



MOST sweete Prince (giue mee leaue to sa∣lute you,Plinie in his Preface to his na∣turall hi∣storie. reseruing the title of Great to your royall Father, as Plinie the worlds Historifier saluted itus, whome the Senate and People called Or∣bis amorem, and Delicias humani ge∣neris.) This Booke at first intended to do you honour, cōmeth now to beg some honour of you. Intended to do you honour, by reuiuing and bringing to fresh memorie, the many leagues and happy mariages
 betweene the two kingdomes of this Iland: to worke a better con∣ceit of either to other, then I found in most men, for the more easie & harty receiuing (in the fulnesse of time) of your excellent house, the common bloud of both nations, to raigne ouer vs: but that we might readily and ioyfully imbrace that, which many ages had sought, none found,Shame and confusion to the ingra∣tis. and now was gratis offered vnto vs. But while I vvas framing this vvorke to this end, the vn∣expected time preuented my de∣signes: and let me see hovv farre Gods vvisdome and goodnesse, ex∣ceeds poore mens mistie cogita∣tions and deuises, filling our soules vvith comfort, by the generall ap∣plause of all men, for the most
 happy issue of so dangerous an alteration in our state. Since which time, my Booke hath lien neglected as needlesse to the world, his end attained, and date expired.
Yet for as much as some of my friends doe censure mee for sup∣pressing that which may do some good seruice (though not the great principally intended) when it is now entring the view of men, it commeth first to beg this ho∣nour of you, to grace the fronti∣spice with your most Gratious name, and sheild it with your pa∣tronage. And since by your Princely and powrefull aspect (without deminution of his su∣per-eminent Maiestie, whence
 you deriue it) you resemble the Sunne in the firmanent, which receaueth light from none (the Creator excepted) but giueth light and life to all inferiour bo∣dies: vouchsafe the beames of your fauour vpon it, to illustrate the obscuritie of the Author, and the meanesse of the worke. So shall my heart be more inflamed (if yet that be possible) with your loue, and my booke more wel∣come to all mens reading. I rest euer to be commanded by your Highnesse.

