



MOST Reuerent and my most honored good Lord,
I haue alwayes appre∣hended the life and Martirdome of that most excellent Prelate, and vndaunted Champion, S. Thomas Archbishope of Canterburie, a most perfect Paterne of a good Pastor, yea and of a good subiect too, as one wisely discerning Gods part
 from Caesars, and giuing to ether their owne, without which there can be no Christian iustice. Take his owne gol∣den, and last words for it, written to King Henry his soueraigne; Prepared I am, not onely to die, but also to suffer a thousand deathes, and all torments what∣soeuer for Christ's sake: Yet whether I die or liue,Cod. Vat. l. 5. Epist. 54. I am and shall euer be yours; and what euer becomes of vs and ours, God euer blesse you and your issue. So that I haue iudged no tyme mispent, in culling the peeces out of the most authenticall and best Authors, which haue con∣curred to the making vp of this litle bulke, or Epistolarie processe of his life and death; which I hope will ap∣peare most contentfull and satisfacto∣rie to all, and fittest to frame a right iudgment in any: as not being croo∣ked and fitted to selfe endes by arti∣ficall amplifications, but furnished by knowne fact, and made good by so many and so ireprochable witnesses,
 as it cannot indeed be suspected to be in any part disguised or forced by cor∣ruption or malice, but to deliuer a na∣ked truth.
Now amongst all those, whom I duely reuerence and honor in earth, I could find none, to whose patronage this poore worke of myne, might laye a more iust clayme then to your Lord∣ship: like as, in my iudgment, your Lord∣shipe can pretend no Patrone in Hea∣uen, to whom you may haue a more confident recourse, or with whom you might haue more sympathie, being considered such as he liued in this earth∣ly habitation, for Religiousnesse, zeale, contrie, cause, constancie. None which comes more home to your vse in res∣pect of your long delay in banishment, and the opposition you haue found, euen amongst some of your children, and those domesticalls of faith. In a word, in reading it you will not fayle before your death, to reade a great part
 of your owne renowned life. May it, I beseech almightie God, be long, con∣tentfull, prosperous in earth: and fol∣lowed out with an eternally blessed one in heauen. These are, and euer shall be, the zealous wishes of all good men; and in particular of

