



DVely and moste frendly I remember my seruice, and best loue vnto you. In ma∣ladies and diseases despe∣rate vsuall remedies will not uer: in con∣trouersies, those that bee (and wronge∣fully) distressed, when equall triall will not bee graunted, must accept vnequall, or none at all. Your late commended hi∣story of the world, recommendeth vnto vs, for moste true, this sentence▪ no∣thing can bee a more excellent wittnessinge, then where an Ene∣my doth approue our cause. Your D. Morton doth testifie as much, and
 no man will deny it; neyther this that fol∣loweth, that in controuersed questions, and their tryall, no condemnation is more approued, then where men in their owne cause, are condemned by their owne Iudgment. Thus in our lawes con∣fession of wronges and euill behauiour, is conuiction; And in matters of Reli∣gion a Recantation. But without some high commaundinge cause how shall wee finde such enforceinge and forced wittnes? Balaam his Asse spake not of himselfe, nor Cayphas of himselfe did prophesye. And in English Protestant Religion, where euery one is made a Iudge ouer all, that will gayne say him in their conceipts, no man will suppose, or once Imagine that any one will bee fownde amonge them, to giue sentence against themsel∣ues, whome they value and esteeme at so high a rate aboue all the world besi∣des, especially for the church of Rome, which they hate and persecute so much.
 Yett because no other meanes is left, I must build vppon this vnleuell groun∣des, and come for Iudgment at such a Consistory, onely to take what they shall giue, and haue nothinge, but what they please to allowe. Which I hope will bee that which is expressed in the Title of this booke, the same to which they haue all sworne, or subscribed, ratified, or confirmed, printed and published for their doctrine and Religion. I dare not goe hygher to the dayes of Queene Eli∣zabeth, nor bringe the testimonies of Protestants in other contries, leaste I receaue for Answeare, as others haue done, that they stand not vppon what forreyne and former Protestants haue taught: which though it bee a vayne and onely cauillons exception to bee at va∣riance, or defyance with them, in faith, of whose church (as they name it) they would bee members: yett to auoide all suspition and colour of euasion, though
 neuer so friuolous. Because no prote∣stant may deny, but that is their prote∣stant Religion in England, vnder our Kinge, supreame heade stiled of that Church, which hee by his lawes, and proceedings, with their Consents and Assentinge hath here established, and this their Bishops and Doctors by oath or subscription haue synce then confir∣med, and by their published printed wri∣tings defended, or mayntayned, or by their Religion ought so to doe; I will onely insist, in this their owne priuiled∣ged, and allowed testimonyes, and au∣thorities. And assume by them, to proue not onely, that all grownds of Religion in generall, doe proue and mayntayne the doctrine of the church of Rome, and condemne this protestant Religion; But further, and demonstratiuely to mani∣fest; by true consequence, that in euery cheife question betweene this Protestāts and Catholicks, they ar in error, and wee
 in truthe: Which will be more then eui∣dent demōstration against D. Morton Protestāt Bishop of Chester his Ap∣peale or pretended Answeare to the Catholick Author of the Prote∣stants Apologie. And therefore being confidently assured, that I haue truely and fully performed, what I vn∣dertake by their so greate aduantage, as to make them both wittnes and Iudge in their owne cause, I presume (as it is) soe to name this Booke: The English Pro∣testants Recantation, in Matters of Religion. I wish it were as easye, (and no more difficult labour) to bridle their wills and Appetites, from libertie, ouermuch loue of this world, and wanton delights thereof, as it is to demonstrate to their vnderstandings, that they bee in error: many men ar able to doe this. But God and themselues must reforme the other; which of his greate mercy I moste humbly beseech him to graūt, That they
 which so longe tyme haue onely talked of Reformed Churches, and Religions, may come to the true, and reall practise of re∣formation, both in mynde and maners. Which I hope they may the soener attay∣ne vnto, if they shall duely consider how fowle and deformed the face of this their new doctrine is, euen as it is poynted by their owne colours, and pencell. That which remayneth, as my onely suite to you, is this: not to bee regardlesse of your best good, not willfully to erre from the way of truthe, to esteeme of the sacred Religion of the Church of Rome, as the greatest enemyes to it, and frends to you shall conclude it worthye, and lett my self and labours enioy your loue, as wee shall deserue it. And so I shall euer rest.

