


BEcause there can not bee a better worke taken in hand, and not mat∣ter may haue so good successe, or any time be so well bestovved, as that which is spent in seeking to set forth the glory of god: therfore for mine own part, when I did see the slackneesse of many, the loose líuing of the most part, and fewe or none, to seke for, or set forth those things that might redound to the praise of God: although of al others most vnable, (yet as one lamenting the miserable condition of the multitude) haue done that which in me didly, that God might be honoured, true re∣ligion imbraced, and vice suppressed and troden vn∣der foot: and sory I am that it ath now fallen out for my lot to play this part, for I had rather to haue scene it of some other that might haue done it bet∣ter
then my selfe, but I do vvel perceiue it to be the solly of many of those that thinke them selues vvise men, rather to bestovve their knovvledge vvhere it shall little profite, then vvell to vse that good talent that God hath lent them, they haue vvit ynough to get them selues promotion, they are skillul ynough to vvaxe riche in the vvorld, and they know how to do al things, saue that they shoulde: the vvisedome of God is counted neere madnesse, the preaching of theCor. 1.18. crose, to them that perish, foolishnesse, to feare God is counted a life by it selfe, and such as the proude Rabbies of this vvorlde, yea, and such as can teach others, in this matter, are to learne many things them selues: it is this worlde that they de∣sire, the vvorlde to come they are not for, so they may aduaunce them selues, they care not thoughe the glorye of God fall to the grounde, they liue as though there were an imortallitie to be found here on earth, and that their dwellinges should continue for euer: if they may be rich in substaunce, they re∣garde not hovv farre they be behind hande in god∣lines: so they haue pleasure and hearts ease here a vvhile, they may haue as it were (to buy it) laide their souls to pawne for the same. This is true, yea and too rue, if it pleased God better to dispose vs, and that their madnesse maye manifestly appeare: and that greeuous sinners may feare to offende. I haue layde vvide open their shame, and displaying their vngodly behauiour, that they may see vvhat daunger they are in that liue vngodly, & that there is no man so godly, as he thatPsal. 91.1. dwelleth vnder the defence of the almighty. And hauing finished that I tooke in hand, I knevv not vnto whom I might so vvell offer the fruits of this my labour, as vnto your
vvorship, vvhome experience hath taught mee to be a fauourer of the trueth, a detester of vice, and to nourish vertue in your brests, as that which you dea¦rest loue. In this little rreatise you shall see the great vvickednes of our time displayed, betweene a ver∣tuous Gentleman, and a Popish Priest, you shal find in the Gentleman, his talke and behauior bo bee such, as may be an example to the most part, in these our daies, his vertuous talke, and strong persuasions, with sure warrant out of the vvorde of God, that it will make the hearts of all Popish Priests: and coue∣tous ministers, if they be not as hard as the adamant stone, to yeeld to the sweete dropping of his sugred words: and contrarily in the Priest, the very picture of a poysoned life, with wordes full of vanitie pro∣ceeding from the aboundaunce of a corrupt heart, vvhich vvould not yeeld vnto any persuasions, nor hearken to any instructions of a long time, before the vvord wrought vvith him more mightily, that at the length he was contented to amende his maners and to forsake three benefices vvhich he did vnlaw∣fully possesse, and to become a new man, and spende the rest of his daies in the seruice of God. I vvishe all proud Prelates and Popish priestes, vvoulde cut their coates by the same paterne, & learne to repent by his example, and leaue their sinnes in season, lost as they haue plovved vvickednes, so they shall  iniquitie. Let no man thinke euil of me, for whishing of them vvell, if they vvill count him an enemy, that vvould giue them good counsell, or couer their il∣thinesse with ig leaues of shamefulnesse, or thinke them selues giltlesse, vvheras they are faulty, here is as much sayde for them, as they can say for them∣selues, vvhich are vvordes that deserue poroofe, and
a life that will aske amendment: for let them flatter themselues as fayre as they can, and thinke they do as much as is required of them, when they haue got ten them so many liuinges that they may be called of men Rabby, and haue fed themselues so wel that their hearts are so fatte as Brawne, yet if their lippes keepe not knowledge, that the people may se the law of the Lorde at their mouth,Mal. 2.8. they haue bro∣ken the couenant of Leui, and caused many to fall. And let not such as can say something thinke they haue knowledge ynough to serue all men, for al∣though they knowe howe to gette them many li∣uings, and to take vpon them the charge of so ma∣ny soules, that for want of teaching, some of them must needes goe to the diuell for their sinnes, they shall one day be founde negligent shepheards, andEzek. 3.18. the bloud of their sheepe will be required at their handes. And because the ministerie is so maymed that many of them can skarse helpe themselues, and are set as candles to giue light vnto others, and yet themselues are full of darkenesse, it standeth euery man vpon to looke to himselfe, and not to trust vn∣to suche as haue no helpe in them. Therefore I vvould wishe euery man that doth tender his owne saluation, to leaue no meanes vnsought for, that might bring it to passe, and to be most carefull for the same, as that which doth deserue greatest labor, if there be any that will say they would willingly do it if they knewe vvich vvay to beginne, letIohn. 5.39. them bring themselues acquainted vvith the vvorde of God vvhich is able to2. Tim. 3.16. make them vvise vnto sal∣uation: if they vvill say their knowledge is smal, and the scriptures are hard to be vnderstoode, let them seeke, diligently,Mat. 7.7. pray hartily, and knocke hard, and
the Lorde vvill open the doore of knowledge vnto them, and giue them right hearts of a good vnder∣standing, if any vvill say they haue so much to deale in worldly affayres, that they cannot spare one hour in the day, to read the vvord of God, let thē knovv, except all their actions be measured by the lyne of Gods vvorde, their labor is lost, their time ill spent, their hope is vaine, their vvroks vnprofitable, andDeut. 28.17. all that they take in hande accursed: if there be a∣ny that thinke themselues so well spedde that they need no more teaching, let them learn to put their knowledge in practise, in framing their liues accor∣ding, lest when they knowLuk. 12.56. much & doe little, their damnation be the greater: if there be any that vvill say there are none so vnwise, to do that which they know to be vnlawfull, let them know that of that number there are too many, and although the most part must of necessitie confesse that there is a God whom they ought to serue, yet the diuell doth draw many with great force to liue as those that knovve no God: such is the corruption of mans nature and so great are the assaultes of our enemie the diuell, that vvhen vve knovv our duetie, and see the path way that will lead vs vnto eternall lyfe, yet through the suggestions of Satan, and the deceitfulnesse of sinne, we are drawne to tread the steps of death and euerlasting destruction. And some there be to ex∣cuse this their fooly, will defende their life, though neuer so vile: and that they may haue the bridle of licentiousnesse, to tunne at ran done, though against their consciences, they will not spare to call euill good, and good euill, darknesse light, and light dark∣nes, they that may make a faire shew in the worlde, and regard not at all how manifestly they lye before
the face of almighty God: this fault vvas found inAct. 5.4. Ananias Saphira his vvife, for the vvhich they both lost their liues: and this vvickednesse doth still remain amongst vs, although the punishment be not so euidently seene: of this number are so many as know their dutie and lead a life cleane contrary, that knovv lying to bee a faulte, and yet vvill not sticke to lye for aduantage: that knovv it to be sinne to sweare, and yet haue their mouthes full of vayne othes; that know adultery to be abominable in the sight of God, and yet liue in whordome al the dayes of their life: that knovv murther to be a breach of the lavve, and yet vvish their brothers throates cut, that they may haue their good: that know coue∣tousnesse to be the roote of all euil, and yet thinke lucre to be godlinesse: that knovve the rewarde of sinne to be death, and yet liue in vvickednesse al the dayes of their life: these men knovve it, yea and vvith all their hearts they knovv it, and vvith shame ynough vvill not sticke to say it, and shut vp al with tushe, God is mercifull, and vvith this cloake they thinke to couer their shame, and by that meanes to set God besides his iudgements: but vvhen they shall be arraigned before his iudgement seate, to aunswere for the breache of his lavves, I feare me, this cloake of hypocrisie beeing founde on their backes, vvill be taken for the liuery of their maister the diuell, vvhom as they haue serued in this worlde vvithout any feare of God, so shal they dwell vvith him for euer in fire euerlasting, vvhich is prepared for him and his Angels. These are the faultes of our time, and such punishments doe follow such sinnes: and the wickednes of the people is so great, that we haue good cause to say vvith Dauid, that it isPsal. 119. time
O Lorde, for thee to lay to thine hand. But because these thinges are farre from you, vvhich doe so ill like of them, that you are an enemye to those that vse them, you may thinke your self happie and thrise happie, vvhom God hath deliuered from so great e∣uils, And for my selfe, as I am by duety bounde to do you the best seruice that I may, and haue recey∣ued more benefites at your handes then euer I de∣serued, I can but vvishe you that vvhich no man can giue you, and pray for that vvhich you may obtaine, that you may so serue the Lorde of heauen and earth, during the time of your pilgrimage in this shorte and transitory vvorlde, that vvhen this life shall cease, and all vvorldly helpes shall fayle you, you may haue God your father, Christ your brother, the holy Ghost your comforter, the Angels your companions, your inheritance aboue the Heauens, vvith ioyes vnspea∣kable, in a life that shall last for euer. Amen.

