



REVEREND SIR.
WHen first I fell into my grie∣uous affliction, as a man surpri∣zed with a mighty Tempest, I did in the midst of mine astonishment, bethinke my selfe, how to ap∣ply my courses to the appeasing

of Gods anger, (whence  crosse proceeded) and the sa∣uing of my perplexed soule, the mayne marke whereat  aymed. In that case I suddaine∣ly and strongly resolued to take Gods Booke into my hand, & by it, as by the true Card and compasse; to saile safely thorow the sea of this worlds troubles, in hope ioyfully in the end to arriue at the hauen of rest and true . Among the bookes of holy Writ, I  mine eyes and thoughts specially vpon the Psalmes of Dauid, which are a short and sweete  of all Scripture, and  mysteries therein com∣prized. Among the Psalmes I conuersed more frequently, in those that are singled from the rest, and stiled by a speciall

title, The Penitentialls, as the fittest medicines for my malady, which are (as one saith) the Anatomy of the spi∣rit and the heart, as it were, of the new man. True it is, (which I confesse ingenuously, though to mine own reproach) that albeit I had very often heretofore heard and red those Psalmes (wherein Dauid his pangs and passions, are liuely described) with a kinde of  delight, and pleasing re∣gret, as men behold Tragedies on a stage, and reade lamenta∣ble stories: Yet could I not ful∣ly rellish, and truly tast them, whiles I liued in quietnesse and contentment, nor indeed, vntil I had by personall experience, felt in some proportion Dauid his  and wounded spi∣rit.

So true is that, which sun∣dry of the Fathers haue obser∣ued,Bern. ad frat. in Mon. and Saint Bernard deli∣uers in these words; You shall neuer rightly vnderstand Dauid, vntill by experi∣ence, you haue put on the very affections, in which Dauid his Psalmes were endited; for none can expresse a passion that feeles it not, nei∣ther can the penne deliuer but what it copieth out of the .
Now being best acquainted with mine owne disabilities and defects; I did  chuse this Plaine-song to , being the prime  Penitentiall, and a liuely Character of a true Mourner, though shaped to the particular condition of Dauid,

yet fitting euery penitent sin∣ner, because it seemes to require the compunction of the heart, rather then the consideration of the head; an imitation ra∣ther then an interpretation, an application, rather then an ex∣plication.
This is The Psalme of Mercy, by excellency, so called, because it begin∣neth with Miserere, which prisoners indicted, and conui∣cted, for lesser fellonies, at our Assizes and , doe so often call and  for, at the Iudges hands. For  that can neither vnderstand nor reade the Latine tongue, can say it by rote (as they say) and doe craue mercy, in desi∣ring to be put to reade, this Psalme of mercy. But with∣out

all question, the most holy, and iust man vpon earth, had neede to beg of the great Iudge of heauen and earth, that hee will  to heare him read with his tongue, and tune with his heart, this sweete, though  Psalme of mercy in his daily , lest he be condemned when hee comes to be arraigned at the grand Assizes: When all offen∣dors without witnesse or Iury, are to be accused & conuicted  the  and  of their own consciences;  not to appeare, it will bee im∣possible, and to appeare without this Psalme of mercy, it will be intolerable.
For who is he among the sonnes of men, that may not truly say, with that ancient Fa∣ther?

A sinner I am, spottedTertul. de Paenit. with all manner of staines, borne for nothing else, in this life, but to act repen∣tance all my life (what o∣ther person  I sustaine) vpon the stage of this world.
Vpon perusall of the Psalme, and some few  thereof (for I did not  many) chewing the Cud, as it were; I haue cast it and them into mine own mold, expressed the sense in  plaine language, and paralelling mine with Dauids perplexities, ap∣plied his plaisters to my sores: I  with the same measure of spirit, I hope with the like successe of grace.
If you meruaile, that I be∣ing no Diuine should aduen∣ture

the conceiuing, much more the publishing of a Me∣ditation of this nature: My answere is briefely; That the subiect of it belongs to the art of Christianity (which euery man is bound to know) and not onely to the profession of Diuinity; and that, in absence of the Master, one  now and than teacheth ano∣ther, and he that learnes of his Schoolefellow, will some∣times apprehēd it sooner from ,  from his Master.
And I hope to suffer the more gentle censure, for suffering this weake Essay to see light in this Age, which is actiue in scribling and prin∣ting, euen to ryot and excesse: because I see mens wills of their gifts to charitable vses daily

printed, to incite others by their example, to the like courses. Why then may not any man declare & publish, the pious be∣quest of his soule, (as it were) and set the presse on worke, to expresse and record his repen∣tance, build his tombe of black∣Marble, & erect it in the Tem∣ple of Gods people; that by loo∣king vpon  Ensignes, and reading the Epitaph, others may be mooued, as in Christian affection to condole with him, so by a kinde of reflection, to mourne for themselues.
If a man would prouide a mourning suite for his sor∣rowfull heart, what hurt or losse were it, to see diuers formes and fashions to make choyce of for patternes? The more course the Stuffe, and

lesse curious the fashion, the fit∣ter for the grat Dueil or so∣lemne mourning. My model may better please some mour∣ner, then a better. If no other vse be made, The often itera∣tion, and frequent renouation of this matter,  vsuall and ordinary resort to houses of mourning, may giue occasion to refresh and reuiue that di∣uine passion, which should euer liue in vs, till it dye with vs, to wit, Repentance.
What fruite others may reape by this my meditation, I know not, but sure I am, that by entertayning the time, and employing my thoughts vpon this subiect, I haue excluded a world of idle fancies, and tu∣multuous cogitations (which otherwise would haue seized

vpon me) and swallowed many indignities, and discontent∣ments that would haue distur∣bed the peace of my soule, had it not beene foreprized, by an exercise of this nature, as an Antidote against such poisons.
The cause why I present and submit it to your view and censure, is not only for that I reuerence your great learning and singuler piety, well knowne to our whole Church by your sundry books; but specially in a recognition of the much contentment I found in that worke of yours, which deseruedly beares the Title of Consolations for the affli∣cted, or the Third part of the Christian Warfare, which gaue the first ouerture to our accquaintance, and be∣gat

sundry conferences, be∣tweene vs sithence, to my no small comfort, as I doe in all thankefulnesse professe. Whe∣ther it shall dye in your hands, vpon your priuate perusall, or liue a while, and so passe fur∣ther, through the hands of o∣thers, I leaue wholy to your dis∣cretion. You shall beare the blame on the one side; howsoe∣uer, you bee like, to receiue small thankes on the other.
The God of all consolation, returne with interest, into your owne bosome, those com∣sorts, which you so freely and plentifully haue imparted vn∣to other.

