



RIght Worshipfull, Fathers, and Brethren, as Elisha said2. King 4. 13. vnto the Shunamite (who prouided a chamber for the Prophet) Behold, thou hast had all this care for vs, but what shall we doe for thee? So may I truely say. The Citie of Norwich hath beene very carefull for me, and ex∣ceeding kinde vnto mee sometime an vnworthy Minister of Christ amongst them, but what shall I doe for them, wherby to shew my selfe thainkefull for their loue? fiue yeares it was my blessed hap (through the goodnesse of God) to reape the benefit of two very reverend & godly persons then your Citie Preachers,M. Moore. M. Roberts. and now Cittizens of Heauen, (whose memorie is blessed of all that knew them, and must of me be euer honored as my Fathers in the Lord, and with them also I inioyed the labours of many learned and godly persons besides, which made your Citie like Bethel and Iericho, which mainetained2. King. 2. the Schooles of Prophets amongst them. Oh the heauenly harmony and sweete amitie that then was amongest you from the highest to the lowest! The magistrates and the Ministers imbracing and seconding one an other, and the common people affording due reverence, & obedience to

them both. No matters of weight were vsually concluded in your common assemblies for the good of your Citie, be∣fore you had first consulted with your graue and godlie Preachers. It was Dauids ioy, to see the people goe vnto the house of the Lorde. And whose heart was not filled with ioy, to see in Norwich the continuall resorte that was eue∣ry day through the yeare, and that for many yeers togither vnto the holy exercises of Religion, which were conti∣nually supported by woorthy and sincere Preachers, and graced by the presence of so many graue and Religious Magistrates? And so great a meeting of learned, godly, and faithfull Pastors; aboue twenty together, of good account haue I seene vsually frequenting the holy exercises, and all hauing pastorall charges in the Cittie, besides those of the Cathedrall Church. And all these were of one heart, and one minde, all as brethren imbracing most louingly each other from the heart, boldely conuersing, and freely re∣ioycing one with another, no man suspecting each other. Such was their care and vigilancie, yea, and such was their grauitie and modestie, yea such was their grace and humillitie, and such was their charitie, and fidelitie; but especially so well were things managed by the wisdome & moderation of those two worthies before mentioned, who were still amongst the rest as presidents, or leaders of an ar∣mie, that it was not possible for any iarre or contention to be of any longer continuance then a sparke of fire produ∣ced by the violent stroke of the steele and flint, of which a man might truly say, Oritur moritur, if any were kindled with one word, the next word quencheth it againe; their heauenly doctrines were greedily receiued of you for the truthes sake, and themselues were alwaies welcome vnto you for their doctrine sake, but whether of their doctrines or their persons were in greater price with you, it is hard for me to say. Being inuited to your houses (as daily they were by one or other) they were seldome or neuer dis-ioyned, but whither some went, all went: none were excluded, to shew that you had not the word in respect of persons, but all were imbraced alike, that all might receiue incourage∣ment

alike in the worke of the Lord: in which course of yours, whether your aboundant loue, or christian wisedom ought to haue the preheminence, I know not: passing sweet was the one, and exceeding pleasant was the other, yea gra∣cious & admirable were you in both chargeable: I confesse it was vnto you, yet such was the loue you bare to those, whose feet brought you the glad tidings of peace, that you counted nothing too deare for them. I write not thus to flatter you: the Searcher of hearts wil witnesse for me, that I speak the truth & lie not, my conscience tels me that I shuld do you open wrong, if I should not acknowlege the City of Norwich to haue been alwaies as kind and louing to their Preachers, as they haue beene famous for their gouerne∣ment. In all, let God haue the glorie. As for my selfe, (the most vnworthy of all) I must acknowledge my selfe by ma∣ny bands of loue to be tied vnto you, but espetially, for that in my troubles which befell me about matters of my Mini∣strie (though long since, yet neuer to be forgotten) it pleased you for the most part in your own persons as occasion ser∣ued, but espetially in the person of a most worthy Senator, then your chiefe magistrate (and now also a glorious citizen of heauen, to stand forth in the face of all the world for my iust defense, as also afterward when all meanes fayled, to extend your inlarged harts to the vtmost of your power for my maintenance. Abounding was your loue before, but thē it superabounded, and by the chearfull working therof it appeared to all the world, that your faith was not dead nor barren, but like Dauids blessed tree, planted by the riuers of celestiall waters, which bringeth forth his fruite in due season, without either fading or fall of the leafe; so farre were you from driuing me away (as it hath pleased Enuie to remour it home euen to the place where I dwell) that I must needs confesse, that you did labour to the vtmost of your skill, to haue kept me still amongst you, and no lesse was the care for the rest of my brethren, & fellow laborers, who being in the fame predicament with my selfe, were also inforced (through the indisposition of those times) to re∣moue their tents from amongst you, to the general griefe of

themselues, and the most parte of your Citie, and to place them elsewhere, vpon those aggrauated rumours posted after me by the malignant messengers of the enuious man, it hath bin my happc (God purposing for my good I trust to haue it so) to be not alittle sifted in this countrey, where it hath pleased the Lord of his goodnesse to place mee: to which end, there hath beene also posting from hence vnto you for coppies of records and I wote not what, assuring themselues, that from thense would come such shot that would batter downe my hold, and make me quite to giue ouer; and no lesse in boasting manner most confidently they gaue out amongst themseles. But God be thanked, who suffered them like deluded soules, no lesse foolish then malitiously to triumph before the victorie: and my feare is, that those men which traueled so far, and searched so neare, and were at such cost and raked (as it were) so many backe∣sides, and troubled both themselues, and others, and all for the finding, and reuiewing of an old rotten coffin (so many yeares since buried with a blocks end in it, sor want of a bet∣ter cose) haue receiued the most hurt themselues: for some of them (besides the forfiture of their credit which they pawned vpon the bargaine) haue prooued since that, like cloth that shrinkes in the wetting, and hauing borrowed till no man will trust them, are glad to liue where no man doth know them, shifting for themselues tanquam indiuidua vaga, which are vix demonstratiua in their owne countrey, wherof I take no pleasure at all, for I haue alwaies wished them more good then they doe themselues: and I hope, the rest of their confederates will make good vse of their fel∣lowes falls. But as for you, right Worshipfull, and in the Lord intirely beloued, your hearts, and hands haue euer bin free from such kinde of practises, and blessed be God that hath euer kept you from casting in your lot amongst them, whose deuising hath bin still to spreade nets for the innocent and simple man: and as the remembrance of your antient loue doth much reioyce me; so is my ioy much more increased, through the constant continuance of your loue, which by many signes and tokens, did most plentifully ap∣peare,

when (after many yeares discontinuance) it pleased the Lord of his goodnesse, to bring mee amongst you a∣gaine. And now, beloued in the Lord, what remaineth, but that you continue your antient & holy courses, that so the fame of your faith, loue, and zeale, which is spread farre and neare, may increase yet more and more, to your euer∣lasting commendation. And if you haue still the holy as∣semblies and sacred exercises of religion continued a∣mongst you, as I hope you haue, I beseeeh you be thank∣full vnto God for them, and make your best vse of them while you may. And you that be the worthy Senatours and gouernours of that Citie, let me intreate you to follow the good example of your predecessours, grace the holy assemblies with your presence, and goe before the people to Gods house, as Dauid did in fetching home the Arke; incourage your Pastors and Preachers still, and shew forth the power of religion in your holy conversation and good gouernment, as you haue done. And my good brethren which be of the ministerie in that Citie, if I haue found grace in your eyes, and may be counted worthy to aduise you in the Lord, be you all of one heart and of one minde in the Lord. And I beseech you forget not the holy coun∣sell, which one of your antient Fathers and Pastours wasM. Moore. wont oftentimes to put you in minde of; though there may be some difference in opinion, about matters of circum∣stance and lesse weight, yet let there be no difference in brotherly affection, but loue one another in the Lord from the heart, remembring that of the Apostle: If any be other∣wise minded, God shall reueale it vnto him in his good time: and let none be too forward in rushing into the heart and conscience of his brother, for that is (as you know) Gods prerogatiue, but rather imitate the Lord himselfe, who said; if Solomon did sinne against him, he would visite2. Sam 7. him with the roddes of the children of men: but yet his lo∣uing kindnesse and mercy, he would not take from him. So, though there may perhappes arise some hote disputes a∣mongst you, about this or that, and in heate, you may per∣chance sometimes strike too hard, and make the sparkles

ie too fast; yea, cause may be giuen sometime to reprehend one another roundly, as Paul did Peter, yet let charitie & lo∣uing kindnes neuer depart frō amongst you, & the God of peace shall blesse you as he hath done, to the wonder of the world. I know you are already established in the present truth, and therefore neede none of my instructions: yet, for somuch as sound faith hath neede of a strengthning, and a pure minde, of a stirring vp, and a wearie heart, of a war∣ming, I beare my selfe somewhat bold vpon your Christi∣an patience, to write thus vnto you as I doe. And now (right Worshipful, and the rest of your Citie beloued in the Lord) for a testimonie of a heart that would be thankfull, if my velle & posse, would be sutable the one to the other, I doe heere offer vnto your Christian consideration, & curteous patronage, these Dialogues, which I haue at times, for my owne recreation, translated out of Latine into english. And because they containe varietie of matters, therefore I dedi∣cate them to your whole Citie, which also comprehendeth varietie of wits and dispositions. I trust you will accept them in good part, as you alwaies haue done my selfe, and all my poore and slender indeuoures in former times: which if you doe, you shall incourage me to labour heere∣after, in arguments of greater moment, if greater may be. In the meane time, I commend you to the grace of God. And as I haue you alwaies in remembrance in all my prayers, so I beseech you, forget not mee in yours, nor the whole Church of Christ, that so the communion of Saints, may not sound onely in our lippes, but may bee pow∣erfull in our hearts, and fruitfull one towardes another, vntill wee shall all fully inioy that blessed fellowshippe of the Saints, which the Lord Iesus Christ, our head and blessed Redeemer, hath purchased with his blood, and re∣serued for vs in the heauens, Amen.
 From my studie at Reading, in Barkeshire, 1606. 
