


ALthoughe I haue not
attained (most soueraign
Lady) to that ripenesse
in knoweledge and pro∣foundnesse
in lerning, as
they haue, who bothe in
reding and writing haue
spente almost the whole
course of their age. Yet forasmuch as paynefull
practize ioyned with diligent studie, bringeth
to effect some thing worth the labour, I toke in
hand this little Boke, as a triall in the true trade
of interpreting. Which done, I thought not my
trauaile mysspent, but worthie to be published
abrode for a common vse and commoditie, and
meete that of all estates he be vsually read, dayly
to be had in hande, and continually to be had in
remembraunce: for if a man reade this, and in
reading consider it with a quiet minde voide of
all care and solicitude, and being attentiue vpon
one thing wherin he is conuersant, he shal find
(as I suppose) nothing more excellent, nothing
more commodious, nothing more godly to be
taughte and shewed vs, than the summe of thys

Boke, and the principal pointes herein compre∣hended
and contained, which are these:
Hurt no man. Obey God and nature.
Suffer iniuries. Deserue wel of al men as
nigh as thou mayst. Take in good parte
whatsoeuer chaunce without thy default.
Vse such things as are giuē for the neces∣sitie
of life, as if thou didst not vse them,
and gladly to restore the same when God
or Fortune (as we commonly say) requi∣reth
the same. Repose and accompt feli∣citie
in an vpright and quiet minde. Fi∣nally
recreate and content thy self in the
diuine administration of worldly things,
as very iust and wise, and to vs auaile∣able,
althoughe sometimes it seeme very
grieuous.
These things so great, so profitable, so needefull
to be knowen, so auaileable for well framing of
life, if we shut it within the chest of our mind,
it is far from that we should be void of all per∣turbatiōs
and troblesome motions of the mind,
that we should be in felicitie, and leade our life
both well and wealthilie. You may coiecture
(most gracious and soueraigne Lady) that in de∣dicating
this Boke vnto your highnesse, I mene
to instruct one better learned than my selfe, and
as the Prouerbe is SVS MINERVAM, the

which doubtlesse is farthest off from my cogi∣tations:
for it is the signe of a man bereft of his
witte, and not of a sounde and perfecte minde,
to carrie wood into the Wood, and to cast wa∣ter
into the Sea. What shoulde I speake of the
goodly vertues wherewith you are adorned?
What shoulde I set forth and with prayses extol
your excellent endowments both of minde and
bodie, which cause in all men an admiration?
For the Greeke tong you are to be compared to
ZENOBIA Queene of the Palmirians, who
was very skilfull in the Greeke language, and
in the Latin not ignorant. For Eloquence you
may be likened to CORNELIA mother of the
Gracchi. For the embracing of the holy and sa∣cred
scripture you are to be numbred with FA∣BIOLA
and MARCELLA women wel ler∣ned
and studious of the heauēly veritie. In brief▪
you may be reconed as EVSTOCHIVM was,
who in hir time bicause of hir litterature and
profoundnesse in knowledge, was called Nouū
orbis prodigiū. Your knowledge in the French,
Spanish and Italian tong I nede not declare, for
vertue nedeth no commendation, nor delighteth
to be ennobled with gay glossing communica∣tion:
for where the sunne casteth his glistering
beames, the light of the candell is diminished
and obscured. This Stoick Philosopher EPIC∣TETVS
wrote this worke in a large Volume,
in his mother tong, and was abbreuiated by one

ARRIANVS a Grecian into this forme, and
entituled it Enchyridion, than the which there
can be no Booke to the wel framing of our life
more profitable and necessary. The Authoure
whereof although he were an Ethnicke, yet he
wrote very godly & christianly, and as he spea∣keth
in other tongs, so nowe he shall speake in
the Englishe language, and vnder your Graces
protection shalbe published to the commoditie
of many. Most humbly beseeching your high∣nesse,
to accepte and take in good parte this
little Booke, offring it as a pledge of
my bounden dutie towards
your highnesse, & af∣fection
towardes
my countrie.
❧ ❧

