



ERasimus Rotero∣damus, one of the excelenste Clerkes of oure tyme, percey∣uynge and felynge the worlde to be waueryng, troublesome, vnquiet, and euery where ben∣ded and inclined to warre and myscheyfe, coulde not temper hym selfe, nor yet his penne, but neades he must write vnto the worlde this true and eloquent complaint the whiche I haue translated and dedicated vnto youre Lorshyp, as vnto a father and a supporter of peace, & quietnes, intytuled the complaynte of Peace. And serchynge very narowlye for a place for peace to reste herselfe in. He in his tyme, coulde no wheres, no not amonge Princes (as he sayth) nor Cardinales, Bys∣shops, Prestes, Lawers, Maried men, nor amonge Scole men, nor Diuines, nor yet amonge Religious mē, find wher to bestowe her quietly: such tempestes, and surges of Controuersye a rose in euery Citie and Region throughoute all Christendome, that peace was and is exiled euen from those, that to thensample of all others shoulde haue enbrased her, the whiche truely yf Christes trewe Relygion had bene amonge



them, wolde moste louyngelye and quyetlye haue re∣ceyued her, and mooste tenderlye retayned her. And euen nowe euerye mannes headde, as I coniecture and perceyue is busye & vnquyet, gyuen al to newfanglenes, the very mother of all commotions vprores, debates, battel and murther: the mother of al ryetus and lycentius lyuynge, and of lewde lybertie sedycion and treson, the very roote and begynnynge. Euery man is nowe redy to inuade other, to spoyle, to robbe, to deace Cyties, townes and burrowes. Thus through Mars and Bellona, and for lacke of vnytie and peace Cities are spoyled & Ciuill lawes, the presente ayde and mayntenaunce of the common weale put to scylence. Thus Marchauntes are robed both by sea and by lande, thus the innocente husbandman is vtterlye vndone, thus Kyngdomes are empouereshed, honest Matrons defyled, Uirgins defloured, incest and sacralege supported, and thee world on euery side redy to decay, & al this (as I haue said) for lacke of true peace in Christ, y• which causeth men to be of one accord in fayth, confyrmable in pur∣pose, and lyke in humilitie and diliction. God of hys goodnes sende vs thys Pace. For why the peace of thys worlde, is rather a dyscorde than a Peace: of the whych and the commodytyes thereof wyth the ncommodytyes of warre, an howe Peace is tur∣mulyd and toste from poste to pyller. Erasymus in thys complaynte mooste syncerelye and euydenlye dothe teache vs, the whyche as it is mooste eloquent∣lye and pleasauntlye wrytten, soo it is to those that auour and receaue the truthe, mooste true and plea∣sante.

Thus oure Lorde preserue youre Lordeshyppe euer and euer, and sende vs the Peace that passeth all vnderstan∣dynge, and that neuer shall haue ende.
Amen.
