


WHERE as manye hi∣stories of olde & auncient anti∣quitie, and also al godly & Chri∣stiāwriters most playnely consēt together, and a∣gree in this, that dignitie, riches, kin∣red, wordly pompe, and renoume, doo neither make men better, ne yet hap∣piat, contrarie too the blynde & fonde iudgement of the most part of menne: but by the power and strength of the mynde, that is, learnyng, wysedome,

and vertue, all menne are hyghly en∣riched, ornated, & most purely beuti∣fied, for these bee thinges bothe nota∣ble, eternall, and verye familiar be∣twene the heauenly father & vs. It is therefore euidente (most excellent Prince) that the fittest ornamētes for your graces tender age, bee, eruditiō and vertue. Wherunto you are bothe so ernestly addicte and therin so wō∣derfully doo preuaile, that I nede not too exhorte & exstimulate your grace vnto the study thereof. For that God him self hath wrought, and fourmed your mynde so apt and desirous too attayne and diligētly too seeke for al godly doctrine, that euē now you doo shewe in all youre saiynges and doo∣inges suche a wonderfull pleasaūres much lyke vnto a certayne swete mu∣sike or harmonie, that any honest hart exceadinglye woulde reioyce in the sight therof. Verely, your grace thin∣keth plainly all time lost, that is not bestowed vpon learnyng, which is a verie rare thyng in anye childe, and rarest of all in a Prince. Thus youre noblenes, rather desireth vertue and

learning the most surest and excellent treasures, which farre surmounte all worldly ryches, then anye vanities or trifles. Nowe youre grace prepareth for the holsome and pleasaunt foode of the mynde. Now you seke for that whiche you shal fynd most surest hel∣per and faythfulst councellour in all your affaires. Now your magnificēt mynde studieth that, whiche all En∣glyshe menne with meke and humile heartes shuld desire GOD to endue your grace with all. Now with dili∣gent labour you searche for a thyng, as one most myndeful of this saiyng: Happy is that realme thathath a ler∣ned Prince. Nowe you trauaile for that, whiche conquereth, and kepeth doune all greuous tourmentes & out∣ragious affections of the mynde, too the furderaunce of good liuyng, and maintenaūce of vertue, I meane hol∣some erudition and learnyng. Many Heathen Princes forsoth, are highly magnified with most ample prayses, which gaue them selues too the study of Philosophie, or knowledge of ton∣gues, for their owne commoditie, and

especially for the weale of their sub∣iectes. Who is nowe more celebrated and worthelier extoiled then Mithri∣dares? that noble kyng of Pont and Bithinia, which, (as Aulus Bellius writeth) vnderstoode so perfitly the languages of. xxii. sondrye countries that were vnder his dominiō, that he neuer vsed any interpretour too ans∣wer his subiectes, but spake their lā∣guages so finelye, as thoughe he had been of the same coūtrie. Ageyn, that honorable manne Quintus Ennius saied: that he had. iii. heartes, because he coulde speake Greke, Italian, and Latin. Yea, and breuely, the most fa∣maus writers, as well the Heathen, as the Christien, with an vniuersall consent, playnly affirme: Whan thei had weied the nature and condiciō of the purest thinges vnder heauen, thei sawe nothyng faire, or of any pryce, or that ought too be accōpted ours, but onely vertue and learning. Euen now too acknowledge that same, it is yeo∣uē you from aboue, for your grace de∣lecteth in nothyng more then too bee occupied in the holye Byble: wherin,

you beginne too sauer & smelle furth the treasure of wisedome, knowledge and fulnes of the deuyne power, that is a studie most conuenient for euery Christien Prince, that kynd of studye cannot haue sufficient laude and com¦mendation. Whose Princely heart forsoth, is raueshed on suche a godlie and vertuousstudie, it can neuer haue condigne and worthie praises, but de∣serueth alwaies too bee had in great price, estimation, and honour. Who dooeth not know? that Prince which is yeouen vnto the scriptures of God and with a stoute stomake and valiāt heart, both searcheth furth and also defendeth ye true doctrine of the Gos∣pell, too bee inrolled in the assemble of Christ. Who dooeth not see? that Prince too bee moost surelye armed, which carieth in his heart the swerd of ye spirit, which is the blessed woord of God. Who is ignoraunt? that euer¦lastyng lyfe consisteth in the knowe∣ledge of God. What Prince woulde not studie to maintaine that, which is written for the health, and saluation of all menne werynge with himselfe

that a Prince can not deserue, neither by conquest, ciuel policie, nor yet by a∣nye other meane vnder heauen, thys name high or honorable, sowourthely as by the setting forward of Goddes woorde. What young Prince humily desendyng doune intoo him selfe and callyng to memory his bounden dutie woulde not with a glad hearte and a chearfull mynde, gredelye desyre too knowe, enlarge, and amplifie the glo∣ry and maiestie of hys derely beloued father? Your grace (forsoth) hath pro¦fessed God too bee your father: Bles∣sed are you then if you obey vnto hys word, and walke in his waies. Bles∣sed are you, yf you supporte suche as preache the Gospell. Blessed are you, yf your mind bee full furnished with the testament of Christ, and shew your selfe too bee the most cruel foo and e∣nemy agaynst ypocrisie, supersticion, and all papistical phantasies, wher wt the true religion of God hathe been dusked and defaced these many yeres Blessed are you, if you reade it daye & nighte, that your grace maye knowe what GOD dooeth forbyd you, and

euer submit your selfe therunto with seruiceable lowlines chiefly desiring to florysh and decke your mynd with godly knowledge. And most blessed are you, if you apply your self vnto al good workes, & plant surely in your heart the scriptures of Christ, If you thus doo, nether the power of any pa∣pistical realme, nor yet of hel can pre∣uaile at any time against your grace. Nowe therfore, with humile hearte, faithfully receiue the swete promises of the Gospel. If you kepe the woor∣des of the Lorde and cleaue fast vnto them: there is promised you the king∣dome of heauen: You are promised a weale publick most riche and welthy You are promised too bee deliuered from the deceiptes of all youre priuie enemyes. You are promised also, too conquere great and mightie nations. Agayne, let your grace bee most fully perswaded in this, that ther was ne∣uer Kyng nor Prince, that prospered whiche tooke parte against Goddes woord, and that the greatest abhomi∣nation that can bee, either for Kyng, Prince, or any other manne, is too for

sake the true woord of God. O with howe rebukefull woordes & greuous iudgement thei be condemned, which dispice & set lytle by the holy Byble & most bessed Testamēt of God, wherin there is contained all the wil & plea∣sure of our heauēly father toward vs most miserable & ignoraunt wretches Who would not quake, too beholde the terrible feares & threatenynges of God ageinst al suche? Who would not lament & gladly helppe their ob∣stinate blyndenes? Who woulde not weepe? to heare and reade in how many places, they be openly accursed by the scriptures of Christ. God him self playnely affirmeth, that he wyll sodēly consume them with the breath of his anger. Yea, besides that whoso euer declyneth from the word of God is accursed in all his doynges, whe∣ther he be Kyng, or Prynce, riche, or poore, or of what estate soeuer he bee. This fearfull saiyng (most excellent Prynce) shulde moue all men to take hede vnto their duties and to praie that goods word maie take place emō∣gist vs. O that al men would fanta∣sie

the scriptures of God, and saye wt the vertuous man Iob. Wee will not bee ageynst the woordes of the holy one. Truth it is, God taketh diligent care too haue vs al know his woord. Woulde God therfore, that all wee were now willing to haue the syncere woord of God & all holsom doctrine too go forward. O that all we would consent togither in the Gospell, bro∣therly admonishyng, and secretelye prouokyng one an other too true reli∣gion & vertue. O that no man would sow emongist the people pernitious doctryne, but with all lowly diligēce and Godlye monition euer prouoke, tempt, and stere them, tyll their hear∣tes were remoued frō their olde dau∣tyng dreames and supersticiō, which haue been long grafted in them tho∣row popyshe doctrine. By this meane wee shuld euer haue concorde emon∣gist vs, whiche in all thynges is ne∣cessary, but most nedefull and expedi∣ent in Gods holi woord. Now truely the godlyest thynge that can bee de∣uysed, for any christian realme, is to haue emongist them one maner and

fourme of doctryne, & too trace trueli the steppes of God and neuer to seeke any other by wayes. Who hath not redde in ye scriptures? but that realme is endued with godly ornamentes & riches, where all men prospere, go for ward and florishe in gods woord, de∣lectyng day and night in the swete cō¦solations of the holy testament. By this way we shuld especially setforth the glory of God, and of our sauiour Iesu Christ, if we would reuerently shew one an other that whiche God hath taught vs. Yea & in this doyng all men shulde well perceaue that we were the true disciples of Christ, be∣ing knitte and coupled fast together in mynde and iudgement, preachyng God with one mouth and also with one assent euer promotyng his glory∣ous testament. O the good happe and grace of that king or prynce emongist whose subiectes there is such an hole consent and iudgement in the woord of God, for yt most assuredly byndeth & adiuigneth ye hartes of al subiectes too their kyng. The strength of the Gospell is euen suche in this puincte,

that there was neuer man, which did humily receaue it, that would mur∣mour ageynst his Prince. It tea∣cheth how wyllyngly all men shulde obey their kyng. It sheweth verye lyuely and most apertly vnto euery man his ful dutie. It euer prouoketh vs from all wicked, cursed, and most obstinate disobedience. It euer in∣structeth men too shewe them selues most lowly, humile, and obesaunt to∣ward their Prynce. Whosoeuer hath tasted fully therof, will declare hym selfe in al thynges, too bee a faithful subiect. Furthermore, it is clearer then the light (most vertuous prince) that it woulde make muche for the weale of this noble realme, yf all mē with heart and mynde, would nowe as well expulse the pernitious and deuely she doctryne af that Romishe bishop, as his name is blotted ī boo∣kes. There is none so ignoraunt, but he knoweth that thorough hym we were brought into a wōderful blind∣nes, thorough hym we did sauer of nothyng, but of stynkyng Ydolatry, through hym we were deceiued with

false Ypocrisie. Now let euery blind stiffe hearted, and obstinate creature compare his abhomination with the gospell, and if he be not shameles, he will abashe to smell of his papistrie, and to walow still in ignoraunce, vn lest he bee priuely confederate and in heart consent with the detestable fe∣lowship of al wicked papistes. Now would God all suche men would re∣duce ageyn their heartes vnto ye gos∣pell of Christ. would god they would bee prouoked by some meane to de∣sire knowledge. O that god woulde yeoue them a couragious mynde too reade the gospel, there they shal sone fynde all the venoume of the romishe sort most playnely detected. Forsoth wee see dayly, yt lacke of knowledge of the gospel maketh some busserdes runne hedlong on all rockes, daun∣gers, & extreme perilles: yea, and be∣side that, olde popysh doctryne whi∣che lyeth folded vp & locked faste in their heartes, doeth so sore blynd thē that they haue neither fauour ne af∣fectiō too printe in their myndes, the expressed coūcels, admonitions, and

preceptes of the holy scripture, but too stepe stil in their owne conceites, dreames, & fonde phansies. Wherfore let your dignitie note well this, that all those whiche bee not wyllyng yt gods woord should bee knowen, and that blyndenes should be clean expul¦sed from all men, whiche be baptised in ye blessed bludde of Christ, bewray themselues playne papistes: for in very deede that most deceatful wolfe and graund maister papist with his totiens quotiens, and a pena et culpa blesseth all suche as will bee blynde stil, maintaine his pōpe, drinke of his cuppe of fornication, trust in his par∣donnes, liue in popery, ypocrisie, and dānable ydolatrie, shut vp the king∣dome of heauen, & neuer regarde the gospel. Cōtrarie too this, christ bi his holy Prophete calleth al those bles∣sed yt seke for his testimonies, al those his elect & chosē childrē, which turne frō synne, ypocrisie, & ydolatrie, all those goddes yt heare his word, yea, & breuely, al those which set it forward honorable mē. & in this puincte your grace shoulde euer beare in mynde,

that noble and vertuous kyng Heze∣kiah, whiche shewed hymselfe very honorable in settīg forward ye woord of God, and therby gotte hym glory and fame immortall, so that nowe he is most highly praysed emongist all men. Ageyn his subiectes dyd obey his commaundement feynedly with Ypocrisie, but in their heartes they abhorred gods woord. O the miserie that dyd afterwarde sodeinly ensue vpon them, O the wonderfull wrath of God that was poured vpon them, O their great and obstinate blindnes whiche caused them most greuously too be scourged: Their plage was no lesse then too bee vtterly spoyled of their enemies, Their plage was no lesse then to eate one an other: Yea, their plage was no lesse then to eate their owne sonues and doughters.
This calamitie and sorow (most no∣ble prynce) happened them because they dyd not regarde the lawes of God, but tourned too their olde ab∣hominable Ydolatrie, and lightelye estemed gods holy woord. Wherfore euen now whosoeuer is an enemie

to the holy Bible, that is, neither stu∣diyng it himselfe, nor willyng that other men shulde knowe it, he can in no wyse be a right christian man: al∣though he fast, pray, doo almes, & all the good workes vnder heauen. And he that hath suche a mynde, is ye most cursed and cruel enemie too god, a playne sower of sedition, and a de∣uelishe disquieter of all godly men. For truly those that reade the gospel of Christ, and labour diligētly ther∣in: doo fynde wonderfull rest & qui∣etnes, from all woofull miserie, per∣turbatiō, and vanicies of this world. And surely none but ypocrites or els deuilles would go about too stoppe or allure men from suche a treasure and godly study. And it were conue∣ment, that all they whiche wyll re∣mayne styll necligent, styffe, & blind: shuld set before their faces the feare of paynes infernall, and if thei haue any grace at all, their spirites ought to be moued: too note the great pla∣ges that haue happened the slouth∣ful in gods woord, & those that haue been stubburne ageynst the settyng

out of it. There bee a thousand recor∣des and examples in the holy Bible agaynst such as be farre wyde from knowledge, and lye now walteryng styl in ignoraunce and will not looke vpon the bible. It woulde seme, they hope for a thyng, but their hope is in vaine: For saint Paule plainely wri∣teth the hope of suche ypocrites shall coom̄ too nought. And too conclude (most honorable Prince) seeyng wee haue suche knowledge opened vnto vs, as neuer had englishe mē, and are clearly deliuered from the snares and deceiptes of al false and wicked doctrine, if we shuid not now thāke∣fully receaue the gospell, and shewe our selues naturally enclyned to set it forwarde, yea, and pray daye and night vnto God, for the preseruatiō and health of the kynges highnes, your graces deare, and most entierly beloued father, we were neither true subiectes nor ryght christen men.
Forsoth, through the absolute wise∣dome, and the most godly and poli∣tike prudencie of his grace, the swete sounde of gods woorde is gone tho∣rough

out all this realme, the holye Bible and blessed testament of oure sauiour Christ are coom̄ne to lighte, and thousandes haue faithfully re∣ceiued those pleasaunt, ioyfull, and most comfortable promises of God. Surely this thyng before all other, is acceptable too god. This thyng e∣specially swageth ye ite of god. This thyng in all holi scriptures god most chiefly requireth of his elect & faith∣full seruaūtes, euen too haue his ly∣tell flocke knowe his blessed woo∣rde, whiche woulde bee muche better knowē & more thankefull i receaued, yf al agees and degrees of men with one mynd, wyll, & voice, would nowe drawe after one lyne, leauyng their owne priuate affections, and shewe theim selues euer vigilant, prompt, & ready helpers & workers with God, (accordynge to the councell of sainct Paule) & especially priestes, scolem it sters & parētes, which accordyng too ye Prophete Dauid are blessed, if they gladly require ye lawe of God. They shuld therfore reade ye bible & purdge theyr mindes of al papistry: for theyr

necligence, in dooyng their duties & slugishnes toward ye blessed woord of god, dooeth too muche appere.
Through them forsoth the gospel of Christ shuld bee most strongely war∣ded and defended, for almost all the Prophetes, and a great parte of the scripture beside teache them their duties, and shew playnely what ma∣ner of men they shulde bee: Yea, and how greuously the holy Prophetes crie out vpon false and ignoraunt priestes, the thyng is very euident.
But through the helppe of God all those that be ignoraunt, or els lear∣ned (as they take them selues) wyll leaue of, and repent them of their wicked and obstinate blyndnes, and bowe them selues with all oportuni∣tie too draw mens heartes too the ho¦ly testament of God: consideryng, yt in the terrible day of iudgement, e∣uery mā shall yeoue accompte of his Beliwicke, where neither ignoraūce shall excuse vs, ne yet any worldly pōpe may defēd vs. Most happye thē shall they bee, whiche haue walked tustely in the sight of the Lorde, and

that haue syncerely preached his te∣stament and lyuely woord withoute flattery or iuggelyng: Yea, and in yt fearful day, all they (as writeth S. Augustine) shal fynde mercie at the handes of god, whiche haue entised and allured other vnto goodnes and vertue. Weiyng this with my self, (most excellent, and vnto all kynd of vertues most prōpt & prestāt Prince) I thought it good too translate this Dialoge, called the Epicure, for your grace: whiche semed too me, too bee very familiar, & one of ye godliest Di∣aloges yt any mā hath writtē in ye la∣tin tong. Now therfore I most humi¦li praie, yt this my rude & simple trās∣lation may bee acceptable vnto your grace, trustyng also yt your most ap∣proued gentilnes, wil take it in good part. There as I doo not folow ye la¦tyn, woord for woord, for I omytte yt of a certaine set purpose.

groume of your graces Chambre.
