



IF all men are by nature and duty bound to gratifie their
wel-deseruing Friends, (most deare, and much respected VNCLE) then must I not ouerslip time to make requitall of your manifold kindnesses, by some slender gift, such as the zeale of my dutie, and the abilitie of my minde is able to performe. And now to make it appeare, not so much in comple∣ments as in action, I haue sent you a small Trea∣tise, which (in the iudge∣ment of some Diuines, whom I reuerence in my heart) is, for matter, of worthy respect; for me∣thod, plaine; for practise,
godly; and (I hope) for the fruits of it, profitable: for what of higher re∣gard, of more facilitie, of deeper deuotion, and of greater comfort, then the meditation of the Historie of our Sauiour CHRIST, which you see here parted into seauen dayes practise, and may be the Christians daily taske. I will say no more of it, onely vse it, peruse it, practise it: and after your charitable censure, if it may seeme worthy your patronage, claime it as your owne; your owne you may then call
it, for without you, it had neuer seene the Sunne, nor the Sunne it. The re∣flexe of your fauours to∣wards me, and the vnde∣serued kindnesse of Some that are neare allyed to you (whom I onely point at,
R. B. &c. I neede no more, as also the godly disposition of you all in matters of pietie and deuotion) haue called this light out of darknesse, and made it (that long hath wandred from the Author) like a wearyed Pilgrime to flye to you for prote∣ction.
As you loue Christ,
so fauour it, and as you fauour godlinesse, so loue It. Make it your daily,
Viz. This Booke. though not your whole, taske: and resolue of this, that Christ cals men, as well to Mount Tabor by diuine Meditation, to ad∣mire his goodnesse and glory; as Caesar cals them to beare the Sword, for the defence and counte∣nance of authoritie.
Thus crauing your fa∣uourable acceptance of this poore mite, vnder∣taking the patronage of the same, I wish you all health and happinesse. Leauing this to you, with
the remembrance of my humble dutie.
London, this 3. of Octo∣ber. 1612.

