


MY continuall imploymēts (Right Honourable) in the function of my Mi∣nistry, might put a strong Remora to my pen, to stay me from farther be∣wraying my vnskilfulnes in writing, had not my intire loue to Sion ouerswayed all difficulties, and vanquished all laboures and impediments. These 2. Sermons I preached before a great and iuditious Auditorie. The one, which I haue intituled; The Iudges and Iuries In∣struction, by commaund of authoritie, long since before the Iudges, at the Assises at Lanceston, when that worshipfull Gentle∣man,
 Sir Bernard Greynuile, my good Pa∣tron, was Shieriffe of Cornwall. The other (The Christians Comfort) is more recent: And chancing of late vpon certayne Copies and notes, pretended to bee taken from my mouth, as I then deliuered them, I found some maymed and defectiue, some patched to∣gether in an indigested maner, and other vt∣terly false and mistaken; which hath enforced me (and the rather through the importunitie of some of my best friends) to search out the originall, and to disrobe this forlorne of-spring of his counterfeite colours, and patched coate; and to put vpon him his owne suite, though in the playnest fashion, without any curious dec∣king or trimming. Which when I had effected (I confesse) my ambiguous thoughts were tos∣sed too and fro for a while, in a deepe and doubtfull dilemma (euery way conuincing) vnder whose Pratrocinie I might send forth this my poore abortiue Orphane abroad in∣to the world: But at length my distracted re∣solution presumed to alight vpon your Lord∣ships Honourable name, to seeke shelter against enuie and detracting tongues, being imboldned by the generall report, and my owne tryall of your Honours heroicall propension, and noble disposition to pietie, learning, and reli∣gion:
 Wherewith, and with all other orna∣ments of vertues fit for such a Personage, God hath so plentifully endowed you, that it were better in silence to passe that ouer, which I cannot sufficiently commend, then by taking vpon mee to illustrate your deserued prayses: I might (perchance) seeme to derogate from the worth thereof, by speaking too little (espe∣cially being so perspicuous and eminent to the eyes of all men) that I might iustlie be taxed with this prouerbe; Solem lucerna osten∣dere. And it might be sayd vnto me, as An∣talcidesAntalci∣des. sayd to an Oratour, who had made a long speech in the praise of Hercules; Quis vnquam sanus eum vituperauit? What man well in his wits euer dispray∣sed him? The searcher of hearts knoweth I speake without flatterie, which I euer dete∣sted as a verball simonie. These my poore labours I commend vnto your Honourable protection: poore (I confesse) if you looke into the manner of handling of it, and the substance of the gifte. But my desire and hope is, that it shall find that acceptance with your Honor, that Sinetas handfull of water did with the great Artaxerxes,Artax∣erxes. King of Persia, who kind∣lie receiued it with alacritie of minde, and se∣renitie of countenance, estimating the wiking∣nesse
 of the Giuer, before the value of the gift, being the best that the poore man had to offer. And as PliniePlinie. saith; The poore people that had no Frankencense did offer Milke, and they that wanted Milke, did offer Salt vnto their gods, with good acceptance; according to the prouerbe; Mola salsa litant qui non habent thura. The God of all mercy, powre downe the riches of his mercies vpon your Honour, and multiply your daies vpon earth, to the good of the Church & Common-wealth, that you my long continue a staie and comfort to these Westerne parts, and after the race of this mortall life being runne, graunt you the eternall blessednesse of his heauenlie King∣dome. Amen.

