


SAge Sibilla (right honorable) said to Ae∣neas that no way could be closed againste Vertue: affirming that al actions happily succeeded whatsoeuer the attēpt be, Vir∣tute duce. And Theodorus Biblian der defineth Vertue to be inuested with di∣uers titles, according to the diuersity of hir proper motions, as in discerning the deceit of mans traditions, in choosing the veritie, and in flying false Hipo∣crisie, she is called Prudence: in maintayning Gods glorie, in with∣standing the Popes tirannie, and in defending the true felowship of Prudence. Christian societie, she is named Fortitude: in suppressing Idolatrie, in embracing mercie, and in aduauncing the ministers of his heauē∣lie Fortitude. maiestie, she is saide to be Iustice, in moderating Romish furies, and weake affections, in qualifying Popish quarrels, and peruerse cō∣ditions, Iustice. & in vsing either to bring both to the true vse of Gods word, she is tearmed Temperance. A Prince with these pillers doth euer preuaile: a tree with these brāches, doth euer blossom, & a body with Temperāce. these members ouercommeth the labours of Hercules. Besids these general graces of Vertue, there are two special precedents chiefelie to be loked into, the cause, and the execution, both which, your honor (whose forward fauour to al Christs professors (vnder hir Maiesty) among the rest of right honorable) long since considered of, perfor∣ming, confirming, & executing the effect, in such famous sort as the whole Worlde is amazed and mated at hir Maiesties moste hap∣pie and blessed gouernement, whereby you haue hitherto proued in your noble person, Sibillas sayings to be true, that nothing can pre∣uaile against this diuine Vertue: which some define to be God him∣selfe.

And now, seing his auntient and opposite enimie the Pope, hath foysted in among vs Petifoggers, who (like sheete stealers, tinckers, or Connyskin buyers) creepe in corners to vtter their trash, my for∣tune being (by a French man) to meet with a packe of their paultry, I presume in humble sort to present the first shew therof to your ho∣nor, wherin if I play the bad Pedler (so your honor pardō me) I force not, for truelie I am not their feed Broker. I haue entituled it The Stage of Popish toyes, as a most meet tearm for the matter. the sum & substance wherof I confesse to haue collected out of H: Ste∣phanus in his Apologie vpon Herodot, who coateth thē in theyr Couchanele colours: and therfore if any part haue his wrong dye, I must yeelde to the fault, and excuse my Author. But my selfe (with∣out vaunt) a martial professor, and continuallie armed to the proofe with a seruisable & dutiful hart to your honor: I hope my errors shal passe for the easier payment, and be the better born with, for that hereby I affirme this auntient Emblem, In v∣trumque paratus, and vow my daylie prayer, for the proceeding and encreasing of that which God at the first placed in you, and is ac∣cording to the saying of Plato, No man to be noble without a heauenly inspi∣ration.

