


WHen Jweygh, that frendship is nothing else, (louing frien∣des) but an es∣peciall agremēt with good wil, and loue, betwene mankinde, as well in matters diuine, as humane: I do then somewhat doubt, whether I were best to publish this smal booke, or not.

The thing that seemeth to let me, is the familiaritie, friend∣ship, and amitie, which hath bene and now yet is betweene vs. For I cannot but feare (so loth am I to lose olde friends) least by this mine alteration in iudgement, you also (though you haue no such cause) will alter your loue, and so with∣draw your good willes. In dede you your selues doe well know, that I was neuer chargeable vnto you, that I neuer sought

friendship for gaine, and that at no time I fawned vpon any for prayse, estimation, or pro∣fite. Onelye did I accept the faithfull harts of my friends, and I greatlye esteemed the gentle willing mindes, and af∣fability of mine acquaintance. And this is it that maketh me the more sorowful, whē I feare to lose their good willes, whose friendship I delighted in, but of whose wealth and goodes I neyther had, nor desired. On

the other side, my duetie to∣wardes God, mine obedience due vnto the Queenes high∣nesse, and the vnfeyned good will that I beare towardes my countrie, these do in dede now cōpell me to professe the truth that I see, to renounce obsti∣nacie, to knowledge the right way, and to bid defiance vnto Idolatrie. I haue therefore in this treatise, though not elo∣quently, yet faithfully brought forth, reason, authoritie and

Scripture, and that to defende the Catholike fayth, and to chase away the smoke of hell, the mist of Antichrist, and the false long mayntayned mer∣chandise of Satan. I treade herein, I trust, the path of our perfite forefathers, I defende the Church, I giue a foyle to pride, I commende prayers, pe∣nance, and fasting, I cut down peruerse hypocrisie, deceite, and blind iugling. I extoll ho∣norable mariage and chastity, I

the cause, that I labour indif∣ferently: you shal plainly per∣ceiue that I speake nothing a∣gainst holinesse, but that I en∣deuour to doe what I can, to further deuotion and godly∣nesse. Why then shoulde our friendship cease? why should it not (these thinges consi∣dered) increase? yet some I know there are, whose breasts be stopped with such pelting disdaine and ignorancie, that hauing a sounde of the Catho∣like

fayth in their mouthes, they neyther know what faith nor fidelitie meaneth. Some o∣thers there are, who thoughe they be worldly wise and lear∣ned, yet they so leane vnto self will and estimation, that they leane not in a maner, but alto∣gither besides their profession. These be not father Adams children, they are made, as they thinke, of a finer moulde, they carie such a toye in their heads (and yet know not they





what) whereby they suppose themselues to passe all other men. Alas, is it not knowen what they are? bee they not terrigeni fratres? bee they not of an earthlye moulde? is not the trade ouer earthly that they leade? yea, and to vtter them further: touching man∣ners, be they not intollerable? and concerning religion, are not their errors in a manner palpable? they will haue no man to be like vnto them, they

thinke that in comparison of them, there is none worthie to be looked vpon, none meete to be hearkened vnto: they ad∣iudge their owne persons, their owne dreames and fantasies to excel, surmount, & to passe all. Who can away with such Pryde? who can suffer suche selfe will, such disdayne, suche arrogancie? But to omitte these: I shall craue of you (deare friendes) if for no∣thing else, yet for olde famili∣aritie,

that you will reade ouer these fewe leaues, before you doe infringe our amitie, and that you will reade as friends, and then iudge indifferently. And for my part this promise I make, though we disagree in Religion, and that but for a time, vntill you receyue the grace that God offereth you, the light which shineth before you, and the Gospell which is preached vnto you, yet in friendship Orestes shall find

me Pylades, Damon shall trie me to be Pythias, The∣seus shall not misse Peritho∣us, Patroclus shall not want hys Achilles, Nisus shall not lacke Eurialus, Lelius shall be assured of his friende Scipio, Dauid shall trie me to be Ionathas. This seing I speake from the heart, and faithfully, shew your good na∣tures, performe the part of friends vnfeynedly. And thus taking you al to be my friends,

whose friendshippes though I can not deserue, yet will J during life desire, I bid you vnfeinedly well all to fare. From London, the iiij. of No∣uember.
FINIS.
