



HAuing (Right Wor∣shipfull) rudely cast the plot of this pre∣sent pamphlet, for mine owne priuate vse and meditation, and for the better edifying of the flocke committed vnto my charge, (as it may appeare by the tenue fi∣lum, incompt and vnpolished parts of this edifice) it chanced to come into the hands of some of my fa∣miliar
and assured friends, which when they had perused it, laboured to perswade me to permit to passe into the publicke viewe of the world, laying before me the profit which of this subiect, many (espe∣cially in these sinfull times) might reape. But (to speake the truth) suadebant potius quam persuadebant, they motioned rather then moued me, as vtterly vnwilling to pester the print, or oppresse the presse with more pamphlets which see∣meth to grone alreadie vnder such burthens, and chiefely in this cu∣rious criticall and carping age; al∣wayes hating that humour which the Eatyrist Iuuenal, noted in this dayes: Tenet insanabile multos Scri∣bend, cacoethes. Beside, when I saw many well furnished, rich men to cast of their superfluitie in the Lords treasure, I iudged my poore Widowes mite to be needelesse.
Yet at length being ouercome with their importunities, and ha∣uing euer a desire to doe good, and that by all meanes (which more preuailed with me then any thing else,) I yeelded to their requests, and suffered it to passe as it is, vn∣polished, hauing no leisure by rea∣son of my other imployments, to adorne it with any other coate, then the first. And resolued with my selfe, that if among so many maister builders, I do but as a poore labourer bring stones, or morter, or the least thing towards the building of the temple, it may stand in some steede. For though this age be furnished, with many excel∣lent writers; ad nauseam vsque, yet of such as labour to make the Theo∣ricke of Christianitie, meete with the practicke, the presse (I thinke) doth not surfet. As for the viperous teeth of base Momus his mates, to
whome it is easier momeisthai potiut quam mimeisthai, to emulate rather then imitate the good purpose of others, let them know I litle regard their Theonine barkings. Only this with Martial I tell them, Carpere vel noli nostra, velede tua:
Either cease to carpe at writing mine,
Or else set forth some thing of thine.
But the courteous reader I re∣quest to iudge freely, admonish friendly, and correct charitablie. And I in the meane time sub tabulit delitescam, imitating that excellent painter Apelles, and will hearken vnto his friendly censure. This small paper gift I commende vnto your Worships protection, being the best at this time that I am able to giue, desiring your fauourable acceptance of this pledge of my good will, which if it be worthy a∣nie
respect, to you being my Pa∣tron in many respects it is due. And thus with the penner of the storie of the Machabees I end: If I haue done well, and as my text required, let God haue the glorie, but if I haue done slenderly and barely, it is that I could. I beseech the Al∣mighty to blesse, preserue, & keepe you and yours, and to powre his spiritual graces vpon you in this life present, & bring you to the fruitiō of his euerlasting glory in the life to come. From Bydforde. Ianuary. 6. 1609.

