



Right Worshipfull,
I Haue once againe laun∣ched forth from a safe Hauen into a turbulent and tempestuous sea of Mens humours; and ex∣posed my selfe afresh to the carping censure of hatesome Criticall Loylus, and filthie Black-mouthed Mo∣mus, whose virulent tongue is no fuller of poy∣son then the venemous Viper; and the kind∣nesse of their lippes no better then the vomit f Aspes: a prophane and degenerate gene∣ation, euer readier to find two faults in ano∣her, then to amende one in themselues. But ecause in my other workes I haue proclaimed pen defiance vnto such (but for modestie sake without name) and meane, if they persist in
 their impious and irreligious humour, the next time to labour to purge out their poyson with a dramme of Mythredatim, and ana∣tomize their names in print.In a worke which I haue in hand; intitu∣led, The A∣natomie of a Christian. At this time I thinke them not worthie of farther speech, but onely in my prayers. I confesse, silence had beene more secure: yet may I freely protest, that no conceit of mine owne gifts, nor the af∣fectatiō of the vaine applause of mens mouthes, but an vnfeined desire to doe good (according to my poore talent) and that by all meanes, in the Church of God (being also heartned by the good acceptance of my former labours, with the well inclined, and the profite and comfort they ingeniouslie confesse they haue reaped thereby) hath encouraged mee to pro∣ceede herein. This (Right Worshipfull) I presumed to censecrate, and dedicate vnto you, as a pledge of my good will and thankefulnesse, for many your kind fauours; and especially (which I shall neuer drench in obliuion) your readinesse in supporting my honest and iust cause: nay, Gods cause, against certaine igno∣rant,W. Iohnes. proud, and malicious Opposites, which make a shew of godlinesse, but haue denied the power thereof: which speake of sanctification with vnsanctified lippes: For which (I doubt not) as also for your loue to religion, good to
 your countrey, protection of the oppressed, &c. there is a reward layde vp for you in heauen, euen an immarcessible Crowne of glorie. If this (as indeede it is not) be not answerable to your worth, impute it not (I beseech you) vn∣to my will, but rather to my want of abilitie, being loth to be branded with the more then barbarous note of ingratitude, which I euer detested, cane peius & angue, knowing the old prouerbe; Omnia dixeris si ingratum dixeris. Now I beseech the God of peace to sanctifie you, that your soule and bodie may be kept blamelesse vnto the day of the Lord.

