


WHEN I CON∣sider, which thing I oftentimes do with my selfe, right Ho∣norable, of what knowledge, sharpe∣nsse of witte, and inustrie, the lear∣ned and wise Philo∣sophiers of aūcient times were, I se cause both to reioyce, and to be sorie: reioyce we , for that through their most ex∣celle labors, it hath pleased almightie God, such is his goodnesse, so to open vn∣to vs the secrete workings of nature, and knowledge of sundrie things, which frō many, were of a long time before secret and hidden: againe, sorie we m be, to

see such singular instrumentes prouided for our welth and benefites, not only to be vtterlye ignorant in the moste com∣fortable, most hygh, and infallible doc∣trine, in the knowledge of their Creator, of our Redeemer and Maker, but also (whereat needes muste we lament) to be so dotinglye wedded vnto theyr owne willes, as wilfullie, or rather willinglie, and that (alas) without anye reason to yelde them selues bonde slaues and wret∣ched captiues vnto the detestable serui∣tude, and most execrable bondage that euer sithens the creation of man reigned, vnto the embracing, I will not say of the euill, but of the most wicked, horrible, and monstruous Idolatrie of the hea∣thens: that is, to worship the Sunne, to adore the Mone, to reuerence the Stars, to honor the fire, to take for thei Gods the brute beastes of the earth, to esteeme for their Sauiours, some Rauenyng Fowle of the aire, and (if all that be not madnesse and abhomination inoughe) further to praye vnto most venemous snakes, to seeke helpe of vglie serpents,

to accompt them for Goddes, to keepe, seede, and honor them. O blinde harts! ô darkenesse palpable! ô learning to no purpose auailable! we may therfore wel say vnto such, yea, be he otherwise neuer so perfect an Orator, neuer so profound a Philosopher, Sapientia tua, & scientia tua, haec est quae decepit te: thy worldly wisdome, thy o∣uer curious knowledge, his, this, is it that hath blin∣ded, beguiled, deceyued thee. For touching the excellencie of learning, and worthinesse of eloquence, if we weigh well, but the flowing stile of the incomparable Cicero, what can be more pleasant? what maye with greater vehemence perswade? what can with more efficacie disswade? who, to be briefe, may but with much admi∣ration embrace it? likewise, if we consi∣der the great wisedome of Socrates, who is to be accompted (this of the heathens I speake) so woorthie? so excellent? so perfect as he? Plato also was very famous, so were both the Catoes, Pythagoras, Sophocles, and Demosthenes, with many more: and yet how frowardlie, nay how frantikly these wandered from the right way, from the

acknowledging of one God, and the same of a diuine essence, liuing, vnderstanding, of an in∣finite power, wisedome and goodnesse, true, bounte∣ous, iust, chaste, and mercifull, which is the fa∣ther, the sonne, and the holy ghost, three persons, and one God, how farre I say, and how wicked∣lie, from this they haue strayed, so eui∣dent it is, that for their sakes how should we but be sorie? for ours, how can we but reioyce? but what? haue they erred in nothing, but in the doctrine (which thing is verie all) of our creation, and re∣demption? haue they not in their owne doings oftentimes so foolishly reasoned, as, i wee fauourd them not much, wee might seeme iustly to saye, that almost they had no reason? and not to speake of Protagoras follie, nor of Diagoras his im∣pietie,De nat. deo. lib. 1. to let all others passe, what if wee ripped vp the doings but of him whom amongst them all, I fauour most, of elo∣quent Cicero I meane? might we not ther∣in sometimes see, verie small proofes? espie sclender reasons? and finde suche childishe shiftes? as better in my iudge∣ment it were, to denie in some places the

woorke, than to acknowledge it for the doings, in other things of so incompa∣rable a man? for to prooue his diuinati∣on, what I pray you among other things alleageth he?De diuin. lib. 1. two Snakes forsooth (so he sayth) were taken in the house of a no∣ble and wise man, one Ti. Gracchus, vnto whom the wise men (for so I name them, whome the Persians call Magos: the Ae∣gyptians Prophetas: the Assyrians Chaldaeos: and the Indians Gymnosophistas) they being asked what these Snakes signified, did saye: that if he did let the Male escape, then should his wife shortly after die: if the Female, then should he. The Female was let gone (for, loth a Gods name he was, that P. Affricanus his daughter, be∣ing a yong gentlewoman should die) so he himselfe in fewe dayes after accor∣dingly died. A worthie proofe of a thing neuer able to be proued Well, if anye of the twaine, sayth he, should escape, by that meane, the man, or the wyfe must nedes die. But as he had choyse to keepe which he woulde, so was he bound by no necessitie to let go anye. Why then kept

he not both? he was a wise man, why sa∣ued he not therby as well his owne life, as his wiues? after the same maner myght we easilye confute (were it not to long) the famous Oracle at Delphi, the cutting of a whetstone with the rasour by Tar∣quinius, the dreame of Aeneas, and al such incredible, lewde and whetstone lies. But let Cicero herevnto (for so he doth) make this aunswere. What subtiltie is this, by trifling to condemne things, confirmed by yeares and antiquitye of time? nay, what follie is it, without any reason, to receiue dreames and fonde fables, found out we know not how, why, nor by whō? yet it is contained in blinde chronicles, it is of authoritie. Yea, but ipse dixit (were the authoritie better than of those, qui sui quaestus causa, fictas suscitant sententias) hin∣dereth the learner, letting him from ad∣iudging what in eche thing is right. In reasoning (as Cicero himself saith) the au∣thoritie is not so much, as is the weight of the reason to be sought for, & requi∣red. What? is this, will some say the opi∣nion of Cicero? is not his first booke of

Diuination written in the name of his brother Quintus? that I graunt. And yet, it is the doings of Tullie, it is his owne worke, and (though it pleaseth him ther∣in to try his wit) his verie and full mind, as the same may well appeare aswell in other of his workes, as speciallye in hys writing vnto A. Caecinna, wherein he af∣firmeth, that no signes can be surer, that none may be more certaine, than Diui∣nation. But let his first passe, and come vnto the seconde. Denieth he not there∣in, not onely dreames, whereof I speake not, but also visions? not only , as therein the difference is pretye,Suidas: but also , and yet we read that in the verie booke of God, how Daniel, S. Peter, S. Iohn, with others saw visions, regarded, estemed and expounded them. But here a while to omit the heathens, I would that we likewyse, euen we that are Christians, shoulde not trust ouer∣much vnto authorities, vnto the wri∣tings, I meane, and coniectures of man, it is modestie to be allowed, and pruden∣cie to be praysed, if we so reade them, as

S. Aug. did the writings of S. Cyprian: that is,Aug. lib. 2 contra quendam Donatist. Quod in eis diuinarum scripturarum au∣thoritati congruit, cum laude eius accipio: quod autem non congruit, cum pace eius respuo, that which agreeth in the same with the authority of di∣uine scriptures, to his prayse I receiue: but which agreeth not, that with his fauour I forsake, & leaue. Where let none thinke, that I contemne authorities, but only wishe, Sine ratione vt non valeret authoritas, that authoritie without rea∣son or scripture, should not take place, and preuaile. For to saye the troth, some receyued of many as authorities, be so fonde, vt aures à cōmemoratione abhorreant. Peter (saith some) denied Christ, that he might follow him, and not for feare. O follie! ô madnesse! the scripture is plaine. A farre off follo∣wed Peter, he feared, yea, he was greatly afrayde. Some also affirme that S. Iohn died not, but was caried aliue, as Enoch, and Elias into Paradys, and yet at his sepulchre is Manna, saye they, as it were bubling vp, euen vntill this daye, a se∣pulchre he had, he was buried, and not∣wstanding all this, he died not. Alas, what weake authorities be these? nay,

what foolish, and intollerable dreaming is this, about the scriptures of God? a∣gaine, such as childishlye do vnderstand, that the Lorde wil discend into a valley, vpō the side of the mount Olyuet, there to iudge the worlde, is not therein their wisedome so small, and their writings so fonde, as whether is most foolish, it is hard to tell? Further, there be which al∣leage, that our Sauiour in no respect fea∣red death, and that he was nothing a∣frayde of his passion. But the scriptures be altogether otherwise. For he himself sayth, My soule is heauye, euen vnto death. Of whom likewise the Euangelist thus spea∣keth,Marc. 14. Christ began to feare, and to be sorowfull.Ibidem. Let them therefore be ashamed, which thinke that our Sauiour, in respect of his manhode, feared not death, and that he did not through feare of his passion say Transeat à me calix iste,Math. 26. let this cuppe passe from me. There is moreouer, which write, that though our sauiour suffered, yet he felt no paine, though he were scourged, and wounded, yet he felt no smart, no griefe, no dolor, that all his passion was

sine sensu poenae, without feeling of paine. What? when he cried,Math. 27 Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani? Lord, Lord, why hast thou forsakē me? Were not then his paines great? his dolors vnspeakea∣ble? his griefe exceding? Oh, our infirmi∣ties he bare,Esa. 54. and our sorowes did he sustein. Wher∣fore, may wee not see, how slender some∣times, are the writings, and authoritie of man? howe farre from the purpose they estray? and how plainelye in some places they differ, from the Prophets, Apostles, Euangelists, and holy Ghost? And to re∣turne vnto the heathens againe, in whose workes although manie things be found vntrue, supersticious and lewde, yet tho∣rowe them, as meanes, we haue attained the ryght entrie into Artes, the readye way how to vnderstand liberall sciences, and the playne path into the pleasaunt park of al laudable studies. And amongst all such benefits, which we thus at their handes haue receyued, no one seemeth more excellent, so profitable, and so to be accepted, as is the Arte of reasoning, which onelie (as the Prince of Orators De leg. lib. 2.sayth) doth conteine the whole skill of

thorowly seeing and adiudging, what both is, and ought to be in euery matter. Yea, and that man, as sayeth the diuine Philosopher Plato, which vtterly in thys Arte is ignorant, seeth nothing else, were he otherwise neuer so rich and renow∣med, but the verie shadowes, and hollow bare images of things. Therefore haue I thought it (my singular good Lorde) worth the labor, if wee in our tongue, as the Latines haue done in theirs, shoulde some briefly, & some at large, so set forth this Art (which I may worthily term the verie treasure house of sciences, the Cas∣ket of Iewels, the ground of all good stu∣dies, and the very nurse of right perfect knowledge) as it maye at the length ap∣peare, that like as the Latine is nothing inferiour vnto the Greke, so our tongue may in time, either be comparable with both, or at the least (somewhat to graunt thē) not much inferior vnto the second. Which my smal labour howsoeuer done, although in value little aboue the apple giuen by the poore man, vnto Artaxerxes Memor, I haue yet bene bolde to dedicate,

and offer vnto your honor. First, as a to∣ken and pledge of the vnfeined good will which (not to speake of your great cle∣mencie) for sundrye good causes, I am bounde to beare during lyfe, towardes your good Lordship: then, that vnder your protection, the same being publi∣shed, the malice of Momus might be wea∣kened, and the spite of Zoilus abated. For it cannot be but Logique hath enimies, but reason hath foes, but one industrious sometimes shall haue aduersaries. Thus humbly I craue that your honor would, with such hart and countenance receiue it, as thereby I may be encouraged (if it shall please God, so to ayde me) to beginne, and goe forwarde with grea∣ter things.

