


AS Darius in his deepe affecting desire,Ptarch. in eg. Apoh. made choice
of many such subiects and Captaines, as Zopyrus;
and Eacus, after that the Pestilence had vnpeo∣pled
Thessalia, did wish that the swarmes of Pis∣mires
(whereupon as it is said,. the Myrmidons
tooke their names) might be turned into men:
So I am vndoubtedly persuaded (right honourable) that you ha∣uing
made your chiefe and speciall choce of the things which are
from aboue, and striuing therein to set vp your rest of contentati∣on,
would with like delight haue welcomed some such thing, as
had concerned the dressing and adorning of the soule: rather than
any course, countrie and domesticall discourse (such as I am here to
offer vnto your Honour) being commonly esteemed but as a tale of
a turfe, or matter for a mattocke. And indeed I could haue wished
that the Heauens had stoupt as low to haue reuealed vnto you some
of her sacred mysteries: as the earth hath aduanced it selfe herein,
and opened her mouth to shew vnto you her cabinet of rich proui∣sion,
and casket of pretious iewels. Or else, that according to your
place and calling, some Caesar had affoorded you some learned
Commentarie of Martiall Stratagems: or some Lycurgus, such trea∣tise
of Policie, as wherein you might haue had pointed out and de∣lineated,
as with Polycletus his golden rule, the exquisit rules of vp∣right
iustice and lawes of Common-weales safe gouernment. But
seeing this is that mite which my store will allow me at this time to
offer vnto your Honour, accepting the same, may it please you to
looke a little thereupon, and consider that varietie and store of rari∣ties

their power, magnificence, and renowe. Furthermore; of or from
the earth, is ministred matter to defend or offend, eed or famish,
cherish or starue, make blind, or restore sight, to ouerturne, or
build vp great towers, to giue, or take away light, to procure health
or fickenese, foes or friends, peace or warre, pleasure or paine, sor∣row
or mirth, taste or distaste, sleepe or watchfulnesse, sores or
soundnesse, barrennesse or fruitfulnesse, life or death: and what
not? Yea, if you should desire to looke vpon the counterfeit of
beautie, or to know Diuine Pandora her manifold other graces, . you
need not farre to search, seeing herein irreprehensible shape, surpas∣sing
fairenesse, infinite riches, rare attire, robes, ornaments, issue, a∣bilitie,
vtilitie, wisdome, and gouernment: seeing it also (as the cen∣ter
of the world) attended with so many glittering globes which the
Heauens doe containe▪ euerie one readie and prest to applie them∣selues,
and whatsoeuer is in them in all seruiceable sort, for the ef∣fecting
of her affaires. For who is he, that vpon such grounds can
refraine as absolutely to giue sentence with it, against all sorts of
creatures (not inhabiting the highest heauens) as euer was giuen
with Hlna for beautie, Penelope for chastitie, Aeneas for pietie, or
Themistocles for fastnesse of memorie? And finally, this sacred god∣desse,
as she sheweth her beautie, in being clothed in her gaiest co∣lours,
and her perfection in her naturall kindnesse, by pressing
out of her neuer drying brests (though euermore conceiued) euen
millions of streames to feed (as with sweet milke) both the young
and old fruit of her wombe: so if you please to call to mind such
names, as the Gretians in their wisedome haue giuen thereunto,
which are , or, , of the verbe  to be glorious, or to excel; or
the names afforded it in the Holie tongue, which are  and 
(the one hauing relation to that kind of earth which bringeth forth
food for man, and the other to that which feedeth cattel) you shall
cleerely see, that there cannot too reuerend an estimation be had of
the earth; and that it is to faile and come short of the scope of the
Creatour (by whom first and principally all names are giuen) to ac∣count
thereof, in any base and vile manner. Now seeing the earth
is so diuine a substance as hath beene proued, and that euery man,
as also his labours, are so much the more or lesse to be regarded, or
honoured, as the subiect is, whereabout he is occupied. I cannot
doubt but that this so renowmed a Grace, shall bee vouchsafed to
haue conferd, all due and worthie dignitie and grace, vpon such as
take paines, like deuoted fauorites, and feruent true louers, to make

her admired and honoured of all. Especially the same falling out
not vpon any light and wanton fantasies, that young and youthfull
yeares may breed; (her last and worst age, hauing alreadie very
deepely seised vpon her:) but rather of intire affection (if not com∣pulsiue
dutie) pricking them forward (so much as lieth in them) to
pluck off her stiffe, hard, and drie growne slough, that so she might
receiue as it were a second birth, to the doubling of the thred of her
liuely and lustie daies. And that vpon both the sorts of them, as
namely those which shape their course, to the purchasing of this
hauen, through the straits of painefull toyle: and the other who
endure hard stormes, till led by learnings load-stone, they haue al∣so
discouered the same by skilful precept.2. Chro. 26. 0. And the rather, seeing that
as wisdome it selfe:Genes. 4. . (calling the first  and  that
is, louers and tillers of the earth) the practice of the Worthies of
all ages & nations, whether you call to mind the Romans amongst
the Gentiles; Sam. . 14. . or the Kings and kingly race amongst the Iewes: and
thirdly, the testimonies of profane writers, Dij pecorum pauere gre∣ges:
And Tempus in agrorum cultu consumere dulce est, haue not suffe∣red
them to want their due laud and praise: so the common and de∣lightfull
reading and studying of the second; besides the lawrell
garland and fauour, with preferment, at the hands of the mightiest
Princes, euer readie and ordained for good writers, doth suffici∣ently
declare their merit and desert; yea vnlettered and senselesse
workes which skill hath framed, cannot but approue and praise the
workeman: and consiquently, the happie hand that was imployed
in penning and pointing out the summe of all that art and cunning.
Againe, if such as faithfully set downe the acts, the speeches, and
seuerall occurrences of persons and times, for performing so woon∣derful
a worke, as to make the things past, and perished, in the first
breathing of the world, still to liue and yeeld forth a liuely breath
vnto the last and finall end of all; and on the contrarie, that which
shall be last, and neuer was before, to bee all beset with the oari
haires of the very first and eldest antiquities, be truely worthie of
immortall honour: then how much more should they, who from
painfull plodding precept, haue reuealed the knowledge of bring∣ing
forth, as also of recording whatsoeuer such famous deedes or
sayings? Wherefore accept, and take in good part, R. Honourable,
(as one who can neuer let slip any the least kindnesse that hath bin
offered to a mother) this laboured worke, the magazin, and store∣house
of all such knowledge, as may make for the honour, digni∣tie,



place and possessions, hee teacheth thee to charge thy selfe as thy
reuenues will liberally reach, taking heed of pordigalitie; and
stirreth thee vp to the knowledge of the ordering and dressing
of ground, or whatsoeuer other thing: that so thou mayest not
onely see what is to bee done, and how, but also iudge there∣of
when it is done. If an inferiour person and hauing no∣thing
but what thou labourest for, lacking also skill, and
so suffering thy field to grow barren: hee teacheth thee all good
meanes for the making of it fruitfull. If for lacke of will,
pouertie come vpon thee as an armed man, know that there
is neuer a precept of paynefull toyle and laborious husbandrie
throughout the whole Booke, but it soundeth an alarum, and
proclaimeth an open defiance against thee as a Sluggard. If
through skill ioyned with will, thou reape the plentifull increase
of a rich Haruest, but abuse it, to the malitious vexing
and troubling of thy neighbour in the Law, or to the corrup∣ting
of the honest and chast liues of Maides, or any of thy
neighbours Wiues, hee calleth thee from such courses vnto the
labours of thy ground: for scarce to take thy lawfull recrea∣tion
at lawfull delights (such as are Hawking and Hunting)
will hee affoord thee any leasure: If a Farmer, hee teacheth thee
kindnesse by deuising something to gratifie thy Lord withall; and
gentlenesse in louingly intreating thy seruants. If thy neighbour
enioy any goodly commoditie of Grasse, Corne, or other dead
thing, or any other liuing thing whatsoeuer that is excellent, be∣cause
hee would not haue thee to looke vpon the same with a re∣pining,
greedie, and couetous eye; hee calleth thee to the pro∣uiding
of such of thine, by teaching thee how to doe it. If thou
bee a seruant, hee willeth thee to bee both painefull and pittifull;
that so all thy businesse may bee well done, and in due time: and the
beasies wherewith thou art charged, may bee tendred of thee in all
mildnesse. And finally, that all vnhonest and disgracefull waies
may bee farre from thee, hee hath taken the paines to instruct
thee in so many things, as that if thou wilt applie thy selfe there∣unto,
and to doe them well: thou shalt not find the leasure to lend
a thought to the euill that might allure thee. And that he might
not bee mistaken and thought to forget that woman was made

for a helper, hee hath called her to her taske, and that neither
little, nor consisting of a few or base things, hauing committed
vnto her (besides many other matters) the cure and charge of
families health. But leauing to speake any more of her charge in
particular, I could wish all such of that sexe as are religious, to
looke before they leape, and to bee wise according to sobrietie and
grauitie: Sobrietie, not medling, aboue their place and reach, in
matters of Physicke: and Grauitie, as not hauing any thing to doe
in the matter of Fukes, either for vsing or preparing of them; see∣ing
they argue, if not plainely proue, a light, a loose, and very sin∣full
life.
And finally, seeing that the whole earth was once a Tempe,
an Eden (that is, a place of all pleasures and delights) and
the assigned possession and naturall inheritance of man and wo∣man,
to labour and liue in, with exceeding great ioy and felicitie;
and that through their sinne it was cursed, and they were cast out
of the most pleasant, commodious, and beneficiall part thereof:
I could wish them iointly to record such their former felicitie, and
the losse thereof, to the end that they may applie their hearts vn∣to
wisedome, and learne, that although they doe continually labour,
yet if they wallow in sinnes, they doe but throw downe twice as
much as they build vp, destroy and marre mare they make,
driue farre away the creatures of meate and maintenance, which
they labour so greedily to scrape and pull vnto them, and euen
bereaue the earth (if it were possible) of all manner of fruits
and increase, that so it might not any more either feede or cloth
them: For knowledge, skill, toyle, paine, rising early, lying
downe late, with euery other helpe, doth loose his vertue and
come short of his end, if delight of sinne bee ioyned as a compa∣nion
therewithall; it being the heauie load and burthen vnder
which all creatures doe grone; the burning ague that drieth all
sappe and moisture; and that cursed seede which causeth them as
a vaporous brood not onely to fret out their mothers bowels, and
bring a curse vpon her bodie; but thereby also to curse and crosse
themselues in all that wherein they would most gladly thriue and
prosper.



You must sowe in March, the Moone being


Garlicke.
Borage.
Buglosse.
Cheruile.
Coriander.
Gourds.
Marierome.
White Poppie.
Purslane.
Radish.
Sorrell.
Double Marigolds.
Tyme.
Violets.



Musked Annise.
Blites.
Skirwoorts.
Succorie.
Fennell.
Apples of loue.
Maruellous Apples.



Artichokes.
Basill.
Thistles.
Blessed Thistle.
Cole Cabbage.
White Cole.
Greene Cole.
Citrons.
Cucumbers.
Harts-home.
Sampier.
Dyers graine.
Spinage.
Gilliflowers.
Hyssope.
Cabbage-Lettuce.
Melons.
Muguets.
Onions.
Flower Gentile.
Burnet.
Leekes.
Sauorie.





You must sowe in Aprill, the Moone being


Marerome.
Flower gentle.
Thyme.
Violets.



Apples of loue.
Maruellous Apples.



Artichokes.
Thistles.
Cabbage Cole.
Citrons.
Harts-horne.
Sampire.
Gilliflowers.
Muguets.
Parsneps.





In May, in the old of the Moone
Blessed thistle.




In Iune, the Moone being


Gourds.
Radishes.



Cucumbers.
Melons.
Parsneps.





In Iuly, the Moone being


White Suc∣corie.



Cabbage-Let∣tuce.





In August, the Moone being


White Suc∣corie.




Hearbes growing of eedes that are sowne, may bee transplanted at all times (ex∣cept
Cheruile, Arrage, Spinage, and Parsley, which are nothing worth when they
are transplanted) euer obserued, That such transplantation bee in a moist or rainie
weather: for otherwise you must looke to them, to water them.


Vnderstand, and know, that the choice and age of seedes is double: for after you haue chosen them ripe, full, heauie, cor∣pulent,
grosse, of a good colour, and that they fall not into powder eyther through rottennesse, or bruisednesse,
Some doe grow better of new seeds, as Leekes and Cucumbers.


Othersome doe grow better of old seedes, as

Coriander.
Parsley.
Sauorie.
Beets.
Origanum.
Crosses.
Spinach.
Poppie.





Know further, that you must preserue from the cold,

Lettuces,
Artichokes,
Basill,
Thistles,
Cabage Cole,
Dyers graine,
Melons.

fifteene dayes after they put foorth of the earth.


Know, that seedes doe thriue and prosper a great deale better, when they are sowne
vpon such daies as are but warme, and not verie hot, or cold, than in hot, cold, or
drie daies.


Note, that seedes must be
Gathered in

Faire weather.
The wane of the Moone.



Kept,
Some in

Boxes of wood.
Bags of Leather.
Vessels of earth.

And after to be well cleansed and dried in the Sun, or shadow.


Other∣some,
as

Onions,
Chibbols,
Leekes,

in their huskes.




Note, that it doth well to

Plant in the last
Gather grifts in the last but one
Grift two daies after the change

of the Moone.





Note, that they which are growne vp to the knowledge of the Pla∣nets
and Signes, may exactly obserue the aspects of the Moone vnto the rest of the Planets, & how long it abideth in anie of them, for shee
aspecting
♁ by a △ or ✶, in the signe

♉
♋
♍
♎
♑
♒

it is good to

Plant Vines.
Sow all things generally.
Sow the fields generally.
Sow Gardens.
Sow euery where, and all things generally.
Plant Trees and Vines.



♂ or ♃, by a △, or □, in the signe ♒, maketh it good to plant and set
Tres and Vines.


being in the

7
1
28
7
15
28
11
24
7
28
11
7

degree

15
57
40
15
49
40
31
3
14
40
2
15

minuts of

♈
♉
♉
♋
♌
♌
♍
♍
♎
♏
♐
♑

Astrologians com∣maund
vs to sowe and plant, because of a well tempered state and conditi∣on
in them.


