


¶ To the moste gracious and mightye Elizabeth, of Englande, Fraunce and Irelande, Queene.
THe saying of Plato, is commonly spoken, and vsed in euery mans mouthe: and yet I doubt, if it be of euery man, so well vnderstanded, (moste Gra∣cious Queene:) that kingdomes are happy, where, either Princies be Philosophers, and geuen to Learning, or Sapient and learned men, doo gouerne Kingdomes. The which saying, containeth more in∣wardlie, then it sheweth outwardly, as I thinke. For whereas Plato, the fowntaine of Wisdom, doth pro∣pound, Plato. two officies and chargies of Philosophie, that is, to know diuine things, and to gouerne humaine matters: he ment, that then, Commonwealthes, and Kingdomes, should be happy & blessed, when Princes should haue the knowledge of God & heauēly things. And being instruc∣ted Pindarus, borne at Thebes, the which Cittie was spared of the Lacedemo∣nians, and his ofspring of Alexan∣der, for his vertues sake Diotimus. with that knowledge, would minister the law purely, study for the publike weale, & keepe the people in obedi∣ence. These be the two Anchores which the Thebane Poet thought meet to be cast, to stay the ship, that is tossed with the tempest. These be the two Nurses, which Antiquitie assigned to Iupiter, Ite, and Adrastia. The one moderatrice of right, the other distributrice, of holy and iust. Dioti∣mus thought these to be necessary ministracies, to the go∣uernment,

and preseruation of kingdomes. Iustinian the Iustinianus. Emperour being instructed by great plenty of learned men, knew none other Philosophy, when he comprehen¦ded the prudence of the law, within the compasse of her barres, and affirmed it was the knowledge of diuine and humaine thinges. This Philosophy, the moste learned Poet, ioyneth together, in Anio, whome, when, he ma∣keth both a King and a Prieste, by the example of the King Ani∣us, bothe a Prince of  Countrey,  a Priest of Apollo. hilippe of Macedone. Iewes, what els doth he meane to shewe, but that he had knowledge of diuine things, & ruled his people iustly, by lawes of authority. These artes, (which be surer and stronger Locke, then those, wherewith Philippe of Mace∣donie, saide, he held Grecia) being giuen to you from God, dooth maruelously bewtifie your Kingdom, moste gra∣cious Queene: for as much as beinge so instructed, you knowe how to rule and maintaine bothe partes. And for as much, as after the example of Chrysanthas of Xenophon, Chrysanth making no difference betweene a good Prince, and a good Father, you beare and shew the affection of a parent toward your subiects, and being constant in cleamencie, you are cleare from crudelitie. In this, following Agis Agis, King of Lacede∣monia, after his noble actes, was kylled in Prison, be∣cause he would haue renued Ly∣curgus his Lawes▪ Kinge of Lacedaemonia, who sayd that a Kinge might go∣uerne his Realme, without force of armes, if he woulde gouerne his Subiects, as a Father dooth his Children: in as much, as by the diuine artes of peace, you adorne, enritche, (and that I may vse the sacred worde) you do sanctifye your most florishing Kingdome. Hereof it is, that among the chiefe ornamentes of this world, you are accompted the onely Queene, and exalted with moste exceeding praise: Plato, the Prince of witte, and foun∣taine of pure Philosophie, did thinke, that to proper names, their was a certaine diuine strength, agreeable to nature, and that moste truelye: For what name coulde

more aptlye be giuen, to the nature of your Maiestie, then that which she hath: as in the which dooth shine a most certaine and vndoubted testimony of God, euen that same, which the word signifieth with the Hebrewes that is, An holesome and sweete studie of peace, a friend of Heauen, comming from none other place, but from Heauen: engrafted to you in your byrth, to the which, streight from the Cradell, succeeded the helpe of sin∣guler and rare learning, as a seasoning of the minde, and a quiet Repose of Musies adhibited: with the which, naturall eloquence, the companion of peace, did so growe, and plentifullye encrease, and is so great in di∣uerse tongues, as the greatest learned Embassadours of Princes, be astonished and amased at it: And I am of opi∣nion, that in a Royall race, nothing can be procured, or wished, more ample, glorious and excellent, then these your two ornaments: that is, testimonies of God, chiefly in this troublesome tempest of states: By these two gardes I thinke, that kingdoms are best and most surely defen∣ded: that is, by peace and by eloquence, which maketh mindes to agree. But why doo I (moste gracious Queene) stay in your praise, the which the more I extoll, the more I diminish.
But because I see the Dedications of bookes, by a receiued and cōfirmed maner, commonly to be directed to Princely persons, for two causes▪ eyther to get and de∣serue thanke of suche as they be, or to prouide an helpe againste enme, and poysoned tongues of slaunderers. Of the which, the first consideratiō, seemeth to proceede from God, to whom, antiquitie, as it is wel knowne, be∣ing mindeful and thankeful of their benifits, did offer the first fruits of their increase: The secōd, to rise of preserua∣tiues: of the which, great plentye was in great price, with men

of the olde time, whose mindes were light of beleefe, and possessed, against poysonings and enchauntments: I being perswaded, yea compelled by both wayes, haue presented to your moste gracious Maiestie, Eunapius, an olde wrighter, (of whom I haue spoken at large in his life,) both that I might gaine you, by inuocation, to my vowe, with a reward, not great, but rare and of old mo∣ney, the which now, cā abide the light, by the benefit of the Presse: and also, the mouthe of lewde detractours, (to vse Catoes word,) that which thinkes nothing well done, might be stopped by the glory of your name. May it please your Maiestie to accept this laboure, & defend it, with a gratious mighty hand, and a cheerefull coun∣tenaunce, of a Straunger: but in time past, an inhabitour longe time of your kingdome, whom God, moste good and mighty, long preserue in safety, to your Realme, and to the Musies of Learninge.
From Harlem, the Kal. of March. 1568.

