



AS mankinde naturallie euer since the fall of our first parentes Adam and Heuah (right honoura∣ble and Woorshipfull) hath not ceased in it selfe, & forsaken of God his spirit, to growe from bad to worse, & from euill to start nought, or (as the Psal∣mist speaketh verie properly) to walke in the counsell of the wicked, to stand in the way of sinners, & (which is a thing most lamentable and feareful) to sit in the seat of the scornful, that is, to clime those stai∣ers,

and scale that ladder, whose steppes beeing sinne, and staues iniquitie, can∣not choose but faile them cōming once to the toppe, and to cast them downe to that horrible downefall of perpetuall ruine and euerlasting condemnation: so GOD a most iust iudge, and yet with all a moste gentle and louing Father to such as are his, hath vsed and tried from time to time all manner of meanes and wayes, to bring the same out of thral∣dome to llbertye, out of prison to en∣largement, out of miserie to ioy, out of paine to pleasure, out of ignorāce to tru∣eth, out of darknes to light, out of wret∣chednesse to happynesse, and out of hell to Heauen. Hee hath prooued and assayed all kinde of remedies, wearying as it were himselfe for our amendement, and hath nothinge at all in a manner preuayled: hee hath myldely intreated vs in the dealing of a Father, hee hath se∣uerelye handeled vs in the person of a iudge. The heauens haue burnte aboue vs in straunge manner with fires, newe Starres, Comets and vnwonted lightes: the earth beneath vs hath trembled and quaked at the iudgementes of GOD,

as notable any longer to beare the bur∣den of our sinnes, yet man hath nothing at all beene moued. Hee hath plentifully sent foorth his woorde; and great haue beene the number of his Preachers: but his people haue stopped their eares like the deafe Adder, and will not heare the voyce of the Charmer, charme he neuer so wiselie. Hee hath pyped vnto vs,Mat. 11.17. and wee haue not daunced: hee hath mour∣ned vnto vs, and we haue not lamented. Hee hath blessed vs in the Citie,Deut. 28. and blessed vs in the field: he hath blessed the fruite of our bodie, and the fruite of our grounde, the fruite of our cattel, the in∣crease of our kine, and the flockes of our sheepe. He hath blessed our basket, and our dough: he hath blessed vs comming in, and blessed vs going out. Hee hath caused our enemies that haue risen a∣gainst vs, to fall before vs, they haue come out against vs one waye, and haue fledde before vs seuen wayes, in so much that all the nations of the earth see this, and woonder at the same: yet can∣not all this make our Realme of Eng∣land thankfull. What then remaineth, but that, if wee goe on still wallowing

in our sinnes, adding contempt vnto vn∣thākfulnes, as drunkēnes vnto thirst, the Lord will turne al these his former bles∣sings, vnto new & vnwonted curses: cur∣sing vs in the town, and cursing vs in the field, cursing our basket, & cursing our store, cursing the fruite of our body, and the fruite of our land, the increase of our kine, and the flockes of our sheepe, cur∣sing our comming in, & cursing our go∣ing out, sending vpō vs trouble & shame, in al that we put our hande vnto, making the heauen ouer our head, brasse; and the earth that is vnder our feete, yrō; smiting vs with a consumption, with the feuer, & with a burning ague, and with feruent heate, making the pestilence to cleaue vnto vs vntil hee hath consumed vs from the land, which we possesse and dwell in. For we are not so wittie and cunning in committing daily and hourely new sins, but the Lord is as expert & skilfull in or∣deining new plagues to correct and cha∣stise the same withall. We see how amon∣gest other his scourges, sent no doubt for the amendement of his chosen, and for the warning of the reprobate, that these are but fleabitings vnto the tormēts that

are reserued for thē in the life to come, how the plague & pestilēce now furiously rageth almost in euery corner of this lād, a sicknes that euery man so greatly trem∣bleth at, & no man feareth to deserue the same: a disease so vsuall, especially in your most honourable citie of London, that albeit it were somwhat feared at the first, yet vse hath now at length made it vnto many so familiar, that there is litle more regard had of it then of any other cōmon & light malady. A great number, & amōg the same, some also of no smal account (at leastwise in their owne iudgement) con∣trary to reason, philosophy, phisick, diui∣nity, yea experience it selfe, absurdlie and fondly both by word & exāple, maintey∣ning ye same not to bee infectious, or that it may be takē one of an other, which ma¦keth thē so vndiscreetely, & vnaduisedly, nay so vnchristianly & rashly, where there is no need, without any feare of thēselues, or regard of others, to resort & keepe cō∣pany with suche as are infected, vnder a pretence of christian charity, but indeed of a blind zeale without knowledge: yea and many times to win the commendati∣on & glory of not fearing, or rather con∣temning

death, this way procuring vn∣timely death (I speake not of the vnchā∣ble determination of God, but as maye bee gessed by the ordinarie course of na∣ture) both vnto them selues and also manie others, to the displeasure of God, and the losse of the common wealth: not that I thinke it vnlawful for one Christi∣an in this kynde of sicknesse to visite an other (whereunto Godlinesse, religi∣on, and Christian duetic doth binde) but that I would haue al needelesse resort re∣strayned, being, although not the only, yet in my iudgemēt, the chiefest cause of the spreading and scattering abroade of the same. But hereof (I meane whether the Plague be infectious or no, and whe∣ther, and how farre it maye of a Christi∣an bee shunned and auoyded) there is a verye notable and profitable Treatise, written by that famous and Godlye Di∣uine Theodore Beza, in Latine, and not manie yeeres sithens by mee turned into English for the benefit of my coun∣trie men, whither for shortnesse sake I sende the Reader that is not alreadye sa∣tisfied. As for you (right Honourable & Worshipfull, whom in the Lord with all

humilitie I reuerence, and on whose shoulders lyeth the heauie charge of go∣uerning this noble citie) I am fully resol∣ued, that you are otherwise perswaded, thinking the Plague not onelie to be in∣fectious, but that it is also your partes and dueties so farre as in you lyeth, and by the wisedome and pollicie of manne, not contrary vnto the word of God, may be attayned vnto, to labour to stop, pre∣uent and hinder the contagion of the same. To the furtherance & forwarding of whiche your Godlye purpose, I haue taken paynes to Englishe this very ex∣cellent and singuler Treatise, the Father of it being a Dutch man, the childe a Ro∣man, not by countrie, but by education: the which being committed vnto my tu∣ition, I haue taught in foureteene daies space to speake this mother tongue of ours in suche rude and homelie manner as you see; hoping that the plainnesse and simplenes of his speech may be par∣doned and borne with in regarde of his shorte time that hee had to learne, not that he would winne praise for his quick capacitie, but seing the occasion of God his so general visitation, he thought, that

if hee might bee hearde speake before your H. & W. he might happily say some thing that might turne to the common benefite, hauing meant ere this time to haue presēted himself vnto you vnder his maisters simple dedication, sauing that I know not howe it falleth out of a prepo∣sterous & ouerthwart course, that good things can hardly passe the presse, whē as vnprofitable and hurtefull Pamphlets haue very quick and to too speedye pas∣sage. Whatsoeuer good and holesome counsell he shall giue, he trusteth shall at your hands not onely be friendly accep∣ted, but diligently folowed, & put in pra∣ctise, as occasion and opportunity shalbe offered, crauing pardon for his wants, & imperfections, nothing doubting but they shalbe supplied, either by your own graue wisedomes, or els by the learned aduise of Godlie and skilfull Phisitions. It is enough for him to haue broken the yse, and to haue shewed the waye for o∣thers, ministring matter of further deli∣beration, what manner course ought to be taken for the taming and maistering of this so fierce and cruell a Dragon, (for so I reade this sickenes of the plague

by some verye singuler Phisitions to bee termed) before he be suffered to approch too farre within your borders. Wee see what preparation is vsed of euery man to withstand his owne priuate enemy: what care euery good husbād hath for the for∣tifiyng of his house against the lawles at∣tēpts & brekings in of theeues: what pub¦like diligence is shewed, & strōg muniti∣on had alwayes in a readines to keep out the power of the forraine souldier: howe much more then standeth it you vpon, & all other godly and faithfull magistrates, to imploy al your endeuours, to commu∣nicate and impart all your counselles, to bend all your deuises, to stop in time the daungerous assaults of this bloody Lion, yt rāgeth so fiercely in most places of this realme at this time? If delay in all perils be dangerous, it cānot choose but in this disease, whiche like a swift deuouring fire consumeth all thinges before it as it go∣eth, but be very perillous and hurtfull. Meete with therfore the beginning, least remedie come too late: when the disease by tract of time is growē to such strēgth, that it can very hardlie, and not without much trouble be cured. A little bracke

in a Wall made to keepe out water, ta∣ken at the first, may quickely be stopped, which being suffered but for a smal time to haue his course, maketh such a breach as often turneth to the drowning of an whole Countrie. The fire that is espy∣ed when it first taketh hold in the thatch or tymber of some house in a Towne, may easily at the beginning with a little helpe bee quenched, whiche catching strength by spreading, causeth somtimes the pitifull desolation and vtter burning to grounde of all the houses and buil∣dinges in the same. After like manner it fareth with this vnrulye streame of the Plague, and vnmercifull flame of the Pestilence, if you geue it leaue by sprea∣ding and scattering abroade, once to ga∣ther force and power, it many times ma∣keth riddāce of whole townes, & cleane sweepeth away huge and mighty Cities, whereas beeyng wiselye looked vnto at the firste, after suche order as in this shorte Treatise is prescribed, it often pas∣seth awaye without anye greate hurte or harme dooynge. You haue heeretofore felt of the inconueniēce that hath grow∣en by delaies in this kind of calamity. Let

therefore your former harmes make you beware against time to come, in recōpē∣sing the former slacknes, with new & spee¦dy diligence. And aboue al thinges haue especiall regard to make sharpe lawes for the punishmēt of such as needlesly resort to those that are infected, and for such as hauing been taken with the sicknes pre∣sume to come abroade, and to thrust thē selues into the cōpany of others, before they bee throughly cured. For these two waies this disease may wōderfully bee in∣creased, whereof in this small discourse you shal reade very strange and wonder∣ful examples. I knowe there be that rea∣son, that the dayes of man are numbred: that the time is set & the houre limited, in which we shall all die, and hereof in∣ferre, that albeit we neuer so much, nor so often haunt the companie of the infe∣cted, yet it skilleth not, wee shall not die before our time, &c. But this Diuelles argument (so I call it,Mat. 4.6. because the Diuell vseth the verye like reason in the tenta∣tion of our Sauiour Christe) shall finde no countenance before your H. and W. as I trust. For it is a verie badde kind of reason from the etetnall and secrete de∣cree

of God knowen onelie vnto him∣selfe, to goe about to take away all ordi∣narie meane to be vsed by man. True it is, that no man shall die before the time which God hath appoynted, which time because it is vnto vs most vncertaine, we are to vse the lawful meanes whiche God hath ordained for vs to sustaine our life withal. Otherwise, if all ordinary meanes be to be refused, let vs eate no meate, for wee shall not dye before God hath ap∣poynted: let vs wilfully destroye our sel∣ues: for wee shall not dye before GOD hath appoynted: yea let the robbers and murtherers by the high way side that lay violent handes to take away the life of man, escape vnpunished, because they haue not killed any man before his time by God appointed. Which reasons look howe vayne, foolishe, wicked, and vngod∣lye they are: euen so vayne, foolishe, wic∣ked, and vngodlie is this; I shall not dye before the houre appoynted by God, therfore I will without all regard eyther of my selfe or others, when there is no cause or need, goe vnto such as are infe∣cted, to the hazarding not onely of myne owne life, but also the life of manye o∣thers.

Christ when as the Diuell (the Fa∣ther of such kind of arguments) alleaged the charge of God giuē to his Angels o∣uer him to keepe him from hurt, to per∣swade him to cast him selfe downe head∣long frō the pinacle of the temple, wher∣as he might vse the ordinarie meanes of going down by the stayers, told him that so to do, was indeede to tempt God. The Heathen mariners, in whose ship Ionas was, at the straunge rising of the tempest,Ionah. 1.5. threw all their goodes into the sea, for the sauegard of the shippe, and sauing of their owne liues, which they needed not to haue done, if they had bin of the same opiniō with these odde felowes, but thus to haue determined the matter: we shall not die before our time, we wil therfore vse no meanes at all to saue our selues, but let God work. I am ashamed to stād so long herein, but that I know that this fond reason carrieth away greate multi∣tudes, not only into the inconueniences aforesaid, but also to the vtter contempt and despising of the most commendable art of phisicke, as a thing vnprofitable and needelesse, the whiche GOD not∣withstanding hath giuen for the singu∣lar

helpe, profite and comforte of man∣kinde, which question is by occasion hā∣deled at large in this selfesame Treatise, the which I haue presumed to offer vnto the gentle acceptation of your H. & W. as the meetest Patrones for suche a woorke, who, as you haue the charge of gouernement of this moste woorthye Citie, so I perswade my selfe, that you will verye carefully seeke in all respectes the welfare of the same, and so farre foorth allowe of the good aduice of this Authour, as you by your wisedomes shal iudge to bee moste meete and expedi∣ent. The principall and chiefe course is, to begin at true and heartie repentance, (which is the first thing that the maker hereof Perswadeth in such a case) bewai∣ling euery man his former wicked life, with prayer and fasting, renting your heartes, and not your garmentes, and commending moste humblye your affli∣cted estate vnto the mercifull conside∣ration of our heauenlie Father: and then to vse all other lawefull remedyes that may be thought necessary for the a∣uoyding of infection in so daungerous a disease.
To which end I commend & commit this litle booke to your through insight and neere consideration, to be followed where it is profitable, to bee supplyed, where it wanteth, to be corrected, where it is faultie, and to bee refused, in what point soeuer it shall vnto your wisdomes seeme not profitable, or conuenient for your state and gouernment. The Lord blesse your H. and W. with the true feare of his name, and a carefull desire as well of the health of the soules, as the wel∣fare of the bodies of the people, com∣mitted to your rule & direction. From Tunbridge the 19. of May. 1583.

