



MAy it like your good Lordship. The renow∣med sentence of diuine Plato, so oft celebrated in Dedication of Bookes to Princies, and great personages: wherein he affirmeth, that those States dooflorish, where Kinges be Phi∣losophers, or Philosophers be Kinges: see∣meth not so sound to some, that are profes∣sours of the Doctrine of the same Plato. For they that are occupied in publique af∣faires, be wont to leaue the studies of lear∣ning, because the life, full of busines, taketh awaye the leysure of the learned. And the nearer we approche to Iupiter, who is Lord of gouernment, the further we straye from

Mercurie, who is Prince of learning.
Moreouer, the Sunne, signifieth, Magi∣strates and Honours, and Saturne betoke∣neth Philosophers and Letters: whose king∣doms & houses in heauē, be contrary one to another. Thē, what Prince cā be a philoso∣pher, or what Philosopher shalbe a Prince?
To this, an aunswer is made by Plotinus, who is the first Philosopher that is spoken of in this worke. That the minde of mā is more mightier, then the nature of the Heauens and earth, and so bringeth to passe, that the one dooth not promise, nor the other permit.
Then, to let this stand as it did. They haue beene accoumpted to be Philosophers, that studieth to know the causies of diuine & humaine things, to teache and follow the way of good life, of the which they were called Maisters of vertue, & Diuines of the earth: who, as sacred Ministers should speake and doo nothing, but that should tend to godlines.
Of these so rare men, Eunapius, hath

vvritten, the second race of the chiefe lear∣ned, florishing frō the reignes of Galienus and Tacitus, xiii. hundred yeares past, vnto the time of Theodotius, or there aboute.
This Booke laye hid in Hungarie, tyll Hadrianus Iunius, a great learned man, did cause it to be Printed in Greeke, and Translated it into Latine: and a eleuen yeares since, Dedicated it to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie, our Soueraigne Lady Elizabeth, and brought it ouer in∣to England: where, hauing continued thus long, is now become English, and vnder the protection and authoritie of your Lordship, he sueth & beseecheth that it may be made of the English natiō, And so being accepted, remaining, also, a faithful member: he may, with feruent minde, pray to the Lord of Lords, for the longe preseruation of your Lordship, in continuance of Honour and good lyking, to the glory of God, the con∣tentacion of the Prince, and commoditie of the Countrie.

