



Your Maiesties most humble, and obedient subiect Lewys Euans, faythfully wisheth here on earth long reigne, all honor, much heith, and continuall prosperitie, and in heauen euerlasting ioye, and blysse eternall.

THE INCLINA∣tion of Mankind (most graciouse, and my so∣uereigne good Ladye) is diuers, and straunge: some are giuen to pro∣uide for their priuate gaine and desires: some for high roome, estimation and honor: some for the safegard of their consciences: and some wholye to profite the common welth. Yea, and besides these, an infinit sort of others there are, who be diuersly caried (a thing not vnmete to be thought vp∣ony

some liuing at ease, and in prodiga∣litie: some wyth payne vsing their in∣dustrie: some delighting in one thing, some in an other: euery one following, as his disposition is, the vaine marchan∣dise of this brickle worlde. Hence it is, that the moste famouse Philosopher Pythagoras, compared the lyfe of man vn∣to a marte, or fayre, as in the which some are busie, some ydle, some byers, some sellers, some lookers & gazers on. But of the former sortes, as I can not ynough commende those, who are all carefull for their soules, seeking rather wyth losse of lyfe to winne heauen, then by rest here and ioy, in the ende to de∣serue sorowe, and hell: so must I praise such, which employe their continuall care, to the profite, enlargement, and conseruatiō of the common welth. For, vnto these, there is (as Cicero saith) a pre∣scribed place in heauen, wherein they shall lyue in blysse for euer: vnto the others, remayneth (saith Christ) the saluation of theire Soules, and they

are those (O moste happie men!) that shall haue our sauiour to be their aduo∣cate and Patrone, he it is, that before his father will acknowledge, receiue, and rewarde them. Yet all are not (O right sacred Queene) to be accounted for re∣ligious, which talke of religion, and in whose mouthes onely and lyppes the name of the Lorde is, all are not true confessours which can and doe abyde long imprisonment, all are not godlye Martyrs which suffer death, yea though they dye vnder colour, and in pretence of defending the true fayth. For, many there are, whome the aduersarye har∣deneth, as the Arrianes, the Anabap∣tistes, wyth others, many there be that dye in blindnesse, that are seduced, and that defend in a maner meere heathines. Of these it is, that S. Augustine sayth: Quae est ista dementia, vt cum male viuitis, lo∣tronum facta faciatis, & cum iure punimim, glo∣riam Martyrum requiratis? What madnesse is this, when you leade an euill lyfe, when you com∣mit theft, and robberies, and when you are iustlye

punished, then to require the glorye of Martyrs? It is not (most benigne Souereigne) all that saye: we be Catholiques, wee be Christians, we haue Abraham to our fa∣ther, whom the Lorde our Sauiour will embrace, and defende. For, there be some, I woulde there were not many, who vnder the name of deuocion doe vpholde superstition, and by the colour of godlinesse and pietie, do pamper vp blindenesse and Idolatrie. The proofe whereof (to the inwarde sorowe of any christiā hart) we may in these our dayes beholde, and see. For, to defende the pryde of one man, to maintayne the pompe of one prelate, (Lorde) what per∣sons, and how many be moued, and set on? how many be egged against Christ and his gospell? howe many be styrred vp against their Prince, their friendes, and their countrey? how many are bent against the lawes of God, of man, and of nature? neyther yet is this, so much to be maruayled at. For, vice and vertue may not agree, light muste varye from

darknesse, good dealings will differ from deceyt, holynesse doth hate vngodly∣nesse, true pietie shall euer detest blinde Idolatrie, to be briefe, heauen is enemie vnto hell. Hence it is that all this hur∣lye burlie and tumults doe aryse, hence it is that within one Realme, within one Citie, yea, and within one house suche dissensions doe growe, suche stryfe doth breede, suche hatred doth happen. And yet, this is not, I saye, straunge, seing that our Sauiour hym∣selfe, hath before hande tolde, and she∣wed vnto vs of the same. Thinke not (sayeth Christ) that I am come to sende peace into the earth. I came not to sende peace but the sworde. For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against hir mother, and the daughter in lawe against hir mo∣ther in lawe: and a mans foes shalbe they of hys owne housholde. What playner wordes can be then these? shewe they not, as in a glasse, our tyme? and further, fully to expresse our calling, You shall (sayth he) be hated of all men for my sake. But how the

professours of the Gospell are hated▪ what whispering there is against them, what toyes are wrought, what trauaile some take, what tryfling newes be deui∣sed, what gadding, what dreaming, what inuenting, what hoping, what ymagi∣ning there is, as I am loth to vtter, (for let God confounde all foolishe deuises) so am I right sorowfull to thinke. I my selfe haue once drunke (before your Maiesties great clemencie I confesse) of the puddell of ignorancy, of the mudde of Idolatrie, of the ponde of superstiti∣on, of the lake of self will, blindenesse, disobedience, and obstinacie. This did I, this doe all they, which fondlye flee this your realme, which grudge (& yet know not why) at your highnesse lawes, which (alas) resist the truth, and haue (as the Apostle sayth) a feruent minde to God warde, but not according vnto knowledge. O here how may your sub∣iects be glad? How may your highnesse reioyce, when vnto transgressours there is such clemencie founde in your grace,

as inuiteth them thus boldly to renoūce their folly, and as offereth, as vnto the prodigall childe, moste gladly, fauour, forgiuenesse, and pardon? these things (most gracious Ladie) considered, let o∣thers esteeme their vaine credite as they list: for mine owne part I protest before God, and your highnesse, during life to the best of my power, to preferre the deuine Scriptures, before the Chaos of mans doctrine, to embrace your most godly proceedings, and to performe in all things towardes God, your Maiestie and my countrie, the part and dutie of a true subiect. In token, & pledge wher∣of, I haue aduentured in moste humble wise, to dedicate these fewe leafes vnto your highnesse most imperiall pro∣tection, beseeching of God, to saue, keepe, and defend your Maiestie.

