



Christian Reader,
IN the entrance of our Christian
profession, we have all promised
to fight vnder Christs banner, a∣gainst
all Antichristian power.
And namely, against the flesh,
the world, and the Devill. To
make good this promise, I haue
ventured (being thereunto called) to fight a combate
with these adversaries, in an eminent place, before
many and great spectators: Having so done, I re∣membred
that I must finish my course, and keepe the
faith, or else I cannot say with the Apostle, that I
haue fought the good fight,1. Tim. 4. 7. 8. and so expect the crowne
of righteousnesse. Therefore having begun conten∣dere
verbis, to encounter with these adversaries, by
way of preaching; I resolved further pugnare ma∣nu,
to set upon them, by way of writing. But here
peradventure you will say, Quorsum haec? to what
end is this writing! There are bookes written already
of all kind of arguments, and of this also. I grant,
there are so. But yet it doth not follow for all that,
that there should be no more written, for as long as
the Devill and his Agents, doe dayly multiply their
temptations, and thereof set forth still new impressi∣ons,
and editions, able to seduce, if it were possible,



the very elect; I see no reason, but that the Mini∣sters,
and servants of Christ, should be as forward to
multiply replies, and to set forth new answeres to the
same. Sure I am, the Lords will and command is,
that we should resist the Divell;Iam. 4. 7. Ephes. 4. 27. c. 6. 13. that we should give
no place to his temptations; that we should put on the
whole armour of God, that is, use all good meanes to
withstand his wiles, and to repell his assaults. And
S. Austin doth instance in this meanes of writing,
saying, that in places infected with heresie (or o∣ther
dangerous temptations) all men should write,
that have any faculty therein, though it bee but the
same things in other words; that all sorts of people,
among many bookes, might light upon some, and the
enemy in all places might have one, or other, to en∣counter
him. And the same Author further saith, uti∣le
esse, that 'tis profitable,Vtile est plu∣res à pluribus fieoi libros, diverso stilo, sed non di∣versa fide. Etiam de iis∣dem questio∣nibus &c. August. de Trinit. l. 1. c. 3. that there bee many bookes,
of many persons, made of like matters, in a diverse
stile & method, so that they be not contrary, in a di∣verse
faith; that from the same the truth may more
clearly appeare, to some in one manner, to some in ano∣ther.
Now that which S. Austin speakes positively, say∣ing,
utile esse, that it is profitable, that there be many
Bookes of many persons, made of like matters, &c. I
hope may be said of mine. Certaine I am the matter is
profitable, and necessary for any mans study, that de∣sires
to approve himselfe a good souldiour of Iesus
Christ. And for the manner also, though it be not e∣legant,
yet here is order, which is the maine thing
requisite in abattell. And for matter and manner, it
hath gained the hearing of honourable, learned, and



judicious auditours. Now if it may also gaine your
reading, and liking, I shall count my paines well be∣stowed,
and be the more encouraged to goe on in my
studies, & to set forth further, and larger testimony of
my desire to doe you good. And verily my intention
was to present you with a larger testimony thereof at
this second time, but I am faine to fall short of that
purpose, and to desire you to accept of this for the pre∣sent,
as from

