


THis booke, which seuen yeares since, was in a manner perfected (as you knowe) doth now vpon iust occasion present it selfe to the view of the world: wherein you haue taken such paines for the triall of each example, that I thinke none can finde any great fault, but such as can see farre into other mens faults, and forget their owne. For after we found some precepts in Wite∣kindus to be false, we were enforced to trie and examine with great care each figure and example in the Sunne. And therefore if any receiue benefite by this our trauell, I would you should haue your due praise you deserue.
I haue altered some fewe things, and added the making of the South and North Erect Declining Dials, by the way of Geometri∣call proportion: because those kinds be most in vse, and I would the learner should haue his choise of the easiest way.
The grauer of the Figures was one M. Iod. Hondius, who hath shewed himselfe an excellent workman in the great Globes set forth by M. Mullineux, and the Mappes of England for M. Camdens booke: and whether he hath performed like diligence in these, I re∣ferre it to your selfe to iudge. If any be desirous to haue the Instru∣ment mentioned in the beginning of this booke for the triall of plats, I hope you will helpe them to it: for being of your owne inuention, I know none so fit as your selfe to make it: on which Instrument also, it were conuenient to draw the Quadrant Horologicall, that so it might serue for diuers vses.
I trust you will not be offended in that I leaue vnder our names this small monument vnto the world, as a speaking witnesse of our thankefull hearts to this our Countrey, and a testimonie of our af∣fection towards the Arts Mathematicall. Thus beseeching the Lord (who hath endued you with extraordinarie knowledge in all Manuel Sciences) to finish that good worke of his heauenly grace alreadie begun in you, to his glorie and your owne comfort, I take my leaue. Commend me many times to your selfe & all our good friends.
From London, Ianuary. 3. 1593.

