



SIR;
IN the time of your Shrief∣altie, you requested this ensuing labour, which I was ready at the time ap∣pointed to haue payd as the tribute, not so much of my courtesie, as duty. It was intended for your eare, but (by I know not what preuention twice or thrice put off) J pre∣sent it now (what ere it is) to your and the Worlds eye. Which is a doctrinall sense too, and by so much the more criticall then the eare, by how much the more curious, and indeed can
 better satisfie its owne quaintnesse by a priue∣ledge it hath to dwell longer on its obiect. But for my owne part, J quaile not for any Momus. I haue been so well acquainted with the worlds folly, that J scorne either to flatter, or feare it. I haue knowne it requite fawning with flouting: and he that clawes it, had best take heede that it kicke not him. Such is its dotage, that for the more part it plants its prime flowers in dung∣hils, not gardens. So that he who dreames to purchase her fauour by deserts, doth but  make roapes of sand; a labour foo∣lish, because fruitlesse. Yea this I dare say, that he of our calling (though it be most excellent) which by his laudable indeauours alone, suppo∣seth in these last and worst dayes to gaine pre∣ferment, shall with expectation, hunger, and stu∣dy make himselfe so leane, that (vnlesse Na∣ture be more indulgent, then charity harborous) hee shall scarce euer bee able by all his gaines to put himselfe in flesh againe. So much, and no more honesty may we expect from the World in its downe-right Nature, and as little or lesse from its vailed, hypocriticall, and whining san∣ctitie. Experto crede. Wherefore if the best
 deserts can hope for no better, I haue small rea∣son by my weakest endeauours to expect so much, vnlesse (as indeed it oft happens in this crosse world) the sillier fellow may haue the better for∣tune. Briefly, I lye so almost leuell with the earth, that Non habeo vndè cadam, I cannot fall much lower. Wherefore I feare no censure; not because I am aboue any enuy, but because in the security of a shrub from the winde, I am be∣neath all. As for you Sir, to whom I offer this poore piece in its homely proportion, shapen to a Country Auditory, if it offend you, reiect it, for euen so you shall not displease me, or (which J wish) if it please you reade it, and in it

