



SIR, I haue put vp the VVolfe, though not hunted him; as iudg∣ing my selfe too weake for that sport-earnest. It is no desert∣lesse Office to discouer that subtle and insatiate Beast; to pull the Sheepe-skinne of Hypocrisie ouer his eares; and to expose his feming malice and sangui∣sugous cruelty to mens censure and detestation. Let those hands strike him, that haue darts of authority put into their Quiuers. Our Land is no Forrest, literally or metaphorically vnderstood: but whether for Church or Common-wealth, profession or soile, an Orchard of Gods owne planting; fruitefull in goods and good workes. VVolues we haue none, but some Mystical ones; whose ferocity is yet hidden vnder the habites and

cases of those Lambes, they haue deuoured. These I haue set in view, or at least meant my best to do it. I haue seldome pretended that common poyse, that (by their owne report) sets so many mad pens, like wheeles, a running, Importunacy of friends. I haue willing∣ly published, what I had hope would do good published. Onely this I feared to keep from the Presse, lest it should steale thither another way. Being there, I could not with better confidence fasten vpon a knowne Patron, then your selfe: who can both vnderstand it, and will reade it: not onely the Epistle, but the whole Booke. Though that fashion with many patrons, of perusing more then their owne Titles, bee now as a Sute of the old make. I know you spend some houres of all dayes in such good exercises; abandoning those idle and exces∣siue customes, wherein too many will please themselues, and none else.
It is an vnthrifty spending of time, and a sorry successe will conclude it, when we are curious in plotting a method for our inferior delights; and leaue our Sal∣uation vnwrought vp. Wee striue to settle our Lands, to secure our monies, to confirme our estates; but to conforme our liues, or to make sure our Election is vi∣lipended. And yet when all is done; braines haue plot∣ted, meanes haue seconded, bonds and lawes haue esta∣blished; nothing can be made Sure but onely our Sal∣uation. But goe you forward to adorne your eternall mind; and to plant your soule full of those Flowers, which giue already a pleasant odour on earth, and shall one day be stucke like glories in Heauen. So shall your memory be sweet in the mouths and hearts of future generations; whiles the vicious, euen aliue, doe not e∣scape

the Satyre. Thus with true thankfull loue I be∣hight you in my prayers, a happy Progresse in Grace, till you shall come to your Standing∣house of Glory.

