



SOlomon giueth this pru∣dent aduice to all buil∣ders:Prou. 24 27▪ Prepare thy worke without, and make it fit for thy selfe in the field, and afterward build thine house. To mee therefore, a∣mongst others, as to one hauing manu∣mission and freedome of that Society, is it directed. But how is it by mee followed? Now that you see me building me thinks I heare you questioning, whether my worke be well prepared, and fitted before

hand? Yea, or I my selfe well prepared, and fitted for this worke? First, for my selfe, I answer (and should so continue answe∣ring yet a while, were I left to my selfe) as Plutarch reporteth Pericles and Demosthenes vsed to doe in sleighter cases, , I am not ready; for if they (so eloquent) thought themselues vnready to speake in any weighty matters, how then can I (so rude) with modesty be so ready to speake (and in print too) about more weighty mat∣ters than any whereof they could speake? Againe, for my prouision before hand, I answer as the wise Virgins did, by way of confession, , There will not be enough for vs and you. For if they (so prudent) feared they had not oyle in such plenty as they might gratifie others with a portion, how then can I (so ignorant) with humility thinke, I haue such store of stuffe by me, as to proffer matter of light vnto others, already better furnished? If I haue prepared any worke without, (inter syluas Academiae, in the field, I meane of the Vniuersitie) surely I haue fitted it, as yet, onely for my selfe (according to the letter

of that aduice) and not to build an house in the City, or (as it were) in the common roade, obuious to the eies of all passengers. But you may quickly reply, If your priuy wants of preparation be such, why take you this publike way of edification? I wil tell you in∣genuously how the case stands with me. My reuerend father desirous of some triall of my Theologie, required mee to make this Discourse, and when hee had heard it, was as desirous that your Worships, and other my worthy Benefactors might bee partakers thereof, in token of thankful∣nesse for your exhibition to me, whiles I was at Cambridge; and this desire cooled not presently, but continued with instant importu∣nity, and encreased out of diuers considerati∣ons of gratefull equity. Now how could I crosse him whose desires are commands? Or what could I oppose against his reasonable perswasions? I might haue said some I feare will say) that this seemes not to bee the right way to goe to worke, to fall into the Presse as soone as to stand in the Pulpit. Might I haue said thus? Nay, I did say so, & so long withstood his pleasure, till I per∣ceiued

the gathering clouds of his discon∣tent. But then I yeelded, (though by yeel∣ding I runne my selfe vpon the pikes of many sharpe censures) calling to minde that of the Poet, In vitium ducit culpae fuga: by shunning the fault of Vaine glory, I must needs fall on the vice of disobedience: and being confident that (what euer others thinke or speake) yee will conceiue (as the truth is) that my willingnesse to doe my duty, ouercame much vnwillingnesse to be in print. Wherefore (Right Worship∣full) in imitation of my Reuerend Father, who many yeares since, dedicated a Cate∣chisme to the Company, out of like respects, I here present you with this poore modell, my first in this kinde, wishing it were wor∣thy to be an encouragement vnto that pious charity which ye not only extended to me, but to my Father before me, and to others with mee, and will (I doubt not) to many after mee; That so ye may helpe to traine vp such as may be able not onely to shew you the right way, but also to point out to you the right worke, and to comfort and strengthen you in it, till yee receiue the glori∣ous

reward of it. But in meane time, how doe I shew the way? I confesse I haue not reared so faire a structure, as the large foun∣dation would haue borne vp, yet shall you finde (I hope) firmnesse ioyned with plaine∣nesse in this little Frame. Which plainnesse I vse, both to shew what I am, (a Carpenter, not a Caruer,) and what I should be too in this kinde of building; subscribing to Cypri∣ans iudgement, as consonant to Gods will, which is to this effect, In iudics in con¦cione pro rostr ∣pulenta facundi volubili ambitu iactetu▪ cum de Dumino Deo vox est, vocis para syn¦ceritas non eloquen∣tiae veribus nitt ad fidei argumenta sed rebus, &c.  1. ep. ad Donatu. Volubility of elo∣quence is requisite in legall pleadings, and ciuill orations; but in speeches concerning God and his matters, it becommeth vs to vse onely purity of words with simplicity of truth, as most powerfull to beget faith. His minde and meaning will bee more fully exemplified in the follow∣ing discourse; which I leaue to your fa∣uourable construction, and kinde acceptation: your selues also to Gods more abundant retribution, my selfe euer remaining,





