



GOD hath stored your Maiesty with such ex∣cellent wisdome, as by it he ruleth more then your own kingdomes. You are his Eye for Europe, and at your sacred girdle, Heaven hangs the Storehouse-keyes of Christian blood.

 VVee may well say it; Since in this age of blood, none hath grieved more to spill it then your Maiesty, none laboured so much to spare it. You have weakned its swelling streames, to the anger of puissant Princes.
Had your Armies troden the bankes of Danow; Nations well know, what bloo∣dy floods you had encreased; Your Trea∣sure Star hath led you a more milken way, rather to lead Christian orbes quiet, then to hasten them to the wrenching of their owne sinewes, satisfied in your selfe that those who best use the Olive, will soonest weare the Laurell.
Wee have lived to see (but ô, teares should have curtained our eyes) the grea∣test inundation of blood that ever flowed from Christian vaines, and that by so ma∣ny tides. Great Kings have kept open the sluces, whom in respects most proper to their boasts of better Religion, it would better become to dry up those ruddy
 springs, were it with the losse of their de∣signes and fortunes. Say Christian drums must needs beat, and bullets fly sometimes to spend of their owne firy spirits, yet may they not finde out a fitter Enemy in Asia, or frame one out of Africa? Heaven hath onely enlightened your Maiesty to ab∣horre deluges of homicides, wallowing in baptized bloud. Your regll beames of pi∣ety most advisedly reflected, that all quar∣rels are not to bee decided by the sword, nor every difference to make its full point at Tyburne. More, even in Kings, desires, although iust, must not alwayes be obtai∣ned, all cannot be had, many but at seasons, and of those which may be had, some ought to suffer a barre, but such as shall bee war∣ded with ages of happines. Not upon a cros∣sing of I will have, are bowels to be drawne out by the Hangman, or lims suddenly se∣vered by Armies; humane blood is a liquor not to be stirred without much warines; if wrongs draw it, it gusheth not out without
 crying to Heaven. Sanguis clamat de Gen. 4. terra. The greatest wit, Aristotle in∣structing a most valorous Prince saith, Parce effundere sanguinem humanum. Arist. ad Alex. Draw not the bloud of men by rivers, but by drops. What Art offered to A∣lexander, your Maiestie holdeth by Na∣ture; whereby our Albania, better clay∣meth now her name from the candorous splendour of your Royall Scepter then from her native Rocks. This your Ma∣iesties most wary disposition to prevent a waste of men, wingeth my hopes flying to your Maiesties feete with these few leaves, which cover or discover (as your Maiesties bright shining eye shall open, or close them) some few Antidotes to prevent and cure a fiery distemper, a Consumption, or waste of blood fatall to the noble bowels of your kingdome. These times have begotten this idle be∣liefe in the brave ones, and they will owne it; that who is stained by any abuse is bound in honour to scoure it by a
 challenge, and hee from whom the mi∣stake first slipt, must presently be drawne to Calis sands: whence if the one be car∣ried to a grave, the other walketh home with honour.
Your radiant wisdome to the high glo∣ry of your Diadem enlightneth and re∣ctifieth this mervailously mistaken way. May a dueller raise honour, because death stumbled upon the better man? No, it is not ever the lot of the Valiant or Innocent, to be death-free in Com∣bats, there are confused uncertainties: death is not alwayes borne by strong armes, nor doth the mightinesse of Man∣hood alwayes cite it: sometimes a sand under foot, a Moate in the Eye, a very silly misfortune brings it. But alas, this is a disease of cradle-courage: duellers, take them at any action of able men, and wee shall finde honour, and them of very small acquaintance: yet forsooth they become honour-sicke; for they deeme their honour must needes dye, unlesse
 they drinke the blood of the bravest.
VVill Kings suffer them so pretious a Niceph. lib. 7. hist Eccl. cap. 33. Bar. to. 3. Annal. ad an. Dom. 324. potion? it is physicke too chargeable for a Kingdome. Great Constantine was but once allowed humane blood to cure his direfull disease, he thought it too deare for a Caesar; and must meane duellers dayly to cure a distemper meerely in fan∣cy, bee permitted bloud, not of Infants, but of men? yea the stoutest; for com∣monly to the meaner man an abuse is gi∣ven, and to the better a Challenge; for by the better spirit, as readiest to spend its mettall, the affront is offered, and by the baser creature, a Challenge is thrust on, as not able to creepe into Honour, but by the casualty of a combat, where a des∣perate Coward is often Victor against a Hector.
By this meanes is a way oft-times Procam 11. Iacob. found to draw bloud out of the breasts of your Maiesties best servants, and day∣ly there are lost brave subjects; which moved your Father of happy memory
 our dread Soveraigne Lord King ames, to thunder out by his Proclamations & Edicts, severe punishments against all hatchers of Challenges, and putters on of such counterfeit manhood.
Wee hope your Maiesty will renew and endow them with a double vigour: penalties may bee put up upon such as provoke duels, and a way layed open to an easie redresse of wrongs by whomsoe∣ver offered: So shall you become an En∣glish Augustus, and we will say with Sene∣ca, excubat Principis cura pro salute singulo∣rum: Seneca de bre∣vit vitae. omnium domos tua diligentia defendit, omnium delitias tua industria; your Prince∣ly care assureth all men safety, freeing your faire dominions from the canker of Duellisme, and fond Mothers shall owe unto you their darlings. Why may not Lawes cure losses of honour, as well as of life and fortunes? Let him keep his coun∣cell whom wrongs privately pinch, and they are cured; if abuses further vent into an open noyse, the Marshals court may
 arraigne them; when the matter is scarce perceptible: it is much, so small a weapon should hurt one, and such a person is too delicate, tender, and unfit to live among men that must bristle: but if there be left a scarre, a blemish to be seene; your Ma∣iesty may gratiously provide for a faire satisfaction, and when wrongs be such as dare not produce, but must hide their cause, there is no right owing them, as no light to darkenesse.
Here I lay downe my pen, and deities; being to bee adored at a distance. From my chamber in the Temple, I kisse your Maiesties Royall feet, and with all hap∣pinesse to your Crowne and Person; for which I am ready cheerefully to pawne the life of

