



IT may seeme strange vnto you (Right Honorable Lord, that I who some eigh∣teene yeeres past (dwelling in Deptford Strand) was diuers times brought before your Lordship, for my contempt of our church and the discipline thereof, should now present vnto you my defence of the the same, especially considering how strongly I was that way seduced, for I was so peremptoriely perswaded, that my mother (this Church) was an Harlot, that I could not be withdrawne in many yeares. Although I conferred oft with diuers Ministers, in diuers parts of England, as also in my trauailes with the best Ministers in Don∣ficke and Denmark, and in the Dutch and French churches in the lowe countreys. But our God who did open Lydia, hart to at∣tend, and beleeue Paules preaching,Act. 16.14 and who calles men home at what houre it pleaseth him: did at last take those fogges and
 scales from my eyes, blessed be his holy name for it: After I had returned into England (from Barbary) and submitted my sele to the gouernors of our Church, who did vse me more kindly then I eyther had deserued, or did expect. For the right Reue∣rend Father in God, Richard Banckroft, beeing then newly con∣secrated Lord Bb. of London: did shew himselfe most louing and liberall to me, (As did the father in the Gospell to the lost sheepe his sonne) And the right Worshipful,Luke 15.22:23.24. Sir Edward Stanop, did forthwith giue mee a discharge vnder seale, from all former warrants gone out for my apprehension▪ then I presently retur∣ned againe into Barbary, not onely to seeke maintenance for my family: but also to see if God would vse me as a meanes, to draw from that schisme either such as were in it before I first came there, or such as partly by my meanes were drawn into it: And I praise God I failed not of my expectation: after this came thither, this reuerend preacher with whom I had this dispute, in other res∣pects, a most honest religious and worthy man he was, (for I am not I praise God like those slinging waspes that if a man discend from them in any point, with neuer so good a reason, they straight rae him with the name of an Apostutate, an enemy to their truth: Nay, it is well if he be not reputed an Athist, yet both di∣uine and humaine writings might teach such better lessons: first the holy Bible teacheth vs to try all thinges, and onely to choose that which is good, and no more, who euer deliuer it: Nay the Apostle saith,Tim. Gal: 1.8. it an Angell from heauen teach any thing more then truth, holde him accursed: and in the Reuelation, the pastor of the Church of Ephesus, is commended for his triall of such thinges: And Peter Martyr in his common places, speaking of Dauid sayeth,Reu 2 2. that so excellent a body was not without his ble∣mishes, and that there was neuer man so holy and perfect in euery respect,Peter Martyr. Common plces. Pet. 4 pag 258. but was corrupted with some sinne: Verily (saith he) wee ought to follow and imitate the vertues of Godly men: but not to their faults, and so for that excellent man of God, nay these vncharitable sencerars of their brethren, may see to their owne shame, the charitie that in olde time, the fathers of the Churches had euen toward Heritikes, great Dionisius Bushop
 of Alexandria in Egipt, who liued more then one thousand three hundreth agoe, as Eusebius sheweth in his Ecclesiasticall Histo: Disputing against one Nepos a Bushop,Euseb. lib. 7. 123. who had wrot to proue (like our Ierusalemits in these dayes) that Christ should raigne heere on earth King, one thousand yeares: and had drawne ma∣ny Disciples to him. Yet this great learned father, is so farre from the humor of some in these dayes, that he giues this Nos wonderfull commendations, for many excellent partes that God had giuen him, for the good of his Church: and doubts not but he rests with God. Many examples more might be giuen to this end, if it would preuaile with them: but I haue seene our prouerbe verified in many of them (none so bold as blind bayd.) Now this Gentleman Mr Barnhere brought mee commendati∣ons and a letter from some that had before that, beene my good friends: The effect was to assist him in setting vp the Geneua or Scottish presbitory, but when I made knowne to him, my vt∣ter dislike of that kind of discipline, as which had giuen the Brow¦nists their holde: then he drew me by letters from time to time, to this dispute, which so soone as it was made knowne I lost most part of my old friends, to my vtter vndoing as it is falne out since, (except God be more mercifull to me then men haue yet beene) for I beeing euen from my first looking after Religion, drawne to effect that trouble church, deuise of new discipline, did who∣ly associate my selfe with men of that minde, and was well im∣ployed by them, but since I left shooting in their bowe, they haue at least some of them, not onely withdrawne their owne fa∣uour from me, but perswaded others to detest mee. So that in truth I haue iust cause to giue God thankes, that at this last change of princes, their deuise did not preuaile, for had it, I am per∣swaded by things which I haue obserued,In his 2.• booke to the prin∣ce called Bassillicō dowr. pag. 41.42.4 that the courts of blou∣dy Bonnar, and Steuen Gardner, might haue giuen place to some of them, for to defame his quiet neighbour the sooner should hee haue obtained an elders gowne to couer all his pre∣cise hipocrisie, for to borrow a speech of his most excellent Ma∣jestie (whom God euer preserue) I protest before the great God that one shall not (of hardly) finde among those that of late were
 called hi land, or border theeues, greater in gratitude, and mo li, and vild slaunders, then with these phamatick spiritted R¦formers.
I did neuer purpose to publish this dispute, but because they haue giuen out in all places of this land (yea and out of it too) that I haue so abused this minister, as did not become any chri∣stian, and all that effect that cause beleeued it, I was aduised both by an honorable personage, and by diuers: no small friends to the new discipline to print i, (who hauing hard it, pittied to haue heard me so oft abused for it) yet they are in minde that if it will recouer my credit againe with all indifferent men, euen of that sort. For I doe confesse that many who haue and yet doe, will effect that discipline, deserue not the name of Puritanes: for I am perswaded that thousandes of them haue honest harts to God and man, although for a time (as I did, they stumble at this vnhappie stone, I would some among them could so charitably conceiue of such as withstand their weake deuise: and sometimes for distinction sake vse that name: But it is not so; for not long since I hard an angry preacher out of a Pulpit affirme, that whosoeuer called any of Gods children Puritanes should be saued, (what the diuell was saued) a hard sentence a∣gainst the ancient and the now present churches of God, if a man might beleeue him, but by his leaue it was the froth of a male-contents zeale: Now I most humbly beseech your Lordship, to shrowd this discourse vnder your honorable protection, the cause why I present your Honor with this, is the want of a bet∣ter matter, and my vnfayned loue vnto your most charitable Lordship: for I shall neuer forget to praise God, and be thank∣full to your Honor, for your exceeding christian compassion to∣wardes mee, when I did deserue your Lordships hard censure: Thus my good Lord, crauing pardon for my presumption: I commit your good Lordship to the protection of the Almighty:
From my house at Ratliffe
this 4. October. 1606.

