



Most gracious and dread Soveraigne,
I Would not presume to present these crude conceptions and expressions to your High∣nesse, if I had not offered them before to an higher Majestie: in whose Courts, with how much the more feare and trembling I delivered them, so much the greater hope I conceive of your Majesties gracious ac∣ceptance. The Texts of Scriptures here expounded are all se∣lect, and most of them mysticall; in the declaration whereof, if my observations second not your Majesties thoughts, yet I perswade my selfe they will occasion more divine raptures in your royall heart. The Crocodiles which besiege the bankes of Nilus, and way-lay those that travell into Egypt,Caussinus pa∣rab. hist. l. 8. c. 31. Comper∣tum est Croco∣dilum impro∣bissimum ani∣mal, si penna Ibidis defrice∣tur, adeò ob∣torpescere & debilitari, ut immobilis red∣datur. if they be rubbed, or but pricked with the quill of the Ibis, are so weakened and stupified thereby, that they cannot stirre: and in like manner
 experience teacheth, that the presentest remedies against those venemous Serpents which infest the Church of Christ, whe∣ther Heretickes or Schismatickes, are the pens of Orthodoxe Writers. For that which is spoken commeth but to a few that are within hearing, and stayeth not by them; but that which is written, and much more that which is printed, presenteth it selfe to the view of all, and is alwaies ready at hand: and as it receiveth, so it maketh an impression. Which consideration, a∣mong others, induced mee to give way to the desires of some friends, for the bringing of these illustrations of darker places of Scripture to light, especially because therein the proper He∣resies of these times are encountred, and the Doctrine and Di∣scipline of the Church of England maintained by the Oracles of God, and the joynt testimony of prime Antiquity. In this Worke I owne nothing but the labour of many moneths, nay rather yeeres, in culling choice of flowers out of many hundreds of gardens, and platting them into a garland for Christ his Spouse. From which I humbly beseech Almighty God, that your Majestie, and all that touch any leafe thereof, may smell a savour of life unto life. The price and worth in all things ma∣keth not the dedication; but in some the dedication maketh the price:Plin. praef. nat. hist. Multa in pretio habentur, quia sacris dicata. And if there appeare in these unpolished lines any lustre, it is no o∣ther than that they receive from the beames of your Majesties eye, if your Majestie vouchsafe a glaunce thereof on them: for which (as we are all otherwise most bound) I shall ever fixe my eyes and devotions on Heaven, and uncessantly pray for the continuance and encrease of your Majesties temporall, and assurance of eternall happinesse.

