


THe people of Germany (as Illyricus writeth of them) aboue an hun∣dred yeeres agoe, com∣plained, that Catal. Test. ver. lib. 19. pag. 1912. olim fue∣runt lignei cali∣ces, & aurei sa∣cerdotes, nunc contra sunt aurei calices, & lignei sacerdotes. in old time there were in the Church woodden Chalices, but golden Priests, but now, say they, we haue golden Chalices, but woodden Priests. A iust complaint against the ignorant Cleargie of Rome, in the latter Ages, especial∣ly before the happie Reformacion of late in our time. Yet the ignorance of Priests was not so blameable, as their sacrilege was damnable. For these wooden Priests tooke away from the peoples vse those golden Chalices, and robbed them of that, which is farre more precious, the heauenly liquor contained in them, which is sacramentally (as wee say, but as they beleeue substantially) the blood of our Sauiour, the in∣ualuable price of mans Redemption. The Hea∣then

Strobilus in the Poet vsed not his God∣desse, Fides, worse, then they doe the de∣uout Laietie. Plaut. in Au∣i Sireperco, Fides, mulsi con∣gialm pleam tibi faciam fide∣liam: id adeo tibi faciam, sed ego mihi bibam vid. Eras Ag. Delphis sacrisi∣cans ipse come∣dit carnes. If I finde my treasure, saith hee, I will offer vnto thee a gallon of sweet wine. Trust me, Faith, I will offer it to thee, but I will drinke it euery drop my self. In like sort the Romish Masse-Priests vpon a thousand Altars offer many flagons of wine, as they pretend, for the people, as well as themselues: but they drinke it all themselues. And yet I know not whether more impiously, or ridiculously in their priuate Masses, and pub∣like Communions they rehearse the words, Bi∣bite Missale Rom. in Can. Miss. ex hoc omnes, Drinke yee all of this, that is, in their sence and practise, Drinke yee none of this, but we onely, that are Priests. Verily of all the abuses in the Masse, which is nothing else but a huge heape, and masse of idolatrous, and su∣perstitious rites, there is none more grosse in the doctrine, or impious in the practise, or absurde in the defence, then this of halfing the Communion, by with-holding the Cup from the people. For it is an open violence offered to our Lords last Will and Testament, a violation of the words of the Institution, a mutilation of the blessed Sacrament, a sacrilegious detention of an holy Legacie from the Sonnes of God. In o∣ther points of difference, our aduersaries lay Concil. Constan. sss 13. Thogh Christ did in stute in both ds, and the  ch did so minister, &c. claime to the Primitiue Church: but in this they yeeld it vs. Against other of their errors wee haue frequent testimonies in the former and purer Ages, for fiue, or sixe hundred yeeres after Christ: but few in the later. Against this

vnsufferable enormity wee abound in passages of good Writers in all Ages. In other contro∣uersies, the Romanists, like Sampsons Foxes, are tyed fast by the tailes: in this they are loose, and parted asunder, and they take direct con∣trary courses. They disproue their own proofes and approoue our disproofes of them. Penelopes telam texunt, & retexunt, they doe and vndoe. There is no argument of ours against them, which is not confirmed by some of them, no obiection of theirs against vs, which is not sol∣ued by some of their owne side; as thou mayst see through the whole, but especially in the last Chapter of this Discourse. Into which I Imbar∣ked my studies the rather vpon this occasi∣on.
About two yeeres since I was desired by a person of qualitie, to conferre with a L. a little before that time seduced by deceitfull guides, who first lead the party out of the right way in∣to the Arminian tract, and afterward into the high rode of Popery lying not farre off. Vpon the first motion, I made some difficultie of gi∣uing the party a meeting: because I suspected there might be shifted into the company, after their manner, some disguized Priest lying in subsidijs, or in Ambush as it were, that he might suddenly rush in vpon the least shew of aduan∣tage. Yet after the messenger had assured mee, that there were none in the Ls companie, but such as sincerely affected the truth of the Gospell, I made then no scruple, but presently

accompanied him to the Honorable personages house. Where I found, notwithstanding that the L. was prouided of a second, and that the L. mouth was vsed onely as a trunke to shoote out those poysoned bullets, which M. Euerard the Priest, and Confessor to this person, had chammed before with his teeth. Aspis à vipera sumit venenum: the Aspe, according to the Prouerb, borrowed poyson of the Viper. The Priest, in a few passages of speech vnawares dis∣couered himselfe, tanquam sorex suo iudicio; whereupon I drew backe, and was very desirous to breake of further conference, because I expe∣cted nothing lesse, then sincere dealing in a meeting, that was contriued by fraud, and be∣gan to be acted in a masking manner. Yet when I obserued, that M. Euerard grew very insolent, and audacious vpon my withdrawing my selfe, and diuerse Knights and Gentlemen there pre∣sent, religiously deuoted to the Truth, both ad∣uised, and intreated me not to bee wanting to the necessarie defence thereof: (Cassium enim hunc sufflaminandum esse) at their instance, I vn∣dertooke Master Euerard, and for many houres sometimes opposed, and sometimes answe∣red in diuers points, but especially in the question most desired by both parties to bee particularly debated, touching the necessity of Communicating in both kinds. The confe∣rence ended, I thought to haue heard no more of it, because it being on my part casuall, and ex∣temporall; I conceiued it of little importance

either way. But being since informed by an ho nourable Lord, that M. Euerard after that en∣counter had not only with his tongue licked all his wounds whole, but also with a venemous tooth fastned many slanders vpon me, I thought fit to send him the ensewing relatiō of the Cō∣ference, requiring him to adde, or alter, what he thought conuenient in his owne arguments, and answers, and then to consigne it with his subscription, as I meant to doe the rest with mine also. Vpon the receit hereof, he promised to returne me an answer with speed: but after many moneths failing thereof, being vrged a∣gaine and again, and vpbrayded with his tergi∣uersations, in the end he sent me a flat denial by S. P. L. and therein shewed himselfe to be of the nature of the Crocodile, or of those barbarous souldiers, of whom Muretus obserued, that they Plin. nat. hist. l. 8. c. 25. Terribilis haec contra fu∣gaces bellua, fu∣gax contra inse∣quentes. Mu∣ret. Orat. Barba∣ri cedentibus in∣stant, instantibus cedeunt. furiously charge them that yeeld, but present∣ly yeeld vnto them that charge them: pursuing hard vpon a retiring enemie, but flying with all speed from a pursuing. Now, lest that this my Antagonist should take D. Weston, and M. Fisher, for two Enfant perdues, or forelorne hopes, for his presidents; who, when they ought mederi capiti, and answer to the maine, touching the visibili∣tie of a Church, professing the Trent Faith 500. yeeres after Christ, reduuiam curarunt, and lea∣uing quit the matter of Faith, shaped some co∣lourable answer to impertinent circumstances of fact, and that of no great consequence either way: I haue therefore premised a Challenge

to M. Euerard, as also to M. Fisher, to deale with me in this principall Controuersie; and I haue set downe the state thereof, and added thereun∣to such proofes for the truth, as the holy Scrip∣tures, and the prime Authors in all ages haue of∣fered vnto me. All which I submit to thy dili∣gent examination, and iudicious censure.
