



THE considera∣tion of Gods dreadful iudge∣mentes powred vpō dissembling hypocrites and disobedient persons in the Church as they are mentioned in the word of God, and obserued of the faithfull in all ages; and the com∣paring
of our daies with former times, wherby we may see how the same sins now reign, for which the Iews long since were punished, the candlesticks of the Gospel were re¦moued out of the seauen famous Churches in Asia, & almost al other Churches planted by the Apostles are destroied, hauing their lampes quēched & their lights put out by the Pope & Mahomet, by the great Turk & the Sophies of the Persians; & how the same iudgments which heretofore haue light vpō the vn∣godly, burn among our neighbors on each side, & of late by famin & fearful sicknes haue already begun to spreade themselues among vs; bring oftē to my remēbrance that saying of the prophet Amos, Cha. 3
ver. 4. &c. Wil a lion roare in the forest, when he hath no preie? Or wila Lions whelp cry out of his den, if he haue taken nothing? can a bird fal in a snare vpon the earth, where no fouler is? or wil he take vp the snare frō the earth, & haue taken nothing at al? or shal a trumpet be blowen in the citie, & the people be not afraid? or shal there be euil in a city, and the Lorde hath not done it? Surely the Lorde God will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secrete vnto his seruantes the prophets. The Lion hath roared: who will not be afraide? the Lorde God hath spoken: who can but prophesie? And this seriously pondred may make all the faith∣ful afraide lest the fulnesse of vs Gentiles be welneere come in, and lest our posteritie and succes∣sors
shoulde be depriued of the worde of GOD, the meanes for the saluation of all Gods elect, and so be disinherited of the king∣dome of heauen, wherein only is ioy, life, and happinesse for e∣uermore. For monstrous pride, cruell oppression, craftie dealing, vnsatiable coueteousnesse, vn∣cleannesse of life so aboundeth, and there is such securitie in all, such contempt in many, and such negligence in the best, that how∣soeuer wee may hope for some good, so there is greate cause to feare much euill. Wherefore as the Churches in former times both before and since Christ, haue alwaies had this onely meanes to preuent Gods greater iudge∣mentes,
euen to breake off their sinnes by some rare kind of repen∣tance, and solemnly to renewe the couenant of God: so haue I according to the smale talent the Lorde hath bestowed vpon me, indeuoured with greate desire in this shorte treatise to lay open be∣fore the eyes of the simple, the manner of the couenant between God and man, that our heartes beeing pricked with sorrowe for our sinnes, as theirs were which hearde Peter preach, Act. 2.37. and our soules melting for feare of Gods iudgementes, as did the hearte of Iosiah at the hearing of the lawe, 2. King. 22.11.19. wee may be stirred vp to lay holde of mercie, before the Lordes hande
take holde on iudgement, and most solemnly to renewe the co∣uenant betweene God and vs, as the Iewes did both, Ezr. ca. 9. & 10. and Nehem. cap. 8. & 9. & 10. For except there be some reconciliati∣on made by our repentance, and renewing of the couenant, whiles there is time and grace offered; it is vndoubtedly true, that the Lord will either weede out from a∣mong vs the great sinners, & bring the rest into the bond of the coue∣nant, as he did with the Israelites a little before they entred into the promised Canaan, Deut. 4.3.4. or else he will vtterly cast vs off, and giue vs vp to reprobation, and in his secret & vnsearchable wisdom reserue a smal remnant according
to the election of grace, as he did with the Iewes at the first cōming of Christ in the flesh. And because of our selues we are vntowarde to euery good work, & plenty, plea∣sure, and security are greate impe∣dimentes to many, my heartes de∣sire and prayer to God hath beene and is, that he would breed in vs by his holy spirit like feeling of our sinnes as Salomon had after his fall, and like affection as he had, that we may say as he did in the booke of repentance, which commonly is called the booke of the preacher, vanity of vanities, saith the preacher: vanity of vanities, all is vanity, &c. throughout that whole book, and so treading vnder our feet whatso euer in this world hindreth vs from
godlines, we may haue our minds set on heauenly things, with pati∣ence run the race that is set before vs, looke stedfastly vnto Iesus Christ, the author and finisher of our faith, and lastlie receiue the ende of our faith, euen the salua∣tion of our soules. In the meane space I humblie beseech all that feare God vnfainedly and from their heartes, that for the tender mercies of God in Iesus Christ, for the continuance of the Gospel amonge vs, for our posterities and successours sakes, who shall possesse the earth for their time when we are gone and swept away, that they woulde not cease night nor day continually to be impor∣tunate with the Lord by earnest &
heartie praier for the continuance and increase of his graces, that true godlinesse may dwell in our lande, and abundance of peace with all prosperitie whiles the sun and moone endure, knowing that the prayer of a righteous man a∣uaileth much if it be feruent.
Nowe right worshipfull, and my deare brethren in Christ, though in needeth not to render any reasons why I dedicate this smale treatise to you, notwith∣standing to omitte others, these two causes I thinke meete heere to be mentioned. First that this may be a publike testimonie of the heartie loue which you be are to the Gospell of Iesus Christ, and which you haue plentifully decla∣red
many waies to the glorie of God, the comfort of others, and the peace of your owne soules. Secondly that by this meanes I may declare the loue that I beare not onely to all that call on the name of the Lord in sinceritie, but specially to you who haue often heard the chiefe pointes of those things pulikly deliuered, which are heere set downe in writing. And if heerein the Lord my God vouch¦safe me this fauor, as that I may be his instrument (though most vn∣worthie, as he knowth very well) to minister some smale comfort to any of the least of his seruantes, I shall obtaine the thing I specially desire of GOD through Iesus Christ our Lorde. The God of
glorie, and father of all mercies continue the Gospell of his sonne Iesus Christ among you for euer∣more.
Octob. 20. 1595.
