



Right Worshipfull
TO three Benefactors are wee of the English Priesthood principally engaged. To God for his provi∣dence over vs; to our most Gra∣tious King for his protection of vs, and to our bounteous Patrons for their munificence vnto vs. God giues vs what is his owne and from

no other, the King what is his owne but yet deriued from God, but the Patron calles to that portion which is neither his nor any o∣thers, saue only Gods. So that God is our Grand Patron, which giues vs our maintenance, our good Prince his vicegerent to defend it, and our Patrones (to whom by their and the Lawes permission belongs the right of advocation or calling) are his stewards to dispence it. To eve∣ry one of which by the Law of gratitude be∣longs both the Dication of our selues, and the Dedication of our Christian labours. In this my poore piece though I cannot finde enough to satisfie all, yet something out of it I may share to each, so (of what it is) not defrauding any. To God then I dedicate that sufficiency it hath; for from his spirit and assistance it came; to my Soveraigne the benefits of Peace, Iustice, and Obedience there-from accruing, for to him in the first place they belong, and to you the Booke, for to you it appertaines, as occasioned by your Commaund. Truth only therein I can promise, eloquence I dare not: it agrees not with our Site, where the daily ob∣iect Aristoph. .of our eares are the Comedians  and the frequentest Prototypes of

our imitations, the obstreperous cadencies of gnats and froggs. Plaine it is, and so, like my selfe; and indeed ceremonious I would not bee, because I would be what I should bee, Reall. For ceremonies are but supplements in the place of realities, a tissue coate to cover a blacke skinne: and therefore I haue alwaies e∣steemed their immoderate vse superstition, as well in the expression of loue and duty, as in re∣ligion. I thinke I need no Apology to the rea∣der: For though my endeavours be weake, yet are they honest. Wherefore if he be good, hee will pardon mee, and if he be bad, I will neglect him. Accept them I beseech you, Noble Sir, what they are. The best I can say of them, is to say, they are the embleme of your servants duty; and with them you shall receiue the zeale of

Saltry All-Saints, alias Moygne. Iuly 30. 1633.
