



GEntlemen, Because you haue iust occa∣sion in your callings to deale often with Merchandise, I haue beene bold to call you a little from your Temporall, to a Spirituall Traffique: and haue sent you a Christian Nauigatour, bound for the Holy Land; who without question will giue you some relations of his Trauells, worthy two houres perusing. You shall finde a whole Sea sailed through in a short time; and that a large Sea, not a foote lesse then the World. You will say, the description lyes in a little volume: Why, you haue seene the whole world narrow'd vp into a small Mappe. They that haue beene said, after many yeares, at last to compasse it, haue not described all coasts and corners of it. Euen their silence hath giuen succee∣ding

generations hope to find out new Lands; and you know, they haue found them. You cannot expect more of two houres discouery, then of seauen yeares. I leaue many things to be descried by others: yet dare promise this, that I haue giuen you some necessary directions for your happiest voyage. Ouer this glassy Sea you must saile, you are now sayling. Truth be your Card, & the Holy Ghost your Pilot. Your Course being well direc∣ted, you cannot possibly make a happier iourney. The Hauen is before your eyes, where your Sauiour sits with the hand of mercy wafting you to him. You cannot bee Sea-sicke, but he will comfort, and restore you. If the Tempest comes, call on him with Peter, Lord saue vs; and he will rebuke the windes and the Seas; they shal not hurt you. Storme and tempest, winds and waters obey his voyce. What Rocks, Gulfes, Swallowes, and the danger (worse then that is called the Terror of the Ex∣change, the Pyrate; one plague which the Deuill hath added to the Sea, more then Nature gaue it) of that great Leuiathan, Satan; and other perils that may en∣danger you, are marked out. Decline them so well as you may; and consider what Prouidence guides your course: this Sea is Before Gods Throne. Keepe you the Cape of good Hope in your eye: and what euer becomes of this weake Vessell, your Body; make sure to saue the Pas∣senger, your Soule, in the day of the Lord Iesus. What is here directed you, shall be faithfully prayed for, by him

