




BEloved Believers, both you and I, are infinitely behol∣den to our ever li∣ving Father, who hath made
his will and given all us his chil∣dren great wealth, rich porti∣ons, and large Legacies, now in present possession; graces, and comforts, in unshaken expecta∣tion and assured reversion, per∣fection and eternall glory. Wee are greatly beholding to Iehova, for his will directory, hortato∣ry, correctory, but most of all for his will consolatory, in which, he salves all our sores; physicks all our sicknesses, me∣decines all our maladies, Psalm. 103.4. Heales all our diseases, and crownes us with loving kindnesse and tender mercies. And surely wee are all of us
much beholding to the holy Authour of this sweet (though little) Book, who hath so pious∣ly, painfully, and profitably pe∣rused the holy will of our hea∣venly Father, and wisely sought and found out and put into our hands, the spirituall portion, and Soule-Legacies, given and be∣queathed unto us by our best friend, many of which, most of scarce knew of, few sought and sued for them, and very few comfortable enjoyed and wise∣ly and diligently used to the do∣nors glory and their own good. Carelesse children, come often∣times to be beholden unto their
more carefull brethren and thri∣ving friends, who save all they have, sue for all that is promi∣sed, and seek for all they heare of: so is it here, wee carelesse, negligent, poore and ill thriven Christians, must be beholding to this carefull, diligent, rich and well thriven Authour, who obeyes Pauls counsell, 1. Cor. 12.31. Covets earnestly the best gifts and will not suffer the heavenly Father, to purse and keep a pen∣ny that is due, to with-hold grace or comfort (which hee hath promised) in whole, or degree, but he shall heare of his promise, and if he doe not pre∣sently
fulfill according to cove∣nant, a petition is speedily drawne, to be preferred in the Court of heaven, and an Advo∣cate prepared Jesus Christ the righteous. 1. Iohn 2.1. Suite (by prayer) begun, and in an eager pursuit continued, till the thing promised be performed.
This little Book, and private practise of the Author (who hath sued for all these Legacies, and in some good measure hath attained the same, and thereby is become spirituall rich) will sufficiently prove what I have spoken. Wee are much behol∣den to this Author, for letting us
see our Portions and Legacies in our Fathers will, and setting us a worke both by penne and practise to sue for the same.
The volume is little, but the vertue contained in the same is great. The book is extraordina∣ry, being altogether for applica∣tion and practise. The scope and drift of it is, to furnish Believers with abundance of good; to free them from all sins inward, outward, secret, and open; To fill them with all graces in life, power, and exercise; To bring them comfort in, and seasona∣ble deliverance from all their troubles; To draw down upon
their foules and bodies abun∣dance of blessings of all sorts and natures: to give them full assurance of certaine and seaso∣nable entrance into glory, and to give them fast hold of hea∣ven.
There are many, I know, that will little regard it: the Pro∣phane person will not like it, for it is full of holinesse: the car∣nall Protestant will not discern of it, nor relish it, for it is spiri∣tuall: the dissembling hypocrite will not well approve of it, for it will rob him of his Rimmon, slay his Mris, his Dalilah, his Herodias, his darling sin, it will
tell him, if he applyes promises, he must keepe the conditions, obey precept, and put every ini∣quty, though never so pleasura∣ble or profitable, farre away from his Tabernacles. But the honest hearted and sincere Be∣liever will approve of it, prize it, use it, and profit by it.
And not to overcommend my commodity, as one desirous to make it more vendible and saleable (for neither I, nor its Authour, God is witnesse, ayme at any such thing, but at the spi∣rituall good of their soules unto whom it shall come) this little Book, like a well filled lttle A∣pothecaries
shop, containes within it heavenly receipts of all sorts, wholesome physick of every kind for expelling and cu∣ring all sorts of diseases and sick∣nesses incident to Saints, and for the corroborating and strengthning of new nature, and for keeping the spirituall man in good health, lusty and strong able for Gods service, Phil. 2.12. and for working out his owne salvation with feare and tremb∣ling. What here J speake unto one Believer, I intend for all.
Hath sin that deadly poyson infected thee? Loe here in this little Book an Antidote, a pre∣servative
which will extract and expell this poyson. Hath this serpent so fiery stung thee? Num. 21.8. Loe here the Brazen Serpent upon the pole. Hath it beggered and undone thee? Iohn 3.14, 15. Behold a way in this Book, how thou maist become rich. Doth it daily trouble thee; will it needs tirannize and do∣mineere over thee? This little Book will learn thee to depose this tyrant, Rom. 6.14. and tell thee he shall not have domini∣on and Lordship over thee Hath it stricken thee dead? Loe heres means of reviving and in∣living thee, to an happy life of
grace. Doth it threaten thy ru∣ine? Loe here Physick for thy feares, Cor. 15.35. death hath lost its sting, sin is destroyed, death shall fully and finally free thee from it. Art thou hunted like a poore Lambe by the hellish de∣vouring Lyon, Sathan, and cha∣sed before this infernall dog, like a silly Deere, in temptati∣ons? Loe here a thicket, a shel∣ter, a sheepheard, under which thou maist repose and rest thy self in safety. Art thou overcome with his wilie stratagems? Loe here wisdome. Art thou beaten downe with his power? Loe here strength. Fearest thou the
fiery darts of this evill one? Loe here a little house full of targets, shields, and bucklers, Ephes. 6.16. (promises applyed by faith) which will repell and quench them. Iob 6.4. Doe Gods ter∣rours set themselves in array a∣gainst thee? are Gods arrowes in thee? doth his slaming wrath burne in thy bosome, and is like∣ly to consume thee? Loe streams of mercy and grace from a re∣freshing fountaine, fluent in the pipes of the promises, by thy hand of faith turn the cock, and the coole water of Gods grace and mercy shall flow forth up∣on thy soule, and allay its burn∣ing
heat, and inflamations. Doth the wilie world endea∣vour to entangle and inveagle thee by its lures and snares? Loe here liberty, freedome, better things propounded, and promi∣sed, which Believers doe for the present in some measure en∣joy, and shall have a most cer∣taine and full possession of af∣terwards. Wantest thou Grace, comfort, deliverance, blessing, or any good thing? Behold, here thou maist have them, to the great joy of thine heart, and content of thy Spirit.
Set faith a work to draw out what thou wantest, and thou
shalt have it. Sucke these sweet and heavenly breasts of God by the mouth of thy faith; open these pipes and veines of the promises, which runne so full of mercy, grace, truth, com∣fort, joy and peace, for every Be∣liever, by faith; and thou shalt bee satiate with every good thing.
Lest I should make too great a porch for this little house, and too great gates for this little Cit∣ty, I will conclude, with an ex∣hortation to all my beloved brethren and sisters which are Believers, to perfect their faith by application of the promises,
both of these in this sweet little Book, and of all others, contai∣ned in the Old and New Testa∣ment.
Suffer not Gods promises (as J may so say) to milke them∣selves, doe you draw them, let not good rest with God, which you may have by believing and begging, to your great comfort and enriching, but take Gods commodities off his hand, trade with that wealthy Merchant in the farre Countrey, the Lord Ie∣sus in heaven, for his rich com∣modities of graces and com∣forts, and glorious hopes, untill you be rich and wealthy; and
for this purpose cause those two good factours, Faith and Prayer, founded upon and quickned and confirmed by the pretious promises, alway to trade for you in heaven, untill you come thither your selves. I would desire all Believers to make this their pocket booke that it may sollicite and woe them to prayer, make solid and firme their faith, increase their graces, comforts, and heavenly hopes, prepare them for endu∣ring the stormes of trouble and tempests of temptations, and may encourage them in holy well-doing and Christian per∣severance
unto the end. Heb. 6.12. Now brethren, my hearts desire is, that ye be not slothfull, but followers of them who through faith and patience in∣herit the Promises.
That you may be inheritours of them, it shall bee my daily prayer unto the Lord my God, to bestow upon your hearts to use all good meanes, for the at∣taining of the good, in these and other promises of God unto his people. That he would teach and enable you to meditate up∣on them diligently day and night, to believe them firmely; to apply them severally, particu∣larly,
personally, to sue for them earnestly by prayer constant and fervent, to waite for their promised accomplishment by patience, that so you may enjoy the good of them here and here∣after, which God in mercy grant unto me, and also you. AMEN.
