



THE Persians in time past, and also, by credible report at this day (right Worshipfull) at vacant and idle times, when they are not busied in the affaires of their commō wealth, nor troubled in their owne priuat matters, vse commonly to whittle small twigs of birch, to keepe them selues from vaine imaginations and idle cogitations, but nothing either profitable to the weale publique, or to their priuat persons. In like manner, Domiti∣anus an Emperor of Rome, was wont to busie himselfe with pricking and thrusting flyes through with needles, in his window: so that this reproachful prouerb sprang vp of his so vaine spending the time: for when any of his subiects de∣manded who was in the Emperors presence (if he then were not about his foolish labor) his seruants would answere, ne musca quidem, not so much as a flye: which commonly was spoken after a reproachful sense. Therefore Sir, for the auoy∣ding of such vnprofitable labors, and also for the shunning of blameable idlenesse, in spending my time about such fruiteles toyes, and friuelous toyles, I trust I haue after a bet∣ter sort imployed my vacant times, not in whitling or sha∣uing of sticks, nor in killing of flyes, neither as Myrmecidas Milesius, or Callicrates Lacedemonius did, who spent and consumed a great time in making a small waggon, to bee drawne with two couples of horses, which might easilie bee

hidden vnder the compasse of a slye, and wrote in a little small bery, no bigger than a beane, a posie of two verses in letters of golde: which fruiteles toyle (although it was fini∣shed with diligent care, and cunning hand) was wonderful∣ly scoffed and derided at amongst the wiser sort of men, for wasting the time so vainely about such toyes, as neither profited themselues, nor was any commoditie at all to the common wealth. It is further reported (right worshipful) that Satyrus, a certaine bagpiper, being present at the Phi∣losopher Aristos disputations, finding what sweete me∣thod, and pithie sentences, were included in his learned say∣ings, sayed:

Cur ego non ignitrado, hoc mihi inutile telum?


Why doo not I vile hairebraine foole,
Commit to fire this fruitles toole?

In like sort my selfe conferring with my books, at conuenient leasure, finding what proffit is reaped there∣by, and taking pleasure in the sweet harmonie and pleasant melody of the wise sayings of the learned Philosophers, am constrained with Satyrus to lay a side and cast of all vaine toyes, and superfluous toyles, vntill my minde be sufficient∣ly satisfied with their learned conference. But for that con∣uenient leasure, and vacant times alwaies at will are not commonly incident to my coate (as your Worship right well knoweth:) wherefore I am forced to write, as the Ae∣giptian dogs doo lap their water: the curs of that countrey by a naturall inclination, doo knowe, that in Nilus, and in other Riuers and floods of Aegypt, certaine venymous beasts, and stinging Serpents doo lye closely hid vnder the water, waighting for their praye, and therefore they to shun that perrill doo run a long the shores and bankes of the streames, and lap their water (as the olde saying is) by sniches, & catches, as they may without danger come by it. So my self being compelled to take such vncertaine leasure, as conueniently I may: wherein I haue by fits, penned this my slender worke, hoping that your Worship will bee to

the booke, as Achilles shield was to Vlisses, or as Hercules club was to the Daughter of King Euritus: Vlisses thought himselfe safe vnder the shield of noble Achilles, which he knew (for the Masters sake) would terrifie the beholder, Iole the Daughter of Euritus did make the knees of mightie men to stoupe, by holding in her hand the weapon of the most renowmed Conqueror Hercules. So I crauing your Worships patronage; whose noble nature, vertuous go∣uernement, and learned experience, I knowe to bee of sufficient force, to shield and couer this my homelie and rude stile, from the hatefull hand of all repiners, from whose mouth it is as hard a thing to get a good word, as to wrest perforce the club out of Hercules handes: and would willingly that a man should reape for his paine∣full labour the thankelesse crop of Cholchos soile, which is to the wearie tiller present destruction. It may be that your Worship doth rather expect at my hand a badge or token of my profession, coming so lately from the Hawks perch, than to treat of matters too high for my learning and skill: Notwithstanding, when I call to minde your wonted cour∣tesies and accustomable affabilitie, I imbolden my selfe to sollicite your Worship with this my slender muse, hoping that you will with Artaxerxes, receiue the good will of the simple meaner; not expecting cloquence so aboundantly to flowe from the Hawkes perch, as from Aristotles Schoole. But if I may perceiue that this my diligent paine is recom∣penced with friendly acceptance, I shal rest right happy and well contented, and my Booke shall thinkest selfe as safely shrowded and defended vnder your fauourable protection, as vnder the patronage of a farre higher State: for that both your Worships vertue, good gouernement, learned dis∣position and courteous behauiour, is sufficiently knowne in this our Countrey, amongest your louing neighbours, where your countenance will make the simple worke to ca∣rie more credite, than of it selfe it deserueth, thorough the good affection that our Countrie-men doo beare to your name.
Thus beeing forced to leaue off from further touching your worthie merit, least that you should blame my pen, for ouer much flattering, which thing (I know) you hartely de∣test, and also fearing that I haue too boldly presumed in crauing your assistance, leauing at the length to abuse your patience, with ouermuch tediousnesse, I end: wishing in∣crease of worship, and whatsoeuer, (in this world) your heart can wish or desire, to fall vpon you.



R Regard not riches if they rise, but for to serue thy need;
remember what was Craesus fall, and how the wretch did speed.
O On Catos words consider well, then rich, when once content:
of Crates thinke, who sure was rich, when all his wealth was spent.
B Beare Titus mind that Roman peere whose noble heart did bend
before the sunne went downe each day, to purchase him a friend,
E Ere angry moode doo make the strike, first play vpon thy lute:
each day Achilles would doo so, and Clinius on the Flute,
R Reuenge not vnaduisedly, call Phocion first to mind:
rather take thou wrong with him, than shew thy selfe vnkinde.
T To wise Themistocles giue eare, that loude his Countrey well:
true subiects liude (as oft we read) when wretched traitors fell.
V Vse not by feare to awe each man, least thou repent too late:
vrge none (saith Tully) by such meanes, for feare procureth hate.
S See that thy Countrimen haue right, the poore man doo not fleece:
so maist thou haue in this our soyle, as Solon had in Greece.


S Shun Caesars pride, beware of that for he himselfe was slaine:
such haps doo greete aspiring mindes, when worlds they thinke to gain.
P Pompey could abide no mate, nor Caesar anie peere:
pride brought them to vntimely death, their state was bought so deere.
E Endeuour to digest abuse, on wise Pericles thinke:
else follow sage Zenocrites, at iniuries to winke.
N Nestor liude with great renowme, in Pilos well esteemd:
now lead a life that thou in fine, a second he, be deemd.
C Call to thy minde King Darius, that vsed oft remorce:
could Nero liue, when he began to rule in Rome perforce.
E Earst Hiero of Siracusa, for learning still would striue:
erre not but spend some time therein, whilest heere thou art aliue.
R Read what wise Seneca doth say, of Cicero goe learne:
run not with vnaduised hast, and thou shalt right discerne.


