



Courteous Reader:
A Few daies since a friend of mine
shewed me a Booke intituled a
Parallel, which I gladly re∣ceiued
from him, and perused
it the more readily, because I
well hoped, that some of the
Parallel lines would sute to our Meridian. But
taking an exact view of them, and applying them
to our Horizon, I found they were somewhat
short of our Eleuation: yet I discouered some
thing drawne in those Parallels, which I concei∣ued

to be of some vse, to wit, the Lineal descent of
Arminius by the half bloud at least, frō Pelagius;
for if it be confessed, that Arminius his pedegree
is lineally to be deriued from Pelagius, and that
Pelagius is the great Apenninus, from which the
diuided streames of corrupt doctrine flow; then
vndoubtedly the assertions of Arminius were
priùs damnatae, quàm natae were condemned
by the Catholique Christian Church, before they
were brought forth by Arminius: And we haue
the Prescription of the Christian world, for more
than 1200. yeares, against the new encroach∣ments
of these Sectaries. But me thinks I heare
thee ring in mine care the peale of the Poet,
Ole quid ad te? what is this to thee, or me? or to
the matter now on foot? It is not Arminius, but
an Appealer that troubles our Israel; Aemilius
fecit, plectetur Rutilius? Aemilius hath done
wrong, shall Rutilius beare the blame? Because
Arminius browseth vpon some branches of Pe∣lagianisme,
(a plant which our heauenly Father
neuer planted, and therefore in time must be roo∣ted
out) is it reason, the Appealer should be
muzled, or any mans teeth whet against him?
Verily, the Appealer disclaimes all kinred or affi∣nitie

with Arminius; nay he protesteth, he know∣eth
not the man; and if peraduenture some Lon∣ginus
or skilfull Genealogist may be able to dis∣proue
him, yet certainly the vulgar reader is not.
I haue therefore thought it worth the paines, to
take the line of Pelagius which is already brought
downe to Arminius, and from Arminius to draw
it out euen to the Appealer, to the end, all, that
are not forestalled with preiudice, may see,
that both the Appealer, and Arminius hold their
errors in capite from Pelagius; And that at the
first the Netherlands, and other parts receiued
the infection of pestilent doctrine from Britaine
by Pelagius; and now at last, that Britaine hath
receiued it from the Netherlands by Arminius:
Mater me genuit, eadem mox gignitur ex me.
But before I open the leaues of my Tablet, repre∣senting
on the one side the Arminian, and on the
other, the Appealers Demi-Pelagianisme, I in∣treat
the Reader emunctae naris to follow the
sent of Arminianisme in the Appealers writings
by these foure steps.

1. His sleight and dilute purgation from
the aspersion of Arminianisme.

2. His direct and professed defence of the
Arminians.
3. His casting a blur vpon the Synod of
Dort that blasted them.
4. His disparaging the Articles of Lamb∣hith,
which are è diametro opposite to
the tenets of Baro then, and since Ar∣minius.

To begin with his Purgation. Although in other
Criminations it may be an argument of Innocencie
not to be moued or any way sensible of them; yet
in the suspition of heresie,Tacit. Maledicta si irascaris, agni∣ta videntur▪ spreta exolescunt. no man (as saith Saint
Hierom) ought to be silent. Silence in such an
accusation is a crying sin, Et patientia digna om∣ni
impatientiâ, and patience it selfe is vnsuffe∣rable.
Euery man is bound to professe his faith,
and consequently openly to discharge himselfe
from all imputation, especially of heresie, which
is so foule a crime, that the water of penitent
teares alone hath not bin thought enough to wash
it away. Scelus hoc exuritur igne; it hath bin
vsually burnt out with fire. It leaueth such a spot
in the conscience, that S. Cyprian conceiueth, The
blood of Martyrdome cannot fetch it out. Ma∣cula
haec nec sanguine eluitur.Cyprian. epist. Now whether

Pelagianisme be heresie, I thinke it is a question
without question, vnlesse we will take vpon vs
to censure the censures of the ancient Church, and
most eminent Doctors thereof. S. Austin in his
booke de bono Perseuerantiae, is not content to
call it perniciosissimus error, c. 17. but c. 21. he
calls it twise,Antequam Pela∣giana haeresis ap∣pareret. and re∣colant aduersus haeresin Pelagi∣anam. Pelagiana haeresis. And that Armi∣nianisme is Pelagianisme, either in whole or in
part, I take the Parallel, till I see it not slightly
glanced at, but substantially refuted to be an ocu∣lar
demōstratiō.Concil. Carth. sub Aurelio. Nefa∣rius & ab omni∣bus anathemati∣zandus error. Concil. Mileuit. Perniciosissimi erroris auctores perhibentur Cae∣lestius & Pela∣gius. But if this be yet , a point
not yet gained, yet that Arminianisme (where∣with
the Appealer is charged, not only by two
Presbyters of his owne ranke, but a reuerend Pre∣late
his Diocesan) is formally heresie, Appello
Caesarem, I appeale to that Caesar whom he first
appealed vnto,August. p. 94. ad Hilariū: Omnes qui spem habe∣mus in Christo huic pestiferae impietati resi∣stere debemus. Prosper. in Crom. Per totum mun∣dum haeresis Pe∣lagiana damna∣ta est. King IAMES, of blessed me∣morie,
who in his declaration against Vorstius
hath these words, concerning Arminius, He was
the first in our age that infected Leyden with
heresie. And concerning Bertius he writeth thus;
Bertius a scholler of Arminius, at this present
remaining in your towne of Leyden,August. ep. 47. Pelagiana haeresis venena. August. lib. 1. de pec. orig. Doctrina illa pestifera. Ad Bonis. l. 2. c. 5. Nnum & execrabil dogma Pelagianum vel Caelestianum. Et post, Exitiosissima prauitas. hath not

onely presumed to publish of late a blasphe∣mous
booke of the apostasie of Saints; but
hath besides bin so impudent, as to send the
other day a copie thereof, as a goodly present,
to our Archbishop of Canterbury, together
with a Letter, wherein he is not ashamed, as
also in his booke, to lye so grosly, as to auow,
that his heresies contained in the said booke,
are agreeable with the Religion and professi∣on
of the Church of England.
To cleare then himselfe from the foule spot of
this heresie, what course doth the Appealer take?
Doth he call God, and his Angels to witnesse, that
he renounceth from his heart all Arminius his
vnwarrantable and dangerous assertions? Doth
he , fairely and openly make this, or the
like protestation? Arminius teacheth none, but
respectiue Predestination: I am for absolute. Vni∣uersall
grace and redemption is an Article of Ar∣minius
faith: It is none of mine. The coopera∣tion
of mans freewill with grace in the first con∣uersion,
and the power it hath to hinder, and fru∣strate
the worke of regenerating grace, is current
doctrine with Arminius. But I take it for a
leaden Leyden error. Arminius maintaineth a

totall and finall falling away from the grace of
Iustification: I detest and abhominate that as∣sertion,
and will haue no Confarreation with the
apostate defender of such Apostasie.
This had beene indeed to vnclaspe the right
hands of fellowship with Arminius, and if he had
euer walkt in his path, to shake the dust from his
feet: but in stead hereof, the Appealer casts
dust in the Readers eyes, by making a deepe pro∣testation,
idque in verbo Sacerdotis, of not rea∣ding
any word in Arminius. I protest (saith he)
before God and his Angels,Appeal. to Cae∣sar pag. 21. the time is yet to
come, that euer I read word in Arminius. Be∣fore
I read this Protestation, I confesse, that my
selfe with many others imagined, that, as Osorius
writeth, that some in the Indies by often smelling
to Brasell, had Scorpions bred in their braines; so
the Appealer by frequent reading of Arminius
his bookes, and smelling to his exotecall positions,
had hatcht this Serpents brood in his braine. But
because hee denieth it, in verbo Sacerdotis, I
rest satisfied, that he neuer read Arminius: but
for ought he saith to the contrary, he may haue
heard all Arminius read ouer to him. Admit he
neuer read, or heard of Arminius, this will be no

good plea, if his doctrine be the doctrine of Armi∣nius;
Legat that was burned in Smithfield, for
an Arrian, might protest truly, that he neuer read
word in Arrius his bookes, as indeed he could not,
because Arrius his bookes, with himselfe, were
many hundred yeares ago eradicated, will the Ap∣pealer
from thence conclude that Legat was no
Arrian? How many thousand Nestorians are
there in the Greeke Church at this day, who
yet neuer read word in Nestorius his writings;
not now extant (I take it) any where? I dare say,
Arminius himselfe neuer read word in a∣ny
of Pelagius his workes, or the workes of the
Semipelagians, or Massilians, yet he cannot free
himselfe from the brand of Pelagianisme; neither
doth much desire to be acquitted from the note of
Semipelagianisme. Wee reade in the Ciuill Law,
Malitia supplet aetatem: Malice oftentimes sup∣plies
the defect of age. In like manner it is most
certaine, that where there is a propension in any
mans minde to any old heresie, the malice of the
Deuill easily supplyeth the want of reading: Za∣barel
hauing coyned, as he thought, a new distin∣ction
vnheard of before, was as proud of it, as euer
Pelius was of his new sword, saying, Ego hanc so∣lutionem

primus inueni:In comment. in poster. Analyt. yet afterwards he inge∣niously
confesseth, that perusing Gandauensis his
writings vpon the same argument, there he found
the selfe-same distinction; and it much reioyced
his heart, that so acute a Philosopher as Ganda∣uensis,
should hit vpon the same conceit with him.
Might it not be so with the Appealer? might he
not first proiect the new plot of Predestination in
his owne head, and yet afterwards light vpon the
same in Arminius, or some of his schollers, and
exceedingly applaud either their conceit in him∣selfe,
or his in theirs? For mine owne part I will
not vndertake to proue that the Appealer was e∣uer
an apprentice to Iames Harmin; but by set∣ting
vp both of their loomes, I will make it appeare
that they are both , of the same trade or
craft.
Thou seest, Christian Reader, that his purgati∣on
of himselfe needeth a defence, but his direct de∣fence
of the Arminians much more needeth a pur∣gation.
No doubt the Appealer read often in the
Heathen Orator,Cic. pro Sylla. that it taints a man deepely once
to open his lips in the defence of such a man, whom
he suspecteth to be an enemie to the State: Quae∣dam
contagio est sceleris si eum defendas

quem patriae obstrictum esse suspiceris. How
much more doth it blurre a mans reputation to
frame an apologie for him, whom King Iames of
blessed memory, vpon iust and religious considera∣tions,Declar. aduers. Vorstium.
proclaimeth to be an enemie of God? Either
the Appealers charity, or his cōscience must needs
be very large, wherein such an offender finds a
Sanctuary,King Iames, ibi∣dem. against whom all the Churches of
Germany made complaint to our then dread So∣ueraigne:
Nemo omnes, neminem omnes fe∣fellerunt:Plin. Panegyr.
Neuer one man deceiued all men, neuer
all men deceiued one man: yet the Appealer is not
only content, some way to blanch Arminius, and
his schollers errours (whereof diuers by the Armi∣nian
way, as a conuenient bridge, haue fairely wal∣ked
ouer to Popery:) but he, to the infinite wrong
of the Primitiue Saints and Martyrs, compareth
these Comets to those Stars, and would make these
as innocent & vnguilty of the late troubles in the
Nether-lands, as they were altogether free from
the aspersions, which the Gentiles odiously and im∣piously
cast vpon them, scil: Appeale pag. 41.
were these late of-spring of the Semipelagians so
harmelesse and free altogether from sowing seed of
dissention in the Church, as the ancient Christians

were from mouing sedition in the State? Why did
then the wise and Christian States generall in the
Low-countries, by the aduice of our then Salo∣mon,
call a nationall Synod, and so long continue
it at their great charge, to suppresse these, not ve∣nimous
vipers, tearing the bowels of her mother,
(in the Appealers esteeme) but silly and harme∣lesse
wormes? Why did our gracious Soueraigne
King Charles,Balchanquall Concio ad clerū. by his Embassador, the Duke of
Buckingham his Grace, deale effectually with the
States to root vp the weed of Arminian Liberty,
so far spreading among them?Appeale ibid. Yea, but (saith he)
did no crafty Interloper put in his stocke a∣mong
these brawling Bankers? Did no wiser
man work vpon exasperated minds? What of
that? No question, as it was there, so it will be
here, Dum pastores odia exercent, lupus intrat
ouile: While the shepherds are at strife, the Wolfe
entreth the sheep-fold. Doth this proue, the braw∣ling
Bankers to be innocent? Or, disproue the speech
of our Sauiour,Matth. 18. 7. Woe be to him by whom offen∣ces
come? But it should seeme there is such a neare
tye betweene the Appealer, and the Arminians,
that they are entred into a league defensiue, and of∣fensiue,

for as he holdeth his buckler ouer them: so
he mainly foiles at their opposites: He slighteth,
vilifieth,Pag. 70. & Pag. 108. and falsly traduceth the Synod of Dort;
for what reason, but because they touch the apple
of his eye, the Arminian theologie? He stirs the
Articles concluded at Lambhith, he carpeth at the
most reuerend Metropolitans, reuerend Bishops,
and renowned Doctors,Appeal. pag. 71. 72. the floure of both Vniuer∣sities,
who subscribed them, and published them.
Neither can hee yeeld any reason hereof, but be∣cause
those eminent and euery way accomplisht
Diuines at Lambhith, crushed the addle egge now
smelling in the Appealers writings, when it was
new laid in Cambridge, before Baro could hatch
it. If these proofes be not pregnant, that the Ap∣pealer
is deepely engaged in the Arminian pact, I
intreat the Reader to trust his owne eyes, in com∣paring
the ensuing doctrines and arguments, set
one against the other by way of Parallel, where he
shall finde, that as in the water, face answereth
face: so in the humor of renuing Pelagianisme, the
Appealer doth Arminius. If Arminius or Ber∣tius
be the Voice, the Appealer is the Eccho; if the
Appealer be the Voice, Arminius or Bertius is

the Eccho. Behold them both in the ensuing ta∣blet,
like those two of whom the Poet spea∣keth,
Alter in alterius iactantes lumi∣na
vultus: One looking, as it
were, babies in ano∣thers eyes.
