



THere came to my hands of late (right vvoorshipfull) a notable peece of vvoorke, of the Portes, and of diuers rare things bothe of the Easte and VVeast Indians, vvritten by Martin Fer∣nandes Denciso, aboute Anno. 1518. then Dedicated to Don Charles King of Castile, and after called in aboute tvventie yeares past, for that it reuealed secretes that the Spanish natiō vvas loth to haue knovven to the vvorlde. And finding in the same vvorke the Lon∣gitudes and Altitudes of many Ilandes, and of the Portes of the tracte of the firme lande of America, I thought good to trāslate out of Spanish into English some parte of the same Calling to minde, that your vvorship vvas the firste man of our nation that gaue light to our people for the finding out of the north∣vvest straight, and that novv you meane in proper person, and that at your ovvne charges, to take some noble voyage and discouerie in hande, to leaue be∣hind you renovvne to your family, and honour and profite to your countrie: I coulde not but honour you in harte. And to make some shevv of my good vvill, I desired much to present some thing to you, and vvas sory that I had no notable vvorke of mat∣ter of Nauigation to Dedicate vnto you, meete for your so greate vvorthinesse. But yet such as this is, I dedicate it vnto you, besechyng you most hum∣bly

to take the same in good parte, and to vvay the good vvill of the giuer, as very greate persons of highe honour haue done, vvhen little trifels haue bene giuen them by others of lovv degree. And Sir, albeit this small gifte (in respect of ministring any knovvledge to you your self) may seeme nothing, in that you doe vnderstande the tongues, vvherein this and many other knovvledges of high value, lie hid from our Seamen, although not from you: yet this may for our meere English Seamen, Pilotes, Marri∣ners, &c. not acquaynted vvith forrayne tongues, bring greate pleasure (if it fortune our Mariners or any other of our Nation, to be driuen by vvinde, tempeste, currents, or by other chaunce to any of the Ilandes, Portes, Hauens, Bayes or Forelandes mencioned in this Pamphlet,) and so it may also in the voyage, be a meane to keepe them the more frō idlenesse, the Nurce of villany, and to giue them also right good occasion by vvay of example, vpon any nevv Discouerie, to take the Altitude and La∣titude, to set dovvne the tracte of the Ilandes, the natures of the soyles, and to note the qualitie of the ayre, the seuerall benefites that the Soyles and the Riuers yeelde, vvith all the discomodities and vvantes that the same places haue, and if our Coun∣trie men fortune the rather to be avvaked out of their heauy sleepe vvherein they haue long lien, and the rather hereby be occasioned to shunne be∣stiall ignoraunce, and vvith other nations rather late than neuer to make thēselues shine vvith the bright∣nesse of knovvledge, let them giue Sir Humfrey Gilbert the thankes, for vvhose sake I translated the same.

And thus committing your vvorship to the greate Neptune, the greate God of the Christians that ru∣leth lande and Sea, I leaue you to your voyage, and to the gouernment of that mightie God, vvho ne∣uer plāted in any man so hie courage, vvith so much desire to greate attempts, but to some greate end, as heretofore in many hath bene seene, and as the se∣quele in your happie successes no doubt shall be founde, as England and the vvhole vvorld shall out of question vvit∣nesse. From London the xiiij. of May. 1578.

