


A Friend of myne (most honorable Lord) be∣inge muche desirous to haue the Conspira¦cie of Catiline, that noble and learned Ci∣tizen of Rome, and the historie of Iugurth kynge of Numidie, most valiaunt and po∣litike in feates of warre, in one volume comprised, in∣stantlie desired me: for as much as I had already tran¦slated the one, to peruse the other. Whose translator was nowe departed, but yet not out of freshe memorie: suche are his diuers workes very ingeniouslie inuented, and ryght eloquentlie translated. But yet here & there (tho∣rough vnlearned correctors) somewhat mangled and corrupted. I, to do my friend a pleasure, and the gentle readers of these two excellente histories no disprofite, haue accomplyshed my friendes requeste: trusting the matters of these histories to be so cherefull and plea∣saunt, the oracions so ingenious and wyttie, the strata∣gemes so close & craftie, the inuencions of things so di∣uers and subtile, the answers of the prudent and poly∣tike Romaines so ingenious and readie, the feates of Iugurth with his Numidians so worthy and manlie, the Romains resistence and enterprises so warlyke and coragious, the actes of the whole warre betwene them so variable and diuers, and Ladye fortune (whiche in

these thinges hathe rule and dominion) nowe smylinge vpon the one and the other most flatteringly and cloked lie, that no man (except enuie do rule hym) can myslyke the historie or the translacion of the same: The whiche because the reader shulde most redelie and plainely vn∣derstande and perceiue the thinge, dothe paraphrastical lie so open the hole matter, that no scruple remaineth to be douted vpon. For Saluste the noble historiographe, doth in the laten tonge so compendiouselie and briefely, but yet moste eloquentlie and truely, knyt vp the whole historie of Iugurth, that the reader in diuers places (ex¦cepte he be very rype and perfecte in the eloquence and figures of the laten tonge, and phrases of the same) shal stumble and stagger in the conueyaunce and vnderstan¦dinge of the true meanyng and sence therof. But nowe to turne my pen somewhat vnto your lordeshyp: What thinge is there so obscure or intricate in sence, be it in la¦ten, Italian, Frenche, or Englyshe, that your fine and subtile wytte can not perce and perceiue? What politike feat of war, what instrument or warlyke engine is ther that ye mooste finelye and exactlye can not handle? Yea what tytle or poynte of nobilitie, or of any other thynge perteinynge to a noble man, is vnknowen to your lord∣shyp, or yet to manie other of this moste noble realme? But I at this presente wyll not speake of your knowe∣ledge and litterature, of your comely and decent ciuili∣tie and maners, nor howe ye fauoure & maintaine lear∣nynge and learned men, nor yet howe your lordeshyp to to your great renowme and eternall fame, hathe at all tymes, and against all the rablemente of heretykes su∣stained, and moste constantly and christianly auaunced

the catholyke fayth of our Sauiour and redemer Ie∣sus Christ. And truely to saye, suche a nother was that excellente and noble man your father, faithfull I mean to his liege lorde and kynge, and to our lorde his God, moste faithfull. But of hys constante faythe, and other his famouse actes, prudente counselles, and wyt∣tye inuencions, at more leasure. In the meane season I mooste humblye desire your good Lordeshyp fauorablye to accepte thys hy∣storie wyth my rude preamble, and mutually wyth fauoure to loue me, for to my slender pow∣er I am youres to commaunde.
