


IT were to bee wished (Right Honourable) that as sinne multiplieth it selfe, so the knowledge and true feare of God, should euerie way be en∣creased among men. For, thereby it would come to passe, by the blessing of God, that fewer should tread the path of destru∣ction, than (alas) doe now. And although it lieth not in man, to stoppe the course, and to damme vppe the streames of iniquitie (for this must be perfourmed by the Lords owne arme, or els all mens indeuours are but vaine) yet is it

the part of all those that feare God, to doe what they may, for the effecting of this work. Where∣in, albeit the attempts of the men of God, haue not alwaies the effectes which they desired, yet their labours, both in preaching and writing, haue not bene destitute of their fruite, in mea∣sure, greater or smaller, as the Lord thought it meet.
The Lord in this latter age, hath raised vp diuers, and excellent men for this purpose, and he hath greatlie magnified his mercies to∣wards vs in this Iland: and vs, in the enioying of his goodnes, if we can make a right vse there∣of. But because wee were not worthie of them, therefore he hath manie times, in the middest of their yeares, yea, and some in the very spring and beginning of their strength, to warne vs, what he is likely to doe with the the rest, if wee be not more thankfull. Amongst the number of those, whome in the Lords great mercies wee inioyed, and lost for our vnthankfulnesse, M. DVDLEY FENNER was one, whome the Church of God in this age could haue hardliest spared: he ended his testimonie in this life, being

vnder thirtie yeares of age: but yet of that growth in the knowledge of God, that fewe (if e∣uer anie of his yeares) haue left behind them the like monuments of great knowledge and lear∣ning, in the true and sound feare of God, as hee hath done. His works both in Latine and Eng∣lish doe beare witnesse hereof. And it is not meet that I should enter into anie farther commen∣dations of him: although, both in regard of the outward fauour of God towards him, as being born an heire of great possessions, & especiallie, in consideration of his spirituall vnderstanding in the wayes of the Lord, his great learning, his conflicts with the aduersaries of God, his con∣stancie, and patient suffering for the trueth: there are manie thinges that make his name blessed among the Sainctes.
Some Treatises of his, being printed at sun∣drie times, and now rare to be gotten, I haue ga∣thered together, and presumed to dedicate vnto your Lordshippe: not doubting, but in regard, both of the Authour, (who being a faithfull Minister of Iesus Christ, I know you will esteem, though vnknowne vnto you) and especiallie, in

respecte of the notable handling of the trueth, which they containe, you will accept them, as be∣ing not vnbeseeming your Lordship, that they were published vnder your name. And if I shuld say, both in regard of the worke it selfe, and also the Authour, that it were no small honour vnto a Christian Noble-man, that they come foorth vnder his Patronage, I think I should not speak amisse.
That one treatise of houshold gouernment, doth so commend the whole worke vnto a Chri∣stian Maister of a Familie, as who so doth well reade and consider it, must needs thinke, what∣soeuer hath proceeded out of the same fornace, doth deserue to be highlie accounted of. And happie were it for all families, that they were go∣uerned according to the prescription, set downe in this Treatise. Your Lordship, I trust, will make that profite hereof, among the rest here∣unto adioyned: namelie, that it will be a confir∣mation vnto you, in that, wherein your familie is alreadie reformed, and a direction for that perfecting of the gouernment thereof, whollie according vnto the word. And to this pur∣pose

it is, that I haue dedicated this and the rest vnto your Honour. Touching my selfe, I will say no more, but as I desire to shew my selfe pro∣fitable in my vocation, vnto the whole Church of God in generall; so I would willingly gratifie your Honour in particular. And so accept this, as a testimony of my good wil towards your Lordship, whome I vnderstand (and knowe in some measure) to beare no small affection and good wil vnto the trueth, and all those that pro∣fesse the same. Thus I commend you to God, & to the worde of his grace, that is able to builde you vp further, and giue you an inheritance a∣mong them which are sanctified. Edinburgh the 24. of December. 1591.

