



Right Honourable,
YOur Lordships courteous acceptance of the grea∣ter The Grand Sa∣criledge of the Church of Rome. Worke, embolde∣neth me to present this Appendix thereof to your Honour: the lesser it is, the lesser trespasse it will make upon the pub∣lique service of the State and your Lordships most pretious houres: and I hope it will proove like Diomedes in Homer, ly.
,
Perpusillas quidem pugnax tamen,

for I laboured therein what I could  expresse the Character which Lipsius Lip. pref. in Sen. gives of Seneca's writings, copiam in brevitate, & vehementiam in fa∣cilitate. The Subject I handle is mos noble and divine, The holy Sacra∣ment of the blessed body and blood of our dearest Redeemer, and it is to be lamented even with teares o blood, that what he ordained for the su∣rest tie of unity, and strongest bond of amity, is through the malice of Satan, and hereticall pravitie turned into a bill of divorce, or rather fire-ball of contention among Christians at this day. For my Antagonist D. Smith, he is a man of greatest note among all our English Romanists, as famous with them, as ever was the Nymph, of whom Ovid. Ep. the Poet writeth,
Tu quo{que} si de te totus contenderit orbis,
Nomen ab aeternâ posteritate feres. For it is he about whom the Sorbonists and Secular Priests on the one side, and

the Iacobines, Iesuits, Benedictines on the other, have of late published so many virulent Pamphlets
Tincta Lycambeo spicula felle madent.
It is he for whose apprehension two Pro∣clamations were not many yeares since  forth. It is he upon whom for his ex∣traordinarie parts, and well deserving of the See of Rome, Pope Urbane the ght hath conferred the high, but empty title of Ordinarie of all Eng∣land and Scotland. It is he whose arie Bishoprick of Chalcedon hath so much troubled this and our neighbour Land. With whom I could have wished that some of higher ranke and place had entered into the lists. But being chal∣lenged by him into this field, lying by the Waters of strife, I could not de∣cline the combat. Which I now under∣take with more confidence, by how much he sheweth many waies apparant diffidence of his cause, for in his fron∣tispice he makes mention of my book in∣tituled

The Grand Sacriledge o Printed by Felix Kingston, An 1630. the Church of Rome, in taking a way the sacred cup from the Laity detected and convinced by the ev dence of holy Scripture, and test monie of all ages, as if he meant to re∣fute the whole worke: yet from the first page to the last, he questioneth not a sy lable, nor disableth any one testimo therein,
Egregiam vero laudem & spol ampla
A doutie piece of service, never  approach any thing neare to the mai Fort and citadell, but sit downe be∣fore a small out-work (a relation of Conference 25. yeares ago, consisting  a few pages) in the batterie whereof,  sheweth himselfe not onely

For he carefully shunneth the point  question, and falleth upon a more plau∣sible tenet. Whereas to gaine or con∣firme a Romish Proselyte, which was th occasion of his Conference with me, h

should  have propugned e Trent doctrine of Transubslantiati∣n, he carefully declineth that rock, and putteth in at the faire harbour of the reall presence, which in a Catholique sense all Protestants admit, and the Lu∣therans in as flat a manner as he. In e despairing to make good his tenet by argument, he turneth argumento∣m tela into maledictorum aculeos: he leaveth the Schooles, and flyeth to the theater, and there setteth a name∣lesse and shamelesse Poet to play upon my name with Anagrames, and my Treatise with Sarcasmes. Whereunto I Epig. gr. l. . c. 3. think fit to returne no other answer then the words of Mars in the Greeke Epigram,




But because I speake to him in every paragraph in the ensuing letter I will say no more of him here; but now I

apply my selfe to your good Lordship to whom I owe the dedication of a fa greater and better worke then this,  this alone I have now ready for  presse, and I held my selfe bound take the advantage of the first oppor∣tunity to testifie in publike my thank∣fulnesse to your Lordship for your Ho∣nours many undeserved favours. An if the argument be well scanned, will not seeme improper to Dedica the Worke to the Lord Keeper of th great Seale, for the Scriptures are th instruments and deeds of our savation, and the Sacraments are t seales annexed thereunto: the grea whereof our Romis adversaries hav audaciously and impiously violated b breaking off halfe of it, and putting false and counterfeit stampe upon  With these misdemeanours (as I con∣ceive) of a high nature I charge them and if I faile in my proofes, I refus not to suffer, pro falso clamore The Lord make your Honour and 

that shall vouchsafe to peruse and amine this worke, like Angells of ht, to discerne betweene good and vill, truth and falshood, and more∣ver crowne your Lordship with his ncipall blessings here, and blesse  with an everlasting crowne eafter.

