



May it please your Grace:
I Haue euer, as much as
lay in mee, declined,
and earnestly conten∣ded
against all con∣tentions,
and publick
Conferences in poynt
of Religion, with
Romish Priests, and Iesuites. For, Pope∣rie
(as I haue oft learned from your Grace)
is a doctrine of lyes; and as it maintaineth

lyes, so it can be maintained by no better
support, then of lyes. In all conflicts with
men of that faction, though their re∣doubted
wrastlers, in grappling with our
Diuines, are put to the worst, yet (like
Pericles in the Theatre) bee they indeed
neuer so much foyled, they will go about,
by their eloquence, to perswade the Spec∣tators,
that they receiued not, but gaue
the foyle. And as Lysimachus, when he re∣ceiued
a sore wound from Alexander in
his fore-head, had it presently bound vp,
and couered with a glorious Diademe: so
when any of their side are wounded sore∣ly
in any skirmish with vs, their fellowes
presently binde it vp, and couer it with a
Crowne of a surmised victorie. I well
knew, and foretold the Pitcher of the
field, that whatsoeuer the issue of the
combate were, Master Deane of Carlile
and my selfe, should be notwithstanding
conquered in effigie, and led in triumph
in many a Pageant at Doway, Bruxels,
Rhemes, and Rome, as since we haue seene
in Letters, and gazettaes from beyond the
Seas. Omnia praecepi, atque animo mecum

antè peregi. Yet knowing that truth is
strong in her weakest, and falshood is
weake in her strongest Champions; and
being vrgently desired by the friends, and
personally challenged by the enemies of
our most holy Faith, to appeare as a Se∣cond
in her sacred & iust quarrel, malui in
illo praesertim legum et iustitiae publicae iustitio
Iesuitas fractos, quàm despectos dimittere: I
chose in that high floate of the Iesuites
pride and hopes, rather by an encounter
to represse their insolencie, then by a re∣fusall
increase their arrogancie. Neither
was the diuine Assistance and benedicti∣on
wanting at the Conference, nor since:
for by it the old Gentleman (whose in∣tended
satisfaction drew on this mee∣ting)
was settled (as himselfe vnder his
hand twice professed) and resolued in
that point, which before left a scruple in
his conscience. And by occasion of
this Dispute, the Chronicles of the
Reformed Churches haue beene
better searched into, and some
most vsefull Relations and Treatises
touching the Visibility of the Church,

brought to light, and more publick view
then before. And, albeit his Maiesty, vp∣on
the first noise and mis-report of this
disputation, seemed to distast it, yet when
the whole truth of that which passed
that day, together with the occasion and
issue thereof, appeared to his Maiesty in
its natiue hiew; the former cloud, which
threatned a bitter showre, was by your
Graces fauourable breath, suddenly
blowne ouer: and then the true Relati∣on
of that Conference, finding the skie
cleere, stole wings to, and from the presse,
and flew freely abroad, euery where
checking and controuling the Iesuits false
Relations, and plucking from their heads
those Lawrell garlands, wherewith they
had crowned their temples, for their
owne noble exployts that day. It could
not bee expected, that this printed Relati∣on
should haue beene otherwise entertai∣ned
by Master Fisher and Master Sweet
(the Popish Combatants), then it was;
who, after a month or two, set vpon it
in print, and dealt with it, as the wife of
Anthony did with TulliesBecause it truly wounded her husband. tongue, after his

death: they thrust it thorow and thorow
with needles, and stabbed it againe and
againe with their poysoned pens; the
one writing an answer to it; the other,
a censure of it. To both these Pamphlets,
this Reply is addressed. In the former part,
Master Fishers Answer to the Fisher catched
in his owne Net, is censured: in the latter,
Master Sweet's Censure is answered. And
because opposita iuxta se posita, magis eluces∣cunt,
I haue printed Master Fisher's Text
with my Reply thereunto, vt dum haere∣tici
hominis venena lector cognoscit, libentiùs
orthodoxi bibat antidotum. If any thing be
omitted, the occasion and reason of the
omission is not omitted. Had I set down
all the Iesuites battologies,
Idem delicti fierem reprehensor et author.
Whatsoeuer I haue done heerein, I sub∣mit
to your Graces censure and fauoura∣ble
construction thereof. I acknowledge,
it is not a worthy present for your Grace:
yet because it is. my first fruits in this
kinde, it of right belongeth to the high
Priest; the rather, because the growth of
it was vpon your sacred gleabe. The

Stork, which alwaies leaues one of her
young ones in the house where shee
breeds, for the Owner thereof, teacheth
mee this poynt of gratitude, to offer that
to your Grace, which was bred vnder
your Graces roofe;
Siue legas, quo dabo siue tegas.
Did not these, and many other priuate
respects, challenge this dedication to your
Grace: yet the sweet influence which
your Graces gouernment continually di∣stilleth
vpon Gods Inheritance, among vs,
would cause from any heart and pen not
barren, the returne of some sweet spira∣tion
of praises to God, and thanksgiuing
to your Grace for your incessant trauels in
Gods cause. The costly oyntment, which
on Palme-Sunday last flowed abundant∣ly
from your lips, so cheered vp and re∣uiued
that numberlesse Auditory, that
your Graces Name is as a most fragrant
oyntment, sending foorth a most sweet
sauour through the whole Kingdome.
What should I speake of the most hap∣pie
and ioyfull newes of our thrice-noble
Prince's returne out of Spaine: whereof

your Grace was the first siluer Trumpet
to the City? And (God bee blessed for it)
the Trumpet gaue not an vncertaine sound.
Those glorious night-Tapours which
were set so thick together in the streets,
that they made a kinde of Galaxia in the
City, were all kindled early in the mor∣ning
at your Graces sacred Lamp. Sicut
Marcelli praelio ad Nolam, saith the Orator,
populus Romanus primò se erexit, posteà mul∣taeres
prosperae consequutae sunt. As the Ro∣man
State, after many disasters, first began
to cheere vp againe at Marcellus his victo∣ry
at Nola, and afterwards much good
fortune followed: so, after much sorrow
and more feare, the happy Returne of our
Prince first cheered vp our drooping spi∣rits;
and, after that, many happie things
haue followed: whereof, vnder his Ma∣iestie,
your Grace haue been, and are, toge∣ther
with your noble Associates in this
high Court of Parliament, the principall
Instruments. Ride on, in the Lords march
prosperously, with your honour, because of
truth and righteousnesse, and your right hands
shall teach your terrible things; terrible

things to the Whore of Babylon, but com∣fortable
to Christs afflicted Spouse. The
good will of him who dwelt in the bush,
make your Aarons Rod to flourish more
and more, to the glory of his Name, ad∣uancement
of the Truth, honour of the
Priest-hood, and your owne endlesse ioy
and comfort. This we all of the Tribe of
Leui are bound to pray for in generall, and
I my selfe more specially, as beeing

