



RIght Honorable: the que∣stions and controuersies wherewith the Church is in continuall trauell, and which do make our pens so rheumatike in this wri∣ting age; be for the most part, matters of speculation, residing in the braine, the coldest region of the little world; and dis∣soluing Religion into matter of discourse, not of deuotion. For euery mans Quaere is, not as of old, in the daies of Luk. 3. 10 John Bap∣tist, of Luk. 10. 27. Christ, of his Act. 2. 34. Apostles, VVhat shall

we doe? but what shall we thinke? As if the Gospell were not Christiana lex, but Christia∣num dogma. Whereas cases of conscience, doe sleepe with conscience, which of all questions are most profitable, and least re∣garded: so loth are men to restraine affe∣ction, and limit their actions. Yet of all such cases this of Vsurie hath most need to be reuiued. For in this, the custome of sin∣ning doth not onely take away the sense, but the acknowledgement of sinne: so as the meere practise of it, hath made an apo∣logie for it; without either sound reason, or good authoritie.
This very inducement which perswa∣deth others that vsurie is lawfull, hath mo∣ued me to write against it, fearing the losse, not onely of so much truth (which I would willingly helpe to redeeme:) but of so ma∣ny soules amongst whom I liue. So farre therefore I doe presume in this businesse to trouble Israel, as to tell the people what 1. King. 18 18. is the truth in this point, and the perill of their practise. Wherin they haue so intang∣led themselues, that they know not well

how to leaue it. If wee then cannot deuise to make that good, which they haue made necessarie, they will be angrie. Seeing them then thus securely to lull their consciences, I am bold a little to disquiet them.
A businesse so thanklesse, and distastfull as this must needes be, (right Honorable and my singular good Lord) doth require a worthie Patron. And of whom may I de∣sire the patronage of my labours, but of your Honour? whose I am, and to whom I owe all dutie and seruice. Of whom should I desire the patronage of these labours, but of your Honour? who are in place to re∣forme this sinne, more by the very counte∣nance of Authoritie, then wee can with all our endeuours. From whom can I receiue more encouragement in these labours, then from your Honour? whose integritie hath manifested it selfe with zeale against this sinne: whose iudgement will not bee blinded with those forged distinctions of poore and rich borrowers: of toothlesse and biting vsurie, &c.
Let these poore endeuours then finde

fauour in your eyes; not for their owne sake, being vnworthie: but for the cause which I haue in hand. It is the cause of God, and the common good, worthie so hono∣rable a Patron. Whom I beseech the Al∣mightie long to preserue, a pro∣tector of good causes in conscience and equitie.

