



RIGHT WORTHY GENTLEMEN:
ALL this Treatise stands vpon that V∣nion spoken of by St. Paul to the E∣phesians,Ephes. 4.4. There is one body and one spi∣rit, euen as you are called in one Hope of your Ʋocation: One Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme: one God and Father of you all, which is aboue all, and through all, and in you all: To preuent distracti∣on, and preserue the vnity of the Church: To limit out the naturall branches, besides those that are cut off by schismes, or pared away by the censures of the Church, to set out the truth of the Redeemer according to the Do∣ctrine of Faith, and the couenant of Baptisme: here are the bonds of peace combined in one head, not in the Church which had their circular Epistles written for com∣munion,Coloss: 4.16. Acts 15.6. nor in the Synods of the Church, which had their Councels for the composing of diuisions: These are but confirmations, no beginnings of that vnity which is pre∣tended. A peace there is pretended, or as the Author saies, a reconciliation: what peace? saith Iehu to Iezabel, Pacem do
vobis, pacem meam Relinquo vobis: sufficit Domine, pacem quam tu relinquis excipio, Relinquo quod Retines. Giue mee leaue to set these feete of durt vpon that golden image of him whom you did admire, and I doe imitate, he did con∣uince you, let me onely moue you by that which followes: Vpon that Scripture there are 3. things grounded: 1. That the Church is vnited in Christ. 2. After him in Peter. 3. af∣ter Peter in the successours of Rome: In the two last poynts he ioynes an issue, and findes that vnity of a visible head, and that Vna Sancta Catholica Ecclesia,Decreto Bonif. in the Decretall: and that subiection thrust vpon euery creature with a De∣claramus, dicimus, definimus esse de necessitate salutis: not to be trust vp in One: when we haue done, I hope this thirteenth article shall be thrust out of our Creede.
First for Peter.
The same reprehension,Mat. 20:26 Mat: 9:23 Mat: 19:28 Rev: 21:17 Acts 1. Acts 8:14. the same commission, the same promise, the same glory, the same power was giuen to the rest of the Apostles as well as to him: If any thing more, it was not giuen but assumed: bee would not assume it that was sent as a Legate, not a Pope, he could not be Pope, that did not decree, but shew his opinion, and his opinion be∣ing reiected at Antioch,Acts 15:19. it is time for them to giue him a sword, and yet wee see not how they can draw it out of that text of Luke, that leaues vs onely to suffer, and not to rule.Galet. 2. Luk. 22:38.
That hee is put the first, and Mary the last, shee full of Grace,Acts 1:14 Acts 2. Luke 2. he but fall of the spirit, neither hee nor any had that prerogatiue to bee full of Grace, and full of that holy fruit besides described by that great Astrologer, to bee an ho∣nest and beautifull Virgine, bearing in her hand two full eares of Corne:Albamaz: in maior: Iotroduct. tr: 6. A fable, as all the writings of the Poets con∣cerning the sonnes of Iupiter was by the policy of Sathan to make the world beleeue that the Prophesies of that Ie∣sus was but a fable: but the truth is, she is so described, and therefore Peter being set before her the last before the first, behind her in dignity,Luke 1:13. 2 Tim: 4:21. before her in place: That Linus is set after Pudens, the Bishop of Rome may blush indeed to
ranke himselfe before all the Church, or Peter before Paul, which besides the excellency of his miracles, as Salmeron confesses, went vp as high into the third heauen, with the fulnes of faith, as Peter sunke low into the waters for want of it, and it seemes hee came to visit Peter,Galat. 2.18 to see whe∣ther hee were sicke of any opinion or no: for I thinke the worde will beare it, if any thinke not so,. wee can shew an author for it: so that except they will make an vniuersall diffusion of some secret Grace flowing from Peter as from the name of Iesus, which is an Oyntment poured out:Cant. 1. Phil. 2. If they thinke that this name of Peter like oyle aboue water giues a generall command ouer heauen and earth and hell as the names of Iesus, which it seemes they doe, for in their wri∣tings Peter is as often writ as the name of Iesus in the Epi∣stles of Paul: but I thinke, as Dauid was not a King ouer all Kings because of his mystery of three times annoin∣ting, no more was Peter Prince ouer all the Apostles, be∣cause of the commission of threefold feeding: but that he was at Rome, that he seated himselfe there, that hee plan∣ted the Church, gaue it after his death to Clement, we take it as a matter of history, not of faith. For if it were so, wee wonder that Paul should be so vnciuill to leaue out a salu∣tation to Bishop Peter amongst the rest.Rom. 16. It may bee Peter being one of the hot spirits of Galilee,Galilei pug∣naces. Ierō. where was nothing but a worde and a blow, as it seemes when he cropt the High Priests seruants eare, would in stomacke at Pauls vn∣kindnesse leaue him when he came to his first answer:Mat. 26. let them answer this, or there is no Apology to be made for Peter,2 Tim. 4.16 that besides vnkindnes is to bee accused of negligence that he grounded the Iewes at Rome no better, that were scarce catechized in rudiments of Christianity by him that was not Bishop of Rome some fiue and twenty yeares,Acts 28. but also of the circumcision: and not onely of negligence but for∣getfulnesse, in not remembring the words of Christ,Ioh: 21:15. Feede my Lambes, vpon whom depended the hope of the whole flocke: It is a signe of lightnesse to be credulous, so saide Porphiry against the Christians; but beeing mortall as wee
are, and not celestiall, let them aperire fontem sciendi, and we will imponere iugum credendi: If they can make vs know it, wee will submit our selues and beleeue it: yet they can∣not.
But that hee left it to the Bishop of that See is the maine issue: let them answere Paul that had not a vision of the Gentiles as Peter had, but the diuision of them from the Iewes: and euen then me thinkes when the Doctor of the Gentils,Acts 28.28 of which Rome was the chiefe City, was out of fa∣uor with his Country-men I think Bishop Peter was some∣thing inhospitable, to let him hire an house. Peter had no Palace,Epiphan: Hares. 27. thats a wonder, no more had Paul, both Romane Bishops: It seems that Peter dwelt vpon the stone in which Luke did engraue the picture of the Virgin Mary, or else to be supposed that he was Bishop of Rome by one of St. Ieroms allegories,Hierom: in Philem: Acts 28.30 as he doth interpret Pauls biennium, to be the gift in the two Testaments, and so the Bishopricke it selfe: so doubtfull we shall finde it in the history, that when wee come to beleeue it, I doubt it will but prooue an Al∣legory.
Let them then interpret Gregory the Pope,Greg: ep. ad Eulog: Alexand. who doth a∣uouch that the succession of Antioch was from Peter, and answer Antioch, who they say, enioyed him seauen yeeres, where was the first name of Christian, or Polichronius of Ie∣rusalem, who thinkes the Primacy should be where Christ first was, where was his first Fecit and Docuit: Then alas it will bee but meere folly to thrust vpon vs the writings of Clemins & Anacletus,Jacobo fra∣tri Domini Episcopo E∣piscoporum Hebraeorum Ecclesiam Regenti. whom they make say so without any craft, for Clement writes to Iames, and after that Iohn is li∣uing, both vnder this Pope, both their writings in the ca∣non, and the Epistles of these the onely heires to Peters Chaire forgotten: and so they may, for truly their authors are hidden and obscure, as the deuout Abbot spoke of William the simoniacall Bishop of Africke. Concerning his letters Apostolicall, so secret they are that they seeme to come à Principe tenebrarum, not à Principe Apostolorum: They were forgotten as he did his owne Dignity, by cal∣ling
Iames the Bishop of Bishops, and yet will teach the A∣postle, as his successour Anacletus it seemes being a little more warme in the Chaire corrects Saint Iohn by deriuing ,Iohn 1. which the Apostle himselfe doth inter∣pret a stone: as simple deriuations as the Latine is in which their Epistles were written.Aug. conf. 8. But as Victorinus the Rhetori∣cian before his full conuersion, ashamed of the humility of the word, blushing at the shame of the crosse, was wont to mocke Simplicianus when he enclin'd him to open professi∣on: Ergo ne parietes faciunt Christianos? The walles of the Church make no Christians, nor the chaire of Rome it seemes make Rhetoricians, but as in Art, so in the Truth of Religion, it may be,Mat. 13.45 they acquire all their knowledge by sitting: no paines they take to purchase that pearle in the Gospell: no, wee presuppose they found it before they sought it.
Is it come to this? Then to that Religion, and vnto that Church which findes vs and we not them, must we bee re∣conciled vnder paine of damnation:Euseb: 5. Let vs deale with them à posteriore: Then was Irenaeus in the state of damna∣tion, which tooke vp Ʋictor for censuring the Easterne Church: Then those were blessed which Cyprian calles De∣sperate,Ep: 55. and hee in a woe case for condemning those that made appeale to Rome from Africke: Then presently af∣ter Cyprian, the Church of Carthage must bee damned for want of Reconciliation, that excepted against the vniuersali∣ty in particular: Ne quidem Romanus. And St. Augustine as deepe in hell that was an assistant to that Councell. Search the Councells Mileuitan and Nice, nothing can be found in the Originals, except as the Athenians made an Altar, where the Beasts staid, to the vnknowen God, so where the Pope sits, they will make relation to some vnknowen Ori∣ginall in the time of Numa: but Plus oculo quam oraculo:Chrysost. Hom: 43. in Matth. we will see it before we receiue it vpon their bare report: for we are sure the Greeke Church would not yeeld in Chryso∣stomes time, hee writes against it, and the other did excom∣municate those that made an appeale to Rome, because no
good did issue from appeales; but long iourneyes, expence of money, many miseries, but no redresse, no pitty, no in∣dignation at the wrongs, and to those that did practise them, it was not Refugium, but Suffugium, a refuge, but a shift to slip off the punishment of some notorious crimes, that they had committed in their own Church: not for any care to religion, but to be of that religion which did eyther permit vnlawfull things, or dispense with great persons, like the Magi that said vnto the Kings of Persia: Wee haue a Law, that it is not lawfull for a man to marry his sister, we haue another Law,Virgils Fglog. that Kings may doe what they list: Et quae tanta fuit Romam tibi causa videndi? Libertas, saith the Poet, liber∣ty and impunity was the cause of these appeales, and though there were a necessity, yet no fruite did grow from it.
The comparison which S. Ierome a Priest in Rome doth make betwixt Orbem and vrbem is well knowne, and the place in which he paralels the merit & Priesthood of Con∣stantinople with Rome.Ier. ep. ad Euagr. Einsdem meriti et Sacerdotij. I omitte the titles of Gregory the Pope himselfe, enough to discouer his successors to be An¦tichristian, not spoken onely for meere opposition to the pride of Iohn of Constantinople, but for his owne part, absit haec leuitas ab aurihus meis,Iob. 7. he would not heare of it, but be∣cause hee was but a sparke of mortality as others were, he would not striue to flie the highest, but shine the brightest, and so we are come past the 600. yeares: Then euery man knowes how Phocas killed Mauritius, and vsurpt the Em∣pire; and to curry fauour with the Romanes, made that dogge of the flocke, Boniface the third vniuersall Bishop: so they continued in hight of pride and cruelty: as the ould Rome was built in bloud: so was the supremacy gotten by parricide,Psa. 67.20 Non Jesui∣tarum suasu sed militum terrcre: Eli∣ens. epis. ad Bell. Apol. Resp. cap. 1. we wish it did not so continue.
It was a saying, Thou leadest thy people like sheepe by the hands of Moses and Aaron, but now alas, it is not Ducit, but Trahit, we must not be led, but drawne by the necks, not so much by the perswasion of Iesuites, as the violence of Souldiers: Ignatius turned from a Souldier to a Iesuite,
now turned from a Iesuite to a Souldier: by bloudy inqui¦sitions and by force of armes must wee be forced to recon∣ciliation: not violence vsed onely vpon Subiects, but vpon Kings: There haue beene some that haue giuen an vncer∣taine sound to the battell against this plea: As that the Bi∣shop of Rome is not aboue a Councell in Paris; not aboue the Lawes and all Ecclesiasticall Persons, by supreame power, in Venice: not aboue all by a direct temporall dominion, in the consistory of Cardinals: There haue beene in England fiue Kings that haue resisted the Pope in such vsurpations, and now, thanke God, IAMES is the sixt, but amongest them and vs the first, which not long agoe in that famous disputation at Cambridge, where the King,Anne Dom: 1614. Marke 8. Luke 2:6. Reu. 1:13. sitting like Christ among the Doctors, keeping an Act, not of approbation, but of admiration, or rather like the Sonne of God in the similitude of the Sonne of Man amongst the golden Can∣dlestickes, a King like a Doctor, opposing, answering, de∣termining, not in the Maiestie of his person, of which hee did but shew the lineaments, but in the beauty of his ad∣ministration, in which he did communicate light to euery disputer, and glory to himselfe: When that profound Schooleman his professour, vpon the Question, Whether the Pope had any power in temporall things as they tended to a spirituall good? Obiected that the Pope had power, in dispo∣sing and transferring dominions, in prescribing the ciuill Lawes of Nations to Kings, as S. Ambrose might to Theo∣dosius vnder paine of Excommunication. The summe of the answer being, that it was not by ciuill authority,Non politi∣ca authori∣tate sed me∣dicina spiri∣tuali, &c. but as by a spirituall medicine, not by the power of constraint, but prescription, not by authority but by Councell: The King added Concionando non cogendo: It pleased him fur∣ther to vse these words, Quaestio est vtrum Ambrosius iure fecit? Vtrum exemplum cius sit lex? Nego planè Ambrosij fa∣ctum fuisse licitum, nimis arroganter se gessit Ambrosius, & plusquam decuit in ea re. Spoken like a King;Leuit. 10. for Moses must speake when Aaron must hold his peace: S Ambrose might perswade him to defer the punishment 30. daies after the or
of the Grecians he could not constrain him, nay a little further, since man is onely aboue beasts, but Kings are a∣boue men, because they are Gods, there is no way but by turning to a greater God,Psal: 82: 6. whose childrē they are, & though they bee wicked, yet they are children of the most highest: strange children,Psa: 18: 76. &c strange because they let go Iustice, but children because they keep the image of God: & therefore when S. Gregory gaue aduice to that murtherer Phocas wch had slaughtered Mauritius with his Sonnes and his Bro∣ther, euen then when he might read the impiety of the fact in the very nature of the plague that followed, which killed them before they had any time to bee sicke,Ex Iudel: 6: lib: 1: c: 1: & 2. as hee murthered them before they had any time to rule: yet his aduice to take away the enemies of the common-wealth, to restore the freedome of it, to remoue abuses was conclu∣ded thus, Melius hoc orando quam suggerendo: A greater de∣gree of diuine wisedome then was in St. Ambrose: This turned to the King, he turned to God, farre from constraint that hee would scarse suggest: And it seemes when Elias had the sword it was giuen him, and then he tooke it, per∣swaded by Propheticall motion, directed by the worde which commands the death of Idolaters, and permitted by the King, but he turned not the sword against the King though hee were an Idolater, no more then Michael did the sword of the Tongue against the Dragon: neither the nature of an Angell with the right of his quarrell, nor the aduantage of the place, nor the multitude of an heauenly host must conquer but the bloud of the Lambe. A King is like vnto Sina that must not bee touched but by Moses, that carries within him the spirit of meekenesse: there is more fire of courage in a King, then in an ordinary person: It must be quenched by preaching of the bloud of Christ: Our Churches bedde is a bed of flowers,Cant. 1. nothing in it but the sweetnesse of peace: The Church may correct some∣thing in zeale, suffer some things in meekenes, some things in good consideration they may dissemble, so they doe not approue thē. And when the King waxes wanton in wicked∣nesse
like Ieroboam that worshipped the calfe, It is enough that the Prophet reprooues it: All shall bee well if wee nei∣ther eat the fat nor the bloud, bee neither carnall nor cru∣ell.Leu: 3: 17. So then we commend S. Ambrose with Mr. Caluin for his constant refusing to appeare before Valentinian a young Emperour. ruled by his mother that was an Arrian:Institu: 4: 11: d: 15. distin∣guishing rightly betwixt his authority in matters temporal, and his iudgement in matters meerely spirituall, but in this poynt leaue him to the censure of the King. In the meane time our Religion is not a Religion of blood: euen the Law onely prescribed the death of beasts, not of men, no humane sacrifice but Christ that came for the preseruation of men to sacrifice his bloud. The same argument there∣fore that we haue against the religion of the Heathen gods, their cruelty in desiring the slaughter of men, and of the most innocent, as virgins and children, which proues it to be false; The same we haue against this religion of Rome, that makes a game of murder, & holds it an Aphorisme to kill the innocent; praeter intentionem, for the Catholike good.Ephes: 4. Ioh: 12: 32. Let vs bee reconciled to that Religion where is the vnity of the spirit in the bond of peace, & not to that which doth not draw vs, but driue vs: not draw vs like a wagon, but driue vs like the horses, and now by this time we are come to mooue you by the consideration of two poynts.
First, what honour the fathers of the 600. yeeres gaue, and vpon what ground.
Secondly what diuision that causes rather then reconci∣liation.
Wee stand not vpon this word Pope, it is but a Fa∣ther, it was but giuen to Pastors, to those that were wor∣thy Pastours. Ascribed to Fathers in Epistles and super∣scriptions, as to Augustine a poore Bishop, and to Pau∣linus a poore Deacon. A name of reuerence now growen odious, as tyrannus is for tyranny: And when it was giuen, it was an amplification in regard of worth of the per∣sons, not in regard of preeminence of place, giuen to those that had nothing to do at Rome: & that  as
Theodosius called Ambrose in the temple of Constantinople and Illustrissimus Doctorum latinorū, ascribed to S. Austin, & the large circuit S. Gregory entitles Cyprian withall, euen all the 4 quarters of the world, is rather a personall amplifica∣tion, then a iurisdiction of place: & indeed consisting with equality of a iurisdiction that others may challenge from Iohn & Iames, and Polycarpus: and if Rome were wise, they would take as great a priuiledge fro Paul as Peter, I am sure Irenaeus is of that mind,Lib. 3. Acts 6. & all the priuiledge that the Coun∣sell of Africke gaue him after Cyprians death, was to be Pri∣maescdis Episcopus, not Princeps Sacerdotū, no relation to the holy Synode of Priests and Bishops, but to the place, and to the place onely in a ciuill respect, other institution it had none from Christ, and in this no likelihood of succes∣sion from Peter. A ciuill priority then, not an Ecclesiasti∣call superiority: Ciuill, for the Scripture in the hottest con∣tention of the Church in the 600. yeeres was neuer vrged for it. It was found out in the grossest times of ignorance, and then it began to bee thus ordered: 1 Rome: 2 Alexan∣dria: 3 Antioch: 4 Ierusalem: And (alas) see the indisposi∣tion, Alexandria before Antioch, the seate of Marke before his Master Peter at Antioch: A malice discouered to the Apostle of loue, is Ephesus of no account where Iohn prea∣ched? he preached too vnhappily and foretold the trickes of Babylon, and that's the reason why the Church that hee founded, was not Patriarchall: And Ierusalem the Iast be∣cause traditions did not begin there, but the Gospell first at Ierusalem had his originall:Luke 24. so that it was not Christ nor his Apostles, that made Churches Patriarchall: They were dead before Constantinople was made one: It was propter Imperium as the Councell of Chalcedon defined, notwith∣standing the instances of Leo's Legates. It is true some of the fathers did inuest the old Rome with priuiledges aboue the rest, but 152. Bishops gaue the yonger Rome equality, because there was an Empire and Senate as well adorned: Magnificent titles the Grecians gaue poore Grecians like schoole-boyes to their Pedagogues, Reuerendissimo, Maximo,
so did they write: for Rome was then the scourge of the world. And for that vnlimited title of vniuersality, it is so trust vp of late, that I must onely gird it vp with one of Iustin Martyrs interpretations vpon that All of euery beast which Peter saw in his vision,Act. 10.12 Quest. 2. ad Orthod. 89. which All hee doth restraine to the vncleane: As Christ who is the head of euery man, that is, of the faithfull who are the body of Christ, not of the vnfaithfull: so they may expound (vniuersall) if they wil of all in Rome, not in the world, and if the comparison hold, then shall they haue (no doubt) a company of clean∣ly beasts except they be mended since S. Bernards time, he describes them hand somely in that Chapter which he en∣titles of the manners of the Romanes, to be a want on peo∣ple, intractable, tumultuous, rebellious, proud, sacrilegi∣ous, seditious, inhumane, vnfaithfull, importable, vnthank∣full,De consid. 4. c. 2. deceitfull, hypocriticall: It is enough for the Pope to dresse his owne stables, all the world is too much, ô but Rome is too little, as Paradise was for Adam: it is too streight a prison for his Godhead,Gen. 3. then since Man is become like one of vs, let vs turne him into the wide world out of Paradise, from Paradise to a fooles Paradise, a little Gar∣den, a small City will not comprehend his godhead: So shall the Bishop of Rome be vniuersall, and like to Lucifer in Heauen, and Adam in Paradise, take vp the Rome of the second person in Trinity, because One.Consid. 3. Cap 4. But Saint Bernard thought it not lawfull for him to dismember the Churches at his pleasure to confound Order, and to breake open the bounds of the Church which his fathers before had made:Rom. 13. power he giues him, and thinkes it vnlawfull to resist him; power he hath, a principall power, but not a singular pow∣er: his meaning is, he hath an head aboue him, vnto which other eminent members of the Church haue a reference as well as he. Euery one knowes how the Fathers runne vpon the difference betwixt praesum and prosum, betwixt domi∣nion and dispensation, betwixt possession and Law: and so his Lordship which was prayed for in their Letanies in the time of Pius Quintus, by the name of Dominus Aposto∣licus
amongst the rest, is by this discouered to be nothing but truely worse then Octanus and Tiberius his predecessors which refused the name of LORD, because it was a Ti∣tle of power, but not of Piety: So then his Ecce duo Gladij, The two swords, the one for the Church, the other of the Church; the one from the mouth of the Priest, the other from the hand of the Emperour: It is enough, it is too much, as deuout Bernard speakes: And by this time we see the reason why the Pope aboue Rome, and Rome aboue all Citties, Inter Caput extulit vrbes, haue exalted themselues.
These 5. things considered will cleere it.
1 A primacy in regard of the Empire.
2 The chiefe men elected Popes, excellent Schollers, woorthy Martyrs. This made the people wing on that side.
3 The Emperour translated to the East, The Pope get∣ting the vpper hand of his deputy at Rome, the Emperor curbing the Bishop of Constantinople, the Latine Church grew strong, and the Greeke weake.
4 The leuity of the Greeke Church, giuen to nouelties, distracted with heresies, suffering of Bishops opposite to their Church, euen within their walls, was the cause that compelled the better sort of Bishops to appeale to Rome for succour, and of the credit of that Sea.
5 The Emperour still withdrawing his forces, the Cleargy of Rome ouer-ballancing the temporalty, Prop∣ter imperium, gaue aduantage as stirrups for the man of Pride to raise himselfe by the helpe of Phocas, and such wicked Pages that lifted him vp into that seate where now hee sits Although all the Fathers that speake of Order, and Gregory, and Hierome themselues so much runne vppon that worde Aequaliter, yet now ambition teares in peeces those brazen steppes where Deuotion be∣fore did weare it selfe, and we are wearied with the weight of this great head that is vpon vs, that neuer yet could bee set vppon the shoulders of Russia and Armenia, and o∣ther
places: and now wee may pray with DAVID, Lord saue vs from the Horne of the Vnicorne, because this head hath made the most precious home of the Church an Instrument of Murther and of diuision rather then Vnion.
Be it so, that will not content them to be Lords ouer vs, but our Faith also: They will haue an infallibility of De∣termination: That must depend vpon that Chaire, and to this we must be reconciled, and so we must thinke vnder paine of damnation.
This Question was canuassed at Cambridge before the King: It must determine and therefore necessary, One Tri∣bunall necessary to determine matters of Faith; Non vnum vniuersum supremum Tribunal saide the King vppon that ground. The Deane of Paules, Loquebatur in puncto,Doctor Cary. as the Prouer be is: His wordes were like goades and nailes, sharp and sure. How wittily and substantially did hee prooue, that there was to bee had the last resolution of Faith: that Christ instituted that infallible: that it was most expedient to be so: that Christ foresaw it to be so expedient: that the Church could not be one body without it: that there could not be without it a iust vniting of the parts of the Church: that there could be no vnity of Faith: that without it Here∣ticks could not be conuinced, nor lay men in the Church: that the vnity of the Church was more preserued by it: that no Heresies were condemned without that Bishops consent: and that hce had the definitiue sentence. If any were giuen by others, yet they had recourse to the Pope for confirmation, as in the Mileuitan Coun∣cell. So pithily disputing, that it was enough to haue plucked out a mans eyes as the preaching of Paul to the Galathians, and led him by a blinde Iesuiticall obedience to thinke so.
The King certainly admired the frame of his arguments, and therefore impatient of interruption, bad them, let the Deane goe on. A frame indeed.

Aut hoc inclusi ligno occultantur Achiui,
Aut aliquis latet error, equo ne credite Teucri.
I had not spoken so much of him, but in remembrance of S. Iohns, That hath brancht out this goulden Candle∣sticke to beautifie one of the most famous Churches in this King dome:Greg. ep. Reg. 12. In∣du. 11. cp. 7. S. Pauls in the time of Gregory the Great com∣plained for want of light, this cannot, howsoeuer in the o∣ther I am sure not in the spirituall sence. I haue done with him; euen in his Relation something may be collected to vnsettle that opinion of dependance vpon the person of that One, as cheefe in matters of faith, because wee take our leuell of beleefe rather from the matter then the per∣son, you shall know him by his fruits,Mat. 7.15. nnt his fruits by him. It is Christs order not Quis but Quid. The Pope as a Graduate or Catholique Priest may erre, not in his Chaire. There is not Quid but Quis, not what he speaks, but what he is, the order of Christ peruerted: and so giue me at the last leaue to perswade you by the second point. That this depen∣dance vpon this one person may bee a cause rather of diui∣sion and separation, then of that Reconciliation that is so much implied, and so furiously perswaded.
Now let vs looke backe and see whether wee can be re∣conciled to that Church: which before that head could be set on that bodie, caused more distractions and bloud-shed of the Lords seruants, then was in any part of Christen∣dome. And why did Chrysostome complaine in his time, that the Bishop of Rome had filled the Churches with bloud, and defiled the holy Eucharist with murthers? well, it might haue beene preuented, if Peters successour had done to his fellow Bishops as Peter to Paul,Gal. 2.9. giuen the right hand of fellowship: or if they would, as Gregory doth inter∣pret that part of Esay;Esa. 40.9. Gregor. O Sion that bringest good tidings, get thee into the high mountaines, not of the highnesse of place, but of the excellency of life, but hee keepes himselfe alost aboue his fellowes of the Cleargy; if hee would des∣cend
a little there might millstones of offences and scanda∣lous sinnes be discouered in him to tumble him as low as Eucebolius that vnprofitable salt: and vpon that place of Marke, after Christ had confuted the supremacy of the A∣postles,Mar: 9: 50. hee inferres, Haue salt in your selues, and haue peace one with another, wisdome with vnity, the Pomegranats be∣sides the bels in the garment of the high Priest, the diuer∣sity of gifts without, the vnity of Faith within, not any e∣minency of place, or necessity of dependance, or infallibi∣lity of determination: in which we may obserue the indis∣position of that Bishop from that scripture in the Romans.Rom: 14: 22 Hast thou faith? haue it to thy selfe: that hee should loue for others, and beleeue for himselfe; but he beleeues for o∣thers, and loues for himselfe. No loue in him that can∣not brooke equality, but is rauished with his height of dig∣nity, as Peter was with his glory on Mount Tabor, not what hee had, but what hee saw, and would not looke once at Paul that mounted higher, yet was brought downe, Ab inuisibilibus coelorum ad Secreta coniugum, from the spirituall mysteries of the third heauen, to the carnall secrets of a marriage bed, and cals himselfe a seruant, a fellow-helper, one that had dominion ouer his own life, not his brethren,1 Cor: 4: 1. 2 Cor 1: 14. all to beat downe pride, but it would not be.
But indeede one visible head is the cause of errors, and pride the cause of diuision, and dependance vpon one a fountaine to poyson all the riuers of the Church: One that hath often prouoked them to hatred, animated them to contentions, instructed them to treacheries, carried them to slanders: the mouth of that One hath taught them that hath beene sometimes impure, sometime blasphemous:Rea: 18. I cannot conceiue how all nations should bee drunke with the cup of that One,Verse 23. how deceiued with the enchantmēts of that One, vnlesse it be by such an vniuersall dependance vp on One. Giue him what they will, the more they giue him, makes vs suspect him the more: that hee can determine a gainst the Epistles of Paul, hee is Paulo maior, that hee can define against the olde Testament, because hee is greater
then all the Authours of the olde Testament, a title in their Canons:Ros: flis: Franc: That Christ did orare, Franciscus exorare, Christ prayed,Sess: 6: Francis a lowzie Frier obtained: That Pope Leo was annoynted the Lion of the Tribe of Iuda in the Late∣ran Counsell vnder him; that not onely the Lion, but the Lambe of God which takes away the sinnes of the world, was ascribed to him by the Ambassadors of Cecilia.P: Aemil: lib. 7: That he can dispense with one that committed adultery with the Virgin Mary, and with one that pluckt a feather from Ga∣briel the Arch-Angels wing, light stuffe for this Thamar the whore of Rome. That they must needes misinterpret the first verse in the Bible, that one visible Head, non in princi∣pijs, sed in principie,Gen: 1: 1: that they must thus adde and diminish, and mistake the word, enforce tradition as articles of faith, such articles as are published at the Popes Parliaments. That it is not lawfull to appeale from the the Pope to God himselfe: and all these to be beleeued vnder paine of dam∣nation, though all the world should stand against it: Then fall downe and worship him,I: de Turre∣crem: in L: 3: 64. Dicite plures, Dicite nullum, Dicite Diabolum: as Apollonius and Iulian the Apostata fell from many Gods to no Gods, and from no God to adore the Diuell, so if we must not onely fall downe heere before God, and worship him, Dicite Papam: who will not then start aside at these fearefull characters which Sathan him∣selfe hath marked vpon the face of this Antichristian Bi∣shop? These are blasphemies.
And now I humbly desire you that loued that sweete Soule that liues now in heauen, and vpon earth did breath this temperate demands in his Treatise against that neces∣sary Dependance amongst you: that being a parcell of his last will vnto you, it may bee a caueat to take heed of those winding Spirits that haue left off the habit of Lions, and Woolues, and Beares, the violence of Kingdomes descri∣bed in Daniel, and haue taken the names of cups, and drinkes, and enchantments, and women, and whoredoms in the Reuelation:Zach: 3: 7. and as in Zacharies prophesie wicked∣nesse is called a woman, so Antichrist is called a whore, not
a whoremaster, that doth ouercome the younger Gentrie of the Land, not by force, but subtilty,Iohn 4. and to that end take heed of those that meddle with the Samaritane like fa∣ctors in other Countries of no Religion, but like Medlers, indeed rotten within, and if that skinne of pretended loue vnto their Country, and loyalty to their King were pluckt off, you will finde it so: and see them turne Assyrians, a scourge to their owne brethren: And though these ordina∣rily obiect our owne diuinons betwixt the separation, the Caluinists and vs, as it was of the obstinate Graecians in S. Barnards time; so say we of them, Iuncti fide pace diuisi, A little lame they are, and will not goe the beaten way of our Discipline, they take a softer way of liberty not farre from vs, as Prudentius comprehends wisely in those hexameters.
— Concordia laesa est,
Sed defensa fide, quin & concordia sospes
Germanam comitata fidem sua vulner a ridet.
In Faith we agree, but in remote points of more diffi∣culty, and lesse necessity wee may differ as themselues doe. It they see our Bishops lesse insolent, and the Cleargy lesse dissolute, if they see desolations, dilapidations, prescripti∣ons, confusions, scandals in our Church, not altogether dressed because of negligence and deceit, yet it hurts not our Faith, because these are personall, and we bid that man of pride looke to himselfe, for he walks as one vpon a rope,Justin Martyr. Ep. ad Ier. & Serenum . aboue the place that God hath prouided for him, and so hath catcht many falls in our obseruation, wee hope fore runners of his destruction: no great motiues from any thing in him for reconciliation.
This man that made that Treatise in terme Lectures for you: The man of loue beloued of you, not in a barren loue, but in the loue of both Rachel and Lea, beneuolence and bounty without any triumph of vnkindnesse, or selfe∣loue, which are the breake-strings of the heart of Loue, A mauit nos quoque Daphnis: for hee called Grayes Inne his Crowne, and well might he call it so that endured so many publike labours and priuate wrestlings, so many Reading
amongst them, so many meditations at home that brought him first to Timothies , often infirmities when hee was but young, the Gout St. Gregories disease, the stone St. Barnards hell, the burning ague St. Augustines Purgatory. All these he had,Mat. 7. like Light and Salt hee did wast himselfe, draw on disease vpon disease, and which is the life of Loue and St. Pauls Impendam, cut off all hope of life, yet not vn∣rewarded in liuing and louing: for he refused all for your sakes, who would haue done this but for a crowne? not a crowne of Paper to write of him and adorne his memory as I doe;Plusarch. in Agesil. 1 Thes. 2.19 but St. Pauls crowne of reioycing in his care and labour for you; so did he Ouare, so was this Lambe crow∣ned with gould, so did hee sacrifice himselfe, and so was crowned D: Fenton the Preacher of Grayes Inne for the space of 17. yeares, whom euery man did know to bee so approued for Sanctity, so Catholicall for profession, so conformable for vnity, so discreet in commanding, so in dustrious in disposing, so able in performing, so modest in speaking, so sober in zeale, so right in iudgement, so affa∣ble in conuersation, so amiable in aspect, and that which was an admirable conueiance to his iudgement, his inuin∣cible meekenesse against all contradictions of opinions: that he went like meeke Moses through the redde Sea,Num. 12.2. a world of Diuisions enclined to no faction, but followed his calling as he did the cloud and the pillar, that wee may say with the same affection as Hales of Bonauenture; non vi∣detur Adam in homine isto peccasse: neuer was more know∣ledge and so much innocence in a Preacher that was the sonne of Adam. We haue lost our delight; he hath chan∣ged his for better, in that place where there is exact know∣ledge, and perfect righteousnesse Let therefore the wor∣thinesse of him bee a motiue to those of your society that are vnsteddy, that they make no intercisions in this point, but relie vpon him as an Oracle sent from heauen: As it was once the crie of the Synode, Haecest fides Cyrilli: haec est fides Cyrilli, so haec est fides Fentoni: Whosoeuer haue any o∣ther acclamation, proceeeding from spirituall tymorous∣nesse;
or diabolicall peeuishnesse: there cutting betwixt two religions; these intercisions will at the last proue ab∣scissions, turne to separations from God and his Church like Goates. And as it was not Abell but his bloud,Matth 25. so not the writer, but the letter shall be the blacke scrole of their condemnation at that day when all iudgements and opi∣nions shall be cleared: which writings are grounded vp∣on rules of Scripture, according to which Scriptures he pro∣fessed: In which profession he liued, according to which life he died and as he liued and died a Lambe,Reuel. so no doubt he followes the Lambe of God from meekenesse to maiestie, from humilitie to Glorie.
FINIS.
