



THAT ELECT VESSEL and blessed Apostle S.Rom. 13. Paule saieth, that all power commeth from God: and that he that resisteth power, resi∣steth the ordinaunce of God. Whereas then, it hath pleased the greate Lord of Lordes, and Kyng of Kynges (moste gracious so∣ueraigne Ladie) to enstalle your highnesse by his diuine prouidence, in the Roialle throne of maiestie, to rule ouer this realme of Englande: it behoueth your grace to be vigilaunt and carefull, that the weightie administracion thereof, bee by your good gouuernemente, throughlie executed and discharged. Whiche then cometh to passe, when God is in his creatures truelie glo∣rified and honoured, and the people trai∣ned vp in godlie learnyng, decēt order, and

vertuous conuersacion. And althoughe there bee many holesome Lawes and or∣dinaunces, sette foorthe and established in your graces dominiōs, wherby your high∣nesse subiectes bee brideled and restrained, from corrupt abuses and licenciousnesse of liuyng, and enduced to embrace Iustice, temperaunce, vpright dealing, and all kin∣des of vertues: yet as soone as one vice or enormitie is rooted out and abolished, an other more notorious and horrible ariseth and encreaseth (soche is the peruersitet of man, prone to all kinde of iniquitie) euen as it were out of Hydras heade. So easie is the waie that leadeth manne to perdicion: so harde is the passage that bryngeth hym to saluacion. But happie be thei, yea, and mooste happie that can so stronglie arme theim selues, that thei maie be able to en∣counter the fearce assaultes of their ene∣mie, to neglect the wicked allurementes of the worlde, to passe the streites of yearthlie vanitees, and to prouide theim selues of suche furniture for their iourney, that frō this vale of miserie and calamitee, thei maie be conueighed vnto the high palaice of felicitie, from this mortafie and visible habitacion, vnto that immortall and inui∣sible Hierusalem. Vnto the whiche man∣sion place, not the dreames and fancies of

the olde Philosophers, nor their vaine su∣persticions and fonde tradicions (although some of theim deuised many good Lawes and rules for politique gouuernement) can directlie leade vs: but the diuine institu∣cions of the Prophetes of God, the sounde doctrine of the Apostles, and the perfecte trueth of Christes Gospelle, are there vnto our mooste sure guides and conductours. In whiche pathe, soche maie the better learne to walke, as will diligentlie reade, and willinglie followe, suche learned les∣sons & godlie instructions, as are set forth in this treatise, touchyng the good orde∣ryng of a common weale. Wherein as vi∣ces bee sharplie rebuked, abuses reproued, and many exhortaciōs vsed, that al impie∣tee should bee vtterlie abandoned: So bee vertues highlie commēded, good customes approued, and mennes myndes moued, to embrace Godlie liuyng.
Whiche thinges how profitable and ne∣cessarie thei bee to bee knowen, soche shall beste iudge, as haue respecte to their owne safetie, and tender mannes wealthe, and the common commoditee. And that your highnesse subiectes of this your common weale of Englande, might the easelier vn∣derstande the same, for their better instruc∣cion, I haue published vnder your graces

protection, this peece of worke in our vul∣gare English toūgue, wherin (as nere as I could) I haue doen the duetie of a faieth∣full interpretour. But when these my sim∣ple doynges, and first fruictes of my studie, be presented before your Maiestie: it maie then please your highnesse, to calle to your remembraunce, that GOD at the tyme of the erection of his tabernacle, did not one∣lieExod. 25. & 35. accepte soche as brought to the beutifi∣yng and ornament thereof, golde, siluer, purple, scarlette, white silke, precious stones, sweete perfumes, & other riche and sumptuous presentes: but also he toke in verie good part the good willes of thē that offered brasse, iron, goates heare, oile, can∣delstickes, frankincense, and other thyn∣ges of like smalle value and importaunce. So my moste humble peticion vnto your Maiestee is (most benyng and gracious so∣ueraigne) that you would aswell accepte this my poore presente, as though it were some greater gifte, or costlier iewell. And I (as my bounden duetie requireth, & as it becometh al soche as owe vnto your high∣nesse, their true allegeaunce) will praie to almightie God, that your grace maie long raigne ouer vs in greate honour, with vic∣torie ouer all your enemies: and that this your graces common weale of Englande,

by your Godlie Lawes and ordinaunces, and throughe the comelie order, and honest behauiour of your high∣nesse subiectes, maie bee a worthye spectacle of vertue to all christendome.
At the middle Temple the. 20. daie of December. 1559.

