


IT is sayde of Salomon euen in outwarde mat∣ters (Right Honorable, and my verie singular good Lady that if a man haue riches treasure, and honour, wanting no∣thing for his soule of all that it desi∣reth, and yet haue not an heart both to feele in comfort the goodnesse of his God therein towardes him, and also to vse the sayde blessinges libe∣rally to his owne good and others helpe, it is but a vanitie and an euill sickenes, yea a price in the hand of a foole (as it is saide in an other place)

that hath no heart. That is, it is a mercie of God, which hee hath no right and true vse of. So necessarie in verie outward things is both feeling and faith: the one to conceiue, the other to applie, and both of them to yeeld vs the true profit, comfort, and good intended into vs in the same by the Lord. Much more, Ma∣dame, in spirituall matters respec∣ting the life of bodie and soule for e∣uer. And by name much more in the worde of God which we now so freely, and so plentifully, vnder the gratious gouernement of our most gracious Prince enioye. For if wee reade it ouer ten thousand times our selues, heare it of others carefully & continually, and yet feele not the sweete spirite of the Lorde by it se∣cret power, as it were with a drop∣ping dewe, piercing and mollifying, shaking and comforting our soules

by the same, assuredly we want what we seeme to haue, and for all our reading or hearing of it, neuerthe∣lesse it remaineth a sealed booke vn∣to vs. This proueth Caine that cur∣sed caytise both heere and euer, who though he knew the promise of cer∣taine safetie by the seede of the wo∣man, hearing it no doubt often in wordes tould, and seeing it by sacri∣fices shadowed out vnto him, yet wanting a heart to feele, and faith to applie vnto himselfe the benefite of the same, wanted also to his woe, what he so inioyed. So did Esau, Saul, Achitophell, and others all whatsoeuer they were, who toge∣ther with the worde receiued not a touch, a tast, & a very rent as it were, in their heartes to feele, as also pier∣cing eyes, & a clasping faith, to see, and take hould of the hidden sweete comprised in the same. Which wey∣ing

often with my selfe (my verie good Ladie) together with the place where I spend my time, and the bur∣ning desire which both his honora∣ble Lo. and your selfe haue, that I should doe good amongest them, I bowe the knee both of bodie and heart vnto the Lorde for them, and I often begge, that in that bottome∣lesse heape of his mercie, wherein he euen swalloweth vp himselfe, it might please him to see it good, to ioine vnto the outward ministerie of his worde, which he nowe voutsa∣feth them, that inward touch, power and might of his spirite, that maketh it both a mortifying sworde, and a comforting grace vnto his children. For so shall my labours be life vnto them, and euer as I speake (deliue∣ring but the word) their consciences shall approoue and confesse within them, that it is a truth. Yea further

I haue often secretly in my selfe in∣tended, to ioyne vnto prayer some further indeuour, and according to that measure of mercie, which the Lorde should voutsafe me, to make some plaine applications of such portions of scripture, as I shoulde iudge in vse & practise fittest for thē. That seeing in them by example the true vse of the worde of God, and howe to sucke out strength in their seuerall needes from it, they might from one place to manie, and from many euen to all, without any fur∣ther guide, than the guide of guides, Gods mercifull spirit, passe with fee∣ling, comfort, and true concept of the good therin contained, & inten∣ded to vs all. And falling by course of reading at last vpon that notable Chapter the 5. of Mathewe, and see∣ing by some further meditation vp∣on those blessings therin contained,

such wisedome taught, such faultes reprooued, such comfort ministred, and such matter handled, as for thē and all the world is most necessarie, I resolued with my selfe euen there to beginne to put in practise my na∣med purpose, and to make a tryall, if by such indeuour I might profit a∣ny. Which Inowe haue done, pre∣senting the same vnto the Lord with humble prayer for his blessing, to mine owne, and others, with hartie request of Christian acceptance, & to your honorable L. as to a meanes that shall make it more acceptable to all, and especially to them, that I chiefely intende it vnto, so greatly honoring with all dutie and liking the manifoulde mercies of God in you. I am not able (Madame) to doe with content, what ten thousande times. I am bounde to doe with all care: namely, to shew my selfe mind∣full

and thankefull, as I ought, for all your La. honourable dealings with me. But this I protest in the eies of the Lorde, that I would, if I could, and in witnesse thereof I deliuer vn∣to the worlde this affirmation, and to your selfe these fewepapers, most humblie beseeching your Honour, that since my want is in abilitie, and not in will, this small testimonie of the same may according to your ac∣customed clemencie be accepted of, and finde a supplie therein of any want wherewith it may be charged. So cease I to adde any further thing, leauing your La. to the Lord of hea∣uen to strengthen you still in that happie course of the studie of his worde, and all other good learning, of the practise of duty to your God, of cheereful incouragement to your seruants, and of honorable clemen∣cie to all men, which is at this daie a

crowne vpon your head aboue ma∣nie others, and a glorious ornament about your necke in the eies, eares, and tongues of all men, that either see you, heare of you, or speake of you, and my selfe remaine to per∣fourme all dueties, that euer I shall be inabled vnto, euen with all the power both of bodie and minde, as I am most bounde. The Lorde open the windowes of heauen and powre his mercies out vpon your La. the Lorde confirme you in all good workes, giue you a true sight of this vaine world, make your heart shake at his iudgementes, melt with a fruitefull feeling of grace assured to holie life, and the Lord to profite make you thinke you euer heare that voice, ARISE YOV DEADE AND COME VNTO IVDGE∣MENT, and yet in faith to saie with cheerefull heart, COME LORDE

IESVS COME QVICKLIE. So be it.
London this first of De∣cember, 1583.

