



I Present vnto your honor the ve∣ry Idaea of a Counseller not sha∣dowed (in truth) with curious eloquence of wordes, but in his kind absolute and perfite. Such an Orator Tullie, such a king Patritius, such a wise man Salomon commendeth vnto vs: as, fit and needfull to be propounded, like a master∣peece for example, though hard to be expres∣sed in full perfection. The booke written in the Castilian tongue by Barthol. Phillippus D. of the lawes, was commended by manie my good friends, men of great iudgement, and thought worthie for desert, and profitable for

vse thereof, to be imparted to our Nation: and diuerse of them (whose will is sufficient commandement, and request perswasion for me) earnestly entreated mee to imploy some time in translating thereof, for the seruice of such Noblemen and Gentlemen (whereof they said there is no small number) as not wel seene in the Castiliā language, are desirous to vnderstand, what this Spaniard doth bring vnder so glorious a title for the direction or furniture of their estate. Which, vndertaken and ended, I was soone resolued to whom I should and ought to addresse it. For the booke intreating of Counsell & Counsellers (which, Plato worthily calleth ) could not more properly be submitted to any then your honnor, whom her Maiestie, a Prince of so ex∣cellent iudgement, hath after her long experi∣ence of your rare perfections called to her ho∣norable priuie Counsell, in this time which requireth extraordinarie habilitie and wise∣dome. And to whom might I without iust note of great ingratitude, offer my labour in this kind, before him to whose honorable fa∣uour both my parents and my selfe haue bin

and are infinitely beholding? For although I am not ignorant that your honor vnderstan∣deth the Author in his owne tongue, and neede not to bee endebted to any Spaniard for precepts or directions in your estate, yet I trust you will not be displeased, that vnder your fauour and protection he may enforme those young Gentlemen, whose vnexperien∣ced yeares and want of knowledge in this lan∣guage will be content to conferre with him, and serue themselues of me for an interpre∣tour. To your honour therefore I leaue this booke as yours (if you please to auow it) , but  theirs to whom such helpes be not superfluous. The Method which the author vseth, hath receiued contrarie censures of di∣uerse iudgements: but I meane not here to defende him, who in truth hath no neede of so meane a Patron, for that my end onely is faithfully to deliuer his meaning in such or∣der as himselfe had disgested it. Which my labour I shall thinke abundantly rewarded, and besides my selfe much bound vnto your honour, if you shall accept it as a signe of my thankefull minde, which honnourable

courtesie, your former fauours make mee hope for at your handes. Thus I leaue your honour, to your affaires of greater moment, with my prayers to God, to direct all your counselles and aduices to the maintenance of the Church without scisme, and the common∣wealth without trouble.
