



IF wee enquire of the times of old (right wor∣shipfull) and seeke out what hath been done in the daies which are pas∣sed: If we goe through that sacred volume, wherein are contayned, the statutes of the most highest, and the glad tidings of our sal∣uation, and diligently oate the histories therein contayned: if we reade the auncient histories wherein are recorded the factes of our forefathers, & those things which haue happened heretofore: wee shall playnely see

& perceiue, yt they haue alwayes had some cloak in readines to couer eue their most ab∣hominable sin, to yt end it might appeare vn∣to mē, to be no sin at all. When as our great Graūdfather Adā had transgressed the Law▪ which God had giuen him, & violated the cōmandement of his creator, by eating the forbiddē fruit: being asked why he did so, he could quickly couer the matter with a figge leafe, & say that it was y• womā which thou gauest me, which gaue it me to eate, where he hath no other to lay y• blame vpō, but vpō God himself. When Cain, y• murtherer, had slaine his brother Abell, being asked of God where his brother was, hee coulde answere God very disdainfully, & say, nūquid ego sū¦custos fratris me? am I y• keeper of my bro∣ther▪ When as y• I sraelites would cōmit i∣dolatrie, they said they would haue gods to go before them into Canaan, for they knew not what was become of that Moses which brought thē forth of y• land of Egypt, where they cloaked their sin with zeale. When A∣hab would haue Naboaths vineyard, the pos¦sessiō of his fathers, it was because he would make a gardē of earbes therof. Whē as that cursed Iesabel (whose life was lewd, & death shamful) did goe about to haue Naboth sto∣ned

to death, shee did cast this couering vpō her prece, & said, he had spokē against god▪ & against the king. When as Saul had trās∣gressed the cōmaundement of God, in not killing the Amelekyts, & all that was theirs▪ he excused his fact with his good intent, and said, he saued the best of the sheepe & of the oxen to offer in sacrifice vnto the Lord. The Iewes would put Christ to death, because he had transgressed their law, by making him∣selfe a king, Caesar being yet aliue. And Ste∣phan was stoned for sooth, because hee spake blasphemie when he spake the truth. Out of which examples we see that thing euidently proued, where of I haue spokē before. Now if we come nigher home, & take a full view of those times which are now, we shal plain∣ly see y• the mē of these dayes are not behind their auncestors in these things, for they cā¦bring a thinne skin ouer their festered sore, that it may seeme to be hole, when it is no∣thing so. The vsurer can say for him self, that it is lawful for a mā to make the most of his own. The couetous man draweth this vaile ouer his sinne, it is good sauing a penny a∣gainst a wet day, & he whose teath doth go before his handes▪ shall neuer be worth one halfpenny.
The fornicator hath gone to scho with the Papistes, and there hath he learned this lesson, Simplex fornicatio non est adulte∣rium, that single fornication is not adul∣terie, and this is his last refuge, when hee can say no more for himselfe. The Drunkard can say that he is a good fellow, and suche are to be well thought on. The lasciuious Dauncer hath all those colours which in this Dialogue are recited, and many more then these, to paynt his dauncing withall, that it may seeme to be golde, whereas it is but copper, that it may seeme good, where∣as it is euill, and that it may seeme an honest recreation, whereas it is inhonest, & of all those which will seeme to be honest, vtterly to be abhorred. And now (right wor∣shipfull) as it hath been the custome of all those holy men (which liued in those dayes when those former sinnes were committed) to pul away those copwebs where with they couered their sinns, that they might appeare as they were in deede: so it behooueth those which liue in these daies, to pluck away the visurs from the faces of their vices whi∣che raigne in these dayes. Which thing I

haue gone about to do (with what diligence I cold) in the last vice which I repeated whi∣che was lasciuious dauncing, sithens it hath pleased God here to fore, and euen nowe of late, to stirre vp those which haue sufficient∣ly refuted whatsoeuer could haue been saide in defence of these other vices. And though I may seem to some to haue enterpriced this thing more rashly then wisely, and more im∣pudently then prudently, fithens there are a great many which might better haue taken this same in hand: yet the causes which mo∣ued me here unto were such, that I thought I had better take this thing vpon me (though I should doe it but simplie), then to let it a∣lone, least when all men do straine curtesie, it shoulde be left vndone. It is not onely the common sort of people which doeth render these reasons for dauncing: but it is euen some of those which carry some credite, and are of great countenaunce, which vse to ob∣iect as followeth. So that it is to be feared, least lasciuious dauncing in time bee taken for a vertue, where as in deede it is but a vice, as it is nowe a dayes vsed. And nowe (right worshipfull) the especial causes which moued mee to dedicate this my simple Dia∣logue

vnto your worship, are two in num∣ber. The first was this, because I ment here∣by (not in any case reaching you your duty) to certifie you (in whose hande it is to re∣forme this and suche like vices in these our dioces) howe commonly this lewde pastime is vsed vpon the Sabboath day, and againe, howe the ministers of Gods worde are con∣temned, because they woulde debarre the youth from dauncing, so that it is to bee doubted, that vnlesse speedie reformation be had, they shall vtterly be set at nought. To whom shall the seruant, who hath espied weedes in the fieldes complayne, if not to the maister whose the fielde is? And whom shold I rather certify of this thing then you, who hath authoritie to plucke vp suche weeds by the rootes. The last cause, but not the least, which enforced mee to offer vnto you the first fruites of my labours, was, be∣cause you are he at whose handes I haue re∣ceiued as much as I haue desired, but more then I haue deserued. So that I thought my selfe bound by duetie not onely to doe this, but also to praye vnto God vncessantlye for your worship, whom I beseech long to pre∣serue you in life and health, and also to en∣dew you

with such graces, as shall bee necessarie for your calling, to the which God, together with his sonne Christ, and the holy Ghost, e all prayse, glorie, and honour, nowe and for euer. Amen.

