



Worthy Sir,
IT will seeme strange to those, that better know my vnworthinesse then your merits, that I should admini∣ster Physicke to a Physician. But my Apologie is iust; conuincing rather them of ignorance, then my selfe of presumption. It is not a Potion, I send, but a Prescript in paper; which the foolish Patient did eate vp, when he read in it written, Take this. Neither do I send it, to direct you, but that you should rectifie it. So the poore Painter sent Appelles a Picture, to mend it, not to commend it. That which tastes of Philosophie in it, is but so much of those axiomes and rudiments, as I gather'd in the Vniuersitie in a short time, and haue had much opportunity to lose since. Somewhat is chym'd out of experience; wherein I may say, Neces∣sit as was ingenii largitor: as Plinie writes of the Rauen; who labouring of thirst, and spying a vessell with

some little water in it, but so deepe as she could not reach, filled the vessell with stones; till the heauier matter sinking downewards, raysed vp the lighter to her easie apprehension. My owne ill health forced me to looke into that poore Cisterne of knowledge, which I had: and finding it almost drie, I assayed by some new contemplations, to raise it vp to experience; which now, behold, runnes ouer, and (without di∣minution to it selfe) is communicatiuely dispersed to others. Only doe you vse it, as I desire you should my selfe: if it be in health, conserue it: if foule purge it. For my owne part, I am content, that no happie meditation of mine should be vt Curia Martis Athe∣nis; or like some precious mysterie, which a Pra∣ctitioner will get money by, whiles hee liues; but suffer none els to vse, when hee is dead: for hee resolues, it shall die with him. It is more Morall, then Physicall; and yet the greater part Theologicall. wherein I haue most satisfied my owne conscience, in ayming at that punctuall Center, and blessed Scope, whither all endeuours should looke; the straitening our warped Affections, and directing the Soule to hea∣uen. And in this passage, (you must pardon mee) I feare not to say your memory at least, if not your vn∣derstanding, may hereby be helped. My Medicines are not very bitter; but nothing at all sweete to a sen∣suall palate: learning from Saluian; that Quae petu∣lantium auribus placent, aegrotantium animis non pro∣sunt. For my soule, I prescribe to others that, which I desire euer to take my selfe; such sauing Recipe's, as Gods holy Writ hath directed mee. For my Body,

though I would not haue it lamed by my owne neg∣lect, that it might leane vpon the staffe of Physicke; hauing not so much health to spare, as might allow some vnthrifty expence of it on surfets: yet when it is sicke, I desire no other Phisician then your selfe. Per∣haps a great number of men are of my mind, and fre∣quent are the knocks at your Study-dore: but I am sure that all those desires are not enflamed with that light of knowledge, which I haue of your sufficiency, through much priuate conference. Rudenesse or prolixitie do ill in an Epistle, and worse when both to∣gether; and may perhaps please a mans selfe, and none els. I haue done, when I haue (yet once againe) chaleng'd your promised Iudiciall of vrines: which if you make publike, you shall haue the like addition to my singular thankes. Till a good gale of oppor∣tunity waft my self ouer to your Sudbury, I haue sent you this Messenger of that loue and seruice, shall e∣uer be ready to attend you; desiring that, as it hath found the way to you, you would giue it your Passe to the World; and (if it grow poore with contempt) your Legacie of approbation. Wingraue in Buck. May vlt.

