



HAuing of late according to my bounden duty (right honourable and my very good Lord) testified my pore affection to the Churche of God, and to your hououre a∣principall member thereof, by translating that worthy  concerning the Churche: I finde that one HOVVLET (If I bee not deceiued) nowe lying in Rutlandshire or thereaboutes: one of mine old acquain∣tance, a scholler in my time, hath taken the matter in great greefe, for that to your honor, I haue infinuated the Papists to be enemies to God, and to her royall maiestie. This he saith, I haue done to excite youre honour to persecution. The truth , I did it to youre honour, because, that as God hath set you in a cheefe place ouer this his church, so you and all the rest of your calling, might vvatch against suche enemies, and discharge that trust he hath committed  to

you, both to  them from farther  the Church of God,  euermore they haue  and also  for the preseruation of the Qe ne her  vpon vvhome  they  fauour & commodity they haue bene, are, and shal be,  her most dangerous enemies, suche as from time to time, haue gone about to seeke her high∣nes  subuersion. This argument, though I did then but touch as it were by the , yet this enemy hath now pro∣uoked me to make a further discourse therof. VVhich al∣thogh it be not don with that glosse & polishing of words that many times ill matters are colored & pounced vvith all, yet it is done truely and faithfully, no one charge being  vpon , to my knowledge, that is not iustifiable in euery respect. I graunt it might haue bene more fully de∣bated, longer stoode vpon, and vvith some better order & methode: But this being a common argument, others also hauing dealt and dealing in it, who can better, doe it then I, And considering against what aduersary it is, whose gifts are known vnto me, I haue ben bolde in this simple & rude sort further to prouoke him, not doubting, but by the assis∣tance of God, to be able from time to time, if he shall take any exception, to giue him his answere. That I vse my selfe otherwise then my manner is, in roughnesse of words and charpenes of stile, which perhaps some delicate eares will hardly beare, supposing it not fit for the spirite of the gos∣pell, I haue done it I confesse, both aduisedly and with iust deliberation thinking it to bee the fittest vvaye, to  dovvne his hawtie presumption. I think I know the man and also his gifts. Neither is it amisse, to vse sharpe medi∣cinesEsa. 58. 10. against impostumous corruptions, and fretting can∣kers.Ier. 10. 21. The Scriptures giue sufficient warrant,  by exam∣plesEze. 22. 25. confirmed in the Gospell, of round speeche against theMat. 23. aduersaries of Gods euerlasting trueth. I thanke God myMat. 6. 2. conscience beareth me vvitnesse of no hatred tovvardesLuk. 11. 42. &c their person, but I protest vnto your honour in the face, & sight of al the worlde, that I hate al their idolatrous and abhominable superstitions, and if they shall at any timePsal. 11. 25. 5. like the proude Philistian, dare to prouoke the hoast of thePsal. 30. 7. Lord in maintenance of their false religion, and shall blas∣pheme the trueth, let them not thinke, but to heare their1. Sam. 17. owne. The Lorde hath many in Israel, in vvhat contempte

soeuer they holde them, that shall be able to meete them, and euery way to match them, yea with their own swords to cut off their owne heades. I beseech your honour there∣fore, cheerefully to go for ward in defence of this trueth of God. Beware of the  of these double tongs, their. 140. 3. mouths are ful of guile, & the  of A pes is vnder their lips. As low as they , & as fast as they vveep, if they mighte but creepe in and haue oportunitie to shevve their nature, you shoulde try (as God forbid) vvhat Crocadiles they are: Her , and al that  the glorious Gos∣pell of Christe, vnder her gratious gouernment, should feel then the svvord, vvhich novv, they haue so annointed with hony. It were much better for vs that  the gospell, to fall among Rauens, if necessity should , then into the hads of these me , for the one wold neuer light on vs, til we vvere dead,  as the other vvould deuour vs vvhilest we are liuing  they haue hony  their mouths, & death in their harts As Doeg the Idume¦an flattered Saul in accusing Dauid, vvho vvas Saules dear Friende and Sonne, so do they by accusing vs. I savve the1. Sam. 22. 9. Sonne of  (saith he) in Nob  Achimelech the Sonne of Achitob the priest. So the flattering messenger that came2. Sam. 7. 10. to informe Dauid of Saules deathe, receaued a iudgement from his owne mouth, a iust  fit for all flatterers. So Rechab and Banaah brought  head of Isboseth to Da∣uid2. Sam. 4. 8. in Hebron, with flattering , But Dauid a iust King, gaue them a iust recompence. So Absalon, stealing the hearts of the subiects, made shew of great readines to exe∣cute iustice and spake flatteringly to  people. Their mat2 Sam. 15. . ters were good and righteous, but no man vvas appointed of the king to heare them &c. Oh, if he vvere iudge, hovv he vvould sit in the gates. No man cold make so much as a signe of obeizance, to vvhome his hande vvas not straight vvay stretched ont to take him, and to giue him a ludas kisse, so populer he vvas But vvhat became of it? The stron gre flatterye is, and the more examples vvee haue, hovve it2. Sam. 16. 7. hath deceiued, the more vvary had Princes and men of au∣thoritie1. Reg. 22. . need to bee (against vvhom especially this kind of2. Par. 18. 10. assault is vsually made) hovve they giue credite vnto it. Si∣bah2. Reg. 22. 12.  man deceiued Dauid, So did Sedechias2. Par. 18. 11. & 10. 10. that horned Prophet vvith his yron hornes, promising the subuersion of Syria. So did the false Prophetes vvho vvould

haue the king to go vp into Ramoth Gilead, againste the worde of the Lorde, and Rheboams councellers in fee ding the humor of their king, Therefore (good my Lord) As you , and haue hitherto ben, so continue, to be circumspect in your place, and looke aboute you. Trust not faire speeche, not fained freendship in them that haue alvvaies shevved themselues so false The diuel that Prince of darknesse de∣ceiueth, by taking vpon him the shape of an Angel,  ap∣peareth not in his ovvne ougly shape, for then vve should abhorre him. No more do these Synons, these Syrenes that play so pleasantly, and sing so svveetly. Though they haue a goodly shape, yet they are vnnaturall monsters. They giue titles (as Iob saith) but they are enemies to God, and to her highnes: The Lord Iesus send these Parasitical Papists their iust revvard, keepe her maiestic, and this vvhole state,  their craftie vnderminings, continue his Gospell, that vve may euermore serue him, and  in the obedience of his name, till vve obteine that euerlasting inheritance.
Amen.
August. 30. 1581.

