



COnsider the olde generatiōs of mē ye children, sayd that wise Sonne of Sirach (Right Honorable and my very singular good Lord) in his tyme, & marke them well.Ecclesiast. 2.11. VVas there euer any confounded, that put his trust in the Lord? Or who hath continued

in his feare, and was forsaken? Or whom did he euer despise, that cal∣led vpon him? Agreeably truely to all Scriptures, and experiences euer, if they were searched. For such a thing is it to cleaue vnto the Lorde with a faithfull heart, that the Bride may forget to trim her selfe the day she is maried, and the mother her Jnfant she bare of her bodie, and esteemeth full deere, before the Lord of heauen can for∣get such. The Lorde knoweth the daies of the vpright men, & their inheritance shalbe perpetual. They shall not be confounded in the pe∣rillous tyme,Psal. 37. and in the daies of famine they shall haue enough. Though he fall he shall not bee cast

of, for the Lord putteth vnder his hand. The Lord shall exalt them, as themselues shall see, and their ende, sayth the Prophet, shall bee peace. Thousands of comforts hath the word mo, & yet these are both many and great ones, if we marke thē. Gayne is not godlinesse, saith the Apostle,1. Timoth. 6.4.5. chap. 4.8. but godlinesse is great gayne, and hath the promise both of this life & that to come. VVher∣fore (Right Honorable) more ioye in this, than in all the earth, if it might be your owne. For the earth must perish, and all the glistring glorie of it passe away as a tale that is tolde, burnt, and consumed, & melted with heate, but the feare of the Lord shall set her seruants

before the highest, for euer & euer. Now did the Apostle say to King Agrippa before so many, O King Agrippa J knowe thou beleeuest? Surely I may say it before as ma∣ny, I knowe (Right Honorable) your L. beleeueth, both Prophets and Apostles, and whatsoeuer the childe of God is bound to beleeue vnto saluatiō. I say I know it, and yet know I it not alone, but others with me, aswell as J, attending your L. both in like, and other pla∣ces. And if we should all denye it, yet would the world steppe in and say, it knewe what we denied. God haue the glorie, to whō it is due, of his free election manifested both to your self and others by a true cal∣ling

vnto sanctification. And it remaineth (Right H.) that with a spirit flaming with thankefull loue to so gracious a God, you let your light shine further & further to a greater glory to the Lord, & a ful∣ler cōfort to your owne soule. Per∣forme your selfe therefore in all truth of hart, before the iudging eyes of a mightie God still more & more, as you do alreadie, an hono∣rable maintainer and furtherer of his truth. A shield and defence to all the godly in their griefes and distresses. Carefull to haue both your selfe and your familie gouer∣ned by the precious and holy word of God, maintayning and counte∣nancing to that end, as most hono∣rably

you do, both at home, and a∣broade, the Lords poore seruants appoynted to that ministerie. Be a rare example stil, both worthy ho∣noring and following of carefull bestowing of those liuings whereof God hath made your Lordship Pa∣trone. Multiplie, as the Lord shall assist, those your Honors zealous prayers, which some can witnesse: for the peace of Hierusalem, that her rightuousnes may breake forth as the light, & saluation as a bur∣ning lampe. And stil say with the Prophet Dauid, we wish you good lucke ye that be of the house of the Lord. Your Honorable seruices for a most gracious Soueraine as euer the earth had any, and for your

deere Countrey, let them still, as they are, be most sweete and ioyful to you. In your Honorable place and gouernment carie your zeale as your L. doth, euen more & more agaynst the incorrigible aduersa∣ries of Judah and Beniamin, to note their doings, to obserue their drifts, and to ouerthrowe their plots. Cut off still with your sword of holy Iustice, as with exceeding trauell your Lordship most hono∣rably doth, those contentions, disorders, and offences that cor∣ruption both breedeth and feedeth ouer much. And finally as the A∣postle sayth, if there be any ver∣tue, if there be any praise, to God, or to Prince, to Countrey, or to a∣ny,

Right Ho. thinke of that. For so shall your L. establish your selfe both in earth and in heauen, both here and for euer. Yea your self & your seede, as the former promises haue giuen assurance. And so shall you, to your God and your self, & as many as knowe your vertues, stand approued euer, whatsoeuer either ignorance or vnkindnesse may effect in some. VVithout this course & care in a measure as the Lord shall giue, well may a worlde continue a while flattring & fau∣ning with many delights, God be∣ing patient and forbearing long, but the end is destruction, death and confusion, God being iust and paying at last. Your self Madame

still more and more, as your Ladi∣ship doth, partake with your owne, what your place permitteth in these Honorable actions, & make them also your owne. Let it still be your honorable iust & true praise, that you feare the Lord, that you loue his truth, fauour his followers and abhorre his foes. For there is no praise shall continue as this, there is no wisedome that may bee compared to it. The feare of God is the beginning of wisedome, a good vnderstanding haue all they that do thereafter, the praise of it indureth for euer. Againe, let this be your wisedome,Deutro. 4. sayd the Lorde of heauen to that people once, euen to heare my wordes, and to worke

my will with a carefull hart. For then shall all Nations say, you on∣ly are wise, and you onely haue knowledge of the best course. Let it be your Posie, (Right Honora∣ble) as pleasant as euer it was: And now Lorde what is my hope,Psal. 39. truely my hope is euen in thee: Though the Lorde should kill mee, yet will I put my trust in him.Iob. 13.15. And let that plaine Prophet strengthen your Ladiship still by his words to King Asa & all Judah: The Lord is with you, while ye be with him, and if you seeke him hee will bee found of you,2. Chron. 15.2 but if you forsake him he will forsake you. The like hath dying Dauid to his deere sonne to be left behinde him: And

thou Salomon my sonne, know the God of thy father, and serue him,1. Chron. 28.9 with a perfit hart, and a willing minde. For the Lord searcheth all harts, and vnderstandeth all the imaginations of thoughts. Jf thou seeke him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him he wil cast thee away for euer. But what spēd J speech, where many giuen gra∣ces say spare thy speech, J know it wel. Then stay J so, & to you both (Right H.) J adde but this, that as duetie bindeth, and many great and honorable fauours both to me and mine require and charge me, I rest before my God in praier, that goeth out of vnfained lips, that it may bee thus with your H. both,

thus stil I say, and thus more, thus more agayne, and thus still, and thus both still & more continual∣ly during life. That those wordes of endlesse comfort may reach vn∣to you in iudging day: Come ye blessed of my father, and possesse e∣ternall ioy. If this poore trauell of mine may auayle any thing to this effect, it is your Honors own, pro∣ceeded from your owne, most deep∣ly bound for euer to be your owne, and therefore bold to present it in this sort, because he is your owne. It was begun in your Honors hea∣ring, being that part of the Cate∣chisme that then fell to my course, both the lawe and faith hauing bene expounded before, the one by

my selfe, the other by my fellowe that followed: & because it could not at that time be gone forwarde withall, J haue since, as J could, layd it downe in this sort, if it please the Lord for the good of mo. VVho all shall welcome it by thus much more (as they did the other) by how much it bringeth counte∣nance from your Honors both vn∣to them, and is a gift deriued euen from your selues vnto them. The Christian Reader els whosoeuer, I should wrong too much, if I should not comfortably hope, he will ac∣cept it well, since alreadie he hath shewed his loue in the like respect. Therefore most humbly beseeching you both (Right Honorable) to

accept my dutie, to weigh my hart, and to pardon my boldnesse, J be∣seech the Lord againe and againe to multiplie his mercies towardes you both, giuing honor here, and honor euer in his happie king∣dome of eternal comfort.
VVilton. the 11. of May. 1588.

