



AFter I perceiued (very reuerend father)
that your good trauell amongest vs had
not so good successe, as the vnfaithfull &
superfluous doinges of other sometimes
doe obtaine, I not onely mused with my
selfe what should be the cause, but also studied with
my whole indeuour to do that lay in me, though not a∣ble
to helpe good affaires forward, yet at the least, not
to hinder them. For certaine ouerthwart persons (pre∣tēding
to cleaue earnestly vnto the faith of the church,
when in very deed they do nothing els but sticke vnto
their owne wils in folowing euill custome) coueted di∣uers
wayes to obscure the praise of your diligent labor.
Being moued thereto partly because you examined thē
by the scriptures, and partly for that you gaue in your
visitation iniunctions to take away the principall mo∣numents
of superstitions, euen the altars of the po∣pish
masse.
Ah God helpe, to be tried by the Gospel, vvas a
strange matter vnto them that were occupied onely in
their pye portuase and ordinalles, but more strange
vnto them that were woont to heare of nothing at visi∣tations
but of paying of mony, and most strange vnto
them that were neuer examined before, not so much
as whether they beleeued in God or no.
This vnwont maner & strangenesse made your godly
indeuors, of some not to be so thankfully receiued (al∣beit
of the honest most thankfully taken) as they woor∣thely
deserued of all: insomuch that for my part I
hearkened for nothing but for some congratulation of
my brethren toward you: and the people looked for

reformation of enormities, for the open punishment
of great crime, and for the plaine setting forth of Gods
word & preaching of the same after your visitation. But
as I haue heard nothing of the one (honest persons ex∣cepted)
so do the people vvait stil for the other. Wher∣fore
(to speake simply) I thinke God recompenseth
the omission of the one vvith the losse of the other, for
praise hath beene vvont to follovv vertue, as the sha∣dovv
doth the body.
Furthermore, that noble king of famous memory,
no lesse prudent then godly minded, king Henry the 8.
put forth vnto vs in the yere of our Lord 1536▪ a booke
of articles, vvherein the signification of certaine cere∣monies
(vvhich before vvere done) he plly declared
sensing, kneeling, offering to images, & vvorshiping of
the same vvere forbid, and also the name of purgitory
vvas cleane taken avvay. But hovv thankefully those
things vvere then of some receiued, their setting forth
& teaching of the same plainly shevved. I do vvell re∣member
that many vvere as loth then to forgoe theyr
purgatory, as they be novv vnvvilling to take dovvne
their altars, the monuments of the same: & that it was
as strange a thing to say on Ashvvednesday Memento
homo, &c. in English (notvvithstanding the said booke
of articles vvilling the same) as it is novv to be exami∣ned
in the Nevv testament by a godly bishop. In the
same yere also came forth godly iniunctions comman∣ding
parents and gouernours to teach their youth the
Lords prayer, the Articles of the faith, & the cōmande∣ments
of almighty God in English, vvhich themselues
had not learned, & therfore the curats vvere charged to
recite one clause or article one day, & another on ano∣ther
day of the same, vntill the vvhole vvere learned.
This yere likevvise by the authority of the same iniun∣ctions,
the Bible, Gods booke vvas set vp in the quiere,
to be read both in Latine and English, vvhich thither
vvas so vvell vvelcome, so much regarded, and so dili∣gently

studied, that he had good leaue to depart from
thence into the body of the church.
For in the yeare of our Lord God 1538. the magi∣strates
were faine to renew the same iniunctions and
speake more plainely, who commanded the said Gods
booke to bee set vp in some conuenient place in the
Church, and no man to be discouraged from reading
of the same in English. They charged all curates againe
to teach the Lordes praier, the articles of the faith, and
the commandementes of God, and that they shoulde
examine euerie person comming to auriculer confessi∣on,
in the same, and heare them say the Lordes praier,
the articles &c. particularly. And also make or cause to
be made one sermon euerie quarter in euerie one of
their cures. O Lord God, what an eye sore & torment
of minde was this vnto them that were obstinate and
wayward: but what a sweete comforte to the simple
that were willing to disburden their conscience? If god
had then, as he hath now, sent vs some godly learned
Bishops that vvoulde haue taken paines to visite their
cures, and to haue examined howe these matters had
gone forward, they should haue perceaued many a false
cast to haue bin plaied vnder the couerlet in the shif∣ting
houses. And some simple folke woulde haue saide
that their ghostles fathers had giuen them counsell to
stick vnto their old primer, and to beware of the newe,
and specially of the testament.
Diuers proclamations about this time were also set
forth, concerning Gods matters, but alas they were so
vnwillingly handled, and so vnthankfully receaued, that
God had almost taken his word from vs againe. At the
length about the yeare of our Lord God 1544. the suf∣frages
were put forth in english, which likewise were so
wel welcome to some that the kings maiestie then was
constrained to write vnto certaine prelates concerning
the same, whome he aduertised, not to be so slacke in
putting the said praiers in practise, as they were inser∣ting

forth his former articles & iniunctions. Thus God
hath wrought among vs by a little and a litle to bring
vs to knowledge, that at the lēgth vve might willingly
embrace his holy word. Againe, forsomuch as of late
Gods booke was in some places almost forgot, in some
places runne out of the church into the chancel to hide
himselfe amongest the popish bookes, and of some so
safely laid vp, that a man might wright vpon him with
his finger, Ecce nunc in puluere dormio. Therefore al∣mightie
God moued the heart of our moste naturall
liege Lord and dearely beloued mayden king, to lift vp
the same Gods booke once again out of the dust. Who
in the yeare of our Lord God 1547. set foorth by hys
royall visitation godly homilies, the paraphrase of that
learned father Erasmus, to the great comfort of the sim∣ple
that be willing to learne, & also godly iniunctions,
meaning thereby to root vp all superstition, abuse, and
idolatry, & to set vp gods word in their place. Where∣in
he commanded not onely to take awaie all supersti∣tion
and idolatrie, but to take away, and vtterly to
extinguish and destroy all monuments of superstition
& idolatrie. cap. 28. But how diligently putoffes haue
practised their pollicie, to hinder this his godly pur∣pose:
it is better to lament it with teares, then to re∣hearse
it in letters. Last of all, to put all out of doubt,
and to make a perfect concord, we haue a booke of cō∣mon
praier with an order in the same for reading of
Gods booke set forth in English by the same aucthori∣tie,
and stablished by act of parliament. And least anie
person would be so foolish & mad to looke for the ro∣mish
ragges againe, one statute at the last parliament
abolisheth and condemneth for euer all other popish
bookes of the old seruice. Notwithstanding some peo∣ple
be yet dased in those Gods matters that they know
not vvhat to doe. Maruaile not therefore (deare fa∣ther)
though the vngodly sorte doe misconster, and
euill interpret your godly trauaile. For they crie for a

law, they must haue a law to lead them from euerie su∣perstition
by name, els they vvill not obey. But if they
loued obedience, quietnesse, and had but one sparke of
reuerend feare either toward God or their prince, or a∣nie
desire of godly knovvledge, there hath inough and
inough againe bin said, cōcerning matters of religion,
and also set forth, both by order and law.
There be articles inough, iniunctions inough, procla∣mations
inough, commandements inough, exhortati∣ons
inough, lessons inough, and lavves inough, if they
vvere vnderstoode, vvillingly embraced & reuerently
obeyed. Albeit for them that be self vvilled, frovvard,
contentious, obstinat, & dul harted, nothing vvil serue.
Therfore to none may be better applied this prophecy
of Esay,Esay. 28. then vnto these. Who saith, They that be such
must haue after one lesson, another lesson: after one com∣mandement,
another commandement: after one rule, ano∣ther
rule: after one instruction, another instruction: there a
litle, & there a litle. For he that speaketh vnto this people,
is euen as one that vseth rudenesse of speeche, & a strange
language. If anie man say vnto them, loe, this is the rest
wherwith ye may ease hym that is wearie, this is the refre∣shing,
they will not harken. Therfore the word of the Lord,
lesson vpon lesson, commandement vppon commandement,
rule vpon rule, instruction vpon instruction, there a little,
and there a litle shalbe vnto them an occasion of stumbling
that they may goe on, and fal backward, be brused, tangled,
and snared. Wherefore heare the worde of the Lord, yee
mockers, ye that haue rule of this people. O vvould God
I might haue ouerleapt this sentēce that goeth before,
that iustly novv it might not besaid. They are out of the
way by reason of wyne, yea farre out of the way are they
by reason of strong drinke. These things (my moste reue∣rend
father) haue inforced me to presume to doe that
vvhich is aboue the strength both of my vvit and lear∣ning,
but not aboue my good vvill, that is, to collect
out of Gods scriptures, a simple and plaine manifesta∣tion

of the Church in English, or a manifest opening or
shevving of the Church, naming it the Epiphanie, be∣cause
that vvord (albeit borrovved of the Grecians) is
frequented already among vs english men in the same
signification. The obscuritie, misunderstanding and
ignorance onely of this argument & article, hath bene
and also is the cause of much obstinacie, contention,
and disobedience. For vntill it pleased almightie God
to open vnto me by his holy spirit and vvorde, this ar∣ticle:
credo ecclesiam &c. vvith the right meaning of the
same according to the scriptures: I vvas as stiffe in the
popish traditions (taking them for good customes and
ceremonies of the fathers) as I am now earnest in Gods
booke, and taught them vvith so good a zeale (but not
according to knovvledge) as I doe novv the Gospell.
Wherefore taking of the same remedy vvherof I tooke
hurt, euen of Credo ecclesiam, as they that be hurt of
scorpions be vvoont to do, I can do no lesse but vvrite
and set forth the same, vnto and for such as be stoong
vvith the same sting, and venomed vvith the same poi∣son.
Whose nature is, not to hurt but vvhere it findeth
bloud. No more Credo ecclesiam hurteth but suche as
cleaue too much to humaine reason and naturall vvit.
I trust they vvill not mislike that thing that loue con∣straineth
me to doe for their sakes. If they doe, they
shall find me as readie to defend the same by the word
of god against all popish bablinges, as I haue bene to
vvrite it. So that your godly learning misliketh it not,
vnto vvhome vvith all other godly learned, I humbly
submit the same, beseeching you to accept in good
part my small industrie, as the first fruites of my pen
and iudge thereof as god shall put in your minde, to
vvhome be all thanke, praise and glory. Amen.

