


SIR,
IT was your care that pre∣serued this Treatise; and it will bee your honour that you haue preser∣ued it. From you I had it in writing; to you I re∣turne it printed. Pitie that hee, who was depriued of sight in his life, should be de∣priued of the light of his true-worth after his death: Pitie that he, who (though his eminent abilities could not altogether bee
 hid) liued in some obscuritie, if not vn∣regarded, yet vnrewarded; should (hauing left this Monument of his Learning, and Loue to his and our Deare Mother, the English Church) be vtterly forgotten as if shee neuer had brought forth such a sonne. I confesse, many of Our Worthies (and be they euer acknowledged and re∣membred with honour) haue, by parts, vpon occasions, vindicated and iustified Our Common Prayer Booke against oppo∣sers, but a through defence thereof neuer met I withall before this.
It was conceiued in the braine and brest of this learned Authour in your Vncle Ar∣gall's house at Colchester, and the first draught thereof was there made. Per∣haps the Laconicall breuitie thereof; the Socraticall disputing, on Irenaeus part; and the Ramisticall Dichotomies, on the part of Nouatus, may perplexe some Rea∣der, but questionlesse to the Learned, as familiarly therewithall acquainted, they will be acceptable. To gather, and con∣triue much into a little was his ordinarie
 course, and he was happie in it. It was his labour in like manner rather to speake to the vnderstanding, then to the affections, yet closely withall (in a Crypticke Rheto∣ricke) he moues them.
Brought vp hee was in his tender yeares among those, whom he here con∣futes, & by them was designed to vphold the faction. His conuersing with them (be∣sides their Books printed) made himselfe acquainted with their plots, & arguments, and had wel-nigh framed him for their purpose: But the Great-Ouer-Ruler of all plots and purposes, gaue this Blind-Man, when he came to maturitie, Inward-Light, and drew him out of that Schisme, which euen with the milke was instilled into him, and vnder the ferule was pressed vpon him. It was his happinesse to come to Cambridge, and, in Cambridge, to that Renowned Colledge sacred to the Sacred Trinitie. There (as your selfe remembers) we were coequalls in time, and companions in studies. There attained he to the know∣ledge both of the Tongues and Arts; and improued them (by his vndefatigable in∣dustrie)
 euen almost to a Miracle. This deepe-learned-man was readie, euer-readie, to impart his knowledge, whether in Philosophie, or Diuinitie, freely, vnre∣strainedly, cheerefully. To many young Schollers there, and at Westminster after∣wards (where hee liued in my brother Doctor Grant's house) was hee a lightsome Guide, though his owne eyes were darke.
Knowledge and Charitie stroue in him which should exceed the other; so that his departure hence so soone, was a great losse to many, if I said to this Whole Church of Ours, I said but the truth.
It was his Charitie (grounded vpon Knowledge) that compiled this Dialogue. And the like Charitie excites me to draw it out of obscuritie into the publique light and view of the Church. And I am encou∣raged the rather hereunto by His Maie∣sties late Blessed-Instructions for the coun∣tenancing of the to-much-neglected-Pray∣ers, and despised Rits of Our Church. This occasion iustly, mee thought, called for it; and would haue laid sacriledge to my
 charge had I with-held it. It attends on the Scepter; and good successe God send it, that the Publique Liturgie of Our Church may hence-forth iustly bee valued, and duely obserued. I confesse ingenuously, that it is Catechizing and Preaching, which enable vs to the required performance of God's Worship; but Prayer it is (especially Publique Prayer in the House-Of-Prayer) which is God's-Immediate-Worship. The more Publique this is, and the more frequent, the-more-likely (yea more then likely) is it to diuert iudgements, and draw downe blessings. And my priuate Prayer shall euer be, that Publique Prayer in Our Church, as it is reuiued, so it may be continued while the World continues, e∣uen till Our Iesus returnes in glorie. So prayes
Saint Barthol. Exchange, London, April 5. 1630.

