



RIGHT HONOURABLE,
THat especiall fauour which your Grace was pleased to shew vnto the Author of this worke while he liued, hath imboldned me to commend the worke it selfe as it is now in∣larged vnto your Gracious protection. And though the Authors particular obligement had not directed me in my choyce, I know not vnto whom I might more fitly haue presen∣ted it then vnto your Grace, who in a more peculiar manner then others, haue vndertaken the protection of Schol∣lers. One example amongst many this Author might haue beene, had hee liued but a little longer, of your honourable care, for the aduance∣ment of learning, and encouragement of Schollers. The volume which I present vnto your Grace, for the bulke and bignesse is not great, espe∣cially if it be compared with the writings of our Aduersaries; whose vo∣luminous workes would make the ignorant beleeue, that they had in∣grossed all learning vnto themselues. But asmany times wee may find in little men that strength of body and vigour of mind which is wanting in those of greater stature; so experience telleth vs that amongst bookes the greatest are not alwaies the best.
Saepius in libro memoratur Persius vno,
Quam leuis in tota Marsus Amazonide.
And those that are acquainted with the writings of our Aduersaries are not ignorant, how for the most part their great volumes are stuffed.

If a man will take the paines to reade them, like those that digge in mines for gold, he must expect to finde paruum in magno, but a little gold in a great deale of vnprofitable earth. Of this worke I thinke I might safely say thus much, that it compriseth much in a little: but I intend not a Panegyrique in the praise thereof. If I giue it not that praise which it deserues, my neare relation vnto the Author may be my excuse; seeing whatsoeuer I should say would seeme rather to proceede from affection then judgment. VVhat my opinion of it is, I thinke I haue sufficiently expressed in that I haue thought it not vnworthy your Graces patronage. And thus praying for the continuance of your Graces prosperous and happy estate I remaine

