



MOST GRACIOVS SOVERAIGNE, These Theologicall La∣bours, which we now pu∣blish, were vndertaken by Order of our

late Soueraygne of Famous Memory, for his desired Satisfaction about some of the prin∣cipall Points, which with-held his Royall ioyning vnto the Church of Rome. The Authour when he penned them, did expect they should haue been kept within the priuate Library of his Princely Reading, and not made publike to the World, as afterward they were by a Doctour Minister, togeather with a Voluminous Reply, wherin he seekes to disgrace them, by much bitternes of speach, vttered in the violence of his Zeale.
This imposed an Obligation vpon the Authour, to reuiew them agayne, and to set them forth whole and entiere, purged from the faults of hand-writing misprisi∣on; cleered from the cloudes cast vpon them by ignorant Cauill; strenghthened with some new Collaterall Additions of more euident Explication and Proofe. Which Labours renewned & published, we humbly offer vnto your most Excel∣lent Maiesty, as vnto the Heyre, not only of your Renowned Fathers Dignity and State, but also of his Wisdome and Vertue,

in whome is perpetuated, as the Nobili∣ty of his Bloud, so the Excellency of his Mind.
And though it be their hard fortune to appeare in your Presence at the time, whē the light of your Royall Clemency is to∣wardes your Catholicke Subiects eclyp∣sed; yet for themselues, they confide to find some speciall Fauour, not to be for∣bidden, or banished your Maiestyes Do∣minions, in that they be Natiffe of your Royall Fathers Command, by the Warrāt of his Authority borne into the World, whose Sacred Pleasure, through pious Ex∣cesse of Filiall Affection, You still reue∣rence after his Discease.
Neyther can it be for the credit of our Aduersaryes, or of their Cause, that free Accesse should be denyed vnto these Wri∣tings, which (as themselues testify) were by the sound of Authority summoned vn∣to the Combat, vpon supposition, that thereby, Our weakenes, and want of strength would manifestly appeare. For thus they write: The better to discouer their weaknes,D. Whites Preface. & to plucke them out of their Fox-hole of Personall Successi∣on,

and visibility, the King imposed the Taske of writing vpon the Nine Questions, knowing our Aduersaryes to be cunning, and subtill in eluding our Arguments, but of no strength, especially in particular Questions, to proue their owne Te∣net, or to confirme their Fayth by sacred Scrip∣ture, or Auncient Tradition.
If after so solemne Inuitation vnto the Combat, if after so bold Promises that in these Writings, our weakenes would be discoue∣red, if after so great assurance giuen to their Credents, that we cannot confirme our Re∣ligion by Scripture, these challenged Wri∣tings be stayed by Authority, not to enter into the Field; this may yield vnto Iudici∣ous Protestants iust reason to suspect, that weaknes and want of strength, rather lyeth on their side; and that the Patrons of their Reformed Religion, place their confidence of Victory, rather in the Partiality of the State, then in the Euidence of the Scrip∣ture, in the behalfe of their Doctrines.
And, as these Tytles, euen the Credit of the Protestant Cause, pleade for the free permission of this Booke: so the Booke it selfe contaynes nothing that may cause the

hinderance of so due a fauour. Therin no person in Authority is censured, no mat∣ter of State touched, nothing vttered that may iustly offēd; only the euidēce of Gods Holy Word is vrged, in defence of that Religion, which euen in your Royall Iudg∣ment, is so farre from being impious in it selfe, or an Enemy of your State, as You haue by most happy choyce selected the same to be the Consort of your Crowne, to be the Parent of those glorious Starres, which (according to the hope of all Loyall Subiects) shal frō your Maiesties Throne, by long continued Succession, shine vnto these fortunate Kingdomes: who by her euer-honoured Name of MARY, but much more by the rare Excellency of her Vertues, liuely represents the sweet Me∣mory of your Right Glorious Grand-mo∣ther, whiles she liued, for Princely quali∣tyes the Paragon of Europe, and now a singular Ornament of the Heauens, in re∣gard of her cōstancy in the Catholike Ro∣man Religion vnto death; that her enra∣ged Enemyes, not being able to conquer her Immortall Affection vnto the same,

feared not to shed her no lesse Innocent, then Noble Bloud, the Fountaine of Your Maiestyes Royall Rights vnto the King∣doms of Great Brittayne, to strike of that Thrice-Venerable Head, more Glorious for the lustre of the One Catholike Fayth She maintayned, then for the shining gemnes of Three Christian Crownes, of which, two She wore, and the third was vndoubtedly her Due.
Your Royall Magnanimity, timely to∣kens whereof appeared in your tender Yeares, hath engaged the Harts of your Loyall Subiects, in a secret Ioy of Hope, that God by meanes of your Maiesty, will illustrate this Kingdome, by many rich Blessings of Temporall Glory. In which Hope we are strengthned by the fortunate Name of Charles the First: fortunate I say, to bring Felicities vpon Kingdomes; vnder, & by which Name, France vnder Char∣les the Great: Spayne vn∣der Charles, the fifth Em∣perour, but the first of that Name Kinge of Spayne, sur∣named Ma∣ximus. the two mightiest Kingdoms of Europe aduanced to Imperial Dignity, grew vnto the highest of worldly Greatnes. In which respect it is not any disloyall Affection, that we wish in our Harts, and pray vnto the Soueraygne Mo∣Moderatour,

in whose hands are the Harts of Princes, that he wil incline your Prince∣ly Hart, to be fauourable vnto that Religi∣on, which only hath been Conquerant in former ages; that hardly can any Christi∣an King be named Renownedly Victori∣ous, that was not a Professour, or a Fauou∣rer therof. Yea, if we call to mind the most famous & wonderfull victoryes that haue ennobled the Christiā Name, we may find, that they were fruits, and effects of some Deuotions of the Catholike Roman Fayth questioned, & proued in this Treatise.
Constantine the first Christian Emperour surnamed the Great, who doth not know that his Conquests were obtayned by his worshipping Euseb. in vita Constan∣tini lib. 3. c. 2. Zozom. l. 1. cap. 8. the signe of the Holy Crosse, being doubtlesse of a contrary Re∣ligion vnto the Prime Religion-deuiser of this age Martin Luther, who sayth of him∣selfe, Luther. Tom. 1. Wit∣temberg. fol. 539. If I were a Souldier, and should see in the field the Standart of the Crosse, I would fly from the same, as from the Diuell. For this Emperour still carryed Euseb. l. 2. de vita Cō∣stant. c. 3· & 4. Saluta∣ris passionis Christi In∣signe, vni∣uersum E∣xercitū per∣petuò ante∣cedebat. the Standart of the Crosse before his army in all his bat∣tayles agaynst Maxentius, Maximinus, & Li∣cinius,

putting therin assured confidence of victory, vnto whome God gaue miracu∣lous successe, and He, an example vnto Christian succeeding Monarches, to pro∣strate the Imperiall Purple before the sayd sacred Ensigne, to adore thereby Christ their God. Wherein a chiefe Saint of that Age reioycing, singeth this verse,
—Prudent. lib. 2. contra Symmach. Iam Purpura supplex
Sternitur Aeneadae Rectoris ad atria Christi,
Vexillū{que} Crucis summus Moderator ADORAT.
Imperiall Purple now Christs ayde im∣plores,
The Soueraygne Lord prostrate his Crosse adores.
Theodosius, to whome likewise Heroicall Worthynes hath giuen the tytle of Great, no doubt, but his so many great Victories, specially agaynst Eugenius the Pagan Vsur∣ping Emperour, were wonne by his Deuo∣tion vnto Saints, whose Churches before he went to that warlike Expedition, he did visit, Ruffin lib. 2. Histor. c. 33. lying prostrate before their Shrines, crauing the assured ayde of their Powerfull In∣tercessions. In the Enterprize, hauing in the first Battayle lost the day, by the

slaughter of a great part of his army that were Infidells, full of perplexity he spent the night in prayer in a Chappell on the top of a mountayne, Theodor. lib. 5. c. 24. Vidit duos viros can∣dido vestitu equis albis vehi. and there hauing watched a lōg while fell asleep. In his sleep two men appeared vnto him in white attyre, moū∣ted on white horses, bidding him not to feare, but the next morning presently vpon breake of day, to offer againe the Battayle, se Auxiliares ei, & Antesignanos à Deo missos, that they were sent of God to be the Pro∣tectours, and Leaders of his army, & that the one was Iohn the Euangelist, the other Philip the Apostle.
The Emperour vpon this warrant the next day gaue agayne the field to his Ene∣myes, and Signo CRVCIS se muniēs, sig∣num praelio dedit. Oros. l. 7. c. 37. making vpon himselfe the signe of the Crosse, began the fight, got a most memorable Victory through the di∣uine assistance. For Theodor. Ruffin. Oros. & omnes Hi∣stor. when the Enemyes through their multitude begā to preuaile, a storme suddenly blowing frō the moun∣tains droue their darts & lances backe vpō themselues, wherewith amazed, without further fighting, they yielded; yea laying hands on Eugenius they brought him vn∣to

Theodosius captiue, & bound in chaines. The miracle of which Victory a Pagan Poet, who then liued acknowledging saith thereof,
—Panegyr. in 3. Honor. Aquilo de monte procellis
Obruit armatas acies, reuolutáque Tela
Vertit in auctores, & turbine reppulit hastas.
O nimiùm dilecte Deo, cui militat Aether,
Et coniurati veniunt ad Classica venti!
A Wind the Army fell'd with Northerne blast,
And Lance and Dart backe on their Au∣thours cast.
O lou'd of God, for whome the Heauens do fight,
And Winds at call imploy commanded might!
Honorius Sonne of the forsayd Theodosius obtayned two wonderfull victoryes to the astonishment of the whole world; the one in Africke, with an army of only fiue thou∣sand, Sigon. de accident. Im∣per. lib. 10. pag. 160. agaynst the army of Gildo the Pagan Tyrant, cōsisting of seauenty thou∣sand: the other in Italy, agaynst Radagay∣sus the Goth, bringing with him an army of more then two hundred thousand, which

was defeated, and wholly extinguished, not one Christian Souldier being August. l. 5. de Ciuit. c. 23. so much as wounded; and this by Paulin. Nolan. de Sancto Felice, Nat. 12. the vertue of Piety and Deuotion vnto Saints. For Paulin. in vita Ambrosij. Saint Ambrose, deceased some few yeares before, appearing vnto the Generall assured him of the Victory, and taught him Oros. l. 7. cap. 36. where, and in what manner he should order his army; therby confirming the Catholicke Doctrine, set downe by S. Augustine as vndoubted: August. de cura pro mor∣tuis. cap. 15. Sancti per diui∣nam potentian humanis rebus intersunt; Saints, not by the force of Nature, but by the po∣wer of God, haue care of human affayres.
Theodoricke the Goth, though in opinion an Arian, yet by speciall diuine instinct Nicephor. l. 16. c. 35. a great Fauourer, and Honourer of the Roman Act. Sy∣nod. Rom. sub Symmach. Religion and Sea, by many fa∣mous victoryes conquered in short tyme the whole Kingdome of Italy, the which he many yeares peaceably enioyed; Sigon. de Occident. Im∣per. lib. 16. vn∣till in the end of his life, deflecting from his former Piety, to be a Persecutour of the Roman Bishop & Fayth, he cōcluded his long happy raygne with a dismall, and vnfortunate death.
Iustinian Emperour, filled the three parts of the world, Asia, Africke, and Europe with the Trophies of his Conquests, which he did euer Nouel. 36. & 37. vide Baron. Anno Domini 533. & 534. acknowledge as benefits besto∣wed on him, for his singular deuotion vn∣to the most Blessed Virgin, whose glorious Tytle of GODS MOTHER, he maintayned agaynst the Nestorians, by ma∣ny Edicts, Procop. de Aedific. Iu∣stin. orat. 4. raysing in Hierusalem, Car∣thage, and other chiefe Cittyes of the world sumptuous and magnificent Temples in her Honour: yea Narses his Generall by whome he expelled the Gothes out of Italy, was so Euagr. l. 4. cap. 23. deuout to our Lady, that being to giue the battayle vnto his Enemyes, his wont was to spend the whole night before in Prayer, & in Inuocations of her ayde, whereby he obtayned so great fauours, as he was still Nicephor. l. 17. c. 13. taught, and instructed by her appearing vnto him, in what manner he was to manage the Field.
Who hath not heard of the renow∣ned Victory which Heraclius the Emperour wonne vpon the King of Persia, with small forces against three mighty armyes, rather by diuine miracle then by human strength

for the recouery of the Holy Crosse, wher∣by God confirmed Rusticus Diaconus cō∣tra Eutich. the Catholike deuo∣tion then vsed without contradiction ouer the whole Christian world, Paulus Di∣aconus Hist. Miscel. l. 1. & Cedrenus de Imper. in Heracl. to worship that most holy wood, & holy Images, the sayd Emperour causing the Image of our Blessed Sauiour to be carryed in all his Battayles before his Army.
Clodoueus the first Christian King of France, surnamed Belliger, what were his so many Victoryes, but Trophies of the now disliked Roman Deuotion? When Gregor. Turon. (who did liue about that time) l▪ 2. Histor c. 17. Hincmar. in vita Sācti Re∣migij. Aimn. & alij. he went in expedition agaynst Alaricus the Arian, who had vsurped Gascoigne, & other parts of the most Christian King∣dome, to prepare the way vnto the victo∣ry, he offered Giftes, and Donaryes vnto S. Martin, in honour of whome he also com∣manded none should touch any thing of the Countrey of Tours, but only water and grasse for their horses. Agaynst which E∣dict when one of his Souldiers had trans∣gressed, he gaue order he should be puni∣shed, saying, VVhat hope of Victory, if we of∣fend Saint Martin? Hence his Enterprize was so fortunate, & illustrated by wonder∣full

euents. A Stagge wēt before his army, shewing where they might wade ouer the Riuer of Vienne, then so swolne with water, as it was not passable, but only in that place. Being in the field neere vnto Poy∣tiers, where Saint Hilaryes body is honou∣red, Pharus ignea. a Tower of light comming forth of the Church of the Saint, shined vpon the King, whereby encouraged, he wonne a a most glorious day, slew the Hereticall Vsurper with his owne hands, deliuered the florishing part of France from the Ari∣an Tyrany. In his returne acknowledging the Victory gotten by Saint Martins inter∣cession, he offered vnto him his Warlike Palfree, whereon he had fought so glori∣ously, redeeming the same afterward with a Summe of money.
Pepinus, who ioyned a great part of Ger∣many that then was Pagan vnto the Crown of France, had greater confidence of Victo∣ry in his deuout Inuocation of Saints, then in the strength of his Armyes. Hence ha∣uing in a fierce Battayle with the Saxons, obtayned a glorious Victory, his weary∣ed and wounded Army being presently set

vpon by a fresh mighty Band of Infidells, S. Lud∣gerus in vitae S. Swiberts. he lighting from his horse, prostrate on the ground, made a Vow vnto God, and vnto Saint Swibert, to visit his Reliques with his whole ar∣my barefoote. Vpon which Vow, straight∣wayes a wonderfull light from Heauen shined ouer him and his Forces, that the Pagans terrified therwith, without fighting yielded themselues, and their whole Coun∣trey of VVestphalia, to his Obedience.
As almost all bookes be full of the Vi∣ctoryes of Charles the first of France surna∣med the Great; so likewise they make full Record of his singular Reuerence vnto the Roman Bishop, in whose defence he fought so many victorious Fields, special∣ly agaynst the Longobards, whose Irreligion towards the Chayre of Peter the principall sea, the fountayne of Christian Vnity, wrought in the end the totall Sigon. de Regno Ital. l. 3. & 4. subuersion of their Kingdome.
After the Empire was translated from the Franks vnto the Saxons, who more Va∣iant and Victorious then Henry surnamed the Faulkener, the first Emperour of that Stocke? Being sicke, and so weake as he

could hardly hold himselfe on his horse, he durst in person go into the Field against the mightiest army of Hunnes that euer en∣tred Germany Witich. l. 1. de reb. Sa∣xon. Frodoar. Chron. Ec∣cles. Rhem. Luitprand. l. 2. c. 8. & 9. Nauclerus in Chron. Gen. 31. à Christo nato.; so many in number, and so confident in their forces, as they durst bragge, they could not be ouercome, ex∣cept eyther the Earth should sinke vnder them, or the Heauens fall vpon them. The King and his Souldiers fought valiantly, but prayed no lesse deuoutly; the King making often Vowes vnto God to roote Symony out of his Kingdomes did he win the day, the Souldiers often repeating Ky∣rie eleyson, Kyrie eleyson; by the deuout ingemination of which Christian Letany, agaynst the Hunnish Hui, Hui, Hui, they got the Victory: making manifest how great is the force of Prayer, though in a language not vulgarly knowne. For the victory was so Illustrious, as in respect thereof, the sayd Emperour became re∣nowned, admired & honoured of all Chri∣stian Princes.
Otho the Great, as in Piety and Deuo∣tion, so likewise for admired victoryes was nothing inferiour vnto the foresayd

Henry his Father. He Witi∣chind. lib. 1. Luitprandus lib. 4. cap. 11. & 12. Naucler. in chron. Gene∣rat. à Christo 32. part. 2. pag. 82. much honou∣red the holy Lance made of the sacred Nayles of our Sauiours Crosse, by vertue whereof he ouercame miraculously an im∣mense Army of Hungarians who then were Pagans, & mighty troupes of Rebells that were ioyned agaynst him. Being on the one side of the Rhene, and the Rebells on the other, a few of his Souldiers, without his priuity passing the Riuer, fell into the Enemyes hands. The Pious Emperour se∣ing them in distresse, and not able to suc∣cour them, mooued with compassion, pro∣strated himselfe (his whole Army doing the like) before the holy Lance with many teares, praying vnto our Sauiour whose Hands, and Feete had been pierced with those sacred Nailes. No sooner was he pro∣strate on the ground, but presently the Re∣bells, no man knowing why, ranne away, their harts inwardly cōsuming with feare, so that many of them were killed, & taken prisoners by the aforesayd poore handfull of men.
Henry the second Emperour, Nephew to this Otho, was on the one side so Victori∣ous,

as he ioyned vnto the Crowne of the Empyre the Kingdomes of Bohemia, Scla∣uonia, and Hungary; on the other so giuen vnto Roman deuotiō, as he is a canonized Saint of the Roman Church. His Dithmar. lib. 6. Reli∣gion towards Gods B. Mother was singular, in whose Honour he vowed, and kept his Virginity vnspotted, togeather with Kune∣gundis the Virgin holy Empresse his Spouse. When Godo∣fred. Viterb. in Chronic. Cuspianus. Bonfin. de re∣bus Hungar. Dec. 2. lib. 1. he entred into any Citty, his cu∣stome was to spend the first night praying in the Church of our Lady, if any were in the place consecrated to her Name. Hence in the battayle he fought agaynst Bolistaus King of Bohemia, the Holy martyrs Saint Laurence, Saint George, & Saint Adrian, sent by the Queene of Saints, were seene to goe before his Army,Nauclerus à Christo gen. 34. part. 2. pag. 106. carrying the Standart of the Crosse, striking the Enemy with blind∣nes; so that they not being able to behold, much lesse to resist the Emperours forces, Bohemia was made Vassall vnto the Em∣pyre, without any effusion of bloud.
About the same tyme the two renow∣ned Normans Robert, and Roger, vnderta∣king to free Sicily from the Tyranny of the

Saracens, wherewith the same had been a long tyme oppressed, were constrayned with small forces to Thomas Fazellus, de rebus Sicul. Decad. post. lib. 7. p. 397. encounter an huge Host wherein were thirty thousand horse, and foote without number. In the heate of the battayle Saint George was seene blazing forth glorious beames of brightnes vpon a white Steed, in a white Horsemans coate, on which was sowed a Red Crosse thereby encouraging the Christian Army, and dri∣uing the Enemy before him. Hence the Nation of the Normans conceaued speciall deuotion vnto S. George, calling vpon him in their Battayles next after God; and with the Normans it is likely, the same deuotion entred into England.
In confirmation of this truth, how many Examples doth Spayne affoard of Victories gotten by Catholike deuotions against the Saracens, who in the yeare 701. made them∣selues maysters of the greatest part of that Countrey? None of their victoryes more famous then that obtayned by the vertue of the Holy Crosse, whereof they keepe yeerly a Triumphall Feast. The This hi∣story is writ∣ten by Rod∣ricus Arch∣bishop of To∣ledo, who was there present. De rebus His∣pan. l. 8. c. 10. Marian. de reb. Hisp. l. 11. c. 14, 15. Maho∣metans, in a battayle with Alphonsus King

of Castile, surnamed the Noble, hauing the better of the day, the Christian Army be∣ing almost put to flight, the Arch-deacon of Toledo full of Christian courage, hauing in his hands the Ensigne of the Crosse which he carryed before his Arch-bishop (wherein also was the image of the Blessed Virgin) went therwith through the thick∣est of the Enemyes without being hurt, though innumerable Lances & Darts were cast, and Arrowes shot at him. By his ex∣ample the Christian Army encouraged, retourning with new fortitude to the Bat∣tayne, put the Saracens to flight, made mas∣sacre of them, who were so many, as the Lances, Darts, & Arrowes left behind thē in the field, could not be consumed with the many mighty fires made two dayes to∣geather, aswell in token of ioy, as for other vses.
More ancient, & no lesse wonderfull is the Victory gotten aganst the same Infi∣dells by Raymirus King of Leon and Galicia. He Ambros. Moral. & all other Histo∣rians. hauing gathered togeather all the forces of his Kingdomes agaynst these Mahometan Vsurpers, being defeated, was

brought to great distresse & sadnes. As he rested in the night, S. Iames appeared vnto him, telling him that Christ had peculiarly committed Spayne to his Tuition, that he should not feare, but trusting in God the next day present the Field to the Infidells, for himselfe would be in the fight. The King did as the holy Apostle ordayned, who according to his promise, was seen in the Field vpon a white horse, with a Red Crosse on his breast, running vpon the Mahometans, and putting them to flight. Vnto Vide di∣ploma Regis apud Ioan. Marian. in lib. de S. Ia∣cobi in His∣paniam ad∣uentu, in fine. which Victory, not only the King in his Charter with many Bishops & Nobles of his Realme, as eye-witnesses giue record, but euen the Mahometan Hi∣storyes make mention thereof.
If I add vnto these forrayne Historyes our domesticall Victoryes, I should be o∣uer long, yet cannot I pretermit to touch one example in euery Line and Nation of our Kings. Amongst the Britans, none more famous then Prince Arthur, nor is a∣ny of his Victories more certayne then that recorded by Beda lib. 1. c. 20. hi∣stor. Henricus Hntng. R∣nulph. Venerable Bede, though without mention of him. The Picts and

Saxons associating their forces, and inua∣ding the Britans with a most dreadfull Ar∣my, the Priests of the Britans (holy S. Ger∣man Bishop being Prince of the Quire) by singing Alleluia, & other Church-pray∣ers, strooke such a dismall fright into the harts of the Infidells, that abandoning their weapons and armour, they ranne a∣way with all possible hast: the miracle of Iosue Iosue c. 6. his victory being renewed, when the walls of Iericho fell to the ground at the sound of the Sacerdotall Trumpets; whereby also the Catholike Doctrine was authorized, that Church-prayers in a lan∣guage not vulgarly vnderstood, may be pleasing and effectuall with God.
In the Line of our Saxon Kings, who for the fighting of many battayles, for the obtayning of renowned Victoryes, more admired then King Alfrede? Which Asser. Me∣neu. in vita Alured Poli∣dor. l . Gu∣el. Malmes. & alij. Victoryes, so many and so great, he wonne by his deuotion vnto Saints, particularly by the assistance of Saint Cuthbert, who ap∣pearing to the King encouraged him vn∣to that famous Battayle, whereby the for∣ces of the vsurping Infidells were in a

manner wholly extinguished.
After the Conquest, (to say nothing of the Conquerour himselfe, whose vast and Valiant Enterprize was made fortunate by a Consecrated Standart Ingulph. Matt. West∣mon. & alij. sent him by Pope Alexander the second) I will only name King Henry the fifth, the mirrour of Kinges, in whome was summed to∣geather the whole perfection of all Ca∣tholike Military and Politike Worthynes. On the one side, who more renowned for Victoryes, thē this Conquerour of France, which in the space of few yeares he broght in a manner wholly vnder his Obedience? On the other, who more Memorable for his Obedience to the Roman Sea, for his Reuerence of Catholike Priesthood, for his care and respect of Churches, for his zeale agaynst the VVickliffian Heresy, for his dayly deuout Inuocation of Saints, for his going barefoote in pilgrimage vnto Churches Titus Li∣uius de vita Henrici. Tho∣mas Walsing. Enguerant. Stow, and o∣thers.? Two Monasteryes he built from the foundations, opposite the one to the other vpon the bankes of the Thames; that tearmed Bethleem for Religious men, this Syon for consecrated Virgins which

should day and night without intermissi∣on pray for the happy Successe of his Warres in France. He Nicol. Harpesfield Hist. Eccles. Anglic. saecul. 15. cap. 3. spent, and com∣manded his Army to spend the night be∣fore the famous Battayle of Agincourt in Prayer, in Inuocation of Saints, in ma∣king their confession vnto Priests, in do∣ing pennance for their sinnes; and in the morning before the battayle euery one by his order, put a piece of Earth to his mouth, to testify his desire (had there beene oportunity) to haue receaued the sacred Communion in one kind, as both the token did signify, and then was the practise. So that the Diuine Prouidence graunting so glorious a Victory vnto so few, agaynst Walsin∣gham writes the French were an hū∣dred & forty thousand, the English not aboue ten thou∣sand. so many, made as it were Proclamation vnto the world, that these now questioned Roman Deuotions, are ac∣ceptable vnto him.
In the Hecto Boethius Hi∣stor. Scot. fol. 196. Bucan. Histor. Scot. fol. 48. Annalls of Scotland we reade, that Guthran King of the Danes, in Bap∣tisme tearmed Athelstan, hauing subdued a good part of England, inuaded Scotland. His army was so puissant, as therewith he in∣uironed Hungus King of the Picts, and Alpi∣nius

Prince of Scotland with their forces that came agaynst him; denouncing vn∣to them by one that had a loud and shrill voyce, that not one of them should escape aliue. The King Hungus after long prayer vnto God and S. Andrew, being asleep, the sayd Apostle appeared vnto him, bad him fight the next day with confidence in God & his ayde. The battayle was fought Crux decussata. Saint Andrewes Crosse appearing ouer the Scottish Army; the field wonne a∣gainst the Danes; Athelstan slayne therein; S. Andrew confirmed Patron of Scotland; his Crosse made their Ensigne; a famous Church built in his Honour, to the vse whereof, and mantaynance of Chanons therin, the King applyed the tenth part of Decimā Regiorum praediorum partem. his Royall Patrimony.
The Greatest Battayle that Scottish∣men euer wonne, without doubt is that of Striueling agaynst our Edward the second. The Scottish Historyes say this Kings Ar∣my did cōsist of an hundred & fifty thou∣sand horse, and of as many foote; And though this may seeme great exaggerati∣on, yet our Thomas de la More in vita Edwardi 2. Numquā magis splē∣didus, nobi∣lis, & super∣bus Anglo∣rum exerci∣tus visus. Stow anno Domini 1313. pag. 333. English Annalls testify,

that neuer before was the like preparation, pride, and cost in tyme of warre; the Souldyers euen the night before the battayle, bathing themselues in wine, casting their gorges, crying, showting, vaū∣ting, confiding in their forces as inuincible. On the Hector Boethius Hi∣stor. Scot. lib. 14 fo. 3.114. Thomas de la More vbi sup other side the Scottishmen spent the night in confessing their sinnes vnto Priests, in prayers vnto God by the me∣diatiō of Saints, specially of S. Finan, whose sacred Relikes they brought with thē into the Field. In the morning, the King with his Nobles on the top of an Hill in the sight of his Army heard Masse, receaued the B. Sacrament at the hands of Mauritius Abbot, as the rest of the troups also did, at the hands of other Priests. The Masse en∣ded, the sayd Abbot came downe, & stood in the Front of the Army with the Stan∣dart of the Crosse, which they all saluted falling with their bodyes on the ground. The English imagining this was done in token that they yielded, soone found thē∣selues deceaued, & were taught by their o∣uerthrow an inuincible Truth, That not Warlike preparatiō, not the multitude of men, not the courage of human Hart, not

the forces of Armes; but true Catholicke Piety, Confidence in God, Inuocation of Saints, Worship of the holy Crosse, hūble Confession of sins vnto Priests, deuotion vnto the most dreadfull Mystery of the Masse, make Kings and Countreyes Vi∣ctorious.
By these examples continued from Con∣stantine vnto these tymes (vnto which in∣numerable others might be added) Your Maiesty may perceaue, the Roman Re∣ligion to haue byn, as the meanes to as∣sure glorious Victoryes vnto Christian Princes; so likewise the publike Christian profession, at the least, of all the last four∣ten Ages. If this so ancient & victorious Religion be proued by the expresse Texts of Diuine Scripture, so cleerly that her Ad∣uersaries be forced to leaue the litterall sense, vpon no better ground then because the same is beyond the capacity of their vnderstanding, what more can be desired?
Now this we haue endeauoured to de∣monstrate, & hope to haue fully perfor∣med the taske, in the Treatise wee heere present, prostrate at the Feete of your Roy∣all

Clemency; humbly beseeching the so∣ueraygne Ouer-seer, and Ouer ruler of Harts, so to incline your maiestyes Hart to be fauourable vnto your Catholicke Subiects, as he seeth their Harts to be sin∣cerly loyal vnto you; euer desirous of your Royall Soueraignty; full of endeared Affe∣ction vnto your Person, which from your Infancy hath growne togeather with the Increase of your Yeares; which hath way∣ted euery where on your Honourable Vn∣dertakings, with hartyest prayers for the most desired successe; still wishing that our CHARLES the first of England, may in the glory of Catholike Religion & Piety, in the Fame of Victoryes and Conquests, in the large Extent of Dominions, equall, yea exceed the former Worthyes of that Name and Number, the GREAT and GREATEST: and after a long hap∣py Raygne, passe to be participant of an eternall Crowne.

