



Right Worshipfull:
THis Sermon, though it be borne last, was not so conceiued. But as it came to passe in Ta∣mars trauell of her Twinnes; though Zarah put forth his hand first, and had a scarlet threed tyed to it, the distin∣guishing marke of primogeniture, yet his brother Pharez was borne before him. I intended this Subiect to a worthie Audience, fastning my me∣ditations on it: but soone finding, that I had gras∣ped more sands, then I could force through the Glasse in two houres, and loath to iniure my pro∣posed

methode; I let it sleepe, till fitter opportu∣nitie might waken it. Now behold, without the common plea of this writing age, the importunate request of friends, I willingly aduenture it to the light. And since your fauour to my weake (or ra∣ther no) deserts, hath beene euer full of reall en∣couragements: since your affection to literature, (and the best of learning the Gospell) hath eue vouchsafed a friendly countenance to your neigh∣bour-Ministers: I could not make my selfe so li∣able to the censure of ingratitude, as not to intrea your Name for Patronage. Which, though it de∣serues better acknowledgement, and findes it from more worthie voices; yet I, that yeeld to all in learning, would yeeld to none in loue, and seruice to you. The cause in question requires a worthy defender: not for the owne weakenesse, but for the multitude and strength of oppositions. Men brooke worse, to haue their sinnes ransacked, then their inveterate wounds and vlcers searched. Qui vinum venenum vocant, they that call drunken∣nesse poysoning, speake harsh to their eares, that (quasi deum colunt) embrace and worship it as a God. You are one of that surrogation, into whose hands God hath trusted his sword of Iustice. Draw it in his defence against the enemies of his Grace and Gospell. You sit at the common sterne, and therefore are not so much your owne, as your Countries. Or derided, reiected Preaching, ap∣peales to your aydes. Helpe vs with your hands, we will helpe you with our Prayers. With wise∣dome

and courage rule the wilde dayes you liue in. Proceede, (worthy Sir) as you haue conformed your selfe, to reforme others. Reach forth your hand to your confined limits; ouer-turne the Ta∣ble, spoile the Banket, chastice the Guests at this riotous Feast. You see, how iustly, this poore, weake, course-wouen labour desires the glosse of your Patronage to be set on it. I cannot either distrust your acceptance, knowing the generous∣nesse of your disposition; nor neede I so much to intreat your priuate vse, (who are stored with bet∣ter instructions;) as your commending it to the world. If any good may, hereby, be encouraged, any euill weakened, my reward is full. The dis∣course is sexduple; whereof the first fruits are yours: whose my selfe am, that desire still to con∣tinue

