



SIR,
THE end of Gods
punishments is to
bring sinful man
vnto Repentance.
In afflicting vs he
intends not our
affliction, but our
reformation. Hee
who delights not in the death of sin∣ners,
takes no pleasure in their suffe∣rings,
but in compassion causeth some∣times
temporall suffering to preuent e∣ternall
aking; according to that of the
Apostle,1 Cor. 11. 32. We are chastened of the Lord, that
we may not be condemned with the world. If

he attaine not this end by one rod, he
vseth another. If the Pestilence preuaile
not, he sends the sword; if that workes
not, he inflicteth Famine, and like a
good Physitian, by diuers medicines he
tendeth to the same cure. If the same
crosse haue not effected the end for
which it was sent, he sends it the second
time, as a man doth his seruant who
hath not fully done his errand at first.
Thus doth he with particular persons,
thus doth hee with whole Nations,
whose good he intendeth. He visited
our sinnes with the Pestilence, this
wrought not a sound recouery; he lan∣ced
vs with the Sword, there yet remai∣ned
many peccant humours, those hee
sought to cure by Famine,Veteres om∣nes morbos inediâ cura∣bant. as the anci∣ent
Physitians vsed to cure all diseases
by Abstinence. We seemed to be on
the mending hand, but we relapsed, and
God was faine to go to work with vs a∣gain;
as we renewed our old sins, so did he
his old iudgements. He sent the Plague

the second time, threatned it the third. About
seuen yeeres sithence the creature suffered and
we by it, for our abuse of it, and for our vn∣thankefulnesse
to the Creator. The same pu∣nishment
hee hath inflicted this yeere on sun∣dry
places of the land. Thus is God enforced
to re-assume his rods, when we renew our sins;
and as wee vse to take from our children their
Bread when they doe wanton with it; so by
want he correcteth our former wantonnesse,
taking from vs that which wee abuse, thereby
teaching vs to vse it better when wee haue it,
that by want we may know how to vse abun∣dance.
These two yeeres of dearth (in some di∣stance)
called from mee these three Sermons.
That which in the first was summarily deliue∣red
in one, vnto the eares of that Bench on
which you haue sate sundry yeeres as chiefe, is
vpon this yeeres occasion enlarged into three,
and now sent abroad into publike, for the be∣nefit
of many, is first presented vnto your eies.
In this Dedication I craue not patronage, but
onely acceptance. The Kings command, my
calling, the necessity of the times are sufficient

to patronize it. Neither haue I cause to doubt
of your acceptance; your care for your Coun∣tries
good, and your endeuour in this particu∣lar
doe assure me that you will approue his la∣bours,
who, according to his calling, addeth
the best aduancement hee may vnto yours▪
Whereunto hee will not cease to adioyne his
continued prayers to the fountaine of Grace,
for all gracious blessings on your person, on
your publike imployments, on your noble
Family; who is, and will be (while he is)

