



THe Lorde know∣eth, who search∣eth my heart and reines (right Ho∣norable and my verie singular good Lord) that being placed in the Vniuersitie with so great

content both for profit, plea∣sure, and the exercise of my ministerie in such place, as it pleased God most mercifully to blesse it in, to my great comfort, I had litle desire to make change of that estate so accompanied both with these and manie other speciall com∣modities, til it pleased him that hath his times and oportuni∣ties for all men, to direct me to your Lo. in such sort as he did, and there first of your selfe, and afterward of my ho. good Ladie to make mee heare so carefull, so Christian, and so zealous a regarde both of your selues, and your whole

retinue to be directed in the course that became the pro∣fessors of the Gospell, and the inioyers of these happie daies vnder so famous and renou∣ned a gouernement of so wor∣thy, blessed, and gracious a Princesse. And thē I must needs confesse I felt a forcing resolu∣tion after I had a while striuen with the losse of these forena∣med benefites, with the farre separation of my selfe from all my friendes, and with the discomforts incident nowe & then euen to the best seruices. So was it (my good Lorde) your zeale and affection to your God, that then first per∣swaded

me. And truely euen the selfe same thing it was, that euer after retained me, more vnable than many, but as wil∣ling as euer was any to the vt∣termost both of power and life to doe your Lo. seruice. The verie selfe same thing it is also out of all question, that shall e∣uer, aboue any worldly com∣moditie that may be offered them, procure vnto your Lo. both in one place and other, those that loue vertue and vp∣right dealing. For verie well with themselues will they euer imagine (as indeede it should be) that where the Lord is fea∣red and honored as he ought

to bee, there faithfull seruice will both be regarded, & con∣ueniently rewarded, there mē shall bee iudged according to proofe, and not according to pratles there heat of affections shall not stirre to souden & vn∣deserued displeasure, but con∣science to giue euerie man his due triall, shall finde out the in∣nocencie of the true dealer. And what should I say? There they will assure themselues, e∣uerie man shall bee vsed with conuenient incoragement, cre¦dit, & comfort, if his dealings doe deserue the same, beside many moe verie speciall ver∣tues of a maister fearing God.

VVherefore if I should wishe vnto your Lo. in a thousande tearmes many seueral and sin∣gular blessings, and afterward include them all in one, truely it must be this, that you may e∣uer know the God of your fa∣ther, and serue him with a per∣fect heart and a willing minde: Knowe him I say, by learning what he willeth, and serue him, by daily practising, as hee ina∣bleth, of that will. For thus to the Lorde you shall become o∣bedient, to your Prince faith∣full, for your countrey care∣full, to your seruauntes, that breake both body and braines in your affaires, and beare the

brunt of many an vnknowen toyle and hazarde, comforta∣ble and beneficiall, to thou∣sandes that liue vnder you, ho∣norable and good, and to eue∣rie man (in a worde) so affected and disposed, as they that are alreadie in all dutifull right your owne, may so remaine: and they that are not, by so cheerefull vsage and honora∣ble vertue may daily be added and wonne vnto you. VVhere∣fore (my good Lorde) with all christian care continue your happie course in the waies of the Lorde, and what Salomon saith, remember often: Heare counsell and receiue instructi∣on

(meaning from the Lorde) for they shall make a man wise in time. Yea they shall so esta∣blish a man in the eyes of the Lorde, as that his seede shall inherite the earth, & his name neuer be blotted out. Cōtinue also that Christiā care to other the desolat flocks of the Lords people, that with so great and iust praise your Honour hath shewed of late so many waies. And amongest all, or rather e∣uen aboue them all (as manie special causes bind me to wish) I most humbly and hartily beg the same to your towne of Car¦diffe, vnable peraduenture in manie thinges, but vnwilling

I hope in nothing, to deserue both fauour and furtheraunce in al causes tēding vnto good. Amongest whome your Lor. in zeale to their good hath left mee, and to whome for your L. sake I vow my selfe if I may doe them good. Yet not more to thē, than to the whole coun∣trie, and euen the verie mea∣nest member therein, they be∣ing all in generall so deere vn∣to your Lo. as manie priuate speaches haue declared. what my power inableth mee vn∣to, both for duetie vnto your H. and affectiō to themselues, I trust they shall euer finde in mee, and as faithfull an heart

withall as euer had straunger amongst them. And if your L. shal vouchsafe thereunto your Ho. and louing assistaunce in their worldlie causes whē they haue neede, then may they say their affections are thrise well bestowed vpon your Ho. and their seruice due ten thousand times, if it were more. Present∣lie I haue indeuored, both for them and others, to lay downe a briefe collectiō of such things concerning the commaunde∣ments of God, as in larger ma∣ner both before your Lo. and them were handled. And I pre∣sume to offer the same to your L. both for my priuate duetie,

beeing bounde, if euer was a∣nie, to bee thankefull, and that also it comming vnto them vn∣der the shadowe and shield of your Lo. protection, whome they so reuerence and honor, may be the more welcome & the better accepted of. For the Christian reader els where, that shall weigh my drift, and consider the place whereunto especiallie I intende it, I assure my heart of his godlie and lo∣uing acceptance, notwithstan∣ding the matter hath bin hand∣led by more able instrumentes by much, because it is not in the same manner, & the Lord may bee glorified in all mens

gifts. Onely therefore of your Lo. I now most humbly begge, that with wonted fauour this small trauell may be accepted, and that vnder your Lo. name I may leaue it to the world, as a speaking witnesse (when I am dead,) of my thankefull heart for all your Honorable good∣nesse to me, which hath beene such, as I wish may incourage vpon my speach any that euer shall bee thereunto requested to succeede him in his place, who nowe inioyeth it. So the Lorde of power and mercie multiplie his spirite vpon your Lo. with all the blessed fruites of the same, and graunt you e∣uer

that grace, that hath pro∣mise both of this life, and that which is to come, Amen. From London this 1. of December.

