




TO whose eyes should these Medita∣tions, now made publique, be first presented, rather then unto yours, whose Eares first gave them attentive entertainement? I made choice (not without justifiable inducements) of your Congregation for their first breathing. But it was not mine intent that they should be buried with∣in the walles where they first breathed, but that they should from you travel over the whole land where they might get admittance and acceptance. I con∣fesse an Ambition in me of pressing forth (some∣times)

into the publique, but it is only in some pub∣lique pressure, that when others are silent, I may be the Drummer, (I dare not say the silver Trumpet) to give the march unto the Lords Armies, against his, and his peoples enemies. Therefore I come not a∣broad untill some incumbent or imminent calamity doth drive me; not as the sea-porpesses to prenun∣tiate a storme, but rather with the Halcion to pro∣cure a calme. Heretofore I stood on mount Ebal de∣nouncing The curse of corne-hoar∣ders. Printed 1631. curses against those, whose couetous∣nesse, (in a yeare of no greate scarsitie) induced or encreased a dearth, and so caused the calamity of their bretheren at home. Now I stand on mount Gerizim to proclame blessings on them whose hearts God shall touch to commiserate and relieve the miserable captivity of our bretheren abroad un∣der a barbarous and cruell generation. The former found good acceptance among the Godly, and (by Gods gratious blessing) produced good effects from some whose former uncharitablenesse procla∣med them ungodly. God give the like blessing to these poore labours, and prosper them in the errand whereunto they were sent. For your parts, your monethly collections for this pious purpose (where∣of I have beene credibly informed) doe shew the for∣wardnesse of your mindes: And I hope that I may boast of you as the Apostle doth of his charitable Corinthians,1. Cor. 9.2. your zeale hath provoaked many. You need not my weake incentives, having two such Sons of the Dove, your Reverend Mr Aaron Wilson Arch∣deacon of Ex∣on Pastor, and your laborious Mr Tho∣mas Bedford B. of D. Lecturer, who both by persuasion and

performance, doe give wings to your willingnesse. Only let the care of the Antiochian Bretheren (as you are in one of these Sermons admonished) ac∣company your charity. Send your reliefe by some trustie hands, as they did theirs by Barnabas & Saul. So shall the blessing of those who are ready to perish, come upon you.Iob 29.13. So shall you have as many interces∣sors for you, as there are distressed Wives and Chil∣dren of your captived bretheren. Many they are (too many, if it pleased God otherwise to dispose) these many and many more shall pray for you. And the prayers of many, especially of the poore and needy, cannot chuse but be powerfull with God, who hath pronounced them blessed that regard and relieve them,Psal. 41.1.2. and hath promised to deliver them in time of trouble, to preserve them and keepe them a∣live—and that they shall not be delivered unto the will of their enemies. The performance of which promised blessings on you, as on all charitable Christians, he will not cease to advance by his best votes and devotions who remaineth

