



I Haue euer accounted in∣gratitude (Right worship∣full) to be not onely the greatest but the vgliest mō∣ster in nature, according to that Ingra∣tum si dixeris, omnia dixeris. Wondring at the most sort of men, which in this our age doe liue, that they so litle re∣gard of it, and not rather altogether shunne & abhor it. But when I perti∣culerly muse of some, as of my selfe: I find, that either oportunitie wil not alwaies serue, or hability in most doth wāt, to those that cary willing minds to shew thēselues mindeful in words, or answerable in deeds. And concer∣ning

my selfe, which is now my drift & purpose, I haue often feared least of diuers hereof I should as guiltie be noted, & of many to whome I haue beene greatly beholden, iustly con∣demned. But of none more then of your worships and this right wor∣shipfull company, which to me and myne, for these many yeres, haue ben most bountifull Patrons, & in diuers respects as louing and carefull parēts. Wherefore hauing gotten some fitt occasion, I thought not to pretermit the same, but therein to show my minde and poore habilitie, wherein I may doe your worships any seruice. I doe here offer to your worships a small present, small I say in respect of answering any benefit receued, but great & pretious in regard of the mat∣ter therin conteined. A Sermon preached at Paules Crosse, as the tytle showeth, by a learned, godly, & serious laborer in the Church of GOD, which being

of the best generally liked, so of many earnestly desired. Amongst whom di∣uers of my friends (by reason of my ancient acquaintance with the Prea∣cher) did request me being therto de∣sirous of my selfe, to procure a copie of the same, affirming that it would for euer be a comfort to them, & one Sermon instead of many Sermons. Which I assaying to doe, at the first found him very vnwilling to graunt, being before requested the like by certaine of great account. Yet I presu∣ming farther to presse him, bearing my selfe bold vpon long acquaintāce & knowledge, with the remembrāce of diuerse other benefits which I had often and diuerse wayes receaued of him, presuming to argue and vrge far∣ther my sute, aleadging that I knew his mind was not onely to profit the audience thē present, but to do good to so many as cōueniently he could, according to my experienced know∣ledge

of him of long time. At length I obtained a Copie of him of his owne hād writing, which I haue cau∣sed to be Printed, not onely for the benefit of your worships, & this right worshipful Company, to whome be∣ing diligently read, & often medita∣ted vpon, I doubt not but it will be fruitfull, but also to so many as shall read or heare the same, which was the authors labor and purpose, and my poore endeuor and request. This I say I am bound to present your wor∣ships with all, hoping you wil vse the benefit therin contained by due con∣sideration, and accept of my minde and dutie which I owe your wor∣ships, to whome as to the rest of this right worshipful company, I pray for the encrease of our heauenly fathers grace, with the still continuance of the same.

