



ALthough I haue bene somewhat bold, and rude, to intermeddle my selfe wyth that kynde of excercyse, which I haue made, and enterpryse to doe, it maye be aunswered, that I had no∣thing to doe withall, I haue to excuse my selfe, that the frayltye of this world is such, that I am perswaded, duety inforceth me, and necessitye so vrgeth me thereto, consydering the vnstedfast stabili∣tye that is vsed among those men which are maysters, and also of yonglinges, which are seruauntes, or Ap∣prentyses, (vse the tearme of spéech thereof, as it shall please you) I thoughte good to gather this my symple Harueste into Barne, and to bestowe it abroade, whereby the poore, indigent and néedy, might be suffi∣ced with the fruitefulnesse thereof, of necessitye I may call them pore and needy, which I am sure eyther for lacke of good instructions, otherwyse for wante that they be not good hearers, are and doe fall, the more is the pittie, headlong into so many daungers, and per∣rils that they are innumerable, & for that it is a thing most wholsom and conuenient, for al those which haue and doe take vpon them the charge of a stewardship, or to be a Captayne of a number of Souldyers, wher∣vnto they ought to haue care & regard. And séeing that Agapetus was not abashed to wryte vnto the Empe∣rour Iustinian: and dyuers others without feare hath written vnto Kinges, Noble men, and others, I with∣out blame, thought good therefore, Worshipfull, to de∣dicate

this my Haruest vnto your Worships, for as much as you are in place to be instructoures, fathers, and sheapheardes ouer a great Flock of shéepe, and I know your carefull myndes is ouer them, as much as the Henne is ouer her Chickens, your Worshippes good willes is not withdrawne, to plucke and roote out Vice, and to extoll right, equitie, and Iustice, and that with Conscience. In lyke maner do I wysh that those Souldyors or Flocke which are vnderneath your au∣thoritye, would follow the commaundements of the A∣postle: Omnis anima potestatibus supereminētibus sub∣dita Rom. 13. sit. Nō enim est potestas nisi a Deo. Let euery soule submit himself vnto ye authority of the higher powers. For there is no power but of God, all powers are or∣dayned of God, whosoeuer therefore resysteth power, resisteth the ordynaunce of God. And they that resiste, shall receiue to themselues damnation. S. Peeter also 1. Peter. 2. exhorteth & commandeth, that we ought to be subiect to euery humayn creature, for the Lords sake. Siue regi tanquam precellenti siue presidibus. Whether it be vnto the King, as vnto the chiefe head, eyther vnto Rulers, as vnto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of euill doers: but for the lawde and prayse of them that doe well. Further, the wyse man Cato sayth, Da locum maioribus. He willeth vs to giue place vnto the Cato. Elders. In lyke manner you are aunciente and dis∣creete, men growen in age, being in Authoritie, and a∣boue all thinges, ought so to behaue your selues, that Math. 5. both your workes and wordes may so shyne, that they may glorifye the father which is in heauen. Godlynes is a thing moste worthy to be imbraced, and practysed both of old and yong, which bringeth as S. Iohn sayth by knowledge, euerlasting lyfe. Especially what is Iohn. 17. Ecclesiast. more comely for olde age, whose departure from thys worlde, by the course of nature is at hand, then the con∣sydering and meditation of heuenly things. Age which

is reuerend, is not accoūted by length of time, or num∣ber of yeres, for ye wyt of man is not the hore heyres. What is old age. But very age is ye life vncorrupted. How séemely is it to a whyte head, to haue a good iudgement, and to old men to vnderstand counsaile?
There is nothing more reprochful, sayth Seneca, than Seneca. an old man, which hath none other argument to proue that he hath lyued long, but only his yeares. S. Paule Titus. 2. requyreth the Eldermen that they be sage, discréete, and sound in the fayth, and would haue them sage and and graue. That is to saye, such persons, as neyther in countenaunce, gestures, words, or behauyour, shoulde shew any poynt of lightnesse, incontinencie, impuden∣cie, or whatsoeuer is contrary to the dignitye of olde age, but rather so behaue themselues in all poynts, as becommeth their age, whose life ought to be vnspotted, and a Myrrour of Vertue, and a spectacle to all yong folkes. Also he requyreth those that be aged, or in Au∣thoritie, to be discréete, temperate, quyet; not rash, not vncircumspect, not furyous in doing any thing of head, but with good aduysement and iudgement, vūng such temperaunce and grauitie, and such discretion in all their enterprises, as shal not be counted vnworthy nor vnsemely for their age. For as much as whē I had fini∣shed this mine enterpryse, which I haue takē in hand, I thought good with my selfe that this my dedication, before recyted, would accomplish my desyre, for that your wysedomes are such to consyder well therof, and somewhat herein I admonish al those which are in au∣thoritie, exhorting them, as it is written. Thou shalte take no giftes, for giftes blynd the syght, and peruert the words of the righteous. Iob sayth: the fire shal con∣sume the houses of such as are ready to receyue gyfts. For as gyftes and brybes causeth the subuersion of Iustice. Likewyse doth friendship many times, and the old Prouerb herein is true. As a man is friended, so is

his matter ended. He is a iust mā that spareth not him∣selfe. King Agesilaus being demaunded, which was Agesilaus the better, eyther Iustice or Fortitude. He aunswered if all men were iust, we néeded no Fortitude. The glo∣rye of a man is to doe Iustice. Some that are in autho∣ritye Ecclesia. are so rash and vndiscréete, that when matters of controuersye be brought before them, the fyrste Tale doth preuayle, and the other partye cannot be harde, although his cause be neuer so iust and good. Where∣fore it is to be well marked of Alexander the great, Alexan∣der. which when any man complayned to him of another, being absent, he vsed to stoppe the other eare with hys hand he being demaunded why he did so, he aunswe∣red, that as he lefte open one eare to the Accusante, so he would kéepe one eare stopped and close for the De∣fendaunt.
Esay sayeth: learne to doe right, applye your selues to Equitye, delyuer the oppressed, helpe the fatherlesse Esay. 1. to his right. The Prophet Zachary sayth: Execute true iudgement, shew mercy and louing kyndenesse euery Zacha. 7. man to his Brother. The Apostle sayth: Let not the Sunne go downe vpon your wrath, neither giue place Ephe. 4. vnto the backbyter. Let vs not loue in worde or in tongue, but in worke and truth, for he that is sound in Iohn. 3. loue, loueth his neighbour as himselfe, and is the very same vnto his neighbour, that Christ is to him. Briefe∣ly haue I calculated and gathered togither the flowers which are swéete and pleasaunt, out of the Garden of lyfe, which is the holy scriptures, not thinking any of∣fence to be committed herein, to slaunder any perticu∣ler person, concerning Iustice, but shewing the estate as the world is now adayes, which is a thing not de∣cent nor agréeable to scripture, we English people are geuen to desyre new toyes and conceites, thinking the newnesse thereof to be more of price then the olde, al∣though it be neuer so fond. The scriptures are olde, my

trauayle and industry herein is but new, and the new∣nesse thereof, is for the reformation and instructing as well of Maysters, as also of seruaunts, haue I made in a new Dyalogue the vnderstāding and true meaning of my mind, whereby it might the better be perceiued. And to show for whoredome, swearing, lying, thefte, Dronkennesse, Idlenesse, Couetousnesse, and Correc∣tion for the offenders. How the scripture and other Godly Authours doe alow. The Apostle sayeth: What sonne is he whome the Father chastneth not? if ye in∣dure Hebr. 12. chastening, God offereth himselfe vnto you, as vnto sonnes, but if ye be not vnder correction, whereof all are partakers, then are ye no sonnes, but Ba∣stardes. For whome the Lorde loueth, him he cha∣steneth, Prou. 3. yea, he scourgeth euery sonne that he recey∣ueth. I moste humbly craue your worshippes pacience herein, if ought I haue varyed, for my Eloquence is not so fine as Cicero wryteth of dueties, to his sonne, and as herein it might haue bene shewed, and am a yong Cicero. beginner of such excercyse, & this being the fyrst tyme of myne enterpryse, I must cōfesse as before I haue de∣clared vnto you, the occasyon thereof. In lyke maner Tobias the auncient father, and faythfull seruaunt of Toby. God, taught his yong sonne Tobias euen frō his tēder age, to feare God, and to refraine frō al sin. His admo∣nicious which he gaue to his sonne, are so Godlye and profitable, so aduauncing vertue and repressing Vyce, that they may iustly séeme worthy to be written in let∣ters of Golde. The Parentes of Susanna broughte her vp from her youth, that shée was so Godly, so ver∣tuous, Dany. 14, and so honest, that God would not suffer ye wic∣ked Iudges to preuayle against her. Phillip the Euan∣gelist, Act. 21. which was one of the seauen Deacons, had fower Daughters Virgines, & he brought them vp so Godly and learnedly, that they were able to Prophecy

and vnderstande the holy Scriptures. S. Paule decla∣reth that Timothie euen from his infancye, and chyld∣hood Tim. 12. had learned and vnderstoode the holy scriptures, which alone are able sufficiently, and euen to the vt∣termost to iustructe the men of God vnto Saluation, through fayth in Christ Iesu. Prouoked with such like examples, I haue done myne indeuour to the vtter∣most of my power, to shew vnto your worships, thys wholsome séede of Doctryne, and my symple labour, trusting hereby, not so to weary my self, to get nought but displeasure, for Salust sayth: It is extreme péeuish∣nesse, Salust. yet doe I commend this vnto you, desyring your worships to accept it as a synguler gifte, profytable, and delectable to be read, and necessary for the right and perfect instructions, according to the tenour which I haue taken in hand; whereof to be ignoraunt, is to much vngodlinesse, but also not attempt any thing that shall eyther be displeasaunt to God, or to Godlye and well learned, or to your selues. Take it therefore, I be∣séech your Worships with ioyfull hartes, as a good wil towardes you, for other gyfte haue I not to giue you, and I shall most humbly beséech God to be your defen∣dour, and to giue you his holy spiryte, which may go∣uerne you all in your doinges, that you maye walke blamelesse in his sight, and be fonnde in the number of Gods elect. The euerlasting peace of God in Iesus Christ, the contynuall ayd, strength, ioy, and com∣forte of his most pure, holy, and mighty spirite, with the increase of fayth, be most effectu∣ally wroughte in your hartes, to your owne commodities, eternal ioy and comforte.
Amen.

