



Right Worshipfull:
THe sicknesse of this World is growne so lethargicall, that his recouery is almost despaired: and therefore his Phisitians, finding by infallible symptoms that his consumption is not cu∣rable, leaue him to the malig∣nancie of his disease. For the eye of his faith is blinde, the eare of his attention deafe, the foote of his obedi∣ence lame, the hand of his charitie numm'd, and shut vp with a griping couetousnesse. All his vitall parts, whereby he should liue to goodnesse, are in a swoune: he lies bed-rid in his securitie, and hath little lesse then giuen vp the (Holy) Ghost. It cannot be denied, but that he lies at the mercie of God. It is therefore too late to tolle his Passing-bell, that hath no breath of obedience left in him: I might rather ring out his knell. Yet because there are many in this world, that are not of this world: many sicke of the generall disease of Sin, whose recouerie is not hopelesse, though their present state be happelesse; and some, that if they knew but themselues sicke, would resort to the Poole of Bethes∣da,

the waters of life, to be cured. I haue therefore presumed to take them apart, and tell them impar∣tially their owne illnesse. Oh that to performe the cure were no more difficult then to describe the Maladie, or prescribe the remedie. I haue endeuoured the lat∣ter: the other to God; who can both kill and giue life: who is yet pleased, by his word, to worke our recouery; and to make me one (vnworthy) instrument, to administer his Phisicke. Now as the most accurate Phisitians, ancient or moderne, though they deliuered precepts in their facultie, worthy of the worlds accep∣tance and vse; yet they set them forth vnder some No∣ble Patronage: so I haue presumed, vnder the counte∣nance of your protection, to publish this (phisicall or ra∣ther) metaphysicall Treatise: for as the Sicknesse is spi∣rituall, so the cure must be supernaturall. Assuring my selfe, that if you shall vse any obseruation here, and giue it your good word of Probatum est, many others wil be induced the more redily to embrace it. My intent is to doe good: and if I had any better Receite, I would not (like some Phisitians, I know not whither more enuious or couetous, with an excellent Medicine) let it liue and die with my selfe. God conserue your (either) health; and giue you, with a sound body, a sounder faith; whereby you may liue the life of Grace heere, of Glory hereafter.

