



SIR,
GRatulation,Sera gratulatio reprehendi non solet. Cic. ep. 7. l. 2. Nam cùm lon∣ga dies sedauit vulnera mentis Intempestiuè qui mouet, ille nouat. though it come somewhat late, findeth accep∣tance, at least esca∣peth check; but La∣mentation, not so: Ʋntimely comfor∣ting, makes the Wound of Sorrow to bleed afresh; which Time (Griefes best Chirurgeon) had almost closed. When the Ilian Embassadours came somewhat late to
 comfort Tiberius for the death of his sonne Drusus,Sueton. in Tiber, c. 52. the old Fox deriding their slow of∣ficiousnesse, answered, That he likewise con∣doled their case, in loosing their worthy Citi∣zen Hector, who died aboue a thousand yeares before. Better entertainement doth ELISHA his Lamentation hope for at your hand, though it haue layen buried now a yeare in my Deske, since the Funeralls of your Religious Grandfather. I hoped to haue sent forth with him that other Starre of our West,M. Carew of Antony. whom God remoued from vs but foure daies before him. But failing of that hope for the present, I now premise this, to make way for the other, and for some more to succeed shortly, if God grant life and leisure. I desire so to preserue the memorie of the Dead, as that I may also edifie the Liuing: this is mine especiall ayme, in publishing this poore Sermon.
Accept, I beseech you, this Glasse of your worthy Grandfather; and as you supply his want to my poore selfe, in continuing his kind∣nesse; so it is expected, that you make his losse more tolerable to Vs all, in expressing his Ver∣tues, especially his Pietie: without which, other
 Ʋertues either are not, or shine not, or are but Gloe-Wormes, or shining sinnes.Splendida pec∣cata. Augustin. More is ex∣pected of you, then of other Heires. In others we seeke but for the Father; in you, we looke for both a Father and a Grandfather; as Paul expected in Timothie the Faith,2. Tim. 1.5. which was found in his Grandmother and Mother. A fairer Patrimonie they could not leaue you, then the president of their Ʋertues. Better examples you can hardly finde, then they haue left you: Your Match into a worthy House (the weal∣thiest of the West) cannot so much aduance you,Sir Richard Ro∣barts, Knight and Baronet. as an emulation to match (if not exceed) the worth of your owne House, and an endeuor that their Endowments may not die, while you doe liue. And that you may long liue, and they in you, to Gods glory, the benefit of his Church, and comfort of your Countrey; prayeth, and will pray while he liueth, He who remayneth

