



HOwsoever in the settled opinions of some wise heads this trifling labor may easily incurre the suspicion of two evils, either to be of an idle subject, and so fri∣volous: or vainly handled, and so odi∣ous. Yet my resolute purpose was to proceed so farre, as the indifferent Rea∣der might thinke this small paines to be rather an effect then a cause of idlenesse; and howsoever Love in this age hath behaved himselfe in that loose manner, as it is counted a disgrace to give him but a kind looke; yet I take the pas∣sion in it selfe to be of that honour and credite, as it is the perfect resemblance of the greatest happinesse, and rightlie valued at his just price, (in a minde that is syncerely & tru∣ly amorous) an affection of greatest vertue, and able of him selfe to aeternize the meanest vassall. Concerning the handling of it, (especially in this age) men may wonder, if a Scholler, how I come by so much leasure: if otherwise, why a writer. Indeede to say trueth, though I can not just∣ly challenge the first name, yet I wish none to be writers, save onely such as knowe learning. And whereas my thoughtes and some reasons drew me rather to have dealt in causes of greater weight, yet the present jarre of this dis∣agreeing age drive me into a fitte so melancholie, as I onely had leasure to growe passionate. And I see not why upon

our dissentions. I may not sit downe idle, forsake my study, and goe sing of love, as well as our Brownistes forsake the Church, and write of malice.
And that this is a matter not so unfitte for a man, either that respecteth him selfe, or is a scholler. Peruse but the wri∣tings of former times, and you shall see not onely others in other countryes, as Italie, and France, men of learning and great partes to have written Poems and Sonnets of Love, but even amongst us, men of best nobilitie, and chiefest fa∣milies, to be the greatest Schollers and most renowmed in this kind. But two reasons hath made it a thing foolishly odious in this age: the one, that so many base companions are the greatest writers: the other, that our English Gene∣vian puritie hath quite debarred us of honest recreation▪ and yet the great pillar (as they make him of that cause) hath shewed us as much witte and learning in this kinde, as any other before or since. Furthermore for all students I will say thus much, that the base conceit, which men generally have of their wants, is such, as I scarce terme him a scholler, that hath not all the accomplyments of a Gentleman, nor sufficiently wise that will not take oportunitie in some sort to shew it. For I can say thus much, that the Vniversitie wherein I lived, (and so I thinke the other) hath so many wise, excellent, sufficient men, as setting their learning aside, wherein they are most excellent, yet in all habilliments of a Gentleman they are equall to any besides. This woulde that worthie Sidney oft confesse, and Haringtons Ariosto (which Madame was respected so much by you) sheweth that his abode was in Kinges Colledge. Yet nowe it is growen to this passe, that learning is lightly respected, up∣on a perswasion, that it is to be found every where a thing untrue and unpossible.

Now in that I have written Love sonnets, if any man measure my affection by my style, let him say, I am in Love; no greate matter, for if our purest divines have not bene so, why are so manie married? I mislike not that, nor I would not have them mislyke this. For a man may be in loue and not marrie, and yet vvise; but hee hee cannot marrie, and not be in love, but be a mere foole. Nowe, for the manner; we will dispute that in some o∣ther place; yet take this by the waie, though I am so libe∣rall to graunt thus much, a man may write of love, and not bee in love, as well as of husbandrie, and not goe to plough: or of witches and be none: or of holinesse and be flat prophane. But (wise and kinde Ladie) not to trou∣ble your eares with this idle discourse let this suffice I fonnd favours undeserved in such manner as my rude a∣bilitie wautes meanes to make recompence, and there∣fore in the meane time I request you to accept this: If I had not so woondred at your admirable and rare ver∣tues; that my hearte was surcharged with the excee∣ding measure of your woorthinesse, I had not written: you are happie everie way, and so reputed: live so, and I wish so you may live long: excuse me, favour me, and if I live, for I am loth to admire without thankefulnesse, ere long it shall be knowne what favours I received from wise Sir Richard, to whome in all kinde affectes I reste bound.
For the Reader, if he looke for my letters to crave his favour, he is farre deceived: for if he mislike anie thing, I am sorie he tooke the paines to reade, but if he doe, let him dispraise, I much care not: for praise is not but as men please: and it is no chiefe felicitie, for I have hearde some

men and of late for Sermons at Paules crosse and for other paines so commended by all (excepting some fewe Cy∣nickes, that commend none that do well) that you would have thought England would haue striven for their spe∣die preferment, but lyke a woonder it lasted but nine dayes, and all is quiet and forgotten: the best is they are yong men and may live to be preferred at another time: so what am I worse if men mislike and vse tearmes? I can say as much by them. For our great men I am sure, they want leasure to reade, and if they had, yet for the most part, the worst speake worst. Well, let the Printer looke he grow not a begger by such bargaynes, the Reader that he loose not his labour, and for mine that is past, and who so wise∣lie after an afternoones sleepe gapes, and saith, Oh howe yong men spend their time idlie: first, let him spende his tyme better than to sleepe: Seeondlie, he knowes not my age: I feared a hot ague, and with Tasso I was content to let my wit blood. But leaving these to their dogged hu∣mour, and wishing your Lady-ship all happinesse, I humbly take my leave. From my chamber. Sept. 4. 1593.
