



THis dedication (Right Honorable and that worthily) may haply make your Honors muse; well fare that de∣dication, that may excite your muse. I am no auctorised Herauld to marshall your precedence. Priuate dutie might perhaps giue one the prioritie, where publike respect should prefer another. To choose Tullie or Ansonius Consuls, is to prefer them before all but one; but to choose either the former of the twaine, is to pre∣fer him before all. It is saide of Atreus in a fact most disorderly, that may be saide of any in so ordering his best dutie,
It makes no matter whether, yet he resolues of neither.
I onely say your Honors best knowe your places: An Italian turne may serue the turne. Lame are we in Platoes censure, if we be not ambidexters, vsing both handes alike. Right-hand, or left-hand as Peeres with mutuall paritie, without disparage∣ment may it please your Honors to ioyne hand in hand, and so iointly to lende an eare (and lende it I beseech you) to a poore man, that inuites your Honors to a christening, that I and my poore studies, like Philemon and Baucis, may in so lowe a cottage entertaine so high, if not deities, yet dignities; of whom the Poet testifies.

Ma sopra ogni altro frutto piu gradito
Fu il volto allegro, e'l non bugiardo amore.
E benche fosse pouero il conuito,
Non fu la volontà pouera e'l core.


But of all other cheere most did content
A cheerefull countenance, and a willing minde,
Poore entertainment being richly ment,
Pleaded excuse for that which was behinde.

Two ouerhastie fruites of mine nowe some yeeres since, like two forewarde fe∣males, the one put her-selfe in seruice to an Earle of Excellence, the other to a Gentleman of Woorth, both into the worlde to runne the race of their fortune. Now where my rawer youth brought foorth those female fruites, my riper yeeres affoording me I cannot say a braine-babe Minerua, armed at al assaies at first houre; but rather from my Italian Semele, and English thigh, a bouncing boie, Bacchus-like, almost all names: And being as the manner of this countrie is, after some strength

gathered to bring it abroade; I was to entreate three witnesses to the entrie of it in∣to Christendome, ouer-presumptuous (I grant) to entreate so high a presence, but your Honors so gracious (I hope) to be ouer-entreated. My hope springs out of three stems: your Honors naturall benignitie; your able emploiment of such ser∣uitours; and the towardly likelie-hood of this Springall to do you honest seruice. The first, to vouchsafe all; the second, to accept this; the third, to applie it selfe to the first and second. Of the first, your birth, your place, and your custome: of the second, your studies, your conceits, and your exercise: of the thirde, my endeuours, my proceedings, and my proiect giues assurance. Your birth, highly noble, more then gentle: your place, aboue others, as in degree, so in height of bountie, and other vertues: your custome, neuer wearie of well dooing: your studies much in al, most in Italian excellence: your conceits, by vnderstanding others to worke aboue them in your owne: your exercise, to reade, what the worlds best wits haue written, and to speake as they write. My endeuours, to apprehend the best, if not all: my pro∣ceedings, to impart my best, first to your Honors, then to all that emploie me: my proiect, in this volume to comprehend the best and all. [In truth I acknowledge an entyre debt, not onely of my best knowledge, but of all, yea of more then I know or can, to your bounteous Lordship most noble, most vertuous, and most Hono∣rable Earle of Southampton, in whose paie and patronage I haue liued some yeeres; to whom I owe and vowe the yeeres I haue to liue. But as to me, and manie more the glorious and gracious sunne-shine of your Honor hath infused light and life: so may my lesser borrowed light, after a principall respect to your benigne aspect, and influence, affoorde some lustre to some others. In loyaltie I may auerre (my needle toucht, and drawne, and held by such an adamant) what he in loue assumed, that sawe the other stars, but bent his course by the Pole-starre, and two guardes, auowing, Aspicit vnam, One guideth me, though more I see. Good parts impar∣ted are not empaired: Your springs are first to serue your selfe, yet may yeelde your neighbours sweete water; your taper is to light to you first, and yet it may light your neighbours candle. I might make doubt, least I or mine be not now of any further vse to your selfe-sufficiencie, being at home so instructed for Italian, as teaching or learning could supplie, that there seemed no neede of trauell: and nowe by trauell so accomplished, as what wants to perfection?] Wherein no lesse must be attributed to your embellisht graces (my most noble, most gracious, and most gracefull Earle of Rutland) well entred in the toong, ere your Honor entred Italie, there therein so perfected, as what needeth a Dictionarie? Naie, if I offer seruice but to them that need it, with what face seeke I a place with your excellent Ladiship (my most-most honored, because best-best adorned Madame) who by conceited industrie, or indu∣strious conceite, in Italian as in French, in French as in Spanish, in all as in English, vnderstand what you reade, write as you reade, and speake as you write; yet rather charge your minde with matter, then your memorie with words? And if this présent presènt so small profit, I must confesse it brings much lesse delight: for, what plea∣sure in a plot of simples, O non viste, o mal note, o mal gradite, Or not seene, or ill knowne, or ill accepted? Yet heere-hence may some good accrewe, not onelie to truantlie-schollers, which euer-and-anon runne to Venuti, and Alunno; or to

new-entred nouices, that hardly can construe their lesson; or to well-forwarde students, that haue turnd ouer Guazzo and Castiglione, yea runne through Guarini, Ariosto, Tasso, Boccace, and Petrarche: but euen to the most compleate Doctor; yea to him that best can stande All'erta for the best Italian, heereof sometimes may rise some vse: since, haue he the memorie of Themistocles, of Seneca, of Scaliger, yet is it not infinite, in so finite a bodie. And I haue seene the best, yea naturall Italians, not onely stagger, but euen sticke fast in the myre, and at last giue it ouer, or giue their verdict with An ignoramus. Boccace is prettie hard, yet vnderstood: Petrarche harder, but explaned: Dante hardest, but commented. Some doubt if all aright. Alunno for his foster-children hath framed a worlde of their wordes. Venuti taken much paines in some verie fewe authors; and our William Thomas hath done pretti∣lie; and if all faile, although we misse or mistake the worde, yet make we vp the sence. Such making is marring. Naie all as good; but not as right. And not right, is flat wrong. One saies of Petrarche for all: A thousand strappadas coulde not compell him to confesse, what some interpreters will make him saie he ment. And a Iudicious gentleman of this lande will vphold, that none in England vnderstands him thoroughly. How then ayme we at Peter Arctine, that is so wittie, hath such va∣rietie, and frames so manie new words? At Francesco Doni, who is so fantasticall, & so strange? At Thomaso Garzoni in his Piazza vniuersale; or at Allessandro Cittoli∣ni in his Typocosmia, who haue more proper and peculiar words concerning euerie seuerall trade, arte, or occupation for euerie particular toole, or implement belon∣ging vnto them, then euer any man heeretofore either collected in any booke, or sawe collected in any one language? How shall we vnderstand Hanniball Caro, who is so full of wittie iestes, sharpe quips, nipping tantes, and scoffing phrases against that graue and learned man Lodouico Casteluetri, in his Apologia de' Banchi? Howe shall the English Gentleman come to the perfect vnderstanding of Federico Griso∣ne, his Arte del Caualcare, who is so full of strange phrases, and vnusuall wordes, peculiar onely to horse-manship, and proper but to Caualarizzi? How shall we vn∣derstande so manie and so strange bookes, of so seuerall, and so fantasticall subiects as be written in the Italian toong? How shall we, naie how may we ayme at the Venetian, at the Romane, at the Lombard, at the Neapolitane, at so manie, and so much differing Dialects, and Idiomes, as be vsed and spoken in Italie, besides the Florentine? Sure we must saie as that most intelligent and graue Prelate said, when he came new out of the South into the North, and was saluted with a womans sute in Northren. Now what is that in English? If I, who many yeeres haue made pro∣fession of this toong, and in this search or quest of inquirie haue spent most of my studies; yet many times in many wordes haue beene so stal'd, and stabled, as such sticking made me blushinglie confesse my ignorance, and such confession indeede made me studiouslie seeke helpe, but such helpe was not readilie to be had at hande. Then may your Honors without any dishonour, yea what and whosoeuer he be that thinkes himselfe a very good Italian, and that to trip others, doth alwaies stande All'erta, without disgrace to himselfe, sometimes be at a stand, and standing see no easie issue, but for issue wish a direction, which in this mappe I hold, if not exactlie delineated, yet conueniently prickt out. Is all then in this little? All I knowe: and

more (I know) then yet in any other. Though most of these you know alreadie, yet haue I enough, if you know anie thing more then you knew, by this. The retainer doth some seruice, that now and then but holds your Honors styrrop, or lendes a hande ouer a stile, or opens a gappe for easier passage, or holds a torch in a darke waie: enough to weare your Honors cloth. Such then since this may prooue, prooue it (right Honorable) and reprooue not for it my rudenes, or my rashnes: rudenes in presuming so high, rashnes in assuming so much for it that yet is vnap∣prooued. Some perhaps will except against the sexe, and not allowe it for a male∣broode, sithens as our Italians saie, Le parole sono femine, & i fatti sono maschij, Wordes they are women, and deeds they are men. But let such know that Detti and fatti, wordes and deeds with me are all of one gender. And though they were commonly Feminine, why might not I by strong imagination (which Phisicions giue so much power vnto) alter their sexe? Or at least by such heauen-pearcing de∣uotion as transformed Iphis, according to that description of the Poet.

Et ognimembro suo piu forte e sciolto
Sente, e volge alla madre il motto, e'l lume.
Come vero fanciullo esser si vede
Iphi va con parole alme, e deuote
Altempio con la madre, e la nutrice,
Epaga il voto, e'l suo miracoldice.


Feeling more vigor in each part and strength
Then earst, and that indeede she was a boy.
Towards hir mother eies and wordes at length
She turnes, and at the temple with meeke ioy
He and his nurse and mother vtter how
The case fell out, and so he paide his vow.

And so his strength, his stature, and his masculine vigor (I would, naie I coulde saie vertue) makes me assure his sexe, and according to his sexe prouide so autenti∣call testimonies. Laie then your blisse-full handes on his head (right Honorable) and witnes that he by me deuoted to your Honors, forsakes my priuate cell, all re∣tired conceites, and selfe-respects to serue you in the worlde, the world in you; and beleeues in your Honors goodnes, in proportion as his seruice shall be of moment and effectuall; and that you will not onely in due censure be his iudges, but on true iudgement his protectors; and in this faith desires to be numbred in your familie, so in your studies to attend, as your least becke may be his dieugarde; for he hath toong to answer, words at will, and wants not some wit, though he speake plaine what each thing is. So haue I crost him, and so blest him, your god-childe, and your seruant; that you may likewise giue him your blessing, if it be but as when one standes you in steede, supplies you, or pleases you, you saie, Gods-blessing on him. But though in the fore-front he beares your Honorable names, it may be deman∣ded how is it, your Honors gaue not him his name? Heerein (right Honorable) beare with the fondnes of his mother, my Mistresse Muse, who seeing hir female Arescusa turn'd to a pleasing male Arescon (as Plinie tels of one) beg'd (as some

mothers vse) that to the fathers name she might prefixe a name befitting the childes nature. So cald she him, A worlde of wordes: since as the Vniuers containes all things, digested in best equipaged order, embellisht with innumerable ornaments by the vniuersall creator. And as Tipocosmia imaged by Allessandro Cittolini, and Fabrica del mondo, framed by Francesco Alunno, and Piazza vniuersale set out by Thomaso Garzoni tooke their names of the vniuersall worlde, in words to represent things of the world: as words are types of things, and euerie man by himselfe a little world in some resemblances; so thought she, she did see as great capacitie, and as meete method in this, as in those latter, and (as much as there might be in Italian and English) a modell of the former, and therefore as good cause so to entitle it. If looking into it, it looke like the Sporades, or scattered Ilands, rather then one well-ioynted or close-ioyned bodie, or one coherent orbe: your Honors knowe, an armie ranged in files is fitter for muster, then in a ring; and iewels are sooner found in seuerall boxes, then all in one bagge. If in these rankes the English out-number the Italian, congratulate the copie and varietie of our sweete-mother-toong, which vnder this most Excellent well-speaking Princesse or Ladie of the worlde in all languages is growne as farre beyond that of former times, as her most flourishing raigne for all happines is beyond the raignes of former Princes. Right Honorable, I feare me I haue detained your Honors too long with so homelie entertainment, yet being the best the meanenes of my skill can affoorde; which intending as my childes christening-banquet, heereunto I presumed to inuite your Honors: but I hope what was saide at your Honors first comming (I meane in the beginning of my Epistle) shall serue for a finall excuse. And in conclusion (most Honorable) once againe at your departure giue me leaue to commend this sonne of mine to your fauourable protections, and aduowe him yours, with this licence, that as Henricus Stephanus dedicated his Treasure of the Greeke toong to Maximilian the Emperour, to Charles the French king, and to Elizabeth our dread Soueraigne, and by their fauours to their Vniuersities: So I may consecrate this lesser-volume of little-lesse value, but of like import, first, to your triple-Honors, then vnder your protections to all Italian-English, or English-Italian students. Vouchsafe then (highlie Honorable) as of manie made for others, yet made knowne to your Ho∣nors, so of this to take knowledge, who was borne, bred, and brought foorth for your Honors chiefe seruice; though more seruice it may do, to many others, that more neede it; since manie make as much of that, which is made for them, as that they made them-selues, and of adopted, as begotten children; yea Adrian the Em∣perour made more of those then these; since the begotten are such as fates giue vs, the adopted such as choise culs vs; they often-times Stolti, sgarbati, & inutili, these euer with Corpo intiero, leggiadre membra, emente sana. Accepting therefore of the childe, I hope your Honors wish as well to the Father, who to your Honors all-deuoted wisheth meede of your merits, renowme of your vertues, and health of your persons, humblie with gracious leaue kissing your thrice-honored hands, pro∣testeth to continue euer

