



IT may perhaps seeme strāg vnto you (dearly beloued, & my much respected Countrey∣men) that I (being a meer stranger to you all, and very different from you, both
 in state of life, and Religion) doe pre∣sume to dedicate vnto you this my Re∣ply, written in Answere of one, who, as I vnderstand, is a man of quality a∣mongst you, and a principall member of your Vniuersity, and therefore by all likelyhood very much respected, ho∣noured, and beloued of many of you, though perhaps not of all. But the truth is, that if I sought protection (as most doe who dedicate bookes, or remune∣ration, as those that write for hyre or gaine) I would follow the example of my Antagonist, who hath made choice of no meaner a Patron then of his Ma∣iesty himselfe, from whome he may as∣suredly expect both Princely protecti∣on, and a Royall Reward; but seeing that my end, and desire heerin is no o∣ther, then the defence of the truth, & of my self; and that the confidence I haue in the iustice of my cause is such, that I feare no Iudge but Ignorance; I haue presumed so much of your fauour, as to remit it to your censures, not doub∣ting,
 but that you being men of iudg∣ent, bred vp in Schooles, & Exercise  all kind of learning, will easily dis∣rne betwixt sleight and plaine dea∣g, shew and substance, falshood & th, & lay the fault where you find  to which end I require no other fa∣our of you for my part, then your pa∣ence to read this Reply, & to suspend our sentence, vntill you haue seen the hole, notwithstanding any preiudi∣te opiniō which you may haue alrea∣y conceaued by reading my Aduersa∣es worke, not hauing seene myne hich he impugneth, neither hauing ad other notice of it, as I thinke, then ch as he hath thought good to giue ou; which how fraudulent it hath byn  many respects will euidently appear nto you by the ensuing Treatise.
And now for as much as I thinke  necessary for your better informatiō uching the whole Controuersy, to duertise you of certaine things, belon∣ng thereto, and first of the ground,
 and occasion thereof, you shall vnder∣stand, that Fa. Robert Persons of goo memory, hauing begun, and almos ended a worke of his entitled, A discus¦sion of M. Doctor Barlowes answere &c.  pleased Almighty God to call him out of this life, in which respect I vnder∣tooke to finish the same (being reque∣sted so to do by himself in his last sick∣nes) and therefore beginning where he left, and enlarging my selfe so far (vpon iust occasions offered) that my Answer grew to a iust volum, I thoght good to print it by it selfe, and to enti∣tle it. A supplement to Father Robert Per∣sons his Discussion &c. And when th same was almost finished, and the be∣ginning already sent to the print, it was my chance to haue a sight of my Lord of VVinchesters answere to Cardi∣nall Bellarmines Apology; and to find therein that the subiect thereof was the same in effect, which I had treated with M. Barlow, and that by the occasion thereof, diuers places, authorityes, and
 arguments which were obiected, as wel  me in my Supplement, as by the ardinal in his Apology, were preten∣ed to be āswered by my Lord of VVin∣ester in his sayd worke; whereupon I solued to examine and confute my ords answers to those places, autho∣tyes, and arguments, to preuent the uills of my aduersary M. Barlow, ho otherwise might perhaps in his eply (if he were disposed to make a∣y) blame me for not taking notice herof, and either turne me ouer to his ordship for satisfactiō touching those oints, or els make vse of the same an∣wers himselfe. And considering af∣erwards that my sayd Confutation of y Lords Answers grew to a greater olume then at the first I determined,  thought good to cause it to be printed lso a part, and gaue it the title of An Adioynder to the Supplement of Fa. Ro∣ert Persons his Discussion &c.
When my Supplement, and Ad∣oynder were diuuldged in England, I
 expected what would be answered t either of them, eyther by M. Barlow, o by my Lord of Winchester or by any o¦ther for them: but within a while I vn¦derstood of M. Barlowes decease, an neuer heard more of him, or of any mā that had vndertaken to answere for him. And some fiue or six yeares after (when I imagined by my Lord of VVin∣chesters long silence that my Adioynder had beene forgotten) I heard that one of your Vniuersity had answered it for his Lordship, and there passed many moneths before I could get a sight of it, or vnderstand so much as the name & quality of the Author. When I saw it, and found the title to be, Epphata t F. T. I do assure you I wondred not a litle, what had moued him so to entitle it, as whether it was only a bare allusi¦on to the sound of the two letters F. T. (which me thought was to light a mo¦tiue for so graue a man, and serious  a matter) or that he imagined me to be become so dumbe, and deafe, that I
 should needs to be coniured with that ord of our Sauiour to make e heare m, and answere him; wherin neuer∣elesse I must needes confesse he had ore reason, then he was aware of; for ch was at that tyme the infirmity of y body growne by frequent diseases, cident to my declyned age, & weake onstitution, that I was resolued to be ent from thenceforth, howsoeuer I ould be prouoked, and to desist from ch laborious exercises, and studyes, s required more health, and strength, en my yeares, and weaknes could af∣rd: yet when I had perused some ood part of his worke, and noted as el his manner of writing, as the sub∣ance of his discourse, & that he pre∣ended so to confute my Adioynder,  not only to answere euery chapter, ut also euery Paragraffe, & as he saith  his preface to the Reader, to leaue no rt of the whole vnexamined, and yet euerthelesse that he neuer set downe y wordes fully, but either his false
 construction of them in a different let¦ter (as if it were my text) or so lamely that the substance, pith, & force ther¦of neuer appeared (whereby he both sayd himselfe, and made me say wha he list, without any feare of controule) besides that I discouered in him by the way so many egregious fraudes, and falsityes in the abuse of the ancient Fa∣thers, Historiographers, and other au∣thors, so cunningly couched, and co¦loured many times, that it was not easy to be perceaued; & all this so būbaste with the vaine ostentation of Greeke pedanticall phrases, thrasonicall brags & triumphāt exaggerations, that to a vnwary Reader (yea almost to any tha hath not seen my Adioynder) he migh seeme to trample me vnder his feet, & to haue got a notable victory. Hauing I say, noted all this, and being iustly moued thereby to indignation (in res¦pect of the iniury offered as well to ou Catholike cause, as to my selfe) I resol¦ued presently to giue way to his Eppha
 t, that it might worke in me the effect hich he seemed to desire, that is to say  breake my determined silence; and et so, that I might hope withall to op his mouth, not by a formall con∣tation of his whole worke (which I old both for a needles, and for a lost bour) but by some briefe, & yet clear iscouery of his fraudulent dealing,  such sort that it should euidentiy ap∣eare to any indifferent Reader, that he eserueth no other answere, then such s might display him to the world for a otorious falsificatour, and coosener, n the highest degree.
This then being my intention, I aue laboured to performe it in this y Reply, with such pregnant proofs, nd manifest examples of his forgery, nd falsity, that they can admit no co∣ur, nor shadow of excuse. And the∣efore as he thought good to imitate ur Sauiour in the vse of Epphata, to ake me heare, and speake when I eant to be silent; so I haue thought
 it not amisse to seeke to stop his mout with Obmutesce, in imitation also of our Sauiour, who did therewith put to si∣lence a iangling, and taling Diuell saying, Obmutesce, & exi de homine. Marc. 1. For albeit I presume not to do a mi∣racle, as our Sauiour did, yet I may well hope that my Obmutesce, seconded with verity and truth, shall haue a much force to put him to silence, a his Epphata grounded vpon falsehoo & fraud, hath had to make me speake and thereupon I haue made my title as you see to be, The obmutesce of F. T▪ to the Epphata of D. Collins: but how wisely, or folishly, I haue done there∣in, I am content to leaue it to you censure: only I will say this for my fur¦ther excuse, that if my Aduersary ha reason for his Epphata, I think I had no lesse for my Obmutesce, if he had none but plaid the foole in his, I haue follow¦ed neuerthelesse the counsayle of th Wise man, in answering a foole acco¦ding to his folishnes, Prou. 26. Thu
 much concerning my Title.
Now then you shall further vn∣rstand, that albeyt my first, and incipall intention was (as I haue d) only to discouer certayn notable audes and falsityes of his in a little mphlet of a few leaues (to shew the∣by that he is not worth the answe∣ng) yet considering afterwards that me perhaps might think that he had  other thinges said somewhat to the urpose, and that therefore I durst not ckle with him hand to hand in a sin∣e combate; I thought good to exami∣e some part of his worke in order as it eth, for some one poynt or question  controuersy; and so I haue followed s footesteps for more thē fifty pages, swering many obiections, and argu∣ents which he vrgeth mightely out  S. Augustine concerning the suprea∣e authority of the Sea Apostolique. nd this I haue done in six Chapters e more amply, because it seemeth by  ostentation, and triumph, that he
 hath pleased himselfe therein excee¦dingly, though you shall see, that h hath notably bewrayed, not only hi own ignorance and folly, but also hi bad conscience, and little honesty whereby you may also conceaue ho easy it would be for me to answer hi particulerly to euery thing, to hi shame, if I had leasure, and would loo so much tyme to do it.
And yet for your further satisfa¦ction, and his greater confusion I hau added six other chapters, touching th Inuocation of Saynts, and the Venera¦tion of theyr holy Reliques, with in¦tention neuertheles, for breuityes sake not to deale therein with his impert¦nent fooleryes (which are inumerable but to discouer only such of his euidē and inexcusable fraudes, as should o¦curre in debating with him some pa of the said question concerning pray to Saints. And those I haue thoug good to represent vnto you for exāp sake only, that you may thereby ta
 a skantling of the rest of his worke∣r, to vndertake to lay open all his udes, and coosenages that may be erued in his whole Treatise, were lesse then to vndergo the labour of rcules, to purge the filthy stable of geas, as you will perceaue by the ltitude, & enormity of those which aue discouered in this Reply, and in him so thick heaped one vpon other, that you will easely iudge whole worke to be compaginate of thing els but fraudes; amongst the ich also, none is more ordinary, or arkeable then his wilfull corrup∣n of the ancient Fathers, of whom y few, or none haue escaped his gers (as I may say) Scot-free; in so ch that within the compasse of two ues of his, I haue noted his notable se of no lesse then ten holy Fathers, d ancient Authours, to wit, S. Am∣se, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Chry∣ome, S. Gregory the great, S. Gregory Towres, Optatus, Theodoret, Sozomen,
 and Victor Vticensis, as you may see my eleauenth Chapter: wherto if  add his fraudulent handling of my t in the dissimulation, lame allegatio and peruerse construction of it,  changing the state of the question,  contradictions, his manifest lyes,  foule ouersights, his vayn Argume more forcible many tymes agai himselfe, then against his aduersar & lastly his other impertinencyes, a fooleryes, it wilbe hard to determy whether is greater, his fraud, or  folly; albeyt the latter is so notorio thoughout all his work, that I can n but wonder, how he got so much rep¦tation among you, as to be doctoure yea and to be approued for a publiq Reader, & Writer; or that my Lord Winchester, would eyther admit h for his champion, or could hould hi selfe to be sufficiently defended by hi in this work of his, which I make  doubt but his Lordship saw before was published, and therefore could 
 bt note therein how miserably he eadeth for him, how often he becom∣eth non-suite, and abandoneth him ite; and that his fraudes and cogge∣es would be most manifest to any at should but confront his Answere th my Adioynder, whereof I am for∣d to lay down whole pages, and lea∣s in euery chapter to shew his perfi∣ous treachery aswell in corrupting y text many tymes, as in peruerting e sense of it, which (as I haue said) very ordinary in him; in so much at I may well say of him as Tertullian th of all Heretikes in generall, tou∣ing theyr handling of holy scripture; ntum veritati obstrpit adulter sensus, antum corruptor stilus lib. de praescript. . 17 Besides that, my Lord might y well see, that whereas his Lord∣s reputation is deepely wounded h the imputation of many foule fal∣es, and fraudes, wherewith I char∣ his Lordship, this his aduocate hath  discharged him of any one, but
 only of a falsification of a place of Ambrose which I obiected to his Lo¦ship (because I found not some word of the text in two or three seuerall i¦pressions, which I had seene, and e¦amined) of which imputation I no acknowledge his Lordship to be ful cleared by certayne printes produce by M. Collins, which haue the text my Lord alleadgeth it; albeyt neith my Lord nor he hath gayned any thin thereby for theyr cause, as I haue sh¦wed euidently in my sixt chapter. An truly this is the only seruice that M. Collins hath done his Lordship in a his prolixe, and tedious Treatise.
Therefore seeing it hath not ple¦sed my Lord to pay his own debt him¦self, but to put me of to M. Collins, wh hath tendred me payment in suc false money, that I haue no reason  accept it; his Lordship cannot blam me if I do not giue him a quitance, bu hould them both for my debters, vnti the one of them do make me bette
 payment, or proue at least the money  be good, which I haue here reiected false, and counterfaite. For if my ord, M. Collins, or any other can so , I will acknowledge my self to be tisfyed for the whole. And of this I ill desyre no other iudges but your ues. Only I will beseech you, that M Doctor Collins do resolue to iusti∣ his counterfait cone, you will do e the fauour, or rather the right, to ake tryal of the truth by the touch∣ one; I meane by cōparing his answer ith the text of my Adioynder, and f this my reply, and not otherwayes o beleeue him: for if in so doing you nd, that I haue done him wrong in fusing his payment, truly I will not nly accept it for good, and lawfull, ut also acknowledge my errour, and ke both him, and my Lord pardon. he like also I request of you (not a matter that any way toucheth my rticuler, but that concerneth your lues, and the honour of your Vni∣uersity)
 to wit, that when you heare him at any tyme labour to confute, or to traduce Catholicke writters, ex ca∣thedra, I meane in his publicke lectures or sermons, you will examine his alle∣gations, & assertions by the Authours thēselues, seeing that he maketh no cō∣science, nor scruple to belye, corrupt, and peruert all kind of Authours anci∣ent, and moderne (and especially Car∣dinall Bellarmine, and the Iesuites) as you shall euidently see in this my reply by many examples; which if you doe well consider, you will no doubt think that to be true in him, which S. Austin sayd of the Pelagians of his tyme, viz. frontem illorum non esse frontem, that his forehead is no forehead, seeing he is not ashamed of such enormious, and prodigious impostures, as you shall find to abound in him euery where.
This being so, I leaue it to your prudent consideration, what a des∣perate cause my Lord of VVinchester, & M. Collins do mayntayne, seeing they
 are forced to defend it with so much alsehood, as I haue discouered first in my Lord, & now in M. Collins, who hauing vndertaken the defence of his Lordship & finding him, as I may say, ouer the shoes in fraudes, and falsityes, ad no other way to deliuer him, then o run himself ouer the eares to fetch him out, that is to say, to become gna∣iter impudens; and no meruayle, seeing hat a lye can neuer be defended with ruth, nor one errour without many, nd euer the longer the worse. And herefore I make account, that if M. Collins do attempt to iustify his former raudes, he must perforce passe the ounds of all modesty, conscience, & hame, and shew himselfe to be the im∣udentest fellow, that euer liued, al∣eit I verily think, that when you shal aue seene how farre he hath exceeded herein already, you will be of opinion hat he cannot go one step further.
But if you thinke that in all this,  do but exagerat some smal ouersights
 of his out of passion, I beseech you to suspend your iudgment vntil you com to the sixt, and seauenth chapter, where I do purposely vndertake the discoue∣ry of his fraudes, and from thenceforth note well what you find, & then iudg of him and me, as you shall see cause. And this shall suffice for the present; for in the Conclusion of the whole, I meane to say somwhat more vnto you concerning him, as also vnto the Rea∣der in my Preface, wherein you may see (if it please you) my Answere to certaine calumnious cauils, and obie∣ctions of his cōcerning my self, wher∣of I will remit the iudgement to any indifferent Reader; not doubting but to discouer therein no lesse fraud then in the rest, with such grosse ignorance and exorbitant malice on his part, that my mutesce shall haue the desired ef∣fect, and stop his mouth, in such sort, that I may truly say with the Psalmist, Obstructum est os loquentis iniqua. Psal. 62.
