



Sir,
THe ignorant generally complaine of too much preaching, and some lear∣ned of too much writing. The first haue no eyes to see, either the grace of God in his word, or their owne want of grace, for want of that gra∣cous word. The other (I thinke) in this, haue squint eyes, or at least looke not the rght way to the Gos∣pell. For did they condemne onely the wanton, idle, and vaine Pamphlets, (which too licentiously panda∣ring for lust) stand forth in every shop, or those tur∣bulent libells, which being engendered in earthly mindes, breake forth into all bitternesse, and fill the world with stormes and schismes, who would not rise up with them against the wicked? But the bookes by
them censured, nay despised, and derided, are such as tend to edification; and are scorned, either because they savour not of profound and deepe learning, or not bumbasted with multiplicitie of reading, or not stucke thicke enough with the flowers of Rhetorike; when yet our owne experience makes us see these despised labours wonderfully to prosper in the Church: whether it bee that the Lord delights to glorifie his power in infirmitie, and takes no pleasure in the wisedome of words, (which makes the crosse of Christ of no effect) or as light, so the word, is most cleere and powerfull, when least mixed. Famous is that historie of Sozomen, who hath left it upon re∣cord, that in the first Councell of Nice, when an hea∣then Philosopher did not a little stumble the learned Christians, a simple old man stept out, and with plaine dealing both confuted, and converted him: No que∣stion there is great, and even necessarie use of those speciall gifts in the Church: yet by such examples the Lord plainely shewes, that hee will not haue his meanest grace despised. I am perswaded, that with as much reason, and lesse blasphemie wee may quar∣rell with the Creator, for making so many rivers and fountaines on earth, so many starres in heaven; as with the Redeemer, and blessed Spirit, for storing this Kingdome with those gifts which make it as a watered garden, and another firmament, full of glo∣rious lights, shedding their beames into every cor∣ner.
For my selfe, if any desire to know the reasons im∣pelling mee to write what before I had spoken, and giue way to my private and weake meditations to
looke out in publike, upon so learned an Age; the chiefe are these.

 First; That redoubled and trebled commaund of our most gracious Saviour,Iohn 21. 15. 16. 17. Feed my sheepe, to∣gether with that inforcing motiue, As thou lovest mee. Oh! who can loue him sufficiently who lo∣ved to death, whose loue passeth knowledge?Ephe. 3. 9. Or how can any man feed too much, when no man can loue enough? Therefore that Apostle, there so adjured, contented not himselfe to feed by prea∣ching, but to this day feedes us by his writing. The same precept is often by his blessed Spirit pressed upon his Ministers:1 Pet. 5. 2. and 4. 10. Feed the flocke of Christ. As every man hath received the gift, so let him ad∣minister it o other,Act .20. 28. as good Stewards of the manifold graces of God. Take heed to your selues, and to the flocke, over which the holy Ghost hath made you Over∣seers to feed the Church of God, which he hath pur∣chased with his owne bloud. O strong adjuration! Now God forbid, that I should ever esteeme any paines sufficient for that, for which God thought not his bloud too much.
 Secondly; The streight account which our So∣veraigne Lord hath foretold he will exact of all his servants,Math. 25. 26. 30. to whom he commits these treasures of his grace, so that the single talent shall bee ac∣countable, and the slothfull person adjudged to a fearefull condemnation, and execution for not putting it to the banke.
 Thirdly; The profit of Gods people, especially those committed to me by Christ. Surely there is a wonderfull loue betweene a faithfull Pastor
and his faithfull people. The Galatians could giue their eyes;Gal. 4. 15.
Rom. 16. 4. Aquila and Priscilla their liues to the Apostle. But beyond all admiration was the loue of that Apostle,2 Cor. 12. 5. who not onely loved the more,Phil. 1. 22. 23. 24. the lesse he was beloved, their neglect (as it were by Antiperistasis) kindling, and enflaming his affections, but could willingly deferre his joyes with Christ in heaven, and still liue under the bloudie persecution of Iewes, Gentiles, false Brethren, and (which is worse then all these) the fierie opposition, and loathsome, but forced struglings with remainders of sinne, that hee might build the Church. He knew not which to choose, his presence with Christ in infinite felicitie, or his edifying the Church with all worldly miserie.
 Lastly; Though there be euē innumerable lights heaven, yet is ther not one in vaine: the very least and most obscure haue their use, their light, and influence: yea those infinite little starres, which by us cannot be discerned, by reason, partly of their distance, partly of their smalnesse, yet doe they paue, embrighten, and point out that milkie way in heaven. And I doubt not, but this little and weake worke shall through his power, who brings light out of dakenesse, direct some, or further them in that blessed way to eternall life.

But it may bee, some will stop my way with slight etertainment, and strong opposition of the world.
This cannot weigh with those stronger argu∣ments inciting mee to this dutie. I remember the Astronomers distinguish the visible fixt starres
into six severall magnitudes; Those of the first and chiefest exceed the whole earth in quantitie an hundred and seven-fold, and even the most ob∣scure and cloudy of the sixt magnitude, eighteen-fold with advantage. Thus those first and great starres (the holy Apostles,) their followers and immediate Successours how wonderfully they did surmount the whole earth, may easily appeare in this; that when all the world interposed it selfe to ecclipse their light, yet did they then shine more bright, and filled the whole earth with the glorious splendour of the Gospell of Christ. So e∣ven in these last ages, we haue knowne that not∣withstanding all the opposition of Popes, Empe∣rours, and many other Princes (the whole earth indeed being banded against a very few, and farre inferiour to those fist Ministers) yet did they o∣vercome all their malice, and shed the long ob∣scured light into all parts of the Christian world. For my selfe I rest assured, that one heavenly sparke in the least of those starres shining in the right hand of Christ shall not, nor cannot by any earthly opposition bee so ecclipsed, but that it shall breake through, and both enlighten, and en∣flame some of those whom God hath chosen.
It may be some also will object, that other more learned, and every way more sufficient, haue al∣ready laboured in this Vineyard, and set forth their workes on this Psalme.
I willingly confesse it: yet I know not any more but one, even that eloquent Apollos,M. Bolton. powerfull and mightie in the word; and am certaine, that
learned and religious men will not disdaine, that when hee from this living fountaine hath filled his silver Cisterne, I should also with my earthly pitcher draw, and poure out some of the same wa∣ter of life unto the sheepe of my Master.
Now most worthy Patrone, I haue beene bold to entitle you, and your worthy Lady to this la∣bour, not onely in remembrance of your much loue, and my long courteous entertainment in your house (such as I never saw any Gentleman giue unto their Minister;) or that first I initiated my weake Ministerie in your Familie and Ham∣let; but especially because I acknowledge my selfe, and whatsoever is mine


