



THIS my defence, against M. Ihon Rider (tearmed Deane of S. Patricks) contayning A Catholick Confutation of his Cauteriated clayme of antiquitie on his syde, and a Cal∣ming comfort agaynst his pretended Frendly caueat to Irland Catholicks; after longing to ex∣hibit vnto you, after loathing to be imployed about it, and after lingring to partake you therwith, Dearly beloued Contrymen, I now present, to your confirmation, and consolation. My longing was nether for any mercenarie respects, nor popular applauds, but only for your aforsaid confirmation, and consolation. My loathing was, to incowntre a spirit of contradiction, esteeming the price of his paynes a countenancing of a falshood, it imported not how impu∣dently, yf confidently, and contentiously. My lingring was, by being vacant to recollections vsual among them of my profes∣sion; and by a doubtful deliberation of my Superiors, whether any further awnswer was due to such an aduersarie, who nether durst permitt that I should imprint this my defence, and whom the right honorable his Maiesties Cownsell pronounced, by pu∣blick act, to haue bene an vnfitt aduocat, or proctor, to iustifie their profession, and vnable to ratifie his owne printed allega∣tions.
2. But, wheras I am to incountre him in the whole purport of my booke, and also to tender resolutions equally belonging to all Catholicks in general; I thought good in this dedication to you, Contrymen Catholicks, without digression to digresse, in

acquainting you of what predecessors you are discended, Catho∣liks, or Protestāts, holy or impiouse, famouse or obscure: that you be not longer strangers at home, and ignorāt of our different pro∣testations; he saying, that your first Christianitie was Protestant, and I auerring that it was only Catholicke, as now this woord and tearme is vsually taken.
3. Two things I would fayne in the begyning obtayne. First, that none censure my relation in this preface to be of tediouse prolixitie, vntill he pondre how many discussions of doubts it contayneth. Secondly, that during my vnfowlding, admirable, incredible, and hidden secreacies of our Contryes former prehe∣minence in Religion, and learning, no Readers would for preiu∣dicated opinions or erroneouse prescriptions in their myndes, more distrust these records, then they can lawfully disdayne au∣thorities by which they wilbe maintayned. Wherfore omitting all remote examinations belonging to our Contryes first inhabi∣tants, and other trifels wonted in like treatises to be curiously in∣quyred;The first part of Ir∣lāds ould Christiani∣tie. I will only, and abruptly, search, the first Christianitie, and degree of learning, and pietie, of our Christian ancestours.
4. Concerning therfore the first planting of Religion among vs, diuers are the opinions of Authors. Some affirme, thatLegenda noua An∣glicana in vita S. Pa∣tricij. S. Iames Apostle among other Contryes of the west, visited Irland, and conuerted many. Others impute the first planting of Religion in the Britanian Isles (among whiche Irland is accompted second, or as Ifaicus in Lycophronem, tearmeth it, the Occidental Brita∣nie) toNicephorus de S. Petro. S. Peter. Others toCatal. Script. Brit. teste wione lib 5. c 101. S. Andrew. Others toFerculphus Lexo niensis & Dorotheus Tyr. Episcopus n sua Synops Apostolorum. S. Philipp, by his directing vnto them Ioseph Arimath, and 12. Compagnions. Others to Symon Zelotes. Many affirme that Irland, and Britanie receaued the fayth of the gospell atBosius d signis Ec∣clesia lib. 8. c 1. one and the same tyme; and conse∣quently at least in the 203. yeare after our Lord and Sauiour Christs incarnation. To which accordeth this chronical verse, belonging only to Irland, as shall God willing palpablye appeare.
Ioan. Maior lib. 1. hist. c. 14.Christi transactis tribus annis atque ducentis
Scotia Catholicam caepit habere fidem.
Two hondred yeares and three of Christ out run,
The fayth of Christ in Scotland was begun.
Mermannius in theatro conuersionis Gentium & Demo∣chares l. de Sacrificio.Of all these opinions, other probabilitie, or monuments, I could neuer fynde, then that soone after the first Christianitie among the Gentils, diuers of our Contry receaued the benifit therof, and preached it to others as S. Mansuetus disciple of S. Peter,

mpagnion of S. Clement, Apostle of Tull in Loraine, by testimo∣e of Mermannius, and Demochares:S. Greg. l. 3. dial. S. Fridian, Apostle of Luca, in ale; of whom S. Gregorie maketh mention:vita Sedulij in mitio suorum operum, & in Trithemio. Hildulphus teacher  Celius Sedulius: Sedulius him selfe:historiae eorum ma∣nuscript. S. Prosper in annal. an. 434. vide Rich. vitum lib. 1. annot. 6. Vide Baron. tom. 3. fol. 323. S. Declanus: S. Colman, and  Albius, and others before S. Patricks tyme by S. Palladius found hristians at his arrual in Irland.
5. But wheras there is attributed to Irland for being called in tin Ibernia, the Conuersion of Iberia in Asia, recorded by Nice∣horus to haue hapened vnder Constantin the great; it is strange hat it was so litle examined by Sabellicus, VVasnerus, Mercator, Hector oethius, Bosius, and manifould others, as that so many differences f all circumstances mentioned by the rehearcer therof, were otable to perswade them otherwyse but that it belonged to rland. Then which supposition, scarcely could any thing be ore absurd, and therfor is not longer to be trauersed.
6. Not withstanding these former pettie, and priuat conuer∣ons, in Irland, rather then of Irland; in duetie, and deuotion, let ll Irlands race with perpetual and humble thankfulnes,S. Antoninus tō. 2. c. 18. S. Vincētius in Speculo. Iacelinus in eius vita. Marianus Scotus an. 452. 453. attribut heir vniuersal conuersion, to the thrise gloriouse, and wonder∣ull S. Patricke. Wonderfull, yf the raysing of 60. deade, the conse∣ration of 365. Bishops, and Churches, and 3000. Preists, the aptising of 12000. Christians, be wonderfull. Wonderfull, yf he entier, and total conuersion of a stiff-necked people, not only r the present tyme, but also by his prayer for the future; not nly against Infidels, Danes, Normans,Aimoinus l. 4. c. 100. Eginardus de gestis Caroli Magni. Vide Bosium de signis Ecclesiae lib. 8. c. 1. Ostmans (yf they were uers) but also against hereticks, Arians, Pelagians, Puritans, be  wōder of Irland incomparable aboue all other nations; whom oth infidelitie, and heresie, ether altogether, or for the most art, some tyme or other infected, after their first Christianitie. Wonderfull, yf all signes, and wonders, or markes of a lawfull vo∣tion, as the gift of prophecie, of tongues, of remedying al maner f diseases, of displacing mountayns, of power ouer all elemēts, of pernatural fastings, of angelical conuersation, of holynes at ome, of peerles reputation abroad, be wonderfull. O what à epth am I vnwittingly trāsported into, when I relate, or rather  collect part of his wonders to beleeuers, neglecting the contra∣etie of winds expecting me among misbeleeuers, from aduan∣ng into the hauens of their conceits? But as much as I haue uentured hetherto, was out of Strangfoord hauen; where the rrent is so strong, that maugre any racke, and gale, to the con∣trary,

yet could not be hindred to fall out so farr with so noble a tyde, into an Ocean (yf I would sayle therin) of endles scope. Yet I will returne into the baye of my matter, and ryde at ancre vpon the point of Irlands primatiue Christianitie, and pietie, to demonstrat of what sorte, and conformitie, to their, or our pro∣fession, they weare.
Volateran. in Anthro∣pologia.7. And first, such as are already specifyed, S. Patrick, for being a Regular canon or religious man, abstayning from fleash during his whole lyfe, deuout toward the Crosse, a perswader of perpe∣tual chastitie to virgins, an erecter of Abbayes; and Sedulius for commending adoration of Crucifixes (as by Gods assistance I intend to shew in the 152.Celius Sedulius Scotus Ibernensis venerabilis a Gelasio papa dictus vt habet Gratianus dist, 15. number) and so of the residue, it is most euident, they could nether fauour nor further Puritanisme, as being diametricaly opposit and repugnant to such their godly proceedings, and conuersations. Nether did their successors de∣generat from their example as confesseth euen Camden him selfe, a sectarist of these tymes (the learnedest of that kinde among the whole crue) saying.Camdenus fol. 683. 684. 685. de chrono∣graphica descriptione Britania. Edit. Fran∣ceford. anno 1590. The disciples of Patrick so surpassed in Christian pietie, that in the age following, there was nothing more holy, nothing more lear∣ned then those Monks. In confessing them to haue bene Monks, (vnaduised Camden) and yet so holy, so learned; how lowdly dost thou condemne thy brethren, and M. Rider in particular, first in maligning the holynes of Monks, and next in clayming a con∣formitie betwixt the first Christianitie planted among vs, and their Puritan profession, so distant from it of Monks? But not to halt at euery occasion; such indeede was their abundant holines, and singular renowme of godly doctrin, that Marianus of the next age to S. Patrick,Marianus lib. 2. pag. 375. Auienus libello Orae maritimae. Beda lib. 3. hist. c. 7. wryteth, Irland to haue bene full of Saincts. Auienus affirmeth, that it was tearmed the sacred Ilande. Beda infor∣meth, that out of France they repayred therto, legendarum gratia scripturarum; For more profound knowledge of scriptures. Wherunto also, S. Brandons lyfe accordeth.
8. But because I am now entring to an information that many can not choose but repyne therat, as by change of tyme not only incredible, but also disdaynefull, that men in the downefall and depth of ignorance, inciuilitie, and abiection, should now appeare to haue bene formerly most learned, most vertuouse, and most respected; I craue of you, Contrymen, to afford such vntrue surmisers, this true defense, that all monuments being silent in our Contryes cause, and the present countenance of our Contry

ost remote from former florishing estate; they had no reason to ppose better therof, then according their wonted maner. Ne∣er had other knowledge bene as yet attayned, yf Gods great rouidence had not permitted the liues of Saincts by late here∣cks to be derided and distrusted, and inspyred Catholick wry∣rs to iustifie, and publish them; in which among other innume∣able benifits, true knowledge of antiquities are most assuredly wght, and discouered. Out of these fountaynes Camden, Bale, and ther lyke tooke their drawghts, and together dronke vpp the orsayd notice, of Irlands owld dignitie.Surius. Molanus. Serrarius. Bosius. VVion. Others fynding purer prings, and sucking thereat throwgh purer pypes the same nowledge, haue also more purely powred owt running streams o our Contryes commendation. Out of which, I am now, to the orie of God, and your cōsolation, to fill all emptie caskes, duely isposed to be replenished; yet nothing without direct deriuation rom the purest well springs of vnsuspitious Authors.
9. And first, who may be more vnsuspitious towards vs, then e forsayd Camden, whether we regarde his Contry, or conscien∣e? He then affirmeth Irlands fame to haue bene so great, as they nly weare accompted among the English nation of laudable ducation, who had bene trayned (O diuersitie of tyme) therin.Camden. pag. 117. or proofe wherof he alleadgeth this prouerbial awnswer, when uestion was made wher any of qualitie was instructed; Amanda∣us est ad disciplinam in Iberniam; He is sent into Irland to his studyes. For onfirmation wherof, he addeth a verse frequented in common peeche.
Exemplo patrum commotus amore legendi
Iuit ad Ibernos sophia, mirabile, claros.Ibidem pag. 678.
Of custome ould, desyring knowledge sownd
To Irish teachers graue, the way he found.
Many other arguments he alleadgeth to verifie the same;Ibid. 684. 117. 122. 630 which for breuitie, and auoyding suspected ambition, I ouerslipp.
10. But although his authoritie may seeme forcible in this ause, as being from one of his disposition; yet I iudge it my part ot to suffre it to depend vpon his only credit, but to auerr it by enerable Beda, and hee an English man, who florished nyne undred yeares agoe in incomparable reputation of religious ynceritie. Thus then he recordeth.Beda in hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 27. This affliction wrought also great estruction in Irland. VVherin at that tyme weare many of the Nobles and ommons of the English nation: who in the tyme of Finan and Colman forsaking

their owne Iland repayred thether, partly for diuine Doctrine, partly for  continent lyfe. And truely some did streight conforme them selues to the con∣uersation of Moncks. Others circuiting the cells of teachers, ioyfully applyed their studie, whom the inhabitants most willingly intertayning cherfully be∣stowed vpon them their dayly diet, bookes to studie, and their teaching freelye. Agayne he recompting how in Magio, (which I thinke to be Mayo in Conacht) a Seminarie was builded by S. Colman, and the Earle of Mayo,Ibidem. l 4. c 3. & 4. & l. 3. c. 26. for the English; thus he concludeth: to witt which monasterie is to this daye possessed by English-men. And it is now be∣come great of a litle one, and is commonly called Iniugeo. So euery one long since being conuerted to better instructions, it contayneth a rare com∣pagnie of Moncks, who being collected from the prouince of English, in great continencie, and synceritye, liue by the laboure of their hands according the example of their venerable forfathers vnder rule, and a Canonical Abbot.
Camden pag. 678.11 Breeflly, to contayne many proofs in one, Camden confes∣seth, that in Iberniam tanquam ad bonarum artium mercaturam vndique confluxerunt; They flocked from all places into Irland, as vnto a market of all sciences. What say you now, Deerly beloued Contrymen: can you beleeue your eyes in behoulding this quondam florishing digni∣tie of your now debased contrye? what thinke you: was it for Puritanisme, or rather for regular discipline, more continent life, obedience vnder a religious Monck, or Abbot, that such floc∣king was into Irlande? Of your greatest emulators, who lif∣teth to regard these authorities, yf they will admyre as amazed at them, yet the most impudent, will not hereafter dare to denye them.
Camden pag. 685. Eginard Aimom. S. Bernard. loc. infrà citandis.12. But how was this florishing deuotion, and doctrin vtter∣ly extinguished? Camden awnswereth by many forrein inuasions. Beda, Eginardus, Aimoinus, and S. Bernard, do confirme the same. Of whom Beda greatly reproueth Ecgfrid, King of Northumber∣land,Beda. l. 4 c. 26. because, vastauit misere gentem innoxiam, & nationi Anglorum sem∣per amicissimam, ita vt neque Ecclesijs quidem aut monasterijs manus parceret hostilis, He miserably wasted the harmeles Irish people, and to the English na∣tion most frendly, so that he did not spare ether Churches, or Abbayes. S. Bernard specifyeth so cruel to haue bene the persecutions of pirats, that in one day, in one only abbaye of Benchor, they killed nyne hon∣dred Moncks.
13 Besyd which ruine of our ancient glorie, I fynde another great desolation in Irland to haue suddenly hapned, by a gene∣ral feruour of our godly doctors, conueying them to infidel

ontryes to imparte vnto them the cleere brightnes of the gos∣ll. I say, I fynde such voluntarie peregrination to haue disabled d impouerished Irland by their absence, as much as they bew∣fyed and benifyted other Contryes by their presence. Of which niuersal transmigration, thus wryteth Henricus Antisiodorensis.Henricus Antisiodorē. in epist. ad Carol. Caluum. Quid erniam commemorem contempto pellagi discrimine pene totam cum grege ilosophorum ad littora nostra migrantem: quorum quisquis peritior est, vltro i indicit exilium? VVhy should I remembre Irland, almost altogether  trowps of philosophers, (the danger of sea vnregared) to these our Coasts oting: of whom as euery one is most learned, so he entreth into banish∣ent more promptly? When therfor the chefe of our learned saincts bandoned their natiue soyle, to displaye and plant Religion broad: is it any merueil that the Contry at home was disfur∣ished, and all the glorious ornaments therof deminished, and ithered?
14. As their zelous Apostolical spirit conducted them to all laces wher they might edifie to saluation, (of which places ome few, for certaintie sake, are to be mentioned) so in En∣gland, so great weare their vertuous trauayles,Camden pag. 117. & 157. that as Camden cknowledgeth, in many places, to them yf not only, yet heefly, their deuotions weare addicted, their towns and hurches dedicated, their patronage by all implored. To which amdens relation do approach and belong thes words of Beda.Beda l. 3. c. 3. y them the yong and ould of the English, weare instructed in studyes, nd obseruation of regular discipline. Agayne: they being teachers,Ibid. l. 4. c. 26. the hole care was to serue God and not the worlde, to fill the soule, and ot to pampre the bodye. So that the habit of Religion was then n great veneration; in so much as wher soeuer any Clercke, or Monck, ould come, he would cheerfully be receaued by all, as the seruant of God. lso yf he weare found in his iournie, they would ronn to him, and bowing heir heads couet to be crossed with his hands, or blessed with his outhe. Was this puritanisme? was this ould Catholick Reli∣gion different from this late Catholick Religion? who, will ere after thynke so, whose senses and witt are at libertie, and whom puritan protestations haue not benummed of all vnder∣standing? But I list not to lingre, or trifle in a case so perspi∣uous.
15. As in situation France is next England; so also was it, to the godly visitation, of our Euangelical pilgrims. I will conioyne their fructifying therin, and in the low Contryes (the bordres

therof) in one declaration. Of the, (Mellifluous S. Bernard) I ex∣pect the filling of my sayles with a prosperous bonace, and for∣wynde; that I may safely ariue at the port of perswasion; trueth, and irrefragable authoritie, being my lead starr, and inoffensiue manifestation of Irlands owld estate my pilot, and thou Benchor Abbay the blessed rode, from which I will begynn my naui∣gation.
S. Bernardus in v. S. Malachie.16. Of this Abbay, sayth S. Bernard: it was à most noble Monasterie befor vnder Congellus first parent therof, yeelding many thousand Moncks, and being head of many Abbayes. A place in trueth holy, fertil of saincts most abundantly fruictfull to God. So that one of that holy congregation named Luanus is reported to haue alone fownded (in France: as Florarium, a written martyrolo∣ge in our librarie of Louain, contayneth) a hondred Abbayes. VVhich I therfor relate, that by this one the Reader may coniecture how surpassing had bene the residue.
17. To be breefe the budds or branches therof so replenished Irland, and Scotland, that the verses of Dauid seeme spoken of those tymes. Thow hast visited the earth, and made it dronken thow hast multiplyed to enriche it. The flood of God is filled with waters, thou hast prepared the foode of them: for so is the pre∣paration therof. Making dronke the bankes of it, thou hast multiplyed therof, in the stilling dropps wherof the fructifying will reioyce; I and in lyke maner, they which follow. Add not only into the forsayd, but also into other strange Contryes thos heaps of saincts powred out them selues as a ouerflowing streame. Of whom S. Columban aryued into thes our parts of France, erected the Abbay of Lexo∣uium, and increased ther into a great multitude. They report, to haue bene so many, as one quyer succeding another, the solemne diuine seruice perpetualy continued, so that no moment of day or night was vacant from Gods prayses. Let this suffice of the ould glorie of the Abbaye of Benchor. This being in tyme past destroyed by Pirats, Malachias for the remembrance of the ancient dignitie therof, tooke it in hande, as yf he weare to replant paradise, because many bodyes of Saincts lay ther in rest. For, that I may say nothing of them that deceased in peace, they record that 900. weare by pirats murthered in one day. Hetherto hath S. Bernard safely transported me, so neere the wished harbo∣row of full perswasion, and reasonable consent pliable to reasons, (for who so presumptuously obstinat, as to distrust S. Bernard.) that now I may lawfully seeme protected from wynds, and weather, without proceeding to further wharfe, or keye; all that I inten∣ded to proue of Irlands ancient glorie, being compendiously com∣prised, in the former discourse.
Sigibertus anno 651.18. Althowgh in common appeareth, that France was aua∣yled,

and aduanced greatly, by recourse of our learned Saincts erto,Vide do his sanctis, Su∣rium, Molanum, Tri∣themium, Iocelmum, & librum M. S. apud Woluerstonum iuxta Dubliniam &c.
De S. Madelgario, Fra. de Rosiers to. 4. stema∣tum lotharingie hist. capitali 73. fol. 255. habet, fuisse illum re∣gē Ibernie. Vide Guic∣ciardinum in descrip. Mentium Hanoniae. certe non fuit pro rex regis Frācie, cui nihil vnquam fuit in Iber∣nia. and by so many erected Abbayes the truest scholes of ver∣e, and veritie; yet the appearing therof in perspicuitie, depen∣th most vpon the particular histories of such our Contries bles∣d broode as are in late wryters plentifully extant. Among hom, what Columbs, Kilians, Vltans, Foilans, Fursees, Fiacres, VViroes, ncents, (otherwyse called Madelgarius, or rather Marguirius) Luglies, uglians, Adalgises, Corbicans, Fredegands, Foranans, Elequies, Bertuins, ombols, and manifould others, might I specifie? In Brabant what umulds (some tyme byshop of Dublin) what Fredegands, what ymnaes (otherwye Diuna; as she is inuoked in Louthe) what Gerebe∣s; in Flandres, what Leuins, what Guthagons, what Gilloes, what in∣osed Columbs; in Holland, what Hierons, what Plechelms; in all the w contryes, what Helyes, wasnulphes, Ogers, Chilens, Helans, Tressans, ermans, Verans, &c. (all being gloriouse Saincts of our Contry, emembred in benediction) might I delate vpon, and Calculat? So reat à Catalogue, or list, might I dinumerat, what by the Kilians, alls, Ruperts, Trutherts, Virgils, Arbogasts, Florences, Hildulphes, Erhards, illigods, Domnols, two Deodats, Totnans Colmans, and others the pa∣ons of Germanie; what by others of Italie, and others the pa∣ons of Irland, that not so few as six hondred are they of our ōtry who florished in admirable Sanctitie, whos names I haue  custodie.
19. This multitude, this abundance caused Marianus to say:Marian. l. 2. pag. 379. ernia insula Sanctis & mirabilibus viris perplurimis plena habetur, The iland  Irland is replenished with Saincts and manifowld admirable persons.Surius & Molanus 2. Maij. It ma∣e Surius, and Molanus, to say: Scotia, quae & Ibernia dicitur, fertilis nctorum insula & stellarum numerum prope equans protrocinijs sanctorum. cotland which is called Irland, is a plenifull iland of Saincts,Theodoricus in v. S. Rumuldi apud Sur. 1. Iulij. and coequal to the mber of starrs, in the patronages of Saincts. It made Theodoricus to say: sula sicut omni terrarum gleba foecundior, ita sanctorum gloriosa simplicita∣ beatior, An Ilande, as more fertil then any clodd of lands, so more blessed in e holy simplicitie of saincts.Vide Camden fol. 678. S. Bern. in v. S. Mala∣chie. vitam S. Colum∣bani, S. Galli. S. Ki∣liani. Brefly it made euery wryter to amplifie rlands commēdations, euery Contry to whom they repayred to und for them (as in Fulda, Herbi poli, Fossis, S Gallo, &c.) habitations, nd euery nation whom they visited, to haue their festiuities in reatest veneration.
20. Neither is it the least part of their glorie, that many of hem weare of Roial or princely race, asVVion. 20. Octob. Vendelin,Florarium. 13. Ian. Kentigerne, Kilian,Idem 8. Maij. Fiacre, Sira his sister,Buchingerus ad ann. 888. Abbas pru∣niensis, Cuspinian, P. Phrig. Platus. Richardis emperesse and wyfe,VVion. 8. Iulij. (yet

perpetual virgin) to Carolus Crassus,Andreas Herbi Ca∣nonicus Attreb. in lib. de vita eorum. Luglius and Luglian brethren and Lilia their sister,Molan in na talibus, in Indiculo, & in recapitulatione. Guthagon,Molan in na talibus, in Indiculo, & in recapitulatione. Dimna,Molan in na talibus, in Indiculo, & in recapitulatione. Vincent,Surius 14 Nouem. Laurence,Ioa. Maior de gestis Scotorum lib. 2. p. 34. Cuth∣bert,Merman, in thea∣tro conuersionis Gen∣tium pag. 104. Fridolin,Volateran. l. 20. Antrop. Fridian,M. S. liber VVoluer∣stoni. Brandub,Ibidem. Cormacus,Trithemical. 3. c. 31. Brandan,Probus l. 2. vitae S. Patricij, tres illas fuis∣se regias virgines com∣memorat. Sabel. enead. 8. l 9. Naucler. in gest. Caroli Mag. Ioan. Valensis parte 10. compendiloquij. c. 6. Gaguin. l. 4. de orig. Francorum. Polidorus l. 5. historie. Aethyna, Vluena, Fethle &c. Shewing therby the degenerat, & bastard mynds, of such as thinke any other nobilitie comparable to serue god in ecclesiastical state; and neuer thinke their sonns fitt to be of the clergie, vnles they be maymed, deformed, sottish: dealing with God as Cayne, in offring to him the refuse oblations, and the choise to the vanitie of the world. But of this prophane in∣consideration, and disdaynefull conceit of godly worthines, and what punishments therby insue; our patriarchal Apostle S. Pa∣trick, soone after will giue vs a spiritual lesson, and priuie repre∣hension, in the relation of the occasions of his owne, and his com∣pagnies captiuitie.
21. Besyd the former two surpassing benifits in forrain Con∣tryes, of innumerable Abbayes erected by our contrymen, and so many preachers planting and watering their dispositions to saluation, in all places whether they went, they also occasioned vniuersities to be erected; and among the rest it of Paris it selfe, and it of Pauie. My authors are no meaner then Sabellicus, Naucle∣rus, Ioannes Valensis, Gaguinus, and Polidorus. The two first in sentence and circumstance concurr, saying. Two men of monastical profession from Irland lauding in France with Merchands of Britanie; when others propown∣ded other Merchandize, they lowdly professed to be Merchands of learning, and wysdome. And being demanded, at what rate they whuld sell their wares; they awnswered for only intertaynement of meat and appareil. At lenght Charles the great duely informed of them, placed one (whose name was Claud Clement) in Paris. The other (who was called Iohn Scott) he directed into Italy to teach wysedome in Pauie. Who doth not euidently behould the singular deserts of most affectionat reciprocation, and spiri∣tual requitals exhibited by Irland to England, France, Italie, Germanie, Flandres, in the most beneficial maner that one nation could demerit an oher?
22. Thus farr, Contrymen Catholicks, haue I succinctly ouerronn many important relations, sufficiently manifesting the ruthfull ruine of our Contrye from so great bewtie, and flo∣rishing fame, to so great decaye, and obscuritie, by the multitude of our offences, that euen in perusing the euidence of them, yet we our selues in comparing them to the present calamitie of our sayd Contry, we staggre to condiscend, and incline to their

surance. The greatest exception against them can be noe other, en that diuers ancient authors did reproach our Contry with rbarietie, and especialy S. Hierome; with which, so floris∣ng doctrine, and deuotion might seeme not to haue con∣ted.
23. To which obiection I fynde two authentical awns∣wers by wryters of a thousand yeares antiquitie. The first is f Ionas disciple to S. Columban, saying: that nation,Ionas in v. S. Colum∣bani apud Sur. to. 6. Nou. 21. wanting in dede e lawes of other nations, was neuer the less florishing in the doctrin of Chri∣ian religion, so that it excelled all neighbour nations. The second is of alafrid Strabo, more pertinently, and pithily (although he former doth auoyd abundantly all brunt of the obiection, hewing that any barbarietie ther found, yf any weare, de∣inished not their religious pietie from being peculiar) be∣onging to the imputation, saying:VValafrid Straba in pref. v. S. Galli, apud Sur. 16. Octob. how horrible soeuer others haue ritten of the inhabitants of Irland, since the fayth of Christ came among em, is to be silenced. For wher synn abounded grace hath super abounded. So hat by the premisses Irland without odiouse ostentation is made otoriously comparable for antiquitie of religion with most of he formest, for stedfastnes with any of the firmest, for fer∣oure with the brightest Contrye now florishing in christia∣itie; in multitude of saincts peerles, by any soyle of lyke pacitie; in fructifying and florishing abrode and indebting ther Contryes by beneficious and officiouse functions, as for∣ward as any.
24. Nether haue I vsurped, borrowed feathers to adorne it s Horace his chowgh; but bene contented with the only propre nd natural plume. Therfor accepted not VVillibrord by graunt f Bruschius, or the catalogue of the abbots of Epternay; nor VVilli∣ald, VVinibald, and their sister VValpurg (although in Dublin ther is  church dedicated to hir mis named S. VVarborowes) by authoritie f Molanus; nor Boniface by authoritie of Trithemius, Molanus, Brussalus, latus; nor VVicbert, and his cōpagnions, by sondry authorities. True n dede it is, that many, or all of these, had their nurture in Irland, nd as others, receaued all their indowments, or ornamēts therin, wherby after they glorifyed God, and them selues: otherwyse, pon examination I accompt them not to haue bene of our Con∣ry. Thus much therfor to the honor, & glorie of God, be knowē, o discerne that our first Christianitie was repugnant to Purita∣isme, & conformable to Catholick Christianitie in the principal

perfection therof as now it is professed.
The second part, that Irland was the ould Scotland.25. Hauing studiously reuealed all thes former antiquities for your contentment, and confirmation, in your ancient, vniuersal, and conformable beleefe, singularly beloued Contrymen Catho∣licks; shal I refrayne from informing you, wherfor many of your blessed fore mētioned saincts are called Scots, which denomina∣tion you retayne no longer? yf I followed wholy their footsteps who ether in latin, or English, haue hitherto vnfoulded diuers parcells of your antiquities; I should also leape ouer this block, and impediment, without remouing it out of your way to know your owne, and when others wrongfully defeat you of your right: and do no more, then informe you, that some tyme you weare called Scots, without specifiyng whether alone, or how long so called or wherfor no longer. But hauing by long inquisi∣tion found out choise guydes, and being willing to aduenture on any iournie wherby I may right you in your cheefest glorie; that being lawfully intituled, and possessed therof, yow may remayne as in the inheritance no lesse of your predecessours goodnes, then of ther goods: will by the assistance of God proceede on this exa∣mination by the most compendiouse path that through the thic∣ket of ould antiquities shal lye open befor me.
26. First therfor I say that Irlād was the only knowē Scotlād til the destruction of Picts: which hapened after the yeare of Christ 800. For assuring wherof, I will follow two kynds of proofs. The first by allegations testifying in such maner Irland to haue bene the only knowen Scotland till that tyme, as in all monu∣ments of wryters befor this last 600. yeares, it is called Scotland without either limitation, or insinuation of any other els wher knowen; and also with some addition incompatible to any other Scotland afterwards so called: ether by being named together an Ilande, or by being specifyed not to be any parte of Britanie, but only neighbouring thereto: or lastly, by being expresly and indifferently applyed to Irland, as much as the very name of Irland it selfe. yea after the thousand yeare of our sauioure, it retayned the name of Scotland with a prerogatiue of being the greater Scotland and mother of the lesse. The second kynde of proofs shalbe of such as condemne and Confute the affirmers of any other Scotland els wher befor that tyme knowen.
27. Among all that euer penned any remembrance of Brita∣nical maters, (as Cesar, Propertius, Dio, Diodorus Siculus, Pomponius, Ptolo∣me,

Solinus, Tacitus, Eutropius, Spartianus, Capitolinus, Lampridius Vopisc, relius Victor, Herodianus, Procopius, and all others) not one of them ifyed any Scots in their tymes to haue dwelled in any parte of itanie, hauing occasion, and intention, to treat of the inhabi∣nts therof. Yea six hondred yeares after Christs incarnation,Hucbaldus in v. S. Lebuini apud Sur. 12. Nouemb. in e historie of S. Bertuinus, and in the prayer also or collect of S. nianus, when all the inhabitants of Britanie weare distinctly re∣arsed, and peculiarly prayed for,Del Rio in Octauian Senecae. Sedulius aequalis Pru∣dentio. Trithemius. in them also weare Britanian ots wholy omitted. Contrary wyse, Amianus who first, S. Hierome ho second, Sedulius and Prudentius coequals who thirdly, Claudia∣ and all othere after conformably, who mentioned the denomi∣tion of Scotland, and Scots; they euer attributed it, as I sayd, syno∣maly, or indifferently, to Irland, and Irish men, as much as the ve∣ name of Irland, and Irish men. Which in any wysdome, all wry∣rs as well ould as late, holy as prophan, forreiners as domesti∣l, would neuee haue done,S. Hieronimus in proem. 3. in Hieremiā. Erasmus ibid. Sedulius in ōnes epist. S. Pauli. Claudianus in 4. con∣sulatu Honorij & alibi S. Orosius lib. 1. pag. 20. S Isidorus lib 12 cap. 6 Hegesippus. l. 5. c. 15. Hucbald. loc. cit. yf ther had bene any wher els Scotlād,  Scots knowen.
28. Of the forsayd authors S. Hierome speaking of the Scotish tion, sayth, it was only in Britanorum vicinia, neighbouring vpon Bri∣nie. Sedulius tearming him selfe a Scot, put to it, Ibernensis, of Irland. audianus maketh Irland bewayle the disconfiture of Scots as the habitants therof: Scotorum tumulos fleuit glacialis Iberna, The death of ts, could Irland did lament. Agayne: totam cum Scotus mouit Ibernam. hen the Scot excited all Irland to warr. S. Orosius sayth; Irland is inhabited Scots. S. Isidore: Scotland is the same that Irland is; Scotland is the Iland next tanie. Hegesippus: Scotland is an iland remote from all other lande. Hucbald: Britanie Irland, otherwyse called Scotland adioyneth. Beda,Beda in hist. eccl. l 1 c. 1 Idem, in appēdice hist. Idem 13. Nouemb. & lib. 4. hist. c. 19. Aimoinus lib. 4 c. 100. Eginard. de Carolo Mag. Surius & Molanus 8. Maij. 1. Iulij. S. Bernard. in v. S. Ma∣lach. Cesarius lib. 12. c. 38. whose ver∣ct in a Britanian mater is irrefragable, wryting in the yeare of r lord 731. sayth: Irland is the propre contry of Scots; Scots inhabit Irland,  Iland neere Britanie; from Scotland he came into Britanie; Comming from land the Contry of Scots; &c. Aimoinus, and Eginardus: Irland the Iland of ots. Marianus: S. Kilian, a Scot, borne in Irland. Surius, and Molanus: Scot∣nd, which is called Irland, fertil Ilande of saincts. S. Bernard of the inha∣tante of Armach: we are Scots, and not French men. Cesarius: let them goe  Scotland, and enter S. Patricks purgatorie. I would inquyre, without ssion, of then that made ample volumes of Kings anh Contryes, arrs and triumphes, marriages and genealogies, peace and wes, liues and deathes of other Scotlands, and Scots: did they inke in their consciences, yf any such had bene, had not so lear∣d, so diligent, so familiar historians in Britanian maters, found 

them out? Yf they had found them out, had they omitted them?  they had omitted them, had they so confused conceits as to nam Irland indifferently for Scotland, and contrary wyse, without in∣timation of any other Contry so called? This age is to sharp-sigh¦ted not to discerne the futilitie and friuolousnes of such forge narrations as are founded vpon mis conceited dreames.
Gildas, Beda, Polido∣rus, Hluidus, Camden &c.29. But obserue, for full instruction in this controuersie, tha in all places of Britanie ther weare first only Britons, or walsh∣men, inhabitants; of whom fewer, and meaner dwelled in the northren partes, by means of greater sterilitie then in the residue Which northren parts weare often euen from Iulius Cesa tyme infested,Panegyricus. and molested by pyratical irruptions of Irishmen. Thes Irishmen, for causes by none so probablye as by Camde specifyed,Camden de Chrono∣graphica descriptione Britanie, & Insula∣rum adiacentium, à fol. 55. deinceps. Im∣press. Francofard. an. 1590. not long after, weare also called Scots. And not long after such name, wherof Amianus (as is befor affirmed) made th first mention, ther came into Irland out of Scithia a people called Picts, and requested the Scots or Irishmen to admitt them to dwell in their dominion. Awnswer was made, that the Iland could not contayne bothe: neuer the less they would aduise then to attempt the Northren desolat parts of Britanie, and to con¦quer habitation to them selues.Beda in hist. l. 1. c. 1. And yf resistance would be made they would second them with strong assistance, and plant then maugre all aduersaries in thos seats. The Picts feercely inuaded those parts, and by succession of tyme purchased them.
Ibid. cap. 12.30. The Britons oft inuoked succours from the Romains against their violence. From whom a legion was sent vnto the twyse, by which they repelled their enemyes, and placed the wall (the ruyns wherof to this day are named the Picts wall) to de∣fend them against their furie, which wal in Seuerus his tyme wa extended from the place wher now Dumberton standeth, to the Firth that entreth into Edinburg; and in Hadrians tyme, fro Selwey Firth, to the place wher Barwick now standeth. For the proceedings of the Picts did ebb, and flow, according to the diuer¦sitie of occasions; till at lenght the Romains pestered with other warrs,Pomponius Letus de anno 22. Valentiniani. Paulus Diac. l. 24. sub finem. Beda l. 1. hist. c. 14. & lib. de natura tempo∣rum vbi de Theodosio iuniore. forlorned the Britons to their owne defense: by whe slacknes, and discords, the Picts anno Domini 446. quietly inioye all that was beyond the forsayd walls: which befor they had only wasted, and vexed, by yearly incursions. The Irishmen, or Sco with their Spoyles returned according their custome into Irland leauing the Picts the second inhabitants now of Britani

mong other captiues by the Scots or Irishmen transported est∣ons into Irland, (for as I sayd it was their annual employment  inuade the Britons) they purchased the most happie bootie that her Irland had, our blessed Apostle S. Patrick;Genes. 41. who as Ioseph to Egipt, was to Irland, a prisoner procuring them libertie, and lyfe. is woords befor promised, I found in a hand written historie of is lyfe in our librarie of Douaye, while I ransaked all libraries in y waye for our Contryes antiquities; wherby bothe his men∣oned instructiō, & his Captiuitie, and the place of habitation or etrayt of the Scots, are euidently notifyed, in maner following.
31. This was the cause of his first peregrination into Scotland.Vita Manuscripta S. Patricij in bibliotheca patrum Societatis Iesu Duaci. The armie of cots when it often sayled into Britanie tooke many Captiues. Then was he seuen ares ould. But it is more probable to my thinking, which he him selfe sayth in e bookes of a Bishop. VVhē I was ledd Captiue I was almost 15. yeares ould. For  was vnmyndfull of the true God, and was transported Captiue into Irlād with  many thousand persons according our deserts. By which we departed from God nd did not keepe his cōmandements, and despised our preists who preached to vs luation. And ther God opened the senses of our incredulitie, that though late we uld remembre our offenses and be conuerted to him. I dayly fedd catle, and ften prayed each day, and the loue, feare, and fayth of God, increased in me, in  muche that dayly, and nightly, I prayed à hondred tymes. I remayned in woods d mountaynes, and was rayfed to prayer, in mists, frosts, and rayne. Nether as Islack therto, but as now I perceaue, then was I feruent. I obserued certayne rmonious vnknowen spirits in me. Thus farr his owne words brea∣ing a venerable antiquitie, and holy simplicitie.
32. The Picts being established in Britanie, anno 446.Beda in hist. l. 1. c. 1. Ioan. Maior in hist. Scotica lib. 1. c. 11. (who be∣re as Beda sayth, anniuersarias praedas trans maria, milite nullo sistente, cogere solebaut, accustomed to take yearly booties ouer he sease, no souldiors being to resist them) desyred to haue wiues ut of Irland: for they had none in their compagnie. The confede∣tion betwixt them purchased, that their request was accorded nto, cōditionalie that their princes should be chosen sooner from he mothers syde, then the fathers. The Picts condiscēded therto,  faythfully obserued it. Amōg these wiues, their kinred, fostrers, quaintance resorted into the Picts contry, & although in small umbers, yet they became the third inhabitāts of Britanie; but so  they remayned fee farmers to the Picts into whose dominion ey came. Both nations thus cōioyned being more distrustfull to e Britōs; they inuoked the Saxōs, English,Beda loc. cit. cap. 15. & other Germain na∣ōs, to their succours. These of defēders, became offēders, & vsur∣ped

all the choise part of the lande to thēselues, hauing first pligh∣ted a leag with the Picts. Of frendshipp also made with the Sco dwelling amōg the Picts, the same may be imagined, by means of their cōsociation with thē; who otherwyse, for their late coming into Britanie & small numbre, are not by authors once mētioned.
Beda in historial. 3. c. 433. In the yeare 565. S. Columb Kille sayled into the Picts pro∣uince, and conuerted the Northren part of them, and of them re∣ceaued to him, and his successors, the Iland of Hye, now called Mula. This also was an occasion, why many Scots passed into those parts.Beda lib. 1. hist. c. 1. After a whyle Edan (who is by Beda called Reuda, of the composition Rye, and Eda, signifying King Eda, and in latin is called Edanus) sonn of Gabrahan sayled as I take it in the yeare 603 into Britanie, with a puissant armie, and what by force what by fauor, intruded among the Picts, and is therfor sayd to be the con∣querour that first planted Scots in Britanie; to witt out of all su∣biection of others. Which Iocelin she weth to haue bene fore pro∣phecied by S. Patrick in these words.Iocelinus Monachus Furnensis, in vita S. Patricij, cap. 137. Of his linadge proceeded the most couragious Edanus, sonn of Gabrahan, who subdued Scotland which is now called Albanie, and Ilands bordering therto, in which his successiue posteritie remay∣neth. The subduing of Scotland called Albanie is imputed vnto him, by his attempting it first, and planting them by whom it was done long after, as the begyning of Rome is imputed to Aeneas who dyed long befor it was begon.
34. The name of Edanus, the circumstance of tyme, and of all things els, as his powerful strength, and the rest, do command me to thinke this to be the Edan King of Scots that inhabited Brita∣nie,Beda in hist. lib. 1. c. 34. who assaulted Edelfrid King of Northumberland, Motus eius pro∣fectibus, only for emulation of his prosperitie, more aduentourouslie, the prosperously. For being repulsed with great losse, nether he; nor any of his progenie after, sayth Beda, returned into Britanie against the English nation, vnto the tyme that Beda did wryte his histo∣rie. Wherby also appeareth, that the first King mentioned of the Britanian Scots, and all the rest following, dwelled out of Brita∣nie, and consequently in Irland, (for other Kingdome of Scots, ye or princely prouince, or place fit for their Kings, nether euer was by ancient author, nor by new can be named) the rather that Bed telleth how the Picts recouered into libertie the land of their possession,Beda ibid. l. 4. c. 26. which the English and Scots that weare in Britanie, and part of the Britons possessed, which hetherto they inioye toward 46. yeares. Wherby is first apparent, the Scots to haue come after the Picts into Britanie and into

ir parts only. Picti secundum veram historiam ante Scotos in Britania.  Picts, (cōfesseth Iohn Maior lib, 1. c. x.) according to the true historie, e befor the Scots in Britaine. Next the Picts not to haue had the et inheritance in Britanie befor the yeare of our Sauiour rist 446. Thirdly King Edan, or in the Irish tong Rye Eda, or da, not to haue florished befor the yeare 603. and to haue bene e first guid of multituds of Scots into Britanie. Lastly the Picts haue soone after recouered their whole dominions, into their ne iurisdiction.
35. Thes all putt together, we may also assuredly suppose, at neuer King of Scots had any dominion peculiarly named otland, in Britanie, whils the Picts had Kings, and as Beda sayth; d he that adioyned the Epitome to his historie;Beda l. 3, c. 4. Epitome historie An∣glorum in fine. potentissimos re∣ & tyrannos, most mightie Kings, and Tyrants, to the yeare of Christ 765. herfor it was no meruayle, that S. Rumuld sonn to Dauid King Scots, bishope of Dublin, liuing anno 750. was called sonn of h King of Scots, notwithstanding he was an Irishman,Ioan. Domins de vita S. Rumuldi, Molanus de natalibus VValt. Carthus. Hect. Boeth. ther ing no wher els any Kings of Scots till after the destruction of cts: Nether also among the Britanian Scots, was ther any cal∣d Dauid, to the yeare of Christ 1129. So coherent is trueth to it fe, and to all monuments of vnsuspitious authors, in our be∣lfe. The same shalbe concluded against our aduersaries out of eir owne chronicles in thes verses.
Primus in Albanis fertur regnasse Kenedus
Filius Alfini prelia multa gerens.Ioan. Maior in hist. Scotica lib. 2. c. vlt.
Expulsis Pictis regnauit is octo bis annis.
Fame sayth, First Alban King was Keneth stowt,
Alfins Martial sonn, who Picts shutt out:
He raigned sixten yeares without all doubt.
36. This destruction of Picts, or rather extirpation,Hect. Boeth. (for the ots vtterly abolished their name and of spring) hapening about e yeare of Christ, 846. and Kenedus being professed in the Alba∣an or Britanian Scotish Chronicles, to be the first Albanian otish King dwelling in Albanie; it may be accompted an infal. le rule, that vntill that tyme, at least, the Scotish name belon∣d only to Irland. For to testifie an vnion of the Britanian Scots ith Irishmen, they named their purchase the lesser Scotland, as e Spaynards denominated their purchase in America, noua His∣nia, Hispaniola &c. new Spayne; and litle Spayne &c. Therfor, for they had purchased their dominion, the name of Scots be∣longed

alone to the Irish, the belonging to whom of the Albanian Scots them selues, being the cause why it was brought into Bri∣tanie, and by the Irish permitted to remayne theirin, to testifie them to haue bene one only people befor, and then first separated rather by distance of place, then affections. For betwixt both nations ther hath bene, and still remayneth, a natural concord, and consociation.
37. The sainctitie of both Irish, and Scotish, appertayning to our contry at least till after 840. yeares, as is pregnantly demon∣strated; what wrong to Irland is it of late Albanian wry∣ters, to wreast, and distort testimonies of wryters in this maner?Georgius Thomsonus in suo libello de anti∣quitate Christianae re∣ligionis apud Scotos. yf they say Columbanus to haue bene an Irish man: their meaning is, that he was only of the mountain part of the lesser Scotland. Yf they say Kilian came out of Irland: their meaning to haue bene, yea their wordes, he came out of some Ilāde of this Scotlād. Haue not such perfidious glosses made all strangers, and others, to accompt their wrytings but meere philopatrial forgeries; and to haue taken our defense generaly against them? The rule then a forspoken is vniuersal, that whersoeuer any Scot is mentioned befor the forsayd tyme;S. Bernardus in v. S. Malachie. Decretal. de dolo & contumacia cap. cum olim. Caesarius lib. 12. c. 38. Fr. Malachias Mino rita de veneno pecca∣tum cap. xi. he could be noe other then an Irishman. When many also, long after, be so called, without other diuersitie, the doubt of them to be vncertayne, till after the tyme that Irland reiected that name. For S. Bernard, the ould edition of the Canon law, Cesarius, Mala∣chias Minorita, doe referr the name of Scotand to our Contry 400. yeares, after the fatal ruine of the Picts.
38. Therfor, Albanian Scots doe lose their paynes, and credit, in repyning that all forsayd Scots weare belonging to Irland. S. Bryde or Brigida wilbe an Irish Virgin, as long as the volu∣mes, and wrytings of all Martyrologes, of Beda, Marianus, Sigebertus, Isingrenas, Capsgrauius, S. Bernard, Genebrard, Baronius, and of the histo∣ries of S. Patrick, S. Ethkin, S. Laurence, and of hir selfe, be vnburned, or vnburied, S. Columbanus wilbe ane Irishman, while the monu∣mente of Ionas VValafridus, all martyrologes, the liues of S. Kilian, of S. Rumuld, Beda, Sigebert, Trithemius, Vincent, Antonin, Vsuard, Volateran, Mermanius, Molanus, Bosius, Baronius, VVion, Bernard, yea Bale, or Camden, beare any reputation. So will S. Fiacre, yf Surius, Clictouaeus, Hareus, Gazetus, Molanus, and ecclesiastical hymnes, be of greater reputation, then some out-cryed, or Horned Hector, Thomson, or the like, without all proofe or probabilitie auerring Bardical fictions. Among which a forsayd hymnes, it of S. Fiacre contayneth.

Lucernae nouae specula
illustratur Ibernia
illa misit Fiacrium.
Irlands high tower is bright
with a new shyning light,Clictouen de hymnis Ecclesiasticis.
it sent Feach man of might.
And so in lyke maner of all others (whether ould or late, sacred r prophane, frēds or foes, domestical or forreiners, general or par∣icular wryters, or rules, be allowed) the former rule is out of all controuersie, that howsoeuer any Scots be graunted to haue in nnual incursions troubled Britanie, in few numbers (and vnder ubiection of Picts, till the Picts weare razed out of being, & me∣morie) inhabited Britanie; yet that they transferred not the King∣dome of Scotland, and name of Scots from Irland, till, and after the forsayd destruction of Picts. Thus much without offending any  for allthough ther be much against preiudicated suppositions, yet the reuelation of trueth deserueth thankfull acception of eue∣ry one, it being a singular benifit to depriue any of errours) be de∣clared, to the honor of God, glorie of his Saincts, and confort of my Contrymen Catholicks.
39. These premisses considered, giue you your selues, as now a lawfull impaneled, & well instructed Iurie, your verdict of these wordes of M. Rider in his pretended frendly Caueat to your sel∣ues. That fayth which can be proued to be taught in Christs tyme,M. Rider in the 34. numbre of his Caueat. and so re∣eaued and continued in the primatiue Church for the first fiue hundred yeares after Christs ascension, must needs be the true, ancient, Apostolical and Catho∣ick fayth. And that other fayth that can not be so proued, but base, bastard, and counterfet. Censure I say, and award, my deere Contrymen, whe∣ther the fayth of your anciēt Mōcks, Heremits, Pilgrims, vowed Virgins, Prelats, Preists, or the puritan fayth be most ancient, most receaued, and continued in the primatiue Church; Since that now you vnderstand S. Patrick your Apostle to haue bene a monck, and his disciples no lesse, and in their profession, of confes∣sed singular holines, and learning. Censure I say agayne, whether his owne fayth be not by him selfe confessed to be base, bastard and counterfeit, not which erecteth Abbayes, but subuerteth them; not which inricheth ornaments of Gods seruice & Chur∣ches, but which turneth them into breches, cushions, & curteins; Not which imployeth plate, and iuwels, to the vse of Pixes and Chalices, but which conuerteth these into swilling bowles. Not which renteth cloisters and hospitals, but which in riote and li∣centiousnes consumeth their reuenues.
l. 7. hist. c. 12.40. To this ende I haue carefully, and curiously, layd open your owne ātiquities, that by your owne predecessors, you might know your professions antiquitie, and iudge your owne cause ac∣cordingly. Sozomenus relateth a prudēt fact of Theodose Emperor, who perceauing heresies plentifully to aryse, he summoned their cheefe patrons. They being assembled, he demanded: what thinke you, my masters, our first teachers of Christianitie, did they hould the trueth, or noe? were they godly, and honest, or noe? It was avnswered, that they held the trueth, and were godly. Why then, quoth he, let vs examin your doctrin and theirs, your liues and theirs: and yf we fynd them conformable, you shalbe, and your doctrin, imbraced; otherwyse you must be sup∣pressed. Therby they weare in dede suppressed. You (Contrymen Catholicks) may demand the same, of them, and vs. Whom you fynde cōformable to your first teachers, them imbrace; the others eschue, and detest.
Galat. 1.9. 1. Ioan. 2.24.41. Wheras therfor S. Paul aduiseth vs, Yf any preach otherwyse then as we haue receaued, to hould him accursed; & S. Ihon, what we haue heard from the begyning to walke in the same, because many seducers are gone into the world: our first preachers, and preaching being manifested vnto vs; shal we for pelfe and trash of the world, for honors, for lyfe, for death,Luc. 9. & 11. Mat. 11. Mar, 8. (Christ saying to vs that yf we be ashamed to confess him befor men, that he also wilbe ashamed to confess vs befor his heuenly father, and angels) be either trayned, or terrifyed, from our ancient professiō, to pro∣fess this new, as yet not fashioned, and vnder the stampe; all shapes that hitherto it hath shewed, dislyking the forgers them selues, and degusting the followers.
Twelue duble reasons to be constant Catho∣licks.42. First our ould profession, that auerreth all scriptures from Christs tyme accompted Canonical, for the profession that dis∣membreth whole volumes, depraueth more, reiecteth all that it  dislyketh vpon priuat,Scripturs. and partial iudgment? 2. It that imbra∣ceth  without exception all articles of the Apostles Crede, for it which denyeth Christs discension,The Crede of the Apo∣stles. the Catholick Church, the communion of saincts, the forgiuenes of synns? 3. It which iusti∣fyeth  and obserueth all Apostolical traditions,Traditions. for it which abhor∣reth  the very name of them? 4. It which consenteth to exposi∣tions of scripture allowed by all ancient fathers,Fathers and Doctors. and primatiue  Doctors, for it which standeth only to selfe vnderstanding? 5. It which remayneth in the doctrine of two hondred & twelue cō∣senting Councils,Councils. for it which neuer had Council, or Cōuenticle,

concordant? 6. It which hath sanctifying Sacraments, and opera∣ing  saluation, for it which hath but simple signes,Sacraments sancti∣fying. friuolouse fi∣gurs, and senseles shaddowes? 7. It which hath a substantial and  piritual sacrifice, and sensible worshiping of God,Sacrifice of the lamb of God. by a heuenly blatiō of the very Sauior of mankynde, for it which disclaymeth veritie, substance, and sustenance of such diuine and immaculat amb, and his holy institution? 8. It which hath Prelats, and preists,Prelats, and preists. Hebr. 5.2. Num. 16.3. separated frō the rest, according to Gods sacred worde, to offre gifts, and sacrifices for offences, for it which with Core, Dathan, and Abiron affirmeth, that all the multitude is equaly sanctifyed toward those functions? 9.Obedience to Princes. It which commendeth and commandeth obedience  to Princes, and Magistrats, not only for policie, but also for con∣science sake, for it which wher it can preuayle, trampleth autho∣ritie, trubleth dominions, denyeth all other tribut then stroakes, and canon shott? 10. It which practiseth,Gods commandements and works of charitie. and professeth Gods  commandements, as easie, and delytsome, for it which fayth they are impossible, and not belonging to Christians? 11. It which hath  a visible Church, vniuersal for tyme and place,A Visible Churche. conformable first and last, inuincible against infidels, hereticks, yea or deuils, for it wich as a Platonical Idea, or poetical chimera is forged in the ayre, particular, dissentiouse, perishing? 12. It that hath florished in  Apostles, Euangelists, Martyrs, Confessor, Virgins,Communion of saints. and is holpen by them, for it that derydeth, and blasphemeth them, and deface their remembrances? O tymes! ô maners! what monstruouse ab∣surdities haue you bred, that a Christian mynde should once stand in consultation whether syde to Gods Church or heresies syna∣gogue he should cleaue, and adhere?
43. But I satisfie my selfe, that you are sufficiently informed, and acquainted, of and in the controuersie betwixt vs, and that yf you be not wittingly miscaryed, you fynde his frēdly caueat a ve∣nimouse kisse from sugred lipps; a wolueishe hypocrisie vnder a lambs contenance;Gen. 3.5. 2. reg. 20. 10. Iosue 9. Isa. 28. a cruel wound vnder pretext of a charitable medicine; a serpentin narration to Adame and Eua; a Ioabs saluta∣tion to Amasa; a Gabaonit to Iosue and the Israelits, counterfeting as the Gabaonits did a remot antiquitie; and brefly as the prophet sayth one protecting him selfe, and putting his hope in an vn∣trueth. God of his infinit goodnes, and according the multitude of his miserations, inspire you to vnderstand the trueth, inflame you to follow it, and fortifie you to remaine, & perseuer in it. Amen.

