


NObles and Gentlemen: Please yee to peruse the Chronicles of this Realme, you may therein reade of many your famous and worthy Progenitors, who (some of them by Valour; the rest, by Wisedome and their other vertues) haue growen great in So∣uereignes fauour, been preferred to high Place in Common wealth, liued and died in much glorie; leauing an ouer-plus of honour and dignitie (by many descents) to you their children. The consideration hereof may, and (I doubt not) wil, incite and egge you on (who are already well en∣tred the way) to tread the same steps of honour, by imitating those your worthy Ancestors in their vertuous actions. For, your tender yeeres are

not ignorant, that The readiest way to get (and surest to hold) true honour, is to deserue it; and (consequently) that Vertue onely, which first be∣gan Nobilitie, must still maintaine it: whereas, contrariwise, by degenerate and base conditions, many forfeit their Nability, ere they come at it. For, who knowes not, that Nobilitie, without Ʋertue, is but apocryphate Gentry? and that, therefore, as it began in vertuous Ancestors; so it endeth in their wicked progenie. We see, The strongest wine becomes the sharpest vineger: and, The most Noble, by nature, are made most vile by negligence. Of which Ranke and sort, are chief∣ly such as hold learning in scorne, and the attai∣ning of knowledge not worth the while. In re∣proofe of whom, truely and eloquently was it (long since) written by M. Ascham; The fault is in your selues, ye Noble-mens sonnes (and therefore ye deserue the greater blame) that commonly the meaner mens children come to be the wisest Counsailors, & greatest doo∣ers in the weighty affaires of this Realme: and why? For, God will haue it so by his proui∣dence; because yee will haue it no otherwise by your negligence. And againe, It grieueth me to say (but it helpeth not to hide) what e∣uery

man sees; Tis seldome seene, that the sonne of an excellent man prooues excellent. I graunt, that in excellent men, Nature must frame the chiefest parts: but learning addeth a further ornament, groundeth a deeper iudgement, and formeth perfection, and excellencie, in shor∣ter time. The best learned are best aduised. And, No man is deceiued, but in those things whereof he is ignorant. In a word: What soeuer may bee saydin dispraise of Ignorance, is the praise of Learning and Knowledge. Wherefore, I trust, your Honours, and the rest, wil thinke it as great shame (which also are M. Aschams words) to be valiant and Courtly without Learning, as to be studious and bookish without Valour. My seruent prayers, to almighty God, shall be so to direct your generous hearts to the studie of good literature, with the loue of vertue and true valour, that you alwayes (not onely in time of this your tender youth) may be found meete Gen∣tlemen to attend so worthy a Prince. Remem∣ber, I beseech you, the Poesies borne in some of your honourable Ensignes; Vero nihil verius. Virtutis comes Inuidia. Serò, sed seriò: And neuer forget the most worthy saying of that thrice honourable late Senatour; Corvnum, via

vna. These Mottoes, well imprinted in youth, will bring honour to olde age. Which the God of heauen and earth make you all partakers of in the present, and possessors in the future; and the same, after many yeeres, to be permanent in the heauens, for euer.

