



TWo yeares (right wor∣shipfull) and somewhat more are now expired, since I, vpon the appearing of a blasing Starre in the South west, the 10. of Nouember 1577. presented vnto you a generall doc∣trine touching that matter. Which worke if it shall please you at your leasure to conferre with the euents that haue insued, you will say that the translation was necessarie, and the publishing not vnprofitable.
A learned and expert man commorant and abiding in this Citie, comparing the ef∣fects following that Comet, with the signifi∣cations aforegoing, & finding them strange, wonderfull, and memorable, thought it not amisse to commit a matter of such impor∣tance to the consideration of his natiue Countrie, in a breefe treatise called by the

name of (A view of euents &c.) wherin he de∣ciphereth such issues within the compasse of one yeare, namely, from Nouember 1577. to Nouember 1578, as are not superficially, but aduisedly to be noted. Which woorke of his worthie the reading, because I am sure your worshippe hath seene and perused, (as no booke can escape your hands, if it sauour of learning and iudgement) I passe ouer with a bare remembrance.
So (Right Worshipfull) the late Earth∣quake which happened the 6. of April, about 6. of the clocke in the Euening 1580. to the astonishment of the inhabitants of this Citie dispersed in sundrie places for their recrea∣tion, set me (as many more) a musing: and tossing a thousand thoughtes in my head, I founde in my selfe a quicker inclination to wonder at Gods workes, than to write the o∣pinions of mans wit. Staied neuerthelesse at last, it was my lucke, looking among such bookes as I haue, not manie in number, nor great in value, to light vpon a discourse so fit for the time, that I thought I should high∣ly honour God, and doe great good to this lande, if I vndertooke the translation of the same.
Persuaded herevnto in the ende, I did mine endeuour, with all diligence, to bring my businesse about: and still finding, as I went forwarde, the worke both weightie and worthie: besides that, so apt for this our age, as if it had bene penned of purpose vpon our late Easter Earthquake: I lost no labour, and

spent no time, till I had done my taske, which growne to some bignesse, as your worship seeth, I finished in fewe daies space, and pro∣cured the same to be presently printed.
Perfourmed therefore, I am bolde, vpon hope of your wonted fauour, to make it de∣dicatorie vnto your worship: the rather, be∣cause the generall doctrine of Blasing stars, of my rude translation, was published two yeares past vnder your protection: and this of Earthquakes, of the same Authours pen∣ning, and my homely Englishing, doth not craue choice of a newe Patrone.
Which that it will please you to accept, with no lesse encouraging countenance, than you haue vouchsafed my former trauelles: though I suspect not the contrarie, yet to be∣seech you it is my bounden dutie. Praieng al∣mightie God to lengthen your worships life, with increase of health, strength, wealth, wor∣ship, & whatsoeuer may make you fortunate: and when the date of your dwelling here on earth is don, to garnish you with the garland and garment of glorie, in heauen his owne habitation: where you may, to the fulfilling of all perfect happines, behold the face of Ie∣sus Christ, by whose bloud all true belee∣uers are put in possession of that vnspeakable bles∣sednesse.

