


SIR:
AS you take-notice of this happiness and blessing of God upon you to bee the Heir of this great & wor∣thie Family; so take-no∣tice also (I beseech you) of the true cause of that worth and greatness of your An∣cestors, and imitate them ther-in: and then, inheriting their worth, together with their wealth, you shall also most undoubtedly enrich your selfe with the obsequious at∣tendance and hearty affection of your na∣tive Countrimen; and so grow in Grace and Favour with God and Man.
Your Noble Progenitours have bin fa∣mous for their Pietie to God; for they were alwaies noted to be zealous in Reli∣gion. They have bin renowned for their Loialtie to their Soveraigne, for they were alwaies of great and high Commission, many of them being ex intimis Regum Con∣siliis. They have alwaies bin much ho∣noured of their Country, for their great care of the Publique Good and Welfare ther∣of: which, as occasions required, they did manifest, sometimes by their Valour, thogh it were to hazard the loss of Life or Li∣ving: sometimes by their Wisdome and Jn∣tegrity; in so much that weighty causes in difference have bin by the Parties consent referred to their sole Arbitration: some∣times by their Lenity, for this was their an∣ciēt Motto, & revived by the last of your name, Posse, & nolle, Nobile: and alwayes by their great Hospitalitie, upon which

to their great Renowne and Glory, they yearly spent the greatest part of their Re∣venues.
All these, with many such, lived toge∣ther with your Predecessors, & whiles they lived, were the Life of their fame & worth. And, let me tell you Sir, there is an expec∣tation (the tedious Monthes of your Mi∣noritie being worn-out) of their reviving, and, together with your Person, of their keeping residence in some or other of your Mansions. God enable you with such a competency of Gifts and Graces as you may satisfie expectation.
I speake not thus out of doubtfull fear, but in officious love: for since it pleased the Divine Providence when you were baptized to use the hand of my Ministery for the receiving of you into the Church: (I living then in your worthy Fathers house, who never entertained any other

Chaplain, but mine unworthy selfe) and sith I live still in statu quo, as your Father placed me; me thinks the same Providence leads me by the hand to doe some service for you, now when his Majesty the King sends you so timely into the Common∣wealth, by gracing you Honoris onere, with the dignity of Knight-Baronet, and by tru∣sting you Onoris honore, with the command of some of his Forces for the Countries de∣fence.
My prayer is that you may walk worthy of the severall Callings wher-unto you are called: and my desire is to doe something for you to further you therein. For which purpose I have presumed to present you with this History, though weakly contri∣ved, yet strongly warranted: for it hath the undoubted truth of God for its autho∣rity. Wher-in I endevour to let you see your selfe in your triple estate: for it doth

not praedicare de uno Homine in specie indi∣viduo, but de singulis Hominibus in toto ge∣nere Humano: and is verified particularly in everie One, being cursed or blessed in their imitation of it.
It will advertise you to take-heed, that you give no way to Naturall Inclinations, but as you finde them renued by Grace: and to stop your ears against the buzzings of fawning Sycophants, which (life flesh-flies that corrupt sweet ointments) alwaies breathe infection: and serpent-like never insinuate but for secret mischievous ends. God give you the Spirit of Wisdome to dis∣cern, and the Grace of Zeale to detest, illud pessimum hominum genus.
In a word, it will (I hope) helpe to di∣rect you, how to recover the perfection of pure Nature; how to get-out of the mise∣rie of corrupt Nature; and how to attaine to the fruition of that super-naturall Feli∣citie

that the world cannot apprehend.
Many Tractates, I confess, you may finde tending to these ends; but all that I have seene, are meerly indicative; teaching onlie by instruction; wher-as this is exem∣plarie, and teacheth by demonstration: and therefore though they may be more pun∣ctuall and pithie, yet I am sure this is more plaine, I trust not unpleasant. God give grace to make them all profitable.
If this shall further you but one step to∣wards any of those ends, either for your mortification or vivification, (a double work, but must be singlie performed by you, and by all that intend to save their soules) I shall rejoice in my paines; and you, I trust, be encouraged to press-on towards the mark set-before you, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
This is the maine thing that you have to doe in this world: without which you

shall neuer here deserue the Happiness you have, nor ever hereafter attaine to the Happinesse you desire. Your Riches, Ho∣nour, the Favour of this VVorld, these were the desert of your Ancestours, which out-lived their Persons, and are now cast upon you their undoubted Heir to make you worldly happy. But it is Religion, and the love and practise of Religion onely in the exercise of vertuous, and pious actions that can bring you to deserve this temporall Happiness, and assure you to enherite that which is immortall.
Thus commending these broken lines to your acceptance, and your selfe to the Grace in Christ Iesus; I humbly take my leave, and rest

