



ILlmo Sr mio, co∣noscèndo che si come il chjaro Sole coiraggi svoi (règolamente girando,) rende splendore á tutto il circojto de la tèrra. Cosi S. E. con la sua grande Liberalitá, Virtú, e Cor∣tesia porge luce á tutta la Nobilta di nostra eta∣de. Le qval cose consi∣derate da me, Ossermo Sr mio, mi hanno mosso ad Intitolar qvesta mia piccjola opera á la Benignita de la S. Cle∣mētia, la qval conosco èsser vero refugio, e recapito di chi, cō tutto l'intrinsico del cuore vi ama, e desidera. Massime per èssere io uscito de le viscere di chi v' é stato fedel, e divoto Vassallo, e per consegvente essendo io restato Sucessore de la medesima servitú, e divotione: vorrèi pjacendo cosi alla E. V. èsser nel numero de qvelli che con perfétto amore vi servono. E percjó Sr. mio tira∣to

dala bvona vlontá, non hó voluto mancare con il mio debil' ingegno, di compjucer á certi Gentil' hvomini mjèi amici, ch' ogni gjorno mi stimulavano di darli in luce alcuni motti, o vo∣gliamo dir Proverby, con certo parlar familiare: á modo di Dia∣logo, da poter imparar tanto la Lingva Italiana, qvanto la In∣glese, e che tutte dua le Natione pottessero alqvanto prevaler∣sene. Longo stètti sospeso manzi che to volessi farlo. Ma alla fine lo feci: ma ben giudico, e ne son cèrto che molti ci saranno che vorrán tassar, e bjasimar detta opera: Forse pju per igno∣ranzia, che altrimenti. Qvesto lo dico, & lo posso affermare, che simil' Lingve ree son sèmpre pju pronte per dir mal, che bene: e non si curano bjasimar l' altrui fatiche, essendo simili a la Vi∣pera, che si pasce co 'l suo proprio veleno; cosi son qvesti. Má non importa. Perche mi confido in qvelli che con maturo giudicjo considereranno la bvona volunta del operatore di essa: e forse la troveranno degna di ésser letta, e notata, non havendo io studj∣ato pjú che tanto. Adunqve Signore mio, non men Gjusto che Virtvoso, il qvalsete un chjaro Sole fra molte Stelle, e unica Rosa tra le Spine, io non dubito ponto come S. E. abbja visto 'l mio bvon animo, e conoscjuto il corso del mio intènto, che ella agradirá l' opera, e non rigvaderá al piccjol dono: Ma si bene al bvon animo del povero Donatore (che é grandissimo) e considerereto che si come in piccjol Mappa si contjène la gran fabrica di tutto 'l mondo: et in piccjol circojto la effigje del pjú gran Cesare. Cosi in qvesta piccola operetta é compresa la vera figura, et effigje del mio bvon volere. Sarete dunqve S. mio contento, concederemi il suo favore, e luce (contra la invidja, e tènebre di coloro che per la oscurit á delle lor mente si sforzano scurar le fatiche altrui) Con speranzá che la Bonta S. non si sdegnera di adempir qvesto mio desidèrio. Accjó he io, e altri studiosi intelètti, alettati da qvesta S. Benignitás' ingegnino con pjú lodevol stu∣dio di produr in luce altri pju soavi frutti, e di utilitá maggiore, in tanto bascjando con la bocca del animo, la virtuosa mano della,

Sua non mai a bastanza lodata S. prego nostro Signor Iddio, per ogni sua Gloria, Felicita, e Contènto, e che lei tènghi la mia Servitú nella sua Memoria, 'nella qual vorrèi che vi∣vesse tanto, qvanto ne la mia viveranno le sue rare, e alte Vir∣tú. Alle qvale per sèmpre, etin tutto per tutto mi Dèdico, Dispo∣no, et Offerisco.

Di Londra á di. 10. Agosto. 1578.




RIght Honorable, when (at the earnest re∣quest of diuers Gentilmen my entire friendes,) I had for there recreation, and priuate exercise, drawen out certaine commō que∣stions, and ordinarie aun∣sweres together with di∣uers Prouerbes, Senten∣ces, and Golden sayinges, vsed as well in Italian as English, & therwithall collected, and translated out of sun∣dry the best Italian authours, with certaine necessarie rules for Englishmen to attaine to the perfection of the Italian tongue, and for Italians to learne the pronountiation of our Englishe. They would needes, (though sore against my will) haue it put foorth in Print, but I (Right Honorable) considering the great, and manifolde inconueniences he hasardes himselfe vnto, that committeth any thing to the open vewe of all men, hauing no worthy Mecoenas to de∣fend him against the malignant, ready backebiters, along while I rested as confused, and troubled in minde, not kno∣wing whom to finde sufficient, to defende mee from such inconueniences. At last calling to remembrance, the No∣blenesse of your Honours minde, I chose you (although presumptuously done of mee) as a sufficient rampier to shield me from the battery of such venemous tongues. For

knowing by experience your continuall delight in setting foorth of good letters, and earnest zeale in maintaining of languages, I did as it were perswade with my selfe that few or none woulde attempt, (remembring your Honour) to set, or whet their carping tongues against it, although my great presumption doo partly merit it. Yet at the last I en∣couraged my selfe in your Honours name to send this little pamphlet abroade, hoping that your Honour wil not one∣ly with curteous acceptation beholde this foolishe, & fond attempt of mine, with your bodely eyes, but also consider of it with your inward eye of discretion, and not weigh the gift giuen by the giuers hart, though too base a gifte to come to your Honours hand, too rude a worke for you to reade, and too too vnripe, sower, and vnsauerie fruites for your Honour to take a tast of, yet notwithstanding such as they be I giue them to you, as a token and zealous affecti∣on, and duetifull loue I beare vnto your Honour, whom I know to be the onely furtherer, maintayner, and supporter of all well disposed mindes toward any kinde of studie, yet (ryght Honorable) consider, that little, or (to say truth,) none at all is the learning I haue, and smal is the seede, plant and grafe whence these, altogether wilde, and vnsauerie fruites doo spring, the which though so they be, are not al∣together to be reiected, & vtterly refused. For the basenes and sowernesse of these, will serue to set out the pleasaunt and delectable taste of other mens fruites, for as by the bad is the good knowen, so by the sower is the sweete the better discerned, and by the darkenesse of the night may a man iudge the brightnesse of the day, in so much that I wholy perswade with my selfe that lightly your Honour will par∣don my attempt, and fond presumption, in being bold vn∣der your honours patronage to shield me with defence a∣gainst such carping, blustering, and malignious tongues, which not onely doo perillously shake at, yea, and indeuour mainely to beat downe, and confute not onely all kind of blossomes, and young budded fruites, but also those, which

are already come to growth and perfection. Wherefore knowing as before, I said, your Honours great good will in aduaūcing al kind of good letters: And seeing by experiēce the nipping, & taunting scoffes of the raging sect of I heo∣ninus, altogether set, and bent against the publishing of the same: As also vsing to preuēt one contrary by another (that is) to preuent I say those lewd and viperous carpers, by the shadow of your Honours most Clement, Benigne, & ther∣withal well fauouring & affectionated mind, both vnto me, and all other the well meanours, in setting foorth of such things which be for the cōmon commoditie of all: (not on∣ly) this our commō wealth, but also of other forraine nati∣ons. I thought it good to houer (I say) & submit mee vnder yours Honours refuge, who of that your so high renowned Clemencie, refuse not, or abiect to shield your humble sup∣pliantes in such good causes, who are loth to stand openly in the caueling reproches of the foresaid taunting broode: As also they being loth to stand, to the displeasure of ill wil∣lers, for yelding foorth their good willes. Which if they had not such good furtherers: surely they would neuer employ their labours to the profit, & commoditie of their coūtrey: but should seeme to be, as salt without sauour, and as fire without heat. Which in deede I do thinke to haue bin the onely cause why learning heretofore, hath bin so obscured, and kept in dennes, and altogether without any such direct or plaine path thereto, as now at this day (God be thanked therefore) it is. And thus deditating, disposing, and yelding these my simple first fruits vnto your Honours Noble pro∣tection, in hope of the gentle acceptation therof, I commit your Honour to the tuition of the Almightie, who main∣taine and keepe your Honour in most prosperous and hap∣pie estate, deliuer, and defend you from all worldly cares, and earthly troubles, and bring you after this transitorie life, into the place of eternall ioy and felicitie.


