


RIght honorable vnderstanding by common fame, confirmed by letters from Italy, Flanders, and France, that one Edward Squire, was lately condemned, and executed in England, for hauing attempted to poyson the Queenes Matie. and my Lord of Essex by the instigation as was surmised of one Father VValpoole a Iesuite in Siuil, with the priuity & consent of Father Creswel and my selfe, here in Madrid, I was (I assure your Lordships) at the first brute amased and much afflicted to heare that these good men so farre of in my conscience from such cogitations, and my self no lesse, were slaundered with matter so haynous, & odious, and although I had reours presentlie to the brazen wall of our owne innocency,Moat. lib. 1. epist. ad Me∣oen. (as the Poet speaketh) and the comfort of a good conscience which our Sauiour geueth his seruāts in like cases, saying to his Apostles, happie are yow when men shall rayle vpon you,Matth. 5. and persecute you, and speake all euil of you, belying you for my sake, reioyce and be glad, for your reward is copious in heauen, although I say I rested cōforted with this consideration, & so resolued my self to patience, & silence, yet waying afterwards, that as the Latyn prouerb sayth, Qui tacet, consentire videtur, he that holds his peace

seemes to consent, & that my sylence might not onlie turne to my further condēnation in this matter, but also to the pre∣iudice of all the good Catholyks of England, against whome euery supposed fault of any one or two (be it neuer so false) is commonlie wrested to the reproche & condemnation of all; I could not forbeare to offer to all indifferēt men this necessarie defence and Apology of my innocencie in this affayre, as also to addresse the same to your Lord ships hands especially for 2. causes which heer I wil expresse.
The one was for that it is not only conuenient in respect of your place & dignitie, as also of the duety I owe & beare you, but also importeth for the preuētion of the inconueniēce aforesaid, that I seek to satisfie your honours, before all others in whose hands principally resteth the satisfastion of her Matie. & the moderation of the rigour, or iniust persecution & vexation which vpon this false conceyt may otherwayes be vsed against the innocents Catholyks of England, which haue neyther parte nor fault therin.
The other is for that persuading my selfe, that so fond a fiction, or rather so foule & vnchristian a practyse tēding to the spilling of guyltlesse blood in this acte, & to the slaunder of innocent people both at home & abroad, could not proceed from the body of a councel consisting of men so honnorable graue, & wise, as your Lordships are presumed to be, but ra∣ther frō some inferiour persons of lesse consideratiō, & more desyrous of garboyles to whose examinations such causes cō∣monly are committed, who may haue abused perhaps your Lordships in this behalf dazling your eyes with pretence of daungers to her Maties. person: in consideration whereof I thought my selfe bound as wel in conscience as duety to your Lordships to discouer vnto you not onely the trecherous

deuises, & dryfts of those that contryned this infamous tra∣gedy, but also the dishonour daunger and ineuitable dom∣mages that must needes redound to her Matie. to your ho∣nours, and to the whole state in tyme, if such proceedings be permitted, in which respect if those ancient senators & go∣uernors among the Romans being heathens, did think it conuenient euen for honour of theyr common wealth to chasten oftentymes most sharpely, & examplary certayne newe deuisers of publyk shiftes, deceyptes, & dishonorable trecheryes vsed by thē though it were against their enemyes, and in farre countreys, and to the common publi{que} benefit of theyr state as they pretended, whereof many examples may be read in Liuy, Halicarnasseus & others, & S. Augustine in his book of the city of God, thinketh that God gaue them so florishing a Monarchie ouer the world for this hono∣rable kynd of proceeding in moral iustice, how much more ought Christian councelours detest and punish such base & vile proceedings or rather malitious and diabolical as this is whereof now I am to treate, vsed against the blood of Chri∣stian subiectes at home in your owne sights, to no publique benefit, but rather to publique infamy, and shame among all nations where it shalbe knowne, wherefore this a matter so worthie & necessary for your L. to know & remedy, I hope you wil take it wel that it cometh dedicated to your selues.
