



THE whole Church, and Kingdome of England, (Right Reuerend Pre∣late) hath a long time to∣gether taken notice of that continuall neerenesse, into which it hath pleased his Maiestie (who does all things vpon Iudgement) to admit your wisedome and faithfulnesse, in matters of aduice especially, which be most proper to your sacred Function. Which Grace of your Lordships with so wise and learned a Prince, hath perswaded me, that as you were the fittest, so you would be the willingest to doe our Great Master this seruice; for so I hope this Office will proue, if your Lordship wil be pleased, that this Boke may by your hands haue accesse vnto his Maiestie. It treats of a Royall Ar∣gument, and therefore (euen of dutie) to be dedica∣ted to a King, as a thing due vnto Caesar: And due

vnto our King especially, whom God hath raysed vp in Brittaine, as the Fort Royall of Princes, to amate that Tower of Babel, that prowd Castle of S. Angelo. And therefore as his Maiestie him∣selfe hath first of all, and best of all, written in this kind, and giuen the ablest directions vnto others to prosecute the Argument; so it might seeme pre∣sumption, if any thing of this subiect should come abroad without his Royall assent.
His Maiesties example (together with this Gentlemans owne zeale to the Cause) did at first, no doubt, encourage this learned Author to vnder∣take this present Worke, who as he still is by his place a Iustice of Peace, so hath he here done Iu∣stice vpon that sawcie Medler with the Rights of Princes, Parsons the Iesuit, and those two sediti∣ous Bookes of his, one comming our vnder the name of P. R. the other of a Catholike Gentleman, both which he hath here made to keepe the Kings peace. The Title will (I hope) find gracious acceptance, and the Booke honourable approbation with his sa∣cred Maiestie. Which hope of mine hath emboldened me to offer it vnto your good Lordship, as a testimo∣nie of my most hearty and humble thankfulnesse, for those fauors which I haue receiued from your good∣nesse: the remembrance of which shall euer bind me to be at your Lordships seruice most faithfully.

