




THe most mighty Monarch Alexander, as∣wel beheld the crooked counterfetit of Vul∣can, as the sweete picture of Venus. Philip of Macedon, accepted a bunch of Grapes, presented by a simple Countrey Swaine. The Widowes mite, was as graciously esteemed, as the great gifts of the wealthie. So I, (Right Honourable, and my verie good Lord,) haue presumed to present your Honour with this Fancie, intituled Honours Triumphe. Imboldened thereunto, by the viewe of those admired giftes of true Nobilitie, that abundantly adorne your Vertuous inclination, vouchsafe the acceptance of this poore present: not for the worthinesse thereof, but for the good intent of the writer, who most humblie sueth for your fauorable protection, to countenance the wel inten∣ding labours of a Scholler, that hath dedicated himselfe in all dutifull regard, to your Honors command: with the poore Countrey-man, presenting somwhat, to shew my dutie & afffection: & willing to giue a worthier gift,

if it consisted in my poore abilitie.
Apoll giues Oracles, as well to the poore as to the Rich. The Noblest mindes haue alwayes as well estee∣med the intents of the well meaning, as the performance of the best able. Euen so I trust your Honour, in whom the Essence of true Nobilitie and vertue are vnited, wil (vn∣der the Protection of your Wisedomes fauourable Censure) re∣garde my dutifull meaning herein. Which hath not bene satisfied with admiration, but longtime desirous to bee one of the participants of your Honours most laudable dispositious, whereunto I doe wholly submit my selfe. Resting in hopefull assurance, that notwithstanding, what∣soeuer wanteth in mee, or the workes worthinesse, yet your Honour will daine to accept this small present, or rather therein my good will: which will yeeld to none, in respect of dutifull douotion, though vnable to compare with the least of the Learned writers, that haue past their woorkes vnder the Title of your Honourable Patronage. Which fauour, I humbly desire your Honor, of your a∣bundant liberalitie, to impart to my poore talent, as to one that of dutie intermitteth not to sollicitie the Almighty, that hee would alwaies direct you in the commendable race of vertue, inrich you with all spirituall and temporall blessings, augment your Honors to the highest degree, and in the ende, reward you with immortall selicitie.

