



IT is written of one Peri∣ander, who for his great wisdome was reputed of many to bee one of the seuen Sages and wise∣men of Greece: that a∣mong other lawes and ordinances, which hee made for the Corinthians (ouer whom hee ruled) this was one, that who∣soeuer was proued vnthankful for a good turne receiued should bee put to death, to shew (as I take it) what an vnnaturall and execrable sinne vnthankefulnesse is, and that hee is vnworthy to liue, who is
 vngratefull and vnkind to him by whom hee liueth. Wherefore (Right worship∣full) fearing least I may seeme to haue incurred and runne already into that o∣dious and capitall crime of vnthankful∣nesse, for the good turne and kindnesse which your worship bestowed vpon me, now almost twenty yeeres since: I glad∣ly laied hold of this occasion, that here∣by I might acknowledge, and confesse vnto the world, how much loue and du∣ty Iowe vnto you: howsoeuer, by reason of my poore and obscure estate, I haue not bin able al this while to manifest the same. Moreouer I supposed that this lit∣tle peece of worke, conteyning the cal∣ling and duties of seruants, could to no man more fitly be exhibited, then to him who is and hath beene a long time so great an house-holder, and Master of ma∣ny seruants, many laborours and hire∣lings, and had experience (no doubt) both of the good, and euill, and so found that true by proofe and practise, which wee finde written, and prescribed in the
 sacred and euerlasting word of God. Wherefore (good Sir) pardon I beseech you this my boldnesse, whereunto neces∣sity hath, as it were, vrged me, and let not the greatnesse of your worship, and worth, despise this little and slender gift, but giue it leaue like an Orphan to couer and hide it selfe vnder the shadow of your excellent dignity, that it may the better creepe into the hands of them it concerneth most, and for whose sake I wrote it: If it doe good to any, honour be to God, and thankes to your worship for concurring to the same. For all the good that I haue receiued from you, I haue in my power but one thing that I can doe, and that by Gods leaue I will. performe all the daies of my life; I will pray to God aboue, the author and gi∣uer of all good things, long to blesse, keepe, and preserue you aliue, that you may be more and more blessed vpon the earth, that you may liue as you haue don along time in much peace and prospe∣rity, and honor, and credit to your house,
 a great peace-maker in your coūtry, ful of good works as Dorcas, Act. 9. 39. to cloath the naked, to feed the hungry, to comfort the comfortlesse. That when the day of your dissolution shalbe at hand, and that you must needs enter into the way of all the world, you may sweetly and ioyfully in a good old age fall a sleepe in the Lord: and all those good deeds which you haue done follow you (as witnesse of your faith) euen to the Tribunal seat of Christ, where GOD will crowne in you his own workes.

