



MOST worthy Syr you cannot but remem∣ber,
that, from the first beginning of our old
acquaintance, I haue alwayes made you the
Aristarchus of my writings. The exactnesse
of whole iudgement; I haue euer found, so
pleasingly tempered, with Sharp, and Sweet,
that, to the one of these, your sharpenesse, in discerning the least
escapes and errors, there could nothing more be added: of the
other, your sweetnesse, in pardoning the greatest, there could
nothing more be required. The recordation of which mixture,
hath giuen me now the boldnesse (notwithstanding the great∣nesse
of your affaires, wherewith I euer find you pressed) yet, to
offer vnto your censure, this vnperfect worke, as matter of con∣templation,
for your more reserued time: wherein, I nothing
doubt, but you haue your oft returnes, to meditations of this
kind. The heads which I haue proiected, in this worke to be
discussed, are all of them such, as though most needefull to be
beleeued; yet least laboured in by Diuines, to further our be∣leefe;
and therefore the most subiect, both to question and
doubting: Especially, with men of the sharpest witts, the grea∣test
spirits, and the richest endowments: whom Nature hath
prepared, for the search of the highest; and most difficult mat∣ters.

These men (out of the penetrating and diuiding nature of
their firie wits) doe trouble themselues with many Quaere's
and doubts, in all these foure Positions which neuer creepe into
the heads of simpler and vnlearned persons; framing some∣times
such Obiections, as to which, they themselues cannot
giue good and sufficient Answeres, but are, ipsi sibi respondentes,
inferiores: as it was sayd of Chrysippus; euen for this very cause.
For the better helpe of which men, and to rid them out of the
snares of their owne curiosities, wherewith they oftentimes
intangle themselues; and to preuent, that they doe not, ipsi se
compungere suis acuminibus, that they wound not themselues, with
the sharpe needles points of their owne pricking wits; I haue done
the best I could, to ioyne my helpe with theirs, by answering
all Obiections, which I could coniecture might any way trou∣ble,
their sciences, or Consciences. For this so meane a worke, I
affect no great Patronage. Satis▪ magnum alter alteri the atrum su∣mus.
Your loue is the greatest: which I haue euer found ready
to couer my greatest: wants. The summitie of my ambition is,
that, as you haue giuen a noble testimony vnto the world, of
the incomparable faithfulnesse of your loue towards me: so I
might yeeld a returne of my like fidelity of thankefulnesse to∣ward
you. Your gracious acceptance of this mine imperfect
worke, shall be a brazen wall vnto mee, against the maleuo∣lous
disposition of all detracting spirits.

