



1. SIR some while since, you wrote a booke of the Visibility of your Church, calling it via tu∣ta, a safe way; prouoked therevnto, as you say, by the challenge of a Iesuit: to which now after a long pause, you see∣me to answeare, though it bee not (as you also say) your profession; thereby to vindicate the cause of your Mother, the Church of England; and maintaine your owne credit. And all this you pre∣tend to doe out of our owne authors. It is true Sir Humphrey, that a Iesuit made

you a challenge, as many haue done be∣fore, and doe still to all Protestants, to shew where their Church was before Luther; and thereby haue putt them to much study and paine, to find her out. And some finding the taske soe hard, haue beene faine to turne about ano∣ther way, and tell vs it is not needfull for the Church to be visible, which they proue,God's arrow against God's enemyes by Hen Smith. Cap. 5. Fulke Apoc. cap. 12. because in the dayes of Elias it perished, as they say; for he said he was left alone; and in the Apoca∣lyps it is said, that the Woman shall fly into the desert. Which say they is all one, as that the Church must be inuisible. But you now, as it should seeme, taking your self to bee somewhat a better man then others that haue gone before you, will needs take vpon you to shew where your Church was before Luther. Wherein you are soe glorious and con∣fident, that you stile your booke a safe way leadinge all Christians to the true, an∣cient, and Catholique faith, now professed in the Church of England; and this you vn∣dertake to performe by the testimo∣nies and confessions euen of your best

learned aduersaries.
2. Which booke of yours, though it hath beene long out, and gained you much fame among some of your owne sect, yet amonge Catholiques it hath seemed of soe small account as noe man hath all this while thought it worth the answearing, thinking it the best way of answeare for such toyes to let them dye as they springe: but since you not conceiuing this to bee the true reason of our silence, nor hauing re∣guard to your owne credit which is les∣se impaired by silence then writing, stand still printing and reprinting this your wise peece of worke, I haue thought good to giue it some answea∣re. For though my intention at first, were only to satisfye a priuate freind, (which was somewhat stumbled with it) by gathering some few corruptiōs, whereby hee might guesse of the rest; Yet coming to reade your booke, and finding the very choyce hard in such aboundance of corruptions; and consi∣dering that many conceiued highly thereof, the rather because it was not

answeared, I resolued vpon a little mo∣re full answeare, which might serue for satisfaction, not onely of that one freind, but of others also, who may ha∣ue conceiued the like opinion of this your booke: the very title and first page especially mouing mee therevnto, in which are contained soe great promi∣ses, or rather soe great braggs, that if Sir Humphrey, you make them good, wee may well change your name from Sir Humphrey to Sir Hercules; for it is more then an Herculian labour which you vndertake therein: if you doe not, I presume you wilbe content to change your surname of Lynde to another word, not farre different in sound, as beginning with the two first letters the same, and more sutable to your deeds: though (not to vndubbe you) howsoeuer the matter fall out, there will still be left for you a title of Sir. Which title should seeme a little by your phrase of speaking, to bee the thing that made you engage your selfe in this quarrell, as if by the honour of your Knighthoode you thought your

selfe boūd therevnto: which if it were,Sir Fr. Ha∣stings. Sir Edw. Hobby. Sir Edw. Cooke. you might haue remēbred, how ill so∣me such Knight venturers as your self haue sped with their zeale. But seing, you will not be ware by other men's harmes, but be putting your fingar into the fire, you must take your chance as they did. And for triall of this quarrell you shall giue mee leaue to enter into the lists with you in the examination of the booke it self: heere only I shall a little examine what you say in your dedicatory Epistle.
3. In which, I reflect first, vpon the title, which is, to the religious and well affected Gentry of this Kingdome, what should be the cause, you should de∣dicate this your worke to the Gentry particularly, the thing yt self pertay∣ning alike to all sortes of men, who ha∣ue soules to saue; vnlesse it were that by hauing specially to doe with Gētle∣mē, you would faine seeme to haue so∣mewhat of the Gentlemen. For which I blame you not, hauing need thereof: for setting your Knighthood a part, it may be your gentry may be questioned, yf it be true that I haue heard, of the

honest Grocer your father, who dwelt next doore to the George in Kings streete: by which your birth as it were by a natural kinde of congruity, you may seeme rather ordained to haue to doe with a pestel and a morter, then a sworde, or pen. This I doe not say Sir Humphrey, that a man meanely borne, may not by his deserts come into a bet∣ter ranke; for reason, authority, and example of all sorts teach the contra∣ry; but because, as nobility of extrac∣tion and vertue ioyned together, adde and receiue lustre reciprocally one frō the other; Soe meanesse of qualities or conditions, such as you shew in your writings, and as (God willing) I shall out of them manifestly proue, doth more shew it selfe, being ioyned with a meane birth and education, the one as it were bearing witnes of the other. Wherefore mee thinkes Sir, you being priuy to your owne wants of this kind, should haue forborne to proclayme them to the world by this manner of writing; which euery man presently seeth, cannot come from an ingenuous

disposition, such as a Gentleman is pre∣sumed to haue.
4. But now to come to your Epistle it self, you say you haue attempted to send forth this Essay of your poore en∣deauours, to make the world see, it is noe difficult matter for a meane Lay man, to proue the ancient Visibility of the Protestant profession; prouoked thereto by a Iesuit's challenge, to shew out of good authors, that the Prote∣stant's church was visible in all ages before Luther; and this you vndertake to doe, not onely out of the most or∣thodox fathers, but alsoe out of the Ro∣mish Bishops. Doctours, Cardinals &c. This essay of your labours Sir Hum∣phrey, is poore indeede, not to stand complementinge with you, as I shall after shew: and for your proofes out of Fathers, and other writers in the Roma∣ne Church, wee shall there also see what ones, they are; that is, either no∣thing to the purpose, or out of Authors branded with the marks of heresy, or at least temerity and singularity. For the challenge it selfe, wherein consisteth

the state of the question, I say heere, that you doe not sett it downe soe true∣ly and fully, as you should. For you were to shew the Visibility of your Church, by naming some who in all ages did professe the Protestant faith, as it is now taught, and professed in En∣gland, entirely beleiuing all that is heere beleiued, and beleeuinge no∣thing els that is contrary vnto it. Which you might haue done, if it could be done, out of some good hi∣stories, without standing vpon proo∣fes of the particular points of doctri∣ne, out of this or that author, for that was not to the present pur∣pose.
5. Neither were it sufficient, as you say in your next paragraphe, seeing it is confessed on all sides, that the faith of Christ in the first age had visible Pro∣fessours, therefore to proue that the Faith of the Church of England is that, which was deliuered to the Saints by Christ, and his Apostles, without farther recitall of succeeding witnesses: this I say were not suffi∣cient.

For the chalenge then which you were now to answeare, and con∣trouersy which you were to handle, was not soe much of the truth of this or that particular point, or of the doctrine euen in generall, but of the Church it self, which was to deliuer the doctrine, and by which we were to come to the knowledge of the truth, who the men were, that were trusted to keepe the depositū which S. Paul gaue Timothy charge of, where the Church was, which the same S. Paul calleth the howse of God, the pillar and firma∣ment of truth? Which was the seede of Christ, whereof I say prophecieth, and promiseth in the person of God the Father, to his Sonne, that hee would neuer take away the words of truth from their mouth? Hoc foedus meum cum eis dicit Dominus. Spiritus meus,Isai. 59.21. qui est in te, & verba mea, quae po∣sui in ore tuo, non recedent de ore tuo, & de ore seminis tui, & de ore Seminis Seminis tui, dicit Dominus, amo∣do & vsque in sempiternum. This is my couenant with them saith our Lord.

My spiritt that is in thee, and my words that I haue put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seede, and out of the mouth of thy Seed's seede saith our Lord from this present and for euer. Who they bee, to whom our blessed Sauiour himself in person, and with his owne mouth promised, that he would send the Spirit of truth to remayne with them for euer? and that himself would be with them to the consum∣mation of the world? Soe as this con∣trouersy being of the Church it self, which was to be found out, by the visi∣bility and succession thereof, not soe much by the doctrine, it could be no way sufficient to proue that the doctri∣ne of the Protestant church, was taught anciently: though that can ne∣uer bee proued. For as I say the que∣stion is not of the doctrine, but of the persons: Wherein the Iesuit tooke the right way, like a wise man and a good scholar, to find out the Doctrine, which is a thing more spirituall and lesse subiect to the sense, by that which

is corporall and more subiect to the view of all sorts of men. For this is the way that all Scholars, in the teaching of all Sciences take, to wit, to beginne with that which is knowne and eui∣dent, and by it to come to the know∣ledge of that which is hidden, accor∣ding to Aristotel's Doctrine.
6. And this hath euer beene the way, which the holy fathers haue taken, ey∣ther in prouing the Catholique faith, or disprouinge of heresies. Soe Tertullian,praescrip. cap. 32. & lib. 3. car. adu. Marcio. soe Irenaeus,lib. 3. cap. 1.2.3. & lib. 4. cap. 43.45.46. soe Cyprian,ep. 52. & 76. Op∣tatus,lib. 2. aduer. Parm. and most of all that great Do∣ctour S. Augustinepsal. 2. part. Don. & ep. 165. & de vtil. cre∣dend. cap. 7. in seuerall places; and particularly in his booke de vtilitate credenai: where writinge to his freind Honoratus, whom he laboureth to draw from the Manichaean heresy, and put∣ting case that he did doubt what reli∣gion to follow, he saith without doubt he were to beginne his enquiry from the Catholique Church. Proculdubio ab Ecclesia Catholica sumendum exordium. For saith hee, whereas there be among Christians many heresies, all which de∣sire to seeme Catholiques, and call

others Haeretiques, there is one Church, as all graunt, if you reguard the whole world refertior multitudine, vt autem qui nouerunt affirmant etiam veritate sincerior caeteris omnibus, sed de veritate alia quae∣stio est. More full of people, and as they that know her for truth more sincere then any other: but of the truth, it is another question. Soe as heere Saint Augustine maketh the first question of the Church it self: Which he maketh to bee the first thing that a man that doubteth and seeketh to saue his soule must enquire after, leauing the truth of the doctrine to be disputed in the se∣cond place.praescr. cap. 19. The like also hath Tertullian giuing withall a good reason thereof: for making this prescription or excep∣tion against Haeretiques, that we are not to admitt them soe farre as to dis∣pute with them of Scriptures, he sayth it is first to be disputed. Quibus competat fides ipsa &c. to whom faith it selfe belongeth, to the which the Scriptures pertaine. From whom, and by whom, and when, and to whom that discipline was deliuered, whe∣reby

men are made Christians. For where it shall appeare, that there is the truth of Christian discipline and faith there shalbe the truth of scri∣ptures and expositions, and all Chri∣stian traditions, soe Tertullian. In whose iudgement it is plaine, that we are first to seeke the persons that professe the faith, that is the Church: because there certainely is the truth to be found. Which is the course wee Catholiques take, and perswade other men to take, following the stepps of our Forefathers; to wit, to seeke out the Visible Church: whereas Haeretiques, as appeareth by Saint Augustine in the same booke, take the cleane contrary course iust as you doe heere Sir Humphrey.
7. This therefore being the thing which you, should haue done, and you being soe mistaken in it, what can be expected at your hands, but that by declining the question, in stee∣de of vindicatinge your Mother's cau∣se, and maintayning your owne credit,

you betray the one, and ouerthrow the other; being not able to shew your pe∣digree and Succession, and in steed of making men see it is noe difficult mat∣ter to proue your visibility, to make them see it is not onely difficult, but al∣so impossible. For though you pretend facility in words, yet in deeds you shew impossibility. That then which you say in your brauery, that you will meete the aduersary vpon his owne ground, and deale with him at his owne weapō euery man seeth how false and vaine a florish it is. For your aduersaryes ground that hee appointeth you, is to shew your Succession in all ages; and his weapon is a catalogue of Bishops and Pastours succeeding one another; Euangelists, and Doctours, the former to gouerne, the later to instruct, such as S. Paul, mentioneth Ephes. 4.11. And he gaue some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Euangelists, and other some Pastours and Doctours, to the consummation of the Saints, vnto the worke of the ministe∣ry, vnto the edifying of the body of Christ, vntill wee meete all into the vnity of Faith.

Bring such a Succession of Pastours, such a people, liuing in this or that Cit∣ty or Countrey, professing the same faith and beleife which Protestants now doe; and you meete your aduersary vpon the same termes; for of this kind of weapon he hath offered you many, as Genebrard, Gualterus, Bellarmine, San∣ders, and many others. Bring such a ca∣talogue of your owne, like one of the∣se, and then you discharge your creditt, which till then lieth engaged. And for this you should not haue needed to ta∣ke all that paines, nor putt your selfe to those straites of prouing out of our owne Bishops, Cardinals, Doctours &c. that your Doctrine hath beene taught in former ages. For to be as liberal with you agayne; the Iesuit would haue gi∣uen you the freedome to take all man∣ner of Writers, whether Catholiques or Haeretiques, Pagans, Iewes, Turkes, or what profession els soeuer they we∣re of, to see whether out of all toge∣ther, you could patch vpp a Catalogue, or bring any the least mention of such a goodly people and commonwealth;

as wee see suddainely started vpp in the world, vpon the reuolt of Luther. For we Catholiques haue a publique testimony of the Visibility of our Church, from all sorts of men, all sects and professions whatsoeuer, that being a condition and property, whe∣reof the whole world cannot but take notice, and consequently all manner of men must necessarily wit∣nesse.
8. And therefore Sir Humhrey while you thinke you haue hitt the bird in the eye, by prouing (though you should proue it as you neuer can) out of our Cardinals, Bishops, and Doc∣tours, that your faith was taught in former ages, you are cleane mista∣ken. For Visibility and antiquity are two different properties: antiquity properly belongeth to the doctrine and beleife of the Church; but Vi∣sibility properly belongeth to the Church it self, as it is a Church, to wit, a community, commonwealth, or kingdome consisting of men liuing in a certaine forme of gouernment, and

professing a certaine outward forme or face of Religion, by Sacrifice, Sa∣craments, and other rites, tending to the worship of God and Sanctifi∣cation of themselues, wherein all that are of that Community doe par∣ticipate, and thereby are distingui∣shed and differenced from all such as are not of the same Community and profession. Wherefore you being cha∣lenged to shew such a community, and flying from that to proue the antiquity of your Doctrine, out of our Fathers and Schoolmen, what els doe you doe, but confesse your Church to want Visibility, and your selfe honesty, by endeauouring to deceiue men with a specious title of a safe way; intending indeed to lea∣de them, from the true safe way of the Catholique Church, into such cer∣taine by-ways and corners, as our B. Sauiour foretold vs of, when hee said, that False Prophets should come and tell vs, loe here is Christ, or the∣re, doe not beleeue them. And by this

you may perceiue, how vnfittly you ioyne, or rather confound antiquity and Visibility, by saying in the very be∣ginninge of this your Epistle, the ancient visibility of the Protestant profession, and soe in many other places. For Visibility must as well be new, to follow your manner of speaking, as ancient: that is, it is a thing which hath beene without interruption, is, and euer must bee to the worlds end, in the true Church of God; and is noe more tyed to these primiti∣ues or ancient tymes, then to these la∣ter of ours, nor noe more to those ty∣mes of ours then to those that shall co∣me after vs againe. Or if it more belong to one tyme then another, it rather be∣longeth more to succeeding tymes. For as it is cleare by the Prophecies going before our B. Sauiour's coming, and the accomplishment of the same, after his coming the Church was to beginne as all things els in this world, from a small beginning; and after, by tyme and continuance, receiue a grea∣ter encrease; and by little and little co∣me to spread ouer the whole world; at

which tyme, it must needs be more vi∣sible then in the beginninge. Soe that little Stone,Dan. 2.36. which the Prophett Daniel speaketh of in figure of the Kingdome of Christ, which is his Church, grew by little and little to be soe great a mountaine, as it filled the whole Earth: at which tyme certainely, it was more visible then at first, when it was but beginning. Soe the Church which began at Hierusalem, & from thence was spread by degrees to other Countries, and is to goe on increasing to the vtmost bounds of the Earth, to the very end of the World, must needes be more visible and appa∣rant, as it goeth more dilating it self in space of place, and continuance of tyme.
9. But now you come vpon vs with a counter challenge, demanding by what authority of scriptures and an∣cient Fathers, we haue imposed new articles of Christian beleife vppon Preists and people: for, as you say, truth denyes antiquity and vniuersality to the principal articles of the new Ro∣man Creede: and you say our best lear∣ned

Romanists, professe that most of them were vnknowne to antiquity. Wherefore after a digressiō against im∣plicite faith, and our altering and chan∣ging the ten commandements (as you say very wisely) you wish, that they that vrge a catalogue of such Prote∣stants, as haue in all ages professed your 39. articles, should produce one anciēt orthodox father in euery age, for the∣se 1500. yeares, who hath held all our Trent articles de fide, and that then you will acknowledge our Professours visi∣ble in all ages; our Cardinals, Bishops, & Schoolemen mistaken, & that they are to bee reformed by an Index expurgato∣rius; you will acknowledge the nouelty of your Church, and submitt your selfe with an implicite faith to the Romane Church. Soe you: for your counterchal∣lēge Sir Humphrey, had you marked the challenge well, you might haue spared it; for the Iesuit required you to perfor∣me nothing, but that which many on the Catholique part haue performed ready to your hand, that is, that you should bring such a Catalogue of suc∣cession,

for proofe of the Visibility of your Church, as we did many of ours, as Sanders, Bellarmine, Gualterus, & others. You aske by what authority we impose new articles of beleife vpon men? this question is not to the purpose: but I an∣sweare, by denying your suppositiō; for we doe not impose new articles vpon men, but defend the old, against new fāgled fellowes, neither is this the pro∣per place for you to require, or for vs to bring proofes out of Fathers & Scrip∣tures of particular points; whereof you cannot but know, that many great and learned men in the Catholick Church, haue written great volumes; which noe haeretique hath euer yet durst ven∣ture to answeare, how then can you soe brasenly say, that our owne best learned confesse, that the articles of the Trent-Creede as you call them, are vnknowne to antiquity: what point is there defined in the Councel of Trent, which is not proued by way of autho∣rity of scriptures & fathers by Iudocus Coccius, by way of reason and solution of arguments by Bell. by way of history by Baronius, to say nothing of others?

some may perhaps say, that some points there defined were not before defined by any general Councel; but to bring any Catholique to say that they are new or that they were not ancient∣ly nor commonly beleeued I dare say Sir Humphrey, is more then you can proue: but suppose any one may say, that there is noe proofe extant in any ancient author of this or that point, must it therefore follow that it is new? noe surely, for all things are not writ∣ten, as S. Iohn verifyeth of our Sauiour's owne words and deeds: how much les∣se then other things, which yet are ge∣nerally taught and practized in the Ca∣tholique Church: which very practize without farther proofe S. Augustine ma∣keth to be an argument of antiquity?Aug cont. Don. lib. 4.24. but of this newnesse of faith, whereof you soe ignorantly complaine, and like∣wise of implicite faith, I shall say more afterwards.
10. Now for our leauinge out the se∣cond commandement wherewith you tax vs, and changing the fourth from sanctify the Sabboth to Sanctify the holy∣dayes,

it is pitty you are soe hard driuen, as when you are called vpon to proue your Succession and Visibility of your Church, to fall vpon vs for the com∣mandements: a thing of soe different nature and soe triuiall. For first it is fal∣se, that we leaue out that which you call the second commandment, Looke in our bibles and see whether you find it not there in all Editions, and transla∣tions as well English as Latine, or any other language whatsoeuer. How then doe we leaue it out? you will say we leaue it out in our catechismes; true: but to leaue a thing out of a catechis∣me, is not absolutely to leaue it out, as long as it is els where. But besids to an∣sweare you another way, wee leaue out many other things, as that God is a iealous God, that hee reuengeth the Sinnes of the Father to the 3. and 4. generation and the like, though they goe intermingled with the commandements in the text: and this we doe without blame; becau∣se they eyther pertaine not precisely to the commandement, or are suffi∣ciently expressed in the very words of

the commandement it self. Soe wee say of this, that it is either contayned in the first commandement being one∣ly an explication of the same; or if it be a distinct precept as some Deuines say, then is it ceremoniall onely, and consequently abrogated with the whole Law.
11. Soe likewise for the other com∣mandement of Sanctifying the Holy∣dayes I answeare that in our bibles or text of scripture we keepe the word Sabboth, and in most and best cate∣chismes also, as for example Cani∣sius, Bellarmines large catechisme, and others but specially in that of the Coun∣cel of Trent sett out by authority of Pius V. Which were answeare enough to shew we make noe such mystery of it, since sometymes we say Sabboth some∣tymes Holydayes: as indeede we well may, the sense being the same: and we may better vse this liberty in catechis∣mes, where we stand not soe much to cite the very words of scripture, as to declare the meaning of them; though in the text it selfe we keepe precisely to

the very words. Where yet we explica∣te it in the same sense, following the∣rein the example of Scripture it self, which vseth those words indifferently as may appeare Leuit. cap. 23. Where other Holydayes beside the Saturday or Sabboth are called Sabbata 3. or 4. ty∣mes in that one chapter: and in the be∣ginning thereof those dayes which are called Sabbata, are called twice Feriae sanctae Holydayes. Soe as you Sir Humfrey in making such a deale of difference betweene Sabboth and Holyday shew your self to be but shallowly read in scripture. Besids I may answeare to this as to the former obiection, that this cō∣mandment was partly ceremonial, to wit, for as much as pertayneth to that particular day of saturday, and partly natural, to wit, soe farre as it obligeth to the obseruing of some daye or tyme holy indeterminately.
12. But if we be such great offenders for changing e word Sabboth in some of our catechimes into Holyday, what are you for changing the very commā∣dement while you stand working vpon

Saturday, and rest vpon Sunday, soe changing the Sabboth it self? but what stuffe is this for you to trouble your gentry Readers withall in the very be∣ginning of your booke, and in your Epistle dedicatory forsooth, and not onely to touch vpon it heere, but to print the commandements faire in a leafe by themselues, with a marginal note of Ledaesma's catechisme of 2. or 3. editions, as if you would make your Reader stand at some goodly gaze? but by this a man may easily guesse what matter hee is like to find in the booke it selfe. I could haue noted a thing of the same kind of yours in this Epistle, in the first leafe where you say, truth is iustifyed of her Children, whereas the text of scripture is Wisedome is iustified &c: but that I did not count it worth speaking of.
13. Touching your great boast, that if we can shew one good author in euery age for this 1500. yeares, who hath held our Trent articles, as you call them, de fide, you will confesse our Doctours, Schoolmen, &c. to be mista∣ken,

and to neede an index expurgatorius; and that you will submitt your self to the Romane Church, acknowledging the nouelty of your owne church: For∣asmuch as this your promise seemeth by the manner, to be but a proud vaunt to delude the simple reader, to make him more confident by your example in his false beleife, I shall not much re∣guard it, or any thing els which you shall say in that kind: for your deeds giue mee assurance of deepe malice, and peruersnes soe grounded in your hart, as that they hinder you from be∣holding the light of truth, for which cause I cannot but reckon you in the number of them, of whom S. Paul la∣mentingly saith.2. Cor. 4.3. Quod si opertum est euangelium nostrum, in ijs qui pereunt est opertum, in quibus Deus huius saeculi excoeca∣uit mentes infidelium, vt non fulgeat illis il∣luminatio euangelij. If our Ghospel be couered or hidd, in them that perish it is hidd, in whom the God of this world hath blinded the minds of the vnfaith∣full, that the light of the Ghospel may not shine vnto them. For otherwise

how were it possible, that in such great aboundance of Catholique au∣thors, now in this age prouing the ve∣rity of the Catholique faith, some by way of controuersy, some by way of history, others by way of chronology, others by way of authority, others by way of schoole diuinity, you should come to aske for one in euery age? what is Gualterus his whole chronolo∣gy, but to proue twelue verityes now adayes most controuerted by the te∣stimonyes of Fathers and Doctours in euery age? Doth not Genebrard in his chronology, at the end of euery 100. yeares, note the antiquity of the Catholi∣que beleife, in most of all these points ci∣tinge the places where the Fathers and Doctours their testimonyes and proo∣fes are to bee found?
14. But you say, they were not taught de fide as points of Faith; what is that to say? that they were neuer defined all in any general Councel, I grant you that; but what then? must they not therefore belong to Faith? how many points be there that were neuer soe de∣fined?

will it not serue your turne, that they were commonly beleeued with∣out contradiction of any, as all these were? or if some one Doctour should bee singular in his opinion, yet soe as to be ready to submit his iudgment to the definition of the church, what would this hinder? nay would it not much hel∣pe to proue the continual Visibility & supereminent authority of the Church, which is the question now betweene vs? but of this more afterwards. Now for our Doctours, whom you will con∣fesse to be mistaken, in witnessing the antiquity of your doctrine, I wil say no∣thing heere, but in dew place wil shew how notoriously you falsifye some, im∣pertinently alleadge others, and eyther very maliciously or very ignorantly bring condemned knowne Haeretiques against vs, for authors of our owne.
15. In which reguard I cannot but admire to heare you soe hypocritically to conclude your Epistle, saying that though by the prouocation of a Iesuit, you haue putt your sickle into another man's haruest, yet you witnesse a true

confession before God and Man, that you haue neither wilfully not witting∣ly falsified any one author, eyther in citation, or translation in this treatise. What execrable periury this is I shall after demonstrate. Prius vos ostendens fa∣bricatores mendacij. First shewing you to be framers of lyes, as I may say to you Sir Humphrey, with soe much more rea∣son then Iob did to his freinds; by how much they did vrge him not with any false doctrines, but onely mis-applied truths. Whereas you offend in all kind of falshood. For euen where you happ to cite a place truely, for soe much as pertaineth to the words, you doe it soe cleane kam from the authors meaning, and discourse, that euery man may see how euidently false, and consequently how iniurious both to God and Man that profession of yours is, wherein you call them to witnesse your truth & ho∣nesty in the citing of authors.
16. And therefore whereas you see∣me to attribute the slipps, if there be any, to your owne weakenesse, which you are content ingenuously to confes∣se,

if they be shewed you moderately, plainely, and faithfully: I must deale freely with you Sir Humphrey, and tell you, that indeede I take your weaknesse or ignorance to be noe whit lesse, if not more, then you seeme to acknow∣ledge, both by what I find in this trea∣tise, & by what I heare from some that know you well, and verily thinke you scarse skill euen of ordinary Latin much lesse of such other Learning as is needfull for writing books of this na∣ture. Wherevpon they conclude this booke to be none of yours, but some Ministers who hath borrowed your na∣me and title to countenance his worke withall: and that you being somewhat greedy of glory were content to lend it, not considering that by soe doing (that is) by fathering such a booke, you are to vndergoe all the reprehension and shame which shall ensew vpon the discouery of the author's ignorance and weaknesse whosoeuer he be. But because this is but a probable coniectu∣re I will not build vpon it, but taking you for author, seeing it beareth your

name, I shall discouere not onely your great weaknes and ignorance which you acknowledge, but greater obstina∣cy and malice, soe as thereby it may plainely appeare that your faults are not soe much to be termed slipps of ignorance or weaknes, as slowes of ma∣lice of purpose to plunge your Reader, and make him sticke fast in some myre of mis-beleife and infidelity with your selfe.
17. Which obstinacy and malice to be the true cause of all your errours, whatsoeuer you may pretend to the contrary, doth yet farther appeare in that hauing receiued a foile or two, and together with them good admonitiōs,A plea for the reall praesence by I. O.
A defence of the appen∣dix by L.D. you neither take notice of the one in your writings, nor shew the fruit of the other in your manners. And therefore for the answeare (which hath beene hitherto differred because noe man of learning could thinke it worth his pai∣nes to make you any, and should still haue beene differred were it not more for other men's sakes then your owne) you are to expect it as you desire, faith∣full

and plaine, and though it must of necessity bee a little round sometymes, yet I hope to any indifferent man it will also seeme moderate, that is much within the compasse of your deserts.
18. Now lastly whereas you craue a fauourable acceptance of these your beginnings promising vs some farther fruits of your labours: if you remember your self well these are not your first fruits: for you translated and published heeretofore with a preface of your owne a certaine treatise of one Iohn Bertram an ancient obscure author, whereby you haue giuen to the world sufficient triall as well of your talent in translating as of your ignorance and corruption, whereof you were most plainely conuinced in a particular trea∣tise of that matter called A PLEA FOR THE REALL PRESENCE BY I. O. Whereto you neuer hauing replyed one word for clearing your self of soe foule a tax it is wonder you could thin∣ke of publishing any farther fruits of your labours, and more wonder that you should desire any fauourable ac∣ceptance

of them. Wherefore it had beene then, and is still, fitter for you to lay aside any such thought, and rather thinke how you can acquit your self to the world of your accounts for these that are past, or rather how you shalbe able to acquit your self before the iudg∣ment-seate of Almighty God, where you will find it another manner of matter then you count of to answeare for one soule, much more for soe many as you haue laboured to peruert: but be∣cause you are not capable of any good aduice of this kind I forbeare to say more heere resting howsoeuer.

