



SYR,
SEING it pleaseth you by the Metaphore ofConters pag. 7. Ge∣lons yolping Curr, to expresse the Mystery of your Counter-snarling answere to the part of my Treatise, wher∣in you thought your self touched: Sure I am, you may not iustly, I hope you will not without cause, be offended, that I

likewise giue you to vnderstand, the drift of my Purgatorie Letter, in a Parable of like nature.
The respectfull affection of my Coū∣tries soueraigne good, that in the Pinnace of my short Confutation of a rayling Sermon, landed in your learned Courts, seemeth to haue felt fauour at your hādes, not vnlike vnto that, which Aenaeas his piety to his disceased parent, sayling to∣wards the Elisian fields, found, at his first setting foot on the shoare. You are not to learne (hauing bene schollar at Eaton)pag. 61. with what an vnfriendly wellcome, the three-mouthed Cerberus, grym Porter of Plut'os Pallace intertayned that pious Pil∣grime, with such a noyse of Hellish cla∣mours, as euen the damned Ghostes were therewith appaled. Neither haue you, I thinke, forgotten the peale of vnlouely termes wherewith your Counter-snarle salu∣ted my little Pinnace, making towards the hauen of your fauour, with an oliue branch, held out, of hartie wishes of your Eternall Happines, and not without the displayed Flagg of due Respect, euen to

your worldly honour, or anie other Wor∣thy Qualitie in you.
I presented vnto youPraf. pag. 22. the Merchan∣dize I had bought, and brought with some coste n treating you, to vouchsafe a par∣ticuler perusall therof, that by compari∣son, you might discerne the counterfait stuff of false slaunders, which crafty tradesmen had laid vpon your handes. And to the end you might with your eyes, behould the perfidious dealing of such wily factours, Ipag. 133. laid open before you two or three peeces of S. Augustine (for such by you cited) full of holes and pat∣ches of another cloth and colour, which I had iust cause to thinke you had taken in grosse, vpon the credit of some Merchant or Minister of your Ghospell, who feare not to sell such broaken stuffe, euen for the fayrest garmēts, hyding their falshood, with fine wordes, and with a deepe die of protestations, that they produce Authors sincerely.
I proued M. Crashaw, whome you praysed most, was, more then any other, chargeable of such fraudulent trickes, that

he sould you spiders webbs, spunne out of his owne bowells, for cloth of siluer, wouen by Catholike Authors, & I grie∣ued, that so soaring a Wit, as I conceiued yours was, should so flutter in a cobweb of palpable vntruthes.
Wherein could I declare towards you greater Affection, then in seeking to make you see the truth, in a busines of such weight, whereon your eternall weale or woe doth depend? Or how could I haue performed this dutie of charity, with more regard vnto your Person, then by freeing you, from the suspition of false dealing, declyning the falsificatiōs of that learned Father, on some Minister, whome I did & probably might suspect, had made them to your hands? If therin I erred, how easily might you haue pardoned my errour, cau∣sed out of respect vnto your Honour, by i∣mitating Nathan, who reprehended the Kingly Prophet in a third person? But truly I did belieue, those falshoods did not spring from your selfe, & still the basenes of that deformed creature, ful of falshoods and reproaches against holy things, as I

doe discouer in this Letter, makes me vnwilling to giue my consent, to natura∣lize the same, as the naturall issue of any worthy Parent.
This then was my dutifull Affection, which notwithstanding, you set your yol∣ping Curr vpon my Treatise, that came in so louelie a manner to offer you seruice, defiling and tearing the same with foule contumelies. You Hierogliph my name of I. R. inpag. 67. English,pag. 76. Latine, andpag. 4. Hebrew, making me in the one Iack Rogue, in the other Iscarioth de Rubigine, and Ishmael Rabshacheh in the third, wherewith you ioyne the Syrname of Cecropidan Lycaonite in the title of your booke, to shew that you can also snarle in Greeke, which you do so learnedly, that I confesse, I know not what you meane, nor why you after∣ward terme me falsifying Cecropidan, bel∣lowing and roaring Lycaonite, hypodidascalian Pedadogue, the most brazen-faced intruder that euer Fooliana harboured, the most fowle-mouthed Impe that euer Cerberus bred, or Crete sawe, a Polypragmist wholy compact of mocking and ray∣ling, that seemeth to haue the mixed quintessence

of them both, that, my vndaunted spirit many myles outstrippeth my leaden art and heauie-heeld learning, an open-mouthed fellow, a fleeting gud∣geon, audacious vassall, Pezantique fugitiue, Rodomantado, and Romified Renagado, which ruding letter springs so naturally in your mouth, that you read me Rudent for Stu∣dent in Diuinity, couering the wolues-skin of a Lycaonite, with the long-sided shirts of a fooles coate, saying, you neuer saw man that was a verier Asse.
These, Syr Edward, & such like snarles, wherof your kennell doth sound, I assure you, doe not moue me to anger, but to much pitty towards you. Had I thought my respectiue lynes would haue put you into such a distemper, I do verily belieue I should haue forborne those friendly admonitions I gaue you. You could not haue giuen a greater signe, then lowd and rude cryes, that my wea∣pons, which you would haue thought weakep. 26. Istae sunt machinae haereticorū vt de perfi∣dia conui∣cti, ad ma∣ledicta se conferant. Hieron. Apolog. 3. aduers. Ruff. c. 11. were indeed strong & did pierce deeply: it being the property of Heretikes as S. Hierome noteth, when they are con∣uinced of falshood, to returne reproach∣full

Answers. Yow could not by any means, haue more honoured my Treatise, then by new deuised titles, which you would not haue sayled into Fooliana to fetch, had they bene the naturall fruite of my ground.
Yet that you may perceiue, that the noyse of your clamours drowneth not in my hart the voyce of charitie, which moueth me to seeke your good, I haue taken the paynes to returne an Answere vnto your lynes, which I might most iu∣stly contemne. I haue appealed with the wronged widdow from Philip vnto Philip, to your second and more sober thoughts, hoping that your ragefull fumes being spent in this blast against me, your cleared vnderstanding will behold the foulenesse of your speach, which then in your writing your passion might hide.
I am not ignorant that the best way to stop the mouth of Snarlers, is to make no account of their wordes: yet both my respect of your Honour, and desire of your euerlasting Happines haue won me to seek

the quietting of your arring Passion with a mild Reply before I cast off your snar∣ling reproaches with disdainfull silen∣ce. Heerin I follow the example of the Cumaean, Virgin that was guide to Aenaeas in his foresaid iourney.Cui Vates horrere videns iam colla colu∣bris. She seeing that Hellish Mastiue to bristle his snakes, and ready to inuade her charge, to diuert his angre, cast before him, Melle saporatam & medicatis frugibus offam, A soppe seasoned with hony and medicinable herbes, which sweet mor∣sell did so appease his furie, that ha∣uing fawned on her without more a∣doe, he layed downe his sleepy lim∣bes to rest in his vast kennell.
But hauing cast your barking Cer∣berus into a sleepe in my first Chapter, the rest of my Letter I spend in the spoyle of your Hell, I meane in the confuta∣tion of the Letter full of blasphemies which some yeares since yow wrote a∣gainst Purgatorie. I haue reduced my discourse to foure heades, wherewith I encounter the foure enemyes a Chri∣stian verity may haue, and which in your

Letter band against this point of Ca∣tholicke Doctrine, to vvit, Diuels vvho by lying, Philosophers vvho by reason, Hereticks vvho by Scripture, Atheists vvho by iesting seeke to ouer∣throvv the Truth.
I discouer the Falshood, both of your Letter and Counter-snarle concer∣ning the Canonicall authoritie of the bookes of Machabees, vvhere the pra∣ctise of praying for soules in Pur∣gatorie is praysed. I lay open the va∣nitie of your Logick by which you ca∣uill at our Catholike deduction of Purgatorie from Christ his vvordes, in the 12. of S. Matthew. I shew the vveakenes of your Scripturall assault to defeate the perpetuall tradition of the Church, standing in defence of this Doctrine. By the light of miracles, wherewith GOD doth, and still in all ages did illustrate his Church, I dissolue the smoky mysts of the Atheisticall scoffs vvhich vampe from your pen. And seeing in your Counter-snarle you will needs pluck a crow with me about the first plan∣ting

of Christianity amongst the En∣glish Saxons, therewith I conclude my Letter, shewing that we were from Pa∣ganisme conuerted to the Catholick be∣liefe of Purgatorie; yea that S. Gregory whome your Mynisters vse to charge to haue bene the greatest Patron of this doctrine, was the chiefest Author vn∣der GOD of this our happy purgation from heathenish superstition. So that this my Letter, describing fiue Victories of Purgatorie ouer your Falshood, Phi∣losophy, Heresy, Atheisme, Idolatry, may be tearmed, Purgatories Triumph ouer your hell.
Thus much concerning the matter and substance of my answere.Ne respon∣deas stulto iuxta stul∣titiam suā. Responde stulto iux∣ta stultitiā suam. Prou. 26. v. 4. As for the manner, I haue sought to ioyne two Counsells of the holy Ghost, vvhich seeme contrary, togeather in my Let∣ter, To answere, and not to answere a foole according to his folly; to make my dis∣course serious as the subiect therof doth require, yet lend now and then a few lynes vnto the discouery of your tri∣fles. I haue follovved Pithagoras his

aduise, not to stabbe the fire,Ignem ne fodito. which from the bramble-bush of your distempered thoughts flashed: yet haue I done my best to quench it, not with the cold vvater of a dull denyall, nor with the oyle of sinners, which might increase your flame, by soothing you in your errour; but with that liquor you are sayd to loue vvell, vvith wyne and su∣gar, vvhich togeather with the secret influence of Loue, wanteth not vertue to draw out the corruption that maketh your sores angry.
I haue made you a Purgatorie sallet into vvhich I haue put 5. medecina∣ble herbes; The Authoritie of the aun∣cient Church and Fathers before Christ: The word of Christ himselfe insinua∣ting the same: The Custome of the Church: The warrant of Myracles: The first Christianitie of our Countrey. Fiue potent reasons to mooue you to imbrace the Catholike doctrine in this point and others, or at least to purge some part of your prophane humors against it. Into this sallet I haue povv∣red

the oyle of charitable exhortations, though sometimes I must confesse the vinager of sharper reprehension goeth mingled therwith; yet not in such store as may make the same iustly displeasing to your tast.
The iudicious Reader that may perchance looke into this Letter, vvill not wonder that your rude hammering vvith heauy reproaches on the rock of Truth, togeather vvith the gentle sound of a solid Answere, hath also fetched out some liuely sparkes of iust disdayne. Such sparkes did fly some∣tymes euen from that marble Pillar (as you tearme him) Saint Augustine, as doth appeare in his vvritings, though prouoked with iniurious speaches, he did (as he saith) endeauour, as much as might be, to curbe the motions of anger,Fraenatis at{que} coer∣citis vanae indignati∣onis aculeis auditori, lectorique consulens, non ago vt efficiar homini conuitiando superior, sed errorem conuincendo sa∣lubrior. l. 3. contr. lit. Petil. c. 1. and seeke to ouercome his ad∣uersaries, not by strong returne of in∣iurious reproaches to disgrace their per∣sons,

but by cleare demonstration of the victorious Truth, the beliefe wher∣of might bring them vnto eternall life. This is my drift, and hauing so wor∣thy a patterne and president before my eyes, I will beginne.
