



Right Honourable,
I Formerly prouided this Sermon for you
in a Country Auditory. Your occasi∣ons
then carried you elsewhere.
The approbation it receiued from
such learned Diuines as hapned to
be present, made mee settle my thoughts and medita∣tions
againe vpon it. Those second thoughts and
meditations gaue it a new being, and that growth,

that it came from the Country to the City. Mee∣ting
there with the Presse, it presumeth to presse
from the City to the Court, bearing your Honours
name in the forehead. For whither could it bee
sent more fitly to cry downe the reigning of sinne,
than to Court? where vertue and not sinne should
reigne among the Peeres and Nobles of so vertuous
and pious a King as wee haue:. histor.  4. 3. who like the Emperors
Theodosius the younger (besides his priuate deuo∣tions)
leauing his Princely sports, is an assiduous
frequenter of publike prayer;Eusb. de vit. . l. 4. . 33 and Constantine the
Great, (besides his priuate reading) is a great and
constant hearer of Sermons, the meanes to receiue
sacred instructions to keepe sinne from reigning in his
mortall body. Let mee not be thought then presump∣tuous
if I dedicate this small worke of mine to your
Honours, to be a Remora to stay you from yeelding
to the inchanting allurements of such perdition-wor∣king
Syrens, as are alwayes seducing the fraile na∣ture
of man vnto sinne. Neither doe I this, because
I any wayes deeme your Honours prone to follow
such, or because you want either good precepts or
neere examples to follow.D. Pridux, his Maiesties Pro∣fessor or Diui∣nitie in the V∣niuersitie of  For, my good Lord, besides
your owne gracious disposition, you haue been brought
vp at the feet of Gamaliel in the Vniuersitie, that
hath furnished you with the one: you haue those noble

Lords,The Earle of Pembroke Lord Steward, and the Earle of Montgomery Lord Cham∣berlaine to his Maiesties houshold. your Vncle and Father in Law, neere and
bright shining Lights to you in the other: you haue
the daily attendance ofD. Williams, with others. such as are able and ready to
direct you in both. And you, right noble Lady, (as
inheritrix of your deceased Lady-mothers vertues)
are ready to ioyne in the practice of such actions as
may bring eternall happinesse to you both. But I de∣dicate
these my poore labours to your Honours to en∣courage
you to goe on in what you are. For your
Lordship well knowes that of the Poet;
Qui monet vt facias, quod jam facis, ipse monendoOuid.
Laudat, & hortatu comprobat acta suo.
I deuote them to you, as a sure testimonie of my vn∣fained
respect to your Honours, and heartie desire that
you may be saued in the day of the Lord. For seeing
this Sermon (such as it then was) should haue beene
yours before, seeing you haue beene graciously plea∣sed
to receiue mee for yours since, to whom may it
more fitly be appropriated than to your Honours? So
that I may say to each of you with the Poet;
Hoc lege quod possis dicere jure meum est.Marti
Censurers I shall haue, and doe expect, many;
but I feare or regard none. My aime is Gods
glory, to cast my mite into the Treasurie of the

Church, for the good of my Country in generall, and
to testifie my desire of doing your Honours seruice in
particular. This is the marke I looke at, and I shall
euer endeuour by Gods grace to hit it. The criticall
Spectators I passe by, without any glance on them; I
shall neuer care to please them. That Archer which
lookes on the standers by, and not on the marke, can∣not
but misse his aime; and that Writer which ende∣uours
to please all, shall please none, neither God,
good men, nor himselfe. But if (next to Gods glory
and the Churches good) your Honours, out of your
wonted candor, will be pleased to accept it, I shall
attaine my wished scope, and shall be encouraged
further to shew my selfe,

