



Right Honourable:
I Will not say, Importunity of
friends hath prest this Sermon
to the Presse: that's a Common
Plea; and implies a Tacit Com∣mendation
of the owne worke;
which is not so commendable;
it beeing as great Wisdome in
our sufficiency, not to know our
selves, as, in our Wants to know
our selues. But I may boldly avouch, Ambition has no
hand in the Impression. For had I beene that way affected
I have had time enough, to be a foole in print (as well as
some others) long ere now-Scribimus indocti, doctique. But
I have ever beene as desirous to Suppresse my Labours, in
this kinde, as others to Presse theirs. The truth is, the
reason, why I have ventur'd to come on the Publike

stage, and to make my Meditations Legible, is, To see
whether I can finde more Charitable Readers of my
Well-meant Endeavours, then I had some Hearers; whose
unhappy Misprision (making themselves, occasionally,
guilty) would have made me guilty of that, I neyther
spake, nor meant; (of that which I hate) A personall
Invective. Whereas it may appeare (upon ingenuous
perusall) neither the Person, nor the Place, but the too-well
knowne Offence (Negligence) of some persons in
those Places, is inveighed against. I can truely say
with Saint Ierome-Nullum loesi, nullius nomen mea Scrip∣tura
designatum est: Neminem specialiter meus sermo pul∣savit
(ad Nepot.) And the Poet tels me (I take it) discreet∣ly,-Licuit,
semper{que} licebit.-Parcere personis, dicere de
vitijs. Whosoever takes offence at this, it is-Scanda∣lum
acceptum, indeed; and I suppose, he is no Competent
Auditor. For if guilty Consciences, who are Parties
should be admitted Iudges of Divine Reprehension, the
Pulpit should bee counted a Pasquil; every admonition
thence (how discreetly-zealous soever) an invective
Defamation. Guilty Consciences are like the Elephant:
which being conscious of his owne Deformity, cannot
abide to see his Face in the cleare Springs, but seekes
for troubled and muddy Chanels, to drinke in; So
they, knowing their soules to be so filthy, that they
dare not view them in the cleare waters of Truth, and
Sincere Admonition, flee to the troubled Chanels of Ca∣villation,
and Contradiction▪ Arbitror te veritate supera∣tum,
ad detractionem, vitae meae, et maledicta converti, saith
Ierome, (Contra Helvid.) But-Qui volens, detrahit famae
meae, nolens addit mercedi, saith August. (Cont. Petil. lib. 3.
cap. 7.) And thus,-Quandiu aegri, indignantur, whiles

men are sicke of Impenitencie, they are Impatient of re∣proofe;-Sed
sanati, gratulantur, but being cur'd by
Repentance, they shake hands with the Monitor, and
thanke him, saith August. (Ad Fest. Epist. 166.) Then
they will acknowledge, 'Tis better once smart, then ever
ake: And so a Galling truth shall have more thankes,
at the last, than a smoothing Supparasitation,-Hee that re∣buketh
a man, shall finde more favour, at the length, than hee
that flattereth with his tongue, (Prov. 28. 23.) But hee
that can, now, play with his Euphemismes and Eulogi∣um's,
and cry,-Pax pax, when there is no peace, makes
the best musicke in the eares of this secure Age. He that
bids the wicked AHABS,-Goe vp to Ramoth Gilead, and
prosper, (1. King. 22. 12.) is now the best Politician. Hee
that that can-Dawbe with vntempered morter, is counted
the best Architect of Soules. This they call, Good tem∣per,
Mildnesse, Discretion. This is the way, they say, to
sleepe in whole skinne, to rise to Preferment.-(Ob∣sequium
amicos, veritas odium,) Such preferment God
send them, who love the praise of Men, more than the praise
of GOD. And-whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey
men, rather than God, iudge yee. But what shall I say?
Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli.
As Bookes, so Sermons have their Credit or discredit
from the fancy of their Readers or Hearers. And it is e∣ver
an easier matter to Dislike, than to Doe the like.—Facilia
sic putant omnes, quae iam facta; nec de salebris co∣gitant
vbi via strata, (Lips.) If you come to an Inne in
Germany, and dislike your fare, dyet, lodging, the Dutch
Host tels you, in a surly tone,-Aliud tibi quaeras diverso∣rium,
(Erasm. Dial.) Such is my resolution: who likes
not this, may reade some other thing.

My Lords, I have not without Cause, Inscrib'd this
Sermon unto your Names. First, it was Preach'd in the
great Assembly, whereof your selves were a Principall
part. Secondly, Preach'd on that Subiect, wherein your
Places have a Principall interest; The Common Good of
Church and Common-weale. A Subiect as necessary
for those Times, as the Times are Subiect to Necessity:
Private ends having brought the Publike Good, almost,
to it's End; and Hungry Coveteousnesse, like PHARAOH's
leane kine, devour'd this fat and flourishing Common∣weale.
To you therefore (as being-Patres Patriae, and-Ecclesiae
Patroni) this Weake, but Well-meant Labour of
mine, flees for Patrociny and protection. I shall make it
my humble Suite, that you will be pleas'd to entertaine
it, as DAVID, lame MEPHIOSHETH, for his Father
IONATHAN's sake. Lame it is in both feet. (Lame
in the Birth, by vnskilfull handling, lame in the Nursing,
by uncharitable scanning) yet entertaine it for it's fathers
sake, Your Country's sake, whose Love begat it. I re∣member
that Apologue in the Talmud; the grapes in Ba∣bel,
sent, upon a time, to the Vine-leaves, in Iudaea desiring
them, to come and over-shadow them; otherwise the
heat would consume them, and so they should never
come to Maturity. Your Lordships may easily guesse
at the Mythology. If Learning be not sheltred by those,
who are in Eminent place, and if they cast not their
Shadow over it, it will soone perish; But where they fa∣vour
it, it prospers. If the Spring bee cold, the Plants,
Herbes, and Blossomes are nipt and wither; But where
the Influence is seasonable, there all things reviue, thrive,
flourish. So where Great Persons are averse from Lear∣ning,
the Spirits, which would otherwise, blossome, doe

wither and decay. But when it is upholden by men of
Higher place, it is like a Fountaine of Living Water. For
my part I cannot praise my Present otherwise, then by
the Truth of that heart, from which it proceeds:
which shall bee Ambitious of all occasions, that may
testifie a Gratefull acknowledgement of your Lordships
undeserved favours; and wherewith, I will daily Petition
the Lord of Lords for the continuance of your Happi∣nesse
and Welfare.

