



RIght Honorable and my very good Lord, three things made me take in hand this un∣handled argument.
1. The insulting of a Iesuit and Dr. of Di∣vinity, Joannes Roberti. Hee hath written against this strange and magicall Cure. I had some light from him. I often cite and alleage him. Thus farre I commend him.

But because some Protestants practise this and Charactericall Cures, (which notwithstanding are more frequent a∣mongst Papists) he calles us Magi-Calvinists, Characterists, &c. Hee makes that gene∣rally in vs all, doctrinall, which is but in some few personally practicall. Herein I detest his Sophistrie & discommend him.
2. The second thing moving me, was a commiseration of the case of some per∣sons of quality, reputed religious, which vse the Weapon-Salve. I pitty these. I pre∣sume they imagine no harme in it. I pray for them in our Saviour Christ his owne words: Father forgive them, for they know not Luke 22. 34. what they doe. Luke 22. 34.
3. Lastly, there are some Friends of J. S. E. C. mine, which presume more of my ability to give the world satisfaction in this que∣stion, than I my selfe doe. At their re∣quests I tooke this unusuall taske on me. For where I may do good, little intreaty shall serve.
For the first of these; the Iesuite & his complices: I would haue them pull downe their crestes. Wee of the

Church of England detest superstitious and magicall Cures. Wee have many poore Parish Priests amongst us (where∣of my selfe is the meanest, placed over but a decade of families, consisting of eight times so many soules as were in Noahs Arke) which dare handle an argu∣ment, and write and preach against such practices (if they know of them) as well as their great Doctors and Vniversitie Readers.
For the second; the Persons of worth practising this Cure; I have written this Treatise for their reading. They may suppose their Cure lawfull, because no man amongst us hath as yet written to contradict it. But I would have them know, that till of late it was little known amongst us, and therefore little or not at all inquired into. But now growing every day more common (so that I have seene the Salve in the very hands of wo∣men) I have adventured (with Gods helpe) to shew the unlawfulnesse of it. In reading of it, I counsell them to an∣noint

their eyes with the eye-Salve bought of Christ, Revel 3. 18: and then I Revelat. 3. 18. doubt not, but the scales will fall from their eyes as from St. Pauls, Acts 9. 18: and Act. 9. 18. they will plainly see the vanity of their Weapon-Salve. It is more ease and security for me to be silent. I might say with St. Au∣gustine; D. August. de Tri. lib. 3. in prooem. Malle me legendo, quàm legenda dictan∣do labor are. I had rather bee reading my selfe, than be writing to be read by others. But I had rather hazard mine owne repu∣tation, than they should their salvation.
And for the last, my Friends; at whose intreaty I condescended to this underta∣king; I desire them and others to know thus much from me, that I esteeme not my selfe, mine owne; but Gods, my Countries, theirs. While I am able, I will shunne no labour for their sakes. I am not of their garbe, which writing nothing, thinke it enough to purchase to them∣selves the repute of great Schollers, if they can shake their head, and play the malici∣ous Critickes in the workes of others. Nor am I of their minde, which to be∣come

great, by being counted good prea∣chers, preach not above twice or thrice a yeare, and then lay all their strength on their Sermon. My resolution is otherwise; I will reade much, write some what, and preach often. Reading in time may make one learned, writing Iudicious, and often preaching a ready man. So I may do good, I will be dainty of none of these, when they are required. Better is goodnesse without greatnesse, than greatnesse with∣out goodnesse. These are the motives of sending abroad this my Treatise. Com∣ming forth, to whom should I first give it, but to your Lordship, to whom I first gave my selfe? To whom but to you, for whom my prayers to God (who gives Sa∣latem sublimium orationibus humilium) are, that you may ever bee both good & great? I presume you will receive the worke, be∣cause you have owned the Author. It is like to passe through many a storme thun∣dred against it, by the malicious contra∣dictions of some obstinate vnguentaries and peevish Censurers. For most true is

that of the Comoedian: Obsequium amicos, Terent. in Ade. Act. 1. Scen. 1. veritas odium parit. But if your Honour out of your wonted candor will be pleased to shelter it and mee, vnder your Wing, I shall be safe from biting, to hurt me, though not from barking (if I cared for it,) to fright me. In confidence whereof I humbly prostrate to your Noblenesse this little worke, together with

