



THis Sermon
The Turke permitteth Christs Gos∣pel to be prea∣ched; the Pope condē∣neth it to the racke and in∣quisition; who is the better man? (most vertuous and ho∣nour: Lady) con∣ceiued at first in the Vines of Pe∣rah, adioyning to renowned Constantinople, the stam∣boll
or great Citie of the great Turke; and there deliuered (insteed of a faire Temple) in a pleasant Garden, vnder a lofty Cypresse
A Tree fit for such assemblies for the Anci∣ents were wont to beare the branches therof in their Fune∣rals. tree, in a goodly as∣sembly of diuers Nations
There were present of most Nations vnder the Sunne, Eng∣lish, French, Dutch, Germain, Italian, Popish, Hungarian, Trā∣siluanian, Mol∣da: Wallachian, Russes, Greekes, Armenians, Bed∣dowines, Turkes, Iones, &c., after long trauaile through many and strange Countries, is now at length by the pro∣pitious fauour of the Almightie, footed in Great Britaine; where thinking to haue reposed it's wearied limbs, is by gentle intreatie moued, and forcible im∣portunitie ouer-ruled, to beginne a new trauaile, to vndertake a new iourney, visite many Cities, enter many houses, passe through many hands, offer it selfe to many quicke-sighted eies, submit to many censorious heads. As therefore in her first birth she had to shadow her frō the Sunnes scorching beames, a beauti∣full and umbriferous Tree; so she nee∣deth
some pleasing Canopie, some refre∣shing vmbrello to shadow her stil. And vnder whose wings may she better sus∣taine and maintaine her selfe (most ver¦tuous and honour: Lady) then vnder yours? you were the Patronesse of the Lady whom she honoureth, whose life she relateth, whose death she lamenteth, whofe Funerall she celebrateth; you, to∣gether with your honourable and religi∣ous
The Lady Croft. Mother, gaue that Lady her bree∣ding, communicated vnto her your ver∣tues, aduanced her to her honours; so that the best of her life, her education, her vertues, her honours, shee deriued (next vnder God) from you: and ther∣fore being dead, her wandring obsequies haue recourse vnto you for protection, presuming that for loue you bare vnto the liuing,
Ruth 2.20. you will not cease to doe good
vnto the dead; the good you shall do her is to daigne that your honourable name (as it was a Sanctuarie vnto her selfe while she liued) so it may patronage her Funerals being dead. It is not I, for what am I vnknowne to you, or my de∣seruings? but shee, or because shee is not, I for her, or rather her liuing ver∣tues for her dead selfe, that imploreth this gratious fauor at your gentle hands. Your tender breast wil not deny so hum∣ble a suter; your olde loue will bid you yeeld to a desire so zealous. In full con∣fidence whereof I haue ventured to pre∣fixe your honourable name, which, if it find (as it feruently desireth) accep∣tance fauourable, it shal perhaps encou∣rage mee to second it with some more pleasing and delightfull subiect, which mine owne experience hath gathered
from no lesse painefull then farre for∣raigne obseruations. In the meane season my deuoted heart shall deuoutly pray for length of daies, redoubled ho∣nours, graces happinesse, to descend and rest vpon your vertuous head, and after this life the eternall crowne of a better life.

