



THE love of you, dearely
beloved, whom I have and
yet do serve in the Lord, stir∣red
by the earnest and for∣ward
desire of some of you,
hath mooved me to alter my
former determination, of ab∣stayning
from all writing, e∣specially
during the present
estate of Gods Church, more
wasted and whithered, then watered, and builded in
grace, by superfluitie of writing: I ever was loth to
put my hande to the penne, and rashlie to adventure the
declaring of my minde, in so deepe mysteries: seeing so
many, by their inconsiderate forwardnes in writing, doe
darken the trueth, more then cleere it, and doe breed
contention, rather, then godly edifying. The sight of
whose weaknes, ioyned with the conscience of myne
owne inabilitie, as being in iudgement farre inferior, so
also in vttering by word, and expressing in writt, the con∣ceptions

of my minde, fare lesse prompt and able, then
many who have so stumbled: hath made me afraide, to
medle in such sort, with the sacred truth of God. More∣over,
in this contending age, I see and perceyve, that
answering of errours, doth more kindle then quench the
fire of endlesse strife: presumption of knowledge, decey∣ving
the mindes of manie: and true humilitie, so neces∣sarie
a vertue, for learning the mysteries of God, so farre
remoued from men, even otherwayes of excellent giftes,
that the most part, striving in preiudged humor, more for
victorie, then truth: it is hard to finde, almost one, who in
this heate of contention, doth not in something, more or
lesse marre the soundnes of Gods truth. So dangerous a
thing it is to do any thing, in contentious manner, and
through vaine glorie, and not in that meeknes of minde,
whereby every man esteemeth others better then him selfe.
Philip. 2. 3. and therefore wisely doth the Apostle forbid oppo∣sitions
of science, falsly so called, in the handling of Gods
truth:1. Tim. 6. 20. 2. as a thing which maketh both them which professe
it, to erre concerning the faith: and also turnes others a∣way
from the truth: and commandeth the servant of the
Lord,2 Tim 2. 24. 25. not to strive, but being gentle toward all men, to in∣struct
thē with meeknes: and willeth those that are strong
in the faith, to receive vnto them, the weake in faith: but
not vnto cōtroversies of disputations,Rom. 14. 1. because that doth
greatly harme such as are weake: who thereby are cast in
a greater doubtfulnes and vncertaintie of the maine foū∣dations.
For as a ship before one faire wind, is carried for∣ward
in hir course, & saffely brought to the havē: which
by contrary blastes, is not onely hindred, but greatly en∣dangered,
if not drowned: even so the faith of the Saints,

which is to be promoved by the onely simple and sound
breath of Gods mouth,1. Cor. 1. 10 in his faithfull servants, all both
minding & speaking one thing,Phil. 2. 2. must needes bee marvey∣lously
hindred in many,Rom. 15. 6. and in many quite destroyed
by these so many contrarie doctrines, blowing every one
against another, and casting the faith of the children of
God, vpon so many daungerous Rockes: and tossing it
with so manie windes and waves, that it is no marvayle,
to see so many, make wofull shipwrackes. It were more
to the honour of God, and profit of the Saints, if the
Builders were more carefull of keeping vnitie in the
truth, in following the true paterne of holsome wordes,
in faith and love,2. Tim. 1. 13. which cannot bee condemned: then
curious in shewing their knowledge.Tit. 2. 8. And that all Pa∣stours,
did labour, after th'example of that Prince of Pa∣stours,
to lead his people by the still waters: rather then
by the turbulent streames of their fighting opinions, and
by strange language, to divert the children of God, from
the waters of Shiloa, that runnes softlie: which only are
able to refresh the Cittie of God. In so doinge, they
should not have sinned, in quenching so many smoking
flaxes, and breaking so many brused reedes. I speake
not against the faithfull labours of Christes witnesses:
cōtending with courage against the errors of the com∣mon
adversarie, either within or without the house of
GOD: and opposing them selves, both in plaine sim∣plicitie
of trueth, and moderate helpe of arte, to eve∣rie
corrupt doctrine. But my speach is against our owne
intestine debates, arising not so much vpon any substan∣tiall
contrarietie, as to much curiositie of judgement,
whereas in one and the same pointe, they holding the

substance, doe contende for the shadowe. as is too ma∣nifest
in this same pointe, whereof I am by your Chri∣stian
importunitie, forced to write touchinge the
Iustification of a sinner before God. Wherein
even they who doe holde Christ, to bee our righteous∣nesse,
according to the word: doe yet notwithstanding
greatly perturbe the peace of the Church, and destroye
the faith of many: and give matter of offence to all, in
striving for the difference, which is in the measure, ra∣ther
thē in the matter of their faith. They that see more
deepely, by importune and vntimely forwardnes, ren∣ting
such as are yet old bottells, with their new wine:
and they who are not come so farre in knowledge, in
vnadvised temeritie, iudging and condempning that,
whereto as yet they themselves have not attained. Both
fayling in the duetie of love: the one not contenting to
have their faith with them selves, vntill without hurte
and offence of others, they may imparte it to their edifi∣cation,
and not to their destruction: the other sorte, not
having learned in sobrietie, to be wise according to the
measure of their owne faith, doe not admitt what more
the Lord reveyleth to others. as though the measure of
their faith and knowledge, should bee the rule and li∣mittes
of the spirit, to binde the whole Church, and
every man therein. And this woefull seed of contradi∣ction
(while men are too much addicted to the vaine de∣ceyte
of their owne reason) hath now at last, not onely
troubled the faith of the weake ones, but hath begunne,
to cast darknes vpon the mindes, of some of the stron∣gest
sorte. while they evanish in their owne reasonings

about the trueth of God reveyled in the Gospell: as did
the Gentiles, in that trueth which God made manifest
vnto them in the creatures.Rom. . 2. These have bene the causes
of my vnwillingnes, to give any thing in write, and that
now, being overcome by your request, I doe follow a
plaine maner of declaration of my minde, without con∣tention
with anie, or direct disputing against anie: as be∣ing
resolved, to have no parte, in the noysome wrang∣ling,
of this contentious age. But as one desirous to
walke honestlie, in all things: I endevour, to keepe mee
within the measure of my owne faith: and to benefitt
the Church of God, with that which he hath given me:
not hindring, nor envying that others, who have recey∣ved
more, do more good in our common Lords worke.
Of whom (as hee who is onely able to give it) I most
humbly crave the gratious direction of his spirit, in this
and all my labours: with his blessing therevpon, to your
comfort, and theirs who shall have the vse thereof. His
grace be with you. Middelburgh, 20. Iuly, 1615.





