



AMong other great Plages that this Realme of Englande encreced why∣lest the scryptures were vnknowen (ryght excellent prynce) there was no¦ne greater thā that by mere ignorāce of godes worde by a long processe of yeres, falshed was receyued for trou∣the, euyll for good, superstytion for true religyon. Wherof ensued no lesse peryll to oure sel¦fes than manyfest dysorder in the publike estate & gouer¦naunce, whylest the people habandonyng the obedience due to theyr souerayn Lyege lorde & Kyng, dyd in stead of hym adhere and clene to an vsurper and tyrant, who not onely kepe theyr bodyes, but theyr soules also in most myserable seruytude and subiection. I meane that Antechrist and head of al abhomination the Bisshop of Rome whose bondage and thraldom yt we be now dely¦uered and made fre. The hole cause and benefyte is to be ascrybed to the illustration and setting furth of god¦des holy worde. And as the thanke therof is geuen to al¦myghtye god, who admytteth no partenets of his glori So next vnto hym aboue all Mortal mē, are we bound to the worthy Prynce of eternall memory kynge Henri the eyght. Who puttyng on the armour of gods worde
 droue out of this Realme the wronge vsurpt of hys power and auctoryte Regall, and delyuered his people fro the captyuyte, wherin the Byshops of Rome hadde longe tyme kept them. Yet lyke as the temple of God in Hierusalem, was begon by Dauyd, and fynyshed by Salomō: so many kindes of supersticiō wer abolished by the sayd good Kyng and no fewer left to be reformed by hys gracyous and most lauful sonne oure new soue∣raygne lorde Kynge Edward the syxt. By whose happy and bly syd procedynge hytherto it is euydent to the world that god is his guyd directyng his passage to the parfectyon of al vertue and godlynes. A notable expe∣ryment wherof we haue, by the holsom and holy lawes that procede from his grace in thys hys mynoryte and chyldhed, to the aduauncement of Goddes worde, and extyrpatyon of al hypocrysy, and fals religyon. For the whyche benefyte how moche the realme of Englande to bounden to hys magesty, my pen can not suffycyently set it furth. But thys must al men confesse, that as long as the memory therof shal remayne, so long shal the ho∣norable fame and prayses of hys grace be fresshe and grene in al true Englyshmens hartes. Whych I sucke not so moche for the syngular benefytes by your grace extendyd too me preuayle, as for the greate wealth and commodyte redoundyng to al men vnyuersally. Wher∣fore deuysyng wyth my selfe in what wyse I myghte showe my selfe thankful, or at the least not vnmyndfull o so ample merytes me thought I could do nothyng, ey¦ther more gratefull to your grace, or more profytable to my countree than to helpe forward in this cause of rely¦gyon, And seing the manyfold errour and confusyd here¦tofore sproyng in this Realme by reason that the true dyfference betwene the power regal ecclesiastycal was eyther not wel knowen or not wel defyned. I bethought me of a boke lent me by my frend master Morison writē in the laten tongue, wherin the dyfference of those two powers, with ye lymyts of eyther of them is so playnly
 set oue, so pureli explaned, and so dystinclye dysclosed by scriptures as no man (I suppose) oneles he be to set drowned in the dregges of popery and superstytion, can be in ony doubt of ye throuth the vtylyte of whych wor∣ke wel weyed with the late controuersy about the same matter, moeued me fyrst to ye translation therof, maruay∣lynge that a matter so prouffytable and necessary to be knowen shold be so longe suppressed, or that the hygher powers had not in so longe tyme prouyded to set hir abrode as well the Englyshe tongue as it is in the latyn Neuer the lese rather than my Countre, shuld be vtterly frustrate of so great fruyte as myght growe by redynge therof, I thought it a well bestood labour to euen it into Englyshe the translacion, wherof I submyt to the indyf¦ferent Iudgement of al lerned reders, requerīg theyr ay¦de where eyther I haue erred or else not parfytly rēdred the sentence of the autor. Wherfore pondryng my weyke¦nes and want of connyng I praye ayde of your grace to whome for my better defence I dedycate my labours, yt they may passe forth vnder your protection of whome yf in stead of praise I receiue pardō of my boldnes it shalbe to my suffycyent recompence. Almyhty god long preserue your grace to the aduaūcement of his glory to ye honoure of the kynges Magesty and prouffyt of his People.
Amen.
