



WHen it first came into my thoughts to offer vnto your Grace, most Reuerend Father, the second part of these my labours, I found not a little consternation of minde, and con∣flict of opinion in my selfe, considering your exquisite learning, and the grauity of your iudgement: it caused me oftentimes to take my hand from the paper, as abashed to offer these rude and vnpo∣lisht lines vnto your patronage. But on the other side, when I re∣membred the singular clemency and gracious disposition which in the whole course of your gouernement hath so abundantly decla∣red it selfe, I was animated and encouraged to present the poore fruits of an vnlearned pen vnto you, not without assured hope to
 finde fauour in your sight, since true honour is alwaies gracious, and the greatest learning hath most facilitie.
I know not what conceit sowre and suspicious hearts will haue of my trauailes, neither after what manner the sharpe swords which are in the mouthes of the popish Emissaries will entertaine me: but surely neither hatred of the persons of them of the Romish Church, nor any other sinister motion of minde (I trust) but onely the desire of the saluation of their soules whose simplicitie is led astray by the deceits of Antichrist, hath stirred me vnto the per¦formance of this duty. For when should dogs awake the houshould, but at what time it is compassed about with theeues? Or when is it so fit to lift vp our voices in the Church, as when the Hereticks and false teachers labour most earnestly to set vp the abominable desolation? which certainly in these our daies they more busily and earnestly practise to effect, then euer they did since reformation of religion in the Church was first begunne.
And here, if I might be bold humbly and reuerently to shew vnto a great part of the Ministers of our Church their blemish, as Dauid shewed vnto Saul the cruse of water, and the Speare that stood at his head, I would presume to say, that euen by the fault of the Candles themselues the Watchmen and Shepheards of the flocke, the darknesse spreadeth it selfe euery day more and more ouer the whole house of God, and the Wolues haue free accesse vn∣to the fouldes of Christ: For surely vnto two sorts of Clergy men may this euill be chiefely imputed.
The first are they who neglecting to stand vp in the breach for the house of Israel, and to make warre against the Beast, spend all their ministerie in digladiation de lana Caprina, fighting about the shining of the Moone in the water: all their labour and endea∣uour is nothing else but to declaime against the gouernement and the discipline of the Church. With their owne hands they bulge the ship that beareth them, and breake downe the walles of the
 house wherein they dwell, and become spiculatores pro spe∣culatoribus, and pro dispensatoribus dissipatores.Author. Ser. ad frat. in eremo. A mi∣serable thing it is that by their contentions and Schisme, Heresie should take oportunitie, and the kingdome of darknesse encrease amongst vs: in this vnhappy ataxy what remaineth? but with the Patriarch to pray,Gen. 9.27. God perswade Iaphet that hee may dwell in the Tents of Sem, and that Canaan may bee his seruant. The Lord of his mercy grant a Christian syncretisme vn∣to his Church,Esay 11.13. that Iudah and Ephraim may ioine together and flee vpon the shoulders of the Philistines, till they bee rooted out. To speake no more concerning them that busie themselues so much in tything of Mynt and Rue, but leaue the greatest and the chiefest office of their Ministery alone, I would wish them to remember often and aduisedly, that if wee shall all giue ac∣count what we haue doue in our owne bodies, much more shall wee bee called to a strict and seuere reckoning of that which wee haue done in the body of Christ, which is his Church.
The second sort is of them who though they approue the go∣uernement and consent vnto the discipline of our Church; yet whether they feare to displease the few of Babylons great Mer∣chants which are left amongst vs; or whether they mis-doubt the stabilitie of times, I know not: but howsoeuer in all Morall arguments they lift vp their voices like Trumpets, yet in the cause and controuersies of Religion they are mute;Iud. 5.23. like the inha∣bitants of Meros they come not forth to help the Lord, against the mighty.
In those great and grieuous warres of Arians against the Son of God, the Orthodox professors, to set forth the Consubstantiality and Coeternitie of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, v∣sed in the publique worship to sing Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the holy Ghost; but the Hereticks to se∣parate themselues from the Church, sung after another manner;
 Glory be to the Father,Theod. l. 2. c. 24. by the Sonne, in the holy Ghost. Le∣ontius Bishop of Antioch, that he might offend neither part, would chaunt out the later verse of the Hymne, As it was in the begin∣ning, is now and euer shall be, like a morning Larke: but the first part, Glory be to the Father, to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, he did with a lowe and submisse murmure whisper forth like the secrets of a Masse.Mt 12.30 He that is not with him is against him, and he that gathereth not with him scattereth.Cic. e na. dor. l. 1 If the Athenians could not endure Protagoras, who of their Gods would neither define whether they were or were not; is it not to bee feared lest our God, a iealous God, and a consuming fire will spue such luke∣warme Laodiceans out of his mouth, as are neither hote nor cold?
Euill must be alwaies resisted, and false doctrine as carefully quenched, as fire when it burneth houses, or the pestilence which infecteth the Citie. Wherefore not onely the Prophets, and Apo∣stles, and all holy men which spake by the Spirit of God, were directed to cry out against the wickednesse of their time, but in all ages the Fathers of the Church haue applied themselues to withstand the Heresies which sprung vp in their daies. Iraeneus laboured against Valentine and Marcion, Athanasius against Arians, Augustine against Donatists, Pelagians, Priscillia∣nists, and Manichees, Leo against Eutiches, Eusebius Do∣roleus against Nestorius, Iohn Bishop of Constantinople a∣gainst Nouatus, Theodorus Bishop of Antioch against the A∣polinarists, Rutherius Veronensis against the Anthropo∣morphits. The time would faile mee to rehearse all that haue op∣posed themselues against spirituall wickednes in heauenly things; in euery age the worthy Fathers of the Church thought it their duty to root out of the field of Christ the seed of Satanicall and peruerse doctrine dispersed.
I trust therefore no man will maruell that I, a very worme
 of the earth, a man of obscure place, and meane gifts, haue put my selfe into the battaile against this huge and pestilent moun∣taine, the Whoore that sitteth vpon many waters: For though I consesse this argument requireth the pen of a ready writer, and skilfull artist to handle it; yet who is so ignorant but can de∣monstrate that the Sunne shineth when the day is bright, that the water is moist, the fire hote, the earth by nature heauy? There are some things so manifest that a very child may proue them; and of such sort I haue alwaies esteemed the Idolatrie, Superstition, Heresie, falshood of the Romish Missals to bee. Wherefore since to the opening of their impietie, there rather nee∣ded faithfulnesse, then learning, and much labour then great knowledge, I presumed to take the worke in hand: like the poore and simple Christian,Zozom. l. 1. c. 17. of whom Zozomen witnesseth that he stood vp against the curious and subtill Philosopher in a great Councell, and euen with simplicitie of Christian faith beat down the Goliah of heathenish and prophane Idolatry. Neither doe I feare to maintaine my propositions, and to proue these blasphe∣mies by me alledged, against any of the Romish brood, bee they neuer so fallacious and full of Sophistications, being prepared if God permit to yeeld a ready account of any thing that in this poore volume I charge them with.
To conclude, I am with all humilitie bold to present this poore Worke vnto your Grace, hoping assuredly that it shall find an honourable and faire acceptance with you, for that the cause is the Lords; and the dignity it is of our great Prophet Iesus Christ, which I desire to vindicate from the barbarous violence, and treacherous hands of the Romish Antichrist. The Lord of his mercy giue successe thereto.
Now the Go of all glory and mercy long and long continue your Lordship in that honourable gouernment of the Church, vn∣to which the diuine prouidence hath chosen you: that after many
 happy daies of labour in his Vineyard here on earth, you may be translated into the glory of his eternall Kingdome, and heare that sweet and comfortable blessing pronounced ouer you, Good seruant and faithfull thou hast beene faithfull in little, I will make thee ruler ouer much, enter thou into thy Masters ioy. This, God grant vnto you, through Iesus Christ, our onely Lord and Sauiour.
Seauern Stoke in Worcester-shire. Nouemb. 6. 1618.

