



THe desired and happy marriage of that Illustrious Princesse, with that magnanimous and Heroical Prince, of so great blood (but of greater merits) hath bin generally celebrated among all the subiects with such an vnaccustomed ioy, that some of them, being not able to containe them∣selues, and yet desirous to shew their deuoted affec∣tions, haue strained their Muse to sing a ioyfull Hymen to their Highnesses nuptiall rights: Among vvhich company, I being one of the number, although infe∣rior to them all in euery thing (my loue and affection onely excepted) commaunded my Muse, though in a hard and vnpleasing stile, yet as well as shee could to expresse my vowed seruice and obedience to their Highnesses. At the first I intended to haue made onely a short and ordinary Epithalamium; but afterwards hauing considered better of it, I found it much fitter to diuide it into three bookes. The first Booke I sent to the right Reuerend Father the

Lord Arch-bishop of Yorke, who presented it vnto the King. By this meanes I did thinke that if my first booke might haue a charitable censure of the wise and learned sort of men, I might then, with lesse feare and with more spirit, presume to present this my booke, with the other two, vnto their Highnesses. Notwithstanding, I had no such good conceit, either of myselfe, or of my labours, to thinke them all three worthy to be exposed to the iudgement, and censure of all men: and yet to haue put forth the one part, without the other, would haue made my Poeme im∣perfect, which had been a greater inconuenience. At length, some of my friends hauing receiued this Po∣eme printed it, being delighted with the noueltie of the matter, and desirous to shew their affection and my congratulation to that happy marriage. At the first it grieued me a little, that my book, being not ful∣ly perfected, should be printed: but at last hauing no desire to haue it printed againe, after that the solem∣nities were ended, som of my friends began to impor∣tune me that I would impart my booke vnto them. I being easily ouercome with their vrging yeelded vnto their requests: This booke they haue now translated into English, to the end that the Ladies may be parta∣kers of this curious symetrie. This booke I offer vp vnto your Highnesse of whom I haue heard many ho∣norable relations at the right reuerend father in God my lord Arch-bishop of Yorkes house; and now I do partly know your Highnes to be of such a Prince∣ly disposition, that you will not refuse the protection of the first fruits of a Scholler, but rather cherish and maintaine them; especially such a one that prostra∣teth

himselfe and his labours at your Highnesse feet, humbly beseeching your Highnesse not to suruey the booke with a curious eye, but to accept of that good minde which offers it. Last of all, I doe wish such a Spouse, as is described in these Hymnes, to be mat∣ched with your Highnesse; and I beseech thee, O God, to adde so much time to my yeeres, that I may liue to see it; to the end, that I may write a nuptiall Hymen of your Highnesse marriage, in a more iudicious and acurate stile.

