



GReat is the difference (welbeloued in Christ Iesus) betwixt want of knowledge, and wilfull errour; ignorance of simplici∣tie, and ignorance of peruerse disposition. For although a small errour in the begin∣ning may growe great in the end,Arist. l. de coelo & Mund. as Ari∣stotle; Yea all deep-rooted errors are hard∣ly by words extirped, as Petrarch witnesseth:Petraro de vit. sot. lib. 1. cap. 2. yet as to bee de∣ceiued in opinion is infirmitie of nature; So with an high hand euen against the face of Trueth to defend falsehood, is Serpen∣tine and Satanicall maliciousnesse.
Wherefore auoiding to sing vnto these deafe Adders which haue stopt their eares, charme the charmer neuer so wisely; I addresse my speech vnto you, poorer in spirit, yonger in
 malice, who although you sit in darknes, yet hate not the light; though you know not truth, yet loue not lies.
All meanes I am sure to detaine you in errour are by your pretended spirituall Fathers of Rome daily practised; force, torture, persecution, forbidding of you to read the labours of all them in whose forehead the Character of the Beast is not. A practice so much the more abominable, because the proofes and arguments which are produced by the professors of the reformed religion against the vse of Rome, are chiefely taken out of the word of God, the Scriptures of our saluation; which to deny vnto the world, what is it but to take the Sunne out of the firmament? and to forbid men to read, What is it but with Nahas to pull out the right eyes of Israel, euen the cleere eye of true faith, that they may be led by blinde guides headlong into all perdition?
Dum enim grauia scripture dicta non perquireur vt mandantur, paula∣tim a sentia deci∣det mens, vt aliquā∣do nec leuia intel∣lectu capantur. Greg. super Cant.Gregory well obserueth; while the weightie sentences of Scripture are not sought for as it is commanded, by little and little the minde falleth from knowledge, so that many times the easie things are not vnderstood. You see then the purpose for which the perusing of Scriptures is interdicted vnto you, that being spoiled of her armour, the soule may bee made captiue vnto the will and pleasure of Idol and brutish Shep∣heards, whose onely study is so to beare rule ouer you, that you may heare by their eares,Eck de Mss Lat. non Germnice dicend. and see by their eyes; as Ec∣kius for defence of his Masse in the Latine tongue shameth not to affirme, that All the hearers thereof must trust in the faith of the Church.
Cyp. in tract. 3. de Simp prael.From this supine negligence and slumber in the cause of Religion let Cyprian awake vs; who saith, the Diuell is changed into an Angell of light, and subornes his Mini∣nisters, as the Ministers of righteousnesse, who put the night for the day, destruction for saluation, desperation vnder the
 pretext of hope, perfidiousnesse for faith, Antichrist for Christ; and while they feigne things probable, they ouerthrow the truth with their subtilty. This is brought to passe (deare bre∣thren) because the Spring of truth is not sought vnto, neither haue men recourse vnto the head, neither is the doctrine of the heauenly Master obserued.Act. 17.11. Let the Breans teach vs al∣so who searched the Scriptures daily concerning the truth of the things which Paul had preached. Finally, hearken I be∣seech you to the high Priest and Bishop of your soules Iesus Christ, who exhorteth not his Apostles, and the Rulers of the Church onely, to awake from sleepe, and to flee the darkenes; But, What I say vnto you, I say vnto all men, Watch.Mark. 13.37. When ambitious Manasses, brother to the good Priest Iadus,Iadus high priest of Ierusalem, Ma∣nasses of Samaria. by the meanes of Shanabalat the Horonite had built a Tem∣ple on Mount Gerizim in Samaria, wherein the holy Law of Moses was daily prophaned, so that who in Ierusalem had eaten vncleane meates, or defiled the Sabath, fled vnto this Temple as a sanctuarie, wherein Idolatry, strange worship, and all prophanenesse was to be found: Yet such was their impudence, that they feared not to contend with the Temple which Salomon built at Ierusalem, for antiquity, dignity, and place. Here was now Mountain against Mountain, Temple against Temple, Altar against Altar, Law against Law, Priest against Priest, while the Iewes auouched the Temple of Ierusalem to be built according to the prescription of Moses;Schisme betweene the Iewes and Sa∣martanes, which should be he true Temple. and the Samaritanes earnestly stroue that on their Mount of Gerizim, Moses intended that the house of God should stand Into such violence burst out, at last, the flame of this conten∣tion, that it came vnto the eares of King Ptolomeu Philome∣ter: and vnto his iudgement on both sides was the cause refer∣red: Before whom they bound themselues with a solemne oath, swearing by God and the King, that they would bring their
 proofes out of the Law of God. Which when they had on ei∣ther part done, the Iewes for their Temple brought better testi∣monies then the Samaritanes could, and had the victorie. The same kinde of triall betwixt the Christian Church,Cotrouersies tryed by the Scripturs. and the Romish Church, we still desire; that by the authority of the pure word of God it may be decided, where the true Temple is: with them, or vs.
Iug. 9.When the Gibeonites saw themselues vnable to stand against Israel, they sent Messengers to Iosua in old and ouer∣worne garments, rent and torne shooes, hauing sowre drinke in their bottles, dryed and moulded bread in their bagges, pre∣tending that they came from far, & dwelt a great way off frō Israel. To which, while the people gaue ouer-light credence, counselling not as they were wont at the mouth of the Lord; they made with them an vnaduised league, and sware a peace to be repented. With the like fraud, vnder false pretence, and borrowed ragges of antiquity and succession, doe the Romish Masters, at this day, insinuate themselues into the hearts and fauour of such who giue no eare vnto the Word and Oracles of God. And not so onely: but as Iezabel to auoide the iust pu∣nishment due vnto her whorish and Idolatricall beastlinesse, entertained Iehu with a painted face,2. Reg. 9.30. and tyred her head; So they also colour their impiety, hide from your eyes their blasphe∣mies, and cast painted glosses ouer their grosse superstition; that they may blinde your iudgement, and abuse your zeale with maskes and shadowes.
I haue therefore, according vnto the measure of grace giuen me, in these my labours, vnscarfed the Papall policie, and laid open the mysterie of Babylon, shewing you her filthy parts, the very dregs of her cup: that seeing there lyeth much Ad∣ders poyson vnder her tongue, which you perceiue not; much gaule, much bitternesse, which by the lying glosse of false hy∣pocrisie is hidden from your eyes, you may at the last finde
 whither they haue led you; and to what place, all this while, blind fold yee haue trauelled, and that your feet stand not in the gates of Sion, nor yet in the Prophets house at Dothan;2. Reg. 6. but that you are in the middes of Samaria, the implacable enemy of the true Ierusalem. Which, that it may be the better brought to passe, I will pray also with the Prophet,2. Reg. 6.20. Lord open the eyes of these men, that they may see.
Your Missals, the solemne formes of publique Seruice, I haue vndertaken to examine, prouing out of them the Limi∣tations of Bellarmine, and such other Sophisters (by which they go about to maintain the grosseness of errours) to be meere mockeries not obserued in the Liturgies of the Romish Church. I haue also studied to shew vnto you the abhominable false∣hood, superstition, and Idolatry, in the Breuiaries, and Masse-bookes contained; that when you see how the open religious seruice of God, is prophaned and falsified, you may iudge what faith or sincerity they keep in their priuate writings; and say with that great Physition, Si aqua praesocat, quid insu∣per sorbebimus; If we be strangled with the purest water what then shall we drink?
One thing let me especially commend to your considerations. Whereas it is a common opinion that your Missals & Legends, of late time set forth, are more reformed then the old and obsolete; It is farre otherwise: for there is no blasphemy so great, nor superstition so absurd, to be found in the one, which is not as palpably deprehended in the other. For as of Masse-bookes the Romane Breuiarie, set forth by the authority of the Councell of Trent, and ratified by Pius Quintus, is held the tersest and most reformed: So the Legend published by Aloysius Lypomanus, is accounted the flower of Legends: But to speake the truth, these aboue the rest, by many degrees, surmount in all spirituall wickednesse, in all falshood and blasphemy.

I haue not onely therfore vsed the testimony of the later Le∣gends and Missals, but of the former also; for that in many things the Romane Breuiarie not onely taketh hands with the most barbarous Legends of Lombardy and England, but it seeemeth for the most part, either taken out of the Missals of Sarisbury and Hereford, or at the least to imitate them in their Rites and Ceremonies.
Neither can any man iustly blame me in this proceeding; seeing the vse of Sarum is neither disanulled, nor exaucto∣rated, but that it may be still sung, and vsed by the Priests in their celebration: as it may appeare by the Bull of Pius Quintus, dated in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred and seuenty the day before the Ides of Iuly, and in the first yeare of his Popedome: in which, though all other Missals be recal∣led,Nisi ab ipsa prima institutione a sede Apostolita appro∣bata vel consuitu∣dine quaevil ipsam stituto super duē∣tes annos Missarum celebrandrum in e∣rdum Ecclesijs assi∣due obsruata sit: à quibus vt Praesatam celebrands costitu∣tionem vel consu tudinem nequaquā auferimus. yet such are permitted vnto any Church, as haue beene vsed aboue the space of two hundred yeaes. Now theEx Baleo. cont. 13. cap. 14. Missall of Sarisbury was first deuised by Osmundus Neustrius Earle of Dorset, a great Souldier, and Captaine, vnder William the Conquerour, Chancellour also of Eng∣land, and second Bishop of Sarisbury, after the translations of the same Episcopall Sea from Shiborne to Saum. But this warlike BishopEx flrint. W∣gorne. Ex com. laudatis∣sum & doctisitis praesul. F. God∣wit Ep. Landineu. de praesulious Agl. died the twenty fourth yeare of his Prelacie, 3. nonas Decembris, anno Domini 1099: and being Sainted, vnto him the third day of December is conse∣crate. Wherefore seeing the Custome of Sarisbury cannot bee lesse then of fiue hundred and eightie yeares continuance, t remaineth as yet in force, and may by the testimony of the Pope himselfe be still celebrated.
As for my sincerity and faithfulness in producing testi∣monies, and witnesses in the cause I handle; as vnto the con∣science of euery man that surueyeth these Labours, and compa∣reth my Quotations with the Originall, I doubt not, but to ap∣proue
 my selfe: So I call that great and glorious God, whose vn∣worthy Minister I am, to witnesse, that I haue not willingly, wit∣tingly, or malitiously falsified, wrested, peruerted, or misconstrued any places by me alleaged; knowing that one day I shall stand before the great Tribunall, where the secrets of all hearts shall be opened, and I my selfe shall giue account of all that I haue said or writ∣ten. I thanke God I feare the Lord, and tremble at his iudgements; before my eyes are all the rabble of false accusers, Doeg the Edo∣mite, Haman the Agagite, the wicked Iewes that slandered Christ, whose shamefull seed is a pillar of Salt to all posterity. I remember also the three accusers of Narcissus, to whom the seue∣rall vengeance, fire, languishing, and blindnesse sorted, as euery one imprecated to himselfe, if he accused falsly. Wherefore let there be no preiudice, I beseech you, either of the cause it selfe, or of my person but as you are zealous of your owne saluation, so peruse the high and heynous crimes, blasphemy, idolatry, super∣stition, falshood, Antichristianisme, which I obiect against the publique forme of your worship, and the daily practice of your policie. Wherein, if you finde me truely and duely to charge them, Go forth out of Babylon, flee from the Chaldeans, flee I say out of the middest of Babylon, and deliuer euery man his soule: be not cut off in her iniquitie. Now this the Lord God grant vnto you that we may be all gathered into the Sheep fold of the great and true Sheep-heard, who hath giuen his life for you, and hath shed his bloud to wash you, and present you faultlesse without spot vnto God. To him, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, bee all Praise, Power, Might, and Maiesty ascribed, in the Congregation of all Saints, world without end, Amen.
Seauern Stoke in Worcester-shire, Nouemb. 6. 1618.

