



My Lord,
AMongst Consolations, it is not the least, to represent to a Mans selfe, like Examples of Calamitie in o∣thers. For Examples giue a quicker Jmpression, than Arguments; And
 besides they certifie vs that, which the Scripture also tendreth for satisfa∣ction; That no new Thing is happened vnto vs. This they doe the better, by how much the Exam∣ples, are liker in circumstances, to our owne Case; And more especially, if they fall vpon Persons, that are greater, and worthier, than our selues. For as it sauoureth of Ʋanity, to match our selues highly, in our owne conceit; So on the otherside, it is a good sound Conclusion, that if our Betters haue sustained the like Euents, wee haue the lesse cause to be grieued.
Jn this kinde of Consolation, I haue not beene wanting to my Selfe; Though as a Christian, I haue tasted (through Gods great goodnesse,) of higher Remedies. Hauing therefore,
 through the Ʋarietie of my Reading, set before me, many Examples, both of Ancient and Later Times, my Thoughts (I confesse) haue chiefly stayed vpon three Particulars, as the most Eminent, and the most Resem∣bling. All three Persons, that had held chiefe place of Authority in their Countries; All three ruined, not by Warre, or by any other Disaster, but by Justice, and Sentence, as Delin∣quents, and Criminalls; All three famous Writers, insomuch as the re∣membrance of their Calamity, is now as to Posterity, but as a little Picture of Night-worke, remaining a∣mongst the faire, and excellent Ta∣bles, of their Acts, and Works. And all three (if that were any thing to the matter,) fit Examples to quench
 any Mans Ambition of Rising a∣gaine; For that they were euery one of them restored with great glory, but to their further Ruine and Destru∣ction, ending in a violent Death. The Men were, Demosthenes, Cicero, and Seneca; Persons, that J durst not claime Affinity with, ex∣cept the Similitude of our Fortunes had contracted it. When I had cast mine Eyes vpon these Examples, J was carried on further to obserue, how they did beare their Fortunes, and principally, how they did employ their Times, being banished, and disabled for Publike Businesse; To the end, that J might learne by them; And that they might be, as well my Counsellours, as my Comforters. Wherupon I happe∣ned to note, how diuersly, their For∣tunes
 wrought vpon them, especially in that point, at which I did most aime, which was the employing of their Times, and Pens. Jn Cicero, I saw, that during his Banishment, (which was almost two yeares,) he was so soft∣ned, and deiected, as he wrote nothing, but a few Womanish Epistles. And yet, in mine opinion, he had least reason of the Three, to be discouraged: For that although it was iudged, and iudged by the highest kinde of Iudge∣ment, in forme of a Statute, or Law, that he should be banished; And his whole Estate confiscated, and seized; And his houses pulled downe; And that it should be highly penall, for any Man, to propound his Repeale; Yet his Case, euen then, had no great Blot of Ignominy, but it was thought,
 but a Tempest of Popularitie, which ouerthrew him. Demosthenes con∣trariwise, though his Case was foule, being condemned for Bribery; And not simple Bribery, but Bribery in the Nature of Treason, and Disloy∣alty; yet neuerthelesse tooke so little knowledge of his Fortune, as during his Banishment, hee did much busie himselfe, and entermeddle with mat∣ters of State; And tooke vpon him to Counsell the State, (as if he had beene still at the Helme,) by letters; As ap∣peares by some Epistles of his, which are extant. Seneca indeed, who was condemned, for many Corruptions, and Crimes, and banished into a solitary Island, kept a Meane; And though his penne did not freese, yet he abstained from intruding into Mat∣ters
 of Businesse; But spent his time, in writing Books, of excellent Argu∣ment, and Vse, for all Ages; Though he might haue made better Choyce, (sometimes) of his Dedications.
These Examples confirmed mee much in a Resolution, (whereunto J was otherwise inclined,) to spend my Time wholly in Writing; And to put forth that poore Talent, or halfe Talent, or what it is, that God hath giuen me, not as heretofore to parti∣cular Exchanges, but to Banks, or Mounts of Perpetuity, which will not breake. Therefore hauing not long since, set forth a part of my In∣stauration; Which is the Worke, that in mine owne iudgement, (Si nunquam fallit Imago,) J doe most esteeme; I thinke to proceed in some
 new parts thereof. And although J haue receiued from many Parts be∣yond the Seas, Testimonies touching that Worke, such as beyond which J could not expect at the first, in so ab∣struse an Argument; yet neuerthe∣lesse J haue iust cause to doubt, that it flies too high ouer Mens Heads: I haue a purpose therefore, (though I breake the order of Time,) to draw it downe to the sense, by some Patternes of a Naturall Story, and Inquisi∣tion. And againe, for that my Booke of Aduancement of Learning, may be some Preparatiue, or Key, for the better opening of the Instau∣ration; Because it exhibit's a Mix∣ture, of new Conceits, and old; where∣as the Instauration, giues the new vnmixed, otherwise than with some
 little Aspersion of the old, for tastes sake; J haue thought good to procure a Translation of that Booke, into the Generall Language, not with∣out great and ample Additions, and Enrichment thereof; Especially in the Second Booke, which handleth the Partition of Sciences: In such sort, as I hold it may serue, in lieu of the First Part, of the Instauration, and acquit my promise in that part. Againe, because I cannot altogether desert, the Ciuill Person, that I haue borne; Which if I should forget, E∣nough would remember; J haue also entred into a worke touching Lawes; Propounding a Character of Iustice, in a middle terme, betweene the Spe∣culatiue, and Reuerend discourses of Philosophers, and the Writings of
 Lawyers, which are tied, and ob∣noxious to their particular Lawes. And although it be true, that J had a purpose, to make a particular Digest, or Recompilement, of the Lawes, of mine owne Nation; Yet because it is a Worke of Assistance, and that, that I cannot master by mine owne Forces, and Penne, J haue laid it aside. Now hauing in the Worke of my Instauration, had in contem∣plation, the generall Good of Men, in their very Being, and the Dowries of Nature; And in my Worke of Lawes, the generall good of Men likewise, in Society, and the Dowries of Gouernment; I thought in duty I owed somewhat vnto mine owne Country, which J euer loued; Jnso∣much as although my Place, hath
 beene farre aboue my desert, yet my Thoughts, and Cares concerning the Good thereof, were beyond, and ouer, and aboue my place: So now being (as I am) no more able to doe my Countrey Seruice, it remained vn∣to me, to doe it Honour: Which J haue endeuoured to doe, in my VVorke, of the Raigne, of King HENRY the Seuenth. As for my Essayes, and some other Particu∣lars of that nature, I count them, but as the Recreations of my other Stu∣dies, and in that sort purpose to conti∣nue them; Though J am not ignorant, that those kind of VVritings, would, with lesse paines, and embracement, (perhaps,) yeeld more Lustre, and Reputation to my Name, than those other, which I haue in hand. But J
 account the Ʋse, that a Man should seeke, of the publishing of his owne VVritings before his Death, to be but an vntimely Anticipation of that, which is proper to follow a Man, and not to goe along with him.
But reuoluing with my selfe, my Writings, as well those which I haue published, as those, which I had in hand, me thought they went all into the City, and none into the Tem∣ple; Where because I haue found, so great Consolation, J desire likewise to make some poore Oblation. There∣fore J haue chosen an Argument, mixt of Religious and Ciuill Con∣siderations; And likewise mixt be∣tween Contemplatiue, and Actiue. For who can tell, whether there may not be an Exoriere aliquis? Great
 Matters (especially if they be Reli∣gious) haue (many times) small be∣ginnings; And the Platforme, may draw on the Building. This Worke, because I was euer an Enemy to flat∣tring Dedications, I haue dedicated to your Lordship; Jn respect of our ancient, and priuate Acquaintance; And because amongst the Men of our Times, I hold you in especiall Reuerence.

