


PResuming nt so much vpon mine owne head, as aduised, or rather enfoced by request, counsayle, and persu∣sion of one lae most unden seruāt to your honour (whose name for diuers respectes I conceale) a therefore bolde to duenture the offer of this small work to your honourable goodnes: humbly beseeching the same, not only to ac∣cept it well in worth, but also, if any such thing occurre in this m simple trauaile which may pleasure or pro∣fiteon, to éelde all thankes to the Lord: if otherwise, to let the fault onely rest vpon me. Albeit notwithstan∣ding other causes also were not wanting, to admonish me of my dutiful office in this behalfe. First your ma∣nifolde and gratefull benefites vpon mée bestowed: which as of your part well may beséeme your honora∣ble benignitie, so of my part very litle haue bene deser∣ued.
Furthermore, remembring with my selfe, at what time this sermon was first preached, and you so ear∣nestly required the sande matter agayne to bee repea∣ted in your chamber being sicke: certes this zealous desie of your so Christian affection, requieth no lesse of duetie, then the whole tractation hereof, whatsoeuer it be, being now published in print, & with some more diligence reuised, to be wholy intituled to your name.

Ouer and besides, an other cause here also falleth in, of my part not to be vnremēbred. For if your bounti∣ful and courteous beneficence neuer of me prouoked, lesse deserued, so liberally hath refreshed my pooe weake health, with the wholsome fruit of your French grape, litle could I do, and vnkind were I, if I would not remember you againe with some part of recom∣pence, in requiting the wholsome fruite of your plenti∣full vineyard, with some branche of this gladsome and Euangelicall Oliue tree: not as in equalitie of suffici∣ent recompence to satise your deertes: but as testif∣ing to you a minde not ingratefull, nor vnmindefull, what he would do, if greater abilitie would serue.
To your good honour, both yours, and to the right worshipl Lady your wie, to the yong litle plants of your domesticall Oliue sitting about your table, & to your good housholde I wishe the grace of Christ long to keepe yu, his mercie to nouish you, his counsaile to direct you, his peace to comfort you, his gifts to ecrese you, to the profite both of the Church and common wealth. Lond. Ao. 1578.

