


WOrship full Sir, whē I glad∣ly remember, and with no small comfort report your great goodnes, and vnfai∣ned fauour toward me, but a straunger vntoo you, and a cold seely suter in the Court: I cā not but be ashamed of my selfe, that habilitie doth not affourde my hand somuch too requite, as my hart willeth my toung too vtter, how deepe indetted I am vntoo you. But you did it of a good deede, not for a good meed: and at the request of a Godly-man, in sute of an honest cause.
Wherefore, consideryng that your due; and full reward is layed vp vntil an other day, in an other place, by an other man, of all fulnes, and habilitie, Christ Jesus, the high steward, and pay-master of all, I am to request your worship till that time come, whiche I trust shall not be long, too accept my good hart, whiche in all honest possible dutie is and shalbe yours bounden too com∣maunde.

A small regard for such a de¦sert, I confesse, yet as kinde and dutifull a myte as the greatest valure of a farther summe. And sith that the most precious iewell in this world whiche Man can shew or geue too Man is vnfayned Loue, then truly the Loue that creepeth when it can not goe is aswell too be accounted of, and esteemed as Loue, nay perhaps the rather, then when it caryeth a higher looke, and a loftyer countenaunce. For, to say the truth Benefites whiche are liberall for the gift, and gratefull for the repay, are in that re∣spect sayd too be great or litle, as the affe∣ction of the hart is great or litle.
This consideration therefore, as also your zeale in Religion, your loue of lear∣nyng, your place vnder the Prince, and the occasion ministred by these worthy, yet but worldly, Triumphes for the Princely en∣tertaynment of most Noble Casimirus, that famous souldier of Christ his Churche, moue mee too offer vntoo you, and in you, too all Godly harted Courtiers what soeuer CHRIST JESUS Triumphant: whose superexcellent workes ouerreach all hand, hart, and thought. What his entertayne∣ment shalbe I leaue vntoo him-selfe who

must geue the grace too entertaine hym. What he hath deserued at our handes, he presenteth him-selfe in this litle Booke too declare. What enemies, whose enemyes, of what power they be whom he hath vtterly subdued, and in whose cause, or too what end, and for whose benefite he ventered the pykes so farre too shead his precious hart bloud, albeit wee haue often heard, and therefore should well know, yet sith wee as often forget, and therefore are still too learne, hee commeth now intoo the Court too shew, beyng the supreme defender, and most mightie Champion of the Churche, with greater maiestie, and cause of Tri∣umph, than any Monarch or Potentate whatsoeuer. But how shall hee be recea∣ued? What Royall preparation shallbe made for his ioyfull wellcome. Runne a good race for sooth, not with armed horse, but with a prepared hart: and whether? Non ad Pacis Aram, sed ad Pacis An∣choram, & Authorem, that is, not too the altar of Peace, (as they dyd) but too the Author, and Anker of perfect Peace, Christ Jesus, him-selfe: and let vs fight a good fight, not with a reached out arme but with the strong hand of Fayth: here∣hence

shall wee purchase more glory in his sight, and be farther in his remembraunce, when wee come intoo his kingdome, than if wee had atchiued ten thousand feates of armes.
But so it falleth out, that wee rather regarde this outward shewe and glorious world, than the spirituall, and inuisible cre∣ature: and all of vs, especially Courtyers (with all modestie be it spoken, without all offence, and affection) rather hunt or hauke after the fauour of the Prince, than after the loue of God: thereby like foolish builders plantyng our Tabernacles on the sand, ne∣glectyng too follow our buildynges on the stedfast rocke. Herein as I would glad∣ly auoyde all teastie, and froward misinter∣pretors, so am I openly, and faythfully too protest that all Obedience, Honor, Tri∣umph and Majestie, is secondly too be ge∣uen too our PRINCE, (whom GOD preserue) but especially too Jesus Christ our full redeemer. Hereof this litle Tre∣atise made by that excellent instrument of GODS Churche in England M. Foxe doth put your worshyp and all other Chri∣stian Courtyers in mynde, and remem∣braunce: whiche when I had Translated,

and Imprinted, no one came so readely too my mynde (my Gracious Prince, and right honorable Lord excepted) too whome I might dedicate, and offer these my first fruites, as too your worships fauour: which if it shall accept of my good meanyng, my meanyng is too be as seruicea∣ble, as all honest dutie shall re∣quire. Thus fare your wor∣shyp well in Christ Jesus. Amen.

