



IESVS Christ, the supreme King of Kings, and of all Lords transcendent Lord and Soueraigne Ruler, crowne your Highnesse with all bles∣sings from the heauens aboue, and from the earth beneath; that after a long and glorious life in this world, you may for euer and euer put on the Stole of immortall felicity in the world to come.
The honour and dignity of Potentates and
 great Gouernours (most gratious Prince) con∣sisteth neither in the largenesse of their Empire, the riches of their Treasure, the abundance of Reuenew, the multitude of Subiects, the pros∣perity of Armies, the strength of Cities, Castles, Palaces or Guards: but in this is euery Prince re∣nowned, if they which delight in Thrones and Scepters, embrace wisedome, that heauenly and diuine wisedome, which was the light vnto the feete,Psal. 119. and the Lanthorne vnto the pathes of Da∣uid; euen true Religion, the sincere seruice of God.
The sweete and Evangelicall Prophet Esay therefore declareth, that to vphold Religion, and to defend the Gospell, is the principall end for which all Gouernours and Magistrates were ordained. Kings (saith he) shall bee thy nursing Fathers,Esay 49.23. and Queenes shall be thy nursing Mothers.
And this indeed is the chiefest reason why vnto Kings, Princes, and great Rulers common∣ly the trauailes and labours of the pen, vnder∣taken in defence of Religion, are commended; not, that by their power men do expect to be de∣fended from slanderous and poysoned tongues (which Kings and Princes themselues cannot a∣uoid) but that vnto them which sit at the Sterne of gouernement, the knowledge of controuer∣sies
 in Religion should bee brought, to the end, that false worship being extirped, true Religion may be vpheld, and the right feare of God esta∣blished vpon the earth.
Hauing finished therefore this poore Orphan labour of mine, begunne not without the know∣ledge and approbation of that thrice-noble Prince, Henry, your Hignesse late dearest and most worthy brother; I thought it my duty to present it vnto your Grace, both in respect of that excellent knowledge of heauenly things, to which, euen in this your tender age you haue at∣tained: as also for that vnder his hopefull aspect, it first tooke life and began to grow.
Surely, I cannot tell to whom rather the knowledge of this cause should appertaine, then to your most excellent Highnesse: whom God (I hope) hath ordained, after a long period of the glorious and happy raigne of your august and gratious father, to sway the Scepter of the Brit∣tish Kingdom, which therefore the hellish brood of Locusts, Iesuites, and Seminaries do so much labour to bring backe againe vnto the Romish seruitude; not, that either they care for our sal∣uation, or that they dislike the doctrine of our Church, but for that this fertile Iland hath yeel∣ded such large reuenew, and copious prouent
 vnto the vnsatiable vultures of that Court.
And it is worthy obseruation, that as neither Religion, nor zeale of the truth hath set these brands on fire to the deuastation & combustion of Christendome; so no lenity nor mercy pre∣uaileth to appease their gall: for otherwise, how could they breake out into such treasons and slanders against the most sacred person of our Tres-noble King? then whom, the Sunne neuer saw a Prince more mercifull, nor more clement; in so much that I should presume to haue said, that his pittie and compassion had beene more then the safety of his State could well endure: sauing that my Lord the King is euen an Angell of God discerning both good and bad.2. Sm. 14 17.
I speak not this to exasperate your Highnesse more then is conuenient: neither do I with Ec∣kius declaime how lawfull it is to put Heretickes to death,Eck trac. de Cō∣burend. Haret. nor vrge the Sentence of diuine Com∣mand by which Idolaters must die. God forbid, that where the Master is a Lambe, the Minister should be a Lyon:Iosh. 9.23. Numb. 5.2. onely, I wish that Gibeonites should not be Lords; nor Lepers liue as they which are clean in the Land. And I must be hum∣bly bold to say vnto your Highnesse after the maner as Amphilochius that worthy Bishop once spake vnto Theodosius the Emperour; A Prince
 may iusty feare how God will prosper him in his succession,Zozom. lib. 7. c. . if he suffer them which are open enemies to the Kingdome and office of his Son Christ Iesus, to flourish without controule in his Dominions. With vs (God be blessed) it is not so: for his most excellent Maiestie hath prouided Christian and wholesome Lawes to suppresse this heresie and superstition; and as well by his peerelesse Labours and exquisite Writings, as by godly Edicts & Proclamations, aduanceth pure Religion vnto the vttermost.Zenoph. de dictis & factis Socr. But as it is in the roofe of an house, if the tyles from the vpper∣most crest depend in due and fit subordination, all tempest and iniurie of weather fals to the ground, and is shaken off; But when they lye athwart and crosse vnto the head, euery little showre will breake in and annoy the Edifice: So, if inferiour Magistrates, who liue in the places where Popish infection is, do not duely execute the Regall Religious Lawes ordained for this purpose, but rather helpe to shuffle delinquents out of the power of the Law, and blinde the eyes of the State; What policie of a Prince can serue turne, or what authority preuaile, Cum bonus,Diocl. Flav. Vopisium. cau∣tus, optimus, venditur Jmperator.
I know, it ill befits Phormio to read a lecture of Chiualrie to Hanniball, or mee to discourse of
 policy in the eares of your excellent Highnesse; whose vnderstanding and knowledge in matters of religion, both by your supernaturall endow∣ment and grace, as by the succesfull labours of your worthy Chiron, Mr Thomas Murrey, euen in your childehood was aboue the power of your age. Yet, giue mee leaue, (most illustrious Prince) since the desolation and destruction of the great Whore must be wrought by Kings and Princes,Apoc. 17.16, who shall eate her flesh, and burne her with fire; to inuite your Highnesse also vnto the banquet, and to declare vnto your Princely Cel∣situde what God requireth at your hands, and the hands of all Kings and Princes, euen to stand on the watch-tower in the day time, and to set your selfe in the watch euery night,Esay 21.8 to put your selfe into the number of those fanners that shall fanne Babylon,ct. 7.2 and empty her land, that is, shall examine her errours, and make desolate her kingdome, and in the day of her trouble bee a∣gainst her on euery side.
Surely, Dauid and Salomon are no more prai∣sed in the Scripture, for preparing the substance, and building of the house of God in Ierusalem,2 Chron. 22.2.3.4 3 Chron. 31.2 then was Iosaphat for taking away the high pla∣ces and groues out of Iudah; Joash for repairing the temple; Hezekia and Josiah for reuiuing the
 worship of God almost vtterly decaied in the land.2 Chron. 35 These are glorious examples for your Highnesse imitation, shining starres of direction in your course, bright mirrours by which you may compose your actions; assuring your roy∣all breast, that if you seeke the glory of GOD, promoting of truth, aduancement of religion with an vpright and perfect heart, no poyson, no gun-powder, no knife of barbarous Iesuits, nor conspiring Seminaries shall hurt you. Hee shall couer you vnder his wings, and you shall be safe vnder his feathers, his truth shall be your shield and buckler.Psl. 9. Psal. 2 You shall not feare the pe∣stilence that walketh in the darkenesse, nor the plague that destroieth at noone day: but you shall flourish like a Palme-tree, and grow vp like a Cedar in Lebanon, the louing kindnesse of the Lord shall endure for euer and euer vpon you, and his righteousnes vpon your childrens chil∣dren. Which the Lord of his mercy, through his deare Sonne Iesus Christ, grant vnto your most excellent Highnesse, O Lemuel, O Jona∣than, O breath of our nostrils!
Seauern Stoke in Worcester-sire. Nouemb. 6. 1618.

