



THis, amongst other reasons (Most Illu∣strious Prince) which prevailed with mee for the publication of this booke, was the prime and prin∣cipall, that I might give notice to the whole world, and to them, who either

out of ignorance or affection, will not judge aright of the truth of things; that the cause, why that same solemne Am∣bassage, which the most incomparable Peere, THOMAS HOVVARD, Earle of Arundell and Surry, lately performed in Germany, for the restitution of peace, and of the Palatinate, both, with one commission to bee dispatched, came not to a happy conclusion; was, neither in the most renowned King CHARLES, Your Vncle, nor in Your selfe: but in those onely, who upon honest conditions and demands, would not suffer any thing that is moderate, and, of it selfe, equall and just, to bee obtained. For Your part, the mindes of all (that were any way interessed in You) were ready and wil∣ling to accept of any tolerable condi∣tions: But of the other side, such things were prescribed and exacted, as neither with honour and safety, nor with con∣science and the good of the Common-wealth, could either bee granted or sub∣mitted

unto: as it is evident by the pub∣like Acts, and which we have shewed in this Enodation.
That which concerned mee in this businesse, I hope, and that not with∣out some diligence, I have discharged; that is to say, with our penne, style, writing, as much as our ability would permit, We doe vindicate, and maintaine both the justice of Your cause, and the innocency of Your person; and exhibite to the world, how great in∣justice is done to Your selfe and Kin∣dred. It is Your duty now, since You have assaied all things  by faire meanes, and Your honest endea∣vours have beene frustrated; that You ad∣vise of other remedies, and embrace such instruments as, You may, by just armes, recover and wrest from those unjust usur∣pers and possessours that, which by violent force they have extorted from You. But that neither the power and fortune of Your adversaries, nor the diffidence of Your

owne abilities, nor the warres proving for the most part unfortunate to King Frede∣ricke Your Father, and his Allies, should either deterre, procrastinate, or make You timorous;
Tu ne cede malis, sed contrâ audentior ito.
To evils doe not you give way,
But forward goe, with vertues sway.
The felicitie of Your adversaries is so much the more slippery, by how much the higher it is ascended: it is come to its height, and now stands tottering, by and by ready to fall with his branches, if but once shaken with some sudden violence of the North & South-wind. Things of moment are ruined in a moment, and the dubious fortune of that injurious and ingratefull House, is wheeled about. It will not long re∣taine those things which, by violence, fraud and injustice it hath detained from Thee.
Quem Dies vidit veniens superbum,
Hunc Dies vidit fugiens jacentem.
Whom the Sun rising saw in honours place,
Him the Sun setting saw in great disgrace.
Goe forward then (most Illustrious Prince) bee bold, confident, adventure to the ut∣most: You shall have God, and the winds to second your Sailes with a prosperous gale. A small Army, guided with Councell and true valour, have many times subdued great forces. How often have a little Com∣pany, by marching forward and adventu∣ring in warlike affaires, got the victory of a mighty hoste?

A Cane non magno saepe tenetur Aper.


Not seldome times, in open Field,
By little Dogge, great Boare is held.

Even small Creatures have procured danger and destruction to greatest beasts. Your cause is good, and You shall have Armes that will maintaine Your cause. The revenge of cruelty and injustice doth pursue your enemies: put on, persist; if

that the Land denies a way, let the Sea prepare your passage to them: by perver∣ting and preventing (said that great King) by turning aside, and by going forward are battailes wonne. The first preparations of warre are somewhat difficult; but, once gone into the field, You shall have Councels, Associates, Companions, Souldiers. A small Band, under the conduct of a couragious and valiant Leader, in time will encrease to a great Army. Observe the occasions, and moments of times, actions, and men, as they offer themselves, and thinke upon them. If You will associate Your selfe with any of Your friends, that doe warre with You, You shall be a most welcome Com∣panion, and receive sociable assistance from them. The experience of many ages, and the Annales doe testifie, that, in the be∣ginning, all warres almost have gone a∣gainst them, to whom of right the victory appertained; but, in the end, the better cause have alwaies triumphed and prevailed. Fortune is not without its returne; shee

hath a long while favoured Your adver∣saries, and forsaken you: now the wheele is turned, shee may forsake them, and follow You. But whether am I carried? These things are not for this place and time: Onely, the God of Heaven make and keepe You (most Illustrious Prince) flourishing and in safety, and prosper all Your Coun∣cells, and designes to Your hearts desire. From the Vbij the Nones of March, 1637.

