



WHen I had finished the prece∣dent Epistles (welbeloued in the Lord) I considerd with my selfe, that, seeing they were Principles, and grounds of Christianity, which I had expounded, and was ready to publish: I might doe some further seruice pleasing God, acceptable and profitable vnto you, (being as yet but nouices and younglings in Religion:) if in some speci∣all
 manner, I should commend them to your meditations.
And owsoeuer to you, Sir Iohn, I am but a stranger, and in that respect, might haue been discouraged: yet such is, & al∣waies hath been mine vnfained loue & good affection twards her, who now (by Gods prouidence) is become yours: that this could nt hinder. For I cannot otherwise rest perswaded, but that all good offices of true loue now done to her, or vnto you for her sake, will as kindely in uery degree be en∣tertained, as if they directly aimed at your selfe alone.
And, good Madame, doe you for your part, cherish by all good meanes, all good motions and affections in your kinde and louing Husband. And as it is a principall end of your Creation, to be an Helper: So in the feare of God, apply, and endeuour your selfe, to bee cheerefull, comfortable, and hlpfull indeed. And as in all duties and respects which concerne this life: So especially in those things that concerne
 Gods glory, and your owne saluation, toge∣ther with the good and saluation of such, as may any way belong vnto you, or depend vpon you.
And for you (welbeloued Mr Thomas) as you haue hitherto by your godly Parents, been carefully traded and trained vp in the feare and nurture of the Lord: and haue shewed your selfe docible, tractable, and towardly, (which I am able to report vpon some good experience,) by yor beha∣uiour, by your gestures, by your speech, and by the course of your practices, making your selfe knowne, to haue vprightnes and good meaning in you without dissimulati∣on: According to that of Salomon,Pro. 20.11. Pro. 20. Euen a child will make knowne by his conuersation, whether he be pure, and whether his worke bee right: So settl your slfe to grow forward in grace and goodnes, as in yeeres and dayes. And then, shall you be sure, as well as the an i∣ent, to be rewarded with saluation in the life to come, and honoured among all good
 men with praise and estimation, whiles you are heere.
To you all I say with Salomon, Ec∣clesiastes 12.Eccles. 12.1. Remember your Crea∣tor in the dayes of your youth, whiles the euill dayes come not, that is, be∣fore old age commeth. For you must know, that God requires the seruice of youth, as well as the seruice of old age. Nay, this, before the other. And if you looke into the Scripture, or into experi∣ence, you shall hardly finde any who haue accustomed themselues to vanity, and prophanenesse in the time of their youth, that doe become truely and vnfainedly repentant when they are old. As Ier. 13.Ier. 13.23. Can the Blackamore change his skinne, or the Leopard his spots? then may yee also doe good, that are ac∣customed to doe euill. And therefore Prou. 22.Prou. 22.6. Teach a childe in the trade of his way, and when hee is old, hee shall not depart from it. And Psalme 119.Psal. 119 9. Wherewith shall a young man
 redresse his way? In taking heed there∣to, according to thy Word. Thus you see, that the Word of God ought to bee the rule and direction of yong mens liues, as well as of those that are old. Let the Word of God therefore dwell in you plenteously in al wisdome,Col. 3.16. & spiri∣tuall vnderstanding. Search the Scrip∣tures,Ioh. 5.39. Psal. 1.2. and take delight to meditate in them day and night: yea, make them the Lanterne for your feet,Psal. 119.105. and a light for your pathes.
And not onely for my sake, and at my request; but for your owne good, and for the better settling and establish∣ing of your hearts and minds in the truth, take a serious view of this little Treatise. Lay these Principles in your hearts, as a foundation for other higher points of Doctrine to bee builded vpon. Imprint them in your memories, bee zealous in the profession of them, with∣out being ashamed. Consider,2. Tim. 2 7. 2. Thes. 2.17 what I say, and the Lord blesse you, and giue
 you vnderstanding in all things, com∣fort your hearts, and establish you in euery word and good worke. And so I take my leaue at Northiham in Sussex. September the 20. 1621. Resting

