



TVllie hauing intreated much of old age, knew not what fitter man to chuse, to commit his writings vnto, than Ti∣tus Pomponius Atticus, a man well striken in age. And hauing compiled a treatise of friend ship, he pic∣ked out the same Atticus, a man full of friendship, to send the same vnto: alwai chusing pratrons according to the mat∣ter. Not much vnlike vnto Luke the E∣uangelist, who writing of the things of God, chose out Theophilus (that is a frēd
 of God) as a most meet man to write vnto: So I hauing according to my weaknes written somthing of comfort, haue found none more meet vnto whōe to dedicate my writings, thā your wor∣ships, at whose hands my self haue recei∣ued, as I must still acknowledge, excee∣ding much comfort. For who ought to haue more interest in comfort, than the comforters? And what fitter patrones of comfort can a man imagin to find than the authors & fathers thereof? For this cause therefore haue I made choise of your Worships, and of your brethren beloued in the Lord, as of all men most meet to commit these my writings vn∣to. And this the rather haue I done, as on the one side in regard of my selfe, to whom there is nothing more deare, or more due, than to recompence spiritual for temporall things: that you which haue sowne temporall, might (if there be any in mee) receiue from mee spirituall comforts: that thus you seeing a har∣uest of your corne, fruit of your labor, comforts to spring of your comfort, & mercies of your mercies, that is, the ri∣ches of the treasures of the mercies of God, opened vnto you, for the mercifull
 vse of your riches, might not think, that either you plowed the barren sand, or sowed in a reproued field, which bring∣ing forth nothing but thorns or briars, is therefore (as some thought) neere to the fire: so on the other side, in a more especiall regard of your selues, to whom the Lord hath in a more plentiful man∣ner opened the treasures of his hidden riches, insomuch, that you are filled therwith. I therefore haue laboured (it lieth in you, that I may say) I hope not in vaine, that you might also abound with spirituall and inward comforts. That thus you being comforted in bo∣die, and comforted in soule, comforted outwardly, and comforted inwardly, a∣bounding in heauenly and earthly com∣forts, in the honest comforts of the flesh, and the glorious comforts of the spirit, might want nothing that might be for your sound comfort, especially for your spiritual comfort, without the which all earthlie comforts are vaine and fruitles. For what shall it profit a man to bee comforted in body, & afflicted in soule? To haue the comforts of the flesh, and to want the comforts of the spirit? To liue as Diues deliciously, and be cloa∣thed
 in purple, if after this life hee should be tormented with Diues in that flame? What should it benefit a man to eat the fat, and drinke the sweet, to be fed with the kidneis of the wheat, to eat the honie of the rocke, the calfe of the stall, the Lambe of the fold, to drinke wine in bowles, to haue instru∣ments of musicke like vnto Dauid, to stretch himselfe vpon his Iuorie beds, and after this life to haue fire & brim∣stone, storme and tempest, for to drink: & to haue his portion in that lake that burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death? What shall it profit a man to haue Achabs life, with Achabs death? Hamans glory with Hāans shame? Dauids musicke, with Saules misery? Sa∣lomons prosperity, with Cains aduersity? Darius his kingdoms, with Iudas hellish paines? Nay, how is it possible, that, that man should haue much comfort in bo∣die, that hath none in soule? And what sound comfort can a man take in this life, euen in the middest of his cheare, his wife, and his women, his vessels of gold and of siluer, if he should with Bal∣tasher, Dan. 7. see the hand of God wri∣ting against him, that fearfull sentence,
 Mene, Mene, Tekel, Vphursin: that is, the Lord hath weighed thee in the ballance & hath found thee too light. And there∣fore should hea e, as the rich man in the Gospell, that saying, of the Lord vnto him; Thou foole, this night shall they (that is the Deuils) fetch away thy soule from thee, & then whose shall these bee that thou possessest? My labor therefore is, that with a good feast, you might haue a cōtinual feast, that is, a good con∣science: that in you good cheere, you might bee of good cheere in the Lord: that you might eate of the fatted Calfe, that immaculate and paschall lambe Ie∣sus Christ: that his blood might be your drinke, and his bodie your meat: that his righteousnes may be put vpon you, as that armour of light, & that wedding garment full of glorie: that you might eate that hidden Manna, and drinke those waters of life, of which whosoeuer drinketh, shall neuer hunger nor thirst more: that Christ that knocketh at the dores, be not shut out of the gates: but that he may come in, and sup with you: so that you eating with him, of his mir∣rhe, with his spices, of his hony combe with his honie, and drinking his wine,
 with his milke, may heare those often cheerings and welcomes of the Lord, being at one table with him, saying; Eat oh my friends, drinke & be drunken, oh my beloued: That so you may not see the hand writing against you vpon the wall, but fastened on the crosse: & may not heare that fearefull voice; Thou fool, this night shall they fetch away thy soule from thee: but that comfortable saying of Christ; Sonne, thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. Without the fll perswa∣sion whereof, I doe not a little marell, how it is possible for any man to take plesure & comfort in any eathly thing. For euen this one bone to gnaw vpon, might occupy them so, that they should haue little pleasure or leisure, to eate of their dainty dishes: & this one doubt of the mercy of God, might bee like vnto Damacles sword, which hanging ouer their heads, as by a horse haire, might make them to take little pleasure in the variety of their meats, in the points of musicke, in the beauty of their boies, in the loue of their womē, in the furniture of their table, & in all other things be∣sides. And howsoeuer the wicked are lulled asleepe in securitie, that they are
 carelesse, and so come to be past sorrow hauing a brawne ouer their hearts, and their consciences seared with a hot bur∣ning iron: yet I am sure that the elect of God, & the vessels of mercie, desire no∣thing so much as the assurance of his mercie. And therefore euen their life it selfe is vnpleasant, without the tast here∣of Insomuch, that they cannot rest in peace, vntill by the peace of God raig∣ning in their consciēces, & his loue shed abroad into their hearts by the holy Ghost, they are fully assured, that they are washed, they a e clensed, they are iustifid, in the name of Iesus Christ, & by the spirit of their God, & so the free & ful forgiuenes of their sins, be fully & freely sealed vnto their own soules. For they are not ignorant, how loathsome a thing sin is in the face of God, and how fearefull a thing it is, to fall into the hands of the liuing lord. Knowing ther∣fore these things, and the feare and ter∣rour of the Lord, I wil not cease, during the time of my abode, to put you in mind (by those meanes that I can) of these things: that you may not rest con∣tented, as the world doth, with earthly, but may aspire higher, seeking for hea∣uenly
 comforts in the Lord, labouring alwaye for those things that are most excellent, according to the excellencie of your place: striuing to increase in all fulnes of God, & of the holy Ghost, that you may be filled with comfort, & true ioyes, and your ioy no man might take away frō you This because I could not otherwise do but by writing, I haue v∣sed the same, as that onely meas which the Lord hath left vnto mee, and haue according both to your deserts, and my debt, at the last presumed (notwithstan∣ding, that diuers reasons of no smal im∣portance, which would be neither plea∣sant, nor profitable in their repeating, might haue perswaded me to the con∣trary) to dedicate this my labor (which what it is, I referre to the iudgement of others) vnto your Worships, & the rest of the Churches of God about you: to whō I acknowledge my selfe a debter also: howsoeuer I acknowledge notwith¦standing, my selfe not to haue receiued, from some, that experience of loue (to speak no hardlier) that I looked for And herein, as neither the mutterings of o∣thers, the suspition of flattery, not the o∣pinion of pride, which might be by the
 malicious falsely couceiued against me, haue more preuailed with me than du∣tie: so I doubt not, but that suspition & disdain, vices too great to raigne in per∣sonages of worship, & professors of the Gospell of God, shall find no place in your very raines. For both the good o∣pinion that my selfe haue conceiued, & the world receiued, cōcerning your sin∣ceritie, will cleare you hereof, & neither suffer you to entertain any such affectiō nor me to admit any such suspition. And now brethren, worshipful, & beloued in the Lord, what remaineth, but that I shuld bow the knees of my soule, to the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, the God of all mercy, the Father of al comfort & consolatiō, that according to the riches of his mercie, he would make you feele, and fill you with all spirituall comforts. That you may with glorying in the lord look for the hope of glory, and the ap∣pearing of the mightie God, and our sa∣uior Iesus Christ; to whom with the fa∣ther, and the holy Ghost, three persons, and one God, immortall inuisible, and onely wise, be all glory, power, praise, & dominion, now and euer, Amen.

