


RIght Worshipfull, and right deare in the Lord, I being desirous to leaue behind me (for after my dayes) some small portion of my for∣mer labours in the Ministerie of the Gospell, as an assured and infallible
 testimony of my vnfayned loue to∣wards the good & saluation of that people, whose resident Pastor I haue beene almost the full space of forty yeeres, and resoluing that it should be the ensuing principles, with their seuerall Expositions: I now make bold to present them to your Wor∣ships, and vpon these two motiues to dedicate them to your worthy names.
The one, that by this meanes they might remaine, as a perpetuall pledge, and euerliuing witnesse of my thankfulnes for your many great and vndeserued fauours, most wil∣lingly and cheerefully vouchsafed vnto myselfe, and vnto mine, from time to time.

These could I expresse in their particulars, but I forbeare to doe it. And yet not so much to escape the reproach of flattery (wherewith vn∣iustly by some I might be branded) as because you take no such delight, (as some others doe) in hearing prai∣ses, and commendations, though iustly deserued.
The second reason is, that they might be a like euidence, and seale of my hearty, and vnfayned longing after your growth, and going on in grace and goodnes, according to the glorious Gospell of Iesus Christ: whereof though I haue no cause to doubt, yet can I not but desire it: & desiring it (as I do) no other way bet∣ter thē this, am I able to expresse it.

Famous, & of great esteeme, and that right worthily, Sir, are you growne to be (the Lord be praised for it:) And that not only in regard of such eminent places, wherein it hath pleased God (by degrees, and in his appointed times) to set you: but for your learning, wisedome, and sufficiency, to the well discharge of all, and euery of them. But yet, if I may be bold, to speake what I conceiue, and rest perswaded of (with the ioynt opinion of many o∣thers) this is nothing so precious for your good name, as your religious, vpright, and conscionable procee∣dings, appearing and shining to the view of all men, in the middest of thick and foggie mists of corruption,
 and when conscience among many is so little regarded. Heereby haue you gayned the loue, and commen∣dation of all estates and degrees: yea many there are, that know not your person, who will not make mention of your name, without great respect.
The like may I say of you also, Madame, that although you bee a∣boundantly qualified, (as God bee praised you are) with all good gifts of body and minde, that be fit orna∣ments, and which adde a grace to your sex, and degree of calling, (as it is respected, and had in account among the men of this world) yet the honour and crowne of your good name, is the good report your Ladi∣ship hath gotten in the Church of
 God, among such as truly feare God, for your good and vertuous dispo∣sition in matters of religion and god∣linesse, for your modesty, meekenes, humility, and such like graces, as they appeare to be graces of sancti∣fication.
And indeed, what reckoning is to be made of humane wisedome, lear∣ning and knowledge, of riches, beau∣tie, of worldly honour and prefer∣ment, (yea euen in the highest de∣gree of them) if they be not found in the way of righteousnes? if they be not sanctified by the Spirit of God? Without this special blessing they do but puffe vp, and make onely a slen∣der shew, and a bare profession, without all care and conscience of
 an agreeable practice.
Oh, let your Worships labour then (in a zealous vse of the ordi∣nary meanes which God hath ap∣pointed) for this so great and ex∣cellent a grace (as is the grace of sanctification) that your high places and callings, your wisedome, lear∣ning, riches, and all other good gifts which God hath bestowed vpon you, being seasoned and sweetned there∣with, they may all ioyne together in a sweet harmony and sound consent, for the aduancement of Gods glory in your mortall bodies, and for the sure sealing and assurance of your owne saluation. And the Lord giue you not onely spirituall vnder∣standing, for a generall conceiuing
 out of his Word, what is to be done, and what not, but spirituall wise∣dome also for a right vnderstand∣ing, and a right applying of it in par∣ticular.
And thus not doubting of your fauourable acceptance of these my weake endeuours, for the reasons before remembred, commended vn∣to you, and according to that of the Apostle Peter, 1. Epist. 1.12. and of S. Iohn, 1. Epist. 2.21. I now take my leaue, as the Apostle Paul doth, Acts 20.32. resting at Northiham, August 24. 1621.

