



MOSTE HYGE excellente, and myghtye Prynce, mooste dere and dradde souerayne lorde, if the loue, whyche your hyghnesse beareth vnto this your noble empyre, stylle enforceth your graces harte, not onely to bestowe the better parte of all dayes, but of all nyghtes alsoo, in deuysynge in tyme of peace mooste godly lawes, statutes, and proclamations, for the tranquillitie and quietnesse of your subiectes sowles, in

tyme of warre, plattes, blocke howses, bulwarkes, walles, castelles, with other munitious, ingins, and fortresses, for the safetie and surenes of their bodies: if no so wernesse of peyne canne amoue your gracis thoughtes from contynuall tra∣uayle, Can I without my great shame, not be styred to worke somewhat for my parte? He hath lyttell wylle to trauayle, lyttell loue to his countrey, that seeth be∣fore his eies, your hyghnesse thus occu∣pied: and yet is nothynge pricked, to do that he thinketh may serue his countrey. Wyse writers feyne, that fond loue hath wynges, and seldome abydeth longe in a place, beynge hyther and thyther ledde by folye, and phansy: I can nat but also thynke, that discrete loue hath his wyn∣ges, and flyeth fast, where he seeth good may be done. Loue hath no leaden heles, and as he is quicke, so is al labour light, where loue hyreth the workeman. The fethers of his wynges are so softe, that if they lye betwene our shulders, and the burdeyn, the weight is lytel felt, though we beare neuer so heuy. Loue easily en∣tertayneth

all powers of the harte, and withoute force compelleth theym all, to doo that, that duetie maye by any title chalenge of them. Your hyghnes welle declareth, that where occasion is, Loue can not be ydell. Lorde, howe may al en∣glyshemen reioyce, that your grace ney∣ther spareth, to vysite with your owne eyes, ye ruinous places of the see quostes, by whiche our enemies myght sodeynly inuade vs, neyther yet letteth, to worke with your own handes, continually ma∣negynge tooles, continually inuentyng newe sortes of weapons, newe kindes of shyppes, of gunnes, of armure. As god helpe me, I can not see, whyche waye to wysshe greatter pleasure, greatter com∣forte, to all englyshe men, than that they all myght se, howe your grace spendeth all the hole day. I haue sene it, and nowe nothyng wonder, though traytours, en∣nemies to your hyghnes, haue bene atte their departure, compellyd to say so mo∣che honour by your grace, as they haue sayde. I see, albeit Malyce maketh men in their lyfe tyme, to swarue, to saye and

doo moche otherwyse, than Trouthe is, that yet, the presence of deathe, feare of god, & force of conscience, dryueth them to confesse trouthe, whan lyes wyll serue no longer, whan vyces appere to be as they are. Coulde syr Nycolas Carowe, haue fallen into treason, yf he hadde thought well vpon that in his lyfe tyme, whyche he confessed to be trewe, at his deathe? But I muste by youre gracis fauour, leaue of that, whyche I am fal∣len into by the way, and intreate of that, whiche I purposed to speake of. I haue longe sythens, bene moche desyrous, to dedicate some thynge of myne to youre hyghnesse, but fyndynge all my tryfles, farre to base, to meane, to humyle, to go abrode, vnder the name of soo noble and hygh a prince, I haue rather doone that becommed me, than folowed that I most desyred. but nowe, not withstandynge, that this my labour is full lyke the reste, rude, vnperfecte, and rather begun than fynyshed: yet perceyuynge youre grace, euen to thyrste the safetie of your people, the defence of this youre moosle noble

royalme, I coulde not, but for a season, a courtayne drawen betweene my weake eies, and the resplendent beames of your most clere maiestie, folow feruent desire, and humblye offer vnto your hyghnesse, this my rude translation, not doubtynge but as noble Xerxes thankfully receyued an handfull of water, of a poore manne, that so youre princely goodnesse, wolle take in good parte, this myne, what soo euer be, borne, and brought vp vndoub∣tedly, in good wylles howse.
It hath ben somtyme moued, whether in warre, Polycy of mynde, or Strength of body, shulde do more. but longe expe∣rience, hath put this thyng so out of que∣stion, that in all battayles, the specialle prayse or disprayse remayneth to the Ca∣pitayne. Yea some men are not affrayde to affirme, that it is moche better to haue an armie, where the Capitayn is a lyon, and all the hoste fearefull dere, than to haue a dere the capitayne, and al the host lyons. Aiax was stronge, Ulysses wise: Homere gyueth moche more praise to the laste, than to the fyrste. Aiax was hardye

and valyant in fyght: but Ulisses knew the time & place, where hardinesse might preuayle. Strength stryketh, but Poli∣cie prouydeth, that the stronge be not o∣uermatched, and that they bestowe stro∣kes in a ryghte place, and at tyme con∣uenient. Many mo fieldes haue ben lost for lacke of polycie, than for wante of strength. many townes wonne by sleigh∣tes, whyche a longe season easilye were kepte ageynst greattest myght, strength, and force. Wherfore seinge present occa∣sion requireth martiall feates to be kno∣wen, and strength of bodye to be armed and anymated with wytte and polycie: I entendynge here to serue my countreye, founde nothynge so fytte, for thaccom∣plyshement of this my purpose, as to set out the Strategemes, sleightes, & craf∣tes, vsed by the noblest capytaynes, that all antyke hystories treate of. By redyng and reasonynge wherof, your gracis ca∣pitaynes shall not only increase and no∣ryshe their imagination, inuention, and derteritie, in vsynge lyke sleightes, but easily escape al trappes, gynnes, and im∣bushementes,

layde for them. They shal also hereby perceyue, many swete baytes to couer sowre hokes. They shall lerne there to escape danger, where gret aduā∣tage is offred. The noble capitaynes of England, haue oft declared, that they ly∣tell nede any instructions, any bokes, to teach them to towse their enemies: & yet it can hurte no man, to see those thynges practysed, by auncient capitaynes, whi∣che may gyue good occasiōs, both ware∣ly to inuente newe polycies, and wysely to vse the olde. Noble hartes, vndoub∣tedly can not but desyre, to here of noble feates, and take pleasure in seinge, howe wytte with smalle force, ofte tymes wor∣keth wonders, where excedynge greatte strength can nat auayle. If men be not wery, to playe a thousande tymes at one game, where eyther Fonde pleasure, or Uile gayne, or (whan it is best) helthe of body is sought: can any gentyll man be lothesome, to refreshe his mynde, to help his memorie, to kendle his courage with honeste delyte, of redynge or herynge su∣che thynges, as appertayne to thesafe∣garde

of body and goodes? to the pur∣chasynge of honourable victories, fame, and renoume? The infirmitie of mans nature is suche, that bothe the senses of our body, and also the powers of oure mynde decay, and go to ruine, onles they be dayly refresshed and holpen. The eie is continually holpen, with clere lyghte, with freshe and comely colours, the smel with holsome ayre, and odours delecta∣ble, the taste asketh in his meates and drynkes, a dewe temperature. And as it is here, soo is it in the better parte of man, wytte, vnderstandynge, Memorie, and Inuention, with all the reste, quali∣ties and ornamentes of the mynde, must be holpen with continuance of redynge, herynge, and reasonynge of mattiers, withoute whiche, they waxe rustye, they canker, and decaye. There is a tyme for al thinges, as Salomon wisely writeth. Whan tyme requyred peace, we talked lyttell of warre. Newe occasyons bryng matters, not thoughte vppon, in place. Tyme maketh euyl thynges not only cō∣parable with good, but good also. Whan

tyme is to pull downe, it is very folye to buylde. Whanne tyme byddeth slee, it is nothynge so good, to heale the diseased, as to kyll them that be not sycke. Whan tyme byddeth spende, sparynge is great waste. Loue is lewdenesse, whan tyme biddeth hate. Peace is to be refused, whā tyme forceth men to warre. Wherfore, I haue besydes this my trāslation, in an o∣ther tryfle of myn, exhorted al my contrey mē, peace laid aside, to prepare for warre, yt if nede constrein them to it, they may be redy to entertayne false frendes, worse thā enmies, accordyng to their desertes. I kepe your highnesse to longe with my rude talke, wherfore moste noble prynce, pardon craued, I wolle make an ende, moste humbly besechynge your maiestic, to accepte this cuppe of troubled water, a tyme maye comme, that good wyll, en∣strengthned with your hyghnes fauour, may fynd some clerer veyne, and so serue your gracis thirst, with right delectable lyquour. Our lorde longe preserue your highnes, to the settyng forth of his glo∣rie, to the cōfort of all your subiectes, to the destructiō, & deth of al popery.
Amē.
