



WHEN I consider the weake frailtie of man, and howe naturallye we be subiecte to many troubles, aduersi∣ties, and temptations, as well of the body as of the soule, and also when I call to my remembraunce the wordes of Christe, spoken to his elect,Ioh. 16. That in this world they shulde suffer persecution and op∣pression, and lykewyse the sayinge of the apostel Paule,2. Tim. 3. That al they
 whiche wyll lyue godly in Christe Iesu, muste suffer persecution: I thynke surely, that euery chrysten man dothe expect Christes promi∣ses, and constantly beleueth, that the scriptures shalbe fulfilled and founde true. Wherfore seing there is no euasion nor meane, to escape the aduersities, temptations, and crosse, whiche god shal laye on the shulders of his electe, and nature is so inconstant, frayl, and weake, that of our own myght and power we are not able to resyste, nor can not wyllyngely and paciently su∣steyne and beare such aduersities, and crosse, it behoueth euery chri∣sten man, to serch out and prouide some godly consolation and reme∣dy to comforte and make stronge his mynde, that he may paciently suffer all tribulation, all tempta∣tion,
 al aduersitie, which god shal sende to hym, alwaye reknowle∣gynge, that there is no power but of god, and that god wyl not send to his electe any suche crosse, but therwith he wyll also gyue grace and meane paciently to suffer the same, so that he shall not be found disobediēt to the good wyl of god. Of the cōfortes agaynst the crosse of tribulation, one in especiall of late I founde. Not a yere paste it pleased God to sende me some ad∣uerse tribulations, whiche were to stronge for Nature to suffer and beare pacientely: but my chaunce was so good, throughe the merci∣full prouydence of god, that in my troubles this lyttel boke was sent me from a frende: whiche when I had red ouer, and delyberately per¦used,
 it animated & made me strōg not onely paciētly to suffer al mine aduersities, but also for theym to gyue god ryghte hartye thankes, that it wolde please hym of his a∣bundante mercy and goodnesse to remembre me, his miserable crea∣ture with his so ernest a token and moste sure pledge of his godly fa∣uour and loue, accordynge to his promyse,Hebr. 12. which is, whom the lord loueth, hym he chasteneth, yea and he scourgeth euery sonne that he receyueth. For in the readynge of this boke, I receyued suche conso∣lation and cōfort, that I thought it moste necessary, yea and expedi∣ent (seinge I haue by experyence felte, what good fruyte commeth therof) to translate the same in to englyshe, and so to put it forthe in
 printe, that it myghte be the more common, and that many chaun∣synge to fall into lyke crosse of ad∣uersitie, maye be partakers and optein like consolation, as I haue receiued therby. And I haue dedi∣cated this boke to you my syngu∣ler good lorde & master, for as mo∣che as I euydently perceyue, that you are endewed not onely with godly knowledge and doctryne, but also haue a right feruēt zeale, good mynd, and desyre to set forth all suche thynge as may be for the vtilitie helpe and comforte of the hole congregation and churche of this realme. Therfore with al hu∣militie I desyre your accustomed benignitie to accept this the firste fruite and labour of me your pore seruant, which am, and shall be e∣uer
 redy and glad with al diligēce, to do you the seruice that I can, & dayly pray almyghty god, to pre∣serue you in longe lyfe, welth, ho∣nour, and prosperitie. Amen.
