



RIGHT HONOVRABLE.
IT was much against my minde, to entitle your
worthy Lordship to these worthlesse toyes, or
make such a slight and Artlesse fabricke carry
so faire and glorious a frontispice, as your Honorable
name prefixed; yet finding it (as it is) in these daies a
matter so frequent with the worst Poets (as they haue
most need) to seeke out the best Patrons: collecting from
their presumption a fearefull boldnesse I haue out of a
reuerent zeale, and obseruance, presented to your Ho∣nour
these my poore and naked labours: Poore, as being
vnpolisht, and naked as they came from their mother
Truth: Yet for that, (and onely but for that) besee∣ming
a better Writer. Vouchsafe them I beseech you,
your Honours wonted benigne and gracious aspect, and
reade them with your accustomed candor; but for your
deepe-searching iudgement, pardon me my Lord, I dis∣claime
from that, and appeale to your partiall, and
more pleasing fauour. The most part of them haue al∣ready
past your Lordships priuate liking: they All tointly
craue your publick protection. It is no diminution to Ho∣nour,
nor disparagement to Greatnesse, to Countenance
the meanest well-meaning Authour: You haue it, Cum
tantis commune viris; Scipio gracing rude Ennius,
and the mightiest of earths Monarks, vnskilfull Chae∣rilus.

Nor is it derogatory to iudgement, to accept an ob∣lation
of Poems of slight subiect; as Augustus of Virgils
Gnatt: nor of bad composure; as that of the fore-named
Chaerilus to Alexander: And I shall surely beare a
part of reproofe, in this ages generall Apostacy to Poesy,
the rather for trading (as the world interprets it) in
the coursest and commonest of it. So hardly heares the
Epigram from all, the very name sticks to him like an
Inustum stigma. But how the Comonest? in it selfe; why,
there, being good (as it is no lesse) it shold be Melius quo
communius. Is it in the Professor? yea there is the mi∣sery,
it is gone, ab Equis ad Asinos, Notum Lippis &
Tonsoribus, & Plaid the Pithagorean pittifully, in∣during
most brutish transmigration, and traueld in as
durty wits as the way between Hogsdon and Houns∣ditch,
Turpe & miserabile: Yet that this shold impeach
the ingenuous is meere iniustice. But indeed the true
cause for which the Epigram suffers, is his liberty and
sincere honesty in the search and vnmasking vice, hence
comes it men marke him with Fenum in cornu, and
fire off; or take the wind of him, as of one infected, Hence
the world feares and consequently hates it: I could go on
in iust indignation, but time is precious with your Lord∣ship,
and this is an Epistle, and not a Treatise. I therefore
returne to your Houour; crauing, once more, acceptance
and Protection, to these (howsoeuer they sound, for so be∣ing)
course-spun Epigrams. Howsoeuer my pen faile, my
prayers shall not, but euer solicite the Calestiall TRI∣VNITY,
to blesse your Honour, and send you heere all,
and the compleatst ioyes on earth, fore-runners of your
future true happinesse in heauen.

