



THere bee almost seauen yeares now ouergone mee, since first I began to be a medler with these Logicall meditations: And whilest I haue said and vnsaid, doone and vndoone, and now doone all a new, mee thinkes these seauen yeares haue quickly ouergone mee. I first began, (when I first came in pre∣sence of that right noble and most renowmed knight sir Philip Sydney) with a generall discourse concerning the right vse of Logike, and a contracted comparison be∣tweene this of Ramus and that of Aristotle. These small and trifling beginnings drewe both him to a greater li∣king of, and my selfe to a further trauayling in, the easie explication of Ramus his Logike.
Sixe tymes in thease seauen yeares haue I perused the whole, & by a more diligent ouerseeing corrected some ouersights: thrise at S. Iohns colledge in Cambridge, thrise at Grays Inne, since I came to London. This last alteration hath chaunged the name of the Booke, & this new name of the Booke proceeded from the chaunge of my profession. For hauing resolutely determined to

acquaint my selfe with our English laws & constitutiōs, I thought good to make tryall, whether my eight yeares labour at Cambridge, would any thing profit mee at an Inne of Court, wheather Law were without Logike, or Logike not able to helpe a Lawyer. VVhich when I prooued, I then perceaued, the practise of Law to bee the vse of Logike, and the methode of Logike to lighten the Lawe. So that after application of Logike to Lawe, and examination of Lawe by Logike, I made playne the prae∣cepts of the one by the practise of the other, and called my booke, The Lawyers Logike; not as though Logike were tyed onely vnto Law, but for that our Law is most fit to expresse the praecepts of Logike. Yet, because ma∣ny loue Logike, that neuer learne Lawe, I haue reteyned those ould examples of the new Shepheards Kalender, which I first gathered, and therevnto added thease also out of our Law bookes, which I lately collected.
I doubt not, but that some welwillers, and many ma∣litiously disposed cauyllers will as much reprehend this straunge coniunction of Lawe and Logike, as they did meruayle at my sodayne departure from Philosophy to Lawe. To those that meane well, and speake according to their meaning, I wish no woorse vse of Logike than may be had in Lawe. For the rest, which make proclama∣tions without authoritie, and exclamations with grea∣ter indignation than discretion, I leaue them to their standish, and pray for their good successe, that after the tearme of seauen yeares fully compleate and ended, they may bee in their blewe veluet night-caps solempnly cal∣led to the Barre for their extraordinary skill in making of obligations.
Tully, at the earnest request of Trebatius, a towardly

Lawyer of Rome, hath eloquently put downe the first part of Logike in his Topikes, to the praecepts whereof hee applyeth Law-like examples, for the better instruc∣tion of Trebatius and helpe of other Lawyers. Seruius Sulpitius, as the same Tully reporteth, became the most excellent Lawyer in all Rome, and that onely by the helpe and direction of Logike: insomuch that he onely, by thease meanes, was said to haue the art & knowledge of the Lawe, whereas the rest had nothing but the prac∣tise of the same, by continuall beating of their braynes a∣bout endles controuersies. Hee knew what was Law, & what was the reason of Law; they like good Catholikes and modest minded men, beleeued as the Church belee∣ued, but why the church beleeued so, it neuer came with∣in the compasse of their cogitation.
But all this notwithstanding, it cannot bee, sayde one great Tenurist, that a good Scholler should euer prooue good Lawyer. God forbid, good sir, you offer your selfe tootoomuch iniury: for wee, countreymen, take your woorship for a greate wise learned man, and I doubt not but that your selfe are well perswaded of your woondrous knowledge in the Lawe, and yet you say, that Lawe and Logike can neuer stande togeather. Tis great pity, God wot, that thease two excellent quali∣ties can neuer bee reconciled. Alas; what should ayle them, if it like your good Maystership? Mary, quoth hee, thease fine Vniuersity men haue beene trained vp in such easie, elegant, conceipted, nice, and delicate learning, that they can better make new-found verses of Amyntas death, and popular discourses of Ensignes, Armory, Emblemes, Hieroglyphikes, and Italian Impreses, than apply their heads to the study of the Law, which is

hard, harsh, vnpleasant, vnsauory, rude and barbarous. VVell said good Iohn a style.
Dij e, Damasippe, deaeque
Uerum ob iudicium, donent ionsore; sed vnde
Tam benè nos nosti?
For my selfe, I must needes confesse I was an Vni∣uersitie man eight yeares togeather, and for euery day of these eight yeares, I do not repent that I was an Vniuer∣sitie man. But for that delicacie of studie whereof you dreame, because it seemeth somewhat straunge, a worde or two, before wee go further. Surely sir, by your pa∣tience be it spoken, it seemeth you came abruptly from a countrey schoole to an Inne of court, or els riding poast towards London, you chaunged horse at the Vniuersi∣tie, and comming thither late in the euening, and riding away early in the morning, saw nothing but by candell light. It was incident to my nature (as I thinke) to bee caried away with as delicate and pleasant a kinde of lear∣ning, as any of my time in Cambridge. VVhich (not∣withstanding an inestimable delectation that drowned the paines of studie) did yet so racke my raunging head, and bring low my crased body, that I felt at last when it was too late, the perpetuall vexation of Spirite, and continuall consumption of body, incident to euery scholler.
And if the most easie conceipts in Vniuersities be so hard, the most delicate studies so full of toyle, how trou∣blesome then and painefull the foundation of arts, the framing of an English tongue to vnknowen languages, must in any case bee, I leaue to be iudged of them, who can discerne betweene a superficiall apparance and true substance, betweene the brauery of a Midsommers Co∣mencement,

and the seauen yeares paynes of a Maister of arts.
Now for the study of the law, which, by these law∣mens report, is so hard, so vnsauory, so rude, and so bar∣barous, shee may well pronounce of her professors, as Horace of his guestes.

Tres mihi conuiuae propè dissentire videntur,
Poscentes vario multum diuersa palato.
Quid dem? quid non dem? renuis tu, quod iubet alter,
Quod petis, id certè est inuisum acidumque duobus.

For the hardenes and difficulty, I say nomore, but : and if Philosophy be harde, and law be harde, I am sumus ergò pares. In deede the want of teach∣ers and good discipline which is in Vniuersities, makes law seeme harde, and Philosophy very easie, which, if ei∣ther we had, or they had not, no doubt, law would soo∣ner be learned in seauen yeares, then seauen arts in one & twenty. But the law is vnsauory, saith an other: But the fault is in your corrupt tast, say I, not in the nature of the thing, which vnto the wisest is most acceptable, vnlesse you play the part of Philoxenus, and vnder pre∣tence of abhorring the loathsome sauour of the law, in∣tend the deuouring of all profites proceeding from the law, whiche seemeth indeede to be the scope you ayme at. You would loue the law but sine riuali: you would raigne, but alone: Hinc illae lachrymae. For otherwise I can hardly thinke so hardly of you, as to measure your discretion by the vnprobable assertion cōprised in your two last Epithetes, wherein you disgrace the law with rudenesse and barbarisme. For, as for that Hotchpot French, stufft vp with such variety of borowed words, wherein our law is written, if this be all the Dunsicalitie

you talke of, you are farre more nyce then any Vniuer∣sitie man of mine acquaintance. I know by experience, there is no word so outworne, no speach so vast and ga∣ping in Brytton, Bracton, Glanuyll, Lytleton, Parkins, and the rest of our Law autors and reporters of the law, as is in Bricot, Burley, Bonauenture, Duns, Durand, D'or∣bell, Aquinas, Andreas, Albertus, and a farre more in∣finite number of those Moonkish cloysterers deuoured of Schollers, than bee of thease others perused by Law∣yers. And yet, notwithstanding all their Persoities, For∣malities, Quiddities, Haecceities, Albedinities, Ani∣malities, Substantialities, and such like, hee that would not gather gould out of Aquinas dregges, as Virgill did out of Ennius, I shall thinke him as wise, as some seelly Pettyfogger, who rather than hee would trouble his conscience with Feetayle and Feesimple, will lyue like a simple foole, and neuer take fee.
VVhether it bee malice therefore and enuy, or igno∣rance and simplicitie, that causeth you to wrangle and chatte so vndiscreatly, you may see how you doo erre by the one, and are deceaued by the other. For neyther are Vniuersity men so daynty, as to loose their dinner be∣cause the Cooke had not on his holiday apron, neither is the Law more vnsweete, than other learning vnsauory, whatsoeuer you cast out to the contrary.
But the Law is in vaste volumes confusedly scattered and vtterly vndigested: so was all other learning not long agoe: yet herein blame not the Law, if it bee datke, but Lawyers themselues that had no light: blame not the Lawe, I say, which was out of order, but Lawyers themselues that neuer knewe Methode: Nay, blame neyther Lawe, nor auncient Lawyers, who by reason

of the generall misery of their obscure age, could not see euery thinge, but exclayme against your selues, who in this floorishing time and blessed opportunity, will see nothing. If those auncient fathers of our Lawe had lyued now, all had beene well, but if you had beene ex∣tant then, all had beene woorse. For neyther can you doo what you should, nor will let others doo what they would for the more orderly explication of the Lawe. Such is the vntowardly disposition of this scornefull age of ours, wherein no man prayseth any more, then hee thinketh himselfe able to performe, but seeketh to cloke his owne ignoraunce by deriding other mens skill, bee∣ing himselfe so simple in other mens iudgement, and wise in his owne conceipt, that when hee hath spoken without measure to a doosen of poynts, all is not worth a penywoorth of pinnes: for neyther himselfe can well vnderstand his vnioynted discourse, nor the hearers con∣ceaue his vncohaerent iangling.
But I feare mee, I haue mooued their patience, whom I most desire to bee patient, and to suffer without grud∣ging Schollers to bee Lawyers, as they wish some Law∣yers to become better Schollers. VVhich if it were so, then would there not bee so many vpstart Rabulae Forenses, which vnder a praetence of Lawe, become altogeather lawlesse, to the continuall molestation of ignoraunt men, and generall ouercharging of the countrey, with an ouerflowing multitude of seditious cauyllers: who, when their fathers haue made some lewde bargayne in the countrey, run immediatly to the Innes of Court, and hauing in seauen yeares space met with six French woordes, home they ryde lyke braue Magnificoes, and dashe their poore neighboures children quyte out

of countenance, with Villen in gros, Villen regardant, and Tenant per le curtesie: much like the swarming ra∣ble of our coystrell curates, which when their fathers haue either compounded with their Landlord for some pelting vicaredge, or payd ready money for a better parsonage, conuey themselues to Cambridge or Oxford, where hauing once knowen the price of an Admission, Salting, and Matriculation, with the intertayning of Freshmenne in the Rhetorike schooles, they returne whence they came, with their mothers wit and fathers learning carefully kept togeather, that when they haue wearied menne with reading skarce true English on the Sonday, all the weeke after they may plague poore boyes with false Latine in a belfraye. Or else, if the ould Par∣son be not yet dead, they staye a little longer, and vnder a precise cloake of Diuinitie, (notwithstanding they bee Arch-asses in all humanitie) creepe in among Batchlers of artes with crosse caps on their grosse pates, and sheepes skinnes cast ouer their lubberlike shoulders, whereof they are more prowde then euer was any foole of his bell and bauble: then come they home to ring their belles, to the vtter disgrace of the Vniuersities, the per∣petuall plague of the Countrey, and euerlasting shame of the corrupted Clergie.
Yet I heare say, that some great lawyers haue had litle learning, and some good churchmen haue beene no great clearkes: VVherevnto I answere, that it were but follie to contemne ordinarie meanes, because some men haue extraordinarie gyftes, and if those rare qualities of nature had beene directed by precepts of art, I thinke they had proued much more excellent.
But to returne thither from whence I came, and to

make an ende with that wherewith I began, thus much I dare bee bould to affirme, notwithstanding the prae∣iudicate conceipt of twenty Ciuilians, and as many com∣mon Lawyers to the contrary, that if the Ciuyll law bee elegant and delectable, the Common lawe is neyther barbarous nor vnsauory. For the volumes, theyrs bee farre greater, and much more infinite. For the style, it is more easily determined that both bee bad, then which is better: and yet both Bartolus his Latine, and Brytton his French, in some mens iudgement is therefore suffici∣ently elegant, because it is fully significant. For the mat∣ter, all is Lawe, although not all one Lawe: and hee that lyketh the one, let him leaue the other, or ioyne them both togeather, if his leysure bee so good, and his ability correspondent.
It is not my meaning to disgrace the one, or aduance the other in comparison wise, by superlatiue woordes, and hyperbolicall amplifications: I haue yenough if I haue this graunted, that our Common lawe is as easie, as short, as elegant, and as delightsome as is the Cyuill, which euery man extolleth, and I am well content, as long as I see these twoo thinges in credite with other men, wherevnto I haue already betaken my selfe. For, as for Fortescues comparing of them both togeather and praeferring of ours, it maketh all with mee, yet I vrge not all: albeit I thinke, as by office hee was a Iudge in Court of conscience, so in this Treatise hee dealt not summo iure, with the Cyuilians, but reasonably and with .
But the Cyuill lawe will some man say, is both in it selfe more constant and philosophicall, and also by Iusti∣nian more methodically, and by later wryters more

eloquently put downe.
I sayde before my meaning was not to enter into any needles discourse of comparison betweene thease twoo lawes, yet because thease bee obiections of latter tyme, I must praesume a lyttle further. And first, for the con∣stancy and philosophicall foundation of the Romayne Lawe, which Iustinian calleth the Cyuill law , (as Homer is called the Poet) the name, Cyuill, beeing common to the seueral lawes of any peculiar kingdome: no doubt, this obiection was made by them, that heard somewhat at the Vniuersity of the Cyuill lawe, but ne∣uer read any thing of our Common lawe. They haue Plebiscita, Senatus consulta, Principum placita, Magistratuum edicta, Responsa prudentum: VVee haue ruled Cases, Max∣imaes and Principles, Customes and Vsages both gene∣rall and speciall; and lastly, continuall reformation of newe abuses by Statutes and Actes of Parlament. Now let any one skilfull in both, iudge of the reason and cer∣teinty of eyther, and remember withall, what Aristo∣tle sayth of the imperfection of all Lawes, least hee impute that as a speciall blemishe to our Lawe, which is a generall want incident to the nature of eue∣rie Lawe.
There is no Law-maker so prouident, as that hee can in particularity foresee, and, as it were, by some propheticall spyrite fore-tell and praeuent the infinite variety of future inconueniences, by application of so many peculiar prouisoes, and speciall constituti∣ons, but must of necessity leaue his Lawe generall, referring the addition, detraction, or mitigation of woordes, vnto the conscience and discretion of the

learned and vnderstanding Iudge. Thus much would I haue remembred, and then let that Lawe bee accu∣sed as least sufficient which is most generall, and therefore not so well able to praeuent imminent mys∣chiefes.
For, as for the methode of Iustinian, it doth not so well content the Cyuilians, but that they dayly contend with newe innouations and continuall prin∣ting of freshe methodes, to bring it vnto better order. Yet if it bee such, as some say it is, then I say, wee haue our Common lawe penned after the selfe same methode twoo hundreth yeares agoe, by that famous and learned Iudge Henry de Bracton, skilfull in both thease Lawes. And if it bee not Iustinians order that thease men fancy, but rather the late Abridge∣ments of finer heades, let them not then with reuy∣ling speaches discourage them, which hope to see the Common lawe of England brought to as good and easie a methode, as euer was any.
For the style of thease late Cyuilians, whiche is somewhat more laboured and lesse vnseemely then that of their forefathers, wee maye as iustly say that there is the lyke diuersitie to bee manifestly percea∣ued betweene the homely speach of oure auncient Lawyers, and the finer phrase of late wryters in our Common lawe. VVoordes are lyke leaues, as Ho∣race reporteth: leaues spring before Summer, and fall before VVinter; and the same inconstancy is in words. Let vs therefore vse that phrase whiche is most vsu∣all: and though in knowledge and conceipt wee con∣tend to bee singular, yet in vttering our thoughtes, let all bee made partakers.

But loe, I see on the sodayne this extrauagant dis∣course abruptly cut off by the importunate exclamati∣ons of a raging and fireyfaced Aristotelean; who seeing Ramus his Logike in some estimation, maketh small ac∣coumpt of his owne credite in vttering such impatient speaches.
Good God, what a world is this? VVhat an age doe wee now lyue in? A Sopister in tymes past was a tytle of credite, and a woord of commendation; nowe what more odious? Aristotle then the father of Philosophy; now who lesse fauoured? Ramus rules abroade, Ramus at home, and who but Ramus? Antiquity is nothing but Dunsicality, & our forefathers inuentions vnprofi∣table trumpery. Newfangled, youngheaded, harebrayne boyes will needes bee Maysters that neuer were Schol∣lers; prate of methode, who neuer knew order; rayle a∣gainst Aristotle assoone as they are crept out of the shell. Hereby it comes to passe that euery Cobler can cogge a Syllogisme, euery Carter crake of Propositions. Hereby is Logike prophaned, and lyeth prostitute, remooued out of her Sanctuary, robbed of her honour, left of her louers, rauyshed of straungers, and made common to all, which before was proper to Schoolemen, and only con∣secrated to Philosophers.
I haue heard the lyke speaches to thease before this, and I looke for no better hereafter: I neuer esteemed of those, and I litle care for thease. Yet, good mayster Quid∣ditary, if you had beene as diligent in meditation of the cause, as you haue beene ouer earnest in admiration of the effect, the knowledge of the one would haue remo∣ued the straungenes of the other. For, if the wisedome of the auncient Sophi bee nowe degenerate into the ydle

subtleties of the new-found Sophistae, what meruayle is it, if when the thing is not aunswering to the name, the name become odious?
Ramus doth not so rule, but that he can suffer reason to ouer rule him. Ould doating graybeards talke much of Baralipton, whilest youngheaded boyes beare away Logike. They thinke much that a boy should conceaue that in a weeke, which they could skarce perceaue in a yeare: but more, that their ould learning should bee corrected by newe teaching, and their labour lost with so little profiting.
Coblers bee men, why therefore not Logicians? and Carters haue reason, why therefore not Logike? Bo∣num, quò communius, eo melius, you say so your selues, and yet the best thing in Logike you make to be the woorst, in thinking it lesse commendable, because it is more common. A spytefull speach, and a meaning no lesse malitious, to locke vp Logike in secreate corners, who, as of her selfe shee is generally good to all, so will shee particularly bee bound to none. Touching the gryefe you conceaue for the contempt of Aristotle, it is needles and vnnecessary: for, where Aristotle deserueth prayse, who more commendeth him then Ramus? VVhere he hath toomuch, Ramus cutteth off, where too little, ad∣deth, where any thing is inuerted, hee bringeth it to his owne proper place, and that according to the directi∣on of Aristotle his rules. Then, whereas there can bee no Art both inuented and perfected by the same man, if Aristotle did inuent Logike, as hee perswadeth you, hee did not perfect it, if hee did not finish it, there is some imperfection, if there bee any want, why then al∣low you all?

But alas, see how farre I haue ouershot my marke: tis more then time to make an ende of this raunging digression. I ende therefore, yet with an end∣lesse desire, that no lesse profite may bee perceaued by others in practising, then I had pleasure in perusing this last explication of Ramus his Logike.

