


THRICE holy mother of God: Vessell of incomparable election, Queene of Soueraigne dilection, thou art the most louelie, the most louing, and most beloued of all creatures. The loue of the heauenly father pleased himselfe in thee from all eternitie, alloting thy chaste heart to the perfection of holy loue, to th'end that one day thou mightest loue his onely sonne, with an onely Motherly loue, as he had done frō all eternitie with a fatherly loue,
 ô Sauiour IESVS, to whom could I better dedicate a speach of thy Loue, then to a heart best beloued of the well-beloued of thy heart.
But ô all triumphant mother who can cast his eyes vpon thy Maiestie, without seeing him at thy right hand whom for the loue of thee, thy Sonne deigned so often to honour with the title of Father, hauing vnited him vn∣to thee by the celestiall band of a vir∣ginall marriage, to th'end that he might be thy Coadiutour and Helper, in the charge of the direction and edu∣cation of thy Diuine Infancie? ô great S. IOSEPH most beloued Spouse, of the well-beloued mother. Ah how of∣tē hast thou borne betwixt thy armes, the loue of heauen and earth, till burnt with the sweete embracements, and kisses of this Diuine child, thy soule melted away with ioye, while he ten∣derly
 whispered in thy eares, (o God what content) that thou was his deare friend, and deare y beloued eare Fa∣ther. It was the custome of old to place the lampes of the aunciēt Tēple vpon flowres of golden Lylies O MA∣RIE and IOSEPH, Paire without com¦pare sacred Lilies of incōparable beau∣tie, amongst which the well-beloued feedes himselfe and his Louers. Alas if I might giue my selfe any hope, that this Loue-leter might inflame and lighten the children of light, where might I better place it, then amongst your Lilies, Lilies, where the Sonne of Iustice, the splendour and candour of the eternall Light, did so soueraigne¦ly recreate himselfe that he thee pra¦ctised the delightes of the ineffable Loue of his heart towards vs? O well beloued mother of the well-be loued; ô well beloued spouse of the
 well-beloued! prone layed at thy sa∣cred feete who bore my Sauiour, I vow, dedicate and consecrate this lit∣tle worke of Loue, to the immence greatnesse of thy Loue; ah! I coniure thee by the heart of thy sweete IESVS, king of hearts, whom thyne adore, a∣nimate my heart, and all theirs who shall reade this writing of thy all puis∣sant fauour, with the Holy Ghost, so that hence-fourth, we may offer vp in holocaust all our affections to his Di∣uine goodnesse, to liue, dy, and re∣uiue for euer in the flames of this heauenly fire, which our Sauiour, thy sonne hath so much laboured to kindle in our hearts, that he neuer ceased to labour and trauell therin, euen vnto death; and death of the Crosse.
