



DIuers men finding them selues in like
daunger, may better iudge each of o∣thers
case, then any one that hath not
experimented the like, as for example,
no mā can better iudge of the charges
and expences that a man hath bene at
in the pursute of some processe, then
he that hath bene at the like.
This doe I say, Syr, sith there is nothing more daunge∣rous
then sclaunder, and that no man can better iudge of
the peruersnesse thereof, then such as haue both tasted and
tryed it. So it is that the Reformed Princes haue bene sclan∣dered
by the Pope, vvho hath noted them of heresie: and in
my opiniō your Maiestie cā best iudge of the iniurie done vn∣to
them, as hauing in your selfe tried the sharpnesse of the
dartes of sclander, for your Maiestie haue vvith the like
dartes bene atteinted, no lesse pernitiously and maliciously
then the Reformed Princes, cōsidering that the sclander rai∣sed
vpon your Maiestie, vvas both vndirect and secret, but
the same vvherevvith the Reformed Princes are charged,
is open. Novv is it a plaine case, that a secret enemy is more
daungerous then an open, and so consequently they that haue
touched your Maiestie vvith such a sclander, bearing you
invvard malice, are most daūgerous enemies. The sclander
vvherevvith the Pope hath charged the Reformed Princes

is vvell enough knovven, and the aunsvvere thereto, to∣gther
vvith their iust defence, shall in my opinion, be
peremptorily enough intreated of in this present Treatise.
But the sclaunder vvherevvith the Pope doth charge your
Maiestie deserueth the laying open, because that being both
secret and indirect, it hath neuerthelesse a more venimous
tayle then the tayle of a Scorpion, and of the same nature: for
the vvound can hardly be cured, but by the death of the by∣ter.
If the Pope could haue burdened your Maiestie vvith
heresie, it is euident that he vvould not haue spared you: but
your Maiestie, haue alvvayes bene so good a Catholick, that
he could not accuse you of heresie, but he must first haue con∣demned
him selfe, and therefore seeing that vvay vvould
not serue, he hath sought out an other: for vnder hand he
hath spread abroad sundry brutes & nevves, importing that
your Maiestie do fauour hereticks, and haue about you those
that take part vvith heretickes, and these rumors hath he
dispersed, not onely in France, but through all Italie, Germa∣nie,
and other places. Novv therfore let your Maiestie iudge
vvhat an impressiō this may leaue in the harts of the people,
and vvhat a consequence this action dravveth after it, your
Maiestie may thereby read in the hartes of the Pope & the
League, & turning the leafe neuer so little, may knovv their
driftes, togither vvith the consequence of the matter: That
is, that the Pope seeketh first to vveaken the part of the Re∣formation,
that it may stand as an 0 in algorisme, and next
to bring in the Councill of Trent and the Inquisition, so to
authorise the League euen aboue your Maiestie, so as no
man may speake amisse of the Pope or the League, but he
shall sodenly be cast into prison: and that once brought to
passe, the next must be to lay hands vpon your selfe, and bury
you in some Monasterie: I say burie, because so you shall dye

double in this vvorld: and by and by raise speaches accor∣ding
to the impressions afore mentioned, that your Maiestie
hauing fauored the heretickes, are by his holinesse deposed
from the crovvne, and the Cardinall of Bourbon declared
next, but vnmeet for succession, and therefore that he vvill
set vp such a one of the League as shall be at his deuotion:
this I say vvill he doe, if your Maiestie take not the better
heede, and prouide not in time for it. Neither shall he doe
any thing that hath not already bene done to your predeces∣sours,
vvhose estates the Popes haue troubled, vvhen there
vvas no speach of Reformation, but onely vpon mallice that
they bare to the priuiledges of the Frēch Church. And also
albeit your Maiestie should shake of the Popes yoke, yet
should you doe nothing but vvhat your predecessours haue
sought to do, vvitnesse the Pragmaticall Sanction, neither
shall it be any noueltie in Fraunce. The hatred also that the
Pope beareth to your Maiestie, is the same that he hath conti∣nued
against your predecessours, euen for their priuiledges,
therefore he vvould vvillingly haue in France such a king
as might be his creature, so that his driftes are as preiudici∣all
to the Clergie, as pernitious to your person, and vvhether
they be hurtfull to the people, let the present troubles declare.
For the people had bene at rest, had not the League troubled
all Fraunce, and therefore it is a matter that concerneth all,
neither is there any other meanes to remedie it, but by sha∣king
of the Popes yoke, your predecessours haue done it for a
smaller matter, not in respect of Reformation, neither did
king Henry the viij. in England shake it for Reformation,
but for his state: And this I vvill aduovv that the libertie
and puritie of the Councell of Nice, vvhich vve doe craue, is
better for France and the state thereof, then the yoke of the
Tridentine Councell that the League requireth. I call it li∣bertie,

because in the time of the Nicene Councell there
vvas no Popish yoke and puritie, for that thē there vvas no
superstitiōs. But albeit your Maiestie vvill not come neare
to that point, yet can you not escape the Popes superstitious
practises, but by renouncing the Papacie, after the example
of your predecessours desires, and as king Henry the eight
of England put in effect, not for Reformation, but for the
state. For it is most certaine that the Pope hath no povver
to hurt any, but his ovvne faction, or such as haue any dea∣ling
vvith him: but to those that haue forsaken him, his
poyson is spit, his povver to hurt is ended, and his endeuors
are quayled and made of no effect. Had king Henry of Eng∣land
still follovved him, he vvould either by guile, excom∣munications,
or croisades, haue thundered against him, but
hauing cast him of, the Pope might like a Cerberus vvith
his three heades crovvned vvith three crovvnes, haue bar∣ked
at him, but byte he could not. The like vvill it be
vvith all that forsake him, vvell he may barke, but not
byte, your Maiestie may knovv vvhat difference there
is betvveene the fidelitie of the Reformed, and the conspi∣racies
of the League: The Reformed vvill dye in your ser∣uice:
but the Pope by the League, seeketh to make your Ma∣iestie
odious to your subiectes, and to other Princes and
people about you, by ministring vnto them such vvicked
impressions by their secret sclaunders. It is a goodly mat∣ter
to knovv vvhom to trust, and vvhom to take heede of,
neither vvonder I but at one thing, vvhich is, that the
Sorbonistes hauing afore time denounced a Pope an here∣ticke,
that the Clergie haue not as yet declared this a schis∣maticke,
for raising so great a schisme in Europe, but espe∣cially
for stirring vp the subiectes against their king in
Fraunce. I vvill not any further dilate vpon these mat∣ters,

vvhich are sufficiently knovven to your Maiestie,
and Kinges loue breuitie. I haue no more to say, but to pray
vnto the Lord to blesse and prosper your Crovvne, and to
make your scepter to sprout, florishe and bring forth fruict
as he did those of Ezechias and Iosias. From London this
12. of December. 1588.

