



PLato that diuine Philosopher (right Worship∣full)
dyd cast out of the common-wealth of
wise-men which he made, Homer and Hesiode
two Poets, because he perceyued some vani∣tie
in theyr Poems. Ouid neuer more iustlie
deserued exilement, then for hys lasciuious
verse, because they incline to the nourishment
of vyce.
If we punish such by penall lawes, which vse false waights and
measures, those are not to be permitted, vvhich diuulgate corrupt
dyscourses: for these are meanes to vitiat the minde, the other can
but defraud vs of money.
That vvhich is infectious to publish, must needes be infamous
to patronize; it is a credit to giue countenance to a good worke;
for that cause I haue made choyse of such a matter, as shall neyther
offend your W. for vanitie in the inuention, or for indignitie in
the protection.
The Subiect handled is vvarre, the rumor of it is fearefull, and
therefore the discourse of it may be fruitfull; vvhich hauing fini∣shed,
I haue presented to your W. not to that ende many ayme
at, in giuing whereof Gratian speaketh, Do vt des vel do vt facias.
Decret caus. 14. To giue to haue giuen agayne, but as a gyft pro∣ceeding
of mere good-will; and I am the rather induced heere∣vnto,
for these causes.
First in respect of promise; the Ciuilians say, Vir iustus est vota
et promissa praestare, I promised long since to gratifie your W. with
some grauer attempt. The Philosopher sayth, that the bird of E∣gypt
being olde, purgeth all the humors of her bodie, by eating
spyces of Arabia, and sendeth forth of her mouth a sweete breath;
so I hauing expelled the vanities of youth, by the experience of
more yeares, may haue a more rype and seasoned iudgment: for as
Euripides sayth, the second actions are more singuler; vve see that

Aritificers be more excellent, in theyr second workes, then much
more are the studies of the minde, alwayes amended by future me∣ditation,
as Cicero sayth, Posteriores cogitationes sapientiores esse solent,
the latter cogitations are wont to be wiser.
Secondly, in regard of your kindnesse; vvhich not onely deser∣ueth
to be cannonized for a vertue by the Schoolemen, T. Aqui.
Art, 1, but to be spoken of to the reproch of many ingratefull per∣sons
in thys age: for there be some that respect not a gyft vvhen it
is giuen; others, that vvill sooner crucifie then gratifie a well-wil∣ler;
but there is in your W. both a ciuill kind of curtesie to accept,
and also, more then a common course of kindnesse to requite; now
it is true that Tully sayth, Omnes immemorem benificii oderunt, all
men hate hym who is not mindfull of a benefite, and therefore if
Heathen men vvould punish vnthankfull persons, with seruitude,
as Claudius Caesar did: Sueton, cap. 25, and vvith death, as the Per∣sians
dyd, Melanct. lib. 1, vvhat were I worthie to haue, if I should
not remember your kindnes and some-way remunerate againe.
These things considered (hauing neyther store of Indian trea∣sure
to bestowe, or costlie Iuels of Egypt to offer) I could doe no
lesse then dedicate my labours to your W. Ʋltra posse non est esse,
there is no defect in affection but in action; but Kings in former
tymes would not refuse gyfts of good-will, though they brought
but a handfull of vvater; Christ him selfe dyd accept the widowes
offer, though she gaue but a myte, and therefore I hope you will
not reiect my simple present, though it be but a peece of paper. So
presuming of your accustomed kindnesse, I commit the protection
heereof to your W. and the preseruation of your selues, to the
Almightie, vvho make you gloryous Cittizens in heauen, as he
hath made you graue Senators vpon earth.

