



THe moost myghtye Monaychie of the Romain Empire Octauius Augu∣stus, (ryghte honourable Lord) did shewe so great liberalitie, or rather mag¦nificence towardes all them that bare him good will, that he also most largely rewarded sondry persones yt had tought Popingayes and other birdes, to pro∣nounce some salutation (as he passed by them) in his prayse & commendation. At the length a poore yonge man, allured (as it séemed) by his bountifull remune∣ration of other: had tought a Crowe (an vntowardly byrde) after the same man∣ner to salute themperour. Who percei∣uing



his purpose, that it was rather for hope of gayne, then testimony of good wyll: answered that he had store inough already, of suche saluters at home, mea∣ning those Popingayes & other birdes, which at the first for their strangenes, he had dearly payed for. In lyke manner (right honorable Lorde) when I present the salutation of this myne vntowardly byrde, a Crowe in comparison of suche pleasaunt popingayes, as haue béen he∣tofofore offered vnto your honorable Lordship: you may haue iust cause of su∣spition, that being moued with your for¦mer liberalitie & magnificence towards other, I doe as the Poet sayeth:
Occulium cautus decurrere piscis ad hamum.
And so if your gentle nature and no∣ble dispositiō could suffer, as a crauer of vndeserued benefites, to reiect both me & my present. But sith my state is such, that I can not testifie the good wyll of myne heart towardes your honour, o∣therwyse then by such meanes as this: I was bolde to referre that suspition to the iudgement of your wysdome and hu¦manitie (knowing my selfe cleare from suche intent) and to commit this vnbew∣tifull



byrd, vnder the wynges of youre honorable protection, trusting that the same (whiche I take as a commen de∣fence of all good learning) shall not on∣ly at this time be my stay & refuge, but also hereafter to more worthy attempts a continual encouragement. But speci∣ally at this tyme, I was bolde to en∣terprise the matter, for that one Iames Rowbothum, a man of notable impudens (that I saye no worse of him abusinge your singular humanitie and gentlenes expressing thexample of one Bathillus, or rather (that I may continue in the alle∣gorie of birdes) of Esopes crowe, hath not ben ashamed to dedicate vnto your Lord¦ship of late a treatise of myne, which I gathered out of diuerse writers, concer∣ning the Philosophers game: notwithstan∣ding he was streightly commaunded to the contrary by the right honorable and reuerent father, my Lord of London, of whome also I was exhorted and encou∣raged to dedicate the same vnto your ho∣nour, my selfe. Whiche though nowe through his importunitie & disobediēce, it be intercepted, and the booke defaced with his rude rythmes & peuish verses:



yet I thought best to geue your Lorde∣ship vnderstanding that your honorable protection which is and should be the de∣fence of learning & learned men, might no more be a boldening to such ignorant and vnhonest persones. And like wyse most humbly to desire your honour that though myne Epistle dedicatory, be not annexed to that booke, yet considring by what pertinacitie I was hindered, you would accept that booke also together wt this, as an homely present of myne, of which I may conclude as one did in like case.
Illum ego cōposui librū, tulit alter honorē
Sic vos non vobis lacte tumetis oues.
Sic vos non vobis praeda agit ampla canes
Sic vos non vobis conditis antra ferae,
Sic vos non vobis pondera a fertis equi.
Thus sparing to trouble your honour any lōger, either wc cōplaint or excuse, I desyre almightie God to multiplie his blessinges toward you, that abounding in all good giftes bothe bodely and ghostly, you may haue long life in health and honour, to his glory, the profit of other, and your endles com∣fort. Amen.
