



MY LORD,
AMong the many absurdities, which giue vs iust cause to abhorre the Religion of the present Roman Church, this seemeth to me none of the least; that they haue filled all the Temples vnder the commaund of their politike Hierarchy, with Idols: and changed the glory of the Inuisible God, into the worship of visible Images. They inuocate the Saints by them, yea they dare not serue the Lord without them. As if God had repea∣led his vnchageable Law; and in stead of condem∣ning all worship by an Image, would now receiue no worship without an Image. I haue obserued this one, among the other famous markes of that Synagogue; that they striue to condemne that which God hath iustified, and to iustifie what he hath condemned. For the former; He hath precisely directed our Iustifica∣tion only by faith in the merits of Christ: this they vehemntly dispute against. For the other; He hath (not without mention of his Ieousie) for bidden all worship that hath the least tang of Idolatry: this they eagerly maintaine. What large Volumes haue they written against the Second Commaunde∣ment! as if they were not content to expunge it out

of their Catechismes, vnlesse they did also Dogma∣tice  it to the whole world. They first set the people vpon a plaine rebellion, & then make shew to fetch them off again with a neat distinction. Thus doe they pumpe their wits to legitimate that by a di∣stinction, which God hath pronounced a Bastard by his definitiue sentence: as if the Papall Decrees were that law, wherby the world should bee iudged at the last day. But who will regard a house of magnificent structure, of honourable & ancient memory, when the plague hath infected it; or theeues possesse it? And who, in their right senses, will ioyne themselues to that Temple, which after pretence of long standing, stately building, and of many such prerogatiues and royalties, is foūd to be be smeared with superstitions, and profaned with innumerable Idols? Why should wee delight to dwell there, where God hath refused to dwell with vs.
I publish this argument as no new thing to your Lordship: but, wherein your well experienced know∣ledge is able to informe mee. Onely I haue beene bold, through your thrice honoured Name, to trans∣mit this small Discourse to the world: emboldened by the long proofe I haue had of your constant loue to the Truth, and the gracious Pietie of your most noble Mother, the best encouragement of my poore labours on earth. The best blessings of God bee still multiplied vpon her, your selfe, your religious La∣dy, and your honorable Family: which is continu∣ally implored by.

