



WHereas there were late orders giuen vs in charge by pub∣lique authoritie, se∣riously commaun∣ding the strict ob∣seruation of these two religious and Christian duties, Fasting, and giuing of Almes, very fit
for all times, but most necessarie for these difficult seasons and late yeares of scarcitie: I iudge it not amisse in some large discourse to dilate vppon them, and that they might more zea∣lously be performed, to vrge by al the plausible arguments that I coulde, the necessitie of thē. For there be too many defectiue in these poynts, who walking after their owne vngodly lusts, do nothing else but sweate ouer their trēchers, in al Epicurisme, with∣out consideration of the affliction of Ioseph, wallowing thēselues, like the sensuall and carnal Iouinianistes whō Augustine reproueth,Aug. de haeresibus nd Quod vult deum. Ambr. Tom. 3 Serm. 37 1 Cor. 15 who vtterly did reiect and condemne all Fasting: and not vnlike Sarmotian, and Barbatian gluttonous lubbers, whom Ambrose remembreth: & finally like the beasts whom Paul fought withall in the ma∣ner of men at Ephesus, who said amōg themselues: Let vs eate and drinke, for to morrow we shall die. The schoole of these is great, & the mischiefe which
they do, is vnsufferable. This kind of people most pestilently troubled the Church in the Apostles time. Paul could not refraine weeping, when he mentioned these vnto the Church of Philippos: whose God was their bellie,philip. 2 Iud. 8. who wer carnally minded. Holy Iude was also much infested with this crew, VVho despised gouernment, & did speake euill of those who were in authori∣tie, fleshly, and not hauing the spirit. This our happie Common-wealth is not a little troubled with refractory rabble∣ments of prophane gospellers, who liue loosely & lewdly, turning fasting into feasting, & charitie into crueltie. They are so far frō fasting, & feeding of the poor, as they do nothing els but surfet thēselues, and fleece the poore. They rauish them (as Dauid saith) when they get thē in their nets.Basil. The reuerend father Basil speaketh of such vngodly fellowes who abounded in his time, who for al their supercilious lookes & graue gestures, and coun∣terfeit & constrained holinesse, were
so wretchedly minded, as they wold not contribute the least peece of mo∣ney towards the reliefe of the poore, or any godly vse: they would first tor∣ment a begger with a hundretd que∣stions, before they would sustain him with the smallest deuotion. But these times (I am perswaded) do exceed all the times that haue gone before vs, and doo seeme to haue come now to their extremitie. There cannot be a more effectuall signe of a consuming and dying bodie, then the coldnesse of the bodie, and therefore it was said of Dauid,1. Reg. 1. that when he was readie to die, that they couered him with cloa∣thes, but no heate came vnto him: it is a token of a dead soule, when as it is cold in duties of deuotion, and can∣not be warmed by the pittifull and pa∣theticall out cries of the poore. When the sicke man with greedinesse laieth hold vpō his bed, and violently wold draw the couerlets, sheets, and what∣soeuer hee can claspe, vnto himselfe,
we say that man will die. The world now with all the Art they can, seeke to draw into their possessions the re∣uenues of the Bishoprikes, and the zelous cōtributions of our godly an∣cestors vnto the Church, it is to be concluded therfore,Mar. 12 Matt. 25 Matt. 7 ye the world shall shortly die. We were neuer greater professors, and lesse practisers. The figge tree had leaues, but no fruit: the foolish Virgins had oyle, but no lampes: we go in sheepes clothing, but inwardly are rauenous wolues. When as Iehu King of Israell went to kill the sonnes of Achab, and destroie Baals priests: he met a souldier by the way, and said to him: Is thy hart right towards mee, Who answered, yea:2. Reg. 10 Iehu replied, then giue me thy hand: So Christ the true King of Israel, who came into this worlde to destroy I∣dolatry, asketh of vs that make our selues professors of his name the same question, whether our hearts be right towards him: if wee say, yea: hee as∣keth
our handes that are the instru∣ments of good works. In the old law, God comaunded that the skinne of euery beast which should be for a sa∣crifice, should bee drawne off. The skin is the outward couering: so our outward couering and dissimulation must be pulled off, & we must expres our religion in our deeds. But it is far otherwise: for how little fasting, and how great feasting, and that vppon dayes and nights inhibited by godly authority, is now to be seene? Wher∣as there should bee no beggers in Is∣rael: by our vnsatiable and extreame couetousnesse, beggers doo increase and swarme in euery place. It ap∣peareth that wee beare but little loue vnto her Maiestie, by whom we liue, who thus vnconscionably doo preferre our owne vngodly lusts be∣fore her godly lawes, thinking that lawful which is lustfull vnto vs, shif∣ting off these her godly lāwes to glut our affections, like the grosse & beast∣lie
Atheists, and Epicures, whō Am∣brose thus describeth. Multi sunt qui∣bus cum ieiunium indicitur de intemperie se tempor is semper excusant. Dicunt enim aestiuis mensibus: Dies long a est, & fortior sol est, & torrentior sitim ferre non possu∣mus: poculis nos refrigerare debemus, hye∣mis tempore algorem tolerare nequimus escis calefieri nos oportet. It a hominis quo∣rum animus semper est in prandio, pran∣dendi sibi causas inquirunt: & dum se a ieiuntis excusant tempora Creatoris ac∣cusant. There are many (saieth Am∣brose) who when as they are com∣maunded to fast, doo excuse them∣selues by the wickednes of the time. For they say, in Sōmer season the day is too long, the Sun is hotter: we are nor able to endure thirst, let vs coole our selues with cuppes. In Winter they replie, we cannot abide the chil∣nesse of the weather, we must warme our selues with meate. Thus these men whose mindes are wholie set vppon their meate, doo alwayes
make occasion to dine, and whiles they doo excuse themselues from fa∣sting, they lewdly do accuse the times of their Creator. If these men will suffer themselues to be reformed, and not remaine incorrigible, I doubt not but if they will peruse these treatises, but they will bee perswaded to ful∣fill these duties. Wherin I haue inde∣uoured by pregnant proofes of Scip∣tures, authorities of Fathers, and ma∣nie perswasorie and effectuall simili∣tudes gathered from the Fathers, to enforce the same. And these I am bold to dedicate to your Grace, and to you Honourable and my good Lord of Norwich, for verie good cau∣ses, both publike and priuate.
1 First, I take my selfe as a poore Minister of the Church, to owe a Ca∣nonicall dutie to your Grace, as to one to whom the gouernment of our Church, vnder the sacred Maiestie of our blessed Queene, is principally committed, and to you (reuerend fa∣ther)
beeing our prudent, godlie, and vigilant Diocesan.
2 Secondly, both your loues to my deceased father, might haue incou∣raged me, if there were nothing else.
3 But principally I presume herein to giue you this booke, because your Graces godly sanctions, and your (my Lord) industrious publication of these sanctions to vs your Clear∣gie, through the confines of your li∣bertie, are the subiect matter, and oc∣casion of my Booke.
3 Also the loue your Grace, and your honour, do beare to all godlie endeuors, and the countenance that you giue vnto painful ministers, hath ministred vnto me no small cheerful∣nesse in this matter.
5 Last of all, in that I haue deuo∣ted my selfe in all solemne obsequies, vnto your good Lordship, and it hath pleased your honour, aswell to ascribe mee in the number of your Chaplains, as to encourage me in my
labour, and studies, as my bounden dutie willeth mee, I consecrate vnto your Lordships, the fruits of these my labours. GOD, euen the most mightie God, enrich your zealous harts with the abundant graces of his spirit, and make your names famous vnto the endes of the worlde: giue you long life, with all worldly pro∣speritie, that by both your god lie wisdoms, we may stil be led as sheep, as by the handes of Moses and Aaron. London the 8. of October, in the yeare of our saluation. 1597.

