



(Most Reuerend, Honorable, and right Noble Lords)
MAy it please your Graces and Honors to be∣hold the wofull picture, and lamentable pro∣tect of your earthly Downefall intended, (the contemplation and cogitation whereof can neuer cause you to bury it in obliuion) where∣in the professed enemies to God, King, and Country, endea∣uoured and attempted with one blow and blast to make your Mittimus, and send you all to another world. But Gods most admirable mercy disappointed their most abho∣minable mischiefe, and doth moue your Graces and Honors to say thankfully with the Psalmist, Psal. 44. 7. Thou hast saued vs from our aduersaries, and hast put them to confusion that hate vs: Therefore will we praise God continu∣ally, 8. and will confesse thy name for euer. In which

prodigious practise, and mercilesse Massacre, your Graces and Honors may behold your selues, how you should haue Primae impres∣sionis Flagitium. beene, not rebaptized, but haue beene buried in fire and flames; and by Gods gracious deliuerance haue receiued a kinde of resurrection from a plotted suddaine death: and this popish powder of a future fire-worke, which should haue beene the martyrdome of the kingdome, remooued and dis∣couered, before these dangerous, aiellish, and Purgatory-Vulcans could bring one sparke to enkindle it: still the Regall Sunne and Moone shines with a bright and beauti∣full lustre in the Royall firmament, who by these foule mon∣sters, and fiery Meteors should haue beene finally eclipsed: Charles-wayne is still in our Horizon, and God grant it may be said of our King Iames, as Iacob said of his Iuda, Sceptrum non auferetur à Iuda, Gen. 49. 10.
Your Graces and Honors the fixed starres of Church and State, still keepe your station, and retaine your powerfull influences, who by these Miscreants should haue bene sent from the stately Parliament to the starry firmament, and though not then your mortall limbes, yet your immortall soules should haue flowen higher. But loe, * The Lord was 2 Chron. 15. 2. with you, while you were with him, and preserued you in safely as reserued instruments for his further seruice and glory, to the vnspeakeable comfort of his Church, and hap∣py welfare of great Britanny. Which incomparable worke of Gods infinite mercy in this most gracious and generall de∣liuerance, as it can neuer beforgotten, so it cannot be too ofr reuined: which poore oblation (a commemoration of your Graces and Honours preseruation) as it is very seaso∣nable for the time, Nouember the 5. against which day it was and is prepared as a yearely present, and poore Tribute of true thankefulnesse, so I heartily wish it weresatable to merit your most honourable acceptance: Yet

Cum desint vires, tamen est laudanda voluntas:
Your renowned worthinesse will, I hope, accept my wil∣lingnesse, and protect this Treatise (the Transcendent of Treason) vnder the fauourable countenance of your most honourable patronages; so shall it be safe from all backbi∣ting vermine, and vipers of our Church and Country. And as some say, The Sea-Vrchin armes himselfe with some stones against a tempest, so I against all the windy tempests of ill tongued Iesuites, and railing Popelings, who take things with the left hand which are offered with the right, as Ariston once said, will I suppose contemne and con∣demne this worke, wherein their treasonable practises and precepts are in part discouered: yet being armed with your Graces and Honors defence, as with precious stones built vpon the chiefe corner-stone & Rocke, Christ Iesus; though flouds from the Sea of Rome should come, or the windes of wicked Iesuites blow vpon this booke with their infecting breath, and would beate it downe with a storme of words, yet. Math. 7. 25. Non cadet, quia fundatur super petram. I feare to be tedious, and therefore in all dutifull and submissiue reuerence, I cease my hand: yet my heart, till death, shall neuer cease to pray for all your prosperous happinesse and heauenly successe in your holy and high affaires for the Church, King and Country; for which Diuine blessing shall be duely and daily powred forth the poore deuotions of your

