



HIppocrates, thauctor and parent preordina∣ted by Goddes diuine prouidence, for the helthe, welthe, and be∣nifite of all mankynd, whose wordes, and au∣cthorities we admitte, receiue, and allowe, together with Galen, as Oracles from Hea∣uen, seemeth vnto me, most noble Earle, nei∣ther to haue written rashely, as diuers did of olde, nor yet vnprobably, as other haue of late, wherof I haue made mention in my dis∣course of the natural beginning of all gro∣wing, and liuing thinges, &c. But rather
 moste diuinely, and Philosophically in en∣treating of the Elementes of mans life, Fire, Ayre, Water, Earthe, omitting with Hipp. the moste simple,Libr. de Carnibus. not receiuing these foure qualities, vt Coelum, Spherae, Stellae, Planetae, as Heauen, Spheres, Starres, and Planets, entreateth here of those simple bo∣dies, the Elementes, receiuers of the foure qualities, whiche be the beginners of all thinges vnder the Moone: whether they be Inanimata, without life, and imperfectly mixt, as the Meteors, or pefectly, as the Mine∣rals, or Animata, with life, Vegetat, sensit, & Rati∣onal, growing thinges, as Hearbes, Plan∣tes, and Trees, &c. Liuing thinges, as Beastes, Foules, and Fishe, and reasonable, as Mankinde, all hauing their originall of the Elementes, not of things void of sense, and vnsufferable, neither of thinges with sense, and vnsufferable: not of the first Ele∣mentes, Suffering, and feeling: neither of thinges suffering without sense, but of the foure Elementes, Fire, Ayre, Water, Earthe, as a Language of an Alphabet,
 and not of one Elemēt, more then this word (Iohn) can consist of one letter (I.) alone. The whiche olde Hipp. righte aduisedly dooth approoue, writing after this maner:In Lib. de nat. homi∣nie. Qui obsecro fieri potest, vt ex vno quicquam consti∣tuatur, quum ne ex pluribus quidem possit, nisi ea pro∣be fuerint contemperata.
How can it be, I pray you, that any thing may of one thing be compounded, seeing of many thinges it cannot, except they be well tempered: comprising briefely and most pi∣thily the summe of the mater.
The nature, propertie, maner of min∣gling, and diuisions, as wee haue very brief∣ly handled in our Tables of Bathes aide, to the prudent Earle of Penbrooke, your ho∣nours Sonne in Lawe: so be they at large taught of Galen, in both his bookes (de E∣lementis.) And do now dedicate them vnto your Noblenesse, as a perpetuall argument of my faitheful and constāt seruice towardes your Lordship, for a presente of this newe yeare: emboldened and animated the rather so to doo, because it is manifeste, as well of Buckstones Bathes benifite, as also by the
 worthy acceptation of my preseruatiue wa∣ter, that your hon̄our doth not a litle esteme: rewarde, and commende them that take any small paine in setting foorth that whiche may profite the posterities, as these workes of the very principles of al Philosophie and Phisicke, and therefore thereunto to be an∣nexed: the argument whereof further to di∣late vnto your puissaunce, sholde be insteede of a preamble, (perhaps) meere tediousnes, the graue affaires of our weightie and most mightie state, whiche you further so nobly, vigilantly, and faithfully (according to the Prouerbe, with tooth and nayle) considered, the whiche state, God, I beseeche, in all ma∣iestie long to continue: Oh ingenious head, fraught full of alveritie: Oh godly breast, preseruer of all tranquilitie: Oh inuincible, and soueraigne harte, Elizabeth, daughter of the victorius, and triumphant Henry the eighte.
Thus, hoping that these workes by vs pu∣blished should seme any lesse englished (albe∣it) rightly Ad Verbū, & Sensum, then with Sir
 Andr. Lacunae Knighte, Doctour of Phisicke, (in Latine abridged forth of the Greeke) that your Honour of your accu∣stomed lenitie wil enterprete it to the best, equall to whom in liberalitie, I knowe fewe, in fidelitie fewer, in affabilitie none.

