



(RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL)
THe law of Nature, which con∣demneth ingratitude, yea, the common Rules of humanitie, which oblige the gratefull to good Benefactors, enforce mee to this Dedication.
I haue reaped with a plentifull hand the goulden haruest of your fauors, in re∣quitall whereof, I tender vnto you the small gleanings of my poore labours: for al∣though I am easily ouercome of others, in parts of nature, learning, and grace; yet, in gratefulnesse to my good friends, I say with resolute Luther, Cedo nulli: I euer abhorred from my heart that fault, wherewith the
Rom. 1.21. Apostle taxeth mankinde, they were not Thankfull.Seneca. Many men like Zeno's mony-minstrell, sing for siluer, or pipe for pence, to whom the Wiseman said, Si dedero, & te, & pecuniam perdo; When their turn is serued, they returne no thankes: I hope I shall ne∣uer merit an exclusion out of the Kalendar, or Catalogue of your thankfull debtors: Saying with Seneca,Epist. 8 3. Nunquā tibi gratiam re∣ferre ptero, illud certè non desinam vbique confite∣ri, me ferre non posse; God accepts votall sa∣tisfaction, where is no power of actuall re∣stitution: I know you desire to imitate your Maker; and with him, Solutio debiti est grata confessio Beneficij. But to pretermit all publike and priuate debts of dutie, where∣by I stand engaged to your Seruice, these two Twinnes, or sister-Sermons desire to call you Patron; who as they were concei∣ued, and brought to light by the life of your loue, so they run to you to be their Protector: And to none more willingly doe I commend, and communicate my preaching paines, then to your Worthinesse (so cordially affected to the Gospell), who of all the Tribe of Gentrie in these parts (whereof be many sincerely religious), yet
among the most eminent, (if Enuie be not iudge) you merit the Palme:Pro. 31.29 Many haue done vertuously, but you surmount them all: And as the flower of Religion (Pietie) is fixed in your heart; so the fruits of it, flow from your hand, (Charitie, & Hospitalitie): farre vnlike many wandring Planets in some places, who at Michaelmasse make the Countrie their Circumference, to gather in their Rents; but at Christmasse, when they should expend their store to feede the poore, make the Citie, or their Cosens hou∣ses their Center; as great non-residents from the Basket, as some of our coat be from their Benefices: but you with charitableIob. 31.17. Iob may say, I haue not eaten my morsels alone, the fatherlesse haue eaten thereof: Couetous∣nesse neuer stood for Porter at your Gate.
But I will not blow a trumpet of your vertues, and almes-deedes; theyReu. 14.13. shall fol∣low you to Heauen, whē your body falleth to Earth: and herein you are worthy to be praised, that though you deserue, yet you desire no praise:Seneca. Magnum est, nolle laudari, & esse laudabilem; You haue the loue of the Clergy, Gentry, Country; the fire of this Triple Loue flames in many hearts,Cant. 8.7. Much
water cannot quench this loue, neither can the flouds drowne it; Vereor, ne violem fron∣tem tuam, Sedem verecundiae.
Worthy Sir! Accept in good part this poore oblation of my deepe Affection, then which fauour, when I weigh my worth, I can wish no more; when I remember you, I do hope no lesse. I preached these cursory meditations at your appointment, in the time of your great Imploiments (being the very worthy high Sherife of Norfolke) and then they found good acceptance; and the Lord chief Iustice, the Oracle of the Assises, graced them with approbation, requiring a copy of them for priuate deuotion, which here I publish (perswaded by many) to posteritie: So crauing a fauourable con∣struction, and acceptation of this plaine, and perfunctory labour, with my hearty prayers to God, to make your pathes eue∣ry way prosperous, To blesse your Wor∣ship, your religious Lady, and hopefull progenie with health, and happinesse on earth, and with a glorified life in Hea∣uen, I euer rest

