



(RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL)
I Haue presumed to seale this Sermon with the Signet of your names, that your worthinesse might giue lustre to this worthles labor: and I was induced by many Allectiues to gratifie you with this small remembrance: First, your religious re∣spect, and affection you beare, and embosome to our tribe of Leui. Secondly, your Cordiall loue, and continuall deuotion you manifest vnto the Gos∣pel. Thirdly, you are the viue Image of your de∣parted father, a Foster-father of the Clergie, who




 now resteth with the Father of glorie, from whom I receiued the first fruits of my poore liuing: and therefore, as a due debt, I tender vnto you the first fruits of my small learning: Accept it as a gratefull Testimony of a thankefull minde,
Qui si non potui maxima, parua dedi: not the greatnesse of the gift, but the gratefulnesse of the Giuer is to bee respected:Cassio. and as one well speakes, Inuitat ad magna, qui grate accipit modica: So your gentle acceptance shall encourage me to some greater businesse: and as the Apostle speakes of Almes,2. Cor. 8.12. So in this Action, If first there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not accordng to that he hath not: And as we reade, when the Tabernacle was to be built by Moses,Exod. 25.2. Euery one brought some thing, some more, some lesse, some better, some worse, and all necessary: So for the building of Gods Church, euery one should bring such as they haue,Lul. 21.2, 3. some Talents, and some with the Widow, mites to cast into the Treasurie: and although in these flourishing dayes of learning, there is a Satiety of worthy writers, yet they cannot breede a surfet: for we cannot say of spirituall oblation, as the wise men said to Moses in the bountifull times of popu∣lar oblation,Exod. 36.5. The people bring too much, and more then enough for the vse of the worke, &c. No: all our h nds, hearts, and tongues were giuen vs to this end,Aliis micans, meipsum consu∣mo. to spend them as selfe-consuming lampes, to giue light to others: and therefore not to shew my selfe defectiue in this publike seruice, (which was so begged by many to bee published) and conside∣ring what Saint Augustine writes, confess.  25. Non licet habere
 cognitionem priuatam, ne priuemur eâ: Wee must not make our knowledge priuate, lest we be depriued of it. I haue aduentured to present this Trauell to the generall eye of men, hoping that the graine be∣ing good, it doth better in the market, then in the garner. If any one Soule shall receiue good by it; I shall be fully satisfied, and your Worship shall be interessed in the claime of that comfort.
As Iacob, when he left his sonnes,Gene. 49.28. blessed them with a seuerall Blessing: So doe I beseech God, the giuer of all gifts, to bestow a spirituall Benediction vpon this labour, and to giue increase to that doctrine, which we here plant and water: and so in all submission, I commit this to your Patronage, and commend you to Gods good pro∣tection.

