



YOu may peraduenture wonder (most worthy Sir) or if not your selfe, yet many others (I am sure) will, why I, being an old man, and in my declining age long since, would be so inconsiderate as to set pen to paper, and write a discourse of Tabacco. But I pray you giue me leaue to speak for my selfe and to answer both the one and the other. Isocrates (the famous Orator) wrote the sweetest and most eloquent Oration of his, called Panathenaica, after hee was fourescore yeares of age: and the same is reported of the di∣uine Plato, who continually studied, and wrote of diuers points in Philosophy when he likewise had passed the Eighty yeere of his age, and so continued to his dying day, as Iohn Pierius in Oloris Hieroglyphico saith. The famous lawyer Baldus began to study the ciuil Law at three of the clocke in the afternoon (at what time king Deiotarus began to build a Ciuity) I mean, when he was an old man: and yet hauing an excellent, prompt, and praegnant wit, and a natural inclina∣tion to that kind of study, he became the most excellent man of his time. And although you will grant old men to bee sub∣iect to many imperfections and weaknesses, yet on the other side you must confesse, that yong men are much tainted with lightnesse, inconstancy of mind, and ouermuch folly. Indeed old men are not so strong, quick, sprightfull, and deliuer as

the yonger sort are: but yet in counsell, wisedom, experience and iudgement, they farre outstrip them; and by these ver∣tues, not by the other, noble and glorious enterprises are at∣chieued and brought to passe: and this questionlesse was the true cause that mooued Augustus Caesar that mightie Em∣perour, to make choise of no Captain that was vnder three∣score yeares of age, in his whole armie. But why I, being of these yeares, should take in hand to write of Tabacco, I know deserueth wonder: but the truth is, that being long detained prisoner in the Kings bench, more vpon malice of some few, than any merite of mine owne, and there seeing all sorts of people taking the fume of this hearb without any difference of age, condition, sexe, or respect of naturall constitution of any particular bodie, I then began to write a little of it for my owne recreation (my minde being then fatigated with o∣ther serious affaires, and caried away with other distracti∣ons) little thinking that that which then I wrote for my own priuate delight, should euer come to bee a prettie volume, as now I perceiue it is. Which after I had done, I acquainted some of my friends with the same, who instantly importuned me to commit it to the presse.
There is no man now adaies, nor heretofore hath beene, that euer I could either see or read, who hath not writ too partially of this plant, and not distinctly and plainely, as (I hope) in this smal work I haue done. Besides, I haue added my owne censure (though verie sparingly) of the writers hereof, as well strangers as those of our owne countrey. I haue fur∣ther discoursed of the diuersities of names giuē to this plant, with the nature and qualities thereof, to what diseases or griefes it is most appropriated, and with what formes it is best prepared & with what correctors; which I suppose few or none hath attempted: and yet whatsoeuer others herein

haue brought to light, though it bee neuer so little, I haue sincerely giuen thē their due worth & honor, so farre forth as the merit of their vertue deserued. In the kingdom of Ca∣stile in Spaine, as Carolus Clusius writeth, there is such great plenty of Ledon (a kinde of wilde rosemarie) which of the inhabitants is called Ardiuieia, as there this is growne to a common prouerbe:
Quien al mont va, ymas no puede, Alomenos ardiuieja.
Hoc est: Quicunque montem accedit, potius quam ina∣nis redeat, vel Ardiuiejā (plantam vilissimam) colligat. So rather than I will sit dronishly idle, will bee doing of some∣what, yea, thogh it be to write but of so mean a subiect as Ta∣bacco. Some besides may also imagine that I doe nothing; but Aranearum telas texere, that is, in a friuolous matter, and of small moment, spend infinite and curious labour: so that I had more need sometimes to craue pardon for my long dis∣course about this subiect: wherein though many things may want to the satisfaction of an affected and search∣ing head, yet I am sure here is inough to warrant the dis∣charge of my good will, and to repell the censure of the scru∣pulous. Facilius est reprehendere quam imitari: and some can reproue without authority, which wil not allow proofes with authoritie: such they thinke their credit is with some people, as Pythagoras was amongst his owne schollers, who thought Pythagoras speech a sufficient warrant to prooue any thing, onely alleaging, Ipse dixit. I doubt not there bee many Pythagoreans, that stand too much in their owne conceite. But to speake truth, and to make no better of my selfe than I am, I am farre vnlike Pytha∣goras, my words carrie no such weight of credit, as that my bare affirmation should barre any man the libertie of

contradicting me: I am rather like the Duke of Venice, who of himselfe can doe little, and is like the Priest at Masse which putting on his golden garment, and making a goodly gay shew, seemeth to be a great man; but if any com vnto him and craue some friendship at his hands, he will say, you must goe to the Masters of the parish, for I cannot pleasure you o∣therwise than by preferring your suit: and so it is with me.

Cum relego, scripsisse pudet: quia plurima cerno,
—me quoque qui feci, iudice, digna lini.


When I re-read, I shame I write: for much I see,
My selfe, who made them, being iudge blotted to be.

And therefore (right Worshipfull) fearing the like cen∣sure vpon mee, that hath happened vnto others, I haue presumed to dedicate these my labors vnto you, & to shield them vnder the patronage of your noble name, trusting that as you haue alwaies been not onely a fauorer, but also a sup∣porter and maintainer of learning and learned men, so you will accept in good worth this rude and compendious trea∣tise, defending it as a patrō, & receiuing it with good wil as from a well willing friend. Thus with encrease of Worship, prosperous health, and Gods graces, I commend you to the Almightie.

