



WOrthy Gentlemen, which by your words, acti∣ons, or writings, shew your selues worthy of so good a cause: to you which loue vertue for vertues sake, without any other collaterall respect: to you which are the stationarie sol∣diers of this Kingdome, contemning the thun∣dering cannon of Romish excommunication, and the crosse-battery of domesticall artillery: to you (next to the maine columnes of this state) I dedicate this short Poem, as an applause to your constancie, and as a Perdu to giue notice of the motions of our Aduersaries. The reasons vrging me thus to ex∣pose my selfe to an infinitie of censures are these. First the varie∣ty of floting humors generally discontented. Secondly, the dili∣gence of Romish Pirats to surprise them. Thirdly, the drousie security of these dangerous times. Lastly the vnseasonable curio∣sity of Sectaries, which (like Archimedes) seriously busie thēselues in drawing circles whilst their Country is in danger. These con∣siderations haue beene the weights, and plummets, to set my poore inuention on worke, to performe some dutifull office to the State, in the perswasion of Vnitie, the chiefest bond of peace, and happi∣nesse, and the surest fortresse against a million of straglers, which hope to prey vpon vs in our disorder and confusion. The Clergie hath already done their most faithfull, and most commendable deuoire: many of whose bookes will neuer bee answered. It re∣maines, that vertuous Gentlemen, hauing ioyned experience to their learning, and valour to their experience, should shew them∣selues in the first rankes, to beat back the golden hopes of the Ro∣mish Alcumists, Cum semiviro Comitatu: Neuer did England inioy a King more iudicious in matters of Diuinitie then now it doth. Neither was there euer a more happy proiector f the Vni∣on, and Vnitie of these kingdomes then Henry the seauenth,Polyd Virgi hist. l by giuing his eldest daughter the Lady Margaret in marriage to Iames the 4. King of Scotland. The one maintaines the Truth,

with his own Pen beyond the performance of any christian King: The other perswades Vnitie in the Truth by anothers report. If mine indeuours herein may any way confirme the constant, or stay the wauering from wronging themselues, and others, I shall be more then satisfied. de q. cap. 1 If the euent shall prooue otherwise, yet sholl it not repent me, Operam praebuisse reipublicae, si nihil profi∣turam, at conaturam prodesse. Now for the manner of writing in verse, the ancient custome of Oracles, and visions in this kind haue preuailed with me, to make tender of my best performance herein: And the incomparable Salust, Lord of Bartasse, hath of late so aduanced Poetry by his graue, maiesticall, and pleasing verse that I can neither feare the scorne of verse in generall, nor the obiection in particular of the vnfitnesse thereof for this subiect being in his nature nothing so deepe as that diuine subiect of du Bartasse his Poem.arel in ife of . Besides it was the practise of Solon by Thales, in pleasing rimes to giue the Athenians the wholsome pils of vertuous precepts: Orpheus, Linus, Pythagoras, Theognis. did the like. Amongst the Diuines, Prudentius, Sedulius, Iuuen∣eus, Paulinus. Lastly, that Kingy Diuine Poet, which was af∣ter Gods owne heart, did martiall his heauenly meditations in a kinde of primordiall verse. And although the number of Ballad∣mongers, and frothy Poems strained for gane to please the vul∣gar, may seeme to impaire the reputation of the auntient Vates, yet there is no question, but that perspicuous verse well couched, comprising much matter in a narrow roome, full of Historie, naturall Allegories, fit similes, and materiall obseruations, shall alwayes winne respect in the most waward & new-fangled age. Not in this assurance (Gentlemen) do I recommend these lines vnto yur view, but hoping that being Schollers yee will not mis∣conster, being generous yee will not carpe, being loyall yee will not disallow my dutifull deuotion. Eminent fortunes haue eminent place to shew their loyalty,. de . cap 3 but priuat men must learne of Seneca;
In privato publicum negotium agere.
