


IF that be true (right honora∣ble) which not onely Aristip∣pus the Philosopher, but all other doe confesse, that those things are to be taught, pra∣ctised and mainteyned, whi∣che in a common weale are moste profitable & necessary: Then I maye boldly without iust cause of repre∣hension affirme that Phisick is not the least, but one of the principall to be taught, practised, and had in honour and price. And because I wyll not further wade then my profession extendeth, I shall onely touche the thyrde parte therapeutick called with vs Chirurgerie. This parte whether for the antiquitie, as the moste auncient parte of Phisicke: or for the necessitie and vtilie of it I shoulde most commende, I can not easly iudge. But if we shall beleue Cornelius Celsus, or the olde wryters, we muste of force confesse it to bee more auncient, then the other two. For before the tyme of the Troian warres, Chiron Centau∣rus, and Telyphus were of greate renome, and
 fame, because they had first founde the arte to cure certaine virulent & maligne vlcers (which afterwarde according to the names of Chiron and Telyphus) were called Chironia & Tely∣phea vlcera. In the tyme of the Troians mortal warre, Podalirius and Machaon, being vnder Agamemnon, did merueylously profite the Sou∣diours in curing their woundes, taking out of Dartes and thyngs in them fixed, and appliyng healthful plaisters and medicines to the woun∣ded partes. What necessitie is of Chirurgerie, or how much commoditie and profite by it ensueth, let them answere, whiche are by the benefite of this arte delyuered from payne, preserued from losse & mutilation of members, & defended from death it self? But here I holde backe my penne in further commendynge Chirurgerie, least it might iustly be answered of your Lordship to me as was to the Sophiste, who resiting a whole booke written in praise and honour of Hercules, said, who dispiseth Hercules? So in like sort, your Honour might answere, who dispiseth Chirur∣gerie? In déede my good Lorde, none dispiseth it whiche are reasonable, and fewer enemies it shoulde haue, if the Professours them selues (in this our miserable tyme) were lesse gredy of mo∣ney, and moore diligent to learne their arte. And although the malice of other make me heare to to holde my peace: yet if I may craue your Lord∣ships supportation in so vertuous an enterprise,
 I shall not cease to set oute some of the partes of Chirurgerie: that thereby the yong and studious Surgians may be made the abler both to know, and also to exercise their art. And therfore I haue made a booke intituled the Institution of a Chi∣rurgion: then I shewe them a methodicall pra∣ctise to cure wounds, fractures, and dislocations, in my booke called an Enchiridion of Chirur∣gerie. And for that I heare that many Surgians want knowledge of curing woundes made with gonshot (being nowe at Newhauen, vnder the right honourable L. Ambrose Earle of War∣wicke, your honours moste deare brother) I for their ayde haue also compiled a treatise contey∣ning the parfite cure of gonshot. In which also I confute ye errours of diuers touchynge this que∣stion: whether the wounde made with gonshot is venomous? laste of all because the yonge men for want of tyme haue not iudgement sufficient, either to chuse out ye best & most conuenient medi¦cines, or ells to compounde newe: I haue made myne Antidotarie, contayning the principall and secrete medicines vsed in Chirurgirie. In which I doe not only set oute suche as the best wryters maketh mencion of, and I by longe experience haue found profitable: but also I do open diuers new, and to other yet vnknowen of my selfe in∣uented. Besechynge moste humblye your Lord∣shyppe, to take these bookes (the first fruits of my labours) into your noble protection, and defende
 bothe them and me the Authour from the ma∣lyce of busye Detractours. And I shall not onely haste other bookes, whiche I haue by me vnfini∣shed, but also as my duty requireth, praye vnto the Almyghtye for your Lordshyppes longe lyfe, perfite healthe, and daylye increase in ho∣noure. At my poore house in London, the sixetenth day of Iuly. 1563.

