



(Right Honourable Lord:)
IT was the saying of St Hierome to Celantia, Summa Epist. 37. apud Deum nobilitas est, clarum esse virtutibus. Yea the wise Moralist, vnchristened Seneca could say, Nobilitas animi, generositas est sensus, no∣bilitas hominis est generosus animus: The which true Nobility of the minde is your inherent, and hereditary honor, famoused for Piety, Iustice, Learning, and Liberality, so that the world sees you write not your desires in the dust. We blesse God, and wonder to behold in you so admirable a patterne of true Nobility, & moues vs to say with K. Lemuel, Pro. 3. 29. Many haue done vertuously, but you surmount them all, in your great perfection of Arts, and happy progresse in Grace, the world can number but few such. Vere∣or ne violem frontem tuā, sedem honoris, testem verecundiae: I know the sound of the trumpet of your praises is no musick to your eares, neyther doe I loue such straines: the land in generall ecchoes your renowned applause, and God who hath so blessed you, and by the Kings Maiesty promoted you to so honourable a Place, continue you an happy instrument of much good to Church and Common-wealth, and prosper your noble proceedings according to the promise of your admired entrance. And now (most honorable Lord) I hum∣blie craue your pardon, in presuming to present so simple a Present, vnto the view of so approued a iudgement, who haue Mercurium in lingua, & Mineruā pectore: yet although not the manner (being meane and homely) yet the matter handled may iustly merit your noble acceptance, being a description of the hainous sin of Treason, the fall and Tragedy of Traitors (plagues which the Arch-traitor to mankinde hath added to the world;) and also a seasonable subiect for the Time, August the fift, against which day it was, and is pre∣pared as an annuall obiect. And I know there is none within the

compasse of Great Brittaine poures forth more hearty prayers to God with a more feruent and faithfull soule, then your Honor doth, for the preseruation of our most deare and dread Soueraigne, and for the detection and destruction of all pestilent and truculent Trai∣tors. Wherefore in a hopefull affiance of your honorable acceptance, I humbly offer this little labor, (a Testimony of my great obser∣uance) with my selfe perpetually to your seruice, not after a cere∣moniall submission, but from a serious agnizing and feeling of mine owne imbecillity, euery way so obscure and weake, that ingenuouslie I confesse,
—Et scripfisse pudet, quia plurima cerno,
me quoque qui feci iudice, digna lini.
And of all others I know your Honors censure and iudgement is most substantiall, yet my weakenesse thus farre encourages me, that your Honor will like my willing mind, commend the matter, though not the manner; and I hope will fauourablie accept this Mite, and put it into your richer Treasurie, and countenance it with your worthy protection, which will be like Aiax buckler to shield it safe against detraction. Ringanter, rumpantur, liueant, improbent maledici; si Honori tuo arriserit, instar mille, Platonis calcu∣lus: I would not bee a monster to please all but some, and say with the Poet Lucilius, Me paucis malle à sapientibus esse probatū.
So giuing my farewell to this feeble Infant, saying as Iakob did when he parted with his beloued Beniamin, * Goe, and the Lord Gen. 43. 13 shew thee fauour in his sight: and sovpon the bended knees of my prostrated heart to God, I shall euer incessantly pray to the Lord Keeper of Heauen and Earth, to make your paths euery way prospe∣rous, blessing your Honour with happy preseruation, and a longioy∣full life on earth, and grant you an eternall Patent (sealed by the euerlasting Decree of the sacred Trinitie) of immortall possession of a glorified life in Heauen.

