


TWO thynges theyr are (sore to be lamented whi∣che chiefely haue brought the most noble and aun∣cient arte of Chirurge∣rie to extreme decaye and ruine: one is that euery person good and badde, learned and vnlearned, Chirurgian or no Chirurgian, doe wythout penaltie and correction of lawes frelye take on them the practise of Chirurgerie. the other thyng is, that the Chirurgians them selues (I speake for the greater number) are vnworthye professours. The fyrste we can not redresse, but la∣ment: the second somewhat we both can and wyll labour to amende. For the greatest number of Chirurgians (I meane those that are their vnto
 laufully called) are so rude and vnskil∣full in their art, because they haue no methode, no exact waie, or yet order in learnynge the grounds & principles of Chirurgery, eyther set oute of any authour whom they are able to vn∣derstande: or elles taughte of their maisters and tutours, of whom they should be instructed. So that they are confused in their studies, and make rather a rude chaos then a perfecte arte of Chirurgerye. For nowe it is come to thys poynte, that if they can get thys recepte, and that recepte as they terme it, they thynke they nede no futher stodye. So that the more receptes he hath, the greater Chirur∣gian he thinketh hym selfe to be: such ignorance now raygnes, that recepts beareth the bell: theorike of Chirur∣gerye is quit forsaken, or not regar∣ded. For yf you shall come to one of these greate maysters wyth their re∣reptes, and aske hym what Chirur∣gery is, what ys the subiecte to Chi∣rurgerye,
 what is the ende of Chi∣rurgerye, howe manye partes doth Chirurgerye consyste on: they are constrayned to be silent and say mum, or yf anye be inpudent and speake, he gyueth but a ridiculous aunswere. & yet we wyl thynke a man not mete to be called an artiste or worekman, whiche cannot tell (beynge required) what hys art is which he professeth: althoughe he hathe neuer so manye instrumentes and toales. For the art consysteth in the righte vse of the in∣strumentes, and not onely in hauinge them. Whiche vse is gotten fyrst by learnyng the arte, and then by exerci∣synge the same. And to learne the art, is required a Methode and Order: for wyth oute it, you shall neuer exacte∣lye attayne the same. Wherefore we nowe accordynge to oure smalle poure and symple knoweledge, way∣inge the promysses, and hartelye wis∣shynge the redresse of the same: haue sette oute the Theorike part of Chi∣rurgrye
 in thys presente volume con∣teynynge the principles and sure groundes of the arte, in suche order and methode as shalbe moste con∣uenient for the yonge student. And yf I haue not here in performed that whyche I desyred: yet I haue gy∣uen occation to those that are bet∣ter learned, to sette oute a more per∣fytte worke of thys argumente. And I thoughte good to make it Dia∣logue wyse for that it is moste apte to teache and instructe by. For by thys meanes, all doubtes maye be bothe demaunded, & also aunswered fullye. And for because it is the fyrste Booke that one muste reade whyche wyll learne the arte, I haue named it the Institution of a Chi∣rurgian, in whyche he shall see not onelye what hys arte is, but also what maner a person he muste be hym selfe: and what conditions are in hym required. further more what instrumentes he muste be garnished wyth, and howe he shall in tyme
 and place vse them ryghtelye to the profyte of the paciente, honour of thys arte, and hys owne worshippe. Wherefore their resteth no more, but that you take these my labours thāk∣fully, and reade them diligently. Farre hartelye well: and forgette not to spende thy tyme to the profyte of the common weale.
At my house in London the 20. daye of Maye. 1563.
