



HONOVRABLE SIR,
ALthough it bee true (which a worthy DiuineMr. Bolton Disc. of true Happi∣nesse, p. 61. obserueth) that formall Hypo∣crites are heartned and hardned in their lewd courses & false conceits of happi∣nesse, when they heare more infamous Sin∣ners than themselues, gloriously and flatte∣ringly commended at their Deaths; yet we
need not feare any such bad effect by the Funerall-commendation of Gods true Saints; because the publike Testimonie of their iust Praises doth not onely make the wicked more inexcusable, and the Glory of Gods Graces shine farre brighter to Posteri∣tie; but also enkindleth in the hearts of the godly a greater fire of Zeale for imitation. These are some of the Ends, why it hath euer been and is still an vnreproueable Cu∣stome in Gods Church, that the Godly should be MarkedPsalm. 37.37. Deut. 34.7, 10, 11.12. Hebr. 3.2. & 11. cap. and Honoured2 Chron. 32.33. at their Deaths, as Hezekiah was by all Iudah & Ie∣rusalem: Valentinean, Satyrus and Theodosius by Saint AmbroseS. Ambr. tom. 3.: Basil, Gregory and Gor∣gonia by NazianzenGreg. Nazian. Orat. 30.28.25.: Nepotian, Paula and Marcella by S. IeromS. Ierom. Ad Heliod. Ad Eustoch. Ad Princip. Ad Ocean.. Had not their Holy Liues and Happie Deaths beene published by such vnpartiall Pens, wee should haue bin ignorant now of many excellent Cour∣ses of sanctified Men and Women, of many comfortable workings of the Holy Ghost in them, and should haue wanted many inflaming Motiues to follow their religious steps. Vpon this consideration I was bold to commend vnto Gods people the more
than Ordinary passages of your Honoura∣ble Mothers Holy Life and Death: where∣in I haue as a Christian spoken the truth of a Christian, that is, (as Saint IeromTstor leum cui ila seruit & g seire ai,  utramq. in are ni l finere;  qsi Christicanu d C∣sti qu st vera prf r,  est, Historim scribere non P ne gri∣cum. S. Ierm, Epitaph. uloe. pro∣testeth in a like case) made a true Narrati∣on; not a Vain-glorious Panegyrick. Let Poets and Oratours praise those women, which Poppaea-likePoppa cun lia fuêre ote Honestum animum. Tacit. Annual. l. 1., are graced with all o∣ther things sauing a Gracious Heart: Let them commend their Wit, Wealth, Beautie, Nobilitie, and other Gifts of Fortune (as they call them) in stead of VertuesLaudauit ipse Ne∣ro apud rostra for∣mam ius & quòd diuinae formae pa∣rens fuisset, aliaque fortunae munera pro Virtutibus. Id. Annal l. 16.. Wee the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, must adorne none with the Honourable Attributes of Heauenly Praise; but such as are truly beautified, en∣riched, and ennobled with the Purity and Power of Gods Feare in their Humble SoulesEsai. 61.3.. This praise the Lord will Pro∣sperEccles. 15 10., which is vttered in that WisdomeProu. 9.10., whereof the Feare of the Lord is the begin∣ning. But for the Saints themselues: I dare say with Saint AugustineEpist. 125 where S. Augustine refu∣seth to commend vnto a wicked Husbād his god∣ly wife that was dead, not onely because she desi∣red not his praise, saying: Laudem ab hominbus am illa non quaerit, imitationem verò ta tantum quaerit eti∣am defuncta, quantum te dilexit etiam dissimilem viua; but also because her Husband loued Her not, which he proueth thus: Nam utiq si amares, cum illa esse post mortem esidere, quod profectò non eris, si qualis es, talis eris., that they desire more the Imitation, than the Commendati∣on
of their vertues: and therefore to tell you the truth (as the same Father doth his friend) you should neuer haue heard mee commend this deceased Lady, but in hope, that Gods Graces in Her might by this meanes, suruiue in your religious Imitation, and not only in you and all them that are of Her bloud; but also in all them that haue heard or shall reade this Sermon. This is all the gaine I looke and pray for, that GodsIer. 23.22, 28. 1 Pet. 4.11. Tit. 2.8. 2 Tim. 2.15. 1 Tim. 4.13. & 6.3. word, which I haue faithfully alled∣ged (not without some Illustrations (I con∣fesse) borrowed from the holy Fathers—Ingenuo pudo∣re qui ornabat aeta∣tem, quid cuius es∣set, confiteri—Illud (ebat) Tertullia∣ni, istud Cypriani, hoc Lactantij, illud Hilarij est. Sic Mi∣nutius Foelix, ita Victorinus, in hunc modum est locutus Arnobius. S. Ierom. ad Heliodor. de Ne∣potian., whereof I need not to be ashamed) may be constantly practised by vs all. For when all is done and said, assure your selfe (Deare Sir) it is only the Life of Grace, the Grace of the Feare of the Lord can truly Honour you, or any vpon earth, sweetly comfort you at your Death, and eternally Glorifie your Soule and Bodie in Heauen. Abandon then I beseech you in the name of Christ2 Thess. 3.6. 2 Tim. 2.19. Prou. 4.14. 1 Cor. 5.11. Ephes. 5.11. Psalm. 26.4, 5. & 119.32, 36, 128. 2 Chron. 19.2. & 20.37., all iniquitie, and all workers of iniquitie, yea abominate the sweetest sin, to which your youthfull affections are most endeared, else you will neuer be able to encline and en∣large
them to the pursuit and practise of so excellent and Glorious a Grace as the Feare of the Lord; because this godly Feare and the impenitent Allowance of any lust, is as in∣compatible as Heauen and Hell: so that if you should hate to be diuorced from your Bosome-sin whatsoeuer it be (which God forbid) you could haue no true right and interest to the precious promises of this and of that other life1 Tim. 4.8. Thinke on this continu∣ally, and hold it your greatest Honour, the Noblest imployment of your Soule, as it is indeed, to keep your selfe (as a KingPsal. 18.23. did before you.) from your iniquitie. Quod si tu (quod procul absit) nolueris, ego liber ero. Epistola, immo concio me haec mea, cum lecta fuerit, absoluetS. Ierom. ad Ca∣storin. Materte∣ram.. And so I rest, being mind∣full of your Vertues,
Saint Maugan the 19. August 1626.

