



RIght Honorable, while I went
about to publish our English
Voyages and Discoueries, I
was aduised by master WAL∣TER
COPE, a gentleman of
rare and excellent parts, to
draw them into a short sum,
adding that in his opinion
that course woulde prooue
most acceptable to the world,
especially to men of great action and employment. Al∣though
in that worke then vnder the presse I could not
conueniently alter my course, yet holding his aduise, as in
many things else, so in this for sound and very good,
I heere present vnto your Honour a briefe Treatie
most agreeable to the same. The authour whereof was

one Antonie Galuano, a Portugall gentleman: of whose
pietie towards God, equitie towards men, fidelity to his
Prince, loue to his countrey, skill in sea causes, experi∣ence
in Histories, liberalitie towards his nation, vigi∣lance,
valour, wisedome and diligence in restoring & set∣ling
the decaied state of The Isles of Maluco, (where he
remained sixe or seuen yeeres gouernour,) if it please
your Honour to read Fernando Lopez de Castagneda, or
Ioannes Maffeius in their Histories of The East Indies,
you shall finde more written in his singular commendati∣on,
then a large Epistle can well comprehend.
The worke though sall in bulke containeth so
much rare and profitable matter, as I know not where to
seeke the like, within so narrow and streite a compasse.
For heerein is orderly declared, who were The first Dis∣couerours
of the world since the time of the flood: by
what waies from age to age the spicerie, drugs, and riches
of the East were conueied into The West: what were the
causes of the alterations of those courses, as namely the
changes of Empires and gouernments: The ceasing of
all trafficke for many yeeres by The Gothes inuasion of
the Romane Empire: The rising vp of The Mahumetane
sect; with their ouerrunning of Afrike and Spaine: The
renewing againe, after many yeeres disturbance, of the
trafficke and entercourse of The East Indies; first by the
Califas of the aforesaid sect: and eftsoones by The Vene∣tians,
Ienowais and Florentines. Then followeth the ta∣king
of Ceuta in Barbarie by Iohn the first king of Portu∣gall
of that name in the yeere of our Lord 1415. whose
third sonne Don Henry (which he had by the vertuous La∣die
Philippa, daughter of Iohn of Gante, and sister to Henry
the fourth, king of England) was the first beginner of all
the Portugall discoueries, and continued the same for the
space of fortie and three yeeres euen to his dying day.

By whose encouragement the kings of Portugall found
out with much patience and constancie the last way of
the bringing the Spicerie into Europe by The Cape of
Buona Sperança; and for these hundred yeeres past haue
become the chiefe Lords of the riches of the Orient By
emulation of which their good endeuours, The Antiles
and The west Indies began to be discouered by The kings
of Spaine. The infancies of both which most important
enterprises, The progresse of the same from time to time,
the discoueries of Islands, riuers, baies and harbours, of
many rich prouinces, kingdomes, and countries; The
erecting of castles in sundry conuenient Islands and pla∣ces,
with the drawing of trafficke vnto the same, where,
when, by whom, and by whose authority is heere succinct∣ly
and faithfully recorded. So that if it please your Ho∣nour
at your conuenient leisure to take a sea card or a
mappe of the world, and carie your eie vpon the coast of
Africa from Cape de Non, lying on the mayne in 29.
degrees of northerly latitude, and follow the shore about
the Cape of Buona Sperança till you come to the mouth
of The Redde Sea, and passing thence along by the coun∣trey
of Arabia crosse ouer to India, and doubling Cape
Comory compasse the gulfe of Bengala, & shooting by
the citie of Malacca through The streite of Cincapura,
coast al the south of Asia to the northeast part of China,
and comprehend in this view all the Islands from The
Açores and Madera in the West, to The Malucoes,
The Philippinas, and Iapan in the East: you shall heere
finde by order, who were the first discouerours, conque∣rours
and planters in euery place: as also the natures
and commodities of the soyles, togither with the forces,
qualities, and conditions of the inhabitants. And that
which I mention of the Orient, is likewise to be vnder∣stood
of The Occident.

Now touching the translation, it may please you sir, to
be aduertised that it was first done into our language by
some honest and well affected marchant of our nation,
whose name by no meanes I could attaine vnto, and
that as it seemeth many yeeres ago. For it hath lien by
me aboue these twelue yeeres. In all which space though
I haue made much inquirie, and sent to Lisbon, where
it seemeth it was printed, yet to this day I could neuer
obtaine the originall copie; whereby I might reforme
the manifold errours of the translator. For whereas a
good translator ought to be well acquainted with the
proprietie of the tongue out of which, and of that into
which he translateth, and thirdly with the subiect or mat∣ter
it selfe: I found this translator very defectiue in all
three; especially in the last. For the supplying of whose
defects I had none other remedie, but to haue recourse
vnto the originall histories, (which as it appeereth are
very many, and many of them exceeding rare and hard
to come by) out of which the authour himselfe drew the
greatest part of this discourse. And in very deede it cost
me more trauaile to search out the grounds thereof, and
to annexe the marginall quotations vnto the worke, then
the translation of many such bookes would haue put me
vnto. Of which quotations there is yet a farther vse; to
wit, that such as haue leasure sufficient, and are desirous to
reade these things more at large, (for breuitie oftentimes
breedeth obscuritie) may fully satisfie their desires by ha∣uing
recourse by the helpe therof to the pure fountaines,
out of which those waters which are drawne are for the
most part most sweete and holsome. Now if any man
shall maruel, that in these Discoueries of The World for the
pace almost of fower thousand yeeres here set downe,
our nation is scarce fower times mentioned: Hee is to
vnderstand, that when this authour ended this discourse,

(which was about the yeere of Grace 1555.) there was
little extant of our mens trauailes. And for ought I can
see, there had no great matter yet come to light, if my
selfe had not vndertaken that heauie burden, being neuer
therein entertained to any purpose, vntill I had recourse
vnto your selfe, by whose speciall fauour and bountifull
patronage I haue been often much encouraged, and as it
were reuiued. Which trauailes of our men, because as
yet they be not come to ripenes, and haue been made for
the most part to places first discouered by others; when
they shall come to more perfection, and become more
profitable to the aduenturers, will then be more fit to be
reduced into briefe epitomes, by my selfe or some other
endued with an honest zeale of the honour of our coun∣trey.
In the meane season nothing doubting of your fa∣uourable
acceptation of this my labour, I humbly beseech
the authour of all goodnes to replenish and enrich you
with his best blessings, long to protect and preserue your
Honour to the profitable seruice of her Maiestie,
and to the common benefit and good
of the Realme. From London
this 29. of October
1061.

