



Right VVorshipfull,
I Am bold, vpon experienced acquain∣tance with your generous qualities, and gentle fauours towards me, to send this vnworthy Treatise to your worthy viewe. I know whose iudge∣ment it must passe, yet am fearelesse: not in a grosse stupidity of mine owne weakenesse, but in an hope∣full presumption of your vsuall Gentlenesse: a dis∣position euen naturalized in your courteous breasts, whereof I acknowledge with gratefulnesse the accep∣table fruites of your long, and large loue towards me, and for which I euer rest your thankefull friend, and ingaged debtor: in part of requitall whereof, I haue presumed to offer to you this Handfull of my duty, and hearty loue towards you, and vnder your worthy name to send it to the world, that they who are bettered by it, may thanke you for it. A short Dis∣swasiue from Popery, necessary for these Times,

wherein you may behold in part some points of the corrupt Doctrine of the Romish Church, which is the common Mother of corruption & superstition: For that Church must needes be a Chappell of er∣rors, which enlarge the sacred Canon with Adferunt haere∣tici Apocryphorum Librorum multitu∣dinem, vt stupefa∣ciant amentes, &c. Iraen. lib. 1. c. 17. Apochry∣phalls, diminish Cum ex Scriptu∣ris arguuntur, in accusationem con∣uertuntur Scrip∣turarum &c. raen. lib. 3. c. 2. Popery is a witchcraft of re∣ligion, teaching her people to eate their God, kill their King, subuert the Scriptures, adore Idols, Deifie the dead, equalize their Pope with God, &c. the authority of the Scripture with Traditions, ouerthrow the Originall with Translati∣ons, & peruert the Text with Glosses: as the Romish Church doth. Yea to maintaine her errors, she con∣ceales the light of Truth, the Scripture, from Lay people vnder the curtaine of the Latin language; and euen in the Schooles among the learned she is put to poore shifts, often forced to conclude arguments out of meere Allegories, lame Similitudes, fained mira∣cles, naked names of Fathers, hired Testimonies of Schoolemen, and other deboshed vassailes and proc∣tors of the Romane Court, who with all artificiall pollicy labour to adorne the Romane Harlot with painted trimmings, whereby the vnwary young age of many (more credulous, then iudicious) is deceiued, and deluded. The whole subiect of our former worke, well perused, and indifferently weighed, doth giue good light (looking vpon her corrupt precepts, and cursed practises) to discouer that smooky King∣dome of Antichrist: but perchance you may say to me with Seneca, Ep. 49. Quidme torques, & lacer as in quae∣stbus? Subtilius est contempsisse, quam , Why doe you trouble me with such questions? it is more subtilty to contemne them, then to confute them. Worthy Sir, it shall not be, I hope, labour lost, if to your priuate contemplations you shall adioyne these short, and sacred speculations, specially penned for your seruice, and published for the bee of all

who are willing to open their eyes to walke in Truth. I giue all but a small kind of taste in these points of Popish fragments; if any mans appetite long for it, I dare promise him heereafter more full dishes.
The Lord giue vnto you a Christian care in the profession of the Truth, which with a sincere heart I haue preached vnto you; and perfit your first Pro∣gresse in the grace of God, to the holy Sanctification, and happy Saluation of your bodies and soules for euer. For which mercy and grace, to be bestowed on you, I shall euer vnfainedly pray to God, and rest,

