



WHatsoeuer my learning, and iudgement is, sure I am it is the gift of God: Euerie gift of God, the more it is occupied, the more it is encreased: euen as fire the more it is blo∣wen the brighter it burneth: or as a sworde which the more it is scowred the more it glistereth: or finally as corne, which the more it is grinded,Matt. 2 the more flower it yeel∣deth. The parable of the Talents insinua∣teth so much, and dayly experience shew∣eth no lesse. I doubt not therefore but that this my small talent put out vnto the exchā¦gers by his good grace vpon it, working in the harts of those that shall borrow it, shall
 be returned to my master with aduantage. The pittaunce of oyle of the widowe wo∣mans remaining in hir pitcher,ing. 4 was so en∣creased through the goodnesse of God, by the hand of his Prophet, as she had not on∣ly ynough to supply hir daylie wants: but sufficient remayning, to make payment of her debts. The Lord our God hath raysed vp a Prophet from among our brethren,ut. 18 by whose blessing, I doe hope that this litle oyle of heauenlie knowledge, which God hath powred into the vessell of my soule, shall receiue such encrease, as besides suffi∣ciencie to serue common needes, some∣what shall redownd to discharge my iust debtes due to you and others. Wherefore (right worthie Knight) take from my hāds this deserued labour by your kindnesse vn∣deserued. It is most due vnto you, for sun∣drie due respects. For first the dedication of bookes to men of merite, hath bin a very ancient and common custome, deducted from the practise of the primitiue church, and since by the ancient fathers & school∣men, and nowe by the learned of our time and age put in common vse. What you merite of mee, I spare to shewe because I woulde not bee thought to flatter you: and
 the rather because your religious loue hath beene of late so publiquelie signified, as it seemeth a thinge needlesse by mee to bee rehearsed. In a word (good Knight) I owe vnto you, as much as it is lawfull for a man to owe, and therefore I entitle this treatise vnto you, in steed of a parcell of the grand arrerages that are comming vnto you. Moreouer, if Saint Iohn did not amisse in superscribing his second epistle which hee made, to his elect Ladie, and his thirde e∣pistle,2. Iohn. 3. Iohn. vnto his beloued Gaius: I cannot be blamed for consecrating these the fruites of my studies to my electe, and most belo∣ued Knight.Luk. 1 Nay if Saint Luke inscribed his gospell to his most noble Theophilus, which signifieth a friend and louer of God: sithence I am assured that I haue hapned vppon another Theophilus and louer of Gods worde, I thinke you very worthie of this historie of Saint Luke. And this was the principall inducement yt moued me to giue you this book: for howsoeuer I might alledge aliaunce, and worldly respects ma∣ny, yet the regarde of your zeale and religi∣on is more moouing then any. You being both of iudgement rightly to conceiue of it and of worship and countenance suffici∣ent
 to defend it, I cōmit it vnto you, & you vnto the almighty, who make your ancient and worshipfull name famous stil in earth, and engrosse it and register it in the booke of the righteous, in the life that is to come.

