


LYeurgus enioyned the people to offer little Sacrifices vnto their Gods, for (saith hee) they respect more the inward affection, then the outward Action: So in a De∣dicatory imitation, I presume to present this little sacrifice of my future seruice, (oh were it worthy of your Honors acceptance) vnto your Honorable selfe, hoping your Honor will more regard the inward deuotion, then the outward Oblation: and happy is this little la∣bour, if it may merit the portion of your Noble pro∣tection, much more of your Approbation, that so be∣ing graced with the mild aspect of so propitious, and Noble a starre of Honor, it may be the more wel∣come to the world; and others inuited to read it for your Honors sake, though not for the worke sake.
And vnder whose Honorable shadow may this Treatise, Britanniae vota, or, God saue the King, more surely, and safely shelter, then vnder yours, who

night and day deuoutly say, and pray, God saue the King: whose approoued fidelity in Kings-seruice hath mooued God and the King to promote you to great dignity, which you grace with such Christian, yet Courtly humility, that both in Church, Court, and Country, you are highly and worthily honored: Heerein your Honor followes those Noble patternos Celarinus, and Aurelius of whom S. Cyprian writes, Epist. 34. In quantum gloria sublimes, in tantum vereoundia hu∣miles, dum nihil in honore sublimius, nibil in humilitate submissius. Proceede (most Honorable) with such pious Graces, and Christian vertues to adorne your eternall minde.
Emeliore luto finxit praecordia Titan.
Your excellent eminency in the endowments of Nature and Grace, in whom vertue, valour, beauty and bounty, Armes and Arts are conioyned, hath made all men ioyfully congratulate the amplificati∣on of your deserued Honor, whose merits march with your pursuits: So that not onely genus, but geni∣us, makes you Nobilem, & Notabilem.
Vndemagis, magtsque viri nunc gloria claret.
The world bestowes vpon you that worthy, not vndeserued, Character of vertue, free from the asper∣sion of Court staines, that I may borrow the Poets verse to put you on in your vertuous progresse:
Quô tuate virtus ducit, ipedefausto,
Grandia laturus meritorum praemia.—
Accept into your Honorable Patronage according to your accustomed gentlenesse, this weake Worke of your deuoted seruant, who craues pardon for this ambition, in desiring to obtaine your Noble fauour and protection, imitating Aeschines to Socrates hauing;

no meete thing to gratifie your Honor withall, I am willing to giue that I haue, euen my selfe: who will alwayes desire to be at your Honors seruice,
—Donec haurietomnes
Xanthi Phoebus aquas.
And euer will pray to God, to giue you happy in∣crease of fauour with God and men, and that your Noble name and same, may long flourish on earth, and be eternally blessed in heauen.
Stet Domus hac, donec fluctus formica marinos
Ebibat & totum Testudo perambulet orbem.
For which multiplication of grace in this life, and consummation of glory in the other, my humble prayers are, and euer shall be powred forth to God for your good Honors great happinesse in either World.

