


THere be some, I make no question, which in this iudging world will censure me, ei∣ther to be too idle, and to haue little else to doe, or imagine mee too curious for committing to the presse this little book: whose criticall censures, & byting stings I doe little esteeme, so that I may heare or know, that these trifles as they are accounted, will doe any good. Many fault-finders, enuious carpers, and malicious sy∣cophants (for malice is euer working of mischiefe: & what is it that cankred Calumnia cannot inuent?) will readily reprehēd, but this chiefly that I haue been too open in publishing medi∣cines. But friendly and indifferent Readers, I for your sakes wil sustain willingly this blame, and for your good & content∣ment will be readie to vndergoe more, and meekely to submit my selfe (if cause so require) to a prouoked patience. I send forth this worke to you that are studious and desirous of lear∣ning, not to sophysticall mount-bankes, cozering quacksal∣uers, & such like false iugling deceiuers with their paradoxi∣call innouations: whose countrey soile is to them a wilde cat, and who abuse all good arts wheresoeuer they come or abide. I must confesse that I haue vsed some store and varietie of ex∣amples, not thereby to vendicate to my selfe much reading, to arrogate to my selfe great learning, or that I coueted my dili∣gence to be praised. For I desire to bee cured of ignorance, which I cannot be vnlesse I confesse the same: and that dili∣gence deserueth but a slight and bare commendation, if any one of his own accord shal voluntarily take vpon him a need∣lesse,

vaine and vnnecessarie labour. But this was my scope, this the whole drift and marke I especially aymed and shotte at, that seeing the fume of this Indian Tabacco to be vsedly and abusedly taken of all sorts of men, all condiions and estates, to shew according to my simple skill the true vse of it, and to remooue out of their mindes the errors that ma∣nie are possessed if not bewitched withall, and to bring both their mindes and bodies to a better temper and moderation: which thing as hitherto, for ought I know, hath not beene performed by any, nay scarselie attempted. But now per∣chaunce whilest I labour to please all, I displease all: If it be so, Iacta est alea, the dice are throwne. If any saying heere dis∣please anie queasie stomacked Tabacconist, for remedie thereof, I would wish him to passe lightlie by it for feare of further offence. Physicke is a large profession: and euerie one as he is affected taketh one or other part to be illustrated, set foorth, and brought more to light by his labour and in∣dustrie: one in the Anatomie as Caspur Bauhinus, Salomon Albertus, Gabriel Fallopius, Andreas Vesalius, and Arantius of Bononia. Another in the historie of Plantes and knowledge of Simples, as the most learned Maister Iohn Gerard Cittizen of London, Carolus Clusius, Andreas Matthiolus, Rembert Dodoens, and others: A third in Fishes as Rondeletius; and o∣thers, in other huing creatures as Conradus Gesner, and some in Mineralls, as Rodolphus Agricola, haue beene found singular. And surelie they are not to be denied their due commendati∣on, who in other smaller matters of Physicke haue done some∣thing, as namely those that haue corrected bookes, haue made commentaries vpon auncient authors, and translated out of the Greeke and Arabick tongues into the Latine or our own vulgar. In this so great a haruest of fertill wittes, and ex∣pence of time, wherein manie men and the same verie learned and well practised haue taken paines, one thing remaineth vndone, that no man in my iudgement hath sufficiently entreated of this Plantnamelie Tabacco, which is so much in vse amongst all English men. For either they doe commend it too much aboue measure, attributing to it so many great and

excellent vertues, as I thinke is scarse possible to finde in any one hearbe, or else on the contrarie they were so farre out of the way, as that they altogether contemned and discommen∣ded it: so that that which was to be well liked, they haue quite omitted, and that which is plaine, euident and manifest to all mens senses, they haue quite either denied or marred: for

—Quid nobis certius ipsis
Sensibus esse potest, quo vera ac falsa notemus?


What can more certaine be than sense,
Discerning truth from false pretense?

But if this my labour may bee gratefully accepted, as with good will it is offered (as I doubt it not, if you please to cen∣sureiustly thereof) I shall be encouraged thereby to publish and set forth in our natiue language, other workes intreating more copiously and fully of Physicke, and no lesse needefull to be knowneand published. So I wholly referre my selfe to your fauours and courteous constructions, still resting

