



SIR,
 I haue perused your Answer to Mr. B. his Pamphlet against you; wherein you haue so clea∣red the point in contro∣uersie betweene you; that I much pitty your oppo∣nents hard lot to fall vpon such a subiect and tenet concerning Lots, as afforded him so small store of Obiections against your Opi∣nion,

that he was euen constrained, according to the manner of some old Roman▪ Orators noted by Quintilian, Caussarum vacua con∣vitijs implere. Neither the matter in hand, about which learned Protestants may differ in iudgement without breach of Charity, or preiudice to Christian vnity, nor your hand∣ling it dog matically and scholastically with∣out any gall at all, could occasion such heats. I cannot imagine therefore, what should so much moue him, but the badnesse of his cause, and the weaknesse of his owne Arguments, which he seeth by your handling them to be like wier-strings ill-nealed, which would not endure the least straining. For albeit I confesse that we are all apt to take too much hold of any point of liberty reached vnto vs out of Gods word; and in particular I cannot but deplore sortem sortis, the Lot of Lot it selfe, which hath beene and is too much by the licentious abused, and thereby in a sort defamed, especially in Carding and Dicing: yet Gods truth must not be suppressed because of mans errors; neither is it a safe way to goe about to cure an error in practise, by another error in iudge∣ment;

I meane, to reforme the abuse in Lu∣sorie Lots by totally condemning the vse it selfe of them. Though a Surgean meane neuer so well in letting his Patient bloud who needeth it, yet if he strike not the right veine, he had better haue spared his paines. The sinne too regnant in sports and games now a-daies is not in vsing the Lot, but in not obseruing those Rules and Cautions in these and other Recre∣ations, which are iudiciously and piously set downe by you in your compleat Treatise of Lots. Let those Cautions be obserued, and set aside the authoritie of some Diuines, whose persons they haue in admiration aboue others; what is there in the casuall falling of the Dye, or dealing of the Cards, more than in the fall of a Coyte, or lighting of an Arrow neerer or further, or the turning of a Boule, to ensnare the Conscience? Art more ruleth the one, and Nature the other; Gods prouidence and con∣currence being equall in either. For to con∣clude, that because some Lots haue beene con∣secrated to an holy vse sometimes, therefore all Lots are sacred, is a feeble kinde of ar∣guing. And to impose a speciall and immedi∣ate

worke of Gods prouidence, vpon the casuall euent of the Lot, more than vpon other naturall accidents and deliberate actions of men, is a temerarious and groundlesse assertion. And furthermore to charge all those seruants of God, who moderately vse their Christian liberty in these Games, with so hainous a sinne, as is the prophaning of a thing sacred, or taking in vaine Gods deciding Iudge∣ments, is an vncharitable censure. The Lord open the eyes of all that seeke to serue him in sinceritie and singlenesse of heart, that neither by enlarging their Christian liberty they open a gap to licentiousnesse, nor yet by too much restraining it lay a snare on weake Conscien∣ces. To deliuer you my iudgement and aduice in a word; Satis actum est: you haue sifted this point of Lots to the bran. Let me aduise you hereafter non reciprocare serram con∣tentionis de ludis sortiarijs, but rather to imploy your able pen against the Sorcerers of Aegypt now abounding in euery place, and making aduantages of the least differences among vs, who hold the like pretious faith pur∣ged from the drosse of their superstition. This

aduice, I know, you will take in good part, as proceeding from

Croydon Sept. 2. 1623.
