



Right Worshipfull,
ALbeit the expressions of a gra∣cious heart by liuely voice breed deeper impressions, (God attending his own or∣dinance of preaching with a more speciall blessising) yet writing hath in this respect a preroga∣tiue, that holy truths thus conueyed to the world spread further, and continue longer.

Those therefore deserue well of the Church that this way impart those things to pub∣like and future vse, by which God wrought on the hearts of the hearers for the present. In which respect this funerall Sermon prea∣ched out of loue and honour of the graces of God in a poore, yet well esteemed Chri∣stian (Master WINTER) may gaine accep∣tan, as being not onely for matter sound, for handling cleere, but for the times seaso∣nable. For what more necessarie in these times, wherein many are ashamed of the downeright profession of that religion by which they hope to be saued, than to presse constant faithfulnesse in known truths, vn∣to which all promises are intailed? Particu∣lar points haue beene much and long vrged amongst vs, it is very needfull that constant cleaing to all those blessed truths likewise be inforced. And from what stronger in∣couragement can this be, than from a crown of life here promised to the crowne of all graces, Perseuerance? Since the fall, one dan∣gerous disease of the soule, is vnsetlednesse in good purposes, especially when either dis∣couragements or alluremēts are offered. But

what wil not a soule break thorow, that hath in the eie of it a crowne held out to all that hold out to the end▪ by him who hath both obtained it for vs, and keepeth it for vs, and vs for it? There is a mutuall passage of trust between God and vs (for thus graciously he condescendeth to vs.) We trust him with the saluation of our soules, he trusteth vs with his truth, which if by grace we be in∣abled to keepe, it will keepe vs▪ and raise vp our hearts to an expectation of all good frō our faithfull and good God, euen at that time when our soules gaspe for comfort, at the houre of death. And at the day of iudge∣ment the sentence will passe, not according to greatnesse of parts and place, but accor∣ding to faithfulnesse, Well done, not learned, wise, rich, but faithfull seruant, &c. This Ser∣mon intreating of things thus vsefull, is pre∣sented by me, as intreated by the widow of the late deceased (Master WINTER) and some others whom I respect, and to you as chiefe of that Company whereof he was a poore member: and this by willing consent of the author, my reuerend & ancient friend of whom I am not willing to take this occa∣sion to speake: his long, faithfull, learned la∣bours

in the Church haue made him suffi∣ciently knowne. He gaue her full power of the copy for her vse. Which in her behalfe, and at her desire, I offer vnto your worships as a testimony of her respect, as likewise if there be a blessing in your hands in the be∣halfe of the Orphans of such as haue beene of your Company, I was not vnwilling to take this aduantage of presenting her estate to your mercifull considerations, conside∣ring she traineth vp a sonne at the Vniuersi∣tie for the future seruice of the Church. It is a speciall blessing of God where he hath gi∣uen power and a willing mind to do good, to offer likewise the opportunity of fit ob∣iects that bounty be not misplaced; which here vndoubtedly you shall haue, and the blessing of the fatherlesse and widow shall come vpon you. The Lord leade you on in a course of faithfulnes to which we are here encouraged, that in the end you may receiue the crowne of life which is here promised.
Graies Inne,
Ian. 2. 1623.

