



Most Noble, and vertuous Ladies:
TO whom should I dedicate the memoriall of your deceased Father, but to you, in whom he liues? Who (mee thinkes)
but his Monuments, may chal∣lenge his commemoration? Besides the life hee was perso∣nally possessed of; you are his deriued life: and he yet liues, (and long may he) though not in himselfe, yet in his Succes∣sions. Yet (alas!) how much rather had you (I know) to haue still enioyed, then thus supply∣ed his life? But you are not ig∣norant, how nature abides not alwayes, but succeedes: how God but lends, not bindes your friends to your inioyment. He was giuen you, to be taken from you: yours hee was, to vse, rather then possesse: yours in his life, name, vertues, gra∣ces, to inherit; and not yours, in an earthly being to ingrosse. Therefore had you him, to lose him, and must therefore be contented with his losse:
yea, ought indeed to reioyce ra∣ther, that once yee had him; then sorrow, that now ye haue him not. Grant, it cannot bee but a griefe to misse him: so neither but a ioy to remember him. It was an happinesse more delighting, when you might reioyce in his presence: but is an happinesse more lasting, that you may yet reioyce in his re∣membrance. You both (be∣yond the common lot and hap) were much, and long happy, in a double Parent: the losse of one now admonishes, yea, ap∣plaudes you, to esteeme another Parent, and feare anothers losse. But, I spare from further repetitions of your losse; lest (while I would striue to conso∣late, and appease them) I ra∣ther prooue but to renew your sorrow; & prouoke your feare.
For mine owne part (who rec∣kon my selfe not the least in his losse) I count it euen as enuy, to bewayle the happy: and but folly, forlornely to sorrow for him; that certainly reioy∣ces for himselfe. Neuerthelesse (for losse of friends) forbid I no man to mourne, but mur∣mure, and despaire. Such our sorrowes, are but the late to∣kens of our loue, and must as wel be moderate, as vnfaigned. Neither should our hearts (in this case) be flinty, nor effemi∣nate: nor our eyes alwayes dropping, nor altogether dry. For me, I like neither to bee niggardly, nor prodigall of my teares: neither to be desperate, nor ambitious of my com∣plaints. I say no more of this sorrow and losse, because I would not packe them vp, or
decke them vp in words onely. Thus much haue I written, because I would not that a pri∣uate houre should extinguish or ingrosse them. What I haue herein presumed, besides the comfort (I trust) you shall re∣ceiue by it: this also shall com∣fort mee, that you daigne to receiue it.

