



IT is the safetie of a Ship, to haue good
Pilots; the strength of a Palace, to haue sure
Pillars; the securitie of the bodie, to haue
cleare eyes; and safe-guard of sheepe, to haue vigilant
Shepheards: So it is thesafety of a
Countrey, and safegard of a Kingdome, to haue many
wise and watchfull Counsellors. Wee neuer had greater reason to
blesse GOD, then in contemplation of the present time, in the perfect
vision of so many principall Planets now met together in happy
Con∣iunction: such a King, such a Prince, such
Honourable Senators, such Assistants.
Pro.The eare that heareth you,
blesseth you: and the eye that seeth you, giues witnesse to you. The
blessing of Her that was ready to perish, is come vpon you. Vnder your
shadow wee are much refreshed. The God of blessing dispose of your
Coun∣saile. Wee waite for you, as for the raine: and our mouthes are
opened wide, as for the latter raine. Ita quisque vt audit, mouetur.
I need not, neither were it lesse then boldnesse and
presumption in me (Right honourable) to suggest vnto you, of what weight
and consequence those af∣faires are, which his Maiesty hath been
graciously pleased to referre to your ioynt consideration and aduice:
neither need I repeat, how deeply you are all interessedherein:
you reuerend Bishops, by your sa∣cred profession; you the Noble
Baronage of this Realme, by your military honour, alwaies prest and
ready for the defence of Religion and of this Kingdom, against open Inuaders,
or secret vnderminers; and you the Representatiue Body of the
Com∣mons, in regard of the libertie of the Sub∣iect; but most of all,
the free course of the Gospel without impeachment: by whom is not onely
represented, but also actua∣ted; the desire and zeale of the body of this
kingdom, being a people true-harted, and feruent toward God in the puritie of
his worship; towards our Soueraigne, in the stedfastnesse of
obedience; and to∣wards the Lawes, in wishes and hopes that they
shall stream forth motu naturali, in their owne course, without
diuersion or obstruction.
But you being at this time imployed about so weighty affaires,
how may I, the meanest of the sonnes of my Mother, presume to
interrupt you? Are there not the Chariots of Israel, and the horsemen
of the same? Doe the Lords battailes wantsupply?
whence should it be expected but from them? But I may say, with
Epicte∣tus: Your hand euer holdeth an equall ba∣lance, and your Sun
shineth alike on the poore and rich. It may be, one Scout may
vpon occasion heare & know what an whole Army hath no present notice
of.
True it is, (and why should I now be ashamed to manifest it
to such an Assem∣bly?) An euill and scandalous report is gone forth
of mee, in regard I was the man that was present at the Iesuite
Drury his Ser∣mon at the Black-Fryers. I was the same day
in the fore-noone at the Ser∣mon at Pauls-Crosse: and lighting
vpon some Popish company at dinner, they were much magnifying the said
Drury, who was to preach to them in the after∣noone. The ample report
which they af∣forded him, preferring him far beyond any of the Preachers of our
Church, and depressing and vilifying the Sermons at
Pauls-Crosse, in regard of him, whetted my desire to heare his
said Sermon: to which I was conducted by one Medcalfe a
Priest. This being heard of by my LordArch-bishop
of Canterbury his Grace, hee sent for mee within few daies
after; and being before him, found mee inclining to their side. I layd open
my selfe vnto him and confessed I had some scruples in Reli∣gion.
Wherupon it pleased his Grace to af∣ford me his holy counsell and
monition: which had that good effect, that albeit my foot was stept into the
Babylonian pit, yet I often meditated of his Fatherly ad∣monitions.
Som other speeches I receiued from his Domestique Chaplains, D.
Goad and D. Featly: for which I shall be bound euer to pray
for them: their words left aculeos et stimulos; Vade et nè pecca
amplius, &c. piercing me the more, being recorded in a publicke
narration: which, my check∣ing conscience did iustly take for an
in∣ditement to conuict me, & a Trumpet to reduce me. Like the
Prodigall, I now returne home with a Peccaui in my heart, mouth and pen,
to God and our blessed Mother the Church of England: to both I
say, Pec∣caui contra coelum et te.
The reason why I presumed to present these lines to your
view, and offer themto your hands, seemeth to me iust,
because sincere; and excusable, because in some sort necessary,
in that the vastnesse of my fault requireth, forasmuch as from my
acquaintance on the left side, I can expect little lesse then indignation
and machi∣nations against mee by them; whom, partly by my relinquishment of
them, but much more by disclosing some of their proceedings, I am like to
prouoke in a high degree: it behoueth me therefore to chuse such Refuge, as
may protect mee a∣gainst their malice. I haue touched (in a manner) nothing
else but the behauiour of the Priests; whereto, I might haue ad∣ded
somewhat of my owne knowledge, concerning the insinuations &
incroach∣ments vsed by those of that stamp, who professe physick:
Who, whatsoeuer they doe vnto the bodies, infuse into the mindes of many
the Kings Subiects, bit∣ter distempers; whereby those pati∣ents tongues
distaste the wholsome food of our Church, and their hearts are
stric∣ken with antipathy against our present State. But these
things I thought fitter foryour Wisdomes to cure, then for my
weaknesse to declare; my intent in this Treatise, hauing beene to act the
part of vnmasking the vailed fraud of the Iesuits & Priests: wherin if
you somtimes dislike the stile, condemn not me for a botcher: for, their
Stories I alter not a stitch, but giue you thē lapt vp in their own
clouts.
If the forme and phrase I vse in other places bee
distastfull, as either too sharp, or too light and Ironicall for one of
my profession; let my matter bee my Aduo∣cate, that draweth mee thereunto;
trus∣ting, that I may be excused, if I sometime light my candle at the
Torch of Elias, when he sindged and smoaked out Baals
Priests from the nest of the Sanctuary. I iest but at their
iesting, that haue made a iest of God, and of his blessed Saints in
heauen, by casting vpon their most pure and glorious faces, the cloud, nay,
the dirt and dung of vgly, vnsauory, ridiculous Fables: whereat the sounder
Christians are scandalized, wherewith the weaker are deluded &
captiuated in superstition, and the very Iewes & Heathen are
driuenfurther off from listning vnto the true & sacred
Mysteries of Christian Religion. For surely, no small mischiefe or
danger is it vnto Truth, to haue her precious gar∣ment eeked out with patches
of false∣hood, and, vpon pretence of imbellish∣ment, to bee dawbed ouer
with the cop∣per-embrodery of cogging Impostures.
In regard of my own particular; here∣by I hope, I shall regaine
that good opini∣on which I haue lost, and no longer bee censured by my
friends and others, as at all wauering, inclining and warping to∣ward their
side: yet withall, you haue the Character of mine hart, toward the pub∣licke
good of our Church and Common∣wealth. I say no more, but God giue you
vnderstanding in all things. Ride on with your honours; and, because of
the Word of Truth, bee courageous and stout Nehemiahs. Such a man as
I, flee? Nehem. 6.11. The deaw of Gods grace bee vpon you and your
children. And thus, with my vncessant prayers for you, I rest,

