



RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL;
YOVR speciall interest in that worthy Ser∣uant of Christ, whom this weak work con∣cerneth, by your sin∣gular fauours to him and his deseruedly procured, cānot but giue you interest in the worke it selfe before any. Vnto your Worship therefore I addresse

and direct it, as to one that may iustly lay best claime to it: Not doubting but that, as you did in more than ordinary manner re∣spect his person while he liued, so you do no lesse honour the memory of him now deceased. The worke I wish were worthy either you or him. But, how little time I had for the compo∣sing and peecing vp of these broken Meditati∣ons, cannot be vnknowne to those, & from them may be made knowne to others, that either sent or brought me the first word of his decease, being newly allighted from a wearisome iourney, not aboue two daies before the Funerall was to be performed. Besides that so sudden and vnexpected tidings of the losse of so deare a Friend, causing much griefe and distractiō, could not but produce with∣all as great an indisposition to the minding of that that this office imposed on me did ne∣cessarily require of me; and defeat conse∣quently that second Diligentia sub∣dium. Cicero pro Quinct. helpe of redoubled di∣ligence, 
 which others are wont to vse (as the sea-man his  . oares, when the wind slacketh or scanteth) to redeeme the want of time with. That which made me (as conscious of the rawnesse of it) the more backward at

first to yeeld to the importunitie of those, (not a few) who both by letters and by word of mouth were very instant and vr∣gent for the publishing of it. Nor haue I had much loisure since to reuise and digest my confused notes; nor yet desire to adde or alter much, lest (to those that then heard it) it might seeme not the same. One short pas∣sage or two onely I haue inserted, that my memory then failed me in. Else the substance of all here was then deliuered. Which if, espe∣cially in the Testimony then giuē vnto him, whom this office was performed vnto, it seeme slight and slender, to that it ought or might haue beene: Besides the former consi∣derations, which might well sufficiently ex∣cuse, let it be remembred; what a great Ora∣tour sometime said, that Pictores pulchrā absolutam{que} faciem rarò nisi in peius ef∣fingunt. Plin. Sec. lib. 5. epist. 10. An exact face is ve∣ry seldome drawn but with much disaduantage: how much more when a bungler but hath it in hand? I may well say of him, as he some∣time of Basile, . Greg. Naz. in Basil. There wanted but his owne tongue to commend him with. A better I wish there had been employed therin than mine owne; or that mine owne (if but for his sake) had (at least then) been better. But the

best is, The Sea needs not the Riuers, that . Ibid. yet runne into it; nor he either mine, or any other mans praise; that due honour and re∣uerent estimation of him remaining in the mindes of so many, that neither mine, nor a∣ny other mans, commendation of him, either need to adde ought, or can adde much ther∣unto. Howbeit this may bide, when they are gone. Which whatsoeuer it is, presuming that your Worship will accept of, if not for it owne sake, yet for his, who liueth yet with you, and you desire (I know) should doe so also with others, I recommend it to your pa∣tronage, and your selfe with all yours to the protection of him who hath promised to be  Sol & Seutum. Psal. 84. 12. Sunne and Shield to all those that sincere∣ly rely on him; and rest.

