



HAving beene, with much impor∣tunity and renewed reqests, Qotidian onvi∣ti es flagtatu Fa∣iu Instit. prf.in∣cessantly solicited, by divers, who either had themselvs heard, or from others heard of, what was delivered at the enterrement of your late worhy Consort, and either had knowne him in his life time, or taken notice of his course of life then related, to make that more publick, that was then utte∣red, in the audience but of a few to speak of, and by reason of the lownesse and feeblenesse of my voice, of the fewer; I was at length over∣wrought (though having formerly no such pur∣pose) to condescend thereunto: the rather ho∣ping that his examplary course of life and

cariage, with the good effect and comfortable issue of it, might be a meanes, through Gods blessing working together therewith, to invite, incite, allure and winne others to the like. Ex∣perience teaching, that Viviur exem∣plis. Nec tam im∣perio nobis opus est qam exemplo. Plin. Paneg. lus succendunt exempla. qàm prae∣dicamenta. Gregor. Dialog. l. 1. prae. & qi praeceptis non accenduntur, ex∣emplis saltem ex∣citantur. Id. mo∣ral. l. 9. c. 43. Ple∣rum{que} ad exercen∣da bona opera, alie∣na nos utiliter ex∣empla persuadent. Ib. l. 22. c. 7. & grex, qi pastoris v∣cm mors{que} seqi∣tur, per exempla melius qam perver∣ba graditur. Id. de Past. l. 2. c. 3. Faci∣lius suadent exem∣pla qam verb. Ambr. in 1 Cor. 14 mans nature is of it selfe more prone to walke by example then by rule; and to follow precedents rather then precepts. Those also having this advantage of these, that . Arist. Probl. lib. 18. q. 3. Longum est iter per praecepta; breve & essi ax, per exempla. Senec. Epist. 6. Insuevit aer optimus hoc. me, u fugerem, exemplis iorum q{que} notando, Formabat dictis puerum sic, sive jbebat ut fceem qid, sive vetab. Flac. Satyr. 4. they shew not only what things are enjoyned, and how things enjoyned may be done; but they Admonetur audiaetas omnis, firi posse qod factum est Cypr. ad Donat. Melius homins exemplis docentur; qae in primis hoc in se boni habent, qod approbt ieri posse qae praecipiunt. Plin. in Paneg. Sermo qidam vivu & efficax exemplum opeis est, acilè pers adens qd in∣tendimus, dum factibile probat esse qod suademus. Bern. de Resur. 2. Adjuvari se exmlis exoptat humana inirmitas, qo facilius ipsa etiam nunc faciat, qae alios secisse ante cognosca Salvian. contr. Avar lib. 3. Ex aliorum enim factis fieri posse credunt, qod fote dum putant fieri non posse, pigrescunt. August. Epist. 134. take away also that common counter-plea of impossibility, which against all exhortation and admonition is by the multi∣tude usually objected; by shewing, that such things as are required of them, are no other then have beene done by . Acts 14.15. Iaes 5.17. men like themselves; and may therefore be done by others also, and

among others . M. Ano∣nn. l. 6. Sect. 19. Teses suos contra nos Dominus in∣sart, eum bora qae fcere ipsi negli∣gimus. ad correpti∣onem nostram, ab aiis facta demon∣strot: ut in recti tudini appeiu nil sibi mens nostra disi ile aesimet, qod ante peragi ab ali∣is videt. Gr. Mor. l. 9. c. 43. Nescio qo modo amplius ad coittē excitamur, per fidem, qâ cred. mus vixisse sic aliqē; & spe qa nos o{que} ita posse vvere, qi homines sumus, ex co qod aliqihoines ita vixerunt, mii. è despramus. Ag. de Trinit. l. 8. c. 9. by themselves, if they will but as those before them have done, endeavour and enforce themselves thereunto. I remember a good saying of a Reverend Divine now with the Lord, that Mr. William Bradshaw in his Meditations on Christ. Tempt. MS. a good great man is a great Moat in the Devils Eye: for that the ex∣ampls of those that are in eminent places, as they are Matth. 5.14. Tu to totius medio telluris in oe Vivere cog∣noscas: cuncis tua gntibus esse Faca palam: nec posse dari regalibus unqam secretum viti. Nam lux alissima fati occultum nihil esse snit, latebras{que} per omnes Intrat, & abstusos explo∣at fan aressus. Cladian de Honor. Coss. 4. . Hero∣dim. l. 4. Perluct omne regie vitium domus. Sen Agam. 2.1. Tibi nullum secretm liberum est: in mult lce fortuna e posuit. Idem ad Poyb. c. 25. Nostos motus auci senint: ibi non magis qam soilaere contigi: multa circa te lux est: omnium in istam convrsi oculi sunt. Idm de Clem. l. 1. c. 8. . Greg. Naz. in Patr. Qi mgro imprio praedi in excelso aetatem agunt, corum facta cuncti mortales nove∣re. Salst. ad Caesar Ad e oculos aures{que} trais: ua facta notamus. Pedo ad Liv. more eyed of others, so . Basil. apud Anton. l ss. l 2 c. 1. . Nicet. in Alx. Comn. l. 2. c. 4. Vua principis censura est, ae{que} perpetua. ad hanc dirigimur, ad hanc convertimur. Flexibiles qamcun{que} in partem dcimur a princp: at{que} ut ita dam, seacs smus: huic enim cari, huic probti ss cupimus: qd dssimiles rust asperant. Plin. paneg. Rex veli honesta, neo nn adem vlt. Se. Thyest 1.1. Nā totus componitur orbis Regis ad exemplū; nec sic inflectre sensus Humanos edicta valent, qam via regentu. Claud. ut sup. Rctè facere princeps sos saciedo docet. Vlleius Hist l. 2. & contra, Vitia principes non selū ipsi concipi, eiam in civiaes infundun; plus{que} exemplo qam peccto ncent. Cic. de leg. l. 3. they draw the more after them, either to good or to evill. And I may well adde, that a rligious rich man is likewise (witnesse blessed Iob 1.10. Job) a great Moat in the Devils Eye: not only be∣cause such an one, having his heart enlarged

answerably to his hand, may Iob 29.13, 15, 16. & 31.16, 20. by his bounty and beneficence do a great deale the more good, and that Gal. 6.10. where the Devill least liketh: but because also in such it is made to appeare, that by honest courses and Prov. 10.22. Gods blessing upon them, men may attaine unto wealth, as well as by fraud, deceipt, extortion, oppression, and such indirect wayes, as Hab. 2.9, 12. most strive to raise and advance their estates by, and Varo, regustatum digito terebrare sae∣lin Contentus per∣ges, si vivere cum Iove tendis. Pers. sat. 5. hoc est, qod Flac. l 2. Sat. 4. Smpr puper eri. without which they think wealth cannot possibly be compassed. Yea, let me adde in the third place, that a religious industrious man (and yet I see not well, Ephes. 4.28. 1 Tim. 5.8. how they can be severed) is a great Moat in the Devils Eye. For that by his aven and wise practise such an one maketh it manifest, that a man may well serve God in a constant course, and yet follow also the du∣ties of his speciall calling; and that there is therefore no such necessity, as many, on either side faulty, pretend, of neglect of the one, if the other be diligently attended; but that 1 Cor. 7.20, 24. Vbi voatio du∣plex, in qâ, ad qam both of them may have their due time and place, without enterfering or justling out ei∣ther of other, as the 1 Thes. 4.11. 2 Thes. 37, 12. rules both of reason and Religion require. The common, yea, almost

generall abuse of the times, might well require me to adde, that a sober and temperate, as well as a religious (and yet Ephes 5.18. Rom. 13.13, 14 what Religion can be, where excesse reigneth?) but yet, that a sober and temperate Merchant or Tradesman, may well be reckoned among those Moates, that disturbe the common ad∣versaries eye: since that by such it appeares, that men may have ordinarily, in orderly man∣ner, mutuall commerce, trade, and traffick either with other, without , ut Athen. dipnos. l. 11. Persaum ri∣tu, qibus . vid. Plut. Sympos. l. 7. c. 9.10. beating every bargaine they make over a Wine-pot, and con∣cluding it with braines equally distempered on either side. In these therefore and divers other respects, I supposed the example of this our worthy friend and faithfull servant of Christ might be usefull to many: and was in that regard the rather induced to satisfie the desire of those, that so instantly pressed me in it. Which having once concluded on, I knew none fitter to addresse it to, then to your selfe; who had chiefe interest under God in him, Gn. 2.24. 1 Cor. 7.4. by Gods own ordinance, while he lived; and may with fairest title and plea lay best claime to the memory of him now deceased. To you

therefore, beloved in our common Saviour, I tender it to remaine by you; for my selfe, as a monument of mine entire afection to him, who is now with the Lord, and to his surviving for him; for your selfe, as a memoriall of what a precious Iewell it pleased God some∣time to possesse you of, and to grace you with: yet not thereby to renew your griefe for your temporary losse of him, (if it may be so tearmed, when he is but, as Philem. 15. Deside anus s tibi, qsi absens, nn qsi : u illum expectare, nn amisisse vide∣ais. Her. de Np. he saith of Onesimus, gone from you for a time, that you may after a while againe receive him and enjoy him for ever) joyned with his eternall and incomparable gaine; but . Basil orat. 5. Ne doleas, qod talem amiseri; sd gaudeas qd tlem habueris. Hiron. in Nepot. Non oere∣mus, qod taē ami∣simus; sed gratias agimus, qod habui∣mus, imò habemus. Idem in Paul. Non contrilor, qod ac∣cepisti; sd ago gatias, qod dedisti. Idem ad Iulian. Esi dolemus abla∣tum, non oblivisi∣mur tomen, qod datu suit: gratias agimus, qod habere illum meruimus, qo carere in tantum non volumus, in qantum non expedit. Bern. in Cat. 26. & de Humberto Ser. 110. Tulisti, qniam tuus erat. Nec pro nobis, qibus ille sublatus est, murmurandum; magis gratias agendum, qod tam di concessus est obis. to minde you of his goodnesse who bestowed him upon you, and of thankfulnesse to him for the continuance of such a favour so long unto you. So beseeching God abundantly to blesse you, and all yours and his, with all spirituall blessings and sweet comforts in Christ, I take leave, and rest

