



RIght reuerend: I haue thought it my part (before I vvade further in publishing of these Posies) to lay open before your graue iudge∣mentes, asvvell the cause vvhich presently moueth mee to present them, as also the depth and secrets of some conceytes, vvhich (being passed in clovvdes and figuratiue speeches) might per∣case both be offensiue to your grauitie, and perillous to my credite.
It is verie neare tvvo yeares past, since (I beeing in Hollande in seruice vvith the vertuous Prince of O∣renge) the most parte of these Posies vvere imprinted, and novv at my returne, I find that some of them haue not onely bene offensiue for sundrie vvanton speeches and lasciuious phrases, but further I heare that the same haue beene doubtfully construed, and (therefore) scan∣dalous.
My reuerende and vvelbeloued: vvhatsoeuer my youth hath seemed vnto the grauer sort, I vvoulde bee verie loth novve in my middle age to deserue reproch: more loth to touch the credite of any other, and moste loth to haue mine ovvn name become vnto you odious.
 For if I shoulde novve at this age seeme as carelesse of reproche, as I vvas in greene youth readie to goe a∣stray, my faultes might quickely grovve double, and myne estimation shoulde bee vvoorthie too re∣mayne but single. I haue learned that although there may bee founde in a Gentleman vvhereby to be repre∣hended or rebuked, yet ought he not to be vvoorthie of reproofe or condemnation.
All this I set dovvne in preamble, too the ende I maye thereby purchase youre pacience. And as I desyre that you vvyll not condemne mee vvyth∣oute proofe, so am I contented, that if heereafter you finde mee guiltie, youre definitiue, sentence shall then passe publikelye vnder the Seale of Se∣ueritie.
It vvere not reason (righte reuerende) that I shoulde bee ignoraunt hovve generally vvee are all magis proni ad malum quàm ad bonum. Euen so is it requisite that I acknovvledge a generall reformation of ma∣ners more necessarie to bee taught, than anye VVhet∣stone of Vanities is meete (in these dayes) to bee suf∣fered. And therefore as youre grauitie hathe thought requysite that all ydle Bookes or vvanton Pam∣phlettes shoulde bee forbidden, so might it seeme that I vvere vvoorthie of greate reprehension, if I shoulde bee the Aucthour of euill vvilfully, or a prouoker of vyces vvittingly. And yet some there are vvho haue not spared too reporte that I receyued greate summes of money for the first printing of these Posies, vvhere∣by (if it vvere true) I mighte seeme not onely a craf∣tie
 Broker for the vtteraunce of garishe toyes, but a corrupte Merchaunte for the sale of deceyptfull vvares.
For ansvvere heereof it is moste true (and I call Heauen and Earth too vvitnesse) that I neuer recey∣ued of the Printer, or of anye other, one grote or pennie for the firste Copyes of these Posyes. True it is that I vvas not vnvvillinge the same shoulde bee imprinted: And that not of a vaineglorious de∣syre too bee thought a pleasaunt Poet, neyther yet of a lyghte minde too bee counted a cunning Louer. For though in youth I vvas often ouerhardie too put my name in Ballaunce of doubtfull iudgementes, yet novve I am become so bashfull that I coulde rather bee content too leese the prayse of my follyes, than too hazarde the misconceyte of the graue and graye headed Iudges. But too confesse a truthe vntoo you right reuerende (vvith vvhome I maye not dissemble in cases vvhiche so generally doe touche all menne) I vvas the rather contented too see them imprinted for these sundrie considerations.
First, for that I haue seene dyuerse Authours, (both learned and vvell learned) vvhich after they haue both reformed their liues, and conuerted their studies, haue not yet disdeyned to reade the Poems vvhich they let passe their pennes in youth. For it seemeth vntoo mee that in all ages Poetrie hath beene not onely per∣mitted, but also it hath beene thought a right good and excellent qualitie.

Next vnto this, I haue alvvayes bene of opinion, that it is not vnpossible eyther in Poemes or in Prose too vvrite both compendiously, and perfectly in our Eng∣lishe tongue. And therefore although I chalenge not vnto my selfe the name of an English Poet, yet may the Reader finde oute in my vvrytings, that I haue more faulted in keeping the olde English vvordes (quamuis iam obsoleta) than in borovving of other languages, such Epi∣thetes and Adiectiues as smell of the Ink horne.
Thirdly, as I seeke aduauncement by vertue, so vvas I desirous that there might remaine in publike recorde, some pledge or token of those giftes vvhervvith it hath pleased the Almightie to endue me: To the ende that thereby the vertuous might bee incouraged to employ my penne in some exercise vvhich might tende both to my preferment, and to the profite of my Countrey. For many a man vvhich may like mine outvvarde pre∣sence, might yet haue doubted vvhether the qualityes of my minde had bene correspondent to the proportion of my bodie.
Fourthly, bicause I had vvrittē sundry things vvhich coulde not chuse but content the learned and Godlye Reader, therefore I hoped the same should serue as vn∣doubted proofe, that I had layde aside vanities, and de∣lighted to exercise my penne in morall discourses, at least the one passing (cheeke by cheek) vvith the other, muste of necessitie persuade both the learned, and the light minded, that I coulde asvvell sovve good graine, as graynes or draffe. And I thought not meete (beeing intermingled as they vvere) to cast avvay a vvhole bu∣shell of good seede, for tvvo or three graynes of Darnell
 or Cockle.
Lastly, I persuaded my selfe that as in the better sort of the same I shoulde purchase good lyking vvith the honourable aged: So euen in the vvorst sorte, I might yet serue as a myrrour for vnbrydled youth, to auoyde those perilles vvhich I had passed. For little may he do vvhich hath escaped the rock or the sandes, if he cannot vvaft vvith his hande to them that come after him.
These consideration (right reuerend) did first moue me to consent that these Poemes shoulde passe in print. For recapitulation vvhereof, and to ansvvere vnto the obiections that may bee giuen: I say to the first that I neither take example of wanton Ouid, doting Nigidius, nor foolish Samocratius. But I delight to thinke that the reuerend father Theodore Beza, vvhose life is vvor∣thily become a lanterne to the vvhole vvorlde, did not yet disdaine too suffer the continued publication of such Poemes as he vvrote in youth. And as he termed them at last Poëmata castrata, So shal your reuerend iudge∣ments beholde in this seconde edition, my Poemes gel∣ded from all filthie phrases, corrected in all erronious places, and beautified vvith addition of many moral ex∣amples.
To the seconde, although I be sometimes constrey∣ned for the cadence of rimes, or per licentiam Poeticam, to vse an ynkehorne terme, or a straunge vvord: Yet hope I that it shall be apparant I haue rather regarde to make our natiue language commendable in it selfe, than gay vvith the feathers of straunge birdes.
To the thirde reason may be obiected, that if I vvere so desirous to haue my capacitie knovvne, I shoulde
 haue done much better to haue trauelled in some notori∣ous peece of vvorke, vvhich might generally haue spred my commendation. The vvhich I confesse. But yet is it true that I must take the Foord as I finde it: Sometimes not as I vvoulde, but as I may And since the ouersight of my youth had brought mee farre behinde hande and indebted vnto the vvorld, I thought good in the meane time to pay as much as I had, vntill it might please God better to inable me. For commonly the greediest credi∣tor is appeased, if he see his debitor vvilling to pay vvhē he hath any thing. And therefore being busied in mar∣tiall affayres (vvhereby also I sought some aduaunce∣ment) I thought good to notifie vnto the vvorlde be∣fore my returne, that I coulde as vvell persuade vvith Penne, as pearce vvith launce or vveapon: So that yet some noble minde might be incouraged both to exer∣cise me in time of peace, and to emploie mee in time of seruice in vvarre.
To the fourth and last considerations, I had alled∣ged of late by a right reuerende father, that although in deede out of euerie floure the industrious Bee may ga∣ther honie, yet by proofe the Spider thereout also sucks mischeeuous poyson. VVherevnto I can none other∣vvise ansvvere, but that he vvho vvill throvv a stone at euerie Dogge vvhich barketh, had neede of a great sat∣chell or pocket. And if the learned iudgements and ho∣nest mindes doe both construe my doings aright, and take therein either councell or commoditie, then care I the lesse vvhat the vvicked conceyue of my conceytes. For I esteeme more the prayse of one learned Reader, than I regard the curious carping of ten thousande vn∣lettered
 lettered tattlers.
To conclude (right reuerend) as these considerations did specially moue me at first to consent to the imprin∣ting of these posies, so novve haue I yet a further consi∣deration vvhich moueth mee most earnestly to sue for this second edition or publishing of the same. And that is this. I vnderstande that sundrie vvell disposed mindes haue taken offence at certaine vvanton vvordes and sen∣tences passed in the fable of Ferdinando Ieronimi, and the La∣die Elinora de Valasco, the vvhich in the first edition vvas ter∣med The aduentures of master F. I. And that also ther∣vvith some busie coniectures haue presumed to thinke that the same vvas indeed vvritten to the scandalizing of some vvorthie personages, vvhom they vvoulde seeme therby to knovv. Surely (right reuerend) I smile to see the simplicitie of such, vvho being indeed starke staring blind, vvould yet seeme to see farre into a milstone. And the rather I scorne their rash iudgements, for that in tal∣king vvith .xx. of them one after another, there haue not tvvo agreed in one coniecture. Alas, alas, if I had bene so foolishe as to haue passed in recitall a thing so done in deede, yet all the vvorld might thinke me verie simple if I vvoulde call Iohn, Iohn, or Mary, Mary. But for the better satisfying of all men vniuersally, I doe here pro∣test vnto you (reuerend) euen by the hope of my salua∣tion, that there is no liuing creature touched or to be no∣ted therby. And for the rest you shall find it novv in this second imprinting so turquened and turned, so clensed from all vnclenly vvordes, and so purged from the hu∣mor of inhumanitie, as percase you vvoulde not iudge that it vvas the same tale. For although I haue bin here∣tofore
 contented to suffer the publication thereof, only to the ende men might see my Methode and maner of vvriting, yet am I novve thus desirous to set it forth eft∣soones, to the ende all men might see the reformation of my minde. And that all suspitions may be suppressed and throughly satisfied, by this mine vnfeined protesta∣tion vvhich I make vnto you in that behalfe. Finally, vvere it not that the same is alreadie extant in such sort as hath moued offence, I should rather be cōtent to can∣cel it vtterly to obliuion, then thus to returne it in a nevv patched cote. And for full proofe of mine earnest zeale in Gods seruice, I require of you (reuerende) most in∣stantly, that if hereby my skill seeme sufficient to vvade in matters of greater importance, you vvill then vouch∣safe to employ mee accordingly. Surely you shall finde me no lesse readie to vndertake a vvhole yeares trauaile in anie vvorke vvhich you shall thinke me able to ouer∣come, than I haue beene vvilling heretofore to spende three houres in penning of an amorous Sonnet. Euen so being desirous that all men generally (and you espe∣cially) should conceiue of me as I meane, I haue thus farre troubled your lerned eies vvith this plaine Epistle, vvritten for my purgation, in matters vvhiche (else) might both haue offended you, and giuen great batterie to the ramparts of my poore credite. The God of peace vouchsafe to gouerne and product you, and me, and all his, in quiet of conscience, and strength of spirit. Amen. From my poore house at VValtamstovv in the Forest, this last day of Ianuarie. 1574.
