


RIght noble & my singuler good lord: if I shuld presume (in this epistle dedicatorie) to blasonne and set forth eyther your iust desertes in gene∣ralitie, or your exceeding fauour and bountie towardes me in perticularitie, I might both of∣fend your honorable eares (which are seldome seene willing to harken vnto your owne prayses) and much dy∣gresse from myne owne former course in writing, since I haue hetherto (in all my lyfe) attayned small skill or grace in the arte of adulation. Let it then please your honor to rest throughly sa∣tisfied with this my simple acknowledging of your great good∣nes, so much surpassing my smal deserts, that I fynde none other meane of discharge but onely to cōtinue your faithful seruaunt and follower. The which I protest to accomplish vnto my lyues end, as well towards your own person & my good Ladie, as to all your posteritie in euerie duetifull respecte. And (my good Lorde) I must needes confesse both vnto your honour and to the whole world, that amōgest a number of imperfectiōs I finde my self giltie of much time mispent, & of greater curiositie thē was conuenient, in penning and endightyng sundrie toyes and trifles. So that lookyng backe (with inward griefe) towardes the beginning of my recklesse race. I fynde that both the tyme, and my duetie doe challenge in me the fruites of repentaunce. To be shewed in some seryous trauayle which might both perticulerly beare witnesse of my reformation, and generally become profi∣table vnto others. VVherevnto I was (now almost twelue mo∣neths past) pricked and much moued, by the graue and discreete wordes of one right worshipfull and mine approued friend, who (in my presence) hearing my thryftlesse booke of Poesyes vnde∣seruedly

commended, dyd say: That he lyked the smell of those Poesies pretely well, but he would lyke the Gardyner much bet∣ter if he would employe his spade in no worse ground, then ey∣ther Deuinitie or morall Philosophie. Vnto which wordes I thought not meete to reply much at that tyme, hauyng learned that a rashe answere should not bee giuen vnto a graue aduyse. But finding my selfe therewith throughly tickld, and therby al∣so finding the great difference betweene that friende and many other, who had sūdrie times serued me as an  with prayses & cōmon suffrages, affirming that I deserued a Lawrel Garland, with sundrie other plausible speeches not heere to be rehersed: I beganne straight waye to consider that it is not suffycient or a man to haue a high ying Hawke, vnlesse he doe also accustome hir to stoupe such Quaries as are both pleasant and profitable. For i the best Faulkener with his best flying aulcon, shoulde yet continually beate the flockes of simple shiftlesse Doues, o suffer his Hauke to checke alwayes at the caryon Crow, the ple∣sure might perhappes content a vayne desyre, but the profite or commoditi would skarcely quyte his cost. And in lyke maner whosoeuer is (by the highest God) endued with anye haughty gifte, hee ought also to bestowe and employe the same in some worthie and profitable subiecte or trauayle. Least in his default, he deserue the name of an vnprofitable and carelesse Stewarde when his accoumpt is strictly cast. So then (to returne to my purpose my singular good Lord:) I haue of long time thought my selfe bounden by some seryous trauayle to declare that those graue and friendly wordes dyd not marche altogither vn∣marked, through m mynde. And therevpon (not manye monethes since) tossyng and retossyng in my small Lybrarie, amongest some bookes which had not ofen felte my fyngers endes in XV. yeares before, I chaunced to light vpon a small vo∣lumne skarce comely couered, and wel wore handled. For to tell a truth vnto your honor, it was written in an old kynd of Carac∣ters, and so torne as it neyther had the beginning perspycuous, nor the end perfect. So that I can not certaynly say who shuld be the Author of the same. But as things of meane swe (outvvardely,) are not alwayes to bee reected, euen so in

thys olde torne Paumphlette I founde sundrye things (as mee thoughte) wrytten with suche zeale and affection, ad tendinge so dyrectly vnto the reformacion of maners, that I dyd not onely (my selfe) take great pleasure in perculer ea∣ding ereof, but thought them profitable to be pblished for a generall commoditie. And therevpon haue translated & col∣lected into some ordre these sundry parcells of the same. he which (aswell bicause the aucthor is to me vnknowen,  also b∣cause the oryginal copies had no  tytle, but cheefly bi∣cause they do all tende zealously to an admonicion whereby we may euery man walke warely & decētly in his vocacion) I haue thought meee to entytle The Droomme of Doomes daye. Thinking my selfe assured that any Souldier which meaneth to march vn∣der the slagge of gods fauour, may by sounde of this droomme be awaked, and called to his watch and warde with right suffi∣cient summons. For more perticuler proofe wherof let it please my good. Lorde to vnderstand, that I haue deuided this worke into three partes. VVhereof the first I haue named The viewe of worldly vanities. Bicause it doth very eloquently (and pythily) persuade all men to contempne the pompes, excessiue plea∣sures, and delightes of this lyfe. A treatise which though at the first it seeme very hard and vnpleasaunt, yet whosoeuer wyll vouchsafe the dyligent reading thereof shall reape thereout no lesse commoditie then a body repleate with hewmours recey∣ueth by the medicinable purgacion. The seconde parte I haue termed the Shame of se. Bicause in deede it displayeth and blasoneth the detestable enormities thereof, and helpeth to cure the sowle by remembraunce and consideracion of the very lothesoomnesse, which sinne doth continually carry in it selfe. This part needeth not so much demonstracion, as it deserueth commendacion. And whosoeuer doth most beasty wallow and delight in sinne & wickednesse, if he bestow but one howre in a daye to reade & record the lessonnes therein conteyned, I doubt not but he shall reape much profit, and I some thankes for my trauayle. The third and last deuision is called The Needls Eye. And teacheth aswell the right rewles of chrystian lyfe, as also

the meanes how to auoyde the crooked by pathes which leade vnto destruction. So that the offences ones auoyded, and the mynde fully bent to goe forthwardes in godlynesse, it shalbe hard to withdraw vs from performance of our possible duties. Vnto these three parts thus collected & ordred, I haue thought good to adde an olde letter which teacheth Remedies against the bitternes of Death. Being perticulerly and yet (in myne opinion) loquently and well wrytten by the originall aucthour. Yea & very meete to be redde as the present tyme requireth. All which to gether drawing to a reasonable vollume, I haue now finished and publyshed in print. And aswell bicause I thought the light of the aucthors ouer bright a Candle to be hydden vn∣der a busshell, as also for that I would make the worlde wytnesse how deepe my graue freendes aduise dyd sinke into my memo∣rye, but especially to leaue some pawne of thankfulnesse in your honorable handes, vntyll I may with greater deserte dys∣charge some parte of such infinite dewties as I owe vnto your Lordshippe: I presume ryght humbly to dedicate my trauayle herein vnto your patronage & noble name. Euen so beseching the same to pardone myne imperfections, if any (through ig∣noraunce and not for lacke of zeale) haue passed my penne throughout this worke. And much the rather for that in deede I haue bothe vsed the conference, and abyd the correction of learned Deuines, to make it the more worthy of so honorable a patrone. How so euer it be, my wyll and desire are very ear∣nest to please and profyt all true christians in generallitie, and to purchase the continuance of your comfortable fauour in perti∣cularitie. In full hope whereof I seace any further to trouble your good ordshippe, but shall neuer cease to beseech the almightie that he vouchsafe longe to vpholde the prosperous pyllers of your estate to his pleasure. From my lodging where I finished this trauayle in weake plight for health as your good L: well knoweth this second daye of Maye, 1576.

