


IN good truth (Madame) I am at my wits end (ere I be∣gin) to thinke, what Error, or Fury it is that hath so succes∣siuely possest the poore despi∣sed Nation of Poets (these many thousand yeeres) still to defame, & traduce your La∣dyshyp with the imputatiue slanders of Niggardise and instability; when I (which haue known you better and more inwardly, then a thousand of these Candle-wasting-Booke Wormes) can affirme you to be the most bounteous, open-han∣ded, firme, vnswayed, constant Ladie vnder Heauen. But since it is no other then the breath of such a pitifull family; let it vanish (as one of my owne Mottley houshold notes wel) like Tabacco smoake. And now (most excellent Patronesse) that you may feele (for I know you do not vse to see) the de∣sire I haue to be truely gratefull for so manie Mountaines of Benefits clapt vpon me (since I first taught Adam to make him a suite of fig leaues) I do heere present your La. with the translated Species of an Hospital, & some few Bedred fooles, lately multiplied out of Italian into English, with a most pro∣sperous

and chymicall successe. My hopes are that you (out of your gratious and accustomed blindnesse) will not so much, as deigne to looke vpon their diseases, but passe them ouer with the hand of Fauour, as you haue often done other sicke creatures of their sanguine complexion. They lacke cheri∣shing, good Lady, let them not want it. I know a good plump Foole comes as welcome to you at all times, as the wisest A∣natomy in a kingdome; you take no pleasure in one of these leane withered Cato's: & it is much more in the way of your praise, that you should bestow your fauours on such as (with adoration) will weare them on their foreheads, then on those, who (out of their too much knowledge) studie to con∣ceale and make them appeere cheape and contemptible. Well Madame, you haue the happinesse both to consider and distinguish these things without me; and yet if the olde Dutch-man (he of Roterodam) were to be brought to the racke now, he would protest me (though I doubt he were scarce a sound Protestant) to haue too meane facultie in counsell; there was a true trick of my selfe now (if you marke it) Folly must haue a flurt of lightnesse and ostentation euer. I feare nothing more, but that I haue beene too graue all this while, & appeer'd like one dancing in a gowne: If I haue, par∣don me; I beg it with as forced a looke, as a Player that in speaking an Epilogue makes loue to the two pennie-roume for a plaudite. But leauing this, what say you? Are my chil∣dren of the Spittle to be receiued into your good thoughts, or no? they stay on the oher side of the leafe waiting your pleasure. Me thinkes being Fooles, they should be answered according to their folly, which is with silence, which is with consent.
