



Most Honourable Lord:
A Tendrell, planted in your soyle; yea, graffed in your Garden, watered with your dew, cheri∣shed with your Sunne; after some smal growth, is (notwithstanding an
vnhappy Remoual) bold to returne you Fruit. Once was it, when I had a perswasiue Faith, in a destination to your Lordships Seruice: ne∣uerthelesse cannot the iniurious Distance, and discontinuance of Time and Place (other cause, I trust is none) for bid mine vtmost deuotion there∣unto. In a weake manife∣station whereof, I now presume to sacrifice this simple Offring of mine, to your honourable Name: Confessing it worthlesse; beseeching
that it may bee bettered by your Worth. So please it your good Lordship (together with my Duty) to take notice of mine Endeauours herein: You shal see sum∣med vp in their seuerals: An old hospitaller, kind∣ly entertaining his new kinde of Guests: they hearfully accepting their but needles cheare. Two of one sex, agreeing one∣ly to be Mothers; and yet as Mothers most disa∣greeing. A couple com∣ming together, to nature, and the promise: with a
yoke, so wisely & order∣ly vndergone; that it prooues not a more ne∣cessary, then delectable yoke. A man, borne a Prophet, and more then a Prophet: a Prophet, dy∣ing a man, and viler then a man. A Disciple taught his duty; confessing what he was taught; denying what he confessed; Re∣canting what he denyed. The wicked grassation of a Tyrant; and Saints admired translation. All is (I confesse) vnworthy your Lordships Name, or Notice; as being but a
small thing, and occasio∣nall; Time (I hope) and fauour, may bring it as well to a Method, as to a volume.
Should I now com∣memorate your Noble Auncestours, and religi∣ous; predicate your own vertues, & hopefull Pro∣geny; it would be, but to light a Candle to your Sunne. I cannot speake, but (as the world knowes) vnder your desert. Better were I to say nothing; then not accordingly. Be∣sides, I would be loath to loade your Lord∣ships




Modesty; which (I know) can content you, with the conscience of your Worth. Let the World (that hath known your Cost, Care, Toyle, Hazard) praise you; it shall be mine, to pray for you. That to your owne Merits, Honours terre∣striall, may be repayed you: and for the onely merits of Christ, Glory celestial vouchsafed you. So vowes

