



RIght VVorshipfull, I stood obliged to the Stock you both sprang frō, before I was able to apprehend what such obligatiō meant. Your worthy Mother was one of those that presented mee to the sacred Laver,

and that undertooke there in my be∣halfe. Shee answered there for mee,  P qam respon∣dere possem: uti Iu∣nius vertt, Palm. 119.67. when I could not answer for my selfe; and did further also then seale up her free affection to me with a reall testimo∣nie of her Love. Neither did her kind∣nesse towards me then and there expire; but as it was oft renewed in her life time, when occasion thereof was offe∣red, so it ceased not untill her selfe de∣ceased. Shee performed one of the first religious offices for mee soone after my birth: and it was one of her last pious workes to remember me, among others whom shee had performed the like of∣fice for, at the time of her decease. Some monument of my thankfull acknow∣ledgement hereof being desirous to have extant, whom should I addresse it unto rather than yourselves; the onely two Principalls now left of that Family? Being therefore moved to make publike two of my weake Discourses, containing the explication of two portions of Scrip∣ture, of some neere relation the one to the other; the one of them relating a

memorable example of the performance of that that is promised in the other, to wit, of Gods blessing o those with tempo∣rall things, that are carefull to looke af∣ter the spirituall: This of the twaine I chose the rather to present your Wor∣ships withall; partly, because at the moti∣on of the one of you,The Worshipfull Company of Ha∣berdashers. being then Head of that worthy Societie, which I acknow∣ledge my selfe also a debtor unto, it was by word of mouth at first delivered; and partly also, that it may helpe (for the best also, even Genes. 35.1. Iacob himselfe, in this kinde need helps) to egge you on, whom God hath blessed with so large a portion of his bounty, unto those religious offices, that by occasion of Iacobs example, men of your rancke are therein encited unto, whether risen from meane estate, as with him here it had beene, or from the first largely and liberally endowed, as your selves. The Worke indeed is growne much larger, than at first was delivered, by reason that a Question betweene us and the Romanists, concerning Mans Merit, is therein now discussed, which

was then but touched upon and poin∣ted at only; neither the streights of time admitting over-long discourse then, nor such matter of controversie so well befit∣ting the occasion that then was. The rest, without any materiall alteration or addi∣tion, is the same for substance that then it was. Which recommending entirely, as now it is, to your Worships, together with my Love and Christian service to you both, and mine heartie Prayers to God for the well-fare, spirituall especial∣ly, of you and yours, with the rest of the Branches of that Family, where∣soever now transplanted; I take leave of you for the present, and rest

