




RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL;
Being requested lately by my
kinde Frends, the Wardens of the
Worshipfull Companie of Skin∣ners,
to assist them in their Visitation of the
free Schole at Tunbridge, founded long since
by that worthy Knight, of blessed memorie,
Sir Andrew Iudde, your Grand-father, and
committed to the charge and ouer-sight of that
well-deseruing Society; I made choise of such a
portion of Scripture there to entreat of, as

seemed not altogither vnfitting an occasion of
that kinde. After the handling whereof, being
then presently solicited by some, and since
further importuned by others, to make these my
weake labors more publike, as not vnlikely (so
they deemed) to doe some further good; I was
at length drawne, regarding more their opinion,
then mine owne conceipt thereof, as well know∣ing
it to be but a tumultuary worke, amids many
distractions hastily peiced togither; and to giue
them satisfaction therein, that seemed so desi∣rous
of it; to let it goe abroad, and make tryall
what benefit either Teacher, or Scholler, or
other might make of it. This resolued on, I be∣gan
to bethinke my selfe, obseruing the vsuall
manner of the times, whom I should make
choise of for the patronizing of it. In all respects
none seemed so fit as your Selfe, whom I haue
therefore made bold to addresse it vnto. The
Schole was first erected and endowed by your
Worships Ancestor. And you haue worthily
built vpon his foundation, and added liberally
to his gift. So that through your munificence it
is very likely to flourish, and not to come behind
some of those that be of cheife note. Your bounty
herein, and in other works of the like nature, is

the rather to be regarded; for that you do not,
(as the manner is of the most, vnwilling to part
with ought, till they must needs leaue all;) defer
wholy your well-doing to your deaths-bed, or
your dying day; but bend your selfe thereunto,
while you may yet surviving your owne dona∣tion,
your selfe see things setled in a due course,
and receiue comfort by view of the fruit and
benefit that may therby redound both to Church
and Common-weale. And certainly, to omit,
thatBen sicium nisi à vlente non atur. Sen. de ben. l. 5 . 19 Beneficium est qud qui dedit, cm ps∣set & non dare. lb. l. 3. c. l 9. the good that men do in their life time is a
surer note of true bounty, then that they do at
their deceasse; asLegatur Ambr. exhort. ad pnit & August. homil. 41. there is greater euidence of
sincere repentance, in the abandoning of vice,
while men haue liberty and abilitie to continue
the practise of it, then in leauing of sinne then,
when sinne it selfe leaueth them, and they can
no longer follow it: Howsoeuer the benefit to
others may be equall in either, to the Doner
himselfe in the former is the comfort far grea∣ter,
Good done at our end is like a Lanterne
borne after vs, that directeth them that come
after vs, but affordeth vs litle light; whereas
the good done in our life time is like a light
borne before vs, that bothBeneficiū dando accepit, qui digno dedit. P. Syrus. benefiteth them
and vs also alike, imparting light equally vnto

either. Yea, of such beneficence I may well say
more: it benefiteth the giuer in diuers respects
much more then the taker; it is a far greater
pleasure to the bestower, then it is to the recei∣uer.
Act. 20. 35. It is a more blessed thing, saith our
Sauiour, to giue then to take. Yea. Epi∣curus. . Plut. de philoseph. apud dutes disser. Non honestius tan. um, sed & tucun∣dius est ben ficium dare quàm accipere.  Ita{que} Sen. de ben. l. 1 c. 1. Mam nn recipere benefi∣ia, quàm non dare. to giue
then to take, saith the Heathen man, it is the
pleasanter of the twaine: to bestow a benefit
vpon an other, then to receiue a benefit from
an other, it is more delightsome to any man of a
free and ingenuous disposition. So that, to passe
by the religious consideration, of the rich and
royall reward and recompence of well-doing
from God and with God, which may be alike
vnto either; the very light of Nature sheweth,
that in true Beneficence there is more pleasure
and contentment, and consequently more com∣fort
and benefit euen for the present, to the gi∣uer
then to the taker: that which is a great part
of it, wanting vnto those, that defer their well-doing,
though they do neuer so well then, till
their deceasse. You, worthy Sir, do otherwise,
and long may you liue so to do, to the increase
of your ioy and comfort here, and the furthe∣rance
of your account and reckoning els-where.
With which wish I seale all vp, that I be not

ouer-tedious and troublesome to your Worship,
amids your other manifold more serious and
weightie affaires; and requesting onely your
fauourable acceptance of this sory trifle,
rest,

