


EXperience bea∣reth such a soueraigntie ouer all thinges humane and diuine, that without it the quality or power ei∣ther of worde, deede, de∣uise, or matter, cannot make it selfe knowen to the vnderstanding of mē: for the heauenly trueth iustifieth it selfe by the effects of his nature and power, made apparant to the eyes & capacities of earthly creatures.
Adam not well staid vpō the trueth of Gods word, transgressed the cōmandement, & feeling the plagues of his offence, had thereby experience of the power & trueth of his Almightie Creator.
The first worlde ouerflowing in wickednesse, was drowned in the flood of Gods vengeance: to geeue experience to the world that ensued, what it is to con∣temne his worde and Prophets.
Noah beleeued the word of the Lord, and obeying his commandement, prepared the Arke & was saued in the flood, he & all his family: by experience wher∣of the world is made to vnderstand the power and as∣surance of Gods trueth and fauour towarde his elect people.
The Lord willed Moses to denounce his plagues a∣gainst Egypt, and in the effect of his power & trueth he accomplished the same vpon man and beast, vpon fruit and tree, vpon earth and water: the experience whereof made Moses and the Israelites so hardie in fayth, that they tooke their way through the red Sea, as through the fieldes on drie land.
Pharao in the hardnesse of his heart pursued the Is∣raelites, and was drowned, he and all his armie in the pathes where Iacob went drye shod▪ whereby all the kings and princes of the earth had & haue experience, what it is to contemne God, to persecute his people, & to despise his worde and ministers.
The like experience made Iosuah bolde to lead Is∣rael through the deepe waters of Iorden: where they passed on foot, and went dry shod to land.
The Israelites breaking the couenant of the Lorde their God, & standing in their rebellion were destroi∣ed out of the land of Iudah, and Ierusalem, and made slaues to the Chaldeans: whereby they were taught by experience (and so are wee by the same example) what it is to despise the Lord of hostes, and to stand in disobedience against his maiestie.
The Lord restoring Iacob out of Chaldea to his in∣heritance againe, according as he had promised by the mouthes of his Prophets: doth teach vs by experience

how faithfull he is in his promises, that we therefore should rest vpon him without doubting.
Christ our Sauiour wrought wonders before all Israel, that their eyes might see his diuine power and beleeue him for his works sake: but they beleeued not their owne eyes, and are therefore confounded by the experience that testifieth against their owne consci∣ences.
By examples of experience, the Lord Iesus taught the Iewes, as by that of Diues and Lazarus, of the sow∣er of seed, of the euill Steward &c. As by familiar de∣monstrations.
Our forefathers the olde Christians, so polluted their Tabernacles with the workes of impietie, that they extinguished the holy Ghost in the Sanctuarie, whereby they fell to ignorance and corruption▪ and were giuen ouer to superstition and Idolatrie. The ex∣perience whereof should teache vs of these dayes, and our children to walke wisely in the presence of our God.
Experience discouereth the effects of wisdome and folly: and maketh demonstration of the fruits of ver∣tue and of vice, and teacheth to distinguishe, betwixt the righteous and the wicked, betwixt the foole and the wise man, &c.
Experience is the mother and nurse of the policies and gouernements, ciuill and martiall, priuate & pub∣like, guiding the counsailes and doinges of men with orderly discretion.
Experience of the inordinate iniquities of mē fuon∣ded the lawes and the iudgement seat.
The experience of the troublesome furies of men

founded Armes, and aduaunced Militarie profession, for the repressing and restraining of the tyrannies and noyfull malice of the wicked.
The experience of the profit and value of lawe and armes, maketh al prudent states and commonwelths, to embrace and to vphold them both with much care and endeuour.
So to conclude, experience is the ordinarie com∣panion and naturall ornament of reason, which ma∣keth mē wise in knowledge, & prudent in the directi∣on and vse of things. He therefore that iudgeth or di∣recteth against experience, is not in deede a man, but a foole more ignorant then a beast.
The experience of other mens harmes, warneth the wise to be ware.
The experience of forren euils, warneth England to waken it selfe out of securitie, and to be watchfull, and wisely to take it selfe.
Experience hath taught me to loue and to honour armes, and in the zeale of a good heart to couet the aduancement of martial occupation, which made me (an vnlettered man) to take vnto me a notarie to sette downe in writing this drift in the defence and praise of warlike prowesse, against al cōtemners of the same: for the benefite and encouragement of my countrie & countrimen.
And finally, the experience of the high noblenes & honour of you, my singuler good Lord, doth enbol∣dē me (in the loue of a faithful hart, to your renoumed vertues) most humbly to commend this litle work to your honorable protection, that vnder the shielde of your noble fauour and iudgement, it may stande in

grace before our nation, to some good effect. God graunt it. To whom be praise, & to your good Lord∣shippe, abundaunce of heauenly graces, and fa∣therly blessings, euen to euerlasting life. Amen. London. 23 De∣cemb. 1578.

