



RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL:
HAVING vpon some enducements (how weightie I leaue to the censure of others; but such as to methen see∣med not altogether vnsufficient) cōceiued a purpose of pub∣lishing the former Discourse, I thought it not amisse to annex this ensuing vnto it, as meetly well suting with the Argu∣ment therein handled, and not vnfit ther∣fore to second it. And remembring withall, that among other of those, whom I owe dutie and respect vnto, I

had not hitherto▪ remembred your selfe in this kinde, I checked my selfe for it, and resolued with my selfe not to rest longer guiltie of such neglect. I know I shall not need in many words to intreat your Worships kinde acceptance of it, either for mine owne sake, or for it selfe. The one I am bold to presume of vpon experience of your wonted courteous vsage and professed respect of mee farre aboue my desert. The other the subiect Matter of it maketh mee confident of: Which what it is, either the bare Title, or Text it selfe will soone acquaint you withall: And both ioyntly together will (I hope) helpe sufficiently either to couer or to counteruaile, the rawnesse and rudenesse, or what euer other defects in my weake and vnworthy Manner of handling so singular a Subiect, may seeme any way to blemish the Worke. I was ne∣uer furnished with any store of Rhetori∣call lights: And am willing therefore the rather to embelish my writings with such borrowed helpes as my poore reading af∣fordeth either out of holy or humane Wri∣ters:

whose Speeches and Obseruations also, either as Exod. 12. 35. Phi∣losophi siqua vera & fidei nostrae ac∣commoda dixerunt, non solùm formidā∣da nō sum, sed ab eis etiam tanquam in∣iustis possessoribus in usū nostrum vendi∣canda. Sicut enim Aegyptij non solùm idola habebant quae populus Israeliticus detestaretur, sed & vasa, ornamenta & vestimenta, quae pe∣pulus ille Aegypto exiens non autori∣tate propria sed Dei praecepto tanquam ad usum meliorem sibi clanculum ven∣dicavit, ipsis Aegyp∣tijs nescienter com∣modantibus ea qui∣bus non benè ute∣bantur. Sic doctrinae Gentiliam non si∣mulata solùm & superstitiosa figmen∣ta habent, quae fu∣gere & detestari debemus, sed & liberales disciplinas veritatis usui aptiores, & quaedam morum praecepta utilissima continent, quae tanquam aurum & argentum, quod non ipsi instituerunt, sed de quibusdam veritatis divinae metallis quae ubique infusa est, eruerunt, & quo peruerse abutun∣tur, ad usum justum praedicandi Deum auferre ab eis Christianus debet. Aug. de doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 40. Aegyptian Spoiles, or as Deut. 21. 10-13. Typus sapientiae secularis. Quando Philosophos legimus, & veniunt in manus nostras libri sapientiae secularis, siquid in eis utile reperimus, ad nostrum dogma conver∣timus. Si quid super fluum de idolis, amore, cura secularium, radimus, calvitium inducimus, in unguium morem ferro acutissimo desecamus. Hieron. ad Damas. Vide & Sidon▪ ad Faustum, ep. 9. lib. 9. Ca∣naanitish Captiues, either Num. 31. 22, 23. hauing past the fire, and beene purged of their Heathe∣nish drosse, or being trimmed and pared from their Paganish super fluities, may well and warrantably vpon good ground euen from Sic Paulus Arae epigraphen usurpavit & Arati testi∣monium Act. 17. 23, 28. Sed & Menandri 1 Cor. 15. 33. Et Callimachi, an Epimenidis Tit. 1. 12. Extat & Epos Hexametron Iacob. 1. 17. Et Iambicum geminum 2 Pet. 2. 22. quod & poeticum spirat. the practise of Gods Spirit, be not onely admitted into the Common∣wealth of Israel, but applied also Exod. 35. 5. to the vse of the Sanctuarie and of Gods seruice therein. He that furnished Esai. 45. 3, 4. Ezra 1. 2. Cyrus with treasure for the building of his Temple, did no doubt furnish them also with much light of knowledge and literature, euen for the benefit of his Church and Children. In this Discourse especially I haue studied to be plaine, and to apply the things therein

deliuered to the present times, Matth. 24. 37, 38, 39. Luk. 17. 36, 37. which our Sauiour himselfe seemeth to parallel with those that NOA liued in. The bad∣nesse and loosenesse of them, all general∣ly complaine of, Quomodo Sen. de benef. l. 3. c. 1. De in∣gratis etiam ingrati queruntur; cùm interim hoc omnib{us} haereat, quod omnib{us} displicet. euen those that helpe to make them so bad as they are. And it were greatly to be wished, that men were on all hands as forward to put their hel∣ping hand to the furthering and effe∣cting of a generall reformation, as . Greg. Naz. ad cives peri∣clit. they are prone to complaine of the badnesse of them, and to murmure rather against others (those especially aboue) by whose meanes they deeme that they become so bad, when themselues are the whilst, it may be, therein as faultie as any, than to mourne for, and repent of their owne excesses. The whole Citie, wee say, would soone be faire, if euery one would but sweepe be∣fore his owne doore. And the whole estate would be soone reformed, if each one would but doe his part, . Aedibus in proprijs quae prava aut recta gerantur. Hemer. Odyss. δ'. Et ex Homere Socrates teste Gellio noct. At∣tic. l. 14. c. 7. Diogen. teste Laert. & Plut. de Valet. tuend. Do∣mum redeamus. Cic, de clar. orat. looke home to himselfe, and set seriously vpon the a∣mendment of that one, whom it con∣cerneth him most to looke after. This it nearely concerneth vs all to doe, that

if the Citie remaine foule still, while o∣thers doe not the like, yet the filth that is the cause of it, be not found before our doores: But those more specially, whose good example may helpe to draw many others on, as being more eminent than ordinary, either for place or parentage. In this ranke it hath pleased God to range your Worship; whose religious cariage therefore shall not onely benefit your selfe, but may pricke▪on and encou∣rage others, both at home and abroad: And for the furtherance of you therein, hath he vouch safed to furnish you with sundrie singular helpes aboue many o∣thers. To omit all other, your Honourable Fathers . Greg. Naz. de Basil. Example may goe for all, whose Life and Actions generally approued and admired, may be a liuely Precedent for your direction and imitation herein, especial∣ly liuing constantly and continually (Plus tibi & viva vox, & convictus, quàm oratio prode∣rit, In rem praesentē venias oportet. Pri∣mum quia homines amplius oculis quàm auribus credimus. Deinde quia longū est iter per praecep∣ta; breve & efficax per exempla. Zeno∣nem Cleanthes non expressisset, si eum tantummodo audis∣set: Vitae ejus in∣terfuit, secreta per∣spexit, observavit illum, utrum ex for∣mula sua viveret. Plus Plato ex mori∣bus, quàm ex verbis Socratis traxit. Et magnos viros non schola Epicuri, sed contubernium fecit. Sen. epist. 60. a matter of no small consequence) with him, and so hauing it daily in your eye. Goe on therefore, Worthy Sir, I beseech you, hauing so rare a Paterne be∣fore you, to imitate him that goeth in

and out before you, as you doe before o∣thers (the Archer giueth not ouer shooting and leuelling at the marke, though he neuer come, it may be, to hit the white; and it shall be Demosthenē imi∣temur, quid. n. aliud ns agimus? aut quid aliud optain{us}? at non assequimur. Cic. de clar. orat. . Greg. Naz. de Basil. your Honour there to imitate, where it is A quo vinci etiā laus est, haud pro∣brum: uti Accius. no disgrace to come short:) in fashioning your life and courses to the Rules of Gods will and word, and in helping to support the practise and profession of pietie, which through the iniquitie of times surroun∣ded with a maine floud of prophanenesse, like enough to bring in, if it hold on, some second Deluge, seemeth in a manner to be cleane ouer set, and in danger to be borne downe. I am not ignorant, what priuie nips, yea and open pointings at (as the times are; and it is no new thing nei∣ther; it was euen so also Iam illud quale, quam sanctū, quod si quis ex nobilib{us} ad Deum converti ce∣perit, statim honorē nobilitatis amittit? aut quantus in Chri∣stiano populo honor Christiē, ubi religio ignobilem facit? Statim enim ut quis melior esse tentave∣rit, deterioris abje∣ctione calcatur: ac per hoc mali esse co∣guntur, ne viles ha∣beātur. Itaque si ho∣noratior quispiam religioni se applicuerit, illicò honoratus esse desistit; ubi mutaverit vestem, mutat protinus dig∣nitatem; si fuerit sublimis, fit despicabilis: si fuerit splendidissimus, fit vilissimus: si fuerit totus honoris, fit totus iniuria. Perversa sunt enim, & in diversum cuncta mutata. Si bonus est quispiam, quasimalus spernitur; si est malus, quasi bom honeratur. Salvian. de provid. l. 4. c. 4. long since) men of your ranke especially, must make account to expose themselues vnto, if they will shew themselues religious, and fauourers of that which yet we all gene∣rally professe. But herein shall you shew

your Christian courage with NOA, whose Example this weake Worke representeth vnto you, if you shall for Gods sake con∣temne and set light by those things that make many, no doubt, forbeare to coun∣tenance that which inwardly they can∣not but like and allow of; and the grea∣ter reward shall you for the same receiue at his hands. Now the same our gratious God strengthen and confirme you in all goodnesse, encrease in you his graces, . Theo∣phylact. epist. 26. preserue you from all euill ones, protect you against . Idem epist. 7. & 10. all euils, as well corporall as spirituall, and bring both you and yours Rom. 6. 22. 2 Thess. 2. 13. Apoc. 20. 6. by true holinesse and sincere sanctification in his due time to full happinesse and eternall saluation. Amen.

