


❧To the right Wor∣shipfull his synguler good friend, Lewes Dyue of Broomeham, in the Countie of Bedforde, Es∣quyer, George Gascoigne wysheth continuance of Gods fauour.
SYR, you maye possibly condempne me of greate ingratitude, who (hauing combred the whole worlde with my thryft∣lesse workes) haue yet neuer remem∣bred to present you with any of them: And in deede your great friendshippe woulde rather challenge at my handes, the preheminence of suche pleasures, togeather with the redoubling of grea∣ter good wyll, as God shall please to enable mee.
But Syr, when my wanton (and worse smelling) Poesies, presumed fyrst to

peark abroade, they came forth sooner then I wyshed, and muche before they deserued to be lyked. So that (as you maye sithens perceyue) I was more combred with correction of them, then comforted in the constructions, where∣vnto they were subiect. And too make amendes for the lost time which I mis∣bestowed in wryting so wantonlie: I haue of latter dayes vsed al my trauaile in matters both serious and Morall. I wrote first a tragicall commedie cal∣led The Glasse of Gouernment: and nowe this last spring, I translated and collec∣ted a worthy peece of worke, called The Droomme of Doomes daie, and de∣dicated the same to my Lord and Mai∣ster: And I inuented a Satyre, and an Ellegie, called The Steele glasse: and The complaint of Phylomene. Both which I dedicated to your good Lord and myne, the Lorde Greye of VVylton: These vvorks or Pamphlets, I esteeme both Morall and Godly: whereof al∣though I presented you no Coppies, yet am I not therein so blamefull as

vnhappy. Surely I must needes alledge that I had verie fewe Coppies thereof my selfe: and yet of those fewe, I had one readie to haue sent you, the last time that my Brother Iohn Dye was in the Cittye.
But at the very instant of his depar∣ture it was not redie: So that I fayled thereby of my determynation, and remayne at your curtesie for the accep∣tance of this iust excuse, wherunto I hope the rather to persuade you, by presenting this small pamphlet called, A delycate Diet for Droonkards, vnto your name and patronage, the which I beseech you to accept as a pawne and token of my contynuing good wyll, I knowe you, and the world hath al∣wayes esteemed you, for a paterne of Sobryetie', and one that doth zelously detest the beastlie vyce of droonken∣nesse: This small worke is therefore so much the meeter to bee dedicated vn∣to you: I present it, both for that re∣specte, and for mine owne discharge: and therewithall the Coppies of the

workes before named: I dyd often reueale, but neuer preuayled, in the errande which my brother Iohn com∣mytted to my sollycytyng when wee last were together. I praye you accept my good wyll in all things: and soone after Mgihelmas (by Gods leaue) I wyll see you. The God of our Forefathers continue his mercye and grace to vs all, now and euer.
From my lodging in London, the. 10. of August. 1576.

