


RIght honorable, noble, and my singular good Lorde: if mine abilitie were any way correspondent too the iust desires of my hart, I should yet thinke al the same vnable to deserue the least parte of your goodnesse: in that you haue alwayes deygned with chearefull looke to regarde me, with affabylitie to heare me, with exceeding curtesy to vse me, with graue aduice to directe mee, with ap∣parant loue to care for me, and with assured assistance to protect me. All which when I do remēber, yet it stirreth in me an exceeding zeale to deserue it: and that zeale begetteth bashefull dreade too performe it. The dread is ended in dolours, and yet those dolours receiue the very same affection, whiche firste moued in mee the desire to honour and esteme you. For whiles I bewayle mine own vnworthy∣nesse, and therewithal do set before mine eyes the lost time of my youth mispent, I seeme to see a farre of (for my comfort) the high and triumphant vertue called Magnanimitie, accōpanied with industrious diligēce. The first doth encourage my faynted harte, and the seconde doth beginne (already) to employ my vnderstan∣ding, for (ahlas my good Lorde) were not the cordial of these two pretious Spice∣ries, the corrosyue of care woulde quickely confounde me.
I haue misgouerned my youth, I confesse it: what shall I do then? shall I yelde to mysery as a iust plague apointed for my portion? Magnanimitie saith no, and Industrye seemeth to be of the very same opinion.
I am derided, suspected, accused, and condemned: yea more than that, I am ry∣gorously reiected when I proffer amendes for my harme. Should I therefore di∣spayre? shall I yeelde vnto iellosie? or drowne my dayes in idlenesse, bycause their beginning was bathed in wantonnesse? Surely (my Lord) the Magnanimitie of a noble minde will not suffer me, and the delightfulnesse of dilygence doth vtterly forbydde me.
Shal I grudge to be reproued for that which I haue done in deede, when the

sting of Emulation spared not to touche the worthy Scipio with most vntrue sur∣myses? Yea Themistocles when he had deliuered al Greece from the huge host of Xerxes, was yet by his vnkinde citizens of Athens expulsed from his owne, and constrained to seeke fauour in the sight of his late professed enemie, But the Mag∣nanimitie of their mindes was such, as neither could aduersytie ouercome them, nor yet the iniurious dealing of other men coulde kindle in their brestes any least sparke of desire, to seeke any vnhonorable reuenge.
I haue loytred (my lorde) I confesse, I haue lien streaking me (like a lubber) when the sunne did shine, and now I striue al in vaine to loade the carte when it raineth. I regarded not my comelynes in the Maymoone of my youth, and yet now I stand prinking me in the glasse, when the crowes foote is growen vnder mine eye. But what?
Aristotle spent his youth very ryotously, & Plato (by your leaue) in twenty of his youthful yeares, was no lesse addicted to delight in amorous verse, than hee was after in his age painful to write good precepts of moral Phylosophy. VVhat shoulde I speake of Cato, who was ode before he learned lattine letters, and yet became one of the greatest Oratours of his time? These examples are sufficient to proue that by industrie and diligence any perfection may be attained, and by true Magnanimitie all aduersitie are easye to be endured. And to that ende (my verie good lorde) I do here presume thus rudely to rehearse them. For as I can be con∣tent to confesse the lightnesse wherewith I haue bene (in times past) worthie to be burdened, so would I be gladde, if nowe when I am otherwise bent, my better en∣deuors might be accepted. But (alas my lorde) I am not onely enforced stil to ca∣rie on my shoulders the crosse of my carelesnesse, but there withall I am also put to the plonge, too prouide (uen nowe) weapons wherewith I maye defende all heauy frownes, deepe suspects, and dangerous detractions. And I finde my selfe so feeble, and so vnable to endure that combat, as (were not the cordialles before re∣hearsed) I should either cast down  armoure and hide myselfe like a recreāt, or else (of a malicious stubbornesse) should busie my braines with some Stratagem for to execute an enuious reuenge vpon mine aduersaries.
But neither wil Magnanimitie suffer me to become vnhonest, nor yet can In∣dustrie see me sinke in idlenesse.
For I haue learned in sacred scriptures to heape coles vppon the heade of mine enemie, by honest dealing: and our sauiour himselfe hath encoraged me, saying that I shal lacke neither workes nor seruice, although it were noone dayes before I came into the Market place.
These things I say (my singular good lorde) do renewe in my troubled minde the same affectiō which first moued me to honor you, nothing doubting but  your

fauorable eyes will vouchsafe to beholde me as I am, and neuer be so curious as to enquire what I haue bene.
And in ful hope therof, I haue presumed to present your honour with this Satyre written without rime, but I truste not without reason. And what soeuer it bee, I do humbly dedicate it vnto your honorable name, beseeching the same too accept it with as gratious regarde, as you haue in times past bene accustomed too beholde my trauailes. And (my good Lorde) though the skorneful do mocke me for a time, yet in the ende I hope to giue them al a rybbe of roste for their paynes. And when the vertuous shall perceiue indeede how I am occupied, then shall detraction be no lesse ashamed to haue falsely accused me, than light credence shal haue cause to re∣pent his rashe conceypt: and Grauitie the iudge shal not be abashed to cancel the sentence vniustly pronounced in my condemnation. In meane while I remaine amongst my bookes here at my poore house in VValkamstowe, where I praye daylie for speedy aduauncement, and con∣tinuall prosperitie of your good Lord∣ship. VVritten the fiftenth of April, 1576.

