



WORSHIPFVLL AND
beloued in Christ; At the
solemne knitting of you
togither, was this Sermon
preached by that worthy
Seruant of God, and our common frend,
now with God, then first (as I haue heard
him say) performing that office that then
he did. Which of late lighting vpon, among
other his loose papers, I thought it would
not be amisse rather to send it abroad, then
to suffer it (as it might soone perhaps other∣wise)
to miscary and so perish▪ The piety

and pithines of the discourse it selfe seemed
to require no lesse of me: that which any
indicious & religious, I assure my self, will
with me easily acknowledge. The rarity
likewise of the subiect the rather encited
me thereunto. He treadeth a tracke not so
vsually beaten. Of Mariage Sermons, that
entreat of Mariage duties, there are extant
not a few. Such as handle the religious ma∣naging
of Mariage Feasts, I suppose not
many; I remember not to haue seene any.
It is that, that this holy Man of God doth
here principally insist vpon: and it is a
point very necessarie, and of no small vse.
For to let passe that grosse abuse, too too
frequent among the prophaner sort, that
esteeme such meetings neuer well seasoned,
or aright celebrated, vnlesse filthy discourse
andQualia fuerunt veterum quorundā Epithalamia: & Iescenini versus de quibus Festus & Seruius ad Aen. l. 7. non, vt illi, ab opi∣do Campano; nec à fascino, credo, de∣pellendo sic dicti; sed à fascino, quod obscoenitatis notio∣em habeat apud Horat. epod. 8. & Varro orig. lib. 6. obscene songs be as common as any
ordinarie seruice; as if they were not dea∣ling
with a sacred ordinance of God, but
were about the sacrilegious rites of some
impure Idoll; and so, like the idolatrous
Iewes, that turned b Bethel into c Beth-aven,
making a Brothel-house of a Bride-house:
As also to passe by the brutish and swinish

disposition of those that thinke there is no
true welcome, nor good fellowship, as they
tearme it, vnlesse there be deepe carousing
and drinking of healths to Bride and Bride∣groome,
and euery idle fellowes Mistris, till
the whole companies wits be so. Synes. de insom. Mergit mentē ex∣trema potatio. Sen. ep. 12. Vnde  dixit Pytha∣goras;  Chrysippus; Ebrietatē insaniam voluntariam Au∣gustinus ad sacr. virg. & Basilius Ebriū . drownd
in drinke, that not religion onely, but. quod de Ira. nescio quis apud Plut. rea∣son
it selfe is vtterly exiled, and the meeting
may well seeme to be rather a drunken
match then a Mariage Feast. To let passe,
I say, the palpable loosenes and lewdnes of
such: euen the best at such meetings are
too prone by ouer-sight, and forgetfulnes
of their dutie to ouer-shoot themselues, and
to exceed that Christian decorum that in
such solemnities ought to be obserued. It
was not without cause thatIob 1. 5. Iob was so iea∣lous
of his Children, what time they held
their mutuall meetings of somewhat the
like nature.Eccles. 11. 7, 10. Youth, andProv. 23. 31, 32 wine, and mirth,
and other delights, are pleasing and enti∣cing
obiects, andHinc Prouerbiū . Vino∣lentia clavum non habet. Eustath. O∣dyss. l. Et . Insanire facit sapientes copia vini. Sthenelus a∣pud Athen. dipnos. l. 10. . Homer. cary the wisest oft vna∣wares
further then Religion well warran∣teth.
. Clom. Alex. paedag lib. 2. cap. 1. Lgatur Plut. sympos. lib. 7. cap. 5, 7, 8. Which yet is not spoken simply to

condemne such solemnities: (It was wise∣ly
and wittily said of the Heathen Man,
that. De∣moerit. Amans life without festiuities,  like a∣long
and wearisome w without Innes:) but
to shew what neede there is o direction
and admonition for Christian cariage in
that kinde.. Plut. de aud. poet. Lycurgus did not well nor
wisely, when he cut downe all the vines in
his countrey, because the wine that came
of them was too much abused by many.
Neither ought Mariage Feasts to be vtter∣ly
abandoned, nor Musicke, or other ho∣nest
mirth be exiled and banished from
them, because too many ordinarily exceed
in the one, and not a few wretchedly abuse
the other. Yea, if mirth and festiuitie be
euer seasonable, it is at such times:Math. 9. 15. & 22▪ 1, 2. Genes. 29. 22. Ier. 7. 34. & 16. 9. & 25. 10 & 33. 11. Legatur Plutarch. sympos. l. 4. c▪ 3. Christ
himselfe and the Spirit of God yeeld and
approue it. Onely Christian. Hi∣rax de Iustitia apud Stob▪ cap 5. Sobriety ought
then to be both our. loan. 2. 8, 9. . Plut. sympos. l. 1. c. 4. qui tamen  pronunciat. Arbiter bibendi Horat. arm. 1. 3. In convivijs potandi (malè, putandi) Modiperatres magistri. Nonius ex Varrone rerum human. lib. 20. Feast-Master, and our
Mirth-Master, our Lord of Rule, not of
Misrule, to moderate both our diet and
our mirth at such meetings. And the ra∣ther
should Sobriety and Modestie be at

such times obserued, not onely in regard of
Heb. 13. 4. the holinesse and honourablenes of that
blessed Ordinance of God that then we
deale with, that we mayAct. 10. 15. not pollute that,
that God hath purified, nor dishonor that,
that he hath honoured; but for that also
we are then laying as it were the first foun∣dation
of a new Familie: and. Eurip. Herc. fur. the building
proueth commonly as the foundation is
well or euill laid.In solido extru∣endum. Vitruv. ar∣chitect. lib. 1. cap. 5. & lib. 3. cap. 3. It is euill building on
a quagmire; and laying a foundation in
wet weather. A sober and a modest en∣trance
giueth good hope of the like pro∣gresse;
as. Hinc Dio∣genes stolido & a∣menti adolescentu∣lo, . E∣brius pater te ge∣nuit. Plut. de liber. educ. the contrary is a foule presage
of euill after-demeanure. This how to
preuent is breifely, but effectually here
shewed. That which I haue therefore
thought fit to present You rather with, then
any other of the Authors frends; that
vnder your names that might come a∣broad
to the vse of others, that was prin∣cipally
at the first intended for your good;
and partly also thereby to renew with you
the remembrance of him, by whose holy
hand you were publikely at first ioyned
togither. Which coniunction God in mercy

of his good pleasure long continue, and
so blesse and sanctifie vnto you, that you
may haue mutuall comfort either in other
by sincere holinesse here, and eternall con∣iunction
either with other in perfect hap∣pinesse
els-where.

