



SIthens at my returne from Nor∣wich (Right worshipfull) you vouchsa∣fed to imparte vnto me your earnest de∣sire to vnderstand the order and manner how hir Maiestie was receyued into that worthy Citie: I am bold likewise to de∣cipher vnto your worship what occasion offered themselues to me vpon the same your request. First appeared to me the Maiestie of my Prince, which beautifieth her kingdome, as the bright shining beames of beautiful Phoebus decketh forth the earth: which gladded the hartes of the people there, as they no lesse laboured to trauayle forth to view the excellency of their soueraigne, than the true labouring Bee enforceth hir self in the Spring tyme (whē dame Flora first decketh the soile) to seeke their delights, and our pro∣fit, amongst the sweete smelling floures. Then the aboundant clemencie of hir highnes, receyuing the loyall hartes of hir lo∣uing people in parte, as good as their meaning deserued, so en∣flamed their former desires, as euery sparke kindled a bonfire. The Nobilitie delighting this Harmony, so endeuoured to hold in tune euery string of this heauenly Musike, as there semed but one hart in Queene, Counsaile, and Communaltie. The Mayor, Magistrates, and good Citizens employed their study and sub∣staunce



to holde on this happy beginning, the Prince had hir pleasure, the Nobilitie their desire, the whole traine such inter∣tainment: As for the tyme of hir continuance there, Norwich seemed (if any such there be) a terrestriall Paradise. But when the frowning Friday folowed, which called hir Maiestie thence, I leaue (because I am loth to tel) the dolour that was, to the re∣port of them that did see it. These all, right Worshipfull, vpon your demaund, presented themselues vnto me to be vttred, and these (I thinke) are the thinges which you desired to heare. And because I doubt not but that there are a great number of your vertuous mynd herein: to satisfie both thē and you, I haue here set forth what my final capacitie could collect (touching the pre∣misses) during the whole tyme of hir abode there. Accept my rude and rashe dealing in this my doyng, I beseech you, for that your Worshipfull request carieth me to my vttermost limite: wherein, though the sodaine chop of an vnskilfull Carer perhaps disquareth the strong tymber of this beautifull  yet let the skilfull eye of your worship and o∣ther learned Readers (to whome I submitte me) place the same to the best purpose, and holde my good will as recompence of my fault, and bynde me to them, and you for euer. Vale.

