



RIght louely and beloued in Christ;ungat Epistola, quos unxit con∣iugium: imo charta non divi∣dat, quos Chris necit amor. Hi∣ton. fere prefat, in Proverb. giue me leaue to in∣clude you both in one Dedi∣cation, whome heartie loue and affection hath conioyned togither, and whome Gods ne ordinance hath made one. At the time of  lmne knitting of you togither, there was  important considerations a dutie  absolutely necessarie, yet at

such times not vnseasonable. To supply that de∣fect, I make bold now to present you with some passages of such a subiect, as it is like, had then beene handled, if opportunitie had serued. They are raw notes of a Sermon long since made on the like occasion: Which finding by mee, and willing to imbrace any opportunitie of expressing my loue there in any degree, where I iustly owe so great a measure, I sud∣dainly reuised and prepared them for the prese. And albeit, in the reuising of them I obserued some defects, and could well haue beene content to haue taken further time and paines for the better polishing, and the more orderly digesting of them, as also for the speciall applying of them to your selues, to whome now they are addressed: yet I supposed it would bee much more conuenient and behoouefull, without fur∣ther delay, while the occasion is yet fresh, to present you with them as they are, that they might salute a New-married Couple at the en∣tring in of the New-yeere. An exact trea∣tise, or large discourse of Marriage Duties

(though the Title be such) I hope they will not expect, that shall vnderstand that they haue here but the Substance of one Sermon, deli∣uered, when it was, within the compasse of lit∣tle more then an houre, and vpon the recolle∣cting of my Meditations afterward, at the re∣quest of some, not much enlarged. And though I doubt not but you may meete with many profi∣table Treatises of the like Argument, yet I was desirous you should haue somewhat thereof from my selfe. The truth of God, I wot well, is the same, and deserueth all due regard, by whomsoeuer it is deliuered. But yet there is some efficacie added to it, when it is brought vs by those whome we specially affect, and of whome we are perswaded that they doe likewise in spe∣ciall manner affect vs. Of this mutuall affe∣ction betweene you both and my selfe, as there is in diuers respects very great and iust ground, so, I hope, there is no doubt at all made on either side of it. The assurance whereof if it may helpe to supply some defects that may be found in this vntimely birth, some good fruite, I

hope, by the reading of it may redound to you both. Much I heartily desire may daily, both by this and by all other good meanes, to all your friends ioy, your owne mutuall comfort here, and your eternall happinesse hereafter. With which vnfained desire I end for the pre∣sent, and rest.

