



Right Honourable,
WHat hath formerly beene offered to your RELIGI∣OVS eare, is now further presented to your IVDI∣CIOVS eie. Nei∣ther doubt I, but that, as it then found attentiue audience with the one, so it will now finde kinde welcome and acceptance with the other:

the rather it being, for the matter and sub∣stance of it▪ the message of Him in whose seate you sit, though brought by a weake and vnworthy Messenger, and deliuered in meane and vnpolished manner. Mes∣sages are wont to be respected and recei∣ued, and Presents esteemed and accepted more for the party from whom they come, then for the Person by whom they come, or for the manner of the deliuery of them. The matter, I hope, will not be altogether vnprofitable or vnfruitfull, though not handled so artificially or me∣thodically as it might, or as were meete But neither mine incessant incumbrances, and perpetuall distractions,  of body, variety of busines, and slender meanes of assistance, will afford leasure or liberty for any accurate and exact dis∣course: Nor is there much neede of Art to perswade godly regard and holy obedi∣ence, where the power of piety hath al∣ready in some good measure possessed the heart. The Truth of God cannot but finde good entertainment with all those that sincerely loue and like it, although it

come naked and bare, as  E∣rip. Phniss. Ve∣ritatis simplex ora∣tio est. Sn. Epist. 49.  ritati operam dat oratio incomposita debet esse & simplex. Ibid. 40. best beseemeth it, or but meanely attired, not bedecked and set out with such ornaments and dressings, as the naturall eye and eare only affect and regard. If in ought it seeme o∣uer-harsh vnto any, Cncti qui de∣runt mandatū sa∣crum, causam od in seipsis habent▪ omne illis fastidium non in legis praecep∣ti, sed in moribus sun. Salvian▪ ad Eccles. cathol. l. 4. the fault is in them∣selues, not in it. Mca 2. 7. The word of God, saith the Prophet, is good, yea and pleasant too, as  à  quod idem cum  the word vsed there signifieth, to euery one that walketh vprightly: Psal. 119. 103. as sweet as hony, yea Psal. 9. 11. sweeter then  distillatione favo∣rū. i. melle acoeto, siue maxi n landa∣bili, quòd è favo vltrò stillat. I. ex Plin. hist. net. l. 1. c. 15. the purest hony to such; as DA∣VID professeth of himselfe. But euen Ho∣ny it selfe, though of it selfe Pro. 24. 13. good and plea∣sant, and wholesome and medicinall, yet  Alex. Aphrodiss. problem. l. 2. 130. . Dion. Chrysost. orat. 57. causeth paine and smart to an exulcerate part: And . Idē ibid. children therfore that, at other times much desire it and crie for it, yet will not endure to haue it come neere their lips, when they haue sore mouthes. Quam d blanditur sibi & dulcis est iniquitas,  est veritas. Aug. de verb. D. 4. It is mans loue of his owne corruptions and impatience of cure, that maketh the word of God harsh and vnpleasant vnto any.

But there is no feare or doubt that ought here should in this kind be distastfull to your Lordship, whose discreet, and mode∣rate and vpright cariage in your place is so generally acknowledged and testified of all sorts. If at vacant houres your Lord∣ship shall vouchsafe to cast your eie on it, it shall be more then a sufficient recom∣pence of my paines in it. A monument it shall at least be of that duty, that I deser∣uedly owe vnto your Honour, and of my thankfull acknowledgement of that vn∣deserued fauour and countenance that your Lo: hath beene pleased from time to time to▪ vouchsafe mee, as well before, as since I came vnder the wing of your Ho∣nourable protection. And the Lord of Lords protect your Lordship, encrease in you his graces, direct you in your courses, and blesse you with long life and many good daies, to his glory, the publike good, your owne spirituall comfort in this life, and your eternall saluation after this life.

