



WORTHY SIR,
YOur earnest request, to have a Transcript of this rude and raw Discourse, sodainely conceived, and sorrily cemented, out of your affection to the par∣tie, whom in speciall man∣ner it concerned, could not but prevaile with me, to recollect it, while it was yet fresh in memorie, and to commit that to writing, as well as I could call it againe to mind, whereof I had no more then some generall heads and briefe notes scribled in a loose paper before:

mine obligations to you, and your interest in me, of right affording you power to command from me a greater matter then that your request amounted unto. And how Quod est potentissi∣mum impe∣randi genus; rogabat, qui jubere pote∣rat, Auson. Idyl. 13. powerfull requests are, backt with such engagements, it is both commonly well knowne, and generally acknowledged. But since your request therein satisfied, I have re∣ceived it backe againe from you, with significa∣tion of the importunitie of divers friends, who out of that respect they bare to the partie decea∣sed, while she lived, and desire of the continu∣ance of the memorie of her with them, have beene no lesse earnest suiters unto you, to have Copies from you of the same. Which being a worke over-troublesome, to make so many Transcripts, your second request was, that with my consent it might be made more publike. To which pur∣pose also, you had remitted it to me, that I might, if I were content to condescend thereunto, upon review of it, adde or alter in it what I should thinke fit, ere it came out. Now howsoever it was never intended by me for the Presle; nor indeed have I at present any desire or purpose, to adde ought in this kind to those things that I have published alreadie; nor did your former motion to me concerning it, extend it selfe any

further, then to have it as a , that is, as I understand it, a private Monument, to lye by you as a memoriall of her, whom not with∣out good ground you so entirely affected; nor can I yet deeme it (being so indigested a Piece) such as may be exposed to so publike view, with∣out some kind of censure: yet to give satis∣faction to your selfe, whom I owe so much to, and those friends of yours, that seeme so much to desire it, I have layd a Law upon my selfe, setting all disswasives aside, to give way there∣unto, if your mind shall continue still bent that way. And upon occasion hereof, I have indeed reviewed it, but altred nothing at all of mo∣ment, in the maine body of it; that those who were present at the deliverie in the Pulpit, might not reade any other then what they then heard: Onely the quotations of Scripture, and such shreds or parcels of exotike Language, as might be some rub to an English Reader, but had beene indifferent to your selfe, I have re∣moved into the Margine, and set on a little more Lace there, to make the Piece somewhat sutable to the rest of my Works, that are in hands abroad alreadie. So onely fourbished, I returne it againe entire to you, as by free do∣nation

your owne formerly; Sive tegen∣da habeas, sive legenda putes, Au∣son. ad Dre∣pan. to be disposed of by you, either for your owne private use, (which would best like me) or for the publike, as your selfe shall please. And thus with heartie wishes of all health and happinesse to you, as well in your present condition, as in the alteration of it also, if any hereafter shall ensue, I take leave, and rest

