



RIGHT HONOVRABLE,
SOme in their Dedicatories employ their Pen, not so much to craue Patronage, as to buy and purchase it by large (and happily de∣serued) commendation of those whose names and fauour they implore. How plentifull matter in this kind I might be furnished withall, they well know that are able to ballance your pietie, learning, and othervertues. But as Cato resolued to haue a mean Tombe, or none at al, that it might rather be asked, why he had no Monument, then why a sump∣tuous:
so in my speaking to & of your worthy selfe, rather would I be asked of many, why I said so little, thē of any one, why so much. I therefore here ad∣dresse my selfe to your Honour, by ap∣proach to that side onely which lyeth most conspicuous & opportune for my harbour, and that is the contemplati∣on of you as you are by his Maiestie ap∣pointed the worthy Head, and Master of that honourable Court, erected for the protection of those, who by reason of Nonage, are vnable to support them∣selues against iniury. In which imploy∣ment, out of your religious & vertuous resolutions, the world knows you most ready to do Iustice, and yeeld Protection, as by way of Iudicature vnto Orphanes, so also in a larger extent by way of fa∣uor & countenance to others that need the same, especially in cause of Religion.
My poore selfe, though not pleading either Wardable Tenure, or Infancie of years, yet in the generall as a Churchman, and in particular, as deuoted to doe all
the seruice I may for the maintenance of Religion established, presume to cast my selfe as a Ward into your tuition. First,
Ecclesia semper est pupilla. the Church by the Ciuil & Canon Lawes, is said to remaine in perpetuall pupillage, and iustly claimeth succour and defence from men in high place, as vnable to relieue it selfe against either those Corrupters that wil thrust in with strange fire, to pollute the Altar; or those Spoilers, that would cut short the skirts of Aarons cloathing. Then also for my personall case in regard of my disabili∣ties to vndertake so high a taske, I must needs acknowledge my selfe to bee a weake Infant, Puer sum, non possum loqui;
Ierem. 1.4. and the more liable to wrong, because incompassed with aduersaries exaspe∣rated against the Truth, and mee for speaking Truth.
Ezck. 2.6. Bryers and thornes are with mee, and I dwell amongst Scorpions, whose stings are the sharper bent a∣gainst my breast, because I haue indea∣uored to giue Antidotes vnto the Kings liege people, for their defence against
such balefull poyson, whereof my selfe haue formerly had a taste. Nor am I more by mine owne danger driuen, then by your goodnesse drawne to cast mine vnworthy selfe, and these my poore Labors into the bosome of your Protection. Though it bee perhaps none of my least faults, that without your Honours leaue I haue intruded vpon your Patronage, yet I cannot bee so mistrustfull in so good a cause, as to feare your either repulse, or offence.
In this good hope I craue your ho∣nourable Pardon and Fauour, alwayes praying God, whose cause I defend, whose truth you aduance, to prosper your Honour in all your laudable and religious indeauours.
London, Nouemb. the 11, 1624.

