


GAllant Gentlemen, and lustie youthes of this my natiue Countrey, I haue here (as you see) published in print suche Posies and rymes as I vsed in my youth, the which for the barbarousnesse of the stile may seeme worthlesse, and yet for the doubtfulnesse of some darke places they haue also seemed (heretofore) daūgerous. So that men may iustly both condemne me of rashnesse, and wonder at my simplicitie in suffering or pro∣curing the same to be imprinted.
A yong man well borne, tenderly fostered, and delicately ac∣companied, shall hardly passe ouer his youth without falling into some snares of the Diuell, and temptations of the flesh. But a man of middle yeares, who hath to his cost experimented the vanities of youth, and to his perill passed them: who hath bought repen∣tance deare, and yet gone through vvith the bargaine: who seeth before his face the tyme past lost, and the rest passing away in post: Such a man had more neede to be well aduised in his doings, and resolute in his determinations. For with more ease and greater fa∣uour may we answere for tenne madde follies committed in grene youth, than one sober ouersight escaped in yeares of discretion. Lycurgus the good princely Philosopher, ordeyned that if an olde man perceiuing a yong man to commit any dishonestie; did not re∣buke but suffer him: the aged shoulde be chastised, and the yong man should be absolued.
All this rehearsed and considered, you may (as I say) growe in some doubt, whether I were worse occupied in first deuising, or at last in publishing these toies & pamphlets: and much the rather, for
 that it is a thing commonly seene, that (nowe adayes) fewe or no things are so well handled, but they shall bee carped at by curious Readers, nor almost any thing so well ment, but may bee muche misconstrued.
And heerewithall I assure my selfe, that I shall bee generally condemned as a man verie lightly bent, and rather desyrous to continue in the freshe remembraunce of my follyes, than con∣tent too cancell them in obliuion by discontinuance: especially since in a house where many yong childrē are, it hath bene thought better pollicie quite to quench out the fire, than to leaue any loofe cole in the imbers, wherewith Babes may play and put the whole edifice in daunger.
But my lustie youthes, and gallant Gentlemen, I had an in∣tent farre contrarie vntoo all these supposes, when I fyrst permit∣mitted the publication heereof. And bycause the greatest of∣fence that hath beene taken thereat, is, least your mindes might heereby become enuenomed with vanities, therefore vnto you I will addresse my tale, for the better satisfying of common iudge∣ments. And vnto you I will explane, that which being before misti∣cally couered, and commonly misconstrued, might be no lesse pe∣rillous in seducing you, than greeuous euidence for to proue mee guiltie of condemnation.
Then to come vnto the matter, there are three sortes of men which (beeing wonderfully offended at this booke) haue founde therein three maner of matters (say they) verie reprehensible. The men are these: curious Carpers, ignorant Readers, and graue Phi∣losophers. The faults they finde are, Iudicare in the Creede: Chalke for Cheese: and the cōmon infection of Loue. Of these three sorts of men and matters, I do but very little esteeme the two first. But I deeply regarde the thirde. For of a verie troth, there are one kinde of people nowadayes which will mislyke any thing, being bred (as I thinke) of the spawne of a Crab or Creuish, which in all streames and waters will swimme eyther sidewayes, or flat backwards: and when they can indeede finde none other fault, will yet thinke Iu∣dicare verie vntowardlye placed in the Creede. Or (beeing a sim∣ple Sowter) will finde fault at the shape of the legge: or if they be
 not there stopped, they wil not spare to step vp higher, and say, that Apelles paynted Dame Venus verie deformed or euill fauoured.
Of this sort I make small accounte, bycause indeede they seeke a knotte in the Rushe, and woulde seeme to see verie farre in a Mylstone.
There are also certaine others, who (hauing no skill at all) will yet be verie busie in reading all that may bee read, and thinke it sufficient if (Parrot like) they can rehearse things without booke: when within booke they vnderstande neyther the meaning of the Authour, nor the sense of the figuratiue speeches, I will forbeare to recyte examples by any of mine owne doings. Since all compa∣risons are odious, I will not say how much the areignment and di∣uorce of a Louer (being written in ieast) haue bene mistaken in sad earnest. It shall suffice that the contentions passed in verse long si∣thence, betwene maister Churchyard and Camell, were (by a block∣headed reader) cōstrued to be indeed a quarell betwene two neigh∣bors. Of whom that one hauing a Camell in keping, and that other hauing charge of the Churchyard, it was supposed they had grown to debate, bicause the Camell came into the Churchyarde. Laugh not at this (lustie yonkers) since the pleasant dittie of the noble Erle of Surrey (beginning thus: In winters iust returne) was also con∣strued to be made indeed by a Shepeherd. VVhat shoulde I stande much in rehersall how the L. Vaux his dittie (beginning thus: I loth that I did loue) was thought by some to be made vpō his death bed? and that the Soulknill of M. Edwards was also written in extremi∣tie of sicknesse? Of a truth (my good gallants) there are such as ha∣uing only lerned to read English, do interpret Latin, Greke, French and Italian phrases or metaphors, euē according to their owne mo∣therly conception and childish skill. The which (bicause they take Chalke for Cheese) shall neuer trouble me, whatsoeuer fault they finde in my doings.
But the third sort (beeing graue Philosophers, and finding iust fault in my doings at the common infection of loue) I must needes alledge suche iuste excuse as may counteruayle their iuste com∣playnts. For else I shoulde remayne woorthie of a seuere punish∣ment. They wysely considering that wee are all in youth
 more apt to delight in harmefull pleasures, then to disgest whole∣some and sounde aduice, haue thought meete to forbid the publi∣shing of any ryming tryfles which may serue as whetstones to shar∣pen youth vnto vanities.
And for this cause, finding by experience also, how the first Co∣pie of these my Posies hath beene verie much inquired for by the yonger sort: and hearing likewise that (in the same) the greater part hath beene written in pursute of amorous enterpryses, they haue iustly conceyued that the continuance thereof hath beene more likely to stirre in all yong Readers a venemous desire of va∣nitie, than to serue as a common myrrour of greene and youthfull imperfections. VVherevnto I must confesse, that as the industrious Bee may gather honie out of the most stinking weede, so the mali∣cious Spider may also gather poyson out of the fayrest floure that growes.
And yet in all this discourse I see not proued, that either that Gardener is too blame which planteth his Garden full of fragrant floures neyther that planter to be dispraysed: which soweth all his beddes with seedes of wholesome herbes: neyther is that Orchard vnfruitfull, which (vnder show of sundrie weedes) hath medicina∣ble playsters for all infirmities. But if the Chirurgian which should seeke Sorrell to rypen an Vlcer, will take Rewe which may more inflame the Impostume, then is hee more to blame that mistooke his gathering, than the Gardener which planted aright, and presen∣ted store and choyse to be taken. Or if the Phisition will gather hote Perceley in stead of cold Endiue, shall he not worthily beare the burthen of his owne blame?
To speake English, it is your vsing (my lustie Gallants) or mis∣vsing of these Posies that may make me praysed or dispraysed for publishing of the same. For if you (where you may learne to auoyd the subtile sandes of wanton desire) will runne vpon the rockes of vnlawfull lust, then great is your folly, and greater will growe my rebuke. If you (where you might gather wholesome hearbes to cure your sundrie infirmities) will spende the whole day in gathe∣ring of sweete smelling Posies, much will be the time that you shal mispende, and much more the harme that you shall heape vpon my
 heade. Or if you will rather beblister your handes with a Nettle, then comfort your senses by smelling to the pleasant Marioram, then wanton is your pastime, and small will be your profite.
I haue here presented you with three sundrie sortes of Posies: Floures, Hearbes, and VVeedes. In which diuision I haue not ment that onely the floures are to bee smelled vnto, nor that onely the VVeedes are to be reiected. I terme some Floures, bycause being indeed inuented vpon a verie light occasion, they haue yet in them (in my iudgement) some rare inuention and Methode before not commonly vsed. And therefore (beeing more pleasant than profi∣table) I haue named them Floures.
The seconde (being indeede morall discourses, and reformed in∣uentions, and therefore more profitable than pleasant) I haue na∣med Hearbes.
The third (being VVeedes) might seeme to some iudgements, neither pleasant nor yet profitable, and therefore meete to bee cast away. But as many weedes are right medicinable, so may you find in this none so vile or stinking, but that it hath in it some vertue if it be rightly handled. Mary you must take heede how you vse thē. For if you delight to put Hemlocke in your fellowes pottage, you may chaunce both to poyson him, and bring your selfe in perill. But if you take example by the harmes of others who haue eaten it before you, then may you chaunce to become so warie, that you will looke aduisedly on all the Perceley that you gather, least a∣mongst the same one braunch of Hemlock might anoy you.
I assure you, my yong blouds, I haue not published the same to the intent that other men hereafter might be infected with my follies forepassed. For though it be a comfort in miserijs habere consortem, yet is it small consolation to a fellon, to haue a Coyner hanged in his companie. And I assure you (although you will think it straunge) that I haue not caused them to bee imprinted for anie vaine delight which I haue (my selfe) therein conceyued. For the most of them being written in my madnesse, might haue yeelded then more delight to my frantike fansie to see them published, than they now do accumulate cares in my minde to set them forth cor∣rected: and a deformed youth had bene more likely to set them to
 sale long sithence, than a reformed man can be able now to pro∣tect them with simplicitie.
The scope of mine intent, and the marke whereat I shoote is double. I meane grounded vpon two sundrie causes: the one that being indebted vnto the worlde (at the least fiue thousande dayes verie vainly spent) I may yeeld him yet some part of mine account in these Poemes. VVherein as he may finde great diuersitie both in stile and sense, so may the good bee incouraged to set mee on worke at last, though it were noone before I sought seruice. The other reason is, that bicause I haue (to mine owne great detriment) mispent my golden time, I may serue as ensample to the youthfull Gentlemen of England, that they runne not vpon the rocks which haue brought me to shipwracke. Beware therefore, lustie Gallants, howe you smell to these Posies. And learne you to vse the talent which I haue highly abused. Make me your myrrour. And if here∣after you see me recouer mine estate, or reedifie the decayed walls of my youth, then beginne you sooner to builde some foundation which may beautifie your Pallace. If you see me sinke in distresses (notwithstanding that you iudge me quick of capacitie) then lerne you to mainteyne your selues swimming in prosperitie, and eschue betymes the whirlepoole of misgouernment.
Finally, I beseech you, and coniure you, that you rather encou∣rage me to accomplish some worthier trauaile, by seeing these Po∣sies right smelled vnto, than discourage me from attempting other labours, when I shall see these first fruites reiected or misused. I haue corrected them from sundrie faultes. VVhich if they had not brought suspition in the first copie, be you then out of doubt you had neuer bene troubled with these seconde presents, nor persua∣ded to flourishe wisely with a two edged swoorde in your naked hands. But as I haue ment them well, so I craue of God, that they may both pleasure and profite you for the furtherance of your skill in any commendable enterprise.
From my poore house at VVal∣tamstow in the Forest the second of Ianuarie. 1575
