



RIght deere, and
vnfeinedly belo∣ued
in Christ Ie∣sus,
I haue a long
time much desi∣red
some good
occasion of testi∣fying
mine hearty affection to your
selues in particular among others of

that Familie, which I acknowledge
my selfe so deeply indebted vnto. And
I seeme now at length to haue lighted
on that, that I haue so long longed for.
Being to publish a wedding Sermō
of a worthy Frend deceassed,Mr. W. Br. (which
I wish, if Gods good will had so bin,
he had liued to doe himselfe) contey∣ning
matter concerning the holy dispo∣sition
& Christian managing of Ma∣riage
Feasts; I thought good to ad∣ioyne
to it (being it selfe but short)
some Meditations of mine owne, of
somewhat a neere subiect, the occasion
of such Feasts, to wit, A good Wife,
by Salomon said to be Gods Gift.
That which here I addresse vnto you,
as to remaine a Monument of mine
hearty well-wishing vnto you, so to
abide by you, as a Monitor to put you
both in minde, what a blessing of God

you enjoy either in other, and what
cause you haue to be thankfull to him
either for other. Since it pleased God
by his prouidence and your Frends a∣greement
to bring you togither, and to
knit that sacred knot betweene you, I
haue not yet bin so happy, as to be an
eye-witnes of your Christian & religi∣ous
cohabitation & conversation: but
haue by many bin informed of it, to
my great ioy, that you tread both in
the steps of your pious Parents, and
therein shew your selues to be their
Children,Rom. 9. 8. not according to the
flesh onely, but (which would haue
bin their greatest comfort, had they
survived to haue seene it, and shall be
your cheifest happines both here and
hereafter) according to the pro∣mise,
euen of eternall saluation, an∣nexed
to the gratious Couenant of

Faith in Christ; which by your god∣ly
practise you shew your selues to haue
common interest in with them. And
indeed to speake in the Holy Ghosts
language, thenEorum filij dici∣mur, quorum actus imitamur. Origen. in Ezech. hom. 4. & Greg. Rom. mor. lib. 20. cap. 17. are we truly the Chil∣dren
of our religious Parents and An∣cestors,
when in goodnes and godlines
we take after those that we come of.
Ioh. 8. 39. Etiam virtus fecit mihi fratrem Iesum, pa∣trem Abraham. O∣rigen. in Ezech. hō. 8. & in Rom. c. 4. They are Abrahams Children,
that doe Abrahams works; and
Rom. 4. 12, 23. Israel spiritalis à carnali, non nobili∣tate patriae, sed no∣uitate gratiae, nec gente, sed mente di∣stinguitur. Aug. doctr. Chr. l. 3. c. 34. that tread in the steps of Abra∣hams
Faith, who is the Father of
all the Faithfull. Those that take
other courses, and degenerate, (as. Ho∣mer. Odyss. . Eurip. Heracl. Hīc Demo∣sthenes, . Aristid. in Cimon. Et inde diverbium, . Neminem prope mag∣norum virorum filium optimum reliquisse satis claret Tales pleri{que} habuerunt, vt melius fuerit de rebus humanis sine posteritate discedere. Spartian in Severo. too
many do,) from the Faith and Piety
of their Parents, are in Gods account,
as our Sauiour termeth the Iewes, but
. Matth. 12. 39. & 16. 4. Spuria soboles: vt rectè Piscat. a bastardly brood; ratherEzech. 16. 3. non de eorum se∣mine, sed de imitatione generati. Greg. mor. l. 20. c. 11. quibus eos non necessitudo, sed morum si∣militudo iungebat. Origen. in Rom. 4. Hit∣tites

and Canaanites, thenRom. 6. 6, 7. Vide Aug. epist. 200. right
Hebrews, orIoh. 1. 47. true Israelites, though
they come of Abraham or Israel ei∣ther
after the flesh. They are not
Galat. 6. 16. Psal. 128. 6. & 125. 5. the Israel of God, vnto whom the
blessing is promised of mercy and
peace; yea ofEsai. 26. 3 & 57. 19. peace, peace; that
is, ofPsal. 119. 165. much peace,Ioh. 14. 27. true peace,
Pacem omnimo∣dam. Iun. all manner of peace, such peace
as noEsai 48. 22. & 57. 21. wicked one euer had or can
haue. WhichPhilip. 4. 7. peace far surpassing
all humane conceipt, that you may
constantly retaine in part here, and
attaine finally vnto the full fruition
of it hereafter; hold on, I beseech
you, in that good course, that by Gods
goodnes you haue already entred into,
and haue made some good progresse in.
Hold on, I say: yea hold out: For
Matth. 24. 13. Apoc. 2. 10. it is holding out to the end, that
must bring you to1. Petr. 1. 9. the end of your





Faith, the saluation of your
Soules. And that you may so do; (be∣cause
standing still is dangerous; and
Vnum è duobus necesse est, aut pro∣ficere, aut prorsus deficere. Bern. in Cant. vnlesse daily we win ground, we soone
fall behind hand and goe backward;)
let it be your continuall care and con∣stant
endeuour2. Pet. 3. 18. to grow in grace &
in the knowledge of our Lord and
Sauiour Iesus Christ; to whom be
glory both now and for euer: And
to whose holy protection committing
you and yours now and for euer, I take
leaue of you for the present, and rest
in Him.

