



SIR,
FRom me perhaps you expected Physicall Aphorismes, rules and directions for health, as

from a Physician; rather then Theologicall Aphorismes, doctrines of salvation, as from a Divine. And, I confesse, con∣sidering my Profession, it had been more proper for me to have sent over such unto you. But such is the nature and condition of man, whilest he lives here be∣low, under the clouds, that no Profession can Priviledge him from storms and tempests, and from injuries of weather: Inso∣much that even Physicians themselves many times become Patients. The Great world is a Theatre in which are Acted nothing but Tragedies of hu∣mane miseries: Every man hath his Intrat, as soon as he is born: He Acts (if I may call it Act∣ing, and not rather Suffering) all his life: He findes no Exit, till he descends into the cham∣bers of death, to put off his dresse.

I may truely call The Great world, The Common school of Patience; and every Socie∣tie, a Private; and every Per∣son in each Societie being a Little world within himself, an Epitome, or Module of the Great. To School we must, to learn Patience: And where should a man learn Christian Patience but in the School of Christ? And where is that but in the Scripture and Books of Devotion? I for one have been so exercised in a World of Suf∣ferings, that it hath driven me to the School of Christ to learn Patience, and according to the counsell of the Apostle, In all estates to be content, and trou∣bled at nothing whatsoever can happen to me from without, con∣sidering that nothing comes to passe without a divine Provi∣dence. Apollonius, as Philo∣stratus

reports, being asked if he did not tremble at the sight of the Tyrant, made this answer,  God which hath given him a terrible Countenance, hath given also unto me an undaun∣ted Heart. And it is the say∣ing of Saint Chrysostome,  It is not so much the nature of Things, as the weaknesse of Persons. Troubles happen alike to all: but all are not alike troubled. Fire is one and the same for Nature: but for Ef∣fect it is not alwaies the same. It consumes wood and cole: but it purifies gold and silver. The Sunne softens wax, and hardens clay. The Light is comfortable to the sound, but troublesome to

the diseased. The saying of A∣pollonius I may apply thus un∣to my self, Though God hath suf∣fered storms and tempests to a∣rise and to be stirred up against me, yet he hath not suffered me to be removed or cast down. Though Fortune frown upon me, yet (I thank God) having a chearfull heart I can smile upon her. And the saying of Saint Chrysostome I may thus apply, Though troubles have come upon me, yet (I thank God who hath given me Pati∣ence) I have not been trou∣bled. But amongst many crosses nothing hath more afflicted me then the death of him who true∣ly honoured you in his life, and was truely beloved by you to his death, my deare brother Fran∣cis Winterton late one of her Majesties Privie Chamber. Vn∣happy man! But shall I call

him unhappy in his death, who was most happy in his life? That I cannot: He that lived well, certainly could not but die well? Shall I call him unhappy, because he died in a strange Countrie? Nay rather happy in this, because he died for his Coun∣trie. Shall I call him unhappy in this, because he is taken from me? This were to love my self more then him, and to envie his happinesse. Or shall I grieve that I my self was not with him to take care for him for things necessarie in time of life, and for his funeralls after death? He wanted neither comfort in life, nor honourable buriall after death. Ever let my tongue be tyed and my hand dried up, If I do not as a poore scholar serve him with both who was so care∣full for him, I mean that most Heroicall worthie, (with the

splendour of whose Titles and Greatnesse I dare not presume to set a lustre on so small a work as this, but shall ever admire, and proclaim his Vertues & Goodnes) who of his innate and noble di∣sposition loved all his followers in generall, as his fellow-souldi∣ers, and my brother in speciall; who to his power provided for all, as for his own familie, but made much of him in health, as a faithfull servant; took care for him before his death, as for a friend; lamented for him a his death as for a brother; and after death, saw him honourably buri∣ed, as a souldier. I will not then lament his death, who is trans∣lated to a better life: Neither will I weep for him, that is in joy: Nor put on mourning clothes for him that is clothed with im∣mortalitie. If it was any unhap∣pinesse for him to die, it is his

friends not his. I wept for him when he was alive: and then he seemed to me to die when I left him on shipboard at Graves-end. The next news I heare, he lies buried at Custrin in Silesia. Whom sea and land and death hath parted, I hope blessed Eternitie shall at length bring together again. So I leave him and return to you. Sir, I hope you will pardon this di∣gression, or rather count it no digression at all, to speak of him whom I know you dearely loved. But I was speaking of my trou∣bles: for which still I finde a Re∣medie in the Sanctuarie. For my manner is, when troubles seize upon me, presently to re∣tire my self into my studie, and take in hand some book of devo∣tion. So presently after I parted from my brother I took in hand Drexelius his Enchiridion of

Eternitie: And since, upon a new occasion offered, I renewed my acquaintance with Doctor Gerhard. It were fit that I should present my service unto you my self in mine own person, consi∣dering my many obligations to you, and your kinde invitations of me. But being otherwise hin∣dred I have sent Gerhard in my place, who dedicates himself and his best service to honour you and your progenie. Concerning whom I may truely say thus much, If you make him your Counsellour and Companion, you shall never be without a walking Library: So full is he of Scripture Fathers and Schoolmen. Con∣cerning my self I can say no more but this (for I know not how to complement) I am and ever shall be in all hearty affection

