



LAdies (and most per∣fecte Ideas of all vertues,) I haue so many times admired your rare perfecti∣ons, brought from the Theater of the very best assemblies thorow Europe: that hauing com∣bated with mine owne naturall affec∣tions, which till then had no matter of maruaile offered them; of necessity now must needes (by right confesse) that you are the onely wonders of time and eternity. And that I am not misse-led heerein, Mercurius Tris∣megistus stands foorth in your cause, and thus defends yee against all your enemies.
A soule enclosed within a body, pure∣ly celestiall, where the notes of whatsoeuer disanulling, are not to be discerned, be∣cause their period can alter no part of a true nature: For no way are her ordinary functions weakned, but onely in strength∣ning the vertue of the minde. So that she is no way to bee dissolued, but may well chaunge into a forme more conuenable, and agreeing with the quality of her De∣mon.
Ladies, you are such as Sappho de∣scribes ye to be.
With child of Honor, rich in all good grace,
Splendant in vertue, which them both surpasse,
A piercing eye, and carried with such state:
As the worlds Torch may light it selfe thereat.
Euen as Apollo from Auroraes lookes,
Gildes all this goodly rounde, & darkest nookes.
And to giue you certaine assurance, that such is mine opinion, I haue roughly hewen out this discourse, ex∣tracted from the vertues of your sexe:

to the end, that by the histories of ma∣ny women, euery man whatsoeuer may perfectly perceyue, that the gifts and graces of women are infinite, and where they can alleadge any doubt in the religion of your desertes: being heerein resolued, you may remaine so much the more admired.
I might call it a Paradoxe, because some men (vainely transported) no doubt will tearme it so: Notwith∣standing, I holde it for a truth, and will defend it against all sortes of men, let them be of what mettall soeuer; being fully perswaded, that if I had no other argument for proofe of my sayings, then the very meere subiect of your choyse perfections: I should fi∣nish my desseignes with no meane honour, and make them perfecte beyonde all other humaine enter∣prises.
Receiue then this gadge of mine humble duty, or rather of the vertue of your owne deseruings: and I shall

binde all my hability to a further im∣ployment, eyther of enlarging this, or any thing else wherein I may doe you seruice.

