



AMong the manifold creatures of God (right Honora∣ble, and my singular good Lord) that haue all in all ages diuersly entertained manv excellent wits, and drawne them to the contemplation of the diuine wis∣dome, none haue prouoked mens studies more, or sa∣tisfied their desires so much as Plants haue done, and that vpon iust and worthy causes; For if delight may prouoke mens labor, what greater delight is there than to behold the earth apparelled with plants, as with a robe of embroidered worke, set with Orient pearles, and garnished with great  of rare and costly iewels? If this varietie and perfection of colours may affect the eye, it is such in herbs and floures, that no A∣pelles, no Zeuxis euer could by any art expresse the like: if odours or if taste may worke satisfaction, they are both so  in plants, and so comfortable, that no confection of the Apothecaries can equall their excellent vertue. But these delights are in the outward sences: the principall delight is in the minde, siugu∣larly enriched with the knowledge of these visible things, setting forth to vs the inuisible wisedome and admirable workmanship of almighty God. The delight is great, but the vse greater, and ioyned often with necessity. In the first ages of the world they were the ordinarie meate of men, and haue continued euer since of necessaire vse both for meates to maintaine life, and for medicine to recouer health. The hidden vertue of them is such, that (as Pliny noteth) the very bruite

Pli. li. . ca. 27.
Ibid, . 22. c. 2.

 beasts haue found it out: and (which is another vse that he obserues) from thence the Dyars tooke the beginning of their Art.
Furthermore, the necessary vse of these fruits of the earth doth plainly appeare by the great charge and care of almost all men in planting and maintaining of gar∣dens, not as ornaments onely, but as a necessarie prouision also to their houses. And here beside the , to speake againe in a word of delight, gardens, especial∣ly such as your Honor hath, furnished with many rare Simples, do singularly de∣light, when in them a man doth behold a flourishing shew of Sommer beauties in the midst of Winters force, and a goodly spring of floures, when abroad a leafe is not to be seene. Besides these and other causes, there are many examples of those that haue honored this science: for to passe by a multitude of the Philoso∣phers, it may please your Honor to call to remembrance that which you know of some noble Princes, that haue ioyned this study with their most important mat∣ters  of state: Mithridates the great was famous for his knowledge herein, as 
Plut.  . adul & .

 noteth. Euax also King of Arabia, the happy garden of the world for princi∣pall Simples, wrot of this argument, as Pliny sheweth. Diocletian likewise, might

Plin. lib. 25.
cap. 2,

 haue had his praise, had he not drowned all his honour in the bloud of his perse∣cution. To conclude this point, the example of Solomon is before the rest, and greater, whose wisedome and knowledge was such, that hee was able to set out the nature of all plants from the highest Cedar to the lowest Mosse. But my very good , that which sometime was the study of great Philosophers and migh∣tie Princes, is now neglected, except it be of some few, whose spirit and wisdome hath carried them among other parts of wisedome and counsell, to a care and stu∣die of speciall herbes, both for the furnishing of their gardens, and furtherance of their knowledge: among whom I may iustly affirme and publish your Honor to be one, being my selfe one of your seruants, and a long time witnesse thereof: for vnder your Lordship I haue serued, and that way employed my principall study and almost all my time, now by the space of twenty yeares. To the large and sin∣gular furniture of this noble Island I haue added from  places all the va∣rietie of herbes and floures that I might any  obtaine, I haue laboured with the soile to make it fit for plants, and with the plants, that they might delight in the soile, that so they might liue and prosper vnder our clymat, as in their natiue and proper countrey: what my successe hath beene, and what my furniture is, I leaue to the report of them that haue  your Lordships gardens, and the lit∣tle plot of myne owne especiall care and husbandry. But because gardens are priuat, and many times finding an ignorant or a negligent successor, come soone to ruine, there be that haue sollicited me, first by my pen, and after by the Presse to make my Labors common, and to free them from the danger whereunto a gar∣den is subiect: wherein when I was ouercome, and had brought this History or report of the nature of Plants to a iust volume, and had made it (as the Reader may by comparison see) richer than former Herbals, I found it no question vnto whom I might  my ; for considering your good Lordship, I found none of whose fauor and  I might sooner presume, seeing I haue found you euer my very good Lord and Master. Again, considering my duty and your Honors merits, to whom may I better recommend my Labors, than to him vnto whom I owe my selfe, and all that I am able in any seruice or  to per∣forme? Therefore vnder hope of your Honorable and accustomed fauor I pre∣sent this Herball to your Lordships protection; and not as an exquisite Worke (for I know my meannesse) but as the greatest gift and chiefest argument of duty that my labour and seruice can affoord: where of if there be no other fruit, yet this is of some vse, that I haue ministred Matter for Men of riper wits and deeper iudgements to polish, and to adde to my large additions where any thing is de∣fectiue, that in time the Worke may be perfect. Thus I humbly take my leaue, beseeching God to grant you yet many dayes to liue to his glory, to the support of this State vnder her Maiestie our dread , and that with great encrease of honor in this world, and all fulnesse of glory in the world to come.

