



IT was the answer of Vespasian to Apol∣lonius desiring en∣trance and accesse for Dion and Euphrates two Philosophers: . My gates are alwayes open to Philoso∣phers: but my very breast is open unto thee. What Vespa∣sian professed in word to A∣pollonius, the late Reverend Dean of SALISBURY hath performed indeed to me: The gates of his liberalitie and ho∣spitalitie

have never been bar∣red against scholars and stran∣gers: but the inward temple of his divine breast was un∣locked unto me, and through that I saw his heart flaming with affection towards me. The experience of that his di∣vine Philanthropie moved me formerly to desire entertain∣ment for a stranger, not doubt∣ing of his wonted Philoxenie, not for Dion or Euphrates the Philosophers, but for Gerard the Divine, having then new put on an English mans habit. I obtained my desire. At SA∣LISBURIE he was welcome. In citie and countrey after∣wards he found good enter∣tainment. After three yeares he came again to Cambridge. I furnished him with ink and paper. Then he resolved to take another progresse. On

New-yeares day I left him on his way to Rochester. He pro∣mised not to divert to any place till he had seen your Lordship, and presented my most humble service. Happy Gerard, that may see your Lordship. O that I might but see once again those heavenly eyes whose first aspect and in∣fluence blessed me! O that I might but kisse those saving hands which raised me! O that I might but visit that temple, and worship that di∣vine breast, where my soul found sanctuary! If Gerard may, in part I shall. That which I cannot see with mine eyes, my dayly thoughts shall present unto me: Him whom I cannot reverence with cap and knee, I will alwayes ho∣nour in heart and minde: whi∣ther with the feet of my bodie

I cannot walk, I will travel with all dutifull affection. But what shall I do to expresse my thankfulnesse? He that hath scap'd shipwrack will hang up his sails to Neptune for a mo∣nument: I have none other sails but such as are made of thin paper, and those scarce yet drie. He that hath passed through the pikes, and is come off safe and sound, will offer a  unto Salus: I have no other  but my self: and that is but a poore scholars service. He that is recovered of a dangerous sicknesse, will do his devotions at Aescula∣pius his temple: My prayers shall alwayes be directed to Almighty God, who hath the hearts of all men in his hands, who opened the good Dean of SALISBURIES heart unto me: Unto him shall my pray∣ers

early and late be directed, to open unto the Bishop of ROCHESTER the treasury of all blessings temporall and eternall: And I hope the Reverend Fa∣ther in God will accept this tribute of a devout soul. Serva∣tus hath nothing else to give: But he shall alwayes remain

