



Much Honoured, &c.
I Make bold to joyn you both in this Epistle, whom GOD hath lincked with those firm bonds of Nature, Affection, and especially true Religion, which is a threefold Cord not easily broken. I know you both would be heartily glad to see her Picture, for whose
sake I have set Pen to paper at this present. But I am con∣sident, that no Limner could draw her to the life, because she was all glorious within,
Psal. 45.13. and her life hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3.
Therefore seeing she must bee represented rather by a Penne than a Pensil, I have en∣deavoured to set before your eyes such a rude draught, as my present, and urgent occa∣sions would suffer me to make at her Funerall. And because those Peeces please the judi∣cious best, which are rather true than rich, or gaudy, I have studyed to set her forth in her owne proper colours, not with garish Eloquence, and gaudy words, but in that language, which shee best li∣ked.
Now that I may speake a
word in season to you in se∣verall. First, for you her deare Mother, in the mid∣dest of all your mourning let this solace your soule and spi∣rit, that you were not onely the Mother of such a daugh∣ter, but had an hand in ma∣king her a daughter of Abra∣ham, yea of Almighty God. Your good instructions, and example, in frequenting the house of God, &c. were a maine motive, (no doubt) to make her in love with that good Word of GOD, which wrought so effectually, and in a manner miraculously in her, therfore you have much more cause of joy and gladnesse, than of griefe and heavinesse. If all Parents would but give such example as you have done, both at home and in Gods house, ô what holy and
happy houses, and congrega∣tions should we have! what thronging and crowding would there bee in most Churches, which now are al∣most empty oftentimes! But when most Parents provide rather for their Childrens bodies than soules, making much of the Carkas, neglect∣ing the Conscience, no mer∣vaile that there is so little hope in most of their Poste∣ritie.
Goe on therfore with good successe as you have begun, and still doe more and more worthily in Israel. GOD hath given you an heart, not only to be a Favourer, which is easie, but a Follower, yea, and a Furtherer of those that hee hath sent into his Vine∣yard: the same Lord multiply his mercy, grace and spirit
upon you and yours, that you may still prove Noble pat∣ternes unto others.
And now good Madam, to returne to your Ladiship, I know you bare no small share of sorrow with your beloved Sister in this businesse, because you have a long time loved your deceased Kinswoman, as if shee had beene your owne daughter: witnesse those affe∣ctionate words of salutation, which you usually inserted into the Letters your Lady∣ship sent to her Mother, which ever had a speciall ac∣cent, and emphasis, when you came to her. Insomuch as I dare boldly say, you desire no∣thing more to your dearest daughters than such a dowry of grace and goodnesse as her heavenly Father had bestow∣ed on her.

For you knew her farre dif∣ferent from the disposition of other Gentlewomen, who make their soules slaves to their bodyes, and both soule and body, drudges to the world and the Devill, Be∣cause, whereas other women trouble themselves with many things like Martha, shee set her soule upon that one thing necessary, chusing with Mary that better part, which could not be taken from her, Luk. 10. last ver.
Shee was never more dili∣gent than when shee was to deale with GOD in his holy Ordinances, and in nothing so negligent, as in the world, and things of the world, and yet shee complained on her death bed, that she had beene too worldly, Alas! what cause then have wee to com∣plaine
of others, who dote so much upon the drosse and dung of the world, and make it no better than an Idoll!
That precious time which other Gentlevvomen vvick∣edly wast in tricking and trimming the body, she spe∣cially spent in decking and adorning the soule, for vvhat∣soever was to bee done, the soule should not be forgotten. And vvhereas others are ta∣ken up with faire buildings and stately houses, &c. shee mainely minded to beautifie her house, not only vvith the Forme of godlinesse, vvhich many families have,
2 Tim. 3.4. but most of all with the Power of god∣linesse, vvhich few regard. And hence vvas it that she so much desired to have the spe∣ciall care of Families commen∣ded unto others at her Fune∣rall.
For she set up her reso∣lution with worthy Ioshuah. Let others doe what they would,
Iosh. 24.15. follow the world, or serve their lusts, and the times. She and her house would serve the Lord.
Neither was shee afraid to owne Christ as many are, who think it more generous; to set up sports and pastimes, and follow pleasures &c. than set up Christ and his ordinances in their houses.
Moreover her charity did notably second her Piety, for not only the loynes of the poore but their bellyes,
Iob 31.20. Shee was willing to heale their sores, and helpe their souls giving them good instructi∣ons as well as plasters. and backes did blesse her, as Job speakes, yea, their legges and hands, their eyes and cares, did pronounce her blessed. So that we have great cause to give God thanks for her work of faith, and labour of love, as the Apostle speaks,
1 Thes. 1.3. There be some, that have Piety, but want Charity, such are but as sounding brasse and tinckling Cymbals, 1 Cor. 13.1. And some againe have a kinde of Charity; but care not for Pie∣tie, they give much Almes, but doe not give themselves to God, nor give over their sinnes. Such Saint Ambrose saith,
Multi sunt qui faciunt eleemosynā, & tamen peccare non cessant tisti quasi sua offerunt Deo & seip∣sos Diabolo. Amb. Ser. 12. give their goods to God, and them∣selves to the devill. But your worthy Kinswoman was none such, for first she gave her selfe to God as the Mace∣donians did, and then to Gods Messengers, and to the Saints, 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
What then though shee dyed a distastfull death by reason of her disease? Yet she left a most sweet smell and sa∣vour behinde her, even the precious oyntment of a good
Name, so that the day of her death was much better than the day of her birth, as Solo∣mon saith, in the same place, Eccles. 7.1. Whereas many others, that die of faire dis∣cases leave a noysome and un∣savoury sent behinde them, going out like the snuffe of a Candle.
This was that which made her so ready to resigne her will to Gods in greatest ex∣tremities, and towards her latter end, so much to long to goe home (as her words were) for shee made no more of death than a departing home, so that we saw her something troubled, when those that were about her laboured to preserve her life, saying, Why will you not let me goe? as if they did hinder her happines. Thus with my singular re∣spect
to you both, and those that bee most neare unto you, commending you, and all yours to the grace of our God,
Ephes. 3.20. who is able to doe excee∣ding abundantly above all wee can aske or thinke, I rest

