



THe sacred Scriptures (as you know right Reuerend) they are the brests of the Church of God, the foode of the faithfull, the oracles of God, the bequeath and Testament of Iesus Christ. By them the Children of the Church, thorough hearing, reading, and meditation in them, receiue that sincere and holsome nourishment, whereby they growe from children to be perfect men in Christ. By them the godly receiue direction in euery enterprise; for they are as faithfull counsailours to teach vs wisdome: so that where men are blind thorough naturall cor∣ruption, they are the lanterne whereby to see the light: where men for sinne despaire of mercie, they teach, with confidence to rest on God; where men are presumptuous, to feare his iu∣stice; where men delight in sinne, they teach the punishment, and how to auoide the danger of the same. And as they doe thus declare the truth; so also by the light thereof they discouer
 error; and are profitable to improue and to correct, that the man of God may be absolute and perfect to all good workes. By them our blessed Sauiour Iesus Christ, taking on him our nature, that in our nature he might appease his fathers wrath for our transgressions, and might furnish vs with the merite of his righteousnesse, whereby being restored to be the sonnes of God, we might be partakers in his kingdome; hath left his will and Testament recorded: by which the infallible truth of God thorough the blood of Christ is sealed vp, and men may know assuredly (for as much as they know, that God who hath promised is true, and cannot lye) themselues to be inhe∣ritours of immortall glorie; so many as indeuour stedfastlie to keepe the conditions of the couenant. I will be their God, saith he, and they shall be my people.
Wherefore as on the one part we haue infinite cause to mag∣nifie the mercie of the Lord, for this inestimable treasure of his holy word; so on the other side of intolerable griefe and lamen∣tation, considering the negligence of men to imbrace this be∣nefite: whereby it commeth to passe that not onely so many thousand soules of men doe daily decay and perish; but euen our enemies reproch our religion and blaspheme the Lord thorough our securitie, that hauing the word of God before vs we neglect it, and are not amended in our liues. Whereunto we cannot but confesse (for our sinnes doe testifie vnto our face) that we are not for the greatest part, of better conuersation, then are the Heathen which know not God; and that many euen among vs, which seemed and were esteemed to be reli∣gious, haue also almost forgotten their former loue. The rea∣son whereof is not strange vnto your Lordship, nor vnto any that is godly prudent. For the word of God hath not this pri∣uiledge, that whosoeuer toucheth the outward hem thereof, shall fully be cured of his disease. But as our corporall meate returneth not to nourishment, vnlesse euery member of con∣coction
 performe his dutie: Euen so this spirituall foode, vn∣lesse it be seene with the eye, heard with the eare, confessed with the mouth, beleeued with the heart, it yeeldeth not that sappe or iuice that men may grow thereby. Neuerthelesse, as the lightning thorough his sudden brightnes, awaketh those that are heauie with sleepe, and forceth their eyes to behold the cleerenes of the same: euen so the Gospell at the suddaine ap∣pearing thereof in this our land, allured all with her perfect beautie; yet many became offended at the light, delighting in darknes more then light, because their deedes were euill: and many became like the stonie ground, whose hearts are harde∣ned and will not yeeld obedience: many also who mixe it with couetousnesse, vaineglorie and voluptuousnesse of life, but not with faith; heare it, and receiue it, and outwardly professe it, but yet are choaked among the thornes. Neither can it be, but many should beholde it, and few regarde it; many receiue it, and many fall away; for many, saith our Sauiour, are called by it, but few are chosen by the Lord.
Now albeit the highest cause of things remaine in the se∣cret counsaile of the will of God; yet the outward meanes vn∣doubtedly of this distresse are plaine and easie to be discerned, and ought of all men to be considered. One is, that darnell and tares haue growne vp together with the wheate, which being sowne before in vnhappie seedes of vnholsome doctrine, haue been permitted by the Lord himselfe to growe together, that they that are approoued might be knowne. Another is, that this vine of God is not in this world so carefullie regarded, but that briers and thornes, corrupted manners and profane impietie, doe make it, for the most part, to bring forth either sower or small grapes. The third and principall is, negligent respect of the will of God reuealed in the Scriptures: whereby it commeth to passe, that men haue not their hearts prepared to receiue it when they heare it; neither can so easilie be
 grounded in the faith, by the preaching of the word, because they search not by reading and conference of Scripture, whe∣ther the doctrine taught them be so in deede, and carrie that equall waight in the balance of Gods sanctuarie: but while it is sowne in them as in the streete, that euill one commeth and stealeth both the practise and remembrance out of their heart.
There are many who to excuse this negligence, pretend dis∣couragement through the hardnes of the Scriptures; which notwithstanding the Lord hath giuen, to be euen instruction and sharpnes of wit vnto the simple. Wherein also we doe con∣fesse, that the Scriptures of God in diuers respects are hard and difficult. Namely, hard to them that despise them and will not vnderstand: hard to be vnderstoode of the naturall man, without the eye-salue of the spirit of grace. Hard in some points of doctrine that are deliuered, which so farre forth as they are deliuered are nothing difficult. And some∣time hard in disposition and maiestie of words, where the doc∣trine of it selfe is plaine and easie. And therefore hath the Lord most wisely included some difficultie in the Scripture, to the end he might prouoke vs, to aske assistance of his spirit, by whose only light they are truly vnderstoode. Secondly, to stirre vp our indeuour, to reade, meditate and search them out. Thirdly, to make vs esteeme them precious as they are, who naturally despise the things we easilie obtaine. Moreouer, to represse our pride and the boasting of our wisdome, he would shew vs thereby our ignorance in heauenly things. Againe, to preserue the treasures contained in them, that they might not be cast before the proud and scornefull men, as holy things to dogs or pearles to swine. And withall, because he hath or∣dained some teachers, some learners in his Church; that the ministerie which is his ordinance, with loue and reuerence might be regarded. Neuerthelesse as there is none so wise on earth, who is able to sound the deepnes of knowledge and wis∣dome
 contained in them; so is there none so simple (indued with common reason, but by the ordinarie meanes of God, may attaine to knowledge by them, sufficient to saue his soule. Neither is any thing more plaine, then the summarie doctrine of Saluation contained in them (to him that taketh delight therein, when as to Atheists and despisers of them, euery sen∣tence is obscure) which can be inuented by the industrie of man, or contained in mens writings, Philosophers, or hea∣then, or whosoeuer.
Some therefore contrariwise obiect vnto themselues, the facilitie and plainenesse of the Scriptures, as though they were not worthie their deepest meditations. To whom againe we answere; Tanta est Christianarum profunditas litera∣rum, &c. So great is the depth of the sacred Scriptures, that if a Christian man were indued from heauen, with the yeeres of Methushalem, and the wisdome of Salomon, and would continually peruse them euen from his childhood vnto his crooked age, he might euer gaine in learning, and alwaies with abundant profit be exercised in them. The more wise the Preacher was, the more he sought forth wisdome: but sound it as a deepe profunditie which he was not able to com∣prehend. They are like Iacobs ladder, the lowest steppe where∣of commeth neere the ground of our vnderstanding; but the last steppe is high aboue mans capacitie, and reacheth vp to Heauen. They are a shallow foord, in which a Lambe may wade; they are an Ocean Sea, in which an Elephant may swimme.
Considering therefore with my selfe (right Reuerend) both the fond obiections of vaine and corrupted mindes, which receiue the holy Scriptures as the word of man, not as it is in∣deede, the word of God; as also the subtill cauils of our aduer∣saries against the holy truth of our profession: and beholding with continuall griefe the horrible neglect of the sacred word
 of God, with the infinite enormities that proceede thereof: I haue been prouoked in my selfe, to vndertake a labour of no small importance; and I humbly beseech the heauenly maie∣stie, it may be found as profitable in time to come vnto the Church of God. Wherein first of all, to the end to prouoke as many as professe the faith, to the diligent reading of holie Scriptures; I haue laboured to vnfould in some conuenient measure, with sinceritie and faithfulnes, the true and sound interpretation of the word, especially in the most difficult and hardest places of the same. Secondly, for as much as very ma∣ny places of Scripture haue been distorted, and wrongfully ap∣plied to the purpose of heretikes from time to time: I haue en∣deuoured to demonstrate the true and vndoubted purpose of the holie Ghost, and gathered the doctrine that thereof ari∣seth, by the guide and authoritie of the Scriptures, and the re∣uerend and orthodox fathers of the Church. Thirdly, where∣as many obiections haue bin by Atheists displaied and bent against the historie of holie Scripture; which may happen al∣so to be called into doubt, either by such as begin to grow to head in these our daies, or some other perhaps that are indeed desirous of the knowledge of the truth: I haue had in purpose to remoue such scrupulosity (which either I could find obiected or call to minde) and to cleere the truth of the word of God. Fourthly, whereas places of Scripture seeme opposite to other, I haue conferred such places and reconciled them. Fiftly, to these interpretations, I haue also gathered the iudgement of ancient writers, as I haue found them either directly exhibi∣ted, or here and there dispersed in their workes, and haue placed them as parallels of full agreement with the doctrine at this day taught in the Church of God. The reader shall thereby perceiue, that the same his iudgement, which before he had conceiued, or from hence shall learne by conference of Scripture, shall be of perfect vnitie with the doctrine of the
 faithfull heretofore. Sixtly, I haue diuided these my labours into questions and answers, which I take to be the plainest kind of teaching vnto the simple; and for to resist the gain∣saiers of the truth, I haue also, as occasion hath been offered, added the arguments and manifest reasons of the Church of God out of the plaine demonstration of the Scripture, care∣fully auoiding all vaine and idle questions and subtill dispu∣tations (which I professe before the Lord and before his Church) as in my worke it selfe I hope it shall appeare: ha∣uing in this kinde of exercise imitated diuers ancient and learned Fathers of the Church, Theodoret, Acasius, Au∣gustine, &c. and some of our countrimen here at home.
I haue directed these my labours vnto the priuate benefit of this my natiue countrie. First, for that I acknowledge my selfe more neerely tied in dutie to those of mine owne nation, and them of my kinred in the flesh: so that this Common-wealth and state, wherein I was borne and hitherto maintai∣ned, as it doth worthily chalenge my life and labours, because next vnder God, it hath been author and maintainer there∣of; through the most godlie, prudent, and happie gouernment of our most redoubted dread Soueraigne Ladie Queene Eli∣zabeth (whom God of his infinit mercie and fauour to this our land, endow with multiplied yeeres and full felicitie) so I desire of the Lord, that for the emolumēt thereof, I may euer bestow my strength and labours, or my selfe may be bestowed to the glorie of God and edification of his Church. Secondly, for that the same our Church and Common-wealth is conti∣nuallie assaulted by the aduersaries, either by open inuasion, or secret immission of lurking espies, Intelligencers, Remem∣brancers, Seminaries, Priests, Iesuits, solicitors for the Church of Rome, remaining in euery corner of this land; who tho∣rough the power of darknes, doe worke into the harts of men, by false suggestions and coloured hypocrisie: I take it as the
 dutie of the Ministers of the word, by sound and holie doctrine; of euery faithfull Magistrate vnder her gracious Maiestie, by authoritie and power; of euery good man in his place, as he tendereth the welfare of the Church of God, the blessed continuance of the Gospell, which her Maiestie hath alwaies so carefully maintained, as the chiefest good of all her subiects; and the safetie and preseruation of the publike wealth; to la∣bour with watchfulnes and wisedome, to bridle the furie of such enterprisers. Moreouer, for that I know right well, that the writings of the Protestants are wholy banished from all the territories of the Papacie, by the authoritie of the Triden∣tine Councell and the Pope (except to certaine licensed) vn∣der paine of confiscation of goods and life: therefore I did assure my selfe, my labours in our vulgar tongue, would be communicate to moe, than in the common language of many countries. Neuerthelesse, if hereafter I shall perceiue it more for the seruice of the Church of God, and honour of my Coun∣trie, to make my labours common to other Nations; I promise also (this booke of Genesis being happily finished) if God giue life and leisure, to conuert my stile. This in the meane time I would craue of your Honourable Lordship, that if I shall be found in some one or other point not so fully perhaps to satisfie my reader, as of some peraduenture will be expected (for as Hierome saith; Quilibet in suo sensu maximè abun∣dat) you would fauourablie impute it, in part, to my mani∣fold distresses, which through the mercifulnes of God may hereafter be relieued; hauing continued these eight and twen∣tie yeeres brought vp in learning, only vpon the charges of mine owne reuenewes; and in these my labours, receiued nei∣ther incouragement or helpe of societie, or conference, or like assistance, which might otherwise haue been mine aduantage in this exercise.
Now that I haue been thus bold to present my simple la∣bours
 vnto your Honourable patronage; I am, besides more priuate causes, publikely inuited, by that honour and thank∣fulnes that is due vnto your Lordship, not only from my selfe, but of this whole Realme, and the Church of God. That pa∣terne of godly praelacie, described by the Apostle, practised by the godly Fathers and Bishops of the Church, is very nota∣blie exemplified in your person. Your life vnproueable (I speake nothing but before the Church of God, and by the testi∣monie of this Realme) your temperancie, vigilancie, sobrie∣tie, modestie, hospitalitie, is knowne and commended in euerie quarter of this land: your grauitie, wisedome, learning, as it hath abounded through the blessing of the Lord, so hath it been, as a rich talent, by a faithfull seruant carefully applied, both in her Maiestie priuate palaces, and in the farthest pla∣ces of her kingdome: your Zeale and diligence in holding forth the word of holesome doctrine, both by painfull preach∣ing, and prudent gouernment in that precinct committed vnto you: your most pregnant loyaltie, and long continued seruice vnto her sacred Maiestie: your continuall endeuours for the publike wealth, which euery good man is bound to re∣uerence, to loue, and gratifie.
Iesus Christ the great shepheard of the sheepe, in the bo∣wels of his mercie tenderly regard his faithfull flocke within this land; preserue in peace this Common-wealth; continue long this happie and triumphant regiment; blesse abundant∣ly our gracious Soueraigne and peerelesse Princesse, renew her yeeres, inlarge her prosperitie, treasure vp in her royall heart all graces of saluation and of gouernment: And finally so prosper all your honourable proceedings; your care and in∣dustrie for the peace and welfare of his Church; your pasto∣rall endeuour, for that stewardship and flocke committed vn∣to you, as that it may be euer to the praise of God, your honour
 and commendation in the sight of men, your continued comfort in your much prolonged life; and at his appearance, through his endlesse mercie, you may receiue that infinit guerdon of your faithfull dispensation, which is that immortall Crowne of vnspeakable glorie. Diligat te Dominus quia tu dei seruos diligis.

