



WHat greate cause there is (right wor∣shipfull and my very good L.) why all men of all sortes should be exhor∣ted, and earnestly excited, to the dai∣ly readyng and meditation of the ho∣ly Scriptures: the infinite perilles and calamities, wherevnto we are al of vs continually subiect, do moste plainely and plentifully declare. For why, who seeth not howe combersome and perillous a state they enter into, that take vpon thē to trauaile in the Wildernes in the night season, without the helpe either of Moone or Starres, or any other light to direct them by? Goe they not oftentimes out of the way? Doe they not manye tymes stumble and stagger like men berefte of their senses? Are they not euer and anone caughte in the Bryars, and there pitiously tattred and torne? Be they not like from time to time to run themselues either againste some Rocke, Blocke, or Tree standing before them? wherby they get one while (per∣haps) a shrewde rushe on the sides, an otherwhile a curst thwacke ouerthwarte the shinnes, now and then a sore bounse on the breaste, by and by a dreadefull duste on the necke and shoulders, straightwayes and odde
blowe crosse the face, and euen immediately an auke rap vpon the nose, or some one dash or other in the eies, eares, or teeth? But what are these in comparison of the rest? very fleabitings. For if they escape either with some or with all these hurts and annoyances which we haue now mētioned, they may say (and that truly) they haue played the tall fellowes. But ouer and besides these, they light many tymes vppon some daungerous quagmire, foregrowne Lake or Pitte, wherein they sticke faste, and are not able to winde themselues out againe, no not to the death. What shall I say of the huge multitude of Beastes so fierce and terrible in their kindes? Are they not like euery moment to be deuoured of them? Howe is it possible they should escape so many roaring Lions, so many rauening Wolues, so many bloudy Beares, boy sterous Bulles, cruell Tygres, Panters, Pardals, Leo∣pardes, Serpentes, Dragons, and suche like, and not be∣come a pray vnto them? I say nothing all this while of a daunger as greate as any other, namely, of the theeues and robbers, cormorants and caytifes, that lurke in ob∣scure places, gaping for the spoile of wayfaring men: of whom notwithstanding they are cruelly rifled, and haue oftetimes their throates miserably cut. But who is able to expresse all the harde happes and hazardes, whyche they throw themselues into, that iourny by night in the Desart (as is aforesaide?) Verily I suppose not Syluanus hymselfe. Nowe then if incace the state of these menne be so difficulte and daungerous, that are in hazarde one∣ly of a bodily death: howe muche more perillous and pernitious is the case of all those, that remaine in suche continuall ieopardy bothe of bodye and soule? Suche doubtelesse is the plighte of all Adams children euen from the tyme of their byrth to the daye of their death. Such is the case and conditiō both of high and low, rich and poore, noble and base, bonde and free, Iewe and
Gentile, al and some, one and other. For why? so soone as wee are borne, we enter into thys worlde as into a huge Wildernesse: where we are eftesoones environed with innumerable straites of the body, with innumera∣ble perplexities of the soule. As touching the bodye, we come naked into the worlde, without either mantell to couer vs, or strength to defende vs, or discretion to guide vs, or prouision to succour vs: in whiche behalfe the very brute beastes do far-away surmount vs. And wee be no sooner crawled foorth of our mothers womb, but wee sette oute oure throates and crye: euen there∣by bewraying bothe oure present misery, and oure wretchednesse to come. As we growe vppe in yeares, so increase oure troubles. Troubles within vs, troubles withoute vs, troubles aboue vs, troubles beneath vs, troubles behinde vs, troubles before vs, troubles on the righte hande, troubles on the lefte, and euerye where troubles. Within vs, all manner of maladies and dissea∣ses proceedyng of inwarde causes, whyche in verye deede are so manye in number, as the verye Phisitions themselues coulde neuer as yet find oute propre names ynoughe for them, much lesse prescribe any sitte reme∣dies to heale them. Without vs, all kinde of outwarde crosses, and distresses: as hunger, thirst, colde, nakednes, woundes, soares, botches, blaynes, blindenesse, lame∣nesse, deafnesse, dumbnesse, perills of sworde, perilles of fyre, perilles of water, &c. Aboue vs are the Hea∣uens (as yee woulde saye) armed againste vs, the Firmament frownyng vppon vs, the Ayre distem∣pered, the Windes wrastling, the Thunders roa∣ring, the Lightnings flashing, the Comettes and blazing Starres lowting, the Sunne eclipsed, the Moone depriued of hir light: and all tokens of calamities vn∣to vs.

Beneath vs is the earth oftetimes trembling and qua∣king, many times sindged and scorched, diuers times o∣uerflowen & surrounded, sometimes opening and swal∣lowing vp all that euer is, not seldome times breathing out pestilent vapours and exhalations, to the destructi∣on of whole Cities and Townes. Behinde vs are al trou∣bles vnlooked for. Before vs, all troubles foreseene. On the right hande our friendes. On the lefte hande, oure foes. Yea, and which way soeuer we turne vs, troubles vppon troubles, trials vpon trials, one vexation vppon an other, and euen death it selfe cōtinually pursuing vs. And thus fareth it with vs as touchyng our bodies. But as concerning our soules, the case is so muche the more dangerous, as the enimies are pernitious, and calamities grieuous whervnto they are subiect. Subiect (I say) not by creatiō, but by deprauatiō, or rather by originall cor∣ruption. For in deede if they be considered accordyng to that excellent nature, wherein they were first created before the fall of Adam: it will appeare, that as in sub∣stance spirituall, and in qualitie immortall, so were they indued also with singular ornaments and heauēly ver∣tues, as whereby they resembled the image euen of God himselfe. But (alas) euer since that fatall ruine and dis∣mall decay of our great vnhappy graundfather Adam, they haue not onely bin depriued of all those ornamēts and graces which before they had, but also infected with contrary vices and deformities: so as in stedde of light, they are become darke: in stedde of pure, they are be∣come obscure: in stedde of holy, they are become pro∣phane: in stedde of vprighte, iust, perfit, happy, blessed, the image of the eternall God, they are become pieuish, peruerse, vnperfect, vniust, accursed, the Image of the infernall Sathan. And this forsooth generally is the state wherein we stand both in respect of our soules and bodies. For the more manifest proofe wherof, the Scrip∣tures
are plentifull, especially where they painte foorth man in his naturall coloures, and set him vp (as it were) on a stage to be seene. For they teache, that there is no sounde or whole parte in him from the crowne of the heade to the soale of the foote. For why?Ps. 14.2.3.4. Psl. 53.4. Ps. 5.10. and 140.2. and 10.7 Prou. 1.16 Iam. 4.8 1. Cor. 1.20 & 2.14. Iere. 9.26 Deut. 10.16 Eccles. 11.33 Genes. 6.5.11.12. and 8.21. Psal. 36.1. Esa. 59.3.7 Rom. 3.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18. VVe are all the sorte of vs corrupte, we haue all gone astray, wee are all become abhominable, there is none that vnderstandeth or seeketh after God, there is none that doth good, no not one: Our mindes are di∣stract within vs, our memories are maymed, oure reason vnre∣formed, our vnderstanding vnperfite, our wisedome foolishnesse, oure heartes vncircumcised, our iudgementes vniuste, oure wils waywarde, oure thoughtes vaine, oure imaginations wicked, our conceites carnall, our fansies frustrate, oure affections euil, oure lusts vnbrideled, our throats an open sepulchre, our tongs haue vsed deceit, the poison of Aspes is vnder our lippes, our mouths are full of cursing and bitternesse, oure handes are filled with cruelty, and our fingers with iniquitie, our feete are swifte to shed bloude, destruction and calamitie are in oure wayes, the way of peace we haue not knowen, and there is no feare of God before oure eies. These and such like are the excellent titles, and prerogatiues wherewith the holy Ghost adorneth vs in the Scriptures. These are in deede the true markes and monuments of our antiquitie, the peculiar badges of our brauery, the right Coat-armour of al Adams offspring. Whereof leaste any man shoulde doubte, and pretende I wote not what priuiledges for himselfe, as thoughe he were exēpted out of the common aray of all fleshe, the Scripture dealeth yet more plainely with vs, and telleth vs, that we are not only wretched and miserable by na∣ture, as being all conceiued of vncleane seede,Psalm. 51.5 Eph. 2.1.3.5 Rom. 3.9 Galath. 3 22 Rom. 2.22. Psalm. 116.11. and all borne the children of wrath and perdition, but also that wee haue al sinned, (where this worde (All) is referred to euery particular person, whether he be Iewe or Gen∣tile) and are depriued of the glory of God: that we are al workers of wickednes, al shrinking and rebellious chil∣dren,
lyars,Rom. 3.4 Esa. 59.5 Deut. 27 Galath. 3.10 Coloss. 2.13 Ephes 2.12 Rom. 6.23. and lighter than vanitie it selfe, all hatchers of Co∣katrice egges, and weauers of the Spiders webbe (as the Prophet speaketh) (and to be shorte) all subiect to the curse and malediction of God, and so consequentlye to endlesse confusion both of soule and body. For, the rewarde of sinne, is death, and euery soule that sinneth shal dye. saith the Lorde. These things thus brieflye premised, although they may seeme sufficient to strike (as it were) an Alarum into al mens consciences, and to make them looke about them, if haply they may espy any remedy: yet ouer and besides these, if wee will weigh and consi∣der what an vnmercifull number of spirituall ennimies we haue to deale and encounter with, how subtilly they lye in wayte to entrappe vs, howe vncessantly they as∣sayle vs, howe greedily they gape to deuoure vs, wee shall bee muche more inflamed (as I thinke) to pre∣pare oure selues to the battaile, and to stand vppon our guarde, if (at leaste) we haue either anye care of oure owne welfare, or dread of our own distruction. For if so be wee haue not vnfitly compared the worlde vnto a Wildernes, where men wander in the middest of innu∣merable dāgers & are euen subiect cōtinually to a thou∣sande deathes: then maye it appeare sufficientlye what oure lotte and portion is in this life, and howe hardlye we are like to be dealte withall, vnlesse wee walke mar∣uellous warily and circumspectly, and bee throughlye fenced and fortified at all assayes. We haue to consider, that as there the wayes and pathes are verye doubtefull and vncertaine by reason of manifolde crinkes and tur∣nings: so here we are to mete with infinite Mazes & La¦byrinths of superstitions and false opinions: so as there is nothing more harde and difficult, than for a man (a∣mongst them) to keepe the straighte course to eternall saluation. Againe, as the desart places are ful of horrible daungers, as well in respecte of the wilde and fauage
beastes, as also of the Theeues and Robbers that lurke in them: euen so are wee in this worlde enuironed about on euery side with farre more grieuous enimies, as which (for their crueltie and more than bloudy desire of destroying all that euer come in their wayes) doe far-awaye exceede the saluagest beastes and cruellest cut-throates that bee. For euen amongest vs rangeth that olde manqueller the Diuell,1 Pet. 5.8 who (as Peter sayth) goeth aboute like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may deuoure. And hee is not a∣lone, but hee hathe an infinite rable, and euen the Deuill and all of wicked Angels and vncleane Spirites to do him seruice: so as he is (not without good consideration) called a Potentate, the Prince of darknesse, the Gouernour of this world,Ephes. 6.12 the spirite that ruleth in the Ayre, &c. to note vnto vs the wonderfull force and puissance that he is of:Ephes. 2.2 like as in o∣ther places, for his malice and subtilty, he is termed a Ser∣pent, for his crueltie, a Lion, and for all togither,Genes. 3.1 1. Pet. 5.8 Apocal. 12 3 a greate redde Dragon hauing seauen heades and ten hornes, and seauen Crowns vpon his heads, &c. There are also belonging to his hellish conduct and Kingdome, an innumerable sorte of wicked doers, whiche hauing vtterly reiected all sense of Humanitie and Godlinesse, are degenerated into wilde & saluage beastes. For we may see euery where a ranke route of leacherous monsters to grunt like Hogges and Swine: a huge throng of wrathfull Termagaunts to yell out lyke Beares: a beastly company of Backbiters to barke abroade like Dogges: a rauening sorte of Cormorants to houle out like Wolues: a fierce and frantike multitude to take on like vntamed Tygres: a number to play the parts of the nimble sighted Lynxes: a slie and subtill sorte to fare like Foxes: a tetchy and kicking kinde of Asses to bray: a ve∣nemous sighte of Serpents to hisse: and to be shorte, such a huge rabble of stinking Goates, bellowing Bugles, puf∣fing Panters, and all manner of vncleane Beastes, that a man shall walke muche safer in the Wildernesse amongst
the wilde beastes in deede, than hee can doe in the world amongest men of so beastly conditions: neyther haue we to feare so great danger from the very Beasts themselues, as we haue to doubt and dreade those, that are of the selfe same nature with vs: Insomuch that the olde fathers said not without a cause, One man is become a VVolfe to an other. Further, as the Desart is waste and barren, and besides, o∣uergrowen with Bushes, Bryars and Thornes: so is thys World, manured with no knowledge of God at all, but is altogither barren and vnapte to yeelde foorth anye good fruite, nay contrariwise, scrawleth euerye where ful of the briars of Sinnes and Vices, whereby we are so grieuously mangled and torne, that (commonlye and for the most parte) we keepe the scarres of them to oure dying daye. I might stande here to shewe howe some of vs (nay all in a maner) are choaked with the cares of this world, and with the deceitfulnesse of riches: some caughte in the pitfall of Pride and Ambition: some snared wyth the Thornes of Couetousnesse: some ouer heade and eares in the Bryars of Voluptuousnesse: some saped in the suddes of Sensualitie: some smouldered wyth the smoake of Va∣nitie: some drenched in the dregges of Drunkennesse: some be-smeared wyth the mudde of Maliciousnesse: some imbrued with the bloude not of Beastes but of Men: and in a worde, not some, but a great summe sti∣fled in the stench of all Sinne and Wickednesse. I mighte shewe in like maner, howe there is nothing vnder the Sunne so excellent, no worke of God so wonderfull, no blessing so bountifull, no creature so beneficiall, holesome and good, but that (through the malice of Sathan and our owne miserable corruption) it is tourned cleane con∣trarye, vnto oure greate harme and discommoditie, yea, euen into a present poyson to infecte vs wyth∣all, and into a Scorpion (as it were) to sting vs to death.

As much might be said of our own selues: in whom there is no parte nor power either of soule or bodye, but that through sin, they are become euen so manye deadly eni∣mies to hale vs to destruction. And herein forsooth appea∣reth by the way the strangenesse, or rather vnnaturalnesse (as I may so say) of our warfare, cleane contrary to the warfare of the worlde. For whereas worldly Souldiours take weapon in hand chiefly against forrainers and stran∣gers, but neuer againste their owne persons: wee on the other side, muste not looke so muche what oure enimies do abroade, as we muste haue an eye what traytours are at home, I meane in our own bosoms, that so letting o∣thers goe in peace by vs, wee maye bende all oure whole force and artillery to the battery of oure owne selues. Not as though it were lawfull for anye man to cutte himselfe shorte by vntimely death (as manye diuellishe and des∣perate persons doe) but to the intent to gette the mastery ouer our affections, to bridle oure lustes, to mortify oure olde man, to kill oure concupiscence, to subdue oure na∣ture, and finally, to submit all our wil, wisedome, reason, vnderstanding, and all that euer we haue either within vs or without vs, to the rule and obedience of Gods holy Worde, and to the gouernment and direction of his holy Spirite. But I feare leaste I haue exceeded alreadye the compasse of an Epistle: I will therefore bee as briefe as is possible. We haue seene then (if I be not deceyued) how wofull our originall state and condition is, what infinite perils and calamities wee are subiecte vnto, what migh∣tye and vnrestfull enimies wee are continuallye matchte wythall, and howe little refuge or succoure wee haue to looke for in this worlde, or in any thing belonging to the Worlde. For, the VVorlde passeth awaye, and the luste thereof: but hee that doeth the will of God, abideth for euer.
The vse of all whyche thynges is, to teache
euery one of vs howe earnestly we oughte to laboure, and contend, euery man according to his present necessitie, to learne well the lesson taughte vnto Nicodemus, namely, to be borne againe,Ioan. 3.3 Ephes. 4.23 1. Pet. 2.2 and to be renued in the spirite of our minde, so as we may couet the sincere milke of the word, to the intent to grow thereby: to be remoued (I say) from the loue of these earthly things here belowe, and to stye vp by the wings Fayth into Heauen, where Iesus Christe sitteth on the right hande of God the father: finally, to purchase the certaintie of a better inheritāce, and the assu∣raunce of a better Country: by cause (as the Apostle saith) VVee haue here no continuing Citie, but wee seeke for one to come. To the obtayning of all whiche graces,Hebr. 13.14 as Faith alone in the word and promises of God is sufficient, so attaine wee to Faith by no other meanes than by conceyuing the free mercy of God in Christe through the reading, hearing, and meditation of the holy Scriptures. The reason is, by∣cause that Iesus Christe beeing the onelye obiect of oure faith, and substance of the whole Scripture, we apprehend in him all the treasures of knowledge and wisedome, and what soeuer else is necessary to eternall saluation. For, Hee is of God made vnto vs wisedome,. Corinth. 1.10 and righteousnesse, and sancti∣fication, and redemption, and euen all in all: as the Apostle speaketh. Who seeth not then what incomparable trea∣sures (in comparison whereof all the pompe and glory of the Worlde is nothyng but dung and drosse) are compri∣sed in the sacred Scriptures? But I maye not stand to am∣plify this point (as by occasion otherwise iustly I mighte) considering in very deede a Preface will not beare it. I must therefore of necessity referre all this whole matter to the consideration of the godly Reader: who may finde e∣uery where in reading, plentifull furniture tending to this purpose.11. Time. 3.16 Only thys I wil adde by way of conclusion, that forsomuch as al the holy Scripture is giuen by inspiration of God and is profitable (as Paule saith) to teach, to conuince, to correct,
and to instructe in righteousnesse, that the man of God may be ab∣solute and made perfite to al good workes:Rom. 15.4 and againe, that what∣soeuer things are written aforetime, are written for oure learning, that we throughe patience and comforte of the Scriptures mighte haue hope: that therefore I say it behoueth al sortes and de∣grees of men and women whatsoeuer, (if at leastwise they stand in neede to be taught and informed in the wayes of the Lorde, if they haue neede of dayly correction and a∣mendment of life, if they be desirous of continuall com∣forte and consolation, and finally, of eternall happinesse and saluation) to be in loue with the holy Scriptures, to embrace them, to reuerence them, to reade them, to heare them, to meditate in them, and aboue all, to liue after thē, and euē to expresse them in their whole lyfe and conuer∣sation. Whiche godly diligence and indeuour as I wishe vnfainedly from my very hearte to be wrought effectual∣ly in mine owne selfe: so make I mine humble prayers vnto the Lord, that he would vouchsafe in his great mer∣cy to kindle and stirre vppe the same in the heartes of all people, to awaken them out of the sleepe of sinne and se∣curitie, to drawe them out of the dirty dregges of Popery and superstition, wherein Sathan hath of long tyme, and yet still keepeth a great number to scatter the cloudes and mistes as well of all olde as newe sprung vp heresies from amongest them, and laste of al, so to ioyne and knit them togyther in one consent of the truth of his holy word and Sacraments, as may be moste of all to the aduancement of his glorious kingdome, and to the vtter ouerthrowe of Sathans outrage and Tyranny. To the furtherance wher∣of bicause I was perswaded that this Booke of the famous and worthy man Andrew Hyperius woulde not a little a∣uaile, I thought it not amisse for my good brethren and Countrimens cause, to turne the same into oure common language, and to publish it in as plaine a stile and phrase as I possibly coulde. Whyche being attentiuely read and
pervsed, wil minister I am sure, not onely sufficient mat∣ter for the godly and Christian Reader to work vpon, but also sounde and substantiall reasons to the satisfaction of al indifferent mindes, and to the confusion of all scorners and cauillers whatsoeuer. And forsomuche as I am not ig∣norant what great and speciall blessings of hys Spirite the Lord in mercy hath vouchsafed to bestowe vppon youre Ladiship, and vpon your progenie, whereby you are mo∣ued againe by apparant testimonies, to expresse the god∣ly loue and zeale whiche you beare to his infallible truth and Gospell: I determined with my selfe amongst many other noble and worthy personages, to make my speciall choice of youre L. as a meete patronesse of thys present worke, and of my trauel and paines taken therein. Where∣vnto I was prouoked so muche the rather, by cause that as you youre selfe are an earnest traueller in the holy Scrip∣tures, as well by publike hearing as by priuate reading, so your example wil not a little help both to the cōmending of this worke vnto posteritie, & also to the incouraging of many other of youre sexe and calling to the following of your steppes. Albeit I must confesse one other cause there was of this my doing, which I wil by no meanes conceale from your L. And that was the greate curtesie and friend∣ly affabilitie, which amongst many other vertues I noted in youre L. at what time you vsed commonly to resorte vnto oure parishe Churche, to the exercise there. But then especially appeared your curtesie most excellent in mine eie, when you of your owne accorde, to my great and singular rrioycing, vouchedsafe to visite and adorne my poore house with your presēce, and to take wel in worth that simple entertainement, whiche then, throughe Gods goodnesse, I was able to giue you. And euen then doubt∣lesse conceiued I this imagination with my selfe, that how soeuer you should be forgetfull of your friendlinesse offered, yet I for my part could neuer be vnmindefull of your
curtesy receyued: but woulde testifye the same by one meanes or other so soone as time and oportunitie shoulde serue.
Thus (Madam) haue you hearde the principall causes that moued mee to putte forth this Booke vnder the title of youre name: whiche, if I may perceiue your L. to take in good parte (as I doubte not but you will) then haue I reaped the onely guerdon of my desire. In the meane sea∣son (to ende withal) I commende the whole successe ther∣of vnto the Lorde, beseeching him so to multiply his mer∣cies vpon you and vpon your whole familie, as that you may liue many yeares a ioyfull and happy mother in Israel, and finally, reape the ende of youre hope, euen endlesse ioy and immortalitie with all the sanctified in Christe Iesu.
AMEN.
Written at VVethersfeld the ninth of Iune. 1579.

