



IF the partiall affection of Phi∣lautia, or selfe loue, and the vn∣satiable desyre or appetite of our own priuat cōmoditie vver once rooted out of mens min∣des, and the cōtrary persuasion settled, to vvit, that it is as vnlauful to liue as to our selues, not profiting our brethren, as it is to seeke our cōmoditie by an other mans hinde∣rance: me thinks I see (right reuerend father) what a cheerful shevv and countenaunce of all things, vvhat mutual loue in mās societie, vvhat securitie and quietnesse to the common vvelth shuld therby ensue Sure I am, that neither Pla∣to, Aristotle &c. nor any other that haue tra∣uailed most to bring the politique gouernmēt to perfection, vvere euer able to describe or paint out such a liuelike patterne of a common vvealth as this one errour once reformed, wold restore vnto vs. Erasmus in Encomie Mariae, pla∣ceth
Philautia first amongst the traine of foo∣lish ladies, vvho doth hold eche mans eyes in a preposterous admiration of himselfe: yea and that in the vievv oftentimes of the vvorst parte euen of the bodie, vvhile he curiously seketh to serue the delicacie, and to support the frayltie of the same, to decke, pamper, and cherish it.
But I vvould to God vve did so consider and vevv our ovvn bodies, that vve might lern ther by, & the better cōceiue vvhat belōgeth to the cōmon vvealth or the churche of God: vvherof the one by the Philosophers: the other by the Apostle is compared to a bodie, vvherein (as in eache of our bodies) symetria & sympathia, id est, due proportion and right placing of eche member, in respect of the vvhole bodie, and a mutual passion or sense of feeling diffused tho∣rovv euery part, must be preserued. For vvhe∣ther soeuer of these tvvo shall happē to be em∣paired or disturbed, forthvvith ther folovveth eyther griefe, or a deformitie, or vtter confusi∣on to the vvhole bodie: as vvitnesseth the A∣postle. Rom. 12 1. Cor. 12. &c. For this cause al∣so the Apostle Romans. 14 sayeth: Nullus no∣strum sibi ipsi viuit, None of vs liueth to him∣selfe &c. The vvhiche Plato, and the Stoickes did affirme, vvhose assertions are cited by M. C. Officiorum. 1. Non nobis solum nati sumus. &c.
VVe are not borne only to our selues, but some parte of our birth our countrey doth chalenge some parte our parentes, some parte our frien∣des. (VVhat coulde haue ben sayd more fully, if he had among these reckened the Churche of God? Item: These things vvhich the earth doth bring foorth, are all created for mannes vse, but man was made for mannes cause, that they among themselues might profite one an other. (O that he had added here also, that all shoulde ioyntlye seeke Gods glorie:) Againe he sayth: Herein we must followe nature as a guide, and bring to light that which may serue for the weale publique, by enterchangeable duties, by giuing and receiuing, and bothe by our artes, trauail & faculties, to knit the felow∣ship of menne one with an other. As often as this assertion of the Philosophers or doctrine of the Apostle is effectually consydered of good and godlie natures, it is apparant with what cheerefuluesse they endeuour to im∣ploye what so euer giftes, or blessyngs, (cor∣poris, fortunae, aut animi,) GOD hath endued them vvith, to the benefite of Gods churche, their countrey, and brethren. And truely I am persuaded, and I suppose also that all men vvill yelde no lesse) that this only care hathe so of∣ten assembled all the vvysest counsellours and
chiefe magistrates from al parts of this realme vnto one high courte of parliamente, there by good aduise prouidently to decree and enact, vvhatsouer mighte bee deemed auaylable for reformation of enormities, or the establishing of good orders in the cōmon vvealth. Many of these and prosperous parliaments haue ben as∣sembled within the happie reign of the Quee∣nes maiestie: but none of them all, beleeue me, hath eyther ben begonne or ended with better successe thā this last session holdē at VVestmin¦ster the eight of May, in the .xiiij. yeare of the reigne of our moste gracious soueraigne Lady E. &c. Of vvhich it may truly be sayd, if euer it might be sayd of any, that it was holdē to the highe pleasure of almightie god, and the weale publike of this realm. Among the procedings of vvhich parliament, that, before al things, can not but be approued bothe by god and godly men, which is conteined Chap. 5. entituled: An act for the punishment of vacabundes, and for the releefe of the poore and impotent. In vvhich acte the whole matter of the Pouertie, as serueth best for the state of this realm, is so charitably, vvisely, and prouidently decreed and enacted, that nothing can in so fevve vvordes bee more piththily defined, I say in so fevv wordes: for as it seemeth, bicause so vvaightie and laborsome
a businesse coulde not fully be discussed vvith∣out a greate many more vvoordes, therefore the chiefest pointes of that businesse, are one∣ly expressed in that acte, wherby a vvay is pre∣pared to the Magistrates and Iustices of the peace, to vvhose good discretion the other lighter circumstances are committed. And I praye vnto God, that euery of them vvithin their circuites and limittes, may carefully, dili∣gently, and cheerefully performe and execute not only that vvhich is expresly conteyned in the sayd act, but also vvhatsoeuer may seme ex∣pedient for the places vvhere they dvvel, as far forth as shall be not repugnant or contrary to the godly and charitable meaning of the sayd act, I vvish also most earnestly that eche faith∣full subiect may so account and iudge of those proceedings, that not only ther be no murmu∣ring or grudgīg, but also that ech one in his cal¦ling, may endeuor to further them, that a pro∣sperous & luckie effect may ensue thereof. The which care and charge, vvhen I acknow∣ledged to apperteyne of duetie in sundry re∣spectes vnto my selfe also, and that bothe the church of God and the common vvelth might of good right chalenge and exact of me the vt∣termost that I am able to do for their benefit, I thought I vvoulde rather offer it vvillingly,
and of mine ovvne accord in season, than defer til it vvere after a sort craued of me, or some o∣ther by extreme necessitie. Gratia enim (ab offi∣cio quod mora tardat abest, For dutie whiche is slacked is not thankvvorthie. Therfore I vvold not conceale that thing vvhich I thought moste auaylable to the accōplishing of the happie fuc∣cesse intended in that acte, but haue set forth in our vulgar tong, the whole regimēt and gouern¦ment of the Pouertie, vvritten in the latin tong by a great lerned doctour of Theologie of our time, D. Andreas Hyperius, no lesse wisely & or∣derly, than learnedly and charitably. A vvorke very necessary for the magistrate, and profitable for the subiect: and as it may serue to direct the one in administring of the said act, so wil it tea∣che the other to think vvel of the procedings. VVhich maner of regiment if any do think vn∣possible to be executed, in such sort as this god∣lie mā hath prescribed, they are much deceiued. For vvhy may it not (if vve vvil be circumspect, diligent and vvilling) as vvel be brought to per∣fection in this realme, as in any other. Nay why may it not as vvel be generally folowed in al pa¦rishes, townes, & cities vvithin this realme, as it is in one town corporate, vvhich I vvil for their commendation name: euen the tovvne of Ne∣warke situate vppon the riuer of Trent, in the
countie of Nothingham, I leaue it to be farther enquired of. Great prouision and a large colle∣ction is also made for the poore in this citie of London, but yet belike ther lacketh some peece of this good regiment. For beggers and disea∣sed people, do both vvalke and lie in the stretes and other vnmeete places, vvhich thing is both lothsom and lamentable. A redresse may easily be accomplished by the order of this booke being assysted by the authoritie of the sayde acte.
Novv, to the ende (Right reuerend father) that this treatise of that learned diuine mighte be the better accepted of our countrey men, I thought it good to assygne your Lordshippe to be his patrone. For to vvhome coulde I more safely committe this learned laboure of his, thā vnto one, vvhiche both loueth, and is himselfe singularly learned? To vvhome might I better commed so vvorthy a minister of gods church, than to a godly Byshoppe? VVho doth better deserue the dedicatiō of this booke, thā he that hath deserued to be high Almener to so liberal a prince? Yea vvho is better able both to de∣fende this treatise, & to further the poore mens cause, than he vvhose eloquence hath aduaun∣ced him to so high dignities, and vvho for his good affection tovvardes the poore is placed
in the chiefe office appertayning to that busi∣nesse? These and infinite other such respect haue moued me to offer vnto your Lordship this my trauaile, in translating this godly trea∣tise, the vvhiche if it may be accepted of your Lordship, and vvorke the effect vvhich I vvish it may among all good citizens, I haue the re∣compence vvhiche I desyre: and shal be en∣couraged hereafter, to bring to lighte the more vvillingly my priuate labours to the benefite of the cōmon vvealth.

