



IT IS VVRITTEN (RIGHT Honorable and my singular good Lady) that Philip King of Macedonia reioy∣ced greatly vvhen his sonne Alexander vvas borne, bicause his Empyre shoulde not lacke a gouernour after his death, but herein he reioyced much more, that his sonne vvas borne in the time of A∣ristotle that learned Philosopher, by vvhome he vvas taught and instructed ten yeares: And in lyke maner it fareth novv vvith me, as vvith the King of Macedonia, and no lesse is my ioye▪ than the delight of that mightie Prince. Herein I doe reioyce, that this vvorke of Dystillation is novve finished to the profite of my coun∣trie, vvherein great studie and long labour hath bene earnestly bestovved. But I reioyce much more that it is finished in the time of you my Honourable, vertuous, and good Ladie, to vvhose lear∣ned vevve and fauourable protection I offer this Booke, as a due testimonie of my seruiceable heart, and as some fruites of my poore paynfull studie and practise, vvishing that it vvere in value coun∣teruayle able to the condigne demerites of your so Honourable ex∣pectation, so as euery lyne, in respect of my loyaltie, might supplye a nevve Iewell for your Nevve yeares gift, albeit, you haue no neede of Golde and Ievvels, abounding honourably in all riches: Notvvithstanding, this booke maye be truely termed the nevve Iewell of health, vvhich before this daye vvas neuer seene or published abroade by anye other man. This nevve Iewell vvyll make the blynde to see, and the lame to vvalke. This nevv Iewell

vvill make the vveake to become strong, and the olde crooked age appeare yong and lustye. This nevve Iewell vvill make the foule seeme beautifull, and the vvithered faces shevve smoothe and fayre, yea, it vvill heale all infirmities, and cure all paynes in the vvhole bodie of man. VVhat is it to haue landes and houses, to abounde in siluer and golde, to be decked vvith Pearles and Dia∣mondes, yea, to possesse the vvhole vvorlde, and lacke health the principall Ievvell. Not vvithout cause therfore Agamemnō the vvyse and famous Captaine of the Greekes did highly esteeme and revvarde Machaon and Podalirius, by vvhose cunning skill in Chirurgerie, thousandes vvorthie Creekes vvere saued alyue, and healed, vvhich else had dyed and perished. But vvhy doe I here name Agamemnon, or the Grekes, vvhen as no age can be vvith∣out Phisicke, no person can lyue vvithout Chirurgerie, no countrie can mysse these noble mysteries. VVherefore I at this time to plea∣sure my countrie and friendes, haue published this nevve Iewell vnder your Honourable protection, that it maye more easily bee defended against Sycophants and fault finders, bicause your vvit, learning, and authoritie hath great force and strength in repressing the curious crakes of the enuious and bleating Babes of Momus charme.


