



SIR,
WHen I had resolued to publish this Sermon, which I lately preached to a mixt Audience and thought whose name  should vse in the fore-front fo protection and countenance of it, I considered that to your right Honourable Father I ough most duty; who (when I was deiected, for th losse of two noble Lords, both deceased in 




 short space, which acknowledged me in their life time,) to supply that want readily at the first motion of a Gentleman, a good friend of mine, accepted of me, and that with sweete words of singular incouragement. Since which time (as by speciall duty I haue beene bound) I haue vs'd his Honors name, by his permission and allowance, in my publike pray∣ers. But fearing, in regard of his superexcel∣lent worth, and the little value of that which I had now ready to exhibite to him, it might be thought too great presumption, to present such an vnpolisht piece of worke to his learned eyes, I thought it my best way rather to descend from the Father to the Sonne; and of all the ge∣neration, for peculiar respects, to single out your selfe, with due remembrance of your Ho∣nourable Lady.
It pleased God after your happy marriage o place you both for a time in that Religious and well-gouern'd City, where I am an vnwor∣hy Preacher and Pastor, and there (your Ho∣nourable Father first accepting of the Recor∣dership, in his loue to the Citie, and in the good opinion he had of the inhabitants for Re∣ligion)
 your selfe also tooke an affection to the people; and their loue being reciprocall to you againe, you soone became euen a member of the Corporation, and were elected to be a Par∣liament-man vnanimi consensu. And for the time you there continued, thanks be to God, many had comfort of you: The poore hauing great reliefe at your doore through your Chri∣stian bounty, and all sorts good example by your diligent frequenting of the publique exer∣cises both vpon the Sabaoth and the weeke∣dayes. And though my charge lay in another Parish, yet it pleased you both to take the paines to be partakers also of my poore Ministry in the other Church. These fruits being found in young beginners, haue giuen good hope of your further progresse in the way to life. I haue therefore now taken an occasion in all duty to be an exhorter vnto you to this end, that ye ne∣uer abate any thing of your loue to GOD and his truth; nor suffer your selues to bee with∣drawne from the Christian Faith, which you haue receiued by any seducers or bad exam∣ples, which abound in this licentious age: But that ye walk on constantly & labour to grow in
 grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus; knowing that this will bee your only comfort another day, when all the world shall not stand you in any stead.
To prouoke you forward heereunto, let me but propound vnto you your Honourable Fa∣thers example, whose steps God and Nature bindeth you most to obserue. In the Faith no man more sound, making the sacred Canon of the Scripture the onely rule of his beliefe: and in the exercise of his authority, and execution of his great Office, and in the course of his life, following the holy rules thereof religiously.
Now as other Ornaments of Art and Nature make him illustrious to them that know him, so t is remarkable, that his religious practices do not any whit eclipse his reputation, but make him the more to bee magnified in the sight of good men, aboue others of his ranke. As Schollers and learned men in all Sciences ho∣nour him for those abilities which are most in equest with them, so for better things the Church of Christ taketh comfort in him, the Tribe of Leui blesseth him, and the GOD of eauen crowneth him with multiplicity of his
 mercies. In the race therefore that you haue to runne (Right Worshipfull) like a good Sonne, follow a good Fathers steps. Now let time be precious with you, & dum vires anni{que} sinunt, while strength serueth, be studious, and industriously labour for knowledge and true wisedome. Remember your Creator in the dayes of your youth; and serue the GOD of hea∣uen constantly with a perfect heart, that the blessings of Wisedomes right hand and left may be vpon you heere, and that you may find mercy and saluation in that great Day; when neither birth, nor blood, nor riches, nor any worldly priuiledge, but onely a good consci∣ence shall be regarded. And so I humbly take my leaue, praying GOD to knit your hearts firmely one to another, and more firmely vnto God, that louing and liuing together in his feare for the time you haue to spend in thi world, you may both be partakers of the grac of life together in his heauenly Kingdome.

