



SIR,
FRom me perhaps you expected Physicall Aphorismes, rules and directions for ealth, as from a Physician;
 rather then Theologicall A∣phorismes, doctrines of salva∣tion, as from a Divine. And I confesse, considering my Pro¦fession, it had been more pro∣per for me to have sent ove such unto you. But such is th nature and condition of man whilest he lives here below▪ under the clouds, that no Pro¦fession can priviledge him from storms and tempests, an from injuries of weather: In¦somuch that even Physician themselves many times becom Patients. The Great worl is a Theatre, in which ar acted nothing but Tragedie of humane miseries. Ever man hath his Intrat, as soon a he is born: He acts (if 
 may call it Acting, and not ather Suffering) all his life: He findes no Exit, till he de∣scends into the chambers of death; to put off his dresse. I may truly call the Great world, The Common school of Patience; and every Socie∣tie, a Private; and every Per∣son in each Societie being a Little world within himself, an Epitome or Module of the Great. To School we must, to learn Patience: And where should a man learn Christian Patience but in the School of Christ? And where is that but in the Scripture & Books of Devotion? I for one have been so exercised in a World of Sufferings, that it hath
 driven me to the School of Christ to learn Patience, and according to the counsel of the Apostle, In all estates to be content, and troubled at no∣thing whatsoever can happen to me from without, consider∣ing that nothing comes to passe without a Divine Providence. Apollonius, as Philostratus reports, being asked if he did not tremble at the sight of the Tyrant, made this answer, , God which hath given him a ter∣rible Countenance, hath gi∣ven also unto me an undaunt∣ed Heart. And it is the say∣ing of S. Chrysostome, .
 It is not so much the nature of Things, as the weaknesse of Persons. Troubles happen alike to all: but all are not alike troubled. Fire is one and the same for Nature: but for Effect it is not alwayes the same. It con∣sumes wood and cole: but it purifies gold and silver. The Sunne softens wax, and har∣dens clay. The Light is com∣fortable to the sound, but trou∣blesome to the diseased. The saying of Apollonius I may ap∣ply thus unto my self, Though God hath suffered storms and tempests to arise and to be stir∣red up against me, yet he hath not suffered me to be removed or cast down. Though for∣tune
 frown upon me, yet (I thank God) having a chearfull heart, I can smile upon her. And the saying of S. Chry∣sostome I may thus apply, Though troubles have come upon me, yet (I thank God who hath given me Patience.) I have not been troubled. But among many crosses no∣thing hath more afflicted me then the death of him who tru∣ly honoured you in his life, and was truly beloved by you to his death, my dear brother Fran∣cis Winterton, late one of her Majesties Privie Chamber. Ʋn∣happy man! But shall I call him unhappy in his death, who was most happy in his life? That I cannot: He that
 lived well, certainly could not but die well. Shall I call him unhappy because he died in a strange Countrie? Nay, rather happy in this, because he died for his Countrie. Shall I call him unhappy in this, because he is taken from me? This were to love my self more then him, and to envie his happi∣nesse. Or shall I grieve that I my self was not with him to take care for him for things ne∣cessarie in time of life, and for his funerals after death? He wanted neither comfort in life, nor honourable buriall after death. Ever let my tongue be tied and my hand dried up, if I do not as a poore scholar serve him with both who was so care∣full
 for him, I mean that most Heroicall Worthie (with the splendour of whose Titles and Greatnesse I dare not presume to set a lustre on so small a work as this, but shall ever ad∣mire and proclaim his Vertues and Goodnesse) who of his in∣nate and noble disposition lo∣ved all his followers in gene∣rall, as his fellow-souldiers, and my brother in speciall; who to his power provided for all, as for his own familie, but made much of him in health, as a faithfull servant; took care for him before his death, as for a friend; lamented for him at his death, as for a brother; and after death, saw him honoura∣bly buried, as a souldier. I will
 not then lament his death who is translated into a better life; Neither will I weep for him that is in joy; Nor put on mour∣ning-clothes for him that is clo∣thed with immortalitie. If it was any unhappinesse for him to die, it is his friends not his. I wept for him when he was a∣live: and then he seemed to me to die when I left him on ship∣board at Graves-end. The next news I heare, he lies bu∣ried at Custrin in Silesia. Whom sea and land and death hath parted, I hope blessed Eter∣nitie shall at length bring to∣gether again. So I leave him and return to you. Sir, I hope you will pardon this digressi∣on, or rather count it no di∣gression
 at all, to speak of him whom I know you dearly loved. But I was speaking of my troubles: for which still I find a remedy in the Sanctua∣rie. For my manner is, when troubles seize upon me, pre∣sently to retire my self into my study, and take in hand some book of devotion. So present∣ly after I parted from my bro∣ther, I took in hand Drexelius his Enchiridion of Eternitie: And since, upon a new occasi∣on offered, I renewed my ac∣quaintāce with Doctour Ger∣hard. It were fit that I should present my service unto you my self in mine own person, consi∣dering my many obligations to you, and your kind invitations
 of me: But being otherwise hin∣dred, I have sent Gerhard in my place, who dedicates him∣self and his best service to ho∣nour you & your progenie. Con∣cerning whom I may truly say thus much, If you make him your Counseller and Compani∣on, you shall never be without a walking Library: So full is he of Scripture, Fathers, and Schoolmen. Concerning my self I can say no more but this, (for I know not how to com∣plement) I am and ever shall be in all hearty affection

