



Right Honour:
IT was a tart and yet true censure of the Popes Clergie,
Bonifac. E∣pisc. In Tri∣burensi con∣cil: Quan∣do Sacerdo∣tes habui∣mus aureos,  vasis lig∣neis utebā∣tur, nuno eum ligneos sacerdotes habemus, aureis va∣sis utuntur
That they had golden Chali∣ces, but wooden Priests. The like may not unfitly bee affirmed of some women, who have golden garments, and guilded bo∣dies, but wood∣den, or leaden soules.
Ber. Epist. 113. For as St. Bernhard said of
some. Induuntur purpura & bysso, & subinde consci∣entia pannosa ia∣cet. They are clad with Purple and silke, but the consci∣ence in the meane while lies torne and tattered. Fulgent monilibus; sed sordent moribus, (saith the same Au∣thour)
they shine and make a brave shew with brace∣lets and Iewels, but are base and sordid in their maners and con∣ditions.
But it was farre∣otherwise with your Honours worthy kinswomā, whose adorning was not
outward in wea∣ring of gold, or putting on of ap∣parell,
1 Peter 3.3, 4. but the or∣nament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is much set by in the sight of God. Therefore I have the rather presumed to prefixe your Noble name to this discourse of
mine (how meane soever) hoping of Your Honours ac∣ceptance, in regard of the relation that it hath to that most worthy, & (in mine opinion) matchlesse Gentlewoman, of whose rare vertues, and singular graces Your Lordship hath often beene an eye∣witnesse,
and admi∣rer. So that I am assured you will thinke it no preju∣dice to Your High and profound stu∣dies to cast your eyes upon such an hea∣venly body, and sub∣limated soule, as she was, but rather ac∣count it as a meanes to refine Your deepe
contemplations, and make them ascend above the Stars and al inferiour Orbs even into the third Heaven,
2 Cor. 12.2, 4. . where the Apostle heard un∣speakeable words, which is not possible for man to utter, which all Arts and Sciences are igno∣rant of, save that
which is called Ars artium, & Scien∣tia scientiarum, to wit, Divinity.
For this blessed Gentlwoman was the mirrour of her time, considering her Age, and Pa∣rentage, and may bee a Patterne to Posterity, both for admiration, and I∣mitation,
Because she so seriously bent her best indeavours to the best things. For having once found that Pearle of greatest price,
Matth. 13. ver. 45, 46. she was willing with the wise Merchant to part with all for the purchase of it, as being the only or∣nament of men and women, surmoun∣ting
al other pearls and precious stones. She was able to dis∣cerne of thing; that differ, and did approve the things that are excellent, so that she became, wiser than the ancient, because shee kept GODS precepts,
Psalm. 119.100. wherby she was ripe
for heaven, before others of her age, and quality, begin so much as seriously to set themselves to∣wards that holy place. She could not satisfie her selfe, as most doe, with that which went for Re∣ligion in Salvi∣ans time,
Genus quod  sancti∣tatis, minus esse vitiosu. Salv. De Guber. lib. 3. pag. 88. when it was counted some
kind of Sanctitie to bee lesse sinfull than others.
Phil. 3.13, 14. But forgetting that which was be∣hinde, and reach∣ing out to that, which was be∣fore, shee pressed toward the mark, for the high cal∣ling of GOD in Christ Iesus.

Therefore I had two speciall motives which induced mee to wenter this little labour into the light in this curious, and criticall age.
First,  To preserve the happie memory of Your Lordships deare and well-de∣serving Neece, who was worthie
to be had in ever∣lasting remem∣brance.
Secondly, 
Your zeale hath pro∣voked very many, 2 Cor. 9.2. That by her zealous and Heavenly Exam∣ple J might (if it were possible) wa∣ken and quicken the dead, and drouzie hearts of men and women, who in the worst things want
the bridle, but in the best the spurre. J know that the best men or women, want warmth and heate in this old, and cold age of the world, therefore I thought so lively, and spark∣ling a spirit as shee had, might bee of much force to make many, either blush
for shame, or burne with zeale for the glory of God.
Thus Noble Lord having had often experience of Your rare humility and courtesie, as also of your approved piety and charity; I was willing by these lines to let the world know, how much J
honor you, and your choyce learning, mixt with singular modesty, and inge∣nuity, which is in∣deed true Nobility But being perswa∣ded that you had ra∣ther do things prais∣worthy than read your own praises,
Facere lau∣danda quā audire lau∣data malu∣isses. I. rest, and humbly take leave, with all
due respect and ser∣vice to your Noble selfe, and much ho∣noured Lady, be∣seeching the Al∣mighty to drop downe his best bles∣sing upon you both.

