



SCIPIO hauing a great summe of money sent him from a mighty and mag∣nificall person, saide, hee had rather hee could rule him that gaue it, then receiue his gift: his ingratefull acceptance of so great a present, had almost dismaide me to offer a peece of paper, but that I pre∣sume of you, as neighbours.
That diuine Plato saith, a man is not borne for his owne be∣nefite onely, but for others: and S. Peter willeth eery one to mi∣nister the gift, as he hath receiued to others: I hope therefore you will not mislike him that doth manifest his good meaing vnto you, but weigh a well-willer by his mind, as the wi s by her myte.
There are many like the floud Tagus in Spe, which carry a show without substance, as that doth a grauell like gold, & yet are so selfe-conceited, that they contemne all other: whose iudgements if they come to be tried in deede, are as farre from sence, as the blind man was from sight, when he could not discerne men from trees. Mark. 8.4. A man to perceiue he is ignorant (saith Di∣dymus) is a token of wisedome: then what shall we estimate these who thinke none wise but themselues, the more learned a man be, the more lowly he should beare himselfe saith Cicero, they should
 d well to remember S. Ambrose wores, no man may profite so much in hearing, but while he liueth, he shall haue neede to be taught.
There bee some that stand altogether vppon Academicall tearmes, who accompt no writers good but graduates: As all men ought to reuerence schooles of learning, so no scholler is to haue honor for his degrees, but his learning. Yet we must not all∣wayes tie Gods giftes, to meanes: for hee woorketh, when, where, and how he pleaseth. To censure men by outward circumstances, when their actions are sincere: or to thincke the worse of their attemptes, because they want fronted titles, are iestes fit for Iewes: for when they could find no fault at Christs doctrine, they sought to impaire it, by his birth and bringing vp: Whence cōmeth this wisedome and great workes, is not this the Carpen∣ters sonne. Matth. 13.54. A poore craftes-man instructed Apollos, a very mighty and eloquent man. Act. 18.27. Yet hee disdained not his counsell by his crafte.
Tully saith truely, Omnes eos contemnunt, de quibus male existimant. Let a worke be neuer so perfect, a mans enemy will depraue it, he that enuies the Actor, will neuer aduaunce his action, be it neuer so vertuous: such men as these, are not to be medled with: for as S. Chrysostome saith, they are sooner van∣quished with silence, then with aunsweares: for malice is sooner stirred, then staid with wordes: and as for malice, it drinkes the most part of his owne poyson, and therefore the Philosopher proo∣ueth the venome of a malitious man to be woorse, then of the ser∣pent: for the venome that serpents haue, for the destruction of men, they keepe it without their owne perill: but malice, hurteth him most that doth retaine it.
There be others that like the Iewes, value mens woorkes by their weaknes, as they did the blind-mans sayinges by his sight:
 Thou art altogether bo anes, doest thou teach  Iohn. 9.34. S. Gregory saith well, God spareth some heere t torment afterward, others he doth punish, which hee will after∣ward spare: If thou hast not tasted of troubles, I say as Seneca did, I iudge thee to be miserable, that neuer knewest misery. It is good for a man (saith Ieremy) to beare the yoake in his youth. Lament. 3. Yet there is no reason that any common impediments should impaire a credible action: for who wil thinke the woorse of a pretious stone, because it is taken from an infectious toade, or of a bullion of gold, because it is digged out of the filthy ground, or of Salomons workes because he was giuen to wantonnesse.
There be others that take no pleasure, but in ploddi for earthly mucke, who esteeme learning to bee madnesse as Feus did Act. 26. it makes me remember a prety merryment of a coun∣trey-man, who looking vpon an Ape in a Dutch-mans shop, ws mockt and mowed at, insomuch as he rebuked the Ape, and sad his parentes had well brought him vp: one which stood by, td him it was no child but an Ape, good Lord (saith he) what e thinges the Dutch-folkes can make for money: these cynic aer∣sons, are like the countreyman: for I haue heard some of them ay of good bookes, as he did by the Ape, what toyes and deuises  inuented for money, and in deede, doe repute them to be nothin els, but the practises of idle wittes, these drdges do esteeme more of a penny, then a good booke, as Esops cocke did of a barley corne, better then a pearle, and therefore may bee fitly resembled to the Poets fiction: for their desires like Danaae, will bee pleased with nothing but a shower of gold.
There is an other sort of people that liue like wenills by the malt, all vpon the spoyle, as delighting in nothing els, but such things as be incident to these common hacksters. Vaine spending, ill speaking, idle liuing, vnlawfull gaming, with whome a good
 action is as much set by as a sheepekeeper amongst the Egyptians. Gen. 46.34. If the Romanes would punish such as went in the streetes without a badge of their occupation, how are they to bee delt with that haue no faculties or honest trades to take to? If the Statute for vagabonds made in ann. 14. Eliz. were well looked to, many of these would come within the compasse of it: for they can hardly giue accompt of their liuing.
There be others that like Hanun, are ready to crosse a man with vnkindnesse for a good turne, as he did Dauid with discour∣tesie for his good-will. Ingratitude in these dayes is as common as a dish of snailes amongst the Grecians, therefore true is that say∣ing of Tacitus, an ill turne is sooner requited then a good: for thancke is reputed a charge, but reuengement an aduauntage. There be few such as Elisha liuing: for when hee had receyued kindnesse of the Shunanimite, he could not rest till he had requi∣ted it. 2. King. 4. very sensible is that saying of Seneca, a good man doth all thinges well, if hee doth all well, hee cannot bee vn∣knd: it is a dishonest person (saith Plautus) that knowes how to take a benefite, and not how to requite it; Is there any man that carries such a minde (saith Tully) that he will be vnmindfull of a good turne? For this cause the heathen men made a law to pu∣nish the vnthankefull persons with death, it was so odious in all ages.
Neighbours and friendes, I goe not about to beard any man (especially such as be ciuill) for I am of this minde, he that offers me the least pleasure, shall find me ready to requite it, if displea∣sure without cause, ego illum flocci pendo. Haue you not such amongst you, as make a comment of mens credites, that maligne those that carry not their mindes, that iest and iere at others mi∣series, that will talke what they please without controlement, that are of no accompt, and yet are countenanced. Are there not ma∣ny
 whisperers and , that goe betweene the barke  tree, which doe d  and exasperate great men to take a∣way all estimation an eing from good men, & make but a sport of it, and yet S. Hierome saith, he that diminisheth the loue in a mans hart from his neighbour, more offendeth then he that puls the meat out of the mouth of a hungry beggar: for like as the soul is more pretious then the body, so is the food of the soule of more estimation then the nourishment of carraine.
What greater griefe can be to the godly then to see abiectes to insult, and be most set by, or bad fellowes to be secrete informers and yet borne with: dwell not (saith Plato) where superfluous expences doe surmount thy reuenues, nor where ill men be more made on then good men. Was there any thing more afflicted Dauids minde then to behold the fauour and flourishing estate of the wicked more then others? I can speake somewhat by expe∣rience, the time was, when one being persecuted amongst you (as the best that feare God may fall) it was a world to see how the ma∣lice of the wicked wrought? disgrace him what y can, saith one, driue him out of towne saith another, with many such impudent speeches, as ought not once to be conceiued amongst Christians: for as one of the fathers saith, that which is sha  to vtter, is so to thincke: if the seely worme will turne agine wich is trode on, what cause hath this to speake that was thus spited.
Alexander the Empero earing that an old woman was ill intreated of one of his soours, he discharged him out of his seruice, and gaue him in bdage vnto the woman, that by his craft being a carpenter, he might get her liuing for amends: if all were so serued that deserue it woorse then the souldior, there would be lesse emulation, and better communication amongst men. But as Cato, inueighing against lewd people, said, it was in vaine to talke to a belly that lacketh eares, so it is friuolous to
 infourme these, whose tounges are like the poyson of aspes, whose eares are as deafe as the adders, whose hartes are lesse pittyfull then Iewes. Yet this I will say, I neuer knew any man vnkind and cruell to another, that hath not bene met with the like in his life time, vt sementem feceris ita & metes. Boetius reportes that one Busyris a giant, did alwayes vse to kill his gestes: Hercules lodging in his house as a guest afterward killed him, little did Manasses thincke to haue bene fettered in iron chaines, when h afflicted many good men, or Paul to haue bene whipt and impr¦soned, when he persecuted the Saintes, or Sampson to haue bene a laughing-stocke, when he was in full strength: therfore no man knowes what hangs ouer his owne head, but that he or his may be∣come one day a pray or a prouerbe to his enemies, aswell as others.
There is no gardeine that hath flowers, but hath weedes: nor any place that hath good-men, but hath bad, there was one tray∣tor among the twelue Apostles: there was Cham aswell as Sem in Noahs Arke. If tenne righteous men could not be found in Sodom, which was a great Citie, you must not thincke much though there be some lewde people in Bury which is but a towne: These and such as these, I vtterly exempt out of this dedication, but for the best and most ciuile sort, as I were loth any way to of∣fend them, so I thought good to bestow this treatise vpon them in testimony thereof; desiring nothing but a frendly acceptance for my paynes, and a good-word in recompence for my good-will. So not omitting any necessary duety I com∣mit you to the tuition of the Al∣mighty.
