


NOt wythstandynge (ryght worshipfull) I haue attempted an en¦terpryce in prouynge eche parcel of the pryuye masse to dysplease god, whiche I can ney∣ther word, matier, ne reason accor¦dynglye, and so am rather dysly∣ked then lyked of manye for thys my doyng, rather heady then hee¦dy as they suppose: Howebeyt in case the sayd persons woll wythe me earnestly respect my bounden
 deutie in the sayd doyng, they (I doubte not (woll be rathere con∣tented then discontēted with me for the same. For why? it is godes oppen wyll that not they alone, whom he hath mercifully delyue¦red ten or fyue talentes vnto,Mat. xxv. but they also, who haue freelye recea¦ued at hys mercye handes, but one talent, shuld occupy the same, to hys most auauntage, & not en∣wrappe it (to his great hinderan¦ce) in a napkyn. Lesse he wolde therfore withdraw it from theim, and delyuer it to the well occupy¦ers, either of the fyue or ten talen¦tes heretofore especyfied (A clear ensample wherof is for our lear∣ning recorded ī Math. xxv) By re¦sō wherof, albeit I am but slēder∣ly knowledged ī scriptur matters in respect of others, whose know∣ledge is ten or fyue talentes too myne one, & so am not hable to a∣uale and gane therwith any thīg
 so much, as they wt thers, who ar passingly skylled in the mattiers before said: This not withstādīg I must occupy my talent & auan∣tage so much therby vnto ye lord, as I can possyble, to the full dis∣charge of my bonden dew herin, otherwise straitely charged with al.luke. xvi. For we must all become accom¦ptable to ye dreadful lord for our receipt & stewardship.luke. xvi Who so sai¦th Christe,Math. 14. is not faithful in a ly∣tle is not trusty ī moch. We must al be busely occupied tyl he come, eche man in his call accordyngly No man must attempt to appear before hym whithoute hys offre,Deut. xvi. more or lesse, according to his ha∣blenes herein, which he estemeth, and not ye value & bygnes of the offredge.luke. 21. Though the sely poore wydowe offred but two mytes in to ye lordes cheast, yet was she no lesse regarded of hym therfor, thē the great rych men, who offred in
 to the same much more. Eche mā (sayeth Hierome) offreth in to the lordes house what he can, Some golde, syluer & {pre}cyous stone, So¦me eyther goteskinnes, or ye hea∣res of the same. For ye lord nedeth all these, And he is egally pleased with them, who haue vnegally o∣ffrede. In respecte wherof I haue offred vnto hym, this my symple poor myte or goate heare, trustīg he wol of hys mercye, both accept ye same, & occasion hereby others, to wryte more groundely & clerk∣ly in thys matteir, whych I haue chosen rather then an otheyr too ētreate vpon, In respecte ye treate therof is both right avaylable & nedefull to hys churche, & so avā∣tageable to him selue, In yt it en∣forceth much to ye discontinuance & owerthrowe of ye pryuat masse, wherin we are most piteously blin¦ded, to ye great dysworshipe bothe
 of our sauyour & hys moste holy communyō. This myne attempt (which as ye se, not of pride but of mere conscience I am ēforced to) not wythstandynge I haue of∣fred to the lorde: Houbeit I ensu¦eng ye prayse worthy vsage of of∣ferers herein doo offre ye same to som other beside, namely to your worshipful mastership, not ye I ad¦iudge it a {pre}sēt, worthy your wor∣ship, but yt I wold hereby opē my poore harte toward your mayster¦shyp, trustyng ye of your wonted vnspekeable gētlenes wol take it in good parte, not respectynge so muche the vylenes therof, as the good mynde of the presenter of ye same, who (vndoubtedly) hath {pre}¦sented, not all what he willyngly wolde, but what hym hably could theyrin. And thus I betake ye to god, whom I most enteirly be¦sech to enuiron you wt hys grace
 so to tread ye Kinges maieste ī all vertue, wisdome, and vnderstan∣dynge, as shalbe, fyrste to the hygh contentacion of god selue, & furtherance of hys trueth, second¦ly to the Kinges honour and weale of hys realmes, lastelye too youre greate worshyppe name and furtheraunce A∣men.
