



SAlomon, that most renowmed and royal King, waying the wretched∣nes of this world by the weight of his wonderfull wisedome, could no lesse but redouble his words, and saie: Vanitas vanitatum,Math. 7.33. vanitas vanitatum, & omnia vanitas. Which seeing it is so (Right Worshipfull) it behoueth euery one of vs, not so much to auoid the causes that maie prouoke vs to vanitie, as to practise all the meanes that may pro∣cure vs to pietie; and to walke with such foresight in this terrestriall pilgrimage, as wee may haue fruiti∣on of felicitie in the coelestiall Paradise; according to the counsell of our Sauiour Christ, who willeth vs first to seeke the kingdome of GOD and his righ∣teousnes;Colos. 3 2. and not dissenting from the saying of the Apostle,Eccle. 1.2. who perswadeth vs to set our affections on things that are aboue, and not on things that are on the earth. Insomuch, as all our knowledge is but vaine that is seduced with vanitie; all our wisedome
 is but meere follie that is carried away with earthly cogitations; yea, all our dooings detestable that tend onelie to temporall dispositions: for there is none to be deemed wise indeed, that will not bestowe his ta∣lent in the treasure of Gods word, considering it is so precious that it ought more to bee desired than gold, yea than much fine gold;Psal. 19 10. Psalm 119.97. and it is so delectable, that in sweetnes it exceedeth the honie & the honie combe; wherein Dauid did oppose his whole delight. And it is so expedient for vs to profite therein, as he that hath much may yeeld somewhat, sithence he that hath lesse shall not bee excused with nothing. The Lord will looke for tenne talents where he left fiue,Matth. 25.22. and wil pu∣nish him that maketh no profite where he bestowed one. Hereof it is I haue proceeded in this enterprise, & bestowed my time to the benefite of others; which although it bee not comparable to any commendable woorke, yet that is not excusable for any to detract his duetie, seeing God will accept a mite of a willing minde; neither ought to be contemptible amongst o∣thers though all bee not currant, for the building is furthered by inferiour helpes though it be framed by finer heads. Againe, the world is now growne into his last age, wherein sects, schismes, and errors doo spread, and sinne and iniquitie aboundeth; insomuch as (I feare me) it is with many of vs in England, as it was with the people of Israel,Exod. 16. they loathed Manna that fell from heauen for the sustenance of their bodies, and too too many of vs doo little regard that spiritual Manna (the word of God) that is sent for the succour of our soules. Hereof it is I haue made choice of your good Worships, and presented my labours to your
 godlie patronage, assuring my selfe that as you bee fa∣uourers and followers of Gods word, so you will be defenders of the fruites of the same, and rather be pre∣ferrers than defacers of a forward action: not doub∣ting but your Worships will well accept of it, as a worke importing and proceeding of good will, by the consideration of that excellent example of the poore widowe, preferring the simplicitie of the giuer before the sufficiencie of the gift; knowing that the imperfection of the present may bee couered by the presumption of the Poet; and I may say in the want of well doing, Est voluisse satis. Thus being loath to be too tedious in my Epistle, hauing obserued breui∣tie in all the whole booke, I referre the conside∣ration thereof to your graue censures, sub∣mitting my selfe to your good curte∣sies, & committing your Wor∣ships to the protection of the Almightie.

