



THE discipline of good conuersation (gentle Mayster Lewes) stan∣deth chieflye, or rather altogether in ij. poyn∣tes: that is, in doctrine, and exercise. By doctrine is taught to know what should be done, by that other, men be broughte to custome, that they be willinge & rea∣dye to put in execution that, which they haue learned. And the one of these with out the other is maymed & vnperfecte. Wherfore Moyses semeth to haue ta∣ken better fourme of gouernement, thē any politike ruler of the heathen, in his lawes makynge. For where the Lace∣demonians and Cretians ordered al by doinges and vse, withoute muche a do makyng in wordes: and contrary wise the Athenians spente longe space in de∣crees making, but were slacke in requy∣rynge the performaunce of the same: Moyses most diligently hath coupled

And ioygned them so together, that ne∣ther he parted good custome of liuynge from doctrine, nor suffered doctrine to be wtout inuring of workes. But because they shoulde agreablye be matched, he aswell made lawes for reste and forbea∣rynge of workes, as he did for the dily∣gence of labour to be occupied, not that theyre ceasynge from workes shoulde mayntayne idlenes and slouth, but that therby they might be guyded by know∣ledge, and that their offences shoulde not be cloked or excused by ignoraunce. For that daye, that they rested (whyche they named therfore the Sabboth, and was not ones or twyse in the yeare, but euerye weke ones on the seuenth daye) they came together to here the lawe of God, wherin was conteyned all suche thynges, as they shoulde do and expres in their behauiour.
The maner of their comming toge∣ther (as Philo telleth) was thus. When the ordinarye day came, they assembled to their temples with muche spede, and there did sitte geuing good audience, & diligenteare to the scriptures, onlesse at tymes wyth one accorde, they spake a word in commendation of that, yt was

there saide, & redde, and the priest or one of the elders rehersed the lawe, and ex∣pounded it, and this fashion they vsed at the seuenth day, till the euening tide, and then departed. By meanes wherof they neded not to aske of the lawiers what they shoulde do, nor coulde be in their euill discharged by any colored ex∣cuse of lacke of knowledge, but the hus∣band to the wife, the father to his chyl∣dren, maisters to their seruauntes, decla¦red the commaundementes of the law. Thus was doctrine taught one daye, & exercise and practise all the weke after, was put in execution, and vsed.
Whatsoeuer labour letted them from resorting to the hearing of the law, was straightly forbiddē, & sharpe payne ap∣pointed for correction of the offendours therin. Nowe if this precise order was vsed on the Sabboth daye, vnder Moy∣ses, & his doctrine so duely taught, and all to bringe men to a ciuill order, & out∣ward rightewesnes: howe muche more nedefull is it, yt we, which profes christ, be busied in learninge the lawes of the gospel, the law of the sprite, the word of life, which whosoeuer knoweth, shal re¦ceaue for their obedience & honest cōuer¦sation









not only reward temporal in this life, but also in ye world to come saluati∣on of our soules, & life euerlastinge. Let it not therfore greue vs, which be in the daylight of the gospell, on the dayes of assembling together deuoutly to vse our selues: seing the Hebrues, ye were hud the cloudy shadow & letter of the lawe, shewed thēselues so willing & forwarde to obserue the same. For albeit the Ie∣wysh Sabboth touching ye seuenth day be abrogated & expelled, yet is not the cō¦maundement of ye Sabboth sanctifiyng disanulled, but remaineth stil as a head¦ful part of christian religion, cōteyning all such due seruice, as belongeth to the glory of god. And for that cause our el∣ders (when otherwise blind ignoraunce had ouershadowed the hole world, that the Sabboth might reuerently be halo∣wed) ordeyned by act of parlament, yt in thys realme no fayres nor markettes shuld be kept vpon the sonday, or other solēne feast, as vpon christmas day, ea∣ster day, with sōday, & ascension day, as appeareth in the actes of Henry the .vi. king of this realme. But nowe, whē for our knowledge we should be better: tho¦rough vnbrideled libertie, we be growē

to such badnes, yt al (law of god & mā) set aside, men be wholy geuē ouer to folow their lustes on ye sabboth daies, not only by going to markets, fayres, & gasinge games, but also by misusing their time, (yt shuld be spent in reading or hearing of ye word of god, in praier, and visiting of ye poore) in beare baiting, hauking, hū¦ting, dāsing, carding, dising, bāquetting & other kindes of riot & surfetting. And thus make those daies most vnholy of al the weke, & worthier to be named idle dayes for their euil occupiyng of ye rest, then holy dayes for any halowed wor∣king: where our rest frō workes of body should be an earnest exercising of oure sprites in goostly doinges. Wherfore it is to be wished, yt a reformation and re∣dresse might be taken therin by the ma∣gistrates, for the restoring of the sabboth to it owne propre kinde. And because I perceaued yt this treatise of maister Iu∣lius of Milayne, declareth & handleth this matter at large, I thought good (so as I coulde) to turne it into oure natiue speche, yt therby ye christiā reders might learn what their office is on ye holy day¦es, & se how far we be swarued oute of frame from the true natural vse therof.

And albeit ye argument be vniuersall, & mete for all men for the matter, yet it specially semeth verye fitting, yt it be de¦dicated to your gētlenes: aswel for that you be geuen to the study of ye Italian tong (ye by reading herof you mighte be an Aristarchus to examine how nere I haue gone to the Italian Phrase, & mea¦ning of ye author) as also because it was my duty to shewe some testimony vnto you, of the good hert ye I haue borne to you, euer sithēwe wre first conuersāt together, in familiaritie of cōpany, and conference of study, whiche as it began long agone, so hath it stil cōtinued, fixed & stedfast on my behalf. Pleaseth it you therfore to accept in good part this to∣kē small in quantitie, but great both for godlines of ye worke, & good will of the presenter, & chiefly for yt it is your wont gētlenes to set muche by any gift, ye co∣meth frō your herty frendes. And I shal dailie, as occasion & oportunitie serueth further vtter my faithfull loue toward you, by suche thynges as my habilitie shalbe sufficient to perfourme, & be a cō¦tinuall petitioner to god for youre pro∣sperouse healthe longe to endure. Fare you hertelye well. From Headcrone the .xxi. of Marche. 1552.
