



AMong all the Vertues (right Honourable,) there is no one which is more profitable, and in euery respect necessary for the safety and good of the humane societie, then Fortitude. Her fruites indeed which she bringeth forth are such, as that those Kingdoms and Common wealthes be blessed, whose Princes and Nobles be valiant. For there trueth, iustice and peace shall florishe. There shall no good thing be wanting.
The fame of this noble vertue is so great, that many of all sorts and degrees of men are enfla∣med to seeke her, bending their chiefe study and care, howe they may become right valiant and braue minded men. But the greater parte, for want of good direction, missing of the right way, and taking into the wrong, in steede of a pure vertue, light vpon a foule vice, which they em∣brace and make much of. Great pittie it is, that the mightie courage which is in many men, is

not framed aright. They know not how to clime vp on hie vnto the royall palace of this goodlie vertue, but imagin that they find her, not know∣ing her properties. I haue therefore written heere a few things (so farre as my small skill serueth,) to giue some light that way.
True it is, that this Image which in rude ma∣ner I haue drawne, deserueth not to be accoun∣ted so much as the line aments, and skiographie of Fortitude, so farre it is aboue my reach to han∣dle the matter as it is worthy. I wish with all my hart, that some Apelles woulde take in hande to draw her picture in the iust summetrie and pro∣portion, and with her liuely colours: that euen the great Princes and Nobles might take pleasure therein. I comming then so farre short of thys, may seeme rashe and worthy much blame, that I presume to offer so rude & so slender a discourse vnto the hands of your Honour. But I thinke I can remember sufficient reasons, to excuse my boldnesse heerein. As first of all, I am assured of this, that the vertue Fortitude, is so beutifull of herselfe, so well fauoured and so comely, that she neede not be ashamed, no not in her meanest at∣tire that can be put vpon her, to shew herselfe in the presence of great Princes. Then secondly, it is the cōmon hope & expectation of our whole Land, (at the least, of so many as carry faithfull harts to their Prince and Country, and loue to the truth) that God hath prepared your Honour as a right worthy instrument, furnished with an he∣roicall spirite for the defence of our most noble Queene and Kingdom. Then when any thing is written (although not so exquisitely) in the de∣fence

of Fortitude, against those which abuse her name, and doe but as it were steale her cloake to couer a vice, to whom shall the same bee offred more rightly for to seeke patronage, then to one of the chiefest of her noble sonnes? Thirdlie, I know, that such a poore Treatise, comming na∣kedly forth, will be little regarded among many, and so, if there bee any thing in it woorth the knowledge, it shall not profit: And moreouer, some matters in it will not bee pleasant vnto di∣uers men, which frame to themselues a fortitude contrary vnto that which I set foorth. This I doubt not of, but that they carry an affection towards the vertue, and loue those greatly which excell therein: wherefore I doe perswade my selfe, that for your Honors sake, euen among those which otherwise would tread it vnder their feete, it shall finde some fauour.
I doe therefore beseech your Honour, for these foresaide respects, to accept of so simple a thing as this is which I offer. I wish greater, for I wish and pray, that the most Mighty, the author & giuer of all good gyfts, will so farre increase in you that heroicall spirit of Fortitude, that your Honor may abounde in all noble and woorthie acts, to the praise of the most hie God, to the good of his Church, and to your owne eternall Honor.

