



I Am (right Honourable) to ex∣cuse my selfe in two thinges: the one, that I take vpon me to write against the Brownists, seeing there be so many great learned mē in our land, which doo refraine: the other, that I doo offer so slender a peece of woorke vnto your Honour. Touching the former, the truth is, I haue beene vnwares drawne vnto it, not purposing any such matter. For more then two yeares past, there were brought vnto me certaine articles which the Brownists doo call, A breefe sum of their profession, with diuers arguments against read prayer. They were brought vnto me by a Scholemaister in Essex, who of a godly minde▪ did desire mee to write my iudgement of the same, which when I refused, hee vrged me with this, that di∣uerse of the people about them were troubled, and did hang in suspense, and for their sakes he did require it, I did graunt his request, and when they had my writings, they were car∣ried to the cheefe men of that sect. Not long after, I receiued large replies, where I perceiued that which before I did not so much as dreame of, namely, that they had made chalenge, and looked to be encountred by the learnedest in the land. They take it greeuously, and reprehend me, as hauing inter∣cepted this businesse, and taken it from the hands of the learned. Heerevpon I stayed long, purposing to giue them but shorte answer to their chiefe matters. But when I sawe that aduantage was taken, as if I had receiued matters vnan∣swerable,

and that Brownisme did begin to spred in manye places of the land: I thought it not amisse, seeing the burthen thus to haue light vpon me, though I be not able to deale so sufficiently as such a matter requireth: yet to publish to the world some of their heresies, and frantike opinions, which are to be gathered from their writings. I haue not set downe the whole discourse of wordes, which hath passed betweene them and me, for it would be somewhat tedious. But if any shall thinke I haue passed any reasons of theirs vnanswered, or wrested their words from the true sence, to gather here∣sies: let them shew any particular, and I wil be able to cleere my selfe. And let men consider, whether the Brownisme can be supported by any pillers, but those heresies which I haue noted. I meddle not with the controuersies of our Church, but deale by way of admission. I neuer receyued the names of any subscribed to the writings I receiued, and for that cause I do name none. And now for the other point, why I presume to offer it vnto your honour. God hath gi∣uen your honour to be an auncient graue Counsellor, and which many yeares haue borne, and still doo beare, a great part of the waight of this our common-wealth, vnder her right excellent Maiestie: and for that cause I iudge it meete your Honor should see such things as any way touch the generall estate. I trust therefore, that although it be not for the slendernesse worthy to be offred to so honorable a per∣son, yet it shall be accepted in some sort. And touching your Honor, as I do not doubt of it but it shal be, so I wish & pray to God, that you may be one of those of whome it is writ∣ten, Psal. 92. The righteous shall flourish like a palme tree, and shall growe like a Cedar in Lebanon. Being planted in the house of the Lord, they shall flourish in the Courtes of our God, they shall still bring forth fruite in their age: they shall be fat and flourishing: to declare that the Lorde my rock is righteous, and that there is none iniquitie in him.

