



THE blessed & holy Euange∣list Saint Luke, (Right Hono∣rable) penning and publishing the Heauenlye story and bles∣sed Gospell of Iesus Christ, doth also dedicate the same to one Theophilus, a Noble and famous man, of singular credit and authority. The reason and

cause that mooued him thereto, is because in those times, the purenesse of the Gospell was hindred, and per∣secuted, whereby many erroures be∣gan to be spreade and allowed: and therefore in great Wisdom it pleased the holy Ghost, not onely to write a faithfull, sure, and perfect story: but also to offer and present the custodie and defence of the same, to one of Religion and Povver. The verye same cause, partly hath mooued me at this time, to bee so bolde as to offer and Dedicate this poore and simple testimony of my trauaile to your Honoures. For although I doe confesse, vvee liue vnder a Gracious Prince (whome the Lorde long con∣tinue to his glory, to the shame and confusion of his enemies, and to the dayly profit of his Church) although (I say) we liue in so peaceable, happy, and gracious a time, vnder the flow∣rishing state of the Gospell; yet true∣ly the dearest Children of God, and the sincerity of Religion, is subiect to bitter Persecution. These wordes at

the first may seeme verye greeuous, hard and haynous, and yet they are most certaine and true. The holy Apo∣stle S. Paul, writing to the Galatians, 4.29. speaketh on this maner: As he that was borne after the Flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the Spirite; euen so is it nowe: hee speaketh of Ismael and Isaac, and yet we do not reade in the scripture of any persecution be∣tweene them, neither did Ismael per∣secute his Brother Isaac, with hande or sworde, but that which is worse, proudly & arrogantly, he raised him selfe against him, mocking him, and as it were, treading vnder feete the promise of God. And this dealing by the apostle is cálled a persecution, & in deede there is not any persecution more greeuous to the Children of God then this. Nowe who doth not dayly see, that the best Christians, and the purenes of Religion are greatly persecuted, by Papists, Atheists, and Hipocrites, as Isaac was by his Bro∣ther Ismael, And of all matters of re∣ligion, I thinke there is scarse any in

these dayes more generally hated of such kind of men, then that, which is most altogether, & almost only hand led in this simple Sermō. For these & such like men, many of them can bee content with a common ordinarye profession, to heare Mattins and Euensong, and sometimes a Sermon, by such men as they like of, but that there should be any continuall course of the pure preaching of the worde of God, they can in no case allowe or like of. This I say, is hated, reiected and persecuted so farre as may be, of the greater sorte, and therefore not without cause haue I attēpted to de∣dicate this my labor, to your honors as special Patrons, & defendors of the Lords cause, & tried Friends and Fa∣uorers of God & his trueth. But yet this attempt may seem very raish and needles: For who am I, that I should take vppon mee to set foorth and to publish any thing. The vnworthiest I confesse of many hundreths, and the vnablest of manye thousands, and yet seeing many things more simple, lesse

needefull and profitable, are not only suffered, but alowed to come abroad: I am not altogether discouraged, nei∣ther hath any mā iust cause to accuse mee in this my simple enterprise. I know these be daies of knowledge & learning, there bee greate store of fa∣mous and learned diuines in our land (whom I beseech the Lorde to blesse, that they may assist their weake bre∣thren, in the defence of this, and such good causes,) and yet the two mites of the pore widow cast into the trea∣sury, amongest the great giftes of the wealthy, are not to be refused. I know your Honours be daily hearers of fa∣mous and learned men, both in your houses and abroad, you are acquain∣ted with the sermons of profound & deepe diuines, and such as are mighty in the scriptures: notwithstanding ha∣uing in my self sufficient trial & expe¦rience of your honors most curteous humble, & fauorable dealing towards me, and also of some liking of my simple & my poore trauelles in prea∣ching heretofore. I am not ashamed

or afrayd after such triall and proofe, to offer this so small and simple a thing vnto your Honours. The great necessity of the matter I deale with∣all, the care of Gods glory, the zeal of his house, the benefit that his church may haue by it, hath especially moo∣ued me that it should be published & come abroad. Let not therefore hy∣pocrites bee too rash in iudging, the Lorde the searcher of the hearts and reynes knoweth my purpose and af∣fection, in preaching and publishing this matter. The cause that hath mo∣ued me to present it to your Honors, rather then to other, is the lōg proof and acquayntance of your honoura∣ble courtesies, and friendlye good will towards me, which for my part, I am neuer able to requite, for the which I thinke my selfe as long as breath is in me, moste bound and in∣debted to your Honours. And here I offer this poore fruite of my trauaile, as some Testimony of good will and thankfulnes. And whereas wee are wont commonly to offer and present

to our dearest Friendes, some giftes, as tokens of good will, or else of spe∣cial duety. Amongst many great and precious presentes, vvhich are no doubt giuen and presented to your honours; I also offer this simple mite, and yet I hope more pleasant and ac∣ceptable to the receiuers, then thou∣sands of gold or siluer, or any earthly thing whatsoeuer. And in deede, can there be any matter more sweete and pleasaunt, to the cheefe Patrons and Defenders of the Godly Preachers, and the word of God, then to heare of the necessity, profite, and excel∣lency of preaching: which things, are set foorth plainly & largely in this lit∣tle Sermon. For howsoeuer many mē hate and abhorre this matter, and can in no case disgest it: yet your honours zeale, courage, liking, goodwill and countenaunce, to this and other good causes is cōmonly known and spreade abroad. A further reason why I pub∣lishe this Sermon, is because there is some matter in it, for the which I haue beene in the country where I dwell, o∣openly

slaundered and euill spoken off, and therefore to cleare my selfe from such false reports, to satisfie my friends which are readie to answer in my cause, to let the enemies knowe, I haue spoken nothing whereof I am a∣shamed, but dare put it to the witnes∣sing and testimonie of the Christian reader: and also to resolue more ful∣ly, the weaker sort, in such things as at the first seeme strange and absurd: for these and such like causes, I say, I am content and willing that this my trauell come to light: although the whole or most part of this Sermon is vnsauory & vnpleasaunt to the grea∣ter sort, and specially to the ignorant people, to the hypocrit, to the idol or dumb minister: yet this is that, which chiefly misliketh and grieueth them; because, both in the place where I pre¦ched this Sermon, and also elsewhere, I sayd and affirmed, that the minister which preacheth not, and hath not those gyftes which the Lorde requi∣reth in his Ministers, that such a one is no Minister, approoued of GOD,

neyther hath anye right and autho∣ritie from the Lorde, to mynister his Sacramentes; which matter, howe straunge and absurde soeuer it seeme to ignoraunt and carnall men: yet I hope it is heere sufficiently confir∣med by authoritye and examples of the holy Scripture. I coulde alleadge further, the allowaunce and iudge∣ment of most famous and pure Di∣uines, and such as are gennerally re∣ceyued and allowed of all true Chri∣stians. Master IOHN CALVIN, about the latter ende of his Cate∣chisme, which is allowed by her Ma∣iesties authoritie, sayth in playne wordes, that the ministration of the Sacraments belongeth to them, who haue the charge to preache openly in the Church. For the preaching of Gods worde, and the ministration of the Sacraments, be things ioyntly belonging to one kind of office: these be his very words which are as plaine as may be. M: Rodolphus Gualter in his 118. Homely vpon Mark, speaking of the institution of the Lordes supper,

and of the right order in ministring that sacrament, amongst other things sayth on this manner. Peccant qui coe∣nam abs{que} verbi predicatione peragunt, a∣deó{que} illam huic praeferunt, quasi vel ad dei cultum, vel ad salutem plus conferat, quam verbum, cum tamen huius maiorem quam sacramentorum rationem habuerunt Chri∣stus & Apostoli. They sinne against the institution of Christe, which doe mi∣nister the supper without preaching of the word, and so preferre the Sa∣crament before preaching: as though that auayled more to saluation and seruice of God, then the worde prea∣ched; whereas notwithstanding, both Christe and the Apostles esteemed more the preaching of the Worde, then the Sacrament: these are his wordes. I might alleadge many other testimonies for this cause, not onely from the most worthy, Godly, and learned diuines, both old and new of other Nations: But also from famous Martyrs and Byshops in this oure Lande, in their sermons and writings, published and priuileged by autho∣rity.

I hope then ther is no cause why this doctrin shold not receiue a fauo∣rable intertainment & allowance, as of your honors, so of al faithful Chri∣stians, hauing such warrant from so pure and learned men, and from the testimony of the holy word. VVhat soeuer I spake in deliuering and vt∣tering this sermon, I haue here set it down (so nere as I could remember) both in forme and matter. To con∣clude, I moste heartily desire in the Lord, the Christiā reader, & especially your honors, to accept this my pore trauell. I am bold to ioyn you both in one, not only because the Lord hath ioined you together in the bonde of friendship, & in a care of my good estate: but also that which is greatest of all, in a zeale of Gods glory & fur∣therance of his religion. Now the ve∣ry God of peace, sanctify you through out: and I pray God that your whol spirits and souls, and bodyes, may be kept blamelesse vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. Amen.

