



SIR, when J call to minde the reuerent and holy me∣mory of that godly Mar∣tyr both of your name, countrie, and house, M. Iames Bain∣ham, who died most constantly for the truth of the Gospell, as we haue his sto∣ry at large described in M. Fox, pag. 1030. and consider withall the great mercie of God, in continuing still vn∣to that VVorshipfull name and stocke, the same light of faith, and zeale of the truth, and holynes of profession: J no∣thing
doubt to say vnto you, as some∣time the holy Apostle wrote vnto Ti∣mothie, When I call to remem∣brance the vnfayned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and in thy Mother Eunice, and am assured that it dwelleth in thee also, 2. Tim. 1.5. So it cannot be but a great ioy and comfort to those that feare God, to see the posteritie of Martyrs, to retayne still the holy faith and profession of Martyrs: not only to be of their earth∣ly linage, but of the spirituall kindred also: not to be next them only in gene∣ration, but to folow them in regenera∣tion. And this example of your owne cloth, as it is vnto vs an occasion of reioycing, so to you it must serue, not as a spur to pricke you, but as a starre to direct you, and a line to leade & draw
you forward to al holy encrease of faith and zeale. That holy man, as he was vertuous in his life, deuoute in prayer, sound in faith, patient in his afflicti∣ons; so most of all was he constant and cheerefull in his death: who in the midst of his torments, and out of the raging flames of fire, thus spake with a comfortable and heauenly voyce: O yee Papists, behold, yee looke for miracles, & here now you may see a miracle, for in this fire I feele no more paine, then if I were in a bed of downe: but it is to me as sweet as a bed of Roses. How ought wee now to honor the memorie of this bles∣sed man, and how much are you to praise God, that hath giuen you out of your worshipfull house so worthie an example and encouragement to all Christian proceeding? J saye againe
with the same Apostle. Wherefore I put you in remembrance that you stirre vp the gift of God in you, &c. 2. Timoth. 1.6. And J doubt not, but that as it is true generally in the Church: Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae: the blood of the Martyrs is the seede of the Church: so more espe∣cially in your familie, that it hath been blessed of God, and made fruitefull, be∣ing seasoned as it were by the blood of so holy a man. Saint Ambrose saith, Passio Christi sufficit ad salutem, passio Martyrum contulit ad ex∣emplum: Christs death sufficient to saluation, the Martyrs death is effec∣tuall for example and instruction. You haue both Christs holy passion to saue you, and this Martyrs worthy exam∣ple and confession to instruct you. The memorie of this excellent man gaue me
occasion to present this Sermon vnto you, which came to my hands, which contayneth a profession of the same faith for the which he dyed, in you re∣uerencing his remembrance, and hono∣ring his faith: God graunt vs all the like zeale and holynes in our liues, that wee may haue the like comfort and cheerefulnes in our end.

