



THE sacred Scriptures (right worshipful) both of the olde and new Testament, do speake in sundrieplaces of Witches, Coniurers, & Sor∣cerers, and that such doings are in high de∣testation before God: but what these can do few of the vulgar sort do rightly vnderstand. For the most part do ascribe vnto them very foolishly, such power and efficacie in working, as in deede the deuill is not able to perfourme, though God should enlarge his chaine & giue him full scope to doe all that he desireth. Againe, some few are of the minde, that whatsoeuer is spoken in the ho∣ly Scriptures, or in other writers concerning things wrought by such kinde of people, it was not done by the deuill, but was a meere craft and cosenage of the deceiptfull men and women, which haue taken vpon them such matters▪ That the holy scrip∣tures haue no meaning to teach that deuils euer did any thing that way▪ And that all other writers haue erred which main∣taine the same power of deuils. The opinion of these latter is grosse, and in some sort contumelious, being against the direct testimonies of Gods word. The vaine conceipt of those former, that is to say, of the multitude, which imagine that Witches can worke at their pleasure, & so are the comon plague of the earth, breedeth so innumerable sins, that it is as a monster with many heads. It is no meruaile that ignoraunt men which despise the light of the gospel are deceiued by the crafty illusions of Satan: but this may seeme strange, that men instructed in the truth should be abused and erre though not in the grossest maner, yet grosly: but in deed the things are sildome handled by the prea∣chers of the holy word, at the least, in such full maner as might

cut downe all false opinions conceiued in mens mindes about the same. I haue therefore bin mooued vppon such considera∣tion to take some trauell, and set forth somewhat to conuince mens vaine opinions therein. I had not this minde, to set forth any large discourse what hath bin Iudged and deemed in for∣mer times by learned men, and what they testifie concerning the slights of deuills by oracles, diuinations and such vaine de∣ceipt: but onely to giue a taste to the simpler sorte euen from the doctrine of the bible vnto which I doo only leae. It may be some which haue lofty mindes, whom nothing can content, but that which is to their thincking absolutely perfect, will say it is slender, and to no purpose. It is that which I am able, not written for those which knowe more, neather to seeke the cō∣mendation of a learned worke: but in very deede to apply that small measure of knowledge which God in mercy hath giuen me, to the benefit of those that want it. If any with deeper skill shal reueale that which I haue not attained vnto, I will be right glad, not onely for my selfe, but also for our countrimen which greatly neede instruction in the same. I present it vnto your worship, not for the greatnes of the worke, but to testifie my hearty good-will: which in respect of that louing fauour, and friendship which your worship hath for certaine yeares shewed towards me, is great: but farre greater, because that your zeale hath bin shewed towards the gospell, and loue towards al those that publish and professe it. I trust your worship will take in good part this poore gift, considering from what minde it cō∣meth: there bee some things handled in it, which are vsually committed both in the city and in the country, that are horri∣ble before God, and to be seuerely punished by such as are pla∣ced in authority, and therfore not vnfit to be perused by them. The Lord which hath inriched your worship diuers waies with his good gyfts, increase and double the same to his honor and your eternall comfort. Amen.

