


THe complaint of many both learned and verie godlie persons, that the Church is burthened and incō∣bred with too great a multitude of bookes, is not made without cause, being grounded vpon the most holy worde of God, as also confirmed by experiēce, in that
 good houres are vnprofitablie spent, pietie with true holynes not a little hindred and impai∣red. Howbeit, it seemeth rather to be directed against vaine fri∣uolous and trifling pamphlets, wherein lewde and ignorante persons haue onely taste and de∣light, but especially against mō∣strous inuentions, vncleane and impure writings, which doe in∣fect and defile, both doctrine & manors (thereby deseruing as a most contagious and pestilent ayre to be consumed and dissol∣ued with fire from amongst the people of God) and not against
 the wise and learned trauailes of godly men, whose whole pur∣pose and indeuour, is to profite the Church, and to further the knowledge and religion of the Lorde. For varietie of good and profitable bookes, seemeth to be necessarie (and therefore would not be wanting) both for the increase of knowledge and learning, because one man, or a fewe, see not all thinges, as also for that euery man writeth not in one forme and maner, and therefore cannot answere the capasitie of euerie one, for some fitte themselues sor smale and
 meane capacities, and some for learned and great vnderstan∣ding. Besides, one hath neede of one speciall instruction, and one of another, this man deligh∣teth in one comforte and reme∣die against his temptation, and an other in that which best aun∣swereth his infirmitie. Further∣more, Sathan hath daylie newe deuises to assaile the faith of Gods elect, and to drawe thē in∣to sinne neuer heard of before, which the Lorde by his spirite doth not onely reueale to some of his seruants aboue others, but
 prouideth remedies according∣lie, which because they cannot be ministred alwayes by worde of mouth; they are to be made knowne by writing to them that stand in neede. And surely the bountie & riches of Gods mer∣cie are so large, and his care of mans saluation and happines so great, that euen as he hath pro∣uided variety of creatures for e∣uery mans tast, and vse: so hath he prouided varietie of spiritual graces, for euery mans benefite & delight, to the end that euery man might profit with cōfort &
 pleasure, or else be left without all excuse. The consideration of which reasons, and some o∣thers (Right worshipfull) caused me, after I had obtained at the handes of that worthie Minister of Iesus Christ, Ma∣ster Gyffard, these fewe Ser∣mons, whereof he is the Author, to publish them in print to the view of the world. Not there∣in respecting so much mine owne gaine and commoditie, as the good and benefite of the Church of God. Whereof J conceiue no little hope, both by reason of the fruite and benifite which haue
 redoūded to the comfort of ma∣ny by his former workes, as also for the excellēcie of the doctrine conteined herein, the which I rather commit to the iudgemēt of the learned, and wise Chri∣stian reader, then to commend them my selfe, least in praysing them for want of iudgement & wisedome, J should in stead of beautie, bring disgrace vpon them. Whatsoeuer they be, J thought it meete to Dedicate them to your worshippes, moued thereto with many respectes. And first of all, that J might publikely testifie my dutie and
 thankefull heart, for your great kindenes and manifold courte∣sies bestowed, not only vpon me, but vpon them that are as neer∣ly linked vnto me as my selfe. Of the which, if I should be vn∣mindfull, J were worthie of the reward which the Lacedemo∣nians appointed for vnthanke∣full persons. But especiallie the great accompt and honour that you haue obtained in the hearts of many of the best and wisest Christiās for your singular god∣lines & rare Christian vertues, do turne mine eyes frō many o∣thers vpon you, as comfortahle
 lightes shining in the midst of this crooked generatiō, as liuely examples to your brethren, and worthie ornamēts to the profes∣sion of the Gospel. And J haue ioyned you together in this dedi∣catiō, not only for the neer band wherewith you are so nighly ioy∣ned together in mariage, but al∣so for that you do not only striue together in one course to obteine the high price of your calling, and that euerlasting crowne of glory reserued for you in the hea¦uens, but also for that you are mutual helpers one to another to the performāce of all Christiā
 duties, but speciallie in the wel gouerning and trayning vp of your housholde, which thereby as a fruite of your rare and holy labours the Lord hath so bles∣sed, as that the heauenly estate & behauiour thereof, may be a presidēt to many families, if it would please the Lorde to giue them heartes to confirme them∣selues thereunto. But I cease to say so much as I knowe, least in speaking the truth, might pro∣cure enuie, and seeme to flatter you, whoe of all other haue least delight in that veine. The onlie thing which I ought in dutie, &
 may safely do, is first to pray vn∣to God, that he would saue & preserue you, & yours, from the manifolde subtilties of Sathan, and the dangerous baites & al∣luremēts of this world, and to fi∣nish the good work that he hath begunne in you vnto the day of Iesus Christ. Secōdly, most hūb∣ly to request you, that you would take in good parte this simple gifte that J offer vnto you, in∣terpreting all thinges, both in regarde of it, and my selfe, in the best parte, and with that af∣fection J offer it to you. And thus once againe, beseeching al∣mightie
 God to blesse and co¦tinue you many happie yeeres  your owne comfort, and the goo of the Church, as also to be fa∣uourable vnto the holy Mini∣strie, which hath many yeeres continued in your congregation, in which, in my childhood I was trained vp in the first principles of Christian religion, the ioyful remembrance of which benefit I trust shall neuer departe from me, either in life, or death. J in all duetie and humble man∣ner take my leaue.

London,
6. Decemb. 1598.
