




CErtaine yeares now past, right Worshipfull, I published a small Treatise concerning Witches, to lay open some of Sathans sleightes, and sub∣till practises, least the ignoran∣ter sort should be carried a∣wry and seduced more and more by them. The errors be farre more grosse, and the sinnes much greater, into which by meanes of Witches he sedu∣ceth multitudes, then in common opinion they be esteemed. It falleth out in many places euen of a suddaine, as it seemeth to me, and no doubt by the heauy iudgement of God, that the Diuels as it were let loose, doe more preuail, then euer I haue heard of. For when as men haue set so light by the hea∣ring

of Gods voice to be instructed by him, they are iustly giuen ouer to be taught by the Diuels, and to learne their waies. Sathan is now hearde speake, and beleeued. He speaketh by coniurors, by sorcerers, and by witches, and his word is taken. He deuiseth a number of thinges to be done, and they are put in practise and followed. The high prouidence of God Almighty and soueraigne rule ouer all, is set forth so vnto vs in the Scriptures, as that without him a Sparrow can not fall vpon the ground. All the haires of our head are numbred. The Deuils would hurt and destroy with bodily harmes, both men and beastes and other creatures: but all the Diuels in Hell are so chained vp and bri∣deled by this high prouidence that they can not plucke the wing from one poore little Wrenne, without speciall leaue giuen them from the ruler of the whole earth. And yet the Witches are made beleeue that at their request, and to pleasure them by fulfilling their wrath, their spirites doe lame and kill both men and beastes. And then to spread this opinion among the people, these subtill spirites be∣wray them, and will haue them openly confesse that they haue done such great things, which all the Diuels at any mans request cold neuer doe. For if they could, they would not stay to be intreated. God giueth him power sometimes to afflict both men and beastes with bodily harmes: If he can, he

will doe it, as intreated and sent by Witches, but for vs to imagin either that their sending doth giue him power, or that he would not doe that which God hath giuen him leaue to doe, vnlesse they should request and send him, is most absurd. There be many diseases in the bodies of men and beastes which he seeth will breake forth vnto lamenes or vnto death, he beareth the witches in hand he doth them: He worketh by his other sort of Witches, whome the people call cunning men and wise wo∣men to confirme all his matters, and by them tea∣cheth many remedies, that so he may be sought vn∣to and honored as God. These things taking root in the hearts of the people, and so making them a∣fraide of Witches, and raising vp suspitions and ru∣mors of sundry innocent persons, many giltles are vppon mens othes condemned to death, and much innocent bloud is shed. How subtilly he continu∣eth these matters, I haue to my smal skill laide open in this slender Treatise. I haue done it in waye of a Dialogue, to make the fitter for the capacity of the simpler sort. I am bolde to offer it vnto your Wor∣ship, not vnto one as needeth to betaught in these thinges, being zealously affected to the Gospell, & so grounded in the faith of the high prouidence, that I haue been delighted to heare and see the wise and godly course vsed vppon the seat of Iustice by your Worship, when such haue beene arraigned. I

offer it therefore as a testimony of a thankeful mind for fauours and kindnesse shewed towardes me: and so intreat your Worshippe to accept of it. If it may doe good vnto any of the weaker sort in knowledge I shall be glad. If I erre in any thing being shewed it, I will be ready to correct it.

