



OVr Lord & master (Right Honourable) foretelling the state of the worlde in the latter dayes, ith, it shall bee as it was in the ime of Noe. They eat, they drāke,Luke. 17. ey maried wiues, & gaue in ma∣iage, vnto the day that Noe wēt

into the Arke: and the flood came and destroyed them. Likewise also as it was in the daies of Lot: they eat, they drancke, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builte. But in the day that Lot went out of Sodome, it rained fire and brim∣stone from Heauen, and destroyed them all. This prophecie must needs be fulfilled, and in the one part it is already in our eies. For mens harts were neuer more generally, and of all sortes, set vpon riches and plea∣sures, then now towarde the com∣ming of Christ to make the dissolu∣tion. I holde it therefore the dutie of all Gods faithfull messengers, most instantly to warne their Chri∣stian people, to beware, least they

also bee carried awaye with the streame of this common infection. Hereby was I moued to make spe∣ciall choyse of the Booke called Ec∣clesiastes, for to expound the same vnto that people which I teach, be∣ing wholly framed for the purpose, to drawe men from the vanities of this world. It was set forth by that noble king Solomon, who was the wisest, the richest, and highest in royaltie & honour vnder the Hea∣uens. He made the greatest triall, and had the deepest experience in all the chiefe and moste precious things of this world. He was ledde also by a higher spirite then his owne, being a worthy Prophete of God.
After I had finished this booke, and my Sermons noted by one that did write, I was requested to per∣vse & to perfect them, in some bet∣ter sort for the Printe: Which as leasure serued I haue performed in one part. If that weake measure of giftes, which the Lord hath be∣stowed vpon me, bring any good by this trauaile vnto the Churche, I shall be glad: and ready to bestow some paines, (if it please God) a∣bout the rest.
I am bold to offer this vnto your Ladyship, as a token of a dutifull and thankefull minde, for so hono∣rable fauours as I haue receyued frō the right Honourable my Lord the Earle of Warwike, and from

your Honour. I am also encoura∣ged herevnto, with this, that your Ladyship hath long time continued an earnest louer, and zealous pro∣fessor of the glorious Gospell of Ie∣sus Christ. My earnest prayer is, that God will continue and in∣crease the same, with all heauenly giftes, and vertues of his holy spirite, to the glory of his most holy name, the good of his Church, and your owne eter∣nall ioye. Amen.

