



MY purpose (Right
Honourable) in the
dedication of these
sermons, was to haue
ioyned your Honou∣rable
father with that
worthy Citie, where∣of
he was a principall
member, and had speciall command and
authoritie: which place he much respec∣ted
and loued, and where he was againe
much respected and honoured. The ioy
and ornament of the Citie, was his name
and countenance, the very report and
newes of whose decease, was the cause
of many a watrie eye, and of many a hea∣uie
heart. But their speciall comfort and

ioy is, that the Lord hath in mercy pro∣uided
so gratious an heire, so worthy a
successor, so vertuous a fauourer, as of
all, that are honest religious: so most of
all, such as haue beene the faithfull
friends and intire louers of your Honou∣rable
father: who himselfe was a louer of
all learning, religion, and of all good
men; a true worshipper of God, zealous
in the truth, a sincere professor & friend
of the Gospell; a fauourer of faithfull
Ministers; a worthie member both of
Church and common-wealth: a faith∣ful,
dutiful, seruiceable, and rare subiect:
like Moses in faithfulnes, in meekenes
and in zeale against Idolatrie: like Iob a
iust man, fearing God, and eschewing
euill: like Nathaniell, a true Israelite
without guile. Finally, a man full of
grace, pietie, curtesie, humilitie, tempe∣rance,
and other, both morall and chri∣stian
vertues. I am not able to commend
him, according to his deserts: that re∣quires
a larger discourse, and it would
perhaps proue an increase of sorrow,
which is rather to be abated then re∣newed▪
I will therefore bend my selfe
to administer comfort for so great a

losse, a losse so generall to Church and
common-wealth. Friends and follow∣ers,
Tenants and seruants, and for my
owne part, I cannot but beare a part in
sorrow for the losse of so kind a Patron
and Benefactor, both to me and mine.
Yet this is the vse of the prayses of the
dead, not onely for imitation of their
vertues, but also for the cōfort of friends
aliue. And is this a small comfort, Right
Honourable, that you had such a father?
yea a comfort and blessing it is to be of
the seed of the righteous. It is a further
comfort, that you enioyed him so long
till your selfe came to ripenesse of
yeares, & that he died in a good age, full
of daies, few of his Auncestors liued lon∣ger:
and howsoeuer he left this life in a
strange countrey, yet (no doubt) he died
in the true faith of Iesus Christ (which
he sincerely professed all his life) and in
the honourable and faithfull seruice of
his gratious Soueraigne the Lords an∣nointed.
It is no wonder, that old men
die, rather it is a wonder in these latter
daies that any liue so long. Moses in his
time made account of mans ordinarie
age, to be threescore yeares and ten.

Now the world decayes, and the daies
of our life is shortned. We heare daily of
the death of Infants, children, young
men, yea Princes taken away in the
prime and strength of their yeares: what
maruell then though the ancient ie?
when the apple is ripe it must needs fall;
when the candle is spent, the light must
needs goe out. This vse we are to make
of the death of young or old, to remem∣ber
alwaies our mortall state, and the
vncertaintie of our life, to be alwaies
readie and prepared, not to regard but
contemne the lusts of the flesh, the lust
of the eie, and the pride of life, pleasures,
honours, riches, and the vanities of this
wicked world. Many moe comforts we
haue against excessiue and immoderate
sorrowe for the death of our best and
dearest friends, as to consider what they
leaue, (a miserable world) and whither
they goe, (to the hauen of happinesse.)
The best sort of the Heathen vsed three
remedies against such kind of sorrow.
First, to consider that death is common
to all and vnauoydable. Secondly, that
it is the end of miserie and hauen of rest.
Thirdly, that it is likely, that the soules

liue and are blessed. We haue the same
and more sure comforts. We know that
our Redeemer liues, and that wee shall
see him as hee is. Wee know not onely
the immortality of the soule, but the glo∣rious
resurrection of the body; and that
those that dye in the Lord are blessed.
Nothing comes to passe without Gods
pouidence, who is wise and mightie:
We pray that his will may be done both
of vs and in vs. It will nothing auaile vs
to torment our selues, we are borne to
dye; many thousands are gone before
vs, and we must follow.
Pardon my boldnes (right Honoura∣ble)
in presuming to put you in minde
of these thinges, which (both by your
own priuate reading, and publicke hea∣uing
of many worthy men) you doe al∣ready
know and vnderstand sufficiently.
Yet in my loue to your Honour, giue me
leaue to adde some further instruction.
It hath alwaies beene the endeuour of
Sathan, the common aduersarie of mans
saluation, by all means possible, to draw
all sorts, degrees, and ages of men, from
the true care and studie of religion and
vertue: to the effecting whereof, hee

hath from euery estate his pretended
colours and faire pleasing shewes of
perswasion & alluremēt, perswading the
elder sort, that it is a thing vnseemely
& vnbefitting their grauitie, to become
schollers in Christs schoole, seeing their
heads are filled with other matters:
namely, of the Common-wealth and af∣faires
of this world. Hee can tell the
middle sort, which are in the prime of
strength and witte, that it is against all
equitie and reason, that such should bee
depriued of the pleasures and delights
of the flesh and the world. And as for
the younger sort, hee will easilie make
make them beleeue, that it is not yet
time to serue God, that the points of re∣ligion
are too high for them, and able to
dull and trouble their tender wits, buz∣zing
into their eares that wicked pro∣uerbe;
A young Saint, an olde Diull.
Thus by his will he would haue none re∣ligious,
because he would haue none sa∣ued;
but rather that all should perish
and come to vtter ruine and destruction.
It is a torment and vexation vnto him to
see any well disposed in religion: but if
wee hearken to the counsell of God in

his word, wee shall soone finde Sathan
herein a lyer, a murtherer, a seducer:
For the Lord chargeth all sorts and de∣grees
of men, to giue themselues, and
that betimes, to religion and vertue:
commaunding his law to bee read and
published to men, women and children.
The Kingly Prophet,Psal. 148. 11. 12. 13. exhorts Kings of
the earth and all people, Princes and
Iudges of the world, young men and
maydens also, old men and children to
prayse the name of the Lord.1. Tim. 5. 1. Saint Paul
chargeth Timothie and Titus to teach
old and young without exception.Tit. 2. 1. Saint
Iohn writeth his Epistle to fathers,1. Ioh. . 13. 14.
young men and children; therefore the
youngest are not exempted in regard
of their young and tender yeeres:Eccle. 12, 1. Inas∣much
as God is their Creator, they are
to remember him in the dayes of their
youth: Seeing in their first entrance in∣to
the world they haue beene baptised
into the name of the blessed Trinitie,
and so haue taken vpon them the pro∣fession
of true religion, their proceeding
and practise when they come to yeeres
must be answerable to their beginning.
Further, that age is slipperie, weake,

dangerous, and subiect to many tempta∣tions,
easilie seduced and ouercome by
bad counsell and company: They had
neede therefore betimes to bee armed
with the shielde of faith, and sword of
the spirit: their witte and capacitie is
then most fresh & pregnant to conceiue,
remember, keepe, and hold good and
gratious instructions.Eph. 6. 4. Parents therefore
are commaunded to bring vp their chil∣dren
in instruction and information
of the LORD. And it is the counsell
of the wise man;Pro. 22. 6. Teach a childe the
trade of his way, and when hee is olde
he will not depart from it. Againe, yong
men are subiect to death, and must ap∣peare
before the great Iudge in that day
as well as other. Neede therefore haue
they of due preparation. Besides, a re∣ligious
disposition and behauiour in
young age, will bring them credit and
honour all the dayes of their life; and
comfort, ioy, and peace of conscience in
old age: And what ioy, what exceeding
ioy will this be to Parents, friends, Tu∣tors,
Pro. 10. 1. teachers, and to all that loue and
feare God?Pro. 23. 24. 25. A wise sonne (saith Salo∣mon)
maketh a glad father, but a foo∣lish

sonne is a heauinesse to his mother.Luke: 1. 14. 15.
It is therefore sayde of Iohn the Baptist,
that his father should haue ioy of him,
and many should reioyce at his birth,
because hee was filled with the holy
Ghost in his mothers wombe.2. Ioh: 4. Saint
Iohn writing to that noble and worthie
Lady, reioyceth greatly that hee found
her children walking in the trueth. And
examples we haue of grace and religion
in the younger sorte: Samuel from his
childhood was consecrated and dedica∣ted
to the seruice of God.
Iosiah was but eight yeares old when
he began to raigne in Ierusalem,2. Chron: 34. 1. 2. yet
there was neuer any before nor after
him,Prou: 4. 3. 4. more vertuous and religious. Salo∣mon
though most tender and deare in the
eyes of his father and mother:Mat: 21. 15. yet in his
young yeares was taught diuine and hea∣uenly
wisedome.2. Tim. 3. 15. When our Sauiour
Christ came riding to Ierusalem in a base
manner, though the Scribes and Pharises
disdained him, yet children cry, Hosanna
the sonne of Dauid: Blessed is he that
commeth in the name of the Lord. Ti∣mothie
from his childhood had know∣ledge
in the scriptures, being instructed

by his good Grandmother Lois, and his
mother Eunic, Iohn the Baptist grew and
ed strong in the spirit, and Iesus
Christ being but 12. yeares old, increa∣sed
in wisedome, in statute and fauour
with God and men. God will haue the
first borne, the first fruits, and he that be∣gins
well is halfe his way. Dimidium fac∣ti
qui bene caepit habet; The tree that buds
not in the spring is dead, and such as are
deformed in youth, neuer proue welfa∣uoured
in age. As the arrow is first di∣rected
so it flyeth: youth is compared to
the day, while it is day, let vs walke in the
light, the night commeth when no man
can worke. The time of youth is the
summer time, with the Ant and Bee, we
must prouide in summer against winter.
The time of youth is compared to Har∣uest,
wherin men take the occasiō, & vse
all meanes they can, for the reaping and
enioying of the fruits of the earth; if they
let that time slip, all is lost. He that
sleepes in haruest is the sonne of confu∣sion.
Dauid in his youth killeth the Ly∣on,
the Beare and great Goliah. Sampson
in his youth, killed the Philistines; let vs
by our spirituall armour ouercome the

wicked one, euen in our young time.
Now besides all this, giue me leaue
(Right Hon.) to put you in remem∣brance
of one worthie example of a no∣ble
young man; Ioseph full of grace and
vertue, worthie to be imitated of Kings,
Princes, and Potentates. In this famous
patterne I obserue these sixe vertues.
The first is his rare chastitie, who being
tempted to follie by his mistresse, did
flatly refuse her, saying, How can I doe
this great wickednesse, and so sinne a∣gainst
God? He knew with Iob, that
this was is a wickednesse and iniquitie
to be condemned, yea that it is a fire
which shall deuoure to destruction, and
shall roote out all his encrease. The se∣cond
vertue in young  which is the
ground of all the rest, is his religion, and
the true feare of God in his heart. All
his actions, and all his proceedings, doe
sauour of the feare of God. It was this
that kept him from that grosse iniquitie.
He ascribes the interpretatiō of dreams,
not to himselfe but to God. He pro∣testeth
to his brethren, that he feareth
God. And againe, when he made him∣selfe
knowne to his brethren, he said, Be

not sad, neither grieued with your selues
that you sold me hither; for God did
send me before you for your preseruati∣on:
5. 9. And when his father asked him of
his sonnes; These are my sons (sayd he)
which God hath giuen me. This is the
chiefe vertue in great persons & the best
Nobilitie.3 A third vertue in Ioseph is his
faithfulnes to his Prince: He gathered all
the money that was found in the land of
Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the
corne which hee bought; not for his
owne priuate vse, but for the profit of
the King his maister: And as he is care∣full
to preserue the royall dignitie of the
King, and seeketh the wealth of Pharoah;
so hee hath a pittifull heart to the poore
distressed people, and is carefull to re∣lieue
them. This is an excellent vertue
in great persons which serue in the
Court, not to seeke their owne priuate
gaine, but the credit and wealth of their
Prince, and yet to haue louing and mer∣ciful
hearts to the poore distressed com∣mons.4
The fourth vertue in Ioseph is his
seueritie and clemencie wisely mixed
together: Hee speaketh roughly to hi
brethren, hee threatens them, and char∣geth

them to be spyes; and yet his heart
is full of compassion and loue: When
they are truely humbled & know them∣selues,
hee doth entertaine them kindly,
and receiue them with much ioy: And
this is a speciall vertue required of Prin∣ces
and Magistrates. They must with
Dauid,Psal. 10. 1. in the gouerning of their Court,
Church, Common-wealth and house,
strike on these two strings, Mercie and
Iudgement. They must bee seuere and
rough against notorious offenders, and
yet their hearts must be full of loue, pit∣tie
and compassion.
The fift vertue in noble Ioseph is his pa∣tience
and magnanimitie in suffering so
great wrongs and iniuries:5 He was hard∣lie
dealt with all by his brethren many
waies, being reuiled, scorned, and sold
into Egypt by them; falsely accused by
his mistris, and vniustly cast into prison
by his maister. In all his miseries he pos∣sessed
his soule with patience; and when
it was in his power to bee reuenged of
his brethren, he bridleth his affections,
kindly entreateth them, and ouercom∣meth
euill with goodnesse. Oh rare ex∣ample
of true Christian patience and

courage; he feedeth them, he entertay∣neth
them, and preserueth them that had
conspired against him. The last vertue
is his kindnesse, loue and dutie to his fa∣ther;
he inquireth of his brethren tou∣ching
the life and health of his olde fa∣ther.
In time of dearth hee sent prouisi∣on
for him and his without money: He
sent Chariots to bring him and hs fa∣milie
into Egypt: Hee went to meete
his father Israel, and presented himselfe
vnto him, falling on his necke and wee∣ping
a good while: Hee bringeth him
before Pharoah: Hee placed his father
and brethren, giuing them possessions
in the Land of Egypt, in the best of the
land: He visiteth his sicke father; he fell
vpon his face, wept vpon him and kis∣sed
him at his death: performes his will,
and honorably burieth him. And to this
kindnes al are bound by the law of God
& nature, by the care, loue, & benefits of
Parents towards them, for which we are
neuer able to make sufficient recōpence.
These are the chiefe and Princely ver∣tues
in a Noble person, worthie to bee
imitated of all the sonnes of Nobles.Ambr. lib. off. cap. 17.
Most worthie is that of Ambrose; Es bo∣norum
adolescentium timorm dei habere, de∣ferre

parentibus honorem, &c. It is re∣quired
of good yong men to haue the
feare of God, to giue honour to
their parents, to reuerence their el∣ders,
to keepe themselues chaste,
bee humble and lowly, to loue kind∣nesse
and shamefastnes, which are or∣naments
to young age: for as grauitie
is commended in olde men: so shame∣fastnes
in young men, as if it were by
the gift and dowry of nature: Isaacke
a childe, fearing God, the sonne and
heyre of Abraham, giueth such ho∣nour
to his father, that hee refused
not death at his fathers pleasure.
Ioseph also, when hee dreamed that
the Sunne and Moone and Starres
shoulde worshippe him, yet was hee
still carefull to honour his father: so
chaste, that hee would not haue an
vnchaste worde: so shamefast, that
hee fled from his mistresse: so humble,
that hee was content to serue: so
patient, that hee cheerefully suffered
imprisonment: so readie to forgiue
iniurie, that hee preferred those that
sought his life.Gen. 49. 22. Therefore the bles∣sing
of his father fell vpon him.

These things I write (Right Honou∣rable)
not that I doubt eyther of
your good education or vertuous
disposition; but hearing of your good
beginning and proceedings in grace:
my purpose is onely to comfort and
encourage you in that good way where
you are already entred. But for fur∣ther
direction, I referre you to the
Sermons following, which I haue de∣dicated
to your Honour, together
with that worthie Citie where they
were preached, and where your Ho∣nour
now (to the comfort of many)
doth succeed your worthie father in
place and authoritie. The cause of
my dedication to your Honour, is;
First, loue to your selfe, heartily wi∣shing
continuance and increase in grace,
being the speciall ioy, hope and or∣nament
of our Countrey. An other
cause is, the dutie I owe to your Ho∣ourable
parents; to whom both I
and mine are so farre obliged, that wee
shall neuer bee able so much as to bee
sufficiently thankfull, much lesse to re∣quite
them.
And thus I beseech the Almighty

God, the father of all gifts, to bestow
vpon your Honour the portion of Ioseph,
all the noble vertues and graces that
were in him; all true prosperitie and
honour in this life, and an eternall inhe∣ritance
in that blessed and heauenly
Canaan, prepared and purchased by the
blood of Christ, for all such as truely
beleeue in him.

