



ACknowledging my selfe deepely
indebted to your woorshippe for
your professed curtesies, & good
opinion conceaued of me, & de∣siring
by some one meanes or o∣ther
to make manifest my thank∣full
minde, I haue aduentured the
dedication of this trifling toy, vn∣to
your protection, notdoubting
of your fauourable acceptance, in
that I bestow it as an earnest pennie of my wel meaning, and
testimonie of the vnfaigned goodwil that I beare you. The
thing that I here present you with, is a posie of Gillowflowers
collected out of the garden of mine owne inuentions. Which
if they shal come too short in shew and colour, or proue infe∣riour
in sent and odour to that which is to be looked for of
so fragrant a flower, let the Gardiner (I pray you) be excused,
who hath done his goodwill and indeuour in the sowing, &
setting of them, and lay the fault in the barrennesse of the
soyle, wherein they were planted: which had it byn better,
their vertue would haue proued to be greater. Though al the
flowers herein contayned, carie one name, yet eche of thé
differs from other, both in colour and sauour, the better
to satisfie the diuersitie of eyes that shall view them, and va∣riety
of noses that shall smell them. Nowe if the spider shall
happen to sucke any poyson out of them, let not the flowers
be the worse thought of, but consider that it is his propertie
to doe the like, out of the most pure and delectable flowers,
that euer were. And God in geuing vnto her and other such
like creatures this nature, doeth no lesse manifest his omni∣potent

power herein, then in his other wonderful works. For
reason telleth, & experience teacheth, that in this vale of mi∣sery,
there is nothing so beautifull, but that it hath some ble∣mish;
nor so pure, but that it sauours of some imperfection:
so that as long as the world is a world, corruption must con∣tinue
amongst vs. Which filthy dregs & poysoned humors, if
they were not in parte drawen & drayned away by the veno∣mous
beastes and wormes of the earth, they woulde a
great deale more annoy vs, then now they doe. And it is to
be doubted whether life could any long time be conserued a
mogst vs. I might here take occasion to liken the crew of cu∣rious
carpers (which more of malice then good meaning ac∣customed
to cauel at other mens doings, playing the ydle
drones themselues) to the venomous beastes & wormes be∣fore
spoken of: Whom for their congruity in condition, and
affinity in disposition I might bring them within the compas
of one cōparison, & conclude that both the one & the other
are necessary euils. But leste that the old prouerb be obiected
agaynst me, Ne sutor vltra crepitam, let the Gardiner meddle
no farther thē his spade, I wil leaue thē to theyr predecessor
Zoilus (whose apes they are in imitating his conditions) & re∣turne
agayne to my Gillowflowers, eft foones beseeching your
worship to accept those that I present you with no lesse thāk∣fulnes
then the Gardiner doth offer them willingly, wherof
he doubtes not, calling to minde your accustomed curtesie.
In one thing I haue vsed suche circumspection as my simple
skill, would permit me, which is that the beauty of my flow∣ers
be not blemished with the weedes of wantonnesse, that
cōmonly grow in such gardens. I hope therfore, ye shal finde
them rooted out in such sort, that if there remayne any, my
trust is they shall not fall out, to be many. The onely thing
that I doubt of this in my dedication, is that your worshipp
shall haue cause to account mee a deepe dissembler and one
that hath byn more lauish in promise, then he is able to pay
with performance. For whereas by my former speeches, yee
might peraduenture looke for some delicate Gillowflowers,

it will fall out to be but a coppy of my countenance, hauing
done nothing els, but (as the fashion of the worlde is now a∣dayes)
set a good face on a bad matter. For (to deale plainly
with you) I was neuer Gardiner in all my life. And the thing
that I here present you with, is but a collection of such verses
and odde deuises as haue (at such idle howres as I founde in
my maister his seruice) vpon sundry occasions by me byn cō∣posed.
The one I confesse farre vnworthy your view, and yet
such as when ye shal returne home weeried from your fielde
sportes, may yeelde you some recreation. The chiefe marke
that I leuel at is, the continuance of your woorships curtesie
and good minde towardes me, which as they haue already
surmounted the reach of my deserts, so if I might enioy the
fruition of them hereafter, in that fulnesse which I hope for,
I shall account all the duetifull endeuour that I can possibly
shew you insufficient, for the satisfaction of the least part of
them. Thus for feare of being tedious, I ende, wishing your
worship, with my good mistres your wife & all yours many
yeeres of prosperitie, with dayly increase of worship, & hea∣uen
for your hauen to rest in, when the daungerous sea of
this life shalbe ouer sailed.

