



HAuing by your worships fauou∣rable
permittance, conuenient
oportunity in your seruice, to
bestow certain houres amongst
my bookes, with which exer∣cise
(of all earthly recreations I
am most delighted) both reasō
bids me, and duety bindes me,
to make you partaker of some
of the fruits of my studies. And
farther, your woorship being the onely maister that euer I
serued, vnto whom (my parentes excepted) I acknowledge
my selfe more bounde, then to al the worlde besides, I might
be sayde to carie a verie bad minde with me, if I shoulde not
endeuour by some one meanes or other, to shewe my selfe
thankefull for your benefites. And not knowing better
how to doe the same, I haue (amongst other toies by me ta∣ken
in hand) made speciall choice of these translations en∣sewing,
to present you with, as a pledge of my loyaltie and te∣stimonie
of the duetiful zeale that I beare yon. The first
thing that shall heerein bee offered to your view, is a moste
excellent Epistle, written first in Italian by Maister Clodius
Ptholomoeus, which according vnto my simple skill, I
haue conuerted into English, although not with suche
eloquence as some other might (peradueuture) haue
done it: yet I trust with suche diligence that yee shall
finde the intent of the Authour sufficiently explaned. Hee
made it for the comforting of an acquaintaunce of his,

who beyng fallen into pouerty, did beare it very impacient∣ly,
wherein he hath discharged the duety of a friend, so faith∣fully,
that no man can say so much in the commendation of
it, but that it will deserue a greate deale more. An
what indifferent iudgement, it shall seeme too wante
of the prayse that I geue it, shall appeare to come to passe
through the imperfection of the Translator, and not any
default of the Authour, wohse abilitie, if it shall not in all
poyntes answeare to the willingnesse of his mynde, me∣riteth
the rather too bee pardoned in that he hath done his
goodwil. Next vnto this Epistle followeth another of the
same mans composition, which for the occasion, wherevp∣pon
it was made, is not inferiour to the first. For the gol∣den
examples and diuine sentences that are cowched in
them, I christened this discourse by the name of A Com∣fortable
Recreation, nothing doubting but that whosoeuer
shall peruse it with aduised consideration, will acknowledge
that what the Title doeth professe in shewe, the treatise will
performe in substance. As the ylnesse of my manner of han∣deling
of it was as it were a bridle to holde me backe from
geuing my consent that it shoulde come foorth, so the
goodnesse of the matter contayned in it, serued me as a
spurre to pricke me forwardes to yeelde to theyr entrea∣ties
that craued to haue it published. Such other french
and Italian toyes as I haue translated, and added heere∣vnto
(if I flatter not my selfe ouermuch in myne owne fol∣lies)
are suche as will bring more delight then disliking
to the perusers of them. I am to craue pardon for my pre∣sumption
in dedicating them to your woorshippe, which
I haue done, in that passing vnder the shadowe of your pro∣tection,
they shall of a number that know you, be receaued
with the greater fauour.
Thus hoping that my welmeaning & willing endeuour
shalbe constred in the best parte, remayning most thankefull
to your worship, for your benefits bestowed on mee, I put an

end to my rud preface, wishing vnto & you my mistres, with
your little ones, and all other your welwillers, many yeeres
of prosperities. With humble and heartie intercession vn∣to
God, that as yee haue already planted a good and law∣dable
beginning amongst your neighbours, and liue in cre∣dit
in your countrey, with the loue and good liking of as
many as know you, that so yee may grow and goe for∣wardes
with dayly encrease of worshippe, vntill
it shalbe his good pleasure, that yee shall
exchaunge this earthly mansion,
for a heauenly habi∣tation.

