



SVch is the gratious fa∣uour
& kindnes of our
good & mercifull God
towards his children &
seruants here on earth,
(Right worshipfull and
beloued in the Lord) that in his loue he
vouchsafeth to accept and to approue
their weake seruice and workes, so that
they be done and performed with ho∣nest,
right, and good affections; And
thus he accepteth our prayer, hearing,
receiuing, almes, and other actions be∣ing
weakely and vnperfectly performed

by vs. And if the Lord were not of this
gratious inclination and nature, wee
might be vtterly discouraged to doe
him any seruice at all, considering the
manifold wants and infirmities that are
in vs. But being sure of his fauour and
acceptance, and of our owne honest de∣sires,
and affections to doe more and
better then wee can performe, and
being sorrie wee can doe no better:
we are emboldned to performe any du∣tie
and seruice to so good a God and lo∣uing
a father,Exod. 25. 2. 3. 4. 5. &c. and it is his owne will and
commandement that we should doe so.
Thus he saith to Moses about the buil∣ding
of the materiall tabernacle: Speake
to the childrē of Israel. that they receiue
an offering for me of euery man, whose
heart giueth it freely. Yet shall take the
offering for me, and this is the offering
which you shall take of them, gold, sil∣uer,
and brasse, and blew silke, & purple,
and scarlet, and fine linnen, and goates
haire, Rammes skins coloured red, & the
skins of Badgers, and the wood Shiim.
From whence we are to learne, that God
requireth the offerings of his people, for
the building of his tabernacle, and fur∣thering

his seruice: Againe, that he re∣quireth
not a compelled, but a cheerfull
seruice; a true, sincere, ioyfull heart and
affectiō, And further we learne; that the
endeuour and labour of those which any
way helpe the spirituall building, either
by cost or counsell, so farre as they may,
is a seruice pleasing to God. For we see
things there offered be of diuerse kinds,
some more pretious, some base and vile.
There be difference of gifts in building
the spirituall tabernacle, some are en∣dewed
with gold, some with siluer, some
with blew silke, and all profitable. Such
as God hath giuen, such we are to bring,
and God will accept it. Some things
God appointed, that the poorest might
be able to offer, and no man shut out for
want of abilitie, they may bring wood,
stone, or at least Goates haire. Euery one
in his calling as he hath receiued, must
doe his vttermost endeuour to further
the building. Some by preaching, some
by writing, some by gouernment, some
by countenance, some by cost, some by
counsell, some by baser seruices, which
yet are accepted, if they be done with
right affections. Indeed, we are to desire

more, and the greatest gifts of all, if we
would haue them: but let vs doe our vt∣termost
endeuour so farre as we can and
the Lord will accept it. Earnest and af∣fectionate
is that speech of a learned Fa∣ther,
Origen: in Exod. Lord Iesu grant that I may haue
some monument in thy tabernacle: I will
wish if it would be, that some part of
that gold might come from me, where∣of
the propitiatorie is made; or with
which the Arke is couered, or whereof
the candlesticke is made; or if I haue
no golde nor siluer, at least I may be
found to offer something that may helpe
forward the pillars and sockets of them;
or that I may haue some brasse in this
tabernacle, whereof the rings may be
made, and other things prescribed by
thy word. O that it were possible for me
to be one of the Princes, or to offer pre∣tious
stones to the adorning of the
Priests garment: but because all these
are aboue my power, at least let me finde
fauour to offer goates haire in the taber∣nacle
of God, that I be not found emptie
and vnfruitfull in all.
A holy, gratious, and deuout speech:
we are all to be of the same minde and
affection, to desire increase of graces, but

yet to vse those well which we haue:
knowing that God will accept them
being rightly vsed: yea he accepteth
the meanest gifts, they are as welcome
to him as the greatest of the richer sort:
Non omnes possum esse Cesares, We cannot
be all Caesars.Mat. 25. To some the Lord hath gi∣uen
ten talēts, to some fiue, to some one,
he accepts of the least, being faithfully
vsed & employed,Luk: 21. 1. he accepteth & allow∣eth
of the two mites of the poore wid∣dow,
cast into the treasurie, as well as of
the great & abundant gifts of the richer
sort. We are to follow this good nature
of God, to take in good part that which
is offered to vs with a louing mind. Thus
ciuil honest men, being of good natures,
do take in good part any smal thing giuē
them, by those whom they know to be
their friends, and would giue more if
abilitie serued. Right Wor: let me en∣treate
the same kindnes and fauour in
accepting these few fermons, which are
as two mites into the treasurie, in re∣spect
of the multitude of learned bookes
and sermons which you daily reade and
heare. I confesse, it may seeme needles
and superfluous for me, the vnworthiest
of thousands, to offer any such thing, to

such a people, as haue such store and a∣bundance,
and plentie of instruction.
It may seeme I say as needlesse as to cast
water into the sea. But seeing many
more needles things are published, and
all are (as they may) to further the build∣ing
of Gods tabernacle, I pray you par∣don
this my bolde attempt. The causes
why I presume to dedicate these my
poore labours to you are these. First, be∣cause
the effect and summe of these ser∣mons,
was preached in the presence and
hearing of many of you, though I con∣fesse
I haue made since some additions
ad amplifications. Againe, because abi∣ding
some while amongst you, I sound
no litle kindnes and fauour, and I recei∣ued
much spirituall comfort and profite
to my soule in many publike and priuate
exercises amongst you: which did cause
me greatly to affect and loue that place,
and now at last by this poore present, to
testifie my loue and thankfulnes to you.
And I doubt not but the matters hand∣led
in these sermons, will be acceptable
to al good Christians amongst you. And
how can the doctrine of good gouern∣ment,
be vnpleasing to that Citie, where

there are so many religious, wise and
good gouernours? who are carefull to
performe all the parts of their calling:
carefull I say, to punish offenders, to
countenance the good, to relieue the
oppressed, to maintaine and defend, the
Gospel of Christ, the preachers, and pro∣fessours
of it. And must not the com∣mendation
of true wisedome be accep∣table
and delightful, to so many friends,
followers, sonnes & daughters of wise∣dome?
There are no doubt amongst you,
many good and gratious hearers, recei∣uing
the seede of wisedome in good
ground, vnderstanding and beleeuing
the word, bringing forth the fruits of it,
some thirtie, some sixtie, & some an hun∣dred
fold: Many, olde, young, rich,
poore, men, women, and children, Mai∣sters
and Dames, seruants professing and
louing the Gospell, and greatly reioy∣cing
in it. Many seeking and searching
for true wisedome, from the true foun∣taine,
being carefull to aske, to enquire
for resolution and satisfaction from the
mouth of God. Many reuerencing and
louing all faithfull teachers; stirring vp &
prouoking others to doe the like, repo∣sing

their chiefe felicitie in heauenly
wisedome, desiring, thirsting, hungring
after it, as the true foode of their soule;
watching daily at the gates, and giuing
attēdance at the postes of the doores of
wisdome, sparing neither for paines nor
cost to enioy it, hating all errours, false∣hood,
folly, and striuing for the mainte∣nance
of the truth, & resolued to hazard
goods, and life, for the defence of the
Gospell. Many like Mar; choosing the
good part which shall neuer be taken
from them. Many like Lydia, whose
hearts the Lord hath opened to giu at∣tendance
to Pauls preaching. Many like
Eunice, and Lois the Grandmother and
mother of Timothi, hauing a care with
them to bring vp their children in the
true faith. All such hearers, as I doubt
not there are many such among you,
must needs be glad to heare their Mi∣stresse,
their Ladie, their Princes, their
mother, so highly commended & mag∣nified.
And will not this storie of so wor∣thie
a Queene, comfort and encourage
all that are readie with her to bestow
paines and cost, for the attaining the
same wisedome, esteeming it more

pretious then all things else in, the
world? Giue me leaue therefore (right
worthie Citizens) to comforte and
set you on in the pathes of wisdome,
wherein many of you haue alreadie a
long time most gratiouslie and profita∣bly
walked. As for any further instruc∣tions
and admonitions, I referre you to
the Sermons following. I now end,
praying heartily for you all, with the A∣postle;
Rom. 15. 5. That the God of patience and
consolation would giue you, that yee be
like minded one towards another, ac∣cording
to Christ Iesus; that you with
one minde and with one mouth, may
praise euen the father of our Lord Iesus
Christ;Phil. 1. 9. 10. that your loue may abound yet
more and more, in knowledge, and in all
iudgement, that you may discerne
things tat differ one from another; that
ye may be pure and without offence, vn∣till
the day of Christ;1. Coloss. 1. 10. that ye may walke
worthie of the Lord, and please him in
all things, being fruitfull in all good
workes.
And the very God of peace sanc∣tifie
you throughout:1. Thes. 5. 23. 24. And I pray God
that your whole spirit, soule and bodie,

may be kept blamelesse to the comming
of our Lord Iesus Christ. Faithful is he
which calleth you, which will also doe
it. Brethren pray for vs.


