



MOst worthy and true is that saying of Salomon (right Honourable) Hee Prou. 26. 27.that diggeth a pit shall fall there∣in: and hee that rolleth a stone, it shall returne vnto him: as if hee should say, The treacherous dissem∣bler, and deceiptfull person, shall feele that mischiefe which he prepared for another. For, euen as sometimes it commeth to passe, that the pit which a man diggeth to catch his neighbour in, taketh his owne foote: and that the stone which aman casteth vpward to hit his neighbour therewith, falleth vpon his owne head. So the euill which the wicked person prepareth for the inno∣cent, on a suddaine, contrary to his expectation, returneth vpon himselfe. A like saying hath Dauid in the Psalms, Be∣hold, Psal. 9. 14.

saith he, the wicked shall trauell with wickednes, for he hath conceiued mischiefe, but hee shall bring forth a lie: he hath made a pit and digged it, and is fal∣len into the pitte that hee made: his mischiefe shall re∣turne vpon his owne head, and his crueltie shal fall vp∣on his owne pate. And in another place, the same Prophet Psal 37. 12.saith thus, The wicked practiseth against the iust, and gnasheth his teeth against him, but the Lord shal laugh him to scorne, for hee seeth that his day is comming. The wicked haue drawn their sword, and haue bent their bowe, to cast downe the poore and needie, and to slay such as bee of vpright conuersation: but their sword shal enter into their own heart, and their bowes shall be broken. And herein Dauid spake vpon his own ex∣perience, How often did Saul purpose and attempt to kill him? how often did hee deuise and plot to cast him into the hands of the Philistines, to bee slaine y them? ut Dauid alwaies escaped, and Saul himselfe, at the length, was ouer∣thrown by these enemies, and miserable endd his daies. Ha∣man Ester 3. 9.purposed and plotted the death of Mordecai and the poore Iewes, he had authoritie from the King, Letters were sent by the Postes into all rouinces, to co out, kill, and de∣stroy all the Iewes, both young and olde, children, and wo∣men in one day: but the Lord so prouided, by the meanes of good Ester, that Haman himslfe was hanged vpon the gal∣lowes he had prepared for others. Daniel his accusers pro∣cure him to be cast into the Lyons denne, but the Lord pre∣serueth him safe from the rage of the Lyons, and his accu∣sers are cast into the denne, and deuoured of the same Lyons. And thus he that laieth a stone in his neighbours way, shall stumble thereon: he that layeth a snare for another, shall bee taken in it himselfe: he that worketh euill, shall bee wrapped

in euill. Sibi pàrat malum, qui alteri parat malum, Hee prepareth euill for himselfe, that prepareth euill for another. Therefore, saith one, this is the mercy and goodnesse of God, to giue such nature to subtill deuices, that the nets & snares, are turned vpon the deuisers and workers of them, that they should cease to hurt the innocent, and their friendes, or deuise any mischieuous plotte against them.
Perillus gaue to Phalaris King of the Argentines a Bul of brasse, into the which, men being enclosed aliue, they might be bruned, that so the Bull would vtter a voice. The King first burned this cunning workman in that Bull, that hee might haue experience whether it was so as hee said or no: whereupon the Poet saith, Ne{que} lex iustior vlla, quam ne∣cis artifices arte perire sua: that is, There can be no iuster lawe then that the inuenters, and workmen of death, should perish by their owne arte. Eusebius in the life of Con∣stantine, writeth of Maxentius, that hee couered a riuer with a bridge, that he might destroy Constantine comming ouer it, but by Gods prouidence he lost himselfe, and many of his by it. There is a worthy example in the life of Hilde∣brand the Pope, set out by Cardinall Benno, I haue read it in sundry Authors of good credit, and it is recorded in the booke of Martires. The Emperour was wont often to re∣paire to prayer to the Church of S. Marie, which is in the Mount Auentine: but this Hildebrand, whenas by his spies he had made diligent inquiry after all his workes, hee made the place be marked where the Emperour was woont to pray, and perswaded one by promising him money, to laie great stones vpon the beames of the Church secretly, and that he should so order them, that he might throwe them downe from aboue vpon the Emperours head as he was at prayer, and so beate out his braines. Which thing when he was ap∣poynted

to doe, he made haste to accomplish so great wicked∣nesse, and sought to lay a huge stone vpon the beames: with the weight thereof, the stone drewe him downe, and the boardes being broken vnder the beames, both the stone, and the miserable man, by the iust iudgement of God, fell downe into the Church floore, and by the said stone hee was quite crushed in peeces. Of the which fact after the men of Rome knew, and of the order thereof, they tied a rope to the wret∣ches foote, and caused him to be drawne three daies through the streetes, for the example of others. See the Popes trea∣chery and impiety, respecting no person, time, nor place, and the iust iudgement of God vpon the malefactor.
In all the former testimonies and examples, we are to con∣sider the malice, and subtilty of wicked men against the in∣nocent: the wisdome, power, and goodnes of God, in pre∣seruing his children in the greatest daungers, and his iustice vpon the inuenters, and authors of mischiefe. Of all this, we our selues, and this whole land haue had experience often heretofore, and now of late most of all. In that mischieuous and bloudie plot, intended and prepared against vs, by our aduersaries the Papists, pittes they haue deepely, and cun∣ningly digged, subtill snares, and traines they haue layed, but to their owne shame and confusion: the goodnes of God hath turned their mischiefe vpon their owne heads, these things are new and fresh in memorie, and we cannot but stil daylie speake and thinke seriouslie of them, and I doubt not buy your Honor hath in priuate, and that in good earnest thought vpon them, and I am sure, that in that famous City, so well gouerned and taught, many worthy sermons haue bin publikely preached, shewing in farre more excellent manner then I can, the greatnes of our daungers, the greatnes of our deliuerance, and the right vse of the same. As for my owne

part, I cannot satisfie my selfe in wondring at the bloudy plots, and malitious practises of our enemies, and in admi∣ring much more the admirable mercie of God to this sinfull land. Th best of vs all are too forgetfull and carelesse, and many dull, and ignorant, and want meanes to instruct them, and stirre them vp: therefore I haue thought fitte, for the further instruction of the simpler sort, and to stirre vp all to some holy duties, to write and publish this little Treatise, to the viewe of the world: my purpose in it, is to drawe all, to an vtter dislike, and hatred of popery, to a sincere loue of the truth, to fidelity, and obedience, to their soueraigne Lord and King, and to hartie thankfulnes to our good God, the King of all Kings: for this purpose I haue chosen this worthy Psalme 116. how fitting it is to this purpose, may appeare in the treatise following.
The reasons mouing me to dedicate this my poore labour to your Honor, are these. First, because you are the chiefe in this countrie, both in power, and professession of the Gospell: and therefore no doubt, will endeauour to the vttermost, to defend the truth, and suppresse the enemies of the same. Se∣condly, to testifie my good will and thankfulnesse, for all your great and manifod fauours, and kindnes to mee and mine, which I am vnable any way to requite. For the which, I pray with the Apostle, The Lord graunt vnto your Ho∣nor, that you may finde mercy with the Lord at that day: and I say to you seuerally, Diligat te Deus, quia Dei ser∣uos diligis: The Lord loue thee, because thou louest the ser∣uants of God. Thirdly, because the matters heere handled, as they are pleasing to all Christians and good subiects: so much more to your Honor, then to many, whose danger had beene in some respect greater, so the deliuerance more: and therefore more thankes and dutie required.

But some perhaps, may thinke this Treatise vnseasonable, comming forth so long after our Deliuerance: they will say, it is now too stale, and forgotten, and many books are extant long since of this kind of Argument. Indeede I confesse it was ready for the Presse, and approoued long since, but it was neg∣lected and slacked by those to whom it was committed. But if our Deliuerance from so great a danger be forgotten, (as I doubt it is with many) then haue we need of newe pruocati∣os, and remembrances to call it againe to our minds and memories. And though there hath beene already much prin∣ted, and preached to this purpose, yet I doubt not, but still from age to age, that famous, or rather infamous and noto∣rious bloody plot of the Papists, and so great and memorable a Deliuerance▪ will be spoken of, priuately and publikely, in Print and Pulpit, to the end of the world: not onely in hese our lands, but in forrain countries, to the great glory of God, the shame of the aduersarie, and the comfort of Gods chil∣dren. And therefore vpon good ground, to stirre vs vp to a perpetuall memory and thankesgiuing, for so great a mercy, hath our Church by Act of Parliament, decreed and com∣manded that day of our Deliuerance, yeerely to be kept holy: seeing that Acte was made, onely one day hath beene as yet generally obserued to that purpose, I hope this treatise will not be thought vnseasonable.
And yet if any distaste this kind of Argument, as stale, beeing so ft handled by others, let them knowe, there bee many comforts and instructions in the handling of this gratious Psalme; and sundry points of Popery confuted in the Application, will be pertinent and profitable to all Chri∣stians at all seasons.
And thus intreating your honour in all dutie, and humi∣lity, to accept fauourably this my simplepresent, and crauing 

pardon for my boldnesse, I c ease from further troubling your Honor at this time, beseeching the Lord of Lords to preserue you from all euill, to prolong your daies vpon earth, to mul∣tiplie his best, and richest blessings vppon you, and yours, to his honour, the good of his Church, & the comfort of your owne soules, through Christ Ie∣sus Amen.

