


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE,

IAMES, Marquis of HAMMILTON.
WILLIAM, Earle of MORTON.
WILLIAM, Earle of LAVTHIAN.
THOMAS, Earle of KELLIE.
IAMES, Earle of CARLILL.
RICHARD, Earle of DESMONT.
IOHN, Earle of ANNANDAILL.
WILLIAM, Vice count of AIRE.
GEORGE, Lord BRVCE.
 And to the Right Worshipfull,

Sr. IAMES FVLLERTON, Groome of his Maiest. Stoole.
Sr. ROBERT CAR, Gentleman of his Maiest. Bed-cham∣ber, and Keeper of the Privie-purse.
Mr. IAMES MAXVVELL,
Mr. KIRKE,
Mr. WILLIAM MVRRAY,
Mr. IAMES LEVINGSTON,
 and Mr. PIT CARNE, Groomes of his Maiesties Bed∣chamber. And to all other Hon: and Wor: Scotsmen re∣maining at the Court of England, that professe the true Ancient, Catholike, and Apostolike faith, all bles∣sed Happinesse in this life, and Eternall blisse in the life to come.
 Right HONOVRABLE, and WORSHIPFVLL.
SOme perhaps may thinke that I haue done an absurd thing in pre∣fixing so many illustri∣ous Peeres, prudent Nobles, and Gentlemen of his Maiesties Bed-chamber, of high and great desert, to so little and so slender a worke: But from the learned I hope for a lesse critick censure, and from the wise for a more judicious sentence: first, because I know that this weake treatise hath need not only of one strong pillar, but of many to vphold it a∣gainst the ruine, which both by Papists; and false Brethren, will maliciously bee threatened against it: and against their subterranian plots, by which at e∣very corner they will intend to vndermine it. Ne∣verthelesse, I will never deny but any one of your Hon: or Wor: is a prop more then sufficient enough to sustaine a more decaying edifice, if any such can be apprehended: and a booke of greater worth should haue but too much honour to haue any one of your names in its frontispiece. Secondly, because I would encourage you, and rouze vp your spirits to a liuelie confidence, that by adoption you are the sonnes of Gods right hand, members of his body, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, a part of that chosen ge∣neration,
 The Church of the elect and spouse of Christ, by marriage vnited vnto him, and freed from that An∣tichristian slaverie and Babilonian bondage, with the wine of whose fornication a great part of the world these many ages past haue beene made drunke, and therefore God hath made you strong, strong for him∣selfe in this time of triall when the sonnes of Anti-christ breathes nothing but blood against the Church of Christ; and against her in many places of Germany haue preuailed, casten out Christ, and in his place set vp that abominable Idoll, their Masse, and now threa∣neth our Church, the Church within this Island with the like, to extinguish the lampe of the glorious Gos∣pell, which God hath lighted amongst vs, to remoue our candlestick, and in lieu thereof to light false lights, to set vp rusty & darke candlesticks, Their seruice in an vnknowne tongue, their Idols in stead of instructions, and their Apostles bones, and clothes in place of the writings of Christs Apostles. But God hath made you strong for himselfe, to fight in his warre, to hold the wild Boares out of his vineyard, and in his cause neither to spare your bodies nor goods; even in his cause, which your Fathers as his instruments did re-establish in the Mo∣narchie of Scotland, expelling the children of Dagon,2. Thes 2. which had come in by the effectuall working of Sathan, with all power, and signes, and lying wonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of vnrighteousnesse: and you honoring the Lord after this manner, he will multiply honours vpon you, keepe you as a signet vpon his hand,Ezech 34. and vpon you, and euery one of you, there shall be raine of blessings, the eye of the Lord shall watch ouer you for good, his mighty hand and out stretched arme shall
 bee ready to protect you in euery danger, and to ap∣point most glorious victories for you: for Babylon is now toward the falling, her sins are come vp to hea∣ven, and God hath remembred her iniquities, shee must drinke in that cup, that she hath filled to others, and as she hath shed our blood, so now must she be repayed and drinke a double draught.
Thirdly I haue presumed to dedicate this Treatise vnto your Hon: and Wor: not onely for the excel∣lencie of the subiect, The vnion betweene Christ and his Church: of which you are a part: But likewise because I am a Scotsman that haue the honour to belong to euery one of you, either by blood or affinitie, and to many of you by both (whereof I hope you shall neuer be ashamed) and therefore I thought it not amisse to let this Sermon go vnder the shadow of your Hono∣rable protections, that now remaine at the Court of England, as an argument of my loue toward my Coun∣try, and as a pledge of my seruice toward you all in ge∣nerall, & euery one of you in particular. In the meane season continuing my prayers that such a vertuous e∣mulation, may alwaies remaine among you, as is to day; that is, first of all, to aduance Gods glory, second∣ly, to be loyall to your King, that by innumerable predecessors hath swayed your Scepter; and lastly, some of you with Pompie to study to preserue your Dignitie, others with Crassus to augment it, and the third sort with Caesar to acquire Dignitie, not by vsur∣pation, as he did, But in your Soueraignes seruice, vnder the banner of CHRIST. Farewell.

