



HAuing resolued what to print, I could not be long doubtfull vnto whom: it had beene an vnfriend∣ly absurdity not to haue intitled him to my second, who might not vniustly haue challenged the pa∣tronage of my first Labour. But if vntill this time I had had no reason for such a dedication, if the same most fruitfull Colledge had not for these many years knowne vs of the same time and friendship, if in all offices of life I had not still found you most insepara∣bly one with mee: yet this Worke at this time could not offer it selfe to any so iustly as to you. It is to your name that I owe what euer fruits of my spent time shall be preserued, it is to your name that I owe whateuer fruits of my former time, being vnhappi∣ly lost, may haue a possibilitie of recouery. And could I dedicate any of my remaining Labours with

more iustice vnto any, then to him, by whose friend∣ly care, I dare almost assure my selfe of them which are remaining? But some perhaps may say for this, that it had beene better if it had beene lost, or at least that these kind of Labours are more iudiciously supprest then published. Sermons had beene fitter for my setting forth, and to preach more proper then to write. But is not this to preach? I haue heard diuers speake an houre, who preach not, and there are many, who effectually preach, that are more sparing of their breath. If I make the ambi∣tious see that he climbes but to a fall, the vsurper to acknowledge, that blood is but a slippery foundation of power, all men in generall to confesse that the most glorious is not the most safe place: is not this to cry downe Ambition and Vsurpation? or is it lesse to shew, then to threaten? and are not men so much moued with the euent it selfe, as with the commina∣tion of the euent? And yet in this age, wherein only Heresie or Sedition preferre a Booke, wherein Con∣tradiction is called Learning, and Zeale wonders that she is become Faction, I can expect but a few Readers, whose small number shall be no discourage∣ment at all to me if that your iudgement shall coun∣terpoise them, which is the onely desired crowne of

