



THE almightie God (right honourable and worshipfull) hath dealte the former yeere with your city and suburbes, as Kings and Princes in the be∣sieging and taking in of towns: first they inuade the suburbes, and liberties; where they destroy, pull downe, and set on fire: Secondlie they come before the walles and gates of the city, which (if the inhabitauntes bee not able to resiste) they presentlie take in, sound the allarum, blowe the trumpets, strike the drumme, and destroy both yong and old: which causeth sighs, lamentations, weeping and how∣ling: So likewise the Monarche of the world, the
 Lord of hoasts, hauing put on his helmet & cloake of reuēge Es. 59.17. & taken one of the weapons of his wrath, (of which in his armory of iustice hee  hath great store) hath first by his destroying Angel taken in your suburbs, freedoms & liberties, there he hath kindled their housen with the fire of the plague, & made whole families desolate, hee hath shot off his arrow that flieth by day,Psal, 91.5. & set the pesti∣lence that walketh in the darkenesse, & destroyeth at noon day, thousandes and ten thousandes haue fallen before him, Psal. 9.6.7. hee hath made ma∣nie to fall, and one fel vpon another, as the Prophet speaketh Ier. 46.16. So that they haue first tasted  the cup of gods wrath. Secondly he is come before your gates, takē thē in, & to speak with the psalmist he hath whet his sword,Psal. 7.12. bēt his bowe, made it rea∣dy, & ordayned his arrowes for thē that persecuted him. His angel hath kindled the flying fire among your citizēs, it hath entred into their housen, & re∣mained in the mids of thē Za. 5.4. The allarū hath bin giuen, witnesse the cōtinuall allarum of bels, the trūpets of Iehouah, which haue soūded in your ears so that your citizens haue also bin set as a mark for the arrows of his heauēly displeasure to be spent at. O the widdows & desolate orphās! O the sighs, tears & lamentatiōs of old & yong, rich & poor, yet cōti∣nuing for the miseries of the former yeer? To what shal we ascribe the cause of our weaknesse, that the bars of our gates, & we also, haue not bē able to keep out the destroyer? And to vse the prophets words,
 why haue our valiant men been put backe,Ierem. 46.5. and could not stand? Two things, R. H. make the inhabitants not able to resist: first, the force of  the enemy without, and lacke of weapons within to repell the enemy, Secondly, treason or traitors  within the city, which rēder it vp. The first, they are able often couragiously to withstand, as ex∣perience of greene memorie, in that admirable besieging of Ostende, admired of all the nati∣ons of the world, doth testify: but the second ve∣ry seldom, of which the Low-coūtries haue had often wofull experience. Both of these forena∣med, haue made vs vnable to keepe out of our city, the Lorde of hoastes, his slaying angell, and his flying arrowes, First the default and want of  spirituall weapons, and of that armor of proofe, described in the 6. to the Ephesians, our heades being not couered with the helmet of saluation, our harts with the brest plate of righteousnesse, our loyns with the girdie of verity, our feet with the gospel of peace, our hands hauing not the sword of the spirit, and the buckler of faith: the which weapons, our long peace & prosperitie, had made vs to cast aside as carelesse soldiers, and to take the armour of sathan,The armour of Sathan. the helme of mistrust, the brestplate of iniury, the girdle of falshood, the shoos of discord, the shield of infide∣lity, the sword of the flesh, the darts of Atheisme, epicurisme, vnmercifulnesse, pride and glutto∣ny.
 The second cause of our weakenesse, hath beene treason within; the traitors and rebelles within our walles, which haue rendred vp the city vnto the Lord of hoastes. Perhaps you will obiect the Apostles saying vnto me,2. Cor 7 4. that, I vse great boldnesse of speech toward you. Be not offended beloued, I meane our manifold sinnes and iniquities, which are, as an auncient father tearmeth them, traitors within vs, which ren∣der vp the castle and fortresse. This is the na∣ture of sinne, it maketh vs soldiers, rebels, and to vse the words of the holy ghost, fighters a∣gainst God Act, 5.39; Sathan beeing the cap∣taine, our flesh the lieftenant, our pride the standart and flourishing ensigne, our lying tongues the trumpets, our blasphemies the pikes wherewith we do as it were pearce him through, our dissensions the drum to giue the allarum, and our damnable oathes and swearings, the horses wherewith wee doe as it were tread and trample vnder feet the sacred name of the im∣mortall god.Foure sorts of traitors haue rendred vp the city. But, to particularize, foure sorts of traitors and rebels wee haue had amongst vs, which haue betraied vs, and rendred vp the ci∣ty. First, traitors against the maiesty of god the king of heauen, our blasphemies, Atheismes, cursings, idolatries, damnable swearings, our contemning of his heauenly proclamation, and of his spirituall heraulds. Thus sathan, as an
 old Seba, had blowen the trumpet and many entising blasts, & had caried vs away from our true allegiance to Christ Iesus our king. These  kinds of sins, although they are committed be∣neath vpon the earth, yet they reach as high as heauen, and therfore may be compared vnto the Pioners or vnderminers, who although they are busie vnder the earth about the foundation, yet their purpose and intent is aboue, to cast downe the high wals, towres and fortresses. Secondlie,  traitors against our neighbors, our murthers, a∣dulteries, our thefts, robberies, fraudes and op∣pressions of the poore, our false witnesses against the innocent, our slaunders and depriuing of the good name and fame of our brethren. Thirdly, traitors against our owne persons, as our  whoredomes traitors against our chastity, drun∣kennesse against our health, pride against our humilitie, and prodigalitie against our sub∣stance. Fourthlie some against the prince, Ab∣ners, Asahels, Isbosheths,2. Sa. 2. Seminaries and  Iesuites, repining at his felicitie, traitors, (to inuert the words of AVGVSTIN against the Donatistes) conuicti non conficti, by conuicti∣on, not by confiction, locusts, come from the bot∣tomlesse pit of hell, spued foorth from the sea of Rome and Rhemes in heapes, into the land, who would rather haue a Reboam then a Salomon; and therfore ar vermins, being come out of the
 high Oke tree of Rome, seeke to destroy the green Oliue tree in the house of the Lord.1 l. 52. And haue not some home-bredde enemies blowne the trumpet of Seba;2. Sam. 20. saying, we haue no part of Dauid, nor inheritance in the sonne of Ishai? to whome may be saide that which Wisdome speaketh to her sonne, Pro. 31.1, What my sonne, the sonne of my wombe! and yet they haue risen against their mo∣ther that did beare them, and gaue them suck.
These foure kinds of traitors haue betray∣ed vs, and made vs vnable to resist the King of Heauen; & as they haue prouoked the Lord against vs, so haue they also made the Lords Angels & the elements our enemies. As it hath beene with the father, so hath it beene with the sonnes; as it hath beene with the King, so hath it been with the subiectes. For, a King be∣ing offended, his seruants are ready to bee exe∣cutors of his anger and displeasure. O the ad∣mirable force of sinne, that whereas nothing is able to break the hedge of the Lords vineyard, the Lyon, nor the wilde Bore, yet our sins are a∣ble to make a breach: & as one speaketh; The Lord is a strong Sampson: but yet our sins, are as a razor, by which we take away, as it were, his strength, and by which wee doe, as it were, shaue the heade of that great Sampson our
 Iudge and defender, that he cannot, or rather will not helpe vs. I haue shewed you then (right Honourable) the causes of our impotencie; giue mee leaue also to signifie to you the meanes, how to escape, against the future, the brunt of such a iudgement and heauie assault; beholde in this newe years gift, out of the armory of King Da∣uid, I discouer the right armour of proofe, wherewith wee shall bee able to keepe out a∣nother time the destroyer; namely, King Dauids repentance, a tree branching it selfe, into these fruites, the knowledge of his sinne, desire of remission, accompanied with faith, humble confession, prayer, sacrificing, pro∣strating of himselfe in sackloath with the Elders of the people. No other target or sworde, no other gate to shut out the destroy∣er then this. These are mans, or rather the Christians weapons. God hath giuen to euery liuing creature his weapon to defend himselfe and to resist; to the Bee his sting, to the Bull his hornes, to the Cocke his spurres, to the Horse his heeles, to the Beare, his pawes, to the Elephant his snoute, to the Lyon his teeth, to the Fish his sinnes: but to man or a Christian, hee hath giuen one more forcible then all the rest, repentance and prayer, fit weapons to resist and to keepe out the slaying Angell, and the Lords armie.

Now, that wee might be skilfull in the hand∣ling of them, this Treatise setteth, before our eyes, DAVID, a skilfull capitaine. Esteem not (Right Honourable and Worshipfull) that it cōmeth too late, & out of time: for as after the taking in of cities, there is a pourtrature and Mappe drawne of the siege and taking in, and of the manner thereof, with a description of the traitors which haue betrayed it, or of the cause of their weaknesse and vnability to resist, and that for the instruction of others, that therein they might learne, where to amende the fault, and the meanes how to keepe out another time the enemie: So likewise, after the besieging and taking in of your honourable citie, by the Lord of Hostes and his Angell, beholde, I haue made a pourtrature, and drawne a Mappe of the manner of the causes of our weakenesse, of the traitours which haue be∣trayed it, to shewe hereby the meanes to stoppe the breach, and the way to resist, if he re∣turne againe the next sommer, or any other time. For although, now in the winter season, our enemie the pestilēce ceaseth to anoy vs, yet he may perhaps the next spring returne, if we take not heed. For, the plague is like vnto Kings and Princes in the besieging of cities: in the winter season, they commonly retyre, the cold∣nesse of the winter suffering them not to con∣tinue;
 but when the Sommer appeareth, be∣holde they are in armes, and come before the citie, destroying, burning, and shooting. In the same manner, the Plague which ceased in the winter, returneth often in the sommer. And therefore let vs not become carelesse Soldiers. Great hath beene the diligence (by the commandement of our wise and gra∣tious Prince) of the spirituall Captaines in your citie, to traine vp the Lords Soldiers, and to teach them to handle these weapons; paise-worthy haue beene the weekely mu∣strings in the Lords fielde, I meane, your weekely fastings in the congregation through the whole citie; wee haue experience of suc∣cesse, for wee haue ouercome the inuincible Lord, and caused him to retire. But let vs not therefore giue our selues to security, and lay aside these weapons: but rather, as the citizens who are in doubt of the enemies returning, let vs continually watch and pray, Luk. 21. that if hee returne, wee bee not vnprouided: let vs not tarry to take them, vntill the Lord enter the citie, as wee haue done, least wee smart for it againe. Alexan∣der the great, being readie to giue an assault, sawe one of his Souldiers then first to take his buckler in hand, and viewing it to try if it were strong enough: for which negligence hee
 displaced him, and punished him; let vs also take heede, that wee suffer not a iust punish∣ment for our procrastination and delay. To auoide the same, (because the prints or markes of gods correcting hand are yet to bee seene, and the noyse of the mournings and gronings of manie, doe yet sounde in our eares) giue mee leaue (Right Honourable and worship∣full) to giue vnto you,Good counsel for the citie. and to the whole ci∣tie,  a twofolde counsell. First, keepe in your citie this yeare, yea continuallie, spirituall gar∣rison, haue the armourie of Dauid, exercise your selues in the handling of these spirituall  weapons. Secondly, let your citie bee wal∣led with mercie, iudgement, trueth, sobrie∣tie, humilitie and sanctimonie: and so it will bee stronger, then if it had walles of brasse and Iron, and will bee able to keepe out the iudgement of GOD in the highest strength therof. To drawe towards a conclusion, accept this little vnworthy Treatise (Right Honora∣ble and Right Worshipful). I offer it vnto you this first day of the yeare, for a newe yeares gift, with the name of the (Kings Medicine) which, the Treatise following will lay open vnto you. It was a medicine vsed by King Dauid, and the Elders of the people, and therefore beeing a kingly medicine, is not vn∣fit to bee dedicated vnto your Honour, a Kings
 Lieutenant, and also to you (Right VVorship∣ful) the Elders of the people. The Lord grant, that with the 24. Elders, yee may fall downe before the throne of GOD, and giue all praise, glorie, wisdome, thanks, honour, power and might, vnto GOD,Reuel. 4.10. for euermore. Amen.

