




SHall not my hand
present my heart to him,
That gaue my feeble armes,
more strength to swimme:
Then faile my hand,
to guide thine artlesse pen,
And heart forget,
good nature vnto men,

If both prefer him not
to lasting praise,
That made me happy,
in my dysmall dayes.
This be a Record,
of your noble mind,
Seated in blood,
of a most loyall Kind:
That Prince, and
people cannot wish to see,
Hearts better stockt,
with true integrity.
Nor any blame my
gratefull heart, that giues
Aduancement to your
worth, where merit liues.


 SIR.
I Haue entred so great a Bond to your worship, that I am hopelesse euer to say (as the indebted seruant to his master) vp∣on your patience I will pay you all: yet doe I not desire, that vpon proofe of my willingnesse, your clemency should pardon all. I would not be so se∣cure; lest ingratitude cor∣rupt me; but that hauing iustly to consider, your free and frequent fauours my best endeauours may still bee striuing to pro∣cure your acquittance: so shall your Worship bee
sure not to loose what is worth the requiting: I hopefull still to receiue those benefits, which may continue my study there∣unto. Sir I could make choyce of no better thing to present you with all, then what my heart hath chosen to rule, and con∣tent it selfe withall, desi∣rous to perswade you so much hereby, that no greater seruice shall bee wanting, which may de∣riue a promise from this briefe Hierogliphick. The shortnesse, is to bee mea∣sured by the streightnesse of my time, not by the
defect of my loue: the matter to bee examined by my purpose of profi∣ting others so well as my selfe, not in any thing tax∣able of presumption: the vnfiled composure to bee tollerated, for the condi∣tion of the matter. As they are, I heartily wish they may at least content you, if not adde a scruple to your happy experi∣ence. The Lord who hath abundantly blessed you with many sweete hopefull branches, like∣wise enrich your hearts with his graces, that you may bee throughly
and perfectly blessed in body, and soule, and euer∣more protect, and di∣rect all yours to the glory of his sa∣uing health.

