



IT is accounted of S.t Augustine, (and not without cause) grande miraculum, a great and won∣derfull miracle, ineruditos libe∣ralibus disciplinis &c. that the Apostles of our Sauiour, twelue poore men (fishermen, publicanes, and such like) ne∣uer brought vp in learning, and in comparison of the gentile Philsophers, altogether vnlettered, not skil∣full in Grammar, not armed with Logike, not swel∣ling with eloquence and Rhetorike, should yet be able by the helpe of Christ, to entangle in the nets of

faith, in a manner the people of the whole world, and amongst the rest the very Philosophers themselues. For of them and their time was veryfied that of the Prophet,Psal. 19.4. Their sound is gon out into all lands, and their wordes vnto the ends of the world. Those peo∣ple, that noe force or power of the Romanes (masters of the world) could bring to the obedience of the Roman lawes, although they subdued their persons, Scythians, Indians, Aethiopians, Parthians, Germans, and Britans (so speaketh Theodoret reckoning many other Nations beside) these same fishermen,De cur: Gr: affect: l: 9. vsing neither weapons nor souldiers, nor any other inforcinge meanes thn perswasions and the examples of their vertues, as especially of their patience of injuries and afflictions; induced notwithstanding to subject them∣selues vnto the lawe of a man done to death by the base, seruile, and most shamefull punishment of the crosse. A branch or limme of this miracle I haue ta∣ken vpon mee to describe, euen soe far forth as it con∣cerneth this our Britaine, and haue presumed to offer the same vnto your Majestie; as an argument, if it were well handled, not vnworthy your conside∣ration. For whereas this worke consisteth of two parts, being both narrations, one reporting the hi∣storie of our conuersion from Paganisme vnto Christi∣an religion; the other containing a memoriall of the liues and actions of such as from time to time haue been the principall instruments of the propagation and continuance of that first plantation: It will lay open two poynts ministring matter of greate and most just glorie, both vnto your selfe and the Domi∣nions ouer which God of his goodnesse hath placed you: the first, shewing, that heere the miracle afore∣said

had his first operation; as the second, that heere likewise it hath found the most effectuall operation.
For first, it will appeare (that which Sabellicus hath well noted) how that Omnium Prouinciarum pri∣ma, Britannia, publicitùs Christi nomen recepit;Ennead: 7 lib: 5. In which respect it is worthylie called Primogenita ecclesiae, the first begoten daughter of the church of God: second∣ly, that the godly care and judicious choyce of your Majesty, hath afforded vnto our Church such Pastors both for pietie and learning, as neither can any age past in our country, nor any other country in the world at this present, be compared justly with vs, for abundance of Preachers of Gods truth, men indued with excellent learning, and moreouer by Godlinesse of life and good example confirminge what they teach; howsoeuer by the slaunderous mouthes as well of Puritanes as Papists, imputations are dayly cast vpon vs importing the contrary. In the former of these I haue the more willingly taken paynes, by inlarging that which heeretofore I haue written to that purpose somewhat more breefly thn were ex∣pedient; because I perceiue that diuers of late yeeres haue greatly endeuoured, to deduce the pedegree of our Christianitie from Rome, by making the Bishops thereof the first authors of the same. And heerein they haue been soe earnest, as well we might maruaile they should soe (incalescere in re frigida) but that one of them telleth vs in plaine tearmes,N: D: in hist: 3. conuers: we haue in that respect such an obligation to the See of Rome, as needs we must mayntaine that religion that is nowe taught and mayntained there by the Bishops of the same. Were the antecedent all true, we might not allow the consequence for good.

Pers: Sat: 1.—Non quicquid turbida Roma
Eleuat, accedas, examenue improbum in illa
Castiges trutina. —
Tertullian (peraduenture alluding to that of the Apostle,Gal: 4. Ierusalem which is aboue is free and Mother of vs all) caleth Ierusalem Matrem & Fontem religionis.Cont: Marci: lib. 2. And S. Augustine in a certaine disputation betweene him and one Pascentius,Epist: 178. saith, that faith and religion sprang first from the Grecians. Heereupon may we in like sort conclude, that Tertullian was perswaded, wee ought euer to mantaine the doctrine taught in Ierusa∣lem & by the Bishops thereof, amongst which diuers are knowne to haue been grosse Heretickes: And that S. Augustine in the place before named, approued once for all, all such opinions as the Greeke Church should at any time happen to defend. Nowe although the consequence being so weake, the argument of it selfe falleth to the ground; yet, in as much as, going about to make good the antecedent (which is notoriously false) these men they cast a myst before our eyes in deprauing and falsifying the history of our Church: I haue thought good to indeuour, that the very truth in that behalfe may appeare, as by testimonies worthy credit and without exceptions I trust it shall. For the other poynt, concerning the vertues and sufficiency beyond all exception of those Prelates, our Church hath brought forth since the refor∣mation of the same; I feare I haue dealt but too too modestlie, refusinge to yeelde to them their due prayses, least I should seeme to flatter men, that either in person, or by their neere friendes and

posterity are as it were yet present amongst vs. For ncerning them I haue set downe nothing, but mat∣r of fact; and that such, as either is to be shewen in blique record, or is so notorious, as noe man but oweth who euer knew them. Neither indeed do I nke it very needfull for me to proceed much far∣er, seeing the writings of most of them heertofore blished vnto the world, are testimonies sufficient  the excellency of their learning and sincerity of octrine: And their conuersations such, as neither y malicious Saunders, or enuious Marprelate, was e∣rable to cast vpon (I doubt not I may say) any one  them, an aspersion of scandall that could leaue a∣ permanent stayne behind it. God of his infinite odnesse graunt vnto your Majestie many and ma∣ happy dayes amongst vs, and that after it shall ease him to translate you from these temporary ingdomes to that which is euerlasting, you may ue of your posterity such, as from time to time ay succeed you as well in your vertues as in your minions. Then shall the breasts of your Priests euermore adorned with Vrim and Thummim; yea y shall shine as so many starres in the right hand im that hath the keyes of hell and of death,Reuel: 1. that lpha and Omega, the first and the last; to whom be onour and glory, now and for euer.

