



HAving resolved what to print, I could not belong doubtfull unto whom: it had been an unfriendly absurdity not to have intit'led him to my second, who might not unjustly have chal∣lenged the patronage of my first Labour. But if un∣till this time I had had no reason for such a dedica∣tion, if the same most fruitfull Colledge had not for these many yeares knowne us of the same time and friendship, if in all offices of life I had not still found you most inseparably one with me: yet this Worke at this time could not offer it selfe to any so justly as to you. It is to your name that I owe what ever fruits of my spent time shall be preserved, it is to your name that I owe what ever fruits of my former time, being unhappily lost, may have a possi∣bilitie of recovery. And could I dedicate any of my remaining Labours with more justice unto any, then to him, by whose friendly care, I dare almost assure

my selfe of them which are remaining? But some perhaps may say for this, that it had beene better if it had beene lost, or at least that these kinde of La∣bours are more judiciously supprest then published. Sermons had beene fitter for my setting forth, and to preach more proper then to write. But is not this to preach? I have heard divers speake an houre, who preach not, and there are many, who effectually preach, that are more sparing of their breath. If I make the ambitious see that he climbes but to a fall, the usurper to acknowledge, that blood is but a slip∣pery foundation of power, all men in generall to con∣fesse that the most glorious is not the most safe place: is not this to cry downe Ambition and Vsurpa∣tion? or is it lesse to shew, then to threaten? and are not men so much moved with the event it selfe, as with the commination of the event? And yet in this age, wherein onely Heresie or Sedition preferre a Boooke, wherein Contradiction is called Learning, and Zeale wonders that she is become Faction, I can expect but a few Readers, whose small number shall be no discouragement at all to me, if that your judg∣ment shall counterpoise them, which is the onely de∣sired crowne of

