


WORTHY SIR,
GIve mee leave for your many favours, to present you with S. Peters Net: his Net, I call his Epistle so, for if our SAVIOVR made him a Fisher of men, I am sure, with this hee hath caught many; and indeed, if the Church hath had any profit by these labours in the delivery, if these have taken some, it was the Nett caught them, and not I. To give you a briefe reason of the end and manner of this Worke; the end is Religion and Thank∣fulnesse, (and indeed Thankfulnesse is a part of Religion:) Religion towards GOD, by setting forth a Divine Worke; Thank∣fulnesse towards you, by setting it forth in your name, whose obligations are so strong upon mee, that, next to him, I am

bound to honour you: these are the End, and the Manner is such, as that I hope it hath hit upon the meane; sure I am that I abhor Barbarisme, and I would not doate upon Curiosity. My words are those of my every dayes discourse, which I would strive to have more full of sense thā sound; and for my part, I never cared how bigge they were, but how expressing; 'twere but folly to see a golden Key that would not open, and to cast away a Leaden one that would; in S. Aust. not leaden similitude. Yet I could never bee of the minde, that Religion and Wit must needs bee at odds, that the Mistris can never agree with the Hand-maid, that those Preachers in the new language are Dawbers, which are not Down-right. It is their owne Partition of Preachers, & those termes must be cōtradi∣stinct if it be a good one, that neither the dawber cā be down-right, nor the down∣right a dawber. But, is Wit, is Elegancie dawbing? Are Esay, Iob, Solomon, Moses in his Songs, but dawbers now? I am sure no∣thing can be invēted more witty than their writings,

more sublimely Elegant. Oh holy Dawbers! oh prophane Down-right∣nesse if it bee opposed to this Dawbing! But why doe I pleade for Wit and Elegan∣cy, when, after al the most forcible reasons, they who speake against it, will speake a∣gainst it, because they have it not, and no reason will bet hought needfull, to com∣mend it to those, who have it, and indeed the most Down-right need not to feare that dawbing here. Yet if here were some of it, I trust it would not bee esteemed an inexpiable offence: Sure I am Solomon spea∣keth it for no disgrace of himselfe, The Preacher sought out acceptable words; or, out of the Hebrew, Words of delight, observe, Words of delight, pleasing words, no lesse than saving words; and that, when he had said immediately before, Because the Prea∣cher was wise: Not onely the wise Preacher sought out these words, but he sought thē out of his wisedome, because he was wise; as who should say, hee had beene, others would be, but foolish Preachers, if they imagined that any other would bee the

words of salvation, besides those which were the words of delight. Oh unwise Solomon! who would take such pains to be a Dawber? who would seeke out those prophane words, which hee should have cast away in an holy anger, yea even when they had offered themselves unto him? Well then, they forbid others to write fine∣ly, but they themselves will not write their owne: they say, that the more Elegant preach their owne selves, but they their owne selves doe not preach; all that they have is what they filch from others; a Ser∣mon perhaps they deliver, but it is not their Sermon, and they have not so much as their absurdities, but by stealth: What a misery is this, that they must have the dis∣grace of theeves, and yet want the com∣mendation of cunning theeves; that they have nothing but what they steale, and yet could never learne to steale the best? Charity forbid, that I should say, that their heart is never inditing a good matter, but con∣fidently I dare say that few of them can tru∣ly say, I speake the things which I have

made. But inveying against ignorance, I have expressed not a little of it, by being too talkative, and it is enough to discou∣rage you from the rest, if this bee my manner of intreating. It remaineth, that I pray GOD, that, for the generall, it may bee received with the same minde that it was set forth, that whereas it is an Exposition of S. Peter, it may have part of S. Peters happinesse; and where he converted thousands at one, these labours of mine may convert some in many Ser∣mons. And in particular, that I intreate you (as you have hitherto done) to protect the Work, and love the Author, who still pray∣eth for your happinesse, with your truely Christian and noble Family: These are the supplications of

