


MAny things there be (right Honourable) which vilifie and diminish the faith of Romes Religion, which fortifie and gar∣nish ours. And yet indeed it is a very mi∣serable and deplorable thing, that in mat∣ter of Religion, mens mindes and iudge∣ments should still hang wauering and anxiously tottering as a Wedge of Steele betweene two attractiue Loadestones; and not to be maturely and firmely confirmed in the in∣dubitable orthodox Faith and Religion. When therefore I had adapted and addicted my mind to the studie of Diui∣nitie, and afterward setled my serious inquisition vpon Controuersies of Faith: Poperie most perspicuously seemed to me, to be nothing else, but a certaine pompous & Ma∣iesticke Monarchie, begotten by Ambition, bred and fed vp by Superstition, blocked-vp and fortified by Tyranny, enlarged and propagated both by the Mammon of the World, and fraudulent Fabrication of the Pseudo-Clergie.
Many most learned Authours haue by their worthy Writings notably shaken this (I say not Religion, but) Re∣legation or Banishment of true Religion: and may It now (with your Honours good liking) put on a versified Ve∣sture, and by this my Edition and Dedication to your

Honour, come forth, yet more grossely guiltie from me.
Theodorite writes of one Ephres of Syrus an Iland in A∣sia, who long since composed in diuers kinds of Verses, whatsoeuer appertained to Pietie and Religion: That so they might the more feruently be affected and earnestly desired. The same doth Socrates and Sozomen affirme of Apollinarius; And Gregory Nyssen of Basil and of Nazi∣anzen. Of more proximious and moderne times also Eo∣banus of Hesse, Beza, Bucanan, and very many more did accomodate themselues (as it were, with a certaine kinde of delightfull Sawce and Seasoning of the Truth) to the il∣lustration and setting forth of the Booke of Psalmes in Verse.
 (as Pindarus) Let not then the stormie Stones of dire Detraction be throwne at me, if I in imitation of those worthy imitable Authours haue in verse composed Hoc  Religionis argumentum, This often controuerted Subiect of Religion.
The most exquisitely learned Interpreters doe call the Booke of Psalmes, the most sacred sugred Poeme of Gods blessed Spirit; And they giue the reason why Almightie God would haue so excellent a Treasure of his Church to be contriued and contained in verse, viz. , that it might be as a Bait to allure and entice men to fa∣cile obedience thereunto. The same also is most manifest that Satan (as he is Operum Dei  the Ape of Gods Actions) was wont to enfold, wreathe and winde-vp in Verse, all his Oracles which in former ages he vsed to de∣liuer by his Pythons or Sybils, that by this meanes they might be the more pleasant and acceptable to those which enquired after them. I omit, that Saint Paul out of certaine Poets, as Aratus, Menander and Epimenedes,

quoted diuers Testimonies or amplifications, and not out of any other Heathenish Authors, as neere as I can obserue in his Epistles.
Once also heretofore I my selfe composed a Module in Latine-Verse, vnder the Title of A Combate betweene the Flesh and the Spirit; or, The Warfare of a Christian Souldier. Of our holy Martyrs; And of The miseries of this miserable Life; Since which time, I with Nazianzen : haue cast and prostrated this my Muse at my Sauiours feet, submitting and addi∣cting it wholly to his seruice, and to the setting forth of his pure Doctrine. And whilest I read the elaborate La∣bours and Diatribae of Diuines, and at intermissiue houres ruminated what I had read; with most feruent desire and full delight, I forthwith put my selfe vpon a versifying Veine, thereby (as well as I might) to strengthen and as∣sist my weake and vntrusty memorie.
The Fruit of this my Labour I humbly Deuote, Dedi∣cate and Consecrate to you (Right Honourable) whom I euer knew (since I euer knew any thing) most exquisitely endued, and adorned, furnisht and accomplisht with all generous and ingenious Vertues and Discipline. Whence, th reason why his Maiesty made you his worthy Princi∣pall Secretarie, cannot be Secretly hidden, but most con∣spicuously euident, to me, to all others: But by this Poeme, the Proeme of my principall intention is, sincerely to lay downe a perpetuall Pledge, and merited Memory of my obsequious obseruance of that great Fauour and Courtesie, wherewith your Honour hath euer graced and embraced mee: And of that firme Faith, which I heere endeuour to defend, and wherein I am most certainely assured, you are most confidently and immoueably settled.
But I trust your Honourable Courtesie will conniue at and excuse me, if (as I am Acrior paulò , a some∣what sharp and tart Opposite to the Antichristian-Crew) the syllables and sentences in diuers places being transposed and alternated, I seeme to say & reiterate one and the same thing: Since that euen from my first vndertaking of this Worke thus once vndertaken, I vndertooke to display and disperse the fragrant and odoriferous Flowers of various Authors, and not onely to write diuers things, but to write them diuers waies, and truely to depaint the power of Popery to be no lesse sumptuously spacious, than auarici∣ously Capacious.
But aboue all, my heart hath eagerly exasperated my Hand and ready Pen (to the vtmost of my power) to pull downe the intolerable and abominable Pride of Rome: whereby her Babylonicall Bishops haue with the Hornes of their Insolency, butted at the Princes of the Earth, shew∣ing themselues to be nothing else, indeed, than the sire∣ly Sons of Saturne, and an aspiring Off-spring of robustious combustious Phaetontine haughty Spirits.
Neither shall the Reader finde heere any flourishing veines or straines of painted Poetry and fabulous Fictions: My prime purpose, in the fashioning and framing of this Honey-Combe, being, to furnish it with a more beautifull Cluster of Theologie, than a bountifull Crop of Poesie.
Nor haue I been ambitiously busie, to cite my Authors Names on the Margines: For, what I write, I write to those, who (as Saint Augustine saies, are willing to reade, and wise to vnderstand; and who together with mee, doe either already know, or easily may know, whatsoeuer I haue writ.
Finally, Heere, you hae neither a few, nor all matters touching the Romish Religion; Let whoso will, giue my Booke a Bill of Diuorce: But from your right Honourable Humanity, and Customary Courtesie, I vndoubtedly ex∣pect, and hope to find, Fauour for what I haue done, and Pardon for what I haue pretermitted and left vndone.

