



RIght Wor∣shipful, and deare in the Lord; right deare and precious are the bands of that relation, wherein a People and Pastor
meeting together, are made one; especially when the lawes and termes of this relation are with all good con∣science, and sound∣nesse, and intirenesse of affection, managed and observed on both sides. If it were put upon the file, (I con∣ceive) it would bee none of the easiest questions now on foot, and under dis∣pute in the world, to determine, whether it be matter of greater
satisfaction, to men of spirituall conside∣ration, and advise∣ment, either to lead, or to be led, to that perfect happinesse which stands in the full fruition of God in Christ. That both the one and the other, are of very high and excellent contentment to the mindes of men so composed, is a Po∣sition, which needes cost a man little in study or thoughts, to beleeve. Doubtlesse
there is no such com∣bination of actives and passives under Heaven, betweene which the mutuall penetration is mutu∣ally more gratefull and acceptable, or wherein there is more satisfaction given and received on both sides, then betweene them. He that is not himselfe called to the place or office of a Mi∣nister in the Church of Christ, cannot (with wisdome) but
put it in head or front of his desires, to eat of the labours, & march towards Heaven un∣der the conduct of such a Minister, of whom he hath this precious assurāce, that his heart is with his soule, and that he tra∣vailes in birth wich him, till Christ bee framed in him, that is willing to doe and suffer all things, to make him partaker of the Gospell with him∣selfe. And for him
whom God hath se∣parated to serve him in the Gospell of his deare Son, and for the worke of the Ministe∣ry, if he be capable of his owne greatest comfort and glory, the greatest joy and strength of his desire must needs be, to help to replenish and fill those many Mansions in Heaven with a ge∣neration of his owne; to goe before such a people that is willing to follow him, round∣ly,
and close up, in all the waies of life, whose resolutions & ingagements for that great piece of immor∣tality, laugh all the glory, pleasures, and contentments of the world, in the face to scorne; and are too great, and deep to suf∣fer them to be cast be∣hinde hand in the things of their peace, with running out of the way for the East∣winde. What hath been said concerning
the sheep, is too inno∣cent a saying, to finde enmity or contradi∣ction from any man. To desire the greatest faithfulnesse, and the dearest tendernesse of affection in him, to whom, under God, a man chuseth to com∣mit that invaluable treasure of his soule, is no such profound, or master-piece of wis∣dome: but that it may well be concei∣ved to be incident to men that have but the
first fruits of the first fruits of the Spirit, or that have but begun to be a little jealous and thoughtfull, that they have soules in∣deed, which will not doe well in hell. Wherefore (to leave this assertion to shift for it selfe, without ta∣king any further care of plea, or proofe for it) what hath been said concerning the Shepheard, seemes to admit more question or dispute. If Timothy
may save his owne soule, is he not well for one, whether hee saves others or no? or what great additi∣on can it be to a Mi∣nister, who otherwise approves himselfe un∣to God, and makes for the great Port of Heavē with a streight course, both in Life and Doctrine, to car∣ry a traine or retinue of his people with him? will it make any breach in his glo∣ry in heaven, that hee
comes thither alone? Will not his Crowne of righteousnesse flou∣rish upon his head, except it be watered with the salvation of others? Whether it be of any concern∣ment, or resentment or no, to a faithfull Minister, being once entred into his Ma∣sters joy, and fully possest of that condi∣tion, wherein morta∣lity shall be swallow∣ed up of life, whether he hath stretched forth
the hand of his Mini∣stery, either to a gain∣saying, or to an obe∣dient or willing peo∣ple, whether he hath saved many or few, or none at all; certaine it is, that whilest he is upon his Pilgrimage, & clothed with flesh; yea, and as it seemes, Heb. 13.17. 1 Thes. 2.19. somewhat fur∣ther, even to the very gates and entring in to that compleat im∣mortality (whereinto there is no entrance
till after the resurrecti∣on from the dead, and the sentence of Abso∣lution passed from the mouth of the great Judge) it is a matter of great thoughts, and workings of heart, ei∣ther on the right hand or on the left hand unto him. Obey them (saith the Apostle in the former Scripture) that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your soules, as they that must give
accompt, that they may doe it with Ioy, and not with Griefe, &c. And in the latter, thus: For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoycing? Are not even yee in the pre∣sence of our Lord Je∣sus Christ at his com∣ming? For yee are our glory and joy. So that a teachable, wise, and tractable people, that know what to doe with the words of eternall life, besides giving them the hear∣ing,
are not only choice matter of hope (for the future) and of joy, yea, and of a Crowne of rejoycing, i. e. matter of the most weighty and solemne rejoycing, unto their faithfull Minister for the present, whilest his dwelling is with flesh, but even after he hath laid aside this earthly Tabernacle, & resumed it againe in the Resurrection, at the comming, and in the presence of Jesus
Christ, they will be a glory and crowne of rejoycing, an annoint∣ing with the Oyle of joy and gladnesse un∣to him, above his fel∣lowes. As on the con∣trary, a froward, foo∣lish, carelesse, stub∣borne flock, as they are a great abasement, and sorrow of heart to a good Shepheard for the present, 2 Cor. 2.1, 3, 7.12.21. So will they be an occasi∣on of the last griefe, and heavinesse unto
him; yea, of such a griefe and heavinesse, that cannot (it seemes by the expression of the holy Ghost) be cu∣red, neither by the richest, and most fear∣lesse, and unquestion∣able assurance, nor by the nearest and most immediate approach, but only by the actu∣all compleate enjoy∣ment of the joy and glory of immortality it selfe.
Though I have no ground of confidence
to put any such great question unto you, as Paul did (and well might) unto the Gala∣tians, to aske you, What hath your felici∣ty been since my com∣ming and preaching the Gospell unto you? yet this I cannot but professe and testifie to the world, to the exal∣tation and praise of the grace of God that hath been given you by my dispensation of the Gospell towards you (let the tree of in∣terpretatiō
fall which way it will, whether to the North, or to the South, it shall neither hurt me nor you by the fall) that you have rejoyced in my light, and have been ready (many of you) if not to pluck out, and give your eyes un∣to me, yet in the best and readiest way of Christian expression, to signifie and seale the truth, life and power which you have seen, tasted, and
felt in my Ministery. And that which I know not how to draw aside to any o∣ther construction, but only to make a demō∣stration and proofe of the naturalnesse of your affection to∣wards me, and to∣wards the truth it self, delivered by me; though the iniquity of many hath aboun∣ded against both, yet your love to neither hath waxed cold: which crowne of
praise, I could willing∣ly enrich yet seven times more, and set it upon your heads; when I had done, if I knew how to worke upon it, without seeming (at least) to soile others by way of complaint, and to make men offenders for personall wrongs: which is a straine of too much effeminate∣nesse in a Christian, and little lesse then ei∣ther an acknowledge∣ment of the strength
of other mens weak∣nesse, or of the weak∣nesse of a mans owne strength. Howsoever, my silence (whether upon this, or other consideration) will be found no treason ei∣ther against the life, or dignity of your Chri∣stian and worthy de∣portment therein: there is one greater then all the world be∣sides, that will see that righteousness of yours fully rendred unto you in due time.
Truth is honest in her deepest poverty and distresse, and whatso∣ever she borroweth or taketh of any man for her support or reliefe in prison, she will pay double and treble when she recovers her liberty, and entreth a∣gaine into her glory. And feare not, he that would not leave the soule of his Sonne in hell, nor suffer his ho∣ly One to see corrupti∣on, will be as mind∣full of, & tender over
his daughter Truth; and will give her beauty for ashes in due season.
You (I confesse) have the advantage of me in opportunities many wayes, for ex∣pressing your selves in point of affection. The giving of carnall and outward things, is both easier of inter∣pretation, and lesse li∣able to sinister con∣struction, then the dispensing of spiritu∣all things is. Mini∣sters
are oftentimes suspected to preach the Gospell out of en∣vy, or other pretences that are not good; but no man gives either silver or gold, but is presumed to doe it of good will. Besides, the work and labour of a Minister, is look∣ed upon (by the most) but as of a matter of course, and that which he is bound to doe; and no great thanke conceived to belong to it; but the bestow∣ing
of a small matter, where men are con∣ceived to be free, (the rule of which free∣dome, is generally made the silence of the Lawes of Land and State) is no lesse then matter of admi∣ration unto many: and two mites cast into a Ministers treasu∣ry, of free gift, signifi∣eth, in the vulgar Dia∣lect of men, twenty thousands in affecti∣on. Yea, the diligence and faithfulnesse of
good Ministers them∣selves successively, who have abounded in this worke, may well be conceived to have abated the e∣steeme of it with ma∣ny, and have caused it to seem now rather a  of  then commendation. Whereas on the other hand, the generall basenesse, and empty handednesse of men towards their Teach∣ers, sets off a slender liberality with much
lustre and beauty: as the scarcity of com∣forts and refreshings in hell make a drop of water to coole his tongue, seem a great boone to the rich man.
Neverthelesse, my trust and confidence is, concerning you that are spirituall, that you, by the light, part∣ly of my labours and paines amongst you, having served you now in the things of Jesus Christ (well
neare the terme of seven yeares) partly of my Doctrine, partly of my manner of life and conversation o∣therwise, can plainly and perfectly reade it written in the Tables of my heart, how deare you are unto me; and how high and glorious my con∣tentments and com∣forts are in such a∣mongst you, whose faces are set towards heaven, and are re∣solved to take no∣thing
in exchange for your soules. I will not be further impor∣tune with you in plea∣ding the cause of my indearments to you; upon this occasion: I had rather give you an accompt of my heart towards you, in deeds then in words, in power then profes∣sion: Neither shall I ever be troublesome unto you for any greater measure of esteeme, or approba∣tion with you, then
what my carriage shall be reasonably valued at, betweene a Pastor and his Peo∣ple. If you will please to interpret this De∣dication, as a recom∣mendation, and testi∣mony of mine especi∣all love, care, and re∣spects unto you, the burden and weight (I conceive) of what you doe herein, shall not need to lie more upon your affections, then your judge∣ments; and those
actions ever come of with best content∣ment and satisfaction to sober men, that are so divided. If you had not been the first of my care and affecti∣ons, these first fruits (it is most like) had not fallen to your por∣tion: There is little in what is here pre∣sented to your view, but that which your eares have tasted al∣ready some yeares since. You may by a fresh perusall of these
things (besides the di∣rect benefit of the knowledge reaped from them) be occa∣sioned better to un∣derstand and consider the state and conditi∣on, as well of your hearts as memories, and to compare them together, so as to finde out, whether you be stronger in the one, or in the other, or in both strong, or in both weake, alike. If you finde the sinewes, strength, and sub∣stance
of these things, in your inner man, so that whilst you reade, you seem to see the li∣neaments of the face of your owne soule, as in a Glasse, to reade the naturall history of your owne spirits: this is a pregnant and precious signe unto you, that your hearts are sound, and their digestion of spirituall nourishment, of the best. If you meet with little here, but what you were able before,
or without your read∣ing, to have uttered, and given an accompt of, this argues faith∣fulnesse in your me∣mories also. If you lie under the power of these things, but have little or no command of the letter, this de∣monstrates a defe∣ctivenesse, or weak∣nesse in memory, but soundnesse of heart (which is the great praise, glory, and comfort of a Christi∣an) if the words, pas∣sages,
and expressions remaine (for the most part) whole with you, but the marrow and fatnesse, the spirit and life of them are not incorporated with your soules and spi∣rits, you doe not finde that such notions and apprehensions as are fire in your bones, and make your conscien∣ces spring and worke lively, when they doe but touch and come neare them: the in∣terpretation of this
signe is, that you have more of that which is lesse, and lesse of that which is more, that you have memories that would doe wor∣thily (indeed) with better hearts, and soules that would escape better with worse memories. But I hope the best things of you. The great and mighty God of Hea∣ven and Earth, who must teach you (and all the world besides) to profit, whether by
the eye, or by the eare, as well by writing, as speaking, by reading, as hearing, in the knowledge of him∣selfe, and of the great things of your peace, make these meditati∣ons as a Cloud of the latter raine unto you, to drop fatnesse upon your soules; and com∣mand them to give out their strength ful∣ly and freely unto you, that they may be felt by your selves, in the renewing and
strengthening your inner man, be seen up∣on you by others, in an unstained excellen∣cie of life and conver∣sation amongst men, and found also in your accounts and reckonings at the great day, as having cōtributed their share toward that joy, and lifting up of your heads for ever; which is the promised re∣ward of all those that know God to be the only true God, and
him whom he hath sent, Jesus Christ. Which Crowne of blessednesse, there is not a man of you but shall most assuredly obtaine, if you be as true to your selves, and the things of your owne glorie, and will runne for your selves with as much faithfulnesse, as he is readie to runne for you, night and day, who here in the presence of Heaven and Earth,
subscribeth, and gi∣veth it under his hand, that he is
 From my Stu∣dy in Cole∣man streete London, this August 7. 1640.
