


BEing admonished by a deare friend of myne, that this Treatise was defectiue, in that it wanted an Epistle Dedicatorie. I considered with my selfe, and resolued to recommend it vnto the Vniuersitie of Oxford, in respect that it was penned by a Scholler, and sometime a student of the said Vniuersitie. And I my selfe in my youth sucked the breasts of that Nurse. Often admiring the pur∣ple robes and decorum of the Doctors: accounting of them, as of the Senators and Sages of England. But yet euer detesting schisme and heresie in my hart, being by Gods prouidence and goodnes euen acunabulis from my cradle inclyned to Catholike faith and Religion. Whereupon I left my natiue soyle, and trauelled into forrayne Countries, where often reflecting with astonishment, that men of that outward grauitie, eloquence and learning should be so ouer-shaddowed with so darke a cloude of error, schisme, and heresie, and of so weake a iudge∣ment as to thinke all the world to be ecclipsed. and that the light of the Gospel could shine onely from Martin Luther, and Peter Martir, two Apo∣stata Fryers, or any such rabble. Returning into my Countrie, especially since his Maiesties happie raigne ouer Great Britaine. I ioyed much to see, as it were at our time, the prime places of Prelacie oc∣cupyed

by Oxford men: as Canterburie by D. Abbot Yorke by D.The prime place of su∣premacie in Englād. Tobie Matthew, Winchester by D. Bilson, Durrham by D Iames▪ Rochester by D. Puke∣rig, London by D. King, an Eloquent Pulpit man, who was vexed long vvith a grieuous painefull sickenesse of the stone. Oftentimes afflictio dat in∣tellectum There vvas a constant report, that he de∣sired a Priest before his death, and to die a member of the Catholike-Roman Church; If the report were true, a memorable note of Gods grace and goodnes; If not true, the vvorst to himselfe: wherefore my innated affection towardes your persons, and the place, vrgeth mee to dedicate this Treatise vnto you, hoping that it may vvorke some good effect among you.
2 Novv hauing named the vvorthie men of Oxford for their prime place for Prelacie. I must not omitte the more vvorthie men for good life & learning, vvho left all vvorldly preferment, enter∣tayned banishment, vndertooke voluntarie po∣uertie, and forsooke all delights and pleasures of this land for their Religion, and for the profession of the Catholike Roman faith,The lear∣ned Do∣ctors who left Ox∣ford for re∣ligion. and for the saluation of their soules. And first I name VVilliam Allen, Doctor of Diuinitie, professor and reader of the Diuinitie lectur in the Vniuersitie of Doway, the first Founder and President of the English Col∣ledge at Doway, vvho vvent vp to Rome and ob∣tayned of Pope Gregorie the 13. the foundation of that Seminarie,Cardinall ALLEN. and exhibition for a certaine num∣ber of Schollers there to be maintained Aftervvard in Pope Syxtus quintus time, he vvas called to Rome againe, and there created Cardinal. the 7. of August, anno Dom. 1587. vvhen hee receaued his Cardi∣nals Hatte. the Pope pronounced these vvords. Ego creoto Ducem, principem, socium regum, Cardinalem Angliae, & fratrem meum. A worthie title for so vvorthie a man. Secondly, I name D. Audoeu, or

Owen Lewes an Oxford man,D. LEWES Archbis∣hoppe of Cassana. vvho vvas Reader of the Lavv lecture in the Vniuersitie of Doway for some yeares, after sent for by the Metropolitan of Cambray, and by him sent to Rome, to negotiat im∣portant businesse of his, vvhich happely being per∣formed, he remained there, and vvas made Refn∣darie to the Pope Gregorie the 13. and Vicar general vnder the Ar h-bishop of Millan, Carollus Boro∣meus the Sainct: after elected and consecrated Bi∣shop of Cassana, and visitor general in Rome vn∣der Clement the 8. and in election to haue bene Cardinall. if he had not bene preuented by death. What should I name D. Harding, D. Sanders, D.D. HAR∣DING and others. Bristow, D. Stapleton, vvith other Oxford men all most famous for learning as their vvorkes written against the heresies of this age, now extant doe de∣clare. Gregorie Martine, William Reonals, M. Ra∣stall, M. Marshial, Licentiat in Diuinitie, and ma∣nie others for breuities sake I doe ommitte worthie members of the Vniuersitie of Oxford. Among the Fathers of the Societie. Edmund Campion, Robert Parsons, a famous writer, with others. Reuerend Priestes, I thinke I may say descending from the same Nurcerie, aboue a hundred. D. Barret, D. Wor∣thington, both Oxford men, and Presidents succes∣siuely in the Colledge of Rhemes and Dowaye. And now speaking of the gouernours of Colledges, I cannot omitte to letaine and number in this rancke the now present President, D.The Presi∣dent of Doway. Kellison (although not an Oxford man, yet I know a well-willer to that Vniuersitie) a mylde Moysies for his gouernment, readie to giue content to all men, a louer of lear∣ning, a premoter of pietie, a great writer. Shall I omitte D. Cicile, who was Almner and Confessor vnto the syster of Henrie the third K. of France,D. CICEL and wife and Queene to Henrie the 4, D. Bagshow. D. Bishoppe. I cannot but admire and praise the proui∣dence and goodnesse of Almightie God in this time

of persecutions, to consider men who haue left their countrie, accepted of banishment, content with pouertie, abrogated the world, without al hope of preferment, yet aduanced aboue all expectation. Therefore looke at this present, and cast your eyes vppon D.D. GIF∣FORD Peere of France. Gifford, in his youth a scholler of Oxford, if I mistake not, went ouer the seaes, was a lumnus of the Colledge of Rome, after became Reader of Diuinitie in the English Colledge of Rhemes, and now promoted by Lewes the 13. King of France, to be Arch-bishop of Rhemes, Metropolitan, and Peere of France, for his learning, for his pietie, for his eazle against the Hugonettes of France, an ex∣cellent Pulpit man, who Preached before the King at Paris, a whole Lent. In Germanie we had D. Tu∣rner, an Oxford man, in the Vniuersitie of Ingolstad, heighlie esteemed for his learning, eloquence and Oratorie. D. Spetheri vvas Theologus to Cardinal Paleat,D. ELIE. Archbishop of Bolonia. D Elie was reader in the Vniuersitie of Mossapoat in Lorayne manie yeares for his learning in the Law, cannon & ciuil, famous, his elder brother sometime was President of the colledge of Iohns in Oxford, he was a Priest in Queene Maries time, and dyed in the latter time of Queene Elizabeth, a prisoner in the Citie of He∣reford. If I should vndertake to capitulate or reakon all our renowned Confessors and Priests, now la∣boring in England, or detayned in prison, or dead, I should be ouer-long.
O Oxford, Oxford, thou that hast had so manie worthie men that haue fledde from the seate of Pestilence, and nurse of schisme and heresie into forraine nations and countries, and haue for their learning, pietie and deuotion, bene heighly aduanced abroad. Consider also how many Mar∣tyrs haue dyed, how manie Confessors, how many Priests haue bene and are imprisoned at home, for profession of Catholike Faith and Religion. And

thou vvhich should be the lanterne of the Land, the Pillar of light, the schoole of learning, the mother of peace, the nurse of pietie; art now be∣come the darke cloud of heresie, the foggie mist of Aegypt, the mayntaine of schisme, the strength of Puritanisme, and mistrisse of ignorance, &c.
Wherefore this liitle Treatise is addressed vnto you, Maisters and students of Oxford, and you who are in purple robes, as Senators and Sages of the land, that you may vncase your selues, cast off your viseards, expel the rauening Wolfes. And know your selues, and acknowledge your errours, schisme, and heresie, and returne to your mother Church, benigna mater est, she is a louing mother, to receaue you. Hell gates cannot preuaile against her, she hath the holy Ghost to assist and direct her in all truth of doctrine and maners, and good life.
You know the Arch-bishop of Spalata, a learned Prelate, as you all confesse,Archbishop of Spalato. he conuersed vvith your prime Prelate, visited your Vniuersities, enformed himselfe of your doctrine, wayed your Church, & Congregation, in his prudentiall ballence, and found you minus habens, to want wayt, to be schis∣maticall: he retyred himselfe with desire to returne home againe, not for that he mislyked his enter∣taynement; for he was highly esteemed of his Ma∣iestie, much honoured of your Prime Prelate, wel∣comed by the Nobilitie, he had large maintenance 800. or a thousand pounde reuenew per annum, whereby hee might commaunde all the delicates, delites and pleasures that the land could yeeld, yet not satisfied in conscience, nor content in minde, labored to get licence of his Maiestie, to returne, which he obtained,His depar∣ture. or else was commanded by him to depart the Realme. Why did he thus? but reflecting vpon his estate, being aged, to prouide for death, to forsake schisme, to saue his soule. I am credible imformed, being vrged to declare his

minde,His cen∣sure of the Church of England. & what he thought concerning the Church of England; he clearely answered, that it was but a schismatical Church, a part diuided from the bodie mysticall of Christ, a congregation that had forsa∣ken the mother Church of the world. Consider and ruminate well (you worthie students) the sentence and censure of this learned Prelate Out of all doubt, there is no saluation, but in the true Church.
There is not the meanest among you, if he doe but read the Annales of M. Iohn Stowe, but he shall clearly vnderstand, how, & when the schisme began in K Henrie 8.Schisme be∣gon by K. HENRIE the 8. his time, vvho after he had raigned 20 yeares in peace with the Church of Rome see∣king a diuorce from his lawfull wife Q. Katherine, which the mother Church of the world neither could nor would graunt, or permit, the King being much discontented, & desirous to obtayne his purpose, beganne his schisme, made himselfe head of the Church of England, and by acte of Parla∣ment, vnited the title to his Emperiall Crowne, a thing in auditum, and neuer by any Christian Prince practised before, vnlesse Iulian the Apostata at∣tempted it. After hee had thus diuided himselfe from the Church of Rome, and established his au∣thoritie of headshpp, he presently quarrelled with the Cardinal, Bishops, and Cleargie, and conuicted them of a preminire;He con∣uicted the Cardinal, & Cleargie of premi∣nire. so that they were forced to compounde with him, for a hunder thousand pounds, which some they payde euerie pennie, and not content with this, but by Parlament also con∣fiscated all the landes and goodes of the religious in his Kingdome; and so like a wilde bore, depopu∣lated and destroyed the Vineyard of our Lord. and ouerthrew ten thousand Churches and Chappels,Ouerthro∣wed all the Religious houses. which were erected, buylded, and maintained by his Predecessors, and auncestors, and by the deuo∣tion of his Nobilitie, and pietie of the people of this land. And within some yeares after, he spoyled

the sepulchers and shrines of the Saints, and what was gold and siluer, and pretious stone,Spoyled the sepul∣chers of Saints. either by oblations, offerings, or other waies not fearing sa∣criledge a whitte, he tooke without scruple. And from one Chapple of S. Thomas of Canterburie, were nine or ten waynes loaden awaie with the wealth of that one place.Put downe al Pilgri∣mages. He also put downe and robbed all the holy places of pilgrimages, frequen∣ted and vsed by deuout people in former ages in this land.
And to omitte other of his good vvorkes, in the 38 and last yeare of his raigne (a thing vvorth the noting) hauing had warres vvith France, and peace being concluded, it vvas proclaimed by Harralds, vvith sound of trumpet the 13. of Iune, being Whit sonday, and the same day a general Procession com∣manded. in vvhich vvere borne all the richest syl∣uer Crosses in London, of euerie Parish one, and the Priestes in their richest Coapes. This Preces∣sion came from Paules Church through Cheape and Cornehill, vp to Leaden Hall, and so vvent backe to Pauls againe. This vvas the last shevv of rich Crosses and Coapes in London for shortly af∣ter all those Crosses and Coapes, vvith other the Church plate vvere commaunded, called for,Robbed all Churches in Londō. and taken by the Kinges Officers into the Kinges Treasure and Wardrope, and neuer seene after∣vvard. And so vvere cunningly all the Churches of London robbed on a daye. This vvas one of the last good vvorkes this Church-robber did. For in Ianuarie after he dyed an excommunicated person, vvhich excommunication vvas published by Pope Paule the 3. thus beganne the schisme in England.
Then succeeded Edward the sixte, a childe, a boye of nine yeares of age, vvho continued the schisme, he had the title of supreame head immedi∣atly in earth vnder God, of the Church of England and Ierland. He had two Vnckles, the Simers by the

mothers side, the one L. Protector, the other L. Admiral of England,K. ED∣WARD established the schisme both infected in German he∣resie. Presently the first yeare they beganne to alter the face of Catholike Religion, which K. Henrie his Father left, commanding the Rood, the Crucifixe, and all Images of Saints, in Churches to be pulled downe, forbidding beades, holy vvater, and other ceremonies, repelling the statute of the sixe articles made by Henrie the eight, also commanded by Pro∣clamation, the Communion to be ministred vnde both kindes vnto the people, and seruice to be in the English tongue, Altars of stone to be taken dovvne, and communion Tables of vvood to be set in their roome. The new booke of common prayer vvas published by D. Ridlie, at Pauls Crosse, &c. Pride vvould not suffer these tvvo brothers peaceably to raigne together.Pride of two Vn∣cles. Thomas Lord Admi∣ral, vvas condemned of heigh treason, and behea∣ded at Tovver hill. 3. yeare of Edvvard the sixt. Shortly after by the cunning of the Lord Dudlie, Duke of Northūberland,L. Ad∣miral be∣headed. vvho aymed to settle the Crovvne in his ovvne blood, by the mariage of his fourth Sonne, vnto the Ladie Iane, daughter of the Duchesse of Suffolke, vvhich indeed vvas by him attempted, but be fayled in his purpose; Edward Duke of Sommerset, L. Protector, vvas commit∣ted to the Tovver of London the 14. of October, the foorth yeere of K. Edward the sixt. But deliue∣red out againe the sit of Februarie for that time. But the first of December follovving, vvas arraigned at Westminster, of fellonie and treason, and tryed by his Peeres,L. Prete∣ctor be∣headed. and acquitted of treason, but sound guil∣tie of fellonie, and the 22. of Ianuarie, beheaded at Tovver Hill▪ the fifth yeere of King Edward. Thus the schisme beganne to be setled by the two Vncles (but GOD shewed his Iudgement of them) and had thought to haue bene continued by the Duke of Northumberland (although he died a

Catholike) for K. Edward being sicke of a Con∣sumption, the Duke married his fourth sonne, the Lord Gifford, vnto the Ladie Iane, eldest daughter to the Duke of Suffolke, her mother was called Ma∣rie, the second daughter of King Henrie the seuenth and sister to Henrie the eight.
King Edward being dead, the Ladie Iane by the Duke vvas proclaimed Queene. But God being for the vvoman, Queene Marie obtayned her right, had the Crowne,Q. MARIE renounced the schisme. and raigned after her brother Edward, she restored Catholike religion, reunited her selfe to the Sea Apostolike, returned to the Mo∣ther Church of Rome, disanulled the title of the head of the Church, caused this Realme to be ab∣solued from the censure of schisme, and so mayn∣tayned it during her life.
After her decease, Queene Elizabeth succeeded, and she altered all againe, and tooke to her selfe,Q. ELIZA∣BETH re∣stored the schisme. being a vvoman, to be head of the Church of En∣gland, restored the scisme vvhich vvas set vppe in K. Edwards time, by his two Vncles, she setled Protestant religion, depriued the Catholike Bi∣shops, &c.
Whether she did this vppon zeale of Protestant Religion, to be the true vvay to saluation: It is doubfull, because she professed her selfe a Catho∣like all Queene Maries time, and vvas so brought vp in her fathers dayes.
Therefore it is thought she being a vvoman, did it vpon policie feare and reason of state.The reason to restore schisme. In pollicie she knovv her next successor in all right to be a Ladie as vvise, and valiant as her selfe, vvhich was the L. Marie, Queene of Scotland, & vvife to Fran∣cis K. of France, vvith all to be a constant prosef∣for of the Catholike Religion. Therefore to make her subiects sure vnto her, thought it in policie fit to winne them to a religion contrarie to hers. She al∣vvaies feared (as shee might indeede, knovving

her ovvne estate) to subiect her selfe to the Church of Rome, vvhich vvould neuer giue consent to graunt that the diuorce of Queene Catherine vvas lawfull; but contrarie approoued her marriage to be good, neither vvould allow that her Father King Henrie should haue tvvo vviues at once, and so consequently, disapprooued and annulled the Marriage of Queene Anne her mother, as illigiti∣mate. By vvhat motiues, or reason soeuer she vvas mooued, I knovv not, but it is certaine she reesta∣blished and continued the schisme from the Mother Church, the Church of Rome.
And King IAMES our Soueraigne, vvho novv by all right of succession raigneth, came into this Kingdome, not with sword, nor yet vvith gard of men;K. IAMES maintay∣neth the schisme. but vvith a ryding rodde in his hande, in all peace, vvelcomed of all, receaued of al, and being a Protestant, so brought vppe from his Cradle, pro∣mised to maintaine the Religion hee here found, which he hath and doth performe.
Thirdly, you may vnderstand, the ingresse and progresse of the schisme of England, and vvhat vvill be the egresse vvee leaue to the prescience and protection of Almightie God, Qui omnia nouit & suauiter disponit.
Thus to returne vnto you the purple Sages, & Do∣ctors of Oxford, Vncase your selues, put off your Maskes and Visardes, repent this schisme, dissolue the darke cloud of heresie,Church. vvhich doth dasel your eyes, and be not vvilfully blinde, but beholde, the citie seated vpon an hill, and the candle light set vpon a candlesticke;Roman faith re∣nowmed. retyre vnto your Mother Church, from vvhich by schisme you haue separa∣ted your selues: Domus Dei est firmiter aedificata su∣pra firmam patram, she is the house of God strong∣ly built vpon the firme rocke. You cannot deny but S.Rom. 1. v. 8. & 13. PAVLE praysed, recommended, prayed for, and prophecied, that the Roman faith was, and is to be

renowned through the vvhole vvorld. You cannot denie, but this Iland receaued her first faith and Christian Religion and Instruction from Rome. Among the Britaines, King Lucius, sent vnto Pope Eleutherius, to be directed in Christian faith:Our first faith from Rome. and among the Saxons, Gregorie the great, and first Pope of that name, called the Apostle of England by S. Bede, sent S. Augustine, and twelue Monkes to Ethel∣bert King of Kent, vvho entred vvith the Crosse,Hist. BED and displayed banners vvith the Picture of Christ, and after builded Churches for Msse and Martins, and set vp in them the Crucifixe the bagge of Chri∣stianitie, adorned them with Pictures of Saints, e∣rected Altars of stone; all vvhich you haue exiled and abolished, and brought in place of them the Pictures of Lyons and Dragons, and Armes of Kings, vvith a vvoodden table for your Commu∣nion. Also you cannot denie, but that the Nations and Countries, and people in this part of the world,All nations in Europe, faith from Rome. receaued their Christian faith from Rome, and ac∣knowledge her to be their Mother Church, as well as vvee. Why then doe you depart from her, why do you make this diuision & schisme in the world?
It is true saye you, that the Roman faith vvas the true Christian faith, and first established by S Peter,O and after confirmed by S Paule, and therefore wor∣thelie called the Apostolicall Sea, & Mother Church of the vvorld. But now there hath many errors crept nto the Church; and it is an Axiome and maximam n Protestant profession, that the visible Church consisting of men, hath erred & may erre, quia hu∣manum est errore, for that man is subiect to error.
O dangerous & damnable opposition, which doth seeke to destroy Catholike faith,Sor no lesse then the Arrian heresie to destroy Christ and Christian faith. or it is as manifest in Scripture, that the Church annot erre, against the Protestāts, as it is true that Christ is God against the Arriās. For its proued out

Scripture, that Christ vvas true God consubstan∣tiall and coequal vvith his Father and no vvaye in∣ferior as God, but as man only: so it is as manifest in scripture, that Christ promised to be vvith his Church vnto the end of the vvorld, and that hee vvould send the holy Ghost to his Apostles, and consequently to their successors, and that this Church should instruct and teach the people all truth, both in doctrine, maners, and in good life: And that S. Paule doth assure vs, that the Church is columna & firmamentum veritatis, the Pillar and foundation of truth, and from her vve haue recea∣ued the scripture, and the true meaning and sence thereof infalliblie vvithout errour. Wherefore as the Arrian heresie sought to destroye Christ, and Christian religion, in denying the Godhead of Christ; so Protestanisme, in seeking to ouer∣throvv the infaillabilitie of the Church, indeauour to disable Catholike faith and religion. And as the Arrians labored might and maine to infect the Ro∣man Church, and to make a Pope of their professi∣on; yet fayled in the purpose. For Pope Foelix whom they promoted and preferred to the Papacie, con∣demned them as heretikes, & defined against them, and dyed a Martyr. O prouidence of God: yea they so afflicted the Church, that the most part of the vvorld vvas ouer-clouded and darkned vvith this filthie cloud of Arriā heresie: yet praeualebit veritas, truth preuaileth, insomuch that novv in the hartes of Christian, & Catholike people, nothing is more odious then this heresie of the Arriās, & by Prote∣stants condemned to the pit of hel. So the Prote∣stants haue labored omnibus vijs & modis (but not able to make a Protestant Pope) yet to sovv this seede of Cockel and Darnel, that the Church of Rome may erre, that they haue infected and caused a great reuoult in these partes of Christendome▪ that almost all Almanie, and a great part of Germa∣nie,

is ouercome vvith this seede of infection: all England and Scotland gone:A great re∣uoult in Christen∣dome by Protesta∣tisme. Ireland strongly assal∣ted: all Holland reuolted from God, Church and Prince: Braband and the Lovv Countries made to stagger: but God be thanked, they haue ouercome: A great part of France in tumultuous rebellion a∣gainst their King, although he vvould giue them libertie of their conscience, yet they vvill not yeeld him devv Temporall gouernement and sub∣iection. The Swissards euen to the confines of Ita∣lie stand stubborne in their obedience to the church of Rome, sed praeualebit veritas, truth vvil pre∣uaile, and this heresie of Protestāts, that the Church may erre, vvill be as odious in future ages, as Aria∣nisme is novv.
If vve argue vvith the Protestants,Protestant flye from antiquitie, traditions, and prima∣tiue church to free the Church of Rome of imputation of error (as manie great Schollers haue vvritten many learned Treati∣ses, concerning this poynt) and doe prooue by anti∣quitie, by practise of the Primatiue Church, by Tra∣ditions from the Apostles, concerning those diffe∣rences in Religion, controuerted betvvne the Pro∣testants and the Catholikes, they flye off and saye they are not demonstratiue arguments, to conuince in matters of doctrine, but only probable proofes.
If vve vrge them vvith the decrees of Popes,From de∣crees of Popes. they care not for them; if vvith the doctrine of the Fathers, and Saincts of the Primatiue Church, as for example; if vve alleadge S. Augustine, that hee prayed for the soule of his Mother Monica, depar∣ted, that the Sacrifice of the Altar, Prayers, Almes,From Do∣ctors. S. Ave. Oblations of the liuing, may profite the dead, that he vvrit a vvhole booke, De cura pro mortuis augen∣da, of the care to be had of the dead, and that the vvhole Church did supplicat and pray for the soules departed; they vvill ansvvere he vvas a particular man, it vvas his errour, and the errour of that time. Aerius vvas condemned for an Heretike, in appo∣sing

against the Church,Epipha. haer. 65. Aug. hae. 15. in the 4. age concerning Prayer and Sacrifice to be offered for the soules departed, Caluins answere is. Lib. 3. inst. c. 5. §, 10. that the auncient Fathers, were destitute of war∣rant from God, to authorize prayer for the dead. Alleadge S.S. Hillar. Hierome against Vigilantius a condem∣ned Heretike, for inuocation, and veneration of Saints, for reuerencing of holy Relickes; for visiting and celebrating the memories of their sepulchers, and burning of waxe tapers, for obseruing the fa∣sting dayes and vigils, determined by the Church, and Ecclesiasticall authoritie, for profession of Vir∣ginitie and chastitie among Clergie men: they an∣swere,. Ambrose lib. 4. de sacr. c. 4. it vvas his errour. Bring Saint Ambrose for the Real presence of Christs bodie in the Sacra∣ment: saying, that before Consecration it vvas bread, but after Consecration his verie true bodie and blood: it vvas his errour, If vvee allow the ex∣ample of S.S. Basil. Basil and S. Benedictus for monasticall life; they vvill vvith the Sabelliā heretikes cōdemne it for a crime, and reprooue it for a meere impietie, and say it vvas their errours, and so of the rest of the ancient Fathers, they were men and might erre.
Generall Councels.Proceede vvith them to generall Counsels, which doth represent the bodie of the Church, and alleadge the foure first, vvhich all the vvorld re∣ceaue, and S. Gregorie highlie commended, and the modee Protestants doe not dare to denie; yet vvill the Puritans refuse them, and the Protestants accept of them no farther then in their imagina∣tion they shall agree vvith them, or serue their turnes. And as for the foure last generall Counsels (I vvill name the last first) the venerable Councell of Trent, the Councell of Florence, of Constance, and Lateran, the Protestants absolutely auerce, that they haue gone awrye, and were deceaued in the principles of faith and Religion,A newe urse. and vvhy? be∣cause they haue particularly censured and condem∣ned

them, and defined their positions as hereticall. So did the Arrians in like maner instance against the Counsell of Nyce, for the same cause, because it defined against them.
Wherefore in this Treatise vvee haue excogita∣ted and thought vpon another course,Only Scrip∣ture. to Vncase the Protestants, to laye open their contradictions, to alleadge their ovvne authorities and writers; to expresse the absurdities of their inferences and consequences, to see vvhither they vvill runne then.
No doubt they vvill crye out, The Scriptures, the scriptures onely shall be our guyde, our Iudge, our gouernour, our vvarrant, in matters of con∣trouersie. Although vvee know that some contra∣uersies cannot be decided by expresse scripture, ac∣cording to the vvritten vvord, but vvee must haue our varrant from Tradition and the Church (which vve call the vnvvritten wordes) as for example the true number of the vvritten scriptures, are these and no more: the Baptisme of Children, &c. Yet vve accept of this condition of tryall, and acknow∣ledge the true scripture to be the vvord of God, ve∣ritie it selfe, wherein no falshood can be hidden, the true tuchstone of trueth, dedicated by the Holie Ghost, vvritten by the Prophets, Euangelists and Apostles of Christ: therefore vvith all reuerence vvee reade it; and S. Charles Boromeus did so reue∣rently esteeme of the sacred scriptures, that vvhen he did seriously read them, he did alvvaies read them vpon his knees, and bare-headed: a rare ex∣ample of pietie.
Let vs vvillingly enter into the liste of this combate vvith Protestants or Puritants? We know vvhat vvill be the ende of this, for demanding of them before hand, vvhether they vvill be tryed by the bare letter of the word, or the true sence & mea∣ning of the word? they wil answere by both. If vvee

aske hovv shall vvee knovv that vvee haue the true sence and meaning of the vvord: they vvill an∣svvere, that they vvill make this plaine, by confer∣ring of place vvith place, and that the spirit vvith∣in them, doth tell them, this is the Trueth, and true sence and meaning. If vvee replie, vvee haue the spirit as vvell as you, vee conferre place vvith place as vvell as you: vvhere then vvill be the end of this controuersie? We must beleeue them vpon the ve∣ritie of their spirit, and the conference of places made by them, or else no end; so that their priuate spirite must end it, or no end at all.
But to make an end at this time, I vvould aduise the young students to take this notandum and ca∣ueat from me; not to be credulous to the allega∣tions of their doctors and Sages, but to read dili∣gently the authentike Authors, least that be veri∣fied in you. Si coecus coecum ducat in foeueam cadent.
Thus vvishing no vvorse vnto you Right vvor∣shipful Doctors, Maisters, and vvorthie students, then to mine ovvne soule, that is vnited in Reli∣gion, peace in conscience and saluation in IESVS CHSIST, I take my leaue, from my chamber at Doway 17. of Ianuarie. M.DC.XXIII.
