



MADAME. The Princely Prophet cōplaineth in ma∣ny of the Psalmes, of the prosperitie and peace of wic∣ked men. He set his eyes vpon their outward welfare, but considered not their wofull case, their inward feares and torments; vntill he
went into the Sanctuarie of God, and then hee vnderstood the estate, and end of such men, to be wretched and miserable. And surely, how∣soeuer a senslesse securitie, and dul∣nesse (by the iust iudgment of God, blinding their eyes, and hardning their hearts) ouer-layeth and smoo∣thereth them, as the Harlot her Child. 1. King. 3. chapter, so that they remaine (as it were) starke dead, without any pricke of consci∣ence, eating and drinking, dancing and singing, laughing and sporting, as that lewd Generation immediat∣lie before the flood;
2. Cor. 5.12. yet their reioy∣cing is onely in the face (as Paul speaketh) not in the Heart, and their conscience shall barke, (at far∣thest) in the vnwelcome day of their death, when the remembrance of their licentious and wicked life
past, shall sting them like a Scorpion. Well therefore may the iudgement of the conscience for a while, bee suspended, but it can neuer be
Semper vir∣gines furiae. cor∣rupted; and well may wicked men, by their countenance, credit, and authoritie, escape the hands of man in this life, but they can neuer bee freed from the feare of the wrath of God, that shall seaze vpon them in the life to come. It is good there∣fore that euery man (while it is to day) seeke out, and prouide for his safetie and best estate: for hee is like to haue an ill day of it, that tak∣eth vp armes against God. There is no wise man, going about to make warre against a King (saith our Sauiour) that sitteth not first downe, and taketh counsell whe∣ther hee bee able with ten thou∣sand, to meete him that com∣meth
against him with twentie thousand. If a man could muster all his sinnes, and set downe the number of them, they would a∣mount indeed to very many thou∣sands, but here's the mischiefe, they are all suspected and false∣hearted Souldiers, and euen Mar∣tiall Policie requires, that they bee dismissed, and discharged the field, and for his vertues, they are so few, and so insufficient, that they shall neuer dare to abide the brunt: there remaines there∣fore vnto him onely this, that while this reuenging GOD is yet a farre off, hee send an Ambas∣sage, and desire conditions of peace.
Some-thing (MADAME) I haue deliuered in this small Trea∣tise, to this purpose. I must not
here enlarge it, least I bee sayd, to passe the nature, and exceed the measure of an Epistle. What euer it bee, I humbly present it to your good Ladyship, as an acknow∣ledgement of my hounden dutie, and seruice vnto Maister Lieu∣tenant, and your selfe. The Lord recompence your carefull respect of my weake estate, with eternall blessings: for I may say of you, as the Apostle Saint Paul of One∣siphorus;
2. Tim. 1.16. You haue beene a continuall refreshing vnto mee, since the time of my great distresse, and exile (as I may speake) from the
Stapleford Abbat in Essex Place and People of my wi∣shes and desires. I preached this Sermon (as your Ladyship may vnderstand) at the Baptizing of your younger Sonne Maister IEAMES, vppon whome
it pleased the Kings Maiestie, to bestow his owne name, that it might alwayes remaine, as an vndoubted token and pledge of his gracious fauour vnto you both, and as a wit∣nesse vnto your Sonne for after times, that his princely will and pleasure is, (if he shall carry and be∣haue himselfe as is fitte for the God∣sonne of so learned, gratious, wise, and valerous a Prince) to aduance him to such places of dignity, as shall serue both for the exercise and im∣ployment of his vertues, as also for the reward of their deseruings. And now I beseech the God of mercy, for euer to regard you and all your chil∣dren (Branches of excellent hopes) with the eyes of his tender mercy & compassion, that the signes of his vnspeakeable loue and kindnesse, may alwayes rest vpon your soules
and bodies in this life, to assure you more and more of that most blessed, glorious, and immor∣tallestate, in the life to come.

