



Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull;
YOur Honour and Worships being (by the good guiding prouidence of GOD) the Generall, Cap∣taines, and Liefetenants of this Metropolis, this chiefe City & Castle of the Kingdome, wherein (by the same Prouidence) I am (thogh one of the meanest, yet) one of the Watchmen; To whom ought I rather to present these fruits of my Watchmans function, then vnto your Honour and Worships? As duty in regard of your pla∣ces, so gratefulnesse also in regard of your kindnesses, re∣quires as much. My Father, Grandfather, and other Prede∣cessors, haue of old from time to time beene beholding to this Honourable City: the kindnesse which they formerly receiued, is still continued to mee. Which as I doe with all humble thankfulnesse acknowledge, so from my heart I desire the Almighty to remember your Honor and Worships, together with the whole estate of this Honourable City, in goodnesse, and not to wipe out the kindnesse which is shewed to the Ministers of his Word, and to poore distressed people. Long hath the Gospell beene purely, powerfully, plentifully preached in this honourable City, and great countenance and maintenance hath by many therein beene giuen thereunto. Good orders haue within these later yeeres beene taken for the better sanctifying of the Lords Sabbath. Much reliefe is from time to time giuen to the poore. These and such like workes of Piety and Charity, are the beauty, honour, strength, and wealth of this City. I denie not, but that in the outward politicke gouernment of this great Corporation, and the many seuerall Companies therein, London may be accounted the glo∣rie of the earth. But the things which make it exceed in glory, are, the faire houses of Prayer and preaching the Word; the great Assemblies of Gods people frequenting the same to worship God: the spacious Hospitals and places of Charity, together with the liberall prouision therein made for reliefe of poore children and orphants, of aged and impotent men and women, of lame and maimed souldiers, and of many other like succourlesse persons; the thrones of Iustice and Iudge∣ment, with the like, wherein London may be compared to Sion the City of God, whereof great and excellent things are spo∣ken.
Right Honourable and Right Worshipfull, goe on this way, (which is the onely right way) to procure the peace and pros∣perity of your City. Let the Ministry of Gods Word be more and more promoted: Let the Lords Sabbaths haue their due obseruations, let the poore be releeued, and the oppressed be succoured; let profane persons and all euill doers (the enemies of Christian Policies) be punished: In a word, let Gods Ordi∣nances be aduanced, and right iudgement executed, and so shall London be accounted the City of the great King, where he will delight to dwell, and bestow his blessing. For in these things is God highly honoured: Now God who can and will performe it,1 Sam. 2. 30. hath said it; Them that honour me, will I honour. It lieth much in the power of Magistrates to procure or hinder the blessing of God in those Cities & places ouer which they are set. For they being publike persons, their good deeds are by the wise God publikely rewarded, and their euill deedes publikely reuenged. Right Honourable and Right Worshipfull, accept, I pray you, the duty, and pardon the boldnes of your Watchman. And, O Lord of Lords, doe good to this City of thine, continue the peace and prosperity thereof: so prayeth

