


TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, ROBERT, Lord RICH, Baron of LEEZ, and Earle of WARWICK. AND, TO THE RIGHT Honourable, the Countesse of WARWICK, His most wor∣thy Consort. All Honour that may make to their true Happinesse.
Right Honourable,
THE Divine Providence (where∣by all things are wisely ordered) hath by a most sacred, neare, firme, and inviolable band knit you two together, and made you one. Most meet it is therefore that the like honour be done, and the like respect testified to the one as to the other:

especially where there is just cause of an answerable re∣spect: as the Author of this Treatise here dedicated to your Honours, hath for the dedication thereof to you both. For,

SIR,
THis Treatise trea∣teth of Warre. Your Lordship is knowne to be a Man of Warre. It setteth out Io∣shua, a Generall of an un∣daunted spirit. Your spirit hath been proved to be such an one. It sheweth how Moses, when he tarried at home, was very sollicitous for his countrimen in the field. And is not such your care? Vpon mention made of Moses, there commeth to my mind this great com∣mendation (He is faithfull in all my house) given to him by God himself. Faith∣ful he was in his own obser∣vation of al Gods ordināces which belonged to him. Who of so eminēt a place, more e∣minent then your Honour herin? Faithful he was also in deputing to the Lords

service men fit for their function. The abundance of able and faitDhfull Mini∣sters in Essex, and other places where the Patro∣nage of Church-livings appertaineth to yr Honour, is the seaie of your Faith∣fulnes in this respect. The greater is the glory of this kind of piety, because therin you do patrissare, tread in the steps of your worthy Father of blessed memory. What infant could not be copious in setting out the dignity of this piety, whereby God is so much honoured, his Church edi∣fied, many distressed con∣sciences comforted, and millions of soules saved. There is yet further a more particular bond of rela∣tion which bindeth me in person and paines to yeeld all homage unto yr Honour, that is, the small inheri∣tance I hold within your Lordships Royalty at Hadly in Essex. Hereto I might adde the benefit of

your Predecessours cha∣rity on the Free-Schoole at Felsted in Essex, where I was trained up three yeares together: and the continuall favours which from your youth you have shewed to me, your selfe as well as I being trained up at Eaton, and thence com∣ming to Cambridge.



MADAM,
THere are in this Treatise many points concer∣ning Devotion: not unfit for a devout Lady: such an elect Lady as S. Iohn de∣dicated his Second Epi∣stle unto: a Lady whom all that knew the truth lo∣ved in the truth, and for the truths sake: a Lady whose children walked in the truth: an evidence that the Lady who loved the truth her selfe, was carefull to communicate that to her beloved chil∣dren, which she had found to be sweet and comfortable to her own soule. And this for the Mothers honor doth the Apostle there mention. I that have long knowne your Honour (even from the child-hood of your

now well grown daugh∣ters, two worthy La∣dies, and beene ac∣quainted, as with your religious care in their good education, so with your owne pious course of life, wherin I make no question but that still you continue) could not omit so faire an opportunity of te∣stifying that duty which I owe you. Hereby that which is made publique for the view of all, is in speciall dedicated to your Ho∣nour, that having a particular interest there∣in, you may be more diligent in perusing it. The principall points herein handled, which may best whet on your pious devotion, concerne Prayer, the Manner of perfor∣ming that Heavenly duty, the Power and Efficacy thereof, when it is made in faith, and

the benefit of persevering therein, at least so long as just occasion giveth occasion of persisting without fainting. These and other like points are handled in this Treatise, which may be (as I suppose) use∣full to your devout mind.

By these and many other enducements hath he beene emboldened to tender this small evidence of much respect to your Honours, who, as he humbly craveth a gracious acceptance, so he faithfully promiseth to continue at the Throne of Grace

