


I Owe you a treble debt, of loue, of seruice, of thankfulnesse. The former, the more I pay, the more still I owe. The second I will be ready to pay to the vttermost of my power; though short both of your deserts, and my owne desires. Of the last I will striue to giue full payment; and in that (if it be possible) to come out of your debts. Of all I haue in this volume giuen you the earnest: as ther∣fore you vse to doe with bad debters, take this till more comes. You see I haue venturously traffic∣ked with my poore talent in publike, whilest I be∣hold richer graces kept close at home, and buried in silence: liking it better to husband a little to the common good, then to hoord vp much wealth in a sullen niggardice. I censure none: if all were writers, who should bee readers? if none, idle Pamphlets would take vp the generall eye, be read and applauded, onely through want of better ob∣iects.

If the graine be good, it doth better in the market, then in the Garner. All I can say for my selfe is, I desire to doe good; whereof if I should faile, yet euen that I did desire it, and endeuor it, shall content my conscience. I am not affrighted with that common obiection of a dead letter: I know that God can effectuate his owne ends, and neuer required man to appoint him the meanes. If it were profitable being spoken, sure it cannot be vnnecessary being written. It is not vnknowne to you, that an infirmity did put me to silence ma∣ny weekes: whilest my tongue was so suspended from preaching, my hand tooke opportunity of writing. To vindicate my life from the least sus∣pition of idlenesse, or any such aspersions of vn∣charitable tongues, I haue set forth this reall wit∣nesse, which shall giue iust confutation to such slanders. If it be now condemned, I am sure it is onely for doing well. I very well know the bur∣den of preaching in this Citie: wee may say of it in another sense, what Christ said of Ierusalem, O thou that killest the Prophets. Many a Minister comes to a Parish with his veines full of bloud, his bones of marrow; but how soone doth he ex∣haust his spirits, waste his vigor! And albeit there are many good soules, for whose sake hee is con∣tent to make himselfe a sacrifice: yet there are some so vnmercifull, that after all his labor would send him a begger to his graue. I tell you but the fault of some, quitting your particular selues: I speake not to diminish the credit of your bounty,

which I haue found, and heere with a thankefull profession acknowledge it. In testimony whereof I haue set to my hand, and sent it you a token of the gratitude of my heart. Receiue it from him that is vnfainedly desirous of your saluation: and if he knew by what other means soeuer he might bring you to euerlasting peace; would studie it, practise it, continue it; whilst his Organ of speech hath breath enough to mooue it.

