


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND most worthy of all honour, Mrs. MARY MOORE, Perpetuity of Grace here, and Eternity of Glory hereafter.
Much esteemed, Much honoured,
GRatefulnesse makes inquisitive. A greatefull mind, both in relation to God, and also in relation to man, is so affected with kindnes∣ses received from the one or the other, as it is ever plotting and enquiring what it may do, what it may render. In relation to God saith a gratefull Prophet, what shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits towards me? Psal. 116. 12. In relation to man saith a gratefull King, Is there yet any left of the house of Saul, that I may shew him kindnesse for Ionathans sake? 2 Sam. 9. 1. Let me say it boldly, for I say it truly. My soule is inquisitive: as in regard of God, what I may render unto him: so in regard of your selfe, Good Mrs. Moore, what I may render unto

you. God knowes my minde and heart. For he is the Searcher of hearts, (Ier. 17. 10.) To you it must be made knowne. For what man knoweth the things of a man save the spirit of man which is in him? 1 Cor. 2. 11. My heart therefore being filled with gratefulnesse to∣wards you, I haue cast this way and that way how to manifest the same: and that in the best manner that I could: which I know not better how to do, then by a publique acknowledgement of the gratefull respect I beare, and bounden duty which I owe to you: toge∣ther with the true and just grounds thereof: which, among many other, are these in particular.
1. Your ancient and constant respect to me and my Ministry, even from the first beginning thereof. For thereby you first tooke notice of me.
2. The many reall demonstrations, and evident te∣stimonies of that entire respect, which from time to time you have given me.
3. Your vouchsafing to take my daughter into your house, under your good government, and to be∣come a mother to the motherlesse. Among many other, this is one thing which gives me occasion to say in regard of my last dangerous sicknesse, It is good for me that I was afflicted. That sicknesse was an occasion of your taking my daughter to your tuition. What is, what ought to be a fathers care, but (next to the salvati∣on of his owne soule) the good education of his chil∣dren? What can be more acceptable to him, then ap∣proved means tending to that end? May I then, can I then be unmindfull of her, or ungratefull to her that hath affoorded such means? Have I not cause to be inquisitive, and to thinke and say, What shall I render? Render a recompence I cannot. All that is or can be

done, is and can be but a testimony of gratitude. Such testimonies as are ordinarily presented for new-yeares-gifts, your bounty (I know) doth not expect, will not accept. Noble spirits do herein resemble the Divine Spirit, which doth good for his owne sake, for goodnes sake. All the recompence which they expect is a grate∣full acknowledgement of the kindnesse they shew, of the goodnes they do. This from my heart I do here be∣fore all that shall cast their eyes upon this Dedicatory Epistle.
There are, beside these particular, other more gene∣rall motives, which induce me to prefixe your worthy name before this treatise: As, 1. the eminency of your endowments, which make this stile Mrs. Mary Moore (at least in their judgement who well know you) more eminent, then such titles of honour as are con∣ferred upon many of your sex. 2. The excellency of your parts, which enable you with judgement to read such treatises as are published to the view of all. 3. The correspondency of your disposition to the most princi∣pall points of this treatise. This treatise is of famine, and of means to remove it, or restraine it, and keep it from excesse. Piety towards him that causeth plenty and scarcity: Prudence in well ordering present abundance: Providence for the future: Compassion in times of want: Liberality to such as need: Contentment in that whereunto God calleth: Patience in all judgements: Diligence in searching after the causes thereof: Consci∣ence in using the meanes warranted and sanctified for averting judgements: Confidence in greatest necessities are principall points handled in this treatise. The na∣ming of the particulars is enough to give evidence of the sutablenesse of your disposition thereunto.





The present necessity of the times, wherein bread the staffe of mans life is so scarce, have drawne my thoughts to meditate on the subject matter handled in this treatise (which is in one word, FAMINE) that I might stirre up my selfe and others to take notice of the beginning of Gods judgement: that wisely we may seek the Lord betimes, and use all good means for moderating and removing this instant dearth, and for preventing the like, or any other heavier judgment for the future. So as I cannot think such a subject at such a time to be unseasonable: if at least the Composer of the Treatise were able answerably to handle it. But as it is, I have made bold to dedicate it to your patro∣nage; whom, for the reasons before rendred, and ma∣ny other like to them, I judge to be as fit thereto, as the treatise it selfe is fit for the present time. In all greatefulnes it is presented unto you. With all kindnes let it be accepted of you. As for recompence, To him that is ready graciously to accept, and able plenteously to reward all goodnesse done for his sake to any of his, knees are humbly bowed at the Throne of his Grace, by
Black Friers, London. 1. Ian. 1630.

