

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE, AND MOST WORTHY OF ALL HONOUR, SIR NATHANAEL RICHE .
SIR,
YOur owne Worth, The publike good Service which you have done to this State, The true Zeale which to the Honour of God, and Good of his Church you have on all occasi∣ons manifested, do all challenge all the honour that can be done to a man of such desert. The ancient acquaintance which hath beene even from your childhood betwixt you and me, The entire famili∣arity that was betwixt us while we were Students in Cambridge, The Continuance thereof by mu∣tuall

Latine Letters about Scholasticall disputes, (Bono enim literarum eadem ferè absentes, quae si coram essemus consequimur) when we Cic Epist. Famil. were parted, And finally, the many favours which in this time of acquaintance you have shewed me, doe, in speciall require of mee all gratefull remem∣brance. For, . Where∣fore having here an opportunity of giving pub∣lique testimony of the high esteeme I have of you, and of the reverend respect I beare to you, I doe most willingly take it. . Theoc. in Ait. It was the commendati∣on of the golden age, that a friend would testifie all the respect he could to his friend. True it is, that in regard of your noble birth, your eminent dignity, your excellent endowments, there is betwixt us (to use the Arist. Ethic. Lib. 5. Philosophers phrase) . But yet (as another Plat lib. de Leg 6. Philosopher saith, . His Aphorisme may fitly be applyed to friends, who though in sundry respects they be unequall, yet unequall things to them become equall. To this tends that which Saint Hier. Com∣ment. in Mic 7 Hierom hath taken from the Oratour, Amici∣tia pares aut accipit, aut facit. In confidence of your true friendly minde to mee, I have made bold to testifie mine to you, and that by prefixing your

noble name before this Sermon of The Extent of Gods Providence. In regard of the smalnesse of it, it is indeed but as a little Pamphlet, and (as here published) but an Appendix to a larger Treatise; Yet a Treatise dedicated to your right honourable Kinseman, the Earle of Warwick: and in that respect I suppose it may be the better ta∣ken. The manner of setting out that divine mat∣ter of Gods Providence, is according to my accustomed manner, very plaine. But I remem∣ber a Proverbiall speech in use among the Iewes, noted by Drusius that great Hebrician, to bee Ioh Drus Sent, vet. Sapient. among the Aphorismes of loses the sonne of Iu∣das (which, I am perswaded, you also have read)  Ne respice cantha rum, sed id quod in co est. The occasion of this Sermon (which was a Downefall of Papists too au∣daciously gathered together to heare a Iesuited Priest preach) is remarkable. The like (I suppose) hath not in our dayes beene heard of. Remem∣brances of divine Iudgements are usefull to Gods Church as well as Memorials of his Mercies. To this purpose that Adage which the fore-mentioned Drusius attributeth to Simeon the sonne of Ga∣maliel, Ioh Drusloc. citat. is not impertinent. It is this 

 Mundus consistit per ve∣ritatem, per judicium, & per pacem. I suppose he under standeth by judgement, as mens just and equall dealing one with another, so likewise Gods just dealing with children of men, both in rewarding the pious and righteous, and also in revenging the impious and unrighteous. Read, Iudge, Favour

