



I DESIRE (my much honoured and en∣tirely
beloued Parishioners) so long as
the Lord of life shall preserue mee in the
Land of the liuing, I desire to goe on in
promoting your spiritual edification eue∣ry
way that I can, priuately, publikely, by prayer, by
preaching, yea and by printing too. Behold here an eui∣dence
thereof. What priuately I first digested in mine
owne meditation, and then publikely deliuered by word
of mouth, whereof in the open Church you heard your
children and seruants examined,Deus est nobis summum bonum. Ne{que} infra re∣manendum nobis est, ne{que} vltra quarendum. Al∣terum euim pe∣riculesum, alte∣rum nullum est. Aug. de Mor. Eccl. Cath. l. 1. c. 8 and for a blessing where∣upon
many prayers by vs all ioyntly and seuerally haue
beene poured out before God, is now thorow Gods gra∣cious
prouidence so published as it may be reuiewed so
oft as you please. Well accept it: for it is A GVIDE
TO GOE TO GOD. God is the highest, and chiefest
Good, below which we may not remaine, beyond which
we cannot attaine. To place our rest in any thing before

we come to God is dangerous.Oratione intra∣mus coelestem il∣lam curiam in qua Rex regum stellato sedet so∣lio &c. Bern. Serm. de 4. modis Orand. Oratione praesen∣tamus nos quasi saci ad faciem cum Deo loquen∣tes. Ibid. To attaine to any rest be∣yond
God is impossible. This therefore, is that proper
place whether the soule well enlightened and rectified a∣spireth,
as all hot light things aspire to the high hot Re∣gion.
The meanes whereby wee men on earth haue ac∣cesse
to God in Heauen, is Prayer. By Prayer we enter in∣to
the Court where God sitteth in his Maiestie, and wee
present out selues before him speaking vnto him as it
were face to face. That therefore which instructeth vs to
pray aright, directeth vs to God. This doth the Lords
Prayer: And nothing can doe it better. For this end, To
teach vs how to pray, it was first prescribed. It is not one∣ly
a most absolute prayer in it selfe, but also a perfect pat∣terne
for other prayers. And in this respect the only way
wherein we can goe to God. Full of matter is this forme
of Prayer, but few the words thereof. Such fulnesse of
matter in so few words make it to many as the prophesie
of Christ was to Candaces Eunuch, whereof he said (to
him that moued this question, Vnderstandest thou what
thou readest?) How can I except I had a guide? A guide
therefore is needfull for many to direct them in this way
to goe to God. Loe a Guide at hand. This Explanation of
the Lords Prayer is offered to you for that purpose. But as
a Guide that directeth a Traueller in his iourney to the
Kings Court, maketh not the way better, but sheweth
him how to order his trauell in that way: so this Guide,
this Explanation, addeth nothing to the Perfection of the
Prayer, but onely helpeth you in the vse thereof. The
many particulars which minister iust matter of ardent
supplication, hearty gratulation, deepe humiliation, and
conscionable obseruation of our wayes, are in this Expla∣nation
distinctly set out. Thereby you may see how rich a
Cabonet the Lords Prayer is: how full of most precious

iewels, vsefull for the soule of man. The Excellencie of this
forme of Prayer is set forth in the first Section of this
Explanation. Whatsoeuer is therein performed is the
fruit of my affected Retirednesse, and suspected Idlenesse
in the countrey. So many, so continuall are my imploy∣ments
in the Citie, so many interruptions from my stu∣dies
day after day are there caused, as I neuer yet could
find any leasure to set down distinctly such points as by
Gods assistance were vttered out of the Pulpet. Whatso∣euer
hath hitherto been published by me, hath in my re∣tiring
time been prepared for the Presse. This benefit of
a few weekes absence in the yeare from my charge (there
being in that time a good supply made by my Reuerend
Brethren) may gaine a sufficient dispensation with those
that are not too supercilious; which I hope you, my Pa∣rishioners,
will not be. For I haue euer found such true
loue, such good respect, such kinde vsage, such fauourable
acceptance of all my paines in euery kinde, as I haue iust
cause to blesse the diuine prouidence for bringing me to
this place. The Lord God so blesse all my labours vnto
you all, as we may haue al iust cause to blesse him one for
another, and to continue mutually and heartily to pray
one for another. Doe ye so: So will doe

 London,
17. Febr. 1625
