


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, SIR HVGH HAMMERSLY, Knight, one of the Aldermen and Coronels of the honourable City of LONDON, and Presi∣dent of the Martiall Company, exercising Armes in the Artillery Garden. AND, To all the Captaines and Gentlemen of the said Company, Such valour as may make them victo∣riously stand against all sorts of Enemies.
Worthy President, Captaines, and Gentlemen,
Semel, & secun∣dò, & tertiò (ni fallor) petijsti à me, ut tibi tuis{que} commilitonibus scriberem exhor∣tationis scrmo∣nem, asserens vobis non parum fore adiutorij, si quos armis non possum, literis animarem. Bern Prolog. in Ser. ad Mil. Temp.AS by a free Election of you all, I was called to preach that which is here presented to you, so by the first mo∣tion and earnest sollicitation of many of you, I am induced to pub∣lish it. How farre mine owne pur∣pose was from any such purpose, God is my witnesse. How farre your desire prevailed to alter that my purpose, this evidence is an apparent evi∣dence. Among other motives mentioned by you that in

the name of the rest were Solliciter in this businesse, this, which by some of you was alleaged, most prevailed with me, that the more common this Sermon was made, the more commodious it might be to your Compa∣ny. How my poore paines may adde any advantage to your important imployments, I know not. This I know, and do openly acknowledge, and publikely professe, that my heart is set upon your Artillery Company: I love it: I admire it: I honour it: I praise God for it: I will continue to pray to the Lord of Hosts for his blessing upon it: and to my poore power, I will doe what I can, for the ad∣vancement thereof. As one, though a very meane and weake proofe thereof, I doe here dedicate to you in particu∣lar, that which by your meanes, and for your sake is divul∣ged to all in generall. I confesse, that as the matter there∣of, so the manner of handling it, is somewhat differing from my ordinary course. For, I had respect to the kind of Auditory before which I spake. Among Souldiers I endea∣voured to speake Souldier-like. If offence be taken at matter or manner, I shroud my selfe under your shields for defence. Now that you have brought me forth into the open field, and set me up to be gazed on, and baited at by the differing censures of diverse censors, leave me not to shift for my selfe. Be not backward to patronize what you have beene forward to produce. I may the rather ex∣pect all just defence from you, because by appearing some∣what otherwise in your Assembly then I use to doe in my usuall Auditory, I take you, worthy President for my president, yea all you valiant Captaines, and other Gen∣tlemen, whom I make as one Patrone, for my patterne herein. Me thinkes, O prudent President, when in a forenoone I see you sitting, and giving advice among the

wise Senators of our City, and in an afternoone march∣ing before the Martiall Gentlemen of your Company, me thinkes the same man is not the same man. But of old, such hath beene the demeanour of those who have beene gifted for the one and the other place, to be both grave Se∣nators and brave Souldiers. Such were Brutus, Scipio the one and the other, Camillus, Marius, Pompey, Cae∣sar, and many other who were both Togati and Armati, prudent Consuls, potent Captaines. The like I may say of all you Gentlemen of the Artillery Garden: You that are, wheresoever you are, in your persons the same Persons, do with that decorum observe the businesse which you are about, as in your ordinary vocation, and Military professi∣on, you seeme to be other and other men. Hereby you mani∣fest your prudence and providence. Prudence, by fitting your selves to that which is fit for the present. Provi∣dence, both by improving the time of peace, and making the best advantage thereof in the duties of your particular callings, and also by preparing your selves against the time of Warre, and preventing the damage which might otherwise thence ensue. Nulli qui est de putatus ad ali∣quod officium, li∣cet id per quod suo officio incon∣gruus redditur. Vnde clericis omnino non licet bella gerere, &c. A quin. 2 2. quaest. 40. Ar tic. 2.So well have I ever approved this your course, as, if my coate and calling had beene answera ble, long ere this, I had endeavoured to have beene of your Artillery Company. But, for those whose education ap∣pertaineth to me, I verily purpose, and openly professe, that if ever any Sonne of mine be a Citizen of London, and of sufficient ability, I will endeavour to have him a member of this your Company. Of which minde, I would more persons and parents were. If they were, and their chil∣drens mind (when they are of age) answerable therto, both City and Kingdome would be much more honoured and se∣cured by this and other like Societies. My desire is therfore,

that this which is likely to come to the view of many more then at first heard it, may prevaile with those many, to doc as you doe, and to adde able men and availeable meanes to the advancement of your Company. To con∣clude, if any advancement (O noble President, Captaines, and Gentlemen of the Artillery Company) may any way by your desire to have that, which once your selves heard, lie open to the view of all, be attained, the end of yeelding to your desire is obtained. For this end therefore, humble and hearty prayer is and shall be made (to him that hath power to move the minds of all men according to his owne mind) by him that promiseth to be
Black-Fryers London. Iul. 10. 1626.

