



BECAVSE (ryght woor∣shipfull) at your earnest request and godly desire, I preached the 15. of Ianuarie last passed, a ser∣mon in the Tower of London, in the presence of Doctour Watson, sometime bishop of Lyncolne, and Maister Fecknam, sometime also Abbot of West∣minster, wyth others: Sithens the which my Sermon, the sayd M. Fecknam hath seemed by writing, to condemne certaine articles contained in my Doctrine at that present, and there by me taught. That is to say: where I affirmed, that it was impossible to keepe the law of God, he hath taken vpon him to affirme the contrarie. vz. That it is possible, and that it lyeth in mans power, to obserue and keepe them. Secondly, where I taught, that we be iustified by faith onely: he de∣nieth the same, and therewyth teacheth iustifi∣cation by workes. Thirdly, where I denied the inuocation of Saintes: he affirmeth the cōtrary. And fourthly and lastly, where as I affirmed, yt all sinnes are deadly: he teacheth the contrary. Aduouching that there be some veniall sinnes, & therefore concludeth that all are not deadly.
All which his assertions, he semeth very clark∣lye to ground and maintaine by the autoritie of the word of God, and consent of the Fathers. Which thing he hath in such maner, and wyth such goodly glosing wordes blased and set forth, that at the first shew he seemeth vtterly to beate me downe to the ground, and maketh that my doc∣trine in the eyes of the simple, and of such whose consciences are not as yet setled in true religion, to appeare false and vnsound, and therefore of no credite, nor to be receaued. I therfore thought it my boūden dutie to stand in the defence of my doc∣trine, being sound and perfect, and according to the sacred and holy Scriptures. And bringyng M. Fecknams obiections to the bright shinyng Sunne of God his most holy woord, hys gay cloked colours might be detected and made appa∣rant to the eyes of all men, and thereby the counterfeited mistes of his Assertions driuen a∣way, the true and wholesome doctrine of myne might be made the more manifest. And there∣fore haue taken vpon me at this present to answer the same, wherein I haue vsed this order.
First, I haue aunswered euery article of the foure, particularly, and restored the Scriptures to their right sence, which M. Fecknam (for the maintenaunce of his errors) hath very corruptly wrested. That done, I proue my doctrine true, both by the Scriptures and Fathers, so suffici∣ently, that I am perswaded that all colours of caueling is remoued or taken away, to all such as seeke the truth, and onely seeke the same, for the better setling of their consciences, rather then for vayneglory or estimacion of men.
Hauing therefore now finished this my aunswer and defence of my doctrine aforesayd: thought it good to dedicate the same to your worship, that

you with the rest of Gods Children, may be the better setled and grounded in this most wholsome and sound doctrine of God his glorious Gospell. And the other, whose eyes are not yet opened, God may in his great mercies hereby remoue the mistes of the false and corrupt doctrine of the Papistes, from the same. That they may yet now at length see how they haue bene seduced and deceiued, and receiue the truth now also offe∣red them, to their euerlasting comfort. Whych obtayned, I haue my desire, and shall in that re∣spect thinke my labours herein well bestowed, which I pray God for his sonne Iesus Christes sake may redounde to hys glory, and profit of hys Church. Amen.
Which thing, as I haue well ment, so I hope your worship wyll take in good part. Whom I pray God so to behold wt his most fauorable coū∣tenaunce, that as he hath begonne in you (and that in hys free mercies) this his good worke, and opened your hart to beleue his truth, and your eyes to see the same, perfect it in you vn∣to the end. That you may dayly grow from grace to grace, from fayth to fayth, and from vertue to vertue, vntyll you become a perfecte man in Iesus Christ, to hys glory and honour, and to your euerlasting comfort.
AMEN.

