


HOwe lothe I haue ben, beyng of long tyme earnest∣lye requyred, to suf∣fer these tryfles of mine to cōe to light: It is not vnknowen to a greate nombre of my famyliar acquain∣taunce. Who both dayly & hourely moued me therunto, and lytell of long tyme preuayled therin. For I both consydered and wayed with my selfe, the grosenes of my Style: whiche thus cōmytted to the ga∣synge

shewe of euery eye shuld forth with disclose ye manifest foly of the Writer, and also I feared and mis∣trusted the disdaynfull myndes of a nombre both scornefull and car∣pynge Correctours, whose Heades are euer busyed in tauntyng Iud∣gementes. Least they shuld other∣wyse interprete my doyngs than in deade I meant them. These two so great mischiefes vtterly diswa∣ded me from the folowynge of my frendes perswasions, and wylled me rather to condem thē to conti∣nuall darkenes, wherby no Incon∣uenience could happen: than to en∣daunger my selfe in gyuynge them to lyght, to the disdaynfull doome of any offended mynde. Notwith¦standynge all the dylygence that I


coulde vse in the Suppression therof coulde not suffise for I my selfe beyng at that tyme oute of the Realme, lytell fearynge any suche thynge to happen. A verye Frende of myne, bearynge as it semed bet∣ter wyll to my doynges than respec¦tyng the hazarde of my name, com∣mytted them all togyther vnpoly∣shed to the handes of the Prynter. In whose handes durynge his ab∣sence from the Cytie, tyll his re∣turne of late they remayned. At whiche tyme, he declared the mat∣ter wholly vnto me: shewynge me, that beynge so farre past, & Paper prouyded for the Impression ther∣of: It coulde not withoute great hynderaunce of the poore Printer

be nowe reuoked. His sodayne tale made me at ye fyrst, vtterly amazed, and douting a great while, what was best to be done: at the lengthe agreyng both with Necessytie and his Counsell, I sayde with Martiall. Iam edporas tuoresse domi. And calling to mynde to whom I myght chief∣lye cōmyt the fruytes of my smiling muse: sodaynly was cast before my eyes the perfect vewe of your frend¦ly mynd (gentle Maister Louelace) Vnto whō for the nombred heapes of sundrye Frendshyps, accoūtynge my selfe as boūde, I haue thought best to gyue them, (not doubtyng) but that they shalbe as well taken, as I do pesently meane them.
Desyrye  herein, as all suche as shall  them especiallye to

beare with the vnpleasaunt forme of my to hastely fynyshed Dreame, the greater part wherof with lytle aduyse I lately ended, bycause the beginnyng of it, as a senseles ead separated frō the body was gyuen with the rest to be prynted. And thus desyrynge but for recompence the frendly receyuyng of my slender Gyfte, I ende: wyshyng vnto you good Mayster Louelace in this life the happye enioyeng of prosperous yeares: and hereafter the blessed estate of neuer ceasynge Ioye.

