



Right Honourable,
EVen he that joyned his  Vox honorem exhibentis, & omnia bono pre∣cantis. A∣brek his joyfull applause with the joyfull acclamations of many when your Lordship Gen 41. 43. was first advanced to your honourable place, doth now see further cause to adde this  Vox congratu∣lantis & collan∣dantis Deum. Rev. 19. 6. & in psal. saepissimè. Halelu-jah, his congratulation, praising God for your conti∣nuance, as in your place, so in your approved Inte∣grity, which hath beene found, (as the Apostle saith of the faith of Christians)  c 1 Pet. 1. 7.,

unto your praise, and honour, and glory, like good gold, which from the furnace appeares more solid and resplendent. For, your kind of judicature, according to the nature of your place, and your owne purpose, is not onely (to use Aug. ad Mar∣cel. Epist. 158. Saint Augustines phrase) Iudicis mollire sententiam, & mitiùs vindicare quàm leges, but it is like that which a Zac 8. 16. Prophet calls  Iudgement of peace: which Hier. Com∣ment lib. 2. in Zac. cap. 8. Saint Hierom thus expounds, Hoc est judicium pacis ut propositum Iudex habeat pacificare discordes. This is no small difficulty, since according to the same Hier. Com∣ment. lib. 1. in Esa. cap. 1. Hierom, Non est omnium rectè judicare, sed eorum qui pruden∣tes sunt: who are made wise from above. Therefore Salomon in vi∣sione per somni∣um hoc à Deo postulavit, ut ac∣cepta sapientia justè populum judicaret. Ibid. Salomon in a dreame asked this of God. And shall not the praise thereof by him that receiveth it, by them that partake of the benefit of it, be retur∣ned to him from whom descendeth  &  Sie distinguo, ut denationem ab ipso dono. Beza. , ; But, my good Lord, least telling the truth of your selfe may seeme flattery to others, and flattery neither sorts with your disposition, nor be∣comes my profession, give mee leave in mine high esteeme of your Honour, and humble expression of mine affection, to publish my poore paines under your honourable name: wishing I were able,

besides my observance to your Lordship, in my zeale to Gods Church, Gemmas offerre. But with Origen, Quia haec supra me sunt, pilas caprarum habere merear, &c. For, whatso∣ever my weakenesses bee, are not these times seaso∣nable (I would they were not) for such a Subject as is here handled, Treatises of Plague and Fa∣mine, yea and of Warre too? For, though by the Prudence & Providence of our royall Soveraigne, Sonne and Heire of the great Peace-maker,  warre be kept out of our land: yet in other parts of Christendome, it, and the restrage like over-flow∣ing flouds, to the ruine of many States and of true Religion. The Lion hath roared, who will not feare? The Lord God hath spoken, who can but prophesie? Yet are these Treatises neither to terrifie for what is past, nor to prophesie of what is yet to come; but rather to heale the wounds that have beene made by the fore-intimated arrowes, and to direct us how to keepe the Lord from fur∣ther shooting out the like. It is the part of us Mi∣nisters of Gods Word, out of his Word to declare what he intendeth and expecteth when he smileth, or frowneth on his people. Magistrates (who by rea∣son of their places, are in Canaans language

stiled  Gods and children of the Psal. 82. 6. most high) have the power to cause divine directi∣ons to bee put in execution. Thus therefore doth an ancient Father paraphrase on that text, bring∣ing in God himselfe thus speaking to Magistrates, I have given you mine own honour, and dig∣nity, . Iustin. Mart. Quest. & Resp. ad Orthodox. q 142. and title, Therefore judge the people as if I my selfe judged it. To whom now may those seasonable Treatises which do (as it were with the finger) point at Gods particular dealing with us, be more fitly presented, then to him, who under his most excellent Majesty, hath so great a place and part, with others, to settle orders for suc∣couring poore people, wounded as aforesaid, and for sheltring them from those arrowes. Of the Treatises thus commended to your honourable Pa∣tronage, gracious acceptance is in all humility cra∣ved by him that professeth himselfe to be.

