


Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull, Beloued;
AMong the many great blessings which the Lord hath beene pleased to bestow on me, his poore ser∣uant, vnworthy of the least, I account this to be an high Fauour, that he hath put me in his Ser∣uice, and appointed me to be one of the Ministers of his Word. Basely is this calling accounted of by the greater, and vulgar sort of people: but my conscience beareth me wit∣nesse that I receiue such contentment therein, and hold my selfe so honoured thereby, as I preferre it to all other callings, and am prouoked thereby to giue some euidence of my thankefull accep∣tance thereof: which better I know not how to doe, then by im∣ploying and improuing to my poore power, the Talent which my Master hath committed to my charge. I am not ignorant how insufficient I am thereunto,. and that not onely in regard of the greatnesse of the worke (whereunto who is sufficient?) but also in comparison of other Ministers,2 Cor. 2. 16. whom God in great number hath raised vp in these our dayes. Yet withall I know that the great Master accepted the imployment of two talents as well as of fine:Mat. 25. 23. yea, if he that receiued but one talent, had imployed it, euen he also should haue beene accepted: for God, the
righteous Iudge,2 Tim. 4. 8. neither exacteth, nor expecteth more then he giueth. If there be a willing mind, it is accepted accor∣ding to that which a man hath,2 Cor. 8. 12. and not according to that which he hath not. This is it which moueth me, as by Prea∣ching, so also by publishing some part of my labours in Print, to seeke the edification of Gods Church. I account Preaching the most principall part of my function: for this is Christs charge,Mar. 16. 15. Goe preach the Gospell; and this is that Ordinance wherein and whereby God doth ordinarily, and most especially manifest his owne power, and bestow his blessing. This is it therefore which hitherto I haue most attended vpon, and in∣tend so to continue as long as God shall affoord mee ability and liberty. Yet I doubt not but Gods people doe also receiue much benefit by sundry Treatises in diuers kinds published in print. For as Preaching is of power especiallie to worke vpon the affe∣ctions, so Printing may be one especiall meanes to informe the iudgement.Vox audita pe∣rit, littera scripta manet. For that which is Printed lieth by a man, and may againe and againe be read, and throughly pondered, till a man come to conceiue the very depth of that he readeth. Besides, here∣in is a great benefit of printing, that the gifts and paines of Gods seruants are made much more common then otherwise they could be: hereby wee partake of the labours of those who haue li∣ued in former times, or in other Countries, and whom we could neuer haue heard speake. Now a good thing,Bonum quo communius eo melius. the more common it is, the better it is. It cannot be denied but that knowledge and learning haue wonderfully encreased by the benefit of Printing. Whereas there is a cōmon complaint against multitude of Books, it is for the most part against idle & euill Bookes, or else an vn∣iust cōplaint. If it be said, that there can nothing be written, but what hath beene written before, I answer, that though it should be true in regard of the summe and substance of matters, yet in regard of a more full opening, a more perspicuous deliuering, a more euident prouing, a more powerfull vrging and pressing of points,Aliquid novus adcit Author. a more fit applying of them to present occasions more and more may be, and daily is added by sundry Authors, whereby the Church of God is much edified. But may not the same argu∣ment be alleadged against Preaching? and doe not many al∣leadge it? Howsoeuer some, too enuiously minded, censure the meanes which God in mercy hath affoorded for the building vp of the body of Christ Iesus, my desire is euery way to doe what good I can; and therefore I haue beene bold to commit to your eies and reading, some part of that which I haue heretofore com∣mended to your eares and hearing. I doe now make a triall of my paines in this kind: if I shall obserue that Gods Church reapeath any benefit thereby, I shall be encouraged to take the more paines hereafter, as I shall find any leasure. I am the seruant of Christ, and of his Church; so long as my life, health, strength, liberty, or any ability is by the good prouidence of God preserued vnto me, my desire is to spend it in the seruice of Christ, and of his Church. Among others I especially entreat you (my beloued Pa∣rishioners and Auditors, of what rancke or degree soeuer ye be) in the best part to interpret, and with the best mind to accept these my endeauours; whereby, though I haue aimed at a more generall good, then I could by preaching (hoping that many whom I neuer knew, nor saw, may reape some benefit by my paines) yet especially I intend your good, whose proper and peculiar Minister I am, and for whose soules I watch, as hee that must giue an account. In this triall which I make of pub∣lishing some of my meditations, I beginne with the last part of my labors, because they are freshest in your memories that heard them preached, and containe points more largely discussed, and, as I take it, of greater vse then any other, which throughout the course of my Ministry I haue handled. For the time of our life being a time of warre, a time wherein our spirituall enemies (who are many, mighty, malitious, sedulous, and subtile) put forth their strength, and bestir themselues to the vttermost that possibly they can,1 Pet. 5. 8. Seeking whom to deuoure, what can bee more behoueful, then to discouer their cunning stratagems and wyles, to declare wherein their strength lieth, to furnish Christs Souldiers with compleat armour and sufficient defence, and to shew how our enemies may bee disappointed of their hopes, and we stand fast against all their assaults? This is the scope of this Treatise. The Analysis and Tables which I haue caused to be set before and after the Booke, doe point out the seuerall and di∣stinct points contained therein, so as I neede not here make any repetition of them. I haue laboured to bee as perspicuous and briefe as I could, in handling so weighty matters. I haue in ma∣ny places deliuered no more then the heads of such points as I largely handled in deliuering them out of the Pulpit: which any may well coniecture to be so, that shall know that the substance of almost an hundred seuerall Sermons is contained in this Treatise. My desire of breuity moued me to referre the quota∣tion of most places of Scripture vnto the margent, and to leaue the Text to be searched out by the Reader, which I wish thee to doe as thy leasure will permit thee. To conclude, I com∣mend this Treatise to your diligent reading, and fauourable ac∣ceptance, my selfe to your Christian prayers, and all of vs to the good grace of God,Church-court in Black-friers London, De∣cember 31. 1618. and rest

