



HAuing a restlesse desier in the dailie exercises of Pen to present some acceptable peece of work to your L. and finding no one thing so fit for my purpose and your honorable disposition, as the knowledge of Armes and Weapons, which defends life, countrie, & honour, I presumed to preferre a booke to the print (translated out of the Italyan language) of a gentle mans doing that is not so gredie of glory as many glorious writers that eagerly would snatch Fame out of other mens mouthes, by a little labour of their own, But rather keeps his name vnknowen to the world (vnder a shamefast clowd of silence) knowing that vertue shynes best & getteth greatest prayes where it maketh smallest bragg: for the goodnes of the mind seekes no glorious gwerdon, but hopes to reap the reward of well doing among the rypest of iudgement & worthiest of sound consideration, like vnto a man that giueth his goods vnto the poore, and maketh his treasure∣house in heauen, And further to be noted, who can tarrie til the seed sowen in the earth be almost rotten or dead, shal be sure in a boūtiful haruest to reap a goodly crop of corne And better it is to abyde a happie season to see how things will proue, than soddainly to seeke profite where slowlye comes commoditie or any benefit wil rise. Some say, that good writers doe purchase small praise till they be dead, (Hard is that opinion.) and then their Fame shal flowrish & bring foorth the fruite that long lay hid in the earth.

This gentleman, perchaunce, in the like regard smothers vp his credit, and stands carelesse of the worlds report: but I cannot see him so forgotten for his paines in this worke is not little, & his merite must be much that hath in our En∣glish tongue published so necessarie a volume in such apt termes & in so bigg a booke (besides the liuely descriptions & models of the same) that shews great knowledge & cun∣ning, great art in the weapon, & great suretie of the man that wisely can vse it, & stoutly execute it. All manner of men allowes knowledge: then where knowledge & cou∣rage meetes in one person, there is ods in that match, what∣soeuer manhod & ignorance can say in their own behalfe. The sine book of ryding hath made many good hors-men: and this booke of Fencing will saue many mens lyues, or put comon quarrels out of vre, because the danger is death if ignorant people procure a combate. Here is nothing set downe or speach vsed, but for the preseruation of lyfe and honour of man: most orderly rules, & noble obseruations, enterlaced with wise councell & excellent good wordes, penned from a fowntaine of knowledge and flowing witt, where the reasons runnes as freely as cleere water cōmeth from a Spring or Conduite. Your L. can iudge both of the weapon & words, wherefore there needes no more com∣mendation of the booke: Let it shewe it self, crauing some supportation of your honourable sensure: and finding fa∣uour and passage among the wise, there is no doubt but all good men will like it, and the bad sort will blush to argue against it, as knoweth our liuing Lord, who augment your L. in honour & desyred credit.

