



BEing long since enioined by that Reuerend Father and painefull preacher, the Lord Bishop that lately liued amongst vs, to pub∣lish this little Pamphlet; I haue at last aduentured it into the view of all. Many Criticks it must make account to meet with, and moe curious Readers then courteous, in this so literate and censorious age; wherein many Poems of the same argument are already ex∣tant, but moe of many other, and for due ca∣dence

of words and poeticall measure, farre more excellent. Sith then the acceptance here∣of may well seeme doubtfull, and the tenuity and nakednesse of it, is so apparant as iustly shameth to looke great learned men in face; I haue thought meete and most conuenient to shaddow it vnder your worships protection. Equity craueth at my hands no lesse: First, in respect of you, who being by place and Office protectors of the poore, may iustly challenge to patronize and support, whatsoeuer poore and lame labours doe creepe out of the House. Se∣condly, in regard of my selfe, who being much bounden to the body of this City, for the loue and fauour I found in my free election, should much forget what I owe, if I should not vpon so iust occasion, thankfully acknowledge what is due. Thirdly, in respect of the poore people of the plce, whose benefit and good, charity doth challenge, and particular relation require me by all iust meanes and fit opportunities to purchase and procure. All the good that may be done them, must necessarily concerne either their soules or their bodies. For the body, as the miseries thereof are more sensible, so is your care commendable, who at your ordinary and monthly Court, indeauour to increase their weekely pay. For the soule, I would to God

there were not some cause of complaint: and seeing this present argument is spirituall and diuine, giue me leaue in presenting the same, to begge for them this heauenly benefit, that euen the soules of forty poore people, may by your due regard and prouision appeare to bee deare nto you, as their bodily estate is tende∣red, pitied, and prouided for. What their case is, I neede not expresse: Saint Iohn describeth it at full, and in few words, Reuel. 3. 17. where he calleth the Laodiceans, wretched, miserable, poore, blind and naked: a dan∣gerous state, and (which is most to bee lamen∣ted) they know it not. That it is to be succou∣red and releeued, I shall not need to vse many arguments for proofe or perswasion: I will on∣ly remember you of the intention; first, of the Foundresse, and then of the poore people. In the eie of the Foundresse both soule and bodie had their due respect; and if shee were so carefull for the benefit of the body, as by a Physitian and Chirurgion to prouide for their griefes, and by meanes of maintenance in some measure for life and lodging, to bring their gray heads in peace vnto the graue; it cannot once bee imagi∣ned (without wrong vnto the dead) but that by the Ministers office and place appointed, a greater care was intended of sending their

soules with comfort to their Sauiour. And as touching the poore people that come to bee placed; it is knowne, to be the profession of all, as to be maintained by the charity of the House; so, to end their daies in the seruice of God. Con∣sider therefore I beseech you, that the sacrifice they offer, is halt, blinde and lame; tat the daies they consecrate, are their last and worst; wherein they are neither fit to serue sin and the lusts thereof, nor yet the Lord and his holy will; and seeing they professe a desire of the choice of the better part, let them not lacke helpe to di∣rect them thereunto, that the eies of their vn∣derstanding may be opened, the hand of their faith strōgthned, and their feet guided to make streight steps towards that narrow gate that leadeth vnto life. That this blessing may be vpon them, and the danger of the ditch auoided, Mat. 1 5. 14. insteed of trash and riffe raffe Vrsn Cat.  Epist.(rightly so valued by the same Reuerend Fa∣ther) let true wisdome dwell among them, and a man of vnderstanding be procured them, that so together with their daily double praying they may haue also often instruction, and plaine teaching. And the laborer (you know) is worthy of his hire; and the hire (you wil say) you know not where to haue, so that herewithall commeth all the difficulty. Here also let me be bold to put

you in minde (and to put it in Print, that it may remaine to put your successors in minde) that speciall care be had for raising and conferring maintenance to this purpose, by your prouident dispensation and husbanding of the profits ap∣propriated heereunto. Your good endeuours heerein, may be a meanes (when God shall grant opportunity) to moue the heart of our noble King Iames, or the hopeful Prince Henry his sonne, to raise this spirituall building higher, vpon so worthy a foundation, laid by that ex∣cellent Princesse, and peerelesse Queene, Eliza∣beth of blessed memory and admired. Whatso∣euer you gaine the poore people, you shall reape to your selues a worthy recompence; praise and good report among men, peace & cōfort to your own consciences for discharge of your duty, and confidence before God in that great day of the appearing of your Sauiour and Iudge, when you shall without feare or fainting, giue vp an ac∣count, as of other actions, so of the trust com∣mitted vnto you, of many the mēbers of Christ, the bodies & soules of your poor brethren. If I seeme tedious, if importunate, if elamorous, let it be remembred, that it is no shame for a Bar∣tholmews man to beg. Hoping therefore that I shall in time be heard, I leaue pleading, and conclude praying; first and principally for

your worships, and the rest of your worthy ranke, that you may be euer found such as the Exo. 18. 21Lord requireth, you should be, men of courage fearing God, dealing truely, and hating couetousnesse; next and generally for the whole people of this City, that as they are politi∣cally one body, so the Lord would giue them one heart, for conscience sake to feare him and obey their Superiours, and to serue one another tho∣row loue; that so his blessings may be continu∣ed and increased vpon both Magistrates and people, from generation to generation for euer.

