



COnsidering (right honorable)
that diuers both of our coun∣trymen,
and others, haue very
paynefully and fruitefully la∣boured,
to set forth the expo∣sition
and meaning, both of
the ten Commandements, &
also of the Lordes prayer, and that in the English
tongue: I thought good, not to meddle any fur∣ther
that waye, seeing so good an entrance was
made vnto it: But neither seeing nor hearing of
any that had giuen forth any sermons or lectures,
vpon the articles of our Christian faith, a thing as
necessarie as the other, I was the more embolde∣ned
to set this treatise forth, that the simple and
ignorant, which can but only reade, and haue this
benefite to profite themselues withall, might haue
the true and playne meaning of euery article of
their faith, as they haue the exposition of the
Lordes prayer, and ten Commandements. For if
this Creede, commonly called the Creede of the
Apostles, shall onely be sayde without booke, and
rehearsed of the people, without the meaning of
it in more words: then they can not take such cō∣fort

out of these articles as were requisite, because
they do not vnderstande them. And so great and
excellent mysteries lying hid, shal do no good, be∣cause
they are not opened and reuealed to the
simpler sort. The cause that moued me to present
these my first fruits vnto your Honour, was, That
partly you had heard them read vnto you, & your
Honors accepting of them as fauoring the trueth
shall incourage others to doe the like, and reade
them more diligently. I haue not laboured to be
curious in this matter, but so plaine as the weakest
of capacitie might easely vnderstande: for whose
sake, and not for the learned I was willing to pub∣lish
this worke, according to that talent that the
Lorde in mercy hath committed vnto me his ser∣uant,
for the building vp of his spirituall temple. I
doubt not, but by the working of Gods holy spirit
in you in reading of these articles nowe and then,
your Honour, (being voyde of waightier matters
and affayres, when leasure shall serue,) you shall
finde some comfort and consolation in them. Al∣though
they be playne, yet are they true, & neede
no eloquence to set them forth: for trueth seeketh
no corners to hide her selfe in: Onely her feare is
least she should be hid. I graunt, it might seeme a
needlesse and fruitlesse thing to write bookes and
publishe them in these dayes, wherein are such
store that nowe bookes lacke readers, rather then
readers want bookes: but if a man consider well
with him selfe, he shall finde that a great many of
them tende not so much to set forth godlines, as
wantonnes: neither do they profit the Church and
common wealth, but rather hurt and hinder it as
much as in them lyeth, so that it had bene better

that a great many of them had bene suppressed
and neuer bene written. They hurt many, for they
leade yong men, (vnlesse Gods spirit guide them
the better) to vtter destruction. These are not the
bookes that teach young men, which are by na∣ture
wanton and wilde, and giuen to lustes, to re∣fraine
from libertie of the flesh: but rather giue
them the bridle to these wanton lustes and appe∣tites:
and pitie it is they should bee suffered in a
Christian cōmon wealth. These idle bookes teach
not a man to amende and correct his wayes, but
vtterly to peruert them. A young man therefore
shall clense his wayes, not by these meanes, but by
ruling himself according to the word of the Lord,
as the Prophet Dauid hath forewarned, Psal. 119.
so then although the store of bookes in our dayes
is great, yet the number of them that encrease
true godlinesse, is not so great, but that it may be
augmēted. And albeit some one booke please not
euery man, yet another may, seeing there are di∣uers
and diuers giftes giuen to edifie, that all men
may be without excuse before the Lorde. If any
find fault and say, This writer is too hard and hye
for my capacity, he may haue an easier: if this
man bee too eloquent and fine, he may haue ano∣ther
that is more simple and playne: for God be
thanked, there is great varietye of giftes in the
Church of Christ: and as it is in the body naturall
of men that al members are not alike, nor haue
the same function, yet all are necessary: and al∣though
the foote be not so excellent a member as
the hand or the eye, yet for the vse of the body, it
is as necessary & profitable: neither can the head
say to the foote, I haue no neede of thee, but one

hath neede of the helpe of another for the main∣tenance
of ye whole: So it is in ye mystical body of ye
Church, some haue more excellent giftes then
others, and some may be likened to the head, some
to the eye, and some to the hand: other of inferi∣our
giftes to the foote and to the legge which yet
surely can not be despised or lightly set by, consi∣dering
the body can not want them: neither is
this onely to be seene in the mysticall body of
the Church, wherein some are pastors, some doc∣tors,
some Deacons, and some haue the gift of elo∣quence,
some of knowledge, some of vtterance,
& some of tongues: But this may be perceiued in
the body of the common wealth, wherein some
are kinges and rulers, appoynted of God to bee
heades ouer others, and some are craftesmen, and
artificers, some husbandmen and plowmen farre
inferiour to the other, and yet notwithstanding, as
necessary is the poore labouring man for the ci∣uil
body, as is the magistrate and superiour: for if
all should rule, who shoulde obey: if all againe
should obey, who should rule or gouerne? but nowe
the Lorde hath so tempered and disposed these
thinges in his infinite wisedome, that there should
be no disorder, and that euery one should be in∣detted
and bounde to another: that so, loue and
vnity might be kept and maynteyned in al. For no
one man hath all giftes giuen vnto him, that hee
might stande in neede of his neighbour, and loue
him the better, hauing that gift which hee seeth
him selfe to be destitute of. Thus, being willing
to performe all the duties of a faithfull minister
of Iesus Christ vnto your honour, I leaue to trou∣ble
you any furthet from other affayres of your

Prince and countrey, beseeching the Almightie
to increase his gratious giftes in you, to the ho∣nour
of his holy name, the profit of his Church,
and the consolation of your owne soule
in the ende. Which he graunt vnto
your honour for his Christes
sake. Amen. 1579.

