



Most Reuerend, and my Honourable good Lord.
IT is not more triuiall then true, Nimia familiaritas parit contemptum, Too much familiaritie breedeth contempt. Plenty breedes loathing of what wee most desired, and wearisomnesse in what we most delighted, custome cau∣seth facilitie, and that againe produceth carelesnesse, and neglect. Necessitie searcheth and findeth out necessaries, Art beautifieth, but out of Art springeth idle curiositie that marreth all. What integrity is there in any thing? When the world was cleane purged by waters, and the wicked swept all away, yet there remained a secret Cham lurking in the righteous familie, and in Lots house

one that looked back to the rich plaine of Sodome. The purest quintessenee extracted from the purest body by the peci∣sest subtiltie, hath in it semen corruptionis, an insensible beginning of corruption. The Church being cleansed of her leprosie, and restored to her antiquitie comely▪ and beau∣tifull, groweth so curious on the one side, and so Atheistical∣ly sacrilegious on the other side, that who is a good man, who a wise man, sub iudice lisest. We are falling from comely sobriety, to proud ouer-weening curiosity, and phan∣tasticall leuitie, like those that thinke a thing neuer to be well, till it be spoiled with too much fingering, whitling, and hammering. Too much playing with the phantasie, (the disease of these times) marreth a good vnderstanding. For as a learned man saith, it is mater erroris, the mother of errour leading vs from naturall portraitures to anticks, the like whereof (for illustration sake) is to be seene in our apparrell, and putting on thereof, and should be seene in our bodies, if they were of aerious substance, and changeable at our will. Much preaching we haue, and much hearing, (a peculiar blessing on this nation) we are ripe of conceit, and glib of tongue, euery thing is easie, nothing difficult, and how many thinke themselues able to teach their teachers, and gouerne their gouernours? Surely, if the Pulpit, and place of authority, were granted them, we should haue so many new coyned Churches, and polities, that the di∣uine, true, and naturall portraiture of both should be lost, and all of vs left in a maze, and as creatures transla∣ted out of their proper element into another. Much haue we in times past desired the sober, and plaine preaching of the word, for knowledge of the truth, and right practise of duties towards God, and one towards another, but the fickle∣nesse

of many is weary of both. They cannot tell whom they would heare, what they would heare, what forme they would haue, and as the sicklie man, and want on childe would haue they know not what. Many are so rauished with their owne anticks, and conceit of their owne knowledge, and all-sufficiency, that it is enough for them to heare for va∣rietie, and comparison sake, new instruments, new voyces, to looke the Preacher in the face, but in the meane while, like Cut-purses, to haue their sacrilegious hands in his pock∣et, and to salue the smarting sore with a dinner or a supper, sawced with oyly words, with deceitfull hollow courtesies, which fill the eye and the phantasie (bewitchingly) but drie vp the bloud in the veines; for wee are fooles, but they are wise. Their heart goeth after their pride, after their couetousnesse, Ezech. 33. 31. Plenty of the word hath bred loathing thereof, and plenty of Preachers con∣tempt of them. Many haue heard, and seene Christ enough, yet finde neither profit or pleasure in him, he hath neither forme nor beautie; therefore vncleane spirit returne home againe, foxe to thy kinde, dogge to thy old vomit, sowe to thy wallowing in the mire. Heathenish deuotion is meere madnesse; Popish deuotion is superstitious, and foolish so∣ber hearing and well doing is wearisome: What remaineth but Epicurisme? And what is that but to make an Idoll of the corruptible body, the most rotten Idoll of all? Surely, neither Pagans, nor Popish Churches and houses were euer so filled with Idols, as they are now. For the belly, body, or person, is the Epicures Idoll, as the Apostle saith, Phil. 3. 19. And how this Bel, and Iezabel, the corrup∣tible carke is should be more adored, and deifyed, than now it is, I conceiue not, neither can any Cooke, or Tailor ima∣gine,

for in deuising new follies they fall into the old vna∣wares. Now what will be the ripenesse of this swinish wal∣lowing in the lees of concupiscence, but backsliding into Pa∣ganisme, or rather a progresse into Atheisme, when all good wisedome and vnderstanding is depraued through lust? So that in the end, we shall be worse Ignorants, or ra∣ther worse miscreants, then euer we were, according to that principle in Philosophie, Bonum optimum corrup∣tum fit pessimum.
Considering the season (beloued Father in God) I was in doubt whether it were better to haue exercised my selfe in the Prophet Ieremie, whose prophesies are well befitting this last end of the world, drawing neere to the vniuersall iudgement, as the particular nation of the Iewes did towards theirs, for their wilfulnesse, hard-heartednesse, contempt of their Prophets, carnality of their Priests, confidence in their owne strength, couetousnesse, oppression, &c. But because I feared both meanes and health would faile me in so long a worke, I vndertooke this, which is of like nature; and in∣tent, namely to withdraw men from the transitory world, and the perishing lusts thereof, euen from this loathsome Belly-Idolatry, spirituall Mastupration, Selfe-harlotry, to the feare of God, and obedience to his commandements, considering the proud presumption▪ want on securitie, the ciuill filthinesse, modest leuity, courteous Chuch-robberies, and the fruitlesse ingling professions of many, whose prat∣ling, and hearing is endlesse, but good workes in humility, and loue, to which God hath elected and redeemed vs, are farre from them, Ephesians 1. 4. Titus 2. 14. which caused wise, aged, experienced Solomon to say, Eccles. 12. 12. Be admonished by these my Sonne, for of

making bookes there is no end, and much reading is a wearinesse to the flesh. But he that is not a forgetfull hearer, but a doer of the worke, this man shall be bles∣sed in his deede, Iam. 1. 25. For this is totum hominis, the whole duty of man, Ecces. 12. 13. Surely, if blessed∣nesse be to be found in the deede, then in much writing, reading, speaking, hearing, there must needes be wearinesse, if not to the body, yet to the conscience, which in these out∣ward exercises onely, can neuer finde true comfort, or assu∣rance of Gods loue.
Now I haue made choice of your Lordship, to whom I might Dedicate this worke; and that for sundry causes: First, that I might exhibite it to you as a New yeares gift, the best that I haue, in token of my sincere loue and duty, and earnest desire of your prosperous and happie welfare, who as you were studious your selfe, when once you were Fellow of Queenes Colledge in Cambridge; so were you a speciall fauourer, and furtherer of the Studious, whereby you purchased speciall loue, both in your owne Colledge and abroad also, and the same through your perseuerance, and prudent gouernement is still continued amongst vs that liue vnder your Iurisdiction. Another cause is, that it might finde the better passage vnder your patronage, and kinder entertainement vnder your name, that though it be defe∣ctiue in selfe-desert, yet for your sake the indifferent, be∣neuolous, and generous eye, respecting the strong, might ingenuously passe by the weke. Moreouer, being desirous to shew forth some testimony of my thankefull minde for your Lordships great fauour towards me; I thought good to offer that, which onely I am able to giue, and which I know you are most ready and willing to receiue, euen the

fruits of my Ministeriall labours to you, a speciall fauourer of faithfull Ministers. Lastly, as tokens of small weight, but of great value, are more acceptable then great Summes, I trust that this small gaine of my one Talent, which I pre∣sent to your Lordship, as a token of my sincere affection, obedience, and seruice, shall counteruaile a ponderous vo∣lume. And what I am lesse able this way to performe, I shall recompence with my continuall and hearty prayers for your temporall and eternall happinesse.
London, 1. Ian. 1621.

