


SALOMON sayth, that there is a time for all things. The wisdome of man therefore, is, to know his time, & for all such acti∣ons as hee vndertakes, to make choyce of the fittest, & most com∣modious time, to effect and bring them to passe. In worldly things which are most agreeable to our nature, we account the Morning the best & most conuenient time

of all the day besides: for reason & experience do teach vs, that in the morning our memory is the quickest, our sences the readiest, our natural powers the ablest, be∣ing reuiued, as it were, & hauing recouered fresh strength & liber∣ty, by reason of that sweet sleepe, and comfortable rest, wherewith they were reposed the night past. And therfore the Student for his study, the traueller for his iour∣ney, the labourer for his worke, and euery man in his place and calling, for such proiects as hee hath, chuseth the morning, as the fittest time, not onely to beginne, but also to further their enter∣prises.
If therefore in things which are agreeable to nature, wee vse the morning, as an helpe to further

vs in our actions, much more should wee make choyce of the morning, for those things which are lesse agreeable to nature, or rather contrary to nature, yea in∣deed, aboue nature, of which kind is praier, & hearing of the word of God: for nature doth not stirre vs vp to prayer, neyther doth nature waken vs early in the morning to heare the word of God. Prayer, and hearing of the word, go with our nature, as against the streame: and therefore it is very necessary, that the first thing that comes to our eyes in the morning, should be the Temple, the first thing that comes to our eares, should be the word of God, and the first thing that comes to our minde, should be prayer and thankesgiuing, that so we may walke with Eliah, al the

day after, in the strength of those things which wee haue heard out of the word of God: and so wee shall vse our callings more care∣fully & conscionably, we shall be directed what to doe, and what to leaue vndone, and whatsoeuer we doe, we shall do all things the bet∣ter to Gods glory, and the posses∣sing of our owne soules continu∣ally in peace and patience.
And truly, if wee consider the practise of the Saints of God, wee shall find, that they haue obserued the morning, as the fittest time for the exercises of their piety & de∣uotion.Gen. 22.3 Psal. 119 147, 148. 1. Sam. 1.19. Abraham rose very early to sacrifice his sonne. Dauid pre∣uented the morning light, & cry∣ed: his eyes also preuented the night watches, to meditate in Gods word. Elkanah and his hous∣hold

arose vp early, and worship∣ped before the Lord in Shiloh.Esay 56.9. And the Prophet Esay in the per∣son of the faithfull, saying, With my spirit within me will I seeke thee in the morning. Mary Magdalene came to visit the sepulchre of our Sauiour Christ very early, while it was yet darke. And as this hath bin the time, which the Saints of God haue chiefly chosen for the practise of their piety & deuotion: so wee read in the Scriptures, that God hath powred his blessings vpō men, more vsually at this time than at any other time of the day. Manna, that heauenly food,Exod. 16 13. 2. Kings 3.20. was by God giuen to the children of Israel in the morning. When the three kings of Israel, Iudah, and Edom made warre vpon the king of Moab, and were greatly distres∣sed

for water, in so much as the king of Israel cryed out for feare of the present danger, it pleased God in the morning, when the meate offering was offered, to send the three kings plenty of wa∣ter, both for the army and for all their cattel.Acts 2.15. The holy Ghost came downe on the Apostles in the morning: for it was the third houre, which was between 7. and 8. of the clocke: so that it may be truly gathered, that they were be∣fore that houre exercised in hea∣ring the word of God & prayer.
Vpon which grounds, you that are of the Parish of S. Antholins in London, & you yt are the hearers of the morning Lectures there, are worthily to be cōmended: the one, because you haue founded a Le∣cture in that place, at the fittest

time of the day, which, as hath bin prooued, is the morning; where∣in appeares your godly wisdome. The other, for repayring to heare the said Lecture; wherin appeares your zeale and deuotion.
Many Cōgregations haue done religiously in this kinde, but you surmount them all: for howsoe∣uer the word is to be preached in season, and out of season, (and no time or season is vnfit for the hea∣ring of the same) yet they are to bee commended aboue the rest, which make choyce of the fittest time for this purpose. There bee some, which dare deride and slan∣der this morning exercise; but this ought not to derogate from the worthines & excellency of it; for I neuer heard of any action, were it neuer so holy and vertuous, but

it alwayes had aduersaries to im∣peach it. And this is a sure argu∣ment vnto me, that it is a seruice acceptable vnto God, aboue other of the same nature, because it is more depraued & slandered than any other: for the more diuine that any action is, the more enuy hath the deuil at it. Let none ther∣fore be discouraged, or take offēce at this Lecture, if they heare it a∣ny way euil spoken of: but let this be my exhortation both to you that mayntayne it, & to you that repayre to heare it▪ that you be not weary of well doing: for so is the will of God,1. Pet. 2.15. that by continuing in well doing, you may put to si∣lence the ignorance and malice of foolish men.

