


RIght Worshipfull,Mr. 14.9. it seemeth by the words of our Sauiour Christ in the Gospell, that those actions do chief∣ly continue our name and memory in the world, which are performed vpon

Christ and his seruice: and that it is an iniurious and malicious practise, to conceale and smoother the bounty of those, who haue beene liberall in con∣tributing to Christian and Religious exercises. Forasmuch therefore as you haue powred your costly oyntment vpō Christs head, more aboundantly than many other of your place and order, you may perswade your selfe, vpon the ground of Christs owne rule, which is infallible, that you haue layd a sure foundation for your name and memo∣ry, as long as the world endureth: and you haue also giuen iust occasion to those that haue tasted your large be∣nignity, to giue the world knowledge thereof, to the end that others may bee mooued by your commendable exam∣ple, to practise the like godly actions & they that are not able to imitate you

in performance, may yet prayse God for you, and pray vnto God long to preserue you, for the further good of his Church, and the benefit of this go∣uernment wherein you are a Magi∣strate.
To imitate you in performance, is neither the will nor power of many: yet I freely professe my selfe to bee one of those, which both praise God, and pray vnto God for you, being obliged thereunto, by receyuing some porcion of my maintenance, from your large contribution to the Lecture at Saint Antholines, where I am one of the morning Lecturers. In which regard, I haue presumed to present to your Worships patronage, these my poore labours sometimes preached there. If they may carry acceptation from you, and bring profit to any soule, I shall be

abundantly satisfied. Howsoeuer, I commend their successe to GOD, their patronage to you, their vse to the world, desiring euery one, into whose hands this Booke shall come, as to take knowledge of your good∣nesse, so to pray for your euerlasting happinesse. Amen.
 one of the Morning Lectures at S. Antholins.
