



I Knowe (moste Honora∣ble) your vvisedome may mar∣uell, and not vvithout cause, that I vvho of all other am to be repu∣ted the moste vnlearned, vvoulde take vpon me, hauing small skill, or little or none in Palmistrie, to discourse or rather intreate of the eleuation or declination of the Mount of Venus, seing both finer vvittes, and yper heads before this time herein haue vvaded ouer shoes for vvāt of greater skill. Yet my Lord, vnder your most Honorable correction, to this your ad∣miration, in mine ovvne defence I obiect this lavvful ex∣cuse: Hono (as Tullie sayth) alit artes, omnes{que} incenduntur ad studia gloriae VVherfore reconing my selfe as one of this genera∣litie, and yet desirous to keepe me vvithin the boundes of this phrase, Ne utor vltra crepidam, lavvfully alluded of A∣pelles for the curious carping at his vndeserued pensell, I may (vvanting feete to runne) creepe, though as slovve as doth the Snayle, vvho refusing to come at the cal of Iupiter vnto his generall feast for all liuing creatures, vvas iustly punished as you see, vvith the cariage of hir house on hir backe, vvherby straying vvhether she list, is neuer the far∣ther from home. Thus your vvisedome may see the great desire vvhich I had, somvvhat to set forth, and that, vvhat best might agree vvith your Honours youthfull yeeres, &

not mislike my youthfull aucthoritie, vvho desirous to paint, as vvel the pleasure as displeasure of Loue, thought good (mingling the svveete vvith the soure) not onely to discourse of the eleuation, but also of the declinatiō of the Mount of Venus, for that they are dependant (as fellovv a∣bians) the one to the other. And though (my Lord) nothing ought to be penned svvaruing or not proceding frō graue aucthoritie, yet often times vnder a defuse garmēt lieth a clodde of vvisdome. Likevvise, if vnskilfull heds shoulde frame thēselues to the limitation of this Greeke prouerbe, Quam quisque orit artem in bac se exerceat: then skill muste dye vvith the Auctor for vvant of youthfull exercise, yea, no∣thing should be practised, much lesse learned, fevve then do as Plato, Pithagoras, and Democritus did, vvho (as some say) sought all the partes of the vvorlde vvherein any thing vvas that might or coulde be learned. Yea Democritus, and Anaxagoas, lofte bothe their goodes and patrimonies (as all men do knovv) onely for the desire of learning. Also Diodous the Stoike, is not much incōparable to these, vvho thorovv his continuall vvatch and excessiue studie, being blinde of long time, knovving nothing but vvhat vvas red vnto him by a little childe, yet gaue himselfe vnto the stu∣die of Geometrie, teaching vvith vvordes vvho vvere de∣sirous to learne, hovv and in vvhat māner each liue should be layed. VVherfore (O grafte of noble stocke) hauing the like desire (if so I might say) as these haue had to lear∣ning, my desire and not my skill, my good vvill and not my penne is to be accepted, as the simple Raddish roote vvrapped in a peece of greene Sarcenet vvas better ac∣cepted at the Prince his handes, than vvas a goodly fayre Horse gorgeously trapped giuen him of his marchaunt, for that in deede he knevv their vvilles vvere not alike: the

poore man gaue his Radish roote for pure loue, but the o∣ther his sumptuous Horse in hope of a greater benefite. Thus preacing (more boldly than vvisely) vpō your Ho∣nours curtesie, I haue brought vnto your Lordshippe a handfull of fragrant floures (though not gathered in A∣donis garden). the chiefe vvhereof are Primeroses and Vio∣lettes. Your choyce is not great, yet chuse vvhat likes you best, the vvorst turne backe againe. For if some may please, and none displease, I shall not onely thinke my time vvel spent, and my diligence better imployed, but al∣so my labour and trauell best of al bestovved. And vvher∣as I seeme (as you shall hereafter perceyue) to ground my Paganicall Pamphlet vpon the song of Apollo, most melo∣diously song vnto me (as me thought) in a visiō: I vvould not your Honour should thinke the painting of my pēne to be Verbatim spoken of Apollo his mouth, but rather the grounde thereof, vvhiche in most ample manner follovv∣ing I haue delated, vvherby eche one may see (as it vvere in a gorgeous garish glasse before their eyes) a pretie poe∣ticall Pamphlet, shevving paganically, as vvell the lavvful copulacion betvveene Vulcano and Venus, as the vnlavvfull combat betvveene hir and Mars. Also in this mery meane a playne mirrour of youthful vanities shall play his parte, and the shade thereof shall bereaue you of your senses. In the ensigne likevvise of this army, your Honour shall finde vvritte (as it vvere vvith letters of pure Gold) a chiefe poynte of vvomens vanities, videlicet, looke vvhat they may haue, coste it neuer so muche, they esteeme not: but by a toy of light valevve, and not easily commen by, they ogreat store, vvherof this Prouerbe came, Far fe and deere bought are good for Ladyes. Also diuers other pointes in this glasse your L. shall perceyue vvorthie of noting,

but vvhy seeme I (vvho as yet neuer receyued one poynt of discourtesie of any veneriall Dame) to display vvith penne and inke vpō the imbecillitie of their natures? God graunt (say I) Euripides may vvell vvithstand their boyste∣rous blasts, vvho in his Tragedie intituled Medea, affirmeth that vvomens vvittes are vnapte to goodnesse, but very vvell inclined to vnhappinesse, bicause (sayde he) vvomen are creatures vnperfect, and vvhere perfectiō is not, there can nothing rest that is good. It seemeth the nebbe of my penne is long, and that I lesse do feare the stubbing therof. Such surmises (beleue me) assent to veritie, my yōg yeres say, I speake not by experience, but rather by heare say: and vvhat of this? riper yeares & mellovver vvittes knovv I fayne not herein, for many of them vnvvillingly haue the proofe thereof. Yet vvould I not, vvho haue no title hereunto, should seeme to chalēge me as their vniust ac∣cuser, for I meane not generally, my surmise is not vn∣knovvne, Rubbe a gauld Horse on the backe and it is a chaunce if ee kicketh not. I vvill not say but that Dame Nature hath played hir part in deuiding and distributing hir gifts equally, as vvell to the one as to the other. For vve see, as vve haue Apollo and Mercurie for Goddes, so Pallas and Mi∣nerua for Goddesses of vvisdome as Mars so Bellona for vvar: as Cupide so Venus for loue: as Pan so Ceres for inuention of husbandrie: yea, as Morpheus so Murcas for sleepe. Thus (to be shorte) God hath appointed the pleasure of vvomen to conteruayle the toyle of man. Neither are the deedes of men more valiant than the mindes of vvomē, vvhose cou∣rage abateth no not vvith the fiercenesse of Tygres, as ap∣peared by the vviues and matrones of Persia, vvho thorovv their valiant hartes, noble courage and impudencie, being ashamed of the flight of their husbandes, prouoked them

to returne againe vnto battel, and not onely to ouercome them of vvhome sometimes not onely they, but Cyrus him selfe stood in dread, but also in the same battell to take king Astyages prisoner. Moreouer, vvho hath not redde of the valiantnesse of Queene Thomyris? vvho hearing of the death of hir onely sonne, began not to reuenge the same vvith teares, sobbes, sighes, and pensiuenesse, as vvomen vse to do (Tullie testifying the same in his seconde boke of Tusculanes questions, vvho inferring vpon this proposition De tolerando dolore, afirmeth that Fletus muliebr ingenio additus) but girded hir self vvith the svvorde, and armed hir body vvith the shielde of Mars, cutting off the heare of hir head, and attiring hir selfe in the manner of a man, vntill such time as shee had gotten the head of Cyrus, vvith the like vvyles that he vsed tovvard hir sonne. Also vvho knovv∣eth not that the Amazones ruled their realme betvveene themselues of a long time vvithout the ayde of any man, cutting off their right dugges for hindring the casting of their dartes, vvherof they tooke this name Amazones (that is) vvanting their right dugges? But softe here I checke, least some sticke not to say behinde my backe, a blasing starre vvil shoote. But vvhat if they do? It is a greate winde that shaketh corns: neither do I thinke but that the stan∣ders by vvhiche heare this (hauing any iudgement at all) vvil easily descerne a difference betveene Orpheus and Pan. I knovv all men are not giuen to say vvell, neither to iudge alike. For (as Plato sayeth) Quot capitatet sunt sententiae▪ some men vvill say, this poynt vvas penned to mystically: and an other vvill say behinde my backe, this shade vvas to grosse: here vvas to much learning shevved, and here vvas none at all: here Apollo and Pallas guided his penne: here Pan molested him vvith his oten pipe: here vvill th male

kinde say, Naestor dreamed, here vvill the female say A∣chilles raigned. Thus in euery corner of the house I looke to finde a bayting ogge, and not vvithout a cause, for I knovv they can not speake so euill of me as my penne de∣serueth. But yet vvhat so euer they say, the blinde man may see in this glasse, vvhat apishe vvittes vvomen haue to inuestigate by interrogatiue similitudes the perfect mea∣ning and the sure grounde of their louers harte: and those vvhiche haue their cleare sight to looke stedfastly herein, shall see perchaunce an Ape vvhipped, vvhich somvvhat may delight him. VVherevpon certen yong Gentlemen and those of my professed friendes (vvell vievving this vvorke) requested me earnestly to haue intituled it A nettle for an Ape, but yet (being somvvhat vvedded as most fooles are) to mine ovvne opinion, vvho vvould hardly forgoe their bable for the Tovver of London) I thought it good (somvvhat to stop a zoilous mouth) to sette a more clean∣ly name vpon it, that is, Golden Aphroditis. For if the other had stoode, vvho most had bene bitten herevvith perad∣uenture vvould haue sought all the meanes they could to haue turned this vvhippe for mine ovvne tale. But stay here a little, I loue not to be coūted a ranger, least thorovv my appearing aboue the vvater, I seeme to prognosticate thereby (as doth the Dolphin) that some storme or tem∣pest approcheth at hande. I trust though my penne dothe seeme to paint at large, yet not to lauishe. For vvhereas it seemeth to blase or painte the incineration of Veneriall dames and ruffling Nymphes, it proceedeth not of any spite, malice, hatred, melancholy, or euil vvill that I beare vnto the chaste Matrones, or vnto any one that may iust∣ly chalenge vnto themselues one little sparke of the spice thereof. Therefore vvho are vvilling to vnderstande, I

vvishe them to shunne the fountaine Chis, and rather to open the gates of their eares, vvherby they might the bet∣ter vnderstand my meaning: iudge likevvise and knovve the difference of my voyces and soundes. If any one see∣meth to be touched herevvith to the quicke, let them pro∣pounde their Quare, and I vvill alvvaies be at hande Reddere rationem therevnto. Yet on vvhome so euer it chaunceth to sounde forth this interrogation (vvhat outvvard coun∣tenaunce so euer she beare) yet can it not be sounded, but as it vvere Tragico boatu, therefore vvho listeth so to do, to ayde them in their enterprise, I thinke it best they cal vpō the dolefull Muse Melpme, on vvhome Virgill in his Epi∣grams thus vvriteth:
Melpmene Tragico proclamat mesta boatu.
For this I dare auouch, that oftentimes vyho seemeth most of al to blaze their chastitie vvith the Tergate of Me∣dusa, they play more legerdemaynes vnder this cleane kind of conueyance, or at the least as many, as do those vvho neuer vvoore the necklace of Iasper, neither knevve so much as the cheyne of Diamantes and Topazes, vvhiche are counted the instrumentes of chastitie. And partly for a profe thereof, vvho marketh vvell each thing comprehen∣ded in this little volume, shal finde, that I haue somvvhat noted hereof by the conception of Diana, vvho alvvaies bore the name of Chastitie it self. Many other pointes (moste Honorable) might here be noted, but that I hate the checke of Ne quid nimis, and (as the Prouerbe goeth) Little sayde▪ soone amended. My good vvill I trust, shall suffice for this once, and though my vvell doing may not coun∣teruaile the same, yet I trust your Honour vvill not sticke to defende me, in saying in my behalfe, Et voluisse sat est. Thus ceasing to trouble your Lordship any farther at this

time. I commit you to the tuicion of the highest, to di∣rect your pathes in true Honour and dignitie: desiring also the Ladies of the destenie, so to prolong the fa∣tall threde of this thy terestriall life: that thou mayst runne the race of hoarie Naestor, to the pleasure of the almightie, and the great comfort of those vvhiche vvishe thee vvell.

