



TIme the deuourer of his own brood consumes both man and his memorie. It is not brasse nor marble that can perpetuate immortalitie of name vpon the earth. Many in the world haue erected faire and goodly monuments, whose memorie together with their monu∣ments is long since defaced and perished. The name, memorie and actions of those men doe only liue in the records of eterni∣tie,

which haue emploied their best ende∣uours in such vertuous and honourable en∣terprises, as haue aduanced the glorie of God, and inlarged the glorie and wealth of their countrie. It is not the house of Salo∣mon, called the Forrest of Lebanon, that continues his name and memorie vpon the earth at this day, but his wisedome, iustice, magnificence and power, yet doe and for euer shall eternize him. A right sure foun∣dation therefore haue you (my Lords and the rest of the most worthie Aduenturers for Ʋirginia) laid for the immortalitie of your names and memory, which, for the ad∣uancement of Gods glorie, the renowne of his Maiestie, and the good of your Coun∣trie, haue vndertaken so honorable a pro∣iect, as all posterities shal blesse you, and vp∣hold your names and memories so long as the Sunne and Moone endureth: whereas they which preferre their money before vertue, their pleasure before honour, and their sensuall securitie before heroical! ad∣uentures, shall perish with their money, die with their pleasures, and be buried in euer∣lasting

forgetfulnes. The disposer of al hu∣mane actions dispose your purposes, blesse your Nauie as hee did the ships of Salomon which went to Ophie, and brought him home in one yeere six hundred threescore and six talents of gold. The preseruer of al men preserue your persons from all perils both by sea and land; make your goings out like an host of men triumphing for the victorie, and your commings in like an ar∣mie diuiding the spoile. And as God hath made you instruments for the inlarging of his Church militant heere vpon earth; so when the period of your life shall be fini∣shed, the same God make you members of his Church triumphant in Heauen.
Amen.
From mine house at the Northend of Sithes lane London, April 28. Anno 1609.

