



TO none more rightly then to you I owe,
this Map (for memory) of holy writ:
The former part, you quickned as you know
by daining grace and liking vnto it,
When as in dust it lay, a birth forlorne
And durst not further ye for feare of scorne.


And from that influence, the later budde
hath sprouted out to satisfie desire:
But all in priuate meant, for walles of mudde,
fit countrey Cottages, but mount not higher.
And that it comes with characters thus clad,
Authority gaue charge they should be had.


To presse vnto the Presse, this world in Print,
where wit with wisdome vvarres, and humors hold;
The raines on reason, to prescribe the stint
and measures that the best, which seemes most bold,
In meaner vvits I doe it madnesse deeme
Since worthier works doe misse of right esteeme.


But call you that oppression of the Presse,
when higher powers command and I obey?
I rather thinke, I should be iudg'd no lesse
then void of reason heerein to gaine-say.
The spreading theirs, the springing is your owne▪
And by the timely fruit, let tree be known.



Gen. 18. 17. 18▪ 1. Sam. 1. 24 2. Iohn v. 4. If masters would in Abrahams steps insist,
if Mothers Bathsh eha's, or Hanna's vvere,
If Ladies like th'Elect, from vvhat they list,
Would curbe their families to God his feare,
Then should this simple plant haue place inough,
Then should the fruits be seene to follow proofe.


If grand-dame Lois, her Lesson were in vse
vve should not see young children from the shell
To sweare, to curse, to practise all abuse,
and by their parents patterne to rebell:
2. Tim. 1. 5. compared with cap. 3. 15 For from the faith that in her first did dwell,
young Timothy could talke and Scriptures tell.


And for impression in that tender mould,
and best those vessels nevv at first to season,
This paines was meant, and by all meanes I could,
made fitte for their capacity and reason.
Story we know, with pleasure spendeth time,
And what runnes readier on the tongue then ryme?


Blessed be God, good Ioshua his minde,
doth plenteously, your worships hearts possesse,
The comforts in his sacred worde you finde,
procure no doubt the fruits which shew no lesse.
And that you may with grace be euer blest
I humbly pray, and euermore I rest


