



THe Tripos (Right Ho∣rable)
ingrauen with e∣tur
Sapienti, was by the O∣racle
allotted to Socrates,
Achilles shielde maintai∣ned
with the sword, fel to
Vlisses for his wisedome:
Pallas had hir library, and
hir launce: and suche as
read Non vltra, on Hercules pillers, pointed out the
Caracters with their speares. Proportion the mo∣ther
of Geometry, and mistresse of Arts, commands
that Hector haue his Honors, Alcides his glories, and
that Olympus bee neuer without bright glittering ar∣mour,
nor greene wreathed garlands: as well to grace
the souldier, as to glory the Poet. This considered
(Right Honorable) hauing done my indeuor to pen
downe the loues of Cicero, which Plutarch, and Corne∣lius
Nepos, forgot in their writings: I presumed to pre∣sent
vnto your Honor not high written poemes, as
Maro did to Augustus, but the fruites of well intended

thoughtes as Calymachus scholler did to Alexander:
Thinking nothing rare, nor view-worthy, sufficient∣ly
patronaged, vnlesse shrowded vnder the protecti∣on
of so honorable a Moecenas. Whatsoeuer was plea∣ded
in Rostro was not pend by Hortensius, and yet the
Senatours heard and gaue plausible censures. Homer
spent verses as well on Irus the beggar, as Eurymachus
the wooer. Euery sentence cannot Cleanthis lucernam
Olere, and yet men will reade poemes & praise them.
Then (Right Honourable) if my worke treating of
Cicero, seeme not fit for Cicero, as eclipsing the beaute∣ous
shew of his eloquence, with a harsh and vnpoli∣sd
stile: yet I craue that your Honour will vouch
of it onely, for that it is written of Cicero. Ennius labo∣red
as hard in his rough poesies, as Virgill in high po∣emes:
Phidias pensill in his own conceit was as sharp
pointed, as Pigmalons chasing tooles: meane wits in
their follies, haue equall paines with learned Clarkes
in their fancies. Apollo yeelded Oracles as well to
poore men for their praiers, as to Princes for their
presents: Stars haue their lights and hayres their sha∣does▪
Meane schollers haue hie thoughtes; though
low fortunes. Thus perswaded & imboldened (Right
Honorable I present this pamphlet of Ciceroes loues
to your Lordship, resolued vpon your curteous ac∣ceptance
that weighing the minde not the matter,
your Honour will say, if not Bucephalus, yet a horse.
And in this hope resting, I wish to your Lordship as
much health and happines as your Honour can de∣sire
or I imagine.

