



RIght Worshipfull, and ever much respected Friends, I find it commanded under the Law, that hee who had not a Lambe to offer Levit. 5. 7. 11.in Sacrifice, was to offer two Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons; and if his sufficiencie could not reach thereunto, then the tenth part of an Epha of Flower was accepted: And it is written of Licurgus, that hee injoyned the people to offer little Sacrifices to their Gods; For (saith hee) they respect more the inward Affe∣ction, than the outward Action. What my hearts desire is, and ever hath been, to expresse my thankfulnesse to your Worships for your many favours, God who best knowes my heart, is by his all-seeing eye insighted therein; yet what to offer that might any way proportionate your Bounties no way having, presuming upon your accustomed courtesie, that you will not disdaine a small tribute of gratitude where a

greater is denyed, I have here made hold to commend to you my Patrons, the Patronage of this my poore and small Labour, assuring my selfe that you will more tender the Authors inward Devotion▪ than his outward Oblation: Which, I present to your Worships, not after a Ceremoniall Submission, but as a Serious and Reall Testification of my bounde Duty: The bashfulnesse of my Disposition, and just consciousnesse of mine owne unworthinesse, were just Remoraes to stay me in this bold attempt to come into pub∣lick; Yet the due and daily experience that I have had, and now doe enjoy, of your kind acceptance, became a suf∣ficient attractive to countervaile all other retractive dis∣couragements. I doe hereby expect to come under the lash of rash Censure, yet had I rather be unjustly taxed by the Vncharitable, than continue ever guilty of that Capitall crime of Ingratitude. Affection, to you (as I doe most sin∣cerely professe) not any desire of Ambition to my selfe was that, together with the motion of some friends which pric∣ked mee forward to this rash enterprize: Let it have but what I heartily desire, Gods favour, your Worships accep∣tance, the Reformation of such vices as therein are justly taxed, and the Practice of such duties as are therein pres∣sed, together with the Readers favourable Construction, and then it hath all that either it can beg, or the Author can expect. And I justly hope, that what not long since found your well-liking after your attentive and judicious hea∣rings, will not in so short a time meet with the poyson of many malignant tongues: However it fare with others, let it I beseech you, crave your Worships gracious eye of Pa∣tronage. I need not to relate unto you in how many respects it is your owne, when in so many respects the Author con∣fesseth himselfe to be yours▪ Receiving my Birth among

you, my Education in part from you, & now for the present, the chiefest meanes of my Sustentation, under God▪ by you. But whilst I strive to expresse thankfulnesse, that I might not be judged basely to flatter, as knowing that the soūding out of your Praises is no such pleasing Musicke to your eares; Let this suffice that I Dedicate this my poore paines unto you, and I shall never cease to breath out my hearty prayers to God, the true Patron to us all, for your health and happi∣nesse, as also for the Peace, Plenty, and Safety of that flou∣rishing Corporation, wherein you are placed Magistrates; which that you may the better Governe, and execute the trust reposed in you, Give mee leave to say to you in the Apostles words, wherewith I will conclude: Let the Peace Coloss. 3. 15.of God rule in your hearts, to the which yee are called in one body, and be yee thankfull, and my love be with you all in Christ Iesus. Amen.
From my Study in Newcastle upon Tyne, this 1 of December, 1635.

