


THe wise man in a most heauenly and de∣uine prouerb, as most wisely by his extra¦ordinary wisedome, so most truly by the instinct of the spirit, wherwith he was in∣spired, in writing that booke, hath com∣mended it to all posteritie that the feareProu. 3. 7. Psa. 111. 10 of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, the meditati∣on whereof, and of such like places of holy scripture no doubt (right H. and my very good La.) did first worke in your selfe, an earnest desire to know and fear God: & af∣ter, that godly & zealous care which your Ho. carieth toward your whole family (whereof I my selfe vpon cer∣taine experience can giue testimony) that they might be instructed & taught in the knowledge and feare of God. This zeale & carefulnes though it be commendable in al, yet it is so much the more commendable, as the per∣son in whom it appeareth, is in hier and greater place, & therfore they also vnto whom the Lord hath giuen ho∣nor & hath exalted & set them aboue other, are especi∣ally boūd in regard of their places & the goodnes of god shewed to them, to rēder thanks to the Lord, by shewing obedience to him, & hauing careful ouersight of them which are vnder their autority & gouernmēt: the which the Lord hauing giuen you to see, & in some good mea∣sure to desire to practise, & to make an open professiō of the zeale of gods glory, so that the same therof is spred in most places of this land (I hope to the sturring vp of many by your good example and to the propagation of the praise & honor of God) it standeth more neerly vp∣pō you to labor, to continue, & to go forward, & increase in that zealous & godly profession of the sinceritie and
 truth of religiō, that God of his goodnes hath more mer∣cifully dealt with you, may be more glorified by you thā by others vpon whom he hath not bestowed like graces & blessings, & hereof great numbers which onely haue by constant report hard of you, do assure themselues & assist you with thir faithful praiers. And I for mine own part at this present (whom it hath pleased the right Ho. my Lord, & your La. by the prouidence of God to place ouer your family) as a testimony & witnes of your zeale & care of religion, which is better known to me then to others, haue caused this short Catechisme & sum of re∣ligion to be published, which I offer vnto your honor as the greatest new yeeres gift which my small power in so sudden and short time could present you withall, hoping that it shalbe accepted in good part, not for the woorthi∣nesse of it, but in consideration of the occasion, the pur∣pose, and the end your La. had in moouing me to write it. In the handling thereof, as your desire was, I haue la∣bored for breuitie, and by questions & answers haue ob∣serued that method which is most easie & plaine. If by the mercifull goodnes of God (as my desire & praier is) this short and little treatise may redound to the benefit of your familie in regard of that end wherevnto it espe∣ciallie aimeth; and if your Ho. vnto other your diuers & manifold tokens of your good acceptation of me conti∣nually since my first comming into your house shal adde this, to accept in good part my indeuors and purpose, I shall thinke my selfe abundantly & fullie rewarded, and haue iust occasion offered to ascend praise & glory vnto the Lord, whose deuine maiesty from the bottome of my heart I most humbly beseech to grant vnto your honor continuance of health & welfare, and the vse of all those his gifts and benefits, which both concerne the goods of this life, and especiallie the atteining of life euerlasting.

