



IN Physicke, and curinge of the Sick (Right hono∣rable) three things onely (sayth Hip∣pocrates) are to be cōsidered, the dis∣ease, the Pacient, and the Physicion, who in his office and function in that behalfe is the minister of Arte and the deputie of Nature. The Phisicion and the disease do mutually oppugne one an other and striue for maistrie. For the Phisicions charge and only care is, and ought to be, to recure his Pacient with

Sicknesse attaynted. The Sicknesse cō∣trarywise employeth his whole deuoire and bendeth all his force to the destru∣ction, spoyle and ruyne of the bodye whereinto he hath made breache and entraunce. Now, is the Patient (all this while) the Subiect and partie in whom this conflict and combate is dar∣reigned: who if for his part, he do wise∣lye and politikely resist the somonce of his enemie Sicknesse, directing the or∣der of his diete and daylie vsage by the Dyal of the Physicions learned prescri∣ption and counsell, and absteine from thinges hurtfull and inconuenient by practizinge that which is holesome and expedient, he is ioygned in commissiō and made (as it were) felowe in office with the Physicion agaynst all raginge assaultes of Sicknesse. Whereby they twaine being thus firmely confederate and linked together, the disease and Sicknesse shal be easely driuen to a na∣rowe exigent and glad to disclaime his interest, and great hope is to be concei∣ued of the victorie and vpperhand.

As contrarywise, if the Pacient reuolte from the Physicion, wilfully refuse and stubbornely disobey his lore & aduise, altogether framinge himselfe to serue the humour and will of his Sicknesse, litle hope and lesse helpe is to bee ex∣pected of his recouery. For in flyinge to thone, and startinge from thother, hee addeth great increase to the disease and prouoketh it to shew the vttermost ef∣fect of his tyrannicall force and qualitie vppon the bodie that is so willinge and readie euen at the firste onsette and A∣larme to surrendre. The Physition for the better atchieuing and compassing of his purpose, vseth. iii. speciall wea∣pons or Instrumentes whereby and wherwith he worketh his feact & sup∣planteth his aduersarie, Diet, Medicine, or els some actuall woorkmanshippe of the hand called Chyrurgery. Which. iij. are in the Greeke, tearmed by apt and seuerall names more liuely and plainlye expressinge their properties natures & operations, the fyrste beynge called Diaetetice, the seconde Pharmaceutice,

the third and last Cheirurgice. Beside these thre, is there none, for by whatso∣euer names any remedies for Sicknesse or preseruatiues for health are called by otherwise, they are to bee referred to one of these three necessarilie. For ey∣ther they belonge to diete, either else they are too be done by receipt of me∣dicinable drouges, potions and applica∣tions, or else finallye by the ministerie and artificiall woorkemanshippe of the hand, called (as I saide) Chyrurgerie. The best and surest of all these is Diet, the which oftentimes of it selfe alone is hable and sufficient to cure the discra∣sed, and without which, the other twoo cannot well and conuenientlie to pur∣pose be practized. Be the Chirurgian neuer so skilfull, yet vnlesse the partie passioned vse good respect in daylie di∣ete, his cunninge hand not onely tur∣neth to no profitable consequence and effect at all, but rather many times the partie is thereby brought into further hazard and daunger. Medicines (bee their vertues neuer so soueraigne and

effectual) are not hable to helpe in such extremities as they be employed vnto, if Diet be not respected accordingly, as Galen in his booke De Theriaca writ∣ten to Pamphilianus most learnedly ad∣uoucheth. Thus is Diet the safest, the surest and the pleasantest way that can be vsed and farre to be preferred be∣fore all other kindes of remedies, vn∣lesse the disease be of such vehemence quality, condition and extremitie that it seeme to requyre some great speciall consideration otherwise, and in time of sicknesse is not onely a special & harm∣lesse recuratiue, but also in time of health, the best and almost the onely preseruatiue. And for that I saw the same in this litle Pamphlet, so clerkely and compendiously decyphered, I haue aduentured to deuest him of his Latine weede, and after a homely sorte forced into barbarous Englishe, whereby al∣though I haue ministred large occasion to the worlde, to thinke in mee some spice of presumption and foly, for thus entermedlyng in an Art nothinge ap∣pendant

to my profession, yet do I not mistrust but the equanimitie of the ho∣nester sort, weighyng my goodwill and meanynge in the balance of reasonable consideration, will freendly dispence with my ouersight that way, & suspēd the sinistre doome of all opinionatiue affection. Man is subiect to very many diseases. Antiquitie reckened vp in a beadrolle, and registred in sundry of their Monuments left behinde them for our erudition and furtheraunce, three hundred and odde seuerall kindes of Maladies, beside casualties. Since when, there hath encreased and sprong vp a fresh supply and swarme of many strange and new diseases earst not kno∣wen nor heard of, seemyng as it were to denounce defiance and continual warre to al the cunnyng that Phisicions haue. VVhich by good counsel and aduise to preuent, or maturely to remooue and take away (as farre as Arte hath his li∣mitation) deserueth in mine opinion to him that beateth his brayne for o∣thers auayle in that behalfe no small

commendation. This caused learned Homere, after he had taken a perfect sur∣uey of man, and cōpared his state with euery other kinde of Creature to geeue verdict and affirme that man among all Creatures was most miserable. Silenus iudged it best, either not to be borne at all, or els most quickly and out of hand to dye and bee ridde out of worldely thraldome. Plini helde opinion that shortnesse of life was the greatest and best gift that euer the Goddes gaue vn∣to man. In Lucian also wee do reade, that Pythagoras after he had oftētimes chaunged his sexe, and shape and dwel∣led (Pylgrymelike) in the bodies of all men, women, and fourefooted beastes of euery degree and callyng, playnely confessed that hee liued a great deale more pleasantly, when he was a Frogge then when he was a King. And al these, although absurd in report, yet in sense iarred not far from a truth, if that hea∣uenly Philosopher had not otherwise assured our weake consciences of an e∣uerlastyng felicitie after this life, layde

vp in the storehouse of his mercy for so many as vnfeynedly repose all their af∣fiance, trust and ankreholde in him and do frame their liues and conuersacion by the squyre and leuell of his sacred woorde. Christian it is therefore and natural also, euery one accordyng to his talent to helpe an other. And if Chri∣stian examples were scantie and hard to finde (wherof there be almost infinite) yet let vs consider and call to memorie the maner and rite that was among the olde Aegyptians and Assyrians, amonge whom, if any happened to fall sicke, he was streightways layde abroade in the high way, that euery man passinge by and beholdyng the maner of his sicke∣nesse, might tell, if he or any other of his acquayntaunce had euer beene dis∣crased with the like, and if he or they had so beene attached, what Medicine or thyng it was that had cured and hea∣led them, that the same remedie might likewise be applied to the pacient ther languisshing. By whiche meanes and way, it is thought, yea constantly aduou

ched by Historiographers that the Art of Phisicke was at the first founde out and practyzed. This poore myte of mine, such as it is, I humbly offre vn∣to your good worshippe as vnto him, whome the very Tytle and argument of the Booke did peculierlie inuite me to make choyse of. Not doubtynge but euen as God and nature hath en∣fraunchysed you with a speciall priui∣ledge of wisdome, learnyng and digni∣tie aboue many thousandes of others, so your Honorable disposition will not e∣straunge, your worthie patrocinie to the symple doynges of other inferiours, who in a farre lower degree by such ho∣nest waies as this, do seeke to in sinuate themselues into your acquayntaunce, and desire to be enrolled in the Kalen∣der of your moste faithfull Suppliaun∣tes. The Lorde perfourme and finish that in you whiche he hath richlie bee∣gunne, and graunte vnto you a moste healthfull mynde within a healthfull bodie euen so longe as natures boun∣des

may stretche to the aduauncement of his glorie and the commodite of this your Countrey, and after your Pilgri∣mage heere ended, mercifully conduct you to the ioyes of his glorious hierar∣chie.

