



RIGHT Worshipfull. The speciall af∣fection that I beare to that louely Oliue, wherof you are a special branch, and the duty, wherein I euer remaine obliged vnto it, hauing heretofore re∣ceiued pleasant nutriture from thence, and delightfull refreshing in the shade thereof, haue of∣ten solicited me by one meanes or other, to shew and te∣stifie my thankefull minde to the same, and to your selfe in particuler. Siluer and gold haue I none, nor any costly present, but such as I haue freely receiued, I freely offer vnto you. The water is a common element; yet when one Synaeta hauing nothing to offer to Artaxerxes passing by, he tooke water out of the riuer Cyrus, with both his hands, and offered it to the king, who accepted it as a speciall gift, (as Aelianus recordeth) first, be∣cause water is the best element. Secondly, because it

was taken out of Cyrus. So the Ayre & the Light are common, and I not hauing any gift to present you with∣all, am glad to offer the Light vnto you, which I hope shal finde special acceptance with you. First, because that of many lights this is the best light, giuing light to all other lights of the naturall soule, without which they are vtter darkenesse, euen as the lesser lights of the fir∣mament are but darke and dead bodies without the light, and vitall influence of the Sun. Secondly, because this light ariseth, and shineth out of another world then is either the Macrocosme or Microcosme, to wit, the spirituall world, which is the word and Church of God: But though this light be common, because it is offered to all, and shineth vnto all, yet it is receiued of few, because darke earthy bodies cannot receiue the light: in which respect it becommeth a proper and speciall light, and I make no doubt, but that you are one of those few, who delight in this light: and therefore I trust will also ac∣cept this as a speciall gift, which is pretious and speciall in it selfe, though it be not specially, but vulgarly set forth by me, to whom the exhibiting, and shewing there∣of to the world is also committed. The Lord protect and conduct you in the way euerlasting.
From Botterwike in Holland, neere Boston, in Lincon. 1616.

