


RIGHT WORSIPFVLL, and worthy minded Gentlemen: Hauing in the first place elected the diuine, learned, iudicious, en∣riched with wisedome, and piety, for the patronage of this worke, I haue also further bestowed the same on you, (nil minuit de lu∣mine lumen) to the end that being shielded with reuerend, and pious grauity▪ in the Van, and guarded by generous and vnblemishable vertue in the Rere, I may be safe∣ly protected from the snarling detraction of enuie on the one side, and receiue a fauourable construction of what may be amisse on the other. The vniuersality, and excellency of the subiect, hath enlarged my de∣dication; It is Solomons Ethiks, his tractate de summo bono, of the chiefe, and compleat felicity, and the worlds vanity, and there∣fore the very roote, seede, or kernell of all happy knowledge, both of

good, and euill in all things, naturall, politicall, ecclesiasticall. Con∣traria iuxta se posita magis illucescunt, say the Phylosophers; and saith a Father. Qui malum non nouit, perfecte bonum non in∣telligit, He that hath not knowne euill, doth not perfectly vnderstand good. As the earth, so the Arts haue their weeds, from which they are purged by their Physicion. Truth is like Gold in the Mine: Vp∣rightnesse is sur▪rounded and clouded with calumnies: Wisedome is darkened with sophistry▪ Impurus spiritus se immiscit in omni∣bus: The vncleane spirit intrudes himselfe into euery thing. So∣lomon therefore doth not onely , id est astruere, positiuely auouch and lay downe the grounds of true felicitie, but also , id est, destruere, destroy the false and counterfeit felicities of mans darke heart, and that by euident arguments, drawne from such grounds as the wise-men of the world could not finde, groping like the Sodomites for Lots doore, but could not finde it; not so quicke-sighted as hee that saw men walking like trees. For as they say, Nullum elementum ponderat suo loco, No element is ponderous in his place; so they being in corruption, felt no weight of corruption, no more then the Fishes in the Sea and wormes of the Earth feele the weight of either. Worldly wisedome is wearinesse, both to the body and minde▪ and a vexation of spirit. For being it selfe crooked, it cannot rectifie things crooked. Mirth is madnesse. Royall magnificence is transitorie and mtable. The sagest aduise∣ments depend on vncertaine issues. Prosperitie and aduersitie are set one against another, as hill against dale. The restlesse Pole is im∣moueably fixed in his place; as the grinding milstone, so is the earth in her centre a masse of mutabilities. Of the heauens there is a con∣stant reuolution, vp and downe, to and fro, they neuer haue the same face, neuer hold the same countenance, at least from the first motion till the end of times. Here is the difficulty of prognostication. Omnia versantur in perpetuo ascensu & descensu; There is a perpetuall ascending and descending of life, and state. Euery man, euery state, euery thing is a Planet, whose sphericall reuolutions are some of lon∣ger, some of shorter continuance. Ʋulgar iudgements are variable; their counsels groundlesse. Scinditur incertum studia in con∣traria vulgus; but the prudent designes of sage States are firme; euen so are the imaginations of the wisest worldlings in all their

wayes, and enterprizes; but the foundation of God remaineth sure. Their wise sayings are applauded, when they doe but dreame waking, and raue like men in sicknesse, thinking themselues to be in Dothan, when they are in the middest of Samaria; 2 Kings 6. When they are on the surest ground, they walke on pinnacles; againe, when they are naked in the middest of their enemies Camp, they are armed in the strongest fort. For the hand of God doth all, that men might feare before him, and not leane to their owne wisedome. Yet vaine man would be wise, seeing he is but a wild Asses Colt, saith Iob. He would be happy, being but a masse of mortalities. For being the most compound and vniuersall nature, as concerning his plasme, and so the most excellent by creation, he is the most miserable by degene∣ration. Nam bonum optimum corruptum fit pessimum. And how much greater then is the corruption of his spirit? That is to be seene by the corruption of the most excellent spirit. Both haue their restraints, and limitations; yet hath not God left man in desperation, but in his eternall wisedome prouided meanes of restauration, which here is begun, and there finished, whence the Authour of corruption fell. This restauration is first the renouation, or change of the centre, the roote of man, I meane his heart or spirit of his minde; then of his spirits vessell, I meane the brutall nature, or inferiour part, which I take to be the sperme, or quintessence of the vniuerse, and then are all things renued with him; 2 Cor. 5. 17. Felicity therefore is here to be had, and by the holy endeauours of renewed wisedome to be obtained. But this good in this vale of misery is imperfect, yet in continuall motion, and progresse to perfection, though the whole en∣gine with all the furniture thereof, man, and euery condition and state of life, ethike, politike, ecclesiastike, groane vnder the burthen of va∣nity. Here then is wisedome and worke for the curious Alchymist, who surpasseth common capacities. Here is the skill that extra∣cteth gall out of hony, and hony out of gall. Here is the Phyloso∣phers stone, that turneth yron that base mettall, into gold the purest mettall, euen the soueraigne good that ouercommeth euill, yea, that turneth things in their natures cursed, into blessings, the beginnings of endlesse torments into eternall glory, the light that expelleth dark∣nesse, the life that swalloweth vp death, the spirit that weareth out the leprosie, canker, and rottennesse of the spirit, of the vessell, of the

person, of the outward state. To omit the many learned dotages of the worldly wise, and madnesses of selfe-willed Idiots; some man thin∣keth himselfe happy, if he knoweth the euils of this life, and with all hath knowledge to auoid them, and in procuring of good vnto him∣selfe for his bodily ease, comfort, and pleasure, thinkes that by this wisedome he hath obtained the chiefe good, and so kisseth his hand, and sacrificeth to his net, his subtle, sound pate, as he iudgeth. Here is his vttermost extent, in this sphere is he rowled as the Sow in the mire. Secondly, some man againe esteemeth such a one but brutishly subtle, because he doth not good to others as well as to himselfe, as the principle of humanity requireth; Quod tibi vis fieri, fac alijs, Doe as thou wouldest be done to. Therefore because he is cautelous, and prouident for himselfe, and communicateth to others also, he iudgeth himselfe to be that happy man. He excelleth indeed the for∣mer brute, as he againe doth that vegetable one; Eccles. 4. 8. euen as the ayre excelleth the water, and that the earth. But the wisedomes of these three conioyned by vnion into one indiuiduall, are but as an excellent vessell, or receptacle for this last. Lastly, another who is truly wise indeed, excludeth this man from happinesse yet, because he is but as a beautifull body without a quickning spirit, which is pie∣tie, the soule or supernaturall spirit, enlining the rest. So that neither the wise vegetable, nor the wise brutall or sensible, nor the wise rea∣sonable or humane, but the wise spirituall organized with the rest (as I may say) is onely capable of this soueraigne good of Solomon. This onely knoweth what is good in euill things and states, what euill in good things and States, what is good for himselfe in both, in this vaine life, according to that line and measure that God dealeth to man. This wisedome ordereth and enliueth the other wisedomes, be∣ing a supernaturall gift, the diuine influence of the sanctifying Spirit: For they being seuered from this, are but an eye without the optike spirit, which indeed is no eye, but a dead member. The like we see in the structure of mans vessell, id est, in the vegetable and brutall spi∣rits, but the reasonable soule enliueth, moueth, and ordereth them both, or rather her selfe in and by them, by vertue of her vnion with them, whereby they become rationall.
The degrees of this good to be gathered out of Solomons , or positiue doctrine, are briefly these:

1. To be in a calling, according to Gods generall decree; Gen. 3. 19. Otherwise a man is a belial, a sluggard, a dissolute, disperst, incompact member, out of fauour with God and man, and his owne conscience, and lyeth open to many miseries, as he is the fittest subiect to be sentina malorum, the sinke of euils.
2. To labour in that lawfull calling, to exercise his talent, that his Lord may receiue his owne with aduantage.
3. To labour with diligence, Chapter 9. 10. of this booke. Hereby many bodily miseries, and occasions of spirituall temptations also are auoyded. For a man to be negligent in his businesse, is to be brother to a waster, as Solomon saith else where.
4. To comfort and solace the body with the fruits of our labours, all the creatures from the highest heauen to the centre of the earth, seruing to no other purpose then the reparation & conseruation of the soules fraile, corruptible vessell: For the soule her self is enliued, fed & conserued by another World, the Word of God effectuall by the spirit that speaketh therein. The body is ex limo terrae, of the slime or seede of the vniuerse; but the soule is ex alia propagine, pro∣genie.
5. As we haue receiued good▪ so to be faithfull dispensers there∣of, viz. to communicate to others, wherein the essence of charity consisteth. Communicating of mutuall duties, is the bond of ciuill or sociable life, whereby a man in any condition of life, in harmefull occurrences, and vnfortunate accidents, is preserued, helped, relie∣ued, and the beneuolous aspect of neighbours congratulating his pro∣sperous state, is a lightsome, pleasant, and comfortable thing. Moreo∣uer, danti dabitur, & qua mensura metimini, vobis metietur. But this communicating is of all gifts and duties, towards equals, superiours, and inferiours, euen of euery one in their place and cal∣ling towards others, in oeconomike, ethike, politike state. Thus farre the Heathen man goeth, but here he makes a stand, he cannot tran∣scend his Orbe. All things are made for man, saith Cicero, and man is borne for man, to be seruiceable and comfortable one to ano∣ther in sociable life. Therefore all these degrees doe but as it were constitute the vessell of the quickning spirit.
6. The sixt and last degree therefore of felicity, is piety towards God, sincerity in diuine worship, briefly shut vp in this word, Feare

God, and keepe his Commandements. It is totum hominis, or totus homo, the whole man, without which he is but praestan∣tissimum brutum. What this feare, and obedience is, is set downe in the Law of Moses at large, which is more largely and plainely expounded by the Prophets, and they againe by the life and doctrine of our Sauiour Christ, and that againe by the Apostles, and they by Pastors and Teachers to the Worlds end. This is that compleate soueraigne good, of soule, body, and state, positiuely taught in this Treatise. Which in a word is this, the wise demeanor of a man to∣wards himselfe, towards others, towards God, in things concerning his owne body, and person, concerning communicating, or sympathi∣sing others, concerning diuine worship according to the direction of Gods Word. These degrees must not be sundered, but kept intire of him that would be compleatly happy, so farre forth as happinesse can be obtained in this confused, enormous World. Men being ig∣norant of this sixe-fold vnion, fall into many errours, run out into ma∣ny extremities, and plunge themselues into a gulfe of miseries, yea, and digladiate among themselues, praysing, dispraysing, blaming, ex∣cusing they know not what, euen tossed in a labyrinth. But he that builds on this ground, and walketh in this light, riddeth himselfe and others out of many, euen infinite errours, and miseries of this vaine life. One man will be very deuout and zealous, but what in∣conueniences runneth he into, when he neglests his particular cal∣ling? and of the practise of how many duties and goods that by him might be done, is he depriued? Cert in quo peccaueris, in eodem puniêris. Wherein a man sinneth, therein shall he be punished; po∣uerty, debt, imprisonment, &c. shall fall vpon him, and the obiecting of his profession to scandall, is no small matter. Sed peccat in tu∣tiorem partem; But I say, what inforceth that offence at all? He that saith, Deum timè, feare God; saith also, Mandata eius serua, Keepe his commandements; whereof diligent labour in a calling is one. For want whereof a man omitteth much good, and offers himselfe to many temptations, and snares. Another labou∣reth diligently, and worshippeth God, but neglects the duties of cha∣rity, whereof in these dayes there are not a few. Saint Iames com∣playneth of such. Another insisting on duties of charity, neglecteth the duties of piety. But to reckon vp the extremities, and errours

of men in the breach of this vnion, which yet would all be wise, and seeme happy to themselues, is an endlesse worke. A sound and pru∣dent spirit within a man, is better then a World of Bookes. There∣fore Saint Iohn saith, that those few leaues of the Gospell by him penned, among a World of Bookes that might haue beene made of Christs sayings and doings, are sufficient, what needeth more? Nei∣ther the whole Scriptures, nor the Ʋolumes of the Fathers, nor what can be vttered by voyce, can preuaile, where an heart is wanting. And who can giue man an vnderstanding heart, but God onely? yet are men presumptuous, therefore they come not to the fountaine of wisedome, and so liue and die in vanity. Thus haue I briefly decla∣red the very life, and substance of this Treatise of the wise and aged King, whose sentences, though they seeme to be difficult and indepen∣dent, collected by some that haue taken them from his mouth, vpon occasions vttered; yet are they doubtlesse a continued speech, purpose∣ly penned, euery thing orderly cohearing, and methodically colliming at the same obiect. The more wise and aged, most commonly the lesse discoursiue; and much talking is tedious, their sentences are briefe, fundamentall, and pithy, and their words seeme oft times very independent. Besides this, Solomon, without regard to artificiall structure, vttereth his experiments, and that from the heart to the heart, not from the braine to the eare, (as common vse among many is in these heartlesse dayes) and also as the sanctifying Spirit of God moued him. Therefore are his words pure without tincture, alto∣gether of spirituall rellish, and without any taste of the caske. For his maine drift is to cast man wholly out of himselfe, that he might be found in Christ alone, or else be vtterly lost. Cap. 12. 13. Phil. 3. 8. 9. 10.
Now my earnest desire, reuerend, religious, and learned Gentle∣men, louers of learning, speciall fauourers, and friends of the lear∣ned and vertuous, is, that you would iudge these labours of mine a∣mongst others, worthy your acceptation, rather valuing the same in your generous spirits, according to the mind of him that honoureth, and loueth your vertues, then respecting the dignity of the worke it selfe, which notwithstanding shall be such like as it shall please you to accept, and the Lord to worke by it in the hearts of the Readers without whose quickning Spirit, the whole Scripture is but a dead

letter, but into whose nostrils the Lord shall breathe againe the breath of eternall life, it is to them no nose of waxe, as the Papists say, but a plaine euen way, a lanterne to the feete, a light to the paths. Howsoeuer, we are vnto God the sweet sauour of Christ in them that are saued, and in them that perish; 2 Cor. 2. 15. And vnto you this publike testimony of my obseruance, and loue for your loue to our gifts and calling, I trust shall be acceptable; which I shall recompence againe with my continuall and hearty prayers to Almighty God, the Father of lights, and fountaine of all good, that the true felicity and chiefe good reuealed to, and penned by Solomon, and here explai∣ned, may be plentifully conferred vpon you, to your greatest comfort here in your spirits, soules, bodies, states, and perfect glory of all in the Kingdome of glory.
London, 1. Ian. 1621.

