



THat poor Castilian Frontino (Right Honourable) being a very vnskil∣full Painter, presented Alphonsus, the Prince of Aragon, with a most imperfect picture, which the king thankfully accepted, not that hee liked the work, but that he loved the art. The paltering Poet Cheril∣lus, dedicated his duncing Poems to that mightie Mo∣narch Alexander, saying that he knew assuredly if Alex∣ander would not accept them in that they were not pi∣thie, yet he would not vtterly reject them, in that they had a shewe of Poetrie. Caesar oft times praised his soul∣diers for their wil, although they wanted skil: and Cicero as well commended stammering Lentulus for his payn∣full industrie, as learned Laelius for his passing eloquence. Which considered (although wisdom did wil me not to

straine further then my sleeue would stretch) I thought good to present this imperfect Pamphlet to your Ho∣nours protection; hoping your Lordship will deigne to accept the matter in that it seemeth to be prose, though something vnsauorie for want of skill, and take my well meaning for an excuse of my boldnesse, in that my poore will is not in the wane, whatsoever this imperfect work do want. The Emperour Traian was never without su∣ters, because so curteously hee would heare every com∣plaint. The Lapidaries continually frequēted the Court of Adobr indinus, because it was his chief studie to search out the nature of stones. All that courted Atlanta were hunters, and none sued to Sapho but Poets. Whersoeuer Mecaenas lodgeth, thither no doubt will schollers flocke. And your Honour being a worthie fauourer and fosterer of Learning, hath forced manie through your exquisite vertue, to offer the first fruits of their studie at the shrine of your Lordships curtesie. But though they have wa∣ded farre and found mines, and I gadded abroad to get nothing but Mites, yet this I assure my self, that they ne∣uer presented vnto your honor their treasure with a more willing minde, than I do this simple trash: which I hope your Lord hip wil so accept. Resting therfore vp∣pon your Honours wonted clemencie, I commit your Lordship to the Almightie. {inverted ⁂}

