


THese Sermons (right Worshipfull) are full of good instruction, and consolation. I haue endeuoured to giue some view of the al, by some short aphorismes, on this manner.
I. The first Sermon, is of the quenching of the spirit, where heeThe first ∣mn. teacheth vs: 1. That albeit those be worthily condemned, that nvr tsted, nor desire to taste of the spirit of God: yet a more iust and fearefull condem∣nation is like to come on them, that hauing once receiued it, do after lose the same. 2. To knowe whether we haue the spirit: he saith, like as hee knoweth best, that hee hath lfe, which feeleth it in himselfe▪ so hee best knoweth whether hee haue the spirit, that feeth th spirit working in himselfe. Againe, he that hath the spirit of Christ, hath some thing in him giuen him of God by his word, aboue all that can be attained, by any naturall gift or humane industrie. 3. Te spi∣rit often in regeneration, causeth in the spirituall man, a great and generall astonishment, for great d enormous sinnes committed: and then it dealeth more particularly, smitg vs with a speciall griefe for speciall sinnes, 4. Then the spirit teacheth, how the faculties of the sole are all bent to re∣bellion against God, and specially how reason fighteth against faith, and is a great patron of vnbe∣liefe. 5▪ After all this, the spirit (saith he) bringeth vs to se the vnsrchable riches of Christ, and worketh in vs that precious faith, whereby  apprehend our free iustification in Christ. And then followes the feeling of ioy vnspeakable, and that blessed peace of conscience which passet vnderstan∣ding, iudgement is reformed, affections are cleane altered, and there wil appeare in ll faculties great forwardnes, and readines, to performe things acceptable vnto God 6. After some falies of frailtie, f we continue our former hatred of sinne, & the oftner w fal conceiue the more ddly hatred against sinne: if our sorrow for sinne increase, if our care continue to preuent and cut off all occasions of sinne albeit we slip and fall often, yet wee may not say the spirit is quenched. 7. Such as haue the greater, and more certaine graces of the spirit of regeneration: their Like the S, knowledge is well grounded, and they labour euermore for a good measure of knowledge, to direct them in their particular duties: the Like a light∣ning. knowledge of the wicked is but cōfused, & general vncertaine. 8. Albeit the spirit can neuer be vtter∣ly taken from the beleeuers: yet if they waxe proud▪ secure, and fall to sin, the graces of the spirit, the cleere vnderstanding, the feeling, the affection, and ioy in the holy Ghost may so die & decay in them, that they may well seeme to themselues and others to haue quenched the spirit.
These and the like singular doctrines concerning this matter, are contained in this Ser∣mon. This argument was further inlarged and amplified in other Sermons by him, which as yet I cannot finde. For he taught also by what degrees the spirit is quenched: and they were these. 1. By neglecting the meanes of cherishing the grace of the spirit. 2. From neglectingThe regenerate doe not eese the spirit of sanctification. the meanes to proceede to the grieuing of the spirit▪ 3. From grieuing, to come to vexing and pro∣uoking the spirit. 4. Lastly, how some after long prouocations, haue quenched the spirit, and lost all the good light & graces of God which they seemed before to haue had. These be most dangerous degrees of sinne, and steps to perdition. And thus farre of the first Sermon.
II. The second sermon is against murmuring, a sinne no lesse dangerous than common in all degrees and conditions of men. We be here taught▪: 1. What the nature is of impati∣encie for outward things, what dishonour it brings to God, what a torment to vnbeleeuers, in whom

e want of one small thing breed such isntntment,  the possssion of m rich bless ot qut them 2. What remedies best srue to make our hearts calme in a such distempred affections, and they bee these: first most highly to esteeme of Gods fauour, and to prferre that one benefit of the ardon of our sinnes, before all the riches of this life. Secondly, to labour for that precious faith i Christ, touching the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, and euerlasting life▪ for if we can once be persuaded, that Christ is ours, wee shall not greatly doubt but that with Christ we shall haue all things needfull for vs. Let vs receiue this benefit though it come alone, vea though it bring troubles with it and then for outward things we shall possesse our soules with patience. For (saith this reuerend man) we haue o true feeling of the forgiuenes of our sinnes, if we cannot (when we feele it) be therewith contented, and readie to forgoe all other things. 3. To looke well to our sanctification and regeneration▪ for if the Lord grant vs to be the glorious temples of his most holy spirit, wherein his graces may shine, he will not deny vs the base things of this life: or if he doe, we shall haue a good supplie of better things. 4. To be well assured of our glorious resurrection: for it is far greater to raise vs being consumed to dust, than to preserue vs being aliue. 5. Faith in Gods prouidence: if hee made all things of nothing, much more easily can hee preserue things made: if hee cares for the beasts, much more for mn: if for wicked men, much more for his children: if for his children when they sought him not, much more when they seeke him with all their hearts, and desire to serue him in holines & true righ∣teousnes. 6. Lastly, learne by examples that it is Gods blessing in the meanes, and not the meanes without it, which preserue vs. The Fathers before the flood fed on hearbes without flesh or fish, and yet liued 700, 800▪ 900. yeeres. The Israelites liued 40. yeeres without change of garments, or any earthly and ordinarie prouision. Moses and Elias liued 40. daies without meate. These examples teach vs if we haue the meanes, not to trust in them; if we want them not to distrust in God. And thus farre the summe of the second Sermon.
III. The third is of zeale, which teacheth: first, how God commaundeth and commendeth zeale: secondly▪ how he rewards it.
The rules to know the true zeale of God are these. 1. True zeale begins in our selues: & so proceeds to others: and gaine returnes from other men, & ends in our selues, Abraham, Iob, Moses, &c. first sinite themselues, & euer be more zealous against themselues than against other men: for by the sense and feeling of our owne sores, we be taught to deale more mildly and meekely with the sores of other men. 2. True zeale is as willing to be admonished, as it is carefull to admonish: and that not onely ofIob. 31. superiours, where we must yeeld of necessitie, but also of equals, yea of inferiours, whom we may seeme to contemne. 3. True Zeale is not to bee hot, by fits, and colde in the ende. 4. A very speciall marke of true zeale is this: To be Paul. comforted in the publike prosperitie of the Church, when priuate crosses may make vs ad: and contrarily, to Examples, Moles, Nehe∣mas, Daniel. mourne and lament for our brethren, when priuate pro∣speritie might cheere our hearts. 5. True zeale (saith he) will not spare sinne in kindred: for that he loueth most naturally, that hath learned to loue most spiritually: and he loueth most truly, that cannot abide sinne in the partie beloued, without some wise and discrecte admonition. 6. True zeale feareth not the force of the mightie, neither is it dismayed at the lookes of the proud. 7, True zeale is seene in their cause who can neuer recompence vs againe. 8. The last rule of zeale is this, to bee humbled in our selues for those sinnes which wee espie or censure in other men: and specially such sinnes as wee espie in them which are committed to our charge: for that the holy Ghost in his word, accounteth2. Cor. 12. 2. last vere. their sinnes our sinnes. And thus farre the third Sermon.
IIII. The fourth Sermon is of a good name. And here he teacheth vs: 1. How deare and precious a thing a good name is. 2. Next, what singular gainfull fruits and effects it carieth with it: how God & good mē are delighted with vs, if we haue it. 3. How careful we ought to be, not to hurt our neighbour in his good name, because it is an inestimable treasure: which being lst, is most hardly recouered. 4. With what care & consciēce we should seeke to find it, & hauing found it, with all ende∣uour & industrie to preserue it. 5. He teacheth how a good name & good report, being good things, must proceede from good causes, as of vertue, godlinesse and good religion. 6. He noteth how the world accounteth of Gods children as of monsters, if they haue but one sip: and highly esteemes of a world∣ling, for one externall gift of minde or bodie, though sinnes swarme in him. 7. He teacheth that if we will auoide an euill name, we must first auoide all euill surmises and deuises against other men▪ & next we must haue a godly iealousie ouer our own waies, that they may not breede in men any suspition of euill. 8. Lastly, men must be plentifull in all good workes: all which must be done, first with a simple

and sincere affectn▪ xt with in   and diertion. And thus farre of a good name.
V. The sit Sermon is of humilitie. The contents of it briefly are these. 1. Whereore the Lord humbleth his children before they be crowned. 2. How pride rots and marres all good gifts in vs. 3. How dangerous and urf prosperitie is to many. 4. How to accept good meanes in time when God calleth vs to repentance. 5. How dangerous spirituall pride is to Gods children. 6. How feare must increase▪ as Gods gifts increast in vs 7. How euill thoughts doe exercise Gods best children, and by what messenge God awaketh them. And this is the short summe of the fift Sermon.
VI. The sixth serues well for Christian parents, for the good education of children. 1. Hee warneth them, that they lament not so much for their children, if they bee dismembred, or prooue idiots, as if they prooue grosse sinners, & so become worse than idiots. For such assuredly (with∣out repentance) dishonour God greatly in this life, & cānot escape euerlasting perdition after death: but of poore idiots there is mre hope. 2. Next he teacheth Parents, that when they finde foule sins in their children, wisely to consider what causes breed them: whether they be not thēselues disobedient to their heauenly father, hand haue been to their naturall parents, and yet not repented of their sinnes. 3. Last∣ly, with what wisedome and affection we must correct our children, euer mindfull how that we punish our owne sinnes in them. And thus much of the sixth Sermon.
VII. The seuenth and last Sermon teacheth vs: 1. That sorrow for sinne is the first step to godlines: for (saith he) it is impossible to hunger after Christ without it. 2. That the word of God must effect that sorrow in vs, by piercing our hearts, and teaching vs that wee haue to doe with God, and not with men, and this will wound vs with a liuely feeling of Gods iudgement. 3. That we must wisely discerne betweene the true sorrow for sinne, which causeth repentance not to be repented of, and that worldly sorrow which causeth death. For godly sorrow softneth the hart to the obedience of the word: but that worldly sorrow causeth men to kicke and spurne against the word, to the further hardning of their hearts. 4. That many are galled and pricked with pouertie, sicknes, and other afflictions: but few with their sinnes, which is the cause of their afflictions. But let men be well assured of this (saith he) that if a man be not troubled for sinne here, he is in the way to hell: if he be troubled in this life for sinne, he is in the way to heauen. 5. Lastly, that in true repentance the pricking of the heart, and sor∣rowing for sinne, must be continued and daily renewed: we must be humbled with continuall sorrow, that we may bee refreshed with daily comfort in Christ. And thus farre the compendious and short view of all these Sermons.
This graue and reuerend Father, who hath left vs these holy instructions, hauing con∣tinued for many yeeres with good successe, and a comfortable experience of Gods blessing on his holy ministery, in preaching the Gospell of Christ, his Sermons were many in number: and how effectuall, let the godly iudge by these fewe, which Gods good proui∣dence hath reserued for posteritie. Now (right Worshipfull) I offer them vnto your good patronage and protection: because I am well assured you loue, and what you may, you fur∣ther the preaching of the Gospell of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ.
Much am I bound to remember your Worship, and that vertuous Lady your wife, for your great loue to me and mine. I can no way require your loue, yet by some poore testi∣monie, I desire to make mine affection knowne in the performance of any Christian duty what I may. The Lord Iesus Christ that hath knit both your harts, by one spirit, in one ho∣ly faith vnto himselfe, and in loue vnfained one to another, graunt you the true peace which passeth vnderstanding, to keepe your hearts and mindes in his faith, loue and feare vnto the end. And thus I humbly take my leaue, recommending you and all yours to the protection of the Almightie.

