


GIVE me leaue (right Honourable) to put you all in one Epistle, whom God and nature haue linked so well toge∣ther: Nature in the neerest bond, and God in the holiest Religion. For a simple new-yeares gift, I present you with as strange a story, as (out of the holy stories) was euer heard. Will your Honours haue the whole in briefe, a∣fore it be laid downe at large? Thus it is.
Galeacius Caracciolus sonne and heire apparent to Calantonius, Mar∣quesse of Vicum in Naples, bred, borne, and brought vp in Popery, a Courti∣er to the Emperour Charles the fift, nephew to the Pope Paul the fourth, being married to the Duke of Nucernes daughter, and hauing by her six goodly chil∣dren; at a Sermon of Peter Martyrs was first touched, after by reading Scrip∣ture and other good meanes, was fully conuerted: laboured with his Lady, but could not perswade her. Therefore that he might enioy Christ, and serue him with a quiet conscience, he left the lands, liuings, and honoures of a Marques∣dome, the comsorts of his Lady and children, the pleasures of Italy, his credit with the Emperour, his kinred with the Pope, and forsaking all for the loue of Iesus Christ, came to Geneua, and there liued a poore and meane, but yet an ho∣nourable and an holy life for fortie yeares. And though his father, his Lady, his kinsemen; yea the Emperour and the Pope did all they could to reclaime him, yet continued he constant to the end, and liued and died the blessed seruant of God, about fifteene yeares agoe, leauing behind him a rare example to all ages.
This (right Houourable) is a briefe of the whole, and it is a story admirable and imitable if any other in this later age of the world.
Some vse to craue of great personages, not to respect the gift but the gi∣uer: but in this case I contrariwise intreat your honours, not to respect the giuer but the gift: of the giuer I say enough if I say nothing; but of the gift,

I meane of noble Galeacius, I say too little, when I haue said all I can. But this I must needs say: So religions, so noble, so vertuous was the man, so resolute, so holy, so heroicall was the fact, so strange the beginning, so ad∣mirable and extraordinary the perseuerance, as if the story were not de∣based by the rudenes of my translation; I durst say, none so great but might reade it, nor so good but might follow it. I may say much ratherGenes. 47. then Iacob, Few and euill haue my das beene: Yet in these few daies of mine something haue I seene; more haue I read, more haue I heard; yet neuer saw I, heard I, or read I any example (al things laid together) more neerely seconding the example of Moses then this, of this most renowned Mar∣quesse Galeacius. Moses was the adopted sonne of a Kings daughter: Ga∣leacius the naturall sonne, and heire apparent to a Marquesse: Mosesa Courtier in the Court of Pharaoh: Galeacius in the Court of the Emperour Charles the fift: Moses by adoption a kinne to a Queene: Galeacius by mar∣riage a kinne to a Duke: by blood, sonne to a Marquesse, nephew to a Pope: Moses in possibility of a Kingdome: he in possession of a Marques∣dome: Moses in his youth brought vp in the heathenisme of Egypt: Galea∣cius nooeled in the superstition of Popery: Moses at last saw the truth and embraced it, so did Galeacius: Moses openly fell from the heathenisme of E∣gypt▪ so did Galeac us from the superstition of Popery. But all this is nothing to that which they both suffred for their conscience. What Moses suffred Saint Paul tels vs: Moses when he was come to yeares refused toHeb. 11. be called the sonne of Pharaohs daughter: and chose rather to suffer aduersitie with the people of God, then to enioy the pleasures of sinne for a season; steeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt: Nay Moses had rather be a base bricke-maker amongst the oppressed Israelites, being true Christians; then to be the sonne of a Kings daughter in the Court of Pharaoh amongst Idolaters. In like case noble Galeacius, when he was come to yeares and knowledge of Christ, refused to be called sonne and heire to a Marquesse, Cup▪hearer to an Emperour, Nephew to a Pope; and chose rather to suffer affliction, persecution, banishment, losse of lands, liuings, wife, children; honours, and preferments, then to enioy the sinfull pleasures of Italy for a season; esteeming the rebuke of Christ grea∣ter riches then the honours of a Marquesdome without Christ: and there∣fore seeing hee must either want Christ or want them, hee dispoyled himselfe of all these to gaine Christ.
If (right Honourable) the wife fooles of this world might haue the censuring of these two men and their actions, they would presently iudge them a couple of impassionate and stoicall fellowes, or else melancholike and brame-sicke men, to refuse Marquesdomes and Kingdomes for scruple of co nscience: but no matter as long as the men are Saints in heauen, and their actions honoured of God and his Angels; admired of good men, and neglected of none, but those who as they will not follow them on earth, so are they sure neuer to follow them to heauen. So excellent was the fact of Moses, and so heroicall, that the holy Ghost vouchsafes it remembrance both in the olde and new Testament, that so the Church

in all ages might know it and admire it: and doth Chronicle it in the Epistle to the H brewes, almost two thousand yeares after it was done. If God himselfe did so to Moses, shall not Gods Church be carefull to com∣mend to posterity this second Moses? whose loue to Christ Iesus was so zealous, and so inflamed by the heauenly fire of Gods spirit, that no earth∣ly temptations could either quench or abate it; but to winne Christ, and to enioy him in the liberty of his word and Sacraments, he delicately contemned the honors and pleasures of the Marquesdome of Vicum. Vicum one of the Paradises of Naples: Naples the Paradise of Italy: Italy of Eu∣rope: Europe o▪the earth: yet all these Paradises were nothing to him, in comparison of attaining the celestiall Paradise, there to liue with Iesus Christ.
If any Papists (musing as they vse, and measuring vs by themselues) do suspect the story to be some fained thing, deuised to allure and intise the peoples minds; and to set a flourish vpon our Religion, as they by a thou∣sand false and fained stories and mirables vse to doe. I answere, first in the generall; farre be it from vs and our Religion to vse such meanes, ei∣ther for our selues, or against our aduersaries: No, we are content the Church of Rome haue the glory of that garland: Popery being a sandie and a shaken, a rotten and a tottering building needs such proppes to vn∣derset it: but truth dare shew her selfe, and feares no colours. But for the particular, I answere: cunning liers (as many Monkes were) framed their tales of men that liued long agoe, and places a farre off and vnknowen; that so their reports may not too easily be brought to triall. But in this case it is far otherwise; the circumstances are notorious; the persons and pla∣ces famously knowen: Vicum, Naples, Italy, Geneua, are places wel knowen: Calantonius his father, Charles the fist, his Lord and Master, Pope Paul the fourth his vncle, were persons well knowen: examine either places or persons, and spare none; truth seekes no corners; disproue the story who can, we craue no sparing: neither is the time too farre past, but may soone be examined. He was borne within these hundred years, and died at Gene∣ua within these twenty yeares: and his sonnes sonne at this day is Mar∣quesse of Vicum. Let any Papist doe what he can, he shall haue more com∣fort in following the example, then credit in seeking to disproue the storie.
In the course of my poore reading (right Honourable) I haue often found mention of this noble Marquesse, and of his strange conuersion; but the storie it selfe, I first found it in the exquisit Library of the good gentle∣man Master Gee; one that honours learning in others, and cherisheth it in himselfe; and hauing not once red it, but often perused it, I thought it great losse to our Church to want so rare a iewel; and therfore could not but take the benefit of some stolne houres to put the same into our tongue, for the benefit of my brethren in this Realme, who want knowledge in Ita∣lian and Latine tongues. And now being translated, I humbly offer and consecrate it to my holy mother the Church of Fngland; who may re∣ioyce to see her Religion spredding it selfe priuily in the heart of Italy; and to see the Popes nephew become her sonne. And next of all vnto you (right Honourable) to whom I am bound in so many bonds of duety, and

to whom this story doth so fitly appertaine. You (my honourable good Lord) may here see a noble gentleman of your own rank in descent, birth, education, aduancements like your selfe; to be like you also in the loue and liking of the same holy Religion. And you good Madam, may here con∣ceiue & iudge by your selfe, how much more happy this noble Marquesse had bin, if his Lady Madam Victoria had bin like your selfe. I meane, if she had followed and accompanied her Lord in that his most holy and happy conuersion. And you all (right Honourable) in this noble Marquesse as in a crystal glasse, may behold your selues: of whom I hope you wil giue me leaue to speake (that which to the great glory of God you spare not to speake of your selues) that you were once darknes, but now are light in the Lord: Blessed be that God the father of light, whose glorious light hath shined into your hearts: Behold (right honorable) you are not alone; be∣hold an Italian; behold a noble Marquesse hath broken the ice, and troden the path before you: In him you may see that Gods Religion is as well in Italy as in England: I meane that though the face of Italy be the seat of Au∣tichrist, yet in the heart thereof there is a remnant of the Lord of hosts. You may see this noble Marquesse in this story now after his death, whom in his life time so many noble Princes desired to see. His body hath lien in the bowels of the earth these seuenteene yeares, but his soule liues in heauen in the bosome of Iesus Christ, and his Religion in your hearts, and his name shall liue for euer in this story. Accept it therfore (right honourable) and if for my sake you will vouchsafe to read it once ouer, I dare say that after∣wards for your owne sake you will read it ouer and ouer againe: which if you do, you shall find it wil stir vp your pure minds, & inflame your hearts with a yet more earnest zeale to the truth: and wil be an effectuall meanes to increase your faith, your feare of God, your humility, patience, cōstancy, and al other holy vertues of regeneration. And for my part, I freely & true∣ly professe I haue bin often rauisht with admiration of this noble example; to see an Italian, so excellent a Christian, one so neere the Pope, so neere to Iesus Christ; and such blessed fruit to blossome in the Popes own garden; and to see a noble man of Italy forsake that for Christ, for which, I feare, many amongst vs would forsake Christ himselfe. And surely (I confesse truth) the serious consideration of this so late, so true, so strange an exam∣ple, hath bin a spur to my slownes, & whetted my dul spirits, and made me to esteeme more highly of Religion then I did before. I know it is an accu∣sation of my selfe, & a disclosing of my own shame to confesse thus much; but it is a glory to God, an honour to Religion, a credit to the truth, and a praise to this noble Marquesse, and therefore I will not hide it.
And why should I shame to confesse it? when that famous & renown∣ed man of God, holy Caluine freely confesseth (as in the sequell of this sto∣ry you shall heare) that this noble mans example did greatly confirme him in his Religion, and did reuiue and strengthen his faith, and cheere vp all the holy graces of God in him. And surely (most worthy Lord, and hono∣rable Ladies) this cannot but confirme and comfort you in your holy courses, and as it were put a new life vnto the graces of God in you, when you see, what; not the common people, but euen such as were like your

selues haue suffred for Religion; and when you see that not only the poore and baser sort of men, but euen the mighty and honourable (as your selues are) doe thinke themselues honored by embracing Religion. Pardon my plainenes and too much boldnes with your honors, & vouchsafe to accept it as proceeding from one who much tendreth your saluations, and reioy∣ceth with many thousands more, to behold the mighty & gracious work of God in you. Goe forward right noble Lord, in the name of the Lord of hosts, still to honour that honorable place you hold, stil to defeat the vaine expectation of Gods enemies; and to satisfie the godly hopes and desires of holy men: still to discountenance Popery and all prophanenes: stil by your personall diligence in frequenting holy exercises, to bring on that backward citie: by your godly discipline in your familie, to reforme or to condemne the dissolutnes and disorder of the most great families in this country: stil to minister iustice without delay; to cut vp contentions, & saue the lawyers labour: still to relieue the fatherlesse and the widow, and helpe the poore against their oppressors: and which is all in all, still to supplant superstition, popery, ignorance, and wilfull blindnes; and to plant and dis∣perse true Religion in that citie, and these Northern countries. By al these meanes still shewing your selfe an holy and zealous Phinehes (vnder the great Phinehes our most worthy Soueraigne) to execute Gods iudgement, and to take vengeance on the Zimri and Cozbi of our nation: namely, on Popery and prophanenes; the two great sinnes which haue pulled downe Gods plagues on our land, and the due and zealous punishment whereof, will be the meanes againe to remoue them.
But I wrong your Honours to trouble you with these my too many and too ragged lines: and I wrong this noble Gentleman to cloth his golden story with this my rude and home-spun English stile: and I wrong you all to keepe you so long from being acquainted with this noble Marquesse, so like your selues; at whose meeting and acquaintance I am sure there will be so much reioycing, and mutuall congratulating at the mighty and gratious worke of God in you all. The same God and mercifull father I humbly beseech, and euer will, to accomplish his good worke in you, as he did in that noble Marquesse: and as he hath already made you so many waies blessed; blessed in your selues, blessed one in another, blessed in your conuersions, blessed aboue many, in your many and religious children: so at last he may make you most of all blessed in your ends; that so after this life, you may attaine the eternall glory of a better world, whither this noble Marquesse is gone before you.
From my studie, Ian. 12. 1603.

