



IT was (worthy Sir) a chiefe care in Saint Paul the ho∣ly and gracious Apostle (who was Gentium tuba, and Gods Organum electum, set apart to preach and transveigh the liquor of life to the Gentiles, after hee had layd downe the Foundation Christ Jesus, and

the body of the truth, to keepe the Corinthian and other Churches from scisme, faction, strife and contention: as in the Corinthians,1 Cor. 1.10, 11. Hee beseecheth them by the Name of the Lord Ie∣sus Christ, that they would all speake one thing, and that there might bee no dissentions among them, but to bee knit together in one minde, and in one judgement, and all this counsell for unanimity was but necessary, seeing the fruits of contention are so bitter.
I desire to be an imitator of this blessed Apostle in this Christian endevour, con∣sidering what great quar∣rels and hot contentions are found in our Brittish Church about matters of no∣thing, meere circumstances and bare ceremonies, & what a Rent it made among us by the same, to the great advantage

of Satans Kingdome, and much damage of the Kingdome of Christ. Now to quiet these un∣necessary jarres and make peace about the same (peace∣making being a blessed thing, Beati pacifii, Mat. 5.9.Mat. 5.9) I have adventured to set forth in this portion of Scripture some∣thing about things indifferent, That we being of one minde, may live in peace, and living in peace,2 Cor. 3.11. the God of love and peace may bee with us.
I know in your Country they are more stiffe in contention about them, than with us here in England: I have therefore made bold to present this sub∣ject of things of a middle na∣ture to your well-affected wor∣ship, not that I thinke you any way troubled or irresolved a∣bout them, but that through your good approbation of this

plaine dealing Tractate, many of your Country-men may bee drawne to the like: that so England and Scotland giving o∣ver these frivolous contenti∣ons about things of no mo∣ment, may joyne strongly to∣gether,ude 3. and zealously contend for the faith and verity of the Gospell of Christ Jesus against all the adversaries of the same: I would to God that we could all learne that grave counsell of wise Salomon:rov. 20.3 It is a mans ho∣nour to cease from strife, but every foole will bee medling. Accept then (I beseech you) of this (more than poore) present, be∣ing the lively expression of mine unfained love and true thankefulnesse, for your kinde respect of mee in Court and Country, and at your best lei∣sure peruse gladly the same.
Having passed things indiffe∣rent

in the forepart of my Text, in the second I proceed to matters of necessity for glory of our God, and the salvation of our soules, a trinity of gra∣ces for number; righteousnesse, Peace, Joy: and whosoever is not powerfully acquainted with the same, shall never bee blessed of the thrice blessed Trinity in the Kingdome of Heaven: Seeke then (good sir) righteousnesse not riches, peace not pleasure, joy not mundane pompe and honour: that as you are honoured to at∣tend the presence of an un∣match-able earthly King, so you may in Christ Jesus be ex∣alted at the Day of Judgement to stand with Gabriel and al the heavenly Hoast bfore the Throne and face of the King of Kings, in glory everlasting.
Thus praying your good

Worship to pardon my bold∣nesse in this Dedication, and praying Gods best mercies to be multiplied upon you, I take my leave but never leave to love and honour you, alwayes resting,

