



IT hath been the cōtinual practise (Right worshipfull) of the most faithfull stewards & dispencers of the misteries of God; not only to spende the time of their pilgrimage, inplanting and watering those partes of Gods vineyarde, wherewithall it hath pleased him to charge them for the present, but also (as much as in them lay) to helpe, and set forward the growth of them, euen vnto the day of their perfection. Amongst many other, our present author M. Richard Greenham, may bet set with the for∣wardest in this ranke. A man, into whose prai∣ses if I should enter, I should eyther be iniuri∣ous to his desert, or tedious, especially vnto you, in whose memory he doth yet most liuely re∣maine. But amongst many excellent gifts which were so plentyfully powred out vpon this man of God, not any one did more shine either to the glory of God, or his cōmendation amōgst men, then that especial gift he had to the raising vp of the cōsciences of those who frō he sense of their infirmitieswere discouraged & cast down. And left this extraordinary gift, should with his

dcease die in the graue with him, he left in writing vnto vs, among many things somthing also of that argument, which after his death, with more speed then diligēce was sent vnto the presse. The same now being brought vnto me to be prepared for the second impression; the cōmon good of those, who frō these holy labours might raise vnto them selues a souerayne cōfort for their oppressed consciences; as also the reue∣rent regard I had vnto the blessed memory of the deceased Author, incouraged, or rather in∣forced me to looke more carefully vnto it, and finding the former edition very defectiue, to indeauour the correction of it, which is thus as you see obtained, & the volume thus far increa∣sed by such written coppies of the like argumēt, as were ministred vnto me. All which, I am imboldened to present vnto your W. fauour & protection; partly for the vnfained loue you bare vnto the roote frō whence they sprang, & partly also for that interest you had in them by the former dedication. May it please your wor∣ship therfore to accept thē, as the poore remain∣der of that hope, which in the Authors life time promised more vnto vs, then the Lorde hath thougt vs worthy to enioy. Thus cōmending your W. and yours to the tuition of the almigh∣ty, I humbly take my leaue.

