



IT is most true, Gentlemen, and wo∣full experience dayly teacheth vs, that the more carefull Princes are in erecting & establishing good lawes, for the rooting out of vice in the common wealth, the more repug∣nant (the diuell altogether predomi∣nant ouer them) do euil disposed per∣sons, caterpillers, and the off-scumme of the world (and ther∣fore to be reiected and excommunicated from the fellowship of all honest men) oppose themselues against God and good gouernement, and in steede of an honest and ciuill cariage (which the Lawe prescribes them) betake them to a most hatefull, vicious, and detestable life: Who, as they may well be compared to vipers, most venimous and spitefull beasts, that for their venime and poison are hated and shunned of all men, as most preiudiciall creatures: so these base people, not once thinking of an honest course of life, trusting vpon their owne mother wits, dayly deuise newe shifts and policies, to fleece the plaine dealing man, and by that meanes growe in∣to more hate amongst honest men, then do the hated Iewes at this day: and the name of Conicatchers is so odious, that now a dayes it is had vp, and vsed for an opprobrious name for euerie one that sheweth the least occasion of deceit. The bookes that were not long ago set forth, concerning Conie∣catching and crosse-biting, and the discouerie of each (if anie sparke of grace were) might haue beene so manie restraints

and bridles to call them from that abominable life, but they that are giuen ouer to their owne hearts lust, with all their might inueigh both against them and their Authour.
I haue therefore, Gentlemen, as one inforced (amore patriae) taken in hand to publish this little Pamphlet (which by a very friend came by a chance to my hands, and adding somewhat of mine owne knowledge, and vpon verie credible informa∣tion) most necessarie in my mind for the good of the com∣mon wealth, both for all men to see, what grosse villanies are now practised in the bright Sunne-shine, that thereby they may be forewarned to take heede how they conuerse with such cosoning companions: as also a iust checke and controll to such wicked liuers, that they perceiuing their goodnesse set abroch, may with remorse and penitencie forsake their abo∣minable course of life, and betake them to a more honest and ciuill behauiour. If any with the spider heere seeke to sucke poison, let such a one take heede, that in practising his villany he chaunce commence Bachelor in Whittington Colledge, and so in good time take his degrees and proceede Doctor, and thence with a solemne procession take possession of do∣ctor Stories cappe; to which some of the worshipfull compa∣nie of Conicatchers haue worthily heretofore attained.
In this Treatise (louing countrimen) you shall see what shifts this crue of helhounds haue put in practise since the bookes of Conicatching came forth vnder these names. viz. The Art of Humoring. The Art of carrying stones; W. St Lift. Ia. lame. Ned Br. catch, and Blacke Robins kindnesse: Wher∣in are manifested the nature of Humorists, such as can insinu∣ate themselues into euerie mans companie: & as they see him addicted, so will they verse vpon him, what policies they haue to purloine goods out of shops vnder the pretence of plain∣nesse, what shifts they haue to cosen poore Alewiues, by the art of carrying stones, what inconuenience may come by fol∣lowing slattering strumpets, I know not I what should be the cause why so innumerable harlots and Curtizans abide about London, but because that good lawes are not looked vnto: is there not one appointed for the apprehending of such hell∣moths,

that eat a man out of bodie & soule? And yet there be more notorious strumpets & their mates about the Citie and the suburbs, then euer were before the Marshall was appoin∣ted: idle mates I meane, that vnder the habit of a Gentleman or seruing man, think themselues free from the whip, although they can giue no honest account of their life. I could wish, and so it is to be wished of euery honest subiect, that Amasis lawe were receiued, who ordained that euerie man at the yeares end should giue an account to the Magistrate how hee liued, and he that did not so, or could not make an account of an honest life to be put to death as a fellon, without fauor or par∣don: What then should become of a number of our vpstart gallants, that liue only by the sweate of other mens browes, and are the decay of the sorwardest Gentlemen and best wits? Then should we haue fewer conicatching strumpets, who are the verie causes of all the plagues that happen to this flouri∣shing common wealth. They are the destruction of so manie Gentlemen in England. By them many Lordships come to ruine. What dangers growe by dallying with such vnchast Li∣bertines, and what inconuenience followes by their inordinat Pleasures, let those that haue had wofull experience and mai∣ster Surgeon together testifie: nay, they not onely indanger the bodie by lothsom diseases, but ingraue a perpetuall shame in the forehead of the partie, and finally consume his soule and make him fit for the diuell.
To leaue these base companions (that can by no wholsom counsell, nor aduised perswasions bee disswaded from their lothsom kind of lise, nor called to any honest course of liuing) in the dregges of their dishonesty. Would it please the hono∣rable and worshipfull of the land to take order for the cutting off of these cosoners, and consuming cankers of this common wealth, they should not only cause a blessing to be powred on this flourishing state, but haue the prayers of euery good sub∣iect for their prosperous health: and welfare. And thus Gen∣tlemen, I conclude with this farewell: God either conuert or confound such base companions.

