


I May seeme to passe the boundes of Christian modeslie, so to presse into your presence (Right Honorable and vertuous Ladies) without due regard of your persons and places. But such is your wisedome, that you can, and your honorable affection, that you will heare with patience the meanest seruant of Iesus Christ. I come (Right Honorable) as in the name of the faithfull seruant of Christ, M. R. Greenham, a man well knowne vnto your honours, and to those most religious patrons of all pietie and good learning, the right Honou∣rable Earles (of blessed memorie) of Huntington, VVarwicke, and of Bedford, which now sleepe in the Lord. Of them much was hee reueren∣ced in his life time; of your Honours much lamented after death, for that you know the losse of such, to be no small wracke vnto the Church and peo∣ple of God. Now so it is (right Honorable and vertuous Ladies) that pietie in this declining age waxeth daily very faint, & impiety doth much abound: and God hath not only set before you those noble examples for imi∣tation, but also hath enriched your harts with his faith, feare and loue, (as it well appeares (to embrace his blessed truth, and to be as nursing mothers to the holy religion of Christ. Now then this good seruant of the Lord, God gaue him (to recompence his want of naturall children) many sonnes and daughters begotten by the Gospell to the faith of Christ, and some Or Post∣humes. orphanes hee left after him, which being cherished and accepted with

grace among men, shall truely resemble the Fathers heart which begat them, and stand vp for him to speake and preach pietie, and the true faith of Christ to posteritie. One of which after a yeeres trauell in the nurcing and education, coated and attired (in the best manner that I can) and now able to speake distinctly and comfortably the fathers minde and meaning to all the spirituall Sonnes and Daughters of God in our Church; here I doe in loue vnfained vnto him, and in dutie to your Honours, humbly present vnto your Honourable protection.
If the holy Ghost thought good to commend his great and most diuine Oracles (which haue a singular kinde of spirit, life, and power in them, knowne to all true beleeuers) to the Church and people of God vnder theLuk. 1 3. 2 Ioh. 1. patronage (as it were) of honourable and vertuous Nobilitie, (for that Inferiours neglect euen the best things, which their Superiours seeme lesse to account of, and examples doe best preuaile with vnbeleeuers:) No mar∣uell (right Honourable Ladies) if the seruants of God desire the like fa∣uour and patronage for their labors, euen of those whom the Lord hath set as bright shining starres among men.
Your Honours shall finde in this first portion of this worke, a delectable and comfortable varietie of graue experienced counsels, which may serue as precious remedyes (wisely applyed) for many euils, and holy directions for the good gouernment of a Christian life, and most diuine rules ground∣ed vpon Scriptures, and well approued by his long practise, seruing well to appease the rage, and to quench the scorching flame and fierie darts of the diuell, which so torment all poore distressed consciences in this life.
Such experience and good liking haue your Honours had of this man of God, of his godlines and grauitie, and of the manifold gifts of God in him, that I neede say no more, as any way doubting of your Honourable accep∣tation. I haue beene bould thus to knit your Honours together in this one Epistle, because I am well assured the spirit of Grace hath knit your hearts together, in his faith and feare: and for that you were so knit together in loue vnfained to this holy seruant of Christ: This worke then I commend vnto your Honours, and your Honours and it to the good blessing and holy protection of the Almightie.

