



THe Philosopher Hermes (right worshipfull) being demanded why continually he carried the stone Celonites about with him, answered, least happily he might become vnthankefull. Meaning hereby that ingratitude is such a loth∣some vice in a liberall minde, and such a mon∣strous offence so repugnant to nature, that the forfeit of such a fault can be no lesse than the ex∣tremitie of death can afoord. For the nature of the stone is presentlie to depriue him of lyfe which is infected with ingratitude. Which say∣ing of Hermes throughly considered, and cal∣ling to minde the innumerable benefits and in∣finite good turns which I haue receiued at your worships hands, finding my abilitie far vnfit to
 requite such curtesie, I was driuen into a doubt∣full Dilemma, whether excusing my self by dis∣abilitie I should incurre the suspition of ingra∣titude, or in offering such simple stuffe my in∣sufficiencie could affoord, I should be counted impudent. Staying thus in suspence, I shaked off the shakles with calling to remembraunce the saying of a poore Painter in Sienna, who offe∣ring a simple picture to Charles the second, be∣ing a present farre vnfit for such a Potentate, de∣maunded how he durst offer such a base gift to so princely a personage. I feared not (quoth he) in that I knew he was our Emperour, knowing that it was kingly to accept of a gift though ne∣uer so simple, and the signe of a worthie minde to thinke as well of the poore mans myte as of the riche mans treasure. Artaxerxes receiued thankfully the handful of water offered to him by a poore pesant, Cyrus was presented with a Pomgranat, and Iupiter himselfe vouchsafed of the graine of wheate which the poore Pismier offred to him for a new yeeres gift. Pricked for∣ward (right worshipfull) with these examples, I was the more bold to present this vnworthie worke as a witnesse of my vnfained good will and affection, assuming so vpon your worships
 wonted curtesies, as I assure my selfe you wil ac∣cept of this my toy be it neuer such a trifle, and vouchsafe of my good will though the gift bee neuer so simple: Promising that if hereafter ei∣ther my witte or skill shall be able to yeeld anie better fruite, I will offer it at your worshippes shrine, that al the world may know you are the two Saints to whome in heart I owe most duti∣ful deuotion. Hoping in the mean time that you will accept more of my wil than of the worke, and of my meaning more than of the matter, I commit your worshippes to the Almightie. From my Studie in Clarehall the vij. of Iulie.

