


PVblius Virgilius (Prince of Latine Poets) beingDonat. in vit. Virgil. demaunded why he read the writings of old En∣nius, made this answere, Aurum colligo ex Ennij stercore: that is, I gather golde out of Ennius his dunghill; meaning thereby, that though Ennius his Poems were not so exquisitely penned as they might haue been, by Virgil himselfe; yet much good matter might be picked out of them. Surely (right VVorshipfull) if one heathen man could gather gold out of the writings of another, how much more may we (being Christians) gather not gold only, but pearles and pretious stones out of the religious and holy la∣bours of Master Richard Greenham (though not all polished by his owne penne) being a most godly brother, yea more than a brother, euen a most painefull Pastor, zealous Preacher, and reue∣rend Father in the Church of God, of whom I am perswaded that for practicall diuinity (which ought worthily to haue the prehemi∣nence) he was inferiour to few or none in his time. VVherefore the same prouidence of God, which moued that faithful Minister, Ma∣sterGen. 6. 9. Henry Holland, to collect and publish so many of his worthie labours for the good of the Church, doth call and allure others to the reading of them; and namely you right VVorshipfull, who haue shewed singular kindnes (as Naomi saith of Boaz) both to theRuth. 2. 20.

liuing, and to the dead: that is, both to good Master Holland while he liued, and to his desolate widow and fatherles children since his death. In respect whereof, shee desired by my hand to testifie hir thankfulnes to both your VVorships, as it were by these two mitesLuk. 21. 1. 2. of this dedicatory Epistle; which office of loue to my deare brother deceased, and to his widow and children liuing, I doe the more willingly tender to your VVorships, because I am partly priuie to your kindnes and bountie, both towards them & towards others. The Lord giue mercie (saith Paul) to the house of Onesiphorus, for he often2 Tim. 1. 26. refreshed me, &c. The same might faithful Holland say, and the same may his widow and children say, The Lord giue mercie to your houses and posteritie, for you haue often refreshed them; which being done (as I doubt not) in faith, and from loue, out of a pure heart, shall be put to your reckning, and brought in as a cleare eui∣dence,Mat. 25. 34. for a comfortable sentence to passe on your side in the day of the Lord Iesus Christ: To whose most gratious direction and blessing, I commit you both, with the vertuous and Christian Ladies your wiues, and whole families. From my house in the Black Friers, this third day of Aprill. 1605.

