



SOcrates (Right Honorable) being forced
by the Athenians to send presents to Apol∣lo,
offered not vp, as others did, the super∣fluity
of wealth, but the Aenigmaes of
Hermes Tresmegistus, yeelding this rea∣son,
that Apollo was not poore but wise. Achilles beau∣tified
the Temple of Pallace with Speares and Helmets,
in that the Goddesse was patronesse of Souldiers. Dyanas
present was a bow: And I by chaunce finding so precious
a monument as the Web of Penelope, the onely trophee
of her chastity, was perswaded to bestow it vpon your
Honors, as vpon two Ladies, whose vertues deserues a∣mong
the best the patronage of such a famous antiquity.
For if truth be the daughter of time, and time the Heralt
that best imblazeth affections. The report that the Greci∣ans
made of the Princesse of Ithaca, may seeme but a fic∣tion
compared with the fame of your Ladiships vertu∣ous

resolutions: which are such and so rare, as your very
enemies (if you haue any) are forced maugre their teeth
to be true discouerers of your vertues. Homer penned his
Odissea comprehending the life of Vlisses because hee
was wise. And I (may it please your Ladiships) haue at∣tempted
the discourse of Penelopes Web, for that she
was chast, that as diuers reading the Poets works did im∣mitate
his wisdome spoke well of his pollicie: so some by
glancing at this toy may take a president of her chastitie,
& giue thanks to your Honors, whose chast & vertuous
life brought this worke to light. But some may obiect
that Homers pen deawd forth such ugred eloquence, as
beseemed the discourse of Vlisses trauailes: whereas my
harsh style and method makes the Web that of it selfe
was as soft as the Seres wool, be as rough as Goates haire.
I confesse my fault, and therefore by custome clame par∣done
of course: yet thus farre dare I answere for my selfe,
that although Demosthenes had a Plaudie for his Oratiō
because it was curious: yet Nemius got the sentence for
the trueth of his plaine tale. Penelope her self was more
chast then eloquent. Virgill was seene to haue Ennius in
his hand. The Romain Ladies spurned at the sweet verses
of Ouid, when they read ouer the Satyres of Inuenall▪
And I hope your Ladiships wl vouchsafe of Penelopes
Web, at least for the vertue of the wowan that first
wrought it, though the Cloath workers arte haue giuen
it so bad a glosse. Damydas caused his Parrat to peake vn∣der
a Dragon of brasse to defend it from the Vulturesty∣ranny:
and I shrowde this simple worke vnder your Ho∣nors
patronage, that the enuious, whose tungs cut like
Swords, may like the Serpent feare to offend that hearb,
whereon the beames of the Sunne doth rest. Thus ho∣ping

your Ladiships will▪ r Penelopes sake vouchsafe
of such a homely present, though otherwise vn∣worthy
the patronage of  Honorable
personages▪ I commit your honors
to the Almightie.

