



APelles (right Honorable) drawing the counterfaite of Ho∣nor, pourtrayeth her holding in the one hand a Starre, and in the other a Stone: meaning as I sup∣pose by this his Embleame, that although noble mindes intituled with dignities should retch as hie as the Skies, yet they might not disdayne to looke as low as the earth. Iupiter glutted with drinking of Nectar, sharpned his stomacke with chewing of Philemons sower Grapes. Honor of times hath her eye assone delighted with the sight of a crooked ta∣ble,

as with the view of a curious Picture: and as well could Tmolus laugh at the homely Musicke of Pan, as wonder at the heauenly melodie of Apollo. The minde wearied with weightie affaires, seeketh assone to be recreated with some pithie conceipts, as with any deepe contemplations: & rather with sleight deuises to procure mirth, thē with sollemne shewes to foster melancholie. They which offered gifts vnto Alexander, presented him with some warlike munition. None cōtented Crassus so much as they which brought him straunge Characters. Nigidius being demaunded why he gaue Antonius Pius the bud of an Oliue, reddily aunswered: be∣cause he is the flower of clemencie. So (right hono∣rable) it is not possible that your Honour beeing a Maecenas of learning, should want the trouble of Schollers, neither that being such a worthie fauou∣rer of good letters, euen the meanest (amongst whō I rest) should not indeuour their simple skill to shewe how duetifully they are affected to your ho∣nors noble and vertuous disposition. VVhich con∣sideration of this your rare and singular minde, hath forced many to present the fruits of their la∣bours to your Lordships patronage: so that all they

which reape profite by others paines, and gaine knowledge by the workes of them which haue wa∣ded the depth of Myneruas Laberinth, are bound to praise and extoll your honor: whose courteous fauour towards learning, hath forced them to dis∣couer their skill for your Lordships priuate plea∣sure, but the Commons publicke commoditie. These premises throughly weighed, although my igno∣raunce might iustly abash me from troubling your honour with such friuolous trash: yet the duetifull and humble affection wherewith I finde my selfe bound to such a worthie patrone of good letters, hath emboldned me to present your Honour with this Pamphlet, being a Planetomachia or generall opposition of the seuen Planets: wherein is Astro∣nomically decyphered their nature & essence, and plainly sheweth (that sith euery man is naturally borne vnder the influence and irradiate constella∣tion of one of these wandring Starres, and that one is alwaies predominant in the configuration of euery natiuitie) what proper qualities each parti∣culer Planet doth appropriate: painting out what affectionat desires Iupiter doth allot to them that are Iouialistes: and what qualities Saturne doth

infuse vpon them which are Saturnistes, together with the diseases incident to their cōstitution and complexion. But as Horace alwaies sung his sa∣tyres vpon the Lute, and Phidias painted blacke Vulcan sitting in an Iuorie Charriot: as Prota∣gines carued the counterfaite of Irus in a wedge of gold: and Demosthenes sawsed his weightie in∣uectiues with some pretie & pleasaunt inuentions. So (right Honorable) I haue mixed melancholie with Musicke, and tempered the brawles of the Planets with pleasaunt though tragical histories: which if your Honour shall accept, my trauell shall be so requited, as if I had optained most rich trea∣sures. And thus hoping your Honor will par∣don my rashnesse, and thinke of my mind more then of the matter, I commit your Honour to the Almightie.

