



THat poore Castiliā Frontino (right honora∣ble)
being a very vnskilful painter, presented
Alphōsus, the Prince of Aragō with a most
imperfect picture, which the king thankful∣ly
accepted, not that he liked the work, but
that he loued the art. The paltering Poet
Cherillus dedicated his duncing Poems to that mightie
Monarch Alexander, saying that he knew assuredly if A∣lexander
would not accept them in that they were not pi∣thie,
yet he would not vtterly reiect them, in that they had
a shew of Poetrie. Caesar oft times praised his souldiers
for their will, although they wanted skill: and Cicero as
well commended stammering Lentulus for his painfull in∣dustrie,
as learned Laelius for his passing eloquence. Which
considered (although wisdome did will mee not to straine
further then my sleeue would stretch) I thought good to
presēt this imperfect Pamphlet to your honors protectiō,
hoping your Lordship will deigne to accept the matter in
that it seemeth to be prose, though some thing vnsauory
for want of skill, and take my wel meaning for an excuse
of my boldnesse, in that my poore wil is not in the wane,
whatsoeuer this imperfect worke doo want. The Empe∣rour
Traian was neuer without sutors, because so courte∣ously
he would heare euerie complaint. The Lapidaries

continually frequented the Court of Adobrandinus, be∣cause
it was his chiefe studie to search out the nature of
stones. All that courted to Atlanta were hunters, and
none sued to Sapho but Poets. Wheresoeuer Maecanas
lodgeth, thether no doubt will schollers flocke. And your
honour being a worthie fauourer and fosterer of learning,
hath forced many through your exquisite vertue, to offer
the first fruits of their studie at the shrine of your Lord∣ships
curtesie. But though they haue waded farre & found
mines, and I gadded abroad to get nothing but Mites, yet
this I assure my selfe, that they neuer presented vnto your
Honour their treasure with a more willing minde, then I
doo this simple trash, which I hope your Lordship
will so accept. Resting therefore vpon your
honours wonted clemencie, I commit
your Lordship to the Almightie.

