



RIght Graci∣ous Lady, the counsell of the holy Apostle is,Iam. 5.13. That if any bee afflicted let him pray: I haue not onely in my long and great
 afflictions in some measure herein de∣lightfully obeyed, but also composed some few yet comfortable praiers for the bene∣fit of the Church of God.
Now considering with my selfe to whom I should commend the same, I thought vpon your Grace, as most worthy of the Dedica∣tion, both in regard of your late and happy call from darknesse to light, as also for your constant & consciona∣ble maintenance of ho∣ly
 and wholesome praiers in your family, to the glory of the Al∣mighty, and the daily supporting and refre∣shing of your owne soule.
Now that your Grace may grow and goe on in grace, and in the sa∣uing knowledge of the Lord Iesus, let mee in∣treat you at your best leasure, to peruse this poore yet profitable present: the Lord giue you grace to stand fast in the liberty where∣with Christ Iesus made you free;Gal. 5.1. and bee not
 intangled againe with the yoke of bondage.
And as your Grace (by Gods especiall mercy) hath tasted of the true and heauenly refreshing, the Lord make you an happy and heauenly Instru∣ment of the conuersion of many great Ones a∣mong vs, so shall you shine as a starre in the firmament of saluati∣on: Thus Andrew drew on Peter, and Philip Nathaniel: thus doing, greater shall your re∣ward be in heauen.
And because euery
 thing is sanctified by the Word and Prayer,1 Tim. 4.5. the Lord giue you grace to reuerence the one, and highly respect the other, that your soule may be preserued aliue in the righteous∣nesse of Christ Iesus, to life and glory euerla∣sting:Psal. 45.10. If you thus for∣get your fathers house, then shall the heauen∣ly King, and earthly too, take pleasure in your beauty.
The Psalmist setting forth the glory of that famous Ierusalem, speaketh thus,Psal. 87.3. Glori∣ous
 things are spoken of thee thou City of God: so (without flat∣tery I auerre it) good things are spoken of thee, O thou hopefull and happy Daughter of God.
Great is the outward glory cast vpon your Grace, I pray God with all my heart, that the commendation of the Kings daughter may be yours, That you may bee found also all glorious within.Psal. 45.13.
Now the Lords best blessings euermore at∣tend you, and the Lord
 prosper the person of your dearest friend, the most Noble and Illu∣strious DVKE, with grace and honour, and all his lawfull attempts with good successe and victory, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen.

From his Majesties Pri∣son of the Fleet, this 13 of Nouemb. 1627.
