



SOme of these Treatises (Right Worshipfull,) serue well to teach vs both the daunger and▪ the cure of the greatest The wound of the spirit. wound a man can haue on earth: the rest differ in argument, yet haue one generall scope, as namely the building of Gods people in the faith and obe∣dience of Christ. Herein first I request your worships patience, to take some view of a short representation of the whole booke, by speciall branches, couching the authors owne very words and matter in this compendious forme following.
The first treatise is of a wounded spirit, wherein this faithfull seruant of Christ teacheth vs: 1. How great an euill the wound of the spirit is: for that the very Pagans and Papists can beare great afflictions till their spirits be wounded, but if their minds be deiected, they will disptch them∣selues with any violent death: and the faithfull also cast downe with Gods arrowes▪ and sight of their sinnes and the feeling of Gods hand vpon their mindes, Iob, Dauid, Ezekiah, Ieremiah, mourned heauily for the wound of the spirit. 2. What comfort the true peace of conscience carries with it, able to free vs from all discomforts of this life: and contrarily how the minde appalled, no blessing can long cheere vs in this present life. 3. How mad they be which by violent death seeke to end their afflictions of minde: for that this is the onely way to increase their torments: for if their burthen be great here, it is intollerable in hell. 4. How most men seeme actiue, painfull, and prudent to preuent and foresee other troubles and euils: but few regard with any care a all to preuent the troubles of minde. How many trauell with great skill for riches, and honour, &c. but few take any paines for the precious treasure of the peace of a good conscience. 5. Preseruatiues against afflictions of minde are the searching of our sinnes past and present, great and small: and the examination of our faith. 6. In examination for sinne, we may not content our selues to haue left them. We must also heartily sorrow for them, euen the sinnes of our youth: for if we doe not truly repent vs of them, they may againe re∣bound vpon vs (saith he) after many yeeres to the great affliction and tormenting of our minds. 7. Examination of sinnes, must be as well of sinnes committed after our calling as before: for these sinnes of all other bite sorest and pearce deepest. Couer them not, but confesse them to God in time least thouBy the often checkes of conscience we may know what sinnes sway most in vs. be constrained to blaze them abroad to thine exceeding griefe and torment. 8. After knowledge and light receiued from God, note euer what sinnes sway most in thee, by the often checks of thy con∣science, and so labour to auoide them, being grieued for them: which if thou doe not, thou canst not escape either hardnes of heart▪ or afflictions of minde. 9. Sinnes of omission haue much distempered Gods good children, the negligent vse of the meanes of saluation, and for the not putting of their gifts

in practise; many haue beene whipoed afterwards in their naked consciences, and the Lord hath euen pearced them in their secret bowels. 10. Some are troubled for their priuate pride, and this is a good preparatiue to receiue Christ▪ Some for doing more in shew than in truth, abusing their know∣ledge, in that they make it but a maske to iuggle in, and for that they make but ther affections to fight with their owne iudgement. Some righteous men are troubled when they offend not (for they are their owne greatest accusers) for some secret corruptions in other matters: so that there is nothing more difficult, than to search our hearts to the bottome for sinnes past and present, for priuie pride, hidden wants, and secret corruptions. 11. That we must carefully auoide too scrupulous a feare, as well as carnall securitie. If the aiuell finde vs voide of all feare, he thinkes his assaults must be stronger, because our resistance is the weaker: but if he finde in vs a cowardly feare and fainting of heart, be∣fore we strike one stroke against him, he will suddenly stab vs to the heart, and make a spoile of vs. 12. If we see the godly afflicted in their consciences, either before or in the issues of death, we may not conclude therefore they are hypocrites, or great sinners before God: for that the Lord may as well make triall of their faith, as take punishment of their sinnes, as we see in Iob and others: for (saith he) if such afflition come principally for sinne, then the greatest sinners should haue the greatest af∣flections. 13. When any shall come to the cure of soules afflicted, they must not begin with words of compassion onely; God is mercifull, &c. but first with a gentle searching of their sores, labouring to draw out of them the confession of some speciall and secret sinnes. 14. All griefes are either confused or distinct rising of knowne or vnknowne causes. The spirituall Physition must wisely consider of the originall of the euill, whether it be in soule or bodie, or both: for this cause he warneth that in this distemper, the Physitions counsell be neuer seuered, nor the godly ministers labour neglected. 15. The persons ministring in this affliction must be men learned, of sound iudgement, wise, and of good experi∣ence, meeke and of most louing spirits. I counsell thee (saith he) if thou canst not come to the particu∣lar sight of sinne i and by thy selfe, vse the helpe of such men, vnto whom thou must offer freely thine heart to be gged an searched, and the whole course of thy life to be examined by the bright shining glasse of the law of God. 16 A certaine cause or knowne sinne is either alreadie committed, and not repented: or a sinn not committed, but whereunto we be tempted. If troubles come for some speciall sinne committed, say thus: Doth this one sinne so displease thee? and deserue I thus to be punished and farre more grieuously for this one? how great then should my punishment be, if thou shouldest so deale with me for all my other sinnes? If the heart be terrified with feare of the commission of sinne, for temptations and motions vnto sine: we are not so much to dispute with our motions, as to resist them strongly by instant and extraordinarie watchfulnes in prayer. 17. If thou labourest in this due ex∣amination of thy selfe▪ thou shalt in time be able to discouer the veines, bodie, age, and strength of many temptations in others, by an holy experience which God hath taught thee, thou shalt see into mens secret corruptions and be able to beget an inspeakeable ioy in others, who may be tempted as thou ar▪ or hast beene, 18. Againe, when men proceed in this cure, they must remember two speciall groundes: first▪ to labour that the afflicted may be perswaded their sinnes are pardonable, and their sores curable. Secondly, that their visitations is not so much a signe of Gods wrath and anger, as a seale of his mercy and fauour: for that it is not blinde and barren, but like to be plentifull in good effects, & fruitfull in godly issues. 19. Albeit some in this cure, suppresse the Law and applie the Gospell onely: yet I see not▪ but that there must bee a sound sorrow for sinne, before the pardon of sinne be sealed, and men must know and acknowledge themselues sicke, before they seeke the Physiti∣on: yet here is wisedome required, neither to presse the Conscience too seuerely, nor to release it too vnaduisedly 20. Lastly, in applying the Law to some persons afflicted, hee warneth vs wisely to ob∣serue: First▪ wheter wee speake to man or woman, for that wee may vrge the Law more strictly to the man as being the stronger. Secondly, whether they haue knowledge or no: for the ignorant in this case, thinkes neuer any so tempted, and Sathan perswades him that hath knowledge, that he hath sin∣ned against the holie Ghost. Thirdly, whether strong or weake, more or lesse wounded for their sinne. Fourthly, whether by nature they are more fearefull and melancholike. Fifthly, whether it bee a signe of infirmitie, or of custome. Sixthly, consider well the persons age▪ estate, and condition of life; for Temptations and Afflictions doe varie according to all these. And yet remember well how there be many (of what condition, sexe, & knowledge soeuer they are) which be more troubled for the vx∣ation of teir mindes distempered, then for the vilenes and horriblenes of their sinnes committed: as fearing some outward shame, rather then humbled for their inward sinne. Seuenthly, the time is to

be obserued: to be more milde in the burning ag of their fites, but more shrpe in admoition in their intermission and rest. Eightly and lastly, to beare patiently the impatiencie of the sicke: re∣membring alwaies the wordes of Gods blessed spirit: A wounded spirit who can beare? And thus farre concerning the principall contents and rules of the first Treatise.
The second is of the very same argument: and here hee commendeth these holy ob∣seruations following: First he willeth vs, in afflictions not so much to fasten our eyes vpon them, as vpon the ende which is most sweete and comfortable. 2. That the Lord shackleth vs the more wit the chaine of his chastisements, because wee are more carefull to ee vn urthened of our afflictions, than to be freed from our sinnes. 3. How the godly should reioyce in their godly sorrowe for sinne, for that it is an earnest of their regeneration. And that they take heede to disquit themselues, because they are pestered with wicked motions, suspitions, delusions, vaine phantasies and imaginations: for that the bodie of sinne will euer send forth some filthie froth, which is not onely (saith he) detestable to the minde regeerate, but also would make abashed the very naturall man and vnbeleeuer, if he could see into that sea of sinne and sinke-hole of iniquitie. 4. Though wee finde in our selues manifold infirmities: though we know not whether we striue for feare of punishment, or for loue of so good a father: yet if wee feele this in our selues that we would faine loue the Lord, and be better, and being wearied and tired with our sinnes, long gladly to enioy the peace of righteousnesse, and desire to please God in a simple obedience of faith: then let vs be comforted, there is no time too late to repent in. 5. If any say his faith is weake and cold, and my conscience is as a burning furnace. I feare the Lord will pursue me with his wrath. I answere, thou doest wll to feare: but feare and sinne not. For that feare which sul dueth the securitie of the flesh is in all most requisite: but fight euer against that feare which hindereth the certainy of faith, for that will encourage our enemies more fiercely to set vpon vs, 6. Hee saith, that some are vtterly ignorant of the afflictions of minde: and when they heare any speech of any such matter, they suppose they heare a man speake in a strange language. But he counselleth vs to runne vnto the Lord in this life with a troubled minde, least wee tarie with such men to be loct vp with the heauie fetters of desperation, when he shall summon vs to the brre of his iudgement in the sight of his Angels, &c. 7. In prosperitie many thinke Gods blessings are their own right, and binde God (as it were) in this life to entertaine them at full charges; and sue him as it were by an obligation, if he seeme to withdraw his hand from them: So they prouokt him, to proue to their faces by some speciall crosse and affliction, that all they haue is but lent and borrowed. But Gods children acknowledge continually that God hath rods in a readines (though they see no present euils) to beate them from their sinnes: and bend all their care how they may rather suffer aduersiie to Gods glorie, than to sleepe securely in prosperitie to enioy the pleasures of sinne for a season. For they knowe Gods graces must not bee idle in his children, but well exercised by afflictions. Thus farre for the second treatise.
The third treatise teacheth vs what be the speciall markes of a righteous man. Here first hee sheweth that true righteousnesse doth not consist of any inherent qualitie, be it neuer so excel∣lent, but is onely by imputation: for the obtaining whereof a man must feele and finde himselfe na∣ked, and voide of all righteousnesse, and full of all vnrighteousnesse, by reason of that sinne which dwelleth in vs. 2. A man must desire to laue his sinnes, and to escape the punishment due vnto them. 3. To commit himselfe by faith vnto Christ, and trusting in him and in his al-sufficient merits for his full reconciliation with God. 4. A man thus iustified and reconciled, is also sanctified to walke with an vpright heart before the Lord. 5. This vprightnesse is tried by foure speciall notes. First, we must loue all good things as well as one, and hate all sins as well as one: hauing respect to all Gods commandements: Yet this rule may haue some exceptions (saith he) for we doe not at the first know all good, nor all euill, much lesse loue the one and hate the other as wee ought: yet let euery man walke according to that measure of grace and light receiued. For of this be assured, in that measure we like of sinne▪ in that measure is hypocrisie in vs. Secondly, we must haue a single care to approue our selues vnto God himselfe, and to set forth his glorie in wel-doing without hope of reward, albit trou∣ble come vpon vs for it. And here (saith hee) where as Pharisaicall Papists which neuer knewe the the true efficient, nor matter, nor forme, nor ende of a good worke, haue in elder ages farre past many of our cold Gospelers, it is a signe there be but a fewe righteous men on earth. And if here wee shall finde in our selues much rebellion and hypocrisie, yet marke euer our chiefest drift in all our actions: for it is one thing to doe a thing for hypocrisie, and another thing mixt with hypocrisie. The third

marks is euen to proceede on, in euery good grace and in all obedience▪ not to stay in the beginning, or to ide backe, when we are gone somewhat forward. And here yet Gos children may both linger and fll: but they mislike and mourne for their lingering; and if they fall, they take better hold of Christ in a new repentance: and because by their fall they haue lost much ground, they runne the faster and cheerefuller in the rest of their rae. The fourth note of a righteous man is to loue righteous manners, and righteous matters, as wel in others as in our selues: we must loue our superiours before vs, to follow them; our equals to confirme them, and to be confirmed by them; our inferiours to instruct them, and to helpe them forward in the waies of godlines. And thus farre this treatise.
The fourth portion of this booke containeth his short notes of election. The fift trea∣tise is of a contract before mariage. And here first for the commendation of this holy con∣tract he vseth these arguments: 1. That it seemeth the light of nature commends it, for that the very Heathen did like it and approue it. 2. Our bessed presidents set before vs in holy Scripture, they likewise recommend it in their practise. 3. The holy law instituting the same punishment for the pollution of parties contracted which it doth vpon adulterers, argueth a contract to bee a speciall pro∣mise greatly respected of God. In the next place hee sheweth, that a contract is a preparation of the parties contracted, by prayer and instruction, to present themselues for mariage in a speciall time ap∣pointed publikely before God and his congregation. Lastly, he giueth the parties contracted many ho∣ly instructions and exhortations, all grounded vpon the articles of faith and the decalogue. Thus at the contract: an argument greatly desired (I am well assured) of many, because so fewe in our age haue written of it.
Now the sixth part followeth, and that is a very large and learned treatise of the Sab∣bath: the principall contents whereof (as briefly as I could contract them) I haue dispo∣sed in this order: First he sheweth the necessitie of this argument from the inconuenience of brea∣king and the commodities and blessings of keeping the same. . Inconueniences are many set downe, in respect of the wicked and vnbeleeuers, as also the true beleeuers in the Church of God, which moue many scruples concerning it, for that they are not throughly taught nor perswaded of it. The commodities and fruites also which follow the right vnderstanding and obseruation of the Sabbath, are mny and great: for that this day is the Lords market day, wherein he laies open the manifold graces of his holy spirit.
2. The method of handling this argument may be thus:

1. This Commandement is 1. Affirmatiue: and 2. Negatiue. The rest not so.
2. The reasons for confirmation:

1. From the end, in the word Remember.
2. From the authoritie of the Law-giue: The seuenth day is the Sabbath of the Lord.
3. From the equitie of it: Sixe dayes thou shalt worke.
4. From proportion of the Lords owne example in the creation: For in sixe dayes, &c.


A fift reason may be couched vnder all: from the time of the first institution: if before the law it was so effectuall to keepe out sinne, then much more needfull now, to recouer vs from sinne, and to keepe vs being recouered.
3. Generally he noteth how this commaundement is for words larger, and for reasons fuller than any other commaundement: because men will neither in reason so soone admit it, nor in affection be so readie to embrace and practise it. For thus hath hee done with all the rest of the Commandements, which finde entertainment and loue among men.
4. This Commandement alone hath a preface in the word Remember: where wee be taught in this first reason, that if we desire to knowe and to obey God according to the first and second tables, re∣member this law set (as it were) betweene both. Secondly, that this law was giuen before, and alwaies practised in the Church of God▪ Exod, 16. before the promulgation in Sina. Wherefore it is not ce∣remoniall, as some phantstically haue conceiued. He addeth many reasons, this speciall argument is one. The first ende is the principall, sanctifie the Sabbath was the first end, and it is the principall.
5. The secōd reason is, from the equitie of the law, that the Lord granting vs freely sixe dayes to trauell & to merchāize for our selues, we should not presume to intermeddle or inuade the Lords

owne day the seuenth day reserued for himselfe. And here againe (against the adsaries) he sith, if these Commaundements be ceremoniall, then the permission of sixe daies for worke als is but of the same nature.
6. The third reason is taken from the authoritie of the law giuer, The Sabbath of the Lord: because it must be wholy spent vpon the Lord, or attending and waiting n him. If the Iewe had neede of this whole day for their instruction, &c. then haue we neede as well as they, that being freed from the manifold distraction of our callings, we might wholy giue our selues to the worship of God commanded in the Gospell.
7. The fouth and last reason is drawne from the proportion of Gods owne example, In sixe daies God made &c. where he sheweth that God hath promised a speciall blessing to this day in the true sanctification of it.
8. After all this he meetes with very speciall obiections▪ which are brought by aduersaries to pre∣iudice the doctrine of the Sabbath, against the morall obseruion of it. And here to know what is morally and ceremonially commanded in the Old Testament, he giueth vs this speciall rule, when aLike reason like law. thing is vrged to the Iewes, and hath a peculiar reason made properly to the Iw, then as it begun with the Iewes, it ceased with the Iewes; but when the reason of the thing vged is not peculiar to the Iewes, but also belongeth to the Christians, then the thing commande is common to Iew and Gentile.
9. The Gentiles by the light of nature can no more see the true Sabbath of the Lord, than the pure meanes and manner which the Lord hath appoynted for his worship. The morall law and the naturall law differ: for aleit the morall law be the explaining of the natural lw, yet it doth not follow, that tht which is in the morall law, is no more than that which is in the law of nature.
10. Hauing shewed the morall vse of the Sabbath to concerne the Gentiles as well as Iewes, and answered all obiections to the contrarie. In the next place he teacheth the obseruation of i: how it is to be kept and how it is broken: what are the publike exercises of the Sabbath: with what care and conscience we should prepare our selues to meete the Lord on the Sabbath: how we must attend vp∣on him, for the time present in the congregation: and lastly, what our priuate exercises must be after our departure from the publike assemblie.
11 In the second part or negatiue, e sheweth vs in this law what workes are forbidden: and them all he referreth to these two heads: First, all workes of our ordinarie calling. Secondly, all law∣fullStrange workes, as Iron mils & such like, must rest on the Sabbath. recreations. Concerning the first kind, be they more vsuall or lesse vsuall,  question would be made, if men were as wise to serue God in diiing the times and seasons for the asements of their bodies, and refreshing their soules on the Sabbath, as they b politike for the increase of their worldly substance. And as concerning lawfull recreation on the Sabbath day: If labour be foriden in seede time and haruest, much more pleasu all the yeere long: i things more needfull for the preseruation of lif▪ to the glorie of God be disallowed; then assuredly, these lesse needfull cannot be allowed. Againe, (saith he) the zeale of worldlings may shame vs in our securitie: for so long as any profit drops on them, they giue no place to pleasure. Behold the policie and painfulnes of the world may teach vs what we ought to doe for our seules. And thus farre of the compendious summe of the treatise of the Sabbath. Of this argument I found three very good copies: after due examination and conference had, I haue here published the best in my iudgement, both for matter and forme, in the best manner that I can. This worke hath beene in many hands for many yeeres, and hath giuen light to some, and I trust shall giue further occasion to others to trauaile yet more herein for the good of posteritie. And whereas so many in all ChurchesI wish that these two arguments, of the Sabbath, and of Tithe, were more fully handled by some godly learned Di∣uines. in these daies passe by this argument of the Sabbath, and that other of Tite, is meere sha∣dowes and ceremonies: it were to be wished, that as this reuerend man of God, and Mai∣ster D. B. haue painfully trauailed in the one: so the learned and faithfull seruants of Christ, would communicate their knowledge and iudgement of the other, vnto the Church and people of God.
The seuenth portion is short, but containeth very good notes of saluation, and of an vpright heart.
The eighth and last part o treatise, teacheth vs very profitable and necessarie rules for the reading and vnderstanding of the holy Scripture, which be these:
1. That Gods people which will profit by pring▪ must  the rea∣ding of the holy Scriptures▪ for that none (saith he) ar so wll profit by preaching, as they that he beene iid vp in reading the Scriptures, or hearing thm rd.
2 Next to profit by reading of the Scripture, e requireth  speciall things to be obserued: 1. Diligence. 2. Wisedome. 3. Preparation. 4. Meditation. 5. Conference. 6. Faith. 7. Prac∣tise. 8. Prayer.

1. Diligence maketh a rough way plaine and easie: here keepe an euen course, and perseuere without wearines or starting from it.
2. With diligence desire to ioyne wisedome: for choise of matter what, of order how, of time when, to reade. For matter search things reuealed, and hunt not after things not reuealed. In things reuea∣led, seeke after things most necessarie, and thenGealogies things lesse necessarie. For order, first desire to lay the foundation of Christian religion, then build vpon it, as God giues thee increase of faith and know∣ledge. For time, we must not reade alwaies, but keepe our appointed times. The Sabbath day we may spd a great part of it in reading▪ the n daies, in the morning, at noone, and euening, when we may redeem▪ the day from the workes of our calling.
3. Againe, a due preparation is required: whereunto appertaine: first the feare of Gods ma∣is wich serues well to correct the pride of reason and to subdue our ffctions, nd so to fit vs forLuk 4. 45. the chle of Christ▪ Secondly▪ faith in Christ, for that he alone opth ur vnderstanding, that we may vnderstand the Scriptures. Thirdly▪ great desire in the heart  vpon the good word of God.
4. The fourth propertie is meditation, which is the life of all good learning, and makes that we haue heard to be our owne: and this is two-fold: first of the minde or vnderstanding, discoursing of things read or heard. Secondly, of the affection, when liking any thing in iudgement, we labour that it may worke also vpon our affections. Here this rule is to be noted, that meditation without reading  crneous, and reading without meditation, barren.
5. The fifth helpe here is conference. For if in naturall things, and in all things appertaining to this life man standeth in neede of the helpe of other men, much more in spirituall things.
6. The sixt propertie after reading, meditation▪ and conference is faith which he requires as an increase of that aforegoing preparation. We must beleeue in Iesus Christ by a generall faith going before: but we must vse (saith he) all the meanes before named, to increase our knowledge and faith in all particulars after.
7. The seuenth is practise: for this is a good way to increase our store, to put to good vse that mediocritie of knowledge, and gifts we haue receiued. And assuredly according to Christs words, we see by daily experience their gifts decay, which put them not in practise.
8. The eight rule or propertie is prayer and thankesgiuing. With this he wil vs to begin, to con∣tinue, and to end this whole worke. Like as we haue no title to meate and drinke without our prayer: so (saith he) they be impudent that doe touch Gods booke without prayer. And here he requires also a spirituall thank sgiuing: for (saith he) if this be needfull for corporall foode, how much more for spirituall, be thankefull for any light and for euery good motion which proceedeth from Gods spirit. And thus farre the compendious summe of all these treatises.

Now (Right Worshipfull) this holy worke I recommend to your protection: first, be∣cause I knew not any in heart more affected towards that reuerend man Maister R. Green∣ham, who was the author of them all. Againe, this worke in part appertaines to one of your Worships by a former dedication. And therefore I am the more bold to recommend it thus amplified and inlarged vnto you both. And the rather, for that Gods good spirit hauing so knit your hearts together in the holy faith of Christ, I may not doubt, but that this and the like blessings proceeding from the same spirit, must delight your spirits, and finde grace & acceptation with you. I haue much presumed on your Christian patience: I commend you with all yours to the tuiti∣on of the Almightie.
Anno Dom. 1599. Aprill 30.

