



THE Emperour Do∣mitian (Right Honourable) made him nets to catch flies, least happily he might be found idle. Caligula beeing wearied with weighty affayres, woulde (to passe away the time) gather Cockles. The Persian Kinges semetimes shaued stickes. Virgill chose rather to rade rude Ennius, then to be founde without a booke in hys hande. Time wisheth rather to be spent in vaine toyes, then in idle thoughts, the one driueth away fantasies, the other breedeth Melancholie. Mercurie vouchsafed once to drinke of Philemons Earthen potte. Apollo gaue Oracles at Delphos, as well to the poore man for his mite, as to the rich man for his treasure. Phillip thought well of the water which a poore shepheard offred to him, in a greasie Bottle: duety bindes the Subiecte to present, and courtesie the Prince to accept, in the one, will is an excuse, in the other, courtesie a bountifull re∣warde. Apelles (right Honourable) presented Alexan∣der with the counterfaite of Campaspe, the face not fully finished, because he liked the picture: and I offer this pamphlet vnto your Lordship, not well furnished because

you are a louer of learning.
Zewxes paynting Triton, drewe onely his face, the rest he hidde with the tumbling waues of the Sea. And I setting foorth Morandos discourse, shew onely his bare talke, the rest I rudely shaddowe with an imperfect tale. The Persians caused their Apes alwayes to maske in cloth of Golde, to couer theyr deformetie. Timocles caused his Popingay to perke vnder a Dragon of Brasse, that the por∣trature might defende her from the Vultures tyranny: and I seeke to shrowde my simple worke, vnder your Ho∣nours winges, thinking one dramme of your Lordships fauoure, sufficient to fence me from the venemous teeth of those byting Vypers, who seeke to discredite all, hauing themselues no credite at all. Achilles made it not strange to take a viewe of Phidias clownish woorke, because it was the image of Mars: and I hope your Honour wyll vouchsafe to cast a glaunce on this silie Booke, for that it represents the discourse of diuers woorthy personages, although of it selfe, it is like Zewxes counterfaits, which seemed at a blush to be Grapes, but being throughly view¦ed, were bare shaddowed coloures. The Phisitions prescribe in theyr dyet, that sometimes bitter Pills, doo asmuch pro∣fit the stoacks, as sweete Potions. Augustus sometimes would solace himselfe, as well with Ennius drosse, as with Maros Golde: and it may bee your Honour passing ouer many learned workes, will at the last stumble at this fonde toye, and laugh as Sigismonde did at the Pomegranat, not that he smiled at the fruite, but at the simple mea∣ning of the man which presented him with so small a gift Resting vpon this point, I commit your Lordship to the Almightie.

