


THE Rascians (right honorable) when by
long gazing against the Sunne, they be∣come
halfe blinde, recouer their sightes
by looking on the blacke Loade stone. V∣nicornes
being glutted with brousing on
roots of Licquoris, sharpē their stomacks
with crushing bitter grasse.
Alexander vouchsafed as well to smile at the croked pic∣ture
of Vulcan, as to wonder at the curious counterfeite of
Venus. The minde is sometimes delighted as much with
small trifles as with sumptuous triumphs, and as wel pleased
with hearing of Pans homely fancies, as of Hercules re∣nowmed
laboures.
Syllie Baucis coulde not serue Iupiter in a siluer plate, but
in a woodden dish. Al that honour Esculapius, decke not his
shrine with Iewels. Apollo giues Oracles as wel to the poore
man for his mite, as to the rich mā for his treasure. The stone
Echites is not so much liked for the colour, as for vertue,
and giftes are not to be measured by the worth, but by the
will. Misn that vnskilfull Painter of Greece, aduentured o
giue vnto Darius the shielde of Pallas, so roughlie shadowed,
as he smiled more at the follie of the man, then at the im∣perfection
of his arte. So I present vnto your honour the tri∣umph
of time, so rudelie finished, as I feare your honour wil
rather frowne at my impudencie, then laugh at my ignoran∣cie:
But I hope my willing minde shal excuse my slender skill,
and your honours curtesie shadowe my rashnes.
They which feare the biting of vipers doe carie in their
hands the plumes of a Phoenix. Phydias drewe Vulcan sitting
in a chaire of luory. Caesars Crow durst neuer cry, Aue, but
whē she was pearked on the Capitoll. And I seeke to shroude
this imperfect Pamphlet vnder your honours patronage,
doubting the dint of such inuenomed vipers, as seeke with
their slaunderours reproches to carpe at al, being oftentims,
most vnlearned of all: and assure my sele, that your ho∣nours
renowmed valure, and vertuous disposition shall be a
sufficient defence to protect me from the Poysoned tongues
of such scorning Sycophants, hoping that as Iupiter vouch∣safed
to lodge in Philemons thatched Cotage: and Phillip
of Macedon, to take a bunche of grapes of a country pesant:
so I hope your honour, measuring my worke by my will, and
wayghing more the mind than the matter, will when you
haue cast a glaunce at this toy, with Minerua, vnder your gol∣den
Target couer a deformed Owle. And in this hope
I rest, wishing vnto you, and the vertuous
Countesse your wife: such happy suc∣cesse
as your honours can de∣sire,
or I imagine.

