



PErusing (right honorable) some of the Germaine wryters, and delighting in their pretie & wittie verses, which to the texts and common places of holy scri∣ptures they fitly haue applied: I founde no sayinges in them of a more quicke and godly sence, then those whiche they bringe oute of Gregorie Nazanzen, a Doctour of the Gréeke churche very wel learned, and very eloquent. Basil the great hath called him the Uessell of election, the profounde fountaine, the mouthe of Christe. Baptist Mantuan thus wryteth in his commendation.
Nunc Maximus ille
Gregorius, cui dat diuina scientia tantum
Nomen, adest, hodie sacros habiturus honores
Praesule patre satus (nam tunc id iura sinebant)
Pastorale pedum gessit post funera patris
By Zantina tulit faustos in menia gressus.
Fama viri traxit varijs ex gentibus agmen
Discipulorum ingens, illic Academica fecit
Gymnasia, & veteres illuc traduxit Athenas
Nam quot erant toto orbe viri, qui scire profundos
Scripturarum aditus vellent, & mistica sensa,
Et Cabilistarum latebras, ea littora adibant,
Hieronymum fama est illuc veuisse trilinguem
Et legis didicisse sub hoc arcana magistro.
Amongest the reste his woorkes those sen∣tences, and Epigrams which are called spiri∣tual, are so in dede as they are called. They moue the spirite, in mouinge delight it, & that with an excellent and choise kinde of delecta∣tion. Beinge thus brought into a booke, the booke is small: and, a pearle is smal likewise, but if it were much bigger or better, it would make me the gladder. That these fewe say∣inges of Gregorie Nazanzen should be to your L. addressed (as the doinges of a learned fa∣ther to a learned father) that is of congruitie: that from me to your L. that is of my dutie.

Neither doe I recke, or recken howe great it is, but howe great, and good I would haue it to be. Neither is it as a thinge in it selfe a∣ble to showe my good wyll: be it therefore as an argument that if I had better where∣with, I would haue ben right willing to haue shewed it. This humbly crauing I cease to trouble you. The .x. of Aprill.

