



RIGHT HONOVRA∣ble,
Worshipfull, and Wor∣thy:
It is an old, and yet a true
Prouerbe, Vis vnita fortior,
Vnited force is most vigorous:
I could haue commended this
poore Fatherlesse Volumne to
the simple perfection of some one man in eminence,
vnder whose shade it might obtaine a quiet rest.
But knowing your conioyned Society, doth extend
the branches of Charity, to a farther limit then some
one particular person, I am bold to present this Or∣phane
to your tuition: assuring my selfe, that althogh
scandals may derogate frō the worth in this our home
bred Nation, your affection will finde it shipping to

transport it to the Land of security, where no biting
Satyre dares assayle it with his enuious teeth, or cen∣suring
Critick, carpe to catch it with his AEnigma∣ticke
braine. The reasons why this long obscured
Off-spring of Charity claimes your worthy particu∣lar
Patronage, diuide themselues into a Tricotomie.
The first Reason is drawne from the supposed parent,
whose industrious seduline to the vast wombe of the
Ocean, describes these two Lands, now Cities of re∣fuge
for poore impouerished persons. For his sake
therefore, whose wisedome liues crowned with the
Garland of Fame, though his bodie be buried in the
Sepulcher of Obliuion, protect this his poore extant
issue.
The second Reason, proceedes from the remarke∣able
note of Christianity, which is Charity: For, by
this (saith our Sauiour) shal all men know that
yee are my Disciples. As therefore you prize the
segregation of your selues from woluish Worldlings,
in Charity entertaine this submissiue petulent, pro∣strate
at the Altar of your acceptance.
The third Reason, yssues from your continued
and dayly exercise in the relapse of mean and decayed
persons, by transporting of them to a Land, where
they haue Corne which they sowed not, Vines which
they planted not, and plenty which some of them de∣serued
not.
Since therefore, so many haue felt the reuiuing
heate of the Sunne-beames of your Charity, whose
very intrals blesse you: amongst the multitude of
these, let this tonguelesse Orphant be one, that by
its birth into the World, though it cannot speake, it
may proue your praise. Thus with my seruice, as ap∣pointed
to speake for this infant, in the hehalfe of it,
I rest a Well-willer to your Businesse.

