



AS euerie man well knoweth those commonweales be most blessed where men do liue in peace: so are those countries miserable where people are not maintained in securitie. And as euerie commonweale is happie wherein subiects are good, so in good commonweales no subiect can be vnfortunate: yet what doth worke the welfare of com∣monweales and people, is and hath beene (euen among the most learned,) long disputed. Some suppose it procee∣deth of goodlawes: others haue thought that ciuill education doth enforme it: o∣thers imagined that the temperature of the heauens doth make men apt for ciuill life: some also do thinke it proceedeth from the endeuour of good kings: because sub∣iects by imitation of their Princes vertue, do (for the most part) become like vnto them. Which opinion I verelie thinke to be most true, so perswaded by obseruation of your Maiesties example, Neither do I iudge the great quietnes and blessednes of this commonweale and kingdome, doth proceed from other cause, then the excellent splendour of your princelie vertues, which are such and so great, as doe not one∣lie incite all subiects to behold them, but also with exceeding admiration and imi∣tation to loue them. Sith euerie man endeuouring (aboue all things,) to honour your Primcelie example, your iustice, and your clemencie, is no lesse enforced to o∣bey, then to loue; and the greatnes of your authoritie is such, as your maiestie is not onelie a moderator and disposer of lawes, but also (which in a free state is most) a iust iudge of each mans vertue, praise, and dignitie: and therewith also haue fra∣med a kingdome so perfect, as on earth none more perfect can be. Moreouer, this kingdome is come to your maiesties hands not by inheritance, not by blood, nor by

vsurpation (as are many thers) but by publique consent of all the Polonian Nation, thereunto perswaded by the auncient vertue and wisedome of your Maie∣stie, and your most noble auncestors. For (to confesse truth) the house of Ia∣geloni, hath beene a Seminarie of Kings so plentifull, as not onely our common∣weale, but also diuers other nations did desire to be thereby gouerned; and would to God that most noble raze had still in Bohoemia, and Hungarie continued. For by the valour thereof, the Turkish empyre should haue beene restrained of that greatnes whereunto it is now aspired. All which things as they are admi∣rable, so are they also the more noble, that holding in hand the Raines of so great a gouernment, your Maiestie by your own iudgement hath called vnto you a Counsell both for nobilitie & wisedome excellent, by whose moderation & prudence the quiet & glorie of our kingdom hath bene greatlie preserued. I Omit to speake of other ma∣gistrates by whom the felicitie of our commonweale is not onely ornified, but also en∣larged: so as Polonia may be well called the habitation of libertie, and seate of iust gouernment. And that your highnes is author and doer of these things, who doth not see? I in my youth did behold them, & in mine elder age found them agree∣able vnto the rules of excellent philosophers and auncient well gouerned common∣weals, which moued me to thinke it were no lost labour, if by mine owne endeuour or the obseruation of other mens workes I should somewhat say of that matter to the profit of all posteritie. This worke therefore I determined to dedicate vnto your Royall Maiestie, as chiefe causer of mine endeuour. Not meaning therby to enforme you (for such is your excellent wisedome as needeth not the instruction of anie) but that by reading, your Maiestie may be delighted to behold your owne vertues, and as a Prince of that gouerment, be glad, that the same is most iust and respondent to other auncient and praiseable commonweales▪ Yet do I well knowe that to discourse of qualities appertaining to an excellent Counsellor, is not onely of great importance, but also accompanied with manie difficulties▪ But my hope is, that albeit my skill cannot therein merit praise, yet (as I hope) my earnest desire of publique vtilitie, shall hold me excused, assuring my selfe, that your maiesties wisedome and princelie Counsell (a vertue proper to all the house of Iageloni) will take my humble endeuour in good and acceptable part.
