



LOve among the Ancients was pourtrayed and sha∣dowed out by, and under the image of a woman cloathed in a greene gar∣ment, having written in her forehead, Procul & Propè, afarre off, and neere at hand; in her breast, Mors & vita, life and death; in the hemme of her garment, Hyems & aestas, winter and summer; in her side, Vulnus apertum, an open wound, thorough which her heart within might be seen. My love to you (farre from me be all base flatte∣ry and selfe-commendation) hath beene very fervent, like the love of women; greene, and ne∣ver withering, alwayes fresh and flourishing; not only while I was present with you, but since
 I have been absent from you, the sense at least of my love hath beene more abundant towards you: such hath been my love to you, that you were in my heart to live and to dye with you: I could willingly in winter and in summer, in all changes, have continued your servant, as Jacob served Labans flock in the heat and in the cold: My heart is open to you, as a Bridegroomes heart and house is open to receive the Bride; and had your former beene like the last manife∣stations of your love towards me, I am assured all the proffers and perswasions of the world, should never have drawne me from you. Great is the power and strength of affection, with which faithfull Ministers love the Lords people: as grace is more powerfull then nature, so is their love stronger then the love of nature: Non mi∣nus vos diligo (saith Ambrose) quos genui ex Evangelio, quàm si suscepissem conjugio; gratia quippe vehementior est ad diligendum quàm na∣tura. I love you no lesse whom I have begotten by the Gospel, then if I had begotten you in ma∣trimoniall conjunction; because grace hath more energy and vehemency in the way and worke of love, then nature. And in my unfained love, and as a pledge and testimony of my never-dying love, I have sent you these papers, part of which is the last Legacy I had to bestow upon you at the time of my departure from you: It is very usefull for all Christians to renew the memory of the past labours of Gods messengers.
Every good child desires a copy of his Fathers
 will, to see his Fathers love, to know his Fathers gift, to remember and observe his Fathers charge and counsell: Children within some few dayes after their Fathers death expect the receipt of their parents Legacie and bequeath; and loving children are ever very glad to accept, and very carefull to keep their parents last gift, though of slender worth: the last words of Gods Ministers, our spirituall parents, doe commonly (like the words of dying men) take the deepest impressi∣on in their hearers. True Christians thinke often, and put great price upon the last labours of Gods Ministers: I therefore here present unto you that which I published as my last ministeriall Will and Testament among you, with some part of my poore labours since bestowed on others, desiring you, like loving children, to accept it; like provident and carefull children, to make the humble, true, and best use of it: A small gift well used, proves many times an instrument of great inrichment.
Though I cease to be your Minister, and am now no more your Instructer, yet I cannot cease to bee your true, though weake and unworthy, perhaps despised, friend: and as ointment and perfume (according to Solomon) rejoice the heart, so would I gladly by hearty counsell, distill on you the drops of some friendly, some Christi∣an and spirituall sweetnesse, to the rejoicing and revivement of your soules: and as iron sharpens iron, so am I willing by some words of admo∣nition, exhortation, and excitation, to shar∣pen
 and quicken your affections.
Let me therefore as a constant lover of your soules, and a carefull remembrancer of your wel∣fare, intreat and perswade you all, 1. To grow in the sight and sense of your sinne: Beware of hardnesse, keepe your hearts soft and contrite, nourish and maintaine all tendernesse in your consciences: sense of misery sweetens mercy; the feeling of sin breeds both the loathing and lea∣ving of sinne; mans sight of his owne vilenesse, makes Christ very precious, and breeds a low o∣pinion of all worldly excellencies. The Hart fee∣ling within him the operation of the serpents poyson, goes from the thornes and thickets and passeth over the greene and pleasant pastures, desires nothing but the fountaine: sense of the venome of sinne and uncleannesse, makes man go from the thornes and thickets of world∣ly cares and riches, and passe from the greene medowes of carnall pleasures, the soule being restlesse untill it comes to Christ Jesus the foun∣tain of all spirituall refreshments.
Secondly, take heed, deceive not your selves with shewes and shadowes in stead of substance, with a forme in stead of the power of godlinesse: As the Poets fable it of Ixion imbracing a cloud in stead of Juno; or as mothers in haste somtimes catch at the swadling clothes, and leave the child behind them. It is very dangerous to stay and applaud our selves in the ceremony of Religion and godliness, not taking with us the Lord Je∣sus, as sometimes Mary and Joseph went on with
 the multitude for company, and left Christ be∣hind them: all religious observations prove com∣plementall, frivolous and fruitlesse, if in them we see not, taste not, receive not, enjoy not Christ: religious exercises are lost labours to the soule that gaines not the Lord Jesus.
Thirdly, Be truely meeke and humble, bee emptied of all opinion of your owne worth and wisedome; this will make you wise unto salvati∣on: He that is in the low pits and caves of the earth sees the starres in the firmament, when they who are on the tops of the mountaines dis∣cerne them not. Hee that is most humble sees most of heaven: Bona est via humilitatis (saith Bernard) quâ veritas inquiritur, charitas ac∣quiritur, & generationes sapientiae percipiuntur. Good (saith he) is the way of humility, where∣by truth is searched out, charity is obtained, and the generations of wisdome are perceived. Hu∣mility exalteth; he that is most humble, is, and shalbe most honourable. Moses was the meek∣est man on earth, and God made him the most honourable, calling him up unto himselfe in the mount, and making him the Leader of his peo∣ple. Gedeon was very little in his own eyes, the least of his fathers house in his owne apprehen∣sion, and God marvellously exalted him, ma∣king him the deliverer of Israel. As mans pride is attended with infamy, so is mans meeknesse waited on with glory. Vis magnus esse? incipe ab imo: Wilt thou be great? begin from below, saith the Father. As the roots of the tree descend,
 so the branches ascend: this makes the soule ca∣pable of grace, as the low grounds of water, and the broken earth of seed. God gives grace to the humble, as men poure liquor into an empty vessell. The Altar under the Law was hollow, to receive the fire, the wood, and the sacrifice: the heart of man under the Gospel must be humble, empty of all spirituall pride and selfe-conceit, to receive the fire of the spirit, and Jesus Christ, who offered himselfe a sacrifice for our sinnes: this keeps the soule free from many darts of Sa∣tans casting, and snares of his spreading, as the low shrubs are free from many violent gusts and blasts of wind, which shake and rent the taller trees. I have read of one, that seeing in a vision many snares of the devill spread upon earth, he sate downe and mourned, and said within him∣selfe, Quis pertransiet ista? Who shall passe through these? whereunto he heard a voice an∣swering, Humilitas pertransiet, Humility shall passe through them. The Divell hath least power to fasten a temptation on him that is most hum∣ble: hee that hath a gracious measure of meek∣nesse is neither affected with Satans proffers, nor terrified with his threatnings: This makes man peaceable in conversing with his brethren, fruitfull in well-doing, cheerfull in suffering, comfortable in every condition, constant in holy walking; this makes a man precious in the eyes of God, as a humble servant in the eyes of his Master. Qui parvus est in reputatione propriâ, magnus est in reputatione divinâ, saith Gregory:
 He that is little in his owne account, is great in Gods esteeme. This makes the way and worke of man acceptable unto God, and also sweetens and encreaseth mans communion with God. If ever therefore you entend to enjoy Gods glori∣ous and blessed presence, labour for this humili∣ty and meeknesse.
Fourthly, Bee servent and unfained in your love to God, his truth, and his children: this will make your language very gracious. Amantium mos est, (saith Chrysostome) ut amorem suum si∣lentio tegere nequeunt: Lovers know not how to keepe silence; lovers of God are very full of gracious expressions: this will make you liberal, you shall give your selves to God and the service of his Saints, as the men of Macedonia did: this will make you patient in suffering, as Jacob in his service for Rachel: this will make you fre∣quent the house of God with all alacrity, fre∣quency, and diligence, as children their fathers house and table: this will make you joyfull in hearing the word of God, as the Bride in hearing the voice of the Bridegroome: this will make you carefull, free and full in the observation of Gods statutes, as loving children in the obser∣vation of their fathers precepts: this will make you diligent and rich in all good workes; the more man loves God, the more he strives in all well-doing to glorifie God. Love, like fire, is not idle, but operative: Amor Dei (saith Gre∣gory) nunquam otiosus est; operatur enim ma∣gna si est; si verò operari renuit, amor non est:
 The love of God (saith he) is never idle; for if it is, it worketh great things; but if it refuse to work, it is not love. Love makes the yoke of God easie, and his worke delightfull; it is only want of love that makes the commandement a bur∣den: Tantò magis delectat opus bonum, quantò magis diligitur Deus summum & incommutabi∣le bonum, saith Augustine: A good work so much the more delighteth, by how much the more God the chiefest and unchangable good is loved.
Love among some of the Ancients was resem∣bled to, and represented by the Sun: the Sunne inlightens the world; the more love the more light. Knowledge and love, like the water and the ice, beget each other; man loves God by knowing, and knows God by loving. God dwels in love, and where God is there is light: that mans light is darknesse which is not attended with the love of God and his testimonies: the Sunne makes the earth fertile; he that loves God cannot be barren, his love makes him fruitfull in all well-doing: the Sunne is swift and constant in his motion; love makes man cheerfull, spee∣dy, and unwearied in running the race which God hath set before him: the Sunne is impassi∣ble, love is patient and invincible, it endureth all things; no floods can drown it, no waters can quench it. Want of love and affection is the maine cause of mans apostacy and back-sliding: the Sunne casteth his beames upward and downward, to the East and to the West, to the North and to the South; Christian
 love causeth its beames to ascend to God above, and to descend to man beneath; to our friends on the right hand, to our enemies on the left hand; to them that are in the state or grace before us, to them tht are in the state of corruption behind us: love which is not in this sense universall, is corrupt and carnall. The Sun beginning to ascend in his circle, never goes back utill he comes to the highest degree thereof: true love abhorres apostacy, ascends to more perfection, and ceaseth not untill, like Eliahs fiery chariot, it hath car∣ried the soule to heaven: If ever you meane to see and enjoy the God of love, labour for this love.
Fiftly, Be very serious, studious, circumspect, and carefull in all your walkings; ponder the path of your feet, like carefull travellers; consi∣der and weigh all your doings, let all your waies of the heart within, and worke without, be or∣dered aright, according the rule of Gods word; every motion of the soule is a step to life or a step to death; a step towards heaven or toward hell: Mans labour and service is temporall, his wages and recompence eternall; therfore as Zeu∣xes that famous Lymner, being demanded why he was so exact and serious, so long, so careful and curious in his workmanship, answered, Diu pin∣go, quia aeternitati pingo; I am long in painting, because I paint unto eternity. We all paint un∣to eternity; every one of our actions tends to an eternity of joyes or sorrowes; all our temporall actions are as seeds of eternity sowne by us: a
 temporall seed an eternall harvest: we speak, we heare, we write, we read, we pray, we sing, we conferre, we worke, we thinke unto eternity: how exact and serious should we be in our short walking, the end whereof is eternall! Vigilanti curâ (saith Gregory) per cuncta opera intentio nobis pensanda est, ut nihil temporale in his quae agit appetat, sed totam se in soliditate aeternita∣tis figat: The intention is thorough all our works to bee weighed with vigilant care, that in the things which it doth, it may desire nothing tem∣porall, but wholly fasten it selfe on that which is eternall: hee that walkes not circumspectly de∣prives himselfe of an eternity of felicity, and casts himselfe into an eternity of misery: better live strictly for a time, then live miserably for e∣ver; nay, bee assured that even for the present, there is more comfort in one dayes strict walk∣ing with God, then in a thousand dayes loose conversing with men. Did men know the peace, joy, sweetnesse, boldnesse, honour and triumph of holy walking, they would instantly and for e∣ver abandon all dissolute living: heaven is the paradice of all joyes; he that in his holy walking commeth nearest unto heaven, is doubtlesse of all men the most joyfull. O say not then, as a man of noble blood and acute wit, but profane life, sometime did, when being demanded what he thought of the austere life of the godly, and li∣centious life of the wicked, answered, Cum istis mallem vivere, cum illis mori mallem; I had ra∣ther live with the latter, I had rather dye with
 the former. But as you desire to dye the death of the righteous, so bee very solici∣tous and studious, very vigilant and indu∣strious to live the life of the righteous: Never promise your selves a blessed death without a ho∣ly life.
Lastly, Be stedfast in adhering to the truth: be not like children carried to and fro with eve∣ry vaine perswasion; nor like ships without an∣chor, tossed up and downe with the winde of every empty doctrine: But be constant in follow∣ing the truth, as the Wisemen did the starre, un∣till you come home to Christ; and as the Israe∣lites did the fiery pillar, untill you come to the heavenly Canaan. Buy the truth (saith Solomon) and sell it not; you can never over-buy it what∣soever you give for it; you can never sufficiently sell it, if you have all the world in exchange for it. It is said of Caesar, Major fuit cura Caesari libellorum quàm purpurae; He had greater care of his books then of his royall robes: for swim∣ming through the waters to escape his enemies, he carried his books in his hand above the wa∣ters, but lost his robe. What are Caesars bookes to Gods booke, and his learning to Gods truth, more then a glow-worme to the sunne? Bee you therefore more carefull of the Gospel then of any earthly possession: though you bee driven into the deepe waters of affliction, and there lose all your worldly fulnesse, yet hold fast the Gospel of Christ Jesus: you shall finde infinitely more worth and comfort
 in the Gospel, then in all the treasure of the world.
It is reported of Alexander the Great, that hee had alwayes Homers Iliads under his pillow, and preferred them above Dari∣us his most precious and costly chest: what are Homers Iliads to Christs Gospel? or Da∣rius chest to the invaluable treasure which is in Christ? Have therefore the booke of God ever with you, when you lye downe, when you rise up, when you walke abroad; have it in your understandings, to know it; in your imaginations, to thinke and meditate upon it; in your memories, to remember it; in your hearts, to love it, to rejoice and delight your selves in it; to solace, refresh, and comfort your soules with it; in your tongues, to speake of it, to edifie and strengthen one another by it; give it preheminence above the chiefest wordly substance. The losse of all cannot make man miserable, as long as hee sincerely and fully adheres unto, and en∣joyes the Gospel.
Make this therefore your constant and per∣petuall light, to guide you; your heavenly Manna, to feed you; your celestiall treasure, to enrich you; your spirituall well-spring, to refresh and fill you; your firme and sure an∣chor, to sustaine and stay you; your holy and gracious Schoole, to edifie you in the knowledge, faith, and love of Chrst; to ravish your soules with the apprehension of
 CHRISTS beauties, to fill you more and more with CHRISTS fulnesse, and prepare you a sweet and entire communion of ever∣lasting continuance with the Lord JESUS: which hee most unfainedly desireth, who ever remaineth,

