


SIR,
THe Wise mans cen∣sure concerning the many Booke-makers of his time,Morbus insanabilie scribendi cacoë∣thes, Iuuenal. Quod de scriptis sa∣cris autho∣re spiritu sanctdici non po∣test, ve∣rū de illis, quae vanitas humana exculpit quotidie, Fayius. Traditiones, decreta Pontificum, Canones generalium consiliorum, quoad obsequij & fidei necessitatem praeser∣tim refelluntur. mee thinks, as much tax∣eth this Writing world of ours, wherein men are almost no men, vnlesse they be men in print; all is but a Cōmentarie vpon the Prea∣chers

words; Of making many bookes there is no end, Eccl. 12.12. I wish to God that there were once an end (which I feare me, will not bee vn∣till the world ends) of making such books, as serue to no end, but to the cor∣rupting of maners, infecting the hart, weakening zeale; and that some good Augustus would banish them, (as hee did fleshly Amato∣riae Nafo∣nis, in qui∣bus non est tutum rudem ex∣erceri, Erasmus. Ouid) out of our Bethel, Christian England, into some Betha∣uen, into some Idolatrous, Superstiti∣ous, and Heathenish Nation, that wor∣ship the Sunne and the Moone, Castor and Pollux, Rats and Mice, in stead of the true God of Heauen; or sent backe for Vagrants into Italy, or the Stewes of Rome, where, like an adulte∣rous broode, they were first borne and bred; or that they were all serued with the same sauce,Stapleton. Praefat. Moral. as (by Stapletons re∣port) Saint Ephraim wittily vsed two

bookes of Apollinaris, who finding them in a womans keeping, borrowed them of her, and glued the leaues so hard together, as the booke could neuer after be opened. For (as one saith well) ten Sermons at Pauls Crosse doe not so much good for moouing men to true doctrine, as one of these bookes doe harme, with entising men to ill liuing; and that more Papists are made by the merry bookes of Italy, then by the ear∣nest bookes of Louaine; so that they doe not only win the wils of the weake vnto wantonnesse, but tend some∣thing to the corrupting of true religi∣on. Saint Iames reprooues very sharp∣ly those, that with the same tongue blesse God, & curse man, Iam. 3.9. why then should the same Caracters set foorth Machiauels workes and Mo∣ses writings, Christ and Belial, the vn∣chast loue of wanton Heathens, and the

chast and reciprocall loue of Christ and his Church? But as for such bookes as haue our Sauiour for their subiect, the holy Ghost for their Author, Gods glory for their end; that are like so ma∣ny Cannons planted against the Gates of hel, that tend wholly to the demolish∣ing of Satans Kingdome, vndermining the Bulwarks of Babylon, but building vp the Walles of Ierusalem, why should not the sound of such goe foorth into the ends of the world? and when they sound foorth, the end of the world? To which end, I haue preacht pend, and through the importunitie of others, contrarie to mine owne minde and meaning when I preached, now im∣printed this little Tract and Treatise; how free I am from Salomons cen∣sure of such as print themselues, let him that is wiser then Salomon bee a witnesse: I am bold to fly vnto your

Worship, and to entreate you, that you would vouchsafe to bee cald a Patron vnto it, as you are to learning, though farre (I must confesse) below your wor∣thinesse: The many testimonies of your loue from time to time toward my eldest Brother and my selfe, doe challenge more at our hands, then my penne can expresse, or the weakenesse of our vtmost power make the least re∣quitall. A handfull of water was fit∣ter to be powred into a Beggars dish, then to be presented vnto a King: yet a King accepted of it, though a beggar gaue it, because he gaue what he had, and had no better to giue: nay, it is ac∣ceptable to God (if we haue no greater gift to offer) to cast a mite into the Lords Treasurie: whereby I am indu∣ced to conceiue, that you will no lesse willingly accept of this Paper gift of mine, a Schollars Mite, the truest testi∣moniall

of mine intimate affecti∣ons, and manifestation of my duty: what is wanting, shall bee supplied in praying for you vnto God, for your preseruation, and for an encrease in all spirituall graces, namely, of faith, which may keepe you from trembling at the day of your death, and in the day of Iudgement. From Whitfield, Iuly the 10.

