



Right Worshipfull, and much respected,
IT is an Axiome among the Logicians: Quicquid re∣cipitur, recipitur ad mo∣dum recipientis: and suta∣bly, wee are taught by dayly experience, that the welfare and issue of our actions is much dependant upon other mens inter∣pretations: sometimes groundlesse surmi∣ses, causelesse jealousies of mens intentions, ends, and purposes, doe put an evill con∣struction
 upon a very good and holy under∣taking, and turne the sweetest flower into a loathsome, and unsavory weede: thus Davids2 Sam. 10.3.4.5. servants sent by him in kindnes, to visit and comfort Hanun after the death of his father, were upon a groundlesse jea∣lousie entertained as spies, and not as friends, sent away not with thankes, but with disgrace; having their garments cut off to the buttockes, and their beards shaved off to the halfe. Sometimes the low estate and condition of the Agent, doth much obscure and darken the glory of the worke; thus Salomon tells us,Eccle. 9.15. there was a little City, and few men in it; and there came a great King against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarkes against it; now there was found in it a poore wise man, and he by his wise∣dome delivered the City, yet no man remembred that same poore man: the jewell is despised because the Casket is not rich and gilded; & thence it was that they looked on our Saviour, as on aEsay 53.2. dry tree, as on one that had no beauty for which they should desire him; called intoMat. 13.54, 55, 56, 57. question his learning, tooke offence at him, because as man, he had (as they conceived) a poore
 originall; sometimes a prejudicate con∣ceit, a forestalled opinion; this maketh men withIohn. 1.46. Nathaniel to question whe∣ther any good can come out Nazareth. Sometimes want of Complement, and hu∣mane varnishings, to set forth the worke; the cloath is not regarded, because the lace wanteth: Thus Pauls preaching seemed1 Cor. 1. foolish to the Grecians, because it wanted the inticing words of mans wisedome. Ho∣ly intentions, good and profitable underta∣kings, have many clouds to darken them, many tongues of a vicious and different temper to glosse upō them: But for mine own part (the integrity of mine intentions war∣ranting to mine own heart this enterprize) I am resolved with S. Paul, to take it a small thing to be judged of1 Cor. 4.3. mans judge∣ment. If I may do any good, give any light, minister any comfort, though but to one poore soule, by my weake and despised en∣deavours, I feare not, I regard not a thou∣sand censures. It is not the importunitie of others, the commemoration of past kind∣nesses, expectation of, or invention unto future favours, but the love I beare to the parties deceased, my desire to have their
 memoriall preserved, continued; the re∣freshing of your memories with the blessing ye enjoyed by their life, and the losse ye sus∣taine by their death; the quickning of you to an holy conversation, the preparing of you for your own dissolution, are the mo∣ving causes of the publication of these two Sermons.
It is not earthly honour, worldly fulnesse, fleshly pleasures, vanishing greatnesse, transitory abundance, that is the richest jewell, the brightest Sunne, the sweetest musicke, the most honorable Crowne; all these are sand sinking, exhalations vani∣shing, thornes pricking, Eagles flying a∣way,Prov. 23.5 things which are not. These are often given for a snare, as Sauls1 Sam. 18 21. daughter to David; These likeJudg. 16.19. Dalilah betray us, after they have sung sweetly to us, cut off our lockes, spoyle us of what should make us happie, and involve us in an irrecove∣rable miserie: likeIudg. 4.20, 21. Iael, after they have fed us, cloathed us, and in our imaginati∣on secured us, drive the naile of destructi∣on into our temples: like Absaloms feast for2 Sam. 13.28. Amnon, they doe but prepare us for destruction. To a soule savingly enlight∣ned,
 unfainedly humbled, truely sanctified, throughly affected with the taste of Gods goodnesse, blessedly enriched with spiritu∣all and heavenly graces, beautified and a∣dorned with the precious pearle surpassing all earthly merchandise: what these things are let Gregory speake;Greg. in 1 Reg. cap. 20. quid di∣vitiae pereuntes, & transitoriae faculta∣tes, nisi stercora, aeterna diligentibus? what are perishing riches, and transitorie abilities, but dung to them that love eter∣nitie? And thus Paul accounted all to be butPhil. 3.8. dung and drosse in comparison of the knowledge of Christ Iesus. It is not greatnesse, but goodnesse; not worldly riches, but heavenly graces; not the highest top of earthly felicities, but true holinesse, is the way leading to the Crowne, and joy of never failing continuance. Though (as one saith) the pursuite of purity is deemed the height of folly; yet you shall find this infallibly, constantly, unchangeably true; That true godlinesse, the religious exercise of holy duties, heavenly walking with God, is a pillar of the greatest strength to support, a starre of the brightest light to direct, a jewell of the richest price to en∣rich,
 a flower of the most orient and shining beauty to adorne, and a shield of the most tryed metall to defend any Kingdome, towne, family, people or particular per∣son.
Many bee the instruments and meanes which God of his goodnesse hath ordained, prepared, sanctified, for the begetting, breeding, nourishing, establishing, and perfecting of this godlinesse, this religion in the hearts of his people: among the ma∣ny, these two, the Ministerie of the Gos∣pel, meditation upon our uncertaine, yet speedy dissolutiō, are not the least effectual, preualent, and powerfull, to make us spee∣dy, carefull, and circumspect runners in this race, and to forward us in this holy and blessed worke. Therefore as theMat. 24.24. Ea∣gles gather themselves to the Carkasse, as theMica. 4.1, 2. waters flow to the Ocean, as theIoh. 5.4.5. lame men came to Bethesda, as the Queene of the South came from farre to heare the wisedom of Salomon; so come ye, attend, wait upon, reverence, receive, embrace and love the holy and faithfull Ministrie of the VVord. Here is the sweetest musick that ever eare heard, the delicat'st Feast
 that ever palate tasted, the most comforta∣ble tidings that ever man brought, the most glorious light that ever eye did see: here is a garden which hath a flower for every sanctified nostrill; an Artillerie-house, wherein are weapons for every soul∣dier fighting Gods battell; an Apothe∣caries shoppe that hath a healing medicine for every wounded soule; here is a Coun∣sellor for every circumcised eare, a guide for every traveller, a comforter for every sorrowfull and dejected spirit. This is the instrumentall staffe and stay of Gods chil∣dren; the Crowne and glory of the Lords people. But as our Saviour tooke occasion, from the quality of the persons receiving the Gospel, to say,Mat. 11.5, 6. the poore receive the Gospel, and blessed is hee that is not offended in me; So may I take occasion from the conditiō of the persons preaching, and from their manner of teaching to say,Esay 11.6. Psal. 8.2 2 Cor. 10.1. mortal men, weake men, men of low estate and condition, men whose bodily presence is weake, and speech contemptible, preach the Gospel, and that in a plaine manner without ostentation: and blessed is he that is not offended, because this Treasure is
 brought in a wooden Vessell, because men preach not themselves, but Christ; that so the excellency of the power may appeare to be of God, and not of men. Jt is with us in∣deede, as we are carnall, as it was with Antiochus,Livi: lib. 37. Plut. in Comp. Scipio. & Annib. and his people, in another case. History makes mention, how Antiochus prepared against the Romans an Army very great and huge, of men of many Nations, but white livered Souldiers, not so strong with armour, as glistering with gold and silver: Antiochus himselfe was amazed at the sight of it, and thought it invincible; and so did the simple fooles of his Countrey: but the Romans contem∣ned it, and Annibal jested at it. So na∣turall men being to wage warre against their spirituall adversaries, will2 Tim. 4.3. heape up many teachers, and if their Sermons glister with the gold and silver, or rather with the gilded brasse, and copper of hu∣mane eloquence, supercilious speeches, cu∣rious and quaint conceipts and devices, though there be little or no spirituall pow∣er in it; yet they stand amazed at it think that the battle is wonne, that the day and crowne is theirs: when it is too apparent
 that Satan, and sinne, like Annibal and his Romans, doe scorne, and are no more moved, no more affrighted with it, then with the admiration used by theActs 19.15. sonnes of Sheva, where Satan prevailed, & they ran away wounded; for as Satan sayd to them: Paul I know, & Iesus I know, but what are ye? So in this case the evill spirit wil, at least may say: them that preach Christ sincerely, faithfully, powerfully, I know; but what are the feeble sayings of Heathe∣nish Philosophers, or the rythmes and fi∣ctions of fond Poets, who sanctified these as a meanes to conquer sinne and Sathan? Two things have I found, (which J pro∣pose to the view and censure of all the Lords people) the one by internall sense and feeling, the other by externall observa∣tion: the first is this; The more or lesse the Minister of God hath of the Spirit in his preaching, so much the more or lesse powerfull is his Sermon, either for con∣viction, conversion, or consolation: The second is this, That holy, humble, and faithfull Pastors, though for humane Elo∣quence like Cicero, for their abilities in Philosophy like Aristotle, for their ver∣sifying
 faculty like Ovid; yet in Gods Sanctuarie have they laid aside these wea∣pons, and studied to preach God & Christ Jesus, not out of Homer, Virgil, Cicero, Aristotle, but of out the Sacred Scriptu∣res, with all1 Cor. 14.18, 19. possible plainnesse, fit for mens capacities. And for mine owne part, I thinke Gods Ministers should use humane helpes, as Abraham did hisGen. 22.5. Asse and his Servant; they may goe with them to the foot of the Hill, & there stay, but not ascend into the Sanctuary, where they preach Christ Iesus, and offer their spiritual sacri∣fice, except in someAct. 17.28. Tit. 1.12. extraordinary cases. For thus S. Augustine: In doctrina sacrae Scripturae authoritatem debet Episco∣pus praeferre, non saecularium literarū peritiam ostentare; non enim Episcopi est officium Grammaticam exponere, nec laudes Iovis personet os pontifi∣cis: that is, the Minister must preferre the authority of sacred Scripture in his teaching, and not shew forth his skill in secular or humane learning; it is not the dutie of a Minister to expound Grammer, or sound forth the prayses of Jupiter: this have I made hold to tell you, that you may
 not sticke in cortice, in the naked world of a Sermon, like men that behold onely the outside of the house; but open the doore, goe in, and see what good cheere the Spirit of God doth make there for your soules;Origen in Levit. Hom. 39. for as Origen saith, Spiritus divinis verbis convalescit, nutrimenta spiritus sunt divina lectio, orationes assiduae, sermo doctrinae; his alitur cibis, his convale∣scit, his actor efficitur: It is not an humane but a divine word which nourish∣eth, and maketh the soule holily opera∣tive: it is Gods word which doth en∣lighten the understanding, awaken the conscience, purifie the affection, re∣concile to God, worke peace in the heart, and fill the inward man with all goodnesse: thinke of these things, and of many poore soules that amongst you come within the walles of the Lords house, and there stand and see, but heare not, that you may accordingly pro∣vide for your owne, and their everlasting good.
And as the holy, and soule-refreshing Ministerie of the Gospell, so also the seri∣ous meditation of our owne slippery stan∣ding,
 fleeting condition, is a spur very for∣cible to quicken us in the way of righteous∣nesse: were that of the Prophet to Eze∣kiah,2 King. 20. thou mayest not live but die, e∣ver sounding in our eares, and fresh in our memories, it would cause us to set both house and soule in order, it would cause us with the Merchant to buy while the Mart lasteth, with the Traveller to walke while the light shineth, with the Mariner to row while the tide serveth. And that the word of God may now be pleasant and profitable, your death at the last comfortable and gain∣full; let the presence, power, and increase of these foure insuing graces, like foure pre∣cious jewels adorne you. 1. Humilitie, which is in Gods eye a1 Pet. 3.3. Pearle of great price, a fruit, an evidence of theProv. 11.2. wise∣dome which is from above, the firstMat. 11.29. lesson learned in the Schoole of Christ Jesus, and that which maketh us capeableIam. 4.6. of all graces. 2. Sinceritie, let your inward disposition, your outward conversation, be like our Saviours Coate without seame; it is yourPsal 32.1, 2. blessednesse, your prayse before God and all good men now, and will be your joy and your2 Cor. 1.12. glory at the last, to bee true
 Israelites, right Nathaniels, in whom is no guile. 3. Vnitie, a holy concord, a sweete agreement in every good way be∣twixt your selves: this is a fruit of the highestIoh. 1. Iam. 3.17. wisedome, like aPsal. 13 3.1.2. precious oynt∣ment in Gods nostrils, a singular sweet∣ning of your mutuall conversation, com∣merce, and communication, a great strengthning, and a powerfull prevention of much evill. 4. Constancy in all the waies of God, having begunne in the spirit, end not in the flesh, be not weary of well doing; having put your hand to Gods plow, looke not back, but come forth as thePsal. 19.5. Sunne, like a Bridegroome out of his Chamber, adorned with all spirituall splendor and brightnesse; and rejoyce yee like a mighty man to runne the race of Gods Commandements:Isa. 40.31. mount up like the Eagle, walke on, and faint not; so shall you at the last embrace death as a friend, rest in your grave, as on a Bed of Downe, have your soules car∣ried in a fiery Chariot into Heaven, be entertained with most sweete embrace∣ments by the LORD IESVS, and
 have with IEHOVAH blessed for e∣ver, the full fruition of endlesse joyes in his most glorious Kingdome: This He unfainedly desireth, who ever resteth.

