


MY dearest sonne, there is nothing so strong as the force of loue; there is no loue so forcible as the loue of an affecti∣onate mother to hir naturall childe: there is no mother can either more affe∣ctionately shew hir nature, or more naturally manifest hir affection, than in aduising hir children out of hir owne ex∣perience, to eschue euill, and encline them to do that which is good. Out of these resolutions, finding the libertie of this age to be such, as that quicquid libet licet, so men keepe themselues from criminall offences; and my mothers vndeserued wrath so virulent, as that I haue neither pow∣er to resist it, nor patience to endure it, but must yeeld to this languishing consumption to which it hath brougt me: I resolued to breake the barren soile of my fruitlesse braine, to dictate something for thy direction; the rather for that as I am now a dead woman among the liuing, so stand I doubtfull of thy fathers life; which albeit God hath pre∣serued from eight seuerall sinister assaults, by which it hath beene sought; yet for that I see that Quem saepè transit casus, aliquando inuenit, I leaue thee this por∣table veni mecum for thy Counseller, in which thou maiest

ee the true portrature of thy mothers minde, and finde something either to resolue thee in thy doubts, or comfort thee in thy distresse; hoping, that being my last speeches, they will be better kept in the conseruance of thy memorie; which I desire thou wilt make a Register of heauenly me∣ditations.
For albeit, if thou prouest learned (as my trust is thou wilt; for that without learning man is but as an immor∣tall beast) thou maiest happily thinke that if euery Philo∣sopher fetched his sentence, these leaues would be left without lines; yet remember withall, that as it is the best coine that is of greatest value in fewest pieces, so is it not the worst booke that hath most matter in least words.
The grauest wits, that most graue works expect,
The qualitie, not quantitie, respect.
And the spiders webbe is neither the better because wouen out of his owne brest, nor the bees hony the worse, for that gathered out of many flowers; neither could I euer brooke to set downe that haltingly in my broken stile, which I found better expressed by a grauer authour.
God send thee too, to be a wits Camelion,
That any authours colour can put on.
I haue prayed for thee, that thou mightest be fortunate in two houres of thy life time: In the houre of thy mari∣age, and at the houre of thy death. Marrie in thine owne ranke, and seeke especially in it thy contentment and pre∣ferment: let her neither be so beautifull, as that euery li∣king eye shall leuell at her; nor yet so browne, as to bring thee to a loathed bed. Deferre not thy marriage till thou commest to be saluted with a God speed you Sir, as a man going out of the world after sortie; neither yet to the

time of God keepe you Sir, whilest thou art in thy best strength after thirtie; but marrie in the time of You are welcome Sir, when thou art comming into the world. For seldome shalt thou see a woman out of hir owne loue to pull a rose that is full blowen, deeming them alwaies swee∣test at the first opening of the budde. It was Phoedra hir confession to Hippolitus, and it holdes for trueth with the most: Thesei vultus amo illos priores quos tulit quon∣dam iuuenis. Let thy life be formall, that thy death may be fortunate: for he seldome des well that liueth ill. To this purpose, as thou hast within thee Reason as thy Coun∣seller to perswade or disswade thee, and thy Will as an ab∣solute Prince with a Fiat vel Euitetur, with a Let it be done or neglected; yet make thy conscience thy Censor∣morum, and chiefe commander in thy little world: let it call Reason to account whether she haue subiected hir selfe against reason to sensuall appetites. Let thy Will be cen∣sured, whether hir desires haue beene chaste, or as a harlot she haue lusted after hir owne delights. Let thy thoughts be examined. If they be good, they are of the spirit (quench not the spirit) if bad, forbid them entrance; for once ad∣mitted, they straight waies fortifie; and are expelled with more difficultie, than not admitted.
Crush the serpent in the head,
Breake ill egges yer they be hatched.
Kill bad chickens in the tread,
Fledge they hardly can be catched.
In the rising stifle ill,
Lest it grow against thy will.
For euill thoughts are the Diuels harbingers; he neuer resteth, but where they prouide his entertainment. Thes

re those little ones whose braines thou must dash out a∣gainst the rocke of true iudgement: for
As a false Louer that thicke snares hath laied,
T'intrap the honour of a faire yoong maid,
When she (though little) listning eare affoords
To his sweet, courting, deepe affected words,
Feeles some asswaging of his freezing flame,
And sooths himselfe with hope to gain his game,
And rapt with ioy, vpon this point persists,
That parleing citie neuer long resists:
Euen so the serpent that doth counterfet
A guilefull call t'allure vs to his net,
Perceiuing vs his flattering gloze disgest,
He prosecutes, and iocund doth not rest,
Till he haue tri'd foot, hand, and head, and all,
Vpon the breach of this new battered wall.
I could be content to dwell with thee in this agrument: but I must confine my selfe to the limits of an epistle, Quae non debet implere sinistram manum. To which rule I doe the more willingly submit my selfe, for that the dis∣courses following are motiues to the same effect: which I pray thee vse to peruse, euen in that my affectionate loue, which diffused amongst nine children which God did lend me, is now vnited in thee, whom God hath onely left for my comfort. And because God hath indued thee with so vio∣lent a spirit, as that quicquid vis valde vis; therefore by so much the more it behoueth thee to deliberate what thou vndertakest: to which purpose my desire is, that thou mightest be seasoned with these precepts in thy youth, that the practise of thy age may haue a taste of them. And be∣cause that it is incident to quicke spirits to commit rash at∣tempts:

as euer the loue of a mother may challenge the performance of her demand of a dutifull childe; be a bridle to thy selfe, to restraine thee from doing that which indeed thou maiest doe: that thou maiest the better forbeare that which in trueth thou oughtest not to doe, for haud citò progreditur ad maiora peccata, qui parua reformidat; hee seldomest commits deadly sinne, that makes a consci∣ence of a veniall scandall.
Thou seest my loue hath carried me beyond the list I resolued on, and my aking head and trembling hand haue rather a will to offer, than abilitie to affoord further dis∣course. Wherefore with as many good wishes to thee, as good will can measure, I abruptly end, desiring God to blesse thee with sorrow for thy sinnes, thankefulnesse for his benefits, feare of his iudgements, loue of his mercies, mindfulnesse of his presence; that li∣uing in his feare, thou maiest die in his fauour, rest in his peace, rise in his power, remaine in his glorie for euer and euer.

