



THe Emperour Tra∣iane (Right Honou∣rable) writing a Let∣ter to the Senate of Rome, concerning the weightie and carefull condition of Princes; among many other matters, vsed these wordes of himselfe. I doe freely confesse vnto you, that, since I tasted the cares and trauels attending on this Imperiall dignitie: I haue re∣pented a thousand times, that euer I did vndertake it, because, if it bee ac∣counted Honour to enioy an Em∣pire, there consisteth farre greater paine and labour, to order and go∣uerne it as it ought to be. But beside, what enuie doth hee expose himselfe to, & multitude of mislikes, that hath the charge of gouerning others? If hee be iust, hee is branded with cru∣elry: if mercifull, hee is contemned: if beautifull, tearmed lauish and pro∣digall: if hee hoorde vp money, then basely couetous: if inclined to peace, then hee is a coward: If full of cou∣rage, proudly anbitious: if discreet∣ly graue, surly and scornefull: if af∣fably courteous, silly and simple: if affecting solitude a dissembling hy∣pocrite: if addicted to mirth and pleasure, then wantonly dissolute. In the end of all, te worthy Emperour thus concluded. Although willingly, I accepted this high office at the first: yet sorrow hath (since) made mee shrinke vnder so brdensom a charge: For, the Sea and dignitie are thinges pleasing to looke n, but very peril∣lous to meddle withall.
I haue alledged his example (wor∣thie Lord) because present vnto your gracious acceptance, his ancient and fa∣mous Booke, called The Diall of Prin∣ces, wherein is at lige, and amply set downe, what care and respect awayteth on the liues of Prins and great per∣sons: for if they canot runne into the smallest errour, but redoundeth to the hurt of many, nor neglect their duty, without other mens userie: Then sayde the Philosopher well. A Prince should not appropriate the Common∣wealth

to himselfe, but shape him∣selfe wholy to the Common wealth. And so much the rather, because he stan∣ding accountable to no man in this Life, ought to remember a farre stricter ac∣count, before him that maketh no respect of Princes, saue onely in this, that they shall finde the Iudge the more seuere a∣gainst them, by how much they haue a∣bused their place of eminencie, as also their power and princely authority.
In the learned Discourses following, set downe by that good Emperour Mar∣cus Aurelius, the honourable Argu∣ment of all this worke; are three especi∣all duties and actions obserued, necessa∣rily required in an absolute and perfect Prince, as namely; In Ruling, Iudging, and Defending: To rule by iust lawes, and good Example; To Iudge by Wisedome, Prouidence, and Iustice; And Defend by valour, care, and vi∣gilancy. And this is that which the Spirit of God so often intimateth by the Prophet Ieremie, ap. 22. verse 3. To execute Iudgement and righte∣ousnesse: To deliuer the oppressed from the handes  the oppressour, Not to vexe the Stanger, fatherlesse, or Widdow: Neyther to doe violence, or shedde the innocent bloud.
Into infinite other famous presidents for Princes I could enter, and set them downe expressely; but that I know, they are so frequent to your Honour, both in reading and memorie, that it were as lost labour, as to hold a burning Taper in the bright Sunne at Noone-day, and there∣fore these few shall suffice, Nor doe I dedicate this vnto your graue and lear∣ned iudgement, as a new labour of mine owne, or as a worke neuer seene before; because it hath already past diuers im∣pressions: albeit not in so exact a maner, nor with the like paines, as hath now bin bestowed vpon it, from many absurde, and grosse imperfections, and yet not so cleanely purged, as I could wish it were, nor as it shall bee, if euer it come to the Presse againe. Wherefore I humbly en∣treate your Honour, to accept it as it is, and as an oblation of my loue vnfained∣ly to you, which gladly would shew it selfe by any possible meanes, as time hereafter may better enable me. Til when, I remain ready at your Honours seruice, to the very vtmost of my best abilitie.

