


HAD the consi∣deratiō of highe dignity (most gratious Quo∣ne) suggesting retiring thoughts, more preuailed, then the reports of your vertuous inclination inciting for warde:neuer should I have presumed, to make so meane a person, knowne to so great Maiesty. But the constant fame of
 your Princely partes, and a soule not stouping to transitory toyes, emboldened my feareful hart: ho∣ping that with gratious countenan∣ce, you will beholde the poore and rich present, of your deuoted ser∣uant: poore in respect of that, which my small ability affordeth: but most rich in regarde of the thing it selfe, being a rare iewell worthy of any Christian Prince, and of none more, then your most excellent person. For to whom coul∣de so heauenly a pearle, more iustly be presented, then to your royall Highnes: whose hart Gods grace so touched, that whē the glorious bea∣mes of an earthly paradise, & new kingdome first saluted, it mounting aboue all corruptible creature, and
 not complying in complements with this false flattering worlde, thought rather vpon the perpetuall plea∣sure of the heauenly paradise, and that kingdome, which crowneth Queenes with the diuine diademe of eternall glory. For I haue bene credibly enformed, how at that very tyme, in the middest of those mee∣ting ioyes: and the very thronge of those terrestriall pleasures: you sent for out of England, such principall bookes of piety and deuotion, as we∣re there to be founde. A zeale veri∣ly commendable, in the person of a meaner fortune, admirable in the highnes of Princes, whose eyes vsually the vanishing vapors of ear∣thly cōtent, doe with false reflexion dazell & deceiue: but surpassing all
 common conceipt, in such a spring-tide of the worlds flowing felicity. God the inspirer of such heauenly cogitations, contine we them with the fire of his diuine grace, to the inflaming of your sou∣le with his loue, that you may with encrease of spirit, walke for warde in that heauenly path, and goe sal. 83. from vertue to vertue, vntill the God of gods be seene in Sion.
Many alas be the allurements, which carry many a mayne from the following of vertue, to the em∣bracing of vice: from the sweete seruice of Christ, to the sowre ser∣uitude of Belial: yet none are in such daunger as Potentates and Princes: whose florishing fortunes,
 and transcendent soueraigntye, commonly so bewitch the powers of the soule, that present pleasure pro∣fered on all handes, is prosecuted with full saile: and future endlesse payne, the dreadfull dregges of de∣lights enchaunting cupp, is not thought vpon, or els spedily bani∣shed; not to disturbe the tiranny of false felicity. And that which is la∣mentable, and deserueth an ocean of teares: whereas priuate persons, finde either friends that of charity doe, or enemies, that of malice will put them in minde of their errors and imperfections: only the eminent dignity of Princes are exempted, who meete with fewe friendes so faithfull, that in any spirituall ne∣cssity whatsoeuer, list to apply any
 such charitable corsiue, not to in∣curre displeasure: and fawning foes to many, that with the pleasing ve∣nim of flattery, will be ready to christen any vice by the name of vertue, to gayne royall grace and fauour. Holy Dauid though a man according to Gods hart, yet was his court haunted with such vermin, and his eares acquainted with the musicke of such Sirenes songs. The wicked (saith he) haue Psal. 118. v. 85. told me fables, but not as thy lawe. S. Iohn Baptist is not foūd in kinges houses, and the text of Potent persons shall suffre po∣tent Sapient. 6. v. 7. paynes, seldome soundeth in the Pallaces of Princes.
This being the dangerous estate of the worlds dearlings, especially of
 Kinges & Queenes: passing necessa∣ry it is, yf they desire frō the short & variable pleasure of corruptible crownes, to passe vnto the endlesse and immutable glory of an euerla∣sting kingdome, that they should principally procure, such faithful & vertuous teachers, to instruct thē in the way of truth and piety, of whō no suspition can be had, that either priuate interest causeth thē to spea∣ke to please: or any feare conceiued, that they vse silence not to offende: such as be the spirituall bookes of aunciēt and learned fathers, whose liues for holy conuersatiō were gra∣tious in the eyes of men, and their deathes for the sweete smell of ver∣tue, pretious in the sight of God. For these be they, which (far
 vnlike to many courting Chaplins, that chaunt litle other euensonge then in the pleasing tune of place∣bo) teach the way of truth, with∣out respect of persons: giuing the same documents, to great and sinall: and without all distinction of di∣gnity, powre wine and oile into the woundes of our soules, launcing the festered vlcers of obdurate and seared consciences: and applying comfortable lenitiues, and sweete salues, to them that be of contrite harts, of tender and timorous dis∣position.
For as much therefore as diuine grace that inspired into your soule, that heavenly resolution, as to seeke for such spirituall masters, as may without all feare of erronious di∣rection,
 guide you in the sea of this worlde (where not only the surging waues of aduersity, but much more the swete gale of delighting pros∣perity is dangerous) to the barbour of true repose, and happy tranquil∣lity: to whom more worthily coulde I present this rare ie well of glorious Saint Gregories Dialogues, en∣treating of the miraculous liues of diuers renowned Saints, then to the Princely person of your Maiesty: wherein you may beholde the faith of the Primitiue Church, to which by him our coūtry was first coūer∣ted: and in which so many Kinges and Queenes your predecessours, through the current of diuers hap∣py ages, gloriously ended their dayes: where in also you may finde so
 many heauenly lessons very delight∣full to reade, and passing profitable to practise: viewe great numbers of familiar examples, of diuers holy persons: and see the comfortable en∣des, sweete deathes, and soueraigne rewardes of Gods seruantes: rauis∣hing our soules with the loue of vertue, and drawing our thoughts, from the shorte, vncertayne, and false ioyes of this worlde, to the se∣rious cogitation, of the eternall, permanent, and true delight of the worlde to come: and that in a most familiar, and pleasing manner, no griefe interposing it selfe, except it be that (which is to be wished) of true contrition for sinne: or els that which other busines bringeth, by drawing vs from so sweete con∣uersation:
 or lastly to see that the golden streame of so diuine a dis∣course, runneth not still forwarde in an endlesse channell.
As your royal dispositiō to vertue, hath iustly deserued the dedicatiō of this booke: so the loue of the author himselfe blessed S. Gregory, not only to our coūtry in general, but to your most excellēt persō in particu∣lar, perswadeth the same. For if the purple gluttō buried in hell, had care Luc. 16. v. 27. of his brethren, and praied for thē, moued thereūto of mere natural cō∣passiō: how much more doth his sou∣le raigning in heauē, inflamed with supernatural charity tēder the good of thē whō whiles he liued he loued so deerely. Being vpon earth such was his affectiō to our natiō, that by
 his pastorall care it was turned 1. Thes∣sal. 1. v. 9. to God from idols, to serue the liuing and true God: and being yet mortall he wrotte to Al∣diberga, Lib. 9. epist. 59. cap. 69. Queene of England, most kinde letters, encouraging hir by the example of Saint Helena (the glory of great Britayne) to la∣bour the conuersion of the kinge and his people, and therfore no question, but liuing now in heauen, his charity to God being greater, his loue towarde vs is not lesse and consequently no doubt can be made, but with farre more burning zeale, he doth sollicitte in that celestiall court the cause of our country: and enioying him selfe immortall felici∣ty, both desireth and also labou∣reth, the temporall and eternall
 happines of Queene Anne our most gratious Princes.
To these former reasons which especiallye gaue support to my fea∣refull harte, this also was adioyned as no small inducement, to thincke that I was the first, that offered his labours to your most excellent Ma∣iesty: for whereas diuers of diuers professions, haue directed theire workes to our most dread Souerai∣gne, and one also to our younge Prince (your deere sonne, and the orient obiect of our countries ioye) so none at all for ought that I can learne, much lesse that professeth the religion os S. Gregorie, hath hitherto presented any booke to your Princely person. Together with this alluring motiue concurred
 also the very tyme it selfe of the newe yeare, dedicated by longe and laudable custome (descending to vs from our forefathers) to the giving and receiuing of divers giftes and presents.
Voulsafe therefore most noble Queene gratiously to accept, among so many Princely giftes this small present, of Saintes liues (written a thowsande yeares since, by the glo∣rious Apostle of Englande, bles∣sed Sainte Gregorie) inferior no question to any for temporal value, but yelding to none at all as I verily suppose in spiritual and true estima∣tion: to grace with the benigne bea∣mes of your roiall countenance the∣se my poore labours, published to the worldes viewe, vnder the pa∣tronage
 of your gratious Highnes, which your renoumed inclination to vertue, and pious affection to spiri∣tuall bookes hath deserued: the loue of S. Gregorie to our countrie, and the Queenes of England, hath allotted you: & my happy for∣tune to be the first in this kinde, with the very consideration of the tyme it selfe, hath iustlie consecra∣ted to your most excellent and wor∣thie person: and to cast a fauorable eye vpon the first fruites of my syn∣cere and seruiceable affection, which is such, that shoulde I men∣tion, worthily might I be suspected: and yet verily hope, were it know∣ne, that it woulde neuer by Prince∣ly bountie be reiected. The newe borne Sauiour of the worlde, Christ
 Iesus, send you in earthly courte, both this and many happy newe yea∣res: and eternity of yeares, in the ce∣lestiall court of heauene. The first of Ianuarie, 1608.

