


AMongst the Philosophers, namely Mimus, Polystorus, Azuar∣chus, and Pericles, there passed no small contention, and no lesse varie∣tie of argument, in the definition, what estate or cōdition of men were most subiect vnto the inconstancie of Fortune? & vn∣to whome she discouered her selfe most suspicious, and least worthy credite. The Philosopher Polystorus said that Fortune was not in any thing more vncerteine, & wherein she did lesse keepe promise, then in the act of matrimonie: for so much as there had beene no mari∣age wherein there was not found some want, weake∣nes, or deceipt: which is to say, that the wife proued ei∣ther foolish, subtile, absolute, of tedious parēts, of dow∣rie vncerteine, ful of strife, or such other infirmitie. The Philosopher Azuarchus held opiniō, that Fortune was not more vncerteine or suspicious, then in the feate of armes, or martiall affayres: affirming, that it was in the hands of men to enter battell, but in God onely to giue victorie. The Philosopher Pericles affirmed, that For∣tune was not in any thing more incōstant, or vnsound, then with the priuate and fauoured seruauntes of Prin∣ces, with whom she staid long in aduauncing of them, and after with a blast she ouerthroweth them. The Phi∣losopher Mimus auouched, that Fortune in any thing did not more vse her will, and lesse obserue promise,

then in sea matters & Nauigatiō of mariners: for there neither profiteth substance, or is wisedome sufficient: eyther doth she respect persons: but if Fortune fancie, she leadeth a Lighter amonges the mounteines of the high seas, and after drowneth a Carrecke in the hauen. Applying that which is said, vnto that which I would say, me seemeth (right noble) that of these foure maner of Fortunes, two of them are knocking at your gates, which is to say, the possession of great fauour with our Caesar, and the ofte sayling whiche you vse at sea. Hee whose honour dependeth on the wil of others, & many times commendeth his life vnto the sea, the one is very daungerous, & the other proceedeth of great rashnes. Your honour performeth no smal attempt, to beard & make head against the stūbling blocks that Fortune be∣stoweth vpon such, as she aduaunceth to great honour, but that you also hurle & abandon your person so oft into the waues of so fierce seas? Publianus the Philoso∣pher said, Improbe Neptunū accusat, qui iterum nanfragiū fa∣cit. As if he would haue said, He vniustly cōplayneth of the sea, that two times passeth the same: since he that only twise passeth the sea, hath not licence to complaine thereof: then, by what iustice may he cōplaine, that foure times twise hath prouoked her fickle cōdition? Alwayes giue not credite & yeld not faith vnto signes, likelyhoods, or cōiectures, either for that alwayes you are serued with a good gallie, or make your choice of a good capteine, or special Pilot, or serued with most chiefe prouision, and obserue or watche most aptest time. All which thinges giue good cause the more doubtfully & with lesse sure∣tie to returne vnto ye sea: for that flattering Fortune ne∣uer shooteth her so cruell shott, as against such persons

onely as she hath led many yeres in great securitie. Lu∣cius Seneca writing vnto his mother, said: O my mo∣ther Albinia, if thou knowe not, I giue thee to vnder∣stand, that I neuer gaue credite vnto whatsoeuer For∣tune did aduertise me, althogh at times there was truce betwixt vs: all thinges which she sent vnto my house, she said they were her absolute giftes, but I neuer con∣ceiued or receiued them but as lent: by which meane it cōmeth to passe, that when she returneth to demaunde them, without any altercation willingly I do yeld thē: in such wise, that if she remoue them out of my cofers, at the lest, she shal not teare them out of mine entrailes. Hee that said these and such like wordes, was natiue of Cordoua, which is not farre distant from your citie of Vbeda: and further, he was as priuate with the Empe∣rour of Rome, as your honour is now in Spaine: And after fourtie two yeares that he had manured the com∣mon wealth of Rome, in ambushe Fortune had placed so great mischiefe, procured by her great despight, and no lesse deceipte, that in one day hee lost both life and goods. Sir beleeue me and be out of doubt, that in this life there is nothing more certeine, then that, what soe∣uer it conteyneth is most vncerteine.
The Emperour Titus on a day eating with great ioy, soudeinely at the table clapt his handes and gaue a great sighe, and being demaunded, why he sighed so deepely, made aunswere: I may not satisfie my selfe, with sighing, either ceasse from weeping, so oft as I call to remembrance howe at the will and pleasure of For∣tune, my honour is cōmitted, my goodes sequestred, & my life deposed. Oh high, and verie high wordes, right worthie to be written in the hartes of the mightie! O∣pulent

riches, high estates, and souereigne fauours, if I durst say, I would say, that it is more honourable and also more safe to despise and hold them in small esti∣mation, then to possesse them: because to obteine them it is but fortune, but to contemne procedeth of valure. To giue you counsel to cease to follow Caesar, were of too great want of reuerence: and to persuade you, not to returne into Italie, were rashe ouerthwartnes: but that which I dare say, is, that you should as much pre∣sume to be a Christian, as to be in fauour: and that first you accomplishe with reason, and then with opinion. Not without consideration, I did say & aduenture my selfe to giue you this counsell: because all the mischiefe of Princes Courtes doth arise, that nation followeth nation, people followeth people, & opinion followeth opinion: but reason neuer followeth reason. And for that vnto Princes we must giue our words by weight, & vnto the fauoured by measure: my letter cōcludeth with this aduertisement, that you commit trust vnto ye Gallie but sildom, but vnto Fortune neuer: because they be matters much better to behold farre off then where∣with at hand to be conuersant. I haue composed vnto your honour a booke, intituled, An aduise for the fauou∣red, at times when you shal be on land to peruse: & now haue composed this other treatise of the life of the Gal∣lie: for when you shall passe the Seas, my intent hath bene, that the one may serue to passe the time, & the o∣ther the profite of time. And if for that I am of smal po∣wer and lesse valure, you hold my watchings in small estimation, yet my intent is not to be reiected: for that none doeth so much desire, that you be in fauour, as I desire that you be saued.
