



THE Diuine philosopher Plato, moste gracious soue∣raigne Lady, trauailing all his life time to abolish the barba∣rous maners of the Grecians, and to induce a ciuile forme of liuing among the people: ordeined a lawe to the greate com∣fort of those that folowed vertue, and no lesse to the terrour of others that haunted vices. The which commaunded, that not onely those, which brought in, or inuented any newe thing that might either corrupt the good maners, violate the aunciente customes, hinder through euill example good liuing, impoison with erronious doctrine the consciences, effemi∣nate with voluptuous pleasures the heartes, impouerish with vnprofitable mar∣chaundise the people, or diffame through malitious words the renowmes: should be (as vnprofitable membres) from the common wealth expelled and banished: but also ordeined, that those which studied to publish any institution, appertey∣ning either to the honoure of the Goddes, to the reformation of the frayltie of men, or by any other meane to the profit of the weale publike, should be conding∣ly of the common wealth enterteined, preferred, and honoured. Then if this lawe were iust, most gracious soueraigne Lady (as it is moste iuste in dede) who deserued more honorable enterteynement amonge the liuing, or who meriteth a worthier fame among the dead, then Don Antony of Gueuara the Author hereof? For by his stayed life God hath bene glorified, by his holsome doctrine the people of Spayne heretofore edified, and by his swete and sauorie writinges, we (and sundrie other nations) at this present may be much profited. The which though they are al pity and ful of high doctrine: yet this entituled Los relox de principes, aboue the rest (in my opinion) is most profonde and pleasaunt. For if the zeale that I beare to his workes deceiue not my iudgement, there is no Authour (the sacred letters set aparte) that more effectuously setteth out the omnipo∣tencie of God, the frailtie of men, the inconstancie of fortune, the vanitie of this world, the misery of this life, and finally that more plainely teaceth ye good which mortal men ought to pursue, and the euill that all men oughte to flie: then this present worke doth. The which is so full of high doctrine, so adourned with aun∣cient histories, so authorised with graue sentences, and so beautified with apte similitudes: that I knowe not whose eies in reading it can be weried, nor whose eares in hearing it not satisfied. Considering therfore (most gracious soueraigne

Lady) that this worke may serue to high estates for councel, to curious serchers of antiquities for knowledge, and to al other vertuous gentlemen for an honest pleasaunt and profitable recreation, and finally that it may profite all and can hurte none: I (according to my small knowledge and tender yeares) haue redu∣ced it into our vulgare tongue, and vnder your graces name hame published it for the commoditie of many. Most humbly beseching your highnes to accept in good parte (according to your graces accustomable goodnes) this my good will and trauaile: which here I offer as a pledge of my bounden duty towardes your highnes, and also as a perpetual memory of the feruent zeale I beare to my coū∣trey. And in so doing your grace shal not onely encourage me beinge young in these my first fruites: but also others (peraduenture) of more ripe yeares to at∣tempt the like enterprise, by the whiche the deuine maiestie may be immortally glorified, your puisaunt name worthely magnified, your royall persone duely obeyed, and all your graces naturall and louing subiectes greatly profited.
At Lincolnes Inne the .20. of December.

