


IF the Poet Horace
(Right Honorable)
founde fault with
the multitude of
Pamphletes publi∣shed
in his time, when he saide, Scri∣bimus
indocti doctique poemata
passim: how much more woulde hee
haue reproued the vain glory of these
daies, of the which we may iustly say
as the learned Petrach writeth of his

age. Omnes assidue libros 
neque vlla aetat tanta  &
disserentiū copia, tanta scientium
atque eloquentiū fuit in opia. The
autority of which two graue authors
together with mine owne opinion cō∣curring
with their iudgement in this
point, caused me a long time to for∣beare
the publishing of this Epitome
of mine. But on the other side when
I considered, first that the subiect of
this booke containeth matter of state
and gouernment, which as saith A∣ristotle
Eth. 2. Principatum tenet
in omnibus artibus. Secondarilie,
that I shoulde but fight vnder the
shielde of another man as Homer
writeth of Teucer, Iliad. 8. And
thirdly; that the originall published
by the author himselfe, is by the iudg∣ment
of all the Politiques of this age
esteemed as a pearle of pereles price.

I began to conceiue well of my tra∣uaile,
and to hope that the wise and
learned allowing so well of the booke
at large, woulde not disallow of my
paines in the abbreuiation therof. At
the least thus much I am well assured
of, that if I haue failed in the publi∣shing:
yet haue I not erred in the apt
adressing and dedication thereof, ha∣uing
(with all humility) presented it
to the protection of your most Hono∣rable
name, being as all forraine na∣tions
confesse the greatest politique
of this age, and as all England with
great ioye acknowledgeth, the sole
piller and onely Atlas as it were vn∣der
hir most excellent Maiesty of this
most flourishing common wealth, &
lastly in regard of mine owne parti∣cular
the onely patron to whome I
owe euen by discent a peculiar hande
of all dewty and deuotion. Wherfore

as I hope that the world wil pardon
the former fault (if it be any) in con∣sideratiō
of the amends that is made
thereof by the later fact: so doubt I
not but that your Honorable L. ac∣cording
to your accustomed clemency
will accept of this my poore endeuour
and protect this my attempt, with
the shield of your honorable autho∣ritie
and iudgement: whereby your
L. shall not onely stop the mouthes of
barking Mastifes, who thinke other
mens reprofes their owne praise, but
also thereby greatly increase the pri∣uate
band of my dewtie and seruice.
And thus no whit doubting but that
your L. will pardon my breuitie,
which I haue the rather vsed to the
end my Epistle may be answerable as
wel to your L. leasure as to the worke
it selfe beeing but an Epitome, most
humblie I take my leaue, beseeching

the Almightie to the great good of
this land and the aduancement of hir
Maiesties affaires, that as hee hath
endued you with Nestors wisedome
and eloquence, so also that hee will
continue the course of your life til you
haue attained to Nestors yeares, and
after this life to receiue you into the
eternall ioyes of his celesti∣all
Paradice.

