


THe recommending of this lear∣ned and pleasaunt Treatise, the more generally to haue it perused (right Honorable) is the cause why I haue dedicated the same to your Honour. For it being warranted vnder your protection, (in whome such vertues haue their seate, that in you is ex∣pressed the right paterne of true Nobilitie) can not but carry great credit, though the matter of it selfe, shoulde lesse deserue the same. It nothing doth dismaye me for that I being vn∣knowne to your Honour, haue thus farre presumed, neyther may this seeme any rashe attempt for that cause. For such is the alluring force of vertue, that shee constrayneth vs to beare singular loue and affection, not only to our owne Coun∣treymen by vew of face vnknowne, but also to Aliants, which by Lande and Sea are farre seuered from vs. Wherefore I being caught with the commendation of your Noble heart, furnished with vertue generally noysed, coulde not but take courage to present this Pamphlet vnto your Honours hands, as a most meete Patron for the same. In the which you shall finde pleasaunt matter concerning the disprayse of the Court, and the commendation of the Rusticall lyfe being eloquently pende by that Reuerende Father in God the Lorde Anthony of Gueuarra, a man of great learning and grauitie, whose
 name may sufficiently warrant the worke to be handled with great discretion: last and least, my willing traueyle to reuiue the same lying as dead, and by tyme worn lmost cleane a∣waye. Therefore accept my good will (Ryght Honourable) and if opportunitie shall serue, hereafter there shall greater thinges appeare vnder your Honours name. For this tyme, not to trouble your Honour with longer speache, I take my leaue, recommending my poore payns as the needie Wydowes Myte to your Honourable courtesie,Mar. 12.42. and courtuouse acceptaunce: beseeching Almightie God to giue you increase of Ho∣nour, and to blesse you and your most Noble and vertuous Lady, that she may en∣ioye to hyr comfort and yours, that long desired and bles∣sed fruite and with Anna the Mother of Samuel,1. Sam. 2.1. ioyfully prayse God for the same.

