



NEver more subtily inten∣ded the Gibeonits vnder pretence of olde Furni∣ture, & comming from a-farre, to deceiue the Lordes People, nor vnder the like pretence of Antiquitie novv, doeth Ba∣bels

brood intende to doe the same to Bethels Children. Nei∣ther more braggingly did ever the carnall Iewes, dissenting frō his Faith, yet claime a corporal descent from Abraham their fa∣ther, nor doe the craftie Iesuits, dissenting frō their doctrine, yet claime a full consent vvith orthodox Antiquitie: accusing vs of Noveltie, as Christs ovvn doctrine, & His Apostles, vvas before vs, that it may be seene true vvhich Sainct Peter fore-prophecied of such: to vvit, That in the latter times there should come false prophets,Marke 1.27. Acts 17.19. 2. Pet. 1.2. vvho privilie should bring in damnable heresies; and by rea∣son of vvhome the vvaye of trueth shoulde bee evill spo∣ken of.
While as vve, notvvithstan∣ding, adhere so to truest Anti∣quitie,

as that consenting vvith Tertullian,Te. Apol. lt. vvho saith, Constat id verius esse, quod prius, id prius, quod ab initio, id ab initio, quod ab Apo∣stolis, Is is manifest, that that is truest, which is first; that that is first, which hath bene from the be∣ginning; that that hath beene from the beginning, which hath procee∣ded from the Apostles; vvee con∣clude vvith Lyrinensis vvordes, Quod it a docemus,Lyrinens. ad∣versiu hereses. vt cum dicimus nove, nont amen dicimus nova, & vniversum penitus mundum saeva repentinae haereseos tempestate per∣culsum, adantiquam fidem, à novel∣la perfidia, ad antiquam sanitatem, à novitatis vesania, ad antiquam lucem, à novitatis caecitate revo∣camus, That we so teach, that when wee speake after a new manner, yet notwithstanding wee speake not new things: and we draw back the whole worlde, affrighted with the cruell tempest of sudden heresie,

from recent-broached perfidie, vn∣to the ancient Faith; from the mad∣nesse of Noveltie, vnto sound An∣tiqultie; from the darknesse of No∣veltie, vnto the ancient Light.
Yet it is no marvell, that as vnder pretence of keeping the lavve made against blasphe∣mers, our Head vvas condem∣ned as a blasphemer, by that Iewish High priest;Iohn, 19.7. So vnder pre∣tence of pleading for Antiqui∣tie, the members be condem∣ned by the Romane High priest, as violaters of Antiquitie. And as the Hagarenes called them∣selues Saracenes, so likevvise that vnder a name contrary to their nature, that Iesuitish crue, vvho seeme moste to procure for Antiquitie, practize moste against the same.
This Pharisaicall brood being herein (as in other things) like

to their fore-fathers, of vvhom our Saviour aith, Dicūt, sed non faciunt, They say, but doe not: So these men, (as Ioab did to Abner) they speake fairlie, but deale most foulie vvith vene∣rable Antiquitie: 1. Rejecting Scripture (vvhich is most pri∣mitiue to vs, and Gods ovvne mouth) from being sole deter∣miner in Gods ovvne cause; because it is indeed that breath of consumption to their man of sinne: and, like the Arke, it plagueth those Philistimes, and over-throvveth their Dagon. Next, vvhen they haue made their recourse frō divine Au∣thoritie, to humane Testimo∣nie, challenging those ho∣lie Fathers of the primitiue Church, as impudentlie to bee altogether on their side, as e∣ver that Whoore challenged

Athanasius, to be her associate in her filthie Whoordome. Yet notvvithstanding, vvhen they finde that vvherein they repose, so clearly and peremp∣torly to depose against them; no more disdainfully did e∣ver the Iewes reject Christ, pre∣ferring to Him Barabbas, than they reject those Ancients, and their famous testimonies, pre∣ferring there-vnto the giddie Wine of their inebriating Er∣rors: and regarding them only so farre as they seeme to make for them; as Elias sate no lon∣ger by Cherith, nor Ionas vnder the Gourd, than the one flo∣vved, & the other flovvrished.
Yea, not only dismisse they them, vvith contempt, vvhen they make not for them; but as the envious man, after the hus¦band-mans fielde vvas sovvne

vvith good seede, came craftily & quietly there-after, & min∣gled in his tares: So haue our Romanists sundry vvayes sophi∣sticated the famous vvorks of the Lords Worthies, eyther by intermingling their language of Babel, vvith the language of Bethel; and so making their Books lyke a Lincie-vvoolsie Garment: or doing to their paines, as Hanun did to the per∣sons of Davids Embassadours, cutting and curtayling them; or els altering their vvords, & vvhere they vvould say Shibbo∣leth, making to say Siboleth.
And as Paul vvas accused, for bringing in Strangers and Gre∣cians in the Temple, to pollute the same; So most justly may they be accused, for vnjust in bringing of strangers (vvhich are Counterfeits, vnder the

name of Fathers) into the Church of GOD, vvith such fraudfull Forgerie, to corrupt craftily; and inventing vvitti∣ly, to circumvent vvickedly. And all this they doe for the Diana of the Papacie, and supporting of that glorious Whoore of their proude Mo∣narchie; setting not only a Ci∣tie, vvith Demetrius, but the vvhole vvorld in vproare: for (as that silver smith sayd) by that Craft they haue their vvealth: & if the Lords vvord prevaile, they see their Craft is in danger to be set at naught, and Dagon vvill surely dovvne before the Arke of GOD.
The proofe and particulari∣zing of vvhat is formerly spo∣ken, both in their dealing vvith Fathers, Councels, and Histories, I haue summarily

hereafter digested, & succinctly set dovvn, & dedicate the same to Your Worships Name, as a most vvorthy Patrō & Pattern of Vertue, sincere in the Truth, zealous against Errour, a Mir∣rour of Policie, a Map of Hu∣manitie, an Honour to Your Name, an Ornament to Your Countrey, & a sole Moecenas of Letters amongst Your Equals in this respectlesse and clayie Age: vvhose Name, therefore, justly the Penns of the painful shal perpetuate, propagat your Fame, & cōtinue your memo∣rie. And amongst many astri∣cted to your Worship, for your Honorable & vertuous parts, I shall ever approue my selfe

