



Right Worshipfull,
THe Lord, who is the God of order, abhor∣ring confusi∣on, hath by de∣grees of light, from time to time manifested that hid trea∣sure of his mercy, and our com∣fort,

fore-shaddowing first by Types, then fore-shewing by Prophecies, and at last point∣ing more cleerely and particu∣larly at that Lambe of God, by the Baptist his fore-runner. So that each age and manner of Reuelation hath had still the cleerer Demonstration of the Messiah, who was approching: Euen as the earth more and more is illuminate, the neerer the Sunnes arising vpon our Horizon is at hand: like Noah who first opened the window of the Arke wherein he was, then remooued the couering thereof, and at last stept forth himselfe. This is the Ladder

which Iacob saw comming thus downe from Heauen, by the seuerall degrees of cleerer and neerer manifestation; and the Starry fore-guiding light, leading at last to the place where the Babe was, but there standing and vanishing with∣out further progresse.
So that it is a maruell how that the Vaile so long should be vpon the eyes of Israel, or the Kall of induration vpon the heart of Iudah; but that euen when hee came, marking euery plain Prophesie, that was fore∣told of him, and seeing the ful∣filling of the same in his Per∣son, they might haue knowne their King.

Herod conuocates all the Ecclesiasticall sort, and askes where he should be borne; and they answere, At Bethleem: For so it was writtē, there they saw his Humilitie at his first entrance into the world: and why then trusted they not like∣wise their owne quotation, and embraced their Lord?
Let them peruse in like ma∣ner, the rest of these Prophe∣cies that are spoken of him, (ac∣cording to the particulars of the Treatise following) and (laying aside their stiffe-nec∣kednes, of old vpbraided vn∣to them) truely apply, and they shall beforced to come to that

conclusion of Apollos, that it Acts 8. 28. is euident by Scripture, That Iesus is that Christ, all those things spoken of the Messiah, agreeing to him alone, and be∣ing applyable to no other be∣sides.
The humble abasement of this lowly Lord, comming in the shape of a Seruant, and dy∣ing so ignominious a death for mankinde, beeing the cause of this stumbling of theirs, they expecting a worldly glorious King, and a corporall Deliue∣rance. Therefore Isaiah, fore∣seeing their incredulity for this cause, cryes out, Who will Isaiah 53. beleeue our report? or to

whom is the arme of the Lord reuealed? And holy Si∣meon Luke 2. 34. pronounceth him to be appointed for the rising & fall of many in Israel, and for a signe which should bee spoken against; the wise Economie of the Lords grace beeing herein manifested, that by the reiecti∣on for a time, the fulnesse of the Gentiles might bee accompli∣shed, all men might taste of grace, & the ends of the earth might be his Sonnes possession. psal. 2.
But would they enter within the Vayle, and behold what glo∣ry of the Holiest is vnder the base outward couering of the Arke, and by a holy considera∣tion

digge within the earth of his humanitie, and they should finde the glorious Pearle and treasure of the incompre∣hensible Deity, manifesting it selfe in his life, in matchlesse miracles, possible onely to that nature to performe; so that the simple people are forced to confesse, that none could do such things, except GOD were with him, discouering it selfe also in his death by fearefull wonders: so that the Centuri∣on proclaimes, Of a surety he was the Sonne of God: and after his glorious Resurrecti∣on and Ascension, notwithstan∣ding the mightiest oppositi∣on

of the world, and Prince thereof, by strait Lawes, close imprisonments, cruel torments, farre exilements, and sundry sorts of death; yet this cruci∣fied Iesus, by a few Fishermen, whom he made Fishers of men, subdued the world in short space to himselfe, making Em∣perours to lay downe their crownes at his feet, who was crowned with Thornes, their Scepters to sway to the ad∣uancement of his Kingdome, in whose hand a Reed, for a Scepter, was sometimes moc∣kingly put; their Empires, O∣racles, Idols, and former Hea∣thenish worship, like Dagon

falne before the Arke, lying ouerthrowne, striken dumbe, broken in pieces, and (as Sise∣ra before Iael) prostrate at the foot of his Crosse, by igno∣rance (as the world accounted) subduing learning, by simplici∣tie, wisedome; by humilitie, pride; by weakenesse, power, by meeknesse, cruelty; by suffe∣ring, obtaining victory; and by shame, attaining to glory, the most glorious and most mighty Kingdomes which wee see, beeing but small pieces of their Conquests, and Monu∣ments of their Trophe.
What a death then is this, that hath done such things 

all the liuing could not doe? What matchlesse power is this that hath wrought such incre∣dible things by weaknesse, by contempt, by the folly of prea∣ching? What base meanes is this to bring down highest▪ Po∣wers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions? And how comes it to passe, that these con∣querors at last glorie to dye for him, who dyed such a cur∣sed, and shamefull death, but that they know hee liueth and reigneth for euer? and thereby they (hauing liued heere by grace in him, and dyed wit∣nessing for him) should bee brought to liue and reigne in

glory eternally with him?
But our hope (according to the promise) is, that the Vaile at last will be taken from their eyes, and Iapheth and Sem shall be found in one Tent: the Lord will powre wpon the House of Dauid, and vpon Zech. 12. 10. the Inhabitants of Ierusalem, the Spirit of grace and of com∣passion, and they shall looke on him whom they haue pearced.
These paines, Sir, that I haue taken herein, I haue de∣dicate to your Name, as a te∣stimony of my more then de∣serued duty and affection to you, which I shall thinke my selfe euer bound to owe,

for your manifold courtesies, whereof at your last being in your owne natiue Countrey, I had sufficient proofe; espe∣cially, not onely in that ac∣cesse of LEVI to his Sa∣cred MAIESTIE, by your meanes, and your vnmerited speeches there-anent: but likewise in that Royall gra∣cing of the same which there∣after ensued, and of the Au∣thor (though vnworthy) thereof. The experience there∣fore of your modest, humane, and most gentle inclination, assures mee at this time, of your owne courteous and kind acceptation of this harmoni∣call

consent, (in making the Old Testament (as it were) by the hand to leade in the New; and the Trumpet of the Prophets to sound the newes of the Gospell) without the needing many (if any) words, earnestly to sute the same. Re∣ceiue therefore, Sir, from an affectionate heart, and duti∣full hand, this small Pledge of gratitude and remembrance, and what weakenesse or defect is therein, let your better a∣bility and learned Iudgement couer, support, and supply the same. Whereunto remitting and recommending it: Be∣seeching God to multiply vpon

you the growth of his grace, and sensible blessing, and that with our Master Iesus, you may dayly grow more & more in fauour both with God and Man.

