


MOst graciouse Queene, your Royalle Mtye. is not ignorante (I truste) of the greate services, vvhich throughe, the handes, of experte Chyrur∣gians, operatinge on Mans bodye, are offerede as svveete smellinge sacrifices, vp into the nostrells, of the omnipotēt, & Longevalle Emperioure of the Caelesti∣alle influences. VVherof also all renoumnede, & providente Caesaristes, ha∣ve dilligentlye providede, and furnishede themselves, vvhen as they are vvounded, by theire me∣anes, and ayde (next vnto God) to be curede, and have of ther health restauratione. I coulde not therfore (beinge also incitatede, and councelede thervnto by divers and sundrye of my frendes, & vvellvvillers) omitt this boocke, composede by the most experte, and verye learnede Chyrurgi∣ane Mr. Iaques Guillemeau, addictede Chyrurgian to the Kinge of Fraunce, of the vvhich (vvith∣out doubte) the French natione, doe reape greate service, and commoditye therof, and therfore I have for the service and vtility of your Renoumnede Maiestyes subiectes, & poeple, and also to the commoditye of our contrye (beinge vnitede in the bonde of amitye together) vvith all expe∣ditione possible for me causede it to be translatede both into Englishe, and Lovvdutch because that all yonger, and iunior Chyrurgians, might heerin behould, and vievve, (as in a resplendente Lookinge-glasse) the most parte, and principalle Instrumentes of Chyrurgerye also vvith a verye excellente methode, and doctrine, for all the especialle operations, vvhich a Chyrurgiane (or any other man beinge in necessitye) other by lande, or by vvater, might have any vse for. And seing that there is noe King, nor Prince on earth, vvhich vvith such fervent desire, and fidelitye ende∣voureth by all meanes possible, to maytayne, and protecte, the health and vvealth, both of bodye and soule of theire subiectes, and poeple, as your (most Illustriouse Mtye.) doth for your peculiare inhabitantes, beinge of God thervnto constitutede, and ordaynede. The excellence of this booc∣ke, hath therfore, incitatede, & as it vveare cōpellede me to vse this audacitye (in signe of gratitu∣de, for soe manye, & innumerable benefites, vvhich next after God, of your Royall Mtye. through your continualle ayde, & opitulatione vve reape) humblelye to presente, and dedicate this verye necessarye boocke, vnto your most Magnificente Mtye. firmelye trustinge, & assuredlye hopinge, that your renoumnede Mtyes. subiectes, not onlye vvithin, but also farre vvithout your Mtyes. Re∣almes, & dominiones, shall heerebye be greatlye aydede, and therof also reape greate commodi∣tye. I have effected this vvorcke, partelye to demonstrate the sincere love, & affectione vvher∣vvith (throughe the good acqvayntance of your Mtyes. Gentlemen, Capitaynes, and valiant Sovl∣diours, vvhich your most Royal Mtye. hath vouchsafede so manye years to sende vs) I affect your Mtye. as also to cause all men together vvith me gratefullye to acknovvledge, the ineffable mercye of God, vvhich hath imbuede, and adorned your renoumnede Mtye. vvith so manye noble, vvor∣thye, and excellent virtues, and verye miraculouslye hath defendede, and protected, your Grace, agaynst all the slye, and vvylye practises of your Maiestyes enimies, by this meanes to continue, and by your handes to protecte, not onlye your dominion, and other nations, your neightvours and vnitede subiectes (amongst the vvhich vve account our selves, most bounden to your Mtye.). But also heerby to cause the florishinge of all spirituall, & corporalle artes in the middest of your Realme, and Kingdome. Amongst vvhich, the Arte, and Science of Chyrurgery is esteemede, & accoumptede (as the first, and most vvorthieste, and necessarye parte of Physicke) vvherof I heere present your Mtye. one of the most exquisite, and perpolite boockes touchinge, and concerninge the same. Most humblye in treatinge your Mtye. that it vvoulde vouchsafe your Highnes not to miscontrue this my temeritye, but take, and construe my audacitye, vvhich I have in this my de∣dicatione vsed, to noe other end, then that vvith all my harte, and minde I endevoure to gratifye

your most renoumnede Mtye. & be at the commaunde according to my bounden dutye) of your most Royall Mtyes. subiectes, as much as is possible for me. Thus fearinge least I might be some interruptione, & hinderance vnto your Highnes, I heervvith, commit your Royall Mtye. into the divine protectione, and handes of the omnipotent Kinge, and Father of Heaven, vvhom inces∣santlye I pray, to give ominouse, & fortunate event to your divine attemptes, to the furtherance of his holye vvorde, and reformede church, beinge congregatede together vnder the shaddovve of your Highnes vvinges.

