



PLato among many of his
notable sentences concernyng the gouerne∣ment
of a common weale hath this: well is
that Realme gouerned, in which the ambici∣ous,
desire not to beare office. Whereby you
may perceiue (right honourable) what of∣fices
are, where they be duely executed: not gainfull spoyles
for the gredy to hunt for, but painefull toyles for the heady to
bee charged with. You may perceiue also by this sentence,
there is nothing more necessary in a common weale, then that
Magistrates be diligent and trusty in their charges.
¶And sure in whatsoeuer Realme such prouision is made, ye
officers be forced to do their duties: there is it as hard a mat∣ter
to get an officer, as it is in other places to repulse & shift of
those that with flattery, brybes, and other shiftes, sue & preace
for offices. For the ambitious (that is to saye prollers for po∣wer
or gayne) seeke not for offices to helpe other, for whych
cause officers are ordained: but with the vndoing of other, to
enrich themselues. And therfore ar them once of this bayt, &
force them to do their dueties, then will they geue more to be
rid from their charges, than they did at yt first to come by eē:
For they seeke onely their priuate profite. And therfore, where

the ambitious seeke no office: there no doubt, offices are duely
ministred. And whee offices are duely ministred, it cannot be
chosen, but the people are good, whereof must nedes follow a
good common weale. For if the magistrates be good, the peo∣ple
cannot be ill. Thus the goodnes or badnes of any Realme
lieth in the goodnes or badnes of the Rulers. And therfore not
without great cause do the holy Appostles so earnestly charg
vs to pray for the magistraes: For in dede the wealth & quiet
of euery common weale, the disorder also and miseries of the
same, come specially thorough them. I neede not go eyther to
the Romaines or Greekes for the profe hereof, neither yet to ye
Iewes, or other nations: whose common weales haue alway
florished whyle their magistrates were good, and decayed and
ra to ruyne, when vicius men had the gouernement.
Out countrey stories (if we reade and marke them) wil show
vs examples enow, would God we had not sene mo thā enow.
I purpose not to stand herevpon the particulars, because they
be in parte setforth in the tragedies folowing. Yet by ye waye
this I note (wishing all other to doe the like) namely, that as
good gouernours haue neuer lacked their deserued praises: so
haue not the bad escaped infamy, besides such plagues as are
horrible to heare of. For God (ye ordeiner of offices) although
he suffer them for punishment of the people to be often occu∣pied
of such, as are rather spoilers and Iudasses, than toilers
or Iustices (whom the scriptures cal Hypocrits) yet suffereth
he them not to scape vnpunished, because they dishonour him.
For it is Gods own office, yea his chief office which they beare
and abuse. For as Iustice is the chief vertue, so is ye ministra∣tion
thereof, the chiefest office: and therfore hath God establi∣shed
it with the chiefest name, honouring and calling Kinges
and all officers vnder them by his owne name: Gods. Ye be al
Gods, as many as haue in your charge any ministration of iu∣stice.
What a foule shame were it for any nowe to take vpon
them the name and office of God, and in their doings to shew

themselues deuils? God cannot of Iustice, but plague suche
shamelesse presumption and hipocrisie, and that with shamful
death, diseases, or infamye. Howe he hath plagued euil rulers
from time to time, in other nations, you may see gathred in
Bochas boke intituled The fall of Princes, trāslated into En∣glish
by Lydgate a Monke of y• Abbey of Bury in Suff. How
he hath delt with some of our countrymen your auncestours,
for sundry vices not yet left, this boke named, A Mirrour for
Magistrates, shall in parte plainye set forth before your eyes
which boke I humbly offer vnto your honours, beseching you
to accept it fauorably. For here, as in a mirror or lokīg glasse
you shal se if any vice be foūd, how the like hath ben punished
in other heretofore, wherby admonished, I trust it will bee a
good occasiō to moue mē to ye soner amēdmēt. This is ye chief
end why this booke is setforth, which God graūt it may talke
according to the maner of the makers. The worke was beḡ
& part of it printed in quene Maries time, but staid by such as
thē were chief in office, neuertheles, through ye meanes of the
right honorable Hēry Lord Stafford, ye first part was licēced,
& imprinted ye first yeare of ye raign of this our most noble and
vertuous Quene, & dedicated to your honours with this pre∣face,
Since wt time, although I wāted such help as before, yet
the said good Lord Stafford hath not ceased to cal vpō me, to
publish so much therof as I had gottē at other mēs hands, so
yt through his Lordships earnest meanes, I haue now also set∣forth
another part, conteining as much as I could obtaine at
ye hands of my frends: Which in ye name of al the authours, I
hūbly dedicate vnto your honours, instātly wishing, yt it may
so like & dete your minds, y• your chereful receiuīg thereof▪
may encourage worthy wis to enterprise & performe ye test.
Which assone as I may procure. I entēd through Gods leaue
& your fauorable allowance, to publish with all expedicion.
In the meane whyle my Lordes and Gods, (for so It may cal
you) I moste humbly besech your honours fauorably to ac∣cept

this rude worke, and diligentlye to reade and consider it.
And although you shal find in it, that some haue for their ver∣tue
bin enuied and brought vnto misery: yet cease not you to
be vertuous, but do your office to the vttermost. Embrace
vertue and suppresse the contrary, both in your selues
and other, so shall God whose officers you are, ey∣ther
so maintaine you that no malice shall
preuaile, or if it do, it shall be for your
good, & to your eternall glory both
here and in heauen which I be∣seech
God you may both
seeke and attaine,
Amen.

