



PLATO A∣mong many o∣ther of his no∣table sentences concerning the government of a cōmon weale, hath this:
Well is that realme governed, in which the am∣bicious desyer not to beare office.
Wherby you may perceive (right honorable) what offices are, where they be duely exe∣cuted: not gaynful spoyles for the gredy to hunt for, but payneful toyles for the heedy to be charged with. You may perceyve also by this sentence, that there is nothing more necessary in a common weale, than that officers be diligent and trusty in their charges. And sure in whatsoever realme such provision is made, that officers be forced to do their duties, there is it as harde a matter to get an officer, as it is in o∣ther places to shift of, and put by those, that with flat∣tery,

brbes, and other shiftes, sue and preace for offi∣ces. For the ambicious (that is to say prollers for po∣wer or gayne) seeke not for offices to helpe other, for whiche cause offices are ordayned, but with the vndoing of other, to pranke vp them selves. And ther∣fore bar them once of this bayre, and force them to do their duties, & they will geve more to be rid fro their charges, than they did at the first to bye them: For they seke only their commodity and ase. And ther∣fore, where the ambicious seeke no office, there no doubt, offices are duly ministred: and where offices are duly ministred, it cā not be chosen, but the people are good, whereof must nedes folow a good common weale. For if the officers be good, the people can not be yll. Thus the goodnes or badnes of any realme lyeth in the goodnes or badnes of the rulers. And ther¦fore not without great cause do the holy Apostels so earnestly charge vs to pray for the magistrates: For in dede the welth and quiet of everye common weale, the disorder also and miseries of the same, cum speci∣cially through them. I nede not go eyther to the Ro∣mans or Grekes for proofe hereof, neyther yet to the Iewes, or other naions: whose common weales have alway florished while their officers were good, and decayed and ranne to ruyne, whan noughty men had the regiment, Our owne countrey stories (if we reade & marke them) will shewe vs examples ynow, would God we had not seen moe then ynowe. I pur∣pose not to stand here vppon the particulers, because they be in part set furth in the tragedyes. Yet by the waye this I note (wishing all other to do the like)

namely, that as good governers have never lacked their deserved renowme, fo have not the bad escaped infamy, besides such plages as are horrible to hear of
For God (the ordeyner of Offices) although he suffer them▪ punishment of the people to be often occupied of such, as are rather spoilers and Iudasses, than toylers or Iustices (whom the scripture therfore calleth Hipacrites) yet suffeth he them not to skape vnpuished, because they dishonour him. For it is Gods owne office, yea his chiefe office, whych they beare & abuse. For as Iustice is the chief vertue, so is the ministracion therof, the chiefest office: & therfore hath God established it with the chiefest name, hon∣ring & calling Kinges, & all officers vnder thē by his owne name, Gods. Ye be all Gods, as many as have in your charge any ministracion of Iustice. What a fowle shame wer it for any now to take vpon them the name and office of God, and in their doinges to shew them selves divyls? God can not of Iustice, but plage such shameles presumption and hipocrisy, and that with shamefull death, diseases, or infamy. Howe he hath plaged euill rulers from time to time, in o∣ther nacions, you may see gathered in Boccas booke intituled the fall of Princes, translated into Englishe by Lydgate: Howe he hath delt with sum of our countreymen your auncestors, for sundrye vices not yet left, this booke named A Myrrour for Magi∣strates, can shewe: which therfore I humbly offre vn∣to your honors, beseching you to accept it fauorably. For here as in a loking glas, you shall see (if any vice be in you) howe the like hath bene punished in other

heretofore, whereby admonished, I trust it will be a good occasion to move you to the soner amendment. This is the chiefest ende, whye it is set frth, which God graunt it may attayne.
The wurke was begun, & part of it  .iiii. yeare agoe, but hyndred by the lord Chauncellour that then was, nevertheles, through ye meanes of my lord Staf∣ford, lately perused & licenced. Whan I first tooke it in hand, I had the helpe of many graunted, & of∣fred of sum, but of few perfourmed, sarce of any: So that wher I entended to have continued it to Quene Maries time, I have ben ame to end it much sooner: yet so, that it may stande for a patarne, till the rest be ready: which with Gods grace (if I may have anye helpe) shall be shortly. In the meane while my lords and gods (for so I may call you) I most humbly be∣seche you, fauourably to accepte this rude myrrour, and diligently to read and consider it. And although you shall finde in it, that sum haue for their vertue been enuied and murdered, yet cease not you to be vertuous, but do your offices to the vttermost: punish sinne boldly, both in your selues and other, so shall God (whose lieutenauntes you are) eyther so mayn∣tayne you, that no malice shall preuayle, or if it do, it shal be for your good, and to your eternall glory both here and in heaven, which I beseche God you may covet and attayne. Amen.

