


My Lord,
I Have understood of your deni∣all, for the publishing of a Libell, lately fram'd against me. And though (perhaps) the harme that I should have received thereby, would have been but small, yet my obligation unto you, never ceaseth to be great; and this argueth a spe∣ciall care in you of my tranquillity, not to suffer that any, the least noise should disquiet it. I know not (my Lord) if this be not to handle with too much nicenesse and ten∣dernes, a man that makes profes∣sion of Philosophy; it were enough

that publike Authority should shel∣ter me from the tempest, without exempting me from the wind and dust, and that it would guard my Retrait from savage beasts, without frighting away the flies also, and such importunate Insects. But (my Lord) the goodnesse which you re∣serve for me, extends farther then to ordinary justice. You take not only care for my repose amidst the hurry and tumult of Europe, but you would have the world also shew a respect unto my retirednesse, and that being sequestred from men. J should be also placed beyond the levell and reach of Detraction. Yet this Fiend did pursue S. Hierome e∣ven unto the Grotts of Bethlehem, and to the foot of our Saviours cra∣dle, there she found him (as he re∣lates himselfe) although he had

thought to hide himselfe. If this insolent Thing had no regard of an admirable sanctity, and a place guarded with Angels, me thinks a vulgar innocence, retired within an ill fortified village, must not expect any favourable treaty. But to passe from common conditions to the learned Tribe; If in all ages, there a∣rose seditious spirits, that rebelled against the Chieftaines of Arts and discipline, and if in the memory of our fathers, it was spoken openly at Paris, that Aristotle was a simple Sophister, J think they deale cour∣teously with me in this Country, if they be contented to call me a simple writer. That great blasphe∣mer of the name of Aristotle (my Lord) was D. Ramus, who afterward, though he was a Catholique, was taken for a Huguenot, at the massa∣cre;

And indeed, some did believe that God permitted this to come to passe by a just judgement; and that the Tutelar Angell of good Letters, took the pretext of Religion, for to revenge the injuries that were done to Reason. There is one this day alive in Germany, a petty Ty∣rant in Grammer, an enimy of common and generall verities, and an accuser of Cicero; who (not long since) hath put forth some obser∣vations, where he preferres a bill against his own Judge, and questi∣ons the precedency ever allowed unto that Prince of Latine Antiqui∣ty. So that (my Lord) the univer∣sall consent of all the world, strengthned by a prescription of 18. centuries of years, is not a suf∣ficient title for to warrant the re∣putation of that Roman, against

the prevaricating quirkes of this Barbarian. Indeed, this is a busi∣nesse of no good example, but yet since it is so, and that it doth litle a∣vaile Virtue, to be consecrated by time, and to be crowned by the people, for to make it inviolable a∣gainst the practises of some private Humors. There is no reason that I should complaine before so many Worthies, that have bin so ill intrea∣ted themselves, and that I should be had in any consideration, where Aristotle and Cicero are not in safety; an ordinary man should not make moan, for suffering the same desti∣ny, which extraordinary Persona∣ges have undergone; and I cannot with modesty, desire or expect from you, that you should reforme the world for the love of me; nay, J know (my Lord) that this litle

disorder, is of some good use in a common-wealth; and it were to be wished, that malice would busy it selfe thus, about things of small importance, that it might not think of businesses of higher conse∣quence. Those that have hitherto bestowed their pains, in depraving the sence of my words, and in falsi∣fying my works, had (perhaps) ere this time, forged mens Testaments, and minted false coines; And he that now desires from you a privi∣ledge, would have stood in need of a Pardon, it may be, if it had not been for me. It is better by farre, that injustice should exercise it selfe upon my books, than that it should vexe and implead against all that is good and sacred in a civill society; that unjust men should rather tosse and transpose words, invert and

pervert periods of speeches, than remove the bounds of lands, or de∣molish their Neighbours houses; To say the truth, this is the most inno∣cent way that vice can imploy it selfe in, and I believe I have not a litle deserv'd from the common-wealth, for keeping at worke these ten years, such an infinite number of idle companions, who (certain∣ly) would have been dangerous Commonwealths-men, if they had not chosen rather to have been ri∣diculous Censors. It is well, that the heat of their braines, is exhaled out this way, and that their intempe∣rance takes this course; and that to prevent their fury, men give some scope and liberty to their folly. Per∣mit them therefore this exercise (my Lord) they cannot choose but make use of their time, which they will

imploy farre worse, if you doe not permit them to imploy it thus. Per∣mit giddy Youth to spend their heat and fury upon a senselesse subject, and a dead letter, which is not ca∣peable either of joy or sorrow. As long as these Pen-fencers only beg the Seale of your Authority, be no niggard of the Prince his grace and favour, and abate something of your wonted severity and rigour. If it were anew & unusuall thing, it may be, I should be contented to have the first Libell, which branded me with injuries be suppressed, but since there is now a pretty Library of them, I am in a manner well pleased it should swell and in∣crease, and I take a delight to build me a moniment with those stones, which Envy hath hurl'd at me, without doing me harme. I ac∣count

it no disgrace to be censur'd by some men, because I account it no credit to be favour'd by them: I intend not to canvasse for voices, nor labour a mysterious secret, whereby I may gaine the generall applause of the world. I have ob∣tained what I desired, (my Lord) if I have obtained your approbation, as being derived from an un-erring principle, and from an Jntelligence most perfectly illuminated. God hath bestowed on you, a soveraigne judgement, before the King had committed to your hands, his sove∣raigne Justice. And you were most powerfull in Reason, before you were so in Authority. J need not have recourse to this, knowing that the other is no way against me, and I estime it more glory to me, to have pleased you, than I would

think it satisfaction to have my enimies proscribed by you. Your speeches of me upon every occasi∣on so full of respect, your own pour∣traiture that you bestowed upon me a yeare agoe, for a pledge of your Affection, your imparting to me the riches of your writings, I mean those writings, that were a∣nimated with the spirit of the State, and were full of the greatnesse of your Master, which seemed to me so farre to transcend the strength and vigor of this age, and so nearly resembling the Roman Majesty. In a word (my Lord) each moment of that happy afternoone, which I had the honour to passe away within your closet, are priviledges, which I doe value above that which you denied a Fantasme, or the Successor of Philarchus. I dare not rehearse

my other obligations, by which I stand bound unto you. You have herein injoyned me silence, and be∣lieve, that your favours would loose something of their purity, if my thanks should still attend them. Neverthelesse you must not stifle in me the intentions of an honest man, or smother the conceptions of gratefull thoughts; you have de∣barred me from divulging my ac∣knowledgements, but you shall not debarre me from acquitting that secret part of duty, and from being, (at least in my soule) and that while I live
My Lord

From Balzac the
1 of Iuly 1637.
