



I Doubt not but your
Honoures knowe,
that when the most
ancient treuth of the
ancient of dayes, re∣gistrate
in his holie
word, and left vnto
vs to be the onlie rule of our fayth,
doeth fayle our Adversaries of the

Romish Church, that then their next
refuge is, after that they haue loa∣ded
sacred Scripture with odious
imputations of obscuritie, imperfe∣ction,
and sweying everie way, in
their severall conflictes, to fill the
eares of each one with their clamo∣rous
vp-brayding of Antiquitie,
and humane authoritie, when di∣vine
hath forsaken them; like Saul,
who when God would not aun∣swere
him, had his recourse to Sa∣muel.
Which notwithstanding how
little it maketh for them, & how as
smallie it avayleth them, as Balaam
did Balak, when hee sent for him to
curse, where in the contrarie hee
blessed: or as Baal ayded his owne
priests, when hee was so earnestlie
in-called vpon by them to answere,
while in the meane time there was
no voyce heard; any one, who with
a single eye ever perused the same,
may easilie perceiue, and manifolde
experience hath oftentimes proven.
And yet we see that this is their
great Diana of Ephesus, wherein they

glorie more than the Iewes, when
they cryed, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord: and as Rahel hid
her fathers Idoles, with the Camels
furniture, and sate on the same, and
would not aryse; So with the furni∣ture
of venerable, but wrested and
wronged Antiquitie, they would
hyde their Errours, and cover the
Idolatrie of their whorish mother,
from whom they can not bee moo∣ved
to depart, nor goe out of Babel,
or put away their strange gods, and
bee purged with Iaakobs godlie fa∣milie.
So that their doing is like the
craftie dealing of the Gibeonite Am∣bassadoures,Ioshua, 9.
who to make a League
with the Lordes People, pretended
that they had journeyed from a ve∣rie
farre countrey, and were come
for the Name of the Lord: and this
their impudent lie (which yet they
would haue to bee believed as an
vndoubted trueth) they soothe vp
(forsooth) by demonstration of
Antiquitie; that therefore all which

they had was olde: and this was
their onlie proofe, whereby Ioshua,
and both Princes and People were
deceived: the reason whereof is gi∣ven
in Scripture, Because they as∣ked
not counsell at the mouth of
the Lord.
Even so, that which our Adver∣saries
bring, when they haue quit∣ted
Scripture, to make their blas∣phemous
lies to bee believed, as
sure & sacred trueth, is that which
(as they pretende) is from a verie
farre, even the Apostles tymes, and
ancient holie Fathers of the primi∣tiue
Church, glorious in sufferings,
and from their immediate succes∣sours:
And all this they doe (for∣sooth)
but for the Name of the
Lord, having a religious pretence
(as Simeon and Levi did) of clearing
trueth, & convincing errour there∣by,
and so to make vnitie of fayth
in the Church of God.
And to performe all this, all
which they would seeme to showe
or say, is all olde, drawne from An∣tiquitie:

But beeing aware (by Io∣shua's
example) will wee trye the
men, and their speaches, their furni∣ture,
and pretences, and all this by
the right rule, with the men of Be∣rea,
and as Israel should haue done
the Gibeonites, asking counsell at the
mouth of the Lord, which hee hath
opened in holie Scripture, and
which wee are bidden search, not
believing rashlie everie doctrine, to
bee carried about there-with, but
trying the spirits, whether they bee
of God, or no: and then wee shall
easilie discerne and discover their
guyle, and knowe the Beast by his
Dragon mouth, to bee but a craftie
counterfet of the Lambe.
And tho for a seducing ende
(as was that of the olde Prophets
of Bethel,1. King. 13. pretending the word of
the Lord) that these ancient Fa∣thers
are adduced by them to proue,
yet they are found rather to im∣proue
their erroures: and beeing
violentlie drawne contrarie to their
minde, to pleade for lies, they either

stand (as Christ before Pilate) not
vttering a word, or (as Daniel for
Susanna) opening their mouthes to
withstand conspyring falshood, and
defende injured innocencie, where∣by
bragging Goliah so, hath often∣times
his head cut off with his own
sword; and what they most repose
in, is found truelie to depose against
them.
And moreover,How the Pa∣pists buse Antiquitie. howe they vse
Antiquitie, let the single eye judi∣ciouslie
heere-by remarke:
First,1. By making them lu Iudgs over the Ancients. by making themselues
Iudges of the Fathers, whome yet
they pretende to admit as Iudges
over them, by admitting the Inter∣pretations
of such as they list, and
seeme to make for them, and round∣lie
rejecting the Expositions of
others; as Bellarmine doeth clearlie,
lib. 1, de Pug. cap. 5, of such as make
against them. And as for the Pope,
by giving him vncontrollable po∣wer
to over-top them, Qto. de . Epist. in  assigning to
their wordes his fittest meaning,
yea, and to make to bee the mea∣ng

which is not, by his celestiall
judgement.
Next,2 By wre∣sting then meaning. (as is set downe in the
xpurgatorie Index of this same
ERTRAM) they avowedlie pro∣fesse,
That in the ancient Catholick
Writers they tolerate manie Er∣ours,
and must extenuate and ex∣use
them, and oftentimes must de∣ye
them, by devysing a fit shit,
nd some handsome meaning vnto
them, when in Disputations they
are opposed against them.
Besides,3. By razing out of their Ws what makes against them. howe shameleslie they
raze out of Auncientes whatsoever
maketh against them, their avowed
practise of the same, in the last Edi∣tion
of Sainct Augustine, printed at
Paris, by Nivel, in Sainct Iacques
Streete, at the Storks, 1571, in these
wordes doeth testifie, Ex sanctiss.
Tridentini Concilii decreto veterum pa∣trum
codices sunt expurgandi. To
whome I must say as Ambose sayde
of olde to the Arrians,Orat. . contra Arriā. That they
may well blot out the letters, but
the fayth they shall never abolish.
Moreover,4. By rejecting them gossly. how disdainfullie
times they reject all the Father
and bring in some handsome exposition
of their owne, to fit their purpose,
let that practise of Bellarmine
lib. 1. de purg. cap. 6, giue proof
and in particular of some, (as o
Tertullian) saying, That little cred
is to bee given him: and of others
(as Origen) That hee was accursed
on earth, lib. 2. cap. 8. and was seene in Hell a∣ter
death, with Arrius and Nesto∣rius.
Yea, of them all in common h
spareth not to say, when they mak
against him, Scripta Patrum non sun
regulae,De Co.  2, cap. 12. nec habent authoritatem obli∣gandi.
And againe, Argumenta à ve∣terum
testimonio petita,De Cocil. I. 1, cap. 3. posse merito cn∣temni
dum a opponuntur.
In like manner, such as they
grant of the Auncientes to bee but
counterfets,5. By calling them Countr∣fts, wh they make against them: but obtruding them as true, when they seeme to make for them. (especiallie affirming
so, when they are adduced against
them) in peremptor manner they
obtrude them as true, when they
seeme to make for them, as the

cleare collation of the ensuing pla∣ces
will evidentlie giue notice: Bel∣lam.
lib. 1, de Christo, cap. 10, com∣pared
with lib. 2, de Pont. cap. 16.
Also lib. 2, de Missa, cap. 12, compa∣ed
with lib. 1, de Verbo, cap. 14.
In the same forme they vse
their owne moste famous Writers,6. By calling them manifst Lars. nd Histriographers, calling them
eart Liars, when they make
against them, as Bellarmine doeth
ozomen and Socrates, lib. 1, de Cleri∣is,
cap. 20: and yet as moste fayth∣full
Writers hee vseth them to
prooue this point, lib. 4, de Pont.
cap. 9.
Neither may I omit the shame∣lesse
corrupting of the Fathers,7. By putting in fale words of their owne in the Writs of the Aun∣cients. by
putting in false wordes, as well as
hey raze out the true: Examples
whereof in place of manie wee may
see in Bellarmine, lib. 2, de verbo, cap.
2: where hee citeth Chrysostome to
haue , where hee hath truelie
: and lib. 2. de reliq. Sanctor.
cap. 3, hee maketh Chrysostome to say
in his Sermon of luventius and Maxi∣mus,

Tumules Martyrum adoremu.
where there is no such word in t
Greeke.
And as wee haue showne,8 By callg the most an∣cient Coun∣cels false. and fraudull. how
they vse the ancient Fathers at the
pleasure, so how they vse ancie
Councels, when they make not f
them, let Bellarmine declare in h
Preface, De summo Pontifice, and e
where; accusing the second gen∣rall
Councell of Heresie, for oppugning
the Papall Supremacie,Bll l. 1, de L i∣, cap. 20. An
381: and the Councell of Chalcedo
holden Anno 451, 1, de P, cap. 9 of falshood an
fraude, while as yet they will haue
the Pope onelie with his privat
Consistorie, whether hee erre, 
not, to be obedientlie believed.
But moste clearelie (to conclude)
how despisinglie they reject
not onelie humane Antiquitie,9. But most of all, in pudent∣lie rejecting and trangre∣sing (by their owne Cons∣son, the most sacre Anti∣quitie of ll, which is that of scripturall Precept, and Christs pra∣ctise. b
divine there-withall, how ever the
brag of nothing more, let their ow
plaine Confession in that Councel
of Constance, Sess. 13, beare witnesse
where concerning the taking away
the Cup from the people, they say

Albeit Christ instituted the Supper
vnder both kyndes of Bread and
Wine; and such-lyke, albeit in the
primitiue Church this Sacrament
was received vnder both kindes,
yet for avoyding some dangers, let
it be taken heere-after by Laiks on∣lie
vnder one kynd,Concil. Trid. Sss. 5, cap. 3, can. 1. and that vnder
the paine of a Curse, as the Coun∣cell
of Trent hath decreed.
So that as the chiefe Priests, and
Elders, and all the Councell, sought
false witnesses against Christ, and
tho manie came; yet found they
none, till at last two came: Even so,
altho the Pope, and all his Coun∣cell,
seeke busilie false witnesses
against Christes blessed Trueth re∣gistrate
in Scripture, yet amongst
these reverend Fathers, and ancient
Doctors of the primitiue Church,
they shall finde none conspyring so
together in everie age, as they al∣leadge
for them: & tho they would
make a show of manie who seeme
to say for them, yet in effect the ju∣dicious
and vnpartiall Reader and

remarker shall finde it so no wise,
till some came in in later tymes for
the behoose of that Romish high
Priest, and few Pople in great store
in the Lords field, and thorow faire
pretences, and secret subdolous
meanes which they vsed, and the
not so warie vigilancie of the Lords
owne Servants, altho they were not
so clearelie perceived, nor heedful∣lie
resisted in the beginnings, yet
when that wicked seede beganne to
kythe more plainlie by anie growth
and discoverie of it selfe, it was
remarked by sundrie vvho vvere
awake, and from tyme to tyme op∣posed
by some, tho few, who were
as Elias in Achabs time, or the two
afflicted witnesses spoken of in the
Revelation, who were still suppressed
as they rose and spake, or els killed
by that bloodie Beaft.
A particular prooffe of the
trueth heereof your Honours may
see in these worthie Monuments of
Antiquitie, concerning that maine
pillar whereon Poperie standeth,TRANSVE∣STANTIA∣TION.

the verie Soule of their Soule-Mas∣ses;
which beeing taken away, lyke
Dagons house, it falleth to the
ground, and the palmes of the
handes of that proude Idole are cut
off, where-by for their spirituall
merchandize they so largelie re∣ceiue.
COnsidering then the worthie
paines that the Pennes of the
godlie of our Neighbour-Nation
from time to time haue taken, for
the common benefite of all, in
translating sundrie worthie Au∣thors,
for comforting and confir∣ming
the truelie religious amongst
them; as also finding how that glo∣rious
reformed and refined Church
of France had not suffered the same
to bee hid from the eyes of their
people, and had therefore translated
the same into their natiue Idiom;
the sight whereof in that worthie
Gentle-mans Librarie, George Ogilvie
of Carnusie, (a Lover of Letters, and
the Learned) did much encourage

me to put Pen to Paper. And there∣with
considering with what serious
intreatie that great & glorious Mar∣tyr,ooke of. Martyrs, Fol. 1660.
Bishop Hooper, at his going to
the fyre, made to Doctor Brookes,
then Bishop of Glocester, for his right
information in the matter of the
Sacrament; desiring him to reade
this worthie BERTRAM, whom in
a singular and earnest manner hee
recommended vnto him.
Weighing these together, (I
say) and viewing with what rare
light, as a cleare Torch-bearer, this
man so long since hath gone before,
howsoever others worthilie of late
haue followed after, I was moved
to bestow some paines in exposing
it (especiallie in these dangerous
dayes) to the common view of all:
whereby if our spirituall Nasci &
Pasci, the new birth, and new re∣paste,
be compared, and the trueth,
or realitie of both, according to the
effectuall force and vertue which a
thing hath, be rightlie considered,

(which maketh the verie renewed
Gentile to be a true Iew indeed) so far
as ignorant Nicodemus swarved by
his literall and carnall meaning,Rom. 2, 29. from the true vnderstanding of
Christs words, when Hee spake of
the one; as farre with the carnall
Capernaite shall our Adversaries bee
groslie found to erre, by their like
literall and carnall meaning, from
the true vnderstanding of Christs
words, when he spake of the other.
And that to them as clearelie Hee
showeth the way to vnderstand
aright the true manducation of His
Bodie, while as Hee sayeth, The
wordes that I speake, are spirite and
lyfe,Iohn, 6, 63. as Hee pointeth at the true
meaning of His wordes, that a man
must be borne of new againe, while
as Hee sayeth, Except a man be borne
of water,Iohn, 3, 5. and the spirite, he cannot en∣ter
into the Kingdome of GOD.
These paines then that I haue
taken heerein, with a most duetifull
hand, & devoted heart, to your Ho∣nours

gracious acceptation, hum∣blie
doe I offer the same, without
assentation, (which least of anie
becommeth not my calling) cea∣sing
to blaze mans praise; and as
best befits mee, I pray to God, that
the deepe Impression of His Image,
who is the viue Character of the
Father, may by the powerfull hand
of his Spirit bee so seated and setled
in your heartes, that by that hea∣venlie
Stampe it thay bee both in∣wardlie
witnessed to your owne
Consciences, and outwardlie testi∣fied
in your liues to the world, that
Your Honoures are the adopted
Children of that heavenlie Father,
whome as You set Your selues to
glorifie on earth, hee shall not (af∣ter
the heaping of much Honour
and Happinesse vpon You and
Yours) fayle to glorifie You in the
highest Heavens, which is the full
Felicitie and blessed Rest of His
owne Sainctes, and which, as the
highest of all Wishes, I shall not

ceasse to beseech GOD to ef∣fectuate
towardes YOVR HO∣NOVRS,
and YOVR Hope∣full
and Happie Off-spring.

