



RIGHT HONOVRABLE,
THat inueterate-enmie of Gods glory & mans good, hath neuer ceased from the beginning to intermie in the Lords field, his pesent pop∣ple amongst the good seed, setting a worke the Mysterie of iniquitie, euen then, when the Mysterie of mans redemption was begun to be published, and by force or fraud, either as a redde Dragon, or as a counterfeite of the Lambe, with implacable malice (but limited power) hee hath euer assaulted the Church both in head and members:
Sometimes prouoking to sinne (as Balak  did the people in Ahabs time, as in sinnes o opinion, contra verum.
This later is of two sorts either hereticall against the  against the Body.  The two preceding were old heresies who long a∣go hath receiued their iust condemnation: the later carry the  of their grosse guiltinesse, and clear conuiction, specially such as are against the Priesthood of Christ, consisting in full satisfaction, until sole inter∣ sufferings with Christs all-sufficient oblation: ma∣king that glorious worke to be as a Lin∣sey-wolsey garment, and man to share in the glory of that, in the grace whereof he hath onely .
By which impious assertion, and illicit coniunction, Christ is degraded, his blood
vilified, his merit maimed, his crosse curtai∣led, his death debased, and his sufferings stai∣ned, by those who of godlinesse haue made gaine, but not made their gaine to bee godli∣nesse: turning Gods Temple againe into a denne of theeues, and therein making Mer∣chandise, not of Doues, but of Soules (as is fore-prophesied of them;Reuel. 18.13.) and haue raised a∣gaine the tables of Money-changers, which Christ once ouerthrew. As no more plainely their owne Mantuan affirmes,Mant. de co∣lam temp. saying, Omnia venalia, Romae: then their owne Pope Pius confirmes,Aeneas Sylui∣us ad 1. pereg. Ep. 66. saying, Nil absque argent Roma∣na curia donat. Nam peccatorum venia & Spiri∣tus dona venduntur.
And indeed though these Subterranean Vul∣cans, and fire-worke men build vpon straw, stubble,2 Cor. 3. and hay, their light assertion, without any more solid foundation, then the ground∣lesse conceit of a brainesicke head, and coue∣tous heart can afford: yet they draw in from the seduced simple, most solid substance of gold, siluer, and large revenewes by a strange sort of Alchymie, Manus porrigentes indultri∣ces, solùm manus porrigentibus adiutrices, but No pennie, no Pater noster, being better seene (as is truely said) in the Golden number of actuall reset, nor in the Dominicall letter of sacred and holy Writ.
Neither without cause does these Locusts that came from the bottomlesse pit smell of

fire; or is it a wonder, that these that came out of the smoke of a great furnace, doe yet speak to poore soules of a fiery furnace; nei∣ther can any iustly admire, that they torment the conscience, whose power giuen them, is as the power of Scorpions, not to kill out∣right, by simply damning soules, (for so they should get no profit nor prey) but to torment them with the sure expecting of a Purgatory fire, out of which there is no release, but by the Suffrages, and Soule masses, and so like Beniamin, they rauen as a Wolfe▪ and as the name of the Prophets sonne was, they be∣come speedie robbers, and swift to the prey, neuer resting cruelly to sting; and like Iobs mi∣serable comforters▪ to propine to the dying soule in the greatest agony▪ and thirst for coo∣ling comfort, such a bitter potion as Christ got on the Crosse▪ while the Lions teeth by some bootie be baited.
The zeale then which we all owe to Gods glorie, and loue which we owe to our fellow members, (as yet perhaps vncome out of Ba∣bell) hath moued me at this time to take some paines in this argument to partie the sedu∣cers, and pitie the seduced, and by the sword of the Spirit, and Lampe of the Word to conuince the one, and conduct the other into the path of truth, if they may be cured.
Which paines, ight Honourable, with no lesse affectionate heart, then an officious

hand, I offer to your view, and dedicate to your Name, beseeching God that in all ho∣nour it may flourish, your soule by grace, and your estate with prosperitie; and that those singular gifts wherewith your God hath in∣dued you, may still receiue a happy growth, for your better acquitall in that eminent sta∣tion, wherein his wise dispensation hath set you, that his Name may bee glorified, his Church comforted, your Countrey benefi∣ted, your posteritie blessed, and your owne selfe eternally may bee saued in that great day.

