



RIght honourable, im∣boldned with your Lordships loue to learning, and fauour of the truth, I haue presumed to present this small Treatise vnto your Honour: which discouereth certaine erronious & dangerous positions, lately sprung vp, and stifly maintained, tending to the great dishonour of God, the destroying of his Nature, and the great incouragement of all libertie. To the opposition of which, the great value and esteeme of the Truth of God, which should be preti∣ous
 to all, and (as Dauid speakes) Psal. 119. dearer then thousands of gold and siluer, haue giuen me strong and cleare ani∣mation. Wee may reade (right Honourable) that the Gen. 26. Canaanites stopped vp the Welles of Isaack, but Isa∣acks seruants would not endure this: they laid them open againe. Your Lordship may in this discourse behold one that stopped vp the Welles of Isaack, the omniscience, the proprietie and nature of God, that his knowledge is not vniuersall, that all things are not na∣ked and open vnto his eies, and therefore cannot, no not in the simple act of his knowledge, see or behold the sinnes of the iustified: but that iustification vtterly swallowes vp the act of Gods knowledge. How then (right hono∣rable) should any seruant of Isaack endure this? how should hee but open these Welles againe, vn∣lesse he would betray the inheritance of his Master in∣to the hands of the men of Gerar? which no faithfull seruant can possibly be drawne vnto; Gods blessed truth being of that ineffable value, that, as Nazian∣zen speakes, Naz. orat. 2. de pac. in the defense thereof, his meekest ser∣uant will stirre, and the most mildest fight, before it shall be endammaged by their forbearance. We may reade in Herodot, Herodot. that the Kings danger made Cresus dumbe sonne to speake. And Dauid saies of himselfe, Psal. 39.2. I was dumbe, and spake nothing; I kept silence euen from good, but my sorrow was more stirred. Though hee was re∣solued to be silent, yet his zeale to Gods glory would not permit him. Alas, the Prophet Ieremie may conclude, Ier. 20.9. as wearie with opposition, that hee will make no more mention of God, that he will speake no more in his name: but his word will be in his heart as a burning
 fire shut vp in his bones, and hee will be wearie with for∣bearing, and not able to refraine when he shall heare the railings of many. And the reason hereof is cleare: For, as Bernard speakes, Bern. sup. Cant. Si zelus deseruit, & amor, If the zeale of Gods glorie once forsake vs, then farewell all loue to God. I haue therefore laboured the suppressi∣on of these pernicious positions, that they might not liue to breath forth an infectious steame, to the dis∣honour of God, and the preiudice of the soules of his people.
Wherefore I most humbly intreat your Lord∣ship, as another Moecenus, to accept and patronize this poore mite, indeed vnworthie your Lordships view, as the fruits of a short conception, the effect of a distracted studie, oft hindered and perturbed by sinister courses. We may reade, that a wise Philoso∣pher commended Artaxerxes, Artaxerxes. who when he percei∣ued a poore man (that had no better treasure to be∣stow vpon him) to bring him from the Riuers side a handfull of water, he respected it as if it had beene a greater and a better Present. And I nothing doubt of the like worthie and generous disposition in your Lordship. For (as Austine speakes) Austine. Deus ita magnus artifex in magnis, vt minor non sit in minimis: God is so great a workman in great things, as that he is nothing lesser in the least. Therefore he confesseth vnto him, Austin. ibid. Omnipotens manus tua semper vna & eadem, &c. Thy hand is almightie, alwaies one and the same. Albeit wee haue the greatest vse of the Sunne to rule the day, and of the Moone to rule the night, yet can we not rightly conclude, wee haue no neede of the lesser
 starres. Thus humbly bequeathing this poore la∣bour to rest vnder your Lordships fauour, and your Lordship to the safe protection of the Almightie, to possesse the felicitie of this life, and the eter∣nall glorie of the life to come, I most humbly take my leaue.

