



SIR,
THe Parable of our Saui∣our in the Gospel must bee my Apologie for the publication of this Sermon to the eye and censure of the world,Luke 11. the which at the first when I preach't it, I thought not worthy your iudicious eares in my priuate Church: but being ouercome by the importunity of the reuerend Diuine, Master Gouge, I condescended (though sore against my will) to giue way to his desire: thus haue I made

a Vertue of Necessity, and as it is in the Prouerbe, Vnica fidelia duos de∣albaut parietes: I haue both satisfied his pious desire for the preseruation of the memory of his vertuous and religious Wife: and also (hauing no better to present your Honor withal) I am bold to offer this, as the poore man brought water in his hands to Artaxerxes: only as a testimony of my willingnesse to returne something to your Ho∣nors hands, from whom I haue recei∣ued so much (euen all the mainte∣nance that now I haue) either imme∣diately from your Honour, or medi∣ately by your Honours procurement. It was my happinesse to be trained vp by that Illuminate Doctor, Prelate & Pillar of our Church, your Brother, and the now most reuerend and reli∣gious, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells; and since to be sustained by your Ho∣nour. So that I may iustly say with the Psalmist,Psal 27.10 When my Father and my Mother forsooke mee, the Lord

tooke me vp, and committed mee to the charge of one Brother, of prime place in the Church, for my spirituall estate; and to your Honour, the o∣ther Brother, of principall place in the common wealth for my tempo∣rall. Now besides your Honours fa∣uours to me in particular; your ma∣ny reall fauours and great affection to the Church and Churchmen, both when you were in publike place of Honourable imployment to our late∣ly gracious Soueraigne, King Iames, of euer famous and happy memory; and also since your priuate retired∣nesse, may iustly challenge the best of our Labours to be consecrated to so learned and noble a Patron of Lear∣ning. Besides these former respects, your Honour hath yet another inte∣rest in these my weake endeuours: because you went chiefe amongst ma∣ny worthy and worshipfull Auditors, which honoured the Funerall with your presence. In all these respects, I

hope your Honour will fauourably be pleased to accept that of mee, which Almighty God doth of vs all, a wil∣ling heart and desire. Saint Paul tells vs,2 Cor. 8.12. in his second Epistle to the Co∣rinthians, that God accepts vs accor∣ding to that which wee haue, not ac∣cording to that which wee haue not. If in this your Honour pardon my ouer-great presumption, you shall more and more make me

