



DREAD SOVERAIGNE,
HAD this Letter of Dr. Carier
beene imparted, or the drift of it
onely reached to your Maiestie, it
would haue deserued none other an∣swere
then your Maiesties priuate
censure; and might well haue beene buried in silence
with the Author of it: But now that it not only aymes
in particular at all the members of the bodie Politike,
First the Nobles, then the Commons, and lastly the
Clergie; but withall is published to the view of the
World, and spread through all the quarters of your
Land, for the better effecting of that it aymes vnto;
and is not a little magnified by the Romish faction:
It must needs argue in vs, either want of wisedome
in preuenting a mischiefe, or of power in prouiding

for our owne safetie, or of zeale and sinceritie in our
loue to the Trueth, if it should passe without some dis∣couery,
aswell of the malicious scope to which it tends,
as the weakenesse of the arguments by which it ende∣uours
to perswade.
The maine end which it driues at, is either a to∣tall
reconcilement to the Church of Rome; or if that
cannot be, a partiall toleration of the Romish Re∣ligion.
The generall meanes by which it striues to com∣passe
this end, are first by working a destraction euen
amongst those your Subiects, who euery way con∣forme
themselues aswell to the doctrine, as the disci∣pline
of the Church of England, established by pub∣like
allowance, in making some Puritanes, and some
Protestants, who in his languageCap. 2. Sect. 41. can endure the
state of the Church of England as it is, but could
be content it were as it was: (implying thereby
the rest to be Puritanes) some Caluinists and some
temperate men,Cap. 2. Sect. 45. who cannot but in iudgment
approue the trueth of that Religion which he
calles Catholike, (thereby implying the rest to bee
Caluinists) the one he termes the greatest enemies
of the Clergie, the other his honest and louing
brethren, wherof he professeth he knew ma∣ny,
and himselfe to be one: whereas in trueth if
any such there be, the difference should rather haue

beene made betwixt Protestants and Papists, En∣glish
and Romish Catholikes, since they who could
be content the Church of England were as it was
before the Reformation, can in my iudgement bee
none other then Papists; and those that in their iudge∣ment
approue the doctrine of the pretended Catholike
Religion, can (as farre as I apprehend it) been none
other then Romish Catholikes. Thus those whom
we call Papists, he calles Temperate Protestants,
and those whom we call Protestants, he calles State
Puritanes.
The second generall meanes for the compassing of
his desired end, is an indeuour to worke an vtter se∣peration
betwixt our Church and other reformed
Churches, specially those of France, and the Nether∣lands;
whom therefore in contempt hee calls Hugo∣nots,
and Geux, and their doctrine Caluinisme;
intending thereby, (as I conceiue) either to weaken
our strength, by leauing vs to stand single, or, which
is worse, to inforce vs at length to relapse vpon
Rome: And to this purpose is hee bold to affirme,
that their doctrine makes as much against the Reli∣gion
of England, as that of Rome; whereas the
writings of the most learned men, aswell on their, as
on our side, our harmonies of Confessions, the testi∣monie
of our aduersaries, nay, theImpia myste∣ria & instituta ad Caluini prae∣scriptum a se sus∣cepta & obserua∣ta, etiam a subdi∣tis seruari man∣dauit, circa med. bull. Pope himselfe in
his Bull against Queene ELIZABETH, your Ma∣iesties

La charité que nous por∣tons aux sieurs estats nos voisins & confederezfai∣sants profession de la mesme re∣ligion auecques nous.
Declaration to∣chant le faict de Conradus Vorstius, pag. 6.
Messieurs les e∣stats doncques estants non seulement nos alliez mais le principallion de nostre coniun∣ction estant no∣stre vniformité en la vraye re∣ligion. pag. 40. Mais la religion dont moy & eux faisons professi∣on na esté iugée n aucun concile ou nous ayons esté ouys: spea∣king of those of the reformed religion in France, desense du droit des Rois, pag. 82.
Ce qu'l dit que les heretiques de France, font leur profit de ceste diuision est fon∣dée sur ceste pro∣position que ceux de la religi∣on Christienne reformee cest a dire repurgée du papisme sont he∣retiques ce qui se prouuera quand vn aura fait vn autre euangile ou forgé vn au∣re bible▪ ib. p. 109 Bookes, and practise in the matching of
that Noble Ladie, your daughter, and in permitting
those Churches the free exercise of their Religion
within your dominions, so plainely euince the contra∣rie,
that I wonder, hauing let fall so foule a blot from
his pen, he durst present it to your Maiesties view:
and yet I neede not wonder, considering hee was not
ashamed to tell your Maiesty, that for any thing you
haue written in your Apologie, or Premonition,
you may when you please, admitte the Popes Supre∣macie
in spirituals: which must needes argue, either
that he was meerely ignorant what your Maiesty had
written, or cared not at all what himselfe wrote; re∣garding
rather the euennesse of his Stile, and the ca∣dencie
of his sentences, then the trueth of his asserti∣ons;
like false windowes, bearing proportion with the
rest of the building, but without light.
By the trueth of these assertions, your Maiestie
may make an estimate of the whole piece; in which, if
I can iudge any thing, I haue not met within the nar∣row
compasse of so short a treatise, so formally pend,
and carrying so faire an outside; so many weake ar∣guments,
so many grosse mistakes, so many notori∣ous
falshoods, so many irreconciliable contradicti∣ons,
so many sandie and disioynted consequences:
howsoeuer were his proofes neuer so strong, so sure,
so true, so consonant, so coherent; yet was hee a man

most vnfit to intermeddle in a businesse of vnion,
and pacification; who was so farre ingaged to one
partie, as by his owne acknowledgement hee was per∣swaded,
Cap. 1. Sect. 20. that all the Religion at this day prescribed,
and practised by the Church of Rome, is the true
Catholike Religion; and promiseth particularly to iu∣stifie
it from point to point, when time and opportu∣nitie
should serue: and your Maiestie, together with
vs of the same profession, he rangethCap. 1. Sect. 13. among Iewes,
and Infidels, and heretiques, for refusing to ioine with
them in the worship of Christ in the Sacrament.
But God blessed not his vaine proiect, Mr. Hen∣rie
Constable dying within fortnight after he came
from Paris, by Cardinall Perrons appointment, to
Leidge, to conferre with him; and himselfe a while
after in Paris, within a moneth of his comming thi∣ther
to conferre with the Cardinall; yet as the Apo∣stle
speakes of Abel, being dead, he yet speaketh,
though in a different manner, and the speach of dead
men commonly prooues more effectuall, more profita∣ble,
or more dangerous then that of the liuing.
For your Maiesty, there is (God be thanked) no
feare at all; the obligations by which you haue tied
your selfe to the Religion established amongst vs, be∣ing
so many and so strong, and withall his motiues for
inducement to the contrary, so weake; dealing with
your Maiesty as the deuill did with our Sauiour, who

being beaten from Scripture, fell to the promising
of the glory of kingdomes, which notwithstan∣ding
was not in his power to performe; onely for
their sakes, some Replie seemed not vnnecessary, of
whom it may truely be sayd, which hee falsly affirmes
of your Maiesty, thatCap. 2. Sect. 6. they imbrace shadowes
instead of substances, which as a matter of high
commendation, he solemnely protests, he gladly wrote,
and so gaue it out with all the honour hee could of your
Maiesty: But such kinde of commendation, as your
Maiesty truely telleth Cardinall Perron, is none o∣ther,
then if a man should commend a souldier
for his faire haire, and call him coward to his
face.
Now because the Letter, (though not without
some marke of presumption) is by the Author, not onely
dedicated, but throughout directed to your Maiesty,
(as if he meant to fight, neither with small nor
great, saue onely against the King) I was im∣boldned
humbly to submit this my defence of trueth
to the Royall arbitrement of the same sacred, and vn∣partiall
vmpire, hoping to find the censure somewhat
more fauourable, in as much, as I haue made bold to
borrow the greatest part of my weapons, both offen∣siue
and defensiue, from the rich armourie of your
Maiesties writings, wherin already, though seuered,
as in the tower of DAVID, built for defence,

hang a thousand shields and all the targets of
the strong men: but being ranged into one volume
as vnited forces, they would doubtlesse haue more
strength, aswell to assault as to resist, both the tongues
and pens of men, and the teeth of time▪ Hauing lighted
my candle then at your Maiesties torch, I thought my
selfe in duety bound to offer it vpon the same altar
againe.
Hee was your Maiesties seruant, and so am I,
both vnworthy, though in a different respect; hee
sworne to serue your Maiestie, which how he perfor∣med
at last, this Letter can best speake, and your Ma∣iestie
best iudge; my selfe sworne to your Maiestie,
for the seruice of your most Noble Sonne the Prince,
my most sweete and gracious Master, whose quicke∣nesse
of Spirit, loue of Vertue, and sense of true Reli∣gion,
though I haue now by a good space obserued sen∣sibly
to grow faster then his yeeres, yet being but ten∣der
in age, and consequently not fully ripened in iudg∣ment;
I thoght I might herein doe him some seruice
for his better information, to marke out vnto him such
passages in your Maiesties writings, as serue for a
satisfaction to such passages of the letter as may con∣cerne
him; hoping thereby hee may somewhat the ra∣ther bee moued to
goe on as hee hath happily begunne,
till hee arriue to that perfection which Plinie com∣mends

to Traian, Facere scribenda, scribere le∣genda.
I conclude with that repetition of the prayer
of Dauid for you both: Giue thy iudgements to
the King (O God) and thy righteousnesse to
the Kings sonne; that your dayes may bee
vpon earth as the dayes of heauen, both for glory
and lasting▪ and for your Maiesty, with that acclama∣tion
of the Romans to their Emperours,
De nostris annis tibi Iupiter augeat annos.

