


IT might iustly be won∣dered (right honorable) that in this so bright a Sunneshyne of the Gos∣pell of Grace, so plenty∣fully ouerspreading this noble Island with such resplendisaūt beames, so many Englishe Endi∣mions could cōtinue so long, so amazedly dazeled of sight, as not to be able to lift vpp the eyes of their sleepy affections to con∣ceaue, much lesse to pearce into the amyable closettes thereof: If the old auncient Enemy of mankynd, and sworne aduersary of all true Religion, were not more vigilaunt to lulle in securitie, then those sluggardes are willyng to be awakened out of their lamentable blindnes. For if we behold the most happy course of this our floorishing continuaunce in sincere Religiō, if we ponder with vpright ballaunce of vnstayned affection, the glorious manifestation of the auncient Apostolicke doctrine, & withall looke into the mar∣uelous discouery of that counterfaict Synagogue of Rome, who could not but wonder at so blockishe in

sensibilitie in so manifest light? A man would haue thought, though Sathan hadd transformed him selfe into an Angell of light, that yet he should not so long haue preuayled, especially emongest so sharpe sighted Deuines, so cunnyng caruers of Scriptures, and profoūde Doctors of Schoole, where a thorough Anatomy is vsually made of all manner of Artes, discipline and doctrine. A man would haue thought that of all other knowledge, the heauenly doctrine of Christ, beyng of all partes so forcible and mighty in operation, so able of it selfe to drawe, moue, stirre, renew and chaūge men, to seàrch, examine, to cutt to the quicke, to opē the filthy soares of sinne, to launce the festered impostumes of our fowle affections, to pearce the inward & most secrett partes of the hart, to sacke and subuerte the kingdome of Sathan, and destroy his whole armye, could with the authoritie and maiestie thereof, haue stayed, holden backe, and crushed in peeces, all the deuises, attemptes, and coū∣termoyles of Sathans ministers, in such sort, as that either with admiration amazed they might be a∣stonyed, or with their mouthes stopped they might be vtterly confounded. Such is the strength of the Gospell, accordyng to that which we read, Neuer man spake like vnto this man. Iohn. 7.Iohn. 7.
Yet loe such is the carefull watchefullnesse of that Emperour of darkenesse, as will not suffer the care∣lesse drowsinesse of our Scribes and Pharisees to ac∣knowledge

their promised Messiah, though he come emongest his owne: yea though with their eyes they see the blind restored to sight, the dumme to speake, the deafe to heare, and the very man of Sinne to sitt in the chaire of pesti∣lence, moyling, turmoyling, peruertyng, subuertyng, razing, defacyng, reuelyng, and ruffling in all ma∣ner of horrible abhominations. But euen as the Iewes deluded by that fanaticall Spirite, cōceaued a vayne and foolishe opinion of their Messiah, as that he should come with worldly pompe, in Princely magni∣ficence, after the maner of some earthly Potentate, to make them Lordes of the earth: Euen so our more then Iewishe Romanistes, carryed with like phancie in their forged Vicar of Christ, and bewitched with false persuasion of the stately Royalties of their visible glorious Synagogue, haue their myndes bu∣sied about nothyng so much, as about the magnifieng, exaltyng, and glorifieng thereof, blazing a∣broad to the world the vayne glitteryng shewes of stagelike ceremonies, friuolous traditions, peltyng deuises, & drowsie dreames of their owne idle bray∣nes, which they deliuer ouer as so many Oracles from heauen, contrary to the expresse word of the Testa∣ment of Grace, which doth minister to all men aboū∣dauntly, all thynges sufficient for the obteinyng of euerlastyng health and saluation.
The whole earth swarmeth euery where with

their bookes and wrytinges testifieng the same: and this our Age is to to much pestered with them, the Authours of which notwithstandyng allready are, or may be satisfied (if they were not altogether cast ouer into a reprobate mynde) with the manifold aū∣sweres of many learned Fathers, and faythfull ser∣uauntes of God, euen to the full. So might this ghost∣ly Byshopp Ierome Osorius, vpon the learned aun∣swere made by M. Haddon, to the slaunderous Li∣bell of his, presumptuously pearching to her highnes with flattery and lyes, haue stayed his course, and by scilēce prouided more wisely for his creditt and good name, which otherwise hadd not bene made so nota∣bly infamous to the world, if this rayling Reply a∣gaynst M. Haddon had not bene published abroad.
But who can tell, whether it hath pleased the Lord to rayse vpp this Iambres against Moyses? and to styrre vpp this proude Popishe Holofernes, a most notable champion of that Romaine Nabu∣chadnezer to make so prowde a challenge agaynst his poore Cittie Bethulia? who can tell if the Lord haue appointed this Semey to rayle so outragiously agaynst our Dauid? who can tell if God haue harde∣ned the hart of this Pharao, that so his people Is∣raell might with greater glory passe fromout that miserable captiuitie of that oppressing Egipt? Great is the God of Israell, and maruelous in his workes. He it is, who by the onely touche of a small rodde,

deuided the readd Sea, and made the same to become drye lande, and a passable way for his people, retour∣nyng the waues thereof vpon the pursuyng Enemy, to the vtter ouerthrowe of Pharao, his Charettes, and all his hoaste. He it is, that gaue the headd of that stought warriour Holofernes into the handes of a seely woman. He it is, that caused the rodd of Aaron to eate vpp all the roddes of thenchauntours, and Sorcerers of Egipt. He it is, that with the one∣ly breath of his mouth hath daunted the insolencie of this Popishe challenger, who beyng esteemed e∣mongest our Englishe Papistes, the most notable Prelate of our Age, is now by the hand of a weake Englishe Pastour discouered in his colours, to be nought els, then a vayne bablyng Rhetorician full of wordes, altogether voyde of matter.
All which notwithstanding, such is the malicious peruersenes of the world, that he onely & alone bea∣reth the price, and carryeth the greatest creditt and estimation of all the writers of our tyme, euery whose sentence is reputed an Oracle from heauē: The odde man of the whole world Ierome Osorius: not able to be aunswered, much lesse to be confused by any Pro∣testaunt whatsoeuer. It was hartely wished, That the Authour him selfe would haue deliuered his tra∣uayles herein in the Englishe toung, that so the vn∣lettered Englishe man, by the Argumentes herein comprised, might haue bene able to stoppe the mou∣thes

of the wayward English cauillers, and suppor∣ters of his quarell. But he respected an other ende, though not so plausible to his owne countreymen, yet much more cōmodious for the generall common weale of Christendome. For he right well perceaued, though Osorius roaued at England by name, that yet he bent his shotte agaynst the generall state of all Christia∣nitie, and therefore most necessary, that as Osorius made his challenge knowen to the whole world, so the world also might be made acquainted with the encounter (I would haue sayd) the vtter ouerthrow of the same. The benefite whereof, though haue re∣dounded to many particuler persons within this Re∣alme, yet hath not bene so vniuersall, as was neede∣full in respect of the multitude, who onely regar∣dyng the name and fame of the man, will (as I sayd before) scarsely be persuaded, that he may possibly be aunswered.
I passe ouer the worthy prayses, which the booke it selfe most iustly deserueth, both in excellencie of matter, and in worthynes of the maner, as the fayth∣full seruaunt of Christ, M. John Foxe hath handled it. Yet this I dare promise, and boldly pronounce, that all men that will, may by readyng, embracyng, belee∣uing, and followyng the doctrine conteined in this booke, be throughly furnished, as well with the most especiall and principall pointes of Christiā Religion, namely, our Iustificatiō, Election, Regeneratiō, and

Redēption by the onely merite and meane of the most pure, and precious bloudshed of that immacu∣late Lambe, slayne before the foundatiōs of the world were layed, to the singuler comfort of their soules: as also by the Argumentes herein contei∣ned, armed at all pointes, agaynst all assaultes, and practizes of all the massemoungers, meritemoūgers, pardonmoungers, Confessionmoungers, and all other of the Popish rable whatsoeuer in the world. As to the trāslation I dare not affirme otherwise, thē that I haue trauailed therein faythfully, accordying to the measure of grace, which the Lord hath geauen me, not doughtyng but it will atteyne the wished suc∣cesse, if mē will but vouchsafe, with the same simpli∣citie of eye, and willingnesse of hart to read, search, examine, and stand vpright in perusing of the same, with the which I haue to my poore abilitie tra∣uayled therein. Certes my purpose was to profitt my countrey men generally all.
These fruites of my labours I haue thought good to present, & dedicate to your honorable patronage, moued hereunto by the most cōmendable report, and opinion that all men do cōceaue of your honours god∣ly zeale, and zealous godlynes, to the singuler glory of your name, and vnspeakeable cōfort of all the god∣ly. To the well acceptyng and good liking whereof, I iudge it not altogether so necessary to seeke by any o∣ther circumstaunce, and persuadible speeches to en∣duce

your honour, saue onely the bare cōsideration of the wōderfull fruite, that may be reaped by readyng the contentes, namely, proceedyng frō so well knowen a Spirite, of so godly and faythfull a seruaūt of God. Wherein albeit the translation atteyne not to so abso∣lute excellencie and perfection, as the dignitie of the matter doth require (as of right it ought haue bene deliuered in such wise, as should not in any respect diminishe the worthynes of the Author) yet for as much as it retcheth the ende, whereunto it was dire∣cted, namely, the benefitt of the Church of God, and the vtter ouerthrowe of that malignaunt Church of Sathan and his ministers, I dought not but your ho∣nour will vouchsafe thereof accordyngly.
Iesu Christ the Sonne of our heauenly, eternall, and euerlastyng Father preserue your honour in all spirituall grace, and heauenly wisedome, prosper your proceedinges, establish your fayth, fructifie your stu∣dies, multiply your consolations, and direct all your wayes, finally blesse your hartes desire, with increase of much honor in this world, to the glorifieng of your body and soule, in that immortall and glorious kyng∣dome of heauen for euer and euer. Amen.
Your honours in the Lord. Iames Bell.
