



PRaise is the end of all Arts, the per∣fection of Praise is onely in Eminence, which begets Example and Ad∣miration. Seeing then (great

Prince) your Birth giues you the best priuiledge to expresse the worthinesse of Vertue, I see not but her followers, eyther in Art or Action, should necessarily flie to your High Patronage. This consideration makes my low de∣serts looke vpward, which in this at least will merit your view, that the Science of De∣fence, not vnworthily stiled No∣ble, (if eyther truely practised, or rightly vnderstood) was ne∣uer before in our Language brought to any Method. The Professors thereof being so ig∣norant, that they could rather doe, then make demonstration,

or reduce their doing to any certaintie of principle.
Many are the imputations laid vpon this Art, (for such I dare now affirme it) the chiefe whereof is, the increasing our bloudy and irreligious Duels, which if the name of this Sci∣ence, being called of Defence, will not auoyd, yet the most li∣centious age of the Romanes shall sufficiently cleare: No Hi∣story of those times making men∣tion of any Duello or single fight to the losse of any Noble Person in that State, or disreputation of the publique Iustice. Yet that this kinde of battell was knowne

and in some cases approued a∣mongst the Romanes. The Hi∣perduels betweene the Curatij and the Horatij, and that fa∣mous Duell betweene Torqua∣tus and the French-man, appa∣rantly speake.
It is not then the publique profession of this Science, nor the multiplicitie of Professors that increase these desperate as∣sassinations: for, Knowledge be∣gets Wisedome, and Wisedome by how much it participates of skill with Discretion, misdoubt∣eth the same in another, and con∣cludes safety as the summe of her abilitie. This is manifest

in the Italians, the first inuen∣ters of Foyle-weapon, and the cunningst Practisers, where not∣withstanding these single Com∣bats are rather reported then seene; and yet in ruder Countries as Poland, &c. nothing more common; which I impute wholy to a daring Ignorance. Neyther had this knowledge of Defence, if iustly taxt with any so wicked effects, been graced with so many Authentick priuiledges in all well gouerned States, nor the Profes∣sors thereof had receiued such honor and respect, insomuch that amongst the Romanes some of them had their Statues erected,

as Plutarch witnesseth. These Reasons (if my iudgement faile not) forcing the same.
First, Necessitie at home, as a Remedie to an vnauoyded Disease, in opposing sodaine as∣saults, which from Caine, plea∣ding Antiquitie, will not now lose their plantation. And since Innocence is no protection a∣gainst murtherous intents, God and Nature tollerate this De∣fence.
The second is, Publique good abroad, for auoyding bloud, if the state of a War should require a single Tryall, which howsoeuer was presumption in Goliah, was

true valor in Dauid: the imi∣tation of this example, hath beene frequent in great Per∣sons in forraigne, and memo∣rable in our owne Country: as betweene Edmund, surnamed Ironside, and King Canute, to a happy issue. Neyther can I forget an offer in the same kinde made in more late yeeres, be∣tweene Frances the first, King of France, and Charles the fift, Emperour, though without ef∣fect.
The last Reason is, Com∣mendable and profitable Ex∣ercise. First, no other re∣creation carries so generall im∣ployment

both of body and minde, as this doth: for here the Feete labour equally with the Hands, the Eye and the Iudgement walke together: and for the profit, it leads to as much vse in making the person ready and daring to the warre; as Horsemanship begets dexteritie for the shocke. The Schoole of our priuate Practise being the same to the Battell, that the Muze is to the Troope: for with what confidence shall hee goe on vpon many, that hath no knowledge to giue him hope of safety from one.
Pardon my tedious discourse

(most Excellent Prince) if it be a Crime, not Error but Zeale of∣fends: for how can I choose but speake much of Armes to you, whom wee all expect the most Heroyicke Professor and Defen∣der of the same: to which your future abilitie in your high At∣chieuements, if my poore ende∣uours may giue the least furthe∣rance (as I promise my selfe much herein) I returne from your Acceptance, loaden with full reward and happiest ex∣pectance: whom no second respect could induce to the vn∣dertaking this so difficult a Labour, which my Person shall

in your command, in all humble seruice, be euer at attendance to make good, resting

