



WHereas (worshipfull Sir) God hath giuen you, not onely by your counsel to further, but also by your good ensample to pro∣uoke, many carelesse people to the hearing of the word: we can∣not but reuerence this grace in you, and wish it many waies multiplied for our coū∣tries good. For when prophanes hath so poisoned the harts of many, that they aske who is the Lord that they should heare his voice, & the world hath so swetned other, that they doe run to it, when they should poste to God. In vayne were our labours, except God stirred vp the hartes of some, which might be leaders to the people, to bring them into the house of God. And al∣though at the first many more sauage then this beast, are hayled perforce into the Arke, and come vnwilling, like such which

are muffled and would not be touched of the sunne: yet when through Gods mercie they shall see all drowned which are with∣out, & shal taste of some of that grace God giueth vnto his; they will not a foote from the dore of his tabernacle but as mē whom the zeale of the Lords house hath eaten, they shall fall downe and worship confes∣sing that the Lord is God. In regard wher∣of be not weary of well doing, but stirre vp the grace God hath giuen you, and know that God hath made you, not onely for your selfe, and for your houshold: but also for the good of other. In the view of which your goodnes as I much doe ioy, so in lew of duety with all desire of your farther good, I haue emboldned my selfe, to offer to your Worship this small treaty of that great peace and reconciliation wee haue with God. The which, although now long fithence, in a great assembly, it hath beene most grauely handled by that blessed man of reuerend memory Iohn Foxe. Yet since our course is diuers as the learned may iudge, to satisfie other rather then my selfe, I haue suffered this although vnwilling to be drawne into the light. Thus commen∣ding it to Gods blessing and your Chri∣stian fauours, my prayer is vnto this God

of peace, that he would giue vs peace with him and with our selues, that wee may ioy in this couenaunt of peace, witnessed in his worde, and assured our heartes by the earnest of his spirit, Amen. 
From North Crowly, Maiij primo. 
