


THAT THE world was made for man, euen Lactantius de diuino praemio. cap. 4. Cicero lib, 2 de Natura Deorum. Philosophers, through the in∣stinct of humane reason coulde, and the carnal worldlinges through the often hearing of Gods holy worde can confesse: that man is created for God Gene. 1, 6. Psalme. 8, 6. me thinks there should be none so barbarouslie ignorant, orCauses why daily praier is necessary. in this cleere light of the glorious Gospel, so desperatelie secure,



as to doubt. A notable cause,1. From the end of mans creation. were there no mo but that, why dailie, and euermore we shoulde extol, and with diuine praises, ce∣lebrate the most sacred Name of almightie God: but manie waies besides are we bounde to doe the same. For consider wee, either the commandements of God; or his benefits; or the frailenes of our corrupt nature; or Satans snares; or the miseries aswel pub∣like as priuate; or our couenant made with God in baptisme; or the vncertaintie of the daie ei∣ther of our death or general iudg∣ment, and we shal finde that the least of these things offereth suf∣ficient occasion continuallie to praie, and to praise God.
For touching the commande∣ments,2. From the commande∣mentes of God. God saith, by the Prophet Dauid, Psa. 50, 15. Cal vpon me in the time of trouble, so wil I heare thee, and thou shalt praise me; by his Sonne our Sauiour, Mark. 13, verse, 33. Watch and praie; by Saint Paule the Apostle, Colos. 4, 2. Con∣tinue in praier, and watch in the same with thankesgiuing. Yea, not3. From the promise of God to here our petitiōs onlie he commaundeth so to doe,



which prooueth the excellencie of the exercise, but also promiseth to heare our petitions, which de∣clareth how surpassinglie sweete, are deuout Meditations, in the eares of God. As in that afore mentioned Psalme of Dauid, Cal vpon me, &c. Againe, Luk. 11, 9. Seeke and ye shal finde, knocke, and it shal be opened vnto you: and againe for al, Iohn. 16, verse, 23. Whatsoeuer yee shal aske the Father in my name, he wil giue it you.
His benefits are for nomber in∣finite,4. From the greatnes of Gods bene∣fites. for greatnes wonderful, ex∣cellent for their worthines, whe∣ther we respect the gifts of the minde or the goods of the bodie, spiritual or corporal, bestowed vpon some particularlie, or gene∣ralie vpon al men. Who can de∣clare the goodnes of God (that I may ouerpasse the temporal be∣nefits, either common to vs with al men, or specialie bestowed vpon vs before al) who can I saie, declare the goodnes of God suffi∣cientlie for creating vs Gen. 1, 26. Colos. 3, 10. after his owne image; for reuealing him∣selfe vnto vs; for redeming vs 1. Pet. 1, 19 Heb. 9, 14. by his deare Sonne; for choosing vs



before the foundations of the world were laide; for enduing vs with his holie spirit; and for exal∣ting vs to eternal life? What ther∣fore shal we render vnto the Lord for al these things? Psal. 116, ver. 12. &c. Let vs take vp the cup of saluation, and celebrate the name of our God.
If we consider the frailenes of5. From the weaknes of our nature. our nature we shal find, that con∣tinualie we are subiect to sinning, to offending, to erring, & to con∣ceauing amisse of the wil of our God to our certaine condemna∣tion. Bernarde serm. 7, de aduentu Domini. There is none of vs al which standeth not in neede of counsaile, of props, and of helpe. The general mise∣rie of mankind is triple, &c. For both we are easie to be seduced, and vnable to doe wel, and weake to resist. If we would discerne betwene good and euil, we are deceaued; if we go about to doe good, we quicklie faint; If we endeuour to resist euil, we cannot endure, but are easilie ouercome. The considera∣tion of this frailetie of ours, made our Sauior Christ graciouslie to admonish his Disciples, saieng, Matt. 26. verse, 41. Watch and praie, least ye enter in∣to tentation.

Againe, the tyrannie and rage of6. From the fury & rage of Satan. the diuel is vnspeakeable, and his power mightie, being the Prince Ephe. 2, 2. Iohn. 12, 31. of this worlde. We wrestle not Ephes. 6, verse. 12. against blood and flesh, but against rule, against powers, against worldlie gouernors of the darkenes of this worlde, against spiritual wickednes in heauenly places. It behoo∣ueth vs therefore, according to the counsaile of Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 5, 8. to watch and praie. For our aduersarie the Diuel, as a roaring Lion, rangeth about seeking whome he may deuoure. But Gaudenti∣us Merula de memora∣bilibus, lib. 2, cap. 9. as the Lion at the sight of a Cocke is dis∣comforted, and at his crowing beta∣keth him to his heeles: so doth Satan both stande in feare of a godlie man, and flie at his praier. As Lactantius noteth, Lactantius de Origine erroris▪ cap. 16. Diuels doe hurt but the faint harted, such as the great and mightie hande of God doth not protect, which are prophane from the Sacrament of truth, but the iust, that is, the true worship∣pers of God, doe the Diuels feare.
What should I speake of the tyran∣nie7. Frō the miseries both pri∣uate and publike. of mightie men; of the miserie of poore; how wickednes doth abound, and heresies ouerflowe? Wherefore wel may I say, as did Nestor vnto hisNestor. children, Praie, for vnles that God helpe

vs we al perish.
Furthermore our couenant made8. From our couenaunt made with God at our Baptisme. with God at our Baptisme, whereby we promised to forsake the Diuel & al his workes, &c. to beleeue al the articles of the Christian faith; and to keepe Gods holie wil and comman∣dement, &c. shoulde driue vs there∣vnto. For neither can Satan be re∣sisted;9. From the vncertaine time of the daie either of our deth, or iudgmēt. nor our faith manifested; nor GOD duelie honored without praier.
Finallie, omitting al other rea∣sons, which are infinite, the short∣nes of our life, the suddaines of Christes comming, his seuerenes in iudgement when he is come, should make vs not slightlie to ouerpasse this noble exercise. For what auai∣leth it, though in this worlde Mat. 16, 26. we abounde in wealth, excel in honor, haue al thinges according to our harts desire, and then when Christ shal returne we are founde vnreadie, and so lose our soules? Happie there∣fore Matt. 24, verse. 46. is that seruant whome the Lorde at his comming shal find watchfull: and Matt. 25, verse. 4. happie are those Virgins which expect the bridegroome with oyle in their lamps. But that euil seruant Matth. 24, verse. 48. Luk. 12, 45. which shal saie



in his hart, my Lorde wil long be a comming, and so begin to smite his fellowes, yea, and to eate and drinke with the dronken, his Lord wil come in a daie, when he looketh not for him, and in an houre when he is not aware of, and shal hew him in peeces, and giue him his portion with hypo∣crites, there shal be weeping and gnashing of teeth; and those virgins which are careles and secure Matt. 25, vers. 10, &c., ac∣companie not the bridegroome to his wedding, but are excluded out of the gates, and heare, I knowe yee not.
The waightines of these reasons,The occasi∣on of publi∣shing this Booke. Honorable, haue especialie mooued me, through the earnest request of some which for their godlie zeale I loue vnfainedly, and reuerence, did greatlie prick me forwarde, to bring these diuine Meditations (I cal them diuine, partlie because they are of di∣uine matters, & concerne the glorie of God; partlie for that they procede from a diuine spirit; but in this re∣spect chiefly, because they are wholy, as fewe or no other praier Booke is that I knowe, taken out of the pure fountaines of the diuine Scriptures)



of the right learned and vertuous of famous memorie Maister Iohn Aue∣nar, into our English tongue. A booke certes most necessarie in respect of the extreeme securitie wherein we liue. Gratefullie it hath bin accep∣ted hetherto in the Latine and Ger∣mane tongues; and now by the wor∣kingHow he muste be qualified y• in praieng wold please God, & vse this Booke to his pro∣fite. of Gods holie spirit, shal profite verie much, if it be vsed as it should be, that is, if the vser thereof praie, Religiouslie in faith; charitablie being voide of rancor and malice; zealouslie with an ardent affection of the minde; and humbly without pride.
1 Faith is necessarie. For Heb. 11, 6. without1. Faith. faith it is impossible to please God. Ther∣fore onely the faithful doe praie. For Rom. 10, verse. 14▪ how can men cal vpon him in whome they haue not beleeued? Rom. 14, verse. 23. It is sinne whatsoeuer is not done through faith. Therefore the praier of infidels is no praier but hypocrisie, and a damna∣ble abuse of good words; neither can it obtaine any thing at the handes of God, according to that of Saint Iames, Iames. 1, verse. 7. He which wauereth let him not thinke that he can obtaine any thing from God.
2 Charitie is necessarie. For we must2. Charitie.

Iames. 5, verse. 16. praie one for another; and for our enimies, Matth. 6, verse. 14. Matth. 5, 44▪ Mark. 11, 25 Luk. 23, 34. as our Sauior doth coun∣saile vs, saieng, When ye stande praieng, forgiue, if yee haue ought against any man, that your Father also which is in Heauen, may forgiue you your trespasses, &c, Againe the spirite of God saith, Eccle. 28, verse 3, &c. Forgiue thy neighbor the hurt that he hath done thee, and so shal thy sinnes be forgiuen thee also when thou praiest. A man that beareth hatred against another, how dare he aske forgiuenes of God. He that sheweth no mercie to a man which is like himselfe, how dare he aske forgiue∣nes of his sinnes? &c. and for al men, as may appeare 1. Tim. 2, 8 in the first Epistle of Saint Paule vnto Timothie.
3 Zeale is necessarie. For what is3. Zeale. praier without the same, but a verie babling, and vaine multiplication of words? yea there is no praier, where this affection is not. For praier is aPrayer what; vehement desire of the hart to ob∣taine something at the hands of God. God loketh not vpon the face as man doth, but beholdeth the hart; nei∣ther doth he listen to the sounde of the mouth, but to the sighes of the minde. After this manner doe Chris∣tians praie, their affections are bent



towardes God, they alwaies Matt. 5, 6. hunger and thirst after righteousnes.
4. Humilitie is necessarie. For vpon4. Humility. whome shal my spirite abide, saith the Lord, Esai. 66, 2. but vpon him which is of a low∣lie spirite? The praier of him which humbleth himselfe Eccle. 35, verse 17. goeth through the clowdes. Much better is it for a sinner, to be humble, than for a righ∣teous man to be arrogant, as may ap∣peare in the Pharisie & Publicane Luk. 18, 10..
It remaineth now, that, as the Au∣ctor of this Booke choase for patrone thereof, not for any defence that it needed, but because others the more willinglie woulde reade and accept the same, being dedicated vnto an honorable person gratious in the eies both of the Nobilitie and baser sort, the mightie Prince, Lorde Augustus, Duke of Saxonie, &c. so mooued thervnto by the singular fame of your honors most virtuous inclination, I present the same now translated (for what other paines I haue taken I spare vpon good considerations, to vtter) vnto your honor, beseeching you to accept this my doing in good part, as my hope is you wil: and then I doubt not, being graciously recea∣ued



of so worthie a person, but grate∣fullie it wil be vsed of the better sort, for whose sake I haue published the same.
God almightie, which is the father of lights Jam. 1, 17., mercy 2. Cor. 1, 3 and consolation, from whom euery good gift, and eue∣rie perfect gift doth proceede, blesse your honor, as with accesse of tempo∣rall benefits: so especially and aboue all, with encrease of his heauenlie blessings, that long you may liue a godlie Counsailer, to our virtuous Queene, a profitable member to this Realme of Englande, a speciall fa∣uorer of the Church of Christ, and a famous aduancer of his truth and glorie, to your euerlasting comfort, and felicitie. Amen.
At London the tenth of October. An. D. 1579.

