



BFloved, the disease commonly called and usually felt and knowne, Poda∣gra, or as a learned Writer saith, Gutta Podagrica, is (as I may say) a slie, subtile, and theevish Serpent. Which I prove; first, a slie and subtile Serpent, in as much as it creepeth not only into the Courts and secret Closets of the greatest Potentates and Princes of Christendome, but of the whole world, and their subordinate Magistrates, in Church and Commonwealth; and so consequently to the

meanest subject: some say the Rich rather than the Poore. And some this Serpent biteth by the heele, and some by the foot, some by the great, and o∣thersome by the lesser toes, and otherwhiles by the anckles. Secondly, it is theevish, for that it commeth alwayes unawares, before it is thought on, or expected: yea, it commonly commeth as a theefe in the night. Now what it is by definiti∣on, our learned Author saith sufficiently in the Discourse following: And certes, if I my selfe were a professed Physitian, I should not be of Pa∣racelsus his minde, who saith, that this Podagra is a gravell gathered between the joints, whereby the Gout is called And however it be, it is a dis∣ease subject to such as are of sedentary and studi∣ous lives: i. e. that sit much: as Councellours of Estate, Senators of Cities, Bishops, Iudges and Scholars, (that study much) do: Nay, may we not sometimes see that even men of active lives and dispositions are surprized with this theevish ser∣penticall disease. For the benefit therefore of the Commonwealth, this Treatise not unlearnedly writ∣ten, I hope is not unprofitably published: Especi∣ally considering, the like, to my knowledge, is not extant, either in English or Latine. I had it not

many moneths past, from the hands of one neere and deere unto me, who is since dissolved, and I hope in Heaven: And sithence it hath beene peru∣sed by one more neere and deere unto me, an anci∣ent Professor of this Apollonian Art. Vouchsafe therefore yee Lords, Ladyes, or of what degree soever, unto whose hands and sight this, though a Pamphlet, shall happen to come, to accept candid∣ly, what is courteously, and not without some cost, published for you benefit.
And so I betake you all to the supreme Physiti∣an of body and soule: and of you take my leave.

