



SIr (as you haue desired) I haue done all my endeauour to satisfie you with the truth of such note∣worthy things, as in these parts happen; beeing recompenced by you with like for like from Lon∣don, our naturall and beloued Citie. So it is (that beeing certified of a matter beyond all na∣turall reason wonderfull) that at this instant is to be scene at the towne of Glabbich in the Duke∣dome of Gulische neare vnto Colaine, from whence I departed not beleeuing the straunge report of many my good frends, till mine eyes had assured my heart, of that which mine eares coulde not perswade it vnto. And to be plaine with you, though I did see it, so admirable the report is, that I am doubtfull to deliuer it, least you should call my knowen credit in question, and count me a reporter of fabulous lyes.
But to cleare my selfe of that supposition, I haue sent you the names and dwelling places of

diuers our countrymen  that inhabite in and a∣bout London, who saw what I did see, won∣dered as I did, and will witnesse on their oathes the truth of what I write. Besides I haue sent you the Towne seale to a certificate of the truth, signed by the Magistrates, with the occasion, why it was gotten: and first will I name my wit∣nesses.

Bartholomew Powels.
Gerrard Powels.
Harman Rutters.

These three aboue written dwell in the pa∣rish of Saint Olaue, commonly called Saint Touleys in Southwarke.

Henry the post, Of the parish of Saint Katherines by the Toure.
Henry Powels, Dwelling in the late Dukes place neare Al∣gate.
Henry Hester, Of Waltham Stow in Essex.

These to my knowledge did see this admirable wonder, which yet continueth for any to see that haue occasion to trauell into those parts.

NOW hauing in some part cleared my way, & streng∣thened my selfe with wit∣nesses dwelling by you, I will the boldlier tell you this strange and admira∣ble accident; which in my conscience (among many other wonders) is in this wicked age by God or∣dained to reprooue the folly of those fooles, that say in their heart, there is no God, that ieast at the promise of his cōming, that blasphemously affirm nature to be conseruer of all things. For no natu∣rall Philosopher in the world can yeeld rea∣son for this admirable wonder. Lon∣ger I will not hold you from it the substance and truth is this.
