



INdeede, my Poetrie was long sithence out of date, & yiel∣ded hir place to gra∣uer

studies: but whose vaine would it not reuiue to looke into these heauenly songs? I were not woorthy to be a Di∣uine, if it should re∣pent me to be a Po∣et with DAVID, after I shall haue a∣ged in the Pulpit: This worke is holy and strict, & abides not anie youthful or heathenish libertie; but requires hands

free from profane∣nesse, loosenesse, affectation. It is a seruice to God and the Church by so much more careful∣ly to bee regarded, as it is more com∣mon. For, who is there that will not challenge a parte in this labour? and that shall not find himself much more affected with holy measures rightly composed▪

Wherfore I haue oft wondered, howe it coulde be offensiue to our aduersaries, that these diuine dit∣ties which the spirit of GOD wrote in verse, shoulde bee sung in verse; and that an Hebrue Po∣eme should be made English. For, if this kinde of compositi∣on had beene vnfit, God woulde neuer haue made choice of

numbers, wherin to expresse himselfe▪ Yea, who knows not, that some other Scriptures, which the spirit hath indited in prose, haue yet been happily & with good allowance put into strict numbers? If histories tell vs of a wanton Poet of old, which lost his eyes while he went about to turne MOSES into verse; yet eue∣rie

student knowes with what good suc∣cesse and commen∣datiō NONNVS hath turned IOHNS gos∣pell into Greek He∣roicks; And APOL∣LINARIVS that learned Syrian, mat∣ched with BAZIL and GREGORY (who lived in his time) in the tearms of this equality, that BAZILS speech was , but APOL∣LINARIES

, wrote, as SVIDAS reports, all the He∣brue scripture in he∣roicks, as Sozomen (somewhat more re∣strainedly) all the Archaiology of the Iewes, till SAVLS gouernment, in 24. parts; or as SOCRA∣TES yet more parti∣cularly, all MOSES in Heroicks, and all the other histories in diuerse meeters: but

how euer his other labours lie hid, his Metaphrase of the Psalmes is still in our hands with the ap∣plause of all the lear∣ned: besides the la∣bours of their owne FLAMINIVS & ARIAS MONTA∣NVS (to seeke for no more) which haue worthily be∣stowed themselues in this subiect. Nei∣ther doe I see how it

can bee offensiue to our friends, that wee shoulde desire our english Metaphrase bettered. I say no∣thing to the disgrace of that wee haue: I know how glad our aduersaries are of all such aduantages; which they are ready enough to finde out without mee, euer reproachefully vp∣brayding vs with these defectes. But

since our whol Tra∣lation is now vniuer∣sally reuised; what inconuenience or showe of innouation can it beare, that the verse should accom∣panie the prose? es∣pecially since it is well knowne howe rude & homely our English Poësy was in those times, com∣pared with the pre∣sent; wherin, if euer, it seeth her full per∣fection.

I haue been solicited by som re∣uered friends to vn∣dertake this taske; as that which seemed vvell to accord with the former exercises of my youth, and my present profession. The difficulties I founde manie, the worke long & great; yet not more paine∣full then beneficiall to Gods Church. Whereto as I dare

not professe anie sufficiencie; so will I not denie my readinesse, and vt∣most indeuour, if I shall bee imployed by Authoritie: wher∣fore, in this part, I doe humbly sub∣mit my selfe to the graue censures of them, whose wise∣dome menageth these cōmon affaires of the Church: and

am readie eyther to stand stil or proceed, as I shall see their Cloude or Fire goe before or behinde me. Onely (how∣soeuer) I shall for my true affecti∣on to the Church, wishe it done by better workemen. Wherin as you ap∣prooue, so further my bolde but not vnprofitable motiō,

and commend it vn∣to greater cares: as I doe you to the greatest.
Non-such
Iuly, 3.

