



WEe are all Souldiers, as wee are Christians: some more specially, as they are men. You beare both Spirituall Armes against the e∣nemies of your Saluation, and Materiall Armes against the e∣nemies of your Countrey. In both you fight vnder the Colours of our great Generall Iesus Christ. By loo∣king a little into this mysticall warre, you shall the better vnderstand how to be Milites cataphracti, good Souldiers in all respects.
Iob calls mans life a Warfare: and wee find, Reuel. 12. that there was warre in heauen: Mi∣chael and his Angels fought against the Dra∣gon; and the Dragon & his Angels. Where by Heauen is meant the Church of God vpon earth; as

Interpreters obserue generally. For in Heauen aboue there is no warfare, but welfare: no trouble, but Peace that passeth all vnderstanding: Now to this War euery Christian is a professed Souldier: not onely for a spurt, for sport; as young Gentlemen vse for a time to see the fashion of the warres: but our Vow runnes thus in Baptisme; that euery man vndertakes to fight manfully vnder Christs Ban∣ner against Sinne, the World, and the Deuill; and to continue his faithfull Souldier and Ser∣uant to his liues end. And this Battell let vs fight with courage, because we are warriours vnder that Generall that (without question) shall conquer. Nil desperandū Christo Duce, & Auspice Christo. They ouercome by the blood of the Lambe. Reu 12.11. Though they loose some bloud, they shall be sure to winne the victorie.
Bernard supposeth a great war between Christ the king of Ierusalem, & Satan the K. of Babylon. The Watchman on the wals spies a Christian soul∣dier to be surprised by the Babylonian Host, & car∣ried captiue to their Tents. Hereof he informes the king, who presently chargeth Timorem, the Feare of God, to run & redeeme the souldier. Feare comes thundring vpon the aduersary power, & forceth thē trembling to surrender backe their prey; which he

is now returning home to the king. Hereupon steps vp Spiritus Tristitiae, Sadnes; & cryes, O ye Ba∣bylonians, is it not a shame that one man should re∣scue a prisoner from such a multitude? Well ne ti∣meatis a Timore isto, be not afraid of this fellow Feare: I will giue you a stratagem how to reduce him. This must not be done Marte sed arte; not by force but by fraud: marke the euent.
This Spirit of Sadnesse lyes in the way, and falls in with the Souldiers, colloguing as a friend, as a fiend; amica sed iniqua collocutione. Suspectles Feare followes a little off. But Sorrow had brought the Souldier to the brinke of a deepe Pitte, Despe∣ration; and was euen vpon the point of thrusting him in; The Watchman obserues it, and againe tells the king: who (quicker then thought) dispatcheth a fresh supply of succour, Hope, to his deliuery. Hope mounted vpon a swift horse, Desire; comes amaine: and with the Sword of Gladnes puts Sorrow to flight; so quits him from the gulfe of Despaire. Once again is the Citizen of heauē freed: now Hope sets him (being weary) on his own horse, Desire: himselfe leads him with the Cord of Promised mercy: Feare comes after with a switch made of Remembrance of sinnes, and so sets him forward to Ierusalem.
Hereupon the King of Babylon calls a Councell;

where some grieue, others rage, all Hell rores, that they had lost a prisoner, of whom they lately thought themselues so sure. There is not more ioy with the Angels in heauen, then there is sorrow with the de∣uils in hell, for this Sinners conuersion. But yet all is not well, as the Watchman certifies the King of Om∣nipotence. The Souldier is mounted vpon Desire, Hope leads him, and Feare driues him amaine: but I doubt he comes too fast, because he hath neither Bri∣dle nor Saddle. Hereon the Kings, that hath euerla∣sting care of all Christian soules, sends forth two of his graue Councellors to him, Temperance and Prudence; Temperance giues him a Bridle, that is Discretion; and Prudence a Saddle, that is Cir∣cumspection. This is not all: Feare and Hope giue him two Spurres; on the left heele Feare of punishment, on the right, Expectation of blisse. Knowledge cleares his Eye, Diligence opens his Eare, Obedience strengthens his Hand, Deuotion rectifies his Foot, Faith encourageth his Heart. And if he want any thing, Prayer offers him her seruice, to wait vpon him as a faithfull messenger; promising that whensoeuer he sends her to the King with a Petition, she will bring him backe a Benediction.
Thus as in a little Tablet you see the whole world; that all of vs must be Souldiers on earth militant,

that will be Conquerors in heauen triumphant. But are there not enemies in the flesh, so well as enemies in the Spirit? Is mysticall armour only necessarie to a Christian, & is there no vse of materiall? No; Aequū∣est Deum illis esse propitium, qui sibi non sunt aduersarij; it is iust, that God should be a friend to thē, that are not enemies to themselues. I know pray∣ers are good weapons: and Exo. 17. there was more speed made to victorie by lifting vp of Moses hands, then of Ioshu's word. He that would ouercome his enemies on earth, must first preuaile with his best friend in heauen. If the mercy & strength of God be made thine by prayer, feare not the aduerse powers. Ro. 8. We shalbe conquerors through him that loued vs. But is it enough to bend the knee, without stirring the hand? Shall warre march against vs with thundering steps; & shall we only assemble our selues in the Temples, lie prostrate on the pauements, lift vp our hands & eyes to heauen, & not our wea∣pons against our enemies? Shal we beat the aire with our voices, and not their bosomes with our swords? only knock our own breasts, & not knock their heads? Sure, a religious conscience neuer taught a man to neglect his life, his libertie, his estate, his peace. Pietie and Policie are not opposites: he that taught vs to be harmelesse as Doues, bad vs also be wise as Ser∣pents.

Giue way to a fiction: fables are not without their vsefull morals. A boy was molested with a dog; the Frier taught him to say a Gospell by heart, and warranted this to allay the dogs furie. The mastiffe spying the boy, flies at him: he begins (as it were) to coniure him with his Gospel. The dog (not capable of religion) approcheth more violently. A neighbor pas∣sing by, bids the boy take vp a stone: he did so, and throwing at the dog, escaped. The Frier demands of the lad, how he sped with his charme. Sir (quoth he) your Gospel was good, but a stone with the Gospel did the deed. The Curs of Antichrist are not afraid of our Gospel, but of our stones: let vs fight, & they wil flie.
Fight say you; why who strikes vs? Yeeld that no enemies doe, are we sure that none will doe? When our securitie hath made vs weake, & their policie hath made thē strong, we shal find thē (like that trou∣blesome neighbour) knocking at our dore early in the morning, before we are vp; when it wil be too late for vs to say, If we had known of your cōming, we would haue prouided better cheare for you. They thank you, they wil take now such as they find, for they purpose to be their owne caruers, and the worst morsels they swallow shalbe your hearts. Let vs therfore like good housekeepers, whō such vnbiddē guests come, haue al∣waies a breakfast ready for thē: which if we giue thē

heartily, they shal haue smal stomach to their dinners.
Be you but ready for warre, and I durst warrant your peace. Whilst you are dissolute, they grow reso∣lute. Ludouicus Viues reports, that the yong nobles and gallants in a citie of Spaine were falne to such le∣uitie of carriage; that in stead of marching to the sound of a Drum, they were dancing leuolto's to the Lute in a Ladies chamber: their Beauers were tur∣ned to Beuer hats. Euery one had his mistresse, and spent his time in courting Venus; but Mars was shut out at the backe gate. The ancient Magistrates obseruing this, consulted what should become of that country, which these men must gouerne after they were dead. Hereupon they conferred with the wo∣men, their daughters, the Ladies: whom they instru∣cted to forbeare their wonted fauours, to despise the fantasticall amorists, and to afford no grace to them that had no grace in themselues. This they obeyed di∣ligently, and wrought so effectually, that the Gentle∣men soone began to spie some difference betwixt Ef∣feminatenes and Noblenes. And at last in honourable and seruiceable designes excelled all their Ancestors. If we had in England such Ladies, (though I doe not wish them from Spaine) wee should haue such Lords. Honour should goe by the Banner, not by the Barue: and Reputation be valued by valour, not

measured by the acre: there would be no ambition to be carpet-Knights.
How necessarie the readinesse of Armes, and of men practised to those Armes, hath beene to the com∣mon good; what Nation hath not found, either in the habite to their safetie, or in the priuation to their ruine? Onely we blesse our selues in our peace; and say to them that aduise vs to militarie preparations, as the Deuils said to Christ, that we come to torment them before their time. But let them rest, that thus will rust: and for your selues, worthy Gentlemen, keepe your Armes bright; and thereby your names, your vertues, your soules: you shall be honoured in good mens hearts, whilst wanton and effeminate Gulls shall weaue and weare their owne disgraces. Spernite vos sperni: there are none that think base∣ly of you, whose bosomes are acquainted with other then ignoble thoughts. But I haue held you too long in the gates, vnlesse I could promise you the sight of a better Citie. Yet enter in, and view it with your eyes: it hath alreadie entred your eares; God grant it may enter all our hearts. So your selues shall be renowned, our Peace secured, and the Lords great Name glorified, through Iesus Christ.

