



Most Gracious Prince.
GOD calleth your Highnes by iust inheri∣tance to defend his faith. This diuine royal∣tie accompa∣nies your Princedome in a blessed



society: wherein your challenge is not more true, then your patterne admirable. He that giues you right to the succession of this claime, giues you such an example, as what Father euer gaue a Son? His scep∣ter hath not more defended it, then his Pen: We blesse God and won∣der: In this right then, all propug∣nations of truth are yours; How much more from him, whose glory it is to haue sworne your seruice? Yet here, I offer to your Highnesse not so much any fight of ours a∣gainst them of Rome, as theirs a∣gainst themselues, and therein for vs: what can be more aduantage to vs, or shame to them? One blow of an enemy dealt to his brother, is more worth then many from an ad∣uerse



hand: All our Apologies cannot hurt them so much, as their own diuisions. Behold, here your Highnesse shall sit still, and see all the Romish Doctors (after all their brags of peace) scuffling and grap∣ling together before you: and (which is most worth) in BEL∣LARMINES owne Theater; No aduersary can giue them more deep wounds, then their own swords: And if ciuill discord can give vs hope of their ruine,Har. Suis & ipsa Roma viribus ruit. ROME cannot stand: Lo these are the men that gloried in their vnity, and vpbrai∣ded vs (not once) with our dissensi∣ons, and haue warned the world (because we differ in one point) not to trust vs in any. The cōfidence of their secrecie made them peremp∣tory,



not either their innocence, or our guilt: If God haue not now opened their own mouthes to con∣uince them of bold falshood, let them haue no accusers. I know the view of this Popish fray could not in their conceits fall more vnhappi∣ly into any eies, then your High∣nesses, whom they grieue to see in this early spring of your age so firmely rooted in the truth, and be∣fore Hannibals yeares threatning hostility to error. So let your High∣nesse still moue their enuy and our ioy. So much shall God more loue you, as you hate their abominati∣ons: Neither shall it I hope euer bee forgotten, that in their bloody pro∣iect, your lims also should haue flowen vp to heauen with your



soule. That God which hath reser∣ued you for the second hope and stay of his Christian world, go on to prosper your gratious proceedings, but according to the promise of their entrances: that we may bee still happy in your Highnesse, and you in him for euer. So be it: Yea so it will be: how can it be that so ma∣ny and faithfull prayers of all Gods faithfull ones through the world should haue other successe? A∣mongst the rest are vowed and du∣ly payd to this purpose, the dayly poore deuotions of your

