


LIke as man was of. ij. substaunces constytuted (most worthie and excel¦lente prynce) that is to say, of sowle and of bodye, so were there for his specyall cōmodyte in them both, & for hys wholsome continuaunce in longe successy∣on, ordayned of God. ij. necessary functy∣ous or administracyons from the worldes begynnynge. Neyther myghte the one of them without the other at any time be, no∣more than the bodie without the sowle, but anon after a deadly decaye therupon folo∣wed in that common welthe. In the bokes of kynges and of Paralipomeno, is this so playnely declared, or the diuided king∣domes of Israel and Iuda, that at no hand it can be denyed, The fyrste of them, was

the explanacion of the heauenly doctryne, whom we now cal ye godly office of a prea¦cher. The other we vnderstande to be the publique or politique regimet, which is in ye high gouernaūce, autorite, & power o a king. The first of these. ij. most necessary of¦fices, the eternal sōne of God instituted in paradise. The other toke beginning of god ye father, which held an euerlasting monar¦chy befor ye worldes constituciō, and on the earth by his speciall gifte it toke successe in man. Through me do kinges reigne (sayth he) through me do princes make iust lawes Prouer. viij. In ye Godhed are they here al¦one, but in person diuerse. The one gouer∣neth, the other teacheth. The seid sonne of God as an euerlastinge prest & bishop first called Adam & Eua to repentaunce, by the voyce of such a lawe as both detected and rebuked their synne.
Furthermor he published ye promise cōcer¦ning ye holy seed of the womā, which shuld breake the head of the wicked serpēt. Thus preached he than the fyrste Gospell of sal∣uacyon, whyche is a ioyfull massage de∣clarynge full remyssyon to be gyuen fre∣lye in Chryste, or for Christes only sake, a righteousnesse in the holy ghost folowing therupon▪ with the life euerlastinge. As A∣dam was confyrmed the ymage of God, & appointed to rule ye whol earth. Gen. i. He succeded him & his eternall sonne in these.

ij. hygh offices of Gouernaunce and of doc¦tryne, through the gydaunce of hys holye sprete, so be comminge to the one a vicege∣rent or liefe tenaunt, and to the other an hygh vycar general. He instructed his po∣steryte in the ryght rules of fayth for that age, and prudently vsed theyr politique re¦gyment. In thys perfyghte trade succeded the fathers, Enos, Cainan, Malalehel, Ia¦red, Henoch, Mathusalah, and Lamech, one after an other, tyll the dayes of Noe. Whyche gouerned most godly, and prea∣ched repentaunce for an hondred and. xx. yeaes space. After ye generall floude stode Noe vp agayne, and executed these. ij. offy¦ces more earnestly than afore. Melchyse∣dech hys sonne was both a kynge and a preste, so was faythfull Abraham and hys chyldren after hym, as apereth both by their warres and sacryfyces.
And all though Moyses at tymes exe∣cuted but one of these. ij. offyces, and Aa∣ron hys brother the other, yet were they af¦terwardes agayne both vnyted in Iosue and hys successours, assysted by the by∣shoppes and Leuytes, tyll the Iewes de∣spred a kynge. Than helde Saul the tem∣porall domynyon, and Samuel the hygh presthode, Dauid and Abiatha, Salomō and Sadoch, in the same trade folowyng, tyll the realme was deuyded into Israell and Iuda for the wyckednesse of rulars.

And as the false worshyppynges or execra¦ble ydolatryes began to increase by the de∣uylyshnesse of false prestes, God raysed vp the prophetes, with an earnestnesse to rebuke them and agayne to renewe the hea¦uenly doctryne and gouernaunce. And as their course was out by a myserable muta¦cyon through warres and captyuyte, that lyuely doctryne of saluacyon, by the sectes of pharysees, Saducees, & Esseanes was yet ones agayne obscured, and the hygh gouernaunce clerely decayed and also re∣moued from the chosen flocke of God, the scepture trāslated to Herode a cruel straū∣ger. The sonne of God the eternall father, called Iesus Christe, than entered into the fleshe at hys tyme appoynted, and became our hygh kyng and preste euerlastynge by hys tryumphaunt passyon and ascensyon, restorynge these. ij. offyces, and reseruynge them in hys gloryfyed humanyte to a sem¦pyternall monarchye. To hys Apostles and dyscyples he appoynted the admyny∣stracyon of hys heauenly word, leauynge to the worldely rulars the hygh gouer∣naunce of peoples. Thys hath bene breue∣ly the very ordre, course and processe, con∣cernynge these. ij. most hygh offyces sens the worldes begynnynge.
How the great aduersary of God An∣tichrist hath sens Christes ascensyō wrou∣ght in hys wycked course, to depraue these

ij. mynystracyons of God, and to cause them to serue his moste blasphemouse and fylthie affectes, the fyrste. ij. partes of my Englyshe votaryes here presente, dothe plenteously shewe. And my hope is that ye ij. lattre partes, whyche wyll, God wyl∣lynge, most spedylye folowe, shall declare it yet muche more at large. I haue therin decreed for difference of the bokes and apt argumentes of the matters contayned in them, to gyue them. iiij. seuerall tytles, of rysynge, buyldynge, holdynge, and falling. For the fyrst part treateth of theyr vp ryspng to myschefe, by the olde ydola∣tours in the reygne of perdycyon. The seconde parte sheweth of theyr hastye buil¦dynge by the hypocrytyshe monkes to esta¦blish the wicked kingedome of Antichrist. The thirde part wil declare the crafty vp¦holdinge of their prowde degrees & posses∣syons, by the wilye and subtile slayghtes of the. iiij. orders of frires. And ye fort part shal manifest their horrible fall in this lat∣tre age by yt groūded doctrines of the true preachers & writers. These votaries do I take for those instrumētes of Sathā, which cōtinually from time to time haue destroi∣ed these. ij hygh mynistracions, by darke∣nynge the doctryne of God, and peruer∣ting iustyce in the rulars. Next to the scrip¦tures I take their moste wicked examples for witnesses in that matter.
If your learned maiestye, in thys second part do marke theyr wycked procedynges in takynge from princes the inuestynge of prelates, and from the churches minysters theyr marryed wyues, ye shall fynde them the greattest traytours that euer were on thys earthe, both to God and to man. For by takynge from prynces the inuestyng of prelates, they deminyshed more than halfe theyr autoryte, makynge them boūde ser∣uauntes to Antichriste. And by condemp∣nynge of marryage in the mynysters, they not onlye peruerted the doctryne of fayth, but also of godly preachers they made ydel workemē and vncleane doers, ydolatours coniurers, lyers, opprssours, tyrauntes, whoremongers, and most execrable bugge¦rers, so secludynge theyr names from the lambes boke of lyfe, and theyr sowles frō saluacyon in Christe, Apo. xxi. Thys sym∣ple worke haue I dedycated to your excel∣lent maiestie, partlye to declare my obedy∣ent hart to the same, and partlye to detecte the subtile slaightes of the hipocrites, your mortal enemyes in the kyngedome of An∣tichrist. Therin maye your highnesse as in a myrrour, beholde the auncyent enemyes of your noble predecessours, se theyr proce¦dynges, knowe theyr cōueyaunces, and cle¦rely perceyue theyr practyses of deceyt. Ye maye also therby be assertayned dyuerse wayes by a nombre of theyr vngodlye ex∣amples

of lyfe, that your noble father of famouse memory, ded ronne for hys tyme a most profytable course to the christen cō∣men welthe, whan he fyrste ouerthrewe that most odyble monstre of Rome wyth hys vncleane generacyon. The eternall father of our lorde Iesus Christ, send your learned maiestye longe lyfe on the earth, that ye maye in the sprete of Helias, dou∣ble hys vyctoryouse doynges, as I haue no doubt but ye wyll. So be it.
Domine, in misericordiatus, saluum facregem.
