



Right Honorable,
I Feuer any men had reason to bee in loue with the face of a for∣raine enter∣tainment, those are they, which

were admitted to the attendance of the truly Generous and Hono∣rable, Lord HAY, your most no∣ble sonne, in his late embassage to France; in which number my vn∣worthinesse was allowed to make oe; who ca therefore well wit∣nesse, that no man could either re∣ceie more honour from a strange Countrey, or doe more honour to his owne. What wanted there that might make men confesse them∣selues more welcome then stran∣gers? Neither doubt I but that af∣ter many ages, France it selfe will wonder at the bountifull express∣ons of her own fauours. But whiles others were nioying the noble courtesies of the Time, my

thoughts entertained themselues with searching into the proofe of that ordinary Trauell, wherewith I saw men commnly affected; which, I must needs confesse, the more I saw, the lesse I liked. Nei∣ther is it in the power of any for∣raine munificence, to make mee thinke ours any where so well as at home. Earthly commodities are no part of my thought: I looked (as I ought) at the soule; which I ell saw, vses not only to gather  mosse in this rolling, but suffers the best graces it bath, o molder away insensibly in such vnneces∣sary agitation. I haue now beene twise abroad: both times (as thin∣king my selfe worthy of nothing

but neglect) I bent my eyes vpon others, to see what they did, what they got: my inquirie found our spirituall losse so palpable, that now at last my heart could not chuse but breake forth at my hand, and tell my Countrymen of the dangerous issue of their curiositie. I meddle not with the common iourneyes to the miner all waters of the Spa; to which many sicke soules are beholden for a good ex∣cuse: who whiles they pretend the medicinall vse of that spring, can freely quaffe of the puddle of po∣pish superstition; poisoning the better part, in stead of helping the worse. These I leaue to the best Physician, Authoritie; which if it

may please to vndertake the cure, may perhaps saue as many English soules from infection, as that wa∣ter cures bodies of diseases. I deale only with those, that professe to seeke the glory of a perfect bree∣ding, and the perfection of that, which we call Ciuilitie, in Trauell: of which sort I haue (not without indignation) seene too many lose their hopes, and themselues in the way; returning as empty of grace, and other vertues, as full of words, vanitie, mis-dispositions. I dedicate this poore discourse to your Lo: as (besides my daily renued obligati∣ons) congratulating to you the sweet libertie and happy vse of your home; who like a fixed starre





may well ouer-looke these planets, and by your constant settlednesse, giue that aime to inferiour eies, which shall be in vaine expected from a wandring light. The God of beauen, to whose glorie I haue intended this weake labour, giue it fauor in the ight of his Church, and returne it backe; but with this good newes that any one of the son of Iaphet, is hereby perswaded to dwell euer in the tents of Sem: Vnto that diuine protection, I humbly betake your Lo: Iustly vowing my selfe

