



MOST REVEREND FATHER, and no lesse honored Lord,
IT was my desire and hope to spend the residue of my Time and thoughts in sweete and sacred Con∣templation. Satan enuying me this

happinesse, interrupts me by the ma∣lice of an importune Aduersary. Twelue yeeres agoe I wrote a little Apologeticall Letter for the Mar∣riage of persons Ecclesiasticall; and now thus late, when I had al∣most forgot that I had written it, a moodie Masse-priest drops out a tedious and virulent Refutation; thorow my sides striking at the most Honourable, and flourishing Cler∣gie of the whole Christian World; labouring not so much for my dis∣grace (what would that auaile him?) as the dishonour and scorne of our holy Profession, in the eyes of our people. I could contemne it in si∣lence, if the Quarrell were only mine; Now my wrong cannot bee distinguished from thousands: God and his Church are ingaged in this cause, which in my foile could not but sustayne losse; neither may I be now silent with safetie, without mis∣construction. Let this hand and Tongue bee no longer mine, then they may serue my Master in Hea∣uen,

and his Spouse on Earth. That which I wrote in some three houres, he hath answered in three quaterni∣ons of yeeres; and what I wrote in three leaues, he hath answered in no fewer Pages then 380. Should I fol∣low him in this proportion, hee might after some Centuries of yeers expect an answere in Tostatus-hydes; whose first word should be, Quis le∣get haec? Or if my patience would delay my reply to the iust paces of his answere, this Volume of his would perhaps▪ bee vanished into Grossers shops for waste Paper in thuris piperisue cucullos; and would no more need answere then now it deserueth one. But hearing of the insultation of some Popishly affe∣cted, who gloried and triumphed in this ACHILLES pro Catholicis, I ad∣dressed my selfe to the Worke, with no little indignation, and no lesse speed: That my selfe-conceited Ad∣uersarie, and his seduced abettors may see how little a well-ordered Marriage is guiltie of deadding our

spirits, or slacking our hands; at the beginning of this Summers Pro∣gresse, when it pleased his sacred Maiestie to take notice of this sorrie Libell, and to question with mee concerning it, I had not so much as read it ouer; so newly was it come to my hands, ere his happie returne, (bee it spoken to the only glorie of him that inabled me) I had not only finished this Answere, but twice written it ouer with my owne hand; and yet made this but the recreati∣on of the weightier businesses of my Calling, which now did more then ordinarily vrge me.
It was my purpose to haue an∣swered (as beseemeth the person à quo, not ad quem) mildely, accor∣ding to my knowne disposition, but vpon better deliberation, I found the insolencie of my Refuter such, that I could not fauour him, and not bee cruell to my cause. If therefore for many (it is his owne art and word) railatiue Pages, hee receiue from my vnwilling and enforced

Pen now and then, though not a Re∣latiue to such an Antecedent, yet perhaps some drop of sharper Vine∣ger, then my Inke vseth to bee tem∣pered withall, hee may forgiue mee, and must thanke himselfe: What needed this cause so furious an In∣uectiue? As if the Kingdome of Heauen, and all Religion consisted in nothing but Mayden-head, or Marriage? Cardinall Bellarmine, when hee speakes of the Greeke Church, wherein a marryed Clergie is both allowed and required, shuts vp moderately; That if this were all the difference betwixt them, and the Romane Church,Si errorem alium non haberent, acilè pax conce∣deretur, Bell. de Cleric. l. 1. c. 21. they should soone bee at peace. If my Refuter had so thought, this had not beene his first Controuersie: Both estates meete in Heauen. Iohn the Virgin rests in the bosome of marryed A∣braham; This inordinate heate therefore of prosecution rises from faction, not from holy Zeale: Hence it was that my Aduersary cunningly singled out this point from many o∣thers,

ranged in my poore Discour∣ses, as that wherein (by Bishop Iew∣els confession) hee might promise to himselfe the likeliest aduantage of Antiquitie; and how gloriously doth he vaunt himselfe in the often∣tation of Fathers and Councels! which vaine flourish how little it a∣uayles him, the processe shall shew; where it shall appeare vpon what grounds no small piece of Antiqui∣tie was partiall to Virginitie, and ouer-harsh to Marriage,B. Rhenan. Arg. lib. de exhor. Castit. Tertull. as Beatus Rhenanus, a learned and ingenuous Papist confesseth. But this wee may boldly say, that if those holy men had out-liued the bloudie Times, and scene the fearefull inconuenien∣ces which would (after a settled peace) insue vpon the ambition, or constraint of a denyed Continency, they had doubtlesse changed their note;Eneas Syluius. Panormitan. Disrandus. Peresius. Mantuanus. Erasmus, &c. and with the moderate and wisest spirits of the later times, plea∣ded for that libertie which the Re∣formed Church now enioyeth. The vniuersall concession whereof (after

the priuate Suffrages of worthy Authours) came to a publike treaty in the Romane Church,Che Coll' intro∣ductione del ma∣trimonio de' Pre∣ti si farelle, che tutti voltassetto l' affetto & amr loro al∣le-moglie, a'figli, & per conse∣quenz alla cā∣sa, & alla pa∣tria: onde cesse∣rebbe la depen denza stretta che l' Ordine Clericale ha con la sede Apostoli∣ca, & tanto sa∣relbe. Conceder ill matrimonio a Preti, quanto distrugger la Hierarchia Ec∣clesiastica, & ridur il Pont. che non fsse piu che Vescouo di Roma▪ Histor. Concil. Trid. pag. 662. Troppo feste, troppo teste, troppo tempeste. Vid. Dallingt. obseru. vpon Guieciard. Doctor Mart. against Pr. Mr. amids the throng of their late Tridentine Councell, and it is worth the while to obserue on what grounds it re∣ceiued a repulse. If Priests should be allowed Marriage (say those wily Italians) it would follow that they would cast their affections on their Wiues and Children, and conse∣quently on their Families, & Coun∣tries, whereupon would cease that strait dependance, which the Clergy hath vpon the See Apostolike; In so much as to grant their Marriages, were as much as to destroy the Hie∣rarchie of the Church, and to re∣duce the Pope within the meere bounds of the Romane Bishopricke. This was the plea of the Clergie; their thriftie Laitie, (together with them) enemies to the blessing, (or, as they construe it, the curse) of fruitfulnesse, are wont to plead, Troppo teste: our Gregorie Martin of old computes the preiudiciall in∣crease

that might arise from these Marriages to the Commonwealth. It is not Religion, but wit that now lyes in our way. Fond men that dare thus offer to controll the wisdome of their Maker, and will be tying the GOD of Heauen to their rules of state. As it is, no Church in the whole World (except the Romane) stands vpon this restraint, whereof the consequences haue beene so no∣toriously shamefull, that wee might well hope, experience would haue wrought, if not redresse of their courses, yet silence of ours. And sure∣ly, if this man had not presumed that (by reason of the long discon∣tinuance of Popery) time had worne out of mens mindes the memory of their odious filthinesses, he durst not thus boldly haue pleaded for their abominable Celibate; The question whereof, after all busie discussions, and pretences of age, must bee re∣solued into no other then this, How farre the Tradition of a particular Church is worthy to preuayle a∣gainst

Scripture: yea, and against other Churches. A point, which a very weake iudgement will bee able to determine.
In this returne of my Defence, I doe neither answere euery idle clause, nor omit any essentiall: This length of mine is no lesse forced then my Aduersaries continencie: wherein yet my Reader shall not sigh vnder an irksome loquacitie. I presume to dedicate this vnworthy labour to your Grace, whome this famous Church daily blesseth, as her wise, faithfull, and vigilant Ouer∣seer, as a renowned Patterne of holy Virginitie, and Patrone of holy Marriage. The GOD of Heauen (whose watch you carefully keepe) preserue you long to his Church; and make vs long happie in your Grace, and you euer happie in his plentifull blessings. Such shall euer be the Prayers of

