



WHereas (Right Honorable) there came lately into my hands an inso∣lēt bragge or challēge contayning nyne poyntes, or articles, and sub∣scribed by M. Champion a Iesuite and (as he calleth himselfe) a Priest of the Catholike faith, latelye ar∣riued here in Englande, and the same directed vnto-your Honours by waye of humble sute and petition: I thought it my duety vnder your Lordships fauoure, and correction, to peruse the same, to scanne his drift, and to answeare his bragges and challenge, as farre forth as it concernes my degree, and the common weale of the Cler∣gie of England. His petition is to your honours for fa∣uoure, his quarell is to the Clergie for Religion, and his drift (as farforth, as yet, it may bee perceiued) is to se∣duce her Maiestyes louing and faythfull Subiectes, with showe of Catholike Priesthood and profession. Vnto your honours he directed the Challenge to be receiued: and vnto your honours with all humility I send it answered

submitting my selfe and the whole to your wisedomes▪ & fauorable interpretations. It is no new deuise, but an old practice of Satan, thus to send forth his wicked spirites, to sow tares among the wheat, who wayting all opportu∣nity, not daring in the clere light and broad day to work his feats, doth it by stelth, and in the night season, when men sleepe in the security of Sinne▪ wherfore the Kinge ruleth, the Priest prayeth, the husbandman ploweth, e∣uery one in his calling, is to serue the Lord, and that in watchfulnes. My selfe as the simplest, togeather with my bretherne of the Clergie we (I say) ioyntlye are greatlye bound to render vnto God harty thankes, and praises, for the vertuous, peaceable, and prosperous raigne of our soueraygne Lady the Quenes▪ maiesty, in whose blessed∣nes we are blessed, in whose peace we enioy quietnes, and of whose vertue and piety we are partakers. Her tempe∣rall swerd aduaunceth the swerd of the Spirite, which is the worde of God, and the messengers therof are shielded vnder her shadow and countenaunce. As Daniell sayed of his Lorde and Mayster the Kinge, so say wee dayly and hourely of our Lady and Mistres the Queene: O noble Queene liue for euer. Secondlye wee blesse God for your honours, and instantly craue the continuance of your health, with the encrease of all heauenly knowledge in your calling to countenaunce vnder her Maiesty the preaching of Gods worde, to commaund the buildinge of his church, and to roote out those that goe aboute to de∣stroy the vineyarde of the Lord. And presently touching the challenge of this bragging Champion, in the name of my fellow laborers, and brethren of the Clergie: I refer the determination therof vnto your Lordships▪ so that

if you graunt it either priuately or publiquely, he shall bee disputed withall. His bragge is but bumbast, their religi∣on is in showe not in substance, they haue wordes and not truth. I will not presume to craue licence for him, but hartely wish with the Apostle, that they were cut of which molest vs, and the quiet state of the Church of England. Thirdly in brotherly loue I am to desire of her Maiesties louing subiects, not lightly to credite such insolēt brags: not vnaduisedly to receiue such wandrers from Rome: but in the feare of God to beholde, what is and hath bene sayd for the truth, and to cleaue fast vnto the word of God. And so I ceasse further to trouble your Lordships, but with remembraunce of my humble duty I pray vnto the lord long to blesse & preserue your Honors.
From London the second of Ianuarie. 1580. 
