



ALthough youre gracious life to all mens iudge∣mentes, is so cleane and pure that it neade no maner of incita∣tyon or ensample of vertue to vertuous & charitable liuinge: yet when I bethought me how corrupt, how caduke, how bryt∣tle, and howe sliding from ver∣tue

to vice, mans nature is e∣uen from the beginning, & with how diuers and manifold insti∣gations the concupiscences and lustes of this deceitfull worlde doth embrace and intangle mā with all, and that our aduersa∣ry the deuill is moste vigilante and diligente daily to deuoure the soul of manne, and to alure him to his waies and tradity∣ons:. Peter. 5. I estemed it irreprehensi∣ble, if I your daily orator shuld at any tyme, I say not quicken youre grace, for tha were but lost labor, but exhort your grace to the continuance of your god∣ly and vertuous liuing, and iud¦ged my sel vnblameable, if I in this tempesious and blustryng time shuld send your grace, as it were an anker, or a staffe to stay you by, and fermely to stablyshe

your grace, least that your gra∣ce should (that God forbid) wa∣uer or slide from the Catholike and true faith of God, from his true and liuelye worde, or from the trace of your charitable and vertuous liuinge. For who is sure to stand fast, and not to fal? Paule saith. Let him that stan∣deth take heede he fall not. Or who can say, I am without syn, or my harte is cleane? What is more surer then to auoide thys fall, than to leane to thinfallible and mighty word of God, than to ensue the life of Christ our sa∣uior & and redeamer, and the ensam¦ples and vndoubted hystories, gathered out of holy scripture, & by me your highnes most ha∣ble & obedient subiect trāslated for the vtilitye & consolation of the vnlearned into english: this

is doubtlesse a verye profitable colection, and the anker & staffe that I spake of, containing most compendiously the wonderfull miracles, the noble historyes, the worthy actes, the wise say∣inges, the politike stratagemes the wicked cōspiracies, the due obedience, faith and fidelitye of a christian, with other innume∣rable and meruelous thynges, and ye parables of all scripture. Rede it therfore most gratious Ladye, and take good holde at the godlye ensamples and doc∣trines there of, for in so doing, youre grace shall not neade to slide from the faithe of Christe, nor yet from the trace of youre godlye and vertuous life, but shall stand as Christes souldier against sathan, the worlde, and

the flesh to your eternal felicity and comfort most victoriously. For where there is no pain nor battaile, there can be no victory nor no triumphe. For Sayncte Paule saithe,Act. 14. that we throughe muche tribulation and payne, must enter into the kingdom of God. And again he saithe,2. Cor. 4 that this our tribulation and aduer∣sity which is momentanye and light, prepareth an exceadynge and an eternall waight of glory vnto vs: yea and that a crowne of righteousnesse is laide vp for all those that suffer tribulation and aduersity,1. Timo. 4. and haue fought a good fyghte, and haue kepte their faith, the which our Lord that is a righteous iudge shall geue vnto all theym that loue his comming. And for as much

as this our slidinge life, is as it were but a warfare and a con∣tinual battail against our ghost¦ly enemi the deuil, fight ye must yea and that earnestly and con∣tinually euen to the latter end, for so your grace shal ouerturne sathan your enemye moste victoriouslye, and be crowned with the crowne of eter∣nal ioy and fe∣licity.
