


AS of Auncient and longe tyme, there hath bene and is now at this present many good godly profitable lawes and actes made and set forthe in this moste noble and floryshynge realme, for the reliefe, succour, comforte and sustentacion of the poore nedye impotente and my¦serable creatures, beinge and in habiting in all parts of the same. So is there (righte honorable and myne especyall good Lady) most holsom estatutes, ordinances and necessary lawes, made setforth and published for the extreme punishement of all vagaran∣tes and sturdy vacabons, as passeth throughe and by all parts of this famous yle most ydelly and wyckedly, And I wel by good experience vnderstandinge and consideringe your most tender, pytyfull, gentle and noble nature, not onelye hauinge a vygelant and mercifull eye to your poore indygente and feable parishnores, yea not onely in the parishe where your honour most happely doth dwell, but also in o∣thers, inuyroninge or nighe adioyninge to the same. As also aboun∣dantly powrynge out dayly your ardent and bountifull charytie vp∣pon all such as commeth for reliefe vnto your luckely gates.
I thought it good, necessary, and my bounden dutye to acquaynte your goodnes with the abhominable, wycked and detestable behauor of all these rowsey, ragged rabblement of rakehelles, that vnder the presence of great misery, dyseases and other innumerable calamites whiche they fayne through great hipocrisye do wyn and gayne great aimes in all places where they wyly wander, to the vtter deludinge of the good geuers, deceauinge and impouerishing of all suche poore housholders both sicke and sore, as nether can or maye walke abroad for reliefe and comforte (where in dede most mercy is to be shewed.) And for that I (most honorable Lady) beinge placed as a poore gen∣tleman haue kepte a house these twenty yeares, where vnto pouerty daylye hath and doth repayre, not without some releife as my poore callinge and habylytie maye and doth extende: I haue of late yeares gathered a great suspition that all should not be well, and as the pro¦uerbe saythe (some thinge lurke and laye hyd that dyd not playnely apeare) for I hauinge more occation throughe sickenes to tarye and remayne at home, then I haue bene accustomed do by my there abyding, talke
 and confere dayly with many of these wyly-wanderars of both sorts as well men and wemen, as boyes and gyrles: by whom I haue ga∣thered and vnderstande, their depe dissimulation and detestable dea∣lynge, beinge maruelous suttle and craftye in there kynde, for not one amongst twentye wyll discouer either declare there scelorus se∣crets: yet with fayre flatteringe wordes, money, and good chere, I haue attained to the typ by such as the meanest of them hath wandred these xiii yeres and most xvi, and some twenty and vpwarde, and not withoute faythfull promesse made vnto them neuer to discouer their names or any thinge they shewed me: for they woulde all saye yf the vpright men should vnderstand thereof they should not be onlye gre∣uouslye beaten, but put in danger of their lyues by the sayde vpright men. There was a fewe yeres since a small breefe set forthe of some zelous man to his countrey of whom I knowe not, that made a lytle shewe of there names and vsage, and gaue a glymsinge lyghte not sufficient to perswad of their peuyshe peltinge and pickinge practy∣ses, but well worthy of prayse. But (good madame) with no lesse tra∣uell then good wyll, I haue repayred and rygged the Shyp of know∣ledge, and haue hoyssed vp the sayles of good fortune, that she maye safelye passe aboute and through all partes of this noble realme, and there make porte sale of her wyshed wares, to the confusion of their drowseye demener, and vnlawfull languag, pylfring pycking, wily wanderinge, and lykinge lecherye, of all these rablement of rascales, that raunges about all the costes of the same. So that their vndecent dolefull dealing and excerable exersices, maye apere to all as it were in a glasse, that therby the Iusticers and Shréeues may in their cer∣cutes, be more vygelant to punishe these malefactors, and the Coū∣stables Bayliffes, and bosholders settinge asyde all feare, slouthe, & pytie, maye be more circomspecte in executing ye charge geuen thē by the aforesayde Iusticers. Then wyll no more this rascall rabblemēt raunge about the countrey, then greater releife maye bée shewed to the pouertye of eche paryshe, then shall we kepe our Horsses in oure pastures vnstolen, then our lynnen clothes shall and maye lye safely one our hedges vntouched, then shall wee not haue our clothes and lynnen hoked oute at oure wyndowes as well by daye as by nyght. Then shall we not haue our howses broken vp in ye night, as of late one of my nyghtbors had and two great buckes of clothes stolen out, and most of the same fyne Lynnen. Then shall wee safely kepe oure pygges and poultrey from pylfringe. Then shall we surely passe by
 the hyghe wayes leading to marketes and fayres vnharmed. Then shall our Shoppes and bothes be vnpycked and spoyled. Then shall these vncomly companies bee dispersed and set to labour for their ly∣uinge, or hastely hange for their demerites. Then shall it incourag a great number of gentlemen and others seinge this securitie, to set vp houses and kepe hospitalyty in the countrey, too ye comfort of their nighboures, releife of the poore, & to the amendemet of the common-welth. Then shall not sinne and wyckednes so much abound among vs. Then wyll gods wrathe be much thee more pacified towards vs. Then shall we not taste of so many and soundry plages, as now day¦ly raygneth ouer vs. And then shall this Famous Empyre, bee in more welth and better floryshe, to the inestymable ioye and comfort of the Quenes moste excellent maiestye whome god of his infynyce goodnes to his great glory long and manye yeares make moste pros∣perously to raygne ouer vs to the great Felycity of all the Peres and Nobles, and to the vnspeakable ioye releife and quietnes of mind of all her faythfull Commons and Subiectes. Nowe me thinketh I fe¦lowe these peuyshe peruerse and pestilence people begyne to freate, fume, sweare and stare at this my booke, their lyfe being layd open and aparantly paynted out that their confusion and end draweth one a pace Where as in dede if it be well wayed it is set forthe for their synguler profyt and commoditie, for the sure safegarde of their lyues here in this world, that they shorter not the same before their tyme, and that by their true labour and good lyfe, in the world to com they maye saue their Soules, that Chryst the seconde person in Trinitye hath so derely bought with his most precious bloud: so that hereby I shall do them more good thē they could haue deuised for them selues. For beholde their lyfe beinge so manyfest wycked and so aparantlye knowen, the honorable wyll abhore them. The worshipfull wyl re∣iecte them, the yemen wyll sharpely tawnte them, The Husbande men vtterly defye them, The Laborynge men bluntly chyde them, The wemen wt a loud reclamation wonder at them. And all Chyldrē with clapping handes crye out at them, I many tymes musinge with my selfe at these myscheuous misliuers merueled whē they toke their oryginall and begynning, howe longe they haue exercised their exe∣crable wandring a bout. I thought it meete to confere with a verye olde man that I was well acquaynted with, whose wit and memory is meruelous for hys yeares, being about the age of fourescore, what he knew when he was yong of these lousey leuterars. And he shewed
 me that when he was yong, he wayted vpon a man of much worship in Kent, who died immediatly after the laste Duke of Buckingham was beheaded, at his buryall there was suche a number of beggers besides poore housholders dwellinge there aboutes that vnneth they myghtly or stand about the House: then was there prepared for them a great and a large barne, and a great far ore sod out in Furmentye for them, with bread and drinke aboundantly to furnesh out the pre∣misses, and euery person had two pence for such was the dole. When Night approched ye poore housholders repaired home to their houses, the other wayfaring bolde beggers remayned all night in the barne, and the same barne beinge serched with light in the night by this old man and then yonge, with others, they tolde seuen score persones of men, euery of them hauinge his woman, except it were two wemen that lay alone to gether for some especyall cause. Thus hauing their makes to make mery with all, the buryall was turnede to bousynge and belly chere, morning to myrthe, fastinge to feastinge, prayer to pastyme, and pressinge of papes, and lamenting to Lechery. So that it maye apere this vncomly company hath had a longe continuance, but then nothinge geuen so much to pylferinge, pyckinge and spoy∣linge, and as far as I can learne or vnderstand by the examination of a nomber of them, their languag, which they terme peddelars Fren∣che or cantig began but wtin these .xxx. yeres lytle aboue, and yt the first inuenter therof was hanged, all saue the heade, for that is the fynall end of them all, or els to dye of some filthy and horible diseases: but much harme is don in the means space by their continuance, as some x. xii. and xvi yeres before they be consented, and the nomber of them doth dayly renew. I hope their synne is now at ye highest, and that as short and as spedy a redres wyl be for these, as hath bene of late yeres for the wretched, wily wanderinge vagabondes, calling and naming themselves Egiptians, depely dissemblings and longe hydinge and coueringe their depe deceitfull practises, fedinge the rude common people wholy addicted and geuen to nouelites, ioyes, and newe iu∣uentions, delytinge them with the strangenes of the attyre of their heades, and practisinge paumistrie to suche as woulde knowe their fortunes. And to be short all theues and hores, as I may well wryt, as some haue had true experience, a nomber can well wytnes, and a great sort hath woll felte it. And now (thankes bee to god) throughe wholsome lawes and the due execution thereof, all be dispersed, va∣nished, & the memory of then cleane extynguyshed, that when they
 bee once named hereafter, our Chyldren wyll muche maruell what kynde of people they were: and so I trust shal shortly happen of these. For what thinge doth chiefly cause these rowseye rake helles thus to continue and dayly increase? surely a nomber of wycked parsons that keepe typlyng Houses in all theres, where they haue succour and re∣liefe, and what so euer they bryng they are sure to receaue money for the same, for they sell good penyworthes. The byers haue ye greatest gayne, yea yf they haue nether money nor ware they wylbe trusted, their credite is much. I haue taken a note of a good manye of them & wylsend their names and dwelling places to such Instecers as dwel∣leth nere or next vnto them, that they by their good wisedomes maye displace the same, and auctoryse such, as haue honesty. I wyl not blot my boke with their names, because they be resident. But as for this fletinge Fellowshyp I haue truly setforth the most part of them that be doers at this presente with their names that they be knowene by. Also I haue placed in the end thereof their leud langage callinge the same pedlers Frenche or canting. And how shall I end my prologe, makinge true declaration (right honorable Lady) as they shall fall in order of their vntymelye tryfelinge time, leud lyfe, and pernitious practises, trustinge that the same shall neyther trouble or abash your most tender, tymerous and pytifull Nature, to thinke ye small méede should growe vnto you for such Almes so geuen. For god our marci∣full and most louinge father well knoweth your hartes and good in∣tent, the geuer neuer wanteth his reward, accordinge to the saying of Saynt Augustyn: as there is (neyther shalbe) any synne vnpunis∣shed, euen so shall there not be eny good dede vnrewarded. But how comfortably speketh Chryst our Sauiour vnto as in his gospel (geue ye and it shalbe geuen you agayne) behold farther, good Madam that for a cup of colde water, Chryst hath promised a good reward. Now saynt Austen properly declareth why Chryst speaketh of cold water, because the poorest man that is, shall not excuse him selfe from that cherytable warke least he would paraduenture saye that he hath ne∣ther wood, poot nor pan to warme any water with. Se farther what god speaketh in the mouth of his prophete Esaye, breake thy bread to him that is a hongred, he sayth not geue him a hole lose: for parad∣uenture the poore man hath it not to geue, then let him geue a pece. This much is sayd because the poore that hath it should not be excu∣sed, nowe howe much more then, the riche? Thus you see good ma∣dam. for your treasure here dispersed where nede and lacke is, it shall
 be heaped by aboundantlye for you in heauen, where neyther rust or moth shal corupt or destroy the same. Vnto which tryumphant place after many good happy, and fortunat yeres pros∣perouslye here dispended, you may for euer and euer there most ioyfully remayn. Amen.
Finis.

depiction of a female figure with a book on a lectern

