

TO THE RIGHT WORTHIE AND HONOV∣RABLE, SIR VVALTER RALEGH, KNIGHT, SENESCHAL OF THE DVCHIES OF Cornewall and Exeter, and L. Warden of the stannaries in Deuon and Cornewall. T.B. wisheth true felictie.



SIr, seeing that the parte of the Worlde, which is betwene the Florida and the Cap Breton nowe nammed Virgi∣nia, to the honneur of yours most souueraine Layde and Quee∣ne Elizabetz, hath ben descouuerd by yours meanes. And great chardges. And that your Collonye hath been theer estab∣lished to your great honnor and prayse, and noelesser proffit vnto the common∣welth:

Yt ys good raison that euery man euertwe him selfe for to showe the bene∣fit which they haue receue of yt. Theerfore, formy parte I haue been all wayes Desirous for to make yow knowe the good will that I haue to remayne still your most humble seruant. I haue thincke that I cold faynde noe better occasion to declare yt, then takinge the paines to cott in copper (the most diligent ye and well that wear my possible to doe) the Figures which doe leuelye represent the for∣me aud maner of the Inhabitants of thesame countrye with theirs ceremonies, sollemne, feastes, and the manner and situation of their Townes, or Villages. Addinge vnto euery figure a brief declaration of thesame, to that ende that eue∣rye man cold the better vnderstand that which is in  represented. Moreo∣uer I haue thincke that the aforesaid figures wear of greater commendation, If somme Histoire which traitinge of the commodites and  of the said trye weare Ioyned with the same, therfore haue I serve miselfe of the  which Thomas Hariot hath lattely sett foorth, and haue   booth togi∣ther to be printed for to dedicated vnto you, as a thinge which by  doth allreadye apparteyne vnto you. Therfore doe I creaue that you will keepe this little Booke, and take yt In goode partte. And desiringe that fauor that  reccueme in the nomber of one of your most humble seruantz,   lord to blese and further you in all yours good doinges and actions, and also to preserue, and keepe you allwayes in good helthe. And soe I comitt you vnto the almyhttie, from Franckfort the first of Apprill 1590.
Your most humble seruant,

