



IT is not long sithence (Right honorable) there was a great brag or cha∣lenge directed to your Lordships from M. Cam∣pion a Iesuite, lately arri∣ued heere in Englande, with other his compli∣ces and confederates of the Romish religion: where he declaring his estate & condition craued with shewe of great humilitie such things as were not to be graūted: the which pe∣titions falling into my hands, were scanned, peru∣sed, & answered in so modest a sort as I might, sub∣mitting my selfe, & the whole to your Honorable Censure & fauourable interpretation. Since which time there hath byn a Pamphlet secretly imprinted, (no doubt in England) though without name, yet hauing this Title: A Briefe Censure vpon two books made in answere to M. Campions offer of disputation, containing very dāgerous doctrine, vnreuerēt speaches against particular persons, tending therby as much as in the Author lay, to discredite the Gospel and the profes∣sors thereof. As hereto fore in mine aunswere to the



chalenge so now also with all humilitie I thought good to direct vnto your honours a further viewe of this Iesuiticall sect and wandering Romanistes, displaying in their Banner (as the Title prefixed to the Booke geueth to vnderstand) their original and successe, their vowe and othe, their hypocrisie and superstition, with their doctrines and positions, be∣yng the rather moued therevnto, by this late Pam∣phlet, heere inserted (as occasion hath beene geuen) & also largely confuted. And seeing it falleth out that with singlenesse of hearte, they seeke not after peace, with humblenesse of submission, they yeelde not vnto her Maiesties proceedinges, neither with penitent mindes they imbrace the Gospel and the trueth of Gods worde: let there continue (as Augu∣stine faith) betweene vs and them, the rather a con∣flict for the defence of the trueth, then with them in falshood a concorde. But it is greatly to be wi∣shed, and my selfe with the rest of my fellow labou∣rers, we I say, are most instantly, agayne and againe to desire your Lordships, to bee a meane vnto the Queenes most excellent Maiestie, that at this pre∣sent summons, and noble assembly, in the most ho∣norable and high court of parliament, there be a vew had of this dangerous sort of people, that their rouing bee restrained, that their religion be refor∣med, if the word cannot take place, in some other sort as shall seeme best to her most Royall mynde, and the holie Ghost the guide and leader of you all. Although Eusebis in the life of Constantine the Emperour, reporteth that the great clemencie



of that most noble Prince was misliked, and that the libertie and fauour then shewed, grew to loose∣nesse: Yet am not I so straight laced, but that I coulde wishe all kinde of fayre meanes, clemencie, curtesie, libertie, conference & long suffering, to be vsed and shewed to such as are to be woon, & espe∣cially, in matters of religion. The Prophete Dauid speaking of the Lorde, saith: that hee is mercifull, long suffering, pacient, yet if the sinner will not turne, he will bend his bowe, he will gird himselfe, he will whet his sword, & shaue the hearie scalpe of the enimie. I am not to procure this Iesuiticall sect displeasure, neither work thē discredit in respect of their persons, whom in tēder loue I do heartely im∣brace: but it is their religion that I desire reformed, and their Romish practises detefted and abhorred. How they preuayle in other Countries with the children of vnbeliefe wee heare daily: What trasshes they bring in their Fardels from Rome, we see they be not woorth the taking vp: how slylie they inueigle the simple, and snare thē in error, ex∣perience doth. daily teach vs: and what treachery they woorke in corners against the state of the Realme, the Crowne and dignity, we are vehemēt∣ly to suspect. They lay fables, visions, and fonde miracles before the people, and keepe the woorde of GOD vnpreached from them: they sweare obedience vnto the Pope, and barre Prin∣ces of the loyaltie and subiection due vnto them: and they prostrate themselues before Idols & ima∣ges & robbe God of his honor. In tender conside∣ration



wherof, may it please your good Lordships being of her Maiesties most honorable counsell en∣dued with the spirite of wisedome and counsell; frō aboue: that by your fauourable countenance▪ religi∣on, and the preaching of the Gospel may be furthe∣red in this flourishing: common weale, and most Christian Realme of England: that sects, schismes and heresies may be rooted out: that as there is one God, one faith, one baptisme, one hope of our cal∣ling, so we may vnaidly honour the same God, imbrace the same faith, performe the vow made in the same baptisme, and rest in the same hope, louing one another, praising God, & obeying our Prince, whom the Lord blesse, and preserue long to raygne ouer vs. AndIo I cease presently, further to trouble your Lordships, but with re∣membraunce of my humble due∣tie, I desire the Lorde long to blesse and preserue your Honours.
From London, the 3. of March. 1580.

