



LONGE was it (moste worthy and ex∣cellēt Prynce) ere ye diuine ma¦ieste wold ful∣lie condescēde, yt Israell shuld haue a KyngeA kinge. to raygne ouer thē, as had the foreyn nacions, consydering that he had bene of so longe time theyr hygh gouernour, leader, & defender.i. Regū.viii. But whē it was ones determinatly graun∣ted them, what was more earnestly requy∣red of God in that magnifycent mynystra∣cyon, then were the necessary affayres of re∣lygion?Dauid. How diligent was kynge Dauid in nombrynge the Leuytes, in assygnyng their

offyces, and in appoynting the sacryfysers, syngers, seruitours, porters, and other my∣nisters, in theyr places, lottes, and courses. i. Para.xxiii. How studiouse was kyng Sa∣lomonSalomon. in buildinge the house of the Lorde. iii. Reg.vi. and in disposyng the priestes, le∣uytes, queresters, & dore kepers, accordinge to the ordre that hys father Dauid had set.Abia. ii. Para.viii. Kynge Abia strongelye war∣red vpon Israell whyche had than rebelled agaynst the Lorde, because they had reiec∣ted the priesthode of Aaron, for a wycked priesthode of the ydolatrouse nacions, to do them seruice in a counterfett and false rely∣gyon, whyche were no goddes but ydolles.Asa. ii. Paralip.xiii. Kyng Asa folowed the plea∣sure of God. He ouerthrew the ydolatrouse aulters, destroyed false worshippinges, cut downe the yrgroues, brake in sondre theyr ymages, deposed hys own mother for ydo∣latry, abolyshed the stues of male children, and commaunded Iuda to seke the Lorde God of theyr fathers, and to do in all thyn∣ges accordynge to hys lawe and commaun∣dementes.iii. Reg.xv.
Kynge Iosaphat hauynge an harte cou∣ragiouseIosaphat. in the wayes of the Lorde, bannis∣shed the hyll aulters and groue chapels out of Iuda, he sought out the word of God, he sent fourth faythfull preachers in the thirde

yeare of hys raygne, whych toke with them the boke of the lawe, and taught the people in all the cyties of the land.ii. Paralip.xvii. Kynge Iehu executed the reuengemente ofIehu. God, for the innocēt bloud of hys holy pro∣phetes & seruan̄ts, that was cruelly shedde. He slewe the great tyraunts, Ioram, Ocho∣sias, and quene Iesabell, wyth theyr chyl∣dren & kyndredes, he destroyed all the false prophets▪ & priestes, consuming the ydola∣tours with theyr ydolatries, & made cōmen takes of theyr churches.iiii. Re.ix. & .x. King Ezechias did cleane to the Lorde, put awayEzechias. the hyl aulters, consumed y• ymages, strake doun the groues, and all to brake the brasen serpent y• Moyses had made.iii. Reg.xviii. He prepared the tēple, purified the sanctua∣ry, pourged y• Leuites, reformed y• priestes, restored again the true religion of Iuda, pro uided for the ministers, & offred vp the lacri fyces to the Lord.ii. Par.xxix. Kyng IosiasIosias. in like case restored again y• decaied religiō, brought y• lawes of the Lord to lighte, com∣maūded the people diligētly to obserue thē, put doun the false religions which had done sacrifices to the hoste of heauen, brent theyr ymages, defaced their aulters, & stampte thē to pouder, brake doun y• bugger places in y•Masmon∣gers. house of y• lord, slew al y• ydolatrouse priests  brent their bones in places of their wicked

sacryfyces, and he put oute of the waye all sothsaiers, sorcerers, inchaunters, witches, and remoued all other abhominaciōs of the vngodlye, reducynge the people to the true seruyce of God.iiii. Reg.xxiii.
Suffycient are these most worthy exam∣ples of y• scripture, to declare what y• dew∣ty of a kyng is, concernynge the affaires of our Christen religion. Two thynges haueii. euils, chiefely bene the cause of the vtter decaye & ful destruccion therof, continually frō time to time, both in the olde law and in the new, whyche are dysputed and improued in thys treatyse here folowynge. The one of them is a prodigyouse priesthode, in no poynt a∣greable to the prescrypcyous, ordinaunces, or determynate rules of God. The other isUowes. a straunge kynd of vowyng, neither taught of Christ nor yet persuaded of his Apostles, but expreslye condemned of them both, for an horryble hypocrysye and manyfeste doc∣tryne of deuyls. In the Testament of Moy ses, is onely the priesthode of Aaron, and in the Testament of Christ, the only priesthode of Melchisedech. The fyrste as a fygure was fynyshed in Christ, in the other he per∣petually reygneth at the right hand of God the father. Let your learned Mayestie thenPriesthed cōsydre, what priesthod it is, that these wily, wilful, wicked, arrogaunt, & obstinate pa∣pistes

of your Realme, extoll so mallopert∣ly & boast so stoutlye, these two priesthodes taken clerelye from thys earthe? way also what the vowes are, yt setteth it in force to worke all vngodlynes, and styll to vpholde the wretched worlde in the moste execrable vyces of ydolatrye and buggery, to remain the wycked mēbers of that great cytie whi∣cheMēbers. the holy Ghost calleth Sodome and E∣gypte. Apocal.ii.
None authoryte haue these vowes and thys priesthod of the holy scrypturs, though they a thousande tymes allege for them: vo∣uere & reddite. Psa.lxxv. for vouere in that place pertayneth nomore to their vnwining state, thā doth reddere there to the office of theyr massynge priesthode. Uowes in thatUowes. kynde, are not of fayth, but of supersticion, not of Christs doctrine, but of the Paganes fables. Marke the folyshnesse of them, whē they are of things impossible. Who can pro myse to do myracles & perfourme it at hys pleasure? who can vowe that hys hear shall not growe, nor his nayles increase, and ful∣fyll it in effecte? Nomore can they do to lyue chaste, onlesse the Lorde geue it, whyche he neuer doeth in causes vnnecessary. An office was thys practised priesthode, not of God,Of boeth. but of ydols, and that kynde of vowynge, an inuencion of the olde Paganes for theyr

vestals and monials. So that an offycein ydolatrye is the priesthode, and the vowe yt they cal of theyr chastyte, a seruyce of pro∣digiouse buggery, muche detested of sainctPrestes. Paule. Roma. i. In Christ we haue a priest∣hode, so many as beleue in hym and are re∣generate. i. Petri. ii. & Apocal. v. why shuld that false priesthod of Antichrist, depryue vs therof, for theyr oylynges and shaynges, & conuerte vs into a layte, to geue place to that deuilrye?
Is darkenesse aboue lyght, vnryghteous∣nesse aboue ryghteousnesse, or Belial aboue Christ? Oh breake down these gates of Ga∣za and buyldinges of helle, lyke a myghtye stronge Samson, & from hens fourth sufferSamson. no suche fylthye orders to be geuen in your realme. In some places of the olde testamēt is thys vsurped presthode called the prest∣hod of Baal. iii. Reg. xviiii. & Hier. xxiii and in some places the presthode of Bel, Daniel xiiii. Esai. xlvi. In the newe testamente, the massynge presthode, whychis the syn∣nefull synke and confuse Chaos of all ydo∣latrye▪Chaos. was reared vppe by the Deuyls ge∣nerall vycar, the bawdy byshop of Rome, and put in full strengthe, Sathan ones sett at large after hys thousande yeares inpri∣sonment. Apocalip. xx. Marke the proce∣dynges of pope helhounde or Hildebrande,

otherwyse called Gregorie the. vii. whyche first deposed priestes that had wyues, and enacted in the general synode at Rome, that none shulde be admitted to that massing or∣dre, vnlesse he professed the lyfe sodomy∣ticall vndre a contrary tytle of chastite, inProfessiō. the yeare of our Lorde a. M. lxxiiii. Neuer were they able afore that daye, of their lytle cakes to make thē pratye goddes by their transubstanciacions▪ nor yet to brynge the blynde people in a madnesse to worshypp them.
As it was wyth the presthode of the olde ydolatours, so was it in continuan̄ce wyth thys massynge presthode of Antichriste. For the Egypcyanes whyche were the first au∣thoursEgypci of the false religion, wold neuer ad∣myt anye man to their presthode, that had not bene nousled vp from hys youth in the rules of that moste fylthie ydoll Priapus. Whych baudy custome is not onely recey∣ued of the Romysh church, but also wyth al dylygente loking on, both maynteyned & re∣ligiously obserued. None may be admytted to their whorysh orders, that hath not those instrumentes, whereby men are knowne to be men, no, not the great Priapus of RomePriapus. his own persō. Though they professed hipo∣critically a perpetual abstinēce frō lawfull

generacion, yet were they not all wythoute theyr vnlawfull remedies, when the vnquē∣cheable heates came vpon them. The bys∣shops had theyre dedicated ladyes and ma∣dames, the monkes theyr veyled moyals, the chanōs theyr professed nonnes, y• frpresProuision theyr religiouse systers, the great cathedrall churches, mynsters, & colleges, had stues at theyr very gates, besydes all theyr other more then beastly occupyinges, not wyth a comely honeste to be named.
These. ii. horryble mōsters, the Romishe Popes priesthode, and the vowe of hys bo∣ryshe buggerye, whyche hath fylled all the whole world wyth so many ydolatries, sor∣ceryes, aduoutries, lecheries, odometries,Frutes. tyrannies, trayteries, sediciōs, cōspiracies, and innumerable treasons, hath not bene so noyouse and hurtefull to the christen cōmen welth, but it hath styll to thys day very ear∣nest vpholders & mayntainers, not onely of the clergye, but also of the laytie, not of the meaner sorte of men, but of them that wyll be cheche mate wyth the beste at home in theyr shyres or contrayes, as appeareth byProued. thys treatyse folowynge. I therfore exhorte your excellent maiestie in the bowels of Ie∣su Christ, as ye vndoubtedly intēd the glory of God and welth of your christē Realme, not only to remoue thys vow & thys priest∣hode,

hence, but also clerely to abolysh theyr names wyth the name of theyr fyrst founder the byshopp of Rome. Suffre not the tytleNopriests of a priest to remayne wythin your christen domynion, nor yet the note of that buggery vowe, but awaye wyth them both, as with the moste pestilente poysons that euer in∣habyted here.
If holy S. Paul wylled fornycacion not ones to be spoken of among the Ephesians, Ephes. v. lette not these two, much greaterii. euils. euils, which hath bredde and brought forth so exceadyng manye myschyefes, dwell styl among your people to theyr deadly corrup∣tynge. Sende them agayne to Rome, from whēce they came first of al, to theyr pōpose patryarke, and permytte them no longer to mayntayne hys cursed cattell here. Lete the one beare away the other, the blinde priest∣hodeCatell. the lame vowe, and lete them trudge hence apace, tyll they come to theyr maister of myschief. And lete theyr names be as ody ble to your maiesties liege people, as theyr frutes hath bene execrable and wicked, els are ye neuer lyke to haue quietnesse wythin youre owne lande. Accompte not hym forEnemy. your maiesties faythfull subiecte, that here a after shall support them or defende them by any kynde of false doctryne, for in the ende ye shall not fynde hym a faythfull subiecte.
The testament of Christ hath names suffici∣entNames. for the mynysters of hys congregacion, as preaching byshoppes, superintendentes, watche men, pastours, euāgelistes, instruc∣tours, elders, deacons, stewards of his mi∣steries, and suche other lyke, though we ho∣rowe not these blasphemouse tytles of An∣tichriste.
Rote oute these temple chaplaynes and aulter prestes, from the multitude of youre people in the English and Irishe churches, for those prestes were neuer lyke the prestesBorowed of the Lord, thoughe they borowed of them both dysgyfinges and obseruacions in out∣ward apearaunce, but lyke the false prestes of the pdolatrouse nacyons. The Lord hath promysed to dispatche the shauen Madya∣ytes, Hiere. ix. and those priestes whom he vtterly forbad to shaue their crounes, Leui.hauen. xix. & . xxi. Deuter. xiiii. & Ezech. xliiii. be you a faythful and earnest minister in executing that Godly offyce. Destroye the male stues (as is sayd afore) wythin your owne lande, as dyd noble kyng Asa. iii. Reg. xv. Breake downe the buggery places in the house of ye orde, as dyd good kynge Iosias. iiii. Reg.Iosias. xxiii. And dryue out of the tēple, the unlaw∣full byers and sellers, with Iesus the sonne of God, Luc. x. Delyuer youre people, lyke a valeaunte Moyses, from the manifolde

bondage of that Babylon and Egypte, that they may stede fastly stande and perseuer in the fredom, wherunto Christ hath most gra∣cyously called thē. I besche the almightie God to preserue your excellēt maiestie, andPrayer. to gyde you alwayes in hys true feare and loue, to prospere yow in longe lyfe to hys pleasure, and to sende yow euermore ouer his cruell enemies and yours, trium∣phaunt victory, to the glory of his holy name & confort of yont faythfull subiectes.
☞ So be it.
