

To the right honorable and my singular good
Lady Elizabeth Countes of Shrewsbury, Thomas Harman wisheth
all ioye and perfect felicitie, here and in the world to come.
AS of Auncient and long tyme there  and is
now at this prefent many good godly profita wes
and actes, made and set forth in this moste noble and
florishing Realme, for the reliefe, succour, comorte
and sustentacion of the pore, nedy, impotent and mi∣serable
creatures, beeing and inhabiting in all partes
of the same. So is there (right honorable and myne especiall good La∣dy)
most holsome estatutes, ordinances and necessery lawes, made, set
foorth and published, for the extreme punishment of all vagarants 
sturdy vagabonds as passeth through and by all partes of this fam∣yle,
most idelly and wickedly: and I (by good experience) w
standing and considering your most tender, pitifull, gentle and 
nature, not only hauing a vigilant and mercifull eye to your poore in∣digēt
& feeble parishioners: yea not only in the parish wher your ho∣nour
most happely doth dwell, but also in others inuironing or nighe
adioyning to the same As also aboundantly powring out dayly your
ardent and bountifull charitie vppon all such as commeth for reliefe
vnto your luckly gates.
I thought it good, necessary, and my bounden dutye to acquayn
your goodnes with the abhominable, wicked and detestable behauior
of all these rowsey, ragged rabblement of rakehelles, that vnder the
pretence of great misery, diseases and other innumerable calamities,
which they fayne through great hipocrisie, doe win and gayne great
almes in all places where they wyly wander, to the vtter deludinge of
the good geuers: deceyiing and impouerishing of al such poore hous∣holders
both sicke and fore, as neyther can or may walke abroade for
reliefe and comfort (where in deede most mercy is to be shewed,) And
for that, I (most honorable Lady) being placed as a poore gentleman,
haue kept a house these twenty yeares, where vnto pouerty dyily hath
and doth repayre, not without some reliefe as my poore callinge and
habilitie may and doth extende: I haue of late yeares gathered a great
suspicion that all should not be well: and as the prouerbe sayeth:
Some thing lurcke and laye hyd that dyd not playnely appeare. For I ha∣uing
more occasion (through sicknesse) to tary and remayne at home.
then I haue bene accustomed, doe by my there abyding, talke and con∣ferre
daily with many of these wyly wanderars, of both sortes, as well
men and women, as boyes and gyrles: by whom I haue gathered and

derstand their depe dissimulation and detestable dealing, being mar∣uelous
suttle and crafty in their kinde, for not one amongest twenty
will discouer, eyther declare their scelerous secretes: yet with fayr flat∣tering
wordes, money, and good chere, I haue attained to the typpe by
such as the meanest of thē, hath wādered these xiii. yeres, & most xvi.
& som xx. and vpward, and not without fatihful promisse made vnto
them, neuer to discouer their names or any thinge they shewed mee:
for they would all saye, if the vpright men should vnderstand thereof,
they should not bee onely greeuously beaten, but put in daunger of
their lyues, by the sayd vpright men. There was a fewe yeares since a
small breefe set foorth of some zelous man to his countrey, of whom
I knowe not, that made a little shewe of their names and vsage, and
gaue a glymsing light not sufficient to perswade of their peuish pel∣ting
and pyncking practyses, but well worthy of prayse. But (good
mame) with no lesse trauell then good will, I haue repayred and rig∣ged
the ship of knowledge, and haue hoyssed vp the sayles of good fortune, that shee may safely passe about and through all parts of this
noble realme, and there make porte sale of hir wished wares, to the
confusion of their drowsey demener, and vnlawfull lāguage, pylfring,
pycking, wyly wandering and lyking lechery, of all these rablement
of rascales that raunges about all the costes of the same, so that their
vndesent dolefull dealing and execrable exercyses may appeare to all
as it were in a glasse, that thereby the Iusticers and Shreeues maye in
their circuites be more vigilant to punishe these malefactores, and the
Constables, Baylifes and housholders, setting asyde all feare, slouth, &
pitie, may bee more circumspect in executing the charge gyuen them
by the aforesayd Iusticers. Then will no more this rascall rablement
raunge about the countrey. Then greater reliefe may be shewed to the
pouerty of eche parishe. Then shall wee keepe our horses in our pa∣stures
vnstolen. Then our lynnen clothes shall and may lye safely on
our hedges vntouched. Then shall wee not haue our clothes and lin∣nen
hooked out at our windowes, as well by daye as by night Then
shall wee not haue our houses broken vp in the nyght, as of late one of
my neyghbours had and twoo great buckes of clothes stolen out, and
most of the same fyne linnen. Then shall wee safely keepe our pigges
and poultrey from pylfering Then shall wee surely passe by the high
wayes leading to markets and faires vnharmed. Then shall our shops
and bothes be vnpicked and spoiled. Then shall these vncomely com∣panies
bee dispersed and set to labour for their lyuing, or hastely hang
for their demerites. Then shall it encourage a great number of gentle¦men

and others, seeinge this securitie, to set vp houses and keepe hos∣pitalitie
in the countrey, to the comfort of their neighbours, reliefe of
the poore, and to the amendement of the common wealth. Then shal not
sinne and wyckednes so much abounde among vs. Then will gods
wrath be much the more pacified towards vs. Then shall wee not taste
of so many and sundry plagues as now daylye raigneth ouer vs. And
then shall this famous Empyre be in more welth and better floryshe,
to the inestimable ioye and comforte of the Queenes most excellente
maiestitie, whom God of his infinite goodnes, to his great glory, long
and many yeares make most prosperously to raygne ouer vs, too the
great felicitie of all the Peeres and nobles, and to the vnspeakable ioy,
reliefe and quietnes of mynde of all hir faythfull commons and sub∣iectes.
Now, me thinketh I see how these peuish, peruerse and pestilent
people begin to freat, fume, sweare, and stare at this my booke, theyr
lyfe beinge layde open and apparantly paynted out, that their confu∣sion
and end draweth on apace: where as in deede if it be well wayed, it
is set forth for theyr singular profyt and commoditie, for the sure sa∣uegard
of their liues here in this world, that thei shorten not the same
before their time, and that by their true laboure and good lyfe, in the
world to come they may saue their soules, that Christe the second per∣son
in Trinitie hath so derely bought with his most precious bloud∣so
that hereby I shall do them more good then they could haue deui∣sed
for themselues. For behold, their life being so manifest wicked, &
so apparantly knowne: the honorable will abhorre them: the woor∣shipfull
will reiecte them: the yeoman will sharplye tawnte them:
the husband men vtterly defye them: the labouringe men bluntlye
chyde them: the wemen wyth a loude exclamation wonder at them:
And all children wyth clappynge handes crye out at them. I manye
tymes musing with my selfe at these mischeuous myslyuers marueled
when they toke their original and beginning, howe longe they haue
exercised their execrable wandringe about: I thought it meete to con∣fer
with a very olde man that I was well acquainted with, whose witte
and memory is maruelous for his yeares, being about the age of foure
score, what hee knewe when he was yonge of these lousey lewterars.
And he shewed mee that when hee was yonge, he wayted vpon a man
of much worship in Kent, who dyed immediatly after the last Duke
of Buckingham was beheaded, at his buryall there was suche a num∣ber
of beggers, besides poore housholders dwelling there abouts, that
vnneth they myght lye or stand aboute the house: then was thereto
prepared for them a great and a large barne, and a great fatte oxe sod

out in Furmenty for them with bread and drinke aboundantly to fur∣nish
out the premisses, and euery person had two pence for such was
the dole VVhē night aproched the pore housholders repaired hom
to their houses, the other wayfaring bold beggers remained all night
in the barn, and the same barne being serched with light in the night
by this old man and then yonge and others, they tolde seuen score
persons of men, euery of them hauing his woman, except it were two
wemen that lay alone togyther for some especiall cause. Thus hauing
their makes to make mery withall: the buriall was tourned to bou∣sing
and belly cheere, mourning to myrth, fasting to feasting, prayer
to pastyme, and pressing of paps and lamenting to lecherye. So that
it may appeare this vncomly company hath had a long continuance
but then nothinge geuen so much to pylferinge, pyckinge and spo∣ling,
and as far as I can learne or vnderstande by the examination of a
number of them, their language which they terme peddelers Frenche
or Canting, began but within these xxx. yeres or litle aboue, and that
the first inuenter thereof was hanged all saue the head, for that is the
finall ende of them al, or elles to dye of some filthy and horrible disea∣ses:
but much harme is done in the meane space by their continuance
as some x. xii. and xvi. yeares before they be consumed; and the num∣ber
of them doth dayly renew. I hope their sinne is nowe at the hy∣ghest,
and that as short and as speedy redresse wilbe for these, as hath
bene of late yeares for the wretched, wyly wandering vagabonds cal∣ling
and naming them selues Egyptians, deeply dissembling and long
hyding and couering their depe deceiteful practises, feeding the rude
common people wholly addicted and geuen to nouelties, toyes, and
new inuentions, delyting them with the straungenes of the attyre of
their heades, and practising paulmistrye to such as would knowe their
fortunes. And to be short, all theues and hoores (as I may well write)
as some haue had true experience, a number can well witnesse, and a
great sort hath well felte it. And nowe (thankes bee to God) through
wholsome lawes and the due execution thereof, all bee dispersed, ba∣nished,
and the memory of them cleane extinguished, that when they
bee once named hereafter, our Chyldren will muche marueill what
kind of people they were: and so I trust shall shortly happen of these.
For what thing doth chiefely cause these rowsey rake helles thus to
continew and dayly increase? surely a number of wicked persons that
keepe typling houses in all shiers, where they haue succoure and re∣liefe,
and what so euer they bryng, they are sure to receyue money for
the same, for they sel good peny worthes. The byers haue the greatest

gayne, yea yf they haue neither money nor ware, they wylbe trusted,
their credit is much I haue taken a note of a good many of them, and
will send their names and dwelling places to such Iusticers as dwel∣leth
nere or next vnto them, that they by their good wisedomes may
displace the same, and authorise such as haue honesty. I will not blot
my booke with their names, because they be resident. But as for this
fleeting fellowship, I haue truly set forth the most part of them, that
be doers at this present with their names that they be knowne by.
Also I haue placed in the end therof their leud language, callinge the
same pedlers French or Canting. And now shall I ende my prologue,
making true declaration (right honorable Lady) as they shall fall in
order of their vntemely tryfelinge tyme, leude lyfe, and pernitious
practises, trusting that the same shall neyther trouble or abashe your
most tender, tymerous and pytyfull Nature, to thinke the smal mode
should growe vnto you for such almes so geuen. For God our mercy∣full
and most louing father, well knoweth your harte and good en∣tent,
the gyuer neuer wanteth his rewarde, accordinge to the sayinge
of Sainct Augustin: as there is (neyther shalbe) any sinne vnpuni∣shed
euen so shall there not be any good deede vnrewarded But how
comfortably speaketh Christ our Sauiour vnto vs in his gospell (giue
ye and it shalbe gyuen you agayne) behold further, good Madam that
for a cup of colde water, Christ hath promised a good rewarde. Nowe
sainct Austine properly declareth why Christ speaketh of cold water,
because the poorest man that is, shall not excuse him selfe from that
charitable work, least he would peraduenture saye that he hath ney∣ther
wood, pot nor pan to warme any water with. See further what
God speaketh in the mouth of his prophet Esaye. Break thy bread to
him that is a hungred, he sayth not giue him a whole lofe: for perad∣uentute
the poore man hath it not to gyue, then let him gyue a piece.
This much is sayd because the poore that hath it should not be excu∣sed,
now how much more then the riche. Thus you see good Ma∣dame,
for your treasure here dispersed, where neede and lacke
is, it shalbe heaped vp aboundantly for you in heauen,
wher neither rust or moth shal corrupt or destroy
the same. Vnto which triumphant place after
many good happy, and fortunat yeres pros∣perously
here dispended, you may for
euer and euer, thero most ioyfully
remayne.
Amen.
FINIS.
