



IT hath bene the maner of olde (Right worshipfull) that if any strange or new thing happened, within a∣nie mans charge, the same as auncient histories record, was im∣mediately shewed vnto the superiors. The Lieuetenant of Iudaea, certified the Emperour Tiberius, & the Senate of Rome, of the fame of Christ, and e∣specially his reion, then rife in the mouthes of most men through∣out Palaestina. Least I should seem for∣getfull of good maners (being of di∣uers intreated to publishe this exer∣cise) I haue thought good to shew vn∣to you the good newes here hapned throgh the mercy & goodnes of our

gratious God, which hath brought home to his folde an erring sheepe, by birth a Turke, borne at Nigropon∣tus, hertofore by professiō a Saracen, addicted vnto the superstitious lawe of Mahomet, but now by the ministe∣rie of our handes (not of worthines, but of fauour called to the function) after publike confession of his true faith in Iesus Christ, receiued into the congregatiō of the faithful, mar∣ked by Baptisme for a vowed profes∣sor, and sealed vp in your Hospital of S. Katherine, (where the diuine proui∣dence hath alotted you, vnder her Maiestie, heade gouernour) for the childe of God. Maners being not for∣gotten, and duetie thus remembred, the beholder and hearer haue ioynte cause to bee ioyful, for the pearle es∣pied in the field, for the coyne found after searching, for the sheepe called home from straying, according vnto the parables in the Gospell, and to praise our God, whose mercie endu∣reth for euer. Of the other side wee haue cause to sorrowe, when wee be∣hold

the face of the earth in manner all couered with heathens, idolatrers and false worshippers. Asia in great∣nes halfe the world, (though of olde reckoned for the third part) with the most famous gouernours Zambei of Arabia, the king of Narsinga, greate Cham of Tartaria, and the Indian I∣lands, (if we may credit Marcus Pau∣lus Ʋenetus) amounting to the num∣ber of twelue thousand & seauē hun∣dred, all at this day (excepting a few Christians here & there scattred) are either Infidels, liuing as brute beastes without God, or followers of Maho∣met, ioyning with the Turke in false worshippe, yet not fearing his power: the which places haue beene of olde acquainted with the voice of Christ, and with the sounde of the Apostles feete. Affrike (excepting the domini∣ons of Presbiter Iohn the greate king of Aethiopia, who professeth the faith in Christ, though not so purely as it is to be wished) hath many Infidels, the rest are Moores, Saracens, Nigroes, Bar∣barians, addicted to Mahomet, and o∣bedient

to the great Turke. In these countries there are fewe Christians seene. This triangle of East, South, & West, haue shaken off the faith, which of olde hath there beene professed. Europe remaineth, though more peo∣pled, yet a lesser parte then Affrike, neyther is this part cleare from Ma∣homet. The great Turke hath taken Greece awaye, and seated himselfe at Constantinople. Christian religion is now couched in the North partes of the world, and so far that it seemeth (if we looke for fruits) all frozen. The professors (according vnto the words of our Sauiour) are now a little flock. It is high time wee should earnestlie pray vnto God, that hee wil enlarge his kingdome, that hee will open the eyes of Infidels, that he will direct I∣dolatrers in the true woorship, that they which call vppon him in worde, maye followe him in deede, that his name may be glorified vpon earth, & that al may be gathered together in∣to one fold, to sing holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabaoth. And here withal I sup∣pose

it needfull to certefie your wor∣ship what moued this Turk to becom a Christiā: not holie words, but wor∣kes, not the name of faith, but the viewe of fruites, not the learning of Clarks, but the liues of certain good Christiās, whose loue & kindnes did so rauish him (as he saide of himselfe) that he cōfessed the God of the chri∣stians to be the onely true God. And among others he named Sir F. Drake that worshipful knight, & W. Haukins that worthy Captaine. The tree is knowne by the fruits, Gods children are known by their holines, the true professors are knowne by their loue. Hereby (saith our Sauiour) shall all men knowe that ye are my disciples, if ye loue one another. The Iews gloried they were of God, their behauior declared thē (our sauiour gaue sētence) to be of the de∣uil: they said they were of the seede of Abraham, their works denied them to be such. This is the course that Christ tooke with the Scribes & Pharises for the stay of his credit: If I do not the wor∣kes of my Father, beleeue me not. Agayne:

though ye beleeue not me, beleue the works, This is the rule that Iewe and Gentile. that Turke & Saracene, & euery good Christiā now marketh & beholdeth, but at this day nothing rifer thē say∣yng, nothing rarer then doing. Wher be the almes-houses, Hospitals, Col∣ledges, and Churches nowe a daies founded & builded? No doubt God hath his people, and they haue their fruites, though the same be very few. If wee were so desirous to haue our lights (I mean our fruits) so shine vp∣on the earth in these North partes of the world, where Christianitie is pro∣fessed, as we are gredily bent to gette the earthly commodities of Affrike, Asia, and the hid treasures of the far Indies, we shoulde no doubt prouoke them out of the said coūtries to seek after our God, and to bee rauished with the conuersation and steppes of the Christians, as they allure vs wyth fame of their commodities, to seeke after their forrain riches. And wheras now one silly Turk is won, ten thou∣sands no doubt woulde receiue the

faith. The heathens in far coūtries do wōder at the couetousnes of the chri∣stiās, & the cruelty among other na∣tions of the Spaniard. Presbiter Iohn in Affrike crieth out vpon the Christian Princes for their diuision & discorde. The great Turk at Cōstantinople laugh∣eth the pope & his prelats to scorn for their pride, the Christian churches he reuileth, and not without cause for their idols & images. Reformation is to be sought for of al men not onely in Religion (wherein some ouer-busie themselues, neuer satisfied vntill they haue ouerthrowne all) but in liues & maners, that they which are without seeing our good workes, may glorifie our father which is in heauen. Thus occasioned by these circumstances, my pen hath ouer-ruled me, I feare lesse ouer tedious. Maye it please you to accept this remembrance procee∣ding from a willing mind, though o∣ther-wise not furnished to gratifie your kindnes. From Shordich the xii. of October, 1586.

