



Right Honourable,
WHen Socrates his Schollers brought euery one rich gifts to him in token of thanke∣fulnes, among the rest,Sen. de ben. lib. 1. cap. 8. hee had one called Aeschines, whose hear∣ty affection was as great to him as any of the rest, but hee wanted meanes to giue: whereupon he spake thus; I haue nothing, O Socrates, to giue vnto thee worthy thy selfe, but that one thing

which I haue in my possession I freely giue, namely, I giue my selfe vnto thee. When I call to minde, the many and noble fauours receiued from your ho∣nour, I wish I could expresse my thank∣fulnes in a more reall manner then my ability will permit; but hauing nothing worthy your selfe, with Aeschines I giue my selfe to your Lordships seruice. At this time I offer this poore mite of my weake endeauours to your ho∣nourable Patronage; A worke not fit the Presse, neither did I intend (had I not bene encouraged to it by your ho∣nours approbation of it, in hope it may redound to the publike good,) euer to haue published it. Such as it is, it pro∣ceeded ex mero motu, out of a hearty desire of Gods glory, and my Countries safety. It meets with the security and iniquitie of the time; and if it may

rowze vs from the one, or the other, or both, I shall thinke my time well bestowed. A double respect makes it due vnto your Honour: First the au∣thor of it, my particular obligation; because my labours in the Gospell being first countenanced, and daily encoura∣ged by your honour, you may of right challenge this, as the first fruits to bee offered vnto you. Secondly, the sub∣iect of it; because your Lordship (as I attendant in your Honourable house can witnesse, being daily acquainted with your wishes and praiers) follow∣ing the steps of your loyall and thrice renowned Father, desire nothing more, then the furtherance of Gods glory, the safetie of his roiall Maiestie, and wellfare of your Countrie; all which, and nothing else this aimeth at: It is all my praier, all my desire. Thus

ceasing further to trouble your Lord∣ship at this time, with my daily and heartie supplications to the Father of mercies, for your selfe, together with your second-selfe, your religious Lady in whom you are happy, beseeching him long to continue that blessed knot, with asmuch happines as euer he bestow∣ed on Abraham and Sarah, or Isaac and Rebekah; and to multiply all those blessings on you which Iacob wished to his deareling Ioseph;Gen. 49. vers. 25. heauenly bles∣sings from aboue, and earthly blessings from beneath, blessings of the breasts, and of the wombe, I commit you to his mercifull and blessed protection.

