



I Have dedicated this Sermon to your Lordship, who heard it pronounced in our late Parliament here; when you represented the State and Person of a great King. It was then expedient (as I thought) for the duety of my place, and instruction of the hearers in that Honourable presence, out of holy Scriptures, and wri∣tings of ancient Fathers, to expresse such markes or demon∣strations, as might distinguish and make the Spouse of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, to be knowne from a step-dame. The true mother nourisheth her children healthfully with bread of life, and sincere milke of the Word: the other setteth before them quelques choses of humane inventi∣ons, and unsavory plants vvhich our heavenly Father never planted. My endevours therein, aymed at no other end, but to leave Noahs fatherly blessing behinde me: that is often in my mouth, and never from my heart; God perswade Ia∣phet to dwell in the Tents of Sem: that living together

like friends and countrey-men, vvee might in some measure have our militant Church on earth, resemble the trium∣phant congregation or citie of Angels and Saints in heaven. Amongst whom, nothing is more peculiar and proper then , that happy agreement and consent vvhich admitteth no strife, no difference: Such holy concord vvould grow here with us (for all aspire to be joyned to that blessed Society) if we were reduced into one Fold. It may be that some small debates come from our own brethren & com∣burgesses; moving unnecessary and unprofitable questions in Ceremonies, things indifferent, and Christian liberty: and therin I think we may say with Debora; The divisions of Reuben are great thoughts of heart. Those will undoubted-cease (as they abate daily) vvhen vve conteyne our selves under the rod and staffe of our shepheard Iesus Christ. Let him possesse us wholly, and ceremonies can give no impediment, as they be used in this Church. Wee put no merit, no matter of salvation, no worship of God in them: but use them to nou∣rish peace, and charitie, to keepe order and decencie in the Church; not for exercises of pietie: And most of them were used in the Church long before Poperie did beare sway. The abuses mixed vvith them by the Romanists, vvee affect not, vve defend not, vve allow not: they have no portion, no right, no memoriall in Ierusalem. Things that have beene abused, neede not to bee cleane abolished: vvere that proposition made generall, it overthroweth Churches, and many things else, as vvell as the Rites and Ceremonies of our Liturgy. Our vvorthy ancestors (saith Saint Au∣gustine) tooke the Temples dedicated to Idolls, and conver∣ted them to holy Oratories or houses of prayer, vvhere CRIST IESVS is vvorshipped sincerely, and his Go∣spel is purely taught. They tooke the revenues vvhich were devoted to the gods of the Gentiles, to Theaters, to Ve∣stals,

and turned them to the entertaynement of Ministers, though they served not Antichrist before, but Belzebub the chiefe of the Divels. And Saint Augustine findeth no solecisme or incongruitie in it. Hoc de illis fit quod de ipsis hominibus, cum ex sacrilegis & impijs in veram religionem immutantur. The grave and learned Father avoweth, that there is not any other thing done in matters of this kind, but that vvhich happeneth unto men them∣selves, vvhen they are turned from sacrilege and impietie, unto Christian Religion. The sacred Vessells of the Tem∣ple had beene fouly abused in Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar and Balthasser, yet vvhen Cyrus had given commande∣ment for the restoring of them againe, Zorobabel made no scruple to imploy them in their former holy uses. It vvas Saint Augustine his practise, and is vvorthy to bee observed: Wee correct those things vvhich Schismatiques or Heretiques have corrupted, vvhen they come unto us from them: but doe acknowledge and allow that vvhich they held, as they received it; lest, suffering our selves to be carried away in offence vvith mens faults beyond the rules of Iustice, vve should doe some vvrong to the things them∣selves. For vvee see the Apostle Saint Paul even in an Altar of the Gentiles vvhere Idols vvere vvorshipped, to confirme the name of GOD, rather then to disavow it. I vvill adde no more to the conclusion of this point, but the lesson vvhich Saint Ambrose gave unto Saint Augustine, and vvas by him ever after esteemed as an Oracle: There cannot be a better discipline, nor more beseeming a grave and discreet Christian, then to doe that vvhich hee seeth observed in the Church vvheresoever hee commeth. For that is ever to be held indifferent and to be performed for their sakes amongst vvhom vvee live, vvhich is neyther a∣gainst faith nor good manners.
The nature and use of these indifferent things is fully described by Saint Bernard:Epist. 7. Certaine things are simply good in themselves; and men can challenge no obedience that vvay: for they must be done, because they are injoyned by GOD. Other things are altogether evill, and follow the same rule. Betweene these things that be good or evill in themselves, there bee other vvhich bee indifferent, and may bee good or evill as they bee used. In this last sort, the Christian Magistrate doth exercise his power (or else hee hath no power left him) and vvhen hee hath interposed his authoritie, then doe they in a manner change their nature, concerning the use of them: for they are not then left free to bee omitted, but are necessary to bee observed. In his fas non est nostrum sensum sententiae praescribere magi∣strorum. In his omnino praelatorum nec jussio nec pro∣hibitio contemnenda. In these indifferent things everie one may not follow his particular fantasie (that vvould bring in confusion, anarchy, and infinite tyranny) but all must comply vvith the Magistrate, vvith the Church, with the governors of it;1. Cor. 14. The spirits of the Prophets are sub∣ject to the Prophets.
This limitation in the use of things indifferent, brings no diminution to the freedome and libertie of a Christian: that hath place or seate in the mind,De votis Monastic. and as Luther teacheth gravely, it resteth in the points that are betweene God and mee; for example, If I beleeve and am perswaded in minde and conscience, that the Crosse in Baptisme, the Ring in ma∣trimonie, Kneeling at the Lords Supper, &c. worke nothing with God, and are not used in the Church to any such pur∣pose; I enjoy the full benefite of my Christian libertie, in the very use of these and the like Ceremonies: But if I goe about to draw my libertie into a freedome of actions too, and to the things vvhich are betweene my brother and mee, thinking

to doe vvhat I list in them (because they are indifferent of themselves, or in their owne nature) vvithout reverence to the Magistrates orders, and respect of the Churches decrees; I doe certainely bring my libertie out of her true bounds, and turne it to a licentious disturbance of the Church, the Ma∣gistrate, and every Christian brother vvhich is vvise unto sobrietie.
Diligent care is to be taken, that wee give not offence to our weake brethren in the use of these indifferent things. And that will be discharged two wayes: first, if we consider who they be that pretend offence in this kinde, Sure they are not weake ones (who are onely to be respected) but such as esteeme themselves stronger in faith then the residue. To these no just offence is given, but they take offence unjustly; not of weakenesse, but of curiositie, and overprizing their owne inventions.
Another, and the second meanes to acquite and cleare the Church from these offences, consisteth in the faithfull labor of the Pastors. Let them bee vigilant to teach their people the nature and true use of ceremonies, and things in∣different, assoone as any scandall ariseth, (for so they should doe) and the offence will wither in the bud, before it grow to strength or maturitie to disquiet the Church. But when they which should extinguish offences, bestow their thoughts and indevors to nourish them; impressions of doubts or scruples will be wrought in soft or tender minds easily: and it is not possible to remove them againe, without much dif∣ficultie and trouble. That can never bee welcome to the Church, neither is now seasonable or suting with my yeares and infirmities: howbeit prepared I am, with the rest of my brethren, to endure and devoure all paines or travayle that may breed peace, concord, and unanimitie amongst us. And I have the greater hope to prevayle, eyther by perswasive

reasons (which please me best) or by discipline (if the other be refused) for the noble assistance that your Lordsh. doth give me alwayes in the affayres of the Church. Continue those honourable respects; for they will make your memory sweet and gratefull to posteritie, as they have obliged the Clergie now present to acknowledge your goodnesse, and my selfe most of all to remaine,

