



MY state is known vnto manie of you (my Brethren) how that of certaine time (though weakely & vntowardly) I haue striuē, and withstood the yoke of spiritual bondage in the wor∣shippe of God, which the man of perdition haue yet left behinde for our sifting and trial. Frō the which that I might bee deliuered (the Lorde God the searcher of heartes I take to recorde) that it haue bene myne onlie quarell, and the cause of stirring me vp to do that, which I did. Concerning the whiche cause, I did not thinke it lawefull for mee (though I coulde haue escaped in time y∣nough) to withdraw my selfe into any other place, for myne owne liberties sake, vntill I had more openly witnessed the same cause. Which when it seemed good vnto God, that I with some others should doo, by abyding imprisonment a certayne time: Then ha∣uing

offered our selues to suffer whatsoeuer our vexers should lay vpon vs, and espyinge nothing like to be done vnto vs, but to bee holden with lingering imprisonement, and that without libertie of communicating vn∣to others the instruction of the same cause, which we professed: wee thought good ra∣ther to vndergoe some exile (as it were) for redeeming at least some libertie of worship∣ping God with safetie of conscience. Which when we did, and diuers of our Brethren, which were willing to come vnto vs were restrayned: and we were persuaded, that to returne vnto them thither, whereas by im∣prisonment we should againe be holden from them, would litle anayle: I haue iudged that we haue bene debters to them to bestow vpon them some thing which might helpe to increase their spirituall courage and com∣forte. In which behalfe, when the expecta∣tion of me and diuers others rested vppon some, who in the ende did but slenderlie an∣swere, and satisfie thesame: Then I, which for my vnworthines and poore gifte, hadde thought neuer to haue set foorth any thinge publikely, yet was prouoked to indeuour my selfe, in some parte, as farre as the Lorde should make me able, to satisfie that want, which I thought to be great. And I went about a piece of work touching Church go∣uernement. But partlie by sicknes, & partly by weying the cost of the print, and findinge it to be aboue my reache of abilitie: I was hindered, and haue let staye that worke, vn∣till the Lorde further inable mee.
In the meane tyme I thought good to write some other little treatse, and I chose this 122. Psalme, thinking thereby to haue occasion ministred to speak of diuers of those pointes, which concerne the cause mētioned. And I was determined to haue spokē some∣what brieflie vpon the whole Psalme. But in the firste entraunce meetinge with those pointes, which I thought good they should be discussed somewhat largelie for edifyinge sake: Agayne, sicknes and other causes cut∣ting me short: I was constreined to ende at this time skarce finishing the firste verse. Neyther was it my desire to seeme to speak much vppon a little Texte, (yea I confesse that I haue passed the boundes of Schol∣ler like handeling the Text) but the thinges which offered them selues to be spoken of, seemed to my iudgement to require so much measure. Herein my desire vnto the lord is, that my poore labour may be accepted of him, and may be pro∣fitable to his people.
