


RIght Reuerend. When I first prea∣ched these Sermons, I little thought to haue put them forth to publike view, yet such hath bene the importunitie of some of my best hearers, in mouing me to penne them, or some others of my Ser∣mons; As I might haue bene thought vn∣kind and vncurteous, if I had altogether denied that their godly and earnest re∣quest. And the rather was I perswaded by them, because it was hoped that the publishing of these, might yeeld some bene∣fite not onely to those persons who former∣ heard them, but likewise to those, who hereafter should reade them.
It is well knowne that the papists make small account of hearing Gods word prea∣ched they hope to be saued, rather by sight then by hearing.
Though hearing be a dutie Deut 6. 3▪ 4. & 31 12. 13. Math. 17. 5. com∣manded by God; exacted by Isai 28. 23. & 66. 2. 5. Ier. 6. 18. & 9. 2 & 10. 1. the pro∣phets:

Enioyned by Math. 11 15. & 13 9. 43 Math. 15 10 Luk. 14. 35 Christ: Requi∣red by the Act. 13. 16 & 15. 13 Re∣uel. . 7. 11. 17. Apostles, and practised Nehm. 89. Luk. 51 Lk. 15 1. & 21. 38. Act. 10 33 & 13. 7 44 Act. 16. 14 by all good people.
Though it be an apparent signe of Ieh 8. 47 & 18. 37 1. Ioh. 4. 6 Gods Elect. An infallible marke of Ioh 10. 27 Christs sheepe. A true note of Deut. 33. 3 Gods Saints. An euident token of our Luk. 8. 21 spiri∣tuall kinred with Christ. A plaine testi∣monie of Luk. 11 28 our happines. A comfor∣table assurance of our Math. 7 24 Lu. 10. 42 perseuerance. Though it be an ordinarie and effectuall meane Ier 23 22 Act. 2. 41 1. Cor. 14 24. 25 of our conuersion, of Act. 4. . & 15. 7 Rom. 10. 17 working faith, of Act. 10. 44 Gal. 3. 2. 5 receiuing the spi∣rit, of obtaining Reuel. 3. 20. fellowship with Christ, and of enioying . Tim. 4. 16 am. 1. 21. saluation in heauen. And though the neglect and con∣tempt of it, 2 Cho. 24. 19. 23. em. 9. 30. Ier. 26. 4. 5 hath bene, and Deut 18. 19 Math. 10, 14, 15. Math, 12. 42: shall be seuerely punished. Yet the papists little regard the word preached, & seldom will vouchsafe to heare it. As they doe wilfully refuse to heare vs; so doe they iudge it, to be neither greatly necessarie, nor much profitable to heare their owne teachers. Moses was read and preached

Act: 15. 21. euery Sabboth in the Iewes Syna∣gogues. It was the custome of Luk: 4: 16. Christ and his Act: 17. 42: 44: & 17: 2: . & 4 Apostles, to preach to the people in the Synagogues euery Sabboth day. The ustin: Matye apo∣log: 2: Teull: apolog: c: 39: Origen: in x. od: omil: 7. ancientest of the fathers testifie, that in their times, the people heard a sermon, each Lords day. And di∣uers councills haue made Colon: ca: 9: Laoic: cap: 16, ul. lan: ca: 19: Ma∣gt: cap: 25. decrees for the continuance of that custome in suc∣ceeding ages. Yet the Romish Bernat∣dinde Sens de obserua: sabb: serm: 1: cap: 3. Tollt. in∣struct: sacer∣do lib. : ca: 6, Vaux: catech: cap 3. pre∣lates haue made it a precept of their Church, that euery one shall see a masse on each Sabboth, but will not make it a pre∣cept, to heare a sermon each Sabboth. As if the often sight of a masse were more ne∣cessarie and more profitable, then the hea∣ring of a sermon: And as if the Sabboth were better sanctified and the peoples soules more edisied, by the masse, then by the preaching of the word. As the priests are accustomed often to say masse, but sel∣dome to preach: so the people for one ser∣mon which they heare, do see fortie or fifty masses. Imitating hom; Wassingh. hist Augt: in Exwar 1, p: 43. & Ido dagm: Neustr: p: 472. De Henrico, 3. that king, who saw three masses each day, but seldome heard any sermon. And being admonished by Lewis king of Frāce, that he must not be∣stow all ls time on masses, but sould oftner

heare sermons, answered, that he had ra∣ther often see his Friend, then heare one speaking of him, though hee spake neuer so good thinges. As if they might with their eyes see Christ corporally present in masses; and could onely heare some talke of him at sermons. Wherein as they doe most blasphemously preferre their owne inuented idoll, before Gods most holy ordinance: So doe they be∣wray their ignorance, touching the neces∣sitie and efficacie of the word preached. If they would duely consider the scope and doctrine of this parable, they might easily perceiue, that the hearing of the word, is as necessarily required for the direction of their liues, and the saluation of their soules: As the sowing of the ground with good seed, is necessarily required of them that would reape a plentifull crop at har∣uest. And that it is not the sight of their abhominable idoll, but the reuerend hea∣ring of Gods sacred word, that must make them fruitfull in all good workes.
Againe, wee cannot but acknowledge, that the Lord hath sent many skilfull and painefull Husbandmen, to sowe his sielde with vs: who according to their office and

dutie, sow it in due season, after a good maner, and with the best seede. And yet it yeeldeth litle fruite. People heare much, learne litle, and practise lesse. Which can∣not be imputed to the want of good prea∣ching, but rather to the want of good hea∣ring: the fault is rather in the ground, then in the sower, or in the seede. The seede is good, and great store is sowne, but the ground is barren. The doctrine is sound, and the maner of teaching prosita∣ble, but the people heare amisse, and so for want of good hearing, loose the fruite of many good sermons; because the profit of hearing, dependeth on the maner of hea∣ring. A medicine sitly prescribed and rightly compounded, looseth his vertue in curing the patients disease, if it be not duly administred, and orderly receiued. We to our great griese loose our labour in prea∣ching, and the people to their great perill, loose their labour in hearing, because they heare amisse. As therefore I was at first enduced to preach these sermons, so was I afterward perswaded to penne them, that by them the simpler sorte (for whose sake onely I do now publish them) might haue some plain direction how to heare for their profit.

There be some among vs, who seeme Math. 26, 8. Ioh: 12, 4. to be of Iudas his minde, and say quor∣sum perditio haec? The pentions giuen by his maiestie, for the maintenance of preachers in these popish partes, might well be spared, or else conuerted to other more necessarie vses, what good doe they in the countrey? Whom his Maiestie may answere, (And no doubt, if he heard their murmuring speeches, would answere them roundly) as the Maister of the Vineyard answered the murmuring labourers: Is it not lawfull for me, to doe with mine owne as I will? Is thine eye Math: 20, 15. euill, because I am good? They may here behold, and if they please, take a tast of the meate wherewith his Maiesties subiects are daily fed. Though their diet be homely, yet I hope it is holesome, though the manner of teaching be plaine, yet is it profitable, especially for such peo∣ple as I am appointed to instruct: My iudiciall hearers can testifie, that these sermons were sutable to my ordinary tea∣ching, and that in penning them, I haue altered very little, either for matter, me∣thode or stile. I thinke few will complaine of the vnprofitablenes of our labours, but

those who doe reioyce thereat, and would haue vs remoued, lest our labours should become more fruitfull hereafter: who would rather haue the countrey still re∣maine addicted to popery and impiety, then brought to the obedience of the Gos∣pell. How fruitfull our labours haue bene, your Lordship can better iudge then any of them. Yet must we needes confesse that the fruitfulnes thereof, hath bene, and still is greatly hindered by two sortes of persons, namely by popish priests, and profane Py∣pers. The priests like Samballat and To∣biah, Nhem. 4, 7, 8 hinder vs in edifying the Lords Temple, and labour to pull downe, as fast as we build vp: like the old seducers, they creepe into houses, and lead captiue, simple women laden with sins, and 2, Tim: 3, 6 led with diuers lusts. They withstand vs, as Iannes and Iambres withstood 2, Tim: 38 Moses. Yea they subuert whole hou∣ses, Tit: 1, 11 teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre. They are sent by the Pope to recouer, if it were possi∣ble, the reuenews, rents, & tributes which once he had out of this kingdome, who ha∣uing no other meanes wherby to liue, haue raised a gainefull trade of seducing, and

through couetousnes, doe make mar∣chandise . Pet: 2, 3. 1. Sam. 28. 7. of the peoples soules. Though it pleased his Maiestie to banish them: yet as a Witch was found in Endor, after that Saul had banished all out of Israel; So now vpon diligent search many priests might be found in these pants.
Though they lurke in secret corners, and dare not shew their faces, yet may we trae them by their footesteps, and take notice of their presence by their practises, euen as we may discerne where a snaile hath crept on the wall, by the slime which it leaueth behind it. Who maryeth our recusants, who baptizeth their children, but they? Not one recusant is maryed, not one of their children is baptized by our ministers. Shall we thinke that they who hold Matrimonie to be a sacrament, would liue together as man and wife, and neuer be maried? Can we imagine that they who hold baptisme to be absolutely necessarie to salnation, will suffer all their children to remaine vnbaptized? There∣in they verifie the Poets saying: In veti∣tum nefas gens humana ruit. Before we had any statute lawe against mari∣ages and baptizings by popish priests, it

was a rare thing to heare of any one who offended that way: But since that law was made, it hath bene a rare thing in this countrey, to heare of a Recusants ma∣riage solemnized, or a Recusants childe baptized by any of our ministers. So as if our law-makers had foreseene the issue, it may be they would haue forborne the ma∣king of that law, least as Solon thought of a law to be made against Parricides, they should put men in mind of such an offence. What is the reason of this their wilfulnes? Not onely impunitie, our lawes made a∣gainst them, being like an vntimely birth, dead assoone as borne, and wanting exe∣cution which is the life of them: but espe∣cially because the priests doe euermore excite them to disobedience, and will ca∣nonize them for holy confessours; for that their contemptuous breach of our lawes.
And whence commeth it, that scarce one of an hundreth, of all our Recusants and non-communicants, would come to take the oath of allegiance, when they were therevnto lawfully called? but be∣cause the priests disswade them from it, by authoritie of the Popes bulles, and by war∣rant of the Cardinalls bookes.

Augustine acknowledged that through Epist. 48. ad viacent. feare of the imperiall lawes put in execu∣tion, not onely some few persons, but like∣wise many whole cities, who formerly had bene Donatists, became right Catholikes: So if our lawes might be duely executed, if not against all papists, yet against the priests, I doubt not but within a while, we should drawe most of the people to due con∣formitie. All their bookes haue bene an∣swered, Leges princi∣pum rectè im∣plorai aduer∣sus hostes fider modo id fiat animo corri∣gendi, non stu∣dio vindican∣di. August: epist: 48 Vides epist: 50. 60. 61, 127 167. all their dispersed pamphlets con∣futed, and many disputations haue bene graunted them; Seeing then that after so many conuictions they remaine obstinate, I hope all will acknowledge with the same Father, that wee may lawfully craue the execution of the lawe against the enemies; of the faith, if it be done with a minde to correct, and not with a desire to reuenge.
Moreouer I cannot but lament, and with griefe of heart complaine, that still in this part of the countrey, the course of re∣ligion is exceedingly hindered, the fruites of our labours greatly frustrated, the Lords Sabboth impiously profained, by publike pyping, by open and lasciuious dan∣cing on that day. That it is not consecra∣ted

as holy to the Lord, but rather kept as a feast of Bacchus and Venus. That py∣ping should put downe preaching: that dancing should draw the people from their dutie: That for one person which we haue in the Church, to heare diuine seruice, ser∣mons and catechisme, euery pyper (there being many in one parish) should at the same instant, haue many hundreds on the greenes.
Our learned and late P. Martyr. comment. in Iudic: 21, 19 21, fol. 177 Simler. com∣ment: n Exod: 20, 8 diuines doe teach, that the virgines of Israel giuing themselues to dancing on their feast day, did thereby abuse it. And that it was no maruaile, if at the same time, they were all ranished for the punishment of that their sinne. Gregory Nazianzen Orat: in Christi natruit. paulo pst i∣tium. exhor∣ted his people to celebrate their feastes di∣uinely, and not by dancing. And Contra . orat. z prope finem. ac∣counteth the vse of it, and such like things, an hethenish maner of celebrating feastes. Isidor Clarius Apud Da∣dae. loc: com tit: estus dies. thought that gam∣sters, players, and dancers, sinned more haynously, and should be punished more gsly, then he who gathered stickes, and  the wes who gathered manna on that day. Augustine taught In psal: 32 onc: 1, In solitrac: 3 De decem chord: cap:  that it was better for men to dig and delue, and

for women to card and spin, then to dance wantonly on the Sabboth, which he ment not of the Iewish Sabboth onely, but also of the Christian Sabboth, because in the same places he exhorted christiās to keepe their sabboth spiritually, end not carnally as the Iewes did by idlenes and dancing. The councell of Toledo, Toletan. corcil. 3. 1. Canon. 22. forbad that custome of the common people on their ho∣ly daies: And charged Priests and Iud∣ges to suppresse that bad custome in all their prouinces. Leo 4. with 67. Bishops in a Synode at Rome, decreed Can. 35. Vides Flac. Illyis. catalog test. verit. in Leo 4 that priests should admonish men and women, not to gather companies together on their holy daies, after the maner of Pagans to dance and sing filthie songs. And that those who were admonished, and would not cease, should be suspended from the Communion.
Yet the greatest part of our people, spend more then the one halfe of the Sab∣both, in as wanton and lasciuious dancing as euer was vsed by any.
The ancient Christians would not cele∣brate the solemne daies of the Emperour, with bone-fires, publike dancings, and drinkings. And were defended Verae re∣ligionis homi∣nes etiam so∣lennia eorum, conscientia po∣tius, quàm las∣ciuia celebrāt. &c. Siccine exprimitur publicum gau∣dium pet pub∣licum dede∣cus: haeccine solen es dies principium de∣cent, quae alios dies non de∣cent Apolo∣get, cap. 35. by

Tertullian for that their refusall: be∣cause they would celebrate those daies rather by conscience, then by wan∣tonnes: because that were to ex∣presse a publike ioy by a publike shame. And those things which were not seemely on other daies, were not seemely on the Emperours solemne daies. Chrysostome Sozom. hist l. 8, c: 20. would not suffer the people to set vp the image of the Empresse, with publicke dancings and stage-playes. Neither would In Genes. 24, homil: 47 in , & ho∣mil. 55. mino. he tol∣lerate any pyping and dancings at wed∣dings. The councell of Laodicia Can. 53, 54. for∣bad dancing at weddings, and enioyned Cleargie men to depart from meetings where it was vsed. Yet our people iudge it an honest and lawfull keeping of the Lords Sabboth, to pype and dance all the after∣noone.
And who are greater maintainers of this impietie, then our recusants and new communicants. Their purses are euer open for the yring of the pyper, their children and seruants, alwaies ready to dance after him, and themselues seldome fayle to be spectators. By this meanes they keepe the people from the Church, and so continue

them in their popery and ignorance.
Though we often preach against this abuse, though we let them knowe that the best learned in the Romish Church, Ludou. vues de insti∣tut. faem. lib. 1. c. 11. Catech. Rom part 3. cap. 7. p. 351. Iudolph de vita christi. part. . c. 66. A. Tho Aqu. Hugo cardio. Ferus. in Math 14. Iansen, con∣cord. euangel. cap: 59. haue condemned it as a tricke of wanton∣nes, as a prouocation to lust, as a breach of the seuenth commandement, and an exer∣cise Polydor vitgil: de in∣uent: lib 5. c: 2, & , 8, Vaux. catech. cap: 3 vnfit for the Sabboth, yet stur∣do canimus, They will not forbeare it, because they are not restrained by autho∣ritie. Augustine witnesseth, Ntum ist omnibus, nugaces & tur∣pes saltationes ab episeopis solere compes∣ci. Contr: epist. Parmen: lib: 3 cap: 6. that the Bishops of his time were accustomed to suppresse such vaine and filthie dan∣cings. As your Lor: doth treade in their steps, by painefull preaching: so if you would imitate them, by reforming this great disorder, you might greatly further the fruit of our ministery.
The papists of our time and countrey, doe esteeme so little of the authoritie of the Canonicall scriptures, and ascribe so much to humane writings, that though we proue our doctrine by most pregnant places of scripture, yet they will not beleeue it, vn∣les they be assured that the old Fathers, and their owne late writers haue taught the same. Therein dissenting from the ancient Fathers, who would try and

Hiero. nim. epist. Tranquilin Augustin. c∣piss: 19, & cō▪ Crescon. lib. 2 cap. 31, 32 Dionys. Alex∣andr. apud. En∣seb. hist. lib. 7 cap. 23. iudge of mens words and writings by the Canonicall scriptures: but would not iudge of the doctrine of the scriptures by humane writings.
I haue therefore added vnto the ser∣mons, a Post-script to papists, to let them vnderstand, that what we preach in the pulpit against them; is not onely warran∣ted by the diuine scriptures, but is also witnessed by the fathers, and some of their owne Church. And therefore if they con∣demne Quis te non videat in me apertum iacta∣e conuitium, de illis occul∣tum quidem; sed tamen si∣mile babere iudicium. contr. Julian. lib. 1. cap. 2. vs as heretikes for teaching such doctrine, we may say to them, as Au∣gustine said to Iulian the Pelagian, condemning him for teaching the same doctrine, touching originall sinne, which other Fathers taught. Who seeth not, that openly you condeme vs, and secretly you condemne them, yet haue you the same iudgement both of them and vs.
These sermons, together with the Post∣script, I now offer vnto your Lordship: not as if the matter of them were worthy your reading: but rather that they be∣ing approued by your iudgement, and pro∣tected by your authoritie, may better e∣scape the spitefull censures of enuious and

superstitious persons. As also that I might thereby testifie my thankefulnes to your Lordship, who not onely from time to time haue much countenanced, and greatly furthered my poore ministerie in these backeward partes: but also of late, consi∣dering my long labours, and small meanes of maintenance, did procure the continu∣ance of that Pension, which was graunted vnto me by the royall gift of two famous Princes: when as some vpon stinister pre∣tences, and by indirect meanes went about to abridge me of a great part thereof.
Thus presuming of a pardon for this my boldnes, I humbly commit your Lord∣ship to the mercifull protection of Almigh∣tie God: who long continue your health and happie estate, and make you a blessed instrument of much good vnto his church.

