



MOST ILLVSTRIOVS PRINCE,
The great respect I receiued from your Highnes at
Leyden two severall times after my comming out of
Barbarie, and the great desire your Highnes expressed (as be¦cometh Princes) to vnderstand, and be informed in foraigne
afaires, and the State of other countries, hath encouraged me
(hauing novv againe been imployed into that countrie) to
present to your Highnes, for a Nevv-years-gift, this short
relation, of the life, & death of the late King Muley Abdala
Melek, as vvas related to me by vvaie of discourse onlie, at
seuerall times, by those vvho for the most part vvere eye∣vvitnesses:
Oculati testes. VVhich also may serue your Highnes
for matter of discourse, and further information likewise, to
discerne betwixt a blessed Christian gouernment, vvhereunto
God hath ordained you, and a cruell tyrannous Mahometan
gouernment (as is the Turkish,) vnder vvhich those miserable
mis-belieuers: yea and manie Christians likevvise there in
most miserable slauerie, groane: the Lord deliuer them
from it. And giue vs grace to make vse of it: both Prince.

people, and acknovvledge our owne happines. Prince, vvho
commaund ouer Christian, obedient, and dutifull subiects:
and subiects vvho liue vnder so peaceable, and Christian a
gouernement, bona si sua norit agricola, free from tyrannie,
rebuel: as, and tumults, vvhereunto that countrie of Barbaric
hath this long time been subiect. Such is the miserable state,
and condition of tyrannie, and of tyrants, euen of Kings: as your
Highnes may perceiue, by the sodaine, fearefull, and miserable
end of this King: qualis vita sinis ita: his life vvas bloodie, and
so it ended in blood, in his owne blood. And thereafter may
your Highnes, and all other yong Princes, vvho haue so good
tuitors, and ouerseërs to informe them learne: (as that famous
Buchanan tuitor to your grand Father King Iames of blessed
memorie, in his epistle dedicatorie before his Tragaedie called
Baptistes, admonisheth, vvorthie to be read ouer, and ouer,
and remembred of all yong Princes, his vvords, as I remember,
are these) maturé odisse quod tibi semper est fugiendum.
VVhich I pray God both your Highnes, and all other Princes
may remember, and make vse of. Hoping your Highnes vvill
accept of this small present out of a Barbarous countrie, for
vvant of a better. vvhither I should haue returned, for the
releasse of the remainder of my poore countrymen, in captiuitie
vnder the new King Muley Elvvalid, vpon a new treatie.
Hauing alreadie been a means to releasse aboue two hundreth
and threescore from Sallie: and threescore mee as yet remai∣ning
vnder this king at Morocco, and Sallie, by them taken
againe vpon a late breach: besides vvhat are dispersed vp and
dovvne the countrie: all promised by that King to be releassed
vpon his treatie. VVhither (I say) I should haue returned
long before this time, longed, and long looked for by those poore
captiues.Isa. 51. 14 For the captiue hasteneth to be loosed &c. as it

is in the Prophet. But vvhether I shall returne at all: or those
poore captiues be loosed, or releassed at all, is in Gods hands:
vvho can make their verie enemies,P 46 and all those that haue
caried them avvaie captiues, to pitie them: othervvise no hope
at all. And so I leaue them to Gods mercie: and both them, &
all others in like distresse, both there, and elsvvhere, to your
Highnes, and all other Christian princes to commiscrate, accor∣ding
to a proposition, or petition, I haue hereunto annexed,
highlie concerning them in honour to consider of: vvhich is also
in Gods hands: For the hearts of Kings (as Salomon saith) are in
Gods hands, he turneth thē vvhich vvaiesoeuer he pleaseth.
In the meane time (as my dutie is, hauing been imployed in
these affaires) I can but sollicit, and petition, though vvithout
effect, in hope contrarie to hope: hauing hitherto receiued
so small encouragement: but discouragements: and so goe on
mourning still, and like to doe: finis vnius mali gradus futuri.
One crosse after an other still readie to receiue me, VVhich I
must beare patientlie, so commaunded, so resolued: To take
vp the crosse of Christ, and follovv him vvhither soeuer he
commaundeth, from one conntrie to an other, from one part of
the vvorld to an other, and to the vvorlds end. Quem statues
finem Rex magne laborum? And so goe on mourning still,
as I haue don these manie years. Hoc continuis agimus annis:
a countinuall mourner euer since the death of prince Henry my
maister, novv renewed by the death of your Royall Father, &
that renovvmed King of Svveden, vvho died that verie day
of the month prince Henry died,The 6. Stilo  in The 1 Stilo novo. Zec. 12 12. the 6. of Nouember: the date
after the povvder plot, ominous. For both vvhich the vvhole
church of Christ hath cause to mourne, and that continuallie,
not onlie outvvardlie, but invvardlie euerie familie a part: as
vvas that great mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of

Megiddon. For that good King Iosiah,2. 18. continuallie, continuis
annis euen to posteritie: to be continued (I say) as vvas that,
for these two so good Kings, so sodainlie, & so vntimelie taken
avvate. To mourne (I say) continuallie, and invvardlie for
our sins, vvhich are the cause of these disasters: Verus luctus
est occultus: that is the true mourning: so to condole, and
mourne. And so let vs continue our mourning, and goe on
mourning still: euerie familie a part, euerie true Christian a
part, to beare a part, in this so great a mourning, vvith our
deare mother the church: that comfortles Rachel, vvho vvee∣peth
for her children, and vvill not be comforted because
they are not. Yea, let the vvhole church of Christ renevve
her vveeping, and mourning againe, till it Echo againe, not
onlie the last vvords, vltima verba (as it is in Seneca) Sed
totos reddat Troiae gemitus) for her children first, and last
taken from her, one after an other, because they are not.
Queene Elizabeth of famous memorie, is not. King Iames,
is not. Prince Henry; is not And the other hopefull young
prince Henry your brother, is not. Your Royall Father, the
King of Bohemia, is not. The King of Svveden, is not.
Hovv is the valiant man fallen that deliuered Israel? Besides
other vvorthies: the old prince of Orange, and others, they
are not. Yea manie other poore Christian soules, of late slaine,
massacred, perished, and lost, both vnder the Antichristian &
Mahometan tyrannie, they are not. For vvhom the vvhole
church of Christ hath cause to mourne: neuer more cause, neuer
more seasonable. VVherunto now I betake myself, euen to praiers
and teares the vveapons of Gods church: VVhich shall be the
second part. And my Account hereafter mentioned, the third,
and last:Isa. 51. If God permit, and other obstacles hinder not.
And so rest Your Highnes humble seruant,

