



IT is a propertie (Right Ho∣nourable,
my singular good
Lord) naturally giuen to e∣uery
workman and artificer,
that be his worke neuer so
rude and homely, yet would
he be loth that his labour
should vanish, and perish:
but seeing that it is the best that his abilitie can
performe, he desireth the same as long as may be,
to remayne and continue vpon the earth. This
cause maketh also many to be so forward in publi∣shing
their writings in print, that when they them∣selues
are taken away by death, yet by their works
there may still remaine some lasting record, and
remembrance of the workemen. But the especiall
cause which hath mooued me at this time to set

foorth these my two bookes of Phlebotomy, is, the
sincere affection and desire that I haue to bring
some supply and helpe (if I can) vnto two very
great wants and abuses, which I dayly perceiue
to be now too common and grassant in sundrie
corners of this realme. For first, although in Ci∣ties,
as principallie in the famous Citie of Lon∣don,
the people enioy a great blessing of God,
in hauing so many worthie and expert Phisitions
and Chirurgians so neerely dwelling together,
that at all times the one may be able and readie
to aduise, and the other also as willing and suffi∣cient
to lend a helping hand: yet in Countrie
townes, there are many nowadayes▪ which doe
practize the opening of vaynes (almost in euery
other Village one) and most of them neither haue
any learned counsaile to direct them, neither are
of themselues sufficiently instructed in the mat∣ter
which they take in hand: whereby, though ma∣ny
of them do meane well, and intend all for the
best, yet in the euent, both to the harme of their pa∣tients,
and also to their owne griefe, there often in∣sueth
more hurt and danger, then ease and succour.
And another as great an occasion there is of many
detriments and hinderances to mans health, to
wit, the wilfull temeritie and rashnesse of some
ignorant people, which for euery small impedi∣ment
haue recourse presently to letting of bloud,
and by their vnaduised importunitie do vrge for∣ward
the Chirurgian, and euen greedily draw vpō
themselues those manifold inconueniences, from
which afterward they can not againe so easily be
deliuered and made free. For although on the one

side the benefits be most excellent which redound
by Phlebotomy being rightly & duly administred,
for thereby the fulnesse of the body doth come to a
mediocrity, griefes which come by extension are
pacified, the spirits are refreshed, & naturall heate
euented, the lims being as it were eased of a great
burthen, are made more quick & ready to execute
euery office, nature is inabled to concoct what is
requisite, and to expell the vnprofitable, flowing
humours are either drawne back, or turned aside,
from the place where they annoy, or else are they
dispatched and vtterly auoyded, narrow and ob∣structed
passages are opened; and finally, very
present help is brought thereby to many dange∣rous
infirmities: Yet on the other side, great also
are the harmes which may ensue by letting of
bloud, if the same be rashly and vnconsiderately
attempted, the spirits and bloud are spent and wa∣sted,
the naturall heate is pluckt away and dis∣persed,
the principall parts are made ouercold,
and vtterly lose their strength, old age is hastened
on, and made subiect to palsies, apoplexies, drop∣sies,
and cachexies or bad habits, many (the
bridle of choler being taken away) do in a mo∣ment
fall into most faint Iaundises, many haue
the one halfe of their hearing and sight dimini∣shed,
and the one arme and the one side vtterly
weakened, and many also are brought to an vn∣recouerable
destruction of their health and life.
To redresse in some part these most perillous
incidents, I haue collected out of the most fa∣mous
Phisitions both auncient and moderne
this discourse of Phlebotomy, which although it be

penned (as commonly Phisick treatises are) in
plaine and familiar words, most fit for them to
whome it is principally directed; yet because it
comprehendeth the handling of one of the grea∣test
remedies of corporall griefes, as a learned
Phisition commenting vpon Galen ad Glauconem
doth write,Trincauel in expla. lib. 1. de arte craua ad Glauconem. Alex. Messer. lib. escops mittendi san∣guinem. Venae sectio in magnis remedijs ab omni∣bus
medicis semper habita est. And Messaria, the
chiefe Doctor and professor of Padua, in a treatise
of Phlebotomy, dedicated to Contarenus a worthy
Senatour of Venice, sayth, Inter medica remedia
nullum sanguinis missione nobilius, nullum praestan∣tius,
nullum tutius, and doth call it further genero∣sum
& praesentaneum vitae hominis praesidium. And
seeing also that amongst the high cares and char∣ges
which chiefe peeres and gouernours do beare
in common wealths, this seemeth not to be the
least, which concerneth so neerely the health, the
strength, and euen the life it selfe of so large a part
of the inferiour commons, I haue therefore aduen∣tured
most humbly here to present and offer this
my first part of the great Phisick remedies vnto
your Honours patronage, and fauourable pro∣tection,
not doubting but that according to your
Lordships accustomed clemencie you will vouch∣safe
the same thereof, not so much respecting the
poore gift, as the good heart of the giuer, and ac∣cording
to your prone inclinatiion vnto the truth,
and to the generall good of the commons, your
Honor will haue greater regard vnto the graue
auctorities of the auctors out of whome these ob∣seruations
are collected, then vnto the homely
phrase and plaine method of the obseruer and col∣lector

thereof. The eternall God, who hath heaped
vpon your Lordship all those degrees of honour,
vnto which your noble Progenitours haue often
heretofore bin most worthily aduanced, graunt
vnto your Lordship with the like good successe
as they in former times haue done, many prospe∣rous
yeares happily to inioy them, to your dayly
increase of honour, and to the good and glory of
our English nation, euer continuing you in the
high fauour of our most gratious Soueraigne, and
blessing you perpetually both in this world with
the loue and hartie affection of the whole
Commons, and also for euer with the
happie societie of the Saints
in the life to come.
From Tanridge in Surrey this 29. of August.
Anno. 1601.

