


SWeet M. Doctour Haruey, (for I cannot intitule youwith an Epithite of lesse va∣lue, then that, which the Grecian, and Roman Oratours ascribed to Theophra∣stus, in respect of so many your excellent labours, garnished with the garland of matchlesse Oratory): if at any time either the most earnest persuasion of a deare frend, and vnusually most deare, and constant, adiured thereunto by the singular vertue of your most prayse-worthy, and vnmatchable wit: or the woon∣derfull admiration of your peerlesse conceit, embraued with so many gorgeous ornamentes of diuine Rheto∣rique: or the doubtlesse successiue benefit thereof, deuo∣ted to the glory of our English Eloquence, and our vulgar Tuscanisme (if I may so terme it); may worke any plausi∣ble, or respectiue motions with you, to bewtifie, and en∣rich our age, with those most praise-moouing workes, full of gallantest discourse, and reason, which I vnderstand by some assured intelligence be now glowing vpon the an∣uile, ready to receiue the right artificiall forme of diuinist workemāship: thē let I beseech you, nay by all our mutuall frendships I coniure you, (loue, and admiration of them, arming me with the placarde of farther confidence) those, and other your incomparable writings, speedily, or rather

presently shew thēselues in the shining light of the Sunne. That by this Publication of so rare, & rich Discourses, our English Rauens, the spitefull enemyes to all birdes of more bewtifull wing, and more harmonious note, then them∣selues, may shrowde themselues in their nests of basest ob∣scurity, & keepe hospitality with battes, and owles, fit con∣sorts for such vile carions. Good Sir, arise, and confound those Viperous Cryticall monsters, and those prophane  of our Commonwealth; which endeuour with their mutinous, and Serpentine hissing, like geese, not to arme the Senatours, and Oratours of Rome, but to daunt, astonish, and if it were possible, to ouerthrow them. And sithence the very thunder-lightning of your admirable E∣loquence, is sufficiētly auailable to strike them with a lame Palsie of tongue, (if they be not already smitten with a sen∣celesse Apoplexy in head, which may easely ensewe such contagious Catharres, and Reumes, as I am priuy some of them haue bene grieuously disseased withall) misse not, but hitt them suerly home, as they deserue with Superero∣gation. You haue bene reputed euermore, since first I heard of you in Oxford, and elsewhere, to haue bene as much giuen to fauour, commende, and frequent such, as were approoued, or toward in learning, witt, kinde behaui∣our, or any good quality, as may be required in any man of your demerit: an vndoubted signe, how much you loath Inuectiues, or any needles contētions. I would, (as many your affectionate frēds would) it had bene your for∣tune to haue encountred some other Paranymphes, then such, as you are now to discipline: most vnwillingly, I per∣ceiue, but most necessarily, & not without especiall consi∣deration, being so manifestly vrged, and grosely prouoked to defend yourselfe. But you haue ere now bene acquain∣ted

with patience perforce: and I hope the most desperate swasher of them will one day learne to shew himself hone∣ster, or wiser. And thus recommending your sweet ende∣uours, with your grauer studies, to the highest treasury of heauenly Muses; I right hartely take my leaue with a So∣net of that Muse, that honoreth the Vrany of du Bartas, and yourselfe: of du Bartas elsewhere; here of him, whose excellent Pages of the French King, the Scottish King, the braue Monsieur de la Nöe, the aforesayd Lord du Bartas, Sir Philip Sidney, and sundry other worthy per∣sonages, deserue immortall commendation. I thanke him very hartely, that imparted vnto me those fewe sheetes: and if all be like them, truly all is passing notable, nd right singular.



THose learned Oratours, Roomes auncient sages,
Persuasions Pith, directours of affection,
The mindes chiefe counsail, rhetoriques perfection,
The pleasaunt baulmes of peace, warres fierce outrages:
Sweet Grecian Prophets, whose smooth Muse assuages
The Furies powerfull wrath, poisons infection:
Philosophers (by Causes due connexion,
Match't with th'Effects of Nature) future ages
Embrauing with rich documents of Art:

The wisest States-men of calme Commonweales:
The learned Generall Councels, which impart
Diuinest Lawes, whose wholesome Physique heales
Both Church, and Layety: All in One beholde
Ennobled Arts, as Precious stones in golde.

From my lodging in Holborne: this of Iune. 1593.
Your most affectionate,
Barnabe Barnes.
Hauing perused my former Sonet, if it may please you Sir, to do asmuch for your deare frends, Parthenophil, and Parthenophe, they shall haue the desired fruite of their short exercise, and will rest beholding to your curteous accep∣tance: which they would be glad to reacquite in the loo∣uingest manner they may. And so most affectionatly re∣commend themselues vnto your good selfe: whose vnble∣mished fame they will euermore maintaine with the best bloud of their hartes, tongues, and Pennes. We will not fay, how much we long to see the whole Prayses of your two notorious enemyes, the Asse, and the Foxe.





The Muses scorne; the Courtiers laughing-stock;
The Countreys Coxecombe; Prnters proper new;
The Citties Leprosie; the Pandars stew;
Vertues disdayne; honesties aduerse rock;
 vile champion; slaunders stumbling block.

Graund Oratour of Cunny-catchers crew;
Base hroaching tapster of reports vntrue;
Our moderne Viper, and our Countryes mock;
True Valors Cancer-worme, sweet Learnings rust.
Where shall I finde meete colours, and fit wordes,
For such a counterfaict, and worthlesse matter?
Him, whom thou raylest on at thine owne lust,
Sith Bodine, and sweet Sidney did not flatter,
His Inuectiue thee toomuch grace affordes.

Parthenophil.





Sidney, sweet Cignet, pride of Thamesis;
Apollos laurel; Mars-his proud prowesse:
Bodine, register of Realmes happinesse,
Which Italyes, and Fraunce's wonder is:
Hatcher, with silence whom I may not misse:
Nor Lewen, Rhetoriques richest noblesse:
Nor Wilson, whose discretion did redresse
Our English Barbarisme: adioyne to this
Diuinest morall Spencer: let these speake
By their sweet Letters, which do best vnfould
Harueys deserued prayse: since my Muse weake
Cannot relate somuch as hath bene tould
By these Forenam'd: then vaine it were to bring
New feather to his Fames swift-feathered wing.

Parthenophe.

