


MAy it please you
Right worshipfull
Sir, after some re∣spite
from so great
businesse, as your
Honorable circuit
carrieth with it, to
accept fauourablie
of the affectionate
minde of a yong scholler, I will presume in
stead of the best well-come-home, that my
poore study can presently afoord, to pre∣sent
your good woorship with a briefe A∣strologicall
exercise, which I lately vnder∣toke
vppon this occasion. Hauing sundry
times perused the Astrologicall discourse
touching the great Coniunction of Saturne &
Iupiter, published the laste Ianuary by my
brother Richard, and therein noting by
the way some wante of certaine necessarie 
profitable Iudicials, which seemed con∣nient
to be added for the more expres
and particular discussing of some pointes▪

generally, and that diligently too, by him
considered, but not so narrowly, and pre∣cisely
examined, as they might haue been,
(which was not my opinion only, but the
iudgement of some his learned welwillers,
and great commenders otherwise) I resol∣ued
in the end to ease him of that labour,
knowing himselfe to bee otherwise busied
vpon more special and necessary occasion.
Which I was the more willing to enter∣prize,
for these foure causes. First, to satisfie
the demaunds and desires of those his ler∣ned
friendes: then, to stoppe the mouthes
of his enuious & carping enemies: thirdly,
to benefit such of our Coūtrey generally,
as by prouidence are desirous to worke
their owne commoditie and safetie: and
last of all, to practise my selfe particularlie
in such an exercise, as was so profitable for
an Vniuersitie man, so conuenient for a
Student in Philosophy, & the Mathematicks,
and finally, so agreeable to that studie and
profession, whereunto partly by my natu∣rall
disposition I was inclyned, and partly
vpon farther aduise of my friendes, and
some priuate consultation of mine owne, I
had wholy betaken, and as it were betroa∣thed
my selfe. Besides which causes, the
verie worthines and dignitie of the Arte it
selfe, not only in respect of the high and

heauenly matter, or obiect thereof, ac∣cording
to the diuine verses of Doctor
Antony Myzaldus.
Semine caelesti satamens, caelestia quaerit
Semina. And so foorth;
But also, euen for the other three
Logike causes, the efficient, the forme,
and the end or finall cause; might as
wel commend this exercise vnto me, as it
hath done many the like, nay many for all
excellencie both of qualitie and quantitie,
farre vnlike vnto other manner of men,
then I either presently am, or am euer
like to be. For the first author and princi∣pall
efficient, what enemie to Astrologie
can deny, but God him selfe, posuit duo mag∣na
luminaria, & stellas in firmamento caeli, as
Moyses writeth in the beginning of Genesis:
Why? vt diuiderent diem, ac noctem, & essent
in signa, & tempora, & dies, & annos. In quae
signa? nimirum in signa naturalium euentuum, vt
futurae pestilentiae, belli, & pacis, penuriae, & abun∣dantiae,
caeterorúmque similium physicorum effe∣ctuum,
as a learned wryter very well in my
simple iudgement expoundeth that place
of Moyses. Besides, who knoweth not
that all good giftes, and all good artes de∣scend
from aboue, and had their originall
from the father of light? Whereupon Me∣lancthon

in his preface to Purbachius, his A∣strologicae
Theoricae, not only concludeth ge∣nerally
of all liberall Artes, Cum Artes Dei
munus sint, non defuturus est Deus his, qui ipsius
dona tuentur, & conseruare student: with this
comfortable addition: Erunt & fatae ipsa a∣liquando
Artibus aequiora: but also particu∣larlie
inueigheth against all such Epicures,
and contemners, as set them selues against
the most heauenly and diuine knowledge
of Astrologie. In which Inuectiue, he is so
earnestly bent against them, that he brea∣keth
foorth into these vehement speeches.
Epicureos illos, qui neque pulcherrimos motus cae∣lestium
corporum admirantur, neque cognitionem
eorum vtilem esse contendunt, ne hominum qui∣dem
appellatione dignos esse iudico. His reason
is. Etenim non solum bellum gerunt cum humana
natura, quae praecipue ad has diuinas res aspicien∣das
condita est, sed etiam  sunt. Voluit
enim Deus horum mirabilium Cursuum, ac caele∣stium
virium notitiam, ducem nobis esse ad di∣uinitatis
cognitionem. And againe shortlie
after he addeth: Haec si quis arroganter con∣teninit,
naturae suae immanitatem prodit, non ali∣ter
atque Cyclops apud Homerum, qui negat se
vllos vereri Deos. So that Melancthon, is
not afraide to condemne them euen for
Epicures, and Atheistes, that condemne
this most goodly and godly Science. And

as for our secundarie Authors and foun∣ders,
what two more famous Princes a∣mongst
the auncient Aegyptians, and Ro∣manes,
then Hermes Trismegistus, and Nu∣ma
Pompilius? Or what two more excel∣lent
kinges amongst the later Aegyptians
and Aragonians, then Ptolomey, and Al∣phonsus?
The rest for breuitie I ouerpasse,
sauing that I must not omitte the poets
honorable testimonie, as well of them, as
of the forenamed:
Faelices animae, quibus haec cognoscere primum,
Inque domos superas scandere cura fuit.
Credibile est illos pariter vitijsque, iocisque
Altius humanis exeruisse Caput.
And so forward, till at last, he geueth
them this marueylous commendation, ta∣ken
from their marueylous effectes:
Admouere oculis distantia sydera nostris,
Aethera{que} ingenio supposuere suo.
Now if we consider either the inter∣nall
forme of the Arte it selfe, or the ex∣ternall
forme of our cheefest Artificers:
can it be gainesaide, but the one is hea∣uenlie,
like the matter: the other, espe∣ciallie,
in the Greeke and Latin toungs,
as distinct and Methodicall, as was to be
found in any Philosopher, or Mathematician

of the same ages? And nowe of late A∣dolphus
Scribonius of Marpurgh in Germanie,
in his small Tractate, intituled Isagoge Sphae∣rica,
hath somewhat reformed the Artifi∣ciall
maner and order of our more aun∣cient
Astrologers, according to the exact
and exquisite rules of Ramus methode,
howbeit he doeth not so farre go beyond
them in maner, but he commeth as farre
behind them in matter: as euery learned
Astrologer must needes confesse. Last of
all, touching the end, or finall cause of
Astrologie, he can do very little, God wot,
that is not able to mainteine the ende
thereof to be partly diuine, and common
with other Artes, partly humane, and pro∣per
vnto it selfe. The diuine or common
ende, is the glorie of God; the humane,
or proper ende, to do good in the world,
by such predictions, and diuinations, as
the principles and rules of this Art truly
deliuered, and rightly vnderstoode, doo
afford: first, in forewarning what euils
and mischiefes are like to ensue: and then
in foretelling, what goods and commo∣dities
may be reaped by timely prouision:
for the better auoiding of the one by pre∣uention,
and the more certeine enioying
of the other by forecast: according to
those notable verses of the learned Poet:

Illic Astra, polos, caelum, septem{que} planetas
Consulit Astrologus: terris{que} reportat eorum
Concilium, hinc armans illas, firmans{que} caducae
Contra caelestes Iras, Superum{que} furorem.
Which finall end, togither with the other
three reasonable, and logike causes, bee∣ing
reasonablie and logikelie considered,
I can not see howe the worthines or dig∣nitie
of this Arte, can any way be impea∣ched,
without great indignitie offered
therevnto. Vpon indifferent examination
of which causes, whereby he principally
measureth the worthines or vnworthines
of euery good or bad thing, my brother
Gabriel, was much the better content, as
he hath him selfe confessed, that both my
brother Richard and I should take these
paines in Iudiciarie Astrologie, which other∣wise
he had rather we should haue besto∣wed
vpon the more popular and ordina∣rie
studies of the right morall and naturall
Philosophie, Arithmetike, Geometrie, and
Cosmographie, with the first principles, and
most necessarie precepts of Astronomie, so
farre as fetting their grounds from infal∣lible
experience, they extende but to the
obseruation of the place, magnitude, and
motion of euery starre, with their whole
number, as partly by Geometricall mensu∣ration,
and partly by Arithmeticall suppu∣tation,

both seuerally & iointly they haue
beene descried, to the altitude or de∣pression
of ech of them, whose farnesse &
neerenes either vnto vs, or amongst them
selues, is so exactly determinable by the
vse of the Astrolabe, either Quadrant, as
Ptolomeis was, or orbicular, as ours now vseth
to be: to the description, & determination
of times, which auaileth so much, aswell to
the exercise of Husbandrie, as to diuers
other expedient and necessary vses: to the
situation of places, in declaring the longi∣tude,
latitude, and distance of euery place,
which is so great an helpe in Cosmographie,
and so specially needefull for direction in
Hydographie or Nauigation, being otherwise
destitute of all certentie in the middest of
so many and huge ieopardies: or finally to
the intimation of any such meere Astro∣nomicall
experiments, without mixture of
any Iudicials, either Arabian, or other, pre∣tending
any prediction of things to come,
or discouerie of hidden & secret matters.
So that considering the premisses, and
therevnto referring that most notable
iudgement of Melancton, vpon Ptolomeis
Magna Syntaxis, where he saith: Exploden∣da
est illa Epicurea Philosophia, quae tollit finales
stellarum caussas, & affirmat earum omnes natu∣ras
: & si sint finales caussae cae∣terarum

rerum, cur non dicemus etiam esse pul∣cherrimorum
corporum, & perpetuarum Mo∣tuum?
Certitudo in motu, artem opisicis indicat;
Ars consilium, ac causam finalem necessariò com∣plectitur:
vnde & stellae haud dubiè suos habent
tum effectus, tum significationes in elementis, &
in ijs, quae inde gignuntur: vt manifesta expe∣rientia,
& omnibus saeculis consentiens, testatur
congressus siccorum syderum magnas siccitates,
humidorum, humidas tempestates efficere: and
so foorth, till he proceedeth thus farre:
At caelestes hae significationes non modo magnas
mutationes tempestatum, sed etiam ciuilium re∣rum
denunciant; vt ostendunt euentus, qui
comitantur Eclypses, & magnas Planetarum
coniunctiones: nec illa signa vllo modo pugnant
cum religione, cum Deus ea & proposuerit, &
gubernet. For these (I say) and the like ef∣fectuall
considerations, my brother Ga∣briel,
beeing of him selfe otherwise affe∣cted,
hath not disliked either of my bro∣ther
Richards, or of my exercise in this
kinde. Wherevppon as he at the length
was the boulder to dedicate his Astro∣logicall
Discourse vnto my Lorde the Bi∣shop
of London, who accepted most fa∣uourablie
and curteouslie thereof; so
am I also the rather encouraged to di∣rect
this my small Treatise folowing, bee∣ing
a supplement of the saide Discourse,

vnto your good worship, who I hope will
likewise vouchsafe it either the same, or
the like fauourable acceptation. Neither
durst he then, or I now, haue presumed
vpon any such dedication vnto such per∣sonages,
but after good aduice and delibe∣ration,
as well touching the premisses spe∣cially,
as generally touching the more am∣ple
auouchment of the whole Arte, being
skilfully handled, discreetly ordered, and
lawfully practised, as it ought to be: which
being more fully and perswasiblie prose∣quuted
by my brother Richard in his se∣cond
Discourse, entreating of Februarie
Newes, and by the way defending both the
right Iudicials of Astrologie, in genere, and his
owne particular Iudicials concerning the
effects of this great April cōiunction, in spe∣cie:
I hope there shall not here neede anie
farther Apologie either of his fact, or mine:
Considering withal, what good and effe∣ctuall
causes moued vs, as well to the vn∣dertaking
of the priuate exercise, as to the
aduenturing of the publique Dedication
vnder the names of so graue, and so well
reputed personages, for their calling and
wisdome. For my selfe, I am to adde,
that not only the right worshipful estima∣tion
and account of your name, and ho∣norable
Commonwelth vertues (which

notwithstanding are of so great reputati∣on
here in Essex, where my most abode
since Michaesmas last, vpon some occasi∣on
hath been) hath caused me to present
this Astrological Treatise, together with my
Translation of Hermes most famous Iatro∣mathematica
vnto your good worship, but
also certaine other respectes, no lesse effe∣ctuall.
If I had been ignorant before, yet
since my late continuaunce here, I coulde
not but learne how singular account you
make of all good learning, what especiall
great fauour you extend towards the stu∣dious
and learned; and lastly, how ready
and desirous you are to defend and main∣taine
both the one and the other, eyther
by priuate, or publicke patronage. Which
very affection of yours, so euidently decla∣red
by so many actuall significations ther∣of,
might of it selfe, without farther rea∣son,
sufficiently encourage me vnto this de∣dication.
But I cannot forgette my Bro∣ther
Gabriels report of the bountifull and
courteous entertainment which it pleased
you aboue three yeeres since to geue vnto
him, and the Oxforde Preacher, his Com∣panion
at that time, being both but stran∣gers
vnto you. Which entertainment I
heard him both then, and since, much cō∣mende,
as well for your worshipfull and

rare courtesie, extended towardes them,
partly by familiar discourse vpon some
chiefe pointes of learning, and partly by
manifest declaration of your good liking,
& welwishing otherwise, as for the great∣nes
of the cheare, choise of the companie,
manner of welcome, and such like. Which
he saide could not choose but proceede of
a liberall, and worshipfull minde, of the
wiser, and learneder sort: as no doubt it
did. Beside this, I haue lately heard it
credibly reported here in Walden, that
your good worshippe should like very wel,
and commend of my brother Richards A∣strologicall
Discourse, with farther men∣tion,
not only of my brother Gabriel, to his
especiall commendation and credit, but e∣uen
of my poore selfe too. All which cau∣ses,
and reasons concurring, as they doo,
how much were I to be blamed, if I
should make any other choise for this my
first Dedication, then of your good wor∣shippe?
To whom my onely suite, and
humble request is, that it may please you
to accept fauourablie of so smal a testimo∣nie
of my duetifull good will, and heartie
affection, vntill God shall enhable me to
make some reasonable amends with some
other of greater shewe, and more impor∣tance.
Which I trust wil not be long, if my

studie in the Mathematikes and Physike,
may haue that successe, which I hope in
God it shall. In the meane time, presu∣ming
in some part, of your wonted good∣nesse,
and fauour, and crauing pardon in
the rest, I most humblie commend your
worshippe to almightie God. This first
of Aprill. 1583.

