


TO THE NEW VP-START MARTIN, AND THE MISBEGOTTEN HEIRES OF HIS body: his ouerthwart neighbor, Mar-Martin, Mar-Mar-Martin, and so foorth following the Traulila-lilismus, as farre as Will Solnes stuttring pro∣nunciation may stumble ouer at a breath: To all Whip Iohns, and Whip Iackes: not forgetting the Caualiero Pasquill, or the Cooke Russian, that drest a dish for Mar∣tins diet, Marforius and all Cutting Hussnufs, Roisters, and the residew of light singred younkers, which make eue∣ry word a blow, and euery booke a bobbe: Perceuall the Peace-Maker of England, wisheth grace to the one party, of the other Parish: and peace stichd vp in a Gaberdine without pleat or wrinckle, to the other party of this Parish.
I Would it had bin PERCEVALS hap, to haue com to the beginning of a friendly feast, or to the latter ending of so dan∣gerous a fraye. And I thought I had bin faire for it at the first: for plodding through Alders∣gate, all armed as I was, with a quarter Ashe

staffe on my shoulder, and an emptie belly vnder my northern belt, I spied me, a large P. with a wide mouth like a porradge pott, and being quicksented thrust forward on the trale, and found it was Papp. But I can∣not tell, what the goodere came into my minde, but somewhat it was, that persuaded me to trie before I tasted, and looke before I licked: And though my sharpset-stomach would haue straight fell into acquaintance, by reason of some auncient familiaritie be∣tweene a western fellow, and a whitpot: yet bearing a braine as well as a belly, I stood sauntring ouer it, like a whelp that had scal∣ded his mouth with lapping vp hotte water Grewell: till I found that it was no meat in∣deed for PERCEVALL, but rather a bone for MARTIN to digest, if his stomach wold serue him: for though the first ladlefull had a smacke as soft as pap, the next morsell, a taste as sweet as a fig, and so forth: yet I see he that was Cooke and Cater, thought to feed MARTIN with these nunchiōs, as men feed Apes: with a bit & a boxe on the eare.

Why but soft maisters, faire plaie and no snatching: is your feasting turned to a fray? put vp, put vp your weapons, and be some wiser then some. They were neuer tall fel∣lows of their hands that were such hacksters in the street: nor euer prooued old wringers indeed, that sell out at their belly mettall. Go to MARTIN, go to: I know a man is a man, though he haue but a hose on his head (& thou hast a close house on thine) but the greatest quarrellers meet often with their ouer-match. Putcase thou hadst a good cause (as alas I am a plaine fellow and not giuen to swearing) yet a couple of these late Roysters would marre ten MARTINS, at the cracking of a stage Iest. They haue pla∣guy Clubfists, the one with his Counter-Cuffe, the other with his Country Cuffe, would quickly make a blew MARTIN. And you on the other side: what neede all this stir? this banding of kilcowes to fight with a shadow? If I were at home, within the pre∣cinctes of mine owne domination, I would charge you in Gods name and the Queens,

to put vp your whinyards, you are men inough, able to deale one to one at handi∣gripes, come cut and long taile: why should you offer to take the aduātage of the high∣er ground? Truly, truly, I will present you at the law day for a ryot, though I be neither side man for this Meridian, nor Warden, but to ward my selfe as I walke. There is more danger in breaking the Queenes Maiesties peace, then you are aware of. That mad companion MARTIN, you know, plaies least in sight, and serues you, as Aeneas ser∣ued Turnus, to make him fight with a mist in steed of a man: he doth but send his picture, to make triall of your affection towards him, as (my boy at home saies) Heliogaba∣lus did, to search the humors of the Roman Senate. If you had vsed his Image somwhat more gentlie, within this space, hee would haue appeared in his likenes, incarnated or incased in some knaues skin or other I war∣rant you: beare with one grosse terme, so as I make no custome of it. Come on therfore MARTIN and the rest, house your selues

in the next Tauerne, I will set my selfe (not a knaue betweene two honest men) but as a good fellow, betwixt the shadow of MAR∣TIN, and the naturall shape of your selues, to trie whether I can stint this, Hold my dagger from your throat, or no.

