



Right Worshipfull, &c.
MOst lamentable it is to see
mens eager pursuit of earth∣ly
vanities, and their wo∣full
neglect, and contempt
of true saving grace, which
is durable riches. To which two, may
be fitly applyed that which was said of
Saul and David (the two first Kings of
Israel) sc. that the one hath slaine thou∣sands,
and the other tenne thousands: both
which arise chiefely (as I conceive) from
mens ignorance, or the want of the know∣ledge,
of the worth and excellency of piety

and true feare of God, or saving grace.
For (as our Saviour said to the woman of
Samaria, Ioh. 4. 10.) If thou knewest
the gift of God, &c. So if they knew
these gifts of God, in the true resplendent
nature of them; if men were but acquain∣ted
with the worth, and excellency of this
precious, and golden commodity of true
saving grace, they would not labour so
immoderately for the meat that perisheth,
but for the meate that endureth to ever∣lasting
life (as our Saviour himselfe speak∣eth,
Ioh. 6. 29.) yea, they would not be so
cumbred (with Martha) about many
things, whilest, in the meane time, the
one thing needfull is neglected; but
rather (with Mary) choose the better
part, which should never be taken from
them, Luk. 10. 42. To this end, I at
first fastened my meditation upon this por∣tion
of Scripture, and tooke into my seri∣ous
consideration this clause of holy Writ,
yea, and have still fixed my saddest
thoughts upon this golden Counsell of our
blessed Saviour, wherein the great Coun∣sellor
of heaven and earth doth give his
blessed advise to the sonnes of men, whom
hee generally findeth like the Church of

Laodicea, sc. wretched, and miserable
and poore, and blinde, and naked; now un∣to
all such, whom he findeth in this wo∣full
and wretched condition, He propoun∣deth
this sweete and heavenly counsell and
direction (which is the ground of this en∣suing
discourse) contained in the words of
this Text, Rev. 3. 18. I counsell thee
to buy of mee gold tryed in the fire,
that thou mayest be rich. Wherein our
Saviour directeth us unto the true riches
indeed, and commendeth unto us, the worth
and excellency of Himselfe, his merits, and
graces of his Spirit, that they are all of a
right precious nature, and of great worth
and value, even gold tryed in the fire,
and such as will truely enrich us unto life
eternall. In prosecuting of which Text, I
have runne this course, and endeavoured
to shew the great worth, and transcendent
excellency of true saving grace, that it is
most fitly resembled to Gold tryed in the
fire, yea, indeed to be farre preferred be∣fore
it, and that in sundry respects; yea,
not only the worth and excellency of grace it
selfe, but also the admirable worth of such
as do enjoy this precious Iewell, that all such
are most excellent, and golden persons

indeed, as comming of golden parentage,
having a golden portion and inheritance,
and also golden attendants, having the
holy Angels of God daily to pitch their
Tents round about them, for their safe∣ty.
Farther, by way of application, I have
earnestly pressed, and perswaded unto the
duty of examination, that wee should all
try, what metall our graces are made of;
whether they be of a right golden nature,
yea, or no. And because herein we are all
of us naturally backward, I have therefore
endeavoured to enforce the duty by sundry
Motives, drawne from the consideration
of the difficulty of the duty, the danger of
being mistaken, as also, the possibility of
performance, and comfort that will hereby
redound unto us, when the worke is once
throughly performed. And that we may
not bee deceived about it, nor gul'd with
Sathans devices, in a businesse of such im∣portance,
I have therefore also endeavou∣red
to manifest and discover the true
markes and characters of this golden
metall; together with the comfortable,
and happy estate and condition of all such,
as doe enjoy this precious commodity.
2. I have endeavoured to prove, that all

such as have true grace, are absolutely, and
incomparably the richest persons in the
world; and that piety is the best, and su∣rest
way to make us truly and spiritually
rich. So that, if there be any that are ready
to say; Who will shew us any good?
Let such come, and see the shortest, and yet
the surest way to get wealth, yea, durable
riches, and righteousnesse. Lastly, if any
be so farre wrought upon, as to cry out with
those in the Gospell, Lord, evermore give
us this bread, this wealth, this precious
treasure; I have therefore, in the last
place, endeavoured to discover the direct
meanes to obtaine it, and that is, Buying.
And the rather to encourage us, to the mak∣ing
of this happie bargaine for our soules;
I have here described the excellency of the
Chapman, that is readie to sell us this rare
commoditie of saving grace. Here you shall
also finde a description of all the particu∣lars,
requisite to the making up of this bar∣gaine
with Christ. Here you shall finde the
price of true grace, and the great varietie
of such customers, as are readie (in appear∣ance)
to bargaine with this spirituall and
heavenly Chapman: Here have you the
summe and substance of this TREATISE.

Whereunto I have adjoyned another of like
argument; shewing the worth and excel∣lency
of the time that is spent in Gods ser∣vice,
or in the use of the means to get grace;
which seemeth fitly annexed to the former
Treatise: for if true saving grace be a jew∣ell
of such worth; then time spent in the use
of the best meanes to get grace, must needs
be the best spent time: For how can any
(that earnestly thirst after saving grace)
spend their time better, then in diligent
attendance upon the Word of Gods grace,
which is able to build us up farther and
farther, and to give us an inheritance a∣mong
all them that are sanctified, as the
Apostle speaketh, Act. 20. 32? Oh how just∣ly
may a man take up a lamentation, in re∣gard
of the general defect amongst men,
in the wofull mis-spending of their precious
time! Men doe even take care, how to passe
away that precious time, which is never to
be recalled, but of it selfe passeth away as
the most swift Ships. Now the desire of my
soule, is not onely to bewaile this dangerous
sinne of wasting and mis-spending of pre∣cious
time; but also to doe my best endea∣vour,
to reform this generall and monstrous
abuse this way. To this end, I have endea∣voured

to stop the streame, and to turne the
water into the right channell, by giving di∣rection
for the right spending of our preci∣ous
time; and have earnestly laboured to e∣vince
thus much, sc. That time spent in
Gods service, is absolutely and incompara∣bly
the best spent time; and therefore have
earnestly perswaded, that we should not on∣ly
begin to serve God betimes, even in our
youth, &c. but also that we should be con∣stant
and abundant in the duties of Gods
worship and service, after we have once be∣gun.
Concerning all which, I have given
sundry motives and directions. Loe here
the summe and substance of the whole booke,
and of both these Treatises; which as they
seeme fitly united together; so being (upon
occasion) to look abroad in publike, they seem
to be most fitly Dedicated to you, the Wor∣shipfull
Company, or bodie of the Company
of the mysterie of Mercers. To you there∣fore
(Right Worshipfull, the Master, and
Head of this beautifull and comely bodie,
consisting of great varietie of Worshipfull
and worthy members,) doe I offer and pre∣sent
this my poore and unworthy present:
which (notwithstanding) if the manner of
handling, was correspondent to the matter

it selfe, I durst then presume to say, t'was
right worthy of you; though in respect of the
manner of illustration of them, I have just∣ly
and fitly called unworthy. To you there∣fore
are these fruits of my poore labours
dedicated, by whose encouragement, the
Author himselfe hath beene supported, and
better enabled to proceede in the worke of
his Ministery. Accept therefore, I pray
you, of this poore paper, as a publike testi∣mony
to the world, of my thankefull ac∣knowledgement
of your noble favours to∣wards
me, and kinde and speciall respect
unto me. By perusall whereof, you may hap∣pily
be encouraged to proceede in the good
worke, which you have begunne, so maine∣ly
importing, not onely my good in parti∣cular,
but also the good of sundry others,
who will have cause (I hope) to blesse God
for you, that he hath beene pleased to make
you the worthy instruments of upholding
the meanes of grace among them; yea, and
to establish for their good, the spirituall
Market of their soules, that they may now
come and buy freely, bread, milke, and
wine, without money, and without
price, as the Prophet speaketh, Isa. 55. 1,
2. Yea, the desire of my soule is, that these

first fruits of my labours may taste and re∣lish
so sweetly in the palate of your soules,
that you may hereby see cause, never to re∣pent
you of the pains which you have take,
and the cost which you have this way ex∣pended;
but may still be perswaded to con∣tinue
your loving respects towards me, and
your zeale to the cause of God, which is here∣by
greatly advanced and furthered by you,
and so discharge the trust committed to you
by that late famous, and admirably chari∣table
and worthy Gentleman, Mr. Richard
Fishburne, who committed money to your
trust, to be both religiously and charitably
employed. Which trust, how faithfully you
have discharged, (as it is best knowne to
God, and to your owne consciences, which
are as so many thousand witnesses) so I my
selfe am not ignorant of your noble & wor∣thy
proceedings; but out of my experience,
to my comfort, and your credit, am able
both to speake, and to write of your fidelitie
and liberalitie, which you are wont to use
in these cases: besides also, that I am well
acquainted with your dealings with others
besides my selfe, on this behalfe. Most glad∣ly
therefore do I take hold on this opportuni∣tie,
to manifest unto the world, my thanke∣full

acknowledgment of your speciall respect
to me, in this case, and of this your noble
courtesie. As the benefits therefore which
I have received from you are publike, and
manifest unto so many: so likewise doe I
desire, that my acknowledgement hereof
should not onely be reall and heartie, but
publike also. For I have not yet forgotten
(though so many yeares agoe) how freely
and kindely I was chosen by you, to partici∣pate
in the fruits and pledges of your love,
after (with all diligence) you had sufficient
tryall, both of my sufficiency, and also of the
unblameablenesse of my life and conversa∣tion;
as touching both which, I trust you
have ever since been fully satisfied. In most
gratefull manner also I doe acknowledge,
with what peace and quietnesse, for sundry
yeares together, I freely did partake in he
fruits of your love towards me; neither was
I ever at any time sithence disturbed, or
molested by you; but rather most kindely
supported by you, against the molestation of
others; yea, and for the present, amidst the
dangers and difficulties, wherewith I am
not only pressed, but oppressed also, my chiefe
hope and expectation of reliefe in this case,
(next under God) is wholly from you; nei∣ther

doe I well know what to doe, but mine
eyes are upon you; and not onely mine, but
also the eyes of sundry others, both in Citie,
and Countrey, are steadily fixed on you, ex∣pecting
what the issue and event will be.
Goe on therefore nobly still, and with your
wisedome and undaunted courage, vindi∣cate
the cause in hand, and cleere those dif∣ficulties
and great encumbrances, which
are lately fallen upon the Rectorie (which
I do enjoy) and consequently, upon my selfe:
whereunto let these poore labours of mine
encourage you, together with the goodnesse
and amiable beautie of the cause it selfe.
For if true saving grace, be of such rare
worth and value; then surely the cost and
paines that is bestowed to uphold the means
of grace, must likewise needs be well em∣ployed.
These Treatises were severall Ser∣mons,
preached in the Countrey among the
people committed to my Charge: and good
reason me thinketh it is, that I should give
some speciall account of my labours to you,
from whose hands, I have received the grea∣test
part of my maintenance, and that con∣stantly,
for more then seven yeares toge∣ther.
Which endeavours of mine, if plaine
and homely, are notwithstanding thus far

justly to be excused, namely, that they
were preached to a plaine Countrey people,
which though of good affection and incli∣nation
towards pietie, (I hope) are yet but
of meane and small capacitie, and under∣standing
in the things of God. Besides, my
care hath ever beene, rather to speake to the
hid man of the heart, in a plaine way, then
tickle the eare with a neat discourse, per∣haps
not understood, and therefore without
all benefit and profit. Besides, no marvell
if these Sermons want ornaments, when
the Anthour himselfe was scarce supplyed
with necessaries; the greatest part of my
meanes, at that time, being wholly taken
from me; so that some small pittance onely
of outward meanes was left me; though
God in his goodnesse hath graciously (by
your hands principally) provided for me.
This I propound, not onely by way of just
excuse, for these my impolished labours,
but also to preserve alive, and keepe awake
your pitie and compassion towards me, and
to stirre up your zealous care and diligence
in the cause of God, which seemeth some
way endangered: yea, hereby you shall deep∣ly
engage a number of poore soules to pray
for you, when they perceive the constancie

of your love, towards both them, and me,
in supporting of me, by way of mainte∣nance,
that I may still impart the Word of
life among them, and goe on still to fulfill
the Ministery, which I have received of
the Lord IESUS. Thus leaving these
things to your grave and loving considera∣tion;
I commend the booke unto your read∣ing,
and your Worships to the protection of
the Almightie, and both your selves, and
it, unto his blessing. I humbly take leave,
and rest
Canwicke this 1. of Iuly. 1638. 
