



ALthough (Right worshipful) at my last being with you, the principall cause, why I chose that text of thanksgiuing (be¦ing a part of the Psalm which was read in the church that Sabboth) was to stir vp our mindes to render hearty prayse vnto God, as well for the peaceable, hap∣py,
 and ioyfull entrance of our most Gracious Soueraigne Lord the King his Maiesty into the possession of these his Realmes and dominions, as also for the assured hope which wee may euery way conceiue of hauing the truth of the Gos∣pel of Christ, by his Graces religious care, to bee most firmely established a∣mongst vs, and likewise to declare by that text, what duties wee owe vnto the Almighty, for these and all other his inestimable benefites: yet seeing I doe now commit to Presse a little Treatise concerning the Soule and Spirit of Man, and that it is for the giftes and graces of the soule, for which wee are bound espe∣cially to render prayses vnto God, I haue therefore thought it not impertinent to adde to the ende of my Description of the Soule those two Sermons, which I lately preached at Camerwell, as a fit conclusion of the Discourse before pen∣ned. In setting them downe in wri∣ting,
 I haue (as neere as I could) deliue∣red the very same which then I spake. Onely I haue thought it best for the ease of the reader, to place in the margent the places and verses of the textes and authorities, which in the vttering of them, I did thinke it more conuenient v∣sually to name, that such as were present and stored with the Scriptures might the better make some profitable vse ther∣of. In the publishing of these Sermons I haue endeuoured (according to the talent graunted to me) generally to benefite my Countrey. In consecrating them particu∣larly as a small token of my dutifull affec∣tion towards your Worships, my purpose only is to shewe some thankfull remem∣brance of your late sauour and kindnesse, in affoording me your good assistāce con∣cerning a motion made by my best wel-willers for the benefit of me & mine. The prayses and thanksgiuings which are due vnto God, do nothing disanull that thāk∣fulnes
 which we owe vnto men, as instru∣mēts appointed of God for our good. Nay, rather by a humane gratitude as by a hād God doth leade vs to the performance of that which is due to his diuine Maiestie. For very well may be framed of it, the selfe same argument which the Apostle doth make concerning loue:1. Ioh. 4.20. He which is not thankfull to man whom he seeth, how can he be thankfull to God whom he hath not seene? It is recorded of Thales the Miletian, one of the seuen wise men of Greece,Stob. Serm. 78 that when studying Astronomy, and looking vp towards the starres, by for getting himselfe, he fel into a ditch, a foo∣lish & simple maid could tell him, that it was a iust reward for such a one as would so contemplate vpon the heauens, that he should in the meane time forget his owne feet. To auoid the danger of this reproofe, in the middest of these my meditations of our heauenly & spiritual thankfulnes to∣wards God, I haue endeuoured somewhat
 to keepe my selfe from falling into the pit of humane ingratitude, & to present vn∣to you this little pledge of my dutifull re∣membrance, which although being two Sermons, they might well haue borne to either of you a seuerall Dedicatory, yet for as much as they were both made at one time, when I came to congratulate your worships for the late fauours worthily bestowed vpon your deserts, and do both of them containe one matter, being parts one of another, and as it were, not two, but one bodie; I doe here present them ioint∣ly vnto you, nothing doubting but that you will yeeld the same approbation to them being Printed, as you vouchsafed to giue vnto them when they were first before you vttered, or as you haue vsual∣ly affoorded to such other Treatises as I haue heretofore published vnder your names. God graunt your Worships long to remaine either a happie comfort
 to the other in this life; and in the end accomplish your long felicitie with an eternall blisse in his kingdome.
From Tanridge this 31. of December. 1603.

