



Mr. Wolfe, Good Newes was euer a wel∣come guest vnto me: and you do well in the current of your businesse, to re∣member the Italian Prouerbe; Good Ti∣dings would be dispatched to ride post, as Ill Tidings may haue good leaue to be a footeman. The nimblest Bee is a slowworme in expedi∣tions of importance, or cōgratulation: & the dullest Snaile the meetest Ambassadour to be employed in messages of damage, or condolement. You haue lately, (as appeareth by your Indices of the sicknesse, and so many other No∣uels) very tidely playde the Bees part: and so continue, as you loue me, or your selfe: vnto whom I wish a rich hiue, and many hony-moones. Since I receaued Parthenophil, Shores wife, and the Articles of accorde, or truce in France, (for which I render you as many thankes, as there be Arti∣cles): I haue now also this instant of September, perused your queint, and cunning Discourse of Remonstrances to the Duke de Maine: with that other new-new Pamflet of the late Turkish assiege of Sysseck in Croatia, the old Libur∣nia, famous for seruiceable Shippes. And take no lesse pleasure in the sounde Declaration of the plaine Ger∣mane, a credible Historicgrapher, then delight in the sly Information of the fine French, a glicking Remembran∣cer. It is not the externall, but the internall forme, (call it the Pith, or the marrow, or the life-bloud, or what you list)

that edifieth: and vndoubtedly the Christian world hath pregnant cause to prostrate the feruentest Zeale of their de∣uotions to his almighty maiesty, that hath brought France, and Croatia to those termes of Truce, and Triumph. A happy Truce, if a happy truce: and an honorable Triumph, if durable. I say, If, and If, bicause I haue knowne many a Truce, like Scammony, that weakeneth the liuer; or Cas∣sia, that enfeebleth the raines; or Agarick, that ouerthrow∣eth the stomacke; the stomacke, that must worke the feate. And who hath not either by Experience, or by heare-say, or by reading, knowne many a Triumph, like Sena, that breedeth winde; or Rubarbe; that dryeth ouer-much; or Euforbium, that inflameth the whole body; the body, that must strike the stroake? Take-away that ouerthrowing, or weakening property from Truce: and Truce may be a di∣uine Scammony, Cassia, or Agaricke, to purge noysome, and rebellious humours. Oh that it might be such a Purge in Fraunce. Correct that ventositie, or inflammation, that accompanieth Triumph: and Lo the gallantest Phisique, that nature hath affourded, witt deuised, or magnanimi∣ty practised, to abate the pride of the enemy, and to redou∣ble the courage of the frende. No Tobacco, or Panacea so mightily vertuous, as that Physique. Oh that it might be such a Physique in Croatia, in Hungary, in Almany, in the whole Christian world. Immensum calcar Gloria: the goldē spurre of the braue Grecian, & the worthy Romane. Pollicy is Politique: & will not easely be coosened with the muske of the Perfumer, though muske be a sweet Curtesan; or al∣lured with the sugar, & hony of the Cooke, though sugar, & hony be dainty hypocrites; or enueigled with the gold∣leaues of the Goldsmith, though gold-leaues be eloquēt & bewitching Oratours; or deluded, that is, betrayed with

any coolerable counterfesance, howsoeuer smoothly enti∣cing, or gloriously pretending. Priuate medicines are often adulterate: but publique medicines will admit no sophisti∣cation: and Pollicy must be well-aduised, before it swal∣low-downe the gilded pilles of flattering pretext. Fraunce hath bene taught to be cautelous in Truce; which hath eft∣soones sucked the sweetnesse of a Iudas kisse: and Croatia may learne to be prouident in Triumph; which hath often fealt the ioyfulnesse of a Sampsons post. Neither Fraunce can be too ielous; nor Croatia too prest; nor Hungary too fierce; nor Almany too hardy; nor any nation too circum∣spect, that is beleaguered with such puissant, and obsti∣nate foes. The house of Guise hath lōg hawked and practi∣sed for a great Crowne: the Duke de Maine hath chopped vpō a main-chāce: Opportunity is a maruelous warriour: The king of Spaine a mighty enemy: the Pope, an vnrecon∣cilable aduersary to a Protestant Prince: the Turke a horri∣ble foe to Christian states; and not to be daunted, or dis∣mayed with two, or three petty foiles. Petty foiles incense choler, & enrage fury; not allay courage, or disarme power. Were not man a man in himselfe, and God aboue all; alas, what security in a fallible Truce: or what repose in a momē∣tany Triumph? Yet euery Truce is respectiuely wellcome: and euery Triumph a Pageant of manfull valour, & a Iubile of diuine fauour. For my poore part, (a single Interest in so great affaires) I am as affectionatly glad to find Victory on the better side, as I haue often bene compassionatly sory, (or shall I say? stomachously angry), to read how pitteous∣ly the Christian hoast hath bene beaten by the Turkish Army, a braue Army, but Turkish. Whose puissance hath long bene, and still is the dishonour of Christendome; and whose Empire cannot waxe, according to their aspiring

deseigne, but Christes kingdome must wane, according to some lamentable Examples. Surely the Onely-wise (for whosoeuer is comparatiuely wise, He is absolutely wise) ordaineth all for the best: and they perish for, or thorough their owne Folly, that perish. Homer in humanity hath af∣firmed it: and the Bible in diuinity hath confirmed it. Howbeit true Wisedome is valiant in aduersity: and right Valiancy wise in prosperity: both euer like themselues, and vnlike the puffes, or bubbles of the world; that know how to disguise, or afflict, but not how to redresse, or solace themselues. Hope neuer dispaireth: and no such resolution, as the resolution of Faith: a vertue of more wonderfull emproouement by thousandes, then the most miraculous graine of mustard-seede; or whatsoeuer Nature ingen∣dreth, Art frameth, or Exercise atcheiueth most powera∣ble. Zeale hath bene, & may be a maruellous Conquerour, euen beyond the brauest Confidence, or fiercest Fury: and Faith was euer the wōder of wonders, where it was. Christ fauoureth a stout, and inuincible Constancy in any good cause: and in his owne cause, (maugre the mainest forces, or suttlelest Pollicies of Mahomet, or the Diuell,) he will finally make them victorious, with Triumphes of ioy, and Trophyes of honour, that fight his battailes with the hart of Zeale, and the hand of Courage. Who honoureth not the glorious memory, and the very name of the renowned Le∣panto: the monument of Don Iohn of Austria, the security of the Venetiā state, the Halleluia of Christendome, & the Welaway of Turky? Christ blesse his stādard-bearers, with many Lepantos, and Syssecks: and make his militant Church, an hoast triumphant. It hath often bene the meditation of One, that with a politique, and diuine Analysis, hath loo∣ked into the successiue proceedings, and fatall ouerthrowes

of Tyrannyes: if Mahomet, and his Alcoran cannot stand, but Christ, & his Euangely must fall: when the Great Turke, continually encroaching, (according to his graund inten∣diments, and ambitious deseigne,) is busiest in his hoatest haruest of engrosing and coheaping kingdomes, and with a most greedy appetite runneth-headlong to deuoure the Christian world at a bit; Lord haue mercy vpon thee, ô little-little Turke. Pride may exalt his hawty presumptions, and Prowesse aduaunce his terrible brauery: but there is a God in heauen: and they cannot laugh long, that make the Diuell laugh, and Christ weepe. Meane-while it were pitty, Sysseck should want the glory of such an immortall Memoriall, as some noble, and royall witts haue bestowed vpon the euer-renowned Lepanto. Excellent Vertue, for a due reward, deserueth excellent Honour: and braue Valour, for worthy imitation, would be brauely extolled: as Or∣pheus glorified lason; Homer, Achilles; Virgill, Aeneas; Ariosto, Charlemaine; Tasso, Godfry of Bollen; and so forth. Especially at such an encountring, and surprising Time, as must either floorish, like the Palme of the moun∣taine; or fade, like the Lilly of the valley.
You know, I am not very prodigall of my discourse with euery one: but I know, vnto whom I write: & he that hath read, and heard so many gallant Florentine Discourses, as you haue done, may the better discerne, what is what: and he that publisheth so many books to the world, as you do, may frame vnto himselfe a priuate, & publique vse of such conference. Few they are, that are qualified to surpasse, or equall those singular Presidents: but they few would be re∣teined with a golden fee, or interteined with siluer Curte∣sie. Some I know in Cambridge; some in Oxford; some in London; some elsewhere, died in the purest graine of Art, &

Exercise: but a few in either, and not many in all: that vn∣doubtedly can do excellently well, exceedingly well. And were they thorowghly employed according to the possi∣bility of their Learning, & Industry, who can tell, what com∣parison this tongue might wage with the most-floorishing Lāguages of Europe: or what an inestimable crop of most∣noble and soueraine fruite, the hand of Art, and the spirite of Emulation might reape in a rich, and honorable field? Is not the Prose of Sir Philip Sidney in his sweet Arcadia, the embrodery of finest Art, and daintiest VVitt? Or is not the Verse of M. Spencer in his braue Faery Queene, the Virgi∣nall of the diuinest Muses, and gentlest Graces? Both deli∣cate Writers: alwayes gallant, often braue, continually de∣lectable, somtimes admirable. What sweeter tast of Suada, then the Prose of the One: or what pleasanter relish of the Muses, then the Verse of the Other? Sir Iohn Cheekes stile was the hony-bee of Plato: and M. Aschams Period the Sy∣ren of Isocrates. His, and his breath, the balme and spick∣nard of the delightfullest Tempe. You may gesse, whose meter I would intitle the harpe of Orpheus, or the dulci∣mers of Sappho. And which of the Goldē Riuers floweth more currently, then the siluer streame of the English Ario∣sto? Oh that we had such an English Tasso: and oh that the worthy du Bartas were so endenisoned. The sky-coloured Muse best commendeth her owne heauenly harmony: and who hath sufficiently praysed the hyacinthine & azure die, but itselfe? What colours of astonishing Rhetorique, or raui∣shing Poetry, more deeply engrained, thē some of his ama∣zing deuises; the fine dittyes of an other Petrarch, or the sweet charmes of pure enchantment? What Did-margari∣ton, or Dia-ambre, so comfortatiue, or cordiall, as Her Ele∣ctuary of Gemmes, (for though the furious Tragedy Anto∣nius,

be a bloudy chaire of estate, yet the diuine Discourse of life, and Death, is a restoratiue Electuary of Gemmes) whō I do not expresly name, not because I do not honour Her with my hart, but because I would not dishonour Her with my pen, whom I admire, and cannot blason enough. Some other Paragons of bewtifullest Eloquence, and Mir∣rours of brightest witt, not so much for breuities sake, as for like Honours sake I ouerskip: whose onely imperfection is, that they are touched with no imperfection. Yet Hope is a Transcendent, & will not easely be imprisoned, or impoun∣ded in any Predicament of auncient, or moderne Perfe∣ction: which it may honour with due reuerence, but will not serue with base homage. Excellency hath in all ages af∣fected singularity: & Ambition how impetuously buckled for the mastery? And albeit witt haue a quicke sent, that wil not be coosened, and Iudgement a sharpe eye, that cannot be bleared: (the Morning Starre of Discretion, and the Eue∣ning Starre of Experience haue a deepe insight in the me∣rites of euery cause): yet still Hope hath reason to continue Hope, and is a white Angell sent from heauen, aswell to en∣kindle Vigorous Zeale, as to awaken lasie Slougth. A wan, or windy Hope, is a notable breake-necke vnto itselfe: but the grounded, and winged Hope, which I someway perceiue in a few other, no way conceiue in miselfe, is the ascending scale, and Milk-way to heauenly excellency. When I be∣thinke me of any singular, or important effect, I am present∣ly drawne into a consideration of the Cause; and deeme it a childish vanity, to dreame of the End, without Meanes. The prompt and pliant Nature, is the dawning of the Crimsen morning: the right Art as fine a workeman, as Daedalus, & as nimble a Planet, as Mercury inspiring Imitation may climbe high: how oft hath fiery Etion won the golden

spurres, and runne his Victorious race, like the shining Sun in his resplendishing Chariot? Pregnant and incestant Ex∣ercise hatcheth miracles. Practise was euer a curious plat∣former of rare and queint Theorickes: and is it not stil pos∣sible for Practise, to deuise as exquisite patternes, as euer were inuented, and euen to contriue new Idees of singula∣rity? The encounter of Vertue, is honorable: & what more commendable, then the Conflict of Art? It is onely that di∣uine Hope, embellished with those Ornaments of skill, and inspired with those blessings of heauen, that must excell it∣selfe; & aduaunce the worthiest Valour, that euer atcheiued Heroicall Exploits, or leuyed Argonauticall Prizes, by land, or sea. Peerelesse wittes may hourd-vp the precious trea∣sure of their Inuention, and store-vp the gorgeous furniture of their Eloquence, till Prowesse hath accomplished migh∣tier wonders vpon Earth. At this present what can Admi∣ration finde, either more resolute for courage, or more puis∣sant for valour, or more honorable for successe, or more wōderfull for imitatiō, thē the smal bādes of the braue Ru∣pertus against the Turke; or the little troupes of the brauer French King against his domesticall, and forrein enemyes?
I might say more, were the place fit: but what written Token shall I returne for so many Printed Tokens? One hand washeth an other: and it apperteineth vnto him, that taketh something, to giue something. I am reasonably furnished with choice of other stoare at this instant: but I will not accloy you attonce: and my least; but Newest Trifle (for that is the meetest name) shall serue in supply of a small requitall for your greater Newes. I terme it a Trifle for the manner: though the matter be in my con∣ceit, superexcellent; in the opinion of the world, most ad∣mirable; for priuate consideration, very notable; for pu∣blique

vse, passing memorable; for a point, or two, excee∣ping monstrous. And that is the very disgrace of the Son∣net, that the Stile nothing counteruaileth the Subiect, but debaseth a straunge body with vulgar attire, and disguiseth a superlatiue Text with a positiue Glosse. As it is, it is your owne to dispose, or cancell at pleasure: and albeit the wri∣ter promise nothing, (for promise he accounteth an Obli∣gation), yet if he fortune to surprise you with a sorry a∣mendes, let it not be vnwellcome, that commeth in the name of good-will; and such a good-will, as is lesse affraide of the Plague, then of Vnthankefulnesse. He that is desi∣rous with the first, to be cōtinually made acquainted with your publique Intelligences, from, or of whatsoeuer king∣domes, or States; will haue a mutuall regard of frendly correspondence, by some returne of priuate Nouels, or o∣ther recompense; as any his vacation yeeldeth leysure, or any his opportunity presenteth occasion.
Touching his present Exercises, or other actions, you know enough, that know why the Asse sleepeth, & the Fox winketh. Or recall to minde our sweet Table-philosophy of the for dead Libbard, a very gentle, and silent creature; and you neede no other inckling. Peraduenture some-body may finde, that the roughest, & awkest things are not so cū∣bersome to other, as they may prooue irkesome to them∣selues. There is a learned kinde of Feare, that preuenteth many mischiefes: and they are iudiciously wise, (howsoe∣uer valiant, rich, or powerable,) that dare not vse other o∣therwise, then themselues would be vsed. Men may stand vpon brauing termes, and puffe-vp their owne swelling veynes: but when wilfulnesse is in the tide, Discretion is in the ebbe. Some haue repented them no lesse, then fower and twenty houers in a day, and a night, for one froward

word. Suerly a man were better shift his footing, then stand stifly in his owne light: and who would not rather say to his Tongue, Tongue thou art a lyer; or to his penne, Penne thou art a foole; then vndooe himselfe vtterly, and shame himselfe euerlastingly? You might heare of the new Trea∣ty, or motiue: and it is not the first time that I haue discoue∣red a broode of witts, like the famous well in Idumea; whose water one quarter of the yeare, was as muddy, as the mud∣diest kennell: an other quarter, as bloudy, as the bloudiest slaughterhouse; the third, as greene, as the greenest grasse: the fourth, as cleere, as the cleerest conduict. Euery ex∣chaunge for the better, doth well: and it is a good signe, when pudled waters grow cleere, if they grow cleere; and disordered wittes become tractable, if they become tracta∣ble. Haue they not cause to doubt, that know the variable nature of that Syrian well: and haue seen so many dogged things returne to their vomit? A good bargaine, and a gentle Offer would not be refused: but he that cōsidereth the fittes of Aprill, and the panges of September, hath reason for a demurrer: and he that hath seene as lunatique creatures, as the Moone, must be pardoned, though he suffer not him∣selfe to be coosened with the legierdemaine of a iugling Conuert. Did I neuer tell you of a grauer man, that wore a priuy coate of interchaungeable colours; and for the Art of Reuolting, or recanting, might read a Lecture to any re∣trograde Planet in Heauen, or Earth? Is it not possible for a wilde Asse of a fugitiue and renegate disposition, in such a point to resemble the tamest Foxe? Or are not Bookes with vnstayed readers, and running heads, like vnto those won∣drous waters, that being dronke of birdes, as Theophra∣stus reporteth, or of sheepe, as Seneca writeth, chaunged them from white to blacke, and from blacke to white? Af∣ter

a sterne and ruthfull Tragedy, solemnely acted, who deeplyer plunged in sober, and melancholy dumpes, then some good fellowes; that from a pleasant, and wanton Co∣medy, finely played, returne as merry as a criket, and as light as a feather? When the sweet Youth haunted Aretine, and Rabelays, the two monstrous wittes of their languages, who so shaken, with the furious feauers of the One: or so attainted with the French Pockes of the other? Now he hath a little mused vpon the Funerall Teares of Mary Mag∣dalen; and is egged-on to try the supplenesse of his Pathe∣ticall veine, in weeping the compassionatest and diuinest Teares, that euer heauenly Eye rained vpon Earth; Iesu, what  of Supererogation haue they atchieued? Riot  was wont to roote so deeply, that it could hardly : and where reckelesse Impudency ta∣keth  not very hastily to be dispossessed. I was say , to a Spring of rankest Villany in February  Diuinity in May? May they not sur , that wonder how Machiauell can teach a Pri  to be religious? An other question, or two , were at my tounges end. But what  talke any-more of Pa∣radoxes, or impossibilities, when He, that penned the most desperate and abominable Pamflet of Straunge Newes, and disgorged his stomack of as poisonous rancour, as euer was vomited in Print within few moneths is won, or char∣med, or inchaunted, (or what Metamorphosis should I terme it?) to astonish carnall mindes with spirituall medi∣tations, vpon one of the most sacred and godfull argu∣ments, that the holyest deuotion could admire, in the pro∣foundest traunce of rapt and Seraphicall Zeale? I will not stay to maruell at the miracles of predominant Causes: the

Holy-ghost is an omnipotent Spirite, that can mollifie the flyntyest minde, and breath a soule of Heauen into a hart of Hell. If vnfaynedly he hath stripped-of the snakes skinne, and put-on the new man, as he deuoutly pre∣tendeth; let him be constant, and not blaspheme his most-reuerend Sauiour with counterfait Teares: if he playeth at fast, and loose, (as is vehemently suspected, by strong presumptions) whom shall he cunnycatch, or crosbite, but his Cast-away selfe, as holly, as a holly-hock? But I thanke God, I haue some-thing else to dispute: and if young Apuleius be not still the sonne of old Apuleius, and Pierce still as diuine, as a wilde Vine, I haue said no∣thing: but commend the sweet art of relenting Humani∣ty, and embrace the good nature of a good Nature, that sheddeth the pure Teares of Repentance. The more no∣torious the offence, and the more vnsatisfiable the Iniurie was; the more fauorable, and liberall he is, that with ho∣nest termes, and reasonable conditions may easely be en∣treated to pardon thesame; that is, to bestow a great bene∣fit insteade of a great reuenge, and to loose the exercise of many weekes, to gaine the recouery of one lost sonne. The best is, I am not yet a Fly in the cobweb of the Spider: and in a mating age, none are free from the check, bukinges. Or if kinges peraduenture finde themselues somewhat shrewdly mated, alas we poore subiectes must be content to be checked: & may dayly learne of our betters, to smoo∣ther with patience, that we cannot quench with order, and will not extinguish with disorder. Socrates professed no∣thing: and I professe lesse then Socrates: yet this I professe. He that neither cockereth himselfe, nor loueth to be lul∣led, or smoothed-vp of freindes, can lightly put-vp the heauiest loade of an enemy: and he can hardly be daunted

with nipping wordes, that is not easely dismayed with pin∣ching deedes. An vnguiltie minae knoweth not what the trembling of the Hart meaneth: and a sounde Conscience is a brasen wall against the mainest battry of Spite, or Feude. Were there no other Philosophie, but Experience, and a settled resolution to proceede according to Reason in gene∣rall, and Occasion in speciall: euery guiltlesse eye that seeith any thing, seeith his owne Confirmation in the Confutation of his guiltie aduersary: whose Vaine railinges are sibbe to other Vanities, that cannot endure, but either Vanish like smoke in the Ayer; or mealt-away like snow in the Sunne; or grow stale like disguised fashions; or dissolue themselues into their materiam primam, that is, into Vanitie, & shame. Had I founde any one materiall article, or substātiall point against me, I must haue imputed some part of the blame to miselfe: but finding nothing in all those pestilent & Vi∣rulent sheetes of wast-paper, but meere-meere forgeryes, and the Diuell in the horologe; might I not iustly say? I haue cause to vse, as I am vsed: or haue I not reason to stand vp∣on termes of consideration? Did I not intende to deale a bountifull almes of Curtesie, who in my case would giue eare to the Law of Obliuion, that hath the Law of Talion in his handes; or accept of a silly recantation, as it were a so∣ry plaister to a broken shinne, that could knocke Malice on the head, and cut the windpipe of the railing throate? Pi∣erces Supererogation, (that was an arrow in my hād, a clogg in your,) is lest beholding to the penknife: Nashes S. Fame hath somewhat more of the launcelet: the Reply of the ex∣cellent Gentlewoman is the fine rasour, that must shaue-away euery ranke haire of his great courage, and little wit. I was long-since aweary with beating the Aier; and take small pleasure in washing the Asses head: or what should I terme

that bootelesse, and irksome businesse? But it is that hea∣uenly Creature (for so she will approue herselfe) that can coniure-downe the mouth of Villany into hell-mouth; & will do it as resolutely, as she can do it peremptorily, Vn∣lesse a cōpetent satisfaction be speedily tendered to my cō∣tentmēt. It were pitty, that diuine handy-worke should be employed but to a diuine peece of seruice, either to gaine a relenting soule, or to cast-away an obstinate body. If she be preuented by a voluntary submission of the offendour; to do a thing done, were a superfluous labour; and to vndo a man vndone, an vnmercifull cruelty. A thing as con∣trary to the shining louelinesse of her milde disposition, as the bitterest bitter seemeth repugnāt to the sweetest sweet. The brauest man is such a personage, as I haue elsewhere described: A Lion in the field, A Lamme in the towne: A Ioues Eagle in feude, an Apollos Swanne in society: A Ser∣pent in wit, A Doue in life: A Fury in execution, an Angell in conuersation. What hath the brauest man, that she hath not: excepting the Lion in the field of Mars, which she hath in the field of Minerua: whose warre she wageth with a couragious minde, an inuincible hand, and the cunning aray of the worthy Old-man in Homer. His talke was sweet; his Order fine; and his whole menage braue: and so is hers: but for a dainty wit, and a diuine humanitie, she is such a Paragon, as may compare with the excellentest of Homers women, and pledge the honorablest of his God∣desses. She is a right birde of Mercuries winged chariot: and teacheth the liuelyest cockes of the game, to besturre them early, to crow gallantly, to march comely, to fight valiant∣ly, to consort kindly, and to liue in any estate honorably. No flower more floorishing, then her witt: no fruite more mature then her iudgement. All her conceits are illuminate

with the light of Reason: all her speaches bewtified with the grace of Affabilitie: all her writinges seasoned with the salt of Discretion: all her sentēces spiced with wittines, per∣sumed with delight, tēpered with proffit: no leauen of Ex∣perience more sauory, thē all her platformes, & actions: no∣thing more mellow, thē the whole course of her life. In her minde there appeareth a certaine heauenly Logique: in her tongue, & pen, a diuine Rhetorique: in her behauiour, a re∣fined Morall Philosophie: in her gouernemēt, a souerain Pol∣licy: in euery part of her proceeding a singular dexteritie: & what patterne of skill, or Practise, more admirable then the whole? Let it not seeme incredible, that shall enact & accō∣plish more, thē is signified. The maner of her wrath, or dis∣daine, (yet I beleeue, she was neuer froward with any, nor euer angry but with One; whō onely she scorneth, & before whō she neuer contemned any,) is somwhat like the coun∣ter-tenour of an offended Syren; or not much vnlike the progresse of the resplēdent Sunne in the Scorpion. Her fa∣uour is liker triacle for the hart, thē ypocrase for the mouth: her disfauour like the Moone withdrawing the cheerely beames of her bounteous light in a cloud: her hatred (if she can hate, for I verily thinke she neuer hated, but One) like the flashing weapon of the fiery Aier. She is not light∣ly moued: but what she resembleth, or representeth, when she is moued, could I as visibly declare, as she cā vigorous∣ly vtter, I would deeme miself a peece of an Oratour. And I were more then Tullyes perfect Oratour, if I could dis∣play her excellent perfections, whose minde is as full of ritch giftes, and precious Iewells, as Newyeares-day. Yet her goodliest ornament, and greatest wonder, is the sweet humilitie of that braue courage. But in remembring her, I forget miself: & what a tedious Letter is here for him that

maintaineth a chargeable family by following his busines: Had I not found you desirous of some particularities tou∣ching Nashes S. Fame, & the Gentlewomans Reply, when you deliuered vnto me Pierces Supererogation in Print: I had dis∣patched ere now. But now you must lend me patience, vn∣till I haue disbalased my minde. Cōcerning her endighting, whereof I haue already giuē you a tast, or smacke in Pierces Supererogatiō: as in the harmony of her mind, so in the me∣lody of her Verse, I seldome or neuer descry any note out∣off tune: and it is not the first time I haue termed her Prose, the tinsell of finest Art, and sweetest nature. What notes I finde aboue Ela in the One: & what counterpoints of ex∣quisite workemanship I admire in the other: it shall else∣where appeare, in a Dialogue, intituled Pandora, or the Mirrour of singularitie. Might I see the finest Art, and the sweetest nature in person, I would report me to the Censure of their owne souerain mouthes; the best Iudges in their owne peerlesse faculty. There falleth not a sentence from her quill, without sappe, and pith: and euery Periode of her stile carrieth marmalad and sucket in the mouth: and euery argument of her inuention, sauoreth of most sauory reason. No chaine so linked, as her Conclusions: nor any Cristall so cōspicuous, as her Method. Her whole discourse, is the creame of the milke; the combe of the hony; the iuice of the grape: & the marrow of the bone. The bestowing of her perfections at occasion, a dainty choice, & fine, marshal∣ling of euery excellency, curiously sorted in their proper places: like the gorgeous wardrobe of Helena, or the precious Iewellhouse of Cleopatra, or the cunning stillhouse of Maedea, or the comely distributing of the neatest and gallantest furni∣ture in the ritchest Oeconomy. What needeth more? Her beginning, like the purest Oile in the crowne of the middest

of the rondelet: her proceeding, like the souerainest wine in the butt: her ending, like the sweetest hoony in the bot∣tome of the hoony-pot. Her intention was defensiue, not offensiue: and had any thing bene tolerable in that scurrilous and villanous declamation, assuredly she would a thousand times rather haue excused the matter, then accused the maker. Humanity, is euer willinger to loue, then to hate, & so is she: Curtesie, much forwarder to com∣mend, then to disprayse; and so is she: Clemencie, infinitly proner to absolue, then to condemne, and so is she. For she is a personall Humanity, a meere Curtesie, and a Clemen∣cie incorporate. But when she sawe the fowle mouth so shamefully runne-ouer, without all respect of manners, or regard of honestie, or pretence of Truth, or colour of Reason: Gentlemen, quoth She, though I lacke that you haue, the Art of Confuting; yet I haue some suddes of my mother witt, to sowse such a Dish clowte in: and if sowsing will not serue the turne, I may hap finde a payre of Pinsons, as sharply cōceited, as S. Dunstōs tonges, that led the Diuell by the nose Autem, vp and downe the house, till the roaring beast bellowed∣out like a bull-beggar. And as for his terrible crackes of Gunpowder termes, neuer lend credit to the word of A Gentlewoman, if I make not old mother-Gunpowder of the newest of those ratling babyes. And if steeping in Aqua fortis, will infuse courage into his goose-quill; why man, I will dowse thee ouer head, and eares in such a dowty Col∣lyrium, as will inspire the Picture of Snuffe, and Fury, into the Image of S. Patience. I haue not bene squattering at my papers for nothing: and albeit I cannot paint with my pen, like fine Sappho, yet I can dawbe with my incke, like none of the Muses: and am prettily prouided to interteine S. Fame with a homely gallimaufry of little Art, to requite

her dainty slaumpaump of little wit. A poore kitchin may be as good an Artist for the stomacke, as a poore dairy: (a∣las, that euer S. Fame should be so whitled): and it shall go hard in my Cookery, but the sillibub of his stale Inuention shalbe wellcommed with a supping of a new fashion, & some straunge sirrupe in cōmendam of his meritorious workes. Though a railer hath more learning, thē a shrew: yet Expe∣riēce hath a fillip for a Scholler: Discretion a tuck for a foole: Honesty a bobb for a K: & my morter, a pestle for Assa fetida. Let him be the Falanta downe-didle of Rymes; the Hayho∣halliday of Prose; the Walladay of new writers; the kutthroate of his aduersaries; the gallowes of his companions; the one∣ly broker of Pamflets; or what he can for his sweltring hart: my battring instrument is resolute, and hath vowed to bray the braying creature to powder. We must haue at least three Peccautes of Pierce Penniles; and three Misereres of the Confuting Tospot: or Lord haue mercy vpon thee, three thousand times-wofull wight. I am loth to struggle for the Moone-shine in the pudled water: but if we must needes buckle for nifles, & grapple for naughtes; though I cannot tell, whither I can bounse him, like a barne doore, or thumpe him, like a drumme of Flushing: yet I may chaūce rattle him, like a baby of parchment, or kneade him like a cake of dowe, or chearne him like a dish of butter, or girke him like a hobling gig, or tatter him like a thing forspo∣kē, or someway haue my Penny-worthes of his Penniles witt. Nay, if the Princock must be playing vpon them, that can play vpō his warped sconce, as vpon a tabor, or a fiddle: let himselfe thāke himselfe, if he be kindly thummed. Sirrha, I will stāpe an vnknowne grape, that shall put the mighty Bur∣deaux grape to bed: & may peraduēture broach a new Tun of such nippitaty, as with the very steame of the nappy liquour

will lullaby thy fiue wittes, like the sences of the drunke∣nest sot, when his braynes are sweetliest perfumed. I fit thee with a Similitude for thy capacity: or belch a new Confutation against the long tongues of the Stilliarde, and some twenty Tauernes in London. I could be content, a drun∣ken Prose, and a mad Ryme, were thy deadlyest sinnes. But they are sweet youthes, that tipple their wittes with quaf∣fing of knauery, and carowsing of Atheisme. If there be no o∣ther iollityes at home, or braueries abroad; it is happy for them, that were borne with those prizes in their throats.
And wellfare a srolicke Courage, that will needes be the Tower of Babylonian Conceit, and with a mightie Bullwarke of Supererogation gloriously confounde itselfe.
The rest of her speaches, and writings; are to be recor∣ded, or suppressed, as it pleaseth the Horne of these pelting sturres: who may haply finde the Trompet of Peace, as suer a Souldiour in case of necessary defence, as the Drumme of Warre, or the Swash of Feude. Some that haue perused eloquent bookes and researched most curious writinges, haue not seene goodliest variety of vernished phrases, and burnished sentēces, then in her stile: which was not so gor∣geously decked, and so fairely limned for nought. How∣beit as in some publique causes, better a mischief, then an inconuenience: so in many priuate cases better an inconue∣nience, then a mischief. Though an Orient Gemme be pre∣cious, and worthy to be gazed-vpon with the eye of Ad∣miration, yet better an Orient Gemme sleepe, then a Pe∣nitent mā perish: and better a delicate peece of Art should be layd-aside, or vnwouen like Penelopes web, then an immortal peece of Nature be cast-away. She loueth not to confute, that confuteth itselfe: & I hate to confound, that confoundeth himselfe. She in the Court of Ciuility hath

learned, to embrace amēdement with the armes of Curtesie: and I in the schoole of Diuinity am taught, to kisse repen∣taunce with the lippes of Charitie. I affect not any colou∣rable insinuation, in glosing or smoothing termes of for∣mall accord: but misery accompany my actions, and the mercy of heauen be my vnmercifull enemy, if I desire not with a longing hart, to wreake my teene vpon wilde vndis∣cretiō by requiting good for bad, & conuerting the worme∣wood of iust offence into the angelica of pure attonement. The onely reason of my demurrer, is my assurance: which consisteth rather in diffidence, then in credulitie, and cannot warrantise itselfe what will be done, vntill it is done. He were very simple, that hauing so heauy causes of diffidēce, and so light causes of credulity, would runne hastily into the trapp, or suffer himselfe to be presently intangled in the snare. Parly is a suttle Sophister: Flattery a tickling sollici∣tour: and Persuasion an inchaunting witch. I cannot but listen vnto them with an itching eare, and conceiue as it were a tang of pleasure in mine owne displeasure: but without Legempone, wordes are winde, and without actu∣all performance, all nothing. Had I not more Premisses of distrust, then promises of trust; or were he not euer to be presumed a bad fellow, that hath once played the bad fel∣low with a witnesse, (nothing but contrary proofe can re∣uerse that iudgement): yet Lawyers loue reall cautions: and they that would be loth to be enticed by white, and defea∣ted by blacke, are curious of their security. Truce was euer a redoubtable freind: & Suspicion hath cause to looke vpon Recōciliation with a ielous eye. Reconciliatiō is a sweet word: but entire Reconciliation a rare thing, & a straūge restora∣tiue: whose sweetnesse lyeth not in the tip of the tongue, or in the neb of the pen, but in the bottome of the hart, & in

the bowells of the minde; the minde that daily emproueth itselfe, the onely deepe Polititian, & inscrutable hypocrite. Whose inwardest secrets notwithstanding, are not so pro∣found, or close, especially in the shallow brest of inconside∣rate youth, but they may in sort be sounded, & discouered by a cunning obseruation of Circumstāces. Some essentiall points I reserue to miselfe: bur M. Wolfe knoweth, & who knoweth not? great Penmen, and Pamflet-marchants play much vpon the aduantage of the time, and care not who be their enemy, so the Terme be their frend. Which of vs can tell, but there may lye the drift, & great Pollicy of the new motion? I haue earnestly, and instantly craued personall conference: but that should seeme to make little for his purpose; or might haue bene graunted with lesse suite. All must be done by the mediation of a third, and a fourth; and such an intercourse, as I may probably haue in some ielousie, though I conceiue well of the interposed persons. There hath already bene a large expence of time: & charges continually runne: & matters of more importance lye dead in the neast: & the burned finger hath reason to startle from the fire: and he that hath bene once abused, would not wil∣lingly be abused twice: and Security cannot be too precise, or scrupulous: and I would there were no Cunny catchers in London. Till a publique iniurie be publiquely confessed, and Print confuted in Print, I am one of S. Thomas disci∣ples: not ouer-prest to beleeue, but as cause causeth: and very ready to forgiue, as effect effecteth. They that know the daunger of Truces, and the couen of Treatyes, vt supra, must begge leaue to ground their repose vpon more cautels, then one; and to proceede in termes of suspence, or Pause, till they may be resolued with infallible assurance. For mine owne determination, I see no credible hope of

Peace, but in Warre: and could I not commaunde, that I desire; I am persuaded, I should hardly obteine, that I wish. I loue Osculum Pacis; but hate Osculum Iudae: and reuerence the Teares of Christ; but feare the Teares of the Crocodile. Shall I be alittle plaine? Methinkes the raunging Eyes vn∣der that lōg haire, (which some would call ruffianly haire) should scarsely yet be bathed in the heauenly Teares of Christ, or washed in the diuine Teares of Penitence. Irish haire, and weeping Irish are no white Crowes in these coun∣tryes: and although there be no Wolfes in England, yet there be Foxes in the hole. I would be loth to aggrauate the least, or greatest particular against a Penitentiall soule: but still to haunt infamous, or suspected houses, tauernes, lewd company, and riotous fashions, as before, (for to this day his behauiour is no turnecoate, though his stile be a chan∣geling) is a greater liberty in my small diuinity, then accor∣deth with that deuoute, and most holy-holy profession. Lord, how curious was the wiser sort euen of the heathen Philosophers, in the neat, & exquisite choice of their pure diet, vndefiled society, Virgin manners, Vnstained dis∣courses, and vnspotted actions? What so clarified, as their witt: so purified, as their minde: so sweetened, as their con∣ference: so vertuous, as their instruction: so powrefull, as their experiments: so exemplary, as their life: so vnblemi∣shed, as their fame? I know not, who weeped the Funerall Teares of Mary Magdalene: I would he that sheddeth the Patheticall Teares of Christ, & trickleth the liquid Teares of Repentance, were no worse affected in pure deuotion, then those Philosophers in morall Conuersation. Were I not content, in some little hope of his finall recouery ei∣ther in deede, or in shewe; to do him a meritotious sauour by concealing his vtter discredit: I could easily, and would

notoriously, make him ashamed of some his late Sayings, and Doinges: ô Lord, how Vnbeseeming the Teares of Christ: & Alas, how likely to forerunne a miserable desti∣ny? Let him reforme his publique, & redresse his priuate enormities, & with a sincere vowe I sweare him frendship: or let him rest quiet, & I am quiet. Otherwise I may possi∣bly be induced, to pay him home with an immortall re∣uēge, that hath plagued his own tōgue with desperate blas∣phemies in iest: ô Christ, of how horrible cōsequence, with∣out Teares in earnest? There is a great distance betwixt Hell, and Heauen: the Diuell, and God: Rakehells, and Sainctes: the Supplication to the Diuell, and the Teares of Christ: the Straunge Newes of Villany, and the miraculous Newes of Repentance: the Herald of Warre, and the Am∣bassadour of Peace: the publique Notary of Lyes, and the Register of Truth: the Diuels Oratour, and Christes Chaun∣cellour. Though Greene were a Iulian, and Marlow a Lu∣cian: yet I would be loth, He should be an Aretin: that Pa∣raphrased the inestimable bookes of Moses, and discoursed the Capricious Dialogues of rankest Bawdry: that pen∣ned one Apology of the diuinity of Christ, and another of Pederastice, a kinde of harlatry, not to be recited: that pu∣blished the Life of the blessed Virgin, and the Legende of the Errant Putana: that recorded the history of S. Tho∣mas of Aquin, and forged the most detestable Blacke∣booke, de tribus Impostoribus mundi. O monster of extre∣mityes; and ô abomination of outragious witt. It was his glory, to be a hellhounde incarnate, and to spoile Origen of his egregious praise: Vbi benè, nemo meliùs: vbi malè, nemo peiùs. Some surmounting spirites loue to arreare a huge o∣pinion of their excessiue validity pro, or contra. Hyperboli∣call Vertues (it is Aristotles Epithite) are heauenly miracles:

and hideous Excellency an heroicall wonder, like the La∣bours of Hercules, and the Bountyes of Errant Knightes: but superlatiue knauery is a ranke Villain; and Vgly Blasphemy, a foule Diuell, tormented with his own damnable mouth. It is not puffing, or blustring in bombasted termes, or Ba∣bilonian Phrases: but the fine and sweet course of Vertue, of industry, of Beaudesert, of Valour, of true brauery, that performeth worthy actions, and purchaseth the honour of the world. If Humanity will needes grow miraculous, it must flye with the wing of Diuinity, not flutter with the plume of Atheisme, or hoise the sayle of Presumption. Who∣soeuer despiseth the Maiestie of heauē, or playeth the Demo∣critus in Goddes cause; be his witt neuer so capon-crammed in Vanity, or his hart neuer so toade-swolne in surquidry: is the abiectest vermin, and Vilest padd, that creepeth on the Earth. If there be no such matter in the world, all the bet∣ter: if there be, wo be to the Autours of their own Confusion: and blessed they, that take-forth a good lesson from other mens miscarriage. Happy, and ten thousand times hap∣py that inspired Heraclitus, that powreth-out the most-ten∣der affectionate Teares of Christ, with the flowing eyes of Zeale, and the melting eloquence of his bowells. Other Oratory would be feeid, as it perswadeth; or thanked, as it edifieth; or honored, as it rauisheth harts with a powrfull impression; or admired, as it stealeth soules with a diuine sacriledge. He is the perfect Oratour, that figureth and re∣presenteth euery thing in Art, as it is in Nature: that dis∣patcheth light points roundly; handeleth weightier mat∣ters more substantially; in the grauest subiect proceedeth with due reuerence; and of faith discourseth faithfully, of heauen heauēly, of diuinity diuinely, of Christ like Christ. Dalliance in the sagest, and highest causes, is an absurdity,

and like a ridiculous Vice in a Tragedy, or a poisonous Serpent in Paradise. Non est bonum, ludere cum Sanctis: cum Christo ludere, execrabile. Aretin was a reprobate ruf∣fian: but euen Castilio, and Macchiauel, that were not great∣ly religious in conscience, yet were religious in pollicy: & there is no kingdome, or Commonwealth vpon Earth, so prophane, or barbarous, but either in conscience is, or in Pollicy seemeth religious, or cannot possibly maintaine any durable state. I would euery Autour, that hath done no better, had done no worse: and it were to be wished, that some desperate wittes were not so forward, to dis∣bowell the intrails of their owne impious mindes. Plinyes, and Lucians religion may ruffle, and scoffe awhile: but ex∣treme Vanitie is the best beginning of that brauery, and ex∣treme Miserie the best end of that felicity. Greene, and Marlow might admonish other to aduise themselues: and I pray God, the promised Teares of Repentance, proue not the Teares of the Onion vpon the Theater. If I knew no more, then I vtter; I would hope no lesse, then I wish: but hearing what I heare, & conceiuing what I conceiue, I would be vnfainedly glad, he should exceede my expe∣ctation: and when he hath resolued my incredulity with a little actuall performance, I will not faile to render him right, with extensiue fauour. For my particular, let his professed Paenitet appeare, by any reasonable, or tolerable satisfaction, without fraude, or collusion: and I am no way rigorous in reuenge, or obstinate in displeasure. Meane∣while it is haply not amisse, to consider by the way, that Truth begetteth hatred; Vertue Enuy; Familiaritie cotempt; Fauour pride; Pardon recklesnesse; and Credulitie damage, or daunger. A straūge case, that so good Moothers should bring-forth so bad daughters: but Improbitie, or Iniquitie,

(or what should I terme that naughty humour?) is the fift Element of the world: and Consultation were better to sit safe∣ly betweene Yea, and No, then to fall suddainly with a ha∣sty No, or to stand weakely with a simple Yea. My Affection is ready to subscribe to any indifferent articles of accorde: (for bona fide I affect agreement) but my Reason hath reason to pawse awhile; and a scruple, or two of some depēdence, may seeme to say No. But euen those two Negatiues, (vp∣on a firme, & Vndefeasible security, sine dolo malo,) would be conformable enough, to conclude an Affirmatiue; and will not sticke at any Transaction, or Composition, that is not Vnreasonable. To make short, (for no Iett, or Load∣stone so attractiue, as Lines, that draw vnto them so many selfe-offering sentences: and I haue already vnmeasurably exceeded my stint) he that longeth to enioy the fruite of priuate amitie, and publique fauour, hasteth not to embrace the blossome, or to dote vpon the shaddow. His onely fi∣nall request, and affectionate prayer is, that howsoeuer poore men be vsed, the deare Teares of Christ, and the cheape Teares of Repētāce, be not abused. All is well, that en∣deth effectually well: & so in some hast he endeth, that wi∣sheth you entirely well: and for your instruction can as∣sure you, he needeth not send to Athens for hony, or to Spaine for sugar, or to Italy for Anniseedes, or to the O∣rient for saunders, or pearles; that may finde as fine, and dainty choice, neerer hand. I can say nothing for miselfe, whose date is expired: but I dare ascertaine you, three drops of the Oyle of roses, or three drops of the Mercury of Buglosse, will enstrengthen the braine, or comfort the hart more, then six, and six ounces of their common sir∣rups. A greater difference betwixt artificiall, and rude stiles; refined, and drossy wittes; skilfull, and ignorant

iudgements; auailable, and vnprofitable workes; I com∣mende to the consideration of the Presse, with a right h∣ty Farewell. This 16. of September. 1593. Your assur wherein he may pleasure you, Gabriell Haruey.
