



MADAM, Your right is greatest to this Sermon, as being heire to the man, though not to his lands: what he was, I neede not tell your Ladiship; nor will I say of you as once one said of a Ro∣mane Ladie: I know not, Hic haeres vxo∣ris at haeredita∣tis alij possesso∣res. Hiero. of Pammach. and Paulina. Valer. of Cornelia; Neseis an faeli∣ciorem dixerim, quòd talem vir habuerit, an miseriorem quòd amiserit. l.4. Nec doleas quòd talem amiseris, sed gaudeas quòd talem ha∣bueris. Ier. to Heliodor. for his nephew. whether your vnhappinesse be greater in now loosing him, then was your hap∣pinesse in once enioying him. A Christian may be happy in losses and crosses, as well as otherwhere; and wee in Christs schoole must learne with Iob, to blesse God for friends past, as well as present; and ra∣ther praise him for once lending them, then ouer∣grieue for his calling for them againe. The time will be better spent, if (leauing these impertinencies) I call vpon your Ladiship, and my selfe, for some im∣prouement of this crosse: and first (Madame) let vs obserue the crookednes of our nature, which neither feares crosses till it feeles them, nor sees mercies till they are out of sight; it being with the soule as with the eye, that sees nothing that is not somwhat distant
frō it. Next, be pleased (I pray) to consider the vanity of this world, what is now lest of your Honourable husband more then his goodnes? Where is health, where is beauty, where is honour now? In how short a space were two of the chiefest flowers in the Copes garden withered? Ah (Madame) it is grace, it is grace and wisedome that will cause our face to shine, and name to liue: as for the glory of this world, it is like a rotten post, that shines indeed, but it is onely in the darke; neuer build vpon it, for all its glistering, it is but a rotten post. Thirdly, re∣member we (I beseech you) our owne estate: indeed it were much if we should forget death, Salus corporis, patrimonium pauperis. Aug. in Psal. 76. who are a∣boue halfe dead. For mine owne part, the Lord hath already stript me of the poore mans portion, health: for your Ladiships, a great part of your selfe is now turned into dust, seeing parēts, childrē, husbands are gone before you, and death hath come very neare you, when thrice it hath cut off your head; the time will shortly come when you also must yeeld to the stroke of death. In the meane, I beseech you remember S. Iohns words, in an Epistle to another Ladie, Looke to your selfe, that wee lose not those things which wee haue wrought, but that wee re∣ceiue a full reward: indeed your losse will bee ours too (for wee expect a tithe in heauen of our heauen∣ly encrease, as well as heere): and therefore (good Madame) husband your soule well, sowe much, worke much, giue much, pray much, and you and wee shall speed the better at that haruest. Thus praying your fauourable construction and accep∣tance of these rude lines, with humble thanks for all
your loue to mee, (especially to those many poore members of Christ, to whom it pleaseth you (thorough my hands) to conuey yeerely so great re∣liefe) I commend you to the Lords grace; who abun∣dantly returne all that comfort vpon you, which you haue so frankly yeelded to so many naked backes, and hungry bellies in this Church. From Hanwell, Iuly 11. the same day whereon (foure yeeres before) your worthy husband was there interred.
Your Ladiships in all Christian services, RODERY HARRICE.
