



RIght Reuerend. When I first prea∣ched these Sermons, I little thought to haue put them forth to publike view, yet such hath bene the importunitie of some of my best hearers, in mouing me to penne them, or some others of my Ser∣mons; As I might haue bene thought vn∣kind and vncurteous, if I had altogether denied that their godly and earnest re∣quest. And the rather was I perswaded by them, because it was hoped that the publishing of these, might yeeld some bene∣fite, not onely to those persons who former∣ly heard them, but likewise to those, who hereafter should reade them.
It is well knowne that the papists make small account of hearing Gods word prea∣ched they hope to be saued, rather by sight then by hearing.
Though hearing be a dutieDeut 6.3.4.& 31 12.13. Math. 17.5. com∣manded by God; exacted byIsai 28 23. & 66.2.5. Ier. 6.18.& 9.2& 10.1. the pro∣phets:
Enioyned byMath. 11 15.& 13 9.43 Math. 15.10 Luk. 14 35 Christ: Requi∣red by theAct. 13.16 & 15 13 Re∣u .7.11.17 Apostles, and practisedNehem. 8 3. Luk. 5 1 Luk. 15 1 & 21.38. Act. 10 33 & 13.7 44 Act 16.14 by all good people.
Though it be an apparent signe ofIh. 8.47 & 18.37 1. Ioh. 4.6 Gods Elect. An infallible marke ofIoh 10.27 Christs sneepe. A true note ofDeut 33.3 Gods Saints. An euident token of ourLuk 8 21 spiri∣tuall kinred with Christ. A plaine testi∣monie ofLuk. 11 28 our happines. A comfor∣table assurance of ourMath. 7 24 Luk. 10 42 perseuerance. Though it be an ordinarie and effectuall meaneIe 23 22 Act. 2.41 1. Cor. 14 24.25 of our conuersion, ofAct. 4.3. & 15.7 Rom 10.17 working faith, ofAct. 10.44 Gl. 3.2.5 receiuing the spi∣rit, of obtainingReuel. 3.20 fellowship with Christ, and of enioying1. Tim. 4.16 an. 1.21 saluation in heauen. And though the neglect and con∣tempt of it,2 Cho. 24.19.23. Nehem. 9.30. Ier. 26.4.5 hath bene, andDeut 18.19 Math. 10, 14, 15. Math, 12.42: shall be seuerely punished. Yet the papists little regard the word preached. & seldom will vi lse to heare it. As they doe wilfully refuse to hear vs; so doe they iudge it, to be neither greatly necessarie, nor much profitable to heare their owne teachers. Moses was read and preached
Act: 15.21. euery Sabboth in the Iewes Syna∣gogues. It was the custome ofLuk: 42: 16. Christ and hisAct: 17.42: 44:& 17: 2: & 4 Apostles, to preach to the people in the Synagogues euery Sathboth day. TheIustin: Matye apo∣log: 2: Teitull: apolog: : 39: Onge: in Ex∣od: homil: 7. ancientest of the fathers testifie, that in their times, the people heard a sermon, each Lords day. And di∣ners councills haue madeColon: cap: 9: Laoic: cap: 16, Trul∣lan: ca: 19: Ma∣gt: cap: 25. decrees for the continuance of that custome in suc∣ceeding ages. Yet the RomihBernar∣dinde Senis d obuat: sabb: serm: 10: cap: 3. Tollt. in∣struct: acer∣doh: ca: 6, Va: catech: ap 3. pre∣lates haue made it a precept of their Church, that euery one shall see a masse on each Sabboth, but will not make it a pre∣cept, to heare a sermon each Sabboth. As if the often sight of a masse were more ne∣cessarie and more profitable, then the hea∣ring of a sermon: And as if the Sabboth were better sanctified and the peoples soules more edified, by the masse, then by the preaching of the word. As the priests are accustomed often to say masse, but sel∣dome to preach: so the people for one ser∣mon which they heare, do see fortie or fifty masses. ImitatingThom: W. sigh. 1st Ag: in Exwar: 1. p: 43 & id. dag: Neustr: 1: 172. De Hentico, 3. that king, who saw three masses each day, but seldome heard any sermon. And being admonished by Lewis king of Frāce, that he must not be∣stow all his time on masses, but sould ofther
heare sermons, answered, that he had ra∣ther often see his Friend, then heare one speaking of him, though hee spake neuer so good thinges. As if they might with their eyes see Christ corporally present in masses; and could onely heare some talke of him at sermons. Wherein as they doe most blasphemously preferre their owne inuented idoll, before Gods most holy ordinance: So doe they be∣wray their ignorance, touching the neces∣sitie and efficacie of the word preached. If they would duely consider the scope and doctrine of this parable, they might easily perceiue, that the hearing of the word, is as necessarily required for the direction of their liues, and the saluation of their soules: As the sowing of the ground with good seed, is necessarily required of them that would reape a plentifull crop at har∣uest. And that it is not the sight of their abhominables doll, but the reuerend hea∣ring of Gods sacred word, that must make them fruitfull in all good workes.
Againe, wee cannot but acknowledge, that the Lord hath sent many skilfull and painefull Husbandmen, to some his fields with vs: who according to their office and
dutie, sow it in due season, after a good maner, and with the best seede. And yet it yeeldeth litle fruite. People heare much, learne litle, and practise lesse. Which can∣not be imputed to the want of good prea∣ching, but at her to the want of good hea∣ring: the fault is rather in the ground, then in the sower, or in the seede. The seede is good, and great store is sowne, but the ground is barren. The doctrine is sound, and the maner of teaching profita∣ble, but the people heare amisse, and so for want of good hearing, loose the fruite of many good sermons; because the profit of hearing, dependeth on the maner of hea∣ring. A medicine fitly prescribed and rightly compounded, looseth his vertue in curing the patients disease, if it be not duly administred, and orderly receiued. We to our great griese loose our labour in prea∣ching, and the people to their great perill, loose their labour in hearing, because they heare amisse. As therefore I was at first enduced to preach those sermons. so was I afterward perswaded to penne them, that by them the simpler sorte (for whose sake onely I do now publish them I might haue some plain direction how to heare for their profit.

 There be some among vs,Math. 16, 2. Iob: 12, 4. who seems to be of Iuas his minde, and say quor∣sum perdito haec? The pentions giuen by his maiestie, for the maintenance of preachers in these popish partes, might well be spaced, or else conuerted to other more necessarie vses, what good doe they in the countrey? Whom his Maiestie may answere, (And no doubt, if he heard their murmuring speeches, would answere them roundly as the Maister of the Vineyard answered the murmuring labourers: Is it not lawfull for me,Math: 20, 15. to doe with mine owne as I will? Is thine eye euill, because I am good? They may here behold, and if they please, take a tast of the meate wherewith his Maiesties subtls are daily fed. Though their diet be horly, yet I hope it is holesome, though the manner of teaching be plaine, yet is it profitable, especially for such peo∣ple as I am appointed to instruct: My indiall hearers can testifie, that these sermons were sutable to my ordinary tea∣ching, and that in penning them, I haue altered very little, either for matter, me∣thode or stile. I thinke few will complaine of the vnprofitablenes of our labours, but
those who doe reioyce thereat, and would haue vs remoued, lest our labours should become more fruitfull hereafter: who would rather haue the countrey still re∣maine addicted to popery and impiety, then brought to the obedience of the Gos∣pell. How fruitfull our labours haue bene, your Lordship can better iudge then any of them. Yet must we needes confesse that the fruitfulnes thereof, hath bene, and still is greatly hindered by two sortes of persons, namely by popish priests, and profane Py∣pers. The priests like Samballat and To∣biah,nehem. 4, 7, 8 hinder vs in edifying the Lords Temple, and labour to pull downe, as fast as we build vp: like the old seducers, they creepe into houses, and lead captiue,2, Tim: 3, 6 simple women laden with sins, and led with diuers lusts.2, Tim: 38 They withstand vs, as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses. Yea they subuert whole hou∣ses,Tim: 1, 11 teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre. They are sent by the Pope to recouer, if it were possi∣ble, the reuenews, rents, & tributes which once he had out of this kingdome, who ha∣uing no other meanes wherby to liue, haue raised a gainefull trade of seducing, and
through couetousnes,2. Pet: 1, 3. doe make mar∣chandise of the peoples soules.1. Sam. 28.7. Though it pleased his Maiestie to banish them: yet as a Witch was found in Endor, after that Saul had banished all out of Israel; So now vpon diligent search many priests might be found in these parts.
Though they lurke in secret corners, and dare not shew their faces, yet may we trae them by their footesteps, and take notice of their presence by their practises, euen as we may discerne where a snaile hath crept on the wall, by the slime which it leaueth behind it. Who maryeth our recusants, who baptizeth their children, but they? Not one recusant is maryed, not one of their children is baptized by our ministers. Shall we thinke that they who hold Matrimonie to be a sacrament, would liue together as man and wife, and neuer be maried? Can we imagine that they who hold baptisme to be absolutely necessarie to salvation, will suffer all their children to remaine vnbaptized? There∣in they verifie the Poets saying: In veti∣tum nefas gens humana ruit. Before we had any statute lawe against mari∣ages and baptizings by popish priests, it
was a rare thing to heare of any one who offended that way: But since that law was made, it hath bene a rare thing in this countrey, to heare of a Recusants ma∣riage solemnized, or a Recusants childe baptized by any of our ministers. So as if our law-makers had foreseene the issue, it may be they would haue forborne the ma∣king of that law, least as Solon thought of a law to be made against Parricides, they should put men in mind of such an offence. What is the reason of this their wilfulnes? Not onely impunitie, our lawes made a∣gainst them, being like an vntimely birth, dead assoone as borne, and wanting exe∣cution which is the life of them: but espe∣cially because the priests doe euermore excite them to disobedience, and will ca∣nonize them for holy confessours; for that their contemptuous breach of our lawes.
And whence commeth it, that scarce one of an hundreth, of all our Recusants and non-communicants, would come to take the oath of allegiance, when they were therevnto lawfully called? but be∣cause the priests disswade them from it, by authoritie of the Popes bulles, and by war∣rant of the Cardinalls bookes.

 Augustine acknowledged that through feare of the imperiall lawes put in execu∣tion,Epist. 48. ad viacent. not onely some few persons, but like∣wise many whole cities, who formerly had bene Donatists, became right Catholikes: So if our lawes might be duely executed, of not against all papists, yet against the priests, I doubt not but within a while, we should drawe most of the people to due con∣formiti.Leges princi∣pum recte im∣plorai aduer∣lus bostes fidei modoid fiat animo corri∣gendi, non stu∣dio vindican∣di. August: epist: 48 All their bookes haue bene an∣swered, all their dispersed pamphlets con∣futed, and many disputations haue bene graunted them; Seeing then that after so many conuictions they remaine obstinate, I hope all will acknowledge with the same Father, that wee may lawfully craue the execution of the lawe against the enemies of the faith,Vides epist: 50.60.61, 127 167. if it be done with a minde to correct, and not with a desire to reuenge.
Moreouer I cannot but lament, and with griefe of heart complaine, that still in this part of the countrey, the course of re∣ligion is exceedingly hindered, the fruites of our labours greatly frustrated, the Lords Sabboth impiosly profained, by publike pyping by open and lasciuious dan∣cing on that day. That it is not consecra∣ted
as holy to the Lord, but rather kept as a feast of Bacchus and Venus. That py∣ping should put downe preaching: that dancing should draw the popl from their dutie: That for one person which we haue in the Church, to heare diuine scruice, ser∣mons and catechisme, euery pyper (there being many in one part?) should at the same instant, haue many hundreds on the greenes.
Our learned and lateP. Martyr. comment. in Iudic: 21, 19 21, fol. 177 Sunler. com∣ment: n Exode 20, 8 diuines doe teach, that the irgines of Israel gining themselues to dancing on their feast day, did thereby abuse it. And that it was no maruaile, if at the same time, they were all rasned for the punishment of that their sinne. Gregory NazianzenOrat: in Cansta natuit paulo pst mi∣m. exhor∣tehs people to celebrate their feastes di∣uinely, an not by dancing. AndContra Iha orat. 2. prope finem. ac∣counteth the vsecsit, ashh like things, anhethh maner of celebrating feastes. Isidor ausApud Da∣ae loc: com: ttesius dies. thought that gm∣sters, players, and dancers, sirned more not for, and should be purashed more gruotsr, then he who gathered suckes, and then the Iewes who gathered manna or that day. At gusine toughtIn pial: 32 01 c 1, In Ioh:tac: 3 De decem choid: cap:  that it was better for men toig and delue, and
for women to card and spin, then to dance wantonly on the Sabboth, which be ment not of the Iewish Sabboth oncly, but also of the Christian Sabboth, because in the same places he exhorted christiās to keepe their sabboth spiritually, and not carnally as the Iewes did by idlenes and dancing. The councell of Toledo,Toletan. cci. 3.1. Canon. 22. forbad that custome of the common people on thir ho∣ly daies: And charged Priests and Iud∣ges to supprsse that bad custome in all their prouinces. Leo 4. with 67. Bishops in a Synode at Rome, decreedCan. 35. Vides Flac. Illyas. catleg test. vetit. in Lo 4 that priests should admonish men and women, not to gather companies together on their holy daies, after the maner of Pagans to dance and sing filthie songs. And that those who were admonished, and would not cease, should be suspended from the Communion.
Yet the greatest part of our people, spend more then the one alfe of the Sab∣both, in as want on and lasciuious dancing as euer was vsed by any.
The ancient Christians would not cele∣brate the solemne dares of the Emperour, with bone-fires, publike dancings, and drinkings. And were defendedVerae re∣ligionis homi∣nes eriam so∣leonis coum, conscientia po∣tius, quàm las∣ris celebrát. &c. Siccine exprimiur publicum gau∣dum pet pub∣licum de de∣us: haeccine solennes dies principum de∣cept quae alios dies non de∣cent Apolo∣get. cap. 35. by
Tertullian for that their refusall: be∣cause they would celebrate those daies rather by conscience, then by wan∣tonnes: because that were to ex∣presse a publike ioy by a publike shame. And those things which were not seemely on other daies, were not seemely on the Emperours solemne daies. ChrysostomeSozom: nist 1.8, c. 20. would not suffer the people to set vp the image of the Empresse, with pubke dancings and stage-playes. Neither wouldIn Genes. 24, homil: 47 in fine, & ho∣mil. 55. inio. he tol∣lerate any pyping and dancings at wed∣dings. The councell of LaodciaCan. 53, 54. for∣bad dancing at weddings, and enioyned Cleargi men to depart from meetings where it was vsed. Yet our people iudge i an honest and lawfull keeping of the Lords Sabboth, to pype and dance all the after∣noone.
And who are greater mntnrs of this impetie, then our recs and new communicants. Their purss are euer open for the hyring of the pyper, their children and seruants, alwaies ready to lance after him, and themselues seldom sayle to be spectatrs. By this meanes they keepe the people from the Church, and so continue
them in their popery and ignorance.
Though we often preach against this abuse, though we let them knowe that the best learned in the Rosh Church,Ludou. vues de rsti∣tut. faem. lib. 1. c. 11. Catech. Rom part 3. cap. 7. p. 351. Ludolph de vita christi. part. 1. c. 66. A. Tho Aquin. Hgo cardi. Feus. in Math 14. Iansen. con∣cord. euangel. cap: 59. haue condemned it as a tricke of wanton∣nes, as a prouocation to lust, as a breach of the seuenth commandement, and an exer∣cisePolydor vitgil: de o∣ucut:lib 5. c: 2, & , 8, Vaux. catech. cap: 3 vnfit for the Sabboth, yet stur∣do canimus, They will not forbeare it, because they are not restramed by autho∣ritie. Augustine witnesseth,Notum ist omnbus, nugaces & tur∣pes salttiones ab episcopis solere compes∣ci. Contriepist. Parmen:lib: 3 cap: 6. that the Bishops of his time were accustomed to suppresse such vaine and filthie dan∣cings. As your Lor: doth treade in their steps, by painefull preaching: so if you would imitate them, by reforming this great disorder, you might greatly further the fruit of our ministery.
The papists of our time and countrey, doe esteeme so little of the authorite of the Canonicall scriptures, and ascribe so much to humane writings, that though we proue our doctrine by most pregnant places of for, e, yet they will not beleee is, vn∣les tey be assured that the old Fathers, and their owne late writers haue taught the same. Therein dissenting from the ancient Fathers, who would try and
Hiero. nim. epist. Tranquilin Augustin. e∣pist: 19, & cō: Crescon. lib. 2 cp: 31, 32 Dionyl. Alex∣andr. pud. En∣seb. hist. lib. 7 cap. 23. indge of mens words and writings by the Canomicall scriptures: but would no. iudge of the doctrine of the scriptures by humane writings.
I haue therefore added vnto the ser∣mons, a Post-script to papists, to let them vnderstand, that what we preach in the pulpit against them; is not onely warran∣ted by the dauine scriptures, but is also witnessed by the fathers, and some of their owne Church.Quis te non vide at in me aptum iacta∣re conuitium, de illis occul∣tum quidem; sed tamen si∣mile habere iudicium. contr. And therefore if they con∣demne vs as heretikes for teaching such doctrine, we may say to them, as Au∣gustine said to Iulian the Pelagian, condemning him for teaching the same doctrine, touching originall sinne, which other Fathers taught. Who seeth not, that openly you condeme vs, and secretly you condemne them,Iulian. lib. 1. cap. 2. yet haue you the same iudgement both of them and vs.
These sermons, together with the Post∣script, I now offer vnto your Lordship: not as if the matter of them were worthy your reading: but rather that they be∣ing approued by your iudgement, and pro∣tected by your authore, may better e∣scape the spitefull censures of enuious and
superstitious persons. As also that I might thereby testifi my thankefulnes to your Lordship, who not onely from time to time he much countenanced, and greatly furthered my poore munisterie in these barkeward partes: but also of late, consi∣dering my long labours, and small me ones of maintenance, did procure the continu∣ance of that Pension, which was graunted vnto in by the royall gift of two famous Princes: when as some vpon stinister pre∣tences, and by indirect meanes went about to abridge me of a great part thereof.
Thus presuming of a pardon for this my boldnes, I humbly commit your Lord∣ship to the mercefull protection of Almigh∣tie God who long continue your health arll apie estate, and make you ablessed isrement of much good vnto his church.

