


Deare Soules.
THough I knowe assuredly that the plodding thoughts of both sortes of you, to whom I now write, vseth for the most part to be rapt vp; the one, with the imagination of Wraths all-ouerturning deluge which you feare, presently to precipitate you, (as I thinke) in the eter∣nall neuer dying furnace of all-deuouring flames: the other, with seeming substantiall thoughts (grounded vpon former and present stony impenitent effects) i∣magining your selues to be as sure of reprobation, as thogh already (assured by some Angel of the Decree) Caines marke had sealed you on the forehead, as sheep to the slaughter: which now so transporteth your hopelesse soules beyond all limits of moderation, that you can lende your eares to heare no voyce, which soundeth not of Desperation, because eyther you

thinke it is too late, or in vaine, to vse the meanes: or that Wraths ouerpressing load so keepeth you down in the flouds of sorrowes, that you are not able to looke vp.
Yet could I not chuse but send vnto your view this little Treatise, which by (Gods prouidēce cōming into my hands) onely for your sakes, did now see the light: wishing, that though (of all others) I was least able to comfort you; yet, that therin you might finde a word in due time: which I know you shall, if you bannish Carnall reason, Sense, Curiositie in prying into Gods Decree before you vse the meanes; and that fast roo∣ted naturall Popery of the soule, which euer desireth to finde somewhat in nature, some sense, some feeling, some goodnes, wherewith to be worthy in some sort, to lay holde of Christ.
I should exceede the limites of a short Epistle (if I were able) to reckon vp the free proclamations of the booke of God; in all which, Christ in the Act of ap∣prehending him, tyeth you vnto no condition, but freely to take and lay hold. It may be, you will ob∣iect, that he calleth onely the weary and laden, and so you say you are not: but to leaue that question, whe∣ther you bee laden or not, and who must be iudge, (since for the most part in temptation you belie your selues) who knoweth not that Christ in that place ra∣ther incourageth such to come, then precisely shew∣eth, that onely those who feele such a burden, must,

and can come and lay holde. O that you were not thus iniurious to the peace of your soules, so much to relye vpon Sense and feeling, so much debasing the strength and glorie of Faith, which many times without sense (and beyond all reason) apprehendeth CHRIST: thus offering violence vnto his King∣dome: who thus apprehended, there followeth the spirit of Mourning, and Compassion, Feeling, and o∣ther graces.
I wonder if the Diuell can once fasten this temp∣tation vpon you, that you must haue such and such a measure of faith, feeling, and repentance, to lay holde of Christ, what measure his vnmeasurable subtilty wil be contented with. Sure I am, if he may be vmpire, you may be dissolued in teares and despaire, before he say hoe. Your strongest let in laying hold of Christ (as may be seene by most of all your Obiections) ari∣seth from your prying into the Decree of God, to be assured of your election: which because you cannot finde, (iudging of your selues, according to your for∣mer actions, & thinking God like vnto you) you con∣clude all is in vaine, you knowe you are Reprobates: there is no hope: so entertaining all threatnings; and reiecting the Promises. Of which pretended know∣ledge, if you should be examined by God (as Adam was) whence thus you knowe your selues to be naked Reprobates? I imagine your answere (with his) must needes bee, that Sathan hath deceyued and deluded

you so to thinke.
And indeed the truth is, that the most part of you looke too much at the Decree of God; your measure of sense and feeling, desiring the assurance of saluati∣on, as it were, at your first entrie into Christianity: which is the glorious price and Crowne, wayting for you at the end of the race: If you so runne that you may obtaine.
I knowe you would thinke him an vnreasonable Souldier, who should desire to bee a Colonnell or a Generall the first yeare, which is not obtained with∣out long seruice, great valour, much watching, way∣ting, and often hazard of life: And that your seruant would much displease you, in demanding his yeeres wages before he had done a weekes worke. Iust so is your case, when at first you would bee assured of your Election and Saluation, before you haue done a quarter or half your work; (Nay somtimes scarse be∣gun the same) chiefly whē you refuse the way of life, which is, to walke in the meanes, whereby onely wee attaine the assurance of saluation.
It may bee you thinke mee a miserable comforter, thus rather to crosse you, then powre balme into your wounds, or bewaile your hardnesse of Heart: but would to God you were not more iniurious then I, in robbing your selues of the strong Tower of your saluation: I meane, of the way to lay holde on Christ for your life: For indeede so doe I pittie all of you,

that if my soule were able, and could dissolue it selfe in teares for you, your sorrowes would haue an ende: since I know, such and so great is the insupportable terrour of Gods wrath, chiefly, if hee (leading the maine battell of his forces) fight against you, as Iere∣mie speaketh) in anger, in wrath, and in great indig∣nation, that there is no creature but must sinke vnder the same: but it is the conclusions some of you draw from thence, which I ayme at, and would willingly cut downe by the roote: viz: I feele no faith, there∣fore I haue none: I neuer had faith, therefore I shall neuer haue any: My former actions haue bene hypo∣criticall, therefore I am damned: my Feeling is lost, therefore I shall neuer haue it againe: I neuer had feeling or sense of Gods loue, therefore I shall neuer haue any: God is angry, therefore hee will neuer be appeased: the Sunne shineth not, therefore it will neuer shine: It is night, therefore it will neuer bee day: the heart was neuer moued, therefore it shall, and neuer can bee mooued: I haue thus, and thus long heard the word, and it hath not renued nor mo∣ued mee no more then a stone, therefore it shall and cannot, for such a heart is immoueable: I am dead in sinne, therefore I can neuer be aliue: God is gone, therefore hee will neuer come againe: The meanes harden mee more and more, therefore I will neuer heare no more: I cannot bring my he in temper to ioyne with my voyce in prayer, the  it is vaine

to bring words vnto God, offering outward submis∣siue obedience: I cannot pay vnto one ten thousand pounds which I owe him, therfore I will pay him ne∣uer a penny: I cannot doe all I should, therefore I will doe nothing: God neuer loued mee, therefore hee will neuer loue mee: I cannot repent, nor euer could, therefore I neither can nor shall: God in the terror of wrath appeareth my enemy, therefore hee will neuer haue mercie, &c: with a number the like absurdities, the very naming whereof, may bee more then confutation sufficient to any reasonable creature not infected with the like follie.
But speake now (though I graunt vnto you all your grounds, many of which for the most parte, are false lyes) Why may not you hope to escape, as well as o∣thers before you? Who deliuered Dauid, Iob, Ioseph, Moses, Damell, &c. from daungers, terrors of soule, the Deuill, imprisonment, drowning, and Lyons den? but you say, that you are in the Furnace of his wrath. And why (with the three Children) may you not bee deliuered from this fiery furnace? GOD is the same still (who as the Prophet speaketh) euen in wrath re∣members mercie: Therefore why may not your bush burne, or (at least) seeme to burne with fire, yet not be consumed: since his mercies are ouer all his works? hee onely knowing what he hath decreed. And you, who are (for the present) bound vp in hardnesse of heart, in the Name of GOD I beseech you, let neuer

this voyce of desperation come from you againe: (All is in vaine, there remaineth no hope:) What, is it pos∣sible, No hope? Is God in heauen, who is wonderfull in all his works? and doth abundantly aboue all that wee are able to thinke or speake? and so long dare any little worme or piece of clay, (a little moate) nay not so much, in regard of him, who is all in all, to say there is no hope? Oh! there remaneth alwaies hope so long as we breath. For you knowe as the Apostle speaketh: Hope that is seene is no hope: For how can a man hope for that which he seeth? so that hope aboue hope, is hope indeede. O hope still to speed as well as any hard-hearted who euer were called, as all haue beene before calling. When then after ef∣fectuall calling, you looke vpon Dauids secure sleepe, and Salomons strange hard-hearted declining from the wayes of God, with the wonderfull and hard-harted impietie of Manasseh, and Nebuchadnezzar, before cal∣ling: and the exceeding mercies of God vnto them: and diuers in our age, with (the good Thiefe) called home at the last houre: O learne to haue a good con∣ceit of God. It was you know, the first thing that en∣couraged the prodigall sonne to come home vnto his Father, because he had a good conceit of him. There∣fore, thinke you with him, the Heauenly Father hath receiued such and such exceeding sinners into mercie. Though I haue run ryot, & straied, yet haue I not gon so farre as they, or if I haue, yet I will submit my selfe

vnto him, it may bee, hee will also be mercifull vnto mee. But what shall I say? It is God who must per∣swade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Sem. It is hee who must cast downe, perswade, inlighten, drawe, in∣struct, teach, conuert, and inlarge our hearts, that wee may bee lifted vp, consent, see, come, vnderstand, bee taught, conuerted, and runne the wayes of his com∣mandements, which that he would hasten in his own good time to doe, my fainte, fewe, colde, and weake petitions shall euer (to my power) beg for you.
Onely now (for conclusion) my earnest request vnto you is, that since it is the custom of most of you, either in reading the Scriptures, or anie other good booke) to reade vntil you find somewhat (in your iudgement) against you, and then close the booke suddenly, as though nothing there did belong vnto you; that you would not so vse this little ensuing Treatise: but ra∣ther before you Censure, to reade it quite through: reiecting whatsoeuer herein you find contrary ei∣ther to the Word, or experience of the Faith∣full: which if you shall doe, you shall bind me more then euer to remaine,

