



FOR two reasons I haue made bold to pre∣sent unto your high and honourable con∣siderations this Treatise following. The one more particular, in respect of that in∣tyre amitie, and correspondence, which was betwixt my deare Master deceased Prince Henrie, of famous memorie, and your Excelencie (and whole State) whom he much honoured, and thereof gaue sundry testimonies, both publique and private, whereof my selfe (hauing the honour to be one of his Seruants neere unto him, and by reason of my at∣tendance much in his presence) was oftentimes an eare-wit∣nesse. And that your princely Brother (alter idem, an other Henry, cujus ego nomine ipso recreor, even for my Masters sake, that gone is, and for that affection he shwed towards his High∣nesse, both in Life and Death) who was much conversant with him before his sicknsse, and in his sicknesse came diurs times to visite his Highnesse, and to condole with us in our heavi∣nesse, can also I make no doubt witnesse sufficiently: whose hearts, or rather but one heart and soule (as it is in that place) seemed to be knit together,1 Sam. 18.1 like the soule of David and Iona∣than by a muuall sympthie, as in name, so in nature and cor∣respondence of disposition: which had not untimely death prevented, some further covenant, like that of David and Io∣nathan, might perhaps in time haue beene concluded, wore

such heroicall spirits. An other reason is, for that the persons whom this Argument chiefly concerneth, to wit, the Iewes, many of them remaine in your Countrie, and haue their habi∣tation in peace and safetie: not in that slaverie as in other Na∣tions, accounted of in the basest maner that may be, in the num∣ber of dogs rather then of Men. Which though it haue falen upon them by the just judgement of God, yea, and by their owne judgement upon themselues, so much the more just: his blood be upon us, and upon our children: yet are they, children of the Promise, and beloved for the fathers sake, as Paul pleadeth for them in divers places, alledging both their prerogatives and priviledges aboue the Gentiles:Rom. 3.1. What is then the preferment of the Iew (saith he) much euery maner of way. For to them appertei∣neth the adoption,Rom. 9.4. and the glorie, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises: of whom are the Fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, &c. And in that respect we Gentiles ought not so proudly and ty∣rannously to insult over them (as many doe) especially Christi∣ans of all others, should not adde affliction to affliction: but ra∣ther pitie and bewaile their induration (as Paul doth in the place before cited) expecting with patience their conversion in due time, as the Lord hath promised: for if God himselfe loue them being his enemies (for they are beloved (as I said before) for the Fathers sake, as he loved us before our conversion (when we were his enemies he loved us: so the Apostle testifieth) why should we Christians hate and abhorre them, who are so highly in Gods account (even the beloved of the Lord) and hold them in such disgrace and contempt as we doe: as in my smal observation, and experience, I am able to testifie, both by that I have seene and heard: which rather exasperateth them against our profession then otherwise. Which harshnesse and unchari∣tablenesse of ours; together with the Idolatrie, and superstition of the Church of Rome, in worshipping of Images, and such like tromperie, I am perswaded, haue beene two maine obsta∣cles to their conversion hitherto: as some of them in Barbarie objected to me, saying: the Christian Religion could not be the true Religion, for that it alloweth the worshipping of images, which is expresly against the Law: Thou shalt not make to thy selfe

any grauen Image. And if we say they crucified Christ, and therefore we hate and abhorre them, even to the third and fourth generation, that is to say, their posterity for ever: so doe we daily by our crying sinnes, euen crucifie againe the Lord Iesus, they but once and unwittingly (as Saint Peter testifieth) we often, and that both wittingly,Act. 3.17. and willingly, to our greater condemnation, in respect of the fulnesse of knowledge we haue in the Messiah. This is that fulnesse of the Gentiles, already come in (whereof the Apo∣stle long since prophecied) as in knowledge abounding, so in sinne super-abounding, and that generally through out all Nations. Of whom I doubt much whether I may say (as it was said in times past of the Amorites as touching their fulnesse) it was not yet come: for I am sure the fulnesse of the Gentiles (as touching sinne) is already come: fulnesse of Bread, and aboundance of Idlenesse, as in Sodome: yea fulnesse and loathsomnesse, even of Manna it selfe: as the children of Israel in the end waxed wearie of that hea∣venly foode, so is it with us in respect of the foode of our soules. Else what meaneth so many Sects, and Schis∣mes in our Church at this day? Diseases arising from some bad humours and corruptions in the body (as all diseases doe) which therefore ought to be purged. Surely the va∣rietie of the one argueth a fulnesse and sacietie of the other. We are fallen from the names of Christians,Act. 11.26. given to the Primitiue Church, to be baptized into new names; Ana∣baptists, Arminians, & id genus farinae: Corne I may not call them, but chaffe: yea,Mat. 13.24 rather tares sprung up with the good Corne, over-spreading, and over-topping it too in ma∣ny places: but both must grow together till the harvest. Yea, our fulnesse and nicenesse is such, as we can taste no ma∣ner of meat almost, but what some curious cookes for the nonce provide for us: every one must have a cooke for his owne palate. We are fallen into that time fore-prophe∣cied by the Apostle, 2. Tim 4. For the time will come when they will not suffer wholesome Doctrine, but having their eares itching, shall after their owne lusts get them a heape of Tea∣chers. We are even wearie of Manna, as the children of

Israel were. And therefore now that they haue fasted so long time, and that fulnesse of the Gentiles come upon us; it standeth both with the Lords justice and his mer∣cie, both to us and them, to doe to them as he did to us at the first,Rom. 11.22 and to us as he did to them. Behold therefore the bountifulnesse and the severitie of God, toward them which have fallen severitie, but toward thee bountifulnesse, if thou con∣tinue in his bountifulnesse, or else thou shalt also be cut off: and they also if they abide not still in unbeliefe shall be graf∣fed in, for God is able to graffe them in againe. Of which gorious worke of the conversion of the Iewish Nation, and finishing of that mysterie of godlinesse; if you (most hgh and mightie Lords) shall be the first beginners in your owne Countrie, as you haue already playd your parts against the mysterie of Iniquitie, both at home and abroad, both by Sea and by Land, as the chiefe bulwarks of Chri∣stian Rligion at this day against the power of Antichrist and all his adhaernts, whereof you have borne the brunt (as Tully saith of the Scipioes; they were propugnacula belli punici) and therefore deserve the prize aboue all other Na∣tions) you shall not onely highly advance your honour in this World (as you have done already, both in those your martiall affires, and otherwise, also by a generall eye of policie (or rather so many Argus eyes) watching over all estats, to keepe them upright and in order: especial∣ly those extraordiary, and magnificent (I may well call them so) workes of Chariie towards the poore, in those your statey Hopitals, and Guest-houses, and such lke places of provision: no crying for bread nor complayning in your Streetes▪ but also in the World to come, you shall avance your selues in honour and glory aboue the Hea∣ves: where you shall shine like so many Starres in the irmament, and as the Sunne in his strength: for so it is said:. 12. They that turne many to Righteousnesse, shall shine as the Starres forever and ever: And they that honour me (saith the Lord) I will honour: then the which, what grea∣ter incouragement.
And so humbly craving pardon for this my boldnesse be∣ing

a Stranger, or wherein otherwise I have erred: I com∣mit you (according to your high and eminent Places, Estates and orders, which in my heart more I honour, than eyther my tongue or Penne can worthily expresse not so well knowne vnto me) to the Al∣mighty: To whose service

