


MOST Gracious, and most
Sacred Soveraigne, This Tyme,
and This Subject, doe joyne and meete so
vvell together, that it is novv, if ever; and
in this, if in anie thing, that I dare be bolde
expresse the desire I haue to doe service
to Your Majestie, and to my Countrey. I vvish the oc∣casion
had not beene so faire for venting  ambition;
but rather that it had lyen buried in my Breast, and I my
selfe had beene vnknovvne of Your Majestîe to my liues
ende. But GOD, vvho putteth Marches to Peace and
Warres, and periods to Tyme; and vho hath His apt and

proper Instruments, for everie disposition of Tyme; HEE
hath encouraged mee, to offer to Your Majestie, this Trea∣tise,
as a necessarie, and vsefull Inter-course of this Tyme.
I did stryue, so much as I could, to make it short; but by
reason of so manie Histories, Discourses, and Examples, as
vvere to bee pertinentlie and profitablie brought in, I
could not confyne it to a more narrovv Compend.
And yet, vvhen Your Majestie shall consider it, it vvill
bee found minus mole, quam facultate, a great deale lighter
in Paper, than in Matter: For vvhy? It contayneth the
large Extent and Misteries of the Spanish Ambition, vvith a
Contemplation of the truest Contrapoyse to bee made there∣vnto
by Neighbour States; Graue and Weightie Theorems in∣deede,
but vvhich fevv of them doe speculate so deeplie
as neede vvere; the greatest part beeing vvhollie carried
to things sensible, present, and of nearest commoditie to
them-selues in particular, al-be-it it should import a ma∣nifest
danger to their Common-peace and Prosperitie: vvith∣out
the care, and curious mayntaynance vvhere-of, ney∣ther
can anie one of Them flovvrish by it selfe, nor yet the
most flovvrishing, long endure.
Farther, SIR, Heere are contayned diverse Purposes
and Passages, touching The present estate of this Kingdome of
SCOTLAND, most expedient for avvaking Your Maje∣sties
Subjects, to looke to that vvhich the great exigence of
this Tyme doeth require at their Handes; together vvith a
varietie of delicate Conceits, verie fit to season both the
Understanding and Humour of a young PRINCE: and
those not hatched in my Braynes, but sought, and sucked
by me, from the richest Hyues of Politicke Wits, vvhich haue
beene committed to Registers in anie Age gone.
Heere also is contayned, A new Reason, brought from
the mysticall Theologie, for the holinesse and perfection of

the number 10; and vvhy GOD did choose it to be the
Quotient of the Ecclesiasticke Goods, in the Leviticall Chur∣ches.
So that if Your Majestie shall vouchsafe to reade it
once, I haue good hope that Ye shall do it tvvise, al-be-it
I knovv, that it is not Your Majesties Calling, to cast
over Bookes, Tu regere imperio popul. Rom. mem. hae tibi
erunt artes: but such Bookes doe belong vnto that same
Arte. Demetrius Phalereus did counsell King Proleme, to
buy all Bookes vvritten, de regno imperio{que} eos{que} lectitaret,
quia (inquit) quae amici non audent Reges monere, ea in ejusmo∣di
libris descripta esse. Alexander the Great did sleepe
vvith Homer's Poësies vnder his head. Iulius Caesar, amidst
the combustion of bloodie Warres, did spende most part
of nights, in reading and vvryting.
Therefore, SIR, let it please Your Majestie, to take
paynes, remembring hovve the same Homer, vvhome
that great Monarch did so affect, and vvhome the Philosophs
esteemed to be A source of humane Sciences, hee hath left
this Aphorisme for a King, Non decet Principem solidam
dormire noctem: A Prince must not take a vvhole nights
sleepe. A thing vvell proved by that Arch-Prince for ci∣vill
vvisdome, Augustus, vvho vvhyles at a certaine tyme
hee could not rest in the night, having his mynde loaden
vvith anxieties and cares of the State, hee sent for the pil∣lovv
of a knovvne Bancq-ruptier, greatlie indebted, vvho
vvas reported to sleepe vvell.
GOD hath called Your Majestie vp in-to this Moun∣tayne
of Paynfull Governament; not lyke vnto Helias, vvho
vvhyles hee vvent vp, too much delyted vvith the pleasant
vmbrage of the Iunopre Tree, hee fell a-sleeping there-by:
But lyke to Moses, to vvhome it vvas sayde, Ascende in
Montem, & esto ibi. Upon vvhich vvordes, Esto ibi, another

doeth vvell note, Non dicitur venisse, qui non steterit. Wee
doe not reade that Moses sleeped in that Voyage to the
Mountayne: It vvas a significant Hyerogliffe, vvhich the
Aegyptians had of a King, Oculum cum Sceptro, One Eye, and
one Scepter: Shevving, that Princes are to joyne Vigilance
vvith Power; and ought to haue Aquiline Eyes, able to pe∣netrate
the hidden thinges of the Vulgar Valleyes belovve
them: Even as the Eagle doeth espy the Prey vnder him,
before him-selfe can bee perceived of Fowles. Nazianzen,
speaking of Governament, he sayeth, it is, Ars artium, to rule
a People: And Seneca, speaking of Man, Nullum morosius
animal, nec majori arte tractandum; There is not a more
enorme and insolent Creature than Man, nor vvhich is to
bee managed vvith more cunning. And, as Plutarch
sayeth, That as Beasts can not bee guided, nor commanded,
but by Men; So Men cannot bee governed, but by Him
vvho is more than a Man, and hath a great measure of
Deitie into Him.
Certaynlie Your Majestie hath neede of Eyes vnder
Wings, as is sayde of the Spanish Cuttuio; that Yee might
flie abroade, to explore the manners of Your Subjects, and
malice of Your Enemies: to see that no Backe-doore bee left
for those to enter at, nor no Fielde commodious, vvhere
they may cover their insidious Nettes: but that the vvhole
Sea of Your Majesties Governament bee calme and peace∣able:
vnderstanding hovv the Spanyard is skilfull to fish in
drumblie Waters. Hee can practise as vvell Protestants as
Papists, if hee finde them loose and vvavering. Which par∣ticular
Your Majestie vvill see examplified in this Treatise:
besides Testimonies of French Wryters, vvhich might bee
suspected of Partialitie, and malicious detraction, it is
verefied by naturall Spaniards, namelie, Antonio Peres, vvho
vvas a chiefe Secretarie of Estate, vnder Philip the second;

and vvhose Relation in some thinges touching the sayde
King, and Estate of Portugall, I haue trusted, and follo∣vved,
for tvvo respects: First, Because none could haue
knovvne those better: and secondlie, Because hee did
handle the lyke Theame to this, by vvay of shovving to
King Henrie the fourth of France, the necessitie of making
Warres to Spayne.
Your Majestie knovveth, that it vvas a braue Embleme
for Kings, vvhich Cyrus had, of putting his foote vpon the midst
of a hard and dry hyde, vvhere-by he kept it close at earth: for
if he had set his foot vpō the borders, or extremities there∣of,
the vvhole should haue revolted: to note the Golden
Rule of the Mid-way in Governament, & forbearing of Extre∣mities:
and to shovv, that Kingdoms are never sure to Princes,
vntill they be in the middest of the Hearts of their People, and
guarded round about vvith their Affections. Your Majestie
seeth hovv the example of David is a perspicuous Mirrour
for Kings to looke vnto; of vvhom vve reade, 2. Sam. 7. When
the king sate in his house, and the LORD had given him rest round
about from all his enemies, he said vnto Nathan the Prophet, Beholde,
Idwell in a house of Cedar trees, & the Arke of God remaineth within
the Curtaines. Hee resolved to provide for building of the
Lord's House: Therefore, can vvee not deny, Sir, that the
Orient of Your Majesties Reigne, doeth breake vp in just &
holy Actions, in favours of the House of GOD, by setting out
a Navie against the mightie Enemies of Christian Peace, and
true Religion; and by vvhom the over-throvv there-of hath
bene so directly sought in these Your Majesties Kingdomes,
that numbers of vs yet liue, vvho did see their proude Ar∣mada,
put even to the parts of our Countrey for that ende.
Your Majesties Intentions at Home, to restore the Mayntay∣nance
and Splendor of God's Worship, doe argue the like zeale:
and vvho doubteth, but God vvill grant to Your Majestie

the same spirit of wisdome, vvith David, rightly to choose your
tymes, for offices of Peace, & offices of warres. The prudence, and
happie successes of Actions, doe consist in discret & sure ap∣plication
of Circumstances. With a little Tyme & Patience, your
M. vvill get your good Subjects, not only to contribute after
your desires, to the House of the Lord, to the Cōmon-wealth, &
vvorks of Pietie; but to doe it vvillingly, as those Israelits did
vnto David, 1. Chron. 29. Then the people rejoyced, for that they of∣fered
willingly; because with a perfect heart they offered willinglie to
the Lord. And David the king also rejoyced with great joye. And
then, Sir, their Sacrifices shall bee savorie vnto God, vvhen
they come not from Hearts dyed into Murmuration, Grudge, or
Blacknesse, like vnto the Swan, vvhich for the same cause vvas
anciently forbidden to bee sacrificed to the gods.
I doe most humbly recōmend these my Christian Ende∣vours
to your M. patronage & protection. If they be acceptable
to your M. I hope they shall displease none of your faithful
Subjects. If they doe not fully correspond the judicious
quicknesse of your M. great spirit, it is not my fault; my
smal Vessell could hold no more. The Lord, vvho is the giver
of all good thinges, and vvho hath sovven into your M.
Heart these Seedes of Royall Pietie and Vertue, Hee may be
pleased to nourish them, vvith the daylie influence of His
Grace; vntill they grovv to that glorious and fruitfull Har∣vest,
vvhich they doe novv prognosticate and promise in
their Spring. That God, vvho hath set your M. over a great
and mightie People, Hee may blesse your M. vvith the true
vvisdome of Governament, the trustinesse of faythfull Coun∣sellers,
the vpright loue of your Subjects, and a prosperous &
fortunate Reigne vnto the ende.

