



IN the first publicati∣on of this Treatise (the argument whereof is more agreeable to the hungry desires of a troubled soule, then to the dainty appetite of them that seeke to haue their

eares delighted with fine inuention) I commended it to none, but vnto such as had the only neede thereof; euen to them that are weary and laden, which grone vnder that bur∣den, whereof none can ease them, but only he that beareth vp all things by his mighty word. Heb. 13. And healeth those that are broken in heart, and giueth me∣dicine to heale their sicknesse. Psal. 147. 3.
At this second edition I haue been bold to publish it vnder your Worships name, not that I haue a∣ny higher conceit of it now, then at the first; to thinke it now worthier, then at that time, to beare it in the forehead thereof thename of any

worshipfull patron. For though it bee in some places altered, and in some enlarged: yet our bookes grow not vnder our hands, as our chil∣dren doe, to become fairer, stronger, and wiser by continuance of yeeres: but they retaine (with little alte∣ration) their first proportion and members. And this little booke, as it was at the first, so it remaineth no other, then a knitting together (in one continud discourse) of those obseruations, which in my publike exercise I deliuered in many Ser mons, when I intreated of that text of Scripture, which I haue put downe in the beginning as the argu∣ment of the whole worke.
But finding my selfe inde bted

vnto your loue, in a greater mea∣sure then I am able to make satis∣faction for (which loue of yours to me hath continued now aboue twenty yeeres, and aboue all other proofes thereof, hath lately decla∣red it selfe in a most free and kinde offer of extraordinary fauour) I haue been bold in this dedication to testifie vnto you. as I was able, my thankefull heart, which is the best recompence that my weake estate is able to affoord. And with this little booke which I offer vnto your Worshippes I offer vnto Almighty God, my most hearty praiers, that the father of mercy, & God of all consolations, will euer continue vnto you, and your poste∣rity,

the abundance of his grace, both for a long and happy life in this world, and for a seasonable and christian departure hence, that af∣ter your yeeres bee compleate on earth, you may raigne with Christ for euer in Heauen. From my house in Wool∣church this thirteenth of Nouember. 1613.

