



MOst Illustrious PRINCE:
OVr late, too late borne, or too soone dying Prince, HENRY of famous me∣morie, your deceased brother, sent for mee, a few monethes before his death. And at my second comming to his pre∣sence, among some other speeches, hee complained much of our Histories of England; and that the English Na∣tion, which is inferiour to none in Honourable actions, should be surpassed by all, in leauing the memorie of them to posteritie. For this cause hee blamed the negligence of former ages: as if they were ignorant of their owne deseruings, as if they esteemed them∣selues vnworthie of their worth.
I answered, that I conceiued these causes hereof; One, that men of sufficiencie were otherwise employed; either in publicke affaires, or in wrestling with the world, for maintenance or en∣crease of their priuate estates. Another is, for that men might safely write of others in maner of atale, but in maner of a History▪

safely they could not: because, albeit they should write of men long since dead, and whose posteritie is cleane worne out; yet some aliue, finding themselues foule in those vices, which they see ob∣serued, reproued, condemned in others; their guiltinesse maketh them apt to conceiue, that whatsoeuer the words are, the finger pointeth onely at them. The last is, for that the Argument of our English historie hath bene so foiled heretofore by some vnwor∣thie writers, that men of qualitie may esteeme themselues discre∣dited by dealing in it.
And is not this (said he) an errour in vs, to permit euery man to be a writer of Historie? Is it not an errour to be so curious in other matters, and so carelesse in this? We make choise of the most skilfull workemen to draw or carue the portraiture of our faces, and shall euery artlesse Pensell delineate the disposition of our minds? Our apparell must be wrought by the best Artificers, and no soile must be suffered to fall vpon it: and shall our actions, shall our conditions be described by euery bungling hand? Shall euery filthie finger defile our reputation? Shall our Honour be basely buried in the drosse of rude and absurd writings? Wee are care∣full to prouide costly Sepulchers, to preserue our dead liues, to pre∣serue some memorie what wee haue bene: but there is no monu∣ment, either so durable, or so largely extending, or so liuely and faire, as that which is framed by a fortunate penne; the memory of the greatest Monuments had long since perished, had it not bene preserued by this meanes.
To this I added; that I did alwayes conceiue, that we should make our reckoning of three sorts of life: the short life of nature, the long life of fame, and the eternall life of glorie. The life of glorie is so farre esteemed before the other two, as grace is pre∣dominant in vs: the life of fame before our naturall life is so farre esteemed, as a generous spirit surmounteth sensualitie; as humane nature ouerruleth brutish disposition. So farre as the noble na∣ture of man hath dominion in our minds, so farre do we contemne, either the incōmodities, or dangers, or life of our body, in regard of our reputation and fame. Now seeing this life of fame is both preserued and enlarged chiefly by history; there is no man (I sup∣pose) that will either resist, or not assist, the commendable or at

least tolerable writing thereof, but such as are conscious to them∣selues, either that no good, or that nothing but ill, can bee repor∣ted of them. In whom notwithstanding it is an errour to thinke, that any power of the present time, can either extinguish or ob∣scure the memorie of times succeeding. Posteritie will giue to e∣uery man his due: Some ages hereafter will affoord those, who will report vnpartially of all.
Then he questioned, whether I had wrote any part of our Eng∣lish Historie, other then that which had been published; which at that time he had in his hands▪ I answered, that I had wrote of certaine of our English Kings, by way of a briefe description of their liues: but for historie, I did principally bend, and binde my selfe to the times wherein I should liue; in which my owne obseruations might somewhat direct me: but as well in the one as in the other I had at that time perfected nothing.
To this he said; that in regard of the honour of the time, hee liked well of the last; but for his owne instruction, he more desi∣red the first: that he desired nothing more then to know the acti∣ons of his Auncestours; because hee did so farre esteeme his de∣scent from them, as he approached neere them in honourable en∣deauours. Hereupon, beautifying his face with a sober smile, he desired mee, that against his returne from the progresse then at hand, I would perfect somewhat of both sorts for him, which he promised amply to requite; and was well knowen to be one, who esteemed his word aboue ordinary respects. This stirred in mee, not onely a will, but power to perfourme▪ so as engaging my duety farre aboue the measure either of my leisure or of my strength, I finished the liues of these three Kings of Norman race, and cer∣taine yeeres of Queene ELIZABETHS Reigne.
At his returne from the Progresse to his house at S. Iames, these pieces were deliuered vnto him; which hee did not onely courteously, but ioyfully accept. And because this seemed a per∣fect worke, he expressed a desire that it should be published. Not long after he died; and with him died both my endeauours and my hopes. His death, alasse! hath bound the liues of many vnto death, face to face; being no wayes able, either by forgetfulnesse to couer their griefe, or to diminish it with consideration.
For in trueth he was a Prince of a most Heroical heart: Free from many vices which sometimes accompanie high estates, full of most amiable and admirable vertues: of whose perfections the world was not worthy. His eyes were full of pleasant modestie; his countenance manly beautifull; in bodie both strongly and de∣licately made; in behauiour sweetly sober, which gaue grace to whatsoeuer he did. He was of a discerning wit; and for the fa∣cultie of his mind, of great capacitie and power, accompanied with equall expedition of will: much foreseeing in his actions, and for passions a commander of himselfe; and of good strength to resist the power of prosperitie. In counsaile he was ripe and measured, in resolution constant, his word euer led by his thought, and fol∣lowed by his deede. And albeit hee was but yong and his na∣ture forward and free, yet his wisedome reduced both to a true temper of moderation; his desires being neuer aboue his reason, nor his hopes inferiour to his desires. In a word, hee was the most faire fruit of his Progenitours, an excellent ornament of the pre∣sent age, a true mirrour to posteritie: being so equally both setled to valour, and disposed to goodnesse and Iustice, as hee expressed not onely tokens, but proofes, both of a courage, and of a grauitie and industrie right worthie of his estate.
Glorious Prince, my loue and duety hath caried me further, then happily is fit for the present purpose: and yet this is but an earnest onely of my earnest affection and zeale to thy Honour. I shall hereafter haue a more proper place to display at large, the goodlinesse of thy shape, the goodnesse of thy nature, the greatnesse of thy minde: all thy perfections, whereby our affe∣ctions were much enflamed. And euillworthy may he be of any happy hopes, who will not adde one blast of his breath, to make vp the glorious gale of thy fame.
In the meane time I haue here accomplished his desire in pub∣lishing this worke: More to testifie to the world the height of his heart, then for any pleasure I haue to set foorth any thing, to the view of these both captious and vnthankefull times; wherein men will be, not readers onely, but interpreters, but wresters, but corrupters and deprauers of that which they reade; wherein men thinke the reproofe of others, to be the greatest parcell of their

owne praise. But how should I expect any better vsage? The Commentaries of Caesar, neuer disliked before, are esteemed by Lypsius, a dry saplesse piece of writing. The most famous Ta∣citus is tearmed by Alceate,  a thicket of thornes; by Bu∣daeus,     a most lewd Writer; by Tertullian, ▪ simu. an exceedin lyar; by Orosius, Adulat. a flatterer; then which assuredly he is ∣thing lesse. I will not expect any better vsage, I will not desire it: I will hereafter esteeme nothing of any worth, which hath not many to detract from it.
Whatsoeuer this is, I haue presumed to present it to your Highnesse, for these causes following: First, for that it receiued this being from him, who was most dearely esteemed by you; who may be iustly proposed, as an example of vertue, as a guide to glory and fame. Secondly, for that the persons of whom it treateth, are those most worthy Ancestors of yours, who laid the foundation of this English Empire; who were eminent among all the Princes of their times, and happely for many ages after, as well in actions of Peace as of Warre. Lastly, for that I esteeme Histories the fittest subiect for your Highnesse reading: For by diligent perusing the actes of great men, by considering all the circumstances of them, by comparing Counsales and meanes with euents; a man may seeme to haue liued in all ages, to haue beene present at all enterprises; to be more strongly confirmed in Iudgement, to haue attained a greater experience, then the lon∣gest life can possibly affoord.
But because many errours doe vsually arise, by ignorance of the State wherein we liue; because it is dangerous to frame rules of Policie out of Countreys differing from vs, both in nature, and custome of life, and forme of gouernment; no Histories are so profitable as our owne. In these your Highnesse may see, the noble disposition and delights of your Ancestors; what were their sweete walkes, what their pleasant Chases: how farre they pre∣ferred glory, before either pleasure or safetie; how by the braue behauiour of their sword, they hewed honour out of the sides of their enemies. In these you may see, the largenesse, commodi∣ties, and strength of this Countrey; the nature of the people,

their wealth, pleasure, exercise and trade of life, and what else is worthy of obseruation. Generally, by these you may so furnish your selfe, as not easily to be abused either by weake or deceit∣full aduise.
The Most High preserue and prosper your Highnesse: that as you succeed many excellent Ancestours in blood, so you may exceed them all in Honourable atchieuements.

