


RIght mighty prince, & redoubted souerayn
Sayling forthe well, in the shyp of grace
Ouer the waues of this life vncertayne,
Ryght towarde heauen, to haue dwellyng place
Grace dothe you guyde, in euery doubtfull case
Your gouernaunce, doth euer more eschewe
The synne of slouthe, enemy to vertue.



Grace stirreth well, the grace of god is great
Whych you hath brought to your ryall se,
And in your ryght, it hath you surely sette
Aboue vs all, to haue the soueraintie:
Whose worthy power, and regall dygnitie
All our rancour, and our debate gan cease
And hath vs brought, both welthe, rest, and peace.


From whom dyscendeth, by the ryghtful lyne
Noble prynce Henry, to succede the crowne
That in his youth, doth so clearely shyne
In euery vertue, casting the vyce adowne:
He shall of fame, attayne the hye renowne
No doubte but grace, shall hym well enclose
Whych by true ryght, sprang of the red rose.


Your noble grace, and excellent hyenes
For to accepte I beseche ryght humbly,
Thys little boke, opprest wyth rudenes
Without rethoryke, or colour crafty:
Nothynge I am experte in poetry,
As the monke of Bury, floure of eloquence
Which was in the time of great excellence,


Of your predecessour, the. b. kyng Henry,
Unto whose grace, he dyd present
Ryght famous bokes, of parfit memory:
Of hys fayuyng wyth termes eloquent.
Whose fatall ficcions, are yet permanent.
Grounded on reason, wyth cloudy fygures
He cloked the trouth of al his scriptures.



The light of trouth, I lacke cunnyng to cloke
To drawe a curtayne, I dare not to presume
Nor hyde my matter, with a misty smoke
My rudenes cunnyng, dothe so sore consume
Yet as I may, I shall blowe out a fume
To hyde my mynde, vnderneth a fable
By couert coloure, well and probable.


Besechyng your grace, to pardon mine ignoraunce
Whiche this fayned fable, to eschue idlenes
Haue so compiled, nowe without doubtaunce
For to present, to your hye worthines
To folowe the trace, and all the perfitenes
Of my master Lydgate, with due exercise
Suche fayned tales, I do fynde and deuise.


For vnder a coloure, a truthe may arise
As was the guise, in olde antiquitye
Of the Poetes olde, a tale to surmise
To cloke the trouthe, of their infirmitye
Or yet on ioye, to haue moralitye
I me excuse, if by necligence
That I do offende, for lacke of science.

¶ Your graces most boūden seruaūt Stephen Hawes, one of the gromes of your maiesties Chamber, the. xxi. yeare of your prosperous raygne.
