



AS they somewhat be more precise, than I (righte Honorable Earle) whiche woulde haue noble menne, and suche as beare sway, and rule in the weale Publike, to be in all man∣ner of Sciences greate Ar∣tistes, and altogether Bookishe: so doo I farre dissent from them, that woulde contrarily haue them vtterly vnlettered, and flatte idiotes: for the Bookishe man busily attendinge his owne study, cannot carefully yenough tender the state. For suche is the propertie of knowledge, that it breadeth a contempt of all other thinges in respect of it selfe. As for the ignorant, it is moste euident and plaine, that he can haue no man∣ner of Gouernance, or skill of Regiment in his heade. The Greekes in all manner of knowledge, and Lear∣ninge,

did farre surmounte the Romanes, but the Ro∣manes in administringe their state, in warlike factes, and in common sense were muche their Superiours: for the Greekes were wedded to theire learninge alone, the Romanes content with a mediocritie, ap∣plied them selues to greater thinges. I doo not denie, but that in many matters, I meane matters of lear∣ninge, a Noble man ought to haue a sight: but to be to muche addicted that waye, I thinke is not good. Now of all knowledge fitte for a Noble Gentelman, I suppose the knowledge of Histories is moste see∣minge. For furtheringe whereof, I haue Englished a passing fine, and wittie Historie, written in Greeke by Heliodorus, and for righte good cause consecra∣ted the same to your Honorable Lordshippe. For such vertues be in your Honour, so hautie courage ioined with great skill, suche sufficiency in learning, so good nature, and common sense, that in your Honour is, I thinke, expressed the right patterne of a Noble Gen∣telman, whiche in my head I haue conceiued. It no∣thinge did dismay me, or for that I was not knowen to your Honour, neither maye it seeme any rashe at∣tempte for that cause. For suche is the force of ver∣tue, that shee maketh vs to loue, not onely our owne Countrie men by sight vnknowen, but also Straun∣gers,

whiche by Lande and Sea be seuered from vs. Therefore I beseeche your Honour, fauourably to ac∣cepte this my small trauaile in translatinge Helio∣dorus, whome, if I haue so well translated as he is woorthy, I am perswaded, that your Honour will like very well of. Sure I am that of other transla∣tours he hath benne dedicated to mighty Kinges, and Princes. Therefore accept my good will (Honora∣ble Earle) and if opportunitie shall serue hereafter, there shall greater thinges appeare vnder your Ho∣nours name. Almighty God geue you increase of Honour, and keepe, and defende, you for euer and euer.

