



COnsyderyng
in your noble
grace (moste
Honourable
Duke) the
same mightie
feruent, & reli¦giouse
zele in
Gods cause,Zele.
whych I a∣fore
tyme by
readynge the scriptures haue dylygent∣ly
marked in Moyses the seruaunt of
God, I haue vrgently bene moued vn∣dre
God and our kynge to seke your ear¦nest
ayde for the same. The rage at thys
presēt is horryble and fearce, whych the

stought sturdy satellytes of Antichrist in
dyuerse partes of ye realme, chefely with∣in
Hamshire.Hamshire, do blustre abroade in their
mad furyes to blemyshe the Euāgelycal
veryte of the Lorde now reuelated. An
intollerable grefe it is to their vncircum¦cysed
hartes, to beholde the glytterynge
toyes of superstycyouse ydolatry and hi¦pocritycall
papystrye remoued frō thys
earthe of Englande, by the kynges wur∣thie
maiestie and hys most honourable
counsell,Relygyon. and Gods true relygyon again
restored. That oure sayde seconde & most
valeaūt Iosias, hath thus pourged hys
Iuda (hys Englande I meane) frō the
abhomynable buggeryes and ydolatries
of the great Baal Peor of Rome, earnest¦ly
sekynge for the true God of Dauid
hys forefather,ii. Paaral. xxxiiii. to the most lyuely exam∣ple
of all other prynces, their vngraty∣ouse
and noughtie eyes are not a lyttle
offended. That hys ymages, rellyckes,
roodes, torches, candels, copes, ashes,
palmes, waxe, water, oyle, creame, and
holy bread, that hys bulles, bedes, belles,Toyes.
bablinges, masses, purgatory, processi∣ons,
confessyons, exorcysmes, hallow∣ynges,
shauynges, gresynges, sensyngs,
slauerynges, slumberynges, and a great
sort of Popysh toyes more, are bānyshed
hens, in conscyence they are dysquyeted.
Not all vnlyke to the grosse wytted

Gergesytes, they wolde gladly ye Christ
were sumwhat further of.Mat. viii. Yea, they ear∣nestly
wyshe, that he wolde peaceably de¦parte
from their coastes, least he went a∣bout
it, to drowne their swyne for euer,
whome they all contrarye to gods ordy∣naunce,
haue so frankely in al beastly∣nesse
maynteyned. They can not awaye
with the precyouse lyght of Christes holi
Gospell, their eyes are so sore.Ihon. iii. Neyther
maye they broke it, to knowe their salua¦tyon
alone to be reposed in Christ Iesu,Colloss. iii.
so blynde are their folyshe hartes. Ney∣ther
maye they abyde it, that God is on∣ly
to be worshypped in sprete and veryte,
so superstycyously minded are they.Ihon. iiii. But
darkenesse they iudge lyght, & the lyght
very darkenesse. That is swete,Esay. v. they
thynke sower, & that is good they deme euyll.
Suche are now a dayes ye peruerse
and frowarde iudgementes of men vn∣godly.
The most christen reformacyon of
thys churche of Englande,Mockers. whych is to
other natyons a most wurthie spectacle,
so they very turkyshely deryde & mocke.
At the dayly suppressyons of their blas∣phemouse
and beastly papystryes,Nume. xxi they
create, they frowne, they grynde their
tethe, and for anger wexe wode. With ye
carnall Israelytes they hate & abhorre
the celestyall Manna of Christes Gos∣pell,i. Iohn. ii.
because it neyther nurrysheth the

lust of the fleshe, neyther fedeth the con∣cupyscence
of the eyes, nor yet maintey∣neth
the pryde of thys lyfe.Nume. xi. To the grea∣sy
fatt pottes of Egipte, wold they glad¦ly
returne agayne, and become subiectes
vnder the great Romish Pharao, so that
they myght be fedde with his olde styn∣kynge
cucumbers, melons, lekes, ony∣ons,
and garlyke, whych are hys vnpro∣fytable
tradycyons.
Malycyously and rebellyously do thei
now resyst the manyfest truthe of Gods
wurde,Rebelles. and wyll by no maner of meanes
consent therunto, although their owne
conscyences both accuseth and condem∣neth
them for it. And all is bicause they
wyll heare of no repentaunce, neyther
yet agre to amendemēt of their most wic¦ked
liues.Papystes, They bragge they boast, they
dreme, thei dote, thei fume they face, thei
grunte they grudge, they iangle they iest
they mocke they mowe, they scoffe they
scorne, they ruffle they rage, wyth dag∣gerand
with fyste, and all to stoppe the
swete blastes of the scriptures,Apo. vii. least they
shulde clearly blowe awaye their old Ro¦mysh
sorceryes, as duste from the face of
thys earthe. Neyther is it any great wō¦dre
vnto vs,Psalme▪ i. to beholde these terryble tur¦moylynges
of the deuils furyouse mem∣bers,
for those Romysh Pharisees leuen▪Luke. xii.
consyderynge he is that roarynge Lyon

whych busyly seketh whome he maye de¦uoure.i. Peter. v. Genesi. iii. Iob. ii. Exody. vii. Psa. lxxvii
He fraudolētly deceiued our first
mother Eue Greuously he afflycted the
pacyent mā Iob. He made Pharaos sor¦cerers
to withstande both Moyses & Aa∣ron.
Dauid ryght sore complayneth of
vexatyons by wicked angels. Who was
a more cruell aduersary to Iesus Iose∣dech
in reparynge the temple,Zach. iii. than was
Sathan? And though he preuayled not
in hys .iii. temptatyons agaynst Christ
our redemer,Math. iiii. yet procured he hys owne
dysciple Iudas trayterouslye to betraye
hym,Ihon. xviii the clergye of the Iewes malycy∣ously
to accuse hym, and the Romish ma¦gistrates
most wrongefully to condēpne
hym. Saynt Paule geueth vs good war∣nynge,ii. Cor. xi.
that Sathan to deceyue vs, can
transforme hym selfe into the Angel of
lyght. and telleth vs also, that we must
alwayes haue sumwhat a do with ye mi∣nysters
of darkenesse.Ephesi. vi.
In the prymatyue churche,Idolles▪ when the
wurshyppynge of Idolles ones ceased,
at the prechynges of the Apostles and o¦ther
vertuouse fathers. The prestes whi¦che
had lyued by those Idolatryes, pro∣uoked
both the prynces and commō peo∣ple
to persecute them to deathe,Priestes. making
them to beleue, that it was neuer a mery
worlde sens they were suffered to preach
This hath both Eusebins in Ecclesiasti¦ca

historia, and also Tertulianus in Apo¦logetico.
Thus haue the wholsō wyndes
of heauenly doctryne, bene alwayes dis∣turbed,Apoca. vii.
letted and stopped, & theyr lyue∣ly
vapours oppressed. First by Sathan ye
deuyll, then by the Iewysh and Popysh
clergye, then by superstycyouse monkes
and sophystycall scole doctours, & nowe
last of all by vnlearned loyterers and des¦perate
ruffyanes, as he of whom I haue
written thys treatise folowynge,Braban. is one.
Of thys latter sort, are some become far¦mers
of benefyces, some blynde brokers
in ye lawe, some scribes, some pharysees,
some flatterers for fauer, some lyngerers
for lucre, some cloynars for aduauntage
menpleasers, and make shyftes. These
gyue the preachers most vncōly reportes
to deface their godly preachynges,aplers. and
most odyble names, to brynge them in cō¦tempte
of the people. Their croked coun¦sels,
persuasyons, illusyons, prouocacy∣ons,
and promyses of ayde in wythstan∣dynge
the mynysters, are suche, for a wel¦thie
lyuynge in ydelnesse, that the truth
of the Lorde can take no place▪ These
are as were Elymas the sorcerer, Hyme∣neus,Actes. xiii. i. Timo. i. ii. Timo. ii. ii▪ Tim. iiii
Philetus, and Alexander the cop∣per
smythe, enemyes of all truthe, with∣standers
of all ryghtousnesse, and chyl∣dren
of ye deuyl. Men of corrupt myndes
resysters of the veryte, and lewde as cō∣cernynge

faythe ii. Tim. iii. And al these
are set a wurke by the popes late masmō¦gers,
by olde pylgrymage goers,Styngers. by craf∣ty
Cathedralystes, mynster men, and col¦lygeners,
lokinge yet for a daye of mayn¦tenaunce
in their olde sorceryes.
And as for our partes, we are not so ig¦noraunt
of the rules of Christes relygy∣on,
but we knowe that hys flocke of true
beleuers,Beleuers. hath had alwaies their wolues
Math x. their blasphemers, persecuters,
and slaunderers, that they myght bryng
fourth godly frutes in pacyēt sufferaūce
For loke what the threshynge flaile dothLuke. viii.
to the corne (S. Gregory saith) the fyery
fornace to the golde,Gregorye. and the polishinge
fyle to the yron, the same doth aduersyte
to the ryghtouse man, for it maketh hym
perfyght. Wicked persons are in all pla∣ces
to be tollerate of priuate men (I say
not maye) because there canne be no A∣bel,Abel.
vnles he be vexed of some maliciouse
Cain. We ought therfor of congruēce ve¦ry
paciently to suffre them, but yet not
in all pointes to holde our peace. We are
not bounde altogyther to beare them in
their mischefes No,Christ. Christe neuer ded so
neither yet the Prophetes afore him, nor
his Apostles after him. But wyth sto∣macke
(as occasiō gaue it) they inueihed
against them, and mightely reproued thē
If any man hurte the witnesses of God

(S. Iohan saith)Iohan. he must be kylled. Apo.
xi. Either must he be consumed of the rite
that cometh out of their mouthes,Esay. xi Heb. iiii▪ or els
by the .ii. edged swerd of the sprete, which
both are the wurde of God. For in their
handes haue they swerdes (saith Dauid)
that are sharpe on both sides. Psa. Cxlix.
manfully to stande vp, for faythe, for
truthe, for religion, for obedience to kin∣ges,
for iust beleuers, and for the glory of
the liuinge God,Sharpe against the manifest e∣nemies
of all godlinesse. And with ye dou¦ble
sharpenesse of those swerdes, shall
they eyther conuert them or dampne thē.
Care not (saith. S. Paule) for the hate of
your aduersaries, for vnto them is it a to¦ken
of perdicion, and to you a most mani¦fest
signe of saluacion. Phi. i. Doubt thē
not (saith Esaye) neither feare them at
all,Christ. but prayse the Lord of hostes, let him
be your feare & drede, for he is the stone yt
they stomble at, and the rocke that they
fall vpon. Esa. viii. for no confusion can
come vpon them that put their full trust
in God. Dan. iii.
Now is there nothynge els behynd
(most honourable Duke) but that your
excellent grace vndre god and our kingeId ducem,
set to your fauourable hāde, with the rest
of his most honourable counsell. If Ab∣bas
Ioachim, Nicolas Lyra, Iohā Tyl¦neye,
and other of our latter expositours

hath taken great Constantine the Em∣prour,Constanti∣nus.
for that other angell in. S. Iohās
reuelacion, which ascended from the ri∣synge
of the sunne for that age. Apoca.
vii. Sebastianus Meyer and Conradus
Pellicanus not all dyssentynge from the
same, because he had than brought the
christen churche to a quyetnesse, all foren
tyrannies suppressed. What shall let me
to thinke as much of our present Constā¦tine,
kinge Edward the .vi. for our time?Edwarde vi. Kynge.
consyderynge that the hande of God is
not yet abbreuiated? Esa. lix. He cōmeth
as wele from the rysinge of the sunne, as
he ded. He hathe as wele hys autoryte of
God, and is now a christen Magistrate.
as he was than. So wele is he kynge of
thys realme, and a Brytayn borne,A Kyng. as he
was. As wele is he gyuen to good letters
and careth for the christen relygyon, as
he ded.Godly. As wele hath he set Christes gos¦pell
at lyberte, from the daunger of ty∣rauntes,
and by proclamacion commaū∣ded
it frely to be preached, as he ded So
wele hath he made a generall desturctiō
of supersticiouse Idolles and other ab∣hominations,
as ded he. As Constanty∣nes
face in all hys coynes of Golde and
syluer was erected towardes heauen, by
report of Eusebius in vit a Constantini,Libro. ii▪
so is the vysage of hys harte eleuated vn
to God in all hys daylye studies & prince¦lye

procedynges, if the good frutes maye
shewe what the tree is. Than maye oure
most vertuouse and godly king Edward
the .vi.Angell. for thys age so wele resemble that
good angel of God, as mighte our great
Constantyne for that age.
Consyderynge therfor (ryght wurthie
and excellēt Duke) that he hath by that
hygh offyce,Apoca. vii. the seale of the lyuynge god
and is declared a prynce of power by hys
lyuely wurde. Roma .xiii. to make all his
subiectes the true seruauntes of God by
the Gospell, lete the malyciouse rable of
Antichristes ruffyanes, by your myghtie
admynystracyon vnder hym be forbyd∣den
any more to noye. Apo. vii.Restraynt. Lete thē
be restrayned from doynge suche vyolēce
rauyne, and excesse, as they haue done
now of late to Christes mynysters in Hā¦shire.
Lete them be inhybyted of dagger
drawynge, and of fyste lyftynge in the o¦pen
stretes, whan no man hath ones offē¦ded
thē. Lete them leaue their pullynges
by the bearde and bosom in the presence
of people,Violence. starynge like wylde oxen, whā
no euyl at all is ment to thē. Lete thē no
longer bragge afore the iustyces in the o¦pen
sessyons, of castinge their gloue and
of wagynge battayle, vncorrected, whan
nothynge is eyther done,agynge. sayde, or yet
thought agaynst thē. Lete them be wele
stayed from ragynge and raylynge, oblo¦cutynge

and slaunderynge, withoute
cause reasonable, for vpholdyng the wic¦ked
tradycyons of Antichrist. Permyt
them no longer to counsell in corners,Councell. to
haue wycked persuasyons, and to drawe
people after them. Lete them from hens¦fourth
be charged vnder payne of sore po¦nyshment,
not lycēcyously to do all their
lewde lykynges, as they haue done her∣tofore,
lyke men that are lawles.Desyre▪ We de¦syre
not the euyll of thys frowarde sort,
but their good. We couete not their losse
but their winning, not their vtter destruc¦cion,
as they do ours, but their spedye a∣mendement,
if such angels of reprobacy¦on
as they are maye amende, whych I
scarsely beleue. Chefely our request is,Request▪ to
lyue in peace by them as in Esaye is pro¦mysed,
that the Lambe shuld dwell with
the Wolf, the Gote lye by the Leopard,
the Cowe fede with the Beare,Peace. the Bul∣locke
company with the Lion, the Child
playe with the Serpent, and yet none of
them shulde hurte the other. Esa. xi.
Hys angelicall voice hath bene hearde
al ready by most earnest proclamacyons,A voyce.
ouerall hys domynyons of Englande,
Wales, and Irelande, as was the loude
voyce of great Constantyne ouer Aegipt
Grece, Persye, Asye, and Italy, by most
straight commaundementes, that Christ
shulde be wurshypped, hys holy Gospell

preached, the mynysters therof both pro∣uyded
for and honoured, and all Idoll
worshyppynges to be vtterly abolyshed.
Lete it now therfor be obeyed of all sub∣iectes
without contradyctyon,Obediēce, no wylde
wytted ruffyane permytted from hens
fourth so stubbernely to withstande it.
Commaunde thys gentyll west winde to
haue styll hys plesaunt passage & frinde∣ly
fre course without anye restraynt orApoca. vii.
cruell impedymente of those angels of
darkenesse, that the earth, sea, and trees
maye wholsomly be refreshed therwith.
Gracyously suffre (as ye haue done hi∣therto)
all sortes of people to haue know¦ledge
df the Gospell.Verytye Lete the veryte of
God, so sounde in the eares of all men,
that they may be marked with the sprete
of Christe, and neuer denye hym for a∣ny
vexacyon. Thys poore Expostulacy∣on,
am I your poore oratour, so muche
the boldar to dedycate to your hyghnesse
that I haue alwayes knowne the same
a moste myghtye,Experiēce. zelouse, and ardente
supporter, maynteyner, and defender of
Goddes lyuely wurde. Ryghte humbly
besechynge your excellente grace, to ac∣cepte
the small gyfte thereof, as the sim∣ple
presente of that poore seruaunte of
yours, whyche hathe alwayes borne
bothe you and all yours a most faythful
harte. The eternall father of our Lorde

Iesus Christe, whose inuyncyble veriteVerytye
your grace hathe hytherto most feruent¦ly
fauoured, vouchsafe prosperously to
preserue the same, with my ladyes grace
your most faythfull spouse, and all
your vertuouse and godly chyl¦dren,
in contynuall helthe
and increase of honour,
to the glorye of hys
holy name.
Amen.

iii. Reg. xl.
If Israel (sayth the Lord) shall hold vp∣on
other goddes, and worship them. I wyl
cast hym out of my syght, and he shall be a
Prouerbe, and a fable amonge the nacions
And they that passe by shall maruel therof,
and shall hysse at hym.

