




IT was, faire, vertuous, wittie, for your sake,
That I this harder taske did vndertake.
I grieu'd, such wit was out of your cōmand,
Lock'd in a tongue you did not vnderstand.
To doe you seruice, not my selfe to please,
Did I at first aduenture vpon these.

I thought to haue proceeded in this method, but the ragged, bashfull slut my Muse (hauing not seene your like before) is amazed, and struc∣ken dumbe at the sight of your excellencies: I must therefore take vp the speech for her, and as She hath heretofore twatled much for me, I must therefore entreat you in Her behalfe. Indeed I told Her, She should finde you very louing and kinde, and should be admitted to kisse your whi∣test hands. She is a stranger, I humbly therefore pray you, to take her into your protection, kind∣ly take her into your hands, and entertaine her courteously; none can doe it better then your selues; whilst you looke kindly vpon her, let her with admiration, and contentment gaze on your beauties: you may looke vpon her boldly with vnuailed countenances, you shall finde her euery where modest, either she hath vailde, or quite o∣mitted what She feares might offend your chast

eares, She hath taken paines to let you know what enuious mē haue too long kept from your knowledge. If She speake any thing against your sexe, it is but what malicious men sometimes mutter in an vnknowne language against your inferior frailties, and hath answered somewhat in your behalfe: you shall finde Her no importu∣nate Companion, for you may begin with her when you please, and leaue her when you list: euery small parcell is an entire treatise, and de∣pends vpon it selfe; they may serue you for pa∣stime, if you please, for vse, for embellishing in your discourse, as spangles in your attire: The translations were the better, if they are not made worse in the change. For our owne, they are the best we can at this time. The grace and loue I receiued sometime from one of your sexe, makes me confident of your gracious goodnesse: but my Muse hath a little recoue∣red her spirits, and requests me She may speake a little vnto you.
Your beauties, wonder and amazement bred
In me, that still I am astonished:
Yet this request I pray doe not deny,
Giue me good words, for you haue more then I.
In recompence one day Ile sing a song
Of your rich worth with my laste buskins on.

