



AMonge many worthie sayings of the most eloquent Lactan∣tius (right Honourable) this one is especially worthye to be noted, which is so oftē repea∣ted by him: that No wisedome is to be allowed without (true) Religion. And againe that where Religion is not there is no wysedome. VVherby we are instructed that frō those in whō wysedome is requisite, religiō must in no case be seperate. And againe that they in whō greater fruites of wisedome ought to flou∣rishe (as it should be in them whose handes GOD hath framed to guid ye sterne of the cōmon wealth) must also beare a more feruent zeale towards the true seruice and Honour of GOD. So that these twaine VVysedome and Religion, are linked and

placed together in ye minde of mā, as the eyes there∣of to giue light to his whole vnderstanding. And therefore to staye a while in this similitude, as the one eye of our bodye is so assisting to the other for the making perfite of our sight together, that ha∣uing the vse of both we attaine thereunto: and o∣therwise the one being blinded, the light of the o∣ther is somwhat dimmed and shadowed, and per∣haps in the ende fadeth away and leaueth vs alto∣gether in darcknes: Euen so standeth the case be∣tweene Religion and wisedome, the lightes of the minde. And therfore grosse hath bin the errour of manye great estates, who because they being lif∣ted hie in the vew of all mēs eyes and therfore de∣sirous to be accompted wyse, haue yet in their wise∣dome made no accompt of Religiō at all, but set it bie as a thinge nothing pertayning to ther estate. who though for a time they haue seemed to groape out the channell well, and so by dilligence to sayle in safetye, and with one dim eye to see their waye perfectly, yet lacking ye light of Religion they haue euer bin blind on the one side and wāted the right and better eye: wherby in the ende the eye of their pollicye euer poaring downeward to things on the left band, and not able stedfastly to loke vp to hea∣uen nor to abide the glorye thereof, hath drawne

them into such deepe darcknes, that vnware they haue strayed farre from the drift of their deuices, and beinge not able to walke vprightlye in their owne wayes without stackering and stūbling, haue in the ende fallen so desperatlye yt they neuer were able to ryse againe: wherby to late they finde true that There is no wisedome where Religion is not. And that whereas they thought themselues to be wyse without it, they neuer came to the first step thereof, it being as Salomō sayth: that The feare of the Lord (which such haue neglected) is ye be∣ginning of wysedome. The commaundementes of ye Lord are pure and giue light to the eyes. Againe Psalm. 8. Thy worde O Lord is a lanterne vnto my feete, and a light vnto my pathes. And therefore when soeuer we leaue this light, though the lampe of mās braine burne neuer so bright, we fall perforce in ye end: For neither the wyse head of Achitophell, nor the fayre and flattering face of Absolon that stale from Dauid the peoples hartes, coulde preuaile in their purposes, so pollitickly attempted against the rule of Religion, but yt it turned to their owne con∣fusion: Matt. 15. For euerye plant that the Heauenlye fa∣ther hath not planted shalbe rooted out▪ Yea most miserable and desperat is their case and cursed of Gods owne mouth, that thincke the care of Religi∣on

belongeth not to them.
Another sort of mē there is which being of bet∣ter iudgemente proceede a step farther then these, and yet not so farre as they oughte in deede. For some hauing an inward regard of Religion, do yet thincke it pollicye, that it should be hidden and se∣crete to themselues, and not apparent vnto other: and in this point especially they would be esteemed wyse. But greatly are these likewyse deceiued: for wysedome is no wysedome and not to be accompted of in anye, so longe as it is dissembled and not em∣ployed, that other men maye see good proofe there∣of. And Religion is no Religion that sheweth not it selfe by his plētifull fruites.Shevv me thy fayth by thy vvorkes. &c. Iacob. 2. And what choyse so euer they yt seeme wysest or holiest make of religiō, doing it so as other men shal not be able to discerne it in them, nor to he witnesses therof, they are to be esteemed neither wyse nor Religious.Faith if it haue no vvor∣kes is deade in it selfe. Ia. z. For who wil not accōpt him rather blind or blincking thē other wyse, that shall say he hath his eyes sound, pure & perfit, and yet in the open daye will neuer shew vse of them in the presence of men, but continuallye be wimpled and weare a veale, so that no man cā per∣ceaue whether he do see or no? Eyther such are blinde in deede whē as they say that they see, or els their meaning is very deceitfull.
And so may we iudge of these wilye winkers in Religion, that either they be blindstockes in deede and lacke the light of that Heauenlye wysedome, which they pretende to haue, or els their wicked wysedome is but a cloake of wickednes▪ & then in¦deede they doate in their worldly pollicye, not kno∣winge that the wysest of all hath sayd: Matt. 5. Let your light so shine before men yt they may see your good workes & glorify your father which is in Heauē. And yt Euery tree that doth not beare good fruite shalbe cut downe & cast into euerlastīg fier.Matt. 3. And therfore these Nicodemites that will visit Christ onelye in ye darcke and by night and not openly be∣fore men, the Lord will not acknowledge him be∣fore his Heauenly father. Such is ye ende of fleshly pollicy. So that (Right honourable) onely such ar to be held as wyse in deede which thincke that it lyeth vpō them & especially belōgeth vnto them, to make a constant and opē profession of true Re∣ligion. If then to be wyse be to professe Religion, it is worthy to be farther considered how a man may attaine to perfection herein.
The heathen that euer measured wysedomē by ciuill pollicy, haue accompted best of those by whose good endeuour their commō wealth hath bin most vpheld and strengthned from forain inuasions:

and that haue employed themselues to breake the force of such as would assault it. And so (my very good Lord) they that haue bin the most worthye members of the Church of God, haue euer excelled in this point, to shew themselues forward in pro∣moting Religion and suppressing to their power ye enemyes therof: and especially I say in suppressing the enemyes. For the houlding downe of them is the houlding vp of ye other.
2. Sam 5.8So the godly Dauid did both fetch home ye arke of God, and scourged his ennemyes the Philistines and Iebusites. So the zealous king Iosias both re∣stored the Law of the Lord, and put downe ye wic∣ked Chemerinus that sacrificed vnto Baal.2. Reg. 23. So ye noble Cyrus deliuered Israell and held Babilō cap∣tiue. Finally so the worthy Cōstantine (the sonne to Helen borne in this Island) brought peace to ye Church,Euseb. li. 9 cap. 9. Ec∣cles. hist. set Christian Religiō at libertye, and also ouerthrew the cruell ennemy and tyraunt Maxē∣tius. If these godly examples were euer to be fol∣lowed in any place: If this zeale in Religion were euer to be shewed in any age, where more then in this our natiue countrye? If this perfit wysedome were euer to be wished in any gouernours, of whom rather then of the nobility of England? when ra∣ther then in this our time, against the tyrannye of

the bishop of Rome? For what enemye bath made such greedy spoyle and wrought such broyle in any countrey, as he and his hath done continuallye in this little Isle, (as but for being tedious might be shewed) almost in euery kings time since ye cōquest, as VVilliam Rufus and Hēry the first, both were sore combred wt Pope Vrban ye second and Paschal the second, through Anselmus bishop of Cāterbu∣ry. Henry the second much more with Thomas Becket and Pope Alexander the 3. Richard the first complayned greuously of the Popes shamefull polling his Realme and yet could not redresse it. K. Iohn suffered a thousand stormes and ye Realme was myserablye spoyled and made tributarye to ye Pope for euer, by the treachery of Stephē Langtō bishop of Canterbury. In the time of Hēry the 3. the Pope ransackt all the Churches in Englande, and so hath he continued with the rest, vexing by exactiōs, excommunications, or some such meanes euerye one. But because his staffe hath here bin brokē & he throwē out of ye dores in this our time, what meanes doth he dailye leaue vnproued to worke our confusion, as sturring rebelliōs, mouing treasons, seditions and conspiracies within ye land, cursing and excōmunicating both Prince and peo∣ple, nobilitye and commons, and yelding vs a praye

vnto him whō he hath assigned by his bulls to en∣ioye their lyuings and dignities abroad, who houre∣lye wait whē eyther by nature it selfe or their vio∣lent hand, the thred shoulde faile whereon depen∣deth the staye of our estate. Such is the purpose of Antichrist against vs, and yet practised with co∣lour of holines. So that if euer the bloud of Christ his Church ought euer to be precious in the eyes of men, the time is now. Now lyeth it vpon euery one to shew himselfe a freind to his countrey, by with∣standing to his power the common enemye therof: and especially those that stande in the hyest place, both for their owne sakes because their fall shalbe the greater, and for charge of Gods people cōmit∣ted vnto them, whose bloud he wil require at their hands if they leaue them to the wolfe.
For the which cause (Right honourable) I as a member of that bodye which is so assaulted by this Dragon both for the safetye of my selfe and other, employed my self a litle to discouer ye secret traynes of this deceitful ennemye: and because this my en∣terprise of it selfe lyeth open to ye perill of the ma∣licious mouthes of many his partakers, so yt it shold not be able to beare out it selfe agaīst their force. Therfore necessitye driueth me to seeke for ye suc∣cour of such a Patrone in whom I might assure my

selfe of that perfite wysedome which Lactancius alloweth, and find that rescue which this cause re∣quireth: that is one who by power should be able, by wysedome skilfull, and in zeale and affection willing and forward to encounter this aduersarye with anye of his faction: whereof because it is not vnknowen to mee by many priuate occasions, that your honour hath made proofe that this perfite wysedome is planted in you as it was in Dauid, Io∣sias, Cyrus and Constantine, bearing on your lefte arme a target of defence for Religion, and hauing your right hand armed with a sword to wound the ennemye Antichrist: And againe seing it hath not bin so priuate but that this zeale hath shewed it selfe openlye in biddinge battell to the members of Antichrist, marchinge against them in fielde and pursuing them out of the countrye: I thought your Lorship most meete and I assured my selfe yt your honour would be most willing to suffer this my lit∣tle volume to fight vnder your bāner in that quar∣rell against the Pope, wherein your honour hath heretofore personallye proceeded. If therefore the worthines of the matter herein contayned & written by maister Bale, maye so excuse the vn∣worthines of my simple stile in translating it, that your honour vouchsafe to accepte the one with the

other and beare with the one for the other, your curtesye shall the rather confirme all the profes∣sours of ye Gospel in that vndoubted opinion which they haue iustlye conceyued of you, and giue them cause still to glorifye God for such nobility, wishing the good encrease and longe prosperitye of such: and I hauing my trauaile most happely bestowed, shall acknowledge my dutye alwayes bounde vnto your honour for it. And thus crauinge pardon of this tedious volume wherewith I haue troubled your Honour ouer longe, I leaue you to the Al∣mightye.

Put your selues in araye against Babilon round about, all ye that bende the bovve shoote at her, spare no ar∣rovves, for she hath sinned against the Lord.
Iere. 50:
