



Right Honourable.
OF Origen, it was vsually sayd amongst the Anci∣ets: where he did wel none did better; where ill, none worse Vbi bene, nemo meli∣us: vbi ma∣le, nemo pe∣ius.: And of those good Bookes he wrote, (which were very ma∣ny) learned Hierom sayth, that as in those Bookes he excelled all others: so Hieron. in praefat in O∣rig. Homel. in Caut: in∣ter oper H∣ron. in Tom. 3. in his Homilies on the Cantickles, hee surpast himselfe. Accordingly (but in the euill sence which best bets them) may it bee sayd of the Iesuites: that as in their trickes they haue played, and garboiles they haue
 raisde, and villanies they haue commi in Christ these last fifty years, they haue gone beyond all men: so in their twoo last exploytes, namely the powder plotte of England, and the French Kings murther, they haue excelled themseluees the truth whereof is most apparant, whe∣ther wee respect their Subtilty in contri∣uing, and Malice in performing; or their Craft in concealing, and Impudencie in de∣nying both these actions. For, as to the two first, what Nation euer receaued such a blowe, and was strucken into such a∣mazement; as France in the death of their great Henrie? And what firme and flo∣rishing state in the world, was euer vpon a sodain, covered with such a desolation, as England had, if blessed Iesus had not confounded the cursed Iesuites plot?
And for the two latter, who knoweth not that though all Records haue regi∣stred them, and most nations of the world proclaimed them the founders and Fa∣thers of the pouder Treason; yet had they not onely▪ contriued to haue cast it vpon
 others, if it had taken effect: but since it miscarryed, haue not blushed to publishe in print Iac. Gret∣serus in stg∣mae mse∣nico pa. 41 4 &c.: that the Iesuites were no way guilty of it, that Garnet was executed not for it, but onely for being a Priest: That he was rackt almost to death to make him confesse himselfe guilty, but neuer did: and that Oven his man was plucked in pieces on the racke, because he would not accuse his Master: whereas the world knowes, Records testifie, and thousands liue, whose eares and eyes can witnesse, all these particulars that ensue:
1 That Garnet the Provinciall (with his six names) & other Iesuits were found guilty of the powder Treason.
2 That Garnet was arraigned and con∣victed onely for that.
3 That he freely and openly confes∣sed both at his tryall and his death, he had neuer been on the racke in his life.
4 That he confessed (without torture) he knew of the powder-plot in confessiō.
5 That he first denyed and forswore this and diuerse other matters which hee
 afterwards confessed, and defended the same by aequiuocation.
6 That Oven confest he kild himselfe with his owne knife, to avoide the racke, least it should make him confesse such things as he had rather dye than discover.
All these thinges are as cleere as the Noone day, and yet (forsooth) the good seely innocent Iesuites must not bee held guilty of the powder treason: but what shall we say to this impudency; if it do ap∣peare, that not onely Garnet and his Eng∣lish brethren, but all the great Iesuites in the world, were priuie to that plot? what shall we thinke, if the very case in terminis, (the powder treason in the particular cir∣cumstances) were propounded, debated, and resolued amongst the Iesuits before it came to passe? what if Garnet was resolued from the principall Father of the society, that though hee knewe the particulars of such a plotte, yet hee ought not by any meanes to reveale it? I for my part will be but the reporter, let the wise reader iudge.
Delrio a great and famous Iesuite, puts d Mart. Delrio: dis∣quis. magic: Tom. 3. lib. 6. ca. 1. sect. 2: &c.
 this case not long before the pouder trea∣son: A Priest is made priuie in confession, that in such a vault or vnder such a house such a quantity of gunpouder is purpose∣ly layd, as if it be not remooued there is evident danger, that not only much peo∣ple, but euen the Prince himselfe are sure to bee murthered. The Iesuites, mooues what the confessor is to do in this case: & for answere hee cannot but confesse, that most Doctors hold, hee ought with wise∣dome and warinesse to discouer it: but for conclusion he resolues, that the safer and better opinion is, he ought to conceale it: Wherby (Right Ho:) your Lordship and all the world may see, that if Garnet did conceale the powder treason, hee did no more then he had the Iesuites resolution aforehand for his warrant in that case. If then, Garnet were arraigned and condem∣ned onely for being priuie to the plot: If it be knowen to all, that he was privie to it by confessiō, and to some that he knew of it otherwise also then by confession: If he was neuer on the racke, and therefore
 never put to confesse all he know: If ∣ven his man chose rather to kill himselfe, then confesse all he knew of the Iesuites in that matter: If the very case of the pow∣der treason (in terminis terminantibus as the Lawyers say) was debated and resolved a∣forehand amōgst the Iesuites: If these par∣ticulars I say, be true, may any reasonable man make question any longer, whether the Iesuites be guilty of that plot?
And nomore question is there (if all were knowne) that they were the forgers, the Authors, and Abbetors of this late dis∣astrous and fearefull french murder: and let them not doubt; but the Author of truth and reuenger of all bloud (but espe∣cially of his anointed) will vnmaske them and discouer it to the full: they plotd it in hellish darkenesse, but God will reveals it, and their shame by it, in the sight of the sonne and face of all the world.
This little Booke (amongst others, which lately Fr hath sent vs) hath begunne this discovery, and Truth will not rest crying to God, till it be so perfec∣ted,
 that all the world may see it: And see∣ing Authority iudged it fit and woorthy to passe in English to publique viewe, it was held not vnfitting in fewe woords to let the world know, that this Author (tho a straunger) hath spoken (touching the great English Treason) no more then knowen truth: and which, if they dare deny it, or any part of it, shal be more par∣ticularly deciphered and averred to their faces, by evidences vndeniable, and be∣yond all exception: Let them accept the condition when they please, it will be performed on our parts.
In the meane time (Right Honoura∣ble) accept this, and giue it reading, as a Testimonie of the love and speciall re∣spect my heart doth owe you: who as I will ever pray, that you may still ho∣nour GOD and your selues, by zeale a∣gainst Poperye, and constancye in the Truth: So shall I reioyce by anye ser∣vice I can perfourme, to bee an instru∣ment
 of your Confirmation in the same. Till when, giue mee leaue to bee one of those, who will euer honour your Noble and Religious vertues, and who in all Christian and hear∣tie affection, doth vowe to remaine

