



IT is, and alwayes hath bin the custome of god∣ly and well disposed Wryters, too imploy theyr time and tra∣uaile too the maintenaunce of vertue and Godlinesse, and too the furtherance of suche as are willing for too learne. Whiche thing appeereth by the many∣folde woorkes of suche as in tymes paste, too theyr owne great paynes & our ease, haue searched out, not onely the groundes of those things that naturall reason is able too reache vntoo, but also the misteries of suche mat∣ters as haue neede of the light and secret woorking of a higher and more diuine power, than reason is. Whereby they haue lefte vntoo vs, a plaine and pleasaunt pathway, vntoo all knoweledge and vn∣derstanding: and the neerer that euery of them approcheth vntoo the truthe, the greater commendation doothe hee deserue too haue and the greater profit yeeldeth hee too his Reader. But neyther is

there any certeintie in mortall mennes woorkes, so long as they speake but of their owne. Neyther is there any assured truthe too bee founde, elsewhere than in the woord of GOD. Wherefore like as Gods woorde is the fountayne of truthe, the keye of knoweledge, and the lanterne of lyghte, or rather the very truthe, knoweledge, and light it selfe: So is cheefe (or rather only) account too be made of their authoritie and doctrine, whiche vnderstanding the same a∣righte, doo sette it foorth purely and sincerely, eyther by preaching or wryting, too the behoofe and commoditie of others, For the scrip∣ture accounted him a leude seruaunt, that hidde his Talent in the grounde, and occupyed it not. And certeine it is, that hee hathe the true vnderstanding and sense of the Scripture, whose interpre∣tation beeing alwayes one without varyablenesse, agreeth with the groundes of our fayth, wyth the meaning of the holye Ghoste vtte∣red in the whole bodye of the Byble, and with the vniforme iudge∣mente and opinion of the Primatiue Churche. Of suche teachers hathe GOD at all times raysed vp some, and in these dayes hathe giuen many too his Churche: whiche labouring like good woorke∣men in the Lordes Vineyarde, endeuer for too cutte vp the Bram∣bles and Bryers of Ignoraunce, Errour, Hypocrisie, and Super∣stition, nowe long time rooted in the hartes of Christians, and in steade of them too plant ageine true knoweledge, feare of GOD, holynesse, and religion, vntoo the aduauncement of Gods glory and enlarging of Chrystes kingdome, and too the vtter ouerthrowe of Antichryste, and Sathans tyrannie. Suche a one is the author of this presente woorke, Nicholas Heminge a Mynister of Gods woorde in the Vniuersitie of Hafnia in Denmarke, who wrate this Postill in Latine, for the helpe and furtheraunce of his fel∣lowe Mynisters. Wherein hee opening the Gospelles after the ma∣ner of our Prophecyings, setteth foorth a Confirmation of the Ar∣ticles of oure beleefe: and confuteth the cheefe errours, heresies, and abuses wherwith the Church is troubled. Ageine, he teacheth the ryght vse of Chrystes Gospell and Sacramentes, and sheweth the frute of the miracles and examples of Chryst, and of all holy men.
Moreouer he toucheth the dueties of all Estates, from the Magistrate, too the poore afflicted outcast among men, and de∣clareth the right vse of things indifferent. Finally hee instruc∣teth the minister, and comprehendeth the whole summe of Chri∣stian lyfe and doctrine. And these things doth he, both breef∣ly, playnly, distinctly and orderly, which are great helpes of re∣membraunce: And also aptly, fully, pithely and learnedly, which are great furtherances too instruction. As for the Doctrine that he teacheth, it is sound and wholsome: in which respecte he de∣serueth credit and estimation. Besides this, he applyeth himselfe too the capacitie and edifying of the simple and weaker sorte, whome he rather dieteth with sweete milke, than combereth with strong meates. And in this respect, he dooth (as it were) glaunce ouer certaine poyntes of deepe misterie, leauing them too the consideration of suche as are more profounde in knowledge and vnderstanding, and growne too more perfection and ripe∣nesse in Christ. Yet wanteth he not whereby the wyser and stronger sort also may bee furthered. For he hath diuers wordes that cary the effect of whole sentences: and sentences that con∣teine large matters. By bothe which, he oftentimes giueth in∣cling of more too be gathered, than is openly expressed: and so dooth he bothe sharpen the witte, and open the vnderstanding. Therfore at suche time as Lucas Harison and George Bishop Stacioners, men well mynded towards godlynesse and true Reli∣gion, taking vppon them too Imprint this woork at their proper charges, requested mee too put the same intoo English, I willing∣ly agreed too their godly desire: bothe for that I hoped it might bee a furtherance and helpe too the simple and vnlearned sorte of our ministers in England, (of whom would God the knowledge were as great as is their number): And also for that I thought it a meete occasion whereby I might testifie my duetyfull good will towardes youre honoure, for your great goodnesse extended vntoo mee at the commendation of your deere freende and my speciall well willer Sir Thomas Smith. To whome I thinke my

selfe in many respects greatly beholding: and yet in no one re∣spect more, than for procuring mee an entraunce intoo your hono∣rable fauour. The continuance whereof (God willing) I shall not cease too seeke by all wayes and meanes of dutie: of which I beseeche you too accepte this Booke as a first hansel, and to suffer this my trauell so necessarie & behoof∣full, too passe foorth vnder your fauourable protectiō, to the profit of our comon coū∣trey, and the glorie of GOD.
Written at London,
the .xij. of October. ANNO. 1569.
