



HAveing long desired to publish our Faith vnto this nation and in perticuler vnto those congregations wherof you are, (as wee have formerly done to our owne Na∣tion): and also to make knowne the thinges wherein you, and wee differ, and are opposite. VVee have now through the mercie of God, thus farr, brought our desires to passe, being onely vnsatisfied for our owne in∣sufficiency that wee are no better able to manifest your errors unto you wee have divers causes from good grounds to do this wee have done. First because we are bound to discover the misterie of iniquitie, by all good meanes that wee can and in the cupp that she hath fil∣led to vs, to fill hir the duble. Secondly that wee might through the grace of God (if your willing minds be thereunto) be instrumentes of good, vnto you herein & the rather, because you haue bene instrumēts of good in discovering divers of our erors unto us, which wee ac∣knowledg to the praise of God, & with thāk full harts to you. Now in that wee do this by way of opposition and reproofe publiquely, wch you did by instruction priva∣tely: for our defence herein, wee answere: you came publiquely amongst us, and advanced your error of Succession and order, From the proportion of the scriptures, and have destroyed the faith of manie ther∣bye, who for sinister respect were willinge to followe you: wee have dltt divers times with divers of yoe privately, but you have lightly regarded our loveing admonitions esteeming all as nothinge wee have faced: some of you goeing on in your sinne seeking to make this people one with you, who are iustly cutt of From God and his people for their falling avvay from Grace. VVe have writtē privately to the vvhole congregation
 you are of, to prevent you in that evill. vvee have vvrit∣ten particulerly unto you H. de R. but all is in vaine, in that you esteeme the truth vvee professe, and us here∣in as vaine. Thus are wee constrained (for the de∣fence of the truth of God wee professe and that vvee may not seeme to justifie you in your evills, and to make it knovvne unto all that vvee have good cause to differ From you) to publish these thinges in this manner as vvee do: and that it may appeare vnto all, and to your consciences that vvee have stronge grounds for ch thinges vvherein vvee differ From you, though vvee be vveake to the mainteynance of them. If anie shal oppose part or all of that is Heere vvritten, vvee de this equal kindnes, that it may be set over into lish For all our understandings, as vvee have caused  to be set over into dutch for all yours, and if there because of Replye, vvee vvill by the assistance of God  were, vvithall the abilyty vvherevvith God shall ma∣ke us able. Fare you vvell. Peace and love, vvith Faith. From God, and From our Lord Iesus Christ, be with all m that are in Christ Iesus, Amen.

