



INfinite, and vnspeakeable are the be∣nefits
of our God to vs ward, right ho∣norable,
among which his gratious &
miraculous reuealing of the eternall
truth from time to time, is, as diligent∣ly,
so gratefully to be recorded. For ma∣nie,
and those mightie aduersaries hath it had in all a∣ges.
Satan the prince of darkenesse in Paradise; Kaine
with his posteritie before the floud; after the drowning
of the worlde Cham and his seede vntill the promise
vnto Abraham; from that time vntil the Lawe was de∣liuered
by Moses, the Ismaelites, the Chaldeans, the
Persians, the Aegyptians blemished, and to their pow∣ers
banished the same.
In the time of Ahab through the priests of Baal,1. Kings. 1. 21. 22. &c. and
the false prophets; in the time of Nebuchad-nezzar
through extreme captiuitie;1. King. 22. 6. and in our Sauiours time
what through the tyrannie of wicked Magistrates, and
through the heresies of vngodly teachers, smal tokens
of this truth in the world could be seene of man.
Furthermore, consider we the time after our Saui∣ours
death when the Apostles yet flourished; & the a∣ges
after that vntil this verie daie, and we shal finde
that verie fiercelie it hath bene assalted; and is come vn∣to
our hands with no smal adoe.

For in the Apostles time Simon,Act. 8, 9. 10 &c. and Elymas sorce∣rers;
false-apostles, and false brethren (whereof some
at Coloss,Act. 13, 8. 9. &c. gaue out that the traditions of men were
necessarilie to be obserued; that the superstitious af∣fliction
of the bodie was à religious seruing of God;Coloss. 2.
that differences shoulde bee set betweene meates, and
drinkes, and daes, according to the Iewish custome;
and that the sonne of God, Christ, was not the worker
of mans saluation, but that by Angels we haue an
open accesse prepared vnto the Father: others at Ieru∣salem,Acts 15.
taught that circumcision was so behooueful
vnto saluation, that vnlesse men were circumcised
it was vnpossible for them to bee saued; and that
freelie, or by faith alone wee are not iustified, but by
workes also; others, at Corinth, were of opinion that
there was no resurrection at al; others, that it is alrea∣die
past,1. Cor. 15. as Hymeneus, and Philetus: and others, (to
oit the vngodlie opinions both of those which in∣ueighed
against Magistrates,2. Tim. 2, 17. 18. whom Peter and Iude
wrote against, and of those which mingled the trueth
with vane fables,2. Pet. 2, 10. and genealogies, as manie did in Asia,
and in Crete,Iude, ver. 8. and of those who thought how such as
beleeued might liue as theie would in al licentious∣nes,1. Tim. 1, 34
forsomuch as freelie without good workes they
were iustified,Tit. 3, 8. 9 which imps of Satan by the Epistle of
Iude are worthilie consuted,Iude, vers 4, and finallie of Antichrist
then arising in his members) vtterlie denied Christ,2. Thess. 2. 3. 4. &c. yea
and God too,Iude ver. 4. as Athests) did what in thē was to seduce
men from this truth.
These being dead, others arose, both in nūber more
plētifulie; & for their abhominable errors more hurt∣fulie
to ye Church of Christ. As vnder the Emperor A∣drianus,
the Gnostikes, a pestilent companie whereof
some were called Barborians, some Barbolites, some
Cod ans, some Stratio tikes, some Phibionites, & some
Zacheans; vnder Antoninus Pius not onely the Valen∣tinians,
of whom did spring the Nasinors, the Phenio∣nites,
the Setheans, the Kainites, the Orphites, the Anti∣tactars,

and others: but also the Marcionites, the Cer∣domtes,
the Eucratites, and Hydroparactites, with the
Seuerians; vnder Antoninus Verus the Montanistes, the
Cataphrygians, the Artotyrits; vnder Philip the Aria∣bans,
and Helchesaits, the Nouatians, and Catharans
vnder Decius; vnder Gallus the Noetians; Patripassi∣ans,
Hermogenians, the Millenaries, and the Nepoti∣ans,
vnder Galienus the Samosatenians, vnder Probus
the Manichies &c, the cursed errors of al which I mind
not either for breuitie, or for modestie sake to recite.
To conclude, so did the seede of heresies in a short
space of time take roote, that Augustine in a certaine
place confesseth howe in his daies they were growen
vnto fourescore and eight principal, famous, and seue∣ral
sects.
Which enimies to this truth decreased not, but dai∣lie
more and more forceablie encreased in such wise,
that their errors were neither in corners taught, nor
defended by a fewe, priuate, and obscure fellowes, as
manie of the former; but both publiquelie profes∣sed
ouer the whole worlde, and also stiflie maintai∣ned
against al men by the greatest tyrans that euer
gouerned, I meane the Pope, and the Turke, where∣of
this by force, and hee by fraude, and both most
wretchedlie for these 900. yeares haue desperatelie
addicted themselues to the vtter abolishing of this e∣ternal
truth. But al in vane. For as God in times passed
raised vp against Kaine, Habel; against Cham, Sem;
against the Ismaelites, the Israelites, Abraham a∣gainst
the Chaldeans; Ioseph against the Aegypti∣ans;
against the Priests of Baal, Elias; Micheas a∣gainst
the false Prophets; Daniel, and his felowes
against Nebuchad-nezzar, Christe against the
Pharisies &c: Philip and Peter against Simon Ma∣gus,
Paul against Elymas, the disciples of Christ a∣gainst
false-apostles, against heretikes (to saie no∣thing
at this time of the blessed Martys whiche
vnto the death stucke vnto this trueth) Irenaeus,

Cyril, Tertullian, Augustine, and other Godly fathers,
by whose learning, zeale, and constancie the trueth
maugre the heads of al aduersaries was maintained:
So he hath, & dailie doth stirre vp his seruants to with∣stand
them.
Howe the one,D. Chytraeus Ora▪ de sta Eccles. namelie the Turke, preuaileth ouer
this truth, not onelie the manifold companies of Chri∣stians
in Grecia,Hoc tempo∣re in Grae∣cia Asia, Africa &c. Mysia, Bulgaria, Thracia, Russia, Mus∣couia
&c; but also the Patriarchs of Byzantie; of Alex∣andria,
of Antioch, & of Ierusalem, al which are Chri∣stians;
& the publike seruice of Christians day by day,
in moe than twentie temples, euen in the chiefest cie
of his empire, at this verie instant, al which coūtries &
persons notwithstanding being tributarie vnto the
Turkes, do witnes.
And how the other, I meane the Pope his holines doth
prosper, by the present state of England, of Scotland, of
Germanie, France, Denmark, Bohemia, besides other na∣tions
and kingdomes, for al his bloodie inquisition in
Spaine, and Massacres in France, and murthers in Scot∣land,
and wars in the low countries, and rebellions in
Ireland, and conspiracies in England, it is apparent to ye
view of the whole world. Wherby it may be gathered
that great is the trueth, and it wil preuaile.
It is the parts therefore of vs which are partakers of
this trueth, first to be thankeful vnto almightie God
for preseruing the same from perishing; for gathering
to himselfe a Church wherein his truth is sounded, and
showen from age to age; and for admitting vs into that
companie, which both in this worlde doe professe his
Name, and in the worlde to come shal euerlastinglie
extoll his goodnes.
And secondly it is our dueties by all the giftes and
meanes which God hath imparted vpon vs to aduance,
and promote this trueth. Which they among others do
worthilie that by preaching; but they, as I thinke, best
of al performe, which by writing publish, & spread-a∣broad
the same, and that not onely because for ye time

present they do greatly profit, but especialie for that
they prouide both for the instruction, and comfirma∣tion
of the posteritie to come. For bookes wil teach,
and strengthen, & testifie, and consute when men hap∣pilie
cannot. In which respect we are much beholding
to the Prophets, much to the Apostles, to the Fathers
much, and much to the Godlie learned of our age. For
by their bookes and writings wee knowe the trueth,
which otherwise smallie, or not so perfectlie coulde be
vnderstoode.
Of which truth I doe nowe present vnto your Ho∣nor,
noble Comitisse, à most singular descriptiō, draw∣en
out of the pure fountanes of Gods holie word, and
to the ouerthrowe of al aduersaries of the same, whe∣ther
theie be Iewes, Turks, Papists, Atheistes, or what∣soeuer
heretikes, written in the Latine tongue by that
learned, and paineful Pastor in the Church of Christ at
this day, Nicholas Hemmingius, publique professor of
diuinitie at Haffine à famous Vniuersitie in Denmark.
Which treatise I haue translated into English for
these causes. One is, that the ignorant sort of people
may see, howe Protestants are not so, as the Papists giue
out, at variance among themselues. For this work, with
infinite other good bookes of foraine writers in our
English tongue, doth shew, that touching the substance
of Religion we varie not, neither wil by Gods grace,
though Satan gladly would bring it so to passe.
nother is, that it may bee knowen from time to
time that the Religion which al the Protestants in the
world doe maintaine, is not à seruice of God newlie
found-out by Luther, Melancton, Caluine, and others,
as the Papists vntruely report; but is verie ancient, and
grounded altogether vpon Gods holy worde. For this
trueth here described, is builded not vpon the weake in
entions of man, but vpon the holie scriptures, as may
easilie appeare.
The third, that it may be more knowen, and cōmon
then hitherto it hath bine. For this is proper to true

Religion, which thing is not proper either to Poperie,
or to any sect of heretikes, that the more it is knowen,
the more it is desired; & the more common, the more
commended.
The last is, seing how good Christians do both stu∣diouslie
reade, and also gratefulie accept good Books
in our vulgar tongue at this day, to giue them an oc∣casion,
when either for the ignorance, negligence, or
Non residence of their Pastors, or for other causes they
can not heare ye word preached, to inflame their zeales
by the reading of this Booke, which in al respectes is
so necessarie and singular, as in mine opinion, though
there be manie good, yet but fewe better Bookes. And
that it maie be read with more pleasure, and vnder∣stoode
with more ease. I haue not onlie illustrated
the same with the places of Scripture, but also diui∣ded
the Booke into Chapters, the one sheweth the in∣tegritie
of the doctrine, and the other openeth the ex∣cellencie
of the method.
And these my labors I am bolde nowe to publishe
vnder your name, Noble Comitisse, moued thereunto
partlie by the good reporte generalie giuen of your
Honor, as one which maketh no smal account both of
Christian religion, and of them, who are Christianlie
religious; and partelie by that fauour which my selfe
haue found at your handes, the which I beseech your
goodnesse, accept wel in worth.
God almightie, euen for his sonnes sake, confirme
your Ladieship in that truth vntil your liues ende,
whereof nowe you are not, neither neede to be a∣shamed;
and graunt to your Honor, and to the Right
Honourable your husband, both the perfect felicitie
of this life to your hearts desire, and in the worlde to
come those thinges which he hath prepared for such as
vnfeinedlie doe loue him, Amen. The fourth of No∣uember,
Anno 1581.

