



WOrthy Ladie, when I began to con∣sider to whome I might best commend the care of this so great a cause; my hart could conceiue of none so fitt as you, & that for two causes & the third may not be wanting. The first is, because I knowe your faithful vnfained loue to God & his truth, & that in manie thinges according to knowledg: The second because I knowe there is none in that Land that hath better meanes to procure a cause of religion, to be handled according to the judgmēt of the best: The third is the faithful reverēd loueing respect I beare to you; & that from your owne worthie de∣serts in the best things, & in all good vnto me. I pray & be∣seech you by that loue of God, that hath bene in you of long time: (the which I wish may abound in you more & more) that you faile not my hopes herein which are: That you wil either plainely see an upright consionable sound answere from the word of truth to this groūd here propounded: or els giue glorie to God, & receiue it for the blessed truth of God. The ground is easilie & plainelie set downe, which is that God giueing Adam freewil / and power in himself not to eate of the forbidden fruit / and live: or to eate / and dye / could not in his eternal decree; ordeyne or appoint him to life, or death, for then had his Freewil bene overthrowne: & if Adam had not eaten & sinned (which

was to his owne power) then had not death entred: There∣fore God did not decree that death should enter: & then Gods decree is not the cause of anie mans condemnation. I now pray you Ladie, with all the loue off my soule 'enter∣taine this great cause off God, into your thoughts, & lett it take vp your best meditations, that good thereby being pro∣duced, you may stil be an instruement to advance the gospell off Iesus Christ: & you shalbe sure off an high recompence off reward at the hands off the most high in heauen, & your remembrance shalbe blessed amonge the Saints upon earth, Thus praieing the Lord to blesse you, and to giue you his holie Spirit with a gracious, wise, vnderstanding hart, to descorne a right the thinges that differ. I take leaue▪ withal the grace & faith∣full honestie off my hart, (as I haue cause) desiering your best good.

Iune 2. 1611.

Psal. 111.2.
The works of the Lord are great, & ought to be sought out off all them that love them.

