

To all that truely wish Ierusalems prosperity, & Babilons destruction, wise¦dome & vnderstanding be multiplied vpon you.
IN these days if ever, that is true which the wisemā said. Eccl. 12.12. there is none ēd in ma¦keing many bookes, & much reading is a weari∣nes to the flesh: yet considering how heynous it is in the sight of the lord to force mē ād wemē by cruell persecutiōs to bring their bodies to a worship, wherevnto they cannot bring their spi¦rits: wee thought it our duety for Gods glory & the reformation thereof in this our owne natiō to publish this litle writing following, wherein is manifestly proved by the law of God, the law of our lād, & his Maties owne divers testimonies, that no mā ought to be persecuted for his religiō be it true or false, so they testifie their faithful alle∣giance to the King. What shal men do striveing about matters of religion til this be ended. For if this be truth that the kings of the earth have power frō God to cōpel by persecution all their subjects to beleeve as they beleeve then wicked is it to resist, ād the persecutiōs of such is iustly vpon thē, and the Magistrats that execute the same are clere frō their blood, ād it is vpō their owne heads: but if the kings of the Earth have not power from God to compel by persecution any of their subjects to beleeve as they beleeve (seeing faith is the worke of God) then no lesse wic¦ked is it in the sight of God to disobey, and the persecutions of such are vpō the Magistrats, & the blood of the persecuted crieth vnto the lord, and wilbe required at the Magistrats hands.
Wherefore in al humility, reverēce ād loyalty wee do humbly desire of our soveraign lord the

K: ād al Gods ministers vnder him, as Iudges Iustices of peace, etc. by whome this persecu∣tiō is executed, thēselves to cōsider, not whether herein they please lord Bbs: but whether they please the lord Iesus Christ, who after a little whyle shall judg all judges, according to their workes without respect of persons, ād therefore are comaunded to kisse the sonne least he be angrie & they prish in the way. psa. 2. our humble desire is, that they would consider what is testified in the scriptures: that, The kings of the Earth shall give their power vnto the Beast, til the words of God be fulfilled thē shal they take their power from hir. If it be granted (as it is) that the kings of this nation formerly have given their power vnto that Romish Beast, it shal evidently appeare, that our lord the king and al Magistrats vnder him do give their power to the sāe beast though the Beast be in another shape: For as that spiri¦tual power or beast of Rome sets vp a worship (as they pretend) for God, and force al therto by cruel persecutiōs, the kings of the earth giveing their power therevnto, so this spirituall power or beast of Englād sets vp a worship (as they pre¦tend) for God, and force al thereto by cruel perse¦cutiōs, the kings Matie giveing his power here vnto. Oh that al that are in authority, would but cōsider by the word of God (which shal judg them at the last day) what they do, when they force men against their soules ād consciences to dissemble to beleeve as they beleeve, or as the K: and state beleeves, they would withdrawe their hands ād harts therefrom ād never do as they have done partely through inconsideration, and partely to please lord Bbs: being in favour with the King.
It cannot but with high thāk fulnes to God ād to the king be aknowledged of al that the kings Matie is no blood thirsty man for if he were, bo¦dily destruction should be the portion of al that feare God, and endeavor to walke in his waies as may be seene in the primitive time of this spi¦rituall power or beast of England, after that king Henry de 8. had cast of the Romish beast, ād since, (so far as leave hath bene graunted them) by hanging, burning banishing, imprisoning, ād what not, as the particulars might bee named. Yet our most humble desire of our lord the king is, that he would not give his power to force his faithful subjects, to dissemble to beleeve as he beleeves, in the least measure of persecution, though it is no smale persecution, to lye many yeares in filthy prisons, in hunger cold, jdlenes, devided from wife, family, calling, left in conti∣nual meseries ād tēptations, so as death would be to many lesse persecution, seeing his Matie. confesseth that to change the mynd must bee the work of God. And of the lord Bbs: wee desire, that they would a little leave of persecuringe those that cannot beleeve as they, til they have proved that God is welpleased therewith, and the soules of such as submit in safety from condē¦nation let them prove this, and wee protest we wil for ever submit vnto them, and so wil thou∣sands: and therefore if there bee any sparke off grace in thē let thē set thēselves to give satisfac¦tion either by word or writing or both. But if they wil not, but continue their cruel courses as they have done, let them yet remēber that they must come to judgment, and have their abhomi¦nations set in order before them, ād be torne in peeces when none shal deliver them.
And whereas they have no other cullor of ground out of the scriptures, then that they have Cano¦zed a law. viz: that whosoever shal affirme hat the K: Ma: hath not the same power ove the church that the godly kings of Israel had vnder the law &c Let him be excomunicate ipso facto. The vnsound s of which ground is manifested in this Dia∣logue followeing▪ wherein is shewed their pal∣able ignorance in that they knowe not the mi∣iay of God, and therefore have they made this canon in flattery to the king onely to support their pride and cruelty: for if the kingdome or and of Israell, or Canaan now vnder the gospel be an earthly kingdome or land, or Israel now a worldly or fleshly Israell as both were vnder the law. Then wee would confesse there should be an earthly king therof, but if the king some of Israel now be not earthly but heavēly, Ioh. 18.36. and the Isralites now not of this world. Ioh. 15.19. then the king thereof is not of this world, as they are not of this world. Ioh 17.16. ād if these spiritual lords cōfesse that Chr: & king now of the sand ād people of Israel, but yet he hath left our lord the king hs deputy to make such lawes and lords over the church as pleaseth him: the word of the lord is against thē ere is but one ord 1. Cor. 12.5. & one law giver. Iam. 4.12. over his Church. Nay his Ma: himself is against thē, who saith. There is no earthly monarch ever the Church, whose word must be a law, & saith further. Christ is his Churches monarch, & the holy ghost his deputy alleging luk. 22.25. the kings of the Gentiles beare rule one over another. &c. but I shal not be so among you saying further. Christ then he ascended, left not Peter with them to direct thē in al truth, but promissed to send the holy ghost

to them for that end. &c. If any wishe rebellions against the word of the lord herein, yet let them not be rebellious against the word of the king. Oh that any thinge would prevail with thē to make them leave of, these cruel courses of perse¦cuting poore soules that desire truely to feare God, and are most faithful subjects to the king and desire also the salvatiō of the soules of these their cruel persecutors, who do seeke their vtter vndoeing by al the forenamed persecutions, one¦ly because they cannot of faith offer vp such wor¦ship to God as these spirituall lords comaund, and the rather let them leave of persecutinge, seeing the kings Matie acknowledgeth. It is a sure rule in divinitie, that God loves not to plant his church by violēce & bloodshed. And if it be a law for al Christiās, that in indifferent thinges one must not offēd another, but the stronge but for∣beare, rather thē offēd his weake brother, other wyse he wounds the weake conscience & sinnes against Christ. 1. Cor 8. Thē how much lesse hath any man power to be lord over the weake con∣science, forceing it to practice that it hath not faith, in bringing it thereby vnto same, and vnto condemnation. Rom. 14. wee do vnfainedly ac∣knowledg the authority of earthly Magistrats Gods blessed ordinance, and that al earthly au∣thority and comaund apperteynes vnto thē, let them comaund what they will, wee must obey either to do or suffer vpō paine of Gods displea¦sure, besides their punishment. But al men must let God alone with his right which is to be lord and law-giver to the soule, ād not comaund obe¦dience for God where he comaundeth none. And this is onely that which wee dare not but main¦taine, vpō the peril of our soules, which is grea¦ter

then bodily afflictiō And onely for the main¦tenance of Christs right herein, do false Pro∣phets and deceivers (who by that craft are clo∣thed in fyne apparel, and faire deliciously every day) labor to make vs odious ī the ears ād eyes of Prince and people, knoweing wel that if they had not power by persecution to force mē to dis¦semble to beleeve as they, their kingdome and paine would soone come to nought, the wicked∣nes of which course is discovered in this wri∣tinge followeing.
For the manner, being Dialogue-wise, wee thought it the fittest in two respects. First, for the vnderstanding of the simple, to whome espe¦cially Gods misteries apperteyne, more then to the wise and prudent of the world. Secondly, be¦cause al the objections that wee have met with, might be set downe, and the playnelyer answe∣red. And because wee have faith and assurance that many wil see and acknowledg the vnlaw∣fulnes of tyrānyzing over the consciēce, vn per∣secuting the bodies of such as cannot be subject, wee have also thought it meet to manifest the careful estate of such subjection, that they may deliver their soules, if they wilbe saved: and al∣so have set downe the beginning of that old and good way, that Iohn Baptist, Christ Iesus, ād his Apostles have left, vnto al that wilbe saved nto the end of the world. Beseeching that Al∣mighty worker, that he would worke in the harts and consciences of men, that they may en¦quire for it, and that out of the scriptures, and walke therein, thē shal they find rest vnto their soules, although afflictions to their bodies. Oh  is time for the Lord to worke, for they have

destroyed his law, and have set vp in many Na∣tions such worship for God as best pleaseth thē that are in authority, and have power to perse∣cute the contrary mynded. Let all Gods people cry. How long Lord? when wilt thou come to destroy Antychrists cruel Kingdome, and esta∣blish Christs meeke and peaceable Kingdome, as thou haist begun, even come Lord Iesus by the Spirit of thy Moueth, and the brigh∣nes of thy coming, even come quicke∣ly. Amen.

