


I Heard (Right Worshipfull) vp∣on
a time, at the mouth of that
good and godlie man, M. Philip
Melancthon, that There is no
worke more excellent, than to
teach & learne the word of God.
And it maie bée so verie well.
For, without heauenlie doc∣trine,Ephe. 4. 17. 18.
wée proll in most thicke
darknesse and ignorance: or (to vse S. Paules speach) We
walke in the vanitie of our minde, we wander through
our owne blinde vnderstanding, and are farre off from the
life of God: because our ignorance, and the hardnesse of
our heart bringeth to passe,2. Cor. 7. 10. that we are touched with no
féeling at all of sorowe for our sinnes: without which fée∣ling,
the voice of the Gospell doth neuer waxe swéete vnto
man: but rather lie wide open, and giue vp our selues, to
the committing of all filthinesse.
Now, the word of God is a souereigne salue to heale vp
these sores: when the same is sincerelie taught, and faith∣fullie
learned. Which thing that kinglie Prophet Dauid
knowing well inough,Psa. 119. 9. witnesseth, saieng: In quo mun∣dam,
&c. Wherewith shall a young man redresse his
waie? In taking heede thereto according to thy word:
which word (doubtlesse) he saith in the same Psalme,Psa. 119. 24.
is his delight and counsellers. For this cause the same
Prophet,Psa. 119. 127. preferreth that verie word, before all the
riches of the world, saieng: Diligo mandata, &c. I
loue thy commandements aboue gold: yea, aboue most



fine gold.Psa. 119. 162. Againe, Laetabor ego super, &c. I will reioice at
thy words,Psa. 119. 72. as one that findeth a great spoile. Againe, Meli∣or
mihi lex, &c. The lawe of thy mouth is better vnto me,
than thousands of gold and siluer.
Dauid therefore confesseth, that the word of God, is the
most pretious treasure in the world: and that our life is
vncleane, and our waie filthie, vntill they be cleansed by
the word of God, as with water of the clearest fountaine.
Which thing is then done, when we obtaine faith by hea∣ring,
and receiue the holie Ghost. For, then the mistinesse
of our mindes is driuen awaie, our vnderstanding is ligh∣tened,
and our heart which was hard before like a stone, is
made fleshie and soft: so that the lawe of God maie bée
written therein, euen to be touched with the féeling of sin,
to defie and spit at sinne, and to followe the counsels, not
of the flesh, but of the spirit, in framing and ordering our
life. Séeing the doctrine of Gods word bringeth so manie
and great benefites, that notable man (whom euen now I
named) saith, euen vpon iust cause, that Among all the
workes of men, to teach and learne the word of God is the
most excellent.
Now, forsomuch as the word of God is a treasure so pre∣tions,
& to teach and learne the word of God, a worke so
excellent, what shall we saie of the sincere & true teachers
of this word? What shall we saie of them, which deliuered
the word of God, as it were from destruction, when it laie
ouertroden with the horrible imaginations of men, and
deuises of diuels, as in most filthie mire, and made the
same faire and cleane with their sound and sincere exposi∣tions?
We are greatlie indebted to them, which sée to the
prouision of such necessaries as belong to the maintenance
of this life, and without which these fraile bodies of ours
cannot continue in health: but we are neuer able to re∣quite
them with the like, which haue restored and made
doctrine pure againe, béeing the verie treasure, without
the which we fall from all hope of euerlasting life, and



haue deliuered the same doctrine vnto vs, both by word
of mouth, and in writing, sound and sincere.
In the number of these I reckon M. Philip Melan∣cthon,M. Philip Melan∣cthon commen∣ded.
our schoolemaster, a man worthie of the first place
next vnder M. Martine Luther: than whom all Germa∣nie
neuer bred and brought vp one sharper in wit, quic∣ker
in iudgement, perfecter in knowledge, greater in
learning, readier & sounder in expounding the scripture
roundlie: yea, & more than that, zealouser in godlinesse,
and earnester in religion▪ In consideration of which no∣table
and singular gifts, he is had in great account and
estimation, not onelie of them which professe the same re∣ligion
with vs: but also of the verie enimies of true re∣ligion.
When Saint Paule wrote to the Philippians of his
time,Phi. 2. 29. concerning Epaphroditus, saieng: Excipite ipsum
in domino, & Receiue him in the Lord, with all glad∣nesse,
and make much of such: the holie Ghost meaneth
indéed thereby: yea, willeth vs, to take them for Gods
instruments: openlie to confesse the benefits which wée
receiue by the meanes of such men, to be of God: to re∣uerence
them as our schoolemasters: to loue them as
our fathers: to estéeme of them as the builders vp of
Gods Church: and to make accompt of them as the most
principall pillers of Gods Temple. Thus much doeth
godlinesse desire: and their trauels deserue no lesse.
We must not therefore giue them anie place, whose
practise it is to deuise slauders, reproches, and foule spea∣ches,
thereby doing what they can, to put out so great
lights of the Church: who, if they séems to haue done a∣misse
in anie thing, let vs make the best of it, for Christi∣an
charitie, and méeknesse sake. It is a true saieng of
Xenophon: .
Which sound thus béeing
expounded: It is a hard matter for men so to do a thing,



that it be amisse in no point: and it is hard for them also
that do a thing in no respect blame-worthy, not to light
vpō some quareling findfault. For the weaknes of men
is great, and manie escapes are made in a mans life,
which are rather friendlie & fauourablie to be couered,
than maliciouslie and enuiouslie to be made worse.
There is also in manie a great lightnesse, which ma∣keth
men to be sharper iudges against others, that haue
not offended at all. As for our weaknesse, let vs lament
it: and as for our lightnesse, (which is the cause that
they are euill thought of, whose labours are greater, and
their gifts excellenter,) let vs leaue it: giuing God
thankes, who sendeth into his Church, for the edificati∣on
or building vp thereof, such healthfull instruments.
And although verie great thankes (as méete is) are
due to them, which haue found out & made redie the first
waie: yet notwithstanding, others that haue followed
after in their place, and trie all the masteries they maie,
for the edification or building vp of the Church, and the
knitting together of the Saints, are not to bée sette at
naught: but euerie one in his place is to be had in ac∣compt.Acts. 18. 3 & 20. 34
Saint Paule was a worthie and chosen instru∣ment
of God, than whom not one of the Apostles labou∣red
more,2. Cor. 11. 22. 23. 24, &c. nor spread the Gospell of Christ further. Ti∣tus
also, who remained in the Isle of Crete, was lesser
than Saint Paule,1. Thes. 2. 9. 10. both in giftes and labours: and also
in degrée of calling. Héere I acknowledge and giue
Saint Paule his title,Tit. 1. 5. to be the great teacher of the
Gentiles: and as for Titus, I reuerence him accor∣ding
to his place, who learned at S. Paules mouth
those things, which afterwards he deliuered to his hea∣rers.
In like sort, I acknowledge and reuerence M. Mar∣tine
Luther, & M. Philip Melancthon, as the principall
and chiefest teachers that euer Gods Church had in our
age: the like I doe also to all, and euerie one of them in



their place, as the healthfull instruments of God in his
Church: by whose workes I set great store, & am also
right glad, that it was my lucke to be of their number,
which acknowledge & reuerence M. Mart. Luther, &. M.
Philip Melancthon, their schoolemaisters For, out of the
riuers, which they fetcht from the fountaines of Israel, I
confesse my selfe to haue drawne that which I set abroch,
and teach in this Vniuersitie of Coppenhagen, as a mi∣nister
of the Gospell of God, and according to the order
of my calling.
I despise no man, I thinke not better of mine owne
opinions than of other mens iudgements: but I yeeld
and submit my selfe to the Catholike Church of God, as
my iudge: which Church I dere to be, not the Fathers
and Mothers of Neptune counsell: but those that iboare
Augusta confession: that is to saie, all such as holde the
Creeds sound & vncorrupt: in what place so euer they be
scattered. I condemne no man, if he disagree from mee: so
that he ouerthrowe not the foundation: that is to saie,
the Créeds.
I acknowledge the weaknesse of vs all, which I both be∣waile,Psal. 127. 1.
& beséech God to set to his owne hand to the buil∣ding.
Nisi enim Dominus, &c. For except the Lord build
the house, they labour in vaine that build it. I allow
euerie ones endeuour, that bestowe anie paines at all to∣ward
the building of Gods Church: in whose number,
although I graunt my selfe to be the verie least: yet not∣withstanding,
I am of this minde,Mat. 25. 14, &c. that the talent which
God hath giuen me, must not lie hid vnoccupied.
And because it is not my séeking, to serue the hearers
present onelie, but those that are absent also: yea, the
whole Church of Christ, I haue put some of mine owne
writings to the presse, caused them to bée printed, & sent
them abroad. With like aduisement also, I haue pub∣lished
these my notes vpon the Epistle of S. Paule to
the Ephesians: beeing willing to haue them come abroad



vnder your name (Right worshipfull:) that some token of
my thankfulnesse to you wards maie be séene, whom it
hath pleased, not onelie to stand my good & sincere friend,
all the time that you tarried in this realme: but also to
vouchsafe the bestowing of verie manie benefits vpon
me: as for those great benefits & good deeds, which you
haue done to our Vniuersitie, & to euerie student of the
same, I let them passe vnspoken. For I know, your wor∣ship
is of their number, which had rather do good, (God
beholding it,) than to be praised of men, and to hunt
after vaine glorie at their mouth. For they that doe
so,Mat. 6. 1. 2 , receiue their reward.
For they are hirelings which serue for hire, and not the
children of God, which doe God seruice of their owne
accord.
Well maie your worship fare, and I praie you take in
good part the gift that I send, fauourablie iudgeing of the
same, according to your manner: and if anie thing mis∣like
you, let me haue vnderstanding thereof. For your
iudgement ruleth me much. Once againe I wish you
well to fare, with that right honest Gentlewoman, mi∣stresse
Anne your wife, who (as I heare saie) hath in∣creased
your houshold with a yong babe. God grant that
it maie turne to his glorie, and to yours, and the mothers
ioie and comfort. I praie you haue me commended to M.
Tyco your Bishop, M. Vessele your Chaunter, M.
Balthasar your Archdeacon, M. Magnus your di∣uinitie
reader, M. Iohn Spandemager, who
hath taken great paines, these thirtie
yeares and more in the Lords
vineyard: and all my
other brethren, my
fellowe labou∣rers.
From Coppenhagen, these Calends
of Nouember. 1564.
