


HOWE great the darkenes of mans
minde is concerning God, and his
prouidence, right Honorable, not
onelie the infinite sectes in à man∣ner
of Philosophers; but also the la∣mentable
securitie of verie manie men, who by
their life and conuersation, doe shewe that either
they acknowledge no God at al, or thinke that God
(as it is in Homer) doth so dallie-out the time a∣mong
I knowe not what Ethiopians, that he hath
no leasure to see vnto the state of mankinde, doe
witnes. Such is the darkenes, & the vanitie of men
is such, euer since the fal of our first Parentes, and
mightilie hath it beene confirmed, partlie through
euil education, & partlie by the examples of those,
who doe seeme to excell others both in wisedome
and vertue.
This loathsome darknes none other way cā be de∣pelled,
thā by the torch of god his world. Hitherto

keth that question and answere of Dauid;Psal. 119. 9 Where∣with
shal à yong man redresse his waie?Pro. 22. 6. In ta∣king
heede to thy worde. Now seeing that as
youthis, such is age, as Salomon saith, it folow∣eth,
that without the worde of God which is the
only remedie for wickednesse, the whole life of man,
is altogether vncleane. And that vncleane∣nes
which cleaueth in al men, vntil it be through
God his worde washed-awaie, is not so much à bo∣dily,
as à spiritual & inwarde blot, cōsisting of many
partes. Whereof the firste (which is the spring of
others) is theignorance both of the trueth and of
goodnes; & is compared vnto grosse darkenes, and
vnto blindnes, wherebie the whole soule of man, as
it were an ouglie monster, gropeth in the darke.
The second is, to haue an erronius opinion of
heauenly matters; & to imbrace and loue the same
as the most euident trueth. As manie Philoso∣phers,
and heretikes had, who by stiffe maintei∣ning
opinions touching heauenlie mysteries, ru∣shed-headlong
into damnation. Thā which nothing
could be more lamentable.
The thirde is, in thought to yeelde vnto wic∣ked
affections. For as the minde is wickedlie in∣formed:
So the affection of the minde, raised-vp
by sinister iudgement, is carried-awaie into that
which is worst.
The fourth is, to consent vnto sinne: after which
ensueth an horrible swarme of al manner wicked∣nes
(as Paul in his first chapter vnto the Romans
disputeth) vntil man be vtterlie drowned in euer∣lasting

miserie.
From these lamentable spots the soule of man is
purged by the cleere fountanes of our Sauiour,Effectes of Gods word. that
is by the worde of God. Touching the efficacie of
which worde of God,Psal. 19. 7. 8. Dauid speaketh to this effect:
The Lawe of the Lord is vndefiled, refreshing
the soules; The testimonie of the Lorde is
sure, and giueth wisedome vnto the simple;
The statutes of the Lord be right, and reioice
the heart; The commandement of the Lord
is pure, and giueth light vnto the eies. This
commendation of Gods word, although it be but
briefe, if you respect the wordes; yet is it verie
large, if you consider the lessons, and consolations
comprised in the same. Which commendation may
of right be opposed againste al the furious iudge∣mentes
of Epicures, Politians, Hypocrites, and
Sycophantes. The partes of which commendation
are eight, al maruelouslie discerning betwene the
word of God, & philosophical or humane doctrines.
The firste; saith he, The Lawe of the Lord is
vndefiled, that is, the word of God both in it selfe
is pure, as that which proceedeth from God him∣selfe
the most pure fountane; and also maketh those
to bee pure, who giue credite therevnto. But
mans doctrine, seeme it neuer so neate, and so
cleere, yet is it not in al respectes cleane, neither
can it make men cleane. The Philosophie of So∣crates,
so bewtified by Plato, maie seeme of right
before al other Philosophical doctrines, to be the
best. (For it containeth verie manie good & right

sentences concerning God his prouidence, and end
of man:) yet is it foulie defiled, whē Plato by lawes
alloweth an vncleane communitie: and by deed cō∣firmeth
more horrible wickednes, than is of vs to be
vttered. And therfore both Socrates & Plato whē
they endeuor of one side to purge the soule of mā, on
the other theie defile the same with an abhomina∣ble
wickednes. But the word of God, or the sound of
the Gospel, as it is in al respectes pure: so it maketh
the soule of him, who by a liuelie faith embraceth
the Gospel, pure and perfect; it deliuereth him from
erronious opinions; it replenisheth him with sound
iudgement; and by the Spirite of Christ raiseth-vp
pure affections to which when the wil doth assent
the actions both internal & outward, as most cleere
riuers from à most pure fountaine, do issue-out.
The second, It refresheth the soules, saith
Dauid. The soules of men are withered with à most
grieuous thirst, neither can theie be comforted or
refreshed before theie haue drunke of the healthful
springes of Israel, which is the worde of the Gospel.
For the conscience of sinne doth euermore augmēt
the thirst, which nothing but the liquor of the Gos∣pel
doth mitigate or take-awaie. Of this water
the Prophet Zechariah speaketh, when he saith:
And in yt daie shal there waters of life go-out
from Ierusalē,Zech. 14, 8. that is ye word of the gospel which
is, that to the soule of man, which the most fresh
and cleere water is to him that thirsteth. Of this
speaketh our Lord in ye fourth of Iohn: whosoeuer
drinketh of the water that I shal giue him,Ioh. 4, 14. shal
neuer be more a thirst: but the water that I

shal giue him, shalbe in him à wel of water,
springing-vp into euerlasting life.
The third, The testimonie of the Lord is sure,
that is, the word of god is no deceiteful testimony cō∣cerning
the wil of god to man-ward. For, as the voice
of the lawe doth witnes that God without respect
both of persons, & of natiōs, wil throw together with
the deuils his enimies, al obstinate & impenitēt sin∣ners
into euerlasting darknes, & tormentes: So the
voice of the gospel doth testifie how God, for his Sons
sake, wil receiue al men, be theie neuer so egregious
sinners, into his fauor againe, that thee may be nū∣bred
among the heires of eternal blessednes, if so be
that they beleeue the gospel, and with à liuely faith
rest vpon the Son of God, who hath giuen himselfe à
rāsome for the sins of the world. In respect of this vn∣changable
rule of God his wil cōmended to vs in his
word, the word of God is caled, Sure, & the word of
the gospel,Ioh. 8, 32. Truth; as when it is said, The truth shal
make you free. For the gospel, which is the word of
truth, doth offer Christ the deliuerer, of whome it is
written,36. If ye son shal mak you free, ye shalbe free
indeed The 4. it giueth wisedome vnto the sim∣ple.
The wise mē of this world know nothing of God
his wil as they should; they vnderstād not through∣ly
his works, which are, to recite the chiefe, his wise∣dome
in creating of man; his iustice in the fal of mā;
his mercie in repairing of mā, his merciful goodnes
in conuerting of à sinner; theie are ignorant of the
difference betweene the houshoulde of God and o∣ther
sectes; theie are ignorant of the waie both to
auoide eternal miserie, and to obteine euerlasting

happines; and they be ignorant of the manner howe
to serue God, which for the most part doth consist
in the feare of God, whose wisedome is infinite.
But euen simple ones through the sound of the go∣spel
attaine this wisedome: whereas the greatest,
and most mightie of the world doe miserablie ouer∣throw
themselues by their selfe wisedome. For the
word of the Lorde spoken by the Prophet Iremiah
shal stand for euer:Iere. 8. 9. They haue reiected the word
of the Lord, and what wisedome is in them?
The fifte, The statuts of the Lord be right.
This saying is to be opposed against the destinies
fained out of Zeno his schole. For it giueth to vn¦derstande
howe God is no accepter of persons, bu
indifferent to al according to the rule of his decree.
Hee will doubtlesse the saluation of al men, but
through the knowledge of the truth. As it is writ∣ten,1. Tim. 2. 4.
(God) he wil haue al men shalbe saued, and
come vnto the knowledge of the truth. He wil
also that al impenitent persons, without respect of
any, shal vtterlie perish.
The sixt, They reioice the heart. This effect
of the Gospel is the chiefest good thing which can
betide mankinde in this life. No doctrine of man
can tel how to heale the wounds of conscience. For
he which is guiltie in his minde of any grieuous
crime carrieth about with him day & night à wit∣nesse
and an accusing conscience, which can bee
helped by no Philosophie at al. But the sound one∣lie
of the gospel it is that applieth the good plaster,
and the most present remedie to the wounded con∣science

while it testifieth howe Christ died for
our sinnes,Rom. 4, 25. and is risen-againe for our iustifica∣tion;Rom. 10, 4.
how Christ is the ende of the Lawe for
righteousnes vnto euerie one that beleeueth;Mat. 11, 28.
And howe Christ calleth those which labor vnto
himselfe, as vnto the Physition, to which he promi∣seth
helpe, and that gratis. For he as Augustine
both godlie and rightly doth saie, hath made our
offences his offences, that his righteousnesse
might be our righteousnes. So that when our
consciences be sprinkeled with the blood of Christ,
as theie are when wee beleeue in him, then are
theie purified,Psal, 84. . whereof à wonderful ioie of hearte
doth insue. that with Dauid we maie saie, Mine
heart and my fleshe doe reioice in the liuing
God.
The seuenth, The commaundement of the
Lord is pure. This is to be opposed to the Papists,
who by certaine diuelish subtilties, doe entangle
the worde of God, therebie to terrifie men from
the reading of the same. They say the letter, that
is, as they falselie expound it, the literal or grāma∣tical
sense, whereas for al that, it is most true,
doth kil; and the spirite that is the allegorical in∣terpretation
approued of the Pope, doth quicken.
But the holie Ghost here by Dauid doth affirme
the contrarie, while it pronoūceth the word of God
to be cleere, bright, and pure: which indeede is
verie true as touching those things belonging vn∣to
the foundation of Christianitie, & be altogether
necessarie vnto saluation.

The eight, It giueth light vnto the eies. This
decareth how mās nature without the word of God
inlightning is altogether blind, as that which carri∣eth-about
with it darkenes, to wit doubting of God,
carnal securitie, distrust, false praier of the mind
doubting, and flieng from the Lord with infinite o∣ther
motiōs swaruing from the law of God. But the
world perceiueth not this blindnes, but rather hath
it in admiration, and price for the smale shadowe of
outward discipline whereas the Church admoni∣shed
by the voice of God his word, doth acknowledg
and bewaile her offences, and beggeth of God newe
light, righteousnesse, and life. In this praier and
meditation of the Gospel, the eies of the minde be
more and more inlightened, so that the Sonne of
righteousnesse it selfe, euen Christe doth glori∣ouslie
arise in their heartes; by whose brightnesse
we are ledde from endelesse miserie vnto eternal
life and blesseenesse. Dauid casting an eye vn∣to
this most comfortable fruite of God his worde,
not without good cause cried-out in this verie
Psalme on this wise:Psa. 19, 10. More to bee desired (is
the Lawe of God) than golde, yea than much
fine golde; Sweeter also than honie, and the
honie combe.Psa. 119, 14 And in an other Psalme, I
haue had as great delight in the waie of thie
testimonies, as in al riches. Here he runneth fee∣ling
the burden of his sinnes, that he may be vn∣loaden
of them, as it is in à certaine Psalme, Out
of the deepe place haue I called vnto thee,Psa. 130, 1.
ô Lorde, &c. Herevnto in his troubles he be∣taketh
himselfe, according vnto this sentence,

In mine affliction it is my comfort, that this
worde doth quicken me. In prosperitie also he
flieth here vnto:Psa. 119, 32 I wil runne, saith he, the waie
of thie commandements, when thou shalt in∣large
mine hearte. At his neede it counsaileth
him,Psa. 119, 24 as in these wordes, Thie testimonies are my
delight and my counsailers; In matters of great
importance with Kinges, and mightie men of the
world, it ministreth wisedome vnto him, so saith
Dauid;Psa. 119, 46 I wil speake of thie testimonies be∣fore
Kinges, and wil not be ashamed. Aainst
the stumbling blocke of the crosse, it strengtheneth
him from falling, when he considereth the prospe∣ritie
of the vngodlie; My feete were almost
gone;Psal. 73, 2. 3. 16. 17. 18. my steppes had welneere slipte. For I
freated at the foolish, when I sawe the prospe∣ritie
of ye wicked &c. Then thought I to know
this, but it was too paineful for me, vntil I wēt
into the Sanctuarie of God, then vnderstood
I their end. Surelie thou hast set them in slip∣perie
places, and castest them downe into de∣solation.
At the point of death he seeketh life
from thence,Psa. 119, 93▪ as witnesse these wordes, I wil ne∣uer
forget thie preceptes; for by them thou
haste quickened me.Psa. 119, 89 O Lorde, thīe worde
endureth for euer in heauen. Because life and
happines promised by the worde, shal endure for e∣uer.
To be briefe, out of this worde Dauid lear∣neth
the manner both howe to escape euerlasting
miserie, and also to obteine the eternal felicitie &
blessednesse, wherevnto man at the first was cre∣ated,

and afterwarde redeemed by Christ.
Seeing nowe the puritie, the necessitie, the cō∣moditie,
the glorie, and the fruite of God his word
is so great, and so sweete, that it can ioine vs to
God, the soueraigne good thing, in whom, we shal
euerlastinglie be blessed, at what time as we haue
atteined the ende of our condition; doubtlesse theie
highlie are to be commended which bestow à por∣tion
of their goods and riches to the maintenance
and propagation of Gods word in the Church. For
theie doe wel consider that this ende to al and e∣uerie
man according to his condition and state, is
proposed, namelie to aduance the glorie of God.
Which thing theie before others, doe best accom∣plish,
who studie to vpholde the ministerie of the
worde in schooles, and temples. Now what dili∣gence
you, noble Sir, haue bestowed on this be∣halfe,
manie doe knowe and theie confesse, whome
at this daie you liberallie bring-vp both in this V∣niuersitie,
and also in other forreigne schooles, to
the ende that in these Churches of Denmarke
there maie be fit ministers frō time to time, which
maie sounde-foorth the pure doctrine of the Go∣spel.
And assuredlie this is trulie to loue our coun∣trie,
not onelie while we liue to adorne the same:
but after we are dead also to leaue it the better to
our posteritie. Wise mē do greatly cōmend the At∣tike
oath, in which, these words among other were,
I wil fight both for religious, & for prophane
causes, and that alone and with others; and
wil leaue my countrie not the worser; but the

better and more ample to the posteritie. How
much more are we bounde so to doe, that are coū∣ted
the Citizens of the Church of Christe, the
most noble countrie of the righteous, whose honour
is more glorious, than was that of Athens, which
the Turkes now possesse. And therefore à farre
greater glorie it is to leaue this most worthie coū∣trie,
I meane the Church of God, not the worser,
but the better, and amplified to posterities: which
theie doe, who by their wealth doe mainteine, and
promote the studies of true doctrin, & of good arts.
Such an indeuor was in Dauid, when in à song he
saide howe he loued his countrie because of the
Church that was therin. Because of the howse of
the Lord,Psa. 122, 9. saith he, I wil procure thy welth. This
howse which is the Church of God, he preferred
before the most glorious Palaties of earthlie Prin∣ces,Psal. 84, 10
when he saide, A daie in thie courtes is
better then à thousand other-where. I had
rather be à doore-keeper in the House of my
God, than to dwel in the Tabernacles of wic∣kednesse.
Which Psalme, whereout these words
are taken, because it conteineth à notable com∣mendatiō
of God his Church, stirreth-vp vnto the
loue of the worde; laieth before our eies the beni∣fites;
depainteth the glorie of the Church; and
sheweth the scope proponed therevnto, which is
eternal blessednesse, I thought good the last yeare
publiquelie in our schoole to expounde the same,
therebie to inuite the youth vnto the loue, reading,
and meditating of the heauenlie worde, which is

as à burning torch to guide vs in this darkenes in∣to
the wonderful light of God, and vnto eternal
life.
Now the cause that imboldened me to dedi∣cate
this mine Enarration, written the yeare im∣mediatelie
past vpon the 84. Psalme, vnto your
Honor, was not onelie the greate and singuler good
wil you beare toward learning & littered men ge∣neralie,
which I desire that the whole world should
knowe; but also your benefites conferred vpon me
and mine particularlie, for which I thought good
to giue some token of à grateful minde to your Ho∣nor.
The which I earnestlie beseech you, to ac∣cept
in in good part. If the quantitie of our worke
be onelie respected, I knowe wel it is far vnmeete
for your Magnificence: but if the minde of the gi∣uer,
and the argument of the matter be waied, I
thinke no man wil finde faulte with me for this my
dedication. Wherefore, regarde these thinges, my
good Lord, and as hitherto I haue had, so hereafter
let me not want your fauor; and for my selfe I wil
endeuor to be worthie of the same.
Thus fare you wel both in mind and bodie, toge∣ther
with your wise the L. Metta Rosenkrātz that
most noble and chast woman; daughter of the right
honorable Sir Olaus Rosenkrantz Knight, Lord
of Wallo, sometime à most prudent Senator, of this
Kingdome of Denmarke, à mā both for iustice, vp∣rightnesse,
liberalitie, clemencie, humanitie, cur∣tesie,
and manie moe virtues euerlastinglie as to be
remembred, so to be praised.

From our studie this 25. of March, in the yeare
1569. Which from the creation of the worlde is the
5539. yeare, wherebie it is manifest that we are
fallen into the last parte of the age of the worlde,
signified by the sixte daie of the creation of things.
For seeing sixe thousand yeares, wherbie the worlds
age, according vnto the tradition of the house of
Elias, is measured, doe answere to sixe daies of the
creation (for à thousand yeares before God are as
one daie,2. Pet. 3, ▪) and of the sixt thousand 539. yeares be
passed-awaie; it is euident that we are lighten into
the after-noone tide of the laste daie of the world.
Which time doubtlesse ought of right to put vs in
mind of greater watchfulnes, especialie seeing that
after the most bright Sunne of the glorious Gospel,
(and that at the verie noone of the last daie of this
worlde, at which time the doctrine of the Church
was by Luther, Philip, and other godlie and lear∣ned
men, purged) the night and darkenes is nigh
at hande. And therefore earnestlie from the heart
with the disciples of the Lord let vs praie,
The night doth come, forsake vs not,
ô Christ, wee humblie praie;
Ne suffer thou thie glorious light
To darken, or decaie.
And listen we vnto the Prophet,Iere. 13, 16. which saith,
Giue glorie to the Lorde your God before he
bring darkenes, and ere euer your feet stumble
in the darke mountaines.

The Lord keepe vs in true godlines, that at the
length that long wished Sabbaoth which we looke∣for,
maie be seene of vs vnto our welfare, blisse, and
euerlasting rest, through Christ our onelie
mediator, to whome with the Father,
and the holie spirite be al praise,
honor, and glorie for euer &
euer, Amen.
