


OF all the things which are in the worlde, there is nothing either more better, or more precious, either yet more profitable: than to know God, & his will aright, and to worship and reue∣rence the same. For, as this whole world is momen∣tanie, and shall passe away: so in like manner the trea∣sures thereof, with how soeuer beautiful and magni∣ficent titles they be named: Yet (to be all fleeting & falling away) dayly experience may shew and teache vs: vnlesse we would suffer our selues to be blinded, or (as it were) to be bewitched of the same. But, to knowe God (Aright) and (hauing gotten the know∣ledge of him) to worship him aright, according to his will, reuealed in his word: that continueth for e∣uer, and leadeth man (from the vnstedfastnes of this vnconstant world) the right way to eternall life and saluation. Therefore in Iohn, Christ saith:Iohn. 17, verse. 3, This is e∣ternall

life, to knowe thee to be the onely true God: and Iesus Christ whome thou haste sent. And in another place: What doth it profit a man to gaine the whole worlde, and loose his owne soule? Therefore Dauid iudgeth aright, in Psal. 84.Psal. 84. where he saithe One day in thy courts, is better than a thousand: I had rather bee  doore keeper in the house of my God, than to dwel in the tents of vngodlynesse. For the Lord God is a light and defence, the Lord wil giue grace and glorie: and no good thing will he withholde from them, which walke in innocencie. In these wordes, Dauid putteth a diffe∣rence betwene those, which are without the church, and those (whiche beeing within the Church of CHRISTE) haue the true vnderstanding of the BEEING and VVILL of God.
This difference, he placeth in fiue thinges, moste specially to bee remembred: by the contraries of which, both doe appeare the more euident: namely, bothe how great, the honour, and high blessed estate of the children of GOD is: and contrarywise, how great the miserie and calamitie is, euen of the moste mightie of this world, which be not citizens of the Church of God.
The first good thing, and commoditie of the children of God, or of the Church is, That God himselfe is in her as a moste lightsome Sun. For, euen as from this visible Sunne, there commeth vnto the worlde, Light, Heate, and Shining beames, wherby al things are quicke∣ned and cherished: so, frō God, (which is the Sun in∣uisible) there cometh vnto the Church, Light, (that is to say) cleere knowledge of GOD: there commeth Heate,1, Cor. 13. that is, affections burning with Faith, Hope, and Loue: and shining beames, which are the mani∣folde

consolations, whereby the faithfull soule is re∣leeued, cherished, and comforted. This Sunne, as it ri∣seth to such as feare God: so it setteth to the negli∣gent, the wicked lyuer, and the carelesse. It is therfore (with great diligence) to be taken heede of: that the godlie (through a certaine sluggishnes of their owne, in hearing, or reading the word of God, wherin this Sunne brightly shineth) doe not suffer this Sunne to be, either darkened, or hidden from them. For, as this visible Sunne, if it shall seeme to a sicke body in his dreame, to be hid, or darkened, there is daunger (as Hippocrates affirmeth) of moste certaine death, to the sicke body, to be at hand; so, if our Sunne Christe be darkened vnto vs (his doctrine beeing either abo∣lished, or obscured) not onely darcknes hangeth ouer vs, but also the death of the soule, and moste assured eternall condemnation.
Furthermore, we may heereby perceiue, the mi∣sery of them, as many as are destitute of this Sunne the worde of GOD. For, they beeing blinde, doe, bothe grope in the darknesse of ignorance: and beeing ig∣noraunt of God, are stricken with dreadfull amased∣nesse of minde, when sinne sheweth foorth it selfe in their consciences. And albeit, that Conscience see∣meth in many, to be (as it were with an hot yron) feared, as though it were voyd of all feeling of sinne: yet notwithstanding it will at sometime be wake∣ned vp, at the least in the extreame agonie of death, and will driue the miserable soule into desperation: than the whiche thing, nothing may happen vn∣to manne, either more heauy, or more bytter: as hauing leather, that hee had neuer beene created

and brought vnto light.
The second good thing, or commoditie of them which knowe the Essence and will of GOD, and yeelde themselues obedient to the same, is: that God is a defence, or sheeld vnto them, wherwith they are compassed, defended, and sheelded, against the king∣dome of darcknesse. Of this sheeld speaketh Dauid in Psal. 5.Psal. 5. when he saith: All they which hope in thee shall reioyce, they shall euer be giuing thanks, and thou shalt dwell in them: all they which loue thy name, shall reioyce in thee. For thou Lord shalt blesse the righteous, and with thy fauourable kindenesse, shalt thou compasse vs as with a sheelde. Item Psal. 18.Psal. 18. And thou haste giuen me the defence or sheelde of thy saluation, and thy right hand doth vpholde me. In this man∣ner, it is the good pleasure of God, that he wil not on∣ly, (with the crowne of his fauourable kindenesse) compasse his about: but also, will haue them to bee happie, with perpetuall blessednesse. Paule, when he writeth to the Ephesians, thus: (Take vnto you the sheeld of Faith,1, Tim. 1. wherewith ye may quench all the fiery dartes of the wicked:) Signifying, that we are thē compassed about with the sheeld of faith, when we fight a good fight, holdeing a stedfast beleefe of the doctrine, with a sure confidence of mercy, & a good conscience. This sheelde, forasmuch as the enemies of God doe want: what (I pray ye) can be more miserable then they? For in asmuch as they be naked and vnarmed, they are not able to resist the diuel the prince of darkenes: but he obteineth ful dominion in them, & throweth them headlong out of one wickednes into an other, vntill he haue brought them to vtter destruction.
The third good thing or commoditie, which the

godly haue by the healthfull knowledge, and feare of the true God: is called of Dauid Grace.
This Grace, is the fauour of God, forgiuing sinne to the beleeuers, for the death of his sonne,What this grace is. and garni∣shing them with a most pure garment, which is, The obedience or righteousnesse of Christe:Roma. 5. VVhereby they are in such wise reputed righteous in the sight of God, as if they them selues had fulfilled the lawe. But they which are out of the congregation, are voide of this grace of saluation: and doe remaine vnder sinne, the wrath of God, and eternall damnation, for their ini∣quitie.
The fourth commoditie which they (that know and feare God) doe inioy: is called of Dauid, Glory,What this glory is, and wherein it consisteth. This Glory is, The adoption of the adopted sonnes of GOD: The inhabiting of the holy ghoste, and the he∣reditary Possession of eternall blessednesse, by Iesus Christe. But contrarywise, they whiche doe not knowe God, are the bondslaues, and dwelling places of the diuell, are mooued by his spirit, and to eternall ignominie, are they reserued.
The fifth good thing or commoditie, which God (by the Psalmist) promiseth vnto the godly, is cōtei∣ned in these wordes: He will withholde no good thing from them which walke in innocencie. O, how great is this promise? It is all one as if he should say: They which walke in innocencie, (that is to say) they which by faith doe yeelde obedience vnto God, shall be abun∣dantly indewed with all good thinges: so, that they may perpetually inioy them, and shall neuer stand in feare of any euill to come vnto them. And albeit, that all the Children of God, shal in this world suffer

persecution: yet notwithstanding they are certaine of the good things promised, which heere they ob∣taine by hope, and in the life to come, shall (without all impediment) for euer possesse. But contrarywise, they (which haue neither learned to knowe God by his worde, neither yet to feare him according to his will: vnto them ignominies, sorowes, and calami∣ties, shall neuer be wanting: but vnto the Diuell, (whome they haue serued) they shall be thrall and subiect for euer.
Heereby now euery one may easely vnderstand that to be moste true which I propounded in the be∣ginning, namely: That of all things which are in the world there is nothing either more better or more precious, neither yet more profitable, than rightly to know the ESSENCE and WIL of God: and that this knowledge is drawne forth of the word of God, in the which word, he hath opened bothe him self and his wil. But least any man should suffer himselfe to be seduced by the deuill & his members: it is to bee knowne, that the worde of GOD is not any other where to be sought, than in the writinges of Moses the Prophetes, the Euangelistes and Apostles, whiche are beautified with the testimonie of the omnipo∣tent God, which is the eternall veritie, and can not lye,Rom. 3. as Paule speaketh. But some may obiect, or, at the least thinke with himselfe in his heart, (as many doe, although they expresse it not by their mouth) af∣ter this manner: If wee were certaine, that that worde were in very deede, the worde of God him self, doutlesse, it were of all things farre the most pre∣ciousest: but, the world, for a great parte therof, is a∣gainst the same, and fewe there be which imbrace it,

& fewest of those which liue according to the same: yea, there be also very many, which verely with their mouth confesse the same to be the word of God, but yet by their liues and manners (contrary to the same worde, whereof they doe so commonly boast) they deny the same. This (without all dout) is that temp∣tation, which the Diuell breathed into our first Pa∣rents, whereby he also seduced them, neither doth he at this day ceasse with vnwearied study, by this his olde deceitfull subtiltie, to circumuent and destroy very many. It is therefore cheefely necessary for all Christians, to haue in a readinesse; (touching the cer∣titude of the word of God) firme arguments & sure demonstrations, which (in the olde and new Testa∣ment) are euery where to be found.
There be in generall two kindes of testimonies, by which it is cōuinced, that the doctrine of the church in the bookes of the Prophets and Apostles deliue∣red: is verely proceeded and inspired of GOD him selfe. Of these, the first is, An outwarde testimonie: but the other is Inwarde in the heartes of eche of the godly.
I call that the Outwarde Testimonie, which runneth into the sences of men, that it may send to the minde,What the out warde testi∣monie is. the bright∣nesse of the Heauenly veritie. Of this, there be six partes, of which partes, albeit euery one by it selfe, might suffice, to euince the infallible certitude of the doc∣trine of the Church: yet not withstanding it pleased the moste mercifull God, by so many meanes to sus∣taine our infirmitie.
The firste parte therefore, of the Outwarde testi∣monie is, The Diuine manifestation, by the whiche God him selfe, (proceeding from his secret seat) hath,

(with his owne voyce) reuealed his wil, touching the doctrine of the Lawe and the Gospell. And, al∣beit that God hath often, and at diuerse times mani∣fested himself, repeating with other, & other words, the selfe same doctrine: we notwithstanding, wil re∣cite certaine of the more selected appearings of God.
First of all therefore, hee appeared to Adam after the fall, and deliuered first with his owne voyce, the doctrine of the Lawe and the Gospell. For in that that he layd punishments vpon our first parentes, for their rebellion (in perpetuall testimonie of his anger against sinners) it perteineth to the lawe: and in that that he promised:Gen. 3. The seede of the woman, to crush the Ser∣pents head, it is the voyce of the Gospell.
Furthermore, God appeared vnto Noah, and by a wounderful deede confirmed bothe the doctrine of the law & the Gospel. For, when with the flood, he destroyed the vnrepentant: he executed the sentence of his lawe: but when he deliuered Noah beleeuing his word, & (by faith) beeing obedient vnto him, he established a testimonie of the promise of his grace reserued, which is of the Gospell.
After the flood, GOD appeered vnto Abraham ten times, to Isaach his sonne twise: and to his Ne∣phew Iacob, seuen times. In which appritions, was propounded not diuers, but one, and the same doctrine alwayes, of the Seede of the woman, (that is to say) of Christe Iesus our Sauiour.
After these thinges, God appeered to Moses in Aegypt, repeating bothe the doctrine of the lawe and the Gospell, and with wonderfull doings confirming the same. For the iust plague & calamitie of Pharao,

and his ministers, is to be referred to the Lawe: but, that glorious deliuerance of the people, with Moses, foorth of that Aegypticall house of seruitude: is to bee referred to the Gospell. All which things are, figures of the last Iudgement, wherein God will condemne the Diuell, with all his traine: and receiue to himself, into euerlasting Tabernacles, as many, as with a true, and liuely faith, shall constantly cleaue vnto Christe.
In the new Testament also, the same GOD hath sounded his word from Heauen, and hath commen∣ded vnto vs Christe the teacher, with his owne mouth, saying; This is my beloued sonne, in whom I am well pleased: heare him. As if he should say: In time paste,Matth. 3. I promised the Seede of the woman to crush the head of the serpent, & to repaire againe my image in man, (the cursse of the Lawe beeing taken away) beholde, he is heere present, heare ye him, which hartely loue life, and saluation: for in him am I wel pleased (that is to say) by this my sonne, am I reconciled to the world, that is, to all them, which (by faith) shall re∣ceiue him. Let vs oppose all these apparitions, with many others (in which one, and the same doctrine is alwayes repeated) against the Deuill, and all wicked Sophisters, Mahometistes, vnbeleeuing Iewes, and pro∣phane nations: and to conclude, against our owne prudence, and carnall wisdome, ascrybing vnto God alone, the praise of the veritie.
The second parte of the Outwarde testimonie is, The varitie of miracles, (that is to say) of the peculiare, and extraordinarie workes of God, which can not bee doone, by any creature. All these thinges hath God

done, that he might help our imbecillitie: that when these outwarde miracles should present themselues to our eyes, we should decree in our minde, that to be the doctrine of God, which (with such manner of woorkes,) as with seales is confirmed.
And, albeit that these miracles (from the begin∣ning of the worlde, foorth vntill the times of the Apostles) be innumerable: yet notwithstanding the scope, and end of them all, is one: namely, that they might confirme the trueth of God, (that is to say) the doctrine of the Lawe, and the Gospell.
In the olde Testament are found miracles done be fore the flood, in the flood, and after the flood. Like∣wise in Aegypt, and after the gooing out of Aegypt, and in the wildernesse, by the space of 40. yeeres. In like manner, in the time of Iosua, of the Iudges, of the Kings, of the Captiuitie of Babylon, and of the Macchabees, vn∣to the comming of Christe: all which, did seale the same doctrine, beeing oftentimes repeated.
The miracles also, of the new Testamēt, wrought by Christe, are no lesse wounderfull: concerning which, he saith to the Iewes: If ye beleeue not mee, beleeue my woorkes. Cheefly this is woorthy to be considered, that Christe the third day rose again from death, and afterwarde, in the beholding of fiue hundred bree∣thren, did ascend visibly into heauen: and so accom∣plished the first promise made vnto Adam.Gen. 3. All these, yea or one of these miracles might be sufficient for vs, that we should beleeue the word of God: but it so seemed good vnto God, by the varietie of these, to sustaine our infirmitie.
The third parte of the Outwarde testimonie, is

The moste certaine fulfilling, (or accomplishment) of the Prophets: which witnesseth, that God himselfe spake, by the mouth of his ministers. For, we haue an vn∣moueable foundation of our faith, when (to the fore∣sayings concerning the Messias, or Christe, prophecied by Moses, Dauid, Daniell, and other Prophets) we see the History Euangelicall, to aunswere. The stedfastnesse of faith (saith Augustine) consisteth in this: that all thinges which came to passe in Christe, were tolde of before. Heereof our faith concludeth on this manner.
He alone, without all doubt, is the true, and onely Messias and Sauiour of the worlde, in whome alone doe meete together whatsoeuer hath beene foretolde, touching the Messias, by Moses, and all others the Prophets of God.
In Iesus, the sonne of Mary alone, mee∣teth together, whatsoeuer hath beene (touching the Messias) foretolde by Moses, and all the rest of the Prophets of God:
Therefore: Iesus alone, the sonne of the virgin Mary, is, (without al doubt) the Sole, true, and only Messias, and Sauiour of the worlde.
Vpon this foundation, the Apostles of Christe, Peeter and Paule, builded the faith of the Gentiles: whiche would neuer haue beleeued in Christe, vnlesse they had shewed them, this agreemente of the foresayinges, and their fulfillinges in Christe. Touching this mat∣ter,

let the 17. Act: and 2. Peter. 1. bee reade.
In like manner also, the foretellings of the Pro∣phets (touching the moste greeuous persecutions of the Church, which at this day, we finde that Romish Antichrist, and Mahomet, to fulfil) are extant. Heere, let vs comforte and lifte vpp our selues against the king∣dome of the Pope, & the raging of Mahomet, when we confer the euent, with the Prophecies shewed long time before. Of the tyrannie of the Roomish Bishop, and Mahomet: Ieremie, and Daniel, foreshewed: when we therefore doe see these things to haue come to passe, what letteth, that we should not thorowly perswade our selues, that those thinges shall come to passe, which are foretolde of the Aduent, or comming of the kingdome of IESVS CHRISTE, wherein, namely in the last day, he will appeere, and will raise vp all people from death, those whiche haue doone good, to the Resurrection of life: but those which haue done euil, vnto the Resurrection of damnation, as the whole sacred Scripture, touching this matter, doth euery where moste plentifully teach vs.
The fourth parte of the Outwarde testimonie, is, the consent of Moses, the Prophetes Christe, the Apostles, and of the whole vniuersall Church, in doc∣trine and worshipping of God. For, all these, with one vniforme agreement, haue holden the same doc∣trine of The Lawe, and The Gospell, and the same manner of worshipping God. Neither hath the diuersitie of ceremonies (which for the cōsideratiō of times, haue beene changed) troubled this agreement, one, & the same foundation of the true and althfehull doctrine, euery where remaining. But if this doctrine had not

beene inspired by God, so greate an agreement had neuer beene in these Ministers of God: whome, (both in teaching, and propounding the same matters, it is conuenient, that their successours should imitate.
VVhere that thing is accomplished, there must needs be the true Church of Christe, and without this not else where.
The fifth parte of the Outwarde testimoninie, is, The Induraunce, and conseruation of the Churche, from the beginning of the world, vnto this time, and so farther, vnto the last day of Iudgement. Heerunto appertaineth that, which is in Acts. 5. when the Scribes, and Pharises rose vp and went together to counsaile, to suppresse the Apostles of Christe: that auncient Gamaliell, a Doctor of the Lawe rose vp, and said:Acts. 5. If this counsell, or this woork, be of men, it shall be dissolued: but, if it be of GOD, ye cannot dissolue it. This is it which Christ him selfe affirmeth, that against his Church,Matth. 16. The gates of Hel shall not preuaile.
The sixth parte of the Outwarde testimonie, is, The bloody confession of many Martyres, from Abell vnto this present day. For, they are called Martyers, because they beare witnesse to the trueth of the Heauen∣ly doctrine, not onely with their mouth, but also with their blood. A matter worthy to bee remem∣bred, is reported of Ignatius the Scholer of Saint Iohn: that, when at a certaine time, the Tyrant would by threatnings haue constrayned him to deny Christe, hee answered: How can I deny him, whose name I doe beare written in my heart? VVhich thing beeing heard, the Tirant commanded the body of Ignatius, to be cut in sunder, and the heart beeing taken out, to be deuided

into small peeces: which thing when it was accom∣plished, in euery peece so cut of the heart, the name of Iesus was found manifestly discrybed.
The other kinde of testimonies, wherby the cer∣taintie of the doctrine of the Church is confirmed, is: The inwarde certification (or assurance made) by the ho∣lie Ghoste, sealing the heartes of faithfull people, touching the veritie of the Gospell. Of this thing, Paule 2. Cor. 1. speaketh: It is God (saith he) which hath annoin∣ted vs, and sealed vs in Christe, and hath giuen the earnest of the spirit in our heartes. This Certification, the godly doe feele, cheefely, in feruent & earnest prayer vnto God. For, when Prayers doe proceede from a true faith: we feele in our heartes the answere of God, whereby we are made the more assured of the diuine promises.
Hetherto, I haue numbred breefely, the testimo∣nyes whereupon, as vpon foundations, the vnmo∣uable certaintie of the Christian doctrine, is stayed. God graunt, that these things may be effectually con∣firmed in the mindes of He vseth this phrase of speeche as S. Paule doth when hee saith, Many became sin∣ners. Rom. 5. many, that they wauer not any more, but that they may dayly, more, and more abound, in all sence, and knowledge. This word of God, beeing by so sure testimonyes approued: God hath commaunded to be spread abroade, through the whole compasse of the world, and by the Ministerie of the same, gathereth out of all mankinde, a Church vnto himselfe: which (through Christe) he hath pre∣destinated to eternall life and saluation.Ephe. 1. & 5. It, therefore becommeth godly Magistrates, to promote this selfe same worde, that it may be purely, and sincerely deli∣uered in Schooles, and Churches, and set ouer to the posteritie. The charge whereof, when the moste

godly, and wise Princes, and Kings of Denmark, per∣ceiued to appertain vnto them: they founded this no∣ble vniuersitie of Hafnia, and moreouer enriched the same, with moste bountifull stipendes: that in the same, they (which in deliuering the pure doctrine of the Gospel, might in time to come, with fruite, serue their countrie) might be instructed and learned.
I, beeing called vnto this Vniuersitie, that with my laboures, I might assist the studyes of Learners: forasmuche as I had hethervnto, bothe with liuely voyce taught, and also committed to open monu∣ments of letters, many things of the moste sacred di∣uinitie, in Lattin: it seemed good to me now, by this writing, set foorth in the common language, to set forwarde the studyes of godlinesse in them, whiche are ignorant of the Lattine speech. I haue drawen to∣gether, into this litle boke, out of the writings of the Prophets, and Apostles, all those things which are neces∣sary to be knowne of a Christian man to the attey∣ning of saluation. And I will, this same little booke to remaine in place of my confession of euery article of the Christian Religion, which hetherto, about the space of 30. yeeres, I haue, in the Church &, Schoole of Hafnia, openly propounded.
That it hath semed best to me, to establish the same (moste woorthy Gentleman) vnder your name: that thing is doone, that I might declare my self to be mindeful of very many benefits, which haue beene by you, to mewards perfourmed, these 21. yeeres now together, from that time, wherin, that magnificent, and gentle Gentleman your brother Nicolas Kaaes, was first com∣mitted to my fidelitie, and discipline.
I beseeche God, that for his only begotten sonne our Lorde IESVS CHRISTE, he will con∣serue the puritie of his worde, in this Kingdome of Denmarke, to the glory of his name, and the saluation of many: and that, with his holy spirit, he would go∣uerne the indeuours of those which, either in the ec∣clesiasticall, or politicall estate, which shall go about to set forewarde his Gospell: that the kingdome of the Deuill beeing destroyed, the Temple of Christe, may in our hearts be builded, Amen. That ye also, (by the fauour, and goodnesse of GOD) may long time be preserued safe, and in good health, I wish of God from my whole heart, through Iesus Christe our Lord.
From Haffnia the feast day of Martin, in the yeere of our Lord. 1570.
