


IT is very behooue∣ful (right déere beloued bre∣thren) too marke the conti∣nuall consent of Chrystes Catholike Churche, in the doctrine and true seruice of God: specially in this moste great varietie of opinions, which maketh many, (and those not of the woorst sort) too bée troubled in theyr mindes, douting with what company they may ioyn themselues in felowship. For while some boast of one maister and some of another, glorying of his wisdom and godlynesse, not without contempt of others, whom they outface with their lofty lookes: it cōmeth to passe that according as they perceiue any mā affectioned towards them to holde with them or ageinst them, so they with blind iudgement commend or discommende his doctrine and Re∣ligion. Héereuppon growe hartburnings, froward suspici∣ons, hatred, fallings out, and desire of reuenge: wherthrough all things are turned vpsidedowne. And from hence (to passe ouer other things with silence) springeth a double pleasure. For both the enemies of the Gospell are boldned in theyr stubbornesse and vngodlinesse: and also the weaker and vn∣skilfuller sort, which earst were more forward in imbracing

of the truth, are not a litle trobled, wauering and vncertein, too whether part they were best too ioyne themselues▪ Amōg whom, not a few (as though nothing certein could be taught or determined of all the whole Religion) begin too dout, not only of al the partes of it, but also of all maner of Religions. In this case it is our duetie (my déere brethren) too succor the weake bothe with our Prayers and aduertisements, that they stumble not at this huge heape and dunghill of opini∣ons, and so fall headlong intoo certeine destruction. The best remedie for this mischéefe, is to marke the continuall con∣sent of the Catholike church, in Doctrine and in the true ser∣uice of God. For as there is but one God: so is there also but one euerlasting, stedfast, and infallible truthe of God, one true religion, one faith: one rule wherby to liue well, and one Church of Chryst, which only knoweth the true maner how too serue God aright. He that is not a Citizen of this Churche, is falne from grace and saluation, though he boast himselfe too haue neuer so great maisters. Contrarywise he that in this Church woorshippeth God in spirit and truthe▪ is the heir of grace and saluation, though he had but a Cow∣herd too his maister or teacher. For this matter hangeth not vpon the worthinesse or vnworthinesse of man, but vppon the mastership of Chrystes spirit, whose wil is, that his pure and vncorrupt woord should be oure rule of life & saluation. In the which woord and woorshipping taught in the woorde, there hath bin a most sound and perfect consent of all the ho∣ly Patriarkes before the flud and after the flud: of the Pro∣phets and Apostles: yea and of al godly men. Whse doctrin and manner of worshipping if wée holde aright, wée may lawfully glorie in Chryste, that wée are Citizens of the Churche of Iesu Chryst, althoughe the whole world hated vs, and abhorred vs as Heretikes. I méene therefore (bre∣thren) too say somewhat concerning this contynuall agrée∣ment, too the intent wée may bée assured in our selues, whi∣ther wée bée in that consent of the Catholike Church, or not,

or whither oure aduersaries bée in it, who making great braggs of theyr maysters (whom they call fathers) endeuer with sword and fire too stop the course of the doctrine of the Prophets & Apostles. In the handling of this matter, many things surely do méete, which all ame as it were at this one marke. For of necessitie it must come héere in question, from whence true religion hathe his begynning, and what assu∣rance is therof: how great hath bin the consent of the church in the same doctrine through all ages: by what sleights Sa∣than is woont too assault the true religion: and finally what aduisednesse the Godly ought too vse ageinst the treasons and crafts of Sathan: least (as oure first parents did) wee suffer our selues too bée led with faire words, from the foun∣tains of saluation, too the Diuels puddles, that is, too mens traditions and wilworshippings.
Wée should not néede to shew from whence true religi∣on hath his beginning, but that the rage of men and féends, bothe hath bin in olde time, and is at this day so greate, that they durst set vp newe religions, after the blynd imagina∣tion of their owne brayn, maynteyning them with swoorde and fyre, and persecuting that Religion, whiche is onely of God: that they may fulfil the prophecie whiche was spoken of the serpents séede that should byte the héele of the womās séede. But muche more rightly than these, iudged that hea∣then man Socrates, who being demaunded in Xenophon, which was the true religion: answered: It was that whiche God himselfe had appointed▪ For in as muche as the Lord sayth playnly by his Prophet, that he abhorreth the doctri∣nes and worshippings of men: Let vs be out of all doute, that the true and continuall abyding Religion, hath his be∣ginning from the euerlasting God himselfe. Apollo Pithius béeing asked of the Atheniens what religions they shoulde chéefly folow, answered, those that their auncetors had vsed. When they obiected ageyn, that the custome of their aunce∣tours had oftentimes bin chaunged: hée sayde that the best

was too bée folowed. For (as Hesiodus sayeth) the auncient custome is euer best: After the same maner, our aduersaries in these dayes boast of antiquitie, vtterly suppressyng the name of the author of true Religion, where as they oughte rather too aunswere as Socrates did, than as the wicked féend did. For like as Sathan abused the authoritie of antiquitie, to stablish errors, so do they. True it is in déede, yt the aunci∣entest religion is best: so as it haue his beginning from God who is best, and not from the olde serpent, who frō the first beginning brought into the worlde his Religion, fighting full but ageinst the religion of God. Wherefore there is a distinction too bée made betwéene the twoo Antiquities. For the one antiquitie is referred too God, and the other too Sa∣than. The first of these antiquities is the auncientest of all antiquities, as which hath neither beginning, nor shall haue ending. Out of this most ancient antiquitie sprang the truth of God, whereby is taught whiche is the true Religion, for the confirmation whereof, God hath added woonderfull re∣cordes, which should bee as it were certeyne euerlasting and authorised seales of his heauenly truthe. The later an∣tiquitie is such a one as both had beginning and shall haue ende, out of which issued all superstition, and vngodlynesse. Either of these religions hath his furtherers, and as it were certeine Patriarks whome the men of late yéeres haue ter∣med fathers, of whome they glorie not a litle. The Papists haue alwayes in theyr mouthe, the Fathers, the Fathers: And in all controuersies concerning the doctrine and ser∣uice of GOD, they flée to them as too theyr last Anchor∣holde. Wee also acknowledge the Fathers, howebéeit farre after another manner than they doo. For wee ad∣mitte those for Fathers, who hauing receiued theyr Re∣ligion at Gods hande, haue also deliuered the same fayth∣fully too posteritie, as are the Patriaks, holy Kings, Pro∣phetes, Chryst himselfe, and the Apostles. These onely doo wée reuerence as fathers, and too vary from them in opinion

wée iudge it a falling away from saluation. Of the fathers that folowed the times of the apostles, wée déeme according too the rule of Ambrose. We iustly condemne al new things which Chryst hath not taught, bycause Chryst is the way too the faithfull. Therefore if wée teache any other thing than Chryst hath taught, let vs iudge it detestable. And according too this rule of Paules: If any man teach any other gospel, accursed bée hée. But the Papistes to bleare the eyes of the simpler sort, doo tell them they must enquire of the auncient wayes, and that they must not passe the olde bounds whiche our fathers and anceters haue stablished: which thing if it be scarce lawfull too doo in the boūds and buttels of fields; howe much lesse shal it be déemed lawful to be doon in the bounds of Religion? Surely we passe not the boundes whiche God the first founder of religion hath pitched: which the holy Pa∣triarkes and Apostles receiuing by heauenly inspiration, maynteined: from which the holy Martyrs (among whom holy Abel holdeth the first place) with inuincible courage of mynd draue back the Bores and Wolues: and finally which the son of God hath stablished with his owne precious blud: but we abyde within thē constantly. As for ye bounds which the old serpent with his broode hath pitched, within which is enclosed nothing but mere dānation, wée make no consci∣ence too passe them. Therfore wée father ye true religiō vpon God, who is called of Daniell, the auncient of dayes. Wher∣by it wil appéere, bothe that the same is the auncientest, and that it representeth the nature and disposition of the firste founder of it. Wherfore as it is most stedfast euermore: so it always continueth like it selfe.
But whiche is that Religion continually stedfaste in it selfe? What is the effecte of it? Whiche are the partes? Gods woorde, and the signe added to the woorde appoynteth the true rule of Religion and seruice of God, for God hath alwayes bin woont too vtter his will too men by his woord, and by some outward signe. For loke what the word putteth

into mens eares too be conueyed vntoo the mynde, the same thing doth the signe set before the eyes too bée séene, to the in∣tent that by them as it were with windowes, a certain light myght be conueyed in vnto the soule, so as the woord and the signe might bée a double warrant, audible and visible, the end and drift of which is all one: Howbéeit, so as the inter∣pretation of the signe is to bée fetched alwayes out of the woord alone. What maner of things these be, the fiue times in whiche GOD vttered his woorde, and gaue signes, will shew most openly: as are the state of man before his fall: the time wherin he was promised recouerie: the time of renuing the promise: the time of Moyses publike weale: and finally the time of the performaunce of the promise, by exhibiting Iesus Chryste our Lorde. It is too bée shewed by Gods worde and heauenly signes, that in these fiue tymes the religion was one selfsame, and alwayes agréeable with it selfe in all poynts.
Before mans fal when Adam was garnished with Gods image, God had deliuered too man bothe the worde and the signe. The woorde required the knowledge of God and obe∣dience towards him: It forbad man too attempt any thing ageinst Gods prohibition, vnder a threat of punishment: and it had a promise of immortalitie, which promise Adam embraced by faith. And the trée of life as a visible warrant conueyed the same by the eyes intoo the mynde. All whiche things tended too this end, that Adam representing Gods I∣mage as it were in a glasse, shold cōtinually serue and praise God. Wherby it is manifest, that the true religion before mans fall, was the pure woorshipping of God according too Gods woord, the rule wherof was the woord and the signe. The parts therof were the acknowledging of God, beléefe of the immortalitie that was promised, and obedience to∣wards God both inward and outward. And the end therof was to represent gods image, & too praise and magnifie him. And in that estate was the seruice of God most perfect, such

as it shal be after the resurrection, sauing that as then it shal bée much fuller, not in substance, but in degrées. This man∣ner of seruing God in such sort as was enioyned too the first man, is required of vs also after his fal. Neither is ther any alteration made in the maner of woorshipping: but there fo∣lowed an horrible mayme in all mankinde after the fall of our first Parents, insomuche as no man is able too perform this seruice too the ful, no nor too begin it, vnlesse he haue ac∣cesse too the trée of life, whiche is Iesus Chryst.
Ageine, after that mankinde was falne in our firste Pa∣rents, God eftsoone vttred his wil by woord and signe: wher∣by is learned with what seruice God would bée woorshipped after the fall. By the woorde hée rebuketh the transgression of his commaundement: by the woorde hée made promise of the Messias, who becomming man, should pay the raunsome for Adams giltinesse, and restore too man the image of God, which he had lost by sinning. And he added a sign too ye woord which was as it were a certeine visible sermon concerning the Messias. The signe was the killing and offering vp of beasts and frutes of the earth. Héerevpon it followeth, that God requireth the selfe same manner of woorshipping after the fall, whiche was before the fall, although it haue not the same perfection, in his degrées, whiche it had before the fall. For God requireth héere an acknowledging of him: hée re∣quireth an acknowledging of our owne sinne: hée requireth an acknowledging of Chryst, who is in steade of the trée of life that was in Paradise: hée requireth fayth in the Messias: hée requireth obedience through Faith, too the intent that by little and little Gods Image may bée more and more repay∣red in man by Chryst, that is too say, that in the minde may shine assured knowledge of God: in the soule, holinesse: and in all the powers, obedience too be perfourmed according too the precisenesse of the woorde. These things are bréefly she∣wed by woorde and signe in the beginning of Genesis. For (that I may vse Platoes woords) the auncient fathers béeing

better than wée, and dwelling néerer vntoo GOD: were better and more substancially taught by shorte grounds and outwarde signes, than wée bée taughte by long Sermons. For in olde tyme thys manner of teachyng was common and familiar, as well vntoo Diuines as Philosophers, that what soeuer they hadde vttered in short groundes, the same thyng they auouched wyth certeine outwarde signes. As soone as man was falne, GOD vttered this grounde with his owne voyce. The womans séede shall breake the heade of the Serpent. The outwarde signe (whiche in a certeyne Image purported the same thing) was the offering of Sa∣cryfises commaunded too the Fathers by GOD. There∣fore when Abell offered hys Sacryfises, hée hadde an eye al∣wayes too the firste grounde that had bin vttered, and in of∣fering, hée thoughte of these things. Firste by beholding the deathe of the Sacrifise, hée was putte in mynde of the death whereintoo all mankinde was falne throughe sinne: Whereby no doubte but his minde was mooued too ryghte great gréefe. Ageine, by looking vppon the bloud of the Sa∣cryfise, hée was put in remembraunce of the promisse con∣cernyng the Messias, by whose merite and intercession hée assured himselfe, that Gods wrath was pacifyed according vntoo the promisse: whereby there grew bothe comforte in his harte and also Fayth, by whiche hée was accepted intoo Gods fauor through Iesus Chryste. Béeing iustified by this Fayth onely, hée minded true holinesse according too Gods woord praysing and magnifying God for his ryghtuousnesse and mercy. And so Abell, hauing after a sort repayred Gods Image in himselfe, performed true seruice vntoo God: which seruice hee afterwarde confirmed with his death. For when his brother Cain béeing an Hipocrite, went about too with∣drawe him from acknoweledging the promised séede, and from the true seruice of GOD, hée chose too die rather than too consent vntoo his brothers wicked purpose, giuing vs too vnderstande by thys his stedfastnesse, that hée onely woor∣shippeth

God aright, which preferreth his obedience to∣wardes God and the profession of Chryste, before all thin∣ges in the worlde, yea and before lyfe it selfe, than whiche nothing is woonte too bée déerer vntoo man. By this woorde and signe deliuered too our first parents, after their fall, it appéereth, that the Religion after the fall, was all one with that whiche was before the fall. And although cer∣teyne outwarde circumstaunces were added in respecte of the corruption of Nature, and the promise of the repayre∣ment of it ageine: Yet the substaunce or grounde of Gods seruice continued all one, and tended too the selfe same ende, thoughe muche more imperfectlye. This pure woor∣ship of GOD endured in the Churche (whiche was very small) vntill the floud, that is too wit, a thousande sixe hun∣nred and sixe and fiftie yeres. For Cains ofspring vnder∣standing the promisse after a fleshly manner, persecuted the true Church: vsurped too themselues the title of the Church: and chaunged the true woorshipping of GOD intoo Hea∣thenish Hipocrisie and Superstition. Moreouer, after God had punished this Hipocrisie and superstition and other hor∣rible crymes, with the floud, he deliuered the true Religion ageyne by woord and outwarde signe vntoo Noe: not a new religion, but euen the very selfesame that he had appoynted from the beginning. Howebéeit, when Iaphet by Hypo∣crisie and Superstition, and Cayn by crueltie had put this true Religion too flyght: It remayned onely in the house of the Patriarke Sem. For he vnderstanding the promisse and the signe thereof aright, woorshipped GOD through fayth, and obeyed him after the same manner that Abell and Noe did. And although that Noe and Sem hilde still the same woorde and outwarde signe that was deliuered too our firste fathers: Yet notwithstanding, by reason of a newe occasion there was added another newe signe. For when God destroyed the wicked world by the flud, for their

falling from the true and pure worshipping of God: he pro∣mised Noe and his ofspring, that he would no more destroy the world by water: Untoo this promis he added a token namely the Raynbow, which was a certeine remembrance of the promise. Therfore God printed a marke of his woord in the Raynbow whiche is woont too appéere in the cloudes, too the intent he might (as it were with a seale) warrante that promise of his too bée ratified: wherby he gaue assurance not onely that he would bée the God of Noe and his posteri∣tie, who had put them selues in his tuition, and seruice: but also that he would neuer destroy the world any more with water. Noe and Sem therefore beholding this signe, did af∣ter the example of holy Abell▪ perfourme true and spirituall seruice vntoo God.
Now foloweth Abrahams age vntoo the time of Moyses, in which age the same religion is betaken too the Patriarks, bothe by Gods owne voyce, and by a newe signe. For in as muche as the wisedome that had bin in the forefathers was now decreased: as there was néede of more euident woord: so was there néed also of a more apparant token. Therefore was this woorde vttered vntoo Abraham: In thy séede shall all kinreds of the earth bée blissed. And the sign or token that was added, was the circumcision of the member of genera∣tion in the male childrē. Then like as by the woord he taught and required the true woorshipping: so did he lykewise by the signe, whiche was the seale of the doctrine and religion. For when he sayth, shal bee blessed in thy seede, he conueieth therein thrée things moste euidently. Whereof the first is a rehersall of the accusation of all mankinde for sinne, and falling away from GOD. For in that he promiseth blis∣sing, he giueth too vnderstand that all men sticke in cursse, which curse soked into al mankinde with . The second is a rehersal of the promis of the séed and of his benefits, which was spoken too Adam in this forme of woords: the womans séede shal breake the serpents head. Which selfe same thing

is expressed héere by a more pithie terme of blissing. For by the terme of blissing is ment Gods fauour, attonement, for∣giuenesse of sinnes, and rightuousnesse for Chrystes sake, according as Paule the interpreter of Moyses expoundeth it. The third thing is a bewraying of our weaknesse, that wée can not attayne blissing by our owne power: but that wée must obteyne it by fayth in the promysed séede. Too this fayth of his, Abraham added obedience in his whole lyfe, ac∣cording too the commaundement: Walke thou before me, and bée perfect: which obedience the holy Patriarke shewed by the offering vp of his owne sonne. For héerby it appéereth howe muche he regarded his obedience towardes God, that hée woulde rather at Gods commaundement offer in sacri∣fise his onely begotten sonne Isaac, whom he had begotten in his olde age, and too whom so royal promises were made: than too step backe from his obedience towards God. Nowe must the signe that is added too the woord, borow his inter∣pretation of the woord. For the signe is nothing else but the visible woord. This signe therfore setteth three things before our eyes: Namely that our fleshly birth is corrupted: agein that there is a séede promised, whereby nature shall bée re∣paired: and also that by the circumcision of the flesh is signi∣fied the circumcision of the hart, wherby is cut of ignorance of God, the filthinesse of affections, and the stubbornesse of hart: that a man may bée borne a newe, bearing the image of God in true holynesse and rightuousnesse. Beholde, howe fitly these things matche with the former things. The form of woords is altered: but the méening abideth still. This va∣rietie of the woorde and signe, serueth mans weaknesse, and remedieth our ignorance: but it appoynteth not any newe fashion of seruing God as the fleshly séede of Abraham hath surmised. For like as Cains broode embrasing hipocriste, and reiecting the pure vnderstanding of the woord and signe, per∣secuted Abel & the folowers of his faith: So the Ismaelites sticking in the letter of the circumcision, and neglecting the

spirituall méening of it, persecuted the true children of A∣braham: whereby it came too passe, that the true woorship∣ping remayneth with very fewe. For whyle the Fathers so∣iourned in Egipte, onely the house of Ioseph did after the death of the Patriark Iacob, holde still the true Religion, whiche being after the decease of Ioseph, little better than quite quenched, then was Moyses borne: In the fourth∣scorth yéere of whose age, being the thrée hundred and for∣tith yéere after the promise was made vntoo Abraham, God renued ageyne the woorde of promise, adding thervnto ma∣ny signes: and too the intent the true Religion myghte bée preserued, he set vp a kingdom and a presthood. And although he betooke the same woord & the same sign too Moyses, which he had betaken afore too the Patriarks: yet notwithstanding he addeth longer sermons & mo signes besides, according as the state of that age required. All which things did leuell at one marke, and deliuered vntoo men one selfe same maner of spiritual woorshipping God. For in the wildernesse (to passe ouer the burning bushe, and the pillers of fire & cloude) the Manna, the Rock, & the brasen serpent were set foorth as sig∣nes or sacraments of ye doctrin & worshipping of God: which thrée things signified Chryst yt was promised lōg ago. For ye Manna, according to ye interpretatiō of Paul, signified ye spi∣ritual foode wherby men being made new by Chryst are sed in Chrysts kingdom. The Rock betokened ye spiritual drink wherwith the beleuers ar refreshed. The serpent being han∣ged vp, did foreshadowe Chryste, that should bée hanged vp vpon the alter of the crosse for the sinnes of the world accor∣ding as Chryst himself interpreteth this signe. The looking vpon ye brasen: serpent was a figure of faith, wherby mē be∣ing iustified & quickned, doo walk before God, and séeke after rightuousnesse. But after that the people was brought in∣too the lande of promise, which was a figure of the heauen∣ly dwelling place: there were yet mo signes, as it were vi∣sible sermons deliuered too them: of which I will touche a

fewe, for my purposed bréefnesse wil not suffer mée for too go through with them all. All their whole common weale beto∣kened the Churche: the Préesthood & Princehood did figure Chryst: who with his Préesthood pacified his fathers wrath according too the firste promise, and with his soueraintie des∣stroyeth the Deuilles kingdome, sinne and death: and with his Préesthood and soueraintie toogither, repayreth Gods I∣mage in man, according vntoo which, man was created: that béeing so garnished agein with Gods Imag, hée might serue him in true obedience, and set foorth his prayses.
Many ceremonies were added, of which the ghostly mea∣ning openeth the first promise, and setteth out the spirituall woorshipping of God. Howbéeit forasmuche as they bée ma∣ny, I wil picke out a few of them (and those of the notablest) whiche I wil expounde in few woordes. The furniture of the Préeste, the yéerely oblation of the hyghe Préest, the Arke of Couenant, the Paschall Lambe, the sprinkling of the bloud, the washings, and the dayly offerings, hadde a singular sig∣nification of spirituall things, all whiche doo swéetely put vs in minde of the conditions of our mediatour, and the duetie of the godly. The highe Préeste ware a plate on his foreheade, and cleane garments. The plate of Golde betokened Chry∣stes Godhead, and his cleane garmente betokened his man∣hood, howbéeit pure and cleane from all sinne. The going in of the Preest once euery yéere, intoo the holy place, was a fi∣gure of Chryst the high préest, who with one oblation should make perfecte all that were too bée sanctified. This is shewed plainly in the .38. of Exo. where the Lord sayth, that the Lord may bée wel pleased with him. Ageine, the Préestes rayment betokeneth holinesse, wherwith the Lord wil haue his Prée∣stes too bée garnished, according as Dauid the interpreter of Moyses expoundeth when hée sayeth: Let thy Preestes bée clothed with Rightuousnesse, and let thy Sainctes leape for ioye. The Arke of couenaunte betokeneth Gods people with whom the Lord hathe made a couenaunt by expresse woords.

In this Arke were the tables of the lawe, which were coue∣red in the Arke with plate of Golde. Whereby was none o∣ther thing signifyed, than is conteyned in the firste promyse. The womans séede shall treade downe the Serpentes head, sauyng that the outwarde signe expresseth the thyng more pleasauntly. For the Table of the ten commaundements is couered in the Ark with a plate of Golde, which is called the propiciatorie. That is too saye, Chryste, who is the propitia∣tion for our sinnes, doth in his church hide the sinnes of men, ageinst the wrath and horrible iudgement of GOD. I pray you what is this else, than that the womans séede shall tread downe the Serpentes head? Thus dooth Paule the interpre∣ter of Moyses, expound this figure in the third vntoo the Ro∣maynes: Wée are iustifyed fréely by his grace throughe re∣demption that is in Chryste Iesu, whom God hath set foorth too bée a propitiation thorough Faith in his bloud. For as the high Preeste of the Hebrues was woont euery yeare once too embrew the propiciatorie with bloud, when hée entred intoo the holy of all holyes. So our high Préest Iesus Chryst offe∣red himselfe once vp too his father for the sins of the world, and found euerlasting redemption. The paschall Lambe had also a secrete meaning, wherein the first promise was pein∣ted oute as it were in liuely coloures: The figure whereof, Paule openeth, when hée sayeth: And Chryst was offred vp oure Passeouer. And whereas this Lambe was taken out of the flocke, it signified that Chryst tooke our fleshe vppon him and bare the infirmities of our flesh, and that hée was temp∣ted as wée are in all respects, sinne excepted, too the intent hée might make vs also heauenly that are earthly, and spirituall which are carnall. And wheras it is sayd of the Lambe: And all the multitude of the Children of Israell, shall offer hym vp: it is ment that Chryste dyed not for one or twoo, but for the whole Churche, that is too saye, for the whole corporati∣on of those that are registred in the booke of life. The sprink∣ling of the bloud hathe a manyfest signification. For it was

a token of Chrystes bloud shed vppon the alter of the Crosse, wherwith our consciences beeing sprinkled, are clensed from dead woorks, according as the author of the Epistle vntoo the Hebrues expoundeth this figure after a godly maner. Too the same purpose perteine their washings and dayly offerings. For these things in generall, did betoken as well that clen∣zing, wherwith Chryst washeth and purgeth vs cleane from all iniquitie, as also the true holinesse, wherewith the belée∣uers are garnished: so as from hencefoorth they may begin too represente Gods Image too his glorie and praise. These sha∣dowes of the Lawe were couert interpretations of the firste promise: whiche who so vnderstood with Adam, Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noe, Abraham. &c. Those yéelded true and ghostely seruice vntoo GOD, not vnlike (as in the respecte of the sub∣staunce of the seruice) but altoogither like and the very selfe same. But what is doone héere? Like as Caines brood vnder∣stoode the promise carnally, and of the signe that was added, did make a seruice or woorshipping by it selfe: Euen so héere the moste part of the Iewes, leauing the spirite, gazed vppon the letter, and determined Gods seruice in these outward ce∣remonies without fayth: whiche errour the Lord reproueth moste sharply in the Prophete, where hée sayth: What passe I for the multitude of your Sacrifices (sayth the Lord?) And anone after: Offer mée no more Sacryfises in vayne, your incense is abhomination vntoo mée. And streight after, he ad∣deth the cause of this matter, when hée sayeth: Your assem∣blies are wicked, my soule hateth your newe Moones and so∣lemn feasts. By these woords GOD dooth vs too vnderstand that hée hath not so ordeyned Ceremonies, as though hée re∣quired them as a ghostly woorship, but that the people should enure themselues in them vntoo godlynesse, and strengthen their fayth by them, and keepe themselues more and more in the pure woorshipping of God. Howbéeit, according too mans superstitious nature, the moste parte are led away by Hipo∣crisie from the true vse of Ceremonies, and haue grounded

the whole weyght of their saluation vpon the obseruation of them. Whose errour when the Prophets that were sent did reproue, they were drawen too punishement as blasphemous folke ageinst Gods lawe.
By these things it is manifest, that those godly personnes whiche lyued in Moyses common weale, agréed fully bothe in Doctrine and Relygion, with the holy Fathers before the flud and after the flud, vntoo the calling of Moyses, and from Moyses euen vntoo Chryste. For what is required héere but acknoweledgement of sinne, beléefe in Chryste, inuocation, holinesse, obedience, and other vertues, whiche are required as partes, too the reparation of Gods Image in vs? Now re∣mayneth the last age, wherein the eternall woorde according too the prophesies, tooke vppon him the womans séede, that is too say, mannes nature, that hée might tread down the ser∣pentes heade, that is too say (as Iohn expoundeth it) that hée might destroy the woorkes of the Deuill.
This Chryste béeing interpreter and fulfiller of Moyses & the Prophetes, did by woorde and outward signes raise vp a∣geine the same seruice of GOD well néere falne too the ground: commaunding repentance and forgiuenesse of sin∣nes too bée preached: garnishing thē that beléeue in him with his owne rightuousnesse: enduing them with his holy spirit: stirring vp in them newe motions agréeable vntoo the Lawe and will of GOD: and too bée shorte, repayring Gods I∣mage, according too whiche, the firste man was created, bid∣ding vs let our light shine so before men, that our father may bée glorifyed in Heauen. This selfe same seruice cōmendeth hée too his Disciples, whiche they bothe taught by woorde and expressed in their life. Notwithstanding, too the intente the Churche might kéepe this seruice continually, hée deliuered them his assured woord, & put as it were twoo outward seales too the woord, namely Baptim, and the Lordes Supper. The word interpreteth the first promise more cléerly. The sacra∣ments are as it were certeine visible sermons, which proffer

the same thing too the senses, which the woord teacheth. But what is done in this case? Like as in olde time Cains broode, Chams broode, and the false Israelites corrupted the woorde, and by their fleshly foolishnesse patched mens dreames vpon it: So the hipocrites fléeting from the woord in this last age of the world, haue defiled the seruice of GOD, so long tyll through the outrage of heretikes and the tyrannye of Anti∣chryst, the sacramentes were partely distayned with mens traditions, and partly mangled, and the doctrine with the true Religion welnéere ageyne ouerwhelmed. Notwith∣standing, about a fortie yéeres ago, God raysed vp a prophet that blissed Luther, who brought agein the auncient doctrine and religion, which both our first fathers receyued of God, and Chryst deliuered too his disciples. And that this seruice of God whiche our Church holdeth at this daye, is the true and continual seruice of GOD, he shall most clerely vnder∣stand, which trieth it by the rule of the Patriarks and of the Apostolike Church. But what hapneth vntoo vs? Ueryly the same that hapned too our first fathers, too the folowers of Abraham, and too the Apostolike Churche. For the diuell rusheth in with all his force, too destroy the Gospell, and too abolish the true seruice of GOD. And this dooth he the more outragiously in these our dayes, bycause he knowes hée hath but a small tyme too execute his crueltie ageynst Chrystes Churche. Now what sleightes, this aduersary of Chrystes vseth too wype out the sincere doctrine and true woorshipping of GOD: the matter it selfe at this daye o∣penly declareth. For firste he hath set vp a kingdome, and that a right large one, namely of the Turks, which openly blasphemeth the name of Chryst. Ageine he hath planted a∣nother kingdome, whiche men call the Popedome: whiche though it professe not it selfe openly too bée agaynst Chryste, dooth neuerthelesse with singuler wylynesse and craft, step intoo Chrysts kingdom, marring the doctrine, defiling the sa∣craments:

and finally ouerthrowing the true seruice of god. For the Pope hauing gotten the primacie vnder colour of the ministerie, hath brought all kinde of superstition and Idolatrie intoo the worlde, so that since man was created, there was neuer yet a more vyolent and intollerable ty∣ranny herd of, neyther was there euer any kinde of Idol-seruice, whereby was wrought more spytefull deroga∣tion too Gods maiestie, or wherewith Chrystian mennes myndes haue bin more monstrously bewitched. And now that Sathan perceyueth his sleyghtes too bée founde out in this behalfe, he taketh no truce, but calles toogither the maysters of mischéefe, suche as are the Lybertines. Ana∣baptistes, Seruetians, Antynomians, and other: wh with their foule snoutes endeuer too béerays ageyne the purged doctrine and Sacramentes. And when he sées he can not by these his practises hinder the course of the Gos∣pell and the pure woorshipping of GOD, he goes too it a∣nother waye, drawing asunder by inwarde debates, and setting toogither by the eares among themselues lyke e∣nymies, those whome hée perceyued too mynde earnestly aboue others, the restorement of the Churche, and of true Religion: Uerely least by ioyning in endeuer and coun∣sell toogither, they shoulde with one minde goe throughe with this so excellent a woorke. Besides this, from tyme too tyme he chaseth some out of Chrystes campe, who becom∣ming forsakers of their order, doo excéeding great harme too the Churche: among whom there are that inuent new de∣uyses whereby too bring the pure doctrine in hatred with the weake and vnskilfull. For they gather toogither the contraryeties in the sayings of those, whose trauell GOD hath vzed too the clenzing of his Churche in this laste olde age of the worlde: when as notwithstanding, they are not able too shewe any true contrarietie in no part of the foun∣dation of the doctrine and woorshipping of God, howsoeuer

these Prothëuses transforme themselues intoo a thousande shapes. By these practises of Sathan wée sée it brought too passe, that the wilful sorte are made more stoute in their su∣perstitiō: and the weaker and vnstedier sort doo for the most part giue ouer, too the great gréef of all the godly: and vnlesse Chryst make hast of his cōming, it is too bée feared least ma∣ny wil bée wrapped ageine in their former darknesse. What is too bée doone in this case my brethren I beséeche you? Wée muste beware of Sathans wyles: Wée muste haue an eye backe too the examples of our aunceters, Abel, Abraham, the Prophets, Chryst, and his Apostles. Let vs accompany oure selues with them in doctrine, woorshipping, and Inuocation. Let vs not bee disquyeted at the multitude of our enimies. Let vs not bée mooued at the number of the runnagates. Let vs not bée dismayed in harte at the persecution and miseries, whyche the godly are fayne too suffer in this worlde. Let vs not onely haue an eye too the lowlynesse of the church, which in this world lyeth vpon the ground despised: but also let vs haue an eye too Chryst tryumphing, who wil in time to come reward those with the glory of blissed immortalitie, whome hée maketh like vntoo hym selfe in thys life, so they continue stedfast too the ende. Let vs beare in minde this most weigh∣tie saying of Chrystes: Watche and pray, that yée enter not intoo temptation. That whiche I say too you (sayth hée) I say too all. The world tempteth: the fleshe prouoketh: the armies of Heretikes trouble: the stumbling blockes of doctrine and manners offende: the fonde quarellings of proude persones vexe: ageinste all these things the surest remedie is too call vppon GOD. For it is not for nought, that Salomon say∣eth: The name of the Lorde is a moste strong Towre: the ryghtuous man shall flée vntoo it, and bée saued. In oure cal∣ling vppon God, let vs haue an eye too the Propheticall and Apostolike churche, and let vs arme our mindes ageinst the Idoll gaddings of Mahomet and the Papistes, and ageynste the wranglyngs of the Heretikes. Lette vs oftentimes be∣thinke

vs, vppon how sure and vnmouable foundations the continuall doctrine of the Churche, and the stedfaste religion of the Catholike Churche is grounded. Lette vs bethinke vs of the heauenly Reuelations, wherby GOD himselfe reue∣led his will vntoo men, when hée spake too the holy Patriar∣kes and Prophets: whiche wil of his, hée hath confirmed by many woonderful miracles, bothe in the olde and new testa∣ment. Let vs beholde the moste swéet consent of Moyses, the Prophets, Chryst, and the Apostles in doctrine and religion. Let vs bée stirred vp too the acknowledging of GOD, by the example of many Martirs, who (with Abell the firste Mar∣tir) confirmed the heauenly doctrine with their owne bloud. Let vs absteyne from fonde disputyng, by whiche the bonde of peace (whiche is charitie) is broken: and let vs rather ap¦plye oure selues too godly life, than too suttle and vnprofita∣ble disputations, by meanes of whiche, what euill hathe ry∣sen in the Churche, it gréeueth mée ryght sore at the harte too thynke. For although in these realmes (GOD bee thanked) there bée a very great calme and a godly agréement in al our churches: yet notwithstanding godlinesse wold we should bée sory for the miseries of those, whiche at this day are afflicted through the vnsesonable strife of certein persons, wherwith ye mindes of many princes & diuers others are woūded. How béeit sith wée are not able too remedy these euils, let vs flée too him, who alonly is able too doo al things. Pray yée therfore wt the whole church of Chryst, vnto ye eternal God the father of our Lord Iesu Chryst, yt he wil gather to himself a church in this world, & that he wil in ye same church mainteine ye pure∣nesse of doctrin, & the true worshipping of him: so as wée may woorship him aright, & for euermore magnifie & praise him. Pray him too gouerne wt his spirit our most méeke soueraine Lord king Frederike the secōd of ye name, who as he hath suc∣céeded his most holy father in ye kingdom: so also is hée ye very right heir of his fathers vertues: & is not only a prince yt bea∣reth special loue too iustice & equitie: but also a singuler fauo∣rer

and patrone, or rather a most faithfull foster father of the churches & schooles. Pray too Chryst that he wil with his spi∣rite rule the counsellers and nobilitie of the realm, & the go∣uerners of churches, ciuill offices, schooles, and housholdes, giuing them courage too mainteyne Gods glorie, true doc∣trine, and honest discipline, so as wée may leade a peaceable and quiet lyfe, with all godlynesse and honestie. Pray for all the states of this realm, yt all may knit them selues toogither in swéete concord, & one reléeue an other, so as the superiors may think that their inferiors shal be coheires with them of Gods kingdom: & the inferiors obey their superiors in the Lord, as Paul willeth them: so yt al the degrées of this realm béeing setled in a moste swéete tunablenesse, wée may liue peaceably & quietly. Pray ageinst the enimies of the king & this realme. Pray Christ too represse the rage of Sathan, & too graunt vntoo his church teachers & shepherds agréeing in true doctrine and godlinesse, which may set foorh gods glorie by teaching aright, & by example of godly life: too the intent that at the length all of vs fully beholding the glorie of the Lord with open face, as it were in a glasse, may bée transfor∣med intoo the same likenesse, as it were from glorie too glo∣rie, by the spirite of the Lord. So bée it.
Now remayneth that I should say somwhat concerning mine own purpose, namely wherfore I haue published these expositions of the gospels vpon ye Sundays. About a fourten yéeres ago, I vttred priuatly certein short notes vpon ye sun∣days Gospels too my scholers at home at my house, to ye intēt I might by this my small trauell, further their studies, not thinking at all too haue put them foorth. But what folowed? The things that wer ended too a few scholers, were cōmu∣nicated too many. And when I perceyued, that diuers sought earnestly after them: I enlarged them somwhat a sixe yée∣res ago. And nat length the entreatance of certeine god∣ly Shepherds, compelled me too publish them and put them foorth in print. Wherfore séeing that this woorke is wholly

ordeyned for the godly ministers of the Gospell, I thought it good (right déere brethren) too put foorth this my trauaile vnder your name. If yée shall reape any thing thereby, giue GOD the thanks, and commende me too God with your Prayers. This one thing haue I earnestly regarded, name∣ly too set foorth purely the doctrine of the Catholike Church, whiche bothe the vniuersitie of Wirtemberge▪ maynteyned a fortie yeres agon, and yet stil mainteineth: And also which those most excellent men the studentes of this Uniuersitie, D. Iohn Machabeus of the Alpes: D. Peter Palladie, D. Iohn Seming, and D. Olaus Chrisostomus, (all which doo now rest in the Lord, looking for full deliueraunce by the comming of the Sonne of God) haue taught. In this consent stande wée also, who haue succéeded them in office in this Schoole: and wée pray God hartily, that wée may liue and die in this con∣sent. For wée doo not dout but that this is the continu∣all consent of Gods Churche, as wée haue suffici∣ently shewed before. I beséech God the Fa∣ther of our Lorde Iesus Chryst, too knit vs toogither with his spirite, that wée may bée at vnitie in him. Fare yée well, and God sende yée good lucke in Chryste. 
At Hafnie the .xxx. of Marche. The yeare since Chryst was borne. 1561.
