



AFter I had deliuered this Pam∣phlet to certaine learned, profound, & graue persons (right vertuous & worthy Gentle∣men and Gentlewomen) to be perused, that I might vnderstand and receaue their iudgements touchinge the same: whether it were to be consecrated (if Chri∣stians might so speake) to
Feigned of Poets to bee president of the fier. Vulcane or
One of the nine Muses supposed to bee president of celestiall matters, such as are most worthy the meditation and practise of all chaste persons, but specially of Virgins and single folkes. Vrania. And af∣ter that they by fauourable sentence had not onely ac∣quited it from the firie flames of vulcane, but also ad∣iudged it to be enlarged out of the darke prison of (if I might so terme it) vnknownnesse, to walke at liber∣tie in the light of edition, as beeing profitable in their indgement to confirme chaste mindes in their godly purpose, and by Gods grace to stop and stay such as be not altogeather gracelesse, from beeing caried hed∣long into the deepe and daungerous Sea of raging af∣fection: and so (except God in great mercy stay them) into the bottomlesse gulfe of endlesse perdition. After these euentes (I say) so fallen out, I studied with my selfe to whom I might most fitly dedicate the same: And pondering the matter deeply in minde, in respect of dutie, matter, and persons, I found i in a manner
due vnto you (right worshipful & vertuous Youths.) For respectinge my dutie vnto the right Honourable your Father, my verye good Lorde and Maister, and his bountifulnesse towards mee of his meere beneuo∣lence, without any desertes on my behalfe: VVhat can bee more due then that the person maintained, de∣fended and preserued in such commodious and quiet state, as by Gods fauour and prouidence hee enioyeth, though in it selfe it bee but poore, meane and simple, should bestow and imploye all his study, endeuours, and labours, to the vse, commodity, pleasure, or con∣tentation of his maintayner and defender? Or if his preseruer and protector in such quiet state should bee of such excellency, praeeminence, and dignitie, and himselfe of such basenesse, pouertie and vnabilitie, that in no wise hee should bee able to pleasure him: yet to assaye and endeuour to the vttermost of his small power to profit his, especially his Children, in time to come, supplyers of his roome here vpon the face of the earth, and Heyres of his vertues, Renowme, and Ho∣nour? Agayne, hauing relation to the matter and per∣sons, what is more fit, meere or conuenient, then that a Discourse or Treatice of Christian Chastitie, collec∣ted and written by a Batcheler and singleman, by vo∣cation and profession studious of chastitie, should bee dedicated to young vertuous youthes, not only chast, but as yet euen Maydes and Virgins? I thought it therfore, no lesse conuenient vnto my bounden dutie, then meete for your persons, and professions, to pre∣sent the same vnto you. Not for that I am so rude or sencelesse that I thinke any of you to stand in neede of any such discourse or admonition, whom I know by the great wisedome and prouidente care of my good Lorde your Father, and by the dilligente instruction
and nurturinge in the Lorde, of my good Lady your Mother, and by the godly and vertuous domesticall examples of them both, togeather with your owne good natures, vertuous dispositions & rare toward∣nesses, to be so grounded and setled in all godlynesse and vertuousnesse, as you neede not greatly any ex∣hortations to the same, especially such as are destitute of Rhethoricall exornations as this is: but as a token of thankefulnesse, or signification of a gratefull minde and humble dutie. Neither yet (peraduenture) shall you at any time repent you of the reading hereof, or thinke it a losse time, bee it neuer so destitute of elo∣quence, trapped wordes or filed speech, as tending ra∣ther to playne profite then vayne pleasure. For be∣sides the methode and order beeinge such, as the lyke wherof I haue not as yet seene in our English tongue, I hope the pith & substance of this matter is so plain∣ly set downe, as it will delight your vertuous and chaste eyes, to consider and vew the shew, sight and prospect therof, seeinge your owne vertues so plainly displayed, and the daungerous Rockes of the contra∣ry vices wherupon many lusty youthes now a dayes (alas for pittie) do make wofull and vnreparable ship∣wracke, and which you by Gods grace, vertuous e∣ducation, and the prudent and carefull prouidence, and domesticall example of your honourable Parents, and godly kinsefolkes, haue hitherto (& I trust euer shall, prosperously escaped) so clearely discryed. This much I dare be bold to affirme, because I know the Authors wherout I collected the greatest part of this Treatice, to be godly, vertuous and learned, yea and eloquent also, though in this matter for the most part studying Breuitie and perspicuitie they neglect and omit the same. But in reading hereof, this I am most earnestly
to request: that though in some place vice be induced and represented in its lothly forme and shape, and with termes and Phrases vnfit for VVorshipfull eares, yet that you would of your goodnesse, beare with the same, seeinge it was first written for Children, mine owne neare & deare kinsewomen, for whō I thought it was expedient, that vice and the filthy practices of the vitious, should be set out in their blacke, and loth∣ly colours, to the intente that youth might euen from the very hart shun, hate, abhor, and detest the same, as of all the godly and vertuous it is, and ought to bee. And that which the Axe of courteous interpretation, and of taking and construinge of thinges in the better part, which is an excellent vertue, especially beseming all Gentlefolkes, in Latine commonly called (Candor) a proper name in English, for the which vertue (such is the barennesse of the tongue in some parts) we lack, you would at once shred away, & cut of all suspitions, and not once to thinke or suspect that I wrote and col∣lected this discourse or treatice of Christian Chastitie, for that I sawe any more inclination to the contrary vices in my sayde deare Cosins, then is in the best na∣tures since the generall corruption of the same, in the roote of the two first created, the origin of al humaine nature: For certainly, to speake as we vse to speake of the beste natures: they are all of a rare towardnesse in that sexe, verye godly and vertuously brought vp, but yet subect to the daungers of youth and prospe∣ritie. And therfore for the naturall loue I bare vnto them, beeing my neare kinsewomen (for it is the na∣turall property of true loue, for to forewarne the par∣ties beloued of all such perilles as it foreseeth may fall vpon them without diligent caution or circumspecti∣on:) I wrote this treatice to enarme them against that
time of their age, which the very Paganes by the only light of nature saw to be most daungerous and peril∣lous, as may plainely appeare to all such as haue reade or sensibly heard the story (or Poeticall Narration) euen of Hercules the Sonne of their great God Iupiter (as they propound it) in his budding yeares sitting in the VVildernesse in a maze whither way to take, that of vice, or that of vertue. And therfore, seeing this happened in the heroicall nature of Hercules, commen (as is affirmed) of progenie diuine, I thought it not superfluous to admonish my kinsewomen, be they ne∣uer so good a nature and inclination, to decline the way of vice, and to take the prooued Path of Vertue, trodden out vnto them by their godly Parentes. And though this Syeth of admonition seeme to some, to be whetted sharper then needed, yet charitie procured it, to mowe downe at once all the weedes of the ouer∣ertile soyle of youth & prosperitic (if it might be) as I trust it hath in them. And the like effect that it hath wrought by Gods grace in them, I hope it will in o∣ther, and to that end cheefly haue I ventured the editi∣on hereof. Not of any fonde presumption, as some Zoyluses (peraduenture) will obiect. For I am not ig∣noraunt of mine owne pouertie, weakenesse, and vn∣abilitie in matters of wit and learninge. But as I haue due proofe and experiment hereof, so do I know that the giftes of God are diuerse, and seuerally bestowed according to his good pleasure, without beeing tyed to person, place, time, or other circumstaunce. And that of his bounteousnesse & vnsearchable wisdome, hee many times fauourably vseth euen contemptible instrumentes to the bringinge to passe of lawdable thinges. But how so euer it bee, the Talent that God hath bestowed on mee I haue spent and imployed as
faithfully and to as great gayne as I can. Hide it in the ground I could not withont clogge of conscience and expectation of the execution of that terrible sentence.
Take the Talente from him,
Math. 25. and caste the vnprofitable ser∣uaunt into vtter darkenesse, there shalbe weepinge and gnash∣inge of Teethe. I know the wittie, wise, and such as haue beene brought vp in learninge all the daies of their life, and haue receiued many Talentes & great guiftes, are able to do many and great things: But yet that ought not to let him that hath receaued but one from occupyinge the same. Neither (I suppose) will any godly or reasonable person bee offended that any that beleueth the
Truely and ightly to beleeue the communion of Sainctes, is for a Christiā to be fully perswaded that such giftes & gra∣tes as he hath eceaued, is o the vse & onifit of Christes Church, which is the ormmunion of Sainctes cōmunion of Saincts should parti∣cipate or cōmunicate vnto other that which hath don himselfe good, & that which he is perswaded will do the like vnto others. And therfore I was imboldned to make a priuate benefit, cōmon, and that vnder your names, hoping that it will therfore be the more accep∣ted, & so to do the more good, which God graunt for his Christes sake. Thus crauing pardon for my bold∣nes I most humbly & earnestly besech the Lord Iesus that Archangel of God, who pitcheth his camp round about all those that feare him, to preserue my good Lord & Maister your honourable Father, & my good Lady & Mistresse your Mother, and all you their godly and vertuous Children long and many yeares, in all prosperitie, and true felicitie, to the glorye of God, the comforte of the godly, and the vtiliti of the cōmon wealth.
From my poore Cottage at West Hergst the .12. of Iuly, in the yeare of our Lord God .1580. and in the .22. yeare of her Highnesse Raigne.

