



PRetily was it aunsweared of Praxiteles (right worshipfull) who beeyng demaunded whych of both were most to be estee∣med the Paynter or the writer of Hystories: whether of the two would you choose (quoth he) to be dumbe and make a signe aptly, or to haue the vse of your tongue, and tell your tale fitly? So that hymselfe beyng a Paynter, and the sci∣ence so greatly regarded as then it was, yet beyng made a iudge of two notable sciences, he thought meeter to de∣rogate something from his owne arte, then to defame a better. Such were the dayes then, and the people so farre enamoured wyth the Arte of Paynting, that to haue skyll in the draught of shadowes, and the apt framing of pictures, was deemed the best quality that could rest in a Gentleman: touchyng whiche, wee may well say as dyd Parrhasius, who paynting one that ranne in a race, and not able to make hym sweate, added this for a note, No farther then coulours. So that Praxiteles with his pen∣cill shall make the signe, and being not vnderstoode, He∣rodotus shall tell his tale, by meanes whereof, that whych wanteth in the one, shall be so plentifully supplyed in the

other, that dyspising the Paynter for setting downe to little, we shall suspect the wryter for alleadging to much, finding faulte with one for obscuritie, and in the other fearing flatterie. So lyuely in many things, and so eui∣dent in all things is the pleasaunt discourse of hystories, that a better coūterfayte may be drawne wyth two pen∣full of incke in Herodotus tale, then with two potfull of coulours in Apelles table. But to leaue the Paynter to his coulours, it was fitly sayde of Cicero, that to knowe no more then that which was done in his owne time, were still to be a childe, meaning that the chiefest parte of wisedome by the which we farthest surmount the boundes of childish ignoraūce, is to be well seene in storyes, out of the which, whether more profite or pleasure redounde to those that reade them, it is hard to say. For what greater commodity may there be, then to fit our-selues with sun∣dry sortes of examples, to direct our wits, to frame our manners, to gouerne the course of our whole lyues, an infinite number whereof are offered in stories to the sin∣gulare profite of the posteritie. Vertue blased with excel∣lency, vice defaced with infamy, famous cities vtterly destroyed, small townes highly aduanced, auncient frend∣ship turned to enmity, mortall hatred conuerted to ami∣tie, free cities brought vnder tribute, and suche as were tributarie, restored to freedome, briefly, all things in sto∣ryes, that may eyther for profite auayle the reader, or for pleasure delight hym. It is lefte to memory of Scipio A∣fricanus a noble Gentleman of Rome, that seeking to en∣sue the example of Cyrus which was fayned by Xenophon, he atchieued that fame of wisedome and valure as fewe had attayned before hym. The lyke happened to Selimus prince of the Turkes, whose auncetours hating stories, he

caused the actes of Caesar to be drawne into his mother tongue, and by his example, subdued a great parte of Asia and Africa. And Caesar himselfe had neuer aspired to the type of so great renowne, but by following of Alexan∣der, reading whose victories, he brast out into teares, forsomuch as at the same age whereat Alexander had subdued the whole worlde, hymselfe had done nothing woorthy memory. The delyghte wee receyue by readyng hystories, is euery way singulare, a soueraigne medicine for the cares of the minde, a speedy remedy for the griefes of the body. So that Alphonsus Kyng of Spayne, lefte by Physicke as incurable, recouered his health by readyng Lyuy. In which kynde of delightsome veyne, sithence of all other Herodotus most excelleth, both for the pleasaunt course of the story, and the plentifull knowledge cōteyned therein, I thought him not vnfit at his first entry into Englande, to growe in fauour wyth so noble a Gentle∣man, by whose countenaunce gaynyng credite, hee may with lesse shame and greater acceptaunce aduenture in∣to the hands of such as shall reade hym. I leaue hym ther∣fore in your worships hands to entertayne as a stran∣ger, and as he deserueth to make hym familiar, not forgetting to wish hym good fortune as a for∣reyner, and to your selfe increase of fame, and the fauour of God to youre lyues ende.

