



AMongest all those, that haue by theyr wrytynge, beautifyed the Greke & Latyn tonge, none are supposed (right honorable & ver∣tuous Lord) so much to haue pro¦fited mortall affaires, as Histori∣ographers, who haue faythfully reduced into writyng the actes & deades of such, as in fame (either good or euyll) haue passed thys transitorye lyfe. They haue put before our eyes, the ly∣ues, maners, and doinges, of all sortes of men, wt theyr counselles, fortunes, and aduentures, the whiche theyr posteritie maye, as in a paynted Table beholde: and therby learne to profyte, aswell the Common wealthe, as their owne priuate estate. Chieflye, through the ma∣nyfold examples, bothe good, and euyll, conteyned in Histories, all sortes of people may attayne by them, to more knowledge in shorte space, then otherwyse they might in al theyr liues, if ye same were much lōger then the commō age of man. For profe wherof, we haue the memorie of Lucius Lucullus the noble Romaine: who (as Cicero wryteth) at his departure frō Rome against the great kyng Mythridates) beyng vtterly vnskylfull in warfare, whyles he sayled on the Sea, so trauayled, in conferring wyth learned men, and reading of Histo∣ries, that when he arriued in Asie, he was so excellente in warlyke knowledge, that by the confession of My∣thridates, he deserued preferment aboue all the Chieue∣taynes in warre, that were before his tyme. Alexander Seuerus also, Emperour of Rome, when so euer he

made preparation to warre, accustomed to consulte wt such as were expert in Histories. And good cause why. For yf Vse (as sayeth Afranius) hath engendred wyse∣dome: and Memorye as the Moother, hath brought her into lyghte: Who oughte to be more sage, and discrete, then they whiche reteyne in memorie, the deades, & ma∣ners, not only of one age, or Citie, but of al ages, & naci∣ons? Thys much considerynge (ryght excellent Lorde) and enduced by the prudente wordes of Salust, in hys Preface to Catilines wonderfull Coniuration, wher∣by he exhorteth man (yf he entende to be reputed wor∣thyer then other mortall Creatures) so to employe hys whole labour, and studye, that he ouerslyp not hys lyfe, in slouthful silence, as sauage, and brute beastes, whom Nature hath fourmed prone, & subiect, to ye filthie lustes of the bealy: I haue enterprysed to trāslate out of Latyn this presente Historie of Herodian, a Greke Authour, treating of the Romayn Emperours, betwene Marcus the Philosopher, and Gordianus the yonger, not be∣fore (I thynke) brought into oure Englyshe tonge. And haue presumed, to dedicat ye same vnto your good Lord∣shyp, whome not onely fame, but also experience, doeth apparaūtly proue, to be the perfect Patrone of knyght∣lye prowes, and vertue. Humbly besechyng your good Lordshyp, of your accustomed clemencie, so to accepte thys my symple gift, beyng the Croppe of my barreyne Haruest, as may embolden other ioyfullye to embrace it, and encourage me, to employe my poore labour fur∣ther hereafter. And so I remayne a continuall Inter∣cessor to almyghtye God, for the prosperous estate of youre Lordshyppe, wyth contynuall encrease of vertue, and honour.
