



RIGHT HONORABLE;
IT is an Aphorisme of State, delivered by a great and wise King; When the Righteous are exalted, the Citty reioy∣ceth. A good Man, (especially, if a Great Man) is a common Good. Where Goodnesse
 and Greatnesse, meete together, that Happie coniunction promiseth a Gracious aspect. Giue me leaue (being received into and shrou∣ded vnder the winges of your Honors Pro∣tection) to congratulate that High Honor which His Maiesty hath so worthily con∣ferred on your Lord-ship. I know not whe∣ther the Place doth more Honor the Man, or the Man the Place. Your Honors Wisedome, Experience, Iustice, Gravitie, Pietie, what good doe they not presage? If the world faile not exceedingly of their expectation, none more like, to doe God, the King, and his Country better service. Your Honor hath the prayers and hearts of the best, and there∣fore need not (being armed with such a Coate of Male) feare the calumnies or oppo∣sition of the worst. For my-selfe, your Ho∣nors favour and countenance afforded me in private, hath obliged me to a publike Gratulation, and emboldened me to dedi∣cate these my Labours to your Honor (to whom I haue given my selfe) as being a chiefe Member of this State, and therefore knowing the state of this Story, better
 then my rude draught can pourtray it; wherein your Honor shall see the Combat, Conflict, and Conquest, as of the Church in generall, so of this Church, this State in speci∣all. Never any Nation so embroiled, so entan∣gled, came off so faire. Never any intended bloudy Tragedy, shut vp with such a reall ioyfull Catastrophe. The Matter cannot but yeeld delight to a Christian, especially to an English-man: If the Manner please not, I haue done my endevour to cloath it with the best Suit my homely Wardrope could affoord, more in so short a time, and on so suddaine a warning I cannot promise.
The Grecians delivered it as a Prover∣biall Precept, that who ever speakes to Great Men, his words must be , Suauissima & breuissima, as wee English it, Short and sweete: What my Discourse wants in the one, (if it be not so sweete as I could wish it) it shall make vp in the other, and be as short as your Honors more weightie employments require, to which I remit your Honor, wishing many a happie New-yeare to your Noble Lordship,
 and my Honorable Good Lady, with all encrease of Honor and Happinesse here, and here-after, remaining

