


Most Excellent

KINGS,
PRINCES,
and PEERES.

IT is accounted an especiall Honour in the GARTER; that it makes them, which for theyr vertue and de∣serts are admitted of it, Companions even unto KINGS and PRINCES. Those therefore, which are ioyned together in so

strict a bond of Vnitie, and made the same in a com∣munion of all Noble qualities; farre bee it from my thoughts to take asunder: or to select Particulars, out of a Generall bodie, so united. The rather, be∣cause I now addresse my selfe unto You, in commenda∣tion of a Cause; wherein your whole Fraternitie, is ingaged ioyntly. It is almost Three hundred yeares, since that most excellent Order, never before ador∣ned, at once, with such and so many Noble spirits; was by the Founder of it, Dedicated to St. GEORGE of CAPPADOCIA. A Saint, more than a Thousand yeares before that Institu∣tion, crowned with Martyrdome: And ever since, continually famous in the Church of GOD. Onely some few of late, on what authoritie I know not; have tooke upon them to discharge him, both of his place in Heaven, and reputation in the Church. In which, though their opinions are so contrary, that pos∣sibly there can bee no agreement made betweene them: yet they agree together to disgrace that holy Martyr: For by the first ranke of them, it is un∣doubtedly affirmed, that GEORGE the Martyr, so much honoured in the Christian world, is but a Counterfeit, a Larva; onely some strange Chi∣maera, the issue of an idle braine; one that had ne∣ver any being on the Earth. The others, as unque∣stionably, have made him in his life, a dangerous and bloudy Hereticke: and since his death, a wret∣ched Soule amongst the damned. On both sides, Sa∣tis pro imperio. For this cause, it hath often beene one of my chiefest wishes, that some of those,

whose names are great for learning, and eminent in point of knowledge; would undertake the vindi∣cating of this iniured Saint. But finding none, that have as yet adventured in it: I rather chose to put my selfe upon the taske, than that Saint GEORGE should longer suffer in his honour, and this Realme in him. The worke, such as it is, next under his most sacred Maiestie, I consecrate to you (most excellent Kings, Princes, and Peeres) and to the honour of that most noble Order, where∣of you are; and in defence of which you were all in∣gaged, at your severall Installations. You celebrate St. GEORGE'S Feast, with many stately and magnifi∣cent Ceremonies: you weare his image and representati∣on as your chiefest Ornament; you count it an especiall honour, to be called his Knights. I doubt not there∣fore, but St. GEORGE thus vindicated from the pennes and stomacke of his Enemies, will finde a gracious welcome to you: and that you will be pleased for St. GEORGE'S sake, to entertaine a favou∣rable opinion both of the Worke and of the Author. In a full hope whereof, I doe with all Humilitie and Reverence, subscribe my selfe

