


WHen I had well consi∣dered with my self how great affinities are sayd to be betwixt learning and good maners, inso∣much as either of them without the other see∣meth to be vnperfect, & both equally ioy∣ned. (O God) how straight a course they take to wyn both worldly fauour & eter∣nall felicitie: I haue thought good, as well presently nourishing thy tender wittes by dayly instruction, as hereafter (when some priuate occasion may perhaps remoue me from thy company) to leaue these fewe preceptes of morall Philosophie togither, with my especiall good will towards thee bent, in riper yeares of discretion to be well wayed and seriously folowed. The gifts of nature which appeare in the blos∣somes

of youth, so bountifully bestowed vpō thee, haue (as it were by cōtemplatiō) allured mee to giue these instructions of Courtly behauior, not bicause I wold ther∣by persuade thee to seeke suche doubtfull prefermēt, but (if hereafter by the good ad∣uice of thy parents thou be commaunded, or by deceiptful emulation drawen to such kinde of seruice) that thou mightest in the entrance of so perillous a passage, be well armed against those daungerous delights which vnto others for want of better go∣uernment, hath bene the chiefe cause of ruinous decayes and skornful ouerthrow. And first I woulde haue thee to vnder∣stande, that the Court is a boysterous Sea, where by the raging stormes aboue head, the strongest shippes are throwen vpon the doubtfull rockes of displeasure, and yet sometymes by the fauourable aspecte of fortune, safely ariued in the quiet ha∣uen of good happe. It is like a steepe hyll or huge mountayne harde for any man to clymbe, and yet apt for all mē easily from thence to fall downe headlong, and espe∣cially

to such as are swiftest of foote, or ra∣ther lightest of heade, nothing subiect to good counsel & foresight of mischiefs. The wayes are pleasāt, the enterteinmēt sweet, but the felowship is the more doubtful, bi∣cause that vnder so sweete a tast oft tymes lie many bitter pilles of hard digestion, and as some say, the common sicknesse of the Court, is to surfeyt in the bākets of dissem∣bling: but no man can burne his fingers without fyre, nor be deceyued where hee hath not ouermuch trusted. Moreouer, the way to vice is readily founde, but the true path and footesteppes of Vertue not so easie to be folowed: For nature is sub∣iect to sinne, and soone allured by the en∣ticements of follie, but noble Vertue re∣quireth longer tymes of increase, whose humble roote as it were by degrees spred∣ding hir selfe abroade, is the more stedfast∣lye planted in the firme grounde of per∣fect knowledge, where not by kinde, but customablye increasing, bringeth foorth the flowers of worthie fame, and soue∣raigne fruites of felicitie. Thys is the

marke whereat all men should leuell, and the boundes of humaine life which by no meanes can be enlarged: and as by the in∣stinct of nature we are all moued with a prouident care to liue (as by the mainte∣nance of pleasures and needefull commo∣dities of life it is manifest) so muche more ought we by reason seriously to seeke the safe conduct of vertue, that guideth vs di∣rectly to the Pallace of eternall life and e∣uerlasting pleasures: by this we haue fel∣lowship with Angels in heauen, after the consummation of this tragicall act, but the other is cōmon to vs with all other earthly creatures. Take therefore these instructi∣ons of vertue for a newe yeares gift at my handes, which (alluding to thy name) I haue entituled the Keyes of Counsaile: ho∣ping, the euē as by the prouidence of God and the furtherance of good parents here∣after, thine estate may be worthily aduan∣ced: so that the daungerous course & ad∣uentures of youth by these my trauayles shalbe the better directed and more safely gouerned. I haue folowed the praise of

vertue more than the reprehensiō of vice, in this short discourse of maners, for that with Cicero the Prince of eloquence, I hold it greater glorie that is gotten by defence of honestie, thā that is doubtfully receiued by disclosing of misdeedes. If want of skill hath vnpleasauntlye closed vp the wyde fields of rethorical exornations in so good a matter, accept the morall sense of simpli∣citie, which tendeth rather to plaine pro∣fite, than vaine pleasure: But if perhaps the discourse seeme to be shorter than the greedie mindes and attentiue eares of the studious herein should require, content thy selfe, that the rest of my winter exer∣cise hath bene applied to thine owne pri∣uate instruction. Farewell, and thus much remember: That life without learning is vnpleasant, and learning without vertues vnprofitable. Cal. Decemb. 1578.

