



Iámque opus exegi.
AS Ovid concludes his Poetry, so may I begin my Divi∣nity. I am at length delivered of that birth, which mine unfained zeale to Gods glory, mine humble ser∣vice to his Church, and my re∣spective
 observance unto your worship, have beene this many yeeres conceiving in mee; and whereof neither the barrennesse of the wombe, nor the hardnesse of the travell, nor the unskilful∣nesse of the midwife, nor the rough handling of some ill dispo∣sed Gossips, could (being so gra∣ciously assisted by the Almigh∣tie) make mee miscarry. How timely and comely the fruit may be, the predominant End I ayme at (the glory of God) gives mee sufficient boldnesse; and the two subordinates (my service in ge∣nerall to the Church, in particu∣lar to your worship) give mee sufficient incouragement to pre∣sent it to the eye of the world: wherein if it shall finde but chur∣lish entertainment, I shall not marvell. I know sufficiently the world cannot brooke its nature:
 the discovery of an hypocrite or a Pharisee deserves no lesse then a Crucifige at the worlds hands, that is so full fraught with both. But I know againe there be some in the world, that are called out of the world, because they are not of the world, that will bid my child good wellcome; such as leane neither to the right hand of Schisme, nor the left of heresie, but worship the Father in spirit and in truth: amongst which small number your worship is well noted and approoved, for sincere and eminent. To these therefore under your worships protection, I desire to commend my first fruit with Saint Iohns blessing, in his 1. Epist. 4. 4. Little babe, thou art of God, and therefore thou shalt overcome the world, for greater is he that is in thee, then he that is in the world. So
 he, that is in thee, keepe thee in him; and he, that hath overcome the world for thee, defend thee from the world, and from the men of the world, whose teeth are speares and arrowes, and their tongue a sharpe sword. And the God of peace tread Sathan under thy feet shortly. Amen.

