




IT is as easie as ridiculous
(Right Wordhipfull) for men officious
By fauours bound: to promise very faire,
But to performe and pay is all the care.
Heer's all the labour, this the onely stop.
This doth the flower of frequent promise crop.
Since then to promise much, and nought to pay,
Is the chiefe badge vaine-glory to display:
And with fond Ciclicus to promise faire,
Is vainely to build castles in the Ayre;
How then should I without deseru'd disgrace
Presume to promise? knowing my weake case:
For as both I and my deere fostered Brother
Haue both of vs Christs-Hospitall our Mother.
And he in you doth finde Paternall care;
And you of that blest-House a Patron are,
A principall and pious Gouernour,
Religions friend, and Learnings fauourer.
Therefore I must ingenuously agnize
That I, with him, am bound to you likewise:
Both for the good which he in you doth finde,
Whereof I doe partake by ioy in minde:
As also that your Worship ruling there

Whereas I now doe a poore office beare,
Therefore I say, I owe vnto you more,
And am obliged in so large a score,
As my poore Talent neuer will suffice
To pay the debt, or ere to equalize
The merit, of your manifold desart
By other reall signe, than thankefull Heart.
Yet, rather then I would so brutish be,
Ingratefully my duety thus to flee:
Because not able to pay what I owe,
Promise and payment rudely to fore-slow.
I haue beene bould, embouldned by your fauours,
To giue this second part of my poore labours:
To dedicate this Mite of my Good-will
To your Good Worship: but not to fulfill
Or fully satisfie the boundlesse bond,
Wherein obliged vnto you I stand.
But onely thus to shew, and to expresse,
My best and prest desire of thankfulnesse:
Which with my prayers for your prosperity,
Shall neuer cease t'implore Heau'ns Deity.
Accept therefore (Right Worshipfull) I pray
This Symbole of my seruice, first Essay.
Regard not (Worthy Sir) the Quantity
Of this poore present, but the Quality.
The gift but meane, the giuers heart sincere,
Thus some small part of my great debt to cleere:
Which, hoping your good Worship will respect,
Heaun's Grace and Goodnes you and yours protect.


