



Most dread Soveraigne:
YOur Majesties exempla∣rie
piety in the house of
God, hath spred it selfe
abroad amongst all
your Subjects; and they
were ill Proficients in
the schoole of piety, did they not profit very

much under such a Master. Your Royall
and religious care, that all things in your
Regall Chappels be done according to the
prescript of the publick Liturgie, and anci∣ent
usage of this Church, is a prevailing
motive unto all your people, not to be back∣ward
in conformity to such an eminent part
of your Princely vertues. Such a most ex∣cellent
patterne would soone finde an uni∣versall
entertainment in the hearts of men;
were there not some, the enemies as well of
piety, as publick Order, that disswade from
both. None in this kind more faulty than
an obscure and namelesse Minister of
Lincoln Diocese, in a discourse of his not
long since published. A man that makes a
sport of your Maties Chappells, as having
neverHoly ta∣ble, p. 36. heard of the use of the Chappel,
nor read of any ordering and directing
course from the Royall Chappells; and puts
a scorne uponIbi. p. 83, 84, 85, &c. the piety of the times, in

being so inclinable (by your most sacred
Maties divine example) to decencie and
uniformity in Gods publick service. Nay,
whereas in the Primitive times, the holy
Altars, as they then used to call the Com∣munion
Tables (for other Altars they
were not) were esteemed so sacred, that
evenMilites irruentes in Altaria, os∣culis signifi∣care pacis insigne. S. Amb. Ep. 33. l. 5. the barbarous Souldiers honou∣red
them with affectionate kisses: this
man exposeth them to contempt and scan∣dall,
as if no termes were vile enough to
bestow upon them. Nor deales hee
otherwise with them, who out of their due
zeale to God, and for the honour of the
Reformation against the unjust imputa∣tions
of those of Rome, and the procu∣ring
Stat. 1. Eliz. cap. 2. of due reverence to Christs ho∣ly
Sacraments (too much slighted in these
times, and in many places) have travai∣led
to reduce this Church to that ancient
Order, which hath beene hitherto pre∣served

in your Majesties Chappells,
and the Cathedralls of this Kingdome:
whom he hath openly traduced, asHoly Ta∣ble, p. 204. if
they were but taking in the out-works of
religion, and meant in time to have a¦bout
with the fort it selfe. In this regard,
I thought it was my bounden duty to re∣present
unto your Majesties faithfull
and obedient Subiects the true condition
of the businesse so by him calumniated:
together with the doctrine and continuall
usage both of the Primitive Church of
Christ, in the world abroad, and the
Reformed Church of Christ in this your
Majesties Realme of England. Which
worke, as it was principally intended to
settle and confirme the mindes of your
Majesties people, whom some have
laboured to possesse with preiudicate feares:
so to the end it may receive amongst them
a more faire admittance, I have presumed

to prostrate both my selfe and it, at your
Royall feet, with that humility and reve∣rence
which best becomes

