



ANtient wisedome, being so worthi∣ly eternis'd; by the now-renew'd Instance of it in your Lordship; And this ancient Authour, one of the most Authentique, for all wise∣dome, crown'd with Iustice and Pie∣tie: To what Sea owe these poore Streames their Tribute, but to your Lordships Ocean? The rather, since others of the like Antiquity, in my Trāslation of Homer, teach These their way, and adde comfort to their Courses; by ha∣uing receiued right cheerfull countenance and approbation from your Lordships most graue and honourd predecessor.
All Iudgements of this Season (sauouring any thing the truth) preferring, to the wisedome of all other Nations, these most wise, learned, and circularly-spoken Grecians. Ac∣cording to that of the Poet:
Graijs Ingenium; Graijs dedit ore rotund
Musa loqui.
And why may not this Romane Elogie of the Graians, ex∣tend in praisefull Intention (by waie of Prophetick Poesie) To Graies-Inne wits, and Orators? Or if the allusion (or pe∣tition of the Principle) begge with too broad a Licence in the Generall: yet serious Truth, for the Particular, may most worthily apply it to your Lop•. truely-Greek Inspirati∣on, and absolutely Attick Elocution. Whose all-acknowledg'd facultie, hath banisht Flattery therein, euen from the Court; much more from my countrie, and more-then-vpland sim∣plicitie. Nor were those Greeks so circular in their elegant vt∣terance, but their inward Iudgements and learnings, were as round and solid. Their solidity prov'd in their eternity; and their eternity propagated, by Loue of all vertue, and integri∣tie: That Loue being the onely Parent, and argument, of all Truth, in any wisedome or learning; without which, all is sophisticate, and adulterate; howsoeuer painted & splinted with Degrees and Languages. Your Lordships aduance∣ment of Learning, then, well showing your loue to it; and in it, being true, to all true Goodnes; your Learning streng∣thening that loue, must needs bee solide and eternall. This Vir verè (seu clarè) sciens: aut illustris Iu∣dex, vel pro∣cul videns Arbiter; quia eos acu∣tos visu, seu gnaros esse oporteat ri de qua agi∣tur.  therefore, exprest in this Author, is vsed here, as if prophecied by him then, now to take life in your Lop. whose life is chiefe soule, and essence, to all knowledge, and vertue: So few there are that liue now, combining Ho∣nour and Learning. This Time, resembling the terrible Time whereof this Poet prophecied; to which hee de∣sired he might not liue: since not a Grace would then smile, on any pious, or worthie; All Greatnesse, much more gra∣cing Impostors, then Men truely desertfull; The worse de∣prauing the better; and that so frontlesly, that Shame and Iu∣stice, should flie the earth for them. To shame wch ignorant Barbarisme now emboldned; Let your Lordships learned hu∣manitie, proue nothing the lesse gracious to Vertue, for the cōmunity of Vices graces; but shine much the more cleere on

her, for those clouds that eclipse her; no Lustre being so Sun like, as that which passeth aboue al clouds vnseen, ouer Fields, Turrets, & Temples; and breaks out, in free beams, on some humblest Cotage. In whose like, Ioue him selfe hath been fea∣sted; And wherein your Lordship may finde more honour, than in the fretted Roofes of the Mighty. To which honor, oftentimes, nothing more conduceth, then Noble accep∣tance of most humble Presentments. On this Noblitie in your Lordshippe, my prostrate humility relying; I rest euer submitted in all simple and hearty vowes,

