



THe richest, rarest mercies daily sent
(Right Christian brethren) to vs of this Land,
From Gods o're flowing Grace, all-filling hand,
May be compar'd to th' Sunne i'th firmament.
Whose glorious Raies, all creatures hearts reuiue,
Whose light enlight'ns all the world throughout:
Whose heat doth cherish plants that spring and sprout,
Whose shine to want, doth vs of ioy depriue.
Yet, since so daily Man doth it enioy,
Who is't almost that valew's it aright?
Who yeelds due praise to heau'n, for heau'ns sweet light?
Oh, few or none: Aboundance doth vs cloy.
From hence we therefore iustly may conclude
That Gods rich mercies which we oft possesse,
Wherewith be daily, hourely doth vs blesse,
We all receiue with great ingratitude.
I need not stand t'exemplifie the same,
It is a fault too frequent, too ranke growne:
And yet to God more odious ther's not one,
Which vnto christians brings more shame, more blame:
Of blessings spirituall, our blest Saluation
Wrought by our Sauiour, bought with 's precious bloud,
Was most Diuine, gaue man his cheefest good,
Was more admired then the Worlds Creation.
But of all Temporall blessings wee enioy'd
Since God did forme the Earth, and Heau'ns high frame,
To our deliuerance, neuer greater came,
When Rome by Powder would haue vs destroyd.
How thankfull for the first to God we are,
I'le tax nones conscience, but examine mine;

But for the second, how wee doe decline
From giuing thankes to God, I may not spare,
To tell you all my Christian Brethren deere
That, which if I should silence, sencelesse stones
Tis to be fear'd would sound with mournefull groanes,
Englands Ingratitude is too too cleers.
And for this cause, I thus haue tooke in hand
To sing, (though simply sung) to Heau'ns high glory,
In this meane Poeme, Englands happy story
How powerfully God to his Church did stand.
'Gainst which though some Athenian, Cretian mind
May scoffe and scorne at this my good intention,
Though from Romes fauourites nought but reprehen∣sion
And taunting termes I shall vniustly finde;
Though Rome doe curse me with Bell, Booke, & Candle,
And like a gauld-backt Iade doe kicke and winch:
Yet I their soares haue laboured so to pinch,
As in their Nature iustly them to handle.
But if to you (my Brethren deere) I may
For my poore Labours kindly be respected:
And from Calumniators fangs protected,
I shall acknowledge this a rich repay.
If I heereby may moue and stimulate
Your Christian hearts to zealous detestation,
Of Romes most impious foule abhomination.
And heau'ns rich mercies oft to ruminate,
Chiefly the great miraculous defence
From this Nefarious Powder-plot of Rome:
Wherein our King and Kingdomes they did doome,
To dire destruction, fatall pestilence.
Then happy I, maugre all Romes despight
That God heereby may haue due thankes and praise,
That this occasion may mens hearts incite
This fact with thankes to memorize alwaies:
Read then (Kind Readers) what's amisse excuse,
And kindly censure my vntrimmed Muse.


