



THis peece of timber, which an other man had roughly hewen ouer, wanting a name (which I haue giuen vnto it) but not a de∣fence & patronage, vnder whose couert, it may be shielded, from the venemous darts of carping toungs: thinke it not amisse, to present the same vnto your excellent worthinesse; sith you haue euen borne, as good and liberall a minde, to learning, and learned workemen, in any facultie, as any noble Gentleman throughout this Realme of England. The subiect matter, whereon it consisteth, is charitable learning or learned charitie, practised vpon and performed vn∣to those, which haue stood in neede: and published by those, that are not ashamed, to shew their names (though for good causes two letters may yet serue to expresse them) being well knowne to the best, and

may be compared with the best, in the facultie of Phi∣sicke and keeping of a good conscience. The ground thē being firme, and the title free hold, whereupon the frame standeth: how can the stormie windes, procee∣ding out of the mouthes, of vnwholesome Aeoles, infect it with their corruption, or one whit moue it with all their violence? I learned this true position long ago amongst other axiomes in the nurserie at Cābridge. Non nobis solum nati sumus, &c. we are not borne for our selues alone, but our countrie challēgeth an interest in vs, our children, our frendes, and our po∣steritie, do laye claime to vs. Howbeit such wicked dayes are come vpon vs, though a man, for glorie to God, loue to his posteritie, good will to his countrie, or other honest motiues, makes priuate things pub∣like, for the common commoditie, of the Church and common wealth; he is not praysed of any, but re∣proued of many, and condemned of all malitious Momes. Bonum quo communius eo melius, hath bene and will be a true morall principle: though some great learned men do scorne to put it in execution. The best Maister that euer I serued did reproue and condemne him, for an euill and vngratious seruant, that hid his talent in a napkin, refusing to put it forth, to his mai∣sters aduantage: Bind him hand and foote, and cast him into vtter darknesse was, and will be the guer∣don, of such priuate companions. As those practisers, are iustly reproued, which (to toll in more custo∣mers) do hang out their signes, and gild their gar∣lands, professing much cunning, and haue little or no learning: so dare I not auouch, to be of their Reli∣gion, which purpose nothing lesse, then to practise

their cunning. God gaue Galene leaue (as Sippontinus writeth) to liue seuen score yeares, what separation he made of impurities from any simple, or what parting of elementes he vsed, I could neuer yet read or heare. But Paracelsus (nicknamed the Sectarie) did more good in three score yeares by working with his owne handes (according to natures direction) concealing no Theorie nor practise from posteritie, shewing much art, celando artem, though Filijs artis he is as playne as a pathway. His schollers and followers, that practised his teaching, and taught his practising, are a cloud of witnesses, to make demonstration of this true position. That with a few medecines, rightly compounded, and with some simples simplie, and without couin prepared, more good hath bene, and may be done, in one weeke against any disease, then in a moneth with all the grosse confections (as VVecker termes them) in their blew pots, or with their hoarie heared drugs, in their braue boxes, which once in a yeare or two (if all men deale truly) must be swept out of dores. Shew me not the meate, but shew me the man: talke not of the receit, but speake truly of the effect. So many as are sand blind, and will not be stone blind, may verifie the truth of the safest kinde of curation; if they will bestow the paynes, to peruse the booke following. Herein is no bragging of cures done, nor promise of impossi∣bilities: but the manner how, the persons who, and vpon whom they were performed, is truly and playn∣ly set downe, euen as they were deliuered by wri∣ting or word of mouth. Briefly and in a word to con∣clude, I appeale vnto their consciences that haue

found certaintie in this kinde of course, for all despe∣rate diseases: albeit they will not be perswaded to giue euery one his due, but speake worse of Spagirickes, then they haue founde by them. Thus not to be further te∣dious vnto your Worship, I do breake off in the halfe way, not doubting, of your fauorable acceptation of this poore gift, which I beseech your noble eyes, not so much to regard, as the true & seruiceable hart of the gi∣uer, to pray for your felicitie, for my good Ladies hap∣pinesse, the health and prosperitie of all your retinew.

