



COmfortable and powerfull is that confirmation to our faith in the Messias, which is drawne from ancient Scripture, when wee see that all which was fore▪shadowed in the Law, and fore-spoken by the Prophets, hath the due and full accomplishment in our Lord Iesus Christ. Who being God ma∣nifested1 Tim. 3. 16 in the flesh, was in the fulnes of time for the sinnes of his people crucified at Ierusalem. And thereafter de∣claredRom. 1. 4 to be the Sonne of God, with power, according to the Spirit of holines by the resurrection from the dead. To this end it is, that the Lord Iesus himselfe biddeth vs search the Scriptures, for they testifie of him. He meaneth thereIohn 5. 29 of ancient Scripture, wherof there is no part which beareth not cleare and evident testimony of him. To Adam heeGen. 3. 15

was promised. Noah made petition for his sonne Iaphet, that he might be perswaded to come to the tents of Sem:Gen. 9. 27 that is, to the Church and family of the Messias. Abra∣hamIohn 8. 56 saw his day, and reioyced in it. Isaac was a speciall type of him, who as he was the sonne of laughter and glad∣nes:Gen. 22. 6 Iohn 19. 17 so Iesus Christ was the ioy of the sonnes of men. And as he bare on his shoulders the timber wherewith he should haue bene burnt in a sacrifice: So Iesus Christ bare on his back the Crosse whereupon he was crucified. Iacob spakeGen. 49 ▪ notably of him, and from his seed the Scepter did not de∣part till he came in the flesh. Moses prayed to send him whoExod. 4. 13 was to be sent. Iehoshua hath but the name of a Saviour in type, who fighting the Lords battels, and leading the people through Iordan to the promised Land, resembleth our strong and mighty Chiftan, that Lyon of the tribe of Iuda, who subdueth his enemies, leadeth captivity captiue, and carrieth his people through the raging and swelling Ior∣dan of the troubles of this life to that promised rest. All the refreshment which the people had vnder Iudges, fighting for them, and rescuing them from their oppressours, was but a shadow and a glasse to looke vnto that rest which is to be found vnder the Messias, who putteth his people in such safetie, that the red Dragon with his power cannot comeApoc. 12. 9 neere to pursue. The holy line is kept, and closeth the bookeRuth 4. 18 of Ruth with Dauid the sonne of Iesse for no other pur∣pose but to point at the Messias the Son of Dauid accor∣ding to the flesh. Samuel by the direction of God, anointed1 Sam. 16. 13 Dauid to be King, who was the type of Iesus Christ in his actions and sufferingt. But the seruant of Iesus Christ as he is the Messias. And therefore he acknowledgeth him to bePsa. 110. 1 2 Sam, 23, 1 his Lord. He is called the sweet singer of Israel. And they

who will looke earnestly to his Psalmes, shall find how se∣cretly he tuneth his harpe, and how heauenly and melodious his song is, when he singeth of the Messias to come, his king∣dome, his subiests, and the great benefit which his people inioy vnder him. The Queen of Seba came to visit Salo∣monMath. 12. 4 the son of Dauid, to see the ordor of his house, and found her sight aboue the report. But behold Iesus Christ greater then Salomon. Ezra writing the history of seuen of Daniel his weekes, which make fourty nine yeares, isDan. 9. 25 leading the people to look to the end when shall come the holy One, who shall make an end of sin, and finish transgres∣sion, to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring an e∣uerlasting righteonsnes. Nehemiah goeth on in the same course, writing the history of seuenty yeares. In the eighteen yeares history of Esther, is it not remarkable to this pùr∣pose, that while as the sword was aboue the heads of the people of God, ready drawne as it were, to cut off their me∣mory,Esther 7 Esther is raised vp as a comfortable instrument of their deliuery. So when the sword of Gods vengeance was drawne, to cut off the whole race of Adam with an euerla∣sting destruction, in commeth Iesus Christ not looked for of▪ Angels, nor expected of man, who setteth his people at freedome, and deliuereth them who were subiect to thatLuc. 1. 74. feare. Iob was afflicted many wayes in his goods, in his children, in his wife, in his body, in his conscience, yet is his head holden vp, and he kept from despair by the faith which he hath in the Messias, still hoping with the eyes of hisIob 19, 25. 26. 27 soule & body both, to see his Redeemer. When the Prophets come in, is not this the summe of all their Prophecy. He that readeth Esay, may read in him all the points of the E∣vangell of Iesus Christ. Euery one of the succeeding Pro∣phets.

holding fast the same point. And the nerer they draw to the time of the rising of that bright Star, the more clear∣lyMalach. 4. 5 they spoke of him. So that the last of the Prophets being Malachie, his last breath is of Iohn the Baptist, the fore∣runner of Iesus Christ. And so Christ himselfe telleth you that all the Prophets and the Law prophecied vnto Iohn,Math. 11. 13 and that by Elias, of whom Malachie spoke, is vnderstood Iohn. When the Lord Iesus came himself, all his actions, and especially his sufferings, were the accomplishment ofMath. 17. 1 Scripture, which was written of old. Vpon the mountaine of his transfiguration there is seen talking with him Mo∣ses and Elias, to testifie the sweet concent and harmony be∣twixt him, the Law and the Prophets. And the subiect ofLuc. 9. 31 their conference saith Luke, was of his death which he should accomplish at Ierusalem. After his resurrection in that powerfull Sermon of his, which made the hearts of the hearers to burne within them. Did he not begin at MosesLuc. 24. 27 and the Prophets, and expound vnto them in all the Scrip∣tures these things that were written concerning him, it would take a long time, and fill many pages to goe through all. These few words to them that are wise in the knowledge of God, may be sufficient. Amongst the rest of the Pro∣phets, our Prophet Zachary (being the last except one be∣foreZach. 3 the comming of Christ) he doth most clearely point him forth. He is in this Prophecie that great Angell who taketh the filthy garments from Iehoshua. It is he only who taketh from vs the filthy garment of our sin, and cloatheth vs with the white garment of his righteousnes. It is he who putteth wickednes in an Epha, and hath cast a weight ofZach. 5. 8 Lead vpon the mouth of it. For let vs bury our sins where we will, they will rise again, except they be buried in the

buriall of Iesus Christ, from whence they shall neuer rise to our confusion here, nor condemnation after this. He isZach. 6. 12 that Branch who buildeth the spirituall Temple of GOD. Yea our Prophet is so speciall in his Prophecy of the Mes∣sias, that he will tell you of his comming in to Ierusalem ri∣ding on an Asse. He will tell you of the very price for whichZach. 9. 9 he was sold and betrayed, euen thirty pieces of silver. AndZach. 11. 13 in end he will conclude his Prophecy with making mention of that glorious comming to Iudgment.
These three Sermons following, are vpon the last three verses of the third Chap. of this Prophet Zachary, where. in you shall find excellent Propheticall speach of the Messias. Here haue you his Natiuity, being that Branch of the root of Iesse. 2. His suffring, being that Stone which the Lord of Hostes himself did ingraue. 3. The fruits flowing there from, which are, the remouing of sin, peace of consci∣ence, and the inioying of all sort of good.
I was not of purpose that these Sermons should haue seen the light, being conscious of my own insufficiency, neither presuming vpon anything that can flow from me. But be∣ing ouercome by the importunity of a kinde and louing friend, who by accident saw my papers, to whom I could re∣suse nothing that was lawfull and possible for me, I was content to be requested, yea in a manner commanded. And seeing they must come forth, to whom can they more proper∣ly belong then to your L. and town of Edinburgh, they be∣ing my first fruits of this sort. I had with you my birth, I was educat in your schooles of learning, I serued (althogh vnworthy) twenty yeares in your publike Ministry, From which now being remoued, since I can doe you no good by publike preaching, I shalbe glad if by writing, or any other

meanes which lyeth in me, I may proue in any sort stedable. Of these Sermons you were also auditors, they being a∣mongst the last which I preached there. And so may be best iudged of by you, if they be not the same which were deliuered.
It may please your L. Baillies and Councill in name of the good Town, to accept this small propine from one of your own, with the like heart and loue wherewith it is offered. Whereby if I shall but rub off me the note of ingratitude, & that your L. doth in any sort like of these trauels, I haue gained what I would, and will be hereby incouraged to vse my pen oftner, that if any good by me can redound vn∣to others, the praise thereof vnder God may be yours, with whom I was bred and brought vp. Thus praying God▪ to blesse your trauels, and make your gouernment prosperous by the propagation of the Gospell among you, and procu∣ring the good of your town and Com∣monwealth, I rest

