



I Haue presumed to offer vnto your Grace (most gracious Princesse) an old Historie clad in a new English coate. But why do I call that old, which ought to be alwayes new, and fresh in euery true English heart, while the world lasteth? We haue a vulgar saying, that fish and guests are stale in a few dayes. And who seeth not, that the greatest and strangest workes of God wrought a∣mongst vs, are but wonders of nine dayes? Our English nation is iustly taxed, as too A∣thenian-like, euer eagerly and curiously li∣stening after nouelties, and ouer slightly and lightly passing by the most remarkable and

memorable accidents and occurrents. This is a generall, and (as I may terme it) a natio∣nall fault, which ought to be acknowledged and amended. Now howsoeuer many passa∣ges may without any great dishonour vnto God or detriment to the State, be buried in the darke pit of obliuion, yet the Powder-treason, that monstrous birth of the Romish harlot, cannot be forgotten without great impietie, and iniurie to our selues. The Israe∣lites were commanded to celebrate yearely the memoriall of their deliuerance from E∣gypt, & often to inculcate vnto their childrē t  workes which the Lord wrought f  in drying the red sea, in deuiding t  of Iordan, in subduing the Canaa∣n  expelling them before their faces. Ts in the time of Hester by a solemne  dained an annuall remembrance of  ance from the cruell designe of Haman  Agagite. The like course hath bene honorably taken in the Powder-Conspi∣racie, by the great Counsell of our State, and  on most iust and weightie considera∣  For this hellish plot, being as it were  nt-essence of Sathans policie, the fur∣  th and straine of humane malice and  not to be paralleld among the sauage

Turks, the barbarous Indians, nor (as I am perswaded) among the more then brutish Cannibals; & the deliuerance being wrought without any humane helpe, by the great watchman of Israel, who neither slumbreth nor sleepeth, so as our enemies must needs acknowledge with the Egyptian sorcerers, Certè hic Dei digitus est: we shall be guiltie of horrible ingratitude, the foulest of all vi∣ces, if we do not embrace all meanes of per∣petuating the memory of so great, so graci∣ous, and wonderfull a preseruation: Nunquam nimis inculcatur quod non satis discitur. Besides, we cannot forget this maruellous deliuerāce, without apparent danger vnto our selues and our posteritie. Improbe Neptunum accusat, qui bis naufragium fecerit. We haue had many faire warnings from these Romish Amale∣kites; if we hereafter fall into their hands, we shall not be pitied, but laughed at, by a or neighbour nations. I hope therefore your Grace, who should haue acted a wofull and yet principall part in the catastrophé of this Tragedie, will vouchsafe the acceptance and perusing of this short Poeme, written by my selfe in Latine, and translated into English by a friend of mine: wherein you may be old as in a cristall glasse, the irefull faces of your

greatest enemies, and the gracious and amia∣ble countenance of the Almightie watching ouer the King your father, the Queene your mother, that Prince of admirable hope, your brother, and your selfe, for your deliuerance from those snares and nets which were so se∣cretly and craftily laid, to haue entangled all your selues together, and to haue put out and quite extinguished the lights of Israel in one day. The same almightie Lord grant, that as he hath bene the sole author of your preseruation and reseruation (as we all hope) for some excellent worke which he hath to accomplish by your hands, so you may be worthy instruments in your places of the aduancement of his Gospell here in earth, to his glorie, and your owne eternall happinesse in the life to come.

