



THat which heretofore I haue propounded to you (right Worshipfull and beloued) in teaching, I doe now pub∣lish to all men by printing, to wit, mine opinion of the vnlawfulnes of games con∣sisting in chance. My desirets either in∣formation, if I erre in iudgement, or re∣formation of so leud a practise. But whe∣ther I erre or no (which yet I would glad∣ly vnderstand,Rom. 3.7. for I ought not to teach
an vntruth, though to Gods glorie) yet there is none, zealous indeede against sin, desirous from the heart to reclaime sin∣ners, and who deeply considereth the grieuous abuses, which accompanie di∣cing and carding (as horrible swearing, dangerous quarelling, losse (I say not of good houres, but) of nights and daies, and the pitifull vndoing of too too ma∣ny) but will remember that1. Cor. 6.12. all things are not expedient, which are lawfull, and therefore abstaine from such Heathenish pastimes, that, if by their example they cannot reforme, they may be sure1. Cor. 8.9. they doe not confirme gamesters in their inor∣dinate walking. Which respect, the 7. In∣iunction forbidding Ministers to vse these vnlawfull games, may be supposed to haue. Now that which authoritie ex∣acteth of Ministers, doth Religion re∣quire of all true Professors. For as the one are to be1. Tit 5 3. ensamples to the flocke, so the other are to bePhil. 2.15 lights in the world. And therefore as Paul saith,1. Cor. 8.10.13. If meate
offend my brother, I will eate no flesh while the world standeth: so euery true Christian should say, and that with more resolution (for Play is not so necessarie as meate) If play offend my brother, who seeing me, hauing knowledge, play, is boldned to follow gaming, I will not play while the world standeth. Which care vnto edification, if all, who haue thePsal. 50.16.17. word in their mouthes, and would not bee thought to hate to bee reformed, would manifest in their sincere conuer∣sation; and if Magistrates, who should notRom. 13.4. carrie the sword in vaine, would doe what they may by33. H. 8. c. 9 5. E. 6. c. 25. law, to banish these forbidden past times, or rather lost-times, I doubt not, but that preach∣ing and writing against them would more mightily preuaile, and this good would come of it, many would applie themselues to better exercises, there would bee lesse time mispent in Ale∣houses, and God lesse prouoked to displea∣sure against vs. But these things I re∣ferre
to the consideration of the wise, and this my Dialogue to the iudgement of the godlie, chiefly to you, whose good I wish especially.
Farewell:
From my studie the first of Ia∣nuarie 1593.
