


THat which heretofore I haue propounded to you (right Worshipfull & beloued) in teaching, I doe now publish to all men by printing, to wit, mine opinion of the vnlawfulnes of Games consisting in chance. My desire is either information, if I erre in judgment, or reformation, of so leud a practise. But whether I erre or no (which yet I would gladly vnderstand,Rom. 3. 7. for I ought not to teach an vntruth, though to Gods glorie) yet there is none, zealous indeede against sin, desirous from the heart

to reclaime sinners, and who deeply conside∣reth the greiuous abuses, which accompanie dicing and carding, (as horrible swearing, dangerous quarelling, losse (I say not of good houres, but) of nights and daies, & the pitifull vndoeing of too too manny) but will remember that all things are not1. Cor. 6. 12. expedient, which are lawfull, and therefore abstaine from such Heathenish pastimes, that ifby their example they cannot refor∣me,1. Cor. 8. 9. they may be sure they doe not confirme gamesters in their inordinate walking. Which respect▪ the 7. Iniunction forbidding Ministers to vse these vnlawfull games, may besupposed to haue. Now that which authoritie exacteth of Ministers, doth Re∣ligion require of all true Professors. For as the one are to be ensamples to the flocke,1. Tit. 5. 3. Phil. 1. 5. 1. Cor. 8 10. 13. so the other are to be lights in the world. And therefore as Paul saith, If meate of∣fend my brother, I will eate no flesh while the world standeth: so euery true Christian should say, and that with more resolution (for Play is not so necessarie as meate) If

play offend my brother, who seeing me▪ hauing knowledge, play, is boldned to follow gaming, I will not play while the world standeth. Which care vnto edification, ifPsal. 50. 16. 17. all, who haue the word in their mouthes, and would not be thought to hate to be re∣formed, would manifest in their sincere conuersation; and if Magistrates, whoRom. 13 4. 33. H. 8. c. 9. . E. 6. c. 25. should not carrie the sword in vaine, would doe what they may by law, to banish these forbidden past-times, or rather lost-ti∣mes, I doubt not, but that preaching and writing against thē would more mightily prevaile, and this good would come of it, many would applie themselues to better ex∣ercises, there would bee lesse time mispent in Alehouses, and Godlesse prouoked to displeasure against vs. But these things I referre to the consideration of the wise, and this my Dialogue to the iudgment of the godlie, chiefly to you, whose good I wish especially. Farewell: From my studie the first of Ian∣uarie 1593.
