



IT is written in the 33.
of Ezechiel: That, if
the people of the land
take a man of their
coasts, and make him
their watchman, if when he seeth
the sword come vpon the land, he
blow the trumpet, and warne the
people: then he that heareth the
sound of the trumpet and will not
be warned, if the sword come and

take him away, his bloud shall be v∣pon
his owne head. But if the watch∣man
see the sword come; and blow
not the trumpet, and the people be
not warned, if the sword come, and
take any person from among them,
he is taken away for his iniquity, but
his bloud will I require (saith the
Lord) at the watchmans hand. So
you (my beloued) haue chosen
me to be your watchman. There∣fore
it concerneth me to giue, and
you to take warning of mortall
danger, as we wil be free from bloud∣guiltinesse.
But I haue publickly gi∣uen
you warning of that bloudy er∣rour,
which denieth the Pestilence
to be contagious: maintained, not
onely by the rude multitude, but by
too many of the better sort; you are
therefore to take warning. That ye
may the rather take heed to the siluer
trumpet, which hath soūded in your
eares, I haue thought it necessary to

set downe in writing all that I haue
publickly taught, together with
whatsoeuer else, I perceiue, by pri∣uate
conference to be appertaining
to that question, that yee may take
time, better to consider that which
is either misunderstood, or not well
remembred, because it was but once
deliuered, and the common sort are
not acquainted with, and therefore
hardly capeable of Scholasticall dis∣putations.
And yet I endeuoured
to speake as plaine as I could. But
now I haue contriued al in the forme
of a Dialogue, which is a more fami∣liar
maner of teaching; hoping that
now yee will more readily both
perceiue, and receiue the truth here∣in
contained. I humbly and earnestly
desire you (at your leisure) diligently
to examine the quotations: but
first to reade ouer the Dialogue it
selfe. If any desire a more learned dis∣course,
I referre them to that worthy

Treatise written by that reuerend fa∣ther
(the light of our age) Maister
Beza, and translated by that faithfull
and profitable seruant of Christ,
Maister Stockwood. Furthermore, as
I desire you to reade this Dialogue
with good respect: so I pray you
do not thinke, that I haue any pur∣pose
to traduce you as maintainers
of errour, and gainsayers of your
teacher. For howsoeuer (indeed) I
was occasioned by that I saw and
heard amongst our selues, to preach
this doctrine, and haue committed
it to writing for your speciall good,
yet knowing that bloudy errour
(which I impugne) to be common∣ly
maintained in London, I thought
it conuenient to publish this Dia∣logue
in print, for a more generall
good. As for your selues, I am so far
from traducing you, that I do (with
ioyfull thankes to God the father, in
the name of Iesus Christ) giue you

this testimony; that notwithstanding
the iudgement of some be not well
informed in this point, yet I haue
much comfort in my Ministery a∣mongst
you: for in sundry things ye
shew the obediēce of faith. Amongst
the rest, ye attend the Sacrament of
Baptisme, from which in most places
people runne away most contemp∣tuously;
Ye frequent Friday Lecture
as diligently (euer since the Plague
was kindled) as in winter nights:
wheras many in & about Londō are
winter hearers, attending the word
when they haue nothing else to do:
and ye fill Gods house vpō the daies
of humiliation, & holy rest, notwith∣standing
there haue died in our pa∣rish
from the 7. of May to this day
2640. Wheras before the Plague our
Church was partly filled by strāgers,
both on Sondayes & Fridayes. These
things I take knowledge of, as to sig∣nifie,
that in this Dialogue I do not

taxe you, or any of you, more than
other, so, to incourage you to go for∣ward
(& not backward) in your holy
profession, seruing God, and sancti∣fying
his Sabboths as religiously
hereafter, as ye do now while God is
present with you in this his grieuous
visitation. For it is a good thing (saith
one Apostle) to loue earnestly al∣wayes
in a good thing:Gal. 4. 18. And it is bet∣ter
(saith another Apostle) for you
not to haue taken the way of righte∣ousnes,2. Pet. 2. 21
than after ye haue taken it to
forsake it. Therfore (good brethren)
take heed that ye coole not in your
deuotion, because the number of the
buried in our parish is fallen (blessed
be God) frō 305. to 51. in one weeke,
and from 57. to 4. buried in one day.
Shall our loue coole, whē Gods loue
is kindled? God forbid. O remember
that when Moses lifted vp his hands,Exod. 17. 11. 12.
Israel preuailed: but when his hands
were heauy Amalech preuailed. And

when it shall please God to remoue
this heauy iudgement, let vs neuer
forget this visitation, according to the
doctrine we haue learned out of the
title of the 38.Psal. 78. 34. 35. 36. 37. 57. Psal. Let vs not turne
backe like a deceitfull bow, and let vs
sin no more, lest a worse euill come
vntovs, according to the saying of
Christ himselfe to a man deliuered
from a grieuous disease. Conceiuing
good hope that yee will hide the
words of exhortation in honest and
good harts to bring forth fruite with
patience, I commend me to your fa∣uour,
my Dialogue to your reading,
and your selues to God, and to the
word of his grace, which is able to
build further. From my study this
13. of October. 1603.

