



I Will honor them, who1. Sam. 2. 30 honor me, saith the Lord of Lords: but in no one thing is that Lord more honored, than in a religious sanctifying of the Lords day, which is an holy SigneExod. 31. 13 betweene the Lord and vs, that he doth sanctifie vs to be his people, and that we sanctifie him to be our God. Of which day it is thus written; If thou turne a∣wayIsa. 58. 13. 14. thy foote from the Sabbath, frō
 doing thy will on mine holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight to cōsecrate it as glorious to the Lord, and shalt honour him, not doing thine owne waies, nor seeking thine own wil, nor speaking a vaine word, Then shalt thou delight in the Lord, and I will cause thee to mount vpon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Iacob thy father: For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. In which words we may obserue, 1. How highly the Lord estee∣meth his Sabbath. 2. How religiously the people of God are to sanctifie the same. 3. That they, who make no conscience of such sanctifying the Sabbath, can neuer delight in the Lord, what profession soe∣uer they make: and 4. That religious sanctifying the Sabbath, as it is a princi∣pall part of Godlinesse, so it hath a speci∣all promise of speciall blessings, euen in this life. With these, and many other most gracious words, would God per∣swade
 man to bee holy. But man hath sought out many inuentions, and a∣mongst the rest, this conceipt; That the Lords day is not the ordinance of God. Vpon which ground many make no more conscience of sanctifying the Lords day, than of keeping holie daies (so called) ordained only by humane au∣thoritie; and some, by writing, not yet published, haue opened a gappe to much licentiousnesse. To sloppe which gappe (as I may) I haue endeuoured to proue; That the Lords day is an ordinance of God. Which Position, with two other, concerning the Church of Rome, and Execution of Priests (written vpon iust occasions, and by perswasion, the former of your Honor, the other of that right Christian Noble-man, of most honora∣ble memorie, Henry late Earle of Hun∣tington) I houe published vnder your Right Honorable name; As knowing your well informed zeale for the Lords day, and against the Synagogue of Rome
 to be such, that England were the happi∣est nation in the world, if all noble per∣sonages were indued with the like; And (withall) hoping, that by these, and other more Diuine Treatises, the same shall be yet more and more inflamed, to the glorie of God, and com∣fort of your owne Soule.
