



RIGHT HONOVRABLE:
AFter so long a discontinuance, and neg∣lect of a most acknowledged dutie, I durst not assume that boldnesse, nor dare I now (without blushing) to ap∣peare before you at this present, did I not bring the Nine Muses, with an Armie of God∣desses and Women, to mediate in my behalfe. In these few sheets, I haue lodged to the number of three thousand; who (could they speake) would vndoub∣tedly informe you, that they were acquired and sought out for no other reason, than to be exposed to your noble view and most iudiciall censure. All which I haue charmed with such art, that the fairest amongst them you may admit into your Bedchamber without suspition, and the most clamorous into your Closet, without noyse. Amongst the illustrious Queenes, your Lordship may reade those whom you haue as zealously honored, as you haue been by them royally fauored, Q. Elizabeth, & Q. Anne. Amongst the No∣ble Ladies, memorated for their incomparable Beau∣ties,

or commended to posteritie for their admirable Vertues; thinke (my Lord) you behold all the vnpa∣ralleld accomplishments of the excellent Ladies your Daughters, intended and comprehended: And to whom more pertinently may I commend the patro∣nage of good women, than to your Honor, who hath been the happie Husband & fortunate Father of such. If you happen of others in this Tractat contrarily dis∣posed, they are but as Foyles to set off the lustre of the former; for Vertue and Vice, Beautie and Deformitie discouered together, makes the horrid aspect of the one more odible, and the imitable glory of the other more eminent. Therfore Minerua still thought her selfe fai∣rest, when Medusa's Head was present, which was of all others the foulest. If your Lordship, from your more weightie designes of State, and grauer Imploy∣ments, can spare any retyred houres, and in them to vouchsafe the perusall of these few imperfect histories, I shall not only hold my trauaile well vndertaken, but liberally rewarded. I was (my Lord) your creature, and (amongst other of your seruants) you bestowed me vpon the excellent Princesse Q. Anne (to whose memorie I haue celebrated in these Papers the zeale of a subiect and a seruant) but by her lamented death your Gift (my Lord) is returned againe into your hands, being stil yours, either to keepe vnto your selfe, or to conferre where your noble disposition shall best please. Howsoeuer, as I haue euer been an admirer of your Vertues, so my prayers still are, they may not only continue you a lasting Honor here vpon Earth, but purchase you an euerlasting Glorie, reserued for you in Heauen.

