



THis litle Catechisme hath been long in Print, but not yet dedicated vnto any. Being now to reprint it with o∣ther litle treatises, I haue thought it conuenient to dedicate it vn∣to you, as a monument of my thankefulnes for your many fa∣uours, but especially for your
 charitable exhibition, when I was a poore student in Oxford; Hoping that this dedication wil not only incourage you to con∣tinue, and increase (as God shall inable) your Christian chari∣tie to Students of good hope in either Vniuersitie (than which I know not a more charitable, and fruitfull worke of faith) but also stirre you vp both to reade the Catechisme diligently your selues, & carefully to cause your families to learne it. For it is commonly seene; that (howso∣euer too many be newfangled, yet for the most part) men are rather moued with those Treati∣ses, which are expressely & spe∣cially addressed vnto thēselues, and that by such as, in some spe∣ciall sort, belong vnto them. This only I desire, that ye would take some paines in examining the
 quotations, because they giue both light vnto the vnderstan∣ding, and warrant to the confir∣mation of the seuerall points of this Catechisme.
I doubt not of your good wil; but whereas this Catechisme is likely to come into the hands of some, who will not, with you, in∣tertaine it fauourablie for my sake, I suppose this obiection: One generall, and well concei∣ued Catechisme doth most edi∣fie; therefore many are but to litle purpose: Whereunto I rea∣dily and freely answere; That, hauing experience how profita∣bly the studies of children haue been furthered, since diuersitie of Grammars hath been aboli∣shed, and one certaine Grammar generally to be taught, by act of Parliament established, I grant that one generall and well con∣ceiued
 Catechisme doth most edifie, in respect of publike vse: But I am assured, that, as sundry Grammars, so sundry Cate∣chismes doe much good in pri∣uate studie, and vse. For the same method of teaching which see∣meth to some plausible & plea∣sant, plaine and profitable, doth not seeme so to other; And one Catechisme doth more cleerely lay opē some points of Christiā faith, than another, yea handleth some necessary point, which an∣other doth altogether omit. A∣gaine, It helpeth much to the confirmation of faith, when it is seene, that, howsoeuer sundry men in sundry ages & countries, publish sundry Catechismes, or make sundry confessions (be∣tweene which two there is no great difference) as to say with Iohn Baptist, Behold the Lambe ofJoh. 1. 29.
 God which taketh away the sins of the world; or with Peter, Thou art the Christ the Sonne of the liuing God, the one publishing his office, the other confessing his nature; yet they hold the same Head, belieue in the same Christ, iustifie the same Wisedome, and professe the same Truth. What great profit do Gods children reape by the Harmony of cōfessions, as of Chur∣ches, so of ancient and late wri∣ters? What benefit hath, and doth redound to the Church of God by sundry Creeds, not only extant, but some of them in pub∣lique vse too, as the Apostolique, Nicene, and Athanasian, euery one doth know, and acknow∣ledge. In these considerations I conceiue hope, that this litle Ca∣techisme will bee offensiue to none, but acceptable to you, and profitable to all such, as with re∣ligious
 humilitie will vse, & per∣use it. And the rather, because they shall find the most necessa∣ry doctrine of the Lords Supper more plainely set downe in this Catechisme, than in many other of no greater volume.
Well, what good opinion so∣euer this Catechisme shall find in the hearts of other Readers, let me exhort you as a brother, to edifie your selues, with all ho∣ly diligence, especially in hea∣ring the Word preached, and (as you may) in reading first the Scriptures, and then other Godly Treatises; Vnderstanding that Edification, so much commēded and commanded in Holy Writ, doth signify Building. Of which spirituall building, your tempo∣rall building should daylie put you in mind; Lest otherwise yee incurre a censure and sentence,
 like to that of the Prophet Hag∣gai,Hag. 1. 4. 6. 1. Cor. 3. 9. 16. viz. Can yee build houses for your selues, and other; and will yee carelessely suffer the Temple of the Lord (which is your selues) to lie waste? Yee shall therefore earne wa∣ges, and put them into a broken bag. But hoping (as I wish) that yee will more and more apply your hearts vnto wisedome, euen that wisedome which is vnto saluati∣on, I commend you to God, and the Word of his grace, which is able to build further, and to giue you an inheri∣tance among all thē which are sancti∣fied.
