



BLessed bee God, the father of our lord Iesus Christ, whose infinite goodnes and incomprehensible wisdome, in euery age, so frustrats the purpose, & maketh of none effect, the slight of Sathan, that the same things, which appeare to be extreme destruc∣tiō, to the iust, and dānage to the small flocke of Iesus Christ, by all mens ex∣pectation (yea, and sathan himselfe) by the mercy of our good God, are tur∣ned

to the laude, praise, & glorie of his own name, vtilitie & singuler profite of his congregatiō, and to the pleasure confort, and aduancement of thē that suffer. How the name of the onely li∣uing God, hath beene magnified in all ages, by them which were sore trou∣bled, by persecution of tyrants, exiled from their owne countrey, long were to rehearse. Yet one or two principall will wee touche, for probation of our words foresaid.Gen. 37. Sathan moued the ha∣tred of the rest of his brethren, against yoūg IOSEPH: To whom God pro∣mised honours, and authoritie, aboue his brethren and parentes. To the im∣pedimēt whereof Sathan procured, he should be sould, as a boūdmā or slaue, caried in a strange coūtrie: where ma∣ny yeares iniustly, hee suffered impri∣sonment. And sathan wrought this, to the intent, that he which reproued the

wickednes of his brethren, should pe∣rish altogether. For nothing is to sathā more noysome, as these mē in whom Godlines, & in whome puritie of life, and hatred of iniquitie, appeareth, that they should floorish in dominion, or authoritie. But all his Counsels were frustrate, when by the singuler mercy, and prouidēce of God, IOSEPH was exalted in most hight honours: made principall Gouernour of EGYPT, by PHARAO, the potēt king therof: who gaue in charge,Gen. 41. that all princes of his kingdom,Psal. 104. should obey his wil, & that his senatours should learne wisedome at the mouth of IOSEPH. Who no doubt, with all studie set foorth the true knowledge, worshipping, and religion of the onely liuing God, which in that coūtrey was vnknowē before. And after certaine yeares, hee receaued his father, & brethrē in this

same Countrey, whome hee with all godlinesse, and wisedome, in the years of hunger, susteined & nourished. And so was sathā frustrate & all his deceate turned to nought.Gene. 15. Iosue. 11. When (after this) god of his great mercy, according to his owne promis, sometyme made to ABRAHAM, had placed the people of Israel, in the land of CANAAN: Sathā to corrupt the true religion,3. Reg. 12. 3. Reg. 13. & 16. which they had receaued frō god by his faith full seruant MOYSES, inuented abo∣minations of Idolatrie,Esa. 1 Ier. 3. 4. Reg. 17. & vltimo. vnder the pre∣text of the true worshipping of God: And albeit, frequently they were re∣proued, by true Prophetes; Yet euer superstition preuailed, while God of his righteous iudgemēt, was compel∣led to punish, first ISRAEL, and there∣after IVDA, giuing them in the pow∣er of their ennemies, which translated them from their owne Countreyes:

SALMANASER, ISRAEL, vnto ASSY∣RIA: & NEBVCADNETZAR, IVDA vnto Babylon. Then Sathan beleeued the true knowledge, and worshipping of God, to haue decayed for euer. But he was farre deceaued, when first NEBV∣CADNETZAR, king of BABYLON, & the mightiest prince in the earth, & after him DARIVS, the potent king of MEDIA, receaueth the true know∣ledge of the Lord God, by DANIEL the prophet, one of the same nomber, whiche were transported from their owne countrey. And not only recea∣ued the kings (thē hauing the whole Empyre in earth) the true religion of god, but also commanded the same to be obserued by their subiectes. For af∣ter this manner, it was written: Then DARIVS wrote vnto all people, natiōs & toūgs in the vniuersal earth, saying: Peace bee multiplied with you. A de∣creite

is ordeined by mee, that in my vniuersal Empyre & kingdom, all mē shall feare, dread, and honour the God of DANIEL: for he is the liuing & eter∣nall God for euer. He is a deliuerer, & Sauiour, working signes, & wonder∣full thinges in heauen & earth, which hath deliuered Daniel frō the denne of lions. Secondly after Darius, the most prosperous, valiāt, & mighty CYRVS, the first Monarche of the Persians, & Medians, not onely of the true liuing God (by the same prophete) obteined knowledge, but also for singuler affec∣tiō which he bare to the true religiō, restored vnto libertie the people of Israell, permitting vnto them to build a new temple of SOLOMON, and to repare the walles of Ierusalem, which by the Babylonians sometyme were brought to ruine. And albeit that by the perpetuall hatred of sathan, work∣ing

by his members, some years they were impedite, yet at the last (to the great consolatiō of all the people) was the work finished, where many years after, Gods true religiō was obserued.
Sathan neuer beleeued his purpose rather to take effect, thē when after the death of Iesus Christ, hee moued the princes of the priests (who then were estemed the true church of god) to per∣secute the Apostles, and other profes∣sours of Christs euangel. For who be∣leeued not great damnage to followe the cōgregation. Whē after the death of STEVEN (who was stoned to death) the professours were dispersed,Act. 7. bani∣shed, and exiled from Ierusalem. But what entres therby tooke the church of god, the 11. chap. of the Actes of the Apostles, showeth in these wordes:
And they whiche were scattered a∣broad, because of the affliction that

arose about STEVEN, wēt through till they came vnto PHENICE, and CYPRVS, and ANTIOCHIA, preaching plainly the Euangell of Ie∣sus Christ.
Of these, and other testimonies of the scripture, we may cōsider (deare∣ly beloued brethren) that the infinite goodnesse of our Father, turned the same thinges, whereby sathan and his members intende to destroy, and op∣presse, the true religion of God, to the aduancemēt, and forthsetting thereof. And that no lesse in these latter, wic∣ked, and dangerous dayes, then he did in any age before vs. Which thing, shall openly declare, this godly worke subsequent. The counsell of sathan in the perfectiō of vs: first was to stoppe the wholesome winde of Christs E∣uangell,Apo. 7. to blow vpō the parts where we conuerse and dwell: and secondlie,

so to oppresse our selues by corporall affliction, and worldly calamities, that no place should wee finde to god∣ly studie. But by the great mercy, and infinite goodnesse of God our father, shall these his counsels be frustrate, & vaine. For in despite of him, and all his wicked members, shall yet that same word (O lord, this I speake, confiding in thy holy promisse) openly be pro∣claimed in that same countrey.Scotland. And how that our mercifull father amōgst these tempestuous stormes, by all mēs exspectation, he hath prouided some rest for vs, as this present worke shall testifie: which was sent to mee in RO∣ANE, lying in Irons, and sore troubled by corporall infirmitie, in a galley, na∣med Nostre Dame: by an honourable man and faithfull Christian Brother, M. Henry Balnaues of Halhill: for the present, holden as prisoner (thought

vniustly) in the old pallaice of ROANE. Which worke after I had once again read, to the great confort and conso∣lation of my spirite: by counsell & ad∣uise of the foresaid noble and faithfull man, Authour of the same worke: I thought expediēt, it should be digest∣ed in chapters. And to the better me∣mory of the reader, the cōtents of eue∣ry Chap. preponed briefly vnto them: with certaine annotatiōs, to the more instruction of the simple, in the mar∣gent: And also that an Epitome of the same work, shuld be shortly collected: wee haue likewise digested the same in chapters, which follow the worke in place of a table: which thing I haue done, as imbecillitie of ingine, and in∣commoditie of place would permit: Not so much to illustrate the worke, (which in the self is godly and perfite) as together with the foresaid noble

man, and faithfull brother, to giue my confessiō of the article of iustification therein conteined: and I beseech you, beloued brethrē, earnestly to consider if we deny any thing presently, or yet conceale or hide, which any time be∣fore we professed in that article. And now we haue not the castle of S. An∣drew to bee our defēce, as some of our enemies fasly accused vs, saying: If we wāted our walls, we would not speak so boldly. But we pray the eternal god, that the same affectiō, which now & thē remained in vs, remaine with thē eternally. The Lorde shall iudge, if all which we spak, was not of pure hart: hauing no respect, either to loue or hatred of any person, but onely to the word of God, and veritie of his scrip∣tures, as we must answere in the great day of the Lorde: where no man shall haue place to dissemble. But blessed be

that lord whose infinite goodnes and wisdome, hath tane from vs the occa∣sion of that slaunder, and hath showē vnto vs that the serpent hath power only to stang the heele: that is to mo∣lest and trouble the fleshe, but not to moue the spirite from constāt adhea∣ring to Iesus Christ, nor publick pro∣fessing of his true word. O blessed bee thou eternall father, which by thy on∣ly mercy, hast preserued vs to this day, and prouided that the cōfession of our faith, which euer wee desired all men to haue knowē, should by this treatise come plainely to light. Continue (O Lord) and graunt vnto vs, that as now with pen and ink: so shortly wee may confesse, with voice and toung the same, before thy congregration, vpon whome looke, O Lord God, with the eyes of thy mercy, and suffer no more darknes to preuaile. I pray you, pardō

me, beloued brethrē, that on this ma∣ner I digresse; vehemēcy of spirite (the lord knoweth, I lye not (compelleth me thereto. The head of Sathan shall be troaden down, when he beleeueth surely to triumphe. Therefore, most deare brethren (so call I all professing Christes Euangell) continue in that purpose, which yee haue begunne godly, though the battell appeare strong, your Captaine is vnexpug∣nable. To him is giuen all power in heauen, and earth. Abide, stand, and call for his support: and so the enne∣mies, which now affraye you, shortly shalbe confounded, and neuer againe shall appeare to molest you.
Consider, brethren, it is no specula∣tiue Theolog, which desireth to giue you courage, but euē your brother in afflictiō, which partly hath experiēce, what sathans wrath may doe against

the chosen of God. Reioyse (yet I say) spiritually, & bee glad: the time of the battell is short, but the reward is eter∣nall. Victorie is sure, without yee list to fly (which God forbid) frō Christ. But that ye may plainly know wherby are Sathan and the world ouercome, and which are the weapons against whome they may not stand: yee shall reade diligētly, this work following: which, I am sure, no man hauing the spirite of God, shal thinke tedious, nor long, because it conteineth nothing, except the very scriptures of God, and meditations of his law.Psal. 2. Wherein is the whole study of the godly mā, both day and night: knowing that therein are found, onely, wisedome, prudence, libertie, and life. And therefore in rea∣ding, talking, or meditatiō thereof he is neuer satiate. But as for the vngodly, because their works are wicked,Io. 3. they

may not abide the light. And therfore they abhorre all godly writings thin∣king them tedious, though they con∣teine not the lēgth of the lords prayer. But according to the threatning of E∣SAY, the proph. saying: because they cōtemne the law of the lord God, hee shall cōtemne them. Their harts shall be indured, in the daye of anguish and trouble, they shall dispaire, & curse the lord god into their harts. They shalbe nōbred to the sword, & in the slaugh∣ter shall they fall. Thē shal they know that their works were vaine, and that they placed their refuge in lies. Their vestimēts of spiders webbes (which ar their vaine workes) shall not abide the force of the lords winde: but they shall stand naked, & the workes of iniqui∣tie in their handes: to their extreame confusion.Esa. 59. And this shall apprehend and ouertake them, because they call

light, darknes: and darknes light: that which was sweete, they called bitter: and by the contrarie, that which was bitter, they called sweet: seeking salua∣tion where none was to be found. But yee, most Christian brethren, hum∣bly I beseeche, and in the bloud of Ie∣sus Christ I exhort, that ye reade dili∣gently this present treatise: Not onely with earnest prayer, that yee may vn∣derstād the same aright: but also with humble and due thankesgiuing vnto our most mercifull father, who of his infinite power so hath strengthned the hartes of his prisoners, that in des∣pite of Sathan, they desist not yet to worke, but in the most vehemency of tribulation, seeke the vtilitie and sal∣uation of others.
It is not my purpose to commend, or aduance this worke with wordes (as commonly writers of prophane,

or humane sciēce do) seeing, the verity by the selfe, is onely to be commen∣ded. But one thing bouldly I dare af∣firme, that no man, which commeth with a godly hart hereto, shall passe from the same, without satisfaction. The firme & weake, shall find strēght, and confort. The rude, and simple, true knowledge, and erudition. The lear∣ned, and godly, humble reioycing, by the omnipotēt spirite of Iesus Christ, to whome bee glorie before his con∣gregation. Amen.
This worke following, cōteineth three principall parts. The first parte, how mā being in trouble, should seek refuge at God alone. And that natu∣rally all men is subiect to trouble, and howe profitable the same is, to the godly. Last, of the cruell persecution of Sathan, and his members, against the chosen of God.
The secōd part cōteineth, how mā is released of his trouble, by faith and hope in the promisses of god, & there∣fore declareth the article of Iustifica∣tion, prouing that faith onely iusti∣fieth before God, without all deser∣uing or merite of our workes: either preceeding or following faith: with a solutiō to certaine cōtrarie argumēts, made by the aduersaries of faith, & this article: With the true vnderstāding of such scriptures, as they alledge for thē.
The third and last part conteineth the fruites of faith, whiche are good workes, which euery man should worke, according to their owne vo∣cation, in euery estate.
All this plainely may be perceaued in the life of our first parent ADAM, which by transgression of Gods com∣mandement fell in great trouble and affliction. From which hee should ne∣uer

haue beene released, without the goodnesse of God, had first called him. And secondly, made vnto him the promisse of his saluation: The which ADAM beleeuing, before euer hee wrought good workes, was re∣puted iust. After during all his life, hee continued in good workes, striuing contrarie Sathan, the worlde, and his owne flesh.
