



RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Let it not (I beseech you) be thought presumption in me, to present that now to your view by Penne, which not long since, I commended to your eares by Voyce. I am, among many others, thankefull to God, who hath put it into your hearts, both to commiserate, and to helpe, the spirituall necessitie of an vntaught Towne, by pro∣curing the establishment of a weekely Lecture in it. I hope, the Lord shall remember you in goodnesse,Nehem. 5.15. according to that which herein you haue cared to doe for that people. And I doubt not but the soules which shall reape comfort by the ordinance of God, there, will blesse you, and God for you, acknowledging you his Instruments for their best Good. It is fallen to my lot, by your chusing, to be one in this Preaching-course: when my first turne came, I thought it fitting, to hansell (as it were) the Businesse, by treating vpon the worth and necessitie of that seruice, which the rest of my Brethren and my selfe, were there called to dis∣charge; that both they which wanted it, might vnderstand their Hazard, and they which enioyed it might know their Happines, if they might be so happie as to embrace it. This thing thus la∣boured in by me, (according to my measure) though it was glad∣ly
 entertained by the most, yet by some it was not so wholly ap∣proued of, but thought in some particulars, to smell too much of selfe-opinion. This hath moued me (contrarie to my first thoughts) to aduenture it by printing, vpon the Common Cen∣sure. I haue deliuered nothing in it, but that which I haue lear∣ned, partly in the Vniuersitie, partly since by my poore studies in the Country, and that from the chiefest for learning, Place, and Paines, in this our English Church; whereof I reioyce to be a sonne, and wherein, it shall be my glorie and my crowne in the day of Christ to haue been employed as a Minister. Now, I am bold, to shroud it vnder your patronage, in as much as your cal∣ling me to a Turne in this Lecture, was the occasion of its first Being, and you all likewise gaue countenance to it by your Pre∣sence, (according as you haue respectiuely done the like to vs al, and I trust will doe still) when it was deliuered. If you shall please to accept it as a fruit of my due respect to each of you in your places, it is all the recompence I looke for: In confident exspectation whereof, I binde my selfe vnder my hand, to be

From VVodbury. 1615.
