



Right honourable,
COncerning the Dignity of your place, and Magnificence of your Inauguration: The first equaling, the latter precelling all the famous Magistracies in Christendome. I shall not much stand to dispute, as being a Maxim already granted: yet one thing I cannot omit, as most worthy remarke; namely, how many of like Iudicature haue borne the Sword in this famous and flo∣rishing Citty, who breathed their first ayre in the County of Lincolne; from whence you deriue your selfe, as Sir Iohn Stock∣ton Mercer, borne at Bratost, L. Maior 1470. Sir Nicholas Ald∣win Mercer, borne at Spalding, L. Maior 1499. Sir William Rennington Fishmonger, at Bosten, L. Maior 1500. Sir William Forman Haberdasher, at Gainsborow, L. Maior 1538. Sir Henry Hobbershorne Merchant-Tayler, at Wadingworth, L. Maior 1546. Sir Henry Amcoats Fishmonger, at Astrop, L. Maior 1548. Sir Iohn Langley Goldsmith, at Althrop, L. Ma∣ior 1576. Sir Iohn Aldot Fishmonger, at Limbergh, L. Maior 1590. Sir George Bowles Grocer, at Gosperton, L. Maior 1617. and now in present your Honored selfe Nicholas Raynton borne at Heighington, L. Maior 1632. not so many hauing attained to the same Dignity bred in any one County, the City of London

excepted. Worthy obseruation it is also, that at one time in the raigne of Queene Elizabeth, most of the Prime Officers of State, were Country-men of the same County: As the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, Whitguist: the L. High Treasurer of England, L. Burbeigh Cecill, the L. Keeper of the Great Seale, Sir John uckering, Viz. Chamberlaine and Chancel∣lor of the Dutchy, Sir Thomas Hennidge one of her Maiesties Priuy Councell: The Lord Chiefe Iustice, Iudge Wraye, &c. Moreouer it may be iustly spoken of you to your great Reputa∣tion and Honour, that since the yeere 1209. from Henry Fitz∣alwin the first L. Maior of this Honourable City, and Re∣ter Duke, and Thomas Necle the first Sheriffes of the same, neuer had any Magistrate a more generall, free, and af∣fectionate Election euen to this present Yeere 1632. Now Time and your owne Demerit Right Honourable, haue raysed you to this Eminence and Dignity, the vniversall eye and expectation of all men is vpon you, who well know, that a wise Magistrate preferres consideration before Conclusion: And (according to the saying of King Agesilaus) Magistrates who gouerne by iust Lawes, must strengthen them by good example: iudge by Prouidence, Wisedome and Iustice, and defend by Power, Care and Vigilance; and thus I humbly take my leaue of your Lordship with this Sentence, Non sat est te tuum officium fecisse, si non id fama approbat.

