



WHile I consider, (Noble La∣dy) how that after the mise∣rable saccage of IERVSA∣LEM, vtter wrake and ouerthrow of the cietie and temple thereof, lamen∣table leading till, and being in capti∣uitie of the Iewes, and to the eyes of man, the vnrecouerable desolation of that whole common weale, ha∣uing nowe as it were, lying so many years deadly buried: yet at the last, be∣sides their deliuerance, which was

most wōderful, how I say that wher∣in their greatest beautie, and highest felicitie euer did stand: yea, the onely glorie wherein any people could ex∣cell, that is, the lawe of God giuen by MOYSES, was found out amongest the old & desperate ruines, vndestroy∣ed, vnuiolated, and safely preserued, as is to bee seene by the holy historie 2. Chro. 34. 2. King. 22. I cā not but ac∣knowledge the wonderful prouidēce & exceeding great mercy of our god, in preseruing from tyme to tyme, his blessed law and word, wherein onely consisteth the glorie & felicitie of his church vpon the face of this earth, frō deprauation, corruption, and destruc∣tion, in whatsoeuer extreame dāgers: howsoeuer the blinde papistes cannot see this without a visible & glistering successiō of a Church, to do the same. The like perswasion, whereof now in

the whole body of the scripture, now in some parts or portions of the same: the histories of tymes and memories of men do recorde: so that Gods care∣full prouidēce: & mercyful preserua∣tion hath alwayes beene bent herea∣way. And if it be lesome to compare small, base, and litle thinges, vnto such as are great, highe, and mightie: surely there was a certein prettie, learned, and godly treatise,M. Henry Balnaues. compyled by a diuine lawier, and honourable sessioner of the kings maiestie, his session and pu∣blicke Counsell, which through the iniuries of time, negligēce of keepers, great and carefull distractions of the author, was so lost, and to the opinion of all perished, that being earnestly co∣ueted, greatly desired, and carefully sought for, and searched out by some good, godly, and learned, as hauing some intelligence of the authors tra∣uels

in that part: yet it could neuer bee had, as desperate at any tyme to haue beene able to bee recouered: vntill to mans appearance of mere chance, but most assuredly by the mercyfull pro∣uidence of our God, a certeine godly, and zealous gentleman,Richard Bannan∣tine. priuy to the desires of some that so earnestly coue∣ted it, being in the towne of Hor∣mistoū in Lothiane, findeth the same in the handes of a child, as it were ser∣uing to the childe to playe him with, and so receaued and recouered the the same. And as this treatise was a prettie, & gentill strand of the aboun∣dant fountaine of the scriptures: why might it not in this point sauour of the own source, spring, & beginning? why might not the birth in such a case follow the nature and conditiō of the womb? & why might not the daugh∣ter this farre euen resēble the mother,

or be of the same fortune, & as it were subiect, to the same fatalitie with her. Wherefore, this treatise comming to my handes, as a singuler token of the finders louing kindnes, and liberall will, and affection towards mee, con∣sidering the worthines, vtilitie, com∣pendious learning, and singuler god∣lines thereof: I could not, either bee so inique to the honourable fame of the godly author: either so ingrate to the louing propiner, and offerer vnto mee, either enuious to the common wealth of christianitie, or sacrilegious towards God, in suppressing his glo∣rie in this point, as not to commit the same by my trauell, to a longer and more lastie memorie: that so in this raritie of trustie and faithfull hand∣maides, and great store of treasonable dealing of vile hyrelings: This lawful & louing daughter might after a ma∣ner

and some what ancillat or famu∣lat (so to speake it after the latines) to the owne mother, that is, to the scrip∣tures, whereof shee floweth and pro∣ceedeth. And surely not a fewe, nor small reasons moued mee to vtter the same (worshipful Lady) vnder the sha∣dow of your name, and as it were de∣dicat it, at least my paines and trauels in setting it out, vnto your honour. For, it being found and recouered in your ground and holding, and after a maner being the birth thereof: who can so iustly as yee nowe and yours challenge the right of the same, after Gods calling to his mercies, the Au∣thor: It is also a work bredd & broght forth in that affliction, and banishmēt for Christs sake, in the which yee did breede and bring forth your dearest children. It is the worke of a faithfull brother and most trustie Consellour

participant of all the afflictiōs, & con∣tinuing constant to the end, and in the end. It is such, that when as it was (I wot not howe) negligently letten bee, amongest the handes of babes to play them with, it was through gods pro∣uidence recouered by that godly gen∣tleman, your Ladyships secretarie.Richard Bannātine. Iohn knox. It was by that notable seruant of God, whome the Larde, your Husband of godly memorie, and yee did euer so duetifully reuerēce, and he so fatherly & christianely loue you, so earnestly cared for, & so diligētly sought out, & inquired of, that it might be preserued frō perishing as almost nothing more. And as the booke of the law found in the tēple by Gods prouidēce, was pre∣sented to IOSIAS, to renew again the couenāt betwixt God, and his people, & to bring thē againe vnder his right obedience, and foūd them in his true

knowledge and worshipping, which all now a long time had beene put in obliuion: who wot, but the like is re∣sembled and shadowed to you, and giuen you to vnderstande and learne in finding this pendicle of Gods lawe, and word in your dwelling, that yee and yours maybe put in mind of your duety towardes God, constantly to a∣byde by his trueth, and to see that hee bee truely serued in your dominion, that yee and yours thus first seeking the kingdome of god, & righteousnes thereof, then all other things may bee cast vnto you: in case yee or they faile in so doing, it may be a testimonie a∣gainst you or them, that God hath of∣fered him self euē to be found by you, & in your groūd, and yet ye haue not rightly regarded him. Surely, these with other reasons, besides my duetie towards your honour, moued me to

set out this small worke chiefly vnder your name. The vtilitie whereof (I doubt not) shall be found so profita∣ble, the delite so pleasant, the dignitie so excellēt, that whosoeuer readeth it, shall find them greatly commodat, by the goodnes of god the foūtain there∣of, ioyfully delited by the author or writer, & honorablie decored throgh your meane, whereby they inioye the vse of it. Now as to that, that rests, god euer preserue your Ladyship, & yours in his true feare, graūt you good day∣es, and long life, to the furtherance and aduancement of his glory, the helping to the building vp of the worke of his Church, and your eternall confort.
