



Excellent MADAME,
BEing assured, that your Ladiship very wel- there is no ornamen  eminent vertues,  sublime  emboldned to 

into the Sanctuary of your protection, re∣nowned Susanna's History: which to your Honour may challenge worthy relation, for manifold respects; worth your gracious acceptance, and leisurefull meditation. To speake a little in her payses: Susanna was a Lady Princely descended from the royall bloud of the loynes of Iudah, whence our iour pleased to derive his happy incar∣nation. Her vertues to her birth in high∣nesse were paralell. Her very infancie gave divine presaging promises to the world, of her future goodnesse. Her countenance in the cradle, manifested infallible tokens, to character succeeding honour. Her riper wisdome was discreet to preserve the ho∣nour of her soule immaculate. Her eleva∣ted cogitations enspheared themselves in

the first Move (a higher Orbe, the  Circles of frailty) He intaminate affection devoted her best service to the glory of her Maker, knowing it the end of her Creati∣on. Her modesty was the exact modell of all her actions. A good conscience she held the most inestimable flower, that grew within the border of Time: farre sweeter then the Roses of England, more fragrant then Iudaean Balmes, or the Cynamons of Egypt; for the same shall be transplanted in∣to the Garden of Paradise. The Temple of her heart she soly dedicated to her Redee∣mers service; that neither the attractive al∣lurements, nor menacing reproaches of monstrous Magistrates, nor obloquy, nor ignominious death (which shee accounted as a pleasant object (in comparison) or a ha∣ven

of harbour to flie unto, o her Creators presence, against the assaults of the swel∣ling waters of wickednesse) rather then to pollute her Nobility with dishonourable : or to defile the Sanctum Sanctorum of her soule▪ (the receptacle of the holy Tri∣y) with uncleannesse: the rougher her rosse, the richer was her Diadem: the more her malignant Adversaries powerfull op∣pression, the more her patience in a con∣st resolution, is laudable with all Poste∣ritie. She perceived her conflict could be but momentany, ncooth; her triumph e∣verlastingly glorious: impalled about with crowns of continuance. Her teares, suspi∣tions, and orizons were as the former & later raine, and winds of Heaven, to foster those diviner seeds, which the Almighty

had sowne in the Eden furrowes of her bo∣some, unto a joyfull harvesting. In her af∣fliction she found variety of Soule-solacing dainties, wherewith she repasted her spirit in supernaturall contemplations Her Cha∣stity, her Charity, her Hospitality were re∣markable. Finally, whatsoever vertues, whatsoever comelinesse, whatsoever pro∣portion, what endowments, and rare qua∣lities of body and mind soever, can com∣mend women were wonderfully com∣pleat, and conspicuous in Susanna. For which her soule hath never-ending felici∣ty; her name immortality. Shee was un∣doubtedly a Darling of the Omnipotent Deity: who miraculously raised a little Da∣niel by heavenly power to vindicate her injuries, in bringing down the mightinesse,

nd esteeme of ancient cunningly combi∣d Senators, to sudden cōfusion. In coun∣cing therefore Susanna's story () for Susanna's sake, your Ladiship shall perpetuate through all Generations your name, living in a like sympathy of your own true Nobility's blessings; and shall de∣monstrate your clemency herein, in par∣doning the errours of a boldnesse in af∣feion of him, that cannot be an Alien, nor  Infidell to your worthy perfections; nei∣ther thinketh now, that he over-presumeth pon, or any way insinuateth, but volunta∣rily, according to your merit, confirmeth  Dedication upon your Honour,

