



SIR; though the propriety of this little Treatise be yours (it being first addressed for your priuate informa∣tion) yet the vse thereof may be de∣riued vnto others vnder your honourable name; buried here, and intombed in a parcell of it self.
For as my hearty affection did single you forth to be the principall obiect of my thoughts, so my compassion enlardgeth it self toward all my louing contreymen, wholy insnared with you in the same danger, and are held captiue therein by the same credulity, and facility of belief,Popidum, qui sibi cre∣dat, habet. S. Bernard. de Henrico haeretico ep. 240. which hath pre∣uayled with your noble heart, to admitt the asser∣tions of your guides, without a triall of their ex∣actnesse.
In which course, though I may commend the goodnesse of your nature, which, being free from intertaynmēt of base, and dishonest cogitations, doth not suspect any collusion, where it seeth a great venditation of Singuli dicurit, ego verū dico, S. Chrys. de haereticis Homl. 33. in Act. Veritas, & veritas; was the saying of the Ma∣nichees. See S. August. cōf. l. 3. c. 6. truth, and neuer had ex∣perience of falsehood, yet it doth import you in IVSTICE, and in WISEDOME, to try a little, before you trust too much.
For as equity doth require all men to auoyd
 partiality in decision of ordinary causes (which can not be performed without the indifferent au∣dience of each party; for, si satis est accusâsse, quis erit innocens? Yea, sayth SENECA; Qui statuit aliquid parte inauditâ alterâ, Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit.) so discretion prescribeth vnto them, that they should be very deliberate, and circumspect in the matters of Religion, which, in their nature, are sublime, and, in their waight, concerne our in∣terminable, & euerlasting estate either in the ioyes of heauen, or in the paynes of hell.
But since GOD hath giuen you eyes to be your immediate witnesses, and indued you with an ex∣cellent portion of vnderstanding, to be a suffici∣ent iudge in this behalf; I desire you, that you would not be vngratefull vnto him for his bene∣fits, but that, with a temperate, and composed mynd, you would exercise theis meanes, which are afforded vnto you for a glorious end.
And forasmuch as I know that D. FIELD, and D. MORTON do shine as Castor, and Pollux in your Church (howbeit, as the howse of theis brethren was reputed Castors alone,Sueton. in Iulio Cae∣sare. by a certayn prerogatiue, and superiority which res∣ted in him; so D. Field hath obtayned the chiefest, if not the onely name) whose writings are estee∣med the diuinest oracles of this age; I haue dee∣med it most conuenable for me, to make choyce of
 them onely at this time, and to giue you so much instruction concerning their workes, as may de∣monstrate their obliquity, and vnfaithfulnesse; which your ingenuous disposition did neuer yet suspect.
But what truth can you expect from the chil∣dren, whose Fathers were remarkeable liars, and are so recognized by M. LVTHER himself, the great Reformer of the Church, and grand progenitour of your ghospell? Theis SACRA∣MENTARIES (sayth See Brent contra Bul∣linger. in Recognit. prophetic. & apostolic. doctr. pag. 276. im∣press. Fran∣cosurti. 1585. he) are non so∣lùm mendaces, sed ipsum mendacium, fu∣cus, et simulatio; not onely lyars, but a very ly it self, deceipt, and simulation: which ZWIN∣GLIVS doth shew in word, and deed. I mer∣vayle not, if they lye They pre∣tended that Luther was van∣quished by them at Marpurg. so impudētly; for I perceiue that they can do nothing else: and I do reioyce in this euent, seeing that they (the DIVELL raig∣ning) do now manifest them selues not onely by craft, but by open lyes.
As your Professours are lineally descended frō theis Creetes, so they degenerate not frō their primitiue manners, and conditions. You may not think that doues haue followed those ravens, as Noah first sent a raven out of the Arke,Gen. 8.7.8. and then a doue; but you must remember the anciēt, and true prouerb; mali corui malum ouum; of an euill stock commeth an euill breed. Behold the continuall decourse, and propagation of your
 pretensed ghospell: such roote, such branches; such tree, such fruict; such maisters, such schollers; such founders, such followers; Tit. 1.12.  alvvayes lyars. Thus their Religion was newly implanted, and thus it is perpetuated vnto this day.
Pag. 183.For though it pleaseth † D. FIELD, & In his ep. to the King prefixed be∣fore his booke, inti∣tuled; A full satisfactiō. &c. D. MORTON to make a very speciall ostentation of Truth (the one pretending, that the Spirit of TRVTH doth teach vs; the other profes∣sing himself to be a Minister of simple truth in his disputes) yet the sequele will discouer such voluntary falsehood in both, that as they can not but Mirū est. si nō riferit Acuspex quāo A∣ruspicē vi∣derit. smile each at others labour (which In his ep. dedicat. pag. 3 l. 32. Do∣ctour FIELD had iust reason to suspect also from his compeeres, at whom he giueth a secrete gyrd) so your self cannot hencefoorth belieue co∣loured, & paynted fictions in your Writers, nor giue an hasty assent vnto their protestations, without a condigne triall of their performance.
Neuer the lesse; I am not so vnequall in my desire, that you should subtract your credulity from them, and translate it vnto me, or vnto any other: but measure me, and them with my owne prescription; TRY BEFORE YOV TRVST: See both, compare both, examine both; 1. Thess. 5.21. Nemo no∣strūmdicat; ian inueni veritatem: sed sic cam quaeramus, quasi ab v∣tris{que} nesci∣atur. Ita e∣nim diligē∣ter & con∣formiter quaeri ote∣ri, si nullâ tmerariâ presumptio∣ne inuenta, & cognisa esse creda∣tur. S. Aug. cōtra epist. Manich. c. 3. Try all thinges, and keepe that vvhich is good. Try the cause, and try the persons; try the faith, and try the Professours; try the solidity of the first, & try the fidelity of the second: follow that
 which is most credible, & belieue them that best deserue your creditt.
My request is little (as you see) but the rea∣son thereof is very great. For what is more ea∣sy, then to suspend your credulity for a weeke, nay for one day, or (if that seeme too long) for a few howres? And what can be more necessary, then to adhibitt circumspection, where the danger is in quality extreame, in euidence probable, in time imminent, as you may behold in your owne case? You know that as heresy doth extermi∣nate hir vnhappy disciples out of the Catholick Church, so it doth precipitate them into an end∣lesse perdition. You shall know likewyse that your credulity hath (actually) ingaged your soule in∣to this miserable estate. Finally, you know that as life is short, and death vncertayn, so you shall stand immediately before a Iudge, whose anger will be inflexible in that howre, & his sentence irreuocable for euer.
Wherefore, that religious, and graue coun∣sayle, which De vtil. cred. cap. 1. S. AVGVSTINE gaue vn∣to his well respected friend, I will affectionately giue vnto you. Which I am the rather invited to do, because I, being mercifully deliuered out of the bandes of death, haue learned, with Contra epist. Ma∣nich. cap. 3. S. Au∣gust. to be cōpassionate vnto seduced soules; and because your self doth symbolize with his friend; for he was misguided by them that pretē∣ded
 sanctity in their demeanure, & did ilia∣queate much people with their plausibility of spe∣ach: such also hath bene your case. He was Honora∣tus. ho∣noured in name; you are honourable in deed. Consider the aduise now; apply it seriously vnto your heart. Si quid te vel ratio, vel oratio nostra commouit, et si veram, vt credo, tui curā geris, velim vt me audias, et bo∣nis praeceptoribus Catholicae Christianita∣tis te piâ fide, alacri spe, simplici charita∣te cōmittas; Deum{que} ipsum, cuius vnius et bonitate facti sumus, & iustitia poenas luimus, & clemētia liberamur, orare non cesses, &c. Hos autem verbosos, & mise∣ros (quid enim aliud dixerim?) penitus desere.
I cease to trouble you any farther with my rude lines. In respect of your wisedome, a little is inough; in respect of my loue, nothing can be too much. God open your eyes to see his truth, & incline your will to embrace it. Amen.

