



ALbeit the houses of the poore are not at any time, as of the rich, alike ador∣ned with gorgeous furni∣ture: yet the gardens of the poore, as well as the rich, are, in the spring-time, a-like couered with flowers furniture.
That great flower of the Sunne, it is not indeede found but amongst the rich: but the Marigold Heliotropiuim, which openeth and setteth with the Sunne, (and which is as profitable as the other is beautifull) this is (amongst other sweet and holesome hearbs) ordinarie in the poorest Orchard.
These kinde of hearbs sometime they vse for meate and medicine; and often, wanting things to present their betters with, of these
 they doe offer a poesie of flowers: As they haue receiued so they giue.
That spirituall Garden, which is committed to my keeping, hath not at this time any rare flowers in it, but such as being planted some few yeares past, doe now shew themselues in a more Orient colour, and in greater aboun∣dance. Out of them, this spring-time, I haue gathered three seuerall nose-gaies, and two of them are presented to two, most honourable Counsellers: this Third I am bold to present to your Honour.
I hope there is no such Antipathie be∣twixt flowers and you, as there was betwixt a worthie Ladie and a Rose:The Ladie Hennage. especially such flowers as these; since Religion, which giueth colour and smell to euery flower in this poesie, is the fairest flower in your owne Garden.
You haue, I confesse, great honour vpon earth, being descended of a Royall familie, Allied to the greatest Peeres of the Land, E∣spoused to an honourable Knight, blessed with hopefull children, and graced (as I heare) with rare gifts of nature: but, that Christs Religion is so precious vnto you, your greatest honour is reserued in Heauen.

If it please you to entertaine this poore present, which before now, I was afraide to offer to any: I doubt not but as you shall re∣ceiue comfort by it: so it shall receiue such fa∣uour by you, that this spirituall nose-gay, com∣ming from you into the hands of others, will not bee vsed as other flowers are, this mor∣ning in the bosome, the next to the beesome. But it will bee often in the hand, frequent in the sight, and comfortable to the sent of each sauourie soule.
The God of heauen who hath planted you, as one of his fairest flowers, in his Garden, the Church Militant, so water you with the dew of Heauen, and heauenly Graces; that after you haue long flourished here, you hereafter may, with your Honourable two Sisters Eli∣zabeth the vertuous Countesse of Hunting∣don, and Anne that worthie Ladie Chan∣doyes, bee transplanted into that Garden of Eden, the Church Triumphant, and for euer flourish in the Courts of your God. London St. Martins in the fields, Iune the 16. Anno 1613.

