



AFter I had increa∣sed
this treatise
of myne (ryghte
worshipful) and
waighing how {pro}¦fitable
this Arte
to be of the inter¦pretatiō
of drea∣mes,
in that the same sheweth to vs rather
comfortable warninge then anye vayne
nd vnfruitefull matter. And that
none also but the vvise and discret par∣sons,
may rightlye discerne and Iudge
of Dreames, seeinge it is thoughte a rash
matter to Iudge of vnknowen matters,
 those which a mā vnderstādeth not.
Yet hovv Dreames may be knowen to
m, whiche neuer had true dreame, in
at they onelye happen to suche, whose
spirites are occupyed with no irrationall
imaginatiōs, nor ouercharged with the



burthē of meate or drinckes, or superflu∣ous
humors, nor geuē to any other bode∣lie
pleasures. For those which are cōtrary
to this order, are not properly dreames,
but be named vain dreames, no true sig∣nifiers
of matters to come but rather she∣wers
of the present affections and desiers
of the body. And yet dreames seene by
graue & sober persons, do signifie mat∣ters
to come, and a spirite vndoubtedlie
shewinge to them, whiche by her nature
is a Prophetesse, that sēdeth forth such a
motion & workemanshippe, throughe
whiche the bodye as in her proper dwel∣lyng,
may either be defended frō the in∣stant
euiles & perils, or moued to the at∣tayninge
of good things to come & that
with diligence workinge the same, that
as it were into loking Glasses of the bo∣dy
placed, it might so beholde and fore∣shewe
al matters imminent. Therefore
this difference of true dreames from the
vayn ought diligently to be noted. Fur∣ther
who that knoweth rightlye to iudge
these, vnderstādeth a great part of wise∣dom,
and they which iudge of the same,
haue a sure and perfite Arte. Besides Hip∣pocrates



and Galen do wryte, howe that
the Phisitionnes by the Dreames of the
sicke) maye the redyar and aptlyar ap∣poynt
a perfite diet and due medecines,
also for the recouery of the sicke: where∣fore
I see not nowe that the rashe iudge∣ment
of the ignorante, can rightlye con∣dempne
the knowledge of this Arte, se∣ing
the learned, yea & holy Scriptures,
do bothe allow and witnesse of Dreames.
As the same I maye heere aptlye applye
out of the Prophet Ioel. xi. where God
sayeth I will breathe downe of my spiry∣on
all the earthe, so that youre sonnes
and daughters shall Prophesie and youre
olde mē dreame dreames, and your yong
men see visions. Also in sondry places of
the newe testamente wee reade howe that
the Apostles and other holy men, were
taught and warned by dreames. Besides
the learned Trogus wryteth, that Ioseph
the sonne of Iacob, first founde out this
laudable Arte of the interpretation of
dreames, althoughe Philo attribute the
this inuētiō vnto Abrahā his great grād∣father.
And after him did the Godly Da∣niel
and wyse Salamō leaue in wrytinge



of this arte, as their Pamphlettes extant
at this day do manifestly shevv. But to
be briefe we learne that this art of the in∣terpretatiō
of Dreames, doth especially
consiste of wysedome, and by cōiecture
in that he which coniectureth cunning∣lye,
is coūted a natural Prophet. So that
the interpreters of Dreames (as vvitnes∣seth
Quintiliā) are named coniecturers.
Yet for that ther be so few parsons that
see true Dreames, and fewer whiche vn∣derstande
or obserue them, yea and most
few vvhich can interpret them, therefore
of this, is the arte now come into a con∣tempt
with most persōs. And although
I might here write sondry examples (for
confirmation of this art) bothe of kin∣ges,
Princes, and others, vvhiche vver
vvarned by their dreames what to do o
auoyde or what vvoulde succeade after
yet for that I mind to be briefe, and no
to seeme tedious vnto youre vvorshipp
in so small a treatyse, therefore I omitt
them, crauinge pardon of this my rud
attempte vnto you. And to conclude,
I sal perceiue this Treatise to be thank¦fullye
accepted at youre handes, it sha

encourage me shortly to set forth my lit¦tle
Treatise of Probleames vvith their
apt aunsvveares, vnder youre worship∣pes
name.
Thus leauinge to trouble youre wor∣shippe
any longer, I commit you to God
vvho sende you a godly increase, & hap∣pye
successe in this lyfe.

