



THere be foure things in the earth verie smal, & verie wise (as witnesseth wise Salomon):Prou. 30.25, &c. the Pismires, a people not strong, yet pre∣pare they their meate in the summer; the Cunnies a people not mightie, yet make they their houses in the rocke; the Grashopper hath no King, yet go they foorth all by bands; the Spider taketh hold with his handes, and yet is he in Kings Pallaces: So must we prouide now in the summer
 time, while the Gospell shineth out of the face of Christ Iesus, against the winter, which hath in it three moneths, death, iudgement, and hell: that as the Emmet escapeth the annoyance of the three winter moneths, so wee may escape the terrour of death, the rigor of Gods iudgement, and the tor∣ments of hell. The Cunnies build their house in the rocke: so we may not trust to our riches which are vncertaine, to our bowe which will breake, to our speare which shall bee knapt asunder, to our horse which is a vaine thing, to our hoasts of men which are but flesh, to our Captaines which are but locusts, to men which are mortall, or to Prin∣ces which shall die; but to the Lord, which can keepe our eyes from teares, our feete from falling, and our life from death. The Grashoppers albeit they haue no king, yet they goe foorth by armies: we haue a father to rule in the house, a preacher to teach in the Church, a gracious Prince, with ma∣nie honorable Senators to rule our Realme, & yet there is strife in euerie house, sedition in euerie Ci∣tie, and sects in euerie Church; and therefore our house will fall, our kingdome shall be desolate, and our church will be the sinagogue of satan. The spi∣der is in Kings pallaces: but wee dwell some of vs in the lusts of the flesh, some in the treasures of the world, and some are as enuious as the diuell; fewe there are that say with Dauid,Psal. 84.2. My soule long∣eth,
 yea and fainteth for the Courtes of the Lord, for my hart and my flesh reioice in the liuing God. To moue my countrimen therefore to a generall, speedie, and heartie repentaunce, I haue laid downe in this treatise, the crie not of So∣dome, but of England; which if it be diligentlie weighed,Luke. 21.34. I doubt not but we shall take heede to our selues, least our hearts be oppressed with surfetting and drunkennes, and cares of this life. We shall be watchfull,Matt. 24.24. Mich. 6.8. Rom: 12.12. Rom. 12.11. we shall doo iustlye and loue mercie, we shall be instant in praier, we shall be feruent in the spirit, we shall not per∣seuere in sinne but continue in praier without cea∣sing, saying: Turne thy face away frō our sins,Psal. 51.9. O Lord, & blot out al our offences:Psa. 19.8, &c. remēber not against vs the former iniquities but make hast & let thy tender mercy preuent vs: help vs O God of our saluation for the glorie of thy name, and deliuer vs, and be mercifull to our sinnes for thy names sake: so we thy peo∣ple and sheepe of thy pasture shal praise thee for euer, and from generation to generation will set forth thy praise: which God giue vs grace to doo for his sonnes sake Christ Jesus: to whom with the holie Ghost be all honor and glorie for euer and euer, Amen.

