


CHristian & curteous Reader, being mo∣ued
by such who had interest in bringing
to light this Sermon, that I would pre∣fix
some small Epistle, I would not hang
backe from performing so small a kind∣nesse.
And two considerations especially swaied mee
to write a fewe lines in this kinde. The first whereof is
the Authors great deserts towards the Church of God;
great in teaching, great in writing. Many a man there
is, who hauing learnedly, iudiciously, and plainly taught
the truth of God, hauing taken heed to the Ministerie
which hee receiued in the Lord, to fulfill it, and that
in preaching alone; not withstanding he hath left his
memoriall blessed upon earth, euen in that regard and
naked respect. But if there bee one man of a great
companie, who as he taught religiously and powerfully
in his life, so besides in his life he did write to the com∣fortable
edification of the Church, and yea also left after
his death other things to be published for the behoofe
of Gods Saints, without question such a worthy may
well haue double honour put vpon him. Many such
deseruing instruments, hath God raised vp in our
Church exceeding both for mouth, and penne: among
the last of which, the Author of this Sermon need not to

be ranked.Pro. 31. 31. His workes praise him in the gates as Sa∣lomon
speaketh of the vertuous Womans deeds. The se∣cond
and third, nay the fift and sixt editions of certaine
Treatises written by him, though in a dumb, neuerthe∣lesse
with a mouing rhetorick, speake effectually to his
commandation. In the second place, that did not a little
encourage me, that this Sermon (if much affection haue
not dazled some eies) may well bee esteemed amongst
one of the cheife he did deliuer. It was preached in a
famous Vniuersitie, in a most learned, & ful auditory,
it was heard with attention (his godly voice, & sancti∣fied
gesture enliuening the hearers:) afterwards it was
spoken of with reuerence and affection; as both hea∣ring
it, and hearing of it, I can truely auouch, it was his
farewell Sermon to his Mother Vniuersitie, although
not (I supose) in the Authors intent, yet in the euent:
the Lord often directing matters▪ otherwise then for
the present wee dreame of. Receiue therefore Christian
Reader this Sermon, sound for edification, sweete for
application, shewing Ministers thier duty, shewing peo∣ple
theirs, and therefore not vnwelcome to ad good ei∣ther
teachers, or learners. Thus wishing thee all bles∣sing
from God in this and all other like furtherances of
thy deuotion, I recommend thee to the Lords mercie,
beseeching him for Christ his sake, to fulfil euery honest
desire of thy heart.

