


AMongst the wise (right Honorable) whose sentēces (for the moste parte) tende either to teache the attaining of vertue, or eschuing of vice: Plotinus that wonderfull and excellent Phylosopher, hath these wordes: The propertie of Temperaunce is to couet nothing Plotin' which maye hee repented: not to exceade the bandes of measure, and to keepe desire vnder the yooke of Reason. VVhiche saying if it were so well knowen, as is needefull: so well imbraced, as hee wyshed, or so surely fixed in minde, as it is printed in his woorkes: then certis manye Christians might by the instru∣ction of an Ethnicke Phylosopher, shunne great and daungerous perils. For to couet without considera∣tion: to passe the measure of his degree: and to lette will runne at randon, is the onely destruction of all

estates. Else howe were it possible, so many learned, politike, wise, renoumed, valiauntand victorious per∣sonages, might euer haue come to such vtter decaye. VVill you that I rehearse Alexander the great, Cae∣sar, Pompey, Cyrus, Hannibal. &c. Al which (by de∣sire of glorie) felte the rewarde of their immoderate and insatiable lustes, for if Alexander had ben con∣tent Qu. Cur∣tius. with Macedonie, or not ben pufte vp with pride after his triumphes: hee had neuer ben so miserably poysoned: If Caesar and Pōpey had ben satisfied with their victories, and had not fell to ciuill discention, ye one had not ben slaine in ye Senate with daggers, the other abrode, by his frendes procurement. If Cyrus  lib. 1. had ben pleased with all Persia, and Media, and not thirsted for bloud, he had neuer com to so infortunat a fall. If Hanniball had not so much delited in glory Plutar∣chus. Liuius. Polybius. of warfare, his countrey had neither fel in ruine, nor he ben miserably forced to poyson him selfe. But you wil say, desire of fame, glorie, renowne, and immorta∣litie (to which al mē wel nighe of nature are inclined especially those which excel or haue any singuler gift of Fortune or of the body) moued them to such daun∣gerous, great and hardy enterprises, which I must ne des confesse as an infallible veritie: but for so much as the aboue named vertue by Plotinus his iudgemēt hath such excellent properties, it is so fit in a Magi∣strate,

that I surely deme those Princes aboue speci∣fied (considering their factes, estates, fortunes, fame and exploytes) had neuer come to suche ende, but for wante of temperance. Yet sithe there are three other Cardinall vertues whiche are requisite in him that should be in authoritie: that is to saye, Prudence, Iu∣stice, and Fortitude, which so wōderfully adorne and beautifie all estates, (if Temperaunce bee with them adioyned that they moue the very enemies with admi ration to praise thē) some peraduenture as affection leades: will commende one, some another. Yea, and though Aristotle prince of Phylosophers name Pru∣dence, Aristot. Cicero. Prudence The mother of vertues. And Cicero define hir the knowledge of thinges which ought to be desi∣red and followed: and also of them which ought to be  and eschewed, yet shall you finde that for wante of Temperaunce, those whiche were counted the wi∣sest that euer were, fel into wonderfull reproche and Iustice. infamie. Yea and though Iustice that incomparable vertue, as the auncient Ciuilians define hir, be a per∣petuall and constant will which geueth to euery man his right. Yet if she be not constant, which is the gift of fortitude, nor equal in discerning right from wrong, wherin is prudence: nor vse proportion in iudgement and sentence which pertaineth to temperaunce, shee can neuer be called equitie or iustice, but fraude, de∣ceate,

in iustice, and iniurie. And to speake of  which Cicero definith, A consyderate vnderta∣king Fortitude Cicero. of perils, and enduring of labours. If hee whom we suppose stoute, valiaūt, and of good courage, want Prudence, Iustice, or Temperaunce, he is not counted bolde, manly and constant, but made beastly and de∣sperate. I will also sith I haue gone so farre with the vertues (and the place so vrgeth) lastly set downe the difinition of Temperaunce, according to Cicero his opinion, Temperaūce (saith he) is of reason in lust and Cicero. Tempe∣raunce. other euil assaultes of ye minde, a sure and moderate dominion and rule. This noble vertue hath three partes, that is cōtinence, clemēcie and modestie, which well and wisely obserued and kept (if grace be to thē adioyned) it is impossible for him that is endued with the aboue named vertues euer to fall into the vnfor∣tunate snares of calamitie or misfortune. But Am∣bition which is an immoderate desire of honore, rule, dominiō, and superioritie. (the very destructiō of no∣bilitie, and commune weales: as among the Romains Silla, Marius, Carbo, Cinna, Cateline, Pompey, and Caesar, are witnesses) hath brought great decay also to our countrey, and countreymen. which Maister Baldwin hath so learnedly touched in his Epistle of the other volume of this booke, that I nede not there∣with deale any further. Onely I would to God it were

so ofte read and regarded of all Magistrates as the matter requireth. I haue here (right honorable) in this booke (which I am so bolde to dedicate to your ho∣nors) only reproued foly in those which are heedelesse: iniurie in extortioners rashnes in venterers, and ex∣cesse, in such as suppresse not vnruly affections. And I trust you will so thinke of it (although the stile de∣serue not like commendation) as you thought of the o∣ther part: which if you shall, I doubt not but it maye pleasure some, if not, yet giue occasion to others which can do farre better, either with eloquence to amende that is amisse in mine, or else when they see these so rudely pende, to publishe their own. And thus wishing you Prudence to discerne what is meete for your cal∣linges. Iustice in the administrations of your functiōs, Fortitude in the defence of your countrey: and Tem∣perance in moderation of all your affections, with in∣crease of honors, and euerlasting felicitie, I bid you in Christe Iesu fare well.

