



MAdam, beeing well perswa∣ded both of your good know∣ledge in Gods holy Truth & of your vnfained affection thereunto, I haue emboldned y selfe, to present you with these two Sermons touching Truth: yet not for your selfe alone, but that from you, they may passe to the common vse of all the Louers of the Truth. I doubt not but that your La: doth both see, and be∣waile the miserie of these wretched times, in which Atheisme, and Policie (falsely so called, beeing indeede little better then plaine villenie,) and Temporizing, haue like a canker, fretted out the very heart of Pietie. They are but a fewe, which seeke to search out the Certaintie in matters of Religiō, or which care to haue stablished hearts,Luk. 1.4. Heb 13.9. and to know precisely, which is the True God, Baal or the Lord. Men had rather halt betweene two opinions, that so they may be for all Times,1. king. 18. then vndergoe the labour of gaining aduised Re∣solution. On the other side, if we come to these, (which yet will needes be religious,) what a wofull
 falling away doe we behold? In some to Poperie, beeing lead captiue (God in iustice sending them strong delusions) by those False brethren,2. Tim. 3.6. 2. Thess. 2.11. Gal. 2 4. which are priuily crept into euery corner, through the remissenes of these Euill Times. In other some to Prophane-nesse, and to that which is of all other the worst, luke-warmenes. So that we may well say,Reu. 3.16. Isa. 1.9. Ier 3.14. Except the Lord of Hosts had reserued vnto vs euen a small remnant, culling out (as it were) one of a citie,Amos 3.11. and two of a Tribe, as the shepheard taketh out of the mouth of a lyon, two legges, or a peece of an eare, according to the Election of grace, we should long ere this haue beene as Sodom, and like vnto Go∣morrha: we had beene (as it is saide of a cursed Tongue) a very world of wickednesse.Iam. 3.6. Now, things beeing so, there are three duties required of all that feare God. The first is, to long for the Appearing of Christ,2. Tim. 4.8. and to crie daily, with the Soules vnder the Altar, How long Lord, holy and true!Reu. 6.10. Reu. 22.20. Euen so come Lord Iesus. The o∣ther is, to beware least they be plucked away with the Errour of the Times,2. Pet. 3.17. and fall from their owne stedfastnes. The third is, euery man in his place, earnestly to contend for the maintenance of the Faith, and the aduance∣ment of the Gospel:Iud: 3. and to be as industrious, to conuert the goers astray,Iam. 5.20. Act. 14.22. and to exhort the Be∣leeuers to continue in the Faith, as the Pharisai∣call,Math. 23.15. both Iesuits and Seculars are, to compasse sea and land, to make men of their professi∣on,2. Tim. 4.4. and to turne them from the Truth vnto Fa∣bles.
 In desire to performe some part of this lat∣ter dutie, as I first preached these Sermons so, with the same intent I doe now publish them. The Text I am sure, is excellent for the purpose, but for my manner of handling it, I leaue it to the censure of Gods Church. In Preaching I haue ever ac∣counted plain-nes, the best eloquence, and the ca∣riage of matters so, that those of the lowest forme may learne somewhat, the soundest and surest learning. If any censorious disposition shall say, that these things are too meane for this ripe and exquisite age, let them consider, that at the buil∣ding of Salomons Temple,1. kng. 5.15. there was roome as wel for Burden-bearers, as for other more curious Ar∣tificers: and at the first making of the Taberna∣cle, not onely the Bringers of blue silke, and pur∣ple, and scarlet, but euen the poorer sort which brought Goates haire,Exod. 25.4.5. and Rammes skinnes were accepted. How euer it be, I doe more then hope, that your La. will kindly accept it from me, and entertaine it as a Testimonie of my loue, and not so onely, but vse it also for your comfort. And so praying the Lord,1. Thess 3.13. to make your heart stable and vnblameable in holines, I commit your La. to his grace in Christ Iesus. Modburie. No∣vemb. 14. 1606.

