



DIuers causes (most reuerēd Father) haue moued me to present this tretise vnto your grace. The one be∣cause your grace hath been charged to de∣fend an error, main∣taining this doctrine that Christ in Soule descended into hell. The other, for that there is like to be as great strife a∣bout the true vnderstanding of this Article in England, as there was in Germany about the true meaning of (This is my body.) For the bet∣ter preuention whereof, I thought it my parte though the vnwoorthiest of all the Ministers of the Church of England, to set down in this short discourse, a plain demonstration of the truth, and a refutation of the contrary out of Gods Booke and godly Interpreters. The last reason that hath

moued me to evulgate these my labors is this: I see diuers Ministers whome for their learning and life, I do honor, very often to preach against the true interprutation of this branche of our Creed, wherby the Papist reioyceth, the Athe∣ist is hardned: and the common sort of people deuiding themselues as they affection. The Pre∣chers do vpon this occasion striue more bitter∣ly one against another, then either of both do a∣gainst our common aduersarye: and by this meanes turning our swords into our own bow∣els, we are a pray to our enemies, and a scorne to the world. If therefore this controuercie be not shortly by the prouidence of almighty God, and your grace his ministery, decided: there will grow among vs enuy, strife, sedition, and al man∣ner of euill workes. Sith then as there is but one God, so there is but one truth. My humble sute vnto your grace is, that if the doctrine contained in this booke be Apostolicall: It may be autho∣rized to proceede, and they that preach the con∣trary in this respect may haue their mouths stop∣ped: for if one builde and another destroy, how can our building prosper? if one gather and ano∣ther scatter, what profit will there be in our ga∣thering? sith it is more easie to destroy and scat∣ter, then to build or gather: Agathon said, Euery Gouerner must learne these 3. lessons, the one that they rule men, the other that they must rule by the laws, the 3. that they shal not rule foreuer. In that vnder her most excellent Maiestie you

rule men, you must vse continuall care and vigi∣lancy. In that you must rule by lawes, you may not for feare of superior or multitude? for loue of freends, for hatred of enemy, nor for desire of reward, leaue the lawes of your Countrie vnexe∣cuted. In that you shall not rule for euer, you are put in minde that you shall appeare one day be∣fore the God of order, being the Iudge of the quick and of the dead, who wil seuerely punish you for the disorders which are in the Church of England vnpunished, except you endeuour as much as you can to reforme thē. Some preach what they please, some do what they fancy, some liue as they list: and the most are impatient of vniformyty, for some weare surpleases, and they are called, Time seruers: some gownes, and they are like Citizens: some clokes, and they are like trauailers: some Coates and they are like fugi∣tiues. Nazianzene saith in his oration of mode∣ration to be vsed in diuine matters. Confusion hath engendred thunders in the aire, tremblings in the earth, shipwrackes in the Sea, warres and strifes in Cities and houses, sicknes in bodies and sinnes in the soule. So that by this learned mans iudgemēt, the air, the sea, the earth, euery house, Cittie, body and soule, is ouerthrown by confu∣sion. For the purest things as the aire is, it infect∣eth: the calmest things as the sea is, it troubleth: the strongest thinges as Citties are, it weakneth: the richest thinges as the house is, it impoueri∣sheth:

the vnitedst things as the bodye is, it ser∣ueth: the holyest things as the soule is, it profa∣neth. God the giuer of all good gifts, giue to our Church a beautifull order, that he may dwell a∣mong vs, least our puritye be turned to vnclean∣nes: our stedfastnes to tottering: our peace to warre: our strength to weaknes: our riches to po∣uerty: our vnion to ciuill discension: and our religion to Atheisme. For the head of this mon∣ster Confusion is the diuell, the hart is enuy, the eares are euill reporte, the eyes are trouble and vexation, the hands are vprore and sedition, the feete are woe and destruction. From the which God deliuer my sweete countrey, for his sonnes sake Christ Iesus. To whom with the holy ghost be all honor and glory for euer and euer. Amen.
Your graces most bounden Orator.
Adam Hyll.
