



To my Honorable good Lord the Bishop of Duresme.
CHristian Auditors. There are 3. things in regarde of God, which euery good person must be ac∣quainted withal; the first is how he must talke with God; The second how he must liue before God; The third how he must come to God, when the seale of his saluation is offered in the sacra∣ment. Of all these three I am bolde at this time to present vnto you this little Manuell.
Lycurgus, a law giuer amongst the Lacedemonians, made this one lawe for sacrificing to the gods, that they should not be sented with many things and thos or no great value. If things are to be esteemed ra∣ther by weight, then worth, I haue
 obserued this lawe in this present gift. I offer vnto you but three things; the first number of which all can be spo∣ken. And I present vnto you but small things; for what can bee conteined in twelue sheetes of paper? yet if it please you to giue these few sheetes the rea∣ding, you shall know better how to pray, learne better how to liue, & vn∣derstand better how to come to Gods table, so long as you shall either pray, liue, or receiue. And because I haue, concerning the first, preached to you of late many Sermons, I am willing at this time,The dig∣nitie of prayer. in way of preface, to cōmend vnto you the dignitie of Prayer.
By it wee conferre and talke with God, & by it we procure much good vnto man: By it we do pierce the very clouds, and by it we haue whatsoeuer is meete. Do we want any thing that is good for vs or others? Prayer is the messenger whom wee must send to∣wards God. Haue wee receiued any speciall fauour from hiaier is our Ambassadour to giue him thankes.
Are we in the morning to beginne our worke?Clauit diei. this is the Key to open
 the day. Are wee at euening to shut our selues in? this is the Claustrum noc∣tis. locke to seale vp the night. If wee would binde the Almightie Vinculum in Deum. Bernard. Ieilo C. to do vs none hurt, heere is the band by which he is tyed Deo sacri∣ficiu diabolo flagellum oranti succor diu. August. The praise of prayer.. And if we would vntie him to doe vs good, heere is the porter of the gates of hea∣uen. It is our Aedypus to dissolue our doubts, It is our commentarie to vn∣derstand Gods word Commentarium scripturae Origen.. It is a sacrifice to God, a scourge to the deuill, and an helpe to our selues in all our troubles. Wherefore as the Apostle by exam∣ples commended faith, so may I by examples commend prayer.
By it Abrahams seruant obtained a wife for Izaak and by it Moses obtai∣ned a pardon for Israell. By this, the same Moses ouercame the Amale∣kites, and by this Abraham interceded for the Sodomites. By praier Iacob was deliuered from Esau; Iosuah from the men of Aie; Dauid from Goliah; The Prophet from Ieroboam; Elizeus from the Samaritans; Hezechiah from death; Iehosaphat from the Ara∣mites; Manasses from captiuitie; Ie∣remiah from his aduersaries; and

Daniel from the Lions, the diseased from his leprosie, the Apostles from prison, and the Church from persecu∣tion. By prayer Hannah obtained a sonne, Dauid deliuerance, Salomon wis∣dome, Elias the restoring of a dead child, Elizaeus the opening of his ser∣uants eyes, Nehemiah the kings fauour, the Centurion his seruāts health, Christ comfort in his agonie, the Apostles a successor to Iudas, Stephen pardon for Paul, and Monima the conuersion of her sonne S. Austin.
Thus true it is which Austin saith, Great is the profit of pure prayer, and as a faithful messenger, deliuers her arrand, and pierceth thither whether flesh cannot come. And this it was which made Bar∣nard to say, Brethren let none of vs light∣ly esteeme his prayer, I tell you, that he to whome we pray doth not lightly esteeme it: after it is out of our mouth, he writes it in his booke: and one of these two we may doubtles expect, either that he will grant our petition, or that which he knoweth to be better for vs.
Call vpon me, and I will heare saith God, aske, and you shall haue saith
 Christ. Before they crie I will heare thē saith Isayah. The Lord is nigh to all that call vpon him, saith Dauid, but to such as call vpon him in trueth. And if wee may beleeue the Apostle Iames, the praier of a righteous man auaileth much.
Pray therefore,Why we ought to pray. and we had neede to pray. Sathan will deuoure thee: pray for deliuerance. The world will a lure thee: pray for assistance. The flesh will betray thee: pray for defence. The wicked will seduce thee: pray for continuance. What beloued? if God had commanded vs a great thing, ought we not to do it, how much more when he saieth, Pray and preuaile, aske and haue, seeke and finde, knock and it shal be opened vnto you? aske tem∣porall things and haue them, seeke for spirituall things & finde them, knock for eternall things, and the gates of heauen shall stand as open to you, as the gates of the prison did to the Apo∣stle Peter.
By this, with Eliah, you may open and shut the very gates of heauen, and by this with the Apostle you may
 shake the foundations of the earth. O pretious praier, what could not onely we, but euē the whole world do with∣out thee. Thou encreasest the earth, calmest the sea, asswagest the fire, pur∣gest the ayre, protectest our gouer∣nours, confoundest our enemie, pre∣seruest our health, instructest our mindes, blessest our actions, encrea∣sest our wealth, exaltest our honour, speakest but the word and we are pre∣serued.
Pray in all places.Pray we therefore in all places, at all times, for all persons, and for all things. Pray we in all places, but in euery place lifting vp pure hands vnto God. Thus, Izaak prayed in the field, Iacob in his bed, Israel in Egypt. Moses on the Mount, Iosuah at Iericho, Elias in the chamber, Hezechiah on his couch, Ieremie in the dungeon, Ionah in the Whales bellie, Daniel in the Li∣ons den, Christ in the Garden, the Disciples in a ship, Peter in a Tanners house, Paul at the Sea side, and the Iewes at Ierusalem. Call vpon him in thy priuate chamber, and crie vnto him with thy familie in thy parlour.
 Thou needest not to fall downe at some pillar with hypocrites, but praise him especially in the congregation of Saints: for there many voyces are Gods best melodie.
Pray also at all times, at euening,Pray at all times. & morning, and at noone day, will I pray vnto thee, yea at midnight will I rise to call vpon thee, nay seauen times a day will I praise thee saith Dauid. Da∣niel did so three times a day, Paul did it day and night, Hannah did it all the dayes of her life, and the Psalmogra∣pher vowes it, I will praise the Lord as long as I liue, as long as I haue any be∣ing, I will sing praises to my God.Euchyta. Pray continually, not as those here∣tiques, who would euer doe so, but as Christians who know when to do so.
With morning prayer, the day begin:
With euening praier the night shut in.
Without this prayer sit not to eate:
Without Gods praise rise not from me ate.
And forget not to pray for all per∣sons,Pray for person. for the King as the head, his Senators as the eyes, his Cleargie as the mouth, his Souldiers as the
 hands, his subiects, of all trades as the feete vpon which the commonwealth doth stand. Art thou a Minister? pray for thy flocke. An Auditor? for thy preacher. A father? for thy child: an husband? for thy wife, a mai∣ster? for thy seruant: or a gouernour? pray for thy famulie. Is any sick? pray for his health: Poore? for his wealth: imprisoned? for his libertie: seduced? for his recouerie: confirmed? for his constancie: or in any distresse? for his deliuery. Pray for all men, that their bodies may be preserued, soules saued, estates maintained, that thy, and their thoughts may bee sanctified, your words seasoned, and your actions or∣dered by the spirit of God.
Will you know now to whom we must pray?To whom we must pray. not to a Calfe as the Israe∣lites did, nor to Baal as his Priests did, nor to an image as idolatours did, nor to any Saints, as our fathers did; but as we are bound to serue God alone, so are we bounden to pray to God alone; for he alone, knoweth our wants, hea∣th our petitions, hath promised to help vs is able to doe for vs, and is the
 alone present helper in the needfull time of trouble.
I will draw to an end,How we must pray. you haue seene beloued the necessitie of this seruice, let me shew you a little the qualities of this seruice. Pray we must in know∣ledge with vnderstanding, in faith by beleeuing, in remorse with feeling in zeale without cooling, in intention without wandring, in reuerence with∣out contemning, in constancie with∣out reuolting, and in loue without re∣uenging. Let our eies be fastned, hearts fixed, knees bowed, mouthes opened, and our hands lifted vp as to the King of Kings. And as Iacob would not let the Angell goe till he were blessed so let not vs let him go till wee be heard. Let not the woman of Canaan be more earnest with Christ militant, then wee wil be with the same Christ triumphāt. Let neuer Queene of Sheba so willing∣ly come to Salomon, as wee must wil∣lingly come vnto Christ: hee loueth most, willing and importunate sutors. Wherefore as Dauid said to Abner, neuer see my face, vnlesse thou bring Michal with thee, so say I vnto you,
 neuer looke God in the face vnlesse you bring prayer with you.
As I haue declared to you the dutie of praier, so should I speake somewhat of giuing of thankes. Many can bee content to pray in troubles, but fewe giue thankes for deliuerance out of trouble. Multi petentes, pauci promittē∣tes, paucissimi reddentes, saith an ancient father, there are many petitioners, few promisers, most few thanks giuers. Are there not ten cleansed? where are the nine? there is none returned to giue thankes but this one, and he is a Sama∣ritan. If euer people vnder the cope of heauen had occasiō to praise God, we are they, especially for his word and gospell, and for many deliuerances shewed to our Princes and people.
But because at the end of this trea∣tise, I haue set downe a forme both of praier & thanks giuing, I refer you to the perusing of those two platformes.
I doubt not of your patience for the length of this preface, because I desire to leaue it as an ocular sermon instruc∣ting you continually how to call vpon God, and preparing you to the expo∣sition
 of the Lords prayer, which of many through ignorance is as much prophaned, as euer God was by saying the Pater-noster in Latin, or repeating other rosaries in an vnknown lāguage.
Now hauing ended as you see these questions and answers, I make questi∣on with my selfe to whom I may com∣mand them; and because for these three yeares immediatly past, I haue liued, and preached amongst you, I am bolde in generall to present them to you all. You haue I confesse knowne my conuersation, bin acquainted with my ministrie, countenanced me in my calling maintained me in health, com∣forted me in sicknes, & afforded vnto me much more kindnesse, then can be requited by this paper present. And since it pleaseth God to dispose of me still in such vncertaine places, as that I could neuer yet say, heere must I rest: I blesse God that euer I came vnto you, whose loue and larges hath bene such vnto me, as makes me to say of my late exile, Perijsse nisi perijssem, I had bene vndone, if others had not sought to vndoe me.

And therefore though I cannot say to you, as Paul did to the Corinthians, I am yours to liue and die with you: yet this I will say, I am yours to liue and pray for you, that you may so know God, as you may pray to him, so pray to God that you may liue before him, so liue, that you may euer be fit to receiue his sacrament, and so both fit to know, pray, liue, and receiue, that after you haue knowne him by Christ, prayed to him through Christ, liued before him in Christ, and receiued his fauour in the seales of Christ, you may in the end dye in his faith, as you haue liued in his feare, and at the last day in bo∣dyes and soules bee partakers of eter∣nall glorye. To the grace of this GOD I commend you, to your grace I cōmend these treatises, doubt∣ing not but many of you will be as rea∣die to read them, as you haue bene wil∣ling to heare them. From your Parish of S. Martin the fields. Ian. 1. 1606.

