



RIght Honourable; as it is the safetie of a Shippe to haue good Pilotes, the strength of a palace to haue sure Pil∣lars, the securitie of the body to haue cleare eyes, and the safeguard of sheepe to haue vigilant shephards: So is it the safe∣tie of a Countrie, and safegard of a King∣dome,
 to haue many wise and watchfull Counsellors. Is this ship tossed? These Pilots will guide it. Is this palace sha∣ken? These Pillars will vphold it. Is this body in perill? These eyes will ouersee it. Are these sheepe in danger? These shep∣heards will defend them. And as, where there is no vision, the Church is naked: So, where no counsell is, there the State is naked.
Of all the miseries which befell the Israelites, this is recorded to bee one of the greatest, That either they had no King to rule them, or that their Kings were but children, who ruled them: yet as that ship is safer that hath but a bad Pilot, than no Pilot; that palace stronger that hath but woodden Pillars, than no pillars; that body securer, that hath but a squint eye, than no eye; and those sheepe better, that haue any shepheard, than no shepheard: So is that nation in farre bet∣ter case, which hath but bad gouernours, than none at all. Is it a blessing to bee commanded by the bad? what a blessing then is it to bee gouerned by the good?
 Haue we good Ministers? they are the horsemen and chariots of2. King. 13.14. Israel. Haue we good Magistrates? they are the light of our eyes, the breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord; and vnder their shadow we are preseruedLam. 4.20. aliue.
Amongst many Right Honourable and truely honoured Senators, both Church, and Commonwealth blesse God for your Honour. You are blessed of the Church as an vncorrupt Patron; you are blessed of the Common-wealth as an impartiall Iudge. In the one, you desire to plant pietie, in the other, you are rea∣die to supplant iniquitie. In the one you are carefull, that one haue not all; in the other, you are watchfull, that each may haue his owne. In the one you pro∣uide for the preaching of veritie; in the other you pronounce the sentence of equitie. Are you in the one to admini∣ster Iustice? I may say with Basil; Your arrow euer aimeth at the white: with E∣pictetus; Your hand euer holdeth an equall ballance: and with Erasmus; Your sunne shineth alike on the poore and rich. Are
 you to conferre Ecclesiasticall prefer∣ments? You will not giue that Iaakob bleare-eyed Leah, who hath serued ma∣nie a yeare for faire Rachel. You wil not make him a shepheard of mens soules, who is rather to bee a shepheard of mens sheepe. What good you haue done to this Church of ours, let Church-men iudge: you loue our Nation: you haue prouided for vs many decaied Sy∣nagogues, and put many poore Prea∣chers into the poole of Bethsdah, who haue beene cured of their long disease of pouertie, without the descending of any one Angell.
Experience I haue had of your fa∣uour to poore Ministers, in my first certaine maintenance that euer I had in our Church. For though I was afraide euen to looke vpon you, yet you were not forgetfull to prouide for mee; and without any either suing or seeking of mine, it pleased you to annex vnto my Lecture at S. Martins,S. Marga∣rets in Fri∣day street. that small Bene∣fice, which I now haue in London, and where I am carefull to Preach euery
 Sabbath, though I cannot liue there for want of an house.
In a thankfull remembrance of your loue to our Calling, and an hopefull acceptation of this enterprised seruice, I am bold to present againe this booke to your Honor. It was penned at the first for the benefit of this Parish: and published by authoritie, for the good of the Church. This Parish of S. Mar∣tin mooued mee to penne it:Doctor Vaughan. and that late Reuerend Bishop of London allow∣ed me to Print it.
In regard of both these, I doubt not but your Honor will afford it your pa∣tronage. You are to the one a most ho∣norable benefactor, prouiding for the liuing, by your charitable almes; and for the dead, by procuring a new, and most needfull Church-yard. You were to the other a most honorable friend: you loued him in his life, and did vn∣fainedly mourne for him at his death.
Of whome, I may say (considering the encouragements I had from him in my ministerie) as Elsha said, when
 his master Eliah was taken from his head,2. King. 2.12. My Father, my Father, the Horse∣men of Israel, and the Chariots thereof.
S. Johns in CambridgHe was an honor to our Colledge, in which hee once liued a painefull stu∣dent: and an ornament to our Church, in which he was (as we haue many Re∣uerend Fathers now he is gone) a prea∣ching Bishop. For his admirable lear∣ning in our Vniuersity of Cambridge, he was long since created a Doctor in Di∣uinitie: and for his abilitie to rule, hee was after Consecrated Bishop of Ban∣gor, and immediatly translated to the Diocesse of Chester, and after a while from thence to London. In these ad∣uancements of his, how much hee was beholding to your Honour, I had ra∣ther be silent, then say little: but sure∣ly hee was worthie you should doe for him.
For the gifts of his Ministerie, he was a powerfull and skilfull Preacher: for the vse of his authoritie, he was a most watchfull and temperate Gouernour. Was hee to speake? his wordes were
 sententious: was hee to aduise? His counsell was religious: was hee to ad∣monish? his exhortations were gratious: and was hee to censure? his sentence was iudicious. Did hee obserue any Mi∣nister painefull in his calling? hee euer did encourage him to go on: did hee see any either negligent, or turbulent? the one hee would aduise to greater la∣bour; the other bring on, to greater peace.
For his iudgement in Diuinitie, what it was, the Church can iudge: hee was a profound Preacher of the truth, a zea∣lous enemie to all superstition, and a great exhorter to all pietie & godlinesse. He halted not betwixt two opinions: hee spake not with those Iewes, Nehe. 13.24. partly the language of Ashdod, and partly the language of Canaan, but euery way shewed himselfe a Prote∣stant indeed.
His learning was good, his life bet∣ter; and his death, for himselfe, best of all. His learning was without compa∣rison, his life without exception, his
 death without suspition. By his lear∣ning hee instructed, by his life hee shi∣ned, and by his death hee yet smelleth as a sweet perfume. What his learning was, this Land knoweth; what his life was, London knoweth; and what his death was, those learned men knowe, who were about him in the time of his sicknesse.
Hee was Bishop of this Diocesse, not much aboue two yeares: in which time this Citie much reioyced in him; and surely no maruaile. For hee was a Clemens to this Rome: a Polycarpus to this Smyrna: a Iustine to this Naples: a Dionysius to this Alexandria: a Cyprian to this Carthage: an Eusebius to this Cae∣sarea. a Gregorie to this Nyssa: an Am∣brose to this Millyne: a Chrysostome to this Constantinople: an Augustine to this Hippo: and a Ridley to this Diocesse.
And as Ambrose was wont to say of his people, so questionlesse he said of∣ten of his; Non minùs vos diligo quos genui ex euangelio, quàm si suscepissem ex contugio: gratia quippe vehementior est
 ad diligendum quàm natura: I loue you no lesse, whom I haue begotten by the Gospell, then my owne children: For grace procures greater loue then nature. Nay it seemeth he loued them more: for hee impoue∣rished the one, to enrich the other. But blessed bee that most reuerend Dauid, that will haue care of Ionathans chil∣dren, now he is dead.
Dead hee is indeede, in regard of his presence; but aliue for euer, in regard of his remembrance: for, the righteous shalbe had in an euerlasting remembrance, when the name of the wicked shall rot. He died not rich in goods; it was an argu∣ment of his goodnesse: he died rich in grace; it was an argument of his godli∣nesse. With Bernard he did liue in terra auri, sine auro: In a Kingdome of gold, without gold: and seemed to thinke, as Lactantius did write, that Qui apud De∣um diues est, pauper esse non potest: Hee that is rich in God, cannot be accoun∣ted a poore man.
Did Abner, saith Dauid, die as a foole dieth? And did this Bishop of London
 die, as that Bishop of Rome, who said, Vixi dubius, anxius morior, nescio quò va∣do: I haue liued doubtfull, I die doubt∣ting, I know not whither I shall goe? no hee did not. But with Ambrose hee said, I haue not so lead my life, that I was ashamed to liue: neither feare I death, be∣cause I know I haue a good Lord. Hee said not with Nero, Me mortuo ruat mundus: I care not what befalle after I am dead; but,These were almost his last words. modo me moriente viuat & floreat ec∣clesia, fiat voluntas Domini: So that after my death the Church may flourish, the will of God be done.
Thus, a good life hath the yeares num∣bred, but a good name endureth for euer.
Not to be troublesome to your Ho∣nor: by his departure, his wife hath lost a louing husband, his children an in∣dulgent father, the Church a worthie Prelate, and I (a poore Preacher) one of the most honourable friends that e∣uer I had, hauing deserued so little of him.
Isa. 57.11.Doe the righteous perish? wee must regard it. Are mercifull men taken a∣way?
 we must consider it in our hearts. After Ambrose was dead, Italy was troubled: after Augustine was dead, Afrike was spoiled: After Luther was dead, Germanie was distracted. After Bucer was dead, heere religion was alte∣red. And after the death of so many worthie men, as wee haue lost within these few yeeres, the Lord graunt that we be not plagued.
I am no Homer to commend this A∣chilles: no Chrysostome to commend this Babylas: no Augustine to commend this Cyprian: no Melancthon to commend this Luther: no Parker to commend this Bucer: onely in honor to him who honoured God in his life, I presume thus to write of him being dead. Your Honor well knoweth that I haue writ∣ten the trueth: and the Lord knoweth I desire to write nothing but the truth.
Thus crauing pardon for my bold∣nesse, and once againe most humbly entreating your Honorable entertain∣ment of these few sheetes of Paper, as
 they are now the fifth time enlarged, I humbly take my leaue; beseeching God to continue you long a trustie Counsellor to our Gracious King, an vpright Iudge to our Christian peo∣ple, and a good Patron to the despised Clergie. From your Parish of Saint Martin in (or rather now by rea∣son of many new buildings neere) the Fields. Iune the 16. 1613.

