



SIR,
IT was the greatest happinesse that ever did befall me, that I was assumed into your noble Family where I was fur∣nished once, and a second time likewise with Ecclesiasticall promotions, without any deserts, yea little or none attendance. A true Friend is decyphered to be an Angell clothed with flesh and blood, such have you beene to me, the most carefull and faithfull friend that ever poore Scholler had. Comming to pay my annuall tribute of thanke∣fulnesse, a Sermon, it pleased you to accept of it, and to cast a respective eye more then ordinary towards me for it, though there be nothing in it to be affected, and in my selfe no affectation at all of it, but rather an in∣dignation against mine owne imbecillity and endow∣ments that I was not able to speake of those heavenly
 things in that manner as might raise my hearers to divine cogitations. What weight there is in it comes from your ballance and favourable construction, for it was handled in plaine familiar words, rather to ex∣presse clearely the matter, then to hunt for polished phrases, and my desire is more to speake fortia quam diserta, as Saint Hierome saith, things of strength then eloquence, and rather vivere then loqui, as Mi∣nutius Felix observes, to live, then speake them.
But I am a man compassed with infirmity, 'tis truly said of me, my bodily presence is weake, and my speech contemptible, 2 Corin. 10.10. But such was your sweet disposition that you still cast a mantle upon mine infirme carriage, which hath engaged my heart in a more thankefull observance towards your worthy selfe. In testimony whereof I present to you this poore Sermon as a publique Record, that to your Noble Family I owe myselfe, and from thence have received all the lively∣hood and meanes of subsistence which I now enjoy, my loynes and bowels blesse you continually. The Lord encrease upon you the blessings of heaven above, the blessings of the deepe that lyeth under, the blessings of the breasts and of the wombe, Gen. 49.25. and the goodwill of him that dwelt in the bush dwell with you for ever, are the prayers of

