



MOST Illustrious, and Renovvned Ladies;
It vvas the opinion of an ancient, and graue Thucydi∣des. Hi∣storian, that men should speake nothing of wo∣men; neither good, nor euill. An opinion vnvvorthy of the Authour; vvhi∣ch as In his Treatise of the vertuous acts of vvo∣men. Plutarch approoueth not in his censure, so nei∣ther Sir Edward Hoby, nor my self, haue obserued in our practise; hovvbeit, in a different manner, and vpon vnlike respects: he speaking euill of you, to the disparadgement of your ites; I good, to the aduan∣cement of your honours: he, out of his Zeale, and VVise∣dome (vvhich, perhappes, did both set forth together, as Currebāt simul, sed ille praecu∣currit. Io. 20.4. Iohn, and Peter, but yet the first hath outrunne the second) he, I say, out of his zeale, and vvisedome, to de∣fame your Religion in your Persons; I, out of my duty, and obligation, to giue a just applause vnto your resplen∣dent vertues. And thus I (vvith your Mary) haue chosen the BETTER part, to speake good of you, and not euill; as also, therein, I sustayn the TRV∣ER part, because your selues are not euill, but good.
In vvhich assurance, and confidence, I may boldly
 defend the lustre of such excellent LADIES, against the misprises of this KNIGHT, attempting to ble∣mish their fame with his pen, which he should main∣tayn with his sword. A work no lesse ignoble in him to vndertake, then impossible to performe. For, were it not a paradoxicall endeauour, in any man, to accuse Pallas of folly, or Venus of deformity, and likewise in the rest, where the perfection of the subject preuenteth the credibility of the discourse: Such also is the project of this Knight, and so improbable is his conceipt; since the generall esteeme, which you haue gayned by the in∣tegrity of your liues, hath made you incapable of his wrongs. Neither so onely; but, wherein he would ma∣ke you inglorious, therein your glory doth consist.
VVherefore; 2. Cor. 7.4. multa mihi fiducia est apud vos, multa gloriatio pro vobis; great is my trust in you, great is my rejoycing for you. Yea I am glad, that I may come vnto you, as my principall defendours a∣against him, by whom you are equally offended; and that the tempest, raised against me by this Knight, hath driuen me vnto the secure harbour of your honourable fauours: whereof though I am vnworthy by my owne deseruings, yet you can make me worthy by your gra∣tious opinions. And I conceiue the greater hope thereof, because I am already intitled thereunto by the Knight, saying; Pag. 12. it is twenty to one, but some of YOVR Ladies will be pearing into this To me, or against me rather. Letter: therefore I will write no more, then I am able to justify. VVhereby your selues haue a peculiar in∣terest, from his owne hand, to require his justificatiō of all those things, which, in his Letter, he hath im∣puted vnto your obsequious, and faithfull seruant.
In which regard, I appeale vnto you (religious, and
 prudent LADIES) and assigne you (with your fauou∣rable leaue) to be my Iudges in this triall; since my CAVSE is honest, and your selues are just. She com∣meth, before your presences, in hir natiue, and naked colours; not painted with eloquence, not adorned with inuention. Our vnhappy Father sought no Genes. 3.7 sigge lea∣ues, while he remayned without sinne, and (conse∣quently) without shame. They, that are guiltlesse, seek no colourable defence; for Stat. Caecilius. Innocency is hir owne eloquence, being easily sustayned by hir inward, and proper strength: whereas an euill cause requireth much art; being like a statue (or Deest ali∣quid, quod intus esse oportet. Plut. in Laconic. dead carcasse) which hath the shape, and proportion of a man, but hath no soule within, to giue it life, and motion.
Finally, therefore, whatsoeuer shall be found defe∣ctiue in me, let your wisedome supply, or charity for∣giue, since he, that offereth vp this little Treatise vnto your acceptance, hath also dedicated himself vnto your seruice; remayning now, and euer,

ROAN.
12. Decemb. 1609.
