



Right noble, and truly Christian LORD;
SInce I haue presu∣med to appeare thus in publique, and to treate peculiarly of this subiect [Mysti∣call Babylon] rather then of any other, and, finally, to re∣commend this Trea∣tise vnto your fa∣uourable patronage; I stand therefore obliged to expresse my Motiues,

and Reasons, in the two former points, for the ge∣nerall satisfaction of others; and, in the last, for the particular of your Honorable Selfe.
As for the FIRST; I am not mooued, vpon any oblique respect, to take vp the Sword of my Pen, in this spirituall warfare: I am not vexed with the ambition of preferment, nor affectation of applause; for I desire earnestly of God, that the diuine sentence of Saint Paul may bee deeply grauen in my heart; The World is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the World.
Neither am I prouoked vnto this designe out of any spleene, or vindictiue humour against the Church of Rome, or any person therein: and in∣deed I haue beene so farre from giuing them any speciall distaste, that I haue obserued the tearmes of ciuill, and morall respect towards some of them, to my greater preiudice, then I will either bragge, or complaine of, vnto the World.
But the true, and proper causes are these. First; I am bound, as a dutifull Sonne of my Mother-Church (from whose sacred breasts I drew the first nutriment of my faith) to succour, and comfort her, in her distressed estate, while the little Foxes of Rome eate vp her Grapes, and the wild Boare thereof seeketh to enter into the Vineyard of God. And therefore, since euery man (indued with any facultie of writing) should performe his seruice vnto the Church of God, especially, when, and where, the contagion of Heresie doth dilate it selfe (as Saint Augustine doth grauely aduise) I could not bee silent in so necessarie a time: for as

wee shall answere vnto God for our idle words, so wee shall answere vnto him for our dangerous silence.
Secondly; to make some satisfaction, thereby, vnto the Church of God; which, being vniustly wronged by my meanes, doth iustly challenge this remedie of my paines; that the hand, which hath hurt her, may somewhat helpe her; and that, as I haue made a wound, so I may make a cure againe.
Thirdly; to procure the sweete peace of my conscience towards God, that I may heale the wound, which I haue formerly made vnto my owne soule; Christian Wisdome teaching me to powre some Oile into that, to supple it, which hath found so much Vineger to fret it; and there∣fore I am resolued to neglect all troubles without, that I may find this comfort within.
Fourthly, to exempt, hereby, all scruple out of their hearts, who desire to vnderstand the state, and disposition of my conscience in the matter of Religion. For as Saint Hierome, being vehemently suspected of the infection of Origens errours, did therefore diuert that suspition, by cleere publica∣tion of his mind in writing, That they, who would not beleeue his tongue, in his deniall, might yet be∣leeue his Pen, in his refutation thereof (as hee doth ingeniously write in this behalfe) so I find my selfe very deeply charged, in the point of con∣science, and discretion, to giue sufficient notice vn∣to all the sonnes of my Mother (touching my Faith, and Religion) by some Treatise, now to bee

published vnto the World, and to remayne) I hope) after my decease, as a Record, what I doe certainly beleeue, concerning the doctrine of faith professed in this Church of England, and oppugned by the Church of Rome.
SECONDLY, therefore, I haue made speciall election of this subiect (concerning Rome, and her ruine) as being of greatest importance in it self, and specially in these dayes. For whereas the most vsuall subiects of disputation, betwixt vs, and the Papists, are particular, and therefore haue a particular issue of veritie, or falshood therein; this is of an higher nature, of a larger extent, and of a more generall effect; for that it doth concerne not onely a part of her doctrine, but the whole be∣ing of the Church of Rome; it toucheth not a branch, or two, but the very root it selfe; it reacheth not onely vnto a piece of her building, but vnto the very foundation thereof. And there∣fore this disputation (viz. Whether, and How the name of Babylon, in the visions of Saint Iohn, doth agree vnto Rome) is of singular consequence; thereby to confront the audacious insultations of her politike Agents; to giue an Antidote against the poyson, which they seeke to instill into many vnsetled hearts: that so, they, who are fallen from the truth, may bee happily reduced vnto it; and they, who are falling, may be strongly confirmed in the same.
Now THIRDLY, and lastly, it remaineth (most worthy Lord) that I make true remon∣strance of the causes, which haue bred this con∣fidence

in mee to offer vp this little Treatise, vp∣on the Altar of your Honourable fauour. I speake not of your descent, and extraction out of a Noble Family, nor of your high degree of Honour, nor of your speciall aduancement in the State (for which respects, many men apply themselues vnto the seruice, and attendance of great persons) but, aboue all things, I am comforted in your sincere, and constant profession of the Truth; which grace seemeth to be hereditarie in your House, as being spectable in all the branches thereof.
Since therefore Greatnesse, and Goodnesse haue mutuall coniunction in your Lordships person, I cannot suppose, that a Worke of this nature can want your acceptation, nor the Author thereof your protection. Whereof also I conceiue the greater hope, because I haue knowne heretofore (by the double testimonie of mine eyes, and eares) the gracious inclination of your Honour towards mee; and that onely for the Truths sake, and the Words sake: as, indeed, I haue euer found them to be my most assured, and certaine friends, that haue affected mee in this regard.
But if I should need, or seeke any externall, or farther motiue, to induce your Honour to vouch∣safe your patronage vnto mee, and vnto this Trea∣tise, I would not goe out of your owne Family (though it must bee from the liuing to the dead) but I would intreate it by the deare, and precious memory of that religious, learned, & most accom∣plished Prelate, your famous Brother, IAMES (lately Lord Bishop of Winton) whose kind enter∣tainement

of mee in priuate, and fauourable testi∣monie of mee in publike, were more sufficient ar∣guments of his loue, then of my desert. For I may truely say, by the certaine experience of sundrie occurrents in my life, that I haue tasted a little of Gods deserued wrath, but a great deale more of his vndeserued grace: whereof I account this no small part, that hee hath giuen mee so much inte∣rest in the good opinion, and affection of sundrie persons of eminent qualitie, and particularly of your Honorable Selfe; whom I beseech the Lord of all mercies to blesse in your owne Person, and in your noble Posteritie, with the temporall blessings of this life, and the eternall of the life to come, through Iesus Christ our Lord; in whom I am, and will euer remaine

London. Ian. 27. 1623.
