



SIR,
IF I were a Iudge instead of a Coun∣cellour, it should be my charge in∣stead of my advice, to charge them that are rich in this world,1. Tim. 6.17. that they trust not in un∣certaine
 riches, but in the living God. Nor could such a charge con∣cerne any (for ought I know) more, than your selfe, on whom the God of blessing hath heap't such afflu∣ence and abundance, as if both Sea and Land, the Christian and the heathen world had conspired to empty themselues into your coffers and ware-houses.
He said it that will maintaine it, To whom much is given,Luk. 12.48. of them much shall be required: Your en¦gagements to the God of Heaven are neither common, nor ordinary, but as if singled out for blessings, you have received a Benjamins portion above many others of your brethren.Gen 43.34.
I know: the world knows, that you hide not these talants in a nap∣kin,Lu. 19.20. thousands are bettered by their improvement, your imployment.
The following Manuell or En∣chiridion,
 will onely advertise you (not as if you wanted better disci∣pline) that amongst all other your transactions and transmutations, you, returne to the Caesar of hea¦ven his tributary due of praise and thankfulnesse, from whose liberall hand you have received such am¦ple testifications of favour and be∣neficence.
This Pyramis of praise, this new erected pillar serues for no other end,Statuae Mercurii in competis & triviis, quae certis indiciis per∣plexo viate∣ri, iter o∣stendebant Al. Gel. but like the Statues of Mer∣cury, to direct every traveller and voyager, or any else that are capable of mercies, to the wayes of thank∣fulnesse, and to divert them from the paths of that Satanicall sinne, ingratitude: What was once plant∣ed in your eares, is now presented to your eyes, favour it with ac∣ceptance, reade it with diligence, follow it with conscience, and the God of mercy give unto you what
 blessings the booke can containe, or the Author wish, for this life or for a better.
It was no dishonour to the great Peere and Lord of Syriah,2. King. 5.13. Naa∣man, that he listened to the advice of his servants.
Solvit inops diti Craeso quod debuit Irus. Owen. Epigr. lib. un. ep. 62. Rich Croesus disdained not to receive a debt from poore Irus. Ac∣cept you also of this my Free-will Offering, which, together with my selfe, is justly devoted to your pro∣tection and patronage. Twas con∣ceived in the wombe of the vast Ocean, tis my First-borne, which I can father on none but your selfe, from whose influence next under God, I received what I have, or can present unto you.
The injury were too publicke if I should be too tedious,Horat. Cum tot su∣stineas, ac tanta negotia solus, in publica commoda peccem si lon∣go sermone morer tua tempora, &c.

In briefe then I commit this to you, and you to God, wishing what happinesse or honour you do or can wish unto your selfe, or successefull progenie, health to your person, blessing to your endeavours, suc∣cesse to your enterprises, securitie to your body, salvation to your soule. So prayes he that doth prof∣fer and promise obedience to your laudable

