



TO THE NOBILI∣TIE AND ALL OTHER IN OFFICE, GOD GRANT EN∣crease of wisdome, with all things neces∣sarie for preseruation of their estates. Amen.
AMongst the wise (right Hono∣rable) whose sentences (for the most part) tend either to teach the attaining of vertue or eschewing of vice, Plotinus Plotinus. that wonderful and excellent Philosopher hath these words: The property of Temperance is to couet nothing which may be repented: not to exceed the bands of measure, and to keepe Desire vnder the yoke of Reason. Which saying if it were so well knowne, as it is needfull; so well embraced, as is wished; or so surely fixed in mind, as it is printed in his works: then certes many Christians might by the instru∣ction of an Ethnicke Philosopher, shun great and dangerous perils. For to couet without consideration, to passe the measure of his de∣gree,

and to let will run at randon, is the only de∣struction of all estates. Else how were it possible, so many learned, politicke, wise, renowned, va∣liant, and victorious personages, might euer haue come to such vtter decay? For example, we haue Alexander the Great, Caesar, Pompey, Cyrus, Hannibal, &c. All which (by desire of glorie) felt the reward of their immoderate and insatiable Quintus Curtius. lusts: for if Alexander had bin content with Ma∣cedonie, or not been puft vp with pride after his triumphes, he had neuer been so miserablie poi∣soned. If Caesar and Pompey had been satisfied with their victories, and had not fell to ciuill dis∣sension, the one had not been slaine in the Se∣nate with daggers, nor the other abroad, by their friends procurement. If Cyrus had bin plea∣sed ustinus b. 1. with all Persia, & Media, and not thirsted for blood, he had neuer come to so infortunate a fal. So if Hannibal had not so much delighted in glo∣ry of warfare, his coūtry had neither fel in ruine, Plutarchus. iuius. Colybius. nor he bin miserably forced to poyson himselfe. But you will say, desire of fame, glorie, renowne, and immortalitie (to which all men well nigh by nature are inclined, especially those which ex∣cell or haue any singular gift of fortune or the bodie) moued them to such dangerous, great,

and hardy enterprises, which must needs be con∣fessed as an infallible veritie: and therefore I sure∣ly deeme those Princes aboue specified (consi∣dering their fortunes, fame, and exploits) had neuer come to such end, but for want of tempe∣rance. And now sith there are three other Cardi∣nal vertues which are requisit in him that should be in authoritie: that is to say, Prudence, Iustice, and Fortitude, which so wonderfully adorne and beautifie all estates (If Temperance be with them adioyned, that they moue the very enemies with admiration to praise them) some peraduen∣ture (as affection leads) will commend one, some another: as Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers names Prudence, the mother of vertues, but Ci∣cero Aristot. Cicero. Prudence. defines her the knowledge of things which ought to be desired and followed, and also of them which ought to be fled and eschewed; yet you shall finde that for want of Temperance, some which were counted very wise, fell into wonderfull reproch and infamie. But Iustice that incomparable vertue, (as the ancient Ciuilians define her) is a perpetual and constant wil which giueth to euery man his right, yet if shee be not constant, which is the gift of Fortitude; nor equal in discerning right from wrong, wherein is Pru∣dence;

nor vse proportion in iudgement and sen∣tence, which pertaineth to Temperance: she can neuer be called equitie or iustice, but fraud, de∣ceit, iniustice and iniurie. And, to speak of Forti∣tude, which Cicero defineth, a considerate vnder∣taking Fortitude. Cicero. of perils, and enduring of labours; if he whom we suppose stout, valiant, and of good courage, want Prudence, Iustice, or Temperance, he is not counted wise, righteous and constant, but sottish, rude and desperate. For Temperance (saith Cicero) is of reason in lust and other euill Cicero. Temperance. assaults of the mind, a sure and moderate domi∣nion and rule. This noble vertue is diuided into three parts, that is, Continencie, Clemencie, and Modesty, which well obserued and kept (if grace be to them adioyned) it is impossible for him that is endued with the aboue named vertues euer to fall into the infortunate snares of calamitie, or misfortune. But Ambition, which is immoderate desire of honor, rule, dominion, and superiority, (the very destruction of nobilitie and common weales, as among the Romans; Sylla, Marius, Car∣bo, Cinna, Catiline, Pompey and Caesar, are witnes∣ses) hath brought great decay to our countrey, and countrey-men. But I haue heere (Right Honorable) in this booke only reproued fol∣ly

in those which are heedlesse: Iniury in ex∣tortioners, rashnesse in venterers, treacherie in traytours, riot in rebels, and excesse in such as suppresse not vnruly affections. Now I trust you will so thinke of it (although the stile de∣serue not like commendation) as you thought of the other part. Which if you shall, I doubt not but it may pleasure some; if not, yet giue occasion to others which can do better, either to amend these, or to publish their owne. And thus wishing your Prudence to discerne what is meet for your callings, Iustice in the admi∣nistration of your functions, Fortitude in the defence of your Countrey, and Temperance in moderation of all your affections, with en∣crease of honors, and euerlasting felicity: I bid you in Christ Iesus farewell.
At Winceham the 7. day of Decem∣ber. 1586.

