



RIght Honourable: Although it be appointed that all must die, yet the most put farre from them that euill day. It is certaine, we must haue an end: and the remembrance of it keepes vs from sinne. The goodliest Cities haue beene equalled with the ground, the state∣liest buildings leuelled with the earth, the greatest Empires brought to nothing, the Kings of the earth haue beene bound in chaines, and their Nobles in fetters of iron: We all waxe olde as doth a garment,
 wee dwell heere as in houses of clay, our breath passeth away, and wee are gone. Where is Methushelah, with all his yeeres? Sampson with all his strength? Absolom with all his beauty? Salomon with all his wisdome? Dauid with all his victories? or Croesus with all his wealth? Are wee in our yong age? till thirty, we may bee sa∣luted with a good morrow: are we in our full age? till fifty, wee are saluted with a good day: are wee in our old age? wee must take it patiently, that we are then salu∣ted with, God send you good rest.
I haue seene (saith Dauid) an end of all perfection: and happy are they that haue Dauids eyes. But all men haue not this sight; the god of this world hath so blindfolded many, that if they bee young, they can∣not see death at their backes: if old they will not see it before their eies. Wee would mourne, if wee knew wee should liue but a moneth: wee laugh, when, it may bee, wee shall not liue one day.
Heu! viuunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur,

Et velut infernus fabula vana foret.
Alas! men liue as though they should not die:
And as if hell were nothing but a lie.
Ambitiosus honos, & opes, & foeda voluptas,
Haec tria pro trino numine mundus amat.
Vaine pompe, and wealth, and luxurie,
The worldling makes his trinitie.
To the end therefore that all men might thinke of their end, I haue published this Direction to die well. And though this small mite, be not worthy to come into your rich Treasurie, yet am I bold to cast it in: and because it is all I can giue at this time, I most humbly beseech you to giue it enter∣tainment.
You haue gained much in this present world: but you haue esteemed godlinesse the greatest gaine: and, with that blessed Apostle Saint Paul, You account all hings to be but dung, to the ende you ight winne Christ. And though it hath leased God to giue vnto you great riches in
 this world, yet am I perswaded, that the remembrance of death is not bitter vnto you:Eccl. 41.1. for as you are not ashamed to liue, so you are not afraide to die. You waite for it, because by her two Harbengers, Sickenesse, and Old age, it euer waiteth vpon you.
Heere you sow liberally, that hereafter you may reape plentifully: you cast your bread vpon the waters,Eccl. 11.2. after many daies you are sure to find it. And if he hath his re∣ward for a cuppe of cold water; you who deale your bread to the hungrie, who bring the wandring poore to your house, who see the naked and couer him, and hide not your selfe from your owne fleshEsai. 58.7.: you, Right Honourable, shall not want your reward.
2. Chr. 30.22.And seeing you (with good King Heze∣kiah) speake comfortably to euery poore and painefull Leuite; how should they but speak honourably of you? The Lord grant th that sheafe of your family, may euer be like vnto Iosephs sheafe, and euery day grow to a greater increase of fruitfulnesse,Gen. 37.7. till it be¦fitted as a ricke of Corne for the Lord Barne: and he grant vnto you a long life,
 godly posterity, and a peaceable end; that heere you may see your Childrens Children in great prosperity: so as you may loue yours, yours may honour you, and both you and yours bee honoured of God: and that you who are blessed in your honorable Predecessors, may euer be hap∣py in your future Successours,
I doubt not, but it will please you to par∣don my boldnesse; and the rather peruse this Direction to die well, because your whole life is, as it ought to bee, a meditation of death. And because it is but a little Manu∣all, and may bee read ouer in a few houres, giue me leaue to commend vnto you two o∣ther Bookes, in which you may reade, all the daies of your life: The one is the booke of Gods mercies; the other is the booke of Gods iudgements. In the one, you may see his goodnesse to you and yours; in the other, his iustice against his and the Chur∣ches enemies. This Booke of mine hath ma∣ny leaues; these other haue only two: in the one, you may reade of Mercy, in the other, you may reade of Iudgement.

The Lord grant vnto your Honor, with your most honorable Countesse, the Lady Francis, a second Dorothea, (giuen both as a gift to you that feare God) such a life, that at the houre of death, when your glasse shall be runne, and the Bridegrome call for you, you may both say, with that holy man;
Vixi dum volui, volui dum Christe volebas:
Sic nec vita mihi, mors nec acerba fuit.
London: From S. Martins in the fields.
May 30. 1613.

