



Worthy Sir,
I Cannot forget your fauours, whiles I enioy them: and yet the contemplation of that which is pre∣sent, cannot properly be called Re∣membrance. But when I thinke of giuing thankes, mee thinkes it is not more my purpose then my feare: since gratitude does in some sort make bountie lesse; bountie being more content, when it is attended by gratitude; but being more emi∣nent, when it is opposed by ingra∣titude: so that the greatest thankes,

though not the best, is not to giue thankes. Besides, bountie hauing in it more of outward good then grati∣tude hath, gratitude may seeme a pu∣rer goodnesse, then bountie; and so whiles it striues to requite it, may seeme to exceed it. Yet since reason tels vs that ingratitude is against rea∣son, being an iniustice, and so against nature, I choose to giue thankes the common way; not that I iudged it enough gratitude, to giue thankes thus: but that I iudged it too much ingratitude, not to giue thankes thus. That I might not therefore requite your goodnesse with iniury, I endea∣uour to imitate that goodnesse by making my thankes; like vnto it, publicke and yet sincere. Secret thankes are often free from flatterie,

yet alwayes like it: being common∣ly at as much distance from exami∣nation, as flattery desires to be. Hap∣py then are my thankes, which are as iust as your merit, being made iust by your merit: which so appeares in your exemplary & daily Deuotion, that you haue taken more possession of your Church, then of your Dig∣nitie. And for your Colledge, you haue made it enioy a Statute of Improouement, not so much in Dyet, as in Studie: ruling it by the Statute of your Example; which will be Deane beyond Your time. Any man May say thus much, but I Must: truth will make it iustice in another: but choice will make it gratitude, in Mee: who owe my selfe vnto you; nay,

who owe my Friendes vnto you. They haue giuen me blessings; but you haue giuen me Them; euen the most Noble (and, through your fa∣uour) My Sir Francis Stuart: whom, when I haue Named, I haue Boun∣ded my vnderstanding: and, when I haue named him Mine, I haue Contented it. Which happinesse must needes make mee remember You, as the cause of that happinesse; and as, before, I was His, by being Yours; so now by being His, I shall be the more

