



THE historie of Job is a treasure inestimable, to teach vs the doctrine of Gods fatherly care and prouidence, to prepare vs with patience to beare all the afflictions of this pre∣sent life.1. Part. The first part of this book hath three chapters, wherein wee bee taught what Job was, how sathan was let loose against him,Cap. 1. with what courage and constancie hee bare the crosse,Cap. 2. till Christ left him to see his cor∣ruption and frailtie.Cap. 3. The second part is con∣tinued from the ende of the third chapter, to the beginning of the 32. chapter, containing a very notable disputation and conference betweene Job and his friends:2. Part. where first from the third to the fifteenth chapter, they
 admonish him to repent,1. Branche from the 3. to the 15. chap. and so to prepare himselfe for death, assuring him, because of this strange calamitie, that he must bee, not onely stained and spotted with some light crimes,The error of Iobes friendes Eliphas. Zophar. Bildad. but also fowly infected and poysoned with great and grieuous sinnes, and with hy∣pocrisie. Job answereth their seuerall spee∣ches, tormented in bodie, perplexed & great∣ly grieued in minde, yet striuing mightily to auoyde their vniust accusations against him. Secondly,2. Branch. they replie sharpely vpon his first answers, from the 15. chapter to the 22. and he answereth them againe with greater bold∣nes and courage then before.3. Branch. Thirdly, they begin a second reply, and here Eliphas and Bildad only spake, the third man fainted and spake no more, for that Iob was inuincible persisting in his apologie and defence of his faith and vpright conuersation. This last branch is continued to the 32. chapter,3. Part. where begins the third part of this booke:Elihu. and here a fift speaker enters in with great grauitie censuring both parts, Iobs friends for want of iudgement in their reproofes, and Job al∣so for his ouer great boldnes in iustifying
 himselfe, and appealing to Gods high throne of iustice. This speech also is continued from the 32. chap. to the 38. And there begins the fourth part of this booke,4. Parte. wherein the Lord himselfe speaketh. And whereas Elihu did bend himselfe most against Iob, sometimes peruerting and wresting his very wordes, and sometimes repeating what hee neuer spake, verie sparingly & lightly touching his aduersaries: the Lorde on the other side, gratiously and fatherly reproueth his ser∣uant Iob, and sharply rebuketh all the rest, teaching them to know his power, wisdome,5. Parte. prouidence, and iustice by his works, chapter 38. 39. 40. 41. then followeth the last parte of this booke, chapter 42. wherein is shewed how Job repented: how God receiued him to grace, and restored him to a better state then he had before.
Two speciall questions are handled in this booke: the first is concerning the iustice of  God: Whether it standeth with his iu∣stice, that the wicked prosper, and the godly bee afflicted in this present life. The second is, whether we may wel iudge
 of the faith, religiō & professiō of men, by their prosperitie & aduersitie in this present life. These questions haue bred occa∣sion of great disputation, and griefe vnto the faithfull of all ages, Psal. 3. Iere. 15. Hab. 1.13. and caused infidels to blaspheme, Mal. 2.17. and 3.15. These doubts are notably re∣solued and answered in this story: for the first, that wee must not searche into the strange iudgements of God, but know as Iob teacheth vs, chapter 24. 1. that all times ap∣poynted for prosperitie and aduersitie, for good and euill, are hid with the Lord, and wee must as Job dooth,Cap. 39. 36. 37. put our hand on our mouth, and adore his maiestie in all his works and iudgements, being well assured that his will is and must be euer vnto vs the only rule of iustice, & that his hand & will gouerneth al the accidents, changes and chances of this present life. For the 2. the Lord teacheth vs also, neuer to iudge of the end, nor of the life past of the faithful, by their present miseries: for it fareth with vs in our spiritual cōbates with the flesh and the deuill, as it doth with wrastlers in the world: for among them we
 shall see often, some one neere cast downe, and yet in the ende giues his aduersarie the foyle. So is it in the spirituall battaile, Gods chil∣dren may seeme cast downe, when desperat speeches passe from them, as we see in Dauid. Psalm. 77.10.22.1.2. and Jerem. 15.20. andQui escente ad tempus in ipso deitate, & sensibus carnis, in horendo illo iudicio quod tum subibat, penitus occupatis, in illam petitionem e∣ripuit. Christ himselfe crieth bitterly in the a∣gonies of death, and yet in the end they tread downe sathan vnder feete. Rom. 16.20. VVherefore we must take heede how we cen∣sure these (as the manner of some is) for al∣beit sathan & the flesh rage and storme for a time, et God giueth his children in death it selfe, strength to triumph ouer them by Je∣sus Christ, albeit this is not so comfortablie manifested at all times to our eyes in this present world.
Secondly, we haue here in Job a singular  president and direction for the gouernement of life: so farre surpassing all other instruc∣tions, as the practise of a most diuine and religious man of God, can excell the morall precepts of the best learned men on earth. Chap. 1. and 29.
Thirdly, the Apostle Saint James doth 
 highly commended Iobs patience, chapter 5. And surely whosoeuer shall well consider his condition and place, his pietie and religion, and so take a view of his most strange cala∣mities, hee shall see a man of inuincible cou∣rage and constancie, and such a president for patience as could neuer be seene, J suppose on earth, excepting only in the sonne of God Ie∣sus Christ. Arguments to demonstrate this briefely are these.1. Peter. 2.19.20. First, Saint Peter saith, If when yee doe well, and suffer wrong, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable to God.What praise is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults you suffer it patiently? Jf Job had been an euill man, or of that common sort of indifferent men, his pa∣tience had been commendable in such intole∣rable afflictions: but beeing a man most rare for all piety and sinceritie, an vnspotted ser∣uant of the Lord, one that gaue himselfe no rest in any suspition of sinne, chapter 3. 26. his patience and courage must bee the more admirable, in such extreame calamities. Se∣condly, Job was exceeding rich, chapter 1. 2. 3. and chapter 29. last verse, it were much if a poore man should so endure the heauie hand of God vpon him, for poore men are more ac∣quainted
 with the miseries of this life then the rich, or if being an vpstart from beggerie to some highe pitche of dignitie he could bee content to bee debased & brought to his lowe ebbe again. But a man flowing in wealth, in great honour and estimation in the worlde continually, all his life time full of prosperi∣ty, to bee thus cast downe, all on a sodaine: there must bee in such a one, more then mans strength to holde him vp, and to keepe him from desperation.Iob stands with courage till they wea∣ken his faith.
Jf we desire to know what wrought this courage, constancie, and patience in Job, the Apostle answereth, 2. Cor 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selues to thinke any thing: and againe, I am able to doe all thinges through the helpe of Christ, which strengtheneth mee, Phillip. 4.13. There do conspire against Job as in a league; sathan, flesh, friendes, wife, and all torment him, yet his courage was inuincible,Chap. 3. till Christ left him a little to see his owne frail∣tie and corruptions, then seemeth he as quite broken for a time, as a man forlorne and for∣saken of God.

The last great plague I was greatly com∣forted with this booke of God, and for that J iudged then, as yet J doe, that the euill An∣gels, sent from God, haue a speciall hand and working in the pestilence, as in sundry other Cōsider these places. Psal. 78.49.50. psal. 104 4. Luke. 13.16. Math. 17.15. Mar. 5.25. incurable diseases, and euils of this life, warres, famine, &c. For this cause then, de∣siring to comfort others with the same com∣forts, wherewith God comforted me, J col∣lected these obseruations and meditations following.2. Cor. 1.4. And now trusting that the Lord will giue them some blessing for the vse and comfort of his people, I haue thought it good to annexe them on this manner, as not im∣pertinent, to the former treatise of fasting. The first part of this booke, I haue commen∣ded to a right VVorshipfull Gentleman, who loues the trueth, and the protection of the trueth. These two parts J recommend to you (good Mistris St.) nothing doubting of your fauourable acceptation. J can no way re∣quite your christian loue. The most merci∣full father so fill you with spirituall com∣fort, as J desire to bee comforted in my most neede, and worke in your heart the true sense
 and feeling of his sweete mercies by the ho∣ly Ghost, and open the eyes of your minde, yet more and more by faith to beholde the vnsearchable riches of his sonne Jesus Christ: Amen. Praye for mee, the Lorde Christ blesse and keepe you and all yours.

