



THese holy and heauenly Meditations, were by the Author of them at first, conceiued vpon the occasion of the decease of a reli∣gious Gentleman, with whom hee was much conuersant: Good Wine needeth no Garland, it will praise it selfe: so I perswade my selfe, will this ensuing Sermon, which a learned, holy, and faithfull Seruant of God, formerly, Viua voce, in pub∣lique sounded in your eares, and in the eares of many others, which it furnisht with the best and rarest things which Canaan, Greece, and Rome doth yeeld. There is scarce in the Booke of God, a Mine, that is more rich and abundant in exhorting men to remember their Creator, then the Text handled in this Sermon. This Treatise will affoord good helpe to those that will deigne, diligently to peruse the same. For, herein the learned shall meete with some things not common, per∣haps not to encrease, yet to renew his secret knowledge, and whet his iudgement; and also the godly Christian shall not want wherewith to feed his deuoutest Medita∣tions,
 and enkindle his best affections toward God. But lest I doe seeme like some deceitfull Broker,Laudat venales qui vult extrudere merces, Horat. to set worth on worthlesse Wares, by goodly words; I will leaue the proofe hereof to the judicious, and not fastidious Rea∣ders. I lighting vpon this Sermon, of that both learned and godly Diuine, Master George Hockin (of whose gracious abilitie in preaching Gods Word, and of whose conscionable care in performing his Ministeriall office, many can witnesse) as a poore Orphan Babe of a decea∣sed Friend, for the memorie of its Author, haue ad∣uentured to shew my selfe so farre on this Theater, as to set it forth to publique view, and to make it com∣mon for the benefit of others. I presume, good men will both accept my good meaning, and conne me thanks, who haue set vp for them such a faire and cleere light, to light them on-ward in the way that will leade them to eternall blisse. The Lord grant, that it may haue that successe in such as are religiously affected, which, he that gaue first life vnto it in studying, and brought it forth by preaching, intended, and I in consenting and causing to haue it Printed, desire: so shall young and old, the feeble, weake, and doubting Christian, be taken by the hand, and we all shall be of the number of them which follow Faith, to the conseruation of our soules: which the Lord for Iesus Christ his sake grant. Amen.

