



LIke as the earth was not made to lye wase, and voyde, as arude congested heape, but to bring forth copious store, and that in sundry sortes, of creatures, corne, and fruites: neither those, as to glory in the riches of her owne proper nature, or∣dained, but for the speciall behoofe, vse, and vi∣litie of mankinde: euen so (right worshipfull) is man for mā, and all things for the cause of others, engēdred. Nothing hath a peculiar life. Nothing ioyeth without societie of other.
Wherfore there ought to be one purpose, andCic. o. Iib. 3. inclination in all men, that a like vtilitie, and of all thinges, may be to euery one. Which if any man do snatch vnto himselfe, all hu∣mane felowship is dissolued.
And if nature do praescribe this, that one man should assist, and take care of an o∣ther, if it be but onely for the cause that he is a man, it is necessarie, according to the same nature, that the vtilitie of all things be cōmon. For no man, of wit, or vnder∣standingDemosthenes. Orat. de. Cor. (saith Demsthenes) will suppose himselfe to be borne onely to his father, and mother, but also to his coūtrey. Why, what is betwene? Euen this, that he, who supposeth himselfe onely to be borne to his parentes, expecteth afatall and naturall death: but he, that acknowledgeth his birth to his countrey, rather, then he will see the same in seruitude, shall willingly put him selfe into the handes of death. Which caused that valiaunt young Romane Curtius to prostrate himselfe, headlong, intoTitus Iiu. M. Curtius. the insatiable gulphe of the earth, which sodeinly had opened in the market place, that (I say) he might free, and (as it were) raunsome the whole Citie from the ter∣rour of that monster. With no lesse pietie haue some abandoned themselues, lest, by their own prosperitie, the state of the cōmons might be impaired. As Genutius Ci∣pus,Val. Max. Ii. 5. ca. . Gnutius Cipus. being Pretor, and walking forth of one of the gates of Rome, their sprāg forth of his bead ij. hornes, vpon a soaaine, and aunswere being giuen, that, if he would returne into the Citie, he should be king: he, that it might not come to passe, forth∣with freely cōmaunded him selfe into perpetuall exile. If then it be so, that a solid common wealth is most prosperous, and that is a solid common wealth, whereof the faithfull inhabitantes beare themselues as the true members of it, their natu∣rall body: of duetie ought we that are the partes, to vse, inuent, and communicate that (eche one according to the portion of his talent) amongest ourselues, which may procrastinate the continuaunce of the healthfull state of our body, that is, the common wealth.
And he that endeuoreth nothing to further it, is vnnaturall, like as he that hindreth the same, is, as arotten member, worthy to be cut away. To this saith theI an ib. . do Catone. Poete, commending vnto vs the maners of Cato, that is,


servare modum, finém{que} tenere,
Naturám{que} sequi, patriae{que} impendere vitam,
Nec sibi, sed toti genitum se credere mundo.

Also that deuine Cicero saith, that, to take away any thing from an other, or off. lib. . one man to encrease his owne profite, by the discommoditie of an other, is more cō∣trarie to nature, then death, then pouertie, then payne, or then whatsoeuer may chaūce to our body, or outward things. For if so we be affected, that euery one may catch vnto him selfe, and hide from others, there is loue broken, then is humane so∣cietie buried. It is more laudable therfore, and according to nature (sayth Cicero) to take vpon vs the greatest labour, and molestatios, for the conseruation and hel∣ping (if it may be) of all nations, imitating that same Hercules (whom fame, mind∣full of all benesites, hath canonized, or as it were made a God) then to liue in all se∣curitie: not onely without any griefes, but abounding also in all pleasures, and ri∣ches, beautie, and strength.
Which, ô so sacred a sayeng (right worshipfull) hath made me, quite forgetting my impotencie, willingly to put on armour also against ignoraunce, and boldly to march towardes the castle of Arte, there to offer my seruice to sciēce, the generall. Of one thing being sure, that the armour, which I carie, is most precious and cost∣ly. Wherfore, I shall humbly craue at his handes, that I may, not as an enemy, be re∣ceiued into his gates: and thē, if he shall esteme me vnworthie, or vnhable to carie so costlie and waightie armour, I shall (right gladly) yeld the same, to the vse of some of his valiaunt Captaines: to whom my good will, now shewed by endeuour, is nothing inferiour.
Which good will in deede, is all that I am hable to shewe, and that taken away, my burden might easely presse me to the ground: for considering so ripe a world, such plenty of Artes, such profound wittes, such learned eares, and, there withall, such Tigrish whelpes of Momus pampering, if feare should haue surprised my sen∣ses, and there withall (if it had bene possible) vanquished my zeale, to the vtter ruine of these my labours, the wise would not haue meruailed at all. Good will ther fore may, of right, he called the bulwarke of the commō wealth. For what thing is so hard, that good will maketh not easie? what is so highe, that good will may not reach? what is so worthy, that good will shall not winne? It is loue, it is truth, it is the author of all artes, and the key of all treasure saith Demosthenes. In sine, there. is nothing so highe in the heauens aboue, nothing so low in the earth beneath, no∣thing so profound in the bowels of Arte, nor any thing so hid in the secretes of na∣ture, as that good will dare not enterprise, search, vnclose, or discouer.
And this benefite I am assured my beneuolence shall purchase, that either, be it, others shale moued, to fall, and fashion these my rough forged labours, or els, accē∣sed with the like pietie, and the rather by example hereof, which shall moue them (as it were) to aemulation, to builde a new worke out of the ground, that may, in all thinges, perfourme that, whiche here I haue wished to haue bene fulfilled. Of both which, whether soeuer shali come to passe, my desire shalbe satisfied.
And, howsoeuer it be, I hope the godly mynded will rather prayse my beneuo∣lence thē discourage my want at all. As for those of Marius sect, which euer scorneVal. Max. Li. 5. ca. 6.Manus. Curtus. the noble courage of Curtius: such Syllaes, as alway deride the rare vertue of Ge∣nutius:Sylla, Genutius.

and such Cinnaes, as perpetually laugh at the meruailous pietie of Aelius,Cinna. Ath. what should I force at all? nay, I am farre frō taking care for their endles malice, as that it shall greatly ioy me, if my vertue may shorten their liues. To the which (I hope) all the souldiers of science will hold vp their handes. For although it be so, as the Poete saith,

Invidia vexantur opes: nam{que} optima livoral. Lib. 2.
Quae{que} malus laedens, odit foelicia semper.

Yet vertue is a sufficient spurre vnto vs: and well it is sayd,

Verum age nate tuos ortus, nec bella pavescas. Ital. ib. 13.
Vlla, nec in coelum dubites te tollere factis.

There is one thing also, which ought to be a great comfort vnto the godly min∣ded, that is, that none do persecute vertuous proceedynges, saue onely the enemies4. ad eren. of vertue. And enuy (saith Cicero) of force will accompany vertue. Wherfore, let∣tingDemost. 2. pist. such go as retaine onely the figure of man, since Adversus invidiam nihil prodest vera dicere, & especially time present cānot say well, as Martial saith.

Esse quid hoc dicam, vivis quòd fama negatur,Lib. 5.
Et sua quòd rarus tempora lector amat?
Hi sunt invidiae nimirum, Regule, mores,
Praeferat antiquos semper ut illa nobis.

Whereto also Ouid.

Pasitur in vivis livor, post fata quiescit:ib. 1. Elig.
Tunc suus ex merito quém{que} tuetur honos.

He that intendeth in deede to beare the name of a man, must first consider hisCic. 2. de. nib. birth, and secōdly his calling. For as the horse to runne, the Oxe to plough, and the dogge to hunte: euen so man (saith Aristotle) is borne to two thinges, that is, to vnderstād, & to do, or endeuour: as who should say, we are not borne onely to haue vnderstāding, but also to put it in vse. For els in deede we shall know nothing, but liu in silthy ignoraunce: that the song of the Poete might be verisied, who saith,

Deni{que} nil sciri si quis putat, id quo{que} nescitLucretius Lib. 4, d  nat. Reum.
An scri possit, quo nil se scire fatetur.

Then which abhominable crime, what to be more vnseemely in a man, cānot be declared or thought. But he that detesteth that, and entreth in vnto the vnderstā∣ding of him selfe, accordingly also imploying his time, his calling shalbe to a higher steppe: which likewise shalbe required of him. For therfore sayth the renowmed Athenian Oratour, By how much thou hast a more excellent nature, by somuchDemosth. ex. or. ama. thou exspectest greater dignities, and somuch the rather, I iudge, thou wilt make triall of thy selfe. And surely Cicero supposeth it cannot be in a man to hid his ver∣tue2. de. Finib. in him selfe. Which moued him to say, we are driuen to it of nature, to desire to prosite many, especially in teaching, and reuealing the reasons of wisedome. Ther∣fore it is not easie to sinde such a one, as will not be cōtent to teach that vnto an o∣ther, which he knoweth him selfe. So that we are not onely inclined to learne, but to teach also. And truth it is in deede, for what pietie is in him, that seeth another

out of his way, and will not shew him of it? or what humanitic hath he that car∣nestly vseth his tyme, in gathering together the goodes of vertue, and at length, in one instant, causeth them to perish with his body?
As therfore (saith Demosthenes) he is accompted great and mighty, whom e∣uery. Olinth. 2. one do iudge to make eche thing profitable to him: euē se, by the same thinges he shall be reiected, when he is conuicted to haue done all for the cause of his owne vtilitie. Which thinges cōsidered, I shall not neede to render accompt of my enter∣prise, neither (I hope) to craue the further ance of the godly learned. For although, to discusse the secretes of nature, which are so meruatlous in mās body, it is the har∣dest point in Philosophie, yet is not the difficultie therof such, as ought wholly to terrisie vs from the searche therof: nay, rather it ought to spurre vs forward, to vse more serious diligence therein. Since the payne is not halfe so great, that is ta∣ken in the winning therof, as the vtilitie rewaraeth of that which is obtained.
And albeit this is so worthy a matter, as needeth no authours commendation, and therfore should worthely merite the labour of the learned: yet as Darius de∣nounced. that to be the sweetest draught that euer he dronke, which, in his wea∣rie flight, he had drawne from a silthy standyng puddle, because, it seemeth be∣fore, he had neuer drunke thirstie: euen so, I hope, my labour shalbe thankfully ta∣ken, of all honest Chirurgians, considering the barren draught, that Chirurgerie, throughout the Realme of England, in this present age, endureth: and which can neuer be quenched, by the fruitefull water that sloweth from the fountaines of A∣nathomie. Of which, I haue now endeuoured to turne one cocke. Which faithful∣ly beyng done, accordyng to my might, such as it is, I offer, before all others vnto you right worshipfull, and my most bounden, beseeching you, to accept the dedi∣cation of these my rude labours: which, were they as worthy as Galens, you might of duetie chalenge. Notwithstandyng, whatsoeuer they are, good will is full in them. And that is the rest of my hope, and that is it, which your worship neuer de∣nied. Which cherishing me, I am bold to publish this History of Man, vnder your name, to the benesite of my Christian brethren, the godlie, and toward Chirur∣gians of England.
Whereupon also if your worship, sometyme in Ciceroes ocium (whereto you are much addicted) shall chaunce to looke, no doubt, but you shall take great de∣lite in the matter therof. Which, now also, of force, cōmittyng to the sundry iudge∣mentes of infinite opinions, I ceasse, beseechyng vnto your worship, and all that godly shall vse me, the sweete encrease of all slourishyng vertues: and vnto the rest, the obtainyng of a better mynde in Christ Iesu.

