


IN those dayes (right wor∣shipful)
when the world was
vnfourmed, orders vnproui∣ded,
and lawes not establi∣shed,
but al sortes of men and
ages, enioyed and embraced their own licen∣tious
libertie: Before Princes tooke power,
Magistrates authoritie, and Rulers gouer∣nement:
At what time arte was vnknowen,
miseries vnsearched, and studies neglected,
the people of all Nations liued in beastly and
brutish maner, folowing their own fancie as a
God, and their wil as reason. But after it plea¦sed
God (of his inestimable prouidence) to
illumine the shadowed sight of the world, and
of his diuine pleasure, to inspire and breathe
into certaine of his Creatures, the prudent

knowledge of sapience skill, then wisedom be∣gat
pollicie, pollicie diligence, and diligence
a desire to knowe, so that the woorking of the
one, founde out the nature of thinges, and the
experience of the other, inuented artes for
the vse and practise of the same, whereby
Lawes after were confourmed, Iustice fea∣red,
and rawe thinges ripened, Rules regar∣ded,
Sciēces searched, and misteries vnfoul∣ded.
At this time the worlde began to bud
the blossomes of a delectable fruite, and sowe
the seede of a happie haruest (if worldly de∣lightes
may so lawefully be termed) for eue∣rie
man nowe delighted to excell, all sortes
embraced knowledge, and eche degree labou¦red
to profite his countrie. Yea all men so al∣lowed
labours, and contemned idlenes, that
immediatly all the worlde flowed with libe∣rall
artes and scientiall Artificers. As Phi∣loPhilo.
first brought into Greece, the inuention of
Letters. Polihimnia,Polihim∣nia. had the first vse of
Rethoricke, OrpheusOrpheus. founde Musicke, Zo∣roastesZoroastes.
Magicke, ErratoErrato. Geometrie. &c.
And so farre they searched, that some foūd
out Astronomie, some Astrologie, some Cos∣mographie,
and suche like, some one thing,
and some an other, so that in fewe yeares ther

seemed nothing left in nature vnsearched or
vnknowen. Among whiche Physicke (whom
it pleased God to predestinate a succour and
aide to the vniuersall worlde (though not at
first or presently, yet in space of time, among
manie other thinges, as a princely pearle) was
created, the Theorick part, wherof the most
doe attribute to ApollosInuention of Phisick Appollo. speculatiō, and the
practicke to AesculapiusAEsculapi{us} proofe, so that in
short space it was so sought, searched, and ex∣perienced
in euerie Nation, and so brightlye
displaied her beames to eche Region, that as
Princes could not ceasse to praise and studie
it, neither could the common people leaue of
to worshippe it, but extolled the Artistes as
Gods, and embraced the fruites therof as in∣comparable.
From time to time (right wor∣shipfull)
as it hath encreased, so hath it bene
esteemed vnto this day in great honour, wor∣thy
fame and princely dignitie, and neuer va¦lued
of so litle price, nor prised for so sm
treasure as in this our age and pret daies,
wherin al Natiōs are geue re to esteeme
priuate gaine, then paque cōmoditie, and
more to regarde esser profite, then fauour a
further vtile. Such is the propertie of this
mutable world, and in such wise is it alted

by the course of ages, that where as (in time
past) all expert persones (whosoeuer excel∣led
in any qualitie or propertie) was magni∣fied
to the skies, erecting their pictures in Ci∣ties,
Townes, and Temples, as ClaudiusClaudius. was
in Rome, ArmodiusArmodius in Athēs, and Hanni∣ballHannibal
in the Temple of Pallas, with an infinite
number moe, whom the people thought not
enough commended in woordes, but extolled
their fames by Pictures and Epigrāmes, and
they which with lesser skill, witte, or cūning,
did their diligence, were laudably encoura∣ged,
Contrariwyse, now a daies the best that
write, reape skant commendation, but haue
their woorkes skornefully skanned, and a silly
fault founde, with curious Momes derided,
and the yonger Studentes (who no lesse desier
their Countries commoditie, then hate to
walke in darkenes) are flouted for trifles as
doultishe dreamers, and their woorkes dispi∣sd
as errour holders. My meaning here is of
suche,  haue and doe take paine daily (for
their natural Nations sake) in pēning forth
and openīg vnto ot the secret misterie of
Physicke and Chyrurgeri euealing and pu∣blishing
foorth to al people, tha Talēt which
God hath lent to them, thinking nothing to

worthy whiche may profite others, nor that
any thing ought to pleasure one priuately,
which might benefite many openly: folowing
the old and oft recited saying of Cicero:Cicero. Nō
solum nobis nati sumus. &c. Why should
we wallow thus in disdain? and why is amitie
so furiously fettered? shall Heathens sur∣mount
vs Christians? and shall Tyrauntes
surpasse vs in enbracing the learned? Hyppo¦crateHyppocra¦tes. was so esteemed of the great king Ar∣taxerxes,Artaxer∣xes.
that he coulde neuer procure him
selfe to be merie without his companie. Phi∣lip
of Macedonie,Phil. Ma∣cedo. so regarded Aristotle,Aristotle.
that he called him selfe happie because his
sonne Alexander the great was borne in his
time. And AueroisAuerois. was so beloued of that
Turkishe Emperour and terrible Tyraunt
Bayazet,Bayazet. that (whē he had finished his blou∣die
broiling warres, and rested at his own pa∣laice)
he tooke pleasure in no companie, nor
esteemed any mans councell like to his Phisi∣tion.
A thousand moe examples could I in∣ferre,
wherein the very Pagans seeme to ex∣cell
vs Christians in lauding the learned,
and encouraging all willing fauourers of
learning and sciences. But affection (at this
daye) so ruleth the roste, and disdain stir∣reth

such contempt (among the bleting ba∣bes
of Momus charme) that a slender fault,Tritūest. Inuidia est serra ani∣mi,
or slight escape, they deride without ceassing,
and a learned woorke doth euen sawe their
mindes asunder. For this cause right wor∣shipful)
some perhappes would demaunde of
me, how I dare put penne to paper to entreat
of anie matter or parte of Physicke, conside∣ring
the scrupelous state of time present, to¦gether
with the barrennes of my witte, and
want of learning, or laye in my dishe this say∣ing
of Terence.Terence. Quid dici possit quod nō
dictum sit prius? Wherto I aunswere, tha
neither the curious crackes of the enuious
can staie me, nor yet the bragging boultes of
the vaine glorious, are of force to holde me
backe, since I am moued hereto by three nota∣ble
causes.The first cause. The first is, to pleasure my coū∣trie
and friendes (amongest whom your wor∣ship
is chiefe,) and therefore some fruite of
my pooer painfull practise, are due vnto you,
hoping also, (as other more learned do in the
publishing of their bookes) that these fewe li∣nes
(partly by the study of other good authors,
partly also by mine own experiēce collected)
may vnder your worships protection be defen∣ded
against Sicophantes and faultfinders, of

you, whose witte, prudence, and authoritie (in
this countrie to this respect) is of great force
among vs. This litle labour therefore it may
please your worshippe to accept, as the hartie
present of a friend poore and faithfull, to you
offred this present yeare, of your new Office,
to be a monument to posteritie of that good
will I beare towardes you in woordes, and
would declare the same in deedes (if habili∣tie
were correspondent to my will.)The secōd cause.
Another cause is, for that I protest my selfe to haue set
forwarde and finished this my present enter∣prise,
deuoyde altogether (as knoweth God)
of hautie minde or stout courage, but with so
simple and zelous harte, that neither ill will
with all his mischieuous dartes, vainglorie,
with his pranked pikes, nor enuie, with his so∣dain
shot, are once able to geue me repulse or
touche.The third cause. And the last cause is, the remem∣braunce
of AristotleAristole. his saying, Bonū quo
communius tanto prestantius, So that to
pleasure and profite, other men is best, and
moste to be desiered, but seeing (as the pro∣uerbe
monisheth,) Non datur cuique adire
Corinthū, I shall thinke my penne and time
well employed, if I may profite some men.
One sorte of people there are (and that is the

learned) who are cōmonly geuen to disdaine
the reading ouer of suche simple collections,
chiefly of this part of Physicke, fulfilling the
common saying, Aquila nōcapit muscas
and such peraduenture will litle regarde, or
lesse esteme it then the meaner sort (to whom
this booke is chiefly left) who (I know) wil not
disdaine or despise the perusing of this trea∣tise
of Chirurgerie, as necessarie as the other
(more exquisite) though some of late more
precise then wise haue fondly affirmed, foo∣lishlye
feined, and frantickelye faced that
the Chyrurgian hathe not to deale in Phy∣sicke,
small curtesie is it to breake faith∣ful
friendshippe or attonement, but it is mad
dotage, to parte that which can not be sepa∣rated.
Howe can Phisicke be praised, and
Chirurgerie discommended? can any man
despise Chyrurgerie, and not defame Phy∣sicke?
no sure, he that speaketh euill of the
one, slaundereth both, and he that robbeth the
one, spoileth the other. For although they be
at this time made twoo distincte Artes, and
the Artistes seuerally named, yet sure, the
one can not woorke without some aide of the
other, nor the other practise without the help
of both. For further assuraunce whereof,

learne of Hyppocrates,Gal. li. de tum. pre∣ter naturā De mittē∣do sang. & De meth. medendi. who practised both
together, and in reading Galenes bookes, you
shall clearely see howe they embrace one an
other with firme frendshippe and inseparable
amitie. Without diet (I saie) and purgation,
Vlcus sordidum, or Cacoaethes (with other
like diseases) may not be healed. Herehence
commeth it diuers times, that many men al∣moste
in euerie countrie, decaie and perishe
in the Arte of Chyrurgerie, by the ignoraunt
dealinges of Chyrurgians, vnskilfull in Phy∣sicke.
Hereby also it commeth, that so many
Runnagates and Idle liuers, make such daily
incursions, and ofte entringes into those wor∣thy
and misterious sciences, who durst not
route if they were at vnitie, but that can not
be, so long as this errour is mainteined, that
the one ought not to participate with the o∣ther,
for so neither of them can be perfecte.
Seing that thing is onely perfect, Cui ne mi∣nima
pars quidem deest. Great ruthe and
pitie it is, that so many idle Idiottes and Er∣ronious
Asses, are permitted to practise this
Arte of great difficultie, that requireth so
many helpes and sūdrie knowledge of things,
as the nature and names of diseases, Simples,
Rootes, Plantes, partes of mans bodie, and a

thousand thinges moe, whereof the greatest
sorte of them are vtterly ignoraunt, whereby
they ruine the bodie with their blinde and
desperate dealing, ofte to the vtter subuersiō
of lie: for as the bodie hath neede of the go∣uernement
of the minde, so hath the minde
neede of the seruice and ministerie of the bo∣dy,
which is the Tabernacle of the Soule, and
lodge of the minde.. Pet. A man shall haue ill lod∣ging
or rest in a ruinous dropping house, and
the minde lesse quietnes in a sickely bodie,
which may be through the occasion of locall
Plaster, or Poulder, or Cerote, vnaptly ap∣plied.
Therefore the Poete wysely wished (in
his praier for a frende) Mentem sanam in
corpore sano.Iuuenal. And Galene proueth that the
discrasie of the one infecteth the other: for a
solitarie sad minde maketh a Melancolie
bodie; and a Melancolie bodie engendreth
Melancolie passions of the minde. This Art
therefore well manifesteth the needefulnes
of diuers sciences and qualities, whose sub∣iect
(Et materia circa quam) is mans bodie
worthelie compared to a Citie or common
wealth. For in a Citie there is but one gouer∣nour
(if it be well ruled) and that in mans
bodie is reason, the Prince is placed on high,

or perill of rebellion, as here reason inhabi∣eth
the braine, the prince hath his watchers
nd guarde, so hathe the bodie memorie as
hief councellour with the other senses for
is guarde, retaining wrath in his harte and
oncupiscense in the Liuer, like Pensioners,
o repulse all iniuries, and the minde riffe go∣ng
betwene reason and these affectiōs, which
oresee, and let all commotions or tumultes,
ls the inferiour sauage mēbers, would sone
cale the Tower and dislodge reason their
Prince. But as that commō wealth, who hath
ainefull and circumspecte gouernours, can
aue no common vprore or seditious discen∣ion,
so hath the bodie that is healthfull, like
iligent artificers, to maintaine his quiet
ate, as the stomacke to boyle the meate for
ll the bodie,The body his office. the Liuer to straine and forge
od bloud, the Milte to draine the Melan∣lie, the Bledar vrine, and the Gall Choler,
the Veines conueighe bloud to all partes and
places, the Arteries haue the transporting
of the vitall spirites, and the sinewes, the ani∣al,
whereof commeth all seeling and mo∣ng.
Discords in a Citie, happeneth through
ill and vnrulie rages, and in the bodie
through vile and vitious humors, which vn∣ordinatly

flowe and ouerrunne their place
and must be corrected and chastened diuers¦ly.
For euen as your worship (and such like 
Authoritie) punisheth not all offences wit
one kinde of paine, that is to saie, euerie of
fence is not repaid by death, so euerie discra¦sie
and griefe of the bodie, meriteth not ex¦treme
dealing, nor the daungerous affectes
slight respect, or slowe administration. An
as offenders oft times are rebuked, and ye
pardoned, in hope of amēdemēt, but again taken
in like crime, without grace or repentaunce,
are shortly executed, least their gra∣celes
actes and pernitious counselles should
entise others to like lewdnes of liuing. In lik
manner doth the Arte of Chirurgerie (th
Artist being expert) procure and purchas
healthfull members to the bodie, abating th
malice of euerie humor, so lōg as in due tim
it is followed: but when suche aboundaunc
of rebellous matter, hath so setled it selfe among
the common or exteriour labour i
partes, and so rooted in space of time, that n
ther nature nor medicine can preuaile, th
we chose rather to seperate it from the bod
then to suffer it further to corrupt, since th
olde prouerbe is that, To much pittie m∣reth

a citie, and vntimelie pittie diffe∣reth
little from plain crueltie. This I
speake of suche Vlcered members, as may not
be both cured and also preserued. Notwith∣standing,
that I haue knowen manie in my
time, that haue moste ruinously lost their
limmes by the desperate dealinges of wilfull
wretches, whose ignoraūce hath spoiled that
whiche might haue bene saued, whose blind∣nes
hath marred that whiche the wise could
haue made, and whose wilful arrogācie hath
cut of, that which might safely haue growen
and continued: such as in mēding one grief,
make commonly twoo moe, and the best suc∣cesse
they haue, is chaunce medley, the blind
man so layeth holde on the hare, but no wise
man will preferre happe before cunning, For∣tune
before Arte, or chaunce before reason,
which is the infallible foundation of all sciē∣ces.
To whose iudgement (right worshipfull)
I willingly committe these my labours, know∣ing
that in reasons schoole, neither enuie re∣igneth,
parcialitie ruleth, nor arrogāt fault∣finders
haue accesse, but in their steedes, art,
equalitie, and godly reformation are in grea∣test
authoritie, fulfilling the lawe of Christe
through charitie, which enuieth not, but fur∣thereth

al mē and hindreth none.1. Cor.13. They ther∣fore
that are not able to swimme, may here
with me wade till they haue gotte the cou∣rage
to enterprise further. And notwithstan∣ding
that Vlcers be taken for a base parte in
Phisicke, yet (as QuintilianQuintili∣anus. writeth of
Grammer) Plus recesu praestat quam
fronte promittit. Euerie Art is necessarie,
and eche part of Physicke is needeful: no age
can be without them, no coūtrie misse them,
neither will any nation despise the goodly
creature of God (for so is Physicke in the
booke of EcclesiasticusEccle. 39. named.) The same
God therfore (who instituted this Arte for
the health of mankinde, as also al other sciē∣ces
for our succour) preserue guide, and go∣uerne
your worship (and all other that loue
and encourage the professours of good artes
and godly misteries) the right waye to eter∣nall
blisse and heauenly happines.

