


FOR me O noble and renow∣med Englande to write to thee, that hath bredde and brought for the so many fa∣mous, honourable, wise, and learned menne, who bee not onely moste expert, in all po∣litique gouernement, but also moste happely furni∣shed eache waie, with all maner of knowledge, cun∣nyng and wisedome, throughly seen in all the noble sciences & artes liberall. Bothe thou and thei maie thinke (and thinke it truely) ouer muche boldnesse, and meere arrogancie in me, that neither am furni∣shed of good letters, knowledge, histories, or other meane, to make a plausable waie of that, or for that I wishe should haue good successe at thy handes, or good opiniō at theirs. Muche more I am afraid lest thou hold it outrage and presumption, for me to de∣dicate vnto thee, and trouble thee, with the patro∣nage & defence of this my deuice: a frutlesse thyng

as some maie deme it, before it be throughly consi∣dered of thē. But sithence I am voide of presump∣tion, all maner of waies (God be my record) & am one of thyne owne broode fostered vp with the fatt of thy loynes, and take not vpon me to discourse of vanities, but of the settyng out of part of thy flou∣yng goodnesse, that hath so enbalmed this thy Re∣gion with secret richesse, though a worlde of eyes be poryng in my face, I trust in thyne owne cause, and for thyn owne sake, and goodnesse of the mat∣ter it self, and for sutche reasons and argumentes, as I haue sette doune, to finde a greate nomber of willyng hartes, and well disposed myndes (that with open mouthe will confesse the inuention sound and good, and the meane to bryng it to passe bothe easie and profitable) to further their natiue soile, and the benefite thereof, with this my simple ac∣tion I take in hande, in displeiyng parte of thy ri∣chesse. And therefore the graue and wise menne of this lande, of their good grace and fauour, I trust vndoubtedly will accepte and take in good parte, this my good will and long trauell, and shroude & defende me and my Booke, vnder the winges of their wisedome, as vnder a sure Anker holde, a∣gainst the rashe opinions of those, that rather wil∣fully

then wisely, will imagine no politique proui∣sion can come, from the Skonse of a Soldioure, that hath trailed the Pike. But as God raiseth instru∣mentes to sette out his glorie diuerse waies, and by diuerse degrees. So lette it not bee greeuous to thee O Englande, nor to the better sorte of menne, that one of thyne owne (though not so finely as others) dooe sette abroade parte of thy richesse, wealthe, and glory to enriche thy owne peculiar people with all, and hath opened the golden streame, of thy se∣crete store house, to the Inhabitauntes of the same. But likewise open thou, by thy Deuine prouidence the hartes of the wise, graue, and riche of this land that thei will affecte it, embrace it, putte their hel∣pyng handes to it, and willyngly further it, by all possible meanes thei can, for the common profite of the inhabitauntes. In as mutche as by Gods mea∣nes, so greate a benefite, is offered with small care, little toile, and no coste, to make all this lande bles∣sed, the people therof happie, strong, and inuincible. If I should perticularly discourse the seuerall cō∣modities that flowe from it, in perticularitie, and the nomber of all sortes of people, within this land, that shall bee maintained thereby, I should but wearie you with a long tale, and keepe you from

the matter, I desire you should knowe. Therefore commendyng the goodnesse thereof to your wise∣dome, and me to your fauourable exposition I ende. Yours humbly in all that I maie at commaundemente duryng life, for the honour of prince and coun∣trey.

