



My good Lord,
THat which is the cause, for which many men doe not pub∣lish their labours, is the chiefe cause for which I doe publish mine, the danger of the attempt. I iudged this the choisest proofe, whereby I might expresse how hardy I dare bee, ra∣ther then bee vngratefull. And this courage in mee is but an effect of your goodnesse; a goodnesse not more acceptable for the bountie, then for the circumstances: which ar∣gues
 as much your wisdome, as your fauour. It is a great fauour to satisfie hope: but it is a skilfull fauour to pre∣uent it. Hope giues more speedy con∣tent, then possession does; but hope giues lesse content, then possession giues; nay, it makes lesse the content, which possession giues. Which, your bounty, that well knowes how to ma∣nage it selfe, so well vnderstands, that it delights only in this noble oppres∣sion, To disturbe him, whom it blesses, giuing him happinesse, sooner then the apprehension of it. And yet it is a kind of mercy to giue a man the re∣spite of expectation, though of good things; the sodainnesse of newes, though good, being sometimes dead∣ly. But this is the only mercy, which your goodnesse vseth to deny: yet, for which, whiles your bountie claimes
 thankes from one, your iudgement claimes applause from all. And this is a part of that wisdome, which now hath made you as eminent in the Church, as it hath hitherto made you industrious for the Church. Which honour, as it was begun by your wisdome and zeale, so was it perfected by the wisdome and fauour of our late Souereigne: with whose most acceptable memory, I thought good thus to conueigh my thankes. And this memoriall may bee the more gratefull, since it is an Anni∣uersary not of his death, but of his hap∣pinesse, in the Vnion of his Britanies It was, before, my seruice to his Maie∣sty; but now to his memory: then it ex∣pressed my duty, but now my syncerity; in which only blessing I shall alwayes defend and endeuour an ambitious per∣fection. Nay, this endeauour is already
 at that height, that it may almost make my gratitude fall into the suspicion of pride, whiles it doth wish my meditati∣ons immortall, that so my thanks might be immortall. The only way of cone at that I haue taught my selfe is, not so much in that your bounty did helpe me, as in that your iudgment did choose mee; to make mee a part of your good workes: which, by their nature, must be a part of your ioy euen in death, and a signe of that ioy, which shall be after death. Thus is it as possible for you to lose your good worke, as the necessarie gratitude of

