


MY Reasons can no longer hold out, nor yet my Modesty: Nature indeed hath armed me against Blushing, not against Bashfulnes. Haue here thē this double imperfect Poëm. First, though ill, not all done: Secondly, through all il done. The faults I confes in making (as they be ma∣ny) are mine: the fault in setting forth (if it be any) is yours, & so much the more yours, by how much the more you would haue mine published. It was (if you remember) the worke, or rather the Pastime of one Vacation. Howbeit that can no way iustly excuse me. For (if the Destiny of these leaues should out-spin

Nature in our liues) how should posterity be infor∣med in how short time the same were written? All the writings of old time were as the Testaments of the writers: But most of the writers of our dayes, are as Executors to their writings, not vn∣like Hecuba in the Tragedy, who in her owne life time saw the death of all her children. And to say but truth (had not I beene the more indulgent father) these Rimes of mine (which nigh vpon two yeares haue nowe layen by me) had long since made winde∣ing-sheetes for perfumed gloues in the EXCHANGE. The last Summer I began to put this Infant (then a∣bout some twelue-moneths old) out of his foule and swatheling clowts; and (like our London Nurses, who when they bring their foster-children to be shewed the friends, dresse them vp in their best habilimen) wrote it out curiously with mine own hand, think to haue gone into Scotland and to haue giuen it the King. Towards whom my loyaltie, I was in those dayes as daring to powre into your bosome, as I

found it ready to endeere the same. Your loue to me, and our duty to him gaue vs both confidence therevnto: to speake nothing of particular Interest, his Maiesty and you descended of two brothers, hee from Rob. le Bruse, and you from Bernard. But ill newes carried me into Wales, and vpon my returne Maister Secretary Herbert (with whom was in com∣mission the Noble and gentle Lord Eure, and the right worthy and vertuous Maister Doctor Dun) be∣ing ready to goe into Germany (which was his thir∣teenth publike Employment) I signified to his Ho∣nour the desire I had but once in my life to see the world (for vntill then I had beene alwayes one of the Queenes Decre) and he louingly consented thereun∣to. Beleeue me Sir Rob. hee is the man I tooke him for, and told you of. I will not speake of honors and titles, things (like representations in glasses) actuated by other: but rather of his learning, his wisdome,  honesty, the first and last whereof are goodly Vertues in a man of his Fortune, all three lying with∣in

the spheare of our owne actiuitie. At Amstered in my way homeward (for I returned before their Lordships) I met those good ill-newes of the Queen death, to whose honour and memory (néque me m∣inisse pigebit ELISAE) as by the Preface may appeare I had once entended this first booke of the Praepara∣tion or Praeludium of the loue betweene Owen Tu∣dyr and the Queene. Which Praeface notwithstand∣ing I will haue printed with the rest, that I doe so much right to that dead Lady, sometimes our Soue∣raigne Queene and Mistresse. The very Gospel itselfe (next which no gladder tidings could haue pierced our eares, then that King IAMES his head should be inuested with the Royall Diadem) did allow the Law an honorable buriall. Neither should we fashion our¦selues to such whose affection to her waxed cold be∣fore her body, who thought they had done her a stout piece of seruice that they forsooke not her body before her soule did. I iudge modestly of them all, and hope it was but a longing they had to see his

Maiesty, whom God of his mercy long preserue, lest he, who hath freed vs from one curse of a Kingdome, that is, a Woman, leaue vs vnto another, that is, a Childe. I haue written an Acrosticke Sonet to his Maiestie, a Canzonet to the Queene, and another Acrosticke vnto the Prince; whose Seruant I am by vow, and subordinate Subiect by birth, For I doubt not but his Noble Father will shortly kisse him, and deliuer him the Verge of gold with his Patent, whereby hee is entituled Prince of Wales. Which (though now high in nothing but Mountaines) I hope one day shall be raised by his Graces presence. In whom we claime a double interest, as well by Walter Stewarte, as Owen Tudyr: both of them lineally descended from the most haught and magnani∣mous Princes of Wales. My second booke (if God spare life) of the entertainment of their loue (which I principally vow to the honour of the better parte of his Graces Principallity my beloued Country gentle Northwales, where by the way I am to speake some∣what

of the warres of Owen Glindoure, with the wor∣thy deeds of the two thunder-bolts of warre, the No∣ble Percies) I purpose to consecrate vnto his High∣nesse: As also the third booke of the perfection of their loue vnto the Queens Right excellent Maiestie. For vnto whom should I dedicate the perfection of Loue but to the perfection of Beautie? I speake this but by heare-say, you haue seene her and know I flat∣ter not: from which fault (if from any) I am most free. For in flattery (saith Tacitus) is the foule fault of Sla∣uery, and freedome of speach will be thought Malice. Howbeit after the faire Example of our good friend M. Martin (who with like libertie, as eloquence was not afraide to tell the King the truth) I will so com∣porte my selfe and wade warily betweene both, that I euer carry the heart of a Monarchy, and the tongue of a Common-wealth: the one loyall, the other liberall. In which resolution I end, Commen∣ding this Poëm to the conceipt of the Reader, my selfe to you, and you to God.

