


BEfore the gratious good∣nes
of God, had created
medicine on the earth, be∣fore
(I saye) he vnfoulded
ye misterie therof to world∣ly
wightes, and mortall creatures, no mā
knewe what plantes could preuayle, not
one could shewe the nature of herbes, e∣uerie
man was ignoraunt of the proper∣ties
of simples, many mineralles were
vnknowen, moste gummes vnfound, an
all seedes vnsought. (To conclude) all
natures benefites (that nowe so ofte pre∣serue
and keepe mans healthful state fri¦hurt)
lay hugely heaped in the boisterous

bowels of confused Chaos, distaunt from
light, absent from knowledge, and farre
from doing good. Whiche nowe (being
brought to light by the same almightie
his prouidence) not only ministreth helth
to the sicke, ease to the painfull, pleasure
to the sorrowfull, & health to the health∣full,
but ofttimes as we dailie proue (euē
by fine force) encountreth the merciles
might of fell disseases, and preuenteth the
dreadful dartes of death (whilest the skil∣full
only haue her in vse. But as enuie
that subtile Serpent hateth all vertue,
contemneth all good thinges, and spiteth
the prosperous successe of famous scien∣ces:
so hath she of late procured and stir∣red
vp suche a sort of beastlye abusers, or
diuelishe dissemblers, as (studie onlye to
deceiue the worlde) inuente willingly to
embase the worthy arte, and seke shame∣fully
to slaūder the godly studentes ther∣of.
As it is not vnknowen vnto you (ther∣fore
needeles for me to tell) howe Phy∣sicke
and Chyrurgerie haue in time past
bene renowmed throughout the worlde:
No more is it to you ignoraunt, how litle
it is in these dayes regarded, which if we

compare time present with that is past,
we shall see and plainely perceiue it, ra∣ther
despised (as needles) then regarded
as necessarie, such slender iudgement and
fond affection raigneth at this daye, and
so is the worlde vpside down turned: that
what so afore time hath ben best accōpted
of, the same is now the basest, that which
was principall, is (at this time) ye poorest,
and the chiefest become lest estemed. In
this case (therefore) as I must needes
blame the fickle state of the worlde and
moste of al accuse the fraile estate of mās
nature (I meane the cōmon sorte of peo∣ple,
who are always readie to turne with
euerie blast of Eolus wauering wynde
without stedfastnes or consideration of
righteouscauses) So can I not altoge∣ther
excuse thē, vnto whom authoritie is
geuen, to establishe orders and reforme
malefactours with the causes of offence,
whose onely slacknes, and vntimely cle∣mencie
is the greatest encouragement
that offenders haue. I speake not this as
seeming to cōtroll your worships (know∣ing
you will rightly conceiue, it cōmeth
of a zelous harte) but if the loue of oure
coūtrie, & eminent desolatiō (which might

happē by want of this arte) doe not draw
vs all hereunto, yet (at the least, if wee
loue our selues) we are forste to crie out
vpon abuses, deplore double dealing, and
seke for spedie reformation. Uerie harde
it were for suche a rowte of Rogishe li∣uers,
so boldly to practise, and to fill all
places with the slaunderous shauinges
of their deuelishe practises, were they not
permitted of some (in authoritie) & win∣ked
at of suche as should them punishe.
I doe not a litle marueile also, howe and
by what meanes or merit, so many gette
their authorities or licenses to practise,
when as in examination they (not onlye)
shewe them selues ignoraunt Asses, and
in their workes bussardly beyardes, but
also of them selues altogether disposed to
incontinencie, and dayly dissimulation,
without either feare of God, or obediēce
to their Prince, I (my self) knowe them
at this daie, the moste beastly deceiuers,
and licentious liuers that euer profest a∣nie
arte, (hauing neither knowledge, mo∣destie,
nor honestie, and yet practise their
accustomed deceites, vnder the colour of
admittaunce frō our hal, being (in deede)
farre fitter for the cart thē Chyrurgerie.

Smally shall it auaile ye learned to take
paines, & lesse encourage the willing to
spende their time in opening thinges ob∣scured,
& reuealing misteries vnknowen,
when euerie saucie Sicophant shall (not
only by peuish permissiō) defame vs with
their desperate doinges, & sucke our com∣moditie
with their chattring charmes:
but also wrest & construe our laboures at
their poopishe pleasures, accompting the
best basest, & the worst worthiest (like spi∣ting
spiders, which turne good to badde,
sweete to sower, and bonie to poyson. If
therefore your worshippes woulde pre∣uent
these proude practisers, & plucke vp
these wicked weedes, which thus pollute
the vineyard (as already you haue godly
begonne) I doubte not but more cōmen∣dations
wil growe of the arte in shorte
space then ther was in the time that A∣polloApollo.
first founde it, more estimation thē
when AesculapiusAEscula∣pius. amplyfied it, & more
feruently embraced then in the time of
HippocratesHyppocr. who made it perfect. And
you for discrete gouernaunce & politique
orders shall (not onely) winne a greater
fame perpetually, then either ye Romains
for their hardines, or ye Lacedemonians

for their valiauut courages haue gained,
but also so stimulate & pricke forward the
hartes of mindeful studētes (such as God
be praised, are of late frutefully sprōg vp
amōgst vs) so as they shal rightly accōpt
their trauailes worthely taken, & their la¦bours
wel bestowed. At ye like stay stand
I at this present time, offering these my
loitered labours, to the skanning eies of
the stately world, & abiding (as at a view)
to see if courage wilbe moued (by ye than∣kefulnes
of such godly patrōs as you be)
to resorte to me againe, for recompence,
which then (as I haue here debated of the
curation of Ulcers, as the most necessary
part of Chirurgerie at this daye) I will
shortly (if God lende me life) enforce my
penne to extend her trauaile to the cura∣tiō
of Tumors against nature. In ye mean
time (crauing your worships assistaūce
in protecting these my firste enterprises (so
much as you may) frō ye tēpesteous taūtes
of such witles wisardes as alwayes loue
to finde faultes in the best, & them selues
not amending the simplest. I commende
to you at all time, present health, and la∣sting
ioye in the world to come.
At my house in Nottingham,
the.vi. of Iune. 1575.
