


IT may seeme (right honorable) a gret pre∣sumptiō in me, to haue taken in hand the col∣lection of this Scot∣tish history, and other of diuers regiōs, con∣sidering so many suf∣ficient men as liue in these dayes, far more able to performe the same. But where at the motion of a special frend, I vndertooke to deale therin,Reginald VVolfe. more vpō trust of his promi∣sed ayde than of mine owne abilitie, it pleased God to cal him to his mercy before the worke could be fully brought to end: but yet to answere the expectatiō of his frends, and trust, which he had cōmitted to thē and me in this behalf, I haue done my good will to accōplish part of that, which in his life time was intended, al∣though not to my wished desire, by reason of such wantes as had bene supplied if he had liued to haue seene it published himself. It resteth (right noble Earle) that it may please your Honor to accept my doinges in good parte, to whom I offer this parcell of my trauayles in this Historie of Scotlande, in regarde of the ho∣nour due to your noble Father, for his incomparable valure well knowen and approued, aswel within that realme as els where in seruice of two Kings of most famous memory, Henry the .viij. and Edward the sixte, sounding so greatly to his renowme as

the same can not passe in silence, whilest any remembraunce of those two most perelesse Princes shall remain in written Histo∣ries. I therfore most humbly beseeche your honour to beare with my boldenesse in presenting you with so meane a gifte, procee∣ding from one, although vnknowen to your Lordshippe, yet not without experience of your bountifull goodnesse extended to∣wardes those, to whome I recken myself, most beholden: as what is he within this realme almost of any degree, which findeth not himselfe bounden to your Honour, either in his owne causes or his frendes? for suche is your inclination to pleasure all men, as the same may seeme a peculiar vertue planted in your noble harte, mouing you so much to delite therin, as no time is thought by your Honour better spent, than that whiche you employ in doing good to others. But least I shoulde enter into so large a discourse as might be framed of this and other your excellent vertues (a matter far exceding my simple knowlege) I wil cease to speake further thereof, sith the same is spread ouer al, aswel this as other regions: for no where doe want greate numbers of such as haue aboundantly tasted of your exceeding courtesies. In making you owner therfore of this abstract of the Scottish histo∣ries, I most humbly beseech your honour if any thing be amisse, to impute the same to the imperfectiō and defect of better in∣structions, and with your benigne & fauourable interpretation to haue me therein excused. Suche as it is I addresse it to your good Lordship with so dutiful a mind as may be imagined, be∣seeching God to preserue your honor in long life, with plentiful increase of wisedome, vertue & al wishful prosperitie.

