



My Lord and Gentlemen:
WHen I considered, that All of you are Potentiall Lords, and Actuall Ma∣gistrates; and not onely so, in your severals, but a Society of such: So
 many Members of an Honourable Head (The Lord Major) and so many Heads of the severall Mem∣bers of this Citie, the Metropolis of the most renowmed Kingdome in Europe. Every particular of which considerations, bearing with it a weight of Honour in the ballance of my Iudgement, have moved mee to intayle vpon you all, the Title of Right Honorable; which being the highest and lowest of my ambition in the Dedication of this Treatise, I have made choyce of your Ho∣nors to tender the Patronage unto. Wherein it cannot be imagined, I should have any End of gratifying some favors received, seeing I ne∣ver had occasion to bee acquainted with any of you, in all my life hi∣therto.

Neither may it be safe to acknow∣ledge any such weaknesse in the VVorke, as that it could not walke without such pillers of support∣ment (a common pretence;) For then I should be grosely guilty of dissimulation or ignorance, two such great infirmities, two such soule deformities as I cannot easily determine whether more to ab∣horre.
Neither can I conceit, That your Honours can want any requisite meanes for instruction and directi∣on in the wayes of Godline  in Pulpit or Prs for  were a mistake as manifest .
But my Ends  more Generall, and (of erre not much) more Gen also 
 onely respecting Your owne, but the Common-good.
And for the first. If J spake with the tongue of Men and Angels, I could never enough set foorth the lustre and beauty of that Goodnes, which concurres with Greatnes; nor the misery of that Greatnes that goes unconsorted with Goodnes: The former is instrophiated with the Tytle of Gods vpon Earth; The lat∣ter lyes subject to the tyranny of De∣vils in hell. VVhich deliberation (Right Hon:) when I entred vpon I was abundantly inflamed with desire, that You all might be as gra∣cious as you are Great; And that your vertue & goodnes might march in aequipage with your State and Au∣thority, whereby your Future glory may transcend your present Honour
 as farre as the Sun doth the Earths Center. In which happy possibility although I am ascertained; That some of you are in a high manner, and all of You in some sort seated and stated; notwithstanding could not my zeale & ambition, but de∣sire and indeavor to have a finger in the affaires of this high impor∣tance;Luk. 24.6. And (according to the An∣gels course in the case of our Savi∣ours resurrection) to bee your Re∣membrancer in these things, where∣in (no question) you haue former acquaintance.
Againe, how well it sorts with Persons of great substance, that they be put in mind of the emptinesse and vanity that is in all Earthly things, least their hearts should be
 stolne away therewith. For Sa∣than is malitious, Sinne is subtle, our Corruptions are strong, and wee (since the Great fall) are full of frailty and weakenesse. To which purpose, this subject serves well; not onely, to discover the vnsatisfying Huskes of Earthly Va∣nities; but also, to shew vs that Bread and Water of Life, that immortall Inheritance of the Saints: The onely satisfaction to the soule of Man. A Subject no doubt as necessarie for the Times, as the Times are subject to Necessi∣tie.
2. Concerning the Common-good. If this meane Present may bee entertayned by such Honou∣rable Persons, the benefit will flow
 further than to your owne parti∣culars.
For as it is in Ʋices, that they are more or lesse accounted of, as is the qualitie of him that com∣mits them;Omne animi vitium, c. Iuuenal. Even so it fareth with Graces and Vertues, according to the Poet:
Regis ad exemplum totus com∣ponitur Orbis.
The eyes of the World are whol∣ly bent, eyther for Love, feare, or flattery, vpon the placets, and pra∣ctises of those Great Persons, where it hath dependance or relation. Each being led more by Examples than Precepts.
Which whether it be done by an inward Principle of GODS owne stamping in mans heart (as
 in all other Creatures in their kinde) inclining to that perfection which eyther Authority of Per∣son, meliority of Judgement, or pulchritude of Appearance pre∣sents to the apprehension: Or it come by an Influence from the actions, or persons of Superiours, mooving the minde of the ad∣mirer or intentionate observer; It is rather fit for the Mimeticks to dispute, then for mee to deter∣mine. Certainly our Sensualitie is much mooved with sensible Ob∣jects.
And sure I am, that your Ho∣nours by your godly conversation, and countenancing of good Acti∣ons and intentions, shall not onely shine in your severall Spheares,
 like Starres in the firmament,Firma men∣te stare est firmamenti astero splen∣didor. but al∣so Edifie your soules in your most holy faith, benefit the Church, and people of God,1 Tim. 4.8. bring much Honour to his great name, And make your selves capable of all the promises both of this Life and of that which is to come. Consider what J say,2 Tim. 2.7. and the Lord give you vnderstanding in all things.
One word of the Worke wherin I am not ignorant of divers Tautolo∣gies, which notwithstanding I have admitted, some for their goodnesse, bonum quo communius eo melius; O∣thers for the fitnesse when they fall, considering withall how requisite such repetitions sometimes are to beget a conviction in Iudgement; an impression in memory, the Master-peeces
 of true Knowledge and Wise∣dome.
If the Simple finde fault with the Method, or the Cynicke with the Style, wee seeke neyther of their satisfaction. Jf any bee Con∣tentious,1 Cor. 11.16. wee haue no such custome, nor the Church of GOD.
The more Judicious are more Ingenuous, and by consequence more Courteous also: Together with whom, so your Honours ac∣cept it, who else like not may looke off, if they please. I will say no more for it, than the Pa∣rents sayd on theyr Sonnes be∣halfe whom our SAVIOVR cu∣red,Ioh. 9.21. It is of age to answer for it selfe.
Lastly, the concealement of
 the Authors name carries this benefite therewith; That neyther can the Faults of the one, reflect vpon the other, while hee goes vnknowne.Praestat age∣re dictum, quam actum dicere. Aug. Neyther can hee be counted guilty of, or subject to bee tempted, with that great Ʋaine-glorie, which makes ma∣ny so forward to become foole in Print. So that every way that excellent Proverbe is wor∣thy of all approbation. Quo ob∣scurior, eo securior. Obscurity is the best security against Censure and Selfe-conceipt,Persij Sa∣tyr. 1. Non te quaesie∣ueris extra.
But least my Boldnesse should be burthensome, in that which is spo∣ken before, I have made choyce of St. PAVLS charge, for mine Apolgie.
 Charge them that are rich in this World that they be not high minded,1 Tim. 6.17 and that they trust not in vncertaine riches, but in the living GOD, which gaveth vs abundantly all things to in∣joy. That they doe good and be rich in Good workes,  ready to distribute and communicate. Laying vp a store for themselues,  a good founda∣tion againe the time to come, that they may obtaine Eternall life.
And so I close all with that Doxo∣logie of the Author to the He∣brews.Heb. 13.20. The GOD of Peace which brought from the dead our Lord Je∣sus, the great Shepheard of the sheepe, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,Vers. 21. make you perfect in all good workes to doe his will, working in you, that which is pleasing in his sight,
 through IESVS CHRIST (our Lord) to whom bee Glorie, both now and ever. AMEN.

