



AS my desire (right honoura∣ble) & so also my endeuor, hath to this day beene, both to profite my countrie, by a faithful vsage of my hand in healing manie members therof, in my life time; as also, by publique writings, to fur∣nish nūbers, to greter fitnes in that seruice; euen so likewise at this time, by this pre∣sent book, I haue continued my purpose. Heretofore I haue set foorth, first Anato∣mi, largly shewing the making, number, situation, office, and vtilitie of the parts of mans bodie, being and abiding according to the rule of nature. Then also I printed a general & perticular handling & order of healing such diseases as are incidēt to the same parts, subiect to the Chirurgiōs cure & administration. And now, lest for lacke

of choice of medicines in all those cases, the soile of this worthie Art should seeme to be barren, & not able to yeeld plentifull varietie, to satisfie euery reasonable inten∣tion of the Artist, in the most high & dif∣ficult cures; I haue gathered and published this manuall Antidotarie, furnished as a fruitful medow, with some things seruing to necessitie onelie, & other things affor∣ding delight besides: also as a faire forest which (besides the large scopes & delite∣some chases) conteineth trees likewise of all growths, and required vses: for in like maner, here are medicins, some of thē bit∣ter, biting & painful, seruing wher neither ease, nor delight of taste, but recouerie of health requireth to be cared for. Yea here are medicines, differing in groweth, mak∣ing, & strength: some of speedie, others of lōger preparation, some for new-grown, other for inueterat diseases; some for sim∣ple, others for malign & depraued affects; some to be chosen for the tender & deli∣cate, & others more fit for the rusticall or harder natured bodies. Againe, whereas mens liking of writings, and tasting of

wines, are things verie agreeable to bee brought into cōparison: (for one saith of new inuentions; these are of none aucto∣rity, the ancient deuises are better: another saith of the old, these are stale, the later are fitter for our times & bodies) I haue inde∣uored (as farre forth as I might) to satisfie both affections: for which cause I haue not onely collected out of the best written practises both of old & late yeres, & obtei¦ned of my frends, verie rare & tried medi∣cines, as many as I could, but also, haue (as it were) emptied my self of mine own pe∣culiar furniture, and deliuered of the verie secrets of my practise; lest any thing shuld be wanting, on my part, to the fulnesse of the work. Now if it shall please your Ho∣nor (my good Lord) to voutsafe it a place amōgst those things, that are graced with your worthie name & Patrocine, my en∣couragement shalbe much encreased. And my hope is the strōger herein; not only in respect of that free fauor which your Ho∣nor hath vouchsafed mee (in taking me in to the number of your seruants, & parta∣king vnto me your H. good countenance

and protection; but also in regard, that so necessary a professiō, as is this Art of Chi∣rurgerie, may by this book receiue much furtherance and enlargement: which is a thing that cannot fale of good affection frō your Honor, in so much that your no∣ble minde hath euer delighted in the pub∣lique profit of your countrie. Onelie this shalbe my humble sute with all, that these my present labors, may for this time serue vnto your Honor, & be acknowledged as a tru pledge, & assured signe, of that intire affection, & dutiful minde, which I keep readie to be shewed in whatsoeuer, euen far greter seruice, your H. shal employ me in; or els vntil by the multiplying blessing of the Lord, my selfe may bee able to offer some greter honor vnto your renowmed name. Mean time, rcōmending your H. in my dailie praiers vnto the L. of Lords, & labouring here, to auoid the tediousnes of a long tale, I humbly take my leaue: the 10. of August. 1589.

