


COmmiserable Ladies, this my Letter to M. T. H. lay a while vpon my hands, for want of a conuenient mes∣senger: at last, by conference with a Merchant of Dunkerke, J vnder∣stood there was no way sooner to conuey it to S. Omers, then by your Ladiships meanes, as hauing weekely newes from the English house, which wil hardly admit any stranger, to cōfer with her new Proselytes, whom she masketh vnder counterfeit names. Might J therefore be secured, by the priuiledge of your fauors, not to haue it intercepted by any Ie∣suiticall superuisor, you shall giue mee iust cause to pay you the tribute of my best seruice.
J am the bolder to solicite you herein, for as much as I first came to the view of his Mo∣tiue, by one of your neere followers, who gaue
 me also to vnderstand, how great those Ie∣suites are in your books. Had I no other thing to write, these tidings would yet haue set my pen on worke.
Jn sooth, my respectiue care of your wel∣fare enforceth me exceedingly to grieue, that you, who haue been baptized since the super∣stitious Romish Rites were abolished; ha∣uing seene this inuincible faith now fully set∣led; being so noblie descended; and religious∣ly trained vp, should so prostrate your selues to that Antichristian beast, whose spotted skin, and alluring sent leadeth into the den of destruction. I could wish his Seminaries had lesse subtiltie, or you more constancy. You may wel thinke, were their grounds of such sound∣nes, as they beare you in hand, they would not so busilie swarme about your sexe, which, by reason of your lesse abilitie of iudgement, is soonest inueigled with their wiles. Your own Prateolus hath giuen them an hint of the eagernes of your affection, of the pitifulnes of your inclination, what fit instruments you are, both for your sundrie opportunities, and many intelligēces, to serue their turne: so that
 if they once win the night-crow, to sing their dittie, then make they no doubt, but that the whole house will soone dance after their pipe.
Hauing once diued into your secrets, dis∣contents, qualities, and affaires, it cannot be long before they rule the rost: Scire volunt secreta Domus, at{que} indè timeri: they wil make you sure for slipping the colar, without some great disaduantage. Jf they find in any of you quicknes of spirit, boldnes of stomacke, or volubtiltie of speech, she shall be employed, as their Agent, (as not long since some of you haue been, though in vaine, vnto two noble personages now deceased) to deale with such, whom either crosses haue distracted, or sick∣nes weakened; where they themselues can haue no accesse: by which meanes their in∣fection spreadeth it selfe on euery side.
Hence it is, that throughly to possesse them∣selues of your fauour, they will pretermit nei∣ther time, nor meanes; yea they will not stick to set out our Ladies picture, (as one of your sprite-speakers did) with one of your best fa∣ces, if that may gaine your assent.
VVhat will be the issue of this your blind
 and factious zeale, J refer me to your selues. Js there any hope you should euer be better resolued, as long as you must neither pollute your eyes with our bookes, defile your eares with our Sermons, nor grace our Churches with your presence?
You much trouble your selues about the Antiquitie of our Church, which you are no lesse vnable to conceiue, then vnwilling to be∣leeue. J would to God, you would not be wise aboue that which is fit: Quid quod libelli Stoici inter sericos iacere puluillos a∣mant? S. Paul teacheth you to aske (not to grieue) your husbands at home. Salomon would haue you giue the portion to the houshold, & the ordinarie to the maids, to open your mouths with wisdom, and to haue the law of grace in your tongue: Then should your husbands be knowne in the gates, when they sit amongst the Elders of the Land. VVhereas now, being kindled with those hellish Mercurialists, the flame of this your intemperate zeale presa∣geth, nay threatneth the vtter desolation of your whole stocke.

Might it please you to consider the infi∣nite expence, which these chargeable encro∣chers, the Iesuitical drones, sucke out of your estates; your monethlie checker-payments; the danger of forfetting your ioyntures; the incapabilitie of suing in any of his Maiesties Courts; the griefe of your neere Allies, and deare friends, for the declining hopes of your ruinous posteritie; or at the least your owne infamie, wherewith you are generally bran∣ded, your houses being held as nurseries of poisonous weeds, and pestilent plants; your tenants, and attendants promising no great safetie to the King, nor peace to the State, nor tranquillitie to the Church: Might it, J say, please you to ponder these things aright, it is vnpossible you should be so inconsiderate, as to buy a fantasticall, J will not say, a fanati∣call humour, at so high a rate.
VVhy should you be so respectlesse of those worthy Gentlemen, your husbāds, as to cause their honors to be eclipsed, their loyalty suspe∣cted, and their aduancement hindred, by your recusancie? How do you think he should be re∣puted wise, who can no better order his owne
 house? How should he be held fit for gouern∣ment in the State, who cannot bring those that are so neere him to the conformitie of the Church?
How these things may affect you, J can not tell: happily as you generallie distaste all that is not of your owne stampe, you will passe them ouer, with a disdainefulleie, still stai∣ning your selues with your owne works, and going a whoring with your owne inuentions. Herein shall you more harme your selues, then hurt me, who for my friendly aduertisement desire no other be one, then the deliuerie of this letter enclosed. Fare you well. From my house in the Blackfriars. May 20. 1609.

