


THe pure worship & ser∣uice of God (right wor∣shipfull) hath two dan∣gerous extremes, super∣stition is the one, impie∣tie is the other. The people of this age seeming wise, to auoide the vnsauerie leauen of popish corruption, are fallen asleepe in carnall securitie & prophane∣nes. If the prince of darknes had not so blinded men, that they can not see the beautie of Gods house, nor reape any comfort by his seruice, this exercise of fasting should little need any letters of commendation. For the booke of God so commendeth it in the practise of the
 Saints, Patriarches, Kings, Prophets, A∣postles, and Church stories in the fa∣thers and seruaunts of God in all ages: that I can thinke a man but meanely ac∣quainted with Gods worshippe, which doth not otherwhiles exercise himselfe herein. This wil good Bucer testifie with me in these very words:Buer de regno Christi lib. 1. cap. 12. Cum ieiunia Do∣minus ipse & Apostoli tantoperè Ecclesiijs commendârunt: de Christi certè spiritu, & regno gloriari non possunt, qui omninò nulla seruant ieiunia. That is, Seeing the Lorde himselfe and his Apostles haue so commen∣ded fasting to the Churches, surely they can not glory of Christes spirite and kingdome which fast not at all. I haue endeuoured in this treatise to lay open this exercise to the vnderstanding of the simple, in the best maner that I could. I must look for many aduersaries, for the greatest part hath euer declined from pietie to superstition and prophanenes. There∣fore (right worshipfull) I come vnto you for protection of Gods trueth: be∣ing the more bolde to aske this fauour,
 because I am so well assured of your loue thereunto, and full resolution to defend the same with al your might du∣ring life. Againe, I haue nowe for ma∣ny yeares knowen your Christian loue towards me for the truths sake, I desire to testifie my hearts affection towardes you in the best manner that I can. The most blessed spirit of Iesus Christ guide and gouerne your spirit, keepe and comfort you and all yours. Februarie. 12. 1596.

