



AMong other accidents of this mortall life (right graue, worthy and learned Doctour) this is one, to build and not to inhabite, to plow and not to see the haruest, to purpose and not to attaine the end of our designes, to write and compile bookes and studies, and not to liue to publish them. So hath it beene with Lawyers, Phisitions, Philosophers, Linguists & Diuines, & among other in late times, with that most learned man Chemnitius a German Diuine, who after he had vndertaken that worthy work of the Harmony of the foure Gospels, which by the opinion of one of our grauest & learnedest Diuines, Doctour Whitaker was called Caput veneris. For that (in his iudgement) hee hauing but entered to speak and write of the head of the Gospels, namely, Christs incarnation & some few miracles and sermons, laid vnmatchable grounds, as it were the colours that none could imitate, afterward before the worke was one quar∣ter performed, to the great losse, not onely of the learned, but of all Christen∣dome, was taken out of the miseries of this present world. Among English Diuines (that I may not presse you with any vnnecessary relations, because you loue singlenes and plainnesse) it was also the lot of as godly & discreete a preacher as any I euer knew in my daies, to draw his last breath before he could effect to his content, the publication of sundry his experimentall works & obseruations, about afflicted consciences and troubled or contrite minds, I meane master Greenham. But as God would not giue the Land of promise to Abraham, but to his seed and children, and as Moses might not enter into Canaan, but see it a far off: so it fared with these men, they saw their wished desires, like Palinurus watching and waiting the returne of his ships, although they dyed before their perfection, and therefore their names are their heires, and God stirred vp learned men to set forth to the world their intended, learned and godly labours, for Lycerus published Chemnitius, & master Holland a preacher late of S. Brides in London, did the like for master Greenham. Now all things haue their course and reuolution. Iron sharpeneth iron, so doth man sharpen the face of his friend. He that keepeth the fig-tree shall eate of the fruit thereof, and he that waiteth vpon his master shall come to honour. As in the wa∣ter face answereth face, so the heart of man to man. Pro. 27.17.18.19.
 That is, they prouided for themselues which thus regarded other men, & as Rahab by entertaining the spies of Israell, deserued to bee regarded by Israell at the sacking of Iericho, so haue these men, to haue the like done for them, that they did for other.
There came vnto my hands about halfe a yeere past, a treatise or coppy bearing title, The foure-fold state of Adam, compiled by master Holland aforesaid, and allowed by authoritie to be printed. But it seemed the work wanted the father, (be it spoken without offence) for it was not well clo∣thed, cowched, or bound vp together; and besides, of the foure esttes pro∣pounded in the title, it wanted one. It had passed through the veiw of many learned men, euery one approuing that which was done, and none helping to bring it to some perfection: at last my friend the Printer (ha∣uing a desire, first, for the glorie of God, and good of the Church: second∣ly, for the releife of the poore widdow and many fatherlesse children) mee∣ting with it, freely vndertooke the charge and aduenture (which cannot be small) to imprint and set it forth to the world. But finding no coherence in the matter, nor pleasant order in the manner, (the margents of the cop∣py being greater, or as great as the booke) was forced to breake off, and leaue that enterprise: and so offred the same to me, praying my help (which God knoweth is weake) to contriue it and bring it into such a fashion as might be plaine, and intelligible to the English Reader; I accepted the la∣bour at the first, not weighing the wants, but thought onely to supply in it the place of a Correctour. And therefore reading it, I found many things in the margent which were ordained for the page, and because I found in it a great number of pithy & substantiall points curiously and not vulgar∣ly handled (like able souldiours wanting a Marshall, or like the beauti∣full limbes of a naked body lacking garments) I strained my selfe, for the honour of God and my loue to the dead, both to marshall all things accor∣ding to his meaning (so neare as I could) and also to put vpon his father∣lesse Orphan, such garments and attire as my poore abilitie could prouide. But when I had gone through it, and found a maime at the last (for the good man was first of all called to the glorie of heauen, out of this world, before he had or could expresse it in his intended treatise) I knew not what to doe, but stood still, amazed and perplexed, thinking with my selfe, that if it should goe forward without the legs, it would be refused for an impo∣tent: If I should adde vnto it and not expresse my addition, those learned men which had formerly seene it, would condemne all for counterfaite: If it should stand still and not go forward, the Printer might be discouraged
 in some other such charitable course: And to thinke that the Authour had left that part in some other of his bookes and labours, and there to looke for it, was as if I should haue wished him aliue to end his owne worke, & why should I doe so good a man such wrong as once to desire his presence on earth? who already before me was gone to heauen, rather I will trot out my purgatory paines, and runne out my race for him on earth: These were my thoughts then in priuate, which now I publish to the world. And to you before all other most worthy, learned, and admired Deane, for as hee when he liued, preached these things at the Church of Saint Brides (which is an appurtenance of your Collegiate Church, whereof he was Pastour, so also doe I eate my bread vpon your allowance, in another possession of yours, wherein I make knowen to the world, and doe hereby desire men that are now aliue, and those that shall be hereafter borne, to take knowledge of your care for the good instruction of the soules of such flocks, as Law and Au∣thoritie haue in former times appropriated to your Church of Westmin∣ster. I may not exhort you, it were boldnesse, although I know your hum∣blenesse would beare it. This is your due, and receiue it as a Theologi∣call guift from a dead man, patronage it, for so much as is master Hol∣lands deserueth fauour, and for the residue which is mine, it craueth par∣dou. You loue the Church and euery diuine thing, and therefore I haue presumed to prefixe your name in the front of this diuine worke, that both learned and godly which shall euer see or read it, may know your pietie & zealous affections, and pray with mee for the encrease of your fauour both with God and men, for your supportation by the holy Ghost, for your fur∣ther aduancement to the good of God his Church, for the length of your daies to bee passed in quiet and contented health, and for your blessed and assured entrance into that which the later end of this treatise descri∣beth, namely, the kingdome of heauen. Amen. From Saint But∣tolphes Aldersgate, September. 22. 1606.

