



THE Scriptures of God (right Honourable) in sundrie
places, doe most euidently teach vs, that there are two
spirituall kingdomes in this world, which haue conti∣nual
hatred & bloody wars, without hope of truce for
euer The Lord and king of the one, is our Lord Iesus,
the tyrannical vsurper of the other, is Sathan, Again,
this also we are as clearely taught, that all men liuing
without exception, are eyther true subiects of the one,
or slaues vnto the other. For albeit, the Neuters of this worlde, dreame that
they may indifferentlie view the scarres and woundes of other men, and ne∣uer
approch neere those bloody skirmishes: yet the truth is, they are fowlie
deceiued: for the great Lord and King hath said with his owne mouth,Matth. 12. 30. Hee
that is not with mee, is against mee. Wherefore, all that build not vp, as much as
in them lyeth, the kingdome and Citie of God, and batter downe the holdes
of Sathan, must be numbred with the rebels and enemies of our Lord Christ,
when the warrefare shalbe ended. The enemies of Christ haue euer beene
many, some open, cruell, foes without: some subtill, close conspirators with∣in
the house of God, most daungerous vnderminers of the Citie of God, if
they be not discouered. In this secret conspiracie, albeit Sathan haue many
Champions, and many artes, mille artes, mille nocendi modos: there is no
arte more effectuall and dreadfull in my iudgement, then those his wic∣ked
faculties in Witchcrafte. I haue indeauoured (right Honourable)
in this small Treatise, according to my poore strength, to shewe the

principall meanes ordained of God for to confound and to discouer them. I
doe here therefore humbly aske your Honourable protection, for the defence
of the trueth and the glory of God, against all the patrones of all such vile
artes, and horrible abhominations. Thus doeing, your Honour shall not
onely encourage me, but also, imbolden others, which are better able, and wil
be willing also, to lay open the secret delusions and practises of Sathans in∣ventions.
Nobilitie without godlines and vertue (as your Honour well know∣eth)
is blood indeede, as a learned man speaketh, but blood without bones
and sinewes. I knowe therefore that to increase in your Honour true Nobi∣litie,
you are well assured, that it principally standeth in purchasing vnto
Christ and his Church, true honour and glorie, and in beating downe
(as much as in your Honour lyeth) all the holdes of Sathans
kingdome. God increase in your heart (right Ho∣nourable)
all his good graces to his glory,
your own saluation, and the benefit
of his Church. Amen. The
yeere of our saluation.
1590.

