


Mr. F. H. I haue pervsed your sermon; for the plainenes of words and sentences like your selfe, who naturally are an enimy to curiosity. For matter sound, and the doctrine necessary, both for the time, & especially for that place. I knowe what tumultuous rumors it bred; and how it was by many more hainously taken then either heresie or treason: how they traduced you and imagined what evill they could a∣gainst you, as both many in that Citty and the whole Country a∣bout can well witnesse. And yet as you said you knewe no cause why, vnlesse it were for that one voice which you vrged among them to wit Obedience, a word indeed harsh sounding in the eares of humorists, and especially to them in that place, who chal∣lenge  by prescription. And howsoeuer me thought, you touched them more neere the quick, the last time you prea∣ched there before, which was at the last Visitation of the late re∣verend Bishop deceased, yet this was more hainously taken; for they say that none but you, euer durst presume so much in that place being a stranger, to preach a doctrine which before hand you knew would be so offensiue; and where as ignorance of their humors at first might be some excuse, yet this now must needs be great presumption. If the whole Citty should bee gouerned by men of that faction, there would be an odde gouernment. As ap∣peared a yeere or two since, when some of them were in speciall autority: one of them pulled downe the picture of Christ from the market crosse, as a monument of superstition, hauing beene there many many hūdred yeeres; & placed in the rome the pict∣ure of an naked womā without superstitiō, til many of the graue ancients of the Citty seeing the absurdity; caused it to bee taken down & the Princes armes to be set in place. Another broke in peeces and defaced the picture of a doue which had hung ouer the font, time out of minde. No marvell therefore if that sort of giddie heads would haue pulled you out of the pulpit, as since
 some of them haue professed, they had purposed. That it may ap∣peare vnto all men what this sermon was, that raised such an∣ger, I haue published it not altogether against your minde, that it might answere for it selfe. And knowing that you owe even more then your selfe to that worthy Gentleman your Patron, I haue prefixed his name by way of Dedication; without other epistle, for I knowe if you were to write vnto him your selfe, you could neither expresse your harty affection towards him, his de∣serts towards you, nor his worthinesse, as well for the execution of iustice in his place, as for his vprightnesse every way, for his setled iudgement in religion and his integrity of practise, gi∣uing himselfe an example of obedience in all things. God blesse your studies that you may profit Gods Church and present him your selfe with greater matters hereafter.
Those few things which you adde in the ende, which you told me you could not then deliuer for want of time; I haue marked them with this marke,, in the margent that no caveller may find shew to except that this is not the same which you deliue∣red.

