



NOt forc't by fortune; but since your free minde
(Made by affliction) rests in choice re∣sign'd
To calme Retreate; laid quite beneath the winde
Of Grace, and Glory: I well know, my Lord,
You would not be entitl'd to a word
That might a thought remoue from your Repose,
To thunder and spit Flames, as Greatnesse does;
For all the Trumps, that still tell where he goes.
Of which Trumps, Dedication being One,
Me thinks I see you start to heare it blowne.
But this is no such Trump as summons Lords,
Gainst Enuies steele, to draw their leaden swords,
Or gainst Hare-lipt Detraction, Contempt,
All which, from all Resistance stand exempt,
It being as hard to seuer Wrong from Merit,
As meate-indude, from blood; or blood from spirit.
Nor in the spirits Chariot rides the soule
In bodies chaste, with more diuine controule;
Nor virtue shines more in a louely Face;
Then true desert, is stuck off with Disgrace.
And therefore truth it selfe that had to blesse
The merit of it all, Almightinesse;
Would not protect it, from the Bane and Ban
Of all Moodes most distraught, and Stygian;
As counting it the Crowne of all Desert,
Borne to Heauen, to take of Earth, no part
Of false Ioy here, for Ioyes-there-endlesse troth,
Nor sell his Birthright for a messe of Broth.
But stay and still sustaine, and his Blisse bring,
Like to the hatching of the Black-thornes spring,
With bitter frosts, and smarting haile-stormes forth;
Fates loue Bees labors; onely Paine crownes Worth.
This Dedication calls no Greatnes then,
To patrone this Greatnes-creating Penn;
Nor you to add to your dead calme a breath;
For those arm'd Angells, that in spight of death
Inspir'd those flowrs that wrought this poets wreath
Shall keepe it euer, Poesies steepest Starr,
As, in Earths flaming wals, Heauens seuenfold Carr,
(From all the windes of Neptunes watrie sphere)
For euer guards the Erymanthian Beare.
Since then your Lordship, settles in your shade
A life retir'd; and no Retreate is made
But to some strength; (for else, tis no Retreate,
But rudely running from your Battailes heate)
I giue this, as your strength: your strength, my Lord,
In Counsailes and Examples, that afford
More Guard, then whole Hosts of corporeal powre,
And more deliuerance, teach the fatall Howre.
Turne not your medcine then, to your disease,
By your too set, and sleight repulse of these,
The Adiuncts of your matchlesse Odysss;
Since on that wisest minde of Man, relies
Refuge from all Liues Infelicities.
Nor sing these, such diuision from them;
But that these spinn the thred of the same streame,
From one selfe Distaffs stuff: for Poesies Pen
(Through al theames) is t'informe the liues of Men:
All whose Retreates, neede strengths of all degrees;
Without which; (had you euen Herculean knees;)
Your foes fresh Charges, would, at length preuaile,
To leaue your Noblest suff'rance, no least saile.
Strength then, the Obiect is of all Retreates;
Strength needes no friends trust; strength, your foes defeates.
Retire to strength then, of eternall things,
And y'are eternall; for our knowing Spring's
Flow into those things that we truely know;
Which (being Eternall) we are render'd so.
And though your high-fixt Light passe infinite farr
Th'aduicefull Guide, of my still-trembling Starr;
Yet heare what my dischardg'd Peece must foretell,
Standing your Poore, and Perdue Sentinell.
Kings may perhaps wish, euen your Beggars Voice
To their Eternities; how skorn'd a choice
Soeuer, now it lies; And (dead I) may
Extend your life to lights extreamest Raie.
If not; your Homer yet, past doubt shall make,
Immortall, like himselfe, your Bounties stake
Put in my hands, to propagate your Fame,
Such virtue reigns in such vnited Name.
Retire to him then, for aduice, and skill
To know, things call'd worst, Best; and Best most ill.
A fimile illu∣strating the most renownd seruice of Ge∣nerall Noris in his Retreate before Gant, neuer before made sacred to Memorie.Which knowne; truths best chuse; and retire to still.
And as our English Generall, (whose Name
Shall equall interest finde in T'House of Fame,
With all Earths great'st Commanders) in Retreate
To Belgian Gant, stood all Spaines Armies heate,
By Parma led; though but one thousand strong:
Three miles together thrusting through the throng
Of Th'Enimies Horse, (still pouring on their Fall
Twixt him & home) & thunderd through them al:
The Gallick Monsiour standing on the wall,
And wondring at his dreadfull Discipline;
Fir'd with a Valor, that spit spirit Diuine:
In fiue Battaillons randging all his Men;
Bristl'd with Pikes, and flanck't with Flanckers ten;
Gaue fire still in his Rere, retir'd and wrought,
Downe to his fixt strength still: retir'd and ought;
All the Battaillons of the Enemies Horse
Storming vpon him still, their fieriest Force;
Charge vpon Charge laid fresh: he fresh as day
Repulsing all; and forcing glorious way
Into the Gates; that gaspt (as swounes for Ayre)
And tooke their life in, with vntoucht Repaire:
So fight out (sweet Earle) your Retreate in Peace;
No ope-warr equalls that, where priuie Prease
Of neuer-numberd odds of Enimie
Arm'd all by Enuie, in blinde Ambush lie,
To rush out, like an open threatning skie,
Broke al in Meteors round about your eares.
Gainst which, (though far frō hēce) through al your Reres
Haue fires prepar'd; wisdome, with wisdome flanck,
And all your forces randge in present ranck;
Retiring as you now fought in your strength,
From all the Force laid, in times vtmost length,
To charge, and basely, come on you behind.
The Doctrine of all which, you here shall finde,
And, in the true Glasse of a humane Minde.
Your Odysses; the Body letting see
All his life past, through Infelicitie,
And manage of it all. In which to friend,
The full Muse brings you both the prime and end
Of all Arts ambient in the Orbe of Man;
Which neuer darknesse most Cimmerian
Can giue Eclipse; since (blinde) He all things sawe
And to all, euer since, liu'd Lord, and Lawe.
And though our mere-learn'd mē; & Modern wise
Taste not poore Poesies Ingenuities,
Being crusted with their couetous Leprosies;
But hold her paines, worse then the spiders worke,
And lighter then the shadowe of a Corke;
Yet th'ancient learn'd; heat with celestiall fire,
Affirmes her flames so sacred and entire;
Vt non fine Maximo fare Dei comparari nqueat. Pla. in Ioue.That, not without Gods greatest grace she can
Fall in the wid'st Capacitie of Man.
If yet, the vile Soule of this Verminous time;
Loue more the Sale-Muse; and the Squirrels chime,
Then this full sphere of Poesies sweetest Prime;
Giue them vnenuied, their vaine veine, and vent;
And rest your wings, in his approu'd ascent
That yet was neuer reacht; nor euer fell
Into affections bought with things that sell
Being the Sunns Flowre; and wrapt so in his skie,
He cannot yeeld to euery Candles eye.

