



SIR,
YOur kind acceptance of a for∣mer
testification of that respect
I owe you, hath made mee ven∣ture
to shewe the world these
godly Sermons vnder your
name. In which as every point is
worth observation, so some e∣specially
are to bee noted. The
first, that as the spirit of Prophecie is from God him∣selfe,
who doth inwardly heate, and enlighten the
hearts & minds of his holy Pen-men, (which if some
would diligently consider, they would not puzzle
themselues with the contentions of Scot, & Thomas,
Whether God only, or his ministring spirits doe infuse in∣to
mens minds propheticall revelations, per species intelli∣gibiles)
so God framed their words also. Whence the
holy FatherLib 4 ca 6. de doct. Chr. S. Augustine religiously obserueth, that
al those, which vnderstand the sacred writers, wil also

perceaue, that they ought not to vse other wordes,
then they did, in expressing those heavenly mysteries
which their hearts conceaved, as the Blessed Virgin
did our Saviour, By the holy Ghost. The greater is Castel∣lio
his offence, who hath laboured to teach the Pro∣phets
to speake otherwise, then they haue already.
Much like to that impious King of Spaine, Alphon∣sus
X, who found fault with Gods workes,Rob. Tolet. l. 4 cap 5. Si, in∣quit,
creationi affuissem, mundum meliùs ordinassem, if
he had beene with God at the creation of the world,
the world had gone better, then now it doth. As this
mā foūd fault with Gods works, so did the other with
Gods words. But because we haue a2 Pet. 1. most (ure word
of the Prophets, to which we must take heed, I wil let his
words passe with the wind, havingPaef in orat. D. Rainold. elsewhere spokē
to you more largely of his errours, whom notwith∣standing,
for his other excellent parts, I much respect.
You shall moreover from hence vnderstand, how
Christianitic consists not in formall, and seeming pu∣ritie
(vnder which who knowes not notorious villa∣nie
to maske?) but in the heart root. Whence the au∣thor
truly teacheth▪ that Mockers, which vse religion
as a cloake to put off, and on, as the weather serveth,
are worse then Pagans and Infidels. Where I cannot
omit to shew, how iustly this kind of men hath beene
reproved by that renowned Martyr of Iesus Christ,
B. Latimer; both because it will bee apposite to this
purpose, and also free that Christian worthy from the
slaunderous reproaches ofParsons in 3. Convers. him, who was, if ever a∣ny,
a Mocker of God, Religion, and all good men. But

first I must desire you, and in you all Readers, not to
thinke lightly of that excellent man for vsing of this,
and the like wittie similitudes in his Sermons. For
whosoever will call to minde, with what riff-raff
Gods people were fedde in those daies, when their
Priests,Malac. 2 7. whose lips should haue preserued knowledge,
preached nothing else but dreames, and false miracles
of counterfeit saints, enrolled in thatCanus locor. lib. 11. c. 6 Vi∣ves lib. 2 de cor¦rupt. art. Hard. lib 4. Detect. sottish Legend,
coined & amplified by a drowsie head betweene slee∣ping
and waking. He that will consider this, and also
how the people were delighted with such toies (God
sending them strong delusions, that they should be∣leeue
lies) and how hard it would haue beene for any
man wholly and vpon the suddaine to drawe their
minds to another bent; wil easily perceaue, both how
necessary it was to vse symbolicall discourse, and how
wisely, and moderately it was applied by that religi∣ous
Father, to the end he might lead their vnderstan∣ding
so farre, till it were so convinced, informed, and
setled, that it might forget the meanes and way, by
which it was led, and thinke only of that it had acqui∣red.
For in all such mysticall speeches, who knows not
that the end, for which they are vsed, is onely to bee
thought vpon?
This then being first considered, let vs heare the
story, as it is related by Mr Fox: Mr Latimer,Pag. 1903. edit. 1570. saith
he, in his sermon gaue the people certaine cardes out of the
fift, sixt, and seaventh Chap: of S. Matthew. For the chiefe
Triumph in the cards, he limited the Hart, as the principal
thing that they should serue God withall, whereby he quite

overthrew all hypocriticall and externall ceremonies, not
tending to the necessarie furtherance of Gods holy word &
Sacraments. By this he exhorted all men to serue the Lord
with inward heart and true affection, & not with outward
ceremonies, adding moreouer to the praise of that triūph,
that though it were never so smal, yet it would take vp the
best coat card beside in the bunch, yea though it were the
king of Clubbes, &c. meaning thereby how the Lord would
be worshipped and served in simplicitie of the heart, and
verity, wherein consisteth true Christian religion, &c.
Thus Mr. Fox. By which it appeares, that the holy
mans intention was to lift vp the peoples hearts to
God, & not that he made a sermon of playing at cards,
and taught them how to play at Triumph, & plaied (him∣selfe)
at cards in the Pulpit, as that base companion
In the third part of 3. con∣versions of Eng¦land: in the Ex∣amine of Foxes Sainte, cap. 14. §. 53. 54 p. 215 Parsons reports the matter in his wonted scurrilous
vaine of rayling, whence hee calleth it a▪Sect 55 Christmasse
Sermon. Now he that will thinke ill of such allusions,
may out of the abundance of his follie iest at Demo∣sthenes
for his story of thePlut in De∣mosthen. sheepe, wolues, & dogs,
and atLiv. dec 1. lib. 2. an. V. C 60 Menenius for his fiction of the Belly. But, hinc
illae lacrymae, The good Bishop meant that the Ro∣mish
Religion came not from the heart, but consisted
in outward ceremonies: which sorely greived Parsons
who never had the least warmth or sparke of hone∣sty.
Whether B. Latimer cōpared the Bishops to the
knaues of Clubs, as the fellow interprets him, I knowe
not: I am sure Parsons of all others deserved those co∣lours,
and so I leaue him.
We see then, what inward puritie is required of all

Christians, which if they haue, then in prayer, and all
other Christian duties, they shall lift vp pure hands, as
the1. Tim. 2. 8. Apostle speakes, not asAnnal to 1 Ann. 57. n. 109 110 & .10. 2. An. 132. num. 5 Baronius would haue
it, washed from sins with holy water, but pure, that is, holy,
free from the pollution of sin, as the greeke word 
doth signify.
You may also see here refuted those calumnies of
the Papists, that we abandon al religious rites, & god∣sy
duties, as also the confirmatiō of our doctrine tou∣ching
certainty of faith (& so of salvation) which is so
strongly denied by some of that faction, that they
haue told the world,S. Paulus de sua salute in∣cert{us} Richeom. Iesuit. lib. 2. c. 12. Idololat. Hu¦guenot. pa. 119. in marg. edit. lat. Mogunt. 1613. interpret Marcel. Bompar Iesuitâ. S. Paule himselfe was vncertaine
of his owne salvation. What then shall we saie, but pro∣nounce
a woe to the most strict observers of S. Francis
rule, and his canonicall discipline (though they make
him evenWitnesse the verses of Hora∣tius of Iesuite, recited by Pos∣sevin. Biblioth. Select part. 2. lib. 17. cap. 19. Exue Francis cum tunicâ, lacero{que} cu∣cullo, Qui Frācisc{us} erat¦iam tibi Chri¦stus erit, Frā∣csci exuviis (si qua licet) indue Chri∣stum, Iam Franciscus e∣rit, qu imodò Christus erat The like hath Bencius ano∣ther Iesuite. equal with Christ) & the most meritori∣ous
Monke that ever was registered in their Calendar
of Saints? But wee for our comfort are otherwise
taught out of the holy Sbripture and therefore ex∣horted
to build our selues in our most holy faith, that
so when our2. Cor. 5. 1. earthly house of this Tabernacle shall bee
destroyed, we may haue a building giuen of God, a house
not made with hands, but eternall in the heavens. This is
that, which is most piously & feelingly taught in these
few leaues, so that you shall read nothing here, but
what, I perswade my selfe, you haue long practised in
the constant course of your life. It remaineth only,
that you accept of these labours tendred to you by
him who wisheth you the long ioies of this world, &
the eternal of that which is to come. Oxon. from Corp.
Christ. College, this 13. of Ianuary, 1613.
