



Most honoured Madam,
HAving had some yeares experi∣ence of Your zeale for God, love to the Truth, and mem∣bers of Christ, continuall ex∣ercising your selfe in religious duties, and carefull endeavour so to adorne your profession in forraine parts, that the name of God and his doctrine might not bee prophaned by any of your family a∣mong such as are strangers to it, and ha∣ving observed how your spirit hath been stirred, when you have seene the supersti∣tious

and idolatrous practises of other na∣tions; and et with much affability, and sweetnes of carriage, applying your selfe to those people by all offices of courtesie & charity, seeking to gaine their affecti∣ons, and credit to the Gospel; having also had speciall helpes & incouragements of your Ladiships example and counsell to further my self in the wayes of Christ: I have emboldned my self to take this occa∣sion to testifie to the world, that I have great cause to blesse God, that ever I had the happinesse to live under your roofe. And wel knowing how welcome Books of piety and devotion are to you, as a small acknowledgement of my dutiful respect, and thankefulnesse for many favours; I here dedicate unto your Ladiship these ensuing Treatises of a grave and godly Author.
If the Copie had beene sent to the Presse immediately from the Author,

it would have come forth more exact and perfect; but sure I am, if I or some other, had not taken some paines in the perusall and transcribing thereof, after it came into the Printers hands, it would have passed the Presse more imperfectly then now it doth.
The Printer, tendering the Au∣thours reputation, and the Readers benefit, hath beene a some cost to have it reviewed, and corrected; and one that was inwardly acquainted with the Authour hath laboured with me in this taske; yet we durst not make so bold, as to alter his phrase, or adde any thing f our owne; onely we amended such errours as would have beene im∣puted to the Authour through the over∣sight of the Scribe▪
The matter handled therein, is of such importance, that I doubt not but

the publishing thereof will be very ac∣ceptable and usefull to such as desire to be more throughly instructed in the way of the Lord, and in matters of their owne salvation.
The two great and difficult lessons of Christianity concerning Selfe-de∣niall & Selfe-tryall, are here largly discoursed of, and such as would not willingly through Selfe-love, and Selfe-deceit, hazard the irrepairable losse of their immortall soules, may learne in the first Tract, upon Mat. 16.24. how to make their calling and ellection sure, upon what termes they may have interest in Christ, and benefit by him; what it will cost a ma o be a Christian, and what he must resolve & lot upon to doe, to suffer, what good to forgoe, and what ells to undergoe, if he will be Christs Disciple.
In the second, on 2 Cor. 13.5. The

duty of Selfe-examination, sundry selfe-deceits, rules of discovery, and helpes to discerne betwixt true and counterfeit grace are laid open.
And in the third on Iohn 1.12.13. The priviledge of Adoption, and tryall thereof by Regeneration, is briefely and pithily discussed.
Though I may perhaps be blamed by some for medling in another mans labours, yet if any poore soule shall reape benefit hereby (as J doubt not, but through Gods blessing many will) J shall more comfortably undergoe the censure of such as mistake my aime herein. Such as cannot keepe pace with the reapers in the Lords harvest, may yet doe some good in the field by gleaning what others scatterd; & they that are not able to adorne the Spouse of Christ with curious needle-works of their owne making, or present her

with rich robes, in bracelets upon their owne cost, may yet be someway service∣able to her, in helping to dresse her, and pin on those ornaments, that others have beene at the paines and cost to provide for her. In the building of Solomons Temple, there was roome and use for porters to carry burdens, as well as for curious Artificers, and Master builders.
Thus hoping, your Ladiship will pardon my boldnesse, in publishing this Booke under your protection, and countenance it with your gracious ac∣ceptance, I humbly commend it to your Patronage and perusall; and your Ladiship to the gracious protection of Almighty God.

