



THis Lecture right (Worshipfull) whereof I presume to make you the Patronesse, is compact of the notes obserued in my reading, at the birthes of your two most sweet iewels, Master Henry, and Ma∣ster Edward Sauels, and now published, as for the common good of all that please to reade it; so to performe my promise made long since vnto you, and to bee a testimonie of the godlie care, which your Honorable Lady-mother, the Lady Paget & your selfe had to shew all thank∣fulnes vnto the Lord for his great mercie towards you. For no sooner were you thorough the goodnes of God deliuered, but that both the one time and the other, I was sent vnto from her Ladyship and your selfe, to giue thankes vnto the Lord on your behalfe: so that the sunne had not shewed his beames before such time as the same mornings, wherein you receaued those blessings. We had the whole familie together, the right Worshipfull your Father, and your Husband, being also present; like as was her Ladiship her selfe, with your Worshipfull sister Mistres Baeshe, performed this exercise, and sang Psalmes of thankesgiuing. J wish as I nothing doubt, of your good continuance in this so holy a course, that all others, who are partakers of the same mercies, would also imitate & follow your godly example and president herein: which they should the rather do, if they could or would con∣sider aright, how many singular blessings in this one thing doo concurre, for nothing hindreth so much our thankefulnes

vnto the Lod as the want of a right consideratiō of his great benefits, wherewith he ladeth vs, which either for lack of in∣sight into them; or for that they seeme ordinarie, and befall vs euerie daie, and others aswell as vs are therefore the lesse of the greater sorte regarded: but were we affected as wee should, the more ordinarie that they are, the more thanke∣full we should be since our sinnes euerie day deserue to break the ordinarie course of them;Dani. 4.24. for that we breake not off our sinnes by righteousnes, nor our iniquities by mercie toward the poore. And since we see dailie, many to faile of thē whom we may iustifie in respect of our selues, for not to speak of ho∣ly Rahel and Ely his daughter in lawe; how many right godly and vertuous women, do daily in Childe-bed miscar∣rie? They therefore who haue the good successe which you now thrise (the Lord be blessed for it) haue had, & alwaies may haue; ought (with Elizabeth and you) acknowledge his great mercies to them. For though it were ordinarie to all in safetie to bee deliuered, which wee see is not: yet therein they shall finde many extraordinarie blessings, as by this lec∣ture they may partlie conceaue, but most plainelie may vn∣derstand of themselues, and by themselues, if themselues they will call to remembrance of their owne deliuerances, and not forget al their former distres (whereout, without the Lords hand, it had been impossible for them to haue been de∣liuered) through ioy of a mā child, whom they haue brought into the world. Leauing therefore the further consideration hereof vnto your Worship, and to all other godly and vertu∣ous Matrons, that haue tasted herein, how sweet and boun∣tifull the Lord is. I end, beseeching you to accept of this my poore labour: and praying the Lord that it may be profita∣ble vnto al, in stirring them vp to a greater thankefulnes vn∣to the Lord for his so great mercies bestowed vpon them.

