



YOu Roaring-boyes, which vse to drink and sweare
As if you straight would cause the Diuell appeare
Amongst you, for your execrable crimes,
To fetch you vnto hell before your times:
View here the farewell of my youths-greene folly,
Which breedes my ioy, but your sad melancholy.
'Tis ioy to mee, because I now doe leaue them:
But griefe to you, that I no more receiue them.
Thus 'tis my onely comfort, but your sadnesse,
That still I ill not follow you in badnesse:
For they which be composed of all euill,
Care not how many goe vnto the Diuell;
That as on earth they all alike doe fare,
Euen so in hell like torments they may share.
Once I was vaine, yet now I doe abhorre it:
But I may blame such wicked tempters for it.
Now by the light of Grace my faults I see,
How vaine, how vilde, and how corrupt they be.
I feele within my brest continuall iarres,
My Flesh and Spirit are at mortall warres,
By reason of my sinnes so extreame vilde,
As hard it is to haue them reconcilde.

But now Repentance comes, and shee makes peace,
And so the Combitants their warres doe cease.
Shee bids me boldly write against that sinne,
And horrid wickednesse, I long liu'd in.
She bids me spit in Drunkennesse foule face,
Deny, defie, and doe it all disgrace:
With sharpe inuectiues bitterly to rate it,
Reuile, detest, and vtterly to hate it.
Thus I of Bacchus seruice am asham'd,
Let mee a Coward therefore be proclaim'd
At drinking healths: to drinke so out of health
They are vilde members in a Common-wealth.
Let Drunkards publish this for their owne grace
In euery Towne and Corporation place,
That where I see pots stand in battle-ray,
They make me Coward-like to runne away:
With this loud clamour I am well content,
'Twill be my praise, but their disparagement.
Then they which filthy be, so still remaine,
Who toucheth pitch, must needes his finger staine.
I will proceede euen as I haue begun,
Vertue shall be the race I meane to run.
And so base Drunkards all, I you defie,
Thus I will liue, and thus I hope to dye.


