



Worthie SIR,
THe first draught of these meditations on this whole Euangelicall Psalme, I sent (some yeeres agoe) to a friend and louer ofOne of the Iustices in attendance at the Coun∣cel, in the Marches of Wales, and chiefe Iu∣stice in one of the welsh Circuits. yours, Richard Atkins, Esquire, now with God, yet without any meaning then, to bring (thus) vpon the stage of publick iudge∣ment. Howbeit, if he had ouerliued, this purpose in Mee of now sending them abroad into the hands of men; I confesse, or professe ra∣ther, they must haue carried his name with them into the world, to the Altar of which I did owe the Sacrifice of my best in this kinde: which must haue beene so, not onely (though chiefly) in respect of himselfe, who was vnreproueable in his place of Iustice, and priuate wayes as you know; but much in regard of my bond to him while he liued, whereofIn my E∣pistle before my Sermons on Luke 15.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. (else where) I gaue true and plaine signification. But, being translated
since to the house of glory from his house of clay, whom could I finde out, next, fitter (vpon iust matter) then your worships selfe to receiue the debt I owed him? your similitudo morum with him, or profession like his; your great respect and loue to Me, with your esteeme of all who, in the Ministerie doe ser∣uice faithfully and with paines, may rightly command Mee in this Dedication, which I esteeme much lesse then your owne. Add vnto this, that (hauing long knowne you) I could ne∣uer finde other minde in you then that which was of the side and part of goodnesse, opposing euill and the workers thereof. Much else might bee spoken of you particularly and truly to the praise of God; but He that seeth in secret will reward you openly. This, at this time, made me bold with your Name, which is as an ointment of sweet odour in the Countrie you liue in. And so I make humble tender of a mean Commentarie vpon a Psalme of grace: the Psalme was Dauids; the Speakers, God and Dauid. God spake to Dauid with good words and com∣fortable, as Zacharie 1.13. and the same Almighty God in the same most gracious Psalme, speakes with like comfort to you, and to all his by Him. Reuerend Beza in his argument vpon it, tells what comfort the had by it, when hee (first) heard it sung in an assemblie of Christians. It so carried him by diuine rape at that instant, that euer (after) he laid it vp gra∣uen in his heart: for, as if it had lift him vp, from the earth, into heauen, it rauished all his powers, making him to thinke hee heard God himselfe to call vnto him by particular. name: what that Worthy conceiued by the singing of the Psalme, that may your worthy selfe gather by the meditation. The Shield of it is large enough to compasse you (also) with the like mercie. If you put on the defence of the Highest; this Psalme will guide your wayes to peace, and finish your course with much true comfort. Thinke therefore (Christian Sir) in reading of this Psalme what godly Beza conceiued
vpon the singing of it: and that is, that God calleth you by Name, meaning to inuest you in these priuiledges of his Saints, and to be on your right hand euer: wherefore, what is here spoken to the Saints, reade with faith, as spoken to your selfe, being a Saint by calling: with this meditation you may make your pillow, when you shall bee ready to make your bed in the darke, and the graue shall bee your house, Iob. 17.13. Then shall you goe with much contentment to your bed of earth, and in great peace to the Lord. Meane while, turne your purer eyes into this excellens Psalme, set foot into it, rather walke through it in your deeper consideration: and then confesse, with gladnesse, what God hath done for your soule. May you not say that God hath been, or will bee (shortly) all that vnto you that the Psalme (so comfortable) speaketh of? for, hath not God beene, in all remoues, your stan∣ding house to remooue vnto? verse 1. hath hee not beene your hope from your youth, nay from your cradle? and haue you trusted in him, at any time, in vaine? verse 2. haue not the feete of many beene taken in the Snare or Net of Pestilence, and you deliuered? verse 3. haue not thousands fallen and you stood? verse 7. and haue you not seene your hope, when there was nothing but destruction to sinners? verse 8, 9. haue not the Angels kept the Lords watch about you in your continuall safety to this day? verse 11, 12. Is not the Dra∣gon of hell, and that roaring Lion of the nethermost hell put vnder your feet for euer? verse 13. In many troubles, haue not you beene quit, and not quit onely, but raised to place and worship? verse 14, 15. and, for length of dayes (though not full of daies, for I trust there are many behinde) you are not farre from Dauids yeeres of seuenty? verse 16. in which space of time, I doubt not but you make your short life a short draught of the dayes euerlasting: Finaly God hath shewed you his large saluation. But these few from the Text of the Psalme
may serue as so many fingers to point to much more, which your owne experience can better enlarge and gather; not to hee set downe in a short Epistle. And now to God all-sufficient, I commend the remnant of your dayes for his best blessings vpon them; vpon your Christian yoke-fellow, and vpon all the bran∣ches of you both. As I am much bound to pray, so I will, and doe daily for the true prosperity of you, and all yours, being
From Clon-bury neere Ludlow Iuly 1625.

