



YOur bountie (Worshipfull Sir) besides my obligation to your Richard Atkins, Esquire, Iustice in one of the Welsh Cir∣cuits, and one of his Maiesties Councell in the Marches of Wales. Fathers name, after his blessed death, hath deserued a better oblation then the tender of this small Booke; which, by way of thankefulnesse to you, and remembrance of Him, in all thankefulnesse, I send to you, and abroad into the world vnder your Name. It pleased, that your Religious and (truly) godly Father, to seeke Mee out in a darke skie, or night of distresse, to doe me good:

which he spared not to doe while he liued; For, as another Onesiphorus, he often re∣freshed mee, 2 Tim. 1.16. the Lord giue mercy to his House, and Posteritie for it. Also, I know few like-minded, who will faithfully care for our matters, as he did: and, where men (earthly minded) seeke their owne, that is, seeke that, and that one∣ly, which is nothing worth when they haue it; he sought in his life, and found in his death that which is Iesus Christ, Phil. 2.20.21.
But what neede I to embalme him (being dead) with my report, who (liuing) had so good report of all who knew him, and the grace in him: and dying sweetly in the peace of his Master, and his good con∣science, like that boxe of oyntment, which (being very precious) the woman powred on Christs head, in his breaking by death, cast forth that name, that is better then the best oyntment, Eccles. 7.3. Mark. 14.3. A name of a right good sauour, such as hath filled the house; and may be an orna∣ment and crowne of reioycing to the House and Stocke hee came of? For you that now liue, the Heire of his House, and (I trust)

of his good minde in good things. You are to remember (as I hope you forget not) that your life is in that age and time, where∣in you may, as in the morning, sow your seed, Eccles. 11.6. the good seed of the doctrine of saluation, in the field of your owne heart, and furrowes of those that are of your fami∣lie and proper charge.
I beseech you, let not your hand rest, and bee diligent to take heed to your selfe, and them, for all necessarie instruction in the way of life: so tilling them, spiritually, for GOD, and his true feare, that your whole House may bee as the field of the righteous, which the Lord will blesse, and the name of it may be, The Lord is there, Ezek. 48.35. So did your good Father in the middes of You, whiles he liued: and so (good Sir) doe you constantly in the mids of your owne House, by his example, who (now is gone. Hee learned of Abraham, who commaunded his householde after him in such matters, Genes. 18.19. and learne You of Him, that the blessing of Abraham may follow You and Yours. I write not doubtingly, and I haue good confidence in the Lord, that you are so minded. In which

good meaning, and intention of yours, to a worke so full of spiritual consolation and god∣linesse, you must looke for aduersaries. The more truelie you feare God, the more you shall finde what enmitie is against it. Looke for this in euery good purpose vnder the Sunne. The world that is not of the fashion of Heauen, Rom. 12.2. will be against you. The flesh, that is all for it selfe, Rom. 13.14. will lust against the Spirit, and the good motions of the Spirit in you, Galat. 5.17. and the Deuill (the Centurion of the band) will pursue you with his armies of temptati∣ons, on your right hand, and on your left, Ephes. 6.12. But Hee that is with you is stronger then all these, and, as long as Mi∣chael is your leader, and his Angels your fellow-Souldiours, what can doe you hurt? if God be on your side, what matter who be against you? Rom. 8.31. If you loue the loue of Christ with all your heart; who, or what shall separate you from it? who, or what shall make you to forsake it? vers. 35. Neither the worlds iniuries, nor the fleshes allurements, nor all the mallice of the ene∣mie, ouer all which you are more then Con∣querour, through him that hath loued you,

verse 37. shall be able to take Christ from you, or the holy Spirit of Christ out of you; by whom you are sealed to the day of Re∣demption, Ephes. 4.30.
Striue (therefore) forward (cheere∣fully) in this narrow way of life: fight the good fight of Faith to the end: whet your heart vpon the Word, and make the Statutes of IEHOVA, your Medita∣tion and Counsellours: pray in your holy Faith: holde that you haue with increase get ground of the commune enemie daily; and that by doing well, while you haue time. This matter requireth your earnest medita∣tion, and deepest thoughts: and, therefore, against all incumbrances and impediments of spirituall life, already remembred, or further spoke of by Saint Iohn, as the lusts of the eyes, the lusts of the flesh, and pride of life, 1 Iohn 2.16. put forth your selfe couragiously in the name of the Lord of Hostes, who will order the whole battell for you, and finish it to your euerlasting victory, and ioyfull triumph ouer all powers, earthly and infernall.
How ill they proceede, that doe not so striue, I haue endeuoured to shewe in the

meditations that follow, concerning the sinne and punishment of the prodigall sonne: perswading my selfe that of Him you haue nothing in you but his repentance, and grace to come home to your heauenly Father, where you haue with Him (young and igno∣rantly) in anything; (and who hath not in Iam 3.2. many things) declined from obedience to God, or the wayes of his truth. These I tooke to taske the beginning of this last Som∣mer, at what time the Lords storme fell, that caused so generall a feare: I would it had effected a like generall amendement in vs. For the now comming forth of them, the Apostle, who saith, Be instant in sea∣son, and out of season, 2 Timoth. 4.2. shall answere for me, if any shall thinke them vnseasonable.
Besides, how can that bee, or be iud∣ged, with any colour of soundnesse, vn∣seasonable, that teacheth vs to remem∣ber what GOD would not haue forgotten: namely, his wonderfull workes, which hee made, the last two moneths of May and Iune, to be remembred? Psal. 111.4. Or, if all his workes must praise him, Psal. 145.10, why should not those praise him in the

Gate, which he wrought so fearefully, and so lately among vs? And, is it euer too late and vnseasonable, to shew to the world how graciously, and how strangely, the Lords late mercies got the better hand of his other fearefull workes, by taking his frownes from the skie, and by putting a more louing coun∣tenance vpon it, in the blessed weather that ensued? I call it the Lords mercie, or not the least of those mercies that are ouer all his workes, Psal. 145.9. For, did our repen∣tance, or any worke of ours seeke and finde that comfortable alteration at Gods hands? Or, did not the greatest number desire a bet∣ter, and more kindely season, and complaine of a season so (generally) hurtfull and in∣temperate with sinne in their right hand? was one Sabbath for all that power of thun∣der that so cracked about our eares, and pouring Raine that so fell vpon the Earth, that is, in such abundance, that it made Brookes and Riuers to rise, and the water to stand in the Furrowes, lesse prophaned in Towne and Countrie? I doubt not, but some stood, as Aaron in that breach and gappe with their Censer of seruent Supplication to the Lord, by whom (in all likelihood) hee

was entreated, and who sought and found him in due time, Psal. 32.6. Yet what was that to the generall inconformitie that still beareth sway? And heere who can but prophecie? for seeing that neither Iudge∣ment nor mercie can preuaile, what can wee looke for, but destruction vpon destruction? Esai. 1.5.
The last Winter, which was in the yeere 1612, what mercie did GOD shew, to make it so milde in so great want of Fdder as was then: so great, that (I thinke) greater in our time hath not beene obserued? Indeed, it beganne sharpe∣ly, and proued sharper to true Christians, and louers of the GOSPELL,Nouemb. 6. Anno 1612. then that sharpest Winter which about foure yeres since, destroyed all our Flowers: for, it tooke away our most beautifull Rose and Flower: our Carnation-Flower, the fairest in the Garden of Christendome, which the LORD pluckt vp for himselfe, to plant in the Garden of his owne presence: I meane, the beloued of GOD and Men, HENRY, our late Prince, the Flower of our Age, whom the Lord tooke from vs by death in the Flower of his Age, that was so

louely. But, who is more turned to GOD for it?
This last Sommer begunne roughly, and in stormes, which caused weedes to come vp abundantly: which weedes GOD sent, as Lions, vpon the standing Corne, to pull it downe. The latter ende of it, was with great mixture of fauour, and in a fruitfull calme: and GOD in mercie, hath giuen vs, but with great abatement, those fruits that some despaired off, yet haue wee not turned to him that hath smitten vs, Esai. 9.13. Amos 4.6.8.9.10.11. And now, if neither the sweet loue of GOD can stirre vs, nor his smart wrath rowse vs, what will doe vs good? But I will end: praying the Almightie God of the spirits of all flesh, to inspire Your heart more and more with all grace and gracious parts, needfull for soule and body; for the wayes of this life, and for Your sure way to eter∣nall life hereafter. So I commend this poore testimonie and Mite of my thankefull heart, to your Worships kinde and fauourable ac∣ceptance; and You, and Your Christian Yoke-fellow, to the speciall grace and kee∣ping of your, and our, most mercifull GOD

and louing Father in CHRIST IESV; with a minde to be what the same God shall inable me to be, for the further helpe, and seruice of your Faith: and rest
Febr. 19. 1613.

