


NOwe it is (righte honorable Lorde) that this Horace my booke wil nedes be abroode, and the rather from me shall haue franke pasporte, because sume parte therofis heretofore alre∣die passed. The glorie, and grace of a booke writen is much what in the noblenes, and mag∣nificence of the patrone. Nor any thing doth add more estimation to true nobilitye, then patronage of lear∣ning. VVell was it for Horace that he was cherisde of Maecenas, for he obteined throughe hym opportunitye to studye: better was it for Maecenas that he cherised Horace, and procured him that opportunitye, for he lyfted vp his name, and made hym immortall. VVher∣as, nathles the wyt of the one, and the port of the other, all theyre wyde fames hadd longe ere this time bene

drenched in the dust, and rakte vp with theyr cynders, had not the Poet bene stayd by his patrone, and the pa∣trons glytterynge honor by the Poett displaide. No po∣tentate of all the world, not he that hath couered the Alpes wt souldyers, nor he that hath made the Sea lāde with shyppes, nor he that hath conquered from Easte to VVest, eyther lyueth more cleare to his posteritie, eyther hath more fayre inditements to his commenda∣tion, then hath this faueror of learninge, this scholers frinde, the Lord Maecenas. It is Gods iustice that those whiche support the moste pretious thinges of all other, learning, and wisdom: should haue the best guerdon of all other, that is immortalitie. They say the right way to eternitie is to please the goddes and the poets, who beautifie, and adorne euerye meritte in euerye person. The verie Crounes and Scepters of best Monarks, and princes had bene rustie, wembde, and warpde with obli∣uion, hadd not they with the goodly eloquence of greate clarkes, and Poettes ben streked and filed: otherwise the fames of kynges, are intumbed with their bodyes. Sum thing it was that made the bell of Augustus his brute to be ronge so lowde, that made kynge Ptolomye to he so muche redd of, that made Alphonsus to be so muche red of, tat made the great gentlemen Medici of Millan to be so muche redde of, that made Leo the tenth in Erasmus, Longolius, Bembo, Sadoletto to be so muche redde of. Nor the reporte of Fraunces the

frenche King so freshely blasened, nor of Charles of Lothering so well celebrated should euel haue bene de∣serued, had they not boulstered learned heads against malice, and ignorance: and yelded courteous acceptance to painfull labours. Horace (gentle and honorable Lord) beinge once of his patrone Maecenas so dearelye tendered, is loth now (turned out of his latin coote) ma∣sterles to gadde abrode at wyde aduenture thoughe his owne doinges do iustly speake his owne commenda∣tions, yet my humble sute is, that vnder your lordships protection he maye be preferred. If we wey both pro∣fytte and delectation Lambinus wrote truly, emongst latin poetes Horace hath not his felowe. This is he▪ whome great Augustus writte shoulde be loked to as him selfe, whom Maecenas loued as himselfe, ripe, py∣thye, excellent for moral preceptes, full of pretye spea∣ches, full of Iudgement, hym I partlye interruptinge my studie of good aduice chosed to translate before all other, whom vnder your worthye patronage in princi∣pall respecte I thought to promote, fytlye deuisynge to haue so trime and elegant a poet, vnder the name of so noble an Earle, and goodly a gentleman.

