



SIR. These first fruits of my pub∣like labours in print, I presume to offer to the Church by You, (to whom a∣boue others) I owe them, and
the whole crop of that that God hath dealt vnto me. A very poor increase (I confesse) compared with that seede of reliefe, which it pleased you with so full a hand to cast vpon me, for some yeares togither at Oxford, as the alone Christian Founder or Mecae∣nas of my yonger studies there. And yet because I would not haue all lost, or accounted so, I haue (like a barren field, of which men doe not receiue their seede againe) sent forth these few blades of publike acknowledge∣ment: in which my meaning is to confesse publikely vnder mine owne hand, that bond and debt of thankefulnesse which I will euer confesse to bee due to your person and house, for the beginning and successe of those meanes, which in this calling in
the Ministerie I haue receiued to edifie with. And this I haue done in foure Sermons, which containe matter for our turning to GOD, and walking in the Spirit. A matter (if any and at any time) needfull in this age of so great vngodlinesse and vn∣righteousnesse among men. For was there euer (I speake of such as know God) greater turning from him by impietie, and wal∣king in the flesh by diuers strange lusts, then at this day? The thing is manifest, and the Sodome of these times doth (too plainely) shew it. Esay 3.9. For, as it was in the dayes of Noah and of Lot: so is it in these dayes of the Sonne of Man. They eate, they drinke, they marry, and giue in marriage. That is, they who doe these things, are ex∣cessiuely
and aboue measure, gi∣uen ouer vnto them: or, they doe them securely, sinfully, and for worldly respects, not once remembring God. Luk. 17.26. 27. For what no care to marrie in the Lord? And what exces∣siue care to marrie for liuing, or parentage? Religion is no question, nor want of religion or setlednesse in a false religion, any stay or impediment in such matters. Men cry peace (saith the Apostle) and destruction commeth as the trauell vpon a woman with Child. 1. Thes. 5.3. She thinketh not of her paine till it come, and they forget the floud that is comming. Further, men buy and sell, as if their were no other end of their life: they build & plant, as if their houses should conti∣nue euer. Luk. 17.28. and there
is no remembrance of death in all their waies. This is the securi∣tie that Christ spake of, and these are the dayes of which Christ said: but when the Sonne of Man commeth, shall hee finde faith on earth? Luk. 18.8. The Apostle Saint Paul hath told vs, that in the last daies shall come hard times. 2. Tim. 3.1. We know not when the last houre will come, or last quarter of that houre. But, if hard times bee the last times of the world; then we are already in them: For, where iniquitie a∣boundeth in so great an ouer∣measure of sinne as wee see at this day: where there is so great and corrupt worldlinesse, not onely in wicked persons, but in the professors of the truth: where appeareth so generall and great a dropsie of getting, by
right or wrong: such oppression and crueltie in all estates: such extortion, & such spoile without mercie of the poore and needie, how can such times bee called o∣ther then Hard times? What car∣king, and caring, and pining of the heart with causelesse feares? are not many so pinching and miserable, without fear of God, or common honestie, that no li∣beralitie can bee seene in their hands, nor iustice in their liues? and a number so laden with worldly dealings, that God and religion (if they come at all) come seldome or late into their mindes? seldome and coldly doe they pray by the word, reade and meditate in it. Often and hotely do they pursue the world and worldly trash, euen with a Horse-leech tooth of greedi∣nesse:
Pro. 30.15. Their heart is a graue for money: and they bu∣ry their neighbors liuing (some∣times life) in their vnlawfull co∣uetousnesse. Are not such times Hard times? Our times are such: and such the men who liue in them. These and such like fore-runners of the last day, bid the wise to prepare for it. Indeede the day so much spo∣ken off is not yet come: and, I feare, many beleeue it will not come at all, because it stai∣eth so long. But, what God hath spoken, shall, and must stand, though it were delaied, besides the yeeres past, sixe thousand yeeres to come. And there are certaine signes men∣tioned in the new Testament, by which wee may know, both that it will come, and that it
will come shortly. All which signes (such I meane as we ap∣pointed to goe before that great and notable day of the Lords comming) are (all of them saue one, viz: the calling of the Iewes) either past, or in being. The first is, the prea∣ching of the Gospell through the world. Math. 24.14. This hath beene done successiuelie, and at seuerall times. The se∣cond is the reuealing of Anti∣christ. 2. Thes. 2.3. who was, e∣uer since the yeere 607. disco∣uered more and more. For, since that time the Lord hath breathed vpon him, and striken him (of late time) in a maruai∣lous consumption. The third is a generall apostasie from the Gos∣pell. 2. Thes. 2.3. which came to passe vnder Arrius & Antichrist
for diuers hundred yeeres. The fourth is a generall corruption in the manners and liues of men. 2. Tim. 3.1.2. which signe hath beene in all ages, and is to be found in ours. The first stan∣deth in diuers great calamities and troubles that were to come vpon the christian world. Math. 24.4.16. which tooke effect and begunne in the tenne first perse∣cutions, as it were plagues of Egypt inflicted vpon Christians by Rome heathen, and hath fur∣ther beene cruelly prosecuted and continued, by the Rome that now is. The sixt is a generall contempt of the Gospell, or deadnesse of heart in the hea∣rers of it. Luc. 17. And when more generally contemned, or carelesly heard then at this day by Schismatiques and Liber∣tines?
Former ages haue, and wee who liue in this, may see plainely the Signe of the comming of the Sonne of man, in the small fruit that the Gospell is able to bring forth, or beget in the liues of men. And now, that so many signes of this great day haue appeared to the world, and are manifest to vs; why should wee arraigne the Lord of any slacknesse, or make question of the day that is so farre spent alreadie, in the signes that wee haue spoken off? But these mat∣ters are further opened in the Sermons that follow, to which I humbly pray you, and the Christian Reader in you, to haue duerespect. Not for want of better treatises in this kind, for there are many, after some of which I haue gleaned with
poore Ruth in this small worke, as after the men whose hands were full: Ruth. 2.15. but because they containe nothing, in per∣swading to the power of god∣linesse, but what is written, and what the word (which is writ∣ten) doth teach for instruction to a godly life. Accept there∣fore (I pray you) what is here offered by you vnto many: and take in good part my endeuour therein. So with many vnfai∣ned praiers for your true and full welfare, which I (vnfained∣lie) wish to you, your yoke-fel∣low, and all yours, in the world and in the Lord; I rest.

