



Right Worshipfull,
I Haue presumed vnder your worthy Name, to send forth a few Obseruations (such as they are) on the Parable of the Rich man and Lazarus: A Scripture that may well beset by the Preacher to an age of such ful∣nesse of sinne as ours is: An age and time, wherein vngodlinesse,Preface to the trunesse of Religion. which (as the (a) L. of Plessis once sayde) was wont but to whisper men in the eare, and lispingly to speake between the teeth, doth now most boldly, and without all blush of shame, with open mouth, call vpon both Bench and Pulpit for protection. Diues hath many sonnes at this day, sprung from his loines of cruelty, and the contempt of the poore: and for his brethren among vs, they be notLuc. 16 28. fiue onely▪ but more then fiue hundred; all which, liuing in no feare of God or death, and impudently in all the deedes of sinne, require the sharpest edge of Discipline, Gods and mans. Therefore and toward the reformation of so many as God shall incline to reade with some conscience the ensuing Dis∣course, I haue (to my poore skill) done somewhat in this fearefull Parable of Diues. That little which is done, is according to the Scriptures, and humbly commended to your Worship by One that doth loue and reuerence You for the good parts of Iustice and Piety, which are noted to be in you by those that know you; and appeareth by this, that you spare no trauell, and accept no faces of men, or letters in matters of publike hearing, whether in Terme or out.

And who can but commend this mind of yours in so scarce a world of iust and painefull Magistrates? Your piety in Gods matters is testified sufficiently and plainely by your exemplary obedience to Gods Sabbothes: where your good affection to the Word, in a louing affabilitie to the Preachers thereof, is obserued and reuerenced by as many as truly know you. And for the in∣tegrity of your mind in Court causes, you haue as many wit∣nesses as the Court hath eares. And indeed how can Iustice badly follow that hath so good fore-leaders? I write not this to giue titles: onely in your person (Sir) I desire to stirre vp others of like place to beare you company in so good a way of piety, in∣tegritie, and in corrupt iustice, if they be behind. Also my desire is, by so true a relation of so many good offices and effects of your chiefe Stewardship in the Marches performed among vs by you (matters which haue a good report of al men, & of the truth it selfe) humbly to prouoke you to goe forward in this narrow path, wherein sofew now walke, of sincere and conscionable Magi∣stracy. So shal you one day heare this comfortable saying: Mat. 25.21. (c) It is well done good seruant & faithfull. But I may not say much in the Preface, where so little is sayd in the Booke it selfe: and therefore to conclude, I say, good Sir, gt ground of the common enemy dayly, as I trust you doe, and keepe what you get. Let no man, let nothing pull this hope from you, nto which you are entred, till you haue finished the dayes of your faith here, and the Ancient of dayes take you to those dayes of endlesse life, which He hath prepared in His Kingdome of glory for all that loue and waite for his comming, as I doubt not you doe, and pray you may doe so still, and with increase, that is, more and more to the true good of your seuerall charges, and the sure good of your own soule; for which hee prayeth, and will pray: Who is

From Mrs. Danets house neere Ludlow. the 19. of May. 1619.
