



WORSHIPFVLL Mrs. DANET▪
YOur Obligation vpon Me, binds me, at least, to ac∣knowledgement. I with my wife, liued with you in house twenty yeeres, saue some few weekes. Most of which time, or (saue some few moneths) the whole of it, I liued Preacher to your Tenants and priuate familie, at a Chappell by; being there set and left by that rightly worshipfull and truly religious old Gentleman, your most kinde husband, IOHN DANET Esquire, long since with God. The instructiōs you receiued that while from me, & before that while of time from faithfull men elsewhere, I doubt not but you remember and will practise for your part and time heere. Some testimony you lately gaue in your zealous and constant obseruation of those Fasts which were (weekely) commanded for London by Royall authority, notwithstanding your often infirmities and great yeeres: which makes me now, vnder your name, to send forth this small Sermon, and to en∣title you to it as to your owne by many interests. In regard of the Plagues late fearefull increase in London, and other places about, and further off, there came a commandement from our Augustus
(King CHARLES) that all of the Realme, that could, or were fit, should meete together in a publike weekely Fast on Wednesdaies, to beseech the Lord by prayer and supplications, vntill it should please him to say, as sometime he said to the destroying Angel, with his sword ouer Ierusalem; it is enough, hold now thy hand, 2. Sam. 24.16. To this, and to vs his Royall Maiesty began in a rare Presi∣dent: and so, did no more by precept then what he first sealed by pra∣ctise in his owne high Person. The Plague was great: and so we fasted, and besought our God for it: and he was entreated of vs, Ezra 8.23. vpon the successe (wonderfull in our eares, most strange in Londons eyes) his Maiesty, hath since published his Royall pleasure for publike thankes to God, through all the Kingdome. All which should moue all of vs of this Land (if we haue not lost all life of motion) euen now to turne vnto the Lord with all our hearts. And therefore, for my par∣ticular, and to set my selfe (some steps) forward inso good a way, I haue left this little pawne in the Sanctuary for mine own engagement. Where, I desire you (Good Mistresle DANET) to goe on in the same good way, you haue been long vpon, and that till you finish your course: which, that it may be with true comfort, to your Blisse eternall, I will pray (as I daily doe) while we haue being together. The time cannot be long to you or me: which should make vs therfore (and I pray God we may be made;) to redeeme all the good houres of it for the power of godlinesse and a pure conuersation in Christ. Which gift also I hum∣bly craue at Gods hands for those you haue Adopted into your family, as the charge of your prouidence: that, to Gods pleasure, they may longer yet haue the comfort of you, your Tenants in like manner, and that whole Neighbour-hood, in that light which now you beare vp a∣mong them by your life in the Gospel, and your beeing in the world, He saith Amen vnto it,
Clon-bury neere Ludlow; Iune 1. 1625.

