



YOure fayeth and firme hope of eternall life (dearelye beloued) whyche of longe time ye haue learned and throughly perswa¦ded your selues in, by the truth & vn∣fallible verity of the heauenly word, sealed with Christes moost precious blood, is very sore and daungerously assaulted, and by all meanes possible attempted to be taken from you, that ye shuld haue no lōger credit to gods truth but beleue mans lies, no more to haue saluation by Christ ye once dy¦ed, & offered him selfe once for all for¦syn, but ye ye must beleue nowe your saluatiō in Christ many times offred by wycked men euery day in the ab∣hominable masse, to y• vter conculca∣sion & opressing of Christs death, as y•

wycked Pope and hys adherentes woulde perswade you, and not as Christ youre sauioure athe taughte you. But this sodayne and miserable chaunge from the truth vnto falshod and from God and Christe to the de∣uyll and Antichriste, doubtlesse co∣meth of god for our manifold synnes towardes the heauenlye father oure shephearde, that taughte vs a longe tyme wyth hys blessed word, and we were neither thankful for it, nor yet put our trusts in him, as in one that onelye coulde saue and defende hys owne worde: but we thought in our foolyshenesse that the worlde was so muche and so many wayes wyth the worde of God, that euen by mannes strength it myghte haue bene defen∣ded: where as the truthe of Goodes worde is permanent and neuer fay∣leth saying, cursed be the that make fleshe theyr defence and shylde. For as kynge Dauyd when God adde brought him to possesse his kingdom paceablye, sayde (lyke a foole as he was) I shall neuer be more vngue∣ted,

but yet the Lord turned his face from him, and he found streight way such an alteration as he neuer found before, wyth increase of new daun∣gers more troublous thē euer he had before: euen likewise when god had geuen vs a blessed and holye kinge, and suche maiestrates (although thei were synners) as wyshed the glorye of God onely to be preferred by true doctrin: we lyke carnal men thought our selues so sure, and so stablished, that it had not bene possible to haue seene suche a pitious and myserable chaunge, and the truthe of Goddes worde opressed as we see at this pre∣sente daye. But we be most worthe∣ly punished, and euen the same waes that we offēded. We put our trust in fleshe, and where as Gods spirite in fleshe dwelled, as in oure holye and blessed kynge departed Edwarde the syxte (who is deadde in the fleshe, and hys holy soule reffeth wyth the heauenlye father in ioyes for euer) he is taken from vs now and can not healpe vs, and suche as in hys tyme,

semed muche to fououre the glory of God, are become Goddes enemyes, and can both heare other to proceede against the glorye of God, and also sette foorthe the same them selues as muche as they maye: So that suche spirituall and Godlye personnes as soughte in the fleshe Gods glory, are taken from vs, or els in suche case as they can do no good. And suche fleshe as folowed and loued God in the sy∣ght of the worlde, and hadde greate vauntage by his woorde, are become hys very enemies, and not only his, but also enemyes too hys members. But yet as kynge Dauyd knewe his foolyshe foly and wyth repentaunce repented and found grace: So it may please God to geue vs of his grace and holy spirit, to amende oure faul∣tes in the lyke offences, and helpe vs as he did him. But doubtlesse greate is oure iniquitye. For there was ne∣uer so greate abhomination redde of and so quickly to preuail, as this ab∣homination of the wicked masse hath preuailed in England. And al Chri∣sten

men know that the Turkes and hethen neither haue nor yet had euer any so sensiblye knowen, and many fest an idoll.
Wherefore that almightye God of his mercye maye preserue his peo∣ple in thys noble citye of London, I haue written vpon this. 23. psalme of kinge Dauid, to aduertise men how thei shal beware of eresies and false doctryn, and so to lyue to his honour and glorye. And  know (dearly be∣loued) that these godly people which seke Gods honour, and all other that wyshe them well, be accompted the quenes enemyes, although we day∣lye pray for her grace & neuer thinke her barme: But we must be content to suffer slaunder, and geue god than¦kes for them. Neuertheles this is out of doubte, that the quenes highnesse hath no autority to compell any man to beleeue anye thinge contrary too Gods worde, neyther maye the sub∣iecte geue her grace that obedience: in case he do his soule is loste for euer

Dure bodyes, goodes and lyues be at her hyghnesse commaundement, and she shall haue them as of true subiectes: but the soule of man for religyon is ounde too none but vntoo God and hys holye worde.
