



RIght worshipfull and my lo∣uing Countrimen; hauing some occasion this last sum∣mer to trauell vp to the Ci∣tie of London, and being there, I was entreated by a godlie friend to bestow my labours on a Sab∣bath day, in preaching at the Parish Church in which hee dwelled: to whom I willingly a∣greed. Whereat, there were some, contrary to
my knowledge or priuitie, that tooke the paines to take the notes of the Sermons, and before my departure out of the Citie made me acquainted therewithall, and shewed them vnto mee: and reading part of them, I did greatly maruell thereat; and worthie was the Author to be commended for his paines and skill, hauing neuer seene the like so largely ta∣ken by any whatsoeuer: for scarce could I finde any word of substance wherein hee fai∣led.
Here upon certaine of my friends who were hearers thereof, laboured with me to commit them to the Presse: and in hope I would sa∣tisfie their earnest sute, sent downe after mee their notes faire copied out to my house: which after some paines taken in setting the same in order, and some things (though not much) added for the more plaine opening of that, which time preuented me in the prea∣ching, I haue sent it vp againe to them to vse at their pleasure. The which hauing by Gods helpe finished, I doe make bold to dedicate the same to your fauorable view. The rea∣sons
moouing mee thereunto are speciallie these three: The first is, because of the expe∣rience I haue had of diuers of your godly, zea∣lous, and sincere loue to the Gospell. The se∣cond is, being bound by nature to leaue it as a testimonie of my vnfained loue to my na∣tiue Citie. Thirdly, in regard of the vndeser∣ued kindnesse and beneuolences I haue often receiued from you. In some liew whereof I thought it a part of my dutie to dedicate these my poore labours vnto you, as thereby to manifest my humble thankefulnesse. Now if any censorious disposition shall say that these Sermons are too meane to be put in print for this ripe and exquisit age, I would wish them to consider, that at the building of the Tem∣ple, as well they were accepted that brought Goates haire and Rammes skinnes, as they that brought Silke, purple and skarlet. But howeuer it be, I doe more then hope you will both kindly accept of this from me, and enter∣taine it as a testimonie of my louing affecti∣on to you all.
The God of all comfort multiplie his
gratious blessings vpon you all, and grant all peace and prosperitie to all those that vn∣fainedlie loue and seeke the peace of the Church, and prosperitie of the Gospell. From my house at Yeardly, the 20. of De∣cember. 1608.

