



THe wyse manne
Cicero (most gracious
and myghtie Prynce)
sayth,Offici. lib. i. that he doth not
onely wronge, yt by vi∣olēce
oppresseth wrōg∣fully
an other mā, but
also he that defendeth
not (if it lye in his pow∣er)
the wronges offered
& is in no lesse faultye
then though he hadde forsaken parentes, fryndes, or
countrye. The same doctrine practised he in the de∣fence
and propulsyng the iniuries and wronges at
tempted wrōgfully against Milo by the fryndes of

Clodius as it appeareth by hys eloquente and a∣cundious
oration made for that purpose in the se∣nate
of Rome. The same kynde of iniuries, other
godly men in the scryptures of God, haue alwayes
accordyng to the lawe eschued: for it is wrytten, if
a manne se hys neyghbours Asse fal vnder hyr but
then, or hys Oxe to go astraye, hys neighboure is
bounde to helpe them bothe.Exodi. xxiii. The Asse from
burthen, and the Oxe from hys straying. The same
practised Abraham:Gen. xiiii. when he perceiued hys neuewe
Loth oppressed with the warres of the Infidelles,
propulsed, and reuenged the iniuries, and set hys
neuewe at large and lybertie: Euen so bee there two
sortes of people, that two sundry wayes do iniuries
and wronges vnto the soule and conscience of men.
The one of thē, by force or subtiltie defraudeth thē
from the truth and perfection of Goddes worde, as
hereticall and supersticious mynisters: The other,
at such tyme as they should wyth prayer, diligence,
and preachynge, defende the people of GOD from
such iniuries and wronges: are negligent or dūme.
The whyche kynde of iniury, doubtles the Lorde
God almyghtie wyll at length greuously reuenge.
Therefore, against this kynde of iniurye, he spake
vnto the Prophete Ezechyel:Ezechi. iii. xxxiii. It I purpose to sende
a Plague vppon the people, and thou gyue theym
not warnynge thereof, I wyll requyre theyr blode
at thy hande. The same sayde he vnto Saynt Pe∣ter:
Feede my lambes,Iho. xxi, Marck. xvi. fedemy sheepe. And vnto all
the Apostles, he sayde: make ye all Gentyles my dis∣ciples.

And saynt Paule fearyng to fall in the daun¦ger
of the second kynde of doyng wrouge, in sauing
the wronges of false religion from the churche of
Christ,i. Corin. ix. layde: woo be vnto me, if I preach not.
Vpon the consideration of these premisses, seyng
al thīge be writtē for our doctrin,Roma. xv haue thought
it good, to wryte and set furth this Confession, and
protestation of my fayth: submyttyng my selfe, and
my fayth also mooste humbly to be iudged by your
Maiestie, your most honourable Counsel, with the
godly assemblaunce of your maiesties most hyghe
Court of Parliamēt, according to the word of god.
That by this meanes, I may auoyde the payn, and
daunger dewe vnto all them that neglect, or omyt
the iniuries and wrōges that may happen & chaūce
by sinister report, and false slaunder of Gods word,
to the conscience of any of your maiesties subiectes.
For I am credibly infourmed that many false, and
erronious opiniōs is entred into their hedes of me
(god forgeue thē that hath bene y• occasiō therof) If
any way these iniuries and daungerous slaunders,
may be holpe, I thynke this to be the waye, to offer
mooste humbly my selfe and my faith to be knowne,
and iudged bi your maiestie, after the worde of god.
I protest before god, and your maiestie, I wryt not
this cōfession for any Apollogie or defence, to con∣tend,
or striue with any man, in any matter, nor for a¦ny
priuate affeccion, or displeasure I beare vnto a∣ny
man liuyng, or for any inordinate or percial loue
vnto my self: but for the cause, & to the same ende, be∣fore
rehersed.

Lykewyse for three other great causes, that shal fo∣low.
The one toucheth God, the other your maiestie,
the thyrd your louyng subiects. As cōcerning God,
seing both his maiestie, myne own conscience, & my
audytory knowe, that I haue nether in doctryne,
nether in maners,Mathew. x. taught no other thynge then I re∣ceyued
of the Patryarches,Marke. viii. Prophetes,uke. xii. & the Apo∣stles,
it were not onely synne, but also the very parte
of a myscreant, to deny or betraye the innocencye of
that doctrine, or to be ashamed to stande to the de∣fence
therof, seing all godly men haue estemed more
the true worde of God, then theyr owne mortall li∣ues.
The seconde cause, that toucheth youre Mage∣stie,
and your mooste honorable Counsell, is because
vpon credyte, and good opinion, and partly by expe¦rience,
that your maiestie had both of my true fayth
and godly zeale: appoynted me (amōg other of your
preachers) though moost vnworthy, to teache your
subiectes their dutie to God and man. What true
subiect can hear and vnderstād such vntrue bruites
of those that a Kynges maiestie shall appoynte to
preach, and would not be glad, both for Gods sake
and his kyngs, to remoue such vngodly bruites, yf
he can, for the peace and quietnes of their subiects.
As for the cause ye toucheth the people, it is no lesse
worthy then eternal dānation. In case he be worthy
of iudgement,Mathew. v. & in daunger of hel fyre yt is angry wt
his brother, & calleth him fole: how much more, if he
cal hys brother heriticke▪ & a denyer of God? If the
fyrst e worthy hel fyre, much more the last▪ There∣fore

least my brother shoulde dye,Galathi. vi. and then receyue
condigne reward,Iacob. v. dew for a slaunderer: what it lieth
in me, I do by this Protestatiō of my fayth, cal him
to repentaunce. And incase any man stand in doubt
of myne opinion and meanyng in religion: Let hym
not damne me before time, but vse the meanes with
me that the .x.Iosi. xxii. Tribes of Israel vsed wyth the Tribe
of Ruben, Gad, & halfe the tribe of Manasses, that
buy it at their returne to their possessions, an aulter
vpon the borders of Iordane the whych fact was
lyke to haue ingendered great warres. But it was
stayed by the meanes of consultation, and commu∣nication
had with those that buylded it: and theyr
myndes knowne, the dissention was ended and ap∣peased.
Euen so I wold desyre my christe coūtremē
to vse me (for I haue built no aulters of ydolatry) if
they be in doubt of me in any thyng, & not to kyll by
hearesay, nether before they haue heard me speake.
Thus I pray God, both thei and I may serch
alwaies to liue in his feare, to obeie oure
Kinge, and to be profitable, and true
members of this Realme of En∣glande.
So be it. The .xx. day
of December, in the yere
of our Lorde God.
a. M. D. & fiftie.
