



THe Godlye pretence and consi∣deration
of your warfare of late
into Scotlond Moost grocious and
uictorious Prince, and the iust occa∣cion

yeuen by youre Ennymyes to u∣se
the forse of youre moost mightie
and uertews Armye: the lord hathe so
magnyfied withe prosperouse and ui¦ctorious
successe: that it semythe not
only à uictory moost Noble worthy
perpetuall memory. But also to be
estemyd as à singuler fauour and mer¦cyfull
benedictiō, of God yeuen from
heuen: Who accustomy the many ty∣mes,
unto souche à godlye pretensyd
purpose, to annex and add an exter∣nall
signe and testimonye of his godd
will, that the worold shuld not only
acknolege hym to be the God of ba∣tell
and saye, this thyng is don by the
lord and is wounderfull in our yeys
but also remembre that thus the lord
uisithe to blysse souche as ferithe his
name, boothe in war and in peace.
And as Euery godly and good man
doothe preace the deuyne magestie of
God for his inestimable fauour and

grace in this heuenly uictorye, so he is
to be callyd upon allwayes here aster
to folow youre grace withe like aye∣de
and cōsolacion. that the thyng god¦ly
begon, may take à gracious and bles¦syd
successe, thold Amite and frends∣hippe
restoryd that God by the crea∣cion
of the worold appoyntyd to be
in that one Realme and Ilond deuy∣dyd
frō all the worold by imparkyng
of the sea by naturall discent of paren∣tayge
and blud, one in langayge and
speche, in form and proporcion of per¦sonayge
one, one in maner and condi∣cion
of lyuyng. and thoccacion of all
discord and hatred banyshyd that the
godd scotishe Englishman may con∣fesse
and do the same at hom that he
doothe in forene and strange coun∣treis
Calling an Englische man all
wayes his contreman and studious to
do hym pleasure before ony other Na¦tion
of the worold. The Breache of

this deuynd and Naturall frendship∣pe
is the uery worke of the deuill by
his wyckid membres that hathe not
tawght Scotland only disobedience
unto here Naturall and Laufull prin∣ce
and superiour powre the Kynges
maiestie of Englond. But also the con¦tempt
of Christ and his moost holy
word throughe all the worold there
iniquite and malyce is fulfillid and go
des mercy, Sufficiently declaryd for
seing they will not repent he reuenchi¦the
there iniustice withe his moost
dredfull Ire not only extenuating the∣reforse
and dyminishing there streng¦he,
but also infatuatythe and turny∣the
into folyshnis there moost pru∣dent
and circumspect counselles. As
it aperid in this batell where as god
usid youre grace as amenys to youre
immortall renowne to optayne à glo∣rious
and Celestiall uictorye agaynst
his Ennymies and youres that were

not only mache and Equall in forse
withe youre Armey. But also treble
or at the lest doble as strangers report
in Numbre at the fyrst onset. Agraci∣ous
and good begynning at the fyrst
brount of youre graces godly uoca∣tion
unto so highe honor, not only to
defend the Kynges maiesties moost
noble person and the Realme but also
to better and perfet the crowne if god
will in reconsiling the unnaturall and
ungodly hatred. Betwen too mem∣bres
of one body whiche of right and
office shuld be as the right hand and
the leffte in peace and Amite to resist
and withstand the forse of all strange
and foren assultes and uiolence. And
as this uictory and triumphe is to be
reyoysid at, so thend why god gaue it
is moost diligently to be consyderyd
who yeuithe the upper hand in the
worold to godly princes because his
afflictyd churche shuld haue some pla¦ce

to rest it selfe in, and the Kyngdom
of god to be amplified in trewthe and
uerite, theffect therof must be folo∣wyd
that as well the ministerye of the
churche be enrychid withe the word
of god, as the ciuile Kyngdom withe
woroldly honor. As I am assuryd you¦re
moost noble grace right well kno∣withe.
Notwithstonding because the
right of euery iust and Laufull here is
halfe loste and more when his title
and cleame is unknowyn I haue wro∣ten
this litle booke conteyning what
Christ is, and what his office is that e∣uery
godly man may put to, his heal∣ping
hand to restore hym agayne un∣to
his Kyngdom and dedicatyd the sa¦me
unto youre Noble grace unto
whom god hathe not onlye commit∣tyd
the defense of apolityke and ciui∣le
Realme but also the defense of his
dere sonnes right Iesus Christ in the
churche who hathe susteynid open

and manifest wrong this manye yeres
as it apperithe by his Euidens and
wrytinges the gospel sealyd withe his
precious blud. And whereas I can∣not
make his cause and right as play∣ne
as it meritithe, nor as it is decent for
hym that would offre and prefer ony
mater to so prudent and mightye à
prince: my godd will and diligence is
acceptyd of god in Christe I dout not
thowghe it be uery litle that I can do
and trust likewyce that for the meri∣tes
of this simple and manifest uerite
your grace will pardon my bold en∣trepryce
and accept this pore worke
in god and gracious part and then it
shall appere youre moost noble puys∣sance
to be coniunyd withe like cle∣mercye
and mercye, the whiche uer∣tewe
of all other causithe man moost
to resemble the almightie god that ma¦de
not only all thinges for his mercyes
sake but likewyce withe mercye ouer

himselfe and his rigorous iusti∣ce
also that the defaultes of mortall
man might fynd solace in Iesus Christ
his only son̄e who preserue the Kyng
his Hignis youre moost noble grace
withe all the councell and the hole
Realme to the glorye of god Amen.
Tiguri 8. decembris. 1547. 
