


THE LITTLE POET ACCIVS NOT knowing which way to couer the smalenesse of hys person, which was somewhat lesse then the meane, thought best to haue a great picture drawne for hys Counterfeyte: This Poet no doubt had some mea∣ning in this deuise, for pictures often go there, where the person whom they represent are not admitted: And it might be that strangers seeing the great shape, would imagine Accius to be a tall man. Tewcer a cunning Archer, but a faynte harted Souldiour, then wanted no courage when he was close couered with the Target of his brother Aiax. Vlisses, whose rype wyt made full amends for his weake body, thought no aduenture dangerous, though neuer so perillous, if he were protected with the shield of Pallas. So I right Noble Ladye knowing my abilitie to wryte, to bee farre lesse then the person of Accius, and so more lykely to incurre more rebukes: my courage therfore more faynte then eyther Tewcers, or Vlisses, and so more needing some strong defence, haue aduentured to place in the forefrunt of this little treatise, the tytle of your name, as a great portrature to a little body, as a sure shield to a weake War∣riour, as a safe defence against any danger. For as they which should see the picture of Accius, would imagine it to aunswere his person: so if the Reader hereof, behold your name in the fyrst leafe, he will deeme the whole Booke the more fruitfull, and the framer therof the more skilfull: but if he shall once perceyue your Honor to be Pa∣tronesse to this labour, he will eyther loue it, bicause he doth honor you, or wil not dare to reproch it, bicause he perceyueth you are as ready, and knoweth you are as able to defend it, as eyther Aiax was to garde Tewcer, or Pallas to guyde Vlisses. I cannot right vertu∣ous Ladye, imagine there was anye greater cause that might induce Accius to frame so bigge a picture: or cause Aiax to shielde Tew∣cer: or mooue Pallas to regarde the safety of Vlisses: then my selfe

now haue to vse your Honors defence. Accius his picture might with a stranger couer the shortnesse of his person: your name shall to the Reader be recompence for the greatnesse of my ignorance. Tewcer fled to Aiax bicause he was his owne brother: I presume to seeke ayde of your Honor, bicause I am your poore seruant. Pallas did defende Vlisses bicause shee knewe he followed and loued her: Your Ladiship (I trust) wyll be my protection, bicause I honor and serue you, which I haue done in tymes past, now doe, and euer hereafter wil do, in such sorte, that the worlde should be wytnesse, if my abilitie to shew it, were as great as my wil is ready to performe it, I would be found equal in dutiful zeale towards your Honor, to Vlisses in harty affection towards Pallas. Therfore right Noble Lady, let me be bold to remember you in behalfe of my self, of that which Demosthenes is reported to haue spoken to Alexander, in defence of the Athenians. You haue (sayd he) most worthy Em∣perour, by fortune no greater good then that you maye: by nature no better gifte then that you wishe to doe good to many. The cre∣dite and estimation your vertuous lyfe, and rare wisdome hath pro∣cured you: the honorable curtesie and sweete behauiour wherewith Nature hath plentifully endued you, shal not be eyther vnfitly or vnfruitfully vsed, if you shal vouchsafe to imploy the one in de∣fence, and shew the other in good acceptance of this slender worke of your seruant, which as I did wryte at ydle times in your house, to auoyde greater ydlenesse or worse businesse: so I present it humbly vnto you, as a testimony of my bounden dutie, euer crauing your Honor to pardon my bolde presumption: and styl beseeching the Almightye to blesse you in earth with much honour, and in heauen to crowne you with eternall felicitie.

