



THE EXPERI∣ence of your honora∣ble acceptation of my last simple trauell in translating Maister Caluins Commenta∣ries vpon Saint Iohns Gospell, hath imbolde∣ned me further to present your Honor with an∣other slender fruit of the same. Which, though it be not of like qualitie with the former, yet I doubt not, but it shal prooue profitable to as ma∣nie, as with diligence and indifferencie shall vouchsafe it the pervsing. The Author (albeit not specified heerin by name) seemeth to be a man of great reading, singular iudgement, and
 excellent dexteritie, in handling the matter which he vndertooke. The worke a notable dis∣couery of that Abaddon, or destroieng eni∣mie, the sonne of perdition, that sitteth in the temple of God, as God; wherein both his defacing of the glorie of the sonne of God in heauen, whose vicegerent he would be counted, and his trampling vnder feete whatsoeuer is called God amongst men, besides his manifold violences committed against the Church and Saints of God, are most liuelie depainted and set before our eies. Many woorthie wits of rare gifts haue trauelled in laieng open his v∣surpations, villanies, and outrages, with the ori∣ginall and processe, causes and effects, prece∣dents and consequents of the same, acording as they were occasioned. But this man hath draw∣en into one entire bodie a great manie memo∣rable points, which are dispersedly found in o∣thers; so that he that listeth may at once take a view, as it were, of such an vglie monster, as would trouble the strongest fantasie in the world to imagine, and the most curious hand to pourtray the like. Howbeit, it is not much to be hoped for, that the Italianate atheists and dis∣contented Papists (of which there are such swarmes amongst vs) will any thing at all be mooued with the cleere light of these most eui∣dent
 demonstrations, to reforme their iudge∣ments and preiudicate opinions alreadie concei∣ued and rooted within them touching his pre∣tended supremacie ouer Gods Church. For it is greatly to be feared, least, by a iust iudgement of the almightie, they are become past feeling, so that they grope as the blind at noone day, gi∣uen ouer to all deceiueablenes of vnrighteous∣nes through a strong spirit of delusion, bi∣cause they would not receiue the loue of the truth that they might be saued. But howsoeuer their harts be as hard as the ada∣mant, and their eies couered with the mist of palpable darknes euen to this day: yet wisedom shal be iustified of hir children. Whom God hath foreappointed to be beholders of his glorie, they shall in their due time be inlightened with the knowledge of his sauing truth, and come out of Babylon with as great speede, as euer the Isra∣elites posted out of Egypt. Yea, they shall clap their hands at the ruine of that Antichristian synagog, which being now tottering and readie to fall to the ground, laboreth with might and maine, by force and fraud, by treacherous at∣tempts, by cruell practises, and open inuasions, as it were by mingling heauen and earth togi∣ther, to vphold it selfe: as may be seene in most places of Europe at this day. But he that sitteth
 in heauen, laugheth them to scorne, the Lord shall haue them in derision. Whose words tou∣ching the ouerthrow of Babylon, cannot fall to the ground, but must be fulfilled in their time. For doubtles Babylon must fal, & be rewar∣ded according to hir works: the kings of the earth shall loath and persecute this vniuersall strumpet, to make hir desolate & naked, to eate hir flesh & consume hir with fire. Thrise blessed are they, that band themselues togither, & bend their whole forces to execute these iudgements of the Lord, which he hath decreed vpon hir. In which respect your H. hath great cause to magnifie the Lord for his gratious mercies to∣ward you, in that he hath vouchsafed you this honor, to stand in armes against one of hir prin∣cipall louers, in so iust and holie a quarell, as is the maintenance of his sacred religion, and the deliuering of the helplesse out of the hands of the oppressor, so aduisedly and necessarily vnder∣taken by hir excellent maiestie. A thing iusti∣fiable by the lawes of God and man, of nature and nations, yea warranted by the like practise of most Christian Emperors in former ages, and sundrie other good presidents of antiquitie. Now, seeing God hath dealt so mercifully with you, it is your H. part, to behaue your selfe vali∣antly, and to fight the Lords battels with cou∣rage.
 He is on your side: therefore you are on the mountaines, and your enimies in the val∣lies: he shall be a brasen wall to defend you on euerie side, if you set his feare before you, and repose your trust in him. The garde of his holie Angels shall be a surer protection vnto you, than any trench, bulwarke, or fortresse you can deuise. The praiers of all the godlie in the land being deeply touched with an inward sympathie and fellow-feeling of their neighbors calami∣ties, are powred out continually for your safetie and happie successe in this noble enterpise: and your H. may be well assured, that they shall pro∣cure more fauour to you at the hands of the Lord, than any either aduersarie forces, or as∣sociations of the holy Tridentine league shal be able to preuaile to the contrarie. Wherfore, my Lord, arme your selfe with Christian courage, policie and warines against these vncircumci∣sed Philistins: remember that they with whom you fight are deuowed vassals to that beast, which is described in this booke: whose power (God be thanked) hath been found too weake to shake the throne of our gratious Souereigne, notwithstanding his often assaults. His thun∣derbolts of excommunications and bannings haue beene esteemed as paper-shot by those no∣ble Princes of the house of Borbon and Ven∣dosme
 in France. He sitteth in his Vaticane as one at his wits end, destitute of counsel, know∣ing that the assurance of his kingdom standeth but vpon one or two such Egyptian reedes, as are mentioned by the prophet, of no great safe∣tie or suretie to be leaned vpon. Should not the consideration of these things increase your for∣titude and magnanimitie, that you neuer faint nor giue ouer before you see a blessed end of your labors? Which the Lord of heauen in a tender regard of his poore Church in this cor∣ner of the world, grant vnto you, that in the end returning home, you may be receiued with such ioifull acclamations and songs of triumph, as Dauid was by the daughters of Israel after his victorious subduing of the Lords enimies; and in the life to come may be crowned with those pretious blessings, which are reserued for them that to the vttermost of their power helpe the Lord against the mightie.
 London. The third of October. 1586.
