


ALTHOVGHE my faythefull and obe∣dient hart towarde your Royal Maiest. (moste souereigne & gracyouse Lady) be so well knowen to God and all good men, that it may se∣me neadeles to declare any outwarde tes∣timoniall of it, yet because (as S. Chryso∣stome sayth) God wolde neuer haue made the mouthe, if it had bene inough in hart to thynck well, I could not at thys tyme content my conscience, onles I dyd gyue

an open and euident signification of my secret fidelitie, loyaltie, and humble obe∣dience toward your most excellent Maiest.
The which, because I was not able to wytnesse vnto the world, ether by famou∣se feates of armes, for lack of experience: ether in bryngyng golden gyftes, for lack of abilitie, ether in writyng workes of nue inuention, for fault peraduenture of lear∣nyng and knowledge, I thought, I myght declare no small token of a true subiectes harte towarde your gracyouse hyghenes, in trauaylyng to trāslate some godly wor∣ke of some worthy wryter: and when I had translated it,The edu∣cation of oure noble Quene. to dedicate it to youre excel∣lent Maiestie: specyally seing your hygh∣nes euen from your tender age, hath bene trayned vp in the treasure howse of lear∣nyng, not so muche bewtyfyed with byl∣lementes and precyouse pearles, as gar∣nyshed with maruaylouse gyftes of grace and godlynes, and euen with the increase of yeares, hathe had an increasyng desyre

of true science and knowledge: in so much that I here it reported credibly, and bele∣ue it verily, that euery nyght callyng your selfe to an accompt accordyng to Pytha∣goras councell, howe you haue spent the day, if by reason of consulting and caryng for youre common wealth, any day scape withoute learnyng of one lesson oute of some godly authour, you be wont to saye vnto them, which be aboute youre noble grace: Frendes, this day haue I loste,A golden sentence of our excel∣lēt Quene. for I haue learned neuer a lesson. O sentence worthy to be pronounced of so excellent a Prynce, O saying worthie to be transla∣ted in to all languages, and to be written in letters of golde.
Truly (moste noble Quene) thys one saying,The cause of our En∣glyshe Lo∣uanians wrytinges dothe encorage many of your gra∣ces faythfull and learned subiectes on this syde of the sea to wrytyng: some to make nue workes neuer sene before, some to translate bokes, which haue bene made of other. Some to wryte in Latē, some in En∣glyshe,

some in verse, and other some in prose. All whose diligence and studye in∣tendeth nothyng lesse, then to wryte one worde wyllingly, whiche myght displease youre Maiestie, which may sowe any se∣des of sedition,A differēce betwene the wry∣ting of the Catholikes now, & the heretykes in Q. Ma∣ries dayes loke kno∣kes his bo∣kes and others. which may disquyet the peace of oure natyue countrie (as in your graces deare systers dayes dyuerse sedity∣ouse sectaryes dyd) but only to further and to preferre as muche as is possible, thys pryncely desyre of knowing the truthe, which we heare with greate ioy to be re∣ported of youre Maiestie.
This is the cause most redoubted Princes∣se, why I am bold to present this my trans∣lacyon vnto your noble grace. Not that I dyd thynk any such lack of Latten to be in your grace, that your grace could not vn∣derstād it in the tounge in the which the fyrst author dyd wryte it (for God hathe made youre grace as it were hys treasure howse of tounges, youre fame florysheth for the Frenche, your renome spreadeth

farre for the Italian, your glory glystreth for the Greke, and many other laudable languages) but that,The cause of dedica∣tyng thys booke in Englishe to oure ree∣doubted Quene. for as much as I ha∣ue learned by experyence, that no man is so wel indued with the knowledge of for∣ren tonges, but when a matter of greate importaunce is tolde hym, the truthe of the which he is desyrouse to knowe cer∣taynly, and to the which he is mynded to make an aunswer wysely, had rather haue it declared in his natural and mother ton∣ge be it neuer so barbarouse, then in a straunge language be it neuer so eloquēt, I thought that this boke intreatyng of so weyghtye and necessari an argument for all Christian men to knowe, shold be bet∣ter welcome to youre grace in oure owne contrye speche for profyt, then in any fy∣ner forren language for pleasure. The which boke, althoughe some men thynck that I myght more boldly haue dedicated to some other, yet in my iudgement I knowe certaynely, I can not exhibit it to

any other more worthily then to your ex∣cellent Maiestie.Our soue∣reigne La∣dy of al o∣ther moste worthy to haue this boke dedi∣cated to her grace. For who is more worthy to haue bokes dedicated to them of veri∣tie, which is lykened to syncere and pure virginitie, then youre grace a most cleare, bryght, and vnspotted virgin? who is more mete to receaue that precyouse iuel which was presented to the wyse, vertuouse and Catholyke Kyng of Poole, then you one of the best learned, graciouse, victoriouse, mercyfull, Prynces vnder the Pole? Ther∣fore most excellent and pearles Pryncesse if I haue any thyng offended in boldnes, by reason of dedicatyng this my lyttell la∣boure vnto your hyghnes, your learnyng, your wysdome, your mercye, and all other your Quenely qualities, which make your grace as it were a marke for all learned men to direct theyr bokes to,our gracy∣ouse Que∣ne a mar∣ke for all learned mēnes bo∣kes to be directed to are the cau∣ses of myne offence.
But my trust is, that nether I haue of∣fended any good man in dedicatyng thys to your hyghenes, nether that youre grace

shall displease God in readyng it.A true prayse of the reue∣rēd Father Hosius. For who is the Auctour of this booke, but Hosius? who, for his prudence in polityke affayres, hathe of the myghtie kyng of Poland be∣ne sent of long tyme in moste weyghtye and honorable Embassages: who, for hys diuine knowledge and incomparable le∣arnyng, was made president of the moste Catholyke and Christian Councell late∣ly holdē at Trent: who, for his syncere and godly lyfe, is worthily called Hosius, which after the Greke Etymologie signifyeth ho∣ly. Althoughe some, whose harte is rotten at the rote with rancor, whose māner is to reproue good men with rayling, whē they arre not able to doo it by reason, laboure to drowne the dignitie of such a pearlesse Prelate, of such a blessed Byshope, of such a famouse father, in saying that he will be ouercome with his Polonyshe pottes. But no maruayle if Hosius be called a drōkard, for euen so was hys Master Chryst before hym called a wyne bybber, which is all o∣ne

to say a quasser, a tosse potte.
As for his boke, that youre grace neade not to feare the displeasure of God in rea∣dyng it, what is it ells but a true treatyse intytuled by the author hym selffe of the begynnyng of heresies, in oure tyme, and by me the translatour, named the hatchet of heresies? for so muche as to shewe the begynnyng of heresies,The cause why this boke is na∣med the hatchet of heresies. is to bryng heresye vnto an end, and to cut it downe none o∣ther wyse then an hatchet in man his hand layde to the roote of a plant, sone supplā∣teth and ouerthroweth it. Euen so truly (most souereyne Ladye) thys boke is the hatchet which supplanteth that euel plant which Sathā hath sowed in God his groū∣de,what man∣ner of plāt this hat∣chet hew∣eth down. whose roote is raylyng, whose body is rebellion, whose braunches be bloodshed∣de, whose leaues be lyes, whose frute be the aples of Atheisme, that is to be of no Religion, or to thynck that there is no God at all.
Wherefore moste humbly vpō my knees

I desire your grace not only to reade this excellent treatise your selffe, but also to be contented that my dearly beloued coun∣trie men youre graces moste faythfull sub¦iectes may do the same, that they may re∣ceaue this souerayne salue of their soules, withoute any harme of their bodyes: that they may here gather the euerlasting trea∣sures of theire myndes, witoute any losse of their temporall possessions: that they may here see, that it is not the expresse worde of God, which our Britānical Brē∣tians teache, but the pressed and wrested worde of God, not the holy Scriptures, but prophane scrapinges of dyuerse olde and nue heresies, not the traditions of the Apostles, but rather (I desyre pardon of youre maiestie to speake reason somwhat rowghly) the trayterouse additiōs of Apo¦states. Finally, that in reading of this no∣table boke, they standyng as it were in the Castell of cōtemplation, and seing howe heretykes marche malitiously on toward

the other in the medowe of madnes,The bat∣tayle of he∣retykes. fight one with the other in the felde of al foly, howe they one against the other bend the ordinaunce of all disorder, cast the dartes of deadly displeasure, shote with the cros∣se bowes of cursed speakyng, and to be short, leaue nothing vndone to vndoo o∣ne an other, I say that youre faythfull sub∣iectes my dearly beloued countrymen se∣ing in this boke quietly all theire disquy∣etnes, may lothe deuydyng discorde, and returne to Catholyke concorde of Christ his holy Churche: vnto whiche, no doubt Christ returnyng to his Father, sayd these wordes, Pacem meam do vobis, pacem meam relinquo vobis &c. My peace I gyue you, my peace I leaue vnto you. whiche peace God graunt, we may seke ernestly, fynde spedily, and holde stedfastly. This (I say) moste humbly and ernestly desyring your grace, beseching also, that it wyll please youre hyghenes to take me, as I am, youre sure and sounde harted subiect in all ser∣uice

that I can, I desyre God to be youre graces buckler in battayle, youre pillar in peace, youre leader in all the slyppery wayes of this lyff, and your crowner in the bles∣sed Kyngdome which is to come. Amen.
Youre graces faythfull and obedient subiect Richard Shacklock.
