


I CAM to the syght (most excellēt King) of a certayne booke cōpyled by Ihon Bren¦tius, whiche Petrus Paulus Vergeri{us} fea∣red not to dedicate vn∣to youre grace: and I haue readen it ouer not withoute greate troble and vexation of myn∣de. He calleth it a golden boke, but I can not easyly be persuaded, that the A Prouerbe which had this begynnyng, when Quintus Cepio toke bi assaulte the citie of To∣losa in Italy: there was founde in the temples greate plentie of golde, which being taken a∣way, all that had any parte thereof, dyed my∣serably: whereof happened this prouerbe, whē anye man fynished his lyffe miserablie, men wolde say, that he had golde of Tolosa. golde of Tolosa, which is a prouerb in euery man his mouthe,Aurum Tolosanū.





dyd worke more harme to them which dyd handle it, then this boke may bryng to vncir∣circumspect and symple soules, which shall ta∣ke in hand to reade it: so that if it deserue to be called golden, in this respect it shall be so called, because it semeth to be made of the gol∣de of Tolosa. For why? dothe he not in that boke ouerthrouwe all order? dothe not he de∣stroy all polytyke gouernemēt? dothe he leaue any thyng vndone, which helpeth to disquiet the peace and tranquillitye of the Churche? If it be true, which a certayne holy father dyd say, that the peace of al thinges, dyd consist in the quyet maynetenaunce of an vniforme or∣der, what place can be there left for peace, where this is only intended, that nothing may be done in order? where laboure is spent in no∣thing more, then that the Churche which is

described terrible, set in battayle ray lyke an hoste of warryars, which also in the scripture is often tymes called, the Kyngdome of heauē, sholde be made that most pestilent place, where no order dothe remayne, but euerlastyng hor∣rour dothe dwell? And that Vergerius pro∣cured that boke to come abroade in prynt, I maruayle nothing: but in that he had the face to dedicate it to you a Catholyke, Christyan, and ryght ruled Kyng, and by suche meanes to stayne the name of youre Maiestie, which throughe the whole worlde, as it is for other vertues, so for the prayse of true godlynes, is notable and famouse euen with the cheifest, that is the thyng, which I can neuer wunder inoughe at.
But what can he feare to doo,Vergerius his blynde boldnes. which not contented to deface as muche as lay in hym, youre Maiestie, by dedicatyng that boke vnto you, durste presume also to abuse a man farre vnlyke vnto hym, named Aloysius Lipoma∣nus Byshopp of Verone, then the which man, for the space almost of six hundred yeares,

synce what tyme oure countrye receaued the Ghospell of Christ, we haue sene in Poole not one of the Apostolicall legates, ether a better lyuer, ether better learned: notwithstandyng this sckyppe Iacke durste take vpon hym with more impudencye then Auxentius the here∣tyke once vsed towarde the moste graue, lear∣ned, and holy man Saynt Ambrose, to pro∣uoke this worthy Prelate to dispute with hym vpon the principall poyntes conteyned in this golden boke (as he calleth it) before youre Maiestie, whome he wolde haue to sette as a Iudge in that controuersye. I say, what can he be afearde to doo, whome we see to haue growen so farre past grace, after that denying Christ his faythe, and embrasyng Luther hys Lore, he hathe lept from one sect to an other, that he boasteth of his beastlynes lyke vnto Sodoma, nether is ashamed to glorye in his maliciouse manners, whilst he openly maketh his vaunte,Vergerius twyse per∣iured. that he hathe broken that pro∣misse, which he twyse had made vnto God: the forme of the which, he caused to be pryn∣ted,

that he myght make all the worlde wyt∣nesse, what manner of merchaunt he was. But I maruayle the lesse at his blynde and beastly boldnes, whome those writynges on∣ly, if there were nothing ells, which he cau∣sed to be scattred among the common people at the laste Parlement holden at Varcauia, do planely proue that he hathe shaken of all shamefastnes, and that there is not one sparc∣ke of the feare of God left in hym. But I can not chose but maruayle greatly, that notwith∣standyng his naughtynes, there be some which reade, and in reading, gyue credit to this fel∣lowe his fansies: which semeth to haue framed hym selffe so to false fordgyng, that he hathe had regarde to nothing more, then that neuer a true worde sholde scape oute of his mouthe. I wyll not speake of all his other mischeuouse doinges, for it were to long for me to wryte, and for youre grace to reade.
Only this his epistle,Vergerius hys lying epistle. whiche he dyd wryte to youre Maiestie, howe is it loden with lyes? He fayneth that youre grace at the fyrst cal∣led

a Parlament to set an order in religion, whereas in very dede nether in the letters, which you commaunded to be sent to youre Councelloures, nether in the message, which was gyuen to them, which, as the manner is, went to the lower Sessions, there was so much as one worde spoken of religion: moreouer this is well knowen, in many of youre Maie∣sties dominions, that strayght charge was gy∣uen to them, which were appoynted messen∣gers to the hygher Sessions, that thei shold not make any mention of religion, nether that thei sholde suffer any chaunge to be made in it, be∣cause thei wolde wyllingly rest in the auncient Religion. Of the which charge and cōmaun∣dimēt, when they cam to the hygher Sessions, some of them were admonyshed. Yea that is not hydde from cōmon knowledge, that youre Maiestie wolde haue consultation to be had of no other thyng in the Sessions by the Mes∣sangers of youre dominions, then suche con∣sultation as properly sholde appartayne to the Sessions, that is, to debate and to consyder

howe the Realme myght be mayntayned and defended: because you dyd very well iudge,Reforma∣tion in re∣ligion to whom it belongeth. that the handlyng and ordryng of Religion, dyd belong to the Synodes and cōuocations of Byshoppes, not to the Sessions of youre Real∣me and Empyre. VVherefore when the mat∣ter required, that there sholde be some men∣tion made of religion, so your grace caused the thing to be proponed by Ihon Oczieski Lorde Chauncelloure of youre Realme, a man in∣dued not only with a syngular wytte and pru¦dence, and a maruaylouse grace of vtteraun∣ce, but allso with specyall constancye in the Catholyke and true faythe, that you gaue in commaundiment, that it sholde be declared in euident wordes, that it was not youre Ma∣iesties pleasure, that they sholde speake theyre myndes, concerning the reforming of religion, which was wellinoughe reformed before: but that they sholde say, what they thought of this, howe in youre Maiesties absence from youre Realme, prouision might be made, that peace and tranquillitie myght neuer the lesse

be preserued: and at the lengthe with the con∣sent of all youre Senatours, you dyd decree, that if hereafter any man sholde be so hardy to make any innouation in Religion, that he sholde be accompted as a breaker of common peace, and sholde be punished after the same sorte, as an ennimie of his countrie is wont to be.
Nowe and please youre grace, do not these thynges differ as muche as chalcke and chese, from those thinges which Vergerius dothe tell? VVho also blushed not to coyne this lye in his Epistle,An other lye of Ver∣gerius. when that a reformation sholde be made of certayne abuses, which be brought in to the Churche, that some certaynelye dyd reporte, that the peares of the Realme dyd de∣nye that thing to appartayne to the knowled∣ge and determination of the Byshopp of Ro∣me and other Byshoppes: whereas by the de∣cree of the Parlementes, which aboue to yea∣res agone were holden at Petricouia, a mes∣senger was sent of youre grace to the Pope, which not only as it is the accustomed manner

of Catholyke Kynges and Princes, sholde promisse that you wolde allway be vnder his autoritie, but also sholde desyre hym to send an Embassadoure, by whose autoritie those hurleburleis might be appeased, which were raysed vp in youre Realme aboute Religion. Of decreing whiche Embassage, the cheife in the Senate was the noble man Ihon Earle of Tarnow, moste famouse for many noble fea∣tes done bothe in warre and peace,A saying worthye for a Sena∣toure. with greate prayse and prosperouse successe: which also dyd not styck to say that, which a Catholyke Senatoure ought for to say: that if any chaun¦ge were brought in of any customes, what so euer they were, withoute cōsent of the holy A∣postolyke sea, it wolde come to passe, that oure Realme sholde run in infamye of Schisme, and of wycked diuision. Therefore seing this message vnto the Pope, was decreed no more of youre graces pleasure, then of the agreable consent of youre whole Councell, the which, this man who is so curiouse in a forren Com∣mon wealthe, coulde not but knowe, what a

brasen browe hathe he, that he dare wryte, that the Peares denyed the amendment of a∣buses and erroures to appertayne to the know¦ledge of the Byshoppe of Rome, and other By¦shoppes? VVhy wolde they so ernestly haue desyred an Embassadoure to be sent from the See Apostolyke, if they had thought that it had nothing to doo with suche thynges?
Vergerius his rayling on the Po∣pe.But nowe as concerning that reproche, with the which he calleth the Pope and By∣shoppes ennimies of the truthe, whome it is no doubt to be and euer to haue bene the defen∣dours and patrones of the truthe, dyd it not procede from the open ennimie of the truthe? But howe many more bokes of hys I dyd rea∣de wrytten very impudentlye, so muche the more I dyd perceaue, that he was all together patched and clouted of guyle, decepte, and ly∣es,Vergerius howe he was a ba∣nyshed mā of Iesus Christ. who neuer semeth to haue spoken a truer worde, then when he calleth hymselffe a ba∣nished man of Iesu Christ: forsomuche as syn∣ce the tyme he translated hym selffe vnto an other Gospell, and cutte hym selffe of from

the body of Christ, he hathe left of to be a ci∣tezin and howseholde seruaunt of God, and made an aliaunt from Christ, he hathe be∣quethed hym selffe to the powre of the dyuell, with whose spyrit for so muche as he is guy∣ded, he can not chose but vtter suche thinges as he dothe. Nether can it be false, whiche the truthe dothe say. Howe can you speake good thinges, when you youre selues be euell? He semeth to be of theire number, whome S. Ihon calleth Antichristes, of whome he sayth: They haue gone oute from vs, but they were not of vs: for if they had bene of vs, they wolde surely haue remayned with vs. For this man, was once in the body of Christ,How euell men be in the church of Christ. as euell humoures be in the bodye of man, the which when thei be purged, the body is lyght∣ned: euen so this fellowe, after he once depar∣ted, the body of Christ, the Churche, was muche eased, in so muche that it is to be re∣ioysed, that suche an one went oute of it. For he was not cut from the fleshe of Christ, of the whiche he was neuer a member, but only he

leaned heauily on his brest, so long as he was in the body, so that great lyghtnes and ease∣ment of Christ his body is followed, after that this euell humoure is gone oute of it. We tru∣ly arre well contented, that suche be called to the defence of this fift nue gotten Gospell, that it may be as saythe the Prouerb,Dignū pa∣tella oper∣culum. A mete couer for suche a cup. But nowe I haue spo∣ken inoughe as concerning the man, and that otherwyse then I dyd propose. Nowe brefely, youre grace shall heare the causes, which mo∣ued me to bend my selffe to confute with my contrary writynges, these bokes of Brentius, which Vergerius dothe sette so muche by.
The causes mouing Ho¦sius to wri¦te agaynst Brentius.I toke it very heauely, when I dyd see that man whiche not only for hys learnyng, and godly lyuing, but also for that autoritie which he dyd beare, ought to be had in greate reue∣rence of all men, shold be so prouoked as it we∣re to a combate of suche a tryfelyng fellowe. But that dyd nypp me nearer the hart, that the saucy face syr durst presume to wryte to you of suche a matter, to make youre grace

hys iudge, to dedicate this Brentian booke to you a Christian and truly taught kyng. The which thyng, when I perceaued to be interpri∣sed of other heretykes diuerse tymes, that they brought you in to an euel name by dedicating theire workes vnto you, and wolde rayse a su∣spition of youre grace, as who saye, that you were of one mynde with them which desyre Christian Religion ether to be chaunged, or ells to be cleane rased, I was trobled in myn∣de, that the Catholykes dyd not bestowe lyke laboure and studye in remouyng that suspiti∣on, whiche these peruerse persones dyd go a∣boute to bryng you into. For althoughe you so behaue your selffe in defendyng and mayn∣taynyng, that Catholyke and true Religion which you haue receaued of your auncetours, that you be nothyng to be suspected of suche a cryme, yet notwithstandyng, for so muche as they whiche knowe you not, and see bookes stuffed with all kynde of wyckednes to be de∣dicated to you, and as it is the manner of this fyft Gospell, do here false rumours to be repor¦ted

of youre maiestie, occasion is gyuen them to thynk and suspect the wurste. Which thing, howe muche grefe it is wont to graft in my hart, it passeth the common credit of all men. For it behoueth youre so excellent Maiestye, not only to be withowte fault, but also to be farre from all suspition of fault. Therefore I haue taken willingly vpon me thys trauayle, that I might delyuer you of thys suspitiō, and that I myght wytnesse it to the whole worlde, that you allway haue purely and vndefyled∣ly defended the Catholyke Religion. Nether am I ignorant, howe malipert, and redy these men be to rayling, which wolde seme to be the defendoures of any other Gospell, then of the Gospell of Christ, with what reproches they rayle on them whiche differ from theire opi∣nion, and will not at a beck bowe to that re∣ligion, which they worshipp as the worde of God. But I weighe not those mennes mali∣tiouse scoldynges, so that I may purge youre grace of that suspition, which they laboure to loade, or rather oppresse youre good name

and estimation. But rather I take my selffe to be hyghely cōmended, so often as I am slaun¦dred of suche fylthye backbyters: and on the other syde, I accompt my selfe defamed, if I be praysed of suche, as be not worthye them selues of any prayse. I beseche God to kepe youre Maiestie long in healthe and pro∣speritie.
Oute of my Castell of Heils∣bergk, in the Ides of Octobre. M.D.LVII.
