


ENtring of late (right Ho∣norable) into some extra∣ordinary consideration, of the common cruelty, and horrible oppression dayly committed, by many couetous cormo∣rants, and cankred Catter-pillets, of this most miserable age wherein we liue, who delight (as the Prophet saith) in nothing but in ioyning house to house,Isa. 5 8. and field to field, till the poore can get no habitation, ex∣cept it be in some prison or other, (where some of these wicked wretches will not stick to say, they liue better then they do abroad. (Indeed, as some of them vse
them,) and then waying with my selfe how vile a monster, nay, how heinous, and hellish an Hydra,Psal. 36.5. & 108.4 Gen. 1.26 Barbarous Cruelty is, both in the sight of God, (whose mercy is greater then the heauens) and in the eyes of good men (made after his owne Image) which is many wayes more practised and put in execution, now in the light or the Gospell, amongst the professors of the same, which beare the name of Christi∣ans, then euer it was, either in the time of darkenesse and ignorance, or amongst the Heathen that neuer heard of God. Wher∣fore, beeing fully perswaded that your Lordship is both a professed foe, and an open enemie, to all bloude Cains, and couetous Ahabs, that any way seeke the subuersion of their poore brothers, or neighbors, spirituall, or temporall, either by might, or pollicie. I therefore, being minimus apostolorum, whose arrowes are feathered with foule Misfortune, and whose sunne-shine of prosperitie, and warme dayes of well-fare, haue beene Eclipsed with the black clouds of cruelty, and nipping frosts of nine yeares most pit∣tilesse imprisonment, haue not onely en∣terprised
to pen this simple tract, of the euill seruant toward his poore fellow,Mat. 18.23. but also presumed to present the same vnto your honorable view, and Christian con∣sideration, supposing no man more wor∣thy then your Lordship of a farre fairer peece of worke then it is; not doubting but your honor will vouchsafe, not onely to accet thereof, as the poore widdowes mite, with as much kindnesse, as I offer it with good-will, but also defend it, vnder the shadow of your shelter, whereby it shall bee safe, from the inection of infa∣mous tongues. And although I haue not streined vp my strings to any high pitche, whereby to make any great sound, fine melody, or musicall harmonie, with Or∣pheus Harpe to moue dumbe, yea senslesse creatures (as it were) to listen therevnto, so foming out the frothe of mans wis∣dome, in making a great shew of learning (for that is not the marke I shoote at) but onely the saluation of mens soules, for whom Christ dyed.) Therefore accord∣ing to the capacitie of the common sort, I haue tuned mine instrument with Hypar∣chyons Pipe, to play by the plainest mood,
at the lowest Key, and sweetest sound, thereby to mooue reasonable men (if it might be) to learne some-thing, towards the saluation of their poore soules, be∣cause wee are not sent to Preach with wis∣dome of words,1. Cor. 1.17.27. & 14.19. for fiue words to edifying is better then ten thousand not vnderstood. Wherein if I haue any wayes passed the bound of modestie, whereby to offend your Lordships patience, or committed any thing distastfull to your honorable conceit, I most humbly craue pardon for the same, attending to receiue the pu∣nishment due to mine imperfections. But if I haue pleased the least part of your Lordships good liking, I shall most hap∣pily rest contented at the dore of your deuotion, and lowest step of your foote∣stoole. And so leauing the crew of all cursed Caines, and all couetous Ahabs, with all such canker-wormes of crueltie and mercilesse misers, in the midst and maine sea of their monstrous mallicious mindes, and your Lordship as a most worthy pillar, and protector of all poore oppressed persons, to weede out the wic∣ked, and defend the innocent, with the
sworde of Iustice, whereby Mercy and Charitie may bee well planted, the Kings Maiestie the better preserued, the com∣mon wealth best gouerned, and God most of all glorified, I most humbly take my leaue. From the Fleete. 1608.

