



THE great Messias, the Lord Iesus (right Ho∣norable) being on the Crosse readie to dye, cast his eye aside, and sawe his mother and the disciple stan∣ding by, whom hee loued, on whose breast he leaned: and sayd to his mo∣ther, Woman behold thy sonne:Iohn 19.26. and to the disciple, Behold thy mother. This voyce then spake from the altar of the crosse on earth: The same voyce see∣meth to speake still from the arch of heauen, the Church being grauen on

the palme of his hands,Esay. 49.16. and her walles euer in his sight on the one side, & see∣ing the Nobles of the world on the o∣therside, especially such Nobles whō hee loueth, on whose shoulders his truth leaneth, in whose breast the loue of the trueth dwelleth: He seemeth to say to the Church, as to a faint & weak woman of them: O woman behold thy sonnes the Nobles of the earth: Psal. 45.16. Thou shalt haue children the Potētates thorow the whole earth. And to them: O ye sonnes of the No∣bles,Galath. 4.26. behold your mother also. This mother, the true Church, maketh you the sonnes of God. That voyce then wrought obedience: he to whom it was spoken, tooke it to heart, and took her home: So ought the Peeres and States of the world, especially whom Iesus hath loued by education in the trueth, to take this mother the church, her sonnes and daughters, the trueth and her defence home to them, to sur∣round it with their power and coun∣tenance, euen as in two circles Israel

with all their tribes and gouernours did hemme in the Tabernacle of God, Numb. 3.38. In the inmost circle Mo∣ses and Aaron on the forefront of the Tabernacle Eastward stood next to it: vers 24. On the other side three fami∣lies of Leui: The Gersonites pitched their tents behinde the Tabernacle Westward: vers 29. The Kohathites had their standing on the South side: vers. 35. The Merarites on the North side. These were the inward lists of it. In the outward wall of it (so to speak) Eastward did Iuda claspe it in, and his associates Issachar and Zabulon: Num. 2.5. On the South side, vers. 10. Reben fastned his standard with Gad and Si∣meon: On the West, vers. 18. ioyned Ephraim with Manasses and Benia∣min: On the North, vers. 24. as closing vp all, came Dan with Asher and Nap∣tali. So strongly and politically was Gods Tabernacle and Church then mannaged and conducted: in so sight∣ly manner did it march on with this alarme: Num. 10.35. Arise O Lord,

and let thine enemies be scatrered. In so puissant and stable manner did it take vp his standing with this solem∣nitie: Returne O Lorde to the many thousands of Israel. The Nobles who thus stand about Gods Church at this time, and lend their shoulders for his trueth to leane vpon, haue a greater place thē Naamans:2. King. 5.18. the King to leane on their hands: then Atlas, the arch of heauen to rest vpon their shoulders: they haue the honour to be the noble disciples whō Iesus loueth, on whose breasts he leaneth, in whose hearts he dwelleth: to whom he hauing sayd, Behold your mother, the Church, the trueth: they doe not onely take her home to them vnder their roofe, dwel with it, conuerse with it: but enter in∣to a strict vow and solemne protesta∣tion, (for this is the heroicall prote∣stant) as Ruth the Moabitish did to Naomi: concerning her cleauing to the trueth and Gods people, though discouraged by contrarie example of one that lay in the same wōbe, though

aboured with by the womb that bare her: she sayd,Ruth. 1.16.17. Intreate me not to leaue thee, nor to depart from thee: whither thou goest, I will goe: where thou dwel∣lest, I will dwell: thy people shall be my people: thy God, my God: where thou dyest, I will dye: and there will I be bu∣ried. The Lord doe so vnto me, and more also if ought but death part thee and me. The obedience to this voyce of God, to take the loue of the trueth home to you, seeing it hath dwelt in your familie and progenie long, and now hereditarily resteth in your Ho∣nour: and the experience of your care, by whose meanes not onely the stan∣dard of the preaching of the word is lift vp in this place, (tanquam in arce Minerua Phidiae) in the midst of cap∣tiued enemies (which was not before) but by whose fruites of faith also it is cherished: emboldened me to present this firstling of my labors in this kind, in the cause of many speechles infants, to your Honour: remembring what Salomons mother sayd to him: Open

thy mouth for the dumme in the cause of all the children of destruction Open thy mouth,Pouer. 31.8. &c. The argument, though diminutiue and low, yet parents loue to heare of the state of their childrē in this life: much more of life to come, specially the godly. Euen graue fathers after serious matters dispatched, for∣beare not to vse modificatiō of speech, to lispe with the little ones: saying, Chesippus, not Chrysippus: as he in Tul∣lie: Coniah,Iere. 22. not Ieconiah: as in the scripture. But why do I seeke further? Haue not these little ones the Dukes and Pecres of heauen for their Pa∣trones?Matth. 18.10. Their Angels (sayth Christ) alwaies behold the face of God the fa∣ther in heauen. And he that set a child in the midst of his Apostles, striuing for honour,Matth. 18.3 with this charge: Verely, except ye be conuerted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdome of heauen: and he that humbleth himselfe as this child, is the greatest in the kingdome of heauen: knew that the case of little children,

their harmlesnes, innocencie, mildnes, are matters for all sorts to meditate vpon, to schoole them to GOD. In which argument Dauid so profited, Psalm. 131.2. that he professeth euen before the Lorde, that he demeaned himself as a weaned, euen as a weaned child, though the court and field had been his nurse. But I may not exceede the measure of a Preface: The Lord ripen the good worke he hath begun in your Honour, and increase it with the mightie increa∣sings of God.

