


SIrach in his writing, the seuenth Chapter, war∣neth vs, that we should willingly visite the sick. And our sauiour Christ, Matth. 25. will at the last  accept and take this woorke of cha∣, that is to say, to visite the sicke, euen hough it were done to him selfe. For r Lord Christ him self saith) What so  you haue done to any amongst these my llest brethrē, that haue you don vnto me.  as much then, welbeloued brother,  this worke to visite the sick, is such ighe and speciall worke of charitie,  such a one, as Christ at Doomes day  allowe and thereby acknowledge vs e his disciples: therefore it will be∣ vs, not alonly with our whole rtes delight to shewe it, but also to e diligent care, howe and after what t, we may properly and rightly visite
 the sicke. And that is specially done in two manner of wayes. For euery sicke body hath specially neede of two maner of remedies. First, that his soul be holpē, for if the soule be once holpen, then will the body be easily holpen afterward. Therfore, first to remedie the soule, is to exhort the sicke body to repentance, & make him to vnderstand his sinne, teach him to call to God for helpe, and after that againe, to comfort and lift vp his fearefull conscience, and set foorth and paint vnto the sicke body liuely Christ, (which is the throne of grace) whereof we haue a fine example of king Ezekia, there did the Prophete Esaias vse this maner & order with the sick king: war∣ned him first to repentance, layd before him Gods iudgement, 2. Paral. 32. And as soone as he had humbled the king, & called to God for grace, the Prophete then comforted him, and after that, re∣medied his bodily sicknesse. 4 Reg. 20. and Esaias. 38. Sirach also putteth vs in minde of like order, in his 38. Chapter. specially, that we in our sicknesse shuld confesse our sinnes, and amend, then to
 call to GOD for grace and helpe, after e to take physicke. Seeing then that visitation of the sicke, is to bee prac∣ after two manners, as is abouesaid: efore haue I taken vppon mee to  the first way, after the order of the ptures: but not for the learned, for  neede it not, but for the wel dispo∣ that they might haue some smal en∣, and one Christian to visite and cō∣ an other, as much as is necessarie to tion. The other way to visite the , as touching the body, is done in y wayes, specially with attending n them, giuing them meat & drink, ng them vp, & laying them downe, nselling them wherein they neede, n other like helpings, exercises, and ngs: these wayes can euery man after  sort doe, if he be disposed after the  of charitie, to deale with his bro∣: and therefore here not necessarie y much more, although that I before  time, in my booke of Gods wrath,  sufficiently shewed, how one shuld  fort the sicke: Yet I haue thought it d at this time, to set foorth a little
 forme very short, & also declare briefly certeine warnings & comforts, after di∣uers sorts: out of which euery man may take one, two, or moe comfortes, to be made vnto the sicke, as a man thinketh good, or as his spirit shal moue him, and as he for the time shall thinke necessarie for the sicke person. For one sicke body is farre vnlike an other, some haue more tēptation thē an other, one hath ben be∣forehand beter instructed in gods word then an other: therefore no man shal be bound to bring out al that is herein wri∣ten. And welbeloued brother in lawe, I haue thought good to cōmend this litle comfortable booke vnto you, to the in∣tent that you, & other good folk, as time and oportunitie shall serue, may vse it as necessitie shall require: and you shall see it good chiefly therfore, bicause you hi∣therto with great diligence and earnest∣nesse, haue taken vpon you to studie the scriptures. Our Lorde God graunt you his grace, that ye may vse the holy scrip∣ture to his prayse, and to the profite and commoditie of your neighbors. Amen.

