



I H made bold (right Worshipfull) to dedicate this Hymne and generall sa∣crifice of compunction and thanksgi∣uing, to your name and memorie, both as a tendering of my particular office to you and yours principally: and because God hath made you so generall a man for the common good, being so learned, religious, and ha∣bitually prudent from the chiefe schoole of high wisedome in our estate, the bourd of his Maiesties most honourable priuie Counsell, and a most sufficient seruant of King and Country in this place: whereupon I begin to conceiue strong hope, that the Lord hath sent you amongst vs, not onely for these deare and present times of this new generation of gun▪ powder men in this place, in which your dexterity and seruice is apparant to all, but to be valued of them who are able to giue it his due weight & poise, without diminishing any graine of such a mineral better then gold:Tower mini∣sterie. but for esta∣blishing also the Church and gouernment here vnto poste∣rity, which hath beene the sinne of omission in many before you: and now needeth some Zerubabel, or Nehemia,Zach▪ 4.7.10. Noh. 13.4.7.8. a restorer after so many exigents, as it hath beene driuen vn∣to in the ministeries of the same, being driuen out of their possessions, and olde indowments, in the midst of gold and siluer, Iewels and Plate, as Tantalus in the miast of water, wanting water: where rather the support should be certaine and liberall for Gods honour, and the Kings, for the atten∣dance of such an one, as both may informe the officers and seruants there, and inhabitants besides, to the number welnigh of 400. communicants (aggregated thither, and

escaping scot and lot else where, who enioy all diuine rights for themselues and their families at the Ministers hands, and as though their soules were worth nothing, or free of heauen,Pro. 3.9. honour the Lord with no part of their substance) and may at times also by moderate dropping of his words vpon the Prisoners,Ezech 21.2. rather then at or a little before their death (for their error came not in a moment,Conference with prisoners. nor is Chri∣stian regeneration ripened but by degrees) instruct the con∣trarie minded with patience, as the ample saith: trying whether God will giue them repentance at any time to know the truth,2. Tim. 2.24.25.26. that they may come to amendment out of the snare of the diuel, of whom they are held to do his wil▪ which place of scripture I confesse I haue long time much made of. In which kind my poore labours haue not beene in vaine in the Lord, both to the reclaiming of diuers, and to the disco∣uerie of matter beneficiall to the estate: which I think some of their honors haue not forgot, glorfied be the name of him that hath his chaire in heauen, and teacheth the heart. In all which ripe and sweet fruites of your faith,In veni late∣ritiam: reli∣qui marmo∣ream. that you may increase with the mighty increases of God, my harty prayer is, that so you may be eminent daily in this your whole so carefull a charge and employment, in this royall Castle, the key of the kingdome: that you make that marble, which you found brick: that that which was planted with wilde figs, you may establish with Cedars: finally, so to wade tho∣rough this whole cumbersome & vncertaine sea full of ma∣ny new monsters, as that you may haue an Oliue branch still in your hand, & with an vncorrupt mind lift vp your head to the head of all with holy ouation, saying. I haue run my full race:2. Tim. 4.7.8. I haue fought a good fight: I haue kept my selfe in the faith, and others: Clavum et clipeū tenui. Amen.

