



IF Vitruuius the Judge of exquisite and perfect workes, al∣lowe no building to be fullie fini∣shed, which wants a couer to beare out a storme, mine enterprise may seeme lesse straunge to you (good master Secretarie) for that hauing in a manner made an ende of this rude pyle, though not so formallie, according to the dein∣tie patternes of Corinthe, Athens, and the pallaces of Greece, as painefullie according to the module of my slender skill: I presume to shroude the same vnder the shaddow of your wges, and to grace it with the louer of your honourable name, that enuie may be quite discouraged from giuing a∣ny sharpe assaulte, or at the least her noy some smoake as∣cending to the toppe, may finde a vent whereby to vanish. For if the sweetnesse of your disposition, the franknesse of your minde, the credite of your place, the leuell of your long experience, and the depth of your iudgement, be meanes sufficient and strong enough, to drawe the mindes of persons well disposed, both to loue and honour you, for of my parte, I am forced to confesse the bonde of my parti∣cular affection, and zeale vnto your selfe to be so much in∣creased by your stedfast freenshippe in the daies of proofe,
 as not my hand alone shall be euer eady to subscribe and sette on the seale▪ but my heart withall, while it hath any sparke of life to acknowledge the great merite of your vn∣deserued fauour. For to whome in reason should men ra∣ther recommend themselues, then on whome they haue greatest cause to loue: who may be more securelie trusted in the porte of libertie, then he that once vouchsaued with a fauourable hand to waifte me out of surges of vncertaine chaunce: who can with better ayme determine of a truth, then hee that euer was hir freend by nature, and is nowe a strong assistaunt by aucthoritie: who can better iudge of my conceyte, then he that hath been best acquainted from the first beginning with mine aunswer. Beside, if it maye please you to recall the tyme to minde, wherein as well to you, as others of your calling, I engaged my assured pro∣mise (if God spared lyfe) to giue publique testimony to the world, what my conceite hath euer beene of Prophecies, which wise men value as the scomme of pride, and dregs of ignoraunce; you maye accept this Treatise rather▪ in dis∣charge of a former debt, then as the lone of a later vsurie. For as it pleased God to direct the sal of Ioseph into Egpt to a certaine ende, although he vnderstoode it not, nor any of those instrumentes that sought to ridde him out of the way for another cause. As saint Phillip had a kind of liking to the beaten way, whereby Queene Candaces zealous Eu∣nuch could not choose but passe, although he were not pri∣uie to the plotte which GOD had set in heauen, before he were emploied therein, so from the sixteenth yeere of mine age, vntyll this present daye, (I knowe not whether by in∣stinct of prouidence, or warning by mishaps of some that went before) my manner hath beene in the course of all my reading, to store vp all such reasons and examples, as
 occurred eyther in Philosophie, the ciuill lawes, diuinitie, or histories, to the ruine of pretended Prophetes, and their Prophecies: although in trueth I could no more foresee what accident might moue mee afterward to dispose and marshall them in order for mine owne defence, then either Ioseph or Phillippe knewe what should betide them in their iourney. My care and studdy hath beene onely to do that which might be confonant to the wyll and pleasure of al∣mighty God, agreeable to the circūstaunces of the present tyme sufficient for mine owne discharge, and pleasing in hir sight, whome peerelesse vertues planted in a royall stocke, baue exempted from comparison. If nothing then that eyther helpeth not, or tendeth not to this prefixed scope be published and recommended by my penne: my hope is then, I may be bolde to blase your name in the first page of my Booke, with lyke deuotion to that where∣with the Romanes vsed to set foorth the portraite of theyr most assured freend, in the formost front of theyr pal∣lace▪ And albeit the sacrifices which in olde tyme were offered to GOD, might neither be vnperfect, defectiue, o lame in any part, yet courtesies which flowe from sted∣fast freendes▪ may be regarded for theyr simple and playne meaning, though not for theyr weight: as pearles beare prices, not according to theyr value, which is sleight, but according to the common estimate, which is of more im∣portaunce. Touching the faultes or ouersightes escaped in this booke, as I doubt not but there may be some, because Iam a man, and, Labi est humanum, so could I wishe, that eyther they were noted with discretion, or concealed with humanitie. But forasmuch as not the qualities alone, but the moodes and humors also of such persons, as are lyke enough to cauil, & except against this plaine defēsatiue, are
 founde to differ by degrees, I will endeuour as I may to sorte them into sundry formes, that a Lyon may be no lesse easily discerned by his pawes, then an Adder by his sting, and both by theyr exercise. The learned may reproue with reason what I haue ouerseene with haste, in recom∣pence whereof, I will be no lesse willing to reforme, then they are to admonish, supposing this ground to be alwaies certaine and vnfallible, that they can not be sayd to swarue or erre so much, which confesse themselues to be quite be∣side the way▪ as others that are not ashamed to pretende a matchlesse vnderstanding in those matters, wherein they are altogether ignoraunt. The Bandogges whose enueno∣med and spightfull teeth, I feare are of three sorts, and yet all whelpes of that accursed kinde, which driue men with their bawling, from the conquest of the golden fleese, that is regarded by the worthy. The first sort, setting downe theyr iudgement touching any matter, looke not into the subiect, but the writer that discourseth therevpon▪ and that with such a partial & preiudicat conceite, as Battus shall be sooner crowned with a Lawrell▪ if he beare theyr liuerye, then Homere wyth an Iuie garlande, if hee wryte not▪ in theyr honor. If the personne whom they like not for per∣ticuler offence, be found to flourish in discourse, they charge him with too much abounding in his wordes, (though Cicero prefer a witte, from which we may detract before that whervnto we shall be fayne to adde) if he ga∣ther and conclude his reasons in a narrow rowme, they touch him with obscuritye according to theyr manner, which as one writes, Nec breuia valent intelligere, nec pro∣lixa amant legere, are neither able to conceiue that which is short, nor willing to read ouer anything that is enlarged. If he make some choise of words, Aucupatur sillabas, he hunts
 for sillables, if not, the work is dry & not worthy reading. If he write in prayse of any person, they demaunde a fine for flattery, if of none, for enuie. If he follow the point or∣derly, which he takes in hand to prooue, the man is tedi∣ous, if he digresse to recreate and refresh a paineful reader, friuolous. If euery string accorde not with the descant of the present time, the writer is a Malecontēt, if he play with dutifull regarde vppon the meane, no fauourer, if he runne too rancke vppon the trebble, then an hipocrite: inuenti∣on with these is vanity▪ discretion cunning, & to ward out selues a wrong to the mallicious. Let men keepe thēselues as warily as they can deuise, out of the shorte of enuie or curiosity, yet all can not content these sharpe inquisitors, who skirmishing against the shaddowes and chimeras of their owne conceite, and supposing whatsoeuer credite is attained by the merite of another, to be compassed in their disgrace, are to be left eyther to the punishment of God, or to the recoile of their owne iniuries, notwithstanding I woulde wish the well disposed, to take notice of their hu∣mor, either by the reason which they vouch against ano∣ther, or by conceiuing how they stand affected to the man, or by enquiring whither custome haue not bredde in thē a kinde of habite, of swimming alwaies with the Trowt a∣gainst the streame, Destruendi aliena quam aedificandi sua, of vndermining other mens endeuour, rather thē erecting of their owne, or whither they be not simple and vnlearned in all artes, because as Cicero discourseth against Anthony, Nemo alienae virtuti inuidet qui satis confidit suae, wherefore I leaue the first kinde as discouered like Rattes, by theyr creeping vnder vailes, wishing that eyther they woulde chaunge their moode, or that the wiser sorte will giue no further credite then belongeth to so great indignity.





The secōd sort is the more perilous, in this respect that they carrie poison vnder sullen lookes, & bestowe their censures no lesse peeuishly by silent scorne them by lauish vtteāce; for Caesar neither stoode in feare of Cicero nor of Dolbella, who were bothe loose and quicke of speech, but feared ra∣ther, Pallidos & tacitos, as Brutus and Cassius, who bark not, but pinch before warning. I haue both heard and read of certaine persons, who for the space of many yeeres, insul∣ting vpon the miseries of all men that by any meane haue been plunged in disgrace, haue challenged vnto themselues withall, a peremptorie censure in all matters, aspiring only to this point and height of credite, that presumption may prescribe against desart, & their voices be regarded as Apol∣los oracles. Against these I discourse more frankly, because mennes eares haue witnessed at sundrie times, the wronges which they haue doone to others without any reasonable ground, (vnlesse it may be rated as a fault, to publishe any thing in print, which hath not both been seen, and perhaps ouerseen by them) and if I be not much deceiued, I am not vnlike to be tried by the same crooked measure. So long as any light exception may be taken, either to the sub∣stance of the matter, or the maner of enditing, they seeke not to trauaile very farre for reasons of reproofe▪ but if that blowe be shunned and preuented warilie by the writers di∣ligence: then fall they to coigne freshe authours with the stampe of their owne deuise, from whence the groundes of all discourses may be supposed to be drawne by stealth▪ en∣deuoring in places where their speeches are of sound record to charge a man with theft, whome they cānot touch with ignoraunce▪ The feare of this hath made me vouch mine aucthors which make for my purpose, in the verie bookes & leaues wherein the places lie▪ so▪ that plaine deeling may
 defend it selfe, where secrete mallice lurketh vnder vayles & shadowes of hipocrisie. But as it is a rule that whosoeuer dare speake what him list, is like sometimes to heare more then contentes his humor: so must I craue a licence (as it were) to sound the depth of those condemning wits, which demaūd account of all men & in modest maner, to reduce their lawlesse scopes to the boundes of reason. First, there∣fore we must note their wisdome to be verie base, and such GOD knowes, as hitherto, hath yeelded greater store of thornes then fruits, excepting complements of seruile flat∣terie, which some count learned skyll, to shifte their sailes according to the sitting of the wind, and taking colour like chameleons and lobsters of the sande or stone wherevnto they cleaue (for pollicie, but not for loue:) applie their stu∣dies either to deuoure young frie, or to deceiue olde credi∣tors. And though they looke as bigge as Esopes long▪ eared beast in a Lions skin▪ though they carrie Gorgones head in an escocheon of pretence, though they loue the tables end lyke Phariseis, and stroke their beardes fiue times, as the Doctors of Sorbona that disputed with Erasmus, did before they bring out one wise word, though they take vpō them to discourse, De omni scibile cum nihil sciant, and enterlarde their fancies with the iudgemēt of great learned men, as if the line of right were euer in the leuel of their eie, yet their conceite and vnderstanding is so slight and shallowe, as neither they are able to define any thing saue assentation, (whose▪ Genus & differētiā, they know much better thē the deepest Doctor in the schooles▪) not to deuide any thing, sauing perfect and assured vnitie. They presse with eager appetite, into the knowledge of such matters as are farre a∣boue their reach, though short of their opiniō, and finding that the rowmes are either full, or that the learned iudges of their skill desire no cōpany with Crassus they are wont
 to smile in Templo, and to whine in Angulo. Faine would they be trusted with the keeping of the Capitoll, but when that cannot be, such is the basenesse of their mindes, as ra∣ther then to faile of all expectation, like to the geese at Rome, which were maintained by the common charge, because they once did seruice, though by chance, & not by choise, they wil hisse in a galery. These men cānot be cōpa∣red better thē to the Locusts, Quae nihil passae sunt germinace,Exo. 10. 5. 6 which would suffer nothing to bloome nor flourish in the land of Egipt. They liue like Vipers, by the marrow which they sucke out of good mens bones, and care not who de∣caies nor by what meanes, so their hornes may be exalted. Sometime they runne with Absalon for his curled heare, sometime with Achitophel for his cunning head, but sel∣dome or neuer with good Dauid for religious simplicitie. They followe freendes that are most able to supplie theyr wantes, as Waspes doo honnie, as Antes doo granaris, and as Kites doo carrion: but so soone as any signe of storme, or fowle weather dooth appeare, farewell good freendes, for these sūmer swallowes will seek out a new climate. They runne to Ophir with great hope of gaine, but if the losse of time maye be compared with the feathers of their nest, it may be thought that in steed of golde & siluer, they bring home nothing else but apes and peacockes. Now touching3. Re. 10. 22 their deepe eloquence, with the peeuish glorie and conceit, whereof they flatter & delight themselues so much, I wish that men will deeme either by their vtterance, which is ob∣structed with a rheume of rayling, or by their words which are affected, or by their works, which either neuer were at all, or are so drossie and so full of toies as nothing can digest them into order, or refyne them, but a flame or a furnace. It is a rule in Cicero, that of all men those are most vnfit toIn Ant. Phil. 2. iudge, Qui aut inuident aut fauent, and in the ciuill lawes
 likewise, Peritis credendum esse in sua facultate, but ourL. 3. F de insp. ven. quicke Censores are so gorged vp to the verie throate, with a puffing kinde of enuie, which ariseth not from the sto∣mach but from the splene: as they cannot vtter any simple word with a faithfull meaning. They were neuer well in∣structed in the groūds of any knowledge, & yet they will not stick to cast at all, while their hands are in, and though their hap be to cast out, and leese for want of skill to make their game: yet all the setters at the table, must be paide and aunswered with graue regardes, and signes of greater coppie in the storehouse of their addle heads, then either men dare trust vnto without able suerties, or themselues are able to perfourme without helpe of their neighbours. To these men I will aunswere, as S. Ierome dyd almost in the verie case of the lyke kinde of examiners: Non estHieron. de ocean. grande garrire per angulos, &c. It is no great matter for men to chatte or carpe in a corner, where either standers by, must giue place for good manner, or holde their peace for modestie. But if any man except against my wordes, let him take his penne and laie downe his groundes, that all the worlde may iudge, whether simplicitie haue beene more strong, or enuie more bolde and impudent. Bos enim lassus fortius figit pedem, for a wearie Oxe dooth sette downe his foote, and treade somewhat harder.
For though for skill I can not be compared to Apelles, yet since the yongest nouice or apprentice is not barred, but encouraged to imitat the best Artificer, in things whereto they giue their minde, I haue aduentured the setting forth of my simple tables, to the sight and scanning of the world desiring onely that the former law Ne sutor vltra crepidam that no man will finde fault, or checke aboue the compasse of his skill, may be retained and obserued in the iudgement that is geuen, or shalbe giuen vpon my labours. If I haue
 erred in Philosophy, Philosophers shall iudge, if in mista∣king any paragraphe of the Ciuile lawe, let the doctors speake, if in the vouching fitte examples out of histories, I will abide the touch & try all of antiquitie, if in the sence or meaning of the scripture, which comes neerest to the quicke, and blasteth not my credite onely with disgrace, but my soule with mortall sinne  must onely say with A∣braham,Gen. 16. 5 Iudicet Dominus inter nos etillos, let God iudge between our ennemies and vs, and in his absence I appeale to learned writers and preachers of the church; to whom the keyes of knowledge and authority were committed, by the prince of Pastors, for the keeping and mainteyning of his best beloued spouse, in trueth and vnity. But if I haue not erred touching any poynt of weight, in any one of these, then must I say with Augustine against the Dona∣tistes, Facile est Augustinum, vincere sed viderint vtrum clamore an veritate. It is an easye matter to put downe poore Augustine, but let them take good heede that it bee not more with their exclamariō, then truth, with furie thē with reason. The fayrest and most certaine course there∣fore, is to appose one cause against another. Vt et causa cum causa certet, which if any one of these inquisitors per∣forme, I will encounter as I dare, and forgiue him as I ought, if not, I see more cause to scorne a feareful enemie, that flyes the light, then he hath reason to molest or pricke me with a secreat stinge, that am desirous to encounter in an open yssewe. But because it fareth with me at this pre∣sent, almost for all the world, as with a man who meaning at his launching out into the Sea, onely to take the breath and ayre thereof, is suddainly transported with a storme in to some forraine Coast, I thinke it time to make an ende with the third kinde of accusers, that is, the false Prophets and their fauourites, who neither vppon splene against the
 writer, nor ouerweening of themselues, but onely with a mortall feare, least then Diana should be robbed of her fil∣uer shrine, and themselues of their golden sunne, are lyke to bend their whole endeuour, with their vttermost deuise and practise of presuming witte, against contempt & scorn of their inueterate abuses. But what should we say to them whose onely drift and scope is; to deceiue, and not the vulgar sort alone, but with Abner Clamant et inquietant regem▪ Moreouer, if we looke into their exercise, it is most1. Re. 26. 4 euident that like young babies, they regarde Sonantia ma∣gis quam solida et pict a quam vtilia, Rattles that can make a kind of hollow sound, more then matters that are sound indeede, & fancies that are ouercast with glaring colours, before artes that are profitable. I can not compare them better then to Caligula, who hauing called all hysbands and companies together by the Drumme▪ and caused them to march in order vppon the fandes of Callais, as if some great exploit had beene in hand against a common ennemy, when all men were prepared for a skirmishe, commaunded them to gather Cockles: and in like sort our Diuiners daly to lesse purpose, when we presse them with most importunity. And therfore what the Philistines af∣firmed wrongfully of Dauid, we may truely speake of thē, Placabunt Dominum suum in capitibus nostris, they will ap∣pease1. Re. 29. 4. their Lord greate Ma. which is the deuill, but it shall be with prices of our heades, or of our soules perhappes, which are inestimable.
But Lord what pittie is it that no mishaps of other men that haue beene souced ouer head and eares in this vnhap∣pie gulfe (as shall be prooued in this worke at large) can a∣lay the froth of wanton witte, which ariseth by distemper of the braine, and endeth with a strong conuulsion from the bottome of the conscience. Experience teacheth, that
 the bowes waxe weaker which are euer bent, and whatso∣euer hath not naturall and successiue rest, cannot long con∣tinew. The beames of Mars himselfe the brawling God (if we beleeue Astrologers) are parched and combust vnder Sol, the sences are amted, as Philosophers defend, with a subiect that excelleth in predominaunce, and hee that la∣boureth to ascend or mount aboue his ordinarie pitche by vncertayne stayes, seeketh not an eleuation, but an ouer∣throwe. Adlocum unde exeunt flumina reuertuntur vt ite∣rumEccle. 1. 4 fluant, The riuers (saith the Preacher) cbbe and returne backe to the place from whence they came, to what ende, marrie to flowe againe, but not to runne ouer bankes, for hee that ouer-shootes the marke, is as voide of aime, as hee that dribbeth and comes short of it. No man will denie, but Salomon vnderstoode exactlie, and much better as I thinke, then diuers of our Astrologers, Stellarm dispositio∣nes, the dispositions or course of the Starres▪ but our que∣stion is, whether he applied his vnderstanding to that ende which many doo, or whether there be not (Sapientia superSap. 7. 29 stellarum dispositiones) a wisedome farre aboue the course of Starres, which the witte of man is ouer-dull and blockishe to comprise by studdie. I would therefore willinglie take paine in perswading these menne to flie beneath the cloudes, for feare of wasting with the foolishe Eagle (which went about to builde her neste, within the cyrcle of the Sunne) in a fruitlesse altitude. For what can it a∣uaile a man to conquer all the world, with the peryll of his owne soule, which Christe hath onely saued and redeemed with a price inestimable. These oddes were well espied by Esay, crying out, En ego morior et quidmihi pro∣deruntGen. 25. 32 primogenita▪ Beholde I die, and wherein am I the better then for mine owne inheritance, for if these outward
 complements are nothing in comparison of health, or lyfePsa. 9. 11 of the body for a time, much lesse of euerlasting ioyes and life for euer. To the same effect is that of David; Quae vtili∣tas in sanguine meo dum descendo in corruptionem, What profite is there in my bloud, when I descend into corrupti∣on, or am dissolued into ashes. For they that measure ima∣ges regard not the base whereon they stand, but their pro∣per height, and whosoeuer will resemble man, according to the liuelie patterne whence his reasonable soule (which re∣presenteth God) was drawne, must not compare him with presumption▪ but deriue him with humilitie. Our diuerse fortunes may be suted best by counters, which in a large account stand for great summes, but after they are shuffe∣led together in the bagge, are of equall value with the rest, and no more worth then their weight amounteth to, or by players on a stage, whereof some represent a King, others persons of a meane estate, and when the plaudites are past, their degrees and fauours are indifferent. But what neede we discourse of honor or degrees, when our verie liues are like to sises or waxe candles, of which some are burned and consumed to the socket in a reasonable time, others beeing tossed too and fro with a sturdie winde, begin to runne and spend a pace, and they that haue the strongest weke, holde out no longer then til the last drop of their moisture, quēch the last sparke of their glorie. As we begin with weeping, proceede with pining and consuming cares, and conclude with death: so must we looke to be arraigned at the barre of equitie, tried by an enquest of Angels, and either cleared by the free gift of mercie, in the merites of our Christe, or condemned by the mouth of iustice, in the sinnes of our Fathers. In the meane time, neither hilles nor vallies, Pro∣phecies nor Oracles, can alter that determinate and cer∣taine course which is prefyxed in the prouidence of God,
 nor prognosticate of any future accident, in other sort then it pleaseth him to reueale by fauour; we maie change our vessell, as men doo commonlie that are sea-sicke; but not our paine, our bedde, but not our fyt, our climate, but not our qualitie▪ For he that stinted and confined vs to go∣uernmentGen. 1. 28. vppon the ground, forbade vs as it were by con∣sequēt, Ambulare in mirabilibus, and he that made vs igno∣rauntPsa. 130. 1. of many present matters for our owne behofe, would not entangle vs with gesses and coniectures, De futuris, for a greater inconuenience. The wise man sayth, that ofEccl. 1. 14 whatsoeuer he began to thinke, it was not prophecie, but vanitie. The trees which are most backwarde in putting foorth their blossomes, prosper long, whereas Almonds are most commonly decaied and sterued by the frost, for put∣ting out before their fellowes▪ Tyll thirtie we are welcome to the world in the kindest manner, from that tyll fiftie much good doo it vs, but from fiftie foreward, is a tyme of taking leaue, and so God be with vs. VVherefore, I nei∣ther count him happy, that hath not what hee looueth, whatsoeuer it be, nor that hath what he desireth, if it be not good, nor that delighteth not in that which he possesseth, though the thing were excellent; For he that craueth what he cannot compasse is in paine, and he that hath atcheeued what he ought not to desire in faulte, and he that laboureth not for thinges most woorthy (in respect of their owne va∣lue) of his paines in ignoraunce, of tyme past there is no comfort, of ioy present no staic, of chaunce future no cer∣taintie. VVhy should not then all sortes of feined Pro∣phetes looke into the deuilles craft, who tooke vp Christe into the mount, but for his owne behoofe, he pointed to the fayrest Citties of the world, but without a cappe or knee, no fauour would bee graunted hee dealeth lyke an Eagle with a shelfishe, or a cunning wrestler with his
 mate, in hoisting vs vp to the nicest and most tyckle point, that afterward the fall maye be more daungerous, and his praie more easie. But this could neuer come to passe, if men would fall from pride, that they might stand in grace, if they would rather mount and flie lyke byrdes, vppe to the hyll of Sion, then flicker with their wanton winges, in the vale of Iosaphat, if they would climbe the ladder with an Angell, not sleepe with Iacob at the foote: If they would looke into the workes of God, with eyes of humblenesse, not pore into the secretes of his purpose, with the spectacles of vaine glorie, if they would imagine death to be (as in deede he is) a pylote of a certayne course, and a messenger of hope, not as the paynters set him out, lyke a bare anoto∣mie with naked bones, or as we figure and conceiue him in our fancie, with a datte of indignation. If neither difference betweene the ioyes to come, and the transitorie pleasures of this vncertaine life, nor the vvrath of God, nor the feare of hell, nor the vanity of all presuming and diui∣ning arts, are able to remooue the Prophets from their fee∣ble staies, I can not othervvise conceiue but that they are Seperati in diem malum, and shall abide the censure which isAmos. 6. 3 reserued for the reprobate. It is enough for me to haue made proffer of a clensing oyle, for the cure of their impo∣stumat and filthy sores: for though they finde small ease thereby, the fault is neither in mine oyle nor me, but in the rancknesse of their angrie flesh, which swelling with a∣boundance of ill humovrs suffers not the medicine to rest, where it may bring remedy. Wherefore to take my leaue of you (good M. Secretarie) with the same regard where∣with I first begunne, my sute is, that according to the per∣fect trust, which I repose more in you then others, accor∣ding to the sounde conceit which I haue had; and not without good reason, of your knowledge and abilitye to
 iudge, and by the freendly zeale which I professe, and euer will perfourme vnto your selfe, that it will please you to vouchsafe this full discourse against false Prophecies and Prophets, the running ouer and perusing with a single ee, and therevppon to adiudge it either to the flame, or to the print, as seemeth best in your opinion. The groundes against which I haue bent my battery, are perrilous to the peace and quiet of a common wealth, the personnes which professe them are for the most parte, Infesti regibus, and eyther practise to keepe open woundes of disgrace & ie∣lousie, which were first inflicted by their glozing tongues, or like Surgions and Sextines thriue, and wexe more wel∣thy by the dearth and plague of the cōmon people. Tou∣ching my selfe as I sayd before, though care to publish my conceite vpon this ground, induced mee to take in hand and finish this rude peece of worke, yet doo I carrie such a resolute and readie will to keepe bothe time and measure, with that musicke which contentes your eare, as further then it pleaseth you to value or esteeme the fruit, of almost one yeeres grouth, it shall neuer haue any fauour, lyking, or cōsent of mine, to rush vpon the taste, or hazard of the multitude. Thus humblie crauing of almightie God, that hee will alwayes blesse you with his heauenlie fauour, in as ample measure as I haue tasted of your honourable freendshippe, I recommend the first fruites of my trauaile to your good conceite, and my selfe to your deuotion.
From Howarde house, this. 6. of Iune.

