



One of his Maiesties consell of State. Captaine general of his Army, vvhiche intered in Germanie: Master de Campe General of, theis States and Captaine General of the sea Ar∣my of the same.

Moste Renowmed, Glorious and Victorious PRINCE,
MAny vvere the reasons and motiues vvhich moued me to set forth in the In∣glish tongue, the illustrious seege, and vvorthy regayning of the tovvne of Bre∣da, by thy so prosperous, and potent arme, and to dedicate the same vnto thy Excel∣lencie. First, so to diuulge vnto the vvorld (as much as I vvas able) the inuincible povver of that Great and Migh∣tie Monarche, the Catholique Kinge of Spaine. Second∣ly, to spread abroade and to proclaime, the fame and pie∣tie of that Pearle of the vvorld, the most Excellent Isabella Clara Eugenia, Infanta of Spaine, such and so vvorthyà

Princesse, vvhose very ēnimies approue of her iust, deser∣ued and undeniable praises, being such indeed, as hardly any mortall pen canset, them forth as they deserue. Thirdly, that both friendes and foes might vnderstand, the true vndanted valor, and inuincible courage, of such an incomparable Generall, as thy selfe, vvho for thy ar∣dent zeale and feruour to the Catholique cause, I may for a briefe and summary abridgment of thy vertues, rightly call, the Captaine of Captaines, the triumphant Palme of all those vvho beare armes, the scourage of re∣belles. Terror of Heretiques, suppresser of seditions, succour of Religious. Protector of virgins safegard of Monasteries, Bulwork of the lowcontries, and inuinci∣ble Champion of the Catholique Church. oneill and odonel those famous warriers of great renoome, pru∣dent. and braue conductors. their notorius actes so re∣douted that their enemies so feared them, ey, and as. I ha∣ue heard say, mootheres to cause there children to houlde there peace when they cried, feared and affric∣ted them. withe this very name. resultinge of the renoo∣me of there rare victories, sore and blooddy encounters and notorius executions. But the name of Spinola, dan∣teth and maketh to tremble, not babes or children, but euen the proodest, hautiest, and most insulting enimie of the greatest Monarche, of all Europe, the King of Spai∣ne, vvho as he is the greatest and most incomparablest of all the rest, and vvhose only name al other Kinges of Christendome (enemies vnto him) do redout: so of all the Captaines and Commanders of this most Catholi∣que Kinge, no Captaine, nor no Commanders name is more redouted, then that of Spinola. For this is that right worthy Spinola, which no Scipio, no Pompeo, no Ce∣sar, did euer surpasse, in prudence, valor, vigilance, fideli∣tie,

and all other vertus. This is that Spinola vvho by his Heroicall facts, manifested to the world by so many most famous victories, hath accquired to him selfe euerlasting glorie, and left to all posteritie, perpetuall memorie. This is that Spinola, vvhome the hand of the highest asisting, conquered and subdued, that almost impregnable towne of Breda. notwithstanding almost all the Princes of Eu∣rope, conspired with their vttermost force to oppose him. This is that glorious flower of all Italie, which contry, as it hath brought forth many rare and incomparable war∣riers in former ages, so hath it now brought vs forth a Spi∣nola, no way inferior to his worthy predecessors, but ra∣ther such an one, in whom alone, all their former virtues seeme to be reuiued. This is that Spinola, or rather to spea∣ke more properly, that thrice renowmed Spine or pric∣king Thorne, which hath pricked the harts of all warlike Nobilitie, vvith the Spine or prick of emulation of his in∣comparable vertues: But principally, this is that Spinola or right vvorthie Spine, vvho hath pricked the harts of the present rebells and enimies of the Church of God, vvith such a prick and deadly dart, as hath vvounded them all e∣uen to the hart. Fourthly and lastly, I vvas moued hereto, that in relating the inuincible povver of that mightie Monarch the King of Spaine the vnspeakable pietie, zeale and deuotion of the most Excellent Infanta, the in∣comparable vertue, valor, prudence, and braue conduc∣tion of this their so noble Generall, togither with the vnited loue vnspotted loayltie, and rare iudgment of other his Maiesties Nobles and faithfull subiects in these executions, in all occasions, I might (with thy Excellencies leaue) both enlighten my beloueded contrymen, with thehonor of thy Heroicall Acts, with the rarieties, of that famous siege, and with the innu∣merable

plots and stratagemes of war, practised as well on Thine, as thy enimies side. And the rather, for that not only my selfe, but other Captaines of my nation, with many of our contrymen, serued in this siege vnder thy co∣lors, euen from the first to the last of the same, receiuing, at thy Noble handes such infinit honor for our seruice, as hath and euershall, iustly oblige our liues vnto thee, when∣ce I douted not, but that as by publishing the same, I should (as both my dutie and desire was) perpetuat thy excellent praises to all posteritie amongst my nation; so they would reape to them selues, much frute therby, in contemplation of thy vertues, and would with as willing mindes receiue the same, as I willingly employed my pai∣nes in setting it forth, principally for thy honor, secon∣darily for their vtilities, such in particular as ar more in∣clined to warres; and ar desirous to learne some curiosi∣ties in the profession of armes. Raigne, Conquer, and e∣uer Ouercome (inuincible Prince) which thy Excellen∣cies seruant and moste loyal Captaine, and humble Ora∣tor, shall euer pray for during life.


