



I Find it an an∣cient and lau∣dable Custome, (Right Worshipfull) in causes of this nature to Dedicate to some wor∣thy
Personage, of Emi∣nent note, those their La∣bours, which yet they in∣tend to communicate to the publicke vse of others, either to testifie thankfulness in returne of kindnesses receiued, or to further them in speciall in some good, tending to their spirituall aduantage; or lastly, to countenance their La∣bours, against the iniuries of persons ill affected to the Truth. This last respect is of least vse in these Halcion dayes of the Gospell, especially, with vs in
this Kingdome, where the Scepter it selfe is both a Patrone, and practiti∣oner of vertue and lear∣ning. The two former Reasons sway my Re∣solutions (formerly in a disway) to ascribe these my poore Endeuors, to your both Countenance and Comfort; and diuerse weightie Considerati∣ons emboldening, and obligeing me hereto. 1. That kind Respect, and Encouragement, both my selfe, and more worthy Predecessor, haue found from your both atten∣tion,
countenance, and liberall Contribution, hath deuoted me to the seruice of your faith. 2. In that this Subject imme∣diately vpon the deli∣uery of it in the place of my Ministery, was so kindly welcommed by your selfe, and others in your Family: a Coppy her of being taken from my mouth, by the pro∣curement of your three Neeces, I presume the Originall Coppy, being far more perfect, will finde much more gracious entertainment.

Thirdly, (vnlesse I mistake your spirituall e∣state) this Treatise of Con∣science may much further your Comfort in Christ. Many an honest hear∣ted Christian writes bitter things against himselfe, fee∣ding on Ashes in stead of Cordialls. And this, not for want of Right, but abilitie to apply their owne promises. I re∣member vpon confe∣rence, you haue expres∣sed perplexitie of Consci∣ence, for want of assu∣rance. A spirituall sicknesse of the soule it is indeed,
but Ague-like, it tends not to the impaire, but Re∣couery of health to the whole: a blessed vncer∣taintie, arising from the sense of our owne vn∣worthinesse, and desire of nearer cōmunion with God. But how (you will say) may this Tract of Conscience Cure this so great a maladie? Yes, very fitly: this trouble (as I conceiue) arising not from want of eui∣lence, but skill in the Schoole of Christ. Conscience is a discursiue power, sub∣uerting, and applying
particular Conclusions out of generall promises, which al∣so by Reflecting on it selfe, discernes in the life the fruits of holinesse, and infallible Characters of grace; from which it gathereth as certaine Demonstrations of sin∣ceritie, and consequent∣ly blessednesse, as either sense, or immediate In∣spiration can haue. Its one thing to beleeue, another to discerne the worke of faith in vs; the latter re∣quires much Christian ex∣perience, and some fruits of sanctification. So that
the true vnderstanding of Conscience working in vs, may further our Christian comfort by acquainting vs with the vprightnesse of our owne hearts. Vnto your selfe therefore I first cōmend these first fruits of my Labours in this kind, for your edification in our most holy faith, & encrease of our Ioy here, and per∣fection of happinesse with Christ hereafter. Desi∣rous also vnder your vaile it may see light, that others who want the knowledge of bet∣ter
helpes, or meanes to procure greater volumes, may receiue some spiri∣rituall refreshing, where∣in you shall performe an office of loue to me, and of Comfort to the Church of Christ, in whose perfection my joyes will surpasse my paines, and Gods glory especially shine forth, in the improouement of my Talent to the truths aduantage.
Make vse then of these my Endeuours, and other like Christian helps, for the enliuing of your
zeale, and furtherance of a well ordered Conuersa∣tion; Wherein you shall both answere the good opinion I haue, and o∣thers may haue of your vertuous dispositiō, but also perfect the worke of your owne saluation, to the day of the Lord Iesus. To whose gracious prouidence, be you and yours euer commended by me.
Knoll De∣cemb. 20.

