


THERE are, Right honorable, as farre as I can iudge,Two peri∣lous poin of popery. in the Romish Religi∣on two principall parts, and peremp∣torie pointes, cor∣rupt Opinions, and outragious Actiōs: both drawen and borrowed from our com∣mon Aduersary: who one way soweth, in
darkens and in the night, among the wheat of gods word, the cockle & darnel of perni∣cious doctrine: the other way he murdreth them from the beginning,Iohn 8. 1. Pet. 5. and roareth like a Lyon, and in his continuall and cruell cir∣cuite seeketh whom he may deuour: euerie way hunteth after blood, and our destructi∣on spiritual and corporal. As Christ is hum∣ble and meek: as the cognisaunce of Chri∣stians is loue: so the badge of Antichrist is bloody, ful of cruelty, voide of charity.
To passe ouer the corruptions of doctrin, This second Monster of Rome,Hydra of Rome hath many heads this Hydra is of many heades: These Actions of Popes are diuerse, both here seen and felt, and vnder∣stood abroad, and euery where practised. As Ashur was Gods rod, and Ʋespasian his seruāt against the Iews: so this reputed Vicar of Christ, hath been the whippe of Princes, the scourge of all Christendome. By his o∣pinion in Masse, he hath learned to offer an vnbloody sacrifice: In his Actions, he is Pi∣lat mingling sacrifices with mans blood.Lu. 13. By his opinion hee is guilty of that which is written:Psal. 144. His mouth speaketh lies: In his acti∣ons, of that which followeth, His right hande is the right hand of iniquity. But ô that al Prin∣ces were of King Dauids mind, not to med∣dle, nor to communicate with such bloody
sacrifices,Psal. . nor to haue these false cruel gods names in their lips.
Although your Lordshippe knoweth his dooings in this realme better then I can de∣liuer: yet I purpose, by your good leaue and licence, to set down the proceedings of this Hydra, and his actions by degrees and steps for some Instruction, and a Caueat to my countrymen.
The first Act and head.The first head of this Romish Monster is a Temporal sword, open defiaunce against kings and kingdomes, misliked by him: He wil be not onely a Bishop of Bishops, but a king, nay a Conquerour of kings: Hee hath in his hande the wheele of fortune to make kings goe vp, and goe downe, according to his pleasure, in driuing & guiding the cha∣riot, and maketh them thus to say:
Regno, regnabo, regnaui, sum sine regno.
One saith: I doe raigne, another: I wil raigne, another: I haue raigned, another: I am put from my raigne. He maketh Apollo to giue ouer the chariot of the Sunne, and to resigne it to any rechles & rash Phaeton, though he set on fier heauen and earth. Hee wil win the horse, or loose both horse and saddle. He can be con∣tent that Dauid or any other godly Prince bee vnhorsed, and vnseated: and that wan∣ton and rebellious Absalom bee placed and
setled. This bloodie action of warring is performed sometime in their owne person: as Iulius the second that fought against the French with Paules sword, and others both Popes and Cardinals may bee witnesses: sometime by inciting, and setting on other Princes against a Realme or Seignory. As Pippin & Charles were imploied against the Lombardians by the commaundement of A∣drian:Cau. 23. q. 8 And Gregory the great willeth the Tus∣cans to doe the like.Thom. wal∣sing. in Ed∣ar: 1. Boniface by letters solli∣cited the King of England against the French King, and promiseth aide. And another time Kings of Fraunce are set vp against England. Al these experimentes fal out in our time by a Catholick cōsent in the councel of Trent: that all Catholicke Princes should prepare against England, and others of the reformed religion. This cannot be good: for euen the Pope himselfe saith that it is not good.Cau. 23 q. 8 . Tim. 2. Pope Nicolas saith to Charles the Emperour: No man that is a souldior to God entangleth himselfe with secular businesse. And if the souldiours of the woorlde apply themselues to warfare, what hath the Bishoppes and souldiours of Christ to doe, but to goe to their praiers? Quid ad Episcopos & milites Christi, nisi vt va∣cent orationibus?
If this head of Hydra by Gods mightie &
mercifull hand bee cut off, so that forreiners wil not, nor cānot satisfie the turn, & his lust,The 2. head a trumpet of ciuil warre beholde another head riseth, A Proclama∣tion of Rebellion to al Catholickes against their dread Soueraigne, for he will set all at six and seuen, and mooue euery stone, he wil goe thorough thicke and thinne. Examples wee haue in England and Ireland with ban∣ners of ciuill dissension displaied to the of∣fence of Almighty of God, to the distur∣bance of our publicke and godlie peace, & to the vtter ouerthrowe of noble families.
Yet, there is another heade springing as a supply to the rest, The spiritual sword, Ex∣communication of Princes,The 3. Ex∣cōmmunica∣tion. interdictment of Realmes, condemning all that bee not at his beck to the bottomlesse pit of hel. As Bo∣niface the eighth excommunicated Philip King of France, because he would not honor & worship him nor acknowledge him to be his Land Lord in the Kingdom of France. In this action, he curseth and banneth, hee ab∣solueth and blesseth, and yet this absolution is not woorth a straw, nor his curse more to be feared of a wise King, then the noise of a tumbrel or a rattle, as that Noble Prince of Orenge did wel account, and boldly protest.Jn Apolog.
Besides these,4. Deposing of Princes. another cruell Buls heade groweth out, forthwith by a Bull to depose,
ex officio & pro imperio, a Christian Prince. So it pleased Pope Zachary to throwe out King Childerick and Pope Gregory the fourth, King Ludowick:ug. Steuc. contra Vall. Pope Pius the Queenes Maiesty, releasing the people from al bands of loyal∣ty and subiection, with a full licence of re∣bellion: but this was but a word, no blow.
God sometime giueth that spirite to Prince and people, that these proceedings take no place: then an other heade starteth vp,5. Priuie practises. Priuie murdering, authorised as lawefull by this Antichristian Prelate. Secretlie and subtillie this Popishe Hydra woorketh with poison, with pistol, with gunne, with sword, with tooles of Death, all framed in the shoppe of the lame Smithe Vulcan,Vasa mor∣ia. nay ra∣ther in the fornace of the Diuel, as the Mas∣sacres and murders of manie Honorable, & worthie men in manie places do testifie: In fraunce the murder of Prince of Conde, after he was taken prisoner, contrarie to the law of armes: of the Admiral Chatellion shot thorowe in the streats and murdered in his chamber: of Dandalot: of Ramus after he had giuen a certain summe of crowns to saue his life: of Marlorate walking in his gardē: of an other preacher killed in the pulpit: In Scot∣lande the murder of the King: of the Lorde Iames: of the Lord Russell: In the lowe
cuntries the murder of the Prince of Orenge, who first was perscribed, and proclaimed a Traitor and an hereticke, with this large promise, that whosoeuer could bring him quicke or dead, or kill him,In , se pro∣scription. should haue fiue and twentie thousand crowns in money or land. And if he were meanly borne he, shoulde be made a gentleman, and if he had committed any faulte, neuer so heynous, he should be pardoned. These be horse-lea∣ches that drawe bloude,Prou. 30. and haue neuer enough.
Al these actions haue been here attemp∣ted: in these steppes hath this Monster wal∣ked among vs: which all sauour of violence, oppression, murdering of the Lordes an∣nointed, and of his Saints. The reason of this Action is set downe by August. Steuchus,Contr. La Vall. descending from the roote of an erronious opinion: Contra Haereticos opus est fustibus, non Anathematis, quae contemnunt. The Here∣ticks contemne the Popes curses, they must be beaten downe with clubbes.
To accomplish these fierce,6. Heade f craft and peri, O∣riginal of the rest. and forcible actions, there is ioined another craftie head of this monster, and now lately and princi∣pally by Iesuits, hauing Commission from Rome to teach periury, and disobedience to Princes, to promise faire, to performe no∣thing,
to dispraise the state, to magnify the Pope, to tell the subiects in their eare a tale of a tub, of a Catholicke Church, and a Ca∣tholick faith, of pardons by their Agnus Dei, masses, Confessions, and of many other goodly bables, of saluation by their traditi∣on, of damnation by our religion, which is nothing, but lying, cogging, and deceiuing the simple. This quality and counterfaite Religion hath bin told before in an exhor∣tation to Princes: It is most euident, that there is no part of the Christian woorlde,In fasic. rer. expe∣ēdar. cōtra decimas. which hath not bene craftily tempted by these kind of Monsters: & that many Kings and Princes haue been frau∣dulently circumuented by them. And againe: They know how to deceiue notably, to circumuent, to forswear, to forge testaments, to prophane diuine and humane thinges, to make strife, to trouble the quiet, to confoūd heauen with earth.
There is yet to make vp 7 deadly sins, the seuenth head, a Magical head,The 7. the heade of witchcraft. woorking by witchcraft & sorcery: for as he wil cōsecrat, so hee can inchaunt, as blesse, so poison the creatures of God for the dispatch of Prin∣ces,Alphonsus a learned Prince. but God is aboue Belzebub. Alphonsus, whē his enemy Cosmas a Florentine sent him for a present the books of Titus Liuius, and his Phisition counsailed him not to handle them, as sent from an enemy, for fear of poi∣son
or infection: Doe you not know (saith he) that the souls and liues of kings are not subiect to the will of priuate men,Aeneas syl∣de dictis Alpho. but safe and secure vnder the prouidence and care∣fulnes of god? Cor & corpus Regis in manu Do∣mini:Prou. 21. The heart and the body of a king is in the hand of the Lord.
These and such like heady actions are in this realme continually practised: which may witnesse to the world what monstrous religion the Pope bringeth and brocheth to vs. No maruel if the first part be naught, and his faith corrupt, sith the second, his fruites and actions be so abhominable.The Pope is like Martiall Marius. Marius the great Captaine of Rome was woont to saie: That he could not hear the voice of Lawes, among the peales of gunnes, the noise of drumslats, and sound of trumpets. The Pope, that is so busie, so occu∣pied in bloody and Martiall matters and cōspiracies, hath no leisure to study or hear or preach the Law of God, or to aduaunce the Gospel of Peace in Christ Iesus.
I haue, Right Honorable, entred into the consideration & confutation of both these parts of popery in other books: but now se∣ing daily the present & perilous practises of the later, both here & elswher: setting aside for the time the first concerning the Pope & his Iesuitical doctrin, I haue lately trauailed
somewhat in the second, opening to my countrimen their frontick and bloody dea∣lings, and calling them by al meanes of per∣suasion, as I could, to conformity and due o∣bedience to the Prince, and to the loue of their owne country, for the common safety and preseruation of vs all, in body and soul. Alas, who would haue thought that there should haue beene any need to haue either spoken or written of this matter to English Subiects, liuing so long vnder a gratious, & peaceable gouernement: farre passing the times past, and the like not to be hoped for after it? Who would haue thought that any Englishe and Christian man woulde haue once muttered or murmured against such a Prince? for countries sake to bee loued, for religion to be obeied, for sundry graces and gifts to bee woondred at, for all these good blessings of God by hir to vs, to be honored? Are there yet foolish frogs, begging of the Romish Capitoline Iupiter either a blocke to crush them, or a Storcke to deuoure them? Though by Gods appointment the Oliue is content to be ouer vs with her fatnes, & the fig with her sweetenesse, and the vine with her fruitfulnesse: yet wee are not content to haue them, but only Rhamnus, or a bramble good for nothing but to burn and consume
vs.English Iewes. Are there yet remaining the Offpring of Iewes, desiring a Saul for a Samuel? Professing & protesting, Nolumus hunc regnare, We wil not haue him raign ouer vs? & that cannot abide the title of Christs crosse, Iesus of Naza∣reth, King of Iewes? Or can there be found yet an Esau, that will say in his heart,Gen. 27. The daies of mourning for my father will come shortlie: then wil I slaie my brother Iacob? I will make awaie with the mother of the Lande, and the god∣ly brethren too? And must wee after the inuention, yea the fruition of wheate, and sweet corne, returne with the old world, ad glandes, to Akornes: as in the late time of Queene Marie? The Religion published by her Maiesty offendeth them: And can this Romish Religion being so stained with bloode, as I haue declared, please them? Is there no remedy, but to turn the blessing of the Prophet Esay, by a contrary Text into a curse?Esa. For our gould, to receiue brasse: For our siluer, iron: and for this gouernement of peace, the tyranny of Exactours and Task∣masters?
For remedy, and some redresse against these bloud-suckers of Rome,The sse of the Ser∣mons follo∣wing. and our rebel∣lious mutiners at home, I haue eft soones called to the memorie of our countrimen, their duety towards God and their Prince,
and Country, and then doubtlesse God wil be a Buckler, and shielde to them and to vs all.
In this copulatiue,An exhor∣tation to a true vnity. in this double dutiful∣nes towards God & the Prince, we must be ioined with a full consent altogether, as one man, or as the twinnes of Hippocrates, who were sicke together, and hadde their fits together, and recouered together, as Austine reciteth out of Cicero: So we, head and foote,De ciuit. Dei lib. 5. cap. 2. and al the body must consent in the true worship and seruice of God: we al, high and low, with hart & hand must agree in this duety towarde the Prince against all forreine or domesticall aduersaries. These two dueties are recommēded to vs by Am∣brose. This becommeth Christians to wish for the tranquillity of peace,Ambrose Epist. 33. and for the constancy in the faith and in the truth. And in the same place: Rogamus,Ibidem. Auguste, non pugnamus, We beseech O Emperour, we fight not.
If wee deale thus duetifully towardes God, and obediently towardes our Prince, then will God mercifully and mightily de∣fend both Prince and vs. No diuelish witch∣craft, no Ruffians dag or dagger, no inuasi∣on of forreiners, no craft or art of any ene∣mies, no nor this seuen-headed beast shall annoy Prince, Peare, or People. He can, he
will send twelue legions of Angels.Matth. 26. Pohdh. 8. Hist. Ang. Then shalbe truly verified that which long a go was prophecied: The Kingdome of Englande, shalbe the Kingdome of God: and that God is a∣lone, & must be the Protector & King of it. If our Prince and Nobles, and Subiects wil sincerely serue him: we shall haue the pro∣tection of our lord,1.5. in ora. cont. . Seruum Christi non custo∣dia Corporalis, sed Domini prouidentia sepire consueuit, saith Ambrose. No guard of men or bodies, but the prouidence of the Lord is the hedge and defence of the seruants of Christ. It may be for our sinnes, that the great ships of Tharshis may come:Ies. 2. but vp∣pon our repētance,De he∣neide so Remora, Pl. l. 9. c. 2 God wil send Remoram euen a litle fishe that shall stay the shippes though vnder saile. It may bee, that some Load stone may drawe some Iron vpon vs, but the Lord will prepare a Diamond that shal with stand the Load-stone,Lib. 13. c. 4. that it shall not haue power to drawe any at all. It may be that Catiline wil make a coniuration, but god wil send one Cicero or other to espy it & ouerthrow it. Al the Traitors against Iulius Caesar within three years perished,Sueon in Julio Cae∣sare. som one way, some an other way, some by Iudgmēt, some with shippe wracke, some in battell, others with the same poinadoe, wherewith Caesar was stricken, none of them had a na∣turall
death. Calippus, because he would stab in and sticke Dion his friend, was stabbed, and killed with the same dagger himselfe by his owne frinds. This shalbe the reward of al those that conspire against the Lordes annointed.
I haue troubled your honour with many words, vttering my wishes to my countri∣men, and declaring to you the argument intreated of in these Sermons. I haue dis∣plaied the new Monster lately receiued, & daily rising and raging against vs. And as in this generall diuision of Christendom, euery nation and faction prouide their Armour: And as your L. and the whole body of the right honorable Counsel make euery way a politick preparation, and euery man see∣keth his piece, & his furniture: So I, hauing no weapon, but only my tongue and pen, haue thought good in my calling, after my weak & simple sort, to fight with the helpe of them both, against this huge Monster, and against all enimies. When I beganne first to expound this Text of Scripture in Ianuarie last, at Oxford, and proceeded in it there and in some places of Hamptonshire, & ended it at London, at the Crosse in May: I little thought of printing it: and so the matter out of my heade, and almost out
of my papers, I fear my short, and vnperfect notes haue brought foorth an vnperfect, & vntimely fruit. Howesoeuer it is, I must commit it now to the world, and appeale to your Lordships patronage for it. I had rather offend by this temerity and negli∣gence, than to incurre the suspicion of silence and neutrality, knowing the danger and penalty of Solons lawe, if in this com∣mon trouble;Plutarc Solone. and turmoile I should shewe my selfe to be idle and of no part.
I am bold to offer to your Lordship as a poore scholasticall New-yeares-gift, & as a gratulation of your prosperous returne, and as a smal signification of my bounden duty to you, my very good Lord, and a speciall Patrone of our Vniuersity, and a friend of this cause which Dauid began, and I haue rudely prosecuted and ended. The Lord Ie∣sus protect our noble Dauid, your honor, the honorable Counsaile, & the whole Realm, & graunt vnto vs all many good new-years, to his glory, and to the commodity & com∣fort of his Church, Amen.
Oxon. Decemb. 28.
