



ALbeit (Right Honourable) my purpose was at the first, to haue dedicated these my labours to the Right, and truly Reuerend Father of the Church of Christ, the most wise and iudicious Bishop of London, my very good Lord onely, for whose sake this taske was vndertaken, as beeing in his place a like President to this Peere, whose vertues I labour to lay out: yet in regard they are more agreeable to one of your sort, but chiefly in regard of a late accident, whereby I was made knowne vnto your Honour, I thought it requisite likewise, as well for the testimony of mine owne synceritie, as also of mine entire affection toward your Lordship, to recommend the same vn∣to you.
Behold then, (I humbly intreate your Honour) a subiect suta∣ble to a man of your ranke, and offering vnto you a most woorthy patterne for your imitation: euen such a one, as the whole Booke of GOD, which ought to be a direction for all estates, doth not afford a more notable and eminent, for those of high degree, sitting
in the seate of Iustice as your Lordship doth. The wisedome of God onely wise hath spoken it; That such as weare soft and costlie attyre are inMath, 11, 8, Kings Courts: It is an ancient Apothegge, Exeat aula qui vult esse pius, and againe, Libertas scelerum virtus, et summa potestas. Ioseph his example hath sealed it for a truth, who by beeing in the Court of Egipt, inured his tongue to sweare by the life of Pharao, and the example of Moses more no∣tably, who for this cause refused to be called the sonne of Pharao hisHebr. 11.24, 25, daughter.Non in Asi∣am venisse, sed in Asia conti∣nenter vixisse laudandum est. Cic: pro Mur: Neuerthelesse, this our Iob, a man of great Honour, conversing among the states of the Countries where hee liued, and those Infidels to for the most part, kept himselfe not∣withstanding vndefiled, yea remained both for life and religion, the onely mirror among men, not of that age alone, but of all suc∣ceeding generations. An example therefore without compari∣son, the rarest and most admirable of all other. For notwithstan∣ding the supply of so many helpes, for the furthering them in the way of a godly life; as can hardly be recounted, which this man wanted, yet neuerthelesse, Salomon with all his wisdome hath not left vnto vs the like: and Dauid himselfe, a man according to the Lords owne hart, must come behind it. For Daniell, Ne∣hemiah, Mordecai, Hester, though children of the captiuitie of Iudah, to seperate themselues from the filthines of the Hea∣then among whom they liued, and claue to the Lord God of Isra∣el, is a thing very rare and extraordinarie: but for Ionathan the sonne of prophane Saule King of Israel, hauing for his consorts ordinarily a companie of beastly Atheists, (for his Fathers Court yeelded none other) is a thing more to be obserued in re∣spect of our times, because the Spirit of God in the mouth of the holy Apostle, pronoūceth very peremtorily, Not1 Cor. 1, 26 many Migh∣tie, not many Noble are called.
Hence it is that all ages doe yeeld vs very few of his place, who are of Ioseph of Arimathea his minde, that haue stepped foorth to their Pilates, and spoken for the Honour of Iesus: and that the number of these hath beene exceeding thinne, which haue beene of that renowned Queenes affection, who seeing her Nation the people of God, now ready to be yeelded ouer to vtter destruction, resolued vpon these termes, I will aduenture my life for their safe∣gard,
& if I perrish, I perrish. Which beeing so, wee of this Na∣tion must needes acknowledge the spirit of the Highest to haue extraordinarily replenished the hart of your Honour, because of the like resolution for the maintenaunce of the same Cause, the faith of the Lord Iesus, against the viperous broode of Antichri-christian Iesusies with theyr Complices: contemning no lesse then one mounted on horse-backe doth the barking of an idle whippet, theyr base threatnings, and esteeming a rebuke for Christ, the greatest beautie and grace vnto your Name, that can possibly be cast vpon it. And let your Lordship stand assured, that together with his Maiestie, the Heauenly Maiestie, the GOD of in∣comprehensible glory, will not be vnmindfull to1 Sam: 2, 30. reward you for this.
Other policie there is I know, and meanes to procure and conti∣nue preferment, but this is the onely true Christian policie, to take Moses, Iohn, and Elias his part, and to stand for the Lord and his Word. Nothing is there in Heauen or Earth, nothing so high and excellent which this shall not atchiue. What better warrant can you haue for it then his owneProu: 4.8, 9. Oracle pronouncing it? True it is that all that will liue godly in Christ Iesus must suffer perse∣cution, but read and consider whatIames 5, 11, end the Lord maketh with our Iob heere, and respect the same for your selfe, haue an eye al∣waies to theHebr: 11, 26, 1, Thes. 1, 7. Reue: 2, 10. recompence of the reward with Moses. And as for this your mortalitie also, perswade your selfe that hee will not leaue you comfortlesse. For what a strongIere: 1, 17, 18 Ezra. 8, 22. assurance hath he gi∣uen you euen for this likewise? Fight still therefore manfully the good fight of fayth, continue this your fidelitie in the Lordes ser∣uice vnto the death, and gaine to your selfe his protection impreg∣nable heere, neuer ending securitie hereafter, ioy and solace eue∣rie way, as much as your hart can desire.
Now, as you may seeme for yourIob, 29, 17. courage, in the Lordes be∣halfe and Gideons,Iob. 29, 9.10, 21, 22, 23. (about which I haue spent these many lines) and againe for your prudènt gouernment in your place, to haue propounded this our Prince & Patriarch of the Gentiles for your example, so in many other his admirablePauareton. read chap. 29 & 31 through out. vertues, the onelie Impes indeed drawne from the vitall iutce of a Noble stocke, (o∣therwise questionlesse there had not beene such lamentation for
your Lordship in the time of your late sicknesse, for this must al∣wayes be remembred,
Hor: lib. 1. Carm: Ode 4.Palliola mors ęquo pulsat pede paupere tabernas Regumque turres)
Wherefore, though this my poore trauell purchase not that accep∣tance, as did the poore mans Pomegranate at the hands ofPlut: Artax: Ar∣taxerxes, because that was Mire magnitudinis, this is Minimi momenti, yet I doubt not, but that it shall obtaine more fauour, then at the hands of them, who when they receiue such like mat∣ters tending to godlines, are wont to say, Who will shewe vs aniePsalm. 4.6. good? Yea I perswade my selfe, your Honour will repute it in the number of those blessings, which the Princely Prophet calleth afterward so earnestly for, Lord lift thou vp the light of thy Countenaunce vpon vs. For theIob. 33.8. inspiration of the Almigh∣tie, a part wherof is this our conflict, giueth Vnderstanding, which is the Mother and Lady of all graces.
The Lord of his mercy grant, that this Land may as long in∣ioy your Honour, as it did your most worthy Father, (whose loue vnto true Religion, watchfulnes ouer the whole State, will neuer be forgotten) our good Ichosophat, wise Salomon, religious Io∣siah, may long sit vpon his throne, and your Lordship remaine a faithfull, and prudent Councellor to him, his enemies beeing clo∣thed withPsal. 132, 18 shame, his Crowne may flourish, vppon his head, and the heads of his seede for euer, our Sanctuary may be as was Sion in her flower, our Citties as was Ierusalem in her beauty, con∣veying happy Peace, and pure Religion to the posterity to come, vntill the Lorde Iesus shall take all gouernment into his owne bandes.

