


HEaring great report
of a booke, which you
had set out, I met
with your treatise in∣tituled
of the Lordes
Supper, printed anno
1581. supposing that your comming
home had stirred the mindes of men to
read and praise the thing, which had
lyen long dispised: I red also with hope
to find the arguments, that induced you
to turne your coate. But finding no
thing, which you might not, and in all
appearance did not knowe before your
peruersion: I pitied your miserable case
who hath a hearte at one time capable
of contrarie persuasions of your saluati∣on▪

and was woe, how be it it be worthie
no answere, that our men had let it lye
19. yeares without an answere: because
it seemed that that silence had made
you confident, and your sectaries hope
that it was vnanswerable. Wherefore
thinking it to be the worke so much spo∣ken
of, I resolued to doe it the ho∣noure,
that no man thought it wor∣thie,
and set my selfe to answere it, be∣cause
you were some time my Regent.
After that I had answered the firste
cap. and a good parte of the seconde:
there came to my handes your seconde
worke. Then I perceaued my erroure, &
stayed my hande to read it also. Hauing
red it, I rewed al, For argumēts in both
I founde none indeede, and few in show.
To flite, which is the greatest parte of
both these bookes, I thought it meeter
for a scoulde then a scholar. And the
last I founde contrarie to the firste, not
onely confuting, but condemning of
heresie the verie inscription thereof.
Your greatest gift for anye thing that I

can see is in nik-naming, and beleing
the Saints of God. That gift we can wel
be contented to leaue to papistes: be∣cause
such graces are more acceptable
to your pope, then our God. Some of you
hath purchased Bishoprickes, and some
Cardinalshipes, be that kind of eloqūece
But wee are assured that he, whome wee
serue, neuer rewardeth that arte with
better hyre then hell. Yet I wonder at
your impudencie, or rather stupiditie,
to hope that naked lies can win credite,
euen where the men of whom you speake
are most hated. Can any man beleeu,
that if GOD had showen so notable a
iudgment on Iohn Knoxe in the pul∣pite,
and presence of such a frequent as∣semblie,
as vseth to be in the Church of
Edinburgh, the people woulde not haue
onely abhorred his doctrine: but stoned
him selfe out of the towne. Or can anye
man that hath a mans harte (that is
reason and vnderstanding) beleeue,
that if Iohn Caluin had vsed that
manifest iuglarie, which ye are not a∣shamed

to publish in the face of the
Sun, in the congregation at Geneua,
that that people, who found the moyen
in a priuate grudge to banish him their
towne for certaine yeares: would not, on
such a notorious cause as that, haue ei∣ther
stoned him in the streetes, or expel∣led
him at the leaste with shame for e∣uer.
But this is a note of gods iudgment,
that hee hath so besotted your senses,
that you haue not the wittes to caste a
probable collour vpon your lyes. This
was an other cause, that made me leaue
my purpose to confute your booke. For if
I had gone fordward, I sawe that I was
to meete with many slanders, which
was not worth the hearing, nor reading
and needed no other to confute them,
then the mouth that toulde them: if the
hearer had but halfe a nose to smell alye
as whote as a foxe. Yet hauing spent
many dayes, and nights in gathering
materialles to that worke, I resolued
not to lose them: but with some trauell
contriued them in this forme, which you

see: hoping that the power of reason and
truth might not onelie staye such from
that erroure, as your sectaries had made
to doubt: but also make you, and them
to doubt of that, which you teach so con∣fidently:
if you would read as aduisedly
as you haue bequeathed your selfe vn∣consideratlye
to that abhomination.
And heare I charge you in the bowels,
and mercies of lesus Christ, as you will
answere in the great daye of the Lorde,
if you doubt indeed (which is not likely
for anye matter that wee can see in your
bookes to haue turned you) or left the
truth for any particular, to open your
eyes againe to the light, and to returne
to the grace from which you are fallen.
I haue heere deduced the truth of this
question whereon standeth the founda∣tiō
of the Romane religion from Christ
to our owne times. I haue taken this
paines partlie for our people, partelye for
you, to whome I wishe the good that a
Scholar should to his maister. And
therefore I praye you, as you loue to liue

for euer, to leaue the way of death euer∣lasting.
Otherwayes in the court of con∣science,
where truth will be reuealed, &
the popes indulgence will doe no good,
I must beare witnesse of your wilfulnes,
and proude contempt of the reuealed
truthe. The Lorde giue you a harte to
loue him better then men.

