



THAT GOOD, happy, and fortunate may proue to al chri∣stians: but chiefelye the people of Englād For stoaringe this our flourishing state with holesomst ordi∣naunces, and moste politike lawes: for recouerye of our lorne li∣berty, for tender cherishinge and renewynge the Churche, by Gods singuler mercye and prouidence: for restoaringe religion from ex∣yle (as it were) to her auncient sincerity, and primitiue purenes: for the merye quiete, and cleare calme, ensuing the tossinges, and trou∣blesome stormes of later times: for the luc∣kye, prosperous, and quiete setlynge al thyn∣ges, as well abroade as at home: is none, so vnmindeful of him selfe, his countreye, or all godlines, who seeth not, we ought fyrst ren∣der hartiest and immortal thankes, to almigh¦tie god. And next your godly trauayle, singu¦ler endeuour, & saythfullest seruyce, (O most Christian Queene) oughte be registred in e∣uery
booke, and spred to all posterytye. For what by therto, nor force, nor power, nor all the fetches of mans witte or pollecy coulde compasse, that nowe to haue happed not through the manhoode, myghte, or gouerne∣ment of a manlye kynge: but vnder the con∣ducte, of a woman queene, without tumult, quietelye, and euen by Gods hande: suche so famous benefite, who nold locke in minde? Who not roll in amased thoughte? Who not renoume in euerye age? Wherein not∣withstandynge (O Queene) we aduaunce not your might, not your arme, not your wise dome: but wonder at your weakenes & infir∣mitye. We praise not mannes power: but as∣cribe it to the bouneye & mercy of God. To whose beeke, worde, and prouidence, all and whole this wondrous facte (howesoeuer greate) must freelye and wholy be imputed. Therefore, that Hymne and tryumphante songe, whych Moses and the childrē of Isra¦el song in the desert, after the buryal of Pha¦rao in the red sea: in the cōgregations of the godly, ought alwaye resound, singinge with one tune and ioyned hertes. The lorde is our strength and praise, & he is become our salua∣cion. He is our God, and we wil prepare him a tabernacle, our fathers god and we wyl ex∣alte him. The lorde is a man of Warre, hys name is Iehouah. Thy right hand lorde, is glorious in power. Thy right hād lord, hath crushd the enemy. But syth, these his bene∣fites, are already sufficiētly blased by others wrytynges, and I otherwhere haue some∣what
signified my minde and good wyll: I neede not here to expresse my ioy. Especially synce nowe my greetynge maye seeme ouer∣late. Neuertheles, so greate and incredible mercye of our God, so meruaylous power, so straunge and vnhoped happe, so sodayne and heauenlye ioye: meante I in no wise to ouerstippe wyth silence. But thys tyme asketh, yea craueth, other charge of me.
Namelye, to shewe the argumente of thys my small treatyse, and dysclose the chyefest causes of the tytle. That your Maiestye, seeyng at one glymse the whole summe, and vnderstandynge wythall, what occasyons moued me to wryte: both by your wysedome maye more certaynelye knowe the whole cause, and accordynge to youre iudgemente, iudge vpryghtly thereof, and as best sytteth your gracious fauoure, yf it seeme worthye your patronage, mayntayne and defende it, as a poore and naked Clyent, as wel against the close whisperynges, as open inuectyues of curyous Carpers.
Seeynge Nobilitye spredde through all realmes and coastes of chrystendome, flou∣ryshe in all estates of honour, beare the sway in pryncely courtes, and in maner the piller and staye of all commen weales: and through it, eyther the greatest aydes, or chiefest hyn∣derances conueyghed into mens life and ma∣ners: I thought, this chosē order once seaso∣ned wyth right & christian opinions, & refor∣med by the vncorrupted squier of antiquity, both princes shold more soūdly gouerne their
subiects and ecclesiasticall ministers more faythfullye performe theyr charge, and the people execut all theyr bounden duties more diligentlye, and so the whole commen wealth more strōg¦lye breath, lyue and recouer. Syth their coū∣cels all these seeme to folowe, and on theyr authoritye leane and staye. And therefore, considered, the deuine Plato, was not cause les chyefelye earnest in his bookes of com∣mon wealth, That the wardens, otherwyse the rulers, called to offyce in eche state, and be guydes of the rest: shoulde frome theyr you the vpwardes, be seasoned with holyest preceptes and principles. For in theym he iudged, the weyghtyest parte, of such goodes or euelles, as happe in the commen wealth to consyst. Nor was I ignoraunt of the mat¦ter it selfe, there were dyuers opinions: yea, some bookes wrytten. And infinite were it, to recken so many surmises, as touchynge it, are tossed to and fro, in the monumentes of auncient Phylosophers. For Anacharses sayde, the wyse Prynce was happye. Socra¦tes, who first could rule him selfe. Pittacus, who so ruled his subiectes, as they feared not hym but his. Others thynke him meetst to be a prynce, who hath liued vnder a prince As Agesilaus sayeth, he ruleth well, whoe hath sometyme obeyed. Cambises in Xeno∣phon thus lessoneth hys sonne Cyrus. One onely meane (O Sonne) in all estates is left to wynne the a noble name. Namely to em∣brace wysedome. Others affirmed Vertue a compendious meane to Nobilitye and ho∣nour.
And these truly thought not al amisse, but tolde truthe. Howbeit not all. For part they shewe. But what chyefe is, and pryn∣cipall, touche not. Moreouer, one thynge is it to be a chrystian, other an heathen Noble. One thyng taught Stoa, Academia, Lyce∣um: other the Chayre of Moses, the Gospel of Chryst, and the Epistels of the Apostels But, that my purpose may more playne and clearelye appeare, suffer me I beseche you (O moste gracious Queene) to forespeake somewhat. And in this entrye (as it were) to discourse a whyle, howe expedyente thys knowledge is, howe profytable, necessarye, aad meete, for these tymes, the handlynge of thys argumente. Not to warne you area∣dye myndeful enough, but, for yf other No∣bles see the summe shortly abbridged, autho∣rised by your noble doome: for the weyghte and authoritye of the paronesse, they neede not contemne it. I haue gathered and heaped out of the best wryters, so muche, as concer∣neth the true and auncient Image and insti∣tucion of Noblesse. Nor teach I onely mine owne opinion, but prooue it. And what erst I supped oute of the swete sprynges of the holy Bibles, and others not despised ryvers of good wryters: that nowe I apply to the enquirye and searche, of the source & offpring of Nobilitye: to shewe the chanels & braun∣ches, the nature, doctrine, and duties there∣of. That it may casely appeare by what ver¦tues it is kyndeled, by what vices quenched. Truly, thus I perswade my selfe, Nobilitye
is farre greater then manye conteyue of it. And the callyng heauenly but hard. The ho∣nour lightsome, but the burthen heauye.
And to vaunt and professe him selfe, others superiour and better: of all others the moste massye charge. Nor place I the honour of Nobilitye in those thynges, whyche so the commen people honoureth, hawkynge, hun∣tynge, hastines, mightye power, vayne vaun¦tes, traynes of horse, and seruauntes, ryot, myschyefes, brauerye, roystynge porte, or great lyne. For these are partly fonde, parte∣lye frayle, partly filthye and abhominable.
But thys accompte I the surest sygne and token of Nobilitye, howe muche men passe beastes, so muche the Nobles to excell the rest: and by all the degrees and stayers of ver¦tue, to clyme and scale, the steepe lyeue of Nobilitye. For so, nor shall cowardry amate the chaungelynge courages, nor stayne of lyfe clypse or blemyshe wyth infamye, the bryghtnes of theyr byrth. But they shall playnelye proue theym selues, descended of that reuerende, auncient, and Goddishe race: whyche for the excellencye of her vertue, and manye merites of mankynde, is deemed to haue had heauenlye byrth, and glyded from the skyes: and as the Sauiour and preser∣uer of mankynd, is honoured with the tun∣ges, and pennes of all men. These are the true prooues, the Noblest Petygrees, and surest oruamentes and armes of an aunci∣ent stocke. To conclude, I thus defyne it.
The hawtiest, worthiest, and honourablest
Nobilitye is that, whyche with the renoume and fame of auncestrye, hath coupled excel∣lent, Chrystyan, and farre spred vertue.
Whereby, both ciuile societyes are mayntey∣ned, and the commen life of man supported. Wherein the profitable bloomes of Vertue approoue theyr roote. With these sparkes of true prayse, and Vertue enflamed our No¦bilitye, striueth with it selfe. And treadynge the steppes and pathes of her auncestoures, fyndeth the entry open onely by two steaites Namely, the commendation of Justice and religion. By Justice the commen wealth is gouerned, by religion the churche is sowdred Justice, with ryght eye beholdeth eche cause with euen care listneth them, wyth straighte foote, wadeth to the indifferencye of ryghte, with vncorrupte, and vpryght heart, trulye weigheth them. Nor euer is spotted wyth dregges of couetyse, or by ambicious lust, of rule bearyng, wryed from ryght iudgement. The nursers of religion are Kynges, and Princes. Her nurses, Queenes. As heauen¦ly teacheth the euangelicall prophete Esay. But for euerye man can not hereto reache, two aydes are requisite. Fyrst wysedome and learnyng. Where withoute, what kinge∣dome, what state, what Citye, what house∣hold may stand: Naye, who maye limite him selfe lawes of lyfe, eyther greenelye or no∣thing nousled in knoweledge of heauenly di∣uinity, or humaine philosophy? The truthe whereof the Paganes learne vs.

Who seyng, the vnlearned blundred as crow¦es in the mist, confounding and disorderynge all thinges: and contrarye wyse, wysedome fyned by knowledge, shoane and cleared all mystes: aduysed to ioyne to them selues tea∣chers, or philosophers, as guydes and mode∣ratours of theyr whole lyues. As Achilles, Chyron, Agamemnon, Hector, Hector Poli¦damas, as witnesseth Homere. And Vlisses we reade in the Odissees, accompanied with Minerua, entred and departed Cyclops caue dronke vnchaunted Circes cuppe, herd but approched not the Syrenes temptynge son∣ges, trauayled to, but abode not wyth the Lo¦tophagi, scaped vndrowned Silla:People that feed onely on the tree Lotos. to con∣clude, sayled to hell, but retourned safe. What nede I mention Cicero? Who ioyned to him Molo, and many moe? What Augustus?
Who had Athenodorus? What Alexander?
Who had Aristoteles. Sith it is euydente yea, Tyrans had teachers? Dionisius Pla∣to. Hiero of Siracuse, Simonides, Policra¦tes, Anacreon? and Nero the monster of the whole earth, held with him a while Seneca? The other parte, is the stomake and stoute∣nes of a hygh and hawtye courage. For, as learnyng sheweth howe iustly, and godly, to do, so this refuseth no trauayle, no peryll, no torment, runneth into fyer, on weapons poin¦tes, ventreth and beareth with a pryncelye courage, all hasards of life and limme: rather then suffer the duties we haue reckened, lye stayned or forsaken. This iudge I (most no¦ble Queene) the true, vnfayned, the bryghte
and cleare, not smoakye and shaded Nobili∣tye. Whiche is iust, louinge to religion, and studious of learnyng. And herewythal stout and wyth a royall readynes inflamed to ac∣tion. But O immortall God, would we but in thought ouerrunne all realmes, how fewe fynde we furnished with these vertues:
Naye rather, howe many blemishd with con¦trary vices, and mischieues? Howe fewe Aristides in Justice? Dauids or Josias in religion? But howe manye tyrauntes, op∣pressours, brybe mongers, and rauenours of the people? Howe many fettred and lymed, with supersticions? or ignorant, dysiemblers or persecutours of the trueth? How few lear¦ned Maiestrates, to whome notwithstan∣dynge is credited power of lyfe and death? To whom is permitted, to draw & vnsheath the sword of authority on al men? To waste all, as well holy, as prophane, with fyre and flame? Howe many, who not onely not guer¦don learning and the learned, but euen hate, spyte, and condemne them? Howe fewe of them stoute warriours in Christes cause, whom it behooued, to haue bene his souldy∣ours, yea champions? They, who receyue of him all thinges, yea, more aboundantlye then the rest, euen they for a matter of nothynge, a goates fleese, or an ashes shade, for then he∣ritaunce of a litle burroughe or lande, what warres wage they not? What hasards ven∣ter not? Howe ofte spende they lyfe? Howe ofte theyr bloud? But the same for religion, for defence of theyr heade, scarse hasarde one
fynger, no not one farthynge. Wherefore, to suche ought this exhortacion worthelye, pro∣fitablye, and necessarilye be applyed, to moue them to ioyne and purchase aunciente No∣blesse, to this theyr newe gentrye, that all maye wyth one honest and commendable e∣mulacion, be enflamed to one selfe desyre. and lyke contencion, and stryfe towardes Ver∣tue. I accompte it truly my labour worthe, that (though grossely) I attēpted to describe the ryghte pathe to Nobilitye. Syth of it, whatsoeuer eyther felicitye or calamitye, is in our present state, seemeth to issue. But, that my talke maye purchace better credyte, and wynne greater authoritye, I haue cou∣pled to me, as a companion and felow The∣seus in my trauayle, the excellent, treatyse of Philo a Iewe. Whom playnely, for the vse of studious & noble young gentlemē, I trans∣lated out of Greeke into Latyne. That ioint¦ly with the knoweledge of the tounge, they maye drynke godlynes. Thus heare you most noble Queene, what I treate. You haue also heard, what chyefelye moued me to it. But though neyther to Englande, nor our Nobilitye namelye my talke be referred, but generallye the cause it selfe debated, (god helpyng), to profyte al: yet after the custome and wonte of wryters, meante I to flye to some ones protectiō, vnder shadow of whose defence I mought arrest my selfe. And ther∣fore chyefelye to you my Queene and pryn∣cesse, thought my selfe bounden to offer, this symple sygnyfyeng of my obseruaunce and
duetye towardes you. Beseechynge ye. thys small volume of Nobles or Nobility, maye appeare vnder safeconducte and protection of your name. Not for I mynde to teache your Noble maiestye any dutyes of Noby∣litye: but for (whyche is no meane plague through all Chrystendome) yf my choyce should chaunce on some other, hardlye per∣happes could he skyll the latyne phrase.
So should I chose some such Tutor and pa∣trone, to defend my cause, as knewe it not.
But on you, and your most victorious bro∣ther, the kynge your father employed no be∣nefyte, eyther greater or Nobler: then in pro¦curyng ye to be polished with all sortes of good artes. For howe much rarer, so muche welcomer tytle it is, trulye to terme a prince trende to the Muses and learnynge.
Farther meant I at thys present to beseech your hyghenes, that for you knowe my fyrst heste, and gladlye (I hope) graunte it: you would next, chiefely furnishe your court, (as most paynefullye and pollitikely ye do) with men famous for commendacion of Iustice, godlynes, and learning, And studious & ear∣nest appliers & practisers therof. Cōtinue to cheryshe and honour true Nobilitye, where∣wyth your kingedome swarmeth, and nowe youre Courte flourysheth. Syth it is the keye of your reygne, the lyghte of youre realme, and the safest garde of youre person But frome Mockecourtyers and counter∣fayt Nobles, yf any such yet lurke (as Au∣gustus Cesar whilome disfrāchised thē, who
coulde not vse theyr citye) eyther reeue you as vnworthy this priuiledge: or at least with Dauyd, banyshe your courte forswearers, blasphemers, money marchaunts, and bribe takers. Whych is more wyshed, for it is gen¦telest and most commodious for them. Which also I despayre not shortly to see. Both by your graue counsaylours aduyce, and other Nobles, and your owne president. For, as the rulers leade, so foloweth and formeth it selfe the rable rest. Worthye it is, that Plu∣tarche noteth of Dionisius. To whom lieng at Siracuse when Plato came, whyle he gaue hym selfe to study of philosophye, al the court was sprent wyth dust. And euery cor∣ner swarmed wyth clusters drawyng Geo∣metricall fygures. But after his breache wyth Plato, when he forsooke philosophye, and fell to women, and banketting: the other courtyers alyke, wyth chaunged moode, al∣tered theyr myndes and thoughtes, to lyke of wantonnesse of life, lyke hate & contempt of dust and learnynge. This therefore, maye be other cause, of my geuinge it to youre grace To propose your maiestie paterne of the aun¦cient dignifye, Image of tholde honour, and piller of true Nobilitye. That in a woman Noble men maye finde, what to learne, what to folowe, what to wonder. Whether they weygh your vpryghte Iustyce welcome to the good, dreadfull to the enemye: or the syn∣guler learnynge, wherewyth euen to mens mase, you are stoared: or your feruent zeale, loue, and furtherynge of religion, or your no∣ble
and hawtye courage: who in greatest tem¦pestes and stormes, both a woman and sole, weeld and steare, most wysely and stoutelye the sterne of so great a kyngdome. Whyche hawtynesse of stomake, to tonfyrme & keepe I see I nede not exhorte you. For maye we doubt, but who with so synguler prudence, so sweete consent of all degrees, so quietely and happely restored the churche, myserablye and horriblye deformed with erroures, superstici∣ons, and infinite heapes of Idolatrye, to the state of her primitiue purenes: the same if yet any dregges remayne, anye limpinge or hal∣tyng, eyther in ordes or maners: wil with al helpe, care, councell, speede, prouyde for it, withstande it, and reforme it? For neyther wyl who began this good worke in you, not finishe it (to whom onelye belongeth to geue princelye mindes to prynces). Nor is youre wysedome ignoraunt, what you do is Gods worke, not your owne. His ye house, yours the buyldynge. Wherein nor the feare of few nor murmuryng of many, ought withdrawe you from your forward foundacion. For, his wil it is, his temple should be raysed, the walles of Hierusalem repayred. Our Cirus our anoynted, and Chryste willeth, what your mightyest father Henrye began, youre godlyest brother furthered, that you euen you should finishe and accomplyshe. Thoughe Foxes barke and howle, though Sanbaliet and the Gentyles rulers with al their might and power withstande it. The lord of Hoa∣stes he is, who byds you buyld: men they are
that withstand you. As in the person of god speaketh Esaye to this effecte. I, I am he who comforte the. Who then art thou that fearest a mortall, or the sonne of man, whoe shall become as haye? I haue put my wor∣des in thy mouthe, and with the shadowe of my hande shyelded the. That I may plante the heauens, and settle the earth: that it may be sayde, to Syon, to Englande, my people art thou. Wherefore moste humble thankes we yeelde the god of Sabaoth, who so hathe armed and assisted youre valyaunte courage, in finishynge so perfectlye and boldelye thys his businesse: as nor the dartes of enuy haue pearced you, nor the shotte of malyce shaken you, nor the wyles of your ennemyes snared you, nor the enmye campe of Sathan ouer∣runne you. We greete wel also our christian Nobilitye, who prouoked by your pryncelye presydent, and enflamed wyth gentilmanlye courage, doubted not to folowe the call, and authoritye of theyr guyde and Capitayne.
Yea, so to folowe, as they blushed not, to set to theyr handes, to employ theyr councel and trauayle, to repayrynge and buyldynge thys heauenly frame. Proceede therefore, proceed O most noble Quene, wyth this your noble trayne, in settyng like rooffe and ende to your beginninges. But so haue you a Mayden Queene begonne, so beganne youre brother a chylde, and kynge: as ye seeme to shadowe all your graūdfathers & great graūdsyres, to haue lyghtned your owne name, and vaun∣ced an enseygne, and glysteryng paterne to all
your famelye and posteritye. As you haue begonne therefore, so proceede. Though a∣loane, though a woman. So wonteth Christ to daunt the world. Not in mennes myght, but enfantes, sucklynges, women. Debbora, brake the Iron Charrettes of Labinus the Cananite. Iudith slewe Holofernes. Hester saued the Iewes condemned to dye, from the rampyng mouth, and yawninge Iawes of death. Nor is he sole, whom god assisteth. Who seeth Gods campe. As Iacob agaynst Esau. Whose mounte is enuyroned wyth horse and fierye chares. As against the king of Siria the prophete Elizeus. Howe are ye desolate, when god encampeth in the syghte of his seruauntes? So as Dauyd sole, fea∣red not thousandes of enemyes. For the lord was with him. Who can when him pleaseth from heauen commaund whole legions. He fyghteth not with noumber, but wyth hys only breath, prostrateth & felleth kings. Holy warre wyl he wage for you his hādmaydē. That onely he may tryumphe, who onely is the mightiest champion, and noblest conque∣rour. But whereto tease I and prouoke you to this christiā battaile, of your selfe, through the holy spirites inspiracion, prone enough? Or wheretoe mention I warre, where no suspicion of warre, no campe, no foe appea∣reth? God hauinge on all sides planted peace, and graunted all nacions tyme and place of rest? All iarres appeased at home: al broy∣les buryed abroade? O meruaylous good∣nes of God. O deepe iudgementes, whyche
no obliuion ought rase: worthy tremblynge and honour of all posteritye. Cal to your se∣crete thought, and mind (O Queene) what straunge and huge wonders, howe singuler¦lye, and wonderously, the prouidence of our God, hath wrought. And ouerrunne atten∣tiuelye, onelye the course of these nyne later yeares. So shall you see the lorde and God of vengeaunce, hath scattered his foes, with his onelye becke and countenaunce.
Snaught hence, the butchers of his saincts, from amiddes theyr slaughters, walowyng in theyr chyefe delyght and calmest quiete. At home in your England, in maner at one stroke, mowed of many Byshoppes, wyth the Cardynall and theyr head. In Germa∣nie somewhat afore, wyth a stretched out arme, smytte Dukes and Byshoppes, war¦ryng agaynst the godlye. In Italye at the selfe instante, typpled three or fower Popes with the selfe cuppe of madnes. Whistynge the Emperoures deathe ensuynge, and the kyng your neyghbour late amids hys try∣umphes, after his vayne and smoakye wor∣des, and the bloudy decree of his crueltie pu¦blyshed, slayne wyth the selfe staffe of God. So as more princes and Prelates haue fal∣len by his hand, then the sword and fyer of Tyraunts. What nowe they be, it lieth not in my power to determyne. What lyuynge they were, hereby appeareth. That not one∣lye the realmes where they raygned, seeme cased and lyghted, of a heauier yoake and masse then Ethna: but euen whole Christen¦dome laugheth, and ioyeth it hath vomyted out so strong a venime. Whose spyrytes I disquiete not. Ne doth my talke nowe com∣batte with the dead. Woulde they had bene here good, hereafter saynctes. Onely meant I hereby (O most gracious Quene) to im¦prynte in all Christendome, deeper memory of Gods prouidence. Continually to behold his gentlenes towardes the vesselles of his mercye: and iust seueritye, towardes his en∣nemyes: rentyng wyth all cruelty and mer∣cyles rage, Chrystes frendes & brethren.
A worthye consideracion, wherein oughte anker, as well the thoughtes of the godlye that suffer, for theyr comforte: as the iniu∣rious vngodlye, to moue theym while time is to turne to the Lorde. Thus much ther∣fore wrote I to you, that seynge God fygh∣teth for you and yours, you qwayle not that hawetines of courage. But rather more stoutely withstand your foes. Seruyng vn∣der the standerd of that general and captaine who is God almightye. But though name¦ly to you I haue thus much sayde, of forti∣tude the fourth parte of Nobilite yet meant I by you to counsayle al Nobles, burieng al basenes and weaknes of stomacke, to fur∣ther, cherishe, defende, and mayntayne vn∣stayned, religion with theyr councell, autho¦ritye, myght, and force. Call to mynde O Queene: weyghe they allso, who, what, and whersoeuer long since, not the deuel, but the true God sayde to the Sybarytes.

Happye, thryse happy shalt shou be Sybarite Whyles in thy weale thou worshypst God aryght. But when thou him neglectst for mortall men Whote broyles abroade, at home bate haue thou then. But whether hathe the streame of my talke ouerborne me? That whom I maye well geue the hearynge, I enterpryse to learne. But I beseeche youre maiestye pardon my boldenes. Ascrybyng it to my willingnes by you to helpe others. To you meant I onelye to signifye, what in this booke I treate, that yf my purpose be not contemptuous, it dys∣please not your hyghenes to haue it dedicate to you. I beseche the Lord Ihesus, Prynce and fountayne of all Noblesse, to enryche and furnyshe all Nobles wyth your like thewes. To anoynt your breast, with the spyryte of Iustice, Godlynes, wysedome, and fortitude and preserue your maiesty, to the greater en∣crease of the glory of his name. That your reygne maye be to your selfe honoure, to the churche ayde and comforte, to the commen wealthe, staye and ornament. That by youre godly president, and Scotland now in faythe our syster: The other neyghbour Nacions Fraunce, Spayne, Flaunders, and all real∣mes and kingdomes maye at lengthe awake from theyr longe slomber, to like lighte of the Gospell. That all Prynces with Chryst, thinke theyr king∣domes not of this worlde. So at last to gayne an e∣uerlasting crowne. Amen.

