



CHrisippus (my good L.) be∣ing demaunded, why he vn∣dertooke not some publique office in the comon wealth. Si male curarem (quoth hee) Dijs displicere. Si bene homini∣bus. And thus to auoide the horne of the argument (by secrete insynua∣tion) inferred vpon the premisses: that sibi vi∣nere should be his suersbie, As the best way to escape from blame in the world. Whose cau∣tion in some sorte I could commend, but his conclusion must I needes condemne of foule absurditie. For as there is no man (except he will be invtile pondus terrae: and such the Apo∣stle suffereth not to eate) but holdeth his place as tenant at will by speciall assignation and li∣mitation from the Lorde, whether it be in the Church or common wealth: So (in trueth) this ship willingly admitteth no loyterers, nor that bodie politique, easily retaineth corruption, but the one by discipline doth exonerate: the other by medicine doth evacuate such noy∣some burthens as otherwise would infect the bodie, or afflict the soule.

The consideration whereof (in my ghesse) moued Plato to affirme,ist. 9. ad e. terent. diuina∣ne. li. 2. Non sibi soli; sed patriae, se esse natum: and Cicero to saie, Neque vllare magis prodesse possum patriae, quam si tradam vias optimarum tum. In semblable persuasion Diuines of euerie age haue painfully enlarged their labors, not by instance in publique and perticular exercise of their function at home a∣lone, but by writing of Cate chismes, penning of Sermons, & putting their studies into print, haue also indeuored to profit such abroad (as haplie with all their hearts) would learne, but lack teachers: haue eares to hege (and soules to sane) and yet al as want instruction. Thus by all possible meanes to manirest their vtter∣most good will to the benefit of the Church, & behoofe of posteritie. But ex duro vltima ferro est. For this vnthankfull age of ours, how vn∣kindly (with playted browes and powting lookes) entertaineth it this seruice and thank∣lesse office, imbracing the while (with heartie applause) euerie odde left or bad toye that fond inuention can excogirate. And first of all, the enimie of Gods trueth (if rampant) how yelpeth he: Sicut Cerberus in stigio. If couchant, how hisseth he, Sicut anguis in herba: and all to confront and ouerbeare each laudable enter∣prise which might further the kingdome of God, or persuade the trueth of religion among the sonnes of men.
Againe, the Atheist (ignauum paecus) how disdainfully (with a forked tongue) discardeth
he each mohument of pietie? how malicious∣ly (in a preiudicat opinion) reiecteth he all cen∣sure that checketh his distempered affectiōs? And who so shall but crosse the path of his wicked delightes, Iam{que} faces & saxi volant fu∣ror arma ministrat. Moreouer the world affor∣deth a giddie headed crewe (absit tamen verho inuidia) and these men of Arbens, (forsooth) looke a squint at euery occurrante that pat not their synister fist. For all beir they scorne the dignities of schoole, and deride all proro∣gatine of learning: yet (like Walthams calfe ia peeuish choise) they will rather Credere ho∣mini prepter hominem, than hominibus propter veritatem: Who after a while that they haue beard but who me they list, and but where they list, at length they list to heare none at all, but become malcoutent, fall into scisme and he∣resie, lamentably vexing the Church with all their stormes, En quo discordia Ces perduxit miseros.
And yet the wealthie Citizens of this world, whome the Apostle termeth :2. Thes. 3.6 whose Iron synowes no labour can bowe, nor lawe binde to the good behauiour.O  oh,  How stand they at defiance with frendlie re∣profe? how impatiently beare they the lore of restraint, induring with delight the bobbes & precious baulmes of sugred placentia, leading them vnwares (as the foole to the stockes) to plowe wickednes, to reape in iquitie,Hosea. 10.13. and to feede vpon the frime of lyes? But (whome I
warne as brethren,) a last sort ther be also, who though in sinceritie & zeale they wil seeme to go before, som vn quiet conceit or other (tho) doth so trouble & distract them, that to speede their fancie, & fixt their pallate were not the least amongst Hercules labours: For one prea∣cher is too formall, another too populer: This mana time seruer: that writer a man pleaser. One Sermon is too full of Doctors & distincti∣ons, all sauouring of Arte: another luke-warm or kay-cold, deuoid of all zeale. This brother affecteth a present Pulpit man without preme∣ditation: another bringeth bosome stuffe, all smelling of the Candle, and thus (as he said) Scinditur innertuns studia in contraria vulgus.uidius. So that thalone view of the face of these trouble∣som seas (enraged through the iniquitie of the time) doth questionles hale away verie manie, otherwise, both apt & able to lanche into the deepe, & driveth them back to rest their boate by the calmer shoare, as too too loath to grap∣ple with the multitud (immanis belua) to whom profered seruice seldome commeth in season, especiallie in the case of controlement.
But what then? posita est sua meta malignis. And as one verie well and wise lie writeth:Hieron. O∣or. li. z. de gloria. vir∣tus non in populi opinionem sed in seipsam intuetur, nec leges accipit, fed potius imponit ab omni male∣rum impetu semper inuicta.
The second thoughtes (which experience holdeth the best) must therefore better aduise diuines, especially, and hart the seruants of
God (to whom that celestial Iniunction  doth especially appertaine) manfully to stand to their tackle,Coll. 3.2. & cheerely to hoise their sailes at all assaies, sith neuer befalleth ship∣wracke (though manie sharpe stormes) where Christ guides the sterne. And if the world haue most vnkindly intreated (nay cruelly persecu∣ted) the sonne of God,Mat. 10.24. shall the seruant be pri∣uileged aboue the master? And if the spouse her self must stoope to let the wicked plowe deepe furrowes vpon her back: who notwith∣standing (as Hillarie saith) doeth vincere cum le∣ditur emergere cum premitur,Psa. 129.3. De Trinit. lib. 7. & exaltari cum hu∣miliatur. Shall not Gods souldiers march on (maugre the malice of men) & proceed with S. Paul by honor & dishonor,2. Co. 6.8. by euill report and good report &c. sith the dearest Iewels be far∣thest fetcht: the purest mettals haue deepest mynes, & difficilia quae pulchra. For as custome (though otherwise oftē the broker of falshod) hath fitly drawen the Poets verse into a prouerb of proofe: Commoditus omnis sua fert incōmoda secum. Euen so aduisedly & truely said Diodorus .Diodorus. And verilie aged is that sawe & seasoned with long experience: Quaenocent, docent: For schola crucis, schola lucis.
S. Augustine writing of the constancie of Martirs in the grieuous persecutions of the church:De Ciuit. dei. li. 22. ca. 6. Ligabantur, includebantur, caedebantur: (saith he) yea, trucidabantur, torquebantur, lauie∣bantur. But (quenching all this crueltie in a word) Multiplicabantur (quoth he) nō pugnantes
pro salute, fed salutem contemnentes pro seruatore.
The cause standing thus (perdie) the pil∣grime that will walke to heauenward must put on the minde to ouerstride manie a stum∣bling blocke in the way, and vndertaking his course, nec temere nec timide must heedefullie passe the straightes, per saxa, per ignes, euen through purgatorie it self curragiouslie main∣teyning the race from the houre of his first breath, vntill the last periode of his mortall life. Where (as one saieth) Lachrimae prius nobis deerunt quam causa dolendi.encea De it. bre. And no maruaile at all: for he that wil be crowned must not grudg to be crossed, sith no conflict no conquest, no conquest no victorie: nay, the fiercer th'en∣counter, the more glorious the triumph to him that holdeth out to the end. Otherwise to be∣gin with courage and to faile in the course, is to loose the Bravium th'apostle proposeth to the runners. And to fight for a while & faint in the liftes, is to gaine the opprobrium where∣with the Romanes vpbroyd the Carthagiman Captaine,. Cor. 9.24 vincerescis Hanniball, vti victoria ne∣scis. As for me (I assure your good L.) I neuer abounded with that humour, nor euer yet la∣houred of their disease whore fingers tickle Prurigine scribendi. For albeit manie a time be∣fore this day I haue beene beset with request of sundrie both in profession and vocation of the best, yet could I neuer be induced to di∣nul gate my studies in writing (for causes need∣les here to repeate) though otherwise. (Gods
Church be my witnes) I neuer was nice to hide or withhold the dimitalent committed to my trust, when or wheresoeuer it might doe good. Howbeit, after I had vpon speciall re∣quest preached this sermon, and was eftsones laboured with assiduall entreatie (in zeale of Gods glorie I dare saie) to gather and penne the same, that (vnworthie tho) it might be∣come imprinted and imparted with mani. Importunitie (at last) ouercame me to condi∣scend and extorted my promise to set it downe (which as memorie would serue I haue pre∣cisely here performed, as the learned of my coate with the other godly auditors of that presence where it was deliuered I thinke will auerre.) But yet with condition endorsed, that your L. graue censure first confirming it to the prefle, or commaunding it to sylence, I would accordingly answere expectation with yea or naye. Lo, reuerend father how bluntly this my Rudis indigesta{que} moles presseth now vpon your charitable patience, whose grauitie trial assureth mee) is nothing delighted with the emptie soundes of hollowe eloquence, but better contented with the frutefull forme of the wholesome documents: Wherein how so∣euer my iarrie stile go lymping lame and vn∣pleasant, the matter I hope is both profitable and currant. And that sufficeth me, if the Lord shall sanctifie my sillie labour to some vse or o∣ther, though to serue in the vtmost courtes of the temple.

For the poore widdowes mite, where God is made vmpire shall alwayes ouer-ballance the superfluities of that sort who stande vpon their painted shea the to drawe a leaden dag∣ger out of an Iverie scabberd.Mar. 12.44. Luk. 21.2. And good fa∣ther Latimers Newe yeares gyft to King Hen∣rie the eight (who when other Bishops sent rare and riche Iewels of golde and plate, pre∣sented a faire newe Testament with a Hand∣karcher wrought about the borders with this inscription and poesie: Fornicatores & adulte∣ros iudicabit Deus,eb. 13.4. was (for waight & worth) more valued in Gods accompt, than those o∣ther rufling treasures that abounded in the Court.
To conclude, if in this my discourse (hether∣to subiect to the eare alone, not the soundest witnesse among the sences, but nowe to be stript to the eye it selfe, the subtilest searcher of all the rest) I haue erred in matter, humanum est errare (my L.) but my amisse once discoue∣red by the kenne of the learned, Peccaui shall be my plea: for hereticum esse nolo. If other∣wise by friuolous digression I haue vndiscreetly ranged without the ring of my compasse, be∣like the man lost his waie ere he wist: for that course was farre from my purpose, and neuer in my custome, as the best acquainted with my fashion can best tell. But if anie thing here in be well or in any measure commen dable, let the praise he the Lords: the paine the authors: and the profit the Readers, that God which
is all in all, may haue all the glorie. It only re∣maineth then that your good L. (according to your wonted curresie) woulde accept this at my hande, as an infallible pledge of my ob∣sequious minde, and eftsones vouchsafe my feeble pilgrime to take vp his crutch and to wander as a stranger in the worlde vnder the couerture of your fauourable protection, that so he may finde some harbor against the stur∣die blastes and scornefull spite of malice & ma∣lignitie. The God of mercie and all consola∣tion blesse your L. in your godlie cares for the Church, and enlarge his graces vpon your heart, chearing vp your aged daies with the gladsome presence of his blessed spirit to the aduauncement of his glorie and the auaile of his Zion.

