


WHEN I read that Epistle written by the Apostle Ioh, vnto an elect Lady (beloued in the Lord Iesus) I cal to mind the Godly & elect Ladies in this our age, which with∣in this country ar knowne vnto mee. Of the which number I count you to be one, euen a Ladie chosen of God to bee one of his saincts, and the Godlie daughter of a faithfull father: forthe children of God have their owne marks. Therefore when I first perceaued the spiritual conference, the graue behauiour, the feruent zeàle, and the great sense of naturall corruption, with the strang resistance of the same that was in you: I thinke them as infallible signes of Sanctification: Let no man suspect me of flatterie, for I speake not after the flesh. N∣ther feare I (Sister) that this my commendation puff you vp: for where the spirit of Iesus dwelles, there is humility: But rather that thereby ye shal be stirred vp & incouag∣ed to perseuere, and grow in Godlines. It is a rare thing

to see a Ladie, a tender youth, sad, solitare, and sanctified, oft sighing & weeping through the conscience of sinne. Would to God that all the Ladies of this Land, especial∣ly they of the greatest ranke, were of the like modest and godlie disposition: for the most part of them we see, to delite mair in couetousnes & in oppressiō of the puire for the intertainement of their pride, or else to spend their dayes in chambering, wantōnes, decking of their bodies in delicat feeding, and in satisfying their lustes, nor to haue ane incorrupt and holie hart, with a meik aud quiet spirit. Araying themselues in cumly apparel, with shame∣fastnes and modestie, and with good workes, as the Apo∣stles of Iesus Christ hath commanded them. 1. Tim. 2. 9. 1. Pet. 3. 3. Let such women remember that a day they shall appeare & giue a compt before the judgement seat of Christ, and shall receaue a rewarde in their bodies ac∣cording to their workes. I would wish them to haue this weightie saying of the Apostle euer recent in memorie, as a dicton: Shee that liues in pleasure, is dead vvhile shee li∣ueth. 1. Tim. 5. 6. But yee liue more in murmuring and in paine: Therefore yee shall rejoyce eternallie. Now to come to the point, hauing composed in my youth a few songes in verse to the glorie of God: seeing the custome of men is to dedicate their workes to their fauorites and patrones: Shall it not be lawfull to me also, after the ma∣ner of men, to present vnto you (a faithfull and beloued Ladie) a part of my little labours? And sa meikle the ra∣ther, because I know ye delite in poesie your selfe; and as I vnfainedly confes, excelles any of your sexe in that art, that euer I hard within this nation. I haue seene your compositiones so copious, so pregnant, so spirituall, that I doubt not but it is the gift of God in you. Finally, be∣cause so little a worke as this is, requires a short epistle, I

take my leaue, not doubting but my good meaning shall be fauorablie accepted. Continue (good Ladie & sister) in that Godlie course which ye haue begun: let nothing be done vpon ostentation. Loue your Husband: haue a modest care of your familie, and let your cheefe care be casten vpon the Lord Iesus, who will recompense vs at his comming. To God therefore the Father, & our Lord Iesus Christ, be all praise for euer, Amen. At Logie the 16. of Februarie. 1598.
Your brother in the Lord Iesus, Minister of the Evangell.
Alexander Hume
