



THe Poets hane prognosti∣cated of an age, which they epithite,
marmo∣rum, durum: steely, stonie, harde, and roc∣kie.
Math. 24. Tim. 2.3. The scriptures haue prophicied of a time, wher in Charitie, should wax cold, men should be couetous, and louers of themselues. And experience hath proued these to be the dayes of vsurie, Simonie, deceit, oppre∣ssion, theft, and want of charitie, yet
Genes. 18. Abraham was full of hospitalitie:
Genes. 1. Lot receiued strangers: Cleomenes and
Polomaeus had the surnames, of benefactors.
Alex. a. The Barbarians had pittie on the seabeaten trauilers.
Alex. 1. And Iob would not let the stranger lodge in the streete, but sette open his doores to him, that wente by the way.
Acts. 28. Yea saith he, if I restrained the poore of their desire, caused the eyes of the widdow to faile, eate my morsels alone, and not fede the fatherlesse.
Iob. 31. If I with held the hirelings wa∣ges, got goods by oppression, or let the naked perish for want of clothing. then let thistles grow in stead of wheate, cockle instead of bar∣ly, my arme fall from my shoulder, and beebroken from the bone. But the Mimicke could tell, that bona comparat praesidia miserecor∣dia, the mercifull shall finde mercie.
Esay. 58. The libe∣rall shall haue plentie, and the waterer raine Martianus said that true riches were
sua indigen tibus largiri, to feede the hungry, lodge the wanderer. and cloth the naked.
Oze. 6. God desired, Christ blessed, and the Saints practised, mer∣cy.
Mah.
5. Iohn's sermons were all for loue: Peters cō∣mendations for hospitalitie: Timothes charge for good workes:
Eccles. 44. Moses cowncels for pittie: & Paules exhortations for loue and charitie.
Ier. com. in Now thē (right worshipful) this small treatis of chri∣stian sayling prest forth to try the surges of censuring seas,
Gal. 3. hath presumed vpon your pa∣tronage (the true supporter of pouertie) to pro∣tect it against the prating assalts of the peuish pirat.
Peter 1.4. Being imboldened therunto by your loue to learning, hospicality to strāgers,
Tim. 1.6. beneficēce to neighbors, piety to kindred, pitty to the pore & bounty vnto al,
Dentron. 10 Rom. 1.2. Co. 3. whose beginnings it blesseth whose proceedings it praiseth, & whose cōtinu∣ance it confirmeth vnto the day of your arriuall in the heauenly hauen of eternall happinesse.

