



BEing drawne (Right honorable) into
this controversie by the accidents ex∣pressed
in the Epistle to the Reader: I
levelled all my labours, to rake vp the
coales, and stiflle the flames of con∣tention.
Being priuate, I endevoured
to keepe my selfe within the boundes of my condition. I
wrote in secrete, acquainting fewe with my counsell. I
tempered my stile with the modestest words that I could
devise I submitted my self to be led by better reasons. I
abstained from offences, & occasions of choller. I wrote
in latine, that it might not come into the handes of the

multitude: hoping that if anie blowes fell harder, then
I meant them, they might be the better taken, the fewer
saw them. But all this seed bred no corne: for M. Doct.
hunting after praeferment (if I mistake not his plot) and
setting the foundation of his praise on this conquest,
hath now published in print, that I wrote in a corner, &
cried at the crosse, that I sent vnder seale. If the worste
were my disgrace, it might be borne with: or if all rea∣ders
had learning, this reply might be contemned. But
seeing this cause is Christs, and slips amongest the simple
may goe for six pence: I will not betray him, that hath
done so much for mee, nor see them deceaued, whome he
hath bought so dearlie. The question is of an article of
our faith, and pertaineth to all, that care what they be∣leeue.
The doubt is not, whether the article be true, but
in what sense it is true. For, seing these articles are not
scripture, but grounded on the Scripture: the question
is, in what sense Christ is said according to the Scrip∣tures,
to descend into Hell. And now seeing hee is no
more a Christian, that is ignorant of his faith, then he
a Carpenter, that cānot handle his axe: this must needs
be a question as necessarie, as it is needfull for a Christi∣an
to vnderstand, what he beleeueth. For that, which
manie saie, it sufficeth to knowe that Christ descended
into Hell, though they knowe not, in what sort he was
there; is as if a farmer shoulde content himself, that hee
hath a lease of his fame, and neuer enquire how long it
lasteth, nor on what condition hee holdeth. By the
same reason, it is sufficiēt to know that Christ was born,
and that he suffered: and needlesse to seeke how he was

borne, and what hee suffered. Wherefore, I haue resol∣ued
to stand at my defense, and to beare the brunt of
these blowes. For, my weapons are sound Syllogismes,
my armour Scripture, and truth my shield. I doubt not
of the proofe, and feare not the muscate. I was brief be∣fore
as the mediocritie of a private letter requyred. My
breuitie bred obscuritie, and gaue more probabilitie to
his inversions▪ and euasions: to his insinuations and col∣lections,
to his making and marring my argumentes in
wrong mouldes. But now I haue made them my self, &
shaped them on such blockes, as will not (I hope) be easi∣lie
wrung out of fashion. I haue turned his ordinance
some against himself, and all from vs, so farre, as I hope
he will dispair himself, to hit this marke with that shot.
Yet because manie mindes are swayed with affection of
the man, or with conceit of the matter: and my name
came neuer neere so manie eares, as this booke is like to
come in mouths: I haue resolued to commend it to your
honor. Hoping, that if your name win minds to read▪ the
waight of my reasons, shall turne the scales, and winne
heartes to beleeue. I haue manie reasons of my choise.
Your Zeale of Gods house. Your loue of Gods glorie, Your
knowledge in Gods worde. And your aestimation, in
Gods Church, amongest such, as loue his name sincearly
and her Maiestie (for his sake) vnfainedlie. Adde,
that M. D. Reynoldes, (the load starre of Oxenford)
whome your honour hath maintained there, to confute
the Fryar Bellarmine, hauing laid open all the plaites,
and ript the seames of this controuersie: I presume the
more to vse your name in this cause, which hath beene

maintained vnder your countenance. If there were any
hope, that that worke would come out shortlie, I would
burie my papers in the duste. But seeing that time is
like to be long▪ and manie in the meane time are decea∣ved
with these bold bragges. I haue thought expedient
(to amaze the adversaries of this doctrine with the
light of that sunne, when it shall please God to giue it to
his Church) to set out my little candle, wherein (I hope)
there is light inough, to disperse the mistes, and pearce
the cloudes of these Sophismes. Thus, beseeching God
(the authour of all honour) to augment your honour, to
your comfort, & his glorie, I commit you to him, whose
cause I commend to you.

