


ACcording to my promise, I proceed and send the rest of that answer, which be∣fore was intended reuiew your grieuā¦ces with the seueral defence annexed. It may be vpon examinatiō of what you reproue & we maintaine, if you spare a little time to keep re∣petitions with your selues, and read that ouer, which you did dislike, you wilbee of another mind. Second thoghts are better then the first. Con¦sider what peril may come to the Church & to your selues, knowing that many of your con¦gregation did not so much admire your paines as they now heartily lament to see thē soil be∣stowed in vncharitablie taxing,Inuidiam faci∣tis Macario qui sialiquid asper∣fecit pro vnita∣te, leue viders poterit d v pro dissentione, &c. Optat. lib. 2. what the wisdome, and zeale of our godlie auncients haue faithfullie penned. Drawe not blessed Macarius into enuie, who if he haue done anie thing sharplie for preseruation of godlie vnitie,Quiduis facer∣debuisse poti∣qm ecclesiam schismate scid¦e. Diony. Ale∣ad Nat apud Hieronan Catae¦lo. it may seeme light to the harme, which commeth by needlesse opposition: Anie thing you should haue done (as Dionysius Alexandrinus writeth to Nouatian) rather then cause a rent in the Church remembring,Manus dextra & prasbyter. Origen homil. 7. in Iosu. though you bee taken for right hand and be called Presbiters, and seeme to preach
the word of God, yet if you doe any thing against the discipline of the Church,Si aliquid con∣tra cclesiasts∣cam discipl∣nam ibid. In vno consen∣s ecclesia e cidat dexteram suam, &c. or rule of the Gospell, the Church with one consent must cut you off being their right hand and cast you from them. VVhich seuere course some you know that (fauour the discipline you stand for) took (in places where it preuaileth) against others that were contra∣ry minded.Ducto Sutr. in the ale sem∣blār. pag. 182. For whē one Iohn Morellie disputed in a certaine treatise that the wordes. Tell the Church belonged not to the consistorie, his booke was burnt, and the man excommuni∣cate. Two ministers at Geneua were deposed, and banished for speaking against vsurie allowed in that estate, and a third was glad to flie for speaking against vnleauened bread. But fear∣ing the allegation of these examples may dis∣tast your liking of that, which I write, my conclusion shalbe to you with the wordes of Saint Paul to his scholler Timothie and in the same manner I rpotest before the Lord that yee striue not about words,2. Tim. 2.14. which are good for nothing, but to peruert the hearers, he might (vnder Apos∣tolical correctiō be it spokē) haue said which peruert the readers. VVherefore intreating your care, & diligence to bethink your selues better, then you haue done, I cōmend you to God, & to the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, whose holy spirit be with vs all. Amen.
