



NOthing makes mee more a¦fraid, to offer this mine an∣swere, to your Graces view & censure, then the very length, which cōtrary to my purpose and conceit, it is now growne vnto. For both it may iustly argue me of indis∣cretion; for framing so long an answere to so short a Treatise: and the longer it is, the more must it needs be subiect to diuers and sundry oversights. Both which give me iust occasion much the rather to flie to so safe a sanctuary, as your Graces patronage, not only against them, who for the matters sake will certainly mislike it: but euen against them also, who fauoring the argument, may peraduēture iudge the coat too big for the body, or wish somthing otherwise then here they find it. May it please your Grace therfore to remember, that first this matter of

the Crosse in Baptisme, is that great stumbling block, whereat al our discontented brethren doe take offence; & secondly, that in this small Treatise al the chiefest arguments which they vsually make against this signe, are comprehē∣ded: I make no doubt, but that both your Grace & al other indifferent Readers, will easily par∣don my length. Especially because my ende∣vour was, to giue iust satisfaction to euery ob∣iection, and to leaue nothing vnanswered, that might seeme to carry any waight of reasō with it▪ which course, as I held throughout the whol Treatise in generall, so more especially in the last part. Where our obiections, which the Tre∣atiser maketh shew to satisfie, are iustified to be too waighty, for so slight and incoherent answers, as are fitted vnto them. The Treatiser more ouer, not only somwhat in every part of the Treatise, but fully and of resolued & setled purpose in the last part, maketh great vaunt, that either the Ancient fathers in their times v∣sed not this signe at al in Baptisme, or if they did, they vsed it to far other purposes thē we do now; or lastly, if they vsed it to any such end yet euen in them it was neuer free from sinne,

and superstition. I thought it therefore a prin∣cipall part of my duty, somwhat more at large to insist vppon these points, being things in my iudgment not slightly to be passed ouer. And accordngly haue declared, both that the Ancient fathers vsed this consignation of the Crosse in Baptisme in their times, And also that they vsed it, (though to other purposes too) yet even to such ends & purposes, as our Church doth at this day: & lastly, I haue freed (as I trust) aswell our Christian vse thereof, from suspiti∣on o olatry, as that vse which the Auntients had of it, from that imputation of sin & super∣stition, which vniustly is supposed to haue ac∣cōpanied it in their times. And this I trust may be sufficient excuse and defense for the prolix∣ity of this answere. As for the ouersights and imperfections therin cōtained, no iust Apolo∣gy can be made: only I must fly to your Graces fauour, & good acceptance of the Readers. I could haue wished, and from my hart I doe de∣sire, that the late Cōference before his most ex¦cellent Maiestie, (so much desired & expect∣ed before it came) might haue had that successe wherof there was hope giuen at the first. That

is either vtterly haue taken away, and made an end of these quarels in our Church, or at the least, after full satisfaction giuen, (which there they had) somwhat abated the heat of their dis∣contentment. That so we all with one hart and one minde, might haue prouided ourselues a∣gainst that head of Popery, that by these do∣mesticall dissentions getteth dayly strength a∣mong vs. But it is come to passe (I knowe not how) that these contētions are since that time, much more rife then they were before, & pro∣secuted with greater heate thē ever; As though by that meeting in the conference, they had ra∣ther taken hart, and greater courage, then any foile; and new strength rather, then any iust re∣profe, or satisfaction. Where vppon, as diuers others haue endeuoured to answere their ex∣ceptions to our Church Ceremonies in gene∣rall; so I haue laboured to take out of the way all their scrupels and obiections against this particular of the Crosse in Baptisme▪ wherein my conscience beareth me record, I haue wal∣ked with an vpright hart, and sincere affection; and I verily thinck, according to the truth in this behalfe. If therfore there shall be any

thing found therin, answerable to the worth & dignity of the cause; all that iustly and proper∣ly belongeth only to your Grace, from whom it tooke the first begining. If otherwise, I shalbe alwaies ready vpon better information, to re∣forme my errors and ouersight. How soeuer I commend both it and my selfe to your Graces honorable fauour and protection, and shalbe alwaies willing to dispose my labours accord∣ing to your Graces directiō; studying in althings wherin God shal enableme, to aduāce the glo∣ry of God, and knowledge of his truth▪ wherof as God hath made your Grace the greatest or∣nament and pillar in our Church; so I humbly beseech him of his infinite goodnes, to blesse all your religious & careful endeuours for the same; And withal, to giue you many honorable daies and comfortable Assistants in so great a worke; to the glory of his holy name, content∣ment of his most excellent Maiestie, & perpe∣tuall good of this Church and congregation.

