


THe remembrance of your former curtesies, (Right Worshipfull) makes me that I cānot forget you, when I remember my chiefest friends. Wherefore deuising with my selfe, how I might in some sort shewe my thankfull mind toward you, I could not do it otherwise, then by presenting this slender gift of my studie before your eyes, wi∣shing & praying, that the effect and meaning there∣of, might take so deep a consideration in your hart, that it may worke your heauenly consolation & as∣surance. VVhose patronage likewise I humbly de∣sire, may giue credit and countenance thereunto. I should haue remembred the right worshipfull my Ladie your mother, but the matters of learning, are more fit to bee directed to men of knowledge, then vnto that sexe, which is not so well acquainted ther∣with. Only this I may say, to shewe my good will

from my heart, and to giue vnto her Ladiship her due, that although her estate be worshipfull, yet is her report and remembrance honorable. As long as she liueth she shall increase it, & when it shall please God to take her to himself, she shall not loose it. God requite vnto her, and comfort her in her most need, as shee hath bountifully relieued and comforted my father and mother, and vs his children, euen all the houshold of vs. And I doubt not, but that many housholdes in Shropshire, especially in Shrewesbury, may saie the same. Yet ought this so much to bee her comfort, as that her onlie staie, I meane her saluatiō, is wrought by the death and precious blood-shea∣ding of Iesus Christ our Sauiour, onlie of his mercy, without any desert of ours, and by no other meanes whatsoeuer. I would to God that many, both hono∣rable and worshipfull women in the lande, (whom God hath inriched, no doubt to do good to others, and to supplie the wants of those that stand in need) would take her course, that they might deserue the like commendation, and haue the praiers and hearts of the people, which is more woorth, then all their landes and treasures, or anie other comfort in the world. And thus hauing signified my good wil, and testified my dutie, praying your worship, to vouch∣safe the reading of that wherein I haue taken some paines, although it bee not so much worth, I com∣mit you to the tuition of the Almightie, and humbly take my leaue.

