



MOst Reuerend in Christ my late trauiles in laboring other of my fellow brethren their godly, peaceable, quiet con∣tentment in such doubts as their busie learning, and too much paines hath vnnecessarily occasioned, I began, and withall at once thought to haue fi∣nished, but since finding I haue but begun (for somewhat remained, and that somewhat much in their opinion, whose opinions goe for articles of faith) much or little, such as it is, I present vnto your Graces fauour: May it stand with your good pleasure to take know∣ledge of my best affections, how deepely in∣debted to God his Church, the Kings most excellent Maiestie, and your Honorable selfe for your speciall fauours done me in the prime
of my studies after some few yeares spent in the Vniuersitie of Oxford, I shall take it for no small comfort,Act. 7.27. specially as the times now are, wherein like the daies of Moses that blessed peace maker, I am sure to receaue no small por∣tion of griefe from them, whose vnderstand∣ing I labour to reconcile vnto our forme of publike praiers. And were not that duetifull remembrance I haue of your auncient fauour, sufficient cause as I must and doe professe, it is farre more, then any seruice of mine can tho∣roughly recompence, yet your continuall, long, graue experience in this argument, your Reuerend, learned, great paines heretofore in the daies of our Renowned late Queene both by preaching and writing, as also in that late conference (where our now dread soueraigne Lord King Iames royally to the admiration of all there present moderated the controuersies then proposed) are effectuall motiues to im∣bolden me in the humble offer, which I make of this present treatise: Nor are all these the onely persuasiue, though euery of them forci∣ble inough, but the eminencie of your place, and highest prelacie, whereunto you are now called, farder exacteth of me submission of
my writings, because your greatest authoritie next after the Kings highnesse may in these Ec∣clesiasticall causes giue me best approbation. VVherefore be intreated to vouchsafe your gracious acceptance of a few lines and what∣soeuer may be thought defectiue, I hartily craue it may no way impeach that fuller de∣fence, with which our Church can make sup∣plie, to whose most sacred iudgement I wholy commend my selfe. Now that God of power, who hath so mercifully appointed the times and seasons, in aduancing the throne of King Iames aboue the throne of Queene Elizabeth, be blessed and praised of vs all this day and for euer. So are mine and euery true harted subiect his vnfained thanks to Godward for roote and branch, for our King, Queene, their roiall progenie, with the high Court of Parliament, graue Senators, Reuerend Bishops, Honora∣ble Iudges, our Worshipfull knights, & choi∣sest Burgesses so lately, so mightily, so mira∣culously preserued to the euerlasting shame of all mischieuous traitors,Nouemb. 5. 1605. and to the incredible ioy of all them that truely feare God and the King. More it is my thoughts conceaue in this point: But remembring, as I pray to God in
heauen, so I write to men on earth, I stay my selfe for this time. Humblie beseeching your Grace to pardon this my attempt, and to in∣terpret it (as I vnfainedly intend it) the earnest of greater, in deede (as the truth is) of all pos∣sible thankfulnesses.

