


WEake meates are fittest for weake sto∣makes, and strong meat for valiant peo∣ple, and bitter potions, are most wel∣come to them, that knowe and vnder∣stand, what their effect and operation is. To write of the remedie of sorrow, and to perswade to the bearing and en∣during of bitter, sorrow, might seeme a paradoxe in most mens mindes, were it not that your Wor∣ship knew these matters better, then I am able to set them downe and expresse them. But I thought good to direct these vnskilfull Treatises vnto you, not only for the friend∣ship I haue found at your Worships hands, but also because this kinde of doctrine, cannot better be receiued, then of re∣solute minds, and of such hearts, which are throughly establi∣shed in the truth. Profitable also it may bee for others, not only to prepare their mindes against the time of aduersitie, but also to lift them vp againe, and to comfort them with the consideration of God his goodnesse, who will recom∣pence their vniust sorrowes, with vnspeakable ioyes. A time there is for all things, though it may be long first ere it come. Whereof in this place I might speake much, if in the hand∣ling of the text, I had not satisfied the Readers mind. I wold

the briefnesse of this Preface, might make recompence for the tediousnesse of the Treatises. Wherin I am to desire the Reader to pardon me, perswading my selfe, that it shall be to his great good and bettering, if he shall vouchsafe, not only to read them, but also to keep them in remembrance, to me∣ditate thereon, and throughly to disgest them. Considering this with himselfe, that Nulla remedia tam sunt salutaria▪ quam quae dolorem faciunt: Nullaque gaudia tam esse cordi, ta∣toque in pretio, quam quae sequuntur dolorem. I haue troubled your Worship, though in fewe words, yet it may be some∣what too long, considering your waightie businesse, that can hardly spare anie time to extraordinarie matters; praying God, to keepe such men as your selfe, long among vs, to the great good example of the Ministers, the comfortable re∣liefe of the poore, and them that are in distresse, to the main∣tenance of learning and poore Schollers, to your own hearts desire and comfort, to the commoditie, welfare, and furthe∣rance of this Common-weale, and especially to the glorie of God.

