



MAtters of learning, are most fit to be presented to thē that excel therein. For as the prouerbe is, Scientia emiē habet ini∣micum, prater ignorantem: so by the same rule may I say, Scientia nemiem habet amicum et Mecanatem, nisi studio∣sum fatreque honorum literarum. Let wisdom grow in fauour with them that haue knowledge, and waighty discour∣ses be accepted of learned men. Caluine and Erasmus, making their Comenta∣ries vpon the New-testament, tooke
choice to dedicate them to Kings and Princes, & Nobles, which I take it, was not only to make them in loue with re∣ligion, but also to make them to fauour and further it, to the vtmost of theyr power. Though my selfe be nothing comparable, & not so much as worthy to carry their bookes after such learned men, yet I may take example frō them.
And although (Right Reuerend) I know right well, that you not onely fa∣uour religion, but are an earnest pro∣fessor thereof, & that I need not to ex∣hort and stirre you vp therein: yet the principal scope of this my writing is, & of this my dedication, in most humble & earnest sort to desire you, thas you haue done much good already by your printed labors, so you would vouchsafe yet more and more, to further Gods church & the ministerie by this means. Among whom my selfe beeing but a mean member, haue reaped great pro∣fit by your labors. For the which, as we of the ministery chiefly, are to acknow∣ledge gods goodnes for raising vp such an instrument in his church, so as many
as haue beene furthered & bettered by your painfulnesse, are also to account thēselues beholding vnto you, as I am, I speak it vnfainedly. I heare being one of your neighbour Diocesse, that you haue great care of a learned ministery, and at the entrance of your honourable place in VVorster, you shewed your selfe a forward man therein. I beseech your Lordship to pardō my presump∣tion, and to take my meaning in good part. For them that are vnlearned, and eyther would, or by any means are like to enter into the ministery, where you haue to doe, either you may aduice thē (as no doubt you doe) to stay a longer time, till they be sufficient, or debar thē, or exhort and counsell them to take vpon them another course of life. For those beeing vnlearned, that are already placed, who considering their ovvne wants and weaknesse, might bestowe some part of their liuing vppon suffici∣ent and able men, to helpe to discharge that vvaightie dutie which lyeth vpon thē to performe in that behalfe; if they be vnwilling this way, & of themselues wilbe studious & painful, endeuouring
to discharge a good conscience in their place and calling, no better helps can they haue then learned bookes. Who if they would but follow the direction which you haue already set foorth, I d asure them they may doe much good in theyr congregation. Nowe as Kings and Princes desirous to gouerne theyr people well, doe not onely com∣maund them to liue in due obedience and ciuill order, but also doe prescribe lawes & statutes, that thereby they may be directed to liue as they ought to do: so such men as your selfe vnder Kings and Princes, beeing appoynted great Gouernours, & hauing a great charge, doe well to perswade your Clergie vn∣der your iurisdiction, that they haue e∣speciall care to instruct the people cō∣mitted to them: but they doe better, that by all meanes they can deuise, doe help and further them, to make them a∣ble Ministers.
The example of your Lordshippes painfull preaching, is a notable incou∣ragement in this behalfe, but if it would please you as yet further, to preach to the by your painfull pen, they might at
good leyfare instruct thel,  by due meditatiō make good vse therof to the edification of others. And that you may continue in your godly  of a learned ministery, as also the vnlearned may take heed what they doe  much heerein they offend, let mee fur∣ther perswade, by the words of that ler∣ned and reuerend man Ma. Doctour Some, who in a printed booke aunswe∣ring Penry his obiections, shweth his great forwardnes in this matter.
I beseech you let it not seeme dous vnto you, though I recite vnto you that which there I haue rd The vvordes are these as followeth.Doctour Smes de∣sire of a ler∣ned mini∣sterie. I haue  very earnestly and humbly, by wriing and speech, for a learned ministerie. I haue receiued very comfortable aunswere of very great and honourable personages, who haue alreadie, (thanks be to God) employed some, and will no doubt im∣ploy more in the churches seruice. Pen∣ry maketh a speech as proceeding from vnlearned ministers, chap. 25. vvhich make the ministery vltim . They in their practise say, Lord, whe∣ther
of soule or no, we care not; but rather then we should not haue the meanes to liue in this life, (for this is theyr onelie scope in continuing in the ministerie,) require the blood of soules, and vvhat thou wilt at our hands. And so sence∣lesse men, they sell themselues body & soule, vnto euerlasting woe & destruc∣tion.
To this speech Ma. Doctour Some aunswereth wisely and discreetly. I am so far (saith he) from beeing a defence, to ignorant eyther Leuites before, or Ministers nowe, that I confesse freelie, that their entrance into the priest-hood and ministerie, and uance in it, most absurdly, vvas and is a geeuous sinne.
If the Lorde hath or shall punish them senerely for theyr intrusion, into so high a calling, they cannot plead not guiltie. If they doe it is in vaine, for at Gods barre, they shall not be acquitted. You write that the ignorant Ministers, whom you call sencelesse men, doe sell themselues body & soule to euerlasting destruction: Your speech is true; Illi viderint: Let them if they be not grace∣lesse
and shamelesse, looke into it. All that I say vnto it is, the Lorde for his Christ his sake; heale that sore. It is not so grieuous (thankes be to GOD) as it was, I assure my selfe it will be lesse, I would to God it were none.
So farre Maister Doctor Some, who I am perswaded vttered this, not so much addicted vnto learning, (beeing himselfe a man verie learned) as princi∣pallie vpon a good conscience, consi∣dering the vvaightie charge that lyeth vppon the Minister to performe, to teach, to confute, to comfort, vvhich cannot bee performed vvithout lear∣ning.
Novve in token of a thankfull mind, for that good which I haue alreadie re∣ceiued by your publique painfulnesse, (both by priuate meditation, and pub∣lique practise, for the which the Lorde be praysed,) I haue made bolde to pre∣sent this Booke vnto your Lordship, not so much for patronage and pro∣tection, (which also I desire) as in re∣uerend sort, once againe to exhort you, and to drawe you on, to be mindfull of vs of the ministery; and to remember
my humble request heerein.
Concerning the Reader, he may per∣swade himselfe, that that doctrine shall most preuaile with his auditory, that standeth vppon diversities of instructi∣ons, leading the minde onward, with a kinde of vriy & delight. And there∣fore I haue taken principall choyce in this sort, as you see, to set forth these pa∣rables with as  & apt notes as I could, being furthed heerein, by Gods help and assistance. Wherein if there be any thing to be liked, it is Gods dooing, if there be any fault, it is mine owne.
God grant that we all, of the ministe∣rie especially, may proue to be wise vir∣gins, and that such as your selfe, vvhich haue receiued fiue talents, may well re∣member that these two twinnes vvere bone both together, at one & the selfe same time, Honores et Onera.

