


MAnet alta mente repo'stum, The Poets speech, expressing the effect of displea∣sure. So hardly are we giuen by the course of nature to forget iniuries and displea∣sures, or to let passe discurtesies offered. But as the wise man saith, it is a mans ho∣nour to passe by an offence; so noble dis∣positions, do not so much regard the iniu∣rie of their inferiours, as what may best fit and beseeme their estate. I must needs confesse (Right worshipfull) that I haue greatly offended, by reason of my absence & want of thank∣fulnesse towards you for so great benefits receiued. But as I found that I was many waies vnworthie and vnable, to stand before your honourable father, so haue I full proofe of the selfe same insufficiency in my selfe toward you, euen vnto this present day. Thinking it all that I could well performe, (if it were possible, to make any requitall or part of amends, for such bountifull liberalitie, as also more then common curte∣sie from your selfe,) to make my hartie praiers vnto God, for your prosperitie and good estate, that you might rise from credit, to worship, and honour, and princely fauour, that you might match, or at lest wise come as neare as might be, to that

high degree, which your noble father possessed. Yet could I not think that sufficient, vnlesse I had in some measure, shew∣ed vnto your worship some fruit and effect of my studie and labours, vnto the which I was so greatly mainteined, by your honourable fathers liberalitie, and furthered also, not meane∣ly, by your fauour and good will, which was and is the more to bee remembred of mee, because it came from you, on my part, vndeserued, and which is more, vnlooked for.
This that I haue presently dedicated vnto your worships view and patronage, part of it, is no other, then that which you haue read before, and somewhat more to expresse my painfulnesse and good will, though otherwise it be but mean, and not so worthie the reading as I could wish it. I laboured in the first part of the Epistle to the Romanes consisting on Iustification, and was so bolde, as to present it vnto your fa∣thers honor, thinking also to haue done my best in the second part of the same Epistle, concerning Gods eternall predesti∣nation. Which at this time by Gods helpe I haue finished, yet so, that my shoulders were eased of the burden. For ligh∣ting vppon a treatise of that matter, written by that famous and learned man, M. Theodore Beza, (farre more excellent, then I could either deuise or frame) glad was I, that my studie and searching was so well preuented. The places of scripture which were added to prooue euery waightie point, were so confusedly set downe, that they might haue wearied the rea∣der, rather then directed him. Which when I perceiued, I tooke some paines though small, to help in that behalfe. And because euerie reader is not of the like vnderstanding, and that this point of religion seemeth hard to conceiue, (especi∣ally to them whose wittes be not exercised in searching such matters) I thought good out of euery chapter, to take out the principall matters, & to ioyne thē to their proofes, desirous to make al as plain & as easie as might be possible. All which I humbly request your worship, to accept in as good part, as it is offered, which shall be a mean to encourage me, to labor further, if it like you. And so I leaue to trouble you any fur∣ther,

only wishing, that your name and credit may be such, as was that of the Right honourable the Earle of Bedford, who had deseruedly gotten this title, The good Earle of Bedford. That in religion to God, and to the Church; in loialtie and faithfulnesse to the Prince, and to the Realme; in loue and liberalitie, to learning and poore schollers; in care and boun∣tifulnesse, to the poore and needie; you may according to your deserts, carrie this godlie and honourable title in the mouthes of all men, that when they name you, they may so report of you, to be, The good Knight, Sir Henry Bromley.

