


RIght Worshipfull, I cannot write vnto you but as vnto a stranger; yet such a stranger, in whome I haue perceiued great good wil & kind∣nesse toward me. So that I may re∣solue with my selfe, to make ac∣count of you, as of my friende; whereof I haue some triall, in that you haue giuen a great token, in the preferment of my sister, for the which, both she and I am bound to giue you hartie thankes. And yet great reason there is, that you should be strange, because as yet I haue shewed no dutie, wherby I might in some sort, warrant my selfe of your fauoure and friendship. The godly minde wherewith Gods spirit no doubt hath indued you, may be some cause, to procure your fauour toward me, if it were but for my profession sake. And so much the more, because you carry a name in Shrop∣shire to be a great fauourer of the Gospell, and if I

should adde the peoples report, of a good Iusticer, I might be iudged to flatter. And yet there is no cause. For where the word of God hath taken deep roote, there of necessitie followeth all vprightnesse, both in life and office. To procure your Worships good will toward me, I haue at this time, though boldly, offered vnto your view, some part of my laboure, which as you like it, so I hope you will accept it, and your good liking shal giue it both countenance and credit inough. And seeing your credit is great in the furtherance of the Gospell, so I would humbly re∣quest you, to promote and further the same more and more, to the vtmost of your power. Though it bee my request, yet is it Gods cause and his glo∣rie, which may both stirre you vp, and also in∣courage you, who need not my perswasion, be∣ing forward inough of your owne disposition and good nature. Doubtlesse, God woorketh excel∣lently in notable men, at whose handes hee re∣quireth woorthie matters, euen at the handes of famous men, and men of renowme. Whome hee hath greatly aduaunced, furthered and furni∣shed vnto suche woorkes. And vnto whome much is giuen, of them also shall much bee re∣quired. King Dauid woulde haue built a Tem∣ple vnto the Lord God of Israel, but God appoin∣ted his sonne King Salomon to doo it. Manie Kinges in Iuda, yet none but Hezekiah caused the brasen Serpent to be pulled downe, and GOD wrought with him, and hee prospered and flou∣rished, and God sent him a miraculous and fa∣mous deliuerance, from the handes of his ene∣mies.

Iosiah was famous for Religion, and none more zealous; the solemne keeping of the Passe∣ouer, that was in his daies, doth declare it. King Cyrus hee is appointed of God, to deliuer the Iewes, from their captiuitie and thraldome. Ma∣ny Heathen Kings there were in the worlde, yet it pleased God that his glorie should bee set forth by none so much, as by King Nabuchodonosor, who wondrously set foorth the praises of God; was a notable meane to deface idolatrie; that God one∣lie might bee truly serued. And although no∣table men, bee not all Kings, yet vnder Kinges, great matters are committed vnto them, and they are rulers vnder Princes, and in the places where GOD hath seated them, hee dooth giue them honour as is meete for them, and agreeable to their estate. Especially hee crowneth them with honour, which honour him. What worke more notable, then the preaching of the Gospell? and that the Nobilitie, and also Gentlemen of good calling and credit, might see it performed, in the places where they dwell, and about them. I would to God the reuerend Fathers of the land, of whome the Prince maketh choyce, as of no∣table men, and men of renowme, had that care as Bishop Hooper, and Bishop Latimer had, to see the people taught and instructed in euerie parish throughout their Diocesse, and I doubt not but that they haue the selfesame care, howsoeuer oftentimes it falleth out otherwise, contrarie to their willes.

Most gentlemē are set against it, because they know not the worthinesse of it, as also the glittering shew of this deceiueable world, hath vtterly blinded thē, togither with their corrupt affections, which are so far from correctiō or amendment, that they cannot abide to heare any reproofe, or counsell, or so much as to acknowledge their fault, & therfore cōsequēt∣ly, notable men they must needs bee, that fauour it. Who in so dooing, procure vnto themselues the fa∣uour of God, and the hearts and good reportes of men, whis is a great honour, that God doth crowne them withall. May I not write vnto your Worship, as I reade in the Reuelation, chapter 3. 11. is written to euery Christiā. Behold I come shortly, hold that which thou hast, that no man take thy Crowne. And again, verse 21. To him that ouercommeth (and continueth) will I grant to sit with me in my throne. I haue bene too tedi∣ous, and here I must staie, and so I humbly take my leaue; praying your Woorship to remember my humblesute, I haue made vnto you, (not long since) so farre forth as conueniently you may, neither is it reason, we should presse vpon you too farre. Wher∣in if you vouchsafe to pleasure vs, wee shall all of vs bee bounde to pray to God, for your prosperous e∣state; and that you may liue long, to Gods glorie, your owne comfort and contentment, to the ioy of your friends, and admiration of your enemies.

