



PVblius Scipio (he that was first surnamed African) ryght honorable Father was wont to say that he was neuer les idle, then when he was Idle, mea∣ning therby forsomuch as he was a ma∣gistrate that he most earnestly thought & mused of cōmon wealth matters, when he semed to others least occupied. A wor¦thy saying for so noble a man, and to be embraced of all rulers, namely in these troubelous dayes, in whiche so manye thinges be disordred, and nede reforma∣cion. So albeit I am no Magistrate as noble Scipio was, bu a priuate persone, yet I haue thought it my boundē dutie to see suche houres, in whiche I myght haue ben vnoccupied, which some spend in banketting, rioting, and gamning, be∣stowed neither vnthriftely, ne idelly, but

to the profite of the common wealth, to teache the laye people vnderstanding & science to the vttermost extente of my small power.
Vnderstanding is a seede that God soweth in mans soule, and among al his gyftes, knowledge is the chiefest. It or∣dreth the mynde, gouerneth the body, directeth al our workes and affaires, tea¦ching vs what ought to be done, & what is to be left vndone, without whiche ne∣ther a kyng can rule his subiectes, nor the captaine guide his armie, nor a By∣shop enstruct his flocke, ne any man of science or craftes man shewe forth and practise his arte or occupation. Nowe if we recount other thynges to be of great price and value, your wysdome know∣eth that the knowledge of God surmoū∣teth so farre all other sciences, as God hymselfe excelleth all other creatures. And thesame without denay is most pro¦fitable and necessary both vnto kynges, Dukes, Erles, and Lordes, as appereth. Psalm. ii. Deute. xvii. Esay. xlix. where they be named the nourses of Religion, and also vnto gentlemen, marchauntmē yeomen, husbandmen, to al degrees spi∣rituall

and temporal. Vaine are all men,Sap. 1 which haue not the knowledge of God, sayth the wyseman:Rom.  and Paul testifieth that because it semed to them not good to haue the knowledge of god, god gaue them vp into a leude minde to their own heartes lust, and to all vnclennes. For if he be lyght, suche as know not hym,1 Iohn.  do stumble in darkenes: if he be the waye, they that be ignoraunt haue loste theyr waye: if he be the truth,Iohn. 14 al suche as haue no acquaintaunce with hym, be blinded & disceiued: if he only be good,Luk. 1 we must borow & craue all good thinges of hym alone: if al science be the lordes, we must be , Gods scholers, if he only be almighty,Eccle. 24 all our power strength and habilitie cometh frō him: if he be life, the end of such as be ignoraūt,Mark. 10 & wil not seke to know the Lord, shal be eternal death. For our sauiour & mercie stock saieth yt this knowledge is eternal lyfe: This is eternal life, to know thee & Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent,  be ye true God.Iohn. 17 But we must fetch the right knowledge and true description of hym out of holy wryte, whiche as the Apostle telleth is profitable to teache,2 Tim. 3 to controll to a∣mende,

and to instructe in all rightuous∣nes. I haue made this treatise of hym out of the same, and forasmuche as my entent and matter herein is to portray and paint our sauiour Christ, who is the bryghtnes of the euerlastyng lyght,Hebr. 1 Sap. 7 the vndefiled glasse and liuely Image of the diuine maiestie, I doe call it the Image of GOD. Or els because suche thinges be here opened and discouered, which be ne¦cessary to be beleued and knowen of the laye and vnlearned people (I would not haue them vtterly lacke Images) name it if ye wyl, the laye mans boke, for ima∣ges wer wont to be named Libri laicorū, the bokes of the laitie. I am not the fyrst that hath painted Christ, Paul painted hym longe sithe to the Galathians, as he wytnesseth:Gala. 3 I haue paynted Iesus Christ before your eyes, and haue cru¦fied him amongst you: and all the other Apostles, Euangelistes, and Prophetes were painters. My mynd is not to por∣traye any new, raunge, or vnknowen Image, but to renew, and repayre again the olde Image that Paul made, which hath bene so darkened with gloses, and is so bespotted with coloures of mans

witte, so stayned through shamefull co∣uetousnes, libertie, and gredy ambicion, that marueyle it is to se men so vnreue∣rent towardes the maiestie of God their maker.
Seneca a wise and sage Phylosopher willeth yt mete giftes be not vnmeetely geuen to vnmete persons, as armour to women, nettes to studentes, wyues to boyes: and Christ the wysdome of God commaundeth: Geue not that which is holy to dogges, neyther caste ye pearles before swyne, meaning therby,Math. 7 that all kynd of giftes ought to be agreable and answerable to their degrees and vocaci∣ons, to whome they are geuen. Nowe what thyng coulde bee deuised more a∣greable to your graciouse estate, then his Image, whose glory & honour you haue alwayes sought to aduaunce, not with∣out great daunger of your goodes and lyfe, for whiche you are bound to render hym moste harty thankes, that he chose your grace for a bless instrumente to sweepe cleane his house and churche, to redresse all abuses, and to restore agayne his fallen and decayed glorye, maugre the head of all ennemies. Therfore I do

presente and dedicate this Image hono∣rable father, vnto your grace, bothe for the worthines of the matter (whiche is incomparable) for the metenes of your person, for a perpetual monument of my good wyll towardes your Lordship, and also for a testimony, token, and declara∣tion of my zeale and beneuolence to my contrey men. If I shal se it to be profita∣ble to them, I shall be encoraged to take mo fruitfull matters in hande, in whiche I desyre continually to occupy my selfe, but the worlde is so euyll, so vnkynde, so vnthankefull to studentes, that pouer∣tie causeth them to remitte, and slacke their studies, and to seke the worlde to maynteine their necessities. Abounda∣unce and wealth dwelleth only with tho¦se, whyche haue Gods houses in pos∣session, whiche eate vp hys people lyke bread, and are not content to lyue vpon theyr owne sweate, but doe lyue vpon other mens goods and laboures, vpon the church goodes, which are the pores. I do meane all suche, as in the papistical tyme were wont to lyue of their landes to kepe good hospitalitie, to mainteine scholes, and houses of almes, and nowe

they be purchessars, and sellers awaye of the same, vsurers, rent raysers, grasi∣ers, and farme mongers, wherby hospi∣talitie, tillage, and many good houses be decayed in Englande, and the Realme is vnpeopled, and disfurnyshed. Besydes some be berebrwers, some fermers of be∣nefices, some persons, some vicares, by∣ers of improparations, some deanes of colledges, some prebendaries, and offi∣cers also in the kynges house. Agayne priestes, which should be preachers, and distributers of the holy sacramentes, be lawiers, commissaries, chauncellors, offi¦cialles, proctors, receiuers, stewards, the office of saluaciō is vnregarded through couetousnes. And lawiers whiche be no priests, be parsons, vicars, prebendaries against the ordinaūce of God, of whiche saynt Paule recordeth: Euen so dyd the Lorde ordeine,1 Cor.  that they whiche preache the gospel, should lyue of the gospel, and no other, neither kynge, Lorde, Gentle∣man, ne lawier. And  this mingle mā¦gle of spirituall, and temporall regiment and offices is suffered, as if ther were ne∣ther god, ne magistrate ordeined of god to redresse suche abuses. What marueile

is it, if mans ordinaunces and statutes be broken, wher the ordinaunce of God is plainly resisted, and not receiued?
Other some that pretend they be true preachers of Gods word, and are coun∣ted holy and discrete men, reteined the kynges chapleines, and with other lor∣des both spirituall and temporall, be in deede benefice mongers, prebend mon∣gers, haue many archdeaconships, dean∣ries, and they do not the office of one of their vocatiōs: some once a yere or twise peraduenture, doth preach a sermon be∣fore the kyng, or at ye spittle, or at Pauls crosse, to delude and paynte the worlde, and to vpholde their good names. But in the countrey where is most nede, and where their liuinges lie, they preach not at all, the most part neuer preache. Idle chaplains many yeres possesse, and with¦holde wrongfully preachers liuynges. Is not the ordinaūce of god broken here in? Is not his proclamation disobeyed, whych he procleth by the mouth of saint Paul: Tessa. 3 He who laboreth not, ought not to eate? Had Eleazar, and Abiather, so many liuinges? Did Hely, Achimelech and Sadoc, dispend so much of the costs

of paryshes, and doe nothyng therfore?Abiatha Sodoc. Dyd temporal men amongst the Iewes in the old testament thus lyue of the al∣tare, as they do now of the Gospel? Loke on their examples, behold the Apostles, behold Timothe and Tite, and if we doe alowe the doctrine of the primatiue and apostolicall churche,The Aap¦stles. let vs folow the ex∣ample of thesame. Behold the elder fa∣thers, Origen, Ciprian, Ambrose, Ierom Austen, Chrisostome, and others, which spent all their liues in preaching Gods worde to the people, as appeareth plaine in their workes, which be ether sermons lessons, homelies to the people, or els dis¦putations, and confutations of heresies in theire tymes. Theyre trade was to preache and expounde the scriptures to the people on the holy daies,The elder fathers were prea∣ching pre∣lates. & on some worke daies, & thē thei procured their ex∣posicions and sermons to be written in latin or greke for the erudition of them whiche folowed. Some begin to renewe this trade now in Egland, I besech al∣mighty God to prosper them. I am sure that the best learned of them, is not able to proue that it ought to be otherwyse, or that the scriptures do alow these plu∣ralities

of liuynges, dispensacions, to quots of promocions, non residences, im∣properacions, and this mingle mangle. Paul cōmaundeth euery mā to exercise that vocation wherunto he is called. He aloweth euery man one vocatiō, Cor. 7 one of∣fice and occupacion, not many, for he say¦eth in vocatione, in his vocation, not in his vocations. I hearsay an ecclesiasti∣call law, which I haue long desired, shall come forth shortly, I trust therfore that al spirituall abuses shalbe redressed spe∣dely, without any consideraciō of priuat lucre to any man, high or lowe, spiritual or temporal, & according to the coūsel of which Dauid speaketh, saying: the word of God is my counseller. Truely onles these thinges be reformed, englyshe ser∣uice, homelies, and the right vse of the sacranētes, do not make vs christen mē: We differ from the Turkes, but in out∣ward rites & ceremonies, not in the sub∣staunce of our fayth, whiche is vpryght conuersaciō & go life. But they which should reforme others, some be entāgled with the same vices them selues. Dicing and carding are forbidden, but dycyng and carding houses are vpholden, some

in their own houses, & in the kinges ma∣iesties court (God saue his noble grace, and graunt that vertue and knowledge may mete in his royal hert) geue ensam∣ple to his subiectes to breake his statu∣tes & lawes. Prisons in London, where men lye for dette, be dycing houses, pla∣ces of correction & punishment, be dēnes and scholes of vnthriftines, open drun∣kerdes haue no punsshment, aduoutrie is recoūted but a light matter, chaplains are found of the costes of pore parishes, thorow which disorder many thousands here in england be depriued of the swete milke of Gods word, and lacke teachers to declare thē their duties toward God and their kyng. This is not only my la∣mentation, but the lamenting of all true herted Christians, the voyce of the comi¦naltie, the decay of the comen welth, and a ioyful hearing, glad & plesaunt newes to our enemies, that gape & looke for the ende of these matters, whiche wyl be de∣struction and ruine,  this darnell of co∣uetousnes and lybertie euery man to do what hym lyste, be not weeded out, and Gods wrath pacified by some redresse and amendmēt. For seing the head is so

sycke and disseased, what marueill is it if the body be so froward, so disobedient, & so desperat, If thou wylt heale the body, thou must beginne with the head, for his health cometh thence: I would saye, the next way to make obedient and Godly people, is ye godly enample of magistra∣tes. It is wrytten: Secundum iudicem po∣puli sic. &c.Eccle. 10 As the rulers of the people be such are their subiectes. They are na∣med of God the heads of the people, of others the bellies of the cōmon wealth. As the head is troubled when the hand, the leg, yea the litle finger suffereth an∣guysh, & the belly sendeth sustenaūce to al the partes of ye body: so rulers, in that they are called heades & bellies, ar admo¦nished of their office, to regard the nede and oppression of their subiectes, and to care for the whole body of the common wealth, leste if thei tender one part, & op∣presse another, it brede and gender diui∣sion, strife, rebellion, & parties, as it hath done. And they liwise are admonished to be obediēt, tractable and lowly of ser∣uice. Nothing is more sauegarde to a prince, thē the loue & hert of his cōmons and nothing is more daungerous, more

slippery, then to be feared, for as father Ennius sayd: quē metuunt, oderunt,Ennius. quem quisque odit, perisse expetit.
Whō men do fear, him do thei hate wtal. And whom they hate, they wyshe and seke his fall.
And Iesus the son of Sirach, saith:Eccle. 1 An vnwise prince spoyleth his people. Loke on the ensample of Roboā, and vpon the good counsel yt his yonge minions gaue their kyng, I thinke he rewarded them for it afterwarde as desirers of diuision and parties.3 Reg. 1 They that wyl be feared of many, must nedes be afrayed of many. The glory of a king, is the welfare of his subiectes. It was a mery world (quod ye papist) before the Bible came forth in en¦glysh, all thinges were good chepe and plentyful. Nay, nay, if these thinges wer reformed, & euery man both spirituall & temporal wer compelled by some lawe & statute to serue but in one vocation, and one office, we shuld haue a golden world England wold become a paradise, God wold blesse vs as he hath promised both heauenly & bodely. The redresse & amen∣demēt of enormities in the cōmon weal, must come frō the magistrates, not by re¦bels,

for they are powers exalted & ordei¦ned of God for thesame entent, who hea¦leth the body by the pollicie of the head, not of the fete. If not, we shal in stede of the comfortable promises of God be de∣stroied and ouerwhelmed with terrible plagues which he threatneth to the brea¦kers of his lawe,Deut. 28 as dearth, warre, discen¦tion, vprores, insurrections, pestilence, straunge disseases. &c. We haue a tast of these curses already, God hath bent his bowe, and let slyp some of his arrowes, (which be his plagues) long sith among vs, we may perceiue by that which hath chaunsed, what touch he wyll kepe with vs hereafter, and what is like to folow.
O eternal God spare thy seruauntes, let not the enemies of ye truth haue suche cause to reioyse, suffer not hogs, filthy & couetous men to roote and treade down thy vineyard any lenger, but hold vp the staffe of thyne enheritaunce: Let not the preaching of thy smete son encrease the damnacion of thy people, but doe thou drawe and turne them, worke their amē¦dement who holdest in thy handes the hartes of rulers and al mē. Al these enor∣mities be the fruites of euil hartes, make them O God cleane hearted, that they

may powre forth good fruites by the o∣peration of thy holy spirit, who pre∣serue your grace in good health and make your gouern∣ment prosperous to you, to this Real∣me, and to the churche of God.
So be it.
At London the .xxvi. of Iune.
