



RIGHT Reverend Father in God, th small treatise finished I present vnto your Lordship, many reasons leading me hereunto. First,Cur ad oe poi∣simum de hae rescribere vo∣luerim 3. max∣mae causae sun quas breviter intimabo. vn est quia donan∣te, &c. altera quia profanio iftis novitati∣bus quibus his disputando resi∣stister curand & infiando effi∣caiter restist 3. quoniā qud▪ dam literarum ab iis scriptu in iuas manu vnisse cogn∣vi August. de nup. & concup lib. 1. cap. . because by the pro¦vidence of God, the argument vvas treated of in your Honourable pre∣sence. Secondly, for that your godly wisdome, and learning was therein v∣sed with exhortations, councels, & graue advertisements. Thirdly, because the doubts moved, were in writing exhi∣bited to your own hands. Such like reasons as these prevai∣led with that learned Austen, wherefore he writ his book to an Earle called Valerius, and the same partly in themselues, partly by his example, haue thus farre drawne me forward to this present businesse. VVhat acceptance it may haue I know not, my conscience is the touch-stone, & to the glory of God af∣ter due examination, I finde it clearely abides triall. In com∣fort whereof (as touching my selfe) I passe very little to bee iudged of any, whose selfe-will is their set controuler. Other∣wise let the better affected, whose zealous wisdome guideth their iudgements say, and spare not: Those I rise, and fall to,
and such I hartily desire, I may no way offend: if I doe, twixt them, and me be it, whose potion of sorrow shall be deepest, theirs, or mine, that either I haue writ amisse, or they mistake. VVell I am advised when God called me to speake in publike, which I did many houres in a cathedrall Church of good note, and expected by the audience to say farther in such points, as some made doubt of my labors returnd not altogether in vain. Satisfaction grew apace. so God wrought in weaknes, and by weake meanes. Since which time I haue beene dealt with by speciall good friends (whom I must regard) to waite the Lords leisure, and the operation of his gracious spirite, how it may worke more, when it hath more liberty to come abroad in pub∣like view. VVhich if so it shall (and I rather wish it may not, specially in a scribling age as this is) pardon me that I seeke your Lordships favourable countenance. Your speciall loue to me ward, having a principall interest therein: for beside so many forcible inducements already mentioned, I professe my selfe particularly bound vnto your honour, since the Almighty wrought in your heart a good liking towards mee, by a generall report spred of my poore labours else-where in a well gover∣ned Cittie of good accompt. In which respect as since my com∣ming into your Diocesse, I haue great cause to giue praise, & thankes to God & shall much forget my duety, if I forget that taske of devotion. Heartily glad what others may acknow∣ledge, as due vnto God, without flattring of mens persons of your singular holy desire, you had to giue men satisfaction in their doubts, who privatly dissented frō the present state & government of the Church. Many daies for a whole yeare, & vpward spent by you for that purpose, and among the rest vp∣on my knowledge 3. daies togither imployed in godly, learned conferences: the first of the 3 from 9. of the clocke in the mor∣ning, to one in the afternoone, without any the least discon∣tinuance
of that serious businesse: the second; and third day, from 8. in the morning till fowre of the clocke in the after∣noone, answering doubt after doubt, sometimes distinguish∣ing other whiles expounding, anon againe returning one ar∣gument, or other, alway instructing with such readinesse & dextrity, as if 30. yeares were gone back againe in the course of your yeares, like the howres vpon Ahaz diall.2. King. 20.11. So present words, such pregnant answers, and with that graue modera∣tion, as commended that memorable Prelat of Siracusa,Vi ad debita religionem & fidē fraternā{que} concordiam vel ferò tandem re∣ditus sieri que a Euseb. lib. 10. cap. 5. of whom Eusebius writeth, and al to that end, which good Constantine proposed, namely, if not, which needeth not (though some things be misconstrued) to due religion and faith, yet to brotherly cōcord (now at length though late) returne might be made. Since which conference had by your Lordship, and other publike good paines vsed, diverse of thē whose doubts these are, and many else painefull in their mi∣nistrie, learned in the tongues, furnished with speciall graces of Gods holy spirite, better instructed in these pointes then heretofore haue willingly subscribed, & exanimo, others yeelding conformity in their practise, men of singular good parts though (because not called) not vrged therevnto. VVhat will els follow of these labors followeth in time to be declared and our parts it is to pray the Almighty, that loue, and peace may follow vpon it. Howsoever. Shall the Lord scourge our church, & the governors thereof with lavish tongues depra∣ving so far as they dare his soveraignty, whose wisdō, zeale personall care hath beene such, as we & all our posterities cā never sufficiently praise God for, yet this your Lordship may take comfort in, that the records of these times shalbe the mo∣nument of his religious zeale, the Lords of his Councell their wisdome, the Bishops their industry, the rest of the brethren their obedience, whē some few refractary men standing out
shall receaue a blemish in all succeeding ages (would yet the Gospell might not haue rebuke.) But I feare that will bee the fruit of mens fruitlesse opposition. If so, let the same mind be in vs, that the Church of God hath proposed heretofore. It is our chastisement, and we will beare it.
Not intending hereby negligence in you, that are then fa∣thers to govene, as if because men growing turbulent, you should giue over your vigilancies, and paines, for you may not so doe,S ia est vt ne∣quissimoum ti∣meatur audacia & quod mali iure, & aequita∣ nō possiunt, te eritate, et des peration perfi∣ciant, actū est de Episcop. vigore, et de Ecclesiae gubernādae sub∣limi potestate, c christiani lera aut ese aut durare pos∣sumus Cyp, Ep 3. lib. 1. Vitā prolixm, imperiū securū, domum tutaem, exercitus fortes senatum fidelē, probum populū, orbem quietum, et quaecun h∣ini & Cas∣i vota sun Trul Apolog. Remembring what good Martyr Cyprian writeth: if the case stand so, that the boldnesse of every audacious man must be feared, to what end serveth the vigor of Epis∣copal authoritie? Jt is quite dasht, and their high power in governing of the Church is vtterly overthrowne. As for vs we neither can be, or (if wee bee) not long to continue Christians. But we hope better things, though St. Cyprian speaketh thus. And the Lord make good our hope, and blesse the sacred person of our dread Soveraigne, replenish his hart with ioy in the holy Ghost, prosper his coning all vertuous loue, protect his royall offspring, giue him long life, direct his go∣vernment store him with faithfull Senators, Reverend Bi∣shops, and among the rest preserue your good Lordship, whose I rest in all dutifulnesse humbly bounden:

