


HAuing fraught my Ship (Gentlemen) for a voyage to golden Castile, in the Vernall time of my age: thin∣king thereby to haue laden it with such Marchan∣dize as should haue yeelded sufficient profit for my future time, in the Hyems part thereof▪ but trauay∣ling towards the line, being vnder the Solstice point of my peregrination, a contrary winde arose and driue me to the Ar∣ticke clime, where being wether bet with the extremity of the Frosen Zone, I was glad to take vp such profits as the Polare circle, of that Latitude would afford; and my weake estate redeeme. But though my fraughtage is not so prtious as the spices of Molucca, nor the gold of Ophir and Orients of India, whereby it might be vendable to heigh estates? yet I haue vnladen it, being such wares as my Fro∣sen braine could seect, and haue made it doneable to the meaner
 sort. Hoping they will accept thereof gratefully, it being the fruite of my trauayle, and the haruest of my Autumnall season; and also such wares as I am sure are not counterfeite, but will endure the touchstone, hauing made sufficient triall of their operation not by ipse dixit, but by ipse fecit.
But because danger doth alwaies attend vpon labour, there was as yet, neuer any that could either speake or doe that which would please all mens varieties, because their braines are so sickly, and subiect toe Danger is a companion of labours. take surfeits especially where the feast is, in their conceipts too full, or the dishes not drest answerable to their weake stomackes: their appetites being commanded either by conceit of their stomackes, or affection to the Cooke: and so giue partiall iudgement, without equity of the cause, and therefore to couer their owne ignorance, in that thing they would be held skilfull in, they contradict the sayings and doings of others, neuer taking paines to examine the trueth: neither looking in that end of the wallet which hangeth behinde.
But this queasinesse doth come by propagation from our first Pa∣rents: Whereby it is become a very hard thing for a man rightly to know himselfe.
For Adam when hee had transgressed, layd the fault vp∣onGen. 3. 12. 13. Eue, and shee to excuse her selfe layd it vpon the Serpent, and neuer acknowledged themselues to haue sinned, thinking thereby to excuse their particuler crimes. Which selfe-liking is so successiuely inherent in our natures, especially where there is so much inquisition, and examination of mens printed workes: that if any thing be spo∣ken or written which may touch their free-hold, then they will pre∣sently haue a writ of error to remoue that disgrace from themselues: either by defacing the Person, confuting the Subiect, or dispraysing the Methode: and so seeke to preserue their owne idle reputation, though it be with a reprochfull ignominy of the painefull and indu∣strious searcher.
Yet for all this, good minds should not be dismayde to take paines to set forth that which may yeeld profit, either to their country or common-wealth, to which end we should wholy addict our selues, be∣cause no man ought to hide his talent in the ground, nor to desist forMath. 25. 25. all these detracting tongues and malitious mindes, seeing the world
 hath not bin free of such from the beginning for our first Parents had the Serpent to enuy them, Abell had his Caine to murther him,Gen. 3. 1. & 4. 8. & 12. 9. & 20. 2. & 19. 4. & 26. 14. & 29. 23. & 37. 4. 1 Sam. 20. 31. Mark. 14. 10. Math. 14 10. Noah had his wicked Cham to shame him, Abraham had his Abi∣melech to abuse him, Lot had the Sodomites to vexe him, Isaack had the Philistines to enuy him, Iacob had his Laban to deceiue him, Ioseph had his brethren to contemne him, Dauid had his Saul to persecute him, Christ had his Iudas to betray him, Iohn had his Herod to behead him, nay to be briefe, all the Apostles and Pro∣phets, had one or more to afflict them, neither can any in this age liue in such sort, nor speake of any subiect that shall not suffer the checkes and taunts of some Zoylists.
Now if no man heretofore could set forth or speake that which would please all sects and sorts of men, shall I (that am the meanest amongst the meaner) thinke to plant this Ʋineyard so perfectly, but some Calumnies will seeke to destroy this planting? Nay, but I must arme my selfe to endure the reproch of the most, so much the rather, because I differ so much from the traditions of the Antients, ayming more to discouer the errors of mens, as the chiefe cause of absurdities then the disposition of the Horse. For I know I should haue pleased many better if I had layd all the fault still vpon the nature of the Horse, and haue giuen them liberty to follow their owne wills, for it is more consonant to man to study to inuent seuerall tor∣tures to inflict vpon others, then to seeke any reformation in them∣selues.
And although to you Gentlemen and Countrymen, to whom I haue beene more familiarly acquainted, it may be thought that the fruits of my labours are idle, as the course of my life, to some hath beene thought to be, because I did not addict my selfe to gather wealth as is their miserable inclinations: Yet if they whosoeuer shall haue such an vncharitable conceit, will but respectiuely weigh my earnest desire by knowledge to build againe this now decayed Art; they will I hope giue mee thankes for my diligent paines, rather then condemne me of vaine prate, and ostentation, for as much as there is no vice that shall arise in this Art, but there is sufficient remedies for the same.
For as it hath pleased God to giue me an ability of minde, so hath he also giuen me some light how to pollish that excellent part: know∣ing
 that no man can purge his soule from error (the dam of all dis∣eased opinions) except he seeke to beautifie it with such knowledge, as is conformeable to reason. And therefore I haue beene alwaies a vowed audersary to the opinionated vulgars, who hold that felicity doth consist in adorning the body with wealth, rather then the soule with knowledge, and so doe pamper the shadow, but starues the substance. For thereby they are kept in slauery to their wills, be∣ing continually inuironed with griefe in getting, and care in keeping.
For as Aristotle saith, he that delighteth in this world must needs fall into one of these two griefs, either to lack that which he coueteth, or else to lose that which he hath gotten with great paine. Wherefore because wealth and knowledge are both vnsatiable (although they be contraries) yet the one is certaine, and the other vncertaine, I haue continually desired that which is the more certain and durable, and haue lesse troubled my selfe to gather wealth, being so inconstant and soone wasted, then knowledge it being as permanent as the soule: for of it the more that a man doth impart, the more it doth increase,(d) 1. Pr. 11. c. but of the other the more that is bestowed, the more it doth waste.
The consideration of which made Pithagoras to dispise those riches which with liberality are wasted and lost, and with sparing doe rust and rot.
Wherefore (Gentlemen and Friends) seeing that the mind is the cheifest part of the man, and the greatest glory that a man can re∣ceiue in this world is to enlighten it with knowledge, I haue taken the more paines, to plant this Ʋineyard of Horsemanship, and to dresse and purge it from such weedes as may hinder the young impes from florishing therein, onely for the good of my Country, for the be∣nefit of which I was onely borne: For the which my hope expects b∣thing but thankes; wishing a better reformation in conceited cen∣surers (as concerning this noble Art of Horsemanship) then hereto∣fore there hath beene.
For it is a misery to see how pur-blinde the most be (who make opinion the director of their actions) thinking this Art to be so easie that it needeth small instruction for the knowledge thereof. Whereby it commeth to passe that what Horses they make good is by chance,
 but what they spoyle is of set purpose: and yet their detraction euer haunteth desire, whosoeuer is notable in any part thereof, him they marke with defamation, but in triall their felicity being grounded(e) The foure Car∣dinall vertues ought to be in euery horse∣man. Prudence. Theo. 1. s. & 5. a. Iustice. Theo. 29. •. Temporance. Theo. 29. d. Fortitude. Theo. 9. d. & 22. b. (f) No Man can tell how to rule except he hath first learned to obey. vpon selfe conceit, their effects are as false as their hearts. But to let them alone, frying on the gridiron of their searing conscience, whosoeuer doth desire to be an impe graffed in this Ʋineyard, and desireth the title of that generous quality, must striue to gaine to himself those foure Cardinall vertues which are in euery noble spirit. For he must haue Prudence, to worke discreetly and orderly without confusion, euer examining his workes by reason, and not by his will. Hee must also haue Iustice to proportionate his helpes and correcti∣ons (equally) according to the Horses disposition. And likewise hee must haue Temperance, to subdue and refell the rebellion of his will and affections, when they shall be prouoked thereto; And lastly, hee must haue Fortitude, to conquer the vnrulinesse of the Horses disobedience. Any of all which if the man be defectiue (howsoeuer hee may iudge of him-selfe) he is as farre from the truth thereof, as he is from drowning.
And though this Method may be thought more Ethnicall then Caualarie, in regard it doth treate more of reformation in the Man, then of teaching the Horse. Let them know (if they right∣ly vnderstand themselues) that it doth derogate nothing at all from this Art: for Man being a reasonable creature, is said to be a King and ruler ouer a Horse (being vnreasonable) and because no Man can rightly rule, except hee hath first learned to obey; therefore he shall neuer truely know how to command his Horse ex∣cept he first learne how to command himselfe, for what speculatiue knowledge soeuer a man hath, if he hath not an actuall gouernement, it is but a shadow.
Wherefore (Gentle Reader) although in these my simple workes thou shalt finde me grose, vnlearned, and barren of such liuely graces, and guifts, as (indeed) should be full fraughted in the braine and vnderstanding of him that will vndertake to speake of such an ex∣cellent Art, for to content the most; I therefore desire thee most heartily, fauorably to beare with me, and my good intended mind, and friendly to accept the ground of my earnest good will, in regard I haue done my best: for sith there is none that hath naturall con∣ceptions,
 but they haue also naturall digressions; if there be some as aforeshowne, that will malitiously depraue, defile, or spot, these my simple doings, or corruptly extoll the glory of their owne excellency, through dispraise or dispite of this that I haue so rudely wrought. Yet I doubt not, but there will be others that will accept, and further this my willing mind, in publishing this my liues experience and practise, and so take it thankefully, in regard it will be a generall profit to the world, if the Theoricke be righly vnderstood, and the Practicke truely performed.
Farewell:

