







RIGHT Reuerend, there is neuer a Why but there is a Wherefore; and there is neuer an Obiection but there is expectd an Answer; nor neuer an Answer but there is presupposed an Obiection: But in this there is an ob∣iection, which is that I roue beyond the marke, inObiection. presenting this Subiect to your Lordship, intreating of Horses and Hyponomie, which is not appertaining vnto you, who is called to a farre more excellent and spirituall function. And therfore it is requisite I should render an Answer for the defence of this my Apologie vpon which I need not insist vnto your Lordship, that knowes to what end all things were created at the be∣ginning, better then I can any way apprehend, much
 lesse write. But yet to answer any curious inquisitor:Answer. First, although your calling is Seraphicall, yet in regard(1) that God of his Fatherly Prouidence, did at the first create all Creatures for the vse and seruice only of Man, and so gaue a free liberty for all men to vse them, with out restraint; therefore you descending from that Stocke which receiued that prerogatiue, may law∣fully vse them, by an hereditary succession, and not any way violate your calling, they being made so necessary and seruiceable for all men, (of what state or degree so∣euer) that liue vpon the face of the earth.
Secondly, you being a member of this bodily Realme,(2) cannot be exempted from the benefit and vse of them, in as much as they are made so necessary and profitable for the whole body thereof, seeing that all the members must be relieued, maintained, and preserued, by the same meanes the whole body is sustained (except they should dye and wither;) because all the parts of the body do participate with the whole: For proofe where∣of,Metap: de mate. there cannot bee a better Allegoricall resemblance to a bodily Realme, then the Osmund or MagneticallEpist: to the Pr. stone, for it (being compleate) doth retaine all the po∣tency and vertues of the naturall qualities: for it hathDoct. Ridl: de Mag. the two Poles (the one of them being of contrary qua∣litie to the other) the Axis, Equator, Meridians, Paral∣lels, and so all the other Circles naturally and sen∣sibly, as are imagined or fained to bee in the Heauens. All which the directory or inclinatory needles, will at∣tractingly deliniate by their conformity and vnion, at conuenient Angles, being moued about a Terrella or round body of the same nature.
In like manner this whole Realme hath an Axis toAn application.
 moue vpon, the Poles of which being differing, one tendeth to good and the other to euill; the estates and degrees of men being the Parallelles, and so mens mo∣tions moue vpon the Meridian, their desires or wills (as an inclinatory needle doth shew the Almicantarax, and Azimuth how farre they doe decline from either of the Poles: Amongst which Parallelles, the Tribe of Leui being the chiefe, may bee compared to the Equa∣tor, being the chiefe parrallel, and doth demonstrate the seuerall attractiue qualities of the Magnet: for when the needle is on the one side of it, it seateth to∣wards the North, but of the other side, then towards the South; and so, as Moses stood in the gap, you standPsal. 106. 23. in the midst, to limit the other Parallelles for declining in their reuolutions past the Articke, least they should loose that vigor of obedience to God, and their King, and be touched with the Antarticke or contrary quali∣tie. Wherefore though your calling bee differing, yet hauing your motion, amongst the other Parallels, or callings, for your temporary or necessary affaires, the free vse and liberty of these worldly blessings of God, are as appertinent vnto you as to other, and so the benefit of this worthy subiect.
Thirdly, in as much as God hath a generall regard to preserue all things that are vnder the Heauens, and(3) Iob. 28. 24. doth prouide for all: yet more especially for his Church, so that indeed the vse of these, and all other Creatures are more proper to his Elect, (in regard hee hath the chiefest care ouer them) although the wickedVitulus mic∣tandus liber in Paschua mitti∣tur. Gregor. haue oftentimes the greatest abundance. And there∣fore your Lordship being one whom God hath dignifi∣ed with a most glorious calling, and likewise indued
 you with extraordinary spirituall gifts, for the edify∣ing and inlarging his Church, it cannot bee denyed,Rom. 5. . but he doth likewise admit of your lawfull and delight∣full(4) vse of them; for, hath he giuen the greater and will not giue the lesse? And lastly, in respect of my selfe, which am bound in a dutifull affection both to your Lordship and your worshipfull Sonnes, Mr. William Doue and Mr. Thomas Doue Arch-Deacon, for so ma∣nifold fauours, and vndeserued respects which I haue al∣wayes receiued from your hands, from the first time I was knowne vnto you, whereby I am so much obli∣ged for the same, that if I should not locke them vp in the closet of my heart there to bee preserued vntill the period of my dayes; I might be vtterly condemned of ingratitude, and with Ouid. Telluris inutile pondus, ha∣uing no other meanes but thankfulnesse to remunerate the same.
Wherefore seeing the ardency of my sincere loue is so much quenched by the water of imbecility, that it cannot giue such a vigorous heat as the bellowes of my desire would prouoke, I haue blowne one little coale of the fire of my affection; and haue presumed bould, to present vnto your Lordship this part of my liues ex∣perience, being the Practicke of this Vineyard, ho∣ping the relish thereof will not be distastfull, the fruit being gathered from morall and naturall stockes, by the hands of practice. Wherein I haue endeauoured to repaire the decayed estate of this excellent subiect to re-establish him in such a primary esteeme, as Art and Nature can effect, both by breeding and riding. Wherein (also) I haue desired to purge this noble Art from such Authenticall errors as haue a long time blin∣ded
 the eyes of many worthy spirits; and haue set forth bounds that they shall not passe, if they desire to di∣rect their course to the meane: And wherein further I haue not set forth any thing for feare or fauour of an∣cient authority; but onely what reason and experience doe approue, neuer following my owne imagination further then the truth would limit.
Therefore wheresoeuer I haue failed by circum∣stance, and method, (through desire in setting forth my minde so truely and plainely) I humbly desire your fa∣uourable approbation, because many inconueniences (both of matter and wordes) may slip out of a good schollers pen (much more out of mine) whilst the mind is fixed in contemplation of things that are hard of themselues; for, Aliquando magnus dormitat Homerus. And therefore this my simple Worke being set forth crassa (vt dicunt) Minerua: I desire your Honour fauo∣rably to passe it ouer, and couer it with your iudicious censure of my good intent, and charitable affection, that I had to publish it for the good of the Kingdome: for what error is committed, was not of neglect but ig∣norance; and therefore but error amoris, because (in∣deed) I would haue done better if I could. And further, I may be condemned of impudency, for presuming to offer this so meane a guift vnto your Lordship, it being so decepi: to which I must needs confesse a great re∣missenes: But desire and want causeth impudence; and therefore I knowing this to haue a little life in it, and being dsirous to haue it preserued, and my selfe not being able to giue it such a vitall spiit as it should; I haue presumed to vse your name to giue better life vnto it.

And therefore, I humbly craue pardon for my at∣tempt, in setting it before so meane a Worke, which offence I trust you will remit, and then I shall be so infi∣nitely indebted vnto your Lordship, as I shall not know how to redeeme those arrerages, but with my hearty prayers vnto God for the safe preseruation of you and yours, in peace and tranquility.

