


TO whom may I better dedicate this Booke of Numbers, then to your selfe, who haue bin trained vp in the Art of num∣bring, euen from your infancie? I speake it to your deserued prayse and commen∣dation: Many go beyond you in the theo∣rick, but few or none in the practick. I could wish, that some men could not Arithmetize and Merchandize so well as they doe; Who whiles they number their wealth, their wit, their learning, their offices, their dignities, their cattel, their lands, their rents, their monies, the better part of their life vanisheth away: This is a fruitlesse and carelesse
kinde of numbring. It is said, that the Athenians (nota∣ble speculatiues, but bad practiques) had money to num∣ber onely. What doe men nou-a-daies, but continually hoord vp Gods blessings, to number them? And yet when they haue made their totall account, they can neuer attaine to the Art of true Numbring. To weane therefore the world, in what I may, from so sordidous and preposterous a kinde of Arithmetick, I haue compiled this worke, trea∣ting of The Secrets of Numbers, contrary to the practice of our common Arithmeticians, as the two Zones are dis∣tant the one from the other; Wishing them, that among so many Theologicall, Arithmeticall, Geometricall, and Har∣monicall numbers heere set downe, they would thinke on one more excellent, which is, To number their daies. Which to doe, in one word, is no otherwise, then to take something from the pleasures of the world, which they haue greedi∣ly pursued, by way of subtraction; and to adde so much to godly endeuours neglected by them, by way of multiplicati∣on: For, the time is short wee spend in vertue, but long which wee consume in vice. There is no Arithmetick comparable to this. Wherefore Pythagoras, reducing all things into Number, making his triplicity of per∣fection, in the end concluded thus: Si recta ratione vixeris, male acta dolendo, et bene acta gaudendo; deosque oraueris, vt opus tuum perficiant: tum exuto corpore, profectus in aetherem, eris immortalis Deus. I doe perswade my selfe, that after you haue read this booke at vacant hours, you will bee a better Pythagorean than
euer you were; Or at least by turning ouer Gods Booke (as many times you doe) you will not forget this one lesson: Re∣cordare nouissima tua, et in aeternum non peccabis. Pythagoras in all his life-time, for all his numbring, lear∣ned not this lesson; but Salomon, wiser then he, did. For that some things heere may be aboue your capacity, and re∣quire more then a Delian swimmer for the searching of their bottome, I would not haue you blame me altogether: For, as in other tractates I haue laboured to instruct the vnlearned onely; so in this I haue done my best endeuour to satisfie both the learned and vnlearned, with equall con∣tentment.
Wee must consider, we liue in a world of learning; and it is in reading of bookes, as it is in banquetting: Not onely grosse and simple viands, but the most dainty and delicate are called for, though they be something sharp & distasting to the stomach. I doe not doubt, but vpon conference had with you, I shall be able to breake the shell, that the kernell of many abstruse and symbolicall mysteries, neuer brought to light before, shall bee farre more pleasing vnto you: which, according to our small skill, I shall alwaies willing∣ly endeuour to performe. To him, who is that infinite Num∣ber, Vnity in Trinity, and Trinity in Vnity, according to Athanasius Symbole, I commend you and yours.

