



TO auoyde the faulte of Ingra∣titude, a∣mōgst the olde Phi∣losophers beeyng accomp∣ted one of the gretest: I tho∣ght it good (ryght Honou∣rable) to dedicate this Boke vnto you, as a token or argu∣ment

of my good will: rather remembring, thā requiting your boūtifull curtesie. The which Boke was written a∣boue three hūdred and thre∣score yeeres past, entituled The miserie of man. The contentes whereof, if with deep and due iudgement we doe consider, we shall easily finde greate cause to make a rechlesse accoūt of al world∣ly pomp & vanitie: & that for great cause: For our life in hir firste entrie into this

world, is encoūtred with thre capital enimies, paine, care, and sorow: Payne bids the body battayle, care continu∣eth the skirmish, and sorowe giueth the victorie. It is a greeuous thing to behold our irst entertainement so dis∣pleasantly entreated: wee lamente in the firste minute, and rewe to the laste mo∣ment. No sooner born but straight bounde hande and foote, and cast into the cra∣dle as into a prison, wher we

lie long time fast fettered in the feeblenesse of our owne flesh. Then enter we into the warres that holy Iob spea∣keth of, where he sayth: The life of man is but warfare. For there is no part of mans age that he passeth ouer, in the whiche he hath not some combate to fight. The firste conflict which we are to en∣dure, is infancy, in the which time wee labour with the lacke of reason, and fighte with our own folly, not kno∣wing

where we are, ne what wee are, ne whence, nor for what we come. Thē after a time, we haue to striue with our hands and feete, vsing them to learne their duties. And in this conflicte wee doe continue vntil the age of se∣uen yeres, al the whiche time we are feble, weak, & with∣out iudgemēt or reason, not able to help ourselues. These yeeres ouerpassed, we warre vnder the fear of the rod, in spending time to learne some

liberall science, or else some other machanical arte, wher¦by we may either aspire to some high estate, or else pro∣cure our necessary sustenāce In the third part of our age, we enter into a most perilous skirmishe, fighting againste the desires of the fleshe, a∣gainste fonde affections and vaine imaginations, whiche causeth the minde to be vn∣constāt, and to be caryed a∣way with sundry fancies. Fourthly, we haue to encoū∣ter

with manhoode. In this warfare, we beare some coū∣tenance in the cōmon welth, ambitiouslye seeking after honor and estimation, and couetously affecting wealthe and riches. To this age is in∣cidēt the charge of wife and children, the maintenaunce of our family, & care of po∣steritie. After all these fo∣loweth the mayne battayle which neuer taketh peace with vs, vntil our dying day. In this field we receiue ma∣ny

wounds which neuer can bee cured: as bleared eyes, trēbling hands, gowty feete, deaf eares, wrinkled brows, leane cheeks, lothsom breth, baldnesse, corruption of sto∣macke, with many moe mi∣series infinite, whiche neuer rest to vāquish the body with furious assalts, ne to disqui∣et the minde with trouble∣some thoughts, & to wound the conscience with the re∣membrance of things past. And furthermore, suche is

the vnhappy lot of life, that all those things whiche wee most greedily desire, as ho∣nor, riches & plesures, wee leaue them again speedily, and in our greatest dangers they do vs no good. Therfore the wise Philosopher, being demāded what was the gre∣test thing in the world? aun∣swered, it was the valiaunte heart of a man, that coulde cōtemne and lightly esteme the high & mighty things of the world. For honor and

dignitie hath no assurance, and in Fortunes fauoure is no stabilitie. Philip king of Macedone obteined in one day three notable victories: After the which he is sayd to haue kneeled downe vpon the grounde, holding vp his handes vnto the Heauens, crying out in this wise: O Lady Fortune most vncer∣tayne, O my happie deste∣nies, I humbly beseech you, that after this greate honor and glory, whiche you nowe

haue giuen mee, you woulde moderate and temper the troubles & afflictiōs which in time to come you will lay vpon mee. For commonly, gret prosperitie is a messen∣ger to greeuous calamitie, & nothing in this life is cer∣tayn or sure. As Socrates affirmed when he sayd, that the certaynest thing in this worlde was, that all things were vncertaine. It is writ∣ten, that diuers Captaynes came vnto Agesilaus, and

requested hym to walke vp vnto the hill called Olym∣pus, where (saide they) you shal see great wealthy mer∣chantes vttering a world of riches and pretious Iewels. His aunswere was this, if I coulde buy or sell, yea or ex∣chāge their sorow for mirth, sicknesse for helthe, deathe for life: I would thē goe thi∣ther and spende all that I haue: but I see (quoth he) that the biers & sellers, yea and the very things them∣selues

are condemned to die and to perishe. Wherefore neither the sight of any thīg, nor the obtayning of anye thing there, can better mine estate, or help me at the hour of death, whē I must creepe into my graue. For although honor, wealthe, and riches, beare great rule amōgst mē, yet they preuaile not against death. To verefie the same, I could wishe (right Hono∣rable) other testimonie,The Ladie Compton. thā the lamentable funerals of your

louing daughter lately de∣ceassed: of whome I wil for∣beare to speake much, least the greene memory may ru∣fully renew your forepassed sorowes. In whome, whiles she was, what might be wi∣shed that she wanted? Shee was indued with all excellēt gifts, as beautie, vertue, and fortune: Hir vertues were passing, and made hir com∣parable with any of hir e∣quals: Hir beautie was sin∣gular, and made hir most a∣miable.

What greater for∣tune, than to be nobly borne and to liue in honor? Shee feared God, shee loued hir Prince, she hted vice, and followed vertue: she pitied the miserie of the afflicted, she releeued the necessitie of those that wanted: she was the daughter of true nobili∣tie, the mirror f al curtesie, the mistresse of al modestie. To be short, she did well and dyed well. Yet neyther no∣blenesse of birth, nor yet the gifts of nature or Fortune,

could keepe hir with vs: whē death would haue hir. Thus you may see, howe lothsome our life is, and howe vncer∣tayne the transitorie things of this world are. I hold him therefore most wisest, that so liueth as though he shoulde always die. There came one vnto Diogenes & sayd: O what a miserable thing it is to liue in this worlde: vnto whom he answered: my frēd you are deceiued, for it is no misery for a man to liue, but it is a miserable thing for a

mā to liue euill. Whose an∣swer we shall find most true when wee shall bee called to make an account of our bay∣liwikes. For we haue heere no cōtinuall, mansion place: beeing made or created of two natures, wherof the one is mortall, and ruleth heere for a time, where fleshe and bloud bereth the sway: The other is celestial, which gi∣ueth feeling, vnderstāding, & iudgemēt vnto the erth∣ly or mortall substāce: of the whiche if it be vndefiled in

this life, they both shal inha∣bite the place of perpetuall blisse, they shal receyue hea∣uēly giftes and vertues, they shal accōany wih Angels, they shal in a momēt se frō one end of the worlde vnto the other, they shal penetrat the heauens and behold the throne of gods maiesty, wher shall be such ioy as no heart can think nor tōg expresse. And so cauing pardon for this my bolde atempte, I leaue you vnto the al∣mightie, who alwayes in ho∣nor preserue your estate.
