



SIR, being impor∣tuned by diverse, for the publishing of this Sermon, which (as they pro∣tested) not without some fruite they had hearde mee preach: I haue condescended at length vnto their desire. The rather, for that by dedicating the same vnto your worship, I might be occasioned (as I thought,) to giue-forth some testimony of my good∣will
and thankefulnes towardes you, to whom I am so deepely beholding, & so many waies indebted. If there were no other thing but this, that at the Fonte you vouch-safed to vndertake for me, I should over-shoote my selfe far, if I did not thinke very dutifully of you; but see∣ing that ever since, you haue enameld, as it were, & embroidered that graund-benefite with infinite other kindnesses, from time to time, as occasion was mi∣nistred: Surely, if I should not lay holde of every opportunity, whereby I might reflect any tokē of an affectionate minde I were highly to blame; yea my own cō∣science would appeach and vpbraid me of foule ingratitude. Such therefore as it is: I do here offer & present vnto you. Desiring you to esteeme of it, not accor∣ding to the simple workemāship which hath beene mine: but according to the worth & value of the stuffe, which hath bin all, I dare assure you, digged-out of the most precious mine of Gods word. My trust is, the goodnes of the one, will
bee alwaies able to counter-peise the rudenes of the other. God blesse you, & preserue you: that you may long liue, to be a principall stay & ornament, to that worthy Citie, my natiue nest. Where how sore you will be missed, whensoever it shall please the Lord to translate you from it vnto himselfe, wee may take a scantling (no disparagement to any) by the exceeding greate steede you long haue and daily doe stand it in. And thus recommending this homely present vn∣to your good acceptation, and you and yours to the most gracious tuition and patronage of the Almighty, I take my leaue. From Stainton in the streete, in the Bishopricke of Durrham the 1. of March. 1597.

