



IF I should goe about (most Gracious and Dread Soueraigne) to blaze a Motto of your Sacred and Puissant Vertues, (which no Fame can equalize, both for Diuine know∣ledge and intellectuall Iudgement in all Arts and Sciences,) my weake apprehension and rude Pen would obscure the very Shadow of your peerelesse worths; seeing
 they extend beyond the reach of any mans in∣uention, being so resplendent as they rarifie and giue light to the eclipsed and darke knowledge of all your Subiects, (as the Sunne giueth light and life to all the other Orbes and sublunarie bodies:) Vpon whom God hath multiplied his guifts and blessings to such a Product, as no Nation or Kingdome vpon the surface of the darke Globe of this earth could euer as yet num∣ber. And vpon the Axis of which blessings we your vnworthy Subiects make our reuolutions, in conformable Peace and tranquility, as the Center of our terrestriall happinesse; whose poles being animated with mercy and peace, are made so stable by conformity and vnition, as wee receiue all our fruition therefrom, not only of temporall but also of spirituall comforts: So as wee may say, God hath made all things prosper in Putiphers house for Iosephs sake.Gen. 39. 5.
For which wee all your humble Subiects are bound to pray vnto God, that as hee hath, so hee will still deliuer Daniel from the Iawes ofDan. 6. 22. the Lions; And as hee gaue power to Dauid to ouercome the Beare and the Lion, so still to strike off the head of Goliah, that will blaspheme1. Sa. 17. 37.
 against God or his annointed; that wee may still heare the golden Bels of Aaron sound inAmos. 8. 11. our eares, that hee doe not send a Famine to the Soule, but that it may still be fed and nou∣rished with the true and liuing Bread, with free liberty without restraint, that we may reioyceLeui. 20. 13. in this Iubile of yeares; for many Prophets and Kings haue desired to see such things as wee see, and haue not seene them, and to heare thoseLuk. 10. 24. things we heare and haue not heard them.
Wherfore to shew our thankfulnes both vnto God and vnto your Highnesse, for such fruition of peace and prosperity, that wee receiue by ha∣uing the glorious light of the Gospell to shine so beautifully amongst vs, wee are bound in duty and Conscience, to offer in Sacrifice the CaluesRom. 13. 5. of our lippes vnto him in whose hands are theProu. 21. 1. hearts of Kings, for the preseruation of so gra∣cious a Souraigne; for euery one (being but as a member) should seeke the good welfare, and to maintaine the strength of this bodily Kingdome, of which your Maiestie is the head.
Amongst whom, I being one of the meanest amongst the meaner, am bound by the same bond of loyaltie, to discharge my dutie, accor∣ding
 to the talent which God hath bestowed on me; and therfore not being able to present such gifts vnto your Highnesse as is worthy your ac∣ceptance (for the excellency thereof) rather then I shall be found with the vngratefull seruant to hide my talent in the ground, I haue presumed to dedicate vnto your Maiestie this Vineyard of Horsemanship, the first fruit of my liues experi∣ence, planted by painfull practise & the charges of my whole estate; knowing the greatest Mo∣narchs haue vouchsafed to receiue poor presents of such as were not able to offer greater gifts.
In which, where I haue at any time failed in order or method, (through inability) so that the truth is not so clearely purged from error as my willing intention did desire, I most humbly sub∣iect my selfe to the perfection of your all-seeingHyperbole. knowledge, and that you would vouchsafe to adorne the imperfections thereof, with a fauo∣rable and charitable censure of my earnest desire to haue this now withered and dead Art of Horsemanship (being such a famous Art) the2. Theo. 2. •. more o flourish in this Kingdome, which hath bee o on▪ frost-bitten with the gealing ryne of tient traditions; whereby Custome
 hath taxed such false impositions vpon these noble Creatures, as now they are become most ignoble and base; In which also I haue done my best, to set these blamelesse Creatures free from such vniust suggestions, and haue laid the cause of them to mans ignorance, to whom they are properly appertaining. Therefore trusting your Gracious lenity will admit a tolleration of my vnworthy labours, it will incite others to digge deeper into this Myne, whereby there will be found such pretious pearles, as will garnish the now deiected Art of this so famous Subiect, that there shall bee no need to desire any Iewells from forraigne Countries, and also it wil imbol∣den mee to persist (during the rest of my life) to bring such things to light as are yet left in dark∣nes, according to the measure of my vnderstan∣ding. And in the meane time, I will pray with heart and mind vnto the King of all Kings, that hee would confound the wicked practises of all those, whether Papists or Atheists, that shall either secretly or openly attempt the subuersion of you or your Royall posterity, but that there may be still one proceeding from your loynes to rule the Scepter till Shilo come;
 and that as hee hath made you the greatest here vpon earth, so hee will crowne you and yours to raigne perpetually with him, in his euerlasting Kingdome.

