



SIr, a farre greater happines then I of late
haue had, either leisure to hope for, or
means to expect; I commend to your
good selfe, & the frends of our acquain∣tance.
Being certified by my affection,
that your gentle nature, doth commi∣serat
the misfortunes hath befalne me, and therein as a
friend, doth share with mee in sorrow: I shall as soone
as occasion will suffer me, make hast to London, to bee
counselled by your aduise, touching those things in
particular, that mainly concerne my estate: Nor make
I any doubt, but before the receipt hereof, you haue
heard of my mishap, from the report of some of my men
who I hope, are ariued by passage, by the way of Holland:
therefore I omit herein to trouble you with the maner of
my first taking by the Turkes, whose gouernours, I
meane Masters & Pilates, are all Englishmen, not onely
Pirates, but mearely reprobates, and whose successe at
Seas is so great, that it is most lamentable to report, how
many Ships of London, and other parts of England haue
beene taken and made prey vnto them: without the help
of which English, the Turks by no means could haue go∣uerned
and conducted them through their vnskilfulnes
and insufficiencie in the art of Nauigation: yet of late to
my wofull experience, I can witnes, they haue beene so
readied by the instruction of our apostate countrimen,
[I meane of Ward and others, who haue beene their
commanders] to tackle their Ships, to man and man∣nage
a fight, that if it doe not please God to moue the
heart of his Maiestie, and other Christian Princes, and

states, to ioyne together for their speedy suppression,
and the disiointing of their late strengthned forces,
which continually encreaseth by the Ships of England,
and Holland, which they daily surprise, It will be disco∣modious
to the state, and so dangerous to the common
wealth, in succeeding times, that Christendome must
expect no Trafficke at Sea: for they are alreadie grown
to the number of fifteene saile of great ships belonging
to Tunis, some bearing 40. some 30. and some 20. pecces
of ordinance, with men accordingly, as 300. 250. and
200. men at the least, in euery Ship, so that I doubt, and
the cause it selfe may breed a generall feare, that if ex∣pedition
be not hastened against them, the state may
heareafter share a part in that sorrow, which wee poore
Sea-faring men haue already suffered. I haue sent you
a note by Leanard Crowder, of diuerse ships, both English
and Dutch, that haue been taken since Ianuary last, which
although it be a businesse not much pertinent to gentle∣men
of your profession; yet I doe assure my selfe, that
you are so faithfull a wel-willer to the good estate and
prosperitie of the common-wealth, of which the Mer∣chant
and Marriners are not the least members, that in
pitie of our losses sustained, with vs you could wish, and
expect a reformation, since the infinite wealth that our
nation hath suffered ruine of, by the Turks this last yeer
it were without doubt, incredible to report, since hap∣pily
you haue heard, and I doubt not to prooue that
Londons losses hath amounted to aboue 200000. pound.
Thus hauing presented you at this time, but with a re∣lish
and taste of that which heereafter shall bee stored to
your expectation in a more ample and fuller feast, I be∣seech
you receiue this with my loue, in good part.

