



THose two daughters Ge. 29, 16 of Laban, Rahel, and Leah by which the reg. in Ezech. fa∣thers shadow forth the liues actiue and contemplatiue, me thinks may be taken for a liuely resemblance of the worlds two ages, the olde world, and this we liue in. For as Leah the elder of those two sisters, Ge. 29. 17 was bleare-eyed for the sight, Ge. 29. 31 but fruitfull in her wombe, so was the olde world something dimme sighted: she saw Nū 24. 17 the starre of Iacob, but it shone not clearely to hir, she beheld Christ Iesus, but it was a farre off with Balaam: yet was shee fruitfull to the God of Iacob, she brought him
 forth great plentie of good woorkes, then men were Gen. 6, 9 iust as Noe was, and walked with God, Ge. 5, 22 as Henoch. Eye hence it is that amongst the Gentiles who knew not him which is Iust. lipsi. polit. lib. 3 cap 1 Minerua vera, the 1. Cor. 1 24 eternall wisedome of God his father, and which had not receiued, nay, which had not Act. 19. 2 heard of the holye Ghost, yet for external ver∣tues they liued so well, as that with Caelius Rhod. anti∣quar. lib. 16. cap. 12 Socrates they haue left vnto posteritie Christianae sancti∣tatis imaginem quandā, such worthy presidents of vprightnesse and iustice, as we that are Chri∣stians, may vouchsafe them imitation. And as Rahel the yonger was Gen. 29 17 well eyed, verie beauti∣ful, yet Ge. 29, 31 barren in her wombe, and brought forth no children: so is this latter age, quicke∣sighted exceeding full of knowledge (for a great light is Matt. 4 16 risen to vs which sate in darknes) but (alas) her womb is barren she wants at her knees those blessed twinnes Luk. 1, 75 of holinesse, vnto God and righteousnesse towards men. I need not ac∣cuse her, the Poet long since told it, that aetas parentū, was peiorauis, in the Horatius car. lib. 3 ode, 6 race of obediēce, our fathers were left farre behinde their ance∣tors, as 1. Cor. 9 24 Peter was of Iohn when they ranne to Christs Sepulchre; but I may well adde, tulit nos nequiores illis, that if the Iewes Iere. 7, 26 in Iosiahs daies, do offend in small trespasses, their chil∣dren will be apt to heape greater transgressions.
 Of which general dissolution and defect of true holinesse, the lest cause is not that vaine idle Curiositye, which at this day the worlde so much affects in knowledge. For the diuell Mat. 13 39 that enuious man which Mat. 13▪ 25 would not haue the seede prosper, vsed this as his first engin to bring man to disobedience; when he told Eue, that her Gen. 3, 5 eies should be wonderfully opened, and that by know∣ing all things, at least she should be God-like, & so Bernard. de gradib. humilitatis. offerendo prohibitum, & auferendo con∣cessum, dum pomum porrigit paradisum sur∣ripit, brought her to an euill match, to change Paradise for an apple. And so euen to this day he assaults vs her ofspring, For as the sunne in the firmament by his influence in the beames, transfuseth to the earth both his Eccle. 23 19 light and Psa. 19, 6 heate: so hath this bright sunne, the Mala. 4. 2 sunne of righteousnesse Christ Iesus, both his Psal. 119 105 worde to enlighten vs, and Luk. 24 32 his spirit to inflame vs: and therefore as the windowes of Salomons rich Temple 1. Kin. 6. 4 which were exceeding spacious and large without, euery one turnes his soules eyes to receiue his chearefull light, with Psa. 13, 3 il∣lumina meos oculos, Lord giue me vnder∣standing: but as the flower which from that pla∣net hath his proper name, (God knoweth▪) there are but few which opē their sinful hearts, to en∣tertaine the warme heate of his blessed spirite,
 with Ps. 119, 5 vtinam sic viae dirigantur meae. O that my waies might once be made direct. Which cu∣stom in the ministry 2 Tim. 1. 6 tendeth no waies possibly to edification, it ingenders needelesse questions, but gets not liuely faith. For as in Christs time, Math. 23 23. the Scribes and Pharisies, whilst they tithed minte, cummin, and anisseede, passed ouer mercy and iudgement, weightie points in the law: so also in latter times Hierom. in epist de duob. filiis. dum nugastenemus, & o∣pinionum riuulos consectamur, ipsum veritatis fontem amittimus, many whilst they haue spent not their houres by the glasse, but the yeares of their liues in questions of ceremonie, and but matters of circumstance, haue omitted that, which Salomon once said shuld be both the sum and substance of a preacher, Eccl 12, 13. to bidde the people feare God, and keepe his commandements. And for the multitude, the children of the church, how much this infirmitie preiudiceth their hea∣ring▪ that they follow nice scruples neglecting greater duties, that one example of the Ephesi∣ans may admonish vs Act. 19, 20. amongst whom it is said, the worde of the Lord did grow mightilie, and through Pauls industrious preaching, at length did much preuaile, Act 19. 19. but not till the bookes of curious arts were burnt, and they which profes∣sed them had left those studies. If then this cu∣riositie bee thus obnoctious both to the prophets
 and the people, that counsell of Iesus the sonne of Syrack is requisit for these our dayes, Eccl. 3, 22 23 where he bids vs not seeke out things which are too hard and hie for vs, but looke what God in his lawe hath commanded vs, and thinke on that with reuerence to performe it. For aduauncement of which rule giuen by the wise man, hauing of late time fallen into a reproofe of that sin, by occasion of a scripture which I hādled in Powles church, which was part of the gospel appoynted for that day, I haue conceiued hope through the mercy of our God, that by publishing these exhortati∣ons, to which by some I haue beene requested, he that hath all mens hearts in his handes, and windes them at his pleasure, as the riuers in the south, will so turne and guide the hearts of his people, that from hencefoorth they shall not withLuk. 10. 40 Martha in the gospel, cumber themselues with things lesse necessarie, but with Mary choose the best part, that one thing which is requisite. In which my endeuors to accomplish this desire, by the blessing of god vpon these few short sermons, (which I send foorth as harbingers to make way for others that I intend as motiues in the like kinde of moralitie) I haue thought it my dutie in al humble lowlinesse, and obsequious reue∣rence, to offer these the first fruits of my slender labours, as the churches due▪ to your honourable
 good Lordship, vnto whom specially (next to that Right reuerend and most gracious Lorde, my Lord of Canterburies grace, who for holinesse and learning, is our English Churches glorie) I doubt not, but all of vs stande bounde in consci∣ence, to yeelde both entire obedience and reue∣rence. Wherfore not this onely, but my selfe for euer in all such seruices, I both submitte and commend to your Lordshippe; for whom I will not cease to solicit God by prayer, that from this tabernacle, on which you waite in this honou∣rable citie (the kings seat, the kingdoms beautie) there neuer may depart the two complet tables of the blessed testament, nor the golden pot of the heauenlie manna, nor Aarons rod by your hands well mannaged. And thus in all dutie I humbly take my leaue, from Clarkenwell the first of Ia∣nuary. 1598.

