



SIr, it hath plea∣sed
God, that
for some cer∣taine
yeares,
there hath bin
a Lecture hol∣den
by fiue o∣thers
of my re∣uerend
brethrē,
and my selfe, e∣uerie
Saturday, being the Market day at
Ashford in Kent, where wee haue a wor∣shipfull
and Christian auditorie, where (as

my turne came about) I haue handled di∣uerse
portions of Scripture, and now last∣ly,
in seuen Sermons, gone ouer the 23.
Psalme of Dauid; and by Gods proui∣dence
it so came to passe, that my course
was to teach on Saturday the 26. of
March, 1603. for which I had also pre∣pared
my selfe; but hauing certaine in∣telligence
ouer night, both of the death
of her Maiestie, and also that the high and
mightie Prince, Iames, was proclaimed
for our king, with generall applause in
London, (whom God in mercy long pre∣serue.)
The consideration of these sud∣den
and great accidents, and also hea∣ring
what a great auditorie there would
be,, both of Knights and Gentlemen, to
proclaime the king there, and also of o∣thers,
desirous to heare and see, did some∣what
astonish me. But cōsidering first, gods
merciful dealing towards this land in this
euill day, which wee haue so long feared,
making our comfort suddenly to appeare,
as a flash of lightning, which breaketh out
of a darke cloude, and secondly his proui∣dence
towards me, who calling mee on
the sudden, to so great and waightie a du∣tie,
yet eased me of halfe the paines by fit∣ting

it so, as my ordinarie text and pre∣meditations
(with some small chaunge of
phrases or stile) did better agree with
the present occasion, then many others
which might haue beene purposely and
curiously chosen, I was much encouraged,
and by Gods mercie (to the comfort of
my selfe and others) discharged that du∣tie
(his name for euer bee praised, who is
alwayes at the right hand of his vnwor∣thie
seruants, to helpe them in time of
neede) since which time, I haue beene ve∣ry
earnestly solicited by diuerse worship∣full
and Christian good friends, to pub∣lish
those my Lectures in print, that the
benefite thereof redounding vnto many;
by many, thankes might bee giuen vnto
God; whose request for a time, I verie re∣solutely
gainsayd, as meeting with many
and those verie waightie discourage∣ments:Solet accep∣tior esse sermo vi∣uus, quam scriptus. Ber. epi. 66.
first the great difference betwixt
preaching and reading, euen the same
matter, whereof one saith verie well, The
liuely voyce is more acceptable, than writ∣ten
wordes.Habet nes∣cio quid la∣tentis , viua vox. And another saith: Liuely voice
hath a kinde of secret force, and powrefull
sound: And Aschines when he had read
the oration which Demosthenes had made

against him, and perceiued the people to
wonder at the excellencie of it, he answe∣red:
What would you haue thought, if you
had heard him pronounce it himselfe?Quid si ip∣sum audis∣setis sua verba reso∣nantem. And
therefore I was loath to chaunge my
tongue into a penne, and laying aside the
gesture and countenance of a liuing man,
to burie my selfe in a dead letter, of farre
lesse effectuall perswasion. Secondly, the
wise Preacher hath long since said, There
is none end of making of bookes, and much
reading is a wearines of the flesh. Eccles. 12.
12. which is most true in this bookish
age, wherein as one saith, It would require
a mans whole life,Vix tota vita indi∣ces. but to read ouer the titles
or inscriptions: for now is the old Poets
saying verified,Scribimus indocti doc∣tique Poe∣mata passim Learned and vnlearned, e∣uerie
one setteth pen to Paper: And hereby
it commeth to passe, that the world is
ouerladen, and the Presses oppressed
with an innumerable companie of friuo∣lous
Pamphlets, the fruits of idle braines,
sauouring of nothing but vngodlinesse,
and carnall vanitie, and tend to none o∣ther
end but the nourishment of all ma∣ner
vice and prophanesse; oh that there
were amongst vs, some zealous Ephesi∣ans,
that bookes of so great vanitie might

be burned vp: Acts. 19, 29. Yea, there are
many verie excellent Bookes, Treatises,
Sermons, and Catechismes, but if there
wanted any, there are many, both in re∣gard
of their abilitie, and leasure, farre fit∣ter
to employ themselues this way then
my selfe. Thirdly, I feared, both the graue
and wise censure of the godly learned di∣uines,
to whom my spirit is subiect. And
also the curious reprehensions of those
Momi, and malignant sinister spirits, who
say they would haue nothing printed, (if
diuinitie,) but that which wadeth into the
depth thereof, and containeth the mar∣row
and quintessence of learning, such as
doe profoundly handle deepe poynts, and
subtill quiddities of controuersies, publi∣shing
that which was neuer heard or
knowne before. And (if humanitie) then
nothing, but that which is excellent, for
wit; singular for learning; rare for know∣ledge;
and pollished with all the orna∣ments
of eloquence; but in truth there
can be nothing so well, learnedly, or god∣ly
done in either, but these men (as it were
pining away with enuie at other mens
good) doe either bitterly backebite, re∣proachfully
slaunder, vndeseruedly re∣proue,

or maliciously defame. What is it
then to publish any thing in print, but for
a man to make himselfe a common by∣word,
a But for euery man to shoot his
arrow at, euen bitter words, yea to offer
himselfe to bee stung and torne, with
the sharpe and venemous teeth and
tongue of euerie reproachfull slaunde∣rer.
Lastly, it is no small discouragement,
to consider the vanitie of Readers in these
dayes (which is not the least cause of so
many idle and vaine bookes) who as if
they were possessed with the Athenian
humour,Poscimus indocti doctique. to delight in nothing but either
to tell,Act. 17. 21 Quid noui. or heare some newes: the first que∣stion
at euery Stacioners shoppe is, what
new thing? and if it smell of the presse,
and haue a goodly title (be the matter ne∣uer
so base and vnprofitable) it is a booke
for the nonce; but be it neuer so good,
if once the Calender be chaunged, that it
beare the date of the former yeare, it is
neuer enquired after, it may serue for co∣uers
to euerie immodest Poeme, girding
Satyre, or ridiculous fable: and thus most
men esteem of vaine books, more then of
those that are profitable, but none almost

esteeme of the best, but as men doe of a
flower, whilest it is newly gathered, but
afterwards it is throwne in the window
corner,M. Dearing in his Pre∣face to his Catechisme. and regarded no more; this vani∣tie
a learned and zealous Diuine, long
since lamented; and surely it still encrea∣seth,
and getteth ground, whereby many
of Gods seruants, (most dysirous euery
way, that God hath enabled them to doe
good to his Church) are mightily discou∣raged
from labouring in this kind: dis∣grace,
pouertie, contempt and iniurie, be∣ing
all the thankes, which many receyue
for their paines, that if there were not o∣ther
farre greater consideration, whereby
these former are deuoured, and darkened
as the light of a Candle by the Sunne at
noone day; O Lord, how many excellent
bookes are there, which had perished a∣mongst
the Mothes and Wormes, and ne∣uer
seene the light of the Sunne. First it is
the greatest comfort that many a poore
soule hath (next vnto preaching, Gods
sanctified ordinance) that at leisure-times
they may read or heare, some plaine ex∣position
or Sermon, penned to their ca∣pacitie,
and wherein many take ixcee∣ding
comfort, delight, and profit. There

are many who for their age, sickenesse,
soulnesse of weather, or other vrgent oc∣casions,
cannot alwayes heare the word,
where, and when they would, who yet
hauing some godly mens labours, may by
the reading of the Scriptures, and them,
in some measure, supplie the want of bet∣ter
meanes, and increase in themselues
the knowledge, feare and loue of God.
Againe, though there be mo books, god∣ly
and learnedly written, then well read
or vsed; yet shall the Church of God, so
long as it remaineth on earth, stand in
need of new Tractates, Comments, Ser∣mons,
and Catechismes, as new reasons,
illustrations, and methodes are inuented,
as new doubts, controuersies, errours or
heresies do arise, and as men do diuersly
bend themselues, to the studying and
handling of particular heads of doctrine,
and parts of the word of God.Non omnia possumus omnes. Again, all is
not expected at one mans hands, one may
sleepe, where another waketh, two eies
see more then one,Plus oculi, quā oculus. one may be darke and
concise, where another is large and plain,
yea in a word, as in diuerse speakers, so in
diuers writers (handling the same doc∣trine
in generall) we shall see the admi∣rable

varietie of spirituall gifts, each one
differing from other, both in method, and
maner, matter, & argument, whereby we
may bee stirred vp to prayse the great
bountie of God, and also. his wisedome
towards his Church, that whome one
booke sauoureth not, he may yet like the
taste of another, the doctrine of godlines
beeing as a large field, wherein manie
thousands may labour, and yet all haue
elbow roome; and like a great fountaine
or Well, whereout euery man may draw
his Bucket-full, and yet neuer see bot∣tome.
Lastly, some men, through some
respect of kindred, friendship, acquain∣tance,
or others, may bee drawne to reade
some booke, whereas they would not
haue regarded any other (though farre to
be preferred) on the same argument. The
consideration whereof, hauing the pub∣like
profite of many, and the eternall glo∣rie
of God (as the propounded scope and
end of all my labours) before mine eies,
togither with the importunate perswa∣sion
of my deare and Christian friendes
in the Lord, haue drawne mee into the
violent current of this time, to cast my
mite into the Lords treasurie, in publi∣shing

these my poore trauelles,At nunc e∣tiam cilius vereor, quā henc. which
long since had come abroad, if I could
haue beene sooner thereunto perswaded.
I haue not altered any thing of the mat∣ter
which was deliuered; or of the method
which I obserued therein, onely I haue
added the testimonies of certaine godly
and reuerend men, whose wordes and
sentences in teaching I reported (in our
owne naturall mothers tongue) but
concealed both names and places, and the
rather I now set them downe, because
many (either simple deceiued, or mali∣ciously
froward) condemne all such for
meerely ignorant and vnlearned, whose
Sermons are not stuffed full with senten∣ces
of a strange and vnknowne language,
alas, who knoweth not that any man but
merely qualified with gifts, and taking a∣ny
commendable paines in his study, may
plentifully alledge the testimonies of mē,
if they saw the same warrantable, or pro∣fitable
(and not rather hurtful) to the edi∣fication
of the Church of God? But I haue
placed them in the margent, as also the
testimonies of Scripture, because I would
not haue the simple reader any way inter∣rupted,
he may at his pleasure, hauing on∣ly

the matter, make a pawse for the exa∣mination
of any thing auerred by the te∣stimonies alledged.
As for the matter, to commend it, I need
not, for if it be the purePs. 12. 6. Reu. 3. 18. Psa. 19. 10. word of GOD,
(as I perswade my selfe it is) then it is
more precious, than fined gold, sweeter
than honie, and cleerer than the light, if it
bee as comfortable in reading, as those
who haue enforced me to publish it, (as
they said) found it in preaching, I doubt
not, but God thereby shall bee glorified,
his Saints comforted, and my soule reioy∣ced,
in the day of the Lord Iesus; but as
for the manner; the stile may seem harsh
and vnpleasant, handling a Shepheards
song, after a Shepheardly and rude man∣ner,
for (as your Worships know) my ma∣ner
is not at any time, to studie for words,
but for matter, which so I deliuer in such
words, as I may be vnderstood of the sim∣plest
hearer, I care for no more; mine on∣ly
desire, being to instruct Gods people,
with the plaine euidencie of the spirit, and
of power. And therefore as in the deli∣uering;
so also in the penning and setting
downe thereof, I haue neither vsed curio∣sitie
of words; eloquence of speech; glo∣ousnesse

of stile, nor of obscuritie, and
darkenesse of matter, to declare a deepe
profoundnesse, but haue endeauoured in
all simplicitie of spirit, sinceritie of heart,
plainesse of phrase, and sensible maner, to
deliuer the only truth, to the Saints of god.
It is the first thing of mine, that euer
passed the Presse, and therefore great rea∣son,
that I should dedicate it, to the first
friends, that euer I had in this Countrey,
who first wonne mine affection by cour∣tesie,
and since many waies confirmed it,
by desert; it was long since planted, and
being plentifully watered,Amor ve∣rus, non no∣uit finem. it still grow∣eth,
and shall, till in the next life it be per∣fected.
Vnder your roofe I found a happie
rest, when I left your brothers house, a
Gentleman truely religious,Mr. vvood∣ward of Bucking∣ham-shire. and worship∣full,
by whose louing Sonnes meanes, I
was first drawne into these Southerne
parts: by your Christian example, and re∣ligious
exercises in your familie, I was a∣wakened
forth of that spirituall slumber,
into which I fell, so soone as I left the
Vniuersitie,Mr. Per∣kins. and the ordinarie hearing of
a most zealous man of God, who spent
himselfe as the lampe, to giue light to the
Church, whose soule is now at rest with

God, and who first turned my feet to∣wards
Gods Kingdome. Your Worships
were my first encouragement to the study
of Diuinitie, (and that with no small hin∣drance
to your childrens proceeding in
learning, whom I taught:) by your meanes
did I first enter into this office, and was
called vnto this place, where I do now ex∣ercise,
and from you and yours, haue I re∣ceiued
manifold encouragements in my
ministrie, the Lord register them in his
Booke, that they may be remembred, and
come in your good accounts, at the glori∣ous
day of his sonne, and be requited sea∣uen-fold
into your bosomes; wherefore
(hauing none other thing) that I may not
be vnthankfull,In gratum si dixeris, omnia dix∣eric. which of all other sinnes
(euen amongst the heathen) hath euer
been reputed most vile, & odious; what∣soeuer
respects others haue, onely to a∣voide
the note of ingratitude, doe I pre∣fume
to dedicate to your Worships, these
first fruits of my labours in this kind; that
as you heard the first Sermon that euer
I preached, your Sonne, was the first
child that euer I baptised, & your daugh∣ter,
the first that euer I maried, so you
would vouchsafe to patronize these few

Sermons, being the first that euer I publi∣shed:
let then this poore Infant, which
knoweth not whither to flie, but vnto
you (as you haue giuen cōfort vnto his Fa∣ther)
find some shadow vnder your roofe,
till the stormes of virulent tongues bee o∣uerpast.
Accept of this small testimonie of
my great good will, according to your
wonted curtesie; and surely, if I shall heare
that it is fauourably entertained of you,
and curteously accepted of the brethren,
I shall not onely greatly reioyce, but also
shall hereby be stirred vp, and pricked for∣ward
to the publishing hereafter of other
things, with more time, better aduice, ex∣acter
diligence, mature deliberation, and
sounder iudgement,Non in prin¦cipiis per∣ficta quae∣runtur, sed de paruis principiis, ad ea quae perfecta sunt perue∣niture. Am∣bros. thorough the grace
of God, increasing his guifts in me. The
Lord for his mercies sake, graunt that
these my first labours, may bee accepted
of the Saints, and tend to the glorie of
God. And I hartely beseech the Lord
God of all grace, the Fountaine of all
goodnesse, and giuer of all spirituall bles∣sings
both for your selues, your sonnes
daughters, brethren, sisters, and kinsfolks,
and your whole religious Stocke, and Fa∣milie,
and specially for that reuerent reli∣gious

Matron, your deere mother, whom
God hath many waies honoured, and af∣ter
many great storms, sweetly refreshed,
to her euerlasting consolation in Christ,
to endue all your foules, with heauenly
knowledge, faith, zeale, and loue to God
his truth, and Saints, and bestowed great
worldly blessings of wealth, wisedome,
and reputatation: so it would please him
to preferue and keepe you all, in pure Re∣ligion,
perfect peace, feruent loue, vnfay∣ned
faith, reuerent feare, and true holy∣nesse,
all the daies of your liues, that the
course of this miserable wretchednesse fi∣nished,
you may receiue the happie fruit,
of the glorious Gospell, with all the
Saints, and bee crowned with immortall
glorie, in his purchased Kingdome, where∣vnto
he speedily bring vs, for his mer∣cies
sake in Christ, Amen.
From
Wye, in Kent the last
of September,
1603.

