



HIM that is weake in the Faith re∣ceive you,Rom. 14.1. but not unto doubtfull disputations; saith the Apostle.
It may please your GRACE to remember, that the Church of Rome, was at this time like the Moone when shee is orient, illustrious for her faith, spoken of
through the whole world,Rom. 1.8. shining in all Christian piety, and made gloriously red with the blood of her Martyrs. Yet was there a duskie mist raised about her, which did much obscure her glory. For though she erred not in fundamentalls, as did the Church of Corinth in the article of the resur∣rection; nor with the Church of Galatia, mixed the Law with the Gospell, as if Chri∣stian religion were an extract of both, as the Socinians at this day; yet in things of lesse consequence God permitted the envious man to sow the seeds of contention in this goodly field,Gen. 16.12. till, as so many Ishmaels, every mans hand was against every man.
The things in question were (if any can be such in the time of the Gospell, of which no sober man doubts) of an indifferent na∣ture, as meats and daies; the parties contend∣ing were the strong, and the weake in faith, the manner of the contention amounted un∣to a Schisme, whilst the strong rejected the weake with scorne, and contempt; and the weake fell to their common ward of judging
and condemning the strong. It was therefore high time for the Apostle to put to his hand; he is a master-builder, and knowes that a house divided cannot stand; of all things therefore hee laboured to procure amongst them a setled peace; since, asInveniat vos diabolus mu∣nitos, & con∣cordiâ arma∣tos, quia pax vestra bellum est illi. Tert: ad Martyres. Tertullian saith, the Churches peace is to Satan, the old ene∣my thereof, a continuall warre. Now the way which the Apostle takes in the worke, is such, as never failes of its effect, the way of knowledge, and the way of love; a mutuall receiving of one another into a good opini∣on, and a moderate discussing of the points in controversy. This latter will doe little good without the former, for till we can be content to receiue one another as brethren; wee shall never satisfie one another as Di∣vines. Till this, Victory will be sought, not Truth; and asSe nec res∣dere nec tace∣re potuisse. Aug. Retract. 1. cap 49. St Augustine notes of Gaudenti∣us the Donatist in his time, though he knewe not how to answere, yet he knew not how to hold his peace. It is well observed, that there is Discordia personarum, as well as opinio∣num, Schisme is commonly more in the man
then in his tenents; in the heart of the Schis∣matique, then in the discord of his judge∣ment. That men should not dissent in opini∣ons, is not to bee expected; the Angells doe thus differ,Discordia fi∣eri potest, u vel llum sit peccatum vel saltem venia∣le, quandò quis probabili∣ter existimêt non esse bo∣num quod alter . Greg. Valen. as the Schoolemen teach. This therefore is no sinne, unlesse we become un∣decently pertinacious; nay, when the heart it selfe is growne Schismaticall, the sinne is the lesse, while we proceed not to definitive sen∣tences against our opposites. But how diffi∣cult, and almost unpossible a thing it is, to be thus temperate, the continually interrupted peace of the Church in all ages hath made too-too apparent; especially in the weak∣lings here spoken of, whose religion hath much more of zeale, then of knowledge. For that the Church should consist of none, but of strong, is an Ʋtopian fancie of the perfec∣tists, whose Church is a Moone without spots; a family, in which are no children; a firmament, in which are no starres, but of the first magnitude. The true Church of Christ ever was, and will be a mixt congregation; in this, like Nebuchadnezars Image, which had
mixed feet of clay and Iron. There remaineth therefore the Apostles other remedy, which is not only to receive them into our hearts, but to support them also with our hands, whilst with the one eye we looke upon their persons, with the other upon their opinions, bringing these into publique light, (for com∣monly they lurke in corners) and the touch∣stone of disputations.Tertullian. Suspecta esse debuit, quae vult occludi: that doctrine justly deserves to be suspected, which desires to be concealed. But herein also the Apostle directs us by a distin∣ction; for some disputations are perplext, and perplexing; others not so, but serve to cleare the Vnderstanding, & settle the Conscience. The former sort have ever been the bane of the Church, a worme bred in religion, and eating out the very bowels thereof. To represse these kinds of disputes, & to confine turbulent searching witts, hath ever been the wisdome of the Church. Such wranglings the Apostle doth even abhorre, as fitter for the Schooles of Heathens,2 Tim, 2.23. then of Christi∣ans; being (how profound soever they
seeme) foolish and unlearned, good only to beget new janglings, filling the Church with disputing, not edifying. Such therefore were ever dangerous, ending alwaies in greater ha∣zard, saith. I sid. Pel. ad Theo. Schola∣sticum Ep. 93. Isidore the Pelusiote: neither are they more dangerous, then endlesse; for diffi∣culties assoyle not doubts, as the same. Ad Alipium. Epist. 97. Father gives the reason,
Questions of this kind are raised, either a∣bout fundamentals, wherein our faith stands, as the Temple upon her pillars; and mise∣rable is that Church, whose foundations are shaken; things of this kinde ought to be be∣beleeved, not disputed; and herein we should gladly give the hand to them of Rome, were the decisions of the Tridentine Fathers, the decisions of the Catholique Church, or con∣sonant thereunto: Or about the secret things of Gods counsell, the Quòd sit whereof is in∣deed revealed, the Quomodò sit not so, in which viam quietativam intellectus, as Pen∣nottus calls it, like the North-west passage long since promised, no man as yet hath ever found. The latter kind of disputes concerne
either the publique peace of the Church, or the outward practice of Christianity; in both which is seene Sathans malice, casting scru∣ples into mens consciences: and the vanity of some spirits, who applaud themselves, say∣ing, with the Fly upon the Chariot, what a dust doe we raise? The disputing of points of this nature against such as these is most ne∣cessary; especially if God be pleased to give men tractable hearts, not to withold the truth in unrighteousnesse.Scrupulus conscientiae est, quand mens dubia vacillat, nes∣ciens quid me∣lius, semper parata facere quod sciret Deo gratum; & contra ist scrupulum seùtirem facere, non semper est peccatum: li∣cèt talis scru∣pulus sit val∣è periculosus & quantùm fieri potest, extinguendue. Gers. com∣pend. Theol. For though they be things in themselves of lesse importance; yet from such trifles (as they seeme) flou∣rishing Churches and States haue been much impayred.
No better worke therefore can be under∣taken, then is the dis-entangling of the con∣science; every scruple therein being like a thorne in the foot, much hindring our pro∣gresse▪ or a mote in the very eye of the soule, of all parts the most tender, not fuffering, without anguish the least molestation. Per∣haps it is not alwaies a sinne (saith Gerson) to goe against the feares, and scruples of our
minds, provided we be ever ready to embrace Truth made known unto us; yet such scruples certainly are very dangerous, & by all meanes to be extinguished. And good reason; for as a carelesse conscience begets presumption; so a scrupulous, desperation. A too large consci∣ence calleth evill good, and a too streight∣ned calleth good evill. The former sort sticks at nothing; and herein haue a kind of advan∣tage,Conscientia tùm nimis lar∣ga, tùm nimis stricta caven∣da; nimis lar∣ga generat praesumptio∣nem, nimis stricta despe∣rationem; ni∣mis larga fre∣quenter dicit malum bo∣num; nimis stricto bonum malum; nimis larga de nullo remor sum ha∣bet, & ideo in rebus  rariùs peccat &c. Gers. ib, for by this meanes they erre not in things indifferent; but the latter start at every thing, and are therefore more often woun∣ded, if ever whole.
The peace also of the Church is to be va∣lued at the highest rate; for it is with her as with the civil State, all the contentments of a Kingdome are nothing, if peace be wanting.
That these questions of the Sabbath are things of this nature many haue long since complained, and Your GRACE doth easily discerne. For notwithstanding the Sabbath∣arian tenents, for the most part thereof, be meere novelties, unknowne even unto our Martyrs in the daies of Queene Mary, and
were but timorously set afoot by their first masters; yet how deepely they are now roo∣ted, who seeth not? and how the hearts of men are thereby alien'd one from another? how such, as dare contradict them, are made even Anathema; all religion being reduced to this one head, the observation of the Sabbath: How a manifest schisme is raised thereby (so farre at least, as for fear of Authority men dare adventure) a weake eye may discerne. So dangerous hath been the long connivence of the Church, and silence of her sonnes; whilst some have undervalued these questi∣ons, as too meane speculations for men of great abilities to be ingaged in▪ others have been contented to see well-affected people to be drawn on in Religion by this holy fraud. But what the issue of both haue been, experi∣ence hath now discovered; for Miloes sucke∣ling is become an Oxe; and the twig, that might haue been snapt in sunder, is growne a sturdy Oake. For my owne part, I well hoped to haue stood upon the Hill, and beheld this skirmish in the Vally, being indeed every
way unfurnished for such a service. But it hath pleased God to dispose otherwise; that which I did, partly for my exercise, but chief∣ly satisfaction, being found as1. Sam. 10.22. Saul hid a∣mongst the stuffe: or (to compare the least thing with the greatest) as they say St Grego∣ry was discovered in the Merchants ware∣house. I haue notwithstanding at length with my best alacrity committed it unto publike view, most humbly beseeching Your GRACE to receive both the Worke, and the Author into your Patronage and protection. The great Bishop and Sheepheard of our soules multiply his choicest Favours upon Your GRACE: and by and through Your GRACE upon his poore Church, untill that pretious oyntment, composed not of sweet spices, but of Gods holy spirit, flow from the head of our Aaron even unto the skirts of his clothing; which shall be the daily prayer of

