



REuerend Father in God, it may in mee (so meane a per∣son) appeare no small pre∣sumption, leaping out of the dungeon of obscurity, which had inclosed me, now to in∣terrupt your learned iudge∣ment, with a few vnskilfull lines: and to eclipse your Lordships aspect from better things. For, I must confesse, (with Barnard) Quod animarum susceperim curam, qui meam non sufficerem custo∣dire. And (as Ambrose saith) Factum est vt prius docere inciperem, quam discere: and therefore not sufficiently worthy, to present your iudgement with this vnlearned Treatise: Which is rawly comprised in a few scattered leaues, and as rudely composed in a sort of scribbled and vnlettered lines: and farre from that lordly gift, that Aconi∣tus offered vnto Alphonsus, King of Aragon. But howsoeuer, I am not able (with ramping Lions) to runne in with mighty prayes: yet giue mee leaue (with the little Ant) to carie into the Gar∣ner,

my small wheaten graine. And though I cannot bring gold to the building of the Tēple, yet let my goats-haire be accepted; and what is wanting by my pen, I supply with desire of bet∣ter: now, animus in dono, astimandus. Plinie was wont to say, Nullum librum tam malum esse, vt non aliqua ex parte prodesses. Therefore (Reuerend Father in God) first I intreate your Lordship, to pardon my presumption in this attempt: and then a kind acceptance of this opusculum, to giue it leaue to feede at your Altar; and gather strength from your greatnesse, (as the Moone doth light from the Sunne) that it may find the more fauour among the vulgar: Dauid was safe vnder Gods protection, and this cannot miscarie, through your Lordships patronizing the same.
Indeed I was purposed, to send it to the broad world, to shift for it selfe, as fearing no man would be god-father to so strange a childe: For it is like the bitter waters of Iericho to the sinner, though it bee as the deaw of Hermon to the peni∣tent. For as it is bonis bona, so it is malis mala; not in it selfe, but through their corruption. It re∣proues the gallant of pride, the Lawyer of cor∣ruption, the Courtier of ambition, the Magistrate of idlenesse, the Vsurer of cruelty, the Broker of theft, the Merchant of ingrossing, the Trades∣man of deceit, and most of sinne: Whither then should it flee, but to the Sanctuary for refuge? For amicus certus, medicus (said Cato.) Nec quisquam melior medicus, quàm fides amicus. And here I de∣sire but two of your Worthies, for this naked

Worke, countenance to beautifie it, and power to protect it. And then I haue what I desire: your Lordship to fauour it, the vulgar to obey it, and God to accept it.
This booke may be compared to Dauids song misericordiam and iudicium; the blessings of Geri∣zim, and the curses of Ebal; the oyle of consolati∣on, and the water of compunction: and, if I may so say, like Ianus with his two faces, comforting the good, reprouing the euill: Or, if you please, like Argus with his hundred eyes, which beholds the sinnes of this age in euery corner, though without thankes, yet not without profit, (if they would obey it.) I intend here with the good gar∣diner, to reuerberate the weeds, & exhilarate the good herbes: The greatest good is to be imbra∣ced, and yet not the least reiected. I doubt not but the small light that enters through my little casements, will chase the creking Bats, and staring Owles, (I meane the wicked of this darke age) and in time cause them to eiaculate their sinnes.
Which would sooner bee effected, if you (to whom God hath concredited both the Word and the sword) should open the eye-lids of Ec∣clesiasticall diseipline, that the filthinesse of sinne may appeare to the heart of the Law: and what our words cannot do with their affections, your swords may worke vpon their maners. Pompo∣nius saith, that Censura est magistra vitae, & mode∣stiae: For, execution of Lawes, and correction of maners, are the sinewes of the Common-wealth, and the lampe of the Church.

I could wish that our Church were purged of wicked persons, that common drunkards, swea∣rers, vsurers, and the like, may not be admitted, as members of the Church, till there be a better re∣formation of them: For it is a great scandall to the Gospell, and no lesse griefe to the godly. And hence it is, that the Separatists speake euill of vs, because these wicked are among vs. But is there no balme at Gilead to cure this sore? Yes, if vici∣ous officers, are not sicke of a golden dropsie: for then it will not bee healed without a siluer plai∣ster: and I feare, the Lawes heeles will be tript vp with tricks, the cause vitiated, the purse woūded, but the sinner sent home as wicked as he came. Therfore this chastening of the sinner is not to be neglected: Non enim superbia, nisivbi negligitur disciplina, nam disciplina est magistra, religionis vitae, & pietatis. What is then to be desired, but as there are good lawes, for the punishing of the sinner, so they may be duely executed, and not E∣clipsed by vitious officers and Proctors: and that the wheeles of their tongues, may not be set a go∣ing with a weight of bribery, nor a golden addi∣tion make the hammer strike to the sinners plea∣sure: and that mercenary tongues, and money spel'd consciences, may not spoyle our Church, to inrich themselues.
Also the contempt of Religion: is growen too generall among vs. What a shame is it, that pro∣fessors of religion should bee brought foorth in Playes vpon a stage, by prodigious Players, to dis∣grace them? Surely wee had not need to dull the

edge of profession, it is too blunt already, but ra∣ther sharpen the same, with the wetstone of ap∣probation. It is no maruell though religion come so seldome to our doores, when it hath such en∣tertainment: We haue beaten the shell so long, that the kernell is come to nothing: We haue re∣prooued the hypocrite so long, till we haue chid∣den away all profession: and yet euery professor is not an hypocrite, though euery hypocrite bee a professor.
Christ taught, that our works should shine be∣fore men & for outward profession must accompa∣nie inward grace. It is no sinne to haue an out∣ward shew of puritie, but a vertue; and therefore to be countenanced, and defended from the pro∣digious spirits of the world: and if I said barking Dogges, I sayd but as Dauid did, which hunts out∣ward holinesse into Obadiahs caue: that it dare not shew it selfe, for feare it should be brought vpon a stage, or put in verse, or to some other vse, to make themselues merrie withall.
Shall this be suffered, then religion will be ba∣nished ere long: and I cannot blame it, if it walke in obscuritie already, and dare not bee seene. But is there neuer an Obadiah in the land, nor Hester in the Court, nor an Ahimelech at Nob, to fauour their profession, and protect their persons? Non est meae humilitatis diotare vobis: yet (say as God said to the Iewes) Though Israel play the harlot, let not Iudah sinne: Though the Temporall Ma∣gistrate sit still and say nothing, yet let not Eccle∣siasticall gouernours keepe silence. You are the

brestplate of defence, the helmet of , and the sword of protection: as Tunc iustitia di∣eitur gladius, ex vtraque parte acutus, quia hominis defendit corpus ab exterioribus iniuriis, & animam a spiritu alibus molestiis: For the sword of gouern∣ment hath two edges. Disciplina ad duo diuidi∣tur, ad correctionem, et instructionem, primum ti∣more, sccunaum amore perficitur: and happy is that Church, where they both doe cut. You are the North winde, to kill all the vermin, and the South to ripen good fruit: I meane your autho∣ritie, to punish the wicked, and cherish the good. But I forget my selfe: your Lordship is wise, as an Angel of God, knowing best what to doe. Yet giue meleaue (not to teach, but) to pray for you, considering your holy profession, high place, and the weighty causes you are to mannage, the ma∣nifold euils you may preuent, and the great good you may procure. And this is all the good I am able to doe, desiring the Lord to prosper your godly proceeding, to Gods glory, and the good of the Church. To the same purpose the Lord fill your soule with grace, your heart with cou∣rage, your life with health, and your time with length of dayes: that after a militarie life ended in grace, you may come to liue a , life in glory.

