



WHosoever you are that in the pur∣pose of your parents and friends; or by the bent of your own
inclination; or ur∣ged by necessity; or by the concurrence of all these motives; or by any other in∣centive) are to un∣dergoe the conditi∣on of a servant or prentice, to the end that you may live well and happily in that Calling; my purpose is in this
little treatise, to set down such precepts & rules as J thoght most profitable to conduce thereunto.
These precepts I reduce to 4. heads.

I. In the first of which, J shew you what you are to doe, before you enter in∣to that Calling.
II. Jn the second,
how you ought to be∣have your selfe in it.
III. In the third, what course to take after you have ac∣complished it.
IV. And in the fourth, how to be sa∣tisfied in some par∣ticular doubts that may trouble your conscience.

I. First then, be∣fore you enter into
that Calling, you are

1. To pray unto God you may be placed with an honest & religious Ma∣ster. p. 3
2. To peruse such precepts, promi∣ses, threatnings, and examples as are recorded in the holy Scrip∣tures, touching
servants, pag. 4
3. To consider some sayings and wri∣tings of men to that purpose. 25
4. To read over a∣gaine and againe this little manu∣all. p. 33

II. Secondly, when you are actually pla∣ced in this Calling, you must be carefull
to perform such du∣ties as become you in respect both of matter and man∣ner. p. 37
In respect of mat∣ter, you are to per∣forme some duties towards God; some towards your selfe; some towards your Master & Mistris; some towards their
children, if they have any; some to∣wards your fellow-servants; some to∣wards those you are to deal with in your Masters businesse; some towards your neighbours and ac∣quaintance; and some towards your parents, kinsfolks & friends. p. 37, 38
 I. Your duty to∣wards God, is set downe in the first Table of the Com∣mandements, and declared more at large in divers ex∣positions upon the Decalogue, and something touched upon in this Trea∣tise. p. 39
II. Your duty to∣wards
your selfe are,

1 Sobriety. p. 43
2. Chastity. 49
3. Contētment. 53

III. The duties you owe to your Master and Mistresse, are,

1. Reverence. 57
2. Feare. 60
3. Subjection. 62
4. Faithfulnes. 66
5. Obedience. 73

IV. Your duties to∣wards
your Masters children, are, 75, 76

1. Sincere love.
2. Circumspect carriage in their presence.
3. Discreete re∣proofe.

V. Towards your fellow-servants you ought to beare true affection, and to ma∣nifest the same by
indeavoring to help thē the best you can for their good p. 78
VI. With your Ma∣sters chapmen you must deale upright∣ly and justly. p. 83
VII. Towards your neighbours and ac∣quaintance, your cōversation must be harmlesse, discreet, humble, peaceable, plaine,
and modest p. 86
VIII. Towards your parents and kins∣folkes, you must shew your selfe thankefull by orde∣ring your conversa∣tion so, that they not only heare well of you by others, but heare from you of∣ten by your owne letters. p 92

 Neither is it sufficient that you performe these du∣ties in respect of the matter, unlesse you doe them in a right manner, that is to say,

1. In Sinceritie. p. 96
2. With Con∣stancie, p. 101
3. With Alacri∣tie,
p. 103
4. With Pray∣er, p. 104

III. Thirdly af∣ter you have ac∣complished the time of your apprenti∣ship, you ought not to set up for your selfe, but upon se∣rious deliberation, p. 104
IV. Fourthly and
lastly, you have here the resolution of some doubts wch may, perchance, up∣on some occasions trouble your con∣science, p. 109
Now the God of Heaven, that powred his blessings upon Eliezer, la∣cob and Ioseph, and upon other god∣ly
& religious ser∣vants, so blesse this little Treatise un∣to you, so fill you with his grace and heavenly benedi∣ction; so guide, di∣rect, protect, and defend you, that not only your Ma∣sters bussines may prosper in your hands; but that
you also may grow more and more in favour with God and with all good men. To this end let it be your care so to behave your selves in your Cal∣ling, as that it may appeare to them with whom you converse (but espe∣cially to your own
conscience) that you believe indeed, that the eye of God is upon you, imagi∣ning that you see every where writ∣ten in capitall let∣ters, CAVE, DEVS VIDET. And so I rest,

