



RIGHT NOBLE LADY,
GReat is their honour in the eies of Gods Saints, whom God, and the King doe ho∣nour; and great is your honour in mine eies, whom birth, & wealth; education, and mariage; vertue, and pietie; God, and King; haue

honoured: it behooued me, hauing receiued so many comforts and encouragements; protection, and preferment; from your thrice noble husband, and your honou∣rable selfe, (in so iustly occasio∣ned common congratulation) to haue gone before others in giuing of honour; Rom. 12.10 but, being with the throng of important occasi∣ons, kept backe, and cast behinde, yet I presume of acceptance, being assured, that I bring the best pre∣sent; for, Solomon hath witnes∣sed, there is nothing to be compa∣red to this Prou. 3.15..
Pearles, and Precious stones are of great esteeme among Prin∣ces, and Nobles; and specially a∣mong Women, who doe naturally delight in ornaments, and in cu∣rious

and artificiall decoration:Genus mulie∣rum natura or∣namentorum a∣mans, et . Pon. in Iob. 5.24 as the Embassadour of Christ; 2 Cor. 5.20 I commend to your honour, a goodly and precious Pearle, such a Pearle as maketh the wearers of it truly honourable: The Disciple whom Iesus loued (whose Gospell your soule loueth) hath said; to as many as receiue it, is this pri∣uiledge giuen, to become the sons of God Ioh. 1.12.. And the Apostle witnesseth of the Bereans; they were more noble then they of Thessalonica, in that they recei∣ued the word with all readinesse of minde, and searched the Scrip∣tures daily Act. 17.11.. Well may they be esteemed, high-borne, noble, and happie indeede, whose father is God 2 Cor. 6.8.; their brother, Christ Rom. 8.2.; their garments, righ∣teousnesse

Reu. 19.8; their foode, the hidden mannah Reu. 2.17.; their rings, chaines, and iewellsEzech. 16.11, 12.; the gra∣ces and gifts of the holy Ghost; their attendants, the Angells; their inheritance, heauen Mat. 25.34.; and reward, the crowne of Glorie1 Pet. 5.4.: Oh, this is indeed, the true resto∣ring of blood, the best part in No∣blemens Scutchions, and highest stemme in their Pedegree; for, be they nere so high, and great, and want it, they are but wretched, poore, and miserable Reu. 3.17.: Alas, what are stately houses; rich fur∣niture; costly apparell; delicate fare; delightfull musicke; all pos∣sible reuerence with tongue, cap, and knee; multitude of followers; great offices; larger euenues; and all earthly pleasures that heart

can wish (in comparison) but ve∣rie vanity, and vexation of spi∣rit? Numquid in honore, sine do∣lore. Bern. d quin{que} negot. Coll. 1718.So as Moses in nothing shewed more wisdome, then refu∣sing to be called the sonne of Pha∣raoh's Daughter; and choosing rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God, then to enioy the pleasures of sinne for a sea∣son; esteeming the reproach for Christ, greater riches then the treasures of Egypt Heb. 11.24.
I confesse, that honour is Gods ordinance; the reward of ver∣tueVrtutis pre∣mium. Arist. Ethic. 4. Aquin. 2.2. quest. 129. a 4; and of externall good things the best: to the pure, all things are pure Tit. 1.15.: yet in holy tongues, the same word doth signifie both honour and burthen▪C hubod. Heb. Honorare & onerare. because ac∣cording to the height of honour, shall be the weight of account at

the last day. I doubt not (ha∣uing had so many yeares experi∣ence) of your Ladiships growth in Grace,Quae hic hono∣rant: ibi. one∣rant. August. Epist. 23. Col. 829. and in the knowledge of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ 2 Pet. 3. vlt.; yea, I am perswaded, you shall bring forth more fruite in your age: yet, considering the times, Virtus pauco∣rum: paucorum inquam preser∣tim Nobilium Barn. Epist. 113 and our owne corrupti∣on, in a godly iealousie 2 Cor. 11.2., I thought it my duty, to put you in remembrance 2 Pet. 1.13., and to stir vp Gods graces in you 2 Tim. 1.6, that as you haue loued Christ & his Gos∣pel in sincerity Eph. 6. vlt. so you would do so still; yea, and to doe it more, not letting the Pearle lye in the heart, as in a Casket, vnder locke and key; but make a frontlet of it, letting the world see, you doe eue∣ry way seeke his honour, who hath

so many waies honoured you.
It is now full twenty yeares agoe,Aug. 28. 1623. on 1. Cor. 22. since preaching in your ho∣nours house, and commending the sauing knowledge of Christ, your Ladiship was pleased, to testifie your gracious acceptance thereof, both by priuate encouragements, and by sute in my behalfe, vnto an honourable person,My L. Meluin. then pre∣sent; which was the first stone in the foundation of my preferment; for, as he friendly promised, hee faithfully performed; so, as I am bound thankfully to acknowledg, from your Ladiships first motion it came, that now for many years, I haue enioyed my place in this Metropolitan Church, with much comfort in my calling, and parti∣cular estate. The Lord recom∣pence

an hundred fold, all the kindnesse I haue receiued from you, and yours, for whose pros∣peritie, I am your daily Orator. C.C.C. Nouemb.

