



SInce it hath pleased such as haue hitherto beene spectators, as well of my weaknesse, as of my industry in the Ministery, to pardon the one for the others sake; it is, and ever shall be my care, to haue your Lordship, (vnder whose patronage, as Honourable Successor to my worthie Founder, I now enioy the continuance of former opportunities) no witnesse of my sloth, or idlenesse. Yet these papers I produce not, either in te∣stimonie of my paines, which in so little a worke can∣not be great; or as a proofe of my diligence in polish∣ing what hereafter I meane to set forth. Rather out of indulgence to my bodily indisposition, & diligent fore cast how long my iourny is like to bee, I haue begunne after such a manner, as by Gods assistance, and your Lordships wonted coūtenance, I may hope to cōtinue. To leaue some fuller explication, then I haue found,

of the admirable consonancie betweene ancient prae∣significations, whether propheticall, typicall, or hi∣storicall, and Evangelicall relations, concerning our Saviours conception, his birth, his baptisme, passion, resurrection, and ascension (or other like parts of his humiliation, and exaltation) is the point, whereto my studies haue beene consecrated, and my observations principally directed, since I vndertooke the ministery. And in this respect, I may truly call my meditations in this kind, the first fruits of all my labours. Now of this crop, which, with reference to my poore harvest, is like to be very great, as much at least as all the rest, and as I trust most acceptable to my God; I haue brought this little Sheafe vnto your Lordship, humbly desi∣ring that you would vouchsafe to offer it vp vnto Him, by whose only blessing all the rest must bee sanc∣tified. Thus omitting longer preface, vntill I may fit it with a larger worke, I humbly commend your Lord∣ship to the gratious protection of our Heavenly Fa∣ther, and this slender pledge of my most intire obser∣vance to your benigne acceptance. 
From my study in CORPVS CHRISTI COLLEGE in Oxford: Septemb. 6. 1617. 
