



SIR,
THe end of mans creation was the service and worship of his maker; this (after the fall)
 began first in Sacrifice, whether by mans ele∣ction or Gods ordina∣tion is not revealed: certain it is, not with∣out Gods approbation and gracious acceptati∣on; for in the universal deluge, when an end of all flesh was come be∣fore him: he made pro∣vision for his service by Sacrifice, in giving order to Noah to take into the Arke of every clean beast by sevens. Gen. 7. 2.
This manner of ser∣vice
 the light of natu∣ral reason did teach the Gentiles, and Gods owne blessed ordinance continued amongst the Jews, which did serve them as it did others, not only as a testimony of their obedience to God, and dependance on him but (God so ap∣pointing) as a Type of that most perfect Sa∣crifice to be offered by Christ on the Crosse: this once offered, at the last put an end to all that went before, and
 in this one they all ex∣pired, all Levitical Sa∣crifices, but other sa∣crifices there are, and these the Gospel still retaines, there in the law, and here in the Gospel, oblations in Oblatio∣nes enim illic, obla∣tiones au∣tem & hic Iraen. ad∣vers. haeres. Vali. l. 4. c. 34. p. 429. both: amongst the people of the Jews, & in the Church of Christ, sacrifices in both: they and wee, the Jew and the Christian agree in this, that God will have Sacrifice; those holy offices of pietie to God and charity to
 man, are termed Sacri∣fices, so that I shall not feare to say there is a Christian Sacrifice; and yet of this of Chri∣stians (as of that of Jews) how quickly God growes weary, if the Heart be wanting. The heart is the salt that seasoneth, and the incense that perfumeth the sacrifice; & makes it an odour of a sweet smell, acceptable and pleasant unto God: and that our Religious ser∣vice may be a Christian
 Sacrifice: there must concurre with an holy action, a devout affe∣ction; for admit a strict and precise observation of all circumstances in the action, if there be a faile in this, the la∣bour is but lost in that: this is chiefly accepted of God, that serving to make a way of discove∣ry for man: and for mans sake, God takes no notice of this without that; dissembling his knowledge of the inmost intentions of the heart,
 & seeming not to know what it is impossible he should be ignorant of: untill by some outward expressions, it be made knowne unto man. It is not then the inward af∣fection only that (in the Heart) God calls for; as if he excluded the outward action, but the affectionate action, to doe what is to be done heartily: what is to be done, I say! for it is not left arbitrarie to the heart, to choose what shall be done, or
 left undone, admitted or omitted: but the a∣ction determined, in the well-managing thereof, is required the sincere intention, and dearest affectió of the heart: re∣specting also the ground as well as the end: ei∣ther of which negle∣cted in a duty of Reli∣gion: makes it an effect of heady zeal, not hee∣die obedience, for obe∣die is a Relative: and ever referres to some precept, Canon, Rule, decree, constitu∣tion
 or injunction: con∣formity, or at least sub∣mission whereunto; is that wee terme obedi∣ence, and obedience is better then sacrifice, or it is the best sacrifice; for hee that obeyeth, makes a sacrifice of his own heart, and a mans heart is himselfe Per obe∣dientiam voluntas propria mactatur. Greg. in ult. mor. Aq. 2. 2. Q. 104. ar. 3. resp. this is the Christian Sacri∣fice, the project of the ensuing discourse: which I have adven∣tred to expose to the view of this censorious age: where I must not
 thinke to speed better; then better then my selfe have done before me: from the learned I cannot expect that any worke of mine should merrit praise: yet doubt not, but at their hands I shall find or pitty or pardon: of others, I shalbe cen∣sured as every man stands affected; but I passe not of their cen∣sures: so long as in conscience of obedience to God, I strive in my calling to edefie his ho∣ly
 Church: this is my prime aime: And next to this is to tender un∣to you some token of thankefulnesse for your many favours, qui be∣neficia invenit com∣pedes invenit, bene∣fits are of a binding na∣ture, and a kindnes re∣ceived obliges an inge∣nious nature to requi∣tall; but where it ex∣ceeds requital, the obli∣ged must not come short of acknowledgment, & a verbal acknowledge∣ment is a poore returne
 for a reall kindnesse: 'tis all wee schollars can, our wealth is in words., and words are swift, no sooner loosed from the tongue, but lost by the eare; they may touch on the fancy by the way, but vanish before they recover the understanding: here then the pen must as∣sist the tongue, and words once spoken, af∣ter written, and pub∣lished to the more deli∣berate view of the eye: remaine as monuments
 in the mind; where they admit a review, untill the judictous be fully informed. And here∣in the disadvantage is mine, in stepping from the pulpit, to the presse; for faults which in transitu, are not espied: at gase are easily discerned; yet here againe is my hope, to meet, as with in∣dulgent eares, so with favourable aspects: and then patience and connivence will salve all defects, and so
 mine infirmities will be either not seene, or not censured: Besides I may say with the Orator, causa ago deorum, I speake in Gods cause, not mine owne: and so in his name (whose cause I undertake) may chal∣lenge acceptance.
And thus much I dare boldly say, I have not by wilfull neglect betrayed the cause in hand; but have studied omnem movere lapidem; and
 to follow Solomon so far as my wits would serve, in his plea for God: which howsoe∣ver some doe take (which doe usually mistake what they doe not understand) I am confident of your favorable acceptance, whom I know so far a freind to Learning, and lover of Religion, that what so relishes of either, finds kind en∣tertainment with you.
Go on, Noble Sir, and season the flower
 of your yeeres with the timely fruits of grace and vertue.
You want not en∣couragements in the way of goodnesse, nor need you to looke fur∣ther then your owne house: even to him, that immediatly went before you (your de∣ceased * Sir John Garrard, Knight & Baronet be∣queathed by his last will to the poore of the parish of Whet∣hamstead 20. l. per annum for ever. Father) who made you the executor of a large legacy to the poore. And left you the heire of a faire e∣state in Lands and Houses: and that
 which is the chiefest ornament of your man∣sion house, a most beautifull Chappell, a continuall and visible memento, to put you in mind of your daily dutie to the God of heaven.
And let it not be thought presumption in me, that to these I have added this as a helpe to your Devoti∣on, and to this mine uncessant prayers for the prospering of your good beginnings: And
 for the welfare and e∣verlasting happinesse of your selfe, your ver∣tuous good Lady and whole familie; shall never be wanting, the hearty desires of

