



THrice worthie Sir; if Demosthe∣nes
his Oration, lost it grace
though pronounced by Aeschi∣nes;
then much more doth rea∣ding
abate the power of speakingHabet nescio quid latenti,  vnia vox, & in aures discipuli de authoris ore transssa fortius so∣nat. Hier. Paul.: yet im∣portunitie
of liuing friends, and dutie to the
dead; haue forced me to lay aside the speech
and gestures of a liuing man; that so, (as
farre as in me lieth) I might by dead letters,
both preserue him in liuing name, whom
cruell death hath vntimely layed in dust;
and also publish to the world my loue, and
losse. Yet what a detraction is this from the
dead? that his waightie vertues, and bound∣lesse
perfections, whilst hee liued: should
(now that hee is dead) be ranged within the
narrow compasse of a few lines; and so ea∣sily
turned ouer with a few fingersEn, sum quod digitis quin{que}; leua∣tur onus. Cornel. a∣pud propert. lib. 4. Eleg. 12.?
I am bold to commend this my poore
seruice to your Worships protection, as as∣sured
of your sincere loue and affection to
him, whose memoriall it still reuiueth: as
also, for those rare good gifts of God and
nature, wherewith your person is beauti∣fied,
iustly procuring present admiration,
and future expectation. And lastly, as a to∣ken
of an obseruant and thankfull heart,

for so many very honourable and immeri∣ted
fauours, and incouragements in my Mi∣nistrie:
goe on in your holy zeale to God,
Noble carriage, and vndaunted resolution,
in actions of best and greatest consequence:
prosper in that Honourablest action vnder∣taken
in the Christian world (for these ma∣ny
yeeres) the plantation of the Church of
God, in Ʋirg, and that graciously proui∣ded
 thereof, the Barmudas, (the
 and Hogs,Matth. 8. into
which they .) The best things
are harest, and meete with greatest crosses;
but all good men, with Countenance, Per∣son,
Purse, or Prayers, and best wishes, doe
further it. Balak & Balaam shall not hinder
it; and (when all mens hearts & affections
shall be rectified) God will blesse that small
companie,1 Chro. 12 22.  Hoast of God. And
whosoeuer shall aduenture life or liuing in
so honourable a seruice to God & his Coun∣trie,Pro 10. 7.
Psal. 112. 6.
God will honor, ennoble, and eternize
their names, that they may be had in euerla∣sting
remembrance. Accept this  of
my loue, and small testimonie great de∣sires;
so shall you adde  score, till Vse
farre passeth  pardon all,
I can pay  pray for you and
yours, and .

