



HAd the consciousnesse of
my weaknesse left any
place for expectation
that my poore Labours
should have found such
benigne acceptāce with
men of higher place and
judgement, as by the report of Honourable
personages, and mine owne late experience
of your noble favours, some of them I
now perceive have found with your Ho∣nour,

these present papers had come to crave
your patronage in a better dresse than now
they doe. Besides the consciousnesse of my
inabilities to please the acurate judgements
of this age, want of opportunities for these
many yeares to give my selfe that content∣ment,
which I was once bold to promise
unto my selfe, had almost deterred me from
publishing any part of my former labours,
which were not popular, and for the Pul∣pit,
of which ranke this present Treatise is
not. The subject or matter of it is Acade∣micall,
and was conceived in that famous
Nurserie of all good literature, which for
these many yeares hath flourished, and ma∣ny
more may it flourish under your Hono∣rable
patronage. If either these, or other of
my Labours of the like argument, which
tooke their first being from the benignity of
that soile, may finde acceptance with your
Lordship, I shall need no other Apologie
for publishing them beside my unfaigned
desire to leave the Christian world a testi∣monie
of that high esteeme which I have
ever made of your Honourable favours to

that renowned Vniversity, and of my
thankfulnesse for my particular interest in
your generall goodnesse. If this manifesta∣tion
of my weaknesse may occasion other
Academickes to shew their strength in this
and like Arguments, it shall be a great part
of my joy and comfort to see better fruits of
your Lordships favour brought forth by
others, than I can present unto you. But
if these may finde that acceptance which I
most desire, your Lordship will haply bee
deemed by some, to patronize not my
weaknesse onely, but mine errors. It is not
so unusuall, nor so much for mee to be cen∣sured
for an Arminian, as it will be for your
Lordship to be thought to patronize Armi∣nianisme.
To give your Lordship that satis∣faction
therefore in this point, which I am
not bound to give unto others; If the man
which most mislikes the Arminian or Luthe∣ran
doctrine in the points most controver∣ted
through reformed Churches, will but
agree with me in these two, That the Al∣mighty
Creator hath a true freedome in doing
good; and Adams off-spring a true freedome of

doing evill; I shall not dissent from him in
any other points controverted, unlesse it be
in this one, that there needs to be no other
controversie at all betweene the Arminians
and their opposites in point of Gods Pro∣vidence
and Predestination. In all other
particulars, save onely so farre as they are re∣ducible
to these two, I have not yet the lear∣ning
or understanding to conceive, what
contradiction there is or can bee, betweene
men not willing to contend about words.
But if any in opposition to Arminius, will
maintaine that all things were so decreed by
God before the Creation of the world; that
nothing since the Creation could have fal∣len
out otherwise than it hath done, or
that nothing can bee amended what is a∣misse,
I must crave pardon of every good
Christian to oppugne his opinion, not as
an errour onely in Divinity, but as an igno∣rance
which involveth enmity to the
sweet disposition of the All-seeing and un∣erring
Providence; as a forerunner of ruine
to most flourishing States and Kingdomes
where it growes common, or comes to full

height. For supplanting or preventing the
growth of such opinions, I make bold to
crave your Lordships patronage. Thus
with my continuall praiers for your Lord∣ships
health, with all increase of honor and
happinesse, I humbly take my leave.
From my Study in
Newcastle upon Tine.
November 20. 1627.

