



WOrthy Sir, I can truly say, my greatest, and (in effect) on∣ly joy, in this world, is, ei∣ther to be preaching, or pre∣paring for it; fishing, or mending my net. That which to many is a great paine and wearisomnesse, is to me greatest plea∣sure and content. I finde that saying of Saint Augustine most true; Wherein a man de∣lighteth there is no labour; or, that labour is lo∣ved In eo quod ama∣tur, aut non ; aut labor ipse amatur. August.. It is a true saying, that Printing is a kinde of Preaching Ambo verbum praediion, hic qui∣dem scripto, ille ve∣ro voce. Clem. Alex. Stromat. lib. 1.; and though not Euangelizo, manu, & scripte. Rei∣nold. praesat. in lib. de Rom. Eccles. Ido∣lat. so plausible and effectuall to perswade;

(wanting the habit and gesture of a li∣ving man, the life of Oratorie Solet acceptior es∣se sermo vivus, quā scriptus. Bern.) yet is it both of larger extent, (seeing a man may preach to moe with his penne, than he can with his tongue, and be further heard out of the Presse, than the Pulpit) the matter delivered more memorable, (af∣fording greater leave to pause and consi∣der) and also of longer continuance; for a dead man may live in his bookes, and by them preach to the living, though un∣borne, when he dieth. I would account it a double happinesse, if I could doe good both waies, and could truly say with that blessed and prime Apostle, I thinke it meet, as long as I am in this Taberna∣cle, to stir you up: Moreover I will endevour, that you may be able, after my decease, to have these things alwaies in remembrance 2 Pet. 1. 13.. Oh, now is the time (if ever) for Ministers of the Gospell instantly to preach the Word 2 Tim. 4. 2.; and now (if ever) to presse the practise of re∣pentance: Gods judgements are abroad in the world Esay. . 9., and can no other way be pre∣vented Matth. 3. 7, 8. Luke 13. 5..

As I am bound by mine office to preach the word, (and woe be to me if I doe it not 1 Cor. 9. 16.) so hath my loving master (whom I have now served, in foure full apprentiships) well deserved, that I should faithfully lay out, and trade with such gifts, as he hath committed to my trust 1 Tim. 1. 11.; as may be for his greatest advantage Matth. 25. 27..
The desire of my soule, is (the evening of my life drawing on, and the shadowes thereof stretching out Ierem. 6. 4.) not only to be found well doing Matth. 24. 46.; and to have my gray haires a Crowne, being found in the way of vertue Prov. 16. 31.; but that I may bring forth more fruit in mine age Psal. 92. 14.; and my last workes be moe than the first Rev. 2. 19.; that when I shall lay downe this earthly Tabernacle 2 Pet. 1. 14., (whose Keepers begin to trem∣ble Eccles. 12. 3.) and shall come to render an account of my Stewardship Luke 16. 2., I may receive such com∣mendation and reward, as he hath gra∣tiously promised Luke 19. 17..
I doe humbly commend these few Ser∣mons to your Worship, as a supply of my needfull and allowable absence Alterius Ecclesia necessitatibus evo∣catus, minimè vobis solitum studium de∣pendisse videor. Amb. Serm. 28., from that part of the Church, to which my

goodwill is, not only to deale the Gos∣pell of God, but even mine owne soule also 1 Thess. 2. 8.. Accept them, both as a fruit of my love, to the good things I have observed in you, and desire the increase of; and also, as a testification of my service, and thank∣fulnesse, for all such manifold curtesies and encouragements, as I have received from your worthy selfe, and the rest of your Christian and religious family Read them at your leasure, regard, remember, and practise; and Christ blesse your hea∣ring and reading, to the furtherance of your salvation: to whose blessed directi∣on and protection, I commit you and yours; and remaine ever,

