



THe great and long afflictions which it hath pleased God to call me vnto, on∣lie for testifying his heavenly truth against the grie∣vous corruptions of the Church in our Land, are well knowen vnto you all, my most deare and loving friends. In the middest of which my troubles what comfort J have receaved from you, though I publish not, yet both a most thankefull remembrance thereof re∣maineth in my heart, and with God a most precious recompence is laid vp for you at the last day. I confesse, I might og since have ben discouraged through many things which I finde both within
and without me. Besides, I have not escaped the bytings of false brethren. Also I am not ignorant that divers (yea of those that least should) doe not only distast, but also speake evill of my innocencie without all cause. In very deed they can not tell why: But God the righteous Iudge seeth it, who yet stil su∣stayneth and strengthenth my infirmi∣tie, by whose grace J am that I am. Wherefore in his Name J do still beare witnesse to the truth denyed by many men; & do now take in hand to intreat heere concerning the Christian peoples power & right ofAlso cō∣sequētly, that a true Church vnder the Gospell cō∣taineth no mo ordina∣ry Congre∣gations thē one: & is not Dioce∣san proper∣ly. free consent in their outward spirituall governement given thē by Christ Jesus in the Gospell. And therefore to his gracious assistance heerein I also do trust. In the which af∣faire I thinke it very behoofull for the better manifestation of my lawful and iust indeavour, and no lesse needfull for Gods glory, to speake to this matter propounded in this Treatise, not my selfe alone, but to shew openly vnto all (who have but a sparke of love to the truth) such an Attestation of faithfull and worthy Witnesses with mee in this
matter being the maine foundation of our greatest controversie touchinge Church governement, that I hope here∣after none will set against this my see∣king both of mine owne and your soules good, nor cavill at it, but such as are too worldly and too earthly minded. In my Discourse vpon this cause, as touching obiections,D Down De∣fenc Anno. 1611. chiefly I gather out of Do∣ctor Downame such as seeme to any purpose, & J answer them. Him beere J specially deale with, because of a friend he is not long since turned from vs, and become our adversarie, yea the latest (I thinkc) which openly sheweth him selfe against vs, and so is like to be (now) most in mens eyes: also hee hath heaped togeather the most thinges that the best of such Defenders have heere∣tofore written. Besides all this, the ma∣ner of his writings is with such anDefence. 1. pag. 16 17. 2. pag 122. in∣solent conceit of him selfe, & with suchDefence 2. pag 55. 15. contempt, indignation, and despite a∣gainst vs, as commonly is not seene in any but those that slide backe from the truth which they had once tacted of. And withall, though in his De∣fence he deale with another, yet in ma∣ny
passages hee very sharply provoketh me in particular, besides other wrongs that he hath done me, well knowen. For these causes both I write this that I do, and I chieflie nominate him for our ad∣versarie; as in this treatise, so alsoIn the De∣claration. els∣where. My Christian and loving friends, for whose sake most of all, I labour and have laboured to make our said question which is long, intricat, & trouble some, to be short and plaine, and to make the matter it selfe also appeare so waightie, as indeed it is: Now your partes are wisely and religionsly to pon∣der in your heartes, and to make vse of this same. As the Apostle spake to Timothie, so do I vnto you: Consider, Brethren, what I say: and the Lord give you vnderstanding in all things. Amen. Iuly 18. Anno 1612.

