



MADAME, its well knowne, that Apologies are, (for the most) of small praise, or profit; being but ei∣ther excuses of prece∣dent euill effects; or fu∣ture bad accidents likely to follow: yet seeing necessity is put vp∣on me; I must say somewhat, though, to vse the Apostles phrase, I speake like a Foole. Your Ladiship cannot be igno∣rant, how Satan and his instruments, in all Ages haue indeuoured to hinder both

the libertie, and dignitie of the Word, that it might not runne and be glorified. Hence sprang these bitter speeches: Is not this the Carpenter, the sonne of Mary? Can any good thing come out of Naza∣ret? Is Saul among the Prophets? How know these vnlettered men the Scrip∣tures? When went the Spirit of God from me, to thee? Is not this Sect spoke euill against euery-where? Was not John said to haue a Deuill? Paul reputed a pestilent fellow? and Iesus Christ the righteous a notorious sinner? One cryeth out, He de∣ceiueth the People: another, He is an e∣nemy to Caesar: a third, And hath he not spoke blasphemie? And, let these men a∣lone, all the world will follow them. And as it hath beene, so it is: for as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses: so doe many in our dayes, resist the truth. And marke their cunning, labouring to bring the Prophets, and Preachers to be contem∣ned; that the doctrine might not take effect, and be entertayned. Who then must stand in this gap, role away this stone, and preuent this euill, stop those

wide mouthes, plucke the venom from vnder their tongues, and be able to keepe in grace, the Word of Grace, but you and such as be of your Worth, Ranke, and Profession? Therefore I haue made the more bold, to prefixe your Ladiships name, in the front of this my weake and pale Infant; as a speciall remedy, to make all his enemies, at the very sight thereof to fall backward; their tongues to cleaue to the roofes of their mouthes, and their very hearts to tremble: so that none dares stretch forth a hand, or bend his brow, to hinder him in his pretended iourney, vn∣till he haue past in peace, and saluted his dearest friends. More reasons might bee added, for to excuse this my boldnesse. The great loue you euer bare to him, for whose sake it was conceiued: Your per∣sonall presence at its birth: And was it not hee that fetcht mee from the Fountayne, cōducted me from thence to your Coun∣trey, counted me worthy, and euer gaue me countenance vntill his change? Why then (though most vnworthy worke in re∣spect of its worth) yet shall it not finde

fauour at your hands for his sake? Let him doubt that list, I will not: except change of time giue iuster occasion. And thus commending you to the protection of him that ruleth all in all things, these my first fruits to your Patronage, with my selfe to your seruice and cen∣sure I humbly take my leaue: From my studie at Ply∣mouth: euer re∣mayning

