



I Am constrained (good Sir) to satisfie your desire in so small a request, as the publishing of those lines, whereunto some∣times you in your owne person gaue attention; and after the deliuery, an acceptable appro∣bation. Now if it be well done, you were the first mouer, and deserue the honour of the action: but if not, I cannot impute the fault to any, except my selfe. Well; howeuer it be, I haue but done your desire, and my owne duty: for I freely confesse, that your loue (many waies manifested to me) deserues aboue my abilitie to make equall requital, propor∣tionable satisfaction. You are well acquainted with my familiar phrase, rude manner of speaking; therefore I cease to make any apology or defence in my owne behalfe: yet truth is truth, that as good
 cloath may haue the coursest colour; the most precious stone bee put in the vncleanest corner, and sometimes set too in the impurest mettall: so may matter of great worth bee couched vnder a meane stile, and come to view in a familiar and plaine habit. For as the siluer vessell, in which the meate is dished, doth not adde to the essence of the dyet, but comlinesse and content: no more doe choise words to the truth deliuered; only they may giue some outward glosse which may de∣light, and thats all.
Might I speake my opinion, then it is this: I doe affect and commend Rhetorique and elegancie of speech with any, of any (for therein the wisedome of God shineth): But to haue queint phrase, and a neate stile amongst the vulgar, is, though lawfull, not expedient. Hee therefore that will benefit the rude people, must speake plainely, carry a low sayle, and descend to their capacities. Was not our Lord Christ Wisdome it selfe? did hee not notwithstanding, draw similitudes from the most familiar and common things; as the hiding of lea∣uen, the loosing of a groat, and children playing in the market place?
Who wiser (except the first and second Adam) then Salomon? yet none plainer then hee in his Prouerbs: He telleth of wringing the nose; chur∣ning of milke; and of a ring in a Swines snout: was this want of art, wisdome, or learning? Where∣fore let him that can and will (amongst the sim∣ple) grapple with his Greeke; flourish with his Fathers; bring foorth farre fetcht Etymologies,
 and obscure Hebraismes; but as for me, I either cannot, or will not. And thus I commend you, with all yours, vnto God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build further, and to giue you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. Amen.
 From my Study in Plymmouth,
Iuly 8. 1618.
