



WOrthie Sirs, and much respected friends, the truth is, that if I would follow the fashion▪ of the world, you should then receiue a large commendation. For, sure I am, many a man hauing narrower footing, hath leaped farre; a smaller bottome spun a long thread; and of lesse matter e∣rected a stately building. But I, to shun the
 appearance of flattry, silence the carping aduersarie; and that, another day, my hand might not cry my heart mercy, will turne my prayses of you, into prayers for you, and exhortations to you, that, as you haue begunne well; so you may neuer waxe wearie, or proud in so doing. You are stiled Gods, able by your example to bring good or euill into fashion: the gouernment of the inferiour lies vpon your shoulder. Where∣fore, doe iustice; and take heede of quitting the guiltie, and condemning the innocent. But let iudgement runne downe as the wa∣ters, and righteousnes as a mightie streame. In thisAmos. 5. 24. sea there must be no ebbing nor flowing: the bankes at euery season, are to be full, swelling ouer. Neither is this streame to be staied for a moment, or turned another way. If it should, iniquity in the meane time would take her place: and whosoeuer drawes, and drinkes of that puddle, shall dye the death. Moreouer, you may not mixe it, the mudde of iniustice with the pure fountaine of righteousnesse: for, that will hinder the current from sliding through the channels of Iudicature, so cleerely and
 speedily, as the Iudge of all the world ex∣pecteth, commaundeth. And, that this wels mouth may not be stopped, this streame stayed; or, by any vncleane carkase cast into it, putrified; but runne strongly, purely, and spring for euer: in your elections remember lethroes counsell to Moses, Choose youExod. 18. 20. 21. 22. 1 Cor 5. 6. out able men, fearing God, leuers of the truth, and ha∣ting couetousnes, though to be an inferiour offi∣cer. Will not a little leauen, leauen the whole lumpe? And tel me, whē is the riuer, troubled? at any time? but when the mud is raised vpward, & the cleere water falleth downeward? Let the righteous rule, there wil be rest: but if the wicked beare sway, troubles shall come. Who wil put a sword into a mad mans hād? will he not beare it for nought? ingender strife, & cōceiue mischiefe? Depresse the pro∣fane23. puddle, exalt the cleare water: then shal God be with you, and all the people al∣so goe home to their place in peace. I speakeIo 13. 10. the truth, I dare not flatter; you are cleane (may I not adde) but not all? Its a rare societie, that consists of none but Saints, a singular body without all blemish; and may we, can wee finde a corporation, that hath no vnsound
 member in it? Will you credit me? haue you but one such? I could wish there were none at all. I accuse no mans person: Euery one must fall or stand vnto his owne master, & the wrath of man doth not accomplish the iustice ofIames. 1. 20. Reu. 22. 11. God. Wherefore, he who is righteous, let him be righteous still; and if any be filthy, let him wash2 Kin. 5. 13. and be cleane. And, not to weary you with words; here you haue at the last, what some of you long since desired at my hands, viz. the first lectures at my comming to you, I preach't among you. Now may the wise see, what the world hath carped at, and the Preacher full often bin blamed for; as if the earth had not beene able to haue borne his words, nor he for the bitternesse of his spirit worthy to set a foot in Gods sanctuary. I confesse my corne may be mix∣ed with chaffe, my coyne haue some slips; and my zeale not altogether according to knowledge; yet, my desire in Preaching & printing these Sermons, was and is, that sinne might be mortified, holines vivified, God our master after the best manner ser∣ued, and both speaker and hearer at the last day saued.

Here you haue onely the beginning, but if the Lord will you may see, and receiue the ende of my labours with you. Truly, I shall greatly reioyce, if my weake indea∣uours proue, in the least measure, to you or any other profitable; and that they may, as∣sure your selues, my prayer according to my power, to him, shall not be wanting, who is only able to giue a blessing. And thus commending you to God, I take my leaue; and will during life, alwayes rest
From Halifax in Yorkshire, August, 19, 1624.

