



Worthy Sirs,
ITs a true saying, That one sinner de∣stroyeth much good.Eccl. 9. vlt. For like a bad Tree, he possesseth the place of a better: And (though barren)
 devoureth equall nutriment with him that beareth. Be∣sides,Luk 13.7. he Cumbers the ground, bring foorth ill fruite, wheso∣ever he stands.2. Chro. 10 13.14 Let Rehoboam be rooted in the land of Iudah the grave Counsell of the aged is reiected, that of greene youth is accepted: he findes shields of Gold,1 King. 14.27. leaves them of brasse: And, in taxing of the subiect, makes his little finger heavier, than the whole body of his father. Set a Pilat in the soyle of iudicature,Mat. 27.26 periurie is approved, Barabbas delive∣red; And Iesus Christ the righ∣teous condemned. Plant a proud Pharisee in the vine∣yard of the Church,Math. 23.5. &c he glorieth in swelling tytles, claimes the highest roome at the Table, And covets the chiefest seate in the Synagogue. He tythes
 Mint, Cummin;Luk. 11.42 omits mer∣cy, truth; straines at a Gnat, swallowes a Camell; violent∣ly pressing the traditions of men,Mat. 23.3. desparatly neglecting the Commandments of God: He saith, and doth not; point∣ing at the way to heaven by speech, treading the path to hell by practise: And (O shameles hipocrit) the Phyla∣cteries vpon his garmēts,Mar. 12.40 are the largest; his prayers in the Temple, are the longest. And if this, be thus? Why then are the prophane Prodigalls reputed kind men? styled good fellowes? And enemies to none,Iosh. 22.2 except themselves? Did not one man sin, And wrath fell on all the Congregation?2. Sam. 21 Was not the whole land plagued, in the dayes of David, three yeeres together with famine
 because Saul and his bloody house slew the Gibeonits? Read and see. And from this ground, may we not be glad when vnfruitfull trees are cut downe?Exod. 15.1. What did Moses? Deborah?Iudg. 5.1. Let it goe well with the righteous, doth not the Citie reioyce?Pro. 11.10. And when the wicked perish, is there not shouting? Will it not also follow hence, that its a wor∣thy worke, by lawful meanes to remove gracelesse men?2 King. 10.24. To roote them out, of Church, Countrey, Kingdome? But not to aime beyond the marke; Let me be bold, from the wise kings proverb, to advise you, exhort you; that in all your elections you lay hands rashly on no man.Tim. 5.22 Call to minde Iothams parable. Plant a bramble in your Citie,dg. 9.14, 18 he will
 hang on each good mans sleeve; And if not teare your flesh, yet prick your fingers. Set him in the Sanctuarie,Mat. 21.13 your Fathers house will be a denne of Theeues. Place him where you please,Luk. 13.7. he shall make the ground barren: Or else ever hold me guiltie of a damnable lye. For your selues, like Iob,Iob. 29.14. be clothed with the Garment of iustice: filled with the fruite of righteous∣nesse. In your old-age,Phil. 1.11. be fat & flourishing. Governe your fa∣milies well:Psal. 92.14. So shall you the Citie better.Eph. 6.4. Nurse vp your Children in the feare of God: And (if need require) let them marrie. Tread not in the steppes of bastard Protestants;1. Cor. 7.36 who will yoke their sonnes to vntamed hei∣fers, if but laden with thicke
 clay: Their Daughters to ve∣rie Asses, have they pastures large enough. Graffe yours in∣to Gods stocke:1 Cor. 7.39 And account your Prayers, their greatest portion. Let others halt be∣tweene two opinions; but as Ioshuah, doe you, and yours serve the Lord.Iosh. 24.15 If you de∣mand, why this little treatise is directed to you? My de∣fence is at hand. Did you not (vnexpected) give me a free and generall call, to be one of your Citie Lacturers? Shall I be thought worthy to speak, And not to write vnto you? Againe; when one meane failes, to manifest affection, gratefull minds will vse ano∣ther. The Law, after Adams fall, was vnable to revive him: Then did not God re∣veale the Gospell? In the like
 case, may not his practise be my president? Moreover, (not to boast) of all the pa∣pers I ever penned, these, by my iudicious friends, have bin best approved, most desi∣red to be published. And final∣ly, how I love you, my soule knoweth right-well. But no∣thing doubting of your ac∣ceptance, I commend you to God, & the word of his grace;Acts 20.32 which is able to build further, And to give you an inheri∣tance among all them that are Sanctified.

