



GIVE me leaue I beseech you (Fathers and Brethren right honorable & beloved in Christ) in so great and necessary a case to reply and Defend my selfe in such wise as becommeth me against the vnseeme∣ly writings of a mā, who indeed, I aknow∣ledg, in the world is far greater then I am. Yet forasmuch as the Cause which heere I maintaine is right and iust, as to any man I hope it shall soone appeare that will simply and soberly trie it by the Scriptures: Againe in regard of mine owne person and poore credit, although meane in the world, yet by Gods mercie such as in conscience I am bound by all honest and Christian meanes to preserue, see∣ing he so strangelie traduceth & accuseth me in his booke as is almost incredible, I am therfore of necessitie (as I take it) to open my mouth at this time, and specially in the be∣halfe of that doctrine, which I am vndoubtly perswaded, for the substance of it, that hither vnto I with infinit mo in England haue truly & faithfully taught. And albeit I finde my selfe very vnequall to try any question with him, who is so high in authoritie, so prompt of witt, so exquisit in learning, my selfe in all things so despised and rejected as I am by him and some others: insomuch that I might iust∣lie be altogeather terrified and wholly turned away (were my cause neuer so good) frō maintayning the same against him: yet surely, God is my witnes, it seemeth to mee so
easy and so plaine to defend, togeather with the necessitie of duetie binding me (as likewise indeed all mē els I think) to stande therevnto, that I could not choose but speake a∣gaine in this matter, and cleere it againe so well as I can from his further weake exceptions, and vnsufficient obie∣ctions against it. Neyther let any man thinke that in thus doing I greatly please my selfe, or seeme vnwilling to let others to vtter their iudgments heerevpon. Nay surely it is the thing that heerein chiefly I desire, even that others, yea many others (if so it may seeme good vnto thē) would declare their mindes touching this new doctrine sprung vp from Winchester, and likely to bring a common cala∣mitie with other errors mo vpon our Churches in Eng∣land, because I feare that not a few among vs, are, & wilbe troubled therewith. And so I doubt not but it will most amply appeare how Holy & true a doctrine this is, which he so disdainfully skoffeth at and reprocheth, beeing well assured that even the most learned and godly Teachers in this land, Defendours of the trueth against Poperie, as wel before time as now at this day vnder our gracious Queene, doe concurre & agree with my opinion herein. This if it shall please God that I may see, it wil far more exceedingly please me to beholde, then whatsoever myne owne vn∣skilfulnes hath or can vtter. In the meane while, I beseech thee, Christian Reader, consider duly with thy selfe, not who speaketh, but what is spoken by eyther of vs. As for me, I am not ashamed to testifie with all duetie, though after my simplicitie, in the behalfe of the Gospell of Christ against mens improbable conjectures: which my trust is that the godly and sober minded will take in good worth vprightly, even as my heart meaneth it (the Lord know∣eth) sincerely. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ bee with you all. Amen.

