



IT hath been the custome of them
that penned the Booke of Bookes,
the Bible, to direct seuerall wri∣tings
to some particular and pri∣uate
persons, although it was in
their mindes, that the Church in
generall should also receiue edifica∣tion
and comfort by them. So then I haue in this respect
trod in their stepps, whose patterne cannot but be worth
the imitation. Were it as conuenient, as lawfull, I would
fully haue set downe your name: but (to auoide the least
appearance of euill) I haue omitted that; and though
many reasons might be produced, why I made choice of
you before others, yet it would be tedious, and to no pur∣pose
to relate them; wherefore let these following suf∣fice.
I assure my selfe that it will be well accepted, and
(as from the hands of a true (though meane) friend)
receiued. I also (so farre as my iudgement leades me)
verily beleeue, that the Lord hath begun his good worke
in you: wherefore, though the meanes be but weake, the
powerfull Creator can vse it, as an instrument to fur-ther

the same. He that could cure the blind man with clay
and spittle, can produce the like effects by an ordinarie
meanes, who doubteth? I will not proclaime to the eares
of the world, what kindnesses I haue receiued from you
(for that might seeme to smell of flattery; or by a more
secret manner of begging, to craue some future fauour).
But this I will onely mention, that it is out of Christian
affection, and a singular desire of your good & comfort;
as also to declare my remembrance of you, that I haue in
this kind put pen to paper. And to say much in one
word: If I haue more than an ordinary affection to any
priuate person, the current thereof runneth towards your
selfe. Let these lines (what euer they be) therefore the
rather find a friendly entertainement: and not so onely,
but especially striue to apply them to what end I haue
aimed at, in the penning of them. They will plainely de∣clare
vnto you, by what meanes we are to stand iust be∣fore
God; of which mystery the vulgar people are (for
the most part) ignorant of, or not thorowly grounded in▪
Againe, you shall find in them, that the spiritual estate
of a Christian is secret, not onely to others, but often hid∣den
from himselfe, especially at the time of his effectuall
vocation; for then he is like the late manured field, na∣ked
and bare, without the least true apprehension, or
sight of sauing grace, and good graine in the furrowes of
his soule. By this you may vnderstand, who are the rea∣pers
of Gods greatest benefits. And finally, you shall
euidently see confuted the opinion of those, that hold
there is no mirth or comfort in a Christian course; who
cry out, what? turne Puritane? become a Precisian?
then farewell all ioy, and welcome melancholy. But we
say (leauing those names to whom they of right pertaine)

that faith in the promises of God, and obedience to his
precepts, will expell feare, quiet the troubled soule, and
make a sad heart the merriest man in the world: for
faith in the Gospell sets vs euen with God; and obedi∣ence
to the Law, will bring vs to his presence, where all
the righteous and vpright-hearted, shall bathe them∣selues
in Riuers of pleasure, that shall neuer be dried vp,
but spring, flow, and be full for euer. To the which
the Lord bring you in a conuenient season,
through the merits of his Sonne, by the
hand of his blessed Spirit. A∣men,
Amen.

