



IN gratefulnesse (Right Wor∣shipfull) hath been condem∣ned amongst the very Hea∣then,Plin. in prolog de naturl hist. Senec 1 de be∣neficijs. ep 48. and reputed a vice to bee abandoned, and as a fruit pro∣ceeding from a wicked and an vnhappie minde.Bernar sup. Cant. Ch ys super Matth. The Fathers too in former times haue auouched, that it is the enemie of the soule, the extenuation of desert, the dispersion of vertue, perdition of benefits; a bur∣ning winde, drying vp the fountaine of pietie, the spring of pittie, the influence of grace; and a sinne that neuer goeth vnpunished:Luk. 17.17. yea our Lord con∣demnes the nine Leapers, that they returned not to giue thankes for their cure;2. Tim. 3 2. and the Apostle makes it a damnable sinne, that shall sprout vp in the last dayes. Wherefore if I should suffer the fauours to slip out of my minde, that I haue recei∣ued
 from you, I could not cleere my selfe from the foule censure of an vngratefull person: But what haue I to render, except words, for all your kindnesses? yet were they good, then might I bee glad, and you receiue some acceptable gratuitie; but howsoeuer they be, know, that had the Lord put better into my mouth, I had deliuered them willingly with my hand, and freely from my heart vnto you. I confesse that when I little expected any fauour from you, you furthered mee, not by word, but deed, in my studies at the Vniuersitie; and that not once, but often. And now I, (as vn∣expectedly, I iudge) haue sent to your hands, one of the first fruits of my labours: in the manner there is some similitude, but in the matter no e∣quall proportion.
Your Worship must not expect from mee curious diuision, rare inuention, Rhetoricall composition, or ambition of quotation: for I am one of the other day, a Babe pluckt from my mothers breast, by a kinde of force; and sent to feed others, before I my selfe was well able to digest stronger meate, and bread of a harder concoction. But not to grow tedious, I presume of your patronage, and willing ac∣ceptation, though not for the dignitie of the worke, or desert of the Authour (which is ve∣ry little); yet because I know, you know, that Gifts are not to bee accepted or reiected, for their greatnesse, and goodnesse; but princi∣pally in respect of the intention and affection of the giuer. And thus referring the worke to
 your Censure, and my selfe in all willingnesse to doe you seruice, I commend you to the Al∣mighty, who stablish you in euery good word, and worke, to doe his will. Amen.

