



RIght Honourable, I find in common experience that euery Author fitteth the patronage of his long labour, vnto some personage of esteeme: and in knitting vp his resolution, presumeth vpon the fa∣uour of such a one, as in his long debated conceit, best vnderstan∣deth the subiect whereon hee laboureth: Euen so I, being h at∣tened forth by other mens good haps, haue only made choise of your honour, vnder whose fauour I hope to be protected: and finding it my duty (considring the honor it hath pleased God to bestow vpon you) to rest my labor vppon so worthy a rocke. The causes mouing me to this worke might be many, but es∣pecially foure. First, the examples of good iustice done by your predecessors. Secondly, the christian and charitable patterns left for after ages, by their exam¦ples. Thirdly, how many poore in this citty and else-where are relieued to the worlds end, by their liberalities and godly prouisions. And fourthly but princi∣pally (Right Honorable that which no good subiect will obiect against) the great mercy of God, in blessing this little land with so precious a Prince, in whose raigne may be told to after ages, that neuer any one age heard before, that 43. Lord Mayors of this Citty, haue seene 43. yeares all in peace, vnder so gracious a Soueraigne: In peace one yeae to take place, and in that great bles∣sing (Peace) the next yeare to resign againe (God long preserue that root from whence such blossomes spring.) I had thought to haue put it out naked, but be∣ing better aduised, I haue in duty (being a poore Citizen) presented your Ho∣nor with the first fruit of my labour, praying pardon at your kind hands for my rash and rude presumption vpon your patience, if I shal any way offend. I haue in this collection dealt as faithfully towardes euery particular personage, as I find recorded, and (I trust) giuen no cause of offence to any good knight, either liuing or deceased. Thus finishing my taske in your yeare of gouernement, I shall daily pray to God for your Honours good successe.

