


RIght high, mightie, and gracious Sove∣raigne, in most humble wise your Maiesties loyall & devoted Subiects who for the safe∣tie of our soules desire the Reformatiō of our Churches according to Gods word, do cast downe our selves in the true affection of our heartes before your Royall presence, whom we acknowledge to be the noblest pillar of the Gospell and the greatest hope for the propagation and establishing thereof that is in all Christendom. Beseeching your Highnes to extend your Kingly ayde and furtherance vnto vs in our foresaid most neces∣sarie and iust desire, with protection also toward our innocen∣cies against the Oppression of our Adversaries in this cause. Their Oppressions of vs are and have ben many, very grievous. and of long continuance. For the which we▪ have knowen that your Maiestie formerly hath ben touched with a godly & tender com∣miseration towards vs. As it is with all humble thankfulnes ac∣knowledged (to your immortall honor) by * a Reverend Father,M. Cartwe. Epist. to the King be∣fore his Ho∣mil. on Ec∣cles. one that heeretofore tasted therof, and now lately sleepeth in the Lord. The truth of God maintayned then, is the very same which we now dutifully seeke for. Our consciences are rather more certified of the goodnes and necessitie of these Ordinances of God, by how much more tyme we have spent since in examining and trying the Reasons alleaged to and fro about the same. The great increasing also of Papistes and Libertines among vs since this time, assureth vs that the present Ecclesiasticall Orders are
more friendly to them then to the synceritie of the Gospell. Be∣sides, the most lamentable dissentions and diversitie of opinions in matters of Religion breaking foorth every where among the people (contrary to lovely Vnitie, which the Diocesan Bishops do vainly pretend to be a proper fruit of their Office, and con∣trary to that which other Churches refusing them and their Tra∣ditions do sweetly inioy) this animateth vs with all dutifull in∣deavour to seeke this Reformation aforesaid so divinely cōmen∣ded vnto vs. Lastly, we have had it from your Maiestie very oft, that whatsoever things in our Churches we can shew to be Con∣trary to Gods word, shalbe by your gracious meanes removed: and whatsoever (yet out of vse with vs) may appeare by Gods word to be Necessary; shall be established. May it please your most gracious Majestie, let this word stand. We crave, we desire nothing more. And lesse then this how can we desire? I hope it is shewed and declared competently in the Treatise following that the matters in question wherewith our consciences are trou∣bled, are in very truth Contrary to Gods Word. And heere we most humbly beseech your Majestie on our bended knees to think of vs no otherwise. The Lord is witnes to our soules, we by not; that of meere conscience to God we seeke the right, and refuse the wrong, namely these Humane Traditions Ecclesiasti∣call: and not (as our Adversaries suggest) of any contentious or peevish mind. There is no other reason in the world moving vs in this matter, but because we see it with our eyes that all such things are directly Contrary to Gods word; and that Christes owne Ordinances which yet we want are necessary to be enjoyed for our soules health. They are vaine words of men vnadvised, yea of corrupt mindes, and studying to flatter, which cease not to inculcat (and specially in greatest presence) that these thinges are Indifferent, and arbitrary. I pray God it com not to passe by such reasoning, that many will hold all things indifferent like∣wise: indifferent of what Religion they be: indifferent whether of any, or of no Religion. Which conceits I feare already are entered in to the hearts of many, yea of thousands in England. But we beleeve (and the truth is) Gods word never knew any in∣differency in matters of the Church or of Religion: wherein all
things (whether great or small) have ever ben either simply good or evill, necessarie or vnlawfull. Our Adversaries do sharply rise vp against vs, and labour to charge vs with most odi∣ous reproches and accusations, chiefly laid out to your Majestie and others neere you. Where as they know well, that we com nothing short of themselves touching any duty to your Highnes Crowne and Dignitie. And in affection to your person we haue ben before them all, yea then when it hath gon the harder with vs for it. Only in a point of Religion we differ from them, that we beleeve Gods written Word ought to be our sole warrant for all things Ecclesiasticall, and even so namely for those with vs now in controversie, if at all they be lawfull. Which point they vtterly deny. And for this cause they cry out importunatly that we are Schismatikes. There is no end of their speeches and writings loading vs with this extreame injurie. Wherevnto though we haue to long vsed more then patient silence, yet all∣wayes we can not do so.Ierom. ad Pammach. We are taught by a worthy saying of an ancient Divine; Jn crimine Haereseos neminem oportet esse pa∣tientem. When any is accused of Haeresie or Schisme, (as we are) he ought by no meanes to put it vp in silence, but to make his lawfull defense, Wherefore I thought it needfull (being, though the meanest of my brethren, yet by Gods grace one of his ser∣vants in the Ministery of the Gospell, and being not only in ge∣nerall, but alsoAnswer to the hū∣ble Petiti∣on of Mi∣nisters de∣siring Res. &c. in particular thus traduced by them) needfull therefore I thought it to be to giue out som Reasons of our faith and conscience in this cause. Whereby our innocencie & sound judgment heerein (through Gods blessing) shalbe made mani∣fest, and our Adversaries chiefest evasions being taken away the truth and necessity of this Reformation is more distinctly and cleerely demonstrated. I deny not (most noble Prince) but that there be divers Brethren desiring this Reformation, who yet affirme not all that I affirme in this Treatise, or something not so fully. Neither are the Diocesan Bishops, nor their fol∣lowers, all wholy of one mind. Yet touching vs, I know we wholy agree in the groūd of our desire; which is the Sufficiency and perfection of Gods word in whatsoever matters meerely Ec∣clesiasticall. I say, meerely Ecclesiasticall. For in matters any
way Civil no man doubteth but God hath left liberty vnto mans judgment and liking. Howbeit not so in things meerely Eccle∣siasticall; as after shall further be shewed, God willing. And thus every sober minded man well considering the Reasons heereaf∣ter deduced from this ground, will (I hope) in short time not hardly accord with vs.
But now it remayneth (Gracious Soveraigne) that I intreate your Majestie, which in most lowly and humble maner I do, to pardon my boldnes. First in gathering these Reasons, & to such a purpose as heere is signified. Secondly in presenting them to your Highnes. Thirdly in presuming heerein to alleage and cite some of your owne goulden sentences. Your religious wisedom easilie perceaveth that this purpose, beside mine owne due de∣fence; concerneth a most waightie and holy work: viz. the Re∣formation of many and great disorders (as we are perswaded) in our Churches, which hitherto haue ben the proper causes of vn∣speakeable hinderance to the Gospell, and of calamitie to infinit faithfull lovers thereof among vs. In which regard how glori∣ous a worke this will be and how acceptable to God, how hono∣rable for your selfe, and how necessary for vs, your Highnes (I am sure) right well vnderstandeth; and I hope by viewing these small labours of mine you may somwhat more vnderstand. My desire was to be brief and plaine in so important a cause. Wherefore I haue touched the pith of all in a few, namely in 4. Assertions for∣tified with short and cleere proofes. And to whom ought I chief∣ly to offer them but to your Highnes? Cōsidering that you have willed vs to prease by patience and well grounded Reasons to per∣swade all the rest to like of our iudgements,In Basilicon Doron, to the Reader. or where we see better grounds on the other part to incline therevnto. Which by Gods grace we shalbe ready alwayes to performe. Considering also that yours is the Soveraign power heere to give generall redresse to these our not only temporall, but also spirituall grievances in our consciences. And considering that you not only know, but also embrace and professe most religiously the same maine Prin∣ciple of our faith and ground of this perswasion of our Consci∣ences which we rest vpon: viz. The holy Scriptures absolut per∣fection in matters Ecclesiasticall. Lastly, considering how you have established the Churches in your Maiesties other Kingdom
of Scotland, and in your Ilandes of Iersey and Guernsey, accor∣dingly already. Therefore have I ben bolde in all duty to offer these Reasons to your Maiestie, as to one whom they principally concerne. Where also we do all beseech you to suffer these words of exhortation. Be strong in the Lord, and loose not the things which you have don. Yea proceed, and do this noble work a∣mong vs also. The Lorde is with you, while you be with him. When you follow close his wayes, your very enemies shalbe at peace with you. It shalbe easie to do it. To your people gene∣rally it wilbe most acceptable, as a thing looked for before: to all neighbour Protestant Countreys ioyfull, as wherein we shalbe all neerer linked togeather. To be short, every way it shall bring more Honor and lesse inconvenience to your estate, then perhaps you may suppose. Finally, Gracious Soveraigne, as tou∣ching my presumption in medling with your writings and ap∣plying them to this purpose, I can say nothing, but only submit my selfe to your wise, vertuous, and religious consideration. Sure I am, when we your loyall and faithfull Subiects did first see and read the same, it was the greatest ioy and comfort to our heartes that could come vnto vs. And therfore I could not but give som notice thereof, alwayes in the most dutifull & obedient affection of my heart that I can expresse. The Lord Iesus in mercy blesse your Maiestie for euer, & preserve your precious soule from flat∣tery and falshood. AMEN.


Colimus Imperatorem vt hominem à Deo secundum, & solo Deo minorem.
Tertull. ad Scapul.

