



WHOME∣to can so rightlie ap∣pertain this booke of in∣structiones to a Prince in all the points of his calling, aswell generall, as a Christi∣an towards God; as parti∣cular,
as a King towardes his people? Whome-to, I say, can it so justly appertaine, as vnto you my dearest Sonne? Since J the authour thereof as your naturall Father, must be careful for your god∣ly and vertuous education, as my eldest Sonne, and the first fruits of Gods blessing towards me in my posterity: and as a King must timous∣lie prouide for your training vp in all the pointes of a Kings office; since ye are my naturall and lawfull succes∣sor therin: that being right∣lie
informed heer-by, of the waight of your burthen, ye may in time begin to consi∣der, that being borne to be a king, ye are rather borne to onus, then honos: not ex∣celling all your people so far in ranke and honour, as in daylie care and hazardous paines-taking, for the duti∣full administration of that great office, that God hath laide vpon your shoulders. Laying so a juste symmetrie and proportion, betuixt the height of your honourable place, and the heauie waight
of your great charge: and consequētlie, in-ease of fai∣ling, whiche God forbid, of the sadnesse of your fall, ac∣cording to the proportion of that height. J haue therfore for the greater ease to your memory, and that ye may at the firste, cast vp any parte that ye haue to doe with, de∣uided this treatise in three partes. The first teacheth you your duty towards God as a Christian: the next, your duty in your office as a king: and the third informeth you howe to behaue your selfe
in indifferent things, whiche of them-selues are neither right nor wrong, but accor∣ding as they are rightlie or wrong vsed; & yet will serue according to your behauiour therein, to augment or em∣paire your fame and autho∣rity at the handes of your people Receaue and wel∣come this booke then, as a faithfull Praeceptour and counsellor vnto you: whiche, because my affaires will not permit me euer to be present with you, I ordaine to be a residēt faithfull admonisher
of you. And becaus the houre of death is vncertaine to me, as vnto all fleshe, I leaue it as my Testament & latter∣will vnto you. Charging you in the presence of God, and by the fatherlie authority J haue ouer you, that ye keepe it euer with you, as carefully, as Alexander did the Ili∣ads of Homer. Ye will find it a just & impartial coun∣sellour; neither flattering you in any vice, nor impor∣tuning you at vn-meete times. It will not come vn∣called, neither speake vn∣speered
at: and yet confer∣ring with it when ye are at quiet, ye shall say with Sci∣pio, that ye are nunquam minùs folus, quàm cum solus. To conclude then, I charge you, as euer ye thinke to deserue my fatherly bles∣sing, to followe and put in practise, as farre as lyeth in you, the praecepts heer-after following. And if ye followe the contrare course, J take the great GOD to recorde, that this booke shall one day be a witnesse betuixt me and
you; and shall procure to be ratified in heauen, the cursse that in that case heere I giue vnto you. For I protest before that great God, I had rather not be a Father, and child∣lesse, then be a Father of wicked children. But ho∣ping, yea euen promising vnto my self, that God, who in his great blessing sent you vnto me; shall in the same blessing, as he hath giuen me a Sonne; so make him a good and a godlie Sonne; not re∣penting him of his mercie
shewed vnto me: I end, with my earnest praier to GOD, to worke effectuallie into you, the fruites of that bles∣sing, whiche heere from my hart J bestowe vpon you.

