




SIR:
I Haue humbly sought leaue of his most Excellent MAIESTIE, to present your Highnesse with this Ʋolume of his MAIESTIES WORKES. I durst not but make the Suite; and his MAIESTIE could not well deny it. I will not say, that it had beene a peece of Iniustice in the KING to haue denyed you this right: But I dare say, it had beene a point of Sacri∣ledge in a Churchman to haue stolne from you such a por∣tion
of your Inheritance, which consists as much in the WORKES of his Royall Ʋertues, as in the wealth of his mighty Kingdomes. Basilius wrote de Jnstitutione Principis to his Sonne Leo; Constantinus to his Sonne Romanus; Manuell to his Sonne Iohannes; and Charles the fift, to his Sonne Philip: The workes of the three former are ex∣tant both in Greeke and Latine. His Maiestie, after the Example of those Emperours, and sundry other Kings, wrote his ΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΟΝ-ΔΩΡΟΝ to Prince Henry, your Highnesse most worthy Brother: His part, by GOD his Prouidence, is falne to your Lot; and who may iustly detaine from you the rest? The rule in Scripture is; that if the first fruits be holy, so is the whole lumpe; and to whom the first was giuen, to him all the rest was due: To your Highnes therefore are these offered, as to the trew Heire and Inheritor of them. And that I may make you the better accompt of them; May it please your Highnesse to vnderstand, that of these Workes, some were out before; some other of them neuer saw light before; and others were almost lost and gone, or at least abused by false co∣pies, to their owne disgrace and his Maiesties great dis∣honour. Now it being the duetie of all Deanes in their Churches, Dispersa colligere; I thought it might sort well with the nature of my place in the Chappel, wherein I haue had the Honour so many yeeres to serue his Maiestie, to gather these things that were scattered, and to bring to light those that too long had lien in darkenes, and to pre∣serue in one body, what might easily haue bin lost in parts. In this Presentment, I must humbly craue of your Highnes, not to be mistaken in the trew meaning and maner of it: For these Workes come not to you, as vsually Bookes doe to men of great Dignitie, for Patronage and Protection; for Protection is properly from iniurie; and that the Royall Author of them is best able to right: But to you they come partly for preseruation, and for that the Disposition
of Nature hath made you more apt, and more principal∣ly for a Patterne, and that not vnfitly; since the Samplar is euer more ancient then the Exemplification: And as in the preseruation, the Sonne hath his aduantage by succee∣ding; so in the Patterne, the Father by preceding hath his Prerogatiue. Let these Workes therefore, most Gracious Prince, lie before you as a Patterne; you cannot haue a better: Neither doeth the Honour of a good Sonne con∣sist in any thing more, then in immitating the good Presi∣dents of a good Father; as we may very well perceiue by the Scripture phrase, where the vsuall Encomium of good Kings is, that they walked in the wayes of their Fathers. Al men see, how like the Patterne GOD and Nature haue framed the outward Lineaments: and who knowes your Highnes wel, knowes also, that the inward Abilliments hold in the like proportion. The Philosophers say, that Imita∣tion proceeds from Inclination; And trewly, if your fu∣ture Imitation be answerable to your forward Inclina∣tion, in Religion, Learning and Ʋertue; your Highnesse cannot come farre short of your Patterne, nor yet of any of your Predecessors that euer went before you: Which GOD grant together with the length of many good and happy Dayes.
Your HIGHNESSE

