



My very good Lord; it is not lōg since, It was my happe, to see a Booke published; quo iure, quáue potius miuria, against your Lord∣ships Fift booke of Reportes: Intituled de Iure Regis Ecclesiasti∣co by one, that if he had not tearmed himselfe a Catholik Deuine, I should haue takē him for any thing els: So far is he in this lying Libel frō being a Deuine, much lesse Catholik (vnlesse it e in the sence vniuersal) being indeed nothing els but an vniuersal Historiā. I haue also read an other book wherin your Lordship is most vniustly produced, or rather traduced for an egregious falsarie, a crime which that Libeller hath made common to others of your ranck, and of higher mark, by im∣puting the same most scandalously vnto one of the most Honorable and religious Peeres of this land. Farthermore I haue hard of diuerse others, whose fingers doe itch, to be dealing with your Lordship, according to the grounds of your Ho∣norable profession. By al which I perceaue, that

your Lordship hath so mortally wounded the hayrie scalp of that man of Rome, which would faine bee accepted for head of this Church, that our aduersaries doe striue with noe smale adoe, whoe shalbe most forwarde, to salue this sore, though it be neuer so incurable. But amongst all others, who so aduenturous, as our pretended Ca¦tholike, surnaming himselfe the Deuine, which hath spared no cost, no labour, for the effecting thereof in his late aunswere. Seely disputer, that where the question is de Iure, produceth testimo∣nies de facto, and being by profession a Deuine, & the questiō of law bringeth his proofs out of His∣storie. Doubtles the Deuine is much beholding vnto your Lordship (though hee doe craftily dis∣semble it) for giuing him so good an occasiō both to shew his great reading, and withal to purg so much choller, being of liklyhood of that chole∣ricke & bilious disposition.
Quod si non aliquà nocuisset, mortuus esset.
I gather so much by his writings; for I am veri∣ly perswaded, that this is not the first book, that hath come out of ths mans forge; here bee di∣uerse books, I should haue said Pamphletts, cast abroad, which sauour of the same stile and file: so

finely smothed and framed for the nonce, that a man maie knowe him to bee his crafts Master, in this black Art, though he transfigure himselfe in∣to an Angel of light, & professe al manner of Can∣dour and Chariie in hi writings; but the contra∣ry is too too manifest in his lyeing Pamphlets. To saie nothing of his slaunderous reports a∣gainst the late religious Queene of blessed me∣morie: against the reuerend Sages and Iudges of the Common law in general, and your Lordship in particular; because he takes vpon him to be so great a Clearke in the question about the Kings Crowne and dignitie, I haue endeauoured in this Apologie (which I haue framed in defence of that famous writer and preacher of Gods word Iohn VVickliff) to oppose against his slaunderous Li∣bel, his answere; as the answere of a most anciēt, Catholike, and learned Deuine. Ancient, for hee liued in the time of K Edward the 3. Catholike, for he maintained the same doctrine then, which the Church of Eng1 and now (being guided by the Holy Ghost and sacred writings of Scrip∣ture & Fathers) doth professe; learned in al kind of good knowledge, needfull for a Divine: & for the maine question touching the kings Regaltie

& the Popes Supremacie, hee delivereth in other termes the very same argumēts & reasons, which I finde written in that your said fift Booke of Re∣ports: proving the truth of your assertiōs, by the Iawes Civill, Canon, & Common. Wherein be∣cause I professe little knowledge (it being not my element; and as your Lordship hath well ob∣serued, Perito in sua arte credendumest,) I haue presu∣med to submit the whole Apologie vnto your iu∣dicious & learned censure, quatenus de Iure. If your Lordship finde him not in this Apologie (where I haue, as neare as I could, truly related his words) most iudicious, religious, temperate, learned, & altogether conformable vnto the doctrine and discipline of this presēt Church (which this libel∣ler so much impugneth) and agreeing with the laws of God and of this Realme, let me beare the fault of presumption, and vndergoe your heaui∣est Censure whom I professe, I doe honour and reuerence, as farr as anie of my profession, and as it becometh me to doe in al Christian dutie; know¦ing your Lordship to be a zealous professor of the truth, a worthy maintainer of the Cleargie, a lo∣uing Patron of both our Vniuersities, and lastly a great furtherer of al good learning: which that

you may liue for to doe, maugre the opposition of our aduersaries, I shal neuer cease to pray vnto the Almighty, long to continue your Lordship in health, wealth and prosperitie, with encrease of spiritual gifts, for the benefit of both Church and Common wealth. From the Library in Oxford Feb. 10. 1608.

