


BRETHREN (for as I
esteeme you, so will I stile
you, iudge you of vs as
you please) some of your
sort, being at this Sermon
when it was preached,
were desirous that it might be printed. The
end of their request themselues best know.
If to traduce it in their Preachings (as many
of your Ministers serue other Bookes of
mine, not sparing my self, as I am credibly in∣formed)
they shall do as many vse, but not
as they ought. Charities precept is to speake well
of all; yea, euen Ciuilities rule, not to backebite
the absent. If to read it for their further satis∣faction,
as not accustomed to the accent of

our Pronuntiation (for so it was said) it hath
pleased his Maiestie I should yeelde to their
request: although their Notes they tooke,
with some personal conference easie for them
to attaine, might without this noyse haue
effected that. If to answere it (for that also
was giuen out) let it bee with modestie and
learning, nothing shall bee more welcome.
(and yet we may say therin as the Emperor
of the Coblers Crow, Satis istarum auium habe∣mus
domi). Indeed, this purpose for answere I
rather suspect, because I vnderstood of a
Challenge offered in an Admonition Epistolar
to your late Parliament, directly confrōting
the maine subiect of this Sermō, namely, that
the Calling Episcopall hath neither Gods word,
ancient Canon, nor learned Father to abbett it.
To say this, not to prooue it, is but Hercules
tragicall club in the Poet,. massy in shew, but
of cloth & straw, an affrighting vanity; to aver
it, & not to be able to maintaine it, were but
Ignorances brood in Nazian: breaking the shel
and cackling afore it be full hatcht,Naz & Thu∣cyd. a praeci∣pitate
boldnesse: to auouch it and make it good,
were a labour worthy your trauaile, and

of vs much desired. And yet neither this your
Challenge, nor the Maintenāce thereof, whē it
comes, might any way concerne vs, it being
a combate within your owne lists: sauing
that the Challengers, not enduring 
Bishops within their owne Church, could
not refraine, but contray to S Peers charge,
in the very same letter make themselues
 Bishops and Censurers of other
Prouinces,1. Pet. 4. 15. by intituling the Church-gouernors
among vs, PAPISTICALL English
Bishops. A slanderous Epithete (pardon mee
brethren, and yet S. Hierom saith, that hee
which is suspected, much more accused of
Heresie, may without pardon asking, brek
the bond of patience) a slander, Isay vntrue
and vnchristian. For first, euery opinion or Ceremonie
which in the Cockpit of Elderlings i
concluded to be POPERIE, is not so Se∣condly
the world can witnes that English
Bishops haue for Religion done that, which
neuer any Clerolaicall Consistorien, or Bench
Presbyterian, either Southern or Northern
durst, hath, or can performe, viz. written
learnedly and laboriously, disputed sound∣ly

suffered manfully, and died constantly in
defiance of PAPISTRIE, readily incli∣ning
both their heads to blockes, and their
bodyes to stakes, rather then by DECLI∣NATORS
from their lawfull Princes tri¦bunall,
appealing to any Synodicall Conuention
whatsoeuer. This, doutbles, is PAPISTI∣CAL,
the other APOSTOLICAL: for
S. Paul appealed to Caesar his iudgement
seat, as the supreme; whereas PAPISTS
& PVRITANS wil haue the King, but
an HONORABLE MEMBER, not a
chef Gouernor in the churches of his own Do∣miniōs.
But to return if an Answer hereunto,
be the Babe we must attēd, (and of it I oft
heae) not uno Lucina, but Charitas & Veri∣tas
erte opē. Let loue of truth cōceiue it, truth of
iudgemēt breed it; variety of reading frame
it; modesti of stile deliuer it▪ ornaments of lear∣ning
cloath and adorne it, and we will em∣brace
it: not doubting then, but like a mo∣dest
& true borne childe, it will speake in the
language, and with reuerence of Antiquitie. In
the meane time, God grant both you and vs
Obedience and Humey, that, to our Soue∣raigne;

this, within our owne hearts: so shall
we neither vnder-vallue him, nor ouer-weene
our selues. Farewell in Christ.

