



GReat Kings haue vouchsafed poore presentsfrom mean persons: a poorer or more base then TITIO, a Brand, a Cole-Brand, ne∣uer King accepted, because no stayed Subiect durst euer offer it; and yet I must. Not for that I dare doe it, yea, I dare not but doe it. For what am I, that I should either gaine∣say, or delay to execute the commaunde of so great a Monarch, and my most gra∣cious

Maister? Perhappes my obedience in performing your pleasure, will not counter-ballance this presumption, in fronting it with your Highnes Name; be∣cause, published it might haue beene, and yet not aspired to so glorious a PA∣TRONAGE. If that bee the offence, I humbly craue pardon, (onely of your Maiestie). For this being a BRAND, fitte matter for fire to worke vppon, and my case as the Prophetts, Iaceo in∣ter wentes, I liue among men, that are Psa. 37. set on fire, whose teeth are dartes, euen those Ignea tela, Ephe. 6: for the tongue Eph. 6 is inflamed by Hell, saieth Saint Iames): to whose protection, should I rather submit it, then to HIS, whose graci∣ous countenance, like vnto thar Angels roscidus flatus, in the middest of the fur∣nace, shall so keepe it, that the most Dan. 3. fiery spirit shall not touch it to scorch it: Since therefore it pleased your Maiestie, (most dreade Soueraigne) to commaund the diuulging thereof, I here in the

duety of a Subiect, and in all humilitie, as becommeth a Christian, offer it to your Highnes, wishing that it may aunswere the report, which those worthy Perso∣nages of great Honour and Wisedome, who were present and heard it, vouchsafed to afforde it. If your Maiestie in the depth of your iudgement approue it, it neede not feare the censure of any. For why? I neuer yet heard▪ But I must stay my selfe, least that your Maiesties due prasyes (such is some mans hap) be as they are, by many, accounted for vndue∣flatteries. My prayers I trust shall not so bee; namely, that seeing the Highest King hath grauntēd vnto your Maiestie, as vn∣to Salomon, a LARGE HEART, re∣plenished with all, capable of more then Royall Endowmentes, it woulde please him to increase his Graces in you, to pro∣long your daies among vs, and to giue vs thankfull heartes for the fruition and affections loyally seruiceable to the

pleasure of so Wise, so Learned, so Gra∣cious, so Religious a King, whose vnworthy seruant I am, euen.


Non omne quod nigrum est, continuô deforme est.
Bern. in Cant.

