



TVVo venemous worms
there are, which (like
snakes at the Palme
roote) doe gaster and
infect the floorishing
state of a setled Church, Sacrilege and
Haeresie: which double mischiefe to
the Church, is principally imputed to
men of the Church; ambition, basely
yeelding to any compact for titular pre∣fermentes,
feeding the sacrilegious
humour: factious traducing each of
other for opinions different, or rather
indifferent, opening a gap for the hae∣reticall
inchanter. This last, through

the despite of Rome, transmitting her
traiterous shauelinges to seduce good
subiectes; disgorging loathsome slaun∣ders,
to defame our Prince and State
among forreners; and principally, dis∣persing
their infamous libels against
our religion, to make it more odious to
our domesticall professors, hath of late
much pestered, and haunted this our
Church and Realme: the inward cause
is their inueterate malice, but this out∣rage
in multiplying their blowes thus
thicke and threefold (pardon, my good
Lord, if I gesse amisse) is incensed by
an opinion they haue conceyued, that
there is among vs, a generall declining
to Poperie, aud the ruine beginning at
the very groundcelles of religion, our
schooles of learning; which, God bee
thancked, stande both fast and sure, a∣gainst

the strongest battery of the Ro∣mish
factiō, & if euer heretofore, cleer∣ly
voyde of all her superstitious infe∣ctions:
yet this hot surmise, though ve∣ry
vaine and false, hath, notwithstan∣ding,
receiued the flame from a wilde∣fire
zeale of some vniuersitie men, who
pronounce euery position to be Popish,
which is not within the verge of their
paper booke common places; and wan∣ting
the Towne-clarke his discretion
Act. 19. 36, to do nothing rashly, but
to referre the determination to a
lawfull assembly vers. 39. proclaimed
that for heresy in a solemne meeting,
which comming to a higher, and more
mature examination, prooued to bee so
farre from Popery, that it was on the
contrary conuinced by the writings &
verdict of the greatest authors of ac∣compt

among vs, to bee most sound do∣ctrine
and orthodoxall. By which of∣fensiue
clamour, woorse then Cham his
irrision, so farre carried and sorting to
so smale effect of trueth, howsoeuer
without seuere and condigne punishmēt
it escaped, yet surely, the whole state of
this realme, the vniuersitie it selfe, and
the particular persons thus slaunderou∣sly
abused, haue receiued a wrōg scarce∣ly
expiable by the diuestiture of the ac∣cusers
from their places. The Realme,
because report, which getteth feathers
by flying, will sound it out in forreine
partes, that our fountaines are infe∣cted;
the vniuersitie, in that no pa∣rent
of wisedome and religion, will send
his sonne to a place suspected; the par∣ticuler
men, beeing iniuried in their
good name, impeached in their prefer∣ment,

discouraged in their indeuours,
being as readie to confront, as willing
to encounter, as able to ouerthrow any
Papist, as the most forward and whot∣spurred
challengers of the opposite en∣raged
faction; which by your Lordship,
and other of authoritie Ecclesiasticall,
being not allayed and scattered, it is no
marueile if the Papist take courage, &
like another Antaeus thus redouble his
strength to the preiudice & disgrace of
this our famous Church. An instance
hereof, among many other, is this smal
pamphlet aunsweared by mee, so com∣maunded
by his Grace, wherin the au∣thor
taketh euery occasion to triumph
in our diuisions. VVhich aunsweare I
haue presumed to present to your Lord∣ship,
both as a testimony publike of that
reuerent regard, which I euer acknow∣ledged

due from my selfe vnto you; &
principally, for that I am acquainted
with that most earnest desire and care
which your L. reuealed at your first in∣uestiture
into that great dignitie, to
haue the common aduersarie euery wy
answered: This if your good Lordship
accept and approue, it is the accōplish∣ment
of mine endeuour; if not, the secōd
part (for this is but the first) may bee
imposed vpō some other, who with more
opportunitie for leysure, & sufficiencie
for learning, may discharge it better.
In the meane time I commend this to
your L. fauour, and your Lordship to
God his protection.
From his Graces house in Lambeth
Ianuary. 11. 1601.

