



Right Worshipfull and worthy Sirs,
I Cannot but often consider, and also solace my selfe in the consideration of, Gods speciall prouidence in cal∣ling me to the exercise of my Ministery in this Town, the natiue place of my birth and breeding. Hee it was, whom I euer found since my first approach to the Vniuersitie, secretly to in∣cline my will and affections, to desire the Ministe∣rie

with a competency of gifts for it, and in his time imploiment in it, especially if he thought fit, in or neere about the place of my natiuitie. And he it is whom I haue now found to effect what himselfe first taught me to affect. For hauing gi∣uen me some triall of my gifts with experience of his assistance, in an Honourable family; and when, by the decease of that Right Honourable and eue∣rie way NobleHenry Earle of Kent, in Bed∣fordsh. who dyed Ian. 1614. Earle, I was to resolue what course to take; Loe, when I thought not on Newcastle (but inclined towards my fellowship for my better furnishing) Newcastle thought on me, and by the letters of your late worthy, learned and reuerendMr. Morton Archdeacon of Durham. Pastor, as also of others well affe∣cted to the Gospell of Christ (wholly ignorant of that libertie I then inioyed) gaue me a call to come vnto it. Vnto which call, considering the Premi∣ses, how could I be disobedient? It was not for me now to thinke or hope for better preferment elsewhere (the way thereunto lying more open in the South) nor much to feare (hauing such a call from God) the experimenting of that often appro∣ued true saying of our Sauiour,Marke 6.4. A Prophet is not without honour but in his owne Country, and among his owne kinne, and in his owne house. As I suffered not these respects to sway me, so I complain not in either kind; but acknowledge my selfe to haue found from you both respect and recompence beyond my deseruings, especially in regard of that liberall yearely stipend which lately your Worships appointed mee out of the common Treasury.
This is the cause why I haue prefixed your names to the greatest part of this ensuing Trea∣tise; which, for the publike good and yours, I thought good, as my weekely paines would giue leaue, to publish as an Argument, if not so plausi∣bly penned for the manner, yet at the least, more strange and vnusuall (yet not vnprofitable) for the matter. As it is, I present it to your Worships as the best testimonie which I can publikely giue of my thankfulnesse to you, and of my duty and loue to the Towne for all the free fauours of it. And indeed this, as other your bounties, is the more kindly taken by how much the lesse it was either deserued or desired by me.
Yet I dare not simply condemne all, who (espe∣cially in these dayes when vertue and learning is not duly respected and rewarded) desire prefer∣ment and a place in the Church of God, if so be they, inabled with competent gifts, desire it rather as it is Onus a place of burthen, then Honos of ho∣nour; rather Prodesse to profit others,3. Epist. of Iohn verse 9. then Prae∣esse, with Diotrophes to haue the Preeminence, propounding as their end Gods glory and the edi∣fication of the people more then their owne main∣tenance: for it is a true saying, in this sence,1. Tim. 3.1. if any desire the office of a Bishop, he desireth a good worke.
But, because in such suites mens desires are commonly inordinate, and their meanes indi∣rect, as briberie, flatterie, or the like; my iudge∣ment and also practise (which I presume you ac∣count no fault in me) hath hitherto beene other∣wise, namely, not so much to seeke meanes of li∣uing

from man, as onely to desire imployment from God, both which hitherto, without my seeking I haue found. Yet, as I approue not of mens immodestie in this kind of putting them∣selues forward (which argues either too high a conceit of themselues and of their owne sufficien∣cie, or too meane a conceit of the waight and bur∣then of that high calling, or otherwise too base a desire of Eminencie or wealth) so doe I also as much hate Ingratitude, where and when, by the religious and vigilant care of such as are men of place, wisedome, meanes, any godly, able and modest minde shall without his seeking receiue incouragement, competent meanes and mainte∣nance in his ministeriall paines and imployment.
This your godly care, Right Worshipfull, I shall be alwaies ready both thankfully to acknow∣ledge as it concernes my selfe, and also to witnesse it to the world (inuiting others with me to blesse God for it) so farre as it bends it selfe to the ad∣uancement any waies of the glory of God in the furtherance of the Gospel of Christ, true religion and learning, or otherwise proues helpefull to the reliefe of the poore, fatherlesse or distressed.
And here I cannot but remember & record how that, as it hath pleased God to blesse your Towne with ample & rich reuenues yearely, so he hath al∣so giuen you a second and greater gift, which is Power and Grace in the yearely good imploy∣ment thereof,Eccles. 5.19. to eate the fruit of it, and to take your portion, inasmuch as the imployment of your temporall wealth in that manner brings in

to your selues and to the Corporation generally a better and spirituall interest, increase and haruest, whiles thus so many Preachers are competently prouided for, so many poore people weekely re∣leeued, such care had for the trayning vp of youth in Grammer learning, wherein, by your care and bounty, your Schoole, through the vigilant paines of the present Master,Master Robert Fowbery. is not behind many at the least in the land; such yearely maintenance allowed so many young students of your owne Towne (whose need may require it) for the ease of their charge in the Vniuersities till seuen yeares study haue inabled them to prouide and care for themselues; so that you haue at this houre (by the helpe of this and other incouragements) now li∣uing, of such as are bred and borne in this your Towne eight Preachers of gifts competent at the least, all whom you well approue of. Besides your other yearely pensions allowed, as to diuers offi∣cers both chiefe and subordinate, so to other Ma∣sters in their seuerall kinds, as for the securing your estates by the counsell and direction of Law, for the curing of your bodies by the helpe and meanes of Physicke, for the trayning of youth to handle the pen by faire writing, and the Pyke and Peece for the seruice of your Prince and Coun∣try: not to speake of such yearely reparations as proue most necessary; all which together keepe the waters of your cisterne (though it haue a good feeder) lowe and neare the bottome.
Well then, and truely is Money said to be one of the sinewes of the Common-wealth: Sure, it

with Gods blessing is so here, as also in part of the Church too. Long then may that flourish by which both our Church here and Common∣wealth flourisheth. Pray yee, (with me then) for the Peace (yea also plenty) of (this our) Ierusalem:Psalm. 122.6.7.8.9. they shall prosper that loue thee, peace be within thy walles and prosperity within thy Palaces: for my bre∣thren and companions sake I will now say, peace be within thee; because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seeke thy good.
This care, Right Worshipfull, of seeking the prosperous estate of this Towne, lies chiefely vp∣on you, into whose hands God hath subordinate∣ly put the sword of Iustice for the due, equall, and vnpartiall execution both of his owne, and also of those many good Lawes of this Land, which most wisely and respectiuely haue beene made for the aduancement of religion and all vertue and godli∣nesse both in Church and Common-weale, as al∣so for the extirpating of whatsoeuer is contrary thereunto.
Each Kingdome, Common-wealth, Citie, Towne, Corporation, is onely and so farre safe and setled, as it rests it selfe by weldoing vpon God by a continuall reliance and dependance on him. Otherwise sinne where it raignes and is suffered in any kind whatsoeuer, is that onely thing which weakens, and at the length ruines both Church and Common-weale, howsoeuer in outward re∣spects,Prou. 28.2. seemingly most strong and flourishing. For the transgressions of a land, many are the Princes thereof. Sinne makes both priuate men of strong

weake, as Sampson, and Cain;Iudges 16.19.20. Gen. 14.14. So Dauid cals him. . 2. Sam. 22.19. Isa. 2.7.8. and also weakens whole Common-weales, Cities and Townes, whilest it makes God (who onely is our strength and stay) depart from vs, and giue vs ouer to our selues and the will of others.
Israel was many waies strong in Isaiahs time: their Land was full of siluer and gold &c. (but it was also full of Idols.) Israel was well furnished of all things needfull for an established state both of Church and Common-wealth: they had stayes of all kinds: As 1. Plenty of food, and yearely prouision of all things needfull for life, as also a∣bundance of wealth. 2. Military strength, pro∣uision and munition. 3. Magistrates and wise Senatours, and the knowledge how to rule the people, with all other parts of Politicall regiment. 4. Prophets,Gal. 2.9. 2. Kings 2.12. who were not onely as Pillars next to Christ in the Church, but as the horsemen and charets of Israel: Who were stayes to them (as godly Ministers are now) not onely by establish∣ing them in grace and goodnes, (which they did by soundnesse of Doctrine, sharpenesse of re∣proofe, example of life, liuing and dying in and for the truth) but also by their prayers, by which they stayed Gods hand, as did Moses, and often stood in the gappe. 5. Mechanicall Arts, which also are necessary. 6. But aboue all, God him∣selfe was their strength, so called, 1. Sam. 15.29. The strength of Israel. Yet because they trusted in the other more then in God, therefore see how they are threatned: Behold, the Lord,Isa. 3.1.2.3. the Lord of hosts doth take away from Ierusalem and from Iudah,

the stay and the staffe, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water, The mighty man & the man of warre, the Iudge and the Prophet, and the prudent and the Auncient, the Captaine of fiftie, and the ho∣norable man, & the Counseller, & the cunning Arti∣ficer, and the eloquent Orator. And this God hath now accordingly brought to passe.
Euen thus must we perswade our selues. God hath blessed this our Towne, in a competency, with most of these stayes. Now it is not any of these, neither yet our strong walles, or our mines of coale (by which our Towne hath hitherto beene as the Hearth to warme most places of this our Iland) nor all these together that can afford vs any security,Vt munitum muro tibi visum est oppidum? Si Incolae benè sint morati, pulchrè munitum arbi∣tror. Perfidia & peculatus ex vrbe & auaritia si exulant: quar∣ta inuidia, quin∣ta Ambitio: sexta Obtrecta∣tio: septima Periurium: Octaua indili∣gentia: Nona iniuria: Decima quod pessimum aggressu, Scelus. Haec nisi indè aberunt, centu∣plex murus rebus seruandis parum est. Plaut: in Pers. if at any time vice, superstition, profanesse &c. be suffered to take root and spread among vs. For each City, saith one, is better fen∣ced with the good maners of theCiuitas non tā¦muris quàm moribus muni∣tur. Citizens, then with the walles of the Citie. To which purpose, Plau∣tus, though an heathen, giues this fit answere to a tempting question which he propounds in the person of Sagaristio, to a virgin concerning A∣thens. How thinke you? is not the Towne well fen∣ced with a wall? If the Inhabitants be well nurtured (sayd the wise maide) I esteeme it excellently fenced. If perfidiousnesse, and Interuerting or stealing from the Prince and common treasury, together with Aua∣rice be banished the Citie: if fourthly Ambition, fiftly Enuy, sixtly Detraction, seuenthly Periurie, eightly Idlenesse, ninthly Iniuries and wrongs, tenthly (which worst is) mischiefe and villanie. These vnlesse they be abandoned and expelled the City, a hundred walles

are nothing to the safety of it.
In like maner;Psm. 125.1.2. As the mountaines are about Ie∣rusalem, so the Lord is round about his people, name∣ly such as trust in him: so that in stead of other walles, he himselfe will be vnto Ierusalem, a wall of fire round about,Zachar. 2.4.5. and will be the glory in the midst of her. But this is meant whilest they rest onely on him: otherwise, if the Vineyard which euen Gods right hand it selfe hath planted, which is the house of Israel, and which he hath fenced, shall bring forth wild grapes;Isa. 5.2.5.7. then will God take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten vp, and breake downe the wall thereof, and it shall be troden downe: So, the Boare out of the wood shall wast it,Psalm. 80.12.13. and the wild beast of the field deuoure it. In which case no walles nor munition, no abundance of wealth nor strength and wisedome of men, can keepe out the wrath of the Lord, if he their defence once depart from them. Sinne then generally,See and com∣pare Numb. 13.27.28. with Numb. 14.9. and more spe∣cially our trusting to man and to our meanes more then to God, if this sinne shall euer raigne among vs, will make our strength, that is, God him∣selfe depart from vs.See and com∣pare 2. Chron. 14.9.10.11. with 2 Chron. 16.7.8.9. Ioel 3.10. Whereas the Lord sheweth himselfe strong in the behalfe of them whose heart is perfit towards him, and who rest and rely vpon him. So that the weakest of such may say, I am strong.
Besides this trusting on meanes, there are other three maine exorbitancies for which God vsually sends changes by his iudgements, not onely in whole Kingdomes and States,Pucer. in epist. praefix. Cario∣nis Chron. but also in particu∣lar Cities, Townes and Corporations. The first is , impietie and vngodlinesse: The se∣cond,

 iniustice: The third,  Luxurie and wantonnesse; whereof the first troubles the state of the Church; the second, of the Common∣wealth; the third, of priuate families. And each of these, helpes and furthers the rest: so that want of domesticall discipline in Parents and Masters of families tends to disorder in the body of the Com∣mon-wealth; as contrariwise euill gouernment and disorder in the State rebounds backe againe to the further hurt and disordering of priuate fami∣lies. And the contagion of both these infects the Church of God, and makes the Ministerie of the word lesse auaileable. On the other side where Religion is either polluted or not duly respected, there the rest fall; for, perfidiousnesse, iniustice, doing wrongs, as also lust and luxurie, depend on irreligion and vngodlinesse,See Rom. 1. from verse 23. to the end. and also on idolatry, as both in the auncient and moderne Romanists may be seene.
Where these or any of these through the negli∣gence of Magistrates are suffered, and not mowed downe by the sword of Iustice, there ere long we may looke for changes.
1. Religion hath three enemies; Heretickes, Schismatickes, Hypocrites, with whom I will ioyne in this businesse, profane liuers. The first sort opposeth the Truth and veritie of Religion; the second, the vnitie; the third, the sinceritie and sanctitie of it: without which three neither Reli∣gion nor any State can long stand.
Not Religion, and that through these in∣ward weaknesses and the forenamed wants of

Truth, Vnity, and Sincerity.
1. Truth in it selfe is most auncient, and is al∣so eternall: for standing vpon its owne (that is a sure) foundation, which is God, it is impregnable, and able to beare out it selfe against all assaults. Great is Truth and mighty aboue all things:1 Esd. 4. it endu∣reth and is alwaies strong, and it liueth and conque∣reth for euermore. It is founded vpon God, who is immoueable and a sure anchor. The man that hath it is by it  and  immoueable and in∣uincible, and  firme and stable euen like the rocke in the Sea, which though assaulted by boiste∣rous winds and waues, yet neither moues nor re∣moues; for his faith is built on the rocke Christ Iesus, and on the foundation of Gods eternall ele∣ction, so that the gates of hell shall not preuaile a∣gainst him, neither, though others who might seeme pillars fall away to Heresie and Apostasie,See 2. Tim. 2.17.18. with 19. shall he, because he neuer depended on man. But he that wanteth truth, is as a waue of the Sea,Ephes. 4.14. driuen with the wind and tossed, caried about with euery wind of Doctrine by the sleight of men, &c.
Secondly, Vnitie is conseruatiue, so that things whose nature is to be vnited, continue firme by continuing vnited. Nature it selfe teacheth each creature to preserue it selfe by preseruing vnitie: The drop falling from the Eues of the house, as long as it can, holds vnity with it selfe by gathe∣ring round, till the ponderositie of it preuaile: So, the same drop falling on the drie ground keepes to∣gether, else seuered it is soone dried vp. The fen∣cer lies as close as he can to keepe himselfe the safer; yea the poore worme and vrchin in danger

gather themselues into a lumpe lest distraction and distention of the parts of their bodies make them more subiect to diuision and separation. Thus each element holds together with its owne kind, and all of them keepe the vnitie of the world by their continuitie one with another, so that ra∣ther then any vacuitie or discontinuitie fall out in nature (which indeed would threaten the dissolu∣tion of the fabricke of the world) they will moue not onely besides, but euen contrarie to their owne proper motion, and will forsake their owne place and condition for the preseruation of the whole: as water will ascend vpward. Euen thus is it among men, Christians especially, who (of all other sorts of men) haue the least interest in themselues, so liuing (when they liue as they should) as giuen to others, lent onely to them∣selues. These being linked together in a spiritu∣all societie, by breaking the vnity which ought to be among all, indanger themselues as being mem∣bers of the same body.
Thirdly, Sincerity is a sure band of continu∣ance; for where Religion seasons the heart, there Grace is as water in the fountaine, and as sap in the root, which makes the streames perpetuall, and the branches euer greene. The single heart in all things aimes at Gods glory, and makes the sincere Chri∣stian euer like himselfe, vpon all occasions in all estates and companies, as it didIoseph vnum habebat proposi∣tum placere Deo; hoc nullâ varie∣tate temporis im∣mutatum est, nec fratrum inuidiâ, nec conditione seruitutis, nec aetatis illecebris, nec dominae re∣promissis, nec squalore carceris, nec posteà tumo∣re Aegyptiae po∣testatis, sed sem∣per vn{us} fuit, &c. Hieron. comment. in ep. ad Ephes. l. 3. c. 4. Hoc idem (in∣quit) de Iob sen∣tiendum est &c. Ioseph and Iob. Whereas insinceritie and a clouen heart, or a heart and a heart, causeth instabilitie and inconstancie, and a falling away. Thus Iames 1.8.  &c. A double minded man is vnstable in

all his wayes. So of the Israelites it is said,Ps. 78.35, 36, 37 Their heart was not right with God, neither were they sted∣fast in his couenant.
Where Religion, by any of the foresaid defects, or yet by open prophanenesse, growes to a lan∣guishing and decay, there without speedy redresse and reformation, Gods iust iudgements vsually breake in vpon those persons, vpon that State and Common-wealth, and layes all waste. Thus were the Israelites by their Idolatry made naked among their enemies, that is,Exod. 32.25, 27 28. destitute and depriued of God and his helpe, and 3000. of them were slaine. Thus were Corah and his complices for their sedi∣tion and schisme swallowed vp of the earth, yea whole Israel for their prophanenesse and contempt of God and his Prophets (added to their Idola∣tries) suffered a fearfull slaughter, and a long capti∣uitie of 70. yeares,2 Chron. 36.16. &c. because they mocked the messen∣gers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, vntill the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedie.
2. And so where Sensualitie, filthy lusts and pollutions, Drunkennesse and Gluttony are suffe∣red without controlment and condigne punish∣ment, there destruction and vengeance hangs ouer the head of such a Citie. For what brought fire and brimstone vpon Sodome and the cities about it, but their sinnes of Pride, fulnesse of bread,Ezek. 16.49. and abundance of idlenesse? which as mother-sinnes brought forth vnnaturall lusts, and these (being finished) brought forth death; which Cities giuing themselues ouer to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example,Iude verse 7.

suffering the vengeance of eternall fire.
3. Lastly, Iniustice, whether vniuersall by vio∣lence, tyranny, rapacity, fraud, deceits, wrongs, contumelies; or yet particular, as when Magistrates doe not render to euery man according to his de∣serts, or otherwise neglect to doe their duty, brings all to ruine at the length.August. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 5. cap. 12 Thus Saint * Au∣gustine notes concerning the ancient Romanes, who were once Lords of the world: The more they gaue themselues to the exercise of iustice &c. the lesse they gaue themselues to their pleasures, and to the in∣creasing of their priuate estates. The exercise where∣of was according to VirgilsTu regere im∣perio populos Ro∣mane memento, Hae tibi erunt ar∣tes, pcíque im∣ponere morem, Parcere subiectis & debellare su∣perbos. Virg. memento, Parcere subiectis & debellare superbos, namely, to spare, yea to fauour and incourage the good and humble subiect, and to destroy and cut off the proud. And then, saith he, the Common-wealth flourished, when there was domi industria, foris iustum imperium, &c. Industry at home, iust and vnpartiall gouernment abroad, &c. But when that Common-wealth decayed, the cau∣ses of it are noted in Catoes complaint.Pro his nos ha∣bemus luxuriam, atque auaritiam, publicè egestatē, priuatim opulen∣tiam. Laudamus diuitias, sequi∣mur inertiam: in∣ter bonos & ma∣los discrimen nul∣lum, omnia vir∣tutis praemia am∣bitio possidet; ne∣que mirum, vbi vos separatim sibi quis{que} consilia ca∣pitis, vbi domi voluptatibus, hîc pecuniae ac gratiae seruitis. Eò fit, vt impetus fiat in vacuam Rempub. Postquam, Luxu atque desidia, ci∣uitas corrupta est rursus Resp. mag∣nitudine su Jm∣peratorum atque Magistratuū vi∣tia sustentabat. In stead of the forenamed things (saith he) we haue luxury and couetousnesse, a poore Common treasury, but richly laden chests at home. We commend riches, and fol∣low idlenesse: no difference is made betweene the good and the bad, ambition inioyes all the rewards due to vertue. And no maruaile, seeing you, euery one of you take counsell for your selues apart, seeing you giue your selues slauishly to your pleasures, and doe all for money or fauour. Hence it fals out, that euery one makes a prey, and violently ceazeth on the poore and desolate Common-wealth. And after hee addes, When once the City (of Rome) was corrupted with luxury and

sloth, then did the Common-wealth with her great∣nesse sustaine and maintaine all the vices of the Em∣peorors and Magistrates.
Saint Austen concludes, that God gaue so large an Empire to the Romanes, inasmuch as they sought the good of their Country, and made that their glory, preferring the good and safety of the Common-wealth before their owne. And that, then that Common-wealth flourished, when vertue and industry flourish∣ed,Cùm Aerarium esset opulentum, tenues res priua∣tae. Aug vt supr. when the Common-treasurie was rich, but each priuate mans estate meane.
That all the forenamed vertues may receiue in∣couragement and furtherance, and the contrary vi∣ces so far as they are, be weeded out in this towne, it belongs to your care, Right Worshipfull, who must still take your selues bound to vse your sword and authority against two sorts of men especially: Enemies 1. of Truth, 2. of Holinesse.
1. Zeale for the truth of God is required in each Magistrate, who must first, truely and sincerely embrace the truth of Religion himselfe in his owne heart and bosome. This may bee knowne where it is: for it wil make such an one seeke by all meanes to further Religion in others, and to seeke Gods glory. Such a Magistrate (of Gods more immediate appointing) was Ioshua;Iosh. 27.16.17.18. 2 Sam. 6.20. &c. such an one was Dauid, who brought backe the Arke, and danced before it. That indeed is the best musicke and pipe to dance after, and the Magistrate the fit∣test man to lead the dance: and such were all the godly Kings of Iudah. Secondly, he must set him∣selfe accordingly to abolish all idolatry,1 Kings 15.1.13. as did King Asa, who remoud euen his mother from being Queen

because she had made an idol in a groue, which he also destroyed.2 Kings 18 4.5. and 23 4.5.6. And such an one was Hezekiah and Io∣sias. Thirdly, he must draw out the sword of iustice against Seducers, as is commanded, Deut. 13.6.7. &c. as did Iehu, Kings 20.25. who slew all the Priests of Ball. At the least hee must restraine them, and keepe them from entring into the Lords Sanctuary and Inheri∣tance. Here the Magistrate must draw out his sword,Gen. 3.24. and play the part of the Angell set at the doore of Paradise, to keepe the way of the tree of life,Psal. 80.13. to keepe the wild Boare from entring Gods Vineyard. As we therefore Gods Ministers do op∣pose our selues by teaching, and as the Lords dogs and house-keepers by barking tell you of the ap∣proach of enemies; so surely, you must also awake and not suffer the house of God to be broken and digged through by theeues and robbers,Iohn 10.10. who come not but to steale and kill and to destroy. Either then shut your gates against such, or expell them, or bring the seduced to the curse,Nehem. 10.2. and to the oath of allegiance both to God and to the Kings Maiestie. You haue many very good lawes to this end. Oh how much good seruice might you doe both to God and his Maiesty if you did wholly set your selues duly and vnpartially to execute the same! at the least, you might weary many of them out by cntinuall mulcts leuied diligently & constantly on them according to statute for each absence, if not bring them to Church, and, with Gods blessing, saue their soules: they want but rousing.
2. There are also enemies of holinesse and good∣nesse, such as being wicked themselues & by their wickednesse daily giuing euill example to others,

hate all goodnes in others,Isa. 59.15. so that he that departeth from euill makes himselfe a prey vnto them. Now good Magistrates, whose office is to be keepers of both Tables, should, by their office and place, bee zealous on Gods behalfe, both to defend the op∣pressed, and also to vse seuerity in punishing offendors. They must therefore first maintaine the innocency of the righteous: else it is a thing highly displeasing vnto God, when in this kind, there is no iudgement, Isa. 59.14.15. Secondly, they must exe∣cute iudgement with seuerity, not only on the fore∣named, but on all sorts of offendors whatsoeuer, so far as Gods lawes and the Kings, command or will permit, whether it be to death or to banishment,Esra. 7.. or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. Thus by Gods law witches must die, & inchanters, wizards,Deut. 18 11. &c. necromancers must not be suffered. Others accor∣ding to their faults must receiue forty stripes.And 25.1, 2, 3. And 19.18, 19, 20, 21. Psal. 106.30 Psal. 101.8. False-witnesses must be dealt with as they intended to deale with others. This zeale in Phinees was com∣mēded, & Dauid professes so zealous he would be.
Thus to doe, is an acceptable Sacrifice to God, which Magistrates should make:Rom. 13.6. for they are , Gods Ministers, and their faithfull seruice in this kinde is to God an acceptable sacrifice. Kings haue beene Priests in former times, and so must now be in this kinde, as also inferiour Magistrates: this is a worke of their calling, and not against the Law which saith, Thou shalt not kill, which binds only priuate men, and publike in their priuate oc∣casions. So that they killing doe not kill, but sa∣crifice:Aug de ciuit. Dei lib. 1. c. 2. Non enim ille occidit qui ministerium debet iubenti; He kils not, who in slaying obeys Gods

command. This seueritie, so farre as your autho∣ritie stretcheth, you must vse, else foolish pitty marrs the city, and will lay it open to Gods iudge∣ments. No priuate or sinister respects must with∣hold you from doing your duty in this, or in any of the forenamed parts of it. Which if you doe, you may expect the continuance of Gods blessed protection and fauour to this your Towne. And that you may so doe, consider how wonderfully zealous Idolaters in all times haue beene and are, when in any kind they thinke they doe seruice to God. This ensuing Treatise will tell you, they spa∣red not their owne bowels, but sacrificed their sonnes and daughters to the deuill, their sup∣posed god.
Thus commending it to your diligent view and reading, my selfe to your loue, and your Worships all, with the state of the whole Towne, to Gods blessed and mercifull protection, I here end, and humbly take my leaue.
From my Study in Newcastle vpon Tine,  this 30. of Ian. 1620.

