


MOST DREAD SOVEREIGNE, that the worthie Acts of Eminent Persons, should alwaies be atten∣ded with malignant En∣uy, is, vnto ingenuous Pindarus.  natures a vexing in∣dignity; though the auoidance thereof Iosephus. . doth appeare vnto some, a meere impossi∣bilitie: Yet seeing the great Philosopher is of opinion, that there is a sort of men who Arist. Rhetor. are , as being aboue and without the reach thereof, because Enuy stretcheth her selfe no higher then those which are a mans equalls, or somewhat his Superiors: If any state or conditi∣on might claime the exemption, to say with the Poet Inuidia quia maior—who would not Horace. thinke, but that the height of Soueraigntie, and

the depth of the Graue, should be freed from this pursuing Furie? but that neither of these (whether Scepter or Sepulcher) can preuaile with some creatures, were there no other instance, the ma∣lice of English lesuits enraged with Enuy of your Maiesties admirable iudgement, singular learning, and constant Resolution for Religion; together with the flourishing prosperitie of these your Churches and Kingdomes, giues euidence suf∣ficient; and among them a principall, this Anta∣pologer, shrowded vnder the title of a BANI∣SHED CATHOLIKE, who hath singled out no meaner obiect, against whom to discharge his ran∣kor, then your SACRED MAIESTIES both Person and Apologie through his whole Pam∣phlet; and also, in a cheife part thereof, the blessed memorie of that Lady (in her time peerelesse) QVEENE ELIZABETH, from before her birth, and below her graue. An infallible demonstration of his degenerous and vnregenerate minde. For none vse to be more spightfully malicious, or Censo∣riously contumelious, then the debosched abiect, & vnreformed Hypocrite; whom a man can neither auoid without Calumnie, nor encounter but with blot of Infamie, nor Conquer with hope of any

Masterie. That your Maiestie vouchsafed not the Conflict with such a Rake-shame, but ad∣iudged a Rope the fittest answer for him; Premonition before the A∣pology pag. 13 therein your Maiestie shewed your magnanimous spirit, geeuing vnto him his iust doome. And with all humblenesse, I could hartely wish, that your HIGHNES would be pleased, from henceforth, to contemne all the rest, as Him, and not to goe forth any more vnto these Battails (they will glorie in it though they be sure to receaue the foile) euen the Generall of their Campe, were his lear∣ning greater, or his Crowne higher, is no match for SVCH a King. Shall they then passe altogether vnconfronted? In no wise; the Infection spreads to farre, and silence (though with contempt) they of that ranke will account an ouerthrow. But I trust your Maiestie shall finde, among your Sub∣iects, many, which maie with more truth and lesse vaunt, say as much as Campian their high∣ly Concert. Ec∣cles. Anglic. Plutar. de sui laude. reputed martyr did for them, that there is a great number and a continuall succession which are ready for this cause, and already entred the Combate; and as the couragious Spartans were wont to sing, . Try them when, and wherein you please. The meanest

among those many I confesse my selfe to be; yet in zeale toward your Maiestie, and in iust indignati∣on against this Rabshekah, I haue vndertaken the answer to his Censure; which, being finished, I humbly present to your Maiesties Patronage, for two principall respects: first, because it is in the true Iustification of your Maiesties late vnanswe∣rable Apologie for that OATH of ALLEGI∣ANCE, which, like to Ieptha his Shiboleth, dis∣couereth the true Israelite from the false-harted Iudg. 12. 6. Fugitiue, and rebellious Ephraemite. Secondly, because what is in it for soundnesse of Argument, or truth of Storie, is, in a manner, your Maiesties owne; who, at the first sight of both these Anta∣pologists, could readilie discerne their falsities, and presently refell with sound answer any quar∣rell that they made. If, therein, some tearmes haue passed, not fully Episcopall, or not so fitting (per∣haps) the calling and place, which, vnder your Maiesties, and by your Gratious fauour, I hold in the Church; I trust the Readers eie will from Me be first turned vpon Him that prouok't; who is knowne for these many yeares to be of a prostitued Conscience and Impudence, not careing what hee writes; nor whom he reuiles; nor how 'tis ta∣ken:

as also to those excellent Personages, TVVO SACRED PRINCES successiuely raigning; whom he hath in the basest sort (with his scorning Ribauldry) defiled and besmeered: that gulfe in Rome being not so vnsauorlie noisome to the Citie, as his reproachfull Contumelies and opprobrious slaunders, odious and offensiue to the best affected Subiects of this your Land. Into which Gulfe, if by casting my selfe (of Dutie to your Roiall Ma∣iestie, and in memorie of my late deere Mistresse, and for contentment of your true-harted peo∣ple) I proue not so happie, as that Romane was by Curtius apud Liuium. running into the other, to choake vp the sinke from sending out, for euer after, such loathsome sa∣uor; yet this good (at least) I shall doe, by drawing AL the filth vpon MY SELFE, keepe it off, either from further annoiance of your Sacred Maiesty or from a generall noisance. For seeing he can not hold, but must needes regorge (his spirit is so turbulent and vnquiet) and as Ierom speaketh of Heluidius, Maledicere omnibus bonae con∣scientiae signum arbitratur, he thinkes his con∣science Hieronim ad. uer. Heluid, then best discharged, when he hath revi∣led most: against ME let him emptie his whole quiuer of reproaches; all of them, I hope, will bee

like the Romish arrowes shot against Sebastian, drawne with bent force, loo'st with much ease, but receiu'd with strong comfort; Et quem veritate Ambros. in. Psal. 118. Idem. non potest, laceret conuitijs, since hee is too weake to dispute, let him lash on with his tongue. This ONE aduantage he shall be sure to get by that licence, that he shall put me to silence; for per∣sonall Calumnies I regard not, especially from Parsons, whose verie name is the Epitome of all Contumelie, beeing as currant in a Prouerbe as was once the name of Daedalus, in omni Fabula, Vide Erasm. Chiliad. & Daedali execratio: for no Libell can come from Rome, but PARSONS is presently suppo∣sed and noised to be the Author; and the more vile, the more PARSONS like. If the obiecti∣on bee, that I haue not spared from reproaching HIM, I deny it not; how could I forbeare, or who can blame me? None, that hath either Loi∣all heart to your Maiestie, beeing our Gracious Soueraigne, or Christian regard of Her (who late was) that euer-blessed Queene. Yet there, in haue I dealt with him no otherwise, then the Apostle with the Cretians: as he out of a Po∣eme of their owne Prophets; so I, out of the Tit. 1. 12. Bookes of his Fellow-Preists, giue him the sameQuodlibet. Iust. defence. &c.

(and no other) tearmes of reproach or bitternesse, which men of the same religion with him, haue described him by, in Print; and, vnto the worlds veiw haue confidently a vowed of him. If hee SO requite me, and quote the printed Authors, I open my selfe vnto HIM, and will indure THEM; If otherwise, I must repute him as a Slanderer, and weare them as my Garland: comforting my selfe with that Conclusion of S. Hierom, Cani∣nam Ierom. vbi su∣pra. facundiam Seruus Domini pariter ex∣periatur, & Vnctus, accounting it my Glorie, that the same Creature should rage and snarle at ME the Lords vnworthie Minister, which hath not spared TVVO ROIALL MONARCH S∣the Lords annointed, and amounted. In hande ling the maine points, I trust it will appeare that I haue neither dallied with him, nor illuded the Reader; so that, from anie sound replie thereto I dare assure my selfe securitie from HIM. Ver∣balize he can, dispute he cannot; In Stories he is a great flourisher, but a false Relator of them: who so inioines him a modest answer, doth vndoe him; neither his age, nor profession; neither shame of the world, nor feare of God, nor grace of the spi∣rit, can mortifie his nature, or restraine his tong.

But be the Reply any, or none, modest or distem∣per'd, your Sacred Maiestie I trust, shal be freed; whom, I besech the eternall God, still to pre∣serue, in prolonging your daies to your Subiects comfort; and in strengthning your arme, not with Pen anie more to confute (it giues them too great Honour) but with Iustice to confound, and with courage to cast off such seducing spirits; restles in nourishing disloialties; cruell in plotting mis∣chieus; and too subtile in veiling Treasons vn∣der the title of Religion: and account this as your great blessing (amongst the rest) from the great God that he hath made your Maiestie (a thing rare in so high a State) a Protectour of the Faith, both with Pen and Sword; and a partaker also of his Sonnes reproach, for So being. To the sauing grace of which blessed Iesus, I, in all humblenesse commend your Highnesse, resting

