



GOod friends, my purpose in publish∣ing these few leaues, is, to rub vp the memory of those many good Treatises, already extant, concer∣ning Temptations and the Christian Warfare,
M. Taylor, M. Downam, &c. and to bring them into vse. Pitie it is to see,
how so many and so good helps are gene∣rally neglected; and people for most part liue, as if they had ne∣uer heard of spirituall enemies, neither in the Ministerie, nor other∣wise. Certainly it is one maine stratageme of our aduersary, the de∣uill: perswading, either that there are no such blacke fiends to be fea∣red, or that they haue no power to tempt or corrupt them, through the goodnesse of their hearts, and the strength of their faith: and wor∣king
them to busie themselues about other matters, worldly af∣faires, lusts, vanities, and the treacherie of pretended friends, true enemies. While they run at large in these things, they shall neg∣lect him, and his vnder∣mining. Whereto if we adde the sensualitie of carnall men and wo∣men, who cannot looke vp to things aboue sense, and will not when they are called on, wee haue (I thinke) the full cause of this vniuersall securitie.

One of these rocks is commonly run vp∣on. The most thinke not on it, whether there be any deuill or no. Many espie a deuill, but rather in others than themselues: And after the sin is committed, not before: And it must be a foule, grosse, open sinne too, or else it goeth without ob∣seruation. The multi∣tude is of opinion, that bare spetting at the mention of the deuill, and defying of him, is sufficient: And so I haue marked in the
very treating of these things publikely. This is an vnreproueable re∣solution, and must not be called into question. And in other places, where this is laughed at for great simplenes (as indeed it is) yet through carelesnesse, or worldlinesse, or volup∣tuousnes, or other pro∣fanenesse, the deuill keepes vp his strong holds, and suffers in no manner as hee should. The story of these wars is all they affect and re∣gard. Yea Gods owne people doe not acqu
themselus so generous∣ly as they ought, in this cōbat; but, by the for∣mer euills, take great foiles, and hinder their progresse in grace ex∣ceedingly. And some of them who resist the de∣uill well and carefully in respect of sanctifica∣tion and the exercises thereof, yet in respect of consolation and those blessed priuileges which their heauenly Father allowes them in Christ, doe not resist him, but passe their daies vncō∣fortably. But these are more to be pitied, than
blamed: Yet withall must bead monished, to resist in this kinde as well as the other: be∣cause the deuils malice is seene in this, as in that, and God hath promi∣sed victory, as well as enioyned resistance.
If I may (as a Trum∣peter) stir vp the Lords Campe to consider bet∣ter of these enemies, I haue my desire. For mē of the former sort is the former voice of this Trumpet, in the Dire∣ction: For those of the latter sort, the latter voice, in the Cōsolation.
Take both together, & you shall acquit your selues like men, like men of God.
Lately I endeuoured by a small watchword to arme Gods people against the malignity of the world,
S. Matthewes contiersion. which at the worst, can but put vs to the losse of all worldly comforts, and must still leaue vnto vs God, and Christ, and our great Comforter, & our gra∣ces, & integrity of our consciences, & the glo∣ry of heauen. And now I attempt the like con∣cerning this Arch-ene∣mie,
the god of the world,
2 Cor. 4.4. the prince of darknes. He hath many waies to assaile vs, and we haue many weapons to repel him, with promise ther∣of, and victory, and a crowne of triumph. There is no one thing that can discourage vs, if we be not wanting to our selues, in watchful∣nesse, in conscionable vse of the meanes, and holy endeuours. Ther∣fore let vs vp and bee doing, and our God will goe out with vs, to assist vs, and foile our enemies.

But I will not preet my sele in the ensuing exhortations Take thē (good Reader) as they are; and though they giue not so strong and shrill a sound, as in the hand of the Lords o∣ther Trumpeters, yet a distinct sound they giue (I trust) & such as may prepare good Christi∣ans to the battell.
The Lord of hosts who hath ordained these conflicts, & hath said to his Prophets & their successors,
Esa. 58.1 Cry a∣loud, lift vp thy voice like a Trumpet, and Set
the Trumpet to thy mouth,
Hos. 8.1. vouchsafe a bles∣sing to these my ende∣uours, and giue his peo∣ple a heart to looke a∣bout them, that, while we keepe out carnall e∣nemies, we admit not spirituall, and lose not our soules by security while wee preserue our bodies and outward e∣states by magnanimity. What will it prosit a man to win the whole world, and lose his owne sowle? So I rest, thirsting for a good is∣sue of all these trialls and skirmishes, to you
and al the Lords War∣riors, that I may re∣ioyce with you in the day of our full Tri∣umph.
Lechlade. No∣uemb. 27. 1624.

