



TRue Religion the only badg of a Christian, hath two marks whereby it is certainely knowne; to wit, Zeale, and Constancie. Zeale, for it must not be cold, nor luke warm; but fervent and hot: Constancie, because it en∣dureth not for a season, and continueth but a while, but abideth vnto the end, vnto the death, for ever. This zeale which is so necessarily re∣quired in all men, but more properly in Magi∣strates and Governours▪ hath appeared Right Ho∣nourable and Right VVorshipfull most evidently, in your late proceedings against Popish Recu∣sants, at, and before the last Sessions, holden for this Countie, at an Aug. 19. vnvsuall time, and with ve∣ry extraordinary care & provision, for the sear∣ching, finding, fining, and restraining of the most dangerous persons of either sexe.
Of your Constancie likewise & perseverance in prosecuting so good beginnings, smal cause haue we to doubt, considering the goodnes of the cause, and the greatnes of autority, where∣with both your hands and hearts are strength∣ned from aboue, to the great ioy of all his Ma∣iesties loyall subiects, Gods faithfull servants. What remaineth now, but that we of the Clear∣gie for our parts, should second these happy beginnings with our vttermost indeavors? by adding the word vnto the sword, perswasions & cōferences, vnto those sharper means & cor∣rosiues which are applied, shewing our selues ready to offer vp, not only our labors, but our selues also for the good of such as haue bin se∣duced by the Priests, & Iesuits, but rather by the Iesuits then by the Priests, for which cause kno∣wing the danger, & being most willing (if it bee possible) to prevent it. I haue taken paines to compile this smal Treatise, that if God shall be pleased in mercy to open their eies, they may see the wicked liues, accursed manners, here∣ticall doctrine, & more then Matchiavillian po∣licy of that Society, which they do so devout∣ly follow, with perill both of soule and body.
This worke I hope will finde the better en∣tertainement with them, because it is taken wholly and soly from the writings of sundrie learned Priests, who spake as they were moved, vpon consideration of their wicked liues and maners, so that theirs are the proofs, mine the collection & method only, as the Quotations in the Margent wil sufficiētly declare. I admit, that both Priests & Iesuits are to be feared more and lesse, as dangerous enimies vnto his Maiesty, & the State: but chiefly the Iesuits, who hold their di¦sciples in such servitude, or rather slavery, that whatsoever they say is a law, & that law must be obayed, though God & man, reason or au∣thoritie, King or Kaisar say to the contrary. Frō such followers, as are once wholly devoted to their company, it wil bee a hard matter for the Magistrate (you find it by too lamentable experi¦ence) to draw either the Oath of Allegiance, or o∣bedience to the Magistrat in things Temporal, much lesse conference and conformity in mat∣ters spirituall.Mat. 8.9. For the Iesuits like the Centurion in the Gospell, haue that command & Iurisdictiō over their inferiors, that if they bid them goe, they goe, if they bid them doe this, they doe it, without ask∣ing

any question whether it be right or wrong, iust or vniust which is commanded: & the reasō is plaine, because they relie altogether vpon the Iesuit, and the Iesuit vpon the Pope, who is the only vnerring person vpon earth.
A most absurd doctrine, as any is in all Pope∣ry, wherewith notwithstanding, they haue be∣witched the soules of I knowe not how many men & women, otherwise very vertuously and religiously inclined, and what pittie is it, for vs to consider, what Cimmerian & more then Egyp∣tian darknesse they doe liue in, that are thus taught by their ignorāt teachers, that do vow themselues blind obedience? VVhen the blinde lead the blind,Mat. 15.14. how can it be but that both of thē should fall into the ditch.
Now this which is spoken against the Iesuits doth not acquit the Secular Priests, nor their fol∣lowers. For as long as they goe about, to recō∣cile men from their true and naturall Prince vnto the Pope, and to withdraw their mindes, from religion, vnto superstition, from Gods word, vnto fables, from God himselfe vnto Mammon: causing them that are reconciled, not only to professe all Popish points, accor∣ding

to the doctrine of the Councell of Trent, as vnwritten Traditions, Transubstantiation, Purgatory Indulgences, worshipping of Images, & Reliques, Iusti∣fication by workes, the truth of seaven Sacraments, obe∣dience to one only Pope, &c. but to make them Ar∣ticles of the Creed, and to take a solemne This true Catholique faith, without which no mā can bee saved which now I doe willingly professe, and hold, I the same N. doe promise, vow, and sweare, to hold & confes most constāt∣ly, by Gods help intire & vncorrupted, even to the last end of my life: & to pro∣cure as much as shall lie in me, that my subiects, or those of whō I shall haue care in my of∣fice, shal hold, teach, and preach the same. So God help mee and these holy Gospels of God. A Profes∣sion of the Ca∣tholike faith set out, according to the Decree of the Councell of Trent. Or, A manifest confes∣sion of the Christian Beliefe, which all vpright Catholike people at al times, being demanded to giue a reason thereof, are bound to confesse. Oath, that they will continue in the profession of all & eve∣ry of them vnto the death, and farthermore, perswade as much as in them lyeth, all others that are vnder thē to doe the like, we haue iust cause to suspect both their dealings, & to oppose our selues against their proceedings. The which thing you haue begun to doe, Right Honorable and Right VVor∣shipfull, to your eternall praise & commendati∣on, and to the example and encouragement of others You haue begun well, who shalbe a∣ble to hinder you, if God be on your side?
Goe forward then, I beseech you, in Gods name, both cheerefully and couragiously, you haue our earnest prayers, & shalbe sure to haue our best endeavors (if need require.) I knowe the readines of many learned and graue Di∣vines, to further this religious service, amongst

which, my selfe being one of the meanest in Gods Church, scarse worthy to be called a Di∣vine, doe most earnestly desire, to contribute my paines and service, & to make knowne vn¦to the world, the great affection which I beare vnto all sorts of people, thus by the Iesuits mi∣serably seduced: whose conversion as I haue al¦waies sought by good and faire meanes, such as the most wayward & peevishest adversaries cānot iustly except against: so is it my purpose, God willing, so to continue vnto my liues end, both by speech & writing, propagating that faith, whereof his Maiestie of al Princes Christian may truly be said to be the Defendor: and be∣cause the Iesuits are his & our chiefest enimies, accept, I beseech you, these few lines, concer∣ning their liues and maners in generall, & one of the chiefest of them in particular; the matter was ministred vnto me by certaine Secular Priests, the method in disposing and digesting of it was mine, to God bee ascribed the glory and benefit thereof, if any shall arise. And thus beseeching him to blesse you all with continu∣ance of your care, and increase of zeale, for the vtter suppressing of all Poperie and superstiti∣on,

and rooting out of all Priests and Iesuits. I humbly take my leaue▪
From the Publique Li∣brary in Oxford, Sept. 16. 1612.

