



GEntlemen, and my Christian friendes, & welwillers, as this Text from which I ex∣tract this Gratulatorie Tractate, (as is well knowne to the best and most of you) was sent me to preach upon, the very day before our solemnities, by Gods proui∣dence, and the choosers prudence, com∣ming to my handes speedily without much seeking or searching, likeGen. 27 v. 20 Iacobs Venison, so I have as I could on a suddaine, like your running banquets, catered and cooked it, (Rebecca like) however not costly, and curiously (for time permitted not) yet so cauteously (though cursorily, that if you have not left or lost your spirituall gust (asNumb. 11.6. Israell was once cloyed even with Manna it selfe) these my mentall dishes added to your corporeal, shall be (which is the Cookes chiefe commendation) both whole∣some andOmne nilit pnctum qui miscuit utile dul∣ci. toothsome. And now as the chiefe of you in this place, as the head and eye, and mouth of the rest sent & lent me this Scripture, as that great Master in theMath. 25.14 15. Gospell, put forth

his Tallents to his servants, to occupie and trafficke withall till his comming; so by labour and industrie, vehement and violent (perhaps) for the time, desirous to be found neither unfaithful, nor unfruitefull at the great Auditory. In the summoning of my best powers and spirits, by paralelling, uniting & annexing other Scriptures, as digging in those best Mines, I haue regained this treasure as you see, which as a cake from your owne meale, as the flowre of your owne Corne (grinded onely by my Milne) I have sent you home, as your owne: bagged and wrapped up, in these printed sheetes: And indeede as these lucubrations were first hatched at your motion, and by your meanes prest abroad thus publicke souldier-like, to doe service to their Prince and Countrie; so, of whom should they have a spect and respect, but from your selves: from whom they have both their first tray∣ning forth, and their principall pay? Besides as at my first plan∣ting in these parts (by the minde and meanes of our ever Ho∣nourable Earle) the very Nerves and Sinewes (under God and his Majestie) of these partes, with the Eagled eye of his farre famoused wisedome, ever vigilant (as a noble Centinell, for the spirituall aswell as temporall good of these Plantations) I was at my first arrivall, (comming over with my Honourable Mece∣nas the Lord Beamont Viscount of Swords) here first desiredly entertayned, and by some of you ever since (till now) lovingly and liberally retayned amongest you: I see not but that, both in reason and religion, you should receive the first fruites of my publike paines, since you have already payd for them aforehand by your pension. Moreover since I am here, a stranger amongest you, why may I not challenge for these my mentall issues and le∣gitimate of springs of my understanding part, the priviledge of our England, graunted to the corporeall issue of the poorest Pa∣rents, to be cast on the charges of the Parish where they were borne? Lastly, you know it is our Irish fashion, (as indeede in manie things we are too much hybernified) to expose our Chil∣dren to foster-fathers: in which streame of custome, (though

corrupt) I now swimming, as carried with the time &Omnia secum ventus & unda rapis. tide, as providing manie strings for one Bowe, least some breake; I have chosen manie fosterers to one Orphane, & though it be not so worthy that you should contend for it, (as some Cities were said to doe for Homer) yet such is my judgement (or opinion) of you all that love me in truth, & for the truth, that I thinke the meanest of my friends (in the best bound) in Town or countrey, to whose strong loves to my person and profession I am indeared & indebted) worthie enough to cherish this fruite as they have demonstrated their affections to the Tree. But to leave this des∣cant) which perhaps with some that can finde a knot inNondum in Scirpo quaerere. a bulrush, may subject me to construction) as your desires & mine sympathize and concurre with our best hearts, & affections, po∣wers and performances, to congratulate with all true English hearts (that un Iesuited & unleavened from Rome) are loyall to God, & to Caesar, this double blessing, (as two streames meeting in one brooke, to make our joyes brimfull from one Ocean and & fountaine of mercie. First the mercifull marvailous & mi∣raculous preservation of the breath of our nosthrils, our Sove∣raigne King, with the Peeres, Nobles, Prelates, & whole body of the Land, together with the Gospell & Religion, from that hel∣lish, horrid, barbarous, bloudy (had it beene effected as affected) Popish powder plot: as it's christened & cald. Secondly his pre∣servation hitherunto amongest us, as the very Atlas & pillar under the supreame Majestie of Heaven, of our Church & Com∣mon-wealth, as also the safe reduction of our Illustrious Prince from Spaine, anchored & fixed here againe, in his own countrey the English Court, every way as sound, as at his departure, in his body, soule, spirit, so calming & baming our grieves for his absence in the midst of the fluctuations of our feares, blessinges great & unspeable, in which we here dispersed in this land (as the Christian Iewes once in Asia, & Pontus) even from Vlster to Connaght, as all in great Brittaine, even from Dan to Beer∣sheba, from Barwicke to Dover, from Edenbrough to the ut∣most

Orcades, have such interest, as Israell had in their Da∣vid & Salomon 2. & as you that were the heades (imitating Limericke, Yoghell, & other well governed places, who set you a coppy, & gave you a perfect president) were not vvanting by your cares & costs, your paines & providence, by feastings, fe∣stivities, discharging of Guns, advancing of pikes (for you can∣not ringThe want of ls, one of our rish eye sores, & eare sores: bloudy Bellona attering our els & our bel∣rayes: our Townes & our Tēples, laying them as level in many places as Rome did Car∣thage, the Greekes Troy, & Titus Ierusa¦lem, is the grea¦test object of pittie my eye ever beheld: Oh that God wold stirre up some Ezras, & Nehe∣miahs to replāt & repayre the ruines of the goodliest king∣dome of the world for fish, flesh, fowle, & wholsome ayre wanting no∣thing, but Re∣ligion, Money, & Munition. Ah si fas dicere, sed non fas. Bels, unlesse you had them) Bonfires & other so∣lemnities to testifie your affections: after which motions also, the countrie moved by their presence, approving, not emula∣ting your performances; so I thought in my willingnesse of spirit though corporeall weakenesse, as you know, not to be behind hand in acting my part according to my place, & profession, dischar∣ging my conscience, my calling, alwayes in judgement & pra∣ctise, approving, delighting in, as desiring that best of Musicks, the harmony and wished correspondencie betwixt Moses and Aaron, David & Nathan, Salomon, & Zadocke, the sword & word, the Magistracie & Ministery, powers Civill & Eccle∣siasticall for the performance of any good worke, Morall, Polliti∣call, or Religious, of pietie towards God, of Charitie or Christia∣nitie towards man.
In which golden yoke, as you SirApostrophe to the Sove∣raigne. have begunne to draw, that are as this yeare, our Annuall Soveraigne, subordinate to three other soveraignes, (as I tould you when you were installed in your place) First to God the soveraigne Monarch of heaven and earth, by whom KingsProver. 8.15. Raigne, & from whose ordinance is all rule & authority, all superioritie &Rom. 13.1.2 subordination, in all conditions, Secondly the Kings Majestie the Lords high Ste∣ward & Vicegerent over us our terrestriallPsal 82.2, 1.6. God. Thirdly, to the R. Ho. Richard Lord Boyle, the Earle of Corke the prop of these parts our bestDe harmonia Politica, Arist. lib. 8 politic. cap. 3. states-Musitian, under his Majestie, to tune all right what's disioynted, & luctaite: ourQuomodo conveniunt Medicus, Minister, Ma∣gistratus, vide apud Berchorium, in suo reducterio Morali, lib. 4. cap. 28. pag. 106. 107. 10. stats-phy∣sitian to purge out our worst humors, and preserue us in sound

loyaltie to our Prince, & love & unitie amongst our selves, as our whole countrie who findes the sweetnesse of his prudencie & prouidence, so improued in publike & priuat, for the peace & prosperity of all in generall, & of euery one in particular, cannot but subscribe unto & acknowledge, unlesse blinded by papisticall prejudice, or possest with that hellish Hagge, the Devils eldest daughter Enuie, or his grand-childe detraction: I say, as you even already haue by your bounty, prouidence, & circumspecti∣on, giuen some good glimpses, & promissing prologues, of your succeeding gouernment; so all that I will recommend unto you, at this time, for incouragment or further direction is this, Per∣ge pede quo coepisti: Spartā quam nactus es, hāc orna, I, bo∣ne: virtus quo te tua vocat, I pede fausto: goe forward as you haue begun: do not extremo actu deficere, faile not in your last part, for theFinis & ho∣num convertun∣tur. end is the perfection of euery worke, both morall & spirituall. The praise & the palme of euery race that's atchei∣ued, whether performed by man, or beast, horse, or greyhound, is not onely speed of the hand, & then to lagge and dragge in the midst, but truth to hold out to the end, though the course be lōg & strong. It's nothing for a new Beesome to sweepe eane, for a new knife to cut sharpe, for a new seruant to be industrious, for a new Bride to be louing, whilst it is honie Moone: for a people to be new fangled of a new preacher, as the Iewes were of Iohn theMath. 3.5. Luke 3.7 8 Baptist, as children are of flowers, & after to throw them a∣way, & reject them, as the Iewes did1. Sam. 8.5 Samuel,Ierem. 18.18. Ieremie, yea to hang & head them, if they could, as Herod did withMark 6.20.27. Iohn. I could apply this to the Magistracie, but verbū sat, &c. a word (a winke) is enough to the wise. Continuance & perseve∣rance crowes euery action, therefore let your last workes be bet∣ter still then theRevel. 2.19. first, (as Aleinious Garden) let your last fruites rellish the ripest, the sweetest, reserue your best Wine for you lastVt apud Iohn. cap. 2.10. feast, use aright those fascesApud Livill & Fenestellam. magistratus, those rods of rule fetcht from the Romanes, those worthy Patriots fa∣moused by all writers. Vse aright as I publikely prescribed you,

those ods of beautie, and ofZeh. 11.7. bands, in the right mixture of thie and justice (as of white and red, in the damaske Rose) I will not give you now, Cramba bis cocta, Coleworts twice sod; only thus much: Vindicate Gods glory upon Drunkards, Swea∣rers, Idolaters, profaners of the Saboth chiefly, against these Cor∣morants (or Cornvorants) that forest all the Markets, inhaūce the price of Corne in grosse, (and so purloine from the poore: so the bellies of the poore shall blesse you as they didb. 29.13. Iob. Stand for God, aswell as for Cesar, as didExod. 32 v. 29 Levit. 9.23 24 Numb. 14.39.40 41. vers. Moses,Nehem. 6 ve. 10.11. & chap. 13. v. 11.25.17. Nehemiah, David, Iosiah in Scripture, Iustinian, Gratian, the two Theo∣dosij, Cōstātine, in histories, in whose glasses see your own faces: knowing that a Governour must bee custos utrius{que} Tabulae, having oculum cum Sceptro, an Eagles eye, & a Lions heart, to spie, redresse and remove (at least the mulcts reprove) sinnes both against God and man, in the breach of the first and second Table: otherwayes (as in the Church & familie, so in Cities & Corporations, in the common-wealth) the sins of inferiours un∣tutored, unpunished not corrected are set upon the score of the Superiors, as the sinnes of Elies sonnes, were the taxations of Eli the1. Sam. 2.29 father, as indeede if the garden be overgrowen with weedes, the Corne with Tares, wher's the fault, but in the Gar∣diner, and in the Husbandman? But hoping that you, and all that shall succed you, here in the Magistracie, (as we in the Mi∣nistery, and Masters in Families) will have a care on the mayne chance to wash your hands, (not in hypocrisie asMath. 27.28 Pilate) but in sinceritie, as onceAct. 20.26. Paul, free from bloud of all men, in Gods great day of retribution. I rest
To all and every one of you, even in that nature you are to me, and to my Ministerie affected.

