



Right Worshipfull Sir, and Euer-honored Tutor:
WHEN I looke backe and consi∣der (as duty bindes mee,) in what age of the world, in what ripenesse of the Gospell, in what Climate and Region, I was brought forth, together with the means of my education and tray∣ning; Then doe I finde my selfe for euer bound in soule and body to the mercy and goodnesse of the Almighty Lord God, who thus gaue me my life, being, and motion, and all other my abilities, with the blessed opportunity of place, time, and

meanes of the Gospel, with a call to the preach∣ing of it, for the eternall saluation of mine owne poore soule and others: Yet so, that my Parents, Friends, Kindred and Countrey, as also my In∣structors and Tutors, may iustly vnder God, and according to his will claime a share and interest in mee. My desire is, in some acceptable measure to bee answerable to my duty in all the parts of it. Now my whole life and strength is, and euer shall be consecrated to the Honour and Seruice of my Lord and Master IESVS CHRIST: to whose glory, I haue, by his grace, spared time from mine ordinary ministeriall paines, to publish this present Treatise, for the behoofe, information, and inci∣ting of my Christian Brethren to glorifie God by a zealous walking with him. And for my kindred and Countrey, among other parts of my dutie daily performed on their behalfe; I thought good to expresse my thankfulnesse to the whole State of the Towne and County of Newcastle, by dedica∣ting to them the two former Sections of this Trea∣tise, in respect not onely of my breeding among them, but chiefly of that encouragement which from their bounty my studies and Ministeriall la∣bours doe finde.
Now, good Sir, I should much forget my du∣ty and respect to you, who vnder God, were the onely Tutor and formor of my studies in the Vni∣uersity, if remembring my thankfulnesse to others, I should passe by your selfe. (Though I forget not my mother the Vniuersity, nor the Colledges, Saint Iohns and Immanuel: the latter whereof gaue

me entertainment and lodged me with you sixe yeares, the other nourished and helped to main∣taine mee twelue yeares. Other requitall then this thankfull acknowledgement, for them I haue not at this present.) Giue me leaue then thus publique∣ly to expresse my dutifull respect and thankfulnesse to you also, by dedicating to your name this third Section, contayning a Sermon preached in your hearing,March 5. 1614. at a solemne Assembly in Saint Maries in Cambridge. Your right to it, as to all other my abilities in this kinde, is the greatest of any mans.
I spare to speake what further right you haue in mee, and how much I am beholding (in my par∣ticular) to the example of your integrity and con∣scionable course of life, of your great and conti∣nuall paines, humility, and modesty euery way, you being as eminent in and for humilitie, as hum∣ble in eminency of gifts. But I dare not presume to presse these while I praise them: I know you had rather so bee, then be knowne to bee, further then Gods glory and the necessity of the Church requires; and so you neither are nor can be vn∣knowne. I will conclude, propounding the exam∣ple of your wonderfull diligence and constant paines, as also modesty, to such as in the Ministery seeke their owne ease, and follow their pleasures, and by the Ministery seeke dignities and prefer∣ments to themselues. Doubtlesse labouring with like singlenesse of heart and modesty of minde, they should finde little cause to doubt so much of Gods Prouidence, as to despaire of Prouision proporti∣onable to their gifts. You haue found it vnsought

for, but shall finde the fruit and reward much more hereafter. . I will not presume to stirre vp you, but my selfe, and other sluggards, in and with the words of Ig∣natius,Ignat. epist. 1. to one Mary, . And thus I end.
Newcastle vpon Tine, April 19. 1621.

