




BEING to publish to the view of the world, and
by way of dedication to present to your worthy
selues (deere Countreymen) this volume, con∣tayning
the liues of the three renowned Patrons
of our Countrey, I deemed it very wel befitting
the argument I handled, and the condition of the tymes we liue
in, to addresse the selfe same Commonitory to you, that the E∣uangelicall
Prophet directed to the Israelits:Isa. 50. Attend (sayth he)
to Abraham your Father, and to Sara your Mother that boare you. For
in these turbulent times, wherein the fury of armed heresy hath
thrust her violent hāds to the stelth of your choisest treasure, the
Roman faith I meane, which you haue peaceably enioyed du∣ring
the reuolution of many ages, what is more powerfull to
stirre vp in your breasts the zeale of Catholike Religion? What
more able to kindle in your hartes the flame of perfect charity?
What more soueraigne to scatter the cloudes of your afflicted
mindes? Or what more potent to breath into your soules the
sweet gale of Christian comfort? Then to offer vnto your intel∣lectuall
view, S. Patricke the Abraham from whome you des∣cended,
and Irland the Sara, by whome you were borne? Tru∣ly
on whome soeuer of them both you cast your eyes, the con∣templation

of either him, or her, will inrich your memories
with the knowledge of so worthy matters, as are able to glutt
your minds with content, and rauish your soules with delight.
Vouchsafe then (deere Countrymen) to cast a fixed eye
on the ancient dignity of Irland,Lectiones Eeclesiae Tarentēsis de Sancto Cathaldo tractatus Collegij Conceptio∣nis fol. 8. & 9. and you shall find, that shee
hath exposed on the theater of the Catholicke Church, such
firme pillars of fayth, such burning lights of Religion, such clear
mirrours of perfection, such perfect paternes of sanctity, & such
rare miracles of learning, that other Christian Kingdomes are
so farre from ouer-peering her, that few peere her in flying so
high a pitch of true glory. And fearing to be branded with the
foule note of adulation, to your worthy selues, or partiality to
my deere Country,Thyreus in Panegiri de Sancto Patricio. I will keep within compasse, so as I meane
to produce nothing, but what hath beene deliuered from the
pens of famous Authors, who either for their antiquity claime
veneration,P. Fitzi∣mons in sua Brit∣onomachi∣a. or for their learning deserue credit, or for their san∣ctity
chalenge authority. Euery Author I will alleadge by
name speaking in his genuin sense, if not in his proper wordes.
And to commence from the splendour of learning, I wil
not detaine you with a longe discourse, touching our domesti∣que
Academies,Lupoldus Babarbu∣gius deze∣lo veter principū Germano∣rum. Lismor, Dune, Cashell, Magon, Dublin, and
Ardmach, the happy nurses, & fecundious mothers of al human
and diuine literature, but will remit such as are curious after
fuller content in this behalfe, to the perusall of the lessons of
of the Church of Tarentum: The treatise of the Colledge of the
Conception: Bishop Thyrrie, and Father Fitzimons, and wil my
selfe passe to take a Suruey of forraine kingdomes, and externe
Academies,S. Anto∣ninus 2. p. hist. tit. 14. cap. 15 §. 12. that receaued from Irland the first beginnings, or at
least the increase, and propagation of learning. Lupoldus Babar∣bugius
sayth: The French may be matched with the Romans, by the in∣dustry
of Clement the Irish man.Sabell. Ae. 8. l 9. Nauclerus tom. 2. vol 3. gen. 28. This Clement to geather with one
Iohn a Monke by profession, and an Irish-man by birth, layd the
first foundations of the famous vniuersity of Paris, which was,
and hath beene accounted for many Century of yeares, the flo∣rishing
Athens of Christendome, as witnesseth S. Antonine, Sa∣bellius,Baron. to 0, ad Ann. 876.
Nauclerus, Barronius. The same learned, and graue Au∣thours
depose in like manner. That the renowned vniuersity
of Padua in Italy, was erected by the prementioned Irishmen,

who were the founders of the vniuersityes of Oxford, Landes∣farne,
and Malmsbury in England? Who were the erecters of
the Academies of Herbipolis, Cullen, Sengallensis, and Fulda in
Germany? Who the authors of Bobium in Italy, and Luxouium
in France?Cambden. in impress. Londinensi fol. 185. 177. 267. 730. Irishmen, as auerreth Cambden, the renowned En∣glish
antiquary. What infinite numbers flocked out of the
Neighbour kingdomes into Ireland, to be enriched with the
ornaments of learning and treasures of piety, the foresayd lear∣ned
Cronicler consecrateth to posterity, telling vs in these
wordes: That his Countrymen the English Saxons, did throug from all
parts into Irland,S. Adel∣mus in epi. ad Elfridū Regem. as vnto the mart of all good litterature, in so much that
it grew to a common Prouerbe among them of such as were giuen to their
studies, he was sent into Irland to be trayned vp. This we may fur∣ther
confirme from the suffrage of S. Adelme, who in his epistle
to King Elfride speaking of Ireland, sayth: It florished and was
stored with as copious a number of Studients, as the heauens were ador∣ned
with the syderiall beames of glittering starres.
These then were the burning lampes of learning, and
brightsome lights of wisedom that shined so gloriously at home,
and extended their lustre so spaciously abroad, for the publique
good, and common benefit of all Europe. Where you are to ob∣serue,
that albeit they were men of rare learning, of profound
wisedome, of deepe iudgment, and subtile vnderstandings,
yet did they submit their vnderstanding, and iudgments, and
captiuate their wisedomes and learning, to the obedience of
fayth: so that in all their number there was none found to de∣ny
the deity of the second person, with Arrius, nor the diuini∣ty
of the holy Ghost with Macedonius, nor the truth of the
reall presence with Caluin, nor the necessity of good workes
with Luther, none was found to be a Manichean, Marcionist,
Donatist, Eunomian, Anabaptist, or Puritan: none I say was
found among them to adhere to ould sectmasters, or to follow
new Dogmatizers, none to embrace the heresies that grew in
former ages, or sprunge vp in these later tymes; so happy was
Ireland by the fauour of heauen to liue still in the perpetuall
sunne-shine of Catholicke Religion, without the interpositiō
of any cloud of errour or heresy. Neither was Ireland our deere
Coūtry happy only, in cōseruing the integrity of faith, without

any touch of disloyalty, and being enriched with the treasures
of wisedome and learning, but she was much more fortunate,
and fecundious in producing from out of her wombe miriades
of Saints,S. Bern. in vita. S. Malachiae. Henric. and holy men, whereof we haue infinite proofes ex∣tant,
of which I will, for your comfort recite a few.
S. Bernard sayth, Out of Ireland, not only into the forementi∣oned,
but euen into forraine regions,Antisidorē. in epist. dedicatoria vitae S. Germani ad Carolū Caluum. Ioselinus infra c. 19. §. 4. as it were after an inundation, such
swarmes of Saints did breake out, of whome S. Columbanus comming
to these our quarters of France, there builded the monastery of Luxoni∣um,
being made into a great nation. And Henricus Antisidorensis
sayth: What need I speake of Ireland, passing (almost all) without any
regard of the dangers of the sea to these our shores, with whole troupes of
Philosophers, and the more skillfull any of them is, so much the more wil∣ling
is he to vndertake a voluntary banishment, that he might serue our
most sage Salomon at will. And Iocelinus beneath in this volume
sayth: Within a short space, there was not a wildernesse, noe nor scarce
any corner,Theod. Ab in vita S. Rumoldi. nor place in all the Iland, but was replenished with perfect
Monkes, and holy Nunnes, so that Ireland by a peculiar name was iust∣ly
called, all the world ouer, The Iland of Saints. They liued accor∣ding
to the prescript, and tenour of life, which S. Patricke set thē down;
for contempt of the world,Gaufridus in vita S. VVironij. Marinus Scotus in Cronica l. 2. aetat. 7. anno 614. Guliman. in vita S. Florent. Ionas Ab. apud Suri∣um 21. Nouemb. desire of heauenly thinges, mortification of the
flesh, abdication of selfe will, they matched the monkes of Egipt, both in
merit and number. Many forraine regions were by them illustrated with
doctrine, and religion. Theodorus Abbot sayth: This iland, as it sur∣passeth
all the world for fertility of soyle, so is it more blessed for the glo∣rious
simplicity of Saints. Gaufridus likewise testifyeth: Scotland,
which is also called Ireland, is a fertile Ile of Saints, and equalling almost
the number of starres, with the patronages of Saints. Marianus Scotus
sayth: Ireland is an Iland full of saints, and very wounderfull men.
Gulimanus: Ireland is the shoppe of most holy and learned men. Ionas
Abbot sayth: Ireland for fayth excelleth all the Neighbour Countryes.
Baronius: Ireland is most constant in the Catholike Religion. Doctor
Sanders: The people of that Country, are farre more Catholike, then
many other Nations. Flodoardus sayth: Ireland for fayth, surpasseth
all the neighbour Nations.Card. Bar. ad Annum 1503. Ioannes Maginus: The Irish maint aine the
Christian religion purely.Sanderus descismat. Anglicano. Flodoard. in vita S. Hellani. Ioannes Maginus Patauiensis tn. 2. fol. 36. These then be the testimonyes (deere

Country men) that learned and graue Authors giue to the san∣ctity,
fayth, and learning of Ireland.
But perchance your pious curiosity will not be satisfyed
with these generall notions, therefore I will descend to some
particulers, and giue a sight of a few of the many trompets of
truth,Ioan. Mol in addit. ad Vsuardum & Id. 51. Belgij. preachers of the ghospell, and mirors of sanctity, which
Ireland hath dispersed all Europe ouer, as witnes Ioannes Mōla∣nus,
Antonius Yepes, Venerable Bede, Wyon, the English martyrologe,
Cambden, and others: Ireland hath sent S. Columbe the Great with
his twelue holy companions into Scotland.Yepes in Cron. ge∣neralib. S. Columban with
his twelue companions into France. S. Clement with his twelue
companions into Almaine. S. Buan into Island. S. Kilian into
Franconia.Ord. S. Benedicti. S. Scruan into the Orcades. S. Brendan into the for∣tunate
Iles. S. Aydan into Northumberland. S. Finian into
Marcia,Beda in hist. Eccl. or the kingdome of the middle Englishmen. S. Albuin
into Lorraine. S. Gallus into Switzerland. S. Virgile into Ca∣rinthia.VVion in ligno vitae & appen∣dice Mar∣tyrologium Anglican. Cambden. vbi supra, & alij.
S. Cathald into Tarentum. Ireland hath giuen the
Diocesse of Cambray S. Etton, Adalgisus, Mombulus. And the
Archbishop of Rhemes S. Abel. She hath giuen to the Diocesse
of Mecklin S. Pumold Archbishop of Dubline, and King of Ire∣lands
sonne, and S. Hiniclin. To the Diocesse of Liedge S. Mo∣man
Martyr, S. Foylan, Vltan and Bertuin. To the Diocesse of S.
Omers S. Luglius King of Ireland, and S. Luglianus Archbi∣shop.
To the Diocesse of Gaunt S. Liuin, and Columban. To
the Diocesse of Antwerp S. Fredegand. To the Diocesse of Na∣mures
S. Foranan, and S. Eloquius. To the Diocesse of Bruges
S. Guthagon. To the Diocesse of Harlem S. Geron. To the Di∣ocesse
of Ruremond, S. Wiron and Plechelmon. To the Diocesse
of Balduke S. Dymphna, and Oda Martyrs, and Virgins of roiall
blood, and S. Gereberne. These were the masters of fayth, the
Embassadors of Religion, the Euangelistés of peace, Ireland em∣ploied
in illustrating forraine Countryes (not to speak of Iliades,
& millions that shined at home like so many meridian sunnes)
Pastors and Bishops (to vse S. Augustines phrase) who were graue,Aug. lib. 1. cont. Iuli
learned, holy, earnest defendors of the truth, who sucked the Catholicke
fayth with their milke, and tooke it with their meate, whose milke, and
meate they ministred to the little and great.
Hitherto deere Countrymen, I haue exhibited Ireland to

your consideration, giuing you rather a transitory sight, then a
full vieu of the beauty, and maiesty, the finger of the Almighty
hath imprinted on her face. Now it resteth that I present to
your fauourable aspects another no lesse gratefull, and eysome
an obiect S. Patricke your glorious Abbot, from whom Ire∣land
receaued fayth, religion, piety, and whatsoeuer els in this
kind she holdeth glorious, deemeth deere, or accounteth hono∣rable.Plauius Dexter in sua omni∣comoda historia.
I doe not deny that S. Iames the Great came long before
S. Patricke to plant the Christian Religion in Ireland, as Fla∣uius
Dexter an anciēt Author liuing in the same age with Ierom,
Ioannes Gill, and Vincentius Bellouacensis teach. Grant S. Mansue∣tus
an Irish man by birth, and disciple to S. Peter the Apostle,
was sent by S. Peter himselfe in the yeare of our Lord 49. to
preach the Ghospell in Ireland,Vincentius Belloua. & Ioannes Gill. as it pleaseth Fisingrēnsis Admit
Palladius, suppose Cataldius, grant Derlanus, Ytarus, Riaranus, &
Hildebertus for the reduction of Irelād from paganisme, this not∣withstanding
the full reclaime and entiere conuersion of Irelād
was reserued for S. Patricke,Fisingresis. who won her to the detestation of
Idols, and worshipp of one true and liuing God, and this none
will controll or gayne stand, but such as are possessed with the
spirit of contradiction, and who are more earnest to iangle, thē
desirous to be informed of the truth. His life which heere we
offer you, will aboundantly teach how stupendious he was in
perpetrating of miracles, how admirable in al kind of sanctimo∣ny,
and how enflamed with the zeale of gayning soules.
He wrote as Pitseus witnesseth, many workes.Pitseus de illustri∣oribus Brittaninae scrip. aetat. 5. fol. 90. Of the fu∣ture
life of the Elect, one booke. Of the three habitacles, one
booke. A Iournall of Confession, one booke. The history of
Ireland, one booke. Offermons, one booke. One booke of
Epistles against the superstitions of the Gentils. An epistle to
the inhabitants of Aualon. Seuerall epistles to the Brittons. Se∣uerall
epistles to the Churches of Ireland. Hodeoporicon or (Itine∣tarium)
of Ireland, one booke.
He liued an hundred and two and twenty yeares, most
part of which tyme he spent in reclayming the Irish from idola∣try
to the agnition of one true God: during the course of so ma∣ny
yeares so fruitfully spent among vs, his pen neuer deliuered,
his tongue neuer vttered, nor himselfe neuer practifed indeed

any thing that might haue the least colour of fauouring or esta∣blishing
that Religion, which the preachers of the fift Ghospel
proudly vaunt, and vainely boast, to be the doctrine and fayth
of the Primitiue Church. And since they obtrude their new
found Ghospell on you, vnder the specious vizard of venera∣ble
antiquity; loe we offer heere S. Patrickes life, written by
a learned pen 400. yeares agoe, and extracted out of the seue∣rall
volumes, S. Luman, S. Benignus, S. Mel, S. Patricke the yon∣ger,
and S. Leuinus haue compiled of his famous acts and stupē∣dious
signes. Loe I say we offer them Saint Patrickes life, who
liued in the purer times of christianity, let them examine it, let
them search it, & point vs out what they shall find in it to coū∣tenance
their cause, or to aduance their religion: but sure I am
they will shrincke from such a disquisition, as would turne to
their notable preiudice and open confusion, by discouering the
fondnes and nouelty of their religion. For nothing will occure
heere but quires of sacred virgins cap. 17. §. 2. and cap. 18. §.
4. and troupes of holy monkes, ibid. &c. 13. §. 5. cap. 12. §. 3.
They will admire at the frequent mention of holy Vayles cap.
10. §. 1. &c. 13. §. 5. and Ecclesiasticall tonsure, cap. 4. §. 1.
Holy water, cap. 16. §. 5. Vessels of holy oyles cap. 15. §. 4.
Hallowed fire, cap. 5. §. 2. The signe of the Crosse cap. 18. §.
2. & alibi, sound very harshly in Protestants eares. Our wi∣uing
Ghospellers hold no commerce, or society with a continēt
and chast Monke cap. 20. §. 3. cap. 22. §. 1. The refined Ritu∣alists
of Geneua, will neuer acknowledge our glorious Prelate,
walking in the maiesty of a Romaine Pallium. These delicate
reformers, wil neuer challenge a religious, consumed with fasts
and weakned with hayre-cloath cap. 1. §. 7. cap. 20. §. 3. as a
disciple of their sensuall Palenesse, comming of long standing in
cold water cap. 20. §. 3. a thing neuer practised by our tender
olifidians. Short and broken sleepes taken all alone on a hard
flint cap. 20. §. 3. seeme strange and absurd in the Theology of
our libidinous Ministers, who lie immersed in beds of downe,
not alone, but embracing their sweet harts with greater deuo∣tion,
then euer any Genua Bible.
This rigid tenor of life, sauoureth much of Martin, and
German, those austere old men, whome S. Patricke glorieth to

haue been his masters & instructors c. 3. §. 1. This child of grace
glorieth to haue had so worthy educators, whose liues, if any list
to peruse, he shal quickly discerne, how far they were from im∣pressing
in his hart, any thing that relisheth to Lutheranisme or
Caluinisme. But what need I run so far into these proportionles
parales? Whē as the monasteries our glorious Apostle erected;
the Churches he foūded; the Cloisters he gouerned; the Bishops
he cōsecrated; the Priests he ordained; the Virgins he vayled;
the pennance he preached; the mortificatiō he exersiced; & the
progeny frō him descended proclaime to the world that he ad∣uāced
no other colors of religiō, thē those, vnder which Christs
militant spouse the Catholike Roman Church marcheth at this
present day. And though the whole body of the reformed reli∣giō
lyeth a bleeding at al her veynes (and had been long since
buryed in the cenders of obliuiō did it receaue no more support
from the tēporal sword, then it doth frō the sword of the spirit)
being so deeply lanced, & cruelly wounded by the irresistable
weapons wherwith Ekius, Castro, Bellarminus, Baronius, Feuardē∣tius,
Becanus, Cano, Stapleton, Panagaroll, & other valiant chāpions
of the Catholike cause, haue copiously stored the Arsenals of
their famous writings: yet wil I here (to remoue all ambiguity
in behalfe of S. Partrick) furnish the scrip of your memoryes with
fiue most bright stons taken vp out of the torrent of our glorious
Apostles life, wherwith if you charge the sling of your tongues,
the weakest among you shalbe able to encounter, & cast downe
any temerarious, & Goliah-harted protestant that should vnder∣take
to renew the lost field, or to recouer the gayned breach, or
to breath life a new into these fiue (for exāples sake) death-sicke
members of the fift Ghospell. Euery King, & tēporall Prince is
head of the Church within his own dominions, and signeories.
The holy Sacramēt of the Eucharist, is but a bare type & naked
figure: no religious worship is to be exhibited to the sacred re∣liques
of Saints: the Masse deserueth not the honour or na∣me
of a sacrifyce, it being but a phantastical stage-show, fraught
with ridiculous gesticulatiōs: sole & naked fayth is able to trā∣port
vs to the hauen of interminable happines. What, is this the
symbole that Patricke hath planted with infatigable paynes, &
roborated with stupendious miracles? Is this the forme of belief
that hath ingendred in our worthy Ancestors such contempt of

sublunar felicity, such detestation of sensuall blandishments, &
such thirst of heauenly beatitudes? Why then did Patrike seeke
and accept of his mission from the Roman chaire c. 3. §. 2. & 4?
Why did he procure her priuiledges and indults c. 17. §. 2? Why
did he not misprize the title of Apostle, the office of Legat, the
Pallium of Bishop she bestowed of him, c. 17. §. 33? Where doth
he treate with Kinges, touching the vndergoing this care of
preaching? Or where is the least mentiō to be foūd that he was
emploied by them in this charge? We find in this volume, c. 10
§. 2. & 4. that he reuoked to life, & enspirited againe, the dead
bodyes of Kinges, but neuer that he entituled them heads of the
Church, & surely he was no lesse faythful in designing of these
liuing vnder one supreme and soueraigne Pastour, then he was
fortunate in reuiuing them. By S. Patrickes verdict then, not
Kings, but Bishops are gouernors of the Church & Presidents
of fayth. The moderne sect masters depriue you of the substāce,
and substitute but a bare shadow of Christs body in the holy
Eucharist. But more liberall is Patricke, who confidently tea∣cheth
(q) the bloud & body of our spouse, to be shrouded vnder
these visible symbols c. 6. §. 6. &c. 16. §. 5. and stileth it, a diuine
Viaticum, c. 10. §. 2. These pure Gospellers daigne not scarce the
honor of sepulture to sacred bodies, of whose cinders S. Patrick
deliuereth magnificent eulogies, & prophecieth gloriously c. 12
§. 5. and brought himselfe frō Rome reliques of the Apostles &
Martyrs, togeather with a sheet died with our Sauiours bloud,
causing thē to be shrined sumptuously, & worshiped religiously
c. 17. §. 3. Calum & Luthers progeny, are so incensed against the
holy sacrifice of masse, that they are not only cōtent to abrogat
the vse therof, but they would haue the very name obliterated.
But S. Patrike was a most earnest establisher of the Masse, by the
cōfessiō of protestants thēselues, so that with the bare instrumēts
used in that misterious oblatiō he wrought stupēdious signes, c.
11. §. 2. & deliuered many honorable encomioms of it. Now as
for saluatiō attained by sole fayth, the Proto-patriark of the fift
gospell, is so serious to establish this wicked Theorem, that in
fauour of it, he shameth not to discard canonicall Scripture;
thinking perchance that himselfe being the Apostle of a god &
goddes Bacbus & Venus might by authority down waigh & ouer

the Apostle of Iesus Christ. S. Patricke was so farre from allow∣ing
of this exoticall and vnchristian paradoxe, the sluce to all
flagitiousnesse, that he tearmeth with S. Iames, Fayth that is
not animated by good workee, a dead, and life-lesse fayth, nay
no fayth at all, that in any wise auailes towardes our finall
happinesse. By this Antithesis of these fiue articles in debate
betweene vs and Protestants (not to enterlarge me any more
in a cause so perspicuous in any dispassionate eye) the Antino∣my
or opposition of the fift ghospell, and S. Patrickes religi∣on,
is rendred so luculent and manifest, that the proudest Achil∣les
of the Protestant side, vnlesse he be moone-sicke, wil neuer
presume to accept of the combat on the open playne of S. Pa∣trickes
life. Now to declare the triall of so indifferent and vn∣partiall
a barre, and to flinche from the vnpreiudicate verdict
of Saint Patricke (who liued within the compasse of the fiue
prime ages of the confessed purity of fayth and religion) cannot
but put all Catholikes, and especially Irishmen, in suspicion of
their fraudulent dēportement, and foule wracking impostures,
since it was Patrike that brought to them the brightsome light
of true, and neuer fayling fayth, if euer she blazed her glorious
beames on the face of Ireland (and I suppose none will be soe
impudent as to deny she did) since it was Patricke that planted
Ireland, a Paradise of pleasures, whether Elias would not dis∣daine
to be transported in his fiery Caoch to glut his mind with
her marueilous delights, since it was he that consecrated her as
it were a third heauen, whether S. Paul would willingly be
rauished to contemplate her delightfull maruayles, since it was
he that disimpestered her by the soueraigne influxion of his sa∣cred
benediction, of the encombrance of serpents, scorpions &
other venemous animals, since it was he that beautifyeth her
with the stately structures of religious monasteries, garnished
her with many miriades of renowned Saints, enriched her
with copious treasures of sacred priuiledges, so that scarce any
corner can be found in Ireland, that is not sanctifyed with some
worthy monument of his holy benediction. What hitherto we
haue instanced in a more ample and diffuse manner concerning
S. Patricke our chiefe patron and Apostle, the same we may
auouch no lesse of S. Bridgit the seconde in the number of our

holy patrons: how farre she was from houlding with Prote∣stants,
or breaking with Catholikes, her life will giue ample
testimony. The same we may as well auerre of S. Columbe,
who is the third in the glory of patronizing Ireland; for he
taught no other religion in Brittany or the lesser Scotland, then
that himselfe learned in Ireland, or the greater Scotland. What
this religion was, Protestant or Papisticall, I leaue it to the ar∣bittement
of any that wil with conscience peruse his life, which
heere we haue compendiously set downe. Heare then, O wor∣thy
childrē with an obsequious eare, the doctrin of your thrice
worthy Father S. Patricke, and of your two other holy Patrōs,
bind it on your fingers,Prou, 1. and write it in the tables of your hartes,
to preuent that you sincke not so deepe in the gulfe of true mi∣sery,
as you haue soared high in the ayre of Christian glory, to
preuent that the world, that hitherto hath proclaymed your
impregnable fidelity, declayme not against your damnable per∣fidie:
If sinners entise you, do not condescend to them; for their feete
do run to euill. What greater euill can they runne into, then to
varnish their nouuell religion, with the graue colours of vene∣rable
antiquity? Or what greater imposture can they impose on
you, then to father their protestant paradoxes, on the primitiue
Christians? Can any conceaue that our moderne sect-masters,
after the reuolution of so many ages, see more clearely, or pra∣ctise
more faithfully, the religion that flourished in the first fiue
centuryes after our redemption, then S. Patricke who liued
within the compasse of the sayd tymes? O no! This bragge
then of their pretensed concordance with the Christians of these
purer tymes, is a vaine flourish, a painted shew, a mere collusiō.
who is meanly conuersant in the Epistles ofAnac. epist. 1. & 2. Anacletus the
first, SixtusSixtus epist. 2. the first, EuaristusEuari. epist. 1. the first, AlexanderAlex. epist. 1. the
first, or inDiony. epist. 2. Dionysius,Euseb. epist, 3. EusebiusSilues. in Concil. Rom. c. 20 SyluesterDam. epist. 2. ad Stephanū. & Concil. Africae. Damasus, or
Anast. ad Ger. & Burgundiae Episcopos. Anastasius, but knowes what to hould, and embrace concer∣ning
the primacy, and headship of the Roman sea? Who euer
perusedTert. de resur. carnis c, 8. Tertullian,Cyprian. epict. 54. S. Cyprian,Hylar. lib. 8, de Trin. S. Hilary,Ambros. de Sacrament. lib. 5. cap. 4. S. Am∣brose,
Hiero. in Ezech lib. 14. S. Hierome,August in Psal. 33. S. Augustine, but see how patently they
confesse the reall presence of our Sauiours bloud, & body in the

holy Eucharist. There is none so little versed inAlex. epist. 1. c. 4 Alexander,Telesp. epist. ad omnes vi∣riliter. c. 2.
Telesphorus,Anac. ep. 1. c. 2. Anacletus,Cypri. ep. 60. & 68. S. Cyprian,Euseb. apud Gra∣tanum de consecrat. distinct. 1. Euseb,Sylue. in actis Cō∣cil. Rom. Syluester,Hil. ad Constan. l 3 S.
Hilary,Hier. ad Helbi∣dium epist. 150. S. Hierome, but can tell, that they acknowledge the
masse to be a true and perfect sacrifice. Who is so alphabeticall
a Controuertist, but can beare witnesse thatBasil. erat. 40. Basil the Great.
Greg. Niss. orat. in Theod. Gregory Nissen,Nazi. in Iulianū opostatam NazianzenAmb. serm. de S S. Naza. & Celso. S. Ambrose,Cyrl. Hieros. cathe. 18. S. Cyrill of Hieru∣salem,
Chrys. hom. 66. cp pulum Antioch. & lib. aduersus Gentiles S. Chrisostome,Hier. aduersus Vigilantium. S. Hierome, allow of religious honour
done to Saints reliques? Euery yesterday-reader of the famous
monumēts of the holy Fathers, can tel you that(h) Origen,(i) Di∣dimus
Alexandrinus,(k) Cyril of Hierusalem,(l) Nazianzen,(m) S.
Gregory Nyssen,(n) Theophilus Alexandrinus,(o) S. Hierome,(p) S. Au∣stin,
(q) Sedulius,(r) Saluianus, openly teach and publikly professe
the necessity of good works, and generally declaime against the
Lutheran iustification by sole fayth.
By these points insisted vpon, and instanced by vs, you
may learne the sympathy between vs moderne Catholikes and
S. Patricke, & betweene S. Patrike and the Primitiue Christiās:
and on the contrary, discouer the discrepancy of the Protestāts,
not only with S. Patcrike, whome I am sure they wil discard for
a very superstitious papist, but from all the current of the anciēt
Catholiks, hauing no more alliance with thē, then truth with
falshood, light with darkenes, or Christ with Belial. And to
returne home, deere Contrymen, it is not they that conuerted
Ireland, being a pagan Kingdome, but rather peruerted her be∣ing
a Catholike country, they haue not illuminated her fayth∣lesse,
with the light of faith, but on the contrary, obscured her
faythfull with the fogge of heresy. For which respect that re∣markable
censure of Tertullian may be deseruedly pronounced of
them: Of the administration of the word, what shall I say? Since it is
their study, not to conuert the Ethnicks, but to peruert ours: and this glo∣ry
they ayme at, if they may procure the ruine of such as stand, and not the
erection of them that are prostrate; for their worke consists not of their
owne proper building, but of the destruction of the truth; they digge vp
our workes, to build their owne, so it comes to passe, that they contriue
more easily the ruine of stāding houses, then the structure of ruinous buil∣dings.
Sinc it is so deer Contrymen, perseuer constantly to the
end, in that fayth our glorious Apostle S. Patricke hath denoun∣ced
& preached to you: keep your selues intrenched within the

strong & impregnable fortresse of the Catholick Roman Chur∣che,
which the fraud of heretiks shall neuer vndermine, nor the
force of Tyrants could neuer ouerthrow, and to the new and
late borne-ghospellers answere with Tertullian.Tertul  Who be yee?
Whence, and when came yee? Whence do yee now come abroad? Where
did yee lurke so long? We neuer hitherto heard any thing of you. And
with blessed Optatus:Optatus, Show vs the beginning of your Chayre, yee
who claime to your selues holy Church? And with holy Hilary:
You came newly, you rose too late, we haue, what we ought to beleeue
touching Christ, the Church, and Sacraments; for we may well suspect
that it is not long since you began to appeare, in regard that the good corne
was sowen, and grew before, and not after the darnel. You may like∣wise
seuerely admonish them with that holy Doctor S. Hierom.S, Ierome.
Whosoeuer thou beest that art a teacher of new opinions, spare the Romās
eares, spare the fayth that hath beene praysed by the Apostles mouth. Why
do you labour to teach vs after 400. (now 1500.) years? What we neuer
heard of before? VVhy did you bring to light that which S. Peter, & S.
Paul would not preach? VVithout this your fayth, the world hath beene
Christian to this present day: I will professe being now an old man, that
fayth wherein I was borne a child. Lastly you may iustly obiect to thē
the goldē trumpet of the ghospel S Paul,Gal. 1. thundring out this ter∣rible
commination: But although we or an Angel from heauen, euan∣gelize
to you, beside that which we haue euangelized to you, be he Anathe∣ma
or accursed. By this is most euidēt with what feare, with what
care, with what solicitude, with what zeale nouelty is to be de∣tested,
and antiquity to be maintained, Protestancy to be auoi∣ded,
& Catholik religion to be embraced, since it is not lawfull
for S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Iohn, no nor the whole senat of the Apostls,
nor yet for al the hostes of Angels, to set down any forme of be∣lief,
other then that which hath byn preached already. Now if
the dissemination of the tares & new dogmats, be liable to this
Apostolical Anathema or curse, & subiect to so heauy a cēsure,
questionlesse the ēbracement of them is as damnable, & implyes
no lesse then wrack of our souls euerlasting weale. The terror of
which dreadful menace, I pray God by the merits of our glori∣ous
Patrōs & intercession of their numerous & holy progeny of
Saints, that it may alway soūd in your eares, & sinke into your
harts to the end, that amidst the swelling billowes & boyling

waues of enraged heresy, you may sticke fast to the irremoue∣able
rocke of the Roman Church, by the stronge cable of true &
ancient Religion, and after attaine to that euerlasting beati∣tude,
which God of his inexhausted manificence, bestoweth of
them that neuer change their fayth from him. For this and no
other end, haue I vndertaken this traduction of our glorious
Patrons liues. So wishing you deere Contrymen, all edifica∣tion,
and furtherance in vertue, by the perusall of this little
Volume, & humbly begging for my selfe a part in your holy
deuotions, I will vpon confidence of your fauorable allow∣ance,
take the quality of

