



I Offer here vnto your
Grace a kind of pre∣sent:
which if it be va∣lued
by the greatnes,
is but small; if by the
goodnesse either of it
selfe, or of my duetifull affection to∣wards
your Grace, is surely great. Cer∣taine
Sermons are they of that reuerēd
learned Father of so worthy memorie
B. Iuel; which hauing receiued of a
friend, and reserued by me some good
time in writtē hand (howbeit faithful∣ly
written, as I trust shal after appear) I
could no longer, no longer, I say, could
I be either so iniurious, or so enuious to
the publike good, as not to publish thē
to the glorie of God, and benefit of his
Church. And if the renowned Orator

Tully could not indure to haue the
least & meanest of his painfull trauells
perish or be lost, were it but some fami∣liar
Epistle or letter, as is apparēt by that
he wrote to his friend Varro in the like
case: Etsi  erat illa epistola, Albeit the
letter which Caninius caused mee to
write (but as I take it, had forgotten to
cal for) were stale and out of season, yet haue I sithēce deliuered it vnto him for thee: Quia nolui perire lucubrationē meā,
saith he. Norblame him pardy, for why
should so sweet a veine of wit and elo∣quence
flow out in vaine? Then what
reason were it that these so many, so
learned, so godly, so eloquent Sermons
of this reuerēd Father & great Diuine;
especially treating, not as Tully doth, of
matters earthly, but heauenly, not of
things temporal, but eternal, not of the
Commonwealth of the Romans, but
the sauing health of al christians: I say,
what pity were it that these his so sūdry
& worthy labors, should either be smo∣thered

vp in hugger mugger, or buried
in obliuion, or  wife alwaies im∣propried,
ingrossed, & restrained vnto
any one, & not rather imparted, diuul∣ged
& made common vnto many one,
for the generall behoofe of the present
age, & so of future posteritie? They are
in Philosophie (as your Grace well
knoweth) rules both antient & authen∣tike:
Bonum quo communius, quo diutur∣nius,
eo melius, Good things the more
they stretch themselues to the benefit
of many, & the more durable they are,
the better they are. For as Lactan∣tius
saith, and saith verie well, Nostrae vo∣ces
&c. Our words once vttered, dis∣solue
& vanish into ayre: but let them
be put in writing, or print, and for the
most part they remaine vnto all succee∣ding
ages. Wherfore not long to hold
your Grace (being holden sufficiently
with your publike trauels for the good
both of Church and Commonweale;
for which to Almighty God, to his ex∣cellent

Maiestie, & to your Grace we
are, and I trust, shalbe stil more & more
beholden) It may please your Gr. to
accept this small , or  of
my thankfull dutie, & dutiful thankful∣nesse;
of whom I am bold to say truely,
which I adde without flatterie, that
next after God the meane liuelihood I
haue, whatsoeuer I haue, by your Gra∣ces
meane I haue: & therfore do pray,
and ought to pray, and will not cease to
pray; that like as the Almightie hath in
speciall fauour placed you in so high
roome of honour & aboue others gra∣ced
you; so he will continue forth his
louing kindnesse & gratious fauor to∣wards
you; so he will multiply his spi∣rituall
gifts, & heauenly blissings vpon
you, to the glorie of his name, the good
of his Church, and your Graces incessant
comfort both here and for euer.

