



IT is now some long tyme si∣thēce that lear∣ned reuerende father bishoppe Iewel deliuered vnto the people of his charge the Exposition vp∣on the epistles of S. Paul to the Thessaloni∣ans: when manie his hearers thought it worthie to be made common, and be∣sought him earnestly (euen as since his blessed departure out of this life they haue

often required me) to publish the same. It is very likely that he would, if he had liued, haue perused these his trauailes, and some others, & haue drawne them to the vse & benefite of the Church: and rather haue spent his time in setting forth matters pro∣fitable for al mē to vnderstand towards the attainement of saluation, than in folowing their humour anie longer, whom neither the weaknesse of their owne cause, nor the force of the truth, nor the defence thereof by so waighty autorities of the holy Scrip∣tures, of the ancient catholike fathers, and of general councels; could content or per∣swade them to forsake the waie of conten∣tion, whereunto they were entred, and of troubling the Church of God, with their writings against the truth.
This his purpose hee partlie declared in giuing his last answeare to a booke written by Maister Harding, entituled, A detection of sundrie foule errours, &c. For answere where∣of, he thought not good to charge with number of bookes, or to encomber the world with needelesse labours: but onelie by a shorte augmentation of his former

defence of the Apologie of the Church of England, to discharge Master Hardings quarels. For reason whereof he saith: I cannot imagine, that anie my poore labours shall be able to end these quarels. For a conten∣tious man will neuer lacke wordes. I haue endeuoured for my simple parte, to say so much as to a reasonable man maie seeme sufficient. If any thing be left vnanswered, either it was nothing, or nothing worth. Wherein hee was of like minde vnto that famous learned man Maister Bucer, who speaking of the new and fresh supplie that is made among the aduersaries of our Christian religion, said thus: Veteribus re∣spondimus, novos quotidie legimus, nihil adferunt novi, quid ergo faciemus? Aunswere hath beene made by vs to their olde Writers: wee reade their newe Writers which come foorth dailie, which yet bring no newe matter or proofes with them. What then shall wee doe? What else, but (as he giueth counsaile) laie downe al affecti∣on and fauour of parties, and peruse that hath beene saide in matter of controuersie on both sides, and iudge iustly of that is

alleadged, and with feare and reuerence be careful of our own saluation. For, after the trueth is once found out, whosoeuer see∣keth farther, seeketh not for the truth, but for errour. The Apostle willeth Titus, to staie foolish questions and genealogies, & contentions, and brawlings about the law: for they are vnprofitable, and vaine. And also to reiect him that is an heretique after once or twice admonition. In like cafe he said vnto Timothie: If anie man teach other∣wise, and consenteth not to the wholsome words of our Lord Iesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godlines, hee is puft vp, and knoweth nothing: but doateth about questiōs, & strife of words, whereof commeth enuie, strife, railings, e∣uil surmisings, froward disputations of mē of corrupt minds, & destitute of the truth, which thinke that gaine is godlinesse: from such separate thy selfe.
Now, bicause he himself had some good liking to publish this exposition, and the matter thereof is so fit for our time, as no∣thing maie be more: and there is not (as I can learne) anie interpretor vpon these e∣pistles,

in the english tongue: and his Ser∣mons vpon them, were the last fruits, and trauailes hee bestowed in the cathedrall Church of Sarum: I made choice of it a∣mōg manie other excellent monumēts of his paines taken in the Church of God, & gaue my best diligence to peruse his notes thereupon, and to draw them to some such perfection, as might carrie to the Reader the whole waight of his matter, without a∣nie diminution, euen as fully as he decla∣red it, so far foorth as the notes, which re∣maine vnder his owne hand, might direct me. The which I most humblie commend to the fauourable protection of your Ho∣nor: whom I beseech so to accept my sim∣ple indeuor herein, as I haue beene careful to answere your Honors commandement, in giuing foorth some part of his laboures to light.
In this discourse, as there are manie good things fruitfully declared, the vse and practise whereof is common to your Ho∣nour with al Christians: so are there two matters, the one of Vsurie, the other of Antichrist: that is, of the bane and poison

of the common wealth, and of the infectiō and decaie of the Church: wherein he be∣stowed more paines to open them, and make them manifest, that all men might know and abhorre them, and beware of them. What hath beene wrought by these two mischiefes to the vndoing in consci∣ence & substance, and to the vtter destru∣ction of the soules and bodies of manie thousand subiects of this realme, within these late yeares, it is to the griefe of all good men, too wel knowne.
If therefore in the duetie of a good Bi∣shop, he standing in his watch, hath discri∣ed these enimies to al ciuil and christian e∣states, and if now so many yeares after his entrāce into rest by these means he cal vp∣on your good Honor, to step forth in fresh courage into the battaile of the Lorde of hostes, and to vse and employ the great giftes of wisedome and aucthoritie which God hath bestowed vppon you, and to ex∣cite and stir vp others the worthie and no∣table captaines set ouer the people, to be a fenced wal betwene them, and these so pe∣rillous monsters, and dangerous enimies:

what remaineth, but that your Honour put to your hande, and doe that for the comfort of Gods people, which, besides hir excellent Maiestie, and hir honorable Counsaile, no other can do, in giuing life to al such lawes, which haue beene deui∣sed by men of great godlinesse and experi∣ence, and haue beene confirmed by high authoritie to the suppression of Vsurie, and to the setting foorth of Gods glorie? The God of glory, and of power, who hath called your Honour to his seruice in high place, strengthen you to doe his wil, and grant you many and prospe∣rous daies, to the comfort of his Church and his common weale.
Your Honours most humble to commaunde,
IOHN GARBRAND.
