



IT had benne greatly to be wished,
moste Gracious Soueraine Lady, that, as
God of his mercie hath geeuen vs, euer si∣thence
the first time of your Maiesties moste
happy gouernmente, sutche successe in al ci∣uile
affaires, sutche concorde, and quietnesse
in al Estates, as our Fathers seldome haue
seene before: so our hartes with like felicitie
mighte thorowly haue consented in the pro∣fession
of one vndoubted Truthe, and al our
willes, whiche now are so violently rente a sunder, and so farre distracted,
mighte fully haue ioined togeather in the VVil of God: that al quarrelles,
and contentions set aparte, wee might with one mouthe, and one minde glori∣fie
God, the Father of our Lorde Iesus Christe. How be it, it appeareth by the
continual storie, and whole discourse of the Holy Scriptures, that Almighty
God, of his deepe Iudgements, and secrete Prouidence, suffreth some menne
oftetimes to delite in darkenesse, to withstande the Gospel, to seeke occasions,
and wilfully to sette them selues againste the knowledge, and Truthe of
God. I write not this, Moste Gracious Lady, to thintente to make them
odious in your Maiesties sighte, that this daie are the procurers of al these
troubles. God is hable euen of the harde vnsensible stones to raise vp chil∣dren
vnto Abraham, and to make them the vessels of his Mercie. Neuer∣thelesse,
as S. Paule teacheth vs, sutche menne there haue benne in times
paste,1. Timoth. 4. that haue had their Consciences burnte with hote irons, speakinge and
maineteininge Lies in Hypocrisie:Roman. 1. that haue geeuen them selues ouer into
reprobate, and wilful mindes, and haue despised the VVisedome of God
within them selues. And, notwithstandinge sutche battailes, and dissensi∣ons,
specially in the Churche of God, whiche is called the House of Vnitie,
be offensiue, and greeuous vnto the Godly, and therefore woorke greate hin∣derance
vnto the dewe passage of the Gospel of Christe, yet in the ende the
trouble hereof in Goddes Electe is recompensed abundantely with greate
aduantage. For Goddes Truthe is mighty, and shal preuaile: Dagon shal

falle downe headlonge before the Arke: the Darkenesse shal flee before
the Lighte: and the more fiercely mannes wisedome shal withstande, the
more glorious shal God be in his Victorie.
But, shortely to discourse vnto your Maiestie the particulare occasions
hereof from the beginninge, after it had pleased Almighty God, at the
firste entire of your Maiesties Reigne, by a moste happy exchange, and by
the meanes of your Maiesties moste Godly trauailes, to restoare vnto vs
the Lighte, and comforte of his Gospel, there was written, and published
by vs a Litle Booke in the Latine tongue, entitled, An Apologie of the
Churche of Englande, conteininge the whole Substance of the Catho∣lique
Faithe, no we professed, and freely preached throughoute al your Ma∣iesties
Dominions: that thereby al foreine Nations might vnderstande the
considerations, and causes of your Maiesties dooinges in that behalfe. Thus
in olde times did Quadratus, Melito, Iustinus Martyr, Tertullian, and
other Godly, and Learned Fathers, vpon like occasions, as wel to make
knowen the Truthe of God, and to open the groundes of their Profession,
as also to put the Infidels to silence, and to stoppe the mouthes of the wicked.
This Apologie, beinge thus written firste in Latine, and afterwarde,
vpon the comfortable reporte of your Maiesties moste Godly enterprises,
translated into sundrie other tongues, and so made common to the moste
parte of al Europe, as it hath benne wel allowed of, and liked of the Lear∣ned,
and Godly, as it is plaine by their open testimonies, touchinge the
same, so hath it not hitherto, for ought, that maie appeare, benne anywhere
openly reproued, either in Latine, or otherwise, either by any one mannes
Priuate writinge, or by the Publique Authoritie of any Nation.
Onely one M. Hardinge, not longe sithence your Maiesties subiecte,
nowe mislikinge the presente state, and resiante in Louaine, hath of late
taken vpon him, againste the saide Apologie, with the whole Doctrine,
and al the partes of the same, to publishe an open Confutation, and to of∣fer
the same vnto your Maiestie: wherin he sheweth him selfe so vehe∣mente,
and so sharpe, and busie in findinge faultes, that he doubteth not to
seeke quarrelles againste vs, euen in that wee maineteine the Baptisme of
Christian Infantes, the proceeding, and Godhedde of the Holy Ghoste, the
Faithe of the Holy, and Glorious Trinitie, and the General, and Catho∣lique
Profession of the common Creede. Thus, for that he hath once se∣uered
him selfe from vs, he beareth nowe the worlde in hande, wee can be∣leeue
nothinge without an erroure.
The maigne grounde of his whole plea is this, That the Bishop of

Rome, what so euer it shal like him to Determine in Iudgemente,Confu fol. 334. a. can neuer
erre: that he is alwaies vndoubtedly possessed of Goddes. Holy Sprite:Conful. fol. 285. b. that
at his onely hande wee muste learne to knowe the VVil of God:Confuta. 324. b. that in his
onely Holinesse standeth the Vnitie,Confut. 204. b. and safetie of the Churche: that who
so euer is diuided from him,Confut. 306. b. muste by iudged an Heretique: and, that with∣out
the obedience of him, there is no hope of Saluation. And yet, as though
it were not sufficiente for him, so vainely to soothe a man in open Erroures,
he telleth vs also sadly, and in good earnest, that the same Bishop is not one∣ly
a Bishop, but also a Kinge: that vnto him belongeth the Authoritie,Confut. fol 280. a. and
righte of bothe Swerdes,Et 305. b. as wel Temporal, as Spiritual: that al Kinges, and
Emperours receiue their whole power at his hande,Confu. fol. 247. b and ought to sweare
obedience,Confu. fol. 248. b. and Fealtie vnto him. For these be his woordes, euen in this
Booke so boldely dedicate vnto your Maiestie:Confu. fol. 178. b. It is a greate eie soare,
saithe M. Hardinge, to the Ministers of Antichriste, to see the Vi∣care
of Christe aboue Lordes, and Kinges of this vvorlde, and to
see Princes, and Emperours promise, and svveare obedience vnto
him. And whereas Pope Zacharie by the consente,Confut at. Folio 178. b. or conspiracie of the
Nobles of France, deposed Chilperichus, the true, natural, and liege
Prince of that Realme, and placed Pipinus in his roume, Loe, saithe M.
Hardinge, yee must needes confesse, that this vvas a Diuine povver
in the Pope: for othervvise he coulde neuer haue donne it.
Thus mutche he esteemeth the dishonoures,Confutat. Fol. 182. a. and ouerthrowes of Goddes
Anointed.
VVhereas also Pope Boniface the Eighth, for that he coulde not haue
the Treasurie of France at his commaundement, endeuoured with al his
bothe Ecclesiastical, and VVorldly puissance, to remoue Philip the French
Kinge from his estate, and vnder his Bulles or Letters Patentes, had con∣ueighed
the same solemnely vnto Albertus the Kinge of Romaines, M.
Hardinge here telleth your Maiestie, that al this was very wel donne, to
thintente thereby to fraie the Kinge, and to keepe him in avve, and
to reclaime his minde from disobedience. Now,Confut. Fol. 182. b. touchinge your
Maiesties moste Noble Progenitours, the Kinges of this Realme,
whereas wee, as oure loialtie, and allegiance bindeth vs, iustely complaine,
that Pope Alexander. 3. by violence, and tyrannie forced Kinge Henrie
the Seconde to surrender his Crowne Emperial into the handes of his Le∣gate,
and afterwarde for a certaine space to contente him selfe in Priuate
estate, to the greate indignation, and griefe of his louinge Subiectes: And
that likewise Pope Innocentius the thirde sturred vp the Nobles, and

Commons of this Realme against kinge Iohn, and gaue the Enheritance,
and Possession of al his Dominions vnto Ludouicus the Frenche Kinge,
(as for the misusinge of your Maiesties moste deere Father of moste No∣ble
Memorie, kinge Henrie the Eighth, for as mutche as the smarte
thereof is yet in freshe remembrance, I wil saie nothinge): To these, and al
other like Tyrannical iniuries, and iuste causes of griefe, M. Hardinge
shortely, and in lighte manner thinketh it sufficiente to answeare thus:
VVhat though Kinge Henrie the Seconde vvere il entreated of
Pope Alexander.M. Harding. Fol. 340. b. 3? VVhat though Kinge Iohn vvere il entreated
of that Zelous, and Learned Pope Innocentius. 3? VVhat though
Kinge Henrie the Eighth vvere likevvise entreated of the Popes
in our time? If know right wel, Moste Souer aine Lady, the goodnesse
of your Graceous Nature deliteth not in sutche rehearsalles. Neither doo I
make reporte hereof, for that sutche thinges sommetimes haue benne donne:
but for that the same thinges euen nowe at this time, either so lightely are
excused, or so boldely are defended. Sutche humble affection, and obedience
these menne by their open, and publique VVritinges, teache your Maie∣sties
true Subiectes to beare towardes their Natural Prince. It shal mutche
warrante the honoure and safetie of your Roial Estate, if your Maiestie
shal sommetimes remember the dishonours, and dangers, that other your
Noble Progenitours haue felte before you.
But concerninge the Maiestie and right of Kinges, and Emperours,
M. Hardinge telleth vs,M. Harding. Fol. 318. b. They haue their firste Authoritie by the
Positiue Lavve of Nations, and can haue nomore Povver, then the
people hath, of vvhome they take their Temporal lurisdiction:
as if he woulde saie, Emperours, and Kinges haue none other righte of
Gouernmente, then it hath pleased theire Subiectes by composition to allowe
vnto them. Thus he saithe, and saithe it boldely: as if God him selfe had
neuer saide,Prouer. 8. Per me Reges Regnant: By mee, and my Authoritie
Kinges beare rule ouer theire Subiectes: Or, as if Christe our Sa∣ueour
had neuer saide vnto Pilate the Lorde Lieutenante,Iohn. 19. Thou shoul∣dest
haue no Povver ouer mee, vvere it not geeuen thee from
aboue:Roman. 13. Or, as if S. Paule had not saide, Non est potestas, nisi a Deo:
There is no povver, but onely from God. And yet further, as if
their whole studie were fully bente to deface the Authoritie, and Maie∣stie
of al Princes, euen nowe one of the same companie doubteth not to
teache the worlde,Dorman. Fol. 15. That the Pope is the Heade: and Kinges, and Em∣perours
are the feete: Like as also an other of the same faction saithe,

The Emperoures Maiestie is so farre inferiour in dignitie to the
Pope,Stanislaus Or∣chouius in Ch∣maera, Fol. 97. as a Creature is inferiour vnto God. VVee diuise not these
thinges of malice, Moste Graceous Lady, but reporte the same truely,
as wee finde them proclaimed, and published this daie by theire vaine, and
dangerous writinges, whiche notwithstandinge they woulde so faine haue
to be taken as Catholique. If this Doctrine maie once take roote, and be
freely receiued emongest the Subiectes, it shalbe harde for any Prince to
holde his Righte.
As for your Maiestie, for that it hath pleased Almighty God in his
Mercie, to make you an instrumente of his Glorie, as in Olde times he made
many other Godly, and Noble Princes, to refourme his Churche from that
huge, and lothesome heape of filthe, and rubble, that either b, violence, or
by negligence had benne throwen into it, therefore M. Hardinge euen in
this selfe same Booke, vnder certaine general threates, chargeth you with
disordred presumption, by the example of Ozias the wicked Kinge,M. Harding. Fol. 298. a. vpon
vvhom, as he vntruely saithe, God sente his vengeance for the like.
For be the Abuses, and Errours of the Churche neuer so many, be the falles,
and dangers neuer so greate, be the Priestes, and Bishoppes neuer so blinde,
yet, by this Doctrine, it maie neuer be lawful for the Prince, be he neuer so
learned, or so wise, or so Zelous in Goddes cause, to attempte any manner of
Reformation. And therefore thus he saithe vnto your Maiestie, and with
al his skil, and cunninge, laboureth to perswade your Maiesties Subiectes,
if any one, or other happily of simplicitie wil beleeue him, that the Godly
Lavves, whiche your Maiestie hathe geeuen vs to liue vnder, are no
Lavves: that your Parlamentes,Confuta. 277. Confut. 328. a. Confuta. 172. b. Reioind. 314. Confut. 87. a. Confut. 269. b. Reioind 42. a. Confut. 43. a. Confut a. 269. a. 323. b. 334. a. 338. a. 348. b. are no Parlamentes: that your Clere∣gie,
is no Cleregie: Our Sacramentes, no Sacramentes: Our Faithe,
no Faithe. The Churche of Englande, whereof your Maiestie is the
moste Principal, and Chiefe, he calleth a Malignante Churche, a Newe
Churche erected by the Diuel, a Babylonical Tower, a Hearde of Anti∣christe,
a Temple of Lucifer, a Synogoge, and a Schoole of Sathan, ful of
Robberie, Sacrilege, Schisme, and Heresie. And al this he furnissheth with
sutche libertie of other vncourteous, and vnseemely talkes, as if he had benne
purposely hired to speake dishonour of your Maiesties most godly dooinges.
Of al these, and other like Tragical fantasies, for as mutche as he hathe
so boldely aduentured to make a presente vnto your Maiestie, wee haue
great cause to reioise in God, for that our controuersies are brought to be de∣bated
before sutche a personage, as is hable so wel, and so deepely to vnder∣stande
them. For I haue no doubte, but as by your greate Learninge, and

marueilous VVisedome, you shal soone see the difference of our Pleadinges,
so of your Maiesties graceous inclination vnto al Godlinesse, you wil rea∣dily
finde out the Falsehedde, and geeue sentence with the Truthe. Verily,
after that your Maiestie shal haue thorowly considered the manifest Vn∣truthes,
and corruptions, togeather with the Abuses, and Errours of the con∣trarie
side: the VVeakenesse of the Cause, the Boldenesse of the Man, and
the immoderate Bitternesse of his speache, I haue good hope, the more adui∣sedly
you shal beholde it, the lesse cause you shal finde, wherefore to like it.
For the discouerie hereof, for my poore portion of Learninge, I haue en∣deuoured
to doo, that I was hable: And the same here I humbly presente
vnto your Maiestie, as vnto my most Graceous, and Soueraine Liege La∣dy,
and, as now, the onely Nource, and Mother of the Churche of God
within these your Maiesties moste Noble Dominions. It maie please your
Maiestie graceously to weighe it, and to iudge of it, not accordinge to the
skil, and habilitie of the VVriter, whiche is but simple, but accordinge to
the weight, and woorthinesse of the Cause. The poore labours haue benne
mine: the Cause is Goddes. The goodnesse of the one wilbe alwaies hable to
countreuaile the simplicitie of the other.
God euermore enflame, and directe your Maiestie with his Holy Sprite,
that the Zele of his House maie thorowly deuoure your Graceous harte:
that you maie safely walke in the waies of your Father Dauid: that you
maie vtterly abandon al groaues, and Hille Aultars: that you maie liue an
Olde Mother in Israel: that you maie see an ende of al dissensions, and sta∣blishe
peace, and Vnitie in the Churche of God. Amen.

