



RIght Honorable: ver∣tue was once estee∣med the woorthiest shelter against the tempestuous storms of worldlie violence. But now (such is the miserie of these times) thogh she deserue most, yet is shee least desired.; and is so farre from being a Protectrix, that shee her selfe doth want a Patronage. Our pre∣decessours were wont to saie,

Vilius argentum est auro; virtu∣tibus aurum.
As gold surpasseth siluer in ac∣count:
So in true value, vertues gold surmount.
But those good daies are past: & the rudenes of our times giues the Lie to that worthy Sentence; saying cleane contrarie, Gold hath all the glory; and shee is the onlie goddesse: vnto whose sacred Altar each one (almost) will sacrifice his life, his soule. He that is wealthiest, now is accounted worthiest: And to bee vertuous (saie the world∣lings) is not the waie to possesse ri∣ches. Oculo eligunt, non animo. The eie of the bodie preuailes now far more with man, then the eie of the soule.
The glittering lustre of a pom∣pous

traine, drawes with it all your braue mindes, and statelie Gallants (according to the worlds phrase) when as poor forsaken Vertue shal be constrain'd Tymon-like to liue alone. They will scarce euer deigne to look on her: or if they do, it wil be in disdain; taunting at her desolate and friendless conditi∣on; saying scornfullie: Is this shee that thirsteth to be the mistresse of manie followers, yet cannot pre∣serue her selfe from ragged pouer∣tie? Vice is so short a cut to ho∣nours, pleasures, and profit (as the world tearmes them) that they dare maintaine, there needes no vertue: saying with Seneca, Cum vitia prosunt, peccat qui iustè facit. He is held most foolish; that deales most faithfully; and accounted most simple, that is most sincere.

Beholde the height of monstrous iniquitie: euerie vice hath its pro∣tection; but, naked Vertue wants a Patronage. Which she would wil∣lingly not beg of any, but onlie of those, that are as readie to proffer it, as shee to sue for it. VVherefore, most boldlie shee addresseth her selfe vnto your Honour; beeing full of confidence (through the Sympathy of both your affecti∣ons) to finde with you a plea∣sing Welcom. For although shee be worthless indeede, in the pur∣blinde eie of the fantastick world; yet shee is a world of worth, in the iudicious eie of your honoura∣ble minde. But, Madame, when your Ladiship shall behold mee, who thus peremptorilie intrude into your honorable presence, you cannot but maruaile much therat:

& my much disturbed selfe (being almost transform'd with amase∣mēt) shal stand as mute as a marble statue. Yet, calling to remembrāce that old saying of the Philosopher, Neminem timendo ad summū locū peruenire, that fear is a fault in such as seek prefermēt, I shal be bold to speak, & beseech your Ladiship to accept of this poor excuse: to wit, that this my presumptiō was occa∣sioned, through the fauours which my best friend hath receiued from your Honor; firmly obliging both himself & me to the dutiful perfor∣mance of our best seruices. Whō, it is not to be maruailed at, if you re∣mēber not among so great a nūber as your Hon. doth good vnto: for∣asmuch as you register not, as most doe, an exact diary of your good deeds, in tables of brass. The oppor¦tunitie

of acknowledging this our obligement, could neuer (in my weake iudgement) be fitter, then by the mediation of Vertue; who, in requital of my louing and kinde office for bringing her vnto your Palace gate, will speake vnto your Ladiship in my behalfe. And so heereby I shall attaine (I hope) to be hereafter knowne vnto your Hon: which I account the greatest part of my felicity. Madame: that heretofore hath been accounted vicious, which by too much vse is now become a custome; which is, to depaint the vertues of those vn∣to whō men dedicate their books, with immoderate praises. Which I dare not attempt to doe; fearing lest my words (if it were possible) might be preiudiciall vnto your worthiness: & also lest your Hon:

should haue cause to distrust the sincere truth of my spotlesse fide∣litie; It being both an vsuall and a true saying: Much praising begets suspicion; and that A flattering tongue hath alwayes relation vnto a false heart. Which danger I will auoide; hauing no occasion to fall thereinto, sithence the sunne needs not the light of a candle to make it seen; nor a perfect naturall com∣plexion, the disgracefull helpe of artificiall tinctures: It being most true which the Poet saith,
Fucati sermonis opem mens con∣scia laudis Abnuit.
Ingenuous mindes, in all true ver∣tues rich,
Doe scorne the blason of a flatte∣ring speech.
That which Pomponius Mela said of Athens, may (with a modest

face) bee spoken of your vertues: Clariores sunt quàm vt indicari ege∣ant. So that, if anie shall looke into mine Epistle, to see what En∣comium I make of your vertues, I must referre their search to the re∣port of the world: which is a copi∣ous Index of your honourable deeds; it being a task farre too dif∣ficult for my vndertakings: for, who can paint the heauens? And againe, such commonlie doe most desire praises, as least deserue them. For in shewing their great loue of such windie puffes, what do they lesse, then giue the Lie vnto their flattering commenders? But your Honourable selfe is most directlie opposite vnto such as those: & ra∣ther then you will endure it, you will strike the flatterer on the check as the Emperour Sigismond did:

who thereupon being demanded by him, Why doe you strike mee; made aunswere, Why dost thou bite mee? Your Noble minde loues the substance onelie, not the outward shew; and ioyeth more in being vertuous indeed, then in see∣ming so: whereby you adde one vertue more vnto your manie o∣thers; and deserue exceedinglie to be praised, for not desiring it. Thus beseeching your Honour to deigne the Patronage of this small Trea∣tise, I will alwaies remaine

