



REuerend, louing & beloued in the God of honor & loue, it so pleasing his diuine Maiestie to withhold me by much weaknesse a great while of late from preaching his holy word, I searched my heart wherein I might do most seruice (in these my old yeares and decay∣ing dayes) to my good God, and most good to his Church, by any other talent which he hath bestowed vpon me. Hauing a small one in writing, I resolued to vse it now (as called thereunto.) Our glorious God saith by Solo∣mons pen, Without counsell,Prou. 15.22. purposes are disap∣pointed, but in the multitude of counsellers, they are established. I desire therefore to haue my poore

labours perused by many of my iudicious friends (and theirs also) thereby to obteine sound counsell. Heartily then I beseech you in that gracious God of ours, to shew me your loue in this action: herein chiefly, viz. if you finde any thing in this Treatise which might dishonour our good God, or do any maner of hurt to his Sion, that you will admonish me of it. As I ought not, so I will not be iudge of mine owne workes (there being nothing wherein a man may sooner deceiue himselfe.) Bookes (in my iudgement) require a greater purifying then gold, yea and a more excellent fire also to purge them. No ma∣teriall fire purgeth gold so well, as the spirits of Gods childoen (a famous kind of fire) do purge those bookes which are submitted to that most true and trustie triall. So I call it, because such spirits doe make their triall by the word (that fire of fires) though I be not of his minde for the time of impression, who said, Nonum preman∣tur in annum (publish your bookes the ninth yeare,) yet am I iust of the same man minde for taking a large time both to reuise and aduise; yet I desire not to tie o∣thers vnto my maner of publishing bookes, or to taxe any who take lesse time and counsell in penning & spreading abroad of their works, if they take so much as may shew that they be not of a priuate spirit, and readier to offer vnto the world nimis praecocia quam satis praeparata, things rather too hastily ripened, then sufficiently pre∣pared. There will be wants when the longest and best care is takē; (for who can say that his heart, pen or tongue are perfect?) much more doth great haste make great waste. You shall perceiue that I finde fault with such kinde of haste: and here I aduise all writers to take good lei∣sure. This also I adde (out of my experience from the

present Treatise) for inducing others the sooner and the more to rely on that old prouerb, Plus vident oculi quam oculu (a great many of eies see more then one,) viz. that to my remembrance I neuer shewed this booke to any, but I was moued necessarily to put in or take out somewhat (so against the next impression, if the godly experienced see cause, I purpose to do.) And I most hum∣bly thanke our gracious God for giuing mee the minde and the meanes to haue the iudgement of diuers godly and worthy men in this action, which yet also I seeke more and more, (vsing the Presse as a helpe at this time to that end.) No more now but that I humbly be∣seech our blessed God to blesse you and yours, and all your emploiments and studies: and withall I desire your pray∣ers for a blessing to me and my endeuours, so as we all in all our purposes and actions may seeke his glorie. To God our Father almightie, and to his dearely beloued Sonne our blessed Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus, and to the holy Spirit, three Persons and one God, most wise, holy, iust and mercifull, be all honour, praise, and thankes for euer and euer. Amen.
