


SEeing alwayes it hath bin ac∣coūted a super∣fluous worke, either to commend in A∣pollo wisedome, or to ex∣toll in Hercules puissance, or to prayse in Minerua knowledge: it may bee
 thought no lesse needlesse for mee, to prayse in fined wordes and garnished stile (if so I were able to doe) your ardent zeale in Gods truth, and maruellous af∣fection towardes the true professors thereof. And because among those that know you, it shineth so o∣riently, as in words to set it foorth, were rather to imbeazle than illustrate it; and among those that know you not, by com∣mending it abundantly, may feare the censure of smoothing, I thinke it better, at this time (as Sa∣lust saith of Carthage) to speake nothing at all of it than a little. Yet surely (though the enuious hap∣pily
 mislike it) this I af∣firme, when I bethought to finde a meete protector for this pamphlet, that might loue it, as Antoni∣us the Emperor was wont to loue books, as Alphon∣sus was accustomed to e∣steeme the workes of Ci∣cero, that might reade it diligently as Erasmus did Terence, as Bishop Iewell did Horace, as Ladie Iane Graie did Platoes Phae∣don: none came to my minde before your Wor∣ship, vnder the wings of whose tuition, these my slender labors might safe∣ly be shadowed, from all the malice of spitefull re∣proouers and taunting
 carpers. Now concerning the worke, some I knowe will finde fault with my presumption, that being a tender suckling and no∣uice in good letters, I would dare to put foorth ought in print, especially in such a plentifull time of bookes. Let these take this aunswere; that I did it not voluntarily but in∣forced, and that by the request, not of one or two, but of many, whose good will I haue often experi∣mented, whose friendship in the Lorde I will not (for a small cause) violate, whose authoritie I may not despise. For lighting by chaunce on this treatise
 of Chrysostome, reueren∣cing it at the first sight more for antiquitie than ought else, assoone as I had read it ouer, I did it faithfully for my priuate vtilitie into English, neuer thinking it should come to this passe. But hauing lent it vnto some of my friends, desirous of such a peece of matter, they fell suddenly into that liking and louing of it, that they neuer ceased exhorting, begging, compelling (I may say) vntill (maugre my head) I graunted, it should goe foorth for the benefit of many. Which now beeing newly borne and come into the world,
 I beseech your courtesie to receiue into your pa∣tronage: and as it procee∣ded from a willing minde, so to take it with a glad∣some countenance. And notwithstanding this te∣stimonie of a gratefull minde, doe not any way counterpoise the weight of your demerits, yet I beseech you to accept of the poore widowes mites. and of the cheerefull gi∣uers minde. Thus surcea∣sing any longer to enter∣rupt your Worships seri∣ous affaires, I suppliantly craue of the Almightie, dayly to augment his gra∣ces in you and the vertu∣ous Gentlewoman your
 wife, that after your race run in this dale of miserie, you may for euer enioy the sight of Christ Iesus in heauen.

