



THE manifold exhortations of Christ and his Apostles conside∣red with the security of these times, are reasons sufficient both to command and encourage his servants to be watchfull, and to awaken o∣thers both by voice and writings, that they hold the times of death and iudgement before their eyes: yet for mine owne particular J have rea∣sons leading me unto this forwardnesse, not one∣ly excusing, but also enforceing me to the publi∣shing of this present Treatise. First, J was not

able by writing to satisfie the importunity of those who heard some of it delivered, nor of those unto whom (upon intreaty) some of it was communicated, except it had beene published. Secondly, I considered, that the same Scripture was not particularly handled by any either an∣cient or moderne, (so farre as J can learne) though Commentatours have given briefe notes upon it; which moved me the rather to commu∣nicate this Exposition, or by my rashnesse to stirre up others more learned, to give sufficient contentment unto such, who by this motion may be set on longing. Thirdly, the disposition of men requires, that in so necessary a subiect they have not onely admonition in words, but that there remaine a daily admonisher standing in sight: yea they who loathe repetition of one thing, yet love to reade often over such things as they finde to move their consciences: unto which may be added Saint Peters example, who endeavoured not by word alone,2 Pet: 1, 13. but by writing also to put his heareres in remem∣brance. Lastly, J alwayes desired, as both my duty first, and your Lordships unexpected boun∣ty in the next place tyed mee, to render account of my labour unto you, and to expresse my

thankefulnesse both to God and to the world, for your ordinary encouragements of Gods ser∣vants, your favours in particular to me, and your willingnesse to have the flocke of Christ exhor∣ted by these my weak endeavours, who are boun∣den to returne prayers to God for your Lordship onely, for whatsoever benefit they may reape reape hereby. J dare not (as building a stately gate for lowly cottages) invite the Readers with goodly promises, seeing I am conscious of mine owne weaknesse and unability to performe: nei∣ther need I intreate the zealous Christian; see∣ing the title, the subiect, and his owne desire to Gods word, are incitements sufficient unto him. And I doubt not but the countenance of you, , (who in name,Luke 12, 35 &c & 17, 24. &c & 21, 17. &c. honour and reli∣gion, are the same with that honourable Christi∣an, to whom this subiect was commended by S. Luke at the beginning) will make it to have bet∣ter acceptance at all their hands, who are (ac∣cording as your name imports) the friends and lovers of God. So praying God long to continue you an instrument of his glory, I take leave; ac∣knowledging my selfe ever

