



RIght Reverend, we live now in those dayes of which the Apostle spake sixteene hundred yeeres since; That in the last dayes should be perillous times, in which there should be , 2 Tim. 3.2. lovers of themselves, covetous: and one depends upon the other; They are too covetous, because they love themselves too much. Such are these sacrilegious times we now live in, for Sacriledge hath already in part, and would if it could, devoure in toto (like Asher and Ammon) the remaines left unto the Church: Victa jacet pietas, Charity and Devoti∣on is banished, Munus illud antiquum offerendi
 vertitur in munus auferendi, quò factum est, Eccle∣siam etiam de reliquiis Decimarum in jus vocari posse, & novas rationes excogitari de stipe, de quotâ parte, de nullâ parte illarum disputare; giving is now tur∣ned to taking away, wherby it is come to passe that the right of the remaines of the Church, (which are Tithes and Offerings) is now cald into Question, and to dispute of some other part, than the tenth, or of no part at all, to bee due to the Ministers of the Gospell by Divine right. For many there are, that say and affirme, Tithes to be due onely jure positivo humano, and not jure Divino, onely by positive humane law, and not by the Divine Law of God. Wherein they seeme to taxe God with injustice, for that he in his Divine law, hath straightly charged us to preach the Word, and by that law to give us no maintenance for preaching, but must bee beholden only to humane lawes for the same. Indeed wee blesse God for these positive Hu∣mane laws for Tithes, because such is the cor∣ruption of these last sacrilegious times, that many men will neither be instructed nor com∣pelled by Divine Law, to pay their Tithes out of a good conscience, and as they ought to do, but must be compelled thereunto by positive
 humane lawes; but it doth not follow thereby that Tithes are due onely jure positivo humano, onely by positive humane lawe, and not by Divine right The Divine Law saith, Thou shalt not steale, and the positive humane law saith likewise; thou shalt not steale. But it doth not therefore follow that the positive humane law should abrogate and annihilate the Divine and Morall Law of God It is agreed on by all sides, that by Divine right Ministers must have maintenance for Preaching; And if mainte∣nance, then either more or lesse, or the same that the Levites had. To allow us more, men now a dayes will not; and to allow us lesse than the Levites had, is to undervalue the Ministe∣ry of the Gospell, which is the ministration of righteousnesse that exceedes in glory, far I say above the ministration of the lawe, which is the ministration of condemnation. If then not more, nor lesse than the Levites had, then the maintenance must be the same, that the Levits had, or nothing at all. Had the Levites Tithes and Offerings? So hath the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospell should live of the Gospell, 1 Cor 9.14. For if it be granted that they of the law receaved Tithes for their Ministery; then it must needes bee granted,
 that wee of the Gospell shall receave Tithes much rather. For so saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.12. If others (that is, the Levites) bee partakers of this power, why not we rather? as if he should say, If they of the law receaved tithes; shall not we the Ministers of the Gospel much rather? Know ye not (saith the Apostle) that they which minister about holy things, eate of the things of the Temple? and they that waite at the Altar, are partakers of the Altar? So hath the Lord ordained, that they which waite at the Altar, and preach the Gospell, should live of the Gospel. Hath the Lord ordai∣ned that the Levites of the law should have tithes and offerings; So hath the Lord ordained that the Ministers of the Gospell should have tithes and offerings: For the Apostle speaking there of the Levits maintenance, concludeth by those words, so hath the Lord ordained, that the Ministers portiō should be no lesse than theirs, if not more. For if we can have no lesse, nor no more, then it must be the same that the Levites had, which is the 10. or else nothing. Now for the word Tenth, who knows not quid sit decima? Nempe ex 10 partibus una And this 10 part was instituted by Abraham, Gen. 14 20. Abraham gave Melchiz. tithes of al. To which the Apostle addeth Heb 7 2. Melchiz. receaved tithes of Abraham. And it
 must needes be that he receaved them de jure, of right For otherwise Melchiz. had not bin more excellent than Abrahā of whom he receaved thē. Neither did Abrahā pay tithes jure sacrificii (nullū enim obtulit) sed benedictionis gratiâ; by right of sa∣crifice (for hee offered none) but because hee might receave a blessing from Melchizedeck: for these 2 cohere, benedixit Melchizedec, decimas pen∣dit Abraham, Thus then I argue against all sacri∣legious persons that gainsay this truth, Melchi∣zedeco benedicenti debentur decimae, sed idem jus sub Christo manet; (quia juravit Deus & non poenitebit e∣um, Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundùm ordinē Mel∣chizedech, Psa. 110 ergo etiam Christo & Sacerdotio ejus, quod non transfertur, sed manet in aeternū, decimae de jure semper debentur; manet semper sub Christo de∣cimarū jus, in quo & per quē, benedicti sumus omnes, & benedictus ipse in secula. Si enim decimae sunt ita Sa∣cerdotio annexae ex instituto Divino, quis vel qualis sa∣crilegus eas separabit. Quae enim Deus conjunxit, nemo separet. Sanè vel adversarii nostri, decimarū jus perver∣sè altercantur, aut Apostolus ad Heb. 7.8. non solidè hâc in re instituit. Ʋbi enim Sacerdos ibi decimae. Vivit Sa∣cerdos, non auferentur 10. vivit Sacerdotiū in aeternū, non auferentur decimae in aeternū. Ergo intelligāt omnes sacrilegi, quòd Deus omnes Abrahami posteros obligavit ut eâdem, quâ decimatus est Lege Abraham, eadem
 lege atque institutione, omnes ejus posteri decimas suas debent persolvere. And as the sacred Scriptures maintaine and teach this truth for tithes, so do also many of the Fathers. S. Ierom writing on that place of the Gospel, Mat. 23 23. Decimatis menthā & anethū, &c. saith, Justitiā & misericordiā & fidē propter suā gloriā mādavit Deus, decimas autē propter Sacerdotes. And S. Cyprian also writeth to like purpose concerning tithes and offerings, Presbyteri ab Altari & sacrificiis non recedant, sed die ac nocte coelestibus rebus ac spiritualibus serviant & decimas tanquā Levitae, ex fructibus terrae accipiant. Let the Priests & Ministers of the Gospel waite at the Altar and receave tithes, as the Levits did. Therefore are tithes due to the Ministers and Preachers of the Word, jure Divino, by Divine right And now my Lord, I thought good out of that respect I owe your Lordship, to addresse the same to your Lordships service and Patro∣nage; not doubting but that your Lordship & all well affected Christians herein, will with me defend this truth, that decima pars, Dei pars est & Ministrorum portio; the tent part is the Lords part, and his Ministers portion. And so leaving your Lordship to the Divine providence, I al∣waies rest, at your Lordships service to be com∣manded,

