



THe Wife whō Bethsheba descri∣bed,Prou. 31. hath bin, is now, and for euer shall be a peerlesse patterne to all vertuous wiues: right so your worthy actions concerning mat∣ters of Chiualrie (that the know∣ledge and exercise thereof may not decay in Citizens) haue bin, are now, and I hope will be a notable example to the pre∣sent age, and to all posteritie. Therefore as it is said of the vertuous wife, A woman that feareth God,Prou. 31.30. v 29. shall be praised: Her children rise vp, and call her blessed: Her husband praiseth her: her owne workes praise her: So say I of you: The training vp of the Cities va∣liant men, yea youths, nay very children in feates of armes (being first taught to feare their God, and to be ar∣med against, and fight against Satan) causeth those chil∣dren to rise vp and blesse both parents and Preachers,

and Captaines for their education: yea and it maketh the whole land to reioyce in their good God for the worthie patterne which you giue to the kingdome in these right worthy actions both for bodie and soule. Hereby you shew that you are not like the lazie people of Laish,Iudg. 18.7, 8, 9. who by their carelesnesse were fit to be made a prey to any that would inuade them. Go on good Citizens thus to ioyne religion and prowesse, pietie (by the peaceable word) and policie (by the preuenting sword:) so shall your workes continue to praise you in the gates, and to cause the praise of our glorious God to sound both in earth and in hea∣uen. For your better progresse herein, I haue sent you (euen first of all) a little Treatise touching the antiqui∣tie and nobilitie of gracious Souldiers, and concerning the holy behauiour which they ought to haue, without which, no science, mysterie or art, no not the seuen Libe∣rall Arts, no nor any other knowledge whatsoeuer, are of any reckoning with our God. The Lord our God blesse it to you, and blesse you all, and the whole Citie also, especially with continuance of that good word of our good God, so powerfully preached, and with your increase of loue and obedience thereunto, together with all kinds of godly peace, and with each good means to maintain them: and all this in a most long, quiet and blessed reigne of our gracious Soueraigne Lord King Iames. Amen.
