



TO testifie, among others, my hearty thankfulnes vnto Al∣mighty God for your High∣nesse preseruation, and safe returne into this Land, may plead an excuse for my pre∣sumption in dedicating this Sermon to your Highnesse. For, though this whole Land haue made shew of the joy of their hearts, and how their hearts within them danced for joy, for your Highnesse happy return, both by publick thanks∣giuings to God, ringing of Bels, Bonfires, and such like; yet (me thinks) the Presse might haue
 been more set a-work than it hath been, to presse out some lines on this subiect, of your Highnesse blessed & happy Return, and our thankfulnesse to God for the same. And first, for your Grace, who chiefly hath found this grace and fauour of God, hee euer giue you grace to blesse and praise him for the same.
Gratitude is a rich and royall vertue, best be∣seeming the best Princes, who haue the best means to expresse their thankfulnesse to GOD, and the most cause to excite others to this duty by their example: which vertue cannot be wan∣ting in your princely heart, the same being ador∣ned with so many other rare princely vertues and transcendent qualities.
Horace.Hîc ames dici Pater atque Princeps.
For, thankfulnesse to God, is the prime and summe of all vertues and duties.
But yet there is another motiue which makes me bold to presume to offer this my poor mite into your Graces Treasury: for, the very Title of the Sermon pleads pardon and acceptance; namely, THE NECESSITY OF FAITH. For, as in this Chapter wee may reade, that the Fa∣thers did great and wondrous works by the se∣cret power of faith;Heb. 11. as, By faith, Enoch was
 translated; By faith, Abraham receiued the promise; By faith, the Israelites passed tho∣row the red sea: So by faith, by your true trust and confidence in God, and by his onely grace & fauour, your Grace hath been translated hither again into this great and glorious Monarchie, this vnited and truely happy Ile. By faith, you haue receiued the promise, & tasted of the sweet mercy and goodnes of God: and by your faith and confidence in God, you escaped also, and passed thorow the many and great dangers of the Sea. What is now your & our duty for this great mer∣cy and fauour of God, but to sing with Dauid (that sweet Singer of Israel) Canticum no∣vum, Canticum laudis, & Canticum grati∣arum actionis; a new Song, a Song of praise, and a song of thanksgiuing vnto God? And since now, your Highnesse is the royall Plant of Gods right hand, and descended of the Race Royall, from THE DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, to whom should this tract of faith bee more rightly entituled, than to the Heire appa∣rant to THE DEFENDER OF THE FAITH? Therefore as I was commanded to preach this Sermon before your Highnesse: and as it pleased your Highnesse, of your wonted gra∣cious
 disposition, to vouchsafe a gracious eare at the preaching thereof, with approbation: so it might also now please your Highnesse to vouch∣safe your gracious patronage heerunto. And let my deuotion to your Highnesse, dispence with my presumption therein: for, I hold it my duty, to haue more regard of my owne seruice, than of the censure of others. And so, hartily beseeching al∣mighty God, that as hee hath made you a conspi∣cuous and eminent Starre, so you may long shine in wisdome and Religion to this and other Na∣tions, to the glory of GOD, the comfort of this Church and Common-weale, the consolation of your owne soule, and to the joy of all our hearts; I will euer (according to my bounden duty) hum∣bly commend your Highnesse, in my prayers, to the true Protector of Princes.

