


IT is one of the greatest honours that may be, to follow the steps of good men in good actions. The praise and benefit hereof you re∣ceiue to Gods glorie, by imitating your renowned Mother-Citie of London in training vp your peo∣ple for skill in warre. The in∣crease in this Skill, is a meanes to strike a feare into in∣veterate foes, who otherwise will watch opportunities to offer strokes. Olde wilie foxes are venturous vpon lambes in places where they winde no foote, nor baite, nor grinne. Olde kites will quickly spie where nets be prepared, and where not. Olde Rauens will soone smell both match and powder: and olde robbers of houses will soone perceiue which houses are strong, and which are weake. Right so it is with old enemies to a nation. Well

you know (by reason of many iourneys about your af∣faires) that the verie sight of a sword makes a theefe stay his hand sometimes (though not his heart,) yea and by Gods restraining power saues some throates from cutting: Right so in peace, a preparation for warre makes the enemies heart to faint, and the hearts of good men to reioyce. This holdeth in the spirituall warre al∣so, by preparing to haue that sword of the Spirit readie both in the greater and lesser Churches of our God; yea and readie also in euerie heauenly hand of each new borne Christian (considering the great subtiltie and strength of that old Serpent, our irreconcileable aduer∣sarie.) Imitate your honourable Mother, in her so ma∣ny holy prouisions and actions: imitate her in the dou∣ble, by pietie I meane and by policie; by prouiding both the heauenly and the earthly sword: endeuour you also alwaies as she doth, to vse all good meanes for defend∣ing your selues and your countrie: amongst others, practise effectually that laudable training prescribed by a prouident order. Thus defend your selues: yea and be you, and let vs all be defenders euer, offenders ne∣uer. Let not your vse in armes be out of your armes (as a thing vnaccustomed.) Our prouerb is, Vse legges and haue legges: so I say, Vse armes skilfully, and haue skill in armes. Be you then religious more and more, and be you also valorous more and more: con∣tinue to bring vp your youth in the trade of both these waies; so shall they not depart from them: both these be holy wayes to enter into, and to walke in. For your bet∣ter treading in these peaceable, yet preuenting & defen∣ding paths; and for your true vse of warre when you

haue occasion (which our good God keepe vs from, if it be his blessed will) I haue likewise sent you (aforehand also) my collections of those eight links, and the chaine made of them, together with a description of your Ar∣mour of choice and proofe. No more at this time, but the Lord our God so guide you still in holy actions, as that you may do them cheerfully and constantly, to your owne priuate and your countries publicke good, and alwayes to his glorie in the first and highest place. Amen.
