


SEeing alwaies it hath been accounted a su∣perfluous worke, ei∣her to commende in A∣ollo wisedome, or to ex∣ol in Hercules puissance, or to praise in Minerua knowledge: it may bee hought no lesse needlesse or me, to praise in fined words and garnished stile if so I were able to do) our ardent zeal in Gods ruth, and maruellous af∣ection towards the true
 professors thereof. And bicause among those that know you, it shineth so o∣riently, as in words to set it foorth, were rather to imbeazle than illustrate it; and among those tha know you not, by com¦mending it abundantly may feare the censure o smoothing, I thinke i better, at this time (as Sa¦lust saith of Carthage) to speake nothing at all o it than a little. Yet surely (though the enuious hap∣pily mislike it) this I af¦firme, when I bethough to find a meete protecto for this pamphlet, tha might loue it, as Antoni¦us the Emperor was won to loue books, as Alphon∣sus
 was accustomed to e∣steeme the works of Ci∣cero, that might reade it diligently as Erasmus did Terence, as bishop Iewell did Horace, as Ladie Iane Graie did Platoes Phae∣don: none came to my minde before your Wor∣ship, vnder the wings of whose tuition, these my slender labors might safe∣ly be shadowed, from all the malice of spitefull re∣proouers and taunting carpers. Now concerning the worke, some I knowe will finde fault with my presumption, that being a tender suckling and no∣uice in good letters, I would dare to put foorth ought in print, especially
 in such a plentifull time of bookes. Let these take this answere; that I did it not voluntarily but in∣forced, and that by the request, not of one or two but of many, whose good will I haue often experi∣mented, whose friendship in the Lorde I will no (for a small cause) violate, whose authoritie I may not despise. For lighting by chance on this treatise of Chrysostome, reueren∣cing it at the first sight more for antiquitie than ought else, assoone as I had read it ouer, I did it faithfully for my priuate vtilitie into English, neuer thinking it should come to this passe. But hauing
 ent it vnto some of my Friends, desirous of such a peece of matter, they fell suddenly into that liking and louing of it, that they neuer ceased exhorting, begging, compelling (I may say) vntill (maugre my head) I granted, it should go foorth for the benefit of many. Which ow being newly borne and come into the world, I beseech your courtesie to receiue into your pa∣tronage: and as it procee∣ded from a willing mind, so to take it with a glad∣some countenance. And notwithstanding this te∣stimonie of a gratefull mind, do not any waye counterpoise the weight
 of your demerits, yet I beseech you to accept of the poore widowes mites, and of the cheerfull gi∣uers mind. Thus surcea∣sing any longer to inter∣rupt your Worships seri∣ous affaires, I suppliantly craue of the Almightie, daily to augment his gra∣ces in you and the vertu∣ous Gentlewoman your wife, that after your rac ran in this dale of misery, you may for euer enioi the sight of Christ Iesus in heauen. From Chud∣leigh, Anno. 1587.

