



I PRESENT vnto your worship a copy of that Sermon, the which I preached pub∣liquely at Pauls Crosse: in that I am al∣ready persuaded, that the doctrine there∣in conteined, is requisite and expedient for these daies. The which when I had considered, I found sundry and diuerse men that had cloathed themselues in Pharisaicall garments, wherein was em∣brodered the summe of Christianity, they themselues in the meane season altogether depriued of the grace of God. Faith saieth the Apostle, it is the gift of God, and in vaine tendeth all our preaching, if the heart and soule of man bee not prepared before by the speciall assistance of Gods spirit: Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but if God doeth not giue the encrease all tendeth to small effect.
The Virgins that slept, and had not their lamps burning, were forthwith excluded the presence of the Bridegroome. The figtree, that had broade and greene leaues, and no fruite, once cursed, withered. So it falleth out with vs, which in externall shew attend and expect the comming of the sonne of man, are found at the last vnfit to attend vpon him, although wee make glorious shewes of Christianity, and doe not perfourme works of charity. These and such like maladies haue infected diuers, the which of a zeale haue put forth themselues before they were called, and in a vaine presumption of humane learning, haue
 caused the weaker sort to follow them, and to relie vpon them, that were not able to upholde themselues. Such men were Eu∣nomius, Vigilantius, whom Saint Augustine in his second booke in∣tituled, quaestiones in Exodum, tearmeth opicos mures the which are spumei in sermrne & in fide parum sani: of whom Saint Cyprian in his booke de simplicitate praelotorum speaketh in this wise. Hi sunt qui se vltro apud temerarios conuenas sine diuina diuina dispositione praeficiunt, qui se praepositos sine vlla ordinationis lege constituunt qui ne∣mine episcopatum dante episcopi nomen assumunt. The which wordes of thir blessed and aged father duely considered, lay o∣pen the preposterous course of sundry leaders in these daies, the which exclame against Cesar and his right labouring as much as lieth in them, to plucke vp by the rootes that which they neuer planted.
So heady, that they wil not stand to the trueth receaued, prea∣ching contrarieties, of whom Irenaeus li. 3. ca. 15. speaketh: Valenti∣nus & Ptolomaeus deliri & fanatici homines auditores suos, cōtradictores fecerunt, as these can sufficiently approue. This Sermon diligent∣ly perused, laieth open the sinister meanes, and deceitful practi∣ses of these men, the which beeing vnstable in their doctrine (as the sundry change of the Church of Scotland) approueth: haue at the last followed the steps of the Parmenian, to contempe all men in respect of themselues, whom Optatus in his 2. booke a∣gainst Parme: counselleth and aduiseth in this wise. Non enim spiritum Dei soli vobis uindicare potestis aut includere quod intelligitur & non videtur, per mitte deum vnde velit ire & quo velit accedere, ha∣beat libertatem qui audiri potest videri non potest. A kingdome de∣uided in it selfe cannot stand, sathan if hee were in armes against himselfe, his kingdome forthwith would bee ended: discorde crept in among the Romans, & ouerthrew the Roman Empire. The parts in mans body if they were at variance, life could not long continue saied Menenius Agrippa long ago. And so, si paruis componere magna liceret, The Church of Christ cannot continue among vs, sith one preacher ioyeth to contradict another: and delight in nouelties, and few to be found that dares oppose thē∣selues to withstand these men, the which pretend conformity & order, and practise nothing else but irregular disorder. Let the Church or Scotland be diligently regarded: good God? What vp∣tores and tumults hath that poore Ilande susteined by factious
 and seditious means & what hath it procured in the end but flat rebellion, such malecontents among vs at home, haue as much as lieth in thē disgraced the established gouernment of our church as diuers books 15 years passed printed at Andwerp can sufficient∣ly testifie: & these men to obtaine a name & to enrich thēselues haue procured a defection from our Church: contemning the Right Reuerend fathers of our Church & wilfully opposing thē∣selues against al lawful authority whatsoeuer. These mē may ve∣ry well bee resembled to one Hermogenes of whom Tertullian in his booke the vvhich hee wrought against him reporteth that hee was homo in saeculo turbulentus, qui Loquacitatem facundi∣am existimat, & impudentiam constantiam deputat, & ma∣lidicere singulis officium bonae constantia iudicat. Such innoua∣tions in Religion are and haue beene daungerous and when men are zealous in contention, then doeth God permit them to bee guided by their ovvne discretion, and then that is ap∣prooued a verity the which the Philosopher gaue out long agoe, vno absurdo concesso mille sequuntur, when a man hath once made a breach into an absurdity, it is an easie matter to cause him to graunt al absurdities and contradictions whatsoeuer. These and the like inconueniences to auoide with the which this age of ours aboundeth, I haue set downe my sermon as I deliuered the same at Pauls Crosse, in the which I haue laied vpon the causes of this schisme & dissension with the which our Churh of England is pe∣stered, and the means to remoue the same. But I am assured that I do surdis canere cantilenā, to thē especially that vtterly reiect the authority of our Church. And frame vnto thēselues a kinde of re¦ligiō that hath altered the course of ours, deliuered vnto vs by our fathers, the verity whereof to approue where nothing else then if I should lucente sole lychnum accendere. For the parties I woulde if I might chuse not meddle with thē: they stand not to any law∣ful authority, if scripture be vrged, expounded by the vniforme consent of Christ his Church, the interpretation is reiected, & the reason is at hand, the Church was then by heresie corrupted. If the Canons of generall councels be cited: for the peaceable and godly gouernment of our Church. The fathers that thē liued did caecutire they had not so special aportiō of gods spirit as they haue obiect vnto them the estate of the Church as it is now, ratified by inuincible authorities of scripture, confirmed by the ancient
 fathers heretofore, defended by the blessed hand of her ma∣iesty against the greatest Monarches in Europe at this day. Iam{que} faces & saxa volant furor arma ministrat. And these are the men of whom Saint Hierom speaketh in his Commentaries vpon the 5. Chapter of Saint Pauls Epistle to the Ephesians. Qui semel fuerit furore superatus, necesse est vt profiliat in clamorem, & turbide fremens huc at{que} illuc in modum fluuij ventiletur & dicat: O rerum iniquitas: O iniusta Dei iudicia, & catera quae solent loqui, qui per indignationis fu∣rorem, mentis iudicium per diderunt. These men I leaue to their owne phantasies, and commend this my sermon vnto your wor∣ship vnto whom I acknowledge my selfe in dutie greatly bound desiring God to blesse your worship with many happy and pros∣perous yeares in this world to the glory of God and your hartes desire.
Oxon▪
