



RIght worshipfull: Ha∣uing of late some occasion, more then I did expert, for some small time, to sequester my minde, (as it were) from more serious studies; I thought it good, for mine owne priuate exercise, to reade

ouer and peruse certaine Sermons of the learned Father Chrysostome, among the which this Exhortation insuing, be∣ing the fourth Sermon which hee prea∣ched at Antioch, is extant. VVhich I haue nowe for the benefite of others, translated into English, the rather for the matter therein contained. For if it bee duly considered, and weighed with iudgement, we may see it is a most liue∣lie mirrour, teaching all Christians how to behaue themselues in afflictions, to vse patience in all manner of tribulations; to continue steadfast and vnmoueable in the fayth, and to holde fast the blessed hope of euerlasting life. The occasion that this godly father made this Exhor∣tation vnto the people of Antioch, was this. The Emperour Theodosius, and some of his predecessours, had caused certaine Monuments to bee set vppe at Antioch, for a memoriall of their im∣periall dignitie, and royall magnificence.

And so it was that this Emperour had imposed an hard Tribute vpon the peo∣ple, and sent his Letters to Antioch, commaunding the Inhabitants there, to make payment thereof. VVhereupon all the citizens were in such perplexitie, and so sore grieued, that a great number of them assembling togither, did greatlie murmure, and complaine, saying, that such an intollerable Tribute was layde vpon them, that they were not able to beare it: and that they were vtterlie vn∣done. This rumour being heard through∣out the Citie, immediately a companie of the baser sort, vnruly and vnstayd per∣sons, made a tumult and sedition in the Citie: and this seditious crew, to auenge themselues, tooke vpon them in contempt of the Emperour, to deface, subuert, and ouerthrow the said Monuments. VVhich enterprise being effected, they procured the great displeasure of the Emperour. The Magistrates (as their loyall dutie

was) did presently sit in iudgement, to execute the Lawe vpon those malefac∣tours: and many of them being appre∣hended, were conuicted, and condemned to death. Some were cut off with the sworde, some were burned, some were cast vnto wilde beasts to be deuoured, not on∣lie the men, but also their children. The women beeing in miserable perplexitie, seeing their husbands and children ledde away to be put to death, durst not com∣plaine of their calamitie, for feare of im∣minent daunger. Many of the men to saue themselues, fled into desart places. The rest that remained in the Cittie, weighing the miserable estate that they were in, by meanes of those malignant offenders, diligently repayred to the Church to serue God in prayer, and to heare the worde of God preached, to their edification and comfort, in that most dan∣gerous time, they kept a fast. And at that instant Chrysostome made this exhor∣tatiue

Sermon vnto them, besides manie other Sermons, labouring what hee could to mooue the people to tranquillitie and peace, to cōfort the minds of the afflicted; and to arme them with pacience, that they should not bee dismayed with the present troubles; considering that tribulation is sent vnto the godly, for the triall of their faith▪ and that in the ende, the Lorde will giue a happie euent to all that constantly perseuere in their godlie profession, if they tarry the Lords leysure; and depend vpon his prouidence, as at the length it come to passe vnto this people of Antioch. For after that Chrysostome, as a faithfull Pastor had imployed much time and dili∣gence in teaching them the good and right way, they being attentiue to heare him; it pleased God to giue such a blessing vn∣to them, that by his instancy in preaching, the wicked were stayed from attempting further euill; and the godly were great∣ly edified and confirmed in the faith. And

by the discreete wisedome of Flauianus their Bishop, who went as an Ambassa∣dour vnto the Emperour, in the name of the whole Cittie, to pacifie him, and to craue their pardon: where as before, the Emperour had threatned to subuert the Citie, and to destroy the inhabitants: the Lord turned his heart, so that he pardo∣ned them, and hee and the Cittie were re∣conciled, to the great ioy and comfort of them al. By this example of them of An∣tioch, we may see, howe daungerous a thing it is, for Subiects to attempt any thing agaynst their Prince, and the hurt that commeth of sedition. Again, we may see, what great good redoundeth vnto the godlie, by the diligent preaching of pain∣ful Pastors, who labor to bring the people vnto repentance, and amendment of life: and how the Lord doth blesse them, who being truely penitent for their sinnes, doo vnfaignedlie turne vnto him, and are content to be reformed by the true Prea∣chers

of his worde. Although they suffer a great cōflict of tribulation & afflictons yet the Lord in his good time, doth merci∣fullie deliuer them, mittigating their sor∣rows, and turning their heauinesse into ioy: wherby they haue most ample occasion to render thankes vnto him, for his great goodnesse and mercie extended towardes them. Now hauing finished the trans∣lation hereof, and earnestly desiring that some profite might thereby growe vnto others, to Gods glorie, and their com∣fort: I thought it not impertinent to publish it, and to present the same vnto your VVorship, as the first fruites of my labour in this kinde: the rather for that you are a zealous fauourer of the Gospell, and true Religion established. If therefore your good worship shall ac∣cept in good part this my small exercise, and shall vouchsafe to protect the same, I shall thinke my labour herein the bet∣ter imployed. And thus praying God

to continue his blessings towardes you, and long to preserue you, for the further good and benefit of our Countrey: I hum∣blie take my leaue of your wor∣ship. Stratton Michaell, 12. of October. 1597.

