



MY LORD. While you cannot change your merit, I dare not change your title: It was that made it, and not I. Vnder which name, I here offer to your Lo: the ripest of my studies, my Epi∣grammes; which, though they carry danger in the sound, doe not therefore seeke your shelter: For, when I made them, I had nothing in my conscience, to expressing of which I did need a cypher. But, if I be falne into those times, wherein, for the likenesse of vice, and facts, euery one thinks anothers ill deeds obiected to him; and that in their ignorant and guiltie mouthes, the common voyce is (for their securi∣tie) Beware the Poet, confessing, therein, so much loue to their diseases, as they would rather make a par∣tie for them, then be either rid, or told of them: I must expect, at your Lo: hand, the protection of truth, and

libertie, while you are constant to your owne goodnesse. In thankes whereof, I returne you the honor of leading forth so many good, and great names (as my verses mention on the better part) to their remembrance with posteritie. Amongst whom, if I haue praysed, vnfor∣tunately, any one, that doth not deserue; or, if all an∣swere not, in all numbers, the pictures I haue made of them: I hope it will be forgiuen me, that they are no ill pieces, though they be not like the persons. But I fore∣see a neerer fate to my booke, then this: that the vices therein will be own'd before the vertues (though, there, I haue auoyded all particulars, as I haue done names) and that some will be so readie to discredit me, as they will haue the impudence to belye themselues. For, if I meant them not, it is so. Nor, can I hope otherwise. For, why should they remit any thing of their riot, their pride, their selfe-loue, and other inherent graces, to con∣sider truth or vertue; but, with the trade of the world, lend their long eares against men they loue not: and hold their deare Mountebanke, or Iester, in farre better condition, then all the studie, or studiers of humanitie? For such, I would rather know them by their visards, still, then they should publish their faces, at their perill, in my Theater, where CATO, if he liu'd, might enter without scandall.

