



AS the preaching of the
Gospell of Christ was not,
nor is, the least gift of
grace that God gaue vnto
his Church; but euen the
greatest miracle that euer
Christ wrought hecre on
earth, for our Conuersion
vnto theMath. 11. 6. faith: So the
abuse of this grace is not
the least, but the greatest
sinne, that can be committed. The which being truly consi∣dered;

I maruell not a little?3. Ep. Ioh. v. 9. why Diotrephes with his
Schollers will persist in resisting of this grace; or Simon
Magus with his Champions continue in purchasing of this
grace;Act. 8. 18. or Iudas with his Successors perseuer in buying and
selling of Christ Spouse the Church, contrarie to the Gos∣pell
of grace. But forasmuch as that I minde not in this
ensuing Treatise to tax them,Matth. 26. 15. or their wicked abuses: Yet
my prayers vnto God for them shalbee; to turne their
hearts from farther renting of the garments of Christ and
his Church, least they become like vnto these their prede∣cessors,
partakers not of the least grace.
The subiect or matter, wherewith I am now to present
your Worships withall: is touching the mysterie of Christ
his Natiuitie. The Text hath beene handed often, and by
manie; Yea and of such men, who for their great vnder∣standing,
reading, wittie inuention, and profound Iudge∣ment,
haue manie degrees exceeded my selfe. Yet to satis∣fie
the earnest and godly requests of some of my especiall
good friends, I haue enterprised, and aduentured, to set
forth the same in print: hoping that your Worshippes will
vouchsafe to giue it the perusall, and accept these the
first fruits of my labours, with the selfe-same affection
wherwith it is offered; how smal and simple soeuer it seeme
to be. And now the Lord Iesus giue it his grace, that it may
not be like firekinled on his Altar in vaine;Mal. 1. 9. but that it may
proue to bee as the morning Incense, and as euening Sa∣crifice,
acceptable vnto God, and profitable vnto this
Church.
Vnto the same God will I pray alwayes to powre downe

his mercies vpon you, to enrich you with his graces,
and to preserue your Worships for the good
both of Church and Common-wealth,
vnto his glorie
AMEN.

