



PAVL that chosen ves∣sell vnto God,Act. 9.15. being ap∣pointed a principall in∣strument or minister, for, the bearing of his name, before the Gentiles, and kings, & the children of Israel, hauing pas∣sed through the handes of many keepers, Centurions, Souldiers, high priests, and go∣uernours, at last appeared in Cesarea before Agrippa the king, who beeing desirous to heare him and his cause, & hauing for that purpose giuen him lawful libertie to speake for him selfe, he thought and pronounced

him selfe happie,Act. 26.2.3. in that hee was called and permitted to answere before him of all the thinges whereof hee was accused of the Iewes, chiefly, because hee had knowledge of all customes and questions which were then amongst them. In like manner I at this time (right Reuerend) cannot but take my selfe if not in the same degree happie, yet in some proportiō fortunate, in meeting with this present opportunitie for the vse of free speech to, and before you, not in the cu∣stomes, and questions of the Iewes, but in the thinges that concerne a better state and gouernment seene, and exercised sufficient∣ly. For I esteeme it no small adiument, or furtherance of an honest cause, to haue such a Iudge of the controuersie as both in qua∣lity is willing to heare, & in iudgement able to determine according to reason & equity: although at this time it is not my intention, to sollicite you as a Iudge in a cōmon quar∣rell, but to purchase you as a Patrone to a schollers work: litle I confes in quantity, & far from any exact or exquisite thing, whe∣ther you respect the phrase & stile, or the maner of hādling thorowout the whole tra∣ctate: by reason wherof, I coulde fully haue

satisfied my self, either in the close reseruing therof amōg my papers, or otherwise in the priuate cōmunicating of the same with my friends: but being pressed with the impor∣tunities of many good brethren, who being present at the preaching, haue made report of the fruit & benefit they therby reaped, & therefore would take no answere, but the graunt of a publike vse of the same, for their further comfort, and the profit of others, I coulde not in conscience or curtesie, denie so reasonable a request proceeding from such Christian & cōmendable minds. And hauing at the last, for their contentment in this one part (though leauing them discon∣tented, for the rest,) yeelded to the multi∣tude of reasons, wherewith they vrged me, I haue taken this course, and made this choise in the publishing to vse your Reue∣rend name, and patronage for the same. VVherunto besides sundrie effectuall mo∣tiues inducing me, (which for some respects I here suppresse) one is of good consequēce, meete in this place to bee introduced, and specified: and that is, an earnest desire wherewith I haue for a season trauailed, to haue you thorowly acquaynted with

the state, and trueth of certaine actions of mine, which by reason of the practises of suche aduersaries,Ezra. 4.1. as Iuda and Ben∣iamin sometimes had, in a matter not muche different in nature though some∣what in circumstance, are so farre from beeing entertayned with lawfull fauour, as that they are prosecuted with extreeme displeasure vnder you, yea and by you, (as of late in your heate and passions openly appeared) to the great incourage∣ment of the common enemie, and no lit∣tle discomfort of manie that professe sin∣cerely and discreetely. I craue pardon if anie syllable sounding to offence, bee in my wordes to your selfe or others towards whom my meaning perhappes may seeme to reache: for, I carrie no purpose to rippe vp, particular matters or to make the name of any man odious by complaint, but onely a care, and conscience to main∣tayne a good cause, to deliuer the trueth of thinges, and to preserue from wracke a Christian account, and reputation, which according to Salomon maketh fatte the bones.Prou. 15.30 VVhich thinges I fynde my selfe animated in this sorte (or otherwise if

occasion bee offered) to vndertake vppon this surmise, that to your selfe, (I meane your selfe, simplie considered, and not by others inchaunted) there cannot be a thing of more prompt acceptance then an honest meane vsed to remoue such vnkinde and causelesse opinions, as vpon priuie suggesti∣on haue beene (too easily) conceiued, and to scatter such mistes of accusations, as by the inuentions of malignant spirits, haue beene plotted, & preferred against my tempe∣rate course. I speak nothing but that which is common in the knowledge of the world,Acts 26.26. as not don in a corner: the dealings of some men (I will not say monsters, being such so many so impudent, so malitious, & so furi∣ous against vs, as that a way to preuent their mischiefes, and a time to breath our selues are hardly recouered, from their ordinarie vexations. Whereunto when I adde in my priuate consideration, the immoderate and fierce proceedings of your self, your courts, and officers, by interrupting the vse of my ministery, and stretching the armes of au∣thoritie to the vttermost▪ I may not say be∣yond law, reason, and christian conscience) to the increase of my disquietinges, and the

full measure of my molestations, I see small cause in common sense, of taking any heart or spirite to fulfill my course, and to growe on in that spirituall worke, whereof a be∣ginning of great hope is already made, and a foundation layd amongst them, who at this present doe inioy the benefite of my attendance: when as those who after a sort naturally (by the communitie of office) shold lend their shoulders & hāds, to beare of the blowes, and iniuries of hypocrites & the broode of vipers, doe contrary to the course of nature, and duetie, ioyne (as it is feared) with them, to strengthen their practises, and to giue more life to their de∣uises, for the vtter spoyle & ouerthrowe of many good & singuler possibilities, which thing hath made me of this opinion, that either you haue egregiously forgotten (my reuerēce to your place & person premised) or that you do wittingly neglect the aduise, or rather charge of the most reuerend, & honorable, the Archbishoppe of this pro∣uince, (whō for dutie & honors sake, in re∣spect of many his speciall fauors towards my selfe I here reēmber) sent & directed to you by letter, to doe nothing, that might tēd to my discourage or troble, bearing my

self in that lawful, & answerable sort wherin I haue alwayes squared, & measured the se∣uerall parts of my ministratiō: & whether I haue done so or not, I referre the iudgement to the testimonies of all indifferent persons not surprised with malice towards vs, nor transported with parciallitie to the cōtrary factiō, yea to your self, & your own sentēce, when the time shal come, and occasion shal yeeld it self, to impart with you the true, & perfect knowledge, of all late accidentes, touching both sides, and causes. In the meane time I conceiue hope of this effect, that vpon the perusing of this parte of my poore daily labors, which with all submissi∣on, and regard of duetie I present you, your selfe of your wisedome will discerne, what great & manifest vntruth the aduersaries reportes doe carry with them, which spare not to charge my indeuors, with bitter inue∣ctiues against persons, and seditious spee∣ches against authoritie, and the present po∣licie & gouernment of our church establi∣shed. Ab vno disce omnes,Aenead. lib. 2. by this one you may iudge of al my trauels: for I my selfe in the feare of God do protest, & the common audience of our assēblies, can & wil witnes, that ye maner & method, vsed and to be seen

herein, hath beene, and is the true forme of my dayly practise and performance of duetie. And I am not in the appurte∣nances, and necessarie adiunctes of my profession so much to seeke, but that I know according to the minde of a worthy and famous Prelate of this our age,Ioh. Iuellus. in lib. de vit. Iuel. and countrey (whose name, and memorie a∣mongst vs is better then any sweete, and ex∣cellent oyntment as the wise man speaketh) that the preaching of the Gospell standeth not in an idle and vnfruitfull discoursing of rites,Eccles 7.3. and ceremonies, but in a sound de∣liuery, and application of doctrine to the conscience of a Christian to worke faith, and repentance in the hearers: and there∣fore I doubte not but that howsoeuer hi∣therto Doeg the Edomite hath curried fa∣uour with his maister, by disclosing Dauid,1. Sam. 22.9. and accusing Ahimelech the sonne of Ahi∣tub, I meane howsoeuer some whisperers haue preuayled with your good nature (for what thing by crafte is sooner abused?) wresting the same to a hard conceit, and misconstruction of vs, and our actions, yet now vpon this iust, and reasonable apolo∣gie for our selues, your grauitie will bor∣row,

and carry Alexanders two eares,Bruson. lib. 3. cap. 10. one alwayes stopt, and reserued for the defen∣dant so shall colours be quickly distingui∣shed from causes, and the truth of things shalbe receiued, and not the informations of those men credited, which carry in their bosomes large consciences to dispence with any report be it neuer so adulterate, ten∣ding to my preiudice. And as I doubt not of this, so I mistrust not the issue of a further thing, to wit: that although Agrippa, not∣withstanding Pauls notable and true decla∣ration,Acts. 26.31.32. and the euident immerit of his bondes departed from the common hall, doing nothing in his matter, speaking well of him, and his innocencie but not deliue∣ring him according to iustice and the ho∣nour of a king, yet your reuerend discreti∣on, hauing discouered the pretences of the aduersarie, and hauing viewed with a good eye the vprightnes of our cause, will, not in regard of vs, but of the matter directly re∣spectiue to the honour of God, and the health of many soules, execute with a good conscience, that iudiciall prescription, deli∣uered by the Lorde himsefe to Moses, not as pertinent to that time, and his policie

onely,Exod. 23.2. but perpetuall for all ages, thou shalt not agree in a controuersie, to decline after many and ouerthrowe the truth. And in so doing I hope the time shall come, wherein as in the dayes of Salomon a man may dwell without feare vnder his vine,1. Kings 4.25. and figtree, from Dan euen to Beersheba: and thus ha∣uing hope for my support I rest for this present, commending my self to your good opinion, and speech, and my poore labor to your protection: requesting vpon the o∣uersight, rather your partiall, then equall iudgment, because of the imperfections scattered in the same: the graunt whereof I shall take and repute, not onely as a suffici∣ent recompence and satisfaction for this paines, but a spurre and prouocation also in time by the will of God, to shadowe vnder the breadth of your winges, matters of more substance, and greater perfection, The God and father of our Lorde Iesus Christ, the sheepehearde, and Bishoppe of our soules, who hath furnished you with many good graces, multiplie the same in you with all things necessarie for your roome, and place that God by you in al your actiōs may be glorified, the truth of

his worde and mysteries ratified, the faith∣full disposers thereof cherished and coura∣ged, the idle and ignorant ministers (the bane of our Church) reformed, and your selfe in the ende blessed with endlesse feli∣licitie. London. May the 17. 1588.

