



Right Honourable;
I Am not ignorant, that great is the mischiefe and misery of warre; than which (as. Maxim. Tyrius. Dissert. 14. p. 143. one saith) no∣thing amongst humane occur∣rences is more sorrowfull, lesse pleasant:Theat. Mund p. 85. Beasts, in their kinde, having more rest, & pleasure than they whose life is led in warfare. For whereas the beast sleeps the night in its cave & den, the Souldier takes his rest at the signe of the Moone,2. Cor. 11.27. in watch∣ings often, in fastings often; subject to the violence of all Martiall stormes, uncertain what the event and successe will be: whose office is, upon the Trumpets sound, eyther mortem ferre, or inferre, to slay or bee slaine; and neyther of both, without some prejudice. If he fals, his wife, his children, his kindred, his coun∣trey have the losse of him: if he conquers, his rising is the ruine of others; his riches the spoyle of others, his joy the mourning of others: insomuch, that hee may cry out as Marcus Aurelius did (when after ma∣ny victories, hee received his Triumph in Rome): When I saw the poore captives in iron chaines, desolate Widowes bereaved of their husbands, disconsolate Orphans deprived of their parents, a
 great deale of treasure gotten by force, & thought upon the number of those that were dead; albeit I outwardly triumphed, yet inwardly lamented, and wept teares of bloud. In times of war, Countryes are wasted, Cities dispoyled, Temples profaned, Religion despised, equity suppressed, humanity defaced; & what cruelty, what impiety not notoriously practised? All this considered, I may (possibly) be censured by criticall carpers, for setting pen to paper on such a subject, and especially for inciting to so bloudy a businesse. But (the call being not mine but the Lords) I shall the more willingly beare the burthen of any undeserved blame, if what I have written may prevaile to provoke them whom it concernes, to a readinesse to succour the di∣stressed Church in forreine parts. If it be demanded what hath emboldened me to crave your Honours patronage for these few papers; I can answer, nothing, but partly your love to Christ his cause, as you are a Beleever; and partly your place in Gods field, as a warlike Commander. If the Author be thought pre∣sumptuous, notwithstanding these motives, censure his boldnesse at your pleasure; but I beseech you be plea∣sed to shelter the Matter (not needlesse for these times) from the worlds displeasure: so shall you engage him to be a suitor to the Throne of Grace, for your Honours prosperity in warre and peace, who is
Your Hon:

