



MOST deere and louing Mothers, the Preachers note in the 12 of his Ec∣clesiastes, and the 12 verse, against the scribling Age wherein we liue, That there is no end of making of Bookes, had once made me vow my life to obscuritie: yet such you see, hath been the efficacie of your in∣treaties, that (for your sakes) that which I meant most priuate vnto

my selfe, I haue now cōmunicated to the world. Your intreaties haue preuailed with me, and at the last you haue what long you haue desi∣red. It is part of my prayers, that now you haue it, it may satisfie the least part of your expectations. The aboundance of your loues (I confesse) at the first made you both to wish wel vnto me; and the desire of seeing somewhat for your mo∣ney, hath made you more impor∣tunate vpon me: but thus far I haue bene wary to my selfe, though that imitating of the prodigall Gallants of these our times, I haue taken vp of you good large summes, and do pay you here againe with inke and paper: this is the onely coine you are like to receiue of me for your manifold charges bestowed vpon me. Accept it then (I beseech you) kindly, and cast a look vpon it now and then: so perhappes you may

thinke at the last, that though your sonne hath mis-spent much, yet he hath not vtterly lost all his time. It is yours now: for I haue sealed & deliuered it vp for your vses; and sooner you should haue had it, but that some mens fingers, who haue delighted in theft, by chance, haue stolen Diuinitie from the Printer to make them good. If they make that vse of it, I am glad they haue it: if to make vse of other mens la∣bours they stole it from him, this Copy will witnesse the worke is none of theirs: and I would haue them know, He seldome proues good that is growne old in theft and wic∣kednesse. But you to whom it doth belong, take it, and vse it as your owne, and command me, who doth desire to be imploied by you, in all offices of loue and duty. The God of loue, who giues to all abundant∣ly, and vpbraideth none, fill you

both full of all spirituall blessings; that as louingly you haue liued here, and haue beene beloued, so aboue, when this life shal leaue you both, you may liue with the foun∣taine of loue. Amen. London this 9th of March. 1615.

