



AS I am desirous to satisfie all indiffe∣rent men concerning the occasion and intent of this my discourse: so I thought good to direct the same espe∣cially vnto this societie, whereof I am a member; to testifie both how iustly or rather necessarily I haue beene drawn to the vndertaking and publishing hereof: as also how willing I am to submit my selfe to your learned censure; the argument of my writing being such as none can better iudge of then your selues.
And first I protest vpon that credit which I desire to haue among you, that I haue not vndertaken this businese of mine owne accord, as if I esteemed of mine owne know∣ledge and obseruation in this case aboue other mens. For (if it had beene thought good to haue imposed it vppon o∣thers) I do acknowledge that there are many among vs better able then my selfe to haue written in this kind, vnto whome I would willingly haue put ouer my taske. Nei∣ther did I euer find my selfe prouoked hereunto vpon any
peeuish humor to contradict or to disgrace any who doe iudge otherwise of some pointes contained herein, then my selfe doe: many of them being such as I do loue and affect well. Neither vpon any fawning humor to please or flat∣ter any person whatsoeuer; which I doe esteeme more base then begging. But disclayming both hony and gall, I haue plainely set downe the true doctrine of Phisicke concerning that disease which giues so great occasion of distraction a∣mong many good men: especially such as haue not lerning sufficient to resolue them of this point, or not that modera∣tion and humilitie of spirit to acknowledge their insuffici∣encie, and to hearken vnto others whom in all reason they might thinke able to direct them better in such a case.
For if it be true that one man cannot be perfect in e∣uery arte and profession, and therefore in cases out of our owne callings, we do depend vpon those which haue beene trayned vp in other particular subiects, beleeuing men in their owne professions: Why should we not prefer the iudge¦ments of Phisitions in a question concerning the actions and passions of mans bodie (the proper subiect of that pro∣fession) before our owne conceites; as we do the opinions of Diuines, Lawyers, Artificers, &c. in their proper Elements. Neither haue I done this as taking vpon me to reforme the mindes of men which are not vnder my charge (for I could willingly haue permitted euery man to enioy his owne opi∣nion:) But being a Phisition, and iudging in my conscience that these matters haue beene mistaken by the commō peo∣ple; I thought good to make knowne the doctrine of this disease, so farre forth, as may be in a vulgar tongue conue∣niently disclosed, to the end that the vnlearned and rash conceits of diuers, might be thereby brought to better vn∣derstanding
and moderation; who are apt to make euery thing a supernaturall work which they do not vnderstand, proportioning the bounds of nature vnto their own capaci∣ties: which might proue an occasion of abusing the name of God, and make vs to vse holy prayer as vngroundedly as the Papists do their prophane trickes; who are readie to drawe forth their wooden dagger, if they do but see a maid or woman suffering one of these fits of the Mother, coniu∣ring and exorcising them as if they were possessed with euil spirits. And for want of worke, will oftentimes suborne o∣thers that are in health, to counterfait strange motions and behauiours: as I once saw in the Santo in Padua fiue or sixe at one sermon interrupting and reuiling the Prea∣cher, vntill he had put them to silence by the signe of the Crosse, and certaine powerlesse spelles.
Wherefore it behoueth vs as to be zealous in the truth, so to be wise in discerning truth from counterfaiting and naturall causes from supernaturall power. I doe not deny but that God doth in these dayes-worke extraordinarily, for the deliuerance of his children, and for other endes best knowne vnto himselfe; and that among other, there may be both possessions by the Diuell, and obsessions and witch∣craft, &c. and dispossession also through the Prayers and supplications of his seruants, which is the onely meanes left vnto vs for our reliefe in that case. But such examples be∣ing verie rare now adayes, I would in the feare of God ad∣uise men to be very circumspect in pronouncing of a pos∣session: both because the impostures be many, and the ef∣fects of naturall diseases be strange to such as haue not loo∣ked throughly into them.
But let vs consider a little the signes which some doe
shew of a supernaturall power in these examples. For if they say there neede no such signes appeare, because the Di∣uill by witchcraft may inflict a naturall disease: then I ask them what they haue to doe with the Diuell, or with dispos∣sessing of him, when he is not their present, but hath beene onely an externall cause of a disease, by kindling or corrup∣ting the humours of our bodies; which disease as well as other will submit it selfe to physicall indications: as is shewed, cap. 1. Wherefore they must needes make him to be an internall cause, and to possesse the members and facul∣ties of the bodie, and holde them to his vse: or else they vnderstand not what they say, when they doe peremptorily disclaime naturall meanes, and auouch that they speake certaine wordes, and performe certaine voluntarie motions vpon his incitation, and are hindred by him from speaking other wordes which they would faine vtter. And therefore to this end diuerse signes and Symptoms are alledged by them, as arguments of a supernaturall and extraordinarie power inhaerent in the body.
One of their signes is Insensibilitie, when they doe not feele, being pricked with a pin, or burnt with fire, &c. Is this so strange a spectacle, when in the Palsie, the falling sickenesse, Apoplexis, and diuerse other diseases, it is dayly obserued? And in these fits of the Mother it is so ordi∣narie as I neuer read any Authour writing of this disease who doth not make mention thereof. This poynt you shall finde proued both by authorities and examples in the 4. Chapter.
There also you shall find conuulsions, contractions, distortions, and such like to be ordinarie Symptoms in this disease.

Another signe of a supernaturall power they make to be the due & orderly returning of the fits, when they keepe their iust day and houre, which we call periods or cicuits. This accident as it is common to diuerse other chronicall diseases, as head-aches, gowtes, Epilepsies, Tertians, Quar∣tans, &c. so it is often obserued in this disease of the mother as is sufficiently proued in the 2. Chapter.
Another argumnt of theirs is the offence in eating, or drinking, as if the Diuell ment to choake them there∣with. But this Symptom is also ordinarie in vterin affects, as I shew in the sixt Chapter: and I haue at this time a patient troubled in like maner.
Another reason of their is, the comming of the fits vpon the presence of some certaine person. The like I doe shew in the same Chapter, and the reasons of it, from the stirring of the affections of the mind.
Another maine argument of theirs, is the deliuerance vpon fasting and prayer: which we will imagin to be so in deed, without any counterfeiting in that point. You shall see in the 7. Chapter, how this may be a naturall remedie two maner of wayes: the one by pulling downe the pride of the bodie, and the height of the naturall humors therof; a verie conuenient meanes, and often prescribed by our Authours in yong and lustie bodies: the other by the confi∣dēt perswasion of the patient to find release by that means: which I shew in that Chapter by rules and authorities in our profession and also by examples, to be a verie effectuall remedie in curing diuerse diseases of this nature.
Many other such like instances they may produce, according vnto euerie ones seuerall conceit: which were in vaine for me to repeate perticularly: vnlesse I knew where∣in
they would principally insist. But in the discourse follo∣wing I haue as neare as I could described al the Symptoms of this disease; whereby euerie man may readily find an∣swers to his seuerall obiections.
Now to testifie my loue and affection to this societie of ours, and that I esteeme more of the censure of a fewe learned and graue men, then of the opinions of a multitude of other people: I thought good to choose no other persons to patronize this slender discourse then your selues, who are best able of any in this land, or any such like societie else∣where (that euer I could find) to iudge whether I write true doctrine or no.
Wherefore desiring you to accept it in good part, and as occasion may serue to giue testimonie vnto it ac∣cording as your iudgements and consciences shall lead you, I take my leaue this 2. Martii, 1602.

