



MOST Honourable Lady:
THe meanest seruant, of the greatest Lord, the glory of his Countrey, & your Lady∣ships wonderfull ioy and Honour, out of a strange amazement, begins now to looke vp: and the I can doe nothing be∣seeming such Honour, or worthy of these iudicious times; yet am I so obliged, that I cannot hold my peace, choosing to be taxed for anything rather then for want of dutie and thankefulnes. When the Tabernacle was building, the poorer sort which brought Goates haire and Rams skins were as well accepted, as they which brought Purple and Scarlet. This is my comfort, that such is your Noble disposition, that you will not dispise the hearty endeauor of the poorest well willer of your Hono∣rable Family. It was no small ioy unto me for diuers yeares to come in my course, and stand in presence of that mirrour of Nobility, that I might heare his wisdome, and behold his gracious conuersation: Many a storme haue I indured both by Sea and Land; But when I saw his face, his gracious countenance dispelled all ill weather, and made mee as re∣solute to returne the next time as euer. I should willingly haue spent my daies in his seruice; yea I haue often wished that my life had beene sacrificed for his, that your Honour and this Land might haue still enioyed such a compleate or∣nament



and pillar, 
But when I consider that thou () tookest  from vs, I lay my hand vpon my mouth and humbly with all who consider his worth, to humble themselues in  and fasting, that Gods Iudgements  Land, which the falling of such Stars  As for your selfe, Madame, who haue  heart already with fasting, and weeping, and  tation; I pray God to giue you patience and com  plaine sort, I labour to perswade your Ladyship  in this sermon, which I humbly commend vnto your  nours perusall: the rather because you told me it did▪  good. And though your Ladyship may thinke, & wee can not deny, but the stroake which cut off two such worthies at once, was very grieuous, yet as the Minister of Christ in the name of Christ, I beseech your Honour to take to heart the goodnes of the Lord towards you in those that still re∣maine. Your Ladyship hath two louing and most worthy Daughters, married to godly, wise, vertuous personages, you haue also another hopefull young Lady. And your Ho∣nour hath a Sonne, who giues great hope that he will tread in his Noble Fathers steps, and be heire of his vertues. All these things are worthy to be remēbred dayly with praise; which I doubt not but your Ladiship doth. And so praying for the perpetuall prosperity of your Honourable house, I leaue your Honour in the hands of the Almighty God and our mercifull Sauiour, who is able to do aboundantly aboue all that wee can desire or thinke.

