



TWo mēbers hath the Lord giuen Man (Right Wor∣shipfull, and Beloued) which are very helpefull to the soule, the Eye, and the Eare. The Eare heareth the word preached: the Eye lookes vpon the word written. Varietie of Obiects of both kindes haue both these Senses in these
 times of knowledge in the multitude of Sermons, and number of Books. So that for a man now to write, may happely seem needlesse & but like the adding of water to the Ocean: And for such an one as I am to write (whose yeres are but few, whose learning is but small, whose iudgement but weak, whose leasure but little, and employmēts many) may seem strange. But both Obiections (I hope without offence) may easily be answe∣red. For the first: Of a good Subiect, as too much cannot be spoken, so too much cannot be written; and we are so back∣ward in sayling towards heauen, that wee haue neede of all helpes to further vs thitherward. To the second, that I should thrust in my farthing amongest the learned and godly Talents in these dayes, I must ingenuously confesse is strange presumption, if I had nothing to speak for my enterprise But the weigh∣tinesse of the matter treated of may bee
 mine Apologie for the publication: and the vndeserued respect which I haue had amongest you since my first comming vnto you, is the cause of the Dedication. For, whom-to may I de∣dicate it, but to them that haue most right vnto it? And who haue more right vnto it, and to the Author of it, then your selues, in whose hearing it was first preached, for whose profit it was first intended, for whose sakes it is now enlarged, and by whom the Author is maintained? I desire, it may lie by you as a testimoniall of my thankefull heart vnto you, and of my vnfayned desire of your good as of mine owne, though it be not so good as I wish it were. It is a Doctrine of wind that I offer; yet of such winde as com∣meth from Heauen, which Gods trea∣surie, the Store-house of the Scrip∣tures doth affoord. And therefore,Aelian. var. hist. li. 1. cap. 32. as Artaxerxes the Persian Monarch
 answered Sinaetas (when hee pre¦sented vnto him an handfull of water fetcht from the Riuer Cyrus) O man,. I accept thy gift, and e∣steeme it precious: First, because of all things, water is the best. Se∣condly, because it cometh from that Riuer which beareth the name of Cyrus. So I haue confidence you will answer me, We accept this Present; first, because of all ex∣halant vapors the Wind is the pu∣rest: secondly, because it is called the Winde of the Spirit, where∣withall whosoeuer are breathed vpon, happy they that euer they were borne.
And Howsoeuer in my manner of handling the Subiect, I can-not so diuinely dresse it, and deepely diue into it, as the food and fountaine it selfe doth deserue: yet I doubt not but you will find more leasure (at your leasure) to reade it, then Antipater King of
 Macedon did a Treatise of Happi∣nesse, which one Dedicated vnto him. I confesse, it is a Present too small for one of you, beeing so little as it is: yet inasmuch as the GOD of Loue hath seated you together in the same Congregation, made you Copartners of the same profession, and hath made some of you truely the same in spiritual communion, I cannot separate you in the Dedication. I haue beene bold with some of your particular names in the Inscription: vnder which as vnder a shade, this Manuall seeketh for shel∣ter for it selfe, and for authoritie a∣mongest them to whose hands it may come; and chiefly for entertainement amongst the rest of the Parish, whom namelesse I subordinately after you send it vnto.
Thus crauing pardon for my bold∣nesse, I beseech the Father of Lights to blesse my Labours among you, so long
 as (with your, and your Pastours loue and leaue) I shall haue mine aboade with you, and to multiply his fauours vpon you, both internall, externall, and eternall, and take my leaue, promi∣sing and purposing to rest and remaine

