



RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
IT was a saying of one of theAmbr. an Constan. Duo sunt tibi ne∣cessaria, con∣scientia & fama, con∣scientia prop∣ter te, fama propter proximu. Fa∣thers, in an Epistle to one of his friends: Two things are needfull for thee,
 conscience, and credite, con∣science for thy selfe, credite for thy neighbour. And not without reason spake he this; for the one is an inward witnesse, the other giues an outward testimony of our doings. The one serues to breed in∣ward consolation, the other to bring outward commendation. But not∣withstanding the necessitie of both, yet the best of the two is least regar∣ded, the Philosophers saying being most true:Senec. de morib. Plerique fa∣mam, con∣scientiam autem pauci verentur. Many feare their credite, but few their con∣science. So it fared (as it seemes) with those ten sonnes of holy Iacob, who did mis-use his beloued Io∣seph: So they might hide that wrong they did their brother, and saue their credite with their father,
 little cared they (vntill distresse a∣waked them) how matters stood in the Court within them. So also it fares with the Secret sinners, and Ciuill liuers of our dayes. To keepe their name good amongst men they are very curious, but to haue a cleere witnesse in their owne conscience, they are nothing studious. That this euill might be somewhat helped, this Treatise haue I com∣piled; wherein my scope is to bring men to a care of their Consci∣ences as well as their names, know∣ing the one to be as needfull to cleere them from blame before the Barre of heauen, as the other to keepe them from shame amongst men. For (if Salomon saith true)
 though a good name be bet∣ter then a precious oynt∣mentEccl. 7.1. Yet, A good consci∣ence is a continuall ban∣quetProu. 15.15.. If any one aske the rea∣son of this my drift: my reason is two-fold. First, because conscience is fearefull in accusing. Second∣ly, because conscience is faithfull in recording: which two things (a∣mongst others, according to the tenour of the text) are principally and most largely handled in this Treatise. And good I desire all may doe in, and to the Israel of God.
To your Worships I thought good to dedicate the same: though wor∣thier papers were fitter for your Pa∣tronage. If I were not confident of
 acceptation: I should not presume to present you with it. Albeit, in∣deede it had beene fit that my first friends, should haue had my first fruits, yet I hope my second pub∣like labours in this kinde, will not be vnwelcome. Howsoeuer, I owe them, your Worships vndeserued fauours showne mee, challenge the same, and more at my hands. If you please to vouchsafe them the rea∣ding. I doubt not but you shall finde something profitable, though plainly deliuered in an homely stile. If you please to afford them the protection, being so simple and small as they are, you shall get me into stronger bonds, continually to wish to both your Wor∣ships, what Iohn did on the behalfe




 of the Elect Ladie, and No∣ble Gaius, euen to your soules: Grace, peace and mercie2. Ioh. 3.: to your bodies health and pros∣peritie3. Ioh. 2.: For which he promiseth to pray, who is

