


FOrasmuche (most excellent Princesse and soueraigne Lady,) as by Diuinitie, Phisike, and Philosophie, it is manifest∣ly proued, and of the faithfull, Christi∣an, and Catholike certainly beleeued, and by youre highnes mightily main∣tained, defended, and deliuered, that no grace, goodnesse, power, vertue, life, health, mainteinaunce, strength, or blessednesse, can be, conti∣nue, or remaine in the heauenly creatures aboue, vppon the earth beneath, or in those that be below vnder the earth, with∣out the especiall grace of God aboue all heauens, do vpholde, guide, and preserue the heauenly bodies, humane nature, di∣uine graces, and Princely rule.
The supercelestiall or not to be seene graces in God, are ve∣ry  manifestly knowen by his most wonderfull workes which he hath done since the making of the world. The said graces are three, Power, wisedome, and Mercie.
From these three all things spring.
In these three all things stande.
By these three all things are ruled.
Power maketh, Wisedome guideth, & Mercie preserueth.
Which three as they be in God after a maner that cānot be vttered, as saith Hugo, so in working they cannot be sundred (as affyrmeth Athanasius.)
But that the distinction of the persons may be vnderstood by the difference of workes.
Power by the mercie doth wisely make.
Wisedome by the power doth mercifully guide.
Mercie by the wisedome doth mightely preserue.
The infinitenesse of creatures doeth declare the power, as may be noted both in number and greatnesse.
The beautie doth shewe the wisedome by sight, moouing, shape and qualitie to be perceiued.
And the profitablenesse, the mercie, as maye bee viewed in that that is delightsome, fitte, commodious and necessary.
 Also the Celestiall graces or powers in the heauenly man∣sions be three, Motion, Light, Influence.
From these three all things compounded of the foure Ele∣mentes throughe mutuall interchange do growe.
In these three do their actions consiste.
By these three they be all qualited.
Motion ingendreth, Light shapeth and sheweth, Influence disposeth or qualiteth.
And these three, as they bee in the heauenly bodies after a maner that dayly may be perceiued (as affirme Hermes, Thales and Aristotle) so in working they may be deuided (as sheweth Ptolomeus with the rest of the Astronomers.)
Motion by the influence doth lightly ingender.
Light by the motion doth comely shape or shewe.
Influence by the light doeth notably encline or dispose the qualities.
The course of the Orbe and Planets running: ebbing and flowing of waters: Bathes, Springs and Hauens: blowing and whirling of the windes: ingendring of Comets, blasing Starres and Meteors: encrease of mineralles, growth of Plants, sense in

beasts, and the reason in mankinde, do sufficiently declare the motion.
Consisting in the bodies not ingendred nor corruptible, And in them that be ingendred, and that doe corrupte.
The twinkling of the Starres, glittering of the Sunne, and shining of the Moone, doe shewe the shape in formes produ∣ced of substances to be seene.
The qualities, properties, temperatures or operations of thinges doe notably signifie the influence naturally abiding in the properties of thinges doing and suffering.
Likewise the graces, faculties or spirites in mankinde bee  found out by their properties, and deuided by their offices, as teache Hyppocrates, Plato, and Galen. And they be three, Reason, Courage, and Loue, appetite or desire.
From these three all the actions proceede.
By these three all the powers do worke.
Through these three all the partes do their dueties.
Reason ruleth, Courage defendeth, and Loue mainteineth.
As they are very euidently in mankinde to bee iudged by suche as knowe the vse of the parts, and of all others that wise∣ly weygh or consider their operations in their thoughtes and deedes.
Reason by the loue couragiously ruleth.
Courage by the reason louingly defendeth.
Loue by the courage reasonably mainteineth.
The reasonable or animall spirite proceedeth from the braine, as is perceiued by feeling, sense, and vnderstanding.
The Irascible or couragious from the hearte, and is shewed by magnanimitie, glorie and honour.
The appetitiue, naturall, or louing, from the lyuer, as maye be knowen by ingendring, longing and feeding.
The two later respecte earthly things subiect to the world, the flesh, and the deuil, and therefore mortall subiecte to cor∣ruption.
But the former heauenly euerlasting to possesse ioye or

paine.
 Fourthly, the Theologicall, Diuine, or Spirituall graces of our moste christian religion, are very manifestlye knowen by their effectes, and plainely deuided by their operations.
The saide graces or vertues be three, Faith, Hope, Charitie.
From these three all holy religion doth spring.
In these three al pietie standeth.
By these three all good and acceptable deedes before God are maintained.
Faith planteth, Hope watereth, Charitie prospereth, increa∣seth and fostereth.
And these as they be in the Christian minde, as saye the A∣postles Peter, Paule and Iames, after a maner right heauenly: So in the Catholike doctrine they are laide down for most hole∣some and sure foundations, as witnesse the holy Doctors Au∣gustine, Ciprian, and Chrisostome.
Faith by the Charitie doth trustily water.
Hope by the faith doth charitably prosper, encrease and fo∣ster.
Charitie by the hope doth faithfully plante.
The protesting of the Catholike beliefe, preaching, bap∣tisme, and receiuing of the blessed Communion, doth declare the faith & regeneratiō resting in newenesse of life, & in forsa∣king the wicked deedes of the worlde, the fleshe, and the Di∣uell.
The imprisonment, persecution, and death of the Saintes, doeth declare the hope to be seene in number of the elect vp∣on earth, and in the obtayning and constant looking for the ioy and life euerlasting in Heauen.
The aduauncing of the humble and godly, assisting of the impotent, lame and needy, and punishing of the disobedient and wicked, declareth the charitie in loue, compassiō, and help abiding.
 Lastly, in kingly gouernment be also three powers, graces, faculties or vertues that prudently be exercised according to

eche regiment, moste fitte for euery region, as we maye gather by Plato, Aristotle, Tullie, Iustinian, Paule, Pontanus, Patricius, Che∣lidonius Tigurinus, Castilio, &c.
Power, Wisedome, Iustice.
From these three all kingdoms are founded.
By these all Empires stande.
Through these eche ruler raigneth, as your Maiestie moste wisely considereth, deliuereth and handleth.
Power ruleth, Wisedome guideth, Iustice preserueth.
Whiche three as they be in gouernment, after a maner that may very wel be vttered, so in offices, ministration, and execu∣tion they are very needefully to be deuided, as maye be pro∣ued by the lawes that Promotheus gaue the Egiptians: that So∣le Solimon gaue the Greekes: that Moses gaue the Hebrues: that Licurgus gaue the Lacedemonians: that Numa Pompilius gaue the Romaines: that Brutus gaue vnto vs Britons, and Howell Da sithence to the same Welchmen: that Christe oure Redeemer hath giuen to all nations that haue grace to desire it.
Power by the iustice doth wisely rule.
Wisedome by the power doth iustly guide.
Iustice by the wisedome doth mightely preserue.
The Sacred and Canonized Scriptures shewe the absolute power of Princes, as doth also the neede and profite that gro∣weth of kingly gouernment, with the mightie armies, noble victories, and glorious triumphes, resting in the Magnificence of the Prince, subiect to no forreyne power, worthinesse of the state, abilitie, number, vse and loyaltie of the Nobilitie, as well of the Clergie as of the Laitie, Gentilitie, Commons, Subiects, Inhabitants and Souldiors.
The high knowledge declareth the excellent wisedome by holy Religion chiefly declared, as doe Phisicke, Law, Science, Artes, Counsels, Statutes, Decrees, Leagues, Ministration, and Traffiques. And the Equitie the Iustice, as is beste perceyued

by defending of the faith, the auntient and catholike religion, assisting of the sicke and feeble, releeuing of the oppressed, and in giuing to euery one his own, first to God that is Gods, to Caesar that is Caesars, and in doing to oure neighbour as wee would be done vnto.
And as the graces of the Deitie of the Trinitie are contay∣ned withoute limitation in one godhead.
The Celestiall aunswerable to euerye Theoricall mansion.
And the Humaine according to the more and the lesse in eche manhoode: So are the Theologicall vertues practised in the actions and deedes of euery of the electe.
And the Kingly in the Christian rule and healthy educati∣on alone.
Of the whiche healthie preseruation and Christian educati∣on, after I had deliberately considered of the profite as well as of my duetie, if suche a treatie were deuised, agreeable no lesse to the holy Writ in ech part, than to Philosophie and Phisike in euery pointe, profitable for the preseruation as well of the healthie body, as beneficiall to the guiding of the persite and godly minde: I deemed then so meete for none as for youre highnesse the defence and protection, bycause there is no Prince to whome God hath giuen the title of Defender of the Faith: And besides that, that he hath yet in our dayes (as of old) dealt so gratiously and bountifully withall, as to endue with full and absolute power and rule, for the bodily and ghostly direction and preseruation ouer both Ecclesiasticall and Tem∣porall causes, as youre inuincible Maiestie alone.
And this preseruation Horace willeth vs earnestly to praye for, that in a body sound, a healthie spirite may be found.
Menander likewise sheweth, that health of all things is the beste.
Planudes the Philosopher, affirmeth the same more earnest∣lye, for it is no life, saith he, excepte we liue in health.
Diuine Plato also testifieth suche a Sympathia to be betwene the bodye and the soule, that if either exceede the meane, the

one suffereth with the other.
Galen Prince of Phisitions teacheth, that if the minde bee troubled, it affecteth the whole body, and contrarily.
T the wisest of the Hebrues writeth, that there is no pro∣fite aboue the profite of the health of the body.
Paule the Apostle of vs the Gentiles, plainely proueth, such a consent, felowshippe and sufferaunce to be betwene the bo∣dy and the mind, that if the soule yeelde to the vices of the bo∣dy, that they shall feele the griefes and punishment thereof, not only in this mortal life both togither, but also in the euer∣lasting life to come.
Saint Ierome that reuerend Doctor and holy Father auou∣cheth, that ouer-much weakenesse of the body doth quaile the force of the minde, and maketh the sharpenesse of the witte to wither and vanishe.
Gregorius Magnus, (that I may conclude as briefly and effe∣ctually as I can, althoughe not so compendious and eloquent as I woulde) writeth, that they that be sounde and whole, be admonished that they keepe this health of their bodies, and practise it to the health of the soule: whose holesome counsell I do thinke good to folow herein, and the same in sorte to de∣liuer to this fraile age, as wel diuinely and Philosophically, as Phisically, for all ages immediately and mediately:
That the graces of the Deitie maye the more earnestly bee desired, dreaded and serued:
The Celestiall or Heauenly to Gods glory, and our profite the wiselier foreseene, considered, applied, and preuented:
The Humaine rightlier vnderstoode, vsed, and preserued:
The Vertues diuine more exercised, & the powers of chri∣stian Regiment of euery subiect the willinglier obeyed: and suche rashe Libertines, and disobedient persons as contemne the lawes of God and your Maiestie, maye be speedily stayed and reformed.
Whereof there wil be no doubt, if the things naturall, per∣fectly  obtayned in the reasonable body, bee rightly handled,

knowen and ordered.
 The things according to nature well vsed, kepte and pra∣ctised.
 The things annexed to nature not sleightly weyghed.
 The things not natural, orderly applied, receiued and mi∣nistred.
 The bringing vp answerable to eche temperature, calling, state and condition in Vnitie and holy Religion.
 And the Politicall lawes and meanes of al Kingly and ab∣solute Rule vnder your highnesse seuerely with al equitie ex∣ecuted in this discourse answerable to the other ages to be de∣sciphered.
And therfore vnto your most mightie maiestie (according to my loyaltie) do I moste humbly and faithfully consecrate these Princely principles, with all the buildings therevppon erected, bycause that in the opinion of eche godly wight, not onely the aforesaide benefites abounde in your Maiestie as in a graine yarde: but also that your highnesse right godly and learnedly can iudge of these things, and therwith hath a most earnest, princely, prudent, and puissant regarde, motherly care, and louing liking towarde all your loyall and liege sub∣iectes, and all other of the housholde of Faith, that they may be so defended, maintained, fedde and instructed, in these your moste blessed and happye dayes, that for euer hereafter they maye rightly glorifie God, duetifully serue their Prince, and liue in al health, peace, vnity, loue & welth one with another.
The Science or Doctrine of this firste Booke, work, or age, as it is termed of the Greekes not farre amisse, Pardetrophia: So I entitle it, not altogither improperly, The Arte and Science of preseruing Bodie and Soule. Which verily had in the middle quailed (although diuerse noble personages, honourable Pa∣stors, learned Doctors, and worthy parentes dyd stil instant∣ly vrge and continually pricke me forward) if the great good∣nesse in your Maiestie alone tried daily toward all suche as set forth the glory of God, serue your highnesse, & that benefite

youre people, did not alwayes put me in sure hope to take it in good worth.
For this kinde of framed foundation first laide once sure a∣gainst all assaultes, and giuen into your moste sacred hands, is the greatest care (if I bee not deceiued) and youre Emperiall Maiestie do accept this new Peere in good parte, and do giue it your gracious safe conducte for a guide, that it may the wil∣linglier be embraced of all your beloued subiects & people of God, it shal not only giue me abilitie, courage, and counte∣nance to performe the rest that I go about, but also shal pro∣uoke diuers others to doe many thinges (farre exceeding my wit or cunning) not to be battered, suncke or ouerwhelmed in your diuine name, and for the weale publique: Which per∣aduenture may make more healthie, more godly, and of lon∣ger life your people, with their posteritie, and more accep∣table, and more beloued eche to other, and more seruiceable to your highnesse, to their Country, vnto their parentes, and vnto themselues.
Long I beseech God the giuer of all rule in al royaltie may your Maiestie liue.
Many prosperous yeares Iesus Christe the wisedome of the father, grant your highnesse ouer vs to raigne in al blessednes.
Alwaies the mercy & loue of God the holy ghost, defende, guide, & accōpany your excellēt Maiestie in all your affaires.
The very mainteiner, rewarder, and aduauncer of euerye grace, gift and commendable Vertue.
The paterne of al Power, Wisedome, and Iustice.
And the sampler of al godlinesse, mercie, and quietnesse.

