



VVorthie Sir,
WHat hath beene for∣merly offered to your religious Eare, is now within a few daies af∣ter presented to your iudicious Eye; neither doubt I but as then it found attentiue audi∣ence with the one, so it will now finde kinde welcome and acceptance with the other.
 Only you will imagine what was then de∣livered by voice can never bee carried so powerfully in papers as in speech. Solet ac∣ceptior esse sermo vivus quàm scriptus, saith Ber∣nard, the habit and gesture of a liuing man is the very life of Oratory. Yet will I not de∣spaire of that good content a review may bring to a longing spirit. The words contei∣ned in the two Tables which God gaue to Moses from the holy mount were first spo∣ken by the mouth of God ere they were writ∣ten by the finger of God, and then carried in∣to the valley to be heard and kept of all the people. So may I likewise say of the Gospel, voices and prophesies went of the blood of Christ ere ever it dropt out of his veines. But if gratious words had not fallen from the mouth of Christ, Christians had neuer con∣ceived either the power or vertue of his death. For as there is a blood of redemption, so there is a word of reconciliation, and surely where the word teacheth not, there the blood droppeth not. You are religiously wise to conceaue whereat I aime: to wit, that rea∣ding, preaching, and practising of pietie,
 may all goe together like Saul and Ionathan, of whom its said, that they were louely in their liues, and at their deathes were not di∣vided. I am sure they are the best meanes to escape those iudgements I came withall in that Visitation discourse. Which, I am made beleeue by many of my brethren & those of worth, so well rellished in the first pas∣sage, that I must not deny you a review. I was never ambitious herein, as well vnder∣standing mine own meannesse; nay my pri∣vacie hath beene a second happinesse to me. But yet after the Cleargies dinner (whereof you were pleased to partake, and among the Lords Prophets, as before you had spent one houre in the Church, so you ioyed to spend another in the Chamber: a high argument of an intire zeale) so many importunities grew vpon me from some, tendering me their hands for the transcribing hereof from o∣thers, vndertaking you should not faile in regard of that interest they might challenge in me, from all iointly soliciting for a gene∣rall favour, that at length I yeelded to send it assoone as a marriage solemnity was past
 in my parish, for the which I was to be pro∣vided against the Sabboth following. These inducements though powerfull, yet I will ingenuously confesse, were not my onely motiues. I haue heard & also obserued your vnfained affection to the truth, when as for it you haue in a māner forsaken your owne, and followed S. Ieroms advise to Fu∣ria, Honour thy father if he doe not separate thee froth the true father. Otherwise, licet parvulus: and as he speakes in another place to Heliodorus: Though thy little Nephewe should hang vpon thy necke, though thy mother with her haire about her eares, and her garments rent, should shew thee the breasts wherewith she nursed thee, though thy father should lye on the threshold, tread vpon thy father to goe over, passe away with dry eyes to the banner of the crosse. It is the chiefe point of piety to shew thy selfe cruell in such a matter. Since I was taken out of that famous Nursery, Magdalen College in Oxford by the liberall favour vnder Gods providence, of my Right Honourable good Lord and right zealous Patron, Viscount
 Wallingford, together with his worthie Spouse, my right noble Ladie, for the which the Lord of heaven multiply his blessings towards them; as also by a second and en∣tire respect of those blessed servants of God M. Edmund Dunch and his religious daugh∣ter in law, the Lady Mary Dunch, now both with the Lord, whose memories daily shine in their most hopefull heire, on whom Al∣mighty God seemes, though in a farre diffe∣rent degree, to fasten that promise made to Abraham, Thou shalt be a blessing, Gen. 12.2. Since, I say, I was taken from the Vniversitie and planted in these parts, I haue beheld faire buildings and sweet seats both on our tops and vallies, but for matter of religion much aversenesse, or key-coldnesse. Moreo∣ver, the place of authoritie vnder his Maie∣stie you now beare, ouerswaied me not a lit∣tle for so much paines; which though, I here came not so welcome to you, yet I thank God from my heart, when I see men of your qualitie and condition selected for such places; I am sure then Religion shall suffer the lesse.

Sir, I haue one boone to craue of you; which I earnestly begge, and am confident in the obtaining, that since I haue beene drawne thus farre; what you haue in your hands you would by no meanes let it goe farther, nor to any other view but in your presence. I am not ignorant how full of mo∣lestation the times are, & that questionings through misinterpretation may occasion much prejudice giue these papers leaue to ly by you as a pledge of my setled purpose to deserue your loue in my readinesse to bestow my paines, if you shall request them; and to be a continuall petitioner to the throne of grace that you may be kept by the power of God through faith to salvation In him I rest
From my study at Greys this 4th of May, 1626.

