



HAving long since (honour'd Gentlemen, and friends) finish'd this Play, and fitted it for the Stage, I intended to have had there the Promethean fire of Action infus'd into it: be∣ing thereto encourag'd by the generall good liking and content, which many of you vouchsaf'd to receive in the hearing of it; which way it never yet miscarryed, but still had all that the eare could give it: and with whom some prime wits of both the Universities, and those that were learned in this facultie (competent Iudges enough) have in their free and open Censures unanimously accorded. This I say was encouragement enough for me to prefer this little Gloweworme (which I had, as yet, only fostred and kept warme with mine owne breath) to the Stage, and to bring it into that Noble nursery of Action, where Dramatick Poëms usually and rightly take their Degrees of applause from them that can best judge, the Spectators; that, as it had been before only demissa per aurem, it might be now at length Oculis subjecta fidelibus. But the Players,

upon a slight and halfe view of it, refus'd to doe it that right; The reason I well know not, unlesse perhaps it had not in it so much Witchcraft in Poëtry, as, now t is known, the Stage will beare. Be what will, it hath again been under the file since they saw it: and now by the earnest impulse of some particular friends, necessity concurring, my selfe also willing to avoid farther trouble and care for it, that it might not hinder the conception of things more worthy your care and sight; I was, unwillingly, forc'd to publish it to the World; where being freely exposed to all censures, I doubt not but many a dogg-tooth'd Cynick will have a snap at it: But I know already they will not be worth my anger, and therefore should be loath to spend any part of my Title upon them; only I wish them to note this saying well:
Anothers work to reprehend
How easie tis? how hard to mend?
In the mean time I doe submit it wholly to the learned judgements of you all (Gentlemen) for whose delight it was conceived and written; To you doe I repaire both for de∣fence and candor: hoping that you will vindicate this harmelesse piece from the rash censures of malevolent and unskilfull Iudges, whilst I take leave to say;
—Ambu∣baiarum Collegii Alumni. Demetri te{que} Tigelli,
Discipulorum inter jubeo plorare Cathedras.
What tho it was never acted? I hold the deep and solid eare a more faithfull messenger to the understanding, than the eye: Grave Auditors are still welcomer to the Muses, than light Spectators: such I meane as applaud only of toyes and bables (Poscentes Vestro multum diversa palato) are like Americans meerely taken with bels, rattles, and Hobby-horses,

not relishing the perfection of nature nor solid Art, though Industry labour to feed them with both at once. But this excuse is left for them: Invincible Ignorance sa∣tisfies before God and man. This hope remaines to us, Non omnes eadem mirantur amant{que} What though it ne∣ver tooke the Degree of the Stage? I presume you are all Learned (Gentlemen) and know better how to judge by the care, than by the eye, though both may exercise their fun∣ctions here: As well a foole as a good Physitian may come from Padua: & an Asse may graduate himself at Athens. Wherefore now (Gentlemen) if you be lovers of the Muses (and such I would have you all) I need not then doubt of your benevolent aspects, which will soon beget a candid cen∣sure. I make but one Musophilus of you all, to whom (as it were) Uno in multis, I dedicate my endeavours bestowed upon this Poëm, hoping to find in you all, severally, that fundamentall similitude and common Ration in your loves to Learning, by which you may easily retribute that recom∣pence to these Labours, which the Stage deny'd

