



HONORABLE SIR, the wisest of Men, or rather the wisedome of God tells vs,Eccles. 3.1. that there is a time for all things: and that the great God, who at his owne will beganne time it selfe, doth at his owne Time beginne all things else: the foolishnesse of men may aske and muse why was this so soone, and that so late? but the wisedome of God knowes what is fit for euery time: And surely amongst the sen∣sible signes, and euident demonstrations of Gods all-gouerning prouidence, this is not the least, that he brings not forth his migh∣tie works altogether, but makes every thing beautifull in his time.Eccl. 3.1. And as in his creation he made not al at once, but produced them in their seuerall daies: so in his gubernation, he reueileth not the knowledge of all things in one Age, but discouers them in the seuerall ages of the World. And if man aske why God doth thus, holy David giues the answere; The Lord hath so done his mar∣vailous works, that they should be had in remembrance;Psal. 111.4. for were they all in one age (such is our corruption) they would bee lesse obserued and sooner forgotten, but being declared in their se∣uerall times, euery Age finds matter to magnifie God; And therefore He whose glorious name is to be praised for euer, reueils some meruailous thing in euery generation,Psal. 72.19. that so his name may be praised from Generation to Generation.
Mans works are for the most part (as Christ saith of the Wine that is serued in at feasts) best at first, and afterwards worse: but with God it is cōtrarie; for as in the Creation, though euery daies
worke was good, yet each daies was better then the former, and the last best of all:Gen. 1. So in his dispensation and gouernement of the world, all knowledge was not reueiled, nor all good things made knowne at the first, but day vnto day vttereth, and night to night (and why not also,Psal. 19.2. age vnto age) teacheth knowledge. And hence is it that as great secrets in nature, and as admirable perfections in art, and as rare inuentions, and profitable experiments (euery way) are daily discouered in these latter ages, as were in the for∣mer. There be not yet two hundred yeares past since the admi∣rable art of Printing was found out,It began about the yeare 1450 an inuention so excellent and so vsefull, so much tending to the honour of God, the manifesta∣tion of the truth, propagation of the Gospell, restoration of lear∣ning, diffusion of knowledge, and consequently the discouerie and destruction of Poperie, that the Pope and Popish Politicians wish it had neuer beene, and haue bestowed many a secret curse vpon him that first reueiled it; and no meruaile, for it hastens and helps forward his confusion more then all the Mechanicke my∣steries in the World. Nor is yet foure hundred yeares agoe, since the superadmirable vse of the Loadstone was found out. The at∣traction of yron vnto it was seene by Aristotle, and the Ancients, and it amazed them: But the correspondencie it hath with the Pole-starre, and consequently the excellent vse of it for Nauiga∣tion (being one of the greatest wonders of the world) was not knowne to them; nay (which is more strange) not to the Apostles themselues; for had it beene, surely Saint Paul and his companie had not beene almost halfe a yeare in his voyage betwixt Iudaea and Italie,Acts 27. and that through so many difficulties, and at last ship∣wrack; Nor would it haue beene said, that when neither Sunne nor Starre appeared for many dayes,Vers. 20. all hope of being saued was taken away. For when neither Sunne nor Starre appeares; yet by the helpe of this poore dead Creature, the Pilot can tell where he is, and knowes his course, more certainely now in the wide and vn∣measurable Ocean, then they could in the narrow Mediterran Sea; and more easily now will an ordinarie Sea-man goe to the West Indies, then S. Paul with all the knowledge God had then reueiled, from Ierusalem to Rome: for howsoeuer the Lord was miraculously powerfull in the Apostles, and glorious and won∣derfull in the Primitiue Church, in giuing knowledge of tongues,
and other learning, and power of miracles, yet he did bound and limit it at his owne pleasure, and reserued this and other of his wonderfull works to be made knōwne in the later times, that so all men in all ages may know, that though all things perish,Psa. 102.26 yet God endures; and though all creatures waxe old as a garment, yet He is the same still and for euer.
It is yet but a hundreth yeares agoe, that (after the world had scarce dreamed of any other habitable place of the earth, more then Asia, Africke, and Europe) God discouered to vulgar know∣ledge another, and as it were the new world of America, which if it had beene foretold in the elder ages, millions of men would neuer haue beleeued it. And that we in this present and peruerse age may also knowe, that Times and Seasons are in Gods hand,Acts 1. He hath vouchsafed amongst the many excellent inuentions and wonderfull discoueries of these times, to make knowne to vs of the poore Ʋirginian plantation, and by vs to the world, the hid∣den and long concealed truth, touching the state of the Barmuda Ilands. Who did not thinke till within these foure yeares, but that those Ilands had beene rather a habitation of Diuells, then fit for men to dwell in? who did not hate the name when hee was on Land, and shunne the place when he was on the Seas? But behold the misprision and misconceits of the world! For true and large experience hath now told vs, it is one of the sweetest Paradises that be vpon the earth. Let them hearken to this and make vse of it, that mislike all new inuentions, and suspect all new discoue∣ries, and hold it for a rule, That whatsoeuer is new is nought. If any had said seuen yeares agoe, the Barmuda Islands are not only accessible and habitable, but also fertile, fruitfull, plentifull, and a safe, secure, temperate, rich, sweet, and healthfull habitation for Man and especially for English bodies; oh how loudly would he haue beene laught at, and hist our of most mens companies! And yet no more then He would haue beene who foure hundred yeares agoe should haue told the world, that by the vse and helpe of a stone a man should more safely saile vpon the Ocean, round about the earth, then formerly in the narrow Seas: Or then He who two hundred yeares agoe should haue said, there was an Art by which all writing of bookes should bee saued, and that two men should Print more in a day, then two hundred can write:
Or then He who 100.t yeares agoe did tell vs, there was another world, as it were vnder our feete, wherein men liued like vs, and a richer part of the world then ours. And yet all these are now proued true before our eyes, and all the world can witnesse it; and who is he that feeles not the benefit of these three blessings? Now therefore let the iealous and suspitious world beare his due reproofe, and let God haue his due glorie and praise, who brings to light things that lie hidde in darkenesse, and reueiles his mer∣uailous works in his due time. And let the Planters and Patrons of the Ʋirginia Colonies take heart and comfort themselues; for that God, who by discouering these Ilands to them hath deli∣uered the world from that old inueterate errour, and giuen them the rightfull possession (vnder God and his Maiestie) of so rich so wholesome, and healthfull Ilands, which may be as nurseries to Virginia, hath hereby let the world see that he will vphold that Christian plantation, if men should be so base and beastly to for∣sake it. But (worthy Sir) if other men were like you, I needed not to make that (If) if all as able as you were as willing, and forward as you, wee should soone see a flourishing Christian Church, and Common-wealth in Virginia; But let this be your comfort, there is One that is more able, is also more willing then you, euen the God of heauen and earth: it is his worke you ma∣nage, and his cause you haue in hand; he may worke with com∣fort that works with God and for God; he that works with God is sure to preuaile; he that works for God is sure to be rewarded. You know good Sir (and you better then many) that He is well kept whom God keepes, and know also that hee shall bee roially re∣warded whom God rewards. And know further for your com∣fort, that though the burden lye vpon you and a few more, yet are there many honorable & worthy men of all sorts, who will neuer shrinke from you: Goe on therefore with courage and constan∣cie, and be assured that though by your Honorable Embassages, and imploiments, and by your charitable & vertuous courses, you haue gained a worthy reputation in the world, yet nothing that you euer did or suffred more honours you in the eyes of all that are godly-wise, then your faithfull and vnwearied prosecution, your continuall and comfortable assistance of these foraine Plan∣tations. A worke so honorable to God, our Religion, our King,
and our Countrie; so comfortable to the Soules of the poore Saluages, and so profitable to the Aduenturers (that of Ʋirginia for our Posterities, but this of the Barmudas for the present) as the like (for all these put together) hath not beene attempted in the Christian world these many Ages. And be cause it is the glo∣rie of God to declare his works: I cannot but commend your wisdomes in publishing those strange and welcome newes from the Barmudas: the stile is base and broken, I confesse, but it bet∣ter beseemes the bare and naked truth. Now then let the Chri∣stian world reioyce to see, that God is worshipped in the Deuills Ilands, and that English men liue safelie and sweetly there where neuer any liued before them. It is almost foure yeares agoe since our valorous Commanders Sir Thomas Gates, and Sir George Sommers, with a hundred and fiftie Persons more, were in a ter∣rible tempest cast away vpon these Ilands, and so found it, when they sought it not: and though they suffered shipwrack vpon the Rocks that compasse these Ilands (as all other did that euer pitcht vpon them) yet were they preserued euery man; which neuer be∣fell any but themselues, such was the fauour of God vnto them; And there they liued in health and safetie almost a yeare, when all the world held them dead, and had liued there till this day, and for ought we know, for euer, had they not made themselues two little ships of Cedar, in which they went to Ʋirginia, yet leauing two men in the Ilands, whom Sir George Sommers comming back againe from Virginia the same yeare, and our Colonie sent thither the last yeare, found in health and good liking: Our Co∣lonie, consisting of some threescore men, hath now beene there almost a yeare, from whom we receiue this plaine and simple, but comfortable Narration, and to whom we now send a supply, not of victualls, or such prouisions, for they neede none such, but of men and vvomen, for habitation and plantation; which by the blessing of God now goes away this present moneth, there to plant a Christian Church, to endure to the worlds end, where ne∣uer man dwelt before, since the worlds beginning: Oh happie men who there find God & his Angels, where the world thought had beene nothing, but the Deuill and his Swine into which he en∣tered. The God that led them to it, saued them vpon it,Math. 8.31, 32. fed them in it, and sends vs so comfortable newes from it, still blesse it and
defend it, and all his children in it, and all that now or hereafter goe to it, and all that loue it, and assist the plantation of Gods Church in it: Peace bee vpon them and Mercie, and vpon the Israel of God, Amen. And to you my Bretheren that be there and haue the honour to lay the first foundation of Gods Church there, and to you much honored Knight, and the rest, who by your care and charge doe beare the burthen, and maintaine the life of such glorious actions which lie neglected in this base and vnworthy world; for this your holy and heroicall resolutions, and your loue therein appearing to the Lord Iesus Christ and his holy Gospell, to our King and Countrie, I professe and deuote my selfe in all offices and duties of a Christian

