



THIS LIFE OF OVRS, (Right Honourable, Worship∣ful, and worthie Catholikes (is à Rase, and course, in which we are to runne for the win∣ning of a goale. (1. Cor. 9.) It is a Wrastling for a garland of eternall glorie. (1. Cor. 9.) It is a Warfare, in which we are to fight against three mightie, knowne, and professed enemies, for no lesse then a Kingdome of Heauen. Our life, (as IOB saieth cap. 7.) is Militia super terram; A warfare, in which we stand alwaies vpon our guarde, alwaies in our armour, alwayes with weapon in hand: but it is a warfare on earth, for in heauen it is a peace; a labour here, a rest there; a sowing in teares here, a
reaping in ioy there; a storme here, a calme there; a troublesome sea here, a quiet hauen there; a battaile here, a triumph there; and there fore the Church is called militant here, triumphant there. Where∣fore as the husbandman laboureth in the field, rest∣eth onely at home: The wayfaring man trauelleth in his ware, takes his ease onely in his Inne: The Ro∣manes tryumphed not in the same place, in which they waged warre, but made warre in forraine Countries for Townes, Prouinces, and Kingdomes, and tryūphed onely in Rome: So we must not looke for ease, peace, tri∣umphes, and garlandes in this life; but here we must prepare our selues to skirmishes, encounters, com∣bats, and battailes, and in Heauen onely expect our Triumph. The children of Israel got not the land of promise, but by the dynt of the sword, by many encoun∣ters and bloudie battailes: neither shall wee obtaine heauen, vnlesse we fight for it. Regnum coelo∣rum vim patitur, & violenti rapiunt illud, (Mat. 11.) The Kingdome of heauen suffereth violence, and the violent beare it away. If we will winne this Cittie, wee must lay siege vnto it by watching and praying. If we will enter it, we must make a breach by the batterie of good workes. If we will take quiet possession of it, we must make vvarre for it.
2. So that the Church militant, is an armie, and an armie alwaies raunged in battaile array. Ter∣ribilis vt Castrorum acies ordinata. (Cant. 6) Terrible as the armie of a Campe set in ar∣ray: In which you shal see nothing but choros ca∣strorum. (Cant. 7.) Companies of Campes. In which armie, the King is Christ; his General, is his
chiefe Vicaire; His Coronelles, are Patriarches, Bi∣shops, and other Prelates; His Captaines, and inferi∣our Commaunders, are inferiour Priests and Pastours; His souldiers, are the rest of Christian troupes, and Companies. To the furnishing of this Armie, all the Sacraments of the new law are instituted and ordai∣ned. Matrimonie peopleth this armie, and furni∣sheth it with men. Baptisme presseth and enrolleth them. Confirmation armeth them, and giueth them their militarie Marke and liuerie. The Sacred Eucharist vittaileth the Campe, and furnisheth it with munition bread. The Sacrament of Order createth Coronelles, Captaines, and such as are to com∣maund. The Sacrament of Penance healeth, and cureth the souldiers, who in this warre are wounded, and euen reuiueth them, who are slaine and killed. Extreame vnction riddeth them, euen of the re∣liques of the woundes and diseases. And so all Christi∣ans are pressed to the warre, and ordained to fight. the whole Church is a raunged Armie, and euery Christian ought to singe that songe, which DAVID sunge against GOLIATH Benedictus Domi∣nus Deus meus, qui docet manus meas ad praelium. & digitos meos ad bellum. (Psal. 42.) Blessed be our Lord my God, who tea∣cheth my handes to battaile, and my fingers to warre.
3. In this Armie, you, (ô valiant and constant Catholikes) are placed, as in the most dangerous, so in the most honourable rancke and place. For as the Ge∣nerall placeth there his most expert and hardie soul∣diers, where the enemies Canon playeth oftenest, the darts and arrowes flye thickest, the pikes are planted
like a wood most terriblie: so our King CHRIST IESVS, vnder whose banner and colours you fight, knowing your vndaunted courage to be such that (absit verbo inuidia) you are the most valiant souldiers of the present Church militant: he hath pla∣ced you against a wood of Pikes, against a shower of Bullets and Pellets, against the most furious assault, that the common enemie giueth to the Christian Armie, and Church militant of Christ.
4. For whereas Christians amongst the Turks, can buy their libertie of Conscience for money, you by no tribute can purchase such a fauour. And whereas in Holland, and other countries, the Magistrate layeth handes on Priests and Catholikes, only when he fin∣deth them at Masse, or diuine seruice; you are sear∣ched for more diligently then theeues, murderers, and publike harlots, and are apprehended, euen in the streetes and fieldes. And although in Fraunce and the Low Countries, Catholikes haue heretofore endured intollerable pillages, cruell deathes and tor∣ments, yet that furie lasted onely a while, whilest the furie of heresie raged in her hoate beginning: but against you the like furie hath long continued. That cruelty was practised onely by way of tumult, but against you the like sharpnes hath bin vsed, vnder the colour of law, & shew of iustice: So that no Nation, no people Christian endureth at this day for Christ his Church, and her Pastours authoritie, that which you haue en∣dured for these many yeares, without interruption. And whereas the more raging the Tempest is, the soo∣ner it is appeased: & the more furious & bloudie the battaile is, the sooner it is ended: you haue this long ti∣me suffered a violent and furious persecution, and yet
you see no ende of this furie, yea, no hope of an ende, by humane meanes, oulde statutes being still renewed, new enacted. So that you are placed in that place of Christs Armie, which is exposed to the greatest furie of the Enemie: yea, you are set as a Butt or marke, against which, the enemies of Gods Church, are permitted to discharge all their Artillarie, and to emptie the quiuers of all the pearsing arrowes of afflictions, against you: and fo you may say as IOB did (Iob. 16.) Posuit me quasi signum. He bath set me to him selue as it were a marck to shoote at. And seeing that he bath bene so long a spectator of these shottes, and furious assaultes, it seemech he taketh delight and pleasure, not in your enimies crueltie and furie, but in your dexteritie in warding, constancie in keeping your standing, patience in suffering and enduring.
5. And truely your afflictions seeme to me, neither inferiour, nor vnlike to those of IOB, and your pati∣ence seemeth to match and to aequalize his; only the or∣der of your afflictions seeme different. For he was as∣saulted first in his goods, thē in his person; you cōtrarie∣wise, first in your bodies and liues; now in your goods and liuings. The Sabeians haue rushed in vpon you, as well as on IOB, and haue spoyled many of you, impouerished the rest. Irruerunt Sabei, tulerunt∣que omnia. (Iob. 1.) The Sabeians came in vi∣olently, and haue taken all things from you, the fire also of God, fell from heauen, and striking the sheepe (of IOB,) and the seruants hath consumed thē. (Iob. 1.) and a fire not from heauen (vnlesse by diuine permission) but frō earth, yea, from hell, and the vnquenchable thirst of hauing, hath consumed all your substance. The Chaldees made
three troupes to inuade the Camels of IOB, & stroke his seruants with the sword. (Iob 1.) So haue they by three troupes, to wit, Concupiscentia carnis Concupiscence of the flesh. (1. Ioan. 2.) Concupi∣scentia oculorum, concupiscence of the eyes, and Superbia vitae, pride of life, inuaded you: because to satisfie their lust and carnalitie, their auarice, desire of riches, and all that may be seene by the eyes, their pride and ambition of greatnesse, they haue made hauocke of all you haue. A vehement winde blowing boysteroussly from the countrey of the Defert, shooke the foure Corners of Iobs house, which falling, op∣pressed his Children. (Iob. 5.) The like whirle winde, from the North, and desert of heresie, hath shaken your houses, and by their fall, hath ruinated your families, oppressed your persons, your wiues and children.
6. And least the deuill should exprobate vnto you, as he did to IOB, that hetherto your goods haue rather suffered, then you; and that therefore if God would touch your bodie, and corporal life, hee should soone see you breake out into impatience (because skinne for skinne, and all things that a man hath, he will giue for his life, Iob. 2, God hath permitted Satan, by his ministers, to haue power ouer your bodies, and corporal life also, as appeareth by the prisons, in which some of you haue rotted, some haue statued, some haue been choaked with stincking ayres, as may easilye bee seene by the rackes, in which your ioyntes haue been dissolued, by the Tyburnes, on which you haue been hanged, and vnder which you haue been most butcherlie quartered, & vnbowelled. Yea, to aug∣ment your affliction, many of you haue not wanted a IOBS wife, carnal and worldly loue, to busse in your
eares that Carnall counsell, Benedic Deo & mo∣rere, (Iob. 2. (Curse God and die; Doe against thy Conscience, frequent hereticall seruice, take the oath of pretended Alleageance, rather then vndoe thy selfe, thy wife and Children: Yet you haue not fayled with IOB, to reprehend such a wise, and tell her that shee hath spoken like one of the foolish woemen. (Iob. 2.), as Sir THOMAS MORE told his wife, that she was a foolish marchant, to coun∣sell him to sell eternitie, for shorte and vncertaine time. Many also of you haue not wanted here∣tickes of your bloud and stocke, prefigured by IOBS false and fained friends (Iob. 2.) who haue gone a∣bout to perswade you, that these miseries, which op∣presse you, are befallen you for your obstinacie in Reli∣gion; and yet you haue repelled such deceauing friends; yea, you haue cast from you such scandalyzing eyes, that is, you haue shaken off such friends, though other∣wise as deare and necessarie vnto you, as your eyes, and haue chosen rather to goe to heauen blinde (Matt. 8.) then to be directed by such ill-guyding eyes.
8. But seeing that God hath not permitted Sa∣than to haue power ouer your soules, but onely ouer your transitorie goods, and mortal liues, loose ye not either hart or courage. Sathan indeede, by his Ministers (as one telleth you) hath broken downe the walles of your house, as no maruaile, it was but of clay, but he could not lay handes on your soule (the good man of the house) that being forbidden him; he hath bro∣ken the chest of your bodie; and no maruaile, it was but of rotten board; but he could not finger the trea∣sure of your faith, Gods grace, and such like Iewels, they being locked vp in the Cabinet, of your conscience,
of which God and you onely keepe the key. And there∣fore be yee not dismayed, for the losse of your temporal goods, liuings, and libertie, yea, corporal life, seeing the principal (the soule) is safe, so long as you will. But for all temporal losses, giue God thankes, and say with IOB, Dominus dedit, Dominus abstulit, sit nomen Domini benedictum. God gaue all this, & he hath taken all awaie, be he praysed as much for the taking awaie, as for the giuing.
8. And doe you not imagine, that God hath for∣saken you in permitting this pillage of your goods, and sackage of your estates, for such goods are common to the good and bad: rather take it for a signe of his fa∣therie loue, in giuing you patience to beare with ala∣critie all those oppressions; and perswade your selues that necesse erat, quia accepti eratis Deo, vt tentatio probaret vos. (Tob. 12.) It was necessa∣rie, because you were acceptable to God, that this ten∣tation should prooue you. God hath indeede cast you into a fornace of tribulation, but as the Potter doth his earthen vessel, to harden it, not to breake it: or as the Goldsmith doth his golde, to purge it, not to conume it. He hath indeede chastised you, but as his dearest children, not as seruants, and out of his loue, more then out of anger, as hee hath dealt with his Apostles, his Martyrs, yea, his Mother, yea his Sonne, and all his dearest. For it is his manner, to chastice whom he loueth, and to scourge euery childe that hee receaueth. As vnto children hee offereth himselfe vnto you. For wat sonne is there, whō the father doth not correct? (Heb. 12.) And when the correction is done, he will embrace you, and cast the rodde into the fier. It is true, he hath
wounded you, but as the Surgeon doth, to let out the corrupt matter. He woundeth and cureth, stri∣keth, and his hands shal heale (Iob. 5.) And, the arrowes of our Lord, are in you, (Iob. 6.) as they were in IOB, but they are as tents, which hee will pull out, when they haue drawen out all corruptiō. He hath permitted the winde of persecution, to beat furiously vpon you, but it is to blow away all chasse of imperfection, and that the solid wheate of your vertues may be the purer. He hath permitted you to be pilled, polled, and spoyled of your goods, but that spoyling is but lopping and pruning, that the tree hereafter may beare his fruits more aboundantly.
9. Say not there fore, God hath forsaken vs, hee thinketh no more of vs; and if your enemies say, Deus dereliquit eos, persequimini & comprehen∣dite eos, quia non est qui eripiat. (Ps. 70.) God hath forsaken them, follow them and apprehende them, there is none to deliuer them: beleeue them not, but ra∣ther answere them: Non derelinquit Deus prae∣sumentes de se. (Iudith. 6.) God doth not forsake them that presume of him. Tell them that you are of the Church, to which God promised, quod non vo∣cabitur vltra derelicta & terra, eius non vo∣cabitur amplius desolata, sed vocabitur vo∣luntas Dei in ea. (Isa. 62.) That she shal no more be called forsaken, and her land shal no more be called desolate, but she shall be called, the will of God in her. And when you behould Englands present desolate state, & compare it with her former glorie it had, weepe not as the lewes did at the sight of their second Temple. (ESDRAS 3.) For peraduenture, Magna erit glo∣ria domus istius nouissimae, plusquàm primae.
(AGGEI 2.) Great shal be the glorie of this last house, more then of the first. And peraduenture at this pre∣sent, England., though all dustie and slurred with the dust and bloud of this battaile, in which she fighteth, is more glorious in the eye of God, then when she flou∣rished in her Churches, Monasteries, and Colledges, and shined in her golden peace. Be not astonished at the sight of the troupes and forces, which the enemy hath brought into the field against you, nor do you cry at such a fight with ELIZEVS seruant, Heu, Heu, Domine mi, quid faciemus? (4. Reg. 6.) Alas, Alas, My Lord, what shall we doe? for there are more with you, then with them. Lift vp your eyes to heauen, and you shal see moe in that mountaine prepared to fight for you, then are in the valley of this world, that fight against you. You shal see your Genera CHRIST IESVS, (whome S. Steuen saw standing) readie to assist you, who giueth courage to your heart, force to your arme, edge to your sworde, and who with his heauenly troupes of Saints and Angels fighteth for you, and in you; else a∣gainst such forces you could neuer haue consisted; much lesse could you haue daiely encreased forces and compa∣nies. And yet you see your Seminaries, where your souldiers are trayned, are as full as euer, and nowe (thankes be to God) new forces of new Colledges and Monasteries, both of men and woemen (whose sexe is not debarred from this warre) doe adioyne them selues vnto you, armed with as great zeale as euer, with as much courage & dexteritie in fighting as euer, as ap∣peareth by your Atkinsōs, Thulises, Maxfieldes, & Helmes, who euen this yeare, by dying in the fielde, discouraged & discōfited their olde Aduer saries. These
troupes of souldiers, promisse one day a victorie: This seede sowen in teares, prognosticateth one day a har∣uest: These materials so well hewed and fashioned, assure vs, that so wise an Architect as is CHRIST IESVS, would neuer haue made them so readie for the building, had he not intended the reedisying of our defaced Temple, and ruinated Church of England.
10. And although your General delay your victo∣rie, and suffer you many times to be ficercely assaulted, yet it is but to make your victorie more glorious: Al∣though, when the storme of persecution bloweth so boysterously, that your Shippe may seeme in daunger of Shipwracke, he seemeth to sleepe, and not to heede you, yet it is but to make you cry vnto him with S. PE∣TER, Domine salua nos, perimus. O Lorde saue vs, we perish: Although he seeme sometimes readie to leaue you, and to goe from you, yet he doth but fingere se longius ire, (Luc. 24.) make sem∣blāce to go further, thereby to giue you occasiō to cry with the two Disciples, Mane nobiscū Domine, quoniā aduesperascit: Tarry with vs, ô Lord, because it waxeth with vs to watdes night, ād the day is now farre spēt: Although he seemeth to haue takē all humane meanes frō you, & euē that hope, which at the first you put in your Princes presumed Clemencie, and noble disposition, yet it is but to make you rely more on God, and not to put your confidence in Princes, in the sonnes of men, in whom there is no salua∣tion (Ps. 145.) For otherwise, those oppressions of so many Innocēts, the equitie and iustice of your cause, the impietie and vengeance-crying sinnes of your aduersa∣ries, the extremitie of your miseries and afflictions, doe pleade for mercie towardes you, iustice against them.

11. But howsoeuer, you must not prescribe God a time, nor set him a day, as OZIAS did (Iudith. 7.8.) nor must you resolue as he did, to deliuer vp the Citie and Church of England, to the Enemie, vnlesse God send you ayde or succour within a certaine time: For then Iudith will reprehende you, and de∣maund sharply of you. Qui estis vos, qui tent atis Dominū? non est iste sermo qui misericordiā prouocet, sed potius qui iram excitet, & fu∣rorem accendat. (Iudith. 8. VVhat are you that tempt our Lorde? This is no word, that may pro∣uoke mercie, but rather that may rayse vp wrath and inflame furie. Rather you must expect, in all patience, the time which God hath appoynted, assuring your selues, that as he knoweth your necessities, better then your selues, so is he more willing to release them, and as able as willing, because his power is his will; and therefore when it shall be most for his glorie, and your good, he will lende his helping hande, and, as you haue expected him, so he will be your arme in the morning, and your saluation in the time of your tribulation. Isa. 53.
12. And what can you tell? perchance the ini∣quities of the Amorrheans are at their full. (Gen. 15.) and Gods sword is readie drawen, to ta∣ke a iust reuenge of them: perchance the Cup of En∣glands Martyrs blood, which God expected for an ex∣piation for the sinnes of vs, and our forefathers, is al∣most brimful, and so he will be shortly appeased: per∣chance your louing Father hath almost done the due correction, and now is readie to lay the rod aside: perchance the destroying Angel, whom S. GRE∣GORIE sawe, is putting vp his sworde, which hath
made such a slaughter among you: perchance England, that all this time of persecution hath trauelled on Christ, and endured the throwes and panges of Ghild∣birth, is now readie to be brought a bed, and that she shall forget her former pressure, and reioyce to see Christ in England, and England in Christ borne againe, and shall be more comforted at Englands birth to the Ca∣tholike Church, then shee hath bene greeued at her death, by Schisme and Heresie: perchance the cup of teares, which God hath giuen you to drincke, as a me∣dicinable potion, is now almost drunke off to the bot∣tome, and he is readie to speake these comfortable wordes vnto you: Eleuare, eleuare; consurge Hierusalē, quae bibisti de manu Domini ca∣licem irae eins; vsque ad fundum calicis so∣poris bibisti, & potasti vsque ad faeces. Ecce ego tuli de manu tua calicem soporis, fun∣dum calicis indignationis meae, non adijcies vt bibas illum vltra. Et ponam illum in ma∣nu eorum, qui te humiliauerunt. (Isa. 51.) Be lifted vp, be lifted vp, arise Hierusalē which hast drunken of the hande of our Lord the cuppe of his wrath, euen to the bottome of the cup of drowsinesse, hast thou drunke, e∣uen to the dregges. Beholde, I haue taken out of thy hande the cuppe of drousinesse, the bottome of the cuppe of myne Indigna∣tion, thou shalt not adde to drinck it any more. And I will put it in their hand, that haue humbled thee. (Is. 51. (perchance tempus miserēdi is at hand; perchance prope est vr veniat tempus eius, & dies eius non elongabuntur (Isa. 14.) it is neere that the tyme (of your relaxa∣tion)
shal come, and the dayes therof shal not be pro∣longed.
13. Onlie looke that there be no ACHAN nor ANATHEMA amongst you (Iosue 7.) for if there bee, God will take your wonted courage from you, and the Citie of HAI will preuaile against you. For as God is so mercifull that he spareth some tymes a whole Citie or kingdome, for the merites of a few, as he was readie to haue spared SODOME if he had found teniust men in it (Genes. 18.) for iust men (as S. AMBROSE sayth lib. 1. De Abraham. c. 1. are a wall to their countrie, and their faith saueth and defendeth the rest from destruction) so also is he so iuste, that out of his secret, but yet iust Iudgements, he chastiseth sometymes a whole armie (as wee see in ACHAN, IOSVE 7.) or Kingdome, for the enormitie of a few. VVherfore (VVorthie Catholickes) the best meanes that I find to procure you a relaxation from this your so long persecution, is to follow the counsell, which the Ammonite ACHIOR gaue to HOLO∣FERNES (Iudith 5.) Perquire si est aliqua ini∣quitas &c. Search if there bee any iniquitie of yours in the sight of your Lord God, for if there bee, then you may iustlie feare least God per∣mitt his and your enemies to dominere ouer you, as he permitted DANIEL, HIEREMIE, and TOBIE, and many Innocents to be caryed into captiuitie with the nocent. For as S. HIEROM sayth episi. 13. Nostris peccatis barbari fortes sunt, nostris vitiis Romanus fugatur exercitus. By our sinnes, the barbarous (heretickes and barbarous persecu∣tours) become strong; and the Roman Armie (the Roman Church) is chased, and put to flight
by our vices. But, as ACHIOR sayd: Si non est of∣fensio populi huius coram Deo suo (Iudith. 5.) If there bee no offence of God amongst you, your enemies shall not lōg preuaile, because God, whose cause you sustaine, will fight for you, and in you.
14. As for me (O constant Catholickes) when I behould your vndaunted courage, which you oppose against the furie of your Persecutours, and your inuincible patience, wherewith you haue hethert endured all kind of aduersities, I can not but admire and commend you, and praise God also for you and in you: But when I consider also what is befallen some of you of late, as I meruaile not therat, so I can not but feareleast by that, by which you thought to finde some ease of this heauy yoke of persecution, vnder which you grone, you haue augmented the burden and prolonged your miseries. I meruaile not, that after so heauie oppressions so long endured, you grone with the Israelites (Exod. 2.) I meruaile not, that after so furious assaultes so long sustained, some giue backe, and forsake their place and standing: for what mer∣uaile that in so great a winde some chasse is blown away? that amongst so many vessels put into the fornace of tribulation to be hardened, some breake in the hardening? for vasa figuli probat fornax &c. the fornacetryeth the potters vessels, & the tentation of tribulation iust men. (Eccl. 27.) Rather I meruaile that in so great a storme & trouble∣some Sea, so few do suffer Shipwrack; and in so great a heape of wheate, so litle chasse is found; and amongst so many peeces of gould, which haue been cast into the fier, so few proue light and counterfet. Yet I feare also least your late giuing backe make the
enemie with more bouldnes to presse vppon you; and that the late Anathema, which is fallen amongst you, hath prouoked the wrath of God against you, and hath giuen courage to your enemie, taken it from you, and hath added surie to him, diminished zeale and feruour in you.
15. You know what I meane: it is the late pro∣posed Oath, which because it goeth vnder the name of Ciuil Alleageance gratefull to such good sub∣iects as you are, whom Religion and conscience tea∣cheth to obey, feare, loue, and serue your Prince, hath deceiued some of you, and hath made you vnder this alluring bayte, to swallow downe the hooke that galleth euen the soule and conscience, and in this goulden cup to drinke your deadlie poison and perdi∣tion. So that I may say vnto you: Anathema est in medio tui Israel, non poteris stare coram hostibus tuis, donec deleatur ex te, qui hoc contaminatus est scelere, (IOSVE 7.) There is Anathema in the middest of thee, O Israel; thou canst not stand before thine enemies, till he be destroyed out of thee (or his sinne in him) that is contaminated with this wicked fact. VVherfore, O VVorthie Catholickes, let no∣thing sticke in your hādes of this Anathema, that our Lord may be turned from the wrath of his furie, and may haue mercie on you. (Deut. 13.)
16. You are not ignorant, that modicum fer∣mentum totam massam corrumpit (1. Cor. 5.) A little leauen corrupteth the whole paste. One mortall sinne mortifieth all your former merites, (D. Th. 3. p. q. 89. a. 4.) and he that offendeth in one
point, especiallie pertaining to faith and the Churches power & right, is made guiltie of all (Iac. 2.) This one hole, which the persecutour hath made in the ship of your soule, is sufficient to let in that water which will drowne you: this one point of your chiefe visible Pastours Authoritie and power, which (though forced therunto) you abiure, is sufficient to disgrace all former constant and glorious Confession. And it will little auaile you to haue layed your hand to the plough, if now you looke backe; to haue runne so well hetherto, if now you faint before the goale; to haue resisted hetherto so va iantlie, if now you yeeld your selues slaues to tyrannie.
17. And although some one persuadeth you, that you may with safe conscience take this oathe, and therefore are not bound with hazard of your estates to refuse it, yet beleeue it, persuasio haec non est ex eo qui vocat vos: this persuasion is not of him that calleth you (Gal 5.) for as S. PETER telleth you: In hoc vocati estis you are called to this, to doe well, and sustaine patientlie, (1. Pet. 2.) and not to yeeld in the least point against God and his Churches right and honour. VVherfore seeing that by this oath the true and lawfull Au∣thoritle of your chiefe visible head and Pallour is abiured (as this booke will make plaine vnto, you) imitate the wise serpent, expose bodie, li∣uings, libertie, and all, for the defence of your Head: and if your zealous Pastour and Primat S. THO∣MAS of CANTERBVRIE, indured banish∣ment, reuilings, contumelies, iniuries, and at length death it self for the defēce of the rights of the Church; how much more should you constantlie endure for
the defence of the Head of the Church?
18. And although Widdrington telles you, (and as he would seeme, as a freind, and one that hath care of your temporall estates) that you are not bound to loose any penny for the Authoritie of the Pope, which this oath abiureth: yet I desire you to cōpare VViddrington to those Allens,
Card. Allan in his Answ. to the libeller. Hardings, Sanders. Bistowes, Stapletons, who had as great a care of your temporall, and more of your spiri∣tuall estates, and yet wrote, and taught, that the Au∣thoritie, which this oath abiureth, is to be defended with hazard of liuings and life. To these I'desire you to adde the Coūcels, not only Prouincial, but also General, which in their decrees haue defined this authoritie; the Popes so many, so learned, so holie, who haue exer∣cized it vpon rebellious Princes; the Kings and Em∣perours (though most herein interessed) who haue acknowledged it; the arguments also deducted out of Scripture, and Principles of faith and Diuinitie, which do conuince it, (all which this booke will make known vnto you) and lastly the fatherlie admonition of your most Holie Father and chiefe visible Pastour PAVL by the Grace of God the fifte of that name, who as by office he hath a generall charge and care of all Christian Nations, so hath he a particular care, not only of the spirituall, but also of the temporall estates of all English Catholikes, as our Colledges haue, and do daiely experience, and consequentlie would not expose your temporall estates to the furie of the per∣secutour, by forbidding you this oath, if (as he tel∣leth you) it did not containe thinges, which can not be sworne without euident and grieuous wronging of Gods honour, and which are
flat contrarie to faith and saluation. (Pau∣lus 5. in Breu.) And therfore seeing that hee, like a wise and carefull Phisitian, hath more care of your health, then of contenting your tast and humour; and VViddrington contrariewise permitteth you that which is pleasing to flesh, and bloud, not so much respecting how preiudicious it is to your soules health; if you will preferre heauen before a temporall estate, and the soule before the bodie, you must also preserre your Holie Fathers counsel and admonition, especiallie grounded in such authoritie, before all the smooth and soothing prescriptions in the world, war∣rāted by onlie Widdringtons, and some few obscure Authors authoritie: for although he alleadgeth often the Doctors of Sotbon, and all the state of France, yet by the late resistance made by the Clergie, and nobilitie of France against the like Oath, who seeth not how he abuseth his reader and iniureth that noble Monarchie?
19. But put the case you should preferre VVid∣dringtons counsel before your chiefe Pastours ad∣monition, and all the authoritie alleadged, neither so (what soeuer he beareth you in hand) should you saue your temporall estates, or decline persecution. For to omitte that if you had at the first iointlie and couragionslie resisted the oath, it is like you should neuer haue been so hoatlie pressed with it; if now you should all resolue to accept of it, neither so should you auoide persecution. For (as I haue tould you) per∣chaunce your yeelding in this point hath prouoked your heauenlie Fathers wrath, and induced him in this his so iustlie conceiued anger, to vse or permitt still the rodd of persecution, which otherwise he was
readie to haue layed aside: and the persecutour, who proposeth this oath, not seeking so much the Princes securitie (which rather hereby, as I haue shewed in the last chapter of this booke, is more en∣daungered) as the molestation of your Consciences, and the pillage of your goods, would not, though you should accept of this oath, surcease therfore from persecution; but if he could not by this meanes molest your consciences, and ruine your estates, he would try other meanes, as to compell you to their Churches or prophane Communion. And this you may gather by his sorrow he shewed, when in the beginning so many of you yeelded to take this oath; and by this also, that many, who haue taken this oath, can not so free them selues from molestation, because nothing but your goods and miseries can satisfie the vnsatiable crueltie of bloudie persecutours. And so by yeelding to this oath, as you prouoke Gods greater anger, so you moue the persecutour to no compassion; rather you make him more insolent, and redouble your owne miserie. But suppose you could thus shake of this hauie yoke of persecution, yet it beeing vnlawfull (as your chiefe Pastour and earnedst Doctours teach you) as hetherto, rapinam bonorum vestrorum cum gaudio suscepistis, cognoscentes vos habere meliorem & manentem substan∣tiā, (Heb 10) the spoile of your owne goods you haue taken with ioy, knowing that you haue a better and permanent substance; so do you perseuere and continue. And if God permit the persecutour to prey, not only on your goods, but also on your liues, yet nolite timere eos, qui occidunt corpus, animam autem non possunt occi∣dere
&c. (Matt 10.) feare not them that can kill the bodie, and are not able to kill the soule: but rather feare him that can destroy both soule and bodie into Hel.
10. Many thinges do make this oath vn∣lawfull, as you will easilie perceaue by the briese exa∣mination, which the last chapter of this treatise ma∣keth of it; but if there were nothing but this, that it is an vncouth and vnwonted oath, neuer yet proposed by any Prince vnto his subiects, and proposed also by the professed Enemies of Gods Church, all Catholikes that feare to offend God, or to doe iniurie to the Church, and her right and authoritie, ought to holde it as suspected, and as such to shunne it, and auoyd it. For it is no new thing for heretikes vnder colour of oathes of fidelitie and ciuil alleageance to deceaue the well meaning and nought-suspecting Catholike. VVee read in the historie of the persecution of the Wan∣dalles, (Victor Vticen. lib. 3. de pers. Vand.) how Hunnericus proposed such an oath to the Catholike Bishops assembled together at Carthage, pretēding onely therby to assure him selfe of their side∣litie towards him and his sonne, that was to succeede him, which if they would take, he premised to send them home to their Churches. The oath seemed rie reasonable, and was no other then this: Iurate si post obitum Domini nostri Regis, eius fi∣lium Hildericum desideratis esse Regem, vel si nullus vestrum ad Regiones transma∣rinas epistolas diriget: Sweare whether after the death of our Lord the King, you desire that his sonne Hildericus should be King: or that none of you will wre or
send letters beyond the seas. At this oath though in shew altogether lawfull, the Catholike Bishops staggered: and some of them suspecting all that cometh from the Enemies of Gods Church, flatlie refused it: others least the people should say that vitio sacerdotum, qui iurare noluerunt, non fuerint Ecclesiae restiturae: by the fault of the Priests, that would not sweare, the Chur∣ches were not restored, accepted of it. But by and by appeared the hidden malice of the per∣secutour: for he tooke aduantage thereby, as well against those that swoare, as those that refused to sweare. To them that swoare, his officers sayd: VVhy against the commaundement of the Gho∣spell haue you Worne? The King com∣maunded, that you should neuer visit your Cities and Churchs againe, but that being banished you should take lands to till, co∣lonatus iure, by right of farmers and new Inhabitants, yet with this condition also, that you neither sing seruice, nor pray, nor carrie booke to reade, nor Baptize, nor giue orders, nor reconcile any. To them that refused to sweare, they sayd: quia regnum filii Domini nostri non optatis, idcirco iurare noluistis &c. Because you desire not that the sonne of our Lord the King should raigne after his Father, there∣fore you would not sweare. For which cause you are commaunded to be banished into the e of Corsica, to hew trees for the Kings buildings. So that in extraordinarie oathes the hereticall Magistrate hath sinister inten∣tions
and hidden meanings, and vnder faire pretences coucheth malice: and therfore all such oathes are by zealous Catholikes to be suspected: much more this oath, which in so plaine wordes abiureth the Popes lawfull authoritie, which Councels, and chiefe Doctors do giue him, and which he hath practised so many yeares without contradiction of all, sauing here∣tikes, schismatikes, and some few obscure authours, ought to be houlden as suspected, and as such of all ti∣morous consciences to be auoided.
21. VVherfore, worthy Catholikes, vse the benefit of persecution for that your good, to which by God it is ordained or permitted: let it serue for a winde to blow away your chaffe of Imperfections, not to scatter the solid wheate of your faith, charitie, zeale, feruour, and constancie: let it serue for a red sea to passe to the land of promise with the Israe∣lites, not to drowne you with the Aegiptians: let it serue for a gale of wind to set you onward to the hauen of heauen, not for a boysterous blast to driue you on the rockes of scandall: let it serue for a blast to enkindle, not to blow out your fier: let it serue for a fire to purge you like gould, not to melte and consume you like wax or lead; to harden you as vessels sit to receaue Gods spirit, and to carrie his name, not to breake you in the heating. And my dearest. (I vse S. PETERS words) nolite peregrinari in feruore, qui ad tentationem vobis sit, quasi aliquid vobis contingat. (1. Pet. 4. Thinke it not straūge in the feruour, which is to you for a tentation, as though some new thing happened vnto you. It is no new thing for the seruantes of God to suffer per∣secution:
but comfort your selues that in suffering for Instice, you are companions to Christ, the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs. Take heede that none of you suffer for disloyaltie or ill demeanour: but whosoeuer suffereth as a true Christian, that is, as a Catholicke Romane (for these two alwayes go together) let him not be ashamed, but let him glorine God (1. Pet. 2.) for such suffering is but to purge him, to try him, to associat him to Christ and his faith, to marke him for one of Christs souldiers, to conforme and con∣figurate him here to Christ patient, that he may be cōfigurated in heauen to Christ triūphant. VVherfore plucke vp your hartes, and call to mynd your former victories, hetherto you neuer encountred, but you ouer∣came and prooued stronger thē all the Tibornes, rackes, and Gibbets, then all the Engines and Ministers of crueltie: doe not now by dastardie and cowardlike yeelding obscure your former glorie, and mortifie your former merites: but seing that you haue of humane frailtie yeelded in this one point, let this your disgrace and foile receiued thereby, serue for a busset of Satan to humiliate you with S. PAVL (2. Cor. 12.) least the greatnes of your reuelations (as it is a re∣uealed doctrine to count it honour and felitie to suf∣fer for Christ) might extoll you: let it serue for a memoriall to put you in mynd, that heretofore by Christ and his graces, not by your own force you ouer∣came: let it serue as a Monitour, to admonish you sit∣ting in the triumphant chariot of your former victo∣ries, that you are of your selues but mortall and frayle men: let this fall make you rise with a rebounde to greater courage then euer; that so all thinges, euen falles, may cooperate to your good. (Rom. 8.)

22. But my zeale of your Honour (VVorthie Catholickes) hath transported me, and made mee not only to exceede the limites of an Epistle, but also to be more officious, then perchaunce gratefull to some, who may thinke, that if I knew, or at least fealt the miseries which they endure, I should rather conde∣scēd vnto them with VViddrington, then vrge them so much to refuse this oath, whose refusall is so daun∣gerous to their persons, and pernicious to their estates. But I haue for such an answer in readines, to wit, that I am not ignorant of your extreame afflictions, and that (as I protest) I neuer thinke of your suffe∣rances seriouslie, but I suffer with you sensiblie, and would, if so I might ease you, spend my blood, and ha∣zard my life, euen for a relaxation from your tempo∣rall miseries: but being perswaded as I am, and stan∣ding vpon so sure grounds, as this Treatise will manifest vnto you, as that Phisition were vnworthie his Profession, that would prescribe onely such Phisick to his patient as is pleasing to his tast, not caring how contrarie it be to his health, so if I, with a VVid∣drington, would seeke to soothe, and sute a worldlie humour, and so my speeches be pleasing to flesh and bloud, little regard the health and state of your soules and securitie of your consciences, I were vnworthie the roome I fill, the person I sustaine, and the function of a Spiritual Physition, which I haue vndertaken. VVherfore if my Physick be distastfull, refuse it not, it being healthfull; neither be you angrie with the Physition for prescribing so bitter a potion, he therby intending your good: and if my speeches seeme too plaine, thinke they are sincere and spoken out of loue; if sharpe and byting, persuade your selues that
meliora sunt vulnera diligentis, quàm frau∣dulenta oscula odientis: (Prou. 27.) Better are the wounds of him that loueth, then the fraudulent kisses of him that hateth. This I am sure, I giue you no other counsell, then I would follow my selfe, who haue that opinion of the vnlawfulnes of this oath, that I would loose liuings, libertie, and life, rather then take it: not that I would not giue that to Caesar, which is due to Caesar, but that I would not take from God which appertaineth to God: not that I neglect a temporal life and state, but that I preferre the spirituall: not that I despise the Prince, to whom I acknowledge all tempor all obedience and honour, but that I honour the Pastour, who hath the rule of my soule: not that I regard not the Com∣mon wealth, but that I desire to liue and dy an obe∣dient sonne of the Church: not that I feare not them, who can kill the bodie, but that I feare God more, who can kill the soule: Matt. 10.
23. And my intention and proiect (I protest) of dedicating this Treatise vnto you, was not to irritate any Prince, but onlie to declare his Authoritie and office; not to flatter any Prelate, but onlie to defend his right; not to increase your persecution, but to ridde you of this Anathema, which hath prolonged it; not to adde affliction to affliction, but courage to your fainting, and comfort to your griefes, to helpe them to rise that are sallen, and to confirme them that stand, that they may the better keepe their standing. And this being my sincere intention, I hope not onlie you, but all others, who shall peruse this booke, will make their profit of it, and interpret it in that good meaning, which the Authour intended. Our Lord
IESVS, for whose cause you endure, either ease you of this burden of aduersities, vnder which you grone, or giue you strength to beare it, comfort in bearing, and make mee a follower of your rare examples, an Imi∣tatour of your patience, and partaker of your merits, as you shall euer be of my poore prayers and small labours.
