



RENOWNED CA∣THOLIQVES.
1. True it is which the wise man
Prou. cap. 21. vers. 30. auerreth, that, there is no wis∣dome, there is no prudence, there is no counsell against our Lord. For as no creature can resist his power, so none can ouer-reache his wisdome.
Pharao by all his policie and po∣wer could not extinguish the Israë∣lites, but
Exod. c. 1. v. 12. the more he oppressed them, the more they multiplied. Why? God stood for them. Herod could not kill Christ, though to be sure of him he killed
Matt. c. 2. v. 16. all the litleones in and about Bethleem. Why? the diuini∣tie was with him and in him. Saule could neuer ruine Dauid. Why? God was with Dauid and had for∣saken Saule. There was made a long strife (saieth
2. Reg. c. 3. v. 1. holie Scripture) between the howse of Saule and the howse of Dauid; Dauid alwaies prospering, and alweies stronger then him selfe, but the howse of Saule decreasing dailie.
2. You (o constant Catholi∣ques) are the hovvse and familie of Dauid, that is, the true Church of Christ the sonne of Dauid. Your aduersaries, that is, the Sectaries of this tyme, are the familie of Saule,
forsaken of God (as Saule was) for their disobedience to his Church. Betwixt these two families there hath beene a long strife in our coū∣trie of England, both chalenging the kingdome and Church of Christ: But Dauid (Christ) in you his mysticall bodie, the Church, hath euer profpered and encreased, maugre all the rigour of persecutiō; The synagogue of the sectaries still decreasing and euerie daye lesser in credit and number, though to ex∣tinguish you, she vsed all the En∣gines of crueltie. You maye saye therefore vvith Iustinus Martyr:
Iustin dial. cont. Triphon. Quo magis in nos saeuitur, tanto plures in Christum, fidē profitentur: The more cruel∣tie is vsed against vs, the moe professe their faith in Christ. You may telle them with Tertullian
Tertul∣in Apolog. cap. 45. Plures effi∣cimur quoties a vobis metimur: VVe are multiplied so often as by you we are mo∣wed:
You maye glorie with saint Leo
Leo ser. 1. de Natali Apost. that your Church is not diminished by Persequution, but angmented, and that alwayes your field is clad with richer, and more aboundant store af corne, whilest euerie graine that falleth by perse∣cution doth arise multiplied. The moe you seme to loose by martyr∣dome, the moe you gaine, manie rising for one, because
Ter∣tul. in A∣pol. c. 45. the bloud of Martyrs, is the seed of Christians. And so in you, Dauid (Christ) al∣waies prospereth and encreaseth.
3. And this your persequntors cannot denie, it being euident to the eye. For they see that notwith∣standing their confiscations, confi∣nings, Seizings, imprisonments, deathes (which you haue hereto∣fore endured, and yet some tymes endure) you are more encreased and multiplied. Tertullian saied to
the persecutors of his tyme:
Tert. in Apologet. cap. 37. Ex∣terni sumus, & vestra omnia impleuimus vrbes, Iusulas, castella, municipia, con∣ciliabula, castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, Pa∣latia, Seratum, forum: sola vobis reliqui∣mus templa: VVe are Externes, and haue filled all your places, cities, Ilands, castles Townes, Counsell owses, campes, tri∣bes, bandes, pallaces, Senate, mar∣ket place: onlie we haue left the Temples to your selues. You maie saie the like to your persequutors: wee are externes to you, not in coun∣trie, but in Church and faith, and notwithstanding all your policie and povver by vvhich you haue endeuoured to extirpate vs; vve are so multiplied, that vve maie be found in your courte, in your parlament, in your vniuersities, amongst your nobilitie, amid your magistrates, yea ministers (if vve regard their hartes) and in the
thicke of your armies: no citie, no towne, no village, no Parish, no Pri∣sō scarse cā you finde where Catho∣liques are not found, as your offi∣cers and Poursuiuantes can assure you: onlie in your Churches and at your seruice (vvhich our con∣sciences cannot brooke) we appeare not. So that if I could wish well to Protestant religion, or ill to ours, I would counsaille them (as things stand now in England) to surcease from persecution, it hauing al∣vvaies encreased our number and glorie, and lessened and obscured theirs.
4. And assure your selues (Wor∣thie Catholiques) so long as they who are your Pastours feed their Sheepe not them selues: So long as they vvho are your
Mat. c. 5. v. 13. salte, be not them selues vnseasoned in faith and mā∣ners: So long as they vvho are
your
Mat. c. 5. v. 15. light, be not them selues endarkened by workes of darke∣nes: So long as they vvho are your guides, runne not thēselues astraie: So long as they who are your heads and eyes, direct well their owne ac∣tions: And so long as you obey your Pastours, follovve the dire∣ction of your heads and guides, re∣fuse not their seasoning salte, and shutte not your eyes against their light: So long as both they and you sticke to God and his Church (as you do) and prouoke not his ire and indignatio by euil life: So long you vvill encrease and prosper: So long God will protect you, and ether ease you of this heauie yoke of persequution vnder vvhich you haue so long groned, or he vvill giue you force and patience to bea∣re it: So long as you are constant in your faith and vpright in your lines;
So long shall you (as Achior
Iudit. c. 5. v. 16. told Holophernes in behalfe of the Iewes) without bowe or arrowe, and without shield and sword, defeate all that shall fight against you, because God whose cause you sustaine, vvill by his grace fight in you and for you:
Iudit. c. 5. v. 24. But as Achior also saied, if there be anie iniquitie in you, tradens tradet vos, deliuering, God will deliuer you into the hands of your enemies; and by persequution which should haue hardened you, you vvill breake in the hardening, by per∣secution vvhich should haue pur∣ged and purified you, you vvil∣be consumed, and by this fire which should declare you currant gold, you wilbe found to be coun∣terfait. And you vvho hetherto ne∣uer encountred with your enemies but you conquered them, neuer grappled with them but you borded
them, neuer fought with them but you foiled them; wilbe forced ether to forsake the field with shame, or to yeeld your selues prisoners to a base seruitude. Your own sinnes will adde force to your enemies, by which they will ouermatche you, who else could not matche you. For, as saint Hierom
Hiere. ep. ad He∣lioderum Epise. saieth, Nos∣tris peccatis barbari fortes sunt, nostris vitijs Romanus superatur exercitus: By our sinnes the Barbarous growe strong, by our vices the Roman armie (that is we, called Romans for our corres∣pondence with Rome in matters of faith) is ouer come: Euen as our Brit∣tannie (according to that vvhich Gildas
Gildas lib. de excid. Britan. writeth) was ouerunne and wasted by the Pictes and Scot∣tes, fortified against it by the sinnes of the people, and especiallie of the clergie. But as for your liues they haue hetherto been so exemplar,
and, as I hope, still are, that for∣raine nations haue and do admire your pietie towards God, constan∣cie in Religion, puritie in life, and
Matt. c. 5. v. 17. Seing your good workes haue glorified your father which is in heauen.
5. Aboue all I commend vnto you charitie, which where it raig∣neth, maketh all of
Astor. c. 4. v. 32. one harte and soule. This is the coate and liuerie by which Christ will haue his ser∣uants to be known saying,
Ioan. c. 13. v. 35. In this all men shall know, that you are my disciples, if you haue loue one to another. By which liuerie the ancient Chri∣stians were so well knowen, that as Tertullian recordeth, the Pagans pointing at Christians, vsed to saie:
Tertul. in Apolo∣get. c. 39. Vide vt inuicem se diligant, & pro al∣terutro mori parati sunt: Behold how they loue one another, and how reade they are to die for one another. And what your charitie hetherto hath
been towards God, your sufferances for his cause will witnesse, and what your charitie to your neighbours hath been, our prisons, and poore Catholiques, yea our Seminaries by you releeued, will giue ample restimonie.
6. Onlie you must take heed least at anie tyme it may be saied to you, as saint Iohn in his Apoca∣lypse vvas commaunded to vvrite to the Angell, that is, to the Bishop of Ephesus;
Apoca. c. 2. a v. 1. I know thy workes and labour, and thy patience, and that thou canst not beare euil men, and hast tryed them which saie themselues to be Apostles and are not, and hast found them lyars, and thow hast patience and hast borne for my name, and hast not fainted. But I haue against thee a fewe things, because thou hast left thy first charitie: That is, thy first feruour of charitie: For if he had quite lost charitie, he vvould
not so much haue praised him for his zele, patience, sufferings and good workes, which are nothing or of no
1. Cor. 13. vvorth vvithout charitie. Take heed, I saie, (most Zelous Catholiques) least at anie tyme you giue occasion to saint Iohn to saie to you: I knovv the great pa∣tience and cōstancie you haue she∣wed in your long persecution, in which you haue neuer fainted, nor lost courage. I knovv your zele against heresie, your loue tovvards heretiques, for whose conuersion you dailie hazard your selues: But I haue a few things against you (take heed, I saie, that he haue no cause to saie so) for that although you haue not lost charitie, yet you haue left your former feruour of charitie, as in tyme euen the most perfect do, if they take not heed; beginnings being commonlie fer∣uerours,
proceedings vvaxing cold. And this losse, not of charitie, but offormer feruour onlie, may make waie to disagrements amongest you, which though they argue not charitie to be extinguished, yet they maie argue it to be cooled and remisse.
7. The Romans so long as they waged warre abroad against other countries, gotte allwayes the vi∣ctorie, and so enlarged their Em∣pire: But when they fell to ciuill warres and turned their forces a∣gainst themselues, they ruined them selues by the same forces, by which they had subdued others. And you (most pious Catholiques) so long as you, and your leaders were vni∣ted, you were an armie inuincible, and all the power and pollicie of your enemies; yea all the forces of
Matt. c. 16. v. 18. Hell could neuer preuaile a∣gainst
you: but if your leaders, and you with them should euer be de∣uided, an handfull of men would defeate you; because euerie Kingdom deuided against it selfe, shall be made de∣solate,
Luc. c. 11. v. 17. and they that
Galat. c. 5. v. 25. bite and eate one another, wilbe consumed by one another. So long as your workemen the secular and regular Priests con∣curred so in all peace and concorde that there was hearde
Reg. c. 6. v. 7. no noise of the hammer of contention in the building of your Hierusalem (your litle Church of England) so long the worke went on prosperouslie and was reared higher and higher daylie, and euen to the height we see; and if the workemen still ioyne their labours peaceablie, your building will in tyme be finished to the saluation of manie, and to the greate ioy of the whole Church militant, yea
Lnc. c. . v. 10. Triumphant. But
if the vvorkemen in steed of hel∣ping should hinder one another, if what one buildeth another should pulle downe: This so much desired building (although for it so manie praiers haue been made, so manie sacrifices haue been offered, so manie liues haue been sacrifi∣ced, so much bloud hath been shedde) will neuer be accomplis∣hed.
8. Wherefore (Dearest Catho∣liques) although (to vse Tertulliās
Tertul. lib. 8. ad Martyres in initio. words which he spake to the de∣signed martyrs) non sum tantus vt vos alloquar: I ame not so greate, nor of that worth, as to speake vnto you, vvhom your sufferāces for Christ, haue in∣obled and exalted aboue the An∣gelles, who can onlie loue God, but cannot suffer for him, as to you it is giuen:
Philip. c. 1. v. 29. Yet giue loue leaue to speake, which feareth no offense
where it loueth: If you should dis∣agree amongest your selues, what
1. Tim. c. 3. v. 7. testimonie, what Iustification would it procure of them, who are wi∣thout (the Church?)
1. Tim. c. 5. v. 14. What occasion would thereby be giuen to the aduer∣sarie, to speake euil of you. O be you all of one mynde, louers of frater∣nitie,
1. Pet. c. 3. v. 8. not rendring euill for euill, not curse for curse, but contrariewise, blessing for vnto this you are called, that in that which they (your aduersaries) speake ill of you, they may be confounded.
9. You haue all the same faith and hope: as one faith therefore linketh your vnderstandings, so let one charitie couple your willes. You participate all of the same Sauro∣ments, you
1. Cor. c. 10. v. 17 eate of one breade: You suffer the same, of the same, and for the same; The same perse∣quution, of the same aduersaries, for the same cause. And you, Re∣uerend
Priests, (vnder which title I comprehend you all, be you secu∣lar or regular) are of diuers orders, but of one Hierarchie: You are di∣ers members but of the same
Rom. c. 12. v. 1. Cor. ca 12. vers. 27. bodie, the Church: You are of di∣uers professions but which all pro∣fesse one faith: and you are sent by the same authoritie, to do the same functions, and for the same end, and that most noble, the conuer∣sion of soules. Amongest so ma∣nie motiues and allurements to concord, what place can there be for discord?
10. God the good seeds man hath sowed peace in your field,
Matth. c. 13. v. 28. let not at anie tyme the common ene∣mie (whom Christ calleth the Ene∣mie man, ouer sowe coccle of discord▪ least it be demaunded of you; Whence then hath it this coccle?
Matt. c. 13. v. 27. and answer be made to your consusion,
the enemie man, the Deuil, when you and your pastours slepte or were to carelesse, came and ouer-sowed it. Follow therefore Tertullians coun∣saile:
Tertul. lib. ad Martyres. Non illi tam bene sit in suo reg∣no vt vos committat, sed inueniat vos pa∣ce munitos & concordia armatos, pax ve∣stra bellum est illi: Do him not the plea∣sure in his kingdome as to let him set you one against another: but let him finde you fortified with peace, armed with concord; your peace is vvarre to him.
11. Christ your heade is the
Isa. c. 9. vers. 6. Prince of peace, he is your true Mel∣chisedech
Hebr. c. 7. v. 1. and Rex Salem, that is Prince of peace, yea he is
Ephes. c. 2. v. 14. your peace who hath made both one. He by the bloud of his crosse hath pacified the things in earth and the things in heauen. He before his departure out of this world bequeathed
Ioan. c. 14. v. 27. his peace vnto vs; let vs imbrace it. He sent his A∣postles as his legates to denounce
Colos. c. 1. v. 20.
peace. And you who are Priests are their Successours and are sent to re∣concilie heretiques and Schismati∣ques to the Church and so to make peace. You are
Isa. c. 33. v. 7. Angeli pacis, the An∣gels of peace; and how
Isa. ca. 52. v. 7. beautifull are the feete of him who euangelizeth peace. You are the peace makers in Gods Church; and how happie are
Matt. c. 5. v. the peace makers? You therefore to whō is giuen
2. Cor. c. 5. v. 10. Ministerium reconciliationis, the ministerie of reconciliation, ende∣uour to make and conserue peace amongest Catholiques. And, Quae pacis sunt sectemur
Rom. c. 14. v. 19. &c. The things that are of peace let vs pursue, and the thinges that are of edifiyng one toward another, let vs keepe. And let vs be of one mynd one toward another. Not minding high things, but consenting to the humble, let vs not be wise in our ovvn conceite, let vs render to no man euil for euil proui∣ding good things, not onlie before God,
Rom. c. 12. v. 16.
but also before all men. If it may be, as much as in you, hauing peace with all men. If therefore (I vse still S. Paules
Philip. c. 2. v. 1. words knovving that you vvil res∣pect them) there be anie, consolation in Christ, anie solace of charitie, if anie so∣cietie of spirit, if anie bovvels of commu∣nication fulfill my ioy (see how he desi∣red peace) that you be of one meaning, hauing the same charitie, of one mynde, agreeing in one. Nothing by contention, neither by vaine glorie, but in humilitie, eche counting other better then themselues, euerie one not cōsidering the things that are their ovvne, but those that are other mens.
12. The Apostle
1. Cor. c. 12. v. 12 obserueth that in the naturall bodie of man, God and nature hath made one member so to depend of another, as that one cannot vvell subsist without another; and this (saieth the Apostle) is done:
1. Cor. c. 12. v. 25. Vt non sit schisma in corpore, that there might be no schisme in the bodie, that is, no op∣position
of one member against an∣other, one needing the helpe of an∣other: but rather that naturall charitie (as there is) that if one member suffer anie thing, all the members suffer vvith it, and as it were condole with it, being as sensible of its euill, as of their own harme or hurt; and there∣fore if one parte of the bodie be ill affected, the eye looketh to it, the feet runne for it, the handes applye the remedie; all the humors runne to the sore with intention to helpe, though contrarie to their meaning they often tymes encrease the euill. The like mutuall depen∣dence Christ would haue in his my∣sticall bodie the Church, and there∣fore hath so ordered the members and orders of the Church, that all depend one of another, and one or∣der needeth the helpe of another, for that neither can the inferiour
1. Cor. c. 12. v. 26.
clergie subsist without the Bishop, nor the laitie vvithout the clergie, nor one order of the clergie vvith∣out another, and the vvhole bo∣die of the Church standeth in need of them all, ether as of essentiall members, or as of helpes and or∣naments. And so one order must honour and loue another; the re∣gulars must honour Secular Priests who (as as vve shall see in this boo∣ke) are by the diuine Institution gouernours of the Church, saint Paule
1. Cor. c. 12. v. 28. vseth the woord guberna∣tiones, gouernements, and the seculars must honour the Regulars as helpes; saint Paule saieth opitulations; that so there maie be no schisme in Christs mysticall body.
13. But you must not onlie be in league and peace one with another, but also, and especiallie with your Heade Pastour and Bishop. For
if the Heade cannot say to the feete,
1. Cor. c. 11. v. 21. you are not necessarie for mee, much lesse can the feete and inferiour mēbers saie to the Heade, Wee haue no neede of you; For that the Heade, as it is the principall parte, so it is the most necessarie; because if some inferiour member be cutte of, that onlie perisheth; but if the Heade, the vvhole bodie dyeth. And there∣fore as the serpent exposeth his vvhole bodie to saue his Heade, knovving if that be saued, although the rest of the bodie be cutte, and gashed, he shall saue his life: and as the members of man will all expose themselues to vvard and fense the head: So you should be all for∣warde to expose your selues for the defence of your Heade the Bis∣hop.
14. When all the members in due order and proportion, are vni∣ted
amongest themselues, and to their Heade, they giue a greate strengh and lustre to the bodie, and nothing is more goodlie to behold: but if the members be separated from one another and from the head; as there is no thing more vg∣lie and deformed then such a bo∣die, so it looseth shape, and life and strength also, if it be a liuing bodie. And you (much honoured Catho∣liques) if you should be thus diui∣ded (as God forbid) vvhat shape, vvhat beautie, vvhat for∣ce, vvhat life vvould there re∣maine in you? you would be as a goodlie tree dismembred or lop∣ped; you would be like a goodlie Pallace whose roofe and walles are fallen; you would be like an armie dissolued, or a Kingdom in which all are out of order.
15. The Bishop is your spirituall
Prince, yea princeps pastorum, Prince of pastours, as saint Ignatius
Ignat. ep. ad Smyrneu∣ses. stileth him; honour and respect him. He is your spirituall father, yea as S. Epi∣phanius
Epiph. haer, 57. calleth him, he is Patrum generator, father of fathers; because as the Priest by Baptisme as by a spiritual regeneration begetteth children; so the Bishop by the Sa∣cramēt of order, which he onlie can minister, begetteth and ordaineth Priests who are the spirituall fathers of the people: loue him as children should do their father. He is your Pastour, you his
Ast. c. 20. v. 28. flocke wherein the Holie Ghost hath placed him to rule: He is your
Hebr. c. 13. v. 7. Prelate who hath such a charge of your soules, that if anie of you miscarrie through his default, he must answer soule for soule, not one for one, but one for euerie one: obserue him and be yee subiect to him. For if, as saint Bernard
Bern. l. 3. de consi∣der. ad Eu∣gen. c. 14. saieth, it
was neuer heard, that an Angell should saie, I will not be subiect to the Archangell, nor that an Archan∣gell should saie I will not obaye the Thrones, then (as he also saieth) that voice cannot be from Heauen nor of God, I vvill not be subiect to the Bishop.
16. If you read saint Ignatius
Ignat. ep ad Ma∣gnes. Epistle to the Magnesians, you will not permitte your selues to be separated frō the Bishop: you will do nothing with∣out him: you will count it a terrible thing to contradict him: you will in no case murmure against him: you will do all in concord, the Bishop presiding, and sitting in the place of God: nothing wilbe in you that maie separate you from him, but you will be made all one with him, subiect to God by him in Christ. But what ho∣nour and respect hath been giuen to Bishops by Kings and Empe∣rours and vvhat is due to him on
your parte, in this Treatise you will see.
17. I will not in this my Epistle or in this Treatise entermeddle with your maine cōtrouersie, that being all readie referred to higher powers: onlie my loue to you all hath im∣boldened me to exhort you to con∣cord with one another and espe∣ciallie with your Bishop, not onlie for his respect (whose authoritie and dignitie requireth it) but also for your own cause, whose neede demaundeth it. For without a Bis∣hop you are a flocke without a Pa∣stour, a Spirituall Kingdome with∣out a spirituall King, a familie with∣out a good-man of the howse, an armie without a Generall or leader: you sayle in Peeters ship amidst the surging waues, stormes and tem∣pests without a Pilot, you trauel vvithout a guide: you are a bodie
without a heade, to vvhom you cannot saie
1. Cor. c. 12. v. 21 vvee haue no neede of you. For that you stade in neede of a Bishop for manie causes.
18. Without a Bishop you can be no particular Church, because according to saint Cyprians
Cypr. ep. 69. ad Florin. de∣finition, the Church is Sacerdoti plebs adimata, & Pastorisuo grex adhaerens: The people vnited to the Priest (Bishop) and the flocke adhering to the Pastour. Without a Bishop you can be no perfect Christians, Confirmation, (which ordinarilie you cannot haue without a Bishop) being the Sacra∣ment which maketh you men in a spirituall life, and which, as S. Tho∣mas of Aquin
D. Tho. 3. p. q. 65. a. 1. in Corp. affirmeth, giueth you your manlie stature and full pitch and grough. Without a Bis∣hop you cannot haue so infalliblie
Ast. c. i. vers. virtutem ex alto, force from aboue, to wit, that speciall and abundant
grace to professe your faith in tyme of persecution with an vndaunted courage, confirmation being the ordinarie meanes by which it is gi∣uen, and for want of which Sacra∣ment Nouatus fell, as
Euseb. lib. 6. hist. c 33. alios 34. Eusebius hath remarked, and as perchaunce many in our countrie haue fallen. For although a man may haue suf∣ficient grace to professe his faith and to die for it without this Sacra∣ment, as diuers in our countrie and in our late persequution haue done, yet this. Sacrament being the ordi∣narie meanes by which this grace is giuen, it is to be feared least in a whole countrie and in an hoate per∣sequution, some, perchaunce many, may fall for vvant of it, especiallie when, if they will, they may haue it. But of these points, and of the ne∣cessitie of Bishops euen in tyme of perseqution; and how therefore
they were successiuelie ordained in all Seas and Churches; and how by all Zelous Catholiques they haue euer been desired vvith hazard of their liues, neuer refused by a∣nie, and hovv in England a Bis∣hop can be no more offensiue to the King or state, or to our Protes∣tant Bishops then a secular or Re∣gular Priest; nor in anie wise more preiudicious to the lay Catholiques temporal estate, or to the Religious priuiledges, in some chapters of this Treatise is at large declared: where also is shevved, that to refuse a Bis∣hop for feare of persequution, is to refuse a pilot vvhen the ship is tos∣sed, or a Pastour vvhen the sheep are in danger to be deuoured, or a Generall when the enemie is readie to giue the battaile.
19. But you, vvho are so con∣stant in your faith, so Religious to∣vvards
God, so Zealous for his Church, cannot but respect all or∣ders of Gods Church, and con∣sequentlie the highest, to vvit the order of a Bishop, vvho in povver of order hath none aboue him, and especiallie and particularlie your ovvn Bishop, vvho for his life and learning is vvithout exception; and vvho neither for statelie pallacies nor riche liuings or reuenues, nor for anie vvordlie honour or splen∣dou, which may moue some other Bishops, but merelie for your spiri∣tuall good, hath vndertaken this charge by vvhich he euerie hovver hazardeth for you not onlie his li∣bertie, but also life it selfe. Yet least anie order out of inconsideration should conceue lesse of another, then is required, and not liue in that peace and concord one vvith an∣others,
vvhich vvere to be desired: I haue compiled this Treatise of the diuers orders of the Church, that you seing euerie order in their pro∣per colours, may loue and honour one another, all the orders of the Church being of God, and all per∣tayning to the essence or ornament of the Church, vvhich in regard of her diuers orders is compared by the Royall Prophet to a
Psal. 44 vers. 10. Queene in golden rayment compassed vvith varietie. And that vvhen you see the mu∣tuall dependence one order hath of another, there
1. Cor. c. 12. v. 25 maie be no schisme in the bodie, but that the members together may be carefull for one another.
20. To this my Treatise tendeth, vvhich if you receue in as good parte as I meane it to you all, it cannot but be gratefull to all: I the Authour of it, ame, I confesse, a se∣cular
Priest (though vnvvorthie) and I glorie to be a member of our English cleargie, which hath had so manie and so lerned Priests, and out of which so manie glorious mar∣tyrs haue proceeded, as (absit verbo inuidia) it hath been a mirrour to all the Clergies of Europe. And I ame no Regular, I cōfesse, but I honour all Religious orders confirmed by the Church, and I esteeme him no good Catholique who doth not esteeme them. I professe but one order, yet I affect all, and so though I be of one side, yet I syde not, though I be of one partie, yet I ame not partiall. I prayse all orders of the Church, but I dispraise none; I so extolle one order, as I depresse not the other: I so right one, as I wrong not the other; yea in righ∣ting all, I commend all, because all
 euer been denied vvho hazard of their liues, neuer refused by a∣nie, and hovv in England a Bis∣hop can be no more offensiue to the King or state, or to our Protes∣tant Bishops then a secular or Re∣gular Priest; nor in anie wise more preiudicious to the lay Catholiques temporal estate, or to the Religious priuiledges, in some chapters of this Treatise is at large declared: where also is shevved, that to refuse a Bis∣hop for feare of persequution, is to refuse a pilot vvhen the ship is tos∣sed, or a Pastour vvhen the sheep are in danger to be deuoured, or a Generall when the enemie is readie to giue the battaile.
19. But you, vvho are so con∣stant in your faith, so Religious to∣wards
 order of a Bishop, vvho in povver of order hath none aboue him, and especiallie and particularlie your ovvn Bishop, vvho ro his life and learning is vvithout exception; and vvho neither for statclie pallaes nor riche liuings or reuenues, nor for anie vvordlie honour or splen∣dour, which may moue some other Bishops, but merelie for your spiri∣tuall good, hath vndertaken this charge by vvhich he euerie hovver hazardeth for you not onlie his li∣bertie, but also life it selfe. Yet least anie order out of inconsideration should conceue lesse of another, then is required, and not liue in that peace and concord one vvith an∣other,




are commendable: I say no more of the secular Clergie then the lear∣nedst Regulars teache, nor of the re∣gulars which secular Doctours doe not confesse: and so neither side can take offense at this Treatise, vnles they first fall out with their own Doctours; all orders, I hope, wilbe pleased to see in it their own por∣traites and praises.
21. If you would take no litle pleasure to be brought into a saint Peeters pallace in Rome, or a Louuer in Paris, or an Escuriel in Spaine, or a Nonsuch or such like princelie pal∣lace in England, and there to see the gorgeous and Stately biuldings, the riche seelings, varietie of cham∣bers and wittie Conueighaunces: If it would much delight you to see the goodlie order of the venerable Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarches,
Cardinalles, and other Pastours and Prelates of the Church assembled in a generall councell; If you would admire the order of the Peeres, Nobles, States and officers of our noble Kingdome meeting together in a parlament, all richelie clad in their goodlie robes: much more will you admire the diuers orders of the Church militant passing all those sightes for varietie, and order; and you will take in good parte this Treatise, which like vnto a Mappe in a litle roome, setteth them before your eyes. The Queene of Saba whē shee sawe the Howse which Salomon had built, and the meates of his table,
3. Reg. c. 10. v. 5.2. Paralip cap. 9. and the habitations of his seruauntes, and the orders, of them that serued, shee had no longer spirit, so shee was astonied. And you (Beloued Catholiques) when you shall see in this Treatise the
Hierarchie of the Church which the second and wiser Salomon hath established, and the diuersitie of or∣ders and Offices, wherewith it is graced; will much more be rapte with admiratiō, and wilbe astonied to see such varietie of so goodlie or∣ders, and you will when you shall see and consider them, praise, com∣mend, loue and respect euerie or∣der in its kind, and will liue in peace and concord one with another, as becommeth the orders of the Hie∣rarchie of the Church militant, which resembleth the peaceable Hierarchies of the Church trium∣phante of the Angelles, and is a liuelie image of that prototypon, an imitation of that patterne, and a copie of that original. This is the proiect, this is the intention of the booke and the Authour: who if
in dedicating it vnto you, he may seeme to haue takē more vpon him then perchaunce he should, or to haue presumed more of himselfe thē in deede he is: hee desireth you to impute it to no sinister intention, which was farre from him, but ra∣ther to his loue towards you all, and zele to the common cause, for which he vvill euer be readie to im∣ploy his labours, and to hazard the remnante of his life; during which he will rest.

