



Sir,
THe cause why the Ancients by fire
signifie Loue, is, for that this Ele∣ment
is the hardest to be hid: For the
more a man seekes to couer it, the
more it discouers it selfe, and blabbs
the place, where it is. Of this quality
is Loue, and truly participateth of the nature of fire.
I came (saith our Sauiour Christ) to put fire into the
world. And the holy Ghost, which is the true God of
Loue, came and shewed it selfe in the shape and figure
of fire. So that Loue is a kinde of extraordinary actiue
fire. Nor can it, where soeuer it be, be hid, or idle. Ope∣ratur
magna, si est, (saith Saint Gregory) si autem
non operatur, amor non est. Loue will be alwayes in
action, alwayes in working; it worketh by benefits▪ it

worketh by good workes, and by friendly offices, and
charitable seruices: And when it cannot worke what it
would, or when the subiect whereon it would worke,
hath no need thereof, it supplyeth that defect with good
desires, and words. God, who needeth not the seruice of
any, contents himselfe with this in those that are his ser∣uants,
accepting (when they can no more) the will, for
the deed. And the Kings, which here vpon earth repre∣sent
his person, doe not require tribute and seruice,
saue onely in that, which euery one is able to giue. That
which I am able to affoord, and doe here offer vnto your
Maiestie, forced thereunto by the loue of my seruice,
(howbeit my desire hath euermore had a larger extent)
is onely a parcell of words; which if they proceed from
the soule, and come truly and sincerely from the heart,
are of some worth and estimation, and perhaps (vpon
occasion) may proue likewise profitable and aduantagi∣ous.
Howsoeuer, it may serue at least to expresse that
my seruice and deuotion, which euer hath beene, is, and
shall be ready prest to serue your Maiestie. And I am
willing to shew it in this little, that I may not wholly
seeme vnprofitable. And therefore with this affection
of Loue, sutable to my subiect, ouercomming those feares
which are wont (and not without reason) to withhold
those that treate with great Kings, Princes, and Mo∣narckes,
and write of such and the like subiects, I pre∣sume
to aduertise them, and in this paper to propone

vnto them, that which I finde written of those that are
past and gone, (and seemeth very fit and conuenient for
the conseruation and augmentation of the authoriy and
greatnesse of those that are now liuing and present a∣mongst
vs) and will with all possible breuity, procure a
full resolution and distinction herein:Sen. epist. 84. i princip. And (as Seneca
saith) Totum comprehendere sub exiguo; To com∣prise
much vnder a little. For, as that is the better sort
of money, which in the matter is the lesser, but the grea∣ter
in value; so likewise that Learning is the best,
which is briefe in words, and large in sentences. It is
Maximus his counsell,Valer. Max. that Multa, & magna, breui∣ter
sunt dicenda. Matters that are many and great, are
briefly to be deliuered. For this breuities sake therefore,
as also for the greatnesse of your Maiesties employments,
and the great burthen of so many weighty businesses that
lye vpon you, I will not here interpose any large dis∣courses
and long disputations, wherewith to entertaine
and spend the time: but briefe, certaine, and generall
Doctrines, such as are of most profit, comprehend most
subiects, and may be applyed to particular, both persons
and things, all taken out of the Politicks, the law of na∣ture,
and men that are Statists, and no way contrary to
the Law of God, and Christian Religion: As likewise
out of ancient Philosophers, and wise men, both
Lawyers and Law-makers. Accompanied wholly for
to giue credit to the cause, and that the subiect may

not be disesteemed as an egge of mine owne hatching) with
the examples of Kings and Emperours, (if the exam∣ples
of Kings may moue Kings) and with those which
cannot but moue, bee esteemed, and beleeued, being
drawne out of the holy Scripture. Which being well ob∣serued
and put in execution by Kings, they shall obtaine
that end for which they were intended; To wit, to main∣taine
and preserue their Kingdomes in peace and iu∣stice.
Reade it therefore, I beseech your Maiestie, and take
it to heart; for it is a piece of worke that is directed
to the seruice of Kings, of their Fauourites and Mini∣sters.
And let them not say, that they are Metaphysicall,
and impracticable things, or, in a manner, meere im∣possibilites,
but rather, that they are very conforma∣ble
to our possibilitie, and practised by our Predecessors,
Princes of famous memory, for their wisedome and pru∣dence,
and in Kingdomes and Common-wealths, of
great Concernment, Artifice, and Policie, in matter of
Gouernement, and reason of State. And viewing those
with these times, and that which then was, with that
which now is, it will appeare vnto vs, that your pre∣sent
Princes doe not come much behinde their good Pre∣decessours:
And that which is good, stands alwayes in a
way or degree of ablenesse to become better: and that
which is not so, may be bettered in the end. Time is a
great proficient, it attaineth to all, and can doe all. And

your Maiestie (whom God preserue) may likewise in time
doe the like, if you will really and resolutely affect the
same; and that you will be pleased to put in execution,
what in these Aduertisements shall seeme good in your
eyes. And seeme they, or not seeme they good vnto you,
sure I am, that my desire, in these, in the rest, and in all,
shall indeuour to hit the marke whereat it aymeth. God
direct it as I desire. For mine owne part, I rest well con∣tented
with my paines, and hold my selfe well paid for
my labour, in hauing put them into your Maiesties hands.
And that you shall vouchsafe to dwell a little vpon them.
For matters of State, Iustice, and Gouernment, and of
things of this high nature, is a King-craft, and a know∣ledge
or science that deserues your care and discourse.
Let others doe as they list; particular men may follow
their particular pleasures and delights. But this well be∣commeth
Kings.
The Argument of this Booke, is the Head of Mans
body; beginning at the vnderstanding, till we come to
the last of the senses. For therein, and thence they haue
the principium or beginning of their operations. And
as in mans body, so in the mysticall body of a Common∣wealth,
Kings are the Head, to whom Regiment & Go∣uernment
belongs; and what choyce they are to make of
those who are to assist them therein; the qualities which
they ought to haue, and how they should carry them∣selues
towards them. How they shall come to dis∣couer

the humours, affections, mindes, and dispositions of
their Ministers. And in a word, how they ought to be∣haue
themselues in all, and with all.
I search not into the secret closet of any mans bosome,
nor touch vpon any particular person, it being the least
part of my intent and purpose. I treate onely in the gene∣rall,
and manifest vnto all, that what I write, being cer∣taine
and true, and grounded vpon principles and cer∣taine
causes, may serue to reforme, amend, and correct,
and (if neede bee) alter those fashions and customes
they finde to bee amisse. This I am bold to vtter vnto
your Maiestie, and dedicate the same with that securitie
and confidence, which mine owne knowledge doth pro∣mise
and prompt vnto mee; being not ignorant, that I
talke and discourse with mine owne proper King and
Lord, whom I humbly beseech, that hee will bee pleased,
out of his great prudence and naturall pietie, to runne
all this ouer with his eye, and to cast his cloake ouer my
faults. And though (no doubt) his Maiestie may meete
with some, yet my minde telleth me, that he may likewise
light vpon something in this Treatise, that may be of some
profit for the seruice of his Maiestie, and for the conser∣uation
of that authoritie and greatnesse of place (which
he so iustly possesseth, and for the good of the Common∣wealth.
For, there is not that Booke saith Seneca) so
vnprofitable, whence some good may not bee gathered.
And though this in supposall, or it's owne nature) may

be small, and of little or no price, yet is it of no lesse no∣ble
and royall a condition, to receiue a little louingly, and
with a gratious acceptance, then to giue much liberally.
All this your Maiestie doth with all, and I assure my selfe
you will likewise doe the like with me. For the naturall
Loue which I beare vnto your Maiestie, meriteth no
lesse, nor the minde wherewithall I doe it. And
herewith I shall in some sort satisfie my desire (which is
to hit the marke I ayme at) and that obligation, where∣with
I was borne to serue you, whom I shall neuer wil∣lingly
offend. And euermore, in all my prayers, and sa∣crifices,
I shall humbly on my knees beseech the Almighty
God, to preserue your Maiestie, to giue you many, and
those most happie yeares, and that hee will conserue you
in his diuine grace, and humane Greatnesse, with much
augmentation of Estate, both Temporall and Eternall.
Amen.

