



AT such time (right Ho∣nourable) as I at the request of
certaine my deere and welbeloued freendes, had beene at her Maie∣sties Towre
of London: partlie to haue some talke with the Ie∣suites, and other
Seminaries de∣seruedly there imprisoned: part∣lie to see if the Lorde
would haue quickened them after great preaching and much conference, with manie
and ve∣rie learned men that came thether: I did finde, that the trauaile and
study of theirs, hath to this day taken so small effect, as not onely the
Iesuites are more and more stiffned in their errors: But also,
they are become so sencelesse in feeling, so blunt in attayning, so
wicked and malicious in resisting, so disloy all and spitefull in
hearing, so sturdie and malaperte in withstanding openlie the teachers of
the Gospell; as the people are vpon the same dismayed, zea∣lous and godly
men discouraged, and all fortes of people moste pittifully distracted,
that either heere or see them at any time.
VVherefore may it please you to vnderstand, that for diuers
causes, I haue giuen vnto your Honour this briefeand shorte
Confutation of their Heresies. First, that their damnable and grosse
errors though they may be seene of all, may yet (especially) be knowne vnto
you: For I doo thinke, that the reformation and order to bee taken for these
Heretiques, dooth lye (in especiall) on your shoul∣ders, and is required at
Gods handes of the Lordes of her Maiesties moste Honourable priuie
Councell: Secondly, that it may appeere, whensoeuer these wicked men
shalbe called to an accompte, that then they will not be able to denie or
dissemble that which they affirme: For the moste principall, though not
all their Articles, are confuted in this booke. Thirdely, I am of opinion, that
esperiallye your Honour hath to discerne the spirits of these men, in
as much as you be in the number of those, that in Roome, (togeather
with many other of the nobles in this Realme) were threatened to be burned by
the Pope, if he gat you either quicke or dead: The laste and the cheefe
cause is this.
As your Honour hath beene alwayes a fauourer of the Gospell, and
moste forwarde in Religion, so I trust that God will now mooue you, to
haue a more care of his poore Church then euer you had. It is not vnknowne how
God hath looued this Realme, sithence her Maiesties moste gratious and
happie raigne among vs. The like rest with such quietnes, the like peace
with such blessednes, the like comfort with such happines, was neuer
seene vnder any Nation and people, as we haue had vnder her Maie∣stie. Now
at lengthe, after so longe and prosperous and peaceable gouernment, to put
this Realme in feare and dread of that woonted Tirranie, which Antichriste
the Pope practised vpon vs. To stirre and mooue vp by way of alienation the
mindes of men, and the faithfull hartes of Englande: to make vs remember the
blood that wasshed of olde time by the Pope, to compell vs
againe to sorrow ouer the bodies of our dead, and ouer the Sainctes whose
blood was shed, and ouer the multitude of good men, that were taken from vs:
There are in the steede and roome of those blodie Fathers, risen and now
in processe of time growne vp, their bloodie and vnnaturall sonnes. Among
these, some would haue hathed their hands in the harts of our people, as
Saunders in Ireland of late was pur∣posed to do, (and it is not to
be thought that he was there alone.)
Some write against vs, as though wee were Haere∣ticques, and
accompt vs worthy to be put to death: (what would these men doo, if they had
vs in their handes?) Of which sort is, Iohn Howlet, and one,
Campion: who bothe of them haue presented their mindes moste
praesumptu∣ously to the right Honourable the Lordes of her Maie∣sties
priuie Councell: some also haue spread abroade their damnable and
seditious Doctrine, thorowe out manie places in this Realme. Such bee the
Iesuites, the Semi∣naries and other Schollers of the Pope,
that bee now in her Maiesties Towre of London: Now, all these are come
hether, and sente in of late dayes by the Pope, to disturbe vs, and rayse
Tumults in this Common wealth. And all these are the children of such
Fathers, as persecu∣ted the Saints: or they be home borne children, &
brought vp in England, being the wicked sonnes of wicked Parēts: and they
all haue beene maintained by that man of sinne, Antichriste. For all which
thinges, it cannot be gainsay de, but that these practising Heretiques,
are most woorthy to haue the lawe of God in execution against them, which
he hath set downe for them in his Booke. I doo well re∣member what our
Fathers, and Forefathers did: Dauid at the hower of his death, called
to minde the iniquitie of aman of his, that shed blood: and when
he lay on his death bed, he sayd thus to his sonne Salomon:1. Reg. 2.5. Thou knowest what Ioab the sonne of
Seruiah did to me, and what he did to the two Captaines of the hoast of
Israel, vnto Abner the sonne of Ner, and vnto Amasa the sonne of
Iether, whome he stone & shed blood of battaile in peace; Doo therefore
according to thy Wisedome, and let not his hearie haires goe downe to the
graue in rest. The same also sayde Dauid, of the sonne of
Gera, the sonne of Iemini of Bahurim, neither did
he ac∣coumpt him innocent. It is well knowne, what woorthy and warlike fellowes
the Papists slewe, and how they were cunning men at the Battailes of the
Lord, and as ready to resist and fight against Sathan in spirituall
skirmishes, as Abner or Amasa either euer were, in
defending their Cit∣ties for their maister Dauid: It is
necessarie therfore, those good men should be remembred, in as much as
they were slaine so trayterouslie: And now the rather, are we all to
thinke vpon that treason of olde, as there are risen vp dis∣loyall and
wicked men to trouble vs: Irreuerend & diso∣bedient persons, to prouoke
vs: faithlesse, and hollowe hearted Papists, to disquiet vs: foolish
and erronious Iesu∣ites, to inueagle & withdraw vs from the
Lord. These are they haue practised so many things against vs, this
many yeeres: these are the wicked, whome the godlie haue fea∣red; these are
the disturbers, haue disquieted this Realme; these are the conspirators
haue withholden the hearts of the wicked, from their loyaltie; these are
they, that if God had not beene on our side, would long ere this haue
ouer∣throwne vs. VVe know that Papistes, were authors of re∣bellion in the
North. We know, that as in the Shambles men sell meate, so in their priuate
assemblies, haue these wicked ones, bothe bought and solde vs of
England. We know that many a time, the Pope hath sent secrete
messē∣gershether, and haue stolne away many of the
Subiectes hearts. We know that newes hath very often ben brought ouer, how the
time hath been appointed, that King Phillip should haue eaten bread,
and giuen his Souldiors drink in Lēd. We know that multitudes of Papists,
hauing been taken, examined, and imprisoned for the fame: they haue sayd
openlie, that they hoped one day, to see their golden day. It is seene of
all men, what numbers haue beene taken  Masse, in despite of the
Gospell. It is seene of all, howe many haue for treason, not onely beene
taken, but execu∣ted in London. It is seene of all men, that they haue vsed
witchcraft, sorcerie, & inchaūtment, to destroy the Lordes annointed.
It is seene, how vnquiet her Maiesties Realme of Ireland hath been, and all
only thorow them. It is seen, what signes and Crosses, the Papistes
haue had brought o∣uer, as is their Agnus Deis, and other Tablets,
which conti∣nually they weare about their necks, as tokēs to be known by, if
time serued. And it is seene and perceiued of all open∣lie, how that
innumerable Bulles, and Pardons, haue & are continuallie sent ouer by the
Pope. And can or may, true and faithfull Christians see all this, and not
speake? Naie, the heauens & the earth, crie out against them; and if
both these should cast out their slaine and dead bodies, which
sometimes the Fathers of these men haue killed in this cō∣men wealth: vve
that liue now, were neuer able to abide the yelling and crying, the sighing
and groning, of our Fa∣thers, our Mothers, Sōnes, Daughters, Kinsfolk &
neigh∣bors, and of all fortes of people some, for the vnspeakeable
tormentes, wherewith these wicked and vngodlie Baalites haue
tormented them. And now they thinke the time to be at hand, in which they may
embrew their handes, and a freesh againe be dronken with the blood of
righteous men, which hope, which trust, which confidence, which desire,
which practise, which sight, which thirst of theirs, cannot
be extinguished, if God either stay not their pretended purpose, or that
some speedy reformation, and sharpe dis∣cipline be not sought after,
for these Heretiques. And albe∣it, we be ready to pawne bothe our liues, and
ourbodies, in the quarell of the Lord, yet haue we a care of the Fa∣milie and
house of God, to keepe the wilde Boare of the wood from deuowring it.
Vndoubtedlie, as Achan trou∣bled Israell,Iosh.
7.21. in taking of the excommunicate and forbid∣den thinges, so haue
these Iesuites, with their companions, that of late came into this
Realme, greeuouslie prouoked the Lord, and moued vs, in bringing ouer their
whorishe, forbidden, and Babilonish garmentes with them.Gen. 35.4. True it is, that all the Trinckettes, and
rubbishe they haue, is no∣thing else but Ceraphims, and the same
straunge Gods, or some such beggerlie, and vnmeete trashe, as the
Patriarke Iacob tooke from them of his household, when as for very
shame, he buried them vnder a Terebinth Tree in Sche∣chem.
Their worshippe is all one, with the worshippe of Aaron, when he
offended in making the golden Calfe. Of which sinne
committed,Moses was so afraide,Exo.
32.20. as in the same, he let fall the Tables of stone, and they
brake: but Moses dealt with them, according to their iniquitie for
all that, and he stamped the golde, of which the Calfe was made off to
powder, and made the Israelites drinke thereof.
And this was much that Moses did, but Asa
the King did more then he;1. Reg. 15.12.For he put
away the Sodomites, and bannished the Idolaters out of the Lande, and he
remoo∣ued Maacha his mother, and disinherited her of Crowne and
dignitie, for that she offered Sacrifice to Priapus.
Notwithstanding, Iehu did more then did he:2. Re.
10.26 for he kil∣led all the Prophets of Baall, and suffered
not one of themto liue, he defaced the Temple of their Gods,
and made a Drawght house of it for euer. And Iehoiada the heigh
Priest,2. Reg. 11.4. together with the yonge Kinge
Ioas, killed the I∣dolatresse Athaliah as she fled for
her life out of the Tem∣ple: Ezechias did wonderfull thinges in his
dayes and he spared not an Idolater in the Lande. How Iosiah delte
be∣ing but a younge Prince, and how he visited, and went tho∣rowe the Realme
in his owne person the booke of the Cro∣nicles and Kings of Iuda doo
declare:2. Reg. 22.8. He put the Idola∣trous
Priestes to death, and was so zealous in the behalfe of his God: that he
burnt their boanes, and sacrificed them vp, vpon their owne Altars. We are
not ignoraunt (right Honorable) of all the Statutes, Ordinaunces, and decrees
from age to age, which the primitiue Churches haue bothe made, and confirmed
against the Idolaters of there time, what the Emperour
Constantinus did, appeareth in Eusebi∣us,Euseb. in vita. Con. lib. 3. and how he delte in
Phaenitia and in Cilitia with the I∣dolaters.
Theodosius, as witnesseth Theodoretus,Theod. lib. 5 cap. 20. did referre all his studie to the
suppressing downe of the Idolatrous Gratians. And I doo
remember, that Leo in his EpistleLeo. Epist.
66. re∣quireth of Licinia, Eudotia, Augusta, that she would
roote out those Heresies spread abroade, by the roauing Monkes in
Palestine. Therefore seeing their children are sprong vp in our
dayes, and in their steede are risen vp as wicked and as great Idolaters as
were they. It is very heigh time they should be looked vnto among vs. For my
owne part I doo protest, that if any thing hath made me to write, it is the
Lords quarrell, and the feare of his name that hath doone it. And in the same
I haue great reason moouing me therevnto, which your Honour shall
vnderstande, and they all perceiue, that shall reade this Booke. But it
hath greeued me moste of all, and stirred me vp espetially, in that I
haue from time to time, seene and vewed the im∣pudentbehauiour,
and bolde presumptions of the Papists: Amonge whom, some men of late
time, in a sound speech, perfect tongue, fine wit, and choyse phrase
(as they did thinke of them selues) haue rashly encroached vpon her
Maiestie, and vpon your Honours, the Lords of her Maie∣sties Honourable
priuie Councell, with sundrie of theyr bookes: Thereby making vs beleeue,
that because they durste doo it, they did it well. Of these Maister
Harding was the first, that reuolted and ranne away from Christe,
but neuer returned, who by this time knoweth, whether he did well or euill. And
Osorius, did but the other day sende abroade his Cōnfections, to
poyson the young Frie of England: who, as he flaunteth it out in a leafe or
two, yet halteth he in many places, and speaketh verie roughly, and breaketh
out euery where vnpleasauntly, and then healeth vp the wound so rawly
againe, as that his gleaned and pi∣ked vp corne, stolne words, borrowed ware,
deceiptfull stile, quauering Notes, and slaunderous speeches against
the trueth, be wundered at, and greatly pittied of all cunning woorkemen.
Moreouer the other day was the like seene, for the Snowe hath not yet falne
vpon the ground, nor yet hath the Sickle beene put into the Corne, sithence
one, to name Campion, and an other, to name Howlet, haue
caste out Rebellious Pamphlets, and offered combate to all the learned in
this Realme. Now, all these men, for that they wanted credit and estimation
where they liued before, are cōtent like Maisterlesse men, to goe
abegging and aske for entertainement abroade: Therefore haue they praesumed
to enter the Courte gates, and there to open their Pedlers Packes, and to set
out to sale their counterfeit Merchaun∣dies, supposing that because her
Maiesties Subiects vpon hope of amendement, haue in all clemencie beene borne
with all to this day: Therefore also they should looke for
the same fauour, and good woordes bothe of her Maiestie
and your Honours handes, as a rewarde giuen them for their slaunderous and
Scismaticall Libelles. May it please you therefore, with the same eyes,
and like harte: as you haue to this daye moste Honourably continued, so
also to turne back, and looke vpō the learned with in this Realme. It wil be
knowne vnto you, that God hath so blessed them in England with all kinde
of furniture, Timber, Wood, and Stone, fine woorke, wrought woorke, and needell
woorke, golde, siluer, and all other kinde of Science, Arte, and know∣ledge,
bothe diuine and humaine, as all theyr outlandish falshoods, robbery,
pilfering and stealth, with their foolish and mishapen Quiddities,
loose arguments, broken rea∣sons, falsified Scriptures, coloured and
disguised Authors, are neuer able to be compared, or come neere vnto vs.
For whye? the Lorde is on our side, and he rayseth vp bothe the eloquent
and the good man: As for those men, what haue we to doo with them, seeing
they are bewitched with falsehood and lyes? The Lorde our God is he that we
must follow, his voyce must we heere, and as for those that bring not his
woorde, the Lorde shalbe reuenged on them him∣selfe. For my owne parte,
what I haue set downe against our aduersaries the Iesuites in
this booke, in the same I will not be my owne Iudge, but I will referre that
I haue spoken to the indifferent Reader, and he, all that I haue doone vnto
the Scriptures. The Lorde, the true and righ∣teous euermore, the God of our
fathers that hath alwayes beene with you, kindle your noble and vertuous
procee∣dings more and more, that you maye bee a light and far∣therer in the
same, to all those that looue and feare the Lorde: And the Lorde graunt,
that his countenaunce may shine vpon vs, that his word may be knowne rightly,
his lawes and commaundements obserued diligently, the ver∣tuousand godly men defended mightely, the wicked and obstinate punished
seuearely, and his goodnes and mercie spreade abroade openly vpon vs all.
That her Maiestie may raigne long time ouer vs, to see the iudgements of
our God put in execution, that her Grace may see an end of all vnquietnes,
dissention, and strife, and establish peace, vnitie, and concorde in
the Church of God. Amen.
 From my Chamber in Holborne at London. 
Iune. 10.
