



IF the Church and House of the Lorde God, were or had beene tyed to any one man, for his skill and cunning woorkemanship in the same: There mighte haue stepped foorth, and shewen themselues greatly greeued (honourable, and my very good Lorde) most singuler and learned men in this common wealth: That for age through discretion: for life through grauitee: for time, in wisdome: for prayse and speeche of people, by their rare and goodly giftes: could very wel and in due season, haue chalenged the first place, and taken vpon them the first roome, to haue made dispatchall, and finished vp this litle building, rather then any other. Whervnto not withstandyng, I haue now put my hands, with Morter and Lyme and such homely pro∣uision, as I haue founde in the Countrie since my depar∣ture from Cambridge. Very bolde now, as at other times I haue been with your Fatherhood, to open my entente and meanyng in this labour of myne. That the care wher∣vnto I am bounde by priuate dutie, may from henceforth discharge it selfe: And that weresome and great burthen layde on our shoulders, that be the dispensers of the word of God, the sooner lightned. I haue not giuen my tra∣uayle, and this the sweate of my browes, to Aristo Chius, (as in Fables) but I haue searched and made choyse in the prae¦sentyng
of this my small gifte, of your Honour, then any other: For that by good right, you chalenge the first frui∣tes of my youthe: Whom it pleased in younge dayes, and this my infancie, to ingrafte & plante in, as one thought worthie some place, in the vineyarde of the Lorde. And I doubt not, but that rule and gouernement, wherewith God hath blessed you in this Common welth of England, shall haue as glorious an ende, in the suppressing & roo∣ting out of sinne, as it hath had a blessed entraunce, and continued vntill this day, in supporting and mainteining of the truth: If any thing in this my small volume, shall appeare to belesse studied, and more craggedly handled, then commonly the stoorehouses of young Occupiers, as I am, ought to be. I haue a good excuse vnto your Lord∣ship: in that a more toublesome and perelous time, ne∣uer happened, by the space of this one whole yeare, then hath done vnto me: either els lesse fruit, and smaller commoditie gleaned vp by the hands of any one labou∣rer: or greater sorrowe, or lingering hope: or sore at∣temps, or the like flames, and such contentions (as your Honour verie well knoweth) that I haue thought him much disquieted, that hath not sought quietnesse, in so vnquiet a life. And yet in these tossings and tumblings, wherein I am sweltered in manner, and ouercome, with out any hope of recouery, I may not be altogether dis∣mayed: neither will I stay the course I haue begonne: but faire and saftely step by step drayle forwarde, till that time the Lorde God shall release vs: The causes hereof with my iudgment of the same: please it you to turne ouer but fewe leafes, they will shewe what manner a ones they be. At the end of this booke, I haue offered to your Lordeship, the copie of that Sermon, the ve∣rie noates and certeine wordes (almost) which I speake, when you thought good, to appoint me at Fulham your Mannor, this yeare last past of our Lord. 1577. Vppon Ascention day at the making of ministers, there to
preach before the Cleargie men. This I haue done at the sute and earnest request, of certeine my friendes of the Cytie of London (men of good calling, & worship) then at that time present, though vnknowen vnto you, when I preached there. These I could not thrust away in so good a demaunde: neither durst I withstand them in so reigh∣teous a cause: Yet I consithered, that the right therof be∣longed not to them, for it pleased you to take it at my handes, at that time by commaundement: Therefore haue I made restitution of the same. For then they hearde it, then they begged it, when as I speake it: But now I write it, though they requirde it, and as due debt, I restore it vnto your honour. Both which: these shorte bookes (as you may knowe the studie of young deuines most commonly busied in) I giue them, as a pawne and pledge of that duetie that I owe vnto you: And I desire of the Lorde God, to increase you in all spirituall giftes in Iesus Christ, that the whole workmanship and Tem∣ple of the Lorde, may be fully finished: all rotten, and shackering sprigges that ouershadowe the Church of God, cut off: all idle, sluggish, and hollowe harted men, discerned: to the increase of his name, the setting forth of his glorie, the abolishing of Poperie and superstici∣on, and the farthering of tranquilitie and peace, in these our borders.
 In Dedham, this xxi. of Iune. 1578.
