


YOV vvill meruaile perad∣uenture (most dread Soue∣raigne) hovve
a Preeste, vvhose very name hath novv of longe tyme, been odious in your
Realme of England, da∣reth bee soe bolde, as to appeare in the pre¦sence of
so Mightie a Prince, sitting in a throne of Maiestie and terrour,
crovvned vvith a Diademe of greater glorie then hetherto hath stoode vppon
the Kinge of England his head, & holding in his victo∣rious hande a nevve
Scepter, by vvhich he commaundeth all the Bretaigne Ilandes, & like a
Neptune, is Lorde of the Ocean sea, vvhich honour vvas reserued for your
sacred Maiestie, the first King Iames of Englād, the only
King Iames of Englād, and the only King of Scotland, and En∣gland. And it
vvill seeme straunge vnto your Highnes, to see one of my coate &
condition, amid the congratulations of all the Princes of Europe, saluting
you vvith so longe a Proeme; and euen then vvhen their honourable Legates,
haue so great and so importaunte affaires, to com∣municate vnto your
Maiestie from their Lordes and Maisters, to intrude into your Chamber of
Presence, so rude a Messen∣ger, and euil-spoken Legate of myne, vvho
speaketh only by signes of vvritten vvordes, and demaundeth audiēce in his
maisters name, vvho is fayne to send bi∣cause he dares not come: not that
he doubteth of your Graces Clemencie, or his ovvn Innocencie, but bicause
such as he is, hauing been for so longe a tyme, forbidden all accesse
both to their Prince and countrie, he dareth not approche so neare vnto your
Gracious prefence, though he bee assured, that you are as milde a Prince,
as mightie, and novve as mightie, as any Prince of Europe. Yea, I may bee
thought peraduenture, to vvante both Face & forhead, vvho nether blush,
nor ame abashed, to present so great a Prince vvith so litle a
presēt, as is a booke of Paper ill printed, bicause in a straunge 
Countrie, and as ill indighted, bicause by one vvho hath liued
longer out of his co∣untrie then in it; and euen at that tyme al∣so, vvhen
all the Princes of the Christiane vvorlde, present your Highnes, vvith the
rarest and ritchest guiftes, vvhich sea and lande can afforde. But if it
shall please your Highnes, to giue eare to your lovv∣est subiecte, he
vvill not doubte but to cleare him selfe of all these three inciuili∣ties,
vvhich maybe supposed to haue been by him committed, and he vvill counte it
noe small honour, to be permitted to speake for him selfe, before so
Potente a Prince, and dares auouch it to be no dis∣honour for your Highnes to
stoupe to so lovve a subiecte, bicause Princes, vvho by ascending can
mounte no higher, as being in temporall Iurisdiction next vnto God, by
condescending to their subiectes, do arise in greatnes, bicause therin
only, they are greater then them selues, in ouerco∣ming them selues. And
from the first the Emperour Adrian vvill excuse me, vvho commēded vnto
Minutius his Proconsul of Asia, as a thing of importaunce, ne no∣men
condemnaretur sed crimen: that the name should not be condemned, but the
crime. For, 
Tert. Apol. c.
. saythe Tertulian
against them that ha∣ted Christians, in vvhom they could finde no other
thīg to hate, but the name, chri∣stian, vvhich they should
haue loued: S nominis
odium est, quis nominis reatus? quae ac∣cusatio vocabulorum? nisi aut
barbarum quid so∣net, aut infaustum, aut maledicum, aut impu∣dicum. If the
name he hated, vvhat is the guilte of the name? vvhat accusation is ther of
vvor∣des? vnlesse they sound of barbarisme, or vnlucki∣nes, or
maledictiō, or vnchastnes. And therfore if Preest-hood be no offence,
the name Preest, is deuoid of harme, and if Preest∣hood be noe treason, a
Preest in that he is a Preest, can be no traitour: Vnlesse vve vvill
accounte Christe and his Apostles traytours, vvho vvere Preestes, and the
first Preestes of the nevv lavve, & esteem after the same manner,
of all the ancient Preestes both of Englād, and other coun∣tres, vvhome
Kinges and Emperours ha∣ue honoured as their vvorthy, and haue loued as their
moste faith-full subiectes; vvho vvere so farre from being enemies to the
crovvne, that from their handes all Christian Kinges almoste, haue hetherto
receiued their cōsecration, crovvnes, and Scepters. As for the second
supposed, or rather presumed inciuilitie, that is so farre from
deterring mee at this tyme, that I thinke novv to be the very tyme, vvhen the
Legates of the Kinges of earthe, in their Lordes & Masters name, vvish
you a longe and a Prosperous Raigne, to sa∣lute you frō the
Great Monarche of hea∣uen, vvhose Legate I ame, in that I ame a Preest,
though a miserable sinner, in that I ame a Manne, and your Maiesties
lovv∣est subiecte, in that I ame an English-man. Nether can I thinke,
that the Legate of the great king of heauen, vvhose Legacie you shall
vnderstand a none (your High∣nes vvill pardon such Highe speeches,
bi∣cause it is the manner of Legates to vse them, for their Masters
honour) shalbe denied audience of your so gracious Ma∣iestie, vvhen the
Ambassadours of the Kinges of earth, vvho are but his Vice∣royes,
Lieutenauntes, and Tenauntes at vvill, are harde vvithe so fauourable a
countenaunce, and such attentiue eares. And if I vvere neuer so base, yet
is novve the tyme of Coronation, vvhen it is lavv∣full for your basest
subiecte, to congratu∣late your nevv and highe dignitie, and vvhen the
poorest man in the Realme hath as good leaue to crie Viue le Roy,
God saue King Iames, as any noble man∣ne or Pere of your Realme. Nether is
the thirde obstacle any obstacle at all: bicause although my present be
small and your personage great, yet to accept of a subiectes litle
present, is not to dimi∣nish, but to a grandize your Greatnes; bi∣cause
in that, you are greater then your sel∣fe, and likest the
Greatest, vvho tooke in as good parte the vvidovves mite, as the ritchest
Offringe. But yet I vvould not haue your Maiestie to esteeme of this my
booke, only as of a bare bundel of pa∣pers; bicause I present you vvithall,
that hūble harte, and sincere affection, vvhich a subiecte can beare, or
ovve vnto his Soueraigne, and vvith my affection, I of∣fer my selfe as your
Maiesties most lovvly & faithfull seruaunte; vvhich is a guifte so
great, be ye giuer neuer so vile, that ye great King of heauen requireth,
yea desireth no more at our handes, but esteemeth that vve giue all, vvhen
vvee giue our sel∣ues, and that vvee giue noe litle, vvhen vvee giue our All,
bee it neuer so litle. Nether is my presēt it selfe to bee
mispri∣sed, nether can it of such a Prince, bicause the booke is not my
present, it is but the boxe, the present is that vvhich it contei∣neth. And
if your Maiestie demaund of me vvhat that is? I ansvvere; not gold, nor
Iuorie of India, not ritch, and orient pear∣le, for vvith such
treasures your England, like an India aboundeth; but it is that
vvhich is more vvorth, and vvhich your India only vvanteth; and vvhat
is that? It is religion? the vvorship of God, the Sal∣uation of your soule,
the safetie of your Subiectes, the health of the body of the Realme of vvhich you are the Heade, the strength of your Kingdome,
the peace of your people, and the ritchest pearle of your crovvne. This is
the subiect of my discourse, these are the contentes of my booke, and
this is my guifte and present, vvhich amongest so many guiftes, vvhich by
so many and so mightie Princes are presented vnto your Highnes, I offer
vvith all humilitie, hopīg, yea persuading my selfe, that such a guifte
as Religion, can not but be gratefull vnto that Prin∣ce, vvho is the Defendour
of the faith, & Protectour of Religion. And bicause this vnhappie age
hath been more frute∣full then profitable, in deuising of reli∣gions, in so
much that, as all is not golde that glisters, so novv all is not religiō,
vvch is called soe; least I may be thought to of∣fer Counterfet for
currante, and heresie for true religion, it is the Catholike Reli∣gion
(most noble Prince) vvhich I pre∣sent, and vvhich my booke conteyneth, and
by many argumentes as occasion ser∣ueth, not only proueth, but also
conuin∣ceth to be the only sincere, and true Chri∣stian religion; and
vnmasking the nevv religion by a seuere, yet syncere Exami∣nation,
declareth it to be nothing else but errour, and heresie, though vnder the
painted face of a Reformed Religion, it hath deceiued some parte
of the vvorld, and especially your litle vvorld, England; vvhich the Poete
chose rather to calle a vvorlde by it selfe, separated from the greater
vvorld, then, a parte or parcel of it; bicause like a 
and litle vvorld, it conteineth compendiously, and in a lesser roome
(vvhich also is a grace) all commodities and perfections, vvhich in the
greater are dispersed. But bicause I ame more in examining and refuting
the nevv religion, then in confirming the olde (bicause the good corne
grovveth easilie, vvhen the vveedes are extirpated) I entitle it a suruey
of the nevv religion. And if your Maiestie demaund of me, vvhy I dedicate
such a booke vnto you? I can not vvante an ansvveare, bicause I can not
vvante a reason. Flauius Vegetius vvill tell your Highnes, that it hathe
beene euer the custome, to dedicate boo∣kes to Kinges and Emperours (as he
him selfe did to Valentinian th'Elder) bicause (sayeth he) nether is any
thing vvel begō∣ne, vnless after God the King fauour it, nether doe any
thinges, beseem Kinges better, then bookes, vvho as they gouern all, so if
it vvere possible, should knovve all. For as in the head vvhich guideth
the vvholle bodie, are all the sences, so a Prin∣ce, the head of the
people, should be in∣devved vvith all sciences; and as the
Son∣ne, bicause it illuminateth the planets vvhich vnder it rule, and guide
the infe∣riour vvorld, is replenished vvith more light then they, so the
King vvho is the Sonne of his ovvn vvorld and Kingdo∣me, from vvhom not only
the people, but inferiour Princes also, are to receue their light and
direction, should be illumina∣ted vvith a greater light, and knovvledge, then
any of his subiectes: and therfore Cirus vvas vvonte to say, that he is not
vvorthy an Empire, vvho is not better, and vviser then the rest; vvhich
also in ef∣fecte King Salomon surnamed vvise, af∣firmed, vvhē he gaue
that holsome coun∣sayle to his fellovv-Kinges: 
Sap. 6. Si delectamini
sedibus, & sceptris (ô Reges populi) diligite sa∣pientiam,
vt in aeternum regnetis: If you be de∣lighted in thrones and scepters
(ô Kinges) loue you vvisdome, that you may raigne for euer:
and to signifie this by an Embleme, God him selfe gaue his people for their
first King, no other then Saule, vvho vvas higher then the rest of the
people, by the head and shoulders. And seing that your Ma∣iestie is not
only a Kinge, but a learned King also, as by many monumentes of your rare
vvitte, and learning, vvhich the learnedst admire, doth plainly appeare; to
vvhom ought I of dutie to consecrate this my vvorke, but to
such a King, vvho for his authoritie, can protecte it, and for his
vvisdome, can Iudge of it. Yea the ve∣rie subiect of my booke vvhich is
reli∣gion, seemed to require of right no other Patrone, then your most
Excellent Ma∣iestie, vvho by office, and Title, are the protectour of
Religion, the champion of the Church, and Defendour of the Fayth. This common
congratulation al∣so, not only of your ovvne litle vvorld, but also of all
the Christiane vvorlde, this vniuersall ioy, these triūphes, these
bone∣fyers, vvhich the french-man calleth feux de ioye haue moued and
stirred mee vp, to shevv some signe also of my affection and ioye,
vvhervvith my harte is so full, that my toungue can not be silent. All
reioise (most Gracious Prince) at your Corona∣tion, as though it concerned
all, and the hope, vvhich is generally conceiued of your Graces Bountie, hath
not only pas∣sed your seas, but the Alpes also. The vvorlde admires the
svveet prouidence of the Almightie tovvardes your Maie∣stie, vvhoe euen
from your infancie hath protected you from many imminent dan∣gers, as thoughe
he had reserued you (as no doubte hee did) for the crovvne of England. The
vvorld expected ether ci∣uil vvarres, or foraine inuasions, after the 
deathe of her Maiestie of late memorie, bicause the Heire
apparaunt vvas not na∣med, and though all men had their eyes, and expectations,
and desires also, fixed on your Highnes person, yet they feared that
vvhich they desired, and hoped not vvithout feare; and yet cōscience
direct∣ing your Nobles, and God gouerning their cōscience, vvithout any
bloud shed, vvithout contradiction, yea vvith great applause of all, your
Highnes is placed peaceably in your Regall throne; and vvch is rare, England
vvas so inamoured vvith your Princely vertues, and so moued by your
vndoubted Title, that shee sent for you, as for her louing spouse, and
hath betrothed her selfe so faste vnto you, that the death of your
person, can not dissolue this Mariadge; bicause her mariadge vvith your
person, is the spousage vvith your noble posteritie. These great
fa∣uours and benedictions of th' Almightie tovvardes your Maiestie, make the
vvorld to thinke, that God hath culled you out for some good purpose, and
that your Highnes to shevv your selfe grate∣full vnto him, vvill imploy
your selfe in some honourable seruice for that Church and fayth, of
vvhich you are called the Defendour: in so much that if the general voice
groūded only on the great expecta∣tion, vvhich commonly is
conceiued of you, vvere as true as common, I should not need at this tyme to
be the Supplia∣unte for the freedom, and libertie of your distressed
Catholiques. And al∣thoughe your Catholique subiectes at home, haue not yet
obteined so great a benefit, yet so ritch hopes, and so firme confidence,
do they repose in your Gra∣ces Bountie, that frō the first day of your
raigne, they hoped, that your Maiestie vvill proue another Moyses, vvho
shall deliuer your Realmes and Kingdomes, from a vvorse then Egiptian
captiuitie, I meane heresie, vvhich makes the vnder∣standing a slaue to
errour, vnder a shovv of veritie; yea that you vvill be vnto them another
losue, vvho shall bring them to their lande of promise, the Catholique
Churche, vvhich is the lande of all Gods promises; and that after a longe
famine more then Ievvishe, or Saguntine, not of body but of soule, you
shalbe another Ioseph, vvho shall store vs by your vvis∣dome and
authoritie, vvith the spiritual prouision of the true vvorde of God, true
fayth, and sacramētes, by vvhich the soule is nourished; Yea that you
vvill bee ano∣ther Constantine to appease the boyste∣rous storme of a
longe persequution, and to repaire the ruines of the Catholique faith and Church of your Realmes, of England, Scotland and Ireland. And
I also armed vvith the same hope, and bid∣den by your Bountie, and
constrained by necessitie, to be bolde: in the name of all your Catholike
subiectes of vvhome I ame the leaste; in the name of the Catho∣like Church,
of vvhich I ame a member and you a Defendour, in the name of all Catholike
Princes, yea of al the Christian vvorld, vvhich hath conceiued such an
expectariō of your Gracious Goodnes; in the name of the Great King of heauen
and earth, by vvhom you raigne, and by vvhom you were preserued and
reserued for this Croune & scepter; that it would please your
Maiestie, to caste a Gracious regard vppon the great affliction of your
loyall, naturall, and moste anciente sub∣iectes, the Catholikes of your
Realme, and to bende your most compationate eares, to their humble &
suppliaunte pe∣tition, vvho desire nether landes, nor li∣uinges, nor
offices, nor pardon for offen∣ces, but libertie for their consciencee,
vvhose restrainte they counte more gree∣uous, then imprisonment, yea
death of their bodyes, and not to contristate them vvith a heauie repulse,
at this ty∣me especially, vvhen euen theeues and murderers, are pardoned so
Graciously. Our zeale tovvards Christe, & his Chur∣che,
the loue of our Religion, the desire of the saluation of your Maiesties
Person of your louing Spouse, our moste Gra∣cious Queene, of your Royal
Children our Noble Lordes, of your Kingdome al∣so our deare Countrie, moueth
vs to de∣sire your Highnes, to restore vvhollie tha Religion, vvhich your Glorious
prede∣cessours maintened vvith Crovvne, Sce∣pter, & Sworde, as for the
defence the of, they vvere
all svvorne at their sacre Coronation. But if it shall not stand vvith your Graces pleasure, to graunte v so much, vvee moste humblie
desire o our knees,
libertie only of our conscien∣ce, and Religion, vvhich the nature o bothe requireth, Nether (as
vvee hope) vvill your Maiestie condemne vs of to great presumption, for
demaunding that, vvhich hath been so longe denyed vs, bi∣cause there is no
Prescriptiō against con∣science, vvhen conscience is enforced and your
princely Prudence vvel percei∣ueth, that necessitie on our parte is
im∣portune, Bountie on your parte imbol∣dneth, and the Religion on your most Noble
Progenitours parte, for vvhich we plead, promiseth a Gracious graunte For if
it much skilleth, fro what
tre the graffe or frute is
taken, vvhy shall it not much importe, to come of a Catho∣lique
Race? True it must be, vvhich the Poet sayeth: 

Fortes creantur fortibus, & bonis; 
Hor Flac.
Est in uencis, est in equis, Patrum
Virtus, nec imbecillem feroces
Progenerant Aquilae columbam. I graunt that Religiō
is supernatural, and is not transfused vvith flesh and bloud, but
infused by God, vvith consent of our vvill, and operation of Grace; but yet
children are naturally bent, to like of that in vvhich their parentes haue
excelled. And truly, for zeale tovvards the Catho∣like Religion, almost all
the noble Kin∣ges of Scotlād, vvhich vvere your High∣nes progenitours, are
most famous; as the Valiaunt and noble Malcolmus, and the blessed
saincte Marguerite his spouse, 
Histoire ab∣bregée par Dauid
ham∣bre. King Dauid
vvho builded 15. Abbeyes, & erected 4. Bishop-rickes, Iames the fourth
your Great Grandfather, surna∣med protectour of the faith, Iames the fifte
your Graūdfather, a moste iust King, and liberall to the poore; to omit
diuers others not only of Scotland, but also of England, yea and Fraunce
also, and namelie that vvarlike and moste Catho∣like Hovvse of Guise,
to vvhich you are allyed; but of all, your Glorious Mother is moste
renovvmed; vvho, as for her goodly personage, she deserued
to b Spouse to a King of
Fraunce, and for he
Princely qualities and Roiall bloud, vva vvorthy a double crovvn in Earth; so fo her Zeale in religiō, and more then man∣ly
Fortitude shevved for the defence o the same at her death, She deserued the third Crovvn in
Heauen, called Au∣reola Martyrum. Is it possible then, tha your moste Excellent
Maiestie, behol∣ding such rare vertue in your Mother should not desire
it in your selfe? Or tha
you should not loue to liue in that Reli∣gion, for vvhich she loued to dye?
I ha∣ue hard of some that vvere belonging to her, and entertained by her,
vvhen she vvas rather detained, then entertained in England, that she
spent many hovven in prayer, shed many teares of sorovve gaue great almes
of charitie, and vsed di∣uers meanes of prouidēce, that your Ma∣iestie
might bee made a Catholike, and amongest other She deuised the meanes that
you should be baptized, 
Nicol Burne in his preface to king lames the
sixt. and confir∣med by a Catholike bishop. That ran∣ne still in
her mynde, that vvas deepest i her harre, and oftenest in her mouthe, fo that she fetched many a sighe, and
sighe out many a
vvishe: and as liuing for thi she shed many teares, so dying, no doub∣te, she offered no
litle parte of her inno∣cent bloud; vvhich as it cryeth
venge∣aunce before God against her ene∣mies, so like a pleasing
sacrifice (as vve hope) it cryeth for conuersion of your Maiestie, and
your Kingdomes, to that religion, for vvhich it vvas shedde. So that, as
sainct Ambrose sayed once to sainct Monica, vvho vvas
allvvayes pray∣ing, vveeping, and vvishing for saint Au∣stines her
sonnes conuersion, vvho then vvas a Manichee; Filius tantarum
lachri∣marum perire non potest, I may say of your Highnes; to vvit,
that the sonne of suche a Mother, and Prince of such a Princess, and
Inheritour of suche vertues, such ex∣amples, such teares, such vvis
hes, can ne∣uer perish, that is can not but bee a Ca∣tholique. This her zeale
tovvardes reli∣gion, these her desires & vvishes, these her
prayers, and teares, and aboue all, her Glo∣rious Martyrdome; vvill euer bee
before your Graces eyes, to moue your harte, if not to admitte vvholy the
Catholike reli∣gion, at least to permitte it, at least not to persequute
it, vvhich she loued her sel∣fe so vvell, and vvished to your Highnes,
so hartilie. And truly (moste Gracious Liege) such is our repose in
your goodnes, that if ther vvere noe other motiues, then your Glorious mothers
example, your Catholike subiectes miserie, and your ovvne
innate clemencie, vve vvould not at all despaire, of a graunt, of our
petition; but seing that, the thing vve request, con∣cerneth not only our
good, but your gra∣ces honour also, and the true felicitie of your Kingdome,
vvee hope confidently, not to suffer a repulse in that, in vvhich your
Highnes also hath a parte, and for vvhich not only vvee, are humble
sup∣pliauntes, but your selfe also, to your sel∣fe, and for your
selfe, are an Intercessour. And first, he graunt of our petition,
shal∣be most honourable for your moste Ex∣cellēt Maiestie. King Lucius
vvas the first king Christian of our Countrie, and the first king, that
laboured in the cōuersion of it, vvith Pope Eleutherius, by vvhose
Counsail, and preachers vvhich he sent, he extirpated idolatrie, and
planted Chri∣stian Religion: and for this glorious facte, his name and fame,
is, and euer shalbe, moste renovvmed, both in heauen and earth. King
Ethelbert vvas ye secōd king, vvho by the meanes of Pope Gregorie (by Popes
alvvayes countries haue been conuerted) and tvvelue Monkes of sainct
Benedictes Order, the second tyme re∣stored this Countrie again, vnto the
same Christiane, and Catholike Religion, the vvhich by the inuasiō of
the Saxons, vvas againe become Idolatricall, and Pagane; and he is
noe lesse glorious, before God and men, for so honourable an
enterprise. But if your Highnes shalbe the third King, vvho shalle againe
reduce this coū∣trie to the same ancient Religion, you shalbe as much more
glorious, and your name as much more renovvmed, 
Th 2.2.4.10.4.6. as here∣sie
is vvorse then Paganisme, and more hardly extinguished. Vvilliam the
Con∣querour, from vvhome your Maiestie is vvorthilie descended, is reckened
amon∣gest the Vvorthies of the vvorlde, and vvritten in the liste, and
catalogue of the moste Vvarlike Kinges, for that famouse conquest vvhich
he made of your litle vvorlde. But if your Highnes shall get the conqueste
of heresie, your honour shalbe as farre more greater then his, as the
conquest of mens soules and myndes, is more glorious, then subdevving of
bo∣dyes. In such a Cōquest, the vvarre is Chri∣stes, the victorie is his
and yours, the crovvne yours only, not in earth only, but in heauen also. You
haue the occasion offered (ô mightie Prince) by vvhich you may make
your name and fame immor∣tall, let not such an opportunitie passe; if you
can atchieue so glorious a Conquest, as you can if you vvill (bicause the
body of your Realme vvill follovv the vvill of their head) you shall be more
Glorious then all the Kinges of England before you. If it please
your Maiestie, to set be∣fore your eyes, those Glorious Champiōs of the
Churche, Constantine, Theodo∣sius, Pepine, Charles, all surnamed Great,
more glorious for their victories ouer he∣resie and idolatrie, then for
conquestes of Countries, more renovvmed for propa∣gating the ancient
Catholique Religion (for it vvas not Lutheranisme nor Calui∣nisme vvhich
they promoted) then for enlarging their dominions; you vvill easi∣lie
percee, that it is muche
greater ho∣nour, for your Highnes to consorte vvith them, rather then vvith
Constantius, and Valēs, those Ariane Emperours, enemies to that Church,
vvhich they defended, & enriched, and Leo Isauricus, &
Constanti∣nus Copronymus, those infamous Image breakers. And if you
please to call to mynde the Catalogue of the noble Kin∣ges of Englād,
Lucius, Ethelbert, Egbert, osvvald, osvvine, Alfred, and many others before
the Conquest, vvith Vvilliam the Conquerour, and so many Henries,
Ed∣vvardes, and Richardes, after the Con∣quest, all your Noble
predecessours; so mightie in force, so ritch in treasure, so noble
of byrth, so fortunate in vvarres, so couragious in fyght, so glorious in
vic∣tories, so vvise in Gouernment, so iuste in
punishing, so mercitall in pardoning, so vpright in life, so zealous in
Religion; vvho builte so many goodly Monasteries, erected so stately
Churches, founded so learned Colleges, enacted so holsome lavves and
vvise statutes, and got so many, and so straunge victories in
Fraunce, and other Countries, euen vnto Palestine; your Princelie vvisdome
vvill easilie see, that greater vvilbee your honour to ioy∣ney our selfe
to these vvorthies, then to stande so nakedly accompanyed, vvith three
only of your Predecessours, vvho haue protected the nevv Religion, and
ruined vvhat they haue builded; vvherof the first vvas not vvholly for the
nevv Re∣ligion, bicause by Parlament he enacted six Catholike Articles, and
at his death founded a Masse for his soule, the second vvas so
younge, that he vvas rather ouer∣ruled thē ruled, the laste vvas but a
vvoe∣man: and though they vvanted not Guif∣tes of nature, vvhich might beseem
prin∣cely authoritie, yet for persequuting the Catholike faythe, and
follovving other pathes then their predecessours had tro∣den, theyr names
are not eternized vvith that immortall fame, vvhich their prede∣cessours
haue purchased by their Reli∣gious Actes. Secōdly (Redoubted Prince) the
Catholike Religion vvilbe greater securitie, for you temporall
State. For your Highnes
dare relye vppon them vvho by Religion, 
Cal. l. 3. Inst c. 19 §. 14.
l 4. . to §
5.23. 27. may disobey you Lavves and Ordinaunces (as I haue in my sixte booke
demonstrated) much mor
may you put your truste and confidence in your Catholike subiectes, vvhom
con∣science and religion, byndeth to obe∣dience. For they are taught by
Religion, that Authoritie is of God, 
1. Pet. 2. Rons. 13.
and that in conscience they are subiect vnto it, and boūd to obey kinges,
though othervvise difficile and harde to please, not only for feare, but
for conscience also. And this obedience they giue not only to Chri∣stian,
but also to Pagane Kinges, such as all vvere, vvhen sainct Peter, and
sainct Paule commaunded vs to obey them, 
E. Eus. Vvee are taught (sayed sainct
Policarpe to the Proconsul) to giue to higher povvers that honour vvhich
is devve to them, and not hurtfull to vs. 
Apol. c. 3. &
 S. apulā. Vvee
(sayed Tertulian to the Ethnikes) pray for the Emperour, and reueren∣ce
him nexte to God, and more then vve doe your Goddes. To be breefe, (as I
should bee vvith a King, if the matter did not enfor∣ce me to be longer then
I should be) giue vs (sayeth sainct Austine) such Iudges, such
magistrates, 
Epist
. ad Mr ellinū. such souldiours, such
subiectes, as our Religion requireth, and Princes shall raigne securely,
and their kingdomes shall flourih more happi∣lie, then Platoes common vvelth. And
bicause Religiō, good, or badde, beareth a great svvay in the rule of mans
life; the Professours of the nevve Religion, must needes be more prone to
disobedience, and rebellion, then vvee; bicause Reli∣gion, vvhich serueth
for a bridle to vs, is a Spurre to them. Vvherfore by Catho∣likes, all your
Predecessours haue been serued vvith great fidelitie, both in vvarre and
peace: and your glorious Mother, if she vvere liuing in Earth, as she is
better liuīg in. Heauen, vvould not lette to vvit∣ness, vvhat affectiō
she hath found amon∣gest the English Catholiques, and vvould vvarraunt
your Grace, that they vvill ne∣uer bee false to the Sonne, vvho haue been
so true to the Mother. But if your Highnes doubte of our fidelitie, vve vvill
bynde our selues by corporall oathe, to obey your lavves in all temporal
causes, and to defend your Roial Person, your Deare Spouse our Gracious
Queene, and your tovvardlie Children, our Noble Lordes, vvith the laste
droppe of our bloud: and this our oathe vve shall be contented to diuulge to
all the Princes of Europe, yea all the Christian vvorlde. And as your Grace
may accounte of vs as of your surest, so not of your fevvest 
nor vveakest subiectes; for notvvithstan∣ding this longe
persequution, vvee are so many, 
Apalog. c. 37. that as Tertulian
sayed to the Pa∣ganes, of the Christianes of his tyme; vve fill your
Courtes, your Vniuersities, your Cities, your Tovvnes, your Villages, yea
your prisons, not for theftes or murders, but for Religion; only vvee haue
lefte the Churches to the Ministers, bicause in them is practised and
preached a Reli∣gion, vvhich our consciences can not brooke. Yea a greater
parte are vvee, then any particuler secte in your Maiesties Realme, and
vvee are linked in Religion to all Catholique Princes and countries about you,
vvho vvill bee more louing neighbours, if they see that vvee their
bre∣therne, synde this desired fauour at your Graces handes: and the
noblest and migh∣tiest of them, vvilbe more desirous to ioy∣ne in
mariadge vvith your Royall poste∣ritie: vvherby hovve your Kingdome shalbe
strengthned, and your Dominions enlarged, your Princely vvisdome easilie
perceueth, and you haue an example in the noble Hovvse of Austria. Your
No∣ble Brother of Fraunce that novv raig∣neth, may be a president in this
matter, vvho though he vvas once an enemie to the Catholique Religion, yet
findeth more faythfull correspondence in his Ca∣tholique subiectes, then in all the rest, and by permitting bothe, is
serued of bothe, and serueth him selfe of bothe. Thirdly (moste
Gracious Soueraigne) to admit the Catholique Religion, or at least to permit
it, is your greatest safetie for your conscience. For as you are a
Prince, so are you a Christian Prince, and therefore a champion, 
cap. 4.9. and (as the Prophet
Esaie sayeth) a Foster-father of the Church; and as the Kinges
of Fraunce euen from Clo∣doueus, the first Christian Kinge of that Realme,
haue beene called Christianissimi, for their good offices
tovvardes the Ca∣tholique Church, 
Genebrar l s. Chron. Baron. to 9.
Annal. and the kinges of Spai∣ne, From Ferdinande, yea from
Alphon∣sus, yea as some thinke, from Recaredus, for extirpating
Arianisme, and propaga∣ting the Christian faythe, 
Geneb l. 4. Chron. Sleid l 3.
Georg. Lilius in Chr. Angl. are surnamed Catholike; so the
Kinges of England, frō King Henrie the Eight, your Graces great vncle, for his
Catholike, & lerned booke, writtē agaīst Luther, & other his most
ho∣nourable seruices, vvhich he perfourmed for the Catholike Church, are
called De∣fendours of the Faithe, that is, the Catho∣like faith. Wherfore your
Maiestie, first bi∣cause you are a Christian King, Secondly bicause
you are a Defendour of
the faithe, are to see that the right vvorship of God, and the true
Christiane religion, be practised in your Realme. This the
honour of God, vnder vvhom you raigne, this the good of his Church, vvhose
Champion you are, this the saluation of your people, vvhose King you are,
this the spiritual he∣alth of the body of your Realme, vvhose head you are,
requireth. For if in any coū∣trie it be true, that the inconstaunte peo∣ple,
changeth vvithe the King, in En∣gland it is moste true, as vve haue seene
by diuerse changes of religion, in this Vnhappie age: and so, in your
Maiestie, it lyeth, to saue or not to saue your people, vvhich so
admireth your authoritie, and Princely vertues, that your vvill is their lavve,
and your lavv, their rule of religion. And vvhere can your Grace finde a
secu∣rer hauen, for the Saluation of your selfe, and your subiectes, then
the Catholike Church? In vvhich soe many Martyrs haue dyed, so many
Doctours haue taught and preached, so many virgins haue liued in flesh,
like Angells, and so many sainctes haue vvrought so straunge and
vvonderfull miracles: by vvhich so many heresies haue been condemned, so
many Councels called, so many Ecclesia∣sticall lavves enacted, and such
goodly order and discipline established: For vvch so many
monasteries, Churches, Colled∣ges, Vniuersities, and hospitalles, haue 
beene builded & foūded. In vvch so many Emperours,
Kinges, and Princes haue li∣ued, raigned, dyed, and (as it is to bee ho∣ped
also) haue beene saued; and against vvhich, so many cruel
persequutours, in vaine haue raysed forces, and vsed tormē∣tes, and so
many heretikes haue raged and railed; vvhich is descended frō the
Apo∣stles, & can proue a continuall succession of her pastours,
and religion, from them, vnto this daye. Vvheras the nevv Church began but
yesterdaye, and her Preachers vvith her, vvho also can not proue their
mission, nor distinguish them selues from false Prophets; vvhose
doctrine hath all the markes of heresie, and is rather Anti∣christian then
Christiā, plucking at Chri∣stes Diuinitie, spoiling him of many
Ho∣nourable Titles, to vvit, Redeemer, Spi∣ritual Phifitian, Lavv-giuer,
Aeternall Preest, Iudge of the quicke and dead, equalizing euery Christian
vvith him, making him an ignoraunt, desperate, and damned man: vvhich hath
nether Preest, nor sacrifice, nor in effect, any sacramēt, no prayer,
not so much as our Lords prayer, no, nor a sermon, according to their
do∣ctrine, nor any of the essential partes of Religion: vvhich is
blasphemous in many pointes against God, iniurious to State and Authoritie,
fauourable to vice, and bending to Atheisme; all vvhich
pointe I haue proued in
this booke. But if you
Maiesties pleasure, or leisure, be not such as by perusing this
booke, to informe your selfe, vvhich is moste likely to be the true
Christian religion, if it shall please your Highnes, to commaund a
conferen∣ce or disputation, vvhich hathe euer bee the vsual meanes to determine
cōtroue∣sies, (as
appeareth by the disputation o Helias vvith Baals Prophetes, 
 Reg 18.10 8. Act. 7.9 17. 18 19. 20. Aug
ep. 47. Ruf. l. hist of Christ vvith the Ievves, of
Sainct Paule vvith levves and Gentils, and of the ancie doctours in Councels, and out of Coun∣cels,
vvith Ethinkes and heretiques) you Maiestie shall finde diuers of your C∣tholike subiectes, bothe at home an abroad, vvho vvill present
them selues a such a
disputation, if you shall but pleas to cōmaund. Lastly suppose your High∣nes
should persequute the Catholiqu religion (as God forbid, so Glorious Prince
should receue so fovvle a disgr∣ce) besides the dishonour vvher vvi your noble Crovvne and Name shoul be obscured, besides that
you can not pe∣sequute
this Religiō, but you must mak vvarre against your Noble progenitou euen your Glorious mother, you
shou sooner make a
conquest of all the Cou
tries about you, then extirpate this Re∣gion; vvhose nature is to gather greater force,
vvhē greatest furie, is armed against it. This Palme-tree (O Mightie
Prince) the more it is pressed, the higher it grovv∣eth; this Camomile the
more it is troden, the thicker it grovveth; This vvallnut∣tree the more it is
beaten, the more frute∣full it vvaxeth; this corne, by treshing, is seuered
from the chaffe; This gold, by a fierie persequution, becometh purer, and
brighter; This Arke by a raging Deluge, mountethe the higher; Killing of
Catho∣likes (moste Clement Prince) is but cut∣ting of boughes, from that
tree, vvhich reacheth from sea to sea, and this cutting is but lopping, the
tree aftervvards in height is taller, and in boughes fuller; and this
spilling of Catholikes bloud, is but vvatering of Christs Vinyarde, in
vvhich, for one Catholike cut of, many an hun∣dred springeth vp in the place.
Those Ne∣roes, Domitians, Diocletians, and Maxi∣mians, cā beare vvitness
of this, of vvhich the laste tvvoe, hauing gathered great for∣ce, and
prouided all the Engines and In∣strumentes of crueltie, that a cruel harte
could deuise, made full accounte of a con∣quest of the Christian race,
and engraued this their presumed victorie in Marble pillers in Spaine, vvith
this Inscription: Diocles. Iouius, Maximin. Hercules, Caess. Aug. 
amplificato per Orientem & Occidentem Imperi Rom. 
Eus l.
. c. 13.25▪ 6 29.
Zon 3. par. Annal. Sur. 10.6. die to Decemb. Aidus Man
post Schol in comm Caes. Bar ann 204 & nomine
Christianorum deleto, qui Remp. euertebant: But they counted their
Chic∣kins, before they vvere hatcht, triumphed before the victorie, gaue a
blaze before their light vvent out, and exalted their hartes before their
ruine; depriuing them selues of their Empire, for the disgrace, vvhich they
conciued in such a foyle,
and dying a death so miserable, that it see∣med the beginning of their
Hell. And those your Predecessours, vvho haue per∣sequuted the litle
Flocke of the Catholi∣ques of your Realme of England, vvould assure your
Grace, if they vvere liuing, that this litle parte of the catholike Chur∣che,
follovveth the nature of the vvholle bicause notvvithstanding so many confis∣cations of their
goods, so many confinin∣ges, & imprisonmentes, and banishmen∣tes of
their parsons, soe many tortures, and deathes of their bodyes; Catholiques,
and Catholique Preestes, are moe at this present in your Realme, then they
vvere fourtie yeares since. It must be true vvch sainct Leo auoucheth:
Non minuitur perse∣quutionibus Ecclesia, 
Ser in nat. Apost. sed augetur, &
semper Do∣minicus ager segete ditiori vestitur, dum grant quae singula
cadunt, multiplicata nascuntur: The Churche by persequutions, is not
diminished but augmented; and alvvayes our Lords feeld is clad vvith a ritcher Haruest, vvhilest the graynes vvhich falle,
spring forth again more multiplied. And the reason is, bicause that
must be perfourmed, vvhich Christe promised: 
Mat. 16. Portae inferi non
praeualebunt aduersus illam: the gates of hell shall not preuaile against
her. Her enemies are dead, rotten and forgot∣ten, she standeth sure
vppon a rocke, al∣vvayes ye more glorious, the more she is assaulted.
But I craue pardō mosthūbly of your Gracious Clemēcie, for my tedious
petition. The miserie of our state, and the importaunce of our humble
supplica∣tion, required a longer, but your rare Cle∣mencie and humanitie
(vvhich hath all∣ready vvonne you the hartes of your peo∣ple) demaunded a
shorter. Vvherfore I shall desire your Highnes, only to imagin, that in
this petition, your Catholique sub∣iectes are not alone; your noble
proge∣nitours and Predecessours, your moste Glorious Mother, all the
Catholike Prin∣ces, to vvhō you are allyed, and their Ca∣tholike Countries
vvhich border vppon you, ye vvholle Church of God, ye Saintes of your
Realmes, the bloud of Martyrs, shed in the same, & for ye same, ye
miserie of your moste ancient subiectes, your Highnes honour &
securitie, both for the tēporal & spiritual state of your Kingdo∣me,
demaunde this also vvith vs. Yea this your ovvne selfe, so
Gracious a Lord to∣vvardes all, requireth of your selfe: vvher∣fore vsing
no other Intercessour, thē your selfe, vvee desire your Grace to
harken to your selfe, vvhich if it shall please you to doe, vvee make noe
doubte of our moste humble petition. In the meane tyme vve shall pray to
him vvho hathe the Hartes of Kinges in his Hande, 
Prou. 21. to bend your
compassionate harte tovvardes your Ca∣tholike subiectes, and so to rule
it and in∣spire it, that you may be a King accor∣ding to his harte, that you
vnder him may rayne long and prosperously in the Real∣me of England, and
hee by you in the Church of England, and that so you may raigne vnder him
here for a tyme, as you maye raigne vvith him herafter for all eternitie.


