



WHEN AS I VNDERSTOODE (right honourable Lordes) your common vvealth to be thorovvly furnished and beau∣tified, not onely vvith good lavves, and ordi∣nances, but also vvith pure religion & sound doctrine, and pleasantly to flourish vvith all honest and vertuous studies, I can scarcely expresse hovve ioyfull it vvas vnto me: and so much the more, bicause you haue determined to giue no place at all to the aduersaryes of Gods truth, vvho novv do labor vvith the vttermost of their force, to darcken the light of Christ, and to bring in againe the stinking and contagious mistes of false and ydolatrous religion. This surely is the stedfastnes of the knovvne & assertaine truth, from vvhich in these dayes (the more pittie) haue great numbers vvithdravvne theirselues, eyther for feare, or hope of liuing & revvard, thā vvhich can nothing be more vvic∣ked, nor of more force to the establishing of vngodlinesse. For ac∣cording to the saying of saint Peter, farre better vvere it for a man neuer to haue knovvne the truth, than after he hath entered the path of true godlinesse to forsake the truth for any cause, and re∣fusing Christ to cleaue to the illusions of Sathan. For vvhat thing do our aduersaries more shoot at, thā to accuse vs of light∣nesse and vnfaythfulnesse, and more and more to entangle vs vvith their errors and entisements? VVo bee to the vvorlde for offences, sayth our sauiour Christ. VVhat commendation, and hovve great a glorie it is in so many stormes and tempestes, yea, in the Shipvvracke of such a number, rightly to holde the helme, and to giue neyther place to vvinde nor vvaue, no man there is but knovves. This glorie of your common vvelth, I doe more a

great vvay esteeme, than if you had brought in subiection some mightie and large dominion, bicause that earthly thinges vvith heauenly thinges and truth (vvhich is Christ) vvith the vvorlde are not to be compared, and earthly things, be vve pleased or dis∣pleased, vvill vve, or nill vve, must shortly be forgone. But the truth remaynes, and shall keepe you for euer. Go therefore hap∣pily forvvard (right vvorthie Gouernors) hauing obteyned such vertue and constancie.
For thus to heauen do vve go, as the Poet in a farre more base and other thing affirmeth. Greatly beholding vnto you are all those that loue and vvorship our Lorde Iesus Christ, but especi∣ally the people that are vnder your gouernment: Considering their neighbours round about them dvvelling in darknesse, they enioy the most svveete and comfortable light of the Gospell, and that thorovv your vvisedome, councell, aucthoritie, stedfastnesse, and of long time great care in aduaunceing the Gospell of God. I vvish therefore vvell from the bottome of my heart, both to you and your cōmon vvealth, and minding to declare my good vvill tovvards you, I find nothing meeter thā to dedicate this present vvorke vnto you, that if it shall happen to come vnto our po∣steritie, your commendable and carefull diligence in setting forth the Gospell may not bee passed in silence. Neyther doe I doubt but that (according to your accustomed gentlenesse) you vvill take in good part this my poore labour and good vvill. The Lorde Iesus long preserue both you and your gouernment in prosperous estate. 
From Campidun the first of March. 1550.
