


MOST noble Prince Elector, and gracious Lorde, many things are required in a good Prince, beeing Gods Vicar among men: among o∣ther, wisedome, which containeth the knowledge of diuine and hu∣mane things, is a singular beau∣tifying of him, and a passing good defence. Hereupon Platoes iudge∣ment was that Common weales should then be happy, when ei∣ther Princes studied philosophy, or els Philosophers ruled Com∣mon weales. And to vse a grauer witnesse,Wisd. 6. the multitude of wise men is the safetie of the worlde, and a prudent king is the stay of the people, saith the wise man. For which cause also Sa∣lomon Dauids sonne, the wisest king of mortal men, when in his tender yeres he had receiued the gouernment of the kingdome, hauing choise offered him of God to aske what he would, craued onely wisedome.In Alcibiades Plato also reporteth what was the custome of the Persians in bringing vp the eldest sonnes of their kings, that were to succeede in the kingdome, and how they aquainted them frō their tender yeres with the study of wisedome and vertue, to the intent they might gouerne the kingdome at length with ho∣nour.

After this sort it was. At their age of foureteene yeeres the kings schoolemasters (as they were called) being foure chosen out of all the Persians, the wisest man, the iustest, the most temporate, & the valiantest mā, did vndertake the charge of them. The first taught them the worship of the gods, and kingly instructions. The second aduised thē to affect & fauour the trueth in their whole life. The third that they would not be ouercome with any desire, but accustome themselues to liue like freemen, & in very deed kings, ruling themselues aboue al things, & not seruing any desires. The fourth made thē stoute, least through feare they should commit any thing not besee∣ming their dignitie, and become seruants. This instructiō of one that should be a Prince florished amōg the Persians. And sure∣ly they rightly iudged, that he ought to be trained vp in the pre∣cepts of wisedome, that is, of religion, and of the kingdome: but that being ignorant of Gods trueth, they imbraced a false reli∣gion through the magical instruction of Zoroaster. An instru∣ction not vnlike, albeit euery way farre better, as being taken out of the cleerest fountaines of heauenly wisedome, hath hap∣pened vnto your Highnesse, most gracious Prince. Neither haue the praiers of Salomon been wanting, both of your High∣nesse, (which from your childhood hauing taken delight in the knowledge of profitable and good things, hath beene earnest in dayly prayers with God, and is vncessantly instant, desiring to be indued by him with an vnderstanding heart:) and also of all good men, who publikely and priuately haue most regarded that thing, and not without cause. And how much hath been effected thereby, manifest experiments doe testifie, and such as shall be with thankefull hearts made knowne to posteritie to the honour of God. First because that noble Prince and Lord, the Lord Iohn Casimire, Tutor, and a second parent as it were, to your Highnes, being lately taken out of this life, your flourishing age, and already ripe to gouernment, and your iudgement riper than your age, (most excellent Frederike) haue afforded vs a re∣fuge and solace in so hard a case. Then, because after you had taken vpon you the gouernment of most large Dominions, wee oyfully haue seene such trials of your great vertue, and such

foundations haue beene layd of good gouernment, although in a lamentable and wicked time, that it hath lifted vp the mindes of all men vnto a singular good expectation. Goe on forwarde therefore in this minde and vertue (most noble prince Elector,) be strong in the Lord and in his mightie power, remember the Lordes exhortation in old time to Ioshua: I will bee with thee, as I was with Moses. I will not leaue thee, nor forsake thee. Be of good comfort that thou mayest doe according to the Law. Let not the booke of the Lawe depart from thy mouth. Then thou shalt deale wisely and prosperously in all things. In like maner also the holy man Dauid (as we read) diligently ex∣horted his sonne Salomon,1. Kings. 2. when being as yet a child hee was now consecrated to raigne. The Lorde God, who taketh away,Dan. 2. and appointeth Princes, and from whom commeth wisedome and fortitude, endue your highnes more and more with vertue from aboue.
But most noble prince Elector, and gracious Lorde, seeing these foure bookes of the Redemption of mankinde, and Gods Predestination being written by me a yeere agoe, should nowe come abroad vnder the authoritie of your gouernment, I thought that this my duety should be acceptable to your High∣nes, if I should intitle and offer them most humbly vnto you: and that in respect of that thankefulnesse, whereunto I am many wayes bound to your Highnes. I know well inough, that I am not able this way to make a full recompence, yet freely to pro∣fesse the same is the propertie of a thankefull person. Further because in these and the like Ecclesiasticall controuersies, that arise from restles wits, it is meete that Princes especially should haue the knowledge and custodie of the trueth, to the intent that malicious detractors and deprauers may doe the lesse hurt to Christian religion. At this day we are slandered of malicious men with a new crime that is fained against vs, as though wee should deny that Christ died for al men. An impudent reproach. For according to the Scriptures we also confesse the same, but we denie, that thereupon it followeth that all mankinde with∣out exceptiō of any one, are by the death of Christ indeed iusti∣fied, saued, and restored into the bosome of grace, hauing recei∣ued

the pardon of their sinnes, whether they beleeue or no. This is a deuise of man, and therefore to be refused, if wee will retaine the consent of the Prophets and Apostles,Acts 10. Ioh. 3. to wit, that euery one that beleeueth in Christ Iesu, receiueth remission of sinnes through his name, the wrath of God abiding vpon the vnbe∣leeuers.
Now the doctrine of Predestination, according to which God saueth in mercie some of the damnable lumpe of mankind, and in iustice punisheth others for their sinnes, being in the same lumpe vtterly forsaken, is of it selfe plaine, if we desire ra∣ther to follow the direction of Gods spirit, than the consequen∣ces of foolish reason. But reason being troubled with the depth of Gods grace and his iudgement, leaueth here nothing vn∣assayd, as we may see by the example of the Pelagians old and newe: the first Augustine of old time soundly confuted, and Lu∣ther the latter.De ser. arb. & alibi. Therefore let those men that would be counted Lutherans, looke to it, how they doe agree in iudgement both a∣gainst Luther, & the truth it selfe also with the Pelagians But I make an end, praying God, that vnder your Highnes the stu∣dies of peace, learning and pietie, may alwayes florish. Amen. At Heidelberge the 12. of March. 1592.

