



HAuing finished the translation of this volume, (Right Honorable) I was in doubt whether I might safely send it forth as a matter that would, as it ought to be imbraced & fauored of eueryone into whose hands it should come: or to offer it to the view of some honorable person, and to commend it to his fauourable protection, and in his name to publish it. If I had resolued vpon the first way, as I doubt not but it should haue found many friends, euen all the louers of the trueth, that would gladly haue accepted it: so I know it should haue had many aduersaries among vs in this land, as it hath had in o∣ther countries alreadie, and commeth now abroad in our owne tongue, from thence greatly reproched, and withstood with a spitefull enemie, albeit to his shamefull foyle, and dis∣grace in the end. And therefore I thought it best to follow mine author, as he offereth the knowledge and custodie of the trueth, which he here maintaineth vnto a high and mightie Prince: so I am bold to offer my translation of so worthie a worke, vnto your honorable protection and defence, against

euill tongues and erronious spirits. The cause that is handled here is Gods; the ground that it hath, is the trueth of his holy word; the witnesse and testimonie thereof, is the vniforme consent of the Church of Christ, beleeuing and confessing the same; the matter hereof is the redemption of our soules, the comfort of our consciences, the stay of our faith, and the anchor of our hope. If the certaintie of these things (right Honourable) be called in question, and taken from vs that are mortall men, what ioy can we haue in any thing, that here for a time wee enioy? What hope can wee haue of a better life, when this fraile one shall be taken from vs, and wee all shall be called to giue our account? But as Satan the enemie of our saluation, hath alwaies heretofore sowed tares among the wheate, and corrupted the sinceritie of the trueth with er∣rors and lyes, and that vnder a faire pretence: so at this day, when he could not effect his purpose so farre as he desired, by the late and lamentable strife that he hath raised among vs, (though thereby he hath quenched the zeale of many, and made them fall from their first loue) hath euen now in our Church, as he hath done in others, raised a doubt, and brohed a controuersie in the maine grounds of our Religion and faith, to wit, in the doctrine of mans Redemption by the death of Christ, and of Gods eternall predestination. Where∣in as he doth not greatly preuaile, because the gouernours of our Church and the consent of all that bee godly and learned for the most part, therein are against him: so, that hee may proceede no further in time to come, and that the mindes of men may bee setled in the trueth of their saluation, I haue thought it my dutie to the Church of God, to testifie my loue of the trueth, and my vnfained care of the knowledge of the fame among vs, and continuance thereof in our posteritie, by taking paines to translate into our vulgar tongue these bookes. Herein you shall plainly see, that albeit the death of Christ the sonne of God, as touching the greatnes of the price, be sufficient for the redemption of whole mankinde in the world, yea if there were many worlds of them, as An∣selme saith: yet the proprietie of redemption belongeth to

those that are not the vessels of the deuill, but the members of Christ by faith, and the grace of regeneration: the rest, who liue without faith and regeneration not belonging to this redemption from sinne and death: Or, which is all one, you shall see it proued by infallible testimonies of Scripture, by generall consent of antiquitie, and of new writers, and by substantiall arguments, that redemption from sinnes, righ∣teousnes and saluation are benefits proper to the Church, and not common to all and euery one, elect and reprobate, beleeuer and vnbeleeuer, to the saued and damned. You shall plainly see (I say) that the Sauiour promised to the world, and preached of alwaies in the Church, by the mouth of all the holy prophets and Apostles, is appoynted by the fa∣ther to be a propitiation through faith in his blood in all, and vpon all that beleeue onely: and that this benefite of the re∣storing and redemption of mankinde, albeit it be proper and peculiar to the Church, as touching the efficacie of it, yet it is vniuersall altogether in that sense, wherein we beleeue and confesse the holy Church of Christ to be vniuersall. Against this trueth the aduersarie fighteth eagerly and impudent∣ly with bitter reproches and lyes, grieuous blasphemies, flat contrarieties, grosse absurdities, peruerting the naturall sense of the sacred Scripture, and abusing the ancient writers. But all these his weapons wins him not the victory, for either they be blunt and cannot hurt our cause, or else the edge of them is turned against himselfe: and his owne masters in whom he glorieth, Luther, Brentius, and the rest, whose disciple and fol∣lower he would faine be, leaue him in his bad cause, nay are brought in plainely, reprouing and condemning his opinion as erronious, and speaking for the trueth on our side. Nay further it is here flatly auouched, that the olde Pelagian he∣resie and impietie, which Augustine long agoe confuted, and the Church of God then condemned, is the father of the birth, and beginning of our aduersaries opinion.
As for the treatise of Predestination annexed hereto, it serueth specially for the fuller euidence and greater certain∣tie of those things that are handled in the former bookes con∣cerning

the vniuersalitie of grace and redemption. For the remnants of the Pelagians of old, and at this day, affirming none at all to bee excepted from the redemption of Christs blood, and in respect of God maintaining eternall life to bee prepared for all, are therefore fallen to the extolling of such grace, because they would in no case confesse, that God ac∣cording to the purpose & coūsel of his own will, in his secret iudgement but manifest worke, maketh one vessell to honor, and another to dishonour: nor will assent hereto, that the number of the predestinate can neither be increased nor di∣minished. Both which points are fully handled, and plainly proued against them in this booke.
Praefat. ad Rom.Luther saith notably: Ex praedestinationis sententia sola pendere omnia, qui accepturi sint verbum, qui non: qui credi∣turi, quinon: qui liberandi à peccato, qui occaecandi: quidam∣nandi, qui iustificandi. That is, Ʋpon the onely sentence of pre∣destination all things depend, who shall receiue the word, who not: who shall beleeue, who not: who shall be freed from sinne, who blinded therein: who shall be damned, who saued. There∣fore seeing God saueth some men, and condemneth others, and that willingly, (for nothing can bee done if he be simply vnwilling, and against it) we must of necessitie confesse, that both are done according to Gods purpose, and that eternall. For there is nothing temporall in God, otherwise he should be mutable. And this is nothing els, than that God hath cho∣sen some, and reiected others from euerlasting.
Touching the certaine number of the predestinate, Augu∣stine saith truly:De Cor. & gra. cap. 13 & 7. Praedestinatorum in regnum Dei ita certus est munerus, &c. that is, The number of them that are prede∣stinate vnto the kingdome of God is so certaine, that nothing can be added to them, nor any thing of them diminished. And againe, Electorum si quisquam perit fallitur Deus, & vitio humano vincitur, &c. that is, If any of the elect perisheth, God is deceiued, and ouercome of mans sinne: but none of them pe∣risheth, because God is not deceiued, nor ouercome of any thing. This treatise also teacheth, that a man may be certaine of his election & saluation, & by what meanes he may know it:

what we are to iudge of the election of others: how necessa∣rie and profitable this doctrine is, to know Gods mercie and iustice, and his free grace against all Pelagians and Semipe∣lagians, and to teach vs humilitie, patience in aduersitie, loue towards God, and an earnest studie of all good works. This is briefly the summe of these bookes, which I haue translated for the benefit and helpe of the common sort, that vnderstand them not in the Latin tongue, that by reading and vnderstanding hereof they that erre, may returne againe to the trueth and imbrace it hereafter the better; they that doubt, may be fully resolued hereby; and they that haue held this doctrine as the trueth of God in time past, may be con∣firmed therein, and incouraged to professe it to their liues end.
Now these my labours I present to the view of your Ho∣nour, crauing pardon for my boldnes, and the protection and defence of these mysteries of the Gospel of Christ, I com∣mend vnto your Honor, assuring my selfe, that as the great and mightie Christian Princes of the world account it an ho∣nour vnto them to be, and to be called defenders of the true faith of Christ, by whom they raigne: so your Honour will gladly and willingly receiue the protection of this his trueth, who hath not onely aduanced you to so high a place of dig∣nitie in this Common-wealth, but hath also giuen you an heart to feare him, to minister true iudgement, and to pro∣mote the Gospel by furnishing this Church with learned and able Ministers, and that freely in this corrupt age when all things are set to sale. The great good report that generally is giuen of your Honor in euery place for these things, of all persons, but especially of Ministers and Schollers, as it draw∣eth the hearts and affections of men vnto you in all dutie, & causeth many a hearty praier to be made to God for your life & continuance in weldoing: so among other, it hath moued mee though the meanest of all, oftentimes to blesse God for you, & to reioyce in your behalfe, & that so much the rather, because it hath pleased God out of Chesshire my natiue soile, to aduance one to so high a place and authority, and to make

him so famous for weldoing, as he hath done your Honour. Goe on still (good my Lord) in that good course that you haue begun: honour the Lord with your authoritie, and he will yet more honour you: keepe a good conscience in all things, and the remembrance thereof shall be your ioy. Bona conscientia (saith Bernard) afficit gaudio viuentem, consolatur morientem, eternum{que} durat: that is, A good conscience glad∣deth a man in his life, comforteth him in his death, and indu∣reth for euer. And after your Honour hath serued your time according to the counsell of God, and shall be ready to bee called before that great Master of the Rolles and records of all the world, you shall with the Apostle say to your endles comfort: Certamen praeclarum decertaui, cursum consum∣maui, sidem seruaui: quid superest, reposita est mihi iustitiae corona. I haue fought a good fight, I haue finished my course, I haue kept the faith: from henceforth there is laid vp for me a crowne of righteousnes.
Thus ceasing any further to interrupt your Honour from your weighty affaires, which I know be many, I humbly with all dutifulnes take my leaue, praying God long to preserue your Honour in health, to make you zealous of his glorie, constant in all weldoing to the furtherance of his Gospell, faithfull to her Maiestie, carefull of Iustice, profitable to the whole Realme, prosperous in all your waies, and com∣fortable to your owne soule, that at length you may sleepe in peace, and make a ioyfull account, Amen. Grensteed in Essex. Octob. 31. 1598.

