



THE Charge that was gi∣uen to the Prophet Esay, by the
Lord himselfe, cry aloud, spare not, lift vp thy voice like a Trumpet,
and shewe my people their Transgressions, and the House of Iacob
their sinnes:Esay 58.1 is also
imposed (Right Reuerend Father in God) on euery Prea∣cher of the Word, in
these lastdaies and perilous times. For ini∣quity
aboundeth now, as much as euer it did: there is no truth, nor mercy, nor
knowledge of God in the Land; by swearing, and ly∣ing, and killing, and
stealing, and committing adultery, men break out, and blood toucheth
blood.Hose. 4.1.2 They rise vp early in
the mor∣ning, that they may follow strong drinke, they continue vntill night,
till wine inflame them.Esay 5.11. Oh! now is
the time (if euer) for a Preacher to lift vp his voyce, and crye downe these
loud-crying sinnes.
As for my selfe, I haue al∣ready (by Gods assistance)
lifted vp my voyce in a Sermon, in a great Congregation, against the
beastly sinne of Drunkennes: but a man may crye louder with pen, then with
tongue: and bee heard further out of the Presse, then outof the
Pulpit. Therefore (sith there is no Labourer so simple, but may bring
somewhat to Gods buil∣ding:) I haue incouraged my selfe, vpon assurance
of your Lordships pardon, humbly to commend this Sermon (as it was deliuered,
with out addition, or detraction) to the view of your Wisedome: and vn∣der
your protection, to the House∣holde of Faith. Not doubting, but that which
hath passed the fa∣uourable censure of so Reuerend, and so Learned an
assembly, as then were the Hearers: will now finde like acceptance with all
that be iudicious and indifferent Rea∣ders.
Many weighty reasons I could shew, that mooued me to Dedicate
these my slender labours vnto your Lordship: but I forbeare to
ex∣presse them, least I exceede an E∣pistle to so small a Booke;
andmake the Wals as big, as the City. And thus hauing satisfied
my desire, by giuing some testimony of my duty to your Lordship:
fearing to hinder the course of your more serious cogitations, and actions;
I humbly take my leaue, and commend my selfe to your fa∣uour, and your
Lordship to the grace, and fauour of God in Christ.
From Hyth one of the Cinque-Ports in
Kent.
February 12. 1630

