


Gentlemen,
TO you I am to sepake of the fairest of Vegetals, Flowers, the minions of the spring, and for their beauties, deserving the title of terrestri∣all starres, being of such excellency, that (if you will beleeve the asseveration of the wisest and the best of the sonnes of men) you must grant that the wisest and happiest Prince that ever was, in all his glory, was not like one of them. And did not the omnipotent Architect of the Vniverse, place his Protoplast in a garden, as being the most convenient and pleasant habitation for Man, as yet unstained with with disobedience, and abstaining from the forbidden fruit? And was not this Eden so holy and pure a place, that Adam could no longer be Tenant there then he kept his innocency? If I should expatiate in the commendation of these glorious creatures (I feare) I should be brought into a maze whence I could not easily extricate my selfe; therefore I will re∣ferre you that are desirous to be industrious in the indagation of their vertues and beauties, to those large volumes that are now xtant, wherein their natures are amply and exactly described. How as concerning your feast, quod multi infectis oculis





conspiciunt. 'Tis true, Many sanctimonists, that like the men of China, thinke themselves wiser than all the world beside, doe inveigh against it (how iustly I know not) but as for my part, if I did thinke it might be any way preiudicial, either to politike, or morall society. I should detest it as deeply as the most zealous Heteroclite of them all. If it had any affinity with Bacchanali∣an riot, if Gluttony and Drunkennes ever found any entertain∣ment there, I should utterly loath to name it: But since it is a meeting so civill, so unspotted, that Malice her selfe, had shee a brazen face, might blush to detract from it; since it is a feast ce∣lebrated by such a conflux of Gentlemen of birth and quality, in whose presence and commerce (I thinke) your Cities welfare part∣ly consists: I cannot but commend it (though not so highly as it deserves) in spite of Ignorance or Envy.
But some there be that are so pure and sage,
That they doe utterly abhorre a Stage,
Because they would be still accounted holy,
And know, the Stage doth oft bewray their folly.
You could but wonder to see what distaste
They tooke, to see an Hypocrite uncas'd:
Oh had they power, they would the Author use
As ill as Bacchus Priests did Orpheus.
These, out of their malicious discretion (having no other way to satisfie their uniust envy) by meere misprisions, and under pretence that I should abuse a Corporation, would faine engage me in your Cities hatred, which although I account it one of the meanest disasters that can betide, yet I should thinke my selfe an unworthy man to doe any thing worthy of their haired. But whereas they accuse me for taxing of some private persons, I am content to referre this centroversie to the arbitrement of any

that is ingenious. But this (as I tender my owne reputation, and Truth her selfe) I must tell ye, that should I spye villany shelter her selfe under a Scarlet Gowne, I durst be so bold as to spurne her with the left foot of contempt, though not be so prodigall of that small store the Muses have allotted me, as to spend a line upon so despicable a subiect.
