



Most gratious Prince,
AS one not ambitious to preach or print my selfe, but desi∣rous to preach the honor of God and publish his mercies, J give light and after-life to this Sermon. J preached it at the mariage of your peerelesse sister; not on the

day it selfe, but before the daies of that feast and celebritie were expired. J publish it at the birth of her sonne, the first-fruits of the riches of God towards the Chri∣stian world from that Princely garden.
My gratious Soueraigne who commanded my seruice at that time, out of his zealous and reli∣gious heart, enioined me likewise my taske namely to blesse the ma∣riage, as with Crescite & mul∣tiplicamini, (the fundamentall blessing of God) and other such like praiers and prefaces of hap∣pie prediction belonging to mari¦age: and as often as my matter fitted me, to draw from the hearts of the people, which sate in the

doores of their lippes and waited the watch-word, their answers and Amens to those wishes of blessing: that both the Priest and the people like the voice and echo in the woods, vniting their spirits and speech together, might sing to the new maried paire their ioifull God speed, O Lord prosperPs. 129. 8. them, wee wish them good luck in the name of the Lord. Thus hauing so glorious a starre to point out my way vnto me, and the readiest affections of mine heart lending me winde and sailes at will to doe what seruice I might to that wished coniunction: as Ophir in the daies of Salomon was the place for gold, because the most and best was there; so

went I for a mariage text to that golden and beaten Psalme, asPsal. 128. well trauelled in this kinde as Ophir for gold, because there was the richest veine to furnish such an occasion. Thence I extracted a small modell for my building: the subiect thereof was a wife; the mirrour and metaphor of that wife, a vine; the honour and at∣tribute of that vine, fruit; the marrow and meaning of that fruit, children, which lay at the next doore to my text. But when I came to the fruit of the vine, J pawsed and with-held my speech, because the time of her fructifying was not yet come. I went on with my song of the vine in the words of Esay, Vinea facta est &c.Es. 5. 1.

hoping there would be a day and daies, when we should change our dittie, and sing as cheerefully of the oliue branches in those sweet notes of the Psalme; Na∣tiPsal. 45. 8. sunt tibi filij &c. This day is this word fulfilled in our eares, both in substance and circum∣stance. For not onely the word and worke of God, prophecie and euent, are really met toge∣ther: but with a reciprocall ser∣uice, and reflected aspect of each to other, that worke and his word are once more met againe: those very words and syllables of the Psalme, wherein at the first our hopes were conceiued and vt∣tered, not forced from their owne ranke and station, but by the

monethly order and course of the day, aptly and happily ministring to the entertainment of that newes which by his Maiesties princely care was conueied vnto vs. For at the morning praier of that day which his Maiestie by a speedie messenger posting vpon the wings of the night was zea∣lous to preuent, it being the day of our Christian Sabboth, whereon the tribes doe vsually ascend to the houses of God, the people, J meane, assemble in their great Congregations to praise his glorious name: J say at the mor∣ning praier of that day, being the ninth of the moneth, by the natu∣rall vse of the Church, was that Psalme read, wherein was that

verse contained of that first dex∣trous presage, Nati sunt tibi fi∣lij &c. As if from out the whole bunch of that sacred Uolume a Psalme had beene pickt of pur∣pose as proper to that day, to yeeld a consonant voice and acclamati∣on to that ioifull tidings. J applie the words of that other Psalme, Dominus dedit verbum, e∣uangelizantiūPsal. 68. 12. exercitus mul∣tus, God gaue the word (appoin∣ted as it were our text, so iust to the time, so meet for application, that he that ran might haue read Gods meaning therein:) and great was the companie (as great as all the Churches of London could yeeld) of those that read and pronounced the same, but not

many perhaps that minded it: that ioined the text and the glosse together, the body and the soule, the letter of the booke and that instant goodnesse of God which that letter imported. Therefore to recall their meditations to that which they might ouerslip, and to reuiue mine owne, to seale the ioy of my heart and my thankefulnes to God in the presence of all his Saints, and to inflame others with the like, and to congratulate to your roiall house your new titles of honor and comfort, as of grand∣father, grandmother, vncle, which you had not before; and one line of degree the more to your roiall pedigree, which for root and branch is the most glorious in

these Northerne parts: to these and the like ends I send this Ser∣mon abroad, making that the cause of my printing it, which was the end why I preached it; that as J preached it in honour of a fruit∣full vine, so to honour that vine and her fruit I might now pub∣lish it.
O Lord of hosts looke downe from heauen, behold and visitPsal. 80. 14. this vine, and the vineyard which thy right hand hath plan∣ted, and the branch which thou hast made (wee trust) so strong for thy selfe. Let thine hand be vpon the man of thy right hand (the father) and vpon the sonne of man (his tender babe;) that hee may grow vp in age and grace

to strengthen thy kingdome. Per∣fect that good worke which thou hast begunne vpon vs. Thou hast begun it in the former part of the Psalme, Nati sunt tibi filij &c. (sauing for num∣ber, that natus is not nati, which number of yeeres may supply heereafter:) perfect it in the lat∣ter, quos constituas principes. Continue thy couenant with them for euer, and establish their throne vpon earth as the daies of heauen.
The prince of the kings ofApoc. 1. 5. the earth prosper your princely beginnings (the morning of our future hopes) with length and strength of daies, and such acces∣sarie blessings as depend thereon; that your loines may be as fortu∣nate

to your people as your sisters wombe, and both the one and the other redouble and multiplie the name of Grandfather to your happie father; and the fruit of both your fruits improoue that name to a great grandfather: that hee may long and long liue, the first-borne of God, higherPsal. 89. 27. then the kings of the earth, to see his childrens children, and leaue behind him a Law-giuer from the midst of his & their feet to sway the scepter of these king∣domes till Shiloh come againe.

