



DAVID the Prophet,
in the .107. Psalme, spea∣kynge
of the marueylous
workes & wounders y• god
doth by his power shew
before the sonnes of men: stirreth vp
the Godly to prayse and extoll his ma∣iestie,
and mooueth the wicked and stub∣born,
to the feare and dreade of his ho∣rible
vengeance. He turneth (saith he)
the Flouds into a wildernesse, and the
springes of water into drie grounde,Psal. 10 33.
& a frutefull lande into barrennesse, for
e wickednesse of them y• dwel therein.
Which notable sentence, may be well
considred, more aptly applied, but cheif∣ly
of vs well examined: waying how
fearfully the Lorde hath bestowed vpon
vs his, meruelous iudgements, in y• he
hath turned many of our fruitful Feelds

and Marshes, Pastures and Meadowes
into vnmercifull Flouds and streames,
vnlooked for, by changyng as he did in
the olde worlde, the moderate course of
the vpper Fountaines; which were or∣dayned
to water the earth, and so to
make it fruitfull, into immoderate, and
vnseasonable Fluddes, which in steede
of makyng fruitfull, hath made barren
many places of the Earthe in this our
countrie by destructiō of the Creatures,
as Pastures, Corne, Cattell, Sheep,
Neate, Horse, Beastes, Oxen, Kine, and
such like, with some of y• bodies of men,
though not so generally, as in the first
Floud, neither half so extremely, as our
sinnes doo deserue, which craue not so
light a scurge as moyste and coolynge
plashes of water, but hot and burnynge
flakes of Fyre and Brimstone, whiche
for lesse offences God poured vpon So∣dome
& Gomorrah. The cause of which
barrennesse (as Dauid saith) in this our
fruitfull countrie, is our wickednesse,
whiche are the inhabitants of the same,
as is to be approued by markynge the
fruites, and operation of two kindes of

people within this land: especially vpon
whom these calamities haue faullen, to
weete, the Riche and the Poore. As
concerning the one, namely the Riche
men,Esay. 3. if euer the Prophet Esayes woe,
against them that ioygne house to house
and lande to lande (till there be no more
place left for the poore) coulde euer be
applied it may be applied vnto them,
whiche as Amos the Prophet saieth,Amos. 4. are
the fat Kyne of Bason in the Mountay∣nes
of Samaria, which oppresse y• poore
and destroy the needy. To whom Abacuk
saith, That their couetousnesse is an euil
couetousnesse to their houses, whereby
they seeke to set their neast on hie, and
to escape from the power of euill. Thou
hast (sayth the Prophet) conseled shame
to thine owne house, and by destroying
many people, and hast sinned agaynst
thine owne soule. For the Stone shall
crie out of the wall, and the Beame out
of the Timber shall answer it, as now
the Seales of the War & Parchment of
the Leaces hath cried vengeance and de∣struction
to the Leasemongers of Eng∣land:
and the conditions haue cried out

of the Leases, which haue béen enhaūsed
and raysed, answeryng, woe worth such
couetous caytifs, as haue caused the care
full cries of so many poore. Thou righte∣ous
God, plague these couetous Lease∣mongers,
these greedy grasiers, which
haue cōuerted the Tillage, of much era∣ble
ground, to the grasing of Shéep, and
Northern Oxen, whereby they enriche
them selues with the ruine and decay of
thousands, round about them. Thou God
that seest this their vnmerciful dealing,
open the cloudes, water their pastures
sowne with sheep, in steede of men and
Corne of all graines, geue their flocke
moysture, that they may see them by
thousandes swim aboue the ground, and
at the fall of the waters, to lie deade vp∣pon
their watred land. Which crie God
hath heard, and this is the cause of suche
ruin and destruction. The Riche are so
welthie, that they are without Iudge∣ment,
without mercy, and that hath
caused their Heards to be wasted, their
Flockes to be deminished, their Gran∣ges
made pasturelesse, with the pitifull
fluddes past, wherby much of their sub∣stance

hath perished. For whose sakes
also the Poore are made partakers of
these greate losses. Those riche Lande∣lordes,
yet addynge to their troubles,
whom the Lorde hath smitten, by exac∣tyng
still their outragious Rents, as∣well
for the halfe yere past, wherein
these perils haue hapned: as before, not
considering y• the Lorde did it to plague
them withall, because of their couetous∣nesse.
God geue them repentance, be∣fore
the Lorde be too to much sturred,
and prouoked to anger, by their wicked∣nesse:
Least y• if these fauourable thret∣nynges
be despised, the Iust and righte∣ous
God, doo in steede of water, raygne
downe Fier & Brimstone vpon them,
and in stéede of the ouerflowing of their
pastures, with watry streames: ouer∣flow
the carelesse consciēces, with cruel
flames of Hell fire, & euerlasting damp∣nacion:
and in stéede of the losse and
wracke of sheep and cattell, Shipwrack
and Landwracke, of bothe their bodies
and soules, which all their rustie Golde
and Siluer shal neuer be able to recouer
agayne. And the Poore, God geue them

patience to beare this the Lordes visi∣tation
thankfully: knowynge that the
poore crieth, and the Lord heareth him,
and that the Lorde is the refuge and
strong hold of the poore, in time of neces∣sity,
who hath his eares open, to heare
their complaintes, and is ready at hand
to help them and receiue theyr prayers.
God graunt that they murmure not at
God handyworke, in striking the litle
they had, but that they may say, with
blessed Iob, the Lord gaue it, the Lorde
hath taken his owne agayne, blessed be
his name for euer and euer. So shall
wee be Gods humble Children, bothe
riche and poore, embrasing his Rods of
correction, as meanes to amende our
liues. The riche forsaking their former
couetous vnmercifull gréedinesse: The
poore learning to be more thankful and
faithful in staiyng vpon Gods prouidēce
that God may restore vs from the hand
of straungers,Psal. 144. whose mouthe talketh of
vanitie, and their right hande is a right
hande of falsehood: That our Sonnes
may be as the Plants growynge vp in
their youth: and our daughters as the

polished corners of the Temple: That
our countries may be full and abundant
with diuers sorts, and that our sheepe
may bring foorth thousands, and tenne
thousandes in our streetes: That our
Oxen may be strong to labour, and that
there be no inuasion, nor goyng out, nor
decaying in our stréetes, which blessings
God wil multiply vpon vs, if wée al wil
once begin to feare him, blessed are the
people that are in such a case, yea blessed
are we if the Lord be our God, his won∣ders
make vs feare and obay him, his
mercy make vs al to loue and serue him,
through his Son, Iesus Christ, our only
sauiour. AMEN.
