



IN times of former ages (honourable faire La∣dy) I haue often
heard, that Vsury, Lying, and Flattery, were worse excommunicate out of
Court and Common-wealth, then thred-bare cloakes or greasie bootes out of the
Presence. O they were vertuous men in those daies, & would giue the
deuill his due, if it were but in wearing deuils breeches. Sure∣ly I am growne
into such infinite amours of their ho∣nest packe-staffe plainenesse,
that sincerely and verily, I do meane, as it were, to imitate it. First,
for Vsury, I hate it worse then any empty purse, and you shal haue none
of mee, I beseech God to inspire mee but with halfe so many good wordes,
as may counteruaile the hundreth part of the principal of your gracious fauors
towards me. Next for lying, in no line of this Booke shall you find me
lyable, (if I be not condēned for too much speaking the troth, I care not)
and to make you know, that I am old Tom-tel-troth indeed, I will giue
you a tast whereby you may iudge of the rest. Item. I say I am
no Scholler, if that be a lie I referre me to the iudgement of the learned, who
if they but pose me in the petigree of a Noune and
Pronoune, I straight crosse and blesse my selfe, &
thinke they begin to coniure. A∣gaine, I affirme that thus being no Scholler,
but a sim∣ple honest Dunce, as I am, that cānot say B to a
Battle∣dore,it is very presumptuously done of me, to
offer to hey-passe and repasse it in Print so, when my Ance∣stors
scarse euer heard of a Pen & Inke-horne, & much more
presumptuously, it being such a course home∣spun linsey woolsey
webbe of wit as it is, to shroude it vnder the protection of so high a
personage, who are more worthy to patronize the deuine Muse of
Apollo, or the thundring spirit of Homer, then this
Countrey dance of the worlds end, or harsh Lancashire Horne∣pipe. Taxe me
who dare, or who can, that herein my tongue doubles one sillable. Marry
some excuse wold do well, for this my Eagle-soaring, and too too
fore∣ward attempting, and yet I need not neither, for out of your owne
super-abounding good nature you would supply it though I let it alone;
& yet I will not let it a∣lone, but throw some light vaile, of
spotlesse preten∣ded wel-meaning, ouer it, to huke & mask it from
pub∣licke shame & obloquy: Faith, no more but this, I see my inferiours
in the gifts of learning, wisedome, & vn∣derstanding, torment the
Print daily with lighter tri∣fles and Iiggalorums, then my
russet Hermit is, which hath made me the bolder to shoulder in
amongst thē. They clap a paire of French spurres on the heeles of Vice to
rowell ope the wombe of that resty Iade Ini∣quity, & let all the
loath-some guts & garbidge of his panch issue out to putrifie and
infect the fresh aire of Pauls Church-yard; I curbe sin with a
double snaffle of reprehensiō, & turne & wind him with my smart
wand of correctiō to what vertuous manage I please. There∣forefor my good meaning, not Art, am I to bee seene & allowed. For my
insolence in presenting this home∣ly bundle of Hermits wands to so
sacred a Madam, vn∣der this couert barron it shall march, that weak
houses require the strongest props, and the poore must pay their fines
to their Lord or Lady whatsoeuer, be it but in pepper-cornes, or single
halfe-pence. My Booke I entitle, A halfe-peny worth of wit in a peny-worth
of pa∣per, whereby it drawes somewhat nere to the matter & the
purpose. If you accept it well, there is no man that will accept it ill, and
except you stray from the worlds ordinary custome (that take Vintners
leaden halfe-pe∣ny tokens for sound payment) you cannot accept of it
amisse. Imagine this one of thē, for either it will passe for a
half-peny or nothing. But soft I haue let passe my last relique of
antiquity, which is there horrible and terrible detestatiō of flattery,
& my religious cōforma∣tion therunto. I haue proued my selfe guiltles of
lying & vsury, & if my Book will not saue me frō being hal∣tred
for flatery, I wold it were treason to write & read, or Gal,
Gum, & Copperis wherof Inke is made, were held more odious
thē poisō: all the flattery that I wil vse (if it be flattery to speak
truth) shal be to pronounce that you are truly vertuous, faire, wise, &
honorable: & so I leaue you, desiring pardon for my boldnes, and
pray∣ing for your encrease of felicity to your dying day.

