



RIGHT Honourable, in this prodigall and intemperate age of the vvorlde, wherein every man writeth more than neede is, and chooseth such patronage to his writinges, as his heart fancieth, If I haue taken the like libertie to my selfe, both of setting my labours openly in the eies of men, and your Honours eies es∣pecially over my labours, I hope, because it is not my private fault, your Lordshippe will either forget to espie, or not nar∣rowly examine it. The number of bookes written in these daies without number, I say not more then the worlde can holde, (for it even emptieth it selfe of reason and moderation to giue place to this bookish folly, and serveth vnder the va∣nitie thereof) but more than well vse, the titles whereof but to haue red or seene, were the sufficient labour of our vn∣sufficient liues, did earnestlie treate with mee,Vix totâ vi∣tâ indices.
Senec. Oerat dis∣centem tur∣ba, non in∣struit. Jd. Eccles. Vl. to giue some rest to the Reader, and not to devide him into more choice of bookes, the plentie whereof hath alreadie rather hurte then furthered him, and kept him barer of knowledge. For much reading is but a wearinesse to the flesh, and there is no

ende of making or perusing many bookes. For mine owne part, I coulde haue beene wel content not to haue added more ful∣nesse to the sea, nor to haue trained the credulous Reader a∣long with the hope of a new seeming booke, which in name, and edition, and fashion, because the file hath a little other∣wise beene drawne over it, may so bee; but touching the sub∣stance, that of the Preacher was long since true, and togither with the growth of the worlde receiveth dailie more strength,Eccles. 1. Scribimus indocti do∣cti{que}. Pers. That that is, hath beene, and there is no new thing vnder the sunne. But as we all write, learned and vnlearned, crow-poets and py-poetesses, though but our owne follies and ignoraunces, and to purchase the credite of writers, some as madde as the sea, some out their owne shame and vncurable reproch, whose vnhonest treatises fitter for the fire then the bookes of Prota∣goras, presses are daily oppressed with, the worlde burthened, and the patience of modest and religious eares implacably of∣fended: so the ambitious curiositie of readers for their partes, calling forth bookes, as the hardnes of the Iewish heartes oc∣casioned the libell of divorce,Poscimus indocti do∣cti{que}. Act. 17. and a kinde of Athenian humor both in learned and vnlearned of harkening after the Mart, & asking of the Stationers, what new thinges? thereby threat∣ning as it were continually to giue over reading, if there want variety to feede and draw them on; made me the more wil∣ling to goe with the streame of the time, and to set them some later taske, wherein, if their pleasure be, their idler howres may be occupied.
My end and purpose therein, if charitie interpret for mee, will be found nothing lesse than vaine ostentation. Because I haue spoken at times, and may hereafter againe, if God giue leaue and grace, the meditations of my hearte, to as manie and as chosen eares almost as these bookes can distract them vnto: and these which I nowe publish were publicke enough before, if the best day of the seven, frequent concourse of people, and the most intelligent auditory of the place vvhere∣in

I then lived, may gaine them that credite. So as this fur∣ther promulgation of them is not much more, then (as the Gentiles besought Paule in the Actes) the preaching of the same wordes an other sabbath day;Chap. 13. and some testimonie of my desire (if the will of God so bee) to doe a double good with my single and simple labours, in that it grieveth mee not, to write and repeate the same thinges. And to adioine one rea∣son more, I shall never bee vnwilling to professe, that I even owed the everlasting fruite of these vnworthie travailes to my former auditours, who, when I first sowed this seede a∣mongst them, did the office of good and thankefull grounde, and received it with much gladnesse. To whom since I vvent aside for a time farre from the natiue place both of my birth and breede, as Jonas went to Niniveh to preach the prea∣chinges of the Lorde, or into the bellie of the fish out of his proper and naturall element to make his song, so I to deliver these ordinarie and weekelie exercises amongest them; the providence of God not suffering mee to fasten the cordes of mine often remooved tabernacle in those North-warde partes, but sending mee home againe; let it receiue fa∣vourable interpretation with all sortes of men, that I send them backe but that labour which they paied for; and there∣in the presence of my spirite, pledge of mine hearte,Soles accep∣tior esse ser∣mo vivus quàm scrip∣tus. Bernard. A mortuâ pelle ad ho∣minem vi∣vum recurre Gregor. Laudare se, vani; vitu. perare, stulti. Aristot. apud Valer. Max. Lib. 7. Ca. 2. and an Epistle of that deserved loue and affection vvhich I iustlye beare them. I trust no man shall take hurte heere∣by, either nearer or father of, excepte my selfe, vvho haue chaunged my tongue into a penne, and whereas I spake before with the gesture and countenance of a livinge man, haue nowe buried my selfe in a dead letter of lesse effe∣ctuall perswasion. But of my selfe nothing on either part. I haue taken the counsaile of the wise, neither to praise nor dis∣praise mine owne doinges: The one, hee saith, is vanitie, the other folly. Thousandes will bee readie enough to ease mee of that paines, the vncerteinty of whose iudgement, I

haue now put my poore estimation vpon, either to stande or fall before them. Howbeit I will not spare to acknowe∣ledge,Nihil egi sine Theseis, & Nihil nostrum, & omnia. that I haue done little heerein without good guides. And, as Iustus Lipsius spake of his Politicke centons, in one sense all may bee mine, in an other not much more then no∣thing. For if ever I liked the waters of other mens vvelles, I dranke of them deepely; and what I added of mine owne, either of reaching or exhortation, I commende it to the good acceptance of the worlde, with none other condition, then the Emperour commended his sonnes, sipromerebuntur, if it shall deserue it.
Nowe the reasons which mooved mee to offer these my first fruites vnto your good Lordshippe, may soone bee presu∣med,  though I name them not. For when the eie that seeth you, blesseth you, and all tongues giue witnesse to your righteous dealing, shoulde mine bee silent? yea, blessed bee the God of heaven, that hath placed you vpon the seate of iustice to dis∣place falshood and wrong. The vine of our English Church  spreadeth her branches with more chearefulnesse, through the care which your honour hath over her. You giue her milke without silver, and breade without mony, vvhich not ma∣ny other patrons doe. In this vnprofitable generation of  ours, wherein learning is praised and goeth naked, men won∣dering at schollers, vt pueri Iunonis avem, and schol∣lers wondering more at men,Iuvenal. that they doe so little for them, learning never departeth ashamed and discontented from  your face. I adde with most zealous and thankefull comme∣moration, in behalfe of my mother and all the children at her knees, your loue to our Vniversitie. Of whose age and nativi∣ty, which others haue beene carefull to set downe, I dispute not. But whither shee bee the elder sister, it seemeth by that neglect wherein shee now standeth, that shee hath lost the honour and inheritance of her birth-right: or vvhither the younger, your Lordship hath not many companions to ioine

with you in compassion, and say in these daies,Cantic. vlt. soror est no∣bis parva, we haue a little sister, and shee hath no breastes, or ra∣ther hath not succor to fill out her breastes, what shall vvee doe for her? How many commō respectes, to let private alone a vvhile, haue naturally borne me to the centre and pointe of your Honours onely patronage?
I deny not, when at my comming from the North, it first came into my head to divulgate these readings, my purpose was to haue made the chiefe founders and procurers thereof (my two deceased Lords) the chiefe patrones also: that as the rivers runne to the place from whence they come, so these to∣kens of my gratefull minde might returne to the principall authours. Wherein the worlde might iustly haue censured me with the words of the Prophet, what? from the living to the dead? contrary to the vse and fashion of all other men? But so I meane; both to avoide the suspicion of a fault which the world laboureth of (flattering of great personages) who was and am content that all mine expectations in any respecte from them or theirs, bee laid in the same dust vvherein their bones lye; and to shew that loue is stronger then death, and that the vnexorable barres of the graue cannot forbid a man to continue that affection to the memory of the dead vvhich he carried to the living. For which cause, as others provi∣ded spices and balmes, and monuments of stone or brasse to preserue their bodies, so I intended a monument of paper, and such other preservatiues as▪ I coulde, to keepe their names in life, which the violence of time cannot so quick∣lye iniurye, as the fatall vngratefulnesse of these latter daies.
But your Lordshippes most vndeserved and vnlooked for bounty towards mee, hath altered that meaninge. In whose countenance & speech evermore from the first houre that I came into your honorable presence, there dwelt such plentifull comfortes and encouragements to make me hope

for better times, that I never went a way, but with more fat∣nesse to my bones. And now the world can witnesse vvith mee, how largely you haue opened your hand, and sealed vp that care, in freely bestowing vpon mee not Leah but Ra∣hel, even the daughter of your strength, the best that your Honour had to bestow, I say not for my service of twice 7. yeares, but being yet to begin my first houres attendance. Which more then credible benignity, my right hande were vvorthye to forgette her cunninge, if shee tooke not the first occasion to write and report with the best skill shee hath.
Notwithstanding I haue bene bold thus farre, after the trees shaken and the vintage gathered to your Honours vse, to leaue as it were a berrye or two in the vtmost boughes to my former Lordes; and by making some little mention of their happy memories, both to testify mine auncient duety towards them, and to deliver them, what I might, from the night of forgetfulnesse, who were the shining lampes of the North in their life time. Such a Moses and such an Aa∣ron, such a Josuah to lead the people, and such a Priest to beare the Arke, such a Zorobabel, and such a Jehozadak, such a Centurion in Capernaum to rule the country, and such a Jairus to governe the Synagogue, when the Lorde shall send togither againe, I will then saie hee hath restored his blessing amongst them. To this purpose I haue added two sermons more, to these Lectures vppon Ionas, the one preached at the funeralles of my former Lord the late Arch∣bishop of Yorke; the other no way pertinent to the latter, the right noble Earle of Huntingdon, except because hee commanded it, and it was not many weekes before his death, and the subiect was so agreeable to his most faithfull and vn∣steined heart. For if the sound of the tongue and applause of the handes may perswade for him, he never behelde the light of heaven within this land, that more honoured the

light of England. Long may it sparkle and flame amongst vs according to his harty wishes. Let neither distempered hu∣mours within quench it, nor all the waters of the sea betwixt Spaine and vs, bring rage and hostility enough to put it out, but let the light of Gods owne most blessed countenance for ever & ever shine vpon it.
It nowe remaineth, that in the humblest manner I can, I wholy resigne my selfe and the course of my life to your honourable both protection and disposition; askinge pardon for my boldnesse, and defense for these my simple en∣deavours, & beseeching the God of heaven & earth, to mul∣tiply his richest blessings, vpon your Honour, your Lady, and your Children whither within or without the land.

