



GReate haue beene those harmes (right honorable and my very good Lord) which the Church of God in euery age hath suffred at the hands of straungers & open enemies vnto the trueth: but yet nothing so grieuous, as that hurte which she hath frō time to time had at home, by some who haue long layen in her owne bosome, and as Children beene serued from her owne table. For, as ciuill warre is alwayes more dange∣rous then foraine force: So the enemyes within the church, be they who of al other deale with greatest dan∣ger against the Church. Against the force of an open e∣nimy we haue the strength of a double wall: the credite of a cause for Religion: & the concorde of our mindes. But these walles are wanting, when the Church dea∣leth against enimyes gone out from her, which some∣times haue been of her. For touching the cause of reli∣gion, they wil be equall with vs: & touching the points wherin we differ, they may be thought euen of some

who are no sworne enemyes vnto Religion (if matters be not very wisely & with great iudgemēt examined) to ouermatch vs. For the continuance of friendship as they pretend vnto Religion, seemeth to assure vs that their profiting in knowledge and iudgement, and no other cause, hath moued them aswell to be diuers from them selues, as to departe from vs. As for the profes∣sed enemie, he is more hardened against our cause and better armed against our selues, when he seeth the cause it selfe as it were parted by opinion, and vs deuided from our selues in affection. These enemyes of the Church do both strengthen the enemies arme abrode, and also discourage the friendes at home, yet hath the true Church alwayes beene subiect to this tryal, euen when Doctrine was moste pure and pastors most pain∣full.2. Tim 3.8 Was not Moses in his time troubled with Ian∣nes and Iambres?2. Tim. 2.17. 1. Iohn. 2.18. Paule in his time with Hymenaeus and Phyletus? Iohn the Euangelist with a multitude of An∣tichristes: and yet I thinke no man dare take excepti∣on either against the puritie of doctrine at those times, or against the trauell & paynes of those persons. Ney∣ther haue we onely examples to tell vs it hath bene so, but doctrine left in the Church to tel vs that it must be so:2. Pet. 2.1. There were false Prophetes among the people (sayeth Saint Peter) euen as there shall bee false teachers among you, which priuily shall bring in damnable Heresies, de∣nying the Lorde that hath bought them.1. Cor. 11.19. There muste bee heresies (sayeth Saint Paule) euen among you, that they which are proued among you may be knowne. The causes why it must be thus with the Church, doe I finde in the scripture to be these: that the good may bee tried and knowne: & the wicked foūd out & punished. The good are tried whether they loue the Lord, aswel by their af∣fection towarde the doctrine of Christe,Deu. 13.3. as by their fruits of conuersation. For there is no man that loueth

an other, who is not studious of his disposition, to knowe what is well liked of him and acceptable vnto him, that he may serue his humour and be set a woorke to his good liking and pleasure. So that hee who hath bestowed no study that way, either is not otherwise set∣led in iudgement or moued with affection, but that e∣uery seducer may deceiue him: doeth plainely declare therein that he beareth no loue towards him.
Punishment is executed against the wicked, either by giuing them vp into heresies and erronious opi∣nions, for that hauinge the trueth in knowledge, they made no conscience of it, neither in affection did beare any loue towarde it: either else because not submitting them selues to the simplicitie of the word, they haue desired to be fed with curious questions, mat∣ters of witte and subtile speculations. Of both those of∣fences, we are not onely warned off by the doctrine of the woorde,1. Timo. 1.19.20. 2. Tim. 2.16.17. but also by the heauy iudgement of God which did fall vpon certaine offenders herein, whereof there is expresse menciō made in the word. Great is the grossenes thē of the Papists, who therfore stūble at the true church, because some proue heretiques that haue beene brought vp in the bosome therof, as if they had neuer red this in the Scripture spoken in the person of the Church, They went out from vs,1. Iohn. 2.19. but they were not of vs, for if they had beene of vs, they woulde haue conti∣nued with vs: but greater is the carelessenesse of ma∣ny that would be accounted Christians, who notwith∣standing all these heauie examples and visible warnings of Gods wrath, bee not touched for all that with care to ioyne conscience vnto knowledge, and to let a good iudgement haue the honour of a louing affection al∣wayes waiting vpon it.
May professors of the trueth now possibly bee any longer satisfied with bare profession, when the almigh∣tie

hath alredy takē the reuengmēt therof into his own hands, & begun to driue such out of their dennes, & to hunt them out of their lurking holes, and not to leaue them before hee haue brought their deserued iudge∣ment of palpable blindenesse vpon them: so that we se them before our eyes, glory in their shame, and put vp∣on them as a garment of honour the couering of con∣fusion: therefore the punishment of God fallen now vi∣sibly vpon this family, is the iudgement of bare profes∣sors and carnal Gospellers. In these persons they al are arrained, found giltie & iudged. Now haue we learned by tryall & experience, that the Gospel disdaineth the sole attendance of our knowledge, and looketh to bee receiued in like manner with a good heart and friendly affection. And good cause and reason there is why it should be so, for who is so meane amongst men, that would be content with this entertainmēt amongst his friendes, if at his comming to them they would vouch∣safe to name him, and take knowledge that they had seene him. And is not this the best welcome that many in these dayes doe make the Gospel? they are content to speake to it, & take knowledge of it, but they are but a few, that so friendly do entertaine it, as that their hear∣tie goodwil & affection may be seene to appeare there∣by towards it. This iudgement of God vpon H.N. and his Family, speaketh plainly of the Gospel, that we can not enioy it, if wee giue no better entertainment then they haue done vnto it. For as for them, they are now farther from the knowledge of the Gospel, then they were the first houre that euer they looked vppon the light. For Christ is nothing with them but obedi∣ence vnto that doctrine which they professe. Which may easily be discerned by H.N. his discription of him, which is this: Christus doth signifie vnto vs (saith H.N.) the safe making oyle of the God sauing being: and yet more plainely is that matter expressed in the Booke en¦tituled

Theol. Ger. A booke that euery mā who hath red any of his workes (if his owne coūtrimen had neuer dis∣couered it) might easely perceiue to haue come frō the same spirit which spake in him. These words are founde there touching that matter. Vetus homo est Adamus,Theologia Germanica. Cap. 14. et inobedientia, ipsitas, egoitas, et similia: at nouus homo est Chri∣stus et obediētia. Adā is the olde man & disobedience, he, I, & such like: but Christ is the new man & obedience. Where that obedience is, nothing that he doth is sinne & where that is not, there is nothing but sinne: God hath nothing so proper vnto him, wherein by this doc∣trine of H.N. his illuminate elders be not felowes with him: euerlasting life if that we beleeue him, is fully felt & possessed in this life: here is our heauen, & here is our hell: the resurrection is not corporall of the body, but spirituall of the minde: Now is Christ come to iudge∣ment, and this doctrine is the last trump: they are rysen againe and in perfect ioy, who haue perfectly imbraced it, and those haue alredy receiued their iudgement & be in hell, who do resist it: to be gilty of death by the sinne of an other, or to be iustified by the righteousnes of an other, is a doctrine not onely not receiued of them, but throughout all their bookes impugned: our sinnes by this doctrine, are answeared within vs, and no righte∣ousnesse that shall doe vs good is without vs. Tou∣ching which point, this is saide in the Booke alledged before: Etiamsi Deus omnes homines quicunque sunt ad se assumeret, & ipse in eis homo fieret, & ipsi in eo deus fierent,Theologia Ger∣manica. Cap. 3. & idem in me non fieret nunquam corrigeretur meus lapsus. Al∣though GOD woulde take all men to himselfe and were made man in them, and they were made God in him, and the same shoulde not bee done in mee, my sinne and offence shoulde neuer bee discharged: They onely are the Church, & al cōgregations whatsoe∣uer that ioine not with thē, they call thē Synagouges of

Sathan and nestes of Deuils: they holde that euery man is his owne Sauiour and a Chrst for him selfe: euery mā that hath wel profited in the schoole of H. N. is perfit and without sinne. To conclude this matter, the er∣rours bee so many, so foule and so filthy, as woulde force the very penne in passing to stay & stop the nose. The onely way whereby a man should enter to do them good, haue they hedged and stopped vp against vs, for they say that they onely are spirituall, and therefore iudge truely of the word, that they haue the sence, and we nothing but the words: they haue the spirit, and we nothing but the letter: that they haue the life, and we the body: they haue the carnel, & we the shell: they haue the sword, and we the scabbard. To be briefe in this matter of doctrine, H.N. turneth religion vp side downe, and buildeth heauen heere vpon earth, maketh God, man: and man, God: heauen, hell: & hel heauen, For venom and poyson which will bring present death, hath he dispersed ouer euery member & article of our beliefe, so vniuersall is the poyson of his opinion.
Touching conuersation, howe may wee imagine that there is any soundnesse, when the doctrine and vitall partes be thus infected. For do we not read in the scrip∣tures, that most shameful corruptiō of life hath alwaies followed as a due & deserued punishment, the corrup∣tion of doctrine.Rom. 1.24. God gaue them vp (saith the Apostle) to their hearts lusts vnto vncleannes, to defile their owne bo∣dyes betwene thēselues, which turned the trueth of God vn∣to a lye. Which thing Priscillianus (of whom H.N. hath borowed not only that villanous wresting of the word by allegories: but also that monstrous opiniō, that per∣iurie and lying be lawfull and may be doon with good conscience to conceale religion) confessed beeing con∣demned to dye for heresie: Priscillianus (saith Daneus) was put to death at Treuyris, which is the most famous

Citie of Germany, hauing confessed before that that hee had oftenten times committed moste shamefull wic∣kednesse with the women of his sect.Danae. in Aug. de haere. cap. 70. And what a li∣bertie H. N. his doctrine giueth vnto all lewdnesse of life, in his allegorie of the woman that is rauished in the fielde: I leaue it to the consideration of the godly.Document. sen∣ten. cap. 13. sect. 8. These be his wordes in his booke called Documentall Sentences, speaking of temptations vnto sinne: If they take and lay holde on vs with force and violence, and that then although we cry, there commeth not any power or helpe vnto vs, for to withstand them in their force and violence: and that they euen so rauish vs against our will, so are wee guiltles of the transgressing: for we haue cryed to be released of the tyranny of the euil, & there is no help come vnto vs. Of the which guiltlesse transgressing, the law likewise witnesseth, where it sayeth: A woman which is violently taken in the field, where as there is not any helpe, and so rauished,Deut. 22. and al∣though she haue cried aloude, yet gotten no helpe, she shall be guiltlesse of the transgressing. What can open anie win∣dow wider vnto all wickednesse, then this doctrine do∣eth? For if temptations presse vs, and our prayers pre∣sently preuaile not, by this doctrine we are discharged of all daunger from the fact, howe often and how grie∣uously soeuer we shall offende. Whom would not this doctrine, not onely incourage vnto sinne: but also make him impudently secure, and senselesse in the same. This monstrous birth so beastly and so blinde hath the con∣tempte of the worde and want of care to keepe it in a good conscience, nourished and brought forth. Wher∣by we may see with what daunger we walke not onely wickedly, but also carelesly against the worde. For this spectacle doeth plainly shew, that it is more precious in the Lord his sight, then that he either can or will put vp at our hands, the contempt and neglect of the same. And therfore when we see at this day, those men who

sometimes haue knowne the trueth, become as beastes voyde of all reason: let vs vnderstande that the Lorde thereby meaneth to magnifie his worde, and to let men perceiue the might and Maiestie of the same. For when he cannot abide that they should anie longer enioy so much credite by his word, as the shew & bare professiō would yeeld vnto them, which is al that they would re∣quire▪ but that he wil haue thē turned out of their clouts and laid naked in their shame: doth he not from heauē by such iudgements preach & declare the maiestie and might of his word? Is not that the great seale sent from heauen into the earth, to be set vnto the worde for the authorizing thereof? For seeing they would not reue∣rence it brought vnto thē vnder the Lords owne hand and seale of signes & miracles: they haue forced him by bringing these heauie iudgements vppon them for the further confirming of it, to set his seale the second time vnto it. Should not all men nowe feare to prophane it, when there is here among vs a mark of such maiestie set vpon it? Should not euerie man now examine what re∣reuerence he doth beare vnto it, when he seeth for the freeing of it from contempt so great & plaine a print of authoritie to be ioyned vnto it? Let people now take heed how they cherish that humor within themselues, which cannot beare any other teaching of the woord, then that which is so interteyned of the eare, that it can not bee hired so much as once to vewe and visite the heart. Let those feare who cannot digest the word vn∣lesse with eloquence and wit, curious questions, & pro∣phane hystories and fables, the power and strenght of it bee so allayed, as nowe there is no more any ma∣iestie in it. And seeing we haue such sensible iudgement among vs against them, who like not the simplicitie of the worde, but will feed of speculations and mysticall matters: let them who minister the worde, take heede

they feede not that affection in them, by laying on such painting and colours, as may rather make them won∣der at the workemanship, then take any profite by the worke. Let them teach and exhort with wholsome do∣ctrine, not onely planting knowledge in them, but ear∣nestly calling vpon them to keepe their knowledge in a good conscience, and so much the rather, because wee see before our eyes, what a daungerous shipwracke they haue made euen of knowledge, who haue gone vn∣to the sea with it, in the riuen vessell of a corrupt consci∣ence. Let them styrre them vppe to haue their recko∣ning in a readinesse, seeing the Lorde hath alreadie be∣gonne to visite the contempt of his woorde. Let them vrge them likewise to seeke for iudgement in the word, whereby to discerne spirites, that seeing nowe we bee sought and sifted that way by Sathan, we may be found sufficiently armed likewise on that side against him, lest wilful ignorance should bee punished in vs with obsti∣nate errour. Let vs prouide that those may be ioyned togither which the Lord cannot abide to put a sunder: that zeale, for lacke of knowledge doe not degenerate either into some daungerous schisme or superstition: neither yet knowledge for want of zeale & affection, ei∣ther into vnprofitable curiosity, or els into some horri∣ble heresie. Touching those who be of opiniō that these heresies will vanish away of thēselues, because the mat∣ter is so grosse, & the men be so vtterly vnlearned, and therfore would neither haue sword nor pen pulled out against them: They are to be required that they woulde vouchsafe to haue their iudgemēt waied by the word, so should they find it lighter then the wind. For doth not the Apostle tell vs, that want of affection and loue to∣wards the truth, pulleth the eyes of our knowledge out of our heads, & procureth belief & credit vnto manifest lies & vntruthes: insomuch that where this iudgmēt of god entreth, the greatest vntruthes shal not be receiued waueringly

in opinion, but cōstantly in beliefe, & strong perswasiō: now with what affection the gospel is receiued of many among vs, whether with so good an affection as will warrant vs that way, I think in this behalfe a good con∣fession is much better then an euill defence. And tou∣ching the want of learning in the patrons of these here∣sies, who knoweth not, that Alexander the Copper∣smith wrought more woe vnto the Apostle S. Paule, by hindering the course of the gospel, then any either elo∣quent Orator, or subtile Philosopher. For when simple men such as be artificers, thrust forth themselues with as much boldnes as blindnesse, to be guides for others vnto God: forthwith that is fathered by the multitude vpon the miraculous & extraordinarie worke of God: and therefore they will haue all of them, who haue at∣teined vnto knowledge by ordinarie meanes, of neces∣sitie yeelde and giue place to their better & superiour. My purpose was at the beginning to haue dealt onely with his booke intituled Euangelium Regni, but finding it stand often vpon one thing (as what order can con∣fusion affoord vnto vs?) I thought I should better pro∣uide for the Reader, if I should examine his iudgement vpon euerie seueral article of our beliefe, which he hath set downe in his first exhortation: and withall for the better vnderstanding thereof should cite these places out of his Euangelie, where hee handleth the same matter, and that so largely, as it may easily appeare vnto all men, that neither I haue missed of his meaning nor yet dealt vnfaythfully by suppressing any trueth in my allegations. Where he doth vsually pester his mar∣gent with plenty of authorities, as if nothing but scrip∣ture might at any time be heard out of his mouth: It is a bayte layde for the simple, who either cannot or will not examen the matter. For falshoode wil as wel guard the trueth, as those authorities defend the cause he hath

in hande. I haue perused them one by one, which are alleaged to warrant his calling, where I am sure hee bringeth foorth the best euidences that hee hath, be∣cause it toucheth his freehold: let them be viewed, that is the treatise which I first deal withal, and as they de∣serue, so let the rest be beleued. Wherin vnlesse I should ouermuch abase H.N. I can no better match him then with S. George, as the papistes doe describe him. For as S. George loueth to bee alwayes on horsbacke albe∣it he neuer ride: So H.N. hath great liking to be moū∣ting in the margent vpon the autorities of the sacred worde, albeit they neuer step forth with him, to speake so much as one woorde for him. I haue added next vnto that before I enter to examine the articles of the beliefe, his iudgement of originall sinne, taken out of the 5. Chapter of his Euangelie, because those only were the matters which that booke had more and be∣sides that doctrine which is handled in his exposition vpon the Creede. His words be wrapped in such dark∣nesse and obscuritie as doe geue euident testimony of his minde that he meaneth to deceiue. As for the parts of his arguments, they be at such variance with in thē selues, that the cōsequens can by no right be deni∣ed the good abearing against his antecedent. For mark their meating, & you shal perceiue that alwaies the one draweth vpō the other, & wil neuer leaue him before he haue either a leg or an arme of him. And in asmuch as partly by his dark speaking, & partly by his allegorical expositiō, he hath hatched a mōster of perfectiō, which he calleth Christ: I haue added to the end of this booke 3. seuerall short treatises, of those 3. special matters, con∣cluding the booke with a Sermō which I made hereto∣fore, moued therunto by the iudgemēt of some, not on∣ly for that the present occasiō did then force me to stād vpō that historie of Christ his death, which H.N. would

wholy and altogither transforme into an allegorie: but also for that in so large a matter of doctrine to reforme our iudgemēt, I wished there might be somwhat ioined to further our cōuersation. I haue likewise set down the iudgemēt of some godly & learned, as wel of the Dutch church as of our owne, touching these heresies of H.N. that thēselues may see I am not alone, neither in my o∣piniō of thē, neither in this necessarie cōtention by wri∣ting with thē. These fruits of my labours my (very good Lord) I present vnto your honour as a publike testimo∣nie of my humble duetie & good will vnto your L. not only in respect of my selfe for your L. great good deser∣uings towarde me, but also in regarde of many others, who find a safe harborow vnder your honourable pro∣tection, and haue such an easie accesse & entrance vnto your honour, in all their good occasions and lawfull re∣quests: as bindeth vs vnto all duetie and thankfulnesse vnto his maiestie and your honor as his instrument for the same. Which hath made me bold at this time to cō∣mend vnto your honourable care, the redresse of a dan∣gerous enormity, which of late hath broken out in this land, I meane this Athisme brought in by H.N. & that his household who will bee called the Familie of loue. The seruice your honour may doe vnto God in it; is great: the hope to preuaile against them in like maner is good: for as true Religion spreadeth and increaseth vnder the crosse, so punishment and affliction is the bane of heresie and false religion. With what care and conscience such matters are to bee dealt withall, that which is read in Deut. 14. may sufficiently direct your honour. Where it is plainly declared, that if anie shall secretly intice vnto a strange religion, either friend, hus∣band, or brother, (the nearest bondes that nature or friendship hath) they stand charged not only to reueale it, but also that their handes shall be first vpon them, to

put them to death. To bewray the secretes of a deare friend, who is to a man as his owne soule, seemeth to flesh and blood an heynous matter: to deale so with a mans brother the sonne of his mother, or with his daughter the bowels of his owne bodie: the law of na∣ture doeth crie out of it: and yet for the glorie of our God, we are not onely in such a case to reueale this a∣gainst them, but our selues to be the chiefe doers in the death & execution of thē: which telleth vs that with the true worship of God and religion, neither friendship nor nature may enter anie comparison: nay it telleth vs that at the bringing in of Idolatry & a strange religion how secretly soeuer the seedes therof shal be sowen, ra∣ther thē by the impunitie therof, Gods glorie should be defaced, and the daunger that is due for the neglect thereof should be susteined: we are not onely to lay a∣side naturall affection, but euē to breake into our owne bowels, & to bathe our selues in our owne blood. The case so nearly touching the glorie of our God, I am in good hope, that this which hath bene said, shall suffici∣ently perswade your honour, to enter into some speedie care & consideration, how to suppresse so great & grie∣uous a danger. Your L. labour in this cause so directly and so daungerously dealing against the highest, hee can neuer forget to recompence: who hath promi∣sed to reward, euē to a cup of cold water bestowed vpō the least of those little ones, who doe beleeue in his name The God of all glorie make you partaker of that honour, which is assured vnto all them, who by these & such like fruites of faith, shall trauaile the ratifying of their owne election, and the remouing of all such enor∣mities, or blemishes, which either hurt the health, or hinder the beautie of the Church.





