


Right Worthy▪
CAptaines, it is now something morethen seven yeares, since the beginning of that private and commendable exercise of Armes by your two Companies together; how much experi∣ence it hath begot in your Soul∣diers, your selues be the Iudges. This must be con∣fessed, that it is so orderly contrived, as to become no hinderance to mens more necessary callings. Yea it rather calls them the earlier unto it: for that the Exercise continueth onely one houre the Thursday of every weeke; and in the Summer time, ending at se∣ven of the clocke in the Morning. Some there have been notwithstanding, that have held a prejudicate opinion of this meeting: conceiving that it would prove an hinderance to the Artillery ground. Never∣thelesse

the proofe hath reported the quite con∣trarie: for that it hath become a great meanes to∣wards the advancement thereof. And that by send∣ing divers Gentlemen thither to enter themselues therein, who before had not the least conceit or purpose that way. As for the Souldiers of that meeting, they neither beat Drumme, display Ensigne, nor discharge Musket: But onely exercise their Postures, Motions, and formes of Battell, with false fire in their pannes. Which is the cause, that the Souldiers having at∣tained some little skill in the handling of their Armes: presently desire, to exercise with more liberty; and so enter upon the Artillery Garden. Wherefore (most worthy Captains) you shall do well to che∣rish your diligent and industrious Souldiers: that so they may be heartened to persist, in so honourable and commendable an entendment. It being such an exercise whereby God may gaine glory, the King and Kingdome, honour; your selues, credit; and your Souldiers, skill: For my owne part, I professe and ac∣knowledge my selfe to be one of the first beginners of it: and do still continue a member of the same. And this maketh me the more silent, though still I wish in heart the continuance of so friendly a societie. And therefore (fellow Souldiers) I pray you accept of my good will for the deed: for were I as able as I am willing; I then, with the Poet,
Would consecrate your Memories to time,
That yours might Live, when I am turn'd to slime.

