


YOu may be pleased to remember (Noble Sir) how often you have Importunde me to write something (by way of instruction) for the bettering of the judgements of such young Gen∣tlemen and Souldiers whose mindes stand this way affe∣cted. And although (for my own part) I can better mannage the Pike then the Pen; yet that I might not be wanting in all acknowledgement, I have taken upon me to satisfie your request; which shall ever carry the authority of a Command with it. Expect not (I beseech you Sir) to finde my Booke set forth with fine phrases, nor to be deckt with historicall dis∣courses, of forraine fought Battels: this being the onely thing by me intended in it; to set forth the exact grounds of this our moderne discipline, for the exercising of a foot Company. Nor is it to be estee∣med a small advancement to the knowledge of the art Military; even to have Taught this little, seeing it must be confessed to have beene one of the chie∣fest

meanes to make Philip from a poore Prince, to become a powerfull Monarch; and his Sonne Alex∣ander amighty Conquerer. I meane his exact obser∣vance of the true grounds of military Discipline, which beginneth with the instruction of a private Company.
Adde hereunto (which I have also toucht upon) his frequent practise and inuring of his Souldiers to the use of Armes: together with his well ordering and contriving the severall formes and figures of his Battels. Alwaies (by the way) observing how to make his advantage, either from the time, the num∣ber, or the place, or some other such like oportunity. But not to cloy your quainter eares with impertinent discourses: who are not onely a Master of Armes, but of Arts; also a Gentleman that hath beene Captaine either over horse or foot; for the space of these last forty yeeres: and from your very infancy brought up in the very bosome of the Muses. So that you are now become a Nestor for Counsell, an A∣pollo for Musicke, and a Mars for the Field. But lest by acknowledging your worthy parts, (your native modesty being such, that you never love to heare your owne due deserved praises) I purchase a frowne for a recompence: I forbeare. My humble desire now is, that your Worship will be pleased to accept of my well meaning: and although I be wanting in artfull expressions, yet to rest assured, that I am yours in all humble and heartie affection, and shall still continue

