



Much honour'd Sir,
and
Right worthy Souldiers,
THe GRECIANS were the first that out of variety of action, and long experience of warre, reduced the knowledge of Arms into an Art; giving precepts for the ordering of Arms, and the embattelling of Armies.

The ROMANES, who were their Succes∣sours in time, so were they also of their precepts; breeding and inuring their youth to hardship, the use of Armes, and the stu∣dies of the Art Military. So that by their countenance and practice therein, they not onely became powerfull and terrible to others: but in a word reigned as sole Mo∣narchs of this Mundane glory.
Plut. in LicurLICVRGVS the Law-giver to SPARTA, ordred that no Epitaph should be made, nor mans name remembred on his Tombe, except of him who had been a Souldier; as esteeming them onely worthy of memo∣ry. The Persian ARTAXERXES, preferred Plut. in Pelo¦pida.PELOPIDAS, and the Thebane friendship before the rest of GREECE. because they were the best Souldiers. PHILIP of MA∣CEDON, King of a poore Countrey, by teaching his people exactly the exercise of Arms, and practising a new discipline, not onely freed himself and Countrey from the oppression of his enemies; but also laid the foundation of the MACEDONIAN glory.
By this, Right worshipfull, you may in part discern the great esteeme that An∣tiquity

made of those studious in this Art. And so please you to compare the Histo∣ries of the passed times, you may as in an Index behold how that the wel disciplin'd have alwayes been the very Bulwarks and impalements of their Countreys. Where to the contrary, neglect of discipline, and the Art Military have been alwayes the fore∣runners of destruction both to Province and people. I might be infinite in examples of this nature, but then I should make my porch larger then my house. Therefore let ROMES remissenesse be a warning to poste∣rity; who as it had a slow gradation in its arise by virtue, so had it degrees of falling, by neglecting discipline and the Art Mili∣tary, suffering it self to be crushed and over∣trodden by every Barbarous Nation.
This as it reflects upon us a necessity, so it demonstrates of how necessary conse∣quence the practice of Arms is: inducing and inviting all generous spirits to endea∣vour the attainment of this Military skill. To acquire the which, the GRECIANS had their Tactick masters, the ROMANES their Tribunes, and other inferiour Tutors

which taught them in Campus Martius; and we our Academies and Military Schooles of war, witnes our ARTILLERY GARDEN with the MILITARY and MAR∣TIALL grounds, wherein the choice and best affected Citizens (and Gentry) are practiced and taught the Rudiments of our militia. In times of peace so fitting them, that they may be able to stand in the day of battell, to Gods glory, their own honours, and their Countreys good But leaving these to your more retyred and serious conside∣rations: be pleased to take notice that the GRECIANS, ROMANES, PERSIANS, and other Nations, had not onely their train∣ings abroad, but they had also their Tri∣umphs at home in Martiall and warlike wise all armed, treading out stately measures, to their Instruments of warre. Such Military exercises as these have you formerly per∣formed, which induced aRich. Nicolls Oxon. his Lon∣dons Artillery page 37 print∣ed in Anno 1616. judicious writer long since to set forth your praises in ele∣gant verse as followeth.
Behold how Londons armed Infantry,
Through practise in true Rules of Souldery
By the Drums martiall Musick often led
The Pyrrhic dance do now distinctly tread:
Which if industriously they do pursue,
And use that timely custome that is due
To warlike practice, in despight of hate,
Which evermore upon desert doth wait;
Times Finger may engrave their Industry,
Vpon Fames Pillars to posterity.
And such as this, right worthy Souldiers, was our last exercise in Merchant-Taylors Hall, which is the subject of this book: the well contriving and exact performance whereof, induced many of the judicious spectators to desire copies: which through severall transcriptions became so imper∣fect, that I was requested by many to bring it to the Presse, so to preserve its Na∣tive purity. This I was the more willing to suffer, by reason no more were to passe the print, then barely might serve such Gentlemen who are desirous of them, be∣ing members of our own Company. As not being willing that so rough and unpolisht a draught should be exposed to the publick view. Therefore hoping your wonted fa∣vours,

and not doubting of your kinde ac∣ceptance; withall desiring, that as I have freely bestowed my pains, so you will as lovingly passe by my errors, whereby you will put a further obligation upon him that is already

