




Pro. 18. 17.
Iustus qui primus in lite su, donec aduenit proximus eius & per∣uestiget illum.

HItherto (Right Honorable) haue our malignant aduer∣saries
had their full scope against vs with the lavve in
their ovvne handes, and haue made no spare or consci∣ence
to accuse, blaspheame, condempne & punish vs, yea to pro∣nounce
& publish vs as damnable heretikes, schismatikes, sec∣taries,
seditious, disobedient to Princes, deniers & abridgers of
their sacred povver &c, to the eares & eies of all men openly in
their pulpits, and in their printed bookes, published by the con∣sent
& approbation of their Church. No triall all this while
vpon anie sute or complaint graunted vs: Either ciuile, that we
might knovv for what cause & by what lavve we thus suffer,
which yet is not denied the most horrible malefactors & offen∣dors:
Or ecclesiasticall by the word of God, where place & free∣dome
might be giuen vs to declare & pleade our ovvne cause in
sobrietie & order: that so the meanes appoincted of God for our
recouerie might be vsed, and we (wherein we should be found
to erre or transgresse) might be cōuinced to our faces by the scrip∣tures,
and left inexcuseable. But in stead of this christian
course, they haue shut vs vp novv more then three yeares in mi∣serable
& close prisons from the aire, from all exercise, from all
companie or conuersation with anie person, from all meanes so
much as to write, yncke & paper being taken & kept from vs,

and a diligent watch both by our keapers held ouer vs, and also
continuall searches vpon one pretence or other made, where we
were rifled from time to time of all our papers and writinges
they could find. And being thus streightly kept & watched from
speaking or writing, their conscience yet giuing them no rest in
all their prosperitie and pleasures, whilest we the Lords poore
witnesses against their sinnes breathed (Not to speake of their
secret & indirect meanes wherby they sought to take avvay our
lyues) they suborned (amongest sondrie others) tvvo special in∣struments,
M. Some & M. Giffard to accuse & blaspheme vs pub∣liquelie
to the viewe of the world, etch of them in tvvo bookes,
the one labouring to proue vs Anabaptists, the other Donatists in
the same. Which Bookes they haue preferred especiallie to your
Honor, as the chiefe obstacle that hindered them from their
violent and bloudie course, of the same intent (no doubt) that
their predicessors the chiefe Priestes and Pharasies accused our
Sauiour vnto Pilat, and the Apostle Paule vnto the Romane go∣uernours.
Yet euen all this, we hope, the Lord hath disposed to
the furder manifestation of his truth, by directing our aduer∣saries
to bring our criminations before your Honor. Of whose
wisdome & equitie we haue so great experience & assurance,
as we can not frō henceforth doubt to be condempned vnheard,
or to find therein worse vsage, then our Sauiour & the Apostles
found at those heathē Rulers. Wherfore we addressed our selues
(by such meanes as the Lord administred, and as the incomomo∣dities
of the place, and the infirmities of our decaied bodies &
memories would permit) to our defence, or rather to the defence
of that truth, wherof God hath made & set vs his vnvvorthie
witnesses, though as signes to be spokē against, and as monstrous
persons in this sinfull generation▪ And haue herevnto vnder∣taken
Mr. Giffards two reprochfull blasphemous Bookes: Shevv∣ing
the true causes of our seperation from the parish assemblies,
confirming & approuing the same to be both true and sufficient

by sondrie weightie reasons & expresse scriptures: Refelling by
the like all the friuolous cauills and iniurious sclanders which
M. G. hath there brought to hide their sinnes, deface the truth,
and to defame vs. As also shevving such apparant dissimili∣tude
betvvixt the Donatists and vs, both in the causes of our &
their seperation, and in the maner of our & their proceedings,
and in sondrie errors they held, as no man of anie knovvledge or
iudgmēt before attempted, or shall hereafter be able (with anie
truth or conscience) to compare vs vnto them herein, or to ex∣cuse
M. G. for this his vnchristian dealing with vs. All whose
vnsanctified reproches whervvith his bookes through euerie
sentence are seasoned in stead of better grace, herevpon fall to
the ground, and remaine vpon his ovvne, and not vpon our ac∣compt.
This defence when whe had through the mercifull hand
of our God finished, though not with anie shevv of humane
wisdome or arte, so much as in simplicitie of the truth & inno∣cencie
of our heartes, we held it our dutie to present in like ma∣ner
in alreuerence & humilitie vnto your honorable vievv &
graue cōsideratiō. That both sides being heard according to equi∣tie,
and our ansvveres as well as their criminatiōs duly expen∣ded,
your sentence, or at the lest approbation, might proceede ac∣cording
to the truth. Crauing herein no furder fauour, then ac∣cording
to the equitie of our cause & innocencie of our doings:
Nor yet shunning any furder triall of the one or the other, that
your Honor shall appoinct or thinck meet; whether with these
our aduersaries, or anie other that shall be contrarie minded,
whosoeuer. Beseaching your Honors perdō for this our bould pre∣sumption,
the rather because such necessitie was layed vpō vs by
the hand of God, through the importunate chalenges & insolent
prouocatiōs of these our accusors: whose mouthes must either be
stopped, or else through our defalt ye holy truth of God, which we
beleeue & professe, yea & our innocēcie be betraied to the perpe∣tual
infamie of these our reprochfull aduersaries, to our ovvne

perill and future iudgment, to the scandall of all that professe
the same truth with vs, but chiefly to the offence and torning
backe of manie, euen of the whole land, from the streight waies
of the Lord, euen the waies of life and peace. All which mis∣chiefes
(we trust) shalbe preuented by these our simple inde∣uours,
the Lord giuing testimonie and blessing to his ovvne
word: The truth wherof shall shine forth in our simplicitie,
the povver therof be made manifest in our weakenes, to the
discouerie & reformation of these publique enormities in the
false worship, open sacrilege, antichristian ministerie & hei∣nous
disorder exercised and soffred in this land, and to the dis∣cipation
of all the delusions & vaine promises and persvvasions
of these false Prophetts, whervvith they haue a long time (for
their ovvne fleshlie pompe and filthie lucre) seduced the whole
land, dravven them into, and held them in the wrath & heauie
iudgments of God. That so the mightie hand of God working in
the heart of our Souereigne Prince & Nobles, especiallie through
your Honors faithfull counsell and furtherance; and also in the
heartes of all the Commons, when the truth of these things shall
be shevved vnto them, a general and sincere conuersion to the
Lord may be made, euen from all things that novv are, or here∣after
shall be found contrarie to his holie will, whither in the
publique estate of all, or in the priuate estate of anie. For sure,
as euerie perticular person goeth forvvard from faith to faith
as knovvledge is increaced, euerie day teaching other vnto eter∣nal
life: So in the publique estate of the Church no change that is
made according vnto the truth, as the publique error is espied,
ought to be held strange or dangerous. But most heauenlie is
that harmonie, where all the members kint together in the same
faith, both in general and perticular, with one accord goe for∣ward
in their callings and duties, still amending what is found
amisse, and daylie indeuouring to doo better. Then should

there not be found anie such vnchristian contention abought
the truth, pleading and spurning against the truth, or persecu∣tion
for the truth. Then should the Lords dreadful iudgments,
which novv hang ouer the whole land for these sinnes, be
auoided, and his blessings in stead therof be multiplied. But
sure in the meane time vntil these sinnes be remoued out of
Gods sight and redressed, there is no peace to be looked for or
asked of the Lord, there is no pleading with or against him,
hovvsoeuer the false Prophet may goe abought to heale the hurte
of this people as a light euill, saijng peace peace when there is no
peace, and to repaire the breaches that are as the sea, with vn∣tempered
stuffe and vaine visions tending vnto abdication.
Wherfore, to the torning avvay of so great euills, and the pro∣curing
of so great and inestimable benefites to our Souereign
Queene and Contrie, as we haue not with-holden our vtmost
indeuours to the discouerie of the publique enormities & sinnes
of these times, in all truth and freedome, being readie yet fur∣der
to witnesse and approue the same, if such neade be, to the
face of our greatest aduersaries and gainsayers, by the euidence
of Gods word: So novv it remaineth that we instantly beseach
your Honor, euen in the name of God, before whome we shall
all of vs shortly appeare to our accompt & iudgment, by whome
this chardge is layed vpon you (the cause being novv brought,
and by both sides, asvvell our aduersaries as vs, layed open be∣fore
your Honor) that you would novv be a meanes to her
right excellent Maiestie that these weightie and dangerous
matters may be no longer wrapped vp or put off in securitie
and silence (lest these our soffrings and testimonies rise in iudg∣ment
with this generation) but may rather be furder inquired
and discussed, and order and redresse taken according to the will
of God. Which shall no doubt torne to the high glorie & most
acceptable seruice of God and of your Prince, to the vnspeakable

benefite of this whole land, and to the happie discharge of your
dutie and conscience to your eternall praise in this life and in
the life to come.

