



Honorable Sir:
IF Saint Pauls Bookes and Parchments long since fell into the hands of Carpus,2 Tim. 4.13. what may I expect in this curious, this censo∣rious, this criticall, this carping age, but to be scoured & scour∣ged with the maleuo∣lent tongues of Mo∣mus & his mates? ,Thucidides, lib. 1. saith Thucidides: Hearing and Reading haue a prerogatiue not to be liable to account; but Prea∣ching and Printing cast themselues vpon the racke of censure. For are there not in the popular sort

as many heads as hearts? Quot capita tot sententiae, quot homines tot humores, quot humores tot mores, saith Lipsius:Lipsius. The many headed multitude is so diuided into faction and action,Bellua multorum capitum Seneca. that Diogenes him∣selfe, with all his Lanterne and candle-light, can scarce finde two in this noone-tide of the Gospel, quibus vna vox aut votum, of one minde or mould. There were diuersities of tastes among Horaces guests, so that that which one deemed dainty, see∣med vnsauory to another. Dianaes Temple was burned by Herostratus the same night that Alex∣ander the great was borne; One more namelesse then Herostratus said: It was no maruell, for Di∣ana her selfe, protectresse of that sacred Monu∣ment, was then absent as midwife as so great a child-birth:Cicero de natura Deorum, lib. 2. Plutarch in Alexandro. Tully commends this for a witty con∣ceit; but Plutarch condemnes it at a witlesse ieast. The like vnlike censures I looke for of this Ser∣mon: for though the reuerend and learned pre∣sence wherein I preached it, was not like Hanni∣bals army,Linius. Collunies omnium gentium, as Liuy cals it, a Miscellany of all Nations; yet was it like S. Peters Audience, Act. 2. consisting of men of many Countries,For it was prea∣ched vpon Stur∣bridge Faire Sunday. and they (it may be) of contra∣ry Languages: Cato, me thought, called on me to plead for peace, Pompey for warre; the Souldiour cried, Arma virum{que} cane; the Merchant, Da pacem Domine: But I followed Ciceroes counsell, Seruiendum tempori, though Lentulus thought it the voice of fawning flatterie. But how? I dis∣coursed of Praier, which is not onely Medicina vulnerum,Bernard. as Saint Bernard stiles it, but is farre

more soueraigne then the Physitians Catholicon, it is a medicine for all maladies. Were my Audi∣tors Students in the abstruse mysteries of Arts & Sciences? Behold, Prayer is their Oedipus to re∣solue, to dissolue their doubts. Were they Mer∣chants that traded for the Gold of Ophir? behold, Prayer sanctifies their profits; hence Constantine writ a Prayer about his coyne. Were they manu∣all Artificers, or such as liued by retaile, and tra∣dition? behold, Prayer is, clauis diei, &It is not dura sera, as Tibul. But firmasera, as Ouid: Yea, ferrea sera, as Plautus. sera no∣ctis, it is the Key to open, and the Locke to shut vp their shops. In a word, were theyDeut. 28.3. blessed in the City, and blessed in the field? behold, Praier is their Embassador to praise their God, and giue him thankes.
What then I spoke in the eare,Quia lucem ali∣quam tenui huic & per se obscura scriptioni conci∣liare conatus sum à luce vestrâ: Lipsius, ad Prae∣tor. Consul. & Senat. Reip. Vltraiectinae. I am bold to put vnder the shelter of your Honours protection, presuming to winne some lustre vnto this poore Paper-present, from your iudicious and learned Patronage. Your fidelitie in Court imploiments, your eminency in Natures endowments, haue moued God and the King to promote you, and all men to congratulate the amplification of your Fortunes. In your Honourable seate of Iudge∣ment you are like the Philosopher Zenocrates,Aelian. lib. 13. cap. 31. into whose bosome the sparrow fled from the tal∣lents of the Hawke: which doth ascertaine me, that Manasses, after the Deluge of his teares, shall not be like Noahs Doue,Gen. 8 9. Aelian. . finding no place to rest in, but that with Noah you will put forth your hand, and receiue him into the Arke of your pro∣tecting acceptance. Thus with Sinaetas in Aelian

I presume to present you with a fist-full of water, distilled from the Limbecke of Manasses his sor∣rowfull soule:Seneca de Bene∣fic. lib. 1. cap. 8. or rather, with Aeschines in Seneca, seeing I haue no meet present worthy so great a Person, I will gratifie you with my selfe, who will euer pray that your good name and fame MAY long flourish on earth,Bonum nomen, bonum omen. fenced and defended from the Theonine consumption of Enuy,Dente Theonino rodere, Horat. till your consummation in glory.
London this present Iune 4. Anno Dom. 1621.

