



THere be two points (Right Honoura∣ble) as witnesseth that worthie Ora∣tourCic. Offic. lib. 2., to bee ob∣serued in committing things to publique view. That they bee not satis nota, sufficiētly knowne before: and that they bee Cog∣nitione digna, worthie to bee knowne.
If the first, they are tedious: If not the second, they are o∣dious. If either, idle at the least, if not naught. If both, both idle and naught.
I hope, this little Treatise need feare iust exception on neither part. Many (I confesse) haue written on this Subiect: and iustly may it bee asked, what I haue found, which in their lear∣ned labours hath not alreadie been brought to light: yet dare I professe, that this small Tra∣ctate, (absit inuidia verbo) will affoord, vnto the illiterate some things, for manner at the least, if not likewise for matter, worth the reading.
And for Prayer, The nature of it is high, it being a peculiar fruite of the Spirit, the Immu∣nities great, the power won∣derfull, and the profit incom∣parable.  As, did not this suc∣ceeding discourse shew it, I could discouer at large. In a word, It is the Chariot and Horse∣men of Israel.
Why want wee necessaries for soule and body; seeing the earth is the Lords, yea, the Hea∣uens and the Heauen of Hea∣uens: and our God is abundant in goodnesse and truth? Wee pray not. Why are we, with E∣phraim, in crosses, as a cake vn∣turnedHos. 7.8.? We pray not. Why are the Heauens as brasse, and the earth as yron? Why is there such decay, frō yeere to yeere, in our stocke, and complaining in our streetes? We pray not.
For could the carnall man pray: and did the man already regenerate, vse this dutie, as hee ought: mercies would be more plentifull, iudgements not so  vsuall, and the rod of the wic∣ked would not bee suffered to lie so long vpon the lot of the righteous.
Requisite is it therefore, and of speciall consequence, that wee learne this great lesson, (taught so carefully of Iohn to his disciples: and begged so in∣stantly, of Christ, by his dis¦ples: I meane) How to pray.
The Doctrine is here hand∣led, the which out of my thank∣full remembrance of the many fauours receiued from your Lordship, for my quiet libertie in my Ministrie, and prefer∣ment, as also in respect of the reuerend opinion, which the Church of God hath a long time (and I hope shall haue oc∣casion to doe no lesse vnto the end) conceiued of your Lord∣shippes Christian affection to∣wards  God and godlinesse, I do humbly dedicate vnto your Honour.
Now the God of peace,Heb.
13.20,21. that brought againe, from the dead, our Lord Iesus, the great Shepheard of the sheepe, through the blood of the euerlasting couenant, make you per∣fect in euery good worke to doe his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Iesus Christ, to whom be glorie for euer and euer, Amen.

