



Sir,
SInce I first vowed to consecrate this rude and rural brood of my braine to your wor∣thy Name, I haue ouer-slipt occasion, & Endimion-like ouer-slept my selfe in the Land of Obliuion. For we liue in an Age so mercilesse to Inke and Paper, that I resolued to silence these my la∣bors,Seneca, in Troa. Act. 3. Lateat, haec vna salus, as Vlysses aduised An∣dromacha in the Tragedie. And are there not
 many curious, enuious and enuenomed Paper-wormes, Pioners, and vnderminers of other mens good endeauors? Aristarchus with his blacke-pile, Momus with his sponge,Martial. Epi∣gram. lib. 1. sect. 59. Laelius with his pen, our Romish Magnificoes with their pencill, audaciously dash out whatsoeuer displeaseth thē, tho otherwise neuer so iudiciously limmed and portraid, as is, or may be perspicuous to the dim∣mest apprehension.
Most of our Readers iudge of our VVritings, eitherNazianz. Apo∣loget. Secundùm praeiudicium allatum, as Nazian∣zen speaketh; orSeneca, epist. Secundùm affectionem innatam, as Seneca saith. Some would haue all our discour∣ses pregnant, cooked for the stomack of the Cri∣ticke: Others delight onely in the lightsome and delightsome, in the rectified and refined quiddities of rare Inuention: A third sort please themselues in the curoius, yet course and despicable Speculati∣ons of the Skepticks. The Schoole-man wisheth to be led into the large VVildernesse of extrauagant opinions; where he, not seldome loseth himselfe in the Maze and Labarynth of his looser curiosi∣tie. In this Babel of distracted, distempered, and diuided minds, not Solon, not Salomon, not Nature, not the GOD of Nature can please all! not Na∣ture; for some haue quarrel'd with her, for placing the Oxes hornes vpon his head, and not vpon his shoulders which are the stronger. Not the God of Nature; forThe Sonne of Titan, the Brother of Saturne. Typhaeus the Giant will haue an higher Firmament vnder which hee may walke, and bigger Starres to giue bigger light, otherwise
 he will pull them downe with a vengeance, andNisi homini placeat Deus, non fit Deus. Tertul. Apologet. cap. 5. Euseb. Eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 2. fight with Iupiter himselfe. Let me then pro∣fesse with that ancient, if not antiquated Poet Lu∣cilius: Me paucis malle à sapientibus esse probatum: for I would not be a Monster to please all men; no, I desire to displease ill men, forSeneca. epist. 77. Malis displicere, laudari est, saith Seneca.
Howsoeuer, I haue aduentured to enter into the Lists of these. Thu∣cid. lib. 2. polemicall essayes, that so I might be sure to please the most; for mans body is not more compos'd of contraries, then is this Age of controuersies. True it is, that this feeble Infant of my Intellect, is farre vnable to grapple with the greatest Giants, yet your learned protection shall beelike Aiaxes Buckler, to shield it safe against detraction. It comes against these Romish Goliahs with1. Sam. 17.40. Dauids staffe, the staffe of the bread of Life, the Word of the Lord. It comes against them with Dauids smooth stones, chosen out of that choisest and chiefest brooke, the Booke of GOD, which welles out the Nectarine and celestiall Torrents of the water of Life. Smooth are these stones, yet harder then the Egyptian Marble; smooth they are, not curiously cut, notExod. 28.11. embossed in gold like Aarons Onyx stones; not amorously enammeled with the inchanting soule-charming characters of glozing Rhetoricke. For who knowes not that Truth loues to be chastly naked, in the chase and pursuit of saluage Sauages, with chaste Diana; when as Falshood likeGen. 38.14. Thamar, hoodwinkes herselfe, and puts on the gairish, the
 Whorish attire of a Strumpet? Who knowes not that the best Olympicke Wrestlers wrestled ked, that so their Spectators might behold the comely proportion of their bodies, and their An∣tagonists might take no hold vpon them? Yet sometimes I place this Pigmey so plainely accom∣plisht, vpon the shoulders of the greatest Giants, of the greatest Grand-parents and Patriarches of the Primitiue Church, that so withIob 59.32. Iobs Eagle, thence she may spie for the space of her flight, and that her eyes may behold a farre off. For I haue euer deem'd them the base-borne birth of vile and seruile natures, who Foster-faction so farre, as fastidiously to contemne, to disdaine the Foster-fathers of the Church.Plutarch That Oracle at Delphos was more discreet then these, which answered Zeno the Philosopher, that hee should become happy, , saith Plutarch, were hee complexioned like the dead, that is, were he deuoted and addicted to the study of the Antique Ancients. I haue therefore taught this wandring Dina, to speak her Fathers & her Mothers tongue; I haue tutored her to regulate her speech and par∣lie, partly according to the Axioms of the prime Fathers, and partly according to the Actions of the Primitiue Church. Now, tho I still am iea∣lous of her rude education, yet am I bold to send herVeritas nun∣quam late. Vlys∣ses apud Senec. in Troa. Act. 3. abroad, vnder the fauourable Patronage of your protecting acceptance, as a pledge of my due and true desire, to shew my selfe thankfull vnto you, for the many vnmerited fauors I haue recei∣ued
 from you. So worthy is your deportment, so courteous your demeanour, so studious your de∣signes, so industrious your endeauors, to endeere others vnto you; that Silenus himselfe, in his most poysonful Pasquill, cānot once carpe at your inge∣nious carriage. But your great modestie prohibits me to extoll in presence, and your splendent Ver∣tues suggest vnto me, that they are sufficiently able to bee their owne Heralds. This onely I cannot conceale, your zeale to Gods House, not only in beutifying the Church with your presence, but in beatifying, in gratifying the Church-man with your Presents. Beneficiall was you to my Prede∣cessours, but bountifull vnto mee your present Preacher; for your remunerating hand hath not been shorted toward me, but much enlarged. So then to dedicate this poore discourse to your eter∣nall Name, is but with Chaerilus to present a few harsh Verses vnto Alexander: For this small Mite this little Monument, is no more equiualent to the maine debt I owe you, then is a Mole-hill to a Mountaine.
It was one of Lycurgusses Lawes enioyned the Lacedaemonians, to offer little Sacrifices vnto their gods, seeing they respect more the internall Deuo∣tion, then the externall Oblation: So the inge∣nuitie of your gentle disposition, hath bin a Spur to prick me on, to present this little Sacrifice of my simple seruice vnto your worthy selfe, Nam{que} tu solebas meas esse aliquid putare nugas: You haue euer more regarded the inward affection, then the outward action.

And thus in my most true and sincerest loue, I humbly take my leaue, leauing you and yours to the heauenly Patronage, Protection and Tuition of him, who neuer leaueth his.

