



GRace be wt your Ma∣iestye and peace from god our father & from our Lord Iesus christ Amen. And it please your Maieste for this cause haue I dedicate this my simple laboure vn∣to your grace. Fyrst because I per∣ceaue yt god hathe called your Ma∣iestie to be apreferrer of his holi and blessed worde as by another Iosias whiche Lord of power prosper your most excellēt Maiestie in al your di¦uine

affayres & godly enterprises Secondarily because ther is found many diuers sectes vnder Christes name at thys preasēte, as Papistes Lutherians, Swyngliās, Anabap∣testes, Laudiās wt other mo, lyke as ther was among ye Iewes, as Has∣butri Hemero. Baptista, Essei, Sa∣ducei Pharesei. &c. And euery one of them bostid thē of the lordes word, & wold be Christians, althought yt the most parte of these fore rehersed sec∣tes, hath not reaceauyd nether word nor sprit nor no christian lerninge, & therfore ar they so ready to persecute them that hath the word sprite & life, but what helpes it, it hath bene thus from the begynnyng, yt the spiritual chyldryn of God muste suffer of the fleshelye, as Abell of Caine, Isaac of Ismaell, Iacob of Esau and the spiritual chyldren of Israell of the fleshely. For before it pleased God to restore in to thys Realme (by youre

graces most noble father, and nowe by your maiestie) the Gospel & Ioy¦full tydinges of hys dearly beloued sonne our sauyor Iesu Chryst, In∣fidelytie as chefe Ruler reyngned in our hartes, Hipocrisie as a vayne glorious Emperesse beare dominiō, superstition, Idolatrye, false sectes, mens traditions, confidens reposed in mens inuentions, Pilgrimages, offerynges, Bulles, Pardons, Dis∣pensations, Masses, marchaundice for merites and workes, bieng & sel∣lynge of the deuine misteres, wyth other abhomenable baggage more, was crept into the great disquietnes of thys your holy Chatholike Chur¦che of Englād, but without doubte they shal no longer preuayle for the daye of the Lorde is at hand which shal breke Satās heed and destroy both him and al his ministers wyth the breathe of his mouth. For he wil no longer suffer thys great wicked∣nes

and abhomynacion, he wyll be knowen for the God and sauyoure alone he is the Lorde whiche alone wylbe exalted and al Idoles shalbe vtterly brōken in peaces.Esaie .ii. He is that God, whiche wyll no longer suffer hys glorye to be geuen to other. He is that lauer which wyl expulse the darkenes of mens tradicions, that fyght wyth hys infallible veryte, & brynge in the gloryous lyght of his most holy worde. To be shorte he wyll ouerthrowe all the Idollys ye obscure his glorye, and set vp hys blyssed name to be praysed for euer and euer Amē. Of this his holy wyl haue we experyens euē at this tyme in whiche it hath plesed hym to send vs your Maiestie his derely belo∣ued seruaunte oure most vertuous lawful and godlye kynge to ouer∣thorowe (not aparte) but all Anty∣chrystes kyngdome, by your diuine polecy and godly enterpryses. So

that the greate hore of Babilon,Apo. xvii. the mother of all Hordome and abho∣minacions of the earth. Hath loste her chefe glorye and renowne. And is nowe become so vyle, that she is made the habytacion of Deuelles, & the Holde of all fowle spyrites,Apo. xviii. Esaie .xii. Iore. xv Apo. xiiii. ps. xiiii iiii Psa. i.xvi & A cage of all vncleane and hathefull Byrdes, so that no man nowe wyll once by any of her marchādes. And wythout doubte the time is (by god∣des prouidence and your graces) yt Babylon hath in this realme suche a faule, that it shall not after this tyme at any tyme be repaired. For ye mouth of the Lorde hath spoken it, whiche is faythfull in all his wor∣des, and whose truthe abideth for e∣uer and euer, neyther can this Pro∣phecy of Chryst by made frustrate by any humayne polyce. Euery plant yt my heauēly father hath not plāted shalbe plucke vp by ye rotes,Math. xv.

whoso reioyseth not to heare these thynges: yea who tryūphes not to se thē. Blessed ar we your subiets to whom it hath chaunced not only to here these thīges Ioyfully, but also to se thē so plentyfully put in vre by your Maiestie, so that al your faith¦full subiectes beinge no papistes do faythfullye reioyse. And although, we be occasioned diuers wayse to ge¦ue god immortal thākes for dyuers gyftes, yet we thynke yt we are most hyghly bounde to be thankefull for the restitution of hys holy worde in thys your graces dayes. And woo worth them that be vnthankeful to hym in thys behalfe, & disobediente to your Maiestie, except they repent and amēd. Wherfore I desyre your Maiestie for the loue of god yt your grace reade it and iudge it wyth the Lordes worde, & cause it to be Iud∣ged of them that ar godly lerned, & not of suspected Papistes. And yf

they can confute it I wyl gladly be lerned. But & I haue the truthe and not they. I desire your grace for the tender mercy of god, and as ye wyll answer afore god at ye daye of Iud¦gement yt ye wyl protecte & defēde it acording to your office, & that youre louīg subiectes because of wekenes of the fleshe be not cōpelled to come from Christ to Antichrist, frō truth to falsed, from euerlastynge lyfe to euerlasting dethe. I knowe wel and it please your Maiesty yt ther shalbe kyckyng agaynst ye prycke,Esay .xl. notwith¦stāding I passe not, ye truth may no lenger be hid,i. Pet. i Esay. xiiii Iude. i ye truth may not come to nowght because of the lye, gods word remaynes euerlastyng. Was ye good Angels worse because of Lu¦cifers prynde, what hyndreth it ye .xi. Appostles yt Iudas was a traytour euery mā shall beare his owne bur∣thyne, ye father shal not beare yt vn∣ryghtwysnes of hys sonne, nor the

sonne the vnryghtwysnes of his fa∣ther. But the soule that sinneth shal dye. Was the pure cleane lerning of the .xii. Apostles worse that ye theyr was so manye damnable sectes in theyr tyme vnder Chrystes name? whiche sectes were no lesse then .vii. The fyrst learned Circumsicion, the seconde that there was no resurrec∣tyon, The thyrde as Philetus and Himeneus that the Resurrectiō was al past. The fourth that the daye of the Lord is at hande. The fyrte the Nicholaitans whiche hath had ther wyfes in comen. The syxte the Ebi∣onytes that denyed the Godhed of Chryst. The seuenth the corinthiās whiche lerned suche abhomynable thynges, agaynst whiche .ii. last sec∣tes saynt Iohan did wryte his gos∣pell and hys Epystles. Nowe seing this inestemable benefite of goddes word is so bounteously geuen vn∣to vs. Let vs youre pore subiectes

all together consent with one minde to conserue & mayntayne this most precyous Iewell that we lose it not hereafter thorough oure owne ne∣glygences. Let vs not hinder your Maiesties procedīges in yt ye go a∣boute to repayre and buyld agayne the Temple of oure Lord God, but rather further it yt you may haue a prosperous successe, & brynge youre laboure to a fortunate ende. In cō∣sideracion wherof all though I am no fyt persō to be a worckeman in this behalfe, yet verely I desyre wt all my harte yt this buildīg may go forward. And I wyshe to ye labour∣res yt are vnder youre Maiestie, all prosperous & fortunate thynges, yt they maye bring theyr worke to per∣fectnes. And although I can not greatly furder there godly labours, yet wyl I not hynder thē, but helpe thē to the vttremost of my power in al thinges. Let thē bring Ceder tres

Syluer, Golde, Perle and precious stones to the byldynge. And garny¦shynge of this Temple. I wyll a∣gaine with the poore wedowe in the Gospell of Luke,Luce. xii. brynge into the treasure house two Mytes, that is for my part, gather the stones, fetch the tember and make the morter, or do suche small thinges as my lyttel strenghes shalbe able to beare and suffer. And to thentent yt your ma∣iestie maye haue an experiēce of my good wyl toward ye bylding of the temple. Behold at this tyme I ge∣ue vnto your maiesty this my boke yt I wold so gladly wer put in print yf it were lysenced, wherein is decla∣red the ryght institucion and vse of the supper of oure Lorde. And ly∣kewyse desclosynge the abbomyna∣ble Idolatrye and false vsyng of it. And to the intente that bothe the persecuter and sclanderer of goddes worde, maie know vpō what groūd

yt the ryght congregacyon of Iesus Chryst the dearely beloued bryde, that holye Chrysten churche ye lyttyl flocke, to the whiche it pleased the father to gyue that kyngdome, and to thentent yt your grace may know which of all these for rehersed sectes is founde vpryght in the learninge of Iesus Chryst. For I saye vnto you in Chryst Iesu. Lyke as there was one Adam and Eua, one Noe and one Arke, one Isaac and one Rebecca, one house of Israell, one Ierusalem, & one Tēple. So is ther one Chryste and one congregacion, whych congregacion hath one Gos∣pel, one fayth, one Baptyme, & one Supper, one vpryght waye & wal∣kyng to euerylastyng lyfe, acording to the declaracion of goddes worde. And al they that hath not these thin¦ges afore rehersed. Namely Gospel fayth, Baptime, Supper, waye and waylkynge, he is no member in the

congregation of god,ii. Iohn .i. here profiteth nother name nor fame, we must be founde inwardly and outwardelye in the lernyng of Iesu Christ or we haue no god. Yt cold not helpe Is∣raell that they ware Abrams childe∣ryn & had not ye dedes of Abrā,Iohn̄. viii ther¦fore examyne thys supper, & ye shal finde it ye right supper of Iesu christ that euerlastyng word,Iacob .i. Math. xvi Exo. i.xix. that word of truthe, the worde of grace, the saffe∣makinge worde, that worde that is vnpossible to be ouercom. Yea ye ga¦tes of hel shal not preuayle agaynst it, it is the two edged sworde that cōmyth out of the mouth of the lord it is the sworde of the sprite, and wt it shal he smite the hethen. Therfore our hope and trust is in your Ma∣iestie for the buyldynge agayne of thys temple that is in decaye, & that ye wyll not be lyke vnto these mor∣therars of sayntes that hath byn in

tyme passed, which hath not streuen agaynste fleshe and bloude, but agaynst hym whose eyes is a flame of fyre, and in ryghtwysnes doth he iudge and make battel, whiche is Crowned with manye Crownes, & hys name no man knoweth, but he hym selfe, and hys vesture is depte in bloude, and hys name is called ye worde of God,Apo. xix Psalm. ii. which ruleth the He∣then wyth arode of Iron, and tre∣deth the wyne, fat of fersenes and wrathe of almyghty God, and hath on hys vesture and on hys thyghe a name wrytten kynge of all kyn∣ges and Lorde of al Lordes. Ther∣fore I desyre your grace that ye ex∣amyne wyth the Lordes worde this my pore boke. And by ye helpe of god your grace shal fynd nothīg sought for, but ye prayse of Iesu Chryst, the which he him selfe hath brought out of Heuē, lerned wt his blessed mouth

and seled with his precyous bloud. Therefore my desyre is to almygh∣ty god the preseruacyō of your ma∣yestie, and that he wyll preserue in you that newe and cleane harte and kepe open the eyes of youre vnder∣standyng that ye may auoyde the vngodly counselles of the shauen naciō that hathe brought this chur∣che in suche rewyne that your gra∣ce hath muche to doo to repayre it agayne. I nede not to resite ther fac¦tes nor ther names to your grace, ye knowe them wel enough they haue prycked at the kynges preuaye chā∣ber. The lord be blessed yt hath sent vs such a godlye kynge & gracious gouerner to delyuer vs, frō them yt morther Iesus christ in his mēbers out of ye power of death & tyrantes handes, I wyll not saye that they are preuaye traytours, but thys is trwe they are preuey Idolaters, be∣sydes thys rewmour renneth into al

landes, that they haue caused the kynges maiestie ye dede is (of whose soule the lorde haue mercy) to make suche lawes that no mā myght ha∣ue nor rade the Gospell but men of sertayne degres and that poore men shulde be occupyed wyth fables, what cā be more blasphemy agaīst god and his anoynted Iesus, then to depryue his members of his god∣ly worde, whiche lawes (blessed be god) is by your maiestie abolished. These Antichrystes haue alwayes defended ther cause with the sword. But Chryst Iesus wyth mekenes and wyth hys holy worde. O bludy wrathe and wryched tyranny which goeth aboue the wrathe of al vnrea∣sonable creatures. For ye fearse Ly∣on, the ragyng Bere, and the gry, pīg wolfe, is euer one of thē at peace in there generacion. But these blud thrusty Dogges neuer faciate, whi∣che shulde be made lyke vnto the I∣mage

of God, which is borne wt out tethe, nayles & horne, wt feble tender flesh without wyt speche or myght, whiche can neyther go nor stande, which alonely must lyue by ye helpe of ye pore mother, in a token yt he is a creatur of peace, he is so ful of ma∣les so ful of blud, yt no mā can think nor write. O how wide ar ye popysh desiples deuided from our maisters learning, & example thē which hathe sought nothīg in this life & learnīg saue peace, saing my peace I leue wt you, my peace I geue vnto you, the sonne of mā is not come to destroye ye soule, but to saue yt which was lost O yu excellent prince turne yu vnto ye wysdome of God, whiche sayeth. O turne you vnto my creaciō, lo I wil expresse my mynd vnto you, & make you vnderstād my wordes, set your affeccyon vpō ryghteousnes ye yt be Iudges of the earth. Be wyse nowe therfore (o ye kinges) be lerned ye yt are Iudges of ye earth, set your lust

vpō wysdom yt ye maye reygne for euermore.Pro. i. Sapi. i. Psal. ii. Sapi. vi. And remember wherto ye ar called namely to punysh euyl do∣ears, as theues & murtherers, hore-hunters & breakers of wedlocke ī al kindes, wytches, buggers Raue∣shers of wemē, mourtherars, extor∣cyners, stretrobers, to depose al false & blind learners, let them be of what secte or name soeuer he or they be, wt ther Antichrystes learninge, beastly lyuing, blasphemyng & sclāderynge ye almyghty maiestie of god Chryst Iesu, & the holy ghost & the euerlas∣tyng safemakyng word ye holy gos∣pel of Iesu Christ. To these thinges are ye called, as it is manifestly ler∣ned ī al ye holy scriptures,Exo. xviii. and .xxiii.ii. Pa. xiv. Roma. xiii i. Petre. ii as in Exo xviii.xxiii.ii. pa. xix. Ro. xiii.i. pe. ii. suche prynces hath bene. Ezecheas Ioseas, Dauid, Iosaphat, zoroba, bel & yet mo, whiche alwayes vsed the offyce accordinge to the decla∣racion of godes worde. They haue

done alwayes theyr hole diligens to rule the lande in the feare of God, & hath roted out all false Prophetes, and Prestes wyth there Alters and Idols. They haue soughe the lawe of the Lorde. The ryght offeryng & Cerymones whiche the Lorde had delyuered vnto the chyldren of I∣srael by Moyses.Deut. vi The feare of God was in theyr hartes. The boke of ye lawe in theyr hādes, therafter haue they lyued. Iudged the folke & pra∣sed the Lorde that hath called them to suche an offyce, they haue sub∣mytted them selues with al ther hole hartes, and hath geuē the Glory vn¦to the God of there fathers, Abram, Isac, and Iacob. Lyke as Dauid dyd playeng daunsynge before the lordes Arke, and was gyrded wyth a lynnen Ephode, so that he was re∣preued of hys wyfe Michol. What hathe he answered I wyll playe be∣fore the Lorde,ii. Reg. vi. and wyll yet be more

vyle thē so, and wylbe meke harted meke in myne owne syght. O thou excellent Prynce beleue the Gospell of Iesu Chryst, feare the stronge punyshment of God, loue ryghte∣ousnes, do ryght to wydowes and fatherles. Iudge right betwene ney¦boure & neyghboure, feare no mans countenaunce, despice no mans sym∣pelnes, punyshe with descretion all euyl doynges, let learned men prech Godes worde in your lande, yt God hathe geuen vnto you, and let them lyue by you, whiche the Lorde hathe called and chosen. So shal your seate remayne for euermore. The Lorde guyde your hart to ye loue of god and to the pacient wyghtyng for Chryste Amen.Sapi. vi. Pro. xxix. ii. tessa. iii.

