


WHat tyme my little worcke, en∣tituled the iustificatiō of faith only, was in the handes of the Printer (moste gentyl Ladye) it fortuned me to reade in a cer¦tayne exposition, whyche Frances Lambert of Auenna dyd wryte vpon Osee the Pro∣phet, that the wyll of man naturally is cap∣tyue to sinne (as the Apostle ryght wel wit∣nesseth sayinge. He whyche doeth syn is the seruaunt of synne. There is not one iust mā, there is not one whyche seketh after God. All men haue erred & gone forth of the way and are altogither made vnprofitable. Ther is not one manne whych doeth good, no, not so muche as one) and also bonde frome do∣ynge of any good thynge of it selfe, as wit∣nesseth the Apostle Iames with these words

Euery good and perfecte gyfte is frome a∣boue, discendinge downe from the father of lyght, whyche article beynge very well dis∣cussed, and wyth the file and touchstone of the scriptures proued and made playne: I thoughte it necessarie and expediente that it shoulde be broughte forthe of the Latin into oure vulgar tonge. Partlye bycause the con∣trarye erroure (that man hathe power to do good of hym selfe) beyng the doctrine of the Papystes, of the Anabaptistes, & of the Pe∣lagiōs, is so inueterated and roted in the sto∣makes of moste men, that almoste they can skante fynde in theyr herte to geue to God any parte of the praise of good worckes, but ascribynge the worthynes thereof to theym selues, do make claime and title vnto heauē for theyr owne deseruynges.
This errour hath caused them to forsake the workes prescribed to vs of God, and to inuent newe worckes on their owne braine Thys erroure caused them to builde mona∣steries, to go on pilgrimages, to set vp can∣dels before stockes and stones, to make ho∣ly water and holye breade, to weare thys or that disguised cote, to faste thys or that pre∣scribed daye, to synge masses for the deade and quicke to make of the blessed supper of the Lord, a sacrifice for the quicke & dead,

to make of breade and wyne (as they moste falselye do affirme) the naturall fleshe and bloude of oure sauioure Iesus Christe, and to be shorte to applye the mooste fruitefull & benefitial fruites of hys passiō to the health of bruite beastes, as shepe oxen, and swyne, as wel as to the soule of man. Wher hadde they any of thys beggery in the scriptuers?
Thys is a foule and a detestable erroure whyche bringeth man into so many whyrle∣poles of dishonouring of God, that there is almost nothinge at all lefte vnto hym but a bare name of God, none otherwyse then as they had vsed in times paste to make kinges and quenes in maye games. Into so greate and palpable darckenesse are they fallen for theyr vnthankefulnes.
The seconde cause whyche moued me to the traunslation of thys smale worke is, that thys erroure of fre wyl to do good in man, standynge styll and not remoued forthe of the hertes and consciences of menne, the con∣trary Article for iustification by fayeth one∣ly muste nedes be infringed and broken.
For if we do wel of our own propre strēgth thē do our owne workes make vs good and rightuouse, whiche is directlye contrarye to the scriptures, to the wordes of Christe say∣inge. No man can come to me, except my fa∣ther drawe hym. These wordes do declare

that all men are alwaye so stubourne and so muche agaynste God that excepte they be drawen, they can not come to Christ. Christ doeth saye also. Of those whyche thou hast geuen me, I haue not loste one.
It folowethe therfore that god was the gyuer, & Christ the keper of thē. They were not the geuers nor the kepers of thē selues, no more then they were the callars of theim selues, what tyme that Peter & hys felowes at the callynge of Christe forsoke theyr ship and netes and folowed hym. But contrary wyse if al menne be liars, as wytnesseth the Apostle Paule. If all the imaginations of man from hys youthe be euyll, and nothing but synne, as it is wrytten in the Genese .vi. Chapte. then are we not made good, & righ∣tuouse by our dedes. Then must thys Ar∣ticle (by fayth onely we are iustified) stande faste, that is to saye, for the confidence and sure truste whyche we haue in the promises of God for hys swete sonne Iesus Christes sake, by the whyche sonne we haue bouldnes and fre passage to come to god, as teacheth vs the Apostle Peter.
For so much therfore as these .ii. Articles. manne can worke any goodnes of hym selfe and the iustification of man frely, by fayeth only, are so faste and nighe lincked togither

that either they muste boeth stande togither or boeth be destroyed and broken togyther: the people beinge I truste (what with lear∣ned preachers, what wyth writers) suffitiēt∣lye instructed and taughte the waye of theyr iustification: I toke on me to traunslate this into our mother tonge, and wyth like auda∣citie, as I dedicated the worcke of iustificati∣on vnto your moste dearly beloued husbāde my Lordes Protectours grace: so I haue bene so bolde to name youre grace a mooste Godly mother & setter forth of this worcke vnder whose name it cometh abrode into the handes of the people, to whom nexte vn∣to God they shall yelde thankes for the fruite therof. Whose graces boeth togyther, I desire the Lorde longe to pre∣serue with a ioyfull continuaunce, to the shynynge of his glorye, and settynge forthe of hys word, wyth increase of al Godlines ther∣to correspōdēt. Amen.
