


SIth it is so, that eache thing naturally coueteth and desireth that, which is good, and that there is nothing that may so muche auaile to the conser∣uation of humane life and societie, as that whiche is necessarie and profitable for him: it is most certeine (Syr,) that among all thinges created good and beneficiall for the auaile of this life, there be none that be to be compared with the commoditie and profite that commeth from man. For what is it, that hath mainteined & cau∣sed Common weales, Realmes,Alexander Iu. Caesar. and Empires to flourishe, but men? Alexander, Iulius Caesar, and other excellent and greate personages, by what other meane haue they done so great and renow∣med thinges? So that it is moste cleare (without need of greater testimonie in so apparent a thing) that there is no one thing after God so commo∣dious and profitable for the weale of life, and hu∣mane societie, as man himselfe: euen as contrari∣ly, it is a thing no lesse certeine and euident, that there is no euil, be the same neuer so great and de∣testable, which chaunceth not vnto men by them selues & by their own default. Wherfore he that tooke vpon him to search out the causes of mans death and destruction: after he had gathered to∣gether an infinite, as sicknesses, pestilences, flouds,Dicearchus. Cicero. lib. 2. of his Offices. and other, concluded in the end, that there haue a farre greater number, without comparison, bene
 destroyed and putte to deathe by mans meane, as by warres, seditions, murders, poysonings and otherlike, then by any other mischiefe or mishap. Which hath moued ye auncient to say in cōmon prouerb,Men like wolues to¦warde men. that men were like vnto wolues toward men: And contrarily, that man was God to man: meaning thereby, that euen as there is nothing more beneficiall to man, then man him selfe: so there is nothing more contrarie and damageable to man, then himselfe. But to what end will you say (Syr) tendeth this discourse? It is, that therby I will inferre, that among all politike things, and which may apperteine to the gouernment, & ad∣ministration of the Publike, there is nothing so recōmendable as to vnderstand what belongeth to vocation: that is to say, which is the way & ma¦ner to liue, whervnto euery one is duly called, & what is the duetie and office of them that haue authoritie to cal men. For without doubt, the first part of a Cōmon weale wel instituted, consisteth in wel choosing, picking out, & ordeining of men apt and meete for the Publike choice, eche one according to the manner of liuing he is called vn∣to: Neither more nor lesse, then, as we see in the gouernment of a shippe, the first and most requi∣site part to be, that the Pilotes, Patrons, and Go∣uernors be wel chosen and ordeined in the same. And euen as the good husbandman reaping most commoditie of his tilth and labour is he, not that hath most land, but that can best choose and dis∣cerne the propertie and nature of ech plotte of his grounde: So the best gouernour and administra∣tour
 of the Publike is he, not that hath a greate extent, and most subiectes, but that can best han∣dle men, in well choosing them apt & meete, ech one for his office. This beeing most certeine, that some say, that The prince and lorde ought to husband his landes, lordships, and reuenues by men: but that he must husbande men by him∣selfe. And if so be that Artificers and handicraf∣tes men be blamed, because they neglect the pro∣uiding of instrumentes, and tooles meete and ne∣cessarie for their Art and Science, and also for not knowing the names, vsage, goodnesse, and place where to fetche them: howe muche more shall the Prince, Souereigne Lorde, and administra∣tour of the Publique, be blame worthie, hand∣ling thinges of so greate importance, and doing his actions, not with tooles without soules, but by the aide and seruice of men, if he be in that point slothfull and negligent? As there neuer was thing better saide, then this, that To vanquish and be vanquished in warre, is but an accident of well or euill choosing and ordeining of men: So say I, that the weale and woe happening to a realme, proceedeth no whence else, but of ignorance and negligence in the feate of vocation. And there is no greeuouser sicknesse, or yet more daungerous to be feared in the body of a cōmon weale (as in mans also,) then when as the members be ill dis∣posed and ordeined, it being impossible that they should then do their office wel. For proofe herof, let vs behold all the seigniories & kingdoms that euer were, & we shal vndoutedly see, that as long as careful diligence in ye wel choosing & ordering of men,
 hath ben  in them, they haue continually prospered, and flourished: but assoone as through the ignoraunce or negligence of them that should haue looked thereunto, force, ambition, fauour, & auarice crept into them, straightways they began to  And without seeking for other examples then our owne, we must not thinke that any one thing more prospered the reigne of king Loys II.King Loys the II. of Fraunce. of that name, your auncestour (Syr) then his sin∣gular dexteritie in the feate of vocation. For, true it is, that there hath not any king bene before or sithens him, that hath beene better skilled in ma∣king of good choice of men meete for his seruice, & singularly of them which were in authority & credite about his person, as those in verie deed, on whome dependeth most good and harme, to the rest of the administration and gouernement of a Realme: and by negligence in taking good heede vnto the which, oftimes hath beene seene happen vnto kings, that which chanceth vpon Theatres, that is, that he yt playeth the part of a seruant, cau∣seth himselfe now & then to be better heard, then he that holdeth the scepter in his hand, who scars∣ly can make himselfe to be vnderstoode: And so happened it vnto king Agesilaus,Agesilaus. Lysander: Galba, Ono∣nias & Lacon. by the ambiti∣ous enterprise of Lysander: and to the good olde Emperour Galba, by the arrogancie of Ononias, & Lacon, his seruants, & sithens to many other. Also men must not thinke that the infinite disor∣ders, troubles, and confusions we see daily in all estates of this realme, be they Politike, or Ecclesi∣astical, without exception of any, proceed frō else where, but of the negligence, & rechlesnesse here∣tofore
 in the feate of vocation: all men hauing ben indifferently admitted & receiued to the pub∣lique administration. So that by reason that eue∣rie man hath heretofore ben allowed & aduanced to charges, & dignities, & offices, not so much in respect of vertue, demerite, and sufficiencie, as by vndue & pernicious meanes, we now see all per∣uerted and mard by extreame confusion, & disor∣der. And therwithal (which is worse) mens wittes and vnderstandings, by that meane so disturned from the path and studie of vertue, that in place of the same smally regarded & lesse rewarded, they haue giuen them selues to follow other wayes, & means, by bringing solicitations and secrete prac∣tises, by monie, presentes, fauour, and ambition, which be the plagues & capital enimies of a Com¦mon weale: Each man beside that vsing in his vo∣cation, after he haue once by hooke or by crooke atteined the same, the like and very selfe diligence and care that they do, which haue bought a house or heritage to no other end and intent, but to see what profite or reuenue they can make thereof: As for the rest, liuing in the same,The selling of Offices o∣penly taunted so newfangled and inconstant, as that without any stay, assoone as they be entered into one kinde of liuing, they straight seeke to leaue the same to enter into an other: or if they keepe it still, they cause sun∣drie other and diuers charges together, changing their roabe & fashion of liuing as oft as they list, without any respect of the publique, onely there∣by to satisfie their greedie ambition and auarice. Wherfore we may not maruell at so manifolde troubles, inconueniences, & disorders, in deed no
 lesse pitifull then lamentable, as be seene in these days: in the which you (Syr) are called to ye crown by right & lawful succession, in hope & assured expectation of all men, yt the giftes, graces, & ver∣tues of your ancestours, shalbe no lesse hereditarie in you, then this souereigne, royall, & diuine au∣thoritie, whiche it hath pleased God to put into your hands: and my self being your most humble and obedient seruant, desiring nothing more then your increase & greatnesse to the commoditie of your subiects, haue enterprised to treat this argu∣ment of vocatiō, not yet, yt I know, taken in hand by any other man: which truly hath seemed vnto me ye meetest for this time, yea the most necessary for al men, beginning from the head to the foote. And because you are souereigne head of all (Syr) & he, in whom therfore, the souereigne authority lyeth, to call, establishe, and dispose eche man to his manner of liuing, to the aduancement of your realme: & to whom also by good reason, al that is done in yt respect, shuld be dedicated & consecra∣ted: I haue boldly aduentured to present the same vnto you, & to cause it to be published vnder the protection of your moste royall name: hoping yt though the work be vnworthy of your Maiestie: that yet for all that, it shalbe receiued of you, as presented by him, who desireth to profit the Pub∣lique, & thereof to his power to giue proofe and testimonie. Praying God (Syr) that with the in∣crease of your yeres, it may please him, to giue you also increase of honour, & all that appertey∣neth to your Royal Maiestie, with the continu∣ance of long life, and all prosperitie.
