

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SYR Thomas Bromley, Knight, Lord Chaun∣celour of England.
AFTER suche tyme as it liked you (Right honorable) to com∣maunde my name to be put into the Commission of the Peace for Kent, I thought it my part, aswel for sauing you (my speciall good L. and fauourer) blamelesse in the Choice, as also for mine owne Information and discharge in the Seruice it selfe, to looke di∣ligently into that portion of our Lawe which concerneth the of∣fice of the Peace, wherewith I had before that time very litle or none acquaintance. And therefore, in greedie appetite, I be∣ganne first with M. Fitzherbertes treatise of the Iusticers of Peace: then went I to an other auncient booke, of the same Ar∣gument, but of an Author unknowen to me, and thirdly I came to M. Marrowes reading. All which when I had perused, I see∣med to my selfe to haue taken same such taste of the thing that I sought, as did rather incense than satisfie my thirste and de∣sire.
Wherefore, seeking after a full meale, and calling to minds that it was truely sayd,
Gratiùs ex ipso fonte bibuntur aquae,
I betooke me to the olde and newe bookes of the Common Lawes, and to the volumes of the Actes and Statutes and
 (mistrusting the slipprnesse of mine owne mseie) I did va∣pon a seconde reading plot the master with my penne, and made (as it were) a Module thereof in a small booke, wherein I brought togeather stuffe of h kinde, sorted in beap  led veadie to be wrought and framed.
Howbeit, I did not then purpose, te haue waded any deeper in this foorde, as fearing that the water was higher than my head, and thinking it sufficient for mine owne pri vse,  haue some seruiceable furniture ready at hand, though other∣wise neither much orderly digested nor painfully penned.
But, when as (through dayly occasion to vse that booke a∣broad) I had emparted it with other men, I was perswaded by sundrie godly, wife, and not vntegrned gentlemen, my friendes, that the more parte of the Iustices of the Peace, at this day had neede of some helpe in writing for their better conduict in that office, & that it might increase the knowledge of many of them, and consequntly doe a common good, to haue the booke made common by Impression.
Then againe, I tooke the booke into my bandes, and ripping (stitche by stitche) my former doing, I enlarged the work gra∣ing vnto it more breathe & roo of speache: I planted Pre∣cedentes here and there in it: I gaue it some light of Order & Methode: and added withall some delight of historie and Re∣corde: Finally, framing it altogether to commune conceipt and practise, I prouided (as I might) both for profite and pleasure and fraught and laded it with the bact ware of counsell and ad∣uice that I had of myne owne, or could borrowe of my friendes, determining so to send it from the Cape of good Hope, and to aduenture it to the Seas and windes of the Iudgements and reaportes of other men.
The same now (my singular good L.) though neither aun∣swearable to your woorthinesse, nor to myne owne wish, I am bold to present vnto you, being there vnto carried by these respectes.
First, trusting that you, which doe goe before them all (in the perfect knowledge of our Lawe) that have gone before you in that honourable place which you now holde, will accoding to the Rule of Lawe (in your owne handes) rectifie the Commis∣sion
 of the Peace, and some other crookednesse, whereof this booke shall bring complaint before you.
Secondly, assuring my selfe, that if you shall not condemne or Cancell it, but shall allow it, and seale (as it were) the Writte De pace for it, then both I shall finde the better com∣fort and defence, and the books it selfe shall haue the more cur∣ous entertainment and freer passage with other men.
Lastly, wishing that it may remaine a perpetuall Monu∣ment of the Sacrifice of mine owne thankefulnesse for those your rare and long continued fauours, from time to time (euen vndeseruedly) bestowed and cast vpon me.
Vouchsafe therefore I pray you (my verie good L.) this slender gift, as the hand and from the heart of him, who (if he had equall mixture of might, to his minde) would giue you that which should be proportionable to the setting foorth of your Honour, and the acquitall of his owne dutie and deuation to∣wardes you.
The Lord of Lordes, blesse (you for his Christes sake) with the spirit of godly and couragious wisedom, and make you a long and happie Counsailour of this Estate, to the furtherence of his holy Gospell, the weale of the English nation, the true seruice of the Queenes Maiestie, and your owne Honourable and long lasting memorie, Amen.
From Lincolnes Inne, this 27. day of Ianurrie. 1581.

