


ACcording as your Worships pleasure was, I haue perused this booke, and as wynde and weather would serue for passage, haue brought it out of France into Eng∣land: The cause of your liking, can not be misliked of any: and the iudgement of the right honourable my Master, may stande as most grounded in trueth and iustice, whereby he sen∣tenced him not onely to bee of the Religion of Christ, but also truely a religious Christian. For surely, if I be not deceiued in iudgement, who so shal reade this booke, shal finde there was a Christ in the man, & such a Christ, as made him in deede a Christian, not for a daye or two, not for fayre and calme weather onely, but from the first beginning of his entrance into the knowledge of God, to his very last breth, in most sharpe and stormie tem∣pestes, as witnesseth his happy and blessed mar∣tyrdome, in that most horrible slaughter of the Sainctes of God, on Barthelmewes daye in Pa∣ris that wicked murderesse of Gods people, against whome their innocent blood crieth to God for vengeance against the daye of wrath. As he felt, so he wrote, and his feeling was with such spirituall vnderstanding, as that we may well see, hee was
one of them of whome hee wrote, and by so well knowing himselfe to his euerlasting comfort, gaue vs a waye to knowe our selues for the ioyous assu∣rance of our saluation. The greatest comfort we haue, is to knowe that we are of the citie of God, and who so would honour vs the most, could not better perfourme it to our liking, then to assure vs we are the childrē of that heauēly Father, brought into that honour and dignitie, by Christ that died for vs, and gaue himselfe for vs, and in whome we dwell, and he in vs, if we deceiue not our selues. As for the cōfort we might reape, by being made mē, and not beastes, though it be great, & God is ther∣fore greatly to be magnified, yet considering what God did for vs, & what we haue done against him, where he set vs by grace, and where we finde our selues through sinne and rebellion, we haue cause rather to sorowe, then to ioye, of heauines then of comfort: and in that respect, the veriest varlet & caitif that goeth vpon the earth hath as muche to triumphe in, as hath the best man of God, the dea∣rest child of our heauenly Father. For they are mē, as well as we, made to the image of God as well as we, haue as great light in them of natural reason & vnderstāding, as we, witnes the Heathē that neuer knewe God, no worse sinners in Adam thē we, but we as bad as they, both of vs for our sinne and re∣bellion against him in that man Adam iustly blin∣ded, iustly condemned. This the blind wyse Philo∣sopher did not see, and this the obstinate Pelagian Papist at this day will not acknowledge, and ther∣fore they bothe lift vp their heeles against God, haue wicked thoughtes, and speake blasphemous wordes against heauen, and against their owne
saluation. And because this prerogatiue ouer o∣ther creatures, but equalitie of and in mankinde, had not that in it, that might in deede comfort the heart of man, but rather cast him down, his minde and purpose was to lay forth the other to vs, which is proper to vs, I say proper to vs, that are of the houshold of faith, of the common wealth of Israel, citizens of heauen, felow heires with Christ, the children of God: and I say proper, because the Heathen and Barbarians, be they neuer so wyse, the Pelagians and Papistes, be they neuer so su∣perstitiously deuoute, haue neither part nor por∣tion in it. And this is the preeminence, not to be called, but to be a Christian, which whosoeuer fee∣leth in himselfe with a right feeling of true vn∣derstanding, which neither of the two before named hath (for the one fighteth against the name of Christ, the other can not abide to heare of any certaine persuasion & assurance of the cōscience, that it is beloued of God, and that God is without doubt our Father,) hath the greatest preeminēce that man can haue vpon earth, and the greatest ioye and comfort that can be felt by man. All of vs at this day, in this part of the world, do ioye in this name, Christian, and it is taken for the greatest dis∣honour that can be done to man, to saye he is no Christian: And yet sure it is, that euery man is not a Christian, that is called a Christiā, euery man is not a Christian that is Christened, not euery one that sayth Lord Lord, shal enter into the Kingdom of heauen, no more then euery one that was cir∣cumcised, was a true Iewe, or all that descended of the race of Abraham, were true children to Abra∣ham. There was amongest them Ismael, who per∣secuted
his brother, and yet was he circumcised, there was Esau, whom the Lord hated, and yet was he circumcised: So are there heretikes amongst vs, Christened, and yet not Christians, for neither the cutting of of a piece of skinne in them, did make thē true Israelites, neither dipping in a litell water, maketh these true Christians▪ both of these standeth in the spirit, not in the letter, in the in∣ward worke by grace and that of God, not in the outwarde worke of man. So that he that hath this honorable name, to be called a Christiā, hath more cause to tremble then to reioyce, vnlesse he haue a sure testimonie both within and without, that he is in deede a Christiā: for the abuse of Gods name can auaile man nothing at all, nay it furthereth and increaseth his condemnation, as great credite committed to a seruant, and abused by that seruāt, procureth greater displeasure. Howe we shal come to the knowledge of this preeminence and excel∣lencie, which is in vs, this booke sheweth, and be∣cause it is so plainely and shortely set forth, I will not stande here to make any discourse of it vnto your worship, onely I most humbly beseche you to reade the booke it selfe, and there shall you finde it so well layd forth, as shalbe to your contentment and comfort. I could very willingly haue bene cō∣tent to haue entred somewhat into the matter, but I feare I should haue ouerslipped my self, for I must needes confesse of my selfe, and to the glorie of GOD, I speake it, that I can easelier enter into it, then come forth, so great comfort I receiue of the doctrine, which is the chiefest part of the ioye of my saluation. Were it not that I had good as∣surance,
and feeling of these markes whiche hee setteth downe, and are in deede the true mar∣kes of our saluation, both in vs and to vs, that we are saued, I should despayre rather then hope, and bende my selfe wholly against God, then euer bee subiect or submit my selfe to GOD. And therefore so oft as euer I enter into conside∣ration of the wicked doctrines, whiche the repro∣bate and condemned Church of Antichrist, giueth out and teacheth, I finde none so detestable as this poynt, that laboureth to take away from vs all per∣swasion of Gods loue towarde vs, and of our moste sure and certaine redemption by the blood of Christ. They call it a presumptuous doctrine, a des∣perate doctrine, a doctrine that leadeth man to all kinde of dissolutenes, an enemie to godlynes of lyfe and deuotion, a furtherer of all sensualitie, all lust, all wickednes and rebellion agaynst GOD. Though we are taught by the Scripture, that none can beleeue but such as are appointed to saluation, and none can receyue Christ, and beleeue in his name, but they which haue this prerogatiue giuen them, to be sonnes of God: though the Apostle say, Knowe ye not that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you: and agayne, The Temple of God is holy, which Temple you are: though Christ him selfe saye, Reioyce that your names are written in the booke of lyfe: and, Of those whom my Father hath giuen me, I will not leese one: yet cease they not agaynst so manifest trueths of the Spirit of God, & witnes of the Sonne of God, yea and euident spea∣ches of God him selfe, to disgorge their blasphe∣mies tending to the subuersion of soules, because they enuie at other mens saluation, not passing, as
seemeth by their doctrine, for their owne, though I iudge them not. Is it a presumption for a Christi∣an man to say as Christ hath commaunded vs and taught vs to say, Our Father which art in heauen? Or may I say, Our father, in doubt, whether he be so or no? No man can call God his Father, but in fayth, and fayth is nothing but an vndoubted per∣swasion that we are beloued of God in Christ, be∣loued as children, because he gaue his Sonne for vs, because he the righteous, dyed for me the vn∣righteous, whereby as he became a sinner, by set∣ting him selfe in my place, so doo I become righte∣ous, in that that God setteth me in his place: And because our condition and state is such with God, Iesus Christ our Sauiour willed vs in praying, to pray thus, Our Father. For if this grounde go not before, we are lyers in so praying, Nay we blas∣pheme him in so praying, for he will not be cal∣led Father of the reprobate, no more then he will accept the sacrifice of the wicked, whereof he sayeth by his Prophet, that it is an abomination to him, for our prayers are sacrifices, and if they be the prayers of his children, then are they sweete smelling sacrifices: but if they be the prayers of the wicked and reprobate, then are they an abomina∣tion to the Lord. Do we not euery one of vs, in the Confession of our fayth, say, I beleeue in God the Father? what do we lye, when we say so? Or must we doubt whē we say so? Wel this is the doctrine of the enemies of God the Papistes, who say, it is pre∣sumption for any man to say that he is saued. Then I say, it is presumption for any man to saye, that he is the childe of God: then is it presumption for any man to saye, that God is our Father: then is it pre∣sumption
for any man to say that he is a Christian: then is it presumption for any man to say in a good and true faith, I beleeue in God. And so by this meanes shal the whole Catholike Church be con∣demned for charging vs to say so: then is Christ a lier, and a master of heresies in teaching vs to pray so: then do we all wickedly to call and professe our selues Christians with such confidence as we doo. And seeing their profession and doctrine is so, that no man can assuredly saye that God is his Father, let them set it downe in flattermes, as they meane it, and let the style of the confession of fayth, and the Lords prayer go as their doctrine is, after this sorte, I doubt in God the Father almightie, I doubt in Iesus Christ, I doubt in the holy Ghost, and If thou which art in heauen be our Father, halowed be thy name, and so forth. What a diuelish doc∣trine is this? & yet it is the doctrine of the church of Rome: what a desperate doctrine is it? and yet it is the doctrine that we must confesse to be true, or els we be heretikes, we must be burned, wee must be condemned. Christians I say, must be condem∣ned, because they say they are Christians, for it is nothing els we say: we say we are the children of God, that is an heresie, say they, and yet they will graunt vs to be Christians. A strange kinde of Christian, that hath not the Spirit of Christ, and if we haue the Spirit of Christ, are we not Children? The Apostle teacheth vs all this: why then what is it els to say, we are Christians, then to saye, we are the children of God? and is there any chylde of God that is not faued? Paul sayeth, if sonnes, then heires, heires of the kingdome, yea felowe heires with Christ. So then it is no more presumption to
say, I am saued, then to say I am the the childe of God: neyther any more presumption to saye, I am the childe of God, then to saye, I am a Christian. Oh but say they, this doctrine maketh men despe∣rate: for if they stand vpon those termes once, that they are saued, they will care no more for good workes, they will abandon them selues to all kinde of sinne. In deede they say, as they feele, for if thei felt what it were to haue this persuasion & groūd, they would knowe, that as they are freed frō sinne, so are they to liue in righteousnes: The true Chri∣stian and chylde of GOD, is more fearefull to sinne, because he loueth God, and is beloued of God, then all the wicked haue for feare of punish∣ment. He knoweth and is perswaded, that as he is dead with Christ, so must he rise againe with Christ in newnes of life, to liue after the Spirit, not after the fleshe, and that God hath prepared his wayes to walke in, which are good workes. If the liues of all men were looked into, it would easely appeare, where were the greatest abundance of sinne, whe∣ther in the true Christian who is a witnes of the trueth of this doctrine, or in the enemie of trueth; which can not abyde this doctrine. And why can he not abyde this doctrine? because he can not a∣byde to heare of the adoption of God, howe God hath adopted and taken vs to be his sonnes in Christ before the foundation of the world was lay∣ed. And why so? Because they go about to set vp their owne righteousnes, and therefore will not be subiect to the righteousnes of god. If we do wel, be∣cause we are the childrē of God, and if we beleue, because we were appointed to saluatiō, thē is it not our wel doing that maketh vs to be Gods children:
then are we not appointed to saluation, because we beleeue: then are al their merites gone, then is al their fat in the fyer. A Heathen, a Pharise, and a Papist, is no bodie vnlesse he may merite, vnlesse God may be bound to him, and not he to God: he wil not take the kingdome of heauen of gift, he wil haue it of duetie, and that is no God a mercie to him. This is the very point of the matter, iudge nowe which is the presumptuous doctrine, either the heathenish pharisaicall papistrie, or the trueth of the Gospel. But as I sayd, I can more easely en∣ter into the matter, then get out of it, the grossenes of their heresie is so notorious and brutishe, the trueth of our doctrine is so plaine and riche, that I can not conteine my selfe, if I should folow my self, I will therefore surcease and leue your worship to the reading of the worke it selfe, which shalbe suf∣ficient to instruct you in the waye of this trueth, and arme you agaynst the assaultes of Satan by these his instrumentes. The Lord by his holy Spi∣rit worke those two effectes in you, for this present, so true and comfortable doctrine: and further leade you into al trueth, as he is the God of trueth, that in the day of the Lord Iesus, you may be founde to haue walked without stumbling in whatsoeuer he hath thought neces∣sarie to reueile vnto you for your saluatiō. 15. Sept. 1576.

