


Grace and Peace.
SENECA the Philosopher reporteth (gen∣tle
Reader) that the looking glasse was first in∣uented
to this end, that man might vse it as a
meane to know himself the better by. Now be∣sides
that in a glasse wee may attaine to some
kinde of knowledge of our selues when wee take
a viewe of our owne countenance, and of the li∣neaments
& proportion of our bodies outward∣ly,
Socrates applied the same to a further vse
for the instruction of manners. For as Apuleius writeth of him, he earnest∣ly
perswaded his Auditors to looke often into a glasse, and to beholde them∣selues
therein, to this intent, that he which thought himselfe beautifull and
faire, might take occasion thereby to auoyde all kinde of deformitie in ma∣ners
and conuersation, whereby that beautie of his woulde be greatly blemi∣shed:
and that whosoeuer perceiued by the glasse any defect of comelinesse
in his countenance, might labour so much the more seriously by the helpe of
vertue and inward graces of the mind to recompence the outward wants &
imperfections of his body. In which respect this Booke may most fitly be re∣sembled
to a glasse, as that which affoordeth vnto vs both these vses in farre
more excellent maner then can be performed by any looking glasse how rare
and surpassing soeuer it be. For euen the best of that kind doth represent vn∣to
our eyes only so much of the surface of our own bodies as is directly before
it, but as for the hinder parts we take no view of them by a glasse, much lesse
is it able to giue vs a sight of the internall members of our bodies, wherby we
may attaine to any profitable knowledge of them. But if wee take a diligent
view of this booke, and with the eies both of body and mind looke intentiuely
vpon the same, it will in most euident maner represent vnto vs not only the
outward members of mās body both before and behind & on euery side, but
euen the most hidden and inward parts thereof, which otherwise before life
haue left the body cannot possibly be seene of any man. Here may you behold
all the bones as it were the frame and timberworke of mans body, yea the very
foundation vpon which all the residue of the building is laide. Heere may
you see the exquisite frame and composition of the head, as it were the vpper
lodging of this house, the seuerall ventricles of the braine, as so many sundrie
chambers for the intertainement of the Animal spirits: the singuler work∣manshippe
of the eyes, as of the lights and windowes appertaining to this pal∣lace
of mans body: the matter and fourme of the humors in the eyes, as it
were the christall glasse set in the windowes, together with the eye-liddes as

casemēts to opē & shut, to receiue in or keepe out the light as need requireth:
besides the eyebrowes as penthouses to defend those windowes from the vio∣lence
of stormy weather. What should I speake of the eares, as of high watch∣towres
whereby warning is giuen to the internal senses so often as any aduer∣sary
noyse giueth notice of enemies approching to annoy this goodly castle?
The mouth is it not as the doore that receiueth in all kind of prouision meete
for the reparation and maintenance of this great building, as occasion ser∣ueth?
It is a world to thinke what excellent workmanshippe appeareth in the
voyce & tongue of man, and what singuler vses it hath very requisite for the
perfection of this piece of worke. Now if we shall descend and enter into the
contemplation of the breast, as of the middle story of this building, & consi∣der
with what goodly houshold stuffe those roomes are adorned, who is able ei∣ther
with tongue to vtter, or with heart to cōceiue, the rare deuises the preti∣ous
Iewels, the singular art there to be foūd? What an exceeding faire roome
is the dining chamber of the heart, the receptacle of the wil & affections, the
shop wherein the vital spirits are wrought, and the forge from whence is deri∣ued
that fire and heate which warmeth the whole house? And least this
fire should breake forth into such a flame as might bring perill of burning to
this goodly building the chamber of the heart is dayly & continually refresh∣ed
with coole blastes proceeding from the lungs, as from an outward roome
that is built round about a great part thereof. Here also is to be seenethe
Artery, which as a liuely conduite carieth forth continually most christall
streams of vital spirits into euery roome and office of the house. Betwixt this
second story and the third is laid the Midriffe as a flore that maketh a sepa∣ration
betweene the instruments of the vitall parts being the implements of
that middle roome, and the naturall instruments of the neather story which
serue both for the vpholding & maintenance of the whole building, and also
conteineth in it matter for the erecting of a new frame, which is to stand af∣ter
the former is come to his ful period. In this third story or partition is to
be seene the stomacke, which being as it were the kitchin of the body recei∣ueth
in at the doore of the mouth al such meats & drinks as are requisite for
the keeping of it in sufficient reparations, & for the defence of it against two
mighty enemies Hunger and Thirst, who by continuall vndermining can of the
same, la or to lay it euen with the ground. And because nothing can be pre∣pared
in the kitchin without heate, & the maintenāce therof, besides the na∣tural
heat of the stomack it is cōpassed on the right side with the liuer, on the
left with the spleene, behind with the muscles of the chinebone, before with
the kal, aboue it hath the hart & midriffe, and within it are sundry vital spi∣rits,
from al which as frō so many seueral fires, it receiueth heat for the bet∣ter
dressing and concocting of that which is conueyed into it. Neither are the
gutters & sinks necessarily belonging to euery house, wāting to the perfection

of this beautifull building of mans body: as may appeare by the guttes and o∣ther
partes of baser seruice, without which it is not possible that this frame
should long continue. Now besides the singular delight and pleasure, which
this naturall knowledge of our owne bodies yeeldeth vnto our minds, the pro∣fite
& commodity that issueth here from is great & manifold. For first in re∣gard
of our selues if we were throughly acquainted with the Anatomy of
our bodies, with the substance and situation, with the forme and qualities,
with the vses and offices of euery part and member of the same, it is out of all
question, that by the knowledge therof, we might both preuent many diseases
and infirmities, which through want thereof would sease vpon vs, and being
ouertaken with any, might recouer our selues more seedly by a wise and
skilfull cariage of our selues according to the same. Neither is it layd vpon
euery one to haue so much skill as is requisite for him that maketh profession
of that art towards all men, but onely so farre forth as may serue for the pe∣seruation
of his owne health, eyther in imploying the talent of his priuate
knowledge, or in yeelding himselfe more readily, vnto the wise direction of
the skilfull Physicion. Secondly,Prou. 6. 6. as Salomon sendeth vs to the industrious
nature of the Pismire to learne diligence and forecast in our calling, so
the Apostle taketh occasion by the varietie of members in one body,1. Cor. 12. to re∣prehend
two sorts of people in the Church of Corinth, both such as were
caried away with enuy towards their superiours, themselues being indued
with meaner gifts, and those also who being furnished with more excellent
ornaments of Gods spirite, were puffed vp with pride in themselues, and with
disdyne towards others of fewer graces. And this being the second vse
that ariseth from this naturall knowledge of our bodies, offreth it selfe in
most plentifull manner to be obserued by vs, in euery part and member of
the same. What a notable lesson of good neighbourhood are we taught by the
view & contemplation of mans face? For, as many seueral members of diffe∣rent
vses are so artificially knit and linked together in one face, that not one
of them is any impediment or hinderance, vnto another in the execution of
his office: so we are instructed thereby how to cary our selues towardes our
neighbours, euery one to containe himselfe within the limits of his seuerall
calling, & not to incroch one vpon another as the maner of a great many is,
that are not contented with their owne estate. Againe, in the second story of
this frame when wee consider the lungs, which are the bellowes of the
voyce, are placed so neere the heart that they compasse it rounde about,
are not all men thereby admonished, that their speach is but the inter∣preter
of the heart, & the messenger therof? that the mouth must like a good
seruant attend vpon the heart, & vtter nothing but that which it receiueth
first frō the same? that no man ought to imitate the example of Hippolytus
in Euripides, who being admonished of his Nurse to remember his Oath,

made her this mishapen answere, : The tongue
hath sworne, but the mind is vnsworne? As many hollow-hearted subiects
of late dayes behaued themselues towads her Maiestie, hauing reciued a
dispensation so to doe from Pope Gregorie the thirteenth, whose goodly posie
was thus set down in certaine tokens sent to all such as were to be reconciled
vnto him, Fili mi da mihi cor & sufficit, My sonne, giue me thy heart,
and i sufficeth. Which is all one as if he had said sweare and forsweare thy
self if thou wilt, say thou art a good subiect go to the church, do whatsoeuer is
commanded thee, so thou let me haue thy heart, it skilleth not who haue thy
tg, thy hande, & all the rest of thy body. Elihu being of another spirit, was
better instructed in the knowlege of this neare coniunction, which naturally
ought to be betwene the heart and the tongue: and therefore speaking to his
friend Iob he telleth him,Iob 33. 3. that his words should be in the vprightnesse of
his heart. Whereas they that follow not this course of nature, but violently
draw their tongue to vtter that which is far disagreeing from the meaning
of the heart, are branded for the same by the kingly Prophet Dauid with this
mark of infamy,Psalme 12. 2. that they are men of two harts, or of a double heart, which
is monstrous in nature. The like instruction to this we are taught in that the
tongue is placed so neere vnder the braine, which is the seate of the mind &
vnderstanding part of man, as it were at the feet of her schoolemaster, to the
intent it should not speake vnaduisedly and handouer head, as we vse to say,
but with great deliberation, both in regard of the matter it self to be deliue∣red
by speech, and also of the circumstances of time, place and persons, which
are not to be neglected. For looke how preposterous it is to set the  before
the horse, so is it for the tongue to run before the wit, and to vtter it knoweth
not wel what, hauing receiued no direction from the same. And therfore Sa∣lomon
putting the name of heart for the minde and vnderstanding part of
man saith,Prouer. 15. 28. and 16. 23. that a righteous mans heart meditateth or pondereth what
it shal answer: & that the heart of the wise guideth his mouth prudent∣ly.
Neither is it slightly to be passedouer, that euery one hauing two eies that
serue for seeing, two eares for hearing, two nostrils for smelling, two feet for
going, hath yet but one soft & fleshy tongue for sundry vses, & that tied fast
with strings, & compassed about with gums, teeth, and lips, as with a double
wall, to teach men thereby, that the tongue being a very vnruly member, had
neede to be brideled & hemmed in on euery side, least it breake forth into a
world of wickednes, and breed destruction to the whole body. Now if we look
into the middle story of this building, there wee shall see that although the
heart be the fountaine of life, and the root of al the vital spirits that are dis∣persed
into euery part and member of the body, yet it cannot want either the
coole refreshing it hath from the lungs, or the veine-pips proceeding from
the liuer, or the moouing strings it hath from the sinews, or the necessary de∣fence

of the ribbes and bones, which as strong bulwarks and rampires fence
it in on euery side. Euen so fareth it with the great and mighty men of this
worlde; who although in regarde of their power and authoritie ouer o∣thers,
they seeme to haue their liues and liuelihoodes at their becke and
commaundement, yet they are so farre from being able of themselues to
maintaine their honours and high places without the necessary aide of the
inferiour sort, as that without them they shoulde want wherewith to vpholde
their owne liues. But this appeareth yet more euident in the lower story of
this frame, where the guttes and entrailes of the body as it were the sinks of
an house haue their abiding. For although in regard of their vse they may
seeme to be the basest and most abiect partes of the body, yet if we consider
the necessitie of them, we shall see that a man may better spare a principall
member of his body then the least gut that is in his belly. Euen so fareth it
with the politike body of a cōmon wealth, in which the base Artisan wil soo∣ner
be missed oftentimes then he that carrieth a greaterport, and is aduan∣ced
to a higher roome and office in the same. A third vse that may be made
of this booke as it were of a christal glasse worthy the looking into, is that sin∣gular
delight & pleasure which may be reaped, by the view and considera∣tion
of the harmony betwene this terrestriall frame, & the celestiall habita∣tion
of the heauens, when they are compared together. And as that famous
sentence , Know thy selfe, is reported of many to haue descen∣ded
from the heauens, so surely it wil be no small furtherance to a man where∣by
hee may attaine to a better knowledge of himselfe, if hee seriously obserue
what a great agreement there is betwene him and the heauens, whereunto
the very situation of his countenaunce lift vp towardes heauen, doeth as it
were leade him by the hand. First therefore if wee consider the originall of
them both,Gen. 1. 1, 26. wee finde in holy Writ, that as God is saide to haue made the
heauens in the beginning, so also it is there related, that not long after he
made man after his owne image and committed vnto him the soueraigntie
ouer the earth and ouer all liuing and moouing creatures vnder the cope of
heauen. Neither can it bee truely said, that howsoeuer the Lord himselfe
formed the first man, and breathed in his face the breath of life, yet since
that first creation hee hath not intermedled at all with the continual propa∣gation
of mankinde, but hath surrendered all his working power into the
handes of nature, by whose powerfull operation the matter of mens bodies
is brought to this glorious perfection, which we see it hath when it first ap∣peareth
in the worlde. For this is to speake after the manner of meere natu∣rall
men, that haue not as yet learned the language of Canaan, as is plaine
if wee call to minde what the kingly Prophet saieth vnto the Lorde, that it
was hee that possessed his reines,Psal. 139. 13. and that couered him in his mothers
wombe. Which also is more manifestly taught by that holy man Iob, who

confidently affirmeth,Iob 10. 10, 11. that it was the Lorde who had powred him out
as milke, and turned him to cruddes like cheese: that he had clothed
him with skinne and flesh, and ioyned him together with bones and
sinewes. Wherefore as it was the eternall God, who first turned the body of
the heauens into that roundnes, gathered the light into the bodies of the ce∣lestiall
lamps, fixed the starres in the firmament, endued ech planet with his
seuerall motion, and clothed the inferior world with this glorious circumfe∣rence:
so the same God at the first planted Adam as the roote of mankind,
and euer since hath caused his whole race & euery seuerall person as so ma∣ny
branches to issue and grow out of his loynes. He turned the eies into that
roundnesse: hee planted the eares as watch-towers in the vpper part of the
head: he placed the tongue, fastned the teeth, stretched out the sinewes? hee
watred the veines with blood, gaue maessines to the bones, and clothed the
flesh with a fine skin as with a garment: he seuered the fingers and toes, cau∣sed
the feete to walke, and the hands to gripe. Hee, and none but he giueth
sight to the eies, hearing to the eares, taste to the tongue, smelling to the no∣strilles,
and feeling to the fingers. Who but hee hath endued the lungs with
breathing, the heart with the spirits of life, the stomacke with concoction, the
liuer with the making of blood, and womens breastes with the making of
milke? Who hath fashioned the instruments of hearing in the head like to a
hammer and an anuile, the heart in the body like a pyramide, and made the
spleene in substance like a spunge? Who hath couered the head with haire for
comelines, and boared the skin through with infinit pores for euacuation?
In a word, who hath giuen beauty to the whole body, and to each member his
seueral operation? What father, what mother, what workman hath wrought
these things, but the onely wise and immortall God? But to proceede, as the
sunne, moone, and celestial starres and planets haue a double motion, the one
common with the whole body of the heauens, the other proper and peculiar
according to the nature of euery seuerall starre: so haue the partes of mans
body two motions, whereof the one dependeth of the motion of the whole bo∣dy,
and is therefore vniuersall, and the other is particular according to the
inset nature and disposition of each seuerall member. And to descend to a
more speciall comparison of one particular thing with an other, how doth the
diuerse operations of the animal spirite (whose seate is in the braine) con∣curre
with the different workings of the sunne in the firmament vpon the in∣friour
bodies here below vpon the face of the earth? We see that through
the selfe-same reflexion of the sun-beames, the clay is hardned, and the wax
made soft: that the light of the sun is comfortable to some eies, whereas other
become worse through the brightnes of the same, that it worketh otherwise
vpon a thicke body then vpon a thin, vpon a hard then vpon a soft, vpon a
plant then vpon a stone, vpon the earth then vpon the water. So the Animal

spirit being distributed into sundry partr and members of the body worketh
diuersly in each of them according to the diuerse nature, composition, and
temperament of euery one. For being imparted to the eyes by the opticke si∣newes
it giueth sight: to the eares by certaine passages, it woorketh hear∣ing:
to the tongue by small Nerues, it breedeth tasting: in a worde, be∣ing
dispersed into the muscles and skinne by meanes of certaine sinowie
threedes concurring in manner of a net, it infuseth feeling throughout
the whole body. And as it often falleth out that wee are depriued of the
heate and light of the sunne, when either some thicke cloude, or the bodie
of the Moone, or some such thing is interposed and put betweene vs and
the same: so wee quickely see and feele the want of the Animall spirite,
when any thicke clammie humour, or winde, or melancholicke fumes, or
any such impediment stoppe the passages and hinder the woorking thereof,
as is to be seene in them that are taken with the palsie, apoplexie, madnesse,
numnesse, and such like. It is no lesse delectable then straunge to consi∣der
in howe many thinges the Sunne as it were the heart of the heauens, a∣greeth
with the heart of man, which may not vnfittely bee called the sunne
of the body. For as the Sunne being the chiefest of the Planets occupieth
the middle place among those wandering starres, hauing the rest as his
guarde both aboue and beneath him, to employ as neede requireth both
for their owne safetie and the good of the inferiour worlde: so the heart
being the chiefest member of the body, is seated in the middle storie of the
same, hauing the other partes both aboue and beneath it and on euery side,
employing them according to their seuerall offices for the vpholding and
preseruation of the whole frame. And as the Sunne is the storehouse of
that celestiall heate, which together with a diuine and quickening spirite
working in the bowelles of the earth maketh it a fruitfull Mother, and ten∣der
Nurse for the bringing foorth and preseruation of all thinges: so the
heart is the harth from whence proceedeth all that inset and natiue heate,
which being conueyed with the vitall spirite into euery member of the bodie
maketh them liuely and powerfull to perfourme those dueties that are en∣ioyned
them. Concerning the motion of the heart, as it agreeth with
the Sunne in this that they both haue a double motion, so in that the hea
being the first that receiueth life and motion, is the Originall of all moti∣on
in the body, it resembleth the whole heauens, of which dependeth all
naturall motions of inferiour bodies whatsoeuer. Againe, the two eies in
the head represent the two chiefe lights in the firmament. And as there are
both simple stars in the heauens, namely the Sunne, Moone, Saturne, Iupi∣tr,
Mercurie with the rest, and also compound, as the Charles-waine, the
Lion, both the beares and others: so in the body there are simple or similar
partes, as the sinewes, bones, arteries, veines, &c. and compound partes,

as the heart, liuer, braine, stomacke, lungs and such like. Moreouer, it is
certaine, that the Planets, howsoeuer in regarde of their moouing to and
fro they are saide to be wandring starres, haue yet their certaine lites in
the heauens, especially in the Zodiacke, in which as in their dwelling hou∣ses
they exercise those naturall powers wherewithall they are endued, as the
proper mansion of the sunne is in Leo, of the Moone in Cancer, of Sa∣turne
in Capricorne, of Iupiter in Sagittarius, and so of the rest. In like
manner, although the body of man bee so framed, as that there is no one
part but it is seruiceable vnto all, yet there are certaine seuerall places ap∣pointed
as peculiar shoppes for each facultie to woorke in especially, as the
braine for the Animall spirite, the heart for the Vitall, and the liuer
for the Naturall: the gall is the receptacle for choler, the spleene for
Melancholy, the sucking veines serue to purge the blood from the serous
substaunce of it, and so of the other powers and partes of the body. To con∣clude
this third vse (for a day woulde not suffice to vtter all that might bee
spoken in this matter) as the Sunne by reason of the Annuall progresse
through the twelue signes, maketh a sensible diuision of the yeere into foure
partes, which haue their different seasons and qualities if they fallout ac∣cording
to the course of nature, and so likewise the Moone by her  quar∣tereth
the moneth accordingly: euen so farethit with the body of man in re∣garde
of his whole age, which being considered from the beginning vnto
the ending, agreeth very fitly to those seuerall seasons both for number
and praedominant qualities, if the threede of life bee not cutte off in the
midway by the rasour of death. For the body of man in his first age, which
is his childehoode, is moist and hote, and so is the former part of the yeere
called the Spring, as also the first part of the moneth from the new moone to
the ending of the first quarter. In the second part of mans age, which is
his florishing and youthfull time, the body of man is hote and dry, such as
are the qualities of the second part of the yeere or Sommer season, and of
that second part of the moneth, which is from the first quarter to the full
Moone. Thirdly, the bodie of man in the third part of his age, com∣monly
called Mans-age, is colde and moist according to the disposition of
the third part of the yeere called Autumne, and of that season of the
Moone, which is from the full to the last quarter. To conclude, in the
fourth and last quarter of mans age called Olde-age, his body is cold and
drie like to the Winter season, and to the fourth part of the Moneth, which
is from the last quarter to the next newe Moone. Nowe as these three
former vses of the Anatomie of mans bodie serue for the commoditie and
delight of man, so the fourth is the same that ought to be made, not onely of
the body of man, but as Salomon teacheth vs, of all the creatures both
in heauen and earth, and that is the glorie of God, For the Lord hauing

set in his visible creatures euident markes of himselfe and of his eternitie,
power goodnes,Rom. 1. 20. wisedome and prouidence, as the Apostle teacheth, what re∣maineth
but that man for whose sake & seruice the Lord created al things,
should thereby acknowledge his soueraigne Lord, and returne vnto him all
glory, praise, and duetifull obedience for the same. That we ought to make
this vse of the Anatomicall consideration of our bodies, the kingly Prophet
Dauid teacheth vs most diuinely by his owne example, when after a view
taken of the admirable woorke of God in fashioning him in his mothers
wombe, he breakth forth into this saying,Psalm. 139. 14. I will praise thee, for I am feare∣fully
and wonderfully made: maruellous are thy works, and my soule
knoweth it wel. And surely vnles we tread in the steps of this worthy king,
& propod this as the scope of all our trauailes in searching out the seuerall
parts of our bodies, that God our Creatour and gratious preserer may bee
praised, worshipped, & feared thereby, we shall neuer know our selues aright,
and as we ought to doe, but rather ioyne with the most part of men who not
vsing their skill in this behalfe as a ladder to climbe vp by vnto God. sticke
fast in the very matter and forme of their bodies, so that many of them be∣come
meère Naturalists and very Atheists. One especiall cause whereof, as
 it is because they lay not the ground and foundation of their skill in
the holy Scriptures, the fountaine of all sound knowlege, which teach vs, that
t is the Lord that made vs and that formed vs from the womb,Isay 44. 2. but followe
after some small streames of this knowledge, euen such as are polluted with
the inentions of mans braine placing the course of nature in the procreati∣on
of mankind (which is but an effect of Gods almightie working power) in
the roome of God himself the supreme cause of al. In which respect they may
not vnfitly be resembled to Moles that are alwaies plodding in the earth, or
to swine that finding acorns vpon the ground, neuer looke vp to the tree from
which they fall. They forget that mans eies are therefore set in the head,
which is the vpper part of the body, rather then in his breast, belly, or feet, be∣cause
he should be admonished thereby to lift vp his mind vnto heauen and
heauenly things: & therfore Plato saith, that mens eies were set in a body e∣rected
and looking vpward, that they might be as guides to leade them to the
knowledge of God, vpon the sight of the celestiall light, & notice taken of the
heauenly motions. Otherwise, althogh a mans skill be neuer so great, althogh
he knowet the way of the stars, the walles of the world, the foundatiōs of the
earth, the top of the heauens, yet if he be ignorant of the creator & modera∣tour
of them all, it shal profit him nothing. But as no man is to look for grapes
of thorns, or figs of thistles, so we must not thinke that Epicures and Atheists
wil once either labor to know God or open their lips to praise him, when as yet
they haue not learned to beleeue that he is, much lesse that he is a rewarder
of them that seeke him.Hebr. 11. 6. And surely of all Sathans delusions wrought by him

in the hearts of vnbeleeers, this monstrous error of ,
as that which is destitute of all shew of 
selfe into the heart of man. For 
rption, hunger and thirst is not more incident vnto him then 
relgion and aberration in , yet for any man not to see and acknow∣ledge
by the dimme candle of nature, that God is, that his  ∣cheth
ouer all, that the soule of man is immortall, and that after this lse
there is a place of happinesse for the good and of torments for the wicked, is
as I may terme it, a supernaturall error, or rather cleun againsst 
religion, nature and all. The trueth whereof appeareth both by the com∣mon
consent of all nations, who haue generally approoed those points as in∣uiolable
principles and maximes in nature, and also by the iudgement of
the sounder sort of Phylosophers and Lawmakers amongst the Heath,
who knowing that all mens consciences did naturally acknowledge not one∣ly
a being of a diuine power, but a subiection also thereunto, pretnded
that their lawes and superstitions came from some one or other of their
supposed gods & goddesses: as Minos King of the Cretensians made the peo∣ple
beleeue that he had receyued his lawes of Iupiter, Lycurgus the D∣demonian
lawmaker of Apollos oracle, Numa Pompilius a Roman king
of Aegeria the Nimph, and so the rest of others. And in truth they that
deny the diuine essence, what do they but deny themselues, and the being of all
things in the world besides? For as Aratus the heathen Poet 
is also confirmed vnto vs by the Apostle Paul,Act. 17. In God we liue, 
haue our being: so that without him it is impossible wee should haue any be∣ing
one moment of an houre. And it is strange to consider  these rea∣onable
beastes (for men I dare not call them) standing so  vpon rea∣son
and sense as they would seeme to do, cannot in reason  that this
great variety & exquisite order, which they behold and see in nature & na∣tural
things, must of necessity haue some superiour cause from which they re∣ceiued
both their first beeing, and their contial  in the same.
When they looke vpon any excellent picture, they presently iudge, as the truth
is, that it was wrought by some cunning painter: and euery  building
leadeth all men to the consideration of some exquisite master builder that
framed it. And shall not the view of the worlde, and the knowledge of so
many admirable things therein as are subiect to all our senses, constra s
to acknowledge a superiour cause and creator of them all? Doeth any
shippe sayle his right course without a Pilot? or is there any Citie well go∣uerned
without a Magistrate? And shall any surmize, that the celestiall
lights could obserue their right motions without the direction of him that
made them? or that the terrestriall globe of the earth coulde  so
well ordered by the course of nature, were it not that all things are 

by him that  them all? But such is the blockishnesse of these 
that they will beleeue nothing but that which they may see
with their eyes, and  knowledge of by the light of their bodies. As
though, if their eyes were plucked out of their heads there could be no sunne
in the  nor light in the worlde because themselues were in darke∣nesse
and coulde see nothing. How many things are there in nature which
, and yet no man maketh any question of their being, no
not they , who notwithstanding deny that there is any diuine na∣ture,
any  soule, Angell or spirite, because they are not visible and
subect to ight. Can any of them see the winde, looke vpon the voice of a man,
beholde the sweete harmony of musicke? Nay, can they take a viewe of the
heartes in their bodies, or of the braines in their heades? Are they there∣fore
without heart and brainelesse? Surely it seemeth they are cleane voyde
of brayne, it and common sense, that nayle all their beliefe so fast to the
sight of their bdily eyes. And yet were it so that they would not most wilful∣ly
 the euidence of their owne hearts, they should there behold with
the eyes of their mind as it were in a christall glasse that which may bee
knowen of God.Rom. 1. 19. Nay the holy Ghost proceedeth further, and telleth vs,
that euen our bodily eyes may and doe after a sort looke vpon the eternall
powe and Godhead,Psal. 20. which are seene by the creation of the worlde,
being viewed in the workes thereof. And because it may so fall out by
the  iudgement of God, that these beetle-eyed Atheists may aswell be de∣priued
of their bodily eyes, as they want the sight of their mindes, the creator
and Lorde of the whole worlde hath set such markes of his diety in his
workes that such as haue onely the direction of nature may euen with their
eyes closed vp touch and handle him if they will but grope after him,Act. 17. 27. in
whom we all liue mooue and haue our being. What should I presse them
with the certayne testimony of their owne hearts and consciences, which will
they will they, drawe them to a fearefull acknowledgement of the mighty
power of God, whensoeuer eyther by his terrible voyce of thunder he shaketh
their heartes, or by some irrecouerable disease, as a messenger of death, hee
 them to appeare before his tribunall seate and throne of iu∣sti.
But there needeth no other proofe to conce them then the wordes
of their owne mouthes. For doe not their horrible oathes whereby they blas∣ph
the Maiesty of God, and asmuch as lyeth in them teare him in pieces,
e ae nesse against themselues that the Lorde whom they despite in that
 hath a being, howsoeuer otherwise they deny the same? And
if no reason will sinke into their braines, yet mee thinks the waight of Gods
iudgement which haue from time to time seased extraordinarily vpon these
Atheists that haue sprung vp in the world should cause them more serious∣ly
to consider of their miserable estate.

It is reported of Protagoras,Protagoras. who was one of the first of that stamp, that
being banished from Athens, and his Books publikely burnt, he was drowned
in the sea as he sailed into Sicilia. DiagorasDiagoras. was violently slaine by certain
men whom the Athenians had hired with mony for that purpose. EpicurusEpicurus.
also, who placed his felicitie in corporall pleasures, died miserably in a vessell
of hot water, after that he hadbin foureteene daies together extremely tor∣mented
with the stone in the bladder. Lucianus,Lucianus. surnamed by his owne
countrimen the Blasphemer, as he behaued himselfe most currishly in bar∣king
both against the gods of the Heathen, and against Christ Iesus the Sa∣uiour
of the worlde, so his ende was thereafter by being torne in peeces
and deuoured of dogges. PliniePlinie Sen. the elder denying the immortalitie of the
soule of man, and placing Nature a creature in the steade of God the Crea∣tour,
whilest he was ouer-curious in searching out the cause of the burning
of Aetna, was choaked with the smoke that issued from it. A iust punish∣ment
for him to ende his life by smoke, who esteemed his soule to be no bet∣ter
then a little vapour.Cassius. Brutus. Cassius being a professed Scholler of Epicurus, &
Brutus most brutishly railing vpon the prouidence of God because his en∣terprises
against Caesar succeeded not to his desire, were both ouertaken
with the reuenging hand of God, the one of them causing his seruant to be
his Butcher, and the other embruing his hands in his owne blood. The like
befell LucretiusLucretius. a most notorious Atheist, who being depriued of the right
vse of his senses, abused by him to the denying of God and of all religion, slewe
himselfe in the middest of his madnesse. Pope Iohn the 13.Pope Iohn 13. may woorthily
be enrolled in this band, as he that was not ashamed to put vp  supplicati∣on
to the deuill to send him goodlucke at dice: and one day in the middest of
his iollitie hee tooke a cuppe of wine and dranke to the deuill. But by the iust
iudgement of God hee was stabbed in with a dagger by one who tooke him
committing adultery with his wife, so that hee died thereof within eight
dayes after. Leo the tenth PopePope Leo. 10. of that name, who thought there was
neither heauen nor hell after this life, and blasphemously saide that the
Gospel of Christ was but a fable, was sodainely striken dead with an ex∣treame
laughter, which he fell into by reason of newes brought him of the
slaughter and ouerthrowe of certaine French men in Italie by his meanes.
The French histories make mention of one Frances Rabelais,Frances Ra∣belais. who hauing
sucked in this poison of Atheisme made a mock at al religion, as Lucretius
his forerunner had done before him: but the selfe-same author & defender
of true religion, that tooke frō Lucretius al vse of reason, did so depriue this
beast of all sense, that as he led a brutish life; so he died like a swine in the
midst of his drunkennes, deriding those that spake vnto him of God and of his
mercy. IodellusIodellus. likewise a French Poet, and a professed Atheist, as he gaue
himselfe in his life time to write tragedies, so he made a right tragicall end.

For hauing through gluttony and riot wasted his patrimony and wealth, he
fell into such extreame neede, that hee was miserably famished for want of
sustenance. It would aske a long time to set downe the iudgements of God
that haue iustly ouertaken sundry others of this abominable crew: only I will
rehearse one history worthy our knowledge concerning this matter, menti∣oned
by Enguerran in the second volume of his Histories. In the raigne of
Lewes the eleuenth, and vpon the fift day of Iune 1464. there happened
(saieth he) a wonderfull accident in the Palace at Paris, whilest there was
a controuersie in pleading betweene the Bishop of Angiers and a rich citi∣zen
of that towne,A citizen of Angiers. whome the Bishop accused of notorious Atheisme,
namely, that he had saide in the hearing of many, that he beleeued not there
was any god or deuill, either any heauen or hell, Now as the Bishops Ad∣uocate
rehearsed these woordes, the place where they were pleading trem∣bled
very sore, insomuch that with the shaking a stone fell downe from the
toppe to the bottome, but hurt no body, albeit they were all taken with a
great feare. Whereupon they went all presently out of the place vntill the
next day when the matter was to be heard againe. And then also the saide
roome beganne to shake againe, so that one of the sommers of the chamber
sprang out of the mortesse, and bowed downeward two feete, but fell not.
All that were present supposed they should haue died no other death, which
caused them so violently to rush out, that for haste some left their hattes,
some their cappes, some their slippers behinde them, neither durst any
pleade any more there before it was throughly mended. Nowe albert En∣guerran
speaketh nothing of the determination of that suite, yet for as∣much
as nothing commeth to passe by happe-hazard (as they vse to speake)
but all things are guided by the good prouidence of God, it is out of questi∣on,
that the Lorde woulde teach vs heereby, howe wee shoulde detest and
abhorre such execrable thoughtes and speeches, seeing the very dumbe
creatures, as the stones, the timber, and the earth it selfe (which of it
owne nature is vnmooueable) were so affected with the horrour thereof,
that they coulde not abide so much as to heare it spoken of without shaking.
But here some will say vnto mee, that this labor might well haue bin spa∣red,
considering that the sunne-shine of the Gospel (which breaketh forth so
cleerely in all quarters of the lande) will quickely descry if any such ougly
bird should once beginne to peepe out of the shell within the nest of this I∣land.
And if the Athenians being meere heathen men banished Prota∣goras
out of their territories, and burnt his Bookes in a publike place, be∣cause
in the beginning of one of them he called the deity into question, wee
may not think but that in this land ouer-spread with the knowledge of God,
this monstrous brood shalbe nipped in the head so soone as euer it shall dare to
shew it selfe. Indeed a man would thinke that Atheisme should not once be

dreamed of, or named amongst vs, considering that we liue in those times of
which the Prophets foretold,Isaiah. 11. 9. & 54. 13.Ier. 31. 34. That the earth should be full of the know∣ledge
of the Lord, as the waters that couer the sea: that all the childrē
of the Church should be taught of the Lord: so that one neighbor shal
not teach another, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me
from the least of them to the greatest, saith the Lord. So a man woulde
thinke that Fraunce, hauing bin for these thirty yeeres & vpwards almost
continually scourged with ciuillwarres, and that for the cause of religion,
shoulde bee so farre from being stained with the least spotte of Atheisme,
as that it might now at the length truely say with the Prophet Dauid,Psal. 119. 71. It is
good for me that I was afflicted, for thereby haue I learned to keepe
thy law. And yet both this our Author and some other of that nation, know∣ing
that this infection hath seazed vpon many of their countrie-men, haue
laboured by their writings to suppresse the same. And surely it is greatly to
be feared, that as their disguised attire couereth the bodies of many of our
people, & maketh them deformed, so this poison of Atheisme hath passed the
narrow seas, & is landed in the hearts of no smal number, to their vtter de∣struction
both of bodie and soule. Neither is this the feare of some few with∣out
any ground, but of a great many wise and godly Christians, who seeing
the generall prophannesse of mens liues almost euery where, both publikely
crie out against the present infection, and priuately bewaile the future euils
that necessarily follow the same. And albeit per aduenture there bee none
amongest vs, that are so farre gone in Atheisme as Ligneroles a French
Courtier of late daies was, who is said to haue made open profession thereof,
yet if the tree may be iudged of by the fruites, & the outward effects of mens
liues doe shew the inward affections of their hearts, he that hath but halfe an
eye may see, that there are a great many amongst vs of those foolishmen of
whom Dauid speaketh,Psal. 16. 1. Who say in their hearts that there is no God. In
the forefront of which companie, the students of Machiauels principles and
practicers of his precepts may worthily be raunged. This bad fellowe whose
works are no lesse accounted of among his followers, then were Apollos O∣racles
among the Heathen, nay then the sacred Scriptures are among sound
Christians, blusheth not to belch out these horrible blasphemies against pure
religion, and so against God the Author thereof, namely, That the religiō
of the heathen made them stoute & courageous, whereas Christian re∣ligion
maketh the professors thereof base-minded, timerous, & fitte to
become a pray to euery one: that since men fell from the religion of
the Heathen, they became so corrupt that they would beleeue neither
God nor the Deuill: that Moses so possessed the land of Iudaea, as the
Gothes did by strong hand vsurpe part of the Romane Empire. These
and such like positions are spued out by this hel-hound sometime against true

religion, otherwhiles against the religion and Church of Rome, some∣times
also taxing the religion of the heathen, of falsehoode, and coosinage:
so that in trueth hee woulde haue all religion to be of like accompt with his
disciples, except it be so farre foorth as the pretence and shewe of religion
may serue to set forward and effect their wicked pollicies. And for this
cause hee setteth downe this rule for euery Prince and Magistrate to
frame his religion by, namely, that he should pretend to be very religi∣ous
and deuout, although it be but in hypocrisie. And to this hee ad∣deth
a second precept no lesse impious, that a Prince should with tooth
and naile maintaine false myracles and vntrueths in religion, so long
as his people may thereby be kept in greater obedience. Nowe what
fruits wee are to expect from the students of this profession, let all men iudge
that haue any sparkes of pure religion glowing in their hearts. Ʋnto these
may bee added, such as treade in the steppes of Lamech, who derided
the iudgement of God vpon Caine: such as walke in the wayes of Ismael,
who mocked Isaac in regarde of the promise: and such as those irreligious
persons were of whome Peter speaketh, who in iesting-wise asked what was
become of the promise of Christ his comming to iudgement. That there are
such amongest vs, euen in these times wherein we liue, let the testimonie
which one of that crew gaue lately of himselfe when the heauy hand of God
by sickenesse sommoned him to giue an accompt of his dissolute life. He be∣ing
one day admonished of his friendes to leaue his badde course of life,
which otherwise woulde bring him to vtter destruction, scoffingly returned
them this answere: Tush (quoth hee) what is hee better that dieth
in his bedde then hee that endeth his life at Tiburne? And beeing fur∣ther
vrged to doubt the losse of his soule in Hell fire for euer although hee
feared not death in this worlde, hee replied, Hell? What talke you of
Hell to mee? I knowe if I once come there, I shall haue the com∣pany
of better then my selfe: I shall also meete with some knaues
in that place, and so long as I shall not sit there alone, my care is
the lesse. But you are madde folkes (quoth hee) for if I feared the
Iudges of the Bench no more then I dread the iudgements of God,
I woulde before I slept diue into one karles bagges or other, and
make merrie with the shelles I found in them so long as they would
last. The voyce of a meere Atheist, and so afterwardes hee pronoun∣ced
of himselfe when hee was checked in conscience by the mightie hand
of GOD. And yet this fellowe in his life time and in the middest of his
greatest ruffe, had the Presse at commaundement to publish his lasciuous
Pamphlets, whereby hee infected the hearts of many yoong Gentlemen and
others with his poysonfull platforms of loue, and diuellish discourses of fancies
fittes: so that their mindes were no lesse possessed with the toyes of his irre∣ligious

braine, then their chambers and studies were pestered with his lewde
and want on bookes. And if the rest of his crew may be permitted so easily as
hee did without controlment to instill their venimous inuentions into the
minds of our English youth by meanes of printing, what other thing can wee
looke for, but that the whole land should speedily be ouerflowen with the deadly
waters of all impieties, when as the flood-gates of Atheism are thus set wide
open? Are they not already growen to this boldnes, that they dare to gird at
the greatest personages of all estates and callings vnder the fables of sauage
beasts, not sparing the very dead that lie in their graues? that the holy A∣postles,
the blessed virgin Mary, the glorious kingdome of heauen it selfe
must be brought in as it were vpon astage to play their seuerall parts, accor∣ding
as the humor of euery irreligious head shal dispose of them? And wher∣as
godly learned men, and some that haue spoken of their owne experience,
haue in their bookes that are allowed by authority, termed Stage-playes and
Theaters, The schoole of abuse, the schoole of bawdery, the nest of the
deuil & sinke of all sinne, the chaire of pestilence, the pompe of the de∣uil,
the soueraigne place of Satan, yet this commendation of them hath
lately passed the Presse, that they are rare exercise of vertue. It were too
long to set downe the Catalogue of those lewde and lasciuious bookes, which
haue mustered thēselues of late yeeres in Pauls Churchyard, as chosen soul∣diers
ready to fight vnder the deuils banner: of which it may be truely said,
that they preuaile no lesse (if not more) to the vpholding of Atheisme in this
light of the Gospel, then the Legend of lies, Huon of Burdeaux, King Ar∣thur,
with the rest of that rabble, were of force to mainteine Popery in the
dayes of ignorance. Wherefore my humble sute is to all such as may by ver∣tue
of their authoritie stay the violent course of Atheisme dayly spredde a∣broade
by these pernicious Pamphlets, that they woulde lay to their helping
hand for the speedy redresse thereof. And as for those that reape the gayne
of iniquitie by the sale of such infectious stuffe, oh what a sweete smelling
sacrifice should they offer vnto the Lord, if they would gather all such hurt∣full
Books together, and cause them to passe through the fire in the midst of
that yeard, where now they are so commonly sold. Hereby it would come to
passe, that the land being purged of so great contagion as droppeth out of the
pennes of such godlesse braines, the Lord would withdrawe his heauy hand,
which now many wayes presseth vs sore, the preaching of the Gospel woulde
preuaile mightilie,Act. 19. 19, 20. as it did in Ephesus after the like sacrifice, and
yoong Gentlemen and others woulde employ good houres
vpon better studies: which the Lord
grant for his mercies sake.
AMEN.
