


❧ To the noble, and moste gentyll lorde: lorde SEBASTIAN, of Moūt faulcone, prynce of Lausanc.

grace, and peace, of god the father, and the lorde Iesus Christe.❧
NOt many yeres passyd, moste noble prynce, whā I shulde preache the pu¦re, and holsome, worde of god, at your cytie of Lausane. I dyd {per}ceiue, by many argumentes, bothe the sobre gentylnes of youre mynde, and also the outragyous wyc∣kednes, of certayne flaterers, and de∣ceiuers. For at altymes, where as you were present, at my sermons, you dyd moste purely fauer the worde of god, and whan you were constreynyd, with vrgent busynes, to be absent (whiche was ones, and eftsones) as you haue enformyd me, very many were aboute sumwhat busyly, to alyenat, or make

you straunge, ye as it were to say, en∣uiously to drawe you frome the worde of god. lyke fyrye burnyng knyghtes, adfyrmyng that I preachyd heresye. But at the laste the myghty verytye, hathe so conuycte you, that you haue wryten many thynges for me, and I gladly cōfesse, that for the loue of you I was gentylly enterteynyd, with the Bernēses, Ligurynes, Basylyanes, & Friburgyanes. Farthermore, at my de¦partyng from you, you instantly desy∣ryd me, very ofte to wryte to you, whi¦che to do I gladly promysed, in tyme conuenient. wherfore I beseche your hyghnes of pardone, bycause I haue nat performyd it to thys daye, for it chansyd nother by obliuiousnes, or ne¦glygence, but very ofte, whan I was about to do it, I was constreynydly rapte, to other maters. The laste of al I wolde haue made answere, to the hundreth paradoxes, or questyones, of CONRADVS TREGARIVS the Augustyne freresēt to you. wherin he is very busy, not alonly to pull you a∣way frome Christe, but also the noble gentyles of Heluetia. although he do

glory, with pretens and zele of the spi¦rite of Christ, in the spirite of erroure and blyndnes. Veryly he dothe tea∣che nothyng lesse then Christ. For he laboryth very sore, to vndermyne the vyneyarde of the lorde of companies. that is to saye, the congregacyon or churche of christen people, euyn lyke to a crafty or wyly foxe. but this foxe, muste be taken, I saye thys lytle foxe, ye the whiche is without effycacytie, or strengthe of the spirite, that other he maye be sauyd, or els confoundyd put downe. accordynge as the spouse commaundyth in the cantykles, saing take to vs these foxes, these lytle fox{is}, that vndermyne the vyneyardes and the lytle eyes of the vynes. which wor¦des, howe they shulde be vnderstādyd I haue declaryd, in my enarracyon in to the cantycles. Farthermore whā I was about, an answere, in to the sayde paradoxes, or conclusyons, the derely belouyd, and trewe teachyd bretheren of god VVLSGANGVS FABRI∣CIVS Capito, and MARTINE BVCER, two of the byshopes of Ar∣gentyne, preuentyd me. And for that

cause I dyd leaue of my purpose and toke on hande, the reiteracyon or set∣tyng forthe the comentaryes (whiche I had begonne) in to certayne of the prophetes, with many other thynges. for I knowe them to furnyshe that mater, more dylygently then shal nede that any man shulde adde any thynge to theyr wryting{is}. I wolde but alonly monishe you, to beware, and take hede of suche wolues, goyng in shepes clo∣thyng, that they do nat in euery place vyolently rapte, slee, and dystroye. I haue also made answere, to the epystle that he dyd wryte to you in the begyn¦nyng of his boke. deferrynge to wryte to you matters, of greater grauytye, vnto a tyme more conuenient, as well as if I had made answere to the sayde paradoxes, or conclusyones. Nor you shall nat merueyle that I sayde, there be many byshopes of one cytye, for ve¦rely euery cytie, hath so many byshop¦pes, as it hathe true euangelystes or preachers, for euery preacher, of the truthe, I say of the truthe, that dothe nat preachelyes, decrees, inuencions, dreames, lawes, and coūselles, of men,

but the moste pure and symple worde of god, is a true byshope, although he be nat callyd so of many the churche of god, hathe no other byshopes, but these. therfore there as is no pure mi∣nister of the worde of god, is no bys∣shop, and without doute, we haue ben very longe and manye yeres without byshopes, in the moste fearfull iudge∣ment of god, for they that haue be cal∣lyd byshopes, to this day, be nothyng lesse than byshopes, excepte they wyll be callyd wycked, or purse byshopes, or byshopes of the kyngdome of anti¦christe. Verely a byshope is callyd by interpretacyō an ouersear or watcher, and euery man is byshope of the thīg that he moste entendythe. But there is no man so blynde, but he perceuyth to what thyng{is} these byshopes of the kyngdome of perdycyon entende. Ye and they glory them selues, in lyenge wordes sayeng. He that dothe a thīg, by another / aperethe to do it by hym selfe. This rule / is execrable / and cur∣syd byfore the lorde, in those thynges that pertaine to the office of a byshop whose hyest pointe is ministery of the

alonly worde of god, for they may cō∣mytte to other the ministery of sacra∣mentes, bycause they be pryncypally sent to the ministery of the worde. As saynte Paule wryteth of hym selfe, in the fyrste epystle to the Corinthianes the fyrste chapitre, sayeng Christ sent nat me to baptyze but to preache the gospell more ouer these buggyshe bys∣shopes, substitute or haue none vnder thē, that is a pure euangelyst, but hyre wretches, and moste couytouse mar∣chantes of lukre, that seke nothynge lesse then the glory of god, and helthe of soules. I shall brefly intreate vpon with your hyghnes, of those thynges that I copiously wrytte vpon, to the moste noble lorde IOHAN Cardinal (as they call it) of Lotherynge. what the Pope, with hys Cardynalles, Ar∣chebyshopes, Byshopes, Abbottes, Chanones, & all other benefised men, shall do, leste they peryshe, but may be sauyd. For of truthe / all theyr hygh∣nes is of the dyuell. Let them beware therfore / that they be nat euerlastīgly confoundyd / and peryshe. For bysho∣pes be alonly {pro}phetes of truthe / and

there shulde be so many byshopes, as the multytude of people requyreth. Ye and to confesse the truthe, I can nat call your hyghnes, a byshope excepte I shulde flatre, and do agaynst my con¦scyence, whiche is to be auoydyd of the faythfull, euyn as the venyme of the serpent Aspis. I cōfesse you to be a prynce, I knowe nat you to be a bys∣shoppe, bycause you preache nat the gospell. But it is nat in euery man, to preache the gospel, but of thē to whō it is gyuen of the lorde, for they muste be sende to it, of him. And these be the true byshopes, of the churche of god. Therfore dylygently endeuour, your selfe that tree byshopes, may be en∣creasyd, within your lordshyp. Bys∣shopes may nat be lordes, but alonlye doctours, or teachers, and seruauntes of the people of god. It is iniury to a prynce, to be callyd byshope, ye and vtterly the moste greuous mockage, if the thynge spoken, be delygently exa∣mynyd, wolde nat be thynke hym selfe deludyd, that were callyd by a name nothyng  for him? whan any man is callyd shoe, what other thyng

is it than to say, beholde a preacher of the worde of god, contynually prea∣chyng the gospell, hauyng knowledge of holy scripture, teachīg the people, with the alonly & pure worde of god, attrybutynge to god hys due honour and prayse, herberous, or kepyng hos∣pitalytie, geuyng example of him selfe to other to folowe the gospell in ly∣uyng, moste dylygent in redynge and expounding the scriptures, and yet he hathe none of all these. I wyll suffre euery man to call you a byshop, which I wyll nat do my selfe leste I be iniu∣ryous to you. I well knowe that you be prynce of Lausane, ye and I wolde that you shulde so playe the prynce, that you wolde dylygently laboure to haue many true byshopes vnder you. For verely euery paryshe ought to haue hys propre byshope, the whiche shulde be chosen of the people, and cō¦fyrmed by the cominaltie of the chur∣che of euery place, and to do this thīg they haue no nede of letters, rynges, sealles, tokēs, and suche other of this kynde very muche vsyd clene cōtrary to the worde of god. So longe they

shulde be accountyd for byshopes as they preache moste purely the gospell of the kyngdome of god. Frō the whi∣che if they swarue one iote, and teache straunge doctryne, they ought to be deposyd, and put out, of them by whō they were electe and chosen, that is to say of the comynaltie of the churche afore namyd, and other more apte to be electe. But of thys matter I haue spoken more at the large in an other place. Therfore I wyll returne to our purpose of Tregarius. He dyd wryte to your hyghnes supposyng you to be Fabiane, where as you be Sebastiane as the letters beare wytnes, gyuen to me by your owne handes, wherin he goyth aboute, to supprese and treade vnder fote the eternall veritie of god, vnder the name (as he hathe wrytten) of Lutherane secte, and vnder colour of zele towarde the church, he rayleth the moste lycētiously in to the truthe, and that same churche, ho is he (at the leaste) that {per}ceiueth the thyng{is} of god, that folowith Luther, or sayeth I am of Luthers secte? Luther is a man, and therfore of hym selfe a lyer,

but if Luther, or any other speake the veritie, and truthe of god, what is the cause that we do nat gyue place to the truthe, whiche the holy ghoste dothe make open to vs, by Luther? For I praye you is it nat wrytten of suche men: you be nat they that speake, but the spirite of your father that spekith in you? it is nothyng sauery, nor plea∣sythe nat at all, that some men do say, and talke of the wysdome of god, whi∣che is founde in Paules epistles. they call it Paules philophie. I do gyue place, and beleue the wrytynges of Paule, Petre, Iohā, Esaie, Hieremie, and other prophetes of god, nat for them, but for the spirite of god, which dyd speake in them. Luther hathe nat teachyd me, nother hys wrytynges, those thing{is} the which I haue knowē by the gyfte of god, in holy scriptures Yet for all that I cōfesse, me to knowe Luther, ye and nat a lytle to haue pro¦fytyd thorugh hys company. I know him to be the apostle, and aungell of god, that is to say sent of hym. For it is inpossible that he shulde be sent, but of him, to haue wrytten those thynges

that he hathe wryttē, that is, the scrip¦tures of truthe, and euyn as it is nat to be condempnyd that Paule hathe wrytten bycause he was a man, in lyke case, nother Luthers wrytynges are to be cōdempnid bycause he is a man. For it is nat Luther, but god yt hathe wrytten and spoken in Luther. But th{is} Tregarius, to obtayne the fauour of Antichriste, vnder the name of Lu∣ther, dothe openly speake agaynste Christe and his viritie. He dothe also vnder that name resyste the impollu∣tyd scriptures of god, all the prophe∣tes, and his louers, and callythe them defenders of sectes, causing great ru∣mores, repletynge the worlde with all vnquietnes, Philistianes hauīg vaine and folyshe armoure, mockers / and de¦ceyuers / & of this maner dothe rayle agaynste them with the moste oppro∣brious crimes. Forthermore he dothe reproue them of vehemente and wyc∣ked zele / and saithe that they haue for¦gote the saieng of our sauyour. Lerne of me for I am meke and humble in harte and agayne. blesse them that say euyll of you / and praye for them that

persecute you. But nowe loke vpon the craftynes of this foxe, {per}auenture he is afrayde / leaste that he shulde be put out and exilyd of antychrist / from the tyrānycall prouincialshype of his secte / & for that cause / he so feruently defēdyth his parte / settyng at nought the worde of the lorde. Nowe if he take this for a secte / to loue and teach the moste pure worde of god (the whi∣che we doubte nat of) we do couit, and halfe this holy / necessary, eternal, and inuincible secte / and byfore hym and suche lyke / we wyll be of this secte / & cleaue to it must surely / orels without remedy we shulde peryshe {per}petually. we be adherētes and defēders of thys eternall / heuenly / and deuyne secte / & it is necessary / that we be tumultuous or bryngers vp of rumoures for it / a∣gaynst the execrable / cursid / and abho¦mynable secte of antichriste. For the worde of the lorde dothe burst vp car∣nal pease / & dothe rayse vp the sworde very ofte in hym selfe / accordynge to the sayīg of the lorde, I dyd nat come to sende pease / but a sworde. Math .x. and it is wrytten Luke .2. that Christ

is put in to the falle (of the vnfaythe∣full) & in to resurrection (of the fayth∣full) and in to a sygne that shalbe re∣systed and spoken agaynste (of those vnfaythful) if we shulde teache world¦ly thynges / beyng carnall and hypo∣crytes / they wolde nat resyst and ryse agaynst vs as they do, but bycause we preache thing{is} cōtrary to the worlde, the worlde hatyth vs / and callyth vs tumultuous / and sedecyous felowes. Ye and byfore it Christe him selfe was a sower of euell sedes / a sclaunderer with wordes / a sedycyous felowe / an herityke, a deceiuer, a subuerter of the people / and an euyll doer. Forther∣more all that lyue mekely in Christe Iesu / and couyt so to do / suffre perse∣cucyon of it. 2. Timoth. 3. God dothe cōmaunde vs also / of Tregarius / and suche other men of that secte / whiche no doubte pertayne to the abhomyna∣ble courte of that purple whore of Babylon / mother of all fornicatyon / in the eyghtenthe Chapitre of the re∣uelacions of saynt. Iohā sayeng. Go from her my people / and be nat part∣takers of her synnes / and receyue nat

of her plages / for her dampnable syn∣nes haue come to heauē / and the lord hathe remembryd her iniquities / re∣warde her euyn as she rewardyd you / and gyue her double according to her workes. and powre in double in the same cuppe / which she filled vnto you & asmuche as she glorified in her selfe / and lyued wantonly / so muche powre you in for her of punyshement / and so¦rowe. This wycked whore ī tyme past hathe fylled to vs her abhominaciōs / in the golden cuppe / of the worde of god. For she hathe confyrmyd her ty∣rannyes / by placys of scripture / falsly vnderstādyd / and vnder the most holy name of Christe / she hathe outragyd / aboue that at man can speake / euyn a¦gaynste Christe him selfe. Verely god wyll that we giue doble to her in that cuppe .i. better thyng{is} then that drūke whore that is to saye / that we do nat fyll to other nowe, after the trute re∣ceyuyd / the abhominable / and ynkīg dunge of the wysdome of the fleshe / & inuencyons of men. But muche more prcyous thing{is} / the whiche do ae with the golden cuppe of the we of

god that is to say, the spirite & truthe of the lettre, by whō is openly knowē that these iugelers be antichristes, scis¦matykes, heretykes, chyldren of per∣dicion, and men of syn. To whose pre∣ceptes bycause we do obey / and gyue place, they name vs to be sclanderers, repleting al the worlde ful of rumours and horyble crymes. But & I myght moue thys questyon to them in what thynge do we erre? I pray you do nat they with an indurat harte resyst / and speake agaynst the truthe. Ye and that same truthe it selfe doth name his ene¦myes, in euery place / wolues / Foxes Beares / Lyones / Dogges / Leoper∣des / wylde beastes / false prophettes / pseudo apostles, roten sedes, vnfayth∣full, hypocrites, folishe, cowerdes, nat hearing the voyce of theyr lorde god, a baren howse, the churche malignant the synagoge of Satan, the generaciō of the lordes furye, apostaticall genty¦les, hauynge the fronte of the greate whore, the fruyte and generatyon of Vipers, the counsell of the wycked, Dragones, the kynde of the serpente Aspis deafe and stopyng theyr eares,

the ennemyes of the lorde, a wycked couent the tabernacles of synnes, the sede of Chaname, Egypte, & Sodome euyl trees and vnfruitful, mokers, that say to men sayeng wyll nat you to see / speake pleasaūt thynges to our eares take hede of our errours, let holy Is∣raell cease from our syght, the blacke tayles of smokye bronddes, ydolles, blynde studientes, the generacyon of Cain wycked and adulterous, decey∣uable workemen, felowes of theuys, effemynate, deserte chyldren, false doc¦toures whose god is theyr belye, and glorie in theyr confusyon, the tasters of earthly thynges, theues of innocen¦tes, and wydoes, and dothe name thē that resyste, and speake agaynste the doctryne of mekenes, with suche na∣mes of this kynde which of vs, coulde euer attayne to suche a vehemence of speakyng. that in confoundyng the re¦prouable, we might obtayne one parte of the pythye rebukyng that is foūde agaynste them in holy scrypture. And peraduenture Tregarius wyll repre∣hende the holy ghoste, and say that he dothe fyl the worlde ful of hatred and

malyce / bycause that suche names / shulde be putte in holy scripture, or at the leaste saye that these be contrarye to Christe, when he saythe. Lerne of me .&c. And agayne saye well by them that saye euyll by you .&c. the whiche (as we haue sayde) he dyd aledge a∣gaynst vs. But what is the cause, that he dyd nat take hede, also of the word that folowythe, you? of men that saye euyll by vs we muste speake well, but nat of them that speake euyll, by the lorde Iesus Christe, and his verytye. No nor yet we maye nat make lyes, to say well by any man. For (and a man myght be bolde with you) is this well sayde, to saye that Magister noster the noble doctour Tregarius, a good ser∣uande of Christ, and dothe well in sup¦pressynge the churche and worde of god, for the synagoge of Antychriste and lyes of men. Or is it lawfull for me to wryte, the reuerende father in god, Prouyncial of the Augustyne fre¦ers, by the hyer Germanye, is a good oratour, and can wryte very well, for the counselles of the Pope, hys Car∣dynalles, and Byshopes, and with a

noble profe openly declarith, that the Synagoge of the Pope, is the trewe church of god? am nat I rather boūde to speake playnly after the worde of god, & saye. thys foxe, thys wolfe, this falsse prophete is aboute to turne the people, frome the sermones of truthe, to the lyes of antychrist, and couytith to bryng the prynce of Lausane, & the noble gentyles of Heluetia, from god and hys Christe, and wolde that they shulde alway perseuer, and continewe in darkenes of errours in the whiche we haue be drownyd so longe season, and hathe nat one iota of scripture to confyrme those thynges that he adfyr¦mythe in hys lyeng, wherof he muste nedes fal. For he can neuer withstāde the myghty worde of the Lorde, the whiche he so sore reclamyth agaynst, of whom he shalbe confoundyd, trodē downe, and consumyd. Ye and if there were, innumerable thousandes of the prophettes of Baalle, with this Tre∣garius, they shalbe dystroyed, and fall from the syde of thē that loue, & teach the pure worde. One Helias, one pro∣phete of the lorde, shall ouercome, and

dystroye thē all although they wolde resyste with playne batayle, and crye & howle in theyr dēnes. but in case that he thynke hym selfe nat worthye thys name, as to be callyd a foxe, or a wolfe let hym do none of these aforesayde. for we be cōstraynyd to it by the word of god. for all that be of this secte, are to be publyshed, to the people of god / that they maye beware of them leste they be deceyuyd. Thys blynde doc∣toure, callythe vs, Phylystianes wea∣ryng vayne and folyshe armoure. and of this maner this blasphemer railith and wonderythe, I wolde to god, that he were nat a blasphemar agaynst the spirite of god, and wolde nat speake wittingly agaynst his cōscience, with what armoure do we resyste these ene∣myes of Christe and hys worde? Is it nat the eternal scriptures of god? and this iugeler callythe them vayne and folyshe. But what is the cause that he was nat present at this laste conflycte or disputation, at Argentine, where he myght haue be sure to haue dysputyd with the Byshopes of the same Cytie we wyl gladly giue our selues to deth

if we be ouercome, and conuicte, where as if he were cōuicte he shulde sustein no daūger at al. but he wolde nat that the people shulde knowe hys lyes, the whiche had be dysclosyd in dede, if he had dysputyd, ye or to speake near the marke if he had be presēt at the sayde conflicte or dysputacyon. the symple people, haue the iudgement of the spi¦rite aboue al suche proude bugges the whiche we call Magistrinostri, bycause they loue the worde of god, the which the other be about to suppresse & tread downe. For is it nat wrytten? Thou hast made me wyse, ouer myne enemies thorowe thy cōmaūdmentes, for it is to me euerlastīg. I do perceiue, aboue all that teache me, bycause thy testy∣monies be my studye. I vnderstande aboue olde men, bycause I haue sear∣chyd, thy commaundmentes. the hun∣drethe & .xviij. Psalme. Forthermore frō these sage and wyse men, god doth hyde his mysteries, the which he doth vouchesafe to reuele and open to the yonge lytle ones. they knowe and per¦ceyue thys lyterature, and attrybute very muche to it, therfore they do nat entre in to the lordes power, verely

these other, be admytted into the sayd powers and feareful iudgemēt of god. For verely there is none although he be lernyd, that is admytted to the in∣teligence of the scriptures of god, but euyn he that dothe attrybute or gyue nothynge at all, to the scyence or wyt of man towarde the vnderstandyng of thē but al only to the spirite of truthe. These mē wyl nat that the lytle flocke of Christe, shulde iudge of his voyce, and it perteyneth most chefely to thē. For be nat they the shepe of Christ, & he theyr shepeherde? but there is one voyce alone of this shepherde or pas∣tor, which doth hyely please his shepe without any other. And they knowe & heare his saide voyce. Iohan .x. It is also sayde to them, proue you the spi∣rites, if they be of god or nat. whiche they do {pro}ue, & knowe by the scriptur{is} of god, the which is ye only & most sure testimony to proue, if the voyc{is} of thē ye teache be of god or nat. also Psal. 18 & .118. & Esa. 8. they he callyd testimo∣nies or witnes. let th{is} Tregari{us}, wt all his secte, outrage as much as they wil and denye the worde of the lorde, that is to saye, that the companye of the

faythful to be apte iudg{is} of the worde for wtout doubte he shal shortly slyde downe & fale, bycause he goyth aboute it with stafe made of rede, of the sha∣dowe of Aegypte, of the dreames of men. If god be with vs who is agaīste vs? Let nat thys hartles knyght ouer boldely promyse to him selfe the vyc∣torie. I saye yet agayne he shall fale, & be confoundyd. we be nat aboute this thorowe our selues, but thorowe the stone, that is, our faythe by Christ, co∣uyteth to subuerte this lyeng and wyc¦kednes. He hath his hedde, antichrist to whom he dothe attrybute and gyue more then to Christe, and to whom he dothe cleaue with all his harte, the ve¦ritie and truthe of Christe setaparte. wherfore we of necessitie muste nedes hate him accordyng to the sayenge of Dauyd Psalme. 118. I haue hatyd the wycked, and Psalme. 138. Dyd nat I hate lorde them that hatyd the, & was mouyd ouer thy enemyes? I dyd hate them with a parfecte hatred, and they were made enemyes to me. wherfore nowe in the meane seasō let him coūte vs for mockers, bycause we be aposta∣ta

from Antychryst, & cursse him lest yt we shulde be apostata from chryst, and let hym opprobryoully speake agaynst vs what he wyl, for we glorye for them al byfore the lorde, of whō his destruc¦tyon is at hande, bycause that baren tre is not abasshed, to coūte ye sayers of truth, for mockers, for no other thīg but bycause they speake the truth / as who saye / the truthe it selfe were a mockage. Thys wyked man wyll not be ouercome of the truth, of the which we glorye in the lorde to be conuycte, for we our selues in tymes paste dyd walke ī the spirite of errour, but nowe the veryte of god hathe ouercome vs, by the which god hath delyueryd vs, ye and dayly doth delyuer vs, frō the most greuous darckenes of ignorance and erroures, whome we do instantly pray, yt he wyl make perfyte the thyn∣ges whiche he hath begonne in vs, we wyl not be conuycte of the decrees of men, by whom he is cōuycte, and most shamfully straungelyd, as I very well knowe, so that in the thynges of god, he maye be confutyd, of innumerable chyldren, and husbande men, for it is

to wyt, that the most vyctorous word of god, which they loue, is able to pre∣ueyle agaynste a hundreth thousande suche as Lregaryus is, if our armour be nat inuyctoryous (as he denyethe them to be) lette hym condescende or come forth, and proue howe inuycto∣ryous they be, but he doth warre ī hor¦ses, and charyotes, that is to say with the sotletyes of men, verelye we warre in ye name, and worde of our lorde god in the whiche we despyse, hym and all that warre agaynste vs, he dothe also say that the Churche, is not so desty∣tute, namely in thys golden tyme, that she shulde not haue her warryours, truely th{is} myght be a sainge of blynde Byarde oh howe nobly doth he know what the churche is, and who be her warryours, he supposethe the church to be that whiche countethe the wyse men of the worlde to be her sodyours, as who shulde say it were not wryttē. I wyl destroy the wysdome of yt wyse and wyl cast away the vnderstandinge of the prudent, where is ye wyse, where is the scrybe, where is the searcher of thys worlde, hathe not god made the

wysdome of thys worlde folyshenes. 1. Corinthy. 1. these be not the soudy∣ours of the churche of god, but the symple, pure, meke, that with all theyr hart{is} cleaue to the worde of god, most hyest, of suche, that be of thys kynde, the frunte of the greate warre of our churche which is peasyble is ordyned the whiche is called by the Hebrewe terme Schulamitis, and not Sunami∣tis as be supposethe, for the Hebrewe bokes haue it wrytten of thys maner in the syxt Chapiter of the Cantikles Reuertere, Reuertere Schulamis. ye which wordes in englyshe be, returne, retur∣ne, or turne agayne my peasyble chur∣che, and in the .7. chapiter. what shall ye fynde in my peasyble churche, but companyes of warryours, spoken by thys terme, Schulamis, let hym haue hys churche, the whiche he callethe Sunamis, that is to say the synagoge of Antychryste, myserable, captyuate, stony, & indurate, & we wel haue ures the whiche we cal Schulamis, that is to saye, the churche of god, the spouse of true Scholomon which is by inter¦prytacyon of Chryst yt pesable kynge

all whose souayours, stronge, ye most strongest, be alwaye gyrded with the most persynge sworde of the worde of god, for nyghtlye dreades Lantik. 3. & these souayours be made moste ware and wyse to the battelles into the con¦iuringe of Antychryst, whom god him selfe hathe made truely wyse Ioh. 6. of whom the reprouable Aegipte So∣dome, & Babylon, be not able to suffer the leaste scyrmyge, or lettynge lose, nor neuer coulde. Thys Trygaryus, dothe saye, that we threaten greate thynges, but to whom, or do we thretē our selues, do not we rather open, and declare the thretenynges of the dread¦ful power of god, the which we be cer∣tyfyed of, shall fall most greuous into the kyngedome of the sonne of perdy¦cyon. he dothe also saye that in bryn∣gynge vp rumoures, and sclanders, we so perpetually be of one mynd, that no man doutethe of it, but we haue al one spirite, I make answere, that when we cal them wolues, beastes, antychristes we do not sclāder thē, but shewe forth what the spirite doth iudge of thē, by the testymonye of scryptures but it is

not alonly, in this one thinge; that we be al of one mynde, for we do dyssente almost in nothyng, that ye same spirite of god doth teach vs in the sayd word he dyd prophesy as Cayphas dyd, ye euen agaynste his wyl, nat dylygently markyng yt we hade al one spirite al∣though he wolde yt his sainge shuldbe otherwayes vnderstāded. But nether be nor yet al his sinagoge, ī any thing be of one mynde, sauynge in thys that they haue all coniured agaynste god, Chryst, and his verite, for what do we se in them perpetual stryfe, of Thomy∣stes, Scotystes, Occanistes, of Nomy¦nalles, Realles, Summeles, and suche other of thys kynde, stryuynge euen contrarye one to an other, whereby is wel knowen that they haue nothynge comen with the doctryne of chryst, ye whiche is the doctryne of mekenes, & vnyte, & they be also straūge from hys spirite, he doth furthermore saye that we with a vayne glose of wordes, do wrast and wrythe the holy scryptures into our owne sēce, wher as we do sub¦dewe our sence by all meanes into the seruyce of the scrypture of god, and

glory to be ouer comē of the truth as any man may openly perceyue, yt shal loke vpon our commētaryes, and also we do affyrme nothynge, that is not proued by the open testymonye of the scripture, what is the cause therfore yt he dothe counte our exposycyons for vayne, but that he is aboute with hys craftines to mocke & haue in derysion all the scryptures of god, wo be to the thou blynde iogeler, for thy iudgment is at hāde, bycause yu arte not affrayed to count the testymonyes of god most hyest, for vayne and folyshnes, perauē¦ture thou doeste thynke the spirite of god to be cōpared to thy doble crafty¦nes, ye warsse then a foxe, but yt shalt shortlye be destroyed with the power of the same spirite, we wyll not cleaue to the counsel or phantyse of any man excepte it haue the testymonye of the scryptures of god, in what thynge do we erre thē, or what haue we reprouyd at any tyme, that dothe agre with the scryptures of god, or what other thin¦ges shulde we receyue, we do receyue the wryttinges of men, that agre with the sayde scryptures, not for the men,

but for ye truth sake, the word of truth ought to iudge, who shulde haue wryt¦ten ryghtfully / if they deny, yt we haue the truth, let them improue our proba¦tyons, by ye worde of god. Tregaryus wyll do it, he makethe argumente Pro and Contra, Primo, secundo, et tertio. &c. we wyl heare this sainge, ye lorde spe∣keth it, to whose least iote of speaking ryghtly taken, we gyue place, but we openly accurse the sotletyes of Tre∣garyus and hys secte, not bycause we be ignorant ī thē, for we haue labored our selues in such sophestycal knott{is}, but bycause it is wyked, and agaynste the worde of god, to entreate apō the scryptures of faythe, with suche con∣tencyous argumentes, nor we do not denye (as he dothe impute to vs) that the worde of god may not be expoun∣ded, but we wolde not that this expo∣sycyon, shuldbe of the proper sence of any man, althoughe he be learned, and holy, but of the sence of Chryst, which is than so, when we expounde scryptu¦res. by scryptures, for as I haue spo∣ken in many bokes, it is impossyble, yt any man shuld ryghtuously expounde

scryptures of h{is} owne sence or brayne And yet besydes th{is} Tregaryus hath added to, a blasphemye agaynste the lorde, that he supposythe there to be many goddes, that can be no maner wayes erre, the whiche doth perteyne alonly to god hym selfe the hyest, and greatest, besydes whom ther is no mo goddes, for who, but he is immutable, so that he can not erre, for all sayntes haue synne .i. concupiscence, as longe as they lyue and say as is wrytten, in the fyrste canonycall epistle of Iohan the fyrst Chapitre, yf we shulde say yt we haue no syn in vs, we deceaue our selues and truthe is not in vs, but for all that they do not worke iniquite or wekydnes for syn dothe not reygne in thē, as is playnly declared Ro. 5. &. 6. he is afrayde also lest that he be iniu∣ryous to the electe, & in the meanese sō blasphemyes the lorde, god hathe no nede of our lyes, no nor yet h{is} sayntes verely when god hath mercy of ye syn¦ners, or the iniuste, and maketh of thē sayntes theyr vnrytousnes doth com∣mende, and laude ye rytousnes of god Ro. 3. for verely from thensforthe hys

iustyce apperythe more gloryous, and he is manyfestly declaryd to be iuste, & true, in h{is} sermones when he is cruell ouer the wekyd and the rebellyon not obseruyng his promyses is iudged, he dothe fayne hym selfe to wryte for the church of god, and yet dothe nothyng els: but aledge the decrees of men / for that thinge that this crafty false pro∣phete doth of the councelles, he doth it so that he is about to subuert al the pryncyples of fayth, I do confesse, yt he speaketh many thinges true, chefly in the begynnynge, but at the laste he doublethe his voyce of the churche, & her councelles, wherby he maye more lyghtly & surely powre out his poysō, but as I sayde in the begynnynge he is answeryd enoughe at al to his que∣styons of them afore named, It dothe greaue me sore / moste noble prynce, to make answere to the wekydnes of th{is} deceyuer, I wold but alonly gyue you warnynge, that you with al dilygence shulde flee, and auoyde, the poyson of hym, and suche other, for you must do so of necessyte, if you wyl play ye true prince / or els it is impossible that you

shulde be sauyd / nowe perceyue / I do thys with a greate hope / remembryng our olde amytye / the whiche in tymes passed / you dyd vouchsafe apon me / & of ye noble mynde of your good lord∣shyppe / I wyl not go aboute to oynte your hede with oyle of a synner / the burden is great that oppressythe you, take hede therfore lest you peryshe vn¦der it / take hede also, that you haue vn¦der you / true chrysten people / and yt chryste may regyne in them / for then you shall cheflye play the true prince / when you chefly gyue delygence / that Chryst maye be a prynce in your sub∣iectes / take hede also yt the most pure worde of god may be preached to you, banyshe from your landes / al false pro¦phetes / wolues, & suche maner of mar∣chande mē / & I wolde that you shulde perfytlye knowe / that if youre people peryshe your soule shalbe for theyres, ye if it be thorowe your cause, & if ther peryshe but one / pryncypally beware of al hoded men / for al they / excepte a fewe / haue coniured agaynst god / and h{is} chryst / but aboue al other take hede of these, for they are to be flede of you

that glory them selues wykedly / with the tytle of obseruantes / execrable to all Chrystyanes / for theyr ypocrysye, hathe lede very many / ye almost innu∣merable to death / I pray god ye hyest and best / that they maye shortly be ex∣pulsyd / the courtes of al princes / & by lytle, and lytle, it is hyely necessary yt you extyncte / & put downe / the tyran∣nes of the kyngdome of Antychryst .i. these dysceytfulnes of perdons ydola¦try of sayntes that slepe / the offycyal∣les courtes / cursyd costomes / by no meanes to be permytted of Chrystya∣nes, the outragiousnes of sectes, with al such other, & then conceaue in your mynde, that you wyl haue holy scryp∣tures in your hādes, & stody vpon thē nyght, & day, the holy gost wyl teache, and enforme you / by what meanes all thyng{is} shalbe wel orderyd withī your kyngdome, for & yf you deny the word of god to the people, they ought not to obeye you, for they be the shepe of Christ they wyl be fedde with ye meate of his holy worde, therfore al the peo¦ple of the faythful, maye saye to theyr princes / & rulers, ye they be bounde to

make cōgregatyons for it, and say / we wyl heare the worde of our lorde god, we wyll not heare the decrees & lawes of the pope / we wyl not ye ecreralles of these glosing sophysters, the which yf prynces / or rulers wyll denye them when they wylbe taken for faythful, ye sayde people may depryue them theyr kyngdomes / & lordshypes / the people be subiecte / in al thinges, to princes, & rulers / sauynge those thinges / that be against the worde of god / or that they shulde not haue the worde of god prea¦ched / let your hyghnes gyue place to the truthe / and god shal encrease you in althynges / & establyshe your kyng∣dome. I was aduertysed of late, that bycause a certeyne minyster (as we cal it) a prest, despysynge yt decre of anty∣chryst, prefarryng the precepte of god is maryed to a wyfe / for the which, he is taken prisoner of a certeyne tyrante thorowe your consente, & they do saye that he doth persecute him to deathe / take hede, that you consent not to any man, for your soule shuldbe for his, he hathe done a thynge necessary, which god hathe commaunded to al that can

not absteyne, as I haue copyouslye opened, in my boke of matrymony and euedētly proued it. To ye most chrystē Kynge of Fraunce, the whiche I dyd put forth because of my owne mariage for I am maryed, altho the synagoge of the son of perdicyon was madde at it, for we must rather obeye god then man, god hath cōmaunded matrimony to euery man, that can not abstayne, ye pope prohibyteth, and maketh ypocry¦tes, to whom shuld we gyue place, not to god, the lorde dyd make no distync∣tyon betwyxte the layealtye, and the clargye the cōmaundement is general perteyning to euery mā, of euery state ye and if your highnes wyl beleue the truthe, take a wyfe, and by your exma∣ple you shal destroy this cursed decre of antychryste, for when he dyd com∣maunde to the Clargy, chastyte of ly∣uynge contrarye to the worde of god, he dyd multyply al maner of lecherye, and to speke the truthe thys reproua∣ble order is spronge of no other thing but of dysceytfull spirites, & doctryne of deuylles, as you maye playnly per∣ceyue ye first of Tim, 4. the same iud∣gement

is of the prohybyting of meat¦tes, ī the same place very copyously I hade no space nor tyme to wryt many thinges to you therfore I haue brefly made answere to that wyked Trega∣ryus wherin I haue putte moch good councel, bycause this deceyuer goeth about falsly to instructe you, of ye au∣thoryte of the coūcelles of the church of the which matter we hade comuny∣catyon very oft in your palace, I shal also adde to .385. Paradoxes or cō∣clusyons / concludynge another thīge then Tregaryus hathe teached, I do also make redy my selfe, to answere to them al, where so euer it shalbe, eyther in Germanye or in Fraunce, or where so euer they wyl, so yt they wyll heare me, & not go about to put me to deathe vn harde, I wyl dyspute the matter o∣penly if the counsel be holdē in Frāce and wyl no other iudges, but the most pure worde of god, and all that iudge syncerely after it, bycause it is no o∣therwyse lawefull, in case they ouer∣come me with the worde of god, and proue that I dyssent from the truthe, in those thynges that I shall affyrme

by the same worde, let them order me as they thynke it beste, and yf they be conuycte, I wyl not that they shulde be in danger of the least heare of theyr hede, but alonly let glory be gyuen to the truthe, wherfore I beseche youre Lordeshyppe to accepte thys trea∣tyse of Paradoxes, or conclusyons, compendyouslye concludynge almost all what soo euer dothe perteyne to Chrystyanytye / and doo not dysday∣ne my dewetye towarde your hyghe∣nes / and perauenture God, the great¦teste / and moste hye, wyl graunte that I may shortlye put forthe vnder your name some thinge more exelent, peace and grace, of oure Lorde Iesus Chryste, and ioye of the holye gost be wt your noble lordship and with al youre peo∣ple. So be it. ❧
