


SYthe the almightie Creator of all
thinges, of his mercifull goodnes,
only for loue that he had to man∣kynd
(who fell by disobedience out
of Paradise into miserie) hath cre∣ated
medicine out of the earth for
man his vtilitie and helpe in the tyme of his sicknes,
as the wyse man sayeth, Eccl. 38. And hath ordeined
ministers of the same medicine, by a true and perfect
order of arte,But of this deuision looke more in my preface to the Reader. deuided nowe into two partes, as the
phisicien for inwarde infirmities, and the chirurgien
or handeworker for outwarde griefes: It shoulde
seme vnto me that they which despise the sayde arte,
despise God his gracious giftes, euen as they whiche
professe either part therof abusing the same, abuse
God his mercifull benefites.
And for as muche as suche despisers and abusers,
are as well offenders to God, as a detrimente to his
creatures: It should seme a thing not vaine or voyde
of profite, to reprehende and warne men of suche vi∣ces:
specially where they are so frequented, that some
by feling, and some by vnderstanding and seyng, dai∣ly

crie out with greuous clamores, of the incommodi∣ous
successe of suche wicked factes.
First the despisers therof oftetymes (as we se) suf∣fer
them selues (thorough hate that they beare to
these excellēt partes and the ministers therof) by ne∣gligence
to runne to extreame desolation: and ther∣fore
many times worthily perishe, as a iuste rewarde
for their contempte of God his ordeined remedies.
And yet truly I can not but confesse, that the abu∣sers
of those thinges are the chiefe cause, of these so
great euels and mischiefes: for the experience of their
wicked doynges, and the ouerthwarte successe of the
same, causeth the ignorant to be at defiāce with that
whiche was made for their owne helpe and succoure:
so that they often perishe, because they feare to seke
remedy: they are so often beaten with the painfull
rodde of hatefull abusers.
And alas, where as there is one in Englande, al∣moste
throughout al the realme, that is indede a true
minister of this arte, there are tenne abhominable a∣busers
of the same. VVhere as there is one Chirur∣gien,
that was apprentice to his arte, or one phisicien▪
that hath trauayled in the true studie, and exercise
of phisique: There are tenne, that are presumptious
smearers, smaterers, or abusers of the same: yea,
Smythes, Cutlers, Carters, Coblars, Copers, Coriars

lether, Carpenters, and a great rable of women:
VVhich (as the moste excellent Galen feared to hap∣pen)
forsake their handiecraftes, and for filthy lucre
abuse phisick, and chirurgerie. The cause wherof the
sayde Galen wysely reciteth: for he sayeth, if these
sciences had no coligance with other nedefull lear∣ninges,
that those inconueniences would therof ensue.
I would to God therfore my dere maisters and
brethrē, that there might no fault be found in vs, cō∣cerning
these thinges: For truly if we weare such men
of science, as we ought to be, those false abusers would
be more fearful to medle as they doe. For what a sha∣me
were it, that suche an abuser in talkinge with a
chirurgien in dede, shall apere more perfecte in the
knowledge of the anatomie, and the natures of sim∣ples,
or the complexion of man his bodie, then he that
hath ben apprentice to his arte? Surely me thinketh
this were a great occasion, not only to cause these abu¦sers
more to presume: but I feare me also that suche
thinges haue bene the cause, that suche abusers haue
ben defended, of those whiche of righte shoulde haue
subdued them.
Heare me my maisters and brethren, is ther any
philosopher so ignorant in philosophie, that he wan∣teth
knowledge, to defende that whiche he doth pro∣fesse,
against his contrary? doth he worthily beare the
name of a Platoniste, that is ignorant in Plato his

workes? or is he worthy the name of a Musiciā, that
hath learned to singe or plaie a fewe songes vpon an
instrument, without the knowledge of the principles
and rules of musicke? I am sure ye will answere no.
If this be true in dede, as I thinke none can denie:
Howe can we for shame call our selues Chirurgi∣ens,
if we be not able to defende the same arte, to
the confutation of the abusers therof. And I suppose
verely, that Galen would not haue thought hym self
a true Phisicien, if he had not bene able to confute
the error of Thessalus and ye empirickes of his time,
that falsly abused the excellēt arte of medicine: wher¦of
Chirurgerie is the most aunciēt and worthy part,
as Cornelius Celsus witnesseth: what so euer in the
abusiue deuision is otherwyse pretended.
Seyng therfore that it lyeth not in vs to extincte,
put downe to silence, or subuerte these abusers:
woulde God that we myght at the leaste, (throughe
our excellentie) cause them as they are to seme exe∣crable.
So that therby, they whiche haue power to re∣dresse
these thynges, shall of their owne motion, se∣ing
these abuses subuerte them: I meane that wee
our selues myght growe to suche perfection, that
the workes and knowledge of vs myghte apeare so
immaculate, that by our iustnes, their falshode
may be sene or knowne, by our cleanes theyr fowlnes,

by our knowledge their ignorance, by our certeyne▪
and true vse: their abusion and vncerteyne aduen∣tures:
As eche thinge is knowen by his contrarie. So
that at the laste, they thē selues (as Iannes and Iam∣bres,
the charmers of Aegipte, although for a whyle
they deceiued the kyng, by counterfeiting the myra∣cles
of of Moises and Aaron the seruantes of God, yet
at the laste confessed, that their owne dedes weare
done by deceite, and the miracles of Moyses by the
finger of God) shall confesse them selues also to be a∣busers,
and we workers by true science. And so at the
laste I doubte not, but all mē shall abhorre them. And
as abuse groweth into hate and cōtempt, so the right
vse shall obteyne loue and credite: so that the good in∣deuour
of vs I truste, shall be the fall both of the abu∣sers,
and the haters, of our excellent arte.
For truly my maisters and brethern, I can not a
little commende your late good indeuoures in this be∣halfe.
For I presently see a number of diligēt hartes,
endeuouryng them selues by all meanes to excelle in
all kynde of studies, belonging to their arte and pro∣fession:
and as it alredy apeareth vnto me, so shall it
shortely to all men, euen as choke peares to our ad∣uersaries.
If we may but haue the fauourable de∣fence
of you our maisters, as we haue had incourage∣ment
therto, by your diligence in repayring our wor∣shipfull

halle, and ye order therof: to the increasement
of al kynde of knowledge, belonging to our profession.
I therfore, as preparatiue to the reste that shall
folowe, dedicate thys my symple laboure, in set∣tyng
forth this excellent compendious worke, called
Chirurgia parua Lanfranci, vnder your ayde, helpe, succor,
tuition, and defence: whiche was translated out of
Frenche into the olde Saxony englishe, about twoo
hundred yeres past. VVhich I haue nowe not only re∣duced
to our vsuall speache, by changyng or newe
translating suche wordes, as nowe be inueterate, and
growne out of knowledge by processe of tyme, but al∣so
conferred my labours in this behalf with other co∣pies,
both in Frenche and latin: namely with maister
Bacter, for his latine copie, and Symon Hudie for
his frēch copie, and other English copies: of the which
I had one of Iohn Chāber, & an other of Iohn Yates,
both very auncient, with other mo: whose good helpe
hath not a little farthered me in these thinges, to the
intēt that it might perfectly come forth to a publique
profite, whiche to doe I was constreigned, not only be∣cause
I would not truste to muche to myne owne rude
iudgementes: but also that by the authoritie of dyuers
men of knowledge, this excellent worke (as it is wor∣thy)
may ye more effectually be alowed and accepted.
And this dedication haue I made vnto you, ra∣ther

then (as the common vse is) to noble menne and
princes, because ye being fathers and auncient mai∣sters
of the same, are better able by perswasion and
instruction of doctrine, to defende the same, to the sa∣tisfiyng
of all men, then the only name of any prince,
or magistrate, whiche defence I doe not desire, be∣cause
I thinke the most excellent Lanfranke, to lack
authoritie of truthe, to defende him selfe, but only
that myne owne imbesilitie and faintnes of name, in
setting forthe of this worke, may by your worshipfull
aide, succour, and helpe, be fortefied. And thus doing,
ye shall not only encourage me for my part, to enter∣prise
other thinges vtile and nedefull, but other also,
with whom I haue conferred my studies, bothe haue
done and doe intende the like, to the increase of the
name, fame, and worshippe, of our excellent arte,
and the companie or brotherhod of the same.
Vnto this worke also is added a briefe Anatomie,
necessary for all Chirurgiens, and a table of the in∣terpretation,
as well of all maner of strange wordes,
as also of all maner of simples, by any occasion trea∣ted
of in this profitable worke: By me collected, ac∣cording
to myne owne experience and the meaning of
good authors, as well ye aunciētes as the new writers.
The whiche thing, if it be well approued of you, it
wilbe (as the goodnes therof deserueth) The better
accepted and receiued of all others, the whiche thing

to see, weare to me for this my good will, a sufficiente
recompence. And what profite or commoditie, this
worke shall be, (being nowe set forth vulgarly) to all
estates of this realme, the excellēcie therof wil short∣ly
so proue it by euident experience, that we nede not
for that cause here to waste the time with wordes.
Therfore that it may so come to passe, that our ende∣uours
in generall, as well the maisters as the reste of
the companie, maye procede as it is begonne, to the e∣dificatiō
and building vp of good science, & to the sub¦uertion
of all haters and abusers of the same: I shall
not cease, not only to praie to God for helpe therin,
whoe is capitaine and author of al goodnes: but also
with such poore weapon, as the forsaid capitaine hath
lent me, I will not cease while breath is in my body, to
lay on with both handes till this battell be wonne, &
our aduersaries conuinced and vanquished: which al∣though
as I saide afore, they are x. to one, yet truthe
being our weapon, and good science our armoure, with
our generall the high author of them, we nede not to
doubt, but that one shalbe good enough for a thousād,
not so strongly armed, but naked men and bare of all
knowledge.
And in the meane tyme, till we brynge forth our
mayne battell, let this worthy Lanfranke skirmishe
with thē, as I. Vigo & other haue done. And also let
not vs be obliuious, in geuyng thankes to such, good
men, as haue in these thinges not a litle furthered our

knowledges: as doctor Recorde, for his Vrinale of phi¦sicke,
whiche he dedicated vnto vs: and also doctor
Turner, whoe compyled his englishe herale, as he
affirmeth for our sakes▪ whiche moste learned and
worthie worke ought of vs to be honorably estemed:
rather then as it hath been of some moste spitfully de∣spised,
for the faulte of the lewde and negligent pryn¦ters:
wherwith they seme most shamlesly to charge
the author▪ where as accordinge to his desire, they
ought rather for their owne profitable vse to amend
the same▪ that by their good receiuing and wel vsing
of it, he maye be animated, to finishe al ye rest of that
worke, according to his former intentes: the which to
doe if he be discouraged by our ingratitude, how much
the common weale shall lacke that commoditie, let
the wyse and learned iudge. I truste I shall not nede
to byd you bee thankefull to maister VVylliam Cun∣ningham
doctor of phisicke, for his so many learned
lectures which he red vnto you in our halle, to your
great commoditie, if the faulte be not in your selues:
of the whiche to be partaker with you, my frowarde
fortune and distance of place (to my no small griefe)
would not suffer me. And besides these, diuers other:
which (to abreuiate the time) I passe ouer without the
rehersall of their names, whose diligence of late hath
bene (as vnto you at this daye it is not vnknowne)

to profite the common weale: whose names therfore
among vs oughte therby to florishe, and their fame
neuer to die or decaie. And then let vs make a gene∣rall
proclamation, that who so euer hath professed
the noble arte of chirurgerie, and will fighte against
the despisers and abusers of the same: let them come
vnder the baner of good authores, nowe sent amonge
them, by our generall the creator of medicine: arming
them selues well with knowledge and good science,
and goe forth to battell against these deceiuers, and
their capitaine filthie lucre. And their wages shall be
well payde them: namely good fame and liuinge
in this life, and eternall lyfe after this vale
of miserie. The which he grante vs all,
that dearly hath redemed vs with
his precious bloude,
Amen.
