


❧ To the moste gracyous Quene ANNE, most deare wyfe, of our most drade soueraygne lorde, HENRY the eyght of Englande, & of Fraūce kynge, defender of the faythe, and lorde of Irelande, and vnder god, next, chefe, and supreme heade of the churche of Englande, your most bondē ora¦tour Trystram Reuel wys∣shethe helthe.
GRace, and peace, from God the father, and the lorde Iesus Chryste, be with you moste Gracy∣ous Quene / moste hum∣bly, and with all reue∣rence gyuynge laudes / and praysynges vnto almyghtye god for your grace, euen after the mynde of saynte Paule,Ephe alwayes in all my prayers for your grace, with gladnes, bycause of the felyshype whiche your grace hathe in the gospel, frō the fyrst day vntyll nowe, and am surely certy∣fyed, that he whiche hathe begonne a good worke in you, wyl also go forthe

with it, vntyl the day of Iesus chryst, with the encrease and establyshement of his gospell, as yet but yonge & hath many enemyes, to whome the lorde sende the day of his visytatyon, to h{is} honoure and glory, and your grace to perseuere, with all dylygence as your grace haue begone to promote, furder, and sette forthe,oh. 1. Goddes worde, vpon the selfe same zele that saynte Iohan cryed in deserte, make redy the way of the lorde / So that euery man may be rulyd by the laste wyll, and testamente of our eldest brother, and lorde Iesus Chryste, which is suffycyent for al vs to lyue after, to euerlastynge helth, to knowe God ye father to be God alone and whō he hath sent Iesus Chryste,. 17. without any other foreyne or straung lawes, he hath also straytly cōmaūded his lawyers,odi. . byshopes ouer the cōgre¦gation or any other, nether to adde or dymynyshe one Iote, to, or from hys forsayd last wyl,isai. . sayng, I am thy god, the God of Zelotes, one alone suffy∣cyent, thou shalte haue no straunge godes ī my syht,ie. 31. nether turne to the ryght hande, nor the lefte. And nowe

heare Israel the preceptes, and iudge¦mentes, whiche I teache the, that do∣ynge them, thou mayste lyue, & goinge in, may possesse the lāde that the lorde God of thy fathers wyll gyue the. Thou shalt adde nothyng to ye worde yt I speake to the,Deu.  nor take any thynge from it, kepe the commaundementes of thy lord god, and holde the kynges hyghe waye, the pathe of holy scryp∣ture, which is the worde, besydes whō there is none other, furthermore vpon the selfe same charge, he hathe orday∣ned, instytute, and made executors for the performaunce of hys sayde testa∣ment, that euery mā without respecte of person, shulde be equally receyued, and yt of sundry wyse. Fyrst he hathe instytute,Mark 17. Math 16. Mark 10. Lu. 2. Hu. 1 3. Re¦gum.  Bysshoppes to teache hys people therin to lose, to bynde, to pro∣naūce grace, and remissyon of synnes, gyuen thoroughe hys worde. More∣ouer he hathe put kynges, prynces, & rulers, ī theyr auctorytes, to punyshe, correcte and expulse from hys congre¦gacyon, transgressours of hys lawes, and straungers, not sekynge to edefye but to kyl, which be callyd bloude sup∣pers,

men lyuynge after theyr owne braynes, and fantasies, not commynge in at the dore but another waye, set∣tynge forthe theyr owne lawes & tra∣dycyons, almost deceyuynge the very electe, as is wel knowen to the fayth∣full, with suppressyon and treadynge vnder fote,Math. 4. euen to this day, the lyght of euerlastyng veryte, the lyuely word of god. And for ye cause most chrysten Quene, that noble and famous clarke FRAVNCYS' LAMBERT Author of thys lytle treatyse, percey∣uynge both the exilynge of the gospel from chrysten mēnes hartes,oh. 16 and also the ruyne, and destructyon of ye fayth∣full, moste lyke a true champyon hath sette forthe, to the quycke Image the pestylente doctryne, and actes of the kyngedome of perdycyon, the church of Antychryste, the men of synne, the Pope, and his sectes, in many workes with great laboures and study, chefly in thys lytle boke, clerely confutynge the synagoge of Sathan as a noble executour of his brothers aforesayde wyll, and by the same auctoryte hathe descrybed and set forth true mynisters

of goddes moste holye worde, a boke to be redde of all chrystē people, therin they may learne to walke in theyr cal∣lynge, pryncypally byshopes ouer the congregacion, which sayde lytle trea∣tyse by a good christen brother lent to me, as yet bothe yonge in yeres, and muche lesse in learnynge, haue taken in hande to translate this so precyous a treasure, and offer it to your most no¦ble grace rudely sette forth, trustynge that youre grace wyll cause the same, eloquently and ornatly to be transla∣ted by some of your dyscret, wyse, and well learned clarkes, most humbly be∣sechynge your grace, in good parte to take this my rude enterpryse, pryncy∣pally (to confesse the truthe) bycause I am very vnmete to do such a thinge and partly for lake of tyme, oppressed with pouertye, the whiche (as the Poete MANTVANE wrytteth) is enemy to good maners, consequēt∣lye my wryttynge is verye course and base, as yet ferre from the trade of a wryter, the which be the causes of my offerynge to your grace, so rude a vo∣lume, so indygeste a phrase, and to be

brefe, so vnsemely set together, wher∣fore I humbly beseche your grace, to take these my fyrste frut{is} (yf they may be called frutes) euen as Chryste our mayster hathe accepted the offerynge of the pore woman whose wyll was good,Mar. 12 Lu. 21. whē she offered al that she hade thoughe it was but lytle. And the holy goste preserue our sayde so∣ueraygne Lorde, and your most deare husbande, your grace, & the ladye ELEZA∣BETHE Pryncesse, Doughter, & heyre vnto you bothe, and gyue to you the lyght of hys mercye, to whome, with god the Father, and the Sonne, be honoure, and glorye for euer more. So be it. ✚
