



THE counsell giuen vs by the auncient, aduising each one (Right honorable,) to couet to be that he is, and no more: if it be well, and duly considered of, is not to be reiected: for that we be thereby taught two especiall pointes, most wor∣thie to be imbraced of all men. The firste is, that there is nothing more decent, commendable, or yet more benefi∣ciall to man, then to be contented, and constantly stande to his calling: without coueting, as ofte as his fond affec∣tion shall egge him, to be other then he is, by chaunging of his manner of liuing. For that, as Numa Pompilius (be∣ing called to be King of Rome,) said: There is no change more daungerous, and more to be eschewed of euery wise and warie man, then the chaunging of his calling, or the manner of liuing, he is in. The seconde, and cheefest, is: that there is not one, who (beside his apparant calling made by mans meanes) is not secretly by the vnspeakable prouidence of God, called to some vocation: that is to say, to one maner of liuing, or other. And who hath not his particular distinct talent assigned him, to be employed to Gods glorie, & the cōmon vtilitie of ye societie of al men? Which, as it shoulde appeare, hath beene the cause why that Philosophers, seeing (as Seneca saith) that a for∣ced nature, or inclination, seldome or neuer thriueth, or bringeth foorth good fruite: haue bene of aduice that chil∣dren, after they haue atteined vnto the yeres of discretion,
 and vnderstanding, should partely be permitted to the choice of the Facultie, Occupation, Art, Science, or Trade of life, they best like to followe: as that, wherein (in ve∣rie deede) for the moste part, they thriue, and profite best. Suche be the secrete furtheraunces of God, for the com∣moditie, ease, and releefe of his creatures. And, to speake by experience, if a man doe well consider their youthfull course, he shall not fayle to see children, almoste euen from their cradle, and first vnderstanding, giuen to like or mislike, to choose or refuse, & also to be more apt to one thing then an other. Some giuen to a forme of Architec∣ture: some to Letters, some to Armes, some to Sciences, and Mechanicall occupations: and so foorth.
All, moste apparent tokens, yea, euident signes, of this secrete vocation, surpassing the comprehension of man. So that this auncient counsell, is no whitte dissenting in that point, from the aduice of the coelestiall Philo∣sopher, and moste blessed Apostle Saint Paule: who, vp∣pon this consideration, willeth each one to walke worthi∣ly, and with all humilitie, meekenesse, and patience, chari∣tably supporting eache other, in the vocation we be called vnto. For (sayeth he) there be distributions of graces, and administrations: and also giftes, different, or vn∣like one an other, giuen vs according to grace: and distributed to eache one, after the measure of Christes blessed will and pleasure: to be by vs (following his ad∣uice) willingly, and with diligence, & fidelitie, prosequu∣ted, without being yrked or annoyed, or yet of our selues disturned from perseueraunce in the intentiue exercise therof, for any occasion, whatsoeuer. Two most remark∣able lessons, & worthie to be remembred and spoken of, in these our dayes full of disorder: when that no man (or at least few or none,) is contented with his owne lott: but
 euerie one ledde with I knowe not what kinde of selfe loue, greedinesse, and ambition, seeketh to be all in all, & is not many times afraide (as if he had as many sufficien∣cies, as vaine thoughtes, or fonde motions,) like a blinde monster to attempte things in despite of Minerua: that is, to vndertake things yt be contrarie to his naturall instinct, and to cast (though for the moste parte, to his owne con∣fusion,) at that whiche passeth his reache, and capa∣citie. Without consideration either of his talent, giuen him, not to be cast aside, or negligently digged vp in the Earth: but rather to be vsed carefully, and also liberally imployed to cōmon profite. Or yet caring for policie, the nource, and conseruatrix of all well founded Common weales: as that which respecteth the Publique, & all men in generall, and not any particular. Or once thinking on his duetie, whiche teacheth him, orderly attendance, ver∣tuous perseuerance, and humble obedience. Yea, or yet (whiche is the worst) without remembring the feare of God: who hath created him a seelie member, of the huge and mightie bodie of humane societie, & appointed him his distinct charge, not to be exercised to his own particu∣lar, but to the reliefe, & common maintenance of the vni∣uersall bodie: neither more, nor lesse, then as we see each member of mans bodie trauel in his degree, for the susten∣tation, and continuance of the whole. All, and euerie one of them, by Gods most wise prouidence, being so streight∣ly restrained within the limits of their duetie, that no one may, or can leaue his owne, to take to him his fellowes office, or charge: no more then one man (if he kepe him∣selfe within his boundes) may, or ought to incroch, or in∣trude him selfe into an others: but to the verie end (fol∣lowing their example, so necessarie for our instruction, proposed vnto vs,) firmely to stand to his owne, without
 starting, or of his own motion, once looking on anothers. A consideration, thoughe of greate importance, in these dayes little thought on, and lesse regarded. For, who euer sawe so many discontented persons: so many yrked with their owne degrees: so fewe contented with their owne calling: and such a number desirous, & greedie of change, & nouelties? Who euer heard tel of so many reformers, or rather deformers of estates, and Common weales: so many controllers of Princes, and their proceedinges: and so fewe imbracing obedience? Whiche beginneth nowe (the more pitie) to be lagged at the cartes taile. And to be short: such straunge, and souden alteration in all estates? Doth not the vnlearned Layman, vndertake the office of a Minister? Doth not the Minister disallowe of inferiour orders, and leuell (as a man would say) with both eyes at once, (for fayling,) at the Bishops myter? Is the Bishoppe, trowe ye, so exempt of selfe loue, and desire of honour, as that he could not be contented to leaue his former vocati∣on, to imbrace the supreme dignitie of Priesthood? Like∣wise, the Plough man, doth he not thinke the Merchant happier then himselfe? The Merchant, doth he not tickle at the title of a Gentleman? The Gentleman, doth he not shoot at the marke of Nobilitie? And ye Noble man, hath he not his eye fixed vppon the glorie and greatnesse of a Prince? What Prince could not be contented to be Mo∣narche of the whole world? What should I say? Would not the Lawyer (thinke ye) agreeably accept the title of a Lord? And thus of other: No one almoste liuing not in∣fected (witnesse experience) with this pestiferous canker of fonde selfe loue, impatient ambition, or yrkesome dis∣contentment of his estate: but for the moste parte, all corrupted with the delight of daungerous change, and innouation. And what should be the cause of this dis∣order?
 Forsooth, in my opinion, either the ignoring of vocation: I meane, that men doe not knowe, or consi∣der themselues, to be but particular members of an vni∣uersall bodie: and that they, in that respect, be, by the in∣comprehensible ordinaunce of God, called & appointed eche one in his degree, to some assured particular estate, & honest maner of liuing, by his secrete prouidence: and not by happe, or fortune (as Philosophers of olde time helde opinion) allotted vnto him, to keepe him selfe sufficiently occupied (without needing to seeke any other, if he list, as he ought, constantly to perseuere, and applie the same) in this life, in all vertue, to the common releefe (as is be∣fore saide) of the vniuersall Politique bodie and societie of all men in generall. Or if they knewe this: because the na∣tures, and manners of men be so depraued, and corrupted, as that they neither force to obserue this vocation, or feare to violate the same: but fare, as if euerie one were or∣deined to liue, as a GOD vnto him selfe, without re∣specte of the Publique: not caring, so their turnes be ser∣ued, what become of the rest. Wherfore, considering how necessarie the remembraunce of this vocation is, and wishing therewithall the impression thereof in all mens heartes: as that, whiche is not onely the originall, and cheefe parte of humane societie, but also the guide, & sure directer of all actions, and affaires, be they Publique or Priuate, Politique or Domesticall: I haue taken vpon me to translate out of the French, into our vulgare tongue, a Booke intituled, Politique discourses: treating of vocati∣on, and the diuersitie thereof in sundrie kindes. By the which, as we be assured of the interiour, or secrete vocati∣on, or manner of liuing each one is called vnto, (as is be∣fore said:) so we be also taught, how, and whiche way, eache one ought orderly, and duely, to enter into exteri∣our,
 or apparent Publike vocatiōs, or trades of liuing: and haue also laide before our eyes, aswell the dueties of them that haue power & authoritie, to cal men to Publique vo∣cations: as of them also, whiche seeke, or sue to be called therevnto: and likewise, how eache one ought to behaue himselfe, and constantly proceed in that he is called vnto: with diuers other points worthie of knowing, touching that subiect, (as I can learne,) not yet treated of by any o∣ther: & haue made bold to cause the same to be published vnder your Honors protection: hoping, though I haue in this my translation, (as a young beginner) rather imi∣tated mine Author verbatim, in his right sense, and mea∣ning: then sought by polished style to beautifie the same: that yet for all that, you will accompte no whit the lesse thereof, but accept it in good parte, as presented for a testi∣monie of a hartie desire to gratifie your Honor with any other agreeable seruice, whensoeuer it shall please you to commaunde. Thus committing your Honour to the tuition of Almightie God, I take my leaue, praying him to preserue, & continue your Honour in health, long life, and all honour.

