




Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull:
SIthence one profession of Religi∣on towards God, and Executi∣on of Iustice towards man hath combined you together; let me not seuer you in this my Dedication:

for my desire is to manifest my dutifull re∣spect of you all; therefore I craue your fa∣uourable construction and acceptance of this my bold enterprise. Your Honour and Worships (by the prouidence of our good God) are the Generall Captaines and Lieute∣nants of this  Citie, and chiefe Castle of this Renowned Kingdome, vnder whose gouernment we the Inhabitants of the same enioy great peace and tranquillitie; God might gouerne the whole Vniuerse (if it pleased him) immediatly by himselfe, but out of his heauenly wisdome (for causes best knowne to himselfe) hath committed the guiding thereof to Magistrates and Rulers, whom with an high stile he hath honored, calling them Gods,Psal. 82.6. Psal. 47.9. and the Shields of the earth to defend from wrongfull euils the children of men; approue your selues there∣fore, according to your titles and places. Let the sound of this Trumpet enter not one∣ly into the eares, but also into the heart, that you may the more bee incouraged to draw out the sword of Iustice, and with bold∣nesse to ransacke the irrilegious corners of

this Citie. Follow the counsell of Cambyses, which he gaue to all Citizens that desire the safetie of their Citie; namely to be most vi∣gilant when the eies most require rest, that the hurtfull people may feare, as well in darknesse as light, night as day.
The Common-wealth is compared to a Mu∣sicall Instrument, the strings whereof are the people, & you are the Musitioners; therefore as the Musitian cannot abide the strings to iar, nor his Instrument to be out of tune, no more should you suffer the people to be without manners, nor the Common-wealth without or∣der. Shew your selues carefull in this one thing, that the world may see, the longer the tree growes, the better: Offer vnto the Lord Primitias cordis, & oris tui, the first fruits of your heart and mouth vpon this Altar. Doubtlesse, it will be an acceptable Sacrifice vnto him, more pleasing then a Bullocke that hath hornes and hoofes. I feare I detaine your Lordship and Worships too long: therefore I conclude, desiring Almightie God so to blesse your gouernment in this Citie, that sinne may bee punished, wickednesse ba∣nished,

the naked cloathed, the hungry re∣freshed, the feeble cherished, Gods word maintained, his Ministers rewarded, and all the enemies of the truth suppressed; which God of his mercy giue you hearts to per∣forme for his Sonne Christ Iesus his sake. AMEN.

