


WOrthy Sir, when I call to minde the great fauours which you shewed to my father in his life time, I cannot but reprehend my selfe of ingratitude, in not performing that dutie, where∣unto (for his sake) I am so farre ob∣liged: but studying how I might best testifie my grate∣full affection, haue here presumed to present you with the first fruits of my poore studies. I could finde no better flowers than those that spring from faithfull loue, bound with the bond of dutie, to make my labours gracious in your thoughts: If I presume too farre, pardon mee, for this my loue is sprung from the root of your bountifull kindnesse towards my father, which if euer I forget, I will not say with Dauid, Let my right hand forget her cunning,Psal. 137.5. (for that is nothing) but let God himselfe forget to pre∣uent me with any grace, or to follow mee with any bles∣sing: Accept therefore (most worthy Sir) these mites, graines, drops, teares, cries, as it was by me sounded forth in place of publike meeting; I must confesse it hath lost what it then had, for a dead letter cannot be so patheticall as a liuing voice; neither can the pen so set it forth in writing, as the tongue in speaking. Papias who was a

companion of Policarpus,Eusch. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 39. thought that hee did not so much profit by the writings and bookes of the Apostles followers, as by the authoritie of the persons, and the liuely voice of the speakers: Whereupon Aeschines, when hee had read the Oration which Demosthenes had made against him, and withall perceiued how the people wondred at the force and excellencie of it, answered them thus:Hier. Ibid. What would you haue thought, if you had heard him pronounce it with his owne mouth: q.d. If you are thus rauished with hearing it read, how would you haue beene rauished if you had heard him speake and pronounce it? Howsoeuer, I hope you will looke more vpon my minde and honest purpose, then vpon the worthinesse of the worke: I durst not presume to shroud these vnpolished sprigs vnder so vertuous a patronage, if I did not hope, that as Dauid loued Mephibosheth for his good father Io∣nathans sake; so you this lame worke of mine. I humbly intreat you therefore, that as Vlisses was defended vnder the shield of Aiax; so these my vnworthy lines may by your fauour, be patronized from the enuie of malicious detractors. Our tribe oweth much to you, both for lo∣uing and rewarding their labours, for which cause I know many ioine with me, to wish your whole man, soule and body, true perfect ioy in this life, and full accomplish∣ment of glory in the next, for the which I doe and euer will pray,

