


SIR, after that this historie, which had bene conce∣led many yeeres, was lately committed to print and published in France vnder your name by my lear∣ned friende M. Marine Basanier of Paris, I was easilie enduced to turne it into English, vnderstan∣ding that the same was no lesse gratefull to you here, then I know it to be acceptable to manie great & worthie per∣sons there. And no maruell though it were verie welcome vnto you, & that you liked of the translation thereof, since no historie hetherto set foorth hath more affinitie, resemblance or conformitie with yours of Virginea, then this of Florida. But calling to minde that you had spent more yeares in France then I, and vnderstande the french better then my selfe, I foorth with perceiued that you ap∣proued mine endeuour, not for any priuate ease or commoditie that thereby might redounde vnto you, but that it argued a singu∣ler and especiall care you had of those, which are to be employed in your owne like enterprise, whom, by the reading of this my translati∣on, you woulde haue forewarned and admonished aswell to beware of the grosse negligence in prouiding sufficiencie of victuals, the securi∣tie, disorders, and mutinies that fell out among the french, with the great inconueniences that thereupon ensued, that by others mishapsOther men mis∣fortune ought to be our warning. they might learne to preuent and auoyde the like, as also might bee put in minde, by the reading of the manifolde commodities & great fertilitie of the places herein at large described & so nere neighbors vnto our colonies, that they might generally be awaked and stirred vp vnto the diligent obseruation of euerie thing that might turne to the aduancement of the action, whereinto they are so cheerefully entred. Manie speciall pointes concerning the commodities of these parts, the accidentes of the French-mens gouernment therein, the causes of their good or bad successe, with the occasions of their abandoning one of their fortes, and the surprise of the other by the

enimies are herein truely and faithfully recorded: Which because they be quoted by me in the margents, and reduced into a large al∣phabeticall table, which I haue annexed to the ende of the worke, it shalbe needlesse to recken vp againe. And that the rather, because the same with diuers other things of chiefest importance are liuely drawen in coulours at your no smale charges by the skilfull painter Iames Morgues, yet liuing in the Blacke-fryers in London (whomThe chiefe things worthie obserua∣tion in Florida are drawne in co∣lours by laes Morgues painter yet liuing in the Blacke Friers in London. Monsieur Chastillon then admirall of France sent thither with Laudonniere for that purpose) which was an eye-witnesse of the goodnes & fertilitie of those regions, & hath put downe in writing many singularities which are not mentioned in this treatise: which he meaneth to publish together with the purtraitures before it be long, if it may stand with your good pleasure & liking. These foure voiages I knew not to whom I might better offer thē to your selfe, & that for diuers iust considerations. First, for that as I haue said before, they were dedicated vnto you in french: secondly because now foure times also you haue attempted the like vpon the selfe same cost neere adioy∣ning: thirdly in that you haue persed as farre vp into the maine & discouered no lesse secretes in the parts of your aboad, then the french did in the places of their inhabiting: lastly considering you are now also readie (vpon the late returne of Captayne Stafforde and good newes which hee brought you of the safe arriuall of your last colonie in their wished hauen) to prosecute this action more throughly then euer. And here to speake somewhat of this your enterprise, I af∣firme, that if the same may speedily and effectually be pursued, it will prooue farre more beneficiall in diuers respects vnto this our relme, then the worlde, yea manie of the wiser sort, haue hitherto ima∣gined: The particuler commodities whereof are well knowen vntoA collection of the commodities of Virginea. your selfe and some fewe others, and are faithfully and with great iudgement committed to writing, as you are not ignorant, by one of your followers, which remayned there a full tweluemonth with your worshipfully lieutenant M. Raph Lane in the diligent serch of the secretes of those countries. Touching the speedie and effectuall pursuing of your action, though I wote well it woulde demanude a a princes purse to haue it throughly followed without lingring, yet am I of opinion, that you shall drawe the same before it bee long to be profitable and gamefull aswell to those of our nation there re∣maining s to the marchants of England that shall trade hereafter

thither, partly by certaine secrete cōmodities already discouered byMeanes to raise benefit in newe discoueries vsed by the Spaniards and Portugals. your seruants, & partly by breeding of diuers sorts of beasts in those large & ample regions, & plainting of such things in that warme climat as will best prosper there, & our realme standeth most in need of. And this I find to haue bene the course that both the Spaniards and Portugals tooke in the beginnings of their discoueries and con∣questes. For the Spniards at their first entrance into Hispaniola found neither suger-canes nor ginger growing there, nor any kind of our cattel: But finding the place fit for pasture they sent kine & buls & sundry sorts of other profitable bestes thither, & transported the plants of suger-canes, & set the roots of ginger: the hides of which oxen, with suger & ginger are now the chiefe marchandise of that Iland. The Portugals also at their first footing in Madera, as Iohn Barros writes in his first Decade, found nothing there but mightie woodes for timber, whereupon they called the Ilande by that name. Howbeit the climate being fauourable, they inriched it by their own industrie with the best wines and sugers of the world. The like ma∣ner of proceeding they vsed in the Isles of the Assores by sowing therin great quantitie of Woad. So delt they in S. Thomas vnder the Equinoctial, & in Brasil & sondry other places. And if our men will follow their steps, by your wise direction I doubt not but in due time they shall reape no lesse commoditie and benefit. Moreouer there is none other likelihoode but that her Maiestie, which hath Christned and giuen the name to your Virginea, if neede require, will deale after the maner of honorable godmothers, which, seeing their gos∣sops not fully able to bring vp their children themselues, are wont to contribute to their honest education, the rather if they finde any towardlines or reasonable hope of goodnes in them. And if Eli∣zabethThe great eale of Elizabeth queene of Castile and Ar∣ragon in aduan∣sing of newe dis∣coueries tending to Gods glorie. Queene of Castile and Arragon, after her husband Fer∣dinando & shee had emptied their cofers and exhausted their trea∣sures in subdueing the kingdome of Granada & rooting the Mores, a wicked weed, out of Spayne, was neuerthelesse so zealous of Gods honour, that (as Fernandus Columbus the Sonne of Christopher Columbus recordeth in the historie of the deeds of his Father) she layde part of her owne Iewels, which she had in great accompt, to gage, to furnish his Father foorth vpon his first voyage, before any foot of land of al the West Indies was discouered, what may we ex∣pect

of our most magnificent & gratious prince ELIZABETH of Eng∣lande, into whose lappe the Lord hath most plentifully throwne his treasuries, what may we, I say, hope of her forwardnes & bountie in aduancing of this your most honourable enterprise being farre more certaine then that of Columbus, at that time especially, and tending no lesse to the glorie of God then that action of the Spaniards. For as you may read in the verie last wordes of the relation of Newe Mexico extant now in english, the maine lande, where your last co∣lonie meane to seate themselues, is replenished with many thousands of Indians, Which are of better wittes then those of MexicoThe aptnes of the people in the mayne of Virgi∣nea to embrace Christianitie. and Peru, as hath beene found by those that haue had some triall of them: whereby it may be gathered that they will easi∣lie embrace the Gospell, forsaking their idolatrie, wherein at this present for the most part they are wrapped & intangled. A wise Philosopher noting the sundry desires of diuers men, writeth, that if an oxe be put into a medow he will seeke to fill his bellie with grasse, if a storke be cast in she will seeke for snakes, if yee turne in a hound he will seeke to start an hare: So sondrie men entring into these discoueries propose vnto themselues seuerall ends. Some seeke authoritie and places of commandement, others experience by see∣ing of the worlde, the most part worldly and transitorie gaine, & that often times by dishonest and vnlawfull meanes, the fewest number the glorie of God and the sauing of the soules of the poore & blinded infidels. Yet because diuers honest and well disposed persons are entred already into this your busines, and that I knowe you meane hereafter to sende some such good Churchmen thither, as may true∣ly saie with the Apostle to the Sauages, We seeke not yours but2. Cor. 12. 14. you: I conceaue great comfort of the successe of this your action, ho∣ping that the Lord, whose power is wont to be perfected in weakenes, will blesse the feeble foundations of your building. Onely bee you of a valiant courage and faint not, as the Lorde saide vnto Iosue,Isne 1. 6. exhorting him to proceede on forwarde in the conquest of the lande of promise, and remember that priuate men haue happily wilded and waded through as great enterprises as this, with lesser meanes then those which God in his mercie hath bountifully bestowed vpon you, to the singuler good, as I assure my selfe, of this our common wealth wherein you liue. Hereof we haue examples domesticall and for∣reine.

Remember I pray you, what you finde in the beginning of the Chronicle of the conquest of Irde newlie dedicated vnto your¦selfe.The good suc¦cesse in Ireland of Richarde Strangbowe exle of Chep∣stowe. Read you not that Richard Strangbowe the decayed earle of Chepstowe in Monmuthshire, being in no great fauour of his Soueraigne, passed ouer into that Iland in the yeere 1171. and ac∣cōpanied only with certaine of his priuate friends had in short space such prosperous successe, that hee opened the way for king Henrie the second to the speedie subiection of all that warlike nation to this crowne of Englande: which so continueth to this present day? The like conqueste of Brasilia and annexing the same to the king∣dome of Portugal was first begunne by meane and priuate men, as Don Antonio de Castillio, Ambassadour here for that realme, & by his office keeper of all the records and monuments of their disco∣ueries, assured me in this citie within these sixe yeeres. Now if the greatnes of the maine of Virginea, and the large extension thereof, especially to the West, should make you thinke that the subduing of it, were a matter of more difficultie then the conquest of Irelande, first I answere, that, as the fresh experience of that happie and sin∣gulerThe happie lte discouerie to the northwest of captaine Dauies. skilfull piltte and Captaine M. Iohn Dauis to the northwest▪ (towarde which his discouerie your selfe haue thrise contributed with the forwardest) hath shewed a great part to bee maine Sea, where before was thought to bee mayne lande, so for my part I am fully perswaded by Orelius late reformation of Culuacan and the gulfe of California that the land on the backe part of Virginea extendeth nothing so farre westward as is put downe in the mappes of those partes, and that before two yeeres come to an ende, God blessing the foresaide Captaine Dauis endeuours, he will put vs out of that doubt and manie others. Moreouer it is not to bee denied, but that one hundred men will doe more nowe among the naked and vnarmed people in Virginea, then one thousande were able then to doe in Irelande against that armed and warrelike nation in those daies. I say further, that these two yeares last experience hath plainely shewed that wee may spare tenne thousand able men with∣out any misse. And these are as manie as the kingdome of Portugal had euer in all their garrisons of the Assores, Madera, Cape verde, Guinea, Brasill, Mozambique, Melinde, Zocotora, Ormus, Diu, Goa, Mallacca, the Moluccoes, Amacan, and Macao vpon the cost

of China. Yea this I say by the confession of singuler expert men ofThkings of Por∣tugal had neuer aboue ten thou∣sand of their na∣tural subiectes in all their nw con∣quered doms. their owne natiō (whose names I suppresse for certaine causes) which haue beene personally in the East Indies, and haue assured mee that their kings had neuer aboue ten thousand natural borne Portugals (their slaues excepted) out of their kingdome remaining in all the aforesaid territories. Which also this present yeere I sawe confirmed in a secrete extract of the particuler estate of that kingdome and of euerie gouernment and office subiect to the same, with the seuerall pensions thereunto belonging. Seeing therefore we are so farre from want ef people, that retyring dayly home out of the Lowe Countries they go idle vp & downein swarmes for lacke of honest intertainmēt, I see no fitter place to employ some part of the better sort of them trayned vp thus long iu seruice, thē in the inward parts of the firme of Virginea against such stubborne Sauages as shall refuse obedience to her Maiestie. And doubtlesse many of our men will be glade & faine to accept this condition, when as by the reading of this present treatie they shall vnderstand the fertilitie and riches of the regions confining so neere vppon yours, the great commodities and goodnesse whereof I trust you will suffer to come shortly to light. In the meane season I humbly commende my selfe and this my translation vnto you, and your selfe, and all those which vnder you haue taken this en∣terprise in hand to the grace & good blessing of the Almightie, which is able to build further, and to finish the good worke which in these our dayes he hath begunne by your most Christian and charitable endeuour.

