



RIGHTE HONORABLE,
Havinge tried my fortune in foraigne nationes, thies thirty three yeares in this my presente profession of armes, in his Catho∣like Majesties service a monghste the Spaniard, Italian, and Irish, meaninge the firste foure yea∣res

in the Real Army of the ocean sea, and the o∣ther 29. yeares in the vvarres, and brave exploi∣tes of the lovve countries, and Germany, as a Souldior, Princioner, Aventajado, Alferis, Ajudā∣te, and Captaine. Novve beinge moved by certai∣ne frendes, as alsoe by the greate affection i all∣vvayes had to this my presente profession of ar∣mes; Havinge intered so far into the blouddy boundes of mars. Duringe vvhiche time i have imployed my selfe in gatheringe, notinge, and learninge oute of many brave Auctors, as alsoe vvhate i have seene my selfe and otheres practi∣sed in vvarr, in many brave exploytes and rare incounters; all vvhiche it oughte fitt to set dovv∣ne in vvrithinge to inlighten my beloved coun∣trimen. Suche as are not skillful in vvarres, and are desirouse to inter into the noble profession of Armes; so that therby they may gather some instructiones, and vvith greater auctority and estimation acomplishe theyre obligationes, (vvherefore I make boulde to dedicate the same un to youre honour,) vvhiche I vvoulde it vvere handled by a more perfecte Souldier then my selfe; soe that it may by the more agreable to youre incorrupted vertues, and noble inclina∣tion, acordinge to the obligation and love, vvhe∣runto iam bounde, as a true and natural ser∣vante

of youre honours, and specially for bein∣ge decended from youre house, as alsoe for the general utility of youre honour and those of my nation, vvhich are inclined to this honorable ex∣ercise; I have taken the paines to vvrite this vo∣lume entituled Military Discipline, in vvhich is contayned the observationes and obligationes of eache one servinge in the Infantery; biginenge vvith a private Souldier to a Captaine generall.
Hopinge youre honour vvill accepte this my vvillinge indevor under youre honours prote∣ction, vvith as vvillinge a mynde as i offer the sa∣me. Beseechinge the Almightie to bless yove vvithe longe life, and increase of vertue, that yo∣ve may follovve the true steppes, and undeniable prudence, hapines, brave conduction and cesar-like determinationes of youre predecessores, in beinge no inferior to them, but rather revive theyre honour and parpetuall fame, as required and hoped of youre honorable birth and Nobi∣litie, accordinge the greate exspectationes of youre frendes, and vvell vvisheres, to increase the honour of youre house.
In leavinge a perpetuall memory to all poste∣rity of youre honoures happie proceedinges, as i youre homble servante, and many more of youre frendes vvisheth both to see and heere.

Dated at the Courte of Bruxells the firste of
May. 1634.

