



YOur emploiments (Right Worship∣full) in sundry hir Maiesties forraine seruices both by sea and land, and al∣so (for your farther experience, and satisfaction) in diuers other noble en∣terprises, beeing accompanied with a sharpe and iudicious obseruation of things memorable, and the perusing of many excellent and rare writers; must of necessitie haue made you not onely expert in matters of war and estate, but also most singularlie well read in God his great booke of na∣ture, I meane the admirable frame of this Vniuers, or whole world. Wherein the infinite varieties and sorts of creatures, like so many visible wordes, doe proclaime and publish vnto man the eternitie, infinitie, omnipotency, wisedome, iustice, bountie, and other essentiall attributes of his dread and so∣ueraigne creatour.
Wherefore I doe here present vnto your Wor. the dis∣course ensuing, not as a teacher to instruct you in things vnknowne, but as a faithfull remembrancer to recall matters to your minde, which are there already both by speculation and experience most soundly imprinted.
It may please you then to accept of this mine homelie translation, not so much for mine owne sake, who am able to deserue lesse then nothing; as for the Authors worthines, being a Gentleman (as appeareth out of this, & other parts his learned ACADEMIE) most rarely qualified: and likewise for the excellencie of this present worke of his, both in re∣gard

of the method, the matter, and the scope. For the me∣thode is most exact, and agreeable to rules of art, procee∣ding from generalles to particulars, and from the whole to the parts. The matter or subiect is most noble: so that if (ac∣cording to Aristotle) all arts and sciences doe receiue their perfection from the dignity of the obiect; then certes of all others (Theologie excepted) this science is the most excel∣lent, hauing so spacious, so beautifull, and so fruitfull a fielde to manure, as the whole world and all things therein contai∣ned. Neither is the scope any whit lesse charitable and chri∣stian, tending partly to the information of mens vnderstan∣dings, and the reformation of their errors; but most especi∣ally ayming at the glorie of the creator, vnto whom onely is due all submission and honor. Finally considering the au∣thors manner of handling this discourse, and the varietie of choise-writers both ancient and of our times, which hee al∣ledgeth for confirmation of sundry truthes, and for other purposes, purging by the fire of his exquisite iudgment the drosse of their opinions from the pure mettall, and in all pla∣ces adorning their gold and siluer with the most orient and inualuable pearles of holy scripture; I deemed it in all res∣pects most worthy to shroude it selfe vnder your Wor. pa∣tronage. London this 28. of March. 1601.

