



I Haue not that libertye (most no∣ble
Ladies and graue Matrons) in
this my Epistle, to set foorth the
praises either of you, or of the work
which I haue labored to send vn∣to
you in Englishe: But a en∣forced
as in an Apollogie, to defende my selfe, that
I a child of eleuen yeares of age haue dealt in a mat∣ter
of religion, and presumed to dedicate the same to
you. For the first I aunswere, there is no age freed,
nor exempted from the knowledge of God, and the
setting forth of his glorye, so farre as he hath en∣bled
them, but as children are asson subiect to
death as the olde, so must they learne to dye and to
yeeld accompt of that one talent which th have

ether they haue emploied it to the vse of God, who
 it them, or no. Besides that I was emploied in
it, by the appointment of those my frends, that in re∣spect
of the interest they haue in me, the loue they
beare mee, the good they wish to come of this la∣bour,
to suche step-parents and children in lawe,
which vnderstand not Latine, that I could not de∣ny
them.
For the second, it is not presumption, that hath
made me to dedicate it vnto you (right Honourable
Ladies and worthy Gentlewomen) but a desire to
yeeld thankes for the comfort which I, my brother
& Sisters (poore children) haue receiued by the
kindenes, which hath often come from you to vs &
our parents in our necessities. Therefore I beseeche
your H. and Wor. in good part to take this booke
which I with all humilitie do heere offer vnto you,
humbly praying that you widowes will receiue into
England, these good widowes, Naomie & Ruth,
come out of Moab, sent as excellent paterns of ver∣tues
and godlynes, by the holy ghost to all christians,
described and lineated by the sermons of that wor∣thie
Minister, Maister Lauaterus of Tygu∣rine,
Like will to like, widowes come to wi∣dowes,
disdain thē not for their pouertye. Haue they
bene in trouble? so haue al you? Was Naomie a
soiourner in a straunge countrie, and lost there her
husband? so haue some of you. Did Ruth leaue her
countrie for religion? So haue some of you. Were
they disdayned, skoft and scorned at? so are you of

the worlde for your zeale in religion, and loue to th
glorious gospell of Iesus Christ. Of the other ,
are you come of noble birth? are you of honorable
calling? so was Naomie of the royall and kingly
tribe of Iudah, and Ruth was maried to Boaz, a
man that sate in the gates of Iudah, iudged Israel,
and was great grandfather to Dauid the king, end
so from these good women came kinges and princes
to rule Gods people, and at length, the hope, ioy and
comfort of all mankinde, our Sauiour Christ accor∣ding
to the fleshe. Therefore Noble and Wor. ma∣trons,
I pray you take it in good part, that I haue
bene so bold to ioyne you of seuerall estates togeather
in this short Epistle: but because yee are all in one
estate of widdow-hode, in one course of religion, in
like regarde of the weale of vs and our parentes,
I was so bolde to knitte you together, entreating you
that my childishnes, which in this I haue shewed, your
wonted vertues may beare out toward your selues,
and as a vaile to couer from others, till God giue
me more knowledg and vnderstanding to amend it.
And I humbly pray the Lord to grant you as much
comfort in your own children, and in your sonnes and
daughters in law, as euer Naomie had in Ruth.
And as they had rest after their traueils, and
ioy after their sorrowes, so the Lord geue
you peace of consciences heere, and
after this pilgrimage that euer∣lasting
rest which neuer shal
be taken from you.
