


YOur emploiments (Right Worshipful) in sundry her Maie∣sties forraine seruices both by Sea and Land, and also (for your farther experience, and satisfaction) in diuers other no∣ble enterprises, being accompanied with a sharpe and iudici∣ous obseruation of things memorable, and the perusing of many excellent and rare Writers; must of necessitie haue made you not onely expert in matters of warre and estate, but also most singularly well read in God his great booke of Nature, I meane the admirable frame of this Vniuers, or whole world. Where∣in the infinite varieties and sorts of creatures, like so many visible words, doe pro∣claime and publish vnto man the eternity, infinitie, omnipotencie, wisdome, iu∣stice, bountie, and other essentiall attributes of his dread and soueraigne creator.
Wherefore I doe here present vnto your worship the discourse ensuing, not as a Teacher to instruct you in things vnknowne, but as a faithfull remembrancer to recall matters to your minde, which are there already both by speculation and experience most soundly imprinted.
It may please you then to accept of this mine homely translation, not so much for mine owne sake, who am able to deserue lesse then nothing; as for the Authors worthinesse, being a Gentleman (as appeareth out of this, and other parts his learned Academie) most rarely qualified: and likewise for the excellency of this present worke of his, both in regard of the method, the matter, and the scope. For the method is most exact, and agreeable to rules of Art, proceeding from generals to particulars, and from the whole to the parts. The matter or sub∣iect is most noble: so that if (according to Aristotle) all arts and sciences doe re∣ceiue their perfection from the dignity of the obiect; then certes of all others (Theology excepted) this science is the most excellent, hauing so spacious, so beautifull, and so fruitfull a field to manure, as the whole world, and all things therein contained. Neither is the scope any whit lesse charitable and christian, tending partly to the information of mens vnderstandings, and the refor∣mation of their errors; but most especially ayming at the glory of the creator, vnto whom onely is due all submission and honour. Finally, considering the au∣thors manner of handling this discourse, and the variety of choise writers both ancient and of our times, which he alledgeth for confirmation of sundry truths, and for other purposes, purging by the fire of his exquisite iudgement the drosse of their opinions from the pure mettall, and in all places adorning their gold and siluer with the most orient and inualuable pearles of holy Scripture; I deemed it in all respects most worthy to shroud it selfe vnder your Worships patronage.
London this 28. of March. 1601.

