



DREAD SOVERAIGNE:
THIS Tract will need Patronage, as great as may be had, that's Yours. Yet, when I first printed part of it, I presumed not to aske any, but thrust it out at the end of anothers Labours, that it might seem, at least, to have the same Patron, your Royall Father of Blessed Memory, as the other Worke, on which this attended, had. But now I humbly beg for it Your Majesties Patronage; And leave withall, that I may declare to Your most Excellent Ma∣jestie the Cause why this Tract was then written:

VVhy it stay'd so long before it looked upon the light: Why it was not then thought fit to go alone, but rather be led abroad by the former VVorke: VVhy it comes now forth both with Alteration, and Addition: And why this Addition made not more haste to the Presse, then it hath done.
The Cause why this Discourse was written, was this: I was, at the time of these Conferences with Master Fisher, Bishop of S. Davids; And not onely directed, but Commanded by my Blessed Master King Iames, to this Conference with him. He, May 24. 1622 when we met, began with a great Protesta∣tion of seeking the Truth onely, and that for it selfe. And certainly, Truth, especially in Religion, is so to be sought, or not to be found. He that seeks it with a Roman One of these  is an  from all ch Truth as fittes not our Ends. And r∣sus à  &c Bias, or any Aug. l. 2. cont.   & Prophet. And 'tis an  Transition, for a man that  Avers from,  become Ad.  to the ruth. Other, will run Counter, when he comes neare it, and not finde it, though he come within kenning of it. And therefore I did most heartily wish, I could have found the Iesuite upon that faire way he protested to go. After the Confe∣rence ended, I went, whither my duty called me, to my Diocesse; not suspecting any thing should be made Publike, that was both Commanded, and acted in private. For VV. I. the Publisher of the Rela∣tion of the first Conference with D. VVhite (the late Reverend and learned Bishop of Ely) In his Epistle  the Reader. con∣fesses plainly, That Master Fisher was straightly charged upon his Allegiance, from his Majesty that then was, not to set out, or Publish what

passed in some of these Conferences, till He gave Licence, and untill M. Fisher and they might meet, and agree, and Confirme under their hands, what was said on both sides. He sayes farther, that Ibid. M. Fisher went to D. White's house, to know what he would say about the Relation, which he had set out. So then, belike M. Fisher had set out the Relation of that Con∣ference, before he went to D. VVhite, to speak about it; And this notwithstan∣ding the Kings restraint upon him, upon his Allegi∣ance. Yet, to D. VVhite 'tis said he went, but to what other End, then to put a Scorne upon him, I cannot see. For he went to his house to know, what he would say about that Relati∣on of the Conference, which he had set out be∣fore. In my absence from London, M. Fisher used me as well. For with the same Care of his Allegi∣ance, and no more, These words were in my former Epistle, And A. C. cheeks at them, in defence of the Jesuite, and sayes: That the Jesuite did not at all so much as in Speech, and much lesse in Papers publish th, or either of the other two Conferences with Dr. White, till he was forc'd unto it by false reports given out to his private disgrace, and the prejudice of the Catho∣like Cause. Nor then did he spread Papers abroad, but onely delivered a very few Copies to speciall friends, and this not with an intent to Calumniate the Bishop. &c. A. C. in his Preface before his Relation of this Conference. Truly, I knew of no Reports then given out to the prejudice of the Jesuite's either Person, or Cause; I was in a Corner of the King∣dome, where I heard little: But howsoever, here's a most plaine Confession by A. C. of that which he struggles to deny. He sayes he did not spread Papers. What then? What? Why he did but deliver Copies. Why, but doth not he that deli∣vers Copies (for Instance, of a Libell) spread it? Yea, but he delivered but a very few Copies. Be it so: I doe not say, How many he spred. He con∣fesses the Iesuite delivered some, though very few; And he that delivers any, spreads it abroad. For what can he tell, when the Copies are once out of his power, how many may Copie them out, and spread them farther? Yea, but he delivered them to spe∣ciall friends. Be it so too: The more speciall friends they were to him, the lesse indifferent would they be to me, perhaps my more speciall Enemies. Yea, but all this was without an intent to Calumniate me. Well. Be that so too. But if I be Calumniated thereby, his Intention will not helpe it. And whether the Copies, which he delivered, have not in them Calumny against me, I leave to the In∣different Reader of this Discourse to Iudge. hee spred abroad Papers of this Conference, full

enough of partiality to his Cause, and more full of Calumny against me. Hereupon I was in a manner forced to give M. Fisher's Relation of the Conference an Answer, and to publish it. Though for some Reasons, and those then approved by Au∣thority, it was thought fit I should set it out in my Chaplain's Name, R. B. and not in my owne. To which I readily submitted.
There was a Cause also, why at the first, the Dis∣course upon this Conference stayed so long, be∣fore it could endure to be pressed. For the Confe∣rence was in May, 1622. And M. Fisher's Paper was scattered and made common, so common, that a Copy was brought to mee (being none of his spe∣ciall friends) before Michaelmas. And yet this Discourse was not printed till Aprill, 1624. Now that you may know how this happened, I shall say for my selfe, It was not my Idlenesse, nor my Un∣willingnesse to right both my selfe, and the Cause, against the Jesuite, and the Paper, which he had spred, that occasion'd this delay. For I had then Most Honourable VVitnesses, and have some yet living, That this Discourse (such as it was, when A. C. nibled at it) was finished long before I could perswade my selfe to let it come into Publike View. And this was caused partly by my owne Backwardnesse to deale with these men, whom I have ever observed to be great Pretenders for Truth, and Unity, but yet such as will admit nei∣ther,

unlesse They and their Faction may prevaile in all; As if no Reformation had beene necessary. And partly because there were about the same time three Conferences held with Fisher. Of these this was the Third; And could not therefore con∣veniently come abroad into the world, till the two former were ready to leade the way, which till that time, they were not.
And this is in part the Reason also, why this Tract crept into the end of a larger Worke. For since that Worke contained in a manner the substance of all that passed in the two former Conferences: And that this Third in divers points concurred with them, and depended on them, I could not thinke it Substantive enough, to stand alone. But besides this Affinity betweene the Conferences, I was willing to have it passe as silent∣ly as it might, at the end of another Worke, and so perhaps little to be looked after, because I could not hold it worthy, nor can I yet, of that Great Du∣ty, and Service, which I owe to my Deare Mother, the Church of England.
There is a cause also, why it lookes now abroad againe with Alteration and Addition. And 'tis fit I should give your Majesty an Account of that too. This Tract was first printed in the yeare 1624. And in the yeare 1626. another Jesuite, or the same, under the name of A. C. printed a Relation of this Conference, and therein tooke Exceptions to some

Particulars, and endeavoured to Confute some Things deliver'd therein by me. Now being in yeares, and unwilling to dye in the Jesuites debt, I have in this Second Edition done as much for him, and somewhat more. For he did but skip up and downe, and labour to pick a hole, here, and there, where he thought he might fasten, and where it was too hard for him, let it alone. But I have gone thorough with him; And I hope, given him a full Confutation: or at least such a Bone to gnaw, as may shake his teeth, if he looke not to it. And of my Addition to this Discourse, this is the Cause; But of my Alteration of some things in it, this. A. C. his Curiosity to winnow me, made me in a more curious manner fall to sifting of my selfe, and that which had formerly past my Penne. And though (I blesse God for it) I found no cause to alter anything that belonged either to the Substance, or Course of the Conference: Yet somewhat I did finde, which needed better, and cleerer expression; And that I have altered, well knowing I must ex∣pect Curious Observers on all hands.
Now, Why this Additionall Answer to the Relation of A. C. came no sooner forth, hath a Cause too, and I shall truly represent it. A. C. his Relation of the Conference, was set out. 1626. I knew not of it in some yeares after. For it was printed among divers other things of like nature, either by M. Fisher himselfe, or his friend A. C.

When I saw it, I read it over carefully, and found myselfe not a little wrong'd in it, but the Church of England, and indeed the Cause of Religion much more. I was before this time by Your Majesties Great Grace, and undeserved favour made Deane of Your Majesties Chappell Royall, and a Counsellor of State, and hereby, as the Occasions of those times were, made too much a Stranger to my Bookes. Yet for all my Busie Imployments, it was still in my Thoughts to give A. C. an Answer. But then I fell into a most dangerous Feaver; And though it pleased God beyond all hope to restore mee to health, yet long I was before I recover'd such strength as might ena∣ble mee to undertake such a Service. And since that time, how I have beene detained, and in a manner forced upon other many, various, and Great Oc∣casions, your Majesty knowes best. And how of late I have beene used by the Scandalous and Scurrilous Pennes of some bitter men (whom I heartily beseech God to forgive) the world knowes; Little Leasure, and lesse Encouragement given me to Answer a Iesuite, or set upon other Services, while I am under the Prophets affliction. Psal. Psal. 50. 19, 20 50. betweene the Mouth that speakes wicked∣nesse, and the tongue that sets forth deceite, and slander mee as thicke, as if I were not their owne Mothers Sonne. In the midst of these Libellous out-cries against me, some Divines

of great Note, and Worth in the Church came to mee, One by One, and no One knowing of the Others Comming (as to mee they protested) and per∣swaded with me to Reprint this Conference, in my owne Name. This they thought would vindi∣cate my Reputation, were it generally knowne to be mine. I Confesse I looked round about these Men, and their Motion; And at last, my Thoughts working much upon themselves, I began to perswade my selfe, that I had beene too long diverted from this necessary Worke. And that perhaps there might be In voce hominum, Tuba Dei, in the still voice of men, the Loud Trumpet of God, which sounds many wayes, sometimes to the eares, and sometimes to the hearts of men, and by meanes which they thinke not of. And as S. Aug. Serm. 63. De Diver∣sis, c. 10. Hee speakes of Christ disput∣ing in the Tem∣ple with the Elders of the Iewes. And they heard Christ the Essentiall Word of the Father with admiration to astonishment, yetbeleeved him not: S. Luk. 2. 47. And the Word the spake to them by a meanes they thought not of, namely per Filium Dei in pucro, by the Sonne of God himselfe under the Vaile of our humane nature. S. Augustine speakes, A Word of God there is, Quod nunquam tacet, sed non semper auditur: which though it be never silent, yet is not alwayes heard. That it is never silent, is his great Mercy; and that it is not alwayes heard, is not the least of our Misery. Vpon this Motion I tooke time to deliberate: And had scarce time for that, much lesse for the Worke. Yet at last to every of these men I gave this Answer. That M. Fisher, or A. C. for him, had beene busie with my former Discourse, and that I would never reprint that, un∣lesse I might gaine time enough to. Answer that, which A. C. had charged a fresh both upon mee, and the Cause. While my Thoughts were thus at

worke, Your Majesty fell upon the same Thing, and was graciously pleased not to Command, but to VVish me to reprint this Conference, and in mine own Name; And this openly at the Councel-Table in Michaelmas-Terme. 1637. I did not hold it fit to deny, having in all the Course of my ser∣vice obayed your Majesties Honourable, and Just Motions, as Commands: But Craved leave to shew what little leasure I had to doe it, and what In∣conveniences might attend upon it. When this did not serve to excuse mee, I humbly submitted to that, which I hope was Gods Motion in Your Majesties. And having thus layd all that Con∣cernes this Discourse before your Gracious and most Sacred Majesty, I most humbly present you with the Booke it selfe, which as I heartily pray You to protect, so doe I wholly submit it to the Church of England, with my Prayers for Her Prosperity, and my Wishes that I were able to doe Her better Service.
I have thus acquainted Your Majesty with all Occasions, which both formerly, and now againe have led this Tract into the light. In all which I am a faithfull Relater of all Passages, but am not very well satisfied, who is now my Adversary. M. Fisher was at the Conference. Since that, I finde A. C. at the print. And whether These be two, or but One Jesuite, I know not; since scarce One amongst them, goes under One Name. But

for my owne part (and the Error is not great, if I mistake) I thinke they are One, and that One, M. Fisher. That which induces me to thinke so, is First, the Great Inwardnesse of A. C. with M. Fisher, which is so great, as may well be thought to neighbour upon Identity. Secondly, the Stile of A. C. is so like M. Fishers, that I doubt it was but one and the same hand that moov'd the penne. Thirdly, A. C. sayes expresly That the Jesuite himselfe made the Relation of the first A. C. p. 67. Conference with D. VVhite: And in the Title Page of the Worke, That Relation as well as This, is said to be made by A. C. and published by VV. I. Therefore A. C. and the Iesuite are one and the same person, or els one of these places hath no Truth in it.
Now if it be M. Fisher himselfe, under the Name of A. C. then what needs these Preface to the Relation of this Conference by A. C. words: The Jesuite could be content to let passe the Chap∣laines Censure, as one of his Ordinary perse∣cutions for the Catholicke Faith, but A. C. thought it necessary for the Common Cause to defend the sincerity and Truth of his Relation, and the Truth of some of the Chiefe Heads contained in it. In which Speech give me leave to observe to your Sacred Majesty, how grievously you suffer him, and his Fellowes to he persecuted for the Catholicke Faith, when your poore Subject and Servant, cannot set out a true Copie of a Conference

held with the Jesuite, jussu Superiorum, but by and by the man is persecuted. God forbid I should ever offer to perswade a Persecution in any kind, or practise it in the least. For to my remembrance, I have not given him, or his, so much as course Language. But on the other side, God forbid too, That your Majesty should let both Lawes and Discipline sleepe for feare of the Name of Perse∣cution, and in the meane time let M. Fisher and his Fellowes Angle in all parts of your Domini∣ons for your Subjects. If in your Grace and Good∣nesse you will spare their Persons: Yet I humbly beseech You see to it, That they be not suffer'd to lay either their Weeles, or baite their Hookes, or cast their Nets in every streame, lest that Tentation grow both too generall, and too strong. I know they have many Devices to worke their Ends; But if they will needs be fishing, let them use none, but And S. Aug. is very full a∣gainst the use of  reti, unlawfull Nets. And saith the Fishermen the∣selves have greatest cause to take heed of them. S. Aug. L. de Fide & Oper. c. 17. Lawfull Netts. Let's have no dissolving of Oathes of Allegiance: No deposing, no killing of Kings: No blowing up of States to settle Quod Volumus, that which faine they would have in the Church: with many other Nets, as dangerous as these. For if their Profession of Religion wee as goood, as they pretend it is, if they cannot Compasse it by Good Meanes, I am sure they ought not to atttempt it by Bad. For if they will doe evill, that good may come thereof, the Apostle tells me, Their Damnation's just, Rom. 3. Rom. 3. 8.

Now as I would humbly Beseech Your Majesty to keepe a serious Watch upon these Fisher-men, which pretend S. Peter, but fish not with His Net: So would I not have You neglect another sort of An∣glers in a Shallower Water. For they have some ill Nets too. And if they may spread them, when, and where they will, God knowes what may become of it. These have not so strong a Backe abroad, as the Romanists have, but that's no Argument to suffer them to encrease. They may grow to equall Strength with Number. And Factious People at home, of what Sect, or fond Opinion soever they be, are not to be neglected. Partly, because they are so Neare. And 'tis ever a dangerous Fire, that begins in the Bed-straw. And partly because all those Domesticke Evills, which threaten a Rent in Church, or State are with far more safety pre∣vented by VVisdome, then punished by Justice. And would men consider it right, they are far more beholding to that man, that keepes them from falling, then to him that takes them up, though it be to set the Arme or the Leg that's broken in the Fall.
In this Discourse I have no aime to displease any, nor any hope to please all. If I can helpe on to Truth in the Church, and the Peace of the Church together, I shall be glad, be it in any mea∣sure. Nor shall I spare to speake Necessary Truth, out of too much Love of Peace. Nor thrust on Vnnecessary Truth to the Breach of that Peace,

which once broken is not so easily soder'd againe. And if for Necessary Truths sake onely, any man will be offended, nay take, nay snatch at that offence, which is not given, I know no fence for that. 'Tis Truth, and I must tell it. 'Tis the Gospell, and I must preach it. 1 Cor. 9. And far safer it is in this 1 Cor. 9. 16. Case to beare Anger from men, then a VVoe from God. And where the Foundations of Faith are shaken, be it by Superstition or Prophanenesse, he that puts not to his hand, as firmely as he Can to support them, is too wary, and hath more Care of himselfe, then of the Cause of Christ. And 'tis a VVarinesse that brings more danger in the end, then it shunnes. For the Angell of the Lord issu∣ed out a Curse against the Inhabitants of Meroz, because they came not to helpe the Lord, to helpe the Lord against the mighty. Iudg. 5. I know 'tis a Great ease to let every Thing be as it will, and every Iudg. 5. 23. man beleeve, and doe as he list. But whether Governors in State or Church doe their duty therewhile, is easily seene, since this is an effect of no King in Israel. Iudg. 17. Iudg. 17. 6.
The Church of Christ upon Earth may bee compared to a Hive of Bees, and that can bee no where so steddily placed in this world, but it will be in some danger. And men that care neither for the Hive, nor the Bees, have yet a great minde to the Honey. And having once tasted the sweet of the Churches Maintenance swallow that for

Honey, which one day will be more bitter then Gall in their Bowells. Now the King and the Priest, more then any other, are bound to looke to the Integrity of the Church in Doctrine and Man∣ners, and that in the first place. For that's by farre the Best Honey in the Hive. But in the second place, They must be Carefull of the Churches Maintenance too, els the Bees shall make Ho∣ney for others, and have none left for their owne ne∣cessary sustenance, and then all's lost. For we see it in daily and common use, that the Honey is not taken from the Bees, but they are destroyed first. Now in this great and Busie Worke, the King and the Priest must not feare to put their hands to the Hive, though they be sure to be stung. And stung by the Bees, whose Hive and House they preserve. It was King Davids Case (God grant it be never Yours.) They came about mee (saith the Psal. 118. 12. Psal. 118.) Apum Simi∣litudine ardo∣rem not at vesa∣num; Non est enim in illis multum roboris sed mira Ex∣candescentia: Calv: in Psal. 118. like Bees, This was hard usage enough, yet some profit, some Honey might thus be gotten in the End. And that's the Kings Case. But when it comes to the Priest, the Case is alter'd, They come about him like VVaspes, or like Hornets rather, all sting, and no Honey there. And all this many times for no offence, nay sometimes for Service done them, would they see it. But you know who said: Behold I come shortly, and my reward is with mee, to give to every man according as his VVorkes shall bee. Revel. 22. And he himselfe is so Revel. 22. 12.

Gen . exceeding great a Reward, as that the mani∣fold stings which are in the World, howsoever they smart here, are nothing when they are pressed out with that exceeding weight of Glory, which shall be revealed: Rom. 8. Rom. 8. 18.
Now one Thing more let me be bold to Ob∣serve to Your Majesty in particular, concerning Your Great Charge, the Church of England. 'Tis in an hard Condition. Shee professes the Ancient Catholike Faith; And yet the Romanist con∣demnes Her of Novelty in her Doctrine. Shee practises Church Government, as it hath beene in use in all Ages, and all Places, where the Church of Christ hath taken any Rooting, both in, and ever since the Apostles Times; And yet the Separatist condemnes Her for Antichristianisme in her Discipline. The plaine truth is, She is between these two Factions, as betweene two Milstones, and unlesse Your Majesty looke to it, to VVhose Trust She is committed, Shee'll be grownd to pow∣der, to an irrepairable both Dishonour, and losse to this Kingdome. And 'tis very Remarkeable, that while both these presse hard upon the Church of England, both of them Crye out upon Persecu∣tion, like froward Children, which scratch, and kicke, and bite, and yet crye out all the while, as if themselves were killed. Now to the Romanist I shall say this; The Errors of the Church of Rome are growne now (many of them) very Old. And when Errors are growne by Age, and

Continuance to strength, they which speake for the Truth, though it be farre Older, are ordinarily challenged for the Bringers in of New Opinions. And there is no Greater Absurdity stirring this day in Christendome, then that the Reformati∣on of an Old Corrupted Church, will we, nill wee, must be taken for the Building of a New. And were not this so, we should never be troubled with that idle and impertinent Question of theirs: VVhere was your Church before Luther? For it was just there, where their's is now. There is no other difference betweene Vs & Rome, then be∣twixt a Church miserably Cor∣rupted, and hap∣pily purged. &c. Ios. Hall. B. of Exon. In his Apologeticall Advertisement to the Reader. p. 192. Appro∣ved by Tho. Morton. B. then of Cov. & Lich. now of . in the Letters printed by the B. of Ex∣eter. in his Trea∣tise called, The Reconciler. p. 68 And D. Field. in his Appen. to the third part. c. 2. where he cites Calv. to the same purpose L. 4. Inst. c. 2. §. 11. One, and the same Church still, no doubt of that. One in Substance, but not one in Condition of state and purity; Their part of the same Church re∣maining in Corruption: and Our part of the same Church under Reformation. The same Naaman, and he a Syrian still, but Leprous with them, and Cleansed with us; The same man still. And for the Seperatist, and him that layes his Grounds for Separation or Change of Discipline, though all hee sayes, or can say, be in Truth of Divinity, and among Learned Men little better then ridiculous: yet since these fond Opinions have gain'd some ground among your people; to such among them as are wilfully set to follow their blinde Guides, thorough thicke and thin, till S. Matth. 15. 14 they fall into the Ditch together, I shall say nothing. But for so many of them, as meane well, and are onely misled by Artifice and Cunning; Concerning them, I shall say thus much only. They are Bells of passing

good mettle and tuneable enough of themselves, and in their owne disposition; and a world of pity it is, that they are Rung so miserably out of Tune, as they are, by them which have gotten power in and over their Consciences. And for this there is yet Remedy enough; but how long there will bee, I know not.
Much talking there is (Bragging, Your Ma∣jesty may call it) on both sides. And when they are in their ruffe, they both exceed all Moderation, and Truth too; So farre till both Lips and Penns open for all the World like a Purse without mo∣ney; Nothing comes out of this, and that which is worth nothing out of them. And yet this nothing is made so great, as if the Salvation of Soules, that Great worke of the Redeemer of the World, the Sonne of God, could not be effected without it. And while the one faction cryes up the Church above the Scripture: and the other the Scripture to the neglect and Contempt of the Church, which the Scripture it selfe teaches men both to honour, and obey: They have so farre endangered the Beliefe of the One, and the Authority of the Other, as that neither hath its Due from a great part of Men. Whereas according to Christs Institution, The Scripture, where 'tis plaine, should guide the Church: And the Church, where there's Doubt or Difficulty, should expound the Scripture; Yet so, as neither the Scripture should be forced, nor the Church so bound up, as that upon Just and farther Evidence,

Shee may not revise that which in any Case hath slipt by Her. What Successe this Great Distemper, caused by the Collision of two such Factions, may have, I know not, I cannot Prophesie. This I know, That the use which Wise men should make of other mens falles, is not to fall with them; And the use, which Pious and Religious men should make of these great Flawes in Christianity, is not to Joyne with them that make them, nor to helpe to dislocate those maine Bones in the Body, which being once put out of Ioynt, will not easily be set againe. And though I cannot Prophesie, yet I feare That Atheisme, and Irreligion gather strength, while the Truth is thus weakned by an Vnworthy way of Contending for it. And while they thus Con∣tend, neither part Consider, that they are in a way, to induce upon themselves, and others, that Con∣trary Extreame, which they seeme most both to feare, and oppose.
Besides: This I have ever Observed, That many Rigid Professors have turn'd Roman Ca∣tholikes, and in that Turne have beene more Iesui∣ted then any other: And such Romanists as have chang'd from them, have for the most part quite leaped over the Meane, and beene as Rigid the other way, as Extremity it selfe. And this, if there be not both Grace, and VVisdome to go∣verne it, is a very Naturall Motion. For a Man is apt to thinke he can never runne farre enough from that, which he once begins to hate; And doth not

Consider therewhile, That where Religion Cor∣rupted is the thing he hates, a Fallacy may easily be put upon him. For he ought to hate the Cor∣ruption which depraves Religion, and to runne from it: but from no part of Religion it selfe, which he ought to Love, and Reverence, ought hee to depart. And this I have Observed farther: That no One thing hath made Conscientious men more wavering in their owne mindes, or more apt, and easie to be drawne aside from the sincerity of Religion professed in the Church of En∣gland, then the Want of Uniforme and Decent Order in too many Churches of the Kingdome. And the Romanists have beene apt to say, The Houses of God could not be suffer'd to lye so Na∣stily (as in some places they have done) were the True worship of God observed in them: Or did the People thinke that such it were. 'Tis true, the Inward VVorship of the Heart, is the Great Service of God, and no Service acceptable with∣out it: But the Externall worship of God in his Church is the Great VVitnesse to the World, that Our heart stands right in that Service of God. Take this away, or bring it into Contempt, and what Light is there left to shine before men, that they may see our Devotion, and glorifie our Father which is in Heaven? And to deale clearely with Your Majesty, These Thoughts are they, and no other, which have made me labour so much, as I have done, for Decency and an

Orderly settlement of the Externall Worship of God in the Church. For of that which is Inward there can be no Witnesse among men, nor no Ex∣ample for men. Now no Externall Action in the world can be Uniforme without some Ceremo∣nies. And these in Religion, the Ancienter they bee, the better, so they may fit Time and Place. Too many Over-burden the Service of God; And too few leave it naked. And scarce any Thing hath hurt Religion more in these broken Times, then an Opinion in too many men, That because Rome had thrust some Vnnecessary, and many Su∣perstitious Ceremonies upon the Church, therefore the Reformation must have none at all; Not considering therewhile, That Ceremonies are the Hedge that fence the Substance of Religion from all the Indignities, which Prophanenesse and Sacri∣ledge too Commonly put upon it. And a Great Weaknesse it is, not to see the strength which Cere∣monies (Things weake enough in themselves, God knowes) adde even to Religion it selfe; But a farre greater to see it, and yet to Cry Them downe, all, and without Choyce, by which their most hated Adversaries climb'd up, and could not crie up them∣selves, and their cause, as they doe, but by them. And Divines of all the rest might learne, and teach this VVisdome if they would, since they see all other Professions, which helpe to beare downe their Ce∣remonies, keepe up their owne therewhile, and that to the highest.

I have beene too bold to detaine Your Majesty so long; But my Griefe to see Christendome bleeding in Dissention, and which is worse, triumphing in her owne Blood, and most angry with them, that would stu∣dy her Peace, hath thus transported me. For truely it Cannot but grieve any man, that hath Bowells, to see All men seeking, but as S. Paul foretold, Phil. 2. Their owne things, and not the things which are Phil. 2. 21. Jesus Christs. Sua, Their owne surely. For the Gospell of Christ hath nothing to doe with them: And to see Religion so much, so Zealously pretended, and called upon, made but the Stalking-Horse, to shoote at other Fowle, upon which their Ayme is set; In the meane time, as if all were Truth and Holinesse it selfe, no Salvation must be possible, did it lye at their Mercy, but in the Communion of the One, and in the Conventicles of the Other. As if either of these now were, as the Donatists of old reputed themselves, the only men, in whom Christ at his comming to Judg∣ment, should finde Faith. No (saith S. Aug. Epist. 48. S. Augustine: and so say I with him) Da veniam, non Credimus. Pardon us, I pray, we cannot beleeve it. The Catho∣like Church of Christ is neither Rome, nor a Con∣venticle. Out of that there's no Salvation, I easily Confesse it. But out of Rome there is, and out of a Conventicle too; Salvation is not shut up into such a narrow Conclave. In this ensuing Discourse there∣fore I have endeavour'd to lay open those wider-Gates of the Catholike Church, confined to no Age, Time, or Place; Nor knowing any Bounds, but

That Faith, which was once (and but once for all) deliver'd to the Saints. S. Jude 3. And in my pur∣suite of this way, I have searched after, and deliver'd S. Iod. 3. with a single heart, that Truth which I professe. In the publishing whereof, I have obeyed Your Majesty, discharg'd my Duty, to my power, to the Church of England, 1 S. Pet. 3. 15. Given account of the Hope that is in me; And so testified to the world that Faith in which I have lived, and by God's blessing and favour purpose to dye; But till Death shall most unfainedly remaine

