



CHRISOSTOM wri∣ting
on the 34.In Psa. 43. Ios. 6. Psalme,
compareth the Pastors of
Christs Church, vnto those
Trumpets, by whose sound
the walls of Iericho were
quite ouerthrowen. The which saying (my
deere brethren) the great diligence you vse
in your function and office wherevnto you
are called, and your extreame labours
which you haue susteyned of late, (yea,
and that not without greate fruite) ma∣keth
mee applye the same vnto you,

For although the the Romish doctrine (i in a∣nie
place it preuailed) most chiefly flourish∣ed
it , because there it was difended
by the forces of men and as it were compas∣sed
about with most high and strong wall
yet notwithstanding by your voice & prea∣ching
the Gospell it is at the last brought to
passe that the whole foundation of the Po∣pish
doctrine throwen downe, & the Walls
therof being ased, the horrible corruption,
abuses &, errors there of is made manifest to
the eies of all men. Wherfore when I com∣pare
this our time with the time of the Isra∣elites,
I cannot sufficiently accuse and con∣demne
the sluggish slothful  This our
age, in respect of the greate  and
watchfulnesse of the olde 
they so soone as they sawe 
ho ouerthrowen, straight waies  and
 the whole For Citie but 
age although they haue seene, yea, and that
now along time the heresies of the Ppish
 to be made manifest and brought
into  notwithstanding so far
from  and rase them
 of their mindes, that
rather they helpe them with all their force.

But to you my brethren which haue suffred
many and so greate stormes, troubles, and
griefes euen to you (I saie) beholde new la∣bours
daily arise, which must be ouercome
with gret cōstācie & inuincible fortitude of
minde. For that I may omit diuers & almost
infinit other discommodities, I perceiue that
you are exercised chiefly in two kindes of
battailes. The one is for that daily wicked
slaunderers (to wit) the ministers of lyes, op∣pone
themselues against the ministers of the
truth, which by their lying Libels go about
to vexe and deface the innocencie of the
godly Pastours of the Church, with most
horrible vntruths and impudent slaunders.
Of this sort are some whome the heate of
persecution hath deuoured, who by force,
and as it were, with a storme and vehement
tempest, carried vnto the Popish heresies, do
now, with most obstinate mindes cleaue
vnto the same, as it were vnto a most firme
rocke. Yea, and that which is to be lamen∣ted,
they begging as it were thereby the po∣pish
prelates good will and fauour make no
end of their malitious slaundering and wic∣ked
writings. This kinde of conflict in my
opinion) you shall right well sustaine not by

striuing against it, but by calling to minde
the faying of Dauid in his 54.Psa. 54. Psalme, to
wit, that it will at last come to passe that
the slanderous tongue of these wicked slan∣derets,
will rebound & fall vpon themselues.
For so it alwaies happene, that the wicked
wound themselues with their owne wea∣pons,
and the innocencie of the godly re∣maineth
vnspotted, beeing deliuered from
their vniust reports. The other kind of con∣flict
resteth, in the which you must thinke to
labour both earnestly and diligently, as I
know right wel ye do. For about a few yeres
past, there hath risen vp certaine men,
who abusing liberall artes and sciences, and
chiefly that science which is ordained to the
searching out of the truth, to wit, Logicke:
wherby they might cōfirme & establish the
Popish heresiesei and that they may the bet∣ter
carrie awaie the matter with craftie con∣ueiaunce
they turne the habite and forme
of good learning, into a certaine sophysti∣call
and contentious manner of disputing,
and such are chiefely those false named Ie∣suits,
for so I tearme those Monkes which
wickedly take vppon them that most ho∣ly
name of Iesus, attributing it to theyr

diuelish sect, and that not without greate
blasphemie: And these nowe of late haue
stuffed Vniuersities, which in times past
were of great fame: and doo euen as it were
possesse them alone, bearing an outwarde
shew of greate learning, and chiefly chal∣lenging
vnto themselues the exact and right
knowledge of disputing. Whose enterpri∣ses
sith I perceiue you goe aboute most
chiefely and valiauntly to resist: I thought
it meete and conuenient to publish some
thing according to the abilitie which is 
mee. And I whome no force, no tempest;
no distaunce of place coulde separate from
you, thought it good (I saie) to ee ioyned a
fellowe companion with you in this con∣flict
and most happie labour. And further∣more,
I haue determined with my selfe to
followe that method of disputation, which
seemeth to bee most fit for their purpose,
as Theologicall, and therefore that kinde
which most truely giueth resolutions to ar∣guments:
And this shall not onely be voide
of all subtill Argumentes, and sophysti∣call
falacies, but also of all Rethorical ex∣ercise.

And I haue chosen rather to drawe this
same methode of disputing as much as in
mee ) from the pure fountaines of the
 Fathers, then followe the filthie 
of those which  of late
 kinde and order of
disguing: and touching this thing, I ex∣pect
both , and the iudge∣ment
of rather the best learned Diuines: to
 I willinglie submit both this my opi∣ni,
and also my selfe, and although I
 short kinde of disputing,
 my purpose heereby
 the  of other mens
large and copious are ▪ For as a certain
man was ont to saie, that the hande maie
be spread abroad and againe  him to∣gether
the ingers, be broght 
likewise one matter maie by copi∣ous
eloquen behand that , and bee∣ing
drawen together by short ,
maie as effellie be , more briefe.
Let therfore each treatise whit is written
at large with copious & slowing stile haue
his  honour, so that it he at  to cō∣firme
the truth.Plut. in Cic. For (as Plutarke saith) truth

 inuineible if it be trulie declared & right∣lie
applied. And to Augustine (not without
good cause,) eloquence seemeth so much
the more to terrifie,De doct. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 14 in how much the more
it is plaintie pronounced. Neuertheles, when
need requireth, let vs also imbrace this short
kinde of disputing, which is verie profitable
so ofte a we be occupied in the searching
out of the truth, inasmuch as it draweth vs
backe, that we follow not the similitude of
truth, for truth it selfe, and so shoulde bee
deceiued with a counterfaite probabilitie of
truth: which things; sith they are so, some
man maie demand, wherefore that great
Orator Tullie, comparing Oratorie with
this sharp and schoole like Disputation,De nat. deor, l, 2. and
peraduenture ouer-well liking his owne
Arte, saith thus: As a flowing Riuer can
scarce or not at all be corrupted or putrifi∣ed,
but a standing water maie verie soone:
so likewise by the floud of eloquence, the
faults of the reprehender are soone wiped
awaie, when as niggishnes of speach, and
want of eloquence, scarce can defend it selfe:
thus much Cicero. The which as I confesse
that it maie happen both in the sophisti∣call
and probable kinde of disputing, so do

I denie that it can chaunce or agree with
true and demonstratiueie Silogismes. For as
the Riuer (that we maie not swarue from
the similitude which wee haue propoed)
while it runneth afloate  aboue his
bankes, doth gather most foule and filthie
things of  sort, which  and are
couered while as the flouds are aloft: so of∣tentimes
great errors (with copiousnesse of
speach did) are by true and briefe disputa∣tions
declared & laid open for the copie of
eloquence taken awaie, things doo appeare
both naked and manifest as they are. But
heereof we will speake more in the Pre∣face.
And now I set downe first a disputa∣tion
touching the word of god writtē, which
as it is chiefe, so ought it to be the verie foū∣dation
of all disputations. The other dispu∣tations
as of the true humane nature of
Christ, of the presence of Christ in the sa∣crament,
of the true and lawfull making of
Ministers, (touching which thinges I wrote
some thing about two yeares past against
Turrianus that false named Iesuit, and will
handle it more at large, whensoeuer he shal
giue anie newe occasion to write) also free
will, Purgatorie, and such lyke, maye bee

grounded on this sayde Disputation. And
this my bretheren I hope you will dooe,
either according to this methode which
I haue followed, or according to that which
you shall better like of. Wherefore I be∣seech
the defenders of the Romish Church,
and chiefelye those which challenge vn∣to
them such skill in disputing, that they
will bring the same from the darke shad∣dowe
of the Schooles, into the open and
cleere light, yea, to the true point of dispu∣ting
in deede, and that all mallice put a
parte, all nipping tauntes set aside, let them
modestlye and with quiet mindes pursue
this my treatise, and when they haue ente∣red
into disputation with me, let them first
note what is worthie of reprehention, and
then let them giue solutions vnto my argu∣mentes:
and on the other side, let them
confirme theyr opinions with plaine and
euident Sylogismes and Argumentes, and
so I hope it shall at the last come to passe
(if GOD permit) that when both our
opinions are conferred together, the truth
will shewe it selfe, and bee manifest∣ly
seene euen of those which bee almost
blinde.

Let therefore those bookes which are re∣pleat
with nothing els but with bitter cho∣ler,
spotted & stained with the sores of their
masters yea, and those seditious Sermons
which blovve forth nothing else but fire &
sword, let them (I say) cease & be quite bani∣shed,
& in steed hereof let there be meeknes
& tranquilitie: yea, let the loue & inward af∣fection
of the truth beare swaie: & let those
which so greatly affect that excellent name
of Catholikes (which so often with open
mouthes repeat & pronounce the same) re∣member
what S. Augustin hath written, to
wit, that the Catholike Church doth teach
that wee owe loue vnto all, and iniurie to
none. But if there be anie such, which go for∣ward
with shamelesse faces and obstinate
mindes still to write and spread abroad their
sichophanticall and infamous Libells, or if
there bee anie such which so farre degene∣rateth
from men, that they had rather obsti∣nately
to bark against the truth, then to im∣brace
the same, the vvhich amongest others
I heare there is one especially, vpon whom
the fearful exāple of Gods most iust iudg∣ment
is manifest, not onlie for other his vn∣godlinesse,
but chiefly for his wicked Apo∣stacie

and backe sliding from the Gospell,
which sometime he professed. If I say there
bee anie such, I vvish vnto them better
mindes, & oppose this my vowe and wish
against their shamelesse wickednesse and
malitious railing, professing that I will not
vouchsafe to ansvvere such their pamphlets,
knowing right well that such their dooings
may be vtterly wiped awaie euen with one
little spark of patience. Againe, touching my
selfe, I professe that I will not reade those
their vvritings in the vvhich they spue forth
their foule poisoned choler, because I haue
determined to dispute, and not to braule, to
contend vvith arguments, and not vvith im∣pious
railings. And you my reuerend bre∣thren,
fight  of faith (for
I may lavvfully vse the Apostles exhorta∣tion
vnto you fight  vvor∣thie
battaile of faith, and apprehend euer∣lasting
life, for vvhich cause you are called,
& haue professed a good profession before
manie vvitnesses. And therefore regarding
nothing at all this vvicked rable, run your
course vvith stout courage, vnremoued con∣stancie,
and inuincible patience, in the truth
of the Gospell of God, as you haue begun:

that is that you go forvvard vvith exact di∣ligence
and integritie, to fight against mans
rrors, that the course of your labours most
manfully being finished, yee may leaue vn∣to
the posterities to come, the puritie of
, and the true vse of ec∣clesiasticall
discipline.
From my studie the
23, of Februarie
An Domini.
1580.
FINIS.

