


WHan man is borne for
man, that one to another
shoulde be a God, and not a
deuyll, an helper, no hynde∣rer.
Vnto whom also the vse
of the tonge is only geuen, wherby they
do both expresse & shewe the affections of
their mindes, there is no man which can
say, I haue no nede of any man.
☜But amonges infinite mischiefes and
euyls of manns pouertie and anguish, by
which he hath nede of other mēnes helpe,
is the instruction of prudence or vertue &
of science. For mākynd doth in thys pre∣cel
chiefly brute beastes because thei helpe
one another by mutual communication.

In learnynge good and vertues ma∣ners,
the vse of communyng is required
chiefly, that men errynge and ignoraunte
should be taught, for there is none which
shall euer learne of him selfe, all thoughe
he be neuer so happily borne.
Therfore, it shal become euerye man,
which doth intēd to lyue godly, to heare &
learne godly bookes, to printe heauenly
documentes in their hartes. For as euyll
doctrine, deuilysh bokes, and fylthy talke
do corrupt good maners: so faithfull pre∣ceptes,
godly bokes, chast commonynge
and honest, shal edifie, and confirme.
Wherfore▪ intendinge to do good vnto al
mē & namely vnto suche, as erre & be igno¦rant,
I haue gathered, write, and brought
into lyght the famous fryday sermōs of
Mayster Hugh Latimer, whiche be prea∣ched
in Lent last past, before oure moste,
noble Kinge Edward the sixte, at the new
Palaice of Westminster, the thirde yeare
of hys reigne. Whiche Sermons (moste
vertuous Lady) I dedicate vnto your ho∣norable
grace, nothing doubting but that
you wyll gladly imbrace them, not onlye
because of their excellēcie, but chiefly for
the profyte whyche shal ensue thoroughe
them vnto the ignorante.

For in them are frutefull and godlye
documentes, directing ordinatly not on∣ly
the stepps, conuersatyon, and liuing of
kinges: but also of other mynisters and
subiectes vnder hym. And let no man be
greued though it be not so exactlye done
as he did speake it, for in very dede I am
not able so to do, to write word for word
as he did speake, that passeth my capacitie
though I hadde .xx. mens wittes, and no
fewer handes to wryte withal. As it is vn¦possyble
that a litell ryuer should receyue
the recourse of the main sea wt in his brym¦mes,
so that no water should ouer whelm
the sides therof: In lyke maner is it more
vnlyke my symle witte to comprehende
absolutely the abundaunt eloquence and
learnyng which floweth most abundantli
out of godly Latymers mouth.
Notwithstandyng, yet had I rather with
shamefastnes declare charitably thys
parte of hys godly documentes, & counsel
then with slowthfulnes forgette or kepe
close folyshly, that thyng which may pro∣fit
many.
Who is that wyll not be glad to heare
and beleue the doctryne of godly Lati∣mer?
Whome God hath appoynted a
prophet, vnto our most noble Kyng, and

vnto our Realme of England, to declare
the message of the lyuynge God, to sup∣plante
and rote out al sinnes and vice, to
plante & graffe in mens hartes the plen∣teousnes
of all spiritual blessynges in Ie∣sus
Chryst our Lorde?
Moses, Ieremias, Helias, dyd neuer
declare the true message of god vnto their
rulers and people, wyth a more syncere
spirite, faithfull minde and godlye zeale,
then godlye Latymer both now in oure
daies vnto oure moste noble Kyng & vnto
the whole realme.iij. King. xxij Furthermore also Io∣sia
receyued neuer the boke of gods wyll
at the handes of Helkia the hie preiste, or yt
admonicion of Hulda yt prophetesse, with
a more perfect and godly feare, then oure
most noble Kinge doth moste faithfullye,
geue credite vnto the wordes of good fa∣ther
Latimer. And I haue no doubte but
all godly men wyl lykewise receiue glad∣ly
his godly Sermons & geue credit vnto
the same. Therfore this my rude laboure
of another mans swet (most vertuous la∣dy)
I offer most humbly vnto your grace,
moued ther vnto of godly zeale, thorough
the Godlye fame, that is disperst vnyuer¦sally of your most godly disposicion, and
vnfayned loue towardes the lyuynge,

almyghtye, eternall God and hys holye
word, practysed dayly both in your gra∣ces
most vertuous behauour, and also
godly charitie towardes the edificatiō of
euery membre graffed in Chryste Iesu,
most humbly desiryng your grace to ac∣cept
fauorably thys my temerous inter∣prise.
And I your most humble and fayth¦ful
Oratour shall praye vnto Iehouah,
the God which is of himself, by whom,
and in whome, all thynges lyue, moue, &
be, that, that good worke whych he hath
begonne in you he may performe it vnto
your laste endynge, thorough our Lorde
Iesu Chryst, who preserue and
kepe your grace now and
euer. So be it.
