



IT was thought good by your Grace, whose thoughts are euer good towarde the Church of GOD, that these Ser∣mons of Lauatere shuld be vulgarly translated, to the end that all sorts among vs, might in this time of Dearth, be directed to know both the proper cause, and the right vse of this Iudgement: because for the most part in such distresses, which is our corrupt nature, we are accustomed, saith

Nazianzene, , either to account of them lightly, or to laie them to Gods charge foolishly.Iob. 1.22. Wherein, as your Grace doth shew your faithful care, as of the High Steward ouer God his familie, to see that the Houshold haue their meate giuen them,Luc. 12.42 not only  in their iust portion, but also , in due season, which is Saint Paul his rule, that the foode ministred vnto them, be both seasoned and seasonable, and a point of as much learning as discretion,Esa. 50.4. in Esay his iudgement, to haue a word in time for him that is wearie: these being the two principall effects desired from Pulpet Diui∣nitie, the one Ne scandalizemus, by our of∣fences not to prouoke Gods iudgements: the other,Ioh. 16.1. Ne scandalizemur, not to be of∣fended when God doth iudge vs: so with∣all, your Grace doth imitate the examples of the Ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church, especially those which were , and popular, who taking Saint Pauls coun∣sell in applying themselues to the Time,Rom. 12.11. preached vnto their auditories,For so I reade it, , not as some doo, . according to Chrysostomes aduice, not only , points profitable to the persons present, but also , thinges proper to the occasions offred,

that so their Sermons might be, to vse saint Austen his wordes, both Commodi and ac∣commodi, as well fitting the Occurrents, as profiting the Hearers. In Nazianzene his time there was a Dearth, much like to ours at this instant, not , through the bar∣rennesse of the ground, but , the destruction of the corne, the hope whereof, in the beginning of the yeare, through the goodly seede-time, and temperate Winter, made mens hearts to leape for ioy, and the Barnes, as it were, to enlarge themselues for the receipt of this promi∣sed plentie: but on the suddaine, , that which the distilling dewe of Heauen had comforted, and brought foorth, the showers immo∣derate and continuall vtterlie rotted and corrupted, whereof though the Sheaues filled the Mowers hand, and the Gleaners lap; yet did they not answer either the thre∣shers labour, or the owners measure: vpon which so vnexpected calamitie, olde Gregory the father was amazedly silent, for deepest conceyued griefes are not easily vt∣tered: but Nazianzene his Sonne, in the zeale of Gods glorie, in care of the people

thus distressed, and in discharge of his owne function, in a solemne Sermon, appointed of purpose, enquired into the causes, which brought on, and shewed the meanes howe to turne away this iudgement. The like did Basil in the like case of Dearth, but vnlike to that and ours in respect of the seconde causes: this in his time comming of a long drought, ours of neuer ceasing raine: then the heauē being as he speaketh ,Caelum nudum sudum. cleare and cloudlesse: but the Skie ouer vs, , lowring and Sunlesse. Which though forreiners and trauailers account no straunge thing in our land, being an Iland compassed with the Sea, and therefore Ta∣citus sayth, we haue alwayes Triste caelum, and others in their iollitie haue reported, that they could neuer salute the Sunne in England, (happily they stayed as little a while in the land, as he did in his office, Qui somnum non vidit in consulatu, or came at that time of the yeare when Vatinius was Consul in Rome,Macro. Sat. lib. 2. cap. 3. when there was neyther VVinter, Summer, Spring, nor Autumne: or perhaps loued their beds as well as he, who neuer sawe the Sunne rising or setting.) Yet who so obserued our heauie heauens this

present yeare, the like not remembred by a∣ny man liuing, by any record remayning, if he sauour of any religion, he cannot ascribe it either to the Climate, or inclination of our Skie, or to the Vicinitie of the sea, but crie out as they did Exod. 8.19. This is the finger, if not the heauie hand of God. The practise of these Bishops, and perhaps their copies, did this learned man Lauatere fol∣low, in framing of purpose three Sermons proportionable to the number of yeares wherein his countrey Switzerland was op∣pressed with Dearth: which, when to them nothing can bee added, that may concerne either christian policie to preuent, or spi∣rituall comfort and instruction to indure, or turne off that Affliction, and for the propor∣tion of time answering to our Dearth, the price of thinges, for these three yeares successiue, expressely inhaunced, I, by your Graces authoritie and commaunde∣ment, haue divulgated to the benefit of our people. If any profite arise thereby, which was your Graces intent, and my endeuour next vnto God, let the thankes redounde wholie to your Grace, being the first & on∣ly motion therof. My desert is nothing, such

a taske as this requiring not much labour, nor anie learning.Plat. M. As Socrates once saide, , my guerdon is sufficient, if in a greater imploymēt any labor of mine, with∣in my ability and strength, may increase that your gracious fauour, which hitherto your Grace hath vndeseruedly vouchsafed mee. And so with my humble and hearty praiers to God for your Graces health, I leaue your Grace to him who neuer leaueth his.
Lambeth. Nouemb. 9. 1596.

