


MAny and diuers thin∣ges are resoned vpon, both of the learned and vnlear∣ned, as well of other mat∣ters, as also of Spirites, which are séene and heard, and make men afrayde in the night season, and in the daye tyme, by sea and by lande, in the fieldes, woods, and houses: And lykewise concerning suche straunge things whiche for the most parte happen before the death of certayne men, especially greate Princes, and before notable innouations of king∣domes and empires. Many which neuer sawe or hearde any of these thinges, suppose all that is reported of them, to be méere trifles and olde wyues tales: for so muche as simple men, and suche as are fearefull and superstitios, persuade themselues they haue séene this or that, when in déede the matter is far otherwise. Againe, there are some which as soone as they heare of any thing, especially if it happen in the nighte, they by and by thinke some spirite doth walke, and are maruellously troubled in mynde, by∣cause they can not discerne naturall things from spirites. And some (chéefly those which hunt after gaynes, by the soules of dead men) affirme that the moste parte of suche

things which are hard or séene, are the soules of dead men, whych craue helpe of them that are liuing, to be deliuered out of the tormentes of most cruell payne in Purgato∣rie. Many not only of the common sorte, but also menne of excellent knowledge, do maruayle whether there bée any spirits or no, and what maner of things they are. Yea & some of my familiar friends haue many times requested me, to shewe them my opinion concerning these matters. Wherefore me séemeth it shall be worth my laboure, if I declare briefly and playnly out of the word of God, what we ought to iudge concerning these things. For the mini∣sters of Gods Churche can take nothing more profitable in hande, than to instructe the people of God purely and plainly, in suche necessary matters as come in question out of the word of God, whiche is a lanterne (as the psalmist saith) vnto our féete, and a light vnto our pathes: and to deliuer them from all erroure and superstition, and bring them out of all wauering and dout. And verily their stu∣dy and diligence is to be highly commended, who for these fewe yeares ago, haue set foorth certayne bookes drawen out of the scriptures writtē in the Germayne tong against sundry errours: & theirs likewise who in these our dayes by writing of bookes do teache, instructe, and confirme the rude and vnlearned people. For amongst many other ex∣cellent benefits, which God our heauenly Father hath be∣stowed vppon mankinde, this also is a great and most li∣berall gifte, that in this latter, and as it were olde age of the world, he hath brought to light by the arte of imprin∣ting, as well many other good authors, as also the holy scriptures of the ole and newe testament, written in di∣uers languages: wherby he dothe not only teache vs am∣ply and fully what to beléeue, and what to doe, but also mightyly subuerteth and quite ouerthroweth diuers and sundry errours, which by little and little haue crept into the Church. Truly all suche are very vngrateful towards

God, which doe not willingly acknowleage this so notabel a benefite.
As touching this my treatise concerning Spirits,The diuision or partes of this booke▪ and straunge wonders, I haue deuided it into three partes for the more clere vnderstanding therof. In the first parte I shewe, that there are visions and spirits, and that they ap∣peare vnto men sometimes, and that many and maruel∣lous things happen besides the ordinarie course of nature. In the second I discusse what manner of things they are, that is, not the souls of dead mē, as some mē haue thought, but either good or euill Angels, or else some secrete and hid operations of God. In the third I declare why God doth sometime suffer Spirits to appeare, and diuers forewar∣nings to happen: and also howe men ought to behaue them selues when they happen to méete with such things. In these points or partes, the chiefest thing whereon men vse to reason touching this matter, are conteined. Nowe I meane to handle this matter, being very obscure and in∣tricate, with many questions, (I trust) so plainly, & clere∣ly out of the holy scriptures, wheron we may surely stay our selues, out of the aunciēt fathers, allowed historiogra∣phers, and other good writers, that those which are studi∣ous and louers of gods truth, may well vnderstand what may be denied and thought of those apparitions, and other straunge and maruellous matters. And I also trust yt euen our aduersaries also, (in case they will lay their affections aside, but a litle while) will say that I haue truly allea∣ged all their arguments, and confuted them without any rayling or bitternesse. For my purposed ende is accor∣ding to the doctrine of saincte Paule, to edifie and not to destroy.
As touching diuinatiōs, blessings, iugglings, cōiurings, and diuers kinds of sorcerie, and generally of all other diuelishe practises, certayne learned men of our time haue written bookes, as Gasper Pecerus, Ioannes Viera, Ludo∣uicus

Mellichius, and perchaunce some others also, whose works I haue not yet séene. It is not long ago since Ioan∣nes Riuius, a man learned and eloquent, published a booke in the latine tong, entreating of spirites and superstition. In the which booke albeit very briefly, yet doth he as he is wont in all things, very finely and eloquently intreat of this matter, and of other foolishe superstitions. And albeit that I doo write more largely of this, yet was it not my minde to gather togither all those things whiche I coulde haue spoken and alleaged touching the same matter: but only suche as séeme the chiefest and most especial points, partly because I wold not be tedious to the reader, & part∣ly also least my bookes should growe vnto an ouer greate quantitie. I haue great hope that Ioachimus Camerarius, that excellent man, who readeth the auncient writers both gréeks and latins, with exquisite iudgemēt, and hath great experience in all things, will shortly write learnedly and at large of this matter and also of others like vnto it. For so much he séemeth to promise in his preface to Plutarches booke, De defectu oraculorum, & figura, & conscrata Del∣phis (wherin he handleth the nature and operations of di∣uels) and also in other of his writings. I for my parte had once written thys my treatise in the vulgar tong, and now bicause I trust it shal be also profitable to other men, I haue translated it into latine, adding certayne things thereto.
The dedica∣on.This my booke which I haue with greate laboure and study gathered out of many mens writings I present and offer vnto you (most noble consul) according to the ancient fashion and custome: not for that I suppose you haue any néed of my teaching, touching these things which are here∣in hādled. (For I am not ignoraunt, vnder what teachers you haue attained vnto true learning, and how you haue and do continually reade ouer sundry good authors with perfecte knowledge in many tongs.) But partely that I

might purchase credite and authoritie vnto this my booke with those men, vnto whome your goodnesse, godlines and constancie (whche you haue alwayes hitherto euermore shewed, and yet do shewe, in setting foorth true religion, and mainteyning good lawes) is throughly knowen: and partly that I might shewe my selfe in some respecte thāk∣full vnto you. For your honour hath bestowed many be∣nefits on me, whom you only knowe by sight, and vppon other ministers of ye Church, wherby ye haue so boūd me vnto you, yt I shall neuer be able to make any recōpence.
Wherefore I most earnestly beséech you, not to refuse this signe and token of my good will, be it neuer so simple: but rather to voutchsafe, when ye haue leisure from the laboure and toile of the common welth, to reade ouer this my booke: for I haue good hope it will not séeme vnplea∣saunt vnto you and others in the reading, as well for the playne order I vse therin, as also for the sundry and ma∣nyfold histories in it recited.
Almightie God, who hath so blessed you with his hea∣uenly gifts, that for them, (albeit very yong) you haue a∣pired vnto the highest degrée in your noble citie and domi∣niō of Berna, voutchesafe to preserue you in health, and in∣crease and multiply his good gifts in you. My Lords and brethrē the ministers of Tigurine and also your olde cōpanion master George Grebelius that excellent man in lerning, vertue, and nobilitie, harti∣ly salute your Lordship. 
From Tigu∣rine in the month of Ianuary the yeare of Christs Natiuitie. 1570.
