



THat princely prophet Dauid describing the peruerse nature and wicked properties of the vngodlie and reprobates, amongst other crimes wherof he  accuse them, he laith also to theyr charge that they haue not called vpon God. By the whiche wordes he doth manifestly teache, that they whiche doo not geue them∣selues to  and saythfull prayer and  ge of the name of God, are in the number of those whiche doo saye in theyr hartes there is no God. For as the Godly by theyr earnest and continu∣all praying and praysing of the name of God, doo declare their reuerend feare they beare towardes his diuine maiestye, and theyr vnfayned loue the whiche is grafted in their harts by the gratious and diuine spirit, to∣wardes their heauenly and most louing father, by the whiche they ar in∣coraged willingly and chearfully to walke in the waye of Godlynes, and to frame their lyues to the will and pleasure of him whom they feare and loue: So on the contrarye syde, the vngodly, in that they doo not call vp∣pon their God, neither prayse him, most euidently declare that they stand not in awe of him, nor loue him, but rather despise him as one that is nei∣ther able to hurte or pleasure them.
By thys now that I haue sayed it doth manifestly appeare, that as saythfull and trew prayer is the occasion of all goodnes and godlynes, so thomitting & neglecting of the same, is the rote & cause of all sinne & mis∣chief: And that wilbe more euident vnto them that doo consider with thē selues these two principall partes wherin trew prayer doth consist. The fyrst part of true praier is called in yt hebrew tōg, Thephilah the which sig  Iudicij vel cōdēnationis deprecatīonē, a harty & ernest request & suplica tiō made vnto god theternal iudge, for the remission, & pardon of synnes, the which request procedeth frō the harte yt is anguished by the ougsome sight of his wickednes, reueled by the brightnes of the law of God. The other part of prayer is called in yt same tōg, Thehillah. Laus, a prayse of gods mercies, the which doth folow the former request. For whē the hart so an guished hath poured out his grief, & is by the spirit of God certifyed that hys synnes be forgeuen, his prayer hearde for Christes sake: by and by it bursteth out into a ioyful praysing of the name of the Lord, who so gra∣ciously hath shewed hymselfe in geuing comfort vnto hys sorowfull con∣science. In these two partes of prayer, the Children of God doo exercise them selues, that is, in lamenting of their synnes, and in reioysing in the forgeuenesse of the same, the whiche consisteth in the deathe of Christe.
Wheruppon the third parte foloweth, the which is to craue at their fathers hands suche thynges as be nedefull for them in this worlde. Nowe he that beholdeth diligently the state of the worlde, shall  perceaue that the most part of men are geuē vp to theyr owne harts iust because they be  of that most comfortable spirit of prayer.
Who doth not see that the principall occasion of this horrible , the whiche of all states of men is showed towardes the 

God, hapneth by the reasō that men do not passe for theyr sinnes, do light ly regard them, & so do not craue  of them at Gods handes, ney ther be . If men did exercise themselues in faythfull prayer, & did vse to examine themselues by the rule of the law of God (in the which glasse they may sone  theyr owne fylthines) they would no doute with great diligence, consider the great and  benefites of the Lord theyr god shewed vnto them, euen in these our dayes. Fyrst how grati∣ously he gaue vs the light of the Gospell in kyng Edwards time, for the space of seuen yeares. After the whiche tyme, by the reason of oure vn∣thankefulnes, he most  plaged vs, and toke the same away agayne, and caused by the deuils hangmen (the papists I meane) darknes, blind nes, and most pestiferous doctrine to be brought into the churche, by rea∣son wherof, a greate number that had before no lust to the truth (euen by Gods iust iudgement) were thē deceaued by lyes and so peryshed eternal∣lye. And yet notwithstanding, the faythful Lord, in al these tormoylings preserued hys seruauntes, geuing vnto a number of them suche a prince∣ly spirit, that they were able to deride & laugh to scorne the threatnings of the tyrauntes, to despyse the terriblenes of prisons and torments, and in the ende, moste ioyfullye to ouercome and conquer deathe to the praise of God and theyr owne endles comforte. Unto other some, the  same most gratious God gaue suche a  spirite, that they were able by hys grace to forsake the pleasures and commodityes of this worlde, and being armed with patience, wer content to trauell into far and vnknowē countreyes with theyr familyes and housholdes, hauing small worldlye prouision, or none at all, but trustyng to hys prouidence, who neuer for∣saketh them that truste in hym. Besydes this, 'the same God preserued a greate number, euen in the middest of their enemyes, not onlye from bodely daungers, but also from being infected with that poysoned andThe congrega∣tion of the faith full at London in Quene Ma ryes tyme. blasphemous doctrine, that then in allopē , with shameles brags and ostentation was set abrode. I will not speake now of that wonder∣full work of God, who caused his word to be preached, and his sacramēts ministred euen in the midste of the enemyes, in spyte of the deuill and all hys ministers.
These thinges the Lorde wroughte most gratiously for hys people. But whē the time came that the measure of wickednes of the wicked was full, the selfe same God, euen of his owne mercy, and by his owne power confounded his enemyes, by the meanes of our most gratious La dy the Queenes maiestie (for whose prosperous estate and preseruation the God of mercye graunte vnto all faythfull Christians grace, most in∣stantly to praye) her most ioyfull comming to the imperiall croune of this Realm, who caused that filthy & dark antichristiā doctryne to vanish out of syght, and in steade therof that most glorious lyghte of the Gospell to shyne agayne, the whych sorowfully was wished for of all faythful Eng lish harts: restoring withall the preachers of the same Gospel, the which before wer expulsed as , by the tyranny of the popish prelates.
The whiche benefites, as they be vnmeasurable, so ought they continu∣ally with thanckful hartes of all them that beare the name of christians to be considered. But as I sayd before, the most part of men doo not pas for these thynges. The light of the Gospell is not confortable vnto them, because they feele not the darknes that is in them: they be not troubled

with their owne wickednes: sinne lyeth lurking and slepyng within thē, and they haue fully, as it were, soide themselues to worldlye busynes, to clyme vp to get honors and dignities, and the pelfe of worldly , and these thynges are the cause why they doo not  vnto the Lorde their God. But wo be vnto suche slepers in their owne sinnes, and for∣getters of Gods benefites. A day will come when they shall wish them selus neuer to haue ben borne. Thus you see that the neglecting of pray er is the occasyon of that horrible vnthankfulnes & forgetfulnes of gods benefytes. What is to be sayde vnto them that contrarye to theyr owne hartes and consciences lye in sinne and wickednes, and wyll not amende theyr lyues, although they heare their synnes accused, condemned, and Gods vengeaunce pronounced vppon them: They bee so drouned with the desyres of theyr owne hartes, that they doo not pas for the wayes of the Lorde. Of suche kinde of men the world is full, whyche haue shame∣les forheades, beyng not abashed of theyr vylenes.
The cause of their miseries (as Dauid declareth) Is quia deum non in , because they haue not called vppon God. But what kynde of prayer doo those men say (trow you) whiche call themselues spirituall and  the lot of the Lorde? It is as manifest as the none daye, that the most parte of them, neyther pray nor know what trewe prayer is. For if they did vse to pray as the trew christians doo, they coulde not chose but be compelled to amende theyr lynes: theyr consciences would be abashed to come before the Lorde without a harty purpose to amende theyr con∣uersation. Doth not the saying of Ose the Prophet take holde vpon theOse. vt. most parte of you that be of the popish clergie, and haue ben mossemon∣gers: Where as he saythe, as theues wayte for a man, so the companye of prcests murther in the way by consent, for they worke mischief.
Did not you conspire together at the entry of  Marye to mur∣ther the people of God, in casting from you most trayterously the precy∣ous Gospell of Jesus Christe? in submittyng your selues to that fylthye beast of Rome, and in receauyng the stinckyng I dolatrous masse, by the whiche you haue destreyed an inaumerable sorte of people? Are you sorye for these your doinges: Doo you humble your selues before the maiestye of the terrible God, with harty and faythful praier acknowledging your wickednes, and intending to eschew the same? No suche thynges can be perceaued in you. For where as before, in the tyme of antichryst, bold∣ly and openlye, you did deceaue the people of theyr saluation in Chryste, now in the lyght of the gospel, secretly you whisper in to the eares of the simple and visswade them from receyuing of the truth: so that most iustlyNume  you may be compared vnto those spyes of whom we reade Nume. xiii. the whyche with theyr false reportes, did hynder the people of I sraell from entryng into the lande of promyse. For they beyng sente by Moy∣ses to searche the land, and to bryng good tydings vnto the people, by the which they myght haue ben incouraged manfully to haue assayed their enemyes, and take possession of the land, they contraye to Moyses ex∣pectation, lyke faytheles men, came and discomforted the people, & caused them to mistrust Gods promises. And doo not ye the lyke? where as god hathe appoynted you to searche the lande of promise in hys holy worde, and to bryng tidinges of the same vnto his people, by faythfull and dily∣gent teachers, and incourage them to embrace and to lay holde vpon the

kyngdome of Christ, you lyke false messengers, eyther by your false re∣portes and wicked doctryne, doo hinder the people from entring into the promised land, or els lyke domme dogges that are not able to barke, you lye in your kennels, fedpng your bellyes, and making good cheare with the laboures and sweate of the poore people, not passyng wheather they swymme or synke, or what become of them.
Worthely therfore the Prophet Dauid numbreth you amongst them that say in theyr hartes there is no God: And this appeareth vnto all o∣thers, because ye doo not call vppon God. For if you did accastom to cal youre selues to an accompte before the maiestie of God, in your faythfull prayers, the remembraunce of your horrible murther of Gods people, of your idlenes, carelesnes, bellychere, ignoraunce of Gods will and word, secret . and suche other lyke stuffe, woulde cause you to water your , and compell you to showe some token of repentaunce vnto the people of God: but nothyng is seen in you but desperatnes, wherfore the spirit of the Lorde is departed from you. And this is more euidente in your manifold and mamfest periuryes, committed by you in king Hen ryes tyme, in king Edwards time, in Quene Maryes tyme. And what may be sayd of you at thys time, but that you be false , bearing two faces vnder one hood, beyng readye lyke weather cockes to turne at all seasons as the wynde doth cary you? can you looke for anye thyng at gods hands, but to be punished with his  as  was (whose companions you be) that all the world may take ensam∣ple by you to beware of these horrible crimes with the which you are so , that no water in the sea is able to make you clean  kynde of water woulde helpe youre disease, if the Lorde of his mercy would geue you grace to call vnto hym for it, that is the same water of lyfe the which the Lorde  to the faythfull and penitente sinners, amongst the number of whom as yet ye be not (sofar as man can .) And therfore it standeth you in hande to locke aboute you in tyme, before the halter be cast about youre neckes, as it hapned to , whose foote steppes you folow in your behauiours in thys worlde, that it is to be feared you shal rest together in one place in the worlde to come. But of the vyle behaui∣our of these miserable men, it greueth me to speake any further not doub ting but that the magestrates whom god hath charged with his people, will euen with speede consider these thynges accordingly, and not suffer those waueryng and  weathercokes to haue any thynge to do within the house of God, the whiche is bys Churche, purifyed with the blud of Chryst. For the  know that they themselues cannot pray vnto the Lorde theyr God, except theyr hartes be faythfully dispo∣sed to do the works of theyr vocatyon trewly and faithfully, of the which the  is to see the people instructed by faythfull ministers in the way  of the Lorde: the which instructions can not be geuen by such as are not only defyled with suche kynde of , as is aboue rehersed, but also are vtterly  of all good gyfts, and knowe not the principles of theyr religion.
This matter is so  and of suche importaunce, that the magi∣stratee, hauing the feare of god before their eyes, must nedes consider it with spede, for it toucheth the eternall saue garde of them, for whom the sonne of god did shede his owne hartes bloud: they oughte to be put into

hands of such as do not passe for theyr owne saluation, muche lesse for o∣thers: therfore with great and spedy dilygence the magistrats are bound (scyng god dothe put them in trust with hys chyldren) to prouide, that as they be bought with the bloud of Chryst, so they may be nourished with the true and sincere word of god, to the praise of his name, and theyr eter∣nall comfort. Further who can not lament, euen from the botom of his harte, to see a great number to lyue in such carelesnes, and flatter them∣selues in theyr owne sinnes, thinkinge that they be the chyldren of God, when as in very dede the comfortable spirit of faythfull prayer is depar∣ted from them, and they worthely numbred amongst them that haue no God nor Chryst: As those men be, whiche be so greedy vpon the world, and haue addicte and consecrate themselues vnto it, after suche a forte, as though thys worlde should last for eucr: And in this takyng be the grea ter part of the gentelmen, which with suche extremities intreate  poore tenantes, with raysyng of rents, taking of synes, and other kyndes of extreme dealinges, that they are compelled day and nighte to crie vnto God for vengeaunce against them: and can any man thinke that these pi∣tiles and cruell men, can appeare before the maiestie of god, and craue re∣mission of theyr sinnes, when as they be purposed to go on forwarde still in their extreme dealinges against the poore? I will not speake nowe of them, that beyng not content with theyr landes and rentes, do catche into theyr hands spiritual liuyngs: as personages & such lyke, and that vnder the pretense to make prouision for theyr houses. What hurt and domage thys realme of England doth sustayne by that deuelyshe kynde of proui∣sion for gentelmens houses, knightes and Lords houses, they cantel best that do trauell in the countreyes, and see with their cyes, great parishes and market townes, with innumerable others, to be  destitute of Gods word, and that because that these greedy men haue spoyled the ly∣uings and gotten them into theyr hands: and in stead of a faythful & pain∣full teacher they hyre a sir John, which hath better skill in playing at ta∣bles, or in kepyng of a garden, then in Gods word, & he for a triefle doth serue the cure, and so help to bring the people of God in daunger of theyr soules. And all those serue to accomplishe the abhominable pryde of suche gentelmen, which cōsume the goods of the poore (the which ought to haue ben bestowed vppon a lerned minister) in costly apparel, belly chere, or in building of gorgious houses. But let thē be assured, that a day will come when it will be layd to theyr charge: Rapina pauperū in domibus vestris, And then they shall perceaue that theyr faire houses ar built in the place called Aceldama: they haue a bloudy foundation and therfore can not stād long. This matter also is so wayghtye, and the spirituall slaughter of the poore people so miserable and wofull, that except the magistrates spedely looke thereunto, and redres the same, the Lorde of Sabaoth hymself will synde oute som remedy to delyuer his people from suche cater pillers, and requyre the bloud of his people at theyr hāds, by whose couetousnes they were letted to come to the knowledge of Christ. And besides thys suche  wolues as deuoure the lyuings of teachers, & ministers of gods word, shall not be hable to come in the presence of the Lord, to pray vnto hym or to prayse hym: for all that euer they doo (yea euen their prayers) is execrable before the Lord, so long as they turne their eare fro the hea∣ting of the lawe of the Lorde: that is to saye, so longe as they doo not euen from the verye  of theyr hartes,  aboute to redresse

these heynous faultes with the which they be intangled. Let them repēt therfore euen , before the wrathfull indignation of the Lord faule vppon them, and so destroy them in theyr sinnes. And these thyngs ought to be considered of all them that pretende christianytie, of what estate or degree soeuer they be, as well lawyers (whose couetousnes hath almost deuoured England) as craftesmen, husbandmen, seruauntes and others, remembryng with them selues, that if theyr hartes be inclined to wic∣kednes, the Lorde will not heare theyr prayers. Let them stand in awe of the Lorde theyr God, and so behaue themselues in theyr conuersation and life, that they may haue recourse vnto him, and be incoraged to make theyr praiers cōsidētly before him in the name of Iesus Christ, of whom they shall receaue comfort of soule and body, as well in this world as in the world to come eternally. For this is most certayne, that if they pro∣cede in their wickednes and vngodlynes, not passying wheather they be ruled, moued, and stirred by the gratious spirit of God to praise his name or not: then most assuredly the Lord wil power out his plages vpon thePsalme. lxxix hole realme, according to the saying of the Prophet: the Lord will power out his wrath vpon the kingdoms that haue not called vppon his name.
Now to the intent that they which are ignoraunt and vnlerned may the better be instracted howe to order themselues when they go about to present themselues before the maiestye of God, and talke with hym con∣cernyng those thinges whiche be nedefull for theyr soules health, and pre∣seruation of their bodyes: I thought it good (by the instant request of the godly learned) to put fourth these sermons here folowing, in print, which were preached in king Edwards , before the right honorable ladye Katheryne Duches of Suffolke her grace, by that same reuerend sather and most constant martyr of Chryste, Doctor Hughe Latymer, my most deere master. For whose most paynfull trauels, faythful , trew carefulnes for his countrey, pacient imprisōment, and constant suffering. all the whole realme of England, hathe great cause to geue vnto the eter∣nall God most high laude and prayse, For who is he that is so ignorante that did not see the wonderfull handiworke of God in that man? did not God appoint him euē in king Kenries dayes, to be a singular instrument to set forth hys truth, & by his preachyng to open the eyes of such as were deluded by the subtyll and deccatfull craftes of the popish presates?
How many fold wayes was he troubled, toste, and tormoyled from poste to piller, by the popish by shops? Whose handes he could not haue escaped if God had not moued the kinges maiesties hart (that then was) to assist hym. By whose absolute power diucrse times he was deliuered from the cruell Lyons. And although it did please God, in proces of tyme to suffer the kyngs  to be deluded and circumuented by the subtyl D. Latiuier withstode the sixe articles al∣though they were confirmed by lawes. sions of those popish by shops, to establish by lawe syxs vngodly articles: Yet thys faythfull seruaunt of Chryste woulde rather put hys owne lyfe in daunger, then forsake or depart from that, the which afore most faith∣fully he had taught out of Gods worde. Wherfore he was contented ra ther to be cast into the Tower, and there to loke dayly for death, then to be found a wauering reede, or to deceane hys Prynce. For they (sayd he) that doo allow any thyng disagreing from Gods word, in respecte to ful∣fill the appetites of Princes, ar betraiers & murtherers of their princes. because they prouoke the wrathe of God to destroy suche princes: & these

slatterers become gilty of the blood of their princes, and are the chiefs causes of their destructions. Wherefore this faythfull man or god, kno∣wing his prince to be deluded by the false priests and bemge assureb the thinges that were allowed to be contrary to gods word, was redy thus to aduenture his lyfe: at the which time god mercifully deliuered him, to the great comfort of al godly harts, and singuler cōmodity of his church.
Now whē he was thus deliuered, did he giue himself vp to yt pleasures of the world? to delicatenes or idlenes? No assuredly, but euen then most of al he began to set fourth his plough, & to till the ground of the lord, and to  the good corne of gods word, behauing him self as a faythful mes∣senger of god, being afrayed of no man, telling all degrees theire dueties faithfully and truely, without respect of persons, or any kind of flattery. In the whiche his paynefull trauels he continued al kinge Edwardes time, preaching for the most part euery sondaye twoo sermons to the great shame, confusion, and  of a great number of our fatbellied vnpreaching prelats. For he beinge a sore brused man and aboue three score & 7 yeres of age, took notwithstanding at these paines in preching, and besides this, euery morning ordinarily, winter and sommer, aboute two of the clock in the morning, he was at his booke most diligētly. And besides this how carefull he was for the preseruation of the churche of God, and for the good successe of the gospel, they can bcare record. which at that time were in autoritye whome continually by his letters he ad∣monished of their , and assisted with his godly counsel.
But when the time approched,  which god had appoynted for the punishmēt of the carnal gospcllers & hipocrited which most wickedly a∣bused the same, how faythfully he did  both prinatly, and open ly al kinds of men, they that wer then about him can beare record. But one thing amongest others is principally to be noted, that god not onelye gaue vnto him his sprit most plentiously and comfortably, to preach hys word vnto his : but also by the same spirite he did most  prophecy of al those kindes of plages, which in very dede afterwards en sued, so playnly I say, as thoughe he had seene them before hys eyes so that, if England euer had a Prophet, he was one.  amongst other things he euer affirmed that the preaching of the gospel would cost hym his life, to yt which thing he did most cherefully arme & prepare him self, being certenly perswaded, that Winchest. was kept in the tower for the same purpose. Therefore not long after Quene Mary was proclamed, a pursiuant was sent down into the country for to call hym vp. Of whose cōming when he was made ware about six howers before, by a faythful man of god Ioha Carelesse (a mā worthy of euerlasting memory) he pre pared himself towards hys iorney before the sayd pursiuant came to his house. At yt which thing, whē the pursiuāt marueled seing him so prepa red towards his iorney he sayd vnto him, my frend: you be a welcō mes senger to me, and be it known vnto you & to the whole world, that I go as willingly to Lōdon at this presēt, being called by my prince to render a reckning of my doctrin, as euer I was to any place in the world, and I do not dout, but that god, as he hath made me worthy to preach hys word before two excellēt princes, so he wil able me to witnesse the same vnto the third, eyther to her comfort, or discomforte eternally &c. At the which tune the pursiuant, when he had deliuered hys letters departed,

 that he had commaundeniēt not to tary for him, by whose sodē departure it was manifest, that they would not haue had him to appere, but rather to haue fled out of the realm. They knew that his cōstantnes should cōfound them in their popery, and confirm the godly in the truth. As concerning the maner and forme how he was interteyned when he came before the counsell, how stoutly he did behaue himselfe in Christes cause, and was content to beare most paciently all the mocks and tan̄tes geuen him by the scornful, and pestilent papists: also howe pacientlye he tooke his imprisonment, and how boldly and willingly he in the end ad∣uentured his life in the defence of the glorious gospel of Iesus Christe, because theise thinges be at large described in the booke of the martyrs by that most godly lerned and excellent instrument of God master Iohn Fox, I wil not spend the time now to reherse the same: sauing one thing the which I would wishe all godly bishops and faythfull preachers to note, the which is this: that he being in prison comfortles, and destitute of all worldly help. most of al did reioyce in this, that god had geuen him grace, to aply his office of preching & assisted him without fear or flattry to tel vnto the wicked theyr faultes, & admonish thē of their wickednes, neyther alowing, nor consenting to any thing, that might be preiudicial or hurtfull vnto the gospell of Christe, although the refusall thereof did cast him in daunger of his life. God graunt that al those that be in that of fice may folow his footesteppes, and that the reste that eyther refuse to take payns, or are giuen to flatter, may be turned out, and be set to the cart or plough, and others put into their romes that be willing, diligent and hable to do their dewties. The other thinge that I would haue no ted, is his  and diligence in prayer, wherin oftentimes so long he continued kneeling, that he was not able for to rise without helpe: & amongst other thinges these were thre principal matters he prayed for. The first, that as god had appoynted him to be a precher and professor of his word, so also he would  him grace to stand vnto his doctrine vntil his death: Thother thing, the which most instantly with great vi olēce of gods sprite he desired, was that god of his mercy wold restore the gospell of his sonne Christ vnto thys realm of England once again, and these wordes once agayn, once agayn, he did so inculcate and beat into the cares of the Lord god, as though he had sene god before him, & spake vnto him face to face. The thirde principall matter wherewith in his prayers he was  was to praye for the preseruation of the quenes maiesty that now is, whome in his prayer accustomablye he was wont to name, and euen with teares desired god to make her a comfort to this comfortles realm of England. These wer the matters he prayed for so earnestly. But were these things desired in vayne? Did god des∣pise the prayers of this his faythfull souldier? No assuredly: for the lord did most graciously graunt all these his requests. First, concerning pro∣fession, euen in the most extremity, the Lord  assisted him. For whē he stode at the stake, without Bocardo gare at Oxford, & the tormen  about to set the fire vpon him and that most reuerēd father D. Rid ley, he lifted vp his eyes towardes heuen with a most amiable and , saying these words. Fidelis est Deus, qui non  nos tentari supra id quod possumus. God is faythful, which doth not suffer vs to be tempted aboue our strength: and so afterwarde by and by

shed his bloud in the cause of christ, the which bloud ranne out of his hart in suche aboundaunce that all those that wer presente (beyng godly) dyd maruell to see the most part of the bloud in his body so to be gathered to his hart, and with suche violence to gushe out, his body being opened by the force of the fyre. By the which thinge God most gratiously graunted his request, the which was, to shede his harts bloud in the defence of the Gospell. How mercifully the Lorde heard his second request, in restoring his gospel once again to this realm, these present dais can beare recorde. But alasse, what shal England say for her defēce, how shal she auoyd the terrible plages of God for the horrible and deuelish vnthanckfulnes, for that treasure? The Lorde be mercifull vnto vs.
Now concernyng his third request, it was also most effectuously graun∣ted to the grent prayse of God, the furtheraunce of his Gospel, and to the vnspeakenble comfort of this realme. For when matters were euen des∣perate, and the enemies mightely florished and triumphed, Gods worde banished, , sodenly the Lorde called to remembran̄ce his mercy, and made an end of all these miseries, and appoynted her, for whom that same gray headed father Latimer so earnestly prayed in hys , as the true & naturall ruler, & owner of this imperial  to shew her , and by the brightnes of Gods worde to confounde the darke,  and  kingdome of Antichrist, and to restore the tem ple of God agayne, the whiche thyng not this faithfull prophet only, but al the rest, whom God made worthy to be his wytnesses, did most ear∣nestly requyre and desyre in their faythfull prayers. The selfe same God graunt vnto euery faythfull Christiar: his spirit, that they may be diligēt and watchfull in prayers for her, by whom God hath bestowed such vn∣speakcable giftes vpon vs, that the same God will assyste her with hys grace and holy spirite, to procede faythfullye in the building of his house, and in plucking downe of all kyndes of synne and , , Idolatrpe & al the monuments of the same, to the glory of hys name and her cuerlasting and endles comfort. To the whych faythful prayers, that all they whiche feare God, may be the  I haue  forth these sermons, made by this holy man of God, and dedicated them to your grace: partly because they were preached  your  house at Grimsthorp, by this reuerend father and faythfull  of god, whom you did norish, and whose doctrine you did most  embrace, to the prayse of god & vnspeakable  of al godly harts, the  did  great admiration maruell at the  gifts of god  vpō youe grace, in geuing vnto you such a  spirit, by whose power & ver∣tue you were able to ouercome the world, to forsake your ,  and goodes, your worldly  and ,  highe estate and estimation with the whiche you  adorned, and to become an  for Christe & his gospels sake, to  rather to  with the people of god, then to  the  of the worlde with a wic∣ked  the  of  greater , then the treasures of Englande: where  the  are farre otherwyse : for they haue theyr pleasures amongst the portes of , they eate and  and make , not passing what become of  or his : they bee  dronken with the swete delicates of thys miserable , that they wyl not tast of yt buter morsels which the lord hath ap∣poynted

and prepared for his chosen children, and especyall frendes: Of the whiche he did make you most gratiouslye to taste, geuyg vnto youre grace his spirit, that you were able in all the tormoyles and greuaunces the whiche you did receaue, not only at the handes of those whiche were your professed enemyes, but also at the handes of them whych pretended  and good will, but secretly wrought sorow and myschyef, to be quyet and , and in the end broughte youre grace home againe into your natiue countrey, no doubt to no other end, but that you shoulde be a comfort vnto the comfortles, and an instrumente by the whiche hys holy name should be praysed, and his gospell propagated and spredde a∣brode, to the glory of hys holy name, and your eternall comfort in Christ Iesus, vnto whose mercifull hands I commit your grace, with all youres eternally.
Amen.
From Southam, the second of October.
