



WHen I was first importun'd to com∣mit these my weake labours to a more generall view: I stood in the bal∣lance, whether way to take: On the one side, I saw the world was full e∣nough of Books: & what good would my spoonfull doo in the Sea? and how vnfit it were that my selfe, the least of littles, should deliuer knowledge to posterity, and that this wayward age, was so ill-disposed, that it could not abide vngues in vlcere, we should scratch in the sore; as also the clowdie stile, and stumbling phrase I had writ it in, not dreaming the world should looke on it. Furthermore, I per∣ceiued on the other hand, that my scarce discerned sparke, gaue a true light; and why may not some gaine a little?
I haue read of night-trauellers, that haue beene refreshed by the shine of Glow-wormes? Wee are borne in a time, wherein people loue new varieties in apparell, diet, houses, yea, friends: why may not some see this, and be better for it? It is an ill winde blowes no man profit; If but one gaine, and that a little, I haue enough. A sicke or weake stomacke, that at a table leaues dainties, and feedes of some course dish, the Cooke will not repent he sent it in.
Being moued by these things, I thought I could not doe bet∣ter then to send it to your hands (although most of you heard it Preached) to expresse my thankfulnes for that loue and li∣berality I haue receiued from many of you: and now I am glad, God hath giuen me this opportunity to lay open to wide report, that worthy worke you haue done amongst vs. There is a cursed crying; Sin raignes in this age without controule,

I meane the taking away of Church-rites,H 18. in. Act. called by Chryso∣stome, the dowrie of the Bride; robbing of God the Fa∣ther, and the Church the Mother: Hence it is, that many braue wits turne to study Law, or Physicke, or follow some other callings, letting passe sacred Diuinity, the Mistresse of sciences; and those that haue taken on them that worthy fun∣ction, yet want of meanes, hath brought want of bookes and other necessaries; so that many stuffe their heads with eares in stead of learning; meane while the Gospell droopes, Gods vine-tree spreads not, Popery holds his ground, & duskie ig∣norance as a thicke mist remains vndispeld in many corners of this Kingdome, for want of sun-beames. But the more we beate on this poynt, the harder mens hearts are; like the Ca∣tadupes, that are deafe by the fall of Nilus. Now blessed be God, who hath so mightily wrought in you, to stirre you vp to bee instruments, to spreade heauens sun-shine, to those that sit in darkenesse; and haue sent labourers into o∣thers vineyards, and paid them with your owne penny. Hap∣pie be the Angell that called on you, to send helpe into our Macedonia: I meane, to establish the preaching of Gods word in that place where I now dwel. I neuer knew any part of this kingdome, where Romes shakie brood roosted & re∣sted themselues more warmer and safer, and with greater countenance, then in our country. But I make no question, it is begun already that as the day breakes, and the shadowes flye away, those owles will betake themseles to Iuie trees, and no longer dominere ouer the childish in experience of many peo∣ple. Goe on worthy Gentlemen with such workes, they shall be your  and crown. The Lord stir vp your hearts more and more, & grant that others may glasse themselues by you, and through your example, tread this holy maze. And so I rest, committing my faint endeauours into your hands, desi∣ring your fauorable acceptance, & wonted loue. I shal remain

Woluerhampton Octob. 16. 1624.
