


Right Honourable, and most Worthy;
AS many things fall in, between the end, and the putting of it in execution: So whilst J was in hand with this Treatise, by the providence of God, and his Majesties call, you were assembled in the Honourable and High Court of Parlia∣ment. Which Assembly we pray, may be like that assembly of David and his States in Hebron; where first they made a co∣venant before the Lord, and thereafter went to warre against the Iebusites, and then against the Philistims, and over∣came them both.
2 Sam. 3.15. Strike your Covenant then with the Lord, and your warre shall surely prosper. For the discoverie of your Adversaries (which is a main principle of warre) you need not a Vox populi, you haue vivam vocem Principis: Onely this little Work, which I humbly commend unto your view, I wish may be, vox tubae, to your martiall designes: a perspectiue it is, whose optic medium is the word of God,
which will make you perfect to this, and every good work. As for order, I hope your Honours are advised to take a strict order with the enemies of your own House, that is, the Draconarie companies of English Romanists, whom I need not describe to you; for you know them by their colours; one∣ly they may be noted by this briefe Description; They are the Popes Asses, the Devils Dromidaries, the Spaniards familiars, and the Iesuits Cabinat. Ere you goe to war, doe as Joshua did with the fiue Kings whom he couped up in a caue, that they should not make head with recollected forces.
Ies. 10. Shut up the Amorits, and roule the stone to the Caues mouth, and then fear not but you shall deal well enough with Amalek.
2 Sam. 5. As David made sure the Jebusites that dwelt in the prime place of his Kingdom, before be went against the Philistims; doe you so with these Iebusites that dwell in the heart of your Countrey. David took in Metheg Amath, by which is meant Gath; the word signifieth, the bridle of Amath, or of the hilly Tract:
2 Sam. 8. For being the strength of the Philistims, David made it a bridle to them. So take in Gath; that is, the strong Fort of our home Philistims, and it will be a bridle to our enemies abroad. The Princes of the Philistims would not trust David, but caused the King to send him back from the battell, least he should betray them to his Master Saul:
Cap. 29. and should the Princes of Israel trust the Philistims, who haue devoted themselues to Babel, and their Country to their Cyrus (as they call him?) You are the Eyes and Armes of our Soveraign, the Body of the land, the Councell and Strength for warre, the Sword and Shield of
Gods distressed cause, the Terrour of the Adversary, the rod for the wicked; the Sithe to mowe down sinne: and in a word the very Helm of the State: Then as you look to haue honour here, and glory hereafter, Stand fast, and quit your selues like men for God and your Country. As the Greek Ephori, the Roman Senators, and the States of Venice to this day, doe lay down themselues, and all private passions of fear, flattery, and the rest, before they enter the Senate house, Vt Reipub. serviant; so you must be all the Common-wealths, and none of your own. You had need of the Senatory ornaments, enumered by Iethro, especially Wisedom and Courage: The greatest good, hath the greatest opposition. A Crown cannot be had without contending for it; you haue not onely the weale of Caesars Crown, but of Christs Crown, to look to; a jealous care of the latter, is the safety of the former: for they who honour God, God will honour them. As the externall evils of the body (such as heat, cold and wounds) may well be prevented, and ea∣sily cured; but internall evils (as sicknesse, vlcers, and the like) are not commonly fore-seen nor easily cured; so the open enemies of State are quickly discovered, and easily opposed, but the mothes and cankers, ulcerous plagues, and hec∣ticks, arising out of the State it selfe, are so hardly disco∣vered till they be past cure, that they become the spoyle of policie, and opprobrie of States-men.
Polib. lib. 11. bist. Of those in∣ward evils haue a speciall care, and keep close to your rules without slavish fear: And howsoever it fall out, it is greater cunning, and matter of more commendation in
the Phisitian to make a true use of his rules, then to eure the Patient. As tediousnesse is not for such a presence, nor weaknesse worthy to direct such a Senate, I depre∣cate what may be found amisse, and with this close I shut up all; Doe you what you should, and let God doe what hee list.

