


Grace, mercy, & Peace in the Lord Euerlastinge.
HAVING in mindefull memorie
(Right Honourable, and Worshipp∣full)
that mercifull couenaunt of
peace, by our omnipotent Crea∣tor
towardes all flesh thus mani∣fested
(I do set my Raine Bowe in the
cloudes,Gen. 9. & it shall be as a tokē betwene
me & the earth) promising hereby
neuer to destroy the same any
more by waters: how much ought mākind specially, en∣ioying
by this peaceable pact, from Heauē, Earth, & the
Sea aboundance of benefittes: feare God in his holines,
loue one an other in righteousnesse, and vse these bene∣fittes
with thankfulnesse to the aduauncement of his
glory. For this Bowe, this Rainebowe I say of his coue∣nant,Arist met liber 3. Cap. 1.
and pledge of his peace, left vnto vs frō the deluge
(as Aristotle affirmeth) Naturally appeareth by reflection
or giuing backe of the light of the Sunne,Trac. 2. from a cloude opposite, or
against the same. So our heauēly God, the Father of light,
and giuer of grace, departeth with the light of his
manifolde mercies vnto mankinde, from the opposite
cloude of his displeasure. Againe, this Bowe of his co∣uenant



and pledge of his peace, (as it is saide by Alber∣tus)
To be so much lesse in appearance, as by how much the Sunne
is higher in the Heauens, and contrarie wise so much greater, as
the Sunne is lower to the earth: So much lesse be the mercies
of God minded of man, as his mightie power appeareth
out of our sight, and againe so much greater seeme his
mercies vnto vs, as his mightie power is nere vs in sight.
Thirdly according to Aristotle, this Rainebow of his co∣uenant
& pledge of his peace, As it appeareth in the Spring
time, in Sommer, in Autume & in Winter, euening & morning,
but specially in Autumne: So is the performance of his
mercifull couenant, and peaceable pacte at all times ap∣parant,
but specially in Autumne, that is when man∣kinde
laboureth most to leaue sinne, and bring∣forth
fruites of good life as I saide, fearing God in his
holinesse, louing one an other in righteousnesse, and v∣sing
his benefittes with thankfulnesse. Thus and to this
end graunting his couenant, our omnipotent Creator
and gratiouse God ordayning Man ruler ouer his Crea∣tures
in earth, yet vnder his protection in heauen, hath
not onely bounde vnto him all humaine societie, but
hath also substituted euen his liuetenauntes godly rulers
ouer the same to the foresaide effect for the aduaunce∣ment
of his glory, confirming the same couenant with
the aucthoritie of his holie worde on this manner. Reg. 7 I will
ordaine a place for my people of Israell. I. And I will plant him,
and I will dwell with him. II. And he shall be no more troubled.
III. And the children of iniquitie shall not vexe or afflict him any
more. IIII. By his word here he promised that which by
his deede he performed to our forefathers▪ Adam in Pa¦radise,
Gen. 1. Noah & his children, Gen. 9. Abraham & his
seede Gen. 12. But louing his lect, and hating their e∣nemies,
he performed his promise vnto Iacob in his
prouidence, and vnto Laban in his iudgments, Gen. 30.
So did he in like manner vnto Ioseph, and his vnnaturall
brethren, Gen. 37. Yea in his prouidence laying his right
hand vpon Ephraim, and in his iudgement his left hand
vpon Manasses. Gen. 48. Whereby as he prospered and



protected his holy ones in peace and warres against their
enemies, we reade also in the deuine histories from time
to time how and by what ordenarie meanes of power,
force, and defence, he reached vnto his feeble flocke his
mightie arme to the discomforture of the enemie & vt∣ter
subuertion both of their power & pollicie, according
to his promises aforesaide. Heere then memorable and
praiseworthie is the prouidence of this most mightie
God, who promising helpe vnto the Iewes against the
Gentiles, vsed no kinde of speach so much as this,Deut 32. That
he would bend his Bow and dye his shaftes in bloud. As who say,
God wil make the Iewes shoote strong shootes to ouer∣throw
their enemies: or at the least, that shooting is a
wonderful mightie thing, whereunto the high power of
God is likened. This bow a weapon of defence, the
Raine Boe a token of truce: This Bow in peace a plea∣sure,
the Raine Bowe a signe of serenitie: this Bow in
warres a paine to the enemie, the Raine Bow at al times
and to all people Gods toaken betwene him and the earth.
The one an instrment of mercy, the other of destruction:
the godly haue both as their comfort and sauegarde
by Gods protection, the vngodly either wanting the
one or hauing both, haue them to their confusion and
subuertion by his reiection.Reg. 3. As we reade of King Saul,
that he was slaine of the Philistians being mightie bow
men: and with him also his Sonne onathas who as the
scripture saith neuer shot shaft in vaine. And that the
kingdome of Israell after Sauls death came vnto King
Dauid: who after he was King, decreed by the first sta∣tute
which he enacted.2. Reg.  That all the children of Israell should
learne to shoote in the bowe, according to a law made many
a day before vt patet in libro iustorum, a booke not now in
vse to be ounde. In his booke of Psalmes as hee saide
He was at peace with them that hated peace. So named hee
the bow and arrowes in diuers manners & meaninges▪
as in his Psal. 7. vers 13. & 14. Psal. 11. vers. 2. Psal. 18.
vers. 13. Psal. 21. vers. 12. Psal. 45. vers. 6. Psal. 49. vers. 9.
64. vers. 3. & 4. 76. vers. 3. 91. vers. 5. 127. vers. 4. & 5.



Finally in his 147. Psal. vers. 6. Praying to God for de∣liuerance
from his enemies and for their destruction. He
saith, shoot thine arrowes and consume them: So yet that He
neither trusted in bowe nor sworde, but in the power of God. Hee
affirmeth it Psalme 44. vers. 6. And to conclude that he
had rather liue in a godly peace thē to warre against the
wicked, he saith in the 119. Psal. vers. 15. As at a marke
he will ayme to walke in the wayes of the Lord. Of this minde
was not King osias, who though leading a godly life at
home in Iuda, yet going vniustly to fight against Nichao
King of Egipt, Reg. 23. was rather friendly dehorted by him frō
his purpose then otherwise, saying: Leaue off to worke a∣gaynst
the Lord which is with mee least he do tay thee, which
admonition Iosias not regarding as spoken from God, tasted in deed
of Gods iust iudgment: for being shot thorow with arrowes he was
woūded to the death incontinently. I could at large here call to
minde the commendation of this peaceable practise of
shooting which once I as a rawe scholler reade ouer in
Toxophilus, and at times by tasked lessons interpreted in
latine here and there: but for breuitie, I refer your ho∣nours,
and worshipes vnto the Histories there, of the E∣thiopian
king, and Cambyses king of Persia. Of Sesostris
and his archers. Of the Messagetanes which neuer went
without their bowe and quiuer neyther in peace nor in
warres. Of Policrates and his one thowsand archers.
Of the Scithians (whose whole substance and riches of
a man being a yoake of Oxen and a plow, a Nagge and
his dogge, his bowe and his quiuer) were inuincible a∣gainst
Darius and other Monarckes. To be short, the
Grecians, Persians, Athenians, and the Romanes, whose
shooting in peace and warres was worthie of praise and
fame. Neyther here ought I nor will I omit with silence
the deserued fame of our Ancestors in fauouringe this
exercise in this our litle England long agoe liuing and
of latter time, though breefly, referring your honours &
worshippes vnto the histories at large, as of Brute and
his Troianes the first Brittaines, before and after the a∣riuall
of Iulius Caesar, Claudius, & Vespasian Emperoures



and they Romanes: after them the Saxons vntill the
time of Vortiger, the vsurping murtherer, who (Gods
prouidence so working for them, and his iudgement
vpon him) by the two Brethern and valiant Brittaines
Aurelius sirnamed Ambrose, & Vther Pendragon, be∣ing
burned in his Castell in Wales, was occasion of the
Brittaines more happier estate afterwardes. But here yet
by the way (Right honourable and worshipfull) as I applaude
in this their well doing, so it had beene a thing of Brit∣taine
most worthelie to be wished, for that Prince him
selfe lesse opprobrius of all mē more praise worthie, and
most pretiouse in the sight of God: if the serpent Ty∣rus
had wanted here his vennime vncurable, though his
flesh proued medicinable against all other poysons (as
saith Cardanus in his booke of Comfort.) I meane if
Vther Pendragon had wanted that serpentine poyson of
adulterie, Nigromancie & murther (things odible to
God and good men:) when that most incomperable
King Arthure of great Brittaine for his princely pro∣wesse,
valiant vertues, and triumphant victories yet
prooued more Royally renoumed throughoute all the
worlde in his time and to his posteritie. The He∣brwes
with greate and not vndeserued titles extolled
their Iudas Maccabeus. Homer the glory of all Greeke
Poets left Hector and Achilles most commendable vn∣to
the worlde. Neyther by lesse diligence did the Gre∣cians
adorne with praise Alexander the most mightie
conquerour. And the Romanes aduanced the noble
actes of their Caesar to the Skyes not enough. The Bur∣gonians
profoundly praised Godfrey of Bulloyn (for
his noble valiancy) as the scourge of the Sarazens in his
dayes. And as euery one of those are commended with
due desert: so in like māner there were neuer Brittaines
wanting of excellent learning and exquisite knowledge
to leaue with carefull diligence and credible commen∣dation,
the progenie, life, prowesse prosperitie, and tri∣umphant
victories of our said auncient Arthure wor∣thely
published vnto the worlde. And as Alexander



would haue none to purtract him but Apelles, nor a∣ny
but Lysippus to engraue him in brase, nor any but
Pyrgotiles to worke him in pretiouse stone: So where
in not three, but many Artizans as learned Gildas,
William of Malmsbury, Nennius, Diuionenses, Graius,
Iosephus, Geoffrey of Munmuth, Siluester Giraldus. &c.
performed their worthie workmanshippes in our Ar∣thure
Maur (to vse the Brittaine phrase:) euen one En∣glish
Leyland for his learned laboure laudable, hath per∣fectly
polished him in all poyntes. Chusing a cheefe
& most perspicuouse, a valiant & most victoriouse, a cou∣ragiouse
and most conquerouse, a religiouse and most
redoubted Royall soueraigne King Henry the eight, as
sole supreme Patron and protector thereof against the
cankered currish kinde of caueling carpers. Bycause his
elder brother being named Arthure, he him selfe a most
christian King for all heroicall vertues commendable,
the rather seemed to fauour and further the aduance∣ment
of the fame of his most renoumed auncestor this
same our ancient Arthure and the knightly traine of his
rounde table. Hereupon by patent of his princely pre∣rogatiue
ordayned, graunted, and confirmed hee vnto
this honorable Citie of London, free electiō of a Chief∣taine
and of Citizens representing the memory of that
magnificent King Arthure, and the Knightes of
the same order, which should for the mayntenance of
shooting onely, meete together once a yeare, with so∣lemne
and friendly celebration therof. So much in his
noble minde preuayled all prouident care of princely
prowesse,2 Reg. 1. valiancie, cheualrie, and actiuitie, that he not
onely herein imitated the examplers of godly K. Dauid
for his Israelites as before,Ao 30 and of that noble Emperour
Leo in ouerthrowing idolatrie, and exalting archerie
maugre the mallice of that Romane Antichrist, and
all his members: but also inuincibly maintayned the
praiseworthie practize of this shooting in peace & wars
by the examples of his princly progenitors. As after te



conquest, of K. Henry II. alîas Beauclerck so sirnamed,
the first furtherer of K. Arthures benificencie, valiāt Ed∣ward
sirnamed long & first vizitor of the saide Kinges
tombe, valiant and victorius Edward III▪ & IIII. bounti∣ous
and liberall Richard II. good and gratiouse Henry
the V. wise, poitique, iust, temperate, and graue King
Henry the VI. his father. Neither hath this ceased in the
branch, that flourished in the bole: but by the milde,
religiouse, and gratiouse King Edwarde the VI. and now
last of all by the Phenix of feminine sex, our most re∣doubted
Hester and gratiouse soueraigne Ladie Queene
Elizabeth laudably lasteth in force and effect:Hest. Cap. ▪ whose
highnesse so many yeares humbling, not exalting her
selfe the more by reason of her power, wholy setteth her
subiectes in peace, preferring the same. Now therefore
(Right honourable and worshipfull) as duetie bindeth euery
degree to further the welfare of this blessed peace, and
the profit of this excellent practise: proceede I humbly
beseech you with noble Nehemias and those godly su∣peruisors
with dutifull diligence,2. Esd. 4, with the one hand
holding your boes, and with the other hand as good la∣borers
for your Prince & publique wealth, to beare the
burdens of your vocation, towards the buylding of this
earthly Ierusalem, euen from the morning spring till the
Starres come forth. Continually I say accustome your
selues to seeke this peace of the gospell and to ensue the
same, ryde on I say with renoume vpō that White Horse
whose sitter hauing a boe and a croune giuen him hath promisse
from the mightie power of God,Reuel. . that he shall go forth conquering
and shall ouercome. That Christ our King of the viuersall
Church with his croune and septer, and with the shafes
of his mouth or worde and gospell of peace may pearce
throughout the worlde to the aduauncement of his glo∣ry
which shal sit on the raineboe in his maiestie to iudge
all Nations, (as the feare of his holynesse, mutuall loue
in righteousnesse, and thankfulnesse for his benefites
may moue all men) I haue trauieled in the translation of
this booke out of Latin into English, with all humble &



true harted reuerence, beseeching God to assist you
right honourable Lord Deputie with his omnipotent
power, that as an inuincible Iosua you may continually
bring in the people to the due knowledge of God,Deut. 31. and obedience of
our Prince: & as a notable Nehemias in true feare of God
without feare of foe buylde vp this earthly Ierusalem to
the perfection of that perpetuall peace, promised in the
heauenly Ierusalem. Finally that you right honourable
Lord President, and you right worshipfull Master Tho∣mas
Smith with your worshipfull associates,Psal. 121. Dayly pray∣ing
for the peace of this Ierusalem, as the amitie thereof is
sweete by the vnitie of your mindes:Psal. 132. So that, Hoc sit lon∣gissime
vt periucundum sic cohabitare fratres in vnum, I accor∣ding
to my humble duty hartely do pray vnto God, cra∣uing
pardon of your honours and worshippes generally
for this my bold dedication. And beseeching you fauou∣rably
to accept the same in furderance of my poore stu∣dy
of dutifull well wishing towardes my Prince & coun∣trie:
I humbly and hartely beseech the eternall & om∣nipotent
God to multiply his manifolde mercies vpon
your honours & worships, that being all of one dutifull
minde in God towardes the maiestie of our most sacred
soueraigne lady (vnder her long liuing in peaceable pro∣speritie)
we may after this life attaine vnto that peace∣able
and perpetuall kingdome of Heauen to raigne as
coheires with Christ our Lord in the glory of his Father.
AMEN.

