



IT thoroughe al ages hath ben a laudable Cus∣tom (right hono∣rable) that wry∣ters, in dedica∣ting their trauai¦les to ye worthi∣es of their tyme, did thereby, not onely shield and succour their cause, but also aduaunce their Patrones name, with high renoume, tho∣rowout al posteritie. Wherfore as it is law∣full for me, in this so good a cause, to vse this benefite: so I especially wishe to ac∣complish

the same, by your honor, to whom as many good men holde themselues di∣uersly bounde: So there is not any that doth not commende the same: For hauing compassion on the distressed: for pardoning of your foes: for succouring of the nedefull: for furthering poore suters: and amongst other, your honours vertues (which I doe ouerpasse, least I shoulde seeme to be ouer curious, eyther in rehearsing those things that are most certaine to all men, or such as your Lordshippe listeth rather to practize than to heare speake of) for that you are a special Mecaenas, to euery studēt. The which the Vniuersitie of Oxforde, a nourcerie of good letters, flying to your protection, eui∣dentely declareth: but especially for that your Lordship is so fauorable and zelous a friend to the ministerie:Hil. in Ps 68. who standing in the feruent zeale of their God & his church, in the indignation of a godly loue, are by the pieuishnesse of many (that thinke they haue gotten aduantage at will) diuersly molested. Goe forth my Lord (Zelo enim Dei irascitur,Idem in Psal. 118. Zadik. qui insolentem in fratres ministrosque con∣spexerit) for frō the zeale of God doth it pro∣ceede, to be displeased with those that are malapert agaynste the brethren, the mini∣sters of God. God shal make you a most re∣doubted and triumphante Gedeon ouer hys

enimies. Goe on therein amongst the soul∣diers of zeale, and assure your self, right ho∣nourable, that there is not, amongst al the causes of perpetuall fame, any one more iust, or apte therfore, than a true report for doing well to the housholde of fayth, and maintenaunce of the Churches right. And committe your name to the perpetuall me∣morie of Gods eternall Church, who doth already acknowledge your louing kinde∣nesse towarde hir, and will not forgette the same. By reason whereof, when as it fyrst came in my thought to seeke some shelter, frō the showres of Zoilus, which are ye shar∣per, in this age, for that they are lesse shame lesse, and from the iniuries of our time: your honor aboue other, was bruted most brim∣ly amongst them, as fittest for the same. To whome I do most humbly sewe, to receyue this little treatise, wyth ye accustomed, and cheerefull countenaunce, which you were wonte to bestowe on others: which if you, of your bountie doe, I dare boldly thinke, that it shall be sufficiently cōsecrated to the church the mother of vs al. That aiger Eri∣phia shall be sufficiently appalled. And that Momus shall moue laughter, but with Mydas long eares. If any man, shal thinke that it is not worthy for the basenesse therof, to be dedicated to your honour, such a one shall

seme an vnthriftie nigarde of your honors gentlenesse, or else enuious of your fame, & of my vnfained good wil to your Lordship. For I graunt that (how vneasy so euer my trauayle was in this frosen seas, no man hauing cut the yse therein) it is now so sim∣ple, as I doubt not, but then, when I shall, by the lustinesse of other be constrayned, I my selfe shal not onely amende this, but set it forth with greater gayne, and increase: and therefore the better learned might not onely, haue done the same much more com∣mendable, but amende thys, which I freely submit to the controlement of euery winde. In the meane tyme, I recommend your honor to the tuitiō of almighty God, who increase in you his loue, and feruente zeale, in knowlege. Amen.

