


Most gracious Prince:
WHILST with mournful eye I often viewed the deepe and long continued distresse of your dearest sister, and of her royall Lord, it gaue me occasion to inquire into the equitie of their cause, which in all impartiall judgemēt shal be found so just, that they and all that loue them may appeale to God for the pleading of it: but perceiving the successe not to answer the cause, and that some for want of love and some for want of judgement, did judge the cause by the events; I went, with David, into the sanctuary whence I discovered the causes of their calamitie (notwithstan∣ding of the goodnesse of the cause) namely the all-wise God to be the chiefe workman, who putteth every one into the refining pot that he appoints for his treasurye, they and theirs, and in them especially all the families of God to be the gold; Aegipt or Babilon to be the sornace; the Ama∣lekits
to be the fewell or fire-workemen; the croaking frogges to be the bellowes; and the purging and refining of his owne people to be the worke. Vpon this discovery be∣tweene love and feare (yea out of more love then skill I must confesse) I undertooke the framing of this modell of the sacred War; wherein I handle at large the particulars of the said discovery as they doe occur in their proper places. Heerin brieflie, by way of application, I haue laid the parti∣culiar passages of both sides to the generall rules illustrated by the fittest examples (that my reading would affoord me) that the regularitie or obliquitie of euery passage may appeare. I haue laid open (according to my small skill) the pandmicall diseases of warr, together with the remedies: by the way, I haue touched vpon domestick affaires: and in all this course I haue made the sacred word the loadstone, the compasse, and the lesbian rule, whereby to square and direct all the rest. This I presumed to dedicate to their Highnesses: be∣cause they are the speciall parties (as the Lord speaketh) that haue seene affliction by the Rod of Gods wrath:
Lam. 3. but considering how they and theirs, Gods cause in their hands, and whatso∣ever is commended to them, standeth need both of a pro∣tector and revenger; I was emboldened on the knees of my bounden duetie, and best affection, to intreat your grace that (according to your accustomed favour) you would vouch∣safe to looke into this looking-glasse; and howsoever its vn∣polished ruggednes may rather be discovered by your com∣pleate skill & Heroick experience in Armes, then its abilitie to direct so Princely a Director; yet that sure word where∣with
this glasse is steeled, will both be light to leade you, and strength to make you victorious: and as a Trumpet, though a meane Officer, serveth to rouse the courage of the greatest Commander; so this shall rather give an Alarum to your Mar∣tiall spirit, thē ad to your Highnes literature, courage or skill. Gird on your sword then, Gracious Sir, goe on in the Lord, and for the Lord, and prosper. Our eies are fixed towards God, and then upon you, in te unū oculi omniū conversi: you are the tree, from whose shade the Saints doe looke for shelter, & refresh∣ing, and which shall kill, by Antipathye, the Snakes of Babel. If your Grace would giue me leaue I could lay downe many motives: as first, Gods honor in the dust; Religion at the stake; the healing of the beasts wound, and the setting of Dagon againe upon the stumps. Secondly, it was Iosuahs honor to deliver the craftie Gibionits (once become his con∣federates) from the fiue Kings, whom he put to the sword: what honor shall it be to you to vindicate from disgrace, and wrong a paragon of Princes, a tryed Iewel aboue the patience of her sex, an onely loving and a lovely Sister, a Prince persecu∣ted by the wicked, and deprived of all for the maintenance of the truth; a Princely issue, as deare and neare to you, as Lot was to Abraham: and lastlie, the people of God in an Aegiptian thraldome? Teares here are the best Orators. I will say no more, but as the wife of Intiphernes said to Darius concerning her brother; you can never haue another Sister. Thirdly, that cruell and cursed crew that hunt for their soules, would devoure you and yours, if opportunitie should serve. Fourthly, it shal be your greatest honour to fight Gods
battles, and who knoweth but that you are the man for whom God hath reserved that honor. Charles the great made Rome great; And may not a greater Charles raze Romes greatnes? Concerning the ruine of Rome which must be accomplished by your Princelie name, I commend to your Grace this prophesie;
Imperium, fses; C. fastus seeptra, triumphus,
Quaefuerant; penitus; C. veniente cadent. Fifthly your late, & admirable deliverance out of the paw of the lyon, & out of the Iaw of the Beare, requireth by course that you should encounter with Goliah.
Non potuit perire tāta∣rum lachri∣marā filius. Aug: conf. Lib. 3. c. 12. Tu non in∣venta reper∣ta es. Sir, God thought on you, and on vs in you, when you thought not on your selfe; and blessed be God his name who hath made that principall good, that the sonne of so many prayers could not perish. Yea, wee may truely say to our comfort, that you are found againe. Lastly, your Princely resolution and irrevocable word, hath ingaged you to the service of Sions deliverance: if you should leaue Sion helplesse (which God forbid,) it were in a manner hopelesse. To inlarge these motives to your Grace, were but to bring the gleanings of the grapes to the vintage of your literature and policie; craving therefore pardon for my boldnesse of speech & bluntnesse of phrase, Play my selfe, the subject, and my humble suite at the soote of your Highnesse censure.

