


AFTER I had bent my selfe vnto a serious Suruey and diligent perusall of your Maiesties new Booke, bea∣ring the inscription of a Preface, or Premonition to all Christian Princes, diuers were the apprehensions, and impressions it made in the different faculties of my soule. Reuoluing therefore, and reflecting vpon the premises by a second reuiew, I resolued, and in fine concluded, being now as it were wonderfully affe∣cted, partly with sollace, partly with sollicitude.

2. My solace was to consider, yea sensibly as it were, before the eyes of my soule, in the impartiall glasse of my recollectedst vnderstanding, and most retyred iudgment, to behould so many rare Princely talents of nature, literature, and other highly estee∣med partes in your Maiesty: which as they are sel∣dome found in such potent Princes so residing habi∣tually in your Royall breast, as in their proper and pe∣culiar subiect, they cannot but minister iust matter of meruailous ioy, content, and comfort vnto all your leige people, your loyall, and louing subiects; espe∣cially since they are accompanied, and attended, yea adorned, nay beautifyed with the irradiant lustre of that burning fire of zeale, I meane, an extraordinary feruour in matters of your Religion. Now if these so rare parts of nature, literature, and zeale (wherwith your Noble Person is habitually inuested) shall be di∣rected by the singer of God his holy spirit, & the high hand of heauen, vnto the sole-sacred, and soule-sa∣uing knowledge of Catholicke Religion (which I ve∣rily hope in time to see, and shall incessantly pray for) they will exceedingly aduance his glory, and gaine vnto your Maiesty an immarcessible, & neuer-fading Crowne of eternity.
3. My spirit also reioyced within me, my hart exul∣ted for ioy, & my perplexed thoughts retyred & re∣posed themselues in hope, whē I tooke but a iust view of that commendable carefull diligence, that pious and religious industrie vsed by your Maiesty in vin∣dieating your noble Person from the least imputa∣tion of herefy, and in remouing the very suspition of such a contagious and soule quessing leprosy, since

that this loud-crying synne, loud-crying in the eares of heauen, is the greatest crime that can be commit∣ted against God, or his Church, separating betwixt God and man, grace and the soule, dissoluing the my∣steriall De prae∣script. c. 16. De vnitate Ecclesiae contra Pe∣til. Dona∣tist. c. 2. vnion, and sacramentall communion, be∣twixt the head & the members, Christ & his spouse, reiecting God for Father, denying the Church for mo∣ther, taking away the very name of a Christian, as an∣cient Tertullian speaketh, depriuing our expectation of all hope and saluation, as S. Augustine that great pillar of the latin Church noteth: a sinne, the soule guilt De vnitate Ecclesiae. whereof, nec sanguine abluitur, nec passione purgatur, to close vp the period with that renowned Martyr S. Cy∣prian his wordes.
4. The last, but not the least, nay the greatest cause of my comfort was, when I really apprehended the candor, serenity, humility, and sincerity of your Noble hart, in submitting your selfe, by remitting the tryall, and decision of the foresaid imputation, and suspition of heresie vnto the sacred Canon of holy Writ, common Creedes, the first foure generall Councels, and the blessed Fathers of the first foure or fiue hundred yeares: to all which vpon an assured (I may rather say a supposed) innocency & integrity of your cause, you appealed for the finall vmpiring, and determining of any point in controuersy betwixt the Catholicks and your Maiesty. Which impartiall and substantiall grounds, as they were very prudētly, reli∣giously, and with great maturity of iudgment propo∣sed by your Maiesty, according to the greatnes, and soundnes of your Iudicious Apprehension: so if they shall stand inuiolable, and irreuocable, like to the law

of the Medes, & Persians, which could not be altered, backed by the word & authority of so potent a Prince as your Maiesty is, which may not be reuoked, for the word is gone forth from the King; you shall not only a∣uert, and auoid all sinister imputation, and suspition whatsoeuer from your Royall Person: but withall, you Dan. 6. 17. shall giue a sufficient testimony by publike declaratiō of your Maiesties gratious disposition for matter of religion. And that if ought haue bene exorbitant, extrauagant or irregular in matter of your beliefe, it is rather to be ascrybed to your violent education, then anyway to be imputed to your owne voluntary obdu∣ration. These things were of wonderfull comfort, & exceeding solace vnto me.
5. But in the midst of this sweet repose. whilst my wearied, and perplexed thoughts seemed to refresh themselues with some kind of promised hope vpon the forsaid premises: behold diuers other pointes of great anxietie, & sollicitude interposed themselues, nay sud∣dainly interrupted my former solace; I meane not ge∣nerally such pointes of your Maiesties Booke, as may concerne other Christian Princes, people, and States, how these thinges would be taken amongst them (for in this behalfe I might not presume to preiudice your Maiestyes Graue Wisedome, and I could not but imagine, but that your Maiesty out of the depth of your owne Prouident Iudgement had duely, and prudently preponderated all such probable ensuing sequeles, and taken farre better counsaile then myne could be:) but such as particulerly respected, and by necessary deduction of a certaine ineuitable consequence, reflected properly vpon my selfe.

For wheras I had with the greatest deliberation that I could possibly imagine, grounded vpon my owne peculiar experience of many yeares trauayle in the sa∣cred volumes of Orthodoxe Antiquity, made before a firme irreuokable resolution to abandon the Prote∣stant Religion vpon inuincible arguments of great so∣lidity, and notorious discouery of execrable blasphe∣my, palpable and detestable heresy, against God, his Christ, his Church, his Saints: building my founda∣tion vpon the mayne rocke of Auncient Primitiue Church, Canonicall Scripture, truly sensed by them, Creedes and Councels, digested, collected, establi∣shed by them; I now descried that your Maiestie in∣tended to ground the cleane contrary Plea vpon the same heades for vindication of the protestant Religiō from the guilty crime of heresy: the very intimation whereof inforced me (I confesse before the all-seeing iudge, and vnto your Soueraigne Maiesty my suprea∣me terrene Lord next vnder him) to looke about me, and to enter into a second, and more serious conside∣ration, and meditation of the foresaid heades againe, least I might happily in a matter of the greatest mo∣ment and weightiest consequence in this world, haue runne awry, to the euerlasting wracke, and ruine of my soule.
6. Now for ought that may concerne your Ma∣iesties Royall Person, touching the imputation of he∣resie, let that loud-crying sinne of open Rebellion a∣gainst the soueraignty of heauen rather light vpon the enemies of God, his Christ, his Church, and the enemies of my Soueraigne, then vpon my Lord the King, whom the God of Angels make as an An∣gell

of God to discerne betwixt hereticall noueltie, and Catholicke antiquity. In the meane time I find no difficulty, nay I do with all alacrity and sin∣cerity of soule admit the difference betweene an Hereticke, and him that giueth credit vnto Hereticks; which S. Augustine admitted in the behalfe of his friend Honoratus, seduced by the Donatists, as your Maiesty is supposed to be mis-led by Prote∣stants. It is in that excellent Tract of his de vtilita∣te credendi, written to his said friend. Si mihi, Ho∣norate, vnum atque idem videretur esse Haereticus & credens Haereticis homo, tam lingua, quàm stylo in hac causa conquiescendum esse arbitrarer &c. Cùm haec ergo ita sunt, non putaui apud te silendum esse &c. If I were perswaded, O Honoratus, that an Here∣ticke, and the man who doth belieue Hereticks were all one, and that there were no difference, I should suppose that I might spare both tongue and penne in this point. But now since there is no small dif∣ference betwixt the two (forasmuch as he is an he∣reticke in my iudgement, who for some temporall commodity, and especially for renowne, and so∣ueraignty, eyther bringeth forth false, and new opinions of himselfe, or els adhereth vnto them that are brought forth by others: but he that giueth cre∣dulity to these kynd of men is such a one as is de∣luded with a certaine imagination of verity, and pie∣tie:) wherefore these thinges being so, I haue thought good not to be silent, or to hold my peace with you, what my iudgment is concerning the finding out, and retaining of truth.
7. We then, that be your Maiestyes Catholicke Sub∣iects,

dutifull in mind, though different in iudgment, do out of the aboundance of our most loyall affection, and to mitigate matters what may be, vntill Almighty God of his infinite goodnes shall vouchsafe to put fur∣ther remedy in your vnderstanding hart by a more cleare reuealing of his truth, most cheerfully, and cha∣ritably fasten vpon that pious, religious & true distin∣ction of S. Augustine, not ascribing that hatefull name of Hereticke vnto your Maiesty, howsoeuer you seeme for the present to adhere and patronize such opinions of Protestant Religion, as we vpon contrary groundes of Catholicke diuinity do hold to be heresies: but rather we esteeme your Maiesty for a Prince, that from your natiuity, and tender in∣fancy (after the vnfortunate losse of your thirce Noble Catholicke Mother) haue byn misguyded in matters of Religion by such as had your Noble Per∣son in their gouerment, whome yow haue belieued, and consequently haue byn deceyued, imaginatione quadam veritatis, & pietatis illusus, to end the sen∣tence with S. Augustine his wordes.
8. And heere in all dutifull submission as a true English-harted man and loyall subiect to his Soue∣raigne, I most humbly prostrate my selfe at your Ma∣iesties Princely feete, beseeching you, euen out of that Royall disposition & Princely benignity of good nature, wherwith Almighty God hath byn pleased plentifully to enrich you: First that you will vouch∣safe to heare these pointes or heades seuerally, and soundly debated and discussed by the equall match & tryall of learned men on both sides, either your Ma∣iestyes naturall subiects or strangers, as shall best likeyou,

and by no mans perswasion or disswasion to go backe from so Honorable an offer already made vnto the whole Christian world: and secondly not to con∣demne me of any audacious, or head-long presump∣tion in this my interprize, tending only to Gods glory, and your owne soule-sauing Honour: Nor yet lastly, in the meane space, to take in euill part, or si∣nister sense this my charitable, and well-meaning attempt, of laying some moderate, and modest Con∣siderations before your iudicious, & graue Wisdome. And the rather I presume to begge this at your Maie∣sties hands, since I haue resolued to limit my discourse within the lists, and boundes of those foure principall heads, mentioned by your Maiesty, and worthy of eternall memory.
9. And if vniust causes now and then, vpon due conuincing circumstances, admit a iust defence, then pardon me (dread Soueraigne) and giue me leaue to bring my most iust defēce vnto so iust a cause. I want not reasons of the greatest weight to induce me. For first my owne interest of soule goeth therein highly impawned, and engaged in this very point, as hauing (amongst other my motiues) made my owne resolution for matter of Religion, vpon the consideration, and foundation of these most Ca∣tholick groundes, to wit, of Scriptures, Creeds, Coun∣cels, and ancient Fathers) and therefore it impor∣teth me not a litle (touching me so neerely) to looke them ouer againe, since the euer-liuing weale, or neuer-dying wo of my soule dependeth necessarily therupon. And secondarily, my loyall duety vnto your Maiesty, and charity to my natiue Countrey∣men

pleadeth for my defence: and this is such, that it inforceth me to encounter all kind of difficultyes in the vndergoing of this busines. For since vpon my second reuiew of the former foure groundes, I found that no other foundation could be layd, no other rule of faith deuised by any, no Angell from heauen teaching the contrary, to be belieued. For, quod v∣num est, verum est; & verum, quod nonvariat, ac∣cording to that most sure and ancient prescription, I thought my selfe in all conscience and duety, both before God and man, obliged to impart the same with your Maiesty, being my naturall borne Prince, King, Father, Lord, and Soueraigne, and I your dutifull & deuoted Subiect.
10. Finally, if that renowned Moralist Plutarch compiled a speciall Treatise to instruct a man how he should reape benefit vnto himselfe, euen by the admonitions, & endeauours of his professed enemies: If that perfect patterne of patience Iob (for so the Scripture decyphereth him vnto vs) pleading his innocency out of the integrity of his conscience, and appealing vnto the Tribunall of heauen for an impartiall doome, insinuateth vnto vs by way of demaund, that he listened vnto the counsaile of his seruant or handmaid, contending with him: his words as they lye in the English are expo∣stulatory, If I haue refused the counsaile of my ser∣uant or hand-maid contending with me? And the an∣swere implied, is negatiue, that he had not, as eui∣dently appeareth by his summoning himselfe to the barre of diuine iustice: How much rather should we accept the same from our friends, and how much

more so great a Monarch as your Maiesty is, may be pleased to take in good part the dutifull counsayle of such of your loyall Subiects, who from their inner∣most soules wish all possible good, euen externall, in∣ternall, & eternall prosperity vnto your Maiesty, not∣withstanding any malicious clamours, suggestions, detractions, and calumniations of Aduersaries to the contrary; or any difference of iudgment on parts in matters of religion. Wishing and praying with pure handes, and innocent hartes, lifted vp vnto Almighty God, that this may be one, and the selfe same also in tyme; that as there is but one God, one faith, one baptisme, and one Lord IESVS CHRIST, which is aboue all, and in all, and ouer all: so there may be but one vnion, and communion in Catholicke Christian Religion: that is, one Catholicke Mother Church for euery sin∣full wandring, and distressed soule to fly vnto for her spirituall repose, that after our sea-faring peregri∣nation we may all arriue safely in the hauen of Heauen.
11. To conclude, of this number of subiects do I ioyfully professe my selfe to be, most since∣rely promysing and protesting vnto your Maiesty by the faith of a Catholicke Christian, the only interest whereby I hope to lay clayme to heauen, that I am in verity and indeed, without all fraud or collusion, euen such a one, as sincerely I haue set downe my selfe heere to be: that is, neyther Priest nor Iesuite, nor yet of any other Religious Order, but only of the Order, and Society of the English Ministry, whereof I was made by a Bi∣shop

of your Maiesties Realme, and licenced to preach by publicke authority for diuers yeares to∣geather: wherein as I trauailed painfully, so I should haue continued constantly, had I not euidently discouered, euen in Caluin the first authour of that schisme, and in all his followers, nouelty, herefy, blasphemie, insteed of antiquity, verity, piety. And albeit my iudgment in Religion, now must needes be changed from theirs, vnlesse to the eternall per∣dition of my soule, I should with a guilty con∣science fight against heauen, in fighting against the knowne Catholicke truth (as I feare me too many of the learneder sort of Protestants in Eng∣land do:) yet remayne I still, and euer shall, by God his sauing grace, with all dutifull obseruance towards your Maiesty: out of which duty of a subiect, towards his soueraigne I shall incessantly powre forth my prayers and teares before the throne of heauen, & implore the God of Truth to lead your Maiesty into all truth: that you may heere according to that high place, wherin God hath set you, help to reare vp the ruines of the Church militant, that you may become a glorious member of the triumphant.
12. And now hauing bene longer, and more pro∣lixe in this my Epistle dedicatory, then at the begin∣ning I had purposed, I shall most humbly supplicate your said Excellent Maiesty to licence me for a time to depart from your Royall Presence, and to turne my speach to the Christian Reader, in treating of the heades that are to be handled. For so much as it see∣meth not conuenient for me to continue my speach for so long time vnto your Maiesties own Person: but

rather with due reuerence, declining the same, to lay forth before the discreet Reader, these things which seeme to me to be of most consideration and ponderation, in the points proposed by your Maiesty: whereby many may be informed, though one be na∣med. And with this I beseech the Highest euer with his eternall Protection to preserue your Maiesty, to his greatest glory, and the true comfort of your loyall Subiects. So be it.
Amen.
