



AS Hanna dedi∣cated her Sa∣muel, a Naza∣rite, to her God at Shilo, so am I bold at your intreaty to se∣parate this mine Anna, a Pro∣phetesse to the Lord at Ie∣rusalem: and do pray 

may passe vnder the shelter of your worshipfull prote∣ction. The Saint is but home∣ly arrayed, and not for these curious daies wherein wee liue: and in which the Son, though clad with glory: yet cannot runne it course, but with censure either of too high a pitch, and then it burneth, or of too lowe a being, and so it heateth not. Atheists, Papists, and Liber∣tynes, will censure my plain∣nesse both in matter of faith and fact, I looke for no o∣ther but to feele their pier∣cing eye, and venomous tooth: yet if I escape in some measure the sorrow of my

Sauiour sighing, and saying: Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends;Zach. 13.6 I make lesse reckoning of those that are without.
Haply the Title of the booke may seeme strange, and from the subiect therein handled; but if you thinke vpon the Ladder Iacob saw in the way to Padan-aram, whose first step was on earth, and last step in heauen, you will finde that none can at∣taine perfection aboue, but first his feete must stand in the Lords presence belowe. It was Anna her holy haunt, she frequented the Church here, that she might come to

blessednesse there, we may not leap out of our mothers wombe into our fathers ioy: but wee must goe by staires from the Temple of grace, to the Tower of glory.
In the meane time this is yours, and so am I in all duty and deuotion obliged, by many your respectiue fa∣uours to me, and mine, from you and yours. Nor doe I hope you will conceiue the length, breadth, and depth of the loue I beare you, can euer bee contained within the circle of these fewe lines. Epistles, and papers may point at more loue then they can expresse: but the

heart is the closet that kee∣peth all, how euer these pa∣pers speake. And so I leaue you, with my very good Lady your wife, and all yours to the mercifull pro∣tection of the Almightie. From London. this 14. of December. 1608.

