



IT is with me (Right Wor∣shipfull▪ Sr.) in this my la∣bour, as it was with Phi∣neas wife, at the birth of1. Sam, 4▪ 21. &c. her Ichabod, who when they said to comfort her, thou hast borne a Sonne, she answered not, nor regarded it, in respect she thought so small a gaine could neuer re∣deeme so great a losse. This poore Posthu∣mus borne at your Fathers funeralls, I haue

euer since regarded the lesse, for that my losse was in it life, nor should it euer haue seene more light, had not your place ouer-awed me, and much instance drawne it on, vrging it often as a pledge of my loue towards him that gon is, and a Christian kindenes to those that remaine. In lieu of both, I could not but bring it foorth, and lay it in the lappe of your fauourable protection, yet accounting it my hard happe, I should with the poore GadarenMark, 5, 2, 3. 4, 5. thus still haunt the graues of the dead, and wound my selfe with the stones of their Se∣pulchres.Eccles, 7, 4 How be it, if it be better to goe into the house of mourning, then of mirth, and that who sowe in teares shal reape in ioy, I wilPsa, 126. 5 repose my selfe in this, (that since I could dis∣cerne what it was to loose a friend) I haue had my part of such dolefull Musicke, and therefore may expect a ioyfull croppe of that sowing. But to leaue the dead and to come to the liuing, your zeale to God, (good Sir) with the loue of his truth, in the Religion of his Sonne Christ, for which neither your arme hath been wearie to fight abroade, nor your tongue to pleade at home, ouer and besides your vndelayed prouision of a skilfull Beza∣leel, to build vp your owne house and neigh∣borsExod. 31. 2

souls about you: As these may be much to your comfort, so are they greatly to my ioy: for that in sorte, I may say with the Apostle, in Christ Iesus I haue begotten you. These1. Co, 4, 1 blessed buds of religion appearing in Oxford, when first I knewe you, and had the care of their groth committed vnto mee, from your carefull Father that gone is, now spreading as Ceders in the readie and ripe practise of pietie and Godlines, doe make mee not onely thankefull to God therefore, but right ioyfull I may vndergoe any duetie to answere your loue, or further your faith: and therefore haue made bolde (sith so you will haue it) to put into your Religious heart & bosome, this Christian Watch. The watch is Iobes, onelie the winding vp is mine, as God hath directed the finger, so it goeth: and (as I trust) truelie, to all such of Gods Saints as expect with patience the blessed day of their change by death or doome: And if I haue failed in the compasse of any wheele, as it may bee I haue, for what am I but dust and ashes, toGe, 18, 2 Gal, 6,  pleade with my God? yee which are spiritual reforme it, and restore mee with the Spirit of meekenes, considering your selues, least ye al∣so bee tempted. And the Lord of his mercie,

multiplie his blessings more and more vppon you, keepe you euer vnder his holy and hel∣ping hand of prouidence and protection, with my verie good Lady your Vine, and all your O liue branches. From Standish the 1. of Ia∣nuarie. 1602.

