



MADAME,
I Am bolde to put into your Princely hands this Balme of Gilead, a Newe-yeares guifte, of an olde-yeares store, powred vpō the head of Queene Elizabeth, in her life, and now againe sh vpō her sacred hearse, after her death, the iniqui of the time requi∣ring a rescue of her  soule, from the vi∣rulent tongue of Popi pietie, then which I am verily perswaded, there was neuer malice vpon the earth more implacable.
Sanguine placactis ventos & virgine caesa: the boysterous windes (as poets faine) were stilled with virgins blood, but here no virgins blood, no Princes blood, no martyrs blood, no Sauiours blood, can quench the fire and furie of popish indignation, or appease their God Apollyon, who pitieth neither sex, nor age, per∣son, or presence, be they quicke, or be they dead, all is one. Bucers bones must he burned, and the sacred soule of Queene Elizabeth, her Ma∣nes, spirit, and ghost, may not passe to blisse, without a blast of Parsons poysoned penne, and breath, thinking it not sufficient to glut them∣selues with the blood of their Soueraignes, vn∣lesse with their buried bones they might ran∣sacke their blessed soules.
Witnesse the moderne doctrine of these our daies, divulged by Dolman, Benedetto Pal∣mio, Haniball, Codrotto, Guicknard, Am∣brose Vyrard, Mariana, and others of that Ie∣suited crewe, who hold it not onely lawfull and meritorios to kill Kings (if they be not pleasing to their deuotions) but ith all an heroicall acte, and a gift of the holy ghost, which Raue∣lacke their designd agent ately put in practise vpon his lige Lord, the King of France, by no essesatall then mortall stabbe. This their dam∣nable

doctrine, bloodie stroake, and poysone breath, against the liues and soules of Princes haue made mee to reuise my papers, and with Iames, to looke backe vpon my former thoughts, how vpon the view they might frame in opposi∣tion against these more then heathenish, and no lesse then hellish designes, whose thirst is neuer quenched but with the blood of their Soue∣raignes, nor gorge euer filled, but with the grosse viandes of popish bull, and indulgence, pardo∣ning from time to time their damnable agents to subuert states, by two of the last and most dange∣rous stratages that euer were deuised against the Church of Christ, Parricide, and Periurie, thereby taking away all faith from God, fealtie from Princes, and commerce with men. And whats that other, but the breeder of all wic∣kednes, the mother of mischiefe, and Babel of all confusion.
Time was when an Angell durst not re∣proue a diuell, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. Now Iesuited diuels dare reproue An∣gels sent from God to be our Soueraignes, and say, Rauelacke may kill thee.
Time was when none might touch the Lords annoynted, or doe his prophets any harme. Now popish powder may blow vp, popish knife may kill,

and popish brambles may teare the flesh of Kings.
Time was when Rulers were regarded, and Kings had their Maiesties, quicke and dead, as the Royall Chappell of Westminster can witnes, euen frō their Diademes, downe to their dust. But now Iesuited crueltie may crush all rule, burst the bandes of all obedience, curse Kings, ouer-awe authoritie, & are so farre from honouring the shrines and maiestie of Princes here on earth, as they haue not spared to maligne their soules in heauen. In a word trust them, who will, and they shall finde their doome is still for death, their drumme for destruction, and their march in the cry of Edome, Downe with it, downe with it, euen to the ground.
A man would haue thought they might haue spared her soule, whose body they could neuer still, with more then thousand intended trea∣sons against her state, and person, by poyson, stabb, and shot: by forraine inuasions, home∣rebellions, and domesticall incumbrances, from all which the Lord still made her glorious by deliuerance. And now her soule being tied in the bundle of the liuing, and she gathered vnto her fathers in peace, they cannot spare to banne what God hath blessed.
I shall not neede to stand in defence either of her sacred life, or death, whose saued soule the heauen of heauens doth now possesse. Neither shall I neede to beate backe his poysoned breath, who now is breathlesse, & knoweth by this what it is to haue touched the Lords annoyned, either in her life, or in her death, that hellish breath is beaten backe by guste and gale of a more hea∣uenly aire: and fully answered by two reuerend fathers of our Church: diuines of worth, whom the pride of poperie may enuie, but shall neuer match otherwise then (as their manner is) with the ume, feathers, and froth of their owne in∣untions, lighter then vanitie it selfe. For were their pennes as perillous as their powder, the shot were more dangerous, but (to God be the praise) truth hath discouered their penne of ignorance, and their powder of treason. My purpose is not to stirre Elizabeths sacred hearse, whose graue is full of Princely earth, and her obsequies are ended, my thoughts are higher euē to match her Manes in blisse, with greatest of Soueraignes there (Soueraigntie it selfe onely excepted) I meane with Dauid, Iosua, and Ezekia, guides, and Kings of Israels Iudah.
Pardn me (gracious Lady) if I put this vn∣dr the sheltr of your highnesse protection, Sem∣blance

of sexe, name and blood, together with your high place, person, and pietie, craueth no lesse at your Princely hands, then protection of her shrine, and Ghost. Shee a Kings daughter, so are you: shee a maiden Queene, you a Virgin Prince: her name is yours, her blood is yours, her carriage is yours, her countenance yours, like pietie towards God, like pittie towards men: one∣ly the difference stands in this; that the faire flower of her youth is fallen; yours flourisheth like a Rose of Saram, and a Lilly of the Valley. Her dayes are determined on earth, and begun in heauen; yours are a doing on earth: and bles∣sed be the current till they bee ended: euer may your happinesse growe together, and make you blessed with that immortall crowne, that withe∣reth not.
The Sermons I here present, were preached vnder the shadowe of her blessed gouernment▪ and in the three last yeares of her gracious raigne. When (if God of the surplusage of his loue towards this English nation had not ended one mercy with the beginning of another) I feare our mourning dayes had not beene yet ended. But God almightie without whose prouidence nothing proceeds, and without whose mercy no∣thing is saued, hath ended one bessing with the

beginning of another, euen the blessed raigne of Queene Elizabeth, with the thrice happie go∣uernment of our Liege Lord, and King, your fa∣ther, in whom the flowers florish, and the King∣domes are vnited, Religion prospereth, and su∣perstition withereth, with a Royall issue euer to liue, the onely remaine of our religious hope. One is easily ouercome, and two will make resi∣stance, but this threefold gable is not lightly broken, being beautifull as the bands of Zacha∣ry, wherewith the Church is honoured, the State is strengthened, the subiect is comforted, and our soueraigne Lord the King your father, no lesse blessed in his three children, then in his three Kingdomes. The Lord God of heauen, maker of Kings, and directer of Crownes, giue vnto you all grace in this life, and glory in a better.
Amen. Amen.

