


TO one, of the two papers which you had from me long agoe, you haue shaped, as it seemeth, a kind of answere; yet not an answere neither, for you send him that would haue one, to looke it in other men that are in print. For my part, I was not willing at the sight of yours (which I espied by meere chaunce, and neuer sawe but once) to be made an Aprill foole, and there∣fore would not be so farre at your commaund. Yet to declare that I was not satisfied, Presumed the chiefe question, out of which the rest are easilie re∣solued; and disputed it more at large: putting downe the conclusions together with their grounds; and maintaining them against that which your self, or your abettors haue obiected. I endeuoured to do this briefly; but it so fared with me in this intelle∣ctuall businesse, as it doth with such as breede: the child in the natiuitie is much bigger then at the conception: the matter I speake of heere, hath an inward inclination to dilate it self, and whilst I was writing, the discourse prooued a booke. VVhere
 vppon, being withall desirous to impart it to my frinds, I determined to multiply my coppies by the print, when I could spare money to discharge it. As I was expecting that opportunitie, ano∣ther occasion, arising out of the late persecution, solicited me, to let it, without more delay, come abroade: and I haue yeelded thereunto, though not without diffitcultie. I will not addresse the thing particularly against you, partly because I dispute also against others, with whom I haue ex∣changed some papers as I did with you, and am willing (if it may be) to be heard where they are: partly because your discourse was not a direct an∣swere to that I sent: and a posting direction of half a sheete of paper, had beene as much, as in way of reply, it could deserue from me, or any other. You had handled the matter so, that in∣deede, I doubed whether I were the man you meant by the name there put downe: you knew me by another; and whether I had euer vsed that, I could not then readily call to mind. You will say peraduenture, that a circumstance tied your tongue. This may be: and therefore, bearing re∣spect that way too, I will discouer you no further, but leaue you at your liberty: though otherwise, being out of the Kingdome, I might be more open then I am. You haue infinitely wronged your owne soule, in offering to drawe men from the communion
 the Church: and to leade them into heresies, oppo∣site directly to the word of God, and accursed by the holy Ghost. Trouble not your self any further to dresse vp ould shifts, that haue beene worne out long agoe. If you cannot prooue your cause positiue∣ly (as none euer yet could, or will doe as long as God is truth) hold your peace. The more you main∣taine heresie, the deeper a lodging you bespeake your self in hell. That you may escape that gulphe, I shewe you heere S. Peeters Shippe fairely vnder saile towards eternitie: and will reach you my hand, if you wil come into it.

