



THE life of man (most illustrious Prince and Princesse) is said by God himselfe to be full of trouble; yea,
Iob 14.2. the Humanists term it (and that truely) rather a trouble then a life.
. Vt sevis projectas ab undis jacet infans in∣digus om∣ni vitali auxio. Lu∣cr. lib 6. Diog. La∣ert. lib 9, in vita ipsius. This needeth no other proofe then woefull experi∣ence through all the parts of mans life. The Poet pretily Emblemes our infancy with a ship broken Marriner, cast naked, hurt, and helplesse from the waues upon the shore, be∣wraying with woefull cryes the rest of the passages answera∣ble to the beginning. If the consideration hereof, made that great Philosopher Democritus weep continually; what heart of flesh, and eye of pittie, can from the promontorie of our present security, without a floud of teares, behold the wether∣beaten Barke of Gods Church, over which (to use the phrase of the Psalmist) all the waues,
Psl. 42.8. and billows of the Lord doe passe; yea, one deep so calleth for another, that if God himselfe were not the Ararat to rest upon, it should be
split in peeces upon the rockes of Shittim.
Quorum pars magna fui. A great part of this distresse, your Graces are: therefore for mine own part, I could wish with Ieremy, That my head were full of water,
Jer. 9.1. and mine eyes were a fountain of teares: Jn the Christall nature wherof, while I looked for the cause of this evill, that memorable passage of defeated Pompey, did offer it selfe to my meditation. An approved Author telleth us, that Pompey being defeated in the Pharsalick battell, as he fled to Aegypt, hee took off tht way to visit the Philosopher Cratippus, whom curiously he questioned, whe∣ther at all there were any divine Providence or Moderation of humane things or not. For his own part he could hardly be perswaded, that God regarded those sublunary things, because he had the worse in the better cause. The Philosopher answered, that there was a full period appointed to King∣doms, beyond which they could not passe. The answer and the question now I passe, because I shall haue occasion in the Treatise further to explane them. But may it please your Highnesse to obserue thus much, that if flesh and bloud, or meere philosophy, be guide in this inquisition, a good man may loose himselfe: for not onely doth the Athiest, from the adversity of the godly, and prosperity of the wicked; pe∣remptorily conclude,
Mal. 3.14. that it is in vain to serue God; but even the Saints of God, forgetting their Logick, haue stumbled upon the like Paralogism,
Ps. 63.4.5.6, &c. Witnesse the Prophet David in that psalm, where he compareth the peace, plenty and pros∣perity of the wicked, with the adverse and contrary things which doe befall the people of God: Waters (saith he) of a
full cup are wrung out to them. Where both the quality and quantity of affliction is laid open. Vpon this the people of God are said to turn in, that is David and others, namely to the thoughts following, Is it thus with us? Hence they ga∣ther this false conclusion, How doth God know, &c. Sure∣ly in vain I haue cleansed my heart, &c. But this they doe in their phrensie, a sympton of the fever of their affliction, which David acknowledgeth with censuring of himselfe in the same psalm, v. 15.21.22. If your Majesties heart hath been leve∣ned (for so the word doth signifie, v. 21.) with any such temptation; be not discouraged, there hath no temptation taken you but such as hath befallen the servants of God. Goe with David to the sanctuary, and there you shall see the cause of your affliction, and your enemies successe for a time, namely, to work, Your tryall, & their destruction. In the mean time (renowmed Princes) the Lord biddeth you goe on; Speak unto the children of Israel that they goe forward.
Ex 14.15. As we cease not to our power, to fill the golden censor with odors,
Rev. 8. that it may be filled againe with fire and cast upon the earth, (that is Gods and your enimies;)
Cicero de crator. Hu∣tarch. in Hannib. . so I haue presu∣med (though the least of all) to present your Highnesse with a model or draught of the holy Warre indeed, with an earnest intreatie, not to faint or giue over till God giue the victory. If an experienced Souldier shall censure this Frame as Hamball did Phormio, for his lecture of Militarie Disci∣pline, with the livery of a fool; or as Archidamus did Pe∣riander, who of a good Phisitian, made himselfe by his evill favored Verses an extreme evill Poet: let him obserue
well, and I hope hee shall finde no wrong offered to his Element As for the meannesse of the Frame, your graci∣ous acceptance, as a stately Roofe, shall cover all the de∣formitie. Jn great things it is enough to will: as Princes are Gods, so in this they resemble him, to respect the good will more then the work. If I can bring but Goats haire to couer the outside of the Tabernacle; or wield but a sling against the Goliah of Babylon, or bring but some odors to the Censor of your annoynted selues and yours, it shall com∣fort me, and happily encourage others to shew the way more fully, at the which I haue pointed. Whatsoever it is, I am bold to present it to your Highnesses joynt protection. You are together, the subject of calamity; yea, the But and point blanke whereat they aim: You are joyntly together prayed for, that the Lord would plant you, as hee hath plucked you up, and giue you double joy for your sorrow, and glory for your confusion: yea, that you may not onely be built up, but that you may joyntly build up Jerusalem, which is the praise of the world. In the mean time gracious Princes, possesse your soules in patience; For the patient wayting of the righteous shall not alwaies be forgotten.

