


SIR
WHen a doubt is pro∣posed out of a desire to knowe the truth, I must not (being cal∣led vpon) be wanting to pro∣fesse what I haue learned and do beleeue: but if it comes out of a curious humor of contra∣dicting, I can dispose of my time better then to spend it in disputes. What your mind is, you reserue as your secret; yet not so secret neither but that I perceaue something of it. Your deliberation, might I be of
 your counsell, should quicklie be concluded.
He takes the safe way that followes the direction of the Church. That Church I mea∣ne, which all times could point at; and which all Hereticks haue opposed. You know that nei∣therMar. vlt. Ioan. 3. Apoc. 21. Tim. 3. Ga∣lat. 5. vide S. Aug. li. 4. con. Donat Hereticks nor1. Cor. 12 Col. 2. Gal. 5. Vide S. Aug. Ep. 152. & de vnit. Eccl. c. 4. Firmissimè tene & nullatenus dubites, non so∣lum omnes Pa∣ganos, sed etiam omnes Iudaos, Haereticos, atque Schismaticos, qui extra Eccle∣siam Catholicā praesentem finiūt vitam, in ignem aternum ituros, qui paratus est diabolo & an∣gelis eius. S. Fulg. de Fide ad Pet. c. 38. inter Op. S. Aug. t. 3. Of the grieuous∣nes of the cri∣me of Schis∣me see S. Aug. li. 2. contra Donatistas. Schis∣matiks (one wanting charitie, the other faith too,) be in state of saluation. These, and such like things, you can weigh, your self. And, where the min∣de is not ill disposed, the reso∣lution is most easie. Prudence neuer sticks at such a matter.
If your hinderance be that onlie which is insinuated, I shall willinglie shew you how you may remoue it. Go the Ca∣tholike waie: that, is secure. Seeke no by-waies.
Suppose you might be ma∣de Arch-bishop of Canterbu∣rie,
 vpon condition that you would go to Lābeth on foote; and that there were some dan∣ger, yet no great dāger neither, of loosing your purse (without further harme) if you tooke the common way ouer the bridge. Would you stay, till winter, that you might go wi∣thout that difficultie, in grea∣ter perill: and then, hearing Themse to be frozen, presen∣tlie (before they durst venture who told you so,) take your iourney ouer the ice? A wise man would not vēture his life and all, in that manner; to saue two or three, ten or twē∣tie peices: being presentlie to receaue a thousand if he came to Lambeth safe, and euer af∣ter to liue in great aboundan∣ce. Yet your case is more des∣perate. You know that in hea∣uen you shall receaue at your
 entrance the possession of an eternall kingdome, with a cro∣wne of glorie amongst Angels in immortalitie. The common way thither is the Catholike, which way if you take, you cō∣ceaue the danger of being a little taxed in your purse; and you think you heare some tell you, there is an other waie, but nice and ticklish: wherein those who speak, themselues durst not venture; because if it miscarrie, soule and bodie and Heauen and all, is lost, by a fault ofQuisquis ab hac Catholica Ecclesia fuerit separatus, quā∣tumlibet lauda∣biliter se viuere existimet, hoc solo scelere quod à Christi vnita∣te disiunctus est, non habe¦bit vitam; sed ira Dei maret super eum. S. August. Epist. 52. Schisme, which o∣pens into a downefall that ends not but (where there is no end at all) in Hell.
To venture your bodie ouer a deepe riuer vpon a bridge of thinne brittle glasse, and to venture your soule ouer Hell∣mouth vpon a ticklish opi∣nion, which is worse? He that
 loueth danger (the Scripture saith) shall perish in it.Eccles. . What speake I of an opinion? When your imagination doth cease from working, no bridge at all appeares: you are but in a dreame.
But, were there two or three, who did (against the rest, and against the knowne practice of the Church,) a∣uouch what you pretend, would you venture your soule (whilst worlds of learned men bid you take heed) vpon their word? Perpetuall torment a∣mong the damned spirits, is a matter of that horrour, that wisedome would seeke the safest waie to decline it: and he that could see heauen a far of, with those inexplicable oyes that are in it, would think on nothing els but the securest way thither; and feare nothing
 more then to misse it.
Were you to purchase a tem∣porall estate or inheritance for your child, you would not venture your mony vpon a ti∣tle, which the practice of the kingdome doth dislike and which Lawiers commonlie say is naught; though two or three should tell you that it were a good title: much lesse in securing to your owne soule an eternall inheritance, should you be contented to re∣lie vpon the Authoritie of two or three (were there such) the rest, with the generall Spirit Gods people, contradicting and anathematizing such as proceede in that manner.
That Catholikes are against you, generallie, in this point you know. They communi∣cate not with those who d openlie oppose themselues to
 the decrees of Councels oe∣cumenicall. The Councels themselues excommunicate and anathematize them also. And, as manie graue Prelates and learned Deuines as euer esteemed their authoritie suf∣ficient to determine a Contro∣uersie and oblige men to con∣forme their iudgment there∣vnto, (who be innumerable,) so manie do counsell you not to trust vnto these fewe, (sup∣pose you found them;) telling you that if you do you for∣faite heauen.
When a fewe, reputed Schol∣lers, (were they many, were it a whole Nation,) hold a te∣net that is against the Church, their Authoritie doth not ma∣ke itProbabilia sunt quae vidētur om∣nibus, aut pluri∣mis aut sapienti∣bus; & his vel omnibus, velplu∣rimis, vel maxi∣mè familiaribus & probatis. A∣rist. li. 1. To∣pic. c. 1. Nonom∣ne quod videtur probabile, est pro∣babile. Ibidem. probable. The truth of her assertions dependeth not vppon the approbation of euerie one that is in her Com∣munion:
 Much lesse, of others. The Pastors are to teach; and if some of them do chance to for∣goe the truth and leaue it, there is power in theYou remem∣ber the practice of the Church in her first Councells, a∣gainst Arians, Nestorians, &c. rest to define the matter and condemne thē.Docete. Matt. vlt. This Catholikes do know; they be grounded; they take the secure way.
The way which you take is temerarious: it is the same which Heresie doth vsuallie take to spred it self. And in ma∣king choise of it you shew in your self the disposition of a Sectarie. The Sectarie findes an opinion auouched by two or three, against the common, and against the Spirit of the Church generallie: yet, be∣cause it likes him, (for that it is easier to be conceaued, or more agreeable to some phan∣tasie that he hath, or better suting to the libertie which
 he could wish,) he is cōtent to hink the authoritie of those o or three (though the st contradict) sufficient to ake is probable: and then, iud∣ng of the reasons and moti∣es which they bring, as his fections incline him, he thinks  at last, certaine. So did the rians; depending vpon the uthoritie, first of their lea∣ers; and then deeming their otiue (as that, pater maior me ) to be manifestlie against the Church, and for them. Neither be the Leaders them∣selues (Arch-heretickes) wi∣out pretence of authoritie; they cite theFortasse ali∣quisinterroget, An & Haeretici, diuinae Scriptu∣rae testimonijs vtantur? Vtun∣tur planè, & vehemēter qui∣dem; nam vi∣deas eos volate per singulaquae que sanctae le∣gis volumina: per Moysi, per Regum volu∣mina, per Psal∣mos, per Apo∣stolos, per E∣uangelia, per Prophetas. Si∣ue enim apud suos, siue alie∣nos; siue priua∣tim, siue pu∣blice; siue in sermonibus, si∣ue in libris; siue in conuiuijs, siue in plateis: nihil vnquam paenè de suo proferūt, quod non etiam Scri∣pturae verbs adumbrare co∣nentur. Vinc. li∣rin. c. 35. Si quis interroget quē∣piam Haere∣corum sibi talia persuadentem, vnde probas, vnde doces, quod Ecclesiae Catholicae Vni∣uersalem & an∣tiquam fidem dimittere de∣beam? Statim ille mille testi∣monia, mille exempla, mille authoritates parat, de lege, de psalmis, de apostolis, de prophetis; qui∣bus nouo & ma∣lo more inter∣pretatis, ex ar∣ce Catholica in Haereseôs bara∣thrum infoelix anima praecipi∣tetur. Idem c. 37. vbi ostendit eos à diabolo modū istum didicisse; Scriptum est e∣nim. Scriptures, d gleane obscure speaches t of auncient, good writers, which in shewe do make for them.
When a man once takes this ay, he squares out his Reli∣gion
 to himself; or rather he runnes out of all: from one thing to another, from more to fewer points or articles from that he calls probable to lesse and yet lesse and lesse pro∣bable; till at last is he findes himself, most certainlie, in Hell. Faith is a firme assent but his, (if well examined) is not so. It is not diuine faith; he doth but flatter himself and de¦ceaue others, with a shadow If two or three tell him that Councell may mistake (though the rest auouch the contrarie, he is content to think it may and heereupon, presentlie doubts of all, that is so defined Then further, proceeding i the same (sillie) motiue; if th whole Church auouch a thing yet so, as some two or three at some time or other, held th contrarie; he will not belee
 the Church neither, No, nor the Apostles, if any tell him they might erre. A Rainolds, a Whittakers authoritie, makes the contrarie to him probable; and by that time he hath read their bookes, he thinkes him∣self certaine of it. But in the meane while, where is the faith of such a man? where∣vnto doth he giue a firme as∣sent? To the Scriptures? No: their authoritie who denied them, makes him doubt. To the Creed? nor so; the autho∣ritie of two or three serues his turne, and there is nothing in the Creede that more then two or three haue not refused. Arianisme, Nestorianisme, Sa∣bellianisme, Eutichianisme, Pe∣lagianisme, Lutheranisme, Swin∣glianisme, all great Heresies haue had multitudes of abbet∣ors; whereas two or three, ser∣ue
 his turne. Where then is his religion? in his mouth perad∣uenture: but in his heart, well examined, there is none.
Others there be, not so rea∣die to relie indifferentlie vpon the Authoritie of any what∣soeuer esteemed learned; but determined extreamelie vnto one. The Puritan for example, to Iohn Caluin; whom he pre∣fers before the rest all toge∣ther. Wherein he shewes him∣self as extrauagantlie peccant against the light of nature as the former. Amōgst the many principes or Axiomes which reason dictates to the Prudent, this is one, that, in matters of beleefe the greatest Authori∣tie must sway our vnderstan∣ding. He will not denie that this is true, he might as well denie the sunne shines at mid∣daie; but his manner of pro∣ceeding
 doth inuolue a deniall of it. The authoritie of a Coun∣cell entirelie oecumenicall, is greater then the Authoritie of one single man. The greatest chollers haue euer stooped to : yet the Puritan rather be∣leeues Caluin, then such a Councell. Yea rather, then all the knowne Churches in the world, thoughThough so∣me now dissēt, as you for ex∣ample, yet the∣se points haue had the consent of all Christian Churches as many as belee∣ued that our B. Sauiour had true flesh and blood. consenting. As, in the matter of the Masse, vnbloodie Sacrifice, reall Pre∣sence. And what way is there, think you, to deale with such a man? or to what end is it to dispute with him? If you cite Scripture, he will rather take the comment of his Master Iohn, then the definition and tradition howeuer auncient, of the whole Church, deliue∣ring the sence of it. It is so in the point of the Reall presence. And, in admitting the Bookes of




 Scripture too, he will be his owne chooser; and will iudge, himself, which is good and sound and which ought to be discarded.
Vide disput. de Eccles pag. 304.But who shall decide the cō∣trouersie betwixt the Church and him, touching the meaning of that Scripture which he pleaseth to let passe for cur∣rant? The Spirit, no doubt. But, in whom? in the Church or the vniuersitie of beleeuers be∣fore his time? Not so. They might erre he thinkes; and so might all the Councells of Bis∣hops that euer were; and all the Pastors of the world, though consenting; they might all, he thinks, be deceaued. Where then speakes the Iudge he meanes to stand to, when the Controuersie is about the sence of Scripture, or about the sinceritie of the letter? in whom
 speakes the Spirit which he will permit to be his Master? In Master Iohn. So he beleeues; rather thē he will beleeue that he speaketh in the Church.
Now tell me, is not this a strange manner of proceeding in matters appertaining to our eternall estate? to challeng to ones self, or his Master Iohn, au∣thoritie to teach and interprete Scripture, and to denie it to the whole Senate of Catholike Bis∣hops and Pastors, whom God hath giuen to teach diuine doctrine, and to keepe the Church from wauering in such matters? and not onlie to them,Ephes. 4 in what age soeuer, but abso∣lutelie to the Church, without exempting the first Disciples, and Apostles? These for sooth, be the men that in the pulpits crie so lowde, who disestee∣ming the whole world besides,
 obtrude themselues as masters of mankind, each an Oracle.
I know you wash your hands; your words condemne their insolencie: you will not seeme to participate of their fault. But what is in your heart? Are not you too, one of those that abbet a priuate judgment against a publike?
You plead against the po∣wer of the Church to determi∣ne matter of faith in her gene∣rall assemblies; that I see. And I know too, that you punish men for not conforming them¦selues to the determinations of one not generall. Reconcile these if you can. And tell me, if I be not bound to conforme my judgment to the judgment of a Councell when it is per∣fectlie oecumenicall, what shall binde me to conforme it vnto one that is onelie Nationall? if
 the Decrees of the whole Church may be lawfullie refused, what obligeth me in conscience and before God to receaue the De∣crees of your Conuocation?Is euerie sub∣iect bound to be of his Prin∣ces Religion? or is it lawfull for him to subscri∣be against that he knowes to be the truth? Is England, since you began to teach, growne bigger then all the world? is a part (is was not of old so,) bigger then the whole?
In way of excuse for your not subscribing to decrees oecu∣menicall, you plead the Autho∣ritie of some fewe men; (how vniustlie, heareafter it will ap∣peare;) and shall not the Au∣thoritie of farre more, and tho∣se great Schollers, excuse vs in conscience for not subscri∣bing to your priuate Articles wherein be many things gene∣rallie condemned in former ages? To giue instance in one point, that containes many. In your 23. article you determine
 thus, The Sacrifices of Masses in the which, was commonlie said that the Priests did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to haue remission of paine or guilt, were blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits. So you. Yet was this Sacrifice, frequentedMissa abo∣minatio in cali∣ce aureo propina∣ta, omnes reges terra & populos à summo vsque ad nouissimum sic inebriauit, vt proram & pup∣pim suae salutis in hac vna vo∣ragine statue∣rint. Caluin. Instit. li. 4. c. 18. See the Pro∣test. Apol. tract. 3. Sect. 1. and in the Conclu∣sion; to the Iudges; Sect. 6. & 10. generallie, when Luther began to make your Schisme. It was auowed in theS. Iren. li. 4. c. 32. Noui testamenti Nouam docuit obla∣tionem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in vniuerso mundo offert Deo. Concil. Nicenum 1. can 14. S. Cyrill. & cum eo Concil. Ephes. in Anathem. 11. S. Augu. Conc. 1. in Psalm. 33. Nondum erat sacrificium Corporis & San∣guinis Domini quod nunc diffusum est toto orbe terrarum. S. Ambros. de Sacram. li. 4. & 5 S. Cyrill. Catech. myst. 5 S. Chrysost. lib. 3. & 6. de Sacerdotio, & Hom. 17. in Epist. ad Hebraeos. His Liturgie is yet extant. And so is S. Ba∣sils too. S. Gregor. Nyssen. Hom. 1. de Resurr. Praeoccupat impetum violentum, ac sese in oblationem & victimam offert pro nobis Sacerdes simul & agnus Dei. Vide Disp. li. 5 c. 9 & Coccium in Thesanro, t 2. li. 6. a. 4. ti∣mes primitiue. And our Sa∣uioursThis is my bodie which is broken for you. This is the blood of the new testament which is shed for you. words, registred in
 the1. Cor. 11. Matt. 26. That it was offered for the quick and the dead, it is also testified abundantlie. S. Epiphan. Haeres. 75 where he saith also the Church receaued it by tradition. S. Cyrill. Cathec 5. Pro omnibus oramus qui ante nos vita functi sunt, maximum credentes animarum iuuamen pro quibus offertur obsecratio sancti illius & tremendi quod ante nos iacet Sacrificij. S. Chrysost. Homil. 3 in Epist. ad Phil. Non frustra hac ab Apostolis sunt legibus constituta vt in ve∣nerandis inquam atque horrisicis mysterijs memoria corum fiat qui decesserunt, nouerant hinc multum ad illos lucri accedere, multum vtilitatis. S. August. in Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 110. lib. de cura pro mort. c. 1. &c. 4. Non sunt praetermittenda supplicationes pro Spiritibus mortuorum, vt quibus ad ista desunt parentes aut filij, ab vna is exhibeatur ia matre Eccle∣sia. Lib. 9. Confess. c. 13. Meminerint ad altare tuum Monica famulae tuae cum Patritio quondam eius coniuge, &c. S. Ioan. Damasc. Orat. quod defuncti Missis inuentur. Quod qui∣dem citra vllam controuersiam Catholica & Apostolica Ecclesia sine vlla ambiguitate retinet &c. Vt consuetudinis testem llum cito. The like appeares by the Liturgies. Where ob∣serue that I reflect preciselie, vpon the termes of your Ar∣ticle, which condemneth vnbloodie Sacrifice offered by the Priest for the Quick and the Dead to haue remission of paine or guilt. If this be a blasphemous fable, the whole world was in Errour. So commonlie was it said and estee∣med lawfull; and so vniuersallie frequented See further Gualterius his Chronographicall table, verit. decima. The Protestants Apol. tract. 1. Sect. 3. subd. 4. and Sect. 7. subd. 6. The Conference of Cath. and Prot. doct. li. 2. c. 24. angl. Bible, being vnderstood in their natiue, proper sence, doWhat necessitie there is to enquire into the true sen∣ce of these words (This is my bodie) will best appeare in the after-examination of the diuers consequences of your owne sence, to wit, your doctrine of transsubstantiation, corporall and materiall presence, propitiatorie sacrifice, and proper adoration: all which depend vpon your Romish exposition of the former words of Christ. The issue then wll be this, that if the words be certainelie true in a pro∣per and litterall sence, then wee are to yeild to you the whole cause. Morton Instit. of Masse. li. 2. c. 1. I omit to note how Luther who did impugne the Sacrifice of Mas∣se, had his instructions from the Deuil. as doth appeare still by his owne booke de Missa Priuata, p. 228 Ego co∣ram vobis And p. 230 . n summa. Edit. Wittemb. an∣no. 1558. where he puts dwne the Deuils arguments; a∣mongst which one is against vnbloodie Sacrifice; Contra institutionem Christi, Missa vsus es pro Sacrificio, &c. §. quarto. confessedlie make for, and confirme it. Now, should wee subscribe to your Article, wee should contradict all this.
 Wee should contradict open Scripture, interpreted by the whole Christian world, and by theAnd this Spi∣rit is the Holie Ghost, Ioh. 14. & 16. Spirit in it. And whilst you sollicite vs so to do, what do you but abbet a priuate Spi∣rit? and this too, importunelie, vnseasonablie; then, when you denie to the whole Church power to define the
 veritie, euen of this cause; or to declare the sence of Scripture touching it, in her Councels oecumenicall.
I am not disposed to beleeue that a part is greater thē the whole. The Authoritie ofEngland al∣so before Cal∣uin was borne, beleeued the Sacrifice of the masse; and offe∣red it for the quick and the deade. See the Prudentiall Bal∣lance. all Natiōs Christian, moues me more then the Authoritie of oneOther Pro∣testants admit not your Con∣fession. onlie, now deuided and apart. Neither can I be perswaded that corpus doth signifie a signe or figure onlie; or that bread properlie, was crucified for my sinnes. I am not wiser then heeretofore men haue beene; not wiser then the Church. I reuerence her decrees, and am readie to be directed by her. Whether those you pretend vnto, were so too, will ap∣peare in the discussion of the Controuersie wee now deale n, which doth concerne the generall Councells wherein
 she declares herself.
Of such Councels, your fel∣lowes haue questioned many things: as first, who hath po∣wer to call them? secondlie, what persōs are to be in them? thirdlie, who is to preside? Fourthlie, whether they be in∣fallible in their decrees? fiftlie which be such Councels? The Controuersie wee are to spea∣ke of is none of these; but on∣lie what learned men, Catho∣likes, haue deliuered & taught about the infallibitie of a Coū∣cell, supposing it be intirelie oecumenicall: which suppo∣sition being premised,The four first, your selues ho∣nour with the title of oecu∣menicall. [and it is confessedlie a possible sup∣position,] the Question is this, Whether any Deuines of the Ca∣tholike communion, haue openlie and to the knowledge of those to whom it appertained to looke vn∣to the Church, auouched and
 maintained of Councels entirelie ecumenicall, such as were generall nd approued, that in decrees of Faith, they might mistake and rre? Wee dispute not, you and , now, whether this, or that, Councell, be such a Councell. That is another matter. Nor, whether such a Councell [sup∣ose it be, and define,] be infal∣ble. But; what, men, Catho∣ike Deuines, haue auerred ouching the priuiledge of a Councell generall, entire, and pproued.
The termes of the Question e remarkable. Councels; not whatsoeuer; but, generall and pproued, or entirelie oecume∣icall. Deuines of the Catholike ommunion; not Hereticks. Wee know that Hereticks re∣use entire approued Councels. Matters of Faith; not matters f Fact. Auouched openlie; the
 knowledge of the cause goes be∣fore the sentence of the iudge.
Your pretence is that some Deuines haue auouched their fallibilitie in matter and man∣ner aboue specified in the Quae∣re. Which if it were true, [that I note this by the way,] the tenet of their Infallibilitie would notwithstanding, continue fir∣me. The Church doth not at all times punish what euer she doth abhorre: and negligence of discipline in a Superiour, is a distinct thing from the lawes or principles of a communitie Much lesse could it be ouertur∣ned by their doubtfull speaches if any could be found: and least of all by obscure passages. Dark and hard speaches may be found inVide S. Hie∣ron. Apolog. adu. Ruf. li. 2. Fieri potest vt— vel certè ante∣quam in Alex∣andria quasi dae∣monium meri∣dianum Arius nasceretur, inno∣center quaedam & minus cautè loquni sunt, & quae non possint peruersarum ho∣minum calum∣niam declinare. vide S. Aug. de Praedest. Sanct. c. 14. Auncient Writers, that seeme to make agains such tenets of Religion as you call fundamentall; and some
 Fathers haue doubted of, some aue denied,Euseb. Hist. Eccles. li. 3. c. 19. Origenes a∣pud eundem li. 6. c. 19. S. Hie∣ron. de Script. Eccles. & in Ep. ad Dard. Bilson Suru. p. 664. See the Disp. pag. 431. bookes of Scri∣ture, which all now beleeue o be Canonicall; wherefore if  this matter of Councels-au∣oritie the like should haue appened, the tenet of Assistan∣e giuen to them in their de∣rees of faith, being grounded  Scripture, and hauing for it  more euident perpetuall tradi∣on then you can shew for di∣ers parts of Scripture which ou do beleeue to be diuine, ere still (euen by you in like anner] to be admitted and aintained: vnles you think it wfull to reiect those Books al∣, because once doubted of or enied; and neuer to beleeue at, which might with a pre∣nce of authoritie, be oppo∣d or contradicted.
Thus I could answer, and are the labour to talke fur∣ther
 of the matter:Vide S. Aug. li. 2. contra Donat. c. 5. but becaus you wrong some that be lea¦ned worthie Authors, and so¦me Fathers too; least you fin adherents that will beleeu you [to the preiudice of the¦selues, and others] vpon yo bare word, when they s none contradict and confu that you boast of, I will suru the citations.
Our dispute in this matte is to be of Catholikes; it is [as b¦fore was noted] impertine to talke of others; and of suc as in plaine termes haue auouch and maintained what you pr¦tend they did. Wee know th some haue beene mistaken  great matters, and yet cont¦nued in the Church, either b¦cause the thing was not suff¦cientlie brought to light, [ matters appertaining to diuin faith be not at all times equa¦lie
 proposed) or because they were readie to submit themsel∣ues,As in the Que∣stiōs of the Ca∣non of Scripture, of Baptisme gi∣uen by Hereticks, &c. and conforme their iud∣gment, as soone as the Church declared her self. Wee know oo, that diuers haue beene tempted in their faith; and of these, some haue falne into Heresie or Atheisme, wherof we haue examples in Luthers preach; and before, in all ages, uen the primitiue. Others ha∣e discouered their tempta∣ions, with all the motions of heir vnderstanding, to and ro: concealing onlie the finall esolution or euent. Of which nfirmitie, some, (and not wi∣hout scandall) haue exhibited hemselues by their writings, ublicke spectacles to the orld. With those you and  need not meddle; being to peake of such onlie (if any can e found,) as haue openlie de∣nied,
 the infallibilitie aboue specified, and yet enioyed the communion of the Church, notwithstanding such a knowne deniall.
She doth not thrust out of her communion, one, who doth onlie propose his doubtes, to be resolued; nor yet, if by way of disputation, he venters to far, but without auouching, especiallie when this is donne with submission to her iudgment: or, if he so conceale his mind, or vtter himself so, that no∣thing can be directlie proued a∣gainst him. Secret and concea∣led thoughts, she cannot look into. Euerie one is to be presu∣med good, vnles the contrarie may be proued. As many as haue exteriorlie communica∣ted with the Church, are law∣fullie presumed to haue recea∣ued her tenets, vnles it be ma∣de
 appeare otherwise.
Though it be true that so∣me who liue amongst vs o∣herwhile, be not of vs. Some o beare themselues for Ca∣holikes, who be in their hear∣es Atheistes, or Heretikes. There be, no doubt,Ipse Satanas transfigurat se in Angelum lu∣cis. Non est ergo magnum si mi∣nistri eius trans∣figurentur velut ministri iustitia. 2. Corint. 11. Nonne ego vos duodecim elegi: & ex vobis v∣nus diabolus est? Ioan. 6. rauening wolues in sheeps-clothing so∣me; and the Pastors driue them ot away, because they know hem not. The Disciples knew ot that one in the companie was a Deuil. Wee are heere to reat of things manifest; and to he Church; and so farre, that hey might be legallie proued a∣gainst the men when they we∣e e liuing, and exteriorlie en∣oyed the benefit of Commu∣ion: or, are now to be seene  their books, (bookes not ensured,) so cleerlie that it is nexcusablie vndeniable. Your elf, I suppose, would require
 no lesse euidence to condemne a man (and in so great a mat∣ter,) after death when he can speake no more for himself, then was necessarie toReus non antè condem∣nandus est quā si idoneis testi∣bus, vel aper∣tissimis docu∣mentis, vel in∣dicijs indubi∣tatis & luce clarioribus cō∣uict is fuerit; aut propria cōfessione, &c. Vide legem fi C. de Probationi¦bus. & l. Qui sententiam 16. C. de poe. Ne∣qe manifestò constet incur∣risse in senten∣tiam excomun: quod nullo modo potest occultari, aut per aliquod re¦ edium iurs excusari: &c. Extra. Mart V. Adeuanda. con∣demne him when he was a∣liue.
To vndertake this Question in the latitude that I do, is mo∣re then was necessarie for the defence of a generall tradition more then can be showne for di∣uers partes of the New testamen by you receaued: but the powe of the veritie will appeare th better when it is found to hau bene so vniuersallie manifest and so commonlie receaued that none, by the Church e¦steemed Orthodoxe in their ¦mes, haue beene euer known (though there were still occa¦sion to looke vpon the autho¦ritie of such Councels) openl to contradict it and auouch th
 contrarie. Neither could I well refuse (it is a duetie in him that hath reaped benifit by their abours) to come abroad, and defend the iust honour of Per∣ons wrongd, who be not a∣iue now to maintaine their owne credit.
