




DEARE FRINDS
I haue vnderstood of your troubles, and doe take comfort in your constancie. Your cause is cleere: your religion that, which the sonne of God hath taught. In former time no other was in England. So much you know by the Histories and Chronicles of the country; so you haue ben told by your parents, who sawe the profession of it, with their owne eies; so your ancestors doe testifie by their wills and graues. Your Churches there, were built for the exercise of it; as you can prooue by the gene∣rall forme of them, by the crosses and pictures, by the altars made for Masse. Euer since the conuer∣sion of the country from Paganisme by Sainct Au∣gustine and his fellowes, monkes, it hath beene there, till of late: and S. Augustine brought it from
 Rome, where it had beene common from the time of S. Peeter; and S. Peeter learned it of our Sauiour Iesus Christ.
Those that are learned, if they will looke into the Ecclesiasticall History, which diuers, and of late the worthy Cardinall Caesar Baronius, haue compiled, may see there (looking vpwards to the Apostles time) this Religion descending thorough all ages, in sacred esteeme euer; the preachers, gods trumpets, proclaiming it; the generall councells ma∣king roome; the martyrs testifying the truth of it with their blood; the light of miracles accompa∣nying it all the way; and worlds of people waiting on. The Societie of those that professe it, is the Church; and is diffused ouer the World, and Catho∣lique: it is that Church which in your Creede you doe beleeue. This is the spouse of the sonne of God, the woman clad with the sunne, manifest vnto all (that willfully do not shutte their eies) by her anti∣quitie, cleere successiō, vniuersality: and the twelue-fold Apostolicall glorie doth crowne her heade, or beginning. Shee hath beene opposed by diuers Heresies, but still gotte the victory, bringing foorth Saincts to Iesus Christ in the labour of persecu∣tion.
You know the counsell of the Scripture, Sonne, comming to the seruice of God, prepare thy soule to temptation, and the affirmation of the Apostle is generall, All those that will liue godly shal suffer persecuton. The state of the Church heere is mi∣litant, and those are to be crowned that ouercome. The way to heauen is full of crosses: mockeries, stripes, and the sword, helpe vs on. This way those
 are gone, of whom the world was not worthy: af∣fliced, needie, in distresse. This way our blessed Sauour went, who was heere contemned, scour∣gel, crucified. It is the King of Heauens high way. Our heade is gone before, all blood, and so entered into blisse: the Apostles, the Martyrs, the Confes∣sos; old Simeon too, and little Agnes, are gone after him with their crosses: and wee are bid, if will liue eternally, to take vp each of vs one, and followe.
To take the spoile of your goods with ioy is to enbrace and kisse your crosse. There is no deliberation when I must leaue gold or god: no comparison betwixt a diamond in a gold ring, and the deitie in eternitie. O my deare frinds! you haue each of you a Iewell within your selues, richer then all the eie can see without, fairer then the sunne it self, and farre aboue all the disposition of the stars. The vsurers Idol, gold, waxeth pale, if you compare it, to the burning sparkles of the chrysolite. In your Iewell you may see heauen and earth, in the compasse of the vnderstanding. It hath engrauen in it the image of allmighty God; and is, for nature next an angell, by grace companion with him; as being to beare a part in the heauenly quire, and there without astonishment to sing allelluia with those thousand thousand glorious queristers, if the fault be not yours.
The Soule, hauing free will, had once lost it self; you may, by the meanes taken to recouer it, know the worth. The sonne of God, came from heauen downe to looke it, and redeemed it with that which is better then the world, his life.
 Those infinite wrongs which he suffered from men of all sorts; hose innumerable stripes which he re∣ceaued from the soldiers, whose crueltie made him all a wound, the bitter passion of the crosse, which no words are able to expresse, was all for our re∣demption, for the soule. If you loose it now againe, you wrong his loue, you depriue him of his right, you moue his father (whose angry lookes are bur∣ning fire) to reueng. It is horrible to fall into the hands of the liuing God. The pillars of heauen do tremble and dreade at his beck. He hath mea∣sured the water with his fiste, and pondered the heauens with a spanne. He looketh on the earth, and maketh it to trēble; toucheth the mountaines, and they smoke. If you keepe it well, he will make it a heauen, wherein he, with the father, and the holy Ghost, will dwell, foreuer. And your bo∣dies he wil invest with ornaments of glory ād im∣mortallity, and place each of you in a throne with himself in the court of heauen, where all are kings. You shall dwell in the celestiall Ierusalem, whose streete is all of pure gold, and walls, pretious stone; where God is the Temple, and the light.
These things God hath promised vnto those who serue him, wherefore aboue all, haue a care of your religion. Your soule is your Iewel, and Reli∣gion is the Iewel of your sowle. Keepe these well, and you shal be happie, though persecution leaue you nothing els. Each of you may haue a com∣mon wealth, a kingdome, within your selues if you please. No State more happie, no gouerment more sweete, then that is, where loue com∣maundeth, and vertues do obay. Let Charitie
 be Queene in your soule: and the Vertues, will all b there. Let men see the streingth of your fait in your constancie, and the sanctitie of it in te candor of your conuersation. Giue all men ther due: to whom tribute, tribute; to whom Feare, Fere; to whom honour, honour. In your a∣ctins be circumspect, as it becommeth Chri∣stians, who beleeue the eies of God and Angels are o them still: and, that each action is in∣rowled exactly, to be reade and censured, in the day of doome.
Loke oft on the liues of Saincts, and by their example learne how you are to carrie your selues in yor difficulties: you will do things with more ease, whē you see them dōne before you: those were mens wee are. Be not afraid of persecution. The protction of allmighty God is more then a wall of brsse: they who trust in him are safe: mountaines in cicuite of the holy cittie, and our Lord round about his people. Nothing cā rob vs of our soules, vnles wee will: and if that be saued, wee shall haue all that God hath, for wee shal haue him. Our time in this world is but short: the sunne runnes it ouer with infinite speede: and the poste of na∣ture is on the way (how neere God only know∣eth) to giue vs notice of a dissolution, wherein, each of vs being as it were diuided, one half is rendered to the earth to feede wormes; the other, caried away to the tribunall to heare a sentence of eternitie. Happie are those who prizing God so∣lidly aboue all, and adhering to him as the foun∣taine of all good; take this iourney with full re∣signation of their spirit, and die in the Churche's armes.

I send you this booke, desiring you to pruse it. I would haue willinglie come my self to haue taken part with you, but imployments tie me heere. In my youth, when I had lost my best frind, whose soule rest in peace, I lost a greate deale of my time: and, it seemes, almightie God hath so disposed of me, that I must now re∣paire the losse. If you find the thing lesse accunte then you might haue expected, you know my excuse. When two imployments do meet in a narrow vnderstanding, and that but poorely lod∣ged both do suffer. Those who laboured in epai∣ring the walls of Ierusalem, whilst they did worke with one hand, were forced, in the other to take a sword. I fight but with one hand. The faults and imperfections heere, are mine; in the reso∣lution the Catholique world doth agree: and you haue the prayers of them all as long as you keepe your selues in their communion. You haue also the prayers of all the Saincts in heauen, the com∣munion of the Church reaching thither. And our Sauiour there doth mediate vnto his Father in your behalf. You haue God an aduocate vnto God, the Sonne to the Father; doe not feare: but serue him carefully, and he will multiplie his blessings on you: and (if wee spend the few daies of our peregrination well) will bring vs all in the end in to our cuntrey Heauen, to the Church of the first borne, to the company of many thou∣sands of Angels, where there is perpetuall Iubi∣lie, where God is all in all. Then death shall be no more, nor moorning, nor sorrow. There shall be no more hunger nor thirst; neither
 shall the sune fall vppon you, nor any heate▪ and God vvl wipe away all teares from your eies. Fare ou well. And let vs resigne our selues wholl to the blessed will of God, and pray each fo other that wee may be saued.


THe Queson. Where a man is to seeke Instructiō in matte of Religion? The Answere. In the Church in Communion with the See of Rome. This resoluon is heere declared in three Proposi∣tions. 1. Th Catholique Church, is assisted by the Holy Ghost, to all uth. the third Booke. 2. And, is that which is in Commion with the See of Rome. the secōd Booke. 3. Not the ompany of Protestants. the first Booke.
The Boke is so little it needeth not an Index, in place of oe, take this direction;
God. li. 2. cap. 4. Incarnation of the second Per∣son. Ibid His Church foretould. lib. 2. cap. 1. Rai∣sed and prpagated. lib. 2. cap. 5. Visibile. lib. 2. ca. 1. & lib 3. ca. 1. 2. 6. Continued till now. lib. 2. cap. 2. & 3. Th Holy Ghost assisting in it. lib. 3. cap. 1. to all Truthe. 2. fundamentall and not fundamentall. c. 3. The written Doctrine. lib. 4. cap. 5. The Vn¦written. b. 4. cap. 10. Particular points of her do∣ctrine prued by text of Scripture. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Her Iteriour Sanctitie lib. 3. cap. 5. Exteriour acte of diine worshippe. lib. 4. cap. 9. Transubstā∣tiation in the Masse. cap. 8. Flesh and blood reallie in the Sarament. cap. 6. and by Antiquitie so be∣leeued.
 cap. 7. In the Church, Priests; and a chiefe Pastour lib. 1. cap. 6. S. Peeter aboue the rest of the Apostles, and Pastor of the Church. lib. 4. ca. 1. The Pope, his Successor, and aboue other Bishops. cap. 2. President in generall Councells. cap. 3. Coun∣cells. lib. 2. cap. 3. & 7. assisted in proposing. lib. 3. c. 2. 3 4. & lib 4 cap. 10. Who a Catholique. lib. 2. c. 6. and lib. 3. cap. 4. Resolution of Faith. Ibid. and. li. 3. cap. 4. & 5.
Answere to Obiections made against, Vniuersa∣litie. lib. 2. cap. 7. Sanctitie. lib. 3. cap. 5. Visibili∣tie. lib. 3. cap. 6. Succession and Vnitie lib. 2. ca. 7. & lib. 3. cap. 4. Infallibilitie. lib. 3. cap 5. & 7. And against our Doctrine. lib. 1. cap. 4. & 5. and lib. 4. thoroughout.
The Protestants are not able to prooue their Re∣ligion by Scripture. lib. 1. cap. 4. 5. 6. nor by Anti∣quity. cap. 3. They should render account of Pre∣decessors agreeing in all points with them. lib. 3. c. 4. but cannot. lib. 1. cap. 2. the Waldenses neither were Protestants, nor had continuall Succession of their Church from the Apostles. lib. 1. cap. 1.
The yong Reader may omitte the . 5. and 6. Chapters of the first Booke.
