



OVR Sauiour Christe, (Right Worshipful, and most Christian Gentle∣man) setting forth the state of the kingdome of heauen, by the parable of the seede, Matth 13. teacheth, that some felvp∣n stony ground, where it had not much earth, and one it sprange vp, because it had not depth of
earth, and when the Sunne rose vp, it was parched, and for lacke of rooting withered away; which our Sauiour himselfe in the 20. verse of the same chapter expoundeth to be, he who heareth the word, and incontinently with ioy receiueth it, yet hath he no roote in himselfe, and dureth but a season; for assoone as tribulation or persecution commeth because of the word, by and by he is offen∣ded. The trueth of which doctrine hath bene most euident in the Churche of God in all a∣ges.
Gen. 18. Lot his wife will needes looke backe to fil∣thy Sodome, because it is a rich, and a pleasant place; and the olde sonnes of Israel rather then they will suffer a litle aduersitie as the peo∣ple of God, will returne into Egypt (an accur∣sed land) so they may haue their Leekes, their Garlike, and Onions; and many will rather returne to Caiphas, and to the pallace of th High Priest,
Heb. 13.13 then they will goe forth with Iesu Christ out of the Campe, bearing his reproche refusing vtterly to drinke of the cuppe of th Sonne of God, to weare his cognisance, and ar ashamed of the choller of his order; and wil at no hand suffer any thing with Iesus Chris (who hath suffered all thinges for them,) t raigne, and to be glorified for euer with him And surely very miserable experience hereo in these laste times, may dailye be seene in th
Churches about vs, as those of France, and o∣ther places: so many for the heate of persecu∣tion, and least they shoulde beare the crosse of Christ, haue, and daily do returne to that spiri∣tuall Egypt, and mystical Babylon, the mother of all abhominations. Among many reuolts and defections, there hath bene none more fearefull and horrible, then that most dreadful Apostasie, which befell not long since on Saint Bartholomewes day, in the Churches of An∣jou; so many falling away, which neuer since returned to the sheepefolde of Christ: which moued this excellent and godly learned man, Maister I. de l'Espine, Minister of the word of God, in the Church of Angers, to write this most excellent Treatise vnto them, that they might remember from whence they be fallen; that they may see howe they haue defiled the Temple of God, and made sad his holy spirite, and the holy Angels to be in sorowe and hea∣uines, beholding their fall, in betraying the son of God, and in sclandering the sufferings of his glorious Martyrs, banished & driuen from heir countries and houses, depriued and forsa∣ken of their fathers, mothers, wiues, children, parents, & friends, cast into dungeons amonge Toades and Serpents, bound and fettered, with ll crueltie and outrage by hangmen and exe∣cutioners
mangled, afflicted, and tormented. But alas these haue refused this so great an ho∣nour,
1. Pet. 4. Rom. 8. as to communicate with the passions of Ie∣sus Christ, and to be made conformable vnto his image, in suffering with him, and for the pro∣fession of his moste glorious Gospell. This godly and learned Treatise, written by the Author in the Frenche tongue, for the vse and benefite especially of his owne Church, being deliuered and commended vnto me by a reue∣rend and learned man, faithfully translated in∣to English: I thought it a meditation very ne∣cessary in these times for the Church of Eng∣land also: who although nowe (God be prai∣sed) she neede notto shrinke for any fiery triall yet she knoweth not how neare the Lord his visitation is,
Mat. 25. and our Sauiour teacheth his ser∣uants continually to watche. That I haue pre∣sumed to dedicate it vnto your Worshippe.  thinke fewe men will aske, and no man ought to maruaile, who knoweth your zealous and most Christian profession; and the great du∣ties wherein I stand bound to your Worship for your great fauour and assistance in my di∣stresses and afflictions. Onely I beseech you t receiue it as a signification of my thankeful mind in dutie towards your Worshippe. The Lord giue you grace still to continue euen t
the ende, to blesse you here with all increase of Worship, and with all spirituall ioyes in hea∣uenly things, in his most blessed Sonne Christ Iesus. London, From my poore house in the Blacke-Friers this present 9. of May. 1587.

