



SVndrye ty∣mes
(right Honora∣ble
and my singuler
good Lorde) deba∣ting
with my selfe
the chiefe causes,
why Artes and disciplines do (in these
Alcyon dayes of ours) so vniuersallye
flourishe, althoughe I knowe well
ynoughe that sundrye men can coigne
sundry reasons, and alledge manifolde
verdictes and probable argumentes
therfore: yet in my simple iudgement,
nothing more effectually whetteth the
wittes of the studious, nor more luste∣lye

he awaketh the courages of the lear∣ned,
then doth the fauourable furthe∣raunce
and cheereful coūtenaunce, of
the Prince and Nobility. For, honor,
preferment, dignity, & prayse, feedeth
nourisheth and mainteyneth, bothe
Artes and vertues: and Glorye is a
sharpe spurre, that vehementlye pric∣keth
forward gallāt heades, and preg∣naūt
natures, to attempt worthy en∣terprises.
VVe see, that thīg to be gree∣dely
(and as it were, with a certayne
kinde of Ambition) on al handes sou∣ghte
for and pursued, whereunto the
Prince and Peeres are studiouslye en∣clined.
And therfore the lesse meruail
is it, though in Royalmes and Coun∣tries
gouerned by barbarous Princes,
& monstruous Tyrannes, learning be
vtterlye prouigated: and thoughe the
Muses taking their flight thence, do
abandon that soyle, where they see thē∣selues
so slenderlye regarded, and so

churlishlie entertayned. As contrary∣wise,
where they be reuerenced, cheri∣shed
maynteined & had in pryce, ther
doe they endenizō thēselues, & settle
their dwellings. And this surelye (my
L.) do I think to be one, or rather an
only cause, which in this old age & la∣ter
caste of the worlde, rayseth vp a∣mong
vs, such a plentiful Haruest of
rype and excellent wittes, conspicuous
in euerye facultie: because by speciall
Priuiledge frō the Almightie, and of
his great bountie and gracious good∣nesse
towardes vs, we haue such a god∣lye,
vertuous, & learned Princesse, &
such an honorable State of noble Per∣sonages,
themselues not only in euerye
seueral Arte singulerly skilled, but al∣so
to the professors thereof (lyke ter∣rene
Gods) benigne and bounteous.
Of whom, may bee sayde that, whiche
(though of vnlike persons) Cicero re∣ported
of Socrates, saying, that there

were further & deeper matters to be
conceyued and thought of Socrates,
then in all Plato hys Bookes, coulde be
purported or fully decyphered. VVhose
lenities and fauourable inclinations,
would not, neyther ought to bee abu∣sed
(as they are by some to muche)
with the Patronage of euery friuolous
fācy & tryflyng toye, tending neyther
to profitable vse in the cōmon wealth,
nor to anye auaileable purpose, tou∣ching
publique society. VVhereas ma∣ny
of thē, if they coulde finde in theyr
harts, otherwise to tickle their pennes
with matters of better importaunce,
and employe their golden giftes to the
aduauncemēt of vertue and commo∣ditye
of their Countrye: in steede of
beinge fine Architectes and contri∣uers
of matters offensiue and scanda∣lous,
they might eternize themselues
(like good mēbers and worthy Orna∣mentes
of their Countrey, within the

Beadrolle of Fame and perpetuitie.
VVhat opiniō that inuincible Prince
Alexander of Macedonie, had of all
vayne Artes, foolish baables, phanta∣sticall
toyes, and curious deuises, well
appeareth by the rewarde, whyche he in
presence of his Nobles, and Souldiers,
publiquely gaue vnto a certain dapper
fellow (one of hys hoaste) who partlye
vpon a brauery and ostentation of his
cunninge, but chieflye in hope of some
magnificente rewarde, did before the
Kings presence, cast or throw a kind of
smal Pulse, called a Cichpease, through
a Needles eye, beīg set a pretie distaūce
of, & that manye times without anye
missing. VVhich vayn trick, & thrift∣lesse
deuise, (sauouringe altogether of
a little foolish curiositie, and nothing
at al, of any expediēt vse or cōmodity)
many of the beholders with admiratiō
cōmended, and deemed right worthye
of recompence. In fine, because the

skilfull Squier, shoulde not loose the
hoped fruicte, of that hys practized
knacke, and notable singularitie: the
Kinge rewarded him onelye with a
Bushell of Cichpeasō. A cōdigne guer∣don
(doubtlesse) and verye fitte to
counteruayle such a peeuishe Practise
and vnnecessarie Mataeotechnie.
A great folly therfore & forwardnes
is it in mannes nature, to bestow such
great study, payn, care, cost, & industry
in attayning suche needlesse & friuo∣lous
tromperies: the hauinge whereof,
nozzeleth the hauer & Artist, in loy∣tering
idlenes, & breedeth otherwise
greate inconuenience in the bodie of
the whole common wealth: VVhiche
deformitie and abuse, manye learned
Clerkes bewaylinge, haue in eche of
their seueral professions, by wryting
and otherwise graphicallye depainted.
And among many, this Author whom
I now (vppon confidence of the gene∣rosity

of your noble nature) presume to
present and exhibite vnto your Lord∣shippe,
goinge a neerer way to worcke
then many others, doth not onely) by
artificial contēplation) wade into the
very Gulphe & Camaryne of mannes
apparaūt wilfulnesse: but also rushing
into the verye bowles of Nature, be∣wrayeth,
& (as with a pensil) liuely set¦teth
downe the affections, condiciōs,
plyghtes, habites, and dispositions, of
euery seueral Complexion. And, as
one that wel knew himselfe not to bee
borne only for himselfe, hath franckly,
frendly, and learnedly bequeathed the
Talent of his knowledge to a publique
and vniuersall commoditye. In rea∣dinge
whereof, I am perswaded, that
none of indifferent iudgemente, shall
thinke his oyle & labour lost, neither
his time and trauaile mispent: at least
wyse, if it were with like grace in any
respect, deliuered out in English, as he
hath done, and left it in the Latine.

But surelye I haue done my beste, tru∣sting
that others in recompence of my
trauail, wil not, vpō a Splene, requite
me with their worste, neyther miscō∣strue
my meaning, which was in plain
tearmes and vulgare phrase to goe as
neere to my Authours plotforme, as
my adle head could well imagine.
And now being arriued to Land, af∣ter
a prety long voyage and pleasant
saylinge, in this hys Philosophicall Sea,
I approach in moste dutifull humility,
wyth suche Newes and VVares, as I
haue heard, seene, read, and gotten,
vnto your Honor, whom for many re∣spectes,
I mistruste not, but wyll hono∣rablie
daigne to heare mee. And now
doe I stande at the Barre of curtesie,
to heare your Lordshippes doome, con∣cerning
this my temerity. The comfor∣table
expectation wherof, putteth me
in no small hope, that all the better
sort (mooued by your Lordshippes ex∣ample

wil bee the more easie and rea∣die,
to dispence with my vnmellowed
adolescencie. As for the frowarder
and eluisher Crew, which be so daintie
mouthed, that nothinge can please, &
so squeymish stomacked, that nothing
can satisfie, let this poore Booke (in
Goddes name) take his chaunce amōg
them, as it falleth out: yea let it be as
AEsope his fyle, to grate and grynde
their viperous teeth withall. Sure I
am that their seuere and Criticall cē∣sures,
can no more disquiet me hereaf∣ter,
then the Conscience of myne own
imbecillitie hath terrified and displea∣sed
me alreadie. Yet if thinges were
to bee obteyned and compassed by wy∣shing,
I wold that neither this Booke,
neyther anye other heretofore by mee
published, should offend anye, no not
the verie waywardest. But because
my case may peraduenture now stande
no better, then it did longe agone,

with the Philosopher Theodorus Athe¦niensis,
who complayned of greate dis∣curtesy
shewed vnto him, because those
thinges which he gaue with the righte
hand, were snatched vp and taken by
his Auditorye, with the lefte: mea∣ning
thereby his workes and Lectures,
whiche he publishinge to good purpose,
were wrested, and sundrely by captious
carpers, canuassed with sinister inter∣pretations:
therfore for refuge I flee
into the Sanctuary of your Lordships
wonted clemencie, with trust, thence
not to be shouldred out and reiected,
but freely to bee allowed the benefite of
your goodnesse, that I may leane vpon
the staffe of your approued wisdome &
aucthoritie, and creepe vnder the
Targe of youre fauorable prorection,
against the currish bawling, & ranck∣linge
tooth of barking Theon. In as∣sured
hope whereof I rest: beseechinge
God to endue and blesse you, with the

Right honourable Lady Francis, your
Lordships vertuous and louing wife,
with the riche giftes of his heauenlye
grace, and with continuaunce of pro∣sperous
health both of soule and body,
to his honor and glory, your own desy∣res
and comfortes, and to the profite
of this your natiue Countrey.
From Butley in Chesshyre, the 21. of
September. 1576. 
