



RIGHT HONORABLE,
SOCRATES reports, that there happening a terrible fire in Constantinople, which consumed a great part of the city, and fastened on the Church, the Bishop went to the Altar, and falling downe upon his knees, would not rise from thence, till the fire was quenched, and the Church preserved: So when I entered in∣to
my charge, (whereunto I was called by your Lordships gracious favour) I found a great fire kindled in that Church, which though it was but Ignis fatuus, proceeding from inconsiderate zeale; yet it threatned the destruction of our Church, and the utter abolishing of all good or∣der: wherefor l indeavoured to bring diverse buckets of water out of the Sanctuary for quenching of that flamme, albeit as yet I have not found either my paines or my prayers to be so effectuall.
At first the Apostles Quaere tooke a deepe impression in me,
. Cor. 4.21. Shall I come unto you with a rod or in love, and in the spirit of meeke∣nesse? And therefor I begun with gentle perswa∣sions, suspendens verbera, and producens ubera,
2. Tim. 2.25. (as the fathers speake) even in all meek∣nesse instructing them who are contrary minded; as having such a charitable opinion of them as Salvian had of some Arian haeretickes in his time,
Salv. de Cu∣ben l. 5. Errant, sed bono animo errant, and Euthymius of others,
Ethym. in Luc. 14. Quidam Pharisaei semi-mali; But I found that I had to doe with men praeoccupyed with praejudice and partiality, and so wedded to their own wills, that they were
resolved to receive no information, making good the saying of Maxentius,
Ap. Bgn. in Biblioth. T. 4 Mens contentioni indulgens, & non sanari fed vincere cupi∣ens, aversa ab eis quae recte dicuntur, tan∣tum intenta est in hoc, ut inveniat quod pro partibus suis loquatur. A contentious mind desiring victory, and not truth, takes no notice of that which is truely spoken, and deviseth only how to elude the same, and find something to speake for his owne part.
VVhereupon I altered my course, and finding by the symptomes of their disease, that it is a head-paine, or rather heady; I remembred that when the Shunamites child cryed my head,
2 Kings 4.1. my head, his father bid carry him to his mother; So I thought it the best course to carry them unto their mother the Church, and shew them both her authority to injoyne those orders which they oppose; and her power to censure and correct such as are disobedient unto her constitutions. But for all this, They persist in their errors, grow more resolute in their opposition, and more dili∣gent to draw disciples after them,
Revel. 12.12. like unto him of whom it was said: He is come downe un∣to you having great wrath, because hee
knoweth that he hath but a short time. So that it may be said of them, as the Prophet of the hard hearted Iewes,
Ierem. 5.3. Lord thou hast stricken them, but they have not sorrowed, thou hast consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction, they have made their faces harder then a stone, and have refused to returne. And this is no new thing for haere∣tickes to bee confirmed in their errors by their sufferings; It was observed in ancient time, that not only Christianitas, but even haeresis mor∣tibus crescit.
And surely I have many times wondered how those men who are none of the learnedest, should be able to draw such a faction after them, and bewitch the minds of the people: for every one of these Presbyteriall Dictators is more esteemed then the whole Church of God, they take upon them to teach their mother to give suck, the people have plucked out their owne eyes, and given to their teachers, being now able to see nothing but through their spectacles, unto whom they doe ascribe more then Papall Infalli∣bility. But I find that it hath beene so in former times, that in a faction neither the learnedest
men, nor the best, but the most factious are regar∣ded. Primianus and Maximianus were the heads of the two factions of the Donatists, and sayeth S. Augustin: It was well for them that faction fell out, else Primianus might have beene Postremianus, and Maximianus, Mi∣nimianus: But now in schisme either of them was a jolly fellow, and the head of a party: So faction gaines these men more esteeme, then o∣therwise they could either have, or deserve in Gods Church.
And besides their forwardnesse to lead a fa∣ction, I have observed diverse other meanes wherby they have wonne the affection of the people unto a generall liking of their cause; I. A great shew of holynesse, like the Encratites of old, who termed all other Christians that lived not in like austerity Psychicos, that is, carnall: And yet even in this they come farre short of that mortification, which was either in Pelagius of old, or is at this day in the Socinians, whom I may justly terme sentinam haereticorum, the worst of haeretickes. II. Their diligence in prea∣ching, which yet in them is, rather the labour of the lungs, then of the brain, and (I thanke God)
many of the conformable Clergie, are as paine∣full as they. III. To taxe the faults of men in chiefe place, and the present government, which the multitude (being ever prone to innovation, and dislike of the present Lawes) are apt to ap∣prove, as Nazianzen observed in his time, he is thought the holiest man that can find most faults, and the greatest zelot for the trueth, who is pleased with nothing, but what proceeds from his owne devising. Are not these they whom S. Peter describes that should arise In populo,
II. Pet. 2. amongst the people, despisers of governement, back-biters of them that are in dignity, speaking evill of those things they know not, who promise unto them∣selves liberty? That is the thing at which they ayme [liberty;] for howsoever they seeme to ex∣cept only against our Lawes, yet the thing they would have, is a freedome from all Lawes, and that it may be lawfull for every man to appar∣rell Gods worship in what fashion he pleaseth, and to doe what seemeth good in his owne eyes, as though there were no King in Israel: wherby they doe wonderfully please the factious people, Et hoc ipso placere cupiunt, quod placere
contemnunt, They seeke to please the people by displeasing of authority. IV. They give unto the people both by their doctrine and example incou∣ragement to commit two sinnes, whereunto of all others they are most inclined, Vsury and Sacri∣ledge: VVherefore S. Iude describing those murmurers, & complainers whose mouths speake proud things, sayeth,
ver. 16. They have mens persons in admiration because of ad∣vantage, And that we may all know whom he meaneth, he addeth,
ver. 19. These are they that sepa∣rate themselves. By whose divinity, men (as I sayd) have these two advantages, one that they may lend their money upon usury: Another that they may safely robbe God of his tythes, and de∣vour all manner of holy things: This last was the ayme of some Politicians in the kingdome of England, they set on discontented men, to cry out against the governement of the Church, ho∣ping by that meanes to prey upon Bishoprickes and Cathedrall Churches, as they had done be∣fore upon the Abbeyes. V. This their snow-ball of popularity hath gained no small accesse by their lying: They traduce those who are not of their faction, as men either of scandalous life, or
mainetayners of false doctrine, and such as seeke to draw us backe agayne unto Popery: They tell the people of their owne victories in disputati∣ons and conferences, how they have put others to silence with the strength of their arguments, when indeed they have not spoken one wise word: They boast of the inward testimony of Gods spirit assuring their consciences of the trueth of their doctrine.
Ludov. Viv. de verit. fid. christ. l. 4. pag. 178. And this (as sayeth a learned writer) is Tutissimum mentiendi genus, The safest way of lying is for men to intitle God to their owne dreames. Lastly, But the spciall meanes wherby they have advanced their facti∣on, is by insinuating into the weaker sexe in whom there is least ability of Iudgment. By this meanes the Serpent overcame mankind, he first tempted the woman, and by her seduced Adam: By this meanes the Philistines overcame Sam∣pson,
Iudg XIV. 18. They ploughed with his heifer and so found out his riddle. And this indeed hath beene the common practise of all haeretickes:
Act XIII. 50. the Iewes stirred certaine devout & honorable women to resist Paul. These new Gospellers make use of such instruments to oppose the Church, and for the most part their Proselytes
are of that Sexe, as if their generative vertue were so weake that they could beget none but daughters. Now to search a litle into the cause of this: Besides the weakenesse of their Iudge∣ment to discerne betweene truth and error, and the naturall inclination which is in women to pitty; two things especially make them in love with that religion, one, It is naturall unto the daughters of Eve to desire knowledge, and those men puff them up with an opinion of science, in∣abling them to prattle of matters of divinity, which they and their teachers understand much alike: Insomuch that albeit S. Paul hath forbid∣den women to speake in the Church, yet they speake of Church matters more then comes to their share. The other is a desire of liberty and freedome from subjection; for these teachers al∣low thē to be at least quarter-masters with their husbands, insomuch that I have not observed that faction to praevaile but where husbands have learned to obey their wives, and where will and affection weare the breeches. There is a civill constitution in the authentickes against women, Non percipientes sacrosanctam & adora∣bilem communionem. that would not receive
the holy and adorable Communion; that they should lose their douries or Ioyntures, which if it were in force in this kingdome, I thinke some of our Ladies would not be so stiff-kneed, choosing rather to goe without that blessed Sacrament, then receive it kneeling.
By these meanes have they assayed to batter the orders and whole fabrick of our Church, which like Caesars bridge,
Caesde bello Gall. lib. 4. the more it is oppu∣gned the stronger it stands; yet they themselves are not all agreed what forme of Policie they would have, and I thinke if it were left to their owne choice and frame, they would prove as wise as Hermogenes Apes in the fable, who would build houses, and live after the manner of men; but when they went about it, they had neither tooles nor skill to effect the worke: In the meane time they labour to bring all men in dislike with the present governement, like Platoes Euthy∣phro who accused his owne father, and like that ungracious fellow Lamprocleus who slande∣red his mother.
Xenoph de dict. & fact. Secrat. The Romans did nourish in the Capitol certaine dogs, and geese which by their barking and gagling should give warning in the night of theeves that entered in: But if they
cryed in the day time when men came in to wor∣ship, then their leggs were broken, because they cryed when there was no cause. Those men have given a false Allarum, crying, barking, gaggling against us, against their mother, their brethren, as though we were all theeves, when there is no other cause, but that we desire to worship God reverently, which they cannot en∣dure.
It hath grieved my very soule to see my flocke thus straying in the praecipices of error and schisme, and I have endeavoured by all meanes to reduce them unto the unity of the Church, whereunto I was rouzed up by your Lordships commands, and therefore I presume to offer unto your Lordship this small account of my labours. The cause which I maintaine is just, the thing which I plead for, is order, and whether should I then goe for Patronage, but unto him who is the admired patterne of Iustice, and Patron of or∣der. Besides, If any thing could proceed from my meannesse, worthy of your Lordship, it is alrea∣dy deserved by your favours unto my selfe, and by your kindnesse unto Gods Church, which is such, that we were all most unthankfull, if we
did not acknowledge that your Lordship is next under his sacred Majesty, Instaurator Ecclesiae Hibernicae, and so a lively Image of him who is the true Defender of the faith upon earth. But I forbeare to give your Lordship your deserved prayses, lest I be thought like Psapho his bird which sung the prayses of him who nourished her. Besides as Alexander would be painted by none but Apelles, graven by none but Lysippus, one an excellent Paynter, the other an excellent Carver: So your Lordship deserves a worthyer pen to expresse the glory of your actions, and I hope such a one shall be found to perpetuat your memory unto the worlds end. In the mean time I shall pray God that this kingdome may be long blessed with your happy governement, and that your God may remember all the kindnesse that you have shewed unto his House: My Lord, this is the constant prayer of

