



HAuing heretofore (for the great liking which I saw generally conceiued of this worke) perused, allowed, and at my better leisure translated it into English, for the benefit of such as were not suffi∣ciently acquainted with the French; I was bold, ere the Translation were fully finished, to acquaint your L. with the Argument: who concurring with the rest in good liking and Iudgment; my intent to publish it vnder your Ls. Patro∣nage, was thereby fully confirmed.
SO that the Picture, which it pleased your L. to like of hereto∣fore, being in his first lineaments but rudely shadowed; is now presented with all his principal colours perfected and accom∣plished. I haue bin carefull to perfect it by the Paterne, and to limme it according to life: yet when I haue all don, it is but a Counterfait; which wanteth much of the perfection of the Prin∣cipal.
THE substance is none of mine; I challenge nought but the shadowe: wherein if the substance be truely represented, I hope it may be allowed of, though it be not curiously beautified.
I CONFES, it were better to put forth his owne Inuentions, for him that hath means to do it: and that, which this Author affir∣meth, namely, that Translations are more painful then praise-wor∣thy, is by me also acknowledged. For diligence assisted with iudge∣ment is herein chiefely requisite; and not any excellent knowledge thereunto required: which appeareth more in inuenting of it selfe, then in translating out of others. Which though it be done neuer so faithfully and elegantly, yet cometh alwaies short of the good grace of the Original: as this Author acknowledgeth, notwithstan∣ding Theodore Gaza an excellent Translator affirme the contrary.
BVT mine owne wit and Inuention, being vnable to write or inuent any thing worth the reading, yet my wil being a welwisher

to all good Inuentions; I thought it more commendable, to com∣mend and communicate to others, that which other men haue ex∣cellently inuented (being not able myselfe to attaine to so much ex∣cellency) then in publishing any fabulous fancy of mine owne, or matter of meane account, (as many do now adaies) to shew some arrogancy ioyned with my insufficiency.
THIS worke is a Comparison of this later age, with all antiquity in Armes, in Learning, and all other Excellency. There was neuer any mighty Empire or Monarchie, Kingdom, or Common-wealth, but is here represented; no famous Founder or Gouernor of State, no learned Law-maker, or worthy Warriour, but is here mencio∣ned; and ech of them to the other in all conueniences and contra∣rieties compared: which being don by a man of great learning and iudgment, to men of much businesse and employment (as to your L. especially) who haue no time to fetch euery thing from the Fountaine, search all Antiquitie, and read the Histories of all nati∣ons, must needs be much auaileable; and the pleasure thereof to all sorts of men accordingly answerable.
MY duety to your L. (to whom this hath bin long intended) hath at length commanded an Intermission of mine ordinary stu∣dies and exercises for the reuiewing and publishing hereof; vnder whose fauourable protection it is now communicated vnto all: who, continually partaking of your L. equity, goodnes, and benig∣nitie, are bound with me to pray for the continuance of your ho∣nour, health, and happines euerlastingly.
From the Middle-Temple the 6. of October. 1594.

