



IF I WERE to yeeld a rea∣son for my bold∣nesse, in presu∣ming to present by way of dedi∣cation, this my poore trauaile vnto your Ho∣nor: beside o∣ther of suffici∣ent force to moue me ther∣vnto, I might (and that truly) say, that the liuely sparks, and tried proofe of your L. Heroicall spirite, farre and neere with generall voice sounded out and emblazoned  our thankefull welwillers, your vndaunted cou∣ and valour abroad, your surpassing affabilitie

and courtly curtesie at home; and (which most is of all) your feruent zeale according to knowledge to∣ward the glorious Gospell of Christ, were causes mo∣uing, or rather vehemently thrusting me on, by this meanes and in this sort, dutifully to attempt your Honorable patience. Of such force is true Nobili∣tie, accompanied with hir proper adiuncts, and in∣uested with hir peculiar titles, that she draweth all men into the loue and admiration of hir. So that all men to their incredible comfort do ioyfully note and euidently behold the liuely image and expresse pa∣terne of that Mirror of Nobilitie, your late most magnificent father, brightly shining in you his sonne: being like ynough (through Gods good fauor, mercifully finishing that, which he hath alreadie graciously and richly begun in you) if not in ech point to surmount, (which is scarcely possible) yet at least to match (which is most Honorable) his martiall seruices, valorous prowesse, woorthie attempts, ven∣turous exploits, inuincible courage, renoumed boun∣tie, and most noble generositie.
The troupe therefore of Vertues, deliuered vnto your Honor (as it were by hand) from your so noble a Parent, and togither with the hereditarie succession of his lands, left, and (by nature) lineally descended vnto you, was the Loadestone, that mightily drew me, being a rude lumpe of vnwrought Yron, to ad∣mire your excellent graces: and by such meanes as I am able, to testifie this my zealous loialtie toward so Honorable a Gentleman, so rare a Peere, so sure a Botreaux vnto his Countrie, & so pretious a Pa∣ragon of perfect Nobilitie. Not doubting, but your

good Lordship will dispence with my presumption, d accept in good part this small token of my faith∣ll hart and loyall minde: which being most willing d readie, would not stay to performe (euen to the termost) that which I ought, if I could do that, hich (alas) I cannot.
The worke (my Lord) in my simple opinion, for the choise of the Argument, raritie of the matter, and profit of the circumstance deserueth to be ad∣uisedly read, attentiuely considered, effectually ru∣minated, and perfectly digested. I am the bolder thus much to speake in the behalfe of it, euen for Lemnius his sake, the chiefe Author thereof: whom especially I haue followed; although for re∣spects, not alwaies (as a Votarie) precisely tyed my selfe vnto his sentence, nor euerie where word for word religiously expressed his discourse. But haue (vpon occasion) in some places, added vnto him for the more perspicuitie: in some, taken away, to auoid diousnes and prolixitie: in many, by conference with other Authors, at large explaned that, which I thought was too compendiously couched, and ouer mystically inuolued in termes of obscuritie: but no where (perdie) otherwise haue I dealt, than I knowe to be vsually tolerable, and by good presidents a∣g the learned, authentically warrantable.
e frankly confesse, and willingly professe my  haue beene singularly delighted in reading  of this mans learned bookes: and haue part∣ly testified my good liking thereof, tenne yeeres ago, by publishing in print a profitable Worke of his, vn∣der the title of The Touchstone of Complexi∣ons;

which I then translated out of Latine into English, in my natiue Countrie of Chesshyre, and dedicated vnto the Right Honorable, my singular good Lord, the Baron of Cobham.
Receiue now therefore (Right Honorable) into your protection and patrociny, these my poore labors▪ and if they seeme woorthie, shrowd them from the criticall doome of waiwarde Wranglers and surly Areopagites, that without looking into my intent, will perhaps be busie ynough to condemne mine at∣tempt. Which humble sute, as I doubt not but to ob∣taine at your Honors hands: so, enioying the same, I shall thinke my paines sufficiently recompenced; my selfe to enterprise some other thing to your L. li∣king, encouraged: and to be ech way as surely gar∣ded, as Vlysses euer thought himself vnder the shield of noble Aiax.
From my poore house at Little Ilford in Essex, the 26. of May. 1587. 
