



AMge all the naci∣ons▪ in whome I haue wandered, for the knoweledge of thynges (moste be∣nygne soueraygne) I haue founde noise so negligent and vntoward, as I haue foūd England in the due serch of theyr auncyent hystoryes, to the syngulare fame and bewtye therof. Thys haue I (as it were) wyth a wofulnesse of hert,

sens my tendre youthe bewayled, and so muche the more, for that I haue not, accordinge to the naturall zele whyche I beare to my contreye, ben able to re∣dresse it for vng tyll pouerte. A much forther plage hath fallen of late yeares Idolorouslye lamente so greate an ouersyghte in the moste lawfull ouer∣throw of the sodometrouse Abbeyes & Fryeryes, when the most worthy mo∣numentes of this realme, so myserably peryshed in the spoyle. Oh, that men of learnyng & of perfyght loue to there nacyon, were not thē appoynted to the serche of theyr lybraryes, for the conser¦ciō of those most noble Antiquitees. Couetousnes was at that tyme so bu∣sy aboute pryuate commodite, that pub¦lyque wealthe in that moste necessarye and godly respecte, was not any where regarded. Yf your most noble father of excellent memory, Kynge Henry the viij. had not of a godly zele, by specyall commyssyon, dyrected maystre Iohan Leylande, to ouerse nombre of theyr sayde libraries, we had lost infynyte treasure of knowledge, by the spoyle,

which anon after folowed of their due suppression.
By that meanes we are yet in hope of somwhat to come forewarde, to the inestymable glory of the lande, namely hys worthye worckes, de Antiquitate Britannica, & de illustribus uiris, with hys Epigrāmes and Epicedes, whiche a great nombre of godly men most fer∣uently despereth. This treatyse folow∣ynge, of hys laboriouse progresse, haue I with al mekenesse, dedycated to your magnificent Maiestie, as a iust possessi¦on to the ryght inherytour. For fyrste was it geuen of the Authour, to youre most noble father of famouse memory in steade of a lowly newe yeares gyft, now do I restore it t youre worthye hyghnesse, his naturall sonne and only true successour in kingely dygnyte, as youre owne propre good, with all sub∣mission decent. I shall not nowe neade to recite to your learned maiestie, what profyte aryseth by continuall readinge of bokes, specyally of aunceyent hysto∣ries, after the necessayre searche of the Byble scryptures, for the treatyse here

folowinge will lenteously declare it. They treat what is in ych cōmōwelth to be folowed, and what to be chefely eschewed. What causeth a realme to floryshe, and what doth dyminish the estate therof, wyth a thousande of like matters. They much deceyue Christen Prynces, that disswade them from ver¦tuouse studie of the sacred scryptures, and Chronicles, as the vprulent papy∣stes haue done vp al practyses possible to make thē the ymages of theyr beast∣in father of Rome, Apoc. xiij.
Moste of all it becometh a kynge, to knowe the lawes of the Lorde, for he here in earthe by power representeth hys eternall maieste. Be learned (saith Dauid) ye kinges that iudge the world embrace good instruccyons, least he in his anger do iustly abhorre yow. Psal. ij. The honour of a kynge (sayth Salo∣mon.) standeth not in strengthe, and ryches, but in the searche of wholsome doctryne, to dyuide the drosse from the syluer, and to folowe Goddes holy cō∣maundementes, Prouer. xxii. A saying it was a thousande, a hondred, and. xxx

yeares ago, suche tyme as Paulus O∣rosius was here a wryter, that the doc¦tryne of Christ was cause of the decay of the cōmen wealth of the Romanes. Against them that so blasphemously ba¦bled, the sayde Orosius wrote. vij. no∣ble bokes, as a confutacion of that per∣nycyouse errour: yet is that moste vn∣happy and deuylyshe opynyon, nowe raysed vp agayne frō hell, and brought hyther into Englande, by a great nō∣bre of obstynate Papystes, and despe∣rate lybertynes (it is to be feared) to the dreadfull dampnacyon of manye. Yf any plage or ponishement for synne do chaunce vpon vs, by the ryghtful hand of God, then is the Gospel or message of saluacyon, wrongfully accused and noysed abroade, to be the chefe cause, and sturrer vp therof, and not theyr owne fornycacyon and brybery wyth a thousande myschieues more, whiche calleth to God for dayly vengeaunce.
We had neuer good worlde (saye they) sens thys newe learnynge came in, neyther are we lyke to haue, tyll it be clerely bannyshed agayne. O voyce

more aparaunt to come from deuylles then from mē christened. The sonne of the lyuinge God Iesus Christ sheweth vs the playne cause, why these wycked persones so obstynatlye dwell in the hate of hys heauenly word. Euery one (sayth he) that worketh wyckednesse doth abhorre that lyghte, because they wyll not their myschieues therby to be knowne. For that lyghte manyfesteth to the worlde, their fowle naughty do∣ynges, and shameful oppressions to re∣buke. Iohn. iij. These seke but to reigne here in a fleshelye lyberte, ouer other mennes wyues & goodes, for the time of theyr cursed lyues, whiche the scrip∣tures wyl not permyt them. And ther∣fore they fret at the very harte, & would haue them bannyshed the contrey, that they so myghte lyue here wythoute checke. These wyth suche other moste detestable abuses, whose due reforma∣cyon chiefely belongeth to a king, may as in a clere mirrour, be seane in ye said scryptures and chronycles. It may al∣so in them be perceyued, wherof they aryse, and how they may wele by good

ordre be abolyshed. And therfore I rec∣ken the contynual searche of them, to a Christen Gouernoure most necessary.
We fynde Exodi. i. that the mighty Magistrate vndre God Moyses, amōg his other most worthy actes, droue the deuouryng locustes, which had in E∣gypte destroyed al that was greue vpō the earthe, into the reade sea, and there drowned thē so, that they were no more sene. The like wrought your highnesses most noble father of excellent memory Kynge Henry the. viij. though it were in an other kinde, suche time as he dys∣charged this his realme of Antichristes noyful cattel, Monkes, Chanons, Fri∣res, Nonnes, Heremites, Perdoners, and soule syngers, with other execra∣ble sectes of perdicion. Neuerthelesse oure Egypcyanes both of the clergye, and layte, haue soughte euer sens, and yet seketh to this daye, to leade youre Maiesties people in a palpable kynde of darkenesse vp their masses, and other sorcerouse witchcraftes, as lately ape∣red in the last commocyon of Corne∣wale and Deuenshyre, to reduce them

agayne to the olde obedyence of the great Pharao of Rome, in ye stynkyng kyngedome of ydolatry. But your no∣ble counsell, to withstande thys vyo∣lence, hath hytherto moste worthelye wrought, in the myghtie worde of the Lorde, & in the stronge power of your regall rodde, to dryue thys horryble plage of darkenesse from the face of thys earthe, and our good hope is, that they wyl gracyously so styll continue.
Salomon is commended of Iesus ye sonne of Syrach, Eccle. xlvij. for that the Lorde had hym replenyshed wyth all wysdome, & for hys sake had dryuē the enemyes awaye farre of, that he myghte buylde an howse in hys name, and prepare vnto hym a sanctuary for euer, whych al to this daye we behold in youre kyngelye persone fulfylled, prayeng vnto God that it maye so styl endure. As in your pryncelye begyn∣nynges ye apere vnto as a very Iosias both in youre tendre youthe & vertuouse educacyon, so our specyal hope is, that in your dayly procedinges we wyl styl perseuer the same. The lykelyhodes in

dede are very aparaunte, Gods name be praysed for it. For by your gracy∣ouse commaundemēt, hath bene taken awaye the abhomynacyons of the vn∣godlye. Whyche is a playne tokē, that ye haue dyrected youre noble harte to the lyuynge Lorde, intendynge to set vp hys true worshyppynges agayne. That we delyuered (as Zacharias the marryed prest sayth, Luce. i.) out of the cruell handes of oure enemyes, maye serue hym from hens fourth wythout feare, all the dayes of oure lyfe. These moste godlye pryncyples refresheth your christen subiectes, and so greatly delyteth their obedyent hartes, that the onely remēbraunce of youre maiesties name, is to them now more plesaunt, swete, & delycyouse, than is any other pleasure wordly, lyke as was ye name of the fyrst Iosias to the people of that age. Eccle. xlix. The eternall lyuynge God prospere youre hyghnesse in all kyndes of learnynge & vertue, and pre¦serue you in longe lyfe vpon earth, to ye glorye of hys holye name & conforte of your louynge subiectes. Amen.
