



IT pleased you, (ighte honorable) aboute nine yeares ago, to accepte me into your seruice: and being then desirous to stu∣dye the arte of reasoning, ye made me your reader: and vsed at sundry times to conferre vvith me in that kinde of learning. There vvas in you (be it spoken to the praise of God, and vvithout all suspition of flaterie) both a gentle nature, easie to be ttained to take pleasure in studie: and also a sharpnes of vvit, readie to conceiue at the first anye doctrine that vvas orderlye taught. So that doubtlesse, if there had not bene a lacke in

me, your L. had long ago profited righte vvell in this arte. The lacke vvhich vvas in mee then, and vvhich I novve remember vvith greife, vvas this: I vsed no good trade to cause your L. to take pleasure in studye, and not to faile of your appointed houres. Verilye it is requisite in all them, vvhich shalbe readers to men of noble birth, that besides knovvledge and diligence to teach, they haue also a certaine sleight, and cun∣ning, to cause their scholers to delight in learning: and so to vse the matter, that per∣sonages of high estate be neither dravven from the loue of their booke, by to muche forced exercise: nor suffered to lose their appointed time of studie, for lacke of a graue and alurable calling vpon, for the one breedeth a lothsomnesse, and the other a forgetfulnesse. But albeit that your L. hath had losse through my lacke of skill in thys point, yet it so falleth out novv, that manye are like to make gaine of your losse. For the lacke vvhich vvas in me, vvhē I serued your honour, hath since bene the chiefe occasion vvhy I haue vvritten this booke, to make some parte of recompence to you. In consi∣deration

vvhereof, I most humblye desire you, to take in good parte, that I dedicate this simple vvorke vnto your L. for my de∣sire is, that it maye pase foorth vnder your protection. If you like vvell of it, I shall not onely thinke my paines vvell bestovved: but my self also to haue a sufficient defence against all ill reportes. Martine Bucer read ouer this arte, in his old days, and renevved in his age, the rules that he learned thereof in his youth. If you minde to renevve your studie, and once againe to assaye, vvhat you can do to obtaine this excellent arte, I offer vnto you my seruice and diligence, as maye best stande vvith your pleasure and my cal∣ling. The rules of this arte are generall, and vpon them grovveth a general knovvledge. VVho hath a pregnant vvit, and is cunning in this facultie, shall haue both to speake, and to iudge, of any matter vvhatsoeuer. If learning be ioyned to vertue and honour, so that they three take place in one person at once, it is a vvonder to see, hovve all mens eyes are bent vppon such a one, and vvhat hope they conceyue of his vveldoing. My prayer is therfore, that your L. may so con∣sider

of this, that as you, in tvvo of these, do exceede almost all: so in the third ye might not be inferior to manye. But hauing al∣vvayes afore your eyes the feare of God, the loue of your Prince, and the duety, you doe ovve to the common vvealth, your L. may liue many ioyfull dayes vvith your louing spouse, increase your noble house vvith immortall fame, and finally, at the good time appointed, rest vvith the Lorde Christ for euer.
