



My singular good Lord and Patron.
RIght Reuerend Lord) There is a disease in the Natures of men, most powerful in the vulgar and base multitude, to mis-interpret, (yet to interpret) all mens pro∣ceedings: Therefore the best cause doth most neede protecti∣on, lest otherwise, it receiue wrong in their iniurious and false constructions. For this particular; the frame and disposition is my owne, and therefore I willingly submitte that to a mercifull Iudgement. The Subject is not mine, but Gods, being extract from sacred Authorities; and therefore of it selfe able to resist all opposition. Here-hence I deriue my comfort, that the worthinesse of the Subject may giue supplyment to my verse, that wants woorth: and that in the opinion of good men, I shall be thought to haue done more, in giuing a religious matter this poore forme, than others (that with much industry and arte) haue painted the deformed face, of profane and idle Inuentions. The reasons (my good Lord) that moue me to this dedication, are these; First, the many testi∣monies I haue of your Lordships gratious respecting me, which earnestly presse me, to returne this little demonstration of thankes, where I haue receiued so much fauor. Next, your Lordships trauell, to conti∣nue

the body of Religion vnited; or rather, to make vp the rent and diuision. Wherein God hath made you prosperous▪ giuing you spirite to enterprise, and vic∣tory to finish a care of that religious importance. And because this Crucifix I present, is a Meditation of the sufferings and death of Christ, represented to vs in the ceremony of the Crosse, (in the holy vse whereof, your Lordshippe hath fortunately trauelled.) I haue therfore thought this Dedication (of right) to belong vnto your Grace, assuring my selfe, that where the Shadow, there the Substance; where the Figure, there the Trueth; and where the Crosse, there the Christ, shall finde gratious and glad acceptance. The which, with all respects of duety and humblenesse, I offer vn∣to your Lordship: beseeching God to giue you to support the reputation of Learning, (helpfull to both the States of Church and kingdom:) and after this life▪ perpetuity with the holy Angells and Saints.

