



I Was prswaded to present you with this Trea∣tise trāslated by  into our mo∣ther tongue, that hath appea∣red far better  in ow∣yde it was first inuested, only through the loue and respect I beare to your so we deser∣ming persons; whose speciall endeauors amidst your other sorous imployments in that famous Citty, should be, and
I hope is, the attayning of such a traffike, that may more redound to the profit of your Soules, then your temporall Estates: since you know well that a sure and solid founda∣tion of true Religion wor∣keth Eternall Saluation; and the contrary eternall woe and misery, though otherwise one were neuer so fortunate in all worldly prosperity.
The worke it selfe is but of some few houres reading, and the Author I hope will not be distastfull vnto yow in respect of his person, though otherwise of a different Pro∣fession & habit. And though
I doubt not, but that many of your haue already seene other learned Bookes of like subiect: yet because this af∣foardeth so great variety of forcible Motiues, both sin∣gularly chosen, and most apt∣ly expressed, to settle mens Consciences in so waighty an affayre as this is; I haue therfore thought good to present it to your View, though in a more humble, and far lesse polished stile, then so profitable a subiect deserueth.
And heerunto I was the more encouraged by vnder∣standing the great fruite and
profit which many haue all ready, and do dayly reape by a diligent perusall of this Booke in other languages, hoping for no lesse in our owne then it hath produced in the Latin, French, and Dutch; especially in men so zealous in that Profession, which hath by in these later tymes preached vnto you: Which zeale of yours would no doub be more feruent, if Gods Grace by other mothes proposed, should open your eyes to see the cleernes of the Catholike Verity.
Neither should it offend you, that (your Consciences
hauing byn setled▪ these 60. yeares last past in the Faith that was then proposed vnto you) now a new reuiew of matters belonging to Religi∣on should be offered. For synce the Scripture doth pre∣monish vs that Heresies must of necessity be, and false Tea∣chers would come to disturbe the peace and vnity of the Church (of which sort, as is apparent by her contrary do∣ctrines, this our vnfortunate Age hath byn most fertile:) it is doublesse no disgrace, or signe of leuity or inconstan∣cy by a diligent and iudicious examen to try which of all
these diuers spirits is of God, and which is that Catholike Church so often commended vnto vs in the Scriptures, as nothing more plainely and seriously.
In which important search the Reading of this little, but golden Treatise, will by Gods grace affoard such light to discerne Truth from Fals∣hood, and such meanes to find out the true gate of Ca∣tholike faith which only lea∣deth to saluation, as may sa∣tisfy the most Iudicious; espe∣cially if they reade with that humblenes of spirit, as they ought to do, who desyre to
know the Truth.
In reading therfore, consi∣der attentiuely euery Passage, & ponder the waight and sub∣stance of ech Reason, not po∣sting the same ouer, as many do, transpotted with curiosity to read all new Bookes that come forth; and I doubt not you will receaue aboundant satisfaction.
Read then (most wor∣thy Cittizens) the ensuing Consultation, with an indi∣fferent and vnpartiall eye, that you may enrich your soules with the treasure of true knowledg & doctrine which leadeth to eternall Life and
Happines. Wherof I humbly beseech his diuine Maiesty to make you partakers, to whom I haue heerewith dedicated both my selfe and seruice, to remayne

This 30 of Septemb. 1618.
