


RIght vvorshipfull, & my ve∣ry
good Lady, after I had peru∣sed
this litle treatise of Chri∣stian
righteousnes, as it vvas
first vvritten in the Frenche
tongue, I tooke great cōfort in it & thought
it to be very necessary, to be turned into
Englishe for the benefite of Christes poore
Church. I therefore as occasiō serued at con∣uenient
times, performed that I purposed,
vvherein I haue studied to be as simple and
plaine (because of the vnlearned) as possibly
the matter & phrase of that tongue vvould
suffer me. I am not ignoraunt vvhat an
hard thing it is to translate vvell, and con∣trarivvise,
hovv easie a thing it is for eue∣ry
carping Momus, or ignoraunt zoilus to

finde fault: but herein I shall as God shall a∣sist
me, arme my selfe vvith paciēce to beare
vvhatsoeuer hath bin, is, or shalbe layd vpon
me. This only shall cōfort me, that I vvalke
not before men, but before God: in vvhose
presence I protest, that according to the sim∣ple
knovvledge he hath giuen me, I haue
dealt simply and sincerely. Of all vanities I
esteeme it the greatest, to hange vppon the
blastes of mens mouthes. They that are that
vvaies caried highest, and haue not the te∣stimony
of good consciences, neither seeke to
approue themselues to God, to vvhom they
must stand or faule, they shall finde no com∣fort
in it, in the day of death. It litle auaileth
a man to be iustified of the vvhole vvorld,
and to be condemned before God. Therefore
God giue vs grace to vvalke as in his pre∣sence,
that vvhatsoeuer vve take in hande,
it may be consecrated to him, & haue an ex∣cellent
blessing vpon it. I haue dedicated my
labours herein, to your good Ladyshippe for
sundry causes, thogh I deny not, but my mea∣ning
is to make them common to the church
of God: first that they may be a testimony to

all posterity of your forvvardnes, fidelity &
sinceritie in the religion of Christ Iesus:
Then, of my bounden duety and good vvill
tovvards you. And I most humbly beseeche
you in the eyes and sight of the vvhole
vvorlde, that you constantly and inuiolably
holde and keepe that blessed hope of your
best inheritance. And as God in mercy hath
dravven you out of the sincke and mier of
Poperie, and of the false vvorshippe of God
(vvherto, as to all other vices vve are most
apt by nature) to the true religion of Christ,
so goe forvvards, and most humbly and con∣tinually
thanke him for it. Acknovvledge
it the greatest benefit that euer in mercy he
coulde haue bestovved vppon you. Bevvare
of the vvorld, that maketh least accompt of
this most excellent, and vvaighty thinge.
Study by all meanes to ansvvere this holy &
excellent callinge, that your religion may
shine as vvell in vvorkes as in vvordes, in
an holy conuersation as in a sincere profes∣siō.
Knovv assuredly that vvhere the truth
of God raigneth, there the kingdome of Sa∣than
decaieth, the strength of sinne abateth,

the pleasures of the flesh are restrained, &
Iesus Christ by the scepter of his holy vvord
& blessed spirit, cōtinually vvorketh, to the
daily mortifying of the outvvard man and
quickening the invvard, to the brideling &
maistering of the affections of the mind: till
it be renued, reformed & chaunged into his
holy obedience, and so by litle and litle be
translated into his kingdome. And till this
be brought to passe, you shall neuer feele
vvhat Christes righteousnes is (vvhich is
our only happines) vvherof this booke so no∣tably
& comfortably entreateth. The Lord
Iesus open your heart, and giue you vnder∣standing
in all his misteries, that you may see
his great glory, till you may comprehende
vvith all Saincts the height, depth, vvidth
and length of his glorious righteousnes, lay∣ing
holde vpon it through aliuely faith, and
so be sealed vp through him (as I doubt not
but you are) to euerlasting happines, fare you
vvell most humbly from my poore house this
seconde of Nouember. 1577.

