



SIR,
AS the Lord in Iu∣stice will adiudge those to bee wicked and slothfull ser∣uants,
Mat. 25.26 that improue not his Ta∣lents: So in Mercie bee graci∣ously
accepteth our Free-will offerings, aswell of Goates Haire and Rammes Skinnes,
Exo. 25.34 as of Gold and Siluer, offered for building his Spiritual Ta∣bernacle; Who is well pleased, not so much with the Extention, as Intention of the Offering: And among the Gentiles, ,
Suid in Voe  It was thought suf∣ficint, if poore men that were not able to sacrifice a liuing Bull, did but offer a Bull of Mele. Vpon consideration of these, I presume that your wor∣thy & Christian disposition, wil not disdaine to accept and pro∣tect the inarticulate Voice of
this Abortive Infant, whose weake and warbling Notes cannot be more disliked by most censorious Criticisme or scorn∣full Ignorance, than by his owne Author. Which if distra∣ction of my thoughts in other businesse, and passages of my Function, had suffered me ful∣ly to peruse, they might happily haue given a more distinct and lowder Echo. But the neuer-enough deplored Iniquities of the Times and place where I liue, enforced them to Aborti∣on; and made me cry out with the Prophet, My bowels,
Ier. 4.19. my bowels, I am payned at my very heart, my heart ma∣keth
a noyse within mee, I cannot hold my peace:
Ier. 20.9. For the Word of the Lord was in my heart, as a burning fire shut vp in my bones,
Psal. 69.10. and I was weary with for∣bearing, and I could not stay. But because when I wept and chastened my soule with Fasting, that was turned to my reproach;
Aug. Con∣fess. 10.12. Rideat me ista di∣centem, qui ista non sentit, & ego dolbo ridentem me; Let him that feeleth not these things, scorne me that say these things, and I will weepe for him that scorneth mee.
How ever the tongue of most men be like Hanuns Rasors,
2 Sam. 10.4
still cutting off, and disfiguring the most holy intents. My hope is,
Theed li. 4.26. that as Aphraates hauing spent the greatest part of his life in solitary Places, could ex∣cuse his vnaccustomed walking once in the streets of Antio∣chia (for which he was admi∣red) by the example of a Maid that all her dayes had kept her selfe within her Fathers house, vntill the violence of a sud∣daine Fire constrained her to bewray some Immodestie, to goe abroad, and give notice of the imminent danger: So now, my first stepping foorth vpon the Stage of the World from my retired Privacie, where ,
Plutarch. Hier de Vi∣tando susp. Contub.
my day∣ly Taske is, Praeterita mea plangere vitia, & vitare prae. sentia) to warn wanton World∣lings, delighting onely in the Sardonian laughter, to a∣bandon their exorbitant enor∣mities by holy weeping, may bee taken in good part; seeing, as sayeth the Schooleman,
Aquin 2.2 107. 1.2. Vo∣luntas est mensura actio∣num. And my endeauour pro∣ceedeth from a will to doe good. Wherein if I seeme to haue stirred a course opposite to the liking of the Multitude, or that my Matter be Cynicall, and Methode Triuiall, al∣most approuing the Practicall
Phylosophy (which I dis∣claime) of Heraclius in his sullen humor; or that others,
Erasm. in Adag. In antro Trophonii vatici∣nantes, should become irrisible: I haue resolued, and doe e∣steeme it a part of my Felicitie vpon Earth, to be accounted a Stoicke of all the world, so I be a Peripateticke to Christ: For sensibly spake he, and fit∣tingly (mee thinkes) to our Times, who Weeping said, that though we commit no other sin,
Hier in A∣pol. contr. Ruffin. Certe verum tacuisse pecca∣tum est, To conceale the Truth is Sinne.
A sufficient Apologie for my bold adventure of publish∣ing
this Essay of my poore en∣deauours, may be the Raritie or rather Nullitie of Ortho∣doxe Tractats in this Argu∣ment.
Bellarm de Gemit. Co∣lum. Bessas Heraclit. Christ. Two onely Popish Dis∣courses, the one of Bellar∣mine, the other of Bessaeus, I meete with; In which, be∣cause (without disparagement to their Learning) their La∣bours are fraught full of fri∣gid, frothy, superfluous, and superstitious Speculations; I haue published this Embryo, though , hee may cost mee the publication of my Ignorance. As then no mo∣tive of this wretched World, but zeale to promote Gods
glory, and Christs Gospell, moved mee to expose these, to the view of this censorious World: So in humble acknow∣ledgement of your many kind∣nesses towards mee, They doe make mention of your Name in the Frontispice. Where be pleased (I beseech you) to accept my briefe and ingenuous Con∣fession, that the Quotations, Quid cuius esset simpliciter confitentes, had these causes: 1. To remove Imputations of Singularitie, and Phantasti∣call delight in going alone: 2. To aduantage (I hope) the Truth; as Testimonies of very Heathens are inserted by A∣postles:
3.
Hieron. in Epitaph. Nep. Hierome estee∣med it a maine argument of In∣genuity in his Nepotian and worthy of imitation: 4. To a∣voide that forging Tricke of Iesuiticall Legerdemaine: 5. I know not better how to confirme what I alledge, then by acknowledging whence I had it. Therefore knowing mine owne defects (Let others Nar∣cissus like content themselues with their own Conceptions) I doe so reverence and admire the rich Compositions of Ancient times, as that I can∣not but accord to them, that (in worthy examples) hold Imi∣tation better then Inventi∣on.
Vouchsafe then (deare Sir) Acceptance of Patro∣nage to this weake Watch▪ word, which feareth the sen∣tence of Weakenesse,
Galen. de Nat facul. l. 2. c. 9. ) though lesse then of Ingrati∣tude: And therefore desireth not so much to expose my Ob∣servations to the World, as my Observance to you, for the fatherly care you ever had in cherishing my Labours, and encouraging my Studies. For which, I pray GOD, to pro∣long your Time with much comfort here, and crowne it with Eternity.
Addimus his precibus Lachryma quo{que}, verba precāri Perlegis, & lachryma finge videre meas.


