



THERE is no ende of making many bookes,Eccle. 1. and much reading is a wearinesse to the flesh: and in our carelesse daies, bookes may ra∣ther seeme to want rea∣ders, then readers to want bookes: whether men desire to tast, and see howe gratious the Lorde is, in learned and Godly discourses;Psal. 34. or otherwise feede their own fancies on the chaffe and huskes of vnlearned and vnsavory pam∣phlets; fitter for children, then men, for infidels then Christians, for swine, then for the prodigal sonne. This consideration well digested,Luke. 16. had wel nigh induced mee to resolve with Licimus, that neither learned, nor vnlearned shoulde reade any of my doinges: not the one, because they are of that stupiditie, that they conceive not ones meaning; not the other, as beeing so wise, that I may dispare of satisfiyng their ex∣act

iudgementes. And doubtlesse, had not my good friend Master Wright, your Worships most diligent and learned Preacher, (at what time you most honourably managed your worthy embassage in Fraunce of late) had not that paineful member of the Church, and common∣wealth, in peace and warre, devoted to Mars, as well as to Mercury when need required, & Gods glory craved his service, had not that tri∣ed souldier of Christ in the vniversity, citie, and country, yea and in the field among the pikes, having pervsed this sermon, greatly animated mee to publish it: I woulde never have brought stickes into the woode, and cast water into the sea, as I doe. Another speciall motive that al∣tered my determination, was this, that I might some way testifie my most gratefull minde to∣wards you, & my very singular good Lady, for your sundry, rare, & vndeserved favours, hea∣ped & multiplied vpō me. If any of Gods Mini∣sters have iust cause, both to love, and honour their loving and liberal benefactors & patrons: thē may that learned Preacher Master Iennings, that grave Devine, Master Sheward, that zea∣lous Trumpettor of Gods word, Master Wright, with others of good note in that famous vni∣versitie, but chiefly I, acknowledge your wor∣ship as a true patterne of all patrons. All men see your magnanimity, prudence, temperance,

affability, constancy, and zeale to Gods glorie: but wee feede daily on your vertue, and mag∣nifie God for such a stay at home, and such an ornament abroad, as is a spectacle of iustice, so∣briety, and true Godlines. The Lorde alwaies blesse you with all his blessings, and blesse vs with you, to the vnspeakeable bene∣fite of Gods Church, for whose good, he hath raised you vp.

This xviij of Iune.
