



Euer Honoured.
MY creeping & weake studies neither a∣ble to go, nor speake for themselues, do (like Pyrrhus in Plutarch) in silence craue your tuition. For they desire, when they now come to light, to refuge to you

who next to God first gaue them life. Your incouragment and incitation did first set mee forward to the culture of holy tongues, and heere I offer you the first fruites of my barren haruest. Your tried learning and tried loue, assure me that you both can iudge soundly, and yet withall will not iudge too heaui∣ly of my weake endeauours; and such a Patron my booke desi∣reth. This hath caused to you, this present trouble, and in mee this present boldnesse. I know it had beene more secure to haue beene obscure, and not to haue come thus to publike Hazzard; for as the Romane said well,

it is hard when the world shall shew me mine infirmi∣ties vnder mine owne hand: yet haue I had some reason, to manifest my selfe thus openly to the view of all. Some there bee that haue hardly censured of me for idlenesse and sloath) as they make it) because (it seemes) I intrude not euery moment into the supply of other mens Mini∣steries, since it hath not yet plea∣sed God, to preferre and promote me to a charge of mine owne. I know well the saying of the Apo∣stle Romans. 1.14. belongs to all Ministers, To Greekes and Barbarians, to the wise and foolish they are all deb∣tors,

and (as the Syrian addes) leakrez, they are debtors to preach:The Syri∣an to that verse adds a wod which may well serue for a Com∣ment mebhaichh∣euo leakrez▪ I am a debtor, or I ought to preach. And who so is neces∣sarily called, and refuseth, is as bad as the false Prophets were, that would run before they were sent, nay, hee may seeme rather worse, that when he is sent will not goe. From this censure how farre I am free, my conscience tells me; though I must con∣fesse that I am not so hasty as many bee, to intrude my selfe, where is no neessity: This hath among some purchased mee the skarr of slothfulnesse: to vindicate which I haue here ventured as children doe, to shoot another arrow to find one

 is lost▪ so haue I hazzar∣ed my Credit one way to saue it nother. I know mine owne eakenesse, and that this my aines, to schollers, may seeme t idle: yet had I rather vnder∣e any censure, then the blot of e other Idlenesse, the begetter  all euil, and of vnthankfulnes, e hinderer of all good. This  the cause that brings mee to a ke, and my booke to you. That the one I may testifie to the rld that I loue not to bee idle,  by the other witnesse to you,  I loue not to be vnthankful. ept I beseech you of so small esent, and so troublesome a nkfulnesse, and what I want

in tongue and effect, I will an∣swer in desire and affection: su∣ing alwyes to the Throne of Grace, for the present prosperi∣tie of your selfe and your nobl Lady, and the future felicitie of you both hereafter.
From my studie at Horn∣sey, neere LONDON. March 5. 1629.

