


WHEN as I did perceyue that my presence and preaching in Englande, should not muche profit, then did I take a long iourney or pilgremage vntoo holie places voyde of Images, inhabited with good Sainctes nowe liuing, whereas in prayer vntoo God, studie of the scriptures, and councelling with godly ler∣ned men, I did euer desire and seeke some way too helpe my natiue countrie. And nowe truely if any man or woman belonging vntoo Englande, and abyding there or elsewhere, will reade this little Booke diligentely, they shall see the way howe too please God, too profit their countrie, too discharge their duetie, too comforte their consci∣ences, and too tourne all perillous Plagues intoo plentifull prouision of all thinges necessarie and commodious for their countrie (beyng Christes Churche) for themselues and for all theirs. Ther∣fore, ô Englande, I an Englishe man enuying or hating no person, high or lowe, riche or poore, but of charitie afore God wishing to euery one as too my selfe, haue made, dedicate and sent this little booke vntoo thee, as a token to witnesse my will, and acknowledge my duetie towardes thee. God graunt that suche thinges as bee well made and

ment for thee, may be well taken and vsed of thee, vnto Gods glorie, vntoo thy profit, and vntoo the comfort of Christians in Christ.
For I take God to witnes that I doo not mean or purpose to charge any maner of persons with any faultes, or too threaten them with any pla∣gues, but such as their owne conscience shall force them to finde in the lawes and commaundementes of God, nor also too flatter any person in forging fayned shifts and refuges, but faithfully to teache euery man that plaine way of godly healthe and welthe whiche is conteyned in the common creede, in that fayth whiche the holie catholike Churche of Christe doth professe.
Therfore all my laboure in studie and prayer for thee vntoo God is, that thou mayest learne to see the dangers of thyne owne deseruings by the lawe of God, and to finde and take the right way to gods sauing helth, welth, & kingdome by faith in Christe For euen as God did once driue his peo∣ple out of Egipt by many greeuous euils to be al∣lured towardes the holy land by moste comforta∣ble promises: so dothe hee nowe by many dangers driue thèe from the wickednesse and vengeance in this worlde, to be called and guyded by grace vn∣too all godly comfort and commodities in Chryste Iesu. Amen. So be it.
At Geneua. 1556.
