



YOur eare hath beene partaker of that I nowe present to your eye. In all things vsually one sense maketh way for the other, and the second perfecteth the first: for hea∣ring doth render that but farre off, which seeing giueth neerer hand. A speaker is then happiest in his labour, when words are permanent and fixed. And that, ei∣ther
in the heart and meditation of the hearer, when the Spirit and finger of God, by zeale and industrious labour printeth them there, as so many engrauen letters: or when to helpe memory, they are exposed to publique view; for sounds doe passe in the aire, this hath the priuiledge of a constant continuance. Sermons deliuered in that audience, are principally for the gouernours of this Honourable Cittie. Therefore I offer it to you by dedication, as I did before in speaking vnto many. Many were ab∣sent, you a present hearer in the time of vacation, when your place being Sheriffe required residence. Moreouer, being for a time a labourer in your Parish, as smaller riuers vse not to breake out into seuerall Chanels if one be preserued full: I let this come to you among the rest, as with a greater confluence. Small I terme this gift in respect of the Authour, and his sufficience. The words eminence which may be seene in plannesse, and natiue simplicity; is onely worth the reckoning. God the great guide of this
world hath giuen the smallest starres their influence. And the milky circle in Heauen (so it is called) consisteth of those starres that are scarce discernable, they are not for that excluded from the Fir∣mament. For although the great Philo∣sopher supposed that circle to be lower, and out of the Heauens: yet the fictions of vnskilfull antiquity made it the way to Paradise, and the caelestiall Court. My desire is, that the word being forcible in the meanest instrument, may moue in the Orbe by this publique passage, to di∣rect on earth, and yeeld the way to Hea∣uen: For this end, I hold it better to com∣mit the prosperous successe of it to him aboue, that committed the deliuerance to me: then to feare the vncertaine cen∣sures of a Criticke. This being the in∣tent of the Writer, I desire the Readers true practise, and entertainment may make it good.

