



Madame;
SEeing the importunities of ma∣ny great and worthy Persons will not suffer the Authour of these Sermons to lie hid in ob∣scuritie; I doe heere present you with a mite of his Labors: your Vertues iustly challenging at my hands richer returnes, then a bandfull of Lilies. Yet, as the learned and iudicious eye, will happly delight it
selfe to beholde the resemblance of the Authours face; so I trust your humble and religious heart will somewhat recreate it selfe with the heauenly sauour of his gracious words.
Let them that knew not his person, iudge his worth by these liuing Images of his soule: for they that knew him, do affoord him the testimony of a milde and humble spirit, fraught with all rich Iewells of excellent learning and knowledge. Of his vertues, what greater euidence can be, then the sweet sauour of a good name? Of his learning, what better proofe can we haue, then the admira∣ble commendations of them who most excell in all excellent knowledge?
O the admirable height of iudgement, and depth of learning that dwelt within the lowly minde of this true humble man! great in all wise-mens eies, except his owne. With what grauity and maiesty of speach did his Tongue and Pen vtter heauenly mysteries? What sweet streames of sanctified elo∣quence did flow from his gracious lips? whose eies, in the true humility of his heart, were alwaies cast downe to the ground: all things that proceeded from his blessed mouth, were sweetely breathed out, as from the spirit of Loue; so that the most famous Vniuersity of Cambridge, once his nur∣sing-Mother,
giues this honourable testimony of him; That for Life and Learning, the whole world hath not many such men. But what shall I say more? His praise is with God.
J here then (good Madame) salute your La∣diship with this little Mite; knowing you to be furnished with many Graces; but chiefly, the ground of all grace, and noblenesse, true Humi∣lity, which neuer takes offence at good-meanings: Therefore all happinesse, shall euer be wished to you, and all yours; by me, which will euer liue,

