



My Lord:
THat of Artaxerzes king of Persia, was neuer too high∣ly set & prised, which said; that it was of no lesse king∣ly bounty and humanity, to accept of little things, than to giue great: I haue receiued great things from

your Honours fauour; euen a daily portion, by which I my selfe and my little family is sustai∣ned: besides other graces, of which you haue vouchsafed mee from the first houre of my ad∣mission into your seruice. And now what haue I to offer vnto my Lord, but euen this little handfull of flowers, which I haue gathered by my Study and Meditation, to make to your Lordship a sweet smell of my duty? Which if it shall please you graciously to accept, you shall more enrich & fill my desire by this receiuing, than by giuing. For to an honest minde it is sweeter to be regarded, than rewarded. And what greater reward can be giuen to him that striueth to be thankefull, than to finde himselfe accepted in that, in which he seeketh most to please? I hope these flowers, to them which peruse them, shall not prooue vnfruitfull, be∣ing gathered out of that field of the Scriptures on which the Holy-ghost hath breathed. As the fruit of the Husband is sweet to the Spouse: so he is to her as . 4. 1. the Rose of the field, and the Lilly of the Vallies: Such is the word of

God, being broken and diuided aright, that it doth both sauour, and fresh, and feede, and nourish the soule of man. Therefore, as it is called The Iohn 6.  at. 4. 4. word of Life, The Iohn 6▪ ▪ bread of Life; so it is called, Cor. 2. 4. The sauour of life vnto life. I haue not taken my Texts of Scrip∣ture from one place, as if a man should ga∣ther hearbs in a garden from one bed, as they grow and lie together: but I haue selected and chosen my parcels out of diuers places of Scrip∣ture, and knit them vp in this little bundle: here Knowledge: there Patience: in another place the duety of a Christian: Then Faith and Obedience: Againe, the fulnesse of Christ: A∣gaine, the Flowers of the Prophets: to these Contrition, Humility, and Loue, with exhort∣ing to meeknesse, and for bearing, &c. All mix∣ed with Instructions, and reproofes, and twi∣sted and made vp with the bindings and testi∣monies of the Apostles and Prophets:
Sic positi quoniam suaues miscetis odores. Because of diuers places of Scripture, thus set and ordered, the sweetest smells are made.

Right Honourable, whatsoeuer these are, or whatsoeuer I am my selfe, the Labour is yours, and the Labourer: Accept the ready heart and thankefull study of
Your Honours most humble and deuoted Seruant,
THOMAS BASTARD.
