


clearly and sincerely preached and professed, then and there is moste acceptable time and saluation, and moste perillous time, daunger and damnation: moste acceptable tyme and saluation for them that vnderstande, beleeue and professe the same truely, and most peril∣lous time, daunger and damnation, for them that neglecte, refuse or abuse the same cor∣ruptly. For the one sorte shall bee taken as children out of a Schoole too enioy their Fa∣thers inheritance, the other shall bee taken as beasts out of a pasture vntoo the day of slau∣ghter. Those that learne and folowe the will and wisedome of God in the worde of God, shal be sure as Gods childrē to haue al things necessarie and comfortable by Gods proui∣dence, and also to inherite Gods kingdome: and those that feede their owne affections in fleshly lustes and in worldly vanities, shall bee taken as beastes from the pasture vntoo slau∣ghter, from pleasure and pastime worldely, vnto payne and perdition eternally. Consider therfore how Gods children learne by Gods woorde written in holy Scripture for theire learning, so as in reading or hearing of the same they seeke and finde comfort of consci∣ence, with suche meditation of the meaning

thereof, as doothe dayly mortifie their carnall affections. All others do eyther vtterly refuse or corruptly abuse the woorde of God, euer feeding their carnall affections, I say, suche as refuse Gods worde do feede their affections in worldely vanities and fleshely lustes, and such as abuse Gods worde, do feed also their affections in some ceremoniall superstitions or hypocriticall abuse of Gods woorde. But Gods children bee all taught of God, so too vse the hearing, reading and meditation of Gods woorde written in holy Scriptures by inspiration of God, taught also as the woorde of faith, preached by ministers and preachers sent of God, that thereby Gods spirite dothe put good lawes intoo their minds, and write them in their heartes. And then they feling their myndes illuminated with the truth, and theirs hearts inflamed with the sincerity and simplicitie of Gods woorde, may boldly and comfortably say that God of his owne good will hath begotten vs by the worde of truthe, wee are nowe borne not of blood, not of the will of fleshe, nor of the will of man, but of God. VVee are nowe not in the fleshe, but in the spirite, bycause the spirite of God dwel∣leth in vs.

So then wee are nowe detters, not vn∣too the fleshe too lyue after the fleshe, but vntoo the spirite. For if wee shoulde liue after the fleshe, wee shoulde die, but if wee mortifie the deedes of the bodye by the spirite, wee shall lyue. There∣fore Gods children vse the hearing, rea∣ding, preaching and meditation of Gods woorde, not to feede, but to kill their carnall lustes.
All others, whether that they doo vt∣terlye refuse, or else accepte and vse the woorde of God, yet they doo but feede carnall affections, through diuelishe illu∣sions, eyther with worldely vanities and fleshely lustes euidently, or else with some abuse of Gods woorde colourably and cor∣ruptly.
Of this matter did I wryte a little Booke beyng at Geneua in the time of Queene Maries raigne, when I was there by di∣uerse Englishe men mooued and requested too cause it too bee printed: and so then with a lyttle Preface I dyd sende many of those Bookes so printed, intoo this Realme of Englande.

And nowe finding none of those Bookes too be solde in anie place, but beeing of some desired too peruse one of them (whiche was founde in a freendes hande) and putte it too printing agayn, with some admonition meete for this tyme, I haue ritten this Epistle or Preface, aduertising and desiring all suche as will reade it, so to search the holie Scriptures, and their owne consciences, that they may see and take occasions to pittie and praye for them selues, for all men, and especially for the Queenes moste excellent Maiestie, and all those that bee in aucthoritie vnder her, that wee may liue a peaceable and quiet life, with godlynesse and honestie. And not too vse suche feeding of their owne affections, as causeth suspecting, enuying, mysliking, and mysreporting of others, especially of such as be in authoritie: for that of such thin∣ges commonly commeth greate daunger, and the vtter ouerthrowe of the Churche and Common wealth, with all vngodlinesse and iniquitie.

And seeing that the grace of God that brin∣geth saluation to all men, hath appeared, tea∣ching vs, that wee forsaking vngodlinesse and worldly lustes, shoulde liue soberly, righte∣ously and godlily in this presente worlde. Therefore lette vs not in feeding our owne worldly and fleshly affections prouoke God vtterly too ouerthrowe: but in learning and folowing the will and wisedome of God, re∣uealed and taught in Gods woorde by Gods grace, pray and desire God too preserue and prosper our Church and com∣mon wealth with the go∣uernours of the same in Christ Iesu.
At London. 1571.
