



RIGHT HONORABLE:
AS the God of Nature hath Decked that Great Man the World with diuers ornaments, it being in no∣thing more admirable then in va∣riety; so hath the same God in∣riched that little World Man, with sundry en∣dowments, he being in nothing more profitable to the Church, then in Diuersity: For to some he hath giuen to be Apostles, to others to Ephes. 4. 11,  be Prophets, to others to be Teachers; and all this for the gathering together of the Saints, for the workes of the Ministry, for the building vp of the body of Christ. So

that wherein one is Defectiue, another is Excel∣lent, that the Church of Christ may bee per∣fectly instructed in all things, by the mutuall la∣bours of each fellow member.
Hence it comes to passe that some men abound with variety of Tongues; others with interpre∣tation of Languages, some with the smoothnes of Doctrine, and others are acquainted with the knotty study of Polemicall Theologie: there being nothing commodious for that Mysti∣call body of Christ, which cannot be supplied by one member or other. And albeit this renow∣ned Kingdome of great Britaine flowes with multitudes of most pregnant wits, (as once did Canaan with and Hony) who are sarre more powerfully able to buckle with our Aduer∣saries, then my selfe; yet (beeing confident in the Almighty) I with little Dauid ad∣uentured to encounter with this great of Gath, the Romish , hoping my la∣bours (albeit vnpollished with Eligancy of stile) shall not bee altogether vnprofitable to the Church. The insolency of the Romish Foxes, (as in all places of this Land, so more especi∣ally) in those parts, where your hath Command and Mansion, and my selfe Re∣sidence

and Imployment, hath forced me to the search of this subiect. The setling of weake, and confirmation of sound Protestants, hath pressed it to the Presse. The bonds of Respect and Duty, wherein I am obliged vnto your Honor, bind both my selfe, and it vnto your Noble Selfe; vnto whose Patronage I Com∣mend it, and vnder whose Name I commit it to the wide World.
The Motiues that induce me to Dedicate this small Treatise to your Honor, are.
First the Externall Nobility of your Birth, being so Noble a Branch, equally springing from two Illustrious Stems. Secondly, the Internall Nobility of your Grace, manifested by your so sincere affection to Religion, where∣in with Timothy, your Honour hath beene instructed from your Child-hood; and to the true Professours whereof, your Lordship hath vouchsafed alwayes a gracious countenance. Thirdly, your purpose to visite other Kingdomes abroad; where doubtlesse occasion will be offered vnto your Lordship, to maintaine that Truth wherein you haue beene bred, and to oppose that Falshood which you cannot but detest. I presumed to preferre this part of my

studies, vnto your Honorable Patronage, that it might remaine with your Honor as an Antidote against the Poyson of Popery, and Infection of the Romish Locusts. Lastly, that hereby I might render vnto your Honor some testimonie of thankfulnesse, for those manie vndeserued Fauours, which Your Lordship hath beene pleased to conferre vppon mee; that as I remaine bound vnto Your Ho∣nor for euer: So heereby I might free my selfe from the staine of Ingratitude.
Accept therefore, (I most humbly beseech your Honor) this pleadge of his vnfained thank∣fulnesse, who shall continually pray to God to blesse your Lordshippe with aboundance of Ho∣nor, Wealth, Grace, Prosperity in this World, and the full Fruition of Eternall Glory in the World to come,

