


IT is an axiome conclu∣ded in philosophie, and a truth apparant in dai∣lie experience, that small forces firmly vnited and cōpacted in one, grow to bee mightie in continuance of time: whereas matters of far greater moment being separated either by casuall diuision, or wilfull discord, are easily ruinated, and sodainly brought to confusion. And ther∣fore Nature in all her actions intending vnitie, buildeth her whole frame vpon the groundworke of sweete harmonie, and musicall concent: tempering the quali∣ties in each seuerall body with such indif∣ferent
proportion, that albeit some one ouerrule the rest, yet it is not permitted to ouerthrow them: but they all by a secret sympathie & mutual agreement, indeuour to support the one the others burden. But whensoeuer this vnisone is interrupted by iarring of the parts, then is Nature by vio∣lence rackt out of her course, and thereup∣on insueth the subuersion of the whole. Seeing then vnitie is the marke whereat Nature aimeth, and the verie meane to preserue her woorkes: and seeing such thinges of all others doe chiefly promise perpetuitie, as draw neerest to the rule of Nature; it is an vndoubted consequent that those common wealthes haue grea∣test likelihood of prosperitie, & least cause of decaie, wherein concord is nourished, and dissension suppressed. Mitigation of punishment is a dangerous imboldening of malicious aduersaries; and obstinate purposes, vnles they be timely preuented by politike foresight, and restrained by speciall penaltie, are often times too late
repented, when in the end they burst out into vnlawfull practises, to the distur∣bance of publike vnitie and the procure∣ment of common confusion. Therefore as the maintenance of vnitie is an instru∣ment that conserueth the state: so is exe∣cution of iustice the golden piller that vp∣holdeth vnitie. The which prop so long as it shall stand in force (but it must stand in force so long as England will desire to rest in safetie) I hope the Traitrous intents of Englands and English enemies shall be vtterly frustrate, neither shall they haue so great cause to triumph for their victories, as she hath now iust reason to complaine of their trecheries. For by the cutting off, of putrified members the whole bodie maie be deliuered from perill: and by a∣uoiding odious iarres, amiable vnitie may be retained. But if their hidden rancour be suffered inwardly to fester, and further to disperse it selfe, then it is greatly to be fea∣red least the contagion thereof breede a fouler maladie, then can bee cured with
an ordinarie plaister. In respect whereof your honors & worships trauailes ioint∣ly and seuerally imploied in these dange∣rous times, as they argue a studious zeale and affectionate deuotion towards your naturall Prince and countrie: so doe they merit all titles of singular commen∣dation. The renowne of diuers your pre∣decessors is with capitall letters so inregi∣stred in the booke of Fame, that neither the darkesome vaile of Obliuion can ouer∣shadow it, nor the forked sting of detrac∣tion at anie time cancell it. In imitation of whose worthines if yee shall constantly proceede, as ye haue alreadie laudably be∣gun, it will appeere that vertue yet stoo∣peth not for age, and that common care is not brought a sleepe by priuate profit. This argument might minister ample matter of true discourse: but least my words should be wrested beyond the le∣uell of my thoughts, & so attainted with suspicion of flatterie, I wrap that vp in si∣lence which I might very wel vtter with∣out
anie impeachment of insinuation; omitting your industrious care for sifting out recusants, your diligent search for dis∣couery of factions, your watchfull regard for appeasing of mutinies, your charita∣ble prouision for relieuing of Orphanes, with diuers other matters of importance greatlie behoofefull to the state of this Realme, & properly incident to the due∣ties of good Magistrates. And seeing these are the daies wherein treason is coloured with religion & malice armed with poli∣cie, I haue in this treatise detected the dea∣lings of Traitors, and vsed dissuasions by manifesting the dangers annexed to their proceedings. The which for that it is fra∣med in the person of England whome yee haue oft assisted in extremities, I haue published vnder your L. and W. patro∣nage, and offer the same to your accep∣tance, whom th'almightie protect with his power, and guide with his grace.

