


Most Sacred Majestie:
THE comfort of all poore Subjects under any Kingdom and Empire, hath ever ben this, That in all oppressions & calami∣ties, they had a Caesar to appeale to who, in the place of God, did defend the poore from the tyranny of the mighty, & deliver them from the cruelty of the more potent, after hee had heard their just Defence and Answer for themselves; & this is the onely glory of a Monarchy and of regal Government, which favour & liberty was never yet denyed under Pagan Emperors to poore Christians; and the which your High∣nesse hath never yet refused to grant to any in your Kingdomes: which hath emboldened mee, a loyall, though poore Subject, in this great extremity to flye unto your Highnes, who hath been most cruelly and unjustly dealt with by the Prelates, for mayntayning your Prerogative Royall, and at this time suffers their mercylesse oppression, being denyed that which hath not been hitherto refused to those, that have been reputed delinquents against sacred Mast. and to have abused the reverend Iudges of the Kingdome, which was the enjoying of the society of their wifes and friends for their reliefe and comfort, and that they might put in their answer under their owne hands & names when they could have no counsel, and yet these are now denyed unto your poore Subjects by the Prelats. Wherefore he, amongst the rest, doth humbly appeals unto your Mast. beseeching your gracious Highnes to heare his just defence and answer, espe∣cially it tending so much for the advancement of the honour of God, the honour & dig∣nity of your most excellent Mast. & the good of the whole Kingdome; it making so much allso for the discovering of the cruelty, tyranny, & unjustice of the Prelats over your loyallest Subjects, in abusing your Mast autority; their impiety also against God, their disloyaltie also against your sacred Mast. with the vvrong they have likevvise done to your royall Father, of famous memory. All vvhich, if hee shall not bee able to prove against them, he vvill vvillingly undergoe vvhat punishment any authoritie shall lay upon him. Therefore he most humbly beseecheth your Mast. that you vvould please to re∣ceive his ansvver, to vvhom he hath made it & vvhom chiefly it concerneth. And hee shall ever acknovvledge your Princely favour in it, and shall ever pray for your Mast. happy raigne, and long life vvith the affluence of all divine benediction upon your Royall Person, Crovvne & Dignitie, & your illustrious Posteritie, and ever remaine

