



AS in our Church (bles∣sed be God,) touching the truth of Doctrine, there is no controuersie, so there is no doubt (deare brethren) but in the controuerted points of Policie, wee would soone agree, if wee did consider what is the power of the Church in these matters, the extent of her power, and the obedi∣ence that is due thereto: therefore concerning these,

I haue thought mee to vse this short Preface vnto you.
The power of the Church.Albeit all things necessarie to the worship of God, and mans saluation, bee eyther expressely, or by ne∣cessarie consequence, contayned in the written Word, yet the particular circumstances of persons by whom, place where, time when, and of the forme and order how the worship and worke of the Ministrie should be performed, are neither expressely nor by necessarie consequence set downe in the Word: but for determi∣nation of these, some generall rules are giuen, accor∣ding to the which the Church hath power to define whatsoeuer is most expedient to be obserued, and done for the honour of God,The power of the Christian Church in e∣lecting Pa∣stors. and edification. This is a pre∣rogatiue wherein the Christian Church differs from the Iewish Synagogue, as is manifest in euery one of the particulars aboue expressed. First, as touching the persons, in the Iewish Church, they who were imploy∣ed in the Ministrie, were particularly designed to bee Leuies Tribe:Numb. cap 3. 1. Tim. 3. In the Christians Church neither Fa∣mily, Nation, nor People, is separated for the worke of the Gospell, but the qualities, graces, and gifts of men meete for the sacred seruice, are onely set downe, and it is in the power of the Church to trie the persons par∣ticularly in whom these graces and gifts are, and accor∣dingly to elect them. And albeit the function where∣vnto they are called be diuine, yet the bounds within which, and the persons towards whom the same must be exercised, is limited by the Church, which hath di∣uided national Churches in Prouinces & Dioceses, and Dioceses in Parishes: so as both the election of Mini∣sters, and the limitation of their jurisdiction, is from

the power of the Church. This the Apostle calls the measure of the Canon,2. Cor. 10. which God did measure out to him, beyond the which, he did not reach in his A∣postleship: and such a rule, and measure should euery Pastor in the Church haue, beyond the which, hee ought not to passe, entering vpon other mens labour. As the Apostles had their measure distributed to them by God, so now euerie Pastor hath his bounds desig∣ned by the Church.
Secondly, vnder the Law,Their power in cnsecra∣ting places. Act. 15.21. albeit the Iewish Church had libertie to build Synagogues for their ordinarie meetings on the Sabbath to prayer, and reading of the Law: yet the place, where the chiefe, and solemne worship of God was performed, was first the Taber∣nacle, and the Temple, both built by Gods owne spe∣ciall direction,Deut. 12.4. and hauing the principall parts of his worshippe so appropriated to them, that in another place, the same might not be performed. But as vn∣der the Gospel men shall neither worship God in this mountaine (saies our Sauiour) nor in Ierusalem, but the true worshippers shall worship him in truth and spirit, the Christian Church hath power according to that Apostolicall Rule,1. Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decent∣ly, and in order, to make choice of a place conuenient, within the bounds of each Parish, for the meeting of the faithfull to performe all the points, and parts of Gods worship: and his place being built, and dedica∣ted to the worship of God, may not bee condemned, neglected, nor profand, but freqented, and kept for religious vses. Not that wee estme that there is any more holiness in it, then in another place or that Gods presence, and so his worship is anxed more to that

place then to another, but to the end religious Seruice may be performed decently, and in order, this is done.
The power of the Church in appointing times to Gods worship. Leuit. 23.Thirdly, vnder the Law the chiefe parts of Gods worship were astricted to certaine set times, & festiui∣ties, & lawfully could not be performed on other daies: but vnder the Gospel omnis dies Domini est, omnis hora, omne tēpus habile est diuino cultui, as Tertul. in his book de Baptismo witnesseth; and Esay prophecied in his 66.23. From one Sabbath to another, and from one New-moon to another shal all flesh appeare before me, saith the Lord. Thus the Apostles ceassed not to teach daily in the Temple,Act. 5. Act. 19. & from house to house, the Doctrine of Christ. S. Paul taught in the Schoole of one Tyrannus for the space of 2. yeres daily, and as one of the Greeke Editions hath it, from the fifth houre to the tenth. On the Iewish Sabbath, which is our Saturday, he taught often in the Iewish Synagogues.Act. 13.14. Epitom. de fide Catholica. And Epiphanius re∣cords, that Christians kept their conuentions on Wed∣nesday, Friday, and Sonday, by Apostolical tradition, and example. S. Augustine affirmes, That in his time men receiued the Sacrament euerie day.Epist. ad Ianuar. 118. Our owne Church, besides the Lords day, hath appointed other houres and times for diuine Seruice in great Townes, as houres for Morning and Euening Prayer euery day, for Preaching, and interpretation of Scripture, such o∣ther times as they hold to bee conuenient. Thus is it manifest, that the Church hath power to appoint o∣ther set times besides the Lords day, for his seruice, as wel by the liberty which God hath giuē to his Church to come, and worship before him euery day, as by the practise of the Apostolicall, and Primitiue Churches. Yea further, the Church hath power to appoint religi∣ous exercises, and certaine speciall parts of diuine Ser∣uice

to be performed in the times, which shee thinkes most expedient for edification. So hath our Church bin accustomed to appoint particular Scriptures to be in∣terpreted vpon the daies so called of Exercise; and by the first Booke of Discipline, euery Pastor is ordained to teach in his Congregation on the Sondaies at after∣noones certaine heads of the Catechisme: Likewise to minister the Sacrament of the Communion vpon the first Sondaies of March, Iune, Septemb. & December. It was the custom of the Church of Geneua, in the daies of I. Caluin,Caluin▪ 361. Epist. to celebrate that holy action vpon the day of the Natiuitie, which wee call Yule, and vpon Easter day which we call Pasche. The ground of this power is first, the abolishing of the New-moones, Festiual daies, and Sabbaths by the coming of our Sauiour, in whom the body of all these shadows is: and next, the libertie giuen by God to the Christian Church mentioned by Isaiah, as ye heard before. For as by the first we are fre∣ed from the bondage of the Law, and the obseruation of the set times therein prescribed; so by the second, all times are sanctified to the worship of God, in so farre, that the Christian Church may make choyce of any time in the weeke, any day in the moneth or yeere for their publique meetings to his worship. And as for the Lords Day, which hath succeeded to the Iewish Sab∣bath, albeit God hath cōmanded to sanctifie it by the publike exercise of religiō, yet neither is the whole pub¦like worship nor any part of it appropriated to that time, but lawfully the same may be performed vpō any other conuenient day of the weeke, of the Moneth, or of the yere, as the Church shall think expedient. Vpon this ground Zanchius affirmed, Ecclesiae Christi liberū esse, quos velit praeter dominic. dies sibi sāctificādos delige∣re.

And by this warrant did the primitiue Church sanctifie these fiue anniuersarie dayes, of Christs Na∣tiuitie, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and the Des∣cent of the Holy Ghost. Where it is obiected, that it is onely proper to God to make holidayes, I answer. That it is onely proper to God, to make times, and places holy, by appropriating to them a diuine wor∣ship, which may not bee performed lawfully, but in these places, and on these times; such as the Taber∣nacle, and Temple, and the Iewish Festiuities vn∣der the Law were: for vnto them was appropriated by God a worship, which might not be performed on another day: and so these dayes did not only belong to the worship as meere circumstances, but were pro∣per parts or points thereof, and could not bee omit∣ted, without marring of the whole action. In which re∣spect, these dayes were holier then other dayes, be∣cause a part of Gods worship consisted in obseruation of them. Such holy dayes the Church cannot make. But to make times and places holy by consecration of them to an holy vse, the Church hath power: for the dayes that she appoints are obserued only for or∣der, and policie; and haue no relation to the worship performed on them, as any Rite or religious Ceremo∣nie belonging necessarily to the integritie thereof. The Natiuitie of our Sauiour may bee remembred, and publike thankes giuen to God therefore vpon any o∣ther time as well, as vpon the twentie fiue of Decem∣ber; likewise the Passion, Ascension, and the rest of these benefits: yet wee remember them at certaine set-times, not because the times require such a wor∣ship, or the worship such a time to the integritie and

lawfulnesse thereof, but to the end the worship may be performed orderly once euery yeare, in euery place vpon one day, that all people, wheresoeuer they be, at home or abroad, may bee instructed, and admoni∣shed to prayse and magnifie the grace of God, and goodnesse of their Sauiour. Herein the reformed Churches differ from the Papists, who Iudaize in ob∣seruation of those Festiuities, because they professe to obserue them, not for order only, but esteeme them to be sacratiores & sanctiores alijs diebus,Bellar. de cult sanctorum, lib. 3. cap. 10. & pars diui∣ni cultus, which we doe not. For the Lords Day, it hath succeeded to the Sabbath, and is holy by diuine Institution, hauing for euidence and confirmation thereof, both a morall Precept, and the exemplarie practice of Christ, and his Apostles in Scripture. In the forth command, after the labour of six dayes, the seuenth is appointed to bee sanctified in memoriall of Gods rest from his six dayes worke; and the particular day, not being expressed in the command, was notified to the people either by the exemplary practice of Mo∣ses, and the Church in the Wildernesse, or by tradition of the Fathers going before, if so it be, that from the Creation that day was obserued. Now after the legall shaddowes are abolished, whereof the Iewish Sab∣bath was one, if any will demand what day must bee obserued in the Christian Church, wee answere, that questionlesse for the quotient of the number, the day cannot bee altered, which by the Law is appointed. Heauen and Earth shall perish, but one iot of the Law shall not perish. Our Sauiour came not to dis∣solue the Law, but to fulfill it. In the Law wee heare that God rested the seuenth Day, that he blessed and

sanctified it, and there is a libertie giuen to labour six dayes, but the seuenth is commanded to be kept ho∣ly: so howbeit the Iewish Sabbath which was the shaddow, be materially abolished as touching the par∣ticular Day, yet the Day commanded in the Law, for∣mally must remayne, and euer be the seuenth after six dayes worke. But if yee will aske, seeing the seuenth Day in particular is not expressed in the Law, and that day which the Iewes obserued, is abolished by Christ, as the shaddow by the body, how the particular and materiall Day may bee knowne, that the Christian Church should obserue? Vnto this we answere, that the particular Day was demonstrated by our Sauiours Resurrection, and his Apparitions made thereon; by the Apostolicall practice and the perpetuall obserua∣tion of the Church, euer since that time, of the Day which in Scripture is called the Lords Day, as that, which the Iewes obserued was called the Lords Sab∣bath; because as the one was appointed by the Lord, for a memoriall of his rest, after the Creation, so the other was instituted by the Lord for a memoriall of his Resurrection after the Redemption. For this wee must hold as a sure ground, whatsoeuer the Catholike Church hath obserued in all Ages, and is found in Scripure expresly to haue beene practised by Christ, and the Apostles (such as the sanctification of the Lords Day) the same most certainly was instituted by the Lord to bee obserued, and his practice in that is exemplar, and hath the strength of a particular pre∣cept. Hereby it is manifest, that the sanctification of the Lords Day is of diuine Institution, as well by rea∣son of the diuine Precept, commanding the seuenth

Day in generall to bee obserued, as of the diuine pra∣ctice of Christ, and the Apostles their specifying the Day, which hath the force of a particular diuine Pre∣cept. In respect whereof, the obseruation of this Day is a point of diuine Worship, and is holy, not by Ec∣clesiasticall Constitution, but by diuine Institution. Moreouer this Day is holy by appropriation of it to a certaine religious vse, whereunto no other Day can be applyed, namely, to bee a memoriall of the Lords rest after the Creation, and of his Resurrection after the Redemption: As also to be a signe of our sanctifi∣cation here, and of our glorification hereafter, as is ma∣nifest by the words of the holy Ghost, Exod. 31.13. It shall be a signe betweene me and you, that I the Lord doe sanctifie you: and that of the fourth to the Hebrewes, A rest is left to the people of God, wherein we should stu∣die to enter. For this wee must hold, that whatsoeuer vse vnder the Law, was proper to the Iewes Sabbath, wherein now vnder the Gospell both Iew and Gen∣tile haue interest, remaynes yet proper to the Lords Day that succeeded thereto: And in that respect, this Day differs from all other Dayes being obserued not for policie and order only, but for diuine institution, and the religious vse whereunto it is appropriate, that is, to bee a memoriall, First of the Creation, as hath beene said, because after our sixe dayes worke, we rest on it, being the seuenth, as God did from the workes of the Creation: Secondly, of the Redemption, be∣cause on it the Lord arose, and perfected that worke: and thirdly, to be a signe of our sanctification, name∣ly, that God, who hath chosen and sanctified vs to be his people, and whom we worship, is God the Crea∣tor,

who in sixe dayes created the World, and re∣sted the seuenth; and God the Redeemer, who rose on this Day, and hauing abolished sinne, and death, did bring in righteousnesse, and life; and God the holy Ghost, by whose power hee did rise, and by whose power we hope also to be raised againe. Vnto this ho∣ly and religious vse, this Day is appropriated, where∣unto no other Day besides can bee applyed. That to conclude, the Church hath power to appoint times, for the publike worship of God, and to appoint such a kind of worship, as shee thinketh most expedient to bee vsed on these times for edification; although shee hath no power to make the obseruation of any time, a point of Gods worship, or to appropriate thereto a∣ny part of his worship.
Finally, to end this point of the power of the Church, when the people are conuened in the ordi∣narie place, and at the times appointed, the Scripture hath not set downe, whereat the Pastour should be∣ginne, how hee should proceed, and wherewith hee should close vp this Seruice: as whether hee should beginne with singing of Psalmes, or praying, or reading, or preaching; and when hee prayes, with what petition he shall beginne, what he shall subioyne next, and so forth: what order he shall obserue in bap∣tizing and celebration of the Supper, in Marriage, in censuring of notorious offenders by Excommunicati∣on, in Absolution: and to bee short, in all such other points of Doctrine, Discipline, and Diuine Seruice, there is nothing particularly prescribed. Although the substance of all be in the Word, yet the order, dis∣position, forme, and manner are left to be determined

by the Church. Many of which points, are of farre greater moment, then any of the Articles concluded at Perth.
Thus much for the power of the Church. We come now to the extent of this power. It is certaine, that this power cannot reach to any thing essentiall or ma∣teriall in the worship of God: but to the decencie, and order only,The Church hath power to determine ge∣nerall circum∣stances neces∣sary for God worship. which is to bee obserued for edification in the circumstances aboue specified; Let all things bee done decently, and in order, saith the Apostle. The things themselues that are to be done, are partly specified in that same Chapter where this rule is giuen, and in the word else-where, they are fully and particularly ex∣pressed, and not left to be prescribed according to the will and iudgement of the Church, but by this Pre∣cept a power is giuen only to the Church to prescribe the decent manner, forme, and order how they should be done. And so to determine the circumstances which are in the generall necessary to bee vsed in diuine wor∣ship, but not particularly defined in the Word. So by warrant of this Precept, the Church hath no power to forme new Articles of Faith, new Precepts of O∣bedience, new Petitions of Prayer, new Sacraments, or new Rites, and Ceremonies, such as Salt, Oyle, Spittle, Chrisme, Ashes, holy Water, Lights, and in∣numerable such other things; which cannot be redu∣ced to any circumstances, that in the generall are of necessary vse: wherein the Church of Rome abusing her libertie, hath laid vpon the Christian Church a burthen of Rites no lesse intollerable then the Legall Ceremonies, yea, and haue imposed them to bee ob∣serued, not onely as things belonging to policie, and

order, but as parts of diuine worship, which we of the reformed Church reiect, esteeming all that to bee will-worship, which men impose to be obserued, as ne∣cessarie points of the seruice of God, which himselfe hath ordayned in his Word.
The Lawes that the Church makes in their mat∣ters are alte∣rable.Further, because the Ceremonies and circumstan∣ces left to the determination of the Church, cannot al∣wayes be one and the same, by reason of the diuersity of Ages, Times, People, and Nations, touching them no constant Law can bee set downe, as is acknowled∣ged in the one and twentieth Article of the Confessi∣on of our Faith confirmed by Parliament; but altered they may be, and altered they should be, when neces∣sitie requires: In which case Charitie (sayes Caluine) can best iudge, what is most expedient, Hanc si mode∣ratricem patiemur, salua erunt omnia.
The obedience due to the Or∣dinances of the Church.The power of the Church being thus limited, it is without controuersie, that the Canons made by her touching the circumstances that in the generall are ne∣cessary for the worship of God, ought to bee obeyed so long as they stand vnchanged or abrogated: not be∣cause they contayne in them any substantiall or mate∣riall part of Religion, or that they haue in them any diuine Authoritie, as the Commandements of God, which in conscience bind to obedience; but because in them an order is established tending to vnitie and peace, whereby confusion, scandall, and Schisme is eschewed: and because the power of the Church, whereby these Lawes are made, is the Ordinance of God, and confirmed by the authoritie of his Word, commanding vs to obey them that are set ouer vs in the Lord, the Canons of the Church must be obeyed,

for reuerence of the Ordinance and Commande∣ment of God, which is the onely direct and imme∣diate obiect of our conscience, and the religious band that tyes vs to the obedience of euery humane ordinance for conscience sake.
But because many excuse their disobedience with a pretext of conscience, I will shortly set downe the rules of conscience, that by the Word of God we are obliged to follow in our actions.
The first is, whatsoeuer is commanded, or forbid∣den in the Word expresly,The rules of Conscience. or by necessary conse∣quence, ought to be obeyed. The next is, whatsoeuer is commanded or forbidden by the Lawes and Ordi∣nances of our Superiours Ciuill or Ecclesiastique, the same, if it be not contrarie to Gods Word, should be obeyed, by reason of his expresse command;
Obey them that haue the rule ouer you, and submit your selues, Heb. 13. And againe, Submit your selfe to e∣uery ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, 1. Pet. 2.13.
To this appertaynes lawfull customs hauing the force of a Law, where there is no written Law. Thirdly, touching things that are free, and are neither deter∣mined by Ciuill nor Ecclesiasticall Constitutions, we haue this rule: Let euery man stand fully perswaded, in his owne minde, that he may doe or omit that which hee intends, without the offence of God or his Neighbour, but hee that doubts is damned, for whatsoeuer is not of Faith, is sinne, Rom. 14. These are the rules of consci∣ence set downe in the Word, concerning which it is to be obserued, that the first rule is absolute, and the second and third subiect to it. The Lawes of men and their opinions must be tryed, and iudged by the Law

of God; for as the Apostle sayes, ,Act. 5.29. that is, We must obey God rather then men. As for the priuate iudgement of euery mans conscience, it is subiect to both the two former rules. That the iudgement of our minde must giue place to Gods Law, no man doubts: And that it ought to giue place vnto Constitutions Ciuill or Ecclesiastical, no man should doubt, that knowes how God by his Word hath ordayned, that euery soule should be sub∣iect to superiour powers. It may be obiected, What if wee doubt, whether the thing commanded in the law of man bee lawfull and expedient, may wee obey thus doubting, seeing the Apostle sayes, that What∣soeuer is not of Faith is sinne? Vnto this the answer is easie; first, touching the lawfulnesse of that which is commanded in a Law, no man ought to doubt, ex∣cept hee bee able to proue euidently that the Law is vnlawfull by the Law of God; which if hee doe, hee must follow the first rule, and rather obey God then men. Next, as for expedience, Rom. 14: The things committed to the iudgement of our conscience, and which according to our faith and perswasion wee ought to doe, or omit, are not things determined or concluded by any diuine or humane Constitution, but such things as are free and indifferent, which a man may freely elect or reiect, doe or leaue vndone, with∣out transgression of any Law Diuine,In matters of expedience where a law∣ful Ordinance is set downe, the same ought to be the rule of our con∣science. Ciuill, or Eccle∣siasticall. In such things, the Apostle willeth euery man to follow that which hee thinks most expedient for edification, and eschuing of scandall. Where a man hath not a Law, his iudgement is the rule of his conscience; but where there is a Law, the Law must

be the rule. As for example, before that Apostolicall Canon that forbad to eate bloud, or strangled things, euery man might haue done that which in his consci∣ence he thought most expedient, according to the cir∣cumstances of times, places, and persons. In presence of the Iewes hee might haue abstayned from these things, if in his heart hee thought it most expedient, for eschuing their offence: Contrariwise, in presence of conuerted Gentiles, he might haue eaten, if hee e∣steemed, that by his abstinence they would haue ta∣ken offence, and doubted of their Christian libertie; but after the making and publication of the Canon that inioyned abstinence, the same was to rule their consciences. And therefore, after that time, albeit a man had thought in his owne priuate iudgement, that to abstayne from these things was not expedient, be∣cause some by his abstinence might haue taken of∣fence as before; yet in that case he ought not to haue eaten, because now the will of the Law, and not the iudgement of his owne mind, was the rule of his con∣science. Neither was hee now to respect the scandall, because it was remoued by the Law: for, by obedi∣ence to a lawfull Ordinance no man giues scandall, and if any take offence, both the cause and occasion thereof is the peruersnesse onely of the person offen∣ded. Tertullian saith well, Res bona neminem offendit, nisi malam mentem, that is, A good thing (such as o∣bedience) can offend no man, but an euill minde; which must bee reformed by good information, and not by disobedience, which confirmeth errour, and causes rebellion. Caluin in his 363. Epist. written to Oleuian, giues many reasons, wherefore the comfort

of the Sacrament ought not to be refused to the sicke in time of extremitie, and declares that in his owne iudgement, he thought it expedient not to refuse the same; yet he subioynes, Scis, frater, alium esse apud nos morem: fero, quia non est vtile contendere, that is, Yee know, Brother, wee haue another custome: I beare with it, because I thinke not good to make con∣tention. Here Caluin preferreth the custome of Ge∣neua to his owne iudgement, and will leaue that vn∣done which he thought expedient to be done, rather then by doing it, and infringing the custome of the Church, to make contention. What then, shall wee doe ill, that good may come of it? for is it not euill to omit that which we thinke expedient to bee done, and that ought not to be refused, to the end good may come of it, namely, peace preserued, and contention eschued? To this I answer, The euill which the A∣postle forbids, is a thing simply vnlawfull in it selfe, and not that which in one respect may be expedient, and in another inexpedient: As to giue the Sacra∣ment to the sicke is expedient for their comfort, but to giue it contrary to the order of the Church, is not expedient. In things of this nature, Ex duobus malis, minus eligendum est, that is, Of two euils the least must be chosen. It is euill to refuse the comfort of the Sa∣crament to the sicke, but it is worse to giue it against the custome of the Church, and make contention. I must therefore in this case choose the least euill, and not giue the Sacrament, because thereby the greater euill being eschued, the lesse ceasseth to bee euil, and becommeth good. It is doubtlesse an euill thing to cast our goods in the Sea, but it is worse to lose our

liues: Here the least euill is to bee chosen, for the es∣chuing the greater, and in that respect it ceasses to be euill. Thus the rule holds in all things of this quality, when that which is euill is not vnlawfull and vnho∣nest, but vnexpedient and vnprofitable. And so to re∣turne, Caluine for this cause preferres the custome of Geneua, to his owne iudgement in a matter of expe∣diencie: for it is euer more expedient to obey a Law, and keepe a lawfull Custome, then to doe a thing thought more expedient, if it cannot be done, but by an open breach of the Law: because thereby the Law must be brought in contempt, priuate opinion prefer∣red to publike authoritie, and so confusion, contenti∣on and Schisme brought in; and order, peace, and v∣nitie shoot to the doore. To conclude, in matters of expediencie, where a Law is set downe, if wee make not the Law the rule of our obedience and consci∣ence, but our owne priuate opinions and conceits, then must we with the Anabaptists disproue and con∣demne all sorts of Gouernment, and liue like lawlesse Libertines, euery man following his owne conceite; whereunto it is certaine the peruersenesse of our na∣ture carryes vs, that is alwayes prone to rebellion, and therefore easily drawne thereto with any shew of rea∣son, pretext of conscience and religion: which the Penner of this pestilent Pamphlet considering, intends with Lyes, Calumnies, Falshoods, craftie Cauillati∣ons, Threatnings and Terrours of Oathes, Promises, and Subscriptions, to deceiue the simple, stirre vp the Seditious, confirme the Rebellious, & to beare down the Truth, his Maiesties Authority, the Power of the Church, and all that loue Order & follow after peace.
To obuiate this his seditious and malicious pur∣pose, it was not onely expedient, but necessary, that this answere should bee made, which by the grace of God, shall giue such satisfaction to all good and vp∣right hearted men, as they shall preferre the iudge∣ment, determination, and lawfull Constitutions of the Church, to the singularitie of their owne, and other priuate mens opinions; order to confusion, peace to contention, and vnitie to schisme: aswell for the feare of God, who hath giuen power to his Church to set downe Lawes for order, and decencie, and hath com∣manded vs to submit our selues thereto; as for obe∣dience to the sacred will of our most gracious Soue∣reigne, at whose instant and earnest desire these Arti∣cles being found lawfull were concluded, and are now commanded to bee practised. When Dauid would haue gone out against Absalon, hee was stayed by the people, who esteemed his life more worth then a thou∣sand of theirs: So should euery good Christian esteeme of the loue and fauour of the Prince towards the Church. Salomon sayes, that the wrath of a King, is the Messenger of Death, and like to the roring of a Lion, which a Wiseman will pacifie, and not prouoke: and that his fauour is as the cloud of the latter raine, and as the dew vpon the grasse. The truth of this is manifest in the Stories of the Church: what comfort the fauour of Constantine the Great did giue to the Christian Church, may be seene by the barbarous and cruell persecutions of the Emperours that went be∣fore.
The euils, troubles, and calamities that the Church of England endured in the dayes of Queene Marie,

declared what benefit they enioyed by King Edward her Predecessor, and Queene Elizabeth her Successor. The beastly crueltie, and massacres vsed in France vn∣der the Gouernment of the Predecessors of Henrie the Great, hath made manifest to the World, what wracke and misery the discontentment, and offence of Prin∣ces; and how great blessing and felicity their loue, and fauour produces to the Church of God within their Dominions. What need wee to goe further then the Scriptures for examples to this purpose? therein wee see, that as the Church decayed vnder wicked and i∣dolatrous Gouernours, so did it euer reuiue, and flou∣rish vnder religious and godly Kings. We stand much vpon the offence of people, and esteeme greatly of their fauour, wherein I will not say we doe euill; but should wee put their fauour and offence in ballance with the fauour, and offence of him whom God hath annointed and appointed to be the nursing Father of this Church? In whose loue we haue found by expe∣rience, and daily findes greater benefite and good for the aduancement of true Religion, then can bee expe∣cted from many thousands of our best Professors; let be at their hands, who in Religion like nothing well but contention, whereby they make their aduantage one way or other, as they are inclined, delighting to fish (as the Prouerbe is) in troubled waters.
It is often obiected, that the chiefe cause of our yeelding at Perth to the fiue Articles, was the respect we had to the fauour of the Prince, and the feare of his wrath: against my selfe in particular it is falsly obie∣cted by the penner of this Pamphlet, that I confes∣sed, we had neither Reason, Scripture, nor Antiquitie

for them, yet to diuert the Kings wrath from the Church, yeelding was best. The truth is, at that time I spake only of kneeling at the receiuing of the Com∣munion, and said no more then I haue set downe in print in that Treatise which I published for kneeling, in the last words of the first Section of the first Chap∣ter, and in the first Section of the second Chapter at the beginning: this was, That neither Scripture, Anti∣quitie, nor Reason doe enforce any necessitie either for lying, sitting, standing, or kneeling at the Sacrament; and that all these gestures being indifferent, I held it most expedient to yeeld, and not to striue with our gracious Souereigne for a matter of that nature, repea∣ting this Verse,
Cedere maiori virtutis fama secunda est:
Illa grauis palma est, quam minor hostis habet.
This I said at that time, and so yet I thinke, that to eschue the Prince his offence, and to keep, confirme, and increase his loue and fauour towards the Gospell and the Church, was a respect and cause great enough wherefore we should haue yeelded vnto his Maiesties desire in matters indifferent; against the lawfulnesse whereof, nothing hath beene, or can bee obiected, which is not, and may not be easily answered. Against the expediencie, the feare of scandall was and is all that could be pretended; which if wee were peaceably disposed, might haue beene, and yet may be very easi∣ly remoued: and therefore such a feare ought neither to haue impedite our yeelding at that time, nor our o∣bedience now. We are exhorted by the holy Ghost to feare God, and obey the King. Where obedience to

the Prince may stand with Gods feare, it ought to bee preferred by euery good Christian to all other respects, and especially by the Pastors of the Church, who should as lights goe before others both in doctrine, and example, chiefly, when peace and vnitie may bee procured and preserued in Gods house by our obedi∣ence.
For vnitie, wee should bee ready to lay downe our liues, as well as for veritie, which Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria writing to Nouatus, affirmed, saying: O∣portuerit etiam pati omnia, ne scinderetur Ecclesia Dei,Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 34. & erat non inferior gloria sustinere martyrium pro eo, ne scindatur Ecclesia, quàm est illa, ne idolis immoletur. Immo secundum meam sententiam, maius hoc put esse martyrium: ibi enim vnusquisque pro sua tantùm ani∣ma, in hoc verò, pro omni Ecclesia martyrium sustinet. That is to say; It behoued thee to haue suffered all things, that the Church of God should not haue been rent, & it had bin no lesse glorie to haue sustained mar∣tyrdome for this, that the Churches vnitie might haue beene preserued, then for refusing to sacrifice vnto I∣dols. Yea in my minde, this is a greater martyrdome: for in that euerie man suffereth for his owne soule one∣ly, but here, hee suffers martyrdome for the whole Church. This was the iudgement of that holy Father. who esteemed it a glorious martyrdome to suffer for the vnitie of the Church. Contrariwise, the Donatists did glorie in this, that by their sufferings, they enter∣tained Schisme and diuision, confirmed the hearts of the simple▪ and supestitious, in their errours; acquired to themselues the renowne of Martyrs, and thereby brought vpon the Church the imputation of persecu∣tion.

To whom S. Augustine answers, That they complained most vniustly, that they were persecuted by the Church, because the Church was more heaui∣ly persecuted by them: and thereupon in the eleuenth Tractate vpon S. Iohn sayes, Albeit Ismael was cast out of his Fathers house, for Isackes sake, yet the A∣postle calls not Isaack, but Ismael, the Persecutor. In his Booke intituled, De Vnitate Ecclesiae, against Petili∣an the Donatist, he writeth thus: Grauius persequitur filius patrem male viuendo, quam pater filium castigan∣do: & grauius ancilla Saram persecuta est per iniquam superbiam, quàm eam Sara per debitam disciplinam: & grauius Dominum persequebantur propter quos dictum est, Zelus domus tuae commedit me, quàm ipse eos, cum e∣orum mensas euertit, & eos flagello de templo expulit: that is to say, The sonne persecutes the father more grieuously by his wicked liuing, then the father doth the sonne by inflicting due chastisement. And Agar the Hand-maid did persecute Sara her mistresse more spitefully, by her vndutifull pride, then Sara did her by vsing due discipline. And they of whom it was said, The zeale of thine house hath eaten mee vp, did persecute the Lord more cruelly, then hee did them while as he ouerthrew their Tables, and droue them out of the Temple with scourges. And a little before in that same place, he affirmes, that they were the per∣secutors of themselues by the Apostles words: Qui resistit potestati, Dei ordinationi resistit: qui autem re∣sistunt, ipsi sibi iudicium acquirunt, that is, He that re∣sisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God, and they that resist draw punishment and iudgement vpon themselues: and often repeateth this sentence, Non poe∣na,

sed causa facit martyrem, It is not the punishment, but the cause that maketh martyrdome. To resist a lawfull ordinance, is euill: to suffer contumeliously for disobedience is worse; but by disobedience and contumelious suffering to confirme People in their er∣rours, and rend the bowels of the Church our cōmon Mother, is worst of all. These things, I shall beseech you Brethren to ponder; and the Lord giue vs all in meekenesse, and humilitie, to trie what veritie requires; and holding that fast, to keepe the vnitie of the Spi∣rit in the band of peace. The God of veritie and peace knit vs together in his truth, by the Spirit of his Sonne Iesus Christ our Peace. AMEN.

