



IF anie thing could
come from my hands,
my verie religious,
Noble good Lord,
worthie your Lord∣ships
fauorable countenance (vnlesse
I would be accused by that twilight
of nature, and condemned by that
cleare light of grace, my God hath
not altogether denied vnto me; bles∣sed
be his name) I am most strictly
obliged, were I as swift of foote as

Hazael was, to runne with my whole
strength to present it; both heartily,
and humbly vnto your Lordship.
Was I not so farre honoured of God
being yet a babe? that from my in∣fancie,
I had your Lordships sin∣cerely
and truly religious father of
most rare worthy memorie, for my
louing, and kindest father? and since
his Lordships death to this day, haue
I not alwayes had your Lordship for
my constant patrone, and louing
fosterer? It hath pleased my good
God to bring to my hands a subiect,
not vnworthie your Lordships consi∣deration;
and which hath refused to
go forth to the world vpon any con∣dition,
till it was couered vnder your
Lordships nourishing, and protect∣ing
winges.
I haue reincountered with these
cruell cunning Robbers, layed by
Satan that Dragon and foxe in the
way of the babes of God, to cut them
off, lest they should in the end at∣taine

vnto that home of heauen they
looke for: and discouered these
Robbers to the sight of a valorous
Dauid, who will proue readie, and
able to apprehend and ouerthrow
them.
I am now to meete (my worthy
good Lord) with those fearefull
Rockes, subtile Satan (abusing alas
the foolish minds and foule hearts of
manie professors) hath euen with
their owne consent and applause,
layed in their way to their wrack.
I am to come to that more then
glorious Inne, towards the which the
babes of God do iourney, and within
the which they are to rest for euer.
Yea, I am to intreate of the Guestes
for whom that endlesse rest, which is
to be found within the golden gates
of this Inne, is prepared. Now to
whom possibly could I haue presen∣ted
these Rockes, to be considered
and discouered vnto the babes of
God, to the end that they might

eschue them beside your Lordship?
who being taught of God, hath hap∣pily
learned to adore Gods holy ora∣cles,
and to abhorre all hellish con∣clusions;
and who is a Pilot ledde by
the Spirit and lanterne of his word, is
not onely able to shew the babes of
God where these Rockes do lie, but
by your Lorships wholesome coun∣sell,
and holy carriage, to stirre
them vp to take their course by
them.
Who so fit to allure men towards
that Inne of heauen, as your Lord∣ship?
who liuing among men for
some yeares, hath alwayes bene wal∣king
with God with Enoch, and be∣fore
God with Abraham; hauing
your conuersation in the heauens,
setting your affections on things
which are aboue, and not which are
on the earth; and so able out of a
sense of these things which God hath
prepared for those who loue him, to
exhort all men, casting away euerie

thing that presseth downe,Heb. 12. 12. and the
sinne that hangeth so fast on, to runne
with patience the race which is set
before them, looking vnto Iesus, the
author and finisher of their faith. To
whom could I offer the considera∣tion
of the condition of these guests,
for whom that Inne of heauen is pre∣pared,
omitting your Lordship? who
being taught of God knowes, that
not all those who crie:Mat. 7. 21. Lord, Lord, shall
enter in the kingdome of heauen, but
those who do the will of that father
which is in heauen;1. Ioh. 3. 2. 3 that whosoeuer hath
this hope in him, that when Christ shall
appeare he shall be like him, seeing
him as he is; purgeth himselfe as he is
pure. Alwaies (in respect of these large
promises made vnto him by God)
cleansing himselfe from all filthinesse
of the flesh,2. Cor. 71. 1 and spirit; and growing vp
in full holinesse in the feare of God.
From my soule, beseeching my good
God for the sonne of his loues sake, so
to sanctifie, and to guard your Lord∣ships,

with your Lordships present,
and future Noble posteritie that your
Lordship with them, happily decli∣ning
these fearefull Rockes, and plea∣santly
iourneying towards that hea∣uenly
Inne, may at length, as guests
fitted of God for it, be receiued to
lodge within it, possessing in Gods
presence, fulnesse of ioy, and at his
right hand, pleasures for euermore.

