


OF that mynde I alwayes haue bene, M. Gryndal, that I thought my selfe not well, yf myne abilitie dyd not serue, some kinde of waye to recom∣pence the friendlye benefyte by others on me bestowed▪ so that in my being before you sun∣drie tymes for religiō: I founde at your handes a certayne kinde of fauour, thoughe, after a world∣lie maner of waye: for that cause I wished often∣tymes (of trothe) that I cold finde out some thing, wherein, I might gratifye you for the same ac∣cordinglie. But sythēce my being laste at Fulham before you, it was my chaunce to meete with cer∣tayne Tables, sett furthe by the right Reuerend Father in God VVillm̄ Bushop of Rurimunde in Ghelderlande: in fowre of the which tables, I thē perceaued the peruerse purpose of heretikes so painted, as more then a wonder vnto me yt was, howe anie man, beholding the same, colde longer lye in suche lothesome sinckes of heresie & synne. For shold not theyr falling out against the diui∣nes and Doctors of the primitiue churche, cause vs to forsake them? sholde not theyr owne diue∣lishe dissention, and stryfe, make vs to aduoyde them? shold not their wylie whispering with olde

condemned damnable heretikes, moue vs to hate them? and sholde not their manifeste wrongfull allegacions, and sclaunderinges of Doctors and Scripture, driue vs to defye them? wherefore, se∣ing that I founde in suche of the sayd Tables all the diuelish doting of harebrayne bolde heretikes so manifestly expressed: I thought it not a mysse, aswell to translate the same, whereby your ouer∣meane Englishe Mynisters might before their eyes beholde the haynous errours, & hatefull he∣resies, wherein they are in these our dayes more then drowned, that the people oppressed with the poyson of false doctrine, might perceaue the pla∣gue wherewyth they be daylie vexed & vndone, and that all men might vnderstande the detesta∣ble doinges, the lyeng lecherous spirite, & facing filthynes of heretykes: as also, to dedicate the sa∣me vnto you, that so the poore people, and feeble newe fangled folkes, throughe the preachinges of yowe, and your onmanerlie mowthed ministers infected, might nowe receaue, as yt were at your handes, a salue and medicine, to heale their in∣warde most greuous, and synfull sores. And thus, I ende, wishing to youe as to myne owne soule, that ys, saluacion before the iuste iudge at the daye of iudgement. From Antwerpe the 29. of Iune.
