



LVke the Euāgelist,Luke 1. 1. 2. 3. know∣ing
that that most Noble
Theophilus was wel instru∣cted
in that misterie of
Christ; dedicated to him,
First, that sacred Historie of the In∣carnation,
life, death, buriall, Resur∣rection,
and Ascension of that God-man,Acts. 1. 1.
and man-God Iesus blessed for
euermore; and thereafter that hea∣uenly
Historie of the holy Acts of
his faithfull Apostles. And shall anie
thing be able to dash me (treading

the cleane pathes of so wise a leader,
of so holy a Maister) my verie religi∣ous
Noble good Lord, in dedicating
this part of my Heauenly Chariot vnto
your Lordship, if it shall please my
blessed good God by his Spirit to
moue your good Lordship to daigne
your selfe to accept of it? Certaine it
is, that since that lamed souldier Ig∣natius
Layola of abominable memory,
had his orderles bloudie order, first
confirmed at Rome by Paulus the
third,Anno. 1540. by the meanes of Cardinall
Conteran: that these Robbers, his ly∣ing
cruell broode, (here offered vn∣to
your Lordships view) compassed
neuer this kingdome (with Satan that
lier, that murtherer from the begin∣ning
their Maister) so frequently, so
busily, so boldly as they do now at
this present, for the surprising of the
soules, and ouerthrowing of the bo∣dies
of Gods Saints among vs. Al∣wayes
when I thinke vpon that light
of God which shineth cleerely in

your Lordships vnderstanding, I see
(to the great comfort of all such lo∣uers
of Christ among vs) one able to
take them vp a far off, and to discerne
them. When I thinke vpon that loue
and zeale of God (which burneth
strongly in your Lordships heart) I
meet one, readily willing, seeing them
and discouering them, to pursue them
till they be apprehended. And when
I cast my eyes vpon that high chaire
(in the which not mortal weake man,
but that immortall strong Monarch,
hath euen at such a time placed your
Lordship) I lay hold on one, carying
an armed hand, able exemplarlie
to punish them being apprehended,
and who knoweth whither your
Lordship be come to this chaire,Esth. 4. 14. at
such a time for this end? These Rob∣bers
being that Goliah, your Lord∣ships
good and wise guide hath most
wisely cast in your Lordships way,
to reuile your Lordship, to defie your
Lordship, yea to reuile, and to defie

to your Lordships hearing, the host
of the Lord: to the end that your
Lordship as his Dauid, sent out by
him against them, may haue them
falling downe dead at your Lordships
feete: and thereafter haue their heads
carried in triumph before your Lord∣ship,
as a manifest euidence to the
world, that that God of hosts, euen
the God of the host of Israel (vpon
whom they haue too long railed) is
with your Lordship. The by-gone
proofes of your Lordships carriage,
and vpright dealing in euery thing,
hath bred such hopes in the hearts of
all feares God, that they expect this:
hath brought such astonishment to
the contrarie minded, that they looke
for this. My good Lord, let not your
Lordships sincere true friends be dis∣appointed,
let not your Lordships
periured, lying, aduersaries be frustra∣ted.
Cleon the Lacedaemonian being
set ouer the Commonwealth to go∣uerne
it, sent for all his friends, and

discharged himselfe of their friend∣ship,
knowing that friendship hath
made many men oftentimes to erre
in iudgement: and shall your Lord∣ships
kinsmen and acquaintances of∣fend
(if your Lordship resembling in
your happie gouernment, that holy
one who gaue himselfe for you) shall
say to these who shall come to your
Lordship in chamber, in counsell, or
in Session:Mat. 12. 49. 50. Behold my mother, and my
brother, for whosoeuer shall do the will
of God (and so haue a good action) the
same shall be my brother, my mother, and
my sister. The Emperour Vitellus ha∣uing
refused the petition of one of his
speciall friends which was vnreasona∣ble,
and hearing him (waxing angry)
said to him: What auaileth thy friend∣ship
to me, since I cannot obtaine that
which I craue? did answer religiously,
prudently, and calmely. And what
auaileth thy friendship to me, if for thee
I must do that which is vnlawfull? And
shall your Lordship hold these for

your Lordships friends, or account
these worthie of your Lordships fa∣uor,
who shall attempt to desire your
Lordship to speake or to do that for
them which may prouoke your Lord∣ships
good God to wrath? My deare
Lord, if diuels shall afterward assault
your Lordship, if men shall be bold,
either by faire promises to allure your
Lordship from good vnto euill, or by
sharpe threatenings to menace your
Lordship to refuse good, and to em∣brace
euill? let that holily & happily
spoken by Iosaphat to these Iudges
deputed by him, be alwayes remem∣bred
by your Lordship:2. Chron. 19. 6. 7. Take heede
what ye do, for ye execute not the iudge∣ment
of men, but of the Lord, and he will
be with you in the cause and iudgement.
Wherefore now let the feare of the Lord
be vpon you. Take heede and do it, for
there is no iniquitie with the Lord your
God, neither respect of persons, nor recei∣uing
of rewards. Suffer me, my verie
Noble good Lord, here to present my

blessed Lord and loue, euen that great
Angell of the couenant before your
Lordship, setting your Lordship to
this his worke, strengthening your
Lordship for this his worke, and fully
incouraging your Lordship against
all difficulties your Lordship possi∣bly
can meete with, in vndergoing
and vnderlying this his worke. The
Lord is with thee thou valiant man.Iud. 6. 12. 14. 16. Go
in this thy might, and thou shalt saue
my Israel, in Scotland out of the
hāds of these bloudy robbing Midia∣nites,
the Iesuites: haue not I sent thee,
I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite
them as one man. He who made an
house to the midwiues of Egypt, shal
not forget to build an house to your
Lordship. He who iustly made the
names of Doeg, Sanballat, Tobiah, and
Haman to stinke, and who mercifully
made the names of Nehemiah, Esdrah,
and Mordecai to smell sweetly, shall in
despight of all hellish and earthly
powers, keepe your Lordships name

from all infection, and made it to be
sweet and fragrant to all future ages;
yea, shall write it in the Lambes book
of life, that after your Lordship hath
serued your King and Soueraigne
Lord here for a while, your Lordship
may be hereafter, for euer, where that
your Lordships Lord & Soueraigne
is:Ioh. 13. 16. for the which till I breathe, I shall
not ceasse heartily and humbly to
draw vp my simple prayers to God.

