



HAuing lately vndertaken (right Wor∣shipfull) the translating of this treatise into the english tongue, intending to gratifie you therewith, I thinke it not amisse to shewe the reasons that first moued mee therevnto: Now after it had bene extant in the latine so many yeares, and of them not a fewe hath lien neglected in my studie without attempting any such matter. It may ther∣fore please you to call to remembraunce, how about Christmas last, maister Iames Thomas a studious gentle∣man, your kinseman and my good friend, comming to your house to visit you, wee happened to fall in talke of some bookes wherin I had done mine endeuour by tran∣slating to pleasure you: Among which I chiefly approued that Antimachi∣auell. wherin I last laboured, being by the Author ther∣of very learnedly handled, & hauing a notable Subiette, to wit,Lipsius Politickes. matter of pollicie and gouernmente in peace and warre. Wherevpon the gentleman recommended vnto me an other excellent booke of that argument, vpon which he wished me to bestowe some paines for your pleasure, whom hee perceaued to bee greatly delighted with such exercises. I promised him so to doe. But at his returne to London soone after, he aduertised me that the

same booke was englished, which in deed is very wel and sufficiently perfourmed by a learned gentleman, with no small labour to him, and some ease to me. Afterwardes seing the method of this writer so much pleased mee, (as I think it can displease no man that taketh pleasure in reading) I called to minde this treatise of CONSTAN∣CIE, which came to my hands about ten yeares past, be∣ing a student in Oxford. And considering of it with better aduisement then euer I did before, it seemed vnto me a work not vnworthy your good consideration. And ther∣fore albeit I know wel your iudgemēt to be very sufficient in vnderstanding latine writers far more profounde then this: yet aswell to make the same somwhat more familiar & plaine vnto you, as also that you may impart it to such of your frends as pleaseth you, and finally to shew my rea∣dy disposition in gratifying you to my power, I haue redu¦ced it into english, I feare me, with more hast then good speede, not hauing spent full fiue weekes there abouts, as you very well know. Wherein I trauelled with the more paines for bringing foorth this vntimely birth, to the end it might receaue his perfecte consummation against this day of your birth, whereunto I had respecte when I firste took the work in hand. And thus I earnestly recommend the preseruation of it to your fauorable protection, pray∣ing you to accepte in good part my little labour, procee∣ding from no little good will. And so I wish to your selfe & to my good lady your spouse all happines, beseeching God longe to preserue you both. From my chamber in your castle of Saint Donatts. The xiij of Iune. 1594.

