



HOly and wholsome is that
counsell giuen by the
Preacher vnto the yong
man, compassed with a
thousand dangers, and

lodging within him ten thousand ene∣mies:Eccl. 12. 1.
Remember thy Creator in the
dayes of thy youth. Alwayes no won∣der
was it that the Preacher aduised the
yong man thus, for well knew he (being
instructed by that greatest teacher) that
to be true:Pro. 22. 6. Teach a child in the trade
of his way, and when he is old he shall
not depart from it. Dauid the father
of this Preacher, knowing the yong man
to be compassed and possessed as is said,
could not possibly finde out away (euen
when he came to the blessed mouth of God
for resolution) to tame a yong man, and
taming him to haue him sanctified for
the seruice of his God, beside the word of
God, for did not Dauid crie out thus to
the hearing of Angels and men:
Wherwith shall a yong man redresse
his way,Psal. 119. 9. by taking heed vnto it accor∣ding
to thy word? Nature that com∣mon
fostering nurse hauing prudently
ioyned your Lordships nearely; Grace
that rarest mother which bringing
forth children vnto God, fill those

heauens of heauens hauing happily tyed
your Lordship one to another more
strictly, who am I that I should attempt
to seuer your Lordships, for should man
separate those whom God hath coupled?
I haue therefore my very noble good
Lords, out of that sincere loue my soule
in God doth carrie ioyntly to your Lord∣ships
coupled by nature, linked through
grace, and who I hope shall not be sepa∣rate
in glorie (considering these manie
dangers and fierce aduersaries the chil∣dren
of God iourneying through the wil∣dernesse
of this world, towards that Ca∣naan
which is aboue doth meete with)
bene bold heartily and humbly to pro∣pine
your Lordships with a leader, with
a lanterne, with a guide, with a guard,
alwayes so to direct, and protect your
Lordships in sinful time, that your Lord∣ships
may dwell and reigne after time in
shining eternitie, farre remoted from
sinne, and from sinners. I hope your Lord∣ships
will yeeld them presence, and ha∣uing
once countenanced them, will

lend them your eares, hearts and hands,
chearfully contented while your Lord∣ships
shall breathe here, to be counselled,
gouerned, and kept by them; for I assure
your Lordships they shall (without all
doubt) prooue that, to your Lordships at
length, which that fierie pillar proued to
the Israelites, coming through the wil∣dernesse
towards that promised Cana∣an.
Let your Lordships Leader be that
blessed Spirit of the Father,Nehe. 9. 20 and of his
dearest Sonne. Let your Lordships Lan∣terne
be that sacred and vnspotted
Word of God, contained in holy Scrip∣ture.
Let your Lordships Guide be the
Man of God,Psal. 119. 105. who being one of a thou∣sand,
hath this Spirit for his maister,
and this written word for his lesson.Act. 8. 31. Let
your Lordships Guard be these celestiall
spirits sent out by God the Father,Heb. 1. 14. Son,
and holy Ghost, for the comfort of those
who be ordained for saluation. This was
that Leader, that Lanterne, that Guide,
that Guard; that sole soueraigne blessed
Leader, Lanterne, Guide, and Guard of

Gods elect, euen our God blessed for euer∣more,
prepared for his owne Dauid, who
was a man according to his owne heart,
and wherein Dauid did reioyce and tri∣umph
exceedingly: for out of the sense
of this did he not draw vp this suite to
his God?Psal. 13. 10. Let thy good Spirit leade me
vnto the land of righteousnesse. Doth
he not out of the sense of this, euen with
ioy, make this confession vnto God before
the whole world? Thy word is a lan∣terne
vnto my feete, and a light vnto
my pathes. Out of the sense of this doth
not that religious King and royall Pro∣phet
reuerence and follow the aduice and
counsell of his Seers,1. King. 1. 24. 25. 26. 27. 32. 33. 34. 35. the men of God led
by his Spirit and word in his greatest
affaires?2. Sam. 12. 7 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. & 24 13. 14. And when he (being deceiued
alas, by Satan and his owne lust) fell in
any sinne, can he not reuerently heare
these his Seers charging him with his
sinne, and sharply admonishing and
threatning him for the same? Yea out of
the sense of this,Psal. 34. 7. doth not Dauid sing to
the comfort of his owne soule, and conso∣lation

of others: The Angels of the
Lord pitcheth round about all them
that feare him, and deliuereth them.
My good Lords, delay not to take your
selues vnto the pathes of Dauid, and
wearie neuer, notwithstanding of hellish
and earthly opposition, of kinsmen and
strangers, of friends and foes, to walke
in the wayes of Dauid, till death shall
close your Lordships eyes. For whosoeuer
with Dauid shall finde grace to commit
himselfe to the direction, gouernment,
and protection of the Spirit of the Word,
of the Man, and of the Angels of God,
can men possibly discouer the happinesse
and glorie of such a one? It is a common
thing to be Noble, but it is as rare a
thing to be truly Noble. Many diuerse
Kings giues many diuerse honors, but
that honour which is onely worthie the
stile of Honor, is giuen onely by that one
King who is the King of kings; for he a∣lone
is able to make the sonnes of Adam
to be the sonnes of God: and these alone
who are Gods sonnes, are truly Noble.

The sense hereof moued that sonne of
thunder euen with admiration to crie
out:1. Ioh. 3. 1. Behold what loue the Father hath
shewed vnto vs, that we should be
called the sonnes of God. That reli∣gious
Poet answering this, could sing se∣cretly
thus:
Generosa Christi nobilitat secta viros:
Cui quisquis seruit ille vere est nobilis.
Now the very God of peace sanctifie
your Lordships throughout, and I pray
God that your Lordships whole spirits
and soules may be kept blamelesse vntill
the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ:1. Thess. 5. 24▪ 23. 24.
Faithfull is he which called you,
which will also do it.

