



CAllyng aduisedly to remembraunce (right Honora∣ble) the worthy places of those, which by a speciall prerogatiue, and the prouident goodnesse of almighty God, are endued with Magnanimity, and called to the hyghest roomes of Authority: I see and finde that by their wyse and prudent gouernmente, there is generallye caused a publique peace both abroade, amonge straungers, and at home among our selues: and also I perceyue and by experience do proue, that the bayte of their cheereful countenaunce, allureth and winneth the hartes of the Inferiours, to the imitation and ad∣miration of like curtesie: And as anye occasion is offered, so do they testifye and geeue out (as tokens of their good will & obedience) some yerely fruict, more or lesse, to confirme & (as it were) to seale vp the vowed zeale of vnfeigned dutie, which they faythfully, and hartely owe and beare vnto theire Superiours. Such Noblenesse, Magnanimitie, Af∣fabilitie,

& Curtesie, harbouringe wythin your L. breast, hath also incited & emboldened me, now to dedicate, and present, vnto your Honors view and consideration, this smal Treatise of the putatiue & imagined Gods of the Gentiles: a worke, as hereto∣fore not gathered in oure vulgar tonge: So I trust not so barrein of fruictfull documentes, but that it maye seeeme both to sauour of no small paynes on myne owne behalfe, and also to yelde out such other instructions, as maye tende to sundrye Godlye pur∣poses, and to the betteringe of manye others.
VVherein we Christians, now lyuinge in the cleare light of the Gospel, may euidently see, with what er∣roneous trūperies, Antiquitie hath bene nozzeled: in what foggy mystes, they haue long wandered: in what filthye puddles they haue bene myered: vnder what masking vysors of clouted religiōs, they haue bene bewytched; what traditions they haue of theyr owne phantastical braynes to themselues forged: & finallye into what Apostacye, Atheisme, Blasphemy, Idolatrye, and Heresie, they haue plunged their Soules, & affiaunced their beleeues. VVhose mise∣rable captiuitie, so long and so manye yeres, vnder the greuous yoake, and thraldome of oure deadlye Enemie, and Capital foe Sathan, as wee are moste pitifullye to bewayle: so are we most humblye, and incessauntlye to prayse God for oure owne delyue∣raunce from the lyke slauerye, for the openinge of our eyes and vnderstandings, & for the reuealing of him selfe vnto vs, in his moste sacred and blessed worde, the most perfect Touchstone, which vnfey∣nedlye

tryeth Truth and Simplicity, frō Falshode & Hypocrisie, Lighte from Darknes, Perfect honoure from Superstition, finally God and Godlines, from the Deuil & Diuelishnes. Receyue therfore (right Honorable Lorde) this poore pawne of my dutifull hart, & vnder the Ensigne of your noble protectiō shrowde it against the malicious Querkes of the Sycophanticall Crewe, if any happen either to con∣demne my Enterprise, or impungue my honest mea∣ning: which was, and is, by shewing my selfe duti∣ful vnto you my Lord and Mayster, to do good also (as much as in me lyeth) vnto al others. Beseching Almighty God to continue and encrease his riche blessinges vppon you, and after manye and flouri∣shing daies here in this life spent, receyue you amōg the trowpe of his holy and heauenly Inhabitaunts, to rest with him in his blessed Hierarchie for euer. AMEN. At Newington the 8. of September. 1577.

