



THey say the soaring Eagle eates no Flies,
yet it may pleasure her to see them play:
The smallest sparke that couch'd in embers lies,
Shew's whilom sier in that circle lay,
Each thing created may yeeld a sweet delight,
To wiest witts perpending it aright.


Great Macedon when he laid by his Launce,
Sported himselfe with Homers golden verse,
And Hercules in his obscured traunce,
Would needs haue Theseus Madrigals reherse,
And Astrophill when bloodie warrs were donne,
Pastim'd himselfe to see the Muses ronne.


The wisest Monarch of Hierusalem,
View'd the Pismire for recreation,
Glorious Adam, Seth, Methusalem,
Had Marble stones in admiration.
Plinie, and Virgill wrote of seely Bees,
Of Gnats, of Fleas, of Shrubs, and Mirtle trees.


Yea simplewormes are vsed for a sport,
And Ladies loue to see a Monkey play,
And euerie tyred wit seeketh comfort,
In honest myrth to passe the time away:
The Ladies Spaniel snarling in her lap,
Sometimes delights her after her mis-hap.


The greatest Clearks of yore to trie their wit,
Made foolishnesse the subiect of their Pen,
And for their pleasures others thought it fit,
To proue that Baldnesse best becommeth men.
And euerie Stationer hath now to sale,
Pappe with a Hatchet, and Madge-Howlets tale.



And now comes creping  Endymion,
Leauing Mysteries Theologicall,
Scarce worth the rotten earth he readeth on,
And tells strange Tales Philosophicall,
Anatomizing th'uniuersall round,
and whatsoeuer may there be found.


He pipeth in his homely Countrey Reed,
Made of an olde Aristotelia Quill,
He ken no Crochets of contentious breed,
Nor ha's that Quintessentiated skill,
He ha's no fine Dichotomating wit,
Such musicke as he learn'd, he descants it.


You mightie Ladies that seeken repaste,
When weightie causes haue your Spirits tyr'd,
Rest here your wearied lims, and take a taste,
Here view the works of God so much admyr'd.
And fit your selues of Byr, of Beasts or Fish,
Twist Laurell Garlands, a your hearts can wish.


High-pryz'd Ourania, let her liue with you,
And shield her from surprizing infamie,
That vertue entertaines with frowning brow,
And learning scorns as pining beggerie,
Making more reckoning o a golden Asse,
Then of Trismegist-Caelestiall-Als.


Endymion vow's if Fates do  aright,
With Corollaries of a laurell Twne▪
That shall endure th'euerlasting light,
Hee'll shortly dignifie your princely shrinepunc;
Mean-while all honor shal your states attend,
Blest e your life, and hape be your end.


