



WHEN I had diligently weighed and duely considered with my selfe. (Right Woorshipfull) the manifolde curtesies, and sure to∣kens of vnfeigned friendshippe, which diuers and sundry times I haue heretofore receiued at your worships hands, sithence my first cōming into this countrie of Es∣sex: I was inwardly moued, stirred, and procured there∣by, to deuise, studie and finde out some way, whereby I might some what exonerate and discharge my selfe of the heauie loade of your vndeserued friendlinesse towards me and mine. So that after I had well deliberated of this mat∣ter, ransaked all my weake and sillie senses, and throughly recounted with my selfe, mine owne estate, wealth and condition, I found it altogether more simple, bae, and slen∣der, then that it mighte in any respecte counteruayle your kindenesse. Notwithstanding at the last by good happe, lighting on a Booke ▪ De Oeconomia Christi∣ana, A matter cōtaining a Christianlike ordering & gouer∣ning

of an houshoulde and familie: collected, framed and composed in the Latine tongue (after the order of a Dia∣logue) by the first Author Bartholomew Batty of Alostensis for the vtilitie and profite of his brethren, children, and countrie men, whereof. I taking some good liking at the first viewe, setled my selfe therein, and would not giue it ouer, vntill suche time as I had throughly perused and diligently read ouer the same. And the matter being pitthy, pleasaunt and profitable, bewrapt me in such delight, that I could not choose, but bestow the second reading therof, & so waded through againe with a more deep consideration, care and diligence then before. Thus passing through the second time I gleyned and gathered together certaine speci∣all notes for mine owne better instruction and reformati∣on of mine owne family. Of the whiche when some of my deare friendes had taken the viewe, together with the Booke, and also hauing good liking thereof, they beganne to perswade me earnestly, and that with ma∣ny and great reasons, that it would be very profitable not only vnto my selfe, for mine owne priuate exercise and in∣crease of knowledge (but also vnto all Parents & childrē, Maisters and seruants old and young, of what estate, degree & condition soeuer, being ignorant of the Latine tongue) if I would bestow, not only the translating therof. But al∣so afterwards commit the same to the printing, that therby our countrie and countriemen (which are right deare vnto vs) might also reape some profite and commodity. And al∣beit I thought my selfe farre vnfit for that purpose and not sufficiētly able to performe their honest & earnest requests nor to manifest the Authours iust deserued praise, in fra∣ming so fit a paterne for this our age & time. Yet at the last aswel for their importunacy, as also chiefly for the increase of mine owne knowledge, and to doe my countriemen

some pleasure (after the example of others.) I haue presu∣med very boldly to attēpt this matter. And as time would permit me frōmine other daily exercises, haue brought the same to such effect as may now appeare, without any iniu∣ry vnto the first Authour. I haue now disfurnished & chan∣ged him out of his owne rich robes and gallant garments, and haue apparelled him after the English fashion, which though perhaps to some may seeme euill shapen, at the first sight, and will also deeme, that the stuffe is not so fine, excel∣lent and costly, nor set out with such delicate deuises, picked points, and curious colours, as the worthinesse of the thing doth deserue, nor that I haue shewed my selfe ther in a cun∣ning and skilful Artificer: yet is it good, wholsome and du∣rable, and not of the coursest nor vilest kind of stuffe, ney∣ther of the basest and simplest fashion. So that such as shall behold the sound body and inward substance, rather thē the outward shew, and shall endure the same vnto the end: shal find (no doubt) sufficient matter ministred vnto them: to garde and defend them at all assayes from many mishaps, sharpe showers, terrible tempests, iniuries and inconuenien∣ces, which otherwise for want therof, might more sodain∣ly annoy them. And for that your worships are Fathers of many children (which I am perswaded are dearly beloued vnto you) and maisters of great families, wherof I knowe you haue care to be vertuously instructed, guided, gouerned and trayned vp in the feare of God. And because this whole discourse tendeth to the same purpose and effect, I haue thought it good to offer these my simple paynes and trauels vnto your woorships, as the present of a true and faithfull friend, which faine would haue offered you a better gift, if his power would haue extended thereunto. But herein fol∣lowing the examples of poore men in the auncient hysto∣ries, I am so much the bolder, euen for the very goodwill

I beare to you and yours. Humbly beseeching your woor∣ships to shrowd the same vnder the shadow of your wings. So shall I thinke my selfe safe, let the bawling Barkers, cu∣rious Cauillors, sawsie Sycophants and Momus his mates, with all the rable of Ruffians in their fretting fumes say what they can. Which if you wil vouchsafe to doe, I haue my whole desire, and will continually pray vnto Almigh∣tie God, to send you in this earthly habitatiō happie health, ioyfull prosperitie, with the increase of much woor∣shippe. And after this life euerlasting bles∣sednesse in the heauenly Hierusalem.
At Malden the xxxj. day of May. 1581.

