



Father: (V. Villiam Beeston Brewer) S.B. wisheth continuall health, with end-lesse felicitie.
WHen, and at such time, beloued Father, I had called to my remembrance, the great good wil, and wished benefites proceeding from you, towardes me: and on my part very slenderly deserued in comparison, the acquiting of suche curtesie: After many inuen∣tions had, by what meanes to shew forth some such occasion, howe to gratifie you, as a sure shewe of obedience, thereby to occasion no lesse good will to folowe, then formally by you was begon. And calling to ininde one of the graue sentences of Seneca, which sayeth, That the remembrance of benefites ought not to be forgotten, and that a smal thing geuen willingly, is more acceptable then great riches with euell will: And that the will of the geuer, and not the value of the gift, is to be regarded: rhese documentes and such like, vrged me to deuise some thing, whereby you might per∣ceiue in me, not only my obedience to fatherly parentage, but also to proue such a sonne (good will being first preferred) to be more worthy a benefite,Diogines then to haue geuen, which benefite that I looke for, is your continuall societye and fatherly affection, to abide wyth no lesse good will, then hitherto it hath bene: To that end therfore, I haue taken vpon me to write this worke folowing for you to loke vpon: And although it seeme barren for lacke of a more furniture, and altogether pore, like vnto the wryter: Neuertheles, I hope you wil except it with no les good wil, in comparison of mortall fieshe, then Iesus the sauioure of mankinde, who excepted the two mites put into the treasury by a pore widow,Luke. 21. being all the substance that shee had: so this small worke of mine, being all the substance that I possesse (as touching good will) haue with no les imparted the same vnto you, which woorke beareth the name of the three graces, Thankfulnes, Plenteousnes, and Liberalitie: which if you peruse

thorowly, I doubt not, but it wil content your minde so, as occasion may serue to further remembrance, considering that to attain ver∣tues, we haue good desire,Marcus but to obtaine vices, we put to all oure workes: such is our corruption,Aur. for the which cause, euery desiring minde to obtaine knowledge, oughte to take heede where vertue is to be learned:Socrates for the les time man hath to liue, which may be per∣ceiued from the day of birth to the houre of death, with what spede it hasteneth, and the time stayeth for none: to be ready prepared to the hauen of peace, to the ende our mortal enemy raigne not ouer vs, the more earnestly ought man, in vertues study to be proceding in: my louing Father (therfore ler this my worke be so accepted, as good wil in his continuaunce, may further a greater: And as con∣cerning this already finished, there can nothing be amended or rightly corrected, but by that, which surmoūteth, and is better then it,Plato. as vice by vertue, falshode by truthe: wrong by iustice: folly by wisdome: ignorance by learning, and such like. For the which cause euery perticular being considered, I doute not but that you wil as fauourably receiue this my trauaile with no les good wil, then I in presuming to dedicate the same vnto you, whome I account moste worthiest: not for affection but for your godly life and christian religion: in the which, the almighty father, sonne, and holy ghost strengthen with continuance, that bothe father, and sonne, by the holy ghost: with father, sonne and holy ghost, may praise the almight in the celestial heauens, worlde without end. Amen.
Your obedient sonne, Steuen Batman.
