



Right Reuerend Father in God,
YOV that from the first haue beene a Father to my studies, and are now, by Gods most gracious blessing to our Church, set as a Father ouer it, suffer mee with fearefull boldnes, and hum∣ble ambition, to offer vp to your Lord∣ship, not any Lordly, but this meane and lowly present. For my Vniuer∣sitie, my Colledge, my place, my per∣son, my profession, my liuing, and all, en∣ioyne, and enforce me to vow, and con∣secrate to your Lordship, if it were possi∣ble,
 more then my all. And on what fai∣rer Obiect can the eies of Oxford, and the hearts of Christ Church be set, then vpon you, who are one of the great bles∣sings of Oxford, & the very ioy of Christ Church hearts. True it is, that being con∣scious of my owne priuat meannesse, and euer most feareful & timorous to appeare in publicke, I had purposed to haue laide aside this Sermon, as I my self lie, in obli∣uion & obscuritie. But since it hath been, once, and againe desired, prodire in lucem, to see the light; & that by some high and honorable personages, such as are emi∣nent both in place & power, it was not in my power to conceale and keep in that, which their graue wisedomes thought fit to goe abroad. And I might haue beene condemned of rudenes, should I haue denied the world that, which, vnworthy though it be, yet men of such worth iud∣ged might profit the world. And now right Reuerend Father I shal euer esteem it my greatest happines, if this too soone
 and vntimely borne infant, which cries to you for succour, may be accepted & fauou∣red of you. For weak though it be in it self, yet beeing armed with your powerfull name, it will thence gather and collect strength. I must confesse, & the world will finde, it is an Embrio, an imperfect and formeless issue, for I had not time, Lambere foetum, so much as to cloath and coate this though my first borne child: and therefore the more bare and naked that it is, so much the more it needs to bee couered vnder the wing of your gracious fauour.
It was S. Pauls speech, Quis idoneus? who is fit for these things? and I may say, Quî idoneus? how can I fit this liuing thing the Presse, that am pressed, and almost op∣pressed with a world of labour & care. And yet I esteeme all my labour but ease; and my yoke, were it heauier then it is, seemes but light, since I liue vnder your Lordship, who haue euer been, and (to your immor∣tall honor) continue still, vir laborum, a ho∣ly and heauenly laborer in the Lords vine∣yard.
 Againe it cheares vp my spirits, and glads my heart, that I serue & sit at the feet of so godly a Gamaliel, as the learned, reli∣gious, & most studious & painfull Doctor, the reuerend Doctor Spencer; whose name as it is famous through the Church, so shal it euer be most deare & pretious vnto mee. But I feare, in publica commoda pecco, Qui lon∣go sermone moror tua tempora; therefore to conclude all, I pray from the ground of my heart, that your Lordship may long and long liue happy in our Church, and that our Church may still be happy in you, and that you, and yours, and all your holy endeauours, may euer be blessed from aboue, by Iesus Christ the sole head of the Church.

