





CHRIST IESVS, the 1 Tim. 6.15. Apoc. 17.14. PRINCE of Princes, blesse your Highnesse with length of dayes, and an increase of all Graces,

which may make you true∣ly prosperous in this life, and eternally happy in that which is to come.
Ionathan shot 1 Sam. 20 20. three Arrowes to driue Dauid further off from Sauls fu∣rie: and this is the third Epistle which I haue writ∣ten to draw your High∣nesse neerer to Gods fa∣uour, by directing your heart to beginne (like Io∣siah) in your 2 Chron. 34.3▪ youth to seeke after the GOD of DAVID (and of IACOB) your Father: Not, but that I know, that your High∣nesse doth this without mine admonition; but be∣cause

I Qui monet vt facias quod iam facis: ipse monendo, laudat, & hortatu cō∣probat actae suo. would with the Apostle, haue you, to Cor. 8.7. a∣bound in euery Grace, in faith and knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your loue to Gods Ser∣uice and true Religion. Neuer was there more neede of plaine and vnfai∣ned Admonitions: for the Comicke in that saying seemes but to haue prophe∣sied of our times, Obse∣quium amicos, veritas o∣dium parit. And no mar∣uell; seeing that wee are fallen into the dregges of Time, which being the last, must needes be the worst dayes. And how can there

be worse, seeing Vanitie knowes not how to be vai∣ner, nor Wickednesse how to be more wicked? And whereas heretofore those haue beene counted most holy, who haue shewed themselues most zealous in their Religion: they are now reputed most discreet, who can make the least pro∣fession of their Faith. And that these are the last daies, appeares euidently; because that Securitie of mens e∣ternall state hath so ouer∣whelmed (as CHRIST fore-told it should) all sorts:Mat. 25.1. &c. that most who now liue,2 Tim. 3.4 are become louers of plea∣sures

more then louers of God. And of those who pretend to loue GOD. O GOD, what sanctified hart can but bleede to beholde how seldome they come to prayers? how irreue∣rently they heare Gods Word? what strangers they are at the Lords Ta∣ble? what assiduous spe∣ctators they are at Stage-playes? where being Chri∣stians, they can sport them∣selues to heare the Vassals of theExemplū accidit Do∣mino test▪ muieris quae Theatrum aeij, & in∣de cum Dae∣monio redij Ita{que} in e∣orcismo cùm oneraretur immundus spiritus, quod ausus est fideem aggredi: con∣stantèr & iustissimè quidem (in∣quit) feci, in meo eam in∣ueni. Tert. de spect. lib. cap. 26. Diuell scoffing Re∣ligion, and blasphemously abusing phrases of holy Scripture on their Stages: as familiarly as they vse

their Tabacco-pipes in their bibbing-houses.Therefore Tertullian in cap. 26. cals the Stage dia∣boli Eccle∣siam, and cathedram pestilentia∣rum. So that he who would now a∣dayes seeke in most Chri∣stians, for the power, shall scarse almost finde the ve∣ry shew of godlinesse. Ne∣uer was there more sin∣ning, neuer lesse remorse for sinne. Neuer was the Iudge neerer to come,Iam 5 9. Apo. 22.20. ne∣uer was there so little pre∣paration for his com∣ming. And if the Bride-groome should now come; how many (who thinke themselues wise enough, and full of all knowledge) would be found foolish Virgines, without one

droppe of the Oyle of sa∣uing Faith in their lamps?Mat. 25.8. For the greatest wisedome of most men in this age; con∣sists in being wise, first, to deceiue others, and in the end, to deceiue themselues.
And if sometimes some good Booke haps into their hands; or some good mo∣tion comes into their heads, whereby they are put in minde to consider the vncertaintie of this life present; or how weake assurance they haue of e∣ternall life if this were en∣ded: and how they haue some secret sinnes, for which they must needes re∣pent

here, or be punished for them in Hell here∣after▪ Securitie then forth∣with whispers the Hypo∣crite in the Eare, that though it be fit to thinke of these things; yet, It is not yet time, and that hee is yet young enough (though hee cannot but know that many millions as young as himselfe, are already in hell, for want of timely Repentance,) Presumption warrants him in the other Eare, that hee may haue time hereafter at his leasure to repent: and that howso∣euer others dye, yet hee is

farre enough from death, and therefore may boldly take yet a longer time to enioy his sweete plea∣sures, and to encrease his vvealth and greatnesse. And hereupon,Prou. 6.10. like Salo∣mons Sluggard, he yeelds himselfe to a little more sleepe, a little more slum∣ber, a little more folding of the hands to sleepe in his former sinnes: till at last; Despayre (Securities ougly hand-maide) comes in vnlooked for, & shewes him his Houre-glasse, dolefully telling him, that his time is past, and that nothing now remaines but

to dye and be damn'd. Let not this seeme strange to any, for too many haue found it too true: & more without more grace, are like to be thus soothed to their end; and in the end snared to their endlesse perdition.
In my desire therefore of the common saluation;Iude ver. 3 but especially of your High∣nesse euerlasting Welfare: I haue endeuoured to ex∣tract out of the Chaos of endlesse Controuersies, the olde Practise of true PIETIE, which flourish∣ed before these Controuer∣sies were hatched; which

my poore labours in a short while comes now forth a∣gaine the third time, vn∣der the gracious protecti∣on of your Highnesse fa∣uour; and by their enter∣tainment seeme not to be altogether vnwelcome to the Church of Christ. If to be pious, hath in all ages beene held true ho∣nour; how much more ho∣nourable is it, in so impi∣ous an age, to be the true Patrone and Patterne of Pietie? Pietie made Dauid, Salomon, Iehosaphat, E∣zechias, Iosias, Zerubba∣bel, Constantine, Theo∣dosidus, Edward the 6.

Queene Elizabeth, Prince Henry, and other religi∣ous Princes, to be so ho∣noured: that their names (since their deaths) smels in the Church of GOD, like a precious oyntment,Eccles. 7.3 Ecclus. 49.1. and their remembrance is sweet as Hony in all mouthes, and as Musicke at a banquet of Wine: when as the liues of others, who haue beene godlesse and irreligious Princes; doe rot and stinke in the memory of Gods people. And what honour is it for great men to haue great titles on earth; when God counts their Names vn∣worthy

to be written in his Booke of life in hea∣uen?
It is Pietie that en∣balmes a Prince his good name, and make his face to shine before men, and glorifieth his Soule among Angels.Exod. 34.29.30. For as Moses face by often talking with GOD shined in the eyes of the People: so by frequent praying (which is our tal∣king with God) and hea∣ring the Word (which is Gods speaking vnto vs) we shall be changed from glory to glory,2 Cor. 3.18 by the Spirit of the Lord, to the Image of the Lord. And

seeing this life is vncer∣taine to all; (especially to Princes) What argument is more fit both for Princes and People to study; then that which teacheth sinfull man to deny himselfe by mortifying his corruption: that hee may enioy Christ the Author of his saluati∣on? To renounce these false and momentanie pleasures of the world, that he may attaine to the true and eternall ioyes of Hea∣uen? & to make them true∣ly honourable before God in Piety, who are now one∣ly honourable before men in vanitie? What charges

soeuer wee spend in earth∣ly vanities, for the most part, they eyther dye be∣fore vs, or wee shortly die after them: but what we spend, like Mat. 26.13 Mary, in the Practise of Pietie, shall remaine our true memo∣riall for euer. For, 1 Tim. 4 8. Pietie hath the promise of this life, and of that which shall neuer end. But Principi∣bus ad salu¦tem so a sa∣tis verae est Pietas: abs que illa ve∣rò nihil est vel exerci∣tus, vel im∣eratoris fortitudo, vel appara∣tus reliquus Zozom. Eccle. hist. lib. 9. cap. 1 with∣out Pietie▪ there is no in∣ternal comfort to be found in Conscience, nor ex∣ternall peace to be looked for in the World, nor any eternall happinesse to be hoped for in Heauen. How can Pietie but promise to

her selfe a zealous Pa∣trone of your Highnesse, being the sole Sonne and Heyre of so gracious and great a Monarch, who is not onely the defender of the faith by Title: but also a defender of the Faith in truth, as the Christian World hath taken notice, by his learned confuting of Bellarmines ouer-sprea∣ding Heresies: and his suppressing in the blade of Vorstius Athean blasphe∣mies? And how easie it is for your Highnesse to equall, if not to exceede all that went before you in Grace and greatnesse, if

you doe but set your heart to seeke and to serue God, considering how religious∣ly your Highnesse hath beene educated by godly and vertuous Gouernours and Tutors:The Ho∣nourable Sir. Robert Carey Knight, and the re∣ligious La∣dy Carey his Wife. Mr. Thomas Murray. Sir Iames Fullerton. as also that you liue in such a time, wherin Gods prouidence and the Kings religious care, haue placed ouer this Church (to the vnspeake∣able comfort thereof) an∣other venerable Iehoiada, that doth good in our Is∣rael, both towards God, and towards his house:2 Chron. 24.16. of whom your Highnesse at all times, in all doubts, may learne the sinceritie

of Religion, for the Sal∣uation of your inward Soule, and the vvisest counsell for the directi∣on of your outward state. And let that Exhortation of Dauid to his Sonne Sa∣lomon be euer in your Princely minde.1 Chron. 28.9. And thou Salomon my Sonne, know thou the GOD of thy Father, and serue him with a perfect heart, and with a willing minde: for the LORD searcheth all hearts, and vnder∣standeth all the imagina∣tions of the thoughts: if thou seeke him, hee will be found of thee, but

if thou forsake him, hee vvill cast thee off for euer.
To helpe you the bet∣ter to seeke and to serue this GOD Almightie, who must be your chiefe Protector in life, and onely Comfort in death: I here once againe, on my bended knees, offer my olde Mite new stampt in∣to your Highnesse hands: daily for your Highnesse offering vp vnto the most HIGH, my humblest pray∣ers, that as you grow in age and stature:Luk. 2.52. so you may (like your Master) encrease in Wisedome

and fauour, with God and all good men. This suite will I neuer cease: In all other matters I will euer rest

