


HOw much the Graecians excelled all o∣ther Nations in the Sciences called Liberall, is better knowne in gene∣rall, then needfull at this time parti∣cularly to be rehearsed to your High∣nesse. The Romans themselues albeit otherwise ambitious, and out of mea∣sure thirsty of honour, and challen∣ging to themselues the highest degree of grauity, constan∣cie, greatnesse of minde, wisedome, faith, and skill of war, contended not herein, but freely left them the possession of that praise vnquestioned. For warre it is not my pur∣pose at this time to make comparison, or commit the two Nations together. The controuersie is already moued by other, and hangeth vndecided in the Court of learning. Thus much, me thinks, I may truly affirme, that the Grae∣cians were the first, that out of variety of actions, and long experience reduced the knowledge of Armes into an Arte, and gaue precepts for the orderly mouing a Battaile, and taught, that the moments of victory rested not in the

hands of multitudes, but in a few men rightly instructed to manage armes, and trained vp in the obseruation of the discipline of the field. In which regard they had almost in all Cities amongst them Masters of Armes, whom they called Tacticks, which deliuered the Arte Military to such, as were desirous to learne. Out of whose Schooles issued those chiefs of warre in number so many, in skill so ex∣quisite, in valor so peerelesse, in all vertues beseeming great Generals so admirable, that no Nation of Europe e∣uen to this day hath been able to match, much lesse to o∣uer-match their fame, and glory. And the time was when the Lacedemonians exceeded the rest in Martiall skill, and were thought to be the best Souldiers of Greece; by meanes whereof they aduanced themselues to the Principality of Greece, which they held with such reputation, that an ene∣mie by the space of 500 yeares was not seene within their Territory. Till at last growing insolent, and surfeiting of, and being not able to brooke their owne fortune, they sought to oppresse, and with wrong and force to possesse the City of Thebes, and stirred vp Epaminond as a The ban by birth, and from his tender yeares nourished by his fa∣thers care in the study of Philosophy, and the science of Armes, to oppose against them, who in two battailes, the one at Leuctra, the other at Mantinea so broke their forces, that from that day forth they were neuer able to recouer their wonted authority, and power in the field. Philip the sonne of Amyntas King of Macedonia, being but a priuate man, was deliuered as a hostage to the Thebans, & brought vp in the same house and learning with Epaminond as. He afterward became King of Macedonia; which being of it selfe but a poore kingdome, and before his time sometimes kept vnder by the Athenians, sometimes by the Lacedemoni∣ans, sometimes by the The bans, & finding it at his entrance

to the Crowne harried, and spoiled by the Paeonians, and forced to pay tribute by the Illyrians, by erecting a new arte, and discipline of warre, to which he exercised, and enured his Macedonians, he not only freed his Countrey from the Barbarous nations, but also ouercame the Graecians, accoun∣ted the only Masters of armes till that day, and caused him∣selfe to be declared Generall of Greece against the Persians: against whom after he had made his full preparation, he re∣solued to go in person. But being preuented by death, he left the succession of his kingdom, and execution of his designes to Alexander his sonne, whom he had before curiously in∣structed in the discipline of Armes inuented by himselfe. The same Alexander (being about 20 yeares of age) after he had vanqushed Darius in 2 great battailes in 12 yeeres ran through, and subiected the spacious, rich, and flourishing kingdomes of Asia, euen as far, as the East Indies, and with terror of armes made the whole world to tremble at his name. His kingdomes were after his death diuided amongst many Successors, who by the same Arte military easily maintained the possession of their conquests. This Arte is it, that I at this time present vnto your Highnesse. It was comprised in writing by many, and yet none of their works attained our age, but only that of Aelian; who hath in a small volume so expressed the arte, that nothing is more short, no∣thing more linked together in coherence of precepts, and yet distinguished with such variety, that all motions requi∣site, or to be vsed in a Battaile are fully expressed therin. Ae∣lian liued in the time of Adrian the Emperor. How much the booke was of ancient time esteemed may appeare by this a∣lone, that Leo a succeeding Emperor setting downe Martiall instructions for the gouernment of his Empire, transcribeth whole passages out of Aelian, & whensoeuer he citeth, or na∣meth the Tacticks, he giueth still the first place vnto Aelian.

How be it the practise of Aelians precepts hath long lien wrapped vp in darknes, & buried (as it were) in the ruines of time, vntill it was reuiued, & restored to light not long since in the vnited Prouinces of the low-Countries, which Countries at this day are the Schoole of war, whither the most Marti∣all spirits of Europe resort to lay downe the Apprentiship of their seruice in Armes, and it was reuiued by the direction of that Heroicall Prince Maurice of Nassau, Prince of O∣range, Gouernour, and Generall of the aid Countries, a Prince borne and bred vp in Armes, and (beside the completenes of his other eminent vertues) for skill, experience, iudge∣ment, and military literature comparable to the greatest Ge∣nerals, that euer were. I haue of late aduentured to take from Aelian his Greekish cloake, and to put him in English appa∣rell, that in that habit he might attend your Highnesse, and be ready with his seruice, in case he were thought worthy of employment. He had before for his Patron Adrian, an Em∣peror, and Ruler of the Roman world. Now he humbly craueth your HIGHNESSE fauour for his protection, who as in Princely descent, and succession of Royall blood you are farre superior, so in vertues worthy of your birth, and yeares, and in all hopefull expectations are you nothing in∣ferior to Adrian. It may please your Highnesse to regard him with a gratious eye, and to esteeme the Presentor of him your faithfull bedesman, that will not cease to pray to the mighty God of hosts, to giue you conquest ouer all your enemies. From my Garrison at Woudrichem in Hol∣land the 20 of September 1616.

