






Worthy Gentlemen:
THese my last endeuours vpon Aelian, I purposed to haue kept to mine owne pri∣uate vse, and not to haue presented them to the view of the world. But now being to depart from you, and toiourney into a farre Countrey, and finding your kindnesse and loue toward me such, as I was not with any reason to expect, I altered my minde, and hauing nothing

else to offer vnto you, I resolued to make this a monument of my thankefulnesse to you, and a testimony of my desire to doe you the best seruice I am able. For my paines herein, I leaue them to the iudgement of any learned Reader; for the profit of the Treatise, I say no more but this, it contai∣neth the practise of the best Generals of all antiquity con∣cerning the formes of Battailes. And whereas many hold opinion, that it sorteth not with the vse of our times, they must giue me leaue to be of another mind: Indeed our actions in Warre are onely now a dayes and sieges oppugnations of Cities; Battailes wee heare not of, saue onely of a few in France, and that of Newport in the Low-Countries. But this manner will not last alwayes, nor is there any Con∣quest to be made without Battailes. He that is Master of the field, may dispose of his affaires as he listeth; hee may spoyle the Enemies Countrey at his pleasure, he may march where he thinketh best, he may lay siege to what Towne he is disposed, he may raise any siege that the Enemy hath layed against him or his. Neither can any man be Ma∣ster of the field without Battaile, in ordering whereof, that Generall that is most skilfull, seldome misseth of winning the day: experience of former times cleares this. I should exceede the compasse of an Epistle if I brought the exam∣ples, which serue to this purpose. Now for the skill of or∣dering Battailes, it is not to be learned out of the practise of our dayes, wherein when we come into the field, we make shewes, and musters rather, then obserue any formes of Battailes for vse: Battailes must not be alwayes of one figure. The wise Generals of ancienter times, fashioned their battailes according to the range, which they saw the Enemy had before taken vp. The place often maketh an

alteration in that forme, which otherwise would serue to our purpose. He that is acquainted but with one forme, if he be forced to change that vpon the sudden, disordereth his troopes, and bringeth all into a confusion. The know∣ledge of the formes of battailes being then so necessary for a Generall, this little Pamphlet must needs be welcome to them that desire the mannaging of fields, and the command of Armies. For here haue you all formes expressed, toge∣ther with their vse; so that the Generall that is acquainted with the practise of these precepts shall not be to seeke to make transmutation of his battaile, into what forme soeuer necessity shall require, & that vpon the sudden. As for them that hold, that great Ordnance will not admit any of these ancient formes in our dayes, I hold that for a dreame, and not worthy the answering; since the inuention of great Ord∣nance, we neuer read of any forme of battaile disordered thereby; some slaughter hath beene made by great Ord∣nance, and the Army that suffred by great Ordnance, hath beene forced the sooner to ioyne with the Enemy; when the Armies are ioyned, great Ordnance hath and must sit still, and looke about as an idle spectator, seruing for no other vse, then for a pray to him that gameth the field. Now for small shot, it succeedeth in the place of the light∣armed of antiquity. By them a Battaile may be broken, if they be not repressed, and themselues cut off in time. But what is said of them that may not be said of Bowes and Arrowes? The greatest fields that we gained against the French, were gained onely by our Archery. To say nothing of other Nations, that had the skill of shooting: so that no reason can be alleadged why the formes of Battailes vsed by antiquity for aduantage, may not be as well vsed in our

dayes. Howsoeuer the matter standeth, my desire is, that the Treatise may with your fauourable acceptance beare your names in the Front thereof. Not because I thinke it worthy of your Patronage, but for that I would haue it ap∣peare to the world, how much I esteeme of your kindnesse (as I said) and of your loue, which you expressed toward me in my taking leaue of the City. The Lord of hostes haue you in his keeping.

