



HONOURED MADAM:
SAint PAUL'S glory and ex∣ceeding great cause of rejoy∣cing, was this; that as a wise Master-builder hee had laid the foundation, whereupon the whole building of Chri∣stianity is established. Though not to lay the ground-work or Principles of Religion,
yet to be fellow-workers with GOD and His holy Apostles, is now the glory and rejoycing of the Mi∣nisters of the Word in these latertimes. Amongst the rest a sincere, faithfull, and judicious Divine in these Workes of his never yet before extant, is pre∣sented to your Honours view and approbation. His abilities were such as became a Successour of a worthy and religious Predecessour, in his ministeriall function in the Vniversitie of Cambridge, by him performed, unto GOD's glory, the good of others, and his owne comfort. The first he unfainedly desired and propoun∣ded as the utmost scope of all his endeavors, that GOD might be glorified by him both in life and death: the second as subordinate to the other, hee procured, not ayming at his owne advantage so much as their salvation that heard him, not seeking theirs, but them. The last was an effect of the two first, this must needs be a consequent where the others are pre∣cedent: for, GOD forgets not our labour of love, to Himselfe, or others. Sensible experience hereof had this holy man, who found much comfort by his Mi∣nistry in himselfe, and by the fruits of it in others. There be many that spend much time in studying, are never weary in wel-doing, are instant in season, and out of season; but with how small successe! for it is in vaine to rise early, and sit up late, except
GOD give a blessing: Paul planteth, and Apol∣los watereth, but GOD giveth the encrease: if GOD put not His hand to the worke, there will be but a Babel of confusion: He knew it very well, who prayed continually for the divine assistance to make his ministeriall worke effectuall. Hee prayed, and his prayer was heard: hee wrestled with GOD (as Iacob did) and overcame Him. Hee fulfilled his desires and granted his requests, and made him a spirituall Father of many children by him begotten unto GOD. Should I say more? I will adde this only: what in him was praise-worthy, let it be applauded; what was in him for Instruction and a godly life, let us imitate: Let us learne of a dead man to live. Dead doe I call him? Though the body die by reason of sinne, yet the spirit liveth unto GOD, through IESUS CHRIST our LORD. Let us there∣fore learne of him to live spiritually, that with him we may live eternally. I have shewed in some sort what hee was, and what it concerneth us to be. And this the rather, presuming of your Honours favou∣rable acceptance, not so much of him that Dedicates these following Expositions, as of him by whose in∣citement hee was encouraged thereto, his worthy friend, Your Ladyships humble servant; that for his
sake, and the Authors, You would vouchsafe to cast over this Booke the wing of Your protection. This is his desire, who shall ever remaine

