



SIr, considering the good accep∣tance that some former few Sermons of that religiously-learned, and learnedly-religious Diuine, Master Paul Bayne haue had with the Church of God, the ensuing Sermon lying hitherto by me, I was (without difficulty) induced to make it publike. For if I should longer conceale it, what know I whether some body else, who had not the like interest to it that my selfe haue, might not preuent me in printing this, as well as they haue done in publishing some other things of the like na∣ture? Moreouer, looking into the carriage and frame of this draught, I did not see how it could disparage any of the rest, which are flowne abroad before it. Lastly, if we will ponder the subiect matter discoursed of in the fol∣lowing leaues, I will permit it to any indifferent wise-hearted Christian Reader, who vieweth the estate of the
times, and waigheth aduisedly what singular vice raign∣eth; what especiall graces are ordinarily defectiue among Professors, whether this Sermon vttereth notCommoda accommoda. profi∣table things, and profitable things in their season. For when (respected Sir) did the like wofull declining from the ancient feruor of our first loue, so generally spread it selfe through all the quarters of our Iland? He hath but halfe an eye, who looking vp and downe, beholdeth not, that euery little nothing in zealous forwardnesse of pro∣fession, seemeth (for the most part) very sufficient. We will neither diligently prouoke our selues to liuely procee∣dings in the way of powerfull walking with God; neither will we patiently endure others to outstrip vs, and to aspire vnweariedly after the highest pitch of well doing. This leauing our first loue, this abatement of former light and heate in our Christian course, is proued in the ensuing Sermon, and reproued. When was there so little minding and remembring whence we are (generally) not slidden, but (as it were) fallen headlong? When were there so few sincere and setled resolutions, to repent of the euill of relinquishing our first loue, a sinne wherein our land hath sinned, besides all its other sinnes? Alas, the sancti∣fied employment of our memories, to consider whence we are fallen; shame and confusion of face working true re∣pentance, that we are so fowlie fallen; are strange things vnto vs! although onely the exercise of these graces can raise vs vp to true happinesse in this life, and in the next. That we may set vpon these sauing practises, wee are effe∣ctually called vpon in the fore-named Sermon. So that (as I formerly said) it will (I perswade my selfe) proue both profitable and seasonable to the Christian Reader; who hath a discerning spirit, both what his owne wants are, and how, by this little booke, some pretty supply may
be affoorded him for his recouering.
Thus much why the Sermon is published: a word or two (Worthy Sir) why, by a more especiall inscription, I haue dedicated it to your name. First (therefore) I was moued hereto with an earnest desire, to manifest fur∣ther then euer yet I haue done, the entirenesse of my dea∣rest affections toward you; who after our many yeeres comfortable louing and liuing together, of late haue been remoued from me into those Northerne parts. Not being therefore now able face to face to enioy the wonted sweet intercourse of speech, and other friendlike offices, I longed (notwithstanding) to tell you, you were not so much out of mind, as out of sight. Secondly, I desired that the de∣dication might befit the person, remembring Senecaes counsell:Vtique caue∣bimus, ne mune∣ra superuacua mittamus: vt foeminae aut seni arma venatoria, aut rustico li∣bros, aut studijs ac literis dedito retia. Sen. de ben. l. 1. cap. 11. we must take heede wee send not superfluous gifts, as to a woman or old man hunting weapons; or to a clowne, bookes; or nets to one following his studies, and learning. On the contrary, to send a booke to a scholer; or a Sermon, to an experienced professor, I cannot see but it will hold good proportion.
Thus not doubting, but you will louingly receiue what was louingly intended, I take my leaue; desiring that hee who hath begun the good worke some yeeres agoe in you, and hath made you graciously proceed hitherto; euen hee (the mercifull and true God) would perfectly accomplish it, vnto the day of Iesus Christ.
 London. 1618.
