



HOnorable Sir, that Axiome in morall Phi∣losophie so often vsed, that Bonum est sui diffusiuum, Good is of a spreading nature,
 hath preuailed with me to go on in further pub∣lishing a parcell of the writings of that worthie Diuine and faithfull ser∣uant of God, Maister PAVL BAINE. The former tractates that are abroad, I heare to be thankfully entertained in the Church of God. And therefore the Printers still importune me to set forth that which remaineth vnpublished; almost chal∣lenging me as one that inuert to my priuate good, such things as should be communicated for gene∣rall benefit. Which asper∣sion
 that I may wipe off from my selfe, I haue gi∣uen way to the printing of the two ensuing vse∣full Treatises. To the which that I haue pre∣fixed your honourable name, let it not (I beseech you) seeme any presumpti∣on. For there being many ends of dedicating bookes, yet the two most frequent∣ly vsed, are to procure countenance to the bookes so dedicated, and to testifie the thankfulnesse of the Dedicators. Both which ends I confesse my selfe to haue aimed at in this de∣dication: howbeit the lat∣ter
 beareth with me the greater sway. For hauing my selfe, honoured Sir, tasted the fruites of your loue, yet my desire is, not onely to be thankfull to you for my selfe, but much more for the many, and great kindnesses, a long time continued to my deare Parents. To whom what is it you could well do, and haue not largely performed? The particu∣lars I need not proclaime, what personall loue you haue vouchsafed them∣selues; what bountie (ma∣ny times) by my louing mothers hand, you haue
 sent to releeue the necessi∣ties of diuerse poore peo∣ple, who haue blessed God for you in that behalfe. Go on thus still, worthie Knight, to do well; and as you haue had the honour of religious profession heretofore, so prouide that your last dayes may a∣bound with such fruites, as are found with them that flourish in the Courts of our God, (as the Psal∣mist saith) who still bring forth fruite in old age,Psal. 92.13.14. be∣ing fat, and flourishing. To the helping forward of which things, if this good & godly Manuel may con∣duce,
 (as vpon diligent reading I trust it will) I shall praise the Lord, whom I beseech heartily to blesse your selfe, and your vertuous Ladie, with the young Knight your onely issue liuing.
Lime-streete the 11. of December. 1618.

