



IF all the actes and monumentes of former ages, most mighty and renowned Queene, and Empresse, which might recom∣mend this action of reformati∣on vnto all posterities, were committed to oblivion, yet the recordes and mo∣numentes of your Maiesties most happy governe∣ment, may sufficiently revive the same:The act of attain∣der of Shane Oneile, Ann. 11. Elizab. where it is saide, that your Highnes hath atchieved vnto that which is most rightly tearmed the greatest magnificence of a Prince, which doth not onely consist in high bloud, hauty progenie, aboun∣dance of private riches and substance, wherewith your Maiestie is every way plentifully adorned, but it resteth chiefely in populous and wel gover∣ned regions, & in beautiful Cities and Townes; al which being impaired in your Realme of Ireland, by the iniquitie of former times, nowe as well the one as the other, by your Maiesties most god∣ly and careful course of governement, are recon∣tinued, amended, and augmented. What more? Have you not reformed all exactions grievous

vnto that people? Have you not reformed that horrible and most detestable custome of Coiney and Livery, that fretter of the peoples lives and substaunce, that Nurse and teate which some∣times gave sucke and nutriment vnto all disobe∣dience, rebellions, enormities, vices and ini∣quities of that Realme, over foule and filthie heere to bee expressed? Have you not in place of sorrow, famine, howling, and cursing, brought ioy, iolitie, plentie, and every where blessings of so gratious a Queene? Have you not reformed that daungerous custome of Captaineshippe, which by factions did dismember the state of Ire∣lande?Anno. 11. Eliz. cap. 7. fo. 168. for all which if wee should bee founde vn∣thankefull, yet the statutes and recordes of that lande, would witnes the same against vs. Great is the honour which is due vnto Robert Fitz Ste∣vens, which first opened the waie of Irelande to the Earle of Stranguile: and great is the honour due vnto the Earle, which opened the same vnto Henry the King: & great is the honor which is due vnto the King, which opened the way vnto Iohn his Sonne greatly is he to bee praised, that first so boldlie began; and woorthy of greater praise is he, that after the beginning so nobly came to exe∣cute

the thing so well begun; but most of all he is to be praised, that shall perfect and finish the same; which praise by Gods divine providēce is light on your Maiestie;Anno. 11. Elizab. for so the subiect of Irelande in the act of Attainder of Shane Oneile doeth liberallie confesse: therefore goe forwarde Brutus, for thy glory in reforming, is farre greater then the glo∣ry of Romulus in building and instituting of the citie of Rome. All nations with the Romaines shall honour your presence, as another Time-sitheus, for reforming and restraining the Lypari∣ans from their accustomed robberies and spoiles; all nations shall rightly honour you with the La∣dies of Rome, which sometimes offered their iew∣els to be solde for the furtherance of publike ser∣vices; for huge be the charges already imployed by your Maiestie, for bringing to passe so great things tending to the sound & vniversall reforma∣tion of this your Realme of Ireland,Act of sub¦sidie Ann. 11. cap. 1. fol. 148. as in the acte of subsidie more at large may appeare. What fur∣ther honour now remaineth due vnto your Maie∣stie, for the accomplishing of so great & worthy a∣ctions, if not that which was sometimes given vn∣to Ianus? for that you have chaunged the life of man which before your time was rude, cruell, and

wilde, in Ireland, and brought it for the most part to be obedient, gentle, and civill, in such sort as we may truely say with the subiect of Irelande, this is the favour which your Maiesty hath found in the sight of God to augment, strengthen, and honour your imperiall crowne of Englande, by the tho∣rough reformation of this your Realme of Ire∣land. All which considering with my selfe, I could not suffer so honourable actions to bee buried in oblivion, without leaving some speciall remem∣brance to all posterities, but have made this plat & counterfet, the which I here present vnto your Maiesties sacred handes, in baser coulours then princes doe vsually beholde, or so weighty mat∣ters may require: but I hope that your Maiesties accustomed clemency will impute this to Solon his follie and lunacie, which now for his boldnes craveth pardon, rather then commendation.

