



RIght worshipfull and worthy Sir, hauing receiued an assu∣red testimony of your fauour and loue, and not beeing able to render, nor your Worsh. ad-mitting the most vsual gratifications; I am in∣forced, because I would auoid Ingratitude (a vice most odious vnto God and man) to ma∣nifest vnto you my thankefull mind in this ma∣ner, altogether out of my element; but that it hath pleased God to dispose of it so fitly, that in the very Interim of your fauor this Sermon was broght vnto my hands, without a Patron, to bee published in the world. And seeing I
 conceiued it not conuenient so to send it forth incident to so much enmity in regard of its op∣position to the worlds affections, I presumed to make bold with your worship, who had bin my patron to entreat your fauor also towards this orphane, that vnder your protection it may passe more safely & freely into the hands and hearts of worldly men. And indeed it will be very necessary for them to carry this Anti∣dote alwaies about them neare their harts: for so shall they escape that death which by earth∣ly carefulnes is ready to seize vpon them. For the more the world is drowned in worldly lusts and cares, (as hardly was it euer so deep∣ly as now) the more requisite is it that there should be all meanes vsed to pull men vp out of this whirle-pit wherein they are diuing vn∣to their euerlasting perdition: now what means can be more effectuall heereunto, than the ex∣plication and fit application of that which our blessed Sauiour himselfe hath prescribed to this purpose? euen to turne our mindes from seeking earthly things which perish with the v∣sing (& for the getting and vsing whereof God will require a strait account at our hands) vnto those things which are spiritual and will endure
 with vs to our comfort for euer. And heerein did the reuerend and learned authour of this Sermon expresse himselfe to be a wise steward, viz. by giuing a fit portion to worldly men in fit season. For if it could once be fixed in mens mindes to loue Gods kingdome and his righ∣teousnes, so as to seeke it first of all, and to be∣leeue that all necessary earthly things should be added vnto them; then the deadly cares of the world would vanish away & trouble them no more, at least nothing so dangerously. But this is rather to bee wisht than hop't for, in re∣gard the world hath so deceiu'd men, that now nothing on earth is esteemed good but that which is gaineful: nay goodnesse it selfe findes little regard but for the gaining of earthly com-modity; so that most men set themselues to catch at the shadow of good, in the meane time losing the substance of it. Yet this essaie to re∣couer men into their right mindes againe, and to reduce them into the true way of happiness as it was most commendable in the holy prea∣cher hereof: So I hope the publishing of it shall not bee vnacceptable vnto any. Howsoeuer, I humbly desire your worships fauourable as∣pect vnto it: & if it shall please you (when you
 are free from greater affairs) to cast an eie vp∣on it, I doubt not but you shall find somthing worthy your view and consideration. But my slender commendations will but dim the splen∣dour of this burning light: and therefore firm∣ly hoping and humbly desiring your worships pardon for my ouermuch presumption, I com-mend you to the almighty proection of God the wise gouernor of euery thing in heauen & earth; who makes all things worke-together for the best vnto those that loue him.

