



RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL:
WHat some rich men, who are them∣selues childlesse, with good proofe & comfort doe, in bringing vp the or∣phane child of some deceased friend; the same, or some such like thing haue I assaied to do in the publishing of this Sermon. I my selfe goe child∣lesse for any publike birth of mine owne braine: nor is that any griefe vnto me. There is no need (I well perceiue) of my slender helpe in this kinde, either  this superfluitie of vselesse pamphlets, (to say no worse of them) wherewith our age ouerflowes; or in this store (which to the glorie of Gods grace in our daies, and iust praise of their authours, I
 acknowledge) of well meant and well deseruing labours. And what need soeuer there were, I am too weak an At∣las to vphold this firmament.Authores non o∣portet libros sed thesauros compo∣nere. Domiti Pso. Writings of Author (sai∣eth one well) should bee, not so much bookes packt vp with paper, and blackt ouer with inke, as Treasuries replenisht with variety of choysest learning: Nor (as I conceiue) empty coffers filled with the fome and fume of i∣dle heads, nor dead mens coffins pestered with the rotten carrion of prophane, filthy, and corrupted hearts, nor olde chests stuffed with rusty iron, thread bare rags, and refuse geare; but rich cabinets, at whose opening the Reader might finde store, new and old, of the best and rarest things which Canaan, Greece, or Rome doth yield. With which varie∣ty I do too well know, that it is beyond my scant store to fur∣nish the table, and entertaine my guests. I am therefore well content to sit still, and chuse rather to feed vpon the sweet and wholesome hony which other industrious Bees gather and bring vnto the hiue, applauding their well furnisht and well polisht works; then to come vpon the publique stage to do that which needs not, or attempt that which I cannot, either with iust shame for my Bayardlike boldnes, or euen from the most fauourable, with more pity for my well mea∣ning, then prayse for my well deseruing. Notwithstanding, lighting vpon this Sermon of that both learned and godly Diuine, Mr Paul Baine (of whose gracious ability in prea∣ching Gods word, somtime your owne eares, &, I perswade my selfe, your harts also were witnesses) as a poore orphane babe of a deceased friend, as for the memory of its Author, which will euer be deare vnto mee, I did gladly embrace and entertaine it: so induced by the example of others, who with good acceptance and seruice to the Church, publish both
 larger Treatises and briefe Sermons of his making; I haue ventured to shew my selfe so farre on this Theater, as to set it forth to publike view, and make it common vnto others with mee. Wherein good men, I presume, will both ac∣cept my good meaning, to doe that for them by the labours of other men, which I cannot by mine owne (that is to set forward their knowledge in the great mysterie of godlinesse) and conne mee thanke, who haue set vp for them such a faire and cleere light, to discouer that abstruse mystery, and to light them onward in that way. For, there is scarce in the Book of God, a Mine that is more rich and aboundant in diuine metall and mystery, then the Text handled in this Sermon. In which at one viewe, as in a cleere mirrour, there is presented to vs the fountaine (Gods eternall loue) from which all good blessings issue and flowe forth vnto vs; the common cisterne (Iesus Christ, the onely begotten of God, bestowed on vs) in whō al these blessings (as al wa∣ters in the Sea) are gathered together, and inclosed; the bucket (Faith) whereby wee may draw out of this Well whatsoeuer grace wee doe neede; Lastly, the most preci∣ous and sweet waters, which are heere in plentifull man∣ner for vs to draw and drinke of: that is, euerlasting blisse and saluation of soule and body. It is much then to bee wished, that as this Scripture is familiar in the mouthes of many; so the mysteries thereof were well vnderstood and close applied to their hearts. Whereunto this Treatise, I dare promise, will affoord some good helpe to those that will deigne diligently to peruse it▪ For, herein the foresaid points are discussed and discoursed, with that equall mix∣ture of learning and pietie, that both the learned shall meete with some things not very common perhaps not to increase,
 yet to renew his more secret knowledge, and whe his iudgement; and also the godly Christian shall not vvant wherewith to feede his deuoutest meditations, and enkin∣dle his best affections toward God.Landat venles qui vult extru∣dremeres. Horat. But least I doe seeme like some deceitfull Broker, to set worth on worthlesse wares, by goodly words; I will leaue the proofe hereof to your owne, and the iudgement of other Christian, and not fastidious Readers. Onely (good Sir) giue mee leaue to send it abroad vnder the shield and shadow of your Wor∣ships name; and in the patronage thereof, to associate with you your very worthy sonne. I could not well separate you in this small office of kindnesse, whom nature hath ioined so neerely by the second of her straitest bonds; and much goodwill in sundry fauours, haue made ioint partners and patrons vnto mee.Fulmen Lauri frut. cem non icit. Pin. l. 2. c 55. Your two names, as a Laurell Garland wreathed on the fore-front heereof, this Sermon, will (I trust) helpe to guarde it from the blasting of euill tongues; or like the fortunate Starres of Castor and Pol∣lux,Plin. l. 2. c. 37. when they appeare double, giue hope of the more secure passage, vnto it. It is a Worke, I am sure, that will well beseeme your gentlenesse, To patronize this Posthume Or∣phane; nor can it bee any blemish to your reputations, To lend your countenance to the child of so good a man. Ac∣cept therefore (much respected Sirs) this slender present which I offer you, as the best acknowledgement which I can make of your constant loue and kindnesse, whereby I haue had speciall comfort in the place where I liue. It were happely more credit for mee to make this whatso∣euer satisfaction out of mine owne stocke: but it will bee your greater gaine, that I doe it out of anothers purse: Mine owne would proue but short pay, and copper coine;
 whereas what heere I haue borrowed to tender vnto you, is currant and pure gold of Gods sanctuary: which, if it please you to put it vp, will adde some good increase to your spirituall treasure of sauing knowledge. What on my part is wanting in performance, I will make vp with my harty desires and prayers for your prosperous state in the world, and spirituall welfare in the Lord.
At the Free-schoole in Cranebrooke in Kent, December the 14. 1618.

