



RIght Worshipfull, although it bee a complaint (perhaps) not causelesse, of too many bookes penned and printed in these dayes; yet there is, and euer will bee neede of new bookes, chiefly such as sauour of the wholesome doctrine of Iesus Christ, and set forward that knowledge of the truth which is according vnto godlinesse. Nay surely, it is no lesse worke of Gods prouidence, to set open the fountaine of heauenly truth, and to maintaine it in a perpetuall current, by the preaching and writing of his faithfull seruants; then that the waters of greater riuers, and lesser springs, doe runne with a continuall streame. For what these are to the earth to water it, that it may bee fertile for mens behoofe, and serue their bodily wants; the same are those to Gods Church to make it fruitfull vnto the Lord, and relieue the spirituall want of mens soules. Besides, whereas the muddy and poysonous wa∣ters
 of false and hereticall doctrine, of vngodly and fil∣thy language (like thatReuel. 16.3. noysome bloudy sea in which no soule could liue and breath the life of God, doth dai∣ly bubble, or rather puddle forth with proud and swel∣ling streames, through the tongues and pens of the di∣uels scribes, or scriblers rather: Is it not a singular blessing, that theMiraris si nō∣dum sapientia omne opus su∣ùm impleuit? Nondum tota se nequitia protulit. Senec. nat. quaest. lib. 3. c. 32. fountaine of truth doth hold its course also, from whence issue the wholesome waters of life, to correct the poyson of the diuels puddle, and preserue Gods people from the deadly contagion of it? Which wholly to damme vp, or in part to restraine, were as great a despite vnto Gods people, as was done vnto Isaac by the Philistims, inGen. 26.15. stopping vp all the welles which Abraham had digged open. What though in new bookes we bring to light (specially in poynts of re∣ligion) no new matter? who (I pray) doth cauill at it in liuing fountaines, that they run still the same waters in colour, kind, and tast? we doe rather like them so much the better, counting it a speciall benefit, that by their perpetuall course, as wee haue the same waters for kind: so we receiue them euer fresh, whereby they are the more pleasant for tast, and the more wholesome for our vse. So it is a commendation rather than any im∣perfections in our new writings, that they propound still the same ancient doctrine touching faith, & good man∣ners, but haply in some new forme and method, wherby they giue a fresher and more pleasant relish to these wholesome waters, and so quicken mens dull and diuers appetites to the better liking of them, and allure them the more liberally to drinke thereof. I may therefore (I trust, to good purpose) adde also this Sermon of that godly and faithfull Preacher Master Paul Bayne, vnto some other books of his, set forth by my selfe and others,
 and open (as it were) one little fountaine more, for thirsty soules to draw and drinke of. Come to it and tast who will, I assure him that hee shall prooue the waters thereof to be good, sweet, and wholesome. Among wa∣ter wondersThe French Comment on Bartas, in the third day of his first week, out of Mela. writers report of two springs, not farre distant one from the other in one of the fortunat Ilands; the one whereof doth yeeld deadly waters, and the other very wholesome: who so drinketh of the first, is anone taken and torne with most painfull conuulsions, euen vnto death; against which, the onely sure and present remedy is to drinke of the other fountaine there at hand. This fountaine (which here is opened) riseth out of Paradise (I meane the Scriptures) with one head, but in the course thereof it is parted into two streames. The first giuing vs the tast of our sinfull and damnable state by nature, is very bitter, and in it selfe mortall: but the second, refreshing vs with the knowledge of our redemption by Christ, is as the water of life, and wine of Gods loue, most cordiall and comfortable. If any de∣sire to be made whole and sound in soule, he must drinke deepe of both. The doctrine of our wretchednesse (like vnto theNumb. 15.18. bitter and cursed water in the Law) must search how sound we be within, or rather make vs feele the sicke and rotten state of our soule. And then the doctrine of our saluation by Christ, like theIoh. 5.4. waters of Bethesda, must restore vs, curing vs of our inward rottennesse and outward sores, whereof wee are deadly sicke.Is corde solus arido Chri∣stum sitit; Sentit mise∣riam corde qui fracto suam. We shall neuer thirst heartily, nor relish fully the sweet waters of life in Iesus Christ, vntill we haue drunk deepe of the salt and bitter waters of our owne misery. Nor will they heale or worke vpon our soules to health, vntill these make our vnsound and rotten hearts smart euen to death. This fountaine (I grant) is not deepe, and
 likeIsa. 8.6. Shiloah, doth runne but softly. For it serueth ra∣ther for Gods Lambes to wade in, than Elephants to swimme in: and it aimeth more to bring men to a feeling of their misery in themselues, and true reioycing in their saluation by Christ, than to exercise their heads with curious contemplation of schoole-poynts. What it is (as it is no degenerate of-spring of a good man and worthy diuine, not wholly vnknowne vnto you, and sometime entertained by you) I offer it (most worthy Sir) vnto your worships hands. Entertaine it (I pray you) according to your wonted and natiue cour∣tesie, a vertue (in the eyes of all) eminent in you, and which (in a speciall degree) is appropriate vnto your selfe: and deriue some part of that loue and kind re∣spect to this orphane Sermon, which sometime you did shew vnto the author of it in his life.
For my part, I haue sent it abroad with your Wor∣ships name wreathed, so to speake, on the fore-front thereof; that wheresoeuer it doth passe, it may report your singular kindnesse and good will many waies ex∣tended, and yet continued toward me, and stand vp as a witnesse of my thankfull remembrance and acknow∣ledgement of the same. An office which (I hope) will not be vngratefull vnto you: who although you are farre fromThemisto∣cles vt Cicero in orat: pro Archia. his mind which counted that voice the sweetest musicke which did most loudly chaunt his ver∣tues, yet may (without impeachment of your modesty) heare this imperfect Eccho of them, from my ruder tongue, rather stammering thankes from an honest heart, than glozing with you by a lauish blazing of of your praise.
But not to hold you longer from the Sermon it selfe, by my courser manner of discoursing, proceed (Good
 Sir) to loue and countenance learning and vertue; mor specially, foster piety and religion, hang out from your house (as from an high watch-tower) a banner thereof for example and encouragement to all that feare God. Esteeme vertue the noblest armes of Gentry: as not amisse the HeathenIuuenal. Satyr. 8. Poet,
Nobilitas sola est atque vnica virtus.
Vertue is onely
True Nobility.
And religion the honour and crowne of Nobility, as better thePrudent. , in Ro∣mano mar∣tyre. Christian Poet,
Generosa Christi secta nobilitat viros:
Cui quisque seruit, ille vere est nobilis:
Illi rebellis inuenitur degener.
The generous faith of Christs profession,
Doth men ennoble with the best renowne:
Who him doth serue comes of the noblest blood,
Who him reiects, much baser is than mud.
And in all this take in good part my well meaning heart, who for this, or whatsoeuer seruice I can doe, haue the full price of my labour to be reputed,


