



AMongest the manifold calamities and griefes of hart that fall vppon the Church in this old age of the world (right Honorable and welbeloued in the Lord) this is not the least, that the peace of the Church, is daily bro∣ken in peeces, and that by such as chalenge to themselues the name of the Churche, which crie as did the Iewes,Ier. 7, 4. The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: but I feare me, be as Christ sayeth, The
 congregation of Sathan, for they dispise Rulers,Reue. 2.9. Iude. 5.8. 2. Tim. 1.4. and speake euill of such as be in aucthority. They de∣light in questions and endles gene∣alogies, which gender strife rather then Godly edyfying, which is in Faith. These men as they trouble the publique State of the Church, with Schismes: so doe they also disquiete, the consciences of many good Soules by making doubts and ambiguities in matters that be most plaine and easie. They draw so ma∣ny as they can frō obedience of the Godly Magistrate, denouncing all those to be execrable, cursed and ab∣hominable, which bee not of their faction, yea they be growen to such grosnesse, which they call Puritie, that as they say, they dare not defile their cleane vndefiled and regenerat Soules, by ioyning in Praier with such as hold of the reformed state of
 this Realme. So by this means they deface so much as in them is our Church, our Ministery, our Orders, and Praiers in the Church. That which they say is good, that order which they obserue is godly how∣soeuer it bee: they dislike all others but themselues and their followers. But what is this? truly euen the ve∣rie practise of the false apostles in the time of Paul: for they to main∣taine gentilisme among the people, defaced Paul, and made them be∣leeue that hee was not the apostle of Christ: euen so these men by the instigation of Satan, to ouerthrow our Church and the godly gouern∣ment thereof, disgrace Paul, and de∣face our Preachers, and al to wound weake consciences, and to make cō∣mendable themselues & their new-fangled deuises. This their sinister dealing hath done, yea and doth at
 this day much harm in the church: for besides the thinges forenamed, it hindereth many good and godly men from dooing that good which they would. I considering with my self of the disposition of these men, of their manners and marke which they shoot at, being by aucthority called to preach at a visitation of the right reuerende Father in God the Bishop of Peeterborrow, did there as the time then serued my office, & the nature of my Text required re∣solutely defende that which they so greatly dislike, that is, our church and Ministerie, the order of our ex∣communication, and our praiers. Since which time, I haue bin often greatly vrged by dyuers good men, & many of my welwillers to make it publique for the benefite of the whole Church. Seeing their request to be reasonable, and that my office

bindeth me not onely, exhortari per sanam doctrinam,Titus 1. verse 9. but also cotradicere maledicentibus: I have satisfied their honest request, and suffered it to bee published. Most humblie crauing that your Honors, and all others which fauor the Gospell, and this our godly gouerment under our most gratious Soueraign, to patronize and defende the same, so shall I and others, be the more en∣couraged to execute our offices in the Church.
The Lord who is the onely giuer of aucthoritie protect and defende your Honours, to the glorie of his name and the benefite of this com∣mon wealth.

