



THE great Kings of Persia, (most noble Prince) before they would sit at any Feast, they would talke of Tempe∣rance; before they would doe any sacrific: to their Gods, they would speake of Iustice; and before they would commence any warre with the enemies, they would discourse of Fortitude; three princi∣pall great vertues, proceeding all frō Prudence: without which, Temperance is slothfulnesse; Fortitude is rashnesse; and Iustice meere iniury: for Vnica & sola virtus Principis, prudentia.
I haue presumed therefore (vnder your Ma∣iesties fauour) to write these fewe Verses, to honour this our Tryumphant and sacred Feast, Hilaria, the fift of August: not as the Greekes, in their Feast Taurilia; nor as the Romanes,

in their Feast Hecatombaeon: but as Israel, with Musike, mirth and Feastes, and to sing Hymnes & Psalmes for our Triumphs, Feasts, and often victories: so did Israel for the victo∣ries of Moses ouer the Egyptians; of Saul ouer the Philistims; and of Dauid ouer the Chana∣nites, with their feast Phase, at Ierusalem; and their Feast Phurim, in Persia.
And sith Angels feasted with men, ministred vnto men, and commanded Feastes to be kept of men, to put vs in remembrance of Gods benefits to men, we should not omit to giue thanks for it. For the old Lacedemonians, in their Feast Phi∣ditia, where was more musicke and mirth, then meat or drinke, had their militarie dancing, and their Songs, Scholia; to commend the renowmed worthines of such famous men, as defended and saued their Cities and Countrey, from the Persi∣ans and Macedonians.
So the Athenians, in their Feast Sisisia, where they obserued such Temperance, that they would not exceed fiue Dishes (by Platoes lawes) in pri∣uate Feastes; called, Bellaria Attica: with such care, that they allowed but fiue Ghests. Yet Homer allowed the whole number of Pithagoras, which was ten: but in publike victorious Feasts,

Plato allowed 28. which was called Symposium Platonis: but when Greece began their first draught to Iupiter, and their last draught to Mercurius, then their lawe was, Aut biberent, aut abirent.
Among the ancient Romans, in priuate Feasts, it was decreed, there should not be aboue seuen: for it was a common speach with the Ro∣mans, Septem conuiuium, nouem conuicium fa∣cere, then Rome by Temperance, being inferior to Spaine, in number; to the Africanes in subtiltie; to the Grecians, in wit and Stratagems: yet the, Victrix & Domina gentium. But when the late Emperours contended, who should excel in ry∣otous Feastes, Geta would haue as many dishes in his Feasts, as could be found vpon the name of euery Letter in the Alphabet. Lucullus would haue so many dishes in his Feast, as were Gods in Rome worshipped. Heliogabulus, so many dishes in his Feast, as could bee found in Summer colours out of the earth, and vpon the earth; that they sought to exceed Vitellius feast: which was such (for the number of his dishes) that his became a By-word (for a long time) in Rome, Vitellianae patinae. This Feast, Vitellius himself named, Clypeum Mineruae; which might haue bin better called, Praeludium Veneris.

But God grant vs, that wee in great Bri∣taine may, in perpetuall memorie of so great a blessing, giue thankes to God, for this our Try∣umphant, Regall, and Crowned Feast.

