



SVch Romanes (right honorable) as delighted in Mar∣tiall
exploites, attempted their actions in the honour of
Augustus, because he was a patron of souldiors: and
Virgil dignified him with his poems, as a Moecenas
of schollers; both ioyntly aduancing his royaltie, as a
Prince warlike and learned. Such as sacrifice to Pal∣las,
pesent her with bayes as she is wise, and with armour as she is vali∣ant:
obseruing heerein that excellent , which dedicateth ho∣nours
according to the perfection of the person. When I entred (right
honourable) with a deepe insight into the consideration of these premis∣ses
seeing your L. to be a Patron of all martiall men, and a Moece∣nas
of such as apply themselues to studie: wearing with Pallas both
the launce and the bay, and aiming with Augustus at the fauour of
all, by the honourable vertues of your minde: beeing my selfe first a
Student, and afterwards falling from bookes to armes, euen vowed in
all my thoughts dutifully to affect your Lordshippe. Hauing with Cap∣taine
Clarke made a voyage to the Ilands of Terceras and the Ca∣aries,
to beguile the time with labour, I writ this booke: rough, as
hatcht in the stormes of the Ocean, and feathered in the surges of ma∣y
perillous seas. But as it is the woorke of a Souldiour and a Scholler,
I presumed to shrowd it vnder your Honors patronage, as one that is
the faut or and fauourer of all vertuous actions: and whose honorable
Loues growne from the generall applause of the whole common-welth

for your higher desertes, may keepe it from the mallice of euery bitter
toong. Other reasons more particular (right Honourable) chalenge
in me a speciall affection to your Lordshippe, as being a Scholler with
your two noble sonnes, Maister Edmund Carew, and M. Robert
Carew, (two siens worthy of so honorable a tree, and a tree glorious in
such honourable fruite) as also beeing scholler in the Vniuersitie vn∣der
that learned and vertuous Knight Sir Edward Hobby, when he
was Batcheler in Artes, a man as well lettered as well borne and after
the Etymologie of his name soaring as high as the winges of knowledge
can mount him, happie euery way, and the more fortunate, as blessed in
the honor of so vertuous a Lady. Thus (right Honourable) tie duetie
that I owe to the sonnes, chargeth me that all my affection be placed on
the father: for where the braunches are so pretious, the tre of force
must be most excellent. Commaunded and imboldened thus with the
consideration of these forepassed reasons, to present my Booke o your
Lordship: I humbly intreate, your Honour will vouch of my labours,
and fauour a souldiers and a schollers penne with your gratious accep∣tance,
who answeres in affection what he wants in eloquence: sodeuo∣ted
to your honour, as his onely desire is, to ende his life vnder he
fauour osso martiall and learned a Patorn. Resting thus
in hope of your Lordships curtesie, in deyning the
Patronage of my worke, I cease: wish∣ing
you as many honorable for∣tunes
as your L. can desire
or I imagine

