



THAT NOBLE PHI∣losopher Plato (right VVor∣shipfull) had not attempted so often the seas from Athens to Si∣cilia, had it not beene for his friende Dion, neyther hadde learned Apollonius sustayned the heate of Ripheus, nor the cold of Caucasus, to trauell from Rome vnto India, had it not beene for his companion Hiar∣chus. Suche is the force of affection, the attempt of friende∣shippe, and the secret search of nature, that vvere it possible that the same (sayth Cicero) might ascende the skies to vevve the glorie of the Sunne, the state of the Starres, and to beholde the beauty of the heauens, vnsvveete vvere the admi∣ration thereof, vnlesse it might bee imparted to friendes. Such is the violence of hidden loue, after long lurcking in the intrailes of the heart, that by force seeketh meanes by some out∣vvard shevv of seruice to reueale the fostered flames therof to his professed friende: by vvhose continuall mocions and rest∣lesse rage I vvas more alured by good vvill than by vvit or learning persvvaded to manifest the fruite thereof vnto your VVorshippe, as to the onely Mecaenas & chosen Patron of this my enterprise, vvhich though more bolde than vvise, more rash than learned, yet I hope more vvilling than able of your vvorship adiudged, vvhich like a Greeke Demetrius, or a Romane Scipio, by some secret sleight of vertue mooued in me most ardent loue, incredible desire and singuler affection to accomplish some charge, as a publicke pleadge of my

true and faythfull heart. So for the clemencie of counte∣naunce, the facility of speach, the excellencie of nature, vvhich in some are more apparaunt than in others, doe euen as the Adamant dravve vp the heauie and lumpishe yron, en∣flame the barren and luntish braineman to a farre further charge, than other learning maye suffice good vvill therein▪ Most vvilling to auoyde the gulfe of Charibdis, perfor hee slideth in Scilla: and seeking to shunne Semphlagades, he sincketh in Syrtes. Hovvbeit, good vvill the vvorthiest revvarde, the chiefest treasure and the greatest gift that the seruaunt can yeelde vnto his maister, the subiect vnto his Prince, or one man vnto another, vvhich as Demosthenes sayth, ought as keis of treasures, bulvvarkes of Cities, de∣fence of countries, and staye of states, bee vvaied and estee∣med. Suche did Phocion onely accept in Athens, vvhen hee refused the offered treasures of the great Alexander. Such did Epaminondas require in Thebes, vvhen he re∣nounced the princelie giftes of Artaxerxes. Suche did Fa∣britius craue in Rome, vvhen he denied the vvelthye re∣vvardes of King Pirrhus: And suche I trust your vvor∣shippe doe vvaye of your vvell vviller, though of others better are tendered: for more holesome it is (sayth Plini) for some to drinke small vvine out of Samos earthen vessell, than strong poyson out of the golden cuppe of Nero: better it is to drinke Cius colde vvater out of faythfull Sinaetes hand, than svveete Nectar out of the infected cuppe of Cirses: and farre more sure is the good vvill of the faythfull, than the ten∣dered treasure of the flatterer, vvhich like a Melitian dogge fauning on euery man, altering himselfe vnto all kinde of cou∣lers vvith the Camaelien, and shifting himselfe vnto sundrie shapes vvith Protheus, vvill hault vvith Clisophus before Phillippe dissemble vvith Aristodemus beefore Antigo∣nus, fltter vvith Aristippus before Dionisius: and in ine deceyue Caesar vvith Curio. These rauening Har∣peis, these tame Tigers, these sucking Serpentes, deceyued the vvise, ouercame the mightie, and deuoured the quicke: they

vvill depraue Homer of his verses vvith flattery, they vvill spoyle Hercules of his clubbe vvith flattery, and they vvill dispossesse Iupiter of his thunder and lightnings vvith flat∣trey. O had noble natures in leau of false flaterers, suche faythfull friendes as Agamemnon had of Nestor, Tele∣machus of Menelaus, Achilles of Chiron, Hector of Po∣lidamus, Vlisses of Alcinus, or hadde Princes suche coun∣cellers as Alexander had of Aristotle, as Augustus hadde of Athenedorus, Antigonus of Zeno, Alcibiades of Socra∣tes, and Cicero of Apollonius, flatterie shoulde bee espied, deceytes auoyded, enuie preuented, and death often escaped, then had not Sinon vvith flatterie vanquished Troye, Zopirus vvith dissimulation, destroyed Babilon, neyther Lasthenes vvith fayre vvordes ouercome Olinthus. But in examining the state of Princes, vvaying their pilgrimages in this toyling Labyrinthus, vve see their fortune as vari∣able, as they themselues are mutable. VVee reade that some from base birth vvere aduaunced vnto emperiall dignitie, as Gordius from the Plough became King in Phrigia, and Giges from a Shepheard vvas made King in Lidia: So vve read that some from regall seates vvere exiled their kingdom, as Torquinius Superbus from Rome, and Dionisius from Sicilia. It is not straunge to the learned, that Tullius Hostilius from keeping of Cattell became a King in Rome, and that famous Zerxes the great King of Persea vvas vanquished by that simple manne Artabanus. VVhat vvoonder is it if Cirus vvas nourished by a Bytche to be a King in Persea, sith Prutias from a king in Bithinia, bee∣came a begger in Asia. If Romulus from an abiect brought vp by a vvoolfe vvas buried so princely in Rome, vvhat mer∣uayle is it that Pompeius being so renovvmed, shoulde be buried in the sandes of Egypt? If Alexander the great, Iu∣lius Caesar, Hanibal, Iugurth, vvith infinite moe vvere sup∣pressed and deiected from their high thrones vnto miserie and penurie? It is not straunge that Agathocles, the potter, Iustinius the svvinehearde, yea, Archilaus borne of a bond-vvoman

shoulde be aduaunced vnto regall seate. That sage Greke therfore Pittach{us} in the temples of Mittilena, depain∣ted a brode ladder vvhere some did ascend and some discend, to notifie the state of fortune. Some hongry feeding at the Table of Tantal{us}. Some toyling to rol the stone of Sisiph{us}. Some stri∣uing vvith the burthen of Atlas. Some busie to fill the empty buckets of Belides: and some carefull to turne the vvheele of Ixion, vvhereat I knovve not vvhether the vvise may laugh rather at the folly of the same vvith Democritus,Democri∣tus laugh at the solly of the vvorlde. or vveepe at the miserie of the same vvith Heraclit{us}. Hovv happy is he that sayleth by Scilla vvithout daunger, that passeth by Ci∣clops dennes vvithout perill, that goeth vnto Lotophagos and not hindered,Heraclitus vvept at the misery of the same. that drinketh vvith Cirses, and not infec∣ted, that heareth the Cirenes and not allured: In fine, that entereth vnto hell and not conuicted: yea tvvise happye is that contented man, vvho hauing nothing, possesseth all thinges, and hauing all thinges, possesseth nothing. By this onely Biton the siely argiue vvas preferred before Cirus king of Persea by Solon:Biton bet∣ter estemed then Cirus. By this Aglaus the poore Arcadian vvas aduaunced before Cressus King of Lidia by Apollo. And by this onely vvas Gangeticus vvoont to say that ha∣uing but bread and vvater, he vvoulde not chaunge life vvith Iupiter,Pirrhus. for had that renovvmed Pirrhus beene contented vvith the kingdome of Epire, he had neuer beene slaine by a simple vvoman at Argos.Siphax. Had Siphax beene satisfied vvith all the dominion of Numidia, he had neuer died a captiue in Rome.Alexander. And had that great conquerour Alexander beene sufficed vvith one vvorld, he had neuer vvept vvhen he heard that there vvere diuers vvorlds. Such gredy desire of vvealth, such vaine ostentation of life, that al Athens coulde not abide tvvo Alcibiades: All Sparta might not suffer tvvo Lisan∣ders: nor all the vvorld might maintaine tvvo Alexanders. Such vaine glorye of selfe loue, such felicitie in the vvorlde, yea such ambition of honour vvith men that poore Temison a Gardener vvoulde be called Hercules in Cipris, simple Menecrates a Phisition vvould be called Iupiter in Greece,

and foolish Hanno a Citizen, vvoulde be called a God in Carthage. So that some put their cheefe felicitie vvith Crisippus in the vvorlde, some vvith Antisthenes in fame after death. Many vvith Themistocles in descending frō a hie linage. A number vvith Simonides to be vvell beloued of the people. Diuers vvith Palemon in eloquence, others vvith Euripedes in a faire vvoman, and others vvith Sophocles in getting of children. Seely Herostrat{us} burned the temple of Diana to become famous. Pausanias slue Philip King of Macedonia to be spoken of. Desire vnto fame made Iuli{us} Caesar to enuy the marshall monumentes of Alexander in Gades, made Alexander vveepe at the fame of Achilles in Phrigia, made Achilles crie out at the renovvme of The∣se{us} in Greece, and made These{us} starke mad at the enterpri∣ses of Hercules in al places. VVherfore that learned Philo∣sopher Plato termed enuy Serra animae. VVhy vvas Per∣dicca enuied? for his noble magnanimitie. VVhy vvas Lysi∣mach{us} hated? for his approued experience. And vvhy vvas Antigon{us} disdained? for his politick vvisdome: so that Plini saith most true, that there is no light vvithout shadovve, nor no vertue vvithout enuy. VVhich if your vvorship sometime bestovv your selfe to reade some booke or other, you shall in reading diuers bookes, knovv and perceaue the causes thereof, for as the Bee gathereth of some hearbe Gumme, of ano∣ther the refuse of VVaxe, of an other Honye: so in rea∣ding diuers bookes, diuers profites, of Rethoricke, the vvaye of persvvation of Logicke, the sleight of reason, of histories, the orders of countreys, of Philosophy, the secretes of nature, and of diuinitie the path of life: vvherefore Alphonsus the great King of Aragon being a long time sicke in Capua, ge∣uing him selfe to reade Titus Liuius, of the marshall feates of Romans and Q. Curti{us} of the noble actes of Alexander the great, hauing thereby recouered his health, vvas vvoont to say that he neuer hearde better Musicke then he hearde in Liuie, nor neuer had better Phisick then he had in Curtius. August{us} Caesar therfore vvould neuer be vvithout Virgil in

hande, nor Alexander the great vvithout Homer vnder his Pillovv. Happy vvas Pompeius vvhen hee had Cicero in his bosome, and glad vvas Scipio vvhen he had Enneus in his sight: yea Dionisius the tiraunt vvoulde honour Plato, and Antigonus the cruell, geue place to Zeno. So as Al∣phonsus saide, there is no svveeter Musicke then in rea∣ding, there is no better Phisicke then in reading, and there is no sounder counsell then in reading. There is mirth, there is sadnesse, there is vvisedome and knovvledge, there is persvvasion, and there is vvarning: vvhich if your vvorship do folovve but Appelles sayinges vnto his schollers, that no day shoulde passe vvithout the reading of one line, or to imi∣tate Hortensius▪ sometime of the day either to reade, aske, or to learne something. I knovve you vvill say vvith Solon, Indies senesco multa discens, trusting to call to minde that short and svveete sentence of Epaminondas vnto his friende Pelopidas, that no good nature ought to go out of his house in the morning, but before he returneth home, he vvill vvinne one friende or other, forgetting not the saying of Tiberius the Emperour, vvho thought that day yll spent in the vvhich he did good to no body, or profited no man. Thus doing your vvorship shall encrease in knovvledge, multiply your freendes, aduaunce your fame, and enioy felicitie of life.

