



THE knowledge of former times (most reuerend) by prophane au∣thors recorded, for the great profit and delight thereof, hath not without cause beene alwaies highlie esteemed of the best & wisest men in Hea∣then common wealths; guided only by natures law, the word of

life not knowne amongst them. This keepeth the memorie of thinges done of old, and in spite of death, preserueth still in some sort, as it were the life of Noble ancestors, who by their prowesse and wisedome, for guiding the course of mans life aright, haue left most worthie examples, and notable patternes of vertue be∣hind them. To Christians it hath this more to commend it selfe: that it bringeth much light to the vnderstanding of God his worde, and greatlie auaileth to the aduancement of that trueth wherby soules are wonne to the Lorde: wherefore I cannot but meruaile at the (shall I terme it follie or rather madnes?) of those men, which for the continuance

of the Persian Monarchie, and the raigne of the seueral kings ther∣in: are bold to reiect the true hi∣stories of ancient writers, who liuing in the times thereof, haue set forth the same for the ages to come. The cause and maine ground whereof, is nothing else but their owne error in misun∣derstanding holie Scripture; by wrested interpretation, making flat contradiction betweene the spirite of God, and prophane truth: So not onelie wrong is done to those excellent men, who by their paines haue deser∣ued well: but also euen the cer∣taintie of Gods worde it selfe, by this meanes is weakned, & made doubtfull, and called into questi∣on. For it is not possible that one

truth should be repugnant to a∣nother. Now because truth (as Augustine writeth in his second booke de doctrina Christiana) is the Lordes wheresoeuer it is found, & therefore euerie Chri∣stian in dutie bound to stand for the maintaining thereof, against all aduersaries, so farre forth as his strength will serue: I haue ac∣cording to my pore talent, vn∣dertaken the defence of the true Historie & Chronologie of the Persian times against the aduer∣saries thereof: and withall an ex∣position of the Angell Gabriels message to Daniel agreeable thereunto. The one, that is my account of the times in fast per∣swasion I hold so sure: as that I stedfastlie beleeue scarse 2. yeres

vnder or ouer, if any at all will be easily disprooued: which in so great a number, were a small matter in regard of those mens conceipt, who are bold at one dash to chop off no lesse then a hundred yeares. For the other, I meane my exposition; by rea∣sō of interpreters disagreement among themselues, hauing not like euidence: I referre my selfe to learnings skill, the iudgement of cunning Linguists, and sound Diuines. In English rather then in Latine I haue chosen to set foorth this treatise: for no o∣ther cause in the world but one. That as my owne Countriemen in their natiue language, by rea∣son of Mathew Beroald the first brocher of the new Chronolo∣gicall

History of the Persian Em∣pire, translated into English, and some other bookes, doe read the wrong, in danger thereby to bee seduced: So likewise in the same their mother tongue, by this my paines they may see the right, & so hold themselues therein from going astray. This my labour I am bolde to present vnto your Grace, sundrie reasons moouing me thereunto. For hauing in in∣tent sought herein the vphold∣ing of truth, to the good of my Countrie, and the benefitte of Christ his Church amongst vs (the chiefe care wherof for these matters appertaineth vnto your Grace.) I feared not the checke of vnseemely boldnes, if by the honour of your Graces name, I

should seeke to commend the same. Your great loue of lear∣ning, and kind good will to Stu∣dents, hartned me on: But aboue all, my especiall motiue hereun∣to, was the earnest desire of my heart, to shew some token of my dutifull remembrance of your great kindnes heretofore so ma∣ny waies shewed vnto mee. That I was first scholler, and after fel∣low of Trinitie Colledge in Cambridge, it proceeded of your louing minde, and fauora∣ble good wil vnto me, besides o∣ther benefits many, some greater then the forme, which were too long to recite. In regard where∣of if it may please your Grace to accept of this acknowledgement of my dutie: I shall account the

same my duty doubled. Thus with my hartie desire of your Graces happy estate long to cō∣tinue, to the glory of God, & the good of his Church, and the wealth of this land, & your own sounde comfort, I most humbly take my leaue of your Grace: this 24. day of Nouember in the 1597. yere of Christ our Lord.

