


WHo can passe in silence (most noble Prince)
the ioyes and triumphes of these Halcyons
dayes, wherein Christianus King of Den∣marke,
leauing his Kingdome, his Queen,
his Court, forsaking his imperiall Sceptor
and his Subiects, renouncing all princely
dignities, as a Prince that had his soule diuided betweene
Great Britane and Denmarke, esteeming more the one
halfe in Britane, than the whole in Denmarke.
O loue! excelling all loue, and that in a King, which the
heauens cannot subdue, the earth forget, nor fortune ouer∣throwe;
of whose eternall fame, fame dare not lye.
Let Maro cease to commend his Troiane Aeneas: let
Homer blush to aduance the greatnesse of Achilles, which
disguised himselfe like a woman, lest hee should goe from
Greece to Phrygia. Let Greece not name Vlisses to faine
madnesse, lest he should depart from Ithaca, and his wife
Penelope to Ilion.
But Christianus King of Denmarke, whom neither mo∣ther,
Queen, Crownes, or Kingdome, could keepe him from
great Britan: where his Maiestie may of right more reioyce
of his princely Progenie, than King Philip of Hercules
stocke in Macedonia, or Augustus Caesar of gens Iulia in
Rome, sith the line of Hercules expired in Alexander,
and the stemme of Aeneas in the Emperour Nero, so that
Romanes now may say, Fuimus Troes; and Macedoni∣ans
say, Fuimus Herculani.
But Great Britane was then neuer so great vnder
Brutus the first King, as nowe vnder Iames the second

King, whose continuance well nye three thousand yeres,
is now againe like the Eagle renewed and reuiued, to be by
Gods goodnesse continued as long by the second Brutus,
that babes in cradles may say, Iubilate Britanni.
Much beholden we are to God, if we forget not God, and
great cause haue we to loue, and to honour his Highnesse in
great Britane: if we looke but vnto the greatnesse of his
loue to England in Queen Elizabeths time, and now with
greater at this present to King Iames, if we shuld be deafe,
and not heare of it, or be dumbe, and not speak of it, heauen
and earth would accuse vs of too much ingratitude, wood
and stones should condemne vs of too much forgetfulnesse.
Sith neither Syracusa, with their conuoyes and proui∣sion
to the Romanes at Thrasymenum, neither Tyre
nor Sydon, with their Caedars of Lybanon to Ierusalem,
were so forward as Denmark was of late to England; but
as Masinissa sayd of the Romanes, that there was one kind
of people vpon the earth, the people of Rome, and among
that one people one Scipio, to whom he fully deuoted him∣selfe,
as one whose soule rested in Scipioes bodie: the like
sayd Hyra King of Tyre, of Salomon King of Israel.
But neither Hyra with his Sydonians, was more grate∣ful
to Salomon King of Israel, nor Masinissa with his Nu∣midians
more louing to Scipio the Romane Consul, than
Christianus King of Denmarke, was to Iames King of
great Britane, whom neither heauens, earth, nor seas, nei∣ther
Kingdomes nor Court, could keepe that louing King
from his loue, to come from Denmark as a crowned starre
of the North, to shine in England, and to come to celebrate
and to renew the name of great Britane, to see the Queene
his Sister, his Nephew, and the rest of the Kings children,
the sound and sacred anchor of three Kingdomes.

O loue immortall! not to be wayed in ballance, not with
measure to be measured, not knitted with Gordius knot to
be cut by Alexanders sword, neither with Hercules knot to be vnknitted by Phoebus, sith all prophane Histories
cannot allow but eight onely of the like loue, but not eight
Kings, most seldome two. For to see a King out of his king∣dome,
is as strange, as to see the Sunne out of the skie.
Let England bee of equall loue with Denmarke, sith
loue is recompensed with loue, iustly weyed in equall bal∣lance,
not with Philips siluer swords in Greece, not with
Artaxerxes golden Archers in Persia, but with Pytha∣goras
weapons, one minde, one heart, and one soule, per∣petuall
weapons, the triumphes thereof haue their euerla∣sting
tropheis.
Among such, what needs such leagues, and couenants
to dippe our weapons in blood, as the Scythians did? or die
our clothes in blood, as the Armenians did? or to drinke
blood out of our armes, as the Medians and Lydians did?
Sith the league between great Britane and Denmarke
is consecrated with inward blood of mutuall hearts, and
confirmed with the entrals and bowels of naturall Parents,
that two Sunnes may be sooner found to agree in the skie,
than these two Kings to disagree on earth.
This God hath appointed, nature confirmed, fates al∣lowed,
and fortune thereto agreed.
Hence grow the cause of our publicke Iubilies, and crow∣ned
feasts, our dayly tropheis, and perpetuall triumphes;
that as the Romans loued and agreed with the Sabins, yeel∣ding
thanks to their God in the Feast Consualia: so the
Britanes with the Danes, yeelding thanks to their
God Iehouah in their Feasts Scaenopegia.
