




RIGHT vvorshipfull, & much endeered in the lord. Promise is debt, & debt is due. The dutie of my seruice, & the debt of my promise I novve make bold to tēder vnto you all. The promise vvhich I made vnto you at London vvhere I began this taske, by gods permission I haue finished at Hamboroughe, & novve tender performance.Doct. Wil∣kenson. It is not many yeares since that a learned Doctour of Divinitie vvho is novve vvhich god preaching in court at an honorable mariage out of the prouerbs,The lord Hay his mariage. She is like a Merchant shippe that bringeth her mer∣chandize

from a farre. Prov. 31.14. called his sermon The marchant royall: I haue the tearmed this. THE MARCHANT REALL. For that royaltie is vpheld by Realtie. And vvise men vvishe ever rather to be Realls, then Nominalls. I could not conceaue in all the boke of god, vvhere a marchant could bestovve his best thoughts better, then vppon his ovvne character so lightsome for Edification, so delightsome & so liuely sett out by Christ himselfe for consolation. VVherein every tittle is pretious, every vvord a fullnes of matter, every point pressing tovvard the marke, & the Period not only pointing to, but putting you into possession of an eternal purchase. In this purchase there is noe vvant but a vvonderfull fullnes of all royalty, & realty. It is a mans greatnes to be greater then himselfe, & it is happines enough for a man to attaine his perfection at last. VVere I a marchant, & did see, & heare Christ resembling his kingdome to my vocation. I should conceaue veary highe thoughts, & purposes of resolution to attaine this pearle, & should beleeue that text punctually to concerne me For vvhat doe vve see here belovve, but toyling, turmoyling, greeving, vvishing, hoping, fearing, vvearinesse, yea vvretchednes in all.
VVhat doth the vvorld but besott vs vvith the loue of our ovvne trouble, The godly knovve it is

better to be vvise to god, then happie in the vvorld. And the reall Christian is euer limited, & euer avved vvith feare of excesse. I knovve noe condition of mē more happie then Merchants Their veary youth is accompanied vvith many, and many fold experiēced trialls both by sea, and land, vvhich may make them prudent. Their mature age is blessed vvith a plentifull portion vvhich may make them thankfull, & their old age affordeth a very surplusage of marveilous fulnes vvhich may satisfie them. In all this. If they should build vp their tabernacle, here, & sing a Requiē to themselues, & to their soules, & not to remember their eternall purchase vvhat can any man implead god for? Solomons navie fetcht the gold of Ophir vvith the perill of a vvhole three yeares voyage, but it vvas to build god an house a glorious house. A blessed end. Some that trauailed in that voyage brought home apes, & Peacockes. A ridiculous Mer∣chantdizing. VVhat gaine vve for all our travaile & labour if vve find not this Pearle, but derision from god, daunger in our liues, & noe good memoriall after vve are gone hence. VVho is so foolish to loue the vvorld that breeds nothing but sorrovve? Let them tell me that haue experience of manyfold occurrences in the vvorld, vvhat find they in it but a smyling deceipt? Not vnlike to the bee that haue hony in

the mouth, & a sting in the tayle. But vvhy doe vve desire so much? Only to keepe it? That is a most base thing. If vve vvill Lay vp, vvhere can vve repose our treasure more secure then in CHRIST treasury VVhat richer purchase then a kingdome? The attaynement vvhereof I haue endeuored in this treatise. The Pearle is Christ in heauen, & Charity on earth, The one the obiect, the other the effecte of faith The one the practice of this life. The other the full possession of eternall life. If euer you vvill vnite minds in vnitie, you must take avvay all discord in Religion. Then the vvhich nothing is so strong to vnite, nothing so forcible to disseuer, & disvnite, if it be in discord. The distraction of minds causeth destruction of estates. Can you loke for true seruice of your Apprētices, or for carefull trust of your factors vvho that loue not your order IN ORDINE AD DEUM. No assure your selues. You heare not vvhat they doe, Neither shall you knovve Their harts are alienated, so are their actions, their intendments, their purposes. Vnite them once in Religion They are yours absolute, present, or absent; sleeping or vvaking, by sea, or by land. Oh vvhat miserable distractions haue falne out by disasters in religion? Nay about the robes, & apparell of the same? Hovve can you thinke god should blesse Your negotiations vvith

successe? vvhen the minds of yours of vvhom you haue a tender care are rent a sunder.
Beleeue me I haue euer conceaued that the trade of Marchantdizing requires a vvhole man. And this man must be a marchant. Shall he not be reall? Reall he cannot be to man that is not so to god. Hovve can he be a faithfull seruant to his earthly master in his accompt, that cares not vvhat audite he makes to his heauenly master. Assuredly as he beleeues not in the one, so he sleights the other. There is a broode of fooles vvho like Shemei vvhile they seeke their servāts, that is Riches, lose their soules. VVhat are else all false harted seruants, & factors, vvho care not to lose this pearle, vvith the price of their soules so they may at∣tayne pealse, It is a thousād pitties to see so many honest harts so miserably distressed in forraine parts vvith more thē lamētable disagreements of folly, & factiō. Either part stryving, & strugling by all manner of meanes they can deuise to offend, & infest the other vvhiles in the Interim they neglecte their trades, their trusts, & spend their dayes in miserable garboyles. All that I can say for my selfe vvherefore I haue made this treatise speake novve in a dead letter that, vvhich before vvas deliuered by the voice of a lyving man is only a desire of doing good.
If I doe seeme to any man Prodigall of my little yet this honest ambition (you see) vvill not suffer my one

talent or if it be but a part of one to rust in the earth. If this Discourse of Merchants, and Merchandizing be not so curiously hādled as the fulnes of the subiecte requireth yet let my endeered affections vnto you all make amends for the manifold defectes hereof. It is that my vveakenes could afford: It is the issue of noe curious brayne, but I hope the symptome of an honest hart. If from hence you vvould be pleased to dravve a Paralel of the cares, trauailes, perills, & aduentures you make here not for an earthly kingdome, but for to attayne some modell of moderate liuely hoode. And compare those labours vvith these you take for heauē, you vvould easily see vvhat defecte there is. I leaue that to your ovvne practice & purpose, & shall euer pray to almighty god to make you all most happie in your selues by being reall Merchants for your ovvne soules; happie in your seruants, & factors that may be reall in your trades, & trusts, & god make you prosperous in all your legall aduentures both by sea, & land. To vvhose blessed guydance, and sauing mercies I recommend you all. resting

