



MVch honored. The Chri∣stian neighborhood, and kind commerce both of bountifull liberalitie, and gracious respect, which my selfe, and mine recei∣ued from you and yours this time twelue∣moneth by our contiguous vicinitie, hath occasioned me to be thus bold in saluting you after long silēce with a paper token, the

onely miniment, and memoriall of a Scho∣ler in this last, and worst age, that hath no∣thing for vs but bookes amongst the best, and by-words amongst the worst, as her one∣ly bequest, and our legacie. Howsoeuer, not∣withstanding it is the heartie ioy of Israel, & the vnspeakeable comfort of Iacob, that still some of the precious balme of Gilead that falls vpon Aarons head, doth distill downe euen vnto the skirts of his priestly clothing. And whereas others may haue spices, and balmes to preserue their bodies for a time, and monuments of brasse, and stone to con∣tinue a future glorie to their memorials: yet euer those haue bene most enobled, whose remembrances the tokens of vertue, and godlinesse haue endeuored to eternize, and keepe from the rottennesse of corrupted ba∣serie, and obscure obliuion. And albeit the purport of this whole proiect is but the tur∣ning of my tongue into my pen, and the matter it selfe is but a preaching againe (as it were) the same words another saboth day,Act. 13. as the Gentiles besought Paule in the Acts:

yet I pray you entertaine them as the pre∣sence of my spirit, the pledge of mine heart, and the earnest of that affection, and loue which I iustly beare vnto you. And whereas before I spake in a great auditory in the pre∣sence and countenance of a liuing man, am now content in this my paines to bury my selfe in a dead letter of lesse effectuall per∣swasion: But principally I protest to this only end and purpose, that God might be magni∣fied (if it be his holy will) in me the weakest, & meanest of his seruāts both by the medi∣tations of mine heart, and in the endeauors of mine hand. The Treatise is of the loue of God deuoted vnto your selues in whom I haue obserued much loue toward God, to∣ward your brethren without, and amongst your selues at home. Goe on then (blessed in the Lord Iesu) in this sacred vettue that disposeth you to God so amiablie, and youIoh. 20. shall find these holy encreases in you 1. You shall euer desire to thinke on him that madeLuke 2. you. 2. Gladly, and willingly to frequent his house the pallace of praier 3. Duly to speake,1. Pet 4.

& talke of him. 4. Often to heare of him byIo. 14. his messengers, and to meditate of that you heare. 5. Readie will you be to giue for his1. Io. 3. sake. 6. Ioyfull that you suffer whatsoeuer itIo. 18. 1. Io. 5. be for Gods honour. 7. Duly to bowe your hearts to the obedience of his holy lawes, 8. Yea you wil loue them that loue the Lord,Mat. 12. and despise and hate them that hate him. 9. Neither will you loue this world, nor anything therein, vnlesse it be for the Lords cause. 10. Yea in a word, you will loue your friend in the Lord, and your enemie for the Lord.
Long may the blessing of this diuine loue which is the beautifull Idea of your soules, sparkle and flame in you. Let the God of heauen grant that the distempered humours of misperswasion may neuer quench it with∣in you, nor the ouerflowings of vngodli∣nesse in the world euer put it out, but let the light of Gods owne most blessed coun∣tenance for euer and euer shine vpon you, and cause it to be enflamed eternally. I be∣seech the God of heauen and of earth to

multiplie his richest blessings vpon your selfe, your Ladie, and your children for e∣uermore. Euen so Lord Iesu be it.
The Colledge of Glou. Febru. 20. 1611.

