



ALL my labour whatsoever, in translating another mans worke, I present here unto your Highnesse, and consecrate to the happie and immortall memorie of your most sacred Majestie. An at∣tempt (I confesse) in regard of mine owne imperfections, ven∣turous and overhold, as the first enterprise, right, hard and exposed to perill. Yet, most Worthie and Powerfull Empresse, Who is there so unsufficient, that by the favourable aspect of your countenance, may not be graced and enabled? What so difficult and dangerous, which under the fortunate auspices of your Majestie, cannot be effected with ease and passe in safetie?
Accept then, most gracious Lady, the first fruits of a few-yeers studie, for the benefit enioyed of life and libertie. An offering, as well in that respect, as of my selfe the mea∣nest of many thousands, under all proportion; but considering either the argument or the first Author, not much unsitting. Hee, in penning the Historie of the greatest state in his time, for exquisite eloquence had not his equall; no more than your Highnesse in glorious government at this day, any second: Such are the incomparable perfections re∣splendent in your Royall person; the Wonder of the world.
Vouchsafe also, of your accustomed clemencie shewed to aliens; of your servent zeale to learning and good letters, wherein (among other rare vertues and singular gifts sea∣ted in your Heroicke mind) no Prince commeth neere unto your Excellence, to reach forth your gracious hand to T. Livius: who having arrived long since & conversed as a meere stranger in this your famous Iland, & now for love therof learned in some sort the language, humbly craveth your Majesties favour, to be ranged with other free∣denizens of that kind: so long to live under your princely protection, as hee shall duly keepe his owne allegeance, and acquaint your liege subjects with religious devotion after his manner, with wisdome, pollicie, vertue, valour, loyaltie; and not otherwise.
And the Almightie guard your Majestie alwaies with his holy angels: prolong your life among us in perfect health: adorne your noble heart with divine graces: maintaine your regall estate in all honour: blesse the rest of your daies (and infinite may they be) with sweet repose and firms peace, to the joy of your true-hearted and loving people: and finally, accomplish all your desires, for present prosperitie and future felicitie.

