


PErusing ouer sundry bookes of volumes large and great,
Which of the worthy feates of Fame, & Martial actes intreat,
Of mightie Princes of the world, accomplished of yore,
In diuers kingdomes vpon earth, and countreis heretofore.
I finde in auncient Histories, by learned men laid downe
The conquestes of the Worthies nyne to be of most renowne:
Who are by famous Register enrowled in record
The greatest and mightiest conquerers, and Worthies of the world:
As well for their couragiousnes, as magnanimities,
Their valiantnes, their wisdomes rare, and Princely pollicies:
As for the wonders maruelous, and miracles also
In their exploytes, and their affaires, which God for them did show.
How God exalted them on hie, to earthly dignitie,
And gaue them Kings and kingdomes by tryumphant victorie:
Appointing them to be his scourge, the wicked to confound,
And their vnrighteous seede vnroote, with sword from of the ground.
How God remained to the end, with them that godly weare,
And prospered all their attempts, which him did loue and feare.
How other were amid their pryde, in highest roome of all,
For that they had forgotten God, brought to a sodaine fall.
As for example: Iosua the Iudge of Israell,
The first of all these conquerers, in vertue did excell.
And doughtie Dauid in like sort, in whom God did delight,
From shepheard being made a King, was righteous in Gods sight.
And noble Iudas Machabeus, these three Iewes by byrth,
And feared God continually, while they did liue on earth.
Wherfore the Lord wrought miracles vpon their enemies,
As shalbe afterwardes discust heere in these Histories.


Then Hector fearce the Phrigian Prince, and Alexander great,
And Iulius Caesar painyms all, their God they did forgeat:
For which, amid their most estate, when they were highest of all,
Ambicion, Pride, and Auarice, gaue each of them a fall.
Then Arthur, Charle-mayne and Guy, were christians as I gesse,
The one was plagde in his most pompe, for his lasciuiousnesse:
The other two were godly men, wherfore they dyed well,
As in their seuerall Histories the Sequell plaine doth tell.
A briefe of all whose liues, I haue in meeter with my pen
Compiled out of sundry bookes of famous learned men.
And as I read of them also, according to my skill,
I haue all their proportions depainted with my quill:
And drawne the armes and cognisaunce in euery seuerall shield,
Which when they liued vpon the earth they bare vnto the field:
The yeare & time where they did raigne, and when & where they died,
And what they were enclined too, I haue herein discried:
Beseeching that your honour wil accept in gentle part
This litle booke which I present, to shew my faithfull hart.
And when your leasure so shall serue, vouchsafe I humbly craue,
To read it ouer once or twise, and where I erred haue,
That crime or fault committed so, let ignorance excuse,
Blame not the man that meaneth well, but blame his simple Muse.
Record the matter in your minde, although this style be base,
Then shall your Lordship plainly see before your present face,
A myrror of mans mortall life, by them compared right,
Which well may be a looking glasse, to euery liuing wight:
And chiefly to the higher sort, whom God shall please t'aduance,
In any wise here vpon earth to rule or gouernaunce:
To learne therby to know the Lord, who liues eternally,
Not to forget their owne estates, through pride nor surquedry:
To abandon wicked vice away, and vertue to embrace,
That to their latter end they may run out a happy race.
Thus humbly I do take my leaue, and hartily do pray,
That God will graunt you Nestors yeares, in vertues honour ay.

