



Grace, peace, & mercie be multiplied in Christ Iesu.
WOrthy frend. VVhen Iuliā the Apostate infested the church of god, sōtimes by barbarous cruelty, & somtimes by deuilish policie, among other his vvicked practises that vvas not the least, nor the last vvhen e interdited the christians all vse of bookes, both priuatly, & publike∣ for their children to learne

excepte Poetry. It pleased almighty god in that distresse of his church to stirre vp a learned man one Apollinarius a singular Meta∣phrast to put into heroicall Greeke verse all the psalmes of Dauid by vvhich blessing the children of god had vse, and comfort of that excel lent booke of the psalme, & the tyrants decree tooke noe hold of thē, because novve it vvas become deuine poesie, & poetry they might read. Which shevves vnto vs gods especiall, & singular providence for his church vpon all occasions. And novve albeit (god be blessed) there is noe cause to complaine either of any such Apostatical povver, for vve haue an Apostoli∣call king, nor of any such vvicked pollicy, for vve haue had kings, & Queēs nursing fathers, & nursing

mothers of our church; yet in these Halyon daies of ours I haue presumed to metaphrase some passages of Dauid psalmes as an Essay to knovve vvhether vve might expresse our harts to god in our holy soliloquies by mōasillables in our ovvne mother tongue, or no. It being a receaued opinion amōgst many of those vvho seeme rather to be iuditious, then caprichious, that heretofore our english tongue in the true idiome thereof consisted altogether of Monasillables, vntill it came to be blended, and mingled vvith the commixture of Exotique languages. And I my selfe haue seene all the lord prayer vsed in the tyme of Iohn Wickleefe to be expressed in vvords of one sillable. And because gods children did reckon seauen tymes seauen yeares

before they could enioy their yeare of Iubile. I haue made allusion in this little Essay to tune forth seauē tymes seauen sad sobbs for sinne, that vvhen vve haue spent the remaynder of our vvretched dayes of our pilgrimage here, god may in his mercie vvipe avvay all teares from our eyes, & bring vs to our eternall Iubile in his glorious king∣dome. Which god grant to you, to me, & to all Christian people for his ovvne rich mercie sake, and the satisfactory meritts of Iesus Christ our lord Amen.
Written from my studie vvithin the English house at Hamborough Jan. 24.

