



ALexander the great (right Honorable) thought long to write the straunge sights hee sawe in India, to Aristotle the philosopher in Ma∣cedonia, Caesar made haste to write the celeritie of his vic∣torie in Pontus, to his friend Anitus at Rome. The like desire is in my selfe, with no lesse longing to make my labour knowne to such honourable friends, as will both accept and defend my trauaile herein; Of whom I made choice of your honour, to dedicate the

Stratagems of Ierusalem, as vnto one that is furnished with stratagems, wisedome, and knowledge, of whō I may say, as Plato spake of such like, Consili∣um eius est, qui rei cuius{que} peritus. Such wise and graue councellors the Lord euer prouided, to attend on godly and vertuous Princes, as eyes and eares, to preuent both home and forraigne stratagemes of enemies, as Chusai with Dauid, to preuent the wic∣ked purpose of Absalon; and Nathan with Salomon, to finde out the trecherous intention of Adonias. The Lord left not the wicked Samaritans vnpro∣uided of Prophets & councellors, yea euen amōg Infidels and Pagans the Lord stirred vp Daniel to counsel Nabuchodonozer in Babilō, & Ioseph to coun∣sell Pharao in Egipt, that they might confesse & ac∣knowledge God to be the Lord; therfore wel said Solon, Non quae suauissima, sed quae optima, sunt cōsulenda: It is not the cōsultatiō of the Romains with their soothsaiers, that made their Empire so to florish, nor of the Persians with their Magi, that got the Monarchy of the Assyrians to Persia. All strata∣gems, victories, & good counsell commeth from the Lord, so wisdom saith, I dwel with Princes in councell, and am among them that seek wisdom & knowledge. Plato the Philosopher could so say, Omnis consultatio quiddam sacrum est: and Aristotle his scholler, called councell of Princes, Diuinissimum

consilium. The kings of Persia, when they admitted any into councell, tooke their fignet, & laid it on their mouths, as a seale of silēce, saying, Anima cōsilij secretū; so Alexā: did to his councellor Ephestiō; Nei∣ther could any be of councel in Persia, but such as were in coūcell most secret, & in gouernmēt most wise & prudent. The cause why Demosthenes was so esteemed amōng the Atheniās, was his wisdō & policie often to preuent the force & stratagems of Phillip of Macedon. The cause why Vlixes was iudged more worthy of Achilles armor then Aiax, was his experience and councell to Agamemnon in the Grecian warres. So it may be well spoken of Nestor, who was preferred before all other Greeke Captaines, for the like cause, Multitudo enim sapientū sanitas orbis terrarū est, saith wisdom. It was not the counsel of the Nimph Egeria to Numa, which was ridiculous, but the wisedome & policie of Numa, therby to establish his lawes, much commēded. Neither the counsell of Iupiter in the Capitoll to Scypio, which was foolish, but the policie & prac∣tise of Scypio, therby to animate his soldiers, much extolled. But no councell, no policie against the Lord, no wisdom nor Stratagem to ouerthrow a king or a kingdom, but the sins of the king & the kingdome. So could Cratippus the Philosopher, to that effect answere Pompey the great, Fata per causas

agunt; So could Phaetenissa the Witch answere Saul at Endor, Fatum pietatis appendix; So could the Idoll of Apollo aunswere Augustus Caesar at Delphos, the one willing to know what should become of the kingdome of Israel, the other of the Empire of Rome. But such busie ambitious braines, like Cor∣nel. Lentulus, that dreamed, he should be the third Cornelius that should gouern the Empire, were ba∣nished out of Athens by the law Ostracismus, & such might not come in Rome in gownes or in long cloakes into the Senate house, by the law of Cinci∣us. Many haue Iocobs voice, but they haue Esaus hands, like Balaam, Qui vocem non mentem mutant. These dissembling Gibeonites were found out by Ioshuah; these bragging Ephraimites were tried by pronouncing the letter Schiboleth. None can resist the set purpose of the Lorde, who could hinder Moses of his triumph in the midst of the sea? or let Ioshuah to set his trophey in the middest of the hea∣uens? euen he that commaunded the seas to be di∣uided, and commanded the Sun to stand ouer Gi∣beon, and the Moone ouer Aialon; to whom iustly belong all stratagems, victories, tropheys, and try∣umphes.

