


ARchimedes a famous Mathematician (most mightie Prince) sayd, If he had but a place to stand free frō the earth, he could inuent meanes to mooue the whole earth: some such there be though not like Archimedes, to mooue the whole earth; yet they mooue Countreys and Kingdomes on the earth. And as Dinocrates that skilfull Archi∣tector thought to bring mount Atho, to the lowe forme and stature of a man, so some would bring hie Mountaines, and great hilles, as lowe as mould-hilles.
Of such wee may nowe so say in Britane, as Pole∣mo spake sometime of counterfeit Tragedians in Smyrna, who with their false Solaechismes, lifting vp their dissembling eyes to heauen, saying, O coelum, when their treacherous hearts and bloody hands be

on earth, saying, O terra. These bee they that haue with the Traitor Saba, what portion haue we in the Sonne of Isa, or in the house of Iudah?
Against such, Ioshua made a law in Israel, that no counterfeit Gibeonite should beare Office in Iudah, but hewe wood, and carrie water for Israel.
Iepthe made likewise a lawe, that no foresworne Giliadite that could not pronounce Schibboleth, should passe ouer Iorden.
Your Maiestie made also a lawe, that no treache∣rous ambitious Papist that had Iacobs voice, and E∣saus handes should stay within great Britane, they should either obey the Romane lawe, lex Iulia, or the Athenians law Ostrachismos; & therefore was the rodde of Aaron, and the lawe Booke commaunded to bee kept together in the Arke, Vt quiescant querel Iudaeorum, which King Iosias had, both the Sword, & the Law booke carried before him, Tanquam insign Principis.
So Iulius Caesar, as it appeareth, his Image that had a Sword in one hand, and a Booke in the other writ∣ten vpon his breast, Ex vtro{que} Caesar. But while any of Sauls seed liued in Israel, Israel could not be quiet, nor Dauid take rest. Shall wee wish as the Apostles did, fire to burne these Samaritans? or with Elias, fire to destroy these Souldiers of Achab?
Themistocles wished a bridge of gold for Xerxes ar∣mie to passe out of Greece vnto Persia. Scipio wished a brazen wall, to conuey Haniball out of Italy into Affrica: truely the Persians were not more greedy of Greece, nor the Carthagenians of Italy, as these Ie∣suits

and Seminaries are of great Britane, who haue sworne and promised, as Zedechas did with his yron hornes to Achab, His ventilabis Syriam.
These be the Frogges that went out of the Dra∣gons mouth, spiritus Daemoniorum, croaking in euery corner of great Britane, to mooue seditions and trea∣sons in Kingdomes and Countreys.
These contend, not as Aiax did with Vlisses for Achilles armour, nor like Edom, though they bee Edomites for the blessing of Isaak, but as Torquine did with Brutus, who should rule Rome, a King, or a Consul; who should gouerne great Britane, a King, or a Pope. Where many if they might heare the Bi∣shop of Rome, proclaimed a Pope in England, would as willingly die for ioy in great Britane, as Diagoras the Philosopher died at Rhodes, for ioy to heare his three Sonnes to bee crowned in the games of Olympia.

