


MY Lord,Lactan. lib. 4. de vera sapi∣ent. Cap. 30. Lactantius hath very properly and fitly cal∣led the Church, the foun∣taine of trueth, the house and dwelling place of faith, & the temple of God, ad∣ioyning withall, that if there bee any whiche entreth not into this Temple: or if there be any that goe out therof, hee is shut out from the hope of life, and from eternall saluation. For euen as in the time of the vniuersall flood, none coulde bee saued, which were out of Noe his Arke:Genesis. 7.20 23. so with∣out the Churche, there is neither hope, nor faith, nor grace, nor saluation. Whiche thing also, the Apostle Saint Paule did verie well declare and meane, when beeing pur∣posed to excommunicate some, and to caste

them out of the Church,2. Cor. 5.3.5. 1. Tim. 1.20 hee saide, hee muste deliuer them vnto Satan. For as Iesus Christe reigneth in the Churche: so Satan reigneth without the same: and as they which are in the Church, hauing Iesus Christ for their head are in very good state & blessed: so they which are out of the Churche, hauing the Diuell for thejr head, cannot but be wicked and accursed. And therfore it is said, both in Isaiah & in Ioel, That in Sion and in Ierusalem there shalbe sal∣uation.Isaiah. 46.13 Ioel. 2.32. There being meant by Syon and Ieru∣salem the Church of God: as also by the worde heauē there is meant the same thing in the A∣pocalips, when S. Iohn saith, I hearde a great & lowd voice,Reue. 12.10. saying, Nowe is saluation in hea∣uen. On the other side wee reade, that when God declareth, that hee will vtterly roote out some, from the heauenly life, hee denounceth against them and threatneth:Ezech. 13.9 That they shal not be in the councell & assemblie of his peo∣ple, neither written in the role of his seruants. And Dauid very well knew and felt this, when sometimes being in exile, all griefes and aduer∣sities, were vnto him tollerable, and as a man would say easie to beare, excepting this, that hee was depriued of, and wanted the solemne assemblies, wherein men made publike decla∣ration

and protestation, of Gods religion and seruice. Wherefore bewailing his conditi∣on, because hee was excluded from the visible Churche, hee being also shut out from accesse or comming to the Tabernacle, by the crueltie and tyrannie of his enimies, hee cried out earnestly, and said,Psalm. 84.1.2.4.10. O Lord of hostes how ami∣able are thy Tabernacles? My soule longeth yea & fainteth, for the Courts of the Lord, for my heart and my fleshe leape for ioy in the liuing God. And a little after, Blessed are they which dwel in thy house, they will euer praise thee. For a day in thy courtes is better, then a thow∣sand other where, I had rather bee a doore kee∣per in the house of my God, then to dwell in the Tabernacles of the wicked: For thereby he hath declared that the conditiō of those men, which bestowe their life (yea although it were but a day long) in the seruice of God, in the middest of the Church, and among faithful peo¦ple, is farre more blessed then theirs, who lyue (though it were neuer so long) out of Gods house, and in the midst of those, out of whose companie, their religion is banished. To which purpose also belongeth that,Psalm. 27.4. which the same Prophete singeth an other Psalme. One thing haue I desired of the Lorde, that I will

require, euen that I may dwell in the house of Lorde all the dayes of my life, to beholde the beautie of the Lorde, and to visit his Tem∣ple.Psal. 106.45 And againe when hee saith, Remem∣ber, or haue mercie on mee O Lorde, with the fauour and good will of the people, and visite mee with thy saluation. That I may see the good things of thy chosen ones; & reioyce in the ioy of thy people, and glory with thine in∣heritance. And for this very cause and occa∣sion,Heb. 11.24.25. the Apostle to the Hebrewes commen∣deth and praiseth Moses. when he saith: That by faith, hee beeing com to age, refused to bee called the sonne of Pharaoh his daughter: chosing rather to suffer aduersitie with the people of GOD, then to inioy the pleasures of sinne, for a short season.
Wherefore if wee woulde, that GOD shoulde gouerne vs by his holy spirite, (to the ende to make vs inioy and possesse his spiritu∣all & heauenly good things, which he gyueth not but vnto his children alone, the members of Iesus Christe his sonne) and by consequent, if wee woulde be saued and made blessed, wee ought to hold and keepe our selues, firme, sure, and well stayed in the Churche, so that there

bee no force of tyrants, no violence of stormes and tempestes, no persecution of enimies, no promises, no threatnings, nor (to be short) any thing els, which may turne vs away, or cause vs to separate our selues from it.
But in the meane while wee see, what controuersie and disputation, there is at this day amongest men, touching the point or mat∣ter of the Church, that beeing true whiche Lactantius saith: to wit, That euery compa∣ny of Heretikes supposeth,Lact. de verae sapient, ca. 10. that they are true Christians, and their Churche is the Catho∣like Churche: as wee knowe that Parmenia∣nus the Donatist saide: That there was not a Churche, but amongest his sorte and com∣panie: insomuch that sundrie in this age suf∣fer them selues too droppe away and bee de∣ceiued by the feigned name and visardlyke ti∣tle of the Churche, abidyng hardened in their superstitions, and blinded in their errours, ma∣king no accounte,August. ad Catecuin, cap. 20. of Saint Augustine his aduertisemente and counsell, who speaketh thus.
This Catholike Churche is our true mother, yea shee is our faithfull and chaste mother, decked within, with the dignitie and worthi∣nesse of her husbande, and not coloured

or painted without, with lying and falshoode: and afterwardes hee addeth: Let vs looke well to our selues, that the strange and false name of the Churche turne vs not away from this mo∣ther of ours, and that the outwarde shewe, or borowed bare title of the Church doe not de∣ceiue vs.
There are some others, who remaine asto∣nished as it were, and doubtfull, not knowing to which parte to turne, neither on which side to set themselues in order, seeing the Romishe Church armed with great force and authority, mainteined and vpholden by great personages, clothed with diuers ornamēts, outward appar∣rell, and folowed of the greatest number: On the otherside, beholding the reformed Church feeble and weake in outward shewe, made and standing for the most parte, of the smalest and basest according to the worlde, simple in dec∣kinges and ceremonies, and folowed of verie fewe people.
But the doctrine of the trueth (which is our principall light, and chiefe guide) giueth vs a good remedie and aide in this difficultie, she∣wing vs that the true Church, ought to be dis∣cerned frō the false, by her own right and true markes. which are the pure preaching of the

worde, and the true and right vse of the Sacra∣ments, and not the great number of people, nor pompes, nor outwarde ceremonies, inuented and deuised by men themselues.
You (my Lorde) haue sometimes seene what trouble & combats the very visard, bare name, & shining shew, of the Romish Church hath brought, to some mens consciences and spirites, and that not onely amongest the ru∣dest and ignorant sort, but euen in the rancke and order of those, which made profession and tooke vppon them to teache others: yea so far it hath carried them, that by reason there was not in them a full resolutenesse, they knew not of what companie they shoulde bee.
Notwithstanding as touching your selfe after that God had honoured you with his knowe∣ledge, and called you into his Churche, that you mighte bee comprehended within the sheepefolde of Iesus Christe his sonne, ha∣uing almost made open profession of his Go∣spell, and cast away the beastes marke, whatso∣euer shaking and staggering you perceiued in diuers others, you notwithstanding haue al∣wayes continued, through Gods grace, groun∣ding and setling your selfe vpon his assured and inuincible worde. And in deede, by

what force and strength coulde the backe sly∣dinges of some, and the Sophisticall disputati∣ons of other some, astonishe your faith, or beate downe your constancie, so well main∣teined and vpholden by the holy Ghoste? How coulde these assaultes cracke your courage, or change and make colde your zeale, so hotte in the seruice of God? Certainely, this is a great matter that all the worlde hath an eye vpon you, wondring at, and louing, the great and singuler affection which you beare, to the aduauncement of Gods true religion and ser∣uice.
But the question is nowe, to continue in well doing, and to proceed dayly from good to bet∣ter. For this is nothing to beginne wel, except a man perseuere and continue euen to the end. And wee knowe what Iesus Christe saith, to wit, That hee which putteth his hande to the plough, and looketh backe, is not apt to the kingdome of God.Luke. 9.62. 2. Tim. 2.5. And Saint Paule. If any man) saith hee) striue for a maisterie, he is not crowned, except hee striue as hee ought to doe.
There are some which say, that this is enough, for a man to haue some testimonie in his conscience, that hee belongeth to God,

albeit hee make not, any declaration or pro∣fession of his religion. But by the testimonies heere aboue marked, and put downe, it is easie for vs to gather what neede wee haue, to range and bring our selues into the true Churche, that wee may therein liue Christianlie in the seruice of God, seeing that any where els there is neither life nor light. And also what assu∣rance can they haue of their saluation, whiche liue in this world as dogs and swine, folowing the traine and steppes of Sardanapalus, or of Epicurus, to eate and drinke, to laugh and re∣ioyce, to play and to giue themselues to plea∣sure without thinking any whit at all of God, or remembring any religion? Wherefore my Lorde, euen as you haue well and blessedly be∣gunne, hauing had right knowledge to discern, betweene the true and false Churche: so it yet resteth, that you perseuer and continue, yea that yet you proceede and passe some what further, to range and bring into order all your house in the feare of God, that it may be vnto him a holy and chaste Churche: in the middest whereof hee may take pleasure to dwell, that thereby hee may blesse you, and make you to prosper.
You know with what ardencie and zeale, the Prophet Haggai reprooued the Iewes of his time,Haggai. 1.4. lately returned out of Babylon, be∣cause they builded many houses, for them∣selues, and did diligently seele and carue them, but they had no regard to build vp the Lordes Temple.
Hag. 2.3.22.And wee muste note, that the Prophete, di∣recteth not his speeche onely to the people and Priestes, to mooue them to doe their duetie, for the furtheraunce and setting vp of this building, but also vnto Zerubbabel, the gouer¦nour of Iudah,. Which serueth well to de∣clare, that great Lordes and Magistrates, as well as ministers, and the reste of the people, ought withal their might and power to im∣ploy them selues, for the edification and ad∣uauncemente of the Churche of God.
Rom. 13.4 Psalm. 82.1.And thereupon commeth it too passe, that Saint Paule calleth Magistrates, the Ministers and Seruauntes of God, and that in another place, They are called euen Goddes: to wit, not onely in respect of ciuill iudgements, and because they are the tutors, mainteiners and defendours, of publike good thinges and the common wealth, but also because the princi∣pall parte, of their charge and office is, to serue

God in nourishing and mainteining his ser∣uice, aswell outwarde as inwarde, in causing pure doctrine and religion to florishe, and in keeping the state of the Church, safe and sound and whole in euery parte. for whiche effect and cause, they are also named in Isaiah,Isaiah. 49.23 Nur∣cing fathers, and Nurces of the Churche. The Apostle writing vnto Timothie,1. Timo. 2.2. sheweth vs the selfe same matter, when after hee had ex∣horted them to pray for the kinges, and for all those which are placed in authoritie, he ad∣deth as a fitte reason and verie strong for that purpose: That vnder them wee may leade, a quiet and peaceable life, in all godlinesse and honestie: For thereby hee euidently declareth that the Magistrates office is, to haue care that the people which are committed too them, shoulde liue not onely in honestie and in peace one of them with another, but also in all god∣lines, and feare of God.
But if the holy Scripture did not teach vs this, yet wee might in some sorte learne it out of prophane authours, that is to saye, Philosophers and Heathen lawe makers. For among the Philosophers,Aristot. in Politicis. Aristotle in his Po∣litikes hath saide: That godlinesse and reli∣gion are the matters which Magistrates ought

to esteeme most necessary, for the establishe∣ment of common weales.
Plato in Epi. nom.And Plato in his Epinomis saith also: That Princes shoulde not at any time bee persua∣ded, that there is any thinge more profitable and necessarie for mankinde, then that vertue is, which men call pietie and godlinesse, that is to say, religion and the seruice of God.
And as concerning lawe makers, wee knowe, that they hauing to prouide, for necessary things, and to make ordinances and decrees therefore, haue alwaies giuen the first & most honourable place, to pietie, or godlinesse, and the seruice of God. And in deede because they woulde that their Lawes should bee of greater authoritie, and better receiued of their people, as well agreeing with pietie and godly∣nesse, they haue made them beleeue that their Gods were authours thereof.Minos. Minos the Lawemaker of the Cretenses, gaue them to vnderstande, that hee was Iupiters familiar friende, and that hee spake often to him, to the ende the people might beleeue that he re∣ceiued from him the lawes which hee establi∣shed amongest them.Zoroastes. Zoroastes, gyuing lawes to the Bactrians and Persians, saide that hee receaued them from Oromason, whome

they accounted for God and authour of all goodnesse. Trismegistus saide also,Trismegistus that hee had receiued from Mercurius, the lawes which hee gaue to the Egyptians.Carondas. Carondas the lawmaker amongest the Cathaginenses, refer∣red and ascribed his lawes to Saturnus.Lycurgus. Ly∣curgus the lawemaker of the Lacedemonians referred the lawes which hee gaue to Apollo. Solon and Draco the lawemakers among the Athenians,Solon & Dra¦co. Xamolxis, Numa, referred their lawes to Minerua. Xamolxis the lawemaker among the Scithi∣ans, ascribed his lawes to Vesta. Numa too the end hee might get authoritie to his lawes amongest the Romans, feigned, that in the night season, hee had great acquaintance, or lay with the goddesse Aegeria.
Wherefore this remaineth resolute, and standeth sure: that Princes and Magistrates, to the end, that they may in good policie and order gouerne their Lordships, and frame the maners of their subiects, ought alwayes to be∣ginnne with pietie and the seruice of God, as with the most necessary matter, and as with∣out the which there is no regiment or go∣uernment in the world, which can long subsist or stand.
And therefore for this cause specially is it, that

good kinges, princes, and lordes are praised in the scripture, as Dauid, Iosiah, Hezekiah, a∣mongest kinges: Ioseph and Daniell, amongst the rulers and gouernours of prouinces for kings: Moses, Iehoshua, & the iudges amongst those, who had the guiding and leading of people which were free.
Wherefore the flatterers of the courte doe uilanously abuse and mocke the very Lordes and Princes, when they blowe this into their eares, that the cause of religion concerneth them nothing at all, and that they ought to be content with this that they haue some care of politike matters committed vnto them, and charge of their domesticall and housholde af∣faires, and namely of their Horses, Dogges, Haukes, Foules. &c, forwarre, for hunting, hauking, and for their other particuler plea∣sures, without trauelling and taking any more paine, for all that, or any part thereof, which concerneth the good estate and affaires of Gods Church.
Thankes bee to GOD (my Lorde) that you be far otherwise instructed in that which belongeth to the duetie of Christian lords and magistrates, thā that which the courtiers brab∣ble and prate, not to suffer your selfe to bee di∣stracted,

neither to goe astray from that, which the trueth hath once taught you. And I hope, yea, I hope it very stedfastly, that that great God who hath put and placed in you so good seed, will giue it so good an increase, that hee will be thereby for euer glorified, and that that true, and not counterfeite profession of the religion which you haue, wil bring to passe that you shalbe more and more loued & hono¦red of good and honest people, and feared and reuerenced of the wicked and persecutors.
On mine owne parte, that I might bring some aide and succour to the faithfull people, to the end that they might learn by your exam∣ple to put a difference betweene the true and false Church, and by the same meane to resolue to keepe and stay them selues vppon the true Church: and that I might also giue some fami∣liar and plaine order to all, to knowe on which side the true Churche is, I haue as diligently builded, framed and prepared this present dis∣course as it was possible for me, wherein I in∣treate of the Churche, and all the pointes and partes thereof, that I thought meete and pur∣posed to touch, or could thinke vpon. And ther¦in I haue followed the most apt & conuenient order that I coulde choose, without confoun∣ding

the matters, therein declaring all that, which wee ought to behold and beleeue of the Church, touching her estate, forme, guiding, and gouernment. For I shewe therein, what is the true Churche: which are her true and in∣fallible markes, which is the true succession and calling of Pastours therein, what is her spreading abrode, increase and continuance, who is the head thereof: howe shee is holy: whether shee may erre: what is her power and authoritie: amongest whom it is: what be the degrees and orders of her guiders: what is her discipline: whether the ministerie be necessa∣ry in her: And lastly I speake, of her persecu∣tions and afflictions, in which point I am som∣what more large then in the rest, because I knewe that the present need and occasion re∣quired it, to the ende I might confirme and strengthē the faithful peoples cōsciences at this time, in which it seemeth that the Diuell, the enimie of Gods glorie and our saluation, is vn∣chayned and vntyed, and that all the worlde is kindled with rage and set on fire with furie, and conspired with him furiously to rush vpon the poore Churche, setting out and making a shewe against it, of all that that crueltie can de∣uise. Weerefore I shewe what is the state

and condition of the Church on earth, & that shee hath alwaies had, such a vertue of patience and so great cōstancie and courage in the mid∣dest of the crosse that tyrants haue rather left of to persecute her, then that shee hath failed and fallen away by their torments: insomuch that she hath abode inuincible and vnconque∣red, against the vehemencie and violence, of so many horrible cōbats, as she was to sustain & indure, and out of all them hath brought a fa∣mous victorie, and moste glorious crowne. In summe: that the sonne of God hath alwaies founde place and passage in the middest of the worlde, notwithstanding the fires, swordes, tormentes, furies, outcries, and horrible scatte∣rings abrode which were made against him.
As touching the fruite and profite whiche may come of this little labor, I dare not affirme any thing thereof, except it bee in respect of you my Lorde, For I doubt not but you take as muche pleasure to heare mee discourse in writing vpon this matter of the church, as you commonly doe, when you heare mee speake, either particulerly to your selfe, or publikelie in the execution of my charge and office. And yet if you regarde that which is mine, without doubt the fruite wil bee none: but if you con∣sider

the argument, and the large laying out of the matters conteined in this present treatie, I assure my selfe, that it will not bee altogether vnprofitable, and that they which shall reade the same, will not repent themselues thereof.
Furthermore, I staying my selfe (my Lord) vpon your accustomed goodnesse, through which you disdaine not, or dislike any thing, which commeth from your seruants, offer and dedicate vnto you this little booke, most hum∣bly beseeching you to accept it, and to take it well that it commeth out into light, vn∣der the inscription of your name, and to re∣ceiue it with such gentlenesse and curtesie, as you haue been accustomed to loue vertue, and fauour Christian religion, and those that make profession thereof. For I hope that (if you re∣ceiue and take it well, that your name shal pro∣cure it more grace and liking, and shall get it more authoritie, and purchase it more fauour, amongest all, because that thinges dedicated to great personages, are better receiued of the lo∣wer sort, although the thinges of them selues are oftentimes very base and of small account and value. And also as touching my selfe, I was gladly minded, to declare and shewe by this slender meane, a testimonie of the obedi∣ence

which I owe you, and for the singuler & earnest desire which I haue, to do you the most humble and acceptable seruice that I can in the Lorde: whom I beseech with all my hearte, to maintein you (my Lord) & my Lady the Coū∣tesse your sister, in his most holy & most wor∣thy keeping, and to preserue you both in a bles∣sed and long life, augmenting and increasing in you dayly more and more, the giftes and gra∣ces of his holy spirite, wherewith hee hath so plentifully decked, and liberally inriched you.
From Turenne this xxv. of March, 1577.

