



REVEREND SIR,
AS J was in the midst of this Preaching-businesse, it fortu∣ned that a Letter of yours long since written vnto mee, came to my hands, wherein I perceiued your desire of see∣ing somewhat on this ensuing Text. And I sor∣rowed much that it came no sooner, that I might haue satisfied your desire, and shewed my duty to him to whom I owe my selfe in so great a measure as I cannot expresse: for when mine owne father
forsooke me, who tooke me in? When he receiued me againe to fauour, who reconciled vs? When he would haue bound me to a Trade; who dis∣swaded him? When he would not heare of my go∣ing to the Vniuersitie; who preuailed with him but you? so that to speake the truth,
Tu Herus, Tu Patronus, Tu Pater esses. Yea, without Excesse of speech, or Suspition of flattery,Plutarch. de vita Alex. I may truely say of you as Alexander did of Aristotle; Hic mihi Principium vi∣uendi dedit, Iste autem Bene viuendi ratio∣nem tradidit. For who in the Countrey gaue me either Countenance or Maintenauce in my course of Schollership, but you? I speake Truely, I blesse God Humbly, I thanke you Heartily, It was You, and none but You that did it. But Quid re∣tribuam? Like for Like? I cannot, for your Fa∣uours are beyond my Deserts, and your Deserts are aboue the reach of my Requitall. Siluer and Gold haue I none, but such as I haue, giue I vnto you; to wit, Duty for Loue; Loue and Respect for your louing me when I was nei∣ther Loued nor Respected. In token of which I send these vnpolished papers, but how? not to Direct you, but that you should Correct them.
My Schoole-exercises haue beene oft cor∣rected
by you, and now I refuse not that my Church-seruices be censured with your Delea∣tur For I am of that Fathers minde, which in all his workes and writings did not onely desire Pi∣um Lectorem,Au. proae. ni∣um. Lib. 3. de Trinitae. fed etiam Liberum Correcto∣rem. I therefore choose that I might be Blamed of you by your friendly smitings, rather then Balmed of Carping Momus, and Scourging Zoilus, with their Precious (or rather Pernici∣ous) Balmes, which euer yet were found of the Ingenious, nay Religious, to be rather Hurt∣full then Helpefull to their Heads and Hearts. And further I craue that if you meete with any, Qui vel non Intelligendo Reprehendunt,Aug. contra Faustam. lib. 22. cap. 34. vel Reprehendendo non intelligunt, that you would be as silent with such as may be: say little to them, and lesse of them, lest in your prayers, you will beg with me, That they might be either of a more sound Iudgement, or sober and San∣ctified Affection.
I confesse it to be a shrew'd aduenture to traf∣fique with one poore talent in Publique, whilest I behold richer graces buried in Silence. But iudging it better to Husband a Little to the Common good, rather then to hoard vp Much in Sullen Niggardize, I send it into the world. It
is but a yong plant, yet yong plants thriue, if the Sunne warme them with it's beames. Cast then your eye of acceptance on these weake beginnings and you shall hearten mee in my proceedings. Which hoping, I commend againe to your kind ac∣ceptance, and your selfe with it, to the blessing of our gracious God, and doe rest with all due reue∣rence,
From my Study at Saint Michaels in Crooked Lane, Lond. 25. of Nou. 1620.

