


MY Lorde,Lactan. lib. 4 de vera. sapi∣ent. cap. 30. Lactantius hath very properly and fitly cal∣led the Church, the foun∣taine of trueth, the house and dwelling place of faith, and the Temple of God, adioyning withall, that if there bee any whiche entreth not into this Temple: or if there bee any that goe out thereof, hee is shut out from the hope of life, and from eternall saluation. For euen as in the time of the vniuersall flood, none could bee saued, whiche were out of Noe his Arke:Gene. 7.20.23. so without the Churche, there is neither hope, nor faith, nor grace, nor saluation. Whiche thing also, the Apostle Saint Paul did verie well declare and meane, when beeing pur∣posed to excommunicate some, and to caste
 them out of the Churche,2. Cor. 5, 3.5. 1. Tim. 1.20 hee saide, hee muste deliuer them vnto Satan. For as Iesus Christ reigneth in the Churche: so Satan reigneth without the same: and as they whiche are in the Church, hauing Iesus Christe for their head are in very good state & blessed: so they which are out of the Churche, hauing the Diuell for their head, cannot but be wicked and accursed. And therfore it is said, both in Isaiah & in Ioel, That in Sion and in Ierusalem there shalbe sal∣uation.Isaia 46.13. Ioel. 2.32. There being meant by Syon and Ieru∣salem the Church of God: as also by the worde heauen there is meant the same thing in the Apocalips, when S. Iohn saith, I hearde a great and lowde voice,Reue. 12.10. saying, Nowe is saluation in heauen. On the other side wee reade, that when God declareth, that hee will vtterly roote out some, from the heauenly life, hee denounceth against them and threateneth:Ezech. 13.9. That they shall not be in the counsell & assemblie of his peo∣ple, neither written in the role of his seruantes. And Dauid very well knewe and felt this, when sometimes being in exile, all griefes and aduer∣sities, were vnto him tollerable, and as a man woulde say easie to beate, excepting this, that hee was depriued of, and wanted the solemne assemblies, wherein men made publike declara∣tion
 and protestation, of Gods religion and seruice. Wherefore be wailing his conditi∣on, because hee was excluded from the visible Churche, hee beeing also shut out from accesse or comming to the Tabernacle, by the crueltie and tyrannie of his enemies, hee cryed out earnestly and saide, O Lord of hostes how ami∣able are thy Tabernacles?Psalm. 84.1.2.4.10. My soule longeth yea & fainteth, for the courtes of the Lorde, for my hearte and my fleshe leape for ioy in the liuing God. And a little after, Blessed are they which dwell in thy house, they will euer prayse thee. For a day in thy courtes is better then a thou∣sand other wheis, I had rather bee a doore kee∣per in the house of my God, then to dwell in the Tabernacles of the wicked: For thereby hee hath declared that the condition of those men, which bestowe their life (yea although it were but a day long) in the seruice of God, in the middest of the Church, & among faithfull peo∣ple, is farre more blessed then theirs, who liue (though it were neuer so long) out of Gods house, and in the midst of those, out of whose companie, their religion is banished. To which purpose also belongeth that, which the same Prophete singeth in an other Psalme.Psalm. 27.4. One thing haue I desired of the Lorde, that I will
 require, euen that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the dayes of my life, to behold the beautie of the Lorde, and to visit his Temple. And againe when hee saith,Psal. 106.45 Remember, or haue mercie on mee O Lorde, with the fauour and good will of the people, and visite mee with thy saluation: That I may set the good thinges of thy chosen ones, and reioyce in the ioy of thy people, and glory with thine inheritaunce. And for this verie cause and occasion, the A∣postle to the Hebrwes commendeth & praiseth Moses,Heb. 11.24.25. when hee saith: That by faith, hee beeing come to age, refused to bee called the sonne of Pharaoh his daughter: chosing ra∣ther to suffer aduersitie with the people of God, then to inioy the pleasures of sinne, for a short season.
Wherefore if wee woulde, that GOD shoulde gouerne vs by his holy spirite, (to the ende to make vs inioy and possesse his spirituall and heauenly good thinges, whiche hee giueth not but vnto his children alone, the members of Iesus Christ his sonne) and by consequent, if wee woulde bee saued and made blessed, wee ought to hold and keepe our selues, firme, sure, and well staied in the Churche, so that there
 bee no force of tyrants, no violence of stormes and tempestes, no persecution of enemies, no promises no threatnings, nor (to bee short) any thing els, which may turne vs away, or cause vs to separate our selues from it.
But in the meane while wee see, what controuersie and disputation, there is at this day amongest men, touching the point or mat∣ter of the Churche, that beeing true whiche Lactantius saith: to wit, That euery companie of Heretikes supposeth, that they are true Christians,Lact. de vera sapien. ca. 10 and their Church is the Catholike Church: as wee knowe that Parmenianus the Donatist said: That there was not a church, but amongst his sort and companie: insomuch that sundrie of this age suffer them selues to drop away and be deceiued by the feigned name and visardlike title of the Church, abiding har∣dened in their superstitions, and blinded in errours, making no account,August. ad Catecum. cap. 20. of Saint Augustine his aduertisement and counsell, who speaketh thus.
This Catholike Church is our true mother, yea shee is our faithfull and chaste mother, decked within, with the dignitie and worthi∣nesse of her husbande, and not coloured
 or painted without, with lying and falshoode: and afterwardes hee addeth: Let vs looke well to our selues, that the strange and false name of the Churche turne vs not away from this mo∣ther of ours, and that the outwarde shewe, or borowed bare title of the Churche doe not de∣ceiue vs.
There are some others, who remaine asto∣nished as it were, and doubtfull, not knowing to which parte to turne, neither on which side to set themselues in order. Seeing the Romishe Church armed with great force and authoritie, mainteined and vpholden by great personages, cloathed with diuers ornaments, outward ap∣parrell, and followed of the greatest number: On the other side, beholding the reformed Church feeble and weake in outwarde shewe, made and standing for the most part, of the sma∣lest and basest according to the world, simple in deckings and ceremonies, and followed of very fewe people.
But the doctrine of the trueth (which is our principall light, and chiefe guide) giueth vs a good remedie and aide in this difficultie, she∣wing vs that the true Churche, ought to bee discerned from the false, by her owne right and true marks, which are the pure preaching of the
 worde, and the true and right vse of the sacra∣ments, and not the great number of people, nor pompes, not outward ceremonies, inuented & deuised by men themselues.
You (my Lorde) haue sometimes seene what trouble and combates the very visarde, bare name, and shining shewe, of the Romishe church hath brought, to som mens consciences and spirites, and that not only amongest the rudest and ignorant sort but euen in the rancke and order of those, which made profession and tooke vpon them to teach others: yea so farre it hath carried them, that by reason there was nor in them a full resolutenesse, they knew not of what companie they shoulde bee.
Notwithstanding as touching your selfe after that God had honoured you with his know∣ledge; and called you into his Churche, that you mighte bee comprehended within the sheepefolde of Iesus Christes his sonne, ha∣uing almost made open profession of his Go∣spell; and cast away the beastes marke, whatso∣euer shaking and staggering you perceiued in diuers others, you notwithstanding haue al∣wayes continued, through Gods grace, groun∣ding and setling your selfe vpon his assured and inuincible worde. And in deede, by
 what force and strength coulde the backe fly∣dinges of some, & the Sophisticall disputations of other some, astonishe your faith, or beate downe your constancie, so well mainteined and vpholden by the holy Ghoste? How could these assaultes cracke your courage, or change and make colde your zeale, so hotte in the seruice of God? Certainely, this is a great matter that all the worlde hath an eye vpon you, wondering at, and louing, the great and singular affection which you beare, to the aduancement of Gods true religion and seruice.
But the question is nowe, to continue in well doing and to proceede dayly from good to bet∣ter. For this is nothing to beginne well, except a man perseuere and continue euen to the end. And wee knowe what Iesus Christe saith, to wit, That hee which putteth his hande to the plough, and looketh backe, is not apte to the kingdome of God.Luke. 9.62. 2. Tim. 2.5. And Saint Paule. If any man (saith hee) striue for a mastrie, hee is not crowned, except hee striue as hee ought to doe.
There are some whiche say, that this is enough, for a man to haue some testimonie in his conscience, that hee belongeth to God,
 albeit hee make not, any declaration or pro∣fession of his religion. But by the testimonies heere aboue marked, and put downe, it is easie for vs to gather what neede wee haue, to range and bring our selues into the true Churche, that wee may therein liue Christianlie in the seruice of God, seeing that any where els there is neither life nor light. And also what assu∣rance can they haue of their saluation, which liue in this worlde as dogs and swine, following the traine and steppes of Sardanapalus, or of Epicurus, to eate and drinke, to laugh and re∣ioyce, to play and to giue themselues to plea∣sure without thinking any whit at all of God, or remembring any religion? Wherefore my Lorde, euen as you haue well and blessedly be∣gunne, hauing had right knowledge to discern, betweene the true and false Churche: so it yet resteth, that you perseuere and continue yea that yet you proceede and passe some∣what further, to range and bring into order all your house in the feare of God, that it may be vnto him a holy and chaste Churche: in the middest whereof hee may take pleasure to dwell, that thereby hee may blesse you, and make you to prosper.

You knowe with what ardencie and zeale, the Prophete Haggai reproued the Iewes of his time,Haggai. 1.4 lately returned out of Babylon, be∣cause they builded many houses, for them∣selues, and did diligently feele and carue them, but they had no regarde to builde vp the Lords Temple.
Hag. 2.3.22And wee must note, that the Prophet directeth not his speech only to the people and Priestes, to moue them to doe their duetie, for the fur∣therance and setting vp of this building, but also vnto Zerubbabel, the gouernour of Iudah. Which serueth well to declare, that great lords and Magistrates, as well as ministers, and the rest of the people, ought with all their mighte and power to imploy themselues, for the edifi∣cation and aduancement of the Churche of God.
Rom. 13.4. Psalm. 82.1.And thereuppon commeth it to passe, that Sainte Paule calleth Magistrates, the Ministers and seruants of God, and that in another place, They are called euen Gods: to wit, not only in respect of ciuill iudgements, and because they are the tutors, mainteiners and defenders, of publike good things and common wealth, but also because the principall parte, of their charge and office is, to serue God in nourishing and
 mainteining his seruice, as well outward as in∣ward, in causing pure doctrine and religion to florishe and in keeping the state of the Church, safe and sound and whole in euery parte. For whiche effect and cause, they are also named in Isaiah, Nurcing fathers,Isaia. 49.23. 1. Tim. 2.24 and Nurces of the Church. The Apostle writing vnto Timothie, sheweth vs the selfe same matter, when after he had exhorted them to pray for the kinges, and for all those which are placed in authoritie, hee addeth as a fitte reason and very strong for that purpose: That vnder them wee may leade, a quiet and peaceable life, in all godlinesse and honestie: For thereby hee euidently declareth that the Magistrates office is, to haue care that the people whiche are committed to them, shoulde liue not onely in honestie and in peace one of thē with another, but also in all godlines, and feare of God.
But if the holy scripture did not teache vs this, yet wee might in some sort learne it out of prophane authours, that is to say, Philosophers and Heathen lawemakers. For among the Phi∣losophers, Aristotle in his Politikes hath saide:Aristot. in Politicis. That Godlinesse and religion are the matters whiche Magistrates ought to esteeme moste
 necessarie, for the establishment of common weales.
Plato in Epi∣nom.And Plato in his Epinomis saith also: That Princes shoulde not at any time bee persuaded, that there is any thing more profitable and ne∣cessarie for mankinde, then that vertue is, which men call pietie and godlinesse, that is to say, re∣ligion, and the seruice of God.
And as concerning lawemakers, wee knowe, that they hauing to prouide for necessarie thinges, and to make ordinances and decrees therefore, haue alwayes giuen the first and most honourable place, to pietie, or godlines, and the seruice of GOD. And indeede be∣cause they woulde that their lawes shoulde be of greater authoritie, and better receiued of their people, as well agreeing with pietie and godlinesse,Minos. they haue made them beleeue that their Gods were authours thereof. Minos the Lawemaker of the Cretenses, gaue them to vnderstande, that hee was Iupiters familiar friende, and that hee spake often to him, to the ende the people might beleeue that hee receiued from him the lawes which hee establi∣shed amongest them.Zoroastes. Zoroastes, giuing lawes to the Bactrians and Persians, said that hee receiued them from Oromason, whome
 they accounted for God & authour of al good∣nesse. Trismegistus saide also,Trismegistus that hee had receiued from Mercurius, the lawes whiche he gaue to the Egyptians.Carondas. Carondas the lawe∣maker amongest the Carthaginenses, referred and ascribed his lawes to Saturnus.Licurgus. Licurgus the lawemaker of the Lacedemonians referred the lawes which hee gaue to Apollo.Solō. & Dra∣co. Solon and Draco the lawemakers among the Atheni∣ans, referred their lawes to Minerua.Xamolxis. Numa. Xamolxis the lawemaker among the Scithians, ascribed his lawes to Vesta. Numa to the ende he might get authoritie to his lawes amongest the Ro∣mans, feigned that in the night season, hee had great acquaintance, or lay with the goodnesse Aegeria.
Wherefore this remaineth resolute, and standeth sure: that Princes and Magistrates, to the end, that they may in good policie and order gouerne their Lordships, and frame the maners of their subiectes, ought alwayes to be∣ginne with pietie and the seruice of God, as with the most necessarie matter, and as with∣out the which there is no regiment or gouern∣ment in the worlde, which can long subsist or stand.
And therefore for this cause specially is it, that
 good kinges, princes, and lords are praised in the Scripture, as Dauid, Iosiah, Hezekiah, amongest kinges: Ioseph and Daniell, among the rulers and gouernours of prouinces for kings: Moses, Iehoshua, and the Iudges amongst those, who had the guiding and leading of people whiche were free.
Wherefore the flatterers of the courte doe villanously abuse and mocke the very Lordes and Princes, when they blow this into their eares, that the cause of religion concerneth them nothing at all, and that they ought to bee content with this, that they haue some care of politike matters committed vnto them, and charge of their domesticall and housholde af∣faires, and namely of their Horses, Dogges, Haukes, Foules, &c. For warre, for hunting, hauking, and for their other particular plea∣sures, without trauelling and taking any more paine, for all that, or any part thereof, whiche concerneth the good estate & affaires of Gods Church.
Thankes bee to God (my Lorde) that you bee farre otherwise instructed in that which be∣longeth to the duetie of Christian lordes and magistrates, than that which the courtiers brab¦ble and prate, not to suffer your selfe to bee di∣stracted,
 neither to goe astray from that, which the truth hath once taught you. And I hope, yea, I hope it very stedfastly, that that great god who hath put and placed in you so good seede, will giue it so good an increase, that he will be thereby for euer glorified, and that that true, & not counterfet profession of the religion which you haue will bring to passe that you shall bee more and more loued and honored of good & honest people, and feared & reuerenced of the wicked and persecutors.
On mine owne parte, that I might bring some aide and succour to the faithfull people, to the end that they might learne by your exam∣ple to put a difference betweene the true and false Church, & by the same meane to resolue, to keepe and stay them selues vppon the true Church: and that I might also giue some fami∣liar and plaine order to all, to knowe on which side the true Churche is, I haue as diligentlye builded, framed and prepared this present dis∣course as it was possible for mee, wherein I in∣treate of the Churche, and all the points and partes thereof, that I thought meete and pur∣posed to touch, or could think vpon. And ther∣in I haue followed the most apt and cōuenient order that I coulde choose, without confoun∣ding
 the matters, therin declaring al that, which wee ought to behold and beleeue of the church, touching her estate, forme, guiding, & gouern∣ment. For I shewe therein, what is the true Church: whiche are her true and infallible markes, which is the true succession & calling of Pastors therin, what is her spreading abrode, increase of continuance, who is the head there∣of: howe shee is holy: whether she may erre: what is her power and authoritie: amongest whom it is: what be the degrees and orders of her guiders: what is her discipline: whether the Ministerie bee necessarie in her: And lastly I speake, of her persecutions and afflictions, in which point I am somewhat more large then in the rest, because I knewe that the present neede and occasion required it, to the end I might con¦firme and strengthen the faithfull peoples con∣sciences at this time, in which it seemeth that the Diuell, the enemie of Gods glorie and our saluation, is vnchained and vntyed, and that all the worlde is kindeled with rage and set on fire with furie, and conspired with him furiously to rushe vpon the poore Church, setting out and making a shewe against it, of all that, that cruel∣tie can deuise. Wherefore I shewe what is the state and condition of the Church on earth, &
 that shee hath alwaies had such a vertue of pa∣tience and so great constancie and courage in the middest of the crosse that tyrants haue ra∣ther left to persecute her, then that shee hath failed and fallen away by their torments: inso∣much that shee hath abode inuincible and vn∣conquered against the vehemencie & violence, of so many horrible combates, as shee was to sustaine and indure, and out of all them hath brought a famous victorie, and most glorious crowne. In summe: that the sonne of God hath alwaies founde place and passage in the middest of the worlde, notwithstanding the fires, swordes, torments, furies, outcries, and horrible scatteringes abrode which were made against him.
As touching the fruite and profit which may come of this little labour, I dare not affirme any thing thereof, except it be in respect of you my Lorde, For I doubt not but you take as muche pleasure to heare mee discourse in writing vpon this matter of the church, as you commonly do, when you heare mee speake, either particularly to your selfe, or publikely in the execution of my charge and office. And yet if you regarde that which is mine, without doubt the fruite will be none: but if you consider the argument,
 and the large laying out of the matters contei∣ned in this present treatie, I assure my selfe, that it will not bee altogether vnprofitable, and that they which shall reade the same, will not repent themselues thereof.
Furthermore, I staying my selfe (my Lorde) vpon your accustomed goodnes, through which you disdaine not, or dislike any thing, which commeth from your seruants, offer and dedicate vnto you this litle booke, most humblie besee∣ching you to accept it, and to take it well that it commeth out into light, vnder the inscrip∣tion of your name, and to receiue it with such gentlenesse and curtesie, as you haue been accu∣stomed to loue vertue, and fauour Christian re∣ligion, and those that make profession thereof. For I hope that (if you receiue and take it well, that your name shall procure it more grace and liking, and shall get it more authoritie, and pur∣chase it more fauour, amongst all, because that thinges dedicated to great personages, are bet∣ter receiued of the lower sort, although the things of themselues are oftentimes very base and of small account and value. And also as touching my selfe, I was gladly minded, to de∣clare and shewe by this slender meane, a testi∣monie of the obedience which I owe you, and
 for ye singuler & earnest desire which I haue, to doe you the most humble & acceptable seruice that I can in the Lorde: whom I beseeche with all my heart, to maintaine you (my Lorde) and my Ladie the Countesse your sister, in his most holy and most worthie keeping, and to preserue you both in a blessed and long life, augmenting and increasing in you dayly more and more, the giftes and graces of his holy spirite, wherewith hee hath so plentifully decked, & liberally inri∣ched you.
From Turenne this xxv, of March, 1577.

