


AS THE first Styrpe whereof we did
spring (Right Honorable) was be∣witched
by that wily & wicked ser∣pent:
Euen so the same wicked ser∣pent
hath neuer since ceased, to en∣chaunt
and bewitch hir posteritie,
knowing them to be hir deare dar∣lings,
and sweete mouthed like their
mother. For who is it that feedeth
not where fancie doth fauour? And
what fauoureth fancie, but sweete
pleasaunt poyson? That flattering
feend, was the first founder of our
fond affection, and entised EVE did
spinne the threede of our thraldom:
but ADAM (alas) did weaue vp this
wofull web. And hath not his pieuish posteritie delited euer since to prowle
for their pleasure, though it worke their owne woe: yea beside wicked praise
and priuate profit to the hurt of other. And to make it more manifest, what
thing hath bene done from the beginning, or is now dailie practised (ex∣cept
of a few) but only for selfe pleasure, wicked praise, or priuat profit? Ex∣amples
hereof are as rare to be founde, as to espie one winke that sleepeth,
nothing almost hath else bene esteemed, & what else at this time of vs is em∣braced?
But if we will not wilfullie winke, but willinglie see, the publike
paine such pleasures haue preferred, the perilous practises such praise hath
permitted, & the pitifull penurie such profit hath procured: that it will make
vs loath that so many hath loued, cause vs detest that so many haue desired,
& feare vs to fauor that thousands haue followed. LVCIFER the ringleader
of this daunce practising for his pleasure to be higher than God did appoint
him, brought him selfe and many thousands of Angells to endles sorrowes:

EVES pleasure in the forbodden apple, wrought the greatest displeasure to
man that could be: DAVIDS pleasure in the beautie of a woman cost V∣RIAS
his life: the pleasure of HOLOFERNES in IVDITH, was the losse
of his head, and the spoile of his armie: many a giltlesse child was murthe∣red
for the pleasure of HEROD: the pleasure that ACHAE had in a litle
vineyard, caused NABOTH be killed: NEROES vile pleasure, made his
mother be murthered, his sister deslowred, and Rome to be burned. Wicked
praise likewise hath bin preferred to the great grief of both godly & other:
for did not PILATE to be praised of the people, saue a murtherer and con∣demne
innocēt Christ? did not HEROD to be praised for the keeping of his
wicked promise, cause IOHN BAPTISTS head to be cut of? Did not
CAMEISES to be praised in his drunkennes▪ shoote his good Counsellors
child, through the hart with an arrow? Besides a great number of mischiefs
wrought only for wicked praise. And hath not priuat profit also, to the hurt
of many bin esteemed, and that of such that ought chiefly to haue abhorred
it? Yes I trow: for BAALAM the Prophet of God, through greedy gaine, did
curse the people of God: IVDAS one of CHRISTS Apostles, for priuat
profit did betray CHRIST his maister: what made ALEXANDER go a∣bout
to conquer the whole earth, but a priuat cōmoditie and a regall rule to
himself? What cities haue bin betraied? what coūtries cōsumed? what peo∣ple
spoyled and murthered, what pouerty vnhoused, what right peruerted,
what townes decaied, how many periured, what widowes wronged, what fa∣therlesse
defrauded, and what poore oppressed? and al for priuat profit? These
are the blossoms that such braūches do beare, these are the floods that flowe
frō such fountaines, and these are the grapes that grow on such grafts. But if
this selfe pleasure (which hurteth many & doth good to none) were chaūged
into godly pleasure which helpeth other though it hinder it selfe: and if wic∣ked
praise, which maketh truth be oft troubled, and much wrōg to be win∣ked
at, were altered into honest and godly report, which iudgeth vprightly,
and fauoreth no falshood: and if priuat profit, which vndoeth many to make
a few riche, were turned into common commoditie, that enricheth many
and impouerisheth none: then many displeasured should liue in quiet, ma∣ny
that want should then haue enough, and thousandes that are wronged
should then haue their right. Which godly chaunge (most meete for Chri∣stians)
is smally preferred, not much procured and a great deale lesse practi∣sed.
Yet the Ethnikes (not knowing the gaine of godly life as we do) so much
did preferre the pleasures of other before their owne, honest praise aboue
other riches, and publike welth before their owne profit: that it is wonder∣full
to heare, straunge to be tolde, and hard to be credited. CVRTIVS to
pleasure the Romaines, in ceasing the infectious fume, left all his owne plea∣sures,
lept into a stinking pit, and so died him selfe: MVTIVS SCEVOLA
to profit his owne Citie, did burne his arme stoutly with a couragious hart:
ZOPIRVS to come in credit with the Babylonians his enemies, did cut off
his owne nose, eares, and lippes, whereby being made Captaine of Baby∣lon,
did after deliuer the same to DARIVS his Lord & maister: PHILIP

king of Macedon, father to ALEXANDER the great, esteeming equity &
honest praise before his owne priuate profit, gaue to a certaine man, so much
money out of his coffers, as by wrong vndaduised iudgement he gaue from
the same: AGESILAVS preferring the profit of his subiects (the Lacede∣monians)
before his owne gaine, did giue all king AGIS treasure among
the poorest of them.
Now seing these Ethnickes and many mo, with the losse of their liues, the
dismembring of themselues, and with their liberall gifts, haue shewed them∣selues
by their deedes, rather Christians than Ethnickes, making pleasure,
praise, and profite, three vertues: then these Christians, that hurt and displease
other, to pleasure and profite themselues, do shewe by their deedes, that they
are rather Ethnickes than Christians, turning pleasure, praise, and profite, into
three vices, whereof there are no small number. But that pleasure, prayse, and
profite, were vsed as they ought (not as they are) I haue with some paines and
studie facioned and framed, not onely of late a worke for that purpose, called
To good to be true, but also now newly compiled and finished a Seconde parte
thereof. Wherby it may appeare if my will were to my wishe, the same three
frequented vices, should be changed into three vnaccustomed vertues. But
seing I can not performe it, I would faine procure it: and therefore for that
I can not profite my countrie with my purse, as I wishe: yet I meane to plea∣sure
the same with my penne, as I may. Which Booke, as it is not to be num∣bred
among common giftes, so I do not giue it as common giftes are giuen.
For common giuers appoint the receyuers of their giftes, before their giftes
be bought: but I haue made my gifte before I appointed the receyuer. And
whereas they chuse a meete gifte for their receyuer: I haue chosen a meete
receauer for my gifte. And that is your Honour: allured thereto through the
common fame of your great wisedome, affabilitie and clemencie. Prote∣sting
vnto you: that I haue dedicated it to your Honour, not to rewarde me,
but to know me: and not to do for me, but to thinke well of me. And though
this gifte is to simple for you to receyue: yet it is the best that I am now able
to giue. Trusting you will not respect the workeman but the worke, not
the pēning but the meaning, and not the defect but the effect. The Methode
and meaning whereof, is plainely described in the Epistle of the first parte:
whiche if you haue not seene already, then I beseech you at leasure to peruse
the same. And if your Honor shall take in good parte this my simple gifte:
I shall thinke my selfe better recompenst, than if I had a bountifull
rewarde of many other. Thus ceassing any further to trouble
your Honour: I wishe you here a prosperous long life,
and an endlesse life in the kingdome
of Heauen.

