



Vlde, ne mittas munera superuacua, vt Faemi∣nae arma: rustico li∣bros: et studiis dedi∣, reta: sayth that Gentile Sa∣mon Seneca in his first Booke  Beneficiis. The wittiest Em∣ematists will that in presenta∣on of gyftes wee should fitte e humour of the partie, to home they are presented, as  send Blacke to mourners, hite to religious people, Greene  youth, and them that lyue  hope, Yellow to the couetous

and iealous, Taunie, to the man re∣fus'd, Red to Martiall Captaines Blew to Marriners, Uiolet to Pro phets & Diuiners, Medley, Gray & Russet to the poore & meaner sort▪
And little Boies, whom shamfastnes did gra
The Romaines deck'd in Scarlet like their fac
Giue Palinure his Compasse & his Carde, let Mars haue armes giue Pan the Pipe, and Corido the plough. Quod medicorum est promitunt medici, tractant fabrilia fabri. The peoples presents vn to Pallas were Bookes and Laun∣ces. Such as coueted to deck the Temple of Delphos, adorne the shryne eyther with greene bayes, or melodious instruments▪ because Apollo did as well patro∣nize Musicke as Poetry.
To whome then should I ra∣ther dedicate this learned and re∣ligious booke of Deuotion, writt

by that rare and matchlesse Di∣ine F: Ludouicus Granatensis, en to one deuout in religion, d learned in knowledge? Rare call him; because as Iacob (that ue patterne of simplicity and paynefull labour) who liued more then 2000 yeares after the eation of the world, was the rst that made a vowe vnto e Lord, vowing was then so re: so this Author almoste 000. yeeres after the re-creation f the world, is the first that Nec habuit ante eum, quem imi∣taretur, nec post eum multi erunt, qui eum imitari ve∣lint. rit a particuler Tractate of euotion. Matchlesse I call im, for as Iacob was the first at vowed, so wee dooe not ad in the Scriptures aboue o (so seldome were vowes ade) that followed him in owing; Iephte & Anna: so I do ot thinke, that we in this dearth f Deuotion, and famine of De∣uout

men, shall haue many imi∣taters of him in the lyke Argu∣ment. But that it may be say of him for his Deuotion, as i was sayde of Demosthenes fo his eloquence, cui adhuc pa nemo fuit, sed ne futurum quide aliquando quenquam arbitror.
Heauenly and exact I also terme this worke, both for the matter, and the manner of han∣dling it. The matter teaching how a soule may soare vp to heauen, & there be vnited to God, and for e∣uer liue in his presence, where is fulnesse of ioy, and plentye for euermore: And the man∣ner so exactly and methodical∣ly discoursing and discouering the whole matter, that vnlesse a man will bee wilfully negli∣gent and idle, and sitte as a stone vpon a stone, he canno but enter into the Theater o

Gods house, and there medi∣te on the wonders of the Lord  his life long.
Iosua the Captaine of the ordes hoast had foure excel∣lnt qualities in him: Religion, Wsedome, Valour and Industry. Which qualities in a Captayne, Uatablus, a man very learned  the antiquities of the He∣wes, doh decypher by foure eroglyphickes. The Hebrewes re brought (saith he) into Ca∣an vnder foure standards or en∣es, vnder euery standard were ee battalians, according to the elue tribes. The first standard s Rubens he carried in his en∣e the picture of an Angell, ich signified Wisedome. Iuda ied in his ensigne a Lyon, which ified Valour and Fortitude. E∣aim carried a Bull, signifying ustry. And Dan carried an Ea∣gle

signifying Religion, because th Eagle mounteth vp to heauen,  flyeth looking against the Sunn So this our spirituall Captain conducting men to the Celesti Canaan, teacheth, that they th will deuote themselues vnto Go and become deuout mē, must al haue these foure qualities in th They must haue Religion, becau they must consecrate their hea vnto God. And Wisedome, becau they must be as wise as Serpentes keep their chiefest part from h that is, their heart from vaine c gitations, & inordinate affectio They must haue Valour and F titude to proceede and perseue in theyr Deuotion, and to wit stand impediments and tempt tions. And it is also necessaryly r quired, that they be Industrio because without paines Deuoti is not attained, for among all t

ours of the religious (as Aga∣n was wont to say) there is no∣ng more difficult then Deuo∣.
To you I say (the kinde enter∣er of vertue, the mirrour of a od minde) doe I dedicate this oke, vnto whome I attribute  acknowledgements, of aboun∣t Schollership in the liberall ences, courteous well gouern∣ behauiour in Gentleman like yage, and rype experienst gement in the Lawes of our d. It very well appeareth, that  counsel of that witty Romane,  taken place in you, who thus nselled the Romane youth.
e bonas artes, moneo, Romana inuentus,
antum trepidos, vt tueare reos.
And yet what is more com∣dable among men, or more eptable with God, then that ry man should seeke anothers

wealth? In this declyning a tottering state of the world  thinks I see againe reuiu'd in yo the integrity of Papinianus, t sinceritie of , and the v right & iust dealing of Phocio Aristides. Of you I may say, Polidore Virgill said of Ioan Batmansonus, Iuuenis es in hones te natus: ac ad humanitatem pa ter educatus, vt ad religionem ac modatus. Who with Mary h chosen the better part, & that o thing that is necessary. W with Great Constantine coun the cheefest ensigne of thy Gl the glorious Gospell of Christ Ie So that religion being ioy with your knowledge, y Hopes dooe promise to fals that conceipt, which the A cient world had conceiued the Empire of gold ouer La and Lawyers.

 pulsa fides, auro  iura,
rum lex sequitur, mox sine lege pudor.
d that prouerbe, which sayth:  Lawyers, Logicians and Swit∣ fight for euery body.
nd surely thus it commeth to e, when as euery Lawyer en∣ureth to be as Abraham was ied vnto Sarah, that is, vnto nity and when as Hagar, that hilosophy, and her yong sonne el the Artes are her hand∣es: Humanae Scientiae pedisiquae  eo∣logiae. whē as all humane lawes, tutions and ordinances, and soeuer else in the world are e subordinate to holy Religi∣ hen as Lawyers are such ma∣f men, as Iethroes Offiicers & es men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating coue∣s. Exod. 18, 2 Qui pecunia non mouetur,  dignum spectatu arbitramur. w your loue to the Lawes, our study in them, and as ay, that Lex plus laudatur,

quando ratione probatur, so you a suredly hold, that Summa relig is summa ratio, & that all huma Sciences are but huskes of corne, they be cōpared to the fine flow of the holy Scriptures. Quod p pilla est in oculo, quod Athenae er in Graecia, hoc est Religio in ani And therefore with Leuinus T rentius you rightly estimate om placita quorumcunque hominu comparata ad Christi doctrin meram ostentationem, & fallax s dium aurae popularis. But se that your vertues are like Ar das doue, whom each Artist  held flying, but could not m flye. And seeing the dayes wh in we liue are so enuious, and full of iniquity, that they will  abide that the vertues of theuing should be published. Et  vberior pars messis tuae adhu herba, hoc est, in spe & expectati

nunc nominatim & seorsim qui reliqua ornamenta, quae in nt: malui iudiciorum illam for∣am, Non Liquet, vsurpare,  temere re non intellecta vlte∣progredi. Valde mihi probatur 10. Bodinus cap. 7. Me∣thod. Hist. ini non minus vrbana quam ens oratio; qui de libro. Apo∣seos sententiam rogatus, in∣e respondit, se penitus ignora∣id velit tam obscurus scrip∣ qui qualisque fuerit nondum at inter eruditos: sic cum um patet qui qualisque eris, m & praeposterum erit, di∣ qui aut qualis es aut eris,  enim quid serus vesper ve∣vt est apud Gellium. And fore as Salust sayd of Car∣, that hee had rather saye ng, then vnperfectly: so  rather with Timanthes,  the rest of your pregnant  vnder the vaile of deserued

Expectation, then blindfold w Cherillus to runne vpon the If your courteous acceptati shall encourage, fauour and co tenance me in this, some thing  long I will aspire to, which I  consecrate to the immortalizi of your Religion, Learning, Bou and Coutesy. And heere lea grow too tedious I make an e humbly desiring God, thro the merits of Christ Iesus, to g vnto your worship long life  health of body, dignitie with  bility of vertue, prosperity  affluence of the best things, at the last a most happy e with the saluation of your soue. London the XI. of May. 1598.

