



AS there is, hath been and will be (right honourable) both Wheate and Darnel, Corne and Cockle, and good Seedes and tares: euen so there hath been, is, and wil be sowers of both sorts. For the chil∣dren of God doe sowe the good corne of Gods word: and the ser∣uants of Satan haue and will, scatter abroad Darnel, the Di∣uels doctrine. But as the godly sowers shall dwell for euer with God, whose good seede they did sow: Sothe throwers abroad of the Darnell, shall dwell with the Diuel, except they cease frō their sowing. Yet they (like senselesse Swine) will needes wal∣lowe in the puddle of perdition, though they are theeatned with the scriptures for the same. Both which sowers are so different at this day, that they that haue any glimmering at all: may know the good sowers frō the euill, the godly frō the wicked, & the true from the false. Notwithstanding, these wicked sowers of the diuels darnell, goe about as much as in them lie: to per∣suade vs that they are the true sowers, and that their Cockle is pure and good corne. But whose sowers they are, and whose seede they doe sowe: all they that are guided by Gods worde, doe right perfectly knowe. And as there hath been a wonder∣full rable of Satanicall sowers from the beginning, euer see∣king to choke the good corne of Gods worde, with their diuelish Darnell: so there hath sprung vp not long since, a seditious sect of Satanical sowers, seeking by al meanes; to choke or suppresse



the good corue with their cockle, and the Gospell of Christ, with the doctrine of the Diuell. And these are they that call themselues Iesuites, but they rather deserue to be called Iudaites: for they follow Iudas in betraying, not Iesus in sauing. One of which number (as it shoulde seeme) hath made a pernicious booke in praise of the Pope and Papistrie, and in reproch of M. Nicols, lately conuerted from Papistrie to the Gospel, and re∣turned from the Pope to his Prince. But it doth appeare that hee doubted his docttrine, els hee woulde haue set his name to his booke. Wherein also hee doth detract a booke by  pende and published, called A persuasion from papistrie (which I  dicated & exhibited to the Queenes ) without dis∣prouing or confuting any one part thereof. Whose namelesse worke, in such points as I knewe to bee false, I haue not only ta∣ken vpon me to reproue: but also to defend my selfe & my said booke, by him therein depraued & slandered. And for that I know your honour to be a zelous fauourer of the Gospell, a per∣fect professour of Gods worde, & an affable Magistrate (whose wisedome and learning is such, that you can easily try, truth from falshood, & right from wrong) I haue chosen you to bee a Iudge betweene a Christian & a Iesuite. Beseeching you to pardon mee for my boldnesse heerein, assuring your honour, that your common commendations, and the good will I beare you: hath made me to doe that, that discretion and modestie shoulde haue made mee refuse. But though my basenesse doth not deserue such a Iudge: yet the cause which is Christs doth craue such a one. Humbly requesting you (though your affaires be great and your leasure little) to reade and peruse the same as occasion will serue and time will permit. Trusting, that your reading thereof, will bee more delightfull than tedious, & will rather recreate you than wearie you. And thus ceasing heerein any further to trouble your honour: I do wishe you in this life to bee guided by God, and after, to raigne for euer with Christ.

