



MADAME
THE least good documents, which we learne in our youth, may in some part of our life serue vs to vse. I remember this sentence in my Pueriles, Voluntas, vbi desunt vires, est laudanda: Where power is wanting the good will is to be accepted. Which J presume will be my war∣rant in presenting your Laship with this Po∣eme, which by chance J did see in my fathers study, amongst many other of his Manu∣scripts. And because it lay idly there, I desi∣red him to giue it me. Who then asking what I would do with it, I told him that I would present it to my Lady my Mistresse. Which humor of mine he seemed very well to like:

but he answered, that it was not faire enough written for her reading. Whereunto J repli∣ed, that if I might haue it, I would amend that fault, and get it printed by the helpe of my Schoole-maister, and in that sort offer it. Whereto my father said, that he liked so well of my deuotion to so noble a Mistresse, as that hee would freely giue it mee. The which now (as mine owne) J do humbly re∣commend to your honourable acceptance, as some testimony of my deuoted zeale, vntill yeares, and ability shall second my indeuours with parts more answerable to my desire. And in the meane season I will perswade my selfe that this poore present is the more aptly offe∣red, knowing that the reading of Heroicall actions do as properly belong to noble and ver∣tuous Ladies, as the acting of them to worthy and valorous Knights. Besides that, your Ladiship is an honourable louer and Patro∣nesse of learning and the Muses, an instinct naturally ingrafted in your excellent spirit, by that worthy blood of the Sydneyes, wherewith you do so neerely participate, and whose perfections did so eminently shine in that hopefull yong Lord your late brother,

one of the mirrours of our Age. Now if this may but receiue your honourable applause, as some pledge of my Deuotion, J will neuer thinke that I need to be ashamed to flutter with my Fathers feathers. And so am euer ready to approue my selfe,

