



IN the shoare of the Sea Euxinus, in the land of Colchis, there stoode a Cyttie named Dioscurias, so much haunted of strangers, that, (as Plinie writeth by record of Thimo∣stenes,) it was resorted vnto of three hundred Nations of distinct languages, and that the Romans for the better ex∣pedition of their wares there, had at length lying in the same 130. Interpreters. Saint Ierome testifieth, that men in times past came to Rome from the furthest Coastes of Spayne and Fraunce, to see Titus Liuius, whose eloquence was fa∣mous throughout the whole vvorld. Certainly, famous and excellent was that Citty, that so many resorted vnto, and where the renowned Romans had so many Interpreters lying. And without all question, admirable was the eloquence of Titus Liuius, that fetched men frō so farre to see him. Then vndoubtedly (Right Honorable) diuine & learned is this reuerend Authour F. Ludouicus Granatensis, whō not onely the spacious Empire of the Latines, but Spayne, Fraunce, and

Italie, haue trauailed to see, and tasting the honnyed sweetnes of his celestiall ayre, and finding such supernaturall and heauenly treasures in him, haue not onely com'd to see him, but haue sent thether their Interpreters, there to soiourne, for the better transportation of his wares and commodities.Onely his Meditati∣ons in Eng∣lish, done by ANONY∣MVS. And his Manuell in the Ger∣mane tonge translated by Philip∣pus Dober∣niner. Onely, I wondred that England, whose Voy∣agers were neuer out-stript by any, had so sparingly and slenderly visi∣ted this famous and renowned Diuine: that shee, I say, as Germany had but onely one Interpreter lying with him, seeing that otherwhere she had such aboundance of worthy Factors, & rich linguists.
Entering into consideration of the great scarcity of our Traffickers to so rich a Mine, I discouered certaine corruptions, which as dan∣gerous Rockes threatned shipwracke, to them that sailed vnto him. The Poets faine, that a Dragon kept the Golden-fleece, and yet that hindered not Iason from the conquest of it: neyther did Gyants nor Monsters fright Hercules from his rich spoyles & glorious con∣quests. Cosmographers write, that in the Mountaines of Albania, and Hircania, Countries of Scythia, there are found the best and freshest Emeralds, the purest Christall, much gold & precious stones, but these Mountaines are encircled with huge woods, wherein are a∣boundance of fierce and cruell wilde beastes, as Gryphons; Leopards, Tygers, Panthers, and Dogs of that fiercenes and greatnes, that they pull downe Bulls, and slay Lyons. But as the Dragon amated not Ia∣son, nor the Monsters amazed Hercules, and as these Scythian dangers doe not hinder men from seeking and finding these earthly & terrestriall iewels: so should wee not be discouraged in this spirituall pursute, for a few corruptions and dangers, remembring that all wry∣tings, (the sacred Scriptures excepted, which are absolutely pure and perfect) haue a relish of theyr earthly and corruptible Authours. Nihil ex omni parte beatum, sayth Horace, and yet wee must not doe as Lycurgus dyd, who, because the Grape was abused by potte companiors, cutte downe all the Spartan Vines. For we finde by ex∣perience, that this Argument Ab abusu ad non vsum, from the a∣buse of good things to the abolishing of them, as it hath bred heresies and schismes in the Church: so also rebellions & treasons in the Com∣mon-wealth. Plutarch sayth, that it had beene better for Lycurgus to haue digged Wells and Fountaines neere vnto the Vines, and as Plato counselleth, Insanum Deum alio sobrio repressum, that is,

to take away the abuse by mixing some quantitie of water with it. Which gaging & moderation, as I haue performed in this interpreta∣tion, by remouing corruptions, that as Rocks would haue endangered many: so if other Interpreters, as good Pylots doe the same in this learned Iberian, neuer had Dioscurias moe Interpreters, nor Ti∣tus Liuius moe visiters, then Granatensis shall haue. For if that most famous and excellent Phylosopher Apollonius Tyaneus (as Philostratus writeth) trauailed almost throughout the whole world, and passed euen to the Mountaine Caucasus, and to the Brach∣manes, Phylosophers of India, that he might onely heare Iarchas an Indian Philosopher, in his golden throne professing wisedome among the small number of his schollers, and disputing of the motion of the celestiall Spheres: what ought not Christians to doe, and whether shoulde not they trauell to heare one, not teaching how the heauens are mooued, but how men may come to heauen: yea, how Sinners may be Guyded thether?
And albeit all the workes of this reuerend Diuine are profitable for instruction in religion, and very auaileable for perswasion to good life: yet my iudgement, (beeing grounded vpon the iudgements of graue and worthy Diuines,) doth estimate this booke aboue the rest, as Sybilla Cumaea did the last of her three Bookes vnto King Tar∣quine. Which with all humility I dedicate vnto your Honor, whom God of his great mercy, hath vouchfafed in this decrepit and ruinous age of the world, to bestow vpon our state for the maintenaunce and countenaunce of Religion and Learning, and for the defacing & sup∣pressing of vice and corruption: like as in times past hee gaue vnto Common-wealths, that needed such helpe, Dauid, Hezekiah, Io∣siah, Hercules, Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Alexander Magnus, Scipio Affricanus, Iulius Caesar, Augustus, Mecaenas, Constantinus Magnus, Theodosius, Carolus Magnus, Sigismundus, Ferdi∣nandus, Alphonsus King of Naples, Fredericke Duke of Saxon Prince Elector, and Lord Ernestus his Brother, Laurentius Me∣dices Duke of Florence, and Borsus Duke of Ferrara, with many other Princes and Nobles, some of which were mighty Pillars and Protectors of true Religion and Christianity, & others liberall main∣tainers and bountifull Patrons of learning and vertue, against all Licinians, Iulianists, Valentinians, Caligulaes, Neroes, Diocle∣sians,

Mahometists, Baiazets, Aretinists, Simonists, & such like Monsters of nature, beeing cruell persecuters of true Religion, ene∣mies of all humanity, and destroyers of all learning and discipline, who despising God and all goodnes, did degenerate so farre from their fore∣fathers, that they delighted wholy to spill the blood of worthy men, to burne famous Libraries, to rob the Church of her patrimony, and to rase and ouerthrow the Vniuersities and Schcoles of all Artes & Sci∣ences, as in the tragicall Histories of former times is recorded, & can∣not be but with great greefe remembred.
All ages haue written and spoken great and glorious things of that good Emperour Great Constantine, for his defence and patro∣nage of sacred Christianitie, and bounty vnto the Church and her Pastors: So all Diuines and whole Vniuersities of Schollers doe daily blesse God, who (in this corrupt & simoniacal age, & in these dog-daies of the Church and Religion, which together with learned Diuines & worthy schollers, doe lie in a desperate Paroxisme, and most dange∣rous fit, ioyntly shaken and assaulted by wicked Patrons and wretched Atheists) hath allotted vnto vs, not onely another Alexander, that so honoured the Poet Pindarus, that at the destruction of Thebes, he gaue charge that the family and kinred of Pindarus should be spared, but another Mathias of the newe Law, nay, a true follower and imi∣tater of Christ, who daily casteth out of the Temple of God all them that buy and sell in it, and ouerthroweth the Tables of Money∣changers, and the seates of them that sell Doues, endeuouring with all zealous sincerity, to make the house of GOD that that it should be, that is, a house of Prayer, not as Simon Magus would haue it, a Denne of theeues, and a Cage of vncleane byrds.
I humbly entreate your Lordship to accept this small gift, the fruites of a poore schollers study, and weigh it, not according to my skill, which is but weake, but according to the soundnes of the doctrine therein contayned, which is warranted by the authority of the holie Scriptures. Quod si ex tua dignitate spectetur, exiguum est; sin ex animo meo, magnum. Multum enim dat, qui cupit dare sa∣tis, qui dat illud quod habet, qui nihil sibi retinet, qui nihil, quod in se est, omittit. The Almighty God, who is the exceeding great reward of all them, that walke vprightly before him, in whose hand is the length of dayes, blesse and prolong your Honor here among vs,

to the perfecting and consummation of that good worke he hath began , euen to the vtter extirpation of all Simony, Sacriledge, and  merchandizing, and to the supportation of all religious Pre∣ of the Church, and learned Scholiers of the Land: and after this yfe, giue your Lordship euerlasting glory with him, who giueth euery man according as his worke shall be. London the tenth of May. Anno. Dom. 1598.

