


THE holye scriptures affirme in diuers places,Dan. 9.11 & 12. Matt. 24. Marc. 13. Luc. 21. 2. Thess. 2. 1. Tim. 4. 2. Tim. 3. 2. Pet. 2. Apoc. 11.12. & 13. that the nea∣rer we approche towardes the comminge of Antichri∣ste, and the ende of the worl∣de, the more perillous will the tymes be for all Chri∣stians. And the perill hereof arisethe cheefelye of the greate enuye and malice of Satan, who fearinge the ende of the worlde, knowinge that then his tyrannous kingdome therein will haue an ende also therewith, extendeth the vttermoste of his rage againste all faithfull Christians, and assaul∣teth them dailie more and more with diuers wilie temptatiōs, and terrible persecutions, to procure them thereby to folowe his most wicked rebellious example:
that is, to breake gods holie commaundements, to con∣temne his diuine ordināces, to neglecte his seruice and honoure, and by pryde and rebellion to lose the image of god, and embrace the image of Satan, and so to be vtterlie vnapt to attaine vnto those euerlastinge he∣auenlie māsions of felicitie, and glorie, for which man was created.
Wherfore to the intent that all Christians might be more circumspecte, and strēgthened, to resiste faith∣fullye against all Satans wylye deceytefull temptatiōs in this our daungerous age, approchinge so neare to∣wardes the comminge of Antichriste, and the ende of the worlde (as by manye coniecturall signes it see∣meth) a holye Angell hath forewarned vs hereof verye preciselye in the revelacions of S. Ihon, thunde∣ringe out theise woordes with a greate voice:Apoc. 12. vers. 12. woe be to the lande, and sea, because the Deuill is descended vnto you, hauinge a greate rage, for that he knoweth he hath but a shorte tyme. And this greate rage of his is the more to be feared in this our corrupte age, for that we reade also in Sainte Ihons revelations,Apoc. 20. vers. 3. that the Deuill shalbe let lose to∣wards the ende of the worlde for a smalle tyme. In other ages and tymes of our holye christian forefa∣thers the deuills exceedinge greate malice and migh∣tie power hath bene moche restrained and bownde throughe the greate vertue of the Crosse,The deuill shalbe let lose more and more the nearer that Anti∣christe ap∣prochethe. and Passion of our Saviour Iesus Christe, communicated then ve∣rie plentifullie vnto the Christian people generallye by their devoute frequentinge of the holie Sacramen∣tes of the Catholike Churche, (which be holie vessells of grace) whereby our Christian forefathers have bene
greatelye strengthened to resiste faithfullye againste the moste horrible temptations of Schisme, Heresie, In∣fidelytie, and Atheisme, and to live generallie verie holie and austere Christian liues in the feare and ser∣vice of almightie god, and in dewe reuerente obediēce to the Catholike Churche. But nowe whereas in this our vngratious age suche a number of horrible sectes, and heresies, and suche a generall corruption with pri∣de, dysobedience, lyenge, detraction, gluttonie, inconti∣nencie, infidelitie, Atheisme, and all kinde of dissolute wickednes doe abounde and raigne more and more in all partes of Christēdome, woe bee therfore to the Lan∣de, and sea, (as the holye Angell hath forewarned vs) because the Deuill is nowe discended, and let lose towardes the ende of the worlde for a smale time, ha∣uinge a greate rage, for that he Knoweth he hathe but a shorte tyme to continewe his tyrannous kingdome in this worlde.
And the verie cause of this so extraordinarie let∣tinge lose of the deuil nowe more and more towardes the comminge of Antichriste in the ende of the wor∣lde,2. Thess. 2. vers. 10. & 11. saincte Paule seemeth to explane in this sense: that for so muche as the wicked will not receiue the trew do∣ctrine of the Catholike Churche with charitie,The Catho¦licke reli∣gion daylie decreasin∣ge, & here∣sies daylie increasinge vnto, worse and worse sectes, is an euident argument that the diuell is more and more let lose towardes the comminge of Antichrist. humi∣litie, obediēce, and thankfulnes, to the ende they maye be saued, therfore Almightie god letteth lose the de∣vill nowe emonge them, by permittinge him to sowe in their prowde inconstante wilfull myndes manye erronious opynions, and heresies, that thei maye believe in lyenge.

And certainlie if we will aduisedlye consider the wylie procedinges of the deuill in sowinge so mani∣folde Sectes and heresies in this vngratious age,Note Satās wylie pro∣ciedinges in this cor∣rupte age. and the finall ende whereunto he directeth them, we maie euidentelie perceaue, that it is to cause all Chri∣stians nowe towardes the comminge of Antichriste to be first dissolute in their liues, and after dowtefull in their faithe, and then to contemne all the holie Sacramentes, and other Mysteries of the Christian Re∣ligion, and afterwardes hauinge by degrees remo∣ued awaie out of their Churches all holie memories of our Saviour Christe, and of his blessed Mother, Apostles, Martirs, & other of his glorious Saintes, and also out of their myndes all feare of God, and of his dreadefull iudgementes, then they be easelye induced by him shortelie after to become harde har∣ted, and vnsensible to conceiue anie spirituall thinges, and also at the laste to become Atheistes, without anie conscience, Religion, or beliefe that there is a God. And so Antichriste findinge his waie so open and readie prepared for him, maie then come frielye when he will, and cause himselfe to be receiued as a Mes∣sias, and adored as God, findinge the Christian people generallie without anye deuotion and Zeale to the seruice and honour of our Sauiour Iesus Christe, and without anye beliefe that there is a God.
Nowe emonge all the wylie deceitfull deuises of Satan for ouerthrowinge of the Christian Religion, and so to prepare the waie for Antichristes commin∣ge, there is none (in my simple iudgemente) of greater force, and consequence, than his so earnest endeuour to procure all Christians vtterlye to contemne and
forgette all the holie misteries of the Christian faithe. Which if he coulde possiblie compasse (as he labou∣reth verie earnestlie therein by diuers craftie meanes in this our corrupte age) then vndowtedlye all the whole Christiā Religion, and euen our Sauiour Chri∣ste himself, and his blessed Mother, and all his holie Apostles, and Martirs, and other of his glorious Saintes woulde consequentlie in a shorte time after be generallie contemned, neglected, and forgotten througheout all Christian countries.
And to write here freelie my minde as I thinke, it woulde seeme verie meruailous vnto me (if I were not fullie perswaded that the deuill is nowe more and more let lose (as Saint Ihon in his reuelations hath forewarned vs he shoulde be for a shorte time towardes the ende of the worlde) howe the deuill coul¦de preuaile so farfoorthe, as to induce a whole newe late secte of heretikes that be called Puritans (profes∣singe in gaie wordes to be more pure, more sincere, and better professours of Christes gospell than anie other Christians either be or haue bene in anie age since the Apostles time) to write of late so vnchristianlie by common consent euen in an Englishe printed booke againste obseruinge in the Churche the moste aun∣cient yearelie solemne holie feastes of Easter,In the puri∣tans replie againste D. Vvhitgifte, pag. 120. 121. 122. & 163. and Pentecoste, and againste all speciall meditations at anie one solemne time of the yeare more then at others of Christs Resurrection, or of the Comminge of the Holie Ghoste, or of the hower of our deathe: becau∣se (saie theie) theise meditations shoulde be vsed con∣tinewallie euerie daie in the yeare, and owght not to be appoynted by the gouernors of the Churche to be
used at anie one speciall time more than at others. Whereby euerie godlie christian reader maie easelie perceiue howe the deuill beinge no we let lose laboureth verie buselie by theise countersaite pure gospellers vn∣der a wylie deceitfull colour of aduauncinge conti∣newal mediatation and memorie of the holie Misteries of the Christian Religion euerie dae in the yeare, to haue no manner of mediation or memorie of them emonge Christians anie daie at all: that so by their suttle wicked doctrine a readie open waie maie be pre∣pared in all Christiā mens Churches and mindes for Antichristes comminge.
But ô the wonderfull prouidence and care of our Sauiour Christe to preserue a continewal knowledge and reuerence of his holie Misteries emonge all faith∣full Christians in his Catholike Churche,How in all ages hathe bene pre∣serued e∣monge Christians a cōtinewal knowled∣ge and reuerence of the holie misteties of our faithe. Matt. 28. Vers 20. Iohn. 14.16. Iohn. 16.13. 1. Tim. 3.15. as hath ve∣rie manifestelie appeared in all ages since Christes Ascension vntill this our corrupte age. And surelie it is a matter worthie of greate and deuoute admira∣tion for anie good christian to consider, howe the Apo∣stles, and the aunciente holie Catholike Byshops their successours beinge by our Saviour Christes owne pro∣misse assuredlie inspired, assisted, and directed by the Holie Ghoste from time to time in gouernement of the Catholike Churche in all truthe, haue with suche di∣uine wisdome disposed the whole yeare into so manie seuerall holye festiuall daies, as that thereby haue be∣ne represented, and preached vnto all Christian peo∣ple in all Christian Churches throughout Christen∣dome a continewal solemne instruction, memorie, and reuerence of the holie Mysteries of the Christian Re∣ligion. In so muche as the common Christian people by
those holie festiuall daies alone (albeit they wanted not also diuers other holie instructions therein in con∣fessions, and Sermons,) were in all ages sufficientlie instructed in the holie Mysteries of their Christian beliefe: I meane, they were thereby made to vnder∣stāde so muche of them, as (hauinge withall a dewe religious respecte to preserue a continewal reuerence in them to the dignitie of suche highe holie Misteries) was fullie conueniente for their weake capacities, and for the comfortinge and strengtheninge of their fai∣the, and as they were bounde of necessitie to knowe.
As for example,The princi¦pall holie festiuall daies of the yeare. by the aunciente institution of the holie feastes of Aduente: of oure Sauiour Chri∣stes Natiuitie, and Circumcision: of his Adoration by the three Kinges: and of the holie solemnitie of Lente, at which time the Catholike Churche teacheth all Christian people to imitate so neare as they can our Sauiours fastinge of fourtie daies in the deserte, and representeth then also with sorowfull mourninge, penaunce, and compassion, all the whole order and hi∣storie of our Sauiour Christes moste bitter Passion and deathe for the redēption of al mankinde: And after∣wardes the Churche solemni Zeth with greate Ioie the holie feastes of our Sauiours Resurrection from death to life: of his Ascension into heauen: and of the Com∣minge of the Holie Ghoste. And then followe also the holie feastes of the blessed Trinitie, and of the moste holie Sacrament, commonlie called Corpus Christi daie: And the holie feastes of the blessed Mother of our Sauiour: And of Sainte thou Baptiste his precur∣sor: And then the holie feastes of Sainte Peter, Sainte Paule, and of other of our Sauiours holie Apostles
and most famouse Martirs, and Confessors: And also the holie feastes of Sainte Michael the Ar∣changell, and of all the glorious Saintes in heauen: And withall a solemne daie of deuoute memorie and generall praiers ana mesdedes for all faithfull Chri∣stian Sowles departed out of this transitorie life, and as yet remayninge in the fier of Purgatorie, to make satisfaction there for all paines dewe and prescribed for their sinnes in the mercifull iuste balance of the diuine Maiestie. All which holie festiuall daies bein∣ge so diuinelie and orderlie disposed into so manie se∣uerall partes of the yeare, and adorned with the holie reuerēe ceremonies appoyncted to be vsed in all Chri∣stian Churches througheout all Christendome with greate solemnitie and reuerēce vpon those holie daies, haue yearelie from time to time in euerie age since the Ascension of our Sauiour Christ into heauen, verie liuelie and continewallie preached, represented, and explaned vnto the common simple Christian people all the holie Misteries of the Christian Religion, which theie had professed at their Baptisme, and were tau∣ghte in the Apostles Creede to belieue. And the re∣uerent solemnitie in euerie yeare of theise holie festi∣uall daies induced them vnto a continewall memo∣rie, admiration, loue, and reuerence of those holie Mi∣steries, and greatelie strengthened their faithe in them, and caused them to haue a wonderfull feruente pietie, deuotion, and Zeale towardes the honor and ser∣uice of Almightie God, whereby they liued verie vertuous liues like the children of lighte (as Sainte Paule termeth them,)Ephes. 5. vers. 8. and died generallie as holie faithfull Christians in the obedience, loue,
and fauour of his diuine Maiestie.
But alas theise golden times be paste, and ended, and the deuill beinge let lose nowe more and more to∣wardes the comminge of Antichriste, and the ende of the worlde, we finde by palpable experience, that since the time that suche a free licentious libertie hathe been permitted vnto euerie lewde bablinge Mi∣nister to raile againste all the holie aunciente diuine ordinaunces, vsed and allowed generallie so manie ages in all Christian Churches, and to terme them in blasphemous manner Antichristian inuentions, and to preache openlie in pulpittes, and publishe in prin∣ted bookes whatsoeuer newe hereticall opinions the ennemie of mankinde sug gesteth into their fantasti∣call heades, the faithe of Christians is thereby gene∣rallie become so weake, and inconstante, and in verie manie or most persons so wholie vndermined, and vtterlie ouerthrowne, and their hope is so transfor∣med into presumption, and their charitie is waxen so colde, and so litle pietie, loue, deuotion, reueren∣ce, and Zeale remaine in them towardes the serui∣ce of Almightie God, and so muche Pride, glut∣tonie, incontinencie, lyenge, detraction, disobedience, with moste horrible contention, schisme, heresie, infi∣delitie, Atheisme, and all kinde of iniquitie doe ge∣nerallie abounde throughout Christendome, that we haue good cause to feare, leaste that terrible time ap∣procheth nowe verie neare at hande, which our Sa∣uiour forewarned vs in the gospell, to wit:Luc. 18. vers. 8. that at his comminge to iudge he shoulde hardelie finde faithe in the earthe.
Wherefore we haue nowe verie greate neede of
extraordinarie spirituall helpes to strengthen our weake mindes, to withstand so manie deceitfull tem∣ptations of the enemie of mankinde in this so corru∣pte and daungerous age. And for this purpose I ha∣ue translated out of the Spanishe tongue diuers boo∣kes of a verie holie and famous learned religious fa∣ther called Lewis de Granada, whose deuoute man∣ner of writinge hath (in my simple iudgemente) a singular rare grace to pearce the harde harte of a dissolute sinner, and to moue and dispose his minde to the abhorringe of synne, to the contempte of the worl∣de, and to the feare, lone, and seruice of Almightie God. And I vnderstande that his bookes haue wrou∣ghte wonderfull muche good, not onelie in Spaine, and Portugall, but also in Italie, Fraunce, and Germanie. And I thinke there bee fewe countries in Christendome but haue his Spanishe woorkes trās∣lated into their tongues. And it is nowe about foure∣teene yeares agoe, since the time that Master Do∣ctor Hardinge (a man for his greate vertue, lear∣ninge; wisdome, Zeale, and sinceritie in writinge a∣gainste heresies, of verie godlie and famous memorie) perswaded me earnestlie to translate some of those Spanishe bookes into our Englishe tounge, affirmin∣ge, that more spirituall profite wolde vndoutedlie en∣sewe thereby to the gayninge of Christian sowles in our countrie from Schisme, and Heresie, and from all sinne, and iniquitie, than by bookes that treate of con∣trouersies in Religion: wich (as experience hath nowe plainelie tried) doe nothinge so well dispose the com∣mon peoples myndes to the feare, loue, and seruice of al∣mightie God, as bookes treatinge of deuotion, and
howe to leade a vertuous life doe. The dewe considera∣tion whereof hath so prouoked or rather pricked me in conscience, that I haue resolued to publishe (god∣willinge) in printe all my translations, in case I shall perceiue that suche as be godlie, wise, and learned, shall like of them. And first (as it were for an as∣saie) I haue here printed his deuoute Meditations of the principall holie Misteries of the Christian Reli∣gion, which booke I finde greatelie commended by di∣uers godlie learned men.
It maie be that some readers of this booke beinge not greatelie acquainted with the holie exercises of a spirituall life,  will imagin that the Authour dea∣leth to austerelie in some of theise meditations: as na∣melie in his Meditations of synnes: of the hower of death: of òur dreydfull accompte at the terrible daie of iudgemente: and of the moste horrible paines of hell. And perhaps some politique wise men will saie, that for so muche as thè common people in our coun∣trie haue beene for the moste parte of our corrupte age altogether accustomed with hearinge and readinge of diuers other contrarie newe erronions doctrines, ten∣dinge directlie to a careles dissolute life, thei be ther∣fore nowe waxen so carnall and negligent of the sa∣luation of their sowles that theise Meditations be to full of threateninge and terror, for suche nice and lose consciences. For answere to this obiection,  it is to be noted, that the Authór beinge (as I am informed) not onelie a greate learned and religious deuout olde fa∣ther, but also of greate wisdome, grautie, iudgemente, discretion, and of longe experience as well in prea∣chinge, and hearinge of Cōfessions, as in diuers gouer∣nementes
in his religious order, and perceyuinge verie euidentlie that farre more Christian sowles be loste in this our corrupte age with ouermuche presumptuous confidence and securetie of their saluation, than with ouermuche feare of leesinge the same, hathe therfore framed his manner of writinge in theise meditations chieflie againste the infinite nomber of presumptuous and careles dissolute Christiās, that presume most cer∣tainlie, and assuredlie to be saued, and yet doe liue ve∣rie dissolutelie all their whole lyfe time, without all care of keepinge gods commaundements, and without all feare of their accompte at the dreadeful daie of iudgemente, notwithstandinge that our Sauiour Christ himselse who shalbe then our Iudge, hathe by plaine and expresse wordes forewarned vs in the go∣spell of saînt Mathewe,Matt. 19. vers. 17. that if we will enter into the Kingdome of heauen we muste Kepe his commaundementes, which euerie Christian maie be able to kepe, beinge assisted, strengthened, and holpen therein with the grace of God, which is neuer denied to anie that praeth dulie for it: and also that we muste at the daie of iudgemente geue an ac∣compte of euerye idle worde.Matt. 12. vers. 36.
And verelie if we peruse diligentlie the holie scriptures, we shall finde that not onely Enoch in the lawe of Nature,Epist. Iude. vers. 14. and afterwardes all the Prophets, but also sainte Ihon Baptiste, and our Sauiour Christe himselfe vsed the same manner of preachinge that this religious godlie father dothe here. And they thought it to be the verie best and rediest waie for conuersion of sinners from their sinfull dissolute lifes, to shewe plainelie vnto them the damnable state
they liue in, and to put them in mynde of the seuere iustice of almightie God at the terrible daye of iudge∣mente against all suche as endeuour not to kepe his commaundementes.Acts 10. vers. 42. And saint Peter protesteth (as it appeareth in the Actes of the Apostles) that our Sa∣uiour Christe commaunded likewise him, and the re∣ste of the Apostles, to preache and testifie this poynte espetiallye, that Christe is appointed to be the Iudge bothe of the quicke, and the deade.1. Pet 1. vers. 16. And therefore in an other place he requireth all Christians to liue in feare duringe the time of their conuersation vpon the earthe.2. Cor. 5. vers. 10. & 11. And sainte Paule maketh also the like solem∣ne protestation of the terrible daie of iudgemente, and what a straite accompte euerie one of vs muste make at that dreadefull time, and exhorteth the Corin∣thians with the knowledge and consideration there of to perswade all men to liue in the feare of God. And disputinge also before the President Felix of the Christian religion,Act. 24. vers. 25. and namelie of the dreadefull daie of iudgemente, he vttered suche wonderfull ter∣rible thinges thereof, that as the holie scripture men∣tioneth, he made the verie President himselfe (thou∣ghe he were an infidell) euen to tremble and quake for fearè with the onelie hearinge of them.Apoc. 14. vers. 7. And sain te thon likewise in his Reuelations affirmeth, that he sawe an Angell preachinge the euerlastinge gospell vnto all Nations, tribes, tongues, and people, (meanin∣ge thereby that he preached as wel to the good, as to the wicked, without anie exception therein of the faithfull Christians,) sayenge: Feare oure Lorde, and giue honor vnto him, becawse the hower of his iudgemēte is come. And I am perswaded
that all godlie wise and graue men will easelie agree in this opinion with me, that this manner of prea∣chinge of the terror of the daie of Iudgemente, and of the moste horrible paines of hell, is muche more neede∣full nowe in this our corrupte age in Englande, and Scotlande, than in Italie, Spaine, or other Catholike countries, sithe so greate numbers of them are infected with so manie hereticall licentious doctrines, that ha∣ue caused them to put quite awaie out of their myn∣des all feare of God, and of his terrible iudgements, and to presume moste certainelie and assuredlye to be saued by their onelie faithe,Philip. 2. vers. 12. 1. Cor. 4.4. 2. Pet. 1.10. and so are generallie beco∣me vtterlie careles of endeuoringe to woorke their saluation with feare, and tremblinge, and doe li∣ue as dissolutelie as anie barbarous Pagans, and Atheists: In so muche as all godlie aunciente wise men doe greatelye lamente to see by experience the ter∣rible prophecie of Dauid to be generallie verified at this daie throughout our Realme: which is, that the iudgements of almightie God be taken quite awaye from the face of the vngodlye.Psal. 9. vers. 26. And if theise and su∣che like godlie Meditations and considerations of the terrible threateninges and iudgements of almightie God againste the wicked, be not a fitt remedie for their conuersion from their careles dissolute lifes, what other remedie then can possiblie be deuised for them?
Howbeit I haue verie greate hope, that with the grace of God theise godlie Meditations will woorke muche good effecte for the conuersion of manie of them. For vndoutedlie that man is verie wilfull and obstinate in his wickednes, that readinge aduisedlie all theise godlie Meditations is not moued inwardelie
in his harte in some parte of them to the feare, loue, and seruice of almightie God, and to the abhorringe of synne, and amendement of his lise. And suche rea∣ders as shalbe inwardelie moued and called thereun∣to by almightie God, I coniure them in his holie na∣me, and in regarde of their owne saluation,Ephes. 4. vers. 30. Psal. 94.8. not to make sad the Holie Ghoste, in hardeninge their hartes, and resistinge vngratefullie and wil∣fullie againste his diuine inspirations, when it shall please his infinite goodnes, and mercie, with suche singuler loue to knocke and calle at the dore of their hartes, but in anie wise to open it out of hande, and receiue him most humblie into their hartes, with su∣che louinge hartie interteynement, submission, than∣kefulnes, seruice, and honor, as duetie requireth they shoulde doe vnto their most highe soueraigne lorde, and Creatour, that hath suche a speciall louinge care of their saluation.
Nowe this booke of Meditations, and whatsoeuer els I haue translated, and shall godwillinge hereafter publishe in printe, I doe most humblie offer vnto the seruice of almightie God for the benefite of our coun∣trie. And for so muche as I am verie warie and as∣sured that this boke conteineth not anie thinge whe∣reby I maie iustlie incurre anie penaltie prescribed by anie lawes of our Realme, I am the bolder humblie to recommende it by this my dedicatorie Epistle vnto your Honours and woorshipps: partelie for that I haue spente some parte of my time in the studie of our Common Lawes in the Middle Temple emonge you, and am verie moche bounde vnto diuers of you: But chiefelie for that I knowe right well the greate
capacitie and dexteritie of your spirites, the grauitie of your iudgementes, and your wisdomes, experiences, authoritie, and example, to be of suche principall esti∣mation, and worthie respecte in our Realme, that in case ye doe Zelouselye emploie your endeuours to the due reuerente consideration of the holie Mysteries of the Christian Religion, (as I doute not but verie ma∣nie emonge you doe,) your holie example will gene∣rallie allure a greate nomber throughout our whole Realme from all contentious disputinge, and iarringe aboute theise late newe controuersies in Religion, to embrace firmelie and Zealouselie the aunciente Ca∣tholike beliefe, and to imitate the vertuous liues of our holie Christian forefathers, who had muche more aboundance of the grace and lighte of the Gospell of our Sauiour Christe, than we haue in this our vngra∣tious corrupte age, as verie manifestlie appeareth by their so manifolde good Christian fruites lefte by them vnto vs, to the glorie of our Sauiour Christ, and of his deare spowse the Catholike Churche, and to the continewall greate admiration, confusion, enuie, and dispite, of Lucifer, and of all his rebellious wicked spi∣rites, and of all Iewes, Turkes, Heretiques, and other Infidells his adherentes.
An exhor∣tation to yonge no∣ble men and gent∣lemen. And (requestinge here humbly pardon, and li∣cence, to treate in a familiar maner with the yonger sorte) I desire your Honors and woorshippes conti∣newallie to remember what greate inclination ye haue vnto vertue more than others of obscure pa∣rentage, and base estate, in regarde of your noble∣nes, and magnanimitie, which euer inuiteth you to imitate the noble vertuous steppes of your noble Chri∣stian
auncesters, and to set vpon highe and noble vertuous enterprises, and to doe all your workes no∣blie, and excellente, that ye take in hande. As also to consider, that a vertuous life is the greatest and moste noble ornamente of nobilitie. And that for this ende cheefelie almightie God bestoweth vpon noble personages here in eathe principalitie, rule, gouerne∣mente, and honor, that thei shoulde giue vertuous and godlie example vnto all others that be vnder their rule, and gouernemente. And by experience we finde that ordinarilie no bysshoppe or other pre∣acher is able with suche facilitie to plante vertue emonge the common people, and cause them sincerelie to loue, honor, and embrace it, as noblemen, gent∣lemen, Magistrates, and Gouernours are able to doe, in case thei them selues do giue good apparante ex∣ample of vertue, religion, and deuotion, and be Zea∣lous also in procuringe all others to doe the like. And therefore I beseeche you to determin with an hono∣rable constant resolution to employe your time in the moste noble exercises of vertue, and to feare, loue, serue, and honor almightie God, who is your most noble, highe, soueraigne Lorde and Creator, and not to suffer either your studie or practise of the lawes, or other your worldlye offices and affaires to be so greate an impedimente vnto your spirituall exercises, but that you maie haue euer one windo we open towardes the heauenlie Ierusalem,Dan. 6. vers. 10. as Daniel had in his chā∣ber in Babylon, prayinge there three times in the daie towardes the earthelye Ierusalem. And in case your worldlie impedimentes be ouer greate, then wis∣dome requireth that for saluation of your sowles you
doe caste them awaie from you. And imitate herein the worldlie foresighte of wise Marchauntes when they be in daunger of drowninge in a stormie tempeste vpon the sea, who vse at suche times for saluation of their liues to cast into the Sea their ryche merchaun∣dise, and all their troublesome heauie encombrances, thereby to cause their shippe to saile more safelye. And I doe also humblie beseache all good Christian readers that shall like well of theise spirituall exer∣cises to remember me in their deuoute praiers, that I proue not like vnto those foolishe carpenters that made Noes arke, who made it to saue others from drowninge in the generall fludde, and yet were drow∣ned them selues.
Thus with all due humble submission of my self, and my trauailes herein to your honours, and woor∣ships, I humblie craue pardon for passinge here som∣what the bowndes of my profession, and treatinge as a diuine of spirituall matters, accordinge as since my departure from the Middle Temple by some studie and readinge of diuers spirituall bookes, and conti∣newall conuersation theise fifteene yeares with manie vertuous and Learned Catholike Priestes in these par∣tes I haue bene instructed. And I moste humblie be∣seache almightie God that theise Godlie Meditations maie woorke so good effecte in all your myndes, as I haue often times verie earnestlie requested of his dui∣ne Maiestie.
From Paris, vpon the holie festiuall daie of Pentecoste. In the yeare of our Lorde. 1582.
