



MY LORD,
THe great subiect of this stately Poem, together with the worth of the noble Author, haue enboldned me to present the Translation (how meanely soever I have performed it) to your

Honourable hand. I cannot but presume that the high, and rich conceits of Lucan from your deepe iudgement shall finde their proper, and due approbation, and my de∣fects, from your noble candor, an easie, and gentle censure. The matter of this Worke is a true History adorned and heightned with Poetical rap∣tures, which doe not adulte∣rate, nor corrupt the truth, but giue it a more sweet and pleasant relish. The History of it, is the greatest of Histo∣ries,

the affaires of Rome, whose transcendent greatnes will admit no cōparison with other States either before, or after it; Rome was then at that great height, in which S. Augustin wished to haue seen it, which after Ages almost with adoration haue admi∣red, and do rather coniecture then fully comprehend. The blood of her valiant citizens, and the conquests, and tri∣umphs of so many ages had raised her now to that vn∣happy height, in which shee

could neither retaine her freedom without great trou∣bles, nor fall into a Monarchy but most heavy and distast∣full. In one the greatnesse of private Citizens excluded moderation: in the other the vast strength, and forces of the Prince gaue him too ab∣solute and vndetermined a power. The vices of Rome did at this time not only grow vp to their power, but over∣throw it. Luxury and Pride, the wicked daughters of so noble a Mother as the Roman

Ʋertue, began to consume that which brought them forth. These were the seeds of that faction, which rent the State, and brought in vi∣olently a change of governe∣ment. The two heads of this great division (if wee may terme Pompey the head of a faction, & not rather the true servant of the publike State) were Pompey the great, and Julius Caesar, men of greater eminence then the former a∣ges had seene any, whose prosperous atchiuements in

forreine wars had too far en∣abled them to ruine that state, which before they ser∣ved. The Author of it was a noble Roman, rich in his minde as his large fortunes, of whose happy conceits, and high raptures I forbeare to dispute, or any way anticipate your Lordships iudgement. To whose noble censure I re∣fer both the Author, and my poore endeavours, and shall ever rest.

