


VNDERSTANDING by good intelligence, of the ge∣nerall well liking, and grate∣full acceptation, that your Honors and Worships haue had, of the Booke of Medita∣tions, of the Reuerend Reli∣gious Father F. Lewis de Gra∣nada, published of late by me in our English tong, and dedicated vnto you, I haue bin thereby much the rather prouoked to dedicate also vnto you this booke of the same Godly Author,A commen∣dation of this booke. intituled A Memoriall of a Christian life: which among all his bookes of deuotion, is accounted most profita∣ble for all sortes of persons: because it containeth all such godlie instructions, as are necessary for e∣uery Christian, from the time of his conuersion, from his sinfull life, vntill he attaine vnto the per∣fection of a Christian life.
And truelie, the Methode & order that the Au∣thor hath taken therein is so excellent, and the doctrine and instructions o singulerly wel treated, for direction both of the learned and vnlearned in
 spirituall life, (wherin the Author hath very discreet∣ly framed his stile to serue both their capacities, and especially of the vnlearned,) that diuers god∣ly learned Diuines intending to treat in like man∣ner of the same arguments, haue plainely, & with great humility confessed, that he writeth with such a rare vertuous spirit, and hath such a singuler gift in explaning his instructions, and in pearcing the hart of a Christian reader, with his zelous god∣ly aduises, & perswations, that they haue therefore eyther a bridged or translated his bookes, and di∣rected them vnto diuers noble vertuous persona∣ges, that requested them to treate of those matters.
And for mine owne opinion, hauing read a great number of spirituall bookes in diuers languages, (all worthy certainly of great commendation,) yet could I neuer find any, whose spirit and wise or∣der of writing hath so well liked my taste, and iudgement, as this godly Authors books, and espe∣ciallie this Memoriall of a Christian life.
In which booke he is greatly to bee commen∣ded, for that in treating therein of the due re∣formation of our liues, and consequently of the whole Christian State, he hath followed the god∣ly order of proceeding of S. Iohn Baptist,Mat. 3. ver. 2.6.8 Mar. 1.5.15. Mar. 6.12. Luk. 13.1.5 Luk. 24.47. Acts. 2.38. Act. 19.18. Act. 26.20. Heb. 6.1. and of our Sauiour Christ, & of all his Apostles, Bishopes and Priests, in founding the Christian religion in all countries, that haue bin conuerted to the faith of Christ: I meane by preaching to the people, to doe Pennance for their sinnes, and to Confesse them, & to shew fruits worthy of Pennance, by do∣ing austere painefull workes of Satisfaction for them.
And would God, that the late Apostatas, Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Caluin, Beza, and other their Schollers, pretending now to be reformers of
 Christs Catholicke church in this our corrupt age, had followed the same godly order of proceeding in their manner of preaching Reformation.
For in my simple iudgement, the right assured way to reforme christendome, being at this present so far corrupted in euery country, is not by force of Armes, nor by terrour, and constraint of grie∣uous penall lawes, for feitures, confiscations, and executions, with terrible deaths: because the chri∣stian common wealth in such a generall corrupti∣on of all estates cannot by any other meanes bee duely reformed, maintained and preserued,The right assured way to reforme christēdome but by such as it was at the first founded, and increased. As by the Bishops and Pastors preaching of Pen∣nance, contempt of the world, mortification of the flesh, and giuing themselues apparant good exam∣ple thereof to the common people, and shewing more christian charitable zeale in their deeds, than in their words, which was the godly order of pro∣ceeding of the Apostles, and auncient holie Bi∣shops their Successors, in founding and increasing the christian religion in the Primitiue church.
And the like godly order of proceeding for Reformation of the christian State, hath in some a∣ges afterwards bin vsed by S. Benedict, S. Barnard, S. Dominicke, S. Frauncis, and by all the saints, which haue in their times by their wonderfull extraor∣dinary godly example of leading holy penitentiall liues, in vtter contempt of the world, & mortify∣ing their flesh, by continual fasting, watching, prai∣ing, wearing of haire cloth, disciplining and whip∣ping their bodies, and other austere vsage thereof, conuerted many thousandes in euery countrey of christendome, some from Schisme, and Heresie, and some from their dissolute licentious carelesse liues, whereby the whole christian State that seemed in
 their times in a manner incurable, and vnpossible to be reformed,Not one of the auncient Christians that builded our Churches Colledges, & other ho∣ foundati∣ns, were of the Calue∣nists religiō. did recouer a godly reformation, & thereupon deuotion hath in such wise generally increased among al christian people, that they haue builded such a number of goodly churches, chap∣pels, Monastaries, Hospitals, Colledges, and other holy foundations in euery christian countrie, re∣mayning euen et for the most part vntill this our time. So as our auiour Christ hath bin much glo∣rified by the same & the christian Religion held in wonderfull admiraion, euen amog the Iewes, Turkes, Sarasins, an other Infidels, hat were o∣therwise professed deadly enemies vnt it.
But we see that the t Apostatas, Lther, Zuin∣glius, Caluin, Beza, and oter new pretened refor∣mers of Christes Catholke church, would in no wie followe the aunciet hlie Bishops, Pastours, and Religions persons, & othr saints in their god∣ly order of proceeding for Reformation of the christian State, and theefore their fruits haue pro∣ued accordingly. For these late Apostatas, hauing addicted them-selues vtterly to discredit all the auncient vertuous Bihops, Pastors, & Gouer∣nours of Christs Catholicke Churh, in all ages and countries since Christes time, yea and most of the christian doctrines beleeued and pofessed by our auncient holie forefathers, haue maliciouslye endeuored, by procuring Schismaticall innouati∣ons in religion in diuers countries of Christen∣dome, & by infecting the ignorant artificers, and o∣ther simple people, with their new hereticall licē∣tious doctrines, to abolish away thereby the Ca∣tholicke religion, and in place thereof to found a new deuised politike licentious Religion,Note that in our age, the seuerall for- consist∣ing of manifold different sects, that as professed e∣nemies to al vnity, & vniformity in religion among

 there,by the Prnce in all Mo∣narchies. in all spirituall and ecclesiasticall thinges or causes, of whatsoeuer Sexe, Age, or Religion the Prince is, yea, albeit the Prince bee but a succ∣king babe in his or her cradle, and cannot speake, and consequently cannot directe all the Archbi∣shops, Bishops, and Pastors, within his or her Mo∣narchie, in gouernement of all their churches in all spirituall, and Ecclesiasticall thinges or causes.
And in all free cities (where many Magistrates doe gouerne the common wealth,Gouernment of the church by manie Magistrates in all fre ci∣ties. Caluin. in his Insti∣tutions. li. 4. Cap. 3. Sect. 8. Beza in his booke of di∣uorces page. 161
Most Cal∣uinists wold haue theyr Churches to be gouerned by the Mi∣nisters and Seniors in euery parish Church, ex∣empted frō all authori∣ty of Bishops Archbishohs Pope, and l others, & one to con∣role them but onely God.) there the church by the English caluenistes new deuised politike doctrine must bee gouerned by all the same Magistrates that bee gouernors of the com∣mon wealth in those cities.
And yet Caluin and Beza, and all the caluinists of the citties of Geneua, Rochel, and of all other cal∣uinisticall citties in Fraunce and Sauoy, as also, all the caluinisticall Ministers in Scotland, Holland, Ze∣land, Flaunders, and in all other of the Seauenteene Prouinces of the Low Countries, and all the Puritans of England, will haue their new churches gouerned perpetually in all Monarchies, Cities, Townes, and Villages throughout christendome, not by anye Prince, Magistrates, or other Gouernours of their common-wealthes, albeit they bee Caluinistes: but only by the Minister, and a Consistory of Se∣niors, in euery seuerall Parish church, which be commonly artificers, and craftesmen, that in re∣gard of their vehement furious zeale vnto nouel∣tie, and heresie, are specially chosen to bee gouer∣nors of their new churches. And so euery light headed Minister, ioyned with a few ignorant Sine∣ors men of occupation or husbandry (moste pari∣shes hauing none other) would rule as it were a Pope and so many Kinges, or rather tirants in eue∣ry seuerall parish church, that thereby they may
 haue free liberty of theyr loose consciences, day∣lie to deuise, coyne, and set forth to the common simple people, newe hereticall opinions, and in∣nouations in Religion, without any controlement of any Prince, Bishop, Archbishop, or Pope, eyther for heresie tirranie, or any other wickednes, and none to correct and controle them for the same but onely God. Which tumultuous forme of go∣uernmet of euery parish church by Seniors, would ingender in euery country & state, as many schi∣maticall factions & sects in religion, as there bee seuerall parish churches, & therefore it is vtterly misliked, not onely by all the politicke Caluenists of England, and Lutherans of Denmarke & Sweth∣land, but euen also in all the Lutheran Princes countries, and Protestanticall Cities of Germany. Yea, and the cittie of Zuriche likewise,Gualter in his Commē∣taries vppon 1. Cor. notwithstanding they be zealous Zuinglians, will in no wie admitte that disorderly, & contemptible forme of gouern∣ment by Seniors, in any of theyr pretended refor∣med parish churches, as Gwalter the Minister affor∣meth. And in all Popular States, (as among most of the Switzers,Gouernemēt of the church by all the people equal¦ly in all po∣pular States which were a monstrous umultuous head of the church with¦out a bodie. And though such imper∣fection of e∣quall gouer∣ment by al the people may be per∣mitted in go¦uernment of some commō wealth, ye the like cā∣not bee in go∣uernmēt of the church in any coū∣trie, with∣out most ho∣rible confu∣sion to the church. Gen. 4. v. 7. Psa. 83. ve 11. Psal. 94.8. Mat. 23.37 Luk. 10.42. Acts. 7.51. Rom. 12.21 Ad Phile∣monem. 14. Apo. 22.17. Caluin vpō S. Mat. 27. Ezech. 18. verse. 24.26 Psal. 5.7. Psalme. 50.12.13. Mat. 6.24. ohn. 8.34. uk. 7.37. om. 12. ve. 2.23. . cor. 3.16.7. phe. 4.30. . Iohn. 3. v. . 15. eh. 3.14. Apo. 21.7.8 he Puri∣ans in their irst reply a∣ainst D. bitgift p. 34. affirme hat it is all ne to haue aith, & to ee Elect of God: but Si∣on Magus eleeued, & et hee was ot elected. ee Acts. 8. ers. 22.24. nd See D. Whitgiftss efence. pa. 611. 243. Mat. 16.17 Si vis ad vi∣tam ingredi serua man∣data. and Grysons,) where all the people haue all equall authoritie, and voyces in gouern∣ment of their common-wealthes, and doe all go∣uerne in common, thereby the English caluinists newe deuised politicke doctrine, all the common people must be equally Head of the church, as they are all equally head of the common-wealth, and so no body at all vnder the head, which were a mon∣ster. By meanes of which newe pretended refor∣mation of the gournment of Christes catholicke church, (which before our wicked age was not variable in euery countrey and state, but vniforme in all christian countries, and states,) the caluinists haue and, and doe yet still endeuour fowlie to de∣forme
 Christes catholicke church in all countries and states throughout christendome, with moste horrible diuision of undrie sectes, and heresies, tending all to a meere confusion, and plaine A∣theysme, vnder the gay colour, and deceitfull pre∣tence of reforming Christs church in euery coun∣trey and state, according to the puritie of the Gos∣pell.
And to proue moreouer, that the wicked inten∣tion of these late Apostatas, is vtterlie to abolish and change the state of Christs catholicke church, and not to reforme it, it appeareth plainly by their preaching of so many hereticall dissolute licenti∣ous doctrines in Germany, England, Fraunce, Scot∣land, Holland and Zealand, whereby they began in this our wicked age their new order of preten∣ded reformation of Christs church, not by preach∣ing of Pennance as Saint Iohn Baptist and Christs Apostles, and the ancient godly Bishops their Suc∣cessors did: but by teaching the people diuers cu∣rious heretical new doctrines concerning predesti∣nation, & reprobation, and perswading them con∣trary to the holy scriptures, that man hath no free will: nor that any christian is able with the assi∣stance of the grace of God to keepe God his com∣mandements, & that a christian ought not to be a∣fraid of his account for his workes at the dreadfull day of iudgement: for that as they falsely teach, Christ will not examine the sinnes of christians at the day of iudgement, but that onely Faith iustifi∣eth a man before God, and onely Infidelitie con∣demneth before God, and no other sinne whatso∣euer shall condemne any christian, hauing Faith in Christ, whether it bee sacriledge, incest, mur∣der, adultery, fornication, theft, periurie, vsurie, nor any other sinne, be it neuer so horrible. And that
 all the sacrileges, sodomites, incestes, murders, adulteries, theftes, periuries, and all other hor∣rible sinnes committed by anie of the Elect & Pre∣destinate of God, (as euery one of the Lutherans, Caluinists, Puritanes, and Anababtists hereticall sects doe assure them selues most certainely to be of that number,) doe not at the very same time when they commit them, put them out of the grace and fauour of God, and that (as the Puritan Caluinists doe affirme) it is all one to haue faith, and to be e∣lect of God: & that therfore euery christian ought to beleeue and assure himselfe most certainely, & infallablie, yea, euen as certainely and infallably as he beleeueth that there is a God, that by his on∣ly faith in Christ, he is iustified in the sight of God, and is also one of the Elect & Predestinate of God vnto saluation. These and other the like condem∣ned hereticall doctrines, preached and defended now openly in bookes and pulpets, by these new pretended reformers of Christs catholike, church haue perswaded an infinite number of christian people, both in our Realme of England, & in di∣uers other countries, to account the way of vertue to be impossible, and consequently not to ende∣uour to follow the same, and that they are not bound (as our Sauiour Christ requireth of them in the Gospell) to keepe God his commādements, nor to be sorrowfull for theyr sins: yea, and with∣all, that christians neede not so long as they haue faith in Christ, to pray daylie to God to graunt them pardon & remission of their sinnes: but ac∣cording to the new doctrine of iustification by on∣ly faith in Christ, (taught now by these new pretē∣ded reformers,) to account the daylie saying of our Lords praier, called the Pater noster, & pray∣ing to God daylie therein to graunt vnto christi∣ans
 pardon of their sins by saying daylie vnto him, dimitte nobis, debita nostra: forgiue vs our sinnes, to be as vaine & as idle a prayer for a faithfull christi∣an to pray daylie to God, as to pray dayly to God to graunt him Baptisme, or any other request, which he is most certainely assured that God hath already graunted vnto im. Forsomuch as christians are now taught by thee new gay reformers, to belieue most certainely & infalliblie before they begin to pray to God, by aying our Lords prayer,Beza in lib contra Syco∣phantam ai Tam certi sumus nos  Deo electo quam si pre∣sentes aeter∣no illius cō∣silio inter∣fuissemus. dimitte nobis debita nostra, forgiue vs (O Lord) our sinnes, that by their only faith in Christ they are alreadie iu∣stified in the sight of God, and that they are of the number of the Elect and Predestinate of God to saluation. Whereupon it followeth consequently, (if this their new licentious doctrine were true,) that neither Christs Apostles had any neede, nor christian people need not now, so long as they haue saith in Christ, to say dailie our Lords praier, for to pray to God dailie therein, to graunt vnto them pardon and forgiuenes of their sinnes, (according as our Sauiour Christ himselfe in the Gospell hath commanded them,Mat. 6. ver 12.) in case they be most certainely and infallibly assured before they begin to pray, that they haue alreadie obtained the same of God, by their onlie faith in Christ.
And therefore let no man maruaile, that these new Preachers doe neuer preach to the people, to doe pennance for their sins, and to fast and pray for them,In the Prin∣ted Englis book of dis∣putation with F. Cam¦pion in the Tower, in the fourth dayes con∣ference fo∣lio. 102. Dd iiij. Gen. 15. ve. 1.15. Exod. 33. ver. 17.19. 4. Reg. 1. Luke. 1.28.30. Luk. 10.20 Ioha. 14.3. Iob. 9.28. Rom. 8.17. 2. Cor. 4.10 Gal. 5.24. 1. Cor. 11.13. Luke. 9.23. 1. Iohn. 2.6. Phil. 2.12. 1. Cor. 9.27 Psa. 118.120. Iob. 31.14.23. Ioel. 2.11. Amos. 5.18 Mat. 12.36 Mat. 16.27 Lu. 12.4.5. 2. Cor. 5.10 Apoc. 14. ve. 6.7.13. Apo. 22.12 seeing all their Doctrines beeing wholly grounded vppon theyr new hereticall licentious doctrine of iustification by only faith, (which new Doctrine they now tearme to be the soule of theyr new caluinisticall church,) are directlie contrarie to dooing of Pennance, and vnto all kinde of spi∣ritual exercises of an austere vertuous life, and doe
 breed in all their followers only an arrogant pre∣sumption of security of their owne peculiar electi∣on, Predestination, Iustification, and Saluation, whereby they are moued to sing Psalmes in their Schimaticall congregations, and at home, onely to thanke God for the same. As though almighty God had reuealed vnto euery Caluinist and Puritan, by such a speciall diuine reuilation, that euery one of them is of the number of the Elect, and predesti∣nate vnto saluation, as hee reuealed by a speciall diuine Reuilation vnto some few of his Saintes, as vnto Abraham, Moyses, Elias, and to the most blessed Virgin the mother of God, and to the Apostles, that they were Elect and predestinate to be saued: and as though all Caluinists & Puritans were already raigning & triumphing in this mortall life with our Sauiour Christ in hys glorious kingdome of hea∣uen, and need not here in this vale of miserie, to mortifie theyr rebellious flesh, and to iudge them∣selues, and to carrie dayly their Crosse, and to worke their saluation with feare and trembling, as all christians are cōmanded in the holy scriptures, and as though there were no day of iudgement for christians to expect & feare in regard of their sins.
And it is wonderfull, that the diuell hath so be∣witched these Apostatas of our time, that hauing so arrogantly presumed without any lawfull vocation and authoritie of the gouernours of Christs catho∣licke church, and before they haue reformed their owne liues, to pretend to reforme all the Ecclesi∣asticall state of Christs catholicke church, and ha∣uing proceeded therein with such a new & strange order of preaching of reformation, grounded vpon their new hereticall licentious doctrine of iustifi∣cation by only faith, contrary to the order of prea∣ching of pennance, and of confession, of & austeri∣ty
 of life, vsed by S. Iohn Baptist,In D. Whit∣gifts defēce against the Puritans. page. 176. See the Pu∣ritans Epi∣stle to the church of England, in their second reply a∣gainst D. Whitgifts defence. The fruites of the cal∣uists religi∣on. and by our Sa∣uiour Christ, and his Apostles, & the ancient chri∣stian Bishops and Pastors of the Primitiue church, and now perceauing themselues by their own pal∣pable experience, as both the Caluinists and Puri∣tans in England, doe in their printed bookes plain∣ly confesse, that the people of our Realme are not more sanctified in their liues by their newe order of pretended reformation, than they were before their Schi maticall departure from the vnitie and obedience of Christs catholicke church, but are & doe dayly grow still worse and worse in pride, ar∣rogancie, blasphemy, glotony, drunkennes, adulte∣rie, periurie, vsurie, detraction, lying, and in al kind of deceitfull and false dealing, yea, euen vnto a cō∣tempt of all the holy misteries of the christian Re∣ligion, and to be vtterly careles of their owne sal∣uation, and to become Atheists, yet will they pro∣ceed in their new disorderly manner of reforma∣tion of Christs church, and with an intollerable shamefull impudencie, doe so proudly vaunt and bragge in vaine commendation of themselues, and of their new caluinisticall religion, euen in a prin∣ted English book published of late with priuiledge against the Puritans,See D. Whit¦gifts defēce against the Puritans. page. 472. 473. 526. that they affirme therein with¦out blushing, that their new caluenisticall Bishops (notwithstanding they be notoriously knowne to be exceeding fleshly, and couetous) are for hone∣sty of life, not only to be compared vnto, but euen also to be preferred before the auncient holy Bi∣shops of the Primitiue church: And also that no Bishoppes in any age since the Apostles time haue taught and held so sound and perfect doctrine, as their new Bishops in England doe at this time, and that their doctrine in England at this day is much more perfect and sound, by many degrees, than it
 was in any age since the Apostles time: and that the Sacraments be now more sincerely ministred in England, than they were in S. Iustine, Tertullian, & S. Cyprians time, being so neare the Apostles.
Whereas, if (as our Sauiour Christ himselfe affir∣meth) euery tree must be knowne,Mat. 12. ver. 33. Luk. 6.44. Mat. 7.19. and iudged by his fruite, and euery tree that beareth not good fruite ought to be cut downe, & cast into the fire, verilie, if we compare the euill fruites, that haue proceeded in this age from the tree of this newe caluinisticall pretended reformed religion,Wee may iudge whe∣ther the ca∣tholicke re∣ligion or caluinists religion be good or euil by theyr fruites, that haue procee¦ded from them. & pro∣fessors thereof, with the good gratious Christian fruites, that haue from age to age proceeded from our ancient christian forefathers, who liued & di∣ed in former ages in the faith, vnitie, and obedience of the catholicke religion, and haue so manifestly approued it, and glorified Almightie God in it by their so manifold good christian fruites, and holie charitable works, hauing built in all christian coū∣tries, so many goodly churches, chappels, and re∣ligious houses for the seruice of God, so many hos∣pitals for reliuing the poore, so many colledges for maintenance of poore mens children in their stu∣die for learning, with so many other holy founda∣tions for marrying of poore young Virgins, and for other workes of pietie, & charitie, the which these new pretended reformers of Christs church haue, and doe yet endeuour to the vttermost of of theyr power, to deface, destroy, and plucke downe, as su∣persttious, and hipocriticall works, insomuch that all the Estates of our realme perceauing by expe∣rience, that their new Bishops & Ministers are not Spirituall men, but very worldlings, and no refor∣mers of the Church (as they guilefully promised to our whole realme,) but manifest deformers, de∣stroyers, and pluckers downe of the church, and
 doe seeke only to inrich themselues, their wiues, and children, with the spoyle & ruine of our chur∣ches, and Ecclesiasticall liuings, haue therefore cō∣plained very grieuously of them in an Act of Par∣laiment lately agreed vpon, and published in print with the full consent of all their said new Archbi∣shops,In the Acts of Parlia∣ment, Anno 13. Reginae Eliza. cap. 10. &c. 17. and Bishops that haue accused them therein of many horrible wicked crimes, to the perpetuall infamie of them, and of all other their new Mini∣sters, and pretended reformers of Christs church, vide licet, that they haue euen now of late yeares not only suffered the ancient Pallaces, Mansion houses, and other buildings belonging to their Ecclesiasticall liuings, to runne to great ruine, & decay, and in some places vt∣terly to fall downe to the ground, conuerting the timber, lead, and stones, to their owne priuate lucre, and commo∣ditie: but haue also made deedes of gift, and couloura∣ble alenations, and other conuayances of their goodes & cattels, in their liues time, of purpose to defeate, & de∣fraud their Successors of their iust actions & remedies against their Executors, and Administrators: And haue likewise made long and vnreasonable leasses, and vsed corrupt and indirect dealinges, in transferring Ecclesi∣asticall liuings to other vses: And haue graunted Pen∣tions, and Rents out of them, to the great defacing of the Ecclesiasticall State, and decay of spirituall liuings, and Hospitallitie, and vtter impouerishing of all their Suc∣cessors, and to the euill president, and example for others. All which most shamefull dishonest dealinges, be∣ing euident demonstrations of their euill consci∣ences, and dishonest liues, and consequently of the euill fruites of their caluinisticall licentious religi∣on, and being also very far different from the god∣ly deuotion, and carefull prouision of building and mainteining of such a number of churches chap∣pels, monistaries, hospitals, colledges, and other ho∣lie
 foundations, which the auncient godly Bishops & Pastors had, that liued in the Primitiue church, and in all ages afterward, vntill these late Aposta∣tas began their new pretended Euangelicall refor∣mation of the church in this our corrupt age, if I say we will be indifferent Iudges, and giue iudge∣ment according to the fruites that haue procee∣ded from both the religions, we must needes say & affirme, that the auncient catholicke religion is a good blessed holy christian tree,Luk. 6. ver. 43.44. Non est ar∣bor bona, quae facit fructus ma¦los: neque arbor mala, faciens fru∣ctum bonū: vnaqueque enim arbor de fructu suo cogno∣scitur. for that it hath brought forth in all christian countries, such a infi∣nite number of good christian holy fruites, to the honour and glory of our Sauiour Christ, and of his deare and louing spouse the catholicke church, & that this new caluinisticall pretended reformed re∣ligion appeareth now euidently to all men, that be not vtterly bewitched with their licentious Here∣sies, to be a cursed euill tree, hauing brought forth euen now in the prime, and first springing forth of their new caluinian church, such an infinite num∣ber of most horrible stincking pestilent weedes, & of so wicked & scandalous axamples, that it is now manifest euen to Hell it selfe, that our Sauiour Christ hath cursed that tree, I meane their new cal∣uinisticall pretended reformed religion, as hee did the vnfruitfull figtree mencioned in the Gospell,Mat. 21. vers. 19. be∣caue it beareth only leaues of bare wordes of the Gospell, and no manner of good fruite, worthy the name of christian fruit. But what excuse think your Honours and Worships, is now alleadged by the schollers of these Apostatas, to withhold them still from reconciling them-selues vnto the auncient christian religion of our holy christian forefathers? Of late one of their chiefest Ministers in England, treating for Pacification in religion betweene them and vs, in an English booke, examined, allowed, &
 published openly in print in the citty of London with priuiledge,M. Edmund Buny Mi∣nister, in his Treatise of Pacifica∣tion. There was neuer any church be∣fore Lu∣thers Apo∣stacie, that had the like variable formes of gouernment & like do∣ctrines, and like order of mini∣stration of Sacramēts, as the cal∣uinists new Scismaticall church hath at this daie. If they can finde out a like Church to theirs herein in a∣ny former age, I offer to be then a Caluinist. and dedicated vnto their Archbi∣shop of Yorke, blameth many of his own fellowes of indiscreete zeale, for vrging their separation and departure from our catholicke church, and for de∣nying vs and them to be all of one true Catholicke and Apostolicke church. For that (saith hee) other∣wise we make our selues answerable for to finde out a seuerall and distinct church from them, from which wee discend, which hath continued from the Apostles age to this present: els (saith he) that needes we must acknow∣ledge, that our church is sprung vp of late, or at least since theyrs. I protest before God, that I am verie hartily glad to vnderstand by this printed English Treatise for a Pacification in Religion, that the new caluinisticall Archbishops, and Bishops of England doe now at the length so solemnely recant, and vt∣terly mislike the Apologie of their new church of Eng∣land, published also in print, both in Latine and English, in the first beginning of her Maiesties raigne, with like aduise and allowance of all their new Archbishops and Bishops. In which Apologie of their new English church, vpon indiscreete zeale, as now it is plainely confessed by them in print, & vpon a dispitefull rancour, and enuie against the Bishop of Rome, and other Catholicke Bishoppes, for condemning the chiefe authors of their newe Sects, for Schismaticks and Hereticks, and burning diuers of them for the same, they then vrged, and protested very vnaduisedly, and passionately, to defende their separation and departure from our Catholicke and Apostolike church, as from the church of Antichrist.
But being now (God bee thanked) so plainelie granted & confessed by them, in an English booke allowed and published in print with Priuiledge, &
 sold openly and freely, now more than a whole yeare together, vnto all our whole realme, for an ouerture of a Pacification, & Reconciliation in re∣ligion betweene them and vs, that our church is the true Catholicke and Apostolike church of Christ, and sithence all the caluinists will needes be accounted now faithfull members of our true Catholicke & Apo∣stolicke church, and perswade vs whether we will or no, that they be neyther departed, nor separated, nor deuided from our true Apostolicke Church, notwithstanding their proclaymed manifest Schisme, and disobedience, with sundry damnable Sectes and Heresies, and apparant Schismaticall departure, se∣paration, and diuision from vs, by their new varia∣ble gouernment of theyr churches in euery coun∣try and state, and new schismaticall deuised order of ministration of Sacraments, and by their open despitefull rayling these many yeares in all theyr pulpits and bookes,The Calui∣ists chiefe xcuse, and mpediment why they efuse a pa∣ification, & reconci∣iatiō with Christes Ca∣holicke and Apo∣stolicke hvrch. Ioel. 2. ver. 12. Mar. 2.20 Marke. 13.33. against our church, and cruell persecuting of all the Pastours, Bishoppes, Archbi∣shoppes, and other gouernours thereof, yea, & of all others that professe the doctrines of our Catho∣licke Religion, calling them all members of the church of Antichrist, and of Satan, as the experi∣ence is notorious vnto all the world, let vs heare yet, what they alleadge in their Treatise of pacifica∣tion for one of their chiefest impedimentes, why they refuse now to ioyne in religion with our true Catholicke and Apostolicke church.
For that (say they in this Treatise of pacification) among other thinges they should then bee bounde to Confession and Pennance: which thinges say they are burdensome, and abhorring from mans nature. Let vs admit now, that in the regard of the corrup∣tion of mans nature they bee so indeede, in like manner as all other spirituall exercises are, that
 tend to the mortification of our flesh, as fasting,Luke. 5.35. Luke. 18.1. Mat. 12.36 Mat. 16.27 Lu. 12.4.5. 2. Corint. 5. ver. 10.11. Matt. 10. ver. 32.33. Luke. 14. ver. 26.33. Mat. 5.44. watching, long prayers, and the feare of our ac∣count at the dreadfull day of iudgement, and the feare of the paines of hell, and to haue a willing minde to loose all our landes and goods, yea, & our life also, in defence of the honour of our Sauiour Christ and his catholicke religion, and not to bee reuenged of our enemies and persecutors, but to pray for them, and loue them: all which vertuous acts our Sauiour Christ in the Gospell requireth of all christians, besides their faith, howsoeuer mans nature abhorreth them, as burdensome vnto it.
But to comfort nowe these zealous men, that seeme to bee so desirous of vnity in one vniforme christian faith, and religion among all christians, in all christian countries throughout christendome, and are so greatly hindred in their so earnest de∣sire of a Pacification, and reconciliation in religi∣on, with our true catholike & apostolike church, by reason of them it requireth confession of theyr sins, and dooing pennance for them, which as they say, their mans nature greatly abhorreth, as burdē∣some vnto it: I doe assure them, that if we consider mans nature only by it selfe alone, without the a∣sistance, light, and strength of the grace of God, which reformeth and strengthneth the frailtie and weakene s of our nature, the mans nature of all ca∣tholikes likewise is generally very prone to fauour their licentious caluinisticall religion in this re∣spect. For that of all thinges in the christian religi∣on, our mans nature findeth most difficultie & re∣pugnancie to yeeld to confesse our secret deadlie sins to a Priest our Ghostly Father, as to the Vicar of Christ, and to doe Pennance for them. And whosoeuer will dilligently peruse the auncient councels, shall find therein, that the auncient chri∣stian
 Bishoppes, and other Gouernours of Christs catholicke church in former ages, haue beene more troubled in deuising good Ecclesiasticall lawes and ordinances, to reforme the negligence of christian people, concerning confession of theyr sinnes, and doing Pennance for them, than for any other mat∣ters appertaining to the christian religion.
And as I haue beene credibly informed by di∣uers godly learned Priestes of our Seminaries, that haue trauailed of late yeares in diuers parts of our realme, with great christian charitable and Aposto∣licke zeale, to conuert the Caluinists and Puritanes from their damnable Schisme and Heresies, to the faith, vnity and due obedience of Christes Catho∣lick church,Caluin. ad∣uers. Ana∣bap. In Do. Whitgiftes defence a∣gainst the Puritanes. page. 260. & 74. (out of which, as euen Caluin in his booke against the Anabaptists, and Doctor Whitgift in his defence against the Puritanes doe affirme, there is no remission of sinnes, but men beeing out of the church doe then as they say become diuels, and fall from error to error without any stay,) our Seminarie Priestes haue found most difficultie, and repugnancie in conuerting the Schismatickes and Heritickes, when they endeuoured to perswade them vnto Sacramentall confession of their sinnes, and to doe Pennance for them.Lutherus in lib. de cap∣tiui. babyl. ait homo Christianus etiam volens non potest perdere sa∣lutem suam quantiscun∣que peccatis nisi nolit credere. Because their cor∣rupted mans nature being so fraile and weake, and accustomed so many yeares together to presume to be secure & most certaine of their election, pre∣destination, iustification, and saluation, by their on∣ly faith in Christ, and not to bee afraide of their ac∣count at the dreadfull day of iudgement, for that no other sin but infidelity onely would condemne any christian before God, as their new Hereticall Preachers haue falsely taught them, what maruaile is it, if they haue bin, and be still vnwilling to con∣fesse their sinnes, and to doe Pennance for them, si∣thence
 they looke onely vnto the burden thereof, (as it seemeth to the fleshly consideration of theyr corrupted mans nature,) and know not as yet the inestimable great spirituall profit that would come vnto them thereby? And therefore we may easely conceaue, that our godly Priestes haue beene ex∣ceedingly encombred these late yeres, to perswade the common people of our miserable countrie to due reconsiliation to the catholike church, by cō∣fessing their sinnes, and doing Pennance for them, sith euen the new caluinisticall Bishops and Mini∣sters are not ashamed now to aleadge the same ex∣cuse, as a principall impediment of their ioyning in a Pacification in Religion with vs. For say they (in their treatise of Pacification,) confession of sinnes, and doing Pennance for them, is burdensome, and their mans nature abhorreth it.
But vnto this their fleshly consideration of the corruption and weakenes of mans nature, without any spiritual consideration of the inestimable great light and force of the grace of God, which remo∣ueth away the great hardnes and difficultie, that is in keeping God his commandements, wee may say vnto the caluinistes and Puritanes, as our Sauiour Christ said vnto the Pharisees, Vos secundum carnem iudicatis. You doe iudge according to the flesh.Ioh. 8. v. 15 1. Cor. 2.14 And as S. Paul writeth to the Corinthians. The sensual mā perceaueth not those things that are of the spirit of God, for it is foolishnes to him, and he cannot vnderstand, be∣cause they are spiritually examined. And withall, wee must put them in remembrance of those notable sayings of S. Paul to the Romans. They that are ac∣cording to the flesh,Rom. 8. ver. 5.6.26 are affected to the thinges that are of the flesh, but they that are according to the spirit, are affected to the thinges that are of the spirit, &c. And that the wisedome of the flesh is death, and an enemie to
 God, for to the law of God it is not subiect, neyther can it be. And that the spirit of God helpeth our infirmity.
If we had such liberty graunted vnto vs by Al∣mighty God,No other religion but only a licen∣tious fleshly religion wil content and perswade the calui∣nists & Pu∣ritans, to a∣gree vnto a pacification with Christs catholicke church. as to deuise and chuse such a religion as should be best liking to mans nature, & not bur∣densome vnto vs, I see then wee might agree with all the Lutherans, Caluinists, and Puritanes vppon a Pacification in religion. For then should we easily agree together to haue no fasting, no watching, no long prayers, nor any sorrow, confession, nor satis∣faction, nor any obseruation of vowes of chastitie made to God, nor any louing of our enemies, and persecutors, nor any iudging of our selues, nor any chastising or mortifying of our rebellious flesh, nor any working of our saluation with feare and trem∣bling: but we might then agree together, to lay all vpon Christs Crosse, & account our selues as faith∣full members with Christ, without carrying our Crosse dayly with Christ, and without following his painefull footsteps,Luke. 9. verse. 23. 1. Iohn. 2.6. Rom. 8.17. 2. Cor. 1.7. 2. Cor. 4.10 2. tim. 2.11 1. Pet. 2.21 1. Pet. 4.1. and we would then be glo∣rified with Christ, without suffering with Christ, & be secure, and most certaine of our election pre∣destination, iustification, and saluation, by our only faith in Christ: and no other sin should then con∣demne any christian, but infidelitie only: and then woulde wee come to church, onely to praise and thanke the Lord, with singing some Geneua riming Psalmes, for such a licentious fleshly Religion, as were void of all painefull austere workes, and wee might then condemne all the austere penitentiall liues of S. Iohn Baptist, & of all the holy Heremits, Monkes, and other Saintes that were in the Primi∣tiue church, as foolish and superstitious.
The calui∣nists licen∣tious religi∣on, groun∣ded vppon Iustification by faith on∣ly, is not bur¦densome to flesh and blood. Rom. 8. verse. 13. 1. Cor. 15.50.O how conformable and well liking would such a licentious religion be to mans corrupted nature: And how soone and easily might we then haue such
 a Pacification in religion th the caluinists & Pu∣ritanes, as would not bee burdensome to flesh and blood, nor abhorring from mans nature?
But now forsomuch as the will and ordinance of almighty God is reuealed to his church in the ho∣ly scriptures, contrary to such a dissolute Pacifica∣tion in religion, for that therein is signified, that if wee liue according to the flesh wee shall die. And that flesh and blood (I meane not their substance, but their corrupt qualitie) cannot possesse the kingdome of God, & that we must mortifie and subdue our flesh, to make it obedient vnto our spirit, and sith also our Sauiour Christ hath instituted, and ordained in the holy scriptures,Iohn. 20. ver. 21.22. that wee must confesse our sinnes vnto a Priest our Ghostly Father, and doe pennance for them, that thereby we may be made partakers (as his faithfull obedient members) of the inestimable abundant fruites of his bitter pas∣sion and death, for obtaining of remission of our sins. All christians ought therefore to follow pre∣cisely his holy will, and ordinance therein, and to pray daily to Almighty God to help vs with the as∣sistance and strengthning of his grace, that we may be strong, and able to beare this burden of confes∣sing our sins, and dooing pennance for them, & to resist and ouercome the great difficultie & repug∣nancy of our mans nature in the execution there∣of: in such wise, that wee may conquere all the in∣ordinate affections, heauines, and lothsomnesse of flesh and blood, and say couragiously with S. Paul.Phillip. 4. ver. 13. Gala. 2.20 1. Cor. 6.17 Qui adhe∣ret Domin vnus spiri∣tus est. Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat. I can doe al things in him that comforteth mee. And say likewise with him. I liue, now not I, but Christ liueth in me. For as he also writeth to the Corinthians. He that cleaueth to our Lord is one spirit with him. In which places of holy scripture we see, that S. Paul maketh no great
 account of the corruption and weakenes of mans nature, when he considereth the inestimable great light, force, and strength of the Spirit, and grace of God,Mat. 7. ve. 7.8.11. which surmounteth it exceedingly in strēgth without any comparison, and is neuer denied to a∣ny christian, praying duely for the same.
And after that a Christian hath obtained the spirit and grace of God, then findeth he verified in himselfe (as S. Iohn saith) that the Commandementes of God are not heauie:1. Iohn. 5.3. Mat. 11.30 2. Cor. 12.9 Sap. 8.21. Phil. 2.13. Rom. 7. ver. 24.25. Rom. 8.37. Mat. 19.17 Ioh. 15.14. Psal. 118. ver. 32.172 Seruaui mā ata tua. and (as our Sauiour Christ af∣firmeth) that his yoke is sweet and his burden light, and withall, that as Christ said vnto S. Paul. Sufficit ti∣bi gratia mea, my grace is sufficient to strengthen thee, so is the grace of God sufficient to strengthen a christian in such wise, that he may be stronge and a∣ble therewith to keepe God his commandements, in such degree of perfection, as Almighty God re∣quireth of vs in this our transitory life, according as the Prophet Dauid did keep them after his con∣uersion, as it is expresly affirmed in one of his Psalmes.
Wherefore I desire the Caluinists & Puritans, in their treating of a Pacification in religion with vs, not to haue so great regard to the burden of flesh, and blood, as to debarre all christians thereby of Pennance, and Sacramental confession of their sins to a Priest their Ghostly father: but rather to con∣sider with them selues what inestimable spirituall profit commeth vnto all christians that deuoutlie frequent the same. For as the learned diuine Caie∣tan saith very well.idi Sum∣ulam Cai∣ani de pec∣atis. it. Confes∣io. Frequens confessio est medicina valde conseruatiua hominis in timore Dei. That is to say, Often confession is a medicine preseruing a man ve∣ry much in the feare of God. Insomuch that by expe∣rience it is now found, that looke in what coun∣tries of Christendome Sacramentall confession to a
 Priest is abolished, there the whole common welth (by wanting such a notable and moste certaine in∣strument, for correcting and amending the maners and liues of christians) is much more full of all se∣cret, and most horrible sins, then it was in former times before Sacramentall confession of sinnes was abolished. And both men, and women, young, and old, are there generally so farre corrupted with the custome of sin, that they haue lost all feare of God, and are become so desperate, and shameles in theyr horrible sinnes, that they are not ashamed nowe o∣penly to commit thē, & openly to bragge of them.
The Protestantes of Germany haue publikely ac∣knowledged their great ouer-sight in debarring their people from vsing Sacramentall confession of theyr sinnes. And therefore as the famous learned diuine Dominicus Soto,Dominicus Soto in Quart. Sen∣ten. dist. 18. quest. 1. art. 1. Ghostly Father to the late Emperour Charles the fift reporteth, as a thing done in his presence, the Protestantes of the Citty of Norim∣berge in Germany, sent an Embassage to the Empe∣rour, whereby they made humble sute vnto him to set forth an Emperiall Edict, for to constraine the people, to vse againe secret confessiō of their sins. For that (as their Embassadors then affirmed) they had found by experience, since the time that the people of their citty had ceased to vse secret con∣fession of their sinnes, that all their common wealth abounded with such horrible vices against Iustice,In the Acts of Parlia∣ments. Ann. 5. Reginae Eliza. cap. 8 cap. 9. & ca. 14. Ann. 13 Reginae Eli∣za. cap. 5. cap. 7. cap. cap. 8. Ann. 23. Reginae Eliza. cap. 7 cap. 8. and cap. 9. And see the Puritanes Epistle to the Church of England, in their se∣cond reply against Do. Whitgifts defence. and other vertues, as in former ages were vtterlie vnknowne to their people.
And as touching our owne countrie of England, I appeale not only to the graue iudgement, and te∣stimony of all the Iudges, Iustices, and other Magi∣strates, and Officers, in euery sheire: but euen also vnto the manifold, lamentable, and most grieuous complaints, of the increase of late yeres of so much
 false deceitfull dealing, and other wickednes spe∣cified (with rehearsall of many horrible particu∣lars) in diuers Acts of sundry late Parliaments, en∣acted, and published in print, by full consent of all the Estates of our realme, yea, and by the consent of all the new Archbishops, and Bishops, who o∣penly agreed and gaue their voices in those Par∣liaments vnto those so lamentable complaints, whe∣ther all sinnes of murder, incest, adultery, theft, wil∣full periurie, subornation of false witnesse, forging of false euidences, and writinges, lying, deceitfull dealing, fraudulent banckrupting, slaūdering, glut∣tonie, delicacie, drunkennes, ruffianlie, and womā∣ly apparell, and all kinde of pride, arrogancy, and presumption, haue not much more increased in our realme, since the time that the vse of secret cō∣fession of our sins to our Ghostlie Father hath bin banished away from thence.
Sacramētall onfession of our sins to our ghost¦ly Father, is ordayned by Christ in his Church as a otable meane for orrecting nd amend∣ng the mā∣ers & liues f Christi∣ans.Verilie, for all catholike countreys all godlie wise men be there perwsaded, that whatsoeuer ho∣linesse, pietie, & Religion, haue beene by the spe∣ciall fauour of God preserued in the Church in this corrupt age, the same for a great part is to bee ascribed vnto the Godly vse of Sacramentall Con∣fession of our sins vnto our Ghostly Father. And of this point we may al assure our selues, that in case it were not of such inestimable profit for the salua∣tion of our soules, and such a principall approued bulwarke & defence of vertue among Christians, as it is, Satan the enemie of all mankinde (who cō∣tinuallie enuieth, and endeuoreth to hinder our saluation) woulde neuer haue labored so malici∣ouslie, and earnestlie, by his hereticall ministers, as he hath done in this wicked time, to depriue al christians of the Godlie vse & benefit therof
Now for conclusion, I must humblie desire your
 honors, and worshipps, not onlie diligentlie to reade ouer, but also earnestlie to followe the God∣lie instructions conteyned in this notable vertuous booke. Wherin the Godlie Awthor hath excellēt∣lie wel taught vs, how to be sorowfull for our sins, and howe to confesse them, and make satisfaction for the gilte of temporall payne dewe vnto them, and with that dewe Preparation and order wee must receaue the most blessed Sacrament of the Aulter. And he hath also geuen vs very notable good christian rules for the better direction of our liues. And withall I haue annexed & dispersed in some partes of this boke diuers additions, collec∣ted out of the best learned catholike bokes I could finde. The which additions in regard of the pre∣sent generall infection of our countrey with manie pestilent heresies, are not onlie in my opini∣on, but in the graue Iudgement also of other more wise, and learned men, thought verie necessarie, for the better explaning, & vnderstāding of the chur∣ches doctrine, concerninge confssion, and Satis∣faction, & diuers causes of conscience. The additi∣ons are printed in a distinct seuerall letter from the Awthors booke, sauing that certayne deuout pray∣ers onlie of the Awthors be printed with the same distinct letter. And whatsoeuer commendations is to be geuen for the additions, is to be referred vnto diuers godly diuines, that haue assisted me therein, with their graue learned aduises, and corrections.
I beeseche almightie God to blesse, direct, and confirme all your honers, & worships with a prin∣cipall spirit, that ye may so liue and die in the aun∣cient Catholicke Faith and Religion of our Holie Christian forefathers, that yee may raigne also with our Sauiour Christ and with them, in euerlasting glorious felicity in the kingdome of heauen, where
 neuer yet came, nor can possibly come, any of the Lutheran, Zuinglian, Caluinian, Puritan, or other damnable Hereticall Sectes, that haue died vnre∣pentant therein, out of the vnitie, and obedience of Christs Catholicke Church. From Roan, vppon the Holy Feast of the conuersion of S. Paul, in the yeare of our Lord. 1599.

