



COnsiderynge thys tyme (moste vertuouse Ladye) to be the tyme of Christes raygne & kyngedome, whe∣rein the Gospel is the rule of the prin¦xely powers, and mercy is more este∣med then sacrifyce: I thoughte that I coulde not gratify your grace more with any kynde of obsequye, that I coulde shewe through the slender ta∣lentes, that it hathe pleased the al∣mighty to endue me withall, then yf
I shoulde set forth in the Englysh tōg, some godly lesson of some learned and Christian teacher, concernyng thesa∣me, I haue therfore translated into the Englishe long this little boke of mai∣ster Martine Luthers doyng, concer∣nyng the kyngedome of Christe and Christian libertie, made vpon the E∣pistle of Ieremye the Prophete. And because I know that a good thing can not be to often nor to muche spoken of. I haue added hereunto another piece of thesame mans labours, a ser∣mon that he made vpon the eyghte Psalme. Lorde, our Lorde, &c. concer∣nynge the same matter, and cousyde∣ryng that fayth in the bloude of chri∣ste our sufficient price and raunsome, & the hope of the resurrection these mor∣tal bodyes, is most necessary to be kno¦wen to al christians. I haue also added in the ende of this litle boke, a sermon made by the famouse doctour Vrba∣nus Regius, concernyng thesame, ma¦de vpō the ix. Chapyter of Mathewe, occasyon taken by the mencyon of the woman, that suffered the bloude flixe
and the rulers daughter.
Howe pithilye, learnedly and christi∣anlye the, these matters be handled, it shal not nede me to reporte, knowing that your grace delyteth more in the, the pervsyng & readynge of the Au∣thours themselues, then of any enco∣mion or prayse, that can be geuen vnto them, willynge all other therfore to followe your graces example herein. I committe this my labour vnto your grace, as a most sure tokē of my good wyll to gratifie your grace by setting forth and furthering to my power, the trueth of Christ, who alway∣es preserue your gra¦ce to muche ho∣nour, spiritu∣all know∣ledge, and lyfe wythout ende. So be it.
Your graces faythfull and dayly Oratour Gwalter Lynne.
