


AMongst the monsters of this world, with whom I haue bin in continuall combate these three whole yeeres and more, I am enforced now at the length to turne mine eyes vnto you, and to haue you in remembrance (O most holy father Leo) yea, for as much as you only bee accoun∣ted the very cause of this my turmoyle, I cannot choose but bee alwayes mindfull of you. And albeit I haue beene constrai∣ned, through insatiable cruelty of your wicked Sicophants, raging against mee without desert, to appeale to the next ge∣nerall Counsell, little esteeming the most vaine decrees of your predecessours, Pius, and Iulius,The De∣crees doe prohibite to appeale to the ge∣nerall Councels. who of a foolish tyranny haue prohibited such appellatiō to be made frō the See Apostolique. Yet did I neuer meane whiles so estrange mine affection from your holines, but that I haue with all mine heart wished all felicity and hap∣pines

to you and to your See, and in my daily prayers with teares and sighes, euen to the vttermost of my power, haue hearti∣ly besought God for the same: But as for those which haue hitherto practised to ter∣rify me with the authority and maiesty of your name, I haue now begun almost to contemne and account them of no force: onely one thing yet remayneth, which I may not despise, which occasioned mee at this present to addresse my letters to your holinesse. And this it is,The cause why Lu∣ther wrote these Let∣ters to the Pope. because I perceiue that I am accused vnto your holinesse, and very grievously blamed for my rashnesse, in that I am supposed to haue no conside∣ration of your personage.
Wherein, to confesse the truth plainly, I am priuy in mine owne conscience, that wheresoeuer behooueth me to make men∣tiō your of person, I did neuer speak ther∣of without all honour and reuerence: the contrary wherof if I had attempted at any time, I might not haue beene able to iusti∣fie, and would by all meanes possible haue subscribed vnto their iudgments, cōceiued of me herein, and withall would haue ap∣plyed

to nothing more willingly, than to make open recantation of this my teme∣rity, and misdemeanour in that behalfe: I haue named you a Daniel in Babylon:How Lu∣ther beha∣ued him∣selfe to¦wards the Pope. and your notable innocency with how earnest affection I haue defended against your slanderous enemy Syluester, euery reader doth sufficiently vnderstand, namely, that the opinion and report of your vnrepro∣uable life, resoūding in each coast through∣out the whole world, by the testimony of so many & so notable personages is mre famous and renoumed, than that it may be impeached by the sinister practise of any man, though neuer so great a potentate. I am not so void of reason, as to defame him whom all men commend, so also haue I beene euer of this minde, not to seeke the defacing of any one, though otherwise in∣famous by report of al others for I reioyce not at another mans blemish, who am my self a sufficient witnes to mine own consci∣ence, of mine owne great beame in mine owne eye: nor can be the first that may cast a stone at the woman taken in adultery.
Indeed I haue accustomed my selfe to

inueigh against wicked doctrines,Why Lu∣ther was so vehe∣ment a∣gainst his aduersaries some∣what sharply: and haue pinched mine ad∣uersaries, not for their licentious liues, but for their irreligious doctrines, somewhat earnestly: whereof it so little repenteth me, that I am fully perswaded, without all regard had of mens censures herein, to perseuere in that vehemency of zeale: en∣duced hereunto by the example of Christ, who according to the same zeale, spared not to call his aduersaries Vipers brood, blinde Hypocrites, and children of the de∣uill. So doth Paul accuse Symon Magus to bee the child of Sathan, full of fraud and malice.Paul and the Pro∣phets be sharpe a∣gainst the tender∣lings. And some others he repro∣ueth openly by the name of Dogges, De∣ceiuers, and crafty Simonists. Of whose sharpe words, if nice delicates may bee admitted Iudges, nothing shall bee suppo∣sed more nipping and vnciuill. What can bee more vehement than the Prophets? certes the manners of our age,The deli∣cate man∣ners of our age. are become so tender through the furious swarme of clawbacks, that wee can no sooner feele our soares a little discouered, but wee ex∣claime forthwith that we are launced: and

being not able to crack the credit of the truth by any cauillation, we flee from her, condemning her of currishnesse, impati∣ence, and modesty. How shall salt season if it be not sauory? what auaileth the edge of a sword if it cannot cut? cursed is the man that doth the Lords worke fraudu∣lently. Wherefore I humbly beseech you (my reuerend Leo) vouchsafe these my let∣ters for mine excuse, and withall perswade your selfe, that I neuer conceiued any e∣uill of your personage. Then also, that I am so affected towards you, as that I could heartily wish vnto your Holinesse all feli∣city for euer.Luthers variance. Moreouer, that I am not at variance with any man, for conuersation of life, but only touching the only word of truth. In all matters else whatsoeuer, I will giue place to others, but the word, neither can I, nor will I forsake or deny. Who so that iudgeth of mee otherwise, or hath conceiued otherwise of my writings, doth not iudge truly, nor conceiue thereof a∣right.
The Court of Rome.But your See (which is tearmed the Court of Rome, and which neither

you, nor any man liuing can deny to bee more filthy than Babylon and Zodome, and as farre forth as I can conceiue, growne to most lamentable, forlorne, and most shamelesse impiety) I haue detested indeed, and haue taken it very grieuously, that the people of Christ should be deluded vnder the countenance of your name and your holinesse, and vn∣der the pretence of the Church of Rome: and herein haue resisted, and will resist the same, as long as the spirit of Faith shall liue in me: not because I dare thinke to atchieue impossibilities, or that by mine onely endeauour, I may hope for any amendment in this most confusely dis∣ordered Babylon, being circumuented with such a rable of brainsicke blaunchers: But because I do acknowledge my selfe indebted to my poore brethren, whose safety I ought to regard; that the losse of them that perish may bee abridged, or at the least lesse infection may spreade a∣broad from those Romish botches.What stuffe hath issued from Rome into the world. For these many yeeres now Rome hath sur∣rounded the whole world with nothing

else, (whereof your holines is not ignorāt) but with vtter destruction of all things, of bodies, of soules, and with most pesti∣ferous patterns of al mostrous wickednes: which doth rage at this day in the sight of all men, more manifest than the Sun in midday:The Church of Rome. And the Church of Rome which was sometime the most holy of all other, is become the most licentious denne of theeues, the most shamelesse Brothelhouse of all the world, the kingdome of Sinne, Death, and Hell, in so much that it passeth all reach of man to deuise any abhomina∣tion, that is not haunted there, no though Antichrist himselfe were come.
In the meane time you (right reuerend father Leo) sit as a Lambe in the middest of Wolues, as Daniel a middest the Lions, and are with Ezechiel conuersant with Scor∣pions. How can you alone be able to wth∣stand all these monsters? Gard your per∣sonage with three or foure Cardinals ex∣cellent in all learning, and most vertuous in manners: what shall this handfull doe amongst so great a troupe? you shall all be sooner swallowed vp with poyson, before

you may dare attempt any reformati∣on. The Court of Rome is vtterly vndone, the wrath of God is bent against it euen for euer and euer. It hateth counsels, it feareth to bee reformed, it is not able to restraine the furiousnesse of her impiety: and it ac∣complisheth the prophecy of her mother, of whom it is written on this wise: Wee haue cherished Babylon, and she is not re∣couered, let vs forsake her. Indeed it be∣longed to you, & your Cardinals, to haue cured those plagues: but this gout scor∣neth the Physitians drugges, and this cart will not goe driuen nor led. Moued there∣fore with remorse, herein I sorrowed al∣wayes (right reuerend Leo) because you were enstalled Pope in this wicked age, whose worthinesse deserued a better time: For the Court of Rome is not worthy to be possessed of you, and such as you are, but rather of Sathan himselfe,Sathan raighneth at Rome, not the Pope. which in truth doth raigne in this Babylon, more thā you. O would to God you could con∣tent you selfe rather with some priuate benefice, or with your parents patrimony, renouncing this portlinesse, wherewith

those flatterers your most detestable ene∣mies, doe vaunt you to bee glorious, with which glory none are meet to bee glo∣rified, but trayterous Iscariots, the impes of perdition. For what commendation else do you get in that Palace (my Leo) but that by how much any Teacher is more wicked execrable, so much the more safe∣ly hee may shrowd him vnder your name and authority, to robbe men of their mo∣ney and soules, to heape mischiefe vpon mischief, to oppresse Faith, Truth, together withall the Church of God? Oh most vn∣fortunate Leo, doubtlesse enthronized in a most perilous place of renowne:Eugenius was Pope, sometimes Schollar vnto Ber∣nard. for I tell you the truth, because I doe wish well vnto you: For if Bernard took compassion of his welbeloued Eugenius, when as yet there was some better hope of the See of Rome, (though then also it was filthily em∣perious,) whereof may we complaine first, who haue weltered these three hundred yeeres now in stench and destruction? Is not this true, that vnder the whole out-stretched face of the heauens, there is no∣thing more cōtagious, more pestiferous, &

more odious, thā the court of Rome? for it is more incomparably execrable, than the turkish impiety, so that true it is indeed, that the same which was in times past the gate of heauen, is now become a certaine gaping gulfe of Hell, and so vnsatiable a gulfe, as cannot possibly be satisfied, the wrath of God being fully bent against the same.One only remedy remaining in the cor∣rupt Ro∣mish Church. One only comfort remaineth for the poore wretches, if we be able to reclaime & preserue some few at the least, from this wide gaping iawes (as I said before,) Be∣hold (my holy father Leo) by what induce∣ment, & by what reason I haue inueigh∣ed against this chaire of pestilence: for it is so farre off from my thought to grow in outrage against your personage, as that I would hope to obtaine your fauour, and bee deemed a stout patrone of your safe∣ty, if I would manfully, and valiantly crush in pieces the Gates of this your dungeon, or of this your Hell rather: for howsoeuer the generall force of all polli∣cie can possibly imagine to worke the vtter ruine of the most horrible Court of this age, the same shall redound al to your

person, to the preseruation of your estate, and to the safety of many others together with you. Such as doe worke her confu∣sion, doe execute your function. They do aduance the glory of Christ, which doe by all meanes possible detest her. To con∣clude, they be right Christians which are least Romanists.
But to speake hereof more at large. There neuer came any such thought into my head, as to enueigh against the Court of Rome, or to discourse thereof any thing at all: For when I perceiued that all pre∣seruatiues were medicinable to procure her amendment, I withdrew mee from her, and deliuering her a libell of diuorce, I spake vnto her in this wise: Hee that is filthy, let him continue in his filthinesse still, and he that is vncleane, let him con∣tinue in his vncleanesse still, yeelding my selfe ouer to the calme and quiet study of holy Scriptures, whereby I might be able to profit my brethren dwelling round about me. Here now when as I could ve∣ry little auaile, Sathan beganne to open his eyes, and to prick forward his trusty

seruant Iohn Eccius,Who did prouoke Luther to pursue the trecheries of the false deceiuers. a notorious enemy of Christ, swelling with a certaine outra∣gious licenciousnesse of glory, chalenging me to a combate vnloked for, tripping me for one very little word escaped mee vna∣wares, touching the Supremacy of the Church of Rome. This same proud praun∣cing Thraso, frushing in his Fustian fumes, vanted lustily that hee durst attempt all things for Gods glory, and the honour of the holy See Apostolique: And being puft vp with saucy malapertnesse of abusing your power, made no surer accompt of any thing, than of present conquest, seeking thereby not so much the pry∣macy of Peters chayre, as his owne prima∣cy peerelesse amongst all the Diuines of this age, for the better atchieuing where∣of, hee perceiued that to leade poore LVTHER Captiue, would bee not the least brauery of his triumph, which enter∣prise, because it hapned vnluckily & con∣trary to the exhortation of the foolish Sophister, the man waxed incredibly fu∣rious: for he perceiued, that whatsoeuer infamy was raysed by mee, against

the Romish Church, was procured by his owne onely temerity and rashnesse.
Vouchsafe here I beseech you (right re∣uerend Leo) that I may here once defend mine owne cause, and discouer your very naturall enemies: It is not vnknowne vnto you, (I suppose) how your Legate the Cardinall of Saint Sixtus did deale with me,Cardinall Caietane. an vndiscrete man, and vn∣ciuill, nay rather a false man: Into whose protection when I had yeelded my selfe and all mine estate for the reuerence that I beare to your holinesse, he endeauoured not to conclude a quietnesse which hee might euen with halfe a word haue esta∣blished easily, when as I then promised to keepe silence, and put vp my quarrell, so that mine aduersaries might be inioyned to doe the like. But this glorious man, not satisfied with these conditions, began to authorize mine aduersaries, to giue them free liberty, and to enioyne mee to recant, which was no parcell of his com∣mission. Certesse, when here the cause was yet in very good plight, through his im∣moderate handling, it began to fester

worse & worse, wherupon, whatsoeuer fell afterwards, was to be imputed, not to Lu∣ther, but to Caietanes vndiscretenesse al∣together, who would not permit mee to be silent, and to remaine in quiet, which I did at that time most earnestly desire, for what might I doe more?
After him came Charles Militius,Charles Militius. and he also Legate of your holinesse, who trauel∣ling many and sundry waies, poasting here and there, forth and backe, and omit∣ting nothing that might appertaine to the redresse of the state of the cause, which Ca∣ietane had rashly and proudly disordered, could scarce at the length bring it to passe, (though countenanced herein by the most renowned Prince Frederike the Elector) that he might haue once or twice some fa∣miliar conference with me,Iudges of Luthers cause cho∣sen. where I once againe yeelded to your authoritie, conten∣ted to hold my peace, not refusing either Archbishop of Tryers, or the Bishop of Numburgh to be iudge in the cause, which was concluded and obtained. Whiles these matters proceeded thus very order∣ly, behold the other, yea, a greater enemy

of your estate,Eccius. The dispu∣tation at Lypsia. Eccius rusheth out with his disputation at Lypsia, which hee had then published against D. Conolastadius, and picking a new quarrell of the supremacy of the Pope, bends his shot against mee at vnawares, and vtterly dissolueth this conclusion of Peace. In the meane time Carolus Militius attendeth the successe, Disputation beginneth, Iudges are chosen: yet neuerthelesse, hitherto nothing was determined, and no maruaile, forasmuch as through Eccius false lying, dissēbling, & false packing, all things were full of vnqui∣etnesse, abounded in all melancholly, and fraught of all parts with confused disor∣der, so that which way soeuer Iudgement were giuen, greater stormes would be ray∣sed: for he sought for Glory, and not for the Truth. And here also I omitted no part of duty that behooued me to doe.
And I confesse, that this was not the least occasion of the discouery of the Ro∣mish trumperies: yet such as it was, if any offence grew thereby, it was altogether to  imputed to Eccius, which vndertaking  enterprise aboue his reach, whiles he

gaped ouer-greedily for his owne glory, did display abroad to the view of the whole world, the infamous estate of Rome. This,The flat∣terer Ecci∣us did hurt the Court of Rome more than the most mightiest enemy else could doe. euen this same Eccius is your e∣nemy (my Leo) or rather the enemie of your Court, by whose onely example, a man may learne sufficiently, that there is none more pestilent an enemie, than a flatterer, for what gayned hee by his blaunching else but a mischiefe, which no earthly King nor Potentate could bring to passe? for the name of the Ro∣mish Court doth stincke now ouer the whole world, and the Papane au∣thoritie is very much crased, notorious ignorance is generally cryed out vpon, whereof wee should not haue heard any one word at all, if Eccius had not turmoyled the peace agreed vpon be∣twixt Charles and mee, which now himselfe perceiueth plaine enough, all too late, and in vaine, storming a∣gainst the imprinting of my Bookes. Thus much behooued him then to haue thought vpon, when like a wilde vntamed Colt, hee raunged wholly for

glory, and when he sought naught else but his owne aduancement, vnder the co∣lour of your holinesse, to your maruel∣lous detriment and danger; notwithstan∣ding the foolish vaine man hoped, that I would haue surceased, and kept silence, being afraid of the sound of your autho∣rity (for of his wit and learning, I doe not beleeue, that he was so foole-hardie) and now perceiuing that I haue taken courage, and my writings scattered abroad too much, being all too late sory for his vn∣aduised wilfulnesse, he doth vnderstand, that there raigneth one in Heauen, who resisteth the proud, and casteth downe the haughty of minde, if at least yet hee con∣ceiue so much.
Therefore, when as by this our dispu∣tation, nothing was wrought but a greater confusion of the Romish cause, Charles Militius maketh now his third repaire to the elders of the order, being assembled in the Chapter house, desireth aduise how to qualifie the contention, which was euen now growne to great trouble, and won∣derfull perill: from whom (for as much as

there was small hope now to ouerthrow me, Gods mercy assisting me) some of the greatest pesonages were sent vnto me, to intreate, that I would haue consideration of the estimation and honour of your ho∣linesse, and that I should in humble let∣ters, excuse both your innocency, and mine owne, declaring that the matter was not yet growne to so despaired a case, as to be without hope of recouery, if Leo the tenth would of his naturall inclination to lenitie, vouchsafe his ayde thereto; here now as one that hath alwaies both offered, and wished for tranquility, that I may the better apply my selfe to more quiet, and more profitable exercise, wher∣as I had so vehemently turmoyled my selfe to this end, that in mightinesse and force, as well of words, as courage, I might suppresse the insolencie of them, whom I perceiued to be farre vnequall to match with me, I did not only yeeld wil∣lingly, but with ioy also and thankefull minde, imbraced the request, as a most ac∣ceptable benefit, if it may proue according to our expectation.
Luther will not recall any thing.In this minde I come now (oh holy fa∣ther) and falling prostrate at your feet, doe most humbly beseech you to grant your assistance herein, and to restraine (if it bee possible) the outrage of these flatterers, the very cankers of Vnity, though masking vnder the vizor of peace. But to wish mee to reuoke that which I haue written (most holy father) it booteth not for any man to hope for, vnlesse he be desirous rather to haue the matter to be more largely blown abroad.
He will not suffer the theeues to make lawes for interpre∣ting Gods word.Moreouer, I doe not allow these lawes concerning the interpretation of Gods word to be restrained to the Church of Rome, or tyed to any place, for as much as the word of God (which teacheth free∣dome of all things else) ought not to bee straighted, and abridged of her freedome. The two conditions reserued, there is else nothing but that I can both doe, and suffer: yea, will most willingly yeeld vn∣to: I doe late hate contention: I will chal∣lenge no man, and I will not bee challen∣ged againe, but if I be teazed, I will not hold my tongue in my master Christ his

behalfe, for it is an easie matter for your holinesse to command silence, and qui∣etnesse on both parts, the quarrels being summoned before you, and determined, which I haue alwaies desired earnestly to heare.
Beware therefore (my holy father Leo) that you hearken not to these enchanters,He coun∣celleth the Pope not to he are flat∣terers. which make you not a naturall man, but halfe a God, and would enduce you to be∣leeue, that ye are able to command, and exact whatsoeuer you list. It will not be so, neither shall you preuaile, you are the seruant of seruants, and placed in the most dangerous estate of all others. Let them not beguile you, which imagine you to be the Lord of the World, which will not permit any man to be a Christian man; vnlesse he be subiect to your authoritie, which doe chatter and iangle, that you are of power to command in Heauen, in Hell, and in Purgatory. Those, euen those be your enemies, and seek the destruction of your soule, as the Prophet Esay doth witnesse, O my good people, such as doe praise thee, euen those doe deceiue thee.

They are out of the way, which doe extoll your maiestie aboue the Councell and v∣niuersal Church. They are out of the way which doe inuest you onely in the right of interping Scriptures, for such doe pra∣ctise to establish in the Church all their owne impieties, vnder your name. And a∣las for woe, by the meanes of those per∣sons, Sathan hath preuailed much in your predecessors. To be briefe, beleeue none of them that doe magnifie you, but such as do humble you, for this is the iudgement of God, He hath throwne downe the mighty from their seate, and hath exalted the humble and meeke. Behold what inequality there is betwixt Christ and his successors, when as they all notwithstanding will be ac∣counted Vicars of Christ. And I feare much, lest many of them be his Vicares in deede a great deale too earnestly: for a Vi∣car is hee that doth present the person of his Prince being not in place.What a Vicar is. Now, if the Pope doe beare dominion whiles Christ is not present, nor resiant within his heart, what is he else, than the Vicar of Christ? But what manner of Church is that then

else, but a rude multitude without Christ? And what maner of Vicar is this else, but Antechrist, and an Idol? How much more truly spake the Apostles, who named them∣selues the seruants of Christ being present, and not Vicars of Christ being absent.
Peraduenture, I shall be accounted a shamelesse fellow, that dare presume to teach so mighty a potentate, from whom all others ought to be instructed, and from whom all iudiciall Courts ought to fetch definitiue sentence (as your pestiferous clawbackes doe arrogantly vaunt) but I follow the example of Bernard, in his Book entituled De cōsideratione ad Eugeniū a necessary Booke for all Popes to know by heart. Neither doe I take this vpon me of any greedy desire to teach, but of duti∣full affection, in a pure and faithfull zeale, which doth enforce vs to be afraid, euen of the most plausible things in our neigh∣bours: and being altogether exercised in the perils and profits of other men, will not admit any respect to bee had of the worthy or vnworthy: for in as much at I know, that your holinesse is troubled,

and tossed at Rome, that is to say, in the maine sea of all sides enuironed about with infinite dangers, and that you swimme now in succourlesse waues miserably, as that you stand in neede of the meanest helpe of any your poorest brethren: I iudged it a point of no great absurditie, if I did lay aside the remembrance of your maiestie for a time, vntill I had executed the dutie of Loue. I will not flatter in so weighty and perillous a cause: in which doing, if I be not conceiued to be most friendly, and most humble vnto you, there is one that doth conceiue and iudge.
To conclude, because I would not seeme to come empty handed vnto your holi∣nesse, I bring with me this little Treatise, published vnder your name, as a pledge of truce to be concluded, & of good successe: wherein you may somewhat conceiue in what kinde of studies I can, and am very desirous to employ my time, more fruit∣fully and commodiously: if I heretofore might, or hereafter may now conuenient∣ly be free from your wicked flatterers. The matter is small, if you regard the outward

coate, but if you comprehend the thing is selfe, it is (if I be not deceiued) a most nota∣ble patterne of a Christian life, briefly cō∣piled. Neither haue I ought else being a poor man to gratifie your holinesse with∣all, neither neede you any other present, than spirituall consolation wherewithall I doe recommend my selfe wholly to your fatherhood, & holinesse. Which I beseech Christ Iesu to preserue for euer. Amen.
At Wittenberge the sixt of September, in the yeere of our Lord, 1520.
