



PARATIVS drawing the counter∣faite of Helen (right honorable) made the attier of hi head loose, who being demaunded why he dyd so, he aunswe∣red, she was loose. Vulcan was painted curiously, yet with a polt foote. Venus cūningly, yet with hir Mole. Alexander hauing a Skar in his cheeke helde his finger vpon it that Appelles might not paint it, Appelles painted him with his sin∣ger cleauing to his face, why quod Alexander I layde my finger on my Skarre bicause I would not haue t see it, (yea sayd Appelles) and I drew it there bcause none els should perceiue it, or if thy singer had bene a∣way, either thy Skarre would haue ben seene, or my ate mislyked: whereby I gather, that in all perfect wokes aswell the fault as the face is to be sowen. The sairest Leopard is sette downe with his spots, the swetest Rose with his prickles, the finest Veluet with his bracke. Seing then that in euery counterfaite as well the ble∣mish as the bewtie is coloured: I hope I shal not incur the displeasure of the wise, in that in the discourse of Euphues I haue aswel touched the vanities of his loue, as the vertues of his lyfe. The Persians who aboue all their Kings most honored Cyrus, caused him to be en∣grauen aswel with his hoked nose, as his high forehead. He that loued Homer best concealed not his lattering, & he that praised Alexander most bewrayed his quaf∣fing. Demonydes must haue a crooked shooe for his wry foote. Damocles a smoth gloue for his streight hād,

For as euery Paynter that shadoweth a man in all parts giueth euery peece his iust proporcion, so he that dis∣ciphereth the qualities of the mynde, ought aswell to shew euery humor in his kinde, as the other doth euery part in his colour. The Surgion that maketh the Anato¦my sheweth aswel the muscles in the heele, as the vaines of the hart. If then the fist sight of Euphues, shal seeme to light to be read of the wise, or to foolish to be regar∣ded of the learned, they ought not to impute it to the iniquitie of the author, but to the necessitie of the histo¦ry. Euphues beginneth with loue as allured by wyt, but endeth not with lust as bereft of wisedome. He wooeth women prouoked by youth, but weddeth not himselfe to wantonnesse as pricked by pleasure. I haue set down the follies of his wit without breach of modestie, & the sparks of his wisedome without suspicion of dishone∣stie. And certes I thinke ther be mo speaches which for grauitie wil mislyke the foolish, then vnsemely termes which for vanitie may offēd the wise. Which discourse (right Honorable) I hope you wil the rather pardon for the rudenes in that it is the first, & protect it the more willingly if it offend in that it shalbe the laste. It may be that fine wits wil descant vpon him, that hauing no wit goeth about to make the Anatomy of wit: And cer¦teinly their iesting in my mynd is tollerable. For if the butcher should take vpon him to cut the Anatomy of a man, bicause he hath skil in opening an Oxe, he would proue himself a Calfe: or if the Horselech would aduē∣ture to minister a Potion to a sick patiēt, in that he hath knowledge to giue a drench to a diseased Horse, he would make himselfe an Asse. The Shomaker must not go aboue his latchet, nor the hedger meddle with anye thing but his bill. It is vnsemely for the Paynter to fea∣ther a shaft, or the Fletcher to handle the pensill. All which thinges make most against me, in that a foole

hath intruded himselfe to discourse of wit. But as I was willing to commit the fault, so am I content to make a∣mendes. Howsoeuer the case standeth I looke for no prayse for my labour, but pardon for my good will: it is the greatest rewarde that I dare aske, and the least that they can offer. I desire no more, I deserue no lesse. Though the stile nothing delight the dayntie eare of the curious sifter, yet wil the matter recreate the minde of the courteous Reader. The varietie of the one wil a∣bate the harshnes of the other. Thinges of greatest pro∣fit, are sette foorth with least price. When the Wyne is neete there needeth no Iuie-bush. The right Coral nee∣deth no colouring. Where the matter it selfe bringeth credit, the man with his glose winneth smal commenda∣tion. It it therfore me thinketh a greater show of a preg¦nant wit, then perfect wisedome in a thing of sufficiēt excellencie, to vse superfluous eloquence. We cōmonly see that a black ground doth best beseme a white coun∣terfeit. And Venus according to the iudgemēt of Mars, was then most amyable, when she sate close by Vulca∣nus. If these thinges be true which experience tryeth, that a naked tale doth most truely set foorth the naked truth, that where the countenaunce is faire, ther neede no colours, that paynting is meter for ragged walls thē fine Marble, that veritie then shineth most bight whē she is in least brauery: I shal satisfie myne own mynde, though I cannot feede their humors, which greatly eke after those that sift the finest meale, & beare the whitest mouthes. It is a world to see how English men desire to heare finer speach then the language will allow, to eate finer bread then is made of Wheat, to weare finer cloth then is wrought of Woll. But I let passe their finenesse, which can no way excuse my folly. If your Lordship shal accept my good wil which I alwaies desired, I will patiētly beare the il wil of the malicious, which I neuer deserued.
Thus committing this simple Pamphlet to your Lordships patronage, & your Honour to the Almigh∣ties protection: or the preseruation of the which a most bounden, I will praye continu∣ally, I ende.

