


MAnifold are the miseries of mans life, wherewith he is greatly grie∣ued and sundry wayes molested, insomuch as Iob sayth that man that is borne of a woman hathe but a short time to liue, and is re∣plenished with miserie. For he beginneth his life with teares & weeping, he pas∣seth it with sorrow & trouble, and endeth it with dolour and payne. Wherefore it is no maruell if some haue thought that it is the best thinge not to be borne, and the next to dye quickly: and that o∣ther some haue mourned and wept at the birthes of their friendes, and solemnly reioyced at their burialls. For what could they being destitute of the light of God and true religion, see in this life but trouble & miserie? Yea the godly themselues, as they haue in all ages suffered many afflictions in this life, so haue they passed through the same
as through a straunge countrie. For if heauen be our countrie, what is the earth els but a place of banishment? wherein being exiled from true de∣lightes and pleasures, we liue in a state vnquiet, troublesom, and many wayes miserable, as to him that shall duely consider the sundry troubles that are incident to all sortes of men in this life, wil ea∣sily appeare.
Forasmuch then as this life is so miserable, as both the Saincts of God haue pronounced of it, the very heathen haue accounted it, & daily expe∣rience proueth it, & yet neuerthelesse we, seeing God hath placed vs in it, must remaine therein till he call vs away: great neede we haue of such con∣solation & encouragement as may be a meane to make vs passe the time thereof without grudging & impatiencie. For of our selues we are very fraile & weake, not able to resist, much lesse of power to ouercome, as is manifest by them, who in the time of affliction haue through impaciēcie murmured against God, albeit there both haue bene, and are many, who being not of them selues but by other meanes supported, haue patiently sustained many troubles and miseries.
Wherefore I trust that my labor shall not be thought ill bestowed, but rather profitably em∣ploied, which I haue taken in translating this trea∣tise into the Englishe tongue, for that it tendeth chiefly to the consolation of such as are in afflicti∣on and distresse. For that which the title of this booke portendeth, the matter thereof sufficiently proueth, namely that it containeth consolations for them that labor and are laden, that is, that suf∣fer
afflictions and troubles in this life: so that they which shall diligently read and peruse the same, may be so confirmed thereby, that when they be troubled with hardnes of aduersitie, they may not be ouercome or throwne downe therewith: when they be molested with griefe & sorrow, they may be also delited with spirituall ioy: when they be e∣uen distressed with troubles and afflictions, they may receiue courage againe, being cheared with sundry consolations, & so patiently suffer accor∣ding to Gods will whatsoeuer it shall please him to lay vpon them.
Howe great this commoditie is, it plainely ap∣peareth not onely by this, that the feelinge of the present affliction is thereby asswaged, but by this also, that it is a meane to moue and make vs to obey Gods will, which otherwise we woulde be readye to resist, and to suffer patient∣ly, whereas otherwise we woulde by impatien∣cie be stubborne agaynste the righteousnes of God.
Wherefore forasmuche as I am not ignoraunt that the crosse is vsually incident to the godly, and that through many afflictions we must enter into the kingdome of God, I am bolde to com∣mende this treatise to all the godly in generall, to be read of them to their singular commoditie and comfort, but especially to your worshippe, whose godly conuersation both of a longe tyme hath bene, and dayly is an euident testimonie of your syncere and vnfeyned profession of Christe his religion: desiringe you to esteeme thereof, not accordinge to the quantitye or
outward appearance (for then shall you make but small account of it, being both litle in quantitie, & adorned with no eloquent tearmes or glorious wordes) but according to the frute that the godly shall reape by diligent reading therof. For pearles and precious stones for the most part are in quan∣titie but small, and in outward appearance simple, which in value notwithstanding are great and in vertue excellent. Howbeit being sufficiently per∣swaded of your well accepting hereof, I will not stand vpon this point, lest I shoulde seeme in any wise to dout of it, but doe desire Almighty God, that as you haue hitherto liued in his feare, so ye may dayly increase, and con∣stantly continue in the same euen vnto the ende.

