



IN reading ouer dy∣uers bookes in the time of the late per∣secution, ther came one litle treatise too my handes wrytten in the Frenche tunge wherein (a∣boue the rest) I toke moste plesure and found cheefest comfort in that miserable time, and being not ful∣ly satisfied with the often readyng thereof: I took in hand for to trans∣late it into the Englishe tunge, for mine own vse only, thinking ther∣by to imprint it the more liuely in

my minde, beig not determined to haue published it abrode vntill a certaine freend by chaunce found it among other of my bookes, wyl∣led mee, and as it were vrged mee not to keep backe so excellent a tre¦sure from the people of God. At last (being overcome) I condescen∣ed to set it forth in print, deuising with my selfe to choose a patrone whose honorable name & renoume might be an occasion somewhat to stop the mouthe of the sicophant & priuy biter, I could not deuise one more meeter, and to whome this wurk more aptlier dooth agree nor whose estate is more liuelyer pai∣ted for the: then is in this litle vo∣lume, wherfore taking courage of your accustomable beneuolent kindenes towards me, I haue per fourmed my deuice, desiring your honour to accept my meaning and to be are with my rudenes.
he apostle. In the 15. to the Ro∣nes, declaring the cheefe con∣ionRo. 15. of a christian, saith. My brn. What so euer thinges are ten aforetime are written for learning, that by pacience and solatiō in ye scripture we might ne hope. In whiche woordes he clareth, that wee ought to seeke r comfortes In the holy scriptu∣s. But we must take heed, for ye riptures doo oft vse a double fy∣re or maner of speaking, shew∣g vnto me as it were a double irrour to look in, of thīg{is} tēpered  mīgled to gether (that is to say) f good and euell, as the wise man ith, in the day of euel: remember he good, and in the prosperous dai∣s remember aduersity. The holy host knowing the affection of mā  be without measure, and to esty∣ate things according to his own pinion, assaieth with all possible

meanes too withdrawe man from his vaine estimation and affeccion of erthly thing{is} so that the affecti∣on beeing taken away, all things wilbe indifferent. But suche an al∣teration and chan̄ge can not come but by the wurd ōf God, and of good right we ought too seek no other cō¦solation or rule to guide vs but the scripture, whiche in the daye of ad∣uersity bringeth vs to consider the prosperitye whiche eyther is pre∣sent or to come, and likewise in the day of prosperity doth call vs back to cōsider aduersity. Also the spirit of God speaking it by the mouthe of wise Salomon, geueth vs too vn¦derstand that the ioy of man is cō∣passed with sorow, and also sadnes, sorow and displeasure, be alwaies ioyned and linked together wyth some mirth & plesure, that hard∣ly can man declare ye end of one or the beginning of the other, in such

meruelous wise is anger, sorow & es, aptly ioyned and linked wt  bewtiful colour of ioy and ple∣, and not only linked or ioined:  rather mingled or confoūded  one into the other, so that it is possible to finde in this mortall e, any litle spark of the one: but is mengled with the other, the ery Hethen knowe this. For a reeke Poet said that the pleasure f this world was not the true ple∣re: but was sorow clothed in ple¦sures garment{is}, and sheweth in is maner. He said that when the essel yt Pandora brought on earth was opened, whereby all the mis∣cheefes and humaine misery wēt forth & then plesure went forth al∣so, & going a brode in the world: he began by all meanes to draw men nto him, who began to folow him in suche sorte that none went any more into heauen. Wherfore Ju¦piter

thought to take pleasure frō the earth and to bring him againe into heauen, and therupon sent the nine Muses for hī, whoo with their melody drew him againe into hea¦uen causing hī yet before, to leaue his apparel behinde him on earth, because into heauen entreth no cor¦rupt deckinges. Sorow in this meane time wandring abrode in the world, found this apparel, and thinking that yf hee clothed hym self therin, he should not so be cha∣ced and driuen from euery man, & not being knowen: he put it on his back, & so euer after he hath gone about the world clothed in pleasu∣res apparel, deceiuing men conti∣nually. Meaning by this yt all thin¦ges yt men take for pleasure bring them sorowe, and the pleasur{is} of this worlde, too be none other but sorowes clothed and couered with a very small delite, whereby men

 desceaued eudeuour them  to seeke them and finde in ye ore sorow then delite. And s the holy Ghoste sayth, that  accompanied with sorow, he eth according to our rude vn∣nding. The eye of our mind{is} e soone be daseled with the be∣ng of some sudaine ioy, yet in tinent it shall perceiue that his ine ioy is accompanied with we, euen as is the shadow folo¦g the body, and how contrarye er these thinges seeme to bee,  neuertheles they be euer knyt ether, but this can not be per∣ued but wt a christian eye, lighte d by faith and whiche is excersi∣d to contemplate this deuine sun ning in the holy scriptures, the ly ghoste teacheth vs this coniūc  in a number of places in the ripture, but if this coniūccion be eruelous, let vs not muse at it,

For the woorker is meruelous. For if in one personne he knew how to ioine the diuinitye and humanity: wherfore can he not aswel ioine in vs, sorowe and ioy, heuines & glad¦nes, sweetnes and bitternes? Hath he not by a supernatural coupling vnited, death and life, hell and hea∣uen, and in generall all other thin∣ges, whiche be directly contrary af¦ter our iudgementes? This is the incomprehensible deuine wisdome of God, whiche maketh vnequall thinges equall, in suche maner as our dull vnderstanding can neuer comprehende suche a meruelous discord, according. The holy Ghost is the onely scoolemaister to teache s this lesson in the holy scriptur{is}.
The kingly Prophet Dauid, de∣clareth these thinges notably, say∣ing. Alas Lord, how great are the tribulations which thou hast thew¦ed mee? and beeing conuerted hast

ened me, and also saith. Thou  taken mee out of the depth  earth. Consider these words e emport on the one side ex∣ dispaire and fearful trouble: n the other side singuler mer¦d consolation. And what shall eak of King Czechias? whiche er hee was ouerwhelmed with nesse and death, looking for de∣ vengeaunce) crying out vntoo , and said, Alas Lorde answer me. And sudēly cried what shal y to him? or what answere shal  made for me? It is he that hath ought this euel vpon me. Th{us} be g opressed with sorow and greef nfessed that no man coulde deli∣r him, and said. I will yet haue y recourse vnto God, and in thus ying: he declareth a certain firm d sure trust and hope, yet suden∣ he saith. Alas, Lord answere for e, and againe as one being cast of

& discomfiited coplaineth moorning¦ly, I know wel yt none other but he cā deliuer me, but what thē? it is he him self yt pursueth me, he hath pro¦noūced my death, what shall I say vnto him to cause him too reuoke the sentence? what shall he say vn∣to me? He is my counterparty, and my iudge. Heere we may se these two passions, directly contrary in one soule. Now considering these two contrary operations within a man and the tormoiling between hope and dispaire, whiche bē so out ragious, sudaine and vnmesarable so that there is no man, but it ma∣keth him amased when he cometh to consider it as it is. Saint Paule to the Romains, after that he had inclosed all vnder sin and dampna¦tion, as one being rauyshed beside or aboue him self, cried out, saying
O prōfound greatnes of the wis∣dome, riches & knowledge of God.

ow incōprehensible are his iudge¦mentsRo. 11▪ and his waies past finding ut? And so concludeth, that all hinges be of God, by God and in God. It appereth that S. Paul felt underful thinges in himself. For udenly from the depth of Hel, and he knowledge of sin, he erecteth im self vp aboue the heauens, and andreth, in his spirit contempla∣ing the high and meruelous diui∣itye of God after an vnspeakable maner. Now heere may we learne ot too be careful for our selues or to haue respect to our owne misery or infermitye, but aske of God our good father and he wil not faile vs but with speede wil exalt vs into ye moste blessed and happye fruition of his deuinity. But we cannot rightlye desire the mercy and good∣nes of God, except we hate oure own sinful wicked life: and we can

not hate our sinne and wickednes: except we haue ye true knowledge & feeling thereof. And wee cannot know it nor feel it: with out his con¦trary, whiche is the great mercy and infinite goodnes of God. But so long as our soule doth dwel and abide captiue & deteined we in this miserable body of finne as a wan∣derer in the desert or as a pilgrim or wayfaring man: there shalbe al∣waise relikes of sin remayning wt∣in vs. The spirituall Philistines & amalechites doo warre continually against vs vntil we come to ye land of promission during whiche tyme: it wil be needefull for vs to knowe our owne misery and euils, alway∣es aspiring too the mercy and good¦nesse of God. And by this meanes this contradiction aforesaid shalbe to vs both more tollerable & easy to be borne, whiche as we haue said ceasseth not too striue in a christian

. And that man whiche fee∣t this within him self is but  souldioure, and rather a n, in name: then in conuer∣ and good life. O Lord God uely is this contradiction a∣id proued and founde heare g vs in this common welth of and? For in what quietnes & quillity haue we liued sence th  of our moste noble Queene?  what security haue we lulled elues a sleep, and looking as it  for Mountaines of golde? for ing God and his woorde, or at  making no great account of n, and all sudenlye, in the mid∣ of our secure life: wee are stri∣ with Hunger, Pestilence, and oord. The like plagues for sin  often to bee seen in the scriptu∣. For in the time of king Dauid ong the Jewes common welth n they had ouercome their ene¦mies

brought home ye arke of God and were become welthy & riche then they grew into securitye, and all sudenly the Plague of God fell vpon them, and there dyed in Isra∣el seuenty thousand men, and God would haue destroied all Jerusalē likewise, had he not in the middest of his fury remembred mercy. I pray you, what hathe welth and se∣curitye brought vs vnto heere in Englond? Hath it not brought cō∣tempt of the Ministers and woorde of God? Nay hath it not brought contempt and disobedience both of the Magistrate and the lawes?
Where euer was there so much▪ crying out against sinne? so many exhortacions? so many good bookes set forth? and all for the suppression of wickednes & sinne: but neuer the better but rather the worse. Altoge¦ther (afew exceptid), from the hi∣est to the lowest, haue as it were

ent them selues and determined o bring to pouertye and in to con∣empt the Ministers of the woord of God. What meanes is daily inuē∣ed to catch & rake from thē, by im ropriations, leasses, first frutes and tenthes with many other simo¦icall meanes, to impoueryshe them and discourage other whiche would enter therintto? But those that laboure and bee so diligent too dispute and reason their cace (pretē¦ing to bring the ministery too the same rule and estate that Christe & his Apostles were) wil in the ende say as the Jewes said of Christe & his Apostles, away with these fe∣lowes they are not wurthy to liue among vs, shal these beggerly ras¦kalles teache vs our duetye? this wilbe the end of your pretence. O Lorde in what reuerence had the Jewes their Ministers? How were they prouided for? Likewise in the

primitiue Christian churche how were they adourned with reuerēce and liuinges as is yet too be seene? yea the very Heathen and Infidel∣les had their ministers in estima∣tion and prouided for thē, and shal we now that proffes so much chris∣tianity seek by all meanes to ouer throwe and bring to nothing our ministers? the Minister being con∣temned: his preaching shalbe little estemed. This is the way to ouer∣throw the wurd of God, and bring vs too brutalitie, for where prea∣ching ceasseth the people perishe, as saith Salomō. But some wil ob¦iect and say, that riches corrupteth the Ministers and hindreth their vocation and that they become co∣uetous and more careful then any other, and that a poore estate is best for them. I answere that my mea∣ning is not to enriche any greedy

or couetous Minister, but wishe hat when any suche springeth vp n welthe whereby his vocation is neglected: that some good ordinaun¦is were prouided in that behalfe for to suppresse and keep backe the greedy desire of suche. And my de∣sire is that those Parishes where reasonable liuinges and stipend{is} were appointed by good men, in time past for a Minister: might be reduced and brought againe to the right vse, & that Minister or Pas∣tor, whiche would not continew and be resident amonge his flock: should be depriued and haue no ly∣uing there. Hospitality is incident to preching, & the Pastor must as∣wel feed their belies as their soul{is}, or els hee shall doo but litle good a∣mong a number. But suche as in∣tende to bring the Ministery to sla¦uery, by thrusting themselues in∣to their liuinges: I trust our mer∣ciful

and louing God, wil preuent them and cut them of, from their wicked purposes and take mercy of his people. But now me thinke I heare the enemies of true religi¦on the Papistes say, these plagues are come vpon vs for your new ler¦ning. I answere, in the time of Pa¦pistry, yea when popery was most hiest had ye no plagnes? Read Po∣lichronicon and ye shall finde that these be but trifels, in respecte of those pestilencis, yea some that felt within this lx. yeere. And I pray you had ye no War in those daies? Read sence Cxx. yeers and see what slaughter, what ciuil dis∣cordes with hunger and penurye happened, ea when ye sang masse moste hyest and when your holy Fathers pardones were moste ho¦liest, that men buried them with thē in their graues, but what shall I say now to the City of London?

The plague hath long beene there among them, I beleeue verely and dare affirme, that God is as dilygently serued, and his wurd as sincerely preached and obeyed as euer was in this realme, (of a good numbre there) But as the holy Ghoste saieth. Judgement beginneth at the house of GOD. God dooth vse moste commonly to beginne with his owne house, but after that he scoureth his enmies, and as our sauioure Christe saied, by those vpon whome the towre of Silo fel. Suppose ye (saith he) that those were greater sinners then the other? I say nay, but except ye repent ye shall like wise perishe. So may I say. Suppose ye that Lō¦don hath more greuously offended then other Townes and Cyties in England? I say nay, but except ye repet and that with speed, ye shal not escape Gods heauy hand, hys

swoord hangeth euen ouer your hed¦des ready to strike, therefore lette vs wt Dauid preuent Gods wrath wt harty prayer & euery man enter into his owne conscience and say. It is I (Lord) that haue caused thy heauy wrath and displeasure. And leaue our olde Adamishe excuses and vaine shift{is}. Let vs call back againe, oure selues to true fasting and praier with harty repētance, but I feare mee popishe fasting hat almoste ouerthrown the true fast, and supersticious latten pray∣ing hath blemished the right vse of praier, so that there remaineth but onely the names of fasting & pray∣er (to a numbre) but the effect is vn∣known. God bring it againe to the right vse, and geue vs hartes dili∣gently to learne, and faithfully to practise it, so that we may turne to the Lorde with all our hartes, that hee may haue mercy vpon vs and

turne away those greuo{us} plagues that wee haue (thorow our secure and disobedient life) moste iustely prouoked to fall vpon vs. Heer haue I according to my small ha∣bility and knowledge declared the minde of Thauthour, & rendred ye very wurd{is} of his text in as plain english as I could expresse, suche homely stuffe as it is, I beseeche your honour and all other yt fear God to accept it. And if ought be a∣misse eyther thorow my negligēc or the printars rechelesnes to bear with vs, or at the least to let vs vn∣derstand it, that if it bee possible it may be amended, & I shall hartely pray for your honour{is} prospero{us} estate long to continew that as ye haue Godly begonne not onely to professe and folow: but also to de∣fende and maintaine the true pro∣fessors and folowers of Christes religion, so ye may cōtinew to the

ende. Amen.
Now least by my not sufficient extolling and declaring your no∣ble and excellent vertues (whiche God hath endued you wt) I should rather seeme to darken or shadow them, then condignly to set them forth: I leaue to the Godly reader to call to minde and consider in them selues, more then I can ex∣presse in wurdes, desiring GOD that as he hathe hether to fortified you with singuler giftes of his ho∣ly spirite: yt hee wil likewise arme you with the inuincible constancy vnto the end. For I am not igno∣rant how God hath tried and excer¦cised you wt many hard and sharp battiles of afflictions the whiche your honour I know wel dooth not forget, but rather looketh for toa∣bide a more sharper assault then a∣ny that is past, if God lay it vpon you. Now hauing learned by long

perience how necessary it is that od stretche forth his hand to help s, it shalbe moste needfull to call pon him to graunt vs the gift of er seueraunce and constancy, and or my part, I wil call vpon the orde Jesus our King, to whome GOD the Father hath geuen all owre in heauen and earth, and in hose hand hath put all the spiri∣uall treasures. That it may please im to preserue and maintain you, long time among vs to the ad∣uauncement of his kingdome and continew your honour in hauing the victory and triumphing ouer Sa∣than and his band to his glory.
Amen.
