


OVR Lorde and Sauiour Iesus hathe left a commaundement which pertay∣neth indifferently to all Christians, that we should performe the duties of hu∣manitie, or rather (as the Scripture calleth them) the workes of mercy to the afflicted and miserable: that we should visit the sicke, endeuour to deliuer the captiues, and doe such like to our neigh∣bour, whereby the present euills may be somewhat as∣swaged. Hereof our Lord Iesus Christ hath in him selfe set forth vnto vs a most manifest & singular example, wheras of his exceeding loue toward mankind, he came downe from the bosom of the father into our miseries and into our prison, that is, into our flesh and most mi∣serable life, and tooke the punishment of our sinnes vp∣on him selfe, that we might be saued: according as E∣sai sayth chap. 43: Thou hast laden me with thy sinnes, and wearied me with thy vngodlines, &c. If there be any whom this so manifest & singular an example doth not stirre vp, and the authoritie of Gods commaunde∣ment
added therunto doth not moue to performe these workes of charitie, surely he shall worthely in the last iudgement heare the voice of the angrie Iudge: Goe thou cursed into euerlasting fire. For I was sicke and thou didst not visit me, but being altogether vnthank∣full for the exceeding benefits which I bestowed on thee and all the world, thou didst not euen in the most sclender duties relieue or helpe thy brethren, no not me Christ in my brethren.
Forasmuch therefore most famous Prince, as I see your Grace to be sore sicke, and that Christ also is sicke in you, I haue thought it my dutie to visit your Grace by writing somewhat vnto you. For I can not dissemble, that I doe not heare the voice of Christ our of your Graces body and fleshe crying to me, and saying: Be∣hold I am sicke here. For these euills, namely sicknes and such like, not we Christians onely, but Christ him∣selfe also our Lord and Sauiour, in whom we liue, doth suffer, as he manifestly witnesseth in the Gospell: VVhatsoeuer ye doe to the least of mine, ye doe it vnto me. Nowe although we owe this duetie to all that are sicke in generall, that we doe visit and comfort them, yet doe we owe it chiesly to them that be of the hou∣shold of saith. For Paule doth plainely distinguish be∣tweene aliens, and them that professe the same faith with vs, or with whome we haue some alliance. Ga∣lat. 6.
Howbeit I haue other reasons also of my duetie. For I know that I as one of your Graces subiectes, togither with the rest of your subiectes ought to be moued with your Graces sicknes, and to be as it were sicke togither with you, as the member with the head, in whom all our good estate, safetie, and prosperitie consisteth. For we
acknowledge your Grace to be as a certain Naamā by whom God at this day giueth health to Germanie, as in time past by him he gaue health to Syria. VVhere∣fore euen the whole Romane Empire hath your Graece in admiration, doth reuerence and honour you as a fa∣ther of the countrie, as a singular ornament and safe∣gard of the whole Empire, but especially of the Ger∣mane nation.
Neither do we owe this only to your Grace, to com∣fort you as much as we are able, and as it were to beare the present case with you, but much rather to pray vn∣to God for your health and recouerie: which I hope is done with all diligence and endeuour of your Graces subiectes. As for my selfe, whom many notable bene∣fits and pleasures haue made a dettour to your Grace more then the rest, I acknowledge that I ought by some singular duetie to declare my thankfulnes. But because in this sclendernes of abilitie and power, I am able to performe no notable thinge, D. George Spalatine, who is your Graces Chaplen, aduertized me that I shoulde doe well to make some spirituall consolation & send it to your Grace, for that that would be a thing very ac∣ceptable vnto you. VVherefore I thought it not good to doe contrary to the aduertizement of my frende, and therefore haue I gathered togither these fourteene chapters, being comprised as it were in a table, and haue intitled them
That is, fourteen, or that which consisteth of that number. Tessaradecas, that they might be in steede of fourteene Sainctes which our superstition made and called the driuers away of all euills. How∣beit this is not a siluer but a spirituall table, where∣with, not the walls of temples are to be adorned, but the godly mind is to be comforted and confirmed. And I hope that it will be very profitable to your Grace in
this present state. Nowe it is diuided into two partes, whereof the former contayneth seuen considerations of euills, whereby the present griefes and troubles are mi∣tigated and asswaged. The latter containeth likewise seuen considerations of good thinges tending to the same ende. VVherefore I desire your Grace to take this my simple labour in good parte, which I pray God ye may so enioy, that by diligent reading and consideration of this trea∣tise ye may haue some ease. I humbly commend me to your Grace.

