



I feare vnlesse some men wyll accuse me of teme∣rite & rasshnes, seynge ye so boldly I dare offer to youre ryghte honorable maystershyp thys lytle lucubracion & worke, which I made now of late, & entitled a Christmasse bancket, in asmuche as I haue ben so seldoe in your cōpany, & haue not attempted nor proued at any tyme perfectly by mutuall confabulacion howe youre mynde is affected towarde me. To thys I answere, that I syttynge at your table before syx monethes past where it pleased you very benignely to talke with me, perceyued in youre

maystershyp at that tyme, as at all other so great humanite, comite, gē∣tlenes & affabilite towarde al men, yt it hath syns that tyme greatly ani∣mated and encouraged me to excogi¦tate & inuent somewhat yt I myght dedicate to your name, trustyng by this meanes that your beneuolence toward me should not only be encre∣sed, but also made consumate & per∣fecte. Whyle I sought diligently an argumēnt fytte & worthy youre be∣nignite, among all other it came to my remēbraūce that this tyme of ye yeare men vse customabye to make feastes & banckettes, and there vnto for to cal theyr frēdes, louers & neigh¦bours. Whan I considered this ma∣ner & custome, it dyd so much please me, seyng that mutual loue is mayn¦tained therby, that hereof I toke an occasion also to make a Christmasse bancket. For I thought although I were poore & not of habilite to make

such a feast or bācket, as the custome requireth, yet I woulde accordyng to that kynde of rytches, which God hath indued me, prepare some banc∣ket, & call vnto it, not twenty or for¦ty, but euen so many as wyll come, ye all men myght cōmende Baille ha∣uynge no house of his owne, for hys housholde kepynge & large maynte∣nāce of hospitalite. And for asmuch as ther shall not want vniuersaly, which shal make feastes for the body at this tyme, I thoughte it beste, to make my bancket, a bancket for the soule, yt men hauynge theyr bodyes fedde of other, might also haue theyr soules fed at my hande. I haue ther∣fore prepared a Bancket, not such a bancket,Ioan. vi. as the meate wherof peris∣sheth, corruptethe, and commethe to nought, but that abideth into euer∣lastyng lyfe. And because it maye be a Christmasse bancket in dede, & wor¦thy wherat Christ should be present

I haue garnysshed it with many de¦licious, pleasaunt, deynte, yea & hea∣uenly dysshes of the moost holy scrip¦tures. So that whosoeuer eateth of this bancket, shall fynde in it muche confortable noryshmēt for his soule & be occasioned therby, I doubt not to geue God hertye thankes, whiche hath vouchedsafe of his deuyne cle∣mency, & vnmesurable goodnes, fre∣ly to call him to his celestiall bācket. Woulde God that by this my bācket makynge, I might excyte & moue o∣ther to vse like cōmunicaciō at their table, as they shall fynd here, or at ye leese that they woulde enterlase in some parte of theyr repast theyr tal∣ke with suche honest & godly wordes as they shall here read, & vtterlye re∣iecte & cast awaye all fylthy and vn∣cleane cōmunicacion, all iestynge & raylyng, all blaspheming & cursing. So shoulde they haue Christe more present wyth them at theyr feastes,

than many haue nowe a dayes, at whose table such kynde of talke is v∣sed, as may iustly seme not to be wor¦thy of God & his sōne Iesus, but of Bacchus and Uenus. These be no Christmasse banckettes, but Christ∣lesse & dyuellysh bankettes. They be no feastes fytte for christen men, but for Gentiles & Ethuyckes. God ba∣nysshe once this great absurdite frō ye tables of thē that professe Christe. Nowe in as muche as at the begyn∣nyng of a newe yeare the vniuersa custome is to gyue gites one to ano¦ther, wherby the proteste theyr mu∣tuall good wyll, loue & fauour. I be∣cause I wyll not seme to be estraun∣ged from this poynte of humanitie, do here hubly offer to your right ho∣norable maystershyp this my Christ¦masse bācket for a new yeares gyft, most īstātly desyrīg you fauourably to accept it, as ye gyfte of him, which wyssheth to you from God ye father,

longe lyfe, continuall elth & prospe¦rous felicite. Hereafter God prospe¦ryng me in my studies, & directyng my pen in the trauaile of his word, I truste to cōpyle vnto the glory of God, & the īmortalite of your name other workes no lesse godly & profi∣table to the reders. In ye meane sea¦son that god, whose blessed word you must intirly fauoure and followe, mought preserue in safe estate, your good maistershyp to the anaūcemēt of his glory, & the great quietnes of vs all in this countre, by executyng on your behalfe, accordyng to your ofyce cōmitted worthelye vnto you by th kynges moost gracious hygh¦nes, suche iustyce & equitie in youre iudgementes, as shal maye turne to the vtter expulsion of all vyce, & the hygh promocion & furtheraūce of al vertu. In the trauayle wherof that LORDE mought assist you, by whom kyng sraygne, & y• makers of lawes

scerne righteous thīges, by whom also, as Salomon sayeth: Prynces beare rule, & the heade officers gyue iudgement accordynge to iustyce.
AMEN.
