



WHEN SATHAN percey¦ued the ground worke and founda¦cion of the papacie to be so weake & slender, that it shulde not be able to sustaine and beare, the weight of the great heap that he intended to erect and buylde theron: then dyd he (mooste deare soue∣raine) beynge the angell of darcknes, put on him the fourme of an aungel of lyght. And vnder that cloke, he endeuoured all that he mighte, to fortifye and strengthen it: by the most sacred and holy scrip¦ture, to thintente that the impietie and wickednesse therof, might the better be cloked and hid. And ther¦fore dyd he subtylly inuent, and diligently instruct all his faithfull children the byshops of Rome craf∣tely to wreste and falsely to interpretate, this place of scripture in Math. Thou art Peter, and vppon

this stone or rocke I will buyld my churche. Vpon this foundacion, buylded he so strongelye, and ere∣cted so beautyfull and gloriouse a peece: that all the whole worlde wondered therat. The wise and lear∣ned men employed all their studye to enlarge, and decke this princely palayce, and see of Rome. Yea princes and rulers, thought it their duty, to become labourers, & drudges in the erecting & vpholding of this so gorgiouse a buldynge. Finally the mater was so handled, that thoroughe all christendome ye see was taken for the fountaine and well of all mer¦cie. Remission and forgeuenesse of sinne, were not to be had in any other place then there. But now, that it hath pleased the lorde (accordynge to the wordes of his prophet Ioel) in these oure dayes (the latter daies of the worlde) to powre out of his spirite vpō all flesh, yt this secrete and hid mistery of abomina∣ble iniquitie, is come to lyghte, and so opened that the suckelynges and younge babes of this tyme, knowe more then dyd the auncient and gray heared fathers in the time of blyndnesse and ignoraunce.
That most victoriouse & triumphāt prince, your dearely beloued and naturall father, perceyuynge that more then hell darkenesse, wherin we (his pore subiectes) were led: opened vnto vs the moste holy and sacred bible, wherin are declared the misteries of this so gorgiouse a buyldyng. Cease not therfore (most graciouse prince) to set forwarde this godlye worke that your father began. And to thentent that your graces louinge subiectes may know by what craft and pollicie this buylding first began, and af∣terwarde proceded, I haue thought good to trans∣late

out of the Germaine tongue into Englysshe, this little boke. wherin is declared what maner of thinges the bishops of Rome were at the first, what was their estate and condicion, and what was their office or deutye. Then how they abusynge their of∣fice aspired, and came to so inordinate honour and dignitie. Howe they leuinge Christ and his mooste holy worde, enployed all their study to please men. The secular power was it that they loked for. And no dout it was that, and not Christ, that gaue to the byshops of rome, ye preeminence to be called fathers of fathers, and to be preferred before other bishops. But because so secrete a misterie, can not wel be ope¦ned without plaine demonstracions: the Author of this boke hath most plainly set forth by figures, the estate, that this Antichrist is in, hath bene in, or shal be in, euen to the day of his vtter distruction. These figures are not of the authors owne inuencion, ne of late daies inuented: but they were found in aun∣cient libraries aboue .ccc. yeres sence. The common experience, that is daylye sene of the greate blynde∣nesse and ignoraunce of that time, wold moue your highnesse to doubte of the truth, and veritie of this reporte: but to certifie your maiestie therin, there is at this daye remaining in the abbaye of saint Lau∣rence in Luyke, a table of great antiquitie, contai∣nynge portrature of like matter. Wherby it is ma∣nyfest that the fathers of auncient tyme, sawe in the papacie, the thinge that they durst not vtter, eyther by wordes or writinge, but trustynge that the time wolde come when men might be bolde to speake it: they dyd in the meane tyme kepe it in painting and

portrature, that suche as could coniecture, might gather knowledge therby, & that the thynge myght remayne tyll such tyme as god had appoynted it to be declared bothe in wrytynge and wordes. The Author therfore of this little boke: hath not onelye added vnto these figures an exposicion to declare ye meanynge of euery of them: but manifest scriptures also, to proue the thinges that they represente, to be true, so that these figures may appeare rather to be the figures of some Apocalipsis or reuelacion, then the inuencion of any man. The spirite of the lyuing god, the geuer of all goodnesse, instructe you in al godly knowledge, that for the time of your reigne in this worlde, your highnesse may vse the sword to you committed, to the honor of god, and wealth of his members, lyuyng here vnder your domi∣nion. And then no doubte ye shall en∣ioye the kyng∣dome, that shall continue for euer. AMEN.

