


BEinge credi∣bly enformed (moo∣ste graciouse Lady) by such as be nygh about your grace, that youre graces chiefe and daylye study is in the holy Byble: I thought I coulde not presente your grace wyth a∣ny Iuwell more acceptable and plea∣saunt to your grace then suche a bryefe concordaunce. Whereby youre grace myghte wyth more redynes fynde all suche thynges, as you shoulde be desy∣rouse
 to see. ctuum .a.Then as for gold or siluer I am not able to presente vnto your grace but my ruyde laboures and that I do wyth all my herte. When thys lyttle boke therfore came to my hand (beynge wrytten in the hygh Almayne tounge) and I perceiued it to be moost diligent∣ly gathered out of the holy Byble and set in suche order that wyth in it lygh∣telly as much maye be founde by it, as by a great concordaunce: I ceassed not tyll I had it translated and sett in lyke order in the Englysh tounge, that your grace myghte not be destytute of so ne∣cessarye an instrumente in your godlye studie. And that all other whych be stu∣dyouse of godly knowledge myghte be the more desyrouse to haue thys lyttle boke and embrace it wyth better wyll (knowynge your graces feruent zeale in the furtherynge of goddis trueth.) I haue (byn as my duitie byndeth me so boulde as to) dedycated vnto your gra∣ce for to forther youre grace in youre godly studye, trustinge that your grace according to your a customable gentil∣nes will accept my good wyll there in, and then shall I thynke my laboures
 well employed & my Paynes well re∣compensed.
Nowe leste your grace shoulde be dis∣ceyued in any thynge conteyned in this lytle boke: Yt may pleace your grace to vnderstande that the Psalmes from the nynth Psalme forwarde, are euer one fewer in nomber then the same Psal∣mes be in the Bybels which be transla∣ted and prynted into Englyshe. As for ensample, that Psalm which in this bo∣ke is noted .x. is in the Bibles .xi. and so forth to the ende of the Psalmes, accor∣dynge to the counte of the Grekes.
It behoueth also, that your grace be admonyshed of thys one other thynge, whych other wyse myght hapely be a great trouble to your grace in the seke∣ynge of matthers whych ye shall desy∣re to fynde. The letters A. B. C. D. E. F. G. Whych be commonly set in the margyne of euerye chappter of the By∣ble, to deuide the chapter into so many partis: Are not set in all Bybles a lyke. So that the thynge that in one boke stā∣deth vpon ,B, or ,C. doeth in an other boke, stande vpon .D. or .E. And thys dyuersytye is growen by the negligen∣ce 
 casyon of many dowbts.
And as tochyng all other thinges ne∣cessary to be knowen abowt thys boke. I desyre your grace to take the payn to rede ouer the preface followyng: which the great lernyd men that were the first authors of the boke dyd sett before yt vnto the vnderstandynge of the Redar.
Nowe to speake some thynge of the commoditie and profite that spryngeth of thys boke: I do your grace to vn∣derstande that from the fyrste begyn∣nynge of learnynge, all learned men haue thought it so necesserie a thynge to the forderaunce of theyr studie, that yf they coulde by no means haue the lyke that were some what to theyr mynde: they woulde not stycke to take the pay∣nes to drawe oute one for theyr owne studye, (and so dyd the fyrst Authours of thys boke,) whyche doubtlesse they would neuer haue done yf necessitye of the thynge had not dryuen them to it. Mooste necessarye therfore it is for all maner of persons (that do employe any parte of theyr study to the holy scriptu∣res) to haue eyther thys or the lyke ta∣ble or concordaunce to helpe theyr me∣morye
 wyth all. Purposly therefore to profite all maner of persons I haue set forth thys lyttle worcke, commytting it to your gracys tuysyon, wyshynge that all men myght be profited thereby and no mann offended. The spiryte of the lyueyng God be all wayes your gracys comforther and guide in all your doingis to the glo∣ry of God and your sowls health. So be it.

