



WRITERS of bookes (most no∣ble Ladie) are spirituall parents, and their bookes are their broods, & young-ones. And therefore, as carnall parents
haue no sooner a child borne to the world, but they looke about them for a secondarie Father or Mother (whom they stile Godfather and Godmother) by whose name the child may be graced, and by whose authoritie it may be protected: So writers of books are no sooner deli∣uered of these their young∣ones, the broods of their braines, and fruitfull vnder∣standings, but they by and by thinke of a Patron or Pa∣tronesse, to whom they may commend them: whose ex∣amples, because they are
common, I being not vnwil∣ling to follow, had no sooner finished this litle Pamphlet of meditations on the B. Sa∣crament (my young Benia∣min borne to me in my old age) but I bethought myself to whose Patronage, and tui∣tion, I might best commend it. And my cogitation did presentlie light, and hitt vpon your Honour, who by your great nobilitie (as being dowager to the Illustrious Earle of Rutland, Sister to the Lord Nicholas Tufton can grace it, by your credit
by your credit (as being of our prime nobilitie) can pro∣tect it, by your pietie will imbrace it, & by your manie noble fauours may challenge it. Let others dedicate their Annales and Histories of warres and Martiall feates to Kings and Emperours: I will presume to offer a booke of Pietie to a Ladie most noble and pious, and yet so pious that her pietie graceth her nobilitie. Your Honour since the death of your noble Husband, the Illustrious Earle of Rutland, hath im∣braced the state of a widow,
the most noble state & most pleasing to God after Vir∣ginitie, in which you haue carried your self so like your self, that you deserue Honour of all, according to that of the Apostle Honour widowes, which are widowes indeed. You imitate by your retired life that famous widow Iudith, who in the Higher partes of her house, made herself a secret chamber, in which she liued retiredlie with her maids, seruing God by praier and fasting: yea you follow the example of the widow and Prophetesse Anna, whom
the Euangelist commendeth for that she departed not from the Temple, but by fasting and prayer serued God. For al∣though your Honour wan∣teth not goodlie Houses, Parkes, and Gardens, where∣in you may recreate your self, yet to shew your self a widow indeed, you haue made choise of your Oratorie for your Pallace and cheefe place of aboade, and from thence you hardlie depart, because there you cōuerse with God, and he with you, and when there you reade your Spi∣rituall books, he talketh
with you, and when you pray, you talke with him. And although you keepe an Honourable Table, suting with your nobilitie, yet the fare which most pleaseth you, is Judithes and Annaes fare, to wit, fasting, which is the foode of the Soule, and the Physick of the bo∣die, which so weakeneth the body, as it strengthneth the soule. And although your Honour wanteth nei∣ther lands nor liuings, nor reuenewes, which the world calleth Riches, yet you esteeme Almesdeeds your
greatest treasures, as indeed they are. For as Marchants when they haue laied out all their monies, do then esteeme themselues richest, because they expect greater and richer marchandises; so your Honour is the richer by your Almesdeeds, be∣cause by this laying out, you purchase greater treasures in heauen. So that, although you be a widow, in respect of your late most noble Husband, yet you are no widow in respect of Christ, to whom you are espoused, not onelie by faith, hope,
and charitie, as all good chri∣stians are, but in a more per∣fect manner, by renoun∣cing all marriage with man on Earth, to marrie and vnite your self more neer∣lie to your Spouse God and man in Heauen: Not thinking now (to vse th' Apo∣stles words) on things that pertaine to the world, as the married woeman doth, how to please an husband, but thinking on the things that pertaine to our lord how to please him. And therefore he now is your spouse, whō you loue aboue all, on whom your loue is
setled, on whom your thou∣ghts are fixed, to whom all your actions are directed: he is euer in your minde, euer in your thought, euer in your memorie: and that time which other Ladies spend in adorning them∣selues, so to please their Husbands, you spend, in adorning your soule, by prayer, meditation, fasting, Almes-deeds, and other vertues, so to please your Spouse Christ Iesus. He therefore, who hath es∣poused you to him in Earth, by his grace, espouse you
also vnto him in heauen, by his glorie, and in the meane time heape many benedi∣ctions vpon you. So desireth, so prayeth.

