


SAint Iohn Chrysostom (most renowmed Queene) saith in one of his Homilies of the praise of S. Paul, that such is the conditi∣on of falsehood, that of it selfe it commeth to naught; and on the contrarie, that truth is knit togi∣ther with such strength, that wel it may be assaulted, but never cō∣quered: and that deceit yeeldeth unto hir, as having no power to resist hirs. I remember to haue read in the 3. booke of Esdras; being questioned before Darius king Esdras 4. of Persia, what might be the thing of greatest strength, it was agreed and concluded, that it was truth; which not onely overcommeth those things that time goeth on consuming, but triumpheth also over time it selfe: false opinion, for a while, may beare authoritie, but at length truth prevaileth: whose nature is woonderfull, for where most force is opposed against hir, there becommeth she most strongest, and the more they strive to throwe hir downe to the bottome, and to bury hir in the bottomlesse pit of oblivion, the more she ascendeth aloft, and shewes hirselfe in the highest: even as the oyle, though it be put un∣der the water, yet straight commeth above it, so is truth, for in case men would put it under falshood, yet it shal arise to the highest place, for it abideth not to lie long in covert. For even as a comet appeer∣eth for a season, in which it sheweth some brightnes, but yet endureth not long, bicause though it seeme a star, yet is none: even so is deceit, though it may be beleeved for a time, by a false apparance of light, yet

at length it shall vanish and consume away, when as truth shal endure to the end. Truth is a thing so pretious and belooved of God, that al they who seeke to excell in vertue, do preferre hir before treasure, choosing to be behinde in wealth, to go forward with truth: And fi∣nallie they esteeme the hazarding of their life (which soone passeth awaie) for wel imploied, for the love of truth which abideth for ever. David, preferring truth before al worldly matters, saith: Take not ô Lord thy truth out of my mouth. In ancient histories we read Psal. 119. that Simandrus prince of Egypt, commanded his picture to be en∣graved on his tombe, and a jewell on his breast, with his eies fixed thereon, which jewell was the image of truth, as recordeth Diodor. Sicul. Elianus saith, that Pithagoras called truth a thing divine. And of the same Pitha. it is written, that he said, that for a man to make himselfe a God, he ought to speake the truth. Truth is a centre where vertues repose, the north star of the vertuous, the balme of the wounded, and finally it is the butte whereat many shoote, and the white that fewe do hitte. All these I bring (renowmed Queene) that they who shall reade my answere may knowe (that in the de∣fense I make of the truth, which hapned in both Navies) that my intent is to deale in truth and not to flatter your Majesty, you being an enimy to adulation: and I knowing it to be as far from the princely nature of your Majestie to heare it, as from mine, to write it. And that you have in memorie the saieng of S. Hierome; that he that would be accounted woorthy of true praise, should not seek it of men. That which heer I meane to speake of are certaine truths, so cleere and manifest, that they publish themselves. For who seeth not the great regard in your Majestie of divine woorship, the great devoci∣on to the sacred scripture, the fulnes of Religion that shineth in your Majestie, the alwaies opened large hand to the poore: And who seeth not more clearely with his eies, then I can utter with my words, the singuler prudencie of your Majestie, your sound justice, your excel∣lent fortitude, your marvellous temperancie, your firme truth, your clemencie, your benignitie, your good government, your royall condi∣tion, and the shining of your works, enterlaced with divine love. Your Majestie may be said to be a coffer wherein nature hath laide up hir treasure, and hir gathering togither of those perfections, which were repartederst, amongst manie, Such finites answer well to the trunck, from whence your Majestie descends, even from that invin∣cible

king, and most christian prince, Henrie the 8. whose woorthie deeds live in the remembrance of this present age, and shall never die in the times to come. These and many such perfect vertues of your Majestie, have wrought in me such love, that I have bin verie desirous to do you some service, & determining to effectuat these my desires, which long I have bread in my breast, I purposed to offer to your Majesty this my answer, but I chanced to meet with a new fear, which made me doubt. For perceiving it not, to deserve to appeer be∣fore so excellent a Queene: I stood in suspence what to do, being dri∣ven into many and sundrie thoughts, as having experience that bold∣nes without deliberation, most commonly causeth repentance; At length the one and the other considerations felt & waied togither, I found love, to overcharge and waie downe respect. Thorow which I determined to dedicate it to your Majestie, thereby as well to shewe the desire I have to serve you, as also that this short answer and poore woorke, belonging to your Majestie, may receive that auctoritie, which it cannot have in being mine, and the darke mist which it hath on my part, may be banished by the resplendent shining, that it shall receive from your Majestie, whose Royall person the Lord Almightie preserve and prosper in his blessed service,
Amen.

