



EDVVARD MAIE.
COnsummatissime Conclamatissime Pontificum:Sidus. Apost: l. 2. epist. 2. l. 7. epist. 7. pardon my humble bold∣nesse, if I speake my soule in these words of old Sidonius (as it fits me) though otherwise affraid to giue you your owne, hauing so often seene in your face the picture of S. Paulinus his humble soule: whose watch ouer himselfe, fearing to admit vndeserued prayses, refused iust commendations,B. Paulinus epist. 1, & 2. ad Seuerum. as it appeares by his iust reprehension of Seuerus, who much honor'd him, Te multa dilectio vs{que} ad mendacij peccatum trahit.

Well,1 Cor. 15.10. Aug. epist. 32. ad Paulium. what you are, you are by the grace of God, & lau∣datus & benedictur  cuius gratia tu talis es, The Church of our blessed Lord Iesus owes him much for you, my selfe owe not the least, and come now to augment my debts, beseeching you to secure mee so farre as I neede protection for my Sermon (which I offer vnto the family for which our Lord Iesus died, as a testimoniall of my desires to liue in it, and for it: and to signifie (though  what obscurely) vnto it, that respect and charitie which my heart exhibits you) necessita∣ted to the Presse, both by the desires of honorable and learned Gentlemen of our owne Societie: (though not for it selfe to be desired) as also by some who haue with much bitternesse (hauing not yet,Sufficiunt nobis sensus tantum & iudicium Sanctorum Sal∣uian ad eccle∣siam Cath. l. 4. Gal. 5.23. Basil de Spiritu Sancto. Cap. 17. I feare tasted of the Spirit of goodnesse) cut me for it: not knowing (God illumine them) that they take from God all that honor and glory which he intends him∣selfe, in our Creation, and consecration to their power, when they doe so. Such and so violent haue the , & , the thoughts and speeches of rigid seperation euer beene, I am loth to say any thing, for many tymes I lament them, because they are of those kind-hearts (of which the world speakes) who are most their owne foes: kinde they are: for they bestow vpon men more then they are willing to receiue, such is their bountie now adayes: yet to the prayse of Gods secret-wisedome I speake it, I haue found such my friendes, and my selfe much improued by them: Cyrill Catech: 4. Christ is still in the manger  &  Greg: Thaturg: Ser. 1. in An∣ia. For Custodes sunt (as Petrarch sayd of enemies) they are my Gardian An∣gells, God hath appoynted them to keepe me in his wayes, yea, Saluatores sunt, they are as so many Sauiours next mine onely Sauiour; yet they are their owne enemies, standing in their owne light, while they studie, and profite, and grow old in affected. Ignorance, learned mis-interpre∣tation, zealous-malice, and in an holy contempt of all sa∣cred and spirituall thinges, as sacred deriuation of the holy-Ghost; sacred imposition of handes, sacred suc∣cession of Bishops and Presbyters; sacred orders; sacred offices; sacred ceremonies; the sacred patrimo∣ny
 of the Crucified; the necessitie of sacred repen∣tance; th' Authoritie of the sacred Church: Yea, the sacred Scepter of Christ himselfe,Animalis homo non percipit quae sunt Dei. and (for which let the world expect the heauie hand of Gods anger) th'efficacie, necessitie, the life and fruits, the reuerence, and ho∣nour of sacred Sacraments themselues, and of all those holy-reall Donations (though spirituall) which Christ Iesus bequeath'd vnto his Church: O Lord God of pati∣ence, and long-suffring, what holy thing haue not their hearts prophaned, their tongues blasphem'de, their handes polluted and destroy'de? And yet, as if they did magni∣fie our Ministrie,2 Tim. 3.7. Coäceruant sibi Magistros ad sua desideria prurientes auribus. Coäceruant wee know their store now adayes when one or two of their owne, are nullius numeri: and sibi Magistros, I correct my selfe, Saint Paul surely spake not of these tymes, for now we are made slaues: ad desideria sua, as their seuerall fancies lead them, not guided by the minde of Iesus Christ, nor his Church; prurientes auribus, Eares, there is the seate of their affections, not well deuoted soules; and what is th'affection it selfe but Itch? A corrupted Liuer is the cause, and if Episcopall Authoritie be not the cure, the sound Doctrine of our deare Redeemer will proue loathsome, and none but scrubbers in request.
And very fitly doth he Metaphor this petulant humour which infects most Churches, Itch, for hee who is taynted with it cannot bee quiet for it; for his handes, and tongue, and eares, and all his parts, and passions must be doing: First, out of his pure deuotion,Qui abhomina∣ris Idôla Sacri∣legium facis? Rom. 2.22. hee cannot holde his fingers from committing Sacrilege; no, nor bridle his tongue, for that is nothing else but a bitter inuectiue, and refutation of an innocent Ornament or two, and that by Scripture, (for hee speakes nothing else, and he doth nothing else but speake) And lastly: when hee heares how well the last are reported of, hee will bee nothing but a hearer, to gaine the name of iust or honest with men, though hee loose it with God,
 for hee runnes vp and downe to heare, to this end to heare; and his eares Itch to heare Schismaticall Doctrine, till he may heare himselfe spoken of for an honest hearer; and till the God of peace and vnitie will not heare his pray∣ers. And further (with pittie and griefe I speake it) not doubting but sighes of fire haue ascended vp to God, from the Altar of your charitable heart for these men) I had euer thought that zeale in Prayer, zeale in praysing God,Fructus spiritus charitas gaudi∣um, pax, &c. Gal. 5.22. . Mat. 3.11. zeale for Gods glory, zealous charitie (the first of the Fruites of the Spirit of Iesus) had beene the true zeale, and fire with which Iesus doth baptize his Saints, when he dips them in the holy Ghost, and not an itching feruor which infects the Church; yet I see these humors (sound Religion that they make) make men accounted the onely zealous ones, and all are Antichristian (how Ortho∣dox soeuer) all prophane (how holy soeuer) who doe not Itch.
Good Lord Iesu looke vpon thy distracted Church, ser∣uing thy selfe of Pastors after thine owne Spirit, and not of popular affectation; and of people who may humblie learne to liue after thy sauing example, and not subtilely to dispute away their soules. Now then (Reuerend Father) whatsoeuer the spirit and humour of some men bee, as my thoughts haue beene as in the sight of our Lord Iesus Christ, concerning this Sermon, onely for the gathering of the Saints, proportionably to my poore skill into one Spi∣rit, (for which I looke for much ill-will from some, for no re∣ward, but from God alone) yet shall it much refresh mee if you accept it: and I shall be defended against all Spirits: and I shall be incouraged to persist stedfast and immoue∣able in the worke of the Lord (though it fall out that I be made eyther pro corpore mystico,1 Cor. 15. vlt. Paulinus Epist 28. ad Victri∣cium. Zeno: Veronens: Ser. de Sancto Arcadio. Acts 2. or pro capite ecclesiastico, Martyr vivus with S. Victricius, or see my selfe vivum cadaver, as did S. Arcadius.) But howsoe∣uer, I shall haue company enough, for all our Blessed Lordes Apostles were beleeued by some, derided by o∣thers,
 and I shall rest with honor enough, that the seruant be as his Lord.
Alma Trinitas & vna Diuinitas paternitatem ve∣stram,S: Bonifacius Anglus Archi: epist. Mogunt. Epist. 9. ad Huetbert. & hic Sanctis virtutibus proficientem ac valen∣tem augeat, & custodiat; & in futurâ bedine, in∣ter splendida Angelorum Agmina gaudentum, remu∣nerando glorificet. Now to our Lord Iesus Christ be all glory, for infinite eternities.

