


ABsence, among approoued frends
disseuers not affect, neither can
the change of aire chaunge resol∣ued
minds. In absence your kind∣nes
toward me hath been appro∣ued,
which I haue studied to re∣quite,
but can no way equall: ne∣uertheles
abilitie shall not hinder
endeuour; but I will doo what I
may, whereby shall bee manifest
what I would. But least I seeme to call my credite in que∣stion
with you by too long circumstance (of which I assure
my selfe you make no doubt) I will leaue protestations, & go
forward with my purpose. Sir, so it is, that in your late em∣ployment
about her Maiesties affaires, hauing left the Tran∣slation
of Gerileon vnfinished, I chaunst to heare of a newe
part fully ended, by an excellent Scholler (I assure ye) as e∣uer
attained to the vnderstanding of As in praesenti. His ripe
wit, rare learning, and excellent Science, hath plentifully ap∣peared,
in sundrie inuented bookes of newes; wherein how
euer he hath audaciously abused sundrie well deseruing per∣sonages,
by attributing to them victories, when they at that
time came not neere the enemie; yet hath hee been liberally
rewarded (after six pence a sheete) of the Book-binder hys
Arch-workmaister. For this sea-swolne Sycophant, can no
sooner heare the thunder cracke, but he interpretes it to bee
the roaring of Cannons, the confusion of enemies, a con∣quest
to the English. Then ouer his Kan of Canarie wine:
nay, soft and faire, his labour gets no such allowance; for tru∣ly,
truly, and in good sooth, ye see this world is hard, & bet∣ter
drink than Barley yeelds, cannot be spar'd. Yea, say ye so;
well, sith we are all English-men, let it bee so: and ouer hys
Ale-pot let him ruminate. Now, in such a month at Lisbone,

fire consumed so manie Hambrough ships of Corne; witnes∣sed
by them that in three yere bfore, neuer left the Realme
of England: them a valiant Suffolke Gentleman, (as indeede
he is) at such a sight tooke such a prize; at another, one so
rich, as it is almost incredible to report: when God knowes
the worthy Gentleman came home, and hardly had saued his
owne. Sundrie of these could I set downe, beside that paltry
rude ryme, wherein an honourable personage of this Realme
was so palpably abusde. But what cares hee? not a Barley
corne: for he calls himselfe a Canonier, and in the discharge
of pot-shot, cares not at whom he leuell, so he fasten on the
white, that by diminutiue degrees is drawen from the strings
of his Stationers purse. But I remember ye tolde mee once,
his newes-buyer is no Stationer, yet I am sure he is a Ballad∣seller,
and hath a whole Armie of runnagates at his reuersi∣on
that swarme euerie where in England, and with theyr ri∣bauld
songs infect the Youth of this flourishing Common∣weale.
I maruell who the diell is his Printer: and but that
I am assured, it cannot bee done but by some mans helpe of
that profession, I should hardly be perswaded, that anie pro∣fessor
of so excellent a Science would bee so impudent, to
print such odious and lasciuious ribauldrie, as Watkins Ale,
The Carmans Whistle, and sundrie such other. But it may be,
there is some wainscot fac'd fellowe, that is abel to print no
good thing, found out to be his instrument: if it be so, it were
not greatly amisse, might my censure serue for a determinate
sentence, that he might dance at a Cartes tayle the Car-mans
whistle, till his backe were as well seasoned as his face. But
this belongs to higher powers: returne wee to our first man.
Who, how euer his credite may bee impayred by the publi∣shing
of vntrue newes, it hath not been a little recouered by
the exquisite Translation of Fortunes Defier Andrugio. For
this is to be prooued, he so followed his Author, that not the
best Scholler in the worlde can reprooue him of digression.
Indeed (as I take it) it was first written in broken English, &

so I am sure it is printed: for if he had not in some measure
the English tongue, he woul be vtterly mute. But here may
a question be mooued, if this that I affirme bee true; where
shall we haue Gerileon by him Englished, sith he vnderstands
not French? Why easely. Is it not a Fiction first deuised
in French? Yes So shall it be in English. Why tell mee, art
thou so impudent to abuse the worke of so noble a Gentle∣man,
as the French Author was; wherein such excelent pol∣licie,
such morrall prudence, such singular conceipted passi∣ons
are included? Go too, let me not take thee publishing a
counterfet part thereof in print: if I doo, I will hang Saint
Peters Church Corner with such Scutchions of thy shame,
that Mannering musing what it should meane, shall neuer
cease bestirring him with his tip-staffe, till at Landen Hall all
the Ballad-ingers be gathered into one Assembly; and there
in rime doggrell (like thy Winter bitten Epitaph) carroll thy
rude conceipts. But whether runne I? Let this bee 
for a warning, and so wil I leaue him to the mercie of his mo∣ther
wit. Beseeching you to proceede, as you haue begun in
that delectable Hystorie, which as it is much desired for the
delightfulnes therof; so shal you be no lesse commended for
your diligence therein.

