


ALthoughe in the whole psalmody of Da uid, there canne not be foe one Psalme, whi che is not able to reple∣nysh the spirituall & true Christen man wyth suche & so great ioye, as is ineffable & can by no meanes be expressed, yet in my iudgement and opiniō this Psalme, which I haue nowe from all the other selected to declare, beynge in nomber the hun The excel∣lency of the Psalme, whych here after shalbe expounded. dred & fyftene after the cōmon La∣ten translaciō, farre excellethe and chalengethe the preeminence, as I may so speake For verely so oft as I redet me thik I am in a ioyfuland

delectable Paradyse, wher al kynd of pleasures do abound, & so ofte as I taste of it, it semeth vnto me lyke a goldē floude, which floweth forth wyth moost goodly and pleasaunte stremes, to conclude, this Psalme, so ofte as I heare the wordes of it, beteth & replenyssheth myne eares wt suche swete and delectable armo¦ny, as none maye iustely be compa∣red vnto it, so that neyther Mercuri∣us, Dauid ex∣celleth all musicions. Apollo, nor his sonne Orpheus, nor yet any other, whome the auncient Poetes do so greatly cōmend & ex∣alte wyth incomparable encomies & prayses in theyr moost eloquente lucubracions and ornate monumē¦tes, are able to compare wyth thys our Mynstrell Dauid, beynge not only an excellent Musicion, but al¦so a puyssaunt kynge and a diuine Prophet Although they shame not to wryte that wyth theyr musicall instrumentes they ware able (theyr

melody beyng of so great efficacye, The fanta sies of y• old Poetes con cernīg their musiciōs. vertue, strength, myghte & power) to make the greate Okes to shake theyr toppes, to cause whole floc∣kes of shepe, goates, oxen. &c. to fol∣lowe them daunsyng pleasauntly, to moue mountaynes, to make the swyfte streames of the runnynge floudes to stonde styl, yea & to fetch oute soules euen out of hell. For all these thynges dothe this our myn∣strell Dauid also much more true∣ly thā they fayne of theyr old Mu∣sicions. What other thyng, I pray you, dreamed they by the shakynge of the greate and harde Okes top∣pes, What the shakyng of the Okes toppes sig∣nifye. but only to shewe, yt the worde of God is of so great strength, that the Princes and rulers, yea euen y• myghtye Tyrauntes of the worlde can none otherwyse then shake, trē ble, bowe & do reuerence vnto it, & graunte that it is the almyghtye worde of trueth, lyfe, health & salua

ciō, wherto they must nedes obey & submyt thē selues, seyng yt agenst it they can neuer preuayle neyther by act, coūcell, wysdōe assēbly, synode, congregacion, or ony other humay∣ne polecy, as Salomon testifiethe, ther is no wysdōe there is no forcast Pro. rri. Esa. viii. there is no coūsayle y• cā preuayle agenst y• LORD, or els y• what so euer they go in hand with all, shall come to noughte & shall not prosper, yea that they them selues also shall be destroyed, as Christ saythe: Who so falleth on this stone, shall be brokē Matth. xxi on peces, & loke vpon whome it fal∣leth, it shall grynd hym to poulder.
Agayne what ment they by the followynge and daunsynge of the What the daunynge of the bea∣stes signify shape, gotes, oxes. &c. but only to de clare, that at y• preachynge of God des word all people reise & are me∣ry, as we maye se in the moost blys∣sed virgin Mary, which replete wt y• great ioy of this worde, songe on

this māner: My soule magnifyeth Luke. i. the LORDE, & my spirite hath reioy sed in God my sauioure. S. Eliza∣bethe also wyfe to the moost vertu∣ous preste acharias & mother to the holye man S. Iohn̄ Baptiste, sayd vnto Mary her Cosyn, whan she came & had saluted her: Behold when I hearde the voyce of thy sa∣lutaciō, the babe dyd skyppe in my wombe for ioye. The Aungels also sayd to the Sheppardes: Beholde I shew to you great ioye. For there Luke. ii. is borne to you this daye a Sauy∣our, whiche is Christ the LORDE in y• Cytie of Dauid. What can make vs soner to be merye, to daunse, to A christen mans ioy, & what it is. skyppe & to leape for ioye, than to heare that by Christ the alone saui∣our of the worlde we are delyuered from our spiritual enemy Pharao the dyuell, and that by hym we are Oz,  i. Cor. xv. Heb . i. Ioan. v. made safe frō synne, death, hell, des∣peracion. &c. to whome all thorowe

the synne of oure father Adam, we ware made seruile, captiue bonde & thraull, & that we are nowe reple∣nysshed wyth lyfe, ioye, pleasure, fe∣licite, wealth, rest, peace, trāquilite quietnes of conscience, and al kynd of gladnes.
Moreouer what is signified What the mouyng of the moun∣taynes sig∣nifye. by the mouynge of mountaynes, but the cōuersion of men of power from infidelite vnto fayth, frō ydo∣latry vnto the true worshyppynge of God from supersticion vnto god ly religion, frō the dedes of the flesh vnto the fruytes of the spirite, frō affiaūce reposed in theyr owne car∣nal & politike workes, vnto ye trust in the true and lyuynge God.
Furthermore what other thyng What the stondynge styll of the swyft flou∣des signyfye dyd they figure & shadowe by ye stō∣dyng styl of the swyfte floudes, but only the great admyracion, merue lynge, stupoure & wonderynge of ye Gentyles, whan they heard a newe

kynde of religion taughte them, as we maye se in the Actes of the Apo stles? To be shorte, as towchynge y• fetchyng of soules out of hel, what other thynge mente they, thē that What the fetchyng of Soules out of hel mene by the preachynge of Christes Gos∣pel the very dead in synne shall re∣uiue & be made alyue agen, as Da∣uid sayth, the lawe of the LORDE is pure, it turnethe soules. The wyt∣nes of the LORDE is faythfull, and gyuethe wisdome vnto babes. The statutes of the LORDE are ryght & Psal. xviii. reioyse the harte, the cōmaūdemēt of the Lorde is pure & gyueth light to the eyes. Christ also sayth, I am ye resurreccion & lyfe, he yt beleueth in me, although he be dead, yet shal Ioan. xi. he liue, & euery one that liueth and beleueth in me, shall neuer dye. Is not the Gospell of Christ called the Phil. ii. word of lyfe in dyuers places of the holy Scripture bycause it quicke∣neth & gyueth lyfe to them, that be

fore were dead & laye buryed in the stynckynge donge hyll of synne?
Thus se we, that what so euer the olde Poetes haue wrytten in ti mes past cōcernyng ye excellency of ye musike of theyr Minstrelles, it is altogither nothīg elles than a very type, figure, cloud & shadow of this our Mynstrell Dauid, which doth y• very same thynge in dede, which they fayned in wordes. So that al the glory & prayse of true Musyke ought of ryght only to redowne vn to oure moost excellente Musicion Dauid. And althoughe he sheweth hymselfe a very perfecte Musicion & connynge Mynstrell in all his o∣ther sōges & Psalmes, yet me thīke in this our Psalme he farre excel∣leth & almoste ouercōmeth himself, his Harpe soundeth so pleasauntly & his songe is so ful of moost swete & delectable armony. Neither doth he entreate of vayne, childish, lyght

& tryflynge thiges, but of serious, Note howe many godly & goodly thynges are entreated of in thys Psalme. graue, earnest & weyghty matters. For he syngeth of fayth, of the con∣fession of his fayth, of good workes of the crosse, trouble & affliccion, of the vanitie & noughtynes of man, of the benefites of God, of the inuo cacion & callynge on the name of y• LORDE, of the vowes to be perfor∣med vnto the LORDE before his peo ple, of the deathe of Saynctes and howe precious it is in the syght of God, of the free delyueraunce from Satan, synne, death, hell, despera∣cion. &c. thorowe Christ, of the Sa∣crifice of prayse, and, as I maye at the last make an ende, of the ryghte institucion of a Christen mans life in this worlde. What songe may be cōpared vnto this our song? What Harpe maketh so goodly & plesaūte melodye, as this Harpe of Dauid doth? Let all mynstrels gyue place to this our Mynstrel. Let all Har∣pes

& other musicall instrumentes be silente & holde theyr peace, whan Dauids harpe entreth & cōmeth in place. Let all songes be banysshed, whan Dauids Psalmes be songe. For what so euer Dauid syngethe, it is excellent & incōparable. He wt Beholde what Da∣uid doth. his songes exciteth, prouoketh & en flameth ye myndes of the faythefull & diligent hearers vnto the loue & desyre not of trāsitory but of heauē ly thynges. He conforteth the con∣forteles. He exhorteth the synnner vnto amendmēt of lyfe. He lyfteth vp the desperate vnto the hoope of Goddes mercy. He corroborateth & maketh stronge the weake. He hea∣leth the diseased. He rayseth vp the dead vnto lyfe. He makethe the sad mery. He exhilarateth & reioycethe y• merely disposed. To cōclude, he is a Mynstrell fytte for all kynde of parsons, so y• they be bent vnto god lynes. Ah woulde God y• all Myn∣strels

in the world, yea & all sorte of parsons both olde & yonge, woulde ones leaue theyr lasciuious, wantō & vnclene balades, & syng such god ly & vertuous songes, as Dauid te cheth them, wherby they myght be auocated & called away from synne & excited & stored vp vnto vertue & goodnes. For it is not vncomly for Not. Christen men to synge Christē son∣ges, yea & that in all places, so that it be done reuerently, & wtoute ony iestynge, scoffynge, raylynge, or re∣proche of other persons.
Moreouer who can deny y• there The greate vertue of Dauids harpe. is much & great vertue in Dauids Harpe, seynge that the sounde ther of dyd chase & dryue awaye the vn∣cleane & wycked spirite out of king Saul, wherwith at other tymes he i. Reg. xvi. was miserably afflicted & troubled? Agayne must not Dauids songes be of great excellency, seyng that y• sonne of god came downe from the

glorious throne of his heauenly fa The excellē cy of Da∣uids songes Luke, xxiiii Ephe. v. ther to accōplish & fulfyl thē? Doth not. Paule also saye, be ye fylled wt the spirite, speakynge among your selues in Psalmes, Hymnes, & spi∣rituall songes, syngyng & makyng melody in your hartes to ye LORDE euer gyuyng thanckes for all thin∣ges in the name of our LORDE Ie∣su Christ? Certes the Psalmody of Dauid maye well be called y• Trea The Psal∣mody of Dauid is  tresure house of the holy Scrip∣ture. sure house of the holye Scripture. For it contayne the what so euer is necessary for a christē mā to know: There is nothynge in the lawe, no thynge in the Prophetes, nothyng in ye prechyng of Christ & of his apo stles, yt this noble Mynstrell, Kyng & Prophet doth not decantate and synge wt moost goodly & manifeste wordes. He syngeth all the workes & wōderous miracles of God from the begynnynge of the worlde, vn∣tyll the redēpcion of mankynde by

Christ. He syngeth Christes incar∣nacion, preachinge, workyng of mi∣racles, passion, death, resurreccion ascencion, glory, the blessynge of all nacions, the conuersion of the Gē∣tiles withe all other misteries that pertayne to our helth. He syngethe the iudgement & mercy of God. He syngeth the discōmendacion of vice & auauncement of vertue. He syn∣geth the vanite & vnryghteousnes of mens strēgthes without ye helpe of God. To be short, he sigeth what so euer is expidiente for a Christen mās knowledge. So that euē this one boke alone of Dauids songes had ben sufficiēt truly to instructe a man in the ryghteousnes of God but yt the goodnes of God would, y• our fragilite, weakenes & ignoran∣cy shoulde be holpen wt mo scriptu∣res. O the wonderful & meruelous strength of Dauids Harpe. O the great & excedyng vertu of Dauids

songes. Happy is that man that de lyghteth & hath a pleasure in them for he shal neuer be vexed wtan euel spirite. He shall alwaye abhore vice & enbrase vertue. He shall neuer be sadde, but euer reioyce wt a godly & Agood lessō for all men of ho∣noure. spiritual myrth. Would God that all men of honoure woulde noryshe such Mynstrelles in theyr houses, as Dauid is, & that might syng vn to thē bothe at dyner & supper, yea and at all other tymes these moost swete & delectable songes of Dauid So should both they & all theyr fa∣mily be desposed to lyue more ver∣tuously, than many be nowe a day∣es, & be prouoked to leaue theyr pō∣pous, galāt, wycked, venereal, flesh∣ly, beastlyke & vncleane manner of lyuynge. Would God also that all Beholde & followe. fathers & mothers, al masters and mastresses, would brynge vp theyr chyldren and seruaūtes in the syn∣gynge of these moost godly songes.

Agayne, woulde God y• all Schole∣masters & teachers of youth, would in stede of Uirgile, Ouide, Horas, Catullus, Tibullus, Properti{us}. &c teach these verses of Dauid. For so shoulde they not only obtayne elo∣quence, but also diuine erudicion, godlye knoweledge, spirituall wis∣dome, & encrease in all kynde of ver tue, vnto the great glory of God, y• saluacion of theyr owne soules, the ryght instituciō of theyr owne lyfe the great ioye of theyr parentes, y• good reporte of theyr techers, and to the hygh cōmodite of the Christē publique weale. God grafit that it maye once thus come to passe. But I wyll returne vnto our Psalme, which I haue entiteled ī the forhed of my boke, Dauids Harpe.
Some man wyll meruayle per∣aduēture whye I call this Psalme Dauids Harpe▪ rather than on y o∣ther. The reason is this. There are

contayned in this Psalme, besydes Why thys Psalme is called Da∣uids Harpe other, ten speciall thynges, mooste worthy to be entreted of. The fyrst is, fayth. The seconde, confession of fay the, wherbye are vnderstandde all good workes. The thyrd, perse∣cucion. The fourthe, the vanite of man. The fyfte, y• benefites of God The syxte, bearinge of the Crosse, ye inuocacion & callynge on the name of the LORDE. The seuenth, vowes to be performed vnto the LORDE be fore all his people. The eyghte, the death of sayntes, & how precious it is in the sighte of God. The nynte, fre delyueraunce from the bondes of Satā thorow Christ. The tente y• sacrifice of prayse. These ten are equal in nomber wt the strynges of Dauids Harpe, which also ware tē as it appereth by his owne wordes wher he sayth, prayse the LORDE wt Harpe, & with a psaltry of ten strin Psa. xxxii. ges synge ye vnto him. Agayne, O

God, I wyl syng to the a new sōge, Psal. cxii yea wc a psaltry of ten stringes wyl I make melody to the. What kynd of musicall instrumēt this psaltry was, which the Grekes call Nablō, of the Hebrewe worde Neball, it is vncertayne to the wryters. But y• it was an instrument of ten stryn∣ges, moche lyke vnto an Harpe, it is euident ynough. Wher of it came to passe that it is nowe commonly called Dauids Harpe. But for as nuche as it is no matter of weygh¦ty importauuce, & only signifyethe the true & spirituall gladnes of the mynde, wher wt a Christē man is re plenished of ye spirite, I wyl omitte & let it passe, & after y• cōmon vsage call it Dauids Harpe, yea & so enti tle this our psalme, desyryng all mē diligētly to marke not the name of Dauids Harpe, but the swete soūd & delectable melody that it maketh yea & the goodly & cōfortable songe,

that he syngethe vnto it. So shall they acquire & gette to them selues much spirituall ioye, great knowe∣lege, godly wisdom, & be very much edified in the doctrine of Christes religion.
Now for as muche as I am not only credibly ēformed of other, but also perfectly perswaded that your ryght honorable Lordeshyp delygh¦teth in nothynge so greatly as in y• holy scripture, whiche is the word Phil. ii. Ioan. viii. Psal. xviii. Iacob. i. of lyfe, the lyght of the worlde, the only treasure of christianite and is abundantly able to saue the soules of so many as heare it▪ beleue it, & worke therafter: I thoughte it not vnfyttyng, nor vnworthy your ho¦nour to dedicate this my labour to your name trustīg y• by this menes many other shalbe allured to y• hea∣rynge of Dauids armonye, & be so enflamed wt the feruent loue & per∣petual desyre therof, that they shal

wysh like paynes to be taken in the declaraciō of y• other Psalmes, that they myghte be red withe the more fruyte. And woulde God that this my laboure mighte excite store vp Sette hand to it, o ye y• be lerned. & moue other that farre excel me in all kynde of diuine knowledge, and that can hādle the scriptures more learnedly thā I, to trauayle in the busines of Gods word, & so to sette forth the sincer intelleccion and the right vnderstandynge therof, that the vayle myght be taken away frō the eies of all men, & the true lyght shyne vniuersally wtout ony impe∣diment ii. Cor. iiii. or lette. There is much har Math. ix. Luke. x. ueste, but fewe workemen. We had nede therfore to praye vnto ye Lord of y• haruest, to send oute labourers into his reape.
But me thynke, I se your Lord shyp verye desyrous to heare some of Dauids melody. I make an end desyrynge you moost intierlye, fa∣uourablye

to accepte this my lytle gyfte, if not for my sake, yet for the loue y• ye haue euer borne vnto Da uid, being not only an excellēt Mu siciō & cōnyng Mynstrel, but also a puyssaūt Kyng & diuine Prophet. God, whose holy worde you moost feruentely loue, and mooste ear∣nestly practyse in your daye∣ly conuersacion, moughte vouchesaufe to preserue your righte honorable Lordshyp & that ver tuous Lady your wyfe, wyth all your moste swete chil dren and family in per∣petuall helth and prosperous felicite.
Amē.
