



Right Honourable,
AS God, in the bestowing of his gifts on men, doth not observe an Arithme∣ticall proportion, in gi∣ving to all alike, but ac∣cording to his unsearcha∣ble wisedome, useth a pleasing kind of va∣riety

and a discreet inequality in the distri∣bution of the same, committing much to some, little to others, as is plaine and evi∣dent by the parable of the TalentsMat. 25.15. Luk. 19 12., where∣of some received more, others but one; so neither doth hee measure the service and o∣bedience that is done unto him, by the matter and quantity of the thing that is done, but by the minde and affection, by the parts and abilities of him that doth it, taking in good part the least and meanest performances, when they proceed from a sincere intention, and an inlarged affection towards him, and are sutable to the gift and ability that is received from him: for, as Chrysostome well observesChrysost. to. 2. in V.T. Edit. graeco∣lat. Homil. 42. in Gen. pag. 609., God respecteth not so much what is given unto him, as the affection out of which it doth proceed; whence it comes to passe, that the price of those services which are very small in themselves, are much raised, and advanced in Gods esteeme and account, by the zeale and sincerity that is stamped upon them; whereas on the contrary, for want of this,

those actions which are most glorious in the eye of the world, lose much of their beauty and lustre; and are little or nothing regarded with him. Consonāt hereunto is that of venerable BedeBeda. com. in Mar. ca. 12. Nō per∣pendit De∣us quantum in ejus sa∣crificio, sed ex quanto proferatur., who saith, that God respecteth not so much the substance of the offering, as the conscience of him that brings it; nor doth hee so greatly regard how much is laid upon his Altar, as hee doth how much hee that comes unto him, is able to give; And S. AmbroseAmbros. to. 1. li. de vi∣duis pa. 142. Vberior est nummus è parvo, quàm thesaurus ex maximo, quia non quantum detur, sed quantum re∣sideat, ex∣penditur. gives the reason, because a little portion out of a small pittance, is more than a greater obla∣tion out of a large heape, and rich Store-house, none can give more than hee that leaves himselfe nothing behinde, though that which he gives bee never so little; and none doth much, that might doe much more, if he did set his whole strength and ability upon it. To whom much is com∣mitted, of him much is justly expectedLu. 12.48., and he that hath but little committed to his trust, if there bee a willing minde to lay it out for his Masters advantage, it shall finde

acceptance, according to that a man hath2 Cor. 8.12. In the old Law all did contribute and of∣fer to the use and service of the TempleExod. 35.5, some brought gold and silver, blew silke and purple, Scarlet and fine linnen; others brought Goates haire, and Rammes skins, yet all were accepted of God, and taken in good worth; yea, perhaps the meanest ob∣lations of those, who out of their penury, were willing to contribute something to the Lord, might finde better acceptance with him, than the offerings of those, who out of their superfluity and abun∣dance, bring farre greater matters unto him. Our blessed Savior, when he beheld how people cast money into the TreasuryMark. 12.42., and tooke notice of many rich men that cast in much, yet hee preferres the poore widows two Mites, before the large contribution of many others: and surely there is not any one thing, wherin greatnesse on earth doth more resemble the great God of heaven, than this, that it is willing to accept of the meanest presents, that are tendred by infe∣riours,

when they proceed out of a hearty affection towards the same; the considera∣tion whereof hath emboldened me (Right Honourable) at this time, to present your Lordship with this poore ten∣der; presuming it shall finde acceptance with your Honour, because it is willingly offered to the use and service of the Tem∣ple, though it bee but as Goates haire in comparison of the gold of Ophir, which others bring, or as the poore widowes Mite, in respect of those larger summes, which others cast into this treasury of the Church, in this learned age. And indeed I cannot so over-love this slender peece which now comes forth into the world, as to think it of more worth than many of his fellowes, which are willingly content to die in the eare, rather than to stand in white sheetes, that they might speake to the eye; much lesse can I set such a high price upon it, as to send it abroad with let∣ters of credit and commendation, that might bespeake and procure friends where

it is unknowne. It was first spoken to a popular Auditory, without any thoughts or intentions of further publication; and therfore it studied nothing more thā plain∣nesse, and such a familiar expression, as might best suite with vulgar capacities: and now that it comes into the open light, and publike view, it cannot well leave that native language which it learned in the Pulpit, to frame it selfe to a stile and phrase of speech, concise and pithie, more befitting the Presse: Such as it is I make bold to send it abroad into the world, un∣der your name and honourable protecti∣on, that it may remaine, as a pledge and te∣stimony of that humble respect and service that I owe unto your Lordship. It comes therefore unto you, not as a Tutor with in∣structions to teach you what you know not, but as a Pupill for protection, that be∣ing sheltred under the shadow of your ho∣nourable Patronage, it may finde the safer passage in those unknowne wayes, and places whither it shall travell. There is

none that I know, in our English tongue, that hath gone before me in handling that portion of Scripture, which this ensuing Treatise, that now comes to your Lord∣ships hands, is spent upon; and, if I mis∣take not, there are few passages in holy Scripture more necessary and usefull for all sorts and conditions of men, than this is, for it is a discovery of those thoughts of peace, which GOD carries towards the sonnes of men, in the primary intention of that course of providence that hee hath ta∣ken for their good; and withall, a declara∣tion of that care and diligence, that should bee in every one to serve this providence of GOD in the day of grace, by applying himselfe unto him in the use of those meanes, wherein mercy may be had, if it be sought for. And these meditations, as they are fit for every one to think upon, so more especially for men of high place and condi∣tion, because, like high trees, they are more subject to those windes of temptation, which may breed in them a forgetfulnesse

of both; whereas by this meanes they might easily prevent those two dangerous rocks of presumption and despaire, upon which many dash and split the precious vessels of their soules, and suffer eternall shipwracke: for hee that firmely beleeves, and perswades himselfe that there is such thoughts of peace in GOD towards him, as that mercy may bee had if it bee sought for, hee cannot easily desparie of finding mercy, if with care and diligence hee apply himselfe to the seeking of it; and hee that layes this foundation, that GOD will bee sought unto for the obtaining of those blessings which hee hath promised, hee cannot easily presume of finding mercy, while hee lives in the neglect of those meanes that lead unto it. And this is the principall end and scope (Right Honoura∣ble) which these weake and unworthy la∣bours of mine doe especially drive at: If they shall finde that acceptance with your Lordship, which they promise unto them∣selves; and bee availeable (if but) to adde

one little sparke more to that flame of de∣votion, which already shineth forth so brightly in your honourable deportment; I shall thinke my selfe happy in the successe of this enterprise, and make it my daily suite and request at the throne of grace, that when you have finished your course with honour here on earth, you may bee glori∣ously crowned with salvation in heaven: in the desire whereof I shall ever rest,

