


SO ofte as I behoulde the fact of this world▪ namelye of thys realme of England (mou Gracious Ladye) I know not whether ther be offered vnto me greater occacions of glad∣nes or of sadnes. For when I consi∣der the horrible blyndnes and mon∣sterous ignoraunce, whyche heretofore reygned a∣mong vs a great number of yeares, yea and that al∣most vniuersally in al partes of the Christen publi¦que wale thorow the subtile deuises of Sara and of his ministers, which to deceiue the folish blinde world, fashyon them selfes lyke vnto the Apostles of Christ and walke as the Aungels of lyght when notwythsandynge they are in deede fale Apostles and deceatfull worckers hauyng an warde appe∣raunce of godlynes,ii. Cor. xi. but vtterly denying the vertue and power therof: and now se the aforesaid pestilē¦ces banyshed and driuē out of this most florishing real of England thorow the wonderful working of Gods spirit in the Kynges Magesy, and in his most honorable Councel, I cannot but hartelye e∣ioyse and ye God most intre harkes. For who seeth  ecept he be wilfully blyne and obsinat¦ly refuse to se how many oable and excelēt bene¦fis of ou saluacion we hae reyued of God vn∣d this our kyng a Prince for hys godly dispoici¦o  eruous enerprises worthy to enioy not onely immortal fame, but also the yeares of anci∣ent and long liuing M ehuselh. 

in these hys yong yeares, by the aduise of his most honorable Coūsel, hath no les trauailed in putti way Idolatry, Papiy▪ Supersiciō and Hypo∣crysy out of this his graces Realme, nd in reo∣ryng vnto vs hys humble and obedient Subiects, the true religiō and the glorious Gospel of our sa∣uiour Iesu Chrit, then that most godly yong king Iosias dyd in hys kyngdom of Iuda, whych beyng but a chylde of eyght yees ole when he began to reygne, dyd not wythstanding both studiously,iiii. reg. xxii▪ and earnestly seke after the God of Dauid his ather▪i. Pa. xxxi▪ & turned neither to the right hand nor to the let. An in the .xii. yeare he began to puge Iuda and Hieu∣salem of hyl altars, groues, harued images, and ima¦ges of mettal, so that they roke down the altares of Baaleuen in the Kynges presence, and the idols that were vpon them, he caused to be destroyed. He slew the Idolatrous Priests and the Chaplens of Baall. He destroyed the stewes, and whorysh hou∣ses, and put down the buggey places. He neuer ce¦sed tyll he had reformed all hys whole realme, and brought in againe the true religion of God. O mos shyning myrrour and liuely examplar for al godly Princes to behold and folow. Euen thys also hath our most Chrysten kyng done and brought to passe, in hys dominions, yea and that in a yoger age, for thys hys graces Relme is al redy deliuered from Antichristes tyranny. We are made free from hys yorke. We are combred no more wyth hys trifling tradicions and dyrty deceyts. The breakyng of his lawes, disquiet our concience no more. His cerem¦nies, are banished. His religious mōures haue no longer place among vs. His inuocacion of saints hys gaddyng on Pilgrimages his gilding of Ima∣ges, his paiting of tabernacles, his setting vp of candles before stockes, hys purgotory, his Masses of Scalecely, his Bules hys Pardons, hys dispē∣sacions▪ his Iubilies, his iutificaciō of works▪ his selling of merites, his canonising of Sains his Di¦riges, his Trētals, his blasphemous masses, his I∣dolatous altares, his  cōfessiō, his hussel in

 kynde for the laye, hys holye breade, hys holy wate, hys oyle, hys creame, hys waxe, hys flae, his Palmes, hys Ashes, hys Idolatrye, hys Hipo∣crisy, hys Candel styckes, hys relykes, hys Corpo∣ralle▪ hys Portasse, hys shepehooke, hys Maise∣boke, hys Crosure, his Mitoure, his sensynge, hys Popyshe astynge, hys hauynge, hys greasynge, hys sacrifycynge, hys God makynge, hys transub∣stanciacion, hys excommunicacyon, hys vnchaste chase vowes, hys halowed bowes, hys Beades, hys vstimentes, hys Idols, hys Romyshe seruise, hys Antichristian orders, his Peterpens, his fra∣ensee, his primary, and al hys pelyng pedlay, is vtterly banished and dryuen oute of thys lande. In steade of these outragyous pestylences of the Christen publique weale, is entred in amonge vs the gloryous lyghte of Christes Gospell, the true knowledge of God, the ryghte worshyppynge of God, the harty callynge on the name of the Lorde, the utificacion of faythe, the hope of hauynge re∣myssyon of al our syns in Christes bloud, the god∣ly and christen worckes, the sincere▪ preachynge of gods blessed word, the true ministracion of the ho∣ly Sacramentes, the readynge of the sacred Scryp∣tures in oure owne English oung, the knowledge of our duty towarde the Kynges Magestye and all the hye powers, and howe we shoulde behaue oure selues toward al men, yea and howe we our selues ought to lyue soberly, ryghtuouslye and godlye in this presente worlde, wyth an infinite number of such godly treasures. And yf any thyng be behynde that is not yet broughte vnto perfeccion (as sores of long continuance are not strayghte wayes hea∣led) I dubt not but that the Kynges mooste excl∣lent Magesty and hys godly prudent, wyse, & ho∣rable coūcel wyl se it reformed, and neuer leaue of heyr godly purpose after the example of good kynge Iosias tyll they haue stablished all thynges in thys Realme acordyng to Gods word, & made this church of Englād a worthye spectacle and no¦able examplace for al forennacions to behold and

followe. The restorynge of the gloryous lyghte of Chrites gospel nto vs, the driuyng away of Pa∣pyry out o this realme, the haui of so goly & noble a Price to be our kynge and gouenour as¦sie with so honourable and godly we counsel∣lours, are withoute al doubt the incomperable and singuar greate benefites of God, and euident to∣kens o hys earnest good wyl towarde thys realme of Englande, and te inhabytauntes of the same. He hath not dealt o wyth al naciōs neither hathe he shewed so manifestly his blessed wil vnto them.Psal. clxviii When I consyder (mooste gracious Ladye) these thynges, I am ioyfull glad and merye, and Iudge my selfe happye and blessed of Go, that it hathe chaunced me o lyue in that age wherein the whore of Babylon wyth all her marked Marchauntes, is confounded: and the Lambe, I meane Christe, euen in vs hys weke members hath gotten the vyctory where in also so godlye a Prynce, and so vertuous a Councel ruleth and gouerneth thys our country. But, as of these frēdly beneyts of God I cōceyue an vnfained gladnes in my hearte, forasmuche as thorowe thē I am fullye perswaded of Gods good wyl toward thys realme of England, so contrary wyse am I manye tymes prouoked vnto sadnesse, when I consyder our ingratitude▪ our vnthankful∣nes▪ yea our beastly churlyshnes toward god. For albeit many amōg vs bothe of the nobylitye and of the base sorte (hankes be to God) do both faythe∣fully and earnestly embrace thys louynge kyndnes of God, and be thankful to hym for hys benefits, ledinge for thei possible power a lyfe worthye of hys fatherly goodnes, yet the mooste and greatest part are vnthanckfull,ii. Cor. iii & lytle esteme these syngu∣lare benefs of God. yea there are (whose iudge∣mentes, wys, and sences the God of thys worlde hathe blynded, because the lyghte of the gloryous Gospell of Christe, whyche is the Image of God, shul not shyne vnto thē) that wyshe rather to be a¦gayne in Egipt among the greasy fleshepots,Num. xi. de∣uournge Cucumbers▪ Melons, Leekes, Oynions

and garlike, then to taste of Mann that heauenlye meate. Some o her agayne there bee (woulde God not of them, whiche be called Gopellers and haue the holy sciptures swymmyng in theyr lyppes and Gods booke eyther in theyr hanes or hangyng at theyr gyrdles) whych pretend a loue to the gospelle nd yet in theyr conuesacion and lyuing,rosse gos∣ellers. at a vn∣godly, vncharytable, vnmecyull, vnryghteous, proude, voluptuouse▪ disdainefull, couetous, mali∣cious, enuyous▪ ydle. & cat. as the Papystes, yea as the Iewes▪Titus. i. Tuckes and Saracens arc. With thei woords they confesse that they knowe GOD but wyth theyr workes they deny hym. They are plea∣saunte fygge trees and blosomes but in truyte no∣thynge at all. They are oute Disciples of Christe so long as Christ fedeth them with breade yea they can be cōtent to make Christ a kyng, but whē christ. requireth of thē a care and study for heauenly thin∣ges,Ihon. vi. a constaunte Faythe, a godlye lye, a mercyfull hearte towarde the poore, then are they gone. They are no lenger Christes frendes then Christ serueth theyr tourne In raylyng agaynst papistes, n defy∣ing the lawes of the Bishop of Rome in dispising the ceremonies of the chuche▪ in eating of al kinde meates witout dyference of daies in the presēce, they care not of whom, in absentyng thē selues frō the Common prayer and frome the receyuynge of the Lordes supper, in breakynge all honest and cy∣uyle orders in gettynge what maye ee gotten vn∣der the pretence of the Gospell, in eadynge a dys∣solue lyfe, in outewardelye speakynge fayre, yee inwardelye meanynge crafte and deceyt. & cet. in all theese thynges (if suche thynges may sette for∣warde th Gospell) they are content to hewe the selfes fyne Gospellers and sweete brohers, but in mortyfying their carnall affectes▪ in dyeing to the worlde, in fy ghtynge agaynste Sathan▪ and in cru∣yyinge the fleshe, in dystrybutyng theyr goodes to the poore, in leadynge a lyfe worthye of the gos∣pell of Christe, they are worse then the greate Tur∣ke▪ or anye other infyell.
The Gospell of Christe begetteth and bryngeth forthe newe lyfe, and newe maners. yea, and those pure, hone and godly. If such frutes followe not the Gospellers profession▪ in vayn do they bragg of the Gospell, of the grac of God, of the Chry∣sten lybertye, of the iustificacyon of faythe, of the sacryfyce of Christes death, of the pryce of his pr¦cyous bloude, and of oure ryghteous makynge by hys gloryous resurreccyon. If they were the sones of God, they woulde do the woorkes of God. The sonne, saythe God, honoureth hys father▪ and the seruaunte hys Lorde, If I be a father, where is my honoure If I be a Lorde, where is my fate, sayeth the Lorde of hoastes? I we diligentlye martke the manner of men, berelye the pryde,Walach. i▪ the couetouse∣nes▪ the vnmercyfulnes, the enuye, the malyce▪ the voluptuous liuyne, fayened frendshyp and such other abhomynable synnes whych reygne and try∣umphe nowe a dayes in vs, shall euidentlye declare what good Gospelles and perfecte Christyans wee are. It maye shame vs in thys open lyghte of the Gospell, to brynge forth the workes of darck∣nesse, and to lyue as though we knew no Gospell, no God, no Chryste, no truthe, God may well saye of vs, as he sayed of the Iewes,Esay. i. I haue nouryshed nd broughte vp children, and they haue dypysed . GOD calleth vs, and we refuse to goe.Prouerbe,  GOD stretceth out his hand, and no manne regardeth it, God commaundeth vs to walcke in hys vyneyard, and wee loyter abroade ydlelye.Wath. xxi. GOD geueth vs Talentes to occupye, and we buryed theym in the grounde and dooe no good wyth theym. God cal∣leth vs vnto the Maryage of hys Sonne,Wath. xxv. and wee haue so muche mynde of oure Fearmes: of our-Oen, and of oure Wyues, that wee haue no plea∣sure to god. God woulde gather vs to gether,Wath. xxii as the hen doothe her Chyckens, but we wyll none of it.Luke. xiii. God proffereth vs the lyghte of hys gloryous Gospell but we loue to walcke in dacknes. God woulde shewe hym selfe vnto s, but we care not for the syghte of hym.Wath. xxiii. God woulde vs to bee

saued, but we regard not our saluation, O to much vnhākeful chucyshnes. The Diuell, the worle, & the flesh haue so ly need our eyes, that we ca not se what is good & profitable cots. What shal I speake of the disoeyente and ubbourne Pa∣pts,Papystes. which bothe obstinately & maliciuly refute the manifet truth of Gods blessed worde & wil by no meanes cōsent vnto it, although their own con∣science accuseth and condempneth them for so o∣yng?Wat. xii. If any commit that moose greuous synne a∣gaynst the holy Gost, which shal neuer be forgeuen, certes those Papists, whyche knowe the truthe of Christes Gospel, and yet maliciously and or a sette purpose wythall theyr power resye it, are gyltye of that synne.Mark. xiii. Luke. xii. Esay. xxx. These Papists, as the Prophet cal∣leth them, are an obstinate people, vnfathfull chil∣dren▪ yea childrene that wyll not heare the lawe of the Lorde. They cry continually, speake pleasaunt thynges vnto vs, & preach vs false things. Treade out of the waye, go out of the pathe, turne the holye one of Israell from vs. Departe from vs, O God, we desyre not the knowledge of thy wayes.Iob. xxi. Wath. viii. Theese Papystes, are lyke the Gergesens, whych for feare of losyng theyr fylthy swyne, were loth that Chrst should come among them. God turne their heartes What shall I speake of the Anabaptistes, Lybet∣ines,Anabapti∣es▪ Libertines. Epycures. Epicures, and suche other sectaryes, whyche scorne and mocke the misteryes of Goddes worde, and lyue so licenciouslye and voluptuouslye wyth∣out al feare of God, as though there were no God at al▪ nor no life after thys? God haue mercy vpon vs
When I consyder thys our bothe vntowarde∣nes and vnthankefulnes, it maketh me sorowefull, because we aunsweare not kyndenesse for kyndnes but rather euyll for good. And to encrease my so∣rowe, thys sentence of oure sauioure Christe dothe manye tymes come into my mynde: The kynge∣dome of God shall bee taken awaye frome you▪Wath. xxi. and shal be geuen to a peope, that shall brynge forth the fruftes of it. Oure lyfe is so vngodlye

and we are so vnfrutefull in good works that with out al doubt except we repent and amend, Goddes word for our vnthankfulnes shal not onely beta∣ken away from v, but also for these moste sweete and pleasaunte benefytes of God, we maye be sure to feele most bytter and greuous plages. God wyll not be mocked. Thys is the condempnacion, say∣eth Christe, that lyght is come into the worlde,Ihon. iii. and men loued darcknes more then light, because theyr dedes wee euil. He loue cursing, saith the Psal∣mographe and it shall come vpon hym:Psalm. cix. he woulde none of the blessing, therfore shal it be farre frome hym. The propertye of God, whyche wyll not the death o a synner, but rather that he turne and lyue is fyrste to sende his Prophetes and Preachers, to exhorte the people vnto repentaunce and amende∣mente of lyfe. If they wyllynelye heare the Prea∣chers, repente and amende theyr lyfe as the Nini∣uites dyd at the preachynge of Ionas, then are all the plages whyche theyr synns mooste iustlye had deserued, turned away from them,Ionas. iii▪ and the blessyng of God lyghteth vpon that people. God fauoureth them. God kepeth and defendeth them. God geueth theym aboundaunce of all thynges. God keepeth theyr realmes quiet and free from commocions. God sendeth theym good Magystrates and godlye preachers. God prospereth all theyr doynges. But if they despyse the preachyng of Gods woorde and wyll not redresse theyr lyfe accordynge to the rule and appoyntment therof, but go forth in the lewd∣nes of theyr hearte and contynue in all theyr abho∣minations then dothe Gods curse fal vppon them, penury and scarsnes of al temporal thynges, insur∣reccions and commocions, erroures and heresyes. battell and plae cruell Tyrauntes and false prea∣chers, confusion of thynges and final destruccion as God hym selfe sayth by the Prophet,Iere▪ xxix. I wyl sēd vpon them swearth, honger and pestylence, because they haue not heard my wordes, whyche I sente to them sayeh the Lorde by my seruauntes the Pro∣phetes. Agayne he sayeth, because they haue forsa∣ken

my lawe, that I gaue them, and haue not hearde my voyce▪ nor yet walcked thereafter, but folowed the wickednes o theyr owne heartes, and runne af∣ter straunge goddes as theyr fathers taughte them. Therfore thus saythe the Lorde of hostes, the God of Israell▪ behoulde.Iere. ix. I wyll feede thys pe ople wyth warme wode, and geue them gal to dryncke. I wyll scatter them amonge the Heathen, whome neyther they nor theyr rathers haue knowen. And I wyll sende a swearde among them to persecute them, and I wyll neuer leaue vntyll I haue broughte them to noghte. The Prophete also saythe, if ye wyll bee louynge and obediente,Esa. i. ye shall enioy the best thyn∣ges that growe vpon the earthe. But if ye wil be ob∣stinate and rebellyous ye shall be deuoured with the swearde. For thus the Lorde hathe promysed with hys owne mouthe. Howe doothe oure sauyoure thonder agaynste Corasin, Bethsaida, and Caper. naum▪ and threate them euerlastynge dampnacyon, because they wolde not receiue the woorde of God, and amende theyr lyuynge? Wo bee to the Corasin wo bee to the Bethsaida saythe Christe.Wat. xi. For if the myracles whyche were shewed in you, hadde bene done in Tyre and Sidon▪ they had repented longe agone in sackecloth and ashes. Neuertheles I saye vnto you▪ it shall de easier for Tyre and Sidon at the day of iudgemente, then for you. And thou Ca∣pernaum which art lift vp vnto heauen: shalte bee broughte downe to hel. For if the miracles whyche haue bene done in the, had bene shewed in Sodome they had remayned vnto thys day. Neuerthelesse I say vnto you, it shal be easier for the land of Sodō at the day of iudgment then for you. Again he saith to his Disciples and to all faithefull preachers,Luke. x. he that heareth you heareth me▪ and he that dispyseth you, dispiseth me, and he that dispisethme▪ dispiseth him that sent me. Therefore whosoeuer wyl not re∣ceiue you▪ nor heare your sermōs, when ye departe out of that house or that cytye: shake of the dust of your eete. Verely I say vnto you, it shall be easier for the land of Sodome and Gomor in the daye of

iudgemente, then for that cytye. The dispisinge of Gods worde and the preachers thereof, neuer esca∣peth vnplaged, as it is eudente by the historyes of the holy scripture. Nohe preaceed to the old world and exhorted them to repente and to amende theyr lyfe, or elsse God woulde surely plage them.ii. Petr. ▪ They laughed Nohe (whome S. Peter calleth the ryghte Preacher of ryghteousnes) to scorne, and hys doc∣tryne. What folowed▪ was not al the world drow∣ned, eyght persons only ecepted?
Lot seyng the vnnaturall and most abhomina∣ble vnclennes of the stynkynge Sodomites,Gene. vii. coun∣celled them to cease so to much licenciouslye to of∣fende theyr Lord God. They would not heare
Lot nor hys Sermons, but churlyshey entreated hym. What followed?Gene. xi. ii. Peter. . Were they not consumed wyth water, fyre and brymstone from heauen? O mooste dreadful plages. The Iewes many tymes fel away from theyr Lorde God, and worshypped straunge Gods, and defyled them selues wyth all the abho∣minacions of the Heathen. The Lorde God of theyr fathers hauyn compassion on hys people, sent to thē by his messengers▪ yea betymes sent he to thē ore to warne thē of the plages that shulde fal vpon thē if they did not repente & wyth all their herts turne agane nto the Lorde their God.ii. pa. xxxvi. But they mocke che messengers of God, and depysed theyr wordes, & mis vsed his Prophetes vntyll the wrathe of the Lorde so arose agaynste hys people, that it was past remedye. What folowed: Did not God send in theyr ennemes among them whyche slewe theyr you▪ men wyth the sweard in their ho∣ly tēple & neyther spared yong man nor maydē nei¦ther old man neither so muche as hm hat seuped fo age? Were not al theyr goodes spoyled, & theyr strong cities and owes destroied, & brēt with fire? Wer not theyr kyngs bound in fettes, & had theyr eyes cruelly thurstou, & so miserably caryed away lyke bond laues and prisoners into captiuity? If any menne of warre, or any connyng Artificers re∣mained alyue, were they not all caryed awaye, and

cōpelled to muche wretchedly to serue in a straung countrye, yea and that theyr very ennemyes? Hor∣ryble and dreadeful plages woul these appere to the eyes of oure mynde, and make vs stande in awe of Gods vengaunce, yf we had anye feare of God in vs.i. Cor. x. All theese thynges saythe S. Pule happened vno them for examples, and were wrytten to putte vs in remembraunce, whome the endes of the worlde are come vpon. Wherfore let him that thin∣keth he standeth take hede leaste he fall For there is no respect o persons wyth God, but in all peo∣ple he that feareth hym and worceth ryghteouse∣nesse is accepted wyth hym.Actes. x So lykewyse he that feareth  God nor worketh ryghteousenes, but lyueth wyth out al feare of God in wyckednes and vngodlynes, maye be sure to be plaged, o what so∣euer country nacion, for kynred he be. For there is no respect of persons wyth God.
Moreouer after certayne yeares of theyr cap∣tiuity, God remembryng hys promyse, euen of hys owne goodnes delyuered them oute of thraldome-and broughte theym home agayne into theyr owne conuery,Zere xxix where by the space of certayne yeres after theyr retourne euen so longe as the Plagues were whoe, and fresh in theyr memorye as the manner of the worlde is they contynued in the feare of God and walked accordyng to hys worde. But whē they once grewe vnto a quietnesse, and by that meanes began to ware welthy, they strayghtwayes forgott both God and hys plages, and became the old men agayne▪ Ambicious, Proude, Couetous, Malyci∣ous, Dysdaynefull, Or mercifull, Voluptuous and styrred vp sedicion among them selues. They stry∣ued who shoulde bee hyghet in authorytye. They bought and sold all offyces and dynityes. Not the worthynes of the personne, but the summe of the money was consydered. They gaue theyr myndes wholy to worldlye honoure and ryches. Hee that coulde sette hym selfe in the tygheste place amonge the offycers of the common wealthe, howesoeuer he came by it, was conted the mooste worthye and

most honourable person. God and hys worde were set at noughte. The Prophetes and Preachers of Gods word were brought vnto extreame beggary made of no reputacion, and not herkened vnto. In thys deepe silence of Gods truthe, there arose cer∣tayne sectes (as the diuell neuer slepeth but wat∣cheth hys tym) the Phaiseis, the Saduceis, the Esses, whyche in steede of Gods woorde broughte in theyr owne tradicions, and so corrupted the ho∣ly law of God. God seyng thys theyr ingratitude and vnthankfulnes vexed them besydes other pl∣ges wyth continual warres, and brought them vn∣der the dominion of the Romaynes, so that where s before they were free, nowe are they in most mi∣serable subieccion to straūgers, yea and those their ennemyes. For God wyll not leaue the conempte of hys worde and wycked lyuynge vnpunyshed. Notwithstanding God accordyng to hys olde and accustomed gentlenes once agayne hauynge petye on them, and wyllynge to proue, yf yet nowe at the last they wyl repent and amend▪ that they maye bee saued, sendeth not vnto theym hys seruauntes the Prophets as afore but hys owne dearelye beloued and only begotten sonne, to cal them, by hys moste godly sermons vnto repentaunce and amendmente of lyfe, and to worke miracles amonge them not onelye for the confirmacyon of hys doctryne, but also for theyr comforte. Christe preacheth. Christ worketh myracles. Christe sendeth hys Disiple and Apostles abrode to preache, Christe turneth e∣uery stone as they saye, to wynne the Iewes vnto true godlynesse, to brynge them vnto repenaunce, vnto faythe, and vnto amendemente of lyfe. But how is Christe and hys doctryne receyued? Fewe godly persons excepted, the residue mocke & scorne Christ. They cal hym a teaher of newe learnynge▪ ne possessed wyth a Diuel a decee of the eo∣ple, a mad man, a glotten, a wne byber, a frende-of synnes nd whores a Samaritan, and al that ought is. To be short, they neuer put f theyr f∣ry vntyl they brught Christ vnto deathe, eē vno

the deathe of the crosse.Math. xxvii. This rewarde hadde good Christe of the churlyshe Iewes for hys vnresfull paynes takynge. Notwythstanynge Chri shew∣eth hym selfe yll a louynge Sauioe euen to hys very enemies.Wat. xxviii. War. xvi. Luke. xxiiii. Acts v.vii. Aces. ii. For after his gloryous resurreccion he sent forth his Apostles to preach and to worcke myracles amonge them, to proue if they oulde yet conuerte and aende. But what became of them, Some they prisoed, some they whipped, some they stoned▪ some they slew with swerde all euen so ma∣nye as they coude get they most cruelye neated▪ so nothynge were they moued vnto repentaunce eyther by the doctrine or miracles of the Apostles. After they had slayne Christe, God gaue theym .xl. yeares respyte to repente, alwayes sendynge them preachers o exhorte theim vnto repentaunce and to a fore warne them of the plages to come excepte they repente and amend. They would not heare but tyrant like handled the faithful preachers of Chris yea the godly poste Seynt Iames, whiche in there chiefe cytye Ierusalem was Byshop and Preacher among them thyrye yeares after Christes ascency∣on▪ neuer cssye neyther daye nor nyghte to ex∣hore them vnto rue godlinesse, and to praye vnto God to be merciful vnto theym, and to forgeue th̄ theyr synnes▪ they mooe cruelly entreatd and vn∣iustly put him to deathe. What folowed? God why∣che wyll not alwayes wyncke at the wyckednes of man, styrred vppe the Romaynes agaynste theym, which besieged them so longe▪ that the Iewes were compelled for very hnger (O horrible act & drede∣ful dede) to ate their owne children, yea & to creepe into the prieies (O mooste lothesome thynge) and to sratte oute the mooste fylye and styncynge dounē (whyche eyes abhor to se and nose to smell) and for very famyne to are it. Whose hearte trem∣bleh not to heare these thynges? One slewe a no∣ther for meae. One plucked anothers meate oue of hys mouthe. Some died for honger.
Some slewe theym selues. The houses were full of deade womenne and chyldren. The wyes laye

full of deade carcasses of olde people. The yonge folke went vp and downe in the cytye famished for honger, and as the verye shadowes of deathe rea∣dye at euerye steppe to fal downe, In the cytye was nothynge but lamentacion, syghnge, ceyinge, We∣pynge sorowe, Plage, Pestilence, Murther, Fa∣mine, feare, tearynge of heare, wryngynge of han∣des, cursinge the tyme of theyr byrthe, desperacyon callynge for deathe, lookynge for presente detruc∣cyon, and what so euer  vnpleasaunte and deade∣ly. The death in the City thorow the plages and fa∣mine was so great, that besides, houses etes and great diches ful of innumerabe dead carcasses, ther wer cast oute of the gates of the citye, sixe hundred thousand deade bodyes of menne, women and chyl∣dren, O moost lamentale chūce. They that were slain, were a leauē hondred .M. They that were led prysonners awaye of the ennemies were in nomber fowrescore and xvii. thousande. They that died for hunger in pryson were .xi. thousande. The famous temple, the princelye palaces, the hyghe towers, the stronge Castles, the gorgyous buyldynge, the plea∣saunte houses, the thycke walles, the myghty For∣tresses, and all that euer there was, they threwe downe and brente. All thynges lost theyr old beau∣tye. A dystructyon and verye desolacyon of al thin∣ges was made: what so euer was wythin the cytye it wente to hauocke.psal. cxxvii. There were two thousande of them that fled out of the ciy, whyche had theyr be∣lies ypte and opened in one nyghte, to see if they had swalowed manye goulde into theyr bodyes or not. Ther ws nothing se ō the ennemy. O truly it is sayde of the Psalmographe▪ excepe the Lorde keepeth the cytye, he watcheth in aine that keepeth it. If the Lorde fyghteth, who can resiste his pow∣er? If the Lorde wyll destroye, who can sae? If the Lord wyl cast downe▪ wn is able to helpe vp.prouerb. xx There is no wisedome, no forae, no Councell that ca n preuayle agayne the Lorde, All the towers, Castles. Fortresses, bulwackes and locke houses, all armoures, Gunnes, and atillae▪ all

stengthe, valeaunce and pollicye, can preuayle no thynge if the Lorde bee agaynste vs, whiche is al∣mightye, as he sayeth by the Prophet, ther is none that can take away any thyng out of my hande, and what I wil do, can no man put away nor chaunge. From that distruccyon of Hierusalem vnto thys daye,Esay. xiiii. the Iewes haue euerlyued like moste vilea∣gaboundes and abhominable abiectes, hauyng no certayne country, no common weale, no kingdome, no priesthode. Verely no man, ecepte he be flynte hearted▪ can rede the historye of the destruccyon of Hierusalem, as Iosephus do the dyscribe it, wyth∣oute moste large teares. Woulde God it were tran∣slated into our Englyshe tonge, that all men myght rede it and learne to feare God. For it God spared not the natural olyue tree for theyr vnfaythfulnes & disobedyence,Rom. xi. I in cae the Iewes▪ neyther wil he spare the wilde oliue tree, I meane vs that are gen∣tiles, if we commit the like offences. If god wolde not spare them, to whome pertaineth the adoption, and the glorye, and couenauntes, and the lawe that was geuen, and the seruyce of God, and the promy∣ses, whose also are the fathers▪ and they of whome (as concernynge the fleshe) Chrise came, whyche is God ouer al thinges blessed for euer, is it too bee thought that he wil spare vs whych were heathen in tyme past, without Christe, reputed aiauntes from the common wealth of Israel and straungers from the testaments of the promes▪Ephe. ii. & had no hope, & wer without God in this world, if we be foūd vnfayth∣ful & dysobedyent?ii. Pete. ii. If God spaed not the aungels that synned but cast them downe into hel, & deliue∣red them into chaines of darcknes, to be kept vnto the iudgement, let vs not thincke that he wyl spare vs mortal & miserable wretches if we without rep¦tance go forth to offend his diuine maiesty.hebru. x. He that despiseth Moses lawe, dieth without merci, vnder two or three wytnesses, of howe muche more gre∣uous punyshemente suppose ye shall he bee coun∣ted worthye, whych treadeth vnder foote the sonne of God, and counteth the bloude of the Testamente

as an vngodlye thinge, wherewith he was sanctifi∣ed, and oth dishonoure to the spirite of grace? Oh, it is a fearful thynge to all into the handes o the lyuynge God.Psalme. ▪ For vpon the vngodlye wyl he raine snares, fyre, brymstone, and tempest, thys rewarde shall the wycked haue to dryncke. God haue mercye on vs & gyue vs al grace to eare hym a ryght, to re∣pente and amende ure lyfe, to embrace hys blessed gospel and to ryng forthe the frutes thereof.
What shall I speake of the myghtye Monar∣chies or Empyres of the Assyryans and Greekes,The Assiri and Greke whiche florished not only with al kinde of tempo∣rall ryches, but also wyth moste excellent and lear∣ned wyttes? Lyue they not nowe in most myserable captiuity vnder that cruell tiraunt the great Turke that mortall ennemye of Christes religion? Howe came it to passe? Verelye they were disobediente to Gods word, vnthanckefull one to another, and led a lyfe more lasciuious and wāton than that effemi∣nate king Sardanapalus. God stirred vp preachers to exhorte them vnto repentaunce. They laughed theym to scorne. It came to pas, that God for thei engratytude and churlyshnes gaue them into suche an ennemies hande, as none could be founde more hateful neyther concerning Christ nor Christes re∣ligion, whych at that tyme bothe kylled & soulde an infynyte number, and euen at this presente oppres∣seth them wyth most miserable seruitude, and houl∣deth them down in most vile slauery, vnto the great decaye of the christen faythe, & vnto the vnspeake∣able sorow of al godly people.
Howe came it to passe that the Rhodes euen in our tyme is subdued also of that most cruell Ty∣raunte the Emperoure of Turckye,The . tourned frome Christ vnto Mahomet, from the christen religiō vn¦to the Turkish profession? Was not superstycyon, Iolotry, fayned holynes colored chastitye, that is to say, fylthy whoredom, stinking fornication, dys∣soluteliuing, vsury, & such lyke abhomnable vyces causes hereof? God hold his holye hād ouer vs. To spee much of Germany, sometime a deare mother

 louynge Nurse, and frendelye Patronesse, of all learnynge, and a sure Sanctuarye for godlye learn∣ned men to lee vnto from Antichristes tirannye,Germnye. a coūtry sometime rychely endued wyth all spiritual blesynges of god rom whome also braue out the comfortable lyghte of Chries Gospell, that nowe shineth here among vs in thys reame, vey sorowe wil not  me. O nowe : a thynge is it so noble fre and famous a contye to be brought into lauery, yea and that wore is godly and Chri∣ste preaches to e banishe, and wicked papites to enter in, the preachynge of Christes Gospell oo be dryuen out o the churches, and the popyhe ser∣uice o be vsed the supper of the Lord to be taken a way, and that moost Idolatrous, ynckyng and ab∣hominable masking Masse to be receiued as a God. What christen hearte lmenteth not too consyder these thynges. Of the plage that is nowe fallen a∣mong them▪ the men of God. I meane the preahers told them ful or to fore and exhorted them vnto re∣pentaunce. But all in vayne. For reaye godlye Magisrates and learened men excepted wyth a few other, the greater parte of Germanye euen as in the Popes kyngedome walcked styll in the woordes of darkenes. They talked muche of Chries Gospell, but lyued no parte thereof. They abused the spy∣rytual lyberye of the Gospell, and tourned it to Carnall edome, makynge the Gospell, a clooke of theyr wyckednesse. Theese abhoynacyons oulde no God sufer, seynge that before all othe nacyons he had euen them the knoweledge of hys holye word. Notwithstanding I doubt not but that God for hys mercyes sake, and for the loue of hys electe whome that countrye nourysheth,Psal. lxxxx. wyl short∣lye tourne away hys anger from theym▪ and lyghten hys chereful and louynge countenaunce agaie vp∣on them▪ as he sayth by the Psalmographe. If they breake my ordynaunces, & kepe not my commaunde¦ments I wyll iser theyr ofences ih the rod, and theyr sins wyth scourges. Neuertheles my louinge kindnes wil I not vtterly take from him, nor suf∣fer

my truthe to fil. The Lord is full of compassi∣on and mecye▪ longe suerynge and of great e goodnes▪ e wyl not ele wyth is after our sins,Psalm. ciii. nor ewarde s acoryng to oure wyckednes. For looke howe hye the heaen is in comparyon o the earthe so greate is his mecye also to wae theym that feare hym. Loke howe wye the  is from the wet, so far wy he sette ou synes rom vs. yea, like as father pteth his owne children euen o is the Lord mercyful to them that fear him. For he kno¦weth wherof we be made▪ he remembreth that we are but ust▪ that a man in hys tyme is out as grasse▪ and florysheth as a oure o the feyle: For as sone as the wynde goeth ouer it▪ it is gonne, and the place therof knoweth it no more. But the merciful good¦nes of the Lorde endureth or euer and euer vppon them that feae him and his ryghteousnesse vppon theyr children, suche as kepe his couenaunte, and thinke vpon the commaunements to do them.
Moreouer, as I maye let passe dyuers other hy∣storyes, whyce be leafte hee amonge vs as monu∣mentes of Goddes vengaunce agaynste the churlish nd vnthanckeful, and as they say come nere home. Rede we not that god stirred vp Gildas to prech vn¦to the olde Britannes ad too exhorte theym vnto repentaunce and amendemente o lyfe,Bryttayne. and afore wane theym of the plages to come▪ if they repente not? Wha  it? Gildas was laughed to scorne and taken for a false Prophete, and a malycyous Preacher. The Bretannes wyth lustye courages, whorishe faces, and vnrepentaunte heates wente forth to synne, and to offende the Lorde theyr God. What folowed? God sente in theyr ennemyes vp∣on them on euery syde, and dystroyed them and gaue the lande vnto other nacions. And sente that ryme God hathe laged thys reale full ofte for theyre synne and dysbedyence. Not manye yeares past, God seinge Idolatry, supestcion, Hipocrisye, and wycked luynge vsed in thys realme, raysed vp that godlye leaened manne Ihon Wyclyfe to preache vnto oure fathers repntaunce, and too exhrte

them to amende theyr lyues, to forsake theyr Pa∣pistrye and Idolatye,Wicleffe with his bokes con∣dempned & brent for an heretike af∣er his deth theyr Hyprocrisye supersti∣cion, and to walke in the feare of God. Hys ehor∣tacions were not regarded. He with his sermons was espysed. Hys bookes and he him self alo af∣ter hys deathe were brete. What folowed? They slewe theyr ryghte kynge, and sette vppe .iii. wrong Kynges arowe, vnder whome all the noble bloude was slayne vppe, and halfe the commones therto, what in Faunce and what with theyr owne werd n fyghtynge amonge them selues for the crowne, and the cytyes and towes decayed, and the Land broughte hale to a wildernes in respecte o that it was before. O extreame plages of gods vengaūce. Sence that time euen of late yeres God once again hauynge pytye on this realme o Englande, raysed vp his Prophets namelye Wyllyam Tindal, Tho∣mas Bilney, Ihon Fryhe, Doctoure Barnes Ie∣rome, Garret, Anthonye arsone, wyth dyuers o∣ther, whyche bothe wyth theyr wryghtynges & ser∣mons earnestlye labored to cal vs vnto repenaūce that by this meanes the fears wrath of God might be tourned awaye from vs? But how were they en∣treated? Howe were theyr paineful labours regar∣ded? They them selues were condempned and brēt as heretikes, and theyr bokes condemned and brēt s heretical. O moste vnworthy act. The tyme shall come saythe Christe, that who so euer kylleth you, wyll thynke that he doothe God hye good seruyce. Whether anye thynge sence that tyme hath chaun∣ced nto thys realme worthye the name of a plage, lette the godlye wyse Iudge.Ihon. xvi. If God hath dyfferred hys punyshement, or forgeuen vs these oure wyc∣ked dedes, as I truste, he hathe, lette vs not there∣fore be prowde and hye myneded, but mooste hum∣blye thancke hym for hys tender mercies & beware of the lyke vngodlye enterprises heareafter. But howe so euer the matter goeth, of thys am I sure, that God yet once agayne is come on visytacyon to thys churche of England yea and that more louing¦ly and beneficially then euer he dyd afore.

or in this his visitacion he hathe redressed many abuse and clense this his church of much vngod∣lynes and superstycyon, and made it a gloryous churche, if it be compaed vnto the olde forme an state. He hathe geuen vs a most worthye Prince t be oure kynge,iii. re.. whyche haste not o bothe yes fo¦lowinge God and Baal▪ Chre and the Pope, ney∣ther toucneth he vnto the ryghthande nor vnto the let,Deut Esay. xx. but he waeth veye faythefullye in the ame waye, that the Lorde hys God hathe appoynnted: hauynge alwayes a respecte vnto goddes lawe, that he maye do all thynges accordynge to the ame. He hathe geuen the Kynge hys Magey also moste wyse and godlye learened councellers to  hys grace,Iosu. . whyche vnto the vttermooste of theyr pow∣r tudye to set forth the glorye of God, to mayne∣tayne the true, and Christen religion: and to keepe the common wealthe in a decente & quiet orer. He hathe geuen vs hys moste blessed woorde to reade. yea and that in oure owne Englyshe tounge. He hathe sente vs faythefull· and godlye preachers t instructe vs aboundauntlye in the knowledg of his blessed wil. He hath driuen awaye that Idolatrous Masse, and restored vnto vs the ryghte vse of the Lordes supper. He hathe banyshed the Romysh seruyce and supersticious Ceremonies oute of the temples, & placed in theyr steade godlye Preachers and learned sermons. Certes louynglye and verye mercifully hath god dealt wyth vs in this his visita¦cion. And al these hys gyftes are euidente tokens of his louinge kindenesse towarde vs. We haue nowe God our louing father and merciful Sauioure, let vs take heede, that we make hym not of a frende a ennemye. He hathe nowe blessed vs wyth all man∣ner of spirituall blessyng, let vs take hede, that hys blessing be not turned into curssing. He hath nowe turned awaye oure captiuity, let vs take hede, that he throwe vs not agayne into our olde thrldome, He hathe enryched vs nowe wyth manye singule and noble benefites, let vs take heede, that they be nt taken awaye from vs for oure vnkindenes and

plages caste vppon vs n theyre steade? If wee walke worthye o gods kyndnes and of these his inestimable benefits, euey man liuing n his voca∣cion with all humblenesse of minde and mekenesse, we be diligene to keepe the vnitye of the spyte in the bond of peace,he. iiii. i we be nthceful to God for hys benefite and benefia to oure pore Chri∣sten brethren and sisene▪ God wyll surely encrease these his ftes in vs nd enche vs with mo singu¦lar benytes. He wyll surely preseue the kynges Maesye and hys mooste honourable Counsel and geue em long and prosperous lyfe in thys world vnto the greate conforte of all s hys Graces sub∣ect . We wyll defende thys ealme▪ kepe vs harme¦les from al our ennemy and send s aounane of al thynges necessarye for this presente lyfe▪ and after our departure from this ae of miserye▪ eter∣nal glory. Cōtrariwise, if we wyl not walcke wor∣hye of goddes kindnes, but bee nthanckfull for hys benefytes, and lyue nowe in thys gloryous lyghte of the Gospell as beastelyke in pride▪ enuye, ouetousnes. Malyce, Voluptuousnes, Unmerci∣fulnes and in all kynde of other sinnes, as we dyd afore ndoubtedlye God wyll take awaye hys be∣nefytes from vs and power hys plages vppon vs. He will bringe in agay the pope, the popes lawes, the popes masse, the Popes Ceremonies▪ the popes lims, the Monckes, the Friers, ec Chanones, the Nus the Akers, Ancesses, the Heemies, and l the table of hipocrites & the deuill & all. And wyl take away our most christē king & his moost ertu∣ous and honourable consel and in theyr ste see vp some wycked kynge and vngodly tyrauntes. He wil take away oure godly Magirates and giue vs Cterpylers of the common wealth. He wyll take away al godly learned preachers and sende in Anti∣christes chapls. He wil take away the pre flower of hys heauenlye worde, and feede vs wyth the sower leaue of the Pharises. Hee wyll Plage vs wyth Pestylence, mye and hunger. ea hee wyll

styre vpe one tyrraunte or other too take venge∣aunce on , o shedde oure bloude, to oppresse vs wyth sweare, to yll ure wyues sons and daugh∣ters▪ to onume , eare all that euee we haue, to mae ure countrye deolate and the aste tter∣lye to  vs  rom the face of the earthe, that hys name thorowe the abhomynable liuynge may no more e blasphemed▪ rayle upon and eyll spo∣ken o▪ as the Prophete tetyyeth, sayinge, If ye wyll be  ad heare me, ye shall eat the good fruites of the earthe. If ye wyll not, but prouoke me vnto anger, surelye the swearde shal deuour you for the Lorde hathe spoken it wyth hys owne mothe: What is then to be done:Esaye. i. that we may con∣tynewe in the fauoure of God, haue hym styll oure moose mercyfull Lorde and enoye hys benefytes vnto the ende: Verelye euen that thinge whyche all godlye menne haue euer vsed to do boothe in pros∣peritie and aduersytye. I meane: praye too the Lorde oure God wyth a penytente and faythefull hearte. For prayer if it be ryghtly vsed, is of great alure before God and doeth not onlye make hym oure good and merifull Lorde▪ but also easlye ob∣tayneth of hym, what so euer wee are accordynge to hys wyll. The holye Ghoste, the knoweledge of Goddes blessed woorde,i. Ihon. . necessaryes for thys pre∣sente lyfe▪ peace for realmes, quyetnesse for com¦mon wealthes, vytorye of ennemyes, hauynge of hyldrene, fortnate delyueraunce of thee same, healthe, longe lyfe, remissyon of synnes eternall glorye, wyth all other good thynges pertaynynge eyther too the soule or to the body, faheful praye obtayneth of God, as oure Sauyoure Christe say∣eth: what so euer ye shall aske in prayer: If ye be∣leue: ye shall receyue it. For asmuche therefore as nothynge is more necessarye too bee vsed of thee treue Christians for the contynuunce of goddes fauoure and of hys heauenlye blessynges towarde them, and for the auoydynge of all plages and dys∣pleasures, than prayer, for asmuche alo as no∣thynge dothe so muche adorne, garnyshe and sete

forthe the goodlye and prosperous state of a com∣mon wealthe, as euerye manne diligentlye, fayeth fullye, and quyetly to lyue in his vocacion and cal∣lynge, I not otherwyse knowinge howe I may be able to doo good to my countrye out by prayinge, preachynge and wryghtynge (for fortune gooeth foorthe frowardelye too trowne vppon me) haue these fewe weekes pae compiled and made a boe  Prayers, comprehendynge not onely necessay nd conuenyen Prayers for al degrees or menne euen frō the highest to the lowest but also for al o∣ther thynges necessary to be prayd for. So that yf wee wyll folwe the order of charytye, and do the wyl of God, whiche commaundeth vs to pray one for another, gayne if we wil praye to obtain ver∣tue and to fl vyce▪ this booke shall minier to the godly, conuenyene and mere prayers. And because the prayers shoulde bee the more acceptable vnto god▪ and soūd the better in hys godly eares, agayne that the godly exercisers of prayer may praye wyth the more fruite, and bee the better editted: I haue trauayled to the vttermooste of my power too vse in theese prayers as fewe woordes of my owea I coulde, and to glee oute of the frutieful fyelde of the sacred scryptures, what so euer I founde meete for euerye prayer that I made, that whan it is prayed, not manne but the holy Ghost may seme to speake.
After I hadde finyshed theese prayers mooste vertuous Ladye, youre  came fyrste too my remembrance, as a worye Patrones boothe of the godlye and of godlynesse, boothe of the lear∣ned and of learninge, to whom euen of most boun¦den dutye I oughte to offer thys my laboure. The gyfte I confesse is small and slender, if it be compared wyth youre graces lyberalytye, whyche your grace hathe mooste bounteouslye shewed vn∣to me sence I came fyrste too youre seruyce. Not∣wythstandynge I am so fullye perswaded of youre gaces mooste gentle nature and godlye dysposy∣on toward so many  are godly and well bent and

vertuouslye minded, that I feare nothinge to oer this my ooke vnto your grace, as a testimonye of my seruisele heart and ready bent good wyll to∣warde your grace. It is a flower, I graunte. Not∣withstandynge suche a flower, as if it be ryghtelye vsed, is of synguler vertue and myghtye in opera∣tyon. No euylaer can hute where the uoue of thys flower commeth. yea the deuil the world & the flesh cā not abide the ayer of thy flower, so migh∣te is the spiritual operacion therof. The flower ge∣th a smel in the strees to the soule of the faythe∣full, as Cimamone and Balme▪ that hathe so good  sauoure▪ yea a swete odoure doth it gyue as it wer mirre of the best. I therfore most humblye besech your grace to take thys my small gyft in good part which comminge as it were from your Grace into the handes of many, shal (I doubt not) doo manye good, and bee the occasion that vyce shal decrese, and vertue abundauntly encrease among vs. God, whose holye worde your Grace most feruently loue and moste earnestly practise in your daylye conuer∣sacion mought vouchsafe to reserue your Grace wyth my Lordes Grace, youre moste louyng husband and al your godly & etuous chyldrē in cō¦tinual health & dayly ēcrease of honour vnto the glo¦ry of his name, and he comfort of al vs your graces moost humble and faytheful sernts.
Amen.
