



THESE two Paradoxes (right honourable) ha∣uing bene presented vn∣to the French King, as a meane to qualifie the ge∣nerall complaints of the dearth of things in France, by prouing that nothing was growne dearer in three hundred yeares,



were answered by the famous M. Iohn Bodine: who dedicated his aunswer vn∣to the President of the high court of Par∣liament of Fraunce, as a matter of great consequence and considerable in the go∣uernment of a Common-wealth. Hence proceeded that resolution, which embol∣dened me to present vnto your Lordship, the substance of both their writings, with all their arguments and propounded re∣medies: to the end, that in the ballance of your graue wisdome they may be weighed with my Replication thereunto, shewing how things are to be considered of for the good of a Common-wealth. Your Honors iudgement shall easily perceiue, that the Paradoxes are opposite, and do contra∣dict one another, besides the slender and weake ground of their foundation: as al∣so that Maister Bodine hath mistaken the true ground of the matter, by com∣paring the prices of things within them∣selues in a Common-wealth: whereas the comparison must be betweene the home



Commodities of one Common-wealth, and the forraine Commodities of other nations: and that, either by way of per∣mutation of Commodities for Commo∣dities, or by Commodities for money in specie, or by exchange. So that a due consideration must be had of the course of Commodities, Money, and Exchange: which are the essentiall parts of all trade and trafficke. Wherein must be conside∣red the end of all Merchants, which is Gaine and profite: at which scope they ayme according to their profession and practise; some by Commodities, some by Money, some by Exchange, some by all three, or that which yeeldeth them most gaine. For as money doth rule the course of Commodities: so the exchange for mo∣nies doth both rule the course of moneys, and Commodities. By the disorder wher∣of it happeneth, that the riches of a Com∣mon-wealth doth so much decrease, as it is not alwayes in the power of the wise, that haue the managing of the gouerne∣ment



thereof, to make choice of the best, and to banish the worst: but must not on∣ly obey the tempest and strike sailes, but also cast ouer boord some precious things to saue the ship and bring it into a safe port: and afterwards by degrees ouer∣come greater things, changing the estate thereof from euill to good, and from good to better, which otherwise might haue bene preuented in the beginning by re∣mouing the causes thereof. To your most honorable iudgement I referre the consi∣deration of all: and pray the Almightie to haue your Honor in his diuine prote∣ction. And so in all humility I take leaue. London, this 16. of Ianuarie. 1603.

