



MY VERIE GOOD LORD, It hath bene (and yet I thinke is) an vse allowable, to present those whom we honour or loue, with such things as either for their value be profitable, or for their noueltie pleasing. Wan∣ting power to performe the one, I make bold to do the other: and according to my promise) send you this old Historie newly translated. Which albeit your L. hath heretofore read in the Italian toong, yet may it be, that (for varieties sake) you will againe vouchsafe to peruse it in our English: written by him that is all yours. Sure I am (and by reading hereof, your L. shall be assured) that neither I haue fully expressed the Authours conceit, nor the writer well performed his dutie. Notwithstanding, sith both those wants may be supplied by your iudgement, I aduenture the Booke into your L. hand, whom I dare trust with any pardonable error. For as I haue taken in hand this labour, more to enter∣teine my selfe, (not otherwise occupied) then thereby to merit your thanks, or the commendation of others: so doo I recommend the same to your L. rather to be looked on at leisure, then as a thing of perfection worthie to be studied. Yet do I thinke (and so do others of more iudgement) that this Hi∣storie doth equall or excell the most part that haue bin written: not so much for the order and argument of the matter, as the iuditiall discourses and ob∣seruations of the Authour. Wherein be discouered the causes of forraine and domesticall discords, the commodities and discommodities of treaties, and the secret humours of Princes: with diuerse other things verie considerable, chiefly of such as be called to consultation of publike affaires & gouernment. And as the end of all Histories ought be to mooue men vnto vertue, and dis∣courage them from vice, so do I thinke, there is not any that conteineth more examples to that purpose, then this writer: who leauing aside all partialitie,

and the custome of those that studie to flatter whom they fauour, and misre∣port whom they loue not, doth seeme greatly to follow the truth, and setteth forth rather the causes and effects of euerie action, then ouer-much extoll or disgrace the persons of whome the storie entreateth. But (as of all other things) so hereof your L. can best iudge. Wherefore most humbly reaccommending to your good fauour, this poore Present, and my faithfull seruice, I take leaue. At the Court, this eight of Aprill, 1588.

