



SIthens GOD (madame) hath made Man of so diuine and heauenly Nature, assi∣gnyng hym the heade and Soueraigne of all other earthly things: pitie were it, yea ra∣ther shame, for him to debase his kinde, or taint himselfe with any thing vnworthie so noble a Creature. Yet so many are the cuils and mischiefes in this life, assaultyag the minde and better part of man, making him franke offer of suche painted pleasures and counterfaite Felie, as without great hede and prouident care, vnpossible is it for him to scape the deceitfull snares of alluring Vice whose ioy cōsistet in h ssion and ful.
 So diuers are the hookes that Sinne layeth to take the Soule withall: as few of many can swim through the rockie Sea of this perilous life without tasting that pleasaunt hurtefull bayte. Whiche if they once feede on, taking therin delight and pleasure, vnawares they deuoure and swallow downe the hooke that brings them spedie and vnauoided death. Wherfore waying the danger hereof, and cō∣sidering the great store of vices, behouefull is it for vs to deuise some one remedie or other against this mischief. And sithens nothing can better haue redresse than by his contra∣rie (as all diseases by contraries are to be re∣cured) there can not (I thinke) bee a more spedie or absolute meane to auoid this mon∣ster Ʋice, delighting in Mans decaye, than to skirmishe vnder the banner of Vertue, alwayes awaiting on hir, neuer doing ought contrary to hir lawes and ordinaunces. For Vertue is it that hateth Ʋice, seeking the best it may to suppresse that cankred nature of his, and withstand his malicious attemp∣tes. But so narow and straight is the passage to Vertue, so sundry are the Ʋices eke lying in awaite and ambushe to intercept vs, as it
 is a labour of no slender toile to attaine the same. Here might I for witnesse appeale A∣ristotle that noble Greke and learned Phi∣losopher, saue that the Experience it selfe sufficiently maketh shewe therof. Yet it shall not be from the purpose to recite his opinion. He in his boke of Morall Vertues hath this Sentence: Quia Virtus medium sibi qua∣si signum proponit, difficile est virtute es∣se praeditum, Whiche I thus englishe: For that Vertue setts before it the Meane, as a marke and scope, a harde matter is it to bee Vertuous. See here (Madame) both the po∣sition of the lerned Philosopher, and his rea∣son withall. For not alone hathe he in these fewe wordes affirmd it hard to attain Ver∣tue, but giueth also a cause of the difficultie therin. Bicause (sayth he) it consistes vpon the meane. And in dede so doth it. Extremi∣ties are the mortal enimies of Vertue. Vertue delighteth euer to obserue the Meane, and flee excesse in al things. Whatsoeuer it is that partakes with Extremes, and shoonnes the golden Meane, can not smatch of Vertue at all. Wherfore waying the difficultie of this matter, As better hap can not befall a wan∣dring
 Pilgrim doubtfull and altogether vn∣certaine of his voyage (hauing many ways at his foote to pace in) than to chaunce vp∣on the right Pathe to his long desired lodge and harbor: So greater cōfort can not come to a mā iorneying in the vncertain progresse of this pilgrimage of life, where Vice offers him sundry wayes and bypathes to wicked∣nesse, than to finde a ready and beaten path to Vertue, there to rest and stay his running and vnstayd foote. Whiche sithens it is so harde a matter to find out without a guide, I (madame) haue here offred my paines, as your Ladyship may se, in this litle Boke, vp∣on great desire to discouer a plaine Path to perfect Vertue, that all men might discerne the hie way that leades to happy life. For assuredly our nature of it selfe is chiefly bent and inclined to the yll and wicked trade. And albeit (Madame) your Ladyship for your owne parte are in euery poynt so furni∣shed with Vertue, as small is youre neede of any instructour therein, beeing very well able to aduise your selfe in liuing well: yet for that the place of honoure wherein you sitte, and your Noble State, is a Spectacle
 and Myrrour to inferiour persons, where∣by to frame their corrupted liues: thought it not amisse to dedicate you this slender trea∣tise of mine. Hauyng desire to publishe it vnder the protection of your name, for that I hope there will the moe peruse the Booke: and in perusing (I trust) shall light vpon some one Wholesome lesson or other, preuai∣ling to the increse of Vertue and honest life. Whiche if doe happen, then shall I reioyce that it was my happe trauailyng in so litle a Booke to doe the Reader so greate a bene∣fite, and youre Ladyshippe haue the lesse cause to accuse my bolde attempte in dedi∣cating you the same. Neither yet doe I cha∣lenge vnto mee the first inuention thereof, for then wrong shoul I doe to Mancinus, myne Authour: but for Vertues sake was desirous to write of Vertue, though follo∣wing the foote and steppes (as it were) of an other man. If my Author be in his lan∣guage to be liked for his deuise in pēning the Treatise, then shall I not (I trust) deserue misliking for translating the same. Where∣fore presumyng vpon the good acceptaunc of this my Boke at youre Ladyships hande
 whome I boldely craue as Buckeler to my weake and vnarmed Muse, and affying well in the Readers curtesie, I ende this tedious Epistle: Crauyng your long continuance of present ho∣nour, with good suc∣cesse in all your Life.


Virtutis comes inuidia, Sed ex virtute gloria.

