


OENOPIDES Chius (most honoura∣ble Syr) dedicated at the Tryumphes holde in Greece to the ho∣nor of Iupiter Olym∣pus (or as others write) to Hercules, a Booke of his owne framing and make∣ing all of Brasse: the Methode and matter whereof was nothing else but a summary Discourse collected oute of Plato as concerning the continuance, circuite, and course of the seuen Pla∣nets. VVhich busines so carefully, and costly perfourmed by the aforesayd Chi∣us, is here peraduēture in another sort with other necessary sequell thereof, & with lesse a doe also and lesse cost scan∣ned
& debated. VVhich small treatise of myne, neyther crauing Iupiter, nor Hercules, but requireth rather youre honors present Patrocynie, and fauo∣rable protection: Your Honour being now in these dayes to our most renow∣med Prince, & the VVeale Publike euē the same that PHOCION a moste renowmed Captayne was to the Athe∣nians: And as EPAMINON∣DAS was to the Thebanes. Three rare & royall vertues there are which AGESILAVS (speaking it vp∣on good tryall and proofe thereof) re∣quireth to bee in a Captayne set ouer the Prynces Garde: the first hee sayth, is fidelity to his Soueraygne, whose per¦son hee is moste carefully to safegarde and defend: the second (he sayth) is an hawty heart and valiancy of Mynde, friendy affected towards his friendes, and litle esteming the force of his foes: and the last he reposeth in ripenesse of Iudgement & dexterity of VVisdome
in geuing of common wealth councell. All which three Ormamēts & Iewels, and the same three (I dare vtter it) thrise doubled and trebled, shyne and shewe forth in your Honor very resplē dishingly. Insomuch that if I were (as I am nothing fit thereto) to determyn as the Orator DEMADES did, of Noble Personages and moste worthy VVyghtes euen eyes of the Realme, as hee calleth them: the consideration of your honors so Infinite and inestima∣ble vertues, euen of very right deseru∣ing the same, required (I shoulde say very worthely) your Honors accoumpt (as it also hath already) among ye chie∣fest Senators and Sages of this Land. And whereas many other Nations be∣ing gouerned onely as it were Cyclopy∣cally, (that is to say) wyth myght & bo∣dely force, therewith onely defeng thē∣selues, being wythout theyr wyse Coun∣cell, as it were without their Eyes (as the Poets say the great Gyaunte CY∣CLOPS
is) doe yet neuerthelesse for want of the same runne oftentimes to much ruyne, subiection, and subuersion. This our Countrey and Nation (the Lord bee hyghly thanked therefore) ha∣uing such theyr Eyes and eysight, as it hath in deede very cleare, perfite, and pretious, whereby aswell all the whole body of the Realme: as also euery parte thereof is most happely dyrected in all kinde of safety: howe greatly wee and the same is to glorifie GOD therefore, though I should say nothing thereof but be silent therein, the very force of such a ryche blessinge and Benefite, it selfe would burst forth and speake it. Now the cause that only mooued me at this time, to craue your Honores Counte∣nauncinge of this Litle Treatise, was chiefly, the hearesay of your Honoures accustomed Clemency, and Curtesy in like behalfe towardes others. VVhich being any thinge accepted at your Ho∣nors hands, shall encourage me hereaf∣ter
to other Trauayles and endeuours. In the meane tyme I shall not cease to pray to the gouernor of all, the Lord of Lordes, for the prosperous & long pre∣seruation of your Honour, and for the continuance of your honors estate & good lyking, to the glory of GOD, the contentation of the Prynce, and com∣modity of the Countrey.
From Northall The last of De∣cember. 1581.

