



DIuerse and many (most gracyouse lady) haue the opynyons bene amonge the prophane philoso∣phers and christen dyuy∣nes, concernynge ryght Nobylyte,Nobylyte and no fewar stryues and con∣tencyons for the same. Some autours ha¦ue vaynely boasted it to take orygynall o the olde Goddes of the Gentyles as eue¦ry lāde hath had hys peculyar Saturne, Iupiter, & Hercules. yea our Englāde here and all. Some hath fatt it from the foure generall monarchyes of the As∣syrianes, Perseanes, Grekes, and Roma∣nes. Some haue attrybuted it, to the bol∣de battayles and bloudshedynges, in Ni∣nus of Babylon the first inuētour of poly∣cyes in warre. in our great Albion the Chamesene,Albion. whych first in thys regyon

suppressed the posterite of Iaphet, vsur∣pynge Brute.therin the first monarchy. in Brute that more than six hondred yeares after defaced of hym the tyrannouse yssue. in Ebrāck and Dunwallo. in Brenne and Belyne. in great Constantyne, Artoure, Cadwalader, Engist, Egbert, Alphrede wyllyam cōquerour & soch other, for lyke questes of the Romanes, Grekes. Gal∣les, pyctes, Brytaynes. Saxons, Danc Irysh and Englyshens.
The hawty Romanes set not yet a lyttle  themselues, that they haue rysē of  & Romulus,Romani. of whom the one most shmefully betrayed hys owne na∣ kyndred and contraye, and the other most vnnaturally slewe hys owne brother  worldly domynyō.Gwalli. Lyke as our walshe∣ Englande. aduaūcynge their successyon or progeny aboue the Englysh wyll nedes come of Dardanus & Bute, a fon̄dacyō not all vnlyke to the other. The∣se gloryouse champyons for thys farre fat∣ched groūde of their Nobylyte, accoūte all other nacyons and peoples, ignoble, pro∣fane, and barbarouse, as is to be seane in the monumētes of their writers. But in the meane season, they are not aware that

they wndyscretely prefarre cursed Cham to blessed Iaphet,Iaphet. by whose posteryte the Iles of the Gentyles were first sorted out in to speches, kyndredes, and nayons, Ge∣ne 10. and not by Chams ofsprynge, of whome the Troianes and Romanes had their noble begynnynge. That the Chame senes had in those Iles, was by cruell vsur¦pacyon & tyrāny, as testyfyeth Berosus the Caldeane and therfor that groūde of Nobylyte is not all the best. Ouer and besydes all thys, some haue applyed it to renomed byrth or successyon of bloude, so∣me to the habūdaūce of pleasures worldly some to the mayntenaūce of great famy∣lyes,kyndes of Nobylyte some to the sūptuousnesse of notable buyldynges, some to the hygh stomake & stature of persone, some to valeaūtnesse in marcyall feates, some to semely maners of courtesye, some to lyberalyte of rewar∣des and gyftes, some to the auncyeninesse of longe coutynuaunce, some to wysdome lernynge & stody for a cōmē welth with soch lyke. And these are not all to be dysa∣lowed, for we fynde them in Abraham, & Dauid with other iust fathers.
But now foloweth, a monstruouse, or whether ye wyll, a prestygyouse nobylyte

The Romysh clergye ymagenynge to ex∣alte themselues aboue the lewde layte Clergy.(as they shame not yet to call the worldly powers) haue geuen it in a farre other kynde, to mytars, masses, Cardynall hat∣tes, crosers, cappes, shauen crownes, oyled thombes, syde gownes, furred amyses, mō¦kes cowles, and fryres lowsy coates, be∣cōmynge therby pōtyfycall lordes, spiry∣tuall sirs, and ghostly fathers. Thys kyn∣de of Nobylyte dygged out of the donge∣hyll, haue I seane gorgyously garnyshed with the retoryckes of Porphyry,Stābery Aristo∣tle, Duns, and Raymundus decretals, in the bokes of Iohan Stanbery byshopp of herforde, De superioritate ecclesiastica, De discrimine iurisdictionum, and De potestate pōtificia. In the bokes also of Walter hūte an ordynary reader sūtyme in Oxforde,Hunte. De precellētia Petri, & De autoritate ecclesie. Yea, and amōge thē∣selues they haue moch contended both by disputacyon & writynges, whych of their sectes myght other excell in the nobyl∣nesse of christen perfection. The monkes in publyque scoles, by a dystynccyon of the actyue and contemplatyue lyfe, haue aduaunced their ydell mōkery aboue the

offyce of a byshopp,Fryres. and the fryres their scalde crauynge beggery, aboue the de∣grees of thē Both. As is largely seane in the brawlynge workes of Rycharde May¦deston, Thomas walden, Wyllyam Byn∣tre & other whych haue written Contra wicleuistas, & Pro mēdicatione fratrū,
In the dayes of kynge Edwarde the fourt,Myluers¦ton. Iohan Myluerton prouyncyall of the Carmelytes, was full thre yeares, a prysoner in the castell of Angell at Rome at the sute of the byshoppes of Englande for the same, and lost so the byshopryck of saynt Dauids, wherunto he was a lyttle afore elected. Thys matter haue I hear∣de, vndre the tyttle of Euangelyck per∣feccyon, most depely reasoned in their or¦dynary dysputacions at their concourses cōuocacyons, aud chapters (as they than called them) yea by those whome I kne∣we most corrupt lyuers,4. order Herūto for four∣nyshynge out the same, the graye fryres added. S. frances paynted woūdes, the, blacke fryres. S. Domynyckes bolde dy∣sputynge with heretykes, the whyte fry∣res our ladyes fraternyte, and the Augu∣styne fryres the great doctryne of their patrone. In the vnyuersytees afte moch

to and fro,Prestes hath it bene concluded, that the order of a prest haue farre excelled in dygnyte the order of a byshopp. And thys haue they left behynde them for a most graue and depe reason therupon. Marke their more than lucyferyne presumpcyon therin. Soch power hath a prest (saye they) as hath neyther Angell nor yet Man, be he of neuer so great autoryte scyēce,O Deuils īcarnate or vertu. For a prest by worde ma∣ye make hym agayne, that by worde made heauen & earth. A prest maye euery daye both byget hym and beare hym, where as hys mother Marye bygate hym (beare hym they wolde saye) but ones. These are their very wordes in a boke entytled. De origine Nobilitatis. ca. 5. with moch mo∣re cyrcumstaunce of matter. Oblasphe∣mouse bellybeastes, & most ydell wytted sorcerers. How ydolatrously exalte they themselues aboue the eternall lyuynge God & hys Christ?
Iohan Chrisostome a man taught and brought vp in the christen philosophy,Nobylyte de¦fyneth the true Nobylyte after a farre other sort, than ded the prophane wri∣ters. He calleth it not with Aristotle, a worthynesse of progeny, neyther yet with

Varro ā opulēcy of ryches, but a famouse renome obtayned by lōge exercysed vertu He is pusaunt, hygh, ād valeaunt (sayth he) and hath Nobylyte in right course, that dysdayneth to geue place to vyces and abhorreth to be ouercomen of them Doctryne greatly adourneth a mā hygh¦ly borne, but a godly endeuoure of christy∣anyte bewtyfyeth hym most of all. By nō other wayes haue the Apostles and Mar¦tyrs obtayned a noble report,Apostles. than by the valeaunt force of pure doctryne and fayth A gētyll hart (sayth Seneca) or a stoma∣ke that ys noble, moueth, prouoketh, and sturreth, only to thynges honest. No man whych hath a noble wytte, delyteth in thynges of small value, moch lesse in mat¦ters of fylthynesse or supperstycyon. Che¦fely apperteyneth it to men and women of syncere Nobylyte, to regarde the pure doctryne and faythe.Faythe. vnto soch hath God promysed in the scriptures, habundaunce of tēporall thynges, longe lyfe, fortunate chyldren, a kyngedome durable, with soch other, Deut. 28.
A most worthy conquerour is Gedeon noted in the scriptures,Gedeon. for destroyenge false relygyō & rennynge the kyngedome

of faythe.Asa rex. Iudi. vj. So is kynge Asa, for remouynge the male stues from the pre¦lates abhorrynge marryage, & for puttyn¦ge downe ydolles whych hys forefathers maynteyned. 3. Reg. 15 So is kynge Iosa¦phat,Iosaphat for beynge couragyouse in the wa¦yes of God, and for puttynge downe the hyll aulters & their sacrifices .2. parali 17. So is kynge Iehu,Iehu. for sleynge the ydo¦latrouse Prestes, and for breakynge and burnynge their great God Baal, and for makynge,Ezechias a Iakes of their holy churche 4. Reg. 10 So is kynge Ezechias for clē∣synge the house of the lorde from all fyl¦thynesse, afore hys tyme therin occupyed 2. Parali. 29. and for breakynge downe the brasen serpent and ydolatrouse yma∣ges with their aulters and sanctuaryes. 4. Reg. 18 So is kynge Iosias, for suppres¦synge relygyouse persones and aulterpre∣stes,Iosias. for cōsumynge their iewels & orna∣mētes, & for ouerthrowynge their bug∣gery chambers in the howse of the lorde 4. Reg. 23. Thys noble kīge also destroyed all theyr carued ymages, he strewed the dust of thē vpon their graues that had offered to them,Prestes. and brent the prestes bo∣nes vpō their aulters, restorynge agayne

the lawes of the lorde .2. parali. 34. Iesus Syrach reporteth of hym fynally, that he whollye dyrected hys hart to the lorde, & toke awaye all abhomynacyons of the vn¦godly. Eccle. 49, Besydes that is spoken of kynge Dauid and kynge Salemon.Ecclesie 49.
Not I only, but many thousandes more whych wyll not from hens fourth bowe any more to Baal, are in full & perfyght hope, that all these most hyghly notable and pryncely actes, wyll reuyue & lyuely florysh in your most noble and worthy brother kynge Edwarde the sixt.Edwarde vj. rex. Most excellent & godly are hys begynnynges reported of the very foren nacyōs callynge hym for hys vertuouse, lerned, and godly prudent youthes sake, the seconde Iosias Those hys wonderfull pryncyples in the eyes of the worlde, and no lesse gloryouse afore God thus beynge to hys honoure, that eternall lyuynge God contynue and prospere to the ende, that he maye haue of them as had these vorthy kinges afore rehearced, a ryght noble and famouse re¦port.Ignoble Nobylyte sought by wycked enter∣pryses and obtayned by the same (as in many afore our dayes, and in some now of late) is not els but a publyque and

notable infamye, and in the ende eternall dāpnacyon. Nobylyte wonne by the ernest sekynge of Gods hygh honour, is soch a precyouse crowne of glory as wyll neuer perysh here nor yet in the worlde to come
TyraūtesCam after a worldly maner. or amōge the  sort, is holden noble for slayinge his brother Iudas of the prelates (for he receyued of thē, a noble rewarde) for betrayenge Christ, Herode of the Ie∣wes for murtherynge the innocētes. And what is there more worthy reproche, dy∣shonour, and shame, than are these exe∣crable factes? The nature of true Noby∣lyte (as I haue sayd afore) is not to ryse of vyce but of vertu,Nobylyte though many men there seke it. Of the most excellēt kinde of Nobylyte is he sure (most vertuouse and lerned lady) whych truly beleueth and se∣keth to do the wyll of the eternall father. for therby is he brought forewarde, and promoted into that heauenly kyndred Ioā. 1. By that meanes becometh he the deare brother,O Noble yndred. syster, & mother of Christ Math. 12. a cytizen of heauen with the Apostles and Prophetes, Ephe. 2. yea the chylde of adopcyon and heyre togyther with Christ in the heauēly inherytaunce

Roma. 8. No soch chyldren left Socrates behynde hym, neyther yet Demosthenes Plato, nor Cicero, with all their plesaūt wysdome and eloquēce. No soch heretage coulde great Alexander the Macedonea¦ne,Alexāde byqueth to hys posteryte neyther yet no¦ble Charles, Artoure, nor Dauid.
Of thys Nobylyte, haue I no doubt (lady most faythfully studyouse) but that yow are, with many other noble women & maydēs more in thys blessed age. If que∣styon were axtme, how I knowe it? my answere wolde be thys.Frutes By your godly frute, as the fertyle tre is non other wyse than therby knowne, luce. vi. I receyued your noble boke, ryght frutefully of yow translated out of the frenche tunge into Englysh. I receyued also your golden sen¦tences out of the sacred scriptures, with no lesse grace than lernynge in foure no∣ble lāguages,4. t̄ge Latyne, Greke, Frenche, & Italyane, most ornately, fynely, & purely writtē with your owne hande. Wonder¦fully ioyouse were the lerned men of our cytie,Men lened. Murseus, Buscoducius, Bomelius Lithodius & Imānus, as I shewed vnto them the seyd sentences in beholdynge (as they than reported) so moch vertu.

faythe, scyence, & experyēce of lāguages & letters, specyally in noble youth & fe∣mynyte. Through whych occasyon there be of thē (I knowe) that cannot withol∣de their lerned handes frō the publyshyn¦ge therof, to the hygh prayse of God the geuer, neyther yet from wrytynge to your worthy grace for studyouse contynuaunce in the same.Sētēces. Your seyd sētēces, (they saye farre passeth the Apohthegmes of Plu∣tarchus, the Aphorismes of Theognis, the Stratagemes of Isocrates, the graue gol¦den coūsels of Cato & the manyfolde mo∣rals of Iohan Goldeston the great allego¦ryser, with soche other lyke.
Your first written clauses in .iiij. spech¦es latyne, frenche & Italyane, out of the xiij.The first clause. Psalme of noble Dauid, mēcyoneth that the vnfaythfull reckeneth folyshly in their hartes, there is no God. Wherupō so corrupt they are in their vayne coniec¦tures, and so abhomynable in their dayly doynges, that not one of their generacyō is godly. By thys do your grace vnto vs sygnyfye,Hypocry¦tes. that the baren doctryne & good workes without fayth of the hypocrytes, whych in their vncōmaunded latyne cere¦monyes serue their ellyes & not Christ,

in gredyly deuourynge the patrymony of poor wydowes & orphanes, are both exe∣crable in themselues, and abhomynable afore God for though those paynted se∣pulchres haue the name of the lorde in their mouthes, & greatly boast the good workes of the lawe, yet knowe they not what belongeth to hys true honoure,Hate. but hate in their wycked hartes both hys gloryouse name and worde. The true do∣ctryne of faythe, and the feare of God, wyll that wycked sort (whome thys psal∣me wryngeth) not heare, but styll tormēt the conscyences of myserable wretched ydyotes for aduauntage of Masses and momblynges.Happye. Happy are they of thys lat¦ter age, that in the Gospell haue receyued the sauynge helth out of Syon (as your grace hath done) beynge clere from the stynge of those yperouse wormes.Tuter Bles∣sed be those faythfull tuters & teachers whych by their most godly instruccyons hane thus fashyoned your tender youth into the ryght ymage of Christ and not Antichrist.Ruler Yea most blessed be those god¦ly gouernours and magistrates, whych haue traueled and yet laboryously tra∣uayle with worthy Moses, to brynge

Gods people clerely out of their most wretched captyuyte.
Your latter clause in the Greke, incy∣teth vs to the ryght worshyppynges of God in sprete and veryte Ioā. 4.The lat∣ter clause to honou¦ringe of our parētes in the semely offyces of naturall chyldren. Ephe. vj. and to the reuerent vsynge of our christen equalles in the due mynystracyons of loue .1. pet 2.Monachi Neyther Benedyct nor Bruno, Domy∣nyck nor Frances (whych haue of longe yeares bene boasted for the pryncypall patrones of relygyon) euer gaue to their superstycyouse bretherne, so pure precep∣tes of syncere christyanyte. Neyther yet Peter lombarde in hys .iiij.ōbardus. bokes of sentē¦ces, with whose smokye dyuynyte, the low¦sy locustes monkes, chanons, prestes, and fryres haue these .iiij. hondred yeares darkened the clere sunne, whych is the ve¦ryte of God, Apoca. 9. If godly wyse men wolde do nomore but conferre thys ler∣nynge of yours and of other noble women ī these dayes,Robert. Kylwar∣by. with the doctryne of Robert Kylwarby archebyshopp of Canterbury and Cardynall, whych the vnyuersytees of Oxforde & Parys were sworne to, for ma∣yntenaunce of that christyanyte in the

yeare of our lorde .1276, by the consent of all masters regentes & non regentes, I doubt it not but they shulde fynde iust cause to holde vp both their handes andA change prayse their lorde God for changynge that helle into thys heauen. An vnsauery gust therof shall they fynde, adioyned of the Paryseanes as necessary dyuynyte,The boke to the foreseyd sentēces of Peter lombarde.
In your forenamed boke, cōposed first of all by the ryght vertuouse lady Mar∣garete, syster sūtyme to the frenche kynge Frances, and quene of Nauerre, And by your noble grace most dylygently and ex∣actly translated into Englysh, fynde I most precyouse treasure concernynge the sowle, Wherfor I haue added therunto the tytle of a Godly medytacyon of the sowle,Elizabet concernynge a loue towardes God and hys Christ. Most lyuely in these and soch other excellent factes, expresse ye the naturall emphasy of your noble name Elischabeth in the hebrue, is as moch to saye in the latyne. as Dei mei requies, in Englysh, the rest of my God. Who can thynke God not to rest in that harte whych sendeth fourth soch godly frutes? I thynke nō that hath ryght dyscressyon

Your pēne hath here plenteouslye vttered the habundan̄ce of a Godly occupyed har¦te,An hart. lyke as ded the vyrgynall lyppes of Christes most blessed mother, whan she sayd with heauenly reioyce, My sowle ma¦gnyfyeth the lorde and my sprete reioy∣ceth in God my sauer, luce. 1. Many no∣ble women of fresh literature haue bene afore tyme in thys regyon, whose nomēcla¦ture or rehearsall of names I intende to shewe in the ende of thys boke,Noble wo¦mē lerned but non of thē were euer yet lyke to those whych are in our age. No, neyther Cambra, Mar¦tia, Constantia, Agasia, Vodicia, Bund∣uica, Claudia, Belena vrsula hilda, nor soch other lyke. Thys one coppye of yours haue I brought into a nombre. to thintēt that many hungry sowles by the inesty∣mable treasure contayned therin, maye be swetely refreshed.Cōclusio. The sprete of the eternall sonne of God Iesus Christ, be alwayes to your excellent grace assystent that ye maye sende fourth more soch whol¦some frutes of sowle, and become a nory¦shynge mother to hys dere congregacyon to their cnfort and hys hygh glorye Amen.

