



BAthyllus, he of Samos (moste honorable Lord) was one whiche the Poet Ana∣creon sang alwayes of, minding him in euery song for a certaine conceipt of worthinesse which he thought was in him: Likewise Ligurinus was alwayes one at

the ende of Horace his pen and mouth. And as a report goeth (and many Romaine Histories shew the same) Numa & Ser∣uius are by Poets commended, vp to the Orbes of the Firma∣ment or Skie: where they saye they liue as they list: whose bread is Nectar, and drink Ambro∣sia, a sugred and confect kinde of Wine, which is serued oute in a faire Goblet or Cuppe by a faire waiting Boy named Ganime∣des. These Poets figured here∣by (most Honorable Lord) that any of the nine Muses, whatso∣euer

kinde of Harpe they vsed, it should be strung and tuned so that it mought reach to Diates∣seron, the onely note of Noble mens commendation. And so doe I gather, it is best vsed. I here∣vpon nowe wishe that although Anacreon be gone, I had yet his Harpe: for then would I now set and tune it many Notes higher than euer could he in the prayse of Bathyllus, or Horace in the testimonie of Ligurius: For I would vse it to recognize and re∣gester the memoriall of Yours such absolute Vertues. But sith

this Harpe is denied me: and the verie Instrument which I nowe sound of, is not as I would it were, my intent notwithstanding and not my possibilitie is to be consi∣dered. Yet rather then I should haue shewed nothing at al of bet∣ter testomonie of my good will to∣wards your Honor, this shall suf∣fise me (vntill hereafter I may do better) to vse so simple a sound. And if so be I could worthilye cō∣mende you (as those Poets did Numa and Seruius) to highe Olympus: you should surely by such our meanes come by some of

their Iuncketts that they haue: But this would I rather be done, by message had to and fro from these (which way Hercules v∣sed with Hyla Thiodamant his Sonne: Apollo with Hya∣cinth: Diana with Hyppoli∣tus:) then that you enioying the presence of those, our Countrie should lacke you, such hir orna∣ment and beautifying. Therfore for their better remembrance of you, I will do so much at the least as to signifie vnto them your cog∣nisance the faire bright Starre: which besides that, hath his hid

signification. But to leaue these: and although Typhis and Ia∣son be bolde: yet I hope (moste Honourable Lorde) I haue not theirs, but Vatienus his face. Whose simple Treatise of mine, when I was excited to bestow it of your Lordship, I straight wayes gathered with my selfe that you were not Licinius the Empe∣rour which was malicious toward the learned: neither yet Britan∣nion, an vtter enimie to the mo∣ther Science, and hir daughter Discipline: neyther yet Va∣lentinian: but rather contrari∣wise

Iulius Caesar, excelling both in Martiall prowesse, and also serious after the inquisi∣tion of good Discipline: or else Iulianus: or Marcus Aure∣lius. Which small gift of mine, if your Lordshippe take in good worth: I shall be encouraged af∣ter a while to enrich these: and to attempt muche greater and better hereafter, so soone as I shall attain to a little more ripe∣nesse. And thus ceasing to trou∣ble your Lordshippe any more I make an end: desiring GOD to blesse you in all his giftes, both

ghostly and bodilye: and to con∣tinue you in long life and true Honour, to his glory: the helpe and assistance of others: and your owne, and endlesse comfort. Amen.

