



GOD the father saythe
by hys Prophete,Esa. lviii. Crye
cease not Lyfte vp thy
voyce as a trompe, and
shew to the people theyr
wickednes, and to y• house of Iacob
theyesynnes. That this is chefelye
spoken to them that are Prechers &
Ministers of Gods worde, Ther is
no mā that is but meanely learned,
ignoraunt therof. For it is theyr du¦tye
to crye & not to cease. It is theyr
dutye to exalte & lyft vp theyr voyce
as a trōpe. It is theyr duty to shew
vnto the people theyr wyckednesses
& synnes. It is theyr duty to preach

the Gospel to euery creature. It is
theyr duty to preach Repentaunce
& remission of synnes in the name of
Christ vnto al nacions.at. xxviii It is theyr
dutye to gyue meate to the Lordes
family & household in due tyme. It
is ther duty to fede Christen people
 wt doctrine & knowledge.uke. xxiiii. It is theyr
duty to conforte the weake,at. xxiiii. to bynd
vp that is broken,uke. xii. to bryng agayne
that is caste awaye,Timo. v to seake vp that
is loste,zec. xxxiiii & to cheryshe all the slocke of
Christ. It is ther duty to cast away
vngodly & olde wyues fables,Tim. iiii. and to
exercyse themselues vnto godlynes
It is theyr dutye to be an example
of the faythfull in worde, in conuer∣sacion,
in loue,Tim. v in spirite, in fayth, in
purite. It is ther duty to rebuke thē
that synne before all menne, that o∣ther
may haue eare. It is theyr du∣tye
to shewe them selues cōmenda∣ble
to God worke men y• nede not to. Tim. ii.

be ashamed, iustly dyuyding y• word
of truth. It is ther duty not to stry¦ue,
but to be gentle & peaseable to∣ward
all men, redy to teache, suffe∣ryng
the euyll wyth mekenes, enfor¦mynge
them that resiste, if God at
ony tyme gyue them repentaunce
to knowe the truthe.ii. Tim. iii It is theyr du¦tie
to preach the word, to be feruent
both in tyme & out of tyme, to repro¦ue,
to rebuke to exhorte with al foft¦nes
and doctrine.Titus. i. It is theyr duty
to watch ī al thynges, not to shrinck
in affliccions, to do the worcke of an
Euangeliste, to make theyr ministra¦cion
commendable euen vnto ye vt∣termost.
It is theyr duty to be faut¦les,
as the stewardes of God, not hy¦ghe
mynded, not angrye, not drone¦ken,
not yghtyng, not gyuen to fyl¦thy
lucre, but mayntenyng Hospita¦lite▪
studious of good thinges, soer
ryghteous, godly, temperate, & hol∣dyng

fast that faythful word, which
is accordyng to doctrine, that they
may be able to exhorte by wholsome
doctrine,1. Pet. v. & to ouercome them that
speake agaynst it. It is theyr dutye
to fede y• locke of Christ, somuch as
lygheth in theyr power. To be short
it is ther duty to shewe themselues
dispēsatours of the diuine misteries
on such māner, that they may seme
& appere vnto all menne to haue ta¦ken
ther power to edifye & not to de¦stroye.
For they are the lyghte of the
world to shew men how they ought
to walk. They are the salt of y• earth
to sauoure such as be vnsauerye.
But alas, the lyght of the worlde I
mean Prestes, is now so do dymme,
y• it shewethe almoste no yght at al.
Menne y• walke in darknes can not
perceaue how to walke, the Prestes
are so wrapped about wyth the wor¦kes
of darkenes. The salt of y• earth

I meane the Prestes, is so vnsauery
that it can not sucke out the corrup¦te
humores. The people that are di∣seased
can not be healed, y• preastes
themselues are so fble, weake, infir¦me,
sycke & wounded on euery part.
Morouer y• Prestes,Esay. lvi. which shuld
be ouersears of y• people, are al blind
as the Prophet sayth, they are all wt 
out knowlege, they are dumme dog¦ges,
not able once to barke, they ha∣ue
a pleasure to looke vpon vayne
thynges, they gyue them selues to
sluggyshenes, they lyghe snortynge
all daye, yea they are vnshamefaced
dogges, that haue neuer ynoughe.
The sheppardes themselues are wt∣out
all knowledge. All follow theyr
owne wayes, euery one of thē s giuē
into couetousnes,Esa. lviii. euen from the hy¦ghest
to the lowest. God sayth, Crye,
cease not. But they turne cate in ye
panne & saye, Cease, crye not. God

sayth, Lyfte vp thy voyce as a trō∣pe.
But they saye, whyst, not a word
vnles we be suspecte to be fellowes
of the new lerning. God sayth, show
vnto the people theyr wyckednesses,
and rebuke theyr synneful lyuynge.
Na by saynt Mary say they, al thīg
saue that. It is good sleapyng in an
whoe skynne. He is not wyse yt wyll
cast hymselfe into trouble, whan he
maye lyue in reste. O Lorde haue
marcy vpon vs. By thys meanes is
it come to passe, that vertue is so ly∣tyll
regarded, & vice so vniuersallye
vsed. Wo be to those prestes, whiche
neglecte theyr office, flatter the peo∣ple
& suffer them to lyue in al wycked¦nes.
For they are the Authors of all
euell. They are the occasion that so
many soules perysh. They cause y• so
much myschyfe & abhominacion rey¦gneth
now a dayes. Theyr negligen¦ce,
ther silēce, theyr dissolute lyuing

cause, y• Gods worde is so euyll re∣garded
among many, and y• so great
wyckednes suppresseth y• honour of
the christen religion. Is it ony mar¦uell?
We se that y• bodye wythereth
awaye, perysheth and decayeth, if it
wanteth corporal sustenaunce. Is it
thā to be thought y• the soule cā be in
salue estate, if it wāteth her meat, I
mene y• word of God?Matth. iiii. Christ sayth,
Man shall not lyue wyth breade a∣lone,
but wyth euery worde,Deut. viii. that cō¦meth
forth from the mouth of God.
Salomon also sayth.Po. xxix. Whan y• prea∣chyng
of Gods worde fayleth, than
perysh the people & come to nought.
We fynd thys true euery daye more
& more. For the longer we lyue, the
more wyckednes do we se reygne.
It pytyeth a Christen mannes hert
to beholde y• face of thys worlde.
What vngodlynes, supersticion, Hy¦pocrisye,
dissimulacion, swearynge,

pryde, enuye, dronkenshyp, glotony,
fornicacion, adulterye, whoredome,
couetousnes, & an whole sea of euel¦les
hath ouerflowed the world? And
all this is come to passe thorow the
sleapye negligence of Curates, ne∣ther
can ther as yet be perceuedony
amendment. The Prestes go forthe
styl to neglecte y• office of preaching
Gods worde, and y• people remayne
styll in theyr old blyndenes, not ca∣rynge
much though they neuer hea¦re
one word of the holye Scripture
preached vnto them in al theyr lyfe,
so lytyll pleasure haue the poore se∣lye
soules in it, because they knowe
not what a precious tresure y• most
holye worde of God is. What than
remayneth, but that one of vs mo∣yshe,Colos. iii,
teache and exhorte another?
as S. Paule byddeth, teache & mo∣nyshe
ye one another For if one laye
man were no more mercyefull to a

nother, than y• Preastes are for the
moste part, surely the greatest part
of the world shuld,phil. ii. I thyncke, ronne
hedlonge vnto the deuel for want of
knowlege. Wherfore I exhort al mē
of what degre & orte soeuer they be
charitably to monyshe one a nother
whan they se ony man offende, and
rebuke hym by the Scriptures of
God, y• we maye shyne in the myd∣des
of a froward & croked nacion as
greate lyghtes in the worlde, pure,
fauteles,Rom. vi▪ & such as noman can com∣playne
of, holdynge fast the word of
lyfe. Let vs suffer no synne to reyg¦ne
in thys our mortal body, but mor¦tifye
all thynges y• stryue agenst the
spirite. Let vs so watch & gyue dili¦gence
to our selfes, y• nether Satan
nor the world, nor yet the flesh, may
haue ony interest in vs.Math. v. Let vs hate
deteste & abhorre synne,Iacob. v. as y• mooste
greuous pestilence and pestiferous

poyson, that can chaunse vnto vs.
But aboue al thynges, as Christe &
Iames monyshehe vs, lette vs not
sweare at all, nether by heauen nor
by earth, nor yet by ony thyng that
is contayned in them. If one of vs
at onye tyme shall chaunse to heare
a nother sweare & pollute y• name of
our Lord God by vayne, idle & vnla¦ful
othes, let vs charitably monishe
the offēder, exhorte hym to cease frō
hys swerynge, and moue hym vnto
y• prayle of God and of hys moste ho¦ly
& blessed name. For surely if ther
were no mo synnes committedde in
Englond, but only y• blasphemynge
of God & of his creatures by vayne
swearyng, it were ynoughe to bring
final destruccion vnto thys Realme
from y• which I besech God longe to
preserue it, and gyue the Inhabitaū∣tes
thereof grace to correcte and a∣mende
theyr synful manners

And to the intent that men may
knowe how great offence it is before
God vaynly to sweare. I haue made
this Inuectyue agaynste swerynge
which here foloweth, wherin as in a
clere myrrour they shal vnfaynedly
perceue and se, what great dampna¦cion
hanggeth ouer the heades of all
swearers, and that it is not possible
for them to escape y• moost greuous
vengeauns of God, excepte wyth al
haste they repent, for sake, theyr dete¦stable
māner of swearyng & earnest¦ly
fal vnto the harty praises of God.
Thys myne Inuectyue I dedicae
to your good Master shyppe, to whō
I confesse my selfe more endeted &
bound, than my poore beggary shal
euer may be able to recompēce your
moost kynd & free gētylnes, desiring
you for your accustomed humanite
to accept this my litle gift wt y• mind
wherwyth I haue offered it to you

and to take it as a testimomy of my
faythefull and seruiseable harte to¦warde
you. I was the gladder to
dedicate this my lytyll treatyse to
you, because I haue in times paste
perceaued, and styl daylye do, howe
greatly ye desyre that al menne shul¦de
lye accordynge to theyr professi¦on
at Baptime, that thorowe theyr
good workes they maye garnysh the
doctrine of oure Lorde and Sauy¦oure
Iesus Christ. Nether is it vn¦knowne
vnto me what a feruēt and
godlye affeccion you beare towarde
the holy scripture, & howe desyrous
ye are that the worde of Christ shuld
dwell in Christen men ritchely with
all wysdome as saynt Paule sayth.Ioan. x▪
Chele be the singulare & great gyf∣tes
of God, which he hath wrought
in you by his holye spirite, and are
manifest ges & tokēs yt ye are the
child of saluacion▪ eheri toure of e∣ternall

glory, & one of Christes flock
seynge ye are o earnestly bent both
to heare & practyse the word of god
in your dayly maners.Titus. i. For Christe
sayth,Loo. iii. He that is of God, hearethe y•
wordes of God. Agen, My shepe hea¦re
my voyce.
God mought vouchsafe to encrease
these his gyftes in you dayly more &Ioan. viii.
more vnto y• glory of hys most blys∣sed
name and the saluacion of your
soule, in whome I desyre to your
ryghte worshypful Mastership
and to the good Gentle wo¦manne
youre wyfe all
good, luckye and
prosperous
thynges.
AMEN.

