


I Thynke ther is no
man so farre estrasiged
from ciuile humanite,
whiche knowethe not,
howe moche euery one
of vs is endetted to his natiue coū∣trey.
For all be it the duty that we
owe to oure parentes,Howe great¦ly we are bo¦unde to our countrey. kynnesfolke,
frendes &c, be great euē by the very
lawe & instincte of nature, yet the
det, wher wt we are obliged to oure
contre, semeth to be greater and of
moche more valour, than we maye
at ony time be able to set our selues
francke & fre from it. Our parētes
onely gyue vs this grosse, rude and
moortall body. Our countrey doth

not only receaue and ioyfully sustē¦tate
it, but also opulently adourne
& garnysh both that and the mynde
wyth moost goodly and godly ver∣tues.
It engraffethe in vs the true
knowledge of our selues,Our coun∣trey is to be more regar∣ded thē oure parentes. the fear of
God, the loue of God and of oure
neyghbour, the true fayth in Gods
promises, the vnfayned obediēce to¦ward
our superious. It tylleth our
hartes wyth the plough of paynful
diligēce. It eradicateth all vnfruyt¦ful
wedes. It eiecteth all vnprofita¦ble
cloddes, and maketh the earthe
of our hartes so fine, pure, pregnāt
& fertile, that it is ready to receaue
ony manner of good seed, that may
be sowne therupon, and to produce
innumerable encrease.What great commoditi∣es we receue of our coun¦trey. It sowethe
also in the elde of our brestes many
precious seedes, as modesty, graui∣te,
gentlenes, honest behauour, affa∣bilite,
comite, liberalite, frugalite,

pacience, long sufferaunce, modera∣cion,
temperaunce, obedience, forti∣tude,
magnanimite, iustice, equite,
continence, humilite, erudicion, pru¦dence,
learnynge, wysdome, probite
of manners, wythe an whole see of
good thynges mo. All this doth our
countrey for vs thorow the diligēt
exercyse of wyse and sage teachers.
So that it may appeare right wel,
men be not only moche endetted to
theyr natiue coūtrey, but also allu∣red
vnto the loue and desyre of the
same euen by a certayne inspiraciō
both of God and nature. For howe
glad is an Englyshe man beynge in
Fraunce, Germany, or Italy or els
where, to knowe by the transmissiō
of mutuall letters, what is done in
Englōd, in what case the publique
weale consisteth, how it prospereth,
howe Gods word is set forward, af∣ter
what manner vertue is mayn∣tayned,

and vice detested. &c? Agen,
is not the Frenche man, Germayn,
or Italion, beyng herein England
very desyrous to knowe lykewyse,
what is done in his natiue contre?
We reade of some,The feruēt affecciō that some haue had to theyr countrey. whiche, whan
they were in straung places, where
they wanted no kynd of pleasures,
desyred rather to be at home t̄ theyr
owne natiue countrey, and to eate
beanes and drosse with hogges, thā
to be in y• moost floryshyng Realme
in the worlde, & to syt at the tables
of Kynges, Prynces and such other
terrene potestates, and to affle wt
all maner of delicious meates.
To whom is it vnknowē, yt whā a
certen noble mā called Leo Byzā∣tius,Leo Byzan¦tius.
was greuously accused of cer∣ten
of the Citie, where he was inha∣bited,
and lyke to be in daunger of
death, and therfore councelled of di¦uers
of hys frēdes to fly into some

straung countrey, he came boldely
into the assembly, which consulted
about hys matter, and sayde, O ye
my Cytysenies, I am counselled to
fly but certes I had rather be slayn
of you, & so to dye among you, than
once to make my self captiue to ony
straung countrey. O valeaunt and
conrageous harte. O noble & prince
lyke stomacke. O vnfayned louer of
his natiue countrey. He chod ra∣ther
to be flayne although vnrighte¦ously
of his contremen, and so to dy
amonge them, than he woulde once
departe oute of his natiue contre.
The victorious Champyō Ser∣toriusSertorius.
also, beyng in the warres or
els wher, was wont to saye, that he
had rather be at home in his owne
countrey, and to be the moost base &
vile Cytysen of Rome, than beynge
absēt to be Emperour of al y• world
so swete a thynge is it for a man to

in his owne natiue countrey.
Thus se we how euery nacion is
led euen of nature wyth such an vn¦speakable
louyng affeccion toward
his contre, as neuer dyethe, excepte
paraduenture ony be of that pesti∣ferous
and poysoned nature, wher∣of
one is, which beyng an Englyshe
man borne, dauncethe nowe lyke a
Traytoure in a Carnalles wede at
Rome, & as a shameles mōsture aba¦sheth
not to write, Roma est mihi patria.
The loue of our countrey muste
nedes be great, seyng that y• graue,
prudēt, sage, and wyse gouernours
of the publique weale heretofore in
all theyr actes soughte nothynge so
much as the prosperite and wealth
therof. What goodly swete senten∣ces
dyd they instille into the brestes
of theyr yonglynges euen from the
cradles, to encourage them vnto y•
loue of theyr countre? As these are:

Pugna propatria. Mortem oppete propatria.
Dulce & decorū estpropatria more. Fight
for the contre. Dye for the coūtrey.
It is a swete & semely thyng to dye
for the cōtrey. And as they taught
other to do this, so dydde they shew
goodly & vertuous examples moost
worthy imitacion of theyr posterite
For no kynd of perel did they refuse
for the safegard of theyr conntrey.
No rytches, no substance, no posses∣sions,
no not theyr owne lyfe dydde
they spare for to profyt theyr coun∣trey.
And this maye we se done in y•
Histories not only of the baser sorte
but also of moost victorious Empe¦rours,
puissaunte Princes, and no∣ble
Consulles.
Kynge CodrusCodrus. ascertayned by y•
infallible oracle of Apollo, that hys
contre men the Athenians could by
no menes enioy the victory of theyr
enemies, excepte he hymselfe were

slayne in the batayle, came forth in
to the felde amonge the other war∣riours
wyth a iustye and valeaunt
chere, fyghtyng wyth his aduersa∣ries
couragiously. But in as much
as it was not only knowē to yt Athe¦nians,
but also to the cōtrary parte
what aūswere was gyuen Codrus
of Apollo, therfore y• enemies gaue
a commaundement that no manne
should hurte the body of kynge Co∣drus.
Which whan he perceyued, he
conueyed himselfe out of the army,
put of his princelyke armours, clad
hymselfe lyke a cōmon Souldiour,
and returned shortly into the hoost
where both manfully and wyllyng¦ly
he dyed, and by this menes saued
his contre O moost excellēt Prince
worthy immortalite. O condigne
spectacle for all rulars to beholde.
A lyke thyng do we read of that
noble Consulle Publius Decius,Publius Decius.

which whā he sawe his army great∣ly
disconforted and almoost slayne,
spoored vp his horse sharply, and wt
a valeaunt courage braste into the
myddes of his enemies army, wher
after that he had slayne many, and
by his valeaūe encouraged of new
the hartes of his Souldiours, he be¦ynge
greuously wounded dyed at y•
instant, for the healthe of his coun∣trey,
so that notwithstondynge by
his woundes, bloud and deathe the
Romans gatte the victory, wherof
before they dyd so much dispayre.
A certen woman also among the
Lacedemonians, caulled Gyrtias,Gyrtias.
whā she herd y• Acrotat{us} her dough¦ters
sonne was greuously woūded
in the warres, yea and dead therof,
aunswered wyth a lustye harte and
sayd, whan he went forthe vnto the
enemies, was it ony other lyke, but
that he should dye, or els slay them?

It is more mery to heare that he is
dead, as it was worthy hym, and y•
citie and his progenitours, than to
lyue all his lyfe lyke a dastarde, and
shew no poynte of valeaūce. O hart
more courageous, thā the feminine
sexe requireth. Grand mothers are
wonte for the mooste parte to loue
theyr neuewes and childres chyldrē
more tēderly than y• very mothers.
Yet this granddame Gyrtias lamē¦ted
nothyng the deth of her neuew,
but entierly reioysed that he died so
valeauntly in the warres.
Another womā of Lacedemony,A womā of Lacedemony
after that she had sent forth fyue of
her sōnes vnto battaile, stode before
the suburbes of the cytie, waytyng
what should be the ende of the bat∣tell.
In the meane season came a cer¦ten
man and shewed her that all her
sonnes were slayne. To whome she
sayd, I dyd not demaūd this of the,

O thou sluggysh slaue, but in what
case the contrey stondeth. Whan he
had aūswered, that the contrey had
gotten the victory, she sayde, oh thā
very well, I am glad that my sōnes
are thus dead. This noble woman
dyd set more by the safegarde of her
contrey, than by her priuate affecte
toward her chyldren.
DamatriaDamatria. also an womā of that
nacion, slewe her owne sonne at his
returne from the battell, because he
behaued hymselfe lyke a coward in
the warres, and dyd not fyght man¦fully
for the wealthe of his coūtrey.
This semeth to smell barbaryke im¦manite,
and to be to moche cruell,
notwithstandyng it is a goodly ex∣ample
to shewe yt all mothers should
desyre nothynge so muche in theyr
chyldren as to haue them euermore
bent to serue the publique affayres
of theyr contre, euē to y• very deth.
The Emperour Otho SyluiusOtho Syl∣uius.
was determined at a certē tyme, I
knowe not for what cause, to gyue
ouer the regimente of his Empyre.
Many came vnto hym, and desyred
hym very instantly, that he woulde
not leaue of his imperial dignite, &
so forsake the commō weale, and the
valeaunt company of noble warry∣ours
y• he had besides other. Among
all one beynge but a Souldiour ta∣ken
at aduenture, perceauyng that
the Emperour persisted in his deter¦minaciō,
toke out his swerd & sayd,
O Emperour knowe thou, that we
all are franckely encouraged thus
to do for the. And streyghte wayes
he kylled hymselfe. O lusty harte, &
frāke couragious stomacke. Whom
woulde it not animate to gyue hys
lyfe for the health of his contrey, se∣yng
so many goodly examples viue¦ly
described and lyuishly set forth in

histories before his face? To moche
brutall is he, that is not moued wt 
these moost memorable antique mo¦numentes.
But yf I shoulde go forthe to re∣hearse
all the Histories, whiche de∣clare
how greatly the feruent petie,
the godly affeccion, & the reuerende
loue toward the countrey hath ben
euer estemed in times past of all gē∣tle
and naturall hartes, I should cō
pyle a worke moche longer than the
Iliades of the Greke Poet Homere,
yea I shoulde not only farre excede
y• limites of an epistle, but also one∣rate
and ouercharge the reader.
But to make few wordes,we ar no les boūde to our coūtrey now than our aū¦cetours were ī times past. euen the
very same godly affecciō owe we at
this daye to this our natiue coun∣trey
Englond, that mē of olde time
haue shewed vnto theyr countrey,
except we be estraūged from all na∣turall
humanite. And what soeuer

oure Auncetours haue done in ty∣mespast,
vnto the very same are we
boūd nowe lykewyse. So that who
so euer detrecteth & refusethe to do
for his countrey, what so euer lieth
in his power, is an vnnatural braū
che, and a corrupte seed, vnworthy
to enioye ony fruyte or commodite
therof, as I may adde nothing here
vnto.
But all men haue not all gyftes,
neyther can euery man profitte his
countrey alyke. Yet oughte the stu∣dious
endeuours and diligent em∣ploymentes
of all men, tende vnto
this, that the cōmodite of the pub∣lique
weale and the helth of the coū¦tre
should be sought aboue al thyn∣ges.
The rytche man with his ryt∣ches,
the stronge mā wt his strēgth,
the wyse with his wisdome, the po∣letike
with his pollecy, the eloquēt
with his eloquēce, the learned with

his learnynge, the artificer wythe
hys science, the plough mā wt his til¦lyng,
and so euery man in his degre
accordyng to his knowledge ought
to serue his coūtrey. For vnto this
doth the lawe both of God & nature
bynde vs, the whiche to resist is ex∣treme
impiete & playne wickednes.
But if ony nacion be estraunged
from y• vnnatural affecciō towarde
theyr coūtrey,The hartye affeccion of English mē toward ther countrey. certes I thinke Eng¦londe,
I meane the Inhabitauntes
therof, maye iustly contende wythe
ony cōtrey for the alienaciō of this
vice. It doth me good yea it maketh
me seriously to reioyce euen at y• ve∣ry
harte, to se how glad my countre
mē are to serue the commodities of
this our countrey Englond. What
so euer our moost excellent Prince,
or ony in his name commaundeth,
it is with all reuerent feare and lo∣uyng
expedicion accomplyshed. No

man grutcheth, no man muttereth
no man thyncketh the precepte vn∣righteous,
nor the burden heuy, so
feruente a loue do they beare vnto
theyr countrey. All with one cōsent
employe theyr endeuours to satisfy
euen vnto the vttermoste of theyr
power the imperiall precepte of the
kynges moost royall maieste. This
hath Gods word wrought in them,
so myghty and fruytfull is yt swerd
of the spirite.Ephe. vi. Thanckes be to God
for it. The Lorde of heauen myghte
graunt, that it may longe prosper,
yea & florish in this Realme of Eng¦lond.
So maye we be sure neuer to
be wtout his diuine blyssyng. Lorde
let it so come to passe.
It wyl not easly be beleued,The Gētle mē of Kent. after
that y• kynges graces letters were
delyuered nowe of late to certayne
Gentyll mē in this Coūtye of Kent
for the prepacion of certē men apte

for the warres, howe expeditely his
graces pleasure was accomplyshed
in euery condicion. The Gentyl mē
(all other businesses layd asyde) im∣mediately
prouided theyrtofore ap∣poynted
nomber of men, arrayenge
them wyth decēt martiall armours
so that nothyng wāted, but al thin¦ges
set at such a staye, that they re∣ceyuyng
premonicion of very lytle
time, are redy at al houres to bring
forthe theyr men apte & redy for the
warres.
Agen the men,The  of Kent. which were prest
to go vnto the warres, it is almoste
incredible to se & perceaue what ala¦crite
& quickenesse of spirite was in
them. They semed to be so desyrous
to defend theyr countrey, that they
in a manner neglected theyr dome∣sticall
trauayles, theyr priuate bu∣sinesses,
not moch estemed ther dere
wyues and swete chyldren, no nor

yet theyr owne lyues, so that they
myght in ony poynt do good to the
publique weale of Englond. Whan
I sawe this valeaūt courage in thē,
and perceaued theyr vnfayned affec¦cion
& loue toward theyr countrey,
Lorde God, wyth how great admi∣racion
and stupore was I affected
& striken? My ioye was surely grea¦ter
thā I cā here expresse, to se this
faythfull obedience in them toward
the Kynges graces maieste, this fer¦uent
loue toward theyr countrey,
this harty affecte toward the cōmō
weale of Englonde. And I doubte
not, but that lyke obeysaunce and
prōptitude was also found in other
places of this Realme.
These thynges thus done,The good mynd & fer∣uent affecciō of y• Author towarde his countrey. I be∣gan
to thynke with my selfe on this
manner, Lord God, vnder howe vn¦fortunate
starre was I borne, that
am endewed neither with wyt, pol∣lecy,

valeaunce, strength, wysdome,
rytches, or ony other thynge, wher∣wythe
I maye do good to my coun∣trey,
as other men do. The vayne of
my wytte is barren, my pollecye is
grosse, my valeaunce is nothynge,
my strength is lytle, my wisdom is
base, my riches are not worth a Gal¦ly
halfe peny besydes a few bokes &
a lytle slender apparell. Alas what
shall I do? Shall I shewe my selfe
in no poynt thanckefull to my coū∣trey?
Shal other men ieopard both
theyr lyues and goodes for the safe∣garde
of the publique weale, and I
in the meane season do nothynge?
Shall I be founde an vnnaturall
braūche and a corrupte seed: It sha¦meth
me to lyue, and I maye ryght
well recount my selfe moost misera∣ble
seynge I am coniecte into suche
vnfortunate state, that I am able
by no meanes to do that for my coū¦trey

in acte, whiche my mynde coue¦teth
in wyll.
At the last I remembred ye poore
wydowe of ye Gospel,Luke. xxi. which althogh
she were not able to cast into y• trea∣sury
so moche as the rytche mē dyd,
yet offered two minutes & ware ac∣cepted
for her good wyll. I called al¦so
vnto remembraunce, howe gen∣tylly
king Artozerzes,Kyng Arto∣zerzes. with diuers
other were wont to receaue base, sī∣ple,
homely & cōmon gyftes of theyr
subiectes, & to geue them rewardes
worthy a Prīce for theyr good wyl.
Whan I perpēded these thynges wt
my self it encouraged me to do some
what (althoughe ye somewhat maye
ryghte well be recounted some lytle
nothyng) that I may shew my selfe
not altogither vnworthy the bene∣ficence
of my countrey. And for as
muche as I haue bene trayned vp
from my cradles in the court of La¦dy

Mnemosyne & her doughters, &
exercised in the wrastlynge place of
Apollo (althogh I maye iustly seme
to haue bene there but a vayne ga∣zer
and ydle spectatour) I thought
it not vndecente accordynge to my
profession of letters to bryng for the
some litteral lucubraciō which beīg
diligentely red and followed of my
coūtremē, shoulde not be altogither
vnfruytfull to our cōmon coūtrey.
I haue therefore in thys tumulte &
noyse of warres compyled a certen
lytle Treatyse, entitled, The polle∣cy
of warre,The conttes of thys boke. not vnworthy the rea∣dynge
chefely at this tyme. In it I
haue declared in howe pitefull case
y• christen publique weale consisteth
almoost vniuersally. I haue shewed
also what is the cause of these cruell
warres, that reygne nwe almoost
thorowe out the whole worlde, & by
what meanes they maye be ceased.

I haue furthermore openned after
what manner we maye get the vic∣tory
of our enemies. Agayne I haue
shewed howe y• Souldiours ought
to behaue them selues bothe whan
they go to ye warres, and whā they
are in them, that God maye be on
theyr syde. Moreouer I haue decla¦red,
howe they that tarye at home,
oughte also to behaue them selues,
vnlesse that for theyr iniquite & vn∣ryghteous
behauoure God forsake
our army. Finally I haue here opē∣ned
how christen men shall returne
frō the warres after they haue got∣ten
the victory, and on what man∣ner
they shall behaue them selues, y•
theyr countrey may enioye peace &
tranquilite euer after.
All theyse thynges haue I done
in this lytle treatyse followyng,Si quis lo∣quitur ut sermones Deiloqua∣tur. ac∣cordyng
as I trust, to the vayne of
the holy scripture And as gladly as

I haue compiled this shorte worke,
so gladly would I haue done ony o∣ther
thynge for the incolumite and
safegarde of my countrey, yf it had
lyghen in my power. Uerely let all
men beleue me, if my rytches & wis∣dome
had bene equall withe Salo∣mons,
if my pollecy & strengthe had
bene lyke with Sāpsons, I would
no lesse hartelye haue employed thē
all for the wealthe of my countrey,
than I haue bestowed my labour in
settynge for the this lytle treatyse.
But whan I maye not do y• one, let
it suffice that I do the other. The
Poet sayth, In magnis uoluisse satest. Ne¦ther
is he altogyther ingrate & vn∣kynd,
which for his puissaūce mayn¦ly
cōtēdeth to shewe hymselfe thāke¦full
and kynd agayne, although his
acte at all tymes dothe not greatly
aunswere his good wyll. Notwyth∣standyng
I trust, yf this my worke

be diligently read, marked and fol∣lowed,
it shall not onlye declare my
honest and naturall harte towarde
my countrey, but also teache men a
more godly fashō in the warres, thā
hathe bene hytherto vsed of many.
I praye God, it maye brynge forthe
no lesse frute, than I haue entēded.
But this my labour what so euer it
be I offer to your ryght worshypful
mastershyp, both because ye are one
whom God aboue many other hath
endewed wt moost goodly qualities,
worthy the renowne of worshyp, &
apte for the godly administraciō of
the publique weale no lesse in y• per∣fecte
knowledge of the diuersite of
Languages, than in the actiuite of
martiall affaires, & also for as much
as ye haue euer hytherto earnestely
embrased not only the studies of hu¦mayne
letters, but also y• graue ex∣ercises
of diuine litterature, trustīg

y• ye wyll accepte this my lytle gifte
with that beneuolence, which al mē
cōmende & prayse in you. If I shall
maye obtayne this, it shall not only
not repēt me of my labour employ∣ed
ī this behalfe, but also encourage
me hereafter to attēpte some other
enterprises of no lesse weyghty and
graue importaunce, & dedicate thē
also vnto your name. In the meane
season God the Author of all good∣nes
and the myghty shelde of them,
that repose theyr affiaunce in hym,
ought vouchsafe to preserue your
good mastership in continuall wor∣shyppe,
and dayly encrease the same
more & more vnto the glorye of hys
name, the conseruacion of the publi¦que
weale, the cōtētacion of your
good mynde, & the cōforte &
ioye of so many as vn∣faynedly
loue you.
AMEN.
