



IT is not without an vr¦gent and moost necessa∣rye cause that we are so ofte commaūded in the moost sacred & holy Bi∣ble to match & praye.Ma xxvi▪ Mar. xiii. i. Pet. iiii. Ephe. vi. For yf we that professe our selues to be souldiours of Christes arm do seriously & wtout saynynge ponder, weye & consyther our state & maner of lyuyng in this world, we shall shortly be occasione to confesse and graunte with the ho∣ly & pacient man Iob,Iob. vii▪ that the lyfe of man is nothynge els than a very knyghthode or warrefare vpon the erth, full of misery & trouble, replete

with lytle ioe & plesure. christen man hath many ene∣myes i this worlde. To whom is it vnknowen what a great multi¦tude of mortall ennemies euery one hath  this world, that doth professe Christ aright? Among al other haue we not thre capital & chefe aduersa∣ries, the dyuell, the world, & the flesh, whiche cease not dayly to assayle vs after the moost crafty & subtyle ma∣ner? Howe doth Satan spreade his nettes in euery Forreste & Parke,The deuel. y• no dere maye escape his deuouryng teth & rauenyng pawes? Howe ma¦ny wayes seketh he to destroye, kyll and say the innocēt shepe of Christ?en. iii. Euen frō the beginnyng of y• world hath he exercised his tyrannicall fu∣ry, & furious tyranye agaynst man∣d. Who hath at any tyme ben free, were he neuer so good & perfecte, frō his subtile & to much craftye assaul∣tes? He is so bēt & feruētly addict to the destruccion of man, that so sone as we are regenerate & borne anew

n Christ by the holy Ghost, & y• most blessed & honorable Sacramente of Baptisme, he streyght falleth in hād with vs, labouryng by one meanes or other vtterly to allure & entise vs from our profession, as we may se in our sauyour & LORDE Iesus Christ,Mat. iiii. Mar i. Luke, iiii▪ whome after his Baptisme Satan dyd not feare to assayle and to tēpte vnto muche absurditie and wicked∣nes. f the sonne of God were not free from his crafte, subtilite & gyle, howe shall we than miserable creatu¦res eschewe his tyranny, whiche are redy to faull at euery houre, excepte we watche and praye. Our stryfe is not,Ephe. vi. sayth S. Paule, agaynst bloud & flesshe, but agaynst rulers, against the powers, agaynste the Lordes of the world, I mene, the gouernours of ye darkenes of this world, agaynst spirituall subtilities in heauēly thi∣ges. Therfore sayeth S. Peter:i. Pet. v. Be ye sober and watche, for your aduer¦sary

the dyuel goeth about lyke a ro¦ryng Lyon sekynge whome he maye deuoure.
The worldMoreouer what an extreme ene¦my is the worlde to so many as pro∣fesse Christe? Howe many occasions haue we thorowe the entysementes and vayne pleasures therof to faull from the true godlynes? Howe doth it allure vs to the loue of transitory thynges? Howe doth it delyghte vs with the beholdyng of the vayne spe¦ctacles therof? Howe doth it drawe vs to the loue of mundane thynges, & to the vtter contempt of thynges celestiall and heauenly? ea how al∣moost doth it wynne vs altogyther on her syde? Whā the scripture not withstandyng sayeth:i. Ioan. ii. Loue not the world, nor those thynges that are in the worlde. If ony man louethe the worlde, the loue of the father is not in hym. For all that is in the world, as the concupiscence of the flesshe, &

the lust of the eies, & the pryde of the lyfe, is not of the father, but it is of the world. And the world passeth a∣waye, & ye lustes therof. But he that dothe the wyll of God, abyde the for euermore.Iacob. iiii. S. Iames also sayeth: O ye adulterers and alulteresses, do ye not knowe that the frendeshyp of ye world, is emnite with God? Who soeuer therfore wyll be the freende of the world, he is become an enemy of Gods.
The flesh.Furthermore what a cruell ad∣uersary is the flesshe vnto a christen man?al. v. Howe doth it at all tymes lust contrary to the spirite? Howe doth it continually fyght with the heauē¦ly mocions of the holy Ghost? Howe dothe it moue vs to the loue of oure selues, to pryde, vncleannesse, gloto∣ny, couetousnesse, wantonnesse of ly¦uynge, vnmercifulnesse, crudelite, & al that euer nought is? And this ene¦my do we norysshe in oure owne bre∣stes.

He is a domesticall aduersarye & one of houshold as they vse to say. He is euer at hande to do vs displea∣sures. He is neuer frō home, but al∣wayes within the dores, so that we are in daunger of destruccion at eue¦ry hour, excepte we deligētly watch and take hede.O the vn∣speakeable miserye of man, wyth¦out y• grace of God. Whyther so euer we turne vs, our enemies mete with vs & so cruelly assayle vs, that excepte the grace of God assyst vs valeaunt∣lye, we are at euerye moment of an houre redy to be caste into hell fyre. O the vnspekable misery of man in this moost miserable worlde.Take hde o pastor∣nr of Gods worde. Where are they nowe y• so lyue in all worlde¦ly ioye & pleasure, that they take no thoughte for the cruell assaultes of theyr enemies▪ Where are these wic∣ked dolaters,Idolaters. supersticious Hypo∣crites, abhominable blasphemers of Gods moost blessed name, & brekers of y• Sabboth day, which settynge a¦syde al loue and feare of God, throw

thē selues headlong into al kynde of vngodlynes?Rebelliōs. Where are these disho¦norers of our moost exceliēt & moost redoubted kynge, & of the other pub¦ligue magistrates, sente by hym for the punisshement of euell doers, but for the prayse of them that do well. Where are the disobediente to theyr parentes?Bloude oupers. Where are these mansay¦ers, which daily thyrst inocēt bloud, no lesse then the thyrstye herte pan∣tynge for hette, desyreth the lyuysh springes of waters?Whoremō∣gers. Wher are these abhominable adulterers, vncleane fornicatours, and stynckyng whore¦mongers, which contēnyng ye bonde of honorable wedlocke, the lawe of ye vndefyled bed, & the chast lyuyng we theyr owne wyues,He. xiii. do dayely hunte after whores, defile virgins, pollute maried women, corrupte wydowes, as I maye passe ouer much other de∣testable vncleannes,O extreme abhomina¦cion. whiche it sha∣meth not thē to
perpetrate and do

yea & that so boldely that this synne of fornicaciō is among many at this present recoūted no synne, but a na∣turall inclinacion, a token of loue, a puttyng awaye of emnite & discord? I thynke yf it be not redressed short∣ly, it wyl growe vp into such freedōe & libertie, that it shalbe counted no synne at all, but rather a vertue, or at the leest a spurre & prouocaciō to vertue. O the abhominacion of the worlde. O intollerable wickednes. O vncleannes more detestable, then it maye any lenger be suffered.Beware ye abhomi¦nable who remōgers betymes. The great displeasure, the fearce wrath, the extreme vengeaunce, the fearce and cruell plages of God hang ouer our heades, yf this to much detesta∣ble vyce be not shortely remoued frō the boūdes of Christianite. Agayne, where are theise malicious Theues,Theues. which despisyng laboure, lyue of the sweate of other mennes faces, & of ye labour of other mennes handes, af∣ter

an vniust and wronge maner? Wher are these false wytnesses,False wyt¦nesses. whi¦che for very malyce or els for monye are redye to the vtter damnacion of theyr soules for to swere & gyue eui∣dence agaynste the innocentes and gylteles? Where are these Catarpil∣lers & Extorcioners of the poore peo¦ple, whiche do nothynge all ye whole daye but gape after brybes and pol∣ynge fees,Extorcio∣ners. no lesse than the hungrye Lyon doth after his praye.Psal. xiii. They de¦uour my people, sayeth GOD, as a pece of bread.Rytch mē. Where are these rytch men, to whome God hath cōmytted the goodes of this world, which like inaciable dogges hauynge neuer y∣nough, do continuallye hunte after the augmentacion of mūdane trea∣sures,O insaia¦ble coue∣tousnes. as by ioynynge Lordeshyp to Lordshyp, Ferme to Ferme, lond to lond, pasture to pasture, house vnto house, enefyce to benefyce, College to Colledge, Prebende to Prebende,

Chauntry to Chauntry, offyce to of¦fyce, promocion to promocion, yea & promocion for a vauntage, as they saye? & yet are they vnmercyfull to y• poore people,Heb. xiii. i. Pet. iiii. despyse the mayntay¦naunce of hospitalite, which y• holye scriptures cōmēd so highly in euery place, & do nothg lesse then exercyse thēselues ī y• workes of mercy. Wher are these spirituall rulers,Spiritual Rulers. which gy¦uyng them selues to volupteous ly∣uyng, neglecte to fede christes flocke with Goddes moost blessed worde?Antechri∣stes. Where are these Antechristes which laboure to suppresse Christes mooste swete & confortable Gospell?Papistes. Where are these Papistes, which desyre the olde papisticall & vngodly superstici¦on to reygne agayne amonge vs?aptiues of Satan. Where are these captiues of Satan which wallowe & tūble thē selues in the dung hylles of synne? To cōclude where are al these wycked pasōnes, which trangresse Gods commaūde∣mentes,

and solyue as though ther were no God at all? O the vngodly & wicked fasshions of this worlde. O the countenaūce of the christen pub¦ligue weale, not a litle deformed tho¦rowe the pernicious maners of the false christians. Thus se we what a nomber of mortal enemies reigneth euery where among vs, & yet is ther no man that lamēteth his synne,Awake, awake. de∣esteth his wickednes, bewaileth his misery, desyreth amendment, seketh for grace, prayeth for the fauoure of God, that thorowe the holy Ghoste we may be restored to our olde puri∣e & cleannes.Prouer. xi. i. Pet. iiii. If the righteous mā shall scarsly be saued, where shall the vngodly & synner appeare? Who se∣th not in howe miserable a case we re? Who perceiueth not how great ede there is of amendemente? Who doth not se as it were in a thynge ly¦uyshly paynted before his face, that excepte we amend shortly, & correct

we shall triumphantly ha the ic∣tory ouer thē all. Be ye obedie to God,Iacob. iiii. sayth S▪ Iames, resist ye de & he shall ye from you. Draw nigh to God, & he shall drawe nyghe vnto you. Make clene your handes O ye synners, & purify your hertes, O ye that are double minded. Be ye trou¦bled, & mourne, and wepe, let youre laughyng be turned to mournyng, & your ioye into sorow. Shew your selues hūble in the syght of y• LORDE & he shall lyfte you vp.
O that we would followe y• godly counsell of this holy Apostle, & so re∣dresse our wicked maners, y• the chri¦sten publigue weale myght be resto∣red to her olde amiable beauty & glo¦rious pleasaunce.Wayes to obtayne Gods fa∣oure. Howe many way∣es hathe God lefte here amonge vs, wherby we maye make him a merci¦full father, & a gentle sauyour vnto vs? As I maye leaue of to speake of fastynge & almes dede, what a good¦ly

& godlye meane is true & christen prayer.Of prayer Note well. for to obtayne the fauour of God, & to prouoke his moost tender mercy toward vs? Hath ony thinge  tymes past so greatly apesed the de¦uine wrath? did not y• holy fathers  tymes pas  theyr troubles aduer¦sitie fly vnto Prayer, as vnto a holy Anchore, or sure Asile, & strong Bul¦wark? Whom would it not delight to talke with the Kinges grace, if he were amytted therto? What a trea∣sure than is it to talke with ye King of Kynges & Lorde of Lordes, in cō∣parison of whom all earthly creatu∣res are more vyle then the wormes? This thyng cōmeth to passe by true and christen prayer.What pa  For what other thynge is prayer, than a familiar cō¦municaciō wt God, wherin we maye frely powre out the troubles of our hertes, and declare all our matters boldly to him, as the chylde doth vn¦to his father, & obtayne at his hand

all good thinges. Uerely we are our owne enemies, yf we neglecte & des∣pyse this great commodite & singu∣lar pleasure? We can not excuse our selfe by ygnorancy, in asmuch as we haue plentie of prayers prepared for vs in the Englysshe tonge both in y• holy Byble, & in other godly treaty¦ses, which are nowe in this moost flo¦ryshyng Realme of England publy∣shed vniuersally vnto y• great glory of God, & y• exceading consolacion of al true christen men, in asmuch that as S. Paule sayeth:ii. Cor. iiii. If the Gospell be yet hyd, t is hydde in thē that pe¦rysh, in whom the God of this world hathe blynded they senses & wyttes of the vnfaythfull, that the lyght of the Gospell of the glorye of Christe, which is the Image of God, shoulde not shyne vnto them. Thanckes be to God for this his incōparable be∣nefyte gyuen vnto vs by his welbe∣loued & faythfull seruaunte Hepe

oure moost redoubted Kynge. That LORDE myghte also graunt that we abuse not this his moost gētle gifte, but rather vse it vnto the glorye of his name, y• edificaciō of his church, & the conforte of our soules.
owe for asmuch as ther is suffi∣ciēcy of praiers prepared alredy & set forth by other, whom God myght al¦so prosper in theyr moost godly affai¦res. A thought it a vayne thynge to encrease the nomber of thē, & to acu∣mulate prayers vpon prayers, wher by wexines rather then cherefulnes shoulde be brought to the Readers▪ I therfore couetyng in this behalfe to worke somewhat ye myghte make vnto the auauncemente of Prayer, wherby the deuout Christiās might receyue knoweledge, & be the better instructed in the true maner of prai¦enge, haue nowe of late compyled a worke entiteled,A pathway vnto pray¦er A pathwaye vnto Prayer. I was the gladder to take

it in hande, bycause no man hath as yet perfectly entreated of this mat∣ter, neither in the Greke,The cause of makyng this worke Latin, nor Englysshe tonge, that euer I could se. What doth it auayle or profitte a man beynge of a debyle & weake na∣ture to haue a Pomegranate or oni other thinge that cōforteth nature, restoreth strēgth,Mark wel & bringeth agayne the perfeccion of health, yf he know∣eth not y• vse of it, & wherfort it ser∣ueth. Uerelye euen so of prayer. If ther be neuer so many praiers prepa¦red for men, yf they knowe not y• vse of them, nor wherfore they serue, nor yet after what maner they shoulde be exercysed, what profytte receyue they of thē? It is but an easy thyng to pray, but to praye aright & accor¦dynge to the wyll of God, is a thyng of gret difficulte & much labour. We thinke it an hard thing to speake vn¦to a terrestiall Prynce with wordes conueniēt, apte & decent, & is it but

a trifle to speake to the moost hyghe Prynce, in whose syght the moost e∣loquent is very barbarous, and the moost holye, prophane? I haue ther∣fore in this my treatyse followynge declared what praier is,The contē¦tes of this Boke. wherfore it serueth, & vnto what end we should vse it. I haue also declared of what vertue & strength the true & christē praier is, & howe we should prepare our selues to prayer, that we maye praye aright, & accordyng to Gods pleasure. And for asmuche as some men are of so scrupulous, I had al∣moost sayd, supersticious consciēce, ye they thynke no prayer to be herd, but that only whiche is prayed in y• chirch, or some other sacred place, as they call it, I haue declared both by Scriptures & auncient Doctours, in what place it is lawfull to praye. Againe I haue declared after what maner men should praye, that God maye accepte theyr prayer, and for

what thynges they should pray, yea & at what tyme. And in asmuche as this word Prayer doth contayne in it not only Peticion, but also than¦kes gyuyng for the benefyte that is receyued, therfore haue I also decla¦red my mynde concernynge gyuing of thanckes to God the Father tho∣row Iesus Christ.Colos. iii. All these thinges haue I done in this lytle worke ac∣cordynge to the true vayne of ye ho∣ly scriptures & the iudgemēt of the best learned Doctors, seking in this my laboure only the glory of God, & the profyte of his holy congregaciō. Which thynge yf it shall maye come to passe, I shall not only not repent me, but verye muche reioyce in the LORDE of this my trauayle, & shall hereby be encouraged after this, to take in hande other argumentes of no lesse vtilite & profyte.
Nowe gentle & prudente Ladye, disdayne not to take this lytle gift,

which your Basille doth with moste gentle herte offer vnto you as a te∣stimonye of his obsequious wyll to∣ward your good Ladiship. I doubt not but that as you your selfe shall fynde much pleasure & profyte by y• readynge of it, so shall all the reders of the same obtayne so muche godly fruyte & christian knowledge by it, y• they shall render herty & immortall thankes to God, that suche a worke cōmeth forth dedicated to your La∣dyshyppes name. I agayn on my be¦halfe shall moost instantly desyre al∣myghty God to assyst you at all ty∣mes with his holy Spirite in ye rea¦dynge not only of this my lytle trea¦tise, but also of al other workes that make to the glory of God & ye helthe of your soule, & chefely in readyng y• moost cōfortable Gospel of his dere∣ly beloued sonne Iesus Christe oure LORDE & omnisufficient Sauyour (wherin the whole studye & pleasure

of a true Christian ought principal¦ly to be) ye you hauynge your whole meditacio in y• lawe of y• LORD both day & nyght,Psal. i. may fīd such swetenes & pleasure ī his moost delectable word that you wantynge at this present the company of a corporal husband, maye be maryed to the moost glory∣ous & beatifull Kynge Iesus Christ Gods owne sonne in youre soule by fayth in this worlde, & after the de∣parture from this vale of misery to lyue with him presentlye in the ful∣nesse of perfecte ioye, worldes wyth∣out ende. AMEN.
¶ The grace of our LORDE Iesus Christ be with your good La∣dyshyppe, and with all your houshold. So be it.
