


I Canne none other∣wyse but highly prayse the honest fashons, com¦mendable vsages, and frendely customes, that our auncetours & elders haue vsed heretofore vnto the greate example of theyr posterite for ye mayntenāce of all humanite & gētylnes. Among many other, who wyl not recoūt ye cu¦tōe of gyuyng newe yeres gyftes to be so commendable and prayse wor∣thy, that he maye seme to be estraū∣ged from all ciuilite, that dothe not obserue it vnto the vttermost of his power? For what other thing do we

meane by geuyng mutuall giftes in the begynnyng of a newe yeare, thā that we desyre, that all good, lucky, prosperous and fortunate thynges maye chaunse that yere vnto euery one of vs, and that one wylleth, wy∣sheth & desyreth well to another, is redy to do good one to another, and to healpe what so euer lyethe in hys power? This vndoubtedly was the meanyng of thē, that fyrst were the inuētours of this moost honest and frendly custome, & to this ende hath it ben obserued, kept & mayntayned hytherto. Whan I consydered this but lately & iudged ye custome to  both good and godly, and nothyn more mete for the preseruacion an cōciliaciō of amite. I thought tha for asmuch as I was not able acco¦dyng to my wyll to gyue such new yeares gyftes, as commonly be sen from one to another. Yet I would

prepare somthyng, wherby I might shewe my selfe to wysh well vnto all men, and to beare an honest & frend¦ly hart to my cōtrey mē of Englōd. I haue therfore prouided a newe ye¦res gyfte, not of corruptible gold or syluer, but of the moost sacred scrip¦tures, whiche,Psal. xviii as Dauid saythe, are much more worthy to be desired thē golde or precious stonne, & are swe∣ter then the hony & hony combe.
In this my newe yeares gyfte I haue openned many goodly & godly thynges. Amonge all other, I haue declared, what a precious treasure Christ is vnto vs,Esay. ix. whiche was gyuē vs of God the father for our new ye¦res gyfte, and how many benefites we haue receyued by hym. I haue al¦so described the whole lyfe of a chri∣sten mā, shewyng what we must do, if we wyll enioy so great benefites. Agen, I haue exhorted men to mor∣tify

theyr carnal affectes & worldly lustes, and shewed them howe they must walke both toward thēselues, theyr neyghbour & God, if they wyl haue the fruicion of the celestiall en¦heretaūce. To cōclude, as I haue she¦wed that all saluacion commeth by Christ, so haue I proued that Christ is no sauiour but to thē that repēt, beleue, lede a vertuous lyfe, & be plē¦teous in doyng good workes. These thinges with diuers other not to be despised shal be foūd in this my new yeares gyfte, so that I doubte not, but that it shall be no les profitable for the soule, than other worldly gif¦tes shall be for the body.
This my labour employed herein after myne so greuous & troublous syckenesses, I dedicate and sende to your ryght worshypfull mastershyp for a newe yeares gyfte, desyrynge you to accepte it wyth no lesse good

mynde, than it is offered to your gē¦tylnes. If I shal may perceaue, that this my lytle gyfte is acceptable vn¦to you, it shall not only not repente me, but also cause me very much to reioyse of my trauayle ī this behalf.
GOD the Author of euery yere mought vouchesafe to graunt that this newe yeare wythe many other maye euer begynne vnto you withe good fortune, procede wyth better, ende with that which is best, and alway be fortunate vnto you so long as they last, so yt ye maye alway enioye cō∣tinual helth & pros∣pero{us} felicite ac∣cordyng to ye wyll of God, to whome be all honour & glory. AMEN.
