



FRiend Pasquine, most harty Com∣mendations.
For I cannot but
both hartelie commend mee to
you,Pasquines Countercuffe. & commend you also▪ The
Cuffe you latelie gaue to Martin
the yonker, in steed of his gloue,
was so smartlie giuen, and sate so
close to his eare; as I must needes praise both your
courage, and cunning in cuffing. And for that both
he, and his good brother, shall not want Cuffes to
keepe themselues warme withall this winter: I haue
giuen them both, now one Cuffe more: which al∣beit
in truth bee but a whirre; yet am I clasping my
fist as fast as I can, to giue them one paire of Cuffes
more, that shall bee so soundlie set on, as I doubt not
shall make them stagger.
Martins sonnes saie Martin is dead; I know it to
be no fable: and haue sent you here the true trans∣cript
of all that worthie & memorable historie, con∣taining,
his Sicknes, last Will, Death, Anatomie, Buriall,

and Epitaphs, with all other Implements belonging
thereunto. Herein I haue made them but a little me∣rie,1 Old Martins Months minde.
as they doo vs, and bobde them with their owne
bable, which I know must please them (for they are
verie pleasurable Gentlemen as their father was). In
the next that shall bee verie shortlie (which I terme
The suing of Martin Senior his liuerie) wee shall giue
them a Cuffe shall make their eares tingle:2 The suing of yong Martins liuerie. but in the
third which shall be Martins models, (for he is in the
building vaine as his father was) containing the mis∣chiefes
of Martinisme both to the Church and state;3 Martins mo∣dells. we shall reach them a rappe, as they will neuer clawe
of, except they scratt off the skinne from the verie
bones, til they come to the Crowes and Pies to help
them: and will prooue in good earnest, what them∣selues
report of themselues which is better than the
best Iurie (prophecying with Caiphas) that they are
the verie botches and blaines of both those bodies.
In the meane space (Pasquine) remember your pro∣mise.
It growes fast towards Ianuarie: it were time
your Almanacke were out;Pasquins Al∣manack. and for that it seemeth
you haue some skill in Astrologie, (if it maie be) by
your calculation, let vs haue a glimse at the least, of
the fooles phisnomies. Thus much maie wee con∣iecture,
without any figure, that they are some yong
Diuells, and that their purpose is to make some hot
worke with vs, (and therefore no maruell that they
haue been so firie heretofore) that haue chosen
a Salpeter man for their foreman,Martin makes gun powder. and a gunne pow∣der
house (an hell on earth) for their printing shop.

But I hope they shall not want Matches to sindge
them with their owne fire, and to blowe vp their
powder and all about their eares.
But especiallie (Pasquine) for that they are so busie
with other mens doings, and themselues onelie, The
Mirrour of all modestie, honestie, curtesie, humilitie, pa∣tience,
and all sanctitie,Pasquins Le∣gend. remember your Legende in a∣nie
wise. The liues of such Saincts must needes be a
singular peece of worke, and edifie much; especiallie
against the seuen deadlie sinnes which they neuer
transgresse.Martins neuer transgresse the 7. dead sinnes.
Pride, for they despise all but themselues.
Lecherie, for three at a clappe, their heaths can yeeld
them. Sloath, for though they bee seldome idle, yet
they are neuer well occupied. Gluttonie, for they
would deuoure all. Couetousnes, for they are neuer sa∣tisfied.
Wrath, for they doo nothing but quarrell. En∣uie,
for they cannot abide anie to haue ought, but
themselues.Their foure Cardinall ver∣tues. But especiallie for the foure Cardinall
vertues: Fortitude, for they hide their heads. Iustice,
for they would take from euerie man his owne.
Wisedome, or els I report me to their wittie conceits.
And Temperance, for they gouern their passions pas∣singly
wel.Their three Theologcall vertues. But for the three Theological vertues they
excell, of all that euer I heard of. Faith, for I doubt
me whether they bee of anie. Hope, which is to see
the ouerthrowe of all. And Charitie, for they detest
and damne all but themselues. And though they
were at the first, and bee still, passing impudent, and
neither feare nor shame to saie anie thing, hiding
their heades, and being out of the reach of all con∣trolement:

(for Qui semel impudentiae fines transierit,
eum bene & knuiter, oportet esse impudentem) yet (Pas∣quine)
since they are now become contemptible, a∣mongst
the most and best, let vs trample on them as
the dirt of the streete; being in verie deed the drosse
and dregges of the Common wealth. And so long∣ing
to heare from you, as you shall from me againe,
(God willing) verie shortlie, I bid you farewell.

