


I Haue not forgotten wt howe gentle & thancke∣full mynde (as I maye passe ouer ye sigulerbene ficēce & grādliberalyte, which at that time ye shewed to me) your ryght honorable mastership did receyue y• Christmasse Bācket which nowe of late I dedycated vnto your name, chefely whan you had diligēt∣ly compared it with the moost holye worde of God, the towch stone of all Gods word is a towche stone to pro∣ue and try al doctryne. doctryne to trye the adulteryne, fay ned & false frō the syncere, germayne & true learnyng, & perceyued that it dyd not onlye agree wyth the moost

sacred Scryptures, but also wythe the teachynge of the auncient Doc∣tors of the holy churche, whome you haue as all mē ought, in great admi∣racion, with whose authoryties it is opuently fortressed. Uerely for the probacion of that my worke, & com∣parynge it with the trueth of Christ & the doctryne of the holy & learned Doctors, I can none otherwyse but hyghly cōmende, prayse, auaunce, & magnifye the industrye & laboure of your righte honorable maystershyp, whiche so prudently proue all kynde of doctryne with the true & infally∣ble towchstone of gods moost blessed word. For in thus doynge you shew youre selfe not to be ledde wyth ony blynde or perciall affecte, but wyth an vpright & high indifferēcy, much alienated & estraunged from the mā ners of diuers men at this tyme, a∣monge whome some as folyshe sym∣ple receyue all kynde of doctryne wt∣oute

ony probacion or triall, some a∣gayne contrarye to the dexteryte of Christen iudgemente lyke frantyke parsons do temeraryously, rashly, & wtout ony aduysement condemne a thynge before they haue iustlye exa∣myned it by the holy Scryptures. S. Paule saythe: Quenche not the ii. Thes. v. spyryte. Despyse not Prophesyes. Proue and examyne all thynges, & that whiche is good, holde. S. Iohn̄ i. Ioan. iiii also saythe, derelye beloued, beleue not euery spiryte, but proue the spy rytes, whyther they are of God or not. Hereto pertayneth the sayenge of Christ, search ye the Scriptures. Ioan. v. Dauid also saythe: Blessed are they psal. . that searche the testymonyes of the LORDE. Here are al Christē men com maūded not furyously streight way es to condemne, what so euer lyketh them not at the fyrst aspecte & blush but to search the scriptures, & by thē to proue, whither they be true or not

Luke declarethe in the Actes of the Act. xvii. Apostles, that whan Paule & Sy∣las preached to certayne mē at Bar∣rea, they that hearde them, receyued the worde gladlye, yet not withston∣dynge they searched the scryptures dayely, & tryed by them, whyther it was so or not, as they preached. So becommeth it all mē to do, not rashe ly to admyte & receyue, nor yet fury∣ously to cōdemne euery thynge at y• fyrste syghte, but as Paule sayth, to i. Thes. v. proue all thynges, & to chose & holde that which is beste. Chynges muste be proued by the Scryptures & not by the spiryte of pryde, contencion, despyte, & contumacy. If mē would do this, there shoulde not be so great diuision in the chyrche of Chryst, as there is nowe a dayes. Christ & Chri Note. stes trueth is only learned of the ho ly scryptures. They that teache ony other thynges than the scryp∣tures, tech not Christ, but humayne

inuēciōs. Neither ought ony thyng as a necessarye trueth to be beleued vnder payne of damnacion, for to be admytted in the chyrche of Chryste, except it may be establysshed by the holy scrypture & pure word of God. For ye righteousnes of god is proued saith s. Paule by ye testymony & wyt Rom. iii: nes of the lawe & Prophetes Agayn he sayth: Yf we our selues or an Aū∣gel Gal. i. from heauen do preach vnto you ony other Gospell, thā that we haue preached vnto you, hold it accursed. As I sayde before, so saye I nowe a∣gayne, yf any man shall preach vnto you ony other gospell than yt, which ye haue receyued, holde it accursed. Hereto agreeth Origene, it is nede∣full for vs, sayth he, to caull the ho∣ly scriptures into wytnes. For our iudgementes & exposiciōs wythout these wytnesses, haue no fayth. Also S. Ierome, that we affyrme, muste In Ierem: Hom. i. be establysshed & approued with the

testimonies of the holye scryptures, Ad iesi∣phon. in the which God speaketh dayly to thē yt beleue. Itē Cyrillus, Christ a∣lone In Ioan. cap. vi. is to be followed as a mayster, & to hī alone ought we to cleue. They that brynge ony other thynge besy∣des the doctryne & teachynge of the Apostles, sayth Theophilact, Paule In Roma. cap. vlt. playnly sayth, yt slaūders, yt is to say heresies & dissēciōs are brought in of them. Do not these thynges declare howe colde & vayne all thynges are, that fyght wyth the worde of God, and haue not theyr foundacions of the moost holy scryptures.
Certes as towechynge my lucu∣bracions The mind of the u∣thor cōcer∣nynge all his bokes  h hathe or shal set forth here after. and workes, which I haue hytherto made, or shall by the helpe of God here after make, I submytte them all with moost submission and humilite of mynde to ye syncere iuge mētes of them that are ghostly lear∣ned & taughte of GOD in Christes chyrche to be iudged, tryed and exa∣mined

by the infallible verite of god des worde. Yf the holy Scriptures shal approue & allow thē, I moost hū bly besech all men thāckefully to ac∣cepte them, & to gyue all the glorye & prayse vnto God. If they shall seme to fyght & dissent wyth the worde of God, holde them accursed, as Paule sayth, & so do in lyke manner ye wor∣kes Gala. i. of all other, that consente not wt the Euangelyke veritie. But yf the worde of God testifieth and beareth witnes of them, receyue thē, & gyue God thanckes, which so plenteously worketh in his seruauntes for ye edi∣ficacion of his chyrche.
Moreouer this your diligēt sear A Potaciō for Lent. chynge & comparynge of my Banc∣ket with the holy scriptures and the auncient Doctors dydde so greatly please me, yt syns yt tyme I thoughte not vnsyttynge to prepare a Potaci on for this holye tyme of Lente, & to dedycate that also vnto your name.

Which thinge I haue done, yea and that in all poyntes accordynge to y• verite of Gods worde & the mynd of the moost auncient and best learned Doctors. Who so euer shall vouch What pro fyt ther is to be got∣ten at this Potaciō safe to be present at this Potacion, & with a gredy appetite to taste of it certes he shal not a litle reioyse of it. For he shal here lerne almoost all thi ges that are necessary to be knowen of a Christen man concernynge this tyme of Lent. Fyrst I haue entrea∣ted of Penaunce, declaryng what it is, how it ought to be done, of whom we shoulde aske grace truelye to re∣pent, & howe it maye be obtayned.
Secondly I haue spoken of Contri∣cion, Cōfessiō & satisfaccion or amēde ment of lyfe. Thyrdely I haue decla red y• true māner of fastyng. Fourth ly I haue intreated of diuers Cere∣monies, that be vsed in the Chyrche this tyme of Lent, & declared what they signify & preach vnto vs. Laste

of all, I haue shewed howe we ought to prepare oure selues for to receyue worthelye at the tyme of Easter the moost blessed Sacrament of the .
All these thinges haue I done in this Potacion following, not folow yng myne owne fātasy or imagyna∣cion but the veryte of Gods worde, the authorite of Christes moost holy Chyrche & the mynde of the aunciēt and best learned Doctours.
This my laboure, what soeuer it be, I nowe dedicate & offer to youre right honorable maisterships name, desyrynge you to accepte thys lytle gyft as a testimony of my good hert and obsequious mynd towarde you, moost instantly also besechyng you, & all other in your name to iudge it by the word of God, & to compare it with the trueth of Christes Gospel. In so doyng I doubte not, but that both this & al my other workes shal

be receyued wythe the more grate, thankefull & acceptable myndes, vn to the great profytte of the readers, & the hygh glorye of almyghty God, who euer preserue your right hono∣rable maystershyp in cōtinuall helth and prosperous felicite.
AMEN.
