


AMong many other godly and noble vertues, whiche God by his holy spirit hath graffed in your graces breast (most hono∣rable Lady) the feruent affection and continuall desyre of prayinge vnto the Lord our God, hath nei∣ther the last nor the lest place in you. And as God hath wrought in you by ye holy Ghost thys godly

mind to call vpon his holy name with diligent prayer, so lykewise doth your grace stur vp and con∣fyrme that spirituall mocion wt the exercise of daily praier, least that godly affecciō shuld be quē∣ched, which the holy Ghost hath kindled in your heart. For your grace doth rightwell consider, yt God deliteth in nothynge more then in ye inuocacion of his bles∣sed name, and in the sacrifice of thankes geuing for his benefits. Where the name of God is dili∣gently called vpon, & most hum∣ble and harty thāks geuen vnto him for his fatherly and frendly giftes, there is hys blessing gra∣ce and fauoure plenteous, there

is the holy Ghost present, there is a mery conscience, ther al thīgs prosper, there wanteth no good thing. Contynue therfore (most honorable Lady) as ye haue god∣ly begun, both you and all your faithful family to call on the glo∣rious name of the Lord our God with feruent prayer, and forget not to be thankfull vnto hym for hys benefites, wherwith aboue many other he hath richly endued your grace. So shal he be your lo∣uing Lord & gracious God, your fauorable father and strōg shilde. So shall he make your grace to prosper in al your doings, & blesse you both with longlyfe and much

honor. And that your grace may haue at hand conuement prayers to pray vnto the Lord our God I thought it good, consyderyng your graces manifold vertues, to geue vnto you this my Pom∣maunder of prayer, wherein are breeflye contayned suche godlye prayers as are most mete in this our age to be vsed of all degrees and estates, most humbly bese∣ching your grace to take in good part this my rude and bolde en∣terprise according to your accu∣stomed gentlenesse. God, whose glory you hartely loue, whose word you ioifulli embrace, whose name you earnestly call vppon:

mought vouchesafe to preserue your grace in continuall health and encrease of honoure.
Amen.

