



Most renowmed and mightie Prince, Jt pleaseth your highnes, after a long win∣ters abode in some one of your Princely Pallaces, (the stormes of colde be∣ing past, and the pleasant spring tide come) to remooue your householde into a fresh and wholsome aire. And for a warning to your officers, and seruaunts of your Court, you doe cause the Trumpet to bee three seuerall times sounded, against you descende from the higher part of your mansion. But if it happen to bee long before the seconde warning of the trumpet be giuen, the third is no sooner soun∣ding, but your owne Person is then comming. Then must all your seruants be readie to waite
vpon you: you are the Souereigne, and not to expect for anie. They that be not readie at the same instant, are not worthie of such a Prince, nor to haue reward for such a seruice. Euen so the most inuincible King of glorie Christ Je∣sus, who by his holie spirit, hath been present in this worldly mansion, with his houshold the Church welneere 1600. yeares while it hath a∣bidden many sharpe and bitter stormes, & hath been as it were imprisoned within the Pallace of this wretched world, is now minded speedely to remooue the same into his owne Countrie, a pleasand land, and place of felicitie. The first warning of his remooue, he sounded by his Apo∣stles, when his fame was spread ouer all the world, by the first preaching of the Gospel. The second he hath proclaimed by the preachers of his word, whom he reuiued (as it were) out of the dust, within these 70. yeres. And together with them, are sent all the promised tokens of his comming. Howbeit the day being so farre spent, before his seconde warning, wee shall see himselfe speedely descend from aboue with the
third sound of the trumpet, and in the voyce of an Archangel. And those that watch for him with their lampes burning, he will receiue, and the rest he will exclude from his kingdom, & from the reward of his seruice. ƲƲherfore your Highnes, beeing one of his principall ser∣uants, nay, at this day the chiefe Stewarde of his household, it shall be a perpetuall honour to your kingdome, a not able blessing to your sub∣iects, an vnspeakable benefit to the Church, an acceptable seruice to Christ, yea an eternal fe∣licitie to your self, if the light of your lampe do continuallie shine, and the oyle of your workes doe perpetually abound, that nowe at his com∣ming, ye may bee readie to enter with him into that glorie which he hath promised to all those which be faithfull seruants.

