


ALthough we haue mooste vrgent & weyghty causes, yea & those īnumerable to extoll, magnify, commend & prayse the exceadynge goodnes & bounteous liberalite of our moost mercifull father, yf we perpend, pē¦sitate, weyghe, ponder & cōsider his inestimable benefites, which he fre∣ly & without our deseruynge daye∣ly giueth vnto vs miserable creatu¦res, yet if we weyghe all thinges in a iust balaunce, we shall easely and withoute ony difficulte perceaue, y• we are moost bounde to celebrate & prayse his moost blyssed name for ye restorynge of his holy word at this

tyme, brought to passe by his true annoynted Hēry our moost redoub¦ted Kynge, as by another Iosias, whose graces moste excellent maie∣ste that LORDE of powers mought prosper in all his diuine affayres & godly enterprises. For before God restored to the world the Gospell & ioyfull tydynges of his derely belo¦ued sonne our LORDE & Sauioure Iesus Christe, incredulite as chefe rulare reygned in oure hertes, Hy∣pocrisye as a vayne gloryous Em∣presse, bare dominion, Supersticiō, Idolatry, false sectes, mennes tra∣dicions, confidence reposed in hu∣mayne inuencions, Pylgrimages, Offringes, Bulles, Pardonnes, di∣spensacions, Masses of Scala celi, marchaundyse for merytes & wor∣kes, byenge & sellynge of the diuine misteries, with an whole sea of euel¦les mo, had creapte in, vnto ye great perturbacion & disquietnes of ye ho¦ly

catholyke chyrch, as I may passe ouer the blynde ignorancy & ygno∣rant blyndenes, into the whiche by this meanes we were cast and tom¦bled. Howe can it otherwyse be? If the lyght of Gods word be obscured extincte or quenched,Psal. cxviii which only is the lanterne to our feete, & a lyghte to our pathwayes, what meruayle is it, though the fearce & outerage∣ous floudes of Idolatry & all kinde of supersticiō breake in and inuade the boundes of christianite, yea and ouerflowe thē. For as Fayth, Hope Charite, Peace, Mercy, Pacience, longe sufferynge, humilite, sobriete iustice, spirituall liberte, obedience towarde the hyghe powers, and all goodnes reygneth, where the LOR∣DES word bereth rule, so in lyke mā¦ner, where yt is expulsed, banysshed & exiled, Incredulite, hatred, enuy couetousnes, vēgeāce, contencion, Glotony, dronckēnes, rapacite, im∣moderate

lustes, vncleane affectes, carnal liberte, disobediēce īsurrecci¦on, arrogācy, pryde, ambiciō, crude∣lite, māslaughter, thefte, false wit∣nes, hypocrisy, ignorāce, blyndnes, sectes, Heresye, and all that is con∣trary to the commaundeme nt and wyll of God, beareth dominiō, and hath preeminence, as Salomō say∣eth,Prouer. xix Where knowledge is not, there is no goodnes for y• soule. Agayne, whan the preachyng of Gods word ayleth,Prou. xxix the people peryshe & runne cleane oute of order. Therfore it is wryten by the Prophet,Esaie. viii. make hast to the lawe & witnes. If they speke not accordynge to this word, they shall not haue the mornynge lyght, that is to saye, the true knowledge of God.Marke. xii. Rebuked not Christ ye Sa∣duces, bycause they were ignorant in the holy Scriptures, affyrming that they were deceaued for lacke of the knoweledge of them? Ye are

deceaued, sayth he, bicause ye know not ye scriptures. Therfore in ye gos¦pel of Iohn,Ioan. v. he exhorteth al men to serch ye scriptures, sayēg, serch ye ye scriptures, for they are they ye beare witnes of me. And ye Psalmograph calleth thē blissed,Psal. cxviii and .i. which search ye te¦stimonies of the LORDE & meditate in his lawe both both daye & nyght The worde of God muste nedes be an excellent & precious treasure, se¦inge it is the power of GOD vnto saluacion for so many as beleue,Roma. i. i. Tim. iiii. se¦inge also it is profitable to teache, to īproue, to amend, & to instructe, in ryghteousnesse, that the man of God may be perfecte & prepared to all good workes. Who is able to ex¦presse, what a precious relique and high treasure the worde of God is? Uerely it is that treasure, wherof Christ speaketh in the Gospell,Math. xii that lygheth hydden in the felde, which, whan a man once fyndethe, for ioye

therof he goeth & selleth all that he hathe, & byethe that felde. And it is no lesse treasure to the soule, than the corporall eyes are to the bodye, as ye Psalmographe testifieth: Thy worde,Psal. cxviii O LORDE, is a lanterne to my fete, & a lyght to my patheway¦es. For as that man, that is depry∣ued of his corporal syght, knoweth not how nor wher to walke, so lyke wyse, hē that wanteth the lyght of Goddes worde seeth nothynge, and therfore walketh he not aright but wādreth abrode lyke a shepe disper∣sed & destitute of a shepparde.Mathew. ix But as he that hath the true & perfecte syght of the eyes stōblethe not, but walketh at all times without daū∣ger, so in lyke māner he ye is endued by Christes spirite wt the light of y• holy Scriptures wādreth not frō that true way, which sayth of him selfe,Ioan. xiiii. I am the waye, the truethe & the lyfe, but alwaye is preserued,

that he walketh continually in the kynges hygh waye, declynyng nei∣ther on the right hand or on ye lyfte hand. He is not caryed about with straūg doctryne.Deut. xii. Hebre. xiii. Math. xvi. Math. vii. Luke. vi. His fayth is bylte on a sure rocke, therfore abideth he fyrme, immutable, stedfaste, sure & constant, what so euer kynde of tē∣peste assaylethe hym. The gates of hell can not preuayle agaynst him. Satan with all his army are not able once to abduce & remoue hym from the true waye.ii. Petre. i. For the lyghte of Goddes worde is continually be¦fore his eies, wher vnto he gyueth diligent attendance, which also he followeth earnestly in all his iour∣neyes, and therfore muste he nedes walke the true waye, & neuer erre. Yf he be blyssed, fortunate & happy that hath the naturall lyght of his body, howe much more blyssed & he∣uēly at ease is he, that is illumined with ye lyght of the LORDES word?

wherof ye holy king Dauid hauīge experience prayeth on this māner, open myne eyes,Psal. cxviii & I shall consyder ye meruelous thynges of thy lawe. To walke in this lyght, Christe ex∣horteth vs, sayeng, walke whyle ye haue lyght,Ioan. xii. vnles ye darkenes come on you. He that walkethe in darke∣nes, wotteth not whither he gothe. Whyle ye haue lyght, beleue on the lyghte, that ye maye be the chyldrē of lyghte. So many as be of God, loue this lyght of y• LORDES word, and desyre with all theyr herte to walke ī it. But they that be of Sa¦tan, hate it, & refuse to walke in it. Why so?Actum. vii. Uerely for they are beast lyke mynded, styffe necked, & in all thynges resist the holy Ghost. The lyght they hate, be it neuer so plea∣saunt & wholesome, but the darke∣nes they enhalse, loue, kysse & kull, be it neuer so tedious and horrible. Therfore shall they receaue y• grea∣ter

dānacion, as Christ wytnesseth sayeng, thys is the condemnacion that lyght came into the worlde, & men loued darkenes rather then lyght. For theyr workes were euel.Ioan. iii. Euery one that doth euell, hate the the lyght, neyther commeth he to ye lyght, vnles his workes shoulde be reproued. O howe blessed are they, to whome it is gyuen to walke in thys lyght. Agayne, howe misera∣ble, wretched & vnhappy are they, y• speare theyr eyes at the commynge of this confortable light, & wyl not only not walke in it thē selues, but also laboure to the vttermooste of theyr power to obscure & quenche it, that it maye appeare & shyne to none at all. These are those people,Esaie. xxx. whiche, as the Prophet saythe, pro∣uoke God to anger. Theise are the lyenge and vnfaythefull chyldren. Theyse are the chyldren that wyll not heare the lawe of the LORDE.

These are they, which say to them that se, se not, & to them that looke, looke not for vs those thinges that are right. Speke vnto vs pleasaūt thīges, preach vnto vs tales of Ro∣byn hood, take awaye from vs the right way, go out of the pathe, and away with that holy one of Israel frō our face. Theise are they, which hate hym,Amos. v. that reproueth thē open∣ly, and abhore hym that telleth the truethe playnely. Theise are they, which call euell good,Esaie. v. & good euell, darkenes lyght, & lyght darkenes. bytter swete, & swete bitter. These are they whiche are wyse in theyr owne eyes, and stonde wel in theyr owne cōceate. But agaynst all such as contemne the holy scriptures & cast awaye the law of theyr LORDE God, wyllynge neither to enter thē selues, nor yet suffryng other, christ intonateth and thōderethe on this māner,Luke. xii. wo be to you lawers, for ye

haue taken awaye the key of know¦ledge, ye haue not onlye not entred in, but ye haue also forbidden them that entend to enter. But without doubte they shal no lēger preuayle.Iob. xv. Esaie. xi. Daniel. viii ii. Thess. ii. For ye daye of the LORDE is at hand whan he shall breake Satans head & destroye bothe him & all his mini∣sters with the breath of his mouth For he wyll no lenger sufferre thys great wickednes & hygh abhomina¦cion. He wyll be knowne for ye God & Sauiour alone. He is that LORD which alone wyll be exalted,Esaie. ii. and all Idolles shall be vtterlye broken on peces. He is that God, whiche wyll no lenger suffer his glorye to be at∣tributed & gyuen to other.Esaie. xiii. Iacob. ii. He is ye lawer, which wyl expulse the darke¦nesses of mennes tradicions, that fyghte with his infallible verite, & brynge in the glorious lyght of his moost holye worde. To be shorte, he wyll detecte and ouerthrowe all the

Idols, that obscure his glory, and set vp his blyssed name to be pray¦sed and magnyefyed for euer and euer. So be it.
Of this thynge haue we experi∣ence euen at this tyme, in ye whiche that LORDE of puissāce hath moost puissantly by his derely beloued ser¦uant Henry our moost vertuous & godlye Kynge, subuerted, topledde downe, and ouerthrowne a great parte of Antechristes kyngedome, so that by his diuine polecy & god∣lye enterpryse,Apoca. xvii. that great whore of Babylon, the mother of all whore dome & abhominacions of the erth, hath loste her chefe glory & renome, & is nowe become so vile, that she is euen made the habitacion of diuel∣les, & the holde of all fowle spirites & a cage of all vncleane & hatefull byrdes.Apoca. xviii So that no man nowe wyl once by ony of her mrchaundyse. And wythoute doubte the tyme is

at hande,Esaie. xii. Iere. xv. Apoca. xiiii. Psal. cxiiii▪ Psal. cxvi. that Babylon shall haue such a faull, that it shall not be able after this at onye tyme to be repa∣red. For the mouthe of the LORDE hath spoken it, whiche is faythfull in all his wordes, & whose trueth a∣bydeth for euer & euer. Neyther cā this prophecy of Christ be made fru¦strate by ony humayne polecy:Math. xv. Eue¦ry plante, that my heauenly father hath not planted, shall be plucked vp by ye rootes. Who reioysethe not to heare these thinges? yea who tri¦umpheth not to se thē? Blyssed are we to whome it hath chaunsed not only to heare these thinges ioyeful¦ly, but also to se them pleasauntly, & which hereafter shall vndoubted∣ly se such thynges mo, as shall may be able to prouoke onye faythefull herte seriouslye to reioyse. Uerelye althoughe we be occasioned dyuers wayes to gyue God immortal thā¦kes for dyuers gyftes, yet me thīke

we are most highly boūd to be thāke¦full for ye reuciō of his moste holy worde in these our dayes. And wo worth them, that be vnthanckefull in this behalfe, excepte they repent and amende.
iii. Reg. iii. ii. Para. ix.The Scriptures shewe howe yt in ye tyme of kyng Salomon, there was so great plēte of syluer at Ie∣rusalem, as there was of stones in the stretes. What carnall manne would not haue delyghted to inha∣bite hymselfe there? Yet verely in my iudgement we do farre excell ye glorious abundans of Salomon & all hys in mundane treasures, to whome it is gyuen not only to flo∣rysh with worldely goodes, but also wyth the incomparable treasures of the spirite. So that our condici¦on at this present doth not a lytle excede & passe the state of those Is∣raelites, which lyued so gloriously vnder the empyre and dominion of

Salomon. Certes as concernynge my selfe, let God be but a lytle mer¦cifull vnto me, yf I had not rather chose to lyue vnder this our moost Christen kynge withe that lytle no¦thinge that I haue, & to enioye the benefyte of Goddes worde, than to lie vnder Salomō, if he were now alyue, & there to abunde with all af¦fluence & plente of all worldly ryt∣ches. I am sufficiētly rytch, so lōge as I haue ye rytches of Gods word wt me. And I doubte not, but that of this opinion are so many as ten∣der the glory of God & the helthe of theyr owne soules. Nowe seynge ye this incōparable treasure & inesti∣mable benefite of Gods word, is so bounteously gyuen vnto vs, let vs all togyther consent wt one mynde to cōserue & mayntayne this moste precious Iewel, that we lose it not hereafter thorowe our owne necli∣gence. Let vs not hynder thē that

go about to repare & byld agen th Tēple of our LORD god, but rather praye for thē, that they maye hau prosperous successe, & brynge theyr labours to a fortunate end. Yea let vs euery one helpe to ye edificacion & byldyng of gods house. If we can not make the waulles, yet lette vs fetche morter & stones to the Ma∣sōnes for to make it wt. Let vs fur∣ther the buyldynge so muche as we maye, and not hynder it by ony me¦anes, vnlesse we be cursed of God. Let vs cast our mony togyther eue¦rye man for hys porcion to the ma∣kinge of this glorious temple, that the name of God may be praysed in it of the faythfull for euermore.Luke. xii. Yf we be not able with the rytche man to cast great abūdans of goodes in to the treasure house, yet let vs wt the poore widowe of the Gospell at the leest gyue two minutes, & God wyll surely approue & accepte oure

good wyll. Only let vs not hynder the workemāshyp of it, but further it to the vttermoost of oure power, so shall the blessyng of God be amōg vs,Esaie. xii. & we shall dwell safely in his ho∣ly mountayne, & the earthe shall be replenisshed with the knowledge of the LORDE, euē as the water of the sea that ouerfloweth the londe.
And although there maye be in∣uented diuers wayes to reedifye & bylde agayne this house of ye LORD, yet me thynke to speake generally, the nexte & moost redy waye to fur¦ther it, & to brynge it vnto a good ende, is to lyue vertuously, & euery man studiously to do that vnto the which God hath called hym.i. Cor. vii. For wt out doubte this oure dissolute & re∣misse manner of lyuynge hathe hy∣therto very much hyndred the byl∣ynge of Gods temple, I wyll not saye, that it hath driuen awaye ma∣ny, which woulde haue ben strennu¦ous

and valeante labourers in the worke of the LORDE, if our sluggish¦nes had not perswaded the contra∣ry. In cōsideraciō wherof, althoghe I am no fytte person to be a worke man in this behalfe, yet verely I de¦syre with all my herte that this byl¦dynge of the LORDES Temple may go forward, & I wyshe to the labou¦rers therof all prosperous & fortu∣nate thynges, that they may bring theyr worke vnto a glorious & ioye¦full ende. And although I can not greatly further theyr godly labou∣res, yet wyll I not hynder thē, but helpe them to the vttermoste of my possebilite in al thynges. Let other brynge Ceder trees, syluer, Golde, Pearle & precious stones vnto the byldynge & garnysshynge of this tē¦ple, I wyll agayne for my parte ga¦ther stones, fetche the tymber, and make the morter or do suche smal thynges, as my lytle strēgthes shal

be able to beare and suffer.
And that all men maye haue an experimēt of my good wyll toward the byldynge of this temple,Eccle. xiiii. Esaie. xi. i Pet. i. Iob. v. Iacob. i. behold at this tyme I brynge forth a nose¦gaye for to adourne & garnyshe the Temple wt all, hauyng in it. v. flou¦res, yea & those not such as wyl wy ther awaye at ye heate of the Sōne but rather such as the beauty wher¦of wyll neuer decaye, nor be obscu∣red with the fearce asperite of onye tempest. The fyrst floure is called, vnfayned Humilite. The seconde,☜ pure innocency, The thyrd, fayth¦ful obedience. The fourth, Redy as∣sistence. The fyfte, Chri sten Chari∣te. These be such floures, as who so euer smelleth well vnto them, and replenyssheth his senses wt ye odori∣ferous sauoures of them, surely he shal ryght sone perceaue, that there can no flures be gathered, yt shall make more vnto the adournemente

of Gods Temple, than these afore∣sayd. For of the fyrst he shall smell y• ryght knowlege of hymselfe, which after the censure of all learned mē is the begynnynge of all wisdome, & learne to be humble, meke, & lowe¦ly, without the which how can ony man fortunately aspire & come vn∣to ony progresse or furtherance in vertues. Of the seconde, he shall sa∣uour howe he ought to behaue him selfe vnto God, that he maye walke innocently, as it becommeth hym. Of the thyrde he shal learne true o∣bedience towarde his Prynce. Of the fourth, he shall smell, what hys duety is towarde his christen bro∣ther. Of ye fyft, how al these thīges ought to be done. Cā ony thīge be foūd more precious for the garnys∣shyng of gods Tēple, thā thys nose¦gay which brīgeth to al ye faythful such delectable, swete, melfluous, & cōfortable sauours? Who so smel∣leth

well on this Nosegay, shall neyther offende hym selfe, nor God, nor the Kynges grace, nor yet his neyghe∣boure, but shall worke all thynges according to the wyll and pleasure both of God & mā. Uerely I would wysh it not only to be borne in the handes or bosoms of all christen mē but also to be prynted and fast roo¦ted in theyr hertes, so myghte they be sure to lyue in this worlde a qui¦et godly lyfe, & after the departure to enioye that glorye, whiche is im∣mortall. God graunt it maye come to passe.
This my Nosegaye gathered of me ī the space of thre dayes at such houres, as I coulde conuenientlye suffurate & steale awaye from ye in∣stitucion & teachynge of my Schol¦lers, I nowe offer and dedicate to youre ryghte worshypfull mayster∣shyp, as a testimony & memorial of my right harty good wyll towarde

you, moost instantly desyrynge you to accepte it with such good mynd, as you are alwayes accustumed of your naturall humanite and gētle∣nes to receaue the gyftes & presen∣tes of them which desyre frendly & wyssh well vnto you. The gyfte is lytle I confesse, & vnworthy youre boūteous liberalite shewed toward me at all tymes. No meruayle. For what shoulde an herbe bryng forth but floures, pleasaūt for the tyme, but sone perysshyng? Yet your Ba¦sille at this time hath broght forth to you such floures, as heuē & earth shal soner perysh, thā ye leest leafe of thē shal so much as ōce wither awai or loose the beaty therof. Wherof I do not doubte, but that this my ly tyll gyfte shall be acceptable vnto you, if not for the price of it, yet for the longe continuaunce of ye same, and so muche the more bycause at this tyme, you are partely occupi∣ed

in the adournynge and garnys∣shynge of that your new garden wt moost swete herbes & pleasant flou¦res. So that ye herbes of that your garden, & the floures of youre Ba∣sille put togyther, wyll vndoubted¦ly make goodly and swete sauours, the one for the body, the other both for body & soule, which thinge that LORDE myght graunt,Iacob. i. from whom descendeth euery good and perfecte gyfte.
God preserue youre good ma∣stershyp longe in helth, with the right worshypfull & vertuous Gētyl wo∣man your wye, and al your fa¦milye. So be it.
