




ROome for a royster; so thats
well sayd, itch a little further
for a good fellowe. Now haue
at you all my gaffers of the
rayling religion, tis J that
must take you a peg lower. J am sure you looke
for more worke, you shall haue wood enough
to cleaue, make your tongue the wedge, and
your head the beetle, Jle make such a splinter
runne into your wits, as shal make thē ranckle
till you become fooles. Nay, if you shoot bookes

like fooles bolts, Jle be so bold as to make your
iudgements quiuer with my thunderbolts. If
you meane to gather clowdes in the Common∣wealth,
to threaten tempests, for your flakes
of snowe weele pay you with stones of hayle; if
with an Easterlie winde you bring Catterpil∣lers
into the Church, with a Northerne wind
weele driue barrennes into your wits.
VVe care not for a Scottish mist, though it
wet vs to the skin, you shalbe sure your cocks∣combs
shall not be mist, but pearst to the skuls.
J professe rayling, and think it as good a cud∣gell
for a Martin, as a stone for a dogge, or a
whippe for an Ape, or poyson for a rat.
Yet find fault with no broad termes, for J
haue mesured yours with mine, & I find your
broader iust by the list. Say not my speaches
are light, for J haue weighed yours and mine,
and I finde yours lighter by twentie graines
than the allowance. For number you exceede,
for you haue thirtie ribauld words for my one,
and yet you beare a good spirit. J was loath so
to write as J haue done, but that J learnde,
that he that drinkes with cutters must not be

without his ale dagger; nor hee that buckles
with Martin, without his lauish termes.
VVho would currie an Asse with an Juo∣rie
combe? giue the beast thistles for prouen∣der.
J doo but yet angle with a silken flye, to
see whether Martins will nibble; and if J see
that, why then I haue wormes for the nonce,
and will giue them line enough like a trowte,
till they swallow both hooke and line, and then
Martin beware your gilles, for Jle make you
daunce at the poles end.
J knowe Martin will with a trice bestride
my shoulders. VVell, if he ride me, let the foole
sit fast, for my wit is verie kickish; which if he
spurre with his copper replie, when it bleedes,
it will all to be smeare their consciences.
Jf a Martin can play at chestes, as well as
his nephewe the ape, he shall knowe what it is
for a scaddle pawne, to crosse a Bishop in his
owne walke. Such dydoppers must be taken vp,
els theile not stick to check the king. Rip vp my
life, discipher my name, fill thy answer as full
of lies as of lines, swel like a toade, hisse like an
adder bite like a dog, & chatter like a monkey,

my pen is prepared and my minde; and if yee
chaunce to finde any worse words than you
brought, let them be put in your dads dictio∣narie.
And so farewell, and be hangd, and J
pray God ye fare no worse.

