


CHrist our Lorde and Sauiour, cōsidering what and how great carnall se∣curitie and fleshly quiet∣nes reigneth in mortall men of all ages,Colos. iii. yea, and that in them, that professe godlynesse, that is to saye: Christians, whiche by their professiō ar dead vnto the world, and haue their lyfe hydden with Christ in God, in somuche that they being oc∣cupied about worldlye and transitory thinges, which sone perish and come to naught, do vtterly neglecte the thinges that appertaine vnto the saluation of their soules: in many places of his holy Gospell admonisheth vs to watche and to make prouision for our latter ende, least we be found vnready whā we shall be called out of the worlde. In the Go∣spell of blessed Mathewe he hath these

words:Math. xxiiii▪ watch, for you know not what hour the Lord will come. Of this be ye sure, that if the good man of the house knew what hour the thief would come he would surely watche, and not suffer his house to be broken vp. Therfore be ye also ready. For in suche houre as ye thinke not, wil the sonne of man come. In S. Markes Gospell also he sayth. Watch, for ye know not whē the mai∣ster of the house wil come,Mark. xiii at euen or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing or in the dauning, least if he come sodenly, he finde you sleping. And that I say vn∣to you, I say vnto all. Watch▪ Yea take hede, watche and pray, for ye know not when the time is. Again in the Reue∣lation of blessed Iohn he sayth. Behold I come as a thiefe.Apoca. xvi. Blessed is he that watcheth and kepeth his garmentes, that he walke not naked, and men see his fylthines.Apoca. xxii. Item, Behold I come shortly, and my rewarde is with me, to geue euery man according as his dedes shall be.i. Thes. v▪ The holy Apostle S. Paule lykewyse exhorteth vs, that we sleepe not as other doo, but that we watche & be sober, nether that we fall into fleshly

quietnes, promysing our selues long lyfe, healthe and reste in this worlde, least soden destruction fall vpon vs.
For the day of the Lorde (sayth he) shall come euen as the thief in the night. Cer¦tes our mortall estate declareth euidēt∣ly, that we be so bound vnto death, that we are not certen of our lyfe not one houre. Out of hand may death oppres vs, for any certentie that we haue of the contrary. What thing is your lyfe, sayth S. Iames?Iacob. iiii. It is a vapour that appeareth for lyttle tyme, and then va∣nisheth away.Iob. ix. My dayes, saith Iob, are more swift then a runner, yea they are passed awaye as the shyppes that bee good vnder sayle, and as the Egle that flyeth vnto the pray. Agayne he saith: Man that is borne of woman, hath but short tyme to lyue, and is ful of mysery. He commeth vp and is cut downe lyke a floure.Iob. xiiii. He flyeth as it were a shadow and neuer continueth in one state. The Prophet also sayth:Esay. xl. All fleshe is grasse, and all the glory thereof is as the floure of the field. The grasse is withered, the flower falleth away: Euen so is the peo¦ple as grasse, when the breathe of the

Lord bloweth vpon them. Thus sewe the misery, vanitie and shortnes of our mortall life painted out before our eies and that these thynges are true, dayly experience proueth. Notwithstandinge such is our blindnes, fondnes and mad∣nes that we vtterly forget the vncerten¦tie of this our wretched and short lyfe and promyse our selues the florishyng yeares of Nestor,Gene. v. or the long lyfe of Me¦thuselah. We may right well be lyke∣ned to that vngodly richman, of whom we rede in the Gospel of Luke,Luke. xii▪ whiche made prouision for a great nomber of yeares, promising him selfe long to liue vpon the face of the earth, & forgetting him selfe to be mortall and bound vnto death. But when he thought least of death and was moste busily occupied in getting and gatheringe together the goodes of ye world, God sayd vnto him: thou foole, this night wil they fetch a∣way thy soul again frō thee. Then who∣se shal those thinges be, which thou hast prouided?Psal. xxxix. The Psalmograph saythe: He heapeth tresure vpon treasure, and yet knoweth he not for whome he ga∣thereth it. After this sort do we behaue

our selues at this day. We moyle and turmoyll our selues in studiyng & deui∣sing how we may come by the giftes of glassy fortune. We refuse no paynes, no laboures to become ritche and wel∣thy in worldly goodes. Yea so blynded are our heartes, that the nerer we ap∣proche vnto the end of our life, ye more studious, carefull & diligent are we to get the substaunce of this worlde. We remember not this saying of the holy Apostle.i. Tim. vi. Godlines is great rytches, if a man bee content with that he hath. For we brought nothing into ye world neither may we cary any thinge out. But when we haue fode and raiment,Psal. xxxix. let vs therwith be content. The holy scripturs calleth vs straungers and Pil¦grims in this worlde,i. Pet. ii. & declareth that we haue here no continuyng city,Heb. xiii. but we seke one to come. Notwithstanding as though ther were none other life af∣ter this, or els as though we should for euer here remaine and neuer departe, we trauaile about ye getting of world∣ly substaunce.Iere. viii. Al, as the Prophet saith, euen from the lowest vnto the hiest set their myndes on filthy lucre.Esay. lvi. They are

shameles dogges, that bee neuer satis∣fied. Hereto agreeth the saying of the Apostle,Philip. ii. all seke their owne auauntage and not that, whiche shuld set forth the glory of Iesus Christ. And as in coue∣tousnes, so lykewyse in all other abho∣minable sinnes do we moste wickedlye walke. And all thinges come to passe, because we remember not the short∣nesse of this lyfe and forget our latter end. This considered the wiseman right well, when he saith: Whatsoeuer thou takest in hand, remember thy end, and thou shalt neuer do amisse,Eccle. vii. Deut. xxxi Moses also saith, O that men would ones be wyse and vnderstande, and make prouision for their latter end. There is not a strō∣ger bit to brydle our carnall affectes, nor a better scholemaister to keepe vs in an order then the remembraunce of our latter end, then to remember that we shall not alway here remaine, yt we ar but straungers and pylgrims in this world, that we shall leaue behynde vs, whatsoeuer worldly substaūce we haue here, ether painfully gotten or carefully kept, that we shal die the death, that we shal appeare before the iudgement seat

of Christ and receaue accordinge to the workes whiche we haue doone in this lyfe, either euerlasting glory or perpe∣tuall payne. But these thinges seeke we not to remember, but rather to for∣get, and therfore fall we into all kynde of vngodlynes and dissolution of lyfe. And when the tyme cōmeth, that God visiteth vs with sickenes or otherwyse plageth vs for our euill behauour, then doo we not prepare our selues vnto the crosse, as we ought submitting our sel∣ues to the good pleasure of God, and beyng contented paciently and thanck∣fully to receaue what so euer is layde vpon vs at the appoyntment of God, but we rather murmur and grudge a∣gainst God, and with vnwillyng hartes suffer that louing visitation of God, almoste wishinge that there were no God to plage and punishe vs, but that we myght here liue continually and go forth to sinne frely & without punishe∣ment. And when death approcheth, & no remedy can be found against ye violence therof, then doo the vngodly & wicked liuers beholding the miserable face of their conscience, which presenteth vnto

them nothing but sin, ye wrath of God hel fyre, & euerlasting damnation, begin to despaire & strayght yeld them selues to the pleasure of Sathan to bee for e∣uer and euer tormēted in that lake that burneth with fire & brimston,Apoca. xxi. thē selues their soules and consciences consenting and assentinge thereunto. For what o∣ther end can be loked for of a wicked & vngodly lyfe? Is it to be thought, that he whiche thorow sinne hath serued the deuill all the tyme of his lyfe, can at his latter end loke for the enheritaunce of euerlasting glory, wherewith God re∣wardeth thē ye painfully labour to serue him in holynes and righteousnes al the dayes of their lyfe?i. Cor. ix. S. Paul saith. So run, that ye may obtayn, that is to say, so trayne your lyfe in all Godlynes and vertue to the vttermost of your power whyle ye lyue in this worlde, yt after ye haue finished your course here, ye may enioy ye glorious reward of eternal life. A corruptible crowne is not obtained without great pains taking, & shall we loke for an euerlasting crown by leding an vngodly and wanton lyfe?ii. Tim. ii. No man is crowned, sayth the apostle, except he

fighteth lawfully. In this world ther∣fore, wherein our life is nothing but a knighthod or warfar,Iob. vii. must we lawful∣ly, valeantly & mightely fight & striue a∣gainst our ennemies ye deuill, the world & the flesh, and by feruent and diligent prayer vnto God so triumphe ouer thē thorow the help of our graund captain Christ, yt we may haue a glorious spoill of our ennemies, & garnishe our selues with al kind of victorious & roial robes I meane, all good workes & godly ver∣tues. Wher such a life is led, there must a good end be, and euerlasting life may with a fre conscience and assured hope be loked for. And to bring this to passe. Who laboureth not to the vttermoste of his power, namely if he be of God, & loketh for a better and more blessed lyfe after this? How we shuld fight against our aduersaries and leade a good life in this world I haue declared aboundant∣ly heretofore in many of my bokes. In this treatise, whiche I haue nowe in hand, entitled (The Sickemans Salue) my mynd is to shew vnto the faithfull chri∣stians, how they ought to make proui∣sion for their latter end, that they may

depart in the faythe of Christ, and be of the nūber of those of whome it is writ∣ten. Blessed are the dead, whiche die in the Lord.Apoca. xiiii. Psal. cxvi Again. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his sainctes. For what shuld it profit a man to wyn all the worlde,Mat. xvi. if at the last he loseth his soule? Therefore in this my worke I haue declared first of all,The conten∣tes of this boke. how the faith∣full christians ought to behaue them selues paciently and thankefully in the tyme of syckenesse.
Secondly, howe they should vertu∣ously dispose their temporall goodes.
Thirdly, after what manner they ought to prepare them selues gladly & Godly to die.
Finally I haue enterlased many cō∣fortable exhortations vnto the sycke, and diuers godly & necessary prayers, some to be sayd of them that are sicke, & some of other for suche as are diseased.
This treatise, after that I had fini∣shed it, calling to remembraunce howe greatly I am bound to your right wor∣shipfull Maistership, considering also your most harty zeale and feruent affec¦tion toward the true and Christen reli∣gion

(all superstition and papistry layd asyde) I thought it my bounden dutie to sende vnto you as a testimonie of my good wyll and thankefull hart toward you, moste entirely desiryng you to ac∣cept and take in good part this my lyt∣tle gift, although much more base then it may seme in any part worthy to re∣compence the least poynt of your vn∣fayned frendship dyuers wayes hereto∣fore declared vnto me.
God preserue your right worshyp∣full Maistershyp, with the moste vertu∣ous Gentlewoman your wyfe, and all your godly chyl∣dren in continuall health and pro∣sperous feli∣citie. Amen.
