


IT hath bene a naturall instinct (right honourable and mine e∣speciall good Lorde) en∣graffed in noble perso∣nages hartes, much ap∣proued and confirmed al∣so by custome, for them to séeke frō time to time, by some meanes in their life, by the which, they after their death, might deliuer ouer their name to their posteritie: least otherwise with their body, their fame also altogether might perchaunce be buried. Vpon the which consideration we read many notable, and fa∣mous thinges to haue bene erected in time past of noble personages (hauing had wealth at will) in such sort, that not onely certain ruines of the same sumptuous workes builded so many hundred yeares past, doe still remaine, but also the most part of those princes the authors of thē, do continually by them dwell in our memoryes. As the Pyramides made at Memphis, or neare the famous Ri∣uer of Nilus, by ye great expences of the Kings of Egypt: the Tower called Pharia, made in the Iland of Pharos by King Ptolomee: the walles of Babylon, made or at the least réedified by Quéene Semiramis: Dianas Church

at Ephesus builded by all the noble persons of Asia: Mausolus Toome or Sepulcher, made by his wife Quéen of Caria: Colossus Solis placed at Rhodes, I remem∣ber not by what Princes charge, but made by the handes of Cares Lindius scholler to Lysippus: and the Image of Iupiter, made of Yuerye by the handes of the skilfull workeman Phydias. The which monumentes made of barbarous and heathen Princes to redéeme them selues from obliuion, deserued both for the magnificence, and perfecte workmanship of the same, to be accompled in those dayes as the 7. wonders of the world. Since the which time, an easier, readier, and lighter way, being also of more continuance then the former, hath ben found out, namely, Letters, which were first inuented by the Caldies and Egyptians, as we read, and augmented since by others, to our great benefite, and now last of all (no long time past) the same to haue bene committed to Printers Presses, to the greatest perfection of the same: men being first enforced to write their actes and monu∣mentes in beastes skinnes dryed, in barkes of trées, or otherwise perchaunce as vnreadily. By the which bene∣fite of Letters (now reduced into Print) we sée how ea∣sie a thing it is, and hath bene for noble persons, to liue for euer by the helpe of learned men. For the memorye of those two worthy and valiaunt Captaines Scipio and Hannibal had bene long before this present quite forgot∣ten, except Titus Liuius, or some such learned Historio∣grapher had written of them in time. And Alexander Magnus him selfe that great conquerour had nothing bene spoken of, had not Q. Curtius, or some other like by his learned stile reuiued the remembraunce of him, and called backe againe his doinges to his posteritie. For the which cause we sée commonly in all ages learned mē to be much made of by noble personages, as that rare paterne of learning Aristotle, to haue bene greatly ho∣noured of that former renowmed Monarche Alexander: who affirmed openly, that he was more bound to his

Maister Aristotle, then to King Philip his father, because the one had well framed his minde, the other onely his body. Many other like examples I could alledge at this present, if I knew not vnto whom I now wrote, or in what. For your honour being skilfull in histories, and so familiarly acquainted with the matter it selfe, that is in still intertaining learned men with all courtesie, I should seeme to light a candle at noone tyde, to put you in remembrance of the one, or to exhort you to do the other, dayly being accustomed to performe the same. Crassus sayth in Tullies first booke, De Oratore: that a Lawyers house is the Oracle of the whole Citie. But I can iustly witnesse, that for these 5. yeares last past, since my re∣turne from my trauell beyond the seas, that your Lord∣ships lodging in the Court (where I through your vnde∣serued goodnesse to my great comfort do dayly frequent) hath bene a continuall receptacle or harbour for all lear∣ned men comming from both the eyes of this Realme, Cambridge, and Oxforde (of the which Vniuersitie your Lordship is Chauncellor) to their great satisfaction of minde, and ready dispatch of their sutes. Especially for Preachers and Ministers of true Religion: of the which you haue bene from time to time not onely a great fa∣uourer, but an earnest furtherer, and protector: so that these two nurseries of learning (in one of the which I haue before this spent part of my time, that I may speake boldly what I thinke) should wrong your honour great∣ly, and much forget them selues, if by all meanes possi∣ble they should not héerafter (as at this present to their small powers many well learned gentlemē of them do) labour and trauell in shewing of them selues thankfull, to reuerence and honour your Lordship, and honest their owne names: whose studies certainly would sodainly decay and fall flat, if they were not helde vp by such noble proppes, and had not some sure anckerholdes in their di∣stresse to leane vnto. How ready dayly your trauell is, and hath long bene besides to benefite all other persons,

in whom any sparke of vertue or honestie remaineth, I néede not labour to expresse, the world knowing already the same. But whosoeuer they be, that in all their life time haue an especiall care by all meanes to profite as many as they be able and hurt none, do not onely a lau∣dable acte, but lead a perfecte and very godly life. Wher∣upon Strabo affirmeth this most truely to be spoken of them: Mortales tum demum Deos imitari, cum be∣nifici fuerint. Great commendation vndoubtedly it bringeth to any noble personage, that as the Moone, that light and brightnes which she receaueth of the Sunne, is wont presently to spread abroad vpō the face of the earth, to the refreshing and comforting of all inferiour and na∣turall thinges bearing life: so for him, to bestow all that fauour and credite, which he hath gotten at the Princes handes, to the helpe and reliefe of the worthy and néedy. Great is the force (my right honourable Lorde) of true Vertue, which causeth them as Tully writeth in his booke De Amicitia, to be loued and honoured oft of those per∣sons, which neuer sawe them. Whereof I neuer had better proofe (I take God and mine owne conscience to witnesse, the which I declared also to certaine of my frendes as soone as I returned) then at my last being at Constantinople, in the yeare of our Lord. 1564. wher∣as I ofte resorting (as occasion serued) to the right honou∣rable Christian Ambassadors, whilest I made my abode there (namely vnto Monseur Antonio Petrimol, léegger there for the King of Fraunce, Sig. M. Ʋictor Bragadino, for the Segniorye of Venice, Sig. Lorenzo Giustiniano, for the state of Scio, or Chios, and Sig. Albertacio delli Alberti, for the Duke of Florence) heard them often re∣port and speake very honourably of your Lordship, part∣ly for your other good inclinations of nature, but especial∣ly for your liberalitie, and courteous intreating of diuers of their frendes and countreymen, which vpon sundry oc∣casions had bene here in this our Realme. So that to con∣clude, all men iustly fauour your honourable dealinges

and desertes: and I for my part haue reuerenced and ho∣noured the same euermore both here at home, & elswhere abroad, wishing often to haue had some iust occasion to pay part of that in good will, which my slender abilitie wil neuer suffer me fully to discharge. For vnto whō should I sooner present any thing any way, especially cōcerning matters done abroad, then vnto your Lordship, by whom I was much cherished abroad in my trauell, and main∣tained since my returne here at home? For yt which cause I haue enterprised (hoping greatly of your Lordships fa∣uour herein) to clothe and set forth a few Italian Newes in our Englishe attyre, being first moued therunto by the right worshipfull Maister D. Wilson Maister of her Maie∣sties Requests, your honors assured trusty frend, a great and painfull furtherer of learning, whom I, and many o∣ther for diuers respectes ought to reuerence: who remem∣bring that I had bene at Cyprus, was willing that my penne should trauell about the Christian & Turkishe af∣fayres, which there lately haue happened: perswading him selfe, that somewhat therby I might benefite this our natiue coūtrey. Against whose reasonable motion I could not greatly wrastle, hazarding rather my slender skill in attempting & perfourming this his requested taske, then he through my refusall thereof should séeme to want any iotte of my good will. In offering vp the which newes, al∣though I shall present no new thing to your honour, be∣cause you are so well acquainted with ye Italian copy, as I know: yet I trust your Lordship will not mislike, that the same which is both pleasant to read, and so necessary to be knowen for diuers of our Captaines and other our countreymen, which are ignoraunt in the Italian toung, may thus now shewe it selfe abroad, couered vnder the wing of your Lordships protection. Certainly it moueth me much to remēber ye losse of those 3. notable Ilands, to the great discomfort of all Christendome, to those Hellish Turkes, Horseleches of Christiā bloud: namely Rhodes beséeged on S. Iohn Baptist day, and taken on S. Iohns

day the Euangelist, being the 27. of December. 1522. Scio or Chios being lost since my being there, taken of Piali Bassà with 80. Gallies, the 17. of Aprill. 1566. And now last of all not onely Famagosta the chéefe holde and fortresse in Cyprus to haue bene lost of the Veneti∣ans the 15. of August last past. 1571. (the chéefe Gouer∣nours and Captaines of them being hewen in sunder by the commaundement of that tyraunt Mustafà Bassà) but all the whole Iland also to be conquered by those cruell Turkes, auncient professed enemies to all Christian Re∣ligion. In the which euill successe (comming to vs as I take it for our offences) as I lament the generall losse: so I am surely pensiue to vnderstand by this too true a report of ye vile death of 2. particular noble gentlemē of Venice, Sig. M. Lorenzo Tiepolo, & Sig. M. Giouanni Antonio Que∣rini: of both ye which I in my trauel was very courteously vsed, the former of them being then (as now also he was in this ouerthrow) Gouernour of Baffo in Cyprus, the other Captaine of one of ye Castels at Corsyra in Grece, now called Corfu. But thinges past, are past amend∣ment, and they could neuer die more honourably, then in the defence of their coūtrey. Besides that the late blowes, which the Turkes haue receaued since this their fury, in token of Gods wrath against thē, much comforteth euery Christian hart. Moreouer this vniforme preparation which is certainly concluded, and forthwith looked for, by very many Christian Princes (would God by all gene∣rally) against these barborous Mahometistes: whose cru∣eltie and beastly behauour I partly know, and am able to iudge of, hauing bene in Turkye amongest them more then 8. monethes together. Whose vnfaythfulnes also and breach of promisse, as the Venetians manly courage in defence of them selues, and their fortresse, your honour may easily read in this short treatise and small handfull of leaues, I hauing set downe also a short description of the Iland of Cyprus, for the better vnderstanding of the whole matter. The which I not onely most humbly be∣séeche

your honour now fauourably to accept as an earnest penny of more to come, and of my present good will: but with your accustomed goodnesse towardes me, to defend the same against such persons, whose tounges too readily role sometime against other mens painfull trauells, perswading them selues to purchase the sooner some credite of learning with the ruder sort, by cōtroling and ouerdaintie sifting of other mens laboured taskes. For I know in all ages to be found as well Basiliskes, as Elephantes. Thus nothing doubting of your readye ayde herein, as I assuredly trust of your honours fauou∣rable acceptation of this my poore present, wishing long life with the encrease of Gods holy spirite to your Lordship and to all your most honourable fa∣milie (vnto whom I haue wholy dedica∣ted my selfe by mine owne choise and election for euer) I, crauing pardon for my former bold∣nesse, most humbly thus take my leaue.
From Lambheth the 23. of March. An. 1572.

