



AS in the Romane triumphes, the worthy Conque∣rour gloriously ascending vnto the Capitoll, did shew his magnificence by giuing ample gifts vnto the people: euen so (most reuerend father) our victorious Sauiour and noble Redeemer, hauing conquered Hell, Death, Diuell and damnation, Triumphantly ascending to the Capitoll of Hea∣uen, did shew his vnspeakeable bountie in giuing admirable and incommparable gifts vnto men,Ephes. 4. 8. 11. That is, some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Euangelists, some Pastours and Teachers. For what hath the Church of God of so precious account, as the holy ministery of the Word and Sacraments, whereby CHRIST IESVS with all his blessings is reuealed and applied to the soule and conscience? It may well be resembled to the Riuers of Paradise, which did water and fructifie the Gar∣denGen. 2. 10. of God: to the Golden pipes, whereby the two Oliue branches replenishedZach. 4. 2, 3. the seuen Lampes in the golden Candlesticke: to the Crowne (which the woman in the Reuelation cloathed with the Sunne, and hauing the Moone vnder herReuel. 12. 1. feete, had vpon her head) being richly beset, not with stones, but with Starres.
Which holy function flowing from CHRIST, as from the fountaine to his

blessed Apostles, was by thē deriued to posterity. But as the water which neere the spring is cleare and chrystalline, in further passages may be polluted: so in processe of time, (by the subtiltie of Satan) the Ministery of the Word and Sa∣craments being the ordinance of God was mingled with sacrifising and other humane inuentions. Yet such was the goodnesse of God, that euen in the dark∣nes of Poperie▪ as Baptisme, so the Ministeriall function (notwithstanding the abominations cleauing thereunto) was wonderfully preserued; for the Church of Rome, by Gods speciall prouidence, in her Ordination of Priests, reteined such Euangelicall words, as in their true and natiue sense, include a2. Cor. 5. 18. 19. ghostly Ministeriall power to forgiue sinnes, by the Ministery of Reconcilia∣tion, consisting in the due administration of the Word and Sacraments. So remission of sinnes is ascribed to the Minister, as to Gods instrument in effe∣cting it, and Ambassadour in pronouncing it. Wherefore in that they haue au∣thority to forgiue sinnes, they haue also authority to vse the meanes thereof, that is the Word and Sacraments. Thus the Church of Rome gaue power to her Priests to teach the truth, although it did not reueale the truth vnto them.
Now when it pleased him, which causeth the Light to shine out of darke∣nesse, in the riches of his Mercie, to remember his distressed Church, those blessed instruments which hee first vsed in the Reformation, were such as had receiued their Calling corruptly in the Church of Rome: But when their eyes were opened, they disclaimed the sacrifising abomination, and other impurities, which by the iniquitie of the time were incorporated into their calling. Thus the pollution of Poperie (by the Grace of God) was drained and drawn away▪ & the Ministeriall function restored to the original beautie.
And here let vs admire and magnifie the Mercy of God, who did not forget this remote Iland situate in a corner of the world, but did most graciously shine vpon it with his Golden beames from the Sphere of Heauen▪ For whereas in other Countreys the Bishops which should be starres and Angels of the Church, did resist the Reformation, and persecuted such as sought it; It pleased God that in England, among other Bishops, Archbishop Cranmer, the chiefest Prelate of the Kingdome, was Gods chiefest instrument to restore the Gospel, which afterward he sealed with his blood; The euent whereof was, That where∣as other Reformed Churches were constrained by necessity to admit extraordi∣nary fathers, That is, to receiue Ordination from Presbyters, which are but in∣ferior Ministers, rather then to suffer the Fabrick of the Lord IESVS to be dis∣solued: the Church of England had alwayes Bishops to conferre sacred Orders, according to the ordinary and most warrantable custome of the Church of CHRIST. And although in Queene Maries time, fiue blessed Bishops were burned to ashes, yet God reserued to himselfe a number, which being then for∣ced

to take the wings of the Doue, and fly beyond the Seas, or to hide themselues in the clefts of the rocke; when the tempest was ouerblowne, the cloudes cleared, and the Sunne of Righteousnes began to display himselfe in the happy raigne of Queene Elizabeth, returned againe, clapped their wings for ioy, praised God, preached the Gospel, and with holy imposition of hands, ordained Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons in the Church of England.
These are the Ordinations which reprochfull Papists doe most traduce and slander, as though they were no Ordinations at all, but onely Nullities; thence perswading their Proselytes, That our present Ministers are no Ministers, but meerely Lay-men, and thereupon inferring that wee haue no Church, no sal∣uation. In which point some Popish Recusants haue beene so confident, that they haue professed, That if we could iustifie our Calling, they would come to our Churches, and bee of our Religion. The consideration whereof (most Re∣uerend father) gaue me occasion to made into this Controuersie, being desirous, next the assurance of mine owne saluation, as I am a Christian, to bee fully and clearely assured of my Calling, as I am a Minister. In prosecuting whereof, I did euidently find, That their chiefest Obiections are nothing but slanders, confutable by Authenticall monuments of publique Record. Whereupon I wished, from the bottome of my heart, That some learned man would haue vouchsafed for the glory of God, and the good of the Church, to scatter these Popish mistes, and to set the Trueth in the cleare light.
A worke in my opinion very important; First in respect of vs of the Mi∣nisterie; and secondly in regard of the people committed to our charge. For how chearefully, and with what ioy of heart may we preach▪ and they heare vs, when the lawfulnesse of our Calling is made manifest to all men? Thirdly, If any haue formerly made scruple to enter our Orders, out of ignorance, how these odi∣ous and scandalous imputations blazed in Popish Bookes might bee truely an∣swered, and the point soundly cleared by Record, it is verely to bee ho∣ped, That all such shall receiue singular comfort, when they see our Calling iu∣stified not onely in it selfe, as the true Ministerie of the Gospel, but also in re∣gard of the deriuation to vs by such Bishops, and in such maner as is most cor∣respondent to the sacred Scripture, and the practise of Primitiue Antiquitie. And if any vpon this surmise bee fallen away to our aduersaries, who know∣eth what effect God may worke in them, when they shall plainely perceiue how they haue bene deluded with Popish stratagemes? Or who can tell whether this may bee a gracious meanes to stay others from yeelding to the inticements of subtill serpents? Finally, the defence of innocencie in a matter of so high a nature, must needes reioyce the hearts of the godly, when Popish polititi∣ans shall bee forced to hide their faces for shame, and confusion. These mo∣tiues

induced mee to wish, that some great Master in our Israel would haue vn∣dertaken this eminent Argument, which now (the Diuine prouidence so dispo∣sing) is befallen vnto me, One of the children of the Prophets.
Which my labours concerning the Ordination of the Pastours of En∣gland, to whom should I rather present, then to your Grace, whom God (by the meanes of a most prudent and Religious Soueraigne,) hath to the sin∣gular comfort of all that sincerely loue the Gospel, aduanced to bee the chiefe Pastour, and chiefe Ordainer in the Church of England? Especially, seeing I proceeded in this Argument with your graces fatherly direction, and incou∣ragement. Now the Lord so direct and sanctifie your endeuours, That as the Rod of Aaron did bud and blossome, and bring foorth ripe Almonds: soNum. 17. 8. the Church and Ministerie of England by the meanes of your Grace, as of Gods blessed instrument, may prosper, flourish and bring foorth fruits of Righteousnesse to the glory of God, and the comfort of all true Christian hearts.

