



THe loue and dutie which I owe to this Church of England (most reuerend Father) haue put into my hand this Oliue branch, that is an exhortation to holy obedience, and peace∣able resolutions, which al∣waies haue beene the crowne and glorie of a Chri∣stian. For when I pondered with my selfe how some of the Ministerie stand vnresolued, and that (as I take it) because they doe not duly consider the na∣ture of things indifferent, and the dutie of a subiect to his Soueraigne; I must confesse that my bowels of compassion were mooued, and the fire of affection was kindled within me. And therefore although many learned and iudicious men haue richly and

plentifully handled this argument, yet in commise∣ration of those my brethren, I also haue aduentured to cast my poore mite into the treasurie, hoping that as they walke amongst the fruitfull trees, they will not disdaine to pull a little berrie from the lowest shrub. The principall marke I shoote at, is to doe my ende∣uour to settle the tender and trembling consciences of those which are not wedded to their owne conceits, but haue bene carried away rather of weaknesse then of wilfulnesse, that such of them as it shall please the Lord, may be reduced to the Tabernacles of peace, and follow the trueth in loue. For alas who can but lament to see so many spend their short and precious time, in such scandalous prosecution of ciuill conten∣tions, and some of them not altogether vnlike to Platoes Euthyphro, who in his inconsiderate Plato in Euthyphr. course went in all haste to accuse his own father? But this Church (God be thanked) neuer wanted a So∣crates to encounter and conuince them, and make manifest to the world that they erred by misconstru∣ction and vnaduised zeale. O how much better had it beene to haue continued their labours in the Lords vineyard, and by bending their vnited forces against Babylon, to haue fought the Lords battails, to the comfort of the godly, who then might haue celebrated their triumph, erected their trophae, and decked their

victorious heads with lawreall garlands? O what a griefe ought this to be to their soules; so to oppose themselues against such a learned and religious Church, and so vnreuerently to traduce that holie Booke of Common Prayer, a worke of so great and admirable excellencie? concerning which, I may tru∣ly affirme, that it hath beene cut vp like an anato∣mie, euery vaine of it hath beene opened, euerie cor∣ner searched, euery rubricke ransacked, not a word but hath beene weighed in the ballance, not a syllable but hath bene sifted to the vttermost: and yet for all this like to the bridge of Caesar, the more it is op∣pugned Caes. de bello Gall. lib. 4. the stronger it stands. The ceremonies wher∣of may aptly be resembled to the altar erected by the tribe of Reuben, Gad, and the halfe tribe of Ma∣nasses, Ioshua 22. vpon the passages of Iordan, at which the rest of the tribes were grieuously offended, imagining that it had beene for sacrifice: But when they were truely informed that it was onely for a memoriall that they had a part in the God of Israel, they were well content, they blessed God, and Phinehas said: This day we perceiue the Lord is among vs, Vers. 31. because you haue not done this trespasse. In like maner, some of our brethren haue beene offended at our ceremonies, vpon an erroneous imagination of Poperie and superstition; but the Church of England

hath often manifested her innocencie, and cleared herselfe of those imputations. And therefore we hope that one day their eies being opened, and their soules satisfied, they will with the Princes of Israel blesse God, and say with Phinehas, This day we per∣ceiue that the Lord is among vs, because you haue not done this trespasse. For the fur∣therance whereof, I doe in all humilitie present this Oliue branch vnto your Grace, whose eminent wise∣dome, and godly care in suppressing innouations, and preseruing the well setled state of this flourishing Church, is most apparent. And therefore as God hath directed the heart of our religious Souereigne, to esta∣blish you the chiefe Pastor and Father of our Church, so I beseech the Almightie to vouchsafe this fruit to your labours, that your Grace may see the weake re∣solued, the wilfull relented, the wandring reduced, and all of them returned to the bosome of the Church, like the Doue to the Arke, with leaues of Oliue in their mouths, in token that all gall and bitternesse being laid aside, the swelling flouds of discord are asswaged.

