



IT is written in histories (Right Wor∣shipfull) that the sonnes of Seth and Seneca, or some other zealous Phi∣losophers, being desirous to leaue some thing woorth memorie vnto their posterities. Did make two pil∣lars, one of brasse, and another of earth, wherein were grauen the principles of the seuen sciences, to the end their successours should vnder∣stand the good wils of their predecessours: whereby they did set forth and shew all such good knowledge and learning, as they had found out in their time, to the furtherance of their common wealth. So likewise now, things necessarie for the same, ought not to bee deferd, nor lightly regarded, or forgotten. And wher∣as the delights of people are of diuers kinds, the same is perceiued by their doings: But as touching their delights, those ought chiefely to be regarded which profit most the common wealth. As (among the rest) the gouernment and preseruation of cattell, and such like: wherein (for lacke of knowledge) oft times the poore man looseth his beast. Also I haue knowne that the diseased cattell, of wealthie yeomen, and other poore men sometimes haue all perished, whereby the whole parisheshaue bene impouerished therby: which thing hath bene a great losse vnto such townes, and also hinderances vnto the common wealth. Marcus Tullius Cicero, was euer desirous to further his coun∣trie and common wealth, and said, that daie was euill spent, that he did not therein do good, to his common wealth: I would it were so now. Euen so likewise our

predecessours, Aristotle, Virgill, Plato, and many other in giuing vs examples therein, haue left immortall fame behind them in writing, through the good zeale and loue they had to their countrie and common wealth. Which thing likewise (Right worshipfull) hath moued me of long time to gather and put in writing the doings of diuers and sundrie persons, as wel stran∣gers as of our owne countrie men, to shew the helpes for most diseases in cattell. And for as much as I am enformed your worship is desirous to know and vn∣derstand of the gouernment of cattell, and of the fat∣ting of Oxen, to the intent to shewe the good will I beare to further therein, I thought good to set forth the practises of many men, how to helpe cattell disea∣sed: which thing ought not to be kept secret for the lucar of a few, but rather I do communicate this my labour to him that hath delight therein. If anie thinke not well hereof, or despise this my trauell, I will frend∣ly desire them with these wordes: Quod meliora nosti, candidus imparti si non, his vtere mecum. VVhich is: If you know anie better how to mend it, of your courtesie impart it, if not, take part of this with me. Thus I leaue to trouble your worship anie further, desiring you to beare with this my plaine and rude stile, and to be the defender thereof in print, and in so doing, I shal thinke my trauell well bestowed, my paines much lightned, and my good will well recompenced.
FINIS.
