



WOrthie Gentlemen (omitting all elabo∣rated Eloquence, which oftentimes is vsed as a varnish, to couer vnprofitable labours; As cunning Goldsmithes doe en∣rich their basest Sil∣uer, when they Gilt it with their purest Gold) J purpose to render to you an accompt of two rea∣sons, which induced me to take this paine, and to publish this worke.
1. Jt is common among Phisitions; That though profound Learning, and frequent Expe∣rience, haue furnished them with abundant skill, in their Honourable profession: yet they doe still

striue to make their knowledge more perfect, in the discouerie of the imperfections of other mens bodies, then of their owne: Jn like sort it is the common custome of our times; that many hopefull Gentlemen (whom Nature and Arts haue beau∣tified, with the rich treasures of their bountie) do endeauour to be more exact and refined, in know∣ing the Religion, Lawes, Gouernment, Maners, Strength, and Sites of forraine Countries, then of that Kingdome wherein themselues were borne.
But as that man is wise in vaine, who is not wise vnto himselfe; So it is a simple grace (nay to speake plainly, it is a foule disgrace) to a Gentle∣man (especially to such a one, as hath, or doth in∣tend to spend much time abroad to know the fashi∣ons of forraine Nations) to be ignorant in the State of his owne Countrie at home. The Histo∣rie of which, affordeth as much varietie and pro∣fitable instruction, to captiuate the Readers de∣light in the perusall, as the fairest Pictures doe contentment, when with their artificiall beauties, they doe allure mens eyes to looke and to gaze vp∣on them.
To this end therefore, that hencefoorth such worthy Gentlemen as are purposed, in long tra∣ueling, to enlarge their experience, by the view of

foraine Countries, may first be furnished with a conuenient knowledge of their owne; J vnder∣tooke this labour, and doe present it vnto you, with this my first reason which induced me thereunto.
2. The second reason of my so doing, sprin∣geth out of mine owne conceit; which (as J con∣iecture) deceiues me not. For, in regard that the Histories of this Kingdome, are frequently in∣terrupted, yea blemished, by too too many inter∣uening Occurrences, and by a multitude of ex∣trauagant Obseruations (which doe much differ from the true Method, and Nature, of a well digested and composed Chronicle; and thereby doe extend it into a needlesse and an vnprofita∣ble length) J am resolued that the Readers ca∣pacitie (to obserue and to remember) is much weakned thereby: And that many yong Gentle∣men, who doe egerly striue to attaine to much knowledge in a short time, doe rather bend their Studies and their courses, to reade ouer the more narrowly contracted Histories of other Countries, then the voluminous Discourses of their owne.
Wherefore to inlighten their knowledge much, by reading this little; J haue thrust forth into the World this short Historie, of the Raignes, Deeds, and Actions, of twentie of our English Kings; which J will neither praise, least J

wrong it by mine owne commendation; nor dis∣praise, least you (beleeuing mee on my word) should thinke your time ill spent, to read what I haue written.
J know that such as are worthily descended, or who by learning are made worthy, will not only winke at some imperfections, because some know∣ledge is to be gained by the rest: but will also take in good part the presentment of a small gift; if it be deliuered with a friendly hand. To such only, and to none other (which are you) doe J dedicate these my labors: Being confidently assured, that they cannot want their expected reward, which is nothing, but your kinde acceptance, and grace∣full loue.
Fare you well, from my house in Exeter the twentieth of Ianuarie. 1615.

