


IN the ordinary exercise of my
ministery among you, when I
came to speak of the ninth Cō∣mandement,
the first thing that
I met with to bee considered,
was the matter of Truth and Lying. And con∣sidering
hereof, I found two sorts of Lyes
frequent among men: the one, an open and
professed Lye; and the other, a cunning and
artificiall Lye. The former was defended by
the Priscillianists, an old kinde of Heretikes: &
the latter is now defended by the Romanists,
a latter sort of false Prophets. Both of them are
odious to God, who is honoured by Truth;
and pernicious to the societie of men, which
is vpheld by Truth: but the latter is the more

dangerous, because vnder a colour of Truth it
beguileth simple soules, who are otherwise e∣nemies
to Lying. The consideration heereof,
made me to enquire a little further into this
Arte; which the fauourers therof haue sought
to conceile, by calling it by a new name. For
beeing ashamed of the name of Lying, they
haue christened it by the name of Equiuoca∣ting:
a name as vnknowne in this meaning,
as the Arte it selfe was vnheard of before these
latter dayes. The mystery and iuggling tricks
of which deuice, I did then and vpon that oc∣casion,
in part discouer vnto you: but briefely
and plainely, the time, and place, and occasion
not admitting of any long or Schoole-like
discourse. But since considering, that together
with the increase of false Prophets in this
Kingdome, this Arte of falsehood hath aboun∣ded
also: I thought it a part of my duty, (God
hauing pleased to place mee as a Watch-man
ouer your Soules) to giue you a fresh warning
of this danger, and that in a more ample and
large discourse, then formerly I had done, and
in such a maner and sort, that you might haue
something lying by you, that might aduertise
you of this dangerous deceit, when I could

not haue opportunity to speak vnto you our of
the Pulpit. And this I was moued to vnat this
time the rather; because I haue of late obserued,
that these artificiall Lyers (among their other
deuices and forgeries, which vpon confidence
of this Arte, they take liberty to vse without re∣morse)
doe instill into the minds of their cre∣dulous
followers, an opinion; and doe labour
to spread abroad among others a suspition,
that among our Learned men, many in heart
are of their Church, howsoeuer for the worlds
sake they dissemble their opinion: and that
there are a good number among vs of the
Clergie, who are better perswaded of their Re∣ligion,
then of our own. Doctor Sheldon, a man
well acquainted with their dealings, as ha∣uing
liued in their bosome, and taken the Or∣ders
of Priesthood in their Church, doth
write, thatSheldon of the mira∣les of Anti∣christ, ca. 4. pag. 52. whilest hee fed on Romes huskes, hee
often heard of many grieuous imputations laied
vpon some of the greatest Clerkes in the Church
of England, as though in heart they were theirs,
which he then beleeued to be true, as others did;
but since hath found to be much otherwise. And
my selfe haue met with some, (which perswa∣deth
me, that they abuse others in this kind,

beside our greatest Clerkes) who haue more
then intimated to my selfe, that I knew that
which might iustifie their cause, if I would
speake it. Which might well put mee into a
muse, what had euer slipped frō me, why they
should be perswaded that I had such an opini∣on
of their Church: sauing that I considered,
that this might well be one of the Iesuires e∣quiuocating
deuices, to instill that opinion cō∣cerning
vs, into their Disciples minds, that so
they might gaine more credit to their cause.
Vpon which occasion, entring a more serious
cōsideration of the point, I perceiued, that be∣sides
this Arte, they vse other deuices also, for
this purpose, which I thought good, for your
better caution and safety, briefely to relate
in this place.
First then, if they meete with any of our
Clergie, which are of weake braine, and vnset∣tled
resolution, (as it is possible, wee may haue
some such as well as they) they set vpon such
weaklings, with plausible tales in commen∣dation
of their Church; whose open abomi∣nations
practised at home among themselues,
are not so well known to vs, who haue neuer
trauelled into Popish Countreys. And if by

this meanes they chance to peruert a weake and
vnsettled man, then the cry goeth, that such a
Learned man, is become a Catholike, because
euidence of truth forced him to forkake his
old Profession.
Secondly, if they meete with men, who be∣ing
either opinatiue of their own worth, think
their good parts not sufficiently rewarded; or
being indeed of good parts, haue but slender
meanes: they tempt such, as the Deuill did
our Sauiour, with offers of gifts and prefer∣ments.
And if by these allurements they can
bribe any man to become their Proselyte, for
filthy lucre sake, then they blaze abroad the
conuersion of such a great and learned Scho∣lar,
who could not withstand the light of truth
shining in the Roman Church.
Thirdly, if by these, and such like policies,
they preuaile not: (for these deuices fit them
best, because then they bring men ouer to their
side, with their own mouthes to publish their
owne shame; but if thus they preuaile not) yet
one shift they haue behind, which is, to deuise
lyes, of such and such mens conuersion to
their Church, who euer hated it from their
very soules. In which kind of forgerie, they

haue so farre proceeded, that they haue spared
neither liuing nor dead. For, as if they had cast
off all feare of shame, which was sure in the
end to be their reward, they haue in writing
belyed in this maner, the chiefest Doctors in
our Church, who haue suruiued to refute, and
to detest their forgeries in Print. But when
men are dead, then they become more bold:
and of the most constant and zealous Profes∣sors
of our Religion, they giue it out to the
world, that such and such men of chiefe e∣steeme
in the Protestant Church, did recant v∣pon
their death beds, it being then no time to
dissemble any longer. And when themselues
haue first deuised these tales on their fingers
ends; then they produce them in their serious
bookes of Controuersie, as graue argumēts to
confirme the Roman faith by. The discouery of
which falsehood, I wish it may worke the like
effect in your hearts, that it hath done in mine:
which is, that whereas I vtterly disliked Pope∣rie
before, I do now detest it more then euer.
And for this purpose I was the rather moued
to penne this small Treatise, that you, of
whose soules I knowe my selfe to haue vn∣dertaken
the charge, seeing these forgeries,

may learne to beware of Equiuocating Spirits:
who, though otherwise they professe strictnes
of conscience, & according to the rules of the
Romane Faith, are very deuout and religious;
yet can cozen you with an hundred lying de∣uices,
and neuer feele the least grudge of con∣science
for it. For so Father Persons telleth vs,
thatApologie of Eccles. Subordinat. cap. 12. in the very end. Equiuocations are allowed principally to 
of scrupulous conscience, for auoiding of lying. By
which he giueth vs a faire warning, (and I de∣sire
you take notice of it) that if there be any
scrupulous and tender consciences amongst
them (as some no doubt there are) though
they would not tell a lye, if they knew it, for
all the world, yet euen such men may with∣out
any scruple or feare, deceiue vs with equi∣uocating
reseruations, and mentall deuices. And
hauing thus giuen you this faire warning, now
me thinketh I may speake vnto you, to the
same purpose as our Lord did to his Disciples;Matt. 24. 5, 23, 24.
If they shall say vnto you, Loe heere is Christ,
or loe there, beleeue it not; for there are many
false Prophets arisen, and doe deceiue many. Be∣hold
I haue told you before. And if after all this
warning,Ezk. 33. 4, 9. any of you shall suffer himselfe to be
deluded by lying Equiuocators, his blood will

bee vpon his owne head, but I haue deliuered mine
owne soule. But I feare not this in you, of whose
constancie and zeale I haue had good experi∣ence:Gal. 5. 10.
so that I may rather take vp that saying
of the Apostle, I haue confidence in you through
the Lord, that ye will be no otherwise minded; but
that, if any man shall trouble you, (or seeke to
withdrawe you from your faith) he shall beare
his iudgement, whosoeuer he be. And in assurance
hereof,Gal. 6. 18. I leaue you to Gods grace, in the words
of the same Apostle; Brethren, the Grace of our
Lord Iesus Christ be with your Spirit. Amen.

