



Right Honourable Lord,
NOt long since I published a small Treatise concerning Fasting: and therein, the matter giuing me occasion for it, I mentioned some ho∣ly duties, fit (as I thought) to bee practised vpon a fasting-day; as namely Examina∣tion of our liues, Confession of our sinnes, and a stedfast purpose of a better life. But these being there but named only, because the handling of them was not proper to that place: some haue desired a more full direction for the right performance of those holy duties. And because Examina∣tion of the Conscience is one of them, and
such a one, as doth leade and direct and carry with it all the rest; I was vpon this occasion perswaded to reuise some Notes, which lay by mee, concerning that argu∣ment: and thence I haue framed this short Treatise, which I therefore call the Tribu∣nall of the Conscience, because the worke in∣tended is a kinde of judiciary proceeding, wherein a mans conscience doth giue sen∣tence vpon himselfe. And this little Trea∣tise concerning the iudgement of the Con∣science, I haue made bold to offer to your Lordships Patronage and Protection, who by your Office are IVDGE of the Court of Conscience: hoping that hauing your Name in the Front, it may finde the more fauour abroad; and nothing doubting, but if it finde entertainement, it will returne some part of thankfulnesse to your Lord∣ship backe againe, by easing you and your Court of friuolous, tedious and vnrighte∣ous quarels. For if Plaintifes would exa∣mine their conscience concerning the iust∣nesse of their cause, and the reasonablenesse of their demands, it would make them to
relinquish their cauilling suites before they did commence them. And if Defendants would examine their conscience concer∣ning the wrongs they haue done, and the dues which they owe, it would make them to giue a willing satisfaction, rather than to weary their neighbour with vniust and shifting delaies. And if Lawyers would examine their conscience concerning such rules as Religion doth tye them to, in plea∣ding for mens rights, it would make them to turne away such Clients, as brought them vnreasonable causes. And if Iudges would examine their conscience, concer∣ning the duties of their place, and the con∣dition of the suites that euery day are deba∣ted in the Court, it would make them so to entertaine all sorts of wranglers, as that they would haue no great lust to bring fri∣uolous matters before a righteous Iudge. And so at length it might bee hoped, that that might happen in your Lordships time, which they say did happen in the time of Sir Thomas More,
Stapletō de tribus Tho∣mis, in vita Tho. Mori, cap. 3. Who (as mine Author saith) hauing ended a cause then before him,




did call for the next to be brought: but answer was returned him, that there was neuer ano∣ther cause behinde. And so the Court was dismissed, because there were no more causes to be heard. A great honour to the Iudge, and a great happinesse to the people. The like honour and happinesse I shall euer pray may once happen in your Lordships dayes; that so conscience preuailing, wran∣gling suites may haue an end. And heere∣with, continuing my prayers also for your Lordships prosperitie, together with the peace of a good conscience; I humbly take my leaue.

