



Reuerend SIR,
HAuing vpon occasion hertofore looked somewhat into the na∣ture & properties of a religious Fast, I found it so pleasing to God and so profitable for men, that I was thereupon induced not onely to make vse of it in mine owne practice, but to cōmend it also in the exercise of my Ministe∣ry, to my Hearers and Parishioners. And for the same reason, I haue now aduentured to offer my Meditations on this subiect to the view of the world abroad; hoping that some may be occasioned hereby to make a better vse of this holy discipline, then of late yeeres men haue bin accustomed to doe. For how∣soeuer I haue incurred some mens censures already, by speaking mine opinion, and shall now in all likelihood, by printing it, incurre the censures of other moe, especially of such forward spirits, as vse to condemne before they consider; yet I hope I shall be able to approue my Conclusions to the moderate & iudicious Readers. For (if I doe not much mistake my selfe; and if I erre, I desire to bee directed better:) I haue on my side first of all the holy and blessed Scripture, the supreme Iudge of Controuersies, against whose sen∣tence there can lye no exception or appeale. Secondly, I haue also the constant and vni∣forme consent of learned Fathers, and of the Primitiue and ancient Church, whose vnani∣mous iudgement all sober men will so farre respect, as not to swarue from it, vnlesse they can cleerely proue that it swarueth frō Gods Word. And lastly, I haue also the approbati∣on of this present Church of
England; whom her owne children may not lightly esteeme, without contempt offered to their heauenly Father: and I for my part, do so much respect and reuerence, that besides the Obseruance, which is due to her as my Mother, I am also perswaded in my soule, that she is the purest & best reformed Church in Europe; & doe blesse God vpon my knees, that hath appointed her to be my Mother, & my selfe to be bred and brought vp in her lapp. In which perswasion, beside the maine reasons or grounds of my beliefe, not now to be insisted vpon, I am the rather confirmed also, because I know it was the constant opiniō & professiō of your wor∣thy Father, my much reuerenced Lord: whose iudgemēt I do highly & deseruedly esteeme; & whose memory I shal euer desire to honor with all dutifull and thankfull respect. And were he now aliue, I should not seeke a Pa∣trone for this little Booke elsewhere. But since that GOD hath translated him from vs into the company of the glorified Saints; as I could not diuert my thoughts altogether frō him, but should rather haue offered this poore seruice to his Ashes, then not to haue mentio∣ned my respectiue dutie to his name: so I could not find any better resemblance of him vpō earth, in which I might see him pourtray∣ed and in some sort made present to mee, then in your selfe, who being his first-borne, doe beare a liuely image both of his person and vertues. In regard of all which, my hum∣ble request is, that you will accept of this small Treatise in stead of him who is gone, & suffer it vnder your shaddow to beare your Fathers name. And so, with my best prayers for your happines, I leaue you to Gods bles∣sing.

