



Most Reuerend Father,
THe first newes that I heard of the E∣quiuocating
Arte,a Prefa praefixâ Sex Pre∣lection. cap. 1. & cap. 1. de Mendac. num. 12, 13, 14. was that which
I learned out of your Graces wri∣tings.
And well might this be to mee
the first newes. For, if I mistake
not, you were the first Writer, that published those
trickes in print to the World: though (as begin∣nings
vse to be) that discouery of this Art was but
briefe in comparison, either because that occasion
did not admit of any long or full discourse, or be∣cause,
but little of this mystery could then at the
first be discouered; the professors of that Trade, as
your selfe also signifie, labouring to hide their se∣crets
from the knowledge of other men. And indeed
it may be obserued, that in managing of the Papacy,
they haue certaine mysteries of State, which the

more they vse, the more they coceale. One of which,
is their power to murder Kings, and blow vp Par∣liaments,
& kill all that stand in their way, like the
Assassini, who held it a point of great merit to mur∣der
all that were their aduersaries in Religion: but
yet they are not willing that the world should know
that this is any part of their Creede. Another such
policy may be that of their Indices Expurgatorij,
by which they haue circucised the lips of such Wri∣ters,
as spoke any word against the Roman Church:
but this they kept as a great mystery among some
few of themselues, till misfortune brought it to
light, full sore against their wils. And for a third
such-like policy, I may reckon also this Art of Equi∣tiocation,
which the Masters thereof did keepe se∣cret
as long, and as much as they could. And there∣fore
it was no maruell, if your first discouery of
this mystery were but briefe in comparison. But
afterwardD. Mor∣ton B. of Lichfield and Co∣uentry, Confutat, of Equiuc∣cation. another Reuerend & learned Prelate,
lighting vpon a more compleate Treatise then for∣merly
had appeared, penned by a Popish Priest in
defence of this Arte, and approued by the Arch-Priest,
and the Prouinciall of the Iesuits: he pur∣sued
the point more fully according as that Treatise
gaue him iust occasion. The crye of which pursuit
did vnkennell the olde equiuocatingPersons, who by occasion of the Bi∣shopps booke wrote a large Treatise in defence of Equiuoca∣on. Foxe, and

hunted him into the open field, there to display
himselfe, and to shew what trickes he could vse, for
sauing his new Art from the infamy of lying. And
here I finding him well chafed, did by the sent fol∣low
after him vnto his Den, to espie if I might, what
he and his Cubs were deuising in the darke. And I
found them very busie in hammering Reseruati∣ons
and mentall frauds, vpon euery occasion and
in all kindes of dealing, thereby to catch vs at vn∣awares,
who being plain and simple men our selues,
could not suspect such frauds and impostures in o∣thers.
And in case these things should come a∣broad,
as in part themselues had discouered them a∣gainst
their wils: yet so confident and resolute did
I finde them, to maintaine all for good and honest
dealing, as that FatherMitigat. cap. 9. nu. 81. p. 403. Persons maketh a won∣der
of it, and thinketh that God should deale worse
with men then hee had done with beasts, if hee
should not grant them equiuocating trickes, and
reserued wiles, as he hath granted to the Hare
and the Foxe, their leapes and turnings, and
windings, and going backe againe in the same
trace they come, to deceiue the Dogges that
pursue them. And yet all this confidence I take to
be but a copie of their countenance. For euen in
their printed Apologies of this Arte, they seeke to

cast mists before the Readers eyes, that hee may
not be able to see the depth of their meaning. These
things when I had found, as I thought, (though I
know I am much short of finding all) I was willing,
according to my abilitie, to impart them vnto well∣meaning
Christians, that they seeing the deepe
frauds of these men, may learne to shun their com∣pany
and acquaintance.
In which indeuour of mine, what seruice I may
haue done for the publique good, I cannot tell: but
sure I am, if there be any good in it, I should in rea∣son
returne it thither, where I first found it. The
consideration whereof, hath made mee to presume
so far vpon your Graces clemency, as to lay downe
at your feete thi poore Treatise, the grounds
whereof I first learned from your owne pen: desi∣ring
(if therein I be not ouer-bold) that it may, vin∣der
your name and protection, be sent forth into
the world. Which being all, that at this time I haue
to say, I humbly take my leaue, desiring the God of
peace and truth, to preserue you from euery euill
word and worke, that you may maintaine his
truth in this world, and enioy his peace both in this
world, and the World to come.

