



Good Sir,
I Did heeretofore offer to your
Dr. Heny King. el∣der Brother a lit∣tle Booke of the right vse of Fast∣ing: and now I bring vnto your selfe one much lesse, of the abu∣ses of Fasting. My intention in both is the same; to testifie towards your deceased FA∣THER,
now with the Lord, my thanks, ser∣uice, dutie, and whatsoeuer a Domesticke could owe to a louing, wise and vertuous Lord: and withall to expresse, according to my power, the loue and affection which I shall euer beare to his suruiuing Posteritie; praying also, that you who haue receiued from him life and being, may follow him, and, if it may be, euen exceede him in his vertues. Which intention and desire of mine, if you shall please to accept of in this small Treatise, as your Brother did in the other; I shall esteeme it in you both, as a token of your Fathers continued loue vnto me in his succeeding Issue.
My purpose in this small Treatise is, to lay open the seuerall abuses, which in these later yeeres haue corrupted this holy exer∣cise of fasting, and made it both odious to God, and lesse passeable among men. And this I did for two causes. First, to admo∣nish good Christians, that they beware of formalitie & empty shews in religious du∣ties: and more especially, that when they fast, they be not like the Hypocrites of our
time, who in so foule a maner haue defiled so good a worke. Secondly,
 I vndertooke this Discouerie, thereby to detect the super∣stition & the pride of the Roman Church; in hope that some, euen amongst them, may be moued to lay these things to heart. And first, for their superstition,
 that is heereby detected, that neglecting the power and vertue of a religious Fast, and whatsoeuer hath any goodnesse or efficacie in it, yet they doe place religion and merit in the empty name, and the bare out-side, which they onely haue retained. And againe for their pride, that appeareth in this, that find∣ing many corruptions crept into their pra∣ctise of fasting, contrarie to the custome both of Scriptures and the ancient Church, as themselues cannot but confesse; yet they had rather defend their grosse practises, then acknowledge that the Church of Rome can doe any thing amisse. Which two foule faults, as they are vsuall with that Church in other things; so they are palpable in this exercise of fasting, as will clearely ap∣peare by the particulars in this ensuing
Treatise. Would GOD, our seduced Countreymen,
Rom. 10.2. who haue a zeale of GOD, but not according to knowledge, would heereby learne, that all are not ancient cu∣stomes that carry the old name: but that the Church of Rome can retaine the titles of Antiquitie, when she hath vtterly abo∣lished the things which were afore time meant by them. And my prayer to God is for such among them, as desire to know the truth to saluation, that God at length will open their eyes, to discerne be∣tweene things that differ; and will moue their hearts to consider how vnsafe it is for them to commit their soules to those mens guiding, who make the corrupt practise of their Church, the vnquestionable rule of their Doctrine. And with this Prayer I end my Preface; commending my selfe to your loue, my labours to your acceptance, and you and all yours to GODS blessing and gracious protection. Iune 12. 1626.

