


Right Reverend,
HAving once more taken heart, to try the patience of the world by publishing a small Treatise; I did heartily wish that this occasion might afford me an opportunity of presenting my service and thanks to your Lordship: which now I also do with your Lordships per∣mission and leave. And I

was the rather emboldned thereunto, because I finde it to have been an usuall thing among men, that Inferiours have brought poore and meane gifts to their Supe∣riours and Betters; and have been accepted for their good meanings sake. When Saul, at that time a poore & meane man, was to go to Samuel, then both a Pro∣phet and a Prince,1. Sa. 9.9, 10. hee thought it necessary to take a present in his hand though it were but a poore one, no more then the fourth part of a shekel of silver, which,

asMr. Brier∣wood de Num. c. 1. Trin proleg de antiquis ponderib. & mne∣tis. p. 80. the Learned do ob∣serve, is lesse then eight pence of our money. Vpon which passage there arise two questions. 1. Whether Samuel would not give his direction without a reward. 2. Why Saul would bring so despicable a gift to so honou∣rable a person: which might seeme both boldnesse in Saul to offer, and baseness in Samuel to accept. To these questions theNon ad pretiū, sed ad honorem hoc re∣fertur. Cajetan. in locum Lear∣ned give one answere; that this was munus honora∣rium, a gift not meant as a recompense of a good turn,

but as an acknowledgement of homage and service. And herein they commend unto us the modestie and humility of Samuel, that did not scorn or refuse the meanest gift that came from a dutifull respect: because in such a case the mind of the Giver, and not the worth of the Gift is esteemed. For so we see, that God accepted from his people an handfull of the first fruits in a basket,Deut. 26 2, &c. for acknowledgement of his mercy in giving them that good Land, which yeelded them all that they had. And

our Lord did so highly esteem of a box of ointment,Matt. 26.13. which a woman out of her love and serviceable respect had powred upon his head; that hee honoured the fact, with a perpetuall remem∣brance of it in the Gospell to the worlds end. Yea, and great Lords are sometimes contented with a pepper-corne, or a red rose, for ac∣knowledgment of their right and interest. This conside∣ration did encourage mee at this time to tender this poore service to your Lordship, in acknowledgment of that du∣ty,

& of those thanks, which we your Clergie of this City, and my selfe more especially do owe unto you, for your Fatherly care over us. I dare presume so much of my bre∣thren, and I may affirme it of my selfe, that we take our selves to bee so much obliged to your Fatherhood, as we know not how to make proof of it in any proportionable sort. Notwithstanding wee hope, your Lordship will ac∣cept of our good meaning at all times: & my selfe at this time do pray that you will re∣ceive this poore tender of my

service: which I shall ever esteem among the rest of your favours towards me. And to second this service with ano∣ther of the like rank; I shall ever pray for your Lordships life and prosperity, that wee may long enjoy you as a ten∣der Father to this part of his Church. And so, with my prayers I leave you to Gods blessings.
March 30. 1635.

