



THere was neuer any age that bragged more of knowledge, and yet, ne∣uer any that had lesse soundnes. For as the harts of men were neuer more empty, and their hands neuer more idle: so their tongues were neuer more stirring, and their braines neuer more stuffed: not so much stu∣dying to doe what they know, as to find what they may beleeue: being like to those Pyrro∣nian Philosophers or Scepticks of whom A.

Gellius writeth Lib. 11. Cap. 5. who would alwaies seeke and consider, but neuer decree, appoint, nor comprehend any thing; but on∣ly according to their owne fantasie, and the depth of their owne capacity. Some thinke, that Gods schoole is more of vnderstanding than affection; and they endeuour to haue much knowledge though it bee without zeale, and to get much skill, though it bee without loyallobedience and good gouernment. It is not sufficient for such to bee of Gods court, but they will be of his counsell also. They will needs prie into his Arke; inquire into things not reueled; and be puffed vp, and be wise in themselues; teaching, preaching, and per∣swading that, which tendeth rather to liberty, fancy, and selfe-will, than to praier, fasting, almes and mortification of the flesh. Yea, and not content with that, they depraue and traduce others that follow not their owne humors and opinions therein; and speake of them, not humbly as Judah said of an offen∣der Gen. 38. 10. She is more righteous than 1: but hatefully and without peace, as Iosephs bre∣thren did of him. Gen. 37. 4.
The reason and occasion why and where∣fore I write this, may soone bee vnderstood, both of you, who are a teacher in the Church, and haue had great experience of this cree∣ping and encroaching euill: and of you also, who beare publike office and authority in the common-wealth, hauing seene the pangs and practises of these kind of people, still murmu∣ring and muttering against princely procee∣dings

in eccleasticall gouernment, and a∣gainst things in themselues indifferent, but by authority necessary, as commanded by his Maiesty. It is charities precept to speake well of all; and Ciuilities rule not to backe∣bite the absent. And yet we see, that some of them consider of other mens doings, that tend to forme, order and decencie, As Satan con∣sidered of Iob, and his actions, when God said vnto him; Hast thou considered my seruant Iob? And he signified yea, but it was to belie & calumniate him. And although we now see the staffe of our bread broken, and the euill arrowes of death and famine sent amongst vs, to make vs humble our selues before the al∣mighty God of heauen, with fasting, praier, and repentance: yet they can not be brought to obserue and keepe any time and season of abstinence and fasting, commanded by au∣thority, but they will rather hazard an oppo∣sition to the peace of the church, and to the good of their cuntrey, than suffer their appe∣tites to be bridled, and their zeale to be guid∣ed by the limits of any good lawes.
The consideratiō of this matter hath moued mee to publish this Sermon, and to dedicate it, both to you, whom for many causes I re∣spect & reuerence, & whose fauour and kind∣nes I haue found in no small measure; and to al you also, who haue shewed your loue and countenance towards me, not only in hearing patiently, but in construing courteously, that which is now come to the generall view of others. Accept of it I pray, and take it as com∣ming

from him, who wisheth you all increase of happinesse, and all grace mer∣cy, and peace in Christ IESVS.
Shaftesbury the 28. of Nouember. 1609

