



REuerend Brethren, euer since my first entring into a Pasto∣rall charge, I haue applied mine endeauours, by Cate∣chising to instruct the igno∣rant. And because I would not be irregular, my Theame hath alwaies been the short Catechisme, set forth in the Booke of Common Prayer, a Cate∣chisme indeede, solely appointed to bee first taught; but to the great detriment of our Church either wholly neglected, any other be∣ing preferred, or barely taught without any fur∣ther explanation, or else for outward formality onely in Lent set vpon the Table, as a dish ap∣propriated to that Fast. My study hath been  first to mend this fault for my owne particular, and therefore I haue diuers yeares labored con∣stantly throughout the yeare, by this kind of teaching to forme in my hearers some distinct knowledge of our Christian Principles: and hauing at length come to my intended period, I digested the pith of all my Collections and Meditations into this Booke, herein imitating
Ʋrsinus vpon Melanctons short Catechisme, so vsefull to young Students in Theologie, and to other studious persons. The labour thus ended, being conscious to my self of mine own weak∣nes, I suppressed it three or foure yeares, till that being animated by some of you (my Brethren) who had either seene or heard hereof, I haue aduentured to bring it into publike view. The worke I confesse is ordinary and worthles; but for forme it is alone, and so may craue enter∣tainement. Heere are collected into one all fundamentall points, of the true Christian Re∣ligion, sparsedlie handled in diuers learned Bookes, and applied to the short English Cate∣chisme. It is a Catechisme and a Comentarie, the one for Children, short, and fitted to their capacity, the other for men, leading to a larger mappe of Christian Principles, and fitted for  the edification of all. To haue written a large new Catechisme without an old text, had bin superfluous amongst so many already abroad, but to write for the illustrating of the Text, to which we English must all hold vs, is very ne∣cessary. In publishing this, I take not vpon me to prescribe a forme vnto any, my selfe being the least amongst thousands, but I whet on all, what I can, to an vniforme proceeding by our common grounds. We haue all one God, one Christ, one Baptisme, one Gospell, and one forme of Articles of Religion, to which wee subscribe; why then should we not all consent in one Catechisme? Our Mother the Church of England, hath first commaunded this one Catechisme, vpon which is my Commentary. If therefore my inward wishes may breake foorth into open request, I would craue that it might please the right Reuerend Fathers of our Church, more strictly to presse the teaching of our common Catechisme in their seuerall Iu∣risdictions: and you my Brethren, who doe already teach it in your seuerall Parishes, to la∣bour in it with all diligence, and to bring it in, and commend it to the priuate exercise of your people in their families, amongst whom it  hath hitherto been much neglected. And I be∣seech you all fauourably to accept this my pre∣sent act, and where I haue faulted, correct me; where I haue failed, supply me; where I haue done rightly, ioyne with me. If this may be a∣ny thing, though but goats hayre, towards the Lords Sanctuary, I shall be glad, and giue God the glory. Our great Shepheard, the Lord Iesus, who hath laid downe his life for his sheepe, make this and all the endeauours of his Ser∣uants, fruitfull pastures for the comfort of his flocke, and for the praise of his holy and glori∣ous name. Amen.

