



IT is the custome (right honourable) of such as set or send out any worke to publike viewe, to make choyse of some worthy Person for the patronizing thereof. So that I, being about the publishing of cer∣taine Essayes and Meditations of mine, mo∣rall and diuine, and among others, of this present Pamphlet, I began to bethinke my selfe of some conuenient Patron for the coun∣tenancing thereof. And in end after that I

had considered of the nature and kinde of the Subiect sufficiently; and had weighed with my selfe the greatnesse of your humanity, both towards Schollers and my Countrymen; I was emboldened so much the more to publish it vnder the combined splendor of your vni∣ted illustrious names. In it one may see as in a cleere Mirrour or christall glasse, a plaine and liuely representation of the sayth, pie∣tie, and deuotion, of the vprightnes, cha∣rity, & compassion; of the Temperance, sobriety, and moderation; and of the di∣ligence, industrie & honest conuersati∣on, of the godly Men and Women of olde, & namely of the six famous & faithfull per∣sons, therein more particularly painted out. In whose golden Legends, I hope the shar∣pest-sighted shal not espie so much as the smallest spice of any fained fiction, falshood or he: the which thing no doubt, many will deeme and esteeme a great rarity in a gol∣den Legend. In it one also may see a perfit patterre and picture of a perfit Seruant of God Man or Woman; together with an exemplary proofe of Gods bountifull requi∣ting and liberall rewarding of them for their seruice. Therein likewise is as it were in a

visible manner expressed to the eye, the ex∣ceeding great care that Almighty God hath of his children, euen of all such as doe commend their estate, and commit their affaires vnto his fatherly prouidence. Finally this little Mirrour doth afford diuers moral obseruations and instructions, to the num∣ber of 68. touching the chiefe duties that men and women owe vnto God, and likewise one vnto another: namely such as doe mutu∣ally concerne husbands & wiues, parents and children, maisters and Seruants. Considering then that the nature of it is such and that it may serue somewhat for the fur∣therance of men and women, chiefely those of the yonger sort, in the exercise of soundnes of beliefe, and of sincerity of life, I am so much the more bold to implore your worthy Patro∣nage therein, and to pray your honours in the behalfe thereof to answere vnto the signifi∣cation of your two christen names, which doe import Grace and gracious, and euen to grace this meane Testimonie of a dutifull minde, with your gracious acceptance. The which fauour, if it shall please your honours to afford me; I shall be encouraged to be a∣about the shewing of some more ample signi∣fication

of mine obseruancie towards the ho∣nour of your names. And thus wishing in the meane time vnto a gracefull IOHN and ANNA such felicitie, hap, and honour, as hath befaln vnto ABRAHAM & SARA, ISACK and REBECCA, IACOB and RAHEL, whose godlines and vertu∣ousnes ye doe so happily imitate: I rest

