


THE History of thinges don in the church of
the Englishe nation which of late I had set
fourth, I did both first very gladly send your
grace desiring then to haue a sight and proufe
therof, and now againe do send it you, to the
entent you may both coppy it out, and more fully at your le∣sure
consider it. I can not but highly commend this yower ze∣le
and good desyre you haue not only to geue good eare to the
holyscriptures, but also to know of things both don and spokē
by worthy men before your time, and specially of our owne
country. For whither an history containeth good thinges don
by good men, the wise hearer is therby prouoked to wel doing:
ether reporteth euill things don by euil men, the vertuous and
wel disposed reader neuerthelesse is moued therby both to flye
that is euill and noisom to his soule, and embrace the thinge
he knoweth to be good and acceptable vnto God. Which thing
you wisely pondering, desire to haue the sayd history published
both to the instruction of your selfe, and also to the edifieng of
such other whom God hath committed vnto your gouernan∣ce.
And to thentent I may put both your grace and all other
that shall heare or reade it, out of all doubt of the verite of the
sayd History, I will briefly shew you what authours I haue
chiefely folowed in the making therof. The chiefest authour
and aider I had in compiling this worke, was the right reuerent
abbat Albinus, a mā of great learning, which being brought vp
in the church of Canterbury vnder Theodorus Archebishop of
blessed memory, and Adrianus abbat, both mē of great worship

and learning, hath procured and sent vnto me al such thinges as
wer don by Saint Gregory the Popes disciples, ether in the pro∣uince
of kēt, ether other places adioyning and bordering vpon
the same. Which thinges the said Abbate hath learned partly by
writinges partly also by tradition of elders, and such things as
he hath in such sorte learned, he hath sent vnto me by the han∣des
of Nothelmus priest of the church of Londō, to be receiued
ether in writting ether by mouth and relatiō of the said Nothel∣mus.
Which also going after vnto Rome was permitted by Gre∣gorie
bishop, which is now head of that church, to search the
closettes of the saied holy church of Rome, where he founde
out certaine epistles of saint Gregorie and other bishops there,
and at his returne hath deliuered vnto vs the sayd epistles to be
put in to our history with the counsell and aduise of the reue∣rent
father Albine aboue mencioned. So that from the begin∣ning
of this booke vnto the time that the countrye of England
receiued the faith of Christe, we learned such thinges as we
bring, gathered out of the workes of such as had wrote thereof
before our time. And from thence vnto this present such thin∣ges
as hath ben don in the church and diocese of Canterbury
by the disciples of Saint Gregory or their successors, or vnder
what kinge they haue ben done, we haue knowen by the
industrie of the sayd Abbate Albine, at the reporte of Nothel∣mus,
who also hath brought me in sum parte of knowledge of
such things as wer don in the prouinces of theEssex. east andSalis∣bury. Exceter VVelles. west
saxons, and also of theSuf∣folck, Norfolck and Cam∣brigd she∣re. east english and of the Northūbers that
is to wit, by what bishops preaching, and vnder what king
ech of the said prouinces wer conuerted vnto the faith of Christ.
And to be shorte, by the exhortation of the sayd Albine, I was
chiefly prouoked and enboldened to set vpō this enterprise.Nort∣humbers are called in this stistory al. that dwel beyōd the riuer Hū∣bre North ward. Da¦niel
also the most reuerent bishop of the west saxons, which is
yet a liue, hath instructed me in certaine pointes of the ecclesi∣astical
history both of his prouince of theSussex and Hap∣shere. South Saxōs, and of

the Ile of Wite. Now in what sort the prouince ofMercia or Marsh∣land con∣taineth the dioce∣ses of Lh∣field and Couētry, Lincolne and VVorcet. Mercia, re∣cerued
the saith which they knew not before, and the prouince
of theEssex. easte Saxons recouered the faith which they had
lost before, both by the ministery of Ceddi and Ceadda priests
of great deuotion, and how the ij saied fathers both liued and
died, we haue diligently lerned of the brothers of the mona∣stery
of Laestinge by them erected. Again of things don apper∣taining
to the church in the prouince of the easte english we
haue found out partly by monuments of writting and tra∣ditions
of the foreliuers, and partly, by the information of the
reuerend Abbot Esius. As for such things as wer don in the ter∣ritory
of Lindissig (that is holy Ilond) touching the furderance
of the faith of Christ, and what priests there succeded from ti∣me
to time, we haue learned ether by the writinges of the reue∣rent
bishop Cynebertus, ether by the liuely voice of other men
of good creditt. The history of the prouince of the Northum∣bers
from the time they receiued the faith of Christ vnto
this present, we haue gotten not by any one author, but by
relation of many faithful witnesses which might know and re∣mēber
the same beside such things as by my owne experience I
knew. Among which you shal note, that such thinges as I haue
wrote of the most holy father and bishop Cutbert ether in this
book ether in the treatice that I haue made of his life, I haue ta∣kē
partly out of those things which I found befor writē of him
by the brothers of the church ofThe co∣untre of Northū∣berland properly. Lindisfarnū folowing sim∣plely
the faith of the history which I read, and partely also ha∣ue
added thereunto such things as I could learne my selfe by
the faithful testimony of such as knew him. I humbly beseche
the Reader, that if he shal finde any thing otherwise then truth
in this treatise, he wil not impute it vnto me, as the which hath
endeuoured to put in writing to the instruction of our after∣commers
such thinges as we could gather by common report,
which is the true lawe of an history.
