


IF THE mind of man (most gratiouse
Souuerain) in respect of vvhich vve
are made after the image of the hig∣hest,
excelled not in passing degrees,
the lumpe of mortall fleshe, by mea∣nes
vvhereof it vttereth his naturall functions, iff
the qualitees of the one surmounted not infinitly
the conditions of the other, neither should it seme
vvorthe the vvhile to set penne to paper for defen∣se
of true religion, in these perilous times of schis∣me
and heresy, neither vvould it be sitting for one
of my calling to commend such labours to the ve∣vve
of your Maiesty. For, as in the vvriting I haue
good cause to remembre that Truthe purchaseth ha∣tred,
so in the commending of the same I can not
forgett that a younge scholer, and base subiect at∣tempteth
to talke vvith a right mighty Princesse
and his lerned Souuerain. Notvvithstanding, con∣sidering
the invvarde man and better portion off
my selfe, I haue to comforte me bothe in the one,

and in the other. In the one, respect of the profit
vvhich may arise hereby to the deceiued conscien∣ces
of my dere countremē, your highnes subiectes,
my regard to Gods honour and zeale to the truth
do make me lesse to feare the displeasure that may
ensue. In the other your highnes most gratiouse
Clemency, and knovven good affection to be en∣formed
of the truth, enboldeth me to present par∣ticularly
to your most Royall Maiesty, that vvhich
I publish to the vvhole Realmes commodite. For
as that vvhich the body receiueth, the Head first
vevveth and considereth, so thought I most conue∣nient,
that the generall history of the realme off
England shoulde first be commended to the prin∣cely
head and Souuerain gouuernour of the same.
Againe, the history in Latin being dedicated by
the Author to a kinge of this realme, one of your
most Noble progenitours, it semed no lesse then
duty, that the translatiō and nevv publishing of it
ought to come forth vnder your highnes protecti∣on
succeding in the Imperial Crovvne of the same.
The matter of the History is such, that if it may
stande vvith your Maiesties pleasure to vevve
and consider the same in vvhole or in part, your
highnes shall clerely see as vvell the misse informa∣tions
of a fevve for displacing the auncient and
right Christen faith, as also the vvay and meane of
a spedy redresse that may be had for the same, to
the quietnesse of the greater part of your Maiesties

most loyal and lovvly subiectes cōsciences. In this
history it shall appeare in vvhat faith your noble
Realme vvas christened, and hath almost these
thousād yeres cōtinevved: to the glory of God, the
enriching of the crovvne, and great vvelth and qui¦et
of the realme. In this history your highnes shall
see in hovv many and vveighty pointes the pretē∣ded
refourmers of the church in your Graces do∣miniōs
haue departed frō the patern of that soun∣de
and catholike faith planted first among Engli∣shemen
by holy S. Augustin our Apostle, and his
vertuous cōpany, described truly and sincerely by
Venerable Bede, so called in all Christendom for his
passing vertues and rare lerning, the Author of this
History. And to thentent your highnes intention
bent to vveightier considerations and affaires may
spende no longe time in espying oute the parti∣culars,
I haue gathered out of the vvhole History a
number of diuersities betvvene the pretended reli∣gion
of Protestants, and the primitiue faith of the
english church, and haue annexed them streight
ioyning to this our simple preface. Maie it please
your most gracious highnes to take a short vevv of
it, and for more ample intelligence of euery parti∣cular
(if it shall so like your highnesse) to haue a re∣course
to the booke and chapter quoted.
Beside the vvhole history of holy and lerned S.
Bede, I haue published a short and necessary dis∣course
to mete vvith the only argument of such as

vvill pronoūce this vvhole booke to be but a fard∣le
of papistry, a vvitnesse of corrupted doctrine, a
testimony of that age and time vvhich they haue
already condēned for the time of no true Christia∣nite
at all: of such I saie as haue altered the faith vve
vvere first Christened in, condemning our dere
forefathers of allmost these thousand yeares, the
Christen inhabitants of your graces dominions.
This I haue done principally in ij partes. In the fir∣ste
by expresse testimonies of holy Scripture, the
psalmes, the prophets, and the nevv Testamēt, by
remouing the obiections of the aduersaries taken
out of holy Scripture, by the glorious successe of
these later 900. yeares in multiplying the faithe of
Christ through the vvorlde, last of all by clere and
euident reasons I haue proued that the faith of vs
Englishmen all these ix c. hundred yeares, coulde
not possibly be a corrupted faith, traded vp in su∣perstitions,
blindnesse, and idolatry, as it is falsely
and vvickedly surmised of many, but that it is the
true and right Christianite no lesse then the firste
vj. c. yeares, and immediat succession of the Apos∣tles.
In the second part, vvhere vve gather a num∣ber
of differences in doctrine, in ecclesiasticall go∣uernement,
in the order and maner of proceding,
in the course and cōsequēces of both religiōs, that
first plāted among vs and so many hundred yeares
cōtinevved, and this presently preached and pretē∣ded,
I haue shevved by the testimonies of the mo∣ste

auncient and approued Fathers, of the Coun∣cels
and histories of that time, that in all such diffe∣rences
our faith first planted and hitherto conti∣nevved
amonge vs, agreeth and concurreth vvith
the practise and belefe of the first vj. c. yeres, the ti∣me
approued by al mens consent for the right and
pure Christianite. If it may stande vvith your Ma∣iesties
pleasure to vveigh this double truthe so cle∣rely
proued first out of Gods holy vvorde and eui∣dent
reason, then out of the assured practise of the
primitiue churche, your Grace shall quickely see a
ready redresse of present schismes, a compendious
quieting of troubled consciences, and an open pa∣the
to returne to the faith, vvithoute vvhiche is no
saluation. As vve knovve right vvell, the mea∣ning
of your gracious highnes to be already seri∣ously
bent to haue the truthe tried and to be sin∣cerely
published throughe all your Graces do∣minions,
so to the ende that this godly zeale ma∣ie
in your Maiesties most Princely hart the more
be kindled and cōfirmed, most humbly and lovv∣ly
I beseche the same, to beholde a fevve examples
of the most puissant Princes that haue ben in
Christendom, vvhich in that singular vertu haue
principally excelled.
At vvhat time Princes and Emperours (hauing
certaine hundred yeares fought and striued all in
vaine against the light of the ghospel and publis∣hing
of Christen religion) beganne at length them

selues to take the svvete yoke of Christe, to sub∣mit
their Sceptres to his holy Crosse, and ioyning
deuoute humilite vvith vvordly policie began to
procure their soule helth, and to prouide for the
vvorlde to come, then the prophecy of Esaie vvas
in them fullfilled saying to the churche of Christ.
Beholde I will stretche out mine hande to the gentils, and sett
vpp my token to the people.Esaiae. 49. They shall bringe thee thy son∣nes
in their lappes, and cary their daughters vnto thee vppon
their shoulders. For kinges shall be thy nursing Fathers,
and Quenes shall be thy nursing mothers. They shall fall
downe before thee: &c et. Then their chiefe endeuour
and principall care hath ben to maintaine the only
Catholike faith in their dominions, and to chase
eftesoones all schismes and heresies that from time
to time sprange vp amonge. Constantin the great
(vvorthely so called for sondry respects) the Arri∣an
heresy vnder him arising, laboured by all mea∣nes
possible and semely to his princely vocation to
quēche the same. For this purpose, first he directed
that lerned and vertuous Father Osius bisshop of
Corduba in Spayne,Niceph. li. . cap. 12. to the churches of AEgypte
vvhere the terrible tragedy of that hainous here∣sie
beganne, vvith his letters of exhortation to re∣concile
them againe vvhich vvere diuided in mat∣ters
of the faith.Cap. 13. He vvrote also to Arrius him selfe
and Alexander the bisshop of Alexandria, persua∣ding
vvith them to come to agreement and accor∣de.
After (al this fuffising not) at the motion and

order of the vertuous bishops of that time and by
their ordinary meanes,In praefat. Nic. Con. he caused the truthe of the
controuersy to be enquired, examined, and discus∣sed
in a full and generall Councell helde at Nice,
vvhere he presented him selfe bearing the charges
of the bishops that dvvelled farre of.Nicep. lib. 8. cap. 14. After this co∣uncell
according to the determination of those
holy Fathers, for quieting the church, he banished
Arrius, Theognis, Euebius of Nicomedia, and other
masters of that secte. He talked also and commo∣ned
vvith Acesius a bishopp of the Nouatians, la∣bouring
to vvinne him to the Catholike church
againe. Being troubled also vvith Donatus and his
complices breding then a nevve secte in Christes
church, against Caecilianus their lavvfull bishop, he
vvrote vnto Miltiades then Pope of Rome to decide
the matter,Idem li. 7. cap. 42. and directed a commission out of his
ovvne Courte for the better expedition of the sa∣me.
Thus laboured that vertuous and Christen
Emperour Constantin the great to maintaine
the vnite of Christes church, and to abolish all he∣resies
in the prouinces of the vvhole vvorld then
subiect vnto him. This glasse he lefte to his poste∣rite
other Christen Princes to looke on.
Valentinian the first, the next catholike Empe∣rour
of any continuaunce after Constantin,Hist. tri∣part. libr. 8. c. 13. so ear∣nestly
t̄dred the catholike religion, that vvhen Va∣lēs
his brother the Arriā Emperour of the East, de∣maunded
aide of him against the Gotthes, then

breaking in to the Romain empire, he ansvvered
that being an heretike, it could not stande vvith
his conscience and religion to helpe him:2. par. 19 &. 25. fearing
vvorthely the checke that God by the mouth of
Iehu gaue to Iosaphat kinge of uda, for aiding
the Apostata and Idolater Achab, kinge of Is∣raell.
Theodosius successour of Valens in the East
called also the great for his vvorthy and princely
qualities, for the maintenaunce of the catholike
faith of Christes church, published an edict a∣gainst
the Arrians and the Manichees, vvherby he
imbarred them all maner of assembles,L. Omnes Vetae. cod. de he. et Manich. preaching
or teaching, banished thē out of cites and places of
resorte commaunding also no man should com∣pany
vvith them. Againe the same Emperour after
much disputations and conferences had vvith the
Arrians, perceauing at lenght by the aduise of Si∣snius,
that they agreed not amonge them selues,
nor approued the lerned vvriters in Christes chur∣che
before their time (bothe vvhich great faultes
are euident in the principal promoters of this nevv
pretended religion) vtterly to extinguish all here∣sy,
and for a finall extirping of schisme,Socrates li. 5. c. 10. Szomenus lib. 1. c. 17. he vvith
Gratian commaunded expressely, that such doctri∣ne
and religion only shoulde take place, as Da∣masus,
then Pope off Rome, taughte and allovved.
Honorius and Arcadius sonnes to Theodosius,
folovved the godly steppes of the vertuous Prince
their Father. Thereupon Arcadius by the stoute

aduise of Chrisostom vvould not graunt to Gainas
a famous Scythian Captain vnder him one poore
corner in all the East to practise his Arrian profes∣sion
in.Niceph. li. 13. c. 5. Honorius likevvise hauing information of
the horrible schismes of the Donatistes in Afrike,
directed in commission thither Marcellinus to be
present at a general assemble in Carthage of the ca∣holike
bishops and the Donatistes,Tom. 7. as it appeareth
by the conferences of that assemble yet extant in
the vvorkes of S. Augustin.
Hovv diligent Theodosius the second next suc∣cessour
to the foresaied Emperours vvas in extir∣ping
the heresy of Nestorius, and in setting forth
the right doctrine touching the godhed of the ho∣ly
Gost against Macedonius and his scholers, the
vvritings of Cyrillus ad Reginas, and to Theodosius
him selfe do euidently declare.
After these Marcianus the Emperour vvith that
vertuous princesse Pulcheria laboured diligently
to extinguish the heresy of Eutyches, as it may ap∣peare
by sundry epistles of lerned Leo then Pope
of Rome solliciting eftsoones the Emperour there∣to,
and by the Actes of the fourth generall councell
of Chalcedon. VVhich not long after him Iustinus
the Emperour,Niceph. li. 17. c. 2 vvith sch Christen zeale defended
that he caused Seuerus the schismaticall bishop of
Antioch to haue his toūg cut out for the daily blas∣phemies
he vttered against that councell.Cap. 9. Iustinian
also his successour caused al the hereticall bookes

and vvritinges of the saied Seuerus and other to be
burned and made it death to any that kept or vsed
any such books. The Christen zeale of this Empe∣rour
tovvard the maintenaunce of Christen reli∣giō
is declaredin the fift general coūcel kept at Cō∣stantinople
against sundry heresies.Cap. 27. Procopius cō∣mending
the earnest and vertuous zeale of this
Emperour,De ello vandalico. lib. 4. vvriteth that he vvould neuer admit
Gelimerius a valiaunt Captain and one that had
done him noble seruice ioyning vvith Belisarius
in the vvarres against the VVandalls, vnto the or∣der
of his Nobilite, bicause he vvas infected vvith
the Arrian heresy.
Such hath alvvaies bē (most gracious Souuerain)
the vertuous zeale of the vvisest and most politic∣ke
Princes to extirpat heresies and false religiō out
of their dominiōs, knovving right vvel, that none
are better subiects to the Prince than such as most
deuoutly serue almighty God. And again that no∣thing
more highly pleaseth God thā that a prince
do farder and set forth the true seruice and vvor∣shipping
of him. Such a one vvas kinge Dauid, of
vvhō therfor God saied. I haue foūd Dauid a mā accor∣ding
to my harts desire.Act. 13. And these Emperours here spe∣cified,
as they tēdred most the setting forth of true
religiō, and abolishment of the false, so prospered
they most of al other in vvorldly respectes. For as
vnder Constantin the great first by vs mencioned
the empire most florished, and vvas thē first pla∣ced

in the East, the cyte of Byzance being then ma∣gnificently
enlarged, and called Constantinople
of that most mighty Emperours name, as he had
diuers and most glorious conquestes against the
tyrans, Maxentius, Licinius, and other forrain bar∣barous
enemies,Prcopius lib. 1. 2. 3. &. 4. so (to lett passe the other) Iusti∣nian
the last of vs mentioned vvas he that most
gloriously restored vpp againe the Maiesty of the
Romain empire then allmost fallen flatt dovvne,
chasing the VVandals out of Afrike, cleering Italy
and the vvest empire of the Gotthes, extingui∣shing
vtterly the Hunnes in Graece, and hauing
most noble victories against the Persians.
Longe it vvere particularly to discourse vpon
the Princes of euery singular prouince in Christen∣dom,
and to notise vnto your hignes, the zeale,
diligence, and endeuour of eche one in extirping
haeresy and schismes. Yet to thentent it may appe∣are
that the one Imperiall Crovvne of Christen∣dome
being parted in to seuerall realmes and do∣minions,
the zeale of eche one in the particular
prouinces vvas no lesse to maintaine the vnite off
Christes church, then vvhen the vvhole vvas vn∣der
the monarchie of one Empire, may it please
your most gracious highnes to call to remembra∣unce
that this Christen and godly zeale hath ben
in the Princes of seuerall countrees so glorious and
euident, that in respect of the same, most honou∣rable
titles haue ben appropriated to the royall

Crovvnes of such personages.
To the Imperiall Crovvne of your Maiesty, the
Noble and glorious title of Defender of the faith hath
ben of late yeares annexed and perpetually geuen
by the Se Apostolike, for the most godly and ler∣ned
vvorke of your highnes moste noble Father,
our late dread Souerain, in defence of the seuen
holy Sacraments of Christes Church (off vvhich
the scholers of Geneua haue taken avvay fiue) and
against the vvicked heresies of that levvde Apo∣stata
Martyn Luther. To the crovvne of Spayne
for the great zeale of kinge Alphonsus in extir∣ping
the Arrian heresy,Michael Ritiu Na politanus. aboue 800. yeares past, the
title of Catholike vvas annexed, and continueth yet
hitherto vnblemished. To the crovvne of the fren∣che
kinge for the passing zeale of those princes (na∣mely
of Clouis the first Chrsten kinge, of Char∣lemain,
of Philippe surnamed Auguste) in extir∣ping
heresies from time to time out of their domi∣nions,Les anna∣ls de Fiā 
the title of Most Christian, hath also ben ap∣propriated
from the time of Pipin and Charle∣maign
his Sonne hitherto.
Though I abstaine (to auoide prolixite) the far∣der
recitall of particular Princes, yet may it please
your most excellent Maiesty fauorably to attend
to one or tvvo examples more for the extirping
of the heresies of Iohn vvicleff and the Bohems,
contayning in many pointes the doctrine novve
preached for the very true vvorde off God.
In the history of Polidore vve read of that Noble
prince and of most vvorthy memory Henry the
fifte one of your highnes most noble lineall pro∣genitours,Lib. 12.
that hauing called a Parlement, and de∣creed
therein a voyage in to Fraunce for recouery
of his right, the mony being gathered, souldiars
pressed, all thinges prepared for that enterprise, yet
the generall Concell of Constance then beinge
appointed, he staied his priat quarell for Gods
cause, directed his legas vnto the Councell, expe∣cted
the fine thereof, and in the meane vvhile ap∣peased
the rebellion of Iohn Oldecastle labouring
by force and disobedience against his Souuerain
(as the nevv VVicleffs do presently in Fraunce and
Scotland) to maintaine the heresy of VVicleff, and
pronounced traitus all the adherents of that
vvicked secte. By this speedy diligence of that gra∣tious
Prince, bothe that heresy vvas then quailed
in your highnes dominions, and (as Polidore no∣teth)
the Noble victories of that valiaunt prince
ensued: God vndoubtedly prospering his affaires,
vvho had preferred the quarell of him, before his
ovvne prepared viage.
It is novv a hundred yeares and more sence the
time that the kingdō of Bemeland being greuous∣ly
mangled and almost destroied vvith ciuill sedi∣tion
through the schismes and heresies plāted the∣re
by the same VVicleff and Huss,Cromerus i eist. ad Proceres Poloniae. vvas offred of the
people it selfe to the king of Poole Vladislaus to ha∣ue

and rule it as his ovvn, setting amonge them so∣me
quiet order of gouernemēt. But bicause of the
heresies then praeuailing, it vvas of that vertuous
Prince vtterly refused. Yea vvarre also vvas threate∣ned
them vnlesse they agreed and recōciled them
selues to the Catholike church.
If it may like your most excellent highnes after
the patern and examples of these most puissāt and
vertuous Princes to procede in your most gratious
meaning to the publishing of the true christen fai∣the
(vvhich is but one, and not nevv) through your
graces dominions, as al Christendom hartely vvis∣sheth,
the vevve and consideration of this present
history, a vvorthy and most authentike vvitnesse
of the first and true Christen faith planted in your
Graces dominions, vvith that vvhich is annexed to
proue it a right and vncorrupted faithe, shal not a
litle (I trust in God, in vvhose handes the hartes of
Princes are) moue and farder your highnes ver∣tuous
intēt to the spedy atchieuing of that it desi∣reth.
For faith being one (as the Apostle expressely
saieth) that one faithe being proued to be the same
vvhich vvas firstgraffed in the harts of englishmē,
and the many faithes of protestants being founde
different from the same in more then fourty clere
differēces gathered out of this presēt history (vvhi∣che
reporteth not al, but a fevv by occasion) it must
remaine vndoubted, the pretended faith of prote∣tants
to be but a bastard slippe proceding of an o∣ther

stocke (as partly of old renevved heresies, part∣ly
of nevv forged interpretations vpon the vvritten
text of Gods vvorde) and therefore not to be roo∣ted
in your graces dominions, lest in time, as here∣sies
haue done in Grece and Afrike, it ouergrovve
the true braunches of the naturall tree, cōsume the
springe of true Christianite, and sucke oute the
ioyse of al right religion: leauing to the realme the
barke and rine only, to be called christians. VVhich
lamentable case the more euery Christen hart ab∣horreth,
and your highnes most gracious meaning
especially detesteth, the more it is of vs your high∣nes
most lovvly and loyall subiectes to be vvished
and daily to be praied for at the dreadful throne of
Gods depe mercy, that it may please his goodnesse
so to direct the harte of your highnes, so to inspire
vvith his heauenly grace the most gracious mea∣ning
of your Maiesty, that it may vvholy and per∣fectly
be bent to the restoring of the one catholike
and Apostolical faith of Christendom, to the extir∣ping
of schisme and heresy, and to the publishing
of Gods true seruice. Al to the honour of almighty
God, to the contentatiō of your Maiesties pleasu∣re,
and to the vvelth of your graces dominiōs. The
vvhich God of his tendre mercy, through the me∣rites
of his dere Son, and intercession of all blessed
Saints in heauen, graunt. Amen.

