


Most gratious and redoubted Soueraigne.
INEVER read those words of the Euangelicall Prophet prefixt in the former page; (and I haue read them often;) but as oft did I thinke of Al∣mighty Gods raising of you our Iacob from the North, and endes of the earth, to performe the part of his Se∣lect Seruant for the especiall good of his Church: and euen, so oft did I call to minde your gratious en∣deauours for the farthering of the glorious worke of Vnitie and Concord amongst diuided Christians: but more especially, ac∣cording to your Royall and proper interest, among your owne vn∣vniformed Britaines. Wherefore perswading my selfe, that it is both the duty of all good Christians to applaude your mest Chri∣stian & Commendable endeauours and designes; and the part of all your good subiects to concurre with your Maiestie in so wor∣thy a worke, for the aduancing thereof; I haue brought vnto the
building of this spirituall Temple of Concord and Peace, two stones, to wit two Treatises penned and framed to the common peoples capacitie. Such as they are, I doe humbly exhibite both heere together into your Royall hands, to dispose of according to your most gratious and wise pleasure, and as ye shall thinke good for them; for whose good they are intended. The first Treatise, containeth an eightfold probation of the diuine and perfit consti∣tution of the Church of England, the which I doe demonstrate to be much more complete then any Genenian forme whereso∣euer in the world, for a moderate, quiet and calme refutation of a certaine contrary assertion contained in the three and fifty prea∣chers of Scotlands petition presented vnto your Maiestie in the late Parliament. And though there were many reasons; which might induce me to dedicate the same vnto your Royall Maie∣stie; yet nothing mooued me so much thereunto, as that the de∣monstration which I doe vse, is drawen out of the diuine Booke of the Reuelation of Saint Iohn the diuine; the which I may in a manner call the Booke of King Iames the diuine, a demon∣stration that no writer hath vsed, before me so farre as I know for I suppose, that no diuine will or can denie; but that  he Booke of the Reuelation is contained a representation both of the Church Triumphant in Heauen by such externall or sensi∣ble signes or showes, as were most fit to represent the same by; and likewise of the Church militant on earth, such as it was to bee after our Sauiours ascensien in the two times of persecution and peace, aye vntill the last period of his glorious comming to iudgement. For as the beloued and diuine man of God Moses, made the Tabernacle according to the patterne or modele shewed him in the mount; as the Scripture speaketh; so our Sauiour Christs beloued and diuine disciple Saint Iohn representeth vnto vs the forme and fashion of the militant Church, according to the patterne of the Triumphant, shewed vnto him by reuelati∣on in the Ile of Pathmos. So that (in the opinion of all diuines) amongst the many particular Churches, that are on earth, that which is likest vnto the Church in heauen, must needs bee the
diuinest and best; and that so much the more because that our Sauiour himselfe hath taught vs to pray and say daily, thy will be done in earth, as it is in heauen. Now that the Church of England doth more neerely resemble the heauenly Church, then the Geneuian doth; I make it apparant by eight pregnant proofes, and irrefragable arguments; founded and grounded all of them in Gods written word, especially in the foresaid diuine booke of Saint Iohns Reuelation. 1. in that the Church of England is more diuine, or God-like then the Geneuian, in her supreame Gouerner on earth, the Prince. 2. in that shee is more Angelicall, or Angel-like in her secondary Gouernours of Archbishops and Bishops. 3. more celestiall or heauen-like for holinesse. 4. more heauen like for humble reuerence. 5. more heauen-like for harmonie. 6. more heauen-like for habite. 7. more heauen-like for locall decencie, Church-implements conueniency, Church-seruice solemnity, and sacramentall ceremo∣nies. 8. and lastly, more heauen-like for honour of the ministery. In the handling of which eight arguments, I doe demonstrate the lawfulnesse, vtility, and conueniencie of the chiefe rites vsed in the Church of England, as namely of holy dayes, of standing vp at the reading of the Gospel, of kneeling at the rehearsall of the Law, and in receiuing the holy Sacrament, of Churchmu∣sicke consisting of song and Organs, of the Church habite of Surplice and Rotchet, of the comely Structure and ornaments of Churches, of hauing a Font with a standing Table for the celebration of the Sacraments, and of signing with the crosse in Baptisme; for the which I doe produce thirteene arguments all grounded in Gods word. I doe likewise iu∣stifie the title of Priest giuen to the inferiours of the mini∣stery, and of Lord giuen to the superiours by diuers good reasons: and by thirteene arguments I prooue the lawfulnes and equity of paying tithes to the ministers vnder the Gospel, adding thereunto an Invectiue against the Genevian or Puritane impure sinne of sacriledge. And in handling the first of the eight branches of this our new demonstration, which is, that the
Church of England is more diuine or God-like then the Gene∣uian in her supreme Gouernour on earth; I do procue these sixe important points after following, most part against the common contrary opinions of Romanes and Geneuians; first that the King∣ly power is immediatly from God, and not from man, by eight Testimonies of Scripture and three arguments. Secondly that the kingly dignitie is absolutely greater then the priestly, and of all other the diuinest, by eight arguments. Thirdly that christian kings are not meere lay-men, but of a mixt condition partly, ec∣clesiasticall and partly secular, by ten sacred examples and three arguments. Fourthly that kings are lawgiuers vnto their people, and haue power of God to make lawes for the good both of church and common-wealth, by sixe arguments. Fifthly that kings are to be honourably and magnificently maintained, and that God hath allotted them a certaine competent portion of their subiects goods Sixtly, and lastly, that Kings are endowed with a sacred immunity from all manner of coercion and censure spirituall or temporall at their subiects hands. The which thing I procue against Romanes and Geneuians by seuenteene arguments, And this is the summe of the first Booke which I most humbly com∣mend vnto your maiesties patronage; the other beeing onely a briefe of a certaine part of a larger worke, I haue begun in La∣tine, containeth a ten-fold probation of the doctrine of the Church of England touching our Sauicurs locall descending in his soule after death into the hell of the damned, against the different and repugnant dostrines of Genenians and Romanes the which I do dedicate vnto the Reuerend prelats and pastors of the Church of Scotland. The verity of which doctrin I do show & confirme 1. by Typical prefiguration both personall and real, 2. by propheticall praediction. 3. by holy Scriptures pregnant histo∣ricall allusion. 4. by Euangelicall asseueration, 5. by apostolical explication, 6 by all christians catholicall confession, 7, by three & fortie ancient doctors and fathers vnanime and harmonious profession, besides some sixe or seauen Councels. 8. by thirtie chiefe protestant writers ingenuous reception and subscription,
besides some particular reformed Churches. 9. by irrefragable reason and demonstration. 10. and lastly, by the consideration of the diuers grosse absurdities, impieties, contradictions, and ridiculous expositions that they haue committed, which haue op∣pugned this auncient doctrine of the Church of England or dis∣sented from the same. And here I will likewise professe pub∣likely, that in case our precise Diuines can but shew as great va∣riety, and as good solidity of arguments and reasons, euen for all their opinions ioyned together, wherein they do dissent from the Church of England, as I shall shew for this one point onely, that I shall not be ashamed to retract my present opinions, wherein I doe dissent from them, and subscribe vnto theirs, and so become as precise, as euer I was knowne to bee once before. And thus haue I briefly laid open vnto your Maiestie the summe and sub∣stance of these two little bookes, which I haue written of late for the furthering of a perfit vniformity both in doctrine and disci∣pline in the Churches of these two Kingdomes; and euen for the perswading and enducing of my deere Countrey men to the reception of the auncient primitiue forme of Church, such as it was in the dayes of glorious Constantine the great, and during the purer time of the first fiue hundreth yeares; which is one of your Maiesties most christian and commendable desires and designes, worthy of the memorie and celebration of all succeding ages, the which, I pray the God of vnity and veritie that yee may as happily atchieue, as yee doe holily wish it and worthily haue begunst. That so the Church of Scotland may in your Maiesties blessed time receiue the consummation and accomplishment of her reformation from England, like as from her, shee had the in∣choation or beginning thereof, as our owne historie, doth witnesse: and that as the said Church hath already receiued of England their English Bible and Psalme-Booke, so may she now likewise receiue her Liturgie or Seruice-booke with the whole rites and orders contained therein. And though I be haply the first of my Countrey that euer wrote thus earnestly in defence of the Church of England; yet let not my deere Countrey-men, (vnto
whom God is my witnesse, I doe dayly wish all manner of happi∣nesse) thinke that I haue done it out of any worldly respect to priuate profite, benefit or benefice either already confe∣red, or hereafter to be confered vpon me; by Prince or Prelate, but out of a meere affection to verity and vnity & to the pure primitiue Church. The truth of which my protestation may hence appeare in part, in that these ten yeere past that I haue liued in England, I was at no time a Suter vnto your Ma∣iestie nor yet beholding to any Bishop, nor euer aimed at any benefice; as being at this houre and intending to continue euer hereafter a Lay-man; notwithstanding that the learned and re∣uerend Deane of Exeter, Doctor Sutcliffe, the nominated Pro∣uost of that begunne Controuersial Colledge, which beareth your Maiesties name, hath chosen me to be a fellow and an Antiqua∣ry therof. So that my deere countrymen shal haue no cause I hope to charge me with any preposterous affection or flattering hu∣mor in the behalfe of England; seeing that I haue no purpose of aspiring to Church preferment amongst them, who haue worthie Schollers enough of their owne and most complete Preachers to brooke their Benefices. Neither shal the learned ministery of my country take it euill, that a lay-man should thus meddle in Eccle∣siastical matters, if it shal please them to consider, how that a lay∣man may with greateringenuity & indifferencie handle such an argument as this is, then a Church-man who might happely be suspected offlatterie or fauour in the behalfe of one churches formemore then another, & that meerely for loue of preferment, from the which kinde of suspicion, one of my fashion is free. And as for capacitie requisite in the handling of this argument, I am content, they should haue no better opinion of me then the course of my life and stadies in their owne good iudgement may challeng at their hands: abreefe narration whereof, I thought good, by your Maiesties gracious leaue, here to insert, not out of any humour of ostentation, but onely that it may thereby appeare, that though I be a lay-man; yet I haue spent a good part of my time in the study of diuinitie, vnto the which, I was knowne at
home, so much to haue addicted my selfe, that at the age of 19. yeares, and euen before, I proceeded Master of Artes, I was re∣quested of some of our Ministery to preach by way of exercise: And though I did refuse to condescend vnto their earnest desire proceeding from their good opinion of me, for the which course I was not a little commended of that learned and renowned Di∣uine of good memorie, (Master Robert Rollock) who disliked the vnripe forwardnesse of some young spirits, howsoeuer other∣wise of great towardnesse; yet I ommitted not my priuate studie of diuinttie, but followed the same assiduonsly, being thereunto en∣couraged by the the foresaid Reuered Diuine, who had diuerted me from my intended voyaege into Denmarke, towards the fa∣mous and noble Philosopher and Astrologian Tycho Brahe, with whom I thought to haue prosecuted my begun Mathema∣ticall studies, and so perswaded mee to finish my Academicall course in the learned Colledge of Edenburgh, before I went to trauaile. And there beeing past some seuenteene yeares since the time I proceeded Master of arts, & went beyond sea, which was in the yeare 1601. I haue all this while giuen my minde wholly to good letters, and aswell diuine as humane. For three yeares of the said space I spent in the priuate studie of Philosophy, in con∣sidering of the more noble and choice questions, that haue beene mooued or disputed by the followers of Aristotle, but especially of diuine Plato, vnto whom I was alwayes more deuoted, and of the renowned Aegyptian Philosopher Hermes Trismegistus; following therein the example of those foure famous Italian Phi∣losophers, Franciscus & Ioannes Picus Mirandula, Marsi∣lius Ficinus, & Franciscus Patricius. Other three years I spent in reading and pondering the Church questions and con∣trouersies of our time, as they haue beene learnedly and diligent∣ly debated on both hands, by diuers great Diuines of these dayes. One yeare I spent in perusing some fourty treatises, discourses, commentaries, and consuitations written by some of the more mo∣derate and ingenuous, tending to pacification. Fiue yeares I spent in reading and perusing some of the choicest bookes of the Do∣ctors
of the Church, Greekes and Latines, and of the more re∣nowned amongst the Schoole-men, and other fiue I spent in per∣using politicall and historicall workes penned by diuers authors, especially Italians and Germans: together with the Genealogies of the Kings and Princes of Christendome. And for some clea∣rer euidence and proofe of this studious pastime, besides some ten little things already published in english, most part vpon diuine and morall arguments, namely, the Looking glasse of grace and glory, the Treasure of tranquillity, the Mirrour of religious men & godly Matrons, the Golden art or the right way of enriching, the Game of concord and vnion, admirable Prophecies of 24. famous Romane catholikes, touching the deformation and refor∣mation of Rome, two Pamphlets containing some seauen short Poems in honour of your Maiestie, and your noble children, to∣gether with these two present Treatises written of late in defence of the Church of Englands discipline and doctrine, besides these ten little exercises, I say, I haue written diuers things in Latine vpon Philosophicall, Historicall, and Politicall arguments, but most of all vpon Theologicall points: for being once a follower of the most precise sort, and euen a professed Puritane as they tearme it, I began at nineteene yeares of age, to write in Latine two bookes against Poperie; one of the which I haue entituled, of the admirable Antipathie or contrariety of Theolo∣gie and Papalogie, or of Gods word and the Popes. Wherein I point forth the oppositions & contradictions betweene the Scripture and the Romane doctrine, from the beginning of the Bible vnto the end thereof, going thorow euery chapter of both Testaments; answerable whereunto I haue deuided the said worke into two parts, the first containing an hundred and fourty nine Sections, the second an hundred and thirty: and it hath bin seene and well liked of some learned Schollers. The other is a de∣scription of the Tyrannie which was to be exercised vpon the mi∣litant Church, according to the tenure of the two noble prophesies of Daniel and Saint Iohn; where I doe entreat of the authors, instruments, duration, beginning, manner and ending of those
great troubles: and doe compare the opinions of writers, together touching the foresaid circumstances with the reasons thereof: a worke of no small labour consisting of eighteene large Sections or Chapters, and was by me dedicated vnto the Church and Col∣ledge of Edenburgh, where I tooke my degree, and therefore I sent it home out of France with my Coosin M. William Max∣well of Kauens, to be presented accordingly; though as I vn∣derstood since, it was the fortune of my Booke, to fall into the hands of M. Iohn Welshe, then a famous Preacher in those parts; who borrowed the same for a few daies, but not deliuering it againe, carried the same away with him into France, and hath kept it vntill this houre. I haue likewise written in Latine ano∣ther Booke called Romase redarguens, or Rome rebuking and reproouing her selfe: Wherein I doe prooue by the expresse Testi∣monies of Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Monkes, Friers, Prophets, Prophetesses, Schoolemen, and Cell-women of the Church of Rome, that shee standeth in need of reformation, against the contrary assertion of the learned Iesuite Martinus Becanus. The Propheticall part, (if so I may call it,) of which worke, I did publish of late in English, a Booke containing a col∣lection of more then an hundred strange Prophesies vtteredin former times touching the deformation, and reformation of Rome, by twenty foure famous Romane-Catholikes, whereof some twelue haue beene canonized for Saints, to wit, seauen men, and fiue women. I haue likewise written a disputation or disqui∣sition touching the seate of Sathan: whether it was to be in the North, as the Romish Doctors doe holde, or in the South, where I prooue against the Romane Doctors by Scripture and nature, by Theologie and Astrologie, by Philosophie and Historie, how that the North is absolutely the most diuine, eminent and excel∣lent, the very seate of God, and not of Sathan, and the chiefe re∣ceptacle of his Church. Another disputation and disquisition I haue written touching the seate of soules, where I refute the Po∣pish opinions of Purgatory, Limbus Patrum, Limbus infan∣tium, and the like hollow habitations of soules within the earth,
and I doe show that the ancient Fathers, knewne more places but three at most, as the Greekes doe at this day; Paradise; Heauen and Hell. In the same I doe refute the erroneous opini∣ons of Romanes and Geneuians, Papists and Puritanes touching our Sauiours descending into hell, and prooue the doctrine of the Church of England touching that article to be only orthodoxe; a briefe of which part of that Booke, I haue here published in English. And in the same larger worke, I do defend the saluation of Salomons soule against Cardinall Bellarmine, and others, iumping with him in that vnprobable and vncharitable opinion. Another disputation I haue written in Latine vpon the Inuo∣cation of Saints, against the Romane Knight of Saint Peter Gaspar Scioppius, against whose allegations of Scripture, and probations fetcht from thence: I who am a layman like him∣selfe, howsoeuer inferiour for humane letters and titles doe em∣ploy some 28. arguments fetcht not only from Scriptures, but also from Greeke and Latine Fathers, besides Philosophers, Poets, and Historians: and the same Methode and manner of probation, I doe vse in a certaine Theologicall and Historicall Plea against the learned Iesuite Iames Gretser, for the prehe∣minence of the Emperour, and Kings aboue Popes, Patriarkes, Archbishops and Bishops, and generally of all Priests, and for their mixt condition of Ecclesiasticall and ciuill. Lastly, I haue written a Treatise called Catholico-Iacobus, Catholi∣co. Britannus; wherein I do demonstrate the true Catholi∣cisme of Britaines, and doe euidently prooue that your Maie∣stie and your subiects haue all those things, that Gods word re∣quireth, to make men true Christians and Catholikes, against the contrary assertion of the learned French Archbishop, Car∣dinall Iames Perron. The which two Treatises last mentio∣ned, written in defence of King Iames, and this Church, against two learned and famous Romane Catholikes of the name of Iames, by your Maiesties subiect and seruant of the same Name, shall be (God willing) shortly published for the first laïck fruits of that begunne Colledge, which beareth the name of
King Iames, whereof I am to bee a Fellow. The which pre∣misses beeing considered, I hope the more easily to gaine the Church of Scotlands good opinion, and that they shall not charge me with incapacitie to handle such a weighty argument as this, hauing written so much in matters belonging to Church and Religion. To be briefe, thus haue I spent these seuenteene yeares yeares of my priuate & obscure life, since I proceeded Master of Artes, and went beyond sea, in giuing my selfe to studie and contemplation, endeauouring to know much, and to contentation, in no wise coueting after much; and to Temperance and Conti∣nency, Whereof I take the all-knowing God and his chaste An∣gels to witnes. And now these my poore labours, such as they are, I most humbly lay downe at your Royal feet, begging your Ma∣iesties most honourable patronage and acceptance, and in pray∣ing the God of Vnitie and Veritie, to giue them a blessing for the furthering of your most Christian desire, and glorious designe, so that we may euen in your owne happie daies, see with our eyes the full accomplishment thereof, to the glorie of his name; the comfort of his Church, the good of great Britaine, and your Maiesties eternall honour. So prayeth daily

