



SIR.
THis Tragedy of An∣tigone
may perchance
(considering the sub∣iect
of it) be thought
a Poem too sad and
balefull to bee read with pleasure,

or presented with delight vpon any
Stage. I confesse the saddnesse of it;
but if it suffer for that, it will raise a
question more general; Why trage∣dyes
haue at any time bin allowed?
Why the ruines and calamities of
some men haue beene represented
as a delightsome pastime to other
men? Why those ancient witts,
whom Greece in her learned'st times
did highly admire, haue chosen for
their deathlesse Poems almost no
other arguments then those calami∣tous
storyes of Thebes, Mycenae,
Troy, and, most of all, this very dis∣course
of the fatall and incestuous
family of Oedipus? where almost

all the passages are so farre (a man
would thinke) from delighting
men, that they might mooue
a suffering euen in the furyes
themselues? and why the grea∣test
Princes, both Graecian and
Roman, in their highest iollity haue
not onely beheld with delight the
presentation of them: but for their
owne excercise (as many of them
as haue had the itch of writing)
haue chosen these arguments, and
made them into Tragedyes? VVhy
this hath been generally so (though
the cause neede no Apology, at least
not mine) I will venture some few
coniectures. All the spectatours are

either wretched or fortunate; the
wretched in sad storyes are in some
sort eased by fellowship in woe, or
delighted with tragicall expressions,
as being somewhat of kindred with
their owne thoughts; those that are
fortunate, are affected, in such
showes, either with delight, or whol∣some
sorrow; if they be delighted, it
is in the tast of their own prosperity,
which appeares greater, set off by an
obiect of such contrariety▪ & this de∣light
is not out of malice (as plea∣sed
with the woes of others) but
acknowledgement to those high
powers which made the difference;
if they be sorrowfull, their sorrow is

wholsome; for as in melancholly dis∣eases
merry tales are vsed to assist na∣ture:
so in too great a ioy, & wanton∣nes
of the soule, such sad representa∣tions
are as a good allay, depressing
the leuity of their thoughts to such a
meane, as is fit to entertaine the best
contemplations. Moreouer Trage∣dyes
(besides the state of them) are
pleasing in the expression, foras∣much
as saddnesse doth vsually af∣ford
the best straines of writing: to
omit other instances, loue it selfe
(the vsuall argument of our new
Comedy) is there best written,
where it is most distressed, and in de∣spairing
passion; that part of the

Comedy seeming best, which is
nearest tragedy, in that straine also
goe most, or the best of loue-sonnets
that noware made. But I wander too
far in this theame; excuse me (no∣ble
Sir) for pressing so much vpon
your patience, the worke it selfe,
did it not more trust ot your good∣nesse
then it's owne worth,
would thinke it selfe too long to be
read by you. If you accept it, it seekes
no farther. To speake of you as you
deserue, I dare not, since your known
modesty would checke my pen: but
this I dare say; there are no arts or
armes, or any other trueabilities, that
euer had the happinesse to know

you, but will sprea your worth,
& thinke you most worthy to stand
(as you doe) in the presence of a
King, wishing you long blest in his
Maiesties fauour, & the King blest
with moe such seruants as you are.
God, after all, grant vnto you his
blessed presence; and so I rest

