


Right Honourable,
I BEING of late in reuoluing and reuiewing the confused Masse of mine vnpolished pa∣pers, among mine other exerci∣ses and essayes, I found the proiect and platforme, of this present Art: and hauing taken some paines about the polishing and finishing thereof, I was loath it should perish, or yet lye any longer shut vp in the obscure corner of a cof∣fer. And therefore partly presuming, and partly ho∣ping that it might do some good, vnto such as labour,

either to get goods with a good conscience, or to vse their goods already gotten in a good and godly manner, I was somuch the more willing to set it out to publicke veiw. And because it was mine hap to prosecute my stu∣dies, and to run my Philosophicall course in the Noble Citty of EDINBVRGE, whereby my small capa∣city hath herein been furthered; and my fortune to write and finish this present Arte in this famous Citty of LONDON, where now I liue: therefore I thought it my duty to dedicate the same vnto the foresaid two most Honourable Citties of this Ile, and that for a testimony of mine obseruancy, and gratefull affection towards them both; Being somuch the more moued to implore and imploy their honourable patro∣nage therein, as for because that the subiect thereof doth especially concerne Citties and Citizens, and gene∣nerally all such in Citty or country as labour to be rich in the right way. In it truely is contained whatsoeuer thing the Sacred Scripture dispersedly doth afford concer∣ning pouerty and riches, and the vertues and vices which are incident or conuersant about the same. Out of the which holy Booke, I haue collected the whole rules reasons, probations, and exemplifications of this Arte, and therfore I haue not amplyfied nor enlarged my dis∣course, as I might haue done with the forraine stuffe of humane testimonies, and that for these three reasons. First because that the holy Scripture beeing diligently searched is no lesse-sufficient to shew a man the right way of Enriching, then it is of Beleeuing; & that the reasons and testimonies thereof are of vncontroullable authority. Secondly because I did foresee how that this Arte by such enlarging would arise to such a volume,

that it should bee both hardly reade ouer of rich men, who haue too little time to peruse large bookes, and hard∣ly compassed or got of poore men, who haue too little money to buy big bookes. And lastly, because it is my purpose, God willing, to discourse both Theologically, and Philosophically, in the Arte of Flying, how that no lesle then these ten Schoolemaisters, 1. Al∣mighty God; 2. The glorious Angels; 3. The holy Pen-men of sacred Scripture, Prophets and Apostles; 4. The reuerend Doctors of the Church; 5. The wise Philosophers of the Hea∣then; 6. The Worlds frame in the Heauens, Starres, and Elements, 7. The Fowles of the Aire; 8. The Fishes of the Sea; 9. The Beasts of the Field; 10. And the creeping things of the earth, do all of them coniunctly concurre to teach Man, how to become a Bird of Paradise; that is to say, how to flie from all vices, to all opposite ver∣tues: Accept therefore, Right Honourable, in good worth, in the name of your foresaid two flourishing Citties the Golden Arte of Enriching, such as it is, being the first Arte that euer was written vpon this subiect, yea, and the first Arte, that euer was ori∣ginally written in the common language of this most noble Ile, and as I suppose the first booke, that euer did beare this Vnionall kind of Dedication. Grace it there∣fore with your fauourable visage, and guarde it with your worthy patronage, So shall it bee secured vnder your shadow, and I encouraged to offer, God-willing, one day, vnto the honour of these your two most Honou∣rable Sister-citties, our IAMES ANNA, that is, the patterne of a perfite Citty. That which resteth is my

thrise hearty wish vnto God, who hath planted peace in your Borders,Psal. 147.13.14. strengthned your gates, and satisfied you with the floure of wheate, that it would be his gra∣tious pleasure, to crowne you more and more with all kind of Spirituall and Temporall blessings, that your Sonnes may be as the plants,Psal. 144.12.13.14. growing vp in their youth, and your Daughters as the corner-stones grauen after the similitude of a Palace,Psal. 65.9.10.11.12.13. that your corners may be ful, and abounding with diuers sortes, and the furrowes of your fieldes may be made soft with showers, and fil∣led with fatnesse. That your pastures may be replenished with dewy grasse, and clad with sheepe, bringing forth thousands in your Territories, together with kine sen∣ding forth the soft streames of sweet milke, and likewise with oxen strong to labour your land. That your vallies may be couered with corne,Psal. 132.15. Zach. 9.17. and your trees and orchards loaden with fruite; so that your Poore may be satisfi∣ed with bread, and your Yong-men and Maids for ioy may shoute and sing.Psal 144 14. That there be no inuasion from without, nor sedition from within, nor no crying in your streetes,Isay 23.58. and circumiacent townes. That your Merchants may be as Princes, and your Chapmen and Shopmen as the Nobles of the earth, that they may be rich in godlinesse and in good workes, no lesse then in gold and in goods, ready to distribute and com∣municate,1. Tim. 6.17.18.19. laying vp in store for themselues a good foun∣dation against the time to come, that they may obtaine eternall life.Exod. 18.21.25. & 23.1.2 3.6.7.8.9. Deut 1.13.16.17. 2. Chron. 19.5.6.7. That your Lawyers, Iustices, and Iudges may be replenished with wisdome, & vnderstanding in the Law, & with conscionablenesse and courage in plea∣ding the good cause, and in doing of Iustice and Iudge∣ment without respect of persons, or yet of reward.

That your Preists may be clothed with saluation,Psal. 132.16. Malach. 2.7. Mat. 5.14.15.16. Deut. 32.5. Philip. 2.15. that their lips may preserue knowledge, and that they may shine as lightes by their sound instruction and sanctifi∣ed conuersation in the middes of the blind and naughty multitude of sinnefull and earthly minded men. Fi∣nally, that it would please his Diuine clemency alwaies to rescue Dauid his seruant, and to shew his saluation and word more and more vnto Iacob our Soueraigne,Psal. 61.6.7, & 91, 14, 15, 16, & 144, 10, 11, & 147.19, Hosh, 14, 6, 7, 8. to satisfie him with long life, and to make his yeares as many ages, to be with him in trouble, to amplifie his Ma∣iesty, and to increase his glory in the sight of all his ene∣mies, that hee may grow as the Lillie, and fasten his rootes in Albion, as the trees of Lebanon. That his branches may spread, and his beauty may be as the oliue tree, and his smell as Lebanon, that they that dwell vnder his shadow may flourish as the vine, and that the sent of Albion may be as the wine of Lebanon, That so a blessed Princes blessed People may goe on from blessednesse to blessednesse, and thus blessed may alwaies blesse him, who is the blesser of you both, euen he whose name is Iehouah, who will blesse you in this life, with temporall and spirituall prosperity and crowne you after this life with eternall felicity.

