



Dread Soueraigne:
AFter that I had compiled this ensing Dialogue, I thought your Maiestie the most fit Maecenas for it; both in re∣spect of the matter and man∣ner. The matter is a Dispute about Religion, both Prote∣stant and Popish; the manner is by vsurping certaine names occurring in the Acts of the holy Apostles, and accommodating them so, as
may best befit these times: amongst which, the chiefe is Sergius Paulus, before whom Paul and Ely∣mas enter the lists, with an ayme chiefely at the ouercomming of this honourable person. The issue is, according to Pauls desire, the setling of Sergi∣us Paulus in the truth; so that with him there was no more place now for Elymas. Your Maiestie hath beene much conuersant in disputations, and now at length, I vvill not say being setled (for it appeareth sufficiently, that there hath euer been a setlednesse and resolution in your Royall brest) but not thinking good to lend an eare any longer to the friuolous arguments of such as haue sought your auersion from the Truth, your MAIESTIE hath prouided, that they shall haue no more copĭe of disputing within your whole iurisdiction. The Worke, I confesse, is too sleighty to bee presen∣ted before so large an vnderstanding, and the Au∣thor too meane to presume to so high a patro∣nage:Epistle Dedi∣catory vpon the Lords Prayer. But forasmuch as your Maiestie hath ac∣knowledged it to haue beene your owne course to dedicate your royall writings to fit persons, with whom each Tract might best suite; my hope is, that my boldnesse shall haue pardon, if in follow∣ing so worthy an example, I haue aspired to this dedication. It hath bred much sollicitude in your Maiestie (as your late directions touching prea∣chers and preaching doe testifie) to consider the dayly increase of Popish superstition euen within your Maiesties Dominions. And wee your faith∣full subiects cannot but haue a sympathy herein; for which cause wee highly applauding that di∣rection
of instructing in the Principles of Religi∣on, doe apply our selues diligently to this Cate∣cheticall kinde of teaching, if haply the mobile vulgus might thus bee faster grounded. And for mine owne part, according to that slender skill, which GOD hath giuen mee, I haue by vvri∣ting endeauoured to further this kinde of teach∣ing,English Cate∣chisme. and to hold to the patterne of the lesser au∣thorized Catechisme, for the auoiding of confusi∣on, by an vniforme proceeding: wherein I haue not beene altogether frustrated of my end neither, there being many Reuerend Diuines and others, amongst whom this labour of mine hath beene so accepted, as that it hath long agoe come to the third impression. Now if my coniecture deceiue mee not, another good helpe to preserue from this infection, would bee some Antidote of our te∣nents and grounds, and of Popish tenents and pra∣ctices in the worship of God, without all ground set vp, either by aduantage taken of the darknesse, or by force, there beeing none able to make re∣sistance in seuerall times and ages of the world; especially if it might bee perspicuous and plaine to any capacitie, and briefe for euery ones leisure and abilitie. And such is this, which I here pre∣sent vnto your Sacred Maiestie, the which or the like vnto which, I could wish that euery one, who is not furnished with better, would make his vade mecum. That Reuerend and learned Bishop of Meath hath lately put out a Worke in answere to a Iesuite, of the noueltie of Poperie, in so com∣plete a manner, as that a man would thinke, as
it was said of the answer of our blessed Sauiour, none should dare to aske that question any more. If this of mine comming after, it should seeme su∣perfluous, my apologie is, that our Church be∣sides the greater hath also the lesser Catechisme. Babes must haue their prouision as well as those that are stronger. Your Maiesties care of the good of this Church committed vnto you herein, like to that of Constantine in the matter of Arianisme, as it hath much reioyced my heart, and the hearts of many thousands that pray for the prosperitie of Si∣on, so it hath incouraged mee to presse into your Sacred presence with this my Goates-haire, not be∣ing able to bring better. Your Maiestie, I know, hath no need of such Tracts, but many of vs that bring presents in this kinde may bee glad to learne from your Pen, and to receiue knowledge from your lips; yea,1 King. 10.. blessed are they that stand alwayes in thy presence to heare thy wisedome. Yet vouchsafe, I beseech your Maiestie, to suffer it to passe vnder the protection of your countenance to your people, and I doubt not, but the Protestant Religion shall hereby ap∣peare vnto them as it is, so amiable and rightly grounded; and the Religion of the Church of Rome so corrupt, and peruerting the grounds, as that thou∣sands, which shall attentiuely and without preiudice reade it, shall herein blesse God for you; some that were ignorant of the differences of these religions, and so standing indifferently affected, being better informed; some that were wauering through the seeming truth of that heresie, being confirmed; and some that were simply seduced and gone from vs,
being againe to the truth reduced, to the great glory of God, and to the fulfilling of the number of most loyall and faithfull subiects, in whom the heart of your Maiesty may most safely trust. The Father of lights, who hath so enlightned your knowledge; the Son, that life, who hath so viuified your heart; and the Spirit, that sire, who hath so inflamed your zeale for the truth, increase, confirme and prosper this your knowledge, life, and zeale to the benefiting of many soules, and to the ioyfull giuing vp of your Maiesties Accounts at the great day of reckoning; Amen prai∣eth he, who is

