

TO THE WORSHIPFVL and singularly religious ROGER THORNTON Esquire, my very good Friend and Patron, and to the hopefull branches of his late cut-off Vine, the com∣fortable fellowship of God the Holy GHOST.
IT is a saying: Dies dolo∣rē minuit: Time lessen∣eth griefe: which if it bee true, I may seeme to misse of my marke, by bringing again to remem∣brance your inestimable losse: seeing to remember a grieuous accident, is to rub
euer a sore, and to increase patne, when time had well nigh worne it away. But to set fourth the praises of the dead, & to arect monuments to their memory, are (I know not how) though no subsidia mortuorum salues vnto the dead, yet solamina viuorū, by the practise of all ages, comforts of friends surui∣uing. And not without cause, seeing it is promised, that the memory of the inst shall be blessed, & the name of the wicked shall rot, Pro. 10-17. Wherefore in all a∣ges, men haue been carried, as it were, by a secret instinct thus to seek the continuance of the good memory of their deceased deare ones, and so haue had some solace by the
remaining shadow which they could not haue by the fading substance. Thus laa∣kob set vp a piller to his best beloued Rachel, and Absa∣lom being conscious to him∣selfe of his ill deserts,Gen. 35.20. for which it was likely, that his memory should not without a Monument, set vp a noted piller in his life time, to con∣tinue his name after death, 2 Sam. 18.18. The Man solemn built by Artemisia to her decre husband deceased, hath beene, for the statcli∣nesse, one of the seuen won∣ders of the world: And it is incredible to recoum what costly Pyramides Turkish Emperours haue built for the continuance of name. And some haue doted so far,
not content to haue the me∣mories of their friends thus continued, as of excelient men and women they haue delighted, in procuring diuine honours vnto them, as vnto he and she gods. But the witty scoffe of Agesilaus King of the Lacedemonians may well bee applied vnto such, who when the Thrace∣ans would needs put diuine honors upon him for his good deserts towards them, sayd: Deos vosipsos priùs faci∣te, rùm deisicandorum hominum potestatem vo∣bis esse credam. First make your selues gods, and then I will beleeue that yeo haue power to make other men gods. Wee are not of those Christians, that doe
thus, robbing God of his ho∣nour, honour the Saints of God departed, or such as by excessine cost robbing the poore, seeke to inrich the tombs of the dead. As rom saith of the costly Churches and Monasteries built to the honour of Saints, so may we iustly say heere. Quis tam insipiens est, vt non intelligat, quod talia aedificia non cedunt ad Deigloriam, sed ad mun∣di pompam? Who is so foo∣lish, that he doth not vnder∣stand that such buildings tend not to the glory of God, but to wordly pomp? And againe, Qualis potest esse iustitia munerare mortu∣os, & spoliare viuos? What righteousnesse can this
be to honour the dead, and to spoyle the liuing? we print and paint, carue and graue, enely for their iust commen∣dation, that we may remem∣ber, that as their memory liueth vpon earth amongst men, so their soulos liue al∣wayes amongst Angells in heauen; and that hauing them still, as patternes before our eyes, we may be whetted on to an imitation of their vertues, who haue so happily runne their race, finisht their course; and already recei∣ued the crowne of righ∣teousnesse. This Worthy, whom I heere describe, de∣serued more cost then I haue, or was able to bestow, and I confesse that her excellency compared with the simplicity
of this rapsody, or hastened labour of mine, hath hither to deterred me from making it publique. But now, be∣cause I see it is expected, and I might otherwise bee bla∣med at many hands, for neg∣lect of so great good deserts, I haue aduentured it forth, and if I haue not so fully di∣splayed her colours, as I might, the fault was in your too great secresie, through which, her singular, pious, and charitable acts done by her in so great closenes, were hidden from my knowledge, so that I could not insert them. And because it is for her memory, that I have done this, I haue diuided it, deuoting to her as is most proper, the dedication, and
to you the consolation. Wher∣fore take that which is yours, and whereof yee haue inst cause, hauing a wife, a mo∣ther already so highly aduan∣ced in heauen: of who I may without flattery, to my know∣ledge,Pro. 31.29. vse the words of Le∣muels mother, Many daughters haue done ver∣tuously, but thou fur∣mountest them all. It is not, if it bee duly considered, your losse, and but her gaine, though I confesse it a great losse to vs all, for with the losse gaine redounds vnto vs. Whilst shee liucd, wee could haue onely the comfort of one in the iourney with vs, now she is dead, we may haue the comfort of one, our iourney-fellow safely come to the end
of the way. And this is a double comfort, the one for that one of our neere fellow-members is gone from mise∣rie to glory, the other for that in her wee haue beene more confirmed, who saw her ioyfull end, so many as walke after him. For wee ought to reioyce with those that re∣ioyce, and it was the ancient enstome of the Church of God, and now is to giue God thankes for the happy depar∣ture of good Christians, in regard of their breaking the ice before vs, to the confir∣ming of our hope, when wee shall follow after. Vnto this monument, for the further garnishing, I haue added a discourse of another Saint dying long agoe, which deser∣ueth
to be engrauen in mar∣ble with a pen of iron. And this I haue done to supply my wants, through defect of memory, in setting downe her speeches and prayers: For looke what is heere spo∣ken in exhorting, in comfor∣ting, in reforming, and in praying, was all in effect spo∣ken by her, if a register heer of had beene made. And I haue made this addition the rather, that all the world may know, that in what faith, and hope, and affecti∣ons, and iudgements, good Christians amongst vs dye now a dayes in the same faith and affections the most lear∣ned and holy seruants of God died twelue hundred yeeres agoe. For let who so will look
with a single eye into this Treatise, and he shall plain∣ly see, that Ierom held a particular faith, prayed only to God, professing great boldnesse, for that Christ was his brother, renounced all merit of his owne workes, and beleeued to passe imme∣diately to be auen, being sha∣ken with no feare of purga∣tory fire, with many poynts more, which may easily bee gathered. But I forget my self, I write too long an Epi∣stle before so briefe a worke. I conclude therefore, and pray the God of comfort to fill you with true heauenly comfort to the end. Amen.

