


DRead Soueraigne, for so much as J haue now a long time de∣uoted my selfe by writing to doe some seruice to this Church, whereof the great God of Heauen hath made your Maiesty, vnder his Sonne
Christ, supreme Head and Gouernour; J haue thought it my duty (now that by the Diuine assistance J haue finished this dif∣ficult Worke, which is the first that J haue put forth since your Maiesties auspicious comming to the Crowne) to present it to your Royall hands, as being the best way that J haue to expresse my vnfained hearty loue and affection, and exceeding great ioy for the happy Inauguration of another very Dauid againe for courage, after such a Solomon for wisdome; of another Iosuah after Moses; after a Writer, a Fighter of the Lords battels: Onely J pray, that he who alone modera∣teth the warres, would likewise grant Ʋi∣ctories to our Iosuah and to his Forces and Confederates, that no idolatrous Amorites may be able to stand before him, but now that their wickednesse is come to such an height, they may be confounded
and dissipated. This must be their end, as the Fountaine of all profound wisdome did long agoe reueale vnto Iohn, neither can it bee long before they come to this end, as the following expositions vpon Iohn I hope will make plaine to euery in∣telligent Reader. The Reuelation, the ex∣pounding of which, is the chiefe part of this Worke, was a Booke, into the mysteries whereof your Maiesties Father of bles∣sed memory delighted much to search, as appeareth by that most worthy Monu∣ment which he hath left to all posterities hereupon; and I doubt not, but your Ma∣iesty being Inheritor not onely of your Fa∣thers Dominions, but also of his Ʋertues, is likewise affected with such holy Studies, being indeed as a furtherance of courage and resolution, so of true blessednesse, as is peculiarly by the Spirit pronounced vpon this Booke, saying,Reuel. 1.3. Blessed is hee that
readeth and they that heare the words of this Booke. The distractions of Kings, I grant, are great, by reason of their manifold most important affaires, yet it is the constitution of the King of Kings that they should haue his Word before them,Deut. 17.18. and be reading therein all the daies of their liues, that they might learne to feare God, and not haue their hearts lif∣ted vp aboue their brethren. The marke at which he would haue them to aime, is the feare of God and humility, amidst so many and great temptations to pride and contempt; the meanes to helpe to these glo∣rious ornaments is daily reading. My hope therefore is, that my seruice tendred in this kinde, though by the meanest a∣mongst many, will not be vnacecptable to your Royall Maiesty, but that notwith∣standing the great and diuers present di∣stractions, there shall be some times spared
to meditate vpon these Expositions. That speech of Chrysostome was notable to secular men,Chrysost. conc de Lazaro. making their continuall worldly imploiments a Supersedeas to the reading of the Scriptures. What sayest thou (O man) that thou hast no leisure by reason of thy worldly businesses to reade the Word of God, the more thy distracti∣ons are, the more need hast thou to reade, that amidst the tossings of these tempestu∣ous waues, thou mayst enioy the perpetuall comforts and directions of the Scriptures. Theodosius the second,Theodos. 2. though his di∣stractions could not but bee great through the amplitude of his Dominions, yet spa∣red so much time in his priuate Closet to the Word of God, that hee wrote the new Testament ouer with his owne hand: and Alphonsus,Alphonsus. King of Spaine and Na∣ples, is said to haue read the Bible with the ordinary glosse fourteene times ouer.
Which things J mention not (most Graci∣ous Soueraigne) but onely to adde fuell to your fire and oyle vnto your flame: that the zeale which your Maiesty is well knowne to haue vnto the Word of God and to the truth therein set forth, may bee yet increased till it commeth to be doubled, as the spirit of Elijah was vpon Elishah. For what seruice is there, that wee, the Ministers of Christs Gospell can doe com∣parable to this of seeking the through Sanctification of the Lords Anointed ouer vs, and of polishing the rich Diamonds of grace vpon his Crowne, that they be more and more resplendent and shining? The bent of our Prayers both publike and pri∣uate is daily this way, and therefore let my Lord, the King, pardon the zeale of his seruants, if when they can get any oppor∣tunity, their exhortations bend this way also. We reade of Gods blessings vpon the
people of Israel vnder Dauid, Solo∣mon, and Iosiah, and generally how in the dayes of all the godly Kings and Go∣uernours that haue beene, the Graces shi∣ning in them haue beene so acceptable, as that the Lord hath delighted to doe good to the whole Kingdome for their sakes. Your Maiesty is the very breath of our nosthrils and the light of our eyes, that great Tree mentioned in Daniel, vnder which we your Subiects, as beasts and birds doe shroud our selues and make our nests, being alone worth 10000. of vs. Jt is therefore the height of our ambition in our inward desires and outward endeuours, that your Maiesty may be vpright hear∣ted and valiant as Dauid, wise as Solo∣mon, and of ardent zeale like vnto Io∣siah. And to this end doe we presse, as into the Court of Heauen by our Prayers, so into your Maiesties Court with Exhor∣tations,
Treatises, Discourses, and Ex∣positions, not passing for any toile and la∣bour, any carping and cauilling of censo∣rious Critikes, or any enmity of Syco∣phants, so that what we doe may be cordi∣all to him, to behold whose vertues in∣crease with his yeeres our eyes and hearts are all fixed. The times are dangerous, and the enemies of the truth haue of late yeeres greatly preuailed, and still they v∣nite their forces like Gebal, and Am∣mon, and Amaleck, and these of Tyre: but God, who is the patron of the truth, hath shewed that he will put an end to these troubles, and one day these incendiaries of warres shall haue a battell, wherein they shall fight their last, euen in Harmaged∣don. Jn the meane season yet, were J a Daniel, though to speake before so great a King as Nebuchadnezzar, or a Io∣seph, though to speake before a King as
renowmed as Pharaoh, J would not only present the explication of these darke my∣steries, but giue counsell also what is to be done by your Royall Maiestie, who by the Grace of God are the most potent and chiefe Defender of the truth at this day in Christendome. But J am a childe in vnderstanding, neither haue J the spirit to be able to giue counsell in State affaires. Onely J pray God, from whom is the spirit of such deepe vnderstanding, to inspire your Maiesties noble Councellors, that they may giue the Counsell, and your Royall Heart, that you may accept of it, whether it tendeth to the animaduersion against sinne and all notorious sinfull persons, and to the discountenancing of them, to the embracing with loue and fauour of the most godly and zealous for the truth, or to a more strict proceeding for the disa∣bling, if not for the rooting out of those
whose cause is common with the enemies that threaten danger and ruine to vs all. And touching my present worke, my humble suit vnto your Maiesty is, that you would accept of it, at your vacant times peruse it, and suffer it to passe vn∣der your Royall Patronage, though not for his sake that publisheth it, being in∣deed vnworthy of such a fauour, yet for the sakes of those Worthies, with whom hee comes accompanied, euen almost all the most famous Instruments that God hath euer vsed to giue light to these ob∣scurities. My desire and first purpose was to haue presented together to your Maiesties view the whole new Testa∣ment, expounded and handled in this man∣ner in all the passages that most need ex∣position, a Worke of that sort that I know not any yet that hath laboured in it, but as I conceiue such as may be of great vse
and benefit to all that are studious of the holy Scriptures, and herein by the Grace of God J haue proceeded so farre that I want not much to the perfecting thereof. But for so much as partly through my bo∣dily infirmities, and partly through my many weekly anocaments in my pastorall charge, I must be a long time in doing à little in this, wherein so many Authors must be perused; I haue made bold to come with this Modell that I haue ready till the whole shall be finished, which if it may be acceptable, shall be altogether then at your Maiesties seruice. Jn the meane season, crauing pardon for this my presumption, I doe out of a true and most affectionate desire, commend your Maiestie to the Grace, Blessing, and Protection of the Highest, beseeching him to make you as happy as any of your Progenitors in a truly Religious and fruitfull Queene, wise
Counsellors, learned and holy Ministers, loyall and obedient Commons, and in vi∣ctorious proceedings for the defence of the distressed Gospell, and after this life en∣ded (to which may it long be) in the par∣ticipation of an vncorruptible Crowne of glory.

