


REceiue Reuerend Fathers, louing bre∣thren,
and deir flock, this Spirituall
Propine: conteiniug in short summe
the substance of that exercise of tryall,
wherewith ye are acquainted in dayly
doctrine, before ye communicate at the
Table of the Lorde, togidder with the
grounds of the doctrine of godlinesse
and saluation, contryued in a peece of not vnpleasand and ve∣rie
profitable Poësie. As I hope the hay Spirite be experience
sall make you to proue and finde with exhortationes, and allure∣ments
to the earnest and holy practise of Pietie, in Deuotion,
Faith, and Repentance. For vnderstanding your custome to
be, to ease the langour of time, and irksomnes of your labours
with singing▪ whilk is a gift naturallie giuen be God to many
for that effect, and the mater of that mufick amongst the com∣mon
sorte, to be vaine and profane▪ seruing to sop the saule in
sinne and vncleannes, and steir vp the corrupt and filt affec∣tiones
thereof to evill lustes, and seiking of occasiones to fulfill
the wicked desires thereof; I thought it my dutie to indeuour
to draw you to the right vse of Musick and singing, the whilk

being sanctified be gud and honest matter, and holy dispositi∣on
of heart, makes meikle for godlie edification and comfort.
For the measures of poësie & harmonie of musick (as I finde be
daily experience in my awin familie) delytes the mind, and sa
helpes the memorie very meikle, to embrace and keip fast the
matter, and stirres vp and sets the force of the soules affectiones
towards God, in pleasand meditation thereof. The reason is e∣uident
and naturall, because that like drawes to like, and de∣lites
therein, and that whilk delites, leaues a stamp and printe
in the memory, and moues sa the affectiones, that it is not easie∣lie
remooued. Now it is certaine that measures, harmonie, gud
order, and temperature, are like to the nature of man, & maist
friendlie and amiable thereunto: Seeing the gud constitu∣tion
of the bodie, standes in the gud temperature of the hu∣mours
therof; sa hes the saule also the awin sort of temperature:
If not in the nature, yet euidently in the faculties and affecti∣ones
thereof, meruelouslie mooued and disposed be the measures
temperature, and harmonious melodie of Musick and Poësie.
And the same also I take to be the cause why method and gud
order is the mother of memorie, & delectation in all thinges.
This the God and maker of the saule and spirites of men, knaw∣ing
best, hes set downe his haly will and veritie in sacred scrip∣ture:
not onely in plaine and simple prose, as in the storie, Pro∣phets,
and writings of the Apostles: but also in Poësie
and verses, meit to be vttered with the melodie of Musick; be
voyce or instrument; And that but question for memorie
and delectation, to bring foorth halines, whereby he might be
rightly worshipped, and men made to atteine to that happines
that is in the presence of his face, and inioying the light of his
countnance, where Angels sing without cease, Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God of Hostes, the warld is ful of thy glory,
as are the biks of Iob, of the Psalms, Prouerbs, Ecclesias∣tes,
& that maist sweete & pleasand Song of songs; & that

song of MOSES, commended be God to be put in the mouth
of the people, and sung continually; with many ma, baith in
the old & new Testament, be that renowmed father of the kirk.
T. B. prettelie put forth in French meeter: The translation
whereof, for your profite also I haue begunne to assay. And
therefore, as I cease not to commend vnto you maist instantly
these poësies of Scripture: namely, the Psalmes of DAVID, &
vther holy Prophets and men of God, whilk ye haue in your
handes, set out of old in meeter, as the maist pretious treasure
of instruction and comfort of the saule and inward man▪ Sa
also for the same cause, I carefully recommend vnto you, this
your Catechisme, & instruction in the right way of the true
seruice of God, and atteyning to saluation be Iesus Christ,
included in this little Poëme, and framed to the common
toones, wherewith ye are best acquainted: To the end, that yee
imploying the misused time therein, may haue the groundes of
Christian Doctrine imprinted in your memorie, with delyte
and pleasure, and be moued and stirred vp to grow in knaw∣ledge
and feeling of true godlines, whilk is profitable for all
things: And that ye may know, this is the very will and com∣mand
of God, for your speciall weill fare, fight, and lay vp in
your hearts, thir places and exhortationes of Scripture follow∣ing,
with the whilk, the Spirite of Grace and sanctification
might mightelie work, that ye may practise and obey the same.
1 Tim. 4. 7. 8. Cast away profane fables and auld wiues
tales, and exercise thy self in godlines. For bodiely ex∣ercise
profiteth little, but godlinesse is profitable for all
thinges, hauing the promises of this life, and that
whilk is to come. Ephes. 5. Harlatrie and vncleannes, and
greedinesse, let them not be named amangst you, as be∣comes
halie people, and foule and daft talk & bawdry,
away with that: but rather thansgiuing. Knawing this,
that na harlot, vncleane person, nor auaritio us, sall in∣herit

the Kingdome of Christ and God. Let nane
therefore deceiue you with vaine talk, for the whilk the
wrath of God, comes vppon the children of disobedi∣ence.
Be not therefore companions vnto them. Euill
communing, corruptes good maners: Speak vnto your
selues, in Psalmes, & Hymnes, and spirituall songs, sing∣ing
vnto the Lord with grace in your hearts. Coloss. 3.
16. 17. Let the speech of Christ dwel amangst you rifely
with all wisedome, teaching & admonishing your selfes
mutually, with Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spirituall
songs. And whatsoeuer ye do in worde or deed, doe it
in the name of the Lord Iesus, giuing thanks to God
the Father, throw him. To the whilk effect also, receiue this
sentence of BASILIVS the great, in his Epistle to GREGORY.
What is more blessed (sayth he) then man being on the
earth, to imitate the consent of the Angels that are
in heauen, soone be day-break, to go to prayer, and with
hymnes and songs to worship the Creator. Thereafter,
at Sunne rysing, to go to wark in na place without Prayer, and
finally, with songs, as with salt to season the actiones. For hym∣mick
cohortationes, brings a glad and cheerefull equabilitie
to the minde. Now, there are many maa things whilk I haue
thought neidfull and expedient for your vse and profite, as the
iust exposition of the Beleefe, Commandes, Prayer, and Sacra∣ments,
as they are Sabbothly exponed and teached vnto you.
Demands of storie, and poynts of Scripture, that our ordinary
proceeding therein, may be the better be remembred, for profite
in knawledge and practise: Spirituall meet medecines for your
accustomed diseases, that maist and oftenest moueth and trou∣bleth
the weake flesh: as seiknes and searenes of bodie, trouble
and griefe of mind, losse of geare, death of the deerest, and siklik,
declaration how dangerous are the sinnes that are maist com∣mon
amongst you, & prouoks God to wrath, & to strike with sik

plagues, that the same may be remooued & amended▪ descripti∣on
of the particular duties of superiors toward their inferiors,
& contrair, & of your chiefe trades & caling be sea & land,
that euery ane knawing and doing their duties, in their ranck
& ordr, your Kirk, common-weill, and societies may stand &
florish n ane halie and happie estate: and finally, the substance of
the solemne actiones, wherby we glorifie God, & edifies ane ano∣ther,
in our publick assemblies; as of Baptisme, the Supper, Fa∣sting,
Thanks giuing; Ordination of Elders, & solemnization
of Mariage: All the whilk be seueral treatises, are purposed &
minuted for your memorie, & salbe ready as ye sal require, that
the paines taken in the doctrine of these points, & actions, both
past & to come, may be the mair profitable, when ye sal haue the
substance thereof shortely abridged ready at your hande, to
be reewed with your eyes, and renewed in your minds, as your
neede sall require. It is true, that many of thir things are better
done & set down be vthers: but cōsiddering that the diuersity of
Gods gifts, in conceiuing & vttering of the self same substance
of doctrine, is als greate and wounderfull amangst men, as the
varietie of proportion, and lineaments of their faces and per∣sone
is: And that the forme wherewith people are accusto∣med
in daylie hearing, is easiest for their conceiuing and me∣morie
in writ: Ioyning herewithall, the liking ye haue of your
awin, and respect of that vnlwsable coniunction in the Loue
of Christ, whilk often being assayed, could neuer, nor hereafter
(be Gods grace) can be distolued betuixt vs. I was perswaded
that this little peece of paine, would not be superfluous and vn∣profitable,
howbeit, the like were done of euery Pastor to their
flock: For I protest (the truth to al, that the special respect of your
profite, deir flock) after dyuers years deliberation, hath thus put
out my name in print whilk vtherwaies suld either haue lurked
at hame, or shawin the selfe with appeirance of greater profite to
the cōmon weil of Christianity. But seeing you ar the only tallent

of the Lords gudes concredit to me: It sufficeth abundantly,
if in any small measure I may better you, and with sum increase
present you againe to my Lord at his comming. Wherefore my
earnest desire is, that you Reuerend Fathers, and louing bre∣thren
of the Eldership, mindfull of the weight of your charge,
and of the solemne aith and obligation, maid before God, his
Angelles aud Kirk thereanent. Take faithful and diligent care
that this word of life dwell plentifully, first in your awin hearts,
and nixt in your families: fra the whilk as fountaines of li∣uing
waters, it may flow vnto the heartes, houses and families
committed in particular to euery ane of your charge, & there∣for
relief of your sauls at that great daye, when the chief Pastor
sall appeare to receiue a reckoning of your Stewartrie. And the
dayly wish of my heart is for the effectual working of the quick∣ning
spirit of Christ in all your hearts, wha alanerly is able to
bring forth the effect of the knawledge & feeling of thir things
in the practise of a renewed life, and sanctified conuersation, to
confirme you mair and mair in the assurance of your election
and calling to the airship of eternall life in Christ Iesus the on∣ly
Sauiour, Sonne of man, and God ouer all blessed for euer.
From Ansteruther, the 20. day of Nouember. 1598.

