



THE treasures of Emperors themselues in their stil-preserued Actions, Counsailes and Liues (transcending farre their transitory treasures) In all Humility I present to your Lordshippes preseruation and protection; as proper, and pe∣culiarly due to the Honors of your Office and Title, for the most apt correspondency of your Iudiciall habilities, to husband and dispose as well the Treasures of Counsailes and Actions, as of Offices and Reuenues. Of all these Im∣periall Liues (my truely honoured Lord) most of the first Edition I haue only weeded, ordered, and amplified: The last six are the fruits of mine owne Labours. Three of the first I haue cast into new Mouldes: And the later I haue faithfully collected according to the most Authenticall and Impartiall-reputed Authours now extant, together with the confident relations of such as haue been eye-witnesses of some of the late Accidents, here offered as a Sacrifice to Immortall Memory. Notwithstanding which sufficient acquitall (and discharge from blame) of my well-intended Industries, I can no more assure nor promise their Approbations, then all other ingenuous and laborious Treasurers of example and vertue; though therein they cannot but be commended for cordiall restoratiues, to redou∣ble Liues, if not to eternize them. But, in these moderne times, Endeuours that profit not, receiue acceptances that please not. Yet such was the Bounty and Nobility of all our antient Presidents of Times, that whosoeuer committed, to the Monuments of writings, eyther the prayses of Cities or singular Men, were euer adorned with Crowns, or Honours.

But in these degenerate yeers of ours; As many other excellent and ornamentall Merits: so these, especially, are left vtterly prayselesse and exolete. For se men cease to doe praise-worthy deeds; To be praysed, likewise they thinke thriftlesse and idle. Not∣withstanding, what Presents more precious can possibly bee giuen to Men, then Prayse, Glorie, and Eternitie? All which I intentionally and effectually present and ascribe, with all Worthinesse, to your Lordshippe, in entitling them to you, in these supreamest Personages. For, Whosoeuer protects and maintaines Vertue and Nobilitie, must ne∣cessarily be himselfe both Vertuous and Noble. To the Protection therefore of all the Uertue and Nobility herein made sacred to Eternitie, Ionly select and inuoke your Ho∣nour, in these my humble Dedications; Abiding euer

