



SIr, my hap was of late, ouerlocking a large Librarie, to light vpon a small, but sweete booke of Method, for men intending their profite and honor by the experience of the world, and accesse to externe and remote parts, by that meanes to inrole themselues in the Cataloge of Homer his . seers of many Regions, and of the manners of many Nations, as Vlisses was, and your selfe more then Vlisses. This Methode, was composed by one M. Albertus Meier, at the command, direction, and charge of the honorable Henry Ranzou, now lord of Bredenberge, Counsailer and deputie to Christiern, the young King of Denmark in his Dukedoms of Sleswike, Holst, Stormare, and Dithmarsen, a man of singular wisdome learning, and zeale, both to his countrie, and the vtilitie and furthe∣rance of vertuous minds in generall.
My resolution was at the first to accommodate the same to my priuate vse, and therby to square my selfe fit for an occa∣sion, whensoeuer the pleasure of God, conuenient time, and good company (which I euermore wished) should draw me to trauell: But considering that excellēt Moral of Tullie, in his golden Offices deriued from the Stoikes:Officiorum  titul. de Iustit. Homines hominū causa esse generatos, vt ipsi inter se alii aliis prodesse possēt,

& communes vtilitates in medium afferre:
that men are borne for men, one to do for another, and to communicate al common helps with those that want them:
& withall, seeing how coherent the argument hereof is, with the occurrents of this yeare, not so myraculous to the Astronomer, as parturi∣ent to al mē of spirit, wherin for military & marine matters, as expeditions, plantings, discoueries, & voyages of the lar∣gest compasse, there is growne so vniuersall a consent and di∣sposition in this triumphant kingdome, that all Christianitie stands now at the gaze, attending from vs some notable ef∣fect & consequence; for these respects, I haue deemed it a bet∣ter duety both towards nature & my countrie, by reducing the same into our vulgar language, and so committing it to the presse, to benefite many thē one, more then my self only, as knowing,
that (according to the Aristoteles▪ bonum quo communius, eo melius. prince of Philosophers)
a good and profitable thing, the more common it is, the better it is.
And whether this methode may iustly be receiued into the number of things of that opinion, yea or no: I appeale to no other iudge thā to your self: a iudge in this matter so suf∣ficient, as that this Realme, nay many realmes (I speake that which is impudēcy to deny) cannot produce an equal. There is no man, although but of meane and ordinary insight in the state of things, that is ignorant of the great necessity and commoditie of Methods, and directions to men of all quali∣ties: insomuch, that whosoeuer vndertaketh any course or profession without it, is like to the foolish youth, that would needs prooue a Latinist without his Grammer, or to the mad Architect, which went about to set vp a house without his rule and compasse, both whose beginnings were confused, and their conclusions ridiculous.
I haue heard speech of a wise Gentleman of Naples, who sometime for a triall dismissed his son, and gaue him libertie to trauell to certaine other Citties, and territories of Italy,

but without instructions, and vpon his returne, he made re∣port that he had seene men, women, wals, houses, woods, and medowes, but of the state, manners, lawes, gouernement and natures of the people, his simple wit could make no reasonable answere. Many of our owne Nation haue beene taken tardy and tripping in this grosenesse: as diuers Gentlemen verie studious in cases of pollicie, and nauigation, by questions and examinations haue found. In whom the ancient complaint of the Poet hath beene too truely and fully verified.
Coelum non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt,
Some by passing the seas, change ayres but not mindes, retur∣ning with brains nothing bettered, & spirits nothing quick∣ned with the varieties of the world.
I doubt not, but that if our men will vouchsafe the reading, portage, and practise of this pamphlet of notes, (a soueraigne Antidotum, or preser∣uatiue against the poyson of that disease) the thicke mistes of ignorance, and harde conception will soone be scattered, and the same conuerted into a quicke sight, and illuminati∣on of the senses, so that the traueller (although in that course a Nouice) after his ranginges and peregrinations, shall re∣tyre him selfe a man of skill, and bring more to his home from ouer-seas, than the seruant did to his Maister from Paules crosse, which peraduenture was a hat and a cloke, but no profite by doctrine.
For the patronage of this discourse, as it is the custome, or rather by custome the habite in men of industry, to cōmende their labours to persons of countenance and iudgement, and for the most part to such as by their owne experience are able to speake of that argument, which the worke presented to thē doth principally prosecute, if either I regarde your selfe, or your present busines, I can not sort & single out a man more fit to whō the same may be offered. The matter is respectiue to trauell, and who in that course this day liuing is your supe∣rior?

And by reason of that peerelesnesse, who in the appur∣tenances, & circumstances thereof, can giue a sounder iudg∣ment, or better censure? And as for the men of seruice that are at this instant to be imployed vnder your charge and go∣uernement what precepts are more conuenient for their ne∣gotiation and vse? So that although it may seeme a fault & error, that I (as yet vnknowen) haue in this sort pressed vpon your selfe: yet the loue I beare by duty to my coūtrie, the care I carrie (according to my standing) to further my countri∣men, & the sincere affection (which abounds in me) towards your intended attempt (which the Lord of Hostes blesse and prosper) may iustly excuse me, and mooue you to accept this poore paynes. I confesse, that although my propension was al∣waies to indeuor somthing for the inlargemēt of your name and honour, hauing so well deserued of this commonwealth, and of euery particular thereof, yet I was motioned to remē∣ber your self in the impressiō of this Method, by my very good and learned friend, M. Richard Hackluit, a man of incre∣dible deuotion towarde your selfe, and of speciall carefulnesse for the good of our Nation: as the world inioying the benefit of some of his trauels can giue testimonie, & is possible to giue better, if that rare & excellent worke which he now plyeth, once come to publike view. In the mean time I record his di∣ligence, and mine owne petition to the grand Captaine, and commander of all armies, which is feruent and incessant, for the happy egresse & victorious successe of the expedition present: that the issue thereof may be, his glorie, the propa∣gation of the truth, the confusion of the enimie, the terror of Antichrist, the comfort of the Church, the honour of our Prince, the renowne of our kingdome, and the immortality of your owne name. London the 24. of Ianuarie, 1589.

