



IT was my naturall Loue, and affection to my natiue Coun∣trey, (right worthy Sir) and to the Church of CHRIST in these parts, which since the time of my setled residence hereabouts, inuited me in the performance of the worke of my Ministery, to strike at the chiefe aduersary, who though he bee branded euen in his forehead, Gal. 1. 8. 9. 1. Cor. 16.22, with an Anathema yet doth he still secretly seduce from vs, and carry with him to perdition no small number, and is like (vnlesse your vigilancy pre∣uent it) to preuaile further. Serpit, & serpet hoc Cic. Epist. Tam. malum longiùs.
It was your zealous authority which indulged

my safe conduct to that sacred place in your Ca∣thedrall Church, whence shortly after (but at se∣uerall times) I deliuered this subsequent Treatise; the subiect whereof is that dreadfull Sinne against Mat. 12.31.32 Mark. 3.29. Luk 12 10. Heb. 6.4.5.6. Heb. 10.26.27 1. Ioh. 5.16. the holy Ghost, to terrifie all such who are vpon eue∣ry becke of the Aduersary as ready to excurre, and runne out from vs, as hee is to inueigle them to ioyne with him, and most virulently to blaspheme that truth, which eftsoone they professed.
In regard of which premisses, of Duty partly, partly of Presumption, I doe consecrate these my labours vnto your Name, intruding (as it were) vpon you for Protection, to ensconce me against the vilification of all Hicke-scorners, that hauing learned  assume the office of Guil. Budaeus praesat in Comē. Momus vnto them, taking it as a great grace (God wot) to disgrace those, whose worth they may rather enuy then imirate.
These are those Eyes (forsooth) and Ouer-seers of other, of whom Gods Church may iustly com∣plaine, Contenebrati sunt oculi mei, yea happy were hee, were shee deliuered of such Eyes, which as the Prophet speakes, Nihilrespiciunt nisimalae. Tren. 5. Ha∣bakkuk.
To whom then in this case should I breake my selfe in these parts? but to your selfe, which I doe: Rumpantur vt ilia Coaro, Aske of Religion (faith Ie∣sus Virg. Bacol. the sonne of Syrach) of him that hath Religion; Ecclus. 37.11. of a matter of Learning of him that hath learning: as for any blinde Aristarchus or his buzzardly broode, who shall presumptuously smite the Law, and diffame the Doctors thereof; and flaunder

his Mothers own Sonnes, what haue I, or indeed, what hath the Spirit of God to doe with them?
They occasion the Aduersaries of the Truth to perfist in Haeresie, yea through their Iudaicall pre∣uarication, some Citizens of Faith (as they seemed sometime) with a Nolumus hunc regnare super nos, Luk. 19. cast off the yoake also.
If any friend them, I recken them as did Clement in the number of those, Qui exterminare volunt Ec∣clesiam Dist. 93, Ca▪ si . Det, I for my part, I confidently prosesse, I passe not for them; yea I proclaime my selfe a mortall enemy for Gods cause, vnto such men; Semper metales insequanter hostes.
Vnto thee therefore (the Resplendent Starre of Joh. , ad . Hebr. Epa. this Climate) doe I flie for Patronage, as to a man for thine incomparable skill in the Orientall sa∣cred D. Pi. tr. . H. Gfrey Pot. O. Joh. Dr. in libr. praeterit. prft. Vita &  Ioh. Dr. Abo Curandro Au∣thore. tongues on this side; and beyond the Seas, by men vnmatchable therein most worthily fa∣moused, as to a man, both in See his  or Behold the man to King Iames. Diuine and Humane literature more profound (which shall I say) or e∣loquent. As to a man for thy piety to God, thy Charity to men, and aboue all, thy most prouident feruentzeale, in preseruing the Possessions, Immu∣nities, & Priuiledges of that little  19.20.22 Segor (that Sea Church I meane) which thou dost now illustrate condignly renowned; In a word, to one for that His Tuilius or  to the Earle of Pem∣brooke. Ioh. 2. 15. 16.17 Christs triple Pasch well known to all, Virtus Vlys∣sis (I will vsurpe that of Seneca) . nota Donais est satis, Nimis{que} Phrigibus. To conclude, I subiect this Tractate to the Censure of the Church, and your worthy selfe; which I doe not publish (I protest)

for any ostentation, much lesse for any purpose to detract from the labours of other more learned Diuines, (whom I cannot neuerthelesse acquit from deficience, and error in this argument) nor doe I obtrude it on the world as a new Article of Faith, to oblige Consciences; for by experience in my selfe, and obseruation in other, I finde it to be most true, which that great light of Physitians spake of Archigenes his error, as elegantly as mo∣destly, Galen. lib. de Composit. Me∣dicament. , 2o. saying:  &c. It is a hard matter for him that is but a man, not to erre in many thinges, as being only sciolous in some, misprisioning other, & wri∣ting also, and publishing some things incuriously.
But from the first birth of it I intended the pub∣licke benefit of the Church of Christ, that is; That Apostataes might bee recalled, terrified, or con∣founded, wauering or doubtfull Christians might be confirmed or reestablished, our Lord and Sa∣uiour IESVS CHRIST might by his Gospell bee glorified, now and euermore. So be it.
So fare thee well, thou rich Ornament of Chi∣chester poore Church.

