



GODS holie spirit in
the xii. chapter of the
Reuelation of S. Iohn
the Diuine, (Right
Honorable) descri∣beth
vnto vs, two no∣table
mysteries: The one, A woman
cloathed with the Sunne, hauing the
Moone vnder her feete, vpon her head,
a Crowne of xii. starrs, and beeing with
childe, cried traueling in birth, and was
payned ready to bee deliuered: The other,
A greate redde Dragon, hauing seauen
heades, tenne hornes, and seauen crownes
vppon his heades: his tayl drue the third
parte of the Starres of Heauen, and cast

them to the earth, and he stoode before the
woman which was ready too be deliuered,
to deuoure her child, when she had brought
it foorth. &c. By the woman is prefi∣gurate
the most blessed estate of that
chaste chosen Church of God inuiro∣ned
with the light of doctrine Propheti∣call
and Euangelicall, who treading (as
it were) vnder feet the moone of mans
inconstancie, or rather mans vaine and
wauering imaginations and deuises, is
crowned with the crowne of constant
truth & adorned with the xii. starres of
eternal blessednes: & traueling with spi∣ritual
fruites, as, True knowledge of God,
Faith, Feare, Loue of God, true inocatio,
&c. beeing payned with aduersities &
calamities in this world; crieth with
the Patriarchs, Prophets, Gouernors, A∣postles,
Teachers & such like, to be deli∣uered
out of and from al worldly wret∣chednes,
to enioy the promised sweete
ioies of euerlasting blessednes. But such
& so extreeme is & hath byn the hatred
of the old enimy Sathā that red Dragō
(by the heads of his malignant church)
that is by impiety, idolatry, & infideli∣ty,
and by the Hornes that is by vio∣lency,

iniury and tyranny of Pharao,
Abimolech, Nabuchodonosor and suche
like cruell persecuting powers: with his
tayle of blasphemy hypocrisie and su∣perstition,
euermore enuying the veri∣ty
of the doctrine propheticall and e∣uangelicall
in all ages) that when gods
churche hath beene most readyest too
bring forth her sincere frutes of good
lyfe and doctrine, then hath this red
Dragon, with open iawes of tyran∣nicall
power, exalting his tayle vp to
the skyes, and as it is sayde (aboue all
that is called God, 2. Tess. 2.) been most
ready therewith too drawe downe
the thirde parte of the starres, that is
too saye not onely too obscure the
light of the true worde of God, and of
the glorious Gospel of his sonne Iesus
Christe, but also vtterly too caste vn∣der
foote all true testimonies there∣of.
Yet blessed bee the Lorde God of
Israel, who being careful for his elect,
doeth nowe and then rayse vp a migh∣ty
saluation vnto his people, Luk.  i sen∣ding
one or other good Michael, with
his Angels, that is too say, one or other
godly religious and christian Prince

with his Godly religious and christian
Nobles, Bishops, Doctors, Preachers,
and Teachers, who with the sworde of
Truth, the shield of faith, breastplate of
righteousnesse & Helmet of hope vnto
saluatiō in Christ, haue borne away like
victory & prize of like Gigantomachia,
with the triumphe of truth according
to that saying: Those shall ight with the
Lambe, & the Lambe shall ouercome thē,
because hee is the Lorde of Lordes, and
King of Kinges: and they which are on
his side, called, and elect, and faithfull. A∣poc.
17. Experience of this spirituall vi∣ctory
(Right honorable) doeth the sa∣cred
bible sufficiently administer vnto
vs: Later ages of the worlde geue vs
also fresh memorie thereof: And our
time no doubte by Gods prouidence
can testifie too his prayse and glorie.
It is not paste fourtie yeeres agone
since the triall of this was wonderful∣ly
manifested to all Christendome, by
the state of Gods churche disqui∣eted
in Germany. What time a
little before the death of that noble
Prince George Duke of Saxony, the

citie of Franckfoorde ad Moenum was
vexed with the enmity of the Romish
Dragon. So that after some preruption
on both sides, it was the good proui∣dence
of God to moue the myndes of
the noble Princes electors there, to re∣quire
of the Emperors Maiesty Charles
the fifth then liuing, a determinate
conuention or meeting for the esta∣blishing
of true religion, and abolishing
of Popety: which beeing decreed too
bee had at Hagonea ad Rhenum in Ger∣many
Ano 1540. thither amongest
other learned Germaines came the re∣uerent
Doctor Philip Melācthon. Who
thinking too haue full conference by
disputation, in presence of Granuella∣nus
President for the saide Emperor:
euen at that time (ipsis aduersarijs tergi∣uer
santibus) were vtterly disappoynted
of their expectation: For Ecchius the
Popes champion with his confede∣rates
seeking priuy and secrete shiftes
of lettes, refused that conflict. And
the matter being deferred till the yeere
following 1541. too bee handled at
Ratisbona, thither in person came the

said Emperour, the Princes electors of
Germany with their lerned Diuines, &
the Popes legate with his adherents the
aduersaries. By whom after some dis∣putation
and concertation had, the
conuention for that time was there
also dismissed, vppon sufficient good
considerations, & by reason of the Em∣perours
expedition in his warres a∣gainst
the Turke.
And after that, as the Reuerent
Ioachim Camerarius testifieth, (who
writeth the whole discourse of his life,)
this zealous Phinees desisted not in
defence of Gods quarrel, as by publi∣shing
his other workes before▪ Name∣ly
his Confessio fidei, exhibited at Au∣gusta,
and his Siluula addressed for the
pacification of the controuersies in
Franckforde: So nowe did he write this
booke intituled De Ecclesia, after the
assembly at Ratisbona. Like a Godly
wise Aeoonomus in the Lordes house,
and like vnto the prouident Scriba do∣ctus
ad Regnum Coelorum, (as Christe
saieth Matt. 13.) bringing forth with
the good Paterfamilias this learned as∣sertion

of spirituall treasures Nono∣rum
& Veterum: for confirmation of
the antiquity of Gods true churche,
and cotutation of mans latter inuen∣tions.
Which hee dedicated vnto that
Godly renowmed Prince and valiaunt
defender of the truthe, Albertu Duk
of Pruse and Mrque of Brandenburge.
The remembraunce whereof surely as
it is notable, so were it a thing iniuri∣ous
to deteine frō the posterity of the
faithfull such a testimony of profound
knowledge. And agayne, as Germany
hath bin a natural nurse to the vniuer∣sal
dispersed and afflicted church of the
gospel long agone▪ so haue wee in En∣glande
greate cause (praysing God for
both their prosperous estates at this
day) to imbrace, & commemorate the
doynges of such godly learned fathers
there liuing, as haue bin, & yet are soūd
faithful furtherers of Gods glory, & cō∣stant
friends of that truth, which we al∣so
now professe. Wheras, (Right hono∣rable
Earle,) sith by Gods gratious pro¦uidence
his church with rare & excellēt
benefits is thus many yeers fructifiyng

amongest vs: Especially vnder the pro∣tectiō
of the immediat next vnder god
supreme heade thereof, so gratious a
Queene, so godly & religious a Princes
our deare Soueraigne Lady, Queene
Elizabeth, thus prosperously and pru∣dently
vpholding her house with the wise
woman. Prou. 14. that, As the Sunne shi∣neth
ouer all the worlde, from the seate of
the most highest: So the beautie of so
good a woman (so vertuous a Virgin
Queene and so gratious) muste needes
be, not onely the principall ornament of her
owne house, Ecele. 26. but also is a light
of excellent comfort vnto the faithfull
throughout all Christendome: Which
I pray God continue to the end of the
world. And again, sith in respect of her
ise & honourable graue counsellers,
with those godly lerned Fathers of the
spiritually this prosperous peace may
verify that Prouerb with vs (Salua res
est consuliante Sene:) Who doubteth, to
the glory of God be it spoken, that the
churche of Englande is the Phoenix of
the world, The Rose planted in Hierico,
Eccle. 24. yea the flower of the fielde, and

the Lillie of the Vallies? Cantic. Canticor.
cap. 2.
The which blessed estate when eue∣ry
member thereof is bounden by all
good gifts to adorne: As it is my one∣ly,
by simple Summum Bonum now &
then too edifie my slender capacity, in
translating and writing: So at this
present with the furtheraunce of the
right reuerend father in God my good
Lord the Bishop of London by his au∣ctority,
and by some helpe of a learned
Diuine my friendly well willer herein,
I haue translated this book, and geuen
it the name, or Title of A Godly and
Learned Assertion, &c. Now published
as a true testimony of my boūden due∣ty
and earnest zeale too the welfare of
Gods Church present, and of the poste∣ritie.
And for good causes mouing me,
I haue chosen your good Lordship the
Patrone thereof: As one (whose noble
progenie heretofore loyall too their
Prince, and louing too their Countrie,
especially the Lorde Roos, in the raigne
of the most victorious King Henrie the
viii. for his noble valiaunt and renou∣med

seruice in Scotlande most woor∣thy
of memory) your honor deseruing
no lesse well to bee thought of for your
like loyalty, learning, wisedome, godly
zeale, and like true seruice also, if like
time of neede should require. And thus
humbly crauing pardon of your honor
for my boldenesse proceeding of an in∣tier
good will towardes you: And
therwith beseeching your noble boun∣tie,
to graunt the same fauourable pro∣tection
vnder the winges of your god∣ly
zeale, as an earnest Hypotheca of my
duetifull true hearte towardes your
honour: which as I shall perceiue to
bee affected towardes my good mea∣ning
in this behalfe, so by Gods grace
shall I not onely take further encou∣ragement
of duetifull gratitude, to∣wardes
your honour, and my natiue
Countrie: But also as heeretofore, so
still shall I rest heartily and incessaunt∣ly
praying vnto the maiestie Diuine
and Lorde of Lordes, too endue your
Honourable Lordeshippe and the ho∣nourable
Ladie your Louing Spouse

with long life, perfect health, augmen∣tation
of honour, and true renowme
in this world: And finally the inex∣pressible
ioyes of life eternall
in the heauenly Hierar∣chie
of the moste
highest Ich∣ua.





