



Most Religious Prince.
THE devout Bernard spake it; and it is a profitable precept for al Posterities, Si vis securus esse, time securitatem: intimating, that man is neuer lesse safe, then when he seemes furthest from dan∣ger; feare of securitie being the gard of safe∣tie; great fortunes and high places, the rocks of ruine. Pythagoras was wont to say▪ That no horse, without a bridle, could well bee gouerned; nor any felicitie, without great wisdome, well swayed. More difficult it is to beare prosperous then aduerse fortune, because it chanceth but to few to bee both happie and wise. For (as one saith well) For∣tuna, quem nimiùm fouet, stultum fecit; which the wisest King expresseth thus; Pros∣peritie destroieth fooles:Pro. 10.22. herein not much vn∣like to Merchants, who, hauing had good successe at Sea, adventure for more and loose all. So that it is too true, That as much light offends the eyes, so much felicitie clouds the vnderstanding, and abuseth the iudgement, 1.1, 
making the conceit of our safetie, to be the cause of our sorrow▪ Hence the golden rule of Salomon:Pro. 28.14. Beatus est homo qui semper est pauidus; Blessed is the man that feareth euer; viz. who euer carefully avoides the deceits of the Deuil, the World, and the flesh; who euer liues in the feare of God, least hee at∣tempt any thing against his will: whoeuer perseers in true repentance, and takes heed of offending God.
Now seeing the safetie of your sacred person (being the most glorious Starre in our firmament, the hope of future times, and safetie of our safetie) is the thing that most doe wish; many labour for; and is the dutie of all Subiects to ayme at; it must be valued of vs at no lesse rate, then our deerest liues, and of you at no lesse then your hardest and godliest labours. Else should wee bee all in∣grate to the Diuine goodnesse, whose bles∣sed showers of mercies are well approued to vs in the faire-springing blossomes of your grace-promising and religious Youth. Ther∣fore knowing ingratitude to be odious with God and all good men;Isay 5 insomuch that God by the Prophet hath sentenced a feareful destruction vpon the ingrate Nation; and at Athens an Action would lie against the in∣grate, as in other causes;2. Iā. 18.3. wee must all striue to stop this iust plea of God and men against
vs. For which cause, my selfe to cast from me the iust aspersion of so foule a vice, doe euer pay my vowes vnto our good God for your safetie; and at this time (to beginue a payment of my neuer-dying dutie) haue ad∣ventured to present your Highnesse with a few chosen flowers, much conducing to your present safetie in this life, and eternall salua∣tion in a better.
And seeing there is no greater pest to a King or Prince, then the hatred of his Sub∣iects; and that (as Seneca saith) simul ista mundi Conditor posuit Deus,God hath euer pla∣ced hatred & gouern∣mēt in one ranke. Odium & Reg∣num; this little booke being well obserued, shall defraught and vnload the Ship of this Kingdome, of Odium, which is the pest and danger, and shall leaue you Regnum, which is the Diamond and Treasure. Which di∣uorce betwixt Hatred and Kingdome (if firmely made) shall make an happie coniun∣ction of King and people, by no violence to be sundered.
I must cōfesse, that in Me there is plus ru∣boris quàm roboris, seeing my presumption oner-ballanceth my performance: but in the Work it self is plus roboris quàm ruboris, be∣ing in part wellicke ouer, as the Beare doth her welphs, by the industrie of those prudent Counsailors, who knew well how to fashion an excellent proportion: and the rest by me
not misse-shapen: for my owne part I may well with Apelles lie hid vnder the couert of my picture, to espie and heare the diuers iudgements, which to know shall not bee vnsavourie vnto mee.Pro. 27. For I account the woundes of a friend, more happie to mee, then the kisses of an Enemie.socrates admoniti∣on to De∣onicus. lin. Iunior to Traian Emperour. Vnto my selfe I am conscious of some paines and diligence in the translation of one peece out of Greeke; and another out of Latine; toge∣ther with some meditations, and matters of moment, the Collections of some Apho∣rismes and Rules out of my owne various reading, and the disposition of the whole. Something I haue done, if (but as Ruth) in the field of Booz I haue gathered the scatte∣red eares:Ruth 2. and albeit I could not bring great hand fuls from the haruest into the Barne; yet some few eares (and not to be despised) haue I cast into the Garner, knowing that worthie sentence of the wise Oratour and States-man; Omnis nostra curain hoc versa∣ri debet semper,Cicero 2. de Oratore. si possumus, vt boni aliquid efficiamus, sin minus, at certe nihil mali: The chiefe care of euery good man ought to be, euer to doe what good he can, but if hee cannot, to take heed that he doe no euil. Sure I am, that as the Noble Historian saith, Nus∣quàm nee opera est sine emolumento,Liuie lib. 5. nèc emo∣lumentum fermè sine impensa opera est. No la∣bour
is without his profitte; not almost any profitte to a mans labour, without charge and expense: Besides, if little profitte should hence bee conceiued to a∣rise, by some,Lamb. Dan to the 17. Prouince Lael. Zaech. to Henrie the 4 K. of France. Ia∣cob. Siman∣cha. to Phi∣lip King of Spaine. more conceitedly iudicious then truly wise; yet it doth much protect my designe, and adde winges to my droo∣ping hopes, in that some thinges of like na∣ture haue beene tendered by diuers very learned to the greatest States and Persona∣ges of our Westerne World.
Wherin the ancient custome of some Na∣tions confirmed mee, which was, That none might come to the King or Prince without giftes; the Law ordayning that none should passe by them, either in their pro∣gresse, or any part of their Kingdome, not giuing them something: as the example of the great Artaxerxes Mnemn King of Persia sheweth, whom Syneed the poore Husbandman meeting in the field; presented with an handfull of water out of the next Riuer; and was rewarded by the King with a Persian garment,Aelianus. a cup of gold, and a thousand Daices of Siluer.
But gifts are not all of one sort; many serue for pleasure, lust, and pompe; many are vaine, or rather plainly insidious and craf∣tie, more hurtfull then profitable, and co∣sting those persons deere, to whom they are
giuen; and are, as Aiax saith in Sophocles, , gifts and no gifts, or rather gifts of an enemie. But there are other gifts more rare, and very fruitfull, such as belong to the culture and ornament of the minde, and studie of vertue, which doe out∣ballance all the price of siluer and gold; such as that holy and heauenly institute, di∣rected to your late most honourable bro∣ther, and now a glorious Saint, by the cun∣ning pencill of that divinely royall, and roy∣ally diuine Bezaleel;Exod. 31. The kings Maiesties . such as Isocrates gaue to Nicocles King of Cyprus, touching the gouernment of the Commonwealth; such as the same Isocrates gaue to that noble young man Demonicus; and Plime the younger to that famous Emperour Traian: which two last are now become my handfull of water, by turning their streames into my grounds, wherewith amongst other things of no vul∣gar worth to present your Greatnesse. And these gifts of all others are most precious. For to what end should wee giue Princes; gemmes, gold, or siluer, which they stnd in need of that giue, and wherewith they a∣bound that haue it giuen? Is not this rather to play the merchants, then the giuers? Is not this craftily to sell their wares dearer, then those that keepe shop? But those who present to Princes wholesome counsailes of
life, whose reading may instruct, or more fitly informe, what to shunne, and what to follow, that they may liue honourably and die happily; their gifts are most profi∣table and rich, and most worthy a Prince to receiue, and a good subiect to giue, be∣ing the gifts that immortalize both the gi∣uer and receiuer; such as Augustine ap∣proues, which neither hurt the giuer nor the taker; most worthy (I say) are those gifts.
For if it be true, that Appion the Gramma∣rian was wont to say, That he immortalized them, to whom he wrote any thing touching Grammar; how much more are they immor∣talized, who haue any thing dedicated to them,The reli∣gious La∣die Carew, and the worthy Knight Sir Robert Ca∣rew her husband, the lear∣ned Ma∣ster Tho∣mas Mur∣rey, Sir Iames Ful∣lerton knight, and Ma∣ster Quyn. touching the eternizing of their souls? And what other end haue these gifts, then to demonstrate vnto you, that as the riuer Ta∣nais goeth vnder Mocotis, and Alphaeus vn∣der the sea; yet is not the one bitter, nor the other salt: so you, passing by the puddle of pleasures, and through the sea of honours, neither that sinke nor this sea, may euer so attaint your heroick heart, but that you may euer retaine the sweetnesse of those diuine and morall vertues, wherewith you haue bin by your Deborah, Nathan, Hushai, and other worthies about you, wisely & godly seasond: Nor shall they which read this little labour returne vntaught: as Aesops Foxe & Crane
sent th'one th'other away, with a ridiculous furniture of a banquet,Plin. lib. 35 vn-supt; but as the storie speaks of that famous Painter Timan∣tes, that his pictures were herein admited in that more was to bee vnderstood then was painted, so this slender labour at the first blush, promising no great thing; if more se∣riously viewed; considering therein, that ma∣ny of these most diuine rules proceeded from heathen men, & destitute of the knowledge of the true God; it is a wonder how they affct, recreate, delight and profit, those that read them.
Neither shall this discourse (I trust) offend against that golden sentence of Isocrates:Plutar. in vita Isoc. who at a banket being desired to shew some feats of his art, answered: Quae ego noxi, temporis huius non sunt, quae vero exigit tem∣pus hoc, ego nescio: The things that I know, are not for this time; and the things which this time requires, I know not. Not much vnlike to that of Seneca,Seneca E. pist. 29. ad Lucillum. Nun quam volui po∣palo placere nam quae ego scio, non probat po∣pulus quae probat populus, ego nescio. I neuer regarded to please the vulgar: for the things which I know, the people do not approue, and the things which the people approue, I know not. But of this I am sure, that there is no wit so strong of weak, which may not frō euery doctrine and booke: draw something,
to nourish & confirme his vnderstanding, or refresh his appetite.Sen. ep. 109 In the same meadow (as Seneca writeth) the Oxe may find grasse, the dog an hare, the Stork a Lizzard & the Vir∣gin may gather a floure: nor need any depart hence hungry, except by the wantonnes of his own appetite; seeing here are golden slips & twigs, gathered from euery holsome tree, to furnish the garden of the mind with varia∣ble, valuable, and delightfull fruits. So that I may truly say as the wise Siracides; Behold, I haue not laboured for my selfe onely,Syr. 24.29. but for all them that seeke wisedome.
Two examples then (most noble Prince) haue stirred me vp to this aduenture; the one of Syneta, presenting an handfull of water to that great King Artaxerxes, as before; the other of Diogenes, to the Athenians. Diogenes, a man not inferior to Plato, in age and sect, seeing all the Athenians busily em∣ploied in rampiring & defencing their wals for feare of their enemies, and himselfe not called to the same worke, because a Philoso∣pher and stranger; least in the common busi∣nes of all, he alone should be counted an idle spectator, began to umble and tosse his tun vp and downe, that he might thereby testifie (being all he could doe) his readinesse to helpe the Athenians, if they pleased to vse his labour. This thing the Athennians ob∣serued,
praised, and committed to perpetu∣all memorie. Wherein two duties were ex∣ceedingly well performed. For it was the part of a good man, albeit a stranger (as Dio∣genes was) to ioyne his care to the common care of the inhabitants, and plainly to shew himselfe as readie, as others of that place, to defend the common good; and this did Diogenes: it was also the part of noble, wise, and thankfull Citizens, to approue and not despise the good minde of that man, whose labour they vsed not in defence of their countrie rights; and this did the Athenians. My selfe, by both these examples being war∣ned of my dutie, and trusting to the most high equitie of your noble disposition, and like comitie and noble acceptance, as the Persian King shewed to the poore Syneta (not estimating the mind by the gift, but the gift by the minde; for (as Bernard) the true value of a benefit is the good wil of the mind) haue not doubted dutifully to offer and pro∣mise my labour and seruice (such as it is) in the common labour and care of your crea∣tures, and most obliged seruants, for the de∣fence of your honour and increase of your future happinesse. Wherein I truly put on the person of both these Presidēts, though (hap∣pily) I shalbe distinguished from them in the successe, as I differ from them in deportment:
for my tunne, and all that is within mee shall neuer leaue tumbling and toyling, to tender my seruice in the care of your preser∣uation; & therin I am like Diogenes: but haue nothing left me by the malice of the time, but an handfull of water; and therin, like Syneta.
Now seeing one way onely of accommo∣dating my selfe to your seruice, is left mee, namely, to represent to you the things that haue beeue prudently written by others, of well gouerning aswel the priuate life, as pub∣lique affaires; I could not be wanting in that duty. I tender not therfore long & perplexed disputes of well managing the life and Re∣publique; but most sweet Meditations, briefe Aphorismes, and Rules, concerning the go∣uernment of both: and discouerie of such rocks, and dangers as vsually dash the con∣sciences of men, and states of greatest King∣domes in peeces: and those, not dubious and naked, but cloathed and confirmed with the iudgemēt of most graue writers, whence they were collected, and approued by the practise and example of great persons, ha∣uing the witnesse of all prudent men, and times, whereby to adde more power and faith to their excellencies.
Nor may this slender present (happily) be intempestiue or vnpleasant: for as sudden stormes and vnexpected alterations of wea∣ther,
do often driue the most skilful Pilots to great perturbations in their Art, in somuch that they know not into what hauen to flie, or what shore to fetch: so, albeit these Halciō and blessed times of peace, seeme to promise no stormes; yet if the great persons be not soundly instructed with diuine and wise pre∣cepts, to entertaine a gust when it falles, or to decline it, that it hurt not when it com∣meth; such stormes may so sodainely arise (euen when we say, peace, peace) as will put the wisest Polititians, and best Leaders, to their wits end. Therfore, that your Highnesse may bring to a safe hauen, aswell this noble bake of your body and soule, as the great ship of this Kingdome, and these glorious countries and people (whereof as God hath made you the most hopefull heire apparant, so the same God make you and yours long and happie gouernours) cast, (I besetch you) your gracious eye sometimes on these short parcels of instruction, and entertaine them into your Princely heart: so shall your gouernment be most happie and peaceable, your end glorious, and for euer blessed, your memorie honourable, & neuer dying, which shall euer be the vote and vowed labour of

