



SIR,
THe Misterious Egyptians when they could not elegantly with their Pensels describe the true condition, or Nature, either of Timerous, Terri∣ble, mild or fearefull man, would excellently with their Pensils in liuely cullors, limbe forth on a Ta∣ble the ful shape & portraiture of a Hart, a Lyon, Lamb, or Hare. So I though not so Hyerogliphicall as they, seeing I cannot ex∣presse my duty to you with my Tongue, striue to paint it forth in this Booke, which is one Embleme both of my Loue, and Labor, of my loue in presenting it to you, of my labor in pēning it for you. For God sels nothing to Man without the price of lobour, And howsoeuer the purblinde Ignorant, that only see with their Cor∣poral & not Intellectualleies may surmise, yet Art is the fellow of sweat and labour and the Muses haue no other Temples to dwell in but studious and laborious bosomes. Sloth and Riches neuer begat Art, but pouerty and Industry. Mony buyes Houses and Lands, but Study the Sciences: And deare Sir, to you that alwaies loued Art I hope nothing can come more pleasing then a Booke (which is the child of Art) for Bookes that Menerua-like, are alwayes borne without a Mother are the forward Infants that speake for their fathers as soone as they are born: They are dumb Orators, who though they want both Tongue and Sence yet are the faithfullest speakers. They are the witnesses of Time the
lights of Truth, the life of Memory, that make present times speake with the past, and both past and present of our owne. The World it selfe is a Book consisting of foure leaues: Fire, Aire, Earth and Water; whose letters are Stars, Birds, Beasts and Fishes: And (Man that is the Epitome and Abstract of the World) is a Book consisting of two leaues; Soule and Body: whose Letters are his good and bad Affections. But I will say no more in the commendation of Books, because they can strongly defend and truly commend themselues: as for my Booke, rather your Booke, although it haue not that Life, Soule, Spirit, Quintessence, & Elixar of wit that quickens others, yet the old saying helps me.
Nullum esse librum tam malum vnde aliquid
Boni discerpere non possis.
Receiue it then deare sir, not as mine, but your owne, and how∣soeuer you may esteeme of it, yet I will remaine

From my ChamberIune the 10. 1620.
