



THE basenesse of this present (my verie good Lorde) compared with the woorthinesse of your honour, may argue me impudent in exhibiting such a gift, & confirme your vvoonted clemencie if you deigne to accept it.
The firstlinges of our fruites are due to the Gods, and men are discharged if they offer them deuoutly: the prime of my labours I giue to your honour, and I thinke my selfe acquited though they be not verie exquisite. A Caesars mind vvill vouchsafe a Codrus might, a curte∣ous Laelius vvill giue attention to a stammering Lentulus, and Iupiter in that did shew himselfe Iupiter, that he refused not the supplication of poore Liberia.
Meete it vvere, faine I vvould, and I hope I shall gratifie your Lordship, edifie the Reader, and damnifie none by this simple Treatise. If your Lordships Triple be not to high for my Base, I doubt not but my musicke vvill be indifferent, and if your ho∣nour disdaine not my seelie Pamphlet, I hope it vvill be reasonablie vvelcome to others.
Had PHILOTIMVS bene serued in at the first course, when your stomacke was not quatted vvith other daintier fare, his relishe perhaps had beene some-thing tooth∣some: But since you are cloied vvith more delicate cates, thus faire notvvithstanding I dare presume, to bring him in for a shovv among other banqueting dishes. And as Olautia reioyced, that Thalestris the Queene of the Amazons receiued a hosegay at her handes, though she neuer smelled to it: or as Cherilus the rurall Poet trium∣phed, that the great Macedo had seene his verses, though he neuer liked them: So if novv and than you doe but looke on PHILOTIMVS, when other vvaightier affaires do not otherwise employ you, I shal thinke my selfe no smal deale happie, that your ho∣norable vievve hath ouershadovved my booke.
The morning is meete for grauer studies, the postmeridian for pleasaunt solace, so that, PHILOTIMVS which commeth in limping at the latter end of the day, though be be no author for knovvledge of importance, yet may some refection by reading his toies, lend recreation to your vvearied Muses.
Iuball first made the portatiue tentes, ordered his flockes, and appointed vvhen rammes should go to the eyves: Tuball deuised the science of musicke, Tubalcan searched out the commodities of mettals, Parmenides inuented the art of Logicke, Saturne first taught the conceit of shooting, and Noema founde out the misterie of vveauing: Yet neither the kinde of Deiotorus his grasing, not the commoditie of La∣gus

his tent making, nor the commendation of Empedocles his melodie, nor the fame of Vulcans smith vvorkes, nor the renoune of Arist. Logicke, nor the praise of Lancus for weauing of his silkes, nor the steady hand of Comodus that neuer missed marke, are any whit impaired by their predecessours praise: no more I truste shall my poore Pamphlet be defaced by the eloquence of them that haue forerun me, (though the comparison be farre vnequal.)
Galen vvas a cunning phisitian, Saluius Iulianus an expert lawyer, Fono a disert orator, Oppian a famous poet, and Maximinus of so strong constitution, that he vvas able to support anie paines: vvere the properties of all these coniested in me, vvhich am inuested in none of them all, then vvoulde I trie, vvhether my seruice vvere able to stande your Lordship in some stead, to vvhom my seruiceable duetie shall be euer obeisant. But alas (my Lord) a barley graine can but yeeld an eare of barley, and tvvo pence is large vsurie of a poore peny: a mightles marling can afoord but a willing mynd, and a halfepeni-worth of skill, a two-peny Pamphlet.
If plaine vtterance be no blemish to a very trueth, & truth do not breed suspition of flattery, I protest to your honour, that as you haue wonne the hearts of all them, who haue heard of your demeanour: So I amongst the rest (though one of the most that can doe you least seruice) haue in faith and fancie, loue and loyaltie, done vnto you such harty homage, as is more possible for you to conceiue, then credible for me to declare to your selfe. And this I say, that whiles you Mecenas are, a Maro shal you neuer want: VVhiles you endeuour to be an Achilles, an Homers deuoire shall neuer quaile to blaze your praise: a vertuous Cyrus will cause Zenophon to be elo∣quent, and Alexanders valute will make Curtius a good Antiquatie.
But least you thinke that Plato is turned to Gnato, and my philosophie chaunged to flatterie, I will rather referre my selfe to tyme and triall, then vaynelie vaunt of loyaltie, where there wants (ah) abilitie.
This therefore (right honorable) is my humble request, that in this warre betwixt NATVRE & FORTVNE, you will vouchsafe to be the vmpeere, whose fortune is prospe∣rous (long may it last) but far inferiour to your nature, whom all men admire. And if at any time hereafter, you see vertue suppressed by casuall calamitie, you will lende your assistance to the rescuing of Vertue, knowing, that Caesar was more commen∣ded for his curtesie then his cheualrie, and that the onely Vertue which made The∣odosius the Emperor, surnamed the yonger, so famous, was bountie to the best & af∣fabilitie to all. Haud facile emergunt (saith the Poet) quorum virtutibus obstat res augusta domi, and oftentimes shall you see inestimable vertues endarkened with the vale of a rus∣set coat, as the mithridate of Medicines (triacle I mean) is extracted out of the bowels of most poysoning woormes.
I speake not this for mine owne lucres sake. For as Isocrates saith in his pareneti∣call oration to Nicocles, I am not so baseminded to marchandize bookes, although my want may stand in need to your Lordship, & vrge me to craue your fauour, when my merits deserue no meed.
I am not ignorant that there be some, who will be as free of a good word to Phi∣lotimus, as a poore man is of his haruest: who, for that they hate me vnaduisedly, will

indiscreetly beat my dog: & because they enuy Melbancke with a peasantly despite, will dispraise all his doings, though they be for their profit.
Plaine dealing is a ewel, (though they that vse it commonly die beggers) and ther∣fore will I speake plainly without a parable, though my simplicitie may impeach me of follie. If they like it, let them vse it, and if they loth it, let them refuse it: If they spite it, let them not spare, so they will promise to amend it: and when this promise hath perfourmance, then will I cancell all my mallice: But then I feare me they shal experiment, that it is easier to spie a beam in an other mans eye, then to pull a moat out of their owne: that it is harder to see a great staine in the mantle that is behind them, then to see a little wrinkle in a gown before them: & lesse difficill to say in an other mans edifice, this stone lies not square, then eyther like Vigetius and Columel∣la to prescribe true rules of Architecture, or like Besaleel, Ooliab, or Hiram of Tyre, to buyld an house by good Geometrie.
The buckler to breake of all these blowes, is your Lordships fauourable patro∣nage, which if you will deigne to bestow vpon me, I shall safely be defended from all their garboyles. The burthens which they lay vppon me with all their might, of them your little finger shall easely vnburthen me: Their malicious fire wherewith they would stiffle me, your very breath shall quickly extinguish: One dram of the quintesence of wormewood will repell any poyson, and one good woord of your good will, thall refell all their morninges.
Thus wishing your Lordship as many prosperous yeares, as vertuous properties, and no fewer vertues, then the Sea hath sandes, And commending both me and mine to your honourable protection, I humbly take my leaue this 28. of Nouember.

