



SIR,
I Well fore-see not only how vn worthy I may be esteemed to present your Highnesse with any furtherances of piety, being already so richly adorned with plenty of al rare and diuine habiliments of the soule; but with all how vn-welcome I shall be to such as doate on their owne shadowes, in the meane while, dis-liking, defacing, and dis commending euen the straigh∣test statures and beautifullest parts in others, who are not of their owne hue, constitution, and complexion.Se. For nun∣quam desunt qui etiam per ornamenta ferient, There will neuer want some to wound a man, euen through the sides
of his best ornaments and graces.
But albeit I presume not of that hap∣pinesse of learning and iudgement,Plin sccun. ei∣ther to act things worth the writing, or write things worth the reading, which is (I confesse) a shred of outward and tem∣porall happinesse; yet I hold it no pre∣sumption to affirme (seeing herein I seek not mine owne,Phil. 2.21. but that which is Iesus Christs) that to goe this Heauenly Pro∣gresse and to take delight in it, is the true and onely way to eteruizer he soule in blisse,1 Sa. 2.30. hauing Gods hand and seale to warrant, that he will honor them that thus honor him.Ioh. 17.3. For if it be life eternall to know God and whom hee hath sent Iesus Christ, and consequently to know a mans selfe, then this Progresse leading directly vnto both, must needs be worth the going: and if it be true herein (as it is most true) which that wise Histori∣an spake in another case,Dinothi aduers. histor. absurdissimum est soris multum sire, domi prorsus igna∣rum esse, that it is most absurd to know many forraine affaires, in the meane while being ignorāt of home businesse: then whosoeuer will taste the ioyes of heauen, must goe this Progresse on earth; for this onely teacheth him to know wel both the things at home in his owne soule, and the things from home in heauen, where he would haue his soule.
Happy is that kingdome, family and soule, where wisedome and youth are so
one, that they are neuer sundered, but sweetly kisse each other: age and wise∣dome in the meane time not sequestred from the same condition; For that makes kingdomes, families and soules eternal: and euen this happinesse is onely ac∣quired by timely beginning and con∣stantly perseuering to serue God in spirit and truth, and walke in this Pro∣gresse.
Therefore it is well obserued, that in buildings God and man do hold a diffe∣rent course; man beginning euer at the foundation, but God at the roofe; he stretched out the heauens before he laid the foundation of the world, by his na∣turall workes, giuing vs spirituall instru∣ction, to follow, his order, & euer begin with care of heauenly things: Seeke first the kingdome of God and the righ∣teousnesse thereof,Mat. 6.33. is our Sauiours di∣rection, to as many as will build mansi∣ons in heauen. For as the building rests on the columns, and the columns on the bases, so the eternall wel-being of the soule is sustained by faith whose foun∣dation is in heauen, accompanied with the glorious fruits of the spirit, as the roofe at which all true Christians must begin their spirituall building.
For as we serue God, so he serues vs; if we begin late or neuer, or for fashion, or for carthly rewards and respects, or faintly, or out of his place to serue him;
hee keepes the same corespondency with vs: giues vs our hearts desire, but with-all sends leannesse into our soules: a false comfort for a false worship,Psal. 106.5. a false saith for a false religion, a false sal∣uation for a false profession. For he that giues God his lips in stead of his heart, teacheth God to giue him stones in stead of bread; and he that rankes him last, and reckons him least, in the duties of his life, teacheth God to set him at the lower end of the table of his earth∣ly blessings, and to reiect him from the enioyment of his heauenly.
One example for all, as a glasse to behold the truth hereof. Whilst Adam serued God, God serued him, he consul∣ted for a mansion for him, for meat for him, for a sweet companion for him: & vntill he rebelled against him we reade of nothing but his works for Adam; as if he had been hired to worke for him: but when hee once lost his innocency, then God tooke from him whatsoeuer he had giuen him: he lost his wisdome, his peace, his liberty, his glory, his dwel∣ling: like that man that betwixt Iericho and Ierusalem fll among theues.Mat. 25.29 For from him that hath not shall bee taken away euen that hee hath. God is as a father deliuering a stocke to his sonne to trade with-all, if he husband it ill at first, he with-draws his hands frō error blessings. And as they that try vessels,
first put water into them, and then wine when they find them staunch; so doth God with vs, he that is faithfull in a lit∣tle, shall be made ruler ouer much, and he that begins to lay his foundation in heauen shall end with a glorious crown in heauen.
Now your highnesse hauing most happily taken your patterne from God, and begun for many yeeres to build from heauen down-wards, making that the corner stone: my labour in this little Pro-gresse is, to bring some materials to this worke, and shew a method how to bring this goodly building to perfection: that seeing it is not my happinesse as Paul to plant, I may bee allowed as A∣pollos to water those rare and admirable seeds of religion and piety already sowen in your Princely heart. For nihil in te mediocre esse contentus sum,Ier. to tum summu totum, perfectum esse desidero. Lesse then exquisite perfection in all things is lesse then I desire may be found in you. Therefore as the Gardiner waters his seeds and plants till they spring, and waters them againe till they be aboue ground, and lastly till they bring foorth fruit on the earth, the seed, the water, the stalke the fruit, and all being from the Lord of the hauest; so must this and such like godly books and sweet sermons be suffered to water the garden of your heart; seeing they are not onely as the
sweet dew of heauen dropping downe grace into the soule, but also as so many little chinkes by which the heart is kept open that the beames of heauenly knowledge may enter.
And so much the rather is this worke now to be entred vpon, because as the foundation is laid, so is the building rai∣sed; either soone to ruine or for euer to remaine.
For as the arrow is directed at the first, so doth it flie all the way, either home, ouer, short, or besides the marke, so that whosoeuer shall make an ill be∣ginning, forespeake themselues as it were at the very first. Therefore happy are they that haue the arrow yet in their hand, and day before them. For if wee haue not ouercome sinne in youth be∣fore it take root in vs, how shal we strug∣gle with it, when the roaring lyon hath vs in his pawes, and when sinne being like an olde man that hath lost his hea∣ring, will not be charmed, but tells vs it was a custome and could not be left.
And because no man is borne to idle∣nesse, nor for himselfe only, I haue be∣thought my selfe of some course, to dis∣charge (at least) some part of my seruice & duty to your High and in generall to benefit al such as with holy deuotion as∣pire to perfection in the seruice of God:Vir. Eneid. lib. 5. imitating herein Palinurus, who finding that he could not saile against the wind
into Italy, turned his course (with Ae∣neas his approbation) into Sicily, where they had before been friendly entertai∣ned: It being a point of wisedome, when a man cānot saile by a fore-wind where he would, (and happily where he shold) to saile by a bowling and side-wind, or at least-wise to cast anchour where hee may.Act. 16.6. Paul & his companions being for∣bidden by the spirit to preach the Gos∣pell in Asia and Bythinia, by a vision ap∣pearing to Paul on the night, a certaine Macedonian intreating him to come into Macedonia, and helpe them, colle∣cted that they were called of the Lord into Macedonia to preach the word; and what shall I thinke of my selfe to whom God would haue that ordinary cōmand of his word to be in stead of Pauls extra∣ordinary vision to him,Heb. 10.24 but that the ho∣ly commandement of sharpning & pro∣noking others to good workes,1. Thes. 5.11. Eze k. 13.5 of edisy∣ing one another, and of rising vp in the gap, and making vp the hedge, hath sufficiently animated me, and warran∣ted my aduenture in putting Gods ta∣lent to the exchangers,Mat. 25.27 that at his com∣ming hee might receiue his owne with aduantage.
I am not ignorant that Aulus Albinus was reproned of Cato because he would rather deprecari culpam quāvacare culpaAul: gell. 11.8. excuse his fault thē want a fault, in that himselfe a Romane borne and writing a
Hystory in Greek, desired pardon, if he chanced to offend in a strange tongue. Yet Catoes reason excusing such as offēd by constraint, and Albinus case and mine differing much, he being a stran∣ger in that language, but I at home in mine owne element, giues mee no small hope of a generall pardon, albeit I should offēd in taking on me an office altogether vafit for my weake and wea∣ry shoulders: for I grant this heauy taske requires a fuller pen, a riper iudge∣ment, a sweeter singer then my selfe. Yet when the equity of my calling, the imploiment in so high a sernice as a Princes Court, and the necessity of the times and manners called vpon me for some duty; and the importunity of some whose words haue much weight and au∣thority with me, had wrung this worke from me, I am the more bold to intreat, that Catoes censure (if any be) may be made with Catoes equity, because I had rather be without a fault, then make an excuse for it.
The wise Orator feinedly reproted,Cic. pro deiot. that therefore applause was not giuen to Caesar, because hee was pressed with men astonished with admiration: but I must vnfainedly confesse that I must passe by in silence the commendations of this kind of seruing God, methodized in this little worke, because the admi∣ration of it,Isa. 6.5. as the sunne beames dazles
the sharpnesse of my weake sight. But as the Prophet witnesseth, when he saw the Lord sitting on his throne, that he was amazed, because a man of pollu∣ted lippes vn-worthy to see the glory of God: so do I ingenuously professe, when I ponder the great Maiesty of Gods word, & the absoiute perfection where∣with he lookes to be serued, I am struck starke dambe, because I am a man of polluted lips indeed, of an vncircumci∣sed heart, and far vnfit to expresse the praise of such wonderfull things. Ther∣fore I willingly leaue such luy-bushes to the worldly wisdome of Philosophers, Physitians, and Lawiers, whose learning (I confesse) are good for mans life, but that life which perisheth, excellent, but yet humane, laudable, but yet mortall, high, but yet most shippery and brittle.
The story roports,Liuy li. XX that Hanniball be∣fore hee would ioyne battell with the Romans, proposed to his army certaine couples of captiues contending with∣their swords, that by this kind of play∣ing conslict the Carthaginians might the more wisely attend, and the more cheerefully be armed to vnder-take the condition of a serious sight: but such is the combat and seruice, wherein by this little booke I must imploy all that pur∣pose to haue the victory against sinne, Satan, hell, and damnation: that if they depart from the rule of combat and
seruice prescribed, it is not the losse of Captiues but of Carthaginians, not of Carthaginians but Christians; not be life of the body but of the soule is in danger; not the law of man but of God is contemned; not transitory riches, nor health, nor all the pleasures of life, but euen the most blessed possession of the kingdome of heauen, the eternall sal∣uation of our soules lies at the stake to be lost.
A matter (if euer any) of great con∣sequence, and therefore timely to bee begun, and constantly to be continued. For hee that hath a great taske to bee performed in a short time, is euer pro∣uident not to let slippe that time. Our taske is our conuersion to GOD, our time of returne, is this short span of life, a short time for so sore a taske: our wages for this taske, is our soules salua∣tion, therefore no wisdome to mis-pend the least portion of time and to loose our glorious inheritance in heauen.
It is strange to see our toylings and sweatings for these sub-lunary vanities, and yet how remisse we are to make our calling and election sure, how negligent and sloathfull to lay hold on that good part which cannot be taken from vs. As the spider spends her owne bowels in spinning sine threeds, & weauing cun∣ning nets to catch slies, when suddenly a pusse of wind or a brome, comes and
marres all that fine fabricke: So we tor∣ment our selues for the base honors & baser pleasures of this life, and when we are at the height of all, comes but one paffe of dis-grace, sicknesse, or death, & defeats all wee did, all wee hoped for. Therefore seeing all doe agree that God is to bee serued, but dispute of the time, let vs take the present time, for youth had neede of legges and age of wings.
I confesse indeed that this manner of seruing God which I propose is some∣thing strict, vncouth, and vnsauory to flesh and bloud, but most of all to such whose glory and greatnesse all men a∣dore, and also to such whose breasts are full of milke and bones full of marrow, such as come in no mis-fortune like o∣ther men; but yet when they shall haue their eies opened to consider the neces∣sity of it, and that as he said of time, hoc mometū vnde pendet aetermitas,Ber. this is the thing vpon which eternall saluation rests, they will submit their scepters to his seruice, who hath created all crea∣tures, for their seruice to maintain their scepters and greatnesse.
And the rather, because in maximo ho∣nore minima licentia est: the greatest ho∣nors haue least liberty to sinne: and except we being vn-thankfull will be∣come like beasts, which stil drinke of the riuers, without euer thinking on the
spring, they must return God greate ho∣mage for great honors. Vilissimus repu∣tandus est,Symmachus nisi praecellat scientia & samli∣tate, qui est honore praestantior. He is to be reckoned most vile of all others who excells in honor, except he also excell in knowledge and sanctity. For as no wife man loues that hawke which catcheth him a Larke and eats him a Hen, so nei∣ther doth God regard that person, who costs him much as the great and noble doe, and yet doth him little or no seruice at all.
Besides, the example of Kings, Prin∣ces, and Nobles, is of much vse to the furtherance of vertue or vice. Iacobs Ewes brought foorth sported Lambs ac∣cording to the colour of the rods before them: and men produce works con∣formable to the liues of great persona∣ges: but this is a great euill that good examples haue not like force to serue vs to goodnesse, as bad haue to induce vs to euill. For as a man strucke with the pestilence will sooner insect a thou∣sand, then so many can helpe him being insected; so one vitious many may more easily infect a thousand, then so many can make one vitious man good. For vice is heere in her owne foule, and comes vp with-out planting, with no paine, much more when it is well sor∣ied without and well laboured too: but ver is anger on earth, like 
throwen into the ground, which after much care and labour prospers but slowly, especially in the contagion of these times which are the dregs and sink of all ages, in which vertue is a prodigi∣ous mouster, and piety a fowle crime, or at least sottish simplicity.
It is hard for flockes to feede among thornes, and not leaue some of their wooll behind them: so is it hard for an honest man to liue amongst such cor∣rupt and contagious persons, but hee must loose some of his innocency. Ther∣fore the Lacedemoniās wisely inquired what play-fellowes their children vsed, for feare of hauing them tainted with vice. But aboue all others, it behoues, great persons most, not onely to haue care that they giue no ill example, but also that they take none from such as are about them for as it was wisely said of worldly Gouernors,Publius. that male impe∣rando, summum imperium amtitur; So by ill gouernment of the soule, in taking contagious example from others, and gi∣uing ill example to others, is the king∣dome of heauen lost, and many by their ill example drawen into the same down∣fall.
Alphoss King of Arragon was wont to say th s the Marigold orned it selfe to the motion of the sonne, so the p∣ple are turned and tramed after the manners of the Pime R ,
nemo non eadem velit;Sen. If the King follow holy courses, there is no man but will do the same. For as from the health of the head, health is deriued to euery mem∣ber, and from the light of the sunne, light is communicated to all the world, so from the Prince and Gouernour, good∣nesse descends vpon all the people. But as the head being sicke and weake, all the other members languish, so the Prince beeing stained either with aua∣rice, lust, cruelty, pride, or any intempe∣rancy, all the subiects decline from e∣quity, reason, and goodnesse, and accom∣modate themselues to the disposition of the Prince.Aen. syl. lib. in res. Alph. It is storied of the same Al∣phonsus, that vnderstanding how Pome∣granades were by art made sweet, sauo∣ry, and delicate meat, hee made thereof this excellent application: surely euen our selues by our industry, and holy art of example ought to make our subiects better, beeing of themselues of a fierce and froward nature. And surely he spoke well of Augustus Caesar, that a good Prince teacheth his people to doe well, by do∣ing well himselfe, and being imperio max∣imus, exempto est maior, great in power, was yet greater in holy example. For as the Ewes conceiued such coloured Lambes as the rods were that lay be∣fore them,Gen. 30. so such as are the Princes actions, such are wont to be the peoples conceptions, cogitations, and issues.
Whence it is, that a Prince should so obserue his owne Law, that his subiects might be stirred vp to the same, and so settle himselfe to the seruice of God and obseruation of his Iawes, that all his peo∣ple by his good example might be drawn to do the like.
But seeing that as a ship without a Pi∣lot sailes not whither it should, but da∣sheth it selfe on the rockes and shelues; and so they who study to serue God, but yet without God, wanting an order therein, (God being the God of order) walke in a Labyrinth and maze, falling into doubts whilst they seeke resoluti∣on, like Cleophas that talkt with Christ, and yet knew not Christ, like birds flut∣tering, but yet cannot slie: therefore euen the greatest and wisest stand need to furnish themselues with holy directi∣ons, and to labour by all meanes for a measure of grace and the feare of God to keepe out the ouer-flowings of vn∣godlinesse in our age, wherein vices are become good manners, and de-bausht humors and prophane vanities are past into nature and turned into complexi∣on. For Gods haruest in this world is but a handfull, and that little remaines of people that serue Christ in truth, can fearce get breath in this corrupt ayre, it is so contrary to them. They are here as fishes without water, as the remain∣ders of great massacres, as peeces of
plankes after the wracking of a great ship: such a contagion is spread amongst vs all. If then where God is best known, he be ill seed, how much more where he is not knowne indeed at all? If vices be e in the sanctuary, how much more in the body of the Temple, and dwelling of the wicked? In such a deluge of ini∣quity wh hel is there to keepe vs from drowning, but by sincere seruing of God to worke his holy seae into our hearts? And if we doe this, it will easily be seen by our liues. For when the kings Porter stands at the gate and suffers none to come in without examining what hee would haue, it is an euidence that the King is within: But when the Porter is absent, and the gtes open to receiue all that come, it is an argument of the Kings absence; so in a Christian, when the feare of God is present, which as the Porter shuts the doore of the sen∣ces, that they see not, heare not, doe not what they list, it is an argumēt the Lord of that house that is God himselfe, is within: but when feare is away, a free en∣trance is giuen to al a mans dissolute de∣sires, it is a plaine demonstration that God is not there.
Nor let Kings and Potentates thinke themselues freed from this course of godlinesse, as if piety rooted out natu∣rall affection, and tooke away all true liberty; as if a father might not loue his
child, a husband his wife, or as if a man might not loue his houses, lands, health, riches, and honest recreations Piety takes not away the good vse of these things, but husbands them well to their good that haue them, and of mistresses which they were, but should not bee, makes them all hand-maides to the loue and feare of God, as they were not be∣fore piety came, but indeed should be. Therefore Kings and Potentates must not consider, vnde sint, whence they des∣cended, but qui sint, who they are, that but men, nor quanti sint, how great they are, but quales sint, how good they are or should be: nor how potent, but how pious. Therefore one asking Socrates if the King of Persia were happy, he an∣swered nescio I know not, cum nescio quam sit doctus quä sit vir boaus, seeing I am ig∣norant how learned and good a man he is. Hence the learned Poet calls a noble and religious gouernment,Virg. who adornes mankinde with the defence and practise of true religion, orders, lawes and disci∣pline, formosi cuslos pecoris, formosior ipse, the shepheard of a beautifull flocke of sheepe, himselfe being farre more beau∣tifull and glorious then his whole flocke.
And indeed that holy thirst and desire of knowing and propagating the hea∣uenly wisedome of God reuealed in his word, by reading, meditating, hearing, praying, and the like, is as necessary to
all sorts of men, as well Kings as Keysar, for the defence of their good, safety and saluation, as heate and moisture are ne∣cessary to the nourishing of plants, and as conuenient and sit nutriment is to the nature of euery thing liuing. And it is our duty, who labour the saluation of all sorts of men, and therefore put them in mind of their seuerall offices and duties, to explode and cast out the vaine opini∣on of those men, who bind the religious and assiduous reading of the holy Scrip∣tures, and other holy acts of religion, vp∣on diuines onely, as if either it consorted not with men of their rankes and offi∣ces, or els that they had no neede of it. For doe not the testimonies of sacred Scripture shew that these things both by manifest Lawes of God are cōmāded to all sorts of men, and also are most neces∣sary and profitable for them? In the an∣cient Church, when the Priest-hood was setled vpon the Tribe of ui only, were there not many Israelites of other tribes for all that, famous for the study and knowledge of holy Letters? And in the Primitine Church and downe wards, albeit the office of teaching, was euer committed to a certaine sort of men, were there not to all other sorts of chri∣stians many commandements proposed to stir them vp to the study of the sacred Scriptures? what is that extent of wise∣dome which the Apostle would haue all
men draw from the word?Col. 3.16. what is the sure word of the Prophets, to which all Christians doe well to take heed, as to a light that shineth in a darke place,2 Pet. 1.19. till the day dawne, and the day-star arise in their hearts? and what are those com∣mendations of holy Scripture, as to be a light shining through all a mans life, a doctrine bringing comforts, hope, pati∣ence, saluation, a faculty to consute all doctrines repugnant to the truth, and by the true profession whereof all good things are promised?
But to Princes, and such as are desti∣nated and appointed to the gouernment of other men, these duties of piety are chiefly and aboue all others conuenient and profitable, as many ponderous rea∣sons may infome vs. For it is no small matter that God communicates his own name with them, calling them Gods: that they are by diuine institutions and precepts instructed and inabled to this their excellent knowledge and faculty of gouerning others, which of all other things in the world is the greatest and most difficult: that they are guarded and defended by the authority of diuine lawes against all aduersary power, of all rebellious and pestilent men: that they are by the authority of peculiar written lawes bound to the assiduous and dili∣gent not onely reading but also medita∣ting of the sacred Scripture.

And albeit this our eu  with such men, as prepa  a returne into the ogly and ke clou∣dy barbarity of error and ignorance, from which by the singular mercy of God, we haue been wondeffully deliue∣red: or  he vtrely ast off all care of godlinesse till they be a dying: and who withall doe as well explode & de∣test, as neglect and contemne, aboe all other things, the study of holy Letters, and labour of sanctification: yet al god∣ly Potētates ought to haue their minds stirred vp to the admiration & exercise of those studies, by the examples and institutes of their worthy and famous predecessors.
And if they will not bee mooued by the examples of most potent, pious and glorious Princes, as Ioseph, Da∣uid, Salomon, Ichosaphat, Iosiah, Ezekiah, Daniel, Nehemiah, and the like, whose re∣ligious care is famous in the sacred sto∣ry: yet at the least let them thinke that they ought to haue no lesse care of di∣uine things, then the heathen Cao, Iuli∣us Caesar, Octauius Augustus, Plyius, and before them Alexander Magnus had of humane things.
Besides, if many haue thought Agesilau that most wise and excellent King of Sparta, worthy of all commen∣dations, in that hee would neither goe to bed, nor rise vp, before he had lookt
into Homer,Panorm. whom he had called amasium suum, his sweet heart: if Alphonjus King of Arragon be extolled for reading the Scriptures ouer fourteen times with glosses and expositions, and the Empe∣ror Theodosius the second for reading prayers and singing Psalmes euery mor∣ning with his wife and family; nay if Scipto Assricanus were for this thought praise worthy, that hee euer had in his hands the bookes of Xenophous institu∣tions of Cyrus, which yet were rather written according to the forme of a iust Empire, then the truth of the History: we cannot but account those Princes worthy of infinit commendations, who are wont euer to carry in their hands the bookes of Moses, the Prophets, Apo∣stles, Christ himselfe, and such other issu∣ing from those diuine fountaines: which are not only written according to the Image of the best, happiest, and most ac∣ceptable men to God, but also accor∣ding to the very truth of the story. For by this their care, they shall bring to passe both more thorowly to vnderstand and embrace, and more willingly to pro∣mote and defend that doctrine and piety which by their places they are bound to promote and defend. As it is truly saide quod latet ignotum est, ignoti nulla cupido, what is hidde, is vnknowne, and vn∣known, vnloued, and , by the sight, the affection is mooued.
Which we find iustly to fall out in such as haue tasted of the waters of the di∣uine fountaine, that albeit they exting∣uish the desire of all other things, yet do they so worke; that quo plas sunt potae, plus sitiantur aquae, the more you drinke them, the more you desire them. And this your Highnesse wisdome & industry in holy things which all men admire in one of your yeeres & honors, the noble∣nesse of your birth, & largenes of your glory & fortunes makes more conspi∣cuous & re-markeable to all men. For as the light of a torch, by how much it is placed in a higher candle-sticke, by so much doth it giue light to more in the roome: so vertue and goodnesse albeit the splendor thereof doe euery where spread it selfe, yet doth it more largely send foorth his beames when grafted in a high & eminēt person. And it is by the good hand of our God vpon vs, so orde∣red in your Princely person, aboue the most of your ranke in the world, that as gold and siluer are apter mettalls to in∣graue pretious stones in, then iron or lead, so is true nobility, but more truly, the noblenesse of your nature, a better subiect to imprint any vertue in, then those of a baser, & lower cōdition. For as waxe is apt to receiue al formes, so true nobility, and most the truenesse of your noble nature, is a disposition fitted by the hād of God, to receiue the impressi∣on
of any vertue. Therefore God ha∣uing done so great things for you aboue others, you must not content your selfe to haue abandoned one vice, or enter∣tained one vertue, but you must empty your heart & affections of all the masse of corruptions, and fill the cabinet of your soule with the rich treasures and lewels of all manner of vertues. For as one vn-tuned instrument destroies the whole harmony of musick, so the defect of any one vertue, mars the sweet har∣mony of the soule. And as a bird is staid frō flying away with a little string, yea a strong man in swimming is held back by a little twig, and often drownd by a little grasse growing in the bottom of the riuer: so euen the least sin hinders our passage into heauen, as it did Mo∣ses from going into Canaan. But especial∣ly if sinne grow into custome; for they seldom euer rise that haue the mil-ston of ill customes pressing them downe.
Therefore, those that would safely arriue at the heauenly Canaan, must ba∣nish the two pests of ill customes and il companions from them. For whē a man once begins to like of pleasure, and to dally with sinne, straight way as many vanities flocke to him as Salomon had concubines. Then he runs ouer reason, treads on conscience, goes by the word, & posts to destruction as if he ran for a kingdom; much like a Larke that retires
and falls faster then shee mounted. The Crocodiles egge (they say) is at first no bigger then a Goose egge; but her issue growes by little and little till it become eighteen foot long; so sinne at first seems but a small matter, but once enter and admit him, hee will fill the house of the soule and prooue a monster. And as it growes, so doth the punishment too: an arrow is swift, the Sunne is swift, but sin is swiftest of all: for in a moment it is ar∣raigned on earth, iudged in heauen, and condemned to hell.
O that I might once see great ones turne sinne but euen their great sinnes a begging for want of seruice, as good seruants often goe a begging for want of maintenance. But I am much afraid, that as God looking downe from heauen to see if any would doe good and seeke after God, said, non est vnus, there is not one: So this kind of seruing God, to shake off om sinnes, and acquaint our selues with God, may goe from Court to country, from City to village, from prea∣cher to hearer, and find none that will subscribe to it. Yet is this required at all our hands vnder paine of eternall dam∣nation. For as Rebecca had not only eare∣rings of gold, but bracelets too: so our armes must bee adorned as well as our cares: we must not onely haue cares to heare well, and mouthes to speake well, but also hands to doe well. And how can
that be done, if we giue our selues whol∣ly to the pleasures of the flesh? for as moist and plashy grounds bring foorth nothing but frogs: so the belly and watry stomacke stuft like a tunne, brings forth nothing but foggy thoughts, filthy spee∣ches, and corrupt affections. Therefore Physitians say, that nothing is better for the body then abstinence, Lawyers say, nothing is beter for the wits, but diuines say nothing is better for the soule.
The story tells vs of a bird, with a mans face, but so cruell to man, that it will kill him; yet afterwards seeing her owne face in the water, like to that shee killed, incontinent kils her selfe, because she had killed one like her selfe. What then will those men doe, that haue not onely kild one like themselues, but euen their owne bodies and soules, by their surfettings, drunkennesse, vncleannesse, malice, pride, enuy, and other beastly intemperancies? O why will we not liue ten yeers, or twenty yeeres like Christi∣ans; that we might liue not a thousand, but euen millions of yeeres like Angels? How long shall it bee a voice from vs, a sound to you, and so all the matter is en∣ded, that wee preach or write, all going away like a boy in ones hand, from our bookes and sermons, remembring and applying nothing that is said or read as the stomacke except it haue power of retention makes no benefit of the meat:
so except wee lay vp these things in our hearts, reading and preaching are but in vaine.
I will not presse your sacred Highn esse out of your Chaire of State, as worthy Gregory did Basil, pulling him out of his Doctors chaire from the profession of Rhetoricke to Diuinity, saying, Omitte ista, & da saluti peram, leaue these toyes and haue care of your saluation? for I know well, it is your principall care to make your calling and election sure: but giue mee leaue to put you in minde so to manage the things of this life which belong to profit or pleasure that you euer preserre the things of heauen, and make the desire of heauē, the moderator of all your pleasures and profits. For the pleasures of youth are like gilded pilles, very bitter; like fresh riuers that euer end in the sea, loosing their sweete rel∣lish in an ocean of saltnesse. True zeale cannot flourish vnder such a delicate go∣nernmēt, nor yet the perfect knowledge of God he subiect to the paunch.
I know not how it comes to passe that we are afraid to be too holy: & whereas we haue a weight for all kind of mettals, a touch stone for golde, and a measure for grame, and we wil not take lesse then measne, waight, and that which is good in both, yet wee slicke not to ut God short of his waight, and measure; and which worse is, to offer him drosse in
stead of gold, water in stead of wine, and chaffer in stead of corne; waighing our seruice in false ballances, and gruing him false drugs, false and counterfeit stuffe, false worship, shadowes for substances.
But let vs take heede, for as God after twelue moneths came to Nebuchadnezar to take an account of his dreames that he sent him, so will he shortly come to euery of vs to take an account of the ser∣mons we haue heard, the books we haue read, the talents wee haue receiued, the stewardship committed to vs, and all the holy meanes be hath vsed to winne vs vnto him. Wisedome, and honour, and greatnesse, without the seare of God will then doe vs no more good, then the Arke did the Philistims, procure our greater plagues. And I doubt much though light be come amongst vs, yet it may truely be said, the Gentils sit in darknesse and the shadow of death. Ther∣fore let not our owne gifts or Gods in∣finit goodnes to vs, in fatuate our harts. For as Noah was drunke with his owne grapes, so we may easily offend God with our owne gifts, and bee drunke with the abundance of his goodnesses.
This dotage of the world should fore∣warne vs as sonnes of the day and light,Tert. with the Eagle and all other birds a cano ad rlum euolare, to mount from the dung hill of this world, to the exceeding weight of glory in heauen. For neither
are the fowles of the heauen in-tangled and caught,Ambr. whilst they cut the highest region of the ayre, but whilst they creep below on the ground. And to aspire to the future life, wee must learne to con∣temne this present life; to contemne the present, it behooues vs to know it to know it, is to remoue it far from our hearts, and banish it from our affections: for the things of this world being so neer vs, doe but dazle the minde, and distract the iudgement. And these beata otia, these blessed times of peaces, these gol∣den seasons of the Gospell can no other∣wise be continued to vs, but by cashie∣ring the vanities of the world and gras∣ping of heauen. Herein (for shame) out∣stripping the Heathen Aristippus, who, when some of Syracusa sayling to Cyrene, askt him, would he commaund them any thing to his family, answered, command mine to care for prouision of such things as with the owner will swimme ashore in ship wrack: and let vs not doe this for a sitte or a flash, but as Catelines Souldiers were found dead or aliue in the same place they were fust put, so must wee in re-signing our selues wholly to the good pleasure of God and contemning the vanities and pleasures of the world, bee setled and resolued to dye and liue in that re-signation.
The way to doe this, is euer to medi∣tare on the last date of our dayes, when
we shal come to that great audit to giue an account of all we haue done in the flesh: for the very thought of death is as a strainer cleansing and purging al our thoughts, words and actions, like a cloth that hath been many times possed and plunged in the water. And the rather is this meditatiō prositable, because death comes suddēly as a messenger vn lookt for. Who would haue thought the ene∣my shold haue entred Ierusalem so soon, and made such a sudden and wofull ha∣uock neuer to be recouered? who would haue thought that Herod should so soon haue beene eaten with lice, when the people cried, the voice of God and not of man? Who would haue thought Ne∣buchadnezzar should so soone haue be on turned out a doore to graze like a beast, when he boasted he had built great Ba∣bylon, for the honor of his name may who would haue thought that Iezabel should haue been a prey for dogs, and not an care left to season the graue withal? but thus it is: great Princes and Peeres, nay such as are Peerlesse here, must die; and though they differ frō all other in their pompe, honors, pleasures, & greatnesse, in their apparell, meat, attendance, and all, shining like the stars; yet is their end like to the beggars at their gates, and many times worse, & in fat worser case are they after their deaths, if they haue not bin rich in good works to his glory
that made them so rich and glorious. Therfore this Morieris, thou shalt die, is an excellent Motto, for all great ones especially, it is like a barre in their armes, it will make the proudest vaile & fall his creast.
But what need so many words to so re∣ligious, iudicious, & well seasoned a na∣ture, whō I know to be of the resolution of that euer memorable Alphonsus King of Arragon, who being highly praised for his nobility, in that he was rex, regis fili∣us, regis nepos, regis frater: a King, a Kings sonne, a Kings nephew, and a Kings bro∣ther: answered, I esteeme nothing lesse in this life, then these vanities, for these are not my commendations, but rather theirs who by their valour and vertues, righteousnes, tēperance, prudence & the like, haue gotten me these kingdoms & honors: nor are kingdomes any thing to the successors but burdens; and then only become honours if they be recei∣ued rather for their vertues, then by te∣stament and succession. This is that on∣ly that can make a man truely noble, both in this life & in a better. Therfore Maximilian answered one well, suing to him for letters Patents to ennoble him: that it was in this power to make him rich, but only vertue could make him noble. And as all, but chiesly those that owe God most, hauing receiued most, must shū the corruptiōs of the world &
all ill customs, so must they be careful to auoide ill company. And to this end, ne∣uer to suffer Dauids protestation and practise in a whole Psalme depart out of their hearts.Psal. 101. For as it is great wisedome not onely to shun the plague, but euen euery ragge that may seeme to carry the plague with it: so it is heauenly wisedom not only to auoid grosse and fowle sinnes and sinners, but euen all the peccadilia dwarse-sinnes, and all those sine mincers of sinne. For as it is policy not to goe so neere the riuers banke as we can for feare of falling in: so it is heauenly dis∣cretion not to come neere sinne, nor ap∣parant wicked persons that are not sea∣soned with the true knowledge of God, the sonnes of Belial: corrupt men and re∣probate, concerning the faith; enemies of the Crosse of Christ, whose belly is their God, whose end is damnation, whose glory is to their shame, which minde earthly things, for feare wee bee ouer-taken and infected before wee bee aware. For one sinner destroieth much good,Eccles. 9.18. nay the breath of a wicked person is euen bainfull to the company. Nor let them euer thinke that such a companion or such a seruant as is not the true ser∣uant of God,Suidas. can euer bee faithfull to them. For as the Historian reports, when one changed his religion to please the King, hee was iudged to loose his head, and one appointed to cry at his execu∣tion
He that keepes not faith towards God, what sound conscience can he haue towards men? therefore in euery great house there would bee prouision of be∣soms and wings to sweep downe the Spi∣ders webs, & so by leauing them no place nor meanes to hurt the harmlesse slies, the Spider it selfe might at last be quite swept our too. Nor let them thinke that because they are great, they may vse what customs, companions, and seruants they please: For as Alexander to a City of Asia, that offered him halfe their ri∣ches to desist from war, answered, I came not into Asia with a purpose to take what you would giue me, but that you should retain what I would leaue you: so faith God to them; I came not into your houses or kingdomes, or soules, that you should condition with me what I should suffer you to doe, and to liue as you list; and to take such conditions of you as you would giue me, at your pleasure; but that what conditions I haue thought fit to require of you, you should accept them, and thinke them best and most happy. For God is our summum bonum, wee must not rest below him, not yet reach aboue him; below him is dange∣rous neglect, aboue him is damnable presumption. Therefore must wee not loue God forour owne profit or pleasure, which is the soule-killing custome of most in the world; for such a one is like a
child that faith his prayers that he may haue his break-fast. But we must loue him how-soeuer it fare with vs, with-out any respect of our owne good, because he only is worthy of our loue, and no∣thing is worthy of it but he, and in his loue consists all our happinesse.
I say there is great need therefore of the practise of this art of seruing God, as this short pro-gresse sets it out; seeing it brings vs not only within the view of the heauenly Canaan, but euen into the bosome and communion of his loue. And seeing also we liue in the dregs of time, wherein it is come to passe, that as the waters couered the whole earth, so pride and other monstrous impieties hath couered it againe, and not suffered eight persons to escape. For doe we not see the City of God, the holy profession of Iesus Christ, to bee destitute of walls, gates, and guards, and the repaire of it either hindered by sects of men madly furious, or else oppugned by the craft and cunning, & violent assaults of men either meerely epicures, or sottedly su∣perstitious? on the one side Christ Iesus is vtterly cast off by the lust of these most impure hogs that are euer wallowing in the myre, on the other side the riches & estate of the meaner sort, nay often of the greater sort is exhausted and vt∣terly rained by the greedy auarice of most cruell and barbarous vos and
other time-sellers? here shall we see bo∣dies by drunkennesse and gluttony con∣sumed, there by lust, surquedry, and pride and other intemperancies, both bodies, soules, and ostates ouer-throwne; and all places and persons with extreme filthi∣nesse and fopperies slurred and defiled? to say nothing of whole Prouinces and Kingdomes by intollerable bribery, ex∣tortion, symony, sacriledge, craft, and cruelty, miserably expiled and robbed: and none to be found for all this, which dare or can meete with these mischiefes: and the most part of men hauing so cast off all hope of amendment of these great euils, as that they thinke they may bee numbred amongst those diseases which are so desperate, as either by no at can be cured, or else whose cure is as dange∣rous as the disease?
For though Nebuchadnezzar bee dead, yet his pride is come amongst vs; though Sodom be burnt to dust and ashes, yet are her sinnes remaining (if not raigning) with vs: though Symon Magus be gone, yet hath he left the staine of symony in the highest degree to vs: though Iezabel be dead, yet doe bribes liue and thriue, and beare away the bell in all businesse: and men begin to take courage to com∣mit any sinne by example. For when the pillars sinke the Temple falls; when a great tree is hewen downe, which is a shade to the beasts, and a rest to the
birds, many leaues, boughs, and twigs, nay the shrubs and lesser trees are borne downe and crushed with it: so many doe fall with them, whose lampes should giue light to others, and thinke it no sinne, to sinne by example and for company.
This being so, it is not only necessary that some stand vp in the gappe to turne away the wrath-full dis-pleasure of God from vs, but also is fully confest that frō this Pro-gresse of the soule, most apt and necessary helps & instructions may be drawne to the vse of all sorts of men of our times. For if we call to mind those heauenly, secret, and wonderfull myste∣ries of our saluation, also those things by which all mankind is either much furthered, or greatly hindered in the way to heauen: to conclude, if we call to minde those things which aswell the Church of God, as kingdomes & states stand as much need of vs as the world doth of fire and water: wee must needs confesse, that in this Pro-gresse are pro∣posed most excellent, necessary, and pro∣fitable things of all men to bee knowne and obserued. How great a benefit the diligent reading thereof may bring to all sorts, accommodating and directing all things therein to the vse of true reli∣gion, and increase of holy life, the due consideration of the parts, and true pra∣ctise of the passages thereof will suffici∣ently declare. For here are shortly and
plainely deliuered, the true and onely means, faculties and helps to raise man to the highest step of perfectiō in glory.
Now for as much as the world is po∣stered with a kind of people resembling seruants and men of low condition, who expecting in the lobbies and out-rooms their masters comming, and being idle and brainlesse how to bestow their time well, do take a coale and with fond and filthy phrases, be-sincare the faire pla∣stered wls; I assure my self to meet with some such enuious idlebies or ignorāts, as most men doe, that put themselues vpon the worlds stage by publicke wri∣tings who with the blacke coale of a blistered tongue will not sticke to be∣spawle and depraue both the worke and the worke-man.
Therefore as those that for some time haue bin exercised in some craggy, dif∣ficult and dangerous place, desire much to come into some safe and wished ha∣uen, wherein they may take their rest, and with true pleasure and delight call to mind their former labours and losses: so I conceiue, it much concernes me to commend these my weake endeauours, to his tutelage, trust & protection, with whom they may not onely be safe, but also of some value & regard. But seeing no man will either gratefully accept, or greatly delight in, much lesse  & protect against the mal  ∣melies
and poisonous breath of carping tongues, those things which are either altogether auerse from his nature, or re∣moued from his vnderstanding and knowledge; or lesse fit for his dignity and greatnesse: therefore am I to seeke some generous and illustrious person, well vnderstanding and regarding these things, to shroud them (vnder his shield) from the tempest of distēpered tongues. And where may I goe to find such a one, but to your noblenesse, (most religious Prince) who hath known the holy Scrip∣tures of a child,2 Tim. 3.15. which are able to make you wife to saluation through the faith which is in Iesus Christ? and who makes conscience to remember your creatour in the daies of your youth,Eccle. 12.8 whilst the euill dayes come not, nor the yeeres wherein you shall say, I haue no pleasure in them?
For there is no writer, that had not need to prouide good structure, and great strength, against the violent and furious waues of malignant tongues: the Alcyon is said to expose her nest beeing made of firmly compacted stuffe,Plut. lib. 9.17. to the shore where the strongest waues do beat; and whatsoeuer it findes not sufficiently and soundly composed, it amends and strengthens. Now if the care and natu∣rall loue of future issue make the Alcyon so sollicitous to bring vp her yong, that shee prepares a building which the sea it
selfe cannot penetrate; I stand excusable in labouring by all meanes to protect this house and shelter of the soules re∣fuge, vnder the shadow of your Princely sauour, against the raging and swelling flouds of impious detractors. Therefore to you alone doe I herein rightly ad∣dresse my selfe, knowing that as when Aeneas was permitted to carry away any one thing, that he would, he made choice to carry with him his country Gods; so you will rather chuse to giue counte∣nance to Gods cause, and the godly la∣bours of diuines therein, then to all other writings seeme they neuer so pro∣fitable, pleasant and glorious: for that of Democritus as it is well known vnto you, so is it well practised; that two things doe rule the whole world, reward and punish∣ment. And what reward or punishment can bee greater or more iust then to ac∣cept of the worthy, and reiect the worth∣lesse labours of men? seeing you doe so wisely iudge that as three verses of slowe Euripides stile lasts longer then a hun∣dred of the Praecipitant stile of Alcestes, so one sentence of those soule-quickning words which proceed out of the mouth of God,Val. Max. 3.7. is more worth then all the elo∣quence and learning of the world be∣sides.
I know well, that a base countryman passeth by the King and salutes him not, because hee knowes him not: and a
simple peasant of the cuntry, as he walks in the fields, tramples vnder his feete many soueraigne simples, which the skil∣full Apothecaries carefully gather vp and preserue: so many vnskilfull persons or if cunning Clarkes, yet carnall pro∣fessors will not only passe by this worke, as they doe all other of this kind, with∣out saluting it, but euen spitefully tread it vnder foot, because they cannot suffi∣ciently value the worth of it. Yet shall the godly wise in this field, finde many excellent herbes of sweet and soueraign operatiō to euery purpose for his soules good.
And for my owne part, Cremutius Bul∣warke shall bee my comfort in all the storms and gust of contagious tongues: Verba mea arguntur adeo factorum in∣noceus sum.Tacit. annal. 4. Let them carpe at my words and writings who list, whilst my consci∣ence is cleere from any foule liuing or offence giuing. Townes that haue wod∣den bridges, doe seare least they should be borne downe by euery floud or en∣crease of waters, but they that haue brid∣ges of stone care not, but only for extra∣ordinary swellings of waters, so he that hath a soule well setled in Christian mo∣deration, contemns the ordinary excesse of iniurious tongues, but such as are weake in godlinesse are disquieted with euery blast of broad and foule mouthed companions. The bridge of my reputa∣tion
is not of wood but of hewen stone, therefore little reckons of any inunda∣tions of vngodly censurers.
Onely herein is my feare, that I haue offended the gratious patience of your Princely eare, with the ouer-tediousnesse of an vnpolisht Epistle: and herein should I faint for feare to displease, were I not with this assurance born vp (out of long obseruation of your godly courses) that it is voluptas summa, & quaestus max∣imus, your greatest pleasure & best gaine to please God,Plato. and gaine many vnto Christ, making all other learning but chiefly this to be instar fraeni, like a bridle to restraine you that you be not distra∣cted with other vnnecessary things. Knowing that as it is the glory of the Sunne, that so many thousand stars bor∣row light from it, so it is your neuer fa∣ding glory, that so many millions of souls shall borrow light and example from you, to follow you in this heauenly Pro∣gresse: and withall remembring that as Alcibiades not finding Homer with the schoolmaster gaue him a boxe on the care and went his way; so you will thinke him vnmeer for your company that fol∣lowes you not in this happy Progresse of all true pleasure.
Neuer therefore let it depart out of your Princely minde that whatsoeuer Gods gifts are in you, yea euen all the gratious occasions and seasons of time
for his seruice, you owe them all to the Church of Christ: and that God hath not made you Lord Paramount of the goods of body or minde, much lesse of those falsly ascribed to Fortune, but his steward to lay them out to his glory, the saluation and good of others. Which if you shall euer remember and doe, God shall bring you thorow the Pro-gresse of this miserable life with much increase of honor and happinesse, vnto your own desired glorious home in heauen; where you shall be satisfied with pleasures at his right hand for euermore. Both which our good God in great mercy confirme and make good vnto you, as is the harty desire of all that wish well vnto our Israel, and the daily seruice and prayer


