



COnsidering and pondering with my selfe (mooste noble Lorde and verye frende of God) the greate diuersitie of opinions nat onely in thys Realme but in al other realmes and dominions, ry∣sen and spronge for lacke of the true knowledge of the worde of God, con∣cernynge the iustificacion of man, be∣syde the greate variaunce and mortall hatred, nat onely betwene man and man

but also betwene Realme and Realme that almoste no countrye, no region, or place, is voyde of thys and suche lyke kynde of controuersies, to no small dy∣structyon of Christians: the matter be∣ynge in the time of Lent last past (which was in the yeare of our lorde. 1547. by the Kynge hys grace hys owne subiec∣tes before his highnes in his Chappell moste clarkely and connyngly declared and made open that nothynge coulde be desyred more: it semed to me a thynge very necessarye and expediente: amonge many, whiche haue written on this ar∣ticle: accordynge to good and syncere doctryne, to select and chose on  doynge: whose labour and payns shulde seme to me so fruytfull: whose reasons so plne, so mete for the capacitie of al men to be perceyued and vnderstanded: that for the comon profite and lerninge of all men (whiche are wyllynge to knowe and learne the truthe): it shulde seme to me no laboure, no payne, but great pleasure and comfort, to trāslate it into this oure mother tonge. That lyke wyse as they haue bene instructed and taught by the liuely voyce of godly and learned preachers: so they maye be∣ynge at home in theyr houses, certifie and confyrme theyr owne conscience,

euery man as God wyl gyue him grace to receyue it.
¶ OF the which article of Iustificati¦on: for as muche as there be thre sundry opinions and myndes of men, so diuers so contrary and different one from that other that almoste no blakis more con∣trary to whyte, beynge no lykenesse of similitude and agrement in them euery man for his perswasion with to the and nayle striuinnge and contendynge: that almost the whole some of our belefe is nowe come to that case that it is no∣thynge els but a bare contention, it is nedeful (I say) therefore that there be set abrode to al the kynge his moste lo∣uynge subiectes in wrytynge some per∣fect instruction (all other phantasies and opinions sayde asyde (wherein be∣ynge lerned they may knowe certaynly wherto they may-stycke and confyrme theyr myndes.
¶ There is one kynde of men whiche contende that by theyr owne workes and merites, they ar iustified, to whom theyr sauyoure and redemer is of none effecte and serueth for no purpose except it be to theyr condempnation, bi¦cause they do refuse so gentyll and lo∣uynge a sauyoure, makynge and deuy∣synge to them selues, euerye man after

his owne phantasye a sundrye sauyoure and redemer, some one thyngesome an other.Papistes, Iewes. The whiche sorte of men are the foule and stynkynge Papystes, and also the Iewes. Of the whiche twayne the Iewes are least to be blamed: for as muche as the Papystes professynge the name of Christ do vtterly denye Christe in byenge and sellynge the saluation of man: none otherwise than Iudas dyd bye and sel his maister. I feare me, that lyke mischefe wyll happen to them, as dyd to Iudas, whiche for sorowe moost desperate, wente a  ed him selfe. The Lorde gyue them g to repente whyle they be in the waye. And as for workes they do drowne mennes consci∣ence in them so muche, that withoute they do them as they be prescribed there shal remaine no hope of saluation: more redy to dryue men headlynge into despe¦ration, than to any trust of the bloude of Christe. The Iewes are no Iewes in comparation to these. They haue the Scriptures to serue for theyr purpose at the leaste they do make them to do them seruyce as the Deuyll, what tyme he tempted the Lorde. If it wolde please God to open the eyes of the Iewes, that they myght beholde and se the lyghte of the ryght Messias, whiche is come all

redy to vs: whome they yet loke after, they wolde deteste and abhorre these foule Cankres they wolde nat knowe them to be anye of the flocke of Christ: but of Sathan: to whom they do seruice of whom they shall be rewarded.
¶ An other sorte there is, to whome Christe is somewhat more beholdynge nat so openly malicious as they be: but no lesse dangerous, for as much as they do come more vnder coloure of vertue. At whose handes Christe lesyth nat all hys laboure, beynge allowed as yet for halfe a sauioure. Our saluation beynge cutte of in the myddes: that one halfe to Christe: and that other to theyr owne workes ascrybed.Hipocrites These be the holy Hi∣pocrites which perceyuynge and seyng the lyght of the Gospell so shynynge a∣brode all the worlde, that theyr abho∣minable traytery to God can no lenger be hydde, do nowe at the last mitigate and swage some thynge that greate and foule errour, wherein they made Christ to lese all his labour, all his paynes, all hys bloudshed as muche as lay in them. They do sause it (I saye) with Sew∣gar: they do myxe Hony with Poyson to begyle the poore soules the more craf¦tely and subtyllye, sayenge that with workes and faythe togyther they muste

or iustified, so that from our iustificati¦on in no case they wyl exclude workes: for none other purpose, but to mayn∣teyne and holde vp the fylthye dignitie of those workes which they haue inuen¦ted by theyr owne brayns for lucre sake The worde of God,The word of God is Triacle to the soule. whiche is the most fyneste Triacle that maye be: can nat chose but expell this deadelye Poyson from the herte of man.
¶ T thyrde sorte knowledgyng and confessynge Christe in his owne kinde: that he is the only sauiour, the only rede¦mer,Trewe pre¦chers. our only mediatour and aduocate, whiche shewethe to his father in oure cause hys bloudy payns, which he hath suffered and passed for vs these men do teache that onely by faythe euery Chry∣styan man is iustified in the bloude of the Lambe, whiche is Christ. Nat there by excludynge repentaunce and good workes from our lyfe:Good workes. as the Papystes, and Hypocrytes do continuallye barke and blaspheme: but excludynge them from the cause of our iustification,The cause of our iusti¦fication. whi∣che cause is only Christ and his merites These be those men which wolde fayne that Christ had hys ryghte and hys ho∣nour nat mynyshed: these men wyll and teache him to be a whole sauioure: nat scanteled, mangeled, peced and botched

Of these sort of newe learned men was Iohn Baptyste:Iohn Ba¦tyst. whiche for all that he taught the people repentance and know¦leginge of theyr sinne, yet for al that he declared, that all that wolde nat serue them, dyd they neuer so muche, shewing to the people with his fynger him whi∣che shulde be theyr sauiour, which came downe for none other cause but to take awaye the sinne of man. If there hadde bene any other thinge beside him, wher¦in our saluation shulde consist: he wold nat haue sayde, beholde the Lambe of God whiche take the away the sinne of the worlde, he wold haue ben wel ware of it: he wolde nat haue spoken these wordes so playne to be any maner of oc¦casion of heresye or diuision, he wolde haue sayde: loke, yender is he, whiche may do muche in thys cause: he shalbe a greate part of youre saluation: but yet take good hede and truste nat to muche to hym:Iohn fyrs preached ¦pentaunce afterwar the Gospe trust to your workes also or els ye may be deceyued. This or suche lyke oration wolde he haue made to his hea∣rers. But he was wel assured of the con¦trarye. And therfore he shewed to them theyr synne, that they myght se and ab∣horre theyr abhomination of lyfe: theyr fylthynes of maners: to the entent they myght be the more apte to receyue com∣forte

of the Gospell: whiche is the glad tidinges. And so after he had rebuked them of theyr sinne: with lyke counsell to repent and to forsake theyr vnhappy lewdnesse: then he taught them the Gos¦pell: that hriste shulde take awaye the sinne, nat of one or twayne: or of a fewe in nombre: but of all the whole world. To this brasen walle he commaunded them to leane harde: whiche is vnable to be broken. If he hadde spoken these wordes within these fewe yeres in Lon¦don,Smithfeld ger san∣uinis. I thynke nat the contrarye but Smythfelde wolde haue bene to whote for hym: he shulde haue learned, what it is to roste a faggot, he shulde haue bene taught to knowe: howe Iudicare came to Crede for hys true preachynge.
¶ Thus the people beynge taught .iii. maner of sundry wayes: euerye teacher hauynge his patron: hys heade: hys bea¦rer: hauynge and makynge the Scrip∣tures for theyr purpose: howe is it pos∣sible (moste noble and Godlye disposed Lorde) that the poore and simple people shuld be in an vnitie,Diuersitie f prea∣hynge cau¦ethe dys∣orde. concord, and loue. Howe is it possible the carte shulde go forwarde when the horse drawers do plucke and drawe sundry wayes. What tyme shal a shyppe be brought to her vi∣age

ende, yf euerye maryner styrrethe a contrary course: what tyme wolde it be or these foure persons shuld mete, if the one goeth East, another West, the third Northe, the fourthe Southe: we muste all go one waye: we must kepe the kyng his highe waye, nat turnynge into by pathes and lanes for lesyng and goyng forth of the ryght way, which is Christ We must kepe all one course to the port of saluation.
¶ I do offer therfore: & exhibite to your grace the mynd, iugement and sentence of that noble clarke: and Godlye deuyne Phylyp Melanchton:Phylypp Melanch¦ton. a man for his in∣tollerable payns and sweat, in settynge forthe the woorde of God susteyned by hym: worthy to be hadde in most hyghe estymatyon: touchynge the artycle of oure iustyfycatyon: by me translated forthe of the Latyne into Englysshe: by hym so playnly: so openly set forthe, his argumentes, reasons, examples, and auc¦torities beynge so manye and so many∣fest: that euerye plowman, whiche can fynde in hys herte to learne to knowe to whome he shal cleaue for his saluation: may with no great payns ye in passing of his tyme come to the knowledge: whereto he shal stande and stycke to for

his saluation. Whose doctryn in al mat¦ters: and specially in thys, i so confor¦mable and correspondent to the Scrip∣tures bothe olde and newe: nat writhen nor wrasted (as shall appeare to the rea∣ders) that I thinke there be no man, which can be so peruerse and malicious that can fynde any faulte therewith. Ex¦cepte he wyll denye vtterlye Christe to be Christe and the Gospel to be trewe. If there be any suche (as there hath ben in dede: and I feare me there be many: whiche louynge the Deuyll as well as the Gospell wyll put awaye theyr ser∣uauntes: yf they maye knowe that they do but ons smatter therof) such I wold wyssh to be banyshed foor from al mens company: suche wolde I desyre to be in lowe auctoritie & rule: that they might do lytell harme or none, I wolde wisshe (I saye) that God of hys infinite mer∣cye wolde open theyr eyes that they myghte se the lyghte of theyr saluation that theyr eyes shoulde be nomore blea∣red with the phantasies and auctori∣ties of men.
¶ Thys worke bycause the learned as well as the vnlearned myghte be full in¦structed and ledde as it were by a lyne to the perfecte knowledge and vnder∣standynge

of thys proposition. Onely faythe iustyfyethe. Therefore it is de¦uyded into foure partes.
¶ The fyrste conteynethe the declara∣tyon of this vocable and word Iustice howe it is taken in the Phylosophers and howe with the Gospell, and what they be bothe in effecte, shewynge what the lawe of God doth requyre of vs: and what we can perfourme of oure owne selfes. And at the laste what remedy by what meanes is to be hadde for oure in∣fyrmytye.
¶ The seconde parte doethe teache the ryghte vnderstandynge of these voca∣bles and wordes. The lawe, the Gos∣pell, Synne, Iustification, Grace, and faythe, howe and in what maner after the sincere doctryn of the Gospel euery one of these vocables must be taken. The blyndnes and ignoraunce wherof: hath broughte so greate darkenesse into the worlde: that the cleare bryghtnesse of the Gospel coulde nat be perceyued: but made darke, clowdye, and so mysty that men hadde no lyst to haue the worde of God in theyr handes, as a thynge most asperous and bytter and fore frome all comforte. The whiche thinge did cause the vngracious and peruerse maner of

interpretacion of the sayde vocables and wordes contrary to the ryght sence and meanynge of them. The ryghte vn∣derstandynge and meaninge therof per¦ceyued and knowen: that whiche semyd before darke and cloudye, shall appeare nowe bryghte, shynynge, lyke the sonne as cleare as any Christall: that whiche was harde and rogged: shall be founde softe and tender: and fynally, which se∣myd to be as bitter as Gall, shalbe more swete then any Honye. So great an all teratyon shall the worde of God brynge with it.
❧ And bycause that the Papystes do beat into the heades of the simple plain and vnlearned people to styrre them to the hatred of the worde of God, sayeng and beatynge theyr handes that these newe felowes they do teache no good workes: they bydde you do no more but beleue, and you shall be saued, lyue you neuer so licensiously, so lewdly. To cō∣uince them therfore of theyr most deue∣lyshe malice and open sclaunder in the thyrde parte he speaketh and teachethe good workes, what workes, and howe they muste be done, howe they shalbe pleasaunt and acceptable to God. The whiche workes he callethe a Christian

mannes obedience,A christian mannes obedience. which commeth ne¦cessary after faythe. In the which parte he shewethe howe venyall sinne is to be taken, and what sinnes they be whiche makethe vs destytute of grace and the holye Ghooste.
¶ In the fourthe and laste parte, lyke a moost diligent Scholemayster, be set¦tethe forthe one after an other all theyr Sophistical cauillations and croked ar¦gumentes, where with they myght de¦ceyue and begyle a ryghte good clerke that bothe you maye knowe what they be, and howe they are to be dissolued and put awaye, whiche thynge shall be very necessary to be marked, that when men do heare them in theyr reasonynge wryenge and wrastynge the woorde of god, thei may stop theyr mouthes with the ryghte vnderstandynge of it, that at the laste they shalbe ashamed to brynge anye more suche durte before men. At thys poynt this Godly clerke finisheth his worke very profytable and necessa∣rye for all men. The whiche woorke I wolde exhorte all men to rede earnestly and to marke the auctorities of the scri¦ptures, by hys Godly laboure gethered togyther for the vse of other men. that they may haue them at all tymes in a re¦dynes,

to ferche them forthe of theyr brestes as it were shaftes oute of a quy∣uer to serue theyr purpose to the mayn∣tenaunce of the trewe worde and glorye of God agaynst the whole rabble of the Papystrie.
¶ In consideration therfore of the most propensed and redye good wyll and fa∣uoure, whiche youre grace alwaye hath borne, and doeth beare styll to the most heauenlye worde of God, and to the fur¦derars thereof. I coulde deuysing with my selfe fynde no man more fytte, to whome thys treatyse shulde be dedicate and gyuen better than to youre grace. Whose naturall inclynatyon to al good¦nesse to be very Godly, the mooste lucky and prosperous successes of all your af∣fayres (the Lorde declarynge his espe∣cyall fauoure and loue to youre grace warde, that agayne in hys defence you shoulde haue a stronge stretched oute arme agaynste hys enemyes) do giue so trewe and manyfeste euydence and testy¦fycatyon, that all Chrystendome spea∣kethe moste honourable thereof.
❧ To the whiche worke of Iustyfy∣catyon I haue annexed and sette to, a lyttell matter: nat vnfruytefull, I truste, called an Apologye or Defence

of the worde of God, declaryng and pro¦uynge howe nedeful it is that the word of God be in the handes of all men and common for al persones, shewynge also what great inconuenyence commeth by the lacke thereof, beynge the only cause of al the detestable enormities and vices whiche are wroughte and commytted thorowe all the worlde. Wherewith as with an apple of myne owne tree moost lowly with all reuerence I submitting my selfe vnto youre grace do presente and gyue, trustynge in the Lorde that ac¦cordyng to your olde accustomable gen¦tylnesse, you wyll with no lesse good wyll receyue and accepte thys myne en∣terpryse, than it was with a most pure and louynge herte offered vp. Whereby I am surely certayned of .ii. commody∣tyes thereby receyued. Fyrste that the purenesse and sinceritie of my herte to your grace ward is hereby declared and also accepted. Secondelye that all they whiche shall receyue any profyt of this translation, shall most thankefully next to God ascrybe the occasyon thereof to your grace, whome I beseche the Lorde long to preserue to the safe tuition and good gouernaunce of oure soueraygne Lorde and vyrgyn Kynge, and to the comforte of all the realme, and dyscom∣forte

of al those whiche are Goddes and his grace his enemyes, and specyally to the furderaunce of the worde of God. Whose excellente Maiestie I pray God manye yeares to contynewe with in∣crease of all hys Godlye gyftes, that his grace may sprynge and growe of a lyltell swete tender plante to be a strong olde tree with many goodly and comfortable braun∣ches.
❧ AMEN.
