



Right worthy Lady:
GIue mee leaue, I beseech you, to presēt your bet∣ter Worth with this lowe ad∣dressement of my loue. Lit∣tle, I confesse, is the value of paper presents, and of so much the lesse account, by
how much our age hath made the number of bookes to bee the medicine or purgation of idle or distempered braines; and medicine, I wish that truely I might haue sti∣led it.
But bookes, which should be as Apothecaries shoppes, and wise Phisitions store∣houses, furnished with all manner of remedies for sick and diseased Soules, are ma∣ny times, banes to the Soules and pests to the bodies of the readers, whilst the subiects handled in them, are fitter to be suppressed then printed.
Mine, I dare not commend to be such as it should be, be∣cause it is maine: but thus much I presume to warrant, that had the worthinesse of the matter beene so happy
to light in a hand, skillfull to discipher the true price and pretious value of that good man which is the ground of my discourse, I might right∣ly haue said of it, as the good king spake of Goliahs sword,2. Sam. 21.9. there is none to that, giue it me.
The least birds haue euer the sweetest voyces, and this small grayne of goodnesse, which is the All of man, thus hammered out into all the fayre wreaths of golden gra∣ces to adorne the Soule, will (I doubt not) finde accep∣tance with all sorts, who are not altogether auerse from goodnesse, louing the foolish new fangled dressings of the vaine world better, then the graue & rich ornaments of a sanctified Soule.

To your Ladishippe is this labour due from mee, who haue been long acquain∣ted with as great a measure of goodnesse in you, as I shall euer hope againe to finde in any. Your godly patience in great, and greatest ex∣tremities, your sweete and discreete deportments, your vertuous disposition to all goodnesse, your labour to performe that which is the Soule of all Religion, euen goodnesse, which is all that is desired of a man, hath en∣couraged mee to dedicate this good Man, or man of goodnesse, to your good∣nesse, as not thinking it fit to diuorce those so happi∣ly ioyned together.
Wherein forgiue mee Madam, I pray, this error
in ioyning a dead and ima∣ginary man to a liuing and a gracious Lady, which I could not auoide, being disappointed of such a liuing man for such a Woman. Yet doubt I not, such is your noble disposition, but that which once had the gra∣cious eare of a most Godly, and excellent Prince to entertaine it, shall gaine the noble and louing hand and heart of a vertuous Lady, to well-come it; and then haue I my desire, though the tooth of enuy bite neuer so deepe.
Howsoeuer it fall out, this I haue aduentured on for the common good, but chiefely for the freeing of my selfe in part from the just imputation of vnthanke∣fullnesse,
who owing so much respect to your La∣dishippe, must craue to haue this little peece of Coyne laide vppe in your Closet, as an acknowledge∣ment of a greater debt. In the meane time, I shall e∣uer pray, that your Lady∣shippe may haue the hope of the Saints who liue, and the happines of the righte∣ous diseased who rest from their labours; which with all Earthly blessings conducing thereunto, our good God for his mercies sake in Christ assure and multiplie vpon you, and yours to the full, a vpon him who will euer be

