




MADAME,
The History comprized within this Booke, doth for sundry reasons apper∣taine vnto you. First, because those things which in themselues are great, rare, or admirable, doe properly belong to great perso∣nages, and your Maiesty is the greatest Queene and Princesse of our age. Secondly, for that your name seated in the highest place of the entry of this History, may occasion Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, to take the paines to reade ouer the same, which will aduan∣tage and profit them as much, as any booke that hath been published these many yeeres. The third reason (which is grounded vpon the two former) is, that our little King your sonne will proue another Iosias, who was crowned and made King of Israel at eight yeeres of age, yet neuerthelesse became the most pious King that euer was in Israel: who did parallel Dauid him∣selfe in sanctity, crushed all manner of Idolatry that for so long space was hatched amongst the people, broake downe their Idols, and put to death all Magicians and worshippers of Baal. Neither doe I slenderly con∣iecture this, because that since his raigne euen at the very first entrance vnto his Crowne, there hath been

made an admirable discouery of Magicians and of the kingdome of Satan, by the extraordinary proui∣dence of God. Henry the Great his deceased father and our so much desired King, gaue the first light and life thereof vnto him, who would rather die then giue credence vnto Magcians: cleane opposite to Saul, who did affect rather to make his addresse to such men, then to hazard himselfe any way to danger. To which may bee added that our present King gaue the first grace and pardon vnto her, who by seducements be∣came the Princesse of Magicians: God hauing through his mercy touched her heart, and conuerted her vnto him, as he will doe all those, that of their owne accord doe make acknowledgement of their impieties: which is the most proper remedy to bring the said kingdome of Satan to vtter confusion, and to attract and winne in his adherents and complices to the true knowledge of God; Neither can hee better assure his state and kingdome then by this meanes.1. King. 23. 4. King. 21. & 23. King Saul was dis-inuested thereof, because he went to a Witch. And God was stirred vp to wrath against King Manasses, in that hee countenanced Magicians and Sorcerers. Vpon the like occasion was the great City of Babylon ruined,Esa. 47. Ezek. 28. as it is written by the Prophets, Esaias and Ezechiel. Contrariwise the good Iosias, although God was much prouoked, and as it were challenged by their former offences, yet raigned religiously and peaceably one and thirty yeeres in Ierusalem.The Acts of the 23. of De∣cember. pag. 219. The fourth and last reason is, because that in this History, our late King Henry the great is mentioned not with∣out grert Attributes of honour and praise; God ha∣uing accepted of his piety and good desires as a sacri∣fice,

and his death as a kind of Martyrdome. To con∣clude, I am not ignorant, that some will heere alleage, that it is not expedient to beleeue all that is written in this History, and that it was not so fitly managed, to put this booke in print, by reason of the inconuenien∣ces which may arise thereupon. But to these two points I will answere in the following Epistle, which I make to the Reader; fearing (Madame) least I proue bur∣thensome to your Maiesty, who am, and alwaies will remaine

From Paris the 2. of October. 1612.
