



THere be foure partes of Arithmeticke, Addition, Multiplication, Substraction, and Diuision, whereof the first two take their beginning from the right hand, and doe multiplie and increase: and these bee GODS numbers: the other two begin from the left, and doe substract and diuide, and these bee the Deuils. When God had marryed Adam and Eua together, God said to them both, increase, multiplie and replenish the earth: this is Gods Arithmeticke. But when the Deuill substrac∣ted Dalila from Sampson, the Leuits wife from her husband, and diuided Micholl from Dauid: this was the Deuils Arithmetick. Diuisum im∣perium cum Ioue Daemon habet, two partes for God, and two for the Deuill. En quatuor ras. Ecce duo tibi Deo, duoque altaria Daemoni. Addition and Multiplication belong to God, but Substraction and Diuision belong to the Deuill. In Gods house are Companies, Ar∣mies and Troupes, but in the Deuils desolati∣on, solitude and destruction. In Gods house





dwel Adam, Noah, Lot, Seth, Enoch, Abra∣ham, Isaac, Iacob, Ioseph, Moses, Iosua, Da∣uid, Ezechias, Iosias, the Apostles of Christ, all which by Multiplication replenished the earth, and by Addition enriched Gods King∣dome. But in the Deuils dwell the Nicolai∣tans, the Marcionites, the Saturnites, the Ta∣tians, the Adamites, the Encratites, the Mani∣chees, the Mahometanes, the Anabaptistes, & that great Dragon of Rome Pope Gregorie the seuenth, otherwise called Hildebrande, all which by Substraction either condemned, or by Diuision contemned Gods Arithmeticke, and bannished out of the bondes of Christiani∣tie, that most famous and glotious Empresse Ladie Matrimonie and exalted in her Throne fained Dame Chastitie, which beeing pure is not to be preferred before holy Wedlocke, ex∣cept we will say that the Daughter hath a pre∣heminence aboue her mother, for Virginitie is the daughter of Marriage, and through mar∣riage is made a Citizen and In-dweller of Pa∣radice, which also without mariage, should nei∣ther be, nor yet possesse Paradice.
The auncient Fathers and Philosophers haue singularlie extolled the knowledge of hu∣mane Arithmeticke, beeing one of the seuen liberall Sciences, when they considered the deepe deuises, the profound practises, & cun∣ning

conclusions therein contained: and also that it is the Key and entrance into all other Artes and Learning: as well approued the no∣ble Philosopher Pythagoras, who caused this Inscription to be written vpō his Schoole doore (where he taught Philosophye) in great Letters: Nemo Arithmeticae ignarus hic in∣grediatur: Let none enter heere, that is ig∣norant in Arithmeticke.
But the commendation of this heauenly A∣rithmeticke, is so excellently depainted and dignified in Scripture, that it needeth neither the penne of Father nor Philosopher, nor the praise of Angelles. Not Romulus of Rome, not Solon of Athens, not Minos of Crecte, not Lycurgus of Sparta, nor vnsatiable Art-sear∣ching Aristotle did institute it, nor any other Creature eyther in heauen or in earth, but God himeselfe that most high Maiestie, who after he had created Man and VVoman in his owne Image, he commaunded neyther angell nor Archangell to marrye and couple them together, but he himselfe, as I may so speake, supplyed the place of a Mini∣ster, and marryed Adam and Eua toge∣ther.
Neyther was it instituted in this wretched

and wicked world, which is nothing but a vale of teares and sorrowes, but in Paradice, that Garden of most sweete and ioyfull pleasures. Vpon which holy and honorable estate the holy and blessed Angelles attende, as we may see in the storie of Abraham and Sara, concer∣ning the hauing of a sonne, and in the booke of Iudges, how the Angell of the Lord came to the wife of Manoah about the birth of Samp∣son, and in the first of Luke, how Gabriell the Angel brought word to Zacharie, how his wife Elizabeth should bring forth Iohn Baptist.
Wee reade also how the reuerend Patriar∣ches, the sage Iudges, the noble Kings, the holy Priestes, the heauenly inspired Prophetes were all marryed, which examples doe not a little grace this estate. In the new Testament wee read, that the Sauiour of the world was born of a Virgin espoused and marryed, & graced this his Fathers ordinance with the firstfruites of his miracles, himselfe being present with his Mother and his Disciples. Wherevpon Saint Augustine saith in his booke De bono coniugali: Bonum coniugii Dominus in Euangelio confir∣mauit, non solum quia prohibuit dimittere uxo∣rem, nisi ex causa fornicationis, sed etiam quia venit inuitatus ad nuptias. The Lord in the Gospell doth commend the goodnes of mar∣riage,

not onely because he vvill haue no ∣vorce, but for fornication, but also because he commeth vnto a marriage being inuited. Mar∣riage also is an holy Misterie of the Vnion of Christ and his Christian Congregation.
Therfore exceeding Derogatorie to the Wisdome of God is that Canon of the Coun∣cell of Trent vvhich maketh Chastitie and Priestes marriage opposite, quite cōtrarie both to the commaundement of God, and the prac∣tise of his Saints. God hath done that for the matrimonie of priestes, vvhich he neuer did for the Matrimonie of King or Kesar, or of any other mortall creature. For in his holy Lavv giuen by Moses, he appoynteth euident∣lie vvhat Woman the priestes should marrye. Are not these his vvords Leuit. 21.? Let not the priest take a vvife, that is an Adultresse, or defiled, nor put from her husband, for such an one is holie vnto his God. He shall take a Mayde vnto his Wife: but a Widovv, a diuor∣ced vvoman, or an Harlot he shall not marrye, but shall take a Maide of his ovvne people to vvife. By the Prophet Ezechiell he saith also, Chap. 44. The priestes shall marrie no Wid∣dovv, neyther one that is put from her Hus∣band: but a Maid of the seede of the house of Israell. Saint Paul also setteth foorth vvhat manner of VViues the spirituall Ministers

should haue. Their Wiues must bee (sayth he, . Timoth. 3.) honest, no euill speakers, but sober and faythfull in all things.
For the practise of Gods Saintes, the holy Scriptures and auncient writings make mani∣fest. The priestes of the olde Testament were marryed, and their Children succeeded them in the Ministery. Ieremie the prophete, who was sanctified in his Mothers wombe, was Helkiah the priestes sonne. Ezechiel the Prophet, to whom marueysous Visions and great Misteries were reuealed, was Buzi the Priestes sonne.
In the newe Testament, Saint Iohn the Baptist, of whom Christ giueth this wttnes, that he was more then a Prophet, and that a∣mong them, which were borne of VVomen, arose not a greater then he, was the sonne of Zachary the Priest. The Apostles of Christ were marryed men, as the Monuments of the auncient Writers testifie. Saint Mathew, Saint Marke and Saint Luke make mention of Peters wiues mother. The Histories declare euidently, that Saint Petronilla was Saint Pe∣ters Daughter. And there are that write, that Saint Marke the Euangelist was Saint Pe∣ters naturall Sonne. Saint Paule in his first Epistle to the Corinth. Chap. 9. testifieth, that the Apostles, of Christ led their wiues with

them, when they went about preaching the Word of God. Saint Luke Acts 21. maketh mention of Phillip the Euangelist, and his foure Daughters which were Virgins and did prophecye.
If wee search the Histories of auncient writers, wee shall see that many reuerend Bi∣shops and vertuous ministers were marryed in the primatiue Church, & many hundred yea∣res after. Spiridion Bishop of Cyprus was married, and had a Daughter called Irene. Pe∣lagius Bishop of Syracusa had both wife and children: Gregorius Nazianzenus was a Bis∣shops sonne, and succeded his Father in place and Office: Policrates Bishop of Ephesus said: Seuen of my Fore-fathers by order were Bis∣shops of this See, and I am the eight: Philo∣gonius was a married Bishop, as Chrisostome testifieth. Cheremon a Bishop in Egypt of the Citie Nilopolis was married: Philias also both Bishop and Martyr was marryed. Adolphus Bishop of Colen had a VVife: The Aun∣cient Doctor Tertulian was mariyed. Saint Hillary hauing wife and Children was made Bishop of Pictania: Basilius Magnus was a marryed Bishops sonne, and Epiphanius Archbishop of Constantinople was a marryed Priestes sonne.

The grauest and prudentest among the Hea∣then, as the Romanes & Grecians, haue great∣ly reuerenced and honoured marriage. The Romanes made a Law, that such as liued amōg them vamaried till they were aged, should pay certaine great summes of money for the de∣fence and mainteinance of the common weale, and that they should bee iudged and counted the enemies of the state. The noble Lacede∣monians made a Law, that if any among them remayned vnmarryed, til he was past 37. years of age he should by no meanes be suffered in Summer time to come vnto the playes, Pas∣times, sports & such other publike spectacles or fights, as were vsed among them for their so∣lace and delight. The Grecian Ladies (as Homer reporteth) count their age from the time of their marriage, not frō the day of their birth, and if they be demaunded how olde they bee, they beginne to recken from their marriage, & so answere accordinglie, for then onelie, say they, wee beginne to liue. And surely there is nothing in this world that makes a life more vitall and pleasant, then this societie doth. Without friendship and loue no Man can liue either in prosperitie or aduersitie. It is friendship that maketh prosperitie more glori∣ous, and aduersitie more tollerable. But in no kinde of society hath this friendship more glo∣riously

appeared, nor more constantly conti∣nued, then betweene man and wife. Which we shall presently yeelde vnto, if wee goe no further then to the stories of the Heathen: The friendship of Pilades and Orestes, of Damon and Pythias, of Achilles & Patroclus, so much admired and extolled of the Grecian Writers, for continuance was neuer more stable, for mu∣tuall dutie and helpe more requisite, or for ten∣dernes of affection and sincerity of true and vn∣fayned loue and loyaltie more commendable, then the loue of Alceste to her husband Ad∣metus, who vnderwent the weightie burthen of death for him. Or of Tiberius Gracchus to his wife Cornelia, who for her tasted of the same cup, that Alceste did for her husband, so that it is a matter vndecideable, whether Al∣ceste loued her husband, or Gracchus his Wife better. Damon and Pythias are much com∣mended for beeing each others pledge in a ca∣pitall case, and for the returne at the prefixed day: But if you poyse with Damon and Pythi∣as the loue of the Mynian wiues to their Hus∣bands, and the loue of the wife of Theopom∣pus the Lacedemonian to him, the VVomens scale will farre prooue the weyghtyer.
Achilles hearing tell of the death of his friend Patroclus, so miserably lamented his losse, that he could scarcely be restrained

from laying violent handes vpon himselfe. But Plancus the Romane for the death of his deare Orestilla could not be restrained. Pan∣thea killed her selfe vpon the carkasse of her slaine husband: Portia the Daughter of Mar∣cus Cato, hearing of her Brutus death, swallowed hote burning Coales to follow him.
For breuitie sake I referre the admirable loue of the Indian Wiues to their Husbandes, to be read in the fift Booke of Tullyes Tuscu∣lan.
Exceeding admirable was the loue of Cam∣ma the Galathian to her Hushand Sinatus, as appeareth by reuenging his death vpon the murtherer Sinorix with the losse of her owne life.
But that I may not bee too tedious in re∣hearcing examples, which are almost innume∣rable, I heare breake of, and briefely con∣lude, that there is no friendship more true, nor amity more honourable, nor any societiy more sacred or profitable, then that which is coupled together by marriage bondes. Ther∣fore verie truely speaketh Propertiu:
Omnis amor magnus, sed aperto conigue maior,
Great is all loue, it maketh sweete mans life:
But greater is the loue between man & wife:

And those most sweet plangors and lamen∣tations euen hearkened too of infernall spi∣rits (if wee will heare the Poets) of Thra∣cian Orpheus for his dearest VVife Eurydice, doe testifie this to be true.
But least this Epistle bee scoft at, as Di∣genes scoft at the Gates of the Cittie Myn∣dus, I referre your Worship to the present discourse, which by proofe of sacred Scripture shall leade you to a due estimation of this ho∣nourable Ordinance, and doe wholy dedi∣cate and bequeath both the Censure of it, and of my selfe to your Religious and ver∣tuous Patronage: hauing a longing desire to make knowne your VVorships curtesies extended to mee at your House at Au∣borne, your forwardnes in preferring my successelesse suite to Maister Laurence Me∣res of Yorke, sometimes of her Maiesties Counsell established for the North, and your willingnes and readines for my lon∣ger abode and stay at Cambridge.
Thus in all humilitie and thankefulnes, I beseech Iesus Christ, the greate Shep∣heard of our soules to endue and blesse you with the Riche Giftes of his heauenly grace, and with continuance of prosperous

health both of soule and bodie, to his honour and glorie, your owne desire and comfort, and to the profite of this your natiue Countrie. From my Chamber in Saint Marie Buttolph∣lane, neere London-Stone this 10. of Oc∣tober. 1597.

