


THe worthines Gentlemen of your demerits, and the dayly benefite of your friendly curtesies, incite me to proffer you my simple seruice, and humbly to entreat you to vouchsafe it acceptance,
I Heartily wish (Gentlemen) that Phylotimus had the propertie of the tree Coccus, vvich beareth ten sundry commodities all at once: or that it resembled the hearb Pauemis, whose emeralds glosse refresheth the sight, whose violets fauour delighteth the smell, whose soueraigne iuyce doth comfort the hart in most dumpish fits of direful malancholie: or that ech of you here in my little garden, might gather a poesie of the three Phoenick flowers. Myrth, Mo∣ney, and Melody, the vvorst vvhereof may serue to decke a Princes garland.
But alasse poore toy (if pitty might preuaile) it rather representeth gratefull Tholies thankful∣nesse, then presumes to present you vvith glozing ullies eloquence, and more submissiuelie craues pardon for this too audacious enterprise, then loftily lookes for praise for an vndeseruing trauaile.
Yet Brasse is good Goulde in a Brasiers Shop, Pottage daintty fare at a poore mans Feast, and murrye sweete beautye in a Blackamoores face: And therfore I hope hautily, that if I inuite you to my homely banquet, (where you shall haue single fare for double cost) you vvill not thanke me so ironeously, as Socrates on a time did a poore honest man, who bad him for good will to his best, though bare, supper. I pray thee, quoth he, vvho made vs so familiar, that thou shouldest thus saucily incroch vpon my curtesie, to inuite me so vnmannerly to a needy beeuer?
I haue beene pregnant, as once vvas Ʋalentia, almost double the time of a vvomans account, and novv at my childbyrth, vvith the same Valentia, I am brought to bed of an halfe-shaped Monster. I graunt that for want of plenarrity this time of vacation, I am vvorthelye falne into your lappes, so that, you may lawfully refuse to admit me to your fauour, and giue the benefite of your friendship to some more meritorious.
Credite me Gentlemen, (I knowe not by what haps, mishaps I shoulde say) Phylotimus hath beene longer in publishing then in compiling, and lesse time in penning then in printing: wher∣in he is not vnlike all manner of fruits, which attein not maturity so soone as they bad, neither are alwayes reaped when they are ripe: or rather a kin to the Beares confused Brood, which she is longer in framing to a perfect shape, then she is in conceiuing and producing.
VVell (Gentlemen) now you haue it, giue it a vvelcome, read it vvith iudgement (as I knovv you can) peruse it vvith pacience (as I hope you will) & mind as you find, I require no more.
I knovv that ventrous VVill doth neuer saile surely, vvhere practised skill doth not holde the Helme, and that brain-sick youth doth neuer raigne vvel, vvhere setled age doth not bear the Bridle, and that it is more meete for my vnmellovved yeeres to be imploied in the studie of Phylosophicall axiones, then take vpon them to instruct others in literature.
Yet haue I tried that the yongest pullet is both toothsome and vvholsom, and that the time∣liest haruest makes the best bread: novv adayes, that Parrat is very yong that vvill not prattle, and that Cock very bad that crovves not till his age: the yong cat cries mevv as vvell as the old one, and youthfull Aristippus vvill be regardant to Phylosophy, as vvell as old Plato is a professor

of VVisdom: if Iune yeelde flovvers, Maie vvil yeeld Cherries, if there be blossoms in the spring, there vvill be fruite in Autumne, and amorous Plato in his adolescencie, is a graue Phylosopher in elder yeeres.
For the excuse of my obscuritie, vvherevvith I haue endarkened my style, I aunsvvere, that I am not of Perillus his minde, that thought himselfe a glorious Orator, if hee vvere plausible to the Populer sort: I vvould rather imitate our master Arist. vvho vvrit his Physicks in so intricate a style, because he vvoulde not vouchsafe euery refuse Coridon the imparture of his mysteries: And I doubt not but amongst you (Gentlemen) I shall finde more of Oedipus his line, then of Da∣vu his lignage, more that can assoile a doubtful ambiguitie vvith their learned resolutions, then vvil inuert a good meaning vvhich they cannot amend, and turne that to scoffing vvhich vvas made for no Skoggins.
If I haue vsed any rare and obsolete vvords, they are eyther such as the Coryphees of our En∣glish vvriters, Chaucer and Lidgate, haue vsed before me, and novv are decayed for vvant of pra∣ctise: or else such as by an apt translation out of the Greekes and Latins (vvhich Crassus in Tullies bookes de Oratore allovves for lavvfull) are fitly contriued into our English language.
For that I haue not kept one vniforme maner of style (much like the Queenes Mules that ne∣uer chaunge pace) I think that I am no more tied to one order of vvriting, in the vniuersal trac∣tation of my treatise, then a Gardener is bound but to sovv one sort of seedes in a great plot of his Garden ground. He (sayth Hermogenes) that adornes his vvhole Oration vvith no other trope, but a svveet subiection or an anomination, may be thought a trim man in the ears of the multitude, but in the iudgement of the elegant Orators, he shall be known as rude in his art of Rhetorick, as the butcher that scalded the Calfe, was in his craft of Butchery.
Good Gentlemen, pardon the faults that are passed in printing, omit the escapes that are com¦mitted by my negligence, and take that vvel in vvoorth, which I wish vvere more then vvel. It may be Gentlemen, that my english Tables of all Arist vvorkes (vvhich some of you haue too long expected) shall shortly make you amends. Although all of you knovv that my Kingdome neuer consisted in the English tongue, but if euer I had any thing wherein to vaunt, (as God knovvs I had nothing) it was some small skill in other languages.
Thus not doubting, but you Gentlemen of Cambridge vvill giue Philotimus friendly enter∣tainment, for that Melbanck his master vvas sometime a Scholler amongst you (with what cre∣dite I know not, but sure I am in more then euer hee deserued, and in such, as for the loue he beares you, he neuer intends quite to forsake you) and that you Gentlemen of the Innes of Court will fauourably censure of Philotimus, because I may ere I die be a Soliciter in your law, I humbly take my leaue this 28. of Nouember.

