


MY Dutie and Seruice to you honorable L.L.L. euery way humbly premised: I haue thought it good to present the same with the loyall Endeuours of a willing mind, though feeble wit, and weaker brayne; the Argument I con∣fesse being of a higher pitch and grea∣ter compasse, then I did imagine whē I tooke it in hand.
Hazard at the first did much discourage me, & in the mids, by Friendes I had been disswaded in regard of the paines, but for th' Enthousiasme still sounding in mine eares.
Ton Ame ne doibt, ta flamme est si diuine, &c.
Thy Soule is so beset by vowes that are deuine,
Thou shalt not tread amisse, why should thy hart decline?
By whose perswasion whē I had but begun, my Conscience thrust me forward, and thus preuailed at last.
Ie veulx qu'un bel oser, &c.
Then dangers stand aside, tis GOODNES calls me to it,
If ought doe put me by, t'is WISDOMS hand shall do it.
My stayes besides were these: That TRVTH was all my Ground, which as Time did suggest, Experience still sup∣plyd. My Pen OPORTET made, and was euer apt to mend: But ORDER gaue the Forme, which I most of all suspected,
and saw some cause to doubt, till PRAYER in conclusion did vndertake to perfect or perswade the best. So that if the Forme for the plainenesse may passe without offence, the Matter for im¦portance may perhaps deserue a double and treble reading.
The Matter indeed is TRAFFICK, I meane our freeborne Traffick, that Nurse of IVSTICE which feedes vs all, and (heere handled ab Effectis,) containes those very CVSTVMS for which the Schollers in all the Free-schooles, of our SOVE∣RAIGNES daily Tributes, haue so long beene subiect to bay∣ting and beating: and for which my selfe, of late so graciously chidden, was forst (by speciall commaund,) to spell againe my Letters, and con this PRIMER.
Now be it what it may be, as your WISDOMS shall esteeme, and as GOD shall giue successe, (to whom the Glorie of All in All is due,) three principall reasons haue moou'd me to present it to your LLL: view, in the names of All the rest. The FIRST, besides his knowledge and sufficiencie of skill, by emi∣nencie and Place hath speciall Experience to iudge of what I write. The SECOND, keepes the Keyes of all those verie Ports that lymits out my Charge, for whose sakes indeede reci∣proke Loue did instant me to write. And the THIRD was the meanes to make me first a Custumer, when I had giuen it ouer and little thought vppon it. For these regards (I say) and tre∣ble respects, (mine Ends beeing no wayes priuat, myne Intenti∣ons alwaies Loyall, disclayming no mans Person, but Sinne and Dishonestie,) I held it meetest and safest, to present my Selfe, and the Fruites of all my Vowes, to your LLL: mylde Censures and Protections. By whose speciall Fauours, as I am but what I am, so I desire but to be knowne

