



RIGHT HONOVRABLE,
THe nature of true good∣nesse, is to communicate it selfe to others; it is a powerfull Agent, and would worke all like it selfe. It pleaseth God to call great ones after his owne name, dixi dij ostis; and good ones af∣ter Christs name, Nolite tangere Christos meos; to to this end saith Saint Bernard, vt sicut sunt haeredes nominis, sint etiam imitatores
sanctitatis, to shew how noble they are by deputation, and how worthy they should be by imitation; that being the Delegats of so high a soueraigne, they might be dij tute∣lares, not titulares onely. The mightie are said to be Gods hilles, & mons Domini, mons pinguis; though they first re∣ceiue raine from heauen, yet they keepe it not to them∣selues, but suffer it with speede to slyde downe to the valleyes: they are the first to whom the Sunne shewes his rising, and the last that behold his setting; yet being once mounted vp to his Meridian, the poorest Ant-hils then feele the vertue of his influence. Those glorious lights of honour that shine in the faire Orbe of iustice, the Starre Chamber, they borrow their beames of brightnesse from one Sunne; and those beames they keep not to themselues, but as Homer calles Apollo, are  longe iaculantes, im∣parting their splendor to inferiour bodies. For greatnesse armed with goodnesse is the sanctuary of innocence, and whither should misery flye, if not to the mercifull? Vertue indeed hath , and is to her selfe a sufficient recom∣pence, sat habet fautorum semper qui recte facit, nor needes she like palliated hypocrisie prostitute her beauty to popu∣larity; for she is the kings daughter, and her glory is with∣in,  saith Clemens Alexandrinus, amiable she is, but not amorous, and with no other philtres then her owne worthines winnes the hearts of the Noble; yet like Truth that goes now and then with a scratcht face, she hath neede of a Patrone, and lookes for protection from her true professours; not to be magnified aboue her me∣rite, for she cannot but to vindicate her honour from vile contempt. He that loues others vertues hath many of his owne; and it is impossible for goodnesse to find fauour, but with the good. Amongst whom (most honourable Lord) I find your noble selfe a Principall: and whose me∣morable loue to my deerest brother if I should forget, I were worthy, as Alexander once serued one, to be branded in the forehead with Ingratus hospes.

He that painted Ingratitude like a Fiend, meant her for hell, not mans heart; which like the Sea, for all the fresh riuers that fall into her vast bosome, is neuer the sweeter; like a whirling gulfe, euer swallowing downe benefites, neuer returning the least remembrance of thankes. The nine leapers that our Sauiour healed, had a worse disease then leprosie sticking on them, vn thankefulnes. Sapientis est (said Seneca) bene debere beneficium, bene soluere, interdum autem solutio est ipsa confessio: so fals it out with mee (right Honourable) hauing obtained more then I durst desire, and wanting power to requite (nam tibi quod soluat non habet arca Iouis.) My heartiest prayers must bee your best pay∣ment, and no other requitall then a thankefull acknow∣ledgement. Accept therefore, I beseech you, haac diuinae particulam aurae, this heauenly parcell, and blessed remnant of that faithfull and painefull Doctor, whose powerfull preaching, like Bonarges one of the sonnes of Thunder (for he was a Iohn) many a Christian eare hath with comfort heard; and whose worthy praise wil sound better from any mans mouth then mine: He was my brother, therefore I forbear; yet me thinks to praise the dead and he deseruing, were no flattery.
That his life was fraught with crosses, I impute not to any inauspicious planet (though he found in his horoscope some too malignant) but to Diuine prouidence, that with the frequent strokes, malorum seu malleorum, he might be fitted for that heauenly Ierusalem, where of he was liuing, a liuely, and dead is now an euerliuing stone. Yet this comfort God sent him and his friends, to sweeten the bitternesse of sorrowes, he serued a most gratious Master, who loued him aliue, and honoured him dead, Cuius erat vinus, mortuus huius erat. For first his most excellent Ma∣iestie, to whom he owed the duetie of a subiect, being his King, of a seruant, being his Master; did out of his Heroick and Princely clemency, a compassionate pitier of wrong'd simplicity, rescue him from the jawes of conspiring periu∣rie.
And after his death hath granted (by your Honourable meanes) an Annuity of an hundred pounds sterling, for the better maintenance of his wife and children. And since it pleased his Highnes to hold him worthy of imployment into Scotland, I can testifie with what abundant ioy hee mentioned in his Letters, your Honourable name; how more like a father then a friend you respected him: and to vse the words of his owne pen, which if hee had liued, the world should not haue known, and which he wrote more for our comfort, then any vaine ostentation: vnlesse hee should lie in your bosome, you could not vse him more lo∣uingly. Also that honourable Lord, the Lord Chancellor of Scotland, in whose house my brother departed this life; whose exceeding kindnes I ought neuer to forget: and if cost or skill, paines or praiers could haue redeemed him from the graue, he had not died. Besides the sumptuous Funerall, the large remuneration of his seruants, all at your honours charge, do witnes to the world your Honorable disposition, and how much you esteemed him. Amongst his other children (right Honourable) left behinde him, this which I here dedicate to your Honour, is one; not bredde of the mother, but borne of the fathers owne braine, like Pallas, for which he endured some throwes, and was by the helpe of a happy memory deliuered of it at Pauls crosse. It is a poore Orphan, but rich enough if you giue it counte∣nance, and safe enough, if protection. And the God of peace, whose Minister he was, whose Agent you are, and whose work this is, vouchsafe the light of his countenance to shine vpon you, and so encrease your earthly honour as you desire the aduancement of his.

