


MOst Reuerend and my singular good Lorde, May it please your Grace with honorable fauour to accept of this paper-Present, which by starts I haue drawne out of Italian into English. Sondry reasons there were that at the first, about three yeares agoe, moued me to begin the translation thereof, but because they are such as concerne matter of estate, where withall I list not

to meddle for feare of burning my fin∣gers, I thought it good rather to con∣ceale them, then in printe to publish them. The onely occasion, that caused mee after so long time hauing layed it a∣side, to take it vp againe and finish the same, was the graue iudgement of Sr. Moile Finche a right worshipfull knight in Kent, who this last Sommer beeing with you at your Maner of Beakes∣bourne, vpon speech then had about the great preparations of the Turke agaynst Christendome, and the huge victories that he had atchieued vpon his enemies that sought to weaken him, did verie highly commende this booke, and the Author thereof: whose eloquence al∣though my english pen cannot possibly reache and expresse, yet is it trulie and faithfully doone in as plaine and signifi∣cant

Termes as I could: whereuntoo I was once minded to haue added certain aduertisementes and collections, as well out of the old auncient writers both sa∣cred and prophane, that haue written of the most stately & magnificent Em∣pire of the Medes and Persians in times past, as also out of Leunclaius & others, that haue lately written of the moderne and present estate thereof, which hath scarse a shaddow of the antique go∣uernement, wherewith it was then ru∣led & gouerned. But that matter grew to be so long, that I gaue ouer my pur∣pose therein, least the volume should haue waxen too great. I was also min∣ded to haue inserted into this Treatise, a certaine Prophesie touching the Cata∣strophe of the Turkish kingdom, which Antonius Torquatus of Ferrara did deli∣uer

to Matthias king of Hungary in the yeare of our Lord 1480. De Regno∣rum Europae Mutationibus. But because he doth peremptorily set downe, that the Turkes shall fall into the handes of the Christians about the yeares 1594. & 1595. and that the house of the Ottomans shall vtterly decay in their thirteenth or fourteenth king, and that it shall not ex∣ceede that nomber, nor passe the yeare of our Lord 1596: He shall pardon me, if I do not beleeue him, nor commend his credit to future posterity. For (with great griefe it must bee vttered) wee see all thinges go so quite contrarie to this prognosticon, and the power of the Turkes growe so huge and infinite; and their enemies so diuided and weakened, that vnlesse God come downe as it were out of an Engine, to protect the Gospell

of his Sonne Iesus Christ, and the Pro∣fessors thereof, I feare greatly that the halfe Moone which now ruleth & rai∣gneth almost ouer all the East, wil grow to the full, and breede such an Inunda∣tion as will vtterly drowne al Christen∣dome in the West. God for his mer∣cies sake rebate her Hornes with the glorious shine of his brightest Sonne. The houres, that I haue employed in writing this translation, were stollen from your Graces grauer businesses whereon I should haue attended: And therfore no man can by any right cha∣lenge the same from you, nor I in due∣tie offer it to any other but to your Grace, whose wholy I am and must be, & of whom I may truely and iustly say as Oedipus saith in Sophocles. .

The Lord God long maintaine your Grace in all honor and health vn∣der the most blessed gouernement of our most happy & renowmed Queen ELIZABETH, for the continuance of the peace of this Church of England, and comfort of all those that are bound to honor and loue you. At Lambehith, this New-yeares-day 1595.

