



A Great Grande of Italy, Right Honourable, de∣lighted much in the delightfull skill of Picture; sent a Cour∣tier in post haste to all the principall Ci∣ties thereof, to take a touch, of the rarest and best Masters in that Science, for his choyce of some rare and exquisite Piece. The Messenger posting from place to place, and getting of every one some∣thing, at last found out Giotto, a very fa∣mous
man, and second to none of his time in that skill; as Angelus Politianus thus saye's in his praise,
— Per quem pictura revixit,In Epitaphi∣um Iotti. Peachams Compl. Gent. Cap. 12.
Cui quàm recta manus tàm fuit & facilis:
Of him I say, this Messenger desired, as hee had done of the rest, some Master Piece, to present vnto his Lord and Ma∣ster. Giotto, willing to shew the dexte∣rity of his Art and wit, and the facility of his hand, call'd for a sheet of paper, and in the turning of an hand, drew a Circle so perfect and exact; that it was impossible for any man living, to circi∣nat, or circulat, with the helpe of a Com∣passe, a more absolute Orb. The Cour∣tier not being an Artist, ask't if that were all: yes said Giotto, and it may bee, more then all. And so indeed it proov'd. For when the Messenger had presented to his Lord and Master all the Pieces, Giotto's Circle was preferr'd to all the rest, and hee honoured aboue the rest: and thence it went into a Proverb in Italy, Piu tondo ch'il Circolo di Giotto: more round then
Giotto's Circle. Others, My Lord, may pre∣sent vnto Your Lordship, Little Fishes, Great Whales, Par's of Exchange, Pieces of greater price; I haue nothing but a Circle: not , the Circle of learning; but the Circle of Commerce: yet such a Circle, as com∣prehends within the Periphery, or circum∣ference thereof, the Ballance of Trade. There's my draught: or rather My Lord, it's Yours.
For although the Ballance of Trade, is an ancient Piece, which in elder times, hath beene in great vse in this Kingdome, as I shall shew in this Circle, in it's owne An∣gle: yet it was almost worne out and de∣faç't, but renew'd and refresh't by none, but by Your Lordship onely. When the Eye of Heaven, in the Eye of the King, had look't vpon You, and pickt You out, and plaç't You in an higher Orb; You were first seene in this Circle, of the Ballance of Trade: Other faire Pieces You had, but this was Your Master Piece, because all the rest had reference vnto this. For all your servi∣ces done to The King, and in The King, The
Kingdome: of what Longitude, or Latitude soever those Pieces were, you tryed them all by this Scale: You discerned the Right from the Oblique, by this Circle, by this Pa∣rallel.
The Oracles of Apollo, being ask't when the warres of Greece should haue a Period, Replyed, when they could Double the Cu∣bique Altar in Delphos: which Plato expoun∣ded to them, to be an answer in reproof of their ignorance in Geometry. For the Doubling of the Cube in Solids,P. Ramus Geom. lib. 4. and the Qua∣drature of the Circle in Plaine, is a Mathemati∣call probleme, not to bee knowne without the knowledge of that Art. And sure∣ly if any man aske, when we shall haue an end, of this decay of Trade: it may be answered, when Your Lordship will Double this Cube, and Quadrat this Circle of Commerce in the Ballance of Trade. Which prooue's a Hercules labour vnto Others, but will be easie vnto You: because You see with Your Owne; They with others eyes.
And hence it is that wee here below,
haue had so much stirre, about Malyne's Par: the Parity and Disparity whereof, a∣mongst ignorant men, is made a Mystery in Exchange, and to haue in it a great deale of Causality of the Decay of Trade. But we are happy in Your Lordship, which can easi∣ly discerne this Flemish, from our Sterling Standard. No glosse, no false face, can deceiue Your Lordships sight. For as You were Of vs, and now You are farre Aboue vs: so can You iudge, as farre Beyond vs, as You are Distant from vs. I shall therefore bee a Suitor to Your Lordship, that if there be any place or vse, in the whole Circle of Commerce, for Malyne's Par of Exchange, that Your Lordship will let him bee the Master of that office when it is Created: if not, that Malynes may know the price of these paines, to teach vs a new doctrine, which we never learnt of Your Lordship: and with such counterfeit stuffe to abuse The State, which happely doth enioy Your Lordship, and in You the knowledge of Commerce.
Your Ballance of Trade, my Lord, will
soone discover the lightnes of this va∣nitie. That, not This, was Your , let it bee Your  also. That was the Foundation, let it bee the Consummation of Your Noble building. Let none build vpon Your Lordships foundation, finish it, perfect it Your Selfe, Your Selfe shall haue all the honour.
Goe on therefore Noble Lord,
Spartam quam nactus es constanter tueri.
You are the Mirrour of Merchants, the Lu∣ster of London, the Renowne of your name, the Beautie of Your Familie, the Glorie of Your Countrie, an Honour to Nobilitie, and the Choice of the Choicest King. Honour His choice, in the choicest service, You can doe, to So Good, to So Great a King. Adorne the Nobilitie, doe good to Your Countrie, Embellize Your Familie, make Your Name more and more Noble, loue London, and make much of Merchants.
And I pray God, with encrease of Ho∣nour, giue you encrease also of the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit: without
which You can doe none of these: and with which, You may doe So and So, and More also.
The Lord of Lords, giue You fauour with God and Man, and conserue Your Lordship long, Regi, Gregi, mihi; to The King, The Kingdome: And last of all, to him that's least of all,

