



GReat is the force of fortune (Righte wor∣shipfull (on either side, to welfare or euill fare, as Ci∣cero the moste aboundant fountayne of Eloquence confesseth, but far greater is that of nature, whiche, as Seneca saith, is a reason deuine, sowen in the world and the partes thereof. From whence all honest actions are deriued as from there foundresse, and by whom all thinges are may tayned, as by their Preseru∣resse. Greatly it is to be wished, that nature, mistresse and lady of liuing thinges, as a di∣uine power, whiche to all men worketh all things for the best, were followed, not neg∣lected: were embraced. not dispised: and as e∣uerye particular parson respecteth chiefly himself, and preferreth his profit before the

commoditie of the multitude, so hath she a special regard of al, not of some, of manye not of a few, for then her force should faile, and liuing thinges should cease to liue, men should become no men, the world no world, all thinges should be reduced to that Chaos and confuse mixture, which (as the Poetes faigne) was in the beginning before beawtie was giuē to the world. Some there be which endeuoure to excell others or to bee equall with others in learninge, actiuity, and qua∣lities commendable, as it weere enuyinge at their knowledges, because they do not coū∣teruaile and surpasse them, doubtles that e∣mulation is good and procedeth frō nature: for it striueth for excellencie, and seketh to aspire to perfection, if we followed nature as she doth vs, that is to say as she doth aduyse vs, we should neuer treade besides the pathe, that goldē age that was shortly after the be∣ginning should eftesones haue recourse, cō∣mon weales should be wel ordered, and mās life wel framed. Nature is now peruerted by the corrupt customes of men, and an other Golden worlde farre vnlike to the other is crept in, whereof Tibullus the Poete maketh

mention in these Verses.

Aurea nunc verè sunt saecula, plurimus Auro
Ʋenit honos, Auro conciliatur Amor.


Novv golden are the times, and highe renovvn
For golde is sould, for gold eke loue is vvon.

This corrupte tyme hath continued many hūdreth yeares, and nature is chaūged into a naughty nature, which doth wel neare in∣fect the mindes of all men, eatinge out that pure nature which is almoste consumed, and few sparkles therof remayne: The chiefeste cause and original hereof is a certayn detes∣table desire engraffed in al mens mindes of soueraigntye, authoritye, honour and gold which one healpeth to the rest: for al things obey monie and she alone beareth the sway. Loue is litle regarded and esteemed, and friendship in most men waxeth cold, which two, nature hath principally brought forth for the comforte and commoditie of man: for man vnto man is most comfortable and profitable, therefore the Greeke Prouerbe sayth  mā is to man a God, your friendship and courtesie which Nature hath wrought in you (Right worshipful) moued me to addresse the few

leaues folowinge vnto you bearing witnes of my good wil and affection. VVherefore if you take it in good parte, I shal not think my laboure mispent, but requited: thus vn∣willing to trouble your worship with many words, I cease, wishing that fortune would fauour and aduaūce you, and Nature graūt you long life.

