



THE NVMBER IS BVT small, (at least not very great) of men so sencelesse or weake of iudgement, but gene∣rall inconveniences they readily see, and can easily discerne. Notwithstanding, to find out the grounds of publique harmes, and the meanes how to cure them, is a stu∣die so intricate, & a practise so dangerous; that wary men hold it safer to prouide for priuate ease (in regard of the times) then to busie theyr wits for anie common-good.
But how aduised soeuer, and respectiuely wise in this kinde, the most sort seeme to be, as wishing onely that all might goe well, though not long of themselues: fewe or none are found of so still a temper, as not to complaine, when publique greefes worke theyr owne sencible smart.
Such then as by long and extraordinary patience supping vp theyr priuate wrongs, haue endeuoured to giue way to the streame of publick contumelies, in hope of better dayes: must needes be excused if com∣pelld at the last by lawlesse necessitie, to referre euents to GODS prouidence, in discharge of their Duties to Him, their Prince, and Country, they vndertake the defence of their owne reputations in a Cause publicke and generall. The rather, when as without purpose of offence towards any, their Intentions appeare, to giue onely a reason of such Disorders in their present Functions, as for want of serious In∣spection, or true Information, haue hetherto by Iealousie and miscon∣ceit,
yeelded matter and occasions from time to time of their speciall Disgraces and obloquie.
Such and none other, was the drift and scope of a late Discourse of the present Estate of Customes, not so publiquely printed, as pri∣uately directed To the Graue and godly vvise in highest Au∣thoritie, by the Title and Inscription of THE CVSTO∣MERS APOLOGIE.
But. Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli. For the booke being written for vnderstanding Readers, and so digested, that by reading alone, without passion or partialitie, such might be their own and onely Iudges; hath notwithstanding, by the Ignorant beene late∣ly censured, and strangly mistaken. Vainely striuing to commend & make good that within Booke, which neuer was in question: and ma∣liciously vrging some things without Booke, that neuer were meant by words nor writing to be defended. But with such successe as still be∣falls Folly, who delighting to see her owne shadow daunce, hath not the grace to conceale her owne shame.
¶ About such time as by the goodnes of GOD, the light of the Gospell beganne to lay open the Errors of Superstion in these parts of the world, and by the hands of our Soueraignes to disperce them in this Kingdome: many Questions were mooued to vphold sundry poynts of the Popish religion; but none so hotly disputed for the time, as that which they terme the Sacrament of the Alter, and Pray∣ing to Saints. Whereof amongst others, a certaine young Scholler more confident then wise, hauing vndertaken a serious Defence: as one sicke of loue with the thing he had begotten, and ambiciously af∣fecting the publishing of it; entreated a learned friend of his, & well-minded to the Cause, to read it ouer. The request was performed. But looking for Arguments sitting the Question, When nothing was found but a needlesse labour, to approoue and maintaine by the Ca∣tholick CREEDE, That IESVS CHRIST, was the true SONNE of GOD, very GOD, and very MAN that redee∣med the Worlde: And that there was also a COMMVNION OF SAINTS. The Booke was returned without applaude, or shew of satisfaction.
RIGHT HONORABLE. Such hath beene of late yeeres, the successe of a like learned Writer, who printing, A Treatise of publique Commerce, in fauour of the priuate Societie of the Mer∣chants-Aduenturers, hath with much a-doe, and a heape of sillie words, (farre vnfitting the grauitie of his Theame) endeuoured to
perswade his Readers, That Trafficke rightly ordered, is the ho∣nor of Kings, and prosperitie of Kingdoms: And that Mer∣chants in that respect, were to be cherished, fauoured, and en∣couraged in all Common-wealths. Quia VITA CIVILIS IN SOCIETATE POSITA EST, SOCIETAS AV∣TEM IN IMPERIO ET COMMERCIO.
It is strange to obserue, what strong apprehentions are able to worke in weake mens braines. For as a plaine simple man was sometimes perswaded, that if Pontius Pilate had not beene a Saint, the Apostles would neuer haue suffered his Name to stand in the Creede: so this Treatise-Writer, by a strong imagination of the Merchant-Ad∣venturers extraordinary deserts: seeing the admirable effects of the golden blessings of England, by turning Creekes into Ports,Read the Treatise printed at Mi∣dleburgh, anno. 1601. ioy∣ning Ports vnto Townes, raysing Townes into Citties, and en∣riching whole Countries with Artificers and Trades, Marriners & Shipping. Applauding withall, theyr singuler happines, and great good fortunes, to haue the managing thereof within themselues. Com∣mending theirThe Merchants Aduenturers, boast themselues to bee able to make and diuert a Trade, at their pleasures. Page, 23. dexterities, in disposing, diuerting, deuiding, mincing, abridging, restrayning, and lastly confining the Store and Staple thereof within the Walles of some one two Townes for best aduantage inMarke this well by the way, for heerein lyes hid, The Pot of Ro∣ses. Forraine Countries, culloured with the Title of their speciall Mart-Townes. And aboue all things extolling their excellent wits, and absolute cunnings, in moulding Lawes by meere Discretion, to hold all men vnder, and themselues aboue. Onely for sending or sayling crosse the Seas from Coast to Coast, without ha∣zard of their Persons, or losse of their Goods more then vsuall & or∣dinary. And for wearingPage, 154. 155. 156. Chaines of gold about their Necks, Caps and greene Feathers, Hats and white Feathers, Buskins of purple Veluet, guilt Rapiers, Daggers, Bridles, Stirrops, Spurres, and such like, at Tryumphs, and publique meetings. But specially for feeding, maintayning, and settingAt Antwerpe. 20000. About Antwerpe, 30000. In Flaunders, 60000. Page, 24. thousands on worke beyond-Seas, when God knowes the wants, & heares the cryes at home: would faine perswade others, (beeing bound to ad∣mire them himselfe,) That their Gouernour is for Skill thePontius. PI∣LOT, for Grauitie the Iudge, and for Wisedome the Oracle of all orderly Commerce. Their priuateTalmud. DECREES, aboue COMMON LAVVES, and FORRAINE-TREATISE. Theyr particulerSynhedry. SYNODES, aboue GENERALL COVNSAILES, and theirSynagogue. SOCIETY a COMMV∣NION OF SAINTS. Pronouncing all that dislike, distaste, or distrust their Doctrine, for EN TER-LO PERS. That is to
say,All English, Christian, & loyall Merchants, Crucifige. Scismaticks, Hereticks, and Infidels, vnwoorthy to breath Common-ayre, or liue in any Common-Wealth. Concluding strongly withall, That these Men thus put in trust with the credite and Creame of the Kingdome, (our Cloth,) must needes bee hol∣den more loyall to their Prince, more seruiceable to the State, more welcome to their Neighbours, and therefore more to be honoured, then any other Men, with a Name aboue all Names, of MER∣CHANTS-ADVENTVRERS.
With this and such like stuffe the Booke beeing confusedly fraught, (cuius contrarium verissimum est,) might well haue beene suffe∣red to haue dyed in the birth, if withall it had not beene mingled with aspertions of obloquy & vntruthes against CVSTOMERS of the Out-Ports of the Realme.
CVSTOMERS. A kinde of Creatures capable of Religion aswell as Reason: free Men by birth, and of best education. Men euery way happy, saue in their Names and Callings: and in nothing more wretched then in the Places of their Functions. The Out-Ports of the Realme.London the onely Port of Eng∣land. all other Ports are counted but Out-Ports, to London. O holy LONDON! Men I say, that being by the curious eye of the Law, Chosen of the best, and placed in the ranke of the most sufficient that Wisedome can finde, or choise af∣ford; would faine retaine the reputations,The Law is as carefull in the choise of a Customer, as of a Shriefe of the Shiere. if not of Saints, yet at the least of Christians, and plaine honest Men.
To let it therefore in some sort appeare, that it is not enough for Men affecting their owne good & credits by Traffick, to value theyr worths by disgracing of others; and that by such kind of Imputations & Shifts,Customers are no Prophets; to gesse by the Goods, of what Na∣tion the Owner is, it beeing a mysterie among Merchants, to lend hands, and culloure one an∣others dealing. as none but Merchants (perhaps themselues that thus byte and whine,) onely or most vsually commit, and is not in the Custo∣mers power to preuent or amend: that which ensueth, hath beene wrung from them by way of further Defence. For though it might be said, That to aunswere all priuate oppositions were fruitlesse, and to no end: yet least he that runnes alone, should still thinke himselfe for∣most: to satisfie Wisedome and Authoritie it selfe,The Treatise hath beene twice printed at Midleburge and Lon∣don, and dedicated to the Lord Cecill. I haue beene prouoked (by words & writings) out of other Mens labours and for∣mer experience, (as by way of witnes) to make good that for Traffick, which the Apologie before did but tenderly touch, and briefelie set downe.
Besides. Not to shew the decay of those Effects which both main∣taine Customers Credits, and giue Essence to their Functions, by the occasions of the Ecclyps in their Cause Efficient: were wittingly to betray the generall good of all Men, & worthily to set down in per∣petuall obloquy. And publique slaunders are not washt off but by
publicke Defence.
For TRAFFICK therefore: Customers beeing bound, and bold to contend, the aduancement whereof, like Hony in Hiues, in∣creaseth Customes.The childish commendation of Trafficke, by the Treatise-writer. Page. 3. Not that Commerce, which children as∣soone as theyr tongues are at liberty doe season their sports by: Nor that which Weomen among themselues doe chop and change by: But that TRAFFICK whose Lawes at the Standart of Equitie, wey out Order, (not by priuate Discretion, nor partiall Af∣fection) but by the weight of generall Iustice. Whose Merchants are Persons all euery where Loyall and friendly. Whose Ports & Staples at home, Markets & Marts at home & abroade, are places for accesse conueniently easie, and for safety generally free. And whose Mer∣chandise, for Matter honest, for Vse profitable, by Nature admi∣rable, and by Art made amiable, is at all handes vendible onely for the Goodnes.
That TRAFFICK, I say, whose diuine Elixar Goodnesse, the quintessence of Nature and Art applied to Materialls, breedes Misteries in Trades, turnes Trades into Mettals, and all Mettals into pure Siluer, and fine Golde. The restauring power whereof, easing all griefes in Sores, suppling all Sores in diseases, and curing all Diseases in particular Members, holdes the whole Bodies of Kingdomes in health. Lastlie: That TRAFFICK which concernes Kings and Kingdoms, whose seate is euery where the Soueraignes bosome. Whose voyce well tuned, is the harmonie of the World, To whom Courts and Countries owe fealtie and homage, the meanest Subiects feeling her care, & the grea∣test Princes subiect to her prouidence. Whom both Noble and vn∣noble admire, as the Nursse of all their earthly honors, prosperities, peace and ioy. To the end, I say, that by other mens complaints, as well as Customers, the world may see how hunted, restrained, mo∣nopolised, and ill beholden, that TRAFFICK is & hath been to all priuate Societies. In the Fore-Ranck whereof I set theThis is heere added, onely that the Treatise-writer might exa∣mine the grounds of his ovvne folly or frenzie in taxing Custo∣mers as friends to the Haunces, by speaking against his Mer∣chants-Aduenturers. To whom, as to Subiects, onely for their So∣ueraignes sake, they wish all kind∣nes and loue, but reuerence ney∣ther as absolute Princes. HAVN∣CES, (that beeing but Subiects a part and a sunder vnder seuerall Soueraignes; yet combined together, dare contest with Princes:) and these our MERCHANTS-ADVENTVRERS, as her two most wayward and wrangling children. Who preferring particuler Decrees before generall Treatise and Lawes, & with publick wea∣pons maintayning contentions for priuate wrongs; in steed of Order pretended, breede nothing but complaints at home, confusions within themselues, endlesse troubles to graue Counsailes at Counsaile-Tables, and vnkind Iarres betweene Kingdomes, States, Allies,
and forraine Neighbour-friendes.
Leauing therefore the TREATISE-WRITER to beleeue still in the CREEDE, whose Articles are certainely most holy and true, though Pontius Pilates Name stand for no Saint: And the MERCHANTS-ADVENTVRERS to the Story of ISIS. Whose Image of gold it was that men so admired, in all places where it came, and not the beautie of the Beast that bare it. I referre your Wisedomes and Honourable patience, to the Counter-Treatise fol∣lowing: beeing a plaine Demonstration of that Canker of Com∣merce, MERCHANDISING-EXCHANGE. I say a cleere de∣tection of that Contempt of Lawes, Disdaine of Equity, Scorne of publique Magistrates, Dishonour of Princes, and Mysterie of Ini∣quitie. And a liuely Description of thatƲSVRIE. Monster of CREETE, deuouring as it were by yeerely tribute, the bodies of Men, & soules of Christians. His hatching and broode, his Muces & haunts, his Practise and Shifts, his Shape and Name, vnder the Title of MERCHANDIZING-EXCHANGE. The Laborinth of whose inextricable Errors, none may safelie enter, & whose Person none can encounter and quell, but fatall THESEVS, assisted by the thred of addresse and Counsaile of ARIADNE. A worke sometimes proiected to giue light vnto others, but happily reserued to honour your Lordships and these our dayes withall.
And since the case of Customers stands so farre preiudged, that euen theyr Cryes seeme but Ecchoes in theOut-Torts. Deserts, round about the Plaines, neere the FORREST OF SHIFTS, the sound whereof most men passe by but heare not, many heare but vnder∣stand not, some few vnderstand but regard not, and no man pitties. And that their painful Apologies are left to the Ignorant, to prosti∣tute publiquely, and turne into Sinne: whilst they sit still in silence, like Barnes so ding'd that they dare not greit: Let Experience tell IELOVSIE, how she torments TRAFFICK, by clogging herCustome seruice. Seruice with swarms of such Instrumēts as loue her Customs, but as Rats do loue Cheese. And let Nature tell SVSPITION howe TRAFFICK appeales. That whilst herCustome houses. HOVSES as Places infected, or haunted with Sprites, are either abandond, or by Extremities made subiect to Shifts: The Free-will Offerings. The Effects of Loyaltie. The True-loue-knots, knit betweene Subiects & Prince. And Tokens ofCustomes. Affection (religiously moued in Minds, admiring the glorious OBIECT of their owne welfare & Good) from the harts of her Merchants, humbly presented to Soueraigne Dignitie, and to None other due. Become now set to sale. As if
franck-harted Loue, & true-louing Loyalty (the Homage of Sub∣iects, and Honor of KINGS.) Were Thinges transferrent from that Prerogatiue which giues them life and Beeing. Or sub∣iect to Exchange. Or vendible for Money. Or fit forThe Farming out of Customes, offensiue to Nature: and vnto Traf∣fick meerely Heterocli∣ton. FAR∣MORS. Dryuing TRAFFICK thus from the Lyme-kill to the Cole-pit: euery way decaying her PORTS,Et Licentijs sumus omnes deteriores. & disgracing her Seruaunts.
But as inveterate Errors, hold still their aduantage, and are ne∣uer ouerthrowne, till from Signes vnto Causes, by Effects it appeare how the Worlde in Matter of TRAFFICK hath beene abused, o∣uer-ruled, and ouer-seene: So when TRVTH, the Daughter of TIME, by practise and proofe shall be brought to light, then shall Ignorance and Impudencie stand both confounded, & IELO∣SIE herselfe see that in Customers vertue is not vice.
For if it be true that Truth hath sworne, Customers haue writ∣ten, & Experience confirmes. To wit: That looke what the Soule is to the outward actions of the Body, in ordering each Member, so as to Nature seemes fittest for the good of the whole Man: the same is TRAFFICK in disposing Mysteries and Trades to the behoofe of the Common-Wealth. TheThe King. DAY-STARRE is risen, and theThe Prince. DAVVNING appeares, which giuing life to our Hopes, makes vs breath out thus much, and say: The time may come, when this hartie zeale of ours to our SOVERAIGNES honour, and his Peoples happines, may be better regarded, and deserue not onely thanks and good words, but make all men confesse themselues (Merchants at least) to owe as much to these weake endeuours of CVSTOMERS, euen those of the despised Out-Ports of this Realme, I say not as one Port, one Towne, or one Citty of Lon∣don, but many Ports, many Townes, and many Citties like Lon∣don, and all their wealth besides are worth, some few priuate, parti∣culer, and preuenting Persons excepted. The Censure whereof I most humbly submit to Iudgement and Wisedome, with this Caution & finall Conclusion. That TRVTH lyes deepe, and few there are that vndertake the toyle to delue till they finde her. And though Publique harmes & priuate Disgaces to men of my Cal∣ling, haue singled me foorth, and pressed mee forward to worke thus alone, for the Common-good; the burden whereof makes mee cry aloude: I must confesse, that in these Apologies, and forced Defen∣ces, (accusing no man, for that was the Deuils part from the begin∣ning, nor at warre with any but Sinne and Dishonestie) Nil magis in Votis nec habui, nec habeo, quam vt inter plures, aliquos
inveniam, qui de istis judicare queant. Iudicare autem non possunt nisi vtcunque Literati, aut Rerum vsu periti. Ex hijs satis mihj pauci Lectores, sat erit si vel vnus: In Appealing there∣fore to the GRAVEST and WISEST in HIGHEST AV∣THORITY. I haue thought it meetest & safest for triple respects, to present my selfe, and my poore seruice, to your honorable Lordships, by whose speciall fauours next GOD and my SOVERAIGNE, I am that I am, and so desire to be knowne.

