


WHen I consider with
my self (right wor∣shipfull
sir) the great
nomber of externall
benefites, whiche it
hath pleased almigh∣tie
God, of his infi∣nite
mercie and goodnes, to bestowe vp∣pon
all mankinde: Although I am cer∣tainlie
perswaded, that no man is able
to thanke and praise hym, for the least of
theim sufficientlie, yet I doe thinke ne∣uerthelesse,
that eche man hath cause to
geue thankes to God, more for his helth
then he hath for any other worldlie pro∣mocion
or benefite: as riches, possessiōs,
honor, dignitie, and soche like. For with
out worldly wealth, a healthfull manne
maie liue in that vocacion,Wealth with¦out health is nothyng. wherin God
hath called him, with pleasure and good
companie: But to a man whiche is ex∣treme

sicke, riches be noysome, possessi∣ons
superfluous, honour neclected, di∣gnitie
despised, pleasures bee lothsome,
and companie is comberous, thereby al∣so
strength and pleasure bee altred into
imbecillitie and weakenes.Paine hathe no pleasure. And laste of
the liuelie ruddie colour and beautie of
the face, is conuerted into deadlie pale∣nesse,
and deformitie. Since therefore,
health is soche a precious iewell to mā∣kinde,
that without it, all worldlie plea∣sures
are painfull. I thinke it meete and
expedient for eche manne, that hath any
regarde to hymself, to learne the know∣lege
of the constitucion of his bodie, and
to obserue a meane in his diet, and other
necessarie thinges concerning his health
that thereby he maie escape dauugerous
diseases, and preserue his bodie longe in
good state, or at the least he maie signifie
to the Phisicion a greate deale the bet∣ter,
the occasion of his sicknes by due ob∣seruacions:
so maie conueniente medici∣nes
bee moche soner ministred, whereby
health will quicklie be recouered again.
In consideracion wherof I am perswa∣ded,

that all menne that bee of good
iudgemente and vnderstandyng, dooe
thinke theim worthie of greate praise,
and of immortall praise, whiche haue by
continuall studie, longe trauaille, and
good experience founde out and lefte be∣hinde
theim to vs their posteritie, soche
an arte and science, as is hable to en∣structe
a manne, not onelie to heale
and cure, a great nomber of greuous di∣seases
(whereunto eche mannes bodie,
is dailie subiect.) But also it teacheth, to
preserue & kepe the same bodie in health,
so long as the course of nature will suf∣fer
á man to liue. These be the effectes,
whiche the moste excellente arte of Phi∣sicke,
can certainlie performe, to as ma∣ny
as wil diligently obserue the precep∣tes
and doctrine thereof, whiche noble
science, as holie scripture doeth testifie,
was not a fonde inuencion of coueteous
heddes for lucres sake, but is certainlie
the necessarie gift of God,Donū dei. by hym ordai∣ned,
and sente emong mortall menne, to
the ende that by the helpe thereof, thei
might the longer sustaine, and preserue

their fraile bodies in health, preuenting
sickenes that would ensue, and curyng
that whiche is presente, whiche thinges
are euidentlie declared, in diuerse places
of the Bible, but moste plainlie in the .38▪
chapiter of Ecclesiast. where it is writtē
after this sorte. Affice medicum suis ho∣noribus
& premijs, vt necessitate vrgen∣te
eo vti possis nam eum creauit domi∣nus▪
Est enim a supremo medicina, & a re¦gestipendium
accipiet. Dn̄s ex terra cō∣didit
medicamenta, & prudens homo nō
contemnit ea, cede locum medico, domi∣nus
enim illum creauit. That is to saie,
giue vnto the Phisicion due honour and
rewards, that thou maiest haue his help
in time of nede, for the Lorde hath ordai∣ned
him.The greatest Minister of God mong men, next the deuine▪ to the Phisiion. Trulie Phisick is of the highest
and it shall receiue a stipēde of the king.
The Lorde hath made medicines on the
yearth: and a wise man will not contēne
them. Geue place vnto the Phisicion, for
the lorde hath ordained him. By whiche
wordes it is euident, that Phisike is or∣dained
of God, for the profite and com∣moditie
of all mākind, whiche although

perchaunce it hath been, and is abused,
ought neuer the more to bee hated or dis∣pised.
For, there is no science nor know∣lege
in the worlde, so perfecte and good,
but that it hath been of euill persones a∣bused:
As it is euident, the holie scriptu∣res
beeyng Gods eternall veriti, haue
sondrie tymes heretofore, been abused of
many sortes of detestable heretiques, as
of Arrians, Anabaptistes, and the dam∣nable,A secr called the Boneri∣tes, or Reno∣bites.
vile, Romishe Papistes, the Dar∣bellites,
the Garnarites, the Bonerites
&c. which wrieth & wresteth the scriptu∣res,
to their erronious and Deuilishe o∣pinions,
deceiuyng the ignoraunte peo∣ple,
& bringing them to vtter distrucciō.
In so moche therefore as Phisike is so
highlie commended to vs in his holie
scripture, as a speciall gifte of God, and
also it is knowen to be, by daielie expe∣rience,
moste commodious, profitable,
and necessarie for all kinde of persones,
beyng indued with vnderstandyng, not
beyng ignorant al together in soch pre∣ceptes
thereof, as doe necessarily pertain
to the preseruaciō of his health. So that

eche man should so farre forthe beholde
his owne bodie, that he might by diligēt
obseruacion, knowe when he were in
healthe, and what diet he ought chieflie
to obserue, for to preserue thesame in
health and good state, whiche thyng if it
were well obserued, would redounde
moste certainly, to the greate commodi∣tie
of an infinite noumber of people, de∣fendyng
them from diuers paines and
diseases, into the whiche, many tho∣rowe
their owne ignoraunce and necli∣gence,
dooe often tymes fall. And there∣fore,
I thought it verie good, to wishe
all menne, to seeke the knowledge of
soche thynges, as concerne healthe. For
which cause (right worshipful sir) I haue
endeuoired my self (as moche as in me
lieth) to declare and comprehende in this
small treatise, soche rules of Phisicke as
are profitable to bee knowen and obser∣ued,
of all soche as bee desirous to pre∣serue
their bodies in healthe. Not arro∣gantlie
presumyng hereby, to enstructe
the learned and skilfull: but beyng mo∣ued
with good will and naturall affec∣cion,

to the readers hereof, accordyng to
my simple knowledge, I purpose by this
my smalle trauaille, to declare vnto the
willyng minded, good rules of Phisike,
wherein the hope of health doe consiste.Hope of Health.
And also to prescribe vnto them, the vse
and commodities of a good Gardaine,
with the names, natures, and vertues of
diuers herbes, whiche are very requisite
for meates and medicines. Beyng part∣lie
prouoked therunto, by that whiche I
haue perceiued in your owne self, that
neither good will hath béen wāting, nor
coste spared, to make a pleasant ground,
furnished with many holsome and swete
herbes and flowers, as at this presente
tyme appereth, at your aunciēt Mansion
called Cockfeld halle, whiche example I
would wishe many gētlemē should imi∣tate.
But chiefly again I was moued, to
write somwhat of a gardein and herbes,
because the greatest part of curing of di∣seases
by medicines, doeth cōsiste in her∣bes,
whiche ye vulgare people ar so igno∣raunt
in, that thei neither knowe them,
nor yet dooe endeuoire theim selues to

haue any store of them in their Gardai∣nes,
whiche is greatlie to their discom∣moditie.
Truely these causes moued me
after that I had declared, what thynges
were mete to be knowen and obserued,
for presecuaciō of health, to speake som∣what
of the commodities of a Gardain,
that is well furnished with sundrie her∣bes:
declaryng also the names, natures,
and vertues, of soche herbes as be moste
common in this region of Englande, to
thentente I might prouoke the common
people, to haue herbes in better estima∣cion,
and to learne to knowe theim, to
plant them, and sowe them in their gar∣daines,
cherishyng theim as thynges,
whereby thei maie obtaine remeadie of
painfull diseases, by the coūsaill of a dis∣crete
Phisicion, without any great coste
or trauail. To this ende I haue declared
vnto your worship, my purpose and in∣tente,
in publishyng this small treatise,
whiche I dooe dedicate vnto you, as an
assured token of my duetie, & good harte
towardes your worship, beyng thereto
prouoked, by the singulare benefites, re∣ceiued

at your hādes. For whiche bene∣fites
(accordyng to my habilitie) in steede
of a recōpence, I signifie vnto your wor∣ship,
by this simple gifte, that I am not
vnmindfull of my duetie. Wherefore I
desire you (right worshipfull sir) to ac∣cepte
this my simple trauaile, beyng the
fruites of that small talent, whiche God
hath vouchesaued to lende me, in good
parte. Thus wishyng vnto your wor∣ship,
and to my good Ladie your bedfel∣lowe,
long continuaunce of perfecte
healthe, with increase of moche
worship: I commit you to
the tuicion of the al∣mightie
God,
whose
hande alwaies
preserue you and yours.
AMEN.

