



MOst excellent Lorde, the faire & white snow doeth complaine vnto mee, say∣ing: that she being so auncient, and of so many ages, celebrated of so many Princes, Kinges, wise and valiant mn, and beyng had in so greate estimation and price, that with greate care they seeke after her, & with greater care they doe conserue her, for to geue health & contentment to all persons: yet for all this, many people with little consideration, & not kno∣wing what they say, doe persecute her, putting vndecent names to her: and that which doeth most greeue her is, that some Phisitions, either for ignorāce, or for malice, do speak euil of her, not perceiuing what so many lerned mē haue treated & said of the great vtility & profit which she doth to many, as experience doth shew, & all people doe vnderstand, chiefly when they doe drinke their drink most cold with the benefit which doth remaine to them there∣of, they do praise & extol her. Moreouer she saith, that she forceth no persō to vse her: but if any wil vse her, shee can geue such order & maner to make cold the drinke, as is cō¦uenient for al persons, geuing the degrees of coldenesse which euery one would haue, & which doeth best apper∣tayn to them, & this with all assurance with onely leauing or placing the vessel whrein the drinke is ioyned nere to her, the which none of the olde writers nor of the late did speake against, or forbid. And especially let this maner of making cold not be done with stinking water of a well, nor with the most burning Saltpeter, but with pure water beyng cleane and cleare. These cōplaintes & many other the faire lillie white Snow hath vttered vnto me, & in the end she lastly saide to me, that since that I had praysed her so much, and taken in hande to fauour hr, that I should


ly the fire hath no mixture of other Elementes, and amongest these Elements the ayre is very principall, which is deuided into three parts, one is the supreame, and neere to the Rgi∣on of the efire, which is whotte and drie for the felowshippe that it hath therewith, taking muche of his qualitie, which is cleere and pure, from whence doe not proceede anye wyndes, nor cloudes: and this they call the celestiall Re∣gion and the partes more lowe which are neere too the wa∣ter and earth be grea and troubled full of Uapours, pear∣ced and visited with the beames of the Sunne, whereby it commeth too bee whotte and the supreame and middle Region of the ayre doeth come too bee very colde, because it standeth in the middest of the twoo extremities, beeyng so whotte. And in it, is increased the colde as in the mid∣dle parte fleing from the extreme partes of heate, as we haue spoken of before. This middle parte hath partes more or lesse colde, for the parte that is ioyning neere vnto vs is not so cold, as that which is neere to the superiour partes of the fire. And how much more the vapours do rise vp on height, the more they doe congele, and hold fast. In the middle region of the ayre doe ingender the clowdes, the small raynes, the droppes, the frost, the rayne, the Snowe, the Hayle, and other impressions as the Thunder, lightnings and sharpe showers, and comets. The Clowdes be the principal mat∣ter which doe ingender the Rayne, the Snowe, and the Hayle, and the other impressions which wee haue spoken of, that are made of many Uapours which doe rise vp from the lower partes vnto the middle Region of the ayre: and so being ioyned, they make one body, and they waxe thicke with the colde of the saide place: and for this the clowd is like to a mother, and is the common matter of all the im∣pressions that are made in the ayre. And so it is of the snowe as a thing ingendred of it, in the middle Region of the ayre. And the Snowe is no other thing but a Uapour, colde, and

moyst, which came into the middle Region of the ayre, bee∣ing ingendred, in the bodie of the Clowde with a meane coldenesse which is not so strong as that which doeth cause the Hayle, nor so soft as that which doeth cause the water, and in the like Uapour before it be made water, it both, con∣geale and freese, and doeth fall broken in peeces and are white, because there doe rayne in them more colde then in the water.
The which Galen doeth shewe vnto vs in the booke of the Philosophicall hystory of Anaximenes the Philoso∣pher. Of the congealed ayre,Galen.Anaxime∣nes. he saieth that the cloudes are made; and of the same, beeyng more thicke, the rayne is in∣gendred, and the same is congealed and frosen, and by the coldenesse of the Ayre it is made Snowe: and beeyng more congealed it is made Hayle. And the same Galen doeth say in his booke de Vtilitate respirationis, the Clowdes congealed are made Snowe: which is the matter that the rayne is made of, the Snowe doeth fall in the highe places, which of their owne nature are colde places, and thereby it is muche conserued, and very seldome it falleth in the Ual∣leyes, and if it doe fall there, it is very smal, & foorthwith it dissolueth. It falleth in the Sea but seldom times by reason of the heat which it hath, & for the winds that are continually in it, for heat & moisture are cōtraries & much more the wind ac∣cōpanied with the sunne. Galen in the nienth of his simples, saieth, that there were Philosophers that saide the snow had hot parts for being takē in the hand,Galen. it heateth & burneth like to fire. And so the saide Galen in the 4. of the sayd Bookes, sayeth as he went vpon snow, his feet did burne: the cause of this is not that the snow is whot, nor that it hath whot parts, but with his cold it doth shut the pores of the handes or feete and causeth that the heate which is in the inner partes haue not wher to come forth: & so being shut in, do cause so great a kindlying, that seemeth to burne: the which we see contrary if the handes doe burne & be put into whot water, as ye pores


drinking of the coldest water they were healed, as Galen sayth in the 7. of his Method,alen. that he sawe in one day, ye in one houre, with a draught of colde water many diseases were healed, and some of these were weake of stomake, not only, with colde water of a fountaine, but with water cooled in snowe,Cornelio Celso. and in Roe it is vsed. And so Cornelio Celso in his first booke, vnto such as were weake of stomake, com∣manded them to drinke, after they had eaten, the coldest wa∣ter they could get, and in cholerike stooles, should be dronke water, that was most cold, and in runnings of whot humors, it shoulde bee vsed, for to stay the fluxe. Auicen in the sayde chapter saith,Auicen. that the cold water doth cōfort all the ertues in his workes that is to say the vertue disgestiue, attractiue, retētiue, and expulsiue. And so he goeth declaring euery one of them, giuing vs to vnderstand how much the colde water doth corroborate and make strong al these vertues, whereby they doe their workes the better.Auicen. And the said Auicen in the second of his first treatie of water, saieth, the colde water is the best of all waters, and it is conuenient for them which are whole, for it giueth lust to meate, & maketh the stomake strong. And a little before hee saieth, that which is not colde doeth corrupt disgestion, and causeth the meate to swim in the stomake, it taketh not away the drithe, it causeth the dropsie, by reason it corrupteth the first disgestin, & consu∣meth the body with his heate. Auicen himselfe confirmeth this in the thirde of the first part,Auicen. saying, the colde water is conuenient for them that haue a temperate complection, for being whot, it causeth the stomake to be sicke. Isaac A∣liabas,Isaak. and Rasis, say the same, that Auicen saith, the which he did let to wryte of,Allabos. bycause hee woulde not bee long in his sayings.Rasit. One thing Auicen would haue in the thirde of the first parte,Auien that hee which shoulde drinke very cold, must first make a good foundation, eating first a good portiō of meate, before he drinke. Also he saith that the cold drinke may not be dronke much at one draught, but by litle and litle, by rea∣son

it doth bring two benefits, which is, that there is taken more taste in that which is drnke,Who drinke colde, let them drike little and lit∣tle. and it doth not kill the natural heat, as it is seene by the pot that boyleth, if you cast into it much water at one tyme, it doeth cease boyling, but if it be cast by litle and litle, it ceaseth not his working. And therfore Auicen himselfe sayeth, when that you will drinke colde, that you drinke with a vessell which hath a straight mouth, that the drinke run not in hastily, the said vessel bee∣ing a limet, or a yewre, with a poynt, surely it is a greate be∣nefit, for them which are affectioned to drinke with the lyke esselles: if they ought first to take out the winde or not, I do remit me to the Doctor Villalabos, who treateth large∣ly of this matter.
And by that it is seene howe Auicen woulde that those which woulde drinke very colde,You must ot drike colde at the begin∣ning of meate. they shoulde not drinke foorthwith at the beginning of their meate. For sme there bee, that as soone as they begin to eate, foorthwith they will drinke, that as is very colde, the stomacke beeing empty without meate, which cannot choose but hurte: and so the hurt which doth come to them by this, they doe attribute it, foorthwith to the colde of the drinke, and not to their euil or∣der: the which Auicen sayth, speaking of cold water, that to drinke it without order, is the cause of many diseases, & if it be dronke in order, as wel in time, as in quantity, it profiteth as he hath said. Therfore let euery one loke to that which is conuenient for him, and let him make experience in himself, and if that it be conuenient for him to drinke colde, that hee may beare, it without that it doe offende him that doe it, for therof wil follow the benefites which we haue spoken of, but if he bee sicke, and fall into any disease, whereby hee saith, that the drinking of colde drinke doeth offende him, in such case let him not vse it, for my intent is to shw and per∣swade them that doe drinke colde, that if it doe them no hurt, nor offende them that they drinke it so, ad such as doe vse it of custome and haue experience that it doe

not offende thē, vnto such i they drinke not, that which they drinke cold, the lust of their meate is taken away from thē, for they take no taste in that which they eate, and they eate it with grief, and with an euil wil, for that which they drinke doth not satisfie them, & the whot drinke doth fil the stomake full of windinesse, and cannot make therewith a good dis∣gestion.
But what is hee that hath a reasonable health, being in the tyme of great heate,He doth counsell to drinke colde. or in the whot summer, that com∣ming to eate, being weary of exercyse, or of greate labour hauing the tongue dry, the breath shorte, that doeth let to drinke colde, seeing that to doe it, there doe followe the be∣nefites that I haue sayde, and doeth succor his necessity, and remayne content and glad without hauing offended his dis∣position, and health. Unto the which Galen doeth animate and exhorte v, in the booke which hee made of good and e∣uil meates, saying. In the tyme of hot weather, when our bo∣dies are whot and somtymes inflamed, then we must vse of thinges that may refreshe vs: although that they bee euill meates, as Plummes, Apples, Cheries, Melons, Goords, & of other colde fruytes, in these lyke tymes. Galen saith, that wee may vse colde meates, as the feete of a pigge or hogge sodden in vinegre, and crudded milke: and the same meates must be made colde, and likewyse the drinke must bee made colde, as the water, and the wyne watered with colde water, or made cold in snowe, the one and the other must be made colde in the most cold water of a fountaine, and if it be not to be had, let it bee made colde in snow, chiefly the drinke.Galen. And after that Galen hath made a large digression, as it is conuenient so much in the tyme of greate heate to eate and to drinke colde things, hee doeth describe who they are that should drinke colde, and saith in this sorte, those that should drinke cold are such, as haue much buzines, and haue care of many things, as those which are gouerners of cities, and common wealthes, and the ministers which doe helpe

them, and doe participate of such cares and troubles, and those that are much exercised in bodily buzines, in especial∣ly the sowldierlyke exercises, or other great exercises, and they which doe iorney, and inespecially long iorneyes, gi∣uing to vnderstand all corporal exercises. Here I doe see ma∣ny being sicke, and hauing great occasions of sicknes, after that they drinke cold, they are whole: and when they vse it not, they become sicke agayne. And although experience doe shewe it, yet Galen doeth teach it vs, in many places, be∣ing the Prince of Phisicke.Galen. For in the thirde degree of the substance of meates, he saith, that vnto them which are whot of stomake, it is conuenient that their drinke be made colde with snowe: the same he doth confirme in the booke of good and euil meates. And in the 7. of his Methodo, it hath beene seene, as he saith, that diseases haue beene healed,Galen. and the griefes of the stomake with colde water, made colde with snowe, and in the 6. of the Epidimias hee doeth vse much of water, first sodden and after cooled with snow,Galen. and in many partes hee doeth put to coole in snowe the medicines, which he doeth vse of: and the same doe the Arabiens, for that, as it is sayde, it doeth seeme that the snowe was had in reue∣rence, by the ancient wryters, and that they did vse of it in the preseruation of their health, and in the healing of their diseases, for that it was the best maner how to nake it cold, more cleane, and more without scruple. For the cold that pro∣ceedeth of snow, is healthful without receyuing hurt, by that which is cooled with it, nor causeth any alteration bycause it is a very good congeled water, and doeth make cold.
Truthe it is, that it is not conuenient to vse of the sayde snowe continually, if it be not in tyme of need,How it ought to be vsed. by the way of medicine: for the vse of the sayde snowe dronke in water or in wyne, or putting the snowe into them, doth ingender many kind of diseases, which if presently they bee not felt, they come to be felt in age: Of the which Galen doeth make

a large relation, in the booke of diseases of the raynes, and in the booke of good and euil meates. And bycause that A∣uicen did expound them, I wil shew what he wryteth, in the third part of the first booke, in the 8. chapter: He which doth drinke snow, and the water that doth proceed out of the same snowe, if hee doe vse it continually there will followe much hurt thereby: it doth offend the sinewes, and it is naught for the brest, and for the inner members, and especially for the breathing: and there is none that doe vse to drinke it, but it wil do them hurte, vnlesse hee be of a sanguine complection which if hee doe not feele hurt presently, hee shall feele it af∣terwarde. Whereby it appeareth howe euill the vse of the sayde snowe is, and the water which doeth come out of it, if it bee not by the way of medicine, onely so it may bee vsed to coole therewith, for in such sorte it doeth not offende, as is sayde. For in this neither the auncient wryters did put any doubt of hurt, nor any scruple, and nowe wee see that it hurteth not, but bringeth health, and benefit, as wee haue sayde.
And as Plinie also sayth, of the delight and dayntinesse of the colde,Plnie. without offence of any malice of the Snowe. And Martiall doeth shewe the same,Martial. in the 4. booke, where hee sayth, the snowe must not be dronke, but that licor which is made very colde with it. And this was shewed and taught vnto vs, by the most ingenious drithe.
And vnto such as are very colde, it commeth not well to pas, for them to drinke that, which is made cold with snow, or that which is very colde, if hee bee not accustomed there∣too: for by custome, they may vse and drinke it without any offence to them, but it is good that they moderate them∣selues in drinking that which is very colde, and that they conent themselues that it bee made colde, after a meane sorte, although it bee with snowe. Also it is not conuenient for children, nor boyes, that their drinke be made cold, with

snowe, for the weakenes of the sinewes, and interiour parts, and for the tendernesse of their age, and chiefly they may drinke no wyne, but water, for that their age doeth not suf∣fer, that they may drinke it: and drinking water very colde, it doeth them very much hurte. The wyne which is made colde with snowe, doeth not offende so much as the water which is made colde: one of the things which taketh away the fury and strength of the Wyne, is the making of it colde.
And so there are three thinges which doe abate the fury of the wyne, that is,Three things which abae the fury of the wyne. to water it a good tyme before you drinke it. Also to cast a peece of bread into it, that it may sucke the vapours, and subtiltie of the wyne. The third is, to put it to coole some reasonable time in water, that is most colde, or in snowe, for the more it is cooled, the more the strength and vapours are repressed, and so it will lesse of∣fend the head, and it will lesse penetrate the ioyntes, which is seene in the sayde wyne, and beeing made colde there is abated much of his strength, in so much that if it bee ve∣ry colde, it seemeth as though that it were water. Some people there are which doe say and publish much euil of the cooling with snowe, without knowing if it be good or euill: and as it is a newe thing, and especially in this Countrie, they feare that there will come hurt to them by the vse of it. And I beeing at the table of a Lorde, there was brought a platter full of Cheries with snowe vppon them, and there was a Gentleman that durst not take any one of them, say∣ing that they would hurt him,History. bycause that they were made colde with Snowe. And as it was a thing vsed a long time, to cast snowe vppon fruite,Snowe vpo fuite.
Galen. as Galen doeth say that it was cast vpon the Mulbery, the cause of this is for lacke of the vse thereof, by reason it hath not bene vsed nor seene in these partes, and alwayes they take it for suspicious.
And heere are none that doe vse it, but the noble men, and not al, but such as haue beene Courtiers and such

as haue proued the benefit and commodity that doth followe of it: for the rest say, that without know they haue loued, and without it, they wil pas on their tyme. And they do not con∣sider that to liue they may passe with Beefe, and Garlyke, and Leekes, but these kinde of meates doe ingender euil hu∣mours: for it is one thing to eate the partridge, & the veale at his time, and mutton & byrds at another tyme. And there is differīce to eate the flesh with sauce, & the partridge with a Lemon, for the one is to eate without taste rustically, and the other is to eate as men doe, choycely and delicately. And so it is in the drinking of cold, or whot, for of the drinke that is made colde with snow, there foloweth health, taste & con∣tentment: and of the drinke that is whot, commeth euill dis∣eases, distyling, & discontentment. Let vs consider vow the old wryters tooke great felicitie to drinke colde,The old wry∣ters did vse much to coole with snow. and chiefly that which was made cold with snow, and they were people both wyse and discrete, and with much care that preserued their health. For in this and in their estimations, & in their maner of subtile liuing, they did put their whole felicitie▪ & seeing that they with so much care as we haue before decla∣red, did drinke that which they made colde with snowe, in countries that was of lesser heate then this, wherfore shoulde we not inioy this benefit, and contntment, seing that therof cannot followe vnto vs, but greate benefit of health, vsing therof as I haue said?
Note.Let euery one looke to that it is conueniēt for his health, age, vse, and custome, and let him haue respect to that which doth agree with him: for the vse wil shew him what hee shall do, seeing that of the hurt or benefit, he may soone perceiue if it ought to be vsed, or no, & he must be aduised that at the be∣inning when he doth vse to drinke cold, that which is made cold with snow, the first daies hee shal feele in the day tyme drithe, but being past 7. or .8. dayes, it is taken away, rather they goe betweene dinner and supper without drith, & with∣out hauing any need to drinke.
They do bring the snow to this countrie, from the moū∣tains wheras is much snow 6. leagues beyond Granado. The snow hath many things to preserue it,Frō whence they bring the snowe. because the way is long and it commeth by a whot country, by reason whereof it doeth muche diminishe, & very little commeth hither of that which they take out there: and therefore it is so deere.
It is a maruellous thing that these mountaines of Grana∣do, are alwaies full of snow,Mountaines of Snow. & that in them it is durable and perpetual, and for great heates, and sunne, that shineth vpon them: yet the snow continueth in one state, and we see that it doth not change. In the moūtaines Pirineos, which are filled with snow euery winter, but the sūmer being come, al is mel∣ted, in such sort that there remayneth in them no snowe. The kinges of Granado, being in all theyr royall authoritie did vse in the moneths of great heat and time of summer, to drink these waters which they dranke made cold with snow, as our hystory writer Alonso de Palensio doth referre himselfe too tha hich he wrote of the warres of Granado.
Let the snowe be kept in cold and dry places, for the moy∣sture and heate are his contrary,The conser∣uation of the Snowe. & the wind which commeth of the sine, much more, because it is whot & moyst. They doe tread or presse the snowe, when they put it in sellers to keepe, that it may the lōger endure & melt lesse. Charles Militineus doth say that the snow must be kept trodē & couered wt leaues and bowes of an Oke,Charles Mi∣litineus. because in this sort it is most conser∣ued. That which is brought to this citie, they bring it in strawe, for it doeth conserue it more then any other thing, & it doeth melt the lesse: which the glorious S. Augustine doeth shew vs in the first booke of the citie of God, where he saith, who gaue vnto the straw a cold vertue so strong,Saint Augu∣stie. that it kepeth the snow which is most cold and conserueth it? and who gaue it likewise so whot & feruent a vertue, that the green fruit not being rype, as apples and other like,The proper∣ties of straw. it doth rype and season them that they may be eaten? in the which it is seene what diuers vertues the straw hath, seeing that it doeh contrary

effectes which doth conserue the snow,  doeth make ripe the greene fruite, and doth more then the water, which is made colde in the deawe, or in other thing: by putting any vessell with it amongest strawe, it doeth conserue his coldenesse all the day.
There were vsed two principal wayes in these times too make colde with snow: the one is, to put the bottelles or the vessels of that as you will make cold, buried in the snow, this is done where there is much snow, & this doth make very cold and quickly: the same is likewise done with the water frosen. There is another way to make cold which is more easie and it is done with little snow, which is to fill a vessell of that which is to be made colde, and put vpon it a little platter of silur or glasse, or of hin Plate called the leafe of Milan & that it may be made so deepe, whereby it may penetrate through that which shalbe made cold, and vppon that deepe vessell let the snow bee put, and from time to time, the water which doeth melt from the snow must be taken away,With a little platter. for if it bee not ta∣ken away, it heateth the snow, and it melteth the more. After this sort it doeth coole much, and maketh it as exceeding cold as you woulde drinke it: and it is a way that euery one may vse more or lesse, as colde as he will, or as hee hath neede of it. The selfesame is done with a long caue made of the leafe of Milan, putting it full of snow, into the thing that you mynde to make colde continuing in it still, and this is to make anie thing colde in an earthen pot or any other great vessell.In a caue.
This manner of way is long or it be colde, and it is need∣full that it be put long tyme before you goe too meate, and for all this it will not make it very colde. Others there bee that doe put the snowe in a little basket, layde vpon a little strawe, for this doeth conserue the snowe muche, putting in one goblet with that as you wil drinke, leaning harde too the snow: after this sorte there followeth muche benefite, for it is not needefull to goe taking away the wa∣ter

from the snowe, by reason that it goeth away through the basket. And the other is, that the snowe doeth not melt so muche, let euery man doe as hee hath the quantitie of Snowe to doe it withall, and likewise in the cooling of it, more or lesse as his necessitie and health doeth require, and can beare well the vse thereof: of the which wee haue made a large relation, although that my intente and pur∣pose was for no more than too defende that the best way too make the drinke colde, and more healthfull is to make cold with snowe, and as for the other manner of wayes and vses too make colde, they haue many inconueniences which I haue spoken of, and onely too make colde with Snow, is that which is conuenient, seeyng that the snowe doeth not touche the thing, onely the little platter that is made cold with it, is onely that which doeth make colde. All other wayes which doeth make colde, doeth not come neere to the cooling with snow by a great way, for that is most colde which is cooled with it, and all other wayes doe seeme whotte, beeyng made colde in the deawe, in welles, or with saltpeter, in comparison of that which is made colde with snow. And so it is a greate thing, and too bee muche esteemed that in the tyme of whot weather, when we are made a burning cole, of the extreeme heate of the tyme, when the drithe is so great, that it maketh vs to sounde and our bodies are so burning and sweating, that we haue so easie a remedie with a little Snowe, wee may drinke so colde as is conuenient for vs, and as colde as wee will, with all assuraunce of health geuing vs so muche delighte and contentment, that there is no price to bee esteemed too it, nor vnderstanding that can expounde it, of the which e∣uery one that doth drinke colde with snowe may bee iudge of my Apologie when they do make an end to drinke by meanes of the most colde snowe.
By that which is said, it is seene what a thing snowe is, & how the vse of it was esteemed amongst the people of old time for to make colde therwith, & as the best maner of these which are to make colde withall, and more agreeable to our health and necessitie, is that which is done therewith; & also as the drinking cold doth bring so many benefits and commodities, & the drinking hot so many hurts & discōmodities, seeing that to vse it is to make leane, and debilitate the stomake, it doeth make the meate to swim in it, & it doth corrupt the disgestion, whereby it doth consume and weaken the bodie, it ingendreth winds, it is the cause that the Liuer is debilitated, & weake∣ned, it causeth continuall drithe, it doth not satisfie our neces∣sity, it geueth paine and griefe and other hurts, that he which doeth vse it, shall quickely feele them in himselfe. The which is contrary to them that do drinke colde being cold of his owne nature, or made colde with snow, for that it doth cō∣fort the stomak if it be weake, & strēgtheneth it & doth stay the flixe, & runninges of whot humors to it, & therefore it taketh a way stooles and vomits being cholerike, it doth comfort all the 4. vertues, it taketh away the driche, it geueth lust to eate, it maketh the disgestion better, & you drinke lesse & that with more contentment & gladnes, satisfiing vs more to a little cold drink, then much which is whot. It doth let the ingendring of the stone vnto thē which are whot of cōplection, it maketh tē∣perate the heat of the liner, it taketh away the kindling of the fire of them that are too hot, or inflamed of what cause soeuer it be, it tempereth the excessiue heate of the summer, it preser∣ueth from the plague in the time of it, and being taken vppon meate it strengtheneth natural heat, that it may make better his disgestion & worke, it taketh away the sharp paines which commeth of any hot cause, it taketh away the trembling of the hearte, it maketh glad them that are melancholie, it ta∣keth from wine his furie & vapours, & the fruits put in snowe, & cause, that they doe not corrupt, hee that drinketh cold doth enioy the daintinesse of the colde that it doth make, which is a

thing that cannot be expressed and the vnderstanding of man cannot comprehend it. They which may liberally drinke cold & being made cold with snow, are such as be temperate of cō∣plection & full of flesh, & those which are of a cholerike com∣plection, hot & inffamed, the which are whot of the liuer, and of the stomake, they which are sanguine and doe exercise thē∣selues and labour as men of great buzinesse, they which haue many cares, the gouernours of cities & common welthes: & the ministers of them, which do participate of the like cares and troubles, they which doe exercise themselues in warlike affayres, and other great busines, they which goe much and haue laboured much, they which doe suffer burning Agues, and euils of great heate and inflammations, & aboue al, those which are accustomed to drink it herein, let euery man drink cold, or most colde as he hath necessity, and as it is most con∣uenient for him: & to such as it is not conuenient to drink cold, nor most colde, are they that are very old, and such as doe liue idlely, without exercise, and without care, they which haue rawnesse in their stomakes, they which suffer griefes of cold humors, they which are sicke in the breast, they which haue diseases of the sinewes, they which cannot tast that they eate for humors or colde causes, they which doe suffer muc ventosity, children, and such as are of young age, and others to whom time and vse haue shewed what is conuenient for them. And thus we en our Apologie.
Finis.


