



MOST noble and woorthie Gentlemen, the birth and growth of Mahomets tyranny, which, like the inundation of some great and mightie riuer, hath ouerflowen the greatest part of the world, is very me∣morable. For that Arabian im∣postor and false Prophet, being descended of meane parentage, vnder colour of a certaine new and plausible Religion, made his way to the Empire; and hauing therewith good successe and fortune of warre, was the first that gaue name to that superstitious sect, and most prodigious king∣dome. And indeed this enterprise was more easily atchieued, be∣cause, in all counsels and contractations he had an excellent ap∣prehension, and affected alwayes in his designments and resolu∣tions to be popular. For being by nature composed all of Subtil∣tie and Flatterie, he became by meanes thereof so powerfull and mightie in his persuasions, that in short time he drew all the peo∣ple to his partie, and purchaste himselfe a great name and repu∣tation amongst them.
The lawes and institutions which he published, were imbraced of his countrey-men with woonderfull applause and liking, partly, for that he pretended to haue receiued them by Diuine inspira∣tion, and partly, because they held good correspondence and pro∣portion with their owne wicked inclination, and dissolute course of

life. And this course seemed vnto him to be the shortest and most compendious way to attaine and establish his greatnesse, being perswaded that where he could not obtaine in a Lions skin, there doubtlesse he should preuaile in a Foxes case. For he called to minde, how Lysander had once aduised to that purpose, deriding the follie of those men, who (as if they were borne of Hercules) seeke to accomplish their designments rather with force than with policie.
But of the maner of gouernment among the Lacedaemonians, being very like to this, and of that wicked Alcoran which was patched together by the labour and trauell of those leud confede∣rates, Iohn of Antioch, Sergius the Arrian, and a certaine Iew that was an Astronomer, in the yeere of our Sauiour Christ, 624. and in the time of Heraclius the Emperour, and of Pope Honorius the first; though a great field is heere opened vnto me to discourse, yet at this time, and at this place I hold it needlesse and impertinent. To returne therefore to our former matter.
When he had ordered his affaires after this maner, he per∣swaded the people, that were madde with desire of libertie, to take armes; wherewith he enlarged the narrow confines of his new Monarchie, and in short time brought great and mightie Pro∣uinces to be subiect to his tyrannie. The people were encouraged heerein the rather, through a vaine hope, wherewith this false Arabian prophet did abuse them, making them beleeue, that they should be Maisters of the whole world: which (as he saide) both by Diuine Prouidence, and right of inheritance did apper∣teine vnto Abrahams posteritie, and consequently vnto them, who deriued their petigree lineally from Sara their mother. This vaine conceit was a strong goade to pricke them forwards to make sharpe and cruell warres against all nations. And to this day, the Turkes made proud with this fancie onely, haue with their armes inuaded diuers Kingdomes and States, and like an heard of hungrie wolues, lying in wait for a flocke of sheepe, they lie in ambush to destroie all Christendome.
Neither was Mahomet the second lesse agreeable in conditi∣ons than in Name, to that Enthusiasticall seducer, exercising

more tyrannie and crueltie, than all the Ottamanes besides, as if the same had beene bequeathed vnto him by the last Will and Testament of his predecessour. For his father Amurathes be∣ing himselfe of all that euer liued, the most barbarous and cruell, declared him to be the heire apparant of all his kingdomes and seignories, vpon condition, that he would be an euerlasting ene∣mie of the name of Christ, and would bend all his studies, and thoughts, to be tyrannous, cruell, and vnmercifull. But so straight a band and caution needed not, seeing the exceeding palenesse of his countenance, hauing swolne cheekes, and a crooked nose which touched almost his lippes, together with manie other signes and tokens of a monstrous nature, shewed euidently in his childhood, what kinde of man he was like to prooue in his riper yeeres. For he that readeth the Histories of former times, shall finde many examples of such mis-shapen and deformed Thersi∣tes, the monsters and wonders of Man-kind, which haue beene in their time, the ruine and confusion of Kingdomes and Com∣mon-weales.
His Mother, being the daughter of the Despote of Seruia, and Duke of Mysia, was carefull to instruct him in the rules of Pietie and Christian Religion. For holding in deepe detestation the wicked heresies of the Saracens, and the sauage crueltie of the Barbarous Turkes, she desired earnestly to haue him conse∣crated to the obedience of Christ, and seruice of the Common-wealth: which, being herselfe a wise and religious woman, she preferred as a heauenly treasure before all the wealth and king∣domes of tho world. But,
Naturam expellas furca, &c.
Nature will not be bridled, and what is bred in the bone will ne∣uer out of the flesh. For Mahomet no sooner came to mans estate, but he cast all into the winde, and tooke no care of any reli∣gion. In priuate he was an absolute Atheist, reposing all his hopes in a good Fortune, making no account of the Diuine pro∣uidence, and with many scoffes and scornes testing at those which affirmed that humane affaires are disposed and gouerned by God.
Wherefore following the example and direction of his prede∣cessour

and father, his chiefest care and studie was to enlarge his dominions, and with the yoke of Mahometane slauerie to oppresse those kings and people whom he subdued. So that in the space of 32. yeeres, that he raigned, many Kingdomes, Dukedomes, and Cities were conquered, and became subiect to his tyrannie. For which cause he was compared to Alexander the Great, and for his noble and great exploits, surnamed the Great amongst his people.
The first and fearefullest feate of warre which he did, was the winning of Bizantium the most renowned and Famous Citie of Constantine the Great, which is acknowledged of all, to haue beene the glory aad beauty of all Christendome. There is no man liuing (as I thinke) that is able with fit words, and due compas∣sion to expresse so greeuous and so great calamities. For then the great and mighty Empire of Greece that was wont to be the wall and bulwarke of the Romane Empire, in lesse than two moneths siege was dissolued, and vtterly subuerted. The Emperour Constantinus Paleologus, a Prince endued with all commen∣dable parts of piety, and vertue, seeing his estate was desperat, and thinking to escape with his people at a backe gate, was mise∣rably smothered and killed in the throng: at what time, the bloo∣dy and cruell tyrant caused Proclamation to be made, that no per∣son of what age, sex, or condition soeuer should be saued or pitied in that common massacre. This lamentable tragedy was acted in the 1453. yeere after the recouery of our saluation by the Sonne of God, when Fredericke the third swaied the Empire of Rome, and Sixtus the fourth gouerned the Papacy.
Now God of his infinite goodnesse and mercy breake the rod and power of the Turkes, and stop their rage and fury, that in these latter daies which are yet remaining vnto the day of iudge∣ment, the Church may enioy peace and safety. For we are come now vnto that time, wherein many graue, wise, and learned persons, among whom Luther was not the meanest, foretold that the Turke should raigne in Germany. And truely so it appeareth. For all their studies and forces are bent only, that by a short cut they may inuade our borders. And if we marke with

what ciuill dissentions, and intestine broiles the whole country of Germany is set on fire, we cannot but confesse that it will be an ea∣sie enterprise for them to subdue it; except our most gratious and mercifull God being pacified with our humble deuotions, will with his inuincible arme defend vs and avert these dangers.
The Turkes (we see) with all diligence and watchfulnesse, doe obserue such aduantages, and seldome or neuer doe they slip these occasions, but with great ioy embrace them, as the only signes and abodements of their good fortune: whereas we are possessed with such dulnesse and stupidity, (what shall I call it else? more pro∣perly I can call it nothing) that, besides it depriueth vs of all sense of our owne miseries, it causeth also in our enemies themselues so great an admiration and wonderment, that they iest at vs for it with extreame laughter and derision.
How happy were it for vs, if the great wealth whereof the Exchequer, and common Treasury is daily emptied, were im∣ploied on this seruice, and the subiects were not suffered to be so much impouerished as they are? For so long as they are rich, and able to contribute to their Soueraignes wants, it will be an easie matter to raise an Army and to make warre vpon any occasion: But if once they be exhausted and drawne drie with vnnecessary exactions and impositions, our armies will soone be dissolued, and our warres will prooue ridiculous and infortunate, for want of meanes to prosecute and maintaine them. And if then necessity compell vs to seeke for peace, and Christian amity with our foes, is it not strange that in time of prosperity the very name of peace is so odious and hatefull? especially considering it happeneth many times, that whilest two are striuing and contending together, they are made (like the frog and the mouse in the fable) a pray and booty to a third enemy, whose malice neuer ceaseth till he hath destroied them both, and sent their soules (that I may vse the Poets words) to fery ouer the Stygian lake, which is the blacke pit of hell.
Why then are we afraid of any forrain Turks? Seeing we, euen we, are Turkes vnto our selues: yea farre more cruell and iniu∣rious than any Turke, or (as the name importeth) any destroier

in the world. For the Turks, being at peace within themselues, doe beare one common hatred against all Christians, that they may subdue them, and destroy their name and memory from the earth: But on the other side, we make peace with Turks, and turne our swords against our owne sides, hauing our pleasure only, with ciuill warres and domesticke broiles, to destroy one another, as if we had conspired with the common enemy, to make ourselues an easie conquest vnto his tyranny. And if this be not madnesse and fury, I know not what is madnesse. But let vs returne to Mahomet:
Who, although he was of such a tyrannous nature, as I haue declared, yet contrary to al other Barbarians, hath this praise and commendation giuen him by all Historiographers, namely that he burned alwaies with an incredible desire to vnderstand all good Arts and Histories. For he caused the Histories of all Nations, hauing to his infinite charge gathered them together out of all pla∣ces, to be translated into the Turkish tongue, that they might serue him as a well-furnished store-house of graue examples, fit for imi∣tation and practise, in the vse of warre, and military discipline: What kind of stratagems and war-like policies he hath gathered out of them, his owne manner of Gouernment, and the Commen∣taries of Vicentinus, his freed-bondman, and of many others that haue written thereof, doe declare at large. Among the rest, these Epistles, being so wittily, and grauely written, deserue not the least nor the last commendation. For they were written by himselfe, either as he marched and set foorth against his enemies, or else when he encamped: against whose testimonie, being most pri∣uy to his owne resolutions and warre-like affaires, there is no ex∣ception can be taken. And where he vseth in them a certaine kind of Laconicall breuity, it is not for want of time to write more largely, but because his desire was alwaies to expresse his minde in a full and plaine kind of speech, without vaine and needlesse cir∣cumstances. For they that are wise indeed, are euer accustomed to deliuer much matter in few words: which praise Homer gi∣ueth vnto Menelaus the Spartan, and many other great perso∣nages are commended by others, for the same quality and vertue.

Yet I deny not, but this witty and concise kind of speech which Mahomet vseth, doth sauour very much of tyranny: because it is common with Tyrants to deliuer their minds in few termes, and those also very imperious and menacing, as their owne verse declareth;
Sic volo, sic iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas.
So doe I will, So I command,
And let my will for reason stand.
As for the responsory letters, which are wouen in the same loome, I haue no more to say, but that they shew a manifest con∣tempt of the Tyrant and his threatnings, holding it farre better to hazard the worst of Fortune, then to yeeld their nekes to the cru∣ell yoake of his intolerable slauery. But to let passe all Histories, is it not a lamentable thing to consider, how he hath subdued and conquered all places that he came vnto? so that he may truely say of himselfe, as once said Iulius Caesar:
Veni, Vidi, Vici.
I came, I saw, I ouercame.
And thus much shall suffice of him. Now concerning the Translatour of these Epistles, (one Laudinius a man famous and well knowen to the world, as well for his learning, as for the honour and place which hee had amongst the Knights of Hierusalem) he deserueth no lesse praise for translating, then the Authour himselfe for composing them. For he hath so liuely and significantly expressed the conceit and meaning of a strange tongue, that he seemeth altogether to relish of Tullie his ele∣gancy and sweetnesse. Therefore my hope is, that good men will not dislike my trauels in publishing the same; which hauing fini∣shed, I thought good to dedicate the same to you, most noble and worthy Gentlemen. For I vnderstand by good and credible re∣port, that you doe apply your whole study vnto learning and know∣ledge,

and that no day passeth you without some time drawen to that purpose. Assuredly, though you are discended of many most ancient and noble Gentlemen, and may iustly boast the honorable badges and armes of your Ancestours; yet the best and readiest way to raise your titles, and to make you more honorable, is to be learned. Which way if you will pursue with your accustomed di∣ligence, you shall shortly reape the happy fruits of your long studies, namely, variety of all perfect and true knowledge, and a noble reputation graced with the best preferments both with Prince and people: The one being enabled through your graue and learned counsels, will gouern his estate vertuously, and the other hauing confidence in your vertue, will feare no dangers. O happy, and thrise happy are they, to whom such blessings are giuen of God. Indeed the common sort of Gentlemen, of whom Carneades sometimes spake, because they learne nothing but to ride horses are in no estimation, no not with the meanest of the multitude. For is there any thing in them, that appeareth worthy or com∣mendable? Cannot euery vulgar and base fellow learne to ma∣nage a horse aswell as they? Which I speake not to disgrace ri∣ding and horsmanship: but wish rather it may haue it's due ho∣nour and respect: only I would not haue you to be of their num∣ber who giuing themselues wholy to this quality make slow procee∣dings or none at all in the way of learning; wherein I doubt not, but your fathers iudgment doth concurre with mine, as I might well perceiue at my first acquaintance with him, when in the Castle of Stradthag I taught that worthy and noble Gentleman, Count Ernestus, the true and sole heire of the Countie of Schoum∣burg. For considering with himselfe, what great commodities learning bringeth with it to all sorts of persons, his principall care and study was to commit you to the hands of graue and learned teachers, to be instructed, and to prouide for you according to your estates, competent and necessarie exhibition. For all which his fatherly care and bounty, he requireth no more of you but to be diligent to furnish your selues with all good learning and know∣ledge. Which if you will doe, you will reioice the harts not only of

your parents, but also of all those that loue you, and you shall be highly esteemed amongst the chiefest Nobilitie. But it is needlesse to spurre a free horse, or to exhort you that are alrea∣die prepared and addressed to this vertuous course. Therefore I will stay my selfe heere, humblie be∣seeching you to take in good part this slender signification of my dutious affection towards you and your stu∣dies. Fare you well.

