


GOod Sir, I haue recea∣ued your Letters, the messengers of your sor∣rowe, and the workers of my griefe: for that I now misse alouing kind Neighboure, as you do want a kind louing Father. And if the most renowned king Dauid, notwithstanding the great enmitie betwixt Saul and him, did shed as many teares from his eyes, when he heard that his enemie was murdered, as there did issue droppes of blood from Sauls body

when it was wounded. I trust my Christi∣an sorrow for my friend, shalbe christianly excused, sith that it is a naturall thing for one man to haue compassion vpon an other: and of all worldly losses which we receiue by death, the losse of such a friende is very bitter; although now by death he hath gay∣ned an estate which is incomparably betr▪ God hauing taken his vnbodyed Spirite, to the fruition of his Diuine essence in hea∣uen: but left his vnspirited Body, to be layde by you, on his last bed in the earth, and your selfe, to the practise of your Fa∣thers forepassed vertues: that in the ende of your race, you may inioy the benefite of your Fathers foretasted comfortes: which I must acknowledge to be the sweete fruites of his godly lyfe. And where as I vnder∣stande by your Letter, so many in number, so excellent in qualitie, so comfortable in his extremitie; both for the quicknes of his sence, and the quietnes of his conscience, and readines of his memorie: that if he would haue wished longer lyfe, then that he lyued, or more Worshyp, then that he inioyed, or greater wealth then that he pos∣sessed, yet he could not haue desired at the

handes of God, a more heroyicall gyft, then the grace he had, to die in his grace: because, as punishment is ioyned to his displeasure, so glorie is alwayes knit to his gracious fauour. Therefore (good Sir) hencefoorth surcease your sorrow, least you be charged to grieue at his solace. And seeing the preuiledge to die well, is onely allotted to them whom God hath giuen the grace to liue well: en∣deuour as you are by nature, so in lyfe and death, you may shew your selfe his Sonne: that as death tooke Manasses cutting his Corne, and binding vp his Sheaues; so death, when death knockes at your gate, may finde your August past, and your Haruest at an ende: (I meane not of your Corne which growes in Swallowclisfe-fielde) but of the thoughtes which flowe from your hart. To this ende, my friende hath bestowed vp∣pon you this litle Treatise, made by a Di∣uine endued with an excellent spirite, re∣questing you to patronize it with your fa∣uour: but especially to follow it with your best indeuour. For so you shall lyue full of good workes, as your Father died full of good dayes, and leaue a testimonie of righ∣teousnesse vnto your Chyldren, as their

Graundfather hath left, both to you and them. Thus, with hartiest resalutations to your selfe, your wyfe, and syster, I commit both you and yours, to the Almightie God, whose you are, and whom you serue. London. 27. of Ianuarie. 1595.

