



Right Reuerend in Christ, Right Honorable,
IT is now three yeeres, and more, that preaching at Windsore, as my course then fell, before his Ma∣jestie, I tooke my Text, Psal. 50.15.

which that Sunday was verbum dici in die suo, Read in the publike Ser∣uice of the Church, according to dire∣ctions in the Booke of Common pray∣er. In Pulpits, and in popular Ser∣mons, J nor like it in others, nor Pra∣ctise it my selfe; to meddle much or far with any Point of abstruse, or contro∣uerted Diuinitie. For common capa∣cities, are made and fitted for matter of meane and ordinarie apprehension. Preaching is appointed to make men better in practique knowledge; and so was euer vsed of the Ancients: not acute and subtile for discourse and specula∣tion, which is the ordinarie pietie of these times. But as then it fell out, such was the Auditorie, so extraordi∣narie The wordes, as they fell in pro∣cesse of handling that Psalme, and of that importment, Call vpon me in

time of trouble; So direct and plaine for addresse vnto God: vnto Him a∣lone: for Immediate accesse without as∣sistance or mediation, J could not well waue the Case of Inuocation, Aduoca∣tion, and Intercession of Saints and Angels, so much perswaded, vrged, practised, and abused, in the common vse and custome of the present Church of Rome. (And yet not so, as to dwell vpon it wholly, or to make it , alto∣gether.) Concluding it a point of plaine folly, if no more, for any man to implore the Helpe of others, to vse Aduocates and Assistants vnto God, in any exi∣gence, time of neede or necessitie, who is so directed, counselled, and inuited by God himselfe, to immediate accesse without mediation, in, Call vpon me. Of folly and ridiculous absurditie, as it is by them conceiued, taught, and laid

downe: euen by the most learned, judi∣cious, and aduised amongst them; though J know, in point of practice and performance, the simple vulgar people, not acquainted with, nor capable of Scholasticall niceties, or difference in termes, of Inuocation and Aduocation, Helpe originall, and deriued; goe to it down right with direct addresse indeed, vnto flat Impietie against God, and J∣dolatrie in their ordinarie deuotion vn∣to the Creature. J was as Conclusiue a∣gainst this custome, as I could be, as di∣rectly opposite vnto their Doctrine of Aduocation as Contradiction could make me; and yet Right Honorable, I haue beene vouched, for an Abettor of their practice, at least in part; I am sure, slandered in my Opinion and Preach∣ing. There was present at my Sermon, that infamous Ecebolius of these

times, Religion is desultor, Arch∣bishop somtime of Spalata, then Deane of that Church, Marcus Antonius de Dominis. This Man and Runaway from Religion (a man, if any other of his Coate and Calling, apt enough to be circumcised and denie Christ Jesus, if the Grand Signior would but make him chiefe Muftie, so much would Am∣bition and Couetousnesse, his bosome in∣firmities, sway with Him) in his late impudent, leud, shamelesse Recantati∣on, in which he professeth and proclay∣meth himselfe vnto the world a Knaue in graine, a man of a cauterised Con∣science, and prostituted Honestie vnto all, euen Ciuill, conuersation; as without all modestie, he belyeth that Church in generall, which my selfe haue heard him often publiquely and priuatly com∣mend and admire: As he spareth not

Particulars, of most Eminent place: so also, amongst others, hath he belyed me; as if J concurred with himselfe now, in opinion; or auowed that ridicu∣lous Romane Doctrine and Practice of Praying vnto Saints and Angels, in time of need. For, He heard with great delight and content, as he saith, one of his then Canons of Windsore, preaching before the Kings Maie∣stie, maintayne, That there was no cause why euery man might not turne himselfe vnto his Angell kee∣per, and say, Holy Angell keeper, Pray for me. Hee nameth me not in this passage, I graunt, but wrappeth vp a certaine quendam in generall and in doubtfull termes. And had J not my selfe professed, En adsum qui feci, J well and quietly had rested blamelesse, y a namelesse aspersion, and left them

to ghesse at randon, or shoot at Rouers, who would happely haue fastned it o∣therwhere. But nothing was said, why I should shunne the Charge, or diuert the Imputation vpon any. And because the first notice that euer I had hereof, being from (though at second hand) your Lordship, I could not possesse my Soule in patience, without giuing your Lordship intimation, how vntruly, an aspersion of siding that way, had by him, so loose a Lozell, beene cast on that so∣ciety, whereof himselfe sometimes had beene, and my selfe am yet, through his Majesties Grace, a member: the rather, because wee haue all vnder his sacred Maiestie, especially in Cases of this condition, a Reference vnto your Honor, as our Visitor. May your Lordship then be pleased, to take notice of his dealing, conformable to the rest of

his leuder actions, in his turne-coating from side to side. He stileth me, One of his Canons of Windsore: as if, for That, my dependance had beene vpon Him, or my selfe, and the rest of my Brethren there had beene his by appropriation. What the course is in the Court of Rome, J know not, where Places of such qualitie are bought and sold. But here J am sure, He was but one of vs, The fundamentall Statutes running thus, De tredecim Canoni∣cis, quorum vnus Custos, vel De∣canus existat. The Deane, and Pre∣bends there, being no mans Canons, but his Maiesties: who by Right Origi∣nall, is, in his Royall Predecessors, Founder and Patron of that College. Secondly, he doth not blsh to write, that he heard me with great delight and content. Whereof He nor was, nor

could be capable. For in his owne in∣tent and meaning to heare, is to vnder∣stand and apprehend. This he did not: this he could not doe. For I preached in English, vnto an English Auditorie, though composed then of Royall and Noble presence. English, hee might heare; but could not vnderstand, ex∣cept carptim and sparsim, now and then, here and there a word, or halfe a sentence. And yet I know he Read, for I was present: and subscribed (he saith since, against his conscience, the more Knaue he) to injoy a good Benefice, for I was a witnesse thereto, the Articles of 1562. in West-Ilsly Church in Bark∣shire. But Reade I can that which J vnderstand not: Vnderstanding and Reading are two things. And yet, this honest man, as if he had vnderstood my Sermon from point to point, shameth

not to say, he heard me. Which chiefly and thirdly is false for the mayne. The wordes, he putteth on me, I professe be∣fore God, I spake not. I nor did, nor doe hold the purport of them, Certum & de fide. The most that himselfe, who must now say, what they at Rome will haue him, is this, and no more, Perad∣uenture, or, it is Probable, quòd sic. But that which he did heare and vn∣derstand is this, for these wordes J spake in Latin, not in English, Sed de Angelo custode, fortassis amplian∣dum. No moe, nor fewer wordes then so, this way. How these wordes, so spo∣ken, should affect him with such content, J cannot tell. I am sure, and can make good, they are farre enough remooued from abetting or maintayning; that or∣dinarie course of Inuocation or assistan∣cy of Saints and Angels: euen of Angels

Guardians, that continually attend vs, as farre as resolution is from doubting. But howsoeuer, I resolued, euen instant∣ly vpon first notice of this defamation, to say somewhat in the Case. And thereupon, repayring vnto my Papers, so soone as I could finde any leisure, out of my briefer Notes, for J wrote not my Sermon verbatim, J drew into a forme, the substance, J am sure, of all which was then deliuered: and enlar∣ged it with much accesse, of more then I could well deliuer, or did speake within the compasse of an houre, especially, or rather wholly in that Eristical part and opposition which is inter partes litigan∣tes, about Mediation in Jnuocation. Which I thought it my dutie to offer vn∣to the view and censure of your Lord∣ship, in regard of that Reference, which, as a Canon of VVindsore, I

haue vnto your Honor, our Ʋisitor. But much rather in respect of priuate obli∣gation, in consideration of my owne par∣ticular. For, let the world take notice, if it may concerne any, your Honor is He, vnto whom, next vnto his most sa∣cred Maiestie, my most gracious So∣ueraigne and Master, J owe more, then to all the world beside, though I confesse my selfe very much obliged vn∣to some of your Lordships Reuerend ranke. So that, I could not answere it vnto God and Man, if any act of mine, voluntarie and direct, should iustly giue your Lordship any distaste of my carriage or disposition in this kinde. And because your Lordship hath beene pleased to finde so much leisure, euen in your manifold distractions diuersly, and very great employments euery way, both in Church and State, as to reade it ouer,

and approue it in your most able iudge∣ment, and giue it your Honorable war∣rant to the Presse; I could not but make it your owne in publike, both out of dutie and discretion; professing vnfainedly, in the word of a Priest, Fecisti vt vi∣uam & moriar, ingratus. Jn which Profession, and Protestation J rest, re∣commending your Honors long health and happinesse, in my daily prayers, as J haue good cause, vnto God Al∣mightie, and my selfe vnto your Honors seruice and deuotion

