



MIne honoured Lord, I here present vnto your view, nor Comedie, nor Trage∣die, as wanting first the iust number of Speakers: Secondarily, those parts or Acts it should haue, which should bee at the least fiue; but a plaine Dia∣logue or conference between so many persons, consisting of three Acts, and no more. If there be any Act in it, to make it sauour in your Lordshippes pallate, I shall be glad: Wormewood or gall to make it distastefull, I am sure there is none, if rightly vnder∣stood: for howsoeuer I may by chaunce light vpon a galled place, my entent is not to rubbe it so hard, to grieue it or make it worse: but rather to wipe it smooth∣ly to clense it, and heale it.
If any man thinkes himselfe touched in any thing

that is amisse, let him endeauour by Gods helpe to a∣mend it; and if there be any good counsell in it, ten∣ding to reformation of manners, or other aduice, as I dare be bold to say, there eyther is, or should be; let him make vse of that, and follow it.
Moreouer, my very good Lord, as in all actions done, or to be done, after what kind soeuer, there be se∣uerall reasons, if grounded vpon reason or iudgement: why, or to what end they are, or should be done, so in this committed to your Lordships hands, though soone conceiued, and as soone brought into the world, being not aboue sixeteene dayes labour therein, more aimed at then the verball sence: Which if it please your Lordship, giue me leaue to giue you some instructions, is thus to be taken.
In the person of the old Gentleman is figured forth a man of singular good education, life & conuersation, a man that had seene the World, tasted the sorrowes and troubles of this life with Dauid, and towardes the end of his dayes had a peacefull possession of an happy estate giuen him: wherein also is set out the benefit of contentation: A man truly vertuous, frugall, bounteous and liberall, a louer of good company and hospitality, desirous to gaine the good will of his neighbours.
Moreouer, are shewed the wonderfull preseruation and blessings that God bestoweth on them that serue him: first, his wife a good wife; then his children, as a principall blessing, next, good children, and his care in their education, besides his temporall blessings.
In the person of his wife is set out a vertuous, chaste and sober Matron, one that was carefull of her charge,

not a gadding houswife, but such an one as did spende her idle times in reading histories and other good bookes, as is easie to bee perceyued. In them both the happiest vnion, and agreement that should bee in that blessed estate of marriage: and lastly, in them two, the prayse of a country life.
In the person of their son is set out an hopefull yong Gentleman, whose father had a great care to see him well brought vp according to his estate, and to let him know the world betimes; not to keepe him at home vn∣der his nose, as many too kind and foolish parentes vse to doe, vntill they haue marde their children, which o∣therwise might haue beene better. Secondly, in him is shewed how a young man should carry himselfe; first, to serue God, to please his parents, to follow that which is good, to reade good bookes, and to make choise of his company.
In the person of the Merchant, the noblest profession of Trade; from whom diuers Worshipfull houses in England haue had their originall, is set out in some part their disposition, who being for the most parte excee∣ding rich, are also exceeding miserable, till they are dis∣posed to get out & warm their blouds with this element of good liquor, and then as farre exceed in superfluity, as by experience I haue knowne some.
In the Serieant is set out, a well-deseruing souldier, who sticking in the first place of preferment, can get no higher.
In the Sentinell, an honest priuate souldier, one that loues a potte better then a Wench, and indeed the na∣turall disposition of all Souldiers, who for the most part

leade a merry life, carelesse of any thing, so they may in a reasonable measure be prouided for of meate, drinke, and apparrell.
In Beerepot is set out an honest seruant, who howso∣euer, he will keepe company, and be merry sometimes, yet nothing can draw him from the performance of his businesse, and the due respect of his seruice, and duty to his master.
In Flutterkin, a Marchant of good Beere, a merry companion, one that will giue content to his guests, set out his wares, and helpe to vtter them himselfe, and ra∣ther then no body should be drunke, he will make one.
In the Moore, a man that had tasted the inconstan∣stancy of Fortune, one that bare his crosses brauely and stoutly, and in despight of Forune, would bee merrie, and sing while others wept.
And for the names which are significant, if you take them according to their Dialect, as lesse materiall, I leaue your Lordship, at your leasure to guesse at: and commending my selfe, and those my poore endeuours vnto your Lordships Honourable patronage. I rest: Vtriecht from my lodging the 14. of Nouember, 1617.

