


MY purpose is not (discreet Reader) here to pleade with pen and paper for the belly and back of Li∣bertines and Epicures, of Swilbolles and Swaggerers, or of any other idle drones, and wretched Atheists, neglecting all lawfull callings and Chri∣stian meanes, to liue orderly and honestly either in Church or common-wealth. All these I acknowledge to be the greatest wasters and spoylers of our country, worse by many degrees, then any depopulators, oppressors or decayers of tillage: (which yet I no further iustifie then did the Pro∣phets Sodome and Gomorrah before Ie∣rusalem, Ezec. 16. 48. 56. Esa. 1. 10. for her rebellions against the Lord) for these I assure thee do good to



none, no not to themselues, nothing at all regarding the priuate or publike good: but making hauocke of the creatures, do liue of the labours of other men for the present time, and surfetting vpon Gods blessings, do take a course to bring the whole world to confusion, and so with all expedition to haue the earth for their in∣tollerable loosenesse to spew them out. Leuit. 18. 25. & 20. 22. Our land swarmeth too full of such ver∣mine, who like the grashoppers of Egypt, Exod. 10. 14. 15. begin to couer the face of our countrey, eating vp al the fruite they can come by, that no greene thing shall grow by their wils, and so darken the land and obscure the glory thereof. So that looke what left of the palmer worme (the oppressors Iocl. 1. 4. 5. of the land) that haue these malt-worms deuoured, and the residue of those can∣ker-wormes and cormorants, haue these caterpillers consumed. The truth is, this viperous brood and wicked generation haue mutually conspired, if not the de∣struction, yet a mightie consumption of



our deare common-wealth, the damme and nourse of vs all. I abhorre to speake of the damnable crue, and cursed com∣pany of drunkards and belly gods, whom the diuell hath taught a new trade of eating and drinking by measure, and methode. Their yards of cups, and order of carowsing with such low courtesie, & salutations of their honest mates absent; after an idolatrous sort prostrating themselues to their Bacchus and bellie∣god, I shame to dilate. Besides the tricke of Tobacco to temper their westie brains, and to adde both pleasure and thirst to Deut. 29. 19. their vnmeasurable desire of drinking. I cannot reckon vp the thousands of mault and good graine, wasted and hel∣lishly spent by these Helluoes and Har∣pies. All these. (I know) abhorre the plough, and are enemies to the state: who yet (I confesse) in their high talke do iu∣stifie tillage, and wil be ready (no doubt) to reforme the decay thereof, with spade and peckaxe. The humours of any such



I detest to please, as being most horrible. Here onely I solicite the pitifull case of painfull plowmen, tradesmen, and poore labourers, not able by their paines, and gaines, to furnish their families with sufficient food, who sometimes for want thereof, breake out into fearefull clamors against the tyrannous dealing of vniust inclosers and needlesse ouerthrowers of tillage, who are here onely taxed. Neither am I so senslesse, simply to condemne all kind of pastures and feedings, knowing that euery creature in the kinde haue their proper place and portion of the earth allotted of the Lord: Besides the Christian libertie of men to vse them for their best gaine and good. Yet doth God allow such care of sheepe and oxen, that Christian men shall be forgotten? and 1. Cor. 9. 9. that so much prouision shall be made for these, that the poore shall want their food? God forbid. I know there is a pro∣fitable vse of hedging and ditching for the diuision of mownds, and propertie of



mens right & inheritance; not to speake of the necessary prouision of wood, main∣tainance of peace, and increase of many other profits amongst neighbours, who otherwise (perhaps) would proue conten∣tious and iniurious one towards another: yet quite to hedge out the poore, and by this meanes to ouerthrow the plough, is a hellish practise. And thus hauing vn∣folded my mind and true meaning, I commit thee to him that hath the hearts of all in his hand to make them pliable to his seruice and publicke good, both of Church and common-wealth.

