


CAllyng to mynde the saynge of Salust, that they lede theyr lyfe lyke beasts which passe theyr tyme in ydlenes. I could not chuse (for as much as I hade a lytle vacant tyme from studye) but attempte some thyng wherwith I might be busyed▪ & when I coulde not in a pretye space bethinke nor deuyse what lytle worke I might occupie my selfe with, that might be corres∣pondent and agreable both vnto my small leysure and tyme, & also vnto the place wherin I was at that present season (for I was in London) at last a booke inteteled the Schole howse of women cam vnto my handes, wherin I had wel hoped to haue redde some notable gestes and actes of women (for so semed the false & forged tytle therof to promyse (but when I had well per∣vsed and ouer redde the same, I found the cleane contrary. For much againste my expectation I myght vewe and see theryn di∣uers & sundry reprochfull thyngis spoken agaynste women, not only (as I thought (vndeserued on theyr partes, but also moost beastiall lyke on hys behalfe which wrote the same. What crea∣ture comme and borne of a woman wold so spytefully wryte a∣gaynste them? what learned man can iudge well of hym? what woman that knoweth hym, can fynde in her harte to loue hym? And fynally what good and honest reader once reading the same wil haue any further desyre or delyght to peruse it. Of a vyper I think hym to be borne, whose nature is to knowe a sunder hys dames belly before he cōmeth forth, wheray she dyeth. But per∣chaunce he in lykewyse, to auoyde ydlenes, toke that hys worke in hand, truly better had it bene for hym (as Erasmus sayth) to haue bene ydle then euyll occupyed. And as in takyng vpon hym that lewde enterpyce he semed to playe a founde and folysh parte: so in lykewyse in hiding of hys name, he only delared his wyt, which if he had expressed, no lesse wolde women wonder at

hym then the smal byrdes at the Owle, no lesse wolde they hate hym then the Ap the snayle, no lesse wold they abhorre hym thē the lysard the serpent, and fynally no lesse wolde they iudge of hym then of Nero which caused hys mothers wombe to be ryp∣ped (she lyuyng) to see the place where he laye in, I then for the seruēt affection which I bare to women was desyrous to wryte in theyr defence, but fyrst I beganne to consulte with my selfe weyther it were best so to doe or no, & I perceyued that many & iust causes dyd prouoke me to wryte herein, & agayne diuers did allure me to hold my peace, for as my god wyll and affection to women the symplicitie, innocēcie and vngiltynes of womē, the∣sche wyng of ylenes, and the verite of the matter & cause exhor∣ted me: so on ye other syde dyd my lack of wytt, learnyng and age allure me to the contrary which were moost mete and requisite in thys behalfe affirmyng it to be a matter more mete & decent for a marryed man to entreate & wryte of, then for a bachyler or prynkokes but of twenty yeares of age or lytle more. And more mete in dede I thought it also for a marryed man, who in defen dyng of women myght partly gratyfye hys owne wyfe, whose honest behauyor sobernes wytt and true loue theryn semyng to be apparant, myght redoune, & sounde not a lyttle to hys owne honestie, & also wolde be a greate encrease of loue betwene them although they skant loued before. Now when I saw none such ready to take paynes and trauayle theryn I lyke blinde bayard quite & clene forgettyng ye impediments in me afore named (that is to say) lack of wytt, learnyng, & age, whych, were most requy∣syte & nedefull for thys purpose, raye and vnaduysedlye tooke thys enterpryce in hande (wherof I repente me not at all) And bycause that I knew nor was acquaynted wyth no Ladye nor worshypfull Gētle woman in the Courte, or els where to whom I myght dedycate ye same as a thynge for the argumente sake. (although not for the clerklyke handlyng therof) moost ee and apte for theyre worshippes to beholde and looke on, you en  to mynde of all men moost worthy of thys simple gyfo, no oly for that that you are an especiall fauorer of women, but also ∣cause

you haue shewed and declared your selfe alwayes to be a synguler patrone and defender of my symple studye. So nowe in lyke wyse hauyng no mystrust at all in you, but that as in ty∣mes past, so you wyll also accepte and take in good worth thys my small present and gyfte, as a testymonyall of my good wyll vnto you, beyng not otherwyse able to declare the same, for lack and wante of worldlye wealth. Thus desyryng you to take so much paynes at your moost conuenyent leasure as to correcte & amende al such fautes as you wal fynde theryn, which although that the worke be but small, yet the numbre of them tho be exce∣dyng great I dare well affirme, I commit you to the tuystion of the blessed Trinytye, whome I besech all wayes to preserue and kepe you hole in soule and bodye to hys wyll and pleasure and  your owne hartes desyre, Frō Hambleden the xx. day of Iulye. Anno domini M. D. L. U. II.

Finis.
