



FOrasmuch as the metall cal∣led yron, is of so great impor∣tance in the worlde, and so necessary for the seruice of man, it moued me to make this Dialogue, which doeth treate of the greatnesse and maruellous workes thereof. Which if they be well consi∣dered▪ they will bring admi∣ration vnto all that shall reade them, by reason it is so ne∣cssary for all states, and manners of liuing. It hath also greate and mediinall vertues, and likewise with worthi∣nesse, and greatnesse, it is an Instrument and meane, whereby the most worthy haue gotten great Titles, and fame; as we see many of those which in times past haue attayned vnto, among whom the Predecssors of your excellencie with theyr noble mindes, and strong armes, the Seare in the fist, and the sworde in the hande, by o∣uercomming battels, by getting townes and places, the name and fame of them haue byn immortall to this day. And for to augment and increase this the more, and to geue to your excellencie, and to your chidn and suc∣cessours, geater glory, you tooke to wise the excel∣lent Duches the Ladie Iuna Curtes that at this day doeh beautifi the whole worlde, with er woorthi∣nesse, etimation, qualitie, and gratesse, daughter to that valiaunt and reowmed Prince, Don ernando Curtes, who with his greatnsse and infinite Labours


is a shorter way, and fewe people will be there. It seemeth to mee, that the greate hall of the treasurie house is sutt: t may bee that whiles I go vp to see the sicke person, they will open it. Burgus. Your worship may go in Gods name, I will tarrye here for you, and seeing the great hall is not opened, I will sitt downe vppon the benche, and will see what doeth passe vntill you come.
Doctour. Master Burgus, I praye you pardon mee, if I haue tarryed long: for the qualitie of the cause hath cau∣sed mee to tarry. Burgus. Rather I woulde haue beene glad that you had tarryed longer, because I would haue seene more. Doctour. What haue you seene whiles I was absent? Burgus. The great hall being shutt, and the parde full of people, and I looking vppon them earnestly, it seemeth to mee that they are people of estimation, but to my iudgement full of cares: for in them I haue seene so va∣riable and diuerse likenesses of countenance, that I maruel at it. Some of them talking to them selues: others being alone with their heads hanging downe, and with great imagination: Others talking by two and two together: Others in clusters treating of the sales of their merchaun∣dize: Maryners and souldiours carrying for their pay∣mentes: Others carrying away their porcions of siluer, which they had taken out, running with it, as though they had stolen it: Others there were with the Notaries about their suites: Others in the office of the treasourer amongest the Registers. There was also a greate noyse of much people, deliuering and receiuing parcels of siluer, but they were in a great strife therevppon. The Iudges were in counsell, and many people tarrying for them in such sort, that I was in greate admiration: I being there onely to beholde, and all the rest to do their businesse. And it was to mee as one that did beholde them without greefe, as a comedye, with many Pageants.
And that which did make mee maruell more, was to see that none were merrye, nor content: rather they seemed to haue great care and troubles.
Doctour. Master Burgus, I am glad you haue seene what doeth passe in that house, with so much attention: for all that which you haue seene, that Gold and siluer is cause thereof, which with so great good will you came to see, and this is it which is the cause of their troubles, and cares, and not onely it bringeth such as you sawe there amazed and astonied, but many others, for they are at this daye the in∣strument of all these things. Some they put downe, others they rayse vp, whereby they haue rule, and dominion in the worlde. These mortall men haue put so much felicitie in them, that they haue and do procure them, by the losse of their lyues, and shedding of their bloud, and after they haue them, they conserue them with much labour, and with grea∣ter care keepe them, and with much misery they spend them, and with great euill fortune they lose them. These are they that take away quietnesse and rest. They take awaye sleape, and many passe the day to keepe them, and to in∣crease their afflictions and cares. In the night also they rest with feare, and care: there are in them so many snares and hazardes, as wee see euery day.
Burgus. For all this I woulde see the Golde, the siluer, and the Emeraldes. Doctour. What? master Burgus, haue you neuer seene Golde, siluer, and Emeraldes? Bur∣gus. Yea, I haue seene them, but in little quantitie. Do∣ctour. What do you thinke is there in seeing of little, or much, but to see much earth, or little earth, and moste of all without the profite of man, of as many as nature hath crea∣ted? And if you haue so great desire to see precious metals: I will carrye you to a place where you shall see one metall much more of price, & of greater estimation, then the golde & siluer y• you were so desirous to see, & better, & of more profit


beginning, and original.
Trimegisto sayde, that the earth was the mother of the metals,Trimegist. and the heauen the Father. And Plinie saith these wordes.Plinie. The inner parte of the earth is a thing most preci∣ous, for into it, and through it doe goe, and pearce all the in∣fluences of heauen, ingendring therein thinges of greate pryce, as stones and metals: and this is done, as Calci∣donio Platonico doeth say, by reason of the greate heate that is in the inner parte of it. Calisthenes. Calcidon. Calisthenes vnderstood that the forme of metals were all one. Anaxagoras and Hermes. Anaxagoras and Hermes sayde, that the metalls had one forme in the inner parte, and an other in the outwarde parte, one secret, and an other ma∣nifest, after the manner as the lead hath within it gold, and the gold lead, and so of al the rest of the metals. See you my maisters howe many and howe variable opinions there are among wise men.
A common opinion.There is another opinion, which is that which is com∣mon, and which for the most certayne we doe followe, which Auicen wrote in his bookes of Metheurous,Auicen. and in the bookes hee made of Alcumisto, which were confirmed by Geber and Raymond Lullio, and Arnolde de Villa no∣ua,Geber. and all the rest that haue treated of these matters, euen vnto our tyme,Raymond. doe say, that the true matter of all metals is ingendred of brimstone,Arnold. and quicksiluer, the brimstone as the father, and the quicksiluer as the mother: and the heat of the brimstone, doeth incorporate, and congele with the quicksiluer, in such sorte that of these twoo thinges are made the metals which are in the bowelles of earth: and of the variation of these twoo beginninges, they come to dif∣fer the one from the other, and of the purenesse of these twoo beginnings, some doe come to be more excellent then other: and for this the golde is more profitable & more fayre then all other metalles, for bycause it is formed of his begin∣ning, cleane, and pure, which was the cause and originall of his perfection.
And there were Philosophers which said that al metals should haue bin gold, if it had not bin for the imperfection of the sulphur, and the quicksiluer. And al other metals besides the golde, they call imperfect mineralles, bycause they had not their purenesse, and concoction, that the gold had, with that maruellous friendshippe, which nature gaue vnto it. And of this it commeth, that the Alcumistes for to make golde, doe pretende to make cleane and purifie these twoo beginninges of the which all the metalles are made, and beeing put into their perfection the golde is made by of them, which is the metall most pure and cleane, of all o∣ther. Thus they de woorke with their distillations and limbecks: and howe harde it is to doe, let them report and speake that haue spent their goods, and also their patrimo∣nies therevppon, and yet in the end haue performed nothing at all.
Such as doe wryte against them, making impossible their woorkes and effectes, doe say, that in the bowels of the earth, the metals are not ingendred, nor made of brimstone, and quicksiluer, as they thinke and holde it for certayne, so they cannot make of them by arte, for if it were so, that of brimstone and quicksiluer they were ingendred, there would be some ase of them, in the mynes of golde, and siluer, and of the other metals: for it is seene that there is no signe or vayne of them in any of those mynes, howe deepe so euer they bee: but rather they are mynes of themselues, as wee see, that neyther in them are founde metalles, nor in the mynes of the metals are found sulphur, nor quickesiluer. And if it were so as they say that the metalles doe breede, and are newly ingendred of these twoo beginnings, it must bee of force, that one metall were alreadie made, and the other shoulde goe a making, for that all coulde not bee made alyke: but rather they take out all metalles ready made, and perfectioned, and in the meltinges


the Iron doeth fall downe into the lowest parte, and so is made a great cake, the which being deuided into peeces, they carry them to the forge, where are certeine great ham∣mers or sledges of Iron which the water dryueth, and they beate them, and there they are forged, and doe make these planches that you see there leaning. Trueth it is, that there are mynes where some Iron is more strong then other some, and likewise harder and stronger to labour. The Iron of Almayne is softer and gentler to worke: That of Flaun∣ders is harde and naught:Almayne. and therefore it is that manye things are soone broken that are made of it.Flandrs. In Italy you haue all sortes,Biskey. that of Biskey is the best, by reason it is good to worke, and it is more mightie and strong then all other, and for the goodnesse it hath, it is carryed to all partes.
Doctour. Do they bring Steele from Biskey as they do from Italy? Ortun̄o. They do bring a certeine kinde of Iron so harde and strong,Italie. that being wrought, it serueth for Steele, cheefely with a temperature that is giuen to it, that doeth make it very strong, although that it be wrought with great labour. There is great difference betweene this, and he Steele which they bring from Italy, and cheefely from Milan, for this is verye pleasant to worke and softe, and is farre better, and the craftes men that doe worke it, for this cause are desirous of it, and do vse it more then any other. Doctour. Some will say, that the Steele is a myne aone of it selfe distant frō the Ion. Ortun̄o. It is not so, fo all are mynes of Iron, but that some is more strong then other some, and the stronger and harder it is, for the strength and hadnesse thereof wee call it Steele, and there are coun∣tries which haue no other Iron but this which is harde and strong, as all the countrey of Mondragon, where all the mnes that are in it,Mnago. are of this Iron, strong, & harde, where∣by it is called Steele, all that is taken out of them, the dis∣position of the place doeth cause it, but that which they bring

from Italy is of another sorte. In that countrie are diuers mynes of yron, some of soft yron & easie to woorke, and other of hard & strong yron, & not easie to worke. And for to make the steele which they sende vs, they vse it in this sorte: they take of the soft yron, the quantitie they seeme good, and they make it in  aine small thinne planches, then they take marble ground small, and also the rust of the yron grounde smal, and mingling it al togither, they put it into a furnace to mel, prepared for this purpose,The mann how they make Steele in Italie. with much quantitie of kin∣dled coale, they cast al together into it, & geueth it a strong fire, and after they cast to it some of that hard Iron that is so hard, that it cannot bee wrought, and with a strong fire it is al melt, and they make it one peece, of the which they make these barres of steele, that thy bring to these partes, in so great quantitie the which they call stele, by reason it is hard to woorke, and strong, & in Latin it is called Chalibs, by reason of certain smal townes yt were so called, whereas was yron most strong: & harde. The steele serueth for many things, bicause it is of greater might,Steee. and stronger then the yron, and of more actiuitie, and they make strong & fortifie the tooles of yron with it, to endure the longer, and may doe their work more quickly, with more strength & readines, for that it is an yron more pure and cleane, and for this cause it is more dry, and white, and better to be wrought: & this is to conclude that which I haue vnderstoode of the originall of yron, and of steele. D. Maister Ortun̄o, hath sayde very well, and not in short speeche, but wisely, and discretly. Rea∣son would that many people should buy of these 2. metalles. for I haue vnderstood that they serue for many things. Or∣tūno, they which doe buy yron of mee, are many; but they which doe worke it, are many more, for I doe not know any office or science in all this citie whereto yron and steele are not needful, & necessary. D. M. B. & I would be glad yt you would tel vs in what occupations, principally yron is vsed & spent. Ortun̄o. They are so many, that in many dayes they

wil not bee declared, much lesse in the little tyme that wee haue here. D. Let vs be informed as long as time wil per∣mit. Ortun̄o. I wil speake of some thinges which I doe remember. One of the thinges in the which yron is most spent,In what thinges Iron & Steele are spent. as also a greate parte of the steele, is in armour, as wel defensiue, as offensiue, so that there is no  at this day in the world where they are not vsed, and exercised, and in many Countries they are made. Chiefly there is spent much yron in making of handgunnes, the vse whereof is so much in the warres, and warlyke exercises, that the people of greatest fame and actiuitie, are they which shoote in them: as a thing very principal, and most necessary: but surely it was an inuention of the Deuill, for to carrie ma∣ny to hell. And to speake of all kinde of weapons which are made of yron and steele, it wil aske a longer tyme, then we haue. The yron doeth profite for the tilling of the earth, and labouring of the fieldes, and for the benefites of all the woorkes in the Countrie, to sowe, and doe other woorkes, a thing so necessarie and profitable for all people, seeing that the woorkes of the fieldes doeth susteine all manner of estates, in the worlde. The yron serueth to make buil∣dinges, so many sortes, and diuers, that therewith they builde Cities, Townes, Uillages, Forts, Churches, and publike places, the which without yron and steele coulde not be made, as also in the sciences of any manner of handy∣crafts man, in the which there are so many necessary instru∣ments, for to vse, and exercise, that therby you may see howe necessary the yron and steele is, seeing that without thē they cannot be made, nor any thing can bee wrought. And to ex∣presse euery office, and science by it selfe, that by meanes of these twoo metalles are made and exercised, it will neuer bee made an ende of. One thing I wil speake with trueth, that there is nothing in the worlde, bee it by it selfe alone or with the helpe of another thing, that hath not need of yron and steele.
By meanes of these two metals, kinges & princes do get kingdomes, and cities, & by meanes of them they do make subiect their enimies, and do defende their goods and per∣sons. And as Liuio sayth, that with Iron the countrie is defended, and not with golde, and with it kings are made strong and mightie, and are esteemed and had in great reue∣rence. By Iron iustice is kept and maintayned, and by the meanes of it, euill doers are chastened, and the good conser∣ned. This mettall hath so much authoritie in the world, that it conserueth peace and quietnesse in common wealthes, in cities, in feeldes, and in the desertes, in such sort that by i in all places they haue all their assurance, and defence: and so much may be sayde of that which it can doe, and the great aucthority that it hath, and the meane that it is for al things, that my tongue is not able to speake them, nor my memory to expresse them. One thing I will say, that the aunciet Romaines had by it such estimation, that onely the noble people onely might weare a ring, & the same to be of Iron.
Of two needles which are made of steele I wil speake, as of the greatest thinges that may be thought:The sowing needle. the one is the Needle with the which they do sowe: howe necessary it is in the world, in cities, in townes, in common wealthes, in particular houses, in the feeld, in the Sea, & in al places, yea and to anye one particular man alone? And let so manye Artes speake thereof, that by meanes of the Needle are v∣sed, and don, and without it, they should not be vsed nor don: and being so many, it will be a thing incomprehensible to speake of them. Let euery man consider thereof, seeing that from the king vnto the sheepeheard, and from the bishop to the sexton, they cannot passe without the vse of it. And if we looke what seruice it doeth to women in their vses and xer∣cises, in their sowings and workes wrought vpon linen cloth and silke, things so politike, and delicate, that with the Needle they do worke: Imitating also, in things which they worke, like vnto the worke of nature, making basts, birds,

plants, leaues, and flowers, which do seeme with the bran∣ches, that they giue of silke in coulours, as if it were the self same that is growing in the feelde. I sawe the picture of the kings maiestie made with a needle so naturally, as if an excellent painter had paynted it. Of all this the needle is the instrument: a thing so small that it is hid among the fingers. The Indians were in great admiration thereof at the beginning, when they were first discouered, when they sawe Spanyards sowe with a Needle, for it seemed to them a thing of wonder, and they gaue for a Needle much golde, and they were askd wherefore they would haue them, see∣ing that they were naked: they aunswered, for the workes that the Spanyardes did with them, they would haue them in their power for a thing of admiration. And with them they tooke out the thornes that can into their feete, better then with any other thing.
The other Needle is that which serueth for Nauigati∣on to sayle withall in the Sea,The needle for nauigati∣on. and is one of the greatest things that hath beene discouered in the whole worlde, with∣in this little tyme: and by meanes thereof, there haue beene found newe worldes, great kingdomes, and prouinces, ne∣uer seene nor knowen vnto vs. And if the Needle had not bene found, they had neuer bin discouered. When they wan∣ted it, the nauigation was very little, and short: they fayled onely casting about by the bankes of the Sea coastes: and nowe by the meanes of it, they do ingulfe them selues, and do sayle in such sort, that the shippe called the Uictorie say∣led all the rounde worlde ouer, as the Sunne goeth euerye day, that it is sayde, shee sayled at one time twelue thou∣sande leagues. And that which is more to be maruelled at, that the shippe being in a gulffe of 800. or 1000. leagues, by meanes of the Needle they came to the porte which they pretēded to go vnto, without any other knowledge, more thē by the meanes of the Needle, or as we cal it the compasse,

the which is of steele: and they do rbbe ouer one parte of it with the lode stone, and forthwith by particular vertue which God hath giuen vnto it by that parte which they did rubbe ouer with the lode stone, it looketh towardes the Pole, which is neare to the North, and perpetually it doeth this being in the Sea, or on the land, eyther by the day, or by the night, with the Sunne or without it, alwayes it looketh towardes the North. With the which Needle, and with the carde of Nauigation, wherein is placed a distincion for the know∣ledge of the wyndes, and the description of the portes, they sayle so many milleons of leagues, as at this day wee see: and it is done so easily, that it is very wonderfull.Who frst found thi needle. The inuē∣tion of this maruelous Needle was founde by a Marriner, who was borne in the citie of Melsin Italy. Also the Iron & Steele do serue to make clockes, which is a thing of greate art, & very necessary to liue wt rule & order: for by them shall be knowē the works that are to be made, & the time that shal be spent in them, they serue for all states of people, whereby they may liue wisely & discrtely: & where is no clocke they liue like beasts. they are made at tis day with so much art & curiousnesse, that they make great admiration, they purifie and make cleane these two metals, that they make them as bright as any other: they gyld them, they siluer them, & there is giuen to them other coulor, & are made very fayre, as we see that there are made cheynes f Steele very delicate and fyne: and there are giuen to thm dyuse sapes ad cou∣lours, and are more esemed then those which are made of Golde or Siler. Thse metals ae disilled y t we of Alcumiste: and thre is mae of them Quinta ssncia,Dised. as of Golde and Siler. he Alcumises too saye, tat the metall moe ape fr thir cuses and efctes, is the Iron.
The Iron doeth suffer a riuous disease, hich doth consume and make an ende of it, wich is calld

rust,That rust come not. and because it may not come to it, there are many re∣medies, that the things which are made of Iron, and of Steele may be continually cleane: principally, that they bee put into no moyst place, and that they be occupyed and vsed, gilding them or siluering them: in so doing they be kepte cleane from the aforesayde rust, or annoynting them with common oyle, or with the marrowe of a Deare, or with the fatt of birdes, or with white lead and vineger, when they are taken with the rust, for to take it away, they must be fi∣led of,Remedies when the rust hath taken it. and put into vineger, and after into the fire, for with this it is taken away, vnlesse when they be so much eaten, that they are not to be remedyed with these benefites. I doe not speake of the finesse and delicatenesse that there is in sodering of it, and closing of it together, and of the vsing of it in the forge, because I am wery I let it passe, with many other things that I should say thereof, and do conclude, that these two things, Iron and Steele are the moste necessarye things for the seruice of mā, of as many as are in the world. Doctour. I am very glad with that which master Ortun̄o hath spoken: for all is to confirme the excellencies, & great∣nesse which I haue vnderstoode of these two mettales, wher∣by I do take them to be more necessarye then the golde and siluer, if we do consider well of it. The golde doth not serue vs principally for any other thing, but for money, which is to buy any thing therewith, and for the trade of things, the which any other metall might serue, or any other thing. For in the olde tyme as there was no money, they did barter and change one thing for another: and by reason in this barte∣ring and changing there could not be vsed any equalitie and iustification betweene parties; the wise and discreete men of common wealthes did agree together to make a thing, which might serue the lacke that might be of the one partye to the other, that with it the thinges might be made equall, and there might be a iustification of both partes. And for this reason and effect, there was inuented and made the first

mony, which was neither of golde nor siluer, but of yron, and of metall, as wee see in the mony of old tyme. And after that, the Romaynes made it of golde and siluer, for the fayr∣nesse thereof, but it is sufficient that the firste which was made, was of yron and of metall, seeing that the Indians haue it to this day, of fruites of trees, and especially of the Cacao, which is the fruite of a tree, lyke to an Almond, this hath serued, and doeth serue them for money, to buy,Money mad of fruite of Tree. and to sell, and to vse all playnesse, in their buzinesse. And in all Ginea the blacke people called Negros doe vse for money, for the same effect, certayne little snayles, which they finde in the Sea, as also other nations doe vse of thinges lyke to this. B. I haue helde my peace, harkening to your woorshippes, with greate attention, and surely you haue treated in thinges of greate importance, and of greate lear∣ning: and seeing you goe treating so effectually the matter of yron, and so delicately, and with so greate learning, I woulde that Maister Doctor might satisfie vs one thing, that I haue seene decyded of learned men, vppon the com∣plection of yron: for some doe say it is colde, and vppon this I haue had so many alterations, that they haue amased me, and seeing that Mayster Doctor can certifie vs concerning this matter, wee shall take greate pleasure, if that hee will declare it vnto vs. D. I thought to haue made an ende with this saying, and that I had accomplished my promise with Maister Burgus: but nowe hee will dryue mee to a question, the most harde and difficulte that is in al Phisicke, and surely it were neede of more tyme, then that wee haue to determine it.
B. Your woorship may not escape by that meanes, for to morrowe you may make an ende of that, which you cannot doe this day. Ortun̄o. I shal receiue great pleasure in it, al∣though it bee not my profession: for beeing a thing touching yron, I shal reioyce therein. D. For to content you, I wil


owne iudgement.
And that wee may more apparantly see the same, I will speake of such that holde the one opinion, and also of those that are of the other,That the Y∣ron is cold.
Galen. and the parties being heard, wee will iudge that which shall seeme best vnto vs. Let vs speak first of those that affirme Iron to be colde, and let Galen be the first, who doeth saye that all those metals of their nature are drye, and so they haue great vertue, and strength, to drye vp, and that that hath moste vertue & strength to doe this aong all of them, is the Iron, as also with this vertue to drye vp: it hath also vertue to make colde. He doeth com∣pare it to the stone, saying that the substance of the stone is constant, and stedfast, for the colde, and dryeth that it hath: Euen so is the Iron, in such sorte that it hath the nature of the stone, the which is colde and drye. And this which hee sayeth in the nynth of his Methodo,Idem. hee doeth confirme in that of the naturall faculties. The harde bodies do shewe to hae more earthly partes, and as the Iron is most harde, it hath more then all other thinges, whereby it commeth to be colde and drye.
Aueroys.Aueroyes doeth confirme the same in the fifth of his C∣liget and sayeth: things which are made harde of heate, with the dominion of earthly partes ought to be colde, and drye,Alberto Maegno. as the Iron is. Alberto Magno in the booke of the Metheuros sayeth: the Iron when it is kindled maketh it selfe very reade, for because in his principall qualitie it hath earthly partes, the same hee doth confirme in the book which he made of metals.
Conciliador in the difference 155. sayeth: in the Iron is not founde that vertue which is expressely actiue,Concilia∣dor.
Idem. but in the ende it is colde and drye. The same wordes are sayde in the difference 128. Gentill in the same question which he made de Actuatione medicinarum, sayeth, that the Iron is colde and drye.
Herculano in the chapter de Vomitu confirmeth the same. Iacobus de partibus vpon the second of the first,Herculano. Iacobus de partibus. Auicn. sayth that the yron is colde and dry. Wee do see that the waters which haue quenched hot yron or steele, are colde and dry. Auicen in the seconde of the first, sayeth that they doe restrayne the colour, and take away dryeth, and the heat, chiefly in time of very hot weather. And following after this, Menardo saith, that the water which hath cooled hot steele is colde,Menardo, seing that it taketh away the drieth, and doth mittigate the heate, in tyme of hot weather: and the drieth being taken a∣way, causeth that the putrefaction of the feuers do cease, and where they are with stooles, it maketh an excellent woorke. Albucasis in the booke which hee made of cering instru∣mentes sayeth,Albucasis, that those instrumentes wherewith the head shoulde be cered, ought to be of golde, bicause it is most tem∣perate: & that in no manner of wyse they be of yron, bycause the yron is colde of nature.
Brasauola in his booke of the Frenche disease sayeth, that the yron is colde and dry,Brasauola. which as he sayeth doth shewe wel in his colour and manner of substance, and in the darke∣nes and waight it hath, for these thinges doe alwaies ap∣peare, and come into earthly substance, as that which is light in to hot, and ayery substance, which is knowen to bee colde and dry for his effectes, seeing that it taketh away, and doeth represse the cholerike stooles, it withholdeth the fluxe, and hot runnings. That which this doeth, alwayes is colde and dry.
Sanauarola putteth the degrees of the coldnes, which the yron hath, and sayeth;Sanauarola. that it is colde in the seconde de∣gree, and dry in the third. B. Maister Doctor I pray you to passe forwarde: for vnto mee, that which is spoken, is suf∣ficient, for I haue no doubt therof, but that the yron is colde and dry, and alwayes I haue vnderstood it to be so, and now with the confirmation of such authors, I holde it for more certaine and firme. D. Maister Burgus hath very quickly

and determination of this controuersie.
A concorde of the dife∣rence.We haue sayde with the opinion of Auicen, and the rest of the authors, that al metals are made of sulfur and quick∣siluer, the sulfur as the father, and the quicksiluer as the mo∣ther, the one as the maker, and the other as the matter, and being so, the matter whereof the yron is made, is of these twoo things, and of these twoo beginninges, of the most hot sulfur, and of the most colde quicksiluer. The which nature hath placed in the inner partes of the earth, and made them metals, and where there was these twoo beginninges, most pure, it was made golde, and lykewyse of that which was grosse and vnpure, according to the degree and qualitie of euery one, there was ingendred and made the metal, confor∣mably to the purenesse, or grosnesse that it had: and where these metals are more vnpure, more grosse, and more darke, the yron did ingender. The which being of beginnings not pure nor cleane, but grosse and filthy, became to be a metall, more harde then al other metals, so that by meanes of it strength, there might bee some who might make it easie and subiect to bee wrought, as also it might bee a necessary in∣strument that thereof men might profite themselues. And whereas the yron is made and ingendred of these twoo be∣ginnings, which are, sulfur and quicksiluer, the one hot, and the other colde: so it hath the complection, and temperature, and doeth participate of both qualities: therfore it is so dry, and for this cause hard and strong. By meanes of the sulfur it heateth, it consumeth, it dryeth, it openeth, it comforteth, it prouoketh appetite, and maketh the meruellous woorkes that we will speake of heereafter, and al is done by meanes of the heate which it hath. And by meanes of the quicksil∣uer, being grosse and vnpure, and being formed with earth∣ly vertue, wherewith it is mingled, it cooleth, it retayneth, it thickeneth, it congeleth, it withdraweth, and detayneth a∣ny maner of fluxe, or runninges by binding, it taketh away stooles, it cooleth and tempereth the heate, and it doeth ma∣ny

other effects, which are all done by meanes of the coldnes that it hath, in such sorte yt as by the aforesaide is seene, the effects are contrarie which the yron doth: the cause wherof is by reason it is compounded of things that haue contrary qualities, which are rooted in it, and do worke conformably to the subiect where they doe worke. For where it is need to open, it openeth; and where it is neede to shut, it shutteth. Trueth it is, that besides these qualities, the yron hath an o∣ther most principal, which is, that it is most dry, more then all other metals, by meanes whereof it doeth many of these effectes and workes, which wee haue spoken of, and also it hath vertue to heate, to coole, and to dry vp. And of this it commeth, that some doe say it is hot, bycause they see that it maketh workes of heate, and others saie that it is colde, by∣cause they see that it doeth workes to make colde, the reason whereof is, that it is compounded of twoo contrarie begin∣ninges, the one hot, and the other colde, and thereby it see∣meth that they may very wel defend themselues, who sayde that yron is colde, and worketh cold effectes: And lykewyse they that sayde, it was hot, and doth hot effects. Whereby it doth appeare that which the one and the other haue spokē and treated therof, to be true. B. Maister Doctor hath ve∣ry wel ended the controuersie, and contrariety that is in this matter discretly and wisely, wherby wee are satisfied: but there remayneth a doubt, if the quicksiluer bee colde, as he sayeth that some doe say that it is, and to prooue it, they say that it sheweth by his strength, colour, and taste, and the ef∣fectes which it doeth, to make colde, seeing that such as doe vse of it, it maketh impotent, they suffer weakenesse, and trembling of sinewes, and are vtterly voyde of the vse of their members, and many dye all togither of a disease cal∣led Apoplexie, and all this doeth come of cold causes. They which say that the quicksiluer is hot, doe prooue it with his effectes, for anoynting the iointes, and other partes, of the body therwith, it maketh great workes, and effects of heat,

it inflameth their mouth, and throte, their gummes, & rooffe of their mouth, with great heat, and burning: it prouoketh sweat most vehement: we see that therof is made that most strong thing like to fire, that is called Sublimatum, which is most strong fire,Sublimatum. and burneth wheresoeuer it bee put, and all that it taketh, it consumeth, and fiereth. Of it is made that corsiue poyson, called pouder Precipitatos, in such sorte that the cause is doubtful, seeing it hath and doeth the workes so contrary to make colde, and to make hot. D. The same doubt we haue of it, as of the yron, and what is that which Maister Burgus wil now haue? B. Now that you brought vs out of the first doubte, we pray you that you wil bring vs out of the second. D. It semeth vnto me that Maister Burgus doth take the matter so earnestly that I must needs do it, bi∣cause I meane to content him, in al things, & it shal bee done very quickly: the euening commeth vpon vs. The quicksil∣uer is a metal cōpounded of diuers parts, the watery parts that it hath, are mingled with earthy things, which is tha that giueth it substance and strength. It hath also min∣gled with it fulfery parts, which seemeth to be very bright: for in chafing the quicksiluer betweene the hands, there re∣maineth in them the perfit smel of brimstone, & so the quick∣siluer i cmpounded of diuers things. The watery & earthy parts giueth it vertue to make colde: by meanes whereof is done the vertue which we haue spoken of, and by meanes of the sulfure which hath ayery parts, it heateth, penetrateth, openeth and maketh thin, and by them it prouoketh sweat, it causeth to expel by the mouth, and by stooles the humour that doeth abounde, by hearing and doing other effectes of heate. And therfore it is not to be maruelled that the quick∣siluer doth contrary effects, seing it hath diuers operations, which is the selfesame that we haue spoken of the yron, and so the doubt remaineth discouered which was propoūded by M. Burgus. D. I remaine sufficiently satisfied of that which

is saide, but not so satisfied that there doeth not remaine for me to aske of M. Doctor another thing, which is of more weight then all that is saide: which is, to knowe the vertues that the yron and steele haue in the vse of medicine: for their works, and effects, as I haue hard it reported, are many.
D. It wilbe a trouble for me to recken, and tel of so ma∣ny ancient authors as also of late written authors, which doe treate of the vertues of yron, and of the steele, by reason they are many, and doe treat of great things. And seing that it shalbe declared, let vs loose no tyme, wherby we may the rather make an ende. By that which is sayde, you haue vn∣derstood howe the yron, and steele, are one kinde of metall, sauing that the steele is more cleane yron, and more fine, & for this cause it is hard and strong. They of old tyme knewe not the steele, but onely treated of the yron, and to it they at∣tributed the medicinal vertues that wee will speake of, and vnder our talke of yron, we wil comprise the steele, seeing that it differeth not from it, in more then in being purer, & cleaner from superfluities: and for this cause the steele doth make cold, and dryeth more then the yron. For where it is needful to heate and to open, the yron hath more force, by∣cause it is not cleane of the sulpherie partes, for there is lost much thereof, when the steele is made in the forme as it is aboue sayde.
It is needful before we proceed forwarde,Of the prepa∣ration of Iron and Steele. whereby wee may the better treate of the vertue of yron, that wee vnder∣stand how it ought to be prepared. For if it be not prepared, neither can it be administred, nor yet wil it worke it effet, bycause t is a hard metal and strong. And seeing that wee haue M. Burgus here, who in his arte is one of the excel∣lentest men of al Spain, he may declare vnto vs how it may bee vsed, and prepared, bicause wee may goe forwarde in this matter. B. I haue receiued great pleasure with ht as I haue hearde treated of yron, and of steele, and thought that wee shoulde haue made an ende, and not treated

any longer of them: but seeing that it seemeth good to Mai∣er Doctor, that I shoulde speake of the preparing of these metlles, I will doe it, bycause I woulde say some thing as well for my parte. But if Maister Doctor woulde take paynes, hee might speake thereof, as wel as most men that are in the world, seeing he knoweth it, and that there is no∣thing in medicine hidden vnto him, but seeing that wee haue of him a good Censor, if any thing doe lacke, he may speake and supply it. The metalles if they bee not corrected and prepared euery one,To correct Metalles. as it is conuenient for them, cannot serue in medicine, nor worke the effects and vertues, which they haue in them, bycause they are grosse of substance, and strong. The Alcumistes haue knowen and do knowe much in correcting and preparing of them, seeing that wee see they vse the golde and the siluer, in broths, that they may be droke, and doe reduce them into pouders, as also they do the like with the lead and copper, and of other minerals and meals, which they doe correct and prepare, for to make them into pouders, that they may serue in medicyne.
They doe correct and prepare particularly the yron for this effect, but with greate difference, from all other me∣talles, as Bulcasis sheweth very learnedly, being a Phi∣sitin,Bulcasis. and a Moore, who in particular doth shew the man∣ner which ought to bee had, for to prepare the yron, and hee sayeth in this manner, the fyling of the yron which is most pure, must bee taken without other mixture, for if it bee mingled with Copper, or Lead, or Glasse, and if it bee gi∣uen so mingled to any person for to drinke, it wil kill them, you may take the quantity you list, of that which is fyled, being most pure, and let it be wshed, and after it is wel wa∣shed, let it be put into a cleane vessell. And let there bee put to it vineger, and put it vnder some thing, so that it bee well couered, let it so remayne thirty dayes, or at the  seen, and after that tyme take it foorth, and

you shall finde that which is filed of the coullour of Uerde∣grece, the which must be dryd: and after it is drye, it must be grounde, and being well ground you may vse thereof.
Some there bee that do washe it with fresh water, or with vineger, and do strayne it through a linnen cloth, and then put it vnder a vessell vntil it waxe rotten, and after they ash it, and keepe it. That which this Moore doeth say, semeth to be of Aueroyes, in the fifth of his gathering,Aueroies. where he set∣teth downe the preparation thereof in this forme: After the Iron is ground very small, let it be put many tymes in to vineger, or into Gotes milke, when it is cruddye. This he would should be the preparation. And Christopher de ho∣nestis,Christpher de honesti. following this in the commentaries which he made vpon Mesue sayeth, Let the fyling of the Steele be put into vinegre many dayes, for in any other wise the vse of it will not profite, although that some do put it into milke of Gotes, and some into oyle of sweete Almondes, and in this sort they take it.Clemen Clementin. The same preparation Clement Clementino doth giue. It seemeth a harde thing to beleeue, that the Iron or Steele is penetrate, and doth waxe soft with any of these things: onely the strong vinegre is that which doth pene∣trate and soften it, whereby it may be well grounde, for to vse of it. And for the more certeintie I will shewe howe I do prepare it.The prep∣ration. I do take of Steele the purest and whitest I can get, as also Iron, and do cause it to be fyled as small as may be, and when it is so fyled I cause it to be washed in wa∣ter many times, vntill the water do come foorth cleare, and then I put it into a cleane glassed vessell, and do cast to it as much strong white vinegre as may be sufficient to wet tho∣rough the sayde fyling, and the vssell being stopped & put ito a close place, I do let it stande xx. dayes, stirryng it well twice euery weeke, and putting to it some vineger if it be needefull: and after the twentie dayes, when it is well ske∣ned, I take it out of that, and put it into some other brode vessell, or vppon a table, that it may dry in the shadowe, and

after it is drie, I doe grynde it in a morter of metall, sifting it twise through a thicke siue of silke, and so beeing made into Pouder, I put it into a fine earthen paynted pot, & then with a Pestle I beate it small agayne, in suche sort that be∣ing taken betweene the fingers, it seemeth not too haue anie maner of substance, neither is it felt between thē. And if it be not done in this sort they are neuer well groune, for it is a thing that they take most care of, so that therby it may worke the effect the better. And beyng made into pouder in this sort, it ought to be kept in a glassed vessel. Some doe wet it with Gumme Dragagaunt and make it in rowles: and it liketh mee very well, because they be the better conserued, and the gumme Dragagant taketh away some parte of their drithe. And seeing that I haue made an ende of the preparing of the steele and Iron, that it doeth the effect when it is needful as though it were the steele it selfe, let Maister Doctor shewe vnto vs the woorkes and vertues that it doeth. D. I doe reioyce very much to heare the good order of the preparati∣on, that Maister Burgus hath geuen and set downe to be vsed with these metals. And seeyng that I am bound to declare the vertues and medicinal works which they haue, I wil speake of it the best that I know, as well that which I haue knowen and read, as that which experience hath taught me, and the vse of so many yeeres,The vertue of Iron and Steele. These two metalles doe serue in me∣dicine two manner of wayes; the one is, that of them may be made instrumentes to worke with, in causes of Surgery, without the which the Surgions cannot worke their works and effectes, nor the Barbours without them cannot do their occupations. To declare what instrumentes those are which serue for the one and for the other occupations, it wil be to te∣dious. The yron and steele doe serue in medicine with great effectes and maruellous workes, by curing and healing di∣uers diseases, and so Plinie in his booke of the naturall histo∣rie, treting of this matter of yron, after he wrote great things of it, as well in that which doeth profite in the seruice of man,

as other curious thinges, hee treateth of he vertes and woorkes which it doeth in medicine, shewing first the quali∣ties of it, saying: The yron hath vertue too drie vp, too re∣tayne, and too holde fast, it is good for suche as doe lacke theyr heare, that it may growe, beeyng prepared and min∣gled with some licour prepared and made for the same pur∣pose, it taketh away the roughnesse of the cheekes, mingled with Uineger: and beyng made in an oyntment with oyle of of Myrtiles, and waxe, it taketh away the blisters of all the vodie: the pouder of it mingled with Uineger, doeth heale the disease called Saint Anthonies fire, as also all maner of skabbes, it healeth the little sores between the nayle and the finger, the pouders therof being applyed thervnto with a lin∣nen cloath. It healeth also the fluxe of women of what sorte soeuer it be, beyng put therevnto with wooll or with otton wool, and also if they be applied therevnto after the mannr of a Tent in the lower partes, the pouder beeyng mingled with mirrhe and put to the sores or wounds newe hurte, doeth soder them and healeth them: and beeyng mingled with Ui∣neger and put vpon the pils, it dissolueth them. It is a great remedy for such as are gowtie, beeyng applyed with thinges made for the purpose vpō the griefe: It stenheth the blood of such as are wounded, which is for the most part made of I∣ron. It is geuen to be drunke to suche as are diseased of the lungs, for it consumeth the disease, and healeth him that is sicke, it stayeth any manner of fluxe & the Piles, & doeth re∣medie the soares of them. It healeth sort cheekes, casting the pouders vpon them it is a great remedy & worthy of estima∣tion. He that doeth cause it to be made & doth put it vpon a Playster called Higre, the which doeth profite to take away and make cleane the soares, and to take away the Fistu∣la and too eate away the Braunches and too cause that the sores bee filled with fleshe: all this is of Plinie in the Chapter of yron. Galen in the Booke of Triacle to Piso,Gale, declareth much the necessitie of yron, for the life of man∣kinde and for the seruice of man, and doeth account it for a

most excellent remedy, for to dry vp the moystures & teares of the eyes. In that of continuall dissolution, he sayeth, that peeces of burning Irō cast into milke, by taking away yt wa∣terishnes which the milke hath, is good for ouer much stoles, and especially for the bloody flix. An in the tenth of the sim∣ple medicines, he commaundeth that milke be giuen, where in peeces of Iron haue beene quenched, and sayth that such kinde of milke doth good vnto them which haue the bloodye flix. And in the like case it is better to vse of Iron, then of stones or pebble stones, by reason the Iron doeth leaue more drithe in the milke.Axander Traliano. Alexander Traliano, adding to this, treatet how milke shoulde be vsed in stooles. He commaū∣deth to seeth milke with a quarter part of water, vntill the one halfe be consumed, and in this sort it may be giuen to them which haue the ague with stooles, and it is better in the place of small pebble stones, wherewith they do com∣maund it to be sodde, that there be cast into it small peeces of burning Iron.Paulo. Paulo, well neare sayeth that which Ga∣len hath sayed, and that the powder of Iron mingled with vinegre profiteth mch to such as haue matter comming forth of their eares, although that it hath beene of a long continu∣ance. And also it is a great remedy for such as haue taken enom, that is called Aconito. And forthwith he treateth of the vertues of the water that haue cooled hot Iron, and sayth, that it doeth good to such as do suffer the payne of the belly, and such as haue any cholerike disease, and such as haue hot stomakes, and such as haue the stopping of the lunges.
Dioscorides.Dioscorides in the chapter where hee treateth of the rust of yron, saieth, that the water or the wyne, that hath quen∣ched a peece of burning yron, is good for them that haue the fluxe of the stomake, and the bloody fluxe, it desolueth the hardenesse of the lungs, and serueth in cholerike stooles, and in the loosenesse of the stomake.Actio. Accio, treating of certaine

rowles which are very excellent for the opilations of the inner partes, saieth, that it is a moste conuenient re∣medie for the Lunges, and inner partes of the Bodie, that the water that hath quenched whotte yron bee taken for a long time: but suche as haue a whotte disease, must vse of the water, and such as are colde if they be weake, of wine that hath quenched yron. Oribacio sayeth, that the water which hath quenched whot stile, is an excellent remedie for suche as are sicke of the lunges. Scribonio,Oribacio. an auncient Phisition sayth, that the water which hath quenched whot steele, is a greate remedy for such as are swollen,Scribonio, and for suche as haue sores and griefes of the bladder, chiefly if they vse it continu∣ally. Rasis in his Continent treating of yron saieth, the same as Galen doth. And Paule adding this,Rasis. the yron doth take away the fluxe beyng ouermuche of the menstruous, and con∣ceauing with child, it healeth the little soares that are be∣tweene the finger and the nayle, it taketh away the Pearle in the eye and the hardnesse of the eye lid, it healeth the piles outwardly, it remedieth rotten gummes, it taketh away the Goute from the feete, and from the handes, it maketh heare growe where it lacketh, although there haue none growne a long time. The water that hath quenched yron, is good for the fluxe of the bellie, although that it hath beene of a long continuance, and for stooles of blood which doth auoyd from the bodie, and the meate which is eaten and not consumed, and for stooles of blood: it also dissolueth the hardnesse of the lunges, it remedieth the runninges, and weakenesse of the stomake. And Macerico an auncient Phisition saith, if the pouder of yron be taken with sodden Wine called Cute, it comforteth the weakenesse of the stomake: he taketh for his Authour Mese a Phisition. And Rasis concludeth the same, saying, I say and certifie by great experience, that the yron, doeth profite in the disease of the Piles, and for the fluxe of Urine, and for ouermuche fluxe of the menstrues: this sayeth Rasis.
Scrapio reciteth all that Rasis saith, word for worde: and because I woulde not say it twice together,Scrapio. I let it alone. Auicen followeth Rasis in all that he hath sayd, adding this tha followeth to it:Auicen. The water wherin yron is quenched, ma∣keth strong the inner members by his owne propertie and manifest qualitie: it comforteth the stomake, for the water which doeth quench whot yron, strengtheneth the vertue, and consumeth the superfluities of the stomake, and the superflu∣ous moysture thereof, for those are the things that take a∣way appetite by the loosenesse of the mouth of the stomake, and they are those which extinguish and kill the natural heat: and the yron by reason of the coldnesse and drithe, helpeth the knitting which is made in the mouth of the stomake, wher the appetite is ingendred, it comforteth the Liuer and the rest of the interiour members, it strengtheneth naturall heat, the sinewes and powers of the bodie, and in such sorte it doth geue them strength, and they take such vertue thereby, that they caste from them the opilations: by reason of which causes the Lunges are consumed. It comforteth the vertue of generation, and this it doeth by consuming the moysture which is that which letteth & troubleth naturall heate which is necessary therefore, and if it be not done by his qualitie yet it is done by his accidents.Auicen. All this is spoken by Auicen, in the second of his first, as also he sayeth in the seconde Ca∣non where hee prayseth the yron greately for Ring wormes, and for swellings, and for the Goute, and mingled with Ui∣neger and put into the eares that of long time haue cast out matter, it healeth them, & for the sharpnes of the eye liddes, and to take away a webbe or the whitenesse of the eyes: and hee saieth moreouer that the Wyne which doeth quenche he Iron dooth profite for the Apostumations in the Lunges, and for the loosenesse of the stomake, and for the weakenesse thereof, it taketh away the superfluous Flute of the Mother; it drieth the piles it taketh away olde stooles and the blooddie Flixe, it doeth good to such as theyr

fundament commeth forth, and to such as theyr water doth auoyd from them, not feeling it, it taketh away the ouermuch Fluxe of the menstrues of women, and comforteth lustinesse in man or woman: all this is taken out of Auicen. Aliabas in the fifth of his Theorica sayeth,Aliabas. the water that cooleth the y∣ron, doeth detayne the bellie; it hardeneth and comforteth the Members, if you bathe your selfe with it, it doth good too the Paynes and Apostumations of the Lunges. Albucasis sayeth, that the vse of yron prepared,Albucari. taketh away the naughtie colour of the yellow face, that is of the colour of Saffron, and the vse thereof doeth make fat, and it shoulde be vsed as the sicke man doeth heale, who being well and whole, doeth waxe fat.
Well neere all that which I haue sayde, Alzananio and Isack, do say: which I doe leaue to relate,Alzarania▪ Isaac▪ because it is shewed already. B. Haue there been any late writers that haue sayd any thing touching this matter? I thinke there be none that considereth howe that the Auncient Writers haue writ∣ten muche therevppon. D. Yes, many and very learned. B. it woulde doe well that you woulde so muche pleasure vs, as to shewe who they are, and what they say, seeyng you haue begunne, and that they remayne not vnknowen. D. I will shewe you, for some of them with care, and particu∣larly, haue written of yron, and the vse thereof, and of the great vertues which it hath, and the like they say of the steele. A Phisition which was a Cardinall called Vitalis de Furno, treating of yron in a particular Chapter, saith: the filinges of yron haue vertue to drie vp and to make thin,What the late Writers say.
Vitalis de Furno. and therefore it openeth and healeth opilations of the lungs: it healeth the bloodie Fluxe, and anie manner of Fluxe of the Bellie taken in meate or drinke. The Iron that is quenched manie tymes in Wyne, is good for the stop∣pinges of the Lunges, and Inner partes, and the milke is good wherein the Steele hath beene quenched.
The yron obeyeth nothing but the Diamont, for it cannot doe more then yron: for it doeth consume it altogeather. There is no mettall, which doeth receiue so much hurt with the rust as the Iron dooth, and much more if it be cankered with the bloode of mankinde, and also after you haue made it cleane againe if you annoint it with the marrow of the deere called the hart, or with Oyle oliue, or with Uineger min∣gled with Alom. This the Cardinall saith.
Monten̄ana in his Counsell a hundreth sixtie one doeth put for a great secrete to kill or quenche fiftie times a peece of steele in strong Uineger and in that Uineger beyng made whot,Monten̄na. to wet a course Linnen cloth, and put it vpon the lungs and inner partes that are stopped, many dayes together, Michael Sauanarola in the booke he made of Bathes,Saanarola. doth say, the yron maketh colde and drieth vp, whereby it is byn∣ding, and therefore it doeth deteyne, and the water that kil∣leth or quencheth the yron, hath the sayde vertues, and all the reft that the yron hath, for the water receiueth into it his qua∣tities, and vertues as Galen saith, that the water receiueth the qualities & vertues of the thinges that we put into them,Galen. or sodde in them, and they doe the same woorkes that the said thinges themselues will doe; the water which killeth or quen∣cheth the yron or steele doeth deteyne, it causeth that the fluxe or runninges doe cease, nd being put to the ruptures, it doeth sodder them together, and shutteth them, it consumeth the olde matter of the eyes. The pouder made of yron doeth loose the swollen eye liddes, it taketh away the Rime from the eye, and doeth make fast the gummes that are losse. When there is a tent made and wet in this pouder prepared and put into the mouth of the Mother, it witholdeth anie maner of fluxe of it: and the loke it doeth by putting it into the fluxe of blod: that commeth from the Piles.
This Pouder is good agaynst the Uenome called Aczto. The Wine that quencheth yron or the steele,

doeth profit for the hardnesse of the lungs, and the weake sto∣make and laxatiue, & any maner of fluxe, chiefly if it be cho∣lerike, it doeth profit much. Such as haue the dropsie, and the fluxe of the vryne, and such as haue the menstrues, ouer∣much, and such as their water goeth from them without perceiuing thereof, and such as their fundament goeth out: hetherunto Sauanarola hath sayde. Nicholas Florentine, prayseth infinitely steele,Nicolas Florentine.
Bartholmew an English man. for opilations of the inner partes of the body, and lykewise the water of the steele. Bartholo∣mew Anglicus, greatly prayseth the vse of yron, & of steele, and saieth, that they are a more excellent medicine, then gold or siluer, for the seruice of a man: for that by them these twoo metalles, that are so greatly esteemed of all men, are kept in safetie, bycause they do defend and sucker them from such as continually doe persecute them. They defende iu∣stice, they conserue the commonwealthes, by them the euill doers are chastened, and the good are conserued and defen∣ded: in all offices of handycraftes they are necessarie: they labour and worke and fieldes with them, whereby wee are maintained, it hath medicinal vertues more then any other metal, for the filing which doeth proceede of it, hath vertue to dry vp, and to make thin. It vndoeth opilations of the lungs, it taketh away any maner of flux of stooles, although they bee of blood: and it profiteth for many other things. Al this the English learned man sayth. William of Saliceto, in the cure of opilations of the lunges,Saliceto. doeth commande to take the pouder of steele, for to loose opilations, and hee ta∣keth it for a great secrete. Platerio in the chapter of yron sayeth, the yron and the scales of it,Platerio. and his rust & the steele euery one of them hath the lyke vertue and propertie, taking twoo partes of a drm of the fyling of yron prepared, as it is conuenient, with hot wyne, it healeth the opilations of the liuer and the lungs, although they be very olde. Mathew Siluatico saith the same,Matthew Siluatico that the rust and the scales of the yron haue the same vertue that the steele hath, either of them


were the lade stone it selfe, and al this it doeth by reason of the greate lykenesse and friendshippe which it hath with the yron, together in one with the hidden propertie which it hath therfore. For this vertue, that it hath to drawe vnto it yron, either it is for the lykenes it hath, or for the propertie, and in this stone ought to bee the one and the other. The dia∣mond is his enemie, insomuch as it is sayde that in his pre∣sence,Galen. it draweth not the yron vnto it. Galen speaketh of greater power that the loade stone hath then the yron, seing that it draweth the yron to him, being of his owne kind, and therfore the ancient wryters do giue it the same vertue, that they giue to the yron, in curing the opilations of the lungs, and other inner partes.Galen. Galen sayth, that the vse therof hea∣leth the dropsie, and doeth euacuate the grosse humors. Se∣rapio saieth,Serapio. that being taken with water and hony, it loo∣seth the belly, chiefly grosse humors: many doe prayse it for the dropsie, with water and hony. I vnderstand that the lo stone ought to be prepared in such sorte that i may bet vsed, as wee haue saide of the preparing of the yron. B. Doth your woorship minister any time the rust of yron prepared' for I haue prepared it by commandement of a Phisition,The rust of the Iron and his vertues. being a stranger, and geue the pouder thereof vnto such as had opilations: and hee saide to mee, that they did better woorke then the pouders of steele D. We haue spoken of Plateario and of Mathew Siluatico,Plateario. howe they say that the rust of the yron,Matthew Siluatico. and the yron it selfe, and the filing of it, and the steele, haue al one maner of vertue, and therfore the rust of the yron prepared wil profit as much for the said purpose, as the rust doth, and I haue vnderstood for to consume and dry vp the moysture of the stomake and the slimy humours therof, it wil make greate effectes, for the rust of the yron and of the steele is the most hot partes, & the dryest parts of them.Galen. And so Galen doeth command it to be prepared with vineger, and that there bee made of it, pouder most small, the which dryeth extreemely, as hee saieth in the nienth of

simples, and in the fifth of his Methodo. Mesue,Mesue. in that of the vlcers of the eares, hee doeth put a confection for them wherein in is conteined the preparing of the rust, and before that hee putteth the same rust prepared in vineger, and made in small pouders, hee maketh of them a liniment for the eares that are troubled with vlcers.Rasis, Rasis in the nienth chapter of those thinges that doe comforte the sto∣make, after hee hath shewed of many compound medicines, saieth, if they doe not profit, let there bee giuen the skales of yron, with wyne, and hee saieth the same in the bookes of the Deuisions, in the chapter of the diseases of the moyst sto∣make: hee commandeth to giue a composition called Trifera Minor, and after that, the rust of yron. And in the same chapter before for the weakenes of the stomake, and the de∣bilitation of the natural heate, hee commandeth that there bee giuen Trifera, and after that the rust of yron: and at the end of the sayde chapter, for such as do eate earth, clay, and coales, hee commandeth them to bee purged with Acibar, and after that they eate Trifera made with the rust of I∣ron.
B. You haue spoken very wel, Maister Doctor, but I pray you shew vs how wee shoulde minister the pouders of these things. D. seeing that there with wee shal make an end, I wil shew it in short tyme, considering that the time doeth no longer giue place.
The cause and original of the disease being knowen, the sicke person ought to bee let blood, and purged,How these pouders are ministred. if it seeme good to the Phisition to bee so, and if the sicke person hath strength therefore: for there are some so leane, that it is not conuenient to vse of any euacuations in them. This beeing done, they shal take of the pouders that shal seeme most con∣uenient for them, of the three thinges which are spoken of the yron, the steele, or the rust of them, the quantity that shal seeme good to the Phisition, according to the age vertue, & strength. I do giue to them of a meane age a dramme,The quantit and

from thence I ryse or fal, as the age and strength or the con∣tinuance of the disease requyreth, and that it may not be lesse then twoo graynes of waight, nor more then a dram & halfe, I giue it many kinde of wayes, either mingled with suggar of Roses, or with conserua of violettes, or with a syrope of Coriander, or of the roote, or made in pilles, with a syrope made for the purpose, casting them into the mouth, or any maner of these wayes, that they bee taken: there must bee dronke after them a little sacke, that it be not cold, nor very strong. And if the person that taketh it, drinke no wine, then he may drinke water sodden with Cinamon, although the wine be the better,When they should be ta∣ken. it must be taken, fasting in the morning, and immediatly after it be taken, they must goe and exercise their bodies, twoo houres after, if they haue strength there∣fore, and if there bee not strength to doe it, one is sufficient, or the tyme yt they may possibly. The going must bee in such sort that the partie bee not ouerwearied: and if he be, let him sit downe, now and then, and by reason such as do take them haue stoppings or opilations, of any maner of exercise, al∣though it bee little, they are foorthwith wearie, and all the payne is for the first dayes, for afterward they shal goe very wel, and shal not be so much wearied.
This exercise is better to bee vsed out of the house, and by the streetes, and in the fieldes, it doeth importe very much by the going whereby these pouders do make their woorke,That which the going doth import. and doe good, that if they bee not well gone with all, they doe not the effect that is desired, and the exercise being made, let him take rest in his house, or in the place where hee commeth vnto, not vnclothing himselfe, but euen so apparelled, let him lye downe vpon his warme bed, and rest himselfe one houre, and let him eate foure houres at the least, after hee hath taken these pouders, or when hee perceyueth his stomake to bee cleere, of them, hee shall eate of a Hen, or of another Byrde without any sauce, with some dry fruite, or some conseruas, and not

to eate any greene thing.The order that he shall haue. Let the drinke be according to the disposition that hee hath, wine watered, if it bee conuenient for him to drinke it, or water sodden with Cinamom: let him refraine to that day from al thinges that may offend him, let him not drinke betweene meales, let him make a light sup∣per, with that as may dry vp moysture. I will not counsell that they take these pouders euery day, but euery third day, and chiefly these first dayes, and especially such which are leane and delicate, for in taking of them euery day, they wil bee much wearied, and one day that they rest betweene, they will be restored, and take strength for the next day. The day that it is not taken, if there doe appeare any feuer, it would doe well that there were taken a good vessel or great cup full of whey, made of goates milke hot, whot with suggar, & if it be not to be had, then take a smal table of rosade of a sweete smel: this day their liuer shall bee anoynted with some oynt∣ment made for the purpose, and their lungs with some thing that may vnstoppe them, and the stomake with some thing that may comfort. This shal bee done in the morning when he is on his bed, and after the oyntmentes are ended a little tyme, one houre or twoo after that they are anoynted, receiue a common medicine with thinges that haue vertue to euacuate, and this medicine shal not lacke, euery day when the pouders are not taken, for it doeth much im∣port, except: if there bee not many stooles: in such sorte it will bee better that it bee a washing medicine. The day which they take not the pouders, they may eate sodde meate with some sauce and greene thinges, and in the one day and the o∣ther drinke little.
These pouders are giuen many or fewe dayes accor∣ding to the necessitie of the partie that is sick,The dayes that they shal take them. and as it doth him good for to some 15. dayes are sufficient, and to others 20. and to others 30. some there be which do vomit them vp the first twoo or three dayes, and they cast vp much choler with them, whereby they are notably lightened, and doeth


i this sort they giue contentmēt & gladnes, I know no other medicinall benefite it can do to them. There are many Phisi∣tions which doo cōmande to carrie to the mony house, (which is the house where the money is made) a pot of water corpo∣rall,Note. and spirituall, and after he hath done this, he doeth mo∣derate it in this manner, saying, But such which haue not these eates, and drinketh without them when they are idle, and in pleasure and doe not exercise themselues: these people as they haue not heate to constrayne them to drinke colde, let them not doe it, neither is it conuenient for them to drinke, it, let them content themselues with colde water, as nature hath brought it foorth, without putting it too coole in any other thing, seeyng that they haue not neede of that which is most colde. And foorthwith he sayeth: Although they liue idlely, and doe no exercise, and also without cares if the time were warme, or very whot, they may drinke the wa∣ter colde, I doe meane that in Countries where it is not colde, they may put it too bee made colde, so that it bee not vry colde. The selfesame is confirmed by Galen himselfe in his thirde booke of meates and in the booke of the disease of the raynes, where hee saith, That the vse of colde water cooled with Snowe, vnto suche as are very whot, and such as are fatt, and suche as doe excercise themselues and labour muche, that suche may drinke very colde, chiefly if they be vsed therevnto, for such as are accustomed to drinke it▪ doe suffer and carrie yt better and more without hurte then suche as doe not vse it, for such ought to drinke it with more respect and consideration.
And albeit the water hath so greate benefite in it, as wee haue sayde, for the conseruation of health, it hath greater too heale Feuers and other diseases: and therevppon Hipo∣crates and Galen treated very particularly, inespecially Galen in the nienth of his Method, doeth reprehende there Erasistrat,Galen. and suche as doe followe him, which did forbid the vse of colde water, vnto such as were sicke of

the Feuers. And in his first booke of his Methodo, by the like reason doeth reprehende Tesalo. and in the seuenth booke he doeth shewe that hee himselfe hath healed many sicke per∣sons that had the griefe of the stomake, with most cold wa∣ter, and also made cold with Snow. And in the eight, nienth, tenth, and eleuenth of the same Methodo, he healeth the Fe∣uers and other diseases with water that is most colde. And it is an excellent remedy taken with the conditions that is con∣uenient. In the xl. he saith, that the sharpe Feuers are cured with letting blood and colde water, & especially the Feues of blood or that haue much mixture thereof. By that which is said, is seene how conuenient it is, that water be made cold with snowe, where there is not to be founde any so colde as is conuenient for our conseruation & contentment, & for to heale vs of many infirmities. Al the which wee haue treated of in briefe, whereby it may be a beginning of our pretence that shall follow, which is to shew the manner how to make tolde with snow, and because that which shall be made colde is the water, and vnder is also to be vnderstood the wine, & al the rest that shalbe made cold, we will speake of that which shall be treated, vnder the water.
The water is cold two maner of waies,Of colde ma∣ter. one naturally as it commeth forth of the springes, and this is as cold as it is con∣uenient, and hath no neede to coole it, if it hath as muche cold∣nesse as will satisfie our necessitie, without hauing neede too seke any thing that may make it colder.
There is an other water which is not so colde as is conuenient for vs, as wel for our conseruation & health, as for our satisfaction: and by reason it is not so colde as it ought to be, it is the cause of the hurts it doth, that before we haue spo∣ken of. Some waters are not so colde as they ought to bee by nature, by reason they are in whot countries: Now our intent is to treate of them how they ought to be made colde, because with their heate they hurte vs, and beyng made cold as much as neede requireth, they doe satisfy vs so that wee may drinke

them and vse them without any hurt that they can doe vs: & so we wil shew of al the meanes that we may haue to make cold, which are vsed at this day in all the worlde, and of them wee will choose the best, and most sure, setting downe the in∣conuenience that is in euery one.
There are foure maner of waies to make colde, which at this day are vsed in all the worlde:Foure waies to make cold. that is to say, with the aire, in the well, with salt Peter, and with snow: euery one of these is vsed at this day.
The first with the ayer in the colde of the night.The first is, to make colde with the ayre, although it bee a common thing, and vsed in all places, yet it hath beene and is most vsed of the Egyptians, by reason they haue neither wels, nor snowe, and that of the salt Peter they neuer knewe. Ga∣len maketh a large relation of the manner howe to make cold with the aire, and saith thus: they of Alexandria and Egypt for to make their water colde,alen. that they may drinke it in time of whot wether, doe warme it first, or doe seeth it, & then they put it into earthen vessels, and set it in the colde aire, or deaw in the night in windowes, or in the gutters of houses, and there they set it all the night, and before the Sunne riseth, they take it away, and washe the saide earthen vesselles in the outside with colde water, and then they roule them with the leaues of a Uine tree, and of lettice, and other fresh herbes and they put them in the grounde in the most colde part of the house, that there the cold may conserue it. This maner of ma∣king colde is vsed at this day in all the worlde, although not with so much curiositie, by reason they seeth not the water and they content themselues with putting it in the cold ayre, and in the dewe, as commonly it is doone.
Likewise they doe make colde the water with hanging it in the ayre,To make cold with hanging in the ayre. hauing certaine skinnes full of water in the aire and moouing them continually: the which is vsed in all the Countrey called Estremadura. Others doe make colde by putting the vesselles with water in the drawe, and before the Sunne come forth, they drappe them in cloth or in skinne,

and this the Sheepheardes and other people of the fielde doe.
This manner to make colde with the ayre hath many in∣conueniences,The hurte to to coole in the ayre. because the ayre is a subtil element subiect to any maner of alteration and corruption: and therefore it may be infected with some euill qualitie, easily: & being infected, it may infect the water that so is made colde, infusing ther∣into his malice. The which Auicen sheweth very wel in the second of the first saying, The ayre is an euill thing, by reason it is mingled with euill thinges, as Uapors, and smelles,Auicen. and euill smoakes, chiefly that which is put in betweene two walles, and especially that which passeth by places where are rotten Plantes, and naughty Trees, and where dead bodies are, for it altereth at euery one of these thinges, and of them receiueth an euill quality. And for this cause the auncient Phisitions did forbid that in time of the plague the water shoulde not be put into the ayre to bee made colde, be∣cause the corrupt ayres should not infect it. There is like∣wise an other inconuenience, that you cannot euery night set the water too bee made colde in the Ayre, for some nights and the moste parte of them, in the Summer time are so whot, that not onely the ayre doeth not make colde, but the water that is set in the ayre, is whotter then it was be∣fore, and if it bee made any whit colde, it dureth no longer then the Morning, when it is not needefull, and likewise in the time betweene Winter and Sommer, or in the Winter when the ayre woulde make colde, then the rayne, the tempestes and cloudes and other alterations will not suf∣fer the ayre to doe it. All these thinges experience doeth shewe at this day.
There is an other manner of way how to make cold with the ayre, which is the most wholesome, and more without hurt than any of all the other: wherein there is no occasion of any euill qualitie. And there are many people of estimation which doe vse this way to make colde that, which they should

drinke, the which they put into vessels of earth, or metall, and do alwayes make winde and ayre to the vessels with a wet lynnen cloth. And it must be so, that it be in the ayre continually without ceasing, as long as you are at meate. And in this sorte it will be made colde to purpose, and the hote ayre that is ioyned to the vessell is taken awaye, and in place of it commeth freshe and colde ayre, euen as it doeth when there is gathered winde to the face, and taking away the hote ayre that is ioyned to it, and with freshe ayre it maketh it colde and refresheth.
The other waye to make colde, is in a well, wherein they do put the vessels with water or wine,The seconde manner howe to make colde which is in wels and the hurt that commeth thereof. and there they remayne the moste parte of the daye. This kynde of making colde hath also many inconueniences, as well of the parte of the water, wherewith it is made colde, as of the parte of the place where it is put, cheefely in the welles of the cities and townes, that for the moste parte are fowle and full of filthinesse. The water of these welles is an earthly water, grosse and harde, because it is continually standing in one place, and shut within the bowels of the earth. And as it is a standing water, it must of force he putrified, for that the beames of the Sunne do not pearce it, nor yet the ayre doeth visite it, and therefore continual∣ly it is full of euill vapours, whereof they do easily rott, and they are foule waters full of durte and claye, and of other mischiefes of an euill qualitie.
And seeing the water or wine is so put a long tyme in∣to this foule standing water, what can come of it, but that it participateth of the euill qualitie that it hath? And so Galen sayeth,Galen. that the vessell which must be put into the well, ought to bee full: for if it lacke of his fulnesse, then the water of the well doeth penetrate it, or the vapour of it goeth into that which is emptie: and therefore it is con∣uenient

that the vessell bee filled full, and that it bee well stopt, for that which is sayde.In the well the vessell ought to be well stopped. And hee sayeth the con∣trarye, when wee shall make colde in the ayre: for then the vessell shall not bee put full, but some parte thereof re∣mayne emptie: for the colde ayre in the night season ente∣ring into that which is emptie, doeth make the water more colde.and in the ayre vnstop∣ped and not full.
To coole in metall, i euill.
Ordinarily they are vessels of Copper, or of the lease of Milan, which are put in welles for to make colde. The Copper, if it bee not well tinned within, doeth suffer too enter into that which is to be made colde an, euil qualitie: for with the moysture of the well, there is growen in it im∣mediately, a certeine greenesse that is seene vppon it, af∣ter it hath stoode a fewe dayes, which is a thing verye euill and hurtfull.
The leafe of Milan is made of Iron, the which with the moysture of the well is taken forthwith with rust, which is a blacke thing that is seene vppon it after a fewe dayes, which is an euill thing, which doeth infuse an euill qualitie into that which is drunke. And therefore I am of the opi∣nion that that which should be made colde in the water of a well, should bee in a glassed vessell or of siluer,The best ma∣ner how to make colde with the water of a well. although the best waye is to take out water of a well, and put it into a vessel, in the which shoulde bee put that which should bee made colde, mouing the water manye tymes: for by ta∣kyng the water out of the well, it looseth much of his euill vapours, by reason it is visited of the ayre, which as is sayde, doeth shewe the incouenience that there is by ma∣king colde in a well.
And besides that, wee see that the water hath euer a taste of earth, or of some euill taste, that is perceyued notably, after it is dronke, besides the euill smell which wee see tha it taketh.
The third manner and fashion to make cold, is with salt∣peter,The thirde way or man∣ner howe to ake cold with saltpe∣ter. the which is an inuention of marchantes, and in espe∣cially of such as goe in the Gallie, by reason that there the ayre doeth not make colde, and especially in the tyme of calmes, and there is neither welles nor snow. Necessity did teach thē this remedie, although it is not good, for the great inconueniences which it hath. It doth coole, as some say, the colde running vnto the inner partes of that which it doeth make colde, for the excessiue heate which the saltpeter hath, the which is done with the strong force of the saltpeter with the water, which the saltpeter beeing entered into the inner partes maketh to bee colde, comming from the heate of the saltpeter working vpon the strong force thereof. Other say, that the water doeth make it selfe grosse with the saltpeter, and being made more thicke and grosse, it hath more colde vertue, the which beeing holpen with the heate of the saltpe∣ter, the cold maketh a greater pearing, through the water, for al thinges that are cold, the more thicke partes that they haue,Galen. the more they coole. And so Galen saith in the bookes of the simple medicines, that nothing cā be very cold, which hath subtil thin partes, by the which howe more thicke the things are the more force they are of. Other there be which say that the saltpeter hath an actual vertue, very colde, and woorking with the water, is made more cold: as is seene by the bryne, that after the salt is very much stirred in the wa∣ter, it is most cold. The selfsame is seene in the water of Al∣lom,The hurt it doeth. and of saltpeter. This maner of making cold doth cause many diseases, it doeth heate the liuer, it causeth continuall heate, and a hot burning, it inflameth the lungs, it taketh a∣way the lust of meate and other euilles, which woulde be te∣dious to treate of.
There are other wayes to make cold, which are in riuers, and most colde fountaines,Other waies to make cold. whereof Galen speaketh, of the which it is not needefull to treate of, for whereas are most cold waters, it is not needful to put them to bee made colde,

but to vse of them as they are.
Wee haue shewed howe the water that shoulde be made rayne with the coldnesse of the middle region of the ayre,Snowe and rayne water doeth differ in little. did freese, and was made snowe, and therfore is little diffe∣rence from the rayne water, and that which commeth foorth of the snowe, for both of them are ingendred of one manner of matter, sauing that the water which proceedeth of the snowe, is somewhat more grosse, for the compultion it hath, of the coldnes of the ayre, in such sort that it is not so euil, as they say it is. And we see the Scithians doe drinke it continu∣ally, as Hypocrates sayth. We see that of the snowe which doeth melt, are made great and mighty riuers, of the which the people that inhabit neere to them, drinke continually without doing to them any maner of hurt, or benumming of them. And of these are many in Spaine, Almanie, and many more in the west Indias, where most of the riuers are of snowe, which doeth melte from the hilles and mountaynes, and al people in general drinke of them, for there is no other water in al the Countrie.
The Romaynes for delight and curiositie, dranke the water that came foorth of the snowe, the which they stray∣ned through stones to make it more thin. Atheneo,Atheneo. doeth rehears certaine verses of Sopita, an ancient Poet, in the which he saith, that in his tyme they dranke snowe, and the water wc came foorth of the snowe. Pericrates, Historiogra∣pher being a Greeke most famous, saith yt in his tyme,Pericrates. they dranke snow, not only in the Cities but in the campes. Eu∣ticles a man very learned,Euticles. in one of his epistels doeth repre∣hende those that were in his tyme, that they did not content themselues to drinke that which was made cold with snow, but that they dranke the snow it selfe. Sciates, maketh men∣tion of the snowe, vsed at tymes conuenient,Sciates. with much care and delite. Xenophon in the thinges of memory which hee wrote,Xenophon. maketh mention of many people that did not onely drinke snowe, but the water therof continually.
The Romanes did vse it much, and so Plinie in the 31. booke of his history saith,Plinie. that Nero was the first that sodde wters, to coole it in Snowe. The which Galen in the se∣uenth of his Methodo doth recite of him, saying, Nero was the first that sodde the waters, and afterwarde cooled them with Snowe: for the water being made colde in this sorte, receiueth more quickly the colde, and more effectually. And it is a water more healthfull, for by the seething of it, is a∣uoyded the earthly partes from the water, and it remayneth more subtile, and more thin, and so it descendeth more spee∣dily from the stomacke.
Plinie in his naturall historie, in the nineteenth booke, complayneth of the care that those of his time had,Plinie. in kee∣ping the Snowe of the Winter, for the hote weather in Summer, saying, that they did ouerthrow the mountaines by keeping the snowe from warme weather, making it to peruert the order of nature, that in the monthes which are most whot, in the which there is nothing but heate & drithe, that the curiositie of the people is so much that at that time, there is such aboundance of snowe, as in the monthes in the which there doeth naturally fal vpon the grounde great quā∣tity thereof. This Plinie saieth, for in his tyme and after, it was a common thing to keepe the snow of the winter, for the summer. Heliogabalo Emperour had made a great caue in a litle mountayne,Reliogabalo. from a garden of his owne, where hee gathered in the winter very greate quantitie of snowe, brin∣ging it from the mountaynes that were neerest to Rome, whereof they vsed in tyme of heate, in their bankettes.
Chares Militineus, in the history that hee wryteth of King Alexander sayeth,Chares Mili∣tineus. that in the Citie of Petra, a most populous Citie in Asia, there was, ordinarily thirty caues, that in the winter tyme were filled with Snowe, for the whot weather, for the seruice of Alexander, & such as were retayners to him.
At this day it is done, not onely in Asia,Snowe is kept by many peo∣ple. but also in many partes of Africa, and in all Europe, chiefly in all the Countries which are vnder the dominions of the greate Turke, and especially in Constantinople, where the snowe is so much vsed, that all the yeere it is solde in publike market, and they vse of it al the yeere. The selfe same is done at this day in all the states of Almanie and of Flaunders, Hungary, and Bohemia, and other places, where they keepe the Snowe, in houses, and bawes in the Winter, for to make their drinke colde therewith in the summer.
They carry from Flaunders to Paris, the water that is frosen, which is more then three score leages di∣stance. Lykewyse in our country of Castile it is kept in houses, and they gather it in the winter: and when winter is past, they conserue it for the whote weather. And there are many Lordes and great men, which haue in the moun∣taynes particular houses, where they commande that it bee put in the winter, for this effect: and many of them doe vse it, and doe make colde therewith as well in the winter, as in the summer, as there are chiefly in Castile in the tyme of winter, waters that are most colde.
They which drinke that which is made colde with snowe, saye that it doeth not offende them,The colde which dooth proceede of Snowe, dooth not offend as oher colde dooth. as that which is made cold with the weather, for it is seene that a cuppe of colde water beeing dronke, that commeth foorth of a well, or of a colde fountayne, hurteth such as doe drinke it, and drin∣king that which is made colde with snow, they feele no such hurte.
I doe much maruell at one thing,How carles eople are that they haue not had Snowe in S∣uill▪ that this Citie of Siuill beeing one of the most famous of the Worlde, wherein alwayes haue liued many greate personages of very high estate, and many people of greate estimation as well of the naturall people of the Country, as strangers,

that ther hath byn none which haue brought thither snowe in the time of whot weather for to make colde that which they drinke, seeyng that the heate of this countrie from the begin∣ning of Sommer, vntil it be well neere towardes Winter, is so great, that it is not to be suffered, and all the waters are most whot, that they cannot scarcely be drunke. And besides that the moste parte of the people of this Citie are people of much businesse and cares. And seeyng that in a Countrie so whot where businesse and cares doe abounde where the wa∣ter is whot,An exhorta∣tion. and nothing wherewithall to coole it; with iust Title it may be admitted and vsed that it may be cooled with snowe, seeyng that the coldnesse is so sure, as we haue sayd, and it doth make the benefites which Galen and Auicen haue shewed vnto vs.
Note.Let euery one looke vppon his disposition that beeing whole, although hee bee not altogether in health, in time of whot wether he may drinke colde more or lesse as it is con∣uenient for him. For the drinking colde doeth temper the Li∣uer, it mitigateth the heate, it geueth appetite to meate, it comforteth the stomake,The good that drinking colde doeth. it geueth strength too all the foure vertues, that may doe theyr woorkes the better, the meate is eaten with appetite, and with gladnesse it taketh away the drithe in the day time, it causeth that the stone doth not in∣gender in the raynes, by keeping temperate the heate of them, it taketh away lothsomnesse, and likewise it doeth ma∣ny other good effectes, that the vse and thereof experience ode shewe vs.
And because it is the best manner too make colde with Snowe as we haue sayde,Auicen. let vs awe thereof with graue Authours: and let Auicen bee the first, in the thirde of the first, where he saith, The water that is made cold with snow, vnto such as are of a temperate complection, whereas colde∣nesse hath beene made with Snowe, yea although the snow be fowle and not cleane then it serueth to make colde the wa∣ter without: and that as is good and cleane, is to be put in,

to that which shalbe dronke, as Auicen himselfe sheweth in the second parte of the first booke, the 16. chapter, where hee sayth, the snowe and the frosen water, when it is cleane, and that the Snowe hath not fallen vppon euill plantes, or that it be not mingled with earth, or other superuties, and the frost not made of euill infected waters, but that the water which come foorth of the snow, bee cleere and cleane, and the water that commeth foorth of the frost, be also good and cleane, if any parte of the water of the snowe or of the frost bee put into the water that must bee dronke, or with them the water be made cold without dout it is good: for the waters which come foorth of them, bee not straunge from o∣ther waters.
This doth Auicen say, giuing to vnderstande that these waters which doe proceed of snow and of frost being cleane, doe not differ from the goodnesse of other waters: onely the difference is, that the water of the snowe and of the frost are grosser then other waters, by reason that the vapour is con∣geled in the middle region of the ayre, as wee haue decla∣red. Rasis amongest the Arabiens the best learned,Ras▪ in the thirde booke of those which hee wrote to the King Alma∣sor sayeth thus, The water of snowe cooleth the Liuer that is whot, beeing taken after meate, it strengtheneth the sto∣make, it giueth appetite and lust to meate, but that which is dronke may not be much. And immediatly after he sayth, the water which hath not so much coldnesse, that it giueth not contentment to him that drinketh it, filleth the belly, & taketh not away the drithe, it destroyeth the appetite, it ta∣keth away the lust of the meate, it consumeth the body, and concludeth, in saying, that it is not a thing conueni∣ent to bee dronke.
I do vnderstand it for the preseruation of the health of man, of the which Rasis,Ide. treating in that booke himselfe in the 4. of Almasor, speaking of the preseruation from the


and there commeth to him hurt and poyson, which destroy∣eth and corrupteth him: beleeue you mee, and suffer not such which are sicke, to spende their mony to cast golde in medi∣cines which they take, nor let them quenche golde that is whot in wyne, nor in water, for of the one and of the other, there remayneth no medicinal vertue, that wil remedy their euilles. Only the golde being made mony, hath greate ver∣tues and properties, for that is it that maketh the hart glad, and taketh away sadnesse and melancholy, and repaireth al the vertues and strength of man, it giueth strength whereas is none, it is an vniuersal remedy of al thinges, vnles it bee of death: for against that, nothing can preuayle. And seeing that night is come, and tyme giueth not vnto vs any longer liberty, and although that it gaue vs; yet age doeth his office, for I feele my selfe weary. God bee with you Maister Ortun̄o, and likewyse to you Maister Burgus, and I goe to take rest.
The end of the Dialogue of Yron.
