



MOst excellent Princesse, sith it hath pleased the God of hea∣uen, so to blesse the realme of Eng∣land by the continuance of your Maiesties raigne, as that like hap∣pines no former common wealth hath been knowne, no forraine king∣dome at this day can be sayed, to en∣ioy; gracelesse were the people of the Land, if with all gratefulnes of minde they should not, first to God as the supreame cause, then to your highnes as the Soue∣raigne meanes of that their exceeding good, most dutifully ac∣knowledge the same. Where-vnto though euery one will readily
subscribe, as hating the imputation of an vnthankfull person, yet he should be thought more curious then wise, who so would examine the performance of mens duties in that behalfe. Wher∣fore (not accusing any,
Plutar. de curiositate. nor excusing all) that I might not seeme to haue the eyes of Lamia, which were layed vp at home, and neuer vsed but to behold others abroade, J haue thought fit to looke vpon my selfe, and to seeke how to quit my selfe of that foule cryme of ingratitude, which in this case towards the Almighty, and your Maiestie, I had rather not liue, then liue to be iustlie suspected of. Of which there should neede no other euidence, then mine owne conscience to condemne me, if considering the world as it is, and perceauing how many, many wayes are em∣ployed, I should sitte still and be idle. But what should I doe? Surely rather then nothing,
Guido. Bitu. J haue chosen to doe as did Dioge∣nes at Corinth; he seeing vpon occasion of danger, euery man laying his hand to some one thing or other, about strengthening the walls for defence of the Citty, bestowed his labour in row∣ling his tub vp and downe. So I, beholding in this busie age of the world, some imployed in the warres abroade, an honourable and now most needfull seruice, others in gouernment at home no lesse necessary, then of necessitie to be maintayned, haue busied my selfe in turning my bookes too and fro: which being in him a stranger, in a strange common wealth commended, I hope in me in mine owne Countrey shall not be reprooued, and the ra∣ther, for that proceeding further, I haue deliuered faithfullie, what of those faithfull friends which neuer flatter I haue lear∣ned, tending to the good of the common good, as I conceaue. For, it serueth to occasion the dutifull remembrance of God, and performance of duty to your highnes, whose hands bestow the be∣nefits, which from his bounty doo proceede. Of default where∣in though there were no speciall cause, specially to suspect any, yet what is done to that ende, ought not to seeme vaine, partly, for that much is aboue all possibility of satisfaction due, but princi∣pally,
because euen the best to good things are often slow. For (to say truly) while men are, they are but men, who being clothed with sinfull flesh, cannot be so cleansed from sinne, which liueth and dyeth with the flesh, but that some corruption thereof of necessitie will remaine, which will in all fortunes minister iust cause of blame. Whereby it commeth to passe that being afflic∣ted in any sort, we murmure, complaine, and lament, and in the greatest happines we can haue, sildome are we thankfull, or well content so far forth as we ought to be. The consideration wher∣of hath moued many, whether feeling in them selues, or finding in others of faults so great, too great a mischiefe, highly to com∣mend valiancie as the chiefe vertue, aboue all to condemne in∣gratitude as the worst vice, and constancie in what estate of life soeuer, as most auailing, and best beseeming to aduise. And yet such, though obtayning, as deseruing the names of wise men, haue shewed them selues no more wise in their counsailes, then men in their actions, being vnable to performe what they could perswade, and fayling to runne the course them selues, wherevn∣to they directed, and prouoked others. He which sayed,
M. Cicero. Tus. 2. A viro dicitur virtus, vertue hath her name from man, that if we will be good men, we must be valiant men,
Dion. Cass. lib. 38. and that true valure doth consist in contempt of death & griefe, euen he was out of Rome, no sooner banished, but in minde he was deiected, and shewed him selfe farre other, then others he taught to be.
The Athe∣nians. Vale. max. 2. They which decreed an vnthankfull liberty for euer to liue a bond-man, did notwithstanding most vnthankfully reward the best men liuing amongst them: Wise Socrates with deadly poyson,
Aelia. 1. Aemil. pro. in Miltia. Plut. in Pho. Idem in A∣risti. valiant Mil∣tiades with chaines in prison, good Phocion after iudgement of death with threats of torment, iust Aristides after many good deserts, with most iniurious banishment. J say not this by way of comparison, to draw into question the good Subiects of England (whom with that weake minded Romaine, or those light vnsetled Graecians, I haue no lyking to compare) but to
shew, as well what difference there is betweene the words, and the works of men, as also that the most forward, beeing farre to short in discharge of that which is required, especiallie towards God, not any ought to be greeued, how oft soeuer they be put in minde of that duty to his Maiestie, whereof neuer they can be mindfull inough. Jt is hee who doth behold what we doo, to whom we owe infinitely more then we can doo; his power is ouer vs, his goodnes towards vs, none lyuing can withstand the one, none can liue and lacke the other: our weaknes is strengthened, our dulnes quickned, by him; enabled we are by his only meanes to serue your Maiestie, and our Countrey. Wherefore, what of him dutifully I shall say (albeit J shall say nothing, which to the most is not already knowne) my hope is will be accepta∣ble to the good, to some profitable, to none offensiue. If in a Cit∣tie the greatest of calling mislike not, that in the dead houre of the night, the chiefe time of rest, a poore man passing by their doore should cry, looke to your fire, J see no cause why the best of vnderstanding, enioying the sweet rest of worldly peace, should be offended, by the simplest to be put in minde of the Lord God, in what houre soeuer, who being forgotten, as a consuming fire, Nations great and mighty,
Deuter. 9. Citties great and walled vp to hea∣uen, will destroy, bring downe, and cast out.
Heereby enboldened most excellent Princesse, J haue aduen∣tured to write, challenging to my selfe nothing, in knowledge a∣boue the rudest, in desert before the vnworthiest of your king∣dome, and what J haue written, I presume (with humble desire and hope of pardon) to dedicate vnto your Highnes, knowing that as you are,
 Menan. not onely for your high place of rule ouer many, the lyuing image of God, but for defence of his true religion, a∣boue all other Princes, his chiefe Lieuetenant vpon earth. So you will be pleased fauourably to heare, and graciously to protect, what shalbe published to his glory, how simple soeuer the Author be, as he no doubt doth lend his mercifull eare, to the meanest
within your realme praying faithfully for the preseruation of your Maiesty, which great God, of goodnes and power infinite, that hath raysed your Highnes to the dignity of a Prince, and hath made you in all princely vertues, all other to excell, settle & seale vp in the harts of your people, such loue, duty, and obedi∣ence towards you, as that the best Subiects through the world, of the best Soueraigne vnder heauen, they worthily may be say∣ed to be, and suffer me not longer to liue, then so I shall liue,

