



Right Honourable:
SVch is the force of Vertue, and of the very shadow of Godlinesse, that (as it were) naturally it draweth mens loue and affection, and after a speciall manner vniteth mindes to∣gether, farre distant, and different in calling and condition. The very Heathen hauing experience hereof, both by their writing confessed, and also practised the same one towards another; who for the loue of morall vertues embraced those whom they neuer saw. How much more then should Gods Children, rightly informed by Gods Word, and reformed by his Spirit, most highly value the incomparable worth of sincere Religion, and the holy pro∣fession thereof, by the meanes and ministery whereof, men

are (as it were) newly created, and restored to the Image of the eternall God, which maketh them most amiable in the sight of God, and honourable in the account of his children,1 Iohn 3.14. who doe know that they are translated from death to life, by louing the brethren? For as God, in himselfe the very fountaine of all goodnesse,1 Iohn 4.16. is loue, and properly to be loued of all, being the very obiect and subiect of all Christian affection, as hauing in himselfe all the causes both motiue and attractiue to draw them vnto him: So they whosoeuer of Gods elect, which most resemble him in grace and goodnesse, doe next deserue our loue; not that we should diuide the same from God (the very Ocean of goodnesse) but rather to make it knowne that we truly loue the Lord our God in them, who cannot possibly loue God whom wee haue not seene,1 Iohn 4.20. except wee loue his Chil∣dren which represent his person, and in whom hee will proue our loue towards himselfe. Hence arise so many good occasions to make Gods children acquainted, which (otherwise) would be strangers; & many poore Christians and despised Ministers in the world, to write and speake, seeke and sue, for the countenance and acquaintance of eminent personages, sincerely professing and patronizing Gods truth;Luke 1.3. and with Luke, to looke for some noble Theo∣philus;2 Iohn 1. and with S. Iohn, some honourable and Elect Lady, vnto whom they may consecrate their labours.
The consideration of which premises (Honourable Sir) may somewhat qualifie my present boldnesse, in this my seeming rash attempt. Neyther is it strange (indeede) that poore men in the valley, looke to the Beacon on the hill, and that such spreading fruitfull trees should be in view,Dan. 4.17.18.19 and knowne for shelter and reliefe against a storme. Hee which seeketh fonsuch friends, seeketh to God his assignes: for are they not his Deputies, to doe good to his Church and Children?Iob 29.13.15.16 Are they not eyes to the blinde, and feet to the lame? Are they not fathers to the poore, and in so be∣ing, procure their blessing? I minde not here to blaze out your iustly deserued praises, but rather in dutie be earnest

in my prayers to God, for the increase and continuance of Gods graces bestowed vpon your Honour, for the good of our Church and Common-wealth: And (I hope) you haue learned, that continuance in well-doing, getteth the greatest praise and prize with God, and all good men: And my particular prayer shall be, that still you may exceede your selfe, in the performance of all Christian duties, to God, our Prince, and Countrey; euer tending to that per∣fection which leadeth to eternall life. Moreouer, let your Honour be throughly perswaded, that God will haue all his children humbled here, before they can aspire to the top of the highest glory (which they hope for) hereafter; and that the way hereunto is rightly to know our selues by our fraile condition and mortall estate. May it please you therefore (with other sorts and rancks of Gods peo∣ple) to take some view thereof in this Discourse: Feare not (Honourable Sir) to read some lines thereof at your lea∣sure, the receipt whereof (I doubt not) will proue more wholsome then toothsome to the flesh, which still would make vs play the Gyants against our God; yet mortified it must be in some measure: For as raw flesh is not fit for the stomacke; no more are vnmortified men for God. Euen Nichodemus himselfe must be borne againe,Iohn 3.3. if he will come to an assured hope of that heauenly inheritance.
I prescribe here no Lawes nor Rules to be obserued, with the Franciscans, Dominicks, and other Fryers, to this or that sect or sort of men;Heb. 9.27. I say (with the Apostle) There is one Law for all men▪ enacted in heauen, without repeale, that they must dye: And for as much as God hath sanctified this Physicke for the saluation of our soules, let the whole∣somnesse thereof qualifie the bitternesse: And since the death of the faithfull hath lost her sting in Christ his death, let vs neuer feare the humbing of this Bee, nor be∣ing able to hurt vs. But for these Cordials of Comfort, with many moe soueraigne Antidotes against Deaths poy∣son and dangerous Symptomes, I leaue your Honour to a larger discourse thereof in the proper place.
Now for offering to your Honour such mournfull mat∣ter of humiliation, and as it may seeme distastfull to Court∣ly senses; let these few words suffice. That as there is a com∣munitie of flesh and bloud, and a generall infection of sin in all Adams heires, that so likewise Death (which is the wages thereof) is, and must needes be common vnto all, without exception of any: And so long as the godly and wicked liue together in this world, euen so long there is be∣tweene them a certaine equalitie in the flesh, though al∣wayes an euident distinction in the spirit: So that vntill this mortall body hath put on immortalitie,1 Cor. 15.53. and the spirit of Christ,Rom. 8.9. which dwelleth in Gods children, hath brought them to God in heauen, all discommodities and casualties, with Death it selfe, must needs be incident to all men alike. Besides that, our earthly prosperitie so dulleth our spirituall senses, and our great imployments in the world, so carry away our affections, and so hinder the remembrance of our latter end, that the greatest men (many times) both for place and gifts, doe mightily forget themselues herein: and knowing it to be so, haue had their speciall Memoran∣dums. I omit to speake of the preparing of their Sepul∣chres in their life time, and the purposed placing of them in their common walkes, with their set salutations of some seruant to that purpose.
Thus most humbly supplicating your Honour to be well pleased with this my honest purpose, and christian in∣deuour, in the fauourable acceptance thereof; I commend your Honour to the gracious protection and direction of the eternall and euer liuing God, who euer guide you with his spirit, in all your weighty imployments, to his glory, and the good of his Church, &c.
From my poore Study at Shearsbie, in Leicestershire. February 21. 1616.

