



WE haue (right Hono∣rable) an old saying amongst vs: He gi∣ueth twise that giueth quickly. And the spirit (which is both antiquitie and ve∣ritie it selfe) saith: A word spoken in his place is like apples of gold with pictures of siluer. How fitly this wil agree with other mens actions
and my present practise, I had ra∣ther others, and your L. especially should iudge and feele than my selfe speake. This I am sure of, that as hertofore many times you haue by sundrie persons ben presented with great varietie of vvordes and workes: so now particularly vpon your going out against the Irish rebels, you haue, and shal haue the like performed, because as Salomon saith, Many doe seeke the face of the ruler. I say againe, how fitly these haue bene, or are accomplished, as also with vvhat affections men do them, that is known to God alone who is the onely searcher of the heart and reins. And yet I doubt not, but that your L. is indued with grace from aboue, in some measure to practise that in your selfe, and to∣wards other, which the holy ghost
speaketh: Though councell in the heart of man is like deepe waters, yet a man that hath vnderstanding will draw it out. I vvill leaue others to the Lord, before whome they must stand or fall, vvhosoeuer they be, for vvho am I that I should iudge or iustifie any, sith that office be∣longeth to the Lord alone? But touching my selfe, it is ynough for me, that I know mine owne heart, and that I can in some sort & sence truelie say, as the Apostle dooth: This is our reioicing, the testimonie of our conscience, that as in other things, so in this that I now doe, I walke not according to fleshly wise∣dome, but in simplicitie and godly purenesse. Many send your L. men and monie, horsse and armor, and many good thinges besides, to∣wards the furnishing and setting of
you forward in this great and no∣ble voiage: yea sundrie are cōtent to aduenture as it vvere their por∣tions and persons vvith you in this vvorthie seruice. All these thinges no doubt of it, are good in them∣selues, & may be true testimonies of sincere affection in your fol∣lowers and fauourits, yea they may be powerfull meanes of iust defence for you and yours, & our whole state, & of lawful annoiance and confusion vpon the enemies against vvhom you goe. But take heede my L. that these cause you not to be puffed vp in your selfe, and so to go forth in the arm of flesh and bloud. The thing that you ra∣ther are especiallie to regard ther∣in is, that they bee thankefullie re∣ceiued, as from God, and religi∣ouslie vsed as in regarde of your
selfe, and those that shall assist you, and be at your command. Outward and humane helpes, my selfe haue not to present, but may rather say vvith the Apostle, Siluer and gold haue I none: such as I haue, such I giue. And yet let not I beseech you, my vvant of vvorld∣lie things, make lesse precious in your iudgement, the spiritual gra∣ces, that God is pleased by me the vnworthiest of his seruants, at this time to offer vnto you: for this I can and dare assure you, euen in the vvord of truth and life (vvhich is more than the vvords of all mor∣tall men in the vvorld, though ne∣uer so great) that though it be lit∣tle in outward appearance, and weak according to vvorldlie shew: yet if it be thorowlie setled in you for knowledge, and continuallie
obserued for practise, it vvil be not onlie as good as the most or best outward things that you carie with you, but a vvorthie mean to sancti∣fie all & euerie one of them to you & others: yea it vvil make your go∣ing out glorious, & your cōming in again prosperous & ful of renown (a matter that manie I am sure, wish and praie for vvith all their harts) as which indeed wil watch for you when you sleepe, & vvill vphold your cre∣dit at home, & person abroad, yea and preserue you & yours, though you should come vnto the grea∣test danger & distresse that could be. In al this great praise of the thing it selfe, I neither praise mine owne paine, I protest, nor prouide for my commendation in the vvorld, nor couetouslie o cunninglie seeke gifts from your L. But dutifullie
thereby to prouoke your L. care to diligent reading thereof, and carefullie to stir you vp to dailie performance of such good things as are propounded therin. Your high place and person, your hono∣rable and holie profession, the wor∣thie and vveightie causes that you must manage, the manifold perils that thereby you may preuent, the singular good that thereby you shall atcheeue, vvith sundrie such like, shou1d I am sure, and I doubt not but they vvill prouoke sincere obedience. Wherof I trust your L. vvill haue no vvhit the lesse regard, euen in this respect, because that I for my part shall think my care, my labour, my loue, and vvhatsoeuer dutie I haue done or may doe vnto your L. to be sufficientlie recom∣penced, if these poore trauails may
find good acceptance vvith you, and patronage from you, and in you may bring forth these good and gracious effects. And so hum∣blie beseeching the Lord merciful∣lie to direct you in all affaires that you shall take in hand, according to his holie vvil, & namelie to pro∣sper this present and so important seruice, for Gods glorie, the welfare of our kingdomes, her Maiesties Christian comfort & peace euerie manner of vvaie, your owne parti∣cular good, and the confusion and ouerthrow of al Gods, the estates, her Maiesties, and your ovvn ene∣mies, I humblie take my leaue.
At London the second of March, 1599.

