



Fifteene yeares (most reuerend Fa∣ther) are now fully expired, since I first began to write against the professed aduersaries of the aun∣cient Christian, Catholike, Apo∣stolique, and old Romane reli∣gion; I meane the late Byshops of Rome, the Romish Cardinals, the Iesuites, Iesuited Papistes, and Gunpowder-popish-vassals: In which space of time, I haue published so many Bookes in defence of the Catholique Fayth, as are in num∣ber correspondent to the yeares. A very long time it was, (the argument in hand considered,) before I could any way extort any Answere to any of my Bookes. Howbeit, when the Iesuites after mature deliberation, had seriously pondered with them-selues, that through their long si∣lence, many Papistes did vtterly renounce Poperie, and ioyfully embrace the Catholique Fayth, this day sinceerely

professed in our Church: then they became so ashamed of their silence in that behalfe, that in the yeare 1605. they published a litle Pamphlet, tearming it, The forerunner of Bels downefall: Fiue Bookes were printed, but hid vnder a Pipkin, least they should be seene, or burnt with the Sunne.wherein they auouched with brasen faces, that they had written fiue Bookes fiue yeares afore that time, against my Motiues and my Suruey of Po∣perie. And least it should be obiected against them, that it cannot be so, seeing we can neither see them, nor heare of them; the Fore-runner telleth vs very grauely, (but to their endlesse shame,) that the Answere is suppres∣sed, and vpon iust occasion stayed from the publication. Alasse, alasse, how are silly Papistes bewitched, with the iugling and deceitfull dealing of these seducers? They haue been buzzing about the answering of my two first Bookes,My Booke of Motyues, and Booke of Suruey. (as they them selues tell vs,) almost the space of sixe whole yeares: and when after their great paines and labours of so many yeares, they had framed the answere in the best manner they could deuise; then they suppressed the same vpon iust occasiō, as their Forerunner in their name telleth vs.Forerunner, pag 15. What, haue they bestowed fiue yeares in wry∣ting fiue Bookes against two of my Bookes, and dare not to this day publish any one of them?To what end were they written, but to be publi∣shed? Out vpon lying lippes; Out vpon trayterous Iesuites, and Iesuiticall deceyuers of the world; The trueth is, that there is no trueth in these men: And it is an euident testimonie, that they are not indeed able to answere; for otherwise, they would not for very shame haue protested so much in print, and haue per∣formed nothing lesse. I am verily perswaded, that they will neuer during my life, (which they wish to be short, and therefore haue they prouided my Winding sheete, and other indirect meanes, to take away my life,) frame any

full and direct Answere to the said Bookes; because in trueth, all the Iesuites in the Christian world, are not able to performe it, the trueth being so cleare & forcible against them. After the Fore-runner, a pretensed Answere, was published in the yeare 1606. against the Downe fall of Poperie. For refutation of which silly Pamphlet, I ad∣dressed my Booke, intituled, The Iesuites Antepast; (which seemeth to their daintie mouthes so vntouthsome, that I deeme, it will serue also for their Post-past,) as I had formerly published an other Reply, (intituled, The Popes Funerall,) to the Fore-runner of the Downe∣fall. Now lately in the end of the yeare 1608. an other pretensed Answere (a silly thing God wote,) was published against my Booke, intituled, The Tryall of the new re∣ligion. This Pamphlet came to my handes in Nouem∣ber last; at which time, I was very ill in body, and also distant aboue one hundred Myles from mine owne Libra∣rie▪ the want whereof, at that time, was farre more grie∣uous to me, then were all my painefull infirmities of body; In the midst of which, whiles I am writing for the trueth, I find no litle comfort: The case so standing, albeit your Grace was then aboue fourtie Myles from me; yet did I presume to bemone my selfe vnto your Grace for the supply of my present want of Bookes; with whom my suite found such intertainement, as I neither did, nor euer could ex∣pect. Bookes indeed I expected▪ but that your Grace should also send them to me vpon your owne charges, most freely and Christianly offering to send me your whole Li∣brarie, (which is indeed, a Librarie most excellent,) if I shouldst and in need thereof, it seemed to mee such an honorable sauour, as that I could not now in duetie, omit

to make this publique acknowledgement thereof. The Ie∣suites and Iesuited Gunpowder Papistes, not able to endure the sound of my Tryall, wherein Poperie was tearmed and prooued the New Religion; haue suborned (as it seemeth) Robert Parsons that lewd companion and trayterous Fryer, to publish that supposed Refutation, the summe and substaunce whereof, they had (no doubt) collected and framed to his handes. His name he dareth not disclose, least the great disgrace, (which can not but insue vpon that silly Answere,) should eternally cleaue vnto him, as being one, who not able to defend Poperie, by honest and Christian-like proceeding, bestirreth himselfe to effect the same, by continuall forgerie, by lying, by coozenage, and deceitfull dealing; as in this Booke I shall make apparant: Wherein, what my selfe haue effected, or rather God in mee, let the iuditious and honest Reader iudge; and for that which he findeth well done, giue God the glorie. Such as it is, I dedicate vnto your Grace; as vnto him, who hath deserued my vttermost service. The Al∣mighty blesse your Grace, with many happy yeares in this life; and with eternall glory, in the life to come. Amen. Iunij 3. 1609.

