



AMongst all the bookes, which of long time haue bene published by the Ro∣mane presse (most renowned and gra∣cious Soueraigne) the late Apologie of the Romane church may seeme both in the Prefaces, and progresse thereof to haue deserued your Maiesties most fauorable acceptance. In the diuerse Prefaces whereof your Ma∣iestie is saluted in those due, and almost proper attributes of In the Epistle dedicatory to the Parliament. Princely and Christian wisedome, and ouer∣flowing fountaine of Grace; your Nobles and Se∣nators of State in the Epithets of Honorable Peeres, and graue Sages; your Diuines and other Protestant-Doctors with at least the adiunct of Learned. Other∣wise than the Romish Jnquisitors haue done, who, lest that a Protestant King might obtaine in the world the cōmendation of Edouardus setus Angliae Rex, admirand indolis adoles∣cens. Haec po∣strema verb deleantur. In∣dx Hisp. fol. 148. Admirable towardnesse; or a Duke the title of Natus est Christopherso∣nus praeclarue Dux Wittéber∣gensis. Deleatut verbum, prae∣clarus. Ibid. Excellent; or lest our publike writers (espe∣cially

Caluine) might be named Bceru The∣logus Deleat it vebum, Theo∣logus. Ibidem. ldenco Zum∣go Theologo. latur. Theo∣logo. Index ibd Diuines, yea or else so much as upprimatur nomen Caluini, onatur, studio∣sus quidam.  2 4.  tat one of their Prosel ran from Menz to Rme to change  name of Calumus into the a  of Baromu.:  illo Cal∣uo longè re∣legato, me tuo proprio (Baro∣ni, cognomine omāsti, & locu∣pletash, &c. Iustu Calunus alias  Veteracastrensi. . sacr. l. 1. p. 1 Melancthonis & ahorum no∣num omittan∣t Index Belg. aud Iunium. pag. 164. named at all; have commanded all such like Ascriptions to be blotted out. Which publike perempto∣rinesse these Apologists may seeme by this their more ingenuous dealing to checke and controll, except that they will be thought to haue vttered the voices Temporum potiùs quàm hominum.
Concerning their progresse. Although the Apologie be farre from that absolutenesse, which the publisher thereof pretendeth, who iudgeth it to be in some things demonstratiuely vnanswerable, as other Romanists do likewise conceiue: yet notwithstanding whatsoeuer Ar∣gument of singular moment is vsed in the volumes of the Romish Doctours, or what colourable accordance soe∣uer hath proceeded from the pen of any learned Prote∣stant, which appeared in anie degree aduantagious vnto their Roman cause; that seemeth herein to haue bene col∣lected, vrged, and reinforced against vs with as singular choise of matter, with as ponderous weight of cōsequence, with an as exact and exquisite a method and style, together with as sober a temper of speech, as they by their diligence, iudgement, wit, Art, and moderation could easily per∣forme.
This seene, forthwith our most reuerend, carefull, and religious Metropolitane commanded a certaine num∣ber of Diuines, then at hand, to employ their studies for the perfecting of a satisfiable Reply: which had accor∣dingly bene sufficiently accomplished, had not the heate of the common sicknesse, and other their importunate oc∣currences hindered their indeuours. At what time the

burthen (my occasions then better sorting) did (yet not by choise but by chance) fall vpon me, the weakest and vnworthiest of those parties assigned: which, notwithstan∣ding, after a due perusall of the Apologie, I did at length vndergo, not vpon presumption of any singular dexterity in my selfe, but as in confidence that God would enable me hereunto, he being In minimis maximus, and often choosing the weake things to confound the strong: so also vpon an experience that diuerse Romish Doctors would be at hand ready to lend me herein their best support.
Which kind of assistance of learned Aduersaries the Apologists themselues In the Epistle dedicatory to your Maiestie. haue layd downe for the grea∣test reason of satisfaction, and we do accordingly ad∣mit. For if it be held an excellent point of physicke, Ex Vipera theriacum, to turne poison into an Antidote a∣gainst poison; and in God accounted an high degree of vengeance, to turne the Aegyptians against the Ae∣gyptians; Esay. 19. 1. and in Dauid celebrated as a principall mat∣ter of triumph, to cut off Goliah his head with his own sword; and in Christ obserued as an vnanswerable ma∣ner of conuiction to iudge the euil seruant from his owne Luc. 19. 22. mouth; and acknowledged in S. Paul as the most expe∣dite means of confutation of the men of Crete, to oppose Tit 1. 1. against them their owne Poet, whom he calleth their Prophet: thē may we iustly presume better of our cause, wherein our Romish Aduersaris will proue our rightfull Aduocates.
For which cause I doubted not to answer that, which they haue vniustly intituled, A Catholike Apologie out 
