



ELect and Christian Ladies, as nothing is more necessa∣rie to our saluation, no∣thing more pleasant to the inward man, renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created vs, then the knowledge of that high mysterie of our iustificatiō by faith only: which doctrine is euen the soule of the Church, agaynst which, as Sathan hath layd all his engines, that this sub∣stantial poynt of Christiā religion, might either by force be ouerthrowne, or with subtiltie might be vndermined; so it hath pleased the Lord to rampire in this doc∣trine: with such a fierie wal of Scriptures,
that all the gates of hell cannot preuayle agaynst it. But as Sathan is wont some∣time to transforme himselfe into an An∣gell of light, so by the Scriptures he see∣keth to ouerturne the Scriptures: but yet the sworde of the Spirite, which is the word of God, is of such sharpe edge, that it hath alwaies and will to the end cut a∣sunder all the knottie quiddities, which our aduersaries (though neuer so con∣ningly) shall endeuour to contriue against the plaine trueth, reueiled in the Scrip∣tures. For experience wherof, I haue here dedicated to your Worships, a little re∣mainder of my labours, reading in my charge vpon the Epistle of Sainct Iames: wherein as I laboured to teach the trueth of God plainly for the capacitie of the simple; so likewise, as occasion was offe∣red, according to my poore skill, I assaied to confute errors of seducing Spirites: which if it shall please you to accept, as willingly as I do offer the same vnto you duetifully, I shall thinke the fruite of my labours well bestowed, to bee receiued
into the hands, and perused with the eyes of two so vertuous and religious Ladies: and the rather I am incouraged hereun∣to, because I would prouoke a fresh the eger appetites of those which haue staied (too long I am sure, as they thinke) with a fore-tast of some little banquetting dish, to make them longue the more for the whole seruice, most artificially and rich∣ly, I hope, ere it bee long, of those to bee brought out, which are able to prouide the diet, and furnish the prouision of a Princely table: who (I am sure) will no more be offended with me for shaking a light Launce agaynst the Campe of An∣tichrist, then worthie Generalls, and va∣liant Coronels are wont with their Cap∣taines for shewing their valure, and smi∣ting a straggler comming in his way, whose comming might something pre∣iudice any corner of the hoast. And now to you, O Romish Rhemists: when wil you open your eyes to see the trueth? when will you take that precious Collyrium,
Reuel. 3.1 a soueraigne eye-salue, wherof S. Iohn spea∣keth,
that you may once see your bon∣dage to that Italian Antichrist , you know what is meant, when will you learne to see the glorious libertie of the Sonnes of God? Will you be more blind then the Turkes, who though they are Agarenes, yet will be called Saracenes? But you who pretending Catholikes, the Mother Church, the sonnes of Sarah, wil yet for all this, as though you were borne of her wombe, ioyne with Hagar. You will not be iustified only by grace, by the free promise only, as Isaac was borne, but as that lusty yonker Ismael, you wil mock Isaac as a Solifidian, and more then that persecute the lawfull heires with fire and fagot; you will be borne by the strength of flesh, and not by the power of the pro∣mise, only: A lustie dame must bee your Mother, or els you will not haue Abra∣ham to be your Father: you will ioyne na∣ture with grace: O blind generation; you will not worke but for hire: you will do no good deedes, but to auoyde the whot scalding house of Purgatorie: O seruile
brood. If you will not beleeue me, I pray you giue eare to that old, eloquent, good father Nazianzene. If thou be a bondslaue,
Nazian. de Sancto Bap¦mate. then feare the whippe: if thou be an hyreling, then looke only for thy rewarde: but ouer and besides this, if thou be a (naturall) Child, then reuerence (God) as thy Father: Do well, be∣cause it is good to obey thy Father: yea, and although thou shalt haue nothing els, yet euen this shall be thy reward: that thou hast been obedient to thy Father. Thus leauing these Iesuites to bee schooled of so graue and reuerend a Father, till his fatherhood and their owne conscience, better instructed, shall direct them, I commend your good Ladiships to the fatherly protection of the heauenly Father, who is the father of all mercies, and the Father of the whole familie both in heauen and earth. To whom be al praise and glorie ascribed for his free and vndeserued mer∣cie, both now and euermore.

