


I Am almoste ashamed, right welbeloued Pe∣ter Giles, to sēde vnto you this boke of y• vto¦pian commen wealth, welnigh after a yeares space, which I am suer you loked forwithin a moneth & a half. And no marueil. For you kne∣we welenough, that I was already dis¦bourdened of all y• labour & study belō∣ging to the inuention in this work, and that I had no nede at all to trouble my braynes about the dispositiō, or cōuey∣aunce of the matter: & therfore had her in nothing els to do, but only to rehear¦se those thinges, which you ad I toge¦thers hard maister Raphaell tel and de¦clare. Wherefore there was no cause whie I shold study to setforth y• matter with eloquēce: for asmuch as his talke cold not be fine & eloquent, being firste not studied for, but sodein and vnpreme¦ditate, and then, as you know, of a m̄
 better sene in the greke language, then in the latine tong. And my writing, the nigher it shold approche to his homely playne, and simple speche, somuch the igher shold it go to the trueth: whiche is the only marke, wherunto I do and ought to direct all my trauail and stu∣dy herin. I graunt and confesse, frende Peter, meself discharged of somuch la¦bour hauing all thies thinges, redy do∣ne to my hand, that almoost there was nothing lefte for me to do. Elles other the inuention, or the disposition of this matter might haue requyred of a witte nother base, nother at all vnlearned bothe some time & leasure, and also so∣me studye. But yf yt were requysyte, and necessary, that the matter shoulde also haue bene wryten eloquentelye, and not alone truelye: of a suerty that thynge coulde I haue perfourmed by no tyme nor studye. But nowe seynge all thyes cares, stayes, and lettes were taken awaye, wherin elles somuche la¦boure and studye shoulde haue bene employed, and that there remayned no other thynge for me to doo, but onelye
 to wryte playnlye the matter as I hard it spoken: that in dede was a thynge lyghte and easye to be done. Howe beit to the dyspatchynge of thys so lytell b¦synes my other cares and troubles did leaue almooste lesse, then no leasure.
Whyles I doo daylye bestowe my ty∣me abowte lawe matters: some to plea¦de, some to heare, some as an arbytra∣tour wyth myne awarde to determyne▪ some as an vmpier or a iudge with my sentence finallye to discusse. Whiles I go one way to see and visite my frend: an other way about mine owne priuat affaires. Whiles I spend almost al the day abrode emonges other, and the resi¦due at home among mine own: I leaue to meselfe, I meane to my boke no time. For when I am come home, I muste commen with my wife, chatte with my chyldren, and talke wyth my seruaun∣tes. All the whyche thynges I reke and accompte emonge busynes, foras∣muche as they muste of necessytye be done: and done muste they nedes be, oneles a man wyll be a straunger in
 hys owne howse. And in any wyse a man muste so fassyon and order hys condytyons, and so appoynte and dyspose hym selfe, that he be me∣rye, iocunde, and pleasaunte amon∣ge them, whome eyther nature hath prouyded, or chaunce hathe made, or he hymselfe hathe chosen to be the fellowes, and companyons of hys lyfe: so▪ that wyth to muche gentle be hauyoure and famylyaryte he doo not marre them, and by tomuche suffe∣raunce of hys seruauntes make them hys maysters. Emonge thyes thin∣ges nowe rehearsed stealethe awaye the daye, the moneth, the yeare. Whe doo I wryte then? And all thys why∣le haue I spoken no woorde of slepe, nother yet of meate, whyche emon∣ge a greate number doth waste no lesse tyme, then dothe slepe, wherin al∣mooste halfe the lyfe tyme of ma crepethe awaye. I therefore doo wynne and gette onelye that tyme, whyche I steale from slepe and meate. Whyche tyme bycause yt ys verye
 littell, and yet somwhat it is, therfore haue I ones at the last, thoughe it be longe first, finished Vtopia, and haue sent it to you frende Peter to reade and peruse: to the intent that if anye thynge haue escaped me, you might putte me in remembraunce of it. For though in this behalf I do not greatly mistruste meself (whiche woulde God I were somewhat in witte and learnyng, as I am not all of the wore and dullest me¦mory) yet haue I not so great trust and confidence in it, that I thinke nothing could fall out of my mynde. For Iohn Clement my boye, who as you knowe was there present with vs, whome I suffer to be awaye from no talke, wher¦in may be anye profit or goodnes (for out of this yong bladed & newe shotte vp corne, whiche hath alredy begonne to sprynge vp bothe in Latine & Greke learnynge, I looke for plentiful increa¦se at length of goodly rype grayne) he I saye hath brought me into a greate doubte. For wheras Hythlodaye (one∣les my memory fayle me) sayde that the bridge of Amaurote, whiche goeth
 ouer the riuer of Anyder is fyue hu∣dreth paseis, that is to saye, half a yle in lengthe: my Ihon sayeth that . hundred of those paseis must be pluc¦ked awaye▪ for that the ryuer contey∣neth there not aboue thre hundreth pa∣seis in bredthe. I pye yow hartely calle the matter to youre remembraū∣ce. For if you agree with hym, I also wyll saye as you saye, and confesse me selfe deceaued. But if you cannot re∣member the thynge, then suerly I wyl write as I haue done, and as myne owne remembraunce serueth me. For as I will take good hede that there be in my booke nothyng fale, so if there e any thynge in doubte▪ I wyll rather tell a lye then make a lye: bicause I had be good thē wise rather. Howbeit this matter maye easely be remedied, if you wyll take the paynes▪ to aske the que∣stion of Raphaell himselfe by worde of mouthe, if he be nowe with you, or els  youre letters. Which you must nedes▪ do for an other doubte also, whi¦che hath chaunced, throughe whoes faulte I cannot tell▪ whether through
 yne or youres or Raphaels. For nei∣ther we remembred to enquire of hym, nor he to tell vs in what parte of that we worlde Vtopia is situate. The whiche thinge, I had rather haue spent no small somme of money, then that it should thus haue escaped vs: as∣well for that I am ashamed to be igno¦raunt in what sea that Ilande stādeth, wherof I write so longe a treatyse, as also because there be with vs certayne men, ad especially one deuoute and godly man▪ ad a professour of diuini∣tie, who is excedynge desierous to go vnto Vtopia: not for a vayne and cu∣rious desiere to see newes, but to the intent he may further and increase oure religion whiche is there already luckely begoe. And that he may the better accomplyshe and perfourme this his good intent, he is mynded to procure that he maye be sent thether of the byshoppe, yea and that he hym∣selfe may be mae bishop of Vtopia: beynge nothynge scrupulous: herein, that he must obteyne this byshopricke with suete. For he counteth that a god∣ly
 , whiche procedeth not of the desiere of honour or lucre, but only of a godly zeale. Wherfore I moste ear∣nestly desyere you, frende Peter, to tal¦ke with Hythlodaye, if you can, face to face, or els to wryte youre letters to hym, and so to worke in this matter, that in this my booke there maye ney∣ther any thynge be founde whiche is vntrue, neither any thinge be lacking, whiche is true. And I thinke verely it shalbe well done that you shewe vnto hym the booke it selfe. For if I haue myssed or fayled in any poynte, or if any faulte haue escaped me, no man can so well correcte and amende it, as he can: and yet that can he not do, one∣les he peruse and reade ouer my booke writtē. Moreouer by this meanes shal you perceaue, whether he be well wyl∣lynge and contente that I should vn∣dertake to put thys worke in wryting. For if he be mynded to publyshe and putforth his owne labours and tra∣uayles hymselfe, perchaunce he would be lothe, and so would I also, that i publyshynge the Vtopiane weale pu∣blyque,
 I shoulde preuente, and take from hym the flower and grace of the noueltie of this his historie. Howbeit, to saye the verie truthe, I am not yet fully determined with meselfe, whe∣ther I wyll put forth my booke or no. For the natres of men be so diuers, the phantasies of some so wayewarde, theire myndes so vnkynde, theire iud∣gementes so corrupte, that they which leade a merie and a iocounde lyfe, fol∣lowinge theire owne sensuall pleasu∣res and carnal lustes, maye see to be in a muche better state or case, thē they that vexe and vnquiete thēselfes with cares and studie for the puttyge forth and publyshynge of some thynge, that maye be either profett or pleasure to o∣ther: whiche neuertheles wyl disdayn∣fully, scornefully, & vnkyndly accepte thesame. The moste parte of al be vn∣learned. And a great numbre hath lear¦nynge in contempte. The rude & bar∣barous alloweth nothynge but that which is verie barbarous in dede. If it be one that hath a lytell smacke of lear¦nynge, he reiecteth as homely and com¦men
 ware whatsoeuer is not  full of olde oughteate wordes, and that be worne out of vse. Some there be that haue pleasure onely in olde ru∣stie antiquities. And some onely in theire owne doinges▪ One is so sowre, so crabbed, and so vnpleasaunt, that he can awaye with no myrthe nor sporte. An other is so narrow in y• sholders, that he can beare no iestes nor awn∣tes. Some  poore soules be so aferd that at euery sappishe worde theire nose shalbe bitten of, that they stande in no lesse drede of euerye quicke and sharpe worde, then he that is bytten of a madde dogge feareth water. Some be so mutable and waueryng, that eue¦ry houre they be in a newe mynde, sa∣inge one thynge syttynge, and an other thynge standyge. An other sorte syt∣teth vpon theire allebencheis, & there amonge theire cuppes they geue iudge¦ment of the wittes of wryters, & with greate aucthoritie they condemne eue as pleaseth the euery wryter accor∣dyng to his writinge: in moste spiteful maner mockynge, lowtynge, and lw¦tynge
 them: beynge themselfes in the  eason affe, and as sayth the prouerbe, out of all daunger of gone∣shotte. For whye they be so  & smoethe, that they haue not somuch as ne heare of an honest man, whereby one may take holde of them. There be moreouer some so vnkynde and vngen¦ell, that thoughe they take great plea∣sure and delectation in the worke, yet for al that they can not fynde in theire hartes to loe the authour therof, nor to aforde hym a good worde: beynge muche lyke vncosrteis, vnthankefull, and chourlishe guestes. Whiche whē they haue with good and deyutie mea∣es well filled theire bellyes, departe home geuynge no thankes to the feaste maker. Go youre wayes nowe & make a costly feaste at youre owne charge is for guestes so deptie mouthed, so dy∣ers in taste, and bisydes that of so vn¦kynde and vnthankefull natures. But neuertheles frende Peter do I praye you with Hythlodaye as I willed you before. And as for this matter, I shal∣be at my lybertie afterwardes to take
 newe aduisement. Howebeit, seynge I haue taken great payes and laboure in wrytynge the matter, if it may stan∣de with hys mynde & pleasure, I wyll as touchinge the edition or publishing of the booke, followe the counsell and aduise of my frendes, and specially yours. Thus fare you well ryght har∣tely beloued frende Peter, with youre gentell wyfe: and loue me as you haue euer done, for I loue you better then euer I dyd.
