



My Lord,
WHen I looke backe vpon the course of your L. life, whom I haue knowne about fourtie eight yeares agoe: I cannot but wonder of the goodnesse and gratious providence of GOD towards your L. For so soone as your L. went to the Court of that Prince of worthy me∣morie in all ages so long as the world shall last, King Iames the sixt of that name in Scotland, & first of that name in Englād, Frāce, & Ireland; God gaue your L. such favour in the sight of that Prince & bestowed vpon you such gifts of mynd & body as did indeed merit at that princes hād, al the degrees of honor and great estate, which that royall and magnifick Prince rewarded your L. service withall. For I may say truely: your L. was faithful to his Majesty and when his Hyenes did honour your L to be Captaine of a guard for the peace of the countrie and for execution of justice, to the well of his Majesties subjects, against Re∣bels, bangsters, contemners of his Heines lawes & autho∣ritie. Your L. did with such courage and conscience ad∣ministrat that charge that you spared not great nor small untill that they were brought vnder obedience 
gaue your L. grace in your old age, to retire your self frō Court, with as great honour, wealth and favour of your Prince, and more, then any other did, as I could marke in my time. Moreover, God hath given to your L. ability & will to honour your countrie, in building of faire Palaces, and planting faire Ortchards & gardens in the places of your L. residences: In being magnifick in Hospitalitie, both to honourable strangers comming to see this country, & to our owne countrie men, noble, ignoble, friends & acquain∣tance. Lyke as God hath made your L. the man to set vp againe that house whereof your L. came, and to raise the ruynes thereof to as good estate as ever it was; Notwith∣standing of your L. liberalitie in advancing your friends to great honours and heritages, to bee injoyed by them as your L. successours, when you shall depart from this life. I know not what more is requyred to make your L. both heere and eternally happie: but that your L. remember & consider this good & gratious providence of God toward you, and bee thankfull, saying with David, What shal I render to GOD for all his benefites to me, &c. Ps. 116. And confesse to God your sinnes with sorrow for them, and to belieue his promises of mercie to penitent sinners throgh the merit of his beloved Son Iesus Christ: that with old Iacob, Gen. 49 and Simeon, Luk. 2. waiting for the sal∣vation of the Lord, your L. may depart in peace in Gods appoynted tyme. To you my Lord I dedicat this little Treatise, as having no kinsman now so neare vnto mee by blood, or so honourable in estate: which I recommend vnto your L. gratious acceptation and your L. selfe, to the grace of GOD. And rests,

