



VPon a tyme, when tidynges came too the citie of Corinthe that kyng Philippe father to Alexander surnamed y• Great, was comming the∣therwarde with an armie royall to lay siege to the citie. The Corinthiās being forth with stryken with greate feare, beganne busilie, and earnestly to looke aboute them, and to falle to worke of all handes. Some to owre & trymm vp harneis, some to carry stones, some to amende and buylde hygher the wal¦les, some to rampiere and fortyfie the
 bulwarkes, and fortresses, some one thynge, and some an other for the defen¦dinge, and strengthenynge of the citie. The whiche busie labour, and toyle of theires when Diogenes the phyloso∣pher sawe, hauing no profitable busi∣es wherupō to sette himself on worke (neither any man required his labour, and helpe as expedient for the commē wealth in that necessitie) immediatly girded about him his phylosophicall cloke, & began to rolle, and tumble vp and downe hether & thether vpon the hille syde, that lieth adioyninge to the citie, his great barrel or tunne, wherein he dwelled: for other dwellynge place wold he haue noe. This seing one of his frendes, and not a litell musynge therat, came to hym: And I praye the Diogenes (quod he) whie doest thou thus, or what meanest thou hereby? Forsothe I am tumblyng my tubbe to (quod he) bycause it were no reason y• I only should be ydell, where so many be workīg. In semblable maner, right honorable sir, though I be, as I am in dede, of muche lesse habilitie then Dio¦genes
 was to do any thinge, that shall or may be for the auauncement & com∣moditie of the publique wealth of my natiue countrey: yet I seing euery sort, and kynde of people in theire vocatiō, & degree busilie occupied about the cō∣mō wealthes affaires: & especially lear¦ned mē dayly putting forth in writing newe inuentions, & deuises to the fur∣theraūce of thesame: thought it my bō¦den duetie to God, & to my countrey so to tūble my tubbe, I meane so to occu∣pie, & exercise me self in bestowing such spare houres, as I beinge at y• becke, & cōmaundement of others, cold conue∣niently winne to me elf: y• though no cōmoditie of that my labour, & trauai∣le to the publique weale should arise, yet it myght by this appeare, yt mye endeuoire, & good wille hereunto was not lacking. To the accōplishemēt ther¦fore, & fulfyllyng of this my mynde, & purpose: I toke vpō me to tourne, and translate out of Latine into oure En∣glishe tonge the frutefull, & profitable boke, which sir Thomas more knight compiled, & made of the new yle Vto∣pia,
 cōeining & setting forth y• best , and fourme of a publique weale:  worke (as it appeareth) writtē almost fourtie yeres ago by thesaid sir Tho∣mas More ye authour therof▪ The whi¦che mā, forasmuche as he was a mā of  tyme, yea almost of thies our da∣yes: & for y• excellent qualities, where  the great goodnes of God had plēty∣fully endowed hī, & for y• high place, & owme, wherunto his prince had mo graciously called hī, notably wel kno∣wen, not only amōg vs his coūtremē▪ but also in forrein coūtreis & nations▪ therfore I haue not much to speake of him. This only I saye y• it is much to be lamēted of al, & not only of vs En∣glish men, y• a man of so incomparable witte, of so profounde knowlege, of so absolute learning, & of so fine eloquēce was yet neuerthelesse so much blinded, rather to obstinacie, then wt ignoraūce y• he could not or rather would not see the shining light of godes holy truthe in certein principal pointes of Christiā religion: but did rather chese to per∣seuer, & continue in his wilfull & stub∣bourne
 obstinacie euē to y• very death▪ this I say is a thing much to be lamē∣ted. But letting this matter passe, I re∣tourne again to vtopia. Which (as I said befor) is a work not only for y• mat¦ter y• it cōteineth fruteful & profitable, but also for y• writers eloquēt latine stie¦le pleasaunt & delectable. Which he y• readeth in latine, as y• authour himself wrote it, perfectly vnderstanding y• sa∣me: doubtles he shal take great pleasu∣re, & delite both in y• swete eloquēce of y• writer, & also in y• wittie inuēcion, & fi∣ne cōeiaūce, or dispositiō of y• matter: but most of all in the good, & holsome lessons, which be there in great plēty, & aboūdaūce. But nowe I feare greatly y• in this my simple translatiō through my rudenes & ignoraūce in our english tonge all the grace & pleasure of y• elo∣quence, wherwith y• matter in latine is finely set forth may seme to be vtterly excluded, & lost: & therfore the fruteful¦nes of the matter it selfe muche perad∣uenture diminished, & appyred. For who knoweth not whiche knoweth a∣y thyng, that an eloqent styele setteth
 forth & highly cōmendeth a meane, ¦ter? Where as on the other side rude, & vnlearned speche defaceth and disgra∣ceth a very good matter. According as I harde ones a wise man say: A good tale euel tolde were better vntold▪ & an euell tale well tolde nedeth none other sollicitour. This thing I well ponde∣ring & wayinge wt me self, & also kno∣wing, & knowledging the barbarous rudenes of my translatiō was fully de¦termined neuer to haue put it forth in printe, had it not bene for certein fren∣des of myne, & especially one, whom a¦boue al other I regarded, a mā of sage▪ & discret witte, & in wordly matters by long vse well experiēced, whoes name is George Tadlowe: an honest citiein of London, & in thesame citie well ac∣cepted, & of good reputatiō: at whoes request, & instaūce I first toke vpō my weake, & feble sholders y• heauie, and weightie bourdein of this great enter∣price. This man wt diuers other, but this mā chiefely (for he was able to do more wt me, thē many other) after that I had ones rudely brought y• worke to
 an ende, ceassed not by al meanes possi∣ble cōtinualy to assault me, vntil he had at ye aste, what by y• force of his pitthie argumentes & strong reasons, & what by hys authority so persuaded me, that he caused me to agree & consente to the impryntynge herof. He therfore, as the chiefe persuadour, must take vpon him the daunger, whyche vpon this bolde, and rashe enterpryse shall ensue. I, as I suppose, am herin clerely acquytte, and discharged of all blame. Yet, honorable Syr for the better auoyding of enuyous and malycyous tonges, I (knowynge you to be a man, not onlye profoundely learned, and well affected towardes all suche, as eyther canne, or wyll take paynes in y• well bestowing of that poore talente, whyche GOD hath endued them wyth: but also for youre godlye dysposytyon, and vertu∣ous qualytyes not vnworthelye nowe placed in aucthorytye, and called to ho¦noure) am the bolder humblye to offer and dedycate vnto youre good may∣strshyppe thys my symple woorke. Partly that vnder the sauffe conducte
 of your protection it may the better be defended frō the obloqie of thē, which can say well by nothing, that pleaseth not their fond, ad corrupt iudgemen∣tes, though it be els both frutefull and godly: & partlye that by the meanes of this homely preet I may the better re¦newe, and reuiue (which of late, as you know, I haue already begonne to do) y• old acquayntaunce, that was betwene you and me in the time of our childho∣de, being then colefellowes togethers▪ Notdoubting that you for your natie goodnes, and gentelnes will accept in good parte this poore gift, as an argu∣ment, or token, that mine old good wil, and hartye affection towardes you is not by reason of long tract of time, and separrtion of our bodies any thinge at all quayled and diminished, but rather  I assuer yo) much augmented, and increased. This verely is y• chieffe cau∣se, y• hath incouraged me to be so bolde with youre maistershippe. Els truelye this my poore present is of such simple and meane sort, that it is neyther able to recompense the least portion of your
 great gentelnes to me, of my part vne¦serued, both in the time of our olde ac∣quayntance, and also now lately again bountifully shewed: neither yet fitte, & mete for the very basenes of it to be offe¦red to one so worthy, as you be. But al mighty god (who therfore euer be thā∣ked) hath auaūced you to such fortune, & dignity, that yo be of hability to ac∣cept thankefully aswell a mans good¦will as his gift. The same god graunte you and all yours long, and ioyfully▪ to contynue in all godlynes and prosperytye.
