



THat excellent sentence worthie
to be written in golden letters
(Right Reuerend father,) which
the good Iew & man of God Zo∣robabel,Esd. 3. vers. 42.
pronounced confidently
before the mightie king Darius;
viz. Magna est veritas, & prae∣ualet;)
is this day verified (God
be blessed for it,) euen in the publike writings of
the Iesuites, against the secular priests, their owne
deare Popish brethren. And reciprocally of the se∣cular
priestes against the Iesuites, their religious
fathers and holy fryers. The deepe and serious con∣sideration
whereof, hath possessed mine heart with
such vnspeakable solace, as I can not easily with
penne and ynke expresse the same. Such is the force
of truth, (my good Lord,) that it hath enforced
the professed enemies of truth, (a thing verie rare
and to be admired,) to testifie the truth against them∣selues,
and to publish the same in printed books, to
the view of the whole world. God (say the popish
priests) hath most straungely,Quodl 8. art. 9. Page. 267. and in verie deed (as it
may be termed,) miraculously, reuealed the truth,

which long hath beene hidden. Thus them selues write
of themselues. Hence proceedeth that rare conceiued
ioy,Phil. 3. vers. 15. which hath enuironed me on euerie side. And
which (I am well assured,) cannot but bring great con∣tentment
to your Lordship, and to all true hearted En∣glish
subiects. For as the Apostle saith: Some preach
Christ through enuie and strife; and some of good will.
The one sort preacheth Christ of contention, and
not purely: but the others preach him of loue. What
then? yet Christ is preached all manner waies, whe∣ther
it be vnder pretence, or syncerely; and I therein
ioy, yea, and will ioy. Thus wrteth the chosen vessell,
of our Lord Iesus. The Iesuites puffed vp with enuie
and malice against the secular priests, doe vnwittingly
and vnwillingly bolt out many important truthes; not
onely against themselues, and to their owne great pre∣iudice;
but also to the euerlasting scandall, and vtter
ruine, of theit patched hotch-potch late Romish reli∣gion.
The Secular priests turmoyled with the vniust
vexations of the cruell Iesuites, seeke by all aswell in∣direct
as direct meanes, to redeeeme their iniust mole∣stations,
and to defend themselues from their villanous
and diabolicall dealing. The while they are thus bu∣sied;
they cannot inuent or deuise, how to find out any
end of their miseries; but by laying open to the world,
the badde and irreligious conuersation of the Iesuites;
and by imputing to them those disloyall treacheries,
and most bloodie complots, wherewith their owne
hearts and hands had sometime beene imbrewed. And
consequently, while they are encombred to disgrace
and gall the malepeart and trayterous Iesuites; they
doe vnawares grieuously wound themselues, euen with
their owne chosen weapons. They freely grant, and

can it not denie; that all papists were kindly dealt
withall, vntill such time as themselues gaue iust cause,
by their disloyall plots and bloudie practises against
her Maiestie,See quodl. 7. art. 8. page. 199. of greater restraint and sharper procee∣ding
against them. For first, they grant, that the Earles
of Northūberland & Westmerlād with their adherēts,
were rebels, & their insurrectiō flat treasō; that the pope
ioyned with thē; that he excōmunicated her Maiestie;
that he assoyled her subiects from their allegeance to
her; that he sent two popish priests, Morton and VVebbe,
(my selfe knew them both right well,) to bring the ex∣communication
into England,The Duke of Nor∣folke. which they effected
accordingly; that the Pope assigned the Duke of Nor∣folke,
to be the head of the rebellion; that he gaue or∣der
to Ridolphi the Florentine, to take 150000▪ crownes
to set forwarde the saide rebellion. That the
King of Spaine at the Popes instance,The duke of Alua. determined to
send the Duke of Alua into England, that with all his
forces he might assist the Duke of Norfolke. Secondly,
they grant that the pope plotted with Stuckeley, Fitzmo.
rize, and others both English, Irish, and Italian, (my
selfe was euen then in Rome,) for enterprise by force in∣to
Ireland,ann. 1578. vnder pretence of religion; to further which
cruell attempt,ann. 1579. Sanders did afterward thrust himselfe
personally into the like action. Thirdly, they confesse,
that Parsons, Campian, Sherwin, and others, were sent
disloyally into this land from pope Gregory the 13. (my
selfe was then in Rome,) and that Parsons presently vp∣on
their arriuall,ann. 1580. fell to his trayterous Iesuiticall cour∣ses,
and bestirred himselfe with tooth and naile,1581. how he
might set her maiesties crowne vpon an others heade.
Fourthly, they confesse, that the Iesuite Heywood was
sent into Englād from the Pope, & that he tooke vpon

him to call a synode, and to abrogate auncient cust∣omes,
to the great scandall of many. Fiftly, they con∣fesse,
that the Pope plotted with the King of Spaine, for
the assistance of the Duke of Guise,1583. to enter vpon the
sodaine, and to aduance the Queene of Scotland to the
crowne of England. For the better effecting whereof,
Mendoza a Iesuite (as they write,) then ledger in this
land for the king of Spaine,The Iesuits sludie no∣thing but treason. set on worke Frances Thro∣cmorton,
and many others. They adde there vnto, that
about the same time Arden, and Somervile had conspi∣red,
how they might lay violent hands vpon her Maie∣sties
sacred person. Sixtly, they write, that about the
same time Parrie was also plotting with the Iesuites be∣yond
the sea, how he might haue effected the like villa∣nie.
Seuenthly,1586. they confesse freely, that the earle of
Northumberland was drawne into the plot of the Duke
of Guise; and that Parsons the bloudie Iesuite, was him
selfe an actor therein. Eightly, they write plainely,
that Babington and his complices committed such no∣torious
treason against her maiestie,1587. as it was shameles
boldnesse to deny or qualifie the same. Ninthly, they
confesse roundly, that Sir William Stanley committed
notable treacherie, & falsified his faith to her maiesty.
Tenthly,1588. they write plainly, that in the yeare 1588. the
King of Spaine made a most cruell & bloudie attempt,
not only against her Maiesty, (to vse the priests-words,)
and their commō enemies; but also against themselues,
all catholikes,1592. and their owne natiue countrey. The
memorie of which attempt (as the priests write,) will
be an euerlasting monument of Iesuiticall treason, and
brutish crueltie. Eleuenthly, they grant, that Richard
Hesket was set on by the Iesuites, in the yeere 1592. or
their abouts, to haue stirred vp the Earle of Darbye, to

rebell against her maiestie. Where I may not omit,
to deliuer mine owne knowledge in this behalfe. This
Hesket I knew very well; in his life, conuersation, and
professiō, I euer deemed him to be of all religions; that
it to say, of none at all, and so the euent did declare. He
could temporize egregiously and frame his religion in
all places,Loe, all traytors are welcōe to our Ie∣suites. after the humours of the companie. In the
end his creditors came so roundly vpon him, for his
manifold and huge debts; that he was in forced secretly
to depart, and to take England on his backe. Not long
after, he became so deeply Iesuited, that he must needs
be a glorious popish martyr; viz. an arrant and most
bloudie traytour. he thought & sought by murdering
his naturall soueraigne, to haue gotten gold, money,1592. &
large possessions; and so perhaps to haue paid his credi∣tors,
or at the least to haue cut them short at his plea∣sure.
But in steade of a popish imaginarie charter, hee
found an english reall halter; according to his cōdigne
deserts. Twelftly, they grant,1592. that shortly after this stra∣tageme,
the Iesuite Holt and others with him, perswa∣ded
one Patricke Collen an Irish-man, to attempt the
laying of his violent and villanous hands, vpon her ma∣iesties
person. Thirteenthly, they freely confesse, that
doctor Lopez the Queenes phisition, was stirred vp to
haue poysoned her Maiestie. and the like they affirme,
of Yorke, VVilliams, and Edward Squire, animated and
drawne thereunto, by VValpole that pernitious Iesuite.
All these notorious treasons (right reuerend father,)
damnable in nature, intollerable in state, and almost
incredible in relation, are plainly confessed of the Se∣cular-priests;
and the same together with many other,
bad, licentious, barbarous, sauage, and plaine brutish
practises of Iesuited papists, are compendiously com∣prised

in this small volume. Which I haue therefore
endeuoured to reduce to certaine heads, distinct
bookes, and chapters, with some profitable annota∣tions
annexed to the same; because I am verily per∣swaded,
that whosoeuer shall seriously pervse them
with indifferencie, cannot but loath and detest cursed
Iesuitisme and all popish Iesuited faction. For, though
it be necessarie to all true hearted English subiects,
to know throughly the matters discouered by the Se∣cular
Priests; yet because many for lacke of money, are
not able to buy the bookes; and others because they
are tedious and confusely written, will either abstaine
wholy from the reading thereof; or lightly and slender∣ly
runne them ouer, and so neuer attaine to the full
knowledge thereof; I haue imployed my industrie &
my wits, to couch in a small volume and portable
manuall, the summe & effect of all their bookes, pam∣phelets,
libells, edicts, and letters; so as euery one may
easily compasse the price, and no one bee wearied in
pervsing the discourse. My desire was to profit all; to
confirme the strong; to strenghthen the weake; to stay
the staggerer; to rowze vp the drowsie; to instruct
the ignorant; to gratifie the thankefull; to perswade the
doubtfull; and to confound the proud, malepeart and
disloyall hearts,1. Cor. 3. . 6. Paule planted, Apollo watred, but God
gaue the increase. If therefore any good be wrought by
these my labours, let such as shall reape that good, be
thankfull to God for the same. The disloyall papists &
bloud thirstie Iesuites, haue alreadie kicked against my
former labours, and whet their malicious tongues a∣gainst
me. Their holy father the bishoppe of Rome,
(whome they tearme the Pope,) hath thundred out
his curse against me. But neither secular priests, nor

religious Iesuites, will or can make any sound answere
to any of my bookes. They haue often beene buzzing
about the matter; yet neuer durst they publish so much,
as but one colourable answere, either to all, or to any
one of my bookes. so as I must needs thinke, that male∣dictiō,
cursing, & rayling, will be their morning and e∣uening
song against me; by reason of this my friendly
posie, which I present as a most redolent odour to their
noses-grauitie; so often as they shall kisse the shoe of
their Pope, and with him commit idolatrie. the vsuall
manner (most reuerend and worthy prelate,) in all such
kind of exercises, both is and alwaies hath beene, to
make choise of some worthy and mightie personage,
to protect, defend, and patronize the cause. and doubt∣les,
neuer did any booke or pamphlet stande in more
neede of a stout and resolute patron, then this pre∣sent
volume. For the traytorous Iesuites and Iesuited
papists, that cannot endure their owne brethren the
secular priests, to publish in their honest defence, their
knowne practises and imperfections; will no doubt
become starke madde, & fetch al their Romish friscols
against me poore soule; who haue as it were anatomi∣zed,
and painted them out in their best beseeming co∣lours.
After mature deliberation had herein, (most
christian patron of learning and learned men,) I haue
resolued to dedicate this worke to your most reuerend
name; as to that vertuous Tobi, who is able with the
perfumes of the heart and liuer of a fish; that is to say,
with the redolent harmonie of christian diuinitie,
(which continually floweth most pleasantly form his
mouth,) to vanquish all the Asmodean-Iesuites vpon
earth, & to strike such terrours into their harts; as they
shall not once dare to grunt or barke, against my true

dealing and sincere proceeding in this behalfe. Sun∣dry
other motiues do occurre, which might most iustly
incite me to this dedication of these my late studies, if
they were better then in deed they are; amongst which,
many large bounties from time to time receiued at
your Lordships hand, doe well deserue to haue a place.
So praying the almightie to increase your godly zeale,
against all traytorous Iesuites, & disloyall po∣pish
vassales; and to blesse your good Lordshippe with
many happie yeeres, to his glorie, your owne soules
health, and the common good of his Church, I hum∣bly
take my leaue. 
From my studie, this 23. of Ianuarie
1602. 
