



Right Honourable:
IT is not with∣out cause that the Apostle S. Paul did desire to know nothing
but Christ crucified; nor to glory in any thing but in his crosse, because the knowledge of this is the substance and marrow of true know∣ledge: for if we know Christ, it is no matter though wee know no∣thing else, but we know nothing if we know not Christ, though we vnder∣stand all mysteries & all knowledge; wch know∣ledge consisteth not in going on pilgrimage to the mount of Caluarie, and beholding the place where Christ was crucified in Golgotha, or
to behold him in a woo∣den crucifix, or in an image as the Papists do; but as the Apostle saith, to goe vnto him out of the campe, not with bodily feet, or with cor∣porall eyes (he is in hea∣uen) but with the feet of faith, which repre∣sents things past as if they were present; with spirituall eyes to behold his passion with com∣passion, himselfe bearing his crosse, and his crosse beares him, he carrying the wood as Isaac wher∣on he was to be sacrifi∣ced: as Noah carried on
the Arke; yea carrying the Arke to saue vs from the Floud of Gods wrath: as Iacob bearing on his shoulder the lad∣der whereby we mount vp into heauen; as Moses with the rod of his crosse ouercomming his enemies in the red sea of his bloud, and sauing his people: to behold the God of glory cruci∣fied betweene two theeues, as the greatest sinner of all, that hee might glorifie vs with Angels; that diuine head at whose presence the very powers of heauen
were wont to tremble, that had heretofore a crowne of glory, all to be crowned and pric∣ked with a crowne of thornes. That Angellike face defiled with the spit∣tle of the Iewes, bowing it & his head to kisse vs. Those chrystall eyes once clearer than the Sunne beames, bloud∣shed and cast ouer with the darknesse of death; thirsting that he might shew his desire of our saluation; his mouth so sweet full of Gall and Vinegar, that he might satisfie for that deadly
iuice which Adam suc∣ked out of the forbid∣den fruit; his hands and armes that framed and fashioned the heauens, all bespred and distrai∣ned on the crosse, on the left & on the right side, that hee might call all vnto him, ready to em∣brace both Iew and Gen∣tile; naked (but cloa∣thed with charitie) be∣cause of Adams naked∣nesse; that we may bee cloathed with grace and glory: his bloud gushing from him as the foure riuers of Pa∣radise to water Gods
Eden, wash his Church with his bloud; crying with feare, that wee might cry in faith; cry∣ing in the anguish of his soule, in his feeling, as if hee were left not of Angels or men (that was but little) but of God his Father, crying My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. At this voyce the earth trem∣bled, because it could not beare so great a bur∣then as the Crosse. The Crosse trembled be∣cause it bare Christ, Christ trembled and was in a bloudy sweat,
because he had so great, so heauy, and so insup∣portable a weight; for first he bare our persons, secondly, hee bare our sinnes, a great burden; thirdly, hee bare the floud of Gods anger and iustice powred on him for our sinnes. At this most dreadfull cry which at once mooued all the powers of hea∣uen and earth, the Sun was eclipsed, and that contrary to its course and custome, which made a Heathen Philo∣sopher to cry, that ei∣ther nature suffered, or
the world was at an end; and mooued the Centurion to say, Verily this was a iust man, this was the Sonne of God; the Sunne was eclipsed, be∣cause it could not be∣hold the Sonne of Righ∣teousnesse, not onely eclipsed with the inter∣position of the body of the earth, of his humane nature; but also eclipsed with the veile of his Pas∣sion; yea, the very stones were rent asunder, and the graues were opened. Euery creature, saith S. Hierome, suffereth with Christ at his suffering;
the Sunne is darkned, the earth mooued, the rockes cleaue asunder, the veile of the Temple diuided, the graues ope∣ned; only miserable man∣suffereth not with Christ, for whom alone Christ suffered. Lest therefore we shew our selues vnsensible, vn∣thankfull and vnfaith∣full, let vs consider his passion with compassi∣on, with faith, with ad∣miration; and as Saint Austin saith, behold the wounds of patient Christ, the bloud of him dying, the price of our
redemption; consider what they are, & weigh them in the ballance of thy heart, that hee may be wholly fixed in thy heart, that was for thee wholly fastned on the crosse. And in it consi∣der the loue of God the Father, the charity, the humility, the patience of God the Sonne, who loued vs his enemies more than himselfe; consider our sinnes and wounds which were healed by the precious balme of his bloud. Consider Oman (saith Bernard) how great are
those wounds for the cu∣ring of which the Lord Christ must needs bee wounded: If these wounds had not beene deadly, yea, and to eter∣nall death, the Sonne of God would neuer haue died that he might cure them. Besides, we must crucifie our sinnes, our members, as Christ was crucified; be crucified to the world, the world crucified to vs; he alone (saith S. Hierom) can glo∣ry in the crosse who takes it vp, and follow∣eth Christ, who crucifi∣eth his flesh & his con∣cupiscence.
So then we must crucifie our heart, that it may die to wick∣ed cogitations; crucifie our hands, so that they may haue no life to commit euill actions; crucifie our eyes, that they take no delight to gaze on worldly vani∣ties; crucifie our eares, that they listen not to fruitlesse and friuolous words; crucifie our tongue, yea, crucifie the old man that hath been a tenant so long, and hath had his habitation in our bosome, that he being dead hee may be
carried to his graue; that our soule may be infected no longer with his carnall impiety, and that wee may no longer loue but loathe, and for euer leaue his damnable company.
Besides the crucifying of the old man, we must suffer and beare afflicti∣ons, as pouerty, crosses, sicknesse, temptations, for what meruaile? If God did afflict his Son for our sinnes, if he af∣flict vs for our own: and God had in the arke of the Couenant both Manna, and the rod of
Aaron; shewing that as a Father hee nourisheth vs, and as a Father hee chastiseth vs as his Sonnes, and these af∣flictions are ensignes & markes of his loue: So saith Christ, I reproue & chastise those whom I loue. So Iacob whom he loued, and Moses the beloued of God and man. And Dauid a man according to GODS heart. So Solomon cal∣led Iedidia, i. the belo∣ued of God, yet if hee sinne, God will chastise him as a Father his Son; for God chastiseth vs to
humble vs, to make vs haue zeale and repen∣tance, to try our faith, obedience, patience, hope; as Iob, Though thou kill me, yet will I hope in thee; and these afflicti∣ons, yea armies of cros∣ses God sendeth against his children to chastise them, not to hurt them; as Dauid sent his armie against Absolon, Deale gently (for my sake) with the young man, euen with Absolon. He reproueth vs not in his fury, but in his mercy, according to our desire, and sen∣deth vs these vipers of
afflictions, that we may shake them off as Paul did, and make an anti∣dote, & treackle against sinne and death; for they are not vnto death, as Christ said of Lazarus, at least not vnto eternall death, but Chariots to carry vs vp to Heauen, for by afflictions wee must enter into the kingdome of heauen. Neither is this all, for wee must goe forth vnto Christ out of the camp, to beare reproaches & crosses for Christ; for Augustine saith, if we re∣member the passion of
Christ, there is nothing so difficult but wee will patiently endure, bea∣ring according to his commandement his crosse after him. And Simon Cyrenaeus exāple, to carry Christs crosse for him, first, because he did beare the crosse and reproach, yea died: now if the head, then much more the members; if that was done to the green wood, then much more to the dry wood; the seruants condition ought not to be better thā the masters: second∣ly, because Christ did
beare our reproach, died for vs; and therefore with Thomas let vs goe and die with him, and for him: thirdly, because the reproches which we endure for Christ, are not tearmed ours but his; so Christ saith to Iames and Iohn, Yee shall drinke of my cup. And Si∣mon Cyrenaeus could not say I beare mine owne crosse, but Christs crosse because he bare Christs crosse, and for Christ. And therefore S. Paul saith, I beare in my body the markes of the Lord Ie∣sus; and that in three respects.

First, As a member of Christ; for as the marke on the hand or forehead redounds not to that member, but to all the members, to the head, yea to the whole person, and that hand should not be branded, but that it is the hand of such a person; so the Christians branded and marked because the members of Christ, Christ is bran∣ded, marked, whipped in their person. Paul and Silas are they whipt in prison? Christ is whip∣ped in their person; Christ, though in hea∣uen,
yet he said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
Secondly, As an Am∣bassadour, for if the in∣iury offered to an Am∣bassadour redounds to the King who sends him; so the dishonour offered by Hanun King of the Ammonites vnto the Ambassadours of King Dauid, redounded vnto King Dauid, and he reuenged himselfe on the Ammonites; then the dishonour offered to Christs Ambassadours and Ministers redounds to Christ himselfe; for
who receiueth you, recei∣ueth mee; who reiecteth you, reiecteth mee; who dishonoureth you, dishonou∣reth me.
Thirdly, As a Souldi∣er: for as a souldier who receiueth wounds and skarres in his Princes quarels, or for his Coun∣tries sake, dares say hee beares his Princes wounds, the skarres of his Country; so Paul beares the skarres and markes of Christ Iesus, hee beares on him (as Chrysostome saith) the ensignes of honour, hee is not ashamed of them,
but he shews them open to the whole world; as Emperours that carrie openly their Coronets, Diadems, and precious ornaments; and as soul∣diers chosen out of companies to vndertake some enter prize, thinke themselues honoured (though they vndergoe those dangers with the danger of their liues) be∣cause they are preferred before the rest, though there be no merit: so the Apostles reioyced in that they were thought worthy to be whipped for Christ his sake; and
as a souldier is not asha∣med to shew his wounds to the world. So Serto∣rius hauing an eye lost in warre was not ashamed thereof, but glorying in it said, that others keepe in their houses their en∣signes and other marks of victory, but he carri∣ed thē in his body. Yea as men, yea noblemen thinke themselues ho∣noured with the order of a King; as for exam∣ple, the order of the Garter, though in it selfe it is a matter of nought: it is but a Garter, yet be∣cause it is of a royall in∣stitution,
and a King hath made this order, and held those Knights of that order to be his brethren and compani∣ons; so though ignomi∣nies, reproaches, im∣prisonment, & chaines, are vile, and naught in its selfe, and ignomini∣ous to the world, yet are they honourable to the Saints, Angels, & God, because they are the or∣der of Christ: the crosse is his order, the chaines are the order of Christs gates; and therefore Moses himselfe did e∣steeme more of this or∣der
of the reproach of Christ, than of all the ri∣ches of Aegypt. And Tertullian said, There is no nobler order of Chi∣ualry, nor no better and fairer colours than the chaines wherewith the Martyrs of Christ are chained and manacled with, and there are not more precious brace∣lets than the manacles wherwith the hands are chained. And it is said in the Ecclesiasticall Hi∣story of an ancient Fa∣ther Babylas the holy Bi∣shop of Antioch, who be∣ing detained in a filthy
and villanous prison for the name of Christ, wherein he died, did re∣quest his friends that came to visite him, that after his death they should bury with him his ornaments & marks of his valour, vnderstan∣ding by thē the chaines wherwith his hands and feet were chained. So our holy Martyrs in the time of Queene Marie did kisse the chaines and stakes wherewith they were cōsumed to ashes; nay, euen Kings haue much esteemed those skarres, and those per∣sons
that haue suffered for the name of Christ, as the Emperour Con∣stantine, who did kisse the holes of the eies and the skarres of those Bi∣shops, who had recei∣ued those markes of the Arians, for the mainte∣nance of Christs deity. And Chrysostome desired to see the dust of that body, namely of the A∣postle Paul, that had borne the markes of the Lord Iesus. By these markes and skarres are the faithfull Christian Martyrs knowne, for these skarres as a conse∣quent
shall they tri∣umph. For as. Arthur the Kings body being takē vp somewhat more than 600 yeeres after his death, was knowne to be his by nothing so much as by the print of ten seuerall wounds which appeared in his skull; and as Christ af∣ter his resurrection had his skarres and wounds whereby he was known; so shall the faithfull bee knowne, not hauing wounds or skarres, for their body shall be glo∣rious; but notwithstan∣ding knowne of God, of
Angels, of Saints, yea of their persecutors, for they shall see them whō they haue pierced, yea those persecutors that haue borne the marke of the Beast, of Antichrist against Christ, against his Gospell; and others that haue carried skars of their villanies, of glut∣tony, whoredome, and riot, and borne their owne crosse, which as bad Carpenters & wic∣ked men they haue he wen vnto themselues; for it is not the marke, nor the death, but the cause that maketh the
Martyr: they as bearing the marke of the world, the deuill, and the flesh, shall be cast into vtter darknesse; but the faith∣full bearing the markes and skarres of Christ, shall triumph for euer. For as the people of Rome would haue hin∣dered Paulus Aemilius after his victory to tri∣umph, there was one that stood vp, and made an oratiō in his behalfe, in the midst whereof he cast open his gowne, & shewed before them the infinite skarres and cuts hee had receiued vpon
his breast, the sight whereof preuailed with the people, that they all agreed in one, & gran∣ted Aemilius his tri∣umph, which he did in the sight of all the Ro∣mans, and went to the Capitoll. So God (the Angels also) beholding the reproaches, banish∣ments, wounds, yea, death, which wee haue endured for his sake, & being marked vpon our foreheads by the Angel, and hauing the seale of the liuing God; maugre the Deuill, the flesh, the world, we shall triumph
in the view of all the world, in the high Capi∣toll of Heauen, & there liue eternally.
But lest I draw my lines beyond the limits of due measure and ex∣ceed an Epistle, especial∣ly to such a small booke, or shape Hercules shooe for a childes foot, or make the gates & walls too big for the Citty, I here breake off.
These three soundly written by that reuerend Authour of blessed me∣mory, that worthy lear∣ned, religious, and no∣ble Gentleman Mr. du
Plessis, I haue translated them; and as Orphans and posthumes after their Fathers decease, I haue cloathed them in a strange habit, making them that spake French before, to speake Eng∣lish; which I presume to present to your Honor, and publish thē in your name to the world, that by your countenance, & vnder the wings of your Honourable protection it may safely walke a∣broad to the view and benefit of others, and that it may be profita∣ble to Gods Church, it
being no new fashion for those that publish any bookes whether of greater or lesser worth, whether their owne or others, vnlesse especial∣ly such workes wherein they haue beene transla∣tors, to present them to great and worthy perso∣nages. It were infinite to instance this point.
Now there are some reasons that haue mo∣ued me to dedicate this Posthume vnto your Honour; First, because great men are content and desire to reade great mens workes; So
the Eunuch of Candace did reade the Prophet Esaias, of the Royall bloud, and Kings and Princes doe reade the bookes of Kings and Princes. Secondly, be∣cause as this Noble man had his Motto, Ar∣te & Marte: So your Honour as Alexander may bee represented with a Horse and a Booke, the one to signi∣fie your desire to marti∣all indeuours, the other your diligence and de∣sire in letters. Alexan∣der had no sooner off his Helmet, but he took
in hand Homers Iliads; So you delight not one∣ly in Martiall actiuitie, but fauour the study of good letters. Thirdly, because they are Or∣phans, and haue need of a good and powerfull Patron in a forreine land, and deserue to be beloued and protected for their Fathers sake, as Mephibosheth for Iona∣thans. Besides, to whom doth a Treatise of god∣linesse, more fitly agree, than to him that profes∣seth godlinesse, and hath the power of it dwelling in his heart? or
to whom should I com∣mend the patronage of truth, better than to him that is a fauourer and a louer of the truth, and of such as loue the truth? your true zeale and desire of the know∣ledge of Iesus Christ crucified, your care to maintaine the honour of God, your constant profession, practise, and defence of the same Truth and Religion, which you haue beene borne and bred in; to this may be added mine own desire to giue some testimony of my dutie
to your Lordship, which could not suffer me else∣where to seeke the shel∣ter of this Orphane vo∣lume; not doubting but your Honour will accept it in good part. Apelles drawing the counterfeit of Honour, pourtrayed her holding in the one hand a starre, in the other a stone; tea∣ching that although Noble mindes should reach as high as the skie, yet they should not dis∣daine to looke as low as the earth. The widdow in the Gospell offered a little mony, the woman
a little oyle to her Saui∣our. Artaxerxes accep∣ted of a few drops from the hands of a poore Cynetas. Mercurie vouch∣safed to drinke of Phile∣mons earthen pot; Sigis∣mond tooke a Pomegra∣nate; and Philip of Ma∣cedon accepted a bunch of grapes presented by a simple countreyman; and his sonne Alexan∣der did parua libenter ac∣cipere; all of them did rather consider the mind of the giuer than the gift. I know your Ho∣nour will kindly accept my small Mite, if you
ballance it with the wil∣lingnesse of my minde. If you iudge them wor∣thy, vouchsafe your Pa∣tronage; if not, your pardon, at least your gracious and fauoura∣ble acceptance. Thus crauing pardon for my boldnesse, I cease to trouble your Honour, not to pray for you; the Lord establish your Ho∣nour in euery good word, and make you rich in name and fame by your good works, to his glory, to the good of his Church, to your euerlasting Honour in
this life, and eternall happinesse in the life to come.

