



MADAME,
AFter that I had receaved some woundes in the house of my friends,Zach 13.6 I contracted much me∣lancholy, which brought vpon me so great sicknesse and weaknesse,2 Cor. 1.9 that I receaved in my selfe the sentence of death: In the which estate your L. may easily consider, that such a man as I, both should and would haue deepe meditation of death, and so indeede I had, being resolved to die at that tyme: yet it was the goodwill of GOD to continue my life, which hath con∣tinued since that tyme, some sixe yeares or more: therefore I thought it was good for me to make better preparation against the next assault of that enemie, which to all true Christians (as witnesseth the A∣postle) is the last enemie:1 Cor. 15.26 and so I set my selfe to recognosce both my terrours and consolations in that first conflict, for remedie against the one, and confirmation of the other. I read in Scripture, in good Christian mens works, and in Heathen writers, so much as could come to my hand concerning death; and gathered the same together as I thought meete for my purpose mixing them in this treatise, as you may see: The trueth is, my first intention in writing, was only to revise the same for mine owne vse: but after that I did let some of mine acquaintance see it, men lear∣ned and fearing GOD, who told me, I did not well to obscure it, seing it might doe good to others, I gaue way to their coun∣sell, and remembered the common axiome, Bonum quo communius eo melius. The naturall gift that I haue of vtterance▪ be∣ing more Laconick than Atticke, I haue vsed in writting heereof: yea, the short∣nesse not only of sentences; but of purpose also I purposely affectate in treating of this subject Death, yet labouring to bee plaine: for I thinke, if either information, or consolation concerning death might be well contryved in as few short aphorismes, as there be letters in an A, B, C: it were the better both for the mynd and memory of the patient in that agonie.
Now the reasons wherefore I haue de∣dicated this little treatise to your L: are: first, because I haue this honour to be your L. kinseman, and of your surname. Se∣condly, because for honour, vertue;
viz. Pietie, charitie, sobrietie, I esteeme more of your L. than any one of my kinsfolk and surname. Thirdly, because your L. is not ashamed to professe, I was the man who first taught you the rudiments of re∣ligion, to make you thinke of the way how to liue well. Now I pray GOD that the reading, and meditation of this treatise may be a meane to helpe your L. to die well, I thinke it needlesse to put a lon∣ger Epistle before so little a Booke, least the head should bee bigger than the bo∣die, and so the birth monstrous. So I rest,

