



RIGHT WORSIPFVLL,
THe Lord promi∣sed vnto Abraham to bee his shielde and his exceed∣ing great reward; the same he promiseth to euery true Israelite, the childe of Abra∣ham: the Creator will bee the creatures shielde, the King his subiects target, the father a buckler to his child,
God to man both a shielde and a rewarde, the infinite and immortal God the por∣tion of a finite and mortall man, yea a crowne to dust and ashes: what better shield can we desire? what greater rewarde can wee require? what greater honour, digni∣tie, or profite can wee de∣maund or obtayne? Hee is our summum bonum, our su∣preme good, the good God who is goodnesse it selfe. The worthy subiect of our meditation, the cheifest ob∣iect of our contemplation, capable to take away our feare, to satisfie our desire.
For desire we any thing? be∣hold a reward, are we afraid of any thing? beholde a shielde, yea a more excellent shielde then that of Achilles, that contained in it the de∣scription of heauen, earth, and sea, for our shield is the Creator of the whole world a heauenlier shield, thē that brasen one of Numa Pompi∣lius, feined to be sent downe from heauen, for the preser∣uation of the city of Rome, for the God of heauen is our shielde to preserue vs: a ri∣cher shield then those of Sa∣lomon, that were of beaten golde, a more precious and
diuine shield, then Perseus christall shield, giuen him by Pallas, to preserue him from that snaky headed Medusa, (who turned menn into stones) by vertue of which shield he ouercame her; for by ye vertue of this shield gi∣uen vs by Pallas, that is wise¦dome it selfe, yea himselfe giuen to vs as a shield, wee haue the victorie ouer the Deuil that old serpent, that striues to turne our fleshy heartes into hearts of stone, a better and a bigger shield, then that of great Goliah, how great and good so euer it was, it coulde not couer
him all ouer, nor preserue him from death; whereas God who is our shield, both couers vs, and preserues vs. This our shield cannot bee peirced, wil not betray vs us that of Brasidas did, it can not be taken away from vs by the Deuill, as those gol∣den shieldes of Salomon were by Shiskak King of Egypt. And therefore a shield wor∣thy to be made much of, for if Aiax and Vlisses striued so much for ye shield of Achilles if Epaminondas being woun∣ded to death, asked if his shield were whole, and reioy¦ced therat, yea kissed it, how
much more must wee striue to get this shield, and hauing gotten it, to esteeme it, to reioyce at it, neuer to cast it away, rather to cast away our weapōs then this shield. It was more dishonorable in a Romane souldier to fling away his shielde, then his sword, his dart or speare, for the which fault hee was dis∣graced, degraded, and pu∣nished; how much more di∣shonourable, nay dangerous will it be for vs to cast away our shield, by the which we are couered, which the darts of Sathan can not peirce, without the which we must
needes perish; nay cast away our shield, and God can not be our reward; and therefore let vs take vp this shield, em∣brace it and keepe it, and as spiritual and Christian soul∣diers armed from top to toe with the whole armour of God, hauing on the breast plate of righteousnesse, the sword of the Spirit, the hel∣met of saluation, the shield of faith, fight vnder the ban∣ner of Christ Iesus our cap∣taine, against the Deuill, the world, and the flesh; we shall be able to stand against the wiles of the Deuill, and to quench all the fiery darts of
the wicked, and so hauing fought a good fight, hauing finished our course, hauing kept our faith, there is laid vp for vs a crown of righte∣ousnes, a crowne of glory, a crowne of life, not one of Lawrel, of brasse, of siluer, or of gold, giue to Roman Conquerors, but a glorious an immortall and eternall crowne, which God the iust iudge shall giue vs at the lat∣ter day yea God himselfe shal be our crowne, our glo∣ry, and our life; yea shall bee all in all in vs.
This is the Summe of that diuine meditation, which
that learned diuine and re∣ligious gentleman du Plessis penned in the French tong, which I haue translated in∣to English, and am bold to present it to your Worships consideration. Of all things that moued me to offer this small treatise to your Wor∣ship: the first is, your great cōtinual & continued affec∣tion & fauour towardes our French Church of this citie of Canterbury, the second, your particular affection & vndeserued loue towardes me; the last though not the least, your calling, as being not only a Souldier, a Cap∣taine,
and a Knight in re∣gard of this world, but also a Christian souldier and a spi∣rituall Knight, fighting vn∣der Christs colours, against your spirituall enemies, ha∣uing GOD both for your shielde and your exceeding great rewarde, so that you may say with Dauid ye Lord is my shield and my portion Imbrace therefore the di∣uine meditation of the Au∣thour, accept the good will and affection of the transla∣tour; make much of this shield, it will couer you, it it will defende you from all harmes; esteeme much this
reward, & you shal enioy all good yea God himselfe. I be seech that God, who is the shield and the reward of the faithfull, to be both a shield to preserue you from all euill, and your rewarde both of grace here on earth, and of glory in the life to come. ∴
Canterbury the 10. of May. 1620.

