


IN this wretched time Sir, wherein vngodlinesse
(which was woont but to whisper men in the eare,
and to mumble betweene the teeth) hath bin so bold
as to step into the pulpit, and to belke out blasphe∣mies
against God and his Gospell: I take vpon mee
(though a new kind of hardinesse, as in respect of
the small abilitie that God hath put into mee) to conuince hir, euen
by hir owne principles and peculiar records, that if I cannot make
hir to come backe againe to a better mind, I may at leastwise yet
make hir hold hir peace for shame, and keepe close hir venim in hir
hart: A right great enterprise, and (in the iudgement of most men)
ouerhard, but yet such as wherein I see great helpes to imbolden me;
namely the World, Man, the open examples of all ages, and (at one
Woord) God himselfe (who neuer faileth those which seeke his glo∣rie)
and all that euer he hath vttered concerning himselfe, as well
in the creating as in the goering of all things. The world, for that
it is as a shadow of Gods brightnesse: and Man, for that he is his
image and likenesse: And both of them, for that if it appeare euen
by the philosophers themselues, that the World was made for man,
how greatly then are we bound vnto the Creator thereof? How
great is the dignitie of this creature? and what else is his shootean∣ker
and his welfare, but to sticke wholly vnto God? Soothly he for
whom the world was made, must needes bee made for more than the
World. He for whome so durable and substantiall a thing was
made, must needs be made for another than this fraile and wretched
life, that is to wit for the euerlasting life, with him that is the
euerlasting. And that is the foundation of all Religion. For Reli∣gion
(to speake properlie) is nothing else but the schoole wherein
we learne mans dutie towards God, and the way to be lincked most
straightly vnto him. Againe, in the world we see a stedie and fast∣settled
order, and euery creature to do seruice in his sort. Onely man
withdraweth his dutie, shrinking from God, and wandring away
in himselfe. He that is most indebted, is lothest to pay and least able

to pay. He for whome the highest thinges are made, is become a bond∣slaue
to the basest and vilest thinges: And the Recordes of all ages
are as inditements against all mankind; prouing him to be vnthank∣full
to God, a murtherer of his neighbors, a violater of nature, and an
enemie to himself. Shall not he then, which instead of dooing his
dutie, is not asbamed to offend God, stand in dread of the death which
wayteth vpon him for his offence? es: for what is God, but Iustice?
What is Iustice, but a iudgement of duety? And before that iudge∣ment
who dareth appeare? What remedy than is there, both for
Gods glorie and for mans welfare: but that the debt be discharged
by release, and the Iustice satisfied with free fauour? The duty ther∣fore
of trew Religion, is to conuict vs by the Law, and to iustifie vs
by grace, to make vs feele our discase, and there with all to offer vs
remedy. But who shall purchase vs this grace so necessarie for mans
welfare? Either the world (as we thinke) or else man. Nay, what is
there in man (I say euen in the best man) which burneth not before
Gods Iustice, and which setteth it not on fire? And what shall become
of the world then, if man for whom it is created be vnable to stand?
soothly it is the welbeloued sonne of God that must stand for all:
the righteous for the vnrighteous, the mightie for the vnmightye,
the rich for the poore, the dearling and the welbeloued for them
that are in the displeasure and curse of God his father, and the same
(say I) is our Lorde Iesus Christ. The foole (sayth the Psalmist) hath
said in his heart,Psalme. 14, Auicen the Arabian. There is no God. And a Heathen man hath passed
yet further, saying: Hee that denieth the one God and his pro∣urdence
in all thinges, is not onely witlesse, but also senselesse.
And his so saying is, because the world which offereth it selfe con∣tinually
vnto vs, replenisheth our wittes with the knowledge of
God: euen in this respect, that with one view of the eye, we see this
vniuersall masse furnished with so many and so diuerse thinges, lin∣ked
one to another, and tending all to one marke. Traly I dare say
and by Gods grace I dare vnder take to prooue, that whosocuer will
lay before him wholly in one table (so as he may see them together
with one view) the promises and prophesies concerning Christ, the
comming of our Lord Iesus and the proceeding of his Gospell, he shall
not be able to deny, euen by the very rules of Philosophie, but that he
was sent of God, yea and that he was God himself. Howbeit, in this
lyeth our fault, that (whether it be through ignoraunce or through
negligence) we consider not the incomparable worke of our creator

and Recreator, but by piecemeale, without laying the one of them to
the other: like as if a man would iudge of the whole space of time
by the night, or by some one season of the yeare, or by some one of
the Elements: or as if he would iudge of a building by some one
quarter: or of an Oration by some syllables thereof: whereas not∣withstanding,
Gods wisedome in creating thinges cannot be conside∣red,
but in the vnion of the partes with the whole, and of themselues
among themselues: nor his goodnesse in recreating or renewing
them, and in regenerating of mankind for whom he made the world,
but by the heed full conferring of all times from the first byrth of
Man vnto the seconde byrth, and repairing of him againe, which it
hath pleased God to ordaine and make for him.
As for the world, it is sufficiently conuersant before our eyes,
and would God it were lesse grauen in our hartes: and therefore
let vs leaue the world, and busie our selues in the vniuersall table
of mans saluation and reparation. When man had by his sinne
drawne Gods wrath and the decay of the world vppon his owne
head: Gods euerlasting wisedome, euen the same whereby God had
created him, stepped in and procured his fauour, so as it was promi∣sed
vnto the first man, that Christ should come and breake the ser∣pents
head, and make attonement betweene God and man. That was
the foundation-stone of the wonderfull building of the Church, and
the seede whereof men were to be regenerated new againe, whome
God did as it were create, beget, and adopt new againe in his sonne,
which is his euerlasting wisedome. This promise was deliuered o∣uer
from hand to hand, and conueyed from Father to Sonne, solemn∣ly
declared to Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob: committed as a pawne
by Moses to the people of Israell, celebrated by Dauid in his songs,
and renewed from time to time by many excellent Prophets, which
pointed out the time, place, and manner of his comming, and sette
downe plainly and expresly his stocke, his parents and his birth, ma∣ny
hundred yeares, yea and some thousand yeares a forehand: which
are such thinges as noman could know, nor any creature teach or
conceiue. What were they else therefore but Herauldes that fore∣shewed
the comming of the king of the world into the world: and
certes by another spirite than the spirite of the world: After a
long successe of these Herauldes, came the sauiour in the selfe
same manner which they had foretolde and painted out. What∣soeuer
they had saide of him, agreed vnto him, and which more

is could agree to none but him. Who then can doubt that the promise
is not performed, and that he is not the bringer of the promised grace
to the World? And seing that the prophets could not tell any tidings
of him but from God, from whence can he be sent but from God? I
know well that this one thing is a stumbling blocke vnto vs, name∣ly
that after the sounding of so many clarions and trumpets, we see
a man in outward show base, and to the sight of our fleshly eies
contemptible, come into the world; whereas notwithstanding if we
opened the eies of our mind, we should contrariwise espie in that
wretchednesse, the verie Godhead, and in that humane weakenesse,
the selfesame infinite almightines which made both the world and
man. He was borne say you: but of a virgin. He was weake: but yet
with his onely voice he healed all infirmities. He died: but yet he rai∣zed
the dead, and rose himselfe from the dead too. If thou beleeue
that, thou beleeuest that he was both sent and susteined by God. Or if
thou wilt doubt thereof, tell mee then how he did the things after his
death, which are witnessed by thine owne histories? As soone as he
was borne say I, he by and by chaunged the outward shape of the
world, making it to spring new again all after another sort.
When he was once crucified, he turned the reproch of his crosse into
glorie, and the curse thereof into a blessing. He was crowned with
thornes, and now Kings and Emperors doo cast downe their crownes
and Diademes at his feete. What a death was that, which did such
things as all the liuing could not doo? By ignorance he subdued
learning; by folly, wisedome; by weakenesse, power, by miserie, vic∣torie;
by reproch, triumphs; by that which seemed not to be, the things
which seemed verily and chiefly for to be. Twelue Fisher-men in
effect, did in short space subdue the whole world vnto him, by suffe∣ring
and by teaching to suffer, yea and by dying, and by teaching to
die And the great Christian kingdomes which we now gaze at, and
which we exalt so much, are but small remnants of their exploites,
and little pieces of their conquests. If his birth offend thee, looke vp∣pon
the Heraulds that went a fore him, and vppon the Trumpetters
that told tidings of him, both in the beginning and in the chiefe state
of the world, from whom, but from him that made the worlde? And
wherefore in all ages, but for the welfare of the world? If his crosse
offend thee, see how the Emperours and their Empyres, the Idols whom
they worshipped, and the deuils whom they serued. Lye altogether o∣uerthrowne,
broken in pieces, fast bound and striken dumbe at the

feete of this crucified man. And how, but by a power passing the po∣wer
of man passing the power of Kings, passing the power of An∣gels,
yea, passing the power of all creainpes together If the little
show of the Apostles moue thee: consider how the silionettes of those
Fishermen, dre we the pride of the world, namely  wise-men, the
Philosophers, and the Orators, by ignorance (as thou tearmest it) to
beleeue, and by folly to die for beleiuing. And forbeleaing of what?
euen of things contrary to the lawe of the world, and to the witte of
man: namely that this Iesus Christ crucified is God, and that it is a
blesfull thing to indure all misfortune for his sake. Behold also how
one of them drawes me into his nette the lesser Asia, another Italye,
the third AEgypt. And some other of them extend vnto the sythians,
the Ethiopians, and the Indians, and vnto other places, whither the
power of the most renowned Empyres did neuer attaine, and which
haue hardly come to our knowledge now within these bundred yea∣res,
and yet haue we euen there found very great conquests of theirs
& like renowmed toens of their victories as are heere among our
selues. Nay, which more is, see how these conquero enriched with

from him, and that they be nothing, further foorth than they are in
him and for him? that is to say, that he liueth and maketh thm to
liue, yea euen for eer, which die in him and for him. surely vppon
the considering of this table, we become as men rauished, distraught,
and besides our selues, and haue nothing to say, but that hee which
created man and the world of nothing, and none other was able to
make and regenerate man and the world againe of nothing, euen in
despite of man and the world This inuisible God which hath made
himselfe visible by creating the visible world & hath she wed him∣selfe
almightic, in  infirmitie of con
temptible man, is the  Man, the Sonne of
God, and is come in the flesh  Lord.
Heere Sir, you haue in few wordes the oot-anker of this booke,
wherein I declare the trewnesse of the christian Religion, and that
(as I hope) with such Reasons, that the despisers of God, if they will
leeue, shall at leastwise find themselues graueled to gainsay it.
Moreouer to offer this to your Maiestie, I haue chiefly two causes, the
one is, that God hath made you to be borne, not onely a Christian, but

also a Christian Prince, to whom it belongeth chiefly both for him∣selfe
and for others, to knowe what the Christian Religion is. For ye
shalbe the more instamed to aduunce it, when you be throughly
perswaded that it is not a deuise of man as other Religions are, but
the Law and truth of God, which maketh both kings and kingdoms.
and hath made you a manye  and set you ouer men. To be short, that
it is both your prospeitie in this life which dependeth vppon Gods
gratious goodnes, and your welfare in the other life which is of far
greater importance, than all that euer we can endure or attaine vn∣to
here.
The other reason is, that forasmuch as God hath called me to be a∣bout
your Maiestie (as I hope) to do you seruice in that notable worke
which he is about to doe in our daies to his glory, and wherein he
hath put into your hart to imploy your person without sparing of
your life: reason would that the fruits both of my labors and of my
leisure should be yours, as well as the field is yours, without that it
should be in my power to dispose otherwise thereof. And I pray the
almighty to increase his grace in you from day to day, and to giue
vnto you his spirit to go for ward with his worke, and vnto me to
do you seruice to the vttermost of my small power as long as I lyue.
Amen.

