



HAuing published many bookes in defence of the truth, against the aduersaries of the truth, (the Pope, his Cardinals, Iesuites, and Iesuited Popelings I meane) and perceiuing by many arguments, that sundry of my deare Country men are not yet fully resolued in certain maine points of religion, vpon which all the rest, in some sort, do depend; I haue deemed it a la∣bour very necessary for the common good, to dis∣pute those most intricate points pro & contra Dia∣logue-wise; that so all difficulties therein may bee cleered, all obscurity taken away, and the truth plainly laid open, before the eyes of euery indifferent reader.
The Papists most impudently bragge and boast, that they maintaine, keepe and defend that faith and doctrine which S. Peter and S. Paul, deliuered to the

Romans, that neither their Pope, nor their Church can erre, that their Church, and none but their Church, is able to shew and truly to proue a perpe∣tuall vninterrupted succession of their Bishops and Priests: that the written word of God containeth not all things necessary to be beleeued vnto saluation, for that it sheweth not the holy Bible to be canonical and that originall sinne remaineth only materially in the bodies of the regenerate, and not formally in their mindes, wils, and hearts. All these points, and euery of them (though most difficult and intricate) I haue taken in hand to confute, relying vpon Gods holy assistance, who neuer forsaketh the truth. What I haue performed, let your wisedomes and others iudge. The work such as it is, I dedicate to your worships, not only to giue as a signe of a grate∣full minde for your kinde fauours to me-ward; but much more to intimate to the world, that inward ioy of mine heart, which issueth out of your rare zeale to Gods eternall truth, constant loyalty to your most gracious Soueraigne, and painefull labours for the good of our Church and Com∣mon-weale. The almighty giue you many hap∣py yeares vpon earth, and vouchsafe to increase his manifold graces in you, that you may dayly more and more (and others by your Christian example) imploy your painefull labours for the aduancement of his glorious Gospell, the cut∣ting downe of sinne, the extirpation of late start-vp▪ Popery, and the rooting out of all trai∣terous Iesuites, and Iesuited Popelings, which

haue beene, and still are, too much fauoured and winked at, by sundry in authority, especi∣ally in these North-parts of noble England. Dixi. March. 21. 1609.

