



YOur Maiesty may bee pleased (most gratious Soueraigne) to call to minde the Dedicatory Preface of Saint Luke, by him prefixed before the Gospell of Christ, and directed to a Lay-Magistrate, in these words; Luke 1.3. I thought good to write vnto thee, most excellent Theophilus. Where, the name THEOPHILVS, signifying a Lo∣uer

of God, manifesteth the interest that euery De∣uout Christian, as well Laick as Ecclesiastick, hath in the Gospell of Christ, to reade, and enioy the com∣fort therof, as the foundation of his Faith, and diuine Charter of his Saluation. And the Attri∣bute of [] Act. 23.26. & Act. 24.3. MOST EXCELLENT, being ascribed to Temporall Gouernors, pointeth out his Magistra∣cie; to note the Obligation, that bindeth euery Chri∣stian Gouernor to professe the same Gospel; and, according to his power, to promote and protect it. As soone therefore as I thought to finde a Parallell to this so honourable an Example, no-one appeared in this age of Christianity either more Worthie, for reli∣gious Deuotion, of the name of THEOPILVS; or, for Protecting the Gospell of Christ, more deser∣uing the Attribute of MOST EXCELLENT, than your Sacred Maiesty.
For I could not conceiue where to finde a more faithfull Professor among (I say, not onely Prin∣ces, but) euen Persons Christians, than Him, who, in a time of Iealouzie and greatest extremity, resolued to resigne his dearest Choice, his inheritance of a Re∣gall Scepter, yea and life it selfe, rather than to in∣thrall his precious Soule to Romish Superstition. And as for the protection of the same Gospell of Faith, to none can this be more proper than to Him,

who (not to question the first beginning thereof) most iustly possesseth the Royall Title of DEFEN∣DER OF THE FAITH. Now hauing said thus much of this Right, I beseech your Maiestie gra∣tiously to vouchsafe a briefe, yet cleare Repre∣sentation thereof.
The same (Gal. 3.23. THE FAITH) so called by the Apostle, is taken by way of Excellencie, to signifie onely that Profession of Christianity, which con∣taineth all things Necessary to Saluation; euen as he calleth it 1 Cor. 9.18. & 23. The Gospell of Faith. And this Faith, which is called but Ephes. 4.5. One, Saint Iude in his Catholike Epistle will haue knowne to be onely that, which was (when he writ) but [] S. Iude ver. 3. Once de∣liuered vnto the Saints. Which one particle (Once) must necessarily condemne euery diuers Af∣ter-Faith for euer. For Saint Paul, against all other Gospels,Gal. 1.8, 9. Besides that, which then had been Preached, is peremptory, pronouncing Euery one, (be he Man, or Angel,) that should suggest or teach it, Anathema and Accursed. To which Apo∣stolicall Censure Antient Fathers, against the He∣retikes of their times, haue All subscribed; accor∣ding to that Comment, made by one of them vpon the same words of the Apostle, thus;Annuntiare quid, &c. Lirinens. To deliuer any thing among Christians, BESIDES that which

was once receiued, neither was, nor is lawfull, nor yet euer wil be. This one speculation may be as good as a thousand, to discerne which kinde of Pro∣fessors, at this day, may most properly be said to pro∣fesse THE FAITH. The (now) Church of Rome hath composed a new Romane Creed & Faith,Bulla Pij Quarti. con∣sisting, by exact disquisition, of moe than twenty Arti∣cles; each one of which is prescribed to be beeleeued vpon Necessity of Saluation. Among which are mentioned Transubstantiation, Worship of Ima∣ges, Indulgences, & the like; notwithstanding they be as newly-old as were theIosh. 9.Gibeonites pretences of torne-shooes, and mouldy-bread, by which they feined themselues to haue come from farre. For Some of these doctrines were not Deliuered vntill fiue or sixe hundred, and some not till more than a Thousand yeeres after that Once-prescribed Time of the holy Apostles, as diuers Doctors of the same Church are ready to confesse, from point to point. And although Some few of Them had obtained an opinion of Probability in the daies of antiquity; yet can it not be shewed that any one of them had stam∣ped on it the opinion of Necessity of Beleefe, vpon losse of Saluation. Which is a Character as proper to the Gospell of Christ, as was to Cae∣sar's coyne the Image of Caesar. Wherfore, euery

new Article of Faith (by S. Pauls Anathema) be∣ing no better than a new Heresie, although the Ro∣mish Opposites dart against our Professors (as they did in the Councel of Trent) their many Anathe∣ma's and Curses, yet stand we secure, knowing that as the Exod. 7. Serpent of Aaron deuoured the Serpents of the Magitians in Aegypt; euen so That one Anathema of S. Paul must needs cōdemne all the Anathema's which they denounce in Defence of That, which is not THE FAITH once deliuered to the Saints, in the dayes of the Apostles.
But because, as the first mooueable Sphere aboue turneth by it's rapture all the inferior Orbes daily about the world; so one Romish Article, to wit, The Catholike, ROMANE, Mother, and Mi∣stresse Church, without which there is no Sal∣uation, carrieth and maketh current, by the violence thereof, all other Romish Articles, albeit otherwise neuer so New, False, Idolatrous, or Pernicious: and for that this One is found by Experience to bee, in that Profession, their strongest Enchantment; This this ARTICLE therefore haue I selected to be the Subiect of this Treatise. Proouing her Addi∣tion of the word (ROMANE) to the CATHOLIKE or Vniuersall CHVRCH, to be (by many confessed Propositions) the Deprauation of that our Christian

Article in the Apostles Creed, viz. THE CA∣THOLIKE CHVRCH: Her pretence of an Vni∣uersall Motherhood, to all Catholike Chur∣ches, to be a manifest Derogation to diuerse ancient Churches (among others, the Church of Bri∣taine) which are confessed to haue bene, before that euer Rome had so much as any face or name of a Church: and her Challenge of Vniuersall Mistris∣ship and Dominion thorow-out all Christendome to bee, in effect, a blasphemous Condemnation of most godly Generall Councels, Churches, and Bi∣shops of Primitiue ages (diuers whereof are by name Registred for Saints and Martyrs in the Calendar of the, now, Church of Rome it selfe:) who, as is Confessed, haue consented Some to impose Lawes vpon the Romane Church, Some to con∣temne her Excommunications, and All to haue denyed absolute Subiection vnto Her, euen in the times of her purest Integrity.
And because all Temporall Estates at this day are included in the same Romish Article of Vniuer∣sall Dominion, therefore both Regall Supre∣macie ouer Ecclesiastiques is in this Treatise de∣fended, by the confessed Examples of the first and best Christian Emperours; and also the Ciuill Subiection of the Clergie vnto Them is iustified,

by the Confessed Obedience performed by the first and best Popes of the same Times.
After this Suruey thus taken of the Churches Christian, in the Primitiue ages, followeth a Con∣templation of the State of Christendome, as it is at this present: wherein appeareth a world of Chri∣stian Churches of remote Nations, reduced to these Generall appellations, to wit, Grecians, Assy∣rians, Aethiopians, Aegyptians, Armenians, Russians, with diuers other particular Churches, for Time as ancient, for Faith as fundamentall, for Succession as Continuall, and for the Profes∣sion thereof (because daily suffering grieuous pres∣sures and afflictions for the name of Christ) as much, or rather, in that respect, more constant than the Romanists haue bene for many ages: All which (notwithstanding the Romane Article of The Ca∣tholike Romane Church, without which there is no Saluation) stand as opposite to the Church of Rome; contemning her Excommunications, and abhorring Subiection vnto her, as they euer did. A perfect Argument of the Falsity, Nullity, and Impiety of that Romish Article, which wee now impugne.
In the last place is presented the Separation of all Protestant Churches from the Church of

Rome, proouing from the Testimonies of diuerse Romish Writers, the Beginning thereof to haue bene Iust, and the Continuance Necessary. Nor can they say, that their Arguments, for defence of that Romane Article (although most specious) are not answered; which herein are iustly retorted vpon them. As to call for the Names of any Protestants before LVTHER; whose names they themselues could relate in Martyring of them: As to Challenge those to haue broken their Vow, in Departing from that Church (namely, a superstitious Vow) which they did, to preserue their Christian Vow ìn Baptisme, which requireth sinceritie in the Faith· As to obiect Schisme, vpon that Article of Necessary Subie∣ction to the Romane Sea; by which she her selfe (diuiding her selfe from all Christian Churches in the world, and all others from her selfe) is prooued to be, of all other, the most Schismaticall: As to impute vnto vs the guilt of Damning all our fore-Fathers, by reason of that her former Article, whereby are necessarily Damned most of the Chri∣stian Fathers, Confessors, and Martyrs of Primi∣tiue Times; besides the Innumerable professed Chri∣stians of Remote Nations (as hath bene said) yea and many Thousands moe, who, though otherwise Romish, yet do not belieue all her Tridentine faith;

(Not to speake of infinite numbers of PROTE∣STANTS farre, more sincerely Professed in the Christian Faith than They:) Finally, as to assume a Priuilege to her Romane See of not-Erring; al∣beit that Church is prooued to be, of all Others, most subiect to Errour: and her Seate, which is ROME, to be the onely Citie prophesied off by the Spirit of God, in Scripture, (accordingly as her owne Iesuites, from the testimonies of Antiquity, and the light of Gods word acknowledge them∣selues bound to belieue, and professe) is to become the Seate of ANTICHRIST.
The Manifestation of all which Points (Most Re∣noumed Soueraigne) I do subiect to your gratious Patronage, not in any spirit of Malignancie, to make the Schisme and breach, which is now betweene Rome and Vs, bigger; which I intend to perswade against thorrow-out this Treatise, by reueiling and remoouing the onely Bar and Partition-wall, which is her Doctrine of Necessary Beliefe of the (now) Tridentine Creed, and Article of Necessary Subiection to the Romane See; the onely Hinde∣rance of a free Generall Councell. An Impiety and Perniciousnesse, which was the very Cordo∣lium of the most Iudicious of Kings, your Maiesties late Father, and our Soueraigne Lord and King

IAMES, of euer blessed and suruiuing Memorie▪ in whose heart God had first imprinted that Blessed Motto of Christ, BEATI PACIFICI, before it was stamped in his Coine; being euer desirous to keepe Ciuill Vnion, Commerce, and Contracts with Them with whom naythelesse (the Case so standing) Epist. ad Front. Du∣caeum. He held it Impossible to haue any Spirituall Re∣conciliation.
Thus not doubting but that the Father's reli∣gious heart dwelleth in the Sonnes brest, I pray GOD so still to protect your Maiestie, in the De∣fence of that THE FAITH, whereby your Throne may be established vpon earth, and your Soule euer∣lastingly blessed in heauen.

