



IT is not long sithence (most gracious Soueraigne) that one inscribed A moderate Answer, did traduce before your Ma∣iestie the late Discouerer of Ro∣mish rebellious Positions for an iniurious and slanderous Pam∣phleter: Now therefore Inno∣cencie, which (Gen. 2. 25. though naked) was neuer ashamed, hath charged me to manifest my selfe vnto your Highnesse, and, together with my Aduersarie, to appeale vnto your incomparable wise∣dome, which I do in so constant assurance of an vpright conscience, as that I shall willingly remit that iust ad∣uantage, which the difference of comparison both be∣tweene a legitimate or conformable subiect, and a per∣son suspiciously degenerate; as also betweene a Minister of simple truth, and a professed Aequiuocator, doth offer vnto me: and to be contented onely with that respect which the equitie of my cause may allow. It hath plea∣sed

my Aduersarie thus to decipher me: Answer cap. 1. in initio. The Discoue∣rer (saith he) is like to the espiall of king Alexander, who brought word that an army of enemies was approching, whē they were but a small companie of sillie Apes, imitating soul∣diers in a march from the mountaines: thus he, as a man dis∣tempered in his braine, and deluded in his fantasie, hath be∣held our Catholike Priests, whom in euery page he calleth se∣ditious and traiterous persons. This then onely was my error; I thought, indeed, that I had discouered a com∣panie of men, but my Answerer telleth me they were but beastes: and I partly beleeue him, for what men could euer be so sauage, as (for so they haue professed concerning Protestants) to depriue men of the due re∣spects of all humanitie? Notwithstanding though I had bene so much mistaken, as not to know that his Monks were but Munkies, and his Priests but Apes, yet sure I am (and he so acknowledgeth) that they were a compa∣nie of creatures which did imitate souldiers on the moun∣taines. This I then partly discouered, and now (God willing) will proue more plentifully in this Replie. The mountaines, from whence they march, be those Apoc. 17. 9. Seuen hils of Babylon, whereon the woman clothed in scarlet sit∣teth: which (by the confession of two most learned Ribera & Viega in their commē∣taries vpon this place. Ie∣suites) doth signifie Rome, as it must be in the dayes of An∣tichrist. May it now please your sacred Maiestie, to see how exactly they imitate Souldiers in their march? Par∣sons, teaching persecution against all Kings and States Protestant, doth propound for his imitation the exam∣ple of Dauid in his conflict against Goliah; Allen the ex∣ample of Eliah in calling, if it were possible, for fire from heauen to consume the messengers of Kings; Renalds the ex∣ample of Iabel to knocke Generals on the head; Bellarmine

the example of Iehoida and other Priestes for murthering of opposite Queenes; Sanders the example of Mattathias, who fought against King Antiochus; Simancha the exam∣ple of Heathenish Scythians, who murthered their naturall King Scyles; Buchier the example of Sampson, to kill, if they can, a thousand, of his supposed Philistims with the iaw-bone of an Asse. These, and many such like be but his sillie Apes: which I should rather iudge to be of that kind whereof the prouerbe speaketh, , because they cannot be discerned but by euents. But this Moderate answerer may be referred to our faithfull Replie, wherein he will appeare often to haue betrayed his owne title, except some will call that moderation, which hath in it neither modum nor rationem. After the Replie is finished, there is presented to your Princely and most religious iudgement, a Confutation of the rea∣sons of two of their more then vnreasonable positions; as namely, of hainous rebellions, and execrable aequi∣uocations: both which are refelled (I hope) sufficiently by the testimonies of their owne most principall Do∣ctors. A course which I professe in all disputes; knowing that by no better wisedome may this new Babylon be confounded, then wherwith God wrought the destru∣ction of the old, euen Gen. 11. 7 & 9 The diuision of their tongues. In the first part of the Confutation is examined the ambi∣tion of Romish prelacie, who would aduance their my∣ters aboue scepters: which vsurpation the right honora∣ble Earle of Northampton, at the arraignement of Gar∣net, did, according to his singular learning formed and habited with sound iudgement, publikely conuince of palpable noueltie, and insolencie intollerable. In the last place is discouered the other mysterie of iniquitie, a

booke which hath this inscription by the Author, A Treatise of Aequinocatiō, but thus altered by the Autho∣riser thereof, A Treatise against lying and fraudulent dis∣simulation. We reade of the idolatrous Iewes, who, wor∣shipping a Exod. 32. 5. Golden calfe, did name their adoration of an abhominable idole, an holy day vnto the Lord. Plutarke maketh mention of certaine Apothecaries who painted vpon their boxes of poison the titles of Antidote or Pre∣sernatiues against poison. Polydore obserueth, that the Popes a long time in their election had their names chā∣ged by Antiphrase, viz. the elected if he were by natu∣rall disposition fearefull, was named Leo; if cruell, Cle∣mens; if vnciuill Vrbanus; if wicked, Ps; if couetous, Bonifacius; if in all behauiours intollerable, Innocentius. So now this Popish Treatise of aequiuocation, the nota∣blest Art of lying, & most bottomlesse dissimulatiō that euer the prince of darknesse did inuent, will be styled, A Treatise against lying and fraudulent dissimulation. Yet why may not a lying title best befit the doctrine of lying & dissimulation? Which kind of publike transfiguration of sinne into the habite of vertue, (as it were the Angell of darknesse into an Angell of light) S. Bernard often na∣meth Daemon meridianus, The diuell at noone day. Not∣withstanding lest that the publishing of this cursed Arte might in respect of the more carnally minded, aedificare ad gehennam: edifie vnto hell (as that reuerend Bishop of Chichester, & learned father of our Church hath said:) I haue so framed this dispute, that it may seeme (I hope) to be like Aristotle his bookes of naturall Philosophie, So published, as not published; because the clause of mentall Reseruation (the taile of this serpent, wherin the whole poyson lyeth) is alwayes deliuered in Latine phrase, to

this end, that onely the guiltie partie by his sensible con∣iecture may perceiue his error confuted, and yet the ig∣norant, though desirous to touch pitch, may not be de∣filed. Which doctrine because it is acknowledged by your Highnesse, in your admirable wisedome, to be in Religion most sacrilegious and detestable, in politike state most pernitious and intollerable, & in euery actor most banefull to the soule of man: it may please your excellent Maiestie to prouide in this behalfe for your faithfull and religious Subiects, that they neuer be so in∣toxicated with this Antichristian spirit, as either to de∣ceiue or be deceiued thereby. First not to be deceiued: but seeing that the authors of Aequiuocatiō are by it, as by a Gyges ring, made in a sort inuisible vnto Protestants to plot and practise against them what & when they wil, and Vlysses-like make a verie Polyphemus of your most noble State, that whensoeuer they be asked, who is the Traitor, licence themselues during life to answer (till they be cōuicted) by that aequiuocating : that ther∣fore against such as cannot hurt vs but by our creduli∣tie, there may be enacted, (the onely refuge of Tullie) Lex non credendi; a law of not beleeuing them. Cōcerning deceiuing by the same policie more subtle then anie Machiauellisme, I would be a most humble suppliant to your gracious Highnesse, not to permit anie, of what condition soeuer, in the cure of the diseased bodie po∣litike, (as it were driuing out poyson with poyson) in winding out these aequiuocators to aequinocate. For this purpose the counsell of S. Augustine is most soueraigne: August. cont. mendac. Non minùs pernitiosè mentitur Catholicus, vt haereticos capiat; quàm mentitur haeretiens, vt Catholicos lateat; nec cuiquam persuaderi potest hominem non mentiri, nè capiat; ur

qui mentitur vt capiat. For it is certaine Ephes. 4. 11. We (to speake in the Apostles tenor) haue not so learned Christ as the truth in Iesus: by whom we are taught that the new man must crucisie the old man, and therefore not to seeke by such diuellish exorcisme to driue out Satan by Satan, but to mortifie ambition by humilitie, intemperance by so∣brietie: in briefe, to conquer all euill by goodnesse, and therefore onely truth must catch and kill a lye. Let not your Maiestie be offended with my boldnesse in excee∣ding the measure of an Epistle against my accustomed breuitie in all my labors: it is Psal. 116. 10. Credidi that begetteth Er∣golocutus sum. Therfore speaking from the truth, I could not but speake for truth: and now, in high detestation both of idolatrous superstition, and hellish aequiuoca∣tion, beseech the God of truth to make your name glo∣rious in Christendome, in the zealous defence both of the true faith of Christ, and Christian faithfulnes: esta∣blishing your Maiesties kingdome in peace, your per∣son in safetie, your soule in grace, your Queene in mu∣tuall ioy, your royall Succession in happie suc∣cesse as long as the world endureth; and in the end of mortalitie to crowne you all with endlesse blessednes.

