

NOble AEgidius, the Letters you gaue me to deliuer at Breme, haue produced a co∣micall euent, (such may all the passages be of our loue,) which you shall vnder∣stand in a word. When in my purposed iourney I came to Stode, more tired with the base companions I had, then the way; it happened, whilest I spent some dayes there with my friends, euery man spake of Spanish theeues, vulgarly called Freeboo∣ters, who stealing out of their Garrisons vpon the Low-countries, lay in the villages, and vpon the high-wayes, by which I was to passe in my iourney to Emden, from which Citie a Merchant was newly arriued, who terrified me more then all the rest, affirming that in one day he had fallen thrice into these cut-throtes hands, and though he were of a neutrall City, yet had paied many Dollers for his ransome, adding, that they inquired curiously after English-men, promising rewards in the villages, to any man should giue them notice when any such passed. I knew not what counsell to take. There was no lesse danger from the Pirats of Dunkirke, if I passed by sea, especially in a ship of Hamburg, no other being in the harbour, & they being like to betray me, out of malice to our nation. Besides, the weather was very tempestious, & not like to change. Therefore my obstinate purpose to see the Cities vpon this coast, made me resolue to goe by land. So I bought an old Brunswicke thrummed hat, and made mee a poore Dutch suite, rubbing it in the dust to make it seeme old, so as my Taylor said, he took more paines to spoyle it, then to make it. I bought me linnen stockings, and disco∣loured my face and hands, and so without cloake, or sword, with my hands in my hose, tooke my place in a poore waggon. I practised as much as I could, Pythagori∣call

silence; but if any asked me who I was, I told him that I was a poore Bohemian, and had long serued a Merchant at Leipzig, who left mee to dispatch some businesse at Stode, and then commanded me to follow him to Emden. If you had seene my ser∣uile countenance, mine eyes cast on the ground, my hands in my hose, and my mo∣dest silence, you would haue taken me for a harmelesse yong man. Many pleasant euents happened to me thus disguised; wherewith I will not trouble you, onely one I am tied to impart to you. When I came to Breme, I was doubtfull what to doe with your Letters. I thought not to deliuer them, but keepe them till a fitter time, or at least to send them by a messenger. But in so doing I should haue broken my pro∣mise to you, haue lost the fruit of your recommendation, and the opportunity to see your mother and sisters, without hope hereafter to see them. Then I thought to deliuer them, and because I was disguised in base apparell, to confesse who I was, and wherefore so disguised. But when I looked my face in a glasse, I could not for shame take this course. At last I resolued to deliuer them, and to say, I was seruant to my selfe, (wherein I lyed not, for I haue euer too much obeyed my owne affections,) and that my master meaning to passe from Stode by sea, for feare of the abouesaid dan∣gers, had sent me by land, with command to stay for him at Leyden. To bee briefe, I went to your mothers house, where a seruant opened mee the doore, to whom I gaue your Letters; but when he scarce looking at me, would haue locked the doore, I took my Letters againe, saying I had promised to deliuer them with my owne hand; and so I entred with him, and gaue them into the hands of your mother and sister, who inquired much after you, and so much after my master, as I might perceiue you had made friendly mention of me in your Letters. They entertained me with much cur∣tesie, being thus disguised for my owne seruant; and when I went away your mother would needs giue mee six batzen to spend, neither would any refusall preuaile, but I must needs take them. So I set a marke vpon these peeces, left I should spend them; and am not out of hope, ere I die, to shew them to you. To the purpose; at the dore I met your brother, whom I had seene at Frankfort, and was not a little afraide left for all my disguising, he would haue knowne me. Let it not trouble you, that I tell you another merry accident I had in the same City of Breme. Disguised as I was, I went to the house of Doctor Penzelius, desiring to haue the name of so famous a Diuine, written in my stemme-booke, with his Mott, after the Dutch fashion. Hee seeing my poore habite, and a booke vnder my arme, tooke me for some begging Scholler, and spake sharpely vnto me. But when in my masters name I had respectiuely salu∣ted him, and told him my request, he excused his mistaking, and with all curtesie per∣formed my desire. I will trouble you no longer, but hope by some good occasion to imbrace you, & tell you all the other passages of my iourney. In the meane time I go forward to Leyden in Holland, you (as you do) euer loue me, and as my soule, liue and farewell. From Emden the twenty one of October, 1592.
I paied twenty foure Stiuers for my passage eleuen miles in a waggon from Stode to Breme. And the first day after breakefast, wee passed three miles to Ford, a poore Citie, subiect to the Bishop of Breme: through wilde, fenny; and woody grounds. The Towne is seated in a Fenne, hauing a long paued Causey to passe vnto it; and the gate being opened to vs by night, each man gaue the Porter two Lubeck shillings, and by the way in a village' each man paied, six Fenning for his person. At Ford the Bishop of Breme hath a Castle, strongly fortified with Rampiers of earth, and deepe ditches full of water; and here each man paied for his supper three Lubeck shillings and a halfe. The waggoner taking me thus disguised (as formerly I haue said) for a poore Bawre; said these words to me in Dutch: Du knecht hilff zu tragen die packe hye: that is Ho good fellow, helpe here to carry this pack; I answered, ya gar gern, yea most wil∣lingly; and smiling laied my shoulder to the burthen, and groned deepely, but help∣ed him very little. Next morning early, by Moone light, we passed on three miles, through large and wilde woods, to a Countrey house; and by the way my compani∣ons fell in talke of English affaires, so foolishly, as my laughter, though restrained, had often betraied me; if twi-light had not kept mee from being seene. Their ignorance

greatly shortned my way, with the pleasure I took in their answeres to some such que∣stions propounded by me, whereof my selfe had many times beene forced to giue an account to others. By the way they shewed mee a Hill called Meineidig, of certaine false witnesses of old sinking there into the ground. At this Countrey house, each man paied for his breakfast three Lubeck shillings and a halfe. Then from sixe of the clocke in the morning, till nine, we passed fiue miles to Breme; through an Heath, and many huge Woods of Oake; hauing towards the South a Fenne of tenne miles length, which of the vastnesse and wildenesse, is called the Diuels Fenne. By the way within a mile of Breme, each man paied halfe a Sesling tribute, to the officers of the City; and from thence wee passed a winding paued Causey, to the very City. Men may also passe from Hamburg to Breme by water.
This Citie is one of the Imperiall free Cities, and of them which vpon this Sea∣coast, Breme. are called Hans-steten, for freedome of trafficke, and it is very strongly fortified with high walles of earth, and deepe ditches filled with water: besides that the Citi∣zens may drowne the Fenny fields almost round about at pleasure. The building of this, as also of the neighbour Cities; is partly of bricke, partly of stone, and very faire, but the streets heere are filthy. The Citie is fiue miles distant from the sea; And the riuer Visurgis running from the South east to the North VVest, by the South west side of the City runneth al the length of the same. On the North east side, the walles of earth are broad, and there bee three faire gates, with strong Rampiers. Vpon the South West side, being compassed all with Fennes, there bee no walles. In the furthest angle or corner towards the North west, where the City growes narrow; there is a strong Fort built, & the gate is within an Iland, beyond which lies a plaine of faire pastures. Osen-bridge lies not farre hence, from which towne great quantity of narrow linnen cloth is brought into England. At Breme I paied halfe a Doller for din∣ner, supper and breakfast; and a stiebkin or measure of wine extraordinary.
They had heere also the custome of making strangers free, and the same ceremony of giuing salt to sweare by; and I confessing that I was not free, committed my fine to their censure, hoping they would deale better with mee, for my poore disguised ha∣bit, but it saued me nothing; the chiefe man saying to mee in Dutch: Gutt gesell du must gedult haben, es geit gleich bistu knecht oder here, deise gewonheit betrefft beyde zu gleich. That is, good fellow thou must haue patience, it is all one whether thou beest a seruant or a master, this custome toucheth both alike.
After dinner, taking my iourney from Breme, wee passed a mile vpon a stony Causey, called Steinweck, that is, stony way; and there each man paied to the officers of Breme, a quarter of a Stiuer. Then entering the Territory of the Graue (that is Count) of Oldenburg, we passed a mile through faire pastures, compassed with ditches of water, to a village, where each man paid a Sesling to the Count, and to this place each man paid for his Waggon fiue groates. Here when my companions had drunke their fill, and had slept a while in the straw, as my selfe did vpon a bench, to shun the stinking heat of the stoue; we hyred another waggon for three miles, paying fifteene groats: and that we might more securely passe, wee tooke our iourney at midnight, through a heath of huge woods of Oake, and came to Oldenburge, early in the mor∣ning before the gates were open.
The Citie is built of meere clay, but the Counts Castle is built in a round forme Oldenburg. of stone, with deepe ditches of water, ouer which they passe by a drawing bridge, and both the Castle and the City are strongly fortified. Heere we had English beere, the goodnesse whereof made my companions speake much in honour of England, and of the Queene, with much wonder that shee being a Virgine, was so victorious against the Spaniards, till in this discourse they all fell fast asleepe.
After breakfast the next morning, wee hauing hired a waggon for eighteene groates, passed foure miles in the territory of the said Count; and one mile to Stick∣hausen, in the territory of the Count of Emden, who had a Castle there. Then because we could get no waggon in this place, wee went one mile further on foot, which be∣ing very long, and my selfe hauing some gold Guldens in my shooes, which I could

not remoue without suspicion; the way was very irkesome to mee, and we came to a countrey house, but wee found good cheere, each man paying for his supper seuen groates. My selfe sitting last at the table, by reason of my poore habit, paied as much as the best, and fedde on the worst, but I had more minde of my bed, then of my meat. And one of my companions after supper, hauing streight boots, when I had taught him to pull off one by the helpe of a staffe, for recompence of my counsell, desired mee to pull off the other, which being disguised as I was, I could not well re∣fuse. The next morning we hired a waggon for eleuen stiuers, and passed along mile to Leere, a towne subiect to the Count of Emden, who dwelt not far off, at Dunort a strong Castle. Our way through a Fen, was so deepe, as the waggon wheeles being pulled off, we went good part of the way on foot.
Here we vnderstood that the Spanish Free-booters (called by the English Male∣contents) lay at Aurick, another castle of the said Count, and being loded with booty, had taken a barke by force, to passe ouer the Emsz. These cut-throates vsed at this time to raunge out of the Spanish Garrisons vpon the Low-countries, & to spoile all passengers in these parts, which they did with more confidence, because the Count of Oldenburg, being offended with the Citizens of Breme, permitted these theeues to rob them, who were also very malicious against those of Breme, because they had lately taken thirty foure Free-booters; and beheading them altogether, had set vp their heads vpon stakes. Besides the Count of Emden hauing beene lately driuen out of Emden, by the Citizens in a tumult about religion, did permit these Free-boo∣ters to lie in his Country, and spoyle the Merchants of that City. The chiefe Cap∣taine of the Free-boaters then lying at Aurick: was Hans Iacob, a notable roge, and very malicious to the English, whom he vsed to spoyle of their very apparell, & to handle them cruelly; mocking them with these English words; I cannot tell, and swearing that he would make them tell, both of themselues, and of their countrey men passing that way. Some few dayes before hee had taken foure English wollen clothes, and many Flemmish linnen clothes; which they diuided by the length of a ditch, in stead of a better measure, and we were glad to heare that in this diuision they fell at variance, for when this Hans I acob would haue stopt a part, for the chiefe Captaine of the Garrison, the rest cryed out in Dutch: wir wollen dein mawger kopff lieber in zwey kleiben: Stelen wir sur andern vnd hangen far vns selbs? That is, wee will rather cleaue thy leane pate in two. Shall we steale for others and hang for our selues? And they vsed many reproches against him and their chiefe Captaine, saying in Dutch: Finstu was, bringt mirs, hangstu aber, habt dirs: Die Iudem, pfaffen, hauptleinte, vnd in hund, ver dienen ihr kost mit thr mund: That is, findest thou ought, bring it me, hangest thou, take that to thee? The lewes, Priests, Captaines and dogs, earne their liuing with their mouth; but these cut-throates, howsoeuer they had passed the Emsz, yet meant presently to returne, and had their spics in euery towne and village.
I returne to my iourney. While we lay at Leere for a night, a Doctor of the Ciuill Law seeing mee walke in the garden, and thinking my seruile habit not fit for con∣templation, commanded mee to draw water for his horse, giuing mee no reward pre∣sently but onely a nod; yet after when he had drunke with his friends, going out, he said to me, Knecht dore hastu zu drincken, That is, Sirra drinke you what is left. After supper, hauing expected a bed almost till midnight, the maide at last told mee I must lie vpon the bench; but after, while I was washing my feet, which the gold in my shooes had gauled, she espying my silke stokings, which I wore vnder my linnen, ran to her mistresse, and procured me a very good bed. This effect pleased me well, but I was afraide of the cause, by which lest I should bee discouered, I hasted away early next morning. I paied heere for my supper and breakfast, fifteene Stiuers, and giuing the seruant one for his paines, hee would haue restored it to mee, seeming by my habit to haue more need thereof then himselfe.
All this night and the next day, great store of raine fell, and the winde was so tempestuous, as we could not passe by water, neither would my companions hire a waggon, besides that, the way was at this time so dirty, as no waggon could passe it.

Notwithstanding since now onely two miles remained of my dangerous iourney, and I thought no thiefe would come out in such raine, I resolued to goe on foot with my companions to Emden, being two miles, but of vnspeakeable length, and difficul∣ty to passe. In the high way wee had three passages; one vpon the top of the Banke, lying vpon an; arme of the Sea, or rather vpon the Riuer Emsz running into the Sea, and in this passage the tempestious winde was like to beare vs ouer; and blinded vs with driuing salt water into our eyes, besides that wee went ouer the shooes in dirt. The second passage was on the side of the banke, from the water, somewhat fairer then the other, but in that most troublesome, that wee were forced continually to leane vpon a staffe, which euery one had in his hand lest being not staied with the staffe, we should fall into the lower way, which was intolerably dirty. The lower way, or third passage, in the bottome of the banke furthest from the water, was for the pas∣sage of waggons, but the fields round about being ouerflowed in winter, this passage was now . In this way we passed a very long mile, from the little City Leere, to the Village Aldernsea, from seuen of the clocke in the morning to twelue. We come out at first tenne companions in this iourney, but at the very com∣ming out  six of them left vs, despairing to passe against a contrary winde in a foule rainy day and their feet sticking fast in the dirt, and they mocked at our obsti∣nacy in going. Within a while, my selfe was wet to the skinne, and my shooes at euery step, were almost to the off, so as I was forced to binde them on with foure points, neither did any of vs looke backe at his fellow, to helpe him if hee could not follow, and if I should haue fallen into the Sea, I am confident none of them would haue come back to succour me. After we had gone halfe a mile, one of our foure com∣panions being a young man: with a blacke beard, & able body, would not goe one foot further, though he had but one Stiuer in his purse, and was forced to borrow money of vs, that he might stay in a poore Ale-house. When we came to Aldernsea, the Free∣booters spies, came to the Inne & gaped vpon vs, so as though I were wet to the skin, yet I durst not pull off any thing to dry, sest my inward garments better then my vp∣per, should betray my disguise: neither durst I call for wine and spend freely lest they should thinke I had store of money. Each of vs paied seuen Stiuers for his dinner. Here another of our companions left vs, being so tired, as hee went to bed without eating one bit. So as now I had onely one companion left, called Anthony, a man of little stature, and a Citizen of Emden. We so be free of this dangerous iour∣ney, went forward, and as we came out of the Village, the Free-booters spies came close to vs, and beheld vs narrowly; but seeing vs all couered with dirt, they tooke vs for poore men, and a prey vnfit to be followed. Wee gathering vp strength went on, till at last wee were so weary, as hauing no strength to chuse our way, wee cast away our staues, and went almost vp to the knees in dirt, in the lower way.
At last, hauing gone one mile (as me thought wondrous long) from one of the Emdex. clocke in the afternoone to fiue, wee came to Emden, where my selfe entring the gate, could not stand till the Souldiers writ our names, but had lyen downe on the ground if they had not giuen mee a seat. Now being out of all danger of the Free-booters, in giuing my name, I wrote my selfe an English-man; the standers by not a little wondring that I had put my self to this dangerous passage. And truly this iourney, if it were free from all danger; yet the ill diet and lodging would yeeld trouble enough, for which I appeale to Lipsius, who hath pleasantly written of the entertainement in West-Phalen, and Oldenburg. The Citie of Emden lies in the vtmost border of the Empire, and is onely diuided by the Riuer Emsz; from the vnited Prouince of Netherland, and by an Inland Sea from West Freez-land, being one of them. The Countrey about Emden aboundeth with villages, and from a Tower at Goricome, a man may see at once vpon a saire day twenty two walled Townes. Not farre from this City, neere , is the place where the Duke of Alūa defeated the forces of Lodwick of Nassaw, his Dutch-men refusing to fight, except they were first paied. All the fields about Emden are drowned in winter, and the City lying vpon the Sea; for want of fresh waters they dresse most of their meat with raine water. The aire

is very vnhealthfull, but the City is fairely built of bricke, and the Citizens are very curteous. On the South side the Riuer Emsz washeth the City with his salt streames, on which side is the Hauen, and the Citizens are said to haue some three score ships of a hundred tunnes a peece, and some six hundred barkes of their owne. In the Church-yard on this side, many peeces of Ordinance are laid, towards Leere and Dunort the Counts Fort, and the like are laid vpon the Hauen, and some places of aduantage: for the City hath no walles on this side. On the West side, beyond the water lyeth Marish ground to the mouth of the Sea, and vpon this side is a strong old Castle. On the North side the City is compassed with a wall of earth, and deepe ditches full of water, and there be two strong gates, Belgar-port, and New-port, with∣out which the fields are Fenny. On this side there is a passage by boat, to the su∣burbes on the East side, where the fields without the towne are faire pastures in sum∣mer, but all ouerflowed in winter; and vpon the Rampier of the wall, are many Winde-mils. The City is of a round forme, if it were not somewhat longer from the East to the West. At Emden they pay ordinarily six Stiuers a meale, three stiuers for a quart of English beere, eleuen Stiuers for a quart of Spanish wine, thirteene Stiuers a quart of Rhenish wine, and seuen Stiuers for French wine: my selfe paid for supper and breakfast twenty three Stiuers.
