

IN those few houres I staid at Schafhusen, you haue made me your Seruant for euer. I remember the houres of our conuersation, which for the sweetnes thereof seemed minutes to me: I remember the good offices you did towards me a stranger, with gentlenes, if not proper to your selfe, yet proper to your Dutch Nation. Now as soone as I had pitched my tents at Bazell, (for me thinkes I am one of the Nomades, euery day changing my dwelling,) I thought fit to giue you account of my iourney, whereof I am sure you desire to know the successe. I will euer be ruled in doubtfull cases by the counsell of so wise and so good a friend as your selfe: but you shall neuer more perswade me to take a iourney on foot, which I find vnprofitable for my health & purse. The other day after dinner by your aduice, I took my iourney on foot, & with more sighes then paces, came in foure houres with much paine to the little City Egli∣saw, and comming to the Inne, they offered me meat, but I did nothing but so crie out for my bed, as you would haue said I was the eldest sonne of sloth. To be briefe, they being slow to satisfie my desire, I flung my selfe on the fether bed without sheetes, and so at ease supped on the old fashion with the cloth spread on the bed: you gaue me a pleasant companion to guide me the way, who made it seeme shorter with his good discourse, and was very diligent to serue my occasions: next morning early by twilight, we began our iourney, hauing the gates opened for a little reward. You may thinke that I was fresh after my nights rest for a new iourney, but I rose ear∣ly onely to be out of my paine. By nine of the clocke in the morning we came to the faire City Zurech, which seemed fairer to me at the end of my tedious walke: present∣ly I ran into my chamber, and with like importunity as before, obtained my bed to be made: the Mercury you gaue to guide me, brought me meat plentifully, and there we dined together; then because he was to returne to Schafhusen that night, I gaue him a Gulden for his paines, besides paying his charges, and fifteene Creitzers of free gift. Each of vs went to our taske, he (as I thought) to goe, I to sleepe. Since I haue begun, I will tell you Historically all circumstances, so you promise me not to reproue him, but rather to salute and thanke him in my name, which if you refuse, I coniure you on all loue to read no further. After foure houres behold this honest man, with a gar∣land of roses on his head, a glasse and pot in his hands, and well armed with drinke, en∣tered my chamber; I being halfe asleepe wiped my eies, as if I had seene a vision, till he drinking to me, and importuning me to pledge him, made mee know it was no appa∣rition: we drunke a whole houre together, then in good earnest he went away, and did nothing (to my knowledge) more wisely, then that being drunken, he left his recko∣ning of forty eight Creitzers to be paid by me, who was sober. Neither Ceres nor Bac∣chia could for twenty houres draw me from bed, but the next morning I deliuered your betters to Master Doctor S. who vsed me very curteously, and presented mee with a Booke he had lately printed. So this Comedy is ended, onely I will adde the Epilogue. Here at Bazell I can get for no money the Booke of Semlerus de Repub. Hel∣uetica, which you commended vnto me: at last I found it in a friends study, who estee∣med it as the apple of his eye, yet I so preuailed with him, as he let me haue it, vpon my faithfull promise; that because I meant to blot the same with notes, I should procure him a new Booke; wherein if you doe not disingage mee by sending the same vnto me, I shall forfet the small credit of a stranger. Farewell good Sir, and I pray you let vs not suffer this sparke of our loue to goe out, but rather with often writing, let vs set all the coale on fire. Againe farewell: from Bazell the 24. day of May 1902.
From Schafhusen I tooke my iourney on foot (as is aboue written) and went halfe a mile in the territory of that City, and a mile and a halfe in the territory of the Count of  Sweitzer, the lands of Zurech lying on the South side from vs; and so wee

passed through Mountaines yeelding corne, and planted with vines, and through woods, pastures, and a large valley of corne, and in foure houres space (for the miles of Sweitzerland are so long, as they reckon the iourneies of horse or foot by the houres, and not by the miles) came to Eglisaw, and entering the same, passed the Riuer Rheine by a Bridge, where I paide two creitzers for tribute, and there I supped for fiue Batzen.
The next morning I went two miles on foot in six houres space to Zurech, through Zurech. a long wood, and hils of corne (which they say are often blasted with haile) and through wooddy Mountaines, and hils of inclosed pastures, with store of Vines plan∣ted neere the City, which is one of the Cantons of Sweitzerland, hauing on the West side the Lake called Zurechsea, and the Brooke Limachus, hauing his head eight miles further on the same side, ruuneth into this lake, and after comming out, diuideth the City into two parts, called the greater and the lesse City, hauing three bridges for passage, the greater where of the Merchants vse for their meetings. The foresaid Lake is three miles long, and hath on each side pleasant hils planted with Vines. The fore∣said Brooke neere the City beareth onely small boates, and is all taken vp with water mils, but aboue towards the Alpes is deeper, and below neere Baden runneth into the Rheine. The streetes of Zurech are narrow, and the Houses builded of timber and clay, and the City it selfe is seated vpon and betweene hils, which on the East side of the Brooke grow higher from it. On the North-west side is a pleasant Mountaine, and a faire meadow for shooting with gunnes, and other exercises, wherein is a faire Lynden or teyle tree, yeelding large and sweet shadow, where the Citizens meete to recreate themselues, and to feast together. The Armes of the City are a Man and Woman, called Falix & Regula: without the City on the South, is the foresaid Lake, and be∣yond it the Alpes couered with snow. On the West side is a plaine, and the Moun∣taines farre off, but on the North and East sides the Mountaines lie neere. The Citi∣zens haue a custome that when they goe forth against the enemy, they place the Mi∣nisters or Pastors in the front, or where they may partake the danger, and there is a place two miles from the City towards Lucerna, where Zwinglius a famous Preacher and reformer of Religion was killed in the field. Here I paid each meale six batzen.
I rode three miles to Baden in three houres, and so hired my Horse as besides the price of six or seuen batzen the day, I paid as much for the daies in which he returned, Baden. and also paid the hire and charges of one to bring him backe. Most part of our way was in the territory of Zurech, through hils of corne and vines, and a plaine of inclosed pastures. Entering the City we passed the brooke Limachus by a bridge: the Su∣burbs are built vpon the ascent of a Mountaine, and the City on the top of it, where there is a Castle vpon a Rocke, of old very strong, but now ruinated: on the North side descending into a valley by the brooke on the right hand, or vpon the East side, within a musket shot lie the Baths, which are famous for medicine, and are in num∣ber thirty, seated on each side the Brooke, which diuideth them into Bethora the great and the little. In the great, diuers Bathes are contained vnder one roofe of a faire house, and without the gate are two common to the poore. These waters are so strong of brimstone, as the very smoake warmeth them that come neere, and the waters burne those that touch them. Of these one is called the Marques Bath, and is so hot, as it will scald off the haire of a Hogge: many hauing no disease but that of loue, how soe∣uer they faine sickenesse of body, come hither for remedy, and many times find it. Weomen come hither as richly attired as if they came to a marriage: for Men, Weo∣men, Monkes, and Nunnes, sit all together in the same water, parted with boords, but so as they may mutually speake and touch, and it is a rule here to shun all sadnes, nei∣ther is any iealousie admitted for a naked touch. The waters are so cleere as a penny may be seene in the bottome, and because melancholy must be auoided, they recreate themselues with many sports, while they sit in the water; namely at cards, and with ca∣sting vp and catching little stones, to which purpose they haue a little table swimming vpon the water, vpon which sometimes they doe likewise eate. These Bathes are ve∣ry good for Weomen that are barren. They are also good for a cold braine, and a sto∣macke

charged with rhume; but are hurtfull for hot and dry complexions, and in that respect they are held better for Weomen then Men. The Innes were wont to pay tri∣bute to the three Cantons, of Baden, Brucke, and Bazell; but now Baden alone makes great profit of them, by the great concourse of sickely persons, and the Parliaments of the Cantons commonly held there. I paid for my diet six Batzen a meale.
From hence I hired a Horse at the same rate as before, and passing through woody Mountaines, came in three houres riding to the City Brucke. By the way I passed the Brooke Russe, which runneth from Lucerna into these parts, and the boate was drawne by a cable running vpon a wheele, by reason of the waters swift course: where I paide for my passage sixe creitzers: and when I came neere Bruck, I passed the Brooke Ara by a bridge, paying one creitzer for tribute; and here I paid fiue batzen a meale. From hence hiring a horse as before, I rode in two houres space to Hornsea, through steepe Mountaines, and a wood of Oake: by the way lies Kingsfeld, that is Kingly field, a Mo∣nastery so called, because Widowe Queenes, and Kings, forsaking their Scepters, and inferiour Princes were wont of old to enter into this place for the solitary profession of Religion. In the same Cloyster of old, liued the Friars of Saint Francis order, in the building on the right hand as you come in, and the Nunnes of Saint Clara on the left hand, and both came to the same Chappell, the Friars to the body of the Church, and the Nunnes to close galleries aboue, looking out and hearing through grates. The Emperour Albertus being killed by his Nephew in the yeere 1380. at Santbacke three miles distant, this Monastery was built for his memory, though his bones were buri∣ed at Spire. The reuenewes of this monastery grew in time to be yeerly forty thousand Guldens, which are now appropriated to the common treasure of the Sweitzer Can∣tons. Leopold Duke of Austria lies here buried. Ferdinand of Insprucke, one of the Arch∣dukes of Austria, is Lord of Hornesea; all the rest of the territories from Schafhusen to this place, belonging to the Cantons of Sweitzerland: and here I paid sixe batzen a meale. Hence I hired a horse as before, and rode in fiue houres to Rheinefeld through fruitfull hils of corne, hauing on all sides wooddy Mountaines in sight. Here againe I passed the Rheine, and paid two raps for my horse and my selfe; foot-men paying but one. The Rheine passeth by with a violent course, and washeth the Towne on the East side. Here I paid sixe Batzen a meale.
Hence hiring a Horse as before, I rode in two houres space to Bazell, through a faire plaine of corne and pasture, lying vpon the Rheine, hauing on all sides woody Bazell. Mountaines in sight, and neere the City were most pleasant fields planted with vines, to the which fields the territory of the said Arch-duke extendeth on the East side of the Rheine. I entered by little Bazell seated in a plaine on the East side of Rheine, and so passed by a bridge of wood into the greater Bazell, seated vpon pleasant hils on the West side of Rheine. This City of old was one of the imperiall free Cities; but now is ioined to the Cantons of Sweitzerland, and was built in the yeere 3 & 2: hauing the name of a Basiliske, slaine by a Knight couered with cristall, or of the word Pasell, which in Dutch signifies a beaten path, or of the greeke word  as a kingly City. The lesse Bazell was of old built by an Arch-duke of Austria, in preiudice of the greater, and after being sold to it for thirty thousand guldens, was incorporated there∣vnto: The greater hath many caues vnder the hils, and suffered a great earth-quake in the yeere 1346, at which time the Pallace neere the Cathedrall Church fell into the Rheine, and another Earth-quake in the yeere 1356. wherein 180. persons were killed, all the people flying out of the Towne. Eugenius the Pope held a Councell in this Ci∣ty, the yeere 1431. The Bridge of wood ioyning the little and great City, diuided by the Rheine, is broad enough for two carts to passe at once; and towards little Bazell six Arches are of stone: but towards great Bazell where the Rheine tunneth most swiftly, eight Arches are built of wood, that they may be more easily repaired, and vpon any warre from Germany more readily broken downe. This City is of the forme of an half Moone, (I meane the great City, reckoning the lesse for a Suburbe) and being seated upon diuers hils on the West side of the Rheine, imbraceth betweene the two hornes the lesser City, seated in a plaine on the East side of Rheine. On the West side of the

greater, the Emperor Rodulphus of Habspurg besieged the City, and on this side some∣thing towards the North, within the walles, is a most pleasant greene for walking, cal∣led peter platz. In this place is the Armory of the City, and the tribunal of Iustice, and some faire houses of priuate men, and a most pleasant shade of trees, among which is an Oake, whose boughes are in circuit one hundred forty walking paces, and from the root are more then twenty such paces in length forward. And they report that the Emperor Manimilian the second supped vnder this Oake, and gaue 2000. Guldens to keepe and trimic. On the East side of great Bazel, the Rheine runneth by it, from the South to the North, and the yard of the Cathedrall Church lieth ouer the riuer, and hath a Lynden tree, which giueth very pleasant shade, hauing seats vnder it, and along the riuer. The course of the Rheine is very swift, but not so violent as that of the Da∣now; yet the water-men of Bazel (as those that dwel vpon the Danow) sell their boats at Sirasburg, which they weekely carrie thither, and cannot bring backe against the streame of the Rheine, and so they returne home on foot, (alwaies remembred that this riuer is at the broadest betweene Bazel and Strasburg.) Pope Pius the second, foun∣ded an Vniuersine at Bazel, in the yeere 1459, and gaue it all the priuiledges of Bo∣logala in Italy. In the publike Innes, men pay six Batzen a meale; but the Students haue their diet with Doctors and Citizens for some eight Dollers a month. My selfe dieted with the Ouerseer of the Coledge, and paied two Guldens a weeke; for strangers may hire chambers in the Coledge, and the Ouerseer willingly admits them to diet with him. In the Cathedrall Church, this is written vpon the Sepulcher of Hotoman, a famous Ciuill Lawyer:


Francisie Hotamant
Of Francis Hotoman


I. C.
Conns. at Law.


Mortalis 
The mortall parts


Tantisper assernandas
So long to be kept


Dum
Till


Christo inbente,
Christ bidding


Immortales exurgant
They rise immortall


Amici.
His friends


Sub hoc Saxo
Vnder this stone


Deposuere.
haue laid.


Loco Honoris ergo
The place for honours sake,


Ab AEdis Cur atoribus.
By the gouernours of the house


Liberal: concesso.
Being freely granted.


Vixit An: 63. M. 5.
He liued 63. yeeres fiue M.


D. 20. Ob: Prid:
20, daies: he died the day before


Id: Febru. Ano.
The Ides of Febr. in the yeere


MILCXC.
MILCXC.



Gallia progennit, sernat Basilea sepultum,
Interitus expers nomen, vib{que} viget.
He borne in France, lies buried here,
His lasting Name liues euery where.

In the same place lies Oecolampadius buried, (to whom Luther opposed himselfe; when in the first reformation of Religion he violently brake downe the Images,) and he hath this inscription in Latine:
M. Iohn Oecolampadius by profession a Diuine, most skilfull in three languages: first Author of the reformed Religion in this City, and the true Bishop of this Church: excellent in sanctity of Doctrine and life, is laid vnder this short stone. In the yeere of war Lord, M. D. XLII.
In the same place lies buried Erasmus Roterodamus: with this inscription in Latines To Desiderius Erasmus, Roterodamus, a most great man carry way, whose im∣comparable learning in all kindes of Arts, ioyned with like wisedome,  come shall admire and celebrate, Boniface Ameribachius, Ierome, Frobe∣nius, Nichol: Bishop, heire and Extertitort of his last Will and Testament: to

their Patron of happy memory, which by his writings he hath got, and so long as the world stands shall retaine: for the reposing of his mortall body, haue layed this stone. He died the fourth of the Ides of Iuly, being now seuenty yeeres old, in the yeere of our Lord, MDXXXVI.
These two Verses are written vpon the Tombe of Lodouicus Pontanus:

Hic iacet arte Plato, Cato, vita, Tullius ore,
Vermes corpus alit, spiritus astra petit.
Here lies Plato, Cato, Tully,
For his Art, life, and eloquence,
Wormes doe feede vpon his body,
His soule to heauen is mounted hence.

There be also the Monuments of Henricus Glarianus, and of Bishop Hatto, whom the Emperour Charles the Great, sent Ambassadour to Irene Empresse of the East. In this City a stone is shewed, called the hot stone, vulgarly Heisteine, vpon which the Consuls, and diuers others were beheaded, who had conspired to betray the Citie, if the clocke striking false had not preuented, and deceiued both them and the enemies, lying in ambush without the City, & expecting a signe to be giuen them at the houre appointed. And for this cause (or as others say, to hasten the Councell held in the Senate house) the clocke to this day strikes one, when it should strike twelue. Neere the staires of the Senate house is an old Statua on foot, armed, but without a sword, bearing a Scepter, clad with a loose gowne, with a birde sitting on the Helmet, and hath this inscription;
Hono & virtuti
L. Munatij L. F. L. N. L.Pron Planci
Cos Imper:& Ter VII viri
Epulonum
Qui triumph ex Raetis
Edem Saturni F. ex
Manub
Agros diuisit in Italia Beneuenti.
In Galliam Colonias Ded
Lugdunum at{que}
Rauracum.
Ciuitas Basiliensis
Ex bellicosiss gente
Alemannorum
In Rauracorum fines
Transducta
Simulacrum hoc ex
Senatus Auct
Dicandum statuendum{que}
Curauit.
Anno salutis Christiane
MDXXC.
Of Lucius Munatius the sonne of Lucius, grand-child of Lucius, great Grand-child of Lucius surnamed Plancus; Being Consul, General, and thrice One of the seuen Presidents of the holy Banquets
Who triumphed of the Rhaetians, Built Saturnus Temple with the spoyles, Diuided the Land in Italy at Beneuento,
Deduced Colonies into Gaul, To Lyons, and about Bazel.
The City of Bazel deduced Of the most warlike Nation Of the Alemans;
Into the Territories of the Rauraci (or Basilians,)
By authority of the Senate, Procured
This Statua to be consecrated and heere set.
In the yeere of Christ, MDLXXX
In the house where the Doctors, and other Graduates take their degrees, are the bones of an Anatomy, (for the Magistrates vse to grant the bodies of some men exe∣cuted to serue this vse,) and it hath this inscription:

Nostro perempti scelere, aliena viuimus manu,
Et facti vasa honoris, qui fuimus ignominiae.
Kild for our wickednesse, we liue by others heere,
And vessels are of honour, as of shame we were.

