



IT is a diuine truth (Worthy Lord) though
crossing humane sense, spoken by the Father
of truth, to him that wasIustin. Mart. qu. & resp. 119. ,
the father of all our fathers in the
truth:. Cor. 12. 9. Virtus mea in infirmitate peri∣citur:
My power is perfited in weakenesse:
That is to say,Calv. Com. in 2. Cor. 12 9. The assisting hand of
God is then most lightsomly discerned,
when the weakenes of man hath most euidently appeared.
As the great Antesignanus of all the Interpreters most pithily
doth expound it. As for example: Gods diuine Spirit, did then
most sensibly shewe it selfe in Iacob, whenGen. 49. hee prophecied so
powerfully lying sicke vpon his death bed. In Dauid, whenPsal. 6. & 51. & alibi. he
prayed so seruently, almost ouerwhelmed with troubles. In Paul,
whenAct. 16. 4, 25. he sang so cheerefully, fastened in the stockes. In S. Lau∣rence,
whenAmbr Oshe. lib. 1. he spake so couragiously, broyling on the gridion.
In a word, through the helping-hand of God, it commeth to
passe, that2. Cor. 1. 10. when men are weake, then they are strong:
weake in the flesh, strong in the spirit, weake in themselues,
strong in the grace of God.
All humane infirmities are in nature destructiue: They a∣rise



from sinne:. 4. Expecati mo ortae sun lachrymae: and
they tend to death, whichRom . 23. is the wages of sinne. For these
are all praenuncij mortis, arbengers of death, and. in Gen. 2. 17. quod∣da
mortis atrium, a dore that leadeth into the house of death:
euery one weakeneth and furthereth dissolution. But nowe the∣ough
grace, they are made preseruatiue against pride, against
securitie, against worldlinesse, against prophanenesse, against
a thousand sinnes:Hugo de . lib. . vtilius est frangi languoribus ad salu∣tem,
qum remanere incolumes ad damnationem.
And as it is with bodily infirmities, so is it generally with all
afflictions. They are like Quick-siluer and Henbane, and such
other creatures, which though they be poisonable in nature, yet
they are made medicinable by art. The Scripture compareth
them sometimes to fire: Peter calleth them1. Pet. 4 12. the firery tryall.
Sometimes to water,Psal. 59. 1. The waters are entered euen into
my soule. In one of the Psalmes they are both conioyned:Psal. 66. 12. tran∣simus
per ignem & aquam: we passed through fire and
water. The resemblance is many wayes significant: For fire
warmeth, and fire consumeth; water refresheth, and water
choaketh. And this they doe, either as they serue vnder men,
or domineer ouer men: for, They are cruell masters, but pro∣fitable
seruants, saith our English Prouerb. So it is with men,
and their afflictions. Where they master (as they d in the wic∣ked)
there they choake and consume them: but where they serue
(as they do in the saints) there they warme and refrsh them. In
so much as Dauid professed,Psal. 119. 71. Bonum est, It is good for mee
that I haue beene afflicted. And one of the Fathers very no∣tably,
Inuenies non alier regnare in nobis Iesum, nisi per
afflictionem: A Christian man shall finde by experience, that
the Lord Iesus doth not otherwise or more effectually raigne in
his heart, but euen by affliction.
I prosecute the Scriptures comparison yet a little farther.
Plinie writeth, that there are some creatures,Plin. l. 11. c. 36. which lie in
the fire, and some thatlib. 10. c 67. quench the fire. This hath beene true
of men: and euen in the letter.Da. 3. 25. The three young nobles wal∣ked



vp and downe in the : and the Apostle saith, that some
Heb. 11. 34. by faith quenched the violence of the fire. But it is daily
true in the Metaphor. The children of God liue, and like, and
thriue in the fire of affliction: as the children of IsraelExod. 1. . in∣creased
vnder the bondage of Aegypt, which Moses calleth
Deut. 4. 0. the iron furnace. TheirRom. 5. 3. 4. tribulation bringing forth pa∣tience,
and patience experience, and experience hope,
and hope making that they are not confounded. The same
Author reporteth of diuers waters in diuers places, in which
nothing will sinke. As ofPli. l. 5. c. 16. Asphaltides in Iurie, oflib. 6. c. 17. Are∣thusa
in Armenia, oflib. 31. c. 1. Apuscidamus in Africa. Now of that
kind, are all the waters of trouble to the children of God.
They sinke not in them, they euer float aboue, as safe as in Noahs
Arke vpon the face of the waters.2. Cor. 4. 8. We are afflicted (saith
S. Paul) yet are we not in distresse: in pouertie, but not
ouercome of pouertie. We are persecuted, but not forsa∣ken:
cast downe, but we perish not. The reason is,Psal. 37. 24. The
Lord putteth vnder his hand, to hold them vp as it were by
the chinne, that they sinke not in those waters. Yea further, the
Spirit of God isMatth. 3. 11. fire, andIoh. 3. 5. water it selfe: with which Spirit
they beeing baptized, their troubles are all so spiritually san∣ctified,
that they consume them not, nor choake them not: but
they serue like fire to warme their zeale, and like water to
coole the heat of flesh: and so many wayes to fit them better to
the workes of their callings.
But whereunto now tendeth this dolefull treatie of Afflicti∣ons?
I write not this so much for you (mine honourable Lord)
whose pathes are on euery side so prosperous: though I doubt
not but you haue also your Crosses to beare, and which Crosses
thorough the grace of God, doe more sanctifie you and your acti∣ons.
But I take vp this Argument, ère nata (as the naturall
course is of Epistles) to shew how in the studying and acting
of this Sermon, The power of God hath appeared in my
weakenesse.
Immediately after that the right reuerend Lord, the good



Bishop of London, had by his mndatorie letters called were to
the Crosse: it pleased the high Bishop of my soule to crosse
mee deepely with infirmitie of bodie: which much  my
studie and meditations. This infirmitie continuing many
weekes, and increasing, I wrote to London to my most especiall
freindD. Gardener. (a man of mine owne degree, and of farre better meanes
to performe it) to make supplie of my place. When  his
vnwillingnesse thereunto, I had resolued to , and to ad∣uenture
my bodie, I found my iorneying all the way so teadiously
painefull, as that those about mee were much discomfited, and
my selfe almost desped of habilitie. Which caused me when I
came there, no only to be  again with that freind of mine,
to haue relieued : bùt also at the bèginning of my Sermon
to màke a certaine Apologie for my selfe: a fearing that I
should haue beene compelled to be more then ordinarily short.
But behold, Chr. 15. 2. The Lord is with vs, while we are with him.
The more mine infirmitie humbled mee, and caused me to cast
 whole hope vpon the helpe of God: the more readie 
his power to support my weakenesse, For, to my best remem∣brance,
I neuer preached with more strength of bodie, with
more audible voice, with more freedome of spirit, nor (as it nw
appeareth) with more acceptation of the hearers. And that
not only of the Common people, whom notwithstanding a
man must not neglect,Plutere. de gerend auribus ducere, to lead them along af∣ter
him by the cares: but also of the better, wiser, and lear∣neder
sort: which Isidore said, were called. Sapiemes à sa∣pore,
as most saorie in themselues, and least tasting the relish
of others. A thing farre beyond mine expectation: and farther
(well I woe) beyond my desert: and of which I can giue no
other reason but this: that God would shew his power in
my weakenesse. To him only be the glorie of all his gifts.
Now, among the best, and best indicious sort of those mine
Hearers, I haue many reasons to seat and ranke your Lord∣ship.
And that not onely for your eminencie of place in the
Common Wealth, which notwithstanding is of right high and



worthie respect: but also for that God hath giuen you so many
meanes of knowledge, so long practise in the heart of the State,
so deepe insight into your owne professed Lawes, and so carefull
a desire, to looke into our discourses of Diuinitie. All which
are euidences that against the malicious Calumnies of that
Romish Catholike Diuine; that your fingers are often turning
ouer bookes of all sorts,P. R. to the increase of all kind of knowledge.
It is true that your place hath many yeares called you to deale
about Capital matters: and the more businesse haue you had that
way a great deale by the treasonable practises of Romish & An∣tichristian
Diuines. But what saith S. Hierome?Hier. in let. l 4. ad c. 22. Homicidas,
sacrilegos, venerarios punire; non est effusio sanguinis,
sed Legis ministerium: To punish murderous, sacrilegious,
and adulterous persons, is not that effusion of blood, which God
hath forbidden; but the administring of necessarie Lawes,
which God hath commanded. For my part I would that euen
their Catholike Diuines themselues, wouldIn Scorpiaco. gladium stylo
mutare, (as Tertullian speaketh of S. Paul) would they did
leaue fingering of blood, euen of the sacred blood of Princes,
and fall more to the fingering of the bookes of holy Scrip∣ture;
and not suffer themselues therein to be outgone of our
Secular Iudges and temporall Magistrates, who besides mat∣ters
of Iustice, applie themselues also to the knowledge of Re∣ligion.
Sed illine vnde abij redeo. To your Lordship first, who
pleased so honourably to comfort me ouer this labour, and then
to all others of like knowledge and moderation, it contenteth
me well to submit the censure of this Treatise: for, to all mens
iudgements, I willingly submit it not. Some are ignorant, and
cannot iudge. Now,Sen. Proverb. Graue iudicium est eius, qui iudica∣re
non potest: The ignoranter man, the seuerer Iudge. A∣nacharsis
misliked it in Greece, and so doe I here with vs.Lae in vit Anachars. Ar∣tifices
certant, iudicant qui non sunt artifices: Diuines
stand and preach in the pulpit; artizans sit and iudge in
the alehouse. Others are too rash and hastie in iudgement:



whereasNaz cyg  indefini. Iudicium est firmitas stabilitas{que} deliberationum
mentis: Iudgement is a firme and stable verdict, giuen of
that vpon which the minde hath often deliberated. Others
like madde dogges satch here and there on both sides as they
goe; reading by starts, and iudging by parcels. But Plutarch
well aduiseth those that will 2 Epi∣curium. sift other mens doings, or con∣fute
other mens writings, non obiter percurrere, nec vo∣ces
hinc inde avulsas adorii: not hastely to runne them
ouer, nor to snatch here and there a word and away: but
totally and aduisedly to examine the whole. Others are mali∣cious,
poisoning with their eyes (like Witches) euery thing they
looke on, maligning other mens credits, and deprauing other
mens labours:Bernard. ser. 39. in Catica. Habe malitia currum suum (saith S. Ber∣nard)
rotis quatuor consistentem: saeuitia, impatientia,
audacia, impudentia. Malice is at her chariot or caroch,
for shee is a loftie minded dame. This chariot is drawne along
on foure wheeles: crueltie, impatiencie, boldnesse, and
impudencie. Cruell shee is, shee will spare no mans name,
no not his life. Impatient shee is, shee will beare no mans in∣firmitie,
no not an error, though to erre be most humane. Bold
shee is, shee blurteth out all whatsoeuer shee knoweth. And
Impudent she is, no checke nor rebuke will snibbe her, to make
her hang the head. To stand therefore to such Iudges, were
halfe before-hand to condemne my selfe. But to learned men,
to temperate men, to studious men, to curteous men, to your
Lordship, and to your like, is this poore labour in all deuotion
most reuerently submitted.
Now some things there are, in which I humbly craue fauou∣rable
interpretation.
1. As first that I doe not put vpon this Treatise in the pen∣ning,
that vigor and viuacitie which it carried in the preach∣ing.
For there is euen in nature a great difference between the
tongue, and the quill, betweene speaking and writing. The ve∣ry
sound and tne of the voice is melodie to the eare: it beeing
the proper Obiect of that Sense. And thereof it is, that the



speciall part ofCie de or at 3. Oratorie, is said to be Pronuntiation. And
besides that,Plutarch. de Socratis Genio. Et de placitis Philosop. l. 4. cap. 1. Vox est ictus animi: passing through the eare,
and braine, and blood, it smiteth (as it were) and giueth a
stroake vpon the verie soule, and so with a kind of violence doth
deepely affect it. Therefore it is called Viua vox, as that which
hath in it a speciall kind of liuelinesse. Hierome beeing ab∣sent,
turneth ouer Macclinus to Austen that was present:
Aug. om. 2. epist. 27. qui viua (vt aiunt) voce docere te poterit: who (saith
S. Hierome) may teach thee thereby the liuely voice, bet∣ter
then I can by an Epistle. But yet further, besides all the
worke of Nature, there is in Preaching a speciall gift of grace:
which enableth a man to speak with such euidence of the Spirit,
& with such power to the Conscience, as no pen of man by wri∣ting
can expresse: whereof Preaching is the most liuely and
effectuall instrument of saluation, and so to be respected.
2. Secondly, I must craue pardon, that all things are not
here exactly set downe, in that order and forme in which they
were deliuered. Writing nothing at large, nor carrying with me
any helpe of my notes into the pulpit; some things might easily be
forgotten, which I premeditated, some things might be added,
which I premeditated not: some things might misse their due
place, and some things their due poize: some things might bee
enlarged,Plat some things might be contracted more then I purpo∣sed:
: It is not possibleAd Dinis.
but things written will slippe out of memorie. I did that
in my yeares, which an other said he had done in his vigour,
D. rante. Orabam meditata loquens, tres tractus in horas.
To doe it without set forme of words, and to misse nothing either
of matter or manner, must be the act of a man of greater gifts
then my selfe. But new when I returned home, and after so ma∣ny
requests, had resolued to commit that which I had said to
writing; I had no safer rule to walke by, then the method by
which I had in short notes digested my meditations. And there∣fore
in that forme, they come forth into the world.
3. Thirdly, if any take offence at the multitude and multi∣plicitie



of mine allegations: I would haue them to knowe, that
as it is not mine vsuall manner of preaching in the countrie; so
here are many more Ouotations added, and some a great deale
more enlarged, then as they were at that time deliuered. Tullie
said of youth,Pro. M. Caelio. Dandum est aliquid aetati: So say I in this case:
something must be giuen to this learned age, something to the
solemnitie of that place, and something to the expectation of the
hearers. Sure I am, that much was to be giuen to this Argu∣ment,
where the Position was to be ouerswaied by Antiquity,
for that the Doctrine is on all sides challenged of Noueltie. It
is hard I confesse, to hold The golden meane. But there is a
worse extremitie growne vp in preaching, which for reuerence
of mine owne coate, I will thus taxe from S. Augustine in an
allegorie:De serm. Do∣min in monte. lib. 1. Aduertendum est, non solm rerum corpore∣arum
nitore & pompa, sed eriam in ipsis sordibus lutuosis
esse posse iactantiam: & eò periculofiorem, quo sub specie
seruitutis Dei decipit.
I haue said, if not all that I would, yet all that I could,
the time so straightening me in the penning hereof, as I
haue scarse found leisure to read it ouer. My prayer is
now to Almightie God, that he would be pleased in mercie to
accept of these my poore endeauours, and to blesse them to the
good of his Church, for which they haue been vndertaken. And
for your Lordship, my supplicatiō shall euer be, that God would
vouchsafe to continue in you, that liuely, iustifying▪ and sa∣uing
faith, treated vpon in this Sermon, which may keepe you
from trembling here, and in the day of iudgement. So I take
my leaue. From Combes in Suffolke. Maij. 29. 1613.

