



RIGHT honorable and my ve∣rie good Lord, as the consi∣derations, which enforced me to offer hir maiestie the first frutes of my publik writing, were exceding great, so those reasons, which induce me now to present to your honor, this my second labor, be not verie small. Hir maiestie representeth the personage of the hole land, and therefor clameth a prero∣gatiue in dewtie, both for the excellencie of hir place, wherewith she is honored, as our prince, and for the greatnesse of hir care, wherewith she

is charged, as our parent. If honor be the end of that, which is don, hir place is to clame, if the common good, then hir charge is to chalenge. VVhich both clame in honor, and chalenge in charge, did concur in one aspect, when I offered hir my book. For mine own purpos was to ho∣nor hir place, with the first of my labor, and my book pretended to benefit hir charge with som generall profit. Again being desirous both to procure my book passage, thorough hir maie∣sties dominions, & to laie som ground for mine own credit, at the verie fountain, how could I haue obtained either the first, without hir suffe∣rance, or the last, but with hir countenance? VVhose considerate iudgement if my book did not please, my credit were in danger, whose gra∣cious permission if it were denyed, my successe were in despare. So that both my dewtie to∣wards hir maiestie, as my souerain prince, and my desire of furtherance by hir maiestie, as my surest protection, compelled me of force to be∣gin with hir highnesse, by satisfying of my dew∣tie, to com in hope of my desire, if the matter, which I offred should deserue liking, as the course, which I took shewed desire to please. Now my dewtie in that behalf towards hir ma∣iestie being so discharged, whom the presenting

of my book makes priuie to my purpos, doth not the verie stream of dewtie, & the force of de sert carie me streight frō hir highnesse vnto your honor, whether I haue in eie your general good nesse towards all them, which be learned them∣selues, or your particular fauor towards my tra∣uell, which teach others to learn? For in com∣mon iudgement is not he to take place next af∣ter the prince in the honor of learning, which all waie by the prince most preferreth learning? wherein I do not se, that there is anie one about hir maiestie (without offence be it spoken, either to your honor, if you desire not to hear it, or to a∣nie other person, which deserues well that waie) which either iustlie can, or vniustlie will cōpare with your honor, either for the encouraging of students to the attainmēt of learning, or for hel∣ping the learned to aduancement of liuing. VVhich two points, I take to be most euident proufs of generall patronage to all learning, to nurish it being grene, to cherish it being grown. Of which your honors both first nurishing, and last cherishing of ech kinde of learning, there is no one corner in all our cuntrie but it feleth the frute, and thriues by the effect. For how manie singular men haue bene worthilie pla∣ced, how manie nedefull places haue bene sin∣gularlie

appointed by your either onelie or most honorable means? with this generall con∣sideration whereby all men ar bound to your honor in dewtie, who either like of learning, or liue by learning, mine own particular doth ioyn it self, with all officiousnesse, and desire to do honor, where it hath found fauor. For I do find my self excedinglie indetted vnto your honor for your speciall goodnesse, and most fauora∣ble countenance these manie years. VVhereby I am bound to declare the vow of my seruice vnto your honor not by the offering of a petie boke alone, such as this is, but by tendring what∣soeuer a thankfull minde can deuise in extremi∣tie of power for so excellent a patron. And tho I begin the shew of my deuotion with a verie mean sacrifice, for so great a saint, (as what a simple present is a part of an Elementarie, or an English ortografie to so great a person, and so good a patron?) yet am I in verie good hope, that your honor will accept it, and measur my good will, not by the valew of the present, but by the wont of your goodnesse. For dewtie will break out, and an ishew it will find, which tho it stream not great, where it springeth first, yet is it as pure, as where it spredeth most. Mo offerings, hereafter of the like sort, maie giue it greater

shew, but none of anie sort can shew more good will. And so I desire your honor to take it, in waie of euidence to the world, that your desert hath bound me: in waie of witnesse to your self, that I would return dewtie. Mine own good will I know my self, of your good liking I nothing dout, whose honorable and ordinarie dispositiō is, to take things well, which taste of goodwill. I offred to hir maiestie the prime of my pen, I offer to your honor the prime of right penning, not handled thus before, as I can perceiue by a∣nie of my cuntrie, tho I se diuerse, that haue bene tampering about it. And as the difference of state betwene hir maiestie, & your honor made me of mere force to begin with hir, and to dis∣cend to you: so the matter of that book, which I presented vnto hir, is the occasiō of this, which I offer vnto you. In that book among other things, which the discourse enforced, as it enfor∣ced manie, (bycause it doth medle with all the nedefull accidents, which belong to teaching.) I did promis an Elementarie, that is, the hole matter, which childern ar to learn, and the hole maner how masters ar to teach them, from their first beginning to go to anie school, vntill theie passe to grammer, in both the best if my o∣pinion proue best. This point is of great mo∣ment

in my iudgement, both for young learners to be entred with the best, and for the old lear∣ned to be sound from the first. This Elementa∣rie am I now to perform. VVhose particular brā∣ches being manie in number, & the book there∣by growing to som bulk, I thought it good to de uide it into parts, vpō sundrie causes, but chefe∣lie for the printer, whose sale will be quik if the book be not big. Of those seuerall parts, this is the first, wherein I entreat (tho that be but litle) of certain generall considerations, which con∣cern the hole Elementarie, but I handle speci∣allie in it the right writing of our English tung, a verie necessarie point, and of force to be handled, ear the child be taught to read, which reading is the first principle of the hole Elemen∣tarie. For can reading be right before writing be righted, seing we read nothing else, but what we se writen? or can writing seme right, being cha∣lēged for wrong, before it be cleared? I account the print as a statarie writing, and therefor inci∣dent to the same term. I haue trauelled in this point of our English writing, somwhat more thē ordinarie. VVherein what my iudgemēt is, your honor maie perceiue euen by this my thus wri∣ting, which is as the common, tho more certain then the common, as my precepts will shew: by∣cause

I write nothing without cause why, and most certain groūd. For I haue soūded the thing by the depth of our tung, and planted my rules vpon our ordinarie custom, the more my frind, bycause it is followed, nowhere my fo, bycause nowhere forced. VVhereby I do perceiue, why we ought to write thus, as the common currant is, without the alteration of either custom, or charact, tho with som correction of certain wāts, and generall direction for the hole pen. I be∣gin to teach this low, bycause I wold not leap, but rise by degrées entending to mount higher, as my argument growes higher. Now this book being parcell of the Elementarie, seuered vpon this cause, presenteth it self first, as a leader to the residew, vnto your honor, making publik shew of my priuat dewtie, and pretending an argu∣ment verie pertinent to my profession, tho se∣ming not so proper to your estate. And yet I take it not alltogither vnproper, considering your honor both handle the pen your self ex∣cedinglie well, and far aboue the common of most nobilitie not onelie with vs, but also els∣where, and besides that you can iudge of the ve∣rie best penning, with as great skill, as your self can vse the pen excedinglie well, which two sin∣gular properties do argew in mine opinion no

great improprietie in the offring such a present to such a personage, so rarelie qualifyed, tho of meruellous height aboue, either the matter, which is offred, or the partie which offereth. And therefor I am in hope that your honor will take this simple treatis concerning the right writing of your cuntrie speche, with a verie goodwill, as your dailie trauell is to work your cūtries good, with your hole endeuor. Further, I do not take it to be anie disparagemēt to your honorable cō∣ceit to seme to fauor so mean a thing, as an orto∣grafie is, considering verie great states and prin∣ces to, in the places, where theie liued, did not think meanlie of it, but were dealers therein, and writers themselues, as M. MESSALA the graue counsellor, M. CICERO the great ora∣tor, C. CAESAR the famous conquerer, who delt this waie in the Latin tung, and thereby did win, both credit to themselues, and coun∣tenance to their cuntrie. I will vse no mo exam∣ples, where there is no more nede, neither prouf of other tungs, where the Latin is enough. The profitablenesse of the thing maie moue your honor to fauor it, as a furniture to know∣ledge, the honorablenesse of such personages maie persuade you to further it, as a brood of nobilitie. As it cannot but yeild most hono∣rable

matter for historie to work on to euer∣lasting memorie, that hir most excellent ma∣iestie amongst other hir affaires, vouchsafed to consider of the state of learning in hir time, that it went in right course, for the right maintaining of a peaceable gouernment, which peaceable∣nesse is the end of all gouernment, as learning is the mean: so it cannot but withall sound to your perpetuall honor, if it shall please you to moue hir maiestie to so honorable a considera∣tion, that all learning maie testify to posteritie, that such a prince did it, such a counsellor moued it. Perfitnesse in learning which cōsisteth in right educatiō of chosen wits, in right method of best matter, in full time both to learn & digest, when it coms to deal abrode, is the instrumēt of quiet∣nesse, considerate in publishing hir own opi∣nion, with warrant for truth, with warinesse for peace: the contrarie corrupts, where it cannot gide: it worketh dissension, when it is not resol∣ued, and in imperfection, vttereth the first con∣ceiued heat, which sufficiencie in time, and digestion in studie, wold either not haue vtte∣red, or haue otherwise qualifyed. And tho after∣ward it reclame it self, vpon better aduise, it cannot staie the quiksiluer, which at the first push it hath poord in peples heads, an enemie

to concorde, which learning pretendeth, as the Art of peace, from the highest diuine to the low∣est infant. The most mightie, and most mercifull God preserue hir most excellent maiestie with long and happie life, to work this and manie such effects, to his honor, hir own renoun, and hir peples good, and the same good God pre∣serue your honor, as a counseller of most trust, to a prince of most wisedom, to beawtify nobili∣tie, to auance knowledge, to assist your cuntrie, in both trew religion, and politik rule: and a∣mongst other things, not of least honor, to fur∣ther our schools: that euen the young infant tho∣rough this hole realm, maie learn to know, how much he is bound to your honorable furtherāce for his good bringing vp in the Elementarie principles of all learning, before he do remoue to anie vniuersitie: as all those students, which ar of the vniuersities, do both praise and praie for your honorable prosperitie, for that great en∣couragement, which theie receiue by you, both while theie studie there, and when theie serue a∣brode in publik functions of the common weal.
Your honors most bound in all devvtifulnesse.
RICHARD MVLCASTER.
