



THe inscription and dedica∣tion of bookes, to men of note and regarde in their time, either for religion, or vertue, or learning, or au∣thoritie: is well knowne to your Grace, (Right Hono∣rable and most reuerend fa∣ther,) for continuance to be very ancient, and for vse to be exceeding profitable. Auncient it is, as appeareth by the writings of the fathers. Damas∣cene dedicateth one of his treatises to the Tractat. de Logica. Bishop of Maiume, another to the Introductio dignitatum elementaris. Bishop of Laodicea. Arnobius inscribeth his commentaries vpon the

Psalmes, Arnob. Pro∣log. Com. in Psal. Charissimis Patribus, Laurentio & Rustico Episcopis: To his deare fathers Laurenti∣us and Rusticus Bishops. Lactant. in∣sit. lib. 1. ca. 1. Lactantius his Institu∣tions, vnto Constantine the Emperor. Iustinus Martyr, his treatise Iust. Mart. de verit christ re∣lig. tom. 2. of the trueth of Christian Religion, to Marcus Pompeius. Saint Augustine, some of his bookes Enchirid. tom. 3. ad Laurentium, some De spirit. & litera tom. 3. ad Marcellinum, some De menda∣cio. tom. 4. ad Consentium, some Contra duas Epist. pelagia∣norum. tom. 7. ad Bonifacium: some particularlie directed to one man, & some vnto another. Yea S. Luke himselfe, though hee wrote (as did also the other Euange∣lists) 2. Tim. 3.16. by speciall inspiration: yet hee entituleth the Actes of the Apostles, Act. 1.1. vnto one Theophilus, Gualther. hom. 1. in Act. 1. some speciall familiar friend of his, or a man of speciall note for his faith & religion in the church, as most learned men haue obserued on that place. That he must needes be a man of great ignorance, and small reading, who wil iudge it to be the new∣fanglenes or vaineglorie of this age, for men to consecrate their labours, and dedicate their studies, to the honour and seruice of their supe∣riors.
And as this custome is very ancient, so is it also exceeding profitable. For first, the sacred memo∣rie of worthie men, is by the continuance of the bookes that are dedicated vnto them, preserued from forgetfulnes, and challenged from the ruine of time. Which time, if it growe to bee  . Olde and long continued, Sophocles, Aiax.  : (as he saith in Sophocles,) it will

as well ouerwhelme with darkenes, things which are now lightsome and glorious, as it will reueale and bring to light, things that yet lie hidden and vnknowne. The greatest men, for want of memo∣rials haue in continuance of time, been buried in obliuion. Secondly, this cannot but cheare vp and encourage men of vertue and of godlines, to perseuer and to grow olde in goodnes, when they see that their persons are regarded of men that now liue, and their names are like (by the bookes which are now dedicated vnto them,) to bee regi∣stred, and recorded to the generations to come. For, although vertue be a thing worthie to bee af∣fected, and laboured after of and for it selfe, be∣cause August. de lib. arbit. lib. 2. Cap. 18. it is one of the greatest good things that fal into the nature of man: and there is not any sub¦stance which we possesse, Isocrates pa∣raines. ad De∣monicum.  , Either more honorable, or more durable then ver∣tue: Yet such is the corruption and wretchednes of our nature, that we are hardlie induced thereto, or vpholden therein, without casting some eye, to∣wards carnall respects, and seeking therein some outward benefite.
—Iuuenal. lib. 4. Satyr. 10. Quis enim virtutem amplectitur ipsam, Praemia si tollas?
The orator said well, Cicero Rhe∣tor. lib. 3. Neque solum laudis cau∣sa rectum sequi conuenit, No man should (& wise men will not) follow right and goodnes onely for praise and commendation. Sed si laus consequitur, duplicatur recti appetendi voluntas. But yet, if

commendation and honor doe followe of well dooing, the desire and appetite of goodnes is dou∣bled and increased. Thirdly, by the learning and authoritie of those to whome bookes are dedica∣ted, the bookes themselues are protected from the causelesse censures of the ignorant, and the biting teeth of the Carper. Hesiode fayned that Hesiod. in Theogonia. Momus was begotten, or brought forth of the night, for that, (as I suppose) he walketh in darknes, & stin∣geth in silence as a serpent in the grasse. Now, as the brightnes of the sunne dispelleth the darkenes of the night: so the honor, yea the very name of a mightie man restraineth the malice of the Car∣per. Maiestas vindex veritatis: Authoritie wil support that trueth, which otherwise by the ma∣lice of men would be troden vnder feete. Hecuba tolde Vlysses, that his worthines and estimation (  ) was such, and so great, that he was able to perswade whatsoeuer he would: yea Euripides tra∣ged. Hecuba.  , though he spake the things that were euil and vn∣iust. How much more then shall the patronage, of a great and honorable man, giue countenance, and credit, and safe conduct to a treatise, the matter whereof is sound, and the publishing whereof is profitable.
These and some other respects haue caused me to resolue, to commend this my poore labour, and endeuour vnto the defense and protection of some worthie personage: yea though I knew right well, that 3. Eza. 4.14. The trueth is great and preuaileth

of it selfe, and God the author of truth is all suffi∣cientlie able to defend it. And among all others, to present it to your Grace and fauor, for these rea∣sons and causes following.
First, the question of vsurie, being controuer∣ted in these dayes among manie (and those verie learned) diuines: requireth and needeth an arbi∣trer of much reading, experience, and moderation. Oecolampadius said, Ocolam∣pad. Epist. 16. lib. 1. De vsuris iudicare non est omnium: Euery man is not a fitte iudge in this cause of vsurie. And Aristot. To∣pic. lib. 2. if no man chuseth a young man for a iudge, or a guide: Quia non constat eos esse prudentes, because there is not sufficient eui∣dence of their wisdome: then should I haue shew∣ed my selfe a very young man, if I had chosen any that is yong, either in yeares, or learning, or experience, to be a determinor of this controuer∣sie, or a protector of this cause.
Secondly, your Grace is reported to bee one, who neither lendeth, nor taketh vpon vsurie, which is not in this age euery such mans com∣mendation. And therefore being free from the guiltines of this sinne, you may the more freelie giue sentence vpon the vngodlines thereof. Ambros. su∣per Beati im∣maculati. & habetur 3. quaest. 7. Iudi∣cet. Iudi∣cet ille de alterius eore (saith S. Ambrose) q non habet in seipso quod condemnet: Iudicet, qui non agit eadem quae in alio putauerit punienda. Let him iudge of an other mans default, who hath not the same fault to condemne in himselfe: Let him iudge of another, who committeth not the

same things which hee deemeth worthie the pu∣nishing in another.
Thirdly, your place and calling hath giuen you a speciall stroke in the maintenance of the lawes of the Church of England: by which lawes, and which Church, vsurie is simply and generally pro∣hibited. And therefore you the fittest man to pa∣tronize those, whose writings doe condemne it. Polyanth. tit. Lex.  saith Menander. The Magistrate is the strength of the lawe: And then shall the Canons of the Church concerning vsurie bee reuerenced and regarded, when by those that are Church gouernors they bee vrged and main∣teined.
If it shall please your Grace to take a view of this treatise, you shall find these two things obser∣ued throughout the whole course of the same. The one, that in this question of vsurie, I haue not declined (as touching the generall conclusion) frō the receiued iudgement  the auncient Diuines: nor deliuered any thing cōtrary to the Canons of our Church. Secondly, that I haue not entred into anie by controuersies not pertinent to this pur∣pose. For I deemed it the part of a scholler, to hold him to his taske, (as the Prouerbe is,) and to pur∣sue without vnnecessarie digressions, the purpose that hee hath in hand. What labour I haue taken, and what authors I haue turned ouer in studying of this argument my selfe only know, and it were in vaine to brag or to boast of them, especially to

your Grace. What I haue attained vnto herein by my labour and reading, I leaue vnto your graue and reuerend censure. If it please you to accept this mine endeuour, I haue my full desire: If to protect it, the benefite which the Church reapeth thereby (if happily it proue anie) shall be ascribed to your gracious fauour. The almightie God con∣tinue and increase vpō you the riches of his grace, to the glorie of his name, to the benefite of his Church, and the publique wealth of this realme, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Bury S. Edmunds this first of Ianuarie. 1595.

