



GReat is the deepenesse (most gracious Soue∣raigne,Rom. 11. Vers. 33. Iob. 26. V. 8. Iob. 27. V. 11▪ Iob. 38. V. 8.) of the wisedome and knowledge of the e∣uerliuing God; vnsearch∣able are his iudgements, his waies past finding out. Hee bindeth the waters in his Clouds, and the cloud is not broken vnder them. He so limiteth the floods, that they neither doe nor can ouerflowe. He shut vp the Sea with doores, when it is∣sued forth as out of the wombe. His decree staied her proud

waues, & appointed her bounds whether she should come, but no farther. He doth great, vnsearchable, and maruellous things without number.Iob. 38. Vers. 11. Iob. 5.9. Yea, his mercies and fauours towards my sillie selfe, a most wretched creature, and vn∣worthie (for any desert in my selfe,) to tread vppon the ground; are so many, so great, and so wonderfull, that I stand amazed at the remembrance thereof:I might here recount many other rare & extraordina∣ry fauours of God towards me. being farre vn∣able with Penne and Inke to expresse the same. The re∣hearsall of one, may suffice for the present: Being student at Rome in the English Colledge, not long afore my arri∣uall in this Kingdome, and on a time walking abroad to take the ayre with many other of the same Colledge, when we came without one of the Posterne gates of the Citie, we espied certaine Bufloes with their Keeper at the Riuer∣side. Which spectacle, (as vnpleasant to the eye, so also most terrible to the heart,The Bufloes are as terri∣ble beasts as the Lyons.) my fellowes and countrey-men no sooner behelde, but they betooke themselues to their best speede. My selfe more bolde therein then wise, would not amend my pace, and so remained bird alone. Sodainly the furious, raging, and cruell Bufloes brake from their kee∣per, and with great violence, rage, and furie came vpon me. My fellowes standing a farre off vpon the toppe of an high mountaine, durst not for their liues approach, to afford me any comfort, helpe, aide, or succour. They neither did, nor could expect any other thing, saue onely present and moste cruell death. Howbeit, (most gratious Soue∣raigne,) the wilde, cruell, raging, and furious Bufloes, (a thing very strange,Many yet li∣uing, knowe his to be most true. rare, and wonderfull, if a miracle, let the Reader iudge,) did no hurt vnto me at all, but spor∣ted with mee, as one childe playeth with another. After a while, the furious Bufloes left mee, and departed in peace from mee. At the last, my fellowes beholding the de∣parture of the Bufloes, and perswading themselues that I was most cruellie slaine, came with conuenient speede to visite my corpes. But finding me aliue, and as liue-like as I

was afore, we al returned to the Colledge, with great ioy and speede. The rector of the Colledge could no way be perswaded, but that I was very grieuously wounded; al∣beit neither my selfe felt any, neither could their eyes or wits discerne any hurt at all,A thing ne∣uer heard or knowne be∣fore. saue onely that my face was something bloody, by reason of the sodaine fall I gotte while I made hast to haue escaped from the imminent daunger. For, it had neuer bin knowne or heard among them; that euer any man, woman, or childe escaped with life, being once in that kind of daunger; to witte, in the curtesie of the furious Bufloes. Many gaue their cen∣sures concerning the fact and euent. The generall reso∣lution was this, viz. That I might fight with Bufloes in England, and haue the vpper hand. My selfe did deeme it probable, & this day me thinketh, the same is brought to passe; though, (Gods name be blessed for it,) in a farre different sense and meaning, from that which ei∣ther they or my selfe did then imagine. I thought then to fight against the true professors of Christs Gospell, (whō I deemed heretiques & spiritual Bufloes:) but God, (whose wisedome reacheth from end to ende, mightily,Sap. 8.1. Ephes. 1. Vers. 4.11. Rom. 9. Vers. 11.15.16. &c. Ephes. 6. Vers. 12. Act. 9. Vers. 1.2.3. &c. and disposeth all things sweetely,) ordained me in his e∣ternall purpose, to a farre more honourable and sacred Warfare; viz. to encounter the trayterous Iesuits and Iesuited popelings, and valiantly to fight the battell of Christs Church, against those most furious, brainlesse, & cruell Bufloes of mens soules. When Saul breathing out slaughter against ye Saints of God, desired of the high Priests, letters, by vertue whereof he might bring all to Hierusalem, that professed the name of Christ Iesus: then our Lord himselfe appeared to him, opened his eyes, & enlightened him with the knowledge of the truth. Sem∣blably, when my selfe was drowned in the depth of su∣perstitious and erronious Poperie, and therein so

blinded, that I could not discerne trueth from falshood; it pleased the same God, so to opē the eies of mine heart and soule,Let mee die a most cruell death, if I shall not con∣found Popery by best appro∣ued Popish Doctors, a∣gainst any English Pa∣pist that shall haue courage to defend the same. Psal. 118. verse 23. that I foorthwith beheld as cleerely, as the Sunne-shining at noone day, late vpstart Poperie, farre dissonant from the olde Romane Religion, to be batte∣red, ouerthrowne, and cleane turned vp-side downe; and that, euen by the cleere euidence, plaine verdict, and constant doctrine of the best learned Doctors, and most renowned writers in the Church of Rome. Which metamorphosis and right Christian alterati∣on being wrought in my soule, I foorthwith beway∣led my former dayes of ignorance, very ioyfully em∣braced the truth in my heart, publiquely acknowledged Gods wonderfull operation in mee, and most humbly yeelded and submitted my selfe, to the mercie of most noble Queene Elizabeth. This was the Lords doing, and it is wonderfull in our eyes. I protest vpon my sal∣uation, that I haue at this houre a good testimonie of a well setled conscience, and vnspeakable comfort in my soule, (God make me euer thankfull for this and all other his manifold mercies,) as I haue also euer had, since I first renounced frō my heart, the late vpstart Romish Religion. For this nowe professed Romish Religion, is not as the sillie seduced Papists imagine,) the old Ro∣mane Religion; but a new no Religion, patched like Mahomets Alcoran, and by little and little crept into the Church;In the Sur∣vey of Po∣perie. as I haue prooued elsewhere at large. But the Papists being condemned in their own consciences, dare not for their liues publish any direct and full an∣swere, either to my Motiues, or to my Survey, or to a∣ny other of my bookes, written against them and their pted Hotch-potch Religion. Yet this last moneth of Februarie, one shamelesse and namelesse Iesuite, hath published, not a direct and full answere, but a Fore-run∣ner

forsooth against mee. In which Pamphlet,The Papists cannot abide to heare their religion thus tearmed. But they must vo∣lētes nolētes endure it, till they answere all my bookes. Forerunner, pag. 15. Nascctur ri∣diculus mus. hee turneth himselfe this way, that way, and euery way, saue onely to the marke at which hee neuer aymeth. He perceiueth right well, that many of the Popelings beginne to stagger at their doctrine and Romish faith: because they haue beene so long silent, and dare not an∣swere my Bookes. For the procuring of which mortall wound, he telleth them of a most rare and soueraigne medicine, which the Iesuits haue brought out of the new found worlde: viz. That my Bookes were answered fiue yeare agoe: and that the answere is suppressed hi∣therto for speciall vnknowne causes, but must shortly come abroad. Hereof more at large, in the proper place.
Now so it is, (most excellent King,) that the Fore-runner would seeme desirous, though indeed he desireth nothing lesse, to haue a publique dispute, and so to fight the combate with me Viua voce; and therefore doth hee challenge me, daring and redaring me to the same. Who if he knew how willingly & gladly I am ready to cast him my Gauntlet, would doubtlesse vse his words more sparingly in this behalfe. In regard hereof (most graci∣ous and dread Soueraigne,O noble King for Christs sake graunt my request. The victory is already got∣ten, none of them dare vn∣dertake the quarrell. Let me be hanged, bowelled and quartred; yea, and and my corpes cast to the fowles of the ayre, if the victorie fall not on my side.) I now prostrate vpon my knees, doe most humblie beseech your most excellent Maiestie, that it will please your Highnes of your most Princely fauour, to graunt your Royall licence▪ and safe conduct for any English Iesuite, or Iesuited Papist in the whole worlde, that shall haue courage to appeare for the true performance of the challenge, in such manner as is in this replie expressed. (Oh most gratious Soue∣raigne,) I am joyfull, when I remember this future com∣bat. I wish in my heart, that it may bee effected with all expedition, for I confidentlie perswade my selfe in our Lorde Iesus, that his Name shall thereby bee glorified: your Maiestie highlie honoured; the Papists stricken dead; and all true hearted English subiects receiue vn∣vnspeakeable

endlesse comfort. If it shall fall out other∣wise, and that I shall not be found euen in your Maie∣sties iudgement, to haue the victorie and vpper hand; I will be content to loose my life for my iust reward, as one that hath dishonoured your Maiestie, and the cause. The Almightie blesse your Maiestie, with a long and most happie raigne vpon earth, and with eternall glorie in the world to come, Amen, 
From my studie, this eighteenth of March, 1605. 
