



AMONG sundrie meanes and helps of furthering of the Gospell of Christ Ie∣sus, (right noble Earle) vvhereby, since the time of the blessed Apostles, much good hath bin done to the Church of God: the vvriting and printing of godly treatises hath bene one of the chiefest. For as hereby not onely an∣cient heresies of all sorts haue long ago bin confuted and laid in the dust, but in later times the nevve damnable doctrines of
the Antichrist of Rome, conuinced and quite in a maner ouerthrovvn: so not only the principall points of true religion, haue excellently bene handled and generallie made knovvn, but manie obscure and hard places of the sacred Scripture illightened and vnfolded. For this cause being desi∣rous to employ my poore talent to the grea∣test aduantage that I can, and to vse the best meanes I am able of doing good, I thought good to bestovve my labour and leisure in furthering of the Church of God by inke and paper, and to vvrite a commē∣tarie on some part of Canonicall Scripture, and namely on this excellent booke of the Prouerbes. The causes vvhy I rather chose to handle & interpret this booke then any of the other, as they vvere verie manie, so among the rest these vvere the chiefest, to vvit, that the morall sentences therein contained are most fit to be considered in these carnall times, that they are the verie keyes of knovvledge, and rules of all righ∣teousnesse, that sometimes I had publikely read and expounded them all, and finally, that they are peerelesse pearles, meet to be
presented vnto such persons of high de∣gree as your Lordship is. There is no parcell of the vvrittē vvord, but you may receiue exceeding frute thereby, if it please your Lordship to looke thereinto: so that if you take anie part of the Scripture to reade or to exercise your selfe in, you can not take amisse as vve are vvont to say. The sacred histories, contained in the fiue bookes of Moses, and in the bookes of Iosua, Iudges, Ruth, Samuell, Kings, Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemia, Hester, vvhereunto the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles are to be ad∣ded, vvill tell you things past and done manie yeares ago. The prophesies, among vvhich the Reuelation of S. Iohn is to be numbred and doth indeed excell, vvill shevve you vvhat things are to come to passe hereafter, and vvere, after the vt∣tering of them, to be accomplished in their times. Ecclesiastes or the booke of the Preacher, vvill admonish you of the va∣nitie of the vvorld, a point verie needfull as for all mortall vvights, so especially for noble personages to consider. In the Epi∣stles of S. Paule, Iames, Peter, Iohn, and
Iude, you may see and heare vvhat the Lord saith to the Churches, and vvhat duties he requireth at the hāds of all Chri∣stians. By the Psalmes of Dauid, and the song of songs, you may be taught & stirred vp to pray and sing, inasmuch as the mones and grones of the Prophets in the one are registred euerie vvhere, and the voice as it vvere of the bridegrome and the bride resounded in the other. To conclude, the lamentation of the Prophete Ieremie, vvhich Gregorie Nazianzen neuer read but the tears did trickle dovvn his cheeks, vvil moue you to mourne for the afflictiōs of Sion, and dravve you to performe that dutie vvhereunto the Apostle exhorteth, vvhen he vvilleth vs to vveepe vvith those vvho vveepe. Euen as then the busie bee, vvhen she flieth into some faire and pleasant garden, and lighteth sometimes here and sometimes there as it falleth out, sucketh out some svveetnesse out of euerie floure and herbe vvhereon she sitteth: so your Lordship looking into the volume of the sacred Scripture, and reading some∣times this parcell thereof, sometimes that,
shall receiue by euerie booke therein such comfort and profit, as vvill cause you to preferre the same before the hony and the honie combe. But if there be anie part of the vvord of God among the rest, vvhich may be called a garland of heauenly flovv∣ers, or out of vvhich your Lordship may reape most precious frute, it is this vvor∣thie booke of Salomons Prouerbs. For here∣in, as it vvere in a cristall glasse, you shall see the nature of God, the maners of men, the comely countenance of vertue, the vglie shape of vice, the image of the true church, & the state of the vvhole vvorld. Hovve manie and hovv notable things are herein spoken, of Gods Predestination, prouidence, iustice, vvisedome and mer∣cie? Hovv diuinely are the natures, the offices, and the vvorkes of Iesus Christ herein described? Hovv liuely are adul∣terers, drunkards, sluggards, misers, proud, vvrathfull, foolish, and enuious persons, herein painted out as it vvere in their co∣lours? On the contrarie side, hovv excel∣lently are the properties and revvards of the faithfull, the iust, the meeke, the
thriftie, the liberall, and the vvise, decla∣clared and pictured as it vvere in the pa∣rables of this booke? To conclude, hovve notably is the vse of lots, the force of gifts, the povver of affections, and the disposi∣tion of sundrie brutish creatures, therein expressed? So many points of great impor∣tance and of singular frute, being compre∣hended in this one litle booke of Salomons Prouerbes, you can not (most noble Earle) better bestovv your labour, then in medi∣tating therein both night and day, and in binding the sentences thereof, as it vvere frontlets before your eyes. Novv to the end that the meaning of these diuine say∣ings may be made manifest vnto you first, and so to other into vvhose hāds this small treatise shall come, I haue translated the text as faithfully as I could, looking into the translatiōs of the best writers both old and nevve, but especially into the Hebrue copie, so farre foorth as my poore talent did enable me and my leisure suffer. More∣ouer, to the same intent and purpose, I haue gathered into mine exposition, the pith and marrovv onely, of all those obserua∣tions
vvhich either I had by me of mine ovvne, or receiued from other by vvhose conference or vvriting I vvas helped. Finally, (that as much light might be gi∣uen to these sacred Prouerbs as vvel could be for the time by me) in the margent I haue referred the reader to the rootes of diuerse parables, pointed to sundrie exam∣ples, noted here and there some reasons of the translation, and quoted for proofe or declaration, infinite places of Scripture. All the vvhich paines notvvithstanding, I confesse and acknowvledge, that I am farre from handling of manie points ex∣actly, vvhich fault my distractions and encumbrances about other necessarie af∣faires may excuse, the vvhich vvere so great, as that euen I could not be present, to lend anie help to my poore booke vvhen it vvas vnder the presse, for the vvhich cause I request your Lordship and the cur∣teous reader, to pardon the escapes of the print, and to correct them according to the direction of the printer aftervvard set dovvne. But, it may be there vvill be some, vnto vvhom this my simple com∣mentarie
vvill seeme scant large and full inough, but too briefe, and too much con∣tracted. I ansvver vnto these, that I fol∣lovved breuitie of set purpose, lest the vo∣lume should be too large and too deare, and lest I in vvriting or other in reading may be said to loose time. And yet neuerthe∣lesse, if the length of a treatise be to be iudged not by the number of the vvordes, but by the matters therein contained, this commentarie is in deed verie long. But as concerning large discourses, they are fit∣ter for sermons then for vvritings, and rather to be vsed by those vvho intend to apply some frutefull instruction, then by those vvhose onely drift is to open and cleare hard and darke places of Scripture. Neuerthelesse againe, to the end that the mislikers of breuitie, may haue somevvhat in this commentarie vvhich may like and please their humour, I haue somevvhat largely handled the foure last chapters. Novv if there shal be any, vvho carrying ill vvill or ill minds in them, vvill either not be satisfied vvith a reasonable an∣svver, or seeke to disgrace my labours, be∣cause
they haue an enuious eye, and a back∣biting tongue, I leaue them as vnreasona∣ble and vncharitable men to their crooked vvayes. Against such cauillers and car∣pers, your Lordships fauour and accepta∣tion of my booke may be no small defence, vnto vvhom I haue dedicated it, not onely for that intent but for diuerse other, as namely to testifie my thākfulnesse for that honorable curtesie and fauour vvhich I haue found both at your Lordships hands and in the eyes of the tvvo choise Ladies, your Aunts, the Countesses of VVarvvick and of Cumberland. And againe, in these your young and tender years, to direct and guide you the best I can in the vvay vvherein you are to vvalke. In deed if you shall receiue this booke onely as a nose∣gay, reioycing in it for a day and then v∣sing it no more, you can reape no frute at all in a maner thereby. But if you shall frō time to time addresse your selfe thereby, as it vvere by a looking glasse, it vvill do you more good then can be spoken. For as there is no vice from vvhich it vvill not dissvvade you, so there is no vertue or
praise, vvhereunto it vvill not moue you. VVhen you shall sit at a table richly furni∣shed, it vvill aduise you to consider dili∣gently vvhat is set before you.Pro. 23.1. VVhen you shall be at your pleasant recreation, it vvil admonish you not to be drovvned therein, nor to loue it aboue measure.Pro. 21.1. VVhē your re∣uenues and riches shall come in & abound, it vvill put you in minde to honour God vvith your substance.Pro. 3.9. VVhē it shall please the Lord to lay some crosse vpon you, it vvil exhort you not to refuse the chastice∣ment of the Lord.Pro 3.11. VVhen you shall go a∣bout to open your lips to speake of anie mat∣ter, it vvill teach you that vaine talke is not seemely in an excellent man or noble person.Pro. 17.7. VVhen you shall see the innocent oppressed or the poore anie vvay vvron∣ged, it vvill stirre you vp to deliuer them that are vniustly pursued,Pro. 24.11. and to open your mouth in the cause of all the children of destruction. To conclude (for it vvould be infinite thus to folovv all the particulars) vvhen you shall haue occasion to chuse any seruants into your Honorable familie, it vvill direct you to admit and accept those
vvhose lips are iust,Pro. 16.12.13 and vvho speake vp∣right things, and to reiect those vvho are vvorkers of iniquitie. VVherefore, seeing this booke of the Prouerbs of Salomon is a∣ble to instruct you in euerie good vvay, & to make your Lordship fit to performe eue∣rie good vvorke. Accept it (right noble Earle) and meditate therein continually. Stories record, that Darius propounded great revvardes vnto those vvho could find out vvittie poesies, that Alexander vvould neuer sleepe vvithout Homer vn∣der his pillovv, that Plinie vvould haue all men alvvayes carrie Tullies Offices in their hands, and that Sophrons book vvas found vnder the head of Plato vvhen he vvas dead. If these Princes and Philoso∣phers so esteemed humane and heathenish vvritings, hovv deare and neare should these diuine sentences and parables of Sa∣lomō be vnto your Lordship? But no vvhit doubting, either that you vvill exercise your selfe in the sacred Prouerbes of that renovvned king, or that you vvill fauou∣rably accept my commentary on the same, together vvith my litle Catechisme as an
handmaid adioyned thereunto, I commit your Lordship to the blessing and prote∣ction of the Almightie, beseeching him, that as he hath cast vpon you exceeding great honor, and adorned you vvith nobi∣litie as vvith a golden chain, so he vvold in suh sort enrich and sanctifie you vvith the giftes and graces of his spirit, as that you may become and long continue, an or∣namēt of the Gospel, a piller of the Church, a pearle of the common vvealth, and an inheritor of the kingdome of heauen.

