



HAuing collected these briefe notes (Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull, and my most respected) concerning the Successe of Times (in most of the Kingdoms tho∣row the World) euen from the Creation, to this instant yeare 1611. and modelled them all in this slender Volume, that such as fauour Reuerend Antiquity, might re∣ceiue both pleasure & profit thereby: I thought

it part of my duty (in regard of some fauour and respect lately by mee receiued) to present your Honor and Worships there-with, as a token of my gratitude, and as a promise of my vttermost imployment, in these, or any other endeuours, whereto my meannesse in ability by you shall be commaunded. I know right well, and such as know me, haue heard me daily confesse it, that I (of infinite others) was the most vnmeetest to vndergoe such a serious businesse, which requi∣red, if not the best able, yet those that therein are much better seene then my selfe. Neuerthe∣lesse, importunitie of Friendes, that greeue to see no willing hand put to the plough, or at least such (euen like my selfe) more forward then wise; their perswasions, I say, and some regard had of the times necessity, euery man beeing borne for the good of his Country; hath (vnder your Ho∣norable and Worshipfull fauour) made me thus aduenturous.
Concerning the helpes I haue had in this la∣borious trauaile, the Authors themselues, who haue best written, and discoursed of those seueral Kingdoms and Nations; euen them, & no other haue I herein followed, borrowing beside some such matters from them, as (to my knowledge) haue not in any of our Chronicles heeretofore bin remembred, or at the least, not plainly reuea∣led.

In our home affaires, especially the antiqui∣ty of this famous Cittie, I haue (with others) deliuered my opinion therin, yet swaruing from some, who haue beene thought ouer-scrupu∣lous, sometime straining at a Gnat, yet very ea∣ly swallowing a Camell. The Dignitie that your Honor holdeth, of Lord Maior of this Cittie, and those graue Senators, the Alder-men your Brethren, I haue aymed at the Original & Anti∣quitie thereof; some Authors tearming them Domesmen, Eldermen, or Iudges of the Kinges Court. But that the name of Alderman decla∣reth both verie Reuerend Originall, and great Antiquitie; I find recorded, that in the time of King Eadgar, one Ailwin, a man of the bloud Royall, and, for the speciall great authority and fauour hee had with the King (being Sir-named Healf-Koning, that is, Half-King) was Alderman of all England, who founded that famous Mona∣sterie in the Isle of Ely. Our learned and worthy Antiquary M. Camden, hath obserued the Epi∣taph engrauen on his Tombe, containing these wordes: Hic requiescit Ailwinus incliti Regis Ead∣gari Cognatus, totius Angliae Aldermannus, et huius sacri Coenobij miraculosus fundator. Heere resteth Ailwin, Cozin to the Noble King Eadgar, Alder∣man of al England, and of this holie Abbey the mira∣culous Founder. Whereby appeareth, that the

Title of Alderman, in those ancient, reuerend, and respectiue times, was an addition of honor and high repute, as distinguishing them that de∣serued that grace, to be men of greater, grauer, and more sollide iudgment, in matters appertai∣ning to the Weale-publique, then others, vnca∣pable of such especiall dignity. Of such worthy Fathers hath this famous Cittie beene plenti∣fully furnished from time to time, as in our Chronicle may more at large appeare, and to you those graue Senators and worthily styled Aldermen (out of intire and dutifull affection) haue I consecrated the liuing memorie of these my poore labours: wishing to you all vnfeig∣nedly, that as heauen hath bestowed this earthly honor vpon you, so (hereafter) it may crowne you with neuer dying happinesse.

