



I Did thinke it a matter not altogether vnseaso∣nable, (most Mighty Prince) if presently af∣ter the solemnization of your Princely Creae∣tion with military spe∣ctacles (wherein innu∣merable beholders did, in your reioycing, con∣gratulate both the happy comfort of your Royall Fa∣ther, our Gratious Soueraigne, and the hopefull ioy of this whole land) I likewise should present vnto you a kinde of military Encounter; which is, although lesse solemne, yet more serious, because it oppugneth an Aduersary vnto your Highnesse, not in a counterfait shew and semblance, but in deede and reall practize:

one, who labored to vndermine the right both of his Maiesties possessions, and of your future succession in this land: then whome this Age hath not found any Scribe more prompt and plausible, or yet a more per∣swasiue and powerfull Inchaunter.
For it is he who once durst exclude, in his Doleman, the Royal line of Henry the seauenth from the Crown See his booke intituled Dol∣man, part. 2. cap. 5. & cap. 10. of this Kingdome, and interested the Infanta of Spaine in the right thereof; and yet found much credit with some: notwithstanding he, euen the same he, no soo ner vnderstood of our Kinges peaceable and prospe∣rous entrance into this land, and ioyfull establishment in his Throne, but forthwith changing his Copy, offered to giue an assurance, that what soeuer had beene See his Trea∣tise of Three Conuersions of England, in the Addi∣tions vpon the newes of the successi∣on of the King of Scotland to the Crowne of England, num. 8. which Addition was printed, Anno 1603. written or done by any Catholike, which with some might brcede disgust, was directed only to the end that his Maie∣sty might be a Catholike, before he should be a King. Which two how can they consist? for either must he haue in the former abused his Mistris the Infanta, or in the later deluded our Soueraigne King Iames. He like∣wise in his Mitigation protested and promised loyall subiection in the behalfe of all Romanists, and was held a credible Proctor for his Clients; yet since, in this his last Reckoning (bringing in, as it were, a sharpe axe to behead Kings of a contrary profession) he pro∣claimeth that none may be an head in Christian commu∣nion who is excommunicate, and notwithstanding here∣in also he wanted not an applause; So potent a Mer∣cury was he.
Of him we heare it now daylie noised by some that say, Our Aduersary M. Parsons is dead: which reporte may be beleeued but only in part; for although it be

possible that M. Parsons be dead, yet will not our Ad∣uersary die, as long as his bookes, or cause shall liue in the handes and hartes of his fauorites. As for me, at the first hearing of these news I knew not wel whe∣ther rather to reioyce, that he was not suffered any longer to delude the simple; or grieue, that he was taken away before that he could see his owne errours, which are very foule, and in this Encounter fully dis∣couered: I say no more, so farre am I from imitating his spirit, by insulting vpon the Ghosts of the dead.
Concerning your selfe (most Noble, and renouned Prince) it is the longing desire of all them, who are like piously affected, as were Gods people, when they prayed for the long life both of Nabuchodnosor, and al∣so Baruch. 1. 11. of Baltasar his sonne; that you would stand vpon two guardes, the one is Confidence in God, the other is wise and due Prouidence vnder God. For God, who was for many yeares so powerfull and glorious, in defending his truth in the weakenesse of a woman (Q. Elizabeth, the King of Queens) in time of extream ho∣stility, against a most potent enemy, euen when hee boasted of his Inuincible Nauie, & made that godly and thrise noble Deborah to singe of the vast Ocean after the olde tune of the Riuer Kishon, to wit, The Riuer Kishon Iud. 5. 21. swept them away, euen the ancient Riuer, the Riuer Kishon: the same God can preserue you from the practises of The malignant, for the Lord of Hoasts is his name.
Notwithstanding know likewise (worthy and migh∣ty Prince) concerning Prouidence vnder God; that it was the voice of the Tempter who said, He shall giue his Angels charge ouer thee, to keepe thee, leauing out the Luc. 4. 10. next wordes, In omnibus vijs tuis, in all thy wayes; by

which clause were signified the prescribed Rules of Gods prouidence, and vse of the means which he hath ordayned for mans preseruation; the neglect whereof is not Confidence, but Presumption, and, in very deed, that ver. 9. Mitte te deorsùm.
I neede not to say much more, but that there daylie soundeth in the eares of our Land and State, the report of two Accidents, which, by the mercy of God, may be as it were, the sound of two warning-pieces, to a∣wake all out of deafe securitie; the one is the late bar barous and tragicall end of that puissant French King; the other, that Acheronticall Powder-plot, the very belch of Belzebub: therefore will your Highnesse stand attent vnto the gratious voices of the Highest, and dis∣pose of your wayes accordingly. That which belon∣geth vnto me, I shal neuer cease to performe, euen my humble prayers vnto God for his right hand of prote∣ction ouer you, both vnder, and after the most happy gouernement of our most gratious Soueraigne.
Our Lord Iesus preserue you to the glory of his sauing grace.

