



THere are two things discoursed of in this Treatise, which are of speciall consequence to this earthly life of man: the one is Prosperitie; the other is Righteousnesse. The first dependeth vpon Goods outward and bodily: the other vpon the Goodnesse & vertues of the minde. Where these concurre, there is the liueliest paterne which this nea∣ther world affoordeth, of true Felicitie: and these two, like children of one fa∣ther, doesweetly embrace and kisse one another. 1. Prosperitie furthereth Righteousnesse: for, a man that is no way streightened or disturbed, is the more free and comfortable to the seruice of God. And Righteousnesse furthe∣reth Prosperity: for They which seeke Psal. 34. 10.

the Lord, shall want nothing that is good. 2. Againe, Prosperitie beauti∣fieth Righteousnesse: for a streight & right-vp tree, the taller it groweth, the more comely it is. And Righteousnesse beautifieth Prosperitie: for Pleasure is not comely for a foole: no, Nemesis Pro. 19. 10. disdaineth the growing vp of the vn∣worthie. 3. Thirdly, Prosperitie perfe∣cteth Righteousnesse: for how shall he minister iustice, that beareth no office? or shew mercie, that wanteth abilitie? or giue comfort, that is himselfe distres∣sed? And Righteousnesse perfecteth Prosperitie: for What shall it profit Matth. 16. 26. a man, though he should winne the whole world, if he lose his own soule? 4. Lastly, there is no true Prosperitie without Righteousnesse: for, to liue in sinne, is with the Paganes To sit in darknesse, yea in the region and sha∣dow Matth. 4. 16. of death. And where Righteous∣nesse is, there is true Prosperitie: for Godlines hath the promise of the life 1. Tim. 4. 8. present, and of that which is to come.

Both of these (through Gods speciall mercie) doe accompanie your Lordship. Prosperous you are in your noble de∣scent, your large reuenues, your loue in your countrey, your successe in affaires, & your speciall fauour with your Prince and ours. Righteous you are: not as free from sinne and infirmities, (so I should both flatter and blaspheme) but as redeemed from sinne by Christ with his blood, and iustified by the same Christ in his resurrection, and washed by the Spirit of Christ in the lauer of regeneration. To all which, your holy life and sincere loue to the Gospel, giue abundant testimony.
Let it not therefore seeme strange vnto your Honor, if I (who long ago be∣held and obserued your holinesse and re∣ligion) doe thus congratulate vnto you the continuance and daily increase of honor and reputation: for this my text teacheth me To reioice in the Prospe∣ritie of the righteous.
It pleased your L. not onely to know

me in Norwich almost twentie yeeres agoe, and to be there an Auditor of my Ministery; but also of your bounty of∣ten to call me to your table, and some∣times of your humilitie to visit my lod∣ging. If now you vouchsafe to acknow∣ledge me in London after so many yeres labours, and almost all my spirits spent in the seruice of the Church: I shall haue much more cause to reioice in your Pro∣speritie, who in this your heigth, giue me in my declining & languishing time some reputation with the Righteous.
The God of heauen and earth grant grace vnto your Honor, so to imploy this Prosperitie of yours to the furthering, countenancing & perfecting of Righte∣ousnesse: as your Righteousnesse may further, beautifie and perfect your Pro∣sperity here & in the heauens, through Iesus Christ our Lord.
April. 13. 1603.

