



SƲndrie reasons mooued me (most Honourable Ma∣dames) both to publish this simple treatise, and to dedicate the same vnto your Ladyships. First of al, I wished with Iob that my wordes
were written,Iob. 11.23. yea that they were imprinted in a booke; not, for that J longed to bring foorth some new discourse into the world (which is pestered with infinit vnnecessary pam∣phlets and treatises) but, for that I greatly desired to spread that Doctrine farre and nere, wherein onely the fountaine of Saluation, and the flower of al sounde consolation consisteth. Secondly, in these days (wherin is so much disorder and distra∣ctions) I deemed it a most ne∣cessarie thing, euē in open street (as it were) to point again vn∣to that Lambe of God, which
taketh avvay the sinnes of the VVorlde, that the simple may knowe what to stick vnto, & where to begin the building of the spirituall house of their professing the word, and seruing God aright. Thirdly, howsoeuer the fixing of such a rude stock, as this homely discourse is, in the ground of the Lords orchard, is indeed a work of no such art or cunning, as whereby the lear∣ned may be increased in know∣ledge, yet may it bee a meanes to stir vp some Paules or A∣polloes, hereupon to ingraft more choice and excellent si∣ens, and hereafter to set such
noble plāts of the tree of life, out of which most precious fruites may spring, to the benefit & cō∣fort of the Church, after that once the Lorde hath powred down his blessing on thē. For in∣deed the Doctrine of the my∣stery of Christ Iesus, is such a treasure house of al good things and such a root of true & eter∣nal happines, that wheresoeuer it is taught with wisdome and with power, and receaued with reuerēce & obediēce, there glo∣ry will assuredly dwell and re∣maine. Yea there such prosperi∣ty shal aboūd in citie & coūtry, that grace & faith shal meet
together, righteousnes and peace shall kisse each other,Psa. 85.11.12. faith shall bud out of the earth, and righteousnes shal looke dovvn from heauen.
These were (Madames) the chiefest of those reasons, where∣by I was brought at last, after long withholding this my me∣ditation from the presse, to per∣mit & commit it thereunto, al∣beit in mine owne opinion most vnworthy to come vnder it, but (in the iudgement of certaine special friends of mine, vnto whō a sight thereof hath bin im∣parted) conuenient, yea almost necessarie to be published.

Now as concerning the cau∣ses which made mee be so bold, as to dedicate this simple trea∣tise vnto your Ladiships, they neither are in number fewer, than those which induce me to let it come abroad, nor lesse weighty in importāce. First, for asmuch as the Lorde hath cast vpon you all kindes of Honour in a manner, so that you seeme to stand amidst the multitude of innumerable Christians, or members of the Church among vs, as Paragons preferred in degree aboue the rest, & Coun∣tesses of excellent and high ac∣count; me thinketh, if any haue
gathered an heape of sweet & pleasant flowers out of the Scripture, for the vse or com∣fort of the professors of the gos∣pel, that such a garland is first to be proffered vnto your right honorable heads, & must needs best fit, & most seemely become your noble temples.
Againe, seeing the fauour which you haue vouchsafed to beare and expresse toward mee hath been speciall, J thought it my duety to repay some token of thankefulnes, first and especi∣ally vnto your Ladiships: of whome what remembrance J haue, and toward whome what
reuerence J beare. Finally, vn∣to whom how great prosperity J wish, J knowe not by what meanes better to declare or te∣stifie, than by dedicating a treatise vnto you, to giue you occasion, both to knowe Christ Jesus more fully, and to growe in him more firmely. Last of all, whereas, albeit your e∣states are full of the riches of Gods mercie, yet they are not so free from all aduersitie, but that the Lorde of late hath exercised you with such losses and crosses, as the Prophets speake of, when they mention the tender mother bewailing
hir first borne,Zac. 12.10 and the lo∣uing yoke-fellowe girding hir selfe with sackcloth for the husband of her youth:Ioel. 1.8. it may bee that in the mysterie of Christ Iesus, through the blessing of the Lorde, you shall finde some cordiall powder, which shall driue away your dolefull pensiuenesse in some parte: yea if you search it throughlie, and make it your owne, it will vndoubtedlie giue you an Ornament in place of ashes,Esa. 61.3, 4 an oyntemēt of ioye in steed of mour∣ning, a Garment of praise in
lievv of a broken spirit, that ye may be called the oakes of righteousnes; that as the plants of Iehoua yee may glorie; that yee may builde the auncient vvast places, that ye may restore the old deserts; that yee may renew the desolate cities, the de∣serts of manie generati∣ons.
Accept then (Christian Madames) from thankefull heart, and reuerens hand, this little booke concerning the ex∣cellencie of Christ Jesus, pre∣sented vnto your Ladiships,
(not for that J ayme at anie preferment, or such by-markes as it ) but onely for the causes before alleadged. Vouch∣safe to protect it with your fa∣uour, to pardon the defects and faults therein escaped: to con∣clude, to profit by thee mysterie there in described. Being now assured you will doe aboue that which is requested, J most hū∣bly commend your Ladiships to the tuition and heauenly bles∣sing of that good God, who hath so loued man in his Sonne Christ Jesus, as to prepare for him, those thinges which
neither eye hath seene, nor eare hath heard, nor  concea∣ued:  be all1. Cor. 2.9. 

