



MY booke by the very argu∣ment, most excellent prin∣cesse, pretendeth a com∣mon good, bycause it con∣cerneth the generall traine and bringing vp of youth, both to enrich their minds vvith learning, and to enable their bodies vvith health: and it craues the fauour of some speciall countenaunce farre aboue the common, or else it can not possiblie procure free passage. For vvhat a simple credit is myne, to persvvade so great a matter? or vvhat force is there in com∣mon patronage, to commaunde conceites? I am therefore driuen vpon these so violent con∣siderations, to presume so farre, as to present

it, being my first trauell, that euer durst venture vpon the print, vnto your maiesties most sacred handes. For in neede of countenaunce, vvhere best abilitie is most assurance, and knovvne ver∣tue the fairest vvarrant, vvho is more sufficient then your excellencie is, either for cunning to commend, or for credit to commaunde? And vvhat reason is there more likely to procure the fauour of your maiesties most gracious counte∣naunce, either to commende the vvorke, or to cōmaunde it vvaie, then the honest pretence of a generall good, vvherein you cannot be decei∣ued? For of your accustomed care you vvill circumspectlie consider, and by your singular iudgement, you can skillfully discerne, vvhe∣ther there be any appearance, that my booke shall performe so great a good, as it pretendeth to do, before you either praise it, or procure it passage. In deede it is an argument vvhich cra∣ueth consideration, bycause it is the leader to a further consequence: and all your maiesties time is so busily employed, about many and maine affaires of your estate, as I may seeme verie iniurious to the common vveale, besides some vvrong offered to your ovvne person, to desire your Maiestie at this time to reade any

part therof, much lesse the vvhole, the booke it selfe being very long, & your Maiesties leasure being very litle. And yet if it maye please your most excellent Maiestie of some extraordinarie grace tovvardes a most obsequious subiect in vvay of encoraging his both toilsome and trou∣blesome labour, to take but some taste of any one title, of smallest encumbraunce, by the very inscription, the pavv of a Lion may bevvraie the hole body in me by the prouerbe, in your high∣nesse by the propertie, as vvho can best iudge, vvhat the Lion is. For the rest, vvhich neither your Maiesties time can tarie on, neither my boldnesse dare desire that you should: other mens report, vvhich shall haue time to read, and vvill lend an officious countrieman some parte of their leysure, vvill proue a referendarie, and certifie your highnesse hovv they finde me ap∣pointed. I haue entitled the booke POSITIONS, bycause entending to go on further, for the a∣uauncement of learning I thought it good at the first, to put dovvne certaine groundes very needefull for my purpose, for that they be the common circunstances, that belong to teaching and are to be resolued on, eare vve begin to teach. VVherin I craue consent of my countrey,

to ioyne vvith me in cōceit, if my reasons proue likely, that therby I may direct my vvhole cur∣rant in the rest, a great deale the better. Novv if it maye stand vvith your Maiesties most gra∣cious good vvill to bestovv vpon me the fauou∣rable smile of your good liking, to countenance me in this course, vvhich as it pretendeth the publike commoditie, so it threatneth me vvith extreme paines, all my paine vvill proue plea∣sant vnto me, and that good vvhich shall come thereby to the common vveale shall be most iustly ascribed to your Maiesties especial good∣nesse, vvhich encoraged my labour, and com∣mended it to my countrey. VVhich both enco∣ragement to my selfe, and commendacion to my countrey, I do nothing doubt but to obtaine at your Maiesties most gracious handes, vvhe∣ther of your good nature, vvhich hath alvvaye furthered honest attemptes: or of your Princely conceit, vvhich is thoroughly bent to the bette∣ring of your state, considering my trauell doth tend that vvay. For the very ende of my vvhole labour (if my small povver can attaine to that, vvhich a great good vvill tovvards this my cun∣trey hath deepely cōceiued) is to helpe to bring the generall teaching in your Maiesties domi∣nions,

to some one good and profitable vnifor∣mitie, vvhich novv in the middest of great varie∣tie doth either hinder much, or profit litle, or at the least nothing so much, as it vvere like to do, if it vvere reduced to one certaine fourme. The effecting vvherof pretendeth great honour to your Maiesties person, besides the profit, vvhich your vvhole Realme is to reape therby. That no∣ble Prince king HENRY the eight, your Maie∣sties most renovvned father vouchesafed to bring all Grammers into one fourme, the multi∣tude therof being some impediment to schoole learning in his happie time, and thereby both purchased himselfe great honour, and procured his subiectes a marueilous ease. Novv if it shall please your Maiestie by that Royall example vvhich othervvise you so rarely exceede, to fur∣ther not onely the helping of that booke to a re∣fining: but also the reducing of all other schoole bookes to some better choice: and all manner of teaching, to some redier fourme: can so great a good but sound to your Maiesties most end∣lesse renovvne, vvhose least part gaue such cause of honour, to that famous King, your Maiesties father? By these fevv vvordes your highnesse conceiueth my full meaning I am vvell assured,

neither do I doubt, but that as you are vvell able to discerne it, so you vvill very depelie consider it, & see this so great a commō good thorough∣ly set on foote. I knovv your Maiesties pacience to be exceeding great in very petie arguments, if not, I should haue bene afraid, to haue trou∣bled you vvith so many vvordes, and yet least tediousnesse do soure euen a svveete and sound matter, I vvill be no bolder. God blesse your Maiestie, and send you a long, & an healthfull life, to his greatest glorie, and your Maiesties most lasting honour.

