



IT is a constant and vndoubted truth, approoued by all
Canonicall Scriptures, ancient Councels, holy Fathers,
Ecclesiasticall Histories,Ephe. 4. 5 and Right reason it selfe;
that as there is but one onely GOD, so but one Faith,
and one Religion. Hence commeth it (Right Hono∣rable)
that the Pope and his Iesuites with other his Popish Vassals,
employ their whole wits, learning, study, care, industry, and diligence,
to instill into the cares and harts of the multitude and common people,
that the Religion which this day they professe, is the old Roman Re∣ligion,
which Saint Peter and S. Paule first planted in the Church
of Rome. And for this end they indeauur with might and maine,
yea, euen with fire and Fagot, to perswade, or rather to enforce all
Christians to call it the Old Religion,The Chu of England defendeth old Rom religion. and to professe and beleeue it
to bee the Catholique and Apostolique Faith; whereas the truth is
farre otherwise, as (God willing) shortly will appeare. Which if the
Vulgar sort did once vnderstand, they would no doubt stand at defi∣ance
with the Pope, and from their hearts detest his late start-vppe
Romish Doctrine. There is a Sect of Fryers at Rome,The late Rmish faith the new reon. called the
Franciscanes, who haue by little and little swarued from their first
institution, and become so licentious and dissolute, that another sort of
Fryers commonly called the Capucheues, haue accused them to
haue departed from their Ancient and Primitiue order; and there∣fore
do the Capucheues tearme themselues, the reformed and true
Franciscanes indeede. This is this day our case in the Church of
Noble England, and in many other Churches within the Christian
World. The Capucheues hold fast, keep still, and constanty defend,
all the Ancient Orders of the first Franciscanes, they onely reiect
and abandon that, which by litle and little crept into their Order,
(viz:) superstition, abuses, and neglect of Discipline. Euen so is it
this day with our Church of England, she holdeth-fast, keepeth still,
and constantly defendeth all and euery iote of the old Romane Reli∣gion,
reuerencing it, as Catholique and Apopostolique Doctrine,



she onely reiecteth and abandoneth Heresies, this point wll . Errours, superstition,
and intollerable abuses, by little and little brought into the Church.
For neither did most Noble Queene Elizabeth in her time, neyther
doth our most gratious Soueraigne King IAMES (who this day most
happily raigneth ouer vs) set vp or bring into the Church any new Re∣ligion;
but onely reformeth the Church, by the example of King Io∣saphat,
King Ezechias,Par. 19. Reg. 18. Par. 29. 30, 1. 34. King Iosias, and other godly Kinges in
their dayes, and reduceth it to the Primitiue order and purity of the
old Romaine Religion. This to be so, none can in conscience deny,
that will with a single and vpright eye this day behold,Reg. 2. 4. 8. ee defend  old Romā ligion. the godly setled
Canons of this Church of England. For, the late Bishops of Rome
haue in many points of great importance, swarued and departed from
the Doctrine of their Ancestors; whereof no doubt many Papists, euen at
& about Rome it selfe,n: Dom:—1498. would this day (if they durst for fear of fire and
Fagot) accuse the Pope himself. What shall I say of Hieronymus Sauo∣narola,
that famous Preacher and Dominican Fryer? Was not be burnt
with Fire and Fagot, because he preached openly in the famous Citty of
Florence, against the licencious liues of the Pope and his Clergy, and a∣gainst
superstition and abuses crept into the Church? I wote it was so, it
cannot be denyed. What?. Did not Iohannes Geilerius a famous Po∣pish
Preacher at Argentorate, oftentimes complain to his trusty friends,
(not daring to acquaint otheres therewith) that the Thomists and Sco∣tists
had brought auricular confession to such a miserable point, as none
possibly could performe the same? He did so, their owne good friend Bea∣tus
Rhenanus doth contest the same with me. What? Did not Fran∣ciscus
à Victoria, annot. in . de potest.  & onc. . 4. p. 139 that amous Popish Schoole-doctor, complaine grie∣uously
in his time, of Popish intollerable dispensations? Did he not publish
to the view of the world, that the Church was brought to such a miserable
state, as none were able to endure the same? Did hee not cry out against
the late Bishops of Rome, and desire Clements, Lines, & Siluesters?
His own Book is extant in print, the world knoweth it to be so. What shall
I say of the Popes errors in Faith and Doctrine? Was not Pope Liberius
an Arrian Heretike? Was not Pope Anastasius a Silestorian Here∣retique?
Was not Pope Celestine condemned for erronious doctrin? Iohns esie con∣nned with sound of pets. did
not Pope Iohn the 22. of that name, teach publikely a most notorious he∣resie?
Did he not commaund the vniuersity of Paris, that none should be
admitted to any degree in Theologie, but such as would sweare to defend
that heresie perpetually? Did not the King of France with the aduise &



consent of the whole vniuersity, for that end, cause his dānable opinion to be
cōdemned with the sound of Trumpets?Adrianus. Adrianus (who was B of Rome
himselfe) Alphonsus à Castro, Melchior Canus, and Vigueri∣us,
all foure being very learned and famous Papists, are constant witnes∣ses
of this truth.Lyr. in 16.  Mat. Doth not Nicholaus de Lyra, a famous and learned
Popish Writer, boldly and constantly affirme in his learned Commenta∣ries,
that many Popes haue swarued from the Faith, and become flt A∣postaaes
in their Romish seates? He doth so, it cannot bee gaine-said.
What shall I say of the Popes liues & conuersation? Was not Pope Iohn
the eight of that name, belying her sexe, and clad in Mans attire, with
great admiration of her sharpe wit and singuler learning, chosen to bee the
Bishop or Pope of Rome? Did she not shortly after by the familiar helpe
of her beloued Companion, bring forth the homely and shamefull fruites of
her Popedome? Is this true? Is it possible? Then farewell Popish Suc∣cession,
the chiefe Bulwarke of Romish Faith and Religion. For seeing no
Woman is, or can be made capable of holy orders; that succession which is
deryued frō our holy Mistris Iohn Pope,The Pope with child. 1. Tim. 2. 12. cannot possibly be of force. Yet
is this story confirmed to be true, by the vniforme assent of many Papistes
of great esteeme, euen in the Church of Rome, (viz:) of Sigebertus
Gemblacensis,Seauen Pop witnesses,  pope Iohn was a wo Marianus Scotus, Matheus Palmerius, Mar∣tinus
Polonus, Philippus Bergoniensis, Baptista Platina,
Bartholomeus Carranza, and others. Was not Pope Iohn the
twelft, made Pope by violent meanes? Did not his Father Albericus
being a man of great power and might, enforce the Nobles to take an oth,
that after the death of Pope Agapitus, they would promote his Son Oc∣tauianus
to the Popedome? Was not the oth accomplished, and bee na∣med
Iohn? Was he not a great hunter, and a man of licencious life? Did
he not keepe women openly, to the notorious scandall of the Church? Did
not some of the Cardinals write to Otto,Behold Po Iohn the vi gin. King of the Saxons, to come &
besiedge Rome so to afflict him for his sins? Did not the Pope perceiuing
it, cause the Cardinals nose to be cut off that gaue the counsel, & his hand
that wrote the letter? Martinus Polonus a Popish Arch-Bishop, &
sometime the Popes owne Penitentiary, affirmeth this to bee a constant
truth? Did not Pope Siluester the second, a French-man borne, Gil∣bertus
by name, promise homage to the Deuill, so long as he should ac∣complish
his desire? Did he not so often expresse his deire to the Deuill,
as he made homage vnto him? And was he not first made Archbishop
of Rhemes, then of Rauennas, at the last Pope of Rome? Did not



the Deuill knowing his ambitious mind, bring him to honor by degrees?
When he was made Pope, was hee not desirous to know of the Deuill,
how long he should liue in his pontificall glory? Did not the Deuill an∣swere
him,: Dom:—07. so long as he said no Masse in Hierusalem? The story is long,
he that can read and desireth to know it at large, may find it in Marti∣no
Polono, aboue named? Did not Pope Benedict the eyght, appear
corporally after his death, as it were riding on a blacke Horse (the De∣uill?)
Did he not desire the Bishop that saw him, to cause some Mony
to be giuen to the poore, because all that he gaue afore time, was got∣ten
by robbey and extortion? Petrus Damascenus affirmeth it. Was
not Pope Formosus, a periured person? Did not Pope Iohn degrade
him, is now  indeleble Character? after he had been Bishop of Portua? Did he not take him sworn,
that he neither should be Bishop, nor euer returne to the city of Rome?
Did not Pope Martine absolue him of his oath? Came hee not to
Rome, and shortly after was made Pope? Did not Pope Stephanus
the sixt, persecute Pope Formosus? Did hee not cause his dead body
to be brought forth into his consistory, the papall ornamentes to bee ta∣ken
away & a laical habit to be put on the dead corps, two fingers of his
right hand to be cut off, and so his body to bee put into the graue? Did
not Sergius the third, cause Pope Formosus, (who now had beene
dead almost ten yeares) to be taken out of his Tombe, and to bee set in a
Chaire with pontificall attire vpon his backe,most bru∣ cruelty! and then his head to bee
cut off and cast into Tyber? Platina, Carranza, and Polonus af∣firme
it for a constant and knowne truth? Did not Pope Vrbanus the
second absolue subiects, from their fidelity and alleageance which was
dew vnto their Soueraigne, so that whosoeuer obeyed the King, was re∣puted
excommunicated, and they that took part against the King, were
resolued from the ime of periury and Iniustice? Did not Pope Boni∣face
the eight, challenge the right of both Swordes? Did hee not depriue
Phillip the French King, and giue his Kingdome to him that could get
it?uclerus. Sigebertus and Nauclerus proclaime it to the World. If I should
enter into the full discourse of these Mysteries, time would sooner faile me,
then matter whereof to speake. Let it suffice for the present, to call to mind
the ladder of eight steppes, by whch the late Bishop of Rome did climbe
vp to their tyrannicall primacy; the killing of Christ in the Popish Masse;
the pluralities of bodies ascribed vnto him; the sensible touching, breaking,
and chewing of Christs Reall and naturall bodie without teeth; the ab∣surdities,
impossiblities, and contradictions, which necessarily insue vpon



their falsely and fondly imagined reall presence; their intollerable and
blasphemous dispensations; the Brother licenced to marry his owne natu∣rall
Sister; persons ioyned in wedlocke by God himselfe, and dissolued by
the Pope; Saint Pauls flat doctrin of Concupiscence to bereiected; Con∣digne
merits of Mans workes established; damnable sinnes to be made
Veniall;Bishops must sweare to be true to the Pope. Bishops not to haue voyces in Counsels, vntill they first sweare
to deend the Pope and his damnable decrees; that Papistes can keepe the
Commandements, and adde thereunto works of supererogation. These and
many like execrable assertions, the Gentle Reader shall finde in this small
Volume, to be truely iustified against the Pope and his Iesuited Popelings.
Many years are expired since I first wrote against the Papists. They haue
desperately afirmed, that my Bookes were answered many yeares agoe,
yet this is the first answere indeede, that euer was published against any
of my Books;Our holy Ie∣suite must needs haue a fore-runner. which was pretended to be such a worthy thing, that it must
needs haue a fore-runner to come before it, to exhort Men to prepare them∣selues
worthily to receiue it; as if forsooth, this saucy Rebell S. R. were
Christ himselfe, and his fore-runer Saint Iohn the Baptist. VVhat
hee hath performed in his supposed aunswere, and my selfe in this
my Reply;The truth  preuaile in time, and Popery wholly ouerthrowne I refer it to the iudgement and censure of the indifferent Rea∣der.
The worke such as it is, I haue Dedicated vnto your Honour; as an
externall signe of thankefulnesse, for the Honourable fauours receiued at
your Lordships hand. The Almighty increase your Christian zeale to∣wardes
his Gospell; and so blesse your faithfull seruice to your Prince and
Countrey, as your most Honorable place and calling doth require.

