



MY LO.
IT hath bene your happinesse, to haue had that highest Nobili∣tie, that can befall vnto the sons of men; I speake not now of Na∣sci, but of Renasci, through Baptisme, in this our most Or∣thodoxe, and flourishing Church: which alas! now (by the same obligation, arising from the due respect of a child vnto the Mother) may seeme to require your Lordships aide and assistance, especially against two sorts of Aduersaries, by whom she is (although in a different degree) vnworthily and vniustly impug∣ned; the one whereof are the Papists, and the other the Non-conformists. The Papists persecute her

with all their engines of hate, as if she were an exe∣crable Apostate: notwithstanding they themselues, (to instance but in two points) first, worship with diuine honor, as the person of the Son of God, that, which, in their opinion, may; but, in the iudgement of all other Churches, doth remaine still (according as Theodo∣ret, 1200 yeares since, in expresse words determined) in forme, figure, & substāce, Bread. which necessa∣rily inferreth an high degree, not only of a possible, but euē of an infallible Idolatry. And secōdly haue they, of late, added twelue new Articles of Beliefe vnto our Christian Creed, with an opinion of equal necessi∣ty: which kind of addition vnto the Christian Faith doth proue them notoriously heretical, and liable vnto the Apostles curse,Gal. 1.8. who pronounceth an Anathema vpon either man or Angell, that shall coine any new doctrine of that kind. Concern̄ing the Non-con∣formist. He, although he doth owe his spirituall birth vnto the Church, as wel as his natural vnto his Pa∣rents; yet neuerthelesse doth he defame his Mothers religious worship; infringe her wholsome libertie; and contemne her iust authoritie: thereby occasioning that horrid Schisme, which is made by Separatists, the dissected Sects, and verie Acephalists of this present age. Against the Papists I haue had many conflicts. Now, in this Treatise, my purpose is

principally to cōtend against the Non-conformists; which being finished, I thought my selfe bound to deuote the same vnto your Honour, in testimonie of my due acknowledgment, for your Lordshis, sing∣lar fauour, and respect towards me: and so much the rather haue I thus aduentured, because the Treatise it selfe was first occasioned by your Lordship. If therefore (Right Honorable) in that eminence of Fauour, which you haue in the eyes of our most gracious Soueraigne, you shall imitate his Maiesties admirable wisedome and zeale, in the aduancing of This, the true daughter of that primitiue Mother-Church, against whatsoeuer kind of Aduersaries; She shall make you twice-honorable, both in the eies of God and Man; by blessing you with her prayers, wishing vnto you Good lucke with your Honor;Psal. 45.5. and happie prosperitie for preseruing of her Peace:Psal. 12 2.6. whereunto, according to my especiall dutie, I resound an answerable Eccho; beseeching God to prosper your Lordship, and to accomplish you, especially, with all his spirituall blessings, in heauenly things; and to preserue you to the glorie of his sauing Grace.

