



WHat? is thy shameles muse so fleg'd in sin
So cocker'd vp in mischiefe? or hast bin
Train'd vp by Furies in the schoole of vice,
Where the licentious Deuils hoyst the price
Of vncought mischiefe, & make a set reward,
For hell-hound slanderers that nought regard
Their reputation, or the wholesome Lawes
Of Vertues Common-wealth, but seek applause
By rayling and reuiling to depraue
The mirrour of Creation, to out-braue
Euen heauen it selfe with folly: could the straine
Of that your barren-idle-donghill braine,
As from a Chymick Limbeck so distill
Your poyson'd drops of hemlocke, and so fill
The itching eares of silly swaines, and rude
Truth-not-discerning rusticke multitude
With sottish lies, with bald and ribald lines,
Patcht out of English writers that combines
Their highest reach of emulation but to please
The giddy-headed vulgar: whose disease
Like to a swelling dropsie, thirsts to drinke
And swill the puddles of this nasty sinke:
Whence through the channels of your muddy wit,
Your hotch-potcht work is drawn and the slimy pit
Of your inuectiue pamphlet fild to th'brim
With all defiled streames, yet many swimme
And bath themselues (oh madnes) in that floud
Of mischiefe, with delight, and deem that good
Which spoyls their reasō, being not vnderstood.
When people view not wel your diuellish book,
Like nibling fish they swallow bait and hooke
To their destruction, when they not descry
Your base and most vnreuerent blasphemy.
How in the ruffe of fury you disgrace
(As much as in you lies) and doe deface
Natures best ornament, and thinkst th'ast done
An act deseruing commendation;
Whereas thy merits being brought in sight,
Exclaime thus on thee, Gallows claime thy right.


Woman the crowne, perfection, & the meanes
Of all mens being, and their well-being, whence
Is the propagation of all humane kinde,
Wherein the bodies frame, th'intellect and mind
With all their operations doe first finde
Their Essence and beginning, where doth lie
The mortall meanes of our eternity,
Whose vertues, worthinesse, resplendent rayes
Of perfect beauty haue alwaies had the praise
And admiration of such glorious wits,
Which Fame the worlds great Herauld sits,
Crowning with Lawrel wreaths & Mittle bows,
The tribute and reward of learned browes,
And that this goodly peece of nature be
Thus shamefully detested, and thus wrong'd by thee.
How could your vild vntutour'd muse infold
And wrap it selfe in enuious, cruell, bold,
Nay impudent detraction, and then throw
And hurle without regard your venom'd darts
Of scandalous reuiling, at the hearts
Of all our female sexe promiscuously,
Of commons, gentry, and nobility?
Without exceptions hath your spungie pate
(Voyd in it selfe of all things but of hate)
Suckt vp the dregs of folly, and the lees
Of mercenary Pasquils, which doe squeese
The glaunders of abuses in the face
Of them that are the cause that humane race
Keepes his continuance: could you be so mad
As to depraue, nay to call that bad
Which God calls good? can your filthy clawes
Scratch out the image that th'Almighty drawes
In vs his pictures? no! things simply good,
Keep stil their essence, though they be withstood
By all the complices of hell: you cannot daunt
Not yet diminish, (how ere you basely vaunt,
With bitter termes) the glory of our Sex,
Nor, as you michingly surmize, you vexe
Vs with your dogged rayling, why! we know;
Vertue oppos'd is stronger, and the foe
That's queld and foyld, addeth but more
Triumph to th' conquest then there was before.


Wherefore be aduised, cease to raile
On them that with aduantage can you quaile.

