



AS many things (most reuerend father,) are both comely and profitable; so neither is there, neither can there be anything more necessarie, in any well managed church or christian common weale, then godly vni∣formitie and christian vnitie in pure Reli∣gion, the proper and peculiar worship of the euerliuing God. Which vnitie and vniforme conformitie for all that, not onely the cruell and blood-thristie Papists in former times, but the Brownists also and the Martinists, (cursed broodes untimely hatched, detested of God, and irkesome to the world,) haue of late daies endeuoured with might & maine, to disturbe, & extinguish it, & to take it quite out of the way. For the speedie conuersion, or else for the vtter confusion, of which professed enemies of the godly vnitie and true christian peace of Gods Sion, I deeme them right happie, who can in any small measure concur by way of re∣dresse, and put to their helping hand. Against the former sect, I haue published many books, challenging all English Iesuites, Seminaries, & Iesuited Papists; yea prouoking and adiuring them all ioyntly and seuerally, to frame some an∣swere either to all or to some one of the saide bookes. But wil ye haue the truth? their harts faile them, their own con∣sciēces accuse them, they are at their wits end, & know not in the world what to say or write. They will not answere,



and why I pray you? because forsooth they cannot, but to their owne shame and confusion euerlasting. For if they could, they would vndoubtedlie answere mee, so to saue their owne credite, and the life of their late harched Ro∣mish Religion. About three yeeres agoe, a railing Iesuit, an odde swaggering Diuine terming himselfe E. O. in his detection against Maister D. Sutcliffe, and Maister Willet, taketh notice of the bookes which I haue published against them, and telleth his Readers, (if they may beleeue him,) that the confutation of my workes is vndertaken. But what followeth? (and the said confutation must be pub∣lished, if it shall be thought expedient.) By which words with the circumstances annexed thervnto, wee may easily vnderstand three memorable points. First, that the Pa∣pists are mightilie troubled, about the answearing of my bookes. Secondly, that they can not tell in the worlde, how and in what sort to answere them. Thirdly, that they would haue all their Popish Vassalls to think, that they haue alreadie answered them; and that they are not published, because it is not thought a thing expedient to bee done. But I pray thee, gentle Reader; who will beleeue these Ie∣suits? what wise man will euer thinke that the Iesuits haue for the space of eyght or nine yeares considered howe to answere my bookes, and after the answere is vndertaken, cannot tell if it bee expedient to publishe the same? for as the Philosopher can tell them, Vltimum in executione, debet primum esse in intentione. That which is the last in execu∣tion, must bee the first in intention. Yea, the very light of Nature and daylie experience teacheth vs; that in all our actions wee must chieflie and principallie respect the end, for the which wee intende to doe them. They dare not fight the combat valiantly, neyther with the long sworde,



nor yet with the shorte. They dare not encounter mee, and cast mee their Gauntlet, No, no, Negry quidem, can bee extorted from their pennes. Against the latter sect, because they whollie dissent from the Papists, and agree with our English Churche, in the chiefest fundamentall points of Doctrine, an other manner of methode, and a different kinde of proceeding, must bee vsed against them. They exclaime with open mouthes, and crie out against our English Church; flying from our companies, and de∣testing vs, as prophane, polluted, and forlorne people. They vse Conventicles, Whisperings, and meetings, in Woodes, Fieldes, and odde corners. They beare the simple people in hand, that our Temples are propha∣ned; our Doctrine corrupt, our Sacraments impure, our Byshops Antichristian, and our kind of Church-gouern∣ment repugnant to that sacred forme and order, which our LORD IESVS prescribed in his holie worde. They say of themselues (but Laus propriioris sordescit,) that they are inspired of the holy Spirit, that they are sent from Heauen to reforme our Church, and to direct it into all Truth. With which faire speeches, and sugred words, (alas for pittie) they seduce the rude vulgar sorte, steale away their hearts, and make them disobedient to higher powers. And while these good fellowes, (the Brow∣nists and Martinists,) seeke to bee reputed the onely wise∣men vpon Earth, they neither knowe what they say, nor yet whereof they affirme; but doe open a large window to all disloyaltie and sedition euery where, and giue the Papists some comforte and hope, once to enioye theyr long expected daye. In regarde hereof (most Reue∣rend Father, and worthie Prelate,) my selfe (though the meanest of manie thousands in this our English



Churche) haue thought it operaepretium, to vse my Penne in my plaine and simple manner, for the vnitie and true peace of our English Sion. and for the manifestation of the lawfull gouernmēt thereof. I haue in this present discourse (most honourable, constant, wise, and christian Patron, of the Churches libertie, power, freedome, & auncient prero∣gatiue, which the Brownists and foolish Martinists would turne vpside downe,) made euident demonstration of the lawfull gouernment of our Church. And that is done in such compendious manner, as neither the Reading can be thought tedious, nor the price of the book chargeable, with such perspicuitie, as the most simple, (euen very babes and children,) may with al facility understād the same with such sufficiēcie, as no Brownist, or Martinist, or other malitious aduersarie of our churches godly setled gouernment who∣soeuer, shall euer be able while the world indures: either with Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, or Ecclesiastical Histo∣ries, to gain say or with stand the same. I haue succinctly and euidently, set down before the eyes of the indifferent Rea∣der, that the monarchical gouernāce of our English church, is both the best and the most laudable of all others. That there is & euer hath beene in all former ages of the church, superioritie of one church-minister aboue and ouer ano∣ther, and that one may this day lawfully haue iurisdiction ouer another. That Bishops, Arch-bishops, Primates, Me∣tropolitains, & Patriarches, haue euer beene in the church: euen from the Apostles themselues. That no church-laws, canons, ordinances, or constitutions Ecclesiasticall what∣soeuer; either ought to be established, or can bee of force, strength, power, or authoritie, without the lawfull assent of the supreme ciuill magistrate. That the church hath power,



freedome, & authoritie, to dispose of all indifferent things, to ordaine ceremonies, and Ecclesiastical rites, to appoint, make, constitute, and establish lawes, canons, ordinances, and constitutions whatsoeuer not repugnant to Gods holy word, so that it be done for any one of these three ends, vz. For order, for comlinesse, or for edification sake, that there is grauitie, decencie, modestie, and edification; as well in the apparell allotted for the Ministers and the ministerie, as in the other ceremonies of our English Church. That the gouernment of euery particular Church may be altered and changed, as the circumstances of times, places, and per∣sons shal require. That no charge is so tied to the practise of the Apostles, but for her necessitie she may alter & change the same. Many other points of great moment, are handled in this compendious discourse. To which or to some part thereof, all that may be reduced with facilitie, whatsoeuer the aduersaries haue said or possibly can say, against the gouernment of our English Church. The worke such as it is, (most gratious Lord,) I humbly dedicate vnto your grace, as well to giue a signification of a thankefull minde for all your graces fauours towards me, namely, for your great liberalitie in time of my sicknesse at my last being at London, as also for your graces most Christiā zeale, singu∣lar care, & painful endeuours, employed for the good and quiet of the Church; both of late dayes, about the most profitable and necessarie canons of Anno, 1604; and in for∣mer times, euen euer since Church-gouernment was first imposed vpon you. For which holy vigilancie and godly care, though the Brownists, the Martinists, and other en∣uious and malitious male-contents, doe both thinke and speake hardly of your grace, yet are all that loue the com∣mon good and peace of our English Church, bound in the



highest degree to bee thankfull to your Grace for the same. The Almightie preserue your Grace, confirme your God∣lie zeale against the disturbers of the common peace, and giue you a long and happie life vpon Earth, (for his owne glorie, and the Godlie gouern∣ment of his Church,) and life eter∣nall in the worlde to come.
Amen.

