



THe Truth is of such force (most gra∣cious
and dread Soueraigne) that it
hath enforced the professed enemies
of truth (the cursed brood of Eng∣lish
traitorous Iesuits and Iesuited
papists I meane) to testifie the truth
against themselues. The secular Seminarie priests (the
Popes owne deere vassals, who professe the selfesame

religion with the Iesuits, and yeeld the selfe same obe∣dience
to the Pope,) tell vs plainly in printed bookes
puplished to the view of the whole world (a thing ve∣rie
rare and greatly to bee admired) of such brutish,
barbarous, cruell, villanous, traytorous, and most
bloodie dealing, practised not onely by their deere
brethren the Iesuites, but euen by themselues also,
though not in one or the same degree; that my selfe
doubtlesse could neuer haue giuen credit thereunto, if
their owne selues had not so written, and so testified
against themselues. They affirme constantly, in ma∣ny
printed bookes published to the view of the whole
world, that the Iesuits by treacherous practises and
most bloodie complots, haue long sought for the vt∣ter
ruine and conquest of noble England, and that
their owne hearts and hands had sometime beene im∣brewed
with the same. They affirme against the Ie∣suits:
First, that they are great lyers. Secondly, that
they are proud men, richly apparelled, furnished with
coaches, and attended on with a great traine of ser∣uingmen,
as if they were Barrons or Earles: Yea,
it is constantly auouched, that the Iesuit Gerard had
two geldings in a gentlemans stable, at thirtie pounds
a gelding, besides others else where, and horses of
good vse. It is also set downe in print, that a Iesuit
had a girdle and hangers of thirtie pound price. Third∣ly,
that they trowle vp and downe from good cheere
to good cheere, commaunding their chambers to bee
perfumed, and gentlewomen to pull off their boots.
Fourthly, that they are great statesmen, and that mat∣ters
of state, titles of princes, genealogies of kings,

right of succession, disposing of scepters, with other
matters of like qualitie, are their chiefe studies. Fift∣ly,
that they threaten a conquest, and promise great
preferment to all that will execute their most trai∣torous
designements. Sixtly, that they are cruell
tyrants, and firebrands of all sedition. Seuenthly,
that they are theeues and murderers, and that the
Iesuit Percie stole seuen and twentie pound of the
common money, by the consent of the other his
fellow Iesuits. Eightly, that they haue a mint of
counterfeit miracles, with which they labour to
seduce the world: Yea, that they endeuoured with
a false miracle, to persuade Sebastian the late king
of Portugall, to establish a setled law, That from
thence forward none might bee capable of the
crowne of Portugall, except hee were a Iesuit,
or chosen by their societie, as at Rome the Pope
is chosen by the Colledge of Cardinals. Nninthly,
that the Iesuits are right Machiauels, and that who∣soeuer
will adhere vnto thē, must depend vpon the
deuil of hell. Tenthly, that the Iesuits are flat cou∣siners;
and that their religion is nothing else, but an
hotchpotch of omnigitherum. And to knit vp all in a
word, that they are the wickedst men vpon earth.
They confesse against themselues: first, that
Sanders a secular priest, was the architect of re∣ligion,
both in England and in Ireland. Second∣ly,
that the same Sanders did too much extoll
the rebels, seeing they were executed by the
auncient lawes of our countrey, for high treason.
Thirdly, that the Iesuits came into England by the

instinct of the deuill, and were the chiefest instru∣ments
of all traitorous practises against our late
Soueraine of most happie memorie. Fourthly,
that popish Seminaries are erected for treason. Fift∣ly,
that the Iesuits and the secular priests expected
a chaunge, which now they haue indeed; but
God bee thanked, to their euerlasting woe and
griefe. Sixtly, that the Seminarie priests are sworne
to be traytours against their dread Soueraigne and
natiue countrey. Seuenthly, that all Iesuited pa∣pists
must depend vpon the deuill. Eightly, that po∣perie
is inseparably annexed with treason. Ninth∣ly,
that the hearts and hands of the secular priests,
had sometime beene as deepe in treasonable practi∣ses,
as the cursed crew of Iesuits. Tenthly, that
the lawes of the land are iustly made, both a∣gainst
the Iesuits and themselues; and that they
are not put to death for religion, but for treason.
Eleuenthly, that long hidden treasons are miracu∣lously
reuealed, God so appointing it to be done.
All these asseuerations to be true, (most dread So∣ueraine)
I am readie to iustifie out of their owne
printed bookes, euen vpon the perill of my life:
if any of them vpon the like perill, will challenge
mee to haue charged them falsly in that behalfe.
This notwithstandlng, the Iesuits, Seminaries, and
other Iesuited papists, doe still expect a tollera∣tion,
to liue as they list, within your Maiesties king∣domes
and dominions; that is in plaine English,
to bee rancke traytours as they haue beene. For
this end they neuer cease to buzze into mens

heads and eares (so to withdraw them from their
due allegeance, and to become popish vassals)
that the next parliament, they shall not faile of
their desire. Against this cursed brood, I haue pub∣lished
many bookes; but to this day, could I not
receiue answere to any of them all. Neither can
they alledge for their excuse, that they haue not
seene my bookes, or else they would haue an∣swered
the same. For, about a yeere agoe the
masked Iesuit E. O. did publish a treatise against
two learned writers of this age,Viz. Against M. D. Sutcliffe and M. Willet. in which he ta∣keth
notice to the bookes which I have publi∣shed
against them, and their late vpstart Romish
religion; which by piece meale, and by little and lit∣tle
hath crept into the Church, as I haue prooued
at large in my former volumes.
These are the expresse wordes of the masked
Iesuit;In his Preface to the reader. To these former, I was once determined
to haue adioined a reformed brother of theirs, one
Thomas Bell, who hath published certaine bookes
against the Catholicke Church, and vaunteth
mightily, and with insolent words braueth all Se∣minaries:
but I altered my purpose, partly vpon
other considerations, but especially, because the
confutation of his worthy workes is alreadie vn∣dertaken,
and to bee published, if it shall bee
thought necessarie.
Thus doth the Iesuit write. By whose wordes
it is very apparant, cleere, and euident, that they
haue beene many yeeres buzzing about some an∣swere,
either to all or some one of my bookes;

but neuer yet durst aduenture to frame any an∣swere
to any one of the said bookes, and to pub∣lish
it to the view of the world. Their silence in
not answering my said bookes, hath reclaimed ma∣ny
a man from their popish faction: and therefore
would they gladly haue the the world to thinke,
that they are in mind to answere my said bookes,
but they seeme to meane nothing lesse in deed:
and why? hee telleth vs forsooth, That the con∣futation
which hath beene long vndertaken, must
be published, but with this addition, (If it shall be
thought necessarie.) What a iest is this? the Iesuits
and Seminarie priests, haue consulted now for the
space of eight yeeres and aboue, and haue all that
time deuised how to frame some colourable an∣swere
at the least, to all or some of the said bookes;
and in the end of the yeere, 1602, haue vnderta∣ken
the confutation of my worthy workes (as they
scornefully tearme them;) but for all that cannot
yet tell, whether it be expedient to publish the said
confutation, or no. Are these men the great Statists
of the world? are these men the skilfull Polititians
that must manage all Europe? are these our learned
Diuines? are these they indeed, vpon whose doctrin
and guiding all Lay-papists do depend, and on their
shoulders do hang their soules and saluation? doubt∣lesse,
they may preach this goodly sermon to wise
men, but onely noddies and starke fooles will be∣leeue
them. In regard hereof (most dread Soue∣raigne)
and because I greatly desire once during my
life, to receiue answere to some part of my labours

published against our English Iesuited papists, that
so wee may valianly fight the combat, my selfe so
hauing occasion to reply vpon their answere, which
would bee to mee melle & fauo dulcius; I haue
compiled and couched in a small roome, a fewe
distinct articles: for answere whereunto, I once
againe challenge Robert Persons that traitorous Ie∣suit;
George Blackwell that seditious and late start-vp
archpriest; and all other English Iesuits, Se∣minarie
priests, and Iesuited papists, whosoeuer
and wheresoeuer, ioyntly and seuerally; daring
them all ioyntly, and euerie one of them seue∣rally,
to answere either all my bookes, or some
one of them, or these few articles; or at least
to confesse plainely, that they cannot answere,
because I hold and defend the truth. These my
late studies (most gratious Soueraigne) I haue
presumed to dedicate vnto your Maiestie, in con∣gratulation
of your most happie raigne ouer vs;
whom God of his great mercie hath raised vp in
our greatest necessitie, to continue his holy Gos∣pell
among vs, and to abolish all idolatrie and su∣perstition
out of his Church. It is not such a pre∣sent
I confesse, as beseemeth your most royall
excellencie; yet such a one, as my small talent
is able to affoord: I most humbly beseech your
Highnesse for to accept it, as our Lord Iesus
Christ did accept the two mytes of the poore
widdow; and withall for to protect and patro∣nize
the same, against the traitorous Iesuits and

Iesuited papists within your Maiesties Realmes;
who seeke by might and maine (as I am credi∣bly
informed) not onely to impaire my good
fame and name with their malicious tongues, but
also to take away my life with their bloodie
hands. The Almightie blesse your Maiestie with
long, prosperous, and happie raigne in this world,
and with euerlasting life in the world to
come, Amen. From my studie
this fourteenth of Ianu∣arie.
1603.

