



AS the writing and publishing
of bookes for the good of the
whole Church, so the intitu∣ling
or dedicating of them (Right
worshipfull Lady) to some notable
personage in particular, is grounded
vpon many iust causes, and great
commodities which it bringeth: com∣mended
vnto vs by the continual pra∣ctise
of the Church from time to time:
and warranted by pregnant examples
in the word of God. For by this meanes
it commeth to passe, that both the fa∣uour

of men (whereby the building of
Gods Church is greatly furthered) is
procured for the maintenance of the
trueth and the proffessours of it, and
also their graces, vertues, and Chri∣stian
liues, not onely crowned with
due and deserued praise (a thing righ∣teous
and acceptable in the sight of
God, yea a notable encouragement,
and spurre to good workes, and there∣fore
carefully perfourmed by the A∣postle
Paul. Rom. 16. and in many
other places) but also propounded for
imitation to the whole Church, as ci∣ties
set on the tops of hils, and as a
candle not couered with a bushell, but
set in a candlesticke, in the light wher∣of
men may see, enter, and follow on
the way leading to eternall life.
Thus the Euangelist Luke writeth

the story of the life & death of Christ,
to one Theophilus, and Iohn that
diuine Apostle, inscribeth one of his
Epistles to a certaine faithfull and e∣lect
Lady: and thus as infinite others
haue written publike argumentes to
priuate men, so we doe now presume to
prefixe your Ladiships name to this
simple treatise, written of a matter
worthy to be handled after a better
manner, to wit, of the spirituall state
of man, or of the holinesse and sinful∣nesse,
the puritie and corruption of
the soule.
It is not needfull, vnlesse perhaps
in regard of them who are vnacquain∣ted
with the state of that country, to
rehearse the reasons mouing me so to
doe. To let passe the earnest desire of
them who might commaund me in a∣ny

lawful matter, but especially in this
it is well knowen, that in the towne &
country where you dwell, as in worldly
dignity God hath giuen vnto you an
high place and calling, so you haue re∣turned
thankefulnesse to him, and
beene in the profession of the Gospell of
Christ, not the last, or lowest, but for∣ward
and zealous and that not one∣ly
in seruing God your selfe, but also
in procuring the saluation of others,
by setting vp and maintaining the
ministery of the word, and fauouring
the sincere preachers and professors of
it. As I my selfe, (who being in some
sort astraunger in those partes know
not much of the affaires of them) know
in diuerse of my friendes, for whose
good I haue good cause to reioyce, and
to giue your Ladiship hearty thankes

for great fauour shewed vnto them.
Yea I am perswaded, that many in that
country (the good whereof especially we
intend in this action) will, to let other
reasons passe, euen for that loue which
they beare vnto you, more hartely fa∣uour,
and more willingly take the
paines to peruse this treatise.
Neither doe I doubt, but that God
will accomplish that notable worke,
which he hath begunne in you, and by
your meanes: & so inlarge that foun∣taine
of spiritual grace which he hath
put into your heart, that the streames
thereof shall ouerflow that dry and
barren contry, and water that tender
plante of the true knowledge of Christ,
so lately set, and so seldome to be seene
in it, yea refresh the bowels, and re∣ioyce
the hearts of all that feare God.

Considering that for the effecting
hereof, God hath giuen vnto you
manie singular meanes, which he hath
denied vnto others of his seruants:
as namelie, worldly honour and pow∣er,
the which meeting with the vnfai∣ned
loue of God, and of his glory, doth
as a mightie gale of winde set forward
the gospell of Christ in a speedie and
happie course: purchasing vnto it
friendlie entertainemet and fauour
at the handes of many, who other∣wise
would perhaps not greatly regard
it. For then the state of the Church is
most flourishing, when as Kinges and
Queenes, Lordes and Ladies, and all
degrees of honourable men & women
are nourse-fathers, and nourse-mo∣thers
vnto her.
But then especially this commeth,

to passe, whenas wisedome sitteth at
the helme, guiding worldly power &
spirituall zeale in the right course. As
touching the which vertue, if I should
heere mention that which is constant∣ly
reported of you, I should seem to ma∣ny,
euen to all that know you not, to
doe that which I would be loath to do,
euen to flatter: & that not onely your
selfe but also your sexe: the which, if
that be true, which is generally thoght
and spoken, may by your example wipe
away that blot of sillie simplicity and
want of deepe reach in matters of
importance, wherewith it is vsually
stained and debased.
But I must be sparing in this behalf
least that I seeme to mind and admire
your wisedome so much, that in the
meane time I forget and offend your

modesty, the most proper and pretious
iewell of your sexe. Onely I desire
God to encrease this and all other his
good graces in you, and so to guide you
by them in the whole course of your
life, that they who haue occasion to
trie, may haue good cause to say, as the
prophet Dauid doth of and to Abi∣gal,
1. Sam. 26. 33. Blessed be thy
wisedome: you know the storie. Thus
being loth to be tedious and trouble∣some
vnto you, I commend this sillie
present to your gentle acceptation, &
your Ladiship to the gracious prote∣ction
of God. 
Written in Cambridge
this xxx. of March, in the yeare of
grace reuealed. 1596.

