



THere are not many weeks past (Right
Honourable) since a person, disguised
by these dumbe characters of P. R.
had couertly sent forth a Booke, inscri∣bed,
A Treatise of Mitigation,
which he aduentured to addresse vnto
both the Vniuersities, especially that, wherein, by the
blessing of God, I haue had my education, and whereof this
is the happinesse, that it hath your Lordship Chancellar
and Protector. I therefore esteemed it my dutie in presence

of your Honor, by this Preamble, to sponge out such vile
imputations, wherewith he indeuoured through me (alas)
one of the least of the Prophets to distaine both my
Mother and her Sister the famous Vniuersities; and
those honorable persons vnto whose care and prouidence they
are committed. At the first reading thereof, although (I
confesse) I receiued some such impressions as that I was not
able to imagine that any, professing Diuinity, could be so vt∣terly
destitute of humanity, as when he clamorously inueigh∣eth
against (as he pretendeth) multiplicitie of falsifica∣tions,
he himselfe should most vsually and egregiously fal∣sifie:
yet then, euen in my greatest iealousie of mine own mis∣cariage,
I conceiued a double matter of comfort: first, from
my selfe, that knowing I durst present my supplications vn∣to
the Iudge of the secret thoughts of all hearts, and iust
Reuenger of all lying wickednesse; I did not doubt but that
being able with true confidence to appeare before God, I
should not greatly feare the censure of man. Secondly, from
my Auersarie, presuming that he that would write in de∣fense
of their Mentall Aequiuocation, would be found
to aequiuocate in writing. But much more was this my di∣uination
fortified at the reuiew of his Treatise; for euen
as the Greeke Commander, who being in apparance mor∣tally
wounded, demanded of his Souldiers, Numquid tu∣ta
est Ciuitas? numquid clypeus meus integer? Is
the Citie safe? is my shield sound? And being satis∣fied

in both recouered his health, and afterwards became
victorious: So I likewise, vnder so many ghastly wounds
of a virulent pen, hauing generally inquired and vprightly
answered my selfe, that my cause was safe, and my consci∣ence
sound, and free from any notorious and wilfull fal∣sitie;
I then began more resolutely to confront my Aduersa∣rie
in this Prelude and First assault: and promise (if God
shall be pleased) a more forcible Incounter, after that I
haue discharged my part in another taske of more impor∣tance,
namely, in The Answer vnto the misconceiued
Catholike Apologie: which by this calumnious Trea∣tise
of P. R. his Mitigation, as by an aduerse tempest,
hath receiued some interruption. This Preamble (Right
Honourable) as a Suruey of some particulars, which being
vnfolded, may, if not satisfie the expectation, yet at the
least stay the preiudice and precipitation of some, I do hum∣bly
present vnto your Lordship, as vnto a most zealous
Patron of the Truth, a vigilant Discouerer of malignant
practises, a prouident Directer of one of those Vniuersi∣ties,
whereunto my Aduersarie presumeth to appeale; sub∣mitting
my selfe vnto the equanimitie of your honourable
iudgement; to which, if by this Briefe it be not manifest,
that P. R. hath in this Treatise preuaricated in his whole
cause both in the question of Rebellion and of Aequiuo∣cation,
betraied his Countreys State, disgraced the Romish
Schooles, strangled his owne conscience, I refuse not, that

to the crimes obiected against me by him, this may be added,
That I durst affirme thus much before your Lordship. For
whose continuance of health, increase of honour, ac∣complishment
of all Spirituall Graces I shall not
cease to pray. Our Lord Iesus preserue
vs to the glorie of his sauing
Grace.

