


DEcay of pure reli∣gion, and dissolute life (right worship∣full,) haue euer beene so great an eye-sore to the God∣ly and well affected magistraites; as none can be ignorant, or stand in doubt thereof, that will serious∣ly peruse the holy Scriptures, and histo∣ries ecclesiasticall. Holy Moses was so Exod. 32. ver. 8. 19. feruent in Gods true religion, that when he sawe the Israelites worshipping and dauncing before the molten Calfe, his wrath waxed so hote against them, that



he cast the two tables of the testimonies out of his hands, and brake them in pieces; euen the tables of stone, which were writ∣ten with the finger of God himselfe. King Ezechias bracke in pieces the bra∣sen Serpent, which God himselfe com∣maunded 2. Reg. 18 Numb. 11 8, Moyses to set vp. And this he did for this sole and onely respect, because euen vnto his dayes, the children of Israell did burne incense to it. For which and the like religious factes, it is saide of him in holy write, that hee walked vprightly in the sight of God, so that after him was none like him among all the kings of Iuda, neither were there any such before him. The Prophet Elias was so constant and cou∣ragious. in true religion, that hee was not afraide to tell Achab that idolo∣trous 1. Reg, 18, vers. 18, king, that hee and his fathers house did trouble Israel, in that they had forsaken the Lord, and followed after Baalim. In which couragious spirit, he



procured fyre to come from heauen, and to consume the messengers, which the 2. Reg. 1. v. 2. 10. 12. wicked king Ahazias sent out against him, because he reproued his adolatry done to the Idoll Beel-Zebub, that god of E∣kron; in which spirit the psalmoghaphe Dauid cryed out, that the zeale of Gods Psal. 69. vers. 9. house had eaten him vp, and that the rebukes of them that rebuked God and his truth, were fallen vpon him. In which spirit, S. Paule sharpely reprooued the sorcerer Bar-Iesus, calling him the Act. 13. vers. 10. child of the Deuill, because he sought to auert Sergius Paulus the proconsull, frō the faith of Chrisi Iesus, in which spirit, S. Peter smot Ananias with sodaine death, because he told a leasing to the ho∣ly Act. 5. vers. 5. 2. Tlm, 4. vers. 14 Ioan Ep, 20 Ghost. In which spirit. S. Iohn forbid∣deth to receiue him into our house, or once to salute him that is an enemie to the worde of God. Which being true as it is true indeede, I cannot but from the depth of my heart, lament the iniquitie



& apostasie of these latter daies, in which daies, they who professe the faith of Christ in shewe of wordes, doe indeede denie Esay. 29. 13. Mat, 15. 8. 1. Ioan. 5, 18, Mat. 7, 15. the faith, doe indeede crucifie againe the sonne of God, and make a mocke of him, in which daies, false prophets come in sheepes clothinge, but are inwardlie rauening wolues, in which daies, as S. Bernard saith, the beast mentioned in Bernerd, ad Gars, ep. 125. the reuclation, to whome a mouth was giuen speaking blasphemies, sitteth in Peters chaye at Rome, as a Lyon reddy to take his pray, in regarde whereof, that I may in some measure of my small talēt, cōcurre with others of better skill, for the redresse of intollerable errours of late yeares crept into the Church; I haue with great watchings, painfull stu∣dies, and nightly lucubrations, founde out the secrete Caues, Dennes, and holes, to which the Romish Foxe, that deuoureth the innocent Lambes of Christes foulde, resorteth vsually,



and hideth himselfe therein from time to time couertly. For the profitable hunting of which Foxe, in waye of Christian merry desport: I haue pro∣uided foureteene couple of well mouthed Romish houndes, who all followe the sent roundly with a lustye crye, euen to the gates of Rome. Which treatise I haue principally compiled, for the common good of the vulgar sort, and of other younge studentes, who either for wante of bookes, or for lacke of time, or other defectes, can not so easi∣lye espie the subtile waies, of this Ro∣mish Foxe, or finde out his secrete dennes. In it the ignorant shall easi∣lye finde much necessarye Doctrine for their better instruction in the truth; In it the waueringe and doubtfull sorte, shall finde inough for their con∣firmation; in it the constant and found Christians, shall not wante matter



for their spirituall consolation in it the Papistes themselues, if they will read it, shall finde inough, either for their spedy conuersion, or for their greater condem∣nation: all which I haue comprised in so small a roome, as euery one may carrye the same in his bosome, which treatise I dedicate to your worshippes for these two speciall causes. First, because I would giue some externall signe of a gratfull minde, for your manifould kinde christian cour∣tesies towardes me; againe, for that your worships zeale in fauouring all faithfull subiects and good christians, specially the preachers of Gods holye word; hath wor∣thilye deserued farre greater thinges, if my smal power could afford the same, & I do it the rather, because your rare zeale in furthering Gods true religion & ver∣tue, and in punishing vices & disloyal∣tie, doth this day shewe it selfe as a lan∣terne in these North partes, where none are more contemned, none more hardely



dealt withall, whether in court or coun∣tye, (if neuer so small a surmise can he pretended against them,) then the prea∣chers of Christs holy gospell; where none are lesse regarded, none lesse fauoured, e∣uen with some placed in authority, then those that are sounde in religion, & for ward in her maiesties affaires; where mal-contents and disloyall recusants, shal find more fauour in one houre, then zea∣lous Chrystians & true hearted sub∣iectes in a whole yeare. Happie therefore is this Realme of England, that bath a princesse so zealous for the mainte∣nance of God true religion; so carefull, for the peace of her people; so mercifull, to all offendours; so bountifull to all well deseruing subiects; most noble Queene Elizabeth. And happie yea thryse hap∣py are these North-Parts, which in these latter dayes are blessed, with such zea∣lous, prudent, painfull, & well affected gouernours. Go forward therefore as ye



happily haue begunne, most faithfull ser∣uants to God and the Queene. Let no∣thing be more deare to you, then the loue of God and his religion, nothing more ioyfull, then the faithfull seruice of your naturall soueraigne; nothing more labo∣rious, then to minister iustice indiffe∣rently, as well to the poore as to the rich, so shall God be glorified, your Prince ho∣noured, and your natiue country receiue comfort in your well doing. Accept this small present I pray your worships, with such minde as I do exhibit the same. And so I humbly take my leaue.

