


TWo yeres are fully complete and expired, since my booke of Motiues came abroad, and was in your hands. In it I pro∣mised to subscribe, if either any one among you, or other Papist in Europe whosoeuer, could effectually confute the same. Your owne Papists here at home, greatly wonder at your silence in that behalfe: Some (God be thanked for it) are wholy and soundly reformed: Othersome are inforced so to doubt of your doctrine, as they know not in the worlde what to say or thinke thereof: Othersome either seduced by your sinister report, or else to saue your credite, if it would be, affirme very desperately, that you haue answered my Motiues already: and all generally both thinke and say, that yee will shortly answere them, if there be any trueth on your side. One whole yeere I haue expected your putatiue answere, as who had then, and still haue, a most feruent desire, speedily to reply vpon the same. Now, since mine expectation is in that point frustrate: in this second yeere I haue addressed my selfe, to giue you a further prouocation. In this Booke I haue not concealed any thing, that I knew or could possibly say for you. I haue not dissembled the mightiest obiections that can be made in your defence, neither haue I passed slenderly ouer them, but confuted them so pithily and so exactly, as if any of you, or of your bre∣thren abroad, shall be able to yeelde a sufficient answere in your defence, I promise vnfainedly to subscribe vnto his doctrine. Remember therfore what the Orator saith: to wit, that to erre standeth with mans infirmitie: but to perseuere in errour, is proper to fooles alone. If you can deuise, how and in what sort to answer me: all wise men both say and thinke, that ye will doe it vndoubtedly. If you know not how to defend your cause, because the trueth preuaileth so mightily: then shew your selues to be wise men by embracing the trueth willingly, and not to be fooles, by striuing against the same wilful∣ly. Haue the feare of God before your eies: pray that your hearts may be in∣lightened with the true knowledge of his sacred word; and let not the shame of the world keep you backe, from the publike confession of the known truth. Peruse my Booke seriously, ponder my discourse deepely, contemne nothing wilfully, examine all my reasons sincerely: and that done, giue your indiffe∣rent censures accordinglie. If you finde Poperie confuted effectuallie, then yeelde to the trueth, and giue God the glorie: if you thinke I faile in prouing my intended purpose; then vse your wittes and your pennes, as well for my confutation, as for the credit of your cause, and the expectation of your seely brethren, who shortly will renounce all Poperie, if ye with speede doe not defend the same.
Amen.
