



ALthogh, most Noble Lord, I (as one ever mind∣full of your L. honorable place, and of that dewtie we all ought therevnto) did not lacke a will to haue saluted your L. with some fruites of my travelles this long time ago: but finding in my selfe that great want of graces which my Muse should haue granted, and not being bould to haue presented my selfe emptie into your presence, as also fearing if I had offered anie thing that my barba∣rity and incongruous speech should rather haue moued your L. to mis∣like me for my homelines, then otherwise to haue receiued me in fauour for the same. Yet being long tosted betwixt two extremities, some∣times calling to minde the dewty I was bound to, and sometimes re∣membering how I was alwaies vnable (because of my manifold defects) to haue satisfied the least point of your worthie desire, haue in end thoght better to be rude then vngrate, and so much the more because of the ex∣cellency of the theam proposed vnto me, I must with your favour (althogh not with such learning as you merite, nor with such holines as the ma∣ter requyres) take the boldnes as to acquaint your L. mith my small beginning, and to speeke a little of this subiect concerning a troubled soule, and of the comforts against the conflict of conscience, as a thing prescrived vnto me for the tyme, being in the same agonie my selfe (for my owne priuate content, and to avoide the tediousnes of ill im∣ployed tyme) I was perswaded by some who had a great interest to the disposition of my will, to publish this little scrole to the world, that others might reape some profite thereby, and be fortified against the feare and apprehension of the gilt of sinne, and certainly the worthines of the sub∣iect mooued me to yeeld the more easily to their desires. Yet knowing that students in their beginning (how worthie so ever) haue but a cold
welcome in a forren land without the support and countenance of some great & worthie personage, as also fearing my imperfections, in handling this sukiect, might happely blemish the excellency of the worke, and giue some dstiaste to the curious reader. I haue therefore in my boldnes di∣rected it to your L. as a patron, hoping ye will rather be a preses to de∣fend my weaknes, then to cavell or oppon against such tender propositions. For since all that I haue done, rather proceedes of loue and bounden dewry, then any santasticall toy or desire of renoun: I must therefore commit all my slips and ignorances to your L. subsidie, looking rather to be acceptable for my good will, then to be loathed for that quhilk is in∣laiking in me, and thought vnsavorie for that quhilk in due affection is done. So I haue presumed to shrewd both my selfe and my labours vn∣der your L. protection, besceching you receaue these strangers (as you vsually do all men) with a gratious and a gentle eie, and to accept of my poore endevours, as a testimonie and a pledge of my humble dewty and service: that by your L. honourable acceptance and exemple, others may be drawne to entertaine them kindely, and bid them the better welcome: so shall your L, incourage me to some stronger attempt, and bind me to continew alwaies, promising certemly if mymuse shall afford any better things thereafter, neither shall your person nor your place be forge, but as my taient incresses your L.shall know.

MY greatest reverence is not halfe my dew,
For more nor all my worth thy worth requyres:
By my attempt I wishe there might ensew
But some contentment to thy hie desires:
And as before the Sun no darknes bides,
Thy Sunnie cies my imperfections hides.


Vertue quhilk dwels into the inward thoght,
Makes good the seed what ever be the smell:
The outwarde glosse some time doth seeme but noght,
Quhill as the inward stuffe doeth much excell:
Gold thogh not finde some men do well esteeme,
I rather loue to be then so to seeme.


