



THE visible Church, (as wri∣teth
Egesippus) remained a
Virgin,Egegesip: apud Euseb. hist. lib. 3. cap. 32. free from all heresies
and corruptions, during the
life of the Apostles: that is to
say, about one hundred yeeres
after Christ, to which time S.
Iohn the Euangelist was li∣uing.
But after the death of
the Apostles (saith he,) Errors by little and little crept
into the Church, as into a voyde and desert house. This
Assertion is dolefull enough, and yet very profitable a∣gainst
all Popish Recusants of our time: as who are not
ashamed, impudently to avouch, that after so many hun∣dred
yeeres from Christes Ascention, there hath been no
Error at all in their Romish Babylon.
If any demaund the cause heereof, the aunswere is at
hand; viz. That many without due examination, recei∣uing
negligently and carelesly the Doctrine of them that
went before them, haue vnawares brought Errors into
the Church.Euseb:  lib. 3. cap: vlt. So writeth Eusebius of Errors in his time,
that Papius, a man of no sound iudgement, was the Au∣thour

of the Chiliasts; who fondly & grosly first inuen∣ted,
that there should be a thousand yeeres after the Re∣surrection.
To which Errour, (though most palpable) I∣raeneus,
and sundry others, (otherwise well learned,)
gaue place onely for antiquity sake. This sottish imita∣tien,
without all rime and reason, was, is, and will be,
the cause of many Errours: which many not of the mea∣nest
sort of Papists, haue both grauely & prudently con∣sidered.
For this cause did that great Shoolemaister Melchi∣or
Canus, oppose himselfe against all the Chanists and
Scotists, both the old & latter Papists. For this cause did
Cardinall Ceranus, (a man of high esteeme in the
Church of Rome,) both in his litterall exposition of Ge∣nesis,
an in his other bookes, roundly reiect the multi∣tude
of fomer Commentaries. For this cause said their
learned  and Schoole-Doctor Victoria, that hee
reputed nothing certaine, albeit all Writers agreed there∣vnto,
vnlesse he could find it in the holy Scriptures. For
this cause did their famous Canonist Nauarrus, peremp∣torily
condemne the common opinion, when it was not
grounded vppon right reason. For this cause grauely
wrote S. Augustine, 19. that he reputed no mans writings
wholy free from Errours, saue onely the Writers of the
holy Scriptures. For this cause wrote theyr owne Rof∣fensis,
that it is lawfull to appeale from Austen, Cypri∣an,
Hierom, and all the rest, because they are men, and
doe not want theyr imperfections.
I (saith S. Augustine) doe not repute S. Cyprians
wrytings as Canonicall, cap. 32. but iudge them by the Canoni∣call
and whatsoeuer doth not agree with the Scriptures,
that by his leaue doe I refuse. And for this cause is it,
that so many silly, follish, rude, and ignorant Papists, doe

at this day, terme late vpstart Popery▪ the Old Religion.
They onely respect the externall face of the Church, as it
was in the late dayes of their forefathers, And for want
of skill, and reading of auncient Councells, Fathers, and
histories of the Church, they deeme that to be very olde,
which is indeede very new. Hence commeth it, that no∣thing
more moueth the rude vulgar people to embrace
Popery, then this theyr fond perswasion, that it is the old
Religion.
In regard hereof (right Worshipfull) I haue taken vp∣pon
me, for the glory of GOD, the peace of his Church,
and the common good of my natiue Country, to set before
the eyes of all indifferent Readers, as cleerely as in a
glasse of Christall, the originall and daily excrements
of Popery, and that it is not the Old but the New Religi∣on:
I haue prooued succinctly and euidently, first, that 
the name (Pope,) was common to the Fathers of the
Church, for the space of 528 yeeres after Christ, and af∣terward
vsurped as peculiar to the Bishop of Rome. Se∣condly,
that the Popes superoyall power, was vnknowne
to the world for the space of 607. yeeres, vntill Phocas
the Emperour of Rome. 3. That the Priests & Bishops 
were euer married in the East Church, and in the West
Church, for the space of 385. yeeres. 4. That Popish par∣dons 
were vnknowne 1300. yeeres. 5. That Purgato∣rie 
was neuer beleeued of the Greeke Church, nor yet of
the Latine Church, for the space of 250. yeeres, about
which time Origen (too much adicted to his allegorical
Speculation) eyned many odde thinges touching Purga∣tory.
After Origen, others began to call the matter in∣to
question: others rashly to beleeue it: others to adde
many thing to Origens conceit: and so by little & lit∣tle
it incresd, till the late Bishops of Rome presumed to

 make it an Article of Popish sayth. That auriculer cō∣fession,
was no Article of Popish fayth, for the space of
 1215. yeeres. 7. That Popish veniall sinnes, were first in∣vented
by Pope Pius the fift of that name, that is to say,
 1566. yeeres after Christ. 8. That the Article of Popish
sayth, that the Pope cannot erre in matters of fayth iudi∣cially,
was neuer knowne to the Church for the space of
1500. yeeres. 9. That the cōdigne merit of mans works,
was not an Article of Popish fayth, for the space of a thou∣sand,
 fiue hundred, and forty yeeres. 10. That the popish
Transubstantiation, was first hatched in the Councell of
 Lateran, 1215. yeeres after Christ. 11. That Popish in∣vocation
of Saints, was neuer knowne nor heard of, for
 the space of 1047. yeeres. 12. That the Communion vn∣der
one kind, was neuer knowne, for the space of 1230.
yeeres: neither was it an Article of Popish fayth, vntill
the Councell of Constance, about 1414. yeeres after
 Christ. 13. That Priuate Masse began 1000. yeeres af∣ter
 Christ. 14. That it was euer holden vnlawfull for
the brother to marry his naturall sister, for the space of
1418. yeeres, at what time Pope Martin set it abroach,
 by the instigation of the deuill. 15. That worshipping of
Images was thought vnlawfull, for the space of 1484.
 yeeres. 16. That the Church seruice was euer in the vul∣gar
tongue, for the space of 443. yeeres at the least. 17.
 That Popish Agnus Deis were not heard of, for the
space of one thousand two hundred yeeres after Christ.
 18. That the Popes Bulls were vnknowne, for the space
 of 772. yeeres after Christ. 19. That Popish hallowed
Candles on Candelmasday, were inuented 843. yeeres
 after Christ. That Bishops were not sworne to defend
the Pope and his Canons, for the space of one thousand,
 two hundred, twenty nine yeeres after Christ. 21. That

Lent-fast in Popish manner, was neuer heard of for the
space of 427. yeeres. All which, and many other impor∣tant
poynts of Popish fayth, are so liuely discouered to the
first hatching thereof, in this short and plaine Discourse,
as euery child may with all facility, boldly pronounce, and
constantly affirme, that the late Romish Fayth and Doc∣trine,
is not the Old, but the New Religion. Which if the
silly Papists would once duly consider, they would no lon∣ger
obey the Pope, or like of his Religion. The Worke,
such as it is, I haue dedicated to your Worships, as a signe
of a thankfull hart, for your manifold kindnesses towards
mee at all times. And so I humbly commend your
Worships to the protection of the Almighty.
From my studie, the first of
Iulie. 1607. 
