



IF manie haue laudably emploied much time and studie (right honourable and my very good Lordes) and that onlie to attain skil in prophane stories; much more doubt∣lesse are their studies commendable, who haue spared no time, no labour, no wat∣chinges, no lucubrations, to atchieue exact knowledge in the holie scriptures and hi∣stories ecclesiasticall, verie necessarie for the accomplishment therof. In which kind of neuer enough commended exercise sundrie vertu∣ous & learned men haue so profited the church of God; as their wor∣thie monumentes haue gotten thē immortal fame, before God and al mortal men. Yet such is the condition of our state during this pilgri∣mage of mortalitie▪ that the best learned neither haue said, neither can say so much, but stil more very fruitfullie may be said therein. For which cause very wisely wrote S. Austen▪ that he did learn & would learne daily, euen to the last houre. While I reuolued these matters deeplie with my selfe; I found some writers tedious, some obscure, some confuse, some abounding, some wanting, no one answerable to al desires. In regarde whereof, albeit I cannot bring gold, siluer, pearles, hyacinths, and pretious stones; yet am I verie desirous to carrie morter to the building vp of the walles of Gods



Sion: not for that I thinke I can saie better then is alreadie saide by others (as who acknowledge my selfe the meanest of manie thou∣sandes;) but because I couet to supplie for the measure of my small talent, such wantes, for the common good of the simple sorte, and of others who haue not store of bookes, as heretofore I finde omitted in farre more learned workes. What varietie, what confusion, what obscuritie, what vncertaintie is amongst historiographers and Chronographers, none doth know or can know sufficiently; but he that doth studie the same seriously. What is more necessary for the vnderstandig of the prophesie of Daniel, then the perspicuous and exact enumeration of the 70 weeks? thē the ready explicatiō of the 2300 daies? thē the liuely purtrate of the foure monarchies what helpeth more for the true vnderstāding of the former & latter pro∣phets? then to know when, where, of what matter, and before whom they did pronounce their propheses. What is more expedient then to know the two captiuities, When, where, by whom, and for what causes the Israelites and the Iewes were so afflicted? what can yeld greater solace to a christian heart, then to behold as in a glasse of christal the original and daily incrementes of poperie, liuely disco∣uered before our eies? when, where, and by whom, and vpon what occasion, al popish errors, heresie, and superstitions haue crept into the church▪ what shal I saie of the time, reignes, and acts▪ of the Em∣perours of Rome? of their kings, their Consuls, their Dictators? what of the kings of Babylon, Ashur, Egypt, Macedonia, Persia, Syria? what of the kings of Iuda and of Israel? What of the birth of our sauiour Christ, of his baptisme, of his corporal conuersation among vs? what of other infinite memorable actes recorded in the old and new testament? what of manie excellent and golden lessons, specified in the histories of the church? All which and manie other important matters, are compendiously and yet sufficientlie handled in this small volume▪ and so contriued I hope, as obscure things shal seeme plaine; with such breuitie, as nothing can be thought tedious; with such plentie of matter, as no necessarie point will be found wanting, and with such methode, as euerie childe maie with facili∣tie beare the same awaie.
The vsual maner is in al such kinde of exercises to make choise of some worthy personages for the honest and lawful protection of the same▪ You my L. of Canturburie, did harbour me a long time in



your owne house. There I enioyed euerie thing not as a prisoner, but as a brother, not as a stranger, but as a deere friend; not as a meane person, but as one of farre better accompt, then I either was then, or yet am indeed. You my L. of Yorke, for rare curtesies receiued both of old and late daies, haue made me greatly bound vnto your grace. You my L. Keeper, to speake nothing of your great zeale for the free passage of Christes gospel; for the sincere preaching of his sacred word, and for the common good of this realme, haue aswel for your rare honourable fauour towards mine owne seelie selfe, as for your late kinde acceptance of my treatise of vsurie, deserued a far better thing at my hands. You my L of Durham, although as yet ye neuer saw my face, haue neuerthelesse affoorded me such christian affecti∣on and rare benignitie, as I haue not often found the like. I therefore present vnto you (my reuerend fathers and honourable Lordes all foure) these fruites of my late studies, as an infallible argument of my vnfeined good will, for your honourable and manifold courte∣sies, countenances and other benefites receiued at your handes. Ac∣cept the present (my honourable Lordes) in good part: respect not so much the person that giueth, as the thing it selfe that is giuen; not the value of the gift so much as the minde of the giuer; not so much what is done, as what the partie was willing to haue done: who if it shal so please the Almightie, will hereafter present larger giftes as time, place, and other circumstances shal affoord. God vouchsafe to encrease his manifold good graces in you all, and to multiply your daies vpon the earth, for the free passage of his ho∣ly gospel, and the peace of his church. From my studie this tenth of August. 1595.

