



SInce my coming into
Prison, what with the
strangnes of the place,
and strictnesse of my Li∣berty,
I am so transpor∣ted
that I could not follow that stu∣dy
wherein I tooke great delight and
cheife pleasure, and to spend my time
Idly would but add more discontent∣ments
to my troubled breast, & bring
in this chaos of discontentments, fan∣tasies
must arise, which wil bring forth
the fruites of an Idle brayne, for è


Malis minimum. It is far better to giue
some account of time though to little
purpose then none at all. To which
end I gathered a handfull of Essayes,
& few Characters of such things as by
my owne experience, I could say Pro∣batum
est: not that thereby I should
either please the reader, or shew ex∣quisitnes
of inuētion, or curious style.
Seing what I write of, is but the child
of sorrow, bred by discontentments

and nourisht vp with misfortunes, to
whose help melancholly Saturne gaue
his Iudgement. The night Bird hir in∣uention,
and the ominous Rauen
brought a quill taken from his owne
wing, dipt in the Inke of misery as
cheife ayders in this great Architect
of so row.
This child is borne and brought to
the Font all things ready, onely there
wants a patron. Hoc difficillimum est.
For who will defend sorrow, and mi∣sery,
who wil giue him entertainment,
who will countenance this worke the
Author being miserable, who will re∣spect
the matter, the man being an ab∣iect,
who wil cherish the circumstance
when the substāce is almost perished?
Surely non in his diebus, for friendship
is banished, loue extinguished, natural
affection gone to trauel, gould is dea∣rer
then a friend, treasure is nearer thē
a kinsman, and mammon better belo∣ued
then a sonne. Yet in this famine
of true friends I will venter vpon you
(most louing Vnckle) as a god-father
to this my first borne though in mise∣ry.
I can haue but a denyall which if
you doe it must dye in obliuion. But

why should I feare since you haue al∣waies
bin my anchor when I haue bin
Ship-wrackt, and many times saued
my poore Barque when it was ready
to split. Why thē shold I doubt of your
friendly patronage which haue neuer
fayled me? Be bould then, and goe thy
way, thou shalt be entertained though
not for any worth which is in thee, yet
in respect thou dost but shew a willing
heart, and dost endeauour to expell
ingratitude a thing most odious not
onely to man but God, not to Christi∣ans
but Heathens, not to Heathens
but Beasts.
What then should I giue to you for
all your kindnesses which you haue
continually bestowed vpon me which
are so many that if I should endeauour
to recite (Ante diem clauso componet
vesper olympo) but to shew my willing∣nes
to my power though I am not able
to requite (for, vltra posse non est esse)
doe offer vp vnto the Oracle of your
loue the sacrifice of a louing heart, ho∣ping
that what is amisse you will im∣pute
it to the slendernes of my iudge∣ment,
and the dulnes of my brayne
which this place hath made worse (and

not to the lest defect of goodwill.) &
that you would let none but your selfe
see my imperfections, which are sufici∣ently
divulged by my owne actions,
& would be vnwilling to haue a second
edition of them by my writing this
was the chiefest cause I tooke. This in
hand; another was because that happily
some friend of mine (post mea funera)
by accident may find this paper, & read
them & by my example say. Foelix sum
quem pericula huius authoris faciunt
me cautum, for qui non ante cauet post
dolebit, & that they may be afraide to
enter into debt any further then neces∣sity
vrgeth, & if they be forced to bor∣row
to pay as soone as the can (for vsu¦ry
& extortion bite deepe) and credit
once crackt is not easily recouered nor
all creditors of on mind, for some will
in pitty forbeare and others will shew
the greatest seuerity.
So hoping you
will accept non donum sed animum▪ I
rest this 27. of Ianuary Anno 1617.
From the Kings-bench Prison in
South-warke.

