

TO THE RIGHT VERTVOVS AND VVorshipfull Patrons OF THIS FAMOVS CI∣TIE OF EDINBURGH, DAVID AIKENHEAD, MOST WORTHIE LORD PROVEST, Iames Cochren, William Reid, Andrew Ensley, Edward Edgar, most just, and faithfull Iudges.
Ioseph Marjoribanks, Dane of Guild, David Mackald Treasurer: And to the whole Counsell within this flouri∣shing Towne of EDINBVRGH, wisheth Grace heere, and Glory heereafter, Wil. Narne.
SOmetimes, Right worshipfull and reverend, comming vnto your citie, for performance of some necessarie dueties of my cal∣ling: I did soone and clearly per∣ceaue three most notable, commen∣dable,

and worthie vertues, where∣with by the Almightie yee are true∣ly beautifull and blessed.
First: Pure religion and pietie.
Secondly: Affection to your King and sincere loyaltie.
Thirdly: A care of your com∣moun-wealth and countrey.
Your religion (in whose bosome all other vertues are conteined, which is the belt and bond that v∣niteth Religionis gre∣mio omnes vir∣tutes continen∣tur. Idoneus. and knitteth the heart to GOD, without the which men haue no more to doe with Heaven; and Psal. 86. 11 Si Relligio tol∣litur, nulla no∣bis ratio cum Coelo est. Lactant. insti∣tut lib. 3. c. 10 1 Cor. 15. 19 of all creatures they are most mi∣serable) doeth most evidently ap∣peare by your frequent resorting to the house of GOD, by your dili∣gent hearing of his holy Word, by the great respect, and due regard yee haue of your faithfull Pastors, and by your holy life and pious con∣versation, conforme to the rule of the LORD his Commandements; and shortlie by your rare charitie, in these last and worst dayes of this dotting and decaying world,

extending it selfe to the depaupe∣rate and indigent members of the bodie of CHRIST.
Concerning your due affection to your supreame Soveraigne, all who walke vpon your streetes may ea∣sily obserue the same: What ear∣nest desire you haue? What prepa∣ration you haue made for his Ma∣jestie comming into this Realme: And this is most certaine, that you haue, and will continue lovingly, and willingly subject, not for wrath only, but much more for conscience Rom. 13. 5 sake, according to Christian duetie.
Touching the third: Your W. care for your commoun-wealth is so great and continuall, so manifest and profitable; that it is worthis of admiration, commendation, and i∣mitation. Heerein you neede no words of exhortation: for to all men is knowne your moderation: Your Philip. 4. 5 light so shineth before them, that they may see your good workes, Math. 5. 6 and glorifie you Father which art in HEAVEN.

For which causes I haue presu∣med to present next to his Ma∣jestie, this small treatise vnto your Wisedomes, praying that your succee∣ding posteritie, and all others of this Kingdome may bee earnest fol∣lowers of your godly vertues, and diligent imitators of your pious pro∣ceadings, for GOD his glory, the welfare of this Kingdome, the good of your Citie, your owne praise, and eternall salvation in the LORD IESVS, to whose grace and bles∣sing I commend you for ever.
From Dysart the last of Maij. 1630.

