



MOST renowned Prin∣sse and Mirro f Vertue, Behold eere, I, one of Your deuoted Vassals, haue presumed (pardon this my humble Presumption) to de∣dicate
vnto Your Maiesty, this poore ensuing Worke; that with the Wings of your gracious Patronage, it may more freely, and vnrestray¦nedly flye abroad.
The subiect thereof is, to vindicate (so farre as in me lyeth) the Honour of the most Blessed Virgin, the Mo∣ther of God, from the Indigni∣ties, which she suffereth from the enuenomed Tongues, & Pens of our Pians; for the more temperate nd learned Protestant is fa from such Exorbitancyes.
In your Patronage wher∣of, She, whome it chiefely
concernes, will a new be∣come your Patronesse: And thus will Mary intercede for Mary; the Queene of Hea∣uen, for a great Queene vpon earth; the Mother of our Ce∣lestiall King, for the mother of our future terrene King: And finally, by your protecting & pleading for it, the Imma∣culate Virgin will (in a more full manner) become an Ad∣uocate for You, her Aduocate.
Vouchsaf refore to ac∣cōplish this my Petitiō, most Great Lady▪ reat, I say, since You are borne Great, married Great, and are Vertuously Great: For you are the daugh∣ter
of a King, sister to a King, Spouse to a King; and (not∣withstanding Your weake∣strong Sex) do perseuer with more then manly Resolution in Practise of Piety, & in in∣uiolably professing the An∣cient Apostolicall Fayth.
For which your immo∣ueable Constancy, all good Catholikes do most ioyfully sound forth your due Pane∣gyricks, and Laudes: Your Vertue here ing of that worth and heigt, as that Words light fahort to ex∣presse it, & therfore a silent Admiratiō must heere in part supply the Tongues office.

The Queene of Saba (as we read, 3. Reg. 10.) repaired to Salomon (a mortall and sinfull Man) to heare his Wisdome: But the Queene of England, firmely anchors her Iudge∣ment, vpon the Vniuersall Church of Christ, sterned with his Spirit, to receaue its holy Instructions. O, how great is the disparity!
And thus, in the good hope of obtaining my much desi∣red suite (So the rather since diuers Passges of this small Treatise do ut Cōment your owne daily Deuotions to∣wards the Intemerate Virgin) I most humbly prostrate my
selfe before your Maiesty, & will neuer cease to batter at the eares of the diuine Maiesty with my incessant Prayers, to protect and defend (as the aple of his eye) our most Gracious Soueraigne, King Charles, and YOV his dea∣rest Spouse, with all your Noble Issue, that so the Cen∣ter of all your designes may be fixed in the feare of God; the Circumference extēded to your fruition of l true Tem∣porall, and Eternall Felicity.

