


Religious and most gracious PRINCE.
THis Treatise, that chiefely concerneth Christ Iesus, and directeth to him, the Prince of all glory and of our saluation; doth most fitly belong to you a Prince of such worth, and of so great ex∣pectation. Let it please your grace therefore fauourably to accept of the
same, which with all humilitie and submission, I one of your meanest ser∣uants doe present vnto your High∣nesse: By such acceptance, as you will giue to the world, notable and comfortable testimonie, that you are an earnest imitator of the godly cour∣ses of your pious and Princely fa∣ther, a Paterne and a Patrone of godlinesse and learning, who there∣fore by a
Idenius in discursu de virtutibus Principum, in Epistola nuncupat. stranger is iustly called, Nostri huius saeculi miraculum, and to whom we may speake, as Varus Germinus that Orator said to Caesar the Emperour, Caesar, qui apud te audent dicere, magnitudinem tu∣am ignorant; qui non audent, hu∣manitatem. So you will also giue euident and ample declaration, that you are an happie follower of your
heauenly Father, your most blessed Creator and Sauiour,
Psal. 113.5. who hauing his dwelling on high, abaseth him∣selfe to behold the contemptible things of this earth, who did graci∣ously receiue
Mar. 12.43. two mites from a poore widow, and of whom a wil∣ling minde is accepted according to that a man hath,
2. Cor. 8.12. and not ac∣cording to that he hath not? But if any shall say, that by presenting these small trauels to so high a Prince, I doe presumptuously, and that by publishing them in such a learned na∣tion, I doe superfluously: This, I an∣swere, is the comfort encouraging me, that goodnesse (God be thanked) in your sacred person is conjoyned with greatnesse, that Courtesie and Cle∣mencie in you, doe grow vp with Au∣thoritie
and eminency, hoping assured∣ly your Grace will be well content, to suffer me patiently at this one time to write to you: who at all times (as my bounden duetie requireth) shall ear∣nestly pray for you,
Psal. 20.4. euen that the great God may grant you accor∣ding to your heart, and fulfill all your purpose, for his glory and your eternall felicitie.
Againe, if it be said, that I come with the dimme light of a small can∣dle, where many bright torches are already shining, and with a rurall pipe where many siluer trumpets are me∣lodiously sounding: This is my heart∣ning, that the most learned and la∣borious, are the most modest and gentle censurers, they wil reuerence the grace of God, euen in his simplest seruants;
the most iudicious and spirituall with
Vacui la∣boris inui∣dent labori∣bus aliorum, & omnem collocant o∣peram su∣am, vt de∣prehendant quod queant reprehen∣dere. the spirit of meekenesse, will take in good part the vnworthy labours of their inferiours, in any way tending to the edification of the Church of Christ Iesus.
Now in the humblest manner I can deuise, I craue your Princely pa∣tience, pardon for my boldnesse and presumption; and prostrate vpon the knees of my heart, I instantly beseech the Almightie and most mercifull God to blesse your highnesse, with heauenly
Gen. 49.25. blessings from aboue, with blessings of the deepe that ly∣eth beneath;
1. Sam. 25.29. that the soule of our hopefull Prince may be bound in the bundle of life with the Lord thy God, who will teach your Highnesse by his holy Spirit,
Psal 17.8. and keepe you as
the apple of his owne eye, and satisfie you with long life, and glorifie you with endlesse saluation in his heauenly kingdome for euer,
Psal. 91.15. remaining

