



AFter that the Englishe Prince (Right Honora∣ble and my verie good Lord) had ta∣ken view of the seemelye Portra∣ture of Gridonia, her tender Infant ly∣ing by her, and leading two Lions in her hand: he presently left the Court, and

tooke himselfe to trauayle. When the princely Primaleō, heard pronoūced be∣fore his famous father the Emperour of Constantinople, the sorrowfull Letters sent by the Lady of the Lake, how his best belooued brother was loste in the vnfortunate Forest of England: he a∣bandoned all his Courtly delights, and neuer ceassed wandring, till he became prisoner in the same place. So my sim∣ple selfe (Right Honourable) hauing sufficiently seene the rare vertues of your noble minde, the heroycall quallities of your prudent person: thought, though abilitie were inferiour to gratifie with some gift, yet good will was ample to be∣stowe with the best. When all the braue Gallants and woorthy Gentlemen in Roome, presented vnto the Emperour Iewels and gifts of great value and esti∣mation:

a poore Cittizen amongst thē all brought a handfull of Flowers, and offe∣red them to the Emperour, the which he receiued gratiously and with great affec∣tion, and gaue him a great reward. Why (quoth one of the Gentlemen) how durst thou presume to giue so poore a present, to so puissant a person? Why (quoth the Ci∣tizen) how durst they be so bolde to giue such great gifts? Quoth the Gentleman, they are of great credit, and beside, their gifts woorthy the receiuing. And I am poore (quoth the Cittizen) and there∣fore I giue such a meane gift, yet hath it beene gratefully accepted: And although they discend of such noble Linages: yet doo they owe dutifull alleageaunce vnto the Emperour, and as poore as I am, I beare him as true a heart as the best: Euen so my poore gift hath beene

as faithfully deliuered: as the richest Iewell that was by them presented.
And loe Right Honourable, among such expert heads, such pregnaunt inuen∣tions, and such commendable writers, as preferre to your seemely selfe, woorkes woorthy of eternall memory: A simple Soule, (more imboldened on your clemen∣cie, then any action whatsoeuer he is able to make manifest) presumeth to present you with such vnpullished practises: as his simple skill is able to comprehend. Yet thus much I am to assure your Honour, that among all them which owe you du∣tifull seruice, and among all the braue Bookes which haue beene bestowed: these my little labours containe so much faith∣full zeale to your welfare, as others whatsoeuer, I speake without any excep∣cion. But least that your Honour should

deeme I forge my tale on flatterie, and that I vtter with my mouth, my hart thinketh not: I wish for the tryall of my trustinesse, what reasonable affayres your Honour can best deuise, so shall your minde be deliuered from doubt: and my selfe rid of any such reproche. But as the puissantest Prince is not voyde of enemies, the gallantest Champion free from foes, and the moste honest liuer without some backbiters: euen so the brauest Bookes hath many malicious iudgements, and the wisest writers not without rashe reports. If then (Right Honourable) the moste famous are foūd fault withall, the cuningest controlled, & the promptest wits reproched by spite∣full speeches: how dare so rude a writer as I, seeme to set foorth so meane a mat∣ter, so weake a woorke, and so skillesse a

stile? When the learned are deluded: I must needes be mocked, and when the skilfullest are scorned: I must needes be derided: But yet I remember, the wise will not reprehend rashly, the learned condemne so lightly, nor the courteous misconster the good intent of the writer: But onely sutch as Aesops Dog, that brags but dares not bite, hid in a hole and dare not shewe their heads, against all such, the countenaunce of your Honour is sufficient to contend, which makes me not feare the force of their enuie. The Chi∣rurgion more douteth the hidden Fistule: then the wide wound, the woorthiest war∣riour more feareth the secret assault: thē the boldest battaile, A little hooke taketh a great Fish, a little winde falleth downe big fruit, a smal spark kindleth to a great fire, a little stone may make a tall mā stū∣ble,

& a small wound kill a puissant per∣son: Euen so the hidden enemy may sooner harme a mā: then whē he trieth his quar∣rell face to face, and the least report of a slaūdrous toūg (beeing lightly beleeued) may discredit him to his vtter vndooing. But for my part I feare not, let thē prate at their pleasure, & talke till their toūgs ake, your Honour to please, is the cheefe of my choise, your good will to gaine is my wished reward: which shalbe more wel∣come then Cressus aboundaunce, and more hartily accepted then any worldly wealth. The last part of this woorke re∣maineth vnfinished, the which for breuity of time, and speedines in the Imprinting: I was constrained to permit till more li∣mitted leysure. Desiring your Honour to accept this in meane time, as a signe and token of my dutifull goodwill.

Not long it will be before the rest be fi∣nished and the renowned Palmerin of England with all speede shall be sent you. Thus praying for your prosperitie, and the increase of your Honourable dignitie: I commend your woorthye state to the hea∣uenly eternitie.

