



RAchell,
Gen. 30.35. the wife of Isra∣ell, had two sonnes, Ioseph, and Beniamin,
Iohn. 19. Mary the spouse, not of Israell, that is of one which see God, but of God himselfe had likewise two Sons, Iesus and Iohn: the Mother of the first was a figure of the last Mother, and their Children not vnfitly to bee compared toge∣ther.
Rachell signifieth a sheepe, and Marie
Iohn. 1. broght a Lamb into the world, a Lambe which tooke a∣way the sinnes of the world.
Ioseph the first begotten of Ra∣chell, because of his dreames, which signified a superiority hee
should haue ouer all his brethe∣ren, grew so odious vnto them, that they sought opportunitie to kill him, and in the end was sold to the Egiptians for thirty pence by Iudas.
Iesus the first begotten of Ma∣ry, because the Iewes feared hee should be King ouer them, being mightie not in dreames,
Luk. 24 but in worke and worde, became so much hated amongst them, al∣though he were a Iew borne, & one of their brethren, that they thought it long vntil they crucifi∣ed him: but he was first sold
Mat. 26 by a Iudas also for 30 pence, yet did they no more preuaile in preuē∣ting what they feared in him, thē did Ioseph his brethren,
Gen. 44. who af∣terward were forced to bow vn∣to him, for hee had as glorious a name, & did more worthely de∣serue it, than did Ioseph,
Gen. 41 who
was accounted and so called by the Egiptians:. The Sauiour of the world.
Gen. 35. Beniamin the sccond sonne of Rachell, when his Mo∣ther was to be deliuered of him came with such defficulty into the world, that it was thought neyther shee coulde haue li∣ued to haue beene disburdned, nor hee likelier to bee borne to breath, than to bee buried, in so much that beeing in the middest of her panges of death, shee cal∣led his name Benoin, which is as much to say, as the son of my sor∣row. But with what great sorow our.
Mark. 1. bless. Lady trauailed whē she was to be deliuered of Ioh. it shall appeare in the discourse fol∣lowing, where the danger was not onely of the life of the mo∣ther & a sonne, but of life it selfe, which liuing as gratiously gaue e∣uery one their life, as dying rede∣med
gloriously each one from death, that had not Iohn been verie filty named before his birth, his Mo∣ther might haue rightly called him Benoin, and vppon greater cause then Rachell called hers.
His name was Iohn, and so it remaineth still. Iohn that is to say, to whom is giuen, & nothing named what is giuen: we are to vnderstande some excellent gift, the like whereof was neither be∣fore nor since giuen to any man.
Iohn. 19. God gaue himselfe to our blessed Lady, and then gaue her to Iohn, and by this gift of her to him, & him againe to her by the sonne of God, is he borne a new into this world, and made our Lady her sonne.
This birth of Saint Iohn, toge∣ther with his breeding I present vnto you, and rather this than a∣nie
other thing of his life, because it seemeth a matter touching most his honour, and a dignitie much passing all his titles, to bee the sonne of her, who only was thought meete and was the Mo∣ther of God.
His conception I suppose was at his mariage in Cana of Galile,
Iohn. 2 and
Iohn. 19 his birth at Christ his Pas∣sion vppon the mount Caluarie, the best of both which places, were an homely presence for a∣ny Honourable personage, but since that GOD himselfe made his choice of
Luk. 1. a Carpenters spouse, to set vp the frame of his owne most blessed body, right well may it beseeme one of what dignitie soeuer to bee present at the labour of a poore Carpen∣ter.
Presuming therefore of your
vsuall fauoring good endeuours, whose outward actions, as well as inward intentions neuer sauo∣red any other. I will vse no fur∣ther perswations to forward a gratious acceptance of a slender trauaile in so worthy a labor, and forbeare to hold you with anie longer pre∣face.
