



IN calling to my remembraunce (O In∣gland)
thou coūtrye of my natiuitie, thy
miserable present state, ouerwhelmed
with iniquitie, wherin veritie is exiled,
godlynes secluded, vertue defaced, fidelitie
suppressed, and trueth imprisoned. And on the
other syde, Falshod retayned, lyes imbrased,
impiete cherished, vyce auaunced, Infidelitie
extolled, and vntrueth set at lybertie, wherein
trew relygion is altered into supersticion, the
worde of God into mens traditions, the holy
Sacraments into blasphemous sacrifices and
supersticious Ceremonies, and the trew wor∣shipping
of god into execrable ydolatrie, wher¦in
thy faythful naturall natyf Kyng is chaun∣ged
into a supersticious vnnaturall forreyne
Prince. Thy worthye Maiestrates, Nobilitie
and Rulers, into faynt harted tymerous per∣sons,
ruled of other theyr inferiours. Thy vy∣gelant
Bishoppes and faythfull Ministers,
into greuous wolues and bloudthurstye mur∣therers.

And thy infinite numbre of Gospel∣lers
and faythful Christians, into dissembling
ypocrites, and hollow harted Papistes.) I cō∣sydered
with my selfe what mighte be the vn∣doupted
cause of this so miserable an alterati∣on:Psa. c. vij
for the certaynte whereof I repayred vnto
the worde of God,Num. 16 ij. esd. ix. the onelye discloser of all
trueth in doutfull matters: wheras notably I
found,prou. 28. Sinne, to be the vndoupted cause of all
these alterations,Esa. 3. 13. plagues, and mutacions. For
Sinne was the cause of Adams expulsion outIer. 5. 30
of Paradyse,Ezec. 23. of the ouerflowinge & drowning
of the worlde,Amo. ix. of the consuming of Sodome &
Gomor with brunstone and fyre,Dani. ix, of the often
captyuitie and slaughter of the people of god:Iudi. 5. 8.
sometyme by the Egiptians,Gene. iij. sometyme by the
Madianites,Gene. vij Moabites, Amorites, Philisti∣ans,
Assyrians,Ge. 13. 19 Caldians and Babilonians, &
the finall subuersion of Ierusalem by the Ro∣maynes.Iudi. 3. 4 6. 11. 13. iiij. Reg. xvij. xxv.
Euen so is Sinne now the cause that
God taketh awaye the light of his word from
vs, and geueth vs ouer to errour & darkenes.
Sinne is the cause that he hath takē away ourMat. 24.
vertuous Kinges and Princes,Lu. 19. 21 and in stede of
them hath geuen vs ypocrites to raygne ouerAmos. 8.
vs.Ioh. xij. Sinne is the cause that he hath taken away
the hartes of our Nobilitie,Iob. 18. xxxviij. Counsayl & Cap∣taynes
in makinge them fayntharted & weake∣linges,Iob. 34.
being contented to submit theyr neckes
vnder the yocke of straungers.Dani. iiij Sinne is the
cause that God hath taken away from his peo¦ple,Esay. iij.
his trew Preachers,Leui. 26. vertuous Ministers,
and faythfull Shepeherdes,Deut. 28. in geuinge them

ouer into the mouthes of most cruell wolues,Iere. iiij.
rauening thefes & fugitiue hyrelinges.1. Reg. 28 Sinne
is the cause that God hath sent a dasinge intoEsay. lix.
the heartes of his people,Iob. xij. to beleue lyes, & not
to credyte the truth: but to grope after vanite,Iere. vij.
thinking by playing the ypocrites,Eze. xiij. to kepe the
thinge that they shall moste certaynely forgo.Naū. iij. ij. Tess. ij
Finally to conclude. Sinne is the vndoubted
cause (as testifieth the scriptures) of al plagesAmos. ix
misfortunes,Leui. 26. ruynes, mutacions, captiuities,
and destructions.Deut. 28. And vnles thou repente in
tyme (O Inglād) it wylbe the cause of thy fi∣nall
desolation and vtter confusion. For thou
doest euen now norishe within thee, those that
shal consume thee.Esai. vij. The Lord hath whisled for
them out of a farre countrye, and they are spe∣delye
come, euen those that shall ruynate thine
honour, adnichelat thyne auncient worthines,
and bring thy prayseworthy fame to ignominy
and shame. Oh Sinne, how odible art thou in
the sight of ye most highest, that bringest such
confusion vpon them that hath so frendly im∣brased
thee. O Ingland, thou receyuedst an yl
gest to herborowe, whē thou waste contented
that synne should lodge with thee: whose loue
and frēdship is the wrath and enmite of God:
whose payment and recompence is, captiuitie,
destruction and desolation: for now thy pryde
shalbe rewarded with pouertie,Esay. iij. thyne abun∣daunce
with scarcitie, thy gredye purchasinge
with dispossessing.Esay. v. Thy sumptuouse buylding
with rasing downe, and thyne ambytion with
desolation: yea the gorgiousnes of thine appa∣rell

shalbe tourned into ragges and sackcloth:
thyne abundant delicate fare, into famyne and
honger,Esay. iij. and the cherished beautye of thy La∣dyes
and dayntie Mistresses into wythered∣nes
and sunne burninge. Theyr fayre layde out
yelowe lockes into baldnesse, for the tyme ap∣procheth
that of force they muste forgo theyr
trinkettes of pryde, the which at the admoni∣cion
of Gods word they would not abandon,
as are theyr abyllements of gold, tawdrye la∣ces,
bongraces, fardingals, tablettes, ringes,
with theyr garded and brodered raymente of
sundrye fashions, counterfeyting all nations:
and because theyr husbandes haue vaynly sup¦ported
them in the same. Theyr bloud shalbe
shed in the stretes, sayth the Lord. Esaye. iij.
This shalbe the reward of Sinne thy gest (O
Ingland) besydes the greuous Idolatry wher¦in
thou now lyuest, to the vtter woundinge of
thy conscientie, agaynst thy knowledge by y∣pocrisye:
the onely meane to accellerat & bring
spedye damnation vpon thy head.Exod. 32. iij. Re. 13. For this
Sinne of ydolatry is so odious in Gods sight
that at no tyme (as testifieth the scriptures)Num. 25
hath ye Lord lefte the same vnpunished: wher∣fore
be thou most certaynly assured of his in∣tollerable
wrath and indignation, that after ye
committing of so manye sinnes, in stede of re∣pentaunce
doest ende in Idolatrye: yea, it is a
playne argument that thou art forsakē of god,
and geuen ouer into reprobation,Ier. xliiij for this is ye
sinne (as witnesseth the Prophetes) that co∣monlyEzec. vi.
goeth before captiuitie, slaughter, pe∣stilence,

famyne, desolation and vtter destru∣ction.
Oh consyder,Luke. xv. I pray thee (O Ingland)
how farre thou art alreadye strayed from the
shepefold of Christ, by one lytle storme of tēp∣tacion.
Oh how cleane art thou blowen awaye
from the port of health, by one blustring blast
of a busie Bishop. Oh how is the shippe of thy
comon wealth now tossed through the vnskyl∣fulnes
of one that ruleth the helme. O how are
thy faythfull Christians induced to playe the
dissemblinge ypocrites, in communicatinge at
vnlawfull seruices and blasphemous ydola∣tries,
by the instigation of a fewe vnlearned
Papistes.ij. Tim. ij Wher hast thou learned in the time
of a storme to abandon the helme,Math. x. in the tyme
of warre to contracte amyte with the enemyesi. Pet. iij.
of thy Captayne, and in the tyme of tryall, to
cloke and dissemble thy fayth? This hath not
the worde of God taught thee, although thou
pretende dyuers excuses for the same: but ra∣ther
the loue of thy selfe, of the worlde, of thy
goodes and ryches, thy landes and possessiōs,
thy wyfe and chyldren, thy fylthy pleasures,
and fleshly delites, the which al, thou thinking
by thy dissimulate ypocrisie to saue and pre∣serue,
thou shalte most certaynly lose and for∣go,
as witnesseth the verytie, saying: Whosoe∣uer
goeth about by any fraudulent meanes toMath. x.
saue his lyfe,Mar. viij he shall most certaynly lose the∣same:
yea,Luke. ix euen this transitory lyfe, besyde the
perpetual damnation of soule and body in the
lyfe to come. For the Lord wyl reteyn no such
souldiers in his Campe, as shall beare a flatte∣ring

face towardes his enemies, and associate
them selues with his aduersaries, he wyl haue
no such seruing men in his Court,iij. Re. 18 as shall halt
on both sydes,Apoc. iij. beyng neyther whote nor cold,
sekinge to please two cōtrary maysters,Math. vi God,
and Mammon: yea, he accoumpteth all those
pretensed frendes, for vtter enemyes, that wyl
vysite the table of deuylles,i. Corin. x ij. Cor. vi and his also: that
seke to couple Christ with Beliall, lighte with
darkenes, righteousnes with vnrighteousnes,
the beleuer with an infydell, and the Temple
of god with Images. In al these thinges thou
art coulpable O Inglande, through thy dissi∣mulate
ypocrisie, in declining from the trueth:
notwithstāding thine earnest promyse, vowe,
and consente, to continue a faythfull Souldi∣our,
a trew seruaunt, and an vnfayned frend:
for who is he in thee, at this present (a few on∣ly
excepted) that ether for feare of men, or loue
of the worlde doeth not abandon the persecu∣ted,
imprisoned and exyled congregation of
God, his faythful seruauntes, and ioyne him¦selfe
with the company of Idolaters and mas∣mongers
hys enemyes? who is he that is not
now contented to abandon the table of ye Lord
the holy communion and Sacrament of Chri∣stes
body and bloud, and to vnyte himself vn∣to
that sacrifycing bloudye aultar of the blas∣phemous
breddē God, the romishe Idol? who
is he that doeth not now with all diligence (in¦stede
of the lyuely water of Gods holy worde
truely preached) repayre vnto the fylthy pud∣dels
of mennes superstitious doctrines, ther∣with

to satisfye theyr thyrste? yea, who is he
now in thee, that notwithstāding before tyme
he condempned with knowledge of consciēce
all maner of Images and Idols, that doth not
now dayly repayre vnto the Temples of Ido∣laters,
in whose cōpany and that before theyr
Idolles, they praye, they knele, they are bare∣headed,
they lifte vp theyr handes, they recey∣ue
holy water, and holy bread, with dyuers o∣ther
exteriour iestures of the bodye: And yet
(that worst is) thei affirme they do not offend
in as muche (as they saye) they do it not with
the consente of theyr harte, but onely with the
outward iesture of the body, and therefore no
sinne, in as much as the Lord onely requyreth
the harte,Roma. x. the whiche they geue vnto hym: as
though there myghte be made a seperation of
the soule and the body, in dedicatinge the one
vnto the seruice of God, and the other to Ido∣latrie:
as though the Lord had not created thēGene. ij.
both, in vnyting and knytting them together,
making but one man, reseruing them bothe to
immortalitie:Deu. 6. 11 as though the Lorde God dyd
not earnestly requyre in his lawe of euery oneMat. 22.
of vs,Mark. 12 our whole soule, harte, mynde, strength,
power and outward man:Luke. x. and yet they contra∣rye
to this knowledge, do make a separation,
whereas the Lord hath made so perfyte a con∣iunction.
But I feare me this theyr separation
tendeth to none other ende, but to deuyde thē∣selues
wholy from God both in soule and bo∣dy,
for he wyl not haue the one without the o∣ther,
neyther is he pleased with halfe of hys

creatures. Wherefore yf he yt detesteth whore∣dom,
fleeth the stewes and cōpany of whore∣mongers:
yf he that hateth swering, auoydeth
the felowship of blasphemers: and yf he that
loueth quietnesse refrayneth the companye of
ruffians & quarellers. How much more ough¦test
thou (O dearly beloued) yf thou dydest in
dede hate Idolatrye, as thou pretendeste in
word, to auoyde and flee the companye of all
Idolatres in the committing of theyr Idola∣trye:
how much more I saye oughtest thou to
auoyde theyr brothell houses & stewes, theyr
sinke and puddel of fylthy Idolatrye, & that
not onely with the hart & minde, but also with
the body and outward iesture. For the Lorde
doeth not onely requyre (as wytnesseth saynte
Paul)Roma. x. the confydence and belefe of the harte
vnto iustifycation, but also the outwarde con∣fession
of the mouth and exteriour conuersatiō
vnto saluation.Num. xi. Let not the greasy fleshpottes
of Egipte, I meane the pleasures of this lyfe,
so muche sincke into thy mynde, as for the en∣ioyinge
thereof, thou be contented to abandon
the church of God in the desert,ij. Petr. ij and retourne
to thy fylthye puddel agayne. Set rather be∣fore
thyne eyes the examples of the holye Pa∣triarkes,
Prophetes, Apostles, and all other
godly men from the beginning, who all as ne∣cessytie
requyred haue abandoned wyllingly
theyr pleasures,Ebre. xi. forsaken theyr commodites,
relinquished theyr natyue countrye, hasarded
theyr lyues, shedde theyr bloud, and paciently
indured the moste greuous tormentes of ty∣rauntes

for the testimony of the truth, rather
then they would ether in body or in mynd cō∣municate
with the vngodlye in any vntrueth.
Why rather doest thou not practyse in this ra∣ging
storme of temptacion, the worthy exam∣ples
of Daniel, Tobias, Eliezar, Sidrach, Mi¦sech,
and Abednego, with dyuers others,Dani. vi. con∣tayned
in the holy scriptures:Tobie. i. ij. mac. vi who all woulde
geue no place, (as touchinge theyr religion in
the trew worshipping of God) vnto the cōtra∣ry
cōmaūdemēts of wicked Princes.Dani. iij. Then the
examples of Nicodemus,Ioh. iij. Ioseph of Arama∣thia,
and Naaman the Syrian,Ioh. xix. which seme to
you to couler your ypocrisy withall.4. Reg.  But they
beyng rightfully wayed and truely vnderstan¦ded,
measured with the lyne of God his holy
word, shal lyttle defend your wicked attēptes,
but rather dyrectly cōfute the same. The which
thing to accomplishe, because I of my selfe am
vtterly insufficient and vnable, and for the ten¦der
loue that I beare vnto my natiue country,
whose saluation in Christ Iesu, I continually
wyshe for as myne owne. I haue taken vpō me
to reduce into our natyue tounge (according to
my promyse in my former translated Boke) a
worthye worke that latelye happened into my
handes, no les necessarye then profytable and
no les profytable then Godly for this present
tyme. The which doeth most dyrectly and in∣uincyble
aunswere to all maner of obiections
and wronge alleged examples that may be pro¦duced
for any dissimularion in religion. Com∣piled
iu. iiij. Dialoges, by the faythful seruaūt

of Iesus Christ, and excellent learned deuine,
Wolfangus Musculus, for the comfort, edify∣cation
and instruction of his contryemen the
Germaynes, then oppressed by the tyrannye
of Antechrist in his fylthy mēbres. And nowe
I dedicate the same vnto the (O Inglād) with
thesame mynde for thy singuler premonition &
consolation in these thy dayes of aduersytie &
myserye, oppressed with the lyfe (or rather
greater) Antechristian crueltye and tyrannye.
In this Boke are .iiij. Collocutors or speakers
aptly set forth of the Author. The fyrste is na∣med,
Eusebius, who according to the signifi∣cation
of hys name occupieth the place of a
faythful Christiā, alwayes perseuering in the
feare of God, voyde of all dissimulation, ha∣uing
alwayes a trew and lyuelye fayth, with∣out
declining at any tyme frō thesame, for any
thing that the deuyl, the world, or the fleshe cā
do, or ymagine. The .ij. is called, Irenius, who
as his name importeth, is all together peace a∣ble,
and a louer of vnyte and concorde, & ther∣fore
he perseuereth in his accustomed maner
of lyuing, without caring for any trouble that
ryseth through any alteratiō of religiō, wher∣in
he differeth from the other two, in as much
as he doeth not condemne all religion, as doth
the Mondayne, nether yet is he so variable as
is the Temporisour, but for all that he swar∣ueth
from the rules of a trew Christiā, in that
the peace and tranquilitie of the cōmen welth
is more deare vnto him, then is the glorye of
God, the florishing of his word, and his own

saluacion. The .iij. is named the Temporisour,
because of his dissimulation, who obserueth
more the tyme, then the rules of a Christian,
tendering his owne saluation. The last is cal∣led
Mondayn, that is to saye: a worldly man,
or an infydell, who hath neyther God, nor any
religion, in any reputacion. These .iiij. persons
thou shalt heare speake in these Dialoges, and
that so aptlye and decentlye, that (yf they had
the lyke grace in the Inglishe, as they haue in
the Frenche) thou wouldest rather iudge them
the lyuely voyces of men then otherwyse. As
it is, take it in good worth, as a testimonye of
my good wyll and earnest zeale vnto my nati∣ue
countrye. Trusting gentle Reader, that af∣ter
thou hast diligently perused thesame, and
examined it wt the touchstone of Gods word,
and thyne owne conscience, thou wilt searche
no more excuses to couer thy dissimulatiō and
impiete withall. For truely suche inuented ex∣cuses
are manifest argumentes of the vtter cō∣tempt
of the sonne of God and his Kingdom,
as the Parable of those that were inuitated to
the mariage doeth notably testifye:Mat. 22. wherfore
flee all excuses,Luk. xiiij and come vnto the banket now
whyle thou art called, leaste thou with thyne
excuses be for euer excluded, and peraduentur
neuer after called agayn.Mat. xix. Wo worth those oxē,
that farme,Luk. xiiij that wyfe, or anye other earthlye
pleasure, that shall staye vs from comming to
that celestiall supper, whereas thou shalte be∣hold
the sonne of god frendly imbrasing thee,
sayinge: Come thou blessed of my father, and

possesse the lyfe euerlasting, mate merye, and
reioyce, the Lord graūt you to be found in the
noumbre of those his gestes in that daye,Mat. xxij xxv. ha∣uing
on the wedding garment, & not amongst
the folishe slepinge vyrgins, who, hauinge no
respect vnto the comming of the brydegrome,Mat. 24.
were shut out from the mariage,Mar. xiij whose trium∣phant
coming I assure you is not farre of,Luk. xix. xxi. for
the signes goyng before thesame, haue alrea∣dy
appeared.ij. Tess. ij The sonne of perdition is reue∣led,
Iniquitie hath alreadye the vpperhande,i. Tim. 4.
The loue of many is abated. What a noumbre
is there that depart from the fayth, in geuing
hede vnto spyrytes of errour, and deuylish do∣ctrines
of them that speake lyes through ypo∣crysye.
Howe are men nowe become louers of
them selues?ij. Tim. iij Couetous, boasters, proude, cur∣sed
speakers, disobedient, vnthankful, vngod∣ly,
vnkynde, trucebreakers, false accusers, tray¦tours,
highmynded, despysers of them which
are good, gready vpon voluptuousnesse more
then the louers of God, hauing a similitude of
godlines, but haue denyed the power thereof:
whose madnes is now made apparant vnto al
menne. These are the tokens as wytnesseth the
scriptures, that shall immediatly go before his
coming, as ye blossome & leaues of ye fygtree be∣fore
the Sōmer. The which tokēs yf they haue
lately appeared, or no: I appeale to all mens
consciēces. Wherfore ye holy ones of the lord
reioyce, for the day of your redemption draw∣eth
nyghe. And in the meane tyme the Lorde
Iesus, the onely Sauiour of our soules graūt

vnto euery one of vs his holy spyrite, to thend
hat we vnderstandinge these thinges maye
yefullye beare in oure bodyes the mortifi∣cation
of the LORDE Iesus, to
thend that the lyfe of Iesus Christ
maye appeare in vs, his
grace and peace be
with you all.
AMEN.

