



RIGHT Reuerend Father in God, & my very good Lord.
THere is no such mo∣tiue, to giue life, nor meanes to preserue life in the affection of loue, as
loue it selfe. Neither is anie thing so kindely to mans nature, or so naturall to mankinde, as to loue, when one is beloued.
Therefore euen hee, which is loue it selfe, takes this course, hee loues vs first, that wee may loue him first, and last; Quid tam populare quam gratia? saieth that generous By∣shop. Fauour and grace, as we affect and desire no∣thing more; So, nothing so much affecteth and de∣lighteth vs. Hence, my Lord it is, that as by du∣tie,
I must not, but honor; so by affection, I cannot, but loue your Lordship: my selfe in particular, ha∣uīg receiued as good cause to doe this, as you giue to others in generall, iust rea∣son to doe that.
Your Lordships pro∣mise, that you would re∣member mee, doth make me vowe, neuer to forget you. Your kinde affecti∣on, in wishing you might do me good, did me much good presently, as soone as you wished it. And certes, I no wayes doubt, (such is
your Lordships loue and respect, with God himself in heauen, and his vice-ge∣rent, & vice-regēt in earth: such your dignitie, and e∣minencie in the Church and Court,) that anie rea∣sonable matter is, or can be so difficult, that your Lordship may wish for it, and yet not haue it.
I know your Lordship looke for no requitall, and indeed I can make none. Yet, if I should not so much, as once shew some willingnes, I should more then make shewe of great
vnworthinesse.
Aeschines, a poore scholler to Socrates, when hee saw manie of his companions bestow great gifts on their maister, himselfe grieuing, hee could not be a compa∣nion with them in giuing rewards, as hee was in re∣ceiuing Learning: thus said, Nihil dignum te, quod dare tibi possim, inuenio: Et hoc vno modo pauperem me, esse sentio. Itaque dono tibi, quod vnum habeo meipsum. Hoc munus, rogo, qualecun{que} est, boni consulas, cogite{que} a∣lios, cum multum tibi darent,
plus sibi reliquisse. I can finde nothing to giue you, which is anie way wor∣thie of you; and heerein onely, I finde my selfe to be poore. Therefore, loe, euen all that I haue, I giue you, that is, My selfe. This gift, I desire you, be it ne∣uer so simple, to take in good worth, and to rec∣kon of others, that though they gaue much to you, yet they kept more for thē∣selues. To whom Socra∣tes made this answere.
Quidni tu mihi magnum mu∣nus dederis, nisi forte paruo te
aestimas? Habebo itaque curae, vt te meliorē tibi reddam, quàm accepi. Without doubt, thou hast giuen me a great gift, vnlesse thou accoun∣test thy selfe little worth: I will therefore endeuour, that I may restore thee a∣gaine vnto thy selfe, better worth then I tooke thee at the first. The like gift, my Lord, I a poore Aeschines, doe most willingly bequeath to your Lordship; & that because I verelie hope, that, with graue and wise Socrates, you will, ere long, restore mee to my selfe a∣gaine,
(now scarcely apud me, through an Ocean of worldlie crosses) much better then you now find me.
And for a pledge of this gift, I beseech your Lord∣ship to accept this rude ser∣mon, and to giue it your countenance to grace it, and protection, to defend it. And then I doubt not, but, as it was once care∣fully attended from my mouth, by honorable and religious hearers, since, ear∣nestly requested from my hands, by worshipful and
deare friends: So, now, much more, it will be thankfully receiued in the hearts of all deuout Chri∣stians, not, because it is a∣ny longer mine, but for that it is become whollie your Lordships. And so, humblie crauing pardon of your Lo: for my bold∣nes, I cease further to trou∣ble you: euer resting, your Lordships humbly to be commanded,

