



Right Honorable, Right Worshipfull, &c.
IT was a solemne Law a∣mong the Persians, that whensoeuer their King went abroad, such as met him, must salute him with some gift, such as their state and condition best supplyed them withall. The equi∣ty of this Law, J suppose, arose from hence, that seeing the King is the common Father and Protector of the Countrey, euerie man should striue by the donation of some thing, to shew his thankefulnesse vnto him, for that vnspeakeable benefit. It fell out on a time, that Artaxerxes, surna∣med Mnemon, a famous King of the Persians, being to trauell abroad, was in his way ready to meet one Sinaetas, a poore, but honest subiect, when he was farre from home, and so vnprouided of his gift; Which he perceiuing, and being loth to bee found slacker then o∣thers in his duty, ranne immediately to the riuer Cyrus, and ioyning both his hands together, catched vp a quantity of water, which hee brought and pre∣sented to the King. Which done, the King very graciously accepted it, and highly praysing the mans honesty for it, commanded forthwith his Eu∣nuches to take the water out of his palmes, and put it in a golden Viall to keep. This Story somewhat fits my case: You are to me next vnder God and his Maiestie, the meanes of my temporall wel-fare and maintenance; you gaue me freely my Liuing where I feed spi∣ritually, and am fed temporally, besides many other courtesies from time to time receiued. For all which fauours, J haue nothing to retribute backe vnto you, but with Sinaetas, to bring you a little water, not from the riuer Cy∣rus, but from the Fountaine of Life, the Well of liuing waters, the holy Word of God. And in this kinde I haue sundry times beene officious to∣wards you, but it was neuer put vp in a Viall till now, but as water in the hand, by drops shed and spilt againe on the ground. This I haue presumed to put vp my selfe, not without the request and desire of many others, that there might remaine hereafter some eui∣dence of thankefull acknowledgement on my part, for your many fauours. Ac∣cept it therefore, I beseech you, and take it kindly, as coming from him, whose minde is willing to expresse him∣selfe towards you in the most thankeful manner. And J desire you to reade it without preiudice and partiality, as it was vttered by me in all plainnesse and syncerity. J doubt not, but such will find content in it, who haue learned to iudge of a Preacher, not by stooping so low, as to measure him by outward po∣pularity, but by looking into him, and weighing him by selfe-sufficiency. Jn which hope, I rest, and for this time humbly take leaue, praying the God of all mercy, to direct all your endeuorus to his glory, and the flourishing wel∣fare of the whole Company.
Feb. 24. 1622.

