


IF Tertullian (right honourable) erred montani∣zing: if Cyprian rebaptizing: if Origen corpori∣zing; if Nazianzen angelizing; if Eusebius arria∣nizing; if Hieronymus monogamizing; if Am∣brose millenizing; if S. Paul gentilizing; if Augu∣stine retracted many things; if Aquinas, Navarrus, Victoria, and many others best learned papists, haue often changed their opinions; if all this I say, be true, as true it is indeed: it will not I trust, (for it can not iustly I wote) be imputed as blame-worthy: that I vpon better advise submit my selfe to my vndoubted Soveraigne, most gracious and bountifull Queene Elizabetb: that I recognize mine errours, that Ire∣claime my former vnsoundly conceived opinions, as best learned writers have done before me. Which alteration he hath mercifully and wonder∣fully wrought in me, (qui attingit à fine ad finem fortiter, & disponit om∣nia Sapient. 8. 1. suaviter;) Our mercifull God, I meane, who hath of late revealed in time, that which in his eternall purpose, he ordained before the worlde was made. For our good God, who according to his common course of pro∣ceeding, directeth things inferiour by superiour, and vseth humane meanes in producing visible externall effects: first inclined my heart to peruse more seriously, some learned papists before studied; and that done, to provide and revolve other most renowmed papists, which before I had neither read nor seene. By meanes whereof God illuminating mine vn∣derstanding, I haue by litle and little perceived the popes owne doctours, to impugne his Romish religion, and so detested all popish faction. As who at this houre (God be thanked for it,) beholde as in a glasse of christall, the false, erroneous, and execrable doctrine of the Church of Rome. And because omne bonum est sui diffusivum, as saith Areopagita: neither Dionys. Ar▪ pag. de divinis nominibus, c. 4 can I with safe conscience hide that light vnder abushell, which God of

his great mercy hath bestowedon me, no doubt as well for the benefite of others as of my selfe: I haue thought it worth the labour to set downe my chiefest motives, by which and through which next vnder God, I was per∣swade to renounce the Romish faith and religion: as who per swade my selfe constantly, that what soever papist in the whole world, shall with an indifferent iudgement peruse the same, having are solved mind to em∣brace the truth when it appeareth: that selfe same papist will vtterly re∣nounce with me, the false, erroneous, & execrable doctrine of the Church of Rome. For I will proove the saide Romish doctrine by Gods holy assi∣stance, to be of such qualitie as is already said; not onely by scriptures, au∣thorities, and reasons, (though such proofes I purpose to vse:) but (which is most forceable against papistes,) by the evident testimonies of best learned papists, and who are of best account: even in the Church of Rome. And consequently, that great learned men of all ages since popery began, yea, in the very altitude of popedome and in the Church of Rome: have approoved, holden, and defended, weighty and important points of do∣ctrine: contrary to the doctrine of the Church of Rome. Which thing so soone as I once vnderstood, my mind and will was by and by alienated from the Church of Rome. This rare methodicall discourse (my right honou∣rable good Lordes all,) as in which papistry is effectually confuted and confounded by papistry it selfe: I have presumed to dedicate vnto your honours, for two especiall consider ations. First, that so I might exhibite some signe of a gratefull and dutifull mind, for your Lordships most ho∣nourable countenances and rare great good willes towards me. Secondly, because this my discourse, will not want many potent and mightie ad∣versaries; and so stand need of honourable, wise, and grave patrons, for the honest and lawfull approbation of the same. The Almighty graunt vnto your Lordships many ioyfull and happy yeres, with much increase of zeale in true religion: to his eternall glory, the faithfull service of her Maiestie, and the common good of our native countrey most noble En∣gland, Amen. From Cambridge the third of November, 1593.

