



TRuly wrote the elect vessel of our Lord
Iesus,1. Cor. 10. v. 11. that vpon vs are come the ends
of the world. For as Christ tolde vs,
we see,Matth. 24. v. 12. that in this last age Charitie
waxeth cold, that iniquitie hath got∣ten
the vpper hand. Now pietie is dee∣med
follie; now scurrilitie is reputed
brauerie; now fidelitie is iudged vani∣tie;
now periurie is thought skilfull pollicie; now charitie is
termed hypocrisie; now deceitful dealing is highly commended,
and treason practised euery where;2. Sam. 17. v. 1 now craftie Achitophels
are much esteemed, and faithfull Chusaies little or nothing at
all regarded.Psal. 12. v. 1. Now haue wee neede to exclame with Gods an∣nointed
Prophet, Help Lord, for good and godly men do perish
and decay; nowe faith and trueth from worldly men is parted
cleane away. Now, now, is nothing more frequent with the
rich men of this world, than to writhe about the neckes of their
poore neighbours, and to impouerish them with the filthie lucre
of Vsurie. Which Vsurie is this day amiably embraced of innu∣merable;
and so magnified of many, that they blush not wiih bra∣sen
faces to defend it, and to terme it a lawfull contract. Yea,
some are so rauished with this kind of impietie, that they haue
sold their inheritance, and thereby prouided a stocke of money;
which they lend out continually for this filthie lucre, to the vt∣ter
vndoing of their honest needie neighbours. In regard here∣of,
that all Vsurers may behold the turpitude of their dishonest
lucre, and once haue true internall remorce for the same (if it
wil please our merciful God to bestow it on them) I haue accor∣ding
to the measure of my smal talent, imploied seriously my ear∣nest
study, care, and industrie, in compiling this succinct and
plaine Treatise. Your Worships zeale in Gods true religion;



your painefull seruice in her Maiesties affaires; your cheere∣full
countenance towards all loyall subiects; your sincere pro∣ceeding
in all maner of iustice, aswel in the behalfe of the poo∣rest
as of the rich; your rare great affection to all painefull la∣bourers
in Christs vineyard; and especially your wonderfull
kindnesse, your vnspeakeable curtesies, and other your manifold
benefites towards my seely selfe the meanest of many thousands;
haue worthily deserued farre better things, both of others and
at my hands. Your worship I know, delighteth not to heare these
commendations, though in deede (absit verbo adulatio) they
be farre inferiour to your condigne deserts. For as it is truely
said, they are best worthie of true praise, that least desire the
same. I therefore, though not able to render condigne compen∣sation
for your manifold goodnes to me wards; do humbly pre∣sent
vnto your Worship, that which I may, and as I can; that is,
this my vnpolished Speculation, as an infallible argument of my
ready gratefull minde, if power were correspondent vnto will.
Accept the gift I pray you heartily in good part, as if it were a
better thing: so commending your Worship, and all your acti∣ons,
words, and thoughts to the grace of our good God, I humbly
take my leaue. From my study this 18. of March 1595.

