


SAint Paul, that chosen Vessell of God, (Right Honourable) made a base reckoning of all other things in the world, in respect of the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ.Philip. 3.8. This know∣ledge was so deare to the Princely Prophet Dauid: that he desired to be but a doore-keeper in Gods house, rather then to dwel in the goodly Pallaces of great Parsonages: esteeming one day better in Gods Church, then a thousand other∣where.Psal. 84. vers. 10. This knowledge yeelded so sweete a sauour in the nosethrels of holy Moses: that he chose rather to be the childe of God, then to be called the sonne of King Phoraohs daughter. Heb. 11. vers. 24. Pro. 1.7. Eccles. 12.13. This knowledge was to the wisest King so precious: that hee reputed it not onely the beginning of wisedome, but euen the finall ende which he aymed at: with the loue of which knowledge hee was so rauished: (Oh most excellent knowledge,) that hauing in his owne free election what hee would receiue at Gods hands: hee desireth neither long life, (which the greater part of people thirst after) nor ri∣ches (which are the greatest ioyes of al couetous world∣lings:) nor yet the death of his enemies, (which the dauncing Damosell preferred before a Kingdome) 1. Reg. 3. verse. 59.11.12. Matt. 14.8. but

he humbly asked an vnderstanding heart, that he might discerne between good and euil, and iudge aright Gods people committed to his charge: a most wise and holy request. King Salo∣mon the wise.This petition pleased God so well, that he gaue the King a wise and vnderstanding heart, so that there was neuer any either before or after him, comparable or like vnto him.
And no marueile, that the true Children of God, de∣sire the true knowledge of God, before all other things. For as our Sauiour himselfe teacheth vs, this knowledge is life eternall, the ioy of all ioyes. But (my good Lord) it may here bee demaunded, how this most excellent knowledge can bee attained?Ioh. 17.3. 1. Cor. 2.9. To which I answere, euen by dilligent reading of the holy Scriptures▪ For Saint Paul, writing vnto Timothie, commendeth his know∣ledge in the holy Scriptures, which he had attained of a childe, and he yeeldeth this reason therof: because for∣sooth, (saith the Apostle,) the Scriptures are able to make him wise vnto saluation.2. Tim. 3. vers. 15. Is this possible? is it so in∣deed? euen so doubtlesse, Gods Spirit cannot lye. Howe then commeth it to passe, that the late Byshops of Rome, (now Cat' e'xochen called Popes,) doe this day sup∣presse the light of the Gospel, and forbid the Lay-peo∣ple to read the holy Scriptures in their vulgar language? How chanceth it, that none may read any Commenta∣ries vpon the old and newe Testament, nor any other bookes compiled for the furtherāce of mans knowledge in that behalfe? vnlesse either the said bookes & Com∣mentaries, be composed by professed papists: or the rea∣ders being the Popes sworne vassals, haue his dispensa∣tion and licence so to doe?
This (my good Lord,) is the reason, that cannot in truth be denied. They that doe euill hate the light, fea∣ring that it should reproue their naughtie deedes.Iohn 3.20. And

 for this end is it, that the Pope can not endure the ma∣nifestation of Gods word, which is a lanterne vnto our feete, & a bright shining light vnto our soules, directing vs the path-way to heauen. Psal. 119.105. 2 pet. 1.19. Ioh 5 39. Rom. 10.13. For this light, if the pope did not smoother it vnder the ashes, and violently keepe it vnder a bushell: would in short time so enlighten the hearts of all well disposed people, that all the world would detest the Pope, all popish superstition, heresies, and blasphemies, and all his bloodie, tyrannicall, and plaine antichristian dealing.
 In regard hereof, (most honourable Baron) and most worthy, zealous, christian, vpright, and religious Magistrate,) because it is not enough for a Christian to know God himselfe, but he must withall, heartily wish and effectually procure, (so much as lyeth in him,) that others may also know and worship the euer-liuing God with him: Leu. 19.18. Ma 19.19. Gal. 5.14. Rom. 12.20 oh. 3.16. Luke 3.11. I haue employed my studie, diligence, care, and industrie, to deliuer a very compendious en∣chiridion to al simple seduced Papists, & to other thank∣full Readers, wherein they may behold as cleerely as the noone-day, the original of popish falsly pretended Primacie: the meanes by which the Byshops of Rome, aspired thereunto: the royall titles and power plaine di∣uine, ascribed to the Popes: the liues, maners, and con∣versation of Popes: the rotten foundations vpon which and by which, Poperie is builded and vnderpropped: the originall and sundry grounds of Popish Purgatorie: the vanitie and vncertaintie of Popish Succession: the popish execrable Excommunications, Superstitions, A∣dorations, and many other matters of great moment. By the due and serious consideration whereof the indif∣ferent Reader, cannot but behold the abhomination of late Romish Religion: and consequently loath, de∣test, and vtterly renounce the same for euer.
The worke such as it is, I haue dedicated vnto your Honour, for two speciall causes. First, to intimate to the world, my inward conceiued comfort, ioy, and solace, (which either is, or at least ought to bee, common to my selfe, with all other honest and true harted English Subiects,) of your Lordships most honorable, zealous, christian, conscionable, vpright, painefull, and religi∣ous care, vigillancie, & holy constant indeuours, vnder God, and his most exellent Maiestie: both for the in∣differencie of iustice extended at al persons, aswel to the poore as to the rich, which is not the vsuall practise of many Magistrates, alas for the pittie,) and also generally for the common good and peaceable gouernment of this Kingdome.Leu. 19.15. Exod. 23.2. Deut. 16. ver. 19.20. Esa. 5.23.
Secondly, to giue at the least some smal signification of a thākfull minde, (where power is wanting,) for your Lordships most honourable, yea, vnspeakable fauours towards me from time to time: euen such and so great, as without which, I could not this day breathe vppon earth: & much lesse make vse of my small talent, (Quod sentio quam sit exiguum,) for the common good of others. The Almightie giue your Lordship, many, long, ioyfull and happy yeares, with much increase of vertue, holy zeale, and true honour in this life, and with life eternall in the world to come. Amen.
From my Studie,
this first of Aprill. 1605.

