


FOrsomuch (right highe and mightie Prince) as both this our diuine Prophet S. IOHN, intreating here most speci∣allie of the destruction of the Antichri∣stian seate, citie and kingdome, doth di∣rect the execution of that great worke of Gods Iustice and iust iudgement to the Kings of the earth: as also the whole Prophets of al ages, haue for the most part, directed al their admonitions generally to Kings, princes and gouernors, to the effect that they (as Heads-men) being by holy admonitions forewarned, might (according thereto) holde all the whole body of their commoun wealth in good order: for certaine it is, that the heade being well affected, will of necessitie ministrat health and wholsome humors to the whole body. Therefore, it is likewise the dutie of Gods seruants in this age, interpreters of Prophecies, as well (ac∣cording to the example of the Prophets) to incourage and inanimate Princes, to be ready against that greate day of the Lords reuenge, as also to exhort them generally, to re∣moue all such impediments in their cuntries and common wealths, as may hinder that work, & procure Gods plagues. For the which causes, wee also all your M. Subiects, that

any waies (how litle soeuer) haue addicted our studies vnto these propheticall mysteries, doth not onely craue your high∣nes to abide constant and couragious against that day of the destruction of that Apostatik seate and citie, in case (God willing) it fall in your time: but also in the meane time, vn∣till the reformation of that Idolatrous seate, to be preparing and purging your M. own seat and kingdome, from all the enemies of that cause: yea, and from all others any waies enemies or abusers of Iustice: for verely and in trueth, such is the iniury of this our presēt time, against both the Church of God, and your M. true Lieges, that Religion is despised, and Iustice vtterly neglected: for what by Atheists, Pa∣pists, and Cold professors, the religion of God is mocked in al estates: Againe, for partialitie, prolixitie, dearth, and deceit∣fulnes of lawes, the poore perishe, the proud triumphe, and Iustice is nowhere to be found. Praying your M. to attend your self vnto these enormities, and (without casting ouer the credite thereof to wrong wresters of Iustice) your M. self, to wit certainly, that iustice be done to these your true & godly Lieges, against the enemies of Gods Church, and their most cruell oppressors: Assuring your M. be concordance of al scriptures, that if your M. ministrate Iustice to them, God the supreme Iudge shal ministrate Iustice to you against al your enemies: and contrarily, if otherwise. Therefore, Sir, let it be your M. continuall study (as called and charged thereunto by God) to reforme the vniuersall enormities of your country, and first (taking example of the princely Pro∣phet Dauid) to begin at your M. owne house, familie and court, and purge the same of all suspicion of Papists, and A∣theists or Newtrals, wherof this Reuelation foretelleth, that the number shall greatly increase in these latter daies. For shall any Prince be able to be one of the destroiers of that

great seate, and a purger of the world from Antichristia∣nisme, who purgeth not his owne countrie? shal he purge his whole country, who purgeth not his owne house? or shal hee purge his house, who is not purged himselfe by priuate medi¦tations with his God? I say therefore, as God hath merciful∣ly begunne the first degree of that great worke in your in∣ward minde, by purging the same from all apparant spot of Antichristianisme, as that fruitfull meditation vpon the 7.8.9. and 10. verses of the 20. Chapter of the Reuelation, which your highnes hath both godly & learnedly set forth, doth beare plaine testimony, to your M. high praise and ho∣nour: So also wee beseeche your M. (hauing consideration of the treasonable practises in these present daies, attempted both against Gods trueth, your authoritie, and the common wealth of this countrie,) to proceede to the other degrees of that reformation, euen orderly from your M. owne persone till your highnes familie, and from your family to your court. Til at last, your M. whol country stand reformed in the feare of God, ready waiting for that great day, in the which it shall please God to call your M. or yours after you, among other reformed Princes, to that greate and vniuer∣sall reformation, and destruction of that Antichristian seat and citie Rome, according to the wordes prophecied, Apoc. 17. saying: The ten horns are ten Kings &c. These are they that shall hate that harlot, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eate vp her flesh and burne her selfe with fire: Beside also a warrant and commaund generally giuen to all men. Apoc. 18. saying, Rewarde her euen as shee hath rewarded you, and giue her double according to her workes, and in the cup that she hath filled to you, fill her the double. And now, because the spirit of God, both by all his Prophets generally, and by S. Iohn particularly, com∣mends

and directs the execution of Iustice to kings and ru∣lers, I trust no man shall thinke, that this our discouery (wherein is contained Gods Iustice and seuere iudgement a∣gainst the Antichristian seate) can more iustly be dedicate vnto any man, than vnto these ten Christian Kings, some∣times maintainers of that seat, whome, or whose successors now both the Prophet promises to be executers of that iudg∣ment, as also in whose kingdomes reformation is already begunne: But because of these kingdomes, sometimes main∣tainers of that seate, and nowe desisting therefro, this your M. Realme is vndoubtedly one, as also this present treatise both being written by your highnes subiect, and in your M. natiue language, were vnproper to be directed to any of the other Princes. Therefore, of necessitie I am led (as by the eare) to direct & dedicate these primices & first fruites of my study vnto your highnes, wherein, if perchance I should seme any waies more presumpteous then acceptable, I doubt not, but your M. clemencie will pardone that pre∣sumption that comes of necessitie: But contrarily, if I herein shall be found acceptable, (as verely I look for, of your M. humanitie) then certainly, not onely conioyne I vnto the former necessitie, a voluntary heart, and so do offer these pre∣sents, both gladly & necessarily vnto your highnes, but also it shall incourage both me and others your M. Lieges, to proceede every man in his own calling, to all kinde of god∣ly workes, and good exercises, to the honour of God, aedifica∣tion of his Church, your highnes renowne, and welfare to your M. realme, when they shall finde your clemencie to be∣come the Patrone and protector of all zealous students, and an allower and accepter of their godly exercises: For let not your M. doubt, but that there are within your Realme (als wel as in other countries) godly and good ingynes, versed &

exercised in al maner of honest science, and godly discipline, who by your M. instigation might yeelde foorth workes and fruites woorthie of memory, which otherwise (lacking some mightie Maecenas to incourage them) may perchance be buried with aeternall silence. Hoping therefore, that your highnes will be a protector of vs and our godly exerci∣ses: wee pray and humblie beseech the Almightie, to be also vnto your highnes selfe and most honourable bedfellowe, the Queenes M. a perpetuall protector of your honourable estates and welfare of your persones, both in body and soule, to the quieting of your M. lieges, increase of the true church, and honour of God, to whome, in Trinitie and Vnitie bee praise for euer. At Marchistoun the 29. daye of Ianuar. 1593.

