


MOST Reuerend Lords, and you other Learned men of our Vni∣uersities (vvhose due Panegyricks, and Lauda∣tiues deserue to proceed from a more skillfull Penne, then mine:) you are not to thinke strange, that I make bould to dedicate this my small Trea∣tise to your selues. The reason is manifest, and it is this.
Common Report (and you knovv the vulgar saying, Ʋox populi, vox Dei) though it of∣ten erre in its ovvne agitation, hath neuerthelesse voyced it much throghout this Realme, that diuers of You do entertai∣ne in your iudgments, certai∣ne Positions in doctrine, not long since reuiued by Iacobus Arminius, heertofore the pu∣blike Poofessour of Leyden in Holland: To vvit; 1. Tou∣ching mans hauing Freevvill. 2. That no man is infallibly assu- of his Saluation. 3. That iustify∣ing Fayth may be lost. 4. And finally, that God doth not repro∣bate any man to damnation, vvithout preuision, or reference

to his bad and vvicked vvorkes. Yea some of you haue in your publike Sermōs learnedly de∣fēded certaine of these Points. And of my ovvne knovvledge there are diuers in the Ʋniuer∣sities, most strong in the sayd doctrines.
The truth of this then be∣ing so fully acknovvledged, I (vvho do runne one, and the same line of doctrine vvith you heerin) haue vndertaken to vvarrant and make good in these ensuing leaues, the most Ancient, & Orthodoxall Verity of the said Points: & therfore in regard of this assumed At∣tempt, my Ambition hath em∣bouldned this my Dedication.
I presume, that most of you, vvho are Patrones of these▪ Theorems, haue already forti∣fyed your Iudgments (throgh your ovvne▪ Reading) vvith most of the Arguments, pro∣duced in this Treatise; & ther∣fore in this respect, to You it vvill proue lesse necessary, or profitable▪ Neuerthelesse, that▪ those, vvho are Anomalous, and irregular Professours a∣mong you (as I may terme them,) and vvho through the crookednes of their ovvn paths, do tread different steps from You therein, may see, vpon vvhat grounds (both Diuine and Humane) the for∣mer Articles are seated, and▪

consequently hovv incompa∣tible the contrary Tenets are vvith the holy Scriptures; I haue to that end vndertaken this Prouince.
The matter is heer deliuered in the forme of a Dialogue, as best comporting vvith the fa∣stidious humour of the present times The Interlocutours are, Arminius himselfe (vvhome I suppose to be novv liuing) & one Enthusiastus an Imagina∣ry English Doctor of Diuinity; a man, sufficiētly learned, but a great Precisian, & a resolute Enemy to the former Positiōs of Arminius. What othervvise this aēry Doctour is, You may casely coniecture; since to you

vvho are learned, his name (as comming from the Greeke Verbe ) is his Character. Novv touching the further fi∣ction of this Dialogue, I refer you to the Argument thereof prefixed before.
If this my labour may be∣come seruiceable to any▪ I shal hould my selfe sufficiently re∣compensed: but hovvsoeuer, my cōfort is, that the Highest euer setteth a poise more vpon the intention of the Worker, then vpon the vvorke it selfe: & vvell I am assured, that my▪ intention heerin is Azimous, and pure, as leuelling only at the spirituall good of others.
That I partly become Ano∣nymous,

or rather (in outvvard shevv) Fatherlesse to this my ovvne Issue, contēting my self only (as it vvere) to Anagrā∣matize my name vnder tvvo letters, your Ingenuity & Cā∣dour (I hope) vvill pardō. The maine reason of thus masking my self, is this follovving: ad∣mitting once the Author heer∣of to be certainley knovvne, vvhat sallies, and incursions (more against my Person, then against my Treatise) vould the▪ maintainers of the contrary doctrines make vvith their Pens? And hovv vvould they, and their follovvers (being so infinite in number, and vvarranted vvith the streame

& current of the tymes) euen shovvre dovvn vvords (of Dis∣grace, & Cōtumely vpon me▪ So loath I am to stand vvithin the breath of such men.
But novv, Reuerend men, I vvill exptiate no further; noi¦ther vvill I distune your eares vvith any longer difcourse; as being more vvilling to spread my selfe in Matter, then in VVords▪ Therefore referring this small vvorke (I could vvish to your Patronage) I hope, to your perusall, I commit You to the Protection of him, vvho is the Protectour of Israel, and do rest,

