



MY LORD: It is a diuine speach of a wel-spoken DI∣VINE,Chrysost. in Math. hom. 1. That it might haue been wished that men had not needed the helpe of Learning from o∣thers, but to haue had so pure a
life in all things, that in stead of Letters Gods grace might haue serued vs; and as Paper with Incke, so our harts with the Spi∣rit, might haue beene imprinted with the knowledge of our duty. But seeing the happyest man that is, is not happy inough this way, our second riches is, to get learning as Vlysseshis Moly, at the hand of God, but with great trauaile and much labour. Both which, how little the best Schollers haue spared to get so rich a prize, may appeare, by that which some report of them seluesMe autem, quid pudeat qui tot annos ita viuo, vt ab illis (Studijs) nullo me vnquam tem∣pore, aut com∣modum aut ociū meum abstrax∣erit, aut volup∣tas auocarit, aut deni{que} somnus retardarit? Cic. pro Archia Poet. that they were so wedded to their studies, as from the same no profit could entice them; no pleasure allure them, no, nor sleepe hinder them.Haec studia adolescentiam alunt, senectutē oblectant, secun∣das res ornant, aduersis perfu∣gium acsola∣tium prae∣bent, delectant domi, non impe∣diunt foris, per∣noctant nobiscū, peregrinantur, rusticantur. Cic. ibid. Account∣ing Learning, to youth, a nou∣rishment; to age, a recreation; in
prosperity an ornament; in ad∣uersity a refuge; a delight at home; no trouble abroad; but a sweet companion at all times, in all places, to all persons. And by that which others report ofValer. Maxim. lib. 8. Pythagoras his going to Mem∣phis; of PlatoDiog. Laert. in vita Platon. his voyage to, and his iourney ouer Egipt, and Italy; ofPhilostrat. vti Hieron. ad Paul. Apollonius his trauails to the Persians; Scythians, Massagets, and other people of India, that he might speake with the Brach∣mans: and of many other whom St. Ierome names; as also by the famousAul. Gell. Noct. Attict. lib. 6. ca. 10. Euclides of Megaris, who, (as Taurus had wont to tell his schollers) when the Athenians had made it treason for any Mega∣rian Citizen to set his foot in A∣thens, yet aduentured in his long gowne to goe by night from his
owne house to Athens, being twen∣ty miles at least, to heare and to learne of the most noble Socrates, the wisest man liuing at that time. And lastly, by the painefull tra∣uailes of many other, which might be named, whose soules at their returne home (asNazi. Orat∣in laud. Caesarij. Nazianzen tels of his brother Caesarius) came like loaden shippes, fraught with all manner precious iewels of wholesome learning.
But because euery man cannot goe to CORINTH, as the Pro∣uerbe saith, God hath not giuen euery man a body patient of la∣bour, nor a minde capable of con∣ceit for the purchase of learning, it followes, that where it is, men should not onely admire it, as a singular gift of God; but respect it, countenance it, and reward it, as
the most precious iewell among men: so by thankfulnesse to God honour the giuer, and by kindnes to the possessors of it, shew their loue to the gift.
Wherein, how much your Lord∣ship excels; (I meane, in louing learning in men, and incouraging men in learning) most men cannot but take notice, and best men can∣not but take comfort. And may it please you through Gods grace thus to goe on; it is the ready way to make your greatnesse good, and your goodnesse great.
Amongst others whom it hath pleased your Lordship to take no∣tice of, my selfe am one, on whom the splendour of your kinde fauour hath shined. Not that there is any such desert in me, (I am too priuy, alas, to my owne wants) or that
I am worthy to be named the same day with learned men, (my soule knowes it, and protests it:) but because your large goodnesse is pleased to reach downe so low, and the bright rayes of your kinde aspect stretch so farre, being ther∣in indeede, like the royall beames of the Sunne in the Firmament, that shines as bright in the poore man cottage as in the Kings pal∣lace.
All which thankefull acknow∣ledgement of your loue, I trust your Lordship takes as spoken without flattery. For, besides that hee hath no neede of false prayses, that abounds with true; so I con∣fesse my disposition is as contrary to that vice, as that vice is to ver∣tue it selfe. Onely my desire is, not to deserue to be accounted vn∣thankfull,
to so worthy a Mecoe∣nas, but to giue euident and open testimony of my thankefull heart, for so many fauours, for the time past; least I should iustly euer after be held vnworthy of any fauour, for the time to come.
And because it pleased your Lordship so much to commend and approue of this simple SER∣MON, I am bold to present it to your person, and to publish it vn∣der your Name, hoping, that (as the King did by the poore-mans rootes, so) your Lordship will take this simple present in good worth, and iudge by it how well I meane toward you in thankeful∣nesse; as the world may conceiue by this, how much you haue done to mee in kindnesse. In which hope resting, I craue leaue for wri∣ting,
and take leaue of writing: praying God to blesse you still in this life; and to crowne you with blessednesse it selfe in the life to come. Barnet, 9. Octob. 1613.

