



Most gratious Soveraigne,
THis is vsuall, (since natu∣rall) that any good earnest∣ly desired, when it is tyMous∣ly offered, is then favourably recei∣ved. Did Isaak loue venisome?

that meate was acceptable to him. Did King David, a valiant war∣riour 2 Sam. 17. 8 affect victorie and renowne? a sword in season was most stead∣able 1 Sam. 21. 9 vnto him. Did Salomon de∣light in policie and stately building? the wise worke-men, and wood sent from Hiram was welcome vn∣to 2 Chron. 2. 13 hi. Did Iosiah rejoyce in ho∣lynesse and learning? the booke of the Law which was brought to him, 1 King. 22. 10 hee heartily heard the same reade before him. Did Charles the Great reverence and regarde rare know∣ledge, Chron. Cari∣on. lib  alii. all vertuous good counsell and direction? then most worthie Al∣conius, disciple to venerable Bede, who well instructed the Emperour both in Divinitie and Philosophie, was ever most lovingly and hono∣rablie entertained by his imperiall Majestie: and mee thinketh cer∣tainly, that this of all tended most to his greatest honour and felici∣tie, because it was spoken of him truely, Carolus plus cum DEO quam cum hominibus loquitur.

Now this is most sure, (with∣out any contraversie or contradicti∣on) that true prayer and earnest supplication is an incomprehensible and vnspeakable good: seing it is 1 Cor. 3.9 Heavenly foode for sustentation, a sharpe sword for victorie and pro∣tection, which will make one GODS blessed building, which will beget all pietie and all happie learning; will bread saving knowledge, and all Heavenly vertues, wise counsell and good direction, which will vndoub∣tedly bring one to everlasting glory and salvation.
For as much then your sacred Majestie (GOD bee thanked) doth delight your selfe in the Lord GOD continually, who will giue Psal. 37. 4. you your hearts desire for his owne glory, and doth earnestly loue, af∣fect, and vse frequently this most holy, honorable, and profitable ex∣ercise of prayer and invocation, which will procure all spirituall and tem∣porall blessings, happinesse eternall, praise and commendation.

I therefore most humbly with all sub∣mission, and reverence entreate your most excellent Majestie, to accept fa∣vourably this small treatise, worthie indeede in respect of the matter, al∣beit not so in regard of mee the weake author, who ever shall most instantly beseech the Almighty to watch over your Majestie, by his continuall and fatherly providence, which is as a wall of fire round a∣bout Zach. 2. 5 you, and to guard you by his mightie Angels, who will keepe Psal. 91.11 you in all your wayes, and to giue you an happie successe in all your honourable enterprises, and to com∣passe you with his favour, as with a shield: yea, to vouchsafe grace Psal. 5.12 and honour heere in this earth, with glory and happinesse in his Celesti∣all Kingdome for ever.
From Dysart the 28 of May. 1630.

