


MOST VVORTHY KING, AND MY DREAD SOVE∣RAIGNE,
LET it not seeme offensiue, that I (one of your Maiesties meanest subiects) do heere presume to present this vnpoli∣shed Discourse to your Highnesse; vvhose Iudgment in Learning is so exquisite, as that it brooketh therein only labours of
 Perfection. Neuertheles this my hum∣ble Ambition (so to tearme it) appeareth to me vvarrantable for seuerall reasons.
One, in that Princes are truly interes∣sed not only in their Subiects goods of Fortune, but euen in their Intellectuall goods of the Mynd; and therefore hovv smal soeuer my Talent is herein, it ought to be appropriated and referred to your seruyce.
The other (more particuler) is, be∣cause your Maiesty is the principall Mo∣tyue of my vvryting this little imperfect vvorke. Novv, vvhither should the riuers run, but into the Ocean, from vvhence originally they receaued their springs? For hauing perused the Epistle of Mon∣sieur Casaubon, vvritten to the Learned & Illustrious Cardinal Peron, as himselfe intimateth, by your Highnesse priuity, if not command and direction, I find ther∣in, that your Graue and Learned Iudg∣ment doth most fully imbrace the Or∣thodoxall
 doctrine of the Reall Presence of the Eucharist, dissenting from the Ro∣man and Catholike Church only in re∣sting doubtfull of the manner of the Presence. For these (besides other like passages) are Monsieur Casaùbons vvords: Haecfides Regis, haec fides Ecclesiae Angli∣canae &c. concluding, after he hath re∣lated the iudgment of the Bishop of Ely herein, thus in the Bishops vvords? Di∣xit Christus, Hoc est Corpus meum; non, hoc modo, Hoc est Corpus meum Nobis au∣tem vobiscum de obiecto conuenit, de modo lis omnis est &c. Praesentiam credimus, nec minùs quàm vos veram &c.
Novv seing your Maiesty hath made such a happy declaration in the beliefe of this high Mystery, I thought it my duty (soluing aforehand all such difficultyes, as may seeme in a vulgar Eye to imply an Impossibility thereof) to publish to the vvorld the chiefe Reasons vvhich do for∣tify your former receaued doctrine; and
 further humbly to present and exhibite to your Iudicious Eye the vveighty Au∣thorities, vvhich mooue the Church of Rome to belieue the particuler manner of Christs Existency in the Sacrament.
Which tvvo Points are promiscu∣ously handled in this Treatise, since both in explicating the doubts, and in diuers of the Proofs alledged, the one doth of∣ten inter-ueyne the other: yet for the greater perspicuity, I haue forted to one Head all the most forcing Authorityes of the ancient Fathers, vvhich in plaine and direct tearmes do euict a true & perfect Change of the Bread and Wyne, into the Body and Bloud of Christ; so clearly ac∣knovvledging by such their testimonyes the doctrine of Transubstantiation. A∣mong so many of vvhich kind, I cannot heere omit that of S. Cyril of Ierusalem an ancient and learned Father, Catech. 4. Hocsciens, & pro certissimo habens, panē hunc, qui videtur a nobis, non esse panem,
 etiamsi gustus panem esse sentiat, sed esse corpus Christi. Et vinum, quod à nobis con∣spicitur, tametsi sensui gustus vinum esse videatur, non tamen vinum, sed sanguinē Christi esse.] A point so euident, that Monsieur Casaubon ingenuously confes∣seth, that the Greek vvords  (vvhich do necessarily imply a true chang of one thing into another) are heerin frequently vsed by the Greeke Fathers.
THIS THEN is that faith, vvhich vvas so vnanimously maintayned (as shall hereafter fully appeare) by the Reuerend Doctours of the Primitiue Church, and no lesse religiously belieued by so many of your Royall Ancestours, and particulerly by that most vertuous and renovvned Queene, your Maiestyes deare Mother; to vvhom it vvas granted by God, that she should vvash her robes in the bloud of the Lambe: A Princesse, in vvhom aboundāce of Goodnes at length
 became criminall; and vvho, as being a Queene, and excelling not only all of her State, but of her Sexe in a spirituall Resolution and greatnes of Mynd, vvas much admyred throughout all Christen∣dome; and yet for bringing forth so for∣tunate and vvorthy a Branch, as your Maiesty is, ought to be more peculiarly reuerenced by vs English. And therefore in this respect, I may freely say, that since the Child is the Image of the Parent, vve Englishmen by eternizing her Memory, haue iust reason (cōtrary to the doctrine of the Schooles) heere to honour the Prototypon euen for the Image sake: Fevv other Mothers in our age being vvorthy of such a Sonne, fevv other Sōns vvorthy of such a Mother.
But novv (most Gratious Prince) since the former doctrine of the Reall Presence is one mayne Article of that Religiō, for vvhich the Professors therof are daily so grieuously afflicted; We the
 impouerished, deiected, & (in our Ad∣uersaries Eye) despicable Catholikes of England, do heere vpon our knees lye battering at your Maiesties eares, vvith our incessant Supplications, for some ease and release of our former pressures, and vexations.
This Mercy vve humbly beseech at your hands, euen for his sake, vvho out of a sea of Mercy vvas content to abase himselfe to the opprobrious death of the Crosse; for the Honour and Loue of him, vvhose Image not only by Creation, but in Gouerment all Princes are (Ego dixi Dij estis) and therfore are bound the more zealously to imitate him in his most glorious title of Mercy; euen by that hope of Mercy, vvhich your Maiesty appearing before the Diuine Maiesty, at the most dreadfull Day, doth expect to obtayne: Finally for the deare remem∣brāce of that blessed Princesse your Mo∣ther, vvho dyed (I vvill not say chiefly
 for, but I am certayne) in our Catholike Religion, and doth (no doubt) novv daily offer vp an incense of praiers to God for the relenting of your mynd herein, naturally enclined to the cōmiseration of the distressed.
Suffer not (ô suffer not) so many in∣nocent and Loyall Subiects, thus, yeare after yeare, to breath (for our afflictions considered, hovv can it be said vve lyue?) in a continuall Night of Misery; vvhose Bodyes and States (like Balles) are tossed to and fro, at the vvill and pleasure of our hungry and pittilesse Aduersaries.
You are our Prince, and therein or∣dayned to protect vs from vvrongs & in∣iuryes: and in further vvarrant of the same, your Highnes may say vvith Lot, Ingressi sunt sub vmbra culminis mei. We are your Subiects, and therefore stand obliged to acknovvledge the strictest Band of Allegiance, due either by the Lavv of Nature, by the Lavv of God, or
 by the example of any Christian Sub∣iects tovvards their Princes, euer since our Redemption, till the fall of that most vnhappy and Apostating Monke.
Let not then the perpetrated crymes of some fevv, so diuert the beames of your Gracious Clemency from vs all, as that the Punishmēt due only vnto them (like the Effect of another Originall Sinne) should propagate and extend it selfe vpon the vvhole Body, and Poste∣rity of Catholikes: but rather, reiecting all the subtile Machinations & vvyse fol∣lyes of our Politick Aduersaryes (vvhich vve trust that finally God vvill frustrate) haue a frequent remembrance of that saying: Superexalt at Misericor dia iudiciū Iustitiae tuae; in vvhich vvords your High∣nes may thinke, that the Apostle Iames preacheth to King Iames.
BVT NOW, as fearing to be∣come ouer tedious (for vvhich reason, as also out of an humble Reuerēce I do for∣beare
 hereafter in this Treatise to direct further speaches to your Highnes) I heere vvill cease, casting my selfe at your Ma∣iestyes feet as lovv, as Humility and Loy∣alty can prostrate themselues, and pray∣ing to the Almighty to preserue you in a Blessed Gouerment ouer vs many (ma∣ny) yeares; and after the Period of this life, to graunt your Highnes the Honour and Happines in being another Dauid, by enioyning tvvo Ierusalems.

