


AFter that I had de∣liuered (Right Honora∣ble) vnto your courteous and gentle perusing, my book intituled Galien of Fraunce, vvherein, ha∣uing not so fully compri∣sed such pitbines of stile, as one of a more riper In∣uention could cunningly haue carued: I rest Right Honorable on your Cle∣mency, to amend my errors committed so vnskilfully But at that time beeing very desirous to attaine to some vnder∣standing in the languages, considering in time to come: I might reap therby some commoditie, since as yet my vvebbe of youthfull time vvas not fully vvouen, and my vvilde oa∣tes required to be surrovved in a forreyne ground, to satis∣fye the trifling toyes that dayly more and more frequented my busied braine: yeelded my self to God and good Fortune, taking on the habit of a Traueler. And hauing sustayned in

the colde Countrey of Fraunce diuers contagious calami∣ties, and sundry sortes of mishaps. As first, beeing but nevv∣ly ariued, and not aquainted vvith the vsage of the Coun∣tref, betvveene Bulloin and Abeuie, my Companion and I vvere stripped into our shirts by Soldiars, vvho (if rescue had not come) vvould haue endamaged our liues also. Me thought this vvas but an vnfreendly vvelcome, considering before I thought that euery man beyond the Seas vvas as frank as an Emperour, and that a man might liue there a Gentlemans life, and doo nothing but vvalke at his plea∣sure, but finding it not so: I vvished my self at home again, vvith sorovve to my sugred sops. But calling to minde that he vvhich fainteth at the first assault: vvould hardly indure to fight out the Battell: tooke Courage afresh, hoping my hap vvould proue better in the end, since it had such a bitter beginning, and so passed forvvard to Paris.
Beeing there ariued, to recompenee my former mishaps: I found the vvorld vvell amended, for not only I obtayned nevv garments, but diuers Gentlemen to be my freends al∣so, some that had sustained as ill fortune as I, and therfore returned back againe into England, and other some that vvere very glad of my comming, in hope I had beene such a one as they looked for. But repelling such Sathanicall illusi∣ons such golden proffers of preferment, to aduaunce me vn to my larger contentment: I gaue them the hearing of all their politique deuises, vvhich (as they thought) had taken deep root at their first planting. And considering that I had enterprised this iourney for my pleasure, and in hope to attaine to some knovvledge in the French tung, if that I should seeme to scripulous in their presence: it might turn to my farder harme. For there no freends I had to help me, no vvelth to maintaine me, no succour neere to saue me,

but if I denyed, my nevv freends vvould disdaine: persvvae∣ded my self in their presence to doo as they bad me, but vvhē they vvere absent: to doo then as pleasd me. By these mea∣nes I obtayned their lavvfull fauoure, in so much, that they thorovvly prouided me for my iourney to Roome. VVhere for my more prefermēt likvvise, they deliuered me diuers let ters, to sundry persons (vvhose names I remit) that there I should be placed in the office of a Preest. VVell my freend & I gaue them a thousand thanks for their liberall expences, and freendly Letters, and so vve departed.
But vvhen vve had vvith an nights rest pondered of our iourney, and considered the emminent daungers before our eyes. First hovv ready Sathan stood to tempt vs, and prick vs forvvard stil to the eternall perdition of our soules. Secondly, that vve should forsake so soone the title & name of a Christian, and yeeld our necks to the yoke and slauerye of the Romaine Decretales, in that vve professing our sel∣ues before faithfull follovvers of our deere Maister Christe, should novv so vvilfully for sake him. Thirdly, vnto all our freends, (espetially our Parents) vvhat an hart sorovve it vvould be, to heare hovv their liberall enpences bestovved on vs in our youth, in trayning vs vp in verteous educati∣ons is novv so lightly regarded: as able to cause the Fa∣ther to yeeld his breath, for the sorrovve conceiued through th negligence of his Sonne, and all ingenerall lament our vnnaturall vsages, Fourthly, from the Seruants of one e∣ternall true God, to come to be Idolaters, VVoorshipers of stocks and stones, and so forsake the feare of God, our duty to our souereign Prince, and our looue to our parents, and all affection to our freends. All these (beeing the principall points) thorovvly cōsidered: vvithdrevv my mind from my former intent, as hauing knovvledge of my Lord the Eng∣lish

Ambassadour then lying in Paris, to him vve vvent, & deliuered our aforsaid Letters, desiring the prudent coun cell of his Honnor therin. His Honnor perceiuing our imbi cilitie, and opening the Letters: found therin vvhere of I haue before certified your Honnor, vvhich vvhen he had vvoorthily ballanced in the brest of a second Solon sayd.
My deere and faithfull Countrymen (as I hope you are) not so glad of your vvelfare, as sory for your ariuall, in that you hazard your selues on such a staylesse state, to become as freends to your enemyes, and foes to your Countrey, heere standing at the mercye of a rauening VVolfe, vvho not on ly vvould deuoure you from your Countrie: but bothe body and soule from Heauenly felicitie, Better therfore to abide the pouertie, of this your vvant and necessitie, then to sell your selues vvilfully into such perpetuall slauery, and not on ly to your great ignomy, but to your freends perpetuall infa∣my, to your Prince and famous Countrie, if you leaue your Captaine thus covvardly. Take hart afresh corragiously, & dread no calamitie, take patient all aduersitie, & God vvil assist ye.
This excellent Discourse pronounced by so prudent a per sonage, me thought did demonstrate the excellencye of true nobilitie. And then departing from his Honnor, I iournied into Italy, to Roome, Naples, Venice, Padua, and diuers o ther excellent Citties. And novv returned, remembring my bounden duty to your Honnor, I present you vvith these my siple labours, desiring pardon for my bolde attempt.
Faccio fine, è riuerentemente baccio le vostro valorose Mani.
Humilissimo, e Diuotissimo, e sempre Osseruandissimo Vasallo, e Seruitore.

