



IF (right Worshipfull) the olde Poet Persaeus,
thought it most preiudiciall to attention, for Ver∣res
to declaime against theft, Gracchus against se∣dition,
Catiline against treason: what such sup∣plosus
pedum may sufficiently entertaine my pre∣sumption,
who beeing an accessarie to Absurditie, haue tooke
vppon me to draw her Anatomie. But that little alliance which
I haue vno Arte, will authorize my follie in defacing her ene∣mie:
and the circumstaunce of my infancie, that brought forth
this Embrion, somewhat tollerate their censures, that would de∣riue
infamie from my vnexperienst infirmities. What I haue
written, proceeded not from the penne of vain-glory but from
the processe of that pensiuenes, which two Summers since o∣uertooke
mee: whose obscured cause, best knowne to euerie
name of curse, hath compelled my wit to wander abroad vnre∣garded
in this satyricall disguise, & counsaild my content to dis∣lodge
his delight from traytors eyes.
Gentlemen that know what it is to encounter with ingrati∣tude
in the forme of Cupid, will soone ayme at the efficient of
my armed phrase, for others that cannot discerne Venus through
a clowde, they will measure each deformed fury by the Queene
of Fayries, all birds by one Phaenix, all beasts by one Lyon. For
my part, as I haue no portion in any mans opinion, so am I the
Prorex of my priuate thought: which makes me terme poyson

poyson, as well in a siluer peece, as in an earthen dish, and Pr∣taeus
Protaeus, though girt in the apparrell of Pactolus. Howe e∣uer
the Syren change her shape, yet is she inseperable from de∣ceit,
and how euer the deuill alter his shaddowe, yet will he be
found in the end to be a she Saint, I dare not prefixe a Nigrum
theta to all of that sexe, least immortalitie might seeme to haue
beene taxt by my slaunder, and the puritie of heauen bepudled
by my vnhallowed speeche. Onely this shall my arguments
inferre, and my anger auerre, that constancie will sooner inha∣bite
the body of a Camelion, a Tyger or a Wolfe, then the hart
of a woman: who predestinated by the father of eternitie, euen
in the nonage of nature, to be the Iliads of euils to all Nations,
haue neuer inuerted their creation in any Countrey but ours.
Whose heauenborne Elizabeth, hath made maiestie herselfe
mazed, and the worlds eye sight astonied. Time, wel maist thou
exult, that in the euening of thy age, thou cōceiuedst such a sub¦iect
of wonder, & Peace, sing io paean, for that in despight of dis∣sention,
she hath patroniz'd thee vnder her wings. Felicitie saw
her inuested with royaltie, and became young againe in the be∣holding.
Fortune ashamed each sorrowe shoulde smile, and her
face alonely be wrapt with wrinkles, suted poore Flaunders and
Fraunce in her frownes, & saluted Englands soule with a smoo∣thed
forehead. Plenty and Abundance, that long had liued as
exiles with the vtmost Indians, were no sooner aduertised of her
aduauncement, but they made their passage through ten thou∣sand
perrils, to spende their prosperitie in her presence. Why
seekes my penne to breake into the buildings of Fame, and Ec∣cho
my amazed thoughts to her brasen Towres, when as my
tongue is too to base a Tryton to eternise her praise, that thus
vpholdeth our happy daies.
Wherefore since my wordes impouerish her worths, my fer∣uent
zeale shall be the vncessant attendant on her weale. I feare
right worshipfull, least the affection of my phrase, present mee
as a foe to your important affaires, whose hart exalted with the
eye sight of such soueraigntie, as soares aboue humane sight,
coulde not but methodize this admiration in this digression of

distinction. But frō such entercourse of excuse, let my vnschoo∣led
indignities, conuert themselues to your courtesie, and ac∣quaint
you with the counsaile of my rude dedication.
So it was, that not long since lighting in company with ma∣nie
extraordinarie Gentlemen, of most excellent parts, it was
my chance (amongst other talke which was generally trauersed
amongst vs) to mooue diuers Questions, as touching the seue∣rall
qualities required in Castalions Courtier: one came in with
that of Ouid, Semper amabilis esto, another stood more stricktly
on the necessitie of that affabilitie, which our Latinists entitle
factius, & we more familiarlie describe by the name of discour∣sing:
the third came in with his carpet deuises, and tolde what
it was to tickle a Citterne, or haue a sweete stroke on the Lute,
to daunce more delicatlie, and reuell it brauelie. The fourth as
an enemie to their faction, confuted all these as effeminate fol∣lies,
and would needes maintaine, that the onely adiuncts of a
Courtier, were schollership and courage, returning picked cu∣riositie
to paultry Scriueners and such like, affabilitie to Aristip∣pus
and his crue, Citterning and Luting, to the birthright of e∣uerie
sixe pennie slaue, and to conclude, dauncing & reuelling,
to euerie Taylors holie day humour. But as for those two bran∣ches
of honor before mencioned, they distinguish a Gentleman
from a broking Iacke, and a Courtier from a clubheaded com∣panion.
This discourse thus continued, at length they fell by a
iarring gradation, to the particuler demonstrations of theyr
generall assertions. One woulde haue one thing preferred, be∣cause
some one man was thereby aduaunced, another, another
thing, because some noble man loues it, euery man shotte his
bolte, but this was the vpshot, that England afforded many me∣diocrities,
but neuer saw any thing more singuler then worthy
Sir Phillip Sidney, of whom it might truely be saide, Arma vi∣rumque
cano. In this heate of opinions, many hopes of Nobility
were brought in question, but nothing so generally applauded
in euery mans comparisons, as your worshippes most absolute
perfections: whose effectuall iudiciall of your vertues, made
such deepe impression in my attentiue imagination, as euer

since there hath not any pleasure mixt it selfe so much with my
secret vowes, as the vndefinite desire to be suppliant vnto you
in some subiect of witte. From which, howsoeuer this my vn∣digested
endeuour declineth yet more earnestly I beseeche
you, by that entire loue which you beare vnto Artes, to accept
of it in good part. And as the foolish Painter in Plutarch, ha∣uing
blurred a ragged Table, with the rude picture of a dung∣hill
Cocke, willed his boy in any case to driue away all lyu
Cocks, from that his worthles workmanship, least by the com∣parison
he might be conuinced of ignorance: so I am to request
your worship, whiles you are perusing my Pamphlet, to lay a∣side
out of your igh, whatsoeuer learned inuention hath here∣tofore
bredde your delight, least their singularitie reflect my
simplicitie, their excellence conuince mee of innocence. Thus
hoping you will euery way censure of me in fauour, as one that
dooth partake some parts of a Scholler. I commit you to the
care of that soueraigne content, which your soule desireth.

