



INgenuous honorable Lord, I know not what blinde custome methodicall an∣tiquity hath thrust vpon vs, to dedicate such books as we publish, to one great man or other; In which respect, least anie man should challenge these my papers as goods vncustomd, and so extend vppon them as forfeite to contempt, to the seale of your excellent censure loe here I present them to bee seene and allow∣ed. Prize them as high or as low as you list: if you set a∣nie price on them, I hold my labor well satisfide. Long haue I desired to approoue my wit vnto you. My reue∣rent duetifull thoughts (euen from their infancie) haue been retayners to your glorie. Now at last I haue en∣forst an opportunitie to plead my deuoted minde. All that in this phantasticall Treatise I can promise, is some reasonable conueyance of historie, & varietie of mirth. By diuers of my good frends haue I been dealt with to employ my dulpen in this kinde, it being a cleane diffe∣rent vaine from other my former courses of writing. How wel or ill I haue done in it, I am ignorant: (the eye that sees round about it selfe, sees not into it selfe): only your Honours applauding encouragement hath power to make mee arrogant. Incomprehensible is the heigth

of your spirit both in heroical resolution and matters of conceit. Vnrepriueably perisheth that booke whatsoe∣uer to wast paper, which on the diamond rocke of your iudgement disasterly chanceth to be shipwrackt. A dere louer and cherisher you are, as well of the louers of Po∣ets, as of Poets themselues. Amongst their sacred num∣ber I dare not ascribe my selfe, though now and then I speak English: that smal braine I haue, to no further vse I conuert, saue to be kinde to my frends, and fatall to my enemies. A new brain, a new wit, a new stile, a new soule will I get mee, to canonize your name to posteritie, if in this my first attempt I be not taxed of presumption. Of your gracious fauor I despaire not, for I am not altoge∣ther Fames out-cast. This handfull of leaues I offer to your view, to the leaues on trees I compare, which as they cannot grow of themselues except they haue some branches or boughes to cleaue too, & with whose iuice and sap they be euermore recreated & nourisht: so ex∣cept these vnpolisht leaues of mine haue some braunch of Nobilitie whereon to depend and cleaue, and with the vigorous nutriment of whose authorized commen∣dation they may be contiually fosterd and refresht, ne∣uer wil they grow to the worlds good liking, but forth∣with fade and die on the first houre of their birth. Your Lordship is the large spreading branch of renown, from whence these my idle leaues seeke to deriue their whole nourishing: it resteth you either scornfully shake them off, as worm-eaten & worthles, or in pity preserue them and cherish them, for some litle summer frute you hope to finde amongst them.

