



RIght Worshipfull, it was a preposterous custom of the Pharisees to sound a trumpet when they did their almes, as if the act could not bee knowne, vnlesse all the world were summoned to take notice: nay, that God which bids vs giue almes in secret, can find a time both to eclipse the glorie of that action, published with so loud an alarum, and also to make the

praise of well-doing breake forth as the light, though before neuer so much hid∣den; and that not onely at that day when the Lord shall come, who will bring to light the hidden things of darkenesse, and then shall eue∣rie man haue praise of God1. Cor. 4. 5.; but euen in this life often, the good workes of some are manifest beforehand, to their praise among mē.1. King. 18. 13. Was it not told my Lord (saith that Noble Courtier) how I hid an hundred men of the Lords Prophets by fiftie in a caue, and fed them with bread and water? Yes Oba∣diah; thou couldst not doe it so priuily, but Eliah knowes it, and many more too, euen all Gods people, which shall therefore for euer call thee blessed. Renowned Sir, as God hath giuen you a large portion in this worlds good, so (which is no lesse a gift2. Cor. 8. 1.) haue you an heart inlarged to com∣municate to the necessities of others. Your bountie extends to many (as I am credi∣bly informed); one I can speake of, much oblieged to your Worship in this kind, euen mine own selfe, who for some yeeres haue had a liberall allowance from you. A

worke though not done by stealth as was Obadiahs (for God be thanked it is now no treason to feed the Prophets, or the sonns of the Prophets), yet not so knowne as might be wished deeds of that nature were to the better prouoking of this cold age: but God hath at length prouided you an Obadiahs reward, a publike commendati∣on for a priuate good desert, occasion be∣ing offered mee to beare witnesse of your charitie before all the Church, euen as many as to whom this booke shall come. Which I mention as to testifie my true thankeful∣nesse, which smothers not a benefit when it ought to bee spoken of, so to shew the world my warrant for presuming to dedi∣cate the ensuing Treatise to a personage so eminent, so taken vp with publike af∣faires. But besides this, the good affection and respect you bare to the Author while he liued, makes me hope you will bee as forward to patronage his Worke, as you haue been found willing to be helpefull to his sonne. And indeed (Right Worship∣full) the worke for the subiect matter of it

is such, as may worthily challenge all rea∣dinesse in you to countenance it: it treates chiefly of faith, that royall grace, the E∣lects peculiar, so pleasing to God, so con∣tended for by the Saints, which to defend is the highest honour of Princes, to liue by the chiefe glorie of Christians. But why goe I about to shew the worth of that, which none can know but those that haue it? Oh! those that haue tasted how good the Lord is, whose soules are sweetly refreshed with that peace that passeth all vnderstan∣ding, rauished with those toyes vnspeakable and glorious, who are strong to ouercome the euill one, the world, themselues, haue power to worke righteousnesse, obtaine promises, yea, to doe all things through Christ that strengthe∣neth them (and all this can beleeuers doe); such best know what faith is, and how much they owe to God the Authour, and the instruments it pleaseth him to vse in this blessed Worke. Amongst other helps this Treatise may be one to all that list to vse it; penned by one, who (to say no more) himselfe liuing by faith, and feeling

in his owne experience the sauing effects of that heauenly gift, knew what he said when he intitled it, A Jewell of toy, and peere∣lesse pearle. The earthen vessell which brought this pearle is now broken; bro∣ken doe I say? or rather made whole for euer, cast anew in the mold of immortali∣tie, and filled with that glorie whereunto it was prepared. Had it pleased God to haue spared him longer, my comfort had been the greater, and this work perfecter: yet such as it is, to Gods people it was in∣tended, and from them I for my part durst not detaine it. It was no childs part in Micah to steale that siluer, which his mo∣therIudg. 17. had dedicated to the Lord, (shee pre∣tended) though indeed to an idolatrous vse; much lesse were it warrantable for me any way to seeke to keepe backe, what my Father bequeathed to the Church, to so good an end. And this I say, though but a mite, yet if cast into the Lords Treasurie, when God accepts it, no good man will disdaine it: though but a few barly loaues, yet it is good they should be distributed,

when through Christs blessing thousands may be fed thereby. If any man shall think the Treatise might be spared, because of the commonnesse of the subject, faith and repentance being the ordinarie theames of mens Sermons and writings, I wish him to consider, whither the Israelites did well to be angrie, when rising in the morning they found Mannah fallen againe about their tents, of which before they had had such plentie. Well, Iohn 6. 32. 33 Moses gaue them not that bread from heauen, but God the Father giues vs the true bread from heauen; for the bread of God is he that commeth downe from heauen, and giueth life to the World, the same is receiued by faith, that bred by the Word; and this, how soeuer through Gods vnspeakable mercie to this Nation, the Presse and Pulpit so much sound with it, is a blessing to be imbraced with all thanke∣fulnesse, not loathed for the commonnes. But if this suffice not, let him answere Christs interrogatorie; When the Sonne of man commeth, shall he find faith on the earth? If no faith, surely as little repentance?

Shall then Gods Seedes men withdraw their hand, because much hath been sowne alreadie, when as so little comes vp? Nay verily, so many as truly beleeue on the name1. Iohn 5. 13. of the Son of God, wil acknowledge they stil neede Saint John should write vnto them, that they may beleeue on the name of the Sonne of God: as for the world that abides in vn∣beleefe, the truth of God where it shines most clearely, shall haue that effect which Christ foretold the Spirit of Truth, the blessed Comforter should haue at his comming, euen to conuince it of sin, becauseIohn 16. 19. they beleeued not on him.
Neither, I hope, will the manner of handling vsed by the Authour, and the kind of phrase farre from affectation, or the entising words of mans wisdome, I hope (I say) this will not offend any, who are content their faith should stand not in the wisdome of men, but in the power of God.
But I returne to you (most worthie Knight) to you principally I offer this Treatise, this field (if so I may call it) wherein the Pearle of faith is discouered.

It is not for me to teach you how you are to account thereof; your wisdome can∣not but approue that high estimation, the Merchant in the Gospel had of the Pearle. This onely I wish, that as you abound in outward treasures, so you may be rich in the faith, and consequently heire of the king∣dome which God hath promised to them that loue him. And certainely if that bee true, that faith workes by loue, then are you not without witnesse, being well reported of for your loue to the truth, and such as walke in the truth. Onely goe on (honou∣red Sir) to deserue well, and heare well of the Church of God. If thus you shall bee content with those 24 Elders (Apoc. 4.) to cast your earthly dignitie at the feet of the Lambe, improouing all to his behoofe, to the aduancing his glorie, and countenan∣cing Religion; If with that worthy King Dauid, in way of thankfulnes to the Lord, who hath done so great things for you, you shall reflect your goodnesse vpon his Saints, those excellent on earth, this shall lift you vp in true honour and reputation a∣mong

men in this world, and be found to your immortal praise and glory in the day of the Lord Iesus: yea, vpon you shall come the blessing of those, who blesse all such in the name of the Lord as are friends to Sion, and seeke the peace of Ierusalem. To this I from my heart say Amen, and the Lord out of Sion blesse your Worship, and grant you to see the good of Ierusa∣lem all the daies of your life. So for euer stands bound to pray, and

