



GOOD Reader.
I heere present thee with a Transla∣tion of one of the spi∣rituall Bookes of the learned, and pious Bellarmine, memorable in all future Ages. But before I proceed further, I would wish thee call to mynd, that two things necessarily concurre to the perfection, and consummation of a Good Christian. The first is a true and Orthodoxall fayth, residing in the vn∣derstanding; The second a deuout and vertuous life, resting in the Vill. Tou∣ching the first, it is recorded in sacred Writ: That without faith it is im∣possible
 to please God, Heb. 11. and of the other we thus read, Decline from euill and do good. Psal. 36. Now this Blessed deceased Cardinall (whose happy Soule I most humbly beseech to pray for me, his poore Client) en∣deuouring to forestall (as it were) & surprize the contrary wayes leading to mans perdition, did first for the in∣struction of Christians of this Age in true fayth, write his learned Tomes of Controuersies, for their worth de∣seruing to be stamped in letters of Gould, and for their continuance to future ages, in Characters of Brasse, or Marble, threatning therin a totall profigation, or rather extinguishment of all present Nouellisme.
After this his labour accomplished, & himselfe growing into greater yea∣res, then did he turne his penne to write certain spiritual Treatises who∣ly breathing deuotion and Sanctity, & teaching the way of performance of the foresayd Precept of declining from Euill, and doing Good. Among which his deuout Discourses, he made one of the Ioyes of Heauen, entituling it: De aeterna Felicitate Sanctorum; The which booke translated into English,
 I do now present vnto thee. In thy se∣rious perusing whereof, thou wilt rest astonished at the proceedings of most Worldlings, who are so wholy buried in Earth, as that wheras Man is borne Heyre to the Kingdome of Heauen (for wee reade to our comfort, that we are Heyres of God, and Coheyres of Christ, Rom. 8.) Neuertheles diuers of them do euen breathlesly labour & toyle in seeking to adde earth for their Sonnes to inherit; and yet are of such nicenes and delicacy themselues, as that they will not once stirre a foote, that (not their Sonnes, but) themsel∣ues may inherit, not Earth, but the true Land of promise, I meane the kingdome of God; but in lieu thereof though their leading a wicked lyfe, become inheritours of Hell fyre and euerlastinge damnation. But to re∣turne to the most worthy Bellarmine. In the reading of this his Booke thou shalt doublesly fynd him not to act Moyses, who was permitted only to shew the Israelites the way to the Lād of Promise, & not to enter with them therein; but rather Iosua, who con∣ducted them into the Land, and also entred with them; which Land was
 but a Type or adumbration of the Ce∣lestiall Land or Country heere discour∣sed of.
Touching my course held in tran∣slating this Treatise, thou mayst be aduertized, that I haue translated it faythfully and truly. Bellarmines gra∣uity scorns to vse in his Writings any flowers of youthful Oratory; but only writes, whatsoeuer it pleased God to dictate vnto his spirit: Therefore I should haue wronged him, and his worke, in disuesting it of its owne pu∣rity and easines of stile, by new cloa∣thing it in forced and borrowed robes of speach. No, let Bellarmine be euer suffered to speake in the dialect of Bel∣larmine, that is grauely, and persua∣dingly; for since his wordes are dar∣ted out of a fyery deuotion and chari∣ty, they therefore are most persua∣ding; and if he speaketh persuadingly, no doubt he speaketh eloquently; since Persuasion is the But, or scope of true Eloquence.
I know full well that Translations in this our fastidious age, are sleighted or little regarded; and that highly pri∣zed, which commeth heat out of the forge, or mint of a Mans owne wit,
 and inuention. Let those men whome God and their owne endeauours haue enriched with such high Talents, hap∣pily employ them to the good of Gods Church; I am not emulous of their due reputation▪ and deserued prayse gay∣ned thereby: I content my selfe with the loely title of a poore Translatour, a not being able to performe more: On∣ly I desire to do good thereby. Neuer∣theles to Apologize, and speake in de∣fence of Translatours, I may be bould to say, that they in some sense may be sayd to be the Authours of other mens Works by them translated; seeing they are Authours and Causers, why diuers (ignorant in the Latin Tongue) though benefit of their Translations, do participate of the contents of the sayd Works translated, of which o∣therwise they would neuer haue ta∣ken notice. And thus a good Transla∣tour is a good Enginer, since he ope∣neth and isloseth the Mynes of the hidden, and goulden Treasure of other Mens learning.
And thus leauing thee to the perusing or rather meditating of this goulden Booke, If thou be Catholike, & reape any profit therby I intreat thy Prayers
 to God in my behalfe, for the remissiō of my infinite sinnes. This I speake not, by way of Ceremony, and for fashion sake, as it is often vsuall to di∣uers in their Epistles Dedicatory to do; but most humbly & earnestly beseech of thee this fauour; & if it shall please his diuine Goodnes out of his boūd-les mercy, to call me (before thy death) to the most happy place of Eternal Fe∣licity (of which this Booke intreateth) I will not there forget to requite this thy Charity shewed me.

