


GEntle M. William, that learned writer Rhenish Wine and Sugar, in the first booke of his Comment vpon Red-noses hath this saying: veterem ferendo iniuriam inuitas nouam, which is as much in english, as one Cuppe of nipitaty puls on another. In moyst consideration whereof, as also in zealous regard of that high countenance you shew vnto Schollers, I am bold in stead of new wine, to carowse to you a cuppe of newes: which if your worship (according to your wonted Chaucerisme) shall accept in good part, Ile be your daily O∣rator to pray that, that pure sanguine complexion of yours may neuer be fa∣misht with pot-lucke, that you may tast till your last gaspe, and liue to see the confusion of both your speciall enemies, Small Beere and Grammer Rules.
It is not vnknowne to report, what a famous pottle-pot Patron you haue beene to olde Poets in your daies, and howe many pounds you haue spent (and as it were throwne into the fire) vpon the durt of wisedome, called Alcumie: Yea, you are such an infinite Mecaenas to learned men, that there is not that morsell of meate they can carue you, but you will eate for their sakes and accept very thankefully. Thinke not though vnder correction of your boone companionship, I am disposd to be a little pleasant, I condemne you of any immoderation either in eating or drinking, for I knowe your go∣uernement and carriage to be euery way Canonicall. Verily, verily, all poore Schollers acknowledge you as their patron, prouiditore, and supporter, for there cannot a threed-bare Cloake sooner peepe forth, but you strait presse it to be an outbrother of your bounty, three decayed Students you kept at∣tending vpon you a long time.
Shall I presume to dilate of the grauity of your round cap and your dud∣gion dagger? It is thought they will make you be calld vpon shortly to bee Alderman of the Stilliard. And thats well remembred, I heard say when this last Terme was remooued to Hartford, you fell into a great study and care by your selfe, to what place the Stilliard should be remooued: I pro∣mise you truely it was a deepe meditation, and such as might well haue be∣seemed Eldertons Parliament of noses to haue sit vpon.
A Tauerne in London, onely vpon the motion mourned all in blacke, and forbare to girt her temples with iuie, because the grandam of good fellow∣ship was like to depart from among them. And I wonder very much, that you Sampsownd not your selfe into a consumption with the profound cogita∣tion of it.
Diu viuas in amore iocisque, whatsoeuer you doe, beware of keeping dyet. Sloth is a sinne, and one sinne (as one poyson) must bee expelled with ano∣ther. What can he doe better that hath nothing to doe, than fall a drinking to keepe him from idlenes?
Fah, me thinkes my ieasts begin already to smell of the Caske, with tal∣king so much of this liquid prouinder.
In earnest thus: There is a Doctor and his Fart, that haue kept a foule stinking stirre in Paules Churchyard: I cry him mercie I slaundred him, he is scarse a Doctor till he hath done his Acts: this dodipoule, this d, this professed poetical braggart, hath raild vppo mee whout wit or  certaine foure penny-worth of Letters, and three farthing-worth of ∣nets: now do I meane to present him and Shakerley to the Queene 

taker for Coatch-horses: for two that draw more equally in one Oratoriall yoke of vaine-glory there is not vnder heauen.
What say you Maister Apis Lapis, will you wirh your eloquence and credit shield me from Carpers? Haue you any odde shreds of Latine to make this lettermunger a Cockescombe off?
It stands you in hand to arme your selfe against him, for he speaks against Conny-catchers, and you are a Connycatcher, as Connycatching is diuided into three parts, the Verser, the Setter, and the Barnacle.
A Setter, I am sure you are not, for you are no Musitian: nor a Bar∣nacle, for you neuer were of the order of the Barnardines: but the Verser, I cannot acquite you of, for M. Vaux of Lambeth brings in sore euidence of a breakefast you wonne of him one morning at an vnlawfull game called riming. What lies not in you to amend play the Doctor and defend.
A fellow that I am to talke with by and by, beeing told that his Father was a Rope-maker, excused the matter after this sort: And hath neuer saint had Reprobate to his Father? They are his owne wordes hee cannot goe from them. You see heere hee makes a Reprobate and a Ropemaker, voces conuertibiles. Go too, take example by him to wash out durt with inke, & runne vp to the knees in the Channell, if you bee once wetshod. You are a∣mongst graue Doctors, and men of iudgement in both Lawes euery day. I pray aske them the question in my absence, whether such a man as I haue describde this Epistler to be, one that hath a good handsome pickerdeuant, and a pretty leg to study the Ciuill Law with, that hath made many proper rimes of the old Cutte in his daies, and deserued infinitely of the state by ex∣tolling himselfe and his two brothers in euery booke he writes: whether (I say) such a famous piller of the Presse, now in the fourteenth or fifteenth yeare of the raigne of his Rhetoricke, giuing money to haue this his illite∣rate Pamphlet of Letters printed (whereas others haue money giuen them to suffer themselues to come in Print) it is not to bee counted as flat simony, and be liable to one and  same penalty.
I tell you, meane to trounce him after twenty in the hundred, and haue about with him with two staues and a pike for this geare.
If he get any thing by the bargaine, let whatsoeuer I write henceforward be condemned to wrappe bumbast in.
Caic to me good lucke, for I am resolutely bent, the best bloud of the broth  pledge me in vineger. O would thou hadst a quaffing bowle, which the Gawens scull should containe a peeke, that thou mightst swap off ary draught to the successe of this voyage.
By whatsoeuer thy visage holdeth most pretious I beseech thee, by Iohn Dats soule, and the blew Bore in the Spittle I coniure thee, to draw out , and giue me nothing for the Dedication of my Pamphlet.
Thou art a good fellow I know, and hadst rather spend ieasts than money, Let it be the taske of thy best tearmes, to safeconduct this booke through the enemies countrey.
Proceede to cherish thy surpassing carminicall art of memory with full cuppes (as thou dost) let Chaucer bee newe scourd against the day of bat∣taile, and Terence come but in now and then with the snuffe of a sentence: and Dictum pua, Weele strike it as dead as a doore naile: Haud terunij estimo, We haue cats meat and dogges meat inough for these mungrels. Howeuer I write merrily, I loue and admire thy pleasant witty humor, which no care or crosse can make vnconuersable. Still bee constant to thy content, loue poetry, hate pedantisme, Vade, vale, caue ne titubes mandataque frangas.

