



AFter that I had duely weighed, and consi∣dered the different natures and conditi∣ons of men, and saw every one walking a severall way, delighting himselfe in Velle suum  nec voto vivitur vno.
Pers: Sat. 5. a severall thing, according to his phantasie and inclination; one in one

thing, another in another; the Gram∣marian in his Etymologies, the Poet in his Poetrie, the Rhetoritian in his Elo∣cution, the Sophister in his Aequivocati∣ons, the Logitian in his syllogisticall De∣monstrations, the Musitian in the va∣rietie of his notes, the Geometritian in his Triangles and Quadrangles, the Ar∣chitect in his Labyrinthes, the Mercibus hic Italis, mutat sub sole recenti
Rugosum piper, & pallentis grana Cumini. Apo∣thecary in his Drugges, the Anatomist in his Dissecations, the foolish Oneiropo∣lus in his Exposition of Dreames, the Cynicke in his privacie, the Hic satur, irriguo ma∣vult turgescere somno. Epicure in his taste, the Stoicke in his dulnesse, the Huntsman in his dog, the Hic Campo indulget; nunc alea decoquit; ille
In venerem est putris.
Pers: ibid. Faulk∣ner in his Hawke, the Artificer in his toole: how some are taken with Anti∣quities, some with Novelties, some with Tragedies, others with Comedies, some with invectiue Satyres, others with smooth Encomiums; and how ge∣nerally the most are Censorious, and are ever pulling the Scribe by the Quoties dicimus, toties de nobis iudicatur; nec quic∣quā est tam insigne, nec tam ad diuturnitatem memoriae stabile, quàm id quo delique∣ris: adest enim serè nemo, qui non acuriùs at{que} acriùs vitia in dicente, quàm recta videat.
Cicero. haire,

Cùm ipsi quidem ne pilum habent, nec in∣genij nec judicij. These things, I say, after that I had duly weighed, & with∣all considered, how difficult a thing it is for the most curious Cooke and Ca∣ter, to please the severall palates of so Tres mihi Convivae propè dissentire videntur,
Polcentes vario multùm di∣versa palato.
Horat. lib. 2. Epist. disagreeing a multitude; I began to withdraw my pen from my paper, and in the midst of my journey Palinodi∣am canere; but when I called to minde what I learnt in my minoritie Simul ista mundi Con∣ditor posuit Deus,
Odium at{que} regnum.
Senec. in Tbeb. quòd regium est audire malè, cùm facias benè; and how Neptune, Vulcan, and Mi∣nerva, together with the most noble Princes, Peeres, and Potentates, haue not beene free from the censure of Fabulatisunt de Momo, quòd cùm Iudexinter Neptu∣num, Vulcanum et Minervam electus erat, eos ommes reprehendebat; nam cùm Neptunus Taurum, Vulcanus hominem, Minerva domum effinxisset; Neptunum repre∣hendebat, quòd cornua in capite, & non ante oculos vel in humeris posuit; Vul∣canum, quia non fenestratum pectus hominis fecit, vt sciri possit, quot doli essent in pectore: Minervam quia do∣mus non effet trusaulis quae potest facilè circumagi, si a∣liquid mali accidexit. Momus, and the iniurious calum∣nies of ignominious persons, I went on with a greater alacritie, & thought it no disparagement to beare my part with such good Company in such a Consort. The calumnies of Momus are as the prayses of Mecaenas: Diog: Lacti in Antist. An∣tisthenes

did never more suspect him∣selfe, than when he had an ignomini∣ous man applaud him, then, then did he vse to enquire what evill he had committed. Simile gaudet suo simili: e∣very thing delighteth it selfe in that, with which it hath a sympathie in qualitie and condition. Sues margari∣tam non curant, gallus Aesopi escam ma∣gis quàm hyacinthum invenire desiderat; spernit bos muscas: it is the nature of swine to wallow in the mire, of Cocks to preferre a graine of Corne before the richest Diademe, of Oxen and Asses to hae the Muses.Sucton: in Caligula. Caligula hated Virgil and Livie, and would haue banisht them out of all Libraries, but he had his reward for it, he dyed like a Qui equos potiùs & ca∣nes alere malunt quàm eru∣ditos, talis erit corum obi∣tus, qualis equorum et ca∣num. Nee post mortem ma∣lus eritipsorum nomé, quàm vrsi et Leonis.
Aeneas Silv. Epist. 111. beast, & had not so much as a pen to remember him, but with detestation and hatred. De amore Alexandri erga Homerum, de Archilao in Euripidem, de African in , de Lysandro in So∣phocleus.
Vid. ibid. Alexander loved Ho∣mer, Archilaus Euripides, Africanus Ennius, Lysander Sophocles, and they

lost nothing by it, their noble acts and atchievements haue bin well set forth, with deserved Encomiums to all suc∣ceeding ages. Let the dogs barke then, I know it is the nature of them so to doe, and they cannot live but they must doe it; let the Asses kicke, it is hereditary to them.
Invideat Satanas, et Zoïlus ilia rumpat.
Let the envious man split himselfe with Calumnies; it is as naturall to him as for the Salamander to liue in the fire, or the Camelion by the ayre. I Moverer, si de me Mar∣cus Cato, si Lalius sapiens, si alter Cato, si duo Scipiones malè loquerentur: sed ma∣lis displicere, laudariest, non potest enim authoritatē ha∣bere sententia, vbi qui dam∣nandus est damnat: Seneca Vnde Poëta;
Contemni à itulto dedecus. este nego. envie him not, but pittie him, and wish him not to hurt himselfe, but to remember what befell to Phoebus his Crow; let me haue the loue of Mecae∣nas onely, which I shall esteeme like vnto Ajax his Buckler & Achilles his Speare, to defend me against the Ca∣ligulaes of our time, and the hydra-like

multitude. Vnto you therefore (right Honorable) (seeing that I find it hath beene a Custome of olde to dedicate Churches to God, and Bookes vnto good men) as vnto a true Mecaenas fuit inter do∣ctos nobilissimus, inter no∣bilissimos doctissimus, inter vtrós{que} optimus. Mecae∣nas doe I present these my Miscel∣lanea. The malefactor betakes him∣selfe to the Sanctuarie for refuge, be∣cause he hath offended; the Colit hic reges, calcet vt omnes;
Tantúm vt noceat cupit esse potens.
Senec. in Hercule Octaeo. oppres∣sor shrowds himselfe vnder the wings of Greatnes, that he may the more freely exercise his crueltie. Innocen∣cie onely seekes refuge, that shee may be free from oppression. The hearbes haue no greater enemies than the weeds, nor Art than ignorance, which is ever fraught with malice and de∣traction. Against these enemies onely these intellectuall fruits desire shelter; whilest the Shepheard is at hand, the sheepe are in safetie; whilest the Chic∣kens are vner the wing, the Vulture will not proffer to make a stoope; but

when the Shepheard is carelesse, and the Henne leaves her Chickens, then doe the Wolues and Vultures ty∣rannize, and sport themselues in the ruines of those harmelesse Crea∣tures.
These fruits of mine would wander in the world, as sheepe without a Shepheard, subject to the Vide Concionem le∣porinam in apologo, quo o∣stenditur, fortem orationem, nisi viribus sit suffulta, à po∣tentioribus derideri. blasting of every carping Zoilus and Momus, did not some vigilant eye watch and defend them. Wherefore I haue Commended them to your Lordships safe protection, and tuition. I must ingenuously confesse, when I had fully finished this Discourse; and weighed it in the ballance of judge∣ment, and found it a little too light, I felt some reluctation in my selfe, whether I should present so worthy a Peere with so vnworthy a present; but when I considered; In minutissi∣mis gemmis nonnunquam esse maximum

pretium, that with noble mindes small things are highly valued and estee∣med; and how I had often found, In maximis personis melitam quandam morum suavitatem, summa cum digni∣tate copulatam elucere; I resolved to runne the adventure of it. Receiue it then (Right Honorable) with the same hand with the which it is deli∣vered, and accept of it as a small pledge of his service, who may per∣haps sometimes present your Lorp. with some Ni Satyram sapiat, nil Epigramma juvat.
Owen.
Si me posthac jugem et se∣dulum lectorem vis efficere, quaeso vt Satyricè, potiùs quàm lyricè mecum agas.
Petrarch.
Qui corripit hominem, gra∣tiá consequitur, potiùs quàm qui blanditur linguâ.
Prov. 23.
Nihil peccat, nisi quòd nihil peccat (dixit Plinius de quo∣dam Oratore suiseculi) de∣bet enim orator erigi, attolli, interdū etiam estervescere, efferri, ac saepè accedete ad praeceps.
Plinius epist. 26.
I Iuvenal thy ierking hand is good,
Net gently laying on but fet-bloud:
So Surgeon-like thou doest with launcing heale,
Where nought but launcing can the wound avayle:
O suffer me amongst so many men,
To tread aright the traces of thy pen!
Pernassus. sharpe and soure things, but never with malicious venemous things; So shall you more and more oblige him that presumes to offer this toy and trifle vnto you, that if any more serious thing happen in future times to come within his thoughts, to make your Lorp. partaker of it, and at all times to desire vnto your Lorp: health and prosperitie, accu∣mulated with yeares and honors, the

proper fruits and effects of so noble, just, and generally approved and ap∣plauded proceedings.

Vale, & Deus Optimus Maximus annos tibi longissimè producat, eventus omnes secundet, & am∣plioribus donis indies impleat.


Interpone tuis interdum gaudia curis,
Vt possis facilé quemvis tolerare laborem▪



