



EXcellent accomplisht Court∣glorifying Lady, giue mee leaue with the sportiue Sea Porposes, preludiatly to play a litle before the storm of my Teares: to make my prayer ere I proceed to my sacrifice. Loe, for an obla∣tion to the rich burnisht shrine of your vertue, a handful of Ierusalems mūmaniz'd earth, (in a few sheets of waste paper enwrapped,) I here (humi∣liate) offer vp at your feete. More embellished should my present be, were my abilitie more a∣boundant. Your illustrate Ladiship ere this (I am perswaded,) hath beheld a bad florish with a Text pen: all my performance herein is no bet∣ter. I doubt you will condemne it for worse.

Wit hath his dregges, as well as wine, Diuinitie his drosse. Expect some Tares in the Treatise of Teares. Farre vnable are my dimme Ospray eyes, to looke cleerely against the sunne of Gods truth. An easie matter is it for any man, to cut me (like a Diamond) with mine owne dust.
A young imperfect practitioner am I in Christs schoole. Christ accepteth the will for the deede. VVeake are my deedes, great is my will. O that our deedes onely should bee seene, and our will die inuisible. Long hath my inten∣ded will (renowned Madam,) been addressed to adore you. But words to that my resolued will, were negligent seruants. My woe-infirmed wit, conspired against me with my fortune. My im∣potent care-crazed stile, cast off his light wings, and betook him to wodden stilts. All agilitie it forgot, and graueld it selfe in grosse braind for∣malitie. Now a little is it reuiued, but not so reui∣ued, that it hath vtterly shooke off his danke vp∣per mourning garment. VVere it effectually re∣cured, in my soule-infused lines, I would shewe that I perfectly liued, and in them your praises should liue: whereas now onely amongst the dead I liue in them, and they dead all those that

looke vpon them. That which my Teare-stub∣bed pen, in this Theologicall subiect hath at∣tempted, is no more but the course-spun webbe of discontent: a quintessence of holy complaint, extracted out of my true cause of condolement.
Peruse it iudiciall Madam, and something in it shall you finde that may pierce. The world hath crowned you for Religion, pietie, bounti∣hood, modestie, and sobrietie: (rare induments in these retchlesse daies of securitie.) Diuers wel∣deseruing Poets, haue consecrated their ende∣uours to your praise. Fames eldest fauorite, Mai∣ster Spencer, in all his writings hie prizeth you. To the eternizing of the heroycall family of the Careys, my choisest studies haue I tasked. Then you, that high allied house, hath not a more deere adopted ornament. To the supportiue perpetu∣ating of your canonized reputation, wholly this book haue I destined. Vouch safe it benigne hos∣pitalitie in your Closet, with slight enteruiew at idle houres: and more polished labours of mine ere long shall salute you. Some complete history I will shortly goe through with, wherein your perfections shall bee the chiefe argument. To none of all those maiesticall wit fore-stalling

worthies of your sexe, my selfe doe I apply but you alone. The cunning courtship of faire words, can neuer ouer-worke mee to cast away honor on anie. I hate those female braggarts, that contend to haue all the Muses begge at their dores: and with Doues, delight euermore to look themselues in the glasse of vaine-glorie, yet by their sides, weare continually Barbary purses, which neuer ope to any but pedanticall Para∣sites.
Diuine Ladie, you I must and will memorize more especially, for you recompence learning extraordinarily. Pardon my presumption, lend patience to my prolixitie, and if anie thing in all please, think it was compiled to please you. This I auouch, no line of it was laide downe, without awfull looking backe to your frowne. To write in Diuinitie I would not haue aduentured, if ought else might haue consorted vvith the re∣generate grauitie of your iudgement. Your thoughts are all holy, holy is your life: in your heart liues no delight but of Heauen. Farre be it I shold proffer to vnhallow them, with any pro∣fane papers of mine. The care I haue to worke your holy content, I hope God hath ordained, to

call mee home sooner vnto him.
Varro saith, the Philosophers held two hun∣dred and eight opinions of felicitie: two hun∣dred and eight felicities to me shall it bee, if I haue framed anie one line to your liking. Most resplendent Ladie, encourage me, fauour mee, countenance me in this, and some-thing ere long I will aspire to, beyond the common mediocri∣tie.

