



RAre adorned Mistris, whom al that know ad∣mire,
and not malice it selfe but doth honor.
True Stemme of Nobilitie, out-flourishing
your sexe or your age; pure saint-like pict∣ure
of Sobrietie and Modestie, sacred and immaculate
virgin Starre, cleare (if anie liuing) from the originall sin
of thought: giue me leaue (though contemptible & ab∣iect)
once more to sacrifice my worthles wit to your glo∣rie.
Manie feruent vowes and protestations of obser∣uance,
your bountifull gracious deserts towards mee,
haue entrancedly extracted, which yet remaine in the
o're vnwrought and vntride. As touching this short glose
or annotation on the foolish Terrors of the Night, you
partly are acquainted from whose motiue imposition it
first proceeded, as also what strange sodaine cause neces∣sarily
produced that motion. A long time since hath it
line suppressed by mee; vntill the vrgent importunitie of
a kinde frend of mine (to whom I was sundrie waies be∣holding)

wrested a Coppie from me. That Coppie pro∣gressed
from one scriueners shop to another, & at length
grew so common, that it was readie to bee hung out for
one of their signes, like a paire of indentures. Where∣vppon
I thought it as good for mee to reape the frute of
my owne labours, as to let some vnskilfull pen-man or
Nouerint-maker startch his ruffe & new spade his beard
with the benefite he made of them. Accept of them, ex∣quisite
Mistris, as the best testimonie I haue yet to expres
the dutie that I owe. A little more leasure and prosperi∣tie,
will beget better labors; wherein I will enioyne my
spirit to be a peremptorie combattant for your praises, a∣gainst
all vulgar deepe flattred mediocritie, and pale pe∣nurious
beautie; which giues dull Painters store of gold
to solder vp their leane dints of deformity. Against your
perfections no tung can except. Miraculous is your wit;
and so is a acknowledged by the wittiest Poets of our age,
who haue vowed to enshrine you as their second DELIA.
Temperance her selfe hath not temperater behauiour
than you; religious Pietie hath no humble hand-maide
that she more delights in. A worthie Daughter are you
of so worthie a Mother; borrowing (as another Phoebe,
from her bright Sunne-like resplendaunce) the orient
beames of your radiaunce. Into the Muses societie her
selfe she hath lately adopted, & purchast diuine Petrarch
another monument in England. Euer honored may she
be of the royallest breed of wits, whose purse is so open
to her poore beadsmens distresses. Well may I say it, be∣cause
I haue tride it, neuer liu'd a more magnificent La∣die
of her degree on this earth. A number of men there

bee, who pursuing the high way to the Indies, haue pe∣risht
in lingring expectation before they could get the∣ther;
but a neerer Cut haue I found in her extraordina∣rie
liberalitie and bountie: and to a companie of my mal∣content
companions will discouer if it please them, how
to be gainfull and gain-coping nauigators if they will in∣sist
in my directions. Now I must tie my selfe to the Prin∣ters
paper limits, and knit vp much thankfulnesse in few
words. Deare Mistris perswade your selfe, that no srow∣ning
misfortune or anye accident whatsoeuer, shall di∣uorce
me from your reuerence. No more I craue in re∣quitall,
but that you would put me in the checke-roule
of your remembrance, and not salute me as a stranger.

