


AS I was desirous (wor∣shipfull Company) to sa∣tisfie the request of di∣uers, and sundrie zea∣lous Catholiques, so am I not forgetfull, of your tried fréend∣ship in a forraine Countrie, constrained at that present time to craue the same, and to shewe my selfe, no lesse thank∣full, then mindfull of your proued cour∣tesie. Duety bindeth me to sende vnto you this Oration and Sermon, made at Roome, written then in Latin, but nowe in Englishe, for the profite and commoditie of the ruder sort (who vn∣derstand not the Latin tongue) which Oration and Sermon, notwithstan∣ding, I purpose God willing, by the per∣mission of my Superiours, as it was once written and registred at Roome
in the Latin tongue, so to write it a∣gaine, and bring it to light. My intent and purpose is not, in writing this booke, to gape for popular applause, and to hunt after prayse: but to signifie to the world what I haue bene, and what I haue doone. I haue been a member of the Romishe Church, as it is well knowne to many, who bothe knewe me, and were conuersant with me at Roome. And at my first comming to that Babilonicall Cittie, I was suspec∣ted to haue bene an Hereticke (for so tearme they Christian Catholiques) wherefore by the meanes of an Eng∣lish man, named Salomon Aldred, some∣time a dweller in Birchen lane in Lon∣don, who was maried, and had bene in my company in France, I was brought by Doctor Morice, prouider of the Eng∣lish Hospitall at Roome (for his owne discharge) to the house of the Romishe Inquisition. Where béeing examined in matters touching Religion, I confessed what I had bene in tyme past, an eni∣mie to theyr Religion. When as by the processe of my wordes, the Domi∣nican Inquisitour had intelligence of
my former state. He commaunded Doctor Morice to bring me before him the day following, which was the .xxvi. day of Aprill, in the yeere of our Lord. 1578. So the morning after I came vnto him, with Doctor Morice: then the sentence of the fowre Cardinalles, which are appertayning to that office, was this, that I should write what I could (with frée lybertie of spéeche and pardon graunted) against the Pope, and against his Religion. Béeing thus commaunded, as I would auoide the Popes indignation and displeasure, to write what I could against his swel∣ling tytle and presumptuous name of supremacie: I spared neyther him, neyther yet, his vnstable Religion, as héerafter in the Sermon made at the cō∣maūdement of the fowre Cardinals and this Dominican, it shall appéere. Which Sermon & Oration were brought be∣fore the Pope, and the rest of the Cardi∣nals, béeing then in the Consistorie, Whē the Pope vnderstoode howe that I had bene reconciled to his Church before the time I came to Roome: he pardoned my trespasse, and gaue me a Signatura, not
forgetting to giue me thankes, and pro∣fessing fréendship, he willed a Letter to be written to the Rector of the Eng∣lish Seminarie, that he should ascribe me to the number of the rest. And the Letters béeing deliuered and read, both of him and Cardinall Morone, Protec∣tor of the English house: I was admit∣ted the .xxviii. day of May, to the Socie∣tie of the English Students. For so much as the Religion of the Papists is grounded vpon lyes, so can they doo no∣thing else but lie, and report vntruelie. Wheras a Masse-monger, who writeth that he did not only knowe me, but also lyued with me, falsely reporteth in his Lybell set out against me, That I was recommended from Cardinall Paleote of Bolonia, to Doctor Lewes, that by his meanes I might finde some releefe at the Popes handes: this reporte is as true, as nowe I am in Wales.
As touching Doctor Lewes, there was not so much as one word spoken, much lesse a Letter written vnto him: But this is ye onely fruite of theyr Religion, to speake more then trueth is, to slaun∣der him wrongfully, that dooth degene∣rate
from them, to hate him vndeser∣uedlie, that findeth out theyr treachery, maliciously to backbite him yt hath for∣saken the dregges of their idolatrie. For that I haue with an vnfayned heart, re∣noūced the Romish faith: what slaunde∣rous reportes, the Papistes haue had of me? in what hatred they haue me? how maliciouslie they speake of me, God knoweth, from whome no secrete is hyd? and so doo I, acknowledging my selfe cléere and frée from those crimes, wherewith I am vniustly accused, these theyr malicious and slaunderous repro∣ches I haue procured against me, for telling the trueth. And for the breach of the fowrth decrée of Pope Leo, which was no crime in déede, for that the de∣crée is vnlawfull. Should I excuse the murther by this Pope committed, as the murthers of Sampson? Should I commend the deuillishe practises, and cruell attempts of this Pope Gregorie, to haue the lyues of the true Christians in the lowe Countries abreuiated, theyr countrie spoyled, theyr houses burnt, theyr Cattell slaine, theyr Daughters rauished, theyr Sonnes murthred, euen
in the sight of theyr Fathers, and the Parentes eyther made slaues, or else constrayned before the due course of nature, to yéelde vp the ghost? Of all this calamitie, iniurie, and murther, the Pope is the onely cause and au∣thor. This I knowe to be true, this I am able to auouch, this I am not a∣fraide to write. Should I prayse your Pope béeing an adulterer? or should I cloake his faulte, as the adulterie of Iacob? Should I thinke your Pope to be a holie Virgin, hauing two Ba∣stardes, the one made a Cardinall, the other a Marquesse? the one a ruler of his Castle, Santo Angelo, the other Grand mon Signior of his abyding Pallace. Should I coullour his robberies, as the robbing of the Egiptians? what rob∣beries hath he done in the Churches of Italie, to mayntaine the English Se∣minaries, bothe at Roome and at Rheimes in Fraunce? he hath compel∣led the most part of all Abbottes, and Priours, and other Ecclesiasticall men, to disburse him about a twelue month past, a summe of money.
Because I haue spoken truely, bothe
by your Pope and by you Papistes, therefore you maliciouslie slaunder me: but in the Booke of Pilgri∣mage, I wyll blaze out your armes, and so discouer your treacheries, the lyues of your Monkes, and Iesuites, among whome I haue lyued, shall be knowen to all England: the hypo∣crisie of your Cardinalles, and Bys∣shoppes, with whome I haue bene con∣uersant, no man there is but shall knowe.
The Sodomiticall life of your Prelats, repeate Monkes, Theatines, Iesuites, Cardinals, and Byshops, and others, I will sound out with the larum bell: The discention of your Colledge, the e∣mulation of the Englishe Studentes, the orders of the house, theyr man∣ner of lyuing, theyr canckred hatred towardes theyr natiue Soyle: all these thinges recited in the Booke of Pilgrimage, shall be truely and not maliciouslie handeled, for the greater detestation of your forged and fayned Religion, sproong vp from co∣uetousnesse and ambition.

I wyll haue an especiall care to the wordes which I shall write, least that in misreporting ought of you rashly, I incurre deseruedly, the displeasure of almighty God, and may not be frée of infamy, and the hatred of such as haue been trauellers, who knew them selues many things to be true, which I intend to bring to light, iustly I should pro∣cure. I would thou Papist hadst the same minde, not to haue excéeded the bondes and lymittes of trueth, because they thought to bring my name to dis∣credit by theyr vntrueths, they thought it good to scatter abroade theyr lying Lybels, to the ende that some, who are weake of beléefe, and others which are inclyning to Papistrie, might reiect my writing, and make no accoumpt of my sayinges: howe false theyr Lybel was, you may reade as followeth.
The first vntrueth is this, that where as be vntruely reporteth: That I was brought vp in Poperie, and therein con∣tinewed, vntyll for pouertie, passing o∣uer the water into the Weste partes of Englande, I became a Minister: Which is as true, as thou art a true subiect to
the Quéenes Maiestie, which is nothing so, for thou art an enimie to her Maie∣stie, and to her procéedinges. It is well knowne that none of my fréendes are Papistes, or that they should bring me vp in Papistrie: It is not doubtfull to a hundred and not so fewe, that before I went to the West countries, I studied at Oxenford, & remained in White Hall, otherwise called Iesus Colledge, one yéere, and from thence I wēt to Brazen∣nose Colledge, from the which Col∣ledge I departed, & came to my fréends, and there in myne owne Countrey, I taught a certayne Gentlemans chyl∣dren, for the space of one yéere & a halfe, and afterwardes I was made a Mini∣ster, and so passed ouer the waters, and serued a Cure which is named Withie∣combe, vnder one Maister Iones, Vicar of Tauntone, and from that place I went to Whitestauntone, and there continewed vntyll the tyme I passed ouer the Seas. And where as thou writest, That by learning three or foure of Maister Northbrookes sermons with∣out booke, I got mee some credite for preaching: With Maister Northbrooke
I neuer had conference, neyther recey∣ued any Sermon that euer he or any o∣ther made. Neyther were my wordes such at any time, that the people tooke me for a young Tobias, and a second Io∣nas. Neyther spake I at any time, that by meanes of simmony, I got me two Benefices. Your Religion consisteth on lyes, and you followe that Religion whereof the Deuill is Author, the fa∣ther of all lyes: You haue Letters Pa∣tents, and you haue the Popes dispen∣sation, to doo with an Hereticke (for this name you attribute to euery Christian) what your lyst, and what your pleasure is, to discredite him if you may, or to hurt him if it lyeth in your power, or to subuert and ouerthrow the trueth of the sacred Gospell you wyll not cease. I know what you be, I haue liued amōgst you, you can not further one good word to him that meaneth vprightly, & spea∣keth truely. Call to remembrance, haue you not vsed the lyke rayling spéech, and the lyke slaunders against a godlie and learned defendour of Christ his trueth, Iohn Iuell Bishop of Salisbury? you were not ashamed (so impudent you are) to
say, that béeing mad, he preached at Sa∣lisburie, and was commaunded to come downe from the Pulpit, for that he ray∣led on the people. Moreouer, that he wrote against his conscience, and dyed a Papist: that his man had told him, that he cited a wrong place of the Doctours: notwithstāding he lightly setting by his words, would néedes cite a thing which was not expressed in the Doctours. What they speake of others, with si∣lence I passe ouer, and how falsely they accuse them, all the world may iudge, reade theyr bookes against the lyues of faithfull and learned Ministers of God his holy word. I am not gréeued verie much, for that they haue vniustly repor∣ted of me, I arme my self with patience. I know their canckred stomacks is rea∣dy to doo me what displeasure they may, they are not able to prooue the least iote of theyr Lybell. How can they prooue that I haue had two Wiues? héere be some in London, and not fewe in num∣ber, that lyued in that Towne where I lyued and was borne: And besides that, knewe me wheresoeuer I dwelt in England.

But neyther they nor any other, knew that euer I was maried, if they can prooue that I was maried once, I wyll be theyr bond man as long as I liue. If they can prooue that I had two Wiues, I seeke but the extremitie of the lawe, yea, requyre death it selfe. I wyll tell them the places where my chéefest a∣bode was in Wales or England. In the common Schooles that were in that Sheere where I was borne, I was brought vp, vntyll I was of the age of sixtéene yéeres, and at that age I went to Oxenford, and from thence I retur∣ned backe againe to my Countrey, and abode at a place called Dunreuen, and from thence I went to Summerset, and stayed at Withiecombe, from the which place I departed and came to Whitstan∣tone, and from thence I departed and came to London, tooke shipping, and arriued at Antwerpe, where part of your Company abydeth, I lodged at an Inne not farre from the gate that goeth to Macklin.
In lying, he procéedeth farther: He sayth, that I became a Souldiour against the King, and vttered to the Prince of
Orainge, part what possiblie I could deuise, or what I heard in England a∣gainst the King, and attempted many most malicious thinges that waye: And that I reported not so, of my selfe mine Hostesse (who is an Englishe woman) may remember, that there was a Scho∣ler at her house, but not a Souldiour, such a one that gaue her Daughter a thymble in siluer, which I found in a Church: there I stayde not aboue fiue or six dayes, but dyrectly tooke my voy∣age to Dowaie. And whereas you say, That I found releefe at Cambraie, in deed of certayne Flemmish Prelates, I re∣ceiued some bountifulnesse, but of Eng∣lish men found no reléefe, for scarse they were able to reléeue them selues, so lytle estéemed they were of Citizens, who for the greater part were Christians. And for that you falsely say, That I fell into the hands of the Kinges side: That is as true as you saye, that you pray for the Quéene of England, where as you pray rather for the Quéene of Scottes, as héereafter it shall appeare. And where as you saye that I reported at Rheimes, That I was driuen out of Englande, for
my conscience sake. Who would thinke that I reported thus? where as before some of the Scholers, I feared not to pronounce our Quéene supreame head of England, and béeing examined of what Religion I was, I aunswered, a Protestant, for speaking the which wordes I was banished the Towne. And Doctor Allen, with the whole Se∣minarie, were commaunded to appéere before the Consuls, and Captaines of the Towne, and were like to be bani∣shed out of the Towne, onely for that they thought that the English men had succoured me, beeing a Christian. As for reléefe, I found not as much as a farthing, except a dinner amongst cer∣taine English Préestes, who kept such a rayling against my Lord Bacon who is dead, and whome they sayd should frit in hell: and against Sir Frauncis Wal∣singham, and against my Lord Burley, and against diuers others, whome they sayd, God would condempne and iudge to euerlasting paine. This dinner dyd me but lyttle good, for they were in a pelting chafe against the wise and faith∣full beleeuers of Christ his Gospell: they
were angrie also with me, for that I had sworne by the Masse, and had spo∣ken a worde or two in defence of Chri∣stian Religion.
From this Cittie I went to Gra∣noble, and there stayde with an Arch∣bishop thrée monthes, and from him I trauelled to Italie, and dwelt with the Bishoppe of Vigeuena, whose name is Alexander Cazalis, ye Popes Protono∣tarie, and kept all his Plate in custodie, and who would haue giuen to me a Ca∣nonship if I would haue staid with him during lyfe: which thing to be true, you your selues know that were Préestes at Roome, for thereof the Bishoppe wrote a Letter, and sent his man with me to Millaine to Doctor Parkar, who also wrote a Letter to the Scholers of the English Seminarie. This his looue towardes me, did I not obtaine in spea¦king vntrueth, but for that he had bene a traueller himselfe to forraine Coun∣tries, and had tried aduersitie him selfe, as he fell into the handes of his eni∣mies, vpon which cōsideration he tooke compassion on me, béeing a straunger, and in pouertie.

Moreouer, whereas thou writest, That I slaundered the lyues of the Bis∣shops, Ministers, and other professours of England. That is as true as they saye, that it is lawfull to rebell against our Soueraigne, for I neuer misrepor∣ted of any Bishoppes Chaplaines: how could I tell how Bishops & Ministers lyued? I neuer was conuersant with them: As for other Ministers, I must néedes confesse thus much I spake, that in the beginning of this Quéens raigne when Ministers were somewhat scant, through occasion well knowen, then there were certaine honest zealous mē of occupatiō, who supplied the roome for a time, but afterward by ye godly care of the Bishops, were otherwise prouided for, & learned mē placed in their roome, which being so néere driuen by casualty of the time, vpon the great godlinesse & earnest zeale of such men, did so order it while til they were better prouided for.
But whereas thou saydest, That I of mine owne freewill went to the Inqui∣sition, to obtayne greater credite: This is as true as thou sayest, That I presen∣ted my selfe, and accused my selfe that I
had beene a Papist: Where as it is well knowen, I was taken at Islington, and brought by a Pursuinant to the right honourable Sir Frauncis Walsingham, and by his commaundement was sent to the Bishop of London, and from him I was brought by the Pursuinant to the Towre of London.
So, as before I haue deelared, I was brought suspected an Heretick at Rome by Doctor Morice, to the Inquisition. But where as thou sayest, I neuer cea∣sed very spytefully, to detract and speak euyll of the Protestants: this is as true as the rest. But this I confesse, that I much discōmended the liues of such who outwardly bare great show of zealous Protestantes, and inwardly were craf∣tie and dissembling Papists, when they came in companye with any Prote∣stants, then they were as zealous as they themselues, but when they came in conference with Papists: they were as earnest in conscience as they like∣wise, carrying in one hand both fire and water, to deceiue the ignoraūt that did not mistrust them, & to séede the Diuell with that he would haue, against this
enormitie I did not a little inueigh, for that I thought it worthy of all repre∣hensiou. But as for otherwise defa∣ming the Protestants, thy wordes are most vntrue, and I neuer opened my mouthe to vse any such spéeches.
Moreouer, whereas you say: That I delighted in flattery. This you speake of mallice, and not of trueth, for I séeke to flatter none for preferment sake, as thou sayst I doo. Because I speake the trueth by thée, and such as thou art, therefore thou sayst I flatter: I gape not for preferment, neyther for any worldly pelfe, I will be contented with Gods prouidence, as he hath or dayned, so shall it be with me: happe well, or hap ill, the Lords name be praysed. To flatter any man for exhibition sake, I intend it not, let them doo as they list, and as God shall put in their mindes.
Whether I liue in myserie, or else otherwise, Gods wil I am not to resist, but accept all thinges patientlye, and speake well of the name of the Lorde, who scourgeth whom he will, and fa∣noureth whom he will.
And moreouer: Thou countest me
no better then halfe a foole, as others maye easilie perceaue, if they make try∣all of mee. Truelie, I confesse I had rather be counted a foole, and professe the trueth: then be named a wise man, and committe idolatrie. The tyme hath béene, that bothe thou and thy fel∣lowes had good hope of me, that I should be an instrument to mayntaine your idolatrous and superstitious Re∣ligion.
And where as thou sayst: That I was vnable to goe foreward in Logicque, or Philosophie. This procéeded not of the rudenesse of my capacitie: but of the mallice which Father Ferdinando, (the Prefect of the Englishe Semina∣rie) bare to the Welshmen: There were Batchelers of Arte, not permitted to beginne theyr course of Logicque or Philosophie, which is an vsuall thing at Roome for Batchelers, yea, & Maisters of Arte, eyther to be permitted to heare Rhetorique, or to beginne Logicque. And wheras thou writest, that I wrote in my booke: That I preached before the Pope. I wrote no such things, the booke is extant, who that wyll may reade it.
And there he shall finde that my wordes are thus in effect: Gentle Rea¦der, to ex∣cuse the fault of the Printer, and to discharge my selfe of the Papistes obiection a∣gainst me in this point: l giue you to vnderstand, that he mi∣stooke him selfe, in prin¦ting a Ser∣mon prea∣ched before the Pope, vvhereas I vvrote it, a Sermon pre¦sēted before the Pope. Wherfore I desire par∣don for his offence, and mine owne negligence, in not vsing more res∣pect in that place.I made an Oration and a Sermon at Roome, which was pre∣sented before the Pope and all his Car∣dinalles, with diuers other in the Con∣sistorie. And the same Oration and Ser∣mon (which was my Recantation cal∣led) and for the which the Pope gaue me thankes, & registred it in three great vo∣lumes, in the house of Inquisition. These wordes I spake, and these wordes are true: and there is one in London, who was at Roome then, and knewe of this my dooing, & knew me also, who will af∣firme the same to be true. Thou writest moreouer: That with vaine brags, I ex∣toll the Sermon which I made at Roome in the English Seminarie, vpon Saint Peters day last, Advincula. Thou art deceyued, I bragge not thereof, I made mention thereof onely for this cause, to signifie to the Readers, howe within thrée dayes after, I became sicke, and dispayred of my saluation, for that I mistrusted many points of that Romish Religion, and could not tell whether they were true or false. And where thou saist: That it was an exercise that Gram∣marians
vse. I studied positiue Diuini∣tie, and not Grammar, nor neuer dyd at Roome, and it was an exercise which the studentes in Diuinitie vsed. And where as thou sayst: Thou knowest who was at it, and laughed to heare such ridi∣culous stuffe as that was. To speake a worde or two to make laughter: it is the part of an Oratour, and it is the part of a Preacher.
But the same Latin Sermon dyd so content them at that present tyme, that they doubted not to saye, but that I should peruert many in England, and should become a profitable seruant to the Pope, and his Romish Sinagogue. How father Minister, a graue and lear∣ned Iesuite, commended my dooings, and sayd I was one of the best Oratours a∣mong all the whole rowt of Students: And as for to speake Latin, I taught yt most part of them all to speake true La∣tin, although they were farre from any Ciceronian phrase. They haue such blockheads that studie Philosophie, that in talke they vse an Accusatiue case, in stéede of a Nominatiue, and the Mascu∣line, in stéede of a Feminine gender,
and I wyll name them for your sakes, Master Dodipol Oliuerius, Master Dou∣ter, Doctor (I would say) Mushe, with twētie more: they are not able to make a true construction, betwixt the Nomi∣natiue case, and the Verbe, the Sub∣stantiue and the Adiectiue, the Relatiue and his Antecedent. Yet for all that, by meanes of theyr déepe Philosophie, they thinke to ouer-crowe our Studentes, héere in England. They that studie Diuinitie (when they are commaunded to make such an Exhortation as I haue done often, in your Seminarie of mis∣chéefe, for I can not say of learning, or yet of vertue. I would I could,) they ascend vp to the Pulpit with a brazen face, or a fooles vizarde: but they des∣cende with shame, and with discom∣mendation, some haue I séene of your company iollie Champions, went a∣bout to preach, but were not able to prosecute theyr matter: Wherfore they came downe from the Pulpitte, and left halfe theyr Sermons vnsayde, for that they had forgotten the residue of theyr Sermon: eyther for that they quafte too much Wine, or else that
they had supt too much pottage. Ex∣cept two (according to the report of Father Minister) of whome I spake, and who soone after Saint Peter, ad Vincula, his day dyed: There was not one amongst thrée score, that coulde preache as well as our common Tay∣lors and Shoomakers in England.
In déede, they excelled them in one point, for that they obserued more guyle and deceipt in theyr preaching, to intrap our Englishe men in the snares of idolatrie: then men of Occupation in persuading the people to decline from papistrie.
And whereas verie impudentlie thou sayst: I was a common game to the rest of the Studentes, who made me of∣ten to mount on a stoole, and to preach to them the Sermons, which I had vt∣tered in England. Thine owne fel∣lowes, such as are taken, denie the same to be true, as they doo the rest of the chéefest pointes of thy infa∣mous Lybell: he that was my Cham∣ber fellowe, maye reporte this to be a lye, as the rest of thy Articles.

If he report truely, this is all, that he or any other is able to auouch: That béeing merelie disposed, I once (but neuer af∣terwardes) stoode vpon a stoole, (as the Iesuits doo when they preach, standing vpon bulks, or else vpon stooles) and de∣maunded of him, who is nowe prisoner in ye Towze, to giue me what Theame he would, and so be dyd, and therevpon made a discourse Extempore. Where∣fore it is vntruth, to report that I prea∣ched a Sermon, vttered once before in England, and to say that I dyd it oftner then once. The lyke thing many of you haue done, whose names I could recite: but because ye matter is of no more im∣portance, I wyll not name them at all. Good man lyer, (I knowe not thy name, for that thou hast not written it, belike thou wert ashamed to name thy selfe, least thou mightest be taken, and thy treacheries espied.)
Wheras thou sayst, That I lingred be∣hinde my fellowes, at a Towne in Vm∣bria, called Fuligne. That is as true as the Pope hath made thee a Cardinal, for I left them & their bay Horse, ouerladen with the Popes blessinges: hauing a
gréeuous disease, and not able to goe, in the plaine feeldes I forsooke your com∣pany. And if so be that this sicknesse had not chaunced vnto me: yet had I occa∣sion offred me to forsake their company, for they made me pay eleuen Iulyes for seuen, and caused me to pay for their mans charges as well as they. What charity you pelting & wandering Masse∣mongers haue, I wyll declare.
There came this last Summer, a Nor∣thren Scholer to Roome, who could not be admitted to the Colledge, but the Rector taking compassion on him, wyl∣led the fowre Préestes (whereof I suspecte thee to be one) who went in my company (for thrée dayes space) to giue this poore Scholer a Crowne a péece, among whome also I gaue him a Crowne. But howe vncharitably they vsed him in the iourney for thrée dayes, you may reade as followeth.
They caused him all the way to leade theyr Horse by the brydle, or to driue him forwardes, yet would they not pay for the mans meate, nor suffer him to ryde, béeing verie sicke, and scarse able to stande on his féete, and payde
more then a Stranger would haue paid vnto them.
The thirde day of our iourney, it so befell when I departed from them, that this youth was so faint, that hée layd himselfe downe on the ground, in the middle of the feeldes, not able to mooue a foote farther. When they sawe that he was able to leade theyr Horse no longer: they forsooke him, not bydding him farewell, neyther giuing him so much as the value of one small pennie.
Behold what charitie Papistes haue, behold theyr inhumanitie, to theyr own countrey-man: Héere in England, they shewe such counterfeyt holinesse, that a mā would scarse thinke that they would play the Varlettes, they deceyue the people wounderfullie. But if our Eng∣lishe men had béene so much conuer∣sant among them as I haue béene, and had tryed theyr manners as I haue done: they would beware howe to giue credite to such hypocriticall fel∣lowes. But if our countrey men, wyll bestowe the reading of the booke
of Pilgrimage, I wyll lyuelie paint foorth the crafte and subtiltie of our Englishe Studentes beyond the Seas, I will describe the horrible abuses crept into the Churche of Roome, which I haue séene with mine eyes, and vnder∣stoode of many that were credible per∣sons.
And whereas thou sayst: That the first Sunday after my comming to the Tower, I refused to repayre to the Church. I graunt it so to be. But whereas thou sayst: The second Sun∣day following, I pronounced this Re∣cantation of mine, which is nowe in print: That is as true as a Catte bringeth foorth whelpes, for Maister Lieuetenant and my Kéeper, with ma∣ny moe, knowe that to be vntrue.
And whereas thou sayst: That if I shall want preferment heere, I wyll goe beyond the Seas againe. Who wyll beléeue this to be true: where as I haue béene once pardoned already, for that I haue béene of the contrarie Religion, all men knowe that the Popishe lawes are against them that reuolte twyse from theyr Religion.

If I returned vnto Roome againe, or to the Popes dominions: I should be condemned, eyther to the fire, or to the Gallies. Wherfore I meane to abide in England, hap well or hap yll, Eng∣land hath no fellowe, better it is to liue in pouertie, then to be whipped on the Seas, and to be taught to rowe, hauing therevnto as good towardnesse, as Tom Collier thy fathers man.
And where as more impudentlie then an Asse thou writest: That the most parte of my reportes, touching your treacheries and malicious practises, a∣gainst the Queenes Maiestie, and her ho∣nourable Councell, is vntrue. If I wrote any thing otherwise then the trueth was: why dydst thou not make mention thereof, that I might haue purged my selfe of infamie, and vn∣trueth? But I wrote no more then trueth gaue place: but in the booke of Pilgrimage I wyll discouer, God wyl∣ling more at large, your treasonable attemptes, against the Crowne and dignitie, against her honourable Coun∣cell, and against her common weale.
I haue spoken, and doo speake, and wyll speake nothing else but trueth of you: But it is as harde a thing to heare trueth of you, as it is for the Pope to giue his Miter away to poore beggers. And finally, where as thou concludest thy Lybell with these wordes: That there shall neuer want vacabounds and runnagates for gaine. If thou wylt haue these wordes to haue relation to thy selfe, and to thy brothers (who in déede are Vacabounds and runnagates from Tauerne to Tauerne, from Towne to Towne, from Shiere to Shiere.) Thou sayst well and truely, and I goe not a∣bout to disprooue thy wordes: but if thou meanest of me, I am no runna∣gate, I stay in one place, and am not af∣frayde to shewe my face, in the presence of you all, if I could tell where to finde you. But you are not farre vnlyke to the théeues, who in the day tyme sléepe or lurke in Caues, and in the night tyme raunge abroade. I thinke you meete bothe together on the plaines of Salisburie: the theefe he séeketh but the purse, but you are not contented
with the purse, but seeke to bereaue a man of his body and soule. We had more néede by a great deale (if we haue respect to the safetie of our bodies and soules) to take héede that we be not de∣ceyued, by the craftie iugling of these wandering Popish Préests.
Thus haue I aunswered to euerie particular Article contayned in the in∣famous Lybell against me written, and I thought it good to containe the same in this Epistle written vnto you wor∣shipfull Company, for this cause onely. For that they say: That I attempted many most malicious thinges, betweene the Prince of Orainge, and the King of Spaine. If you heare and vnderstand it of credible persons, that I was such a fellowe as they report me to be: I desire you, as not compelled, to make mention thereof in your Letters, and conuay it to London. I am sure and certaine, that there is no man can a∣uouch that I was such a fellowe, as they make me to be. I confesse my life hath béene wicked and lewde, but neuer so wickedlie and lewdlic bent, as the
Papists doo report. They say, I am irre∣ligious, I am altogether giuen to vngod∣linesse, God hath forsaken me, there is no hope of my saluation. This is but theyr rashe iudgement, God forgiue them, I wishe them well to doo, God graunt them a penitent heart, and a tongue to speake trueth. I am not the first that hath béene wrongfullie slaundered, nor shall be the last.
There is a Popishe Préest héere in England, that reported that he knewe him selfe, bothe noble men, worshipfull, and Preachers héere in this Land, to be of the householde of Atheisme: But as I told, so tell I againe, that Papists can doo nothing else but lye, and false∣lie report.
I leaue héere to trouble you any far∣ther, beeing otherwise occupied with waightier affayres, then to obtaine fitte opportunitie and leasure to peruse this rude Letter of mine. Pray that I may stand fast to the glorie of his name, and the good example of others, whose lyke conuersation I doo heartily wishe in the Lord.

And so desiring your good prayers to Iesus Christe (worshipfull Company) to assist me with his grace, that I may persenere in this his gratious calling, to the end, and in the end: The Lord Iesus gouerne and guide you, in true obedience of his glorious Gospell, to the glorie of his name. Amen.

