



IVuenall in his daies complained of the multitude of writers, saying: —Tenet insanabie multos Scribendi Cacothe.
And that Patrons were wearied in protection of their labours. There be also many in this our age, that ad prelum tanquam ad praelium runne to the presse, and subscribe to their indeauours: yet learning was neuer so friendlesse, that she so wearied her fauorers, but that alwayes his works s  worthy Maecenas. I haue in this litle booke discouered the follies of irreligious Hippocrites and dis∣semb, by which the Church hath beene lipended, God  beene offended, and th and grieuously pun∣nished. God auert his future plges, and turne his Iu∣stice into mercy. GOD raise vp (especially now) trusty Chusa, prouident Ioseph, and iust Samuel, bold Eli∣as, playne Iohn the Baptist, instant Paule, and feeding




Peter: exploding & extirpating wicked Achitophel, couetous Iudas, blind Elimas, and paltry Magus: and graunting that the fig▪ leaues of Authority, Parentage, Selfe loue, flattery, and dissembling, may bee pulled off from Madam Placentia, and the Noble Lady Verona may shew her liniaments in vninuested and vnobscured nakednes: So that with true harts & pure Souls euery one may bring the Arke of God into their houses, while they may; that their houses may be blessed, as those hou∣ses vvhere the Arke was: and that this famous Cittie vvith the adioyning places, now after their long infec∣tion, and late sorrovvfull sighing of that Hei mihi quanta despe decidi, may (as it was saide of Christ) gustare post fella fauos: to the glory of God, Church, Common-ealth, and our priuate good.
 oldned by good notice taken of your loue to Learning and vertue, to passe this my Labour vnder the proteion of your name. Not doubting but the sub∣iect being good, it shall find your fauourable and good acceptance, and bee thereby sorovvded from the preiu∣e of Contempt. If you looke on it, and like it, my in∣deauours haue a condigne counterpoise. In which hope I commit your orship to the Al∣mighty.

