



RIght Worshipfull, those exquisite and most cu∣rious workes, which Aholiab and Beza∣leel wrought in the Temple, were to bee seene long after their times, and remained as testimo∣nies of their skil to them that did sur∣uiue: And we see also in common ex∣perience, that earthly buildings, when the workmen be dead, oft times stand still as monuments of their art, and meanes of much good to them that
liue after. In like manner it were to be wished that the workes of the skil∣full builders vp of Gods house (when they themselues bee gone) might still continue as memorials of their skill in spirituall Architecture, and as in∣struments of much good to succeeding generations.
Among diuers workes of worthie workmen, who haue of late very arti∣ficially and cunningly wrought a∣bout the temple of Christ, I am sure that some of the Manuscripts of that iudicious Diuine Master Thomas Newhouse, may well for their art be valued with the best in their kinde, and cannot doubtlesse but bee very precious in your eyes, who loued their author so well, and very profitable to many others, by whō they be so much desired. For this cause (hauing some of them by me) lest I should seeme in∣iurious either to their author, in sup∣pressing that which might make so much to his praise, or to the publique good, in keeping backe those things are much desired as vsefull to Gods
people, I thought it a meete thing to publish these few to the making vp of this little volume.
Among the manifold true harted and entirely affecting friends this godly man had, I doubt not but that I might single out diuers, of whose kindnes I might presume for defence of his workes, and may iustly feare for passing them by, to be challenged as a man vnmindfull of their loue; but the time is comming wherein I hope to meete with good opportunitie of giuing them satisfaction in this kinde. In the meane while, I thinke it my dutie to remember your Worships with these; which if I had neglected to doe, I see not but that I should in some measure haue been blemished with the tincture of vnthankfulnes. I therefore doe offer these Sermons to your view, and also to your protectiō, hoping that you shal finde them wor∣thie of both. If you respect their au∣thor, they bee his something; if me the publisher, alas they be my no∣thing: yet sure such is your ingenui∣tie,
as that I doubt not but that you will receiue them as pledges of loue, both his and mine.
Indeede I acknowledge the parti∣cular respects whereby it hath pleased your Worships to ingage me vnto you, doe farre exceed all that poore recom∣pence, which the slender dedication of these few sheetes of paper can possiblie make; neither would I that the same should bee taken as any way equali∣zing your desert, but onely I desire herein to giue you partly a signe of my dutifull and most vnfained affection towards you, and partly also a memo∣riall of the Author, your departed friend, who is now in blesse; not doub∣ting but that your Worships will please to giue a kinde acceptance to this my poore offer, not weighing the worth of the thing it selfe, but rather (as you are wont) the minde and good will of him that giueth.
Now for these two Sermons, in them the Author doth chiefly treate of these two things: Baptisme, and the feare of God: the first, a signe
of our insition into Christ, and a bles∣sed seale of the couenant of grace. The second is called in Scripture, the Re¦uerence of Iehouah, the fountaine or wel-spring of true and heauenlie wisedome.
As touching Baptisme me thinkes when wee seriously consider with our selues what weighty things were done therein, and mutually past twixt God and vs, we cannot but see it to be vt∣terly a fault, so easily to cast aside all thoughts about it, and to make it such a stranger to our meditations as vsu∣ally wee doe. For mine owne part I know not whether any one thing be more worthie of a Christians consi∣deration then is his baptisme, for by it as by a conduit it pleased God to conuay vnto vs the best of his fauors. For example, whereas by nature (as scripture speakes) we were aliants frō God, and sonnes of wrath,
Ephes. 2.3.12. when wee were baptized in the name of the Fa∣ther, Sonne and holy Ghost, wee were brought into an holy fellowship with the blessed Trinitie, and were admit∣ted




into the familie of Christ, euer af∣ter to remaine as adopted sonnes in the house of the most high God; A most blessed condition.
Againe,
Ephes. 2.1. whereas by nature wee were all dead and rotten in sinne, and altogether deuoid of the life of grace, in baptisme wee receiued quicknance from the spirit of life the holie Ghost. And whereas our poore soules were beggerlie clad with natures cloath, which is (God wot) nought else but a torne and rotten ragge of old Adam, in baptisme we laid aside that old, and put on a new and most costly coate, euen the rich robe of Christ his righ∣teousnes, whereby the whole Church (the spouse of Christ) doth stand as a glorious obiect in the sight of God for euermore. Lastly, whereas by nature we were most filthie and loathsome in Gods eye, no leper or lazer so lothsome to vs as wee to God: for as the childe new borne lieth tumbling in blood, so we in sin, in baptisme we were washed by the cleane water of the spirit of God, and thereby freed from the spots
and guilt of sinne,
2. King. 5. as Naaman was from his leprosie in the riuer Iordan.
Thus by our baptisme, of strangers to God we became euen Gods associats; of limbes of the diuell, members of Christ; of beggers brats poorely clad, Kings sonnes richly attired in the righteousnes of God; of polluted and vncleane, pure and amiable:  thus were we blessed when wee were bapti∣zed with water and with the holie Ghost.
Now further see wee what great things did passe from vs to God in our baptisme; surely as God therein became a God vnto vs, so wee became a people to him, wee renounced the world, and proclaimed a defiance to sinne and Satan, wee dedicated our selues, soules and bodies to the seruice and worship of the most high; and as Dauid vowed to keepe Gods com∣mandements, so did wee by a solemne vow in the sight of men and Angels, binde our selues to beleeue in God, and to become as it were Gods apprentises, or rather the loyal subiects, and faith∣full
souldiers of our Lord Iesus to fight vnder his colours, and maintaine his quarrell against all aduersarie power of our saluation and his glorie. And thus wee see that in our baptisme the Lord did great things for vs, and we promised great things to God againe; how requisite a thing is it therefore, nay how necessary that we should now and then admit of thoughts about our baptisme, that so wee might haue a sense and feeling of the comfort of those blessings of God which there we receiued, and also be quickned vp to the carefull performance of what wee haue so solemnely promised. For this very cause I wish that this little trea∣tise concerning this argument, might be as a Remembrancer to put vs in minde of these things which are of such weight, and so neerely doe con∣cerne vs.
As touching that other Sermon, in it wee may see very exactly and iu∣diciously handled that rare and singu∣lar vertue so oft spokē of in the Scrip∣tures, and called by this name, The
feare of God, a most excellent gift of the spirit, as vsefull almost as any other to help forward a Christian life, and no lesse gainfull in bringing in Gods blessings.
As for a Christian life, as we know it is chiefly spent in two things, that is, abstaining from euill, and ende∣uouring that which is good; or as Isaiah speakes, in ceasing to doe euill,
Isaiah 1.16.17. and learning to doe well. Now both these bee streames flowing from one and the same sountaine, viz.
Prou. 3.7. the feare of Iehouah. Salomon saith, The feare of the Lord is to hate euill, Prou. 8.13. there is Gods feare the cause of surceasing from euill. He fur∣ther saith, Pron. 14.2. He that wal∣keth in righteousnesse feareth the Lord: where the wise man reasoneth from the effect to the cause, & shewes that Gods feare is it that causeth a man to walke righteously, that is, to doe well: and indeed there was neuer any man that feared God, but ende∣uoured in the course of his life to please God in well-doing. So then as we see
man that rides, in ordering his horse doth vse a bridle & a spurre, a bridle to restraine him if hee bee too free, a spurre to pricke him on forward if he be dull; so in ordering our liues, the feare of God is as a bridle to curbe vs from rushing into sin, and as a spurre to pricke vs on forward, and quicken our slow and lazie natures to that which is good and pleasing to God.
Yet moreouer as this is a vertue of great vse in directing vs to heauen, so I may truly call it, as the Apostle doth call godlinesse, great gaine, for it brings in with it the abundance of Gods blessings, in so much as whosoe∣uer will attempt to trade therewith, shall finde her reuenewes to bee very great: and that which Salomon saith of Wisedome, Prou. 3.14. will be verified of her, viz. that her merchā∣dise is better then the merchandise of siluer, and the gaine thereof is better then gold. What good is there almost that a good man can set his heart a wishing or desiring, but may bee ob∣tained (if God thinke meete) so be it
he will be a fearer of God, the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it Psalm. 34. that nothing shall be wanting to them that feare him; would we liue long and inioy many daies on earth, which is the foundation of all earthly com∣forts: the wise man saith,
Prou. 10.27. that the feare of the Lord increaseth the daies. Would we faine be rich, and had in high esteeme and repute among men? Prou. 22.4. The reward of the feare of the Lord is riches, and glorie. Are wee desirous to know the holy Scrip∣tures aright, and to bee acquainted with the deepe secrets and hidden councels of the most high God? The Prophet Dauid saith;
Psal. 25.14. The secret of the Lorde is reuealed to them that feare him. Doe we long after Gods fauour, and that his louing counte∣nance may shine vpon vs, without which nothing in this world is worth the hauing? The Prophet saith, the louing countenance of the Lord indu∣reth for euer on them that feare him. Would we be truely happie and blest of God both in our selues and in our
Children we leaue behinde vs? Que∣stionles, our onely way for this purpose is to feare the Lord, Blessed saith the Prophet, Psalm. 112.1.2. is the man that feareth the Lord, his seede shall be mightie vpon earth, and the gene∣ration of the righteous shall be bles∣sed. And most excellent is that sen∣tence, Psalm. 25. His soule shall dwell at ease, his children shall inherit the land. Loe thus and many other waies shall that man be blessed that feareth the Lord.
Thus I thought good (Right Wor∣shipfull) to touch the titles of these two Sermons in these sewe words, wherein you may see the worth and weight of the subiect matter they are about, and so be led to a further peru∣sing of them to your soules good.
Now the God of heauen who hath alreadie seasoned your hearts with his feare, and set you apart as sancti∣fied vessels to beare his glorious name, hold on your hearts in a wise and zea∣lous profession of his truth, and grant that you may see your seruice to God
abundantly rewarded, euen with the best of his fauours, vpon your selues, and vpon your most hopefull posteri∣tie for euer. From Norwich, Nouemb. 15. 1613.

