



RIGHT Worshipfull, though the Word of God be the Bread of life, yet the Ministers of Gods word are his Stewards to deuide it: and though the same Word be the Water of Life, yet they are his Con∣duits to conuey it. If the Bread in a loafe be not cut out vnto the hun∣gry,
 an Infant that is hungry may dye with a whole loafe in his hands: and if the Water in a fountaine be not drawne out to the thirsty, a childe may perish with a bottle in his armes.
How necessary it is, that the one should be cut out to the hungry soule, and the other drawne out to the thir∣stie spirit, they know best that haue the care of their owne family, and how necessary it is that both the bread and water of life, should be carued and fil∣led out to all such as hunger and thirst after righteousnesse, they know well who haue any care of Gods Family.
We that liue in this Kingdome, haue good experience of Gods fauour towards vs in this respect. We haue many a faithfull Ahimelech amongst vs, who rather then Dauid should pe∣rish for hunger, will giue vnto him the Shew-bread of the Sanctuary: We
 haue many a worthy Minister amongst vs, who rather then Dauid should dye for thirst, will with the hazard of their liues giue vnto him of the waters of Bethlehem.
When I enter into a serious medita∣tion of the Maiestie of Gods Word, and withall consider that all is as no∣thing without application, methinkes I doe say, here is salue: but where is the hand that must lay it on the soare? Here is Balme: where is the finger that must poure it into the wound? Here is Physicke: where is the Phy∣sitian? And here is the Poole of Be∣thesdah: where is the friend that will help vs in? Doe we looke for an hand? the hand of Gods Minister will lay on the salue. Doe we desire a finger? The finger of Gods Minister will poure in this oyle. Would we send for a Physi∣tian? the Art of Gods Minister will administer this Physicke. And if at
 the descent of the Angell, we would faine be put into the Poole of Bethes∣dah, who will sooner doe it then this Man of God?
I cannot deny, but that by reading of Gods word a man may receiue much comfort: nay, I am perswaded that by the same, he may be excellently prepa∣red to get sauing knowledge: yet prea∣ching is that alone ordinary meanes, which God hath sanctified for the sal∣uation of his Children, and to make them wise vnto that saluation.
By preaching, the Minde of the ig∣norant is enlightned: the Memorie of the forgetfull is strengthened: the Heart of the obstinate is mollified: the Affections of the vntoward are reduced: the Will of the peruerse is restrained: and the Life of the vn∣godly so changed, that at the voyce of a simple and sinfull man, he cryeth out with the Iewes in the Acts, Men and
 brethren, what shall I doe to be sa∣ued? This made Dauid to say, I am the man: Saul to say, I haue sinned: and euery priuate conuert to say: God is in these men indeed.
Were it not for preaching of the Word, where were the vnderstanding of it? where were the consolation by it? where were direction from it? Without it how should hard places be made plaine? plaine be applyed? re∣pugnances in it be reconciled? or op∣pugners of it be confuted? Take away Preaching, and then downe with our Schooles of learning, our Houses of prayer, our Obedience to Superi∣ours, our Loue to equals, and our right to heauen.
I am now in a Labirinth, I cannot well come out. The Preaching of the Gospell, is the power of God vnto sal∣uation: the Pillar of God in our iour∣ney to Canaan: the Angell of God
 to bring vs out of Sodome: the Mes∣senger of God to prepare his way: the Trumpet of God, to cry downe Ie∣richo: and the Hammer of God to driue in the nayle of piety, and to breake out the braines of profane∣nesse.
How much we are beholding to the Preachers of the Gospell we shall then know, when the Lord shall send such a Famine of this Bread, that though we goe from East to West we shall not finde it: or such a Drought of this water of life, that we shall runne from Citie to Citie, and shall not get it. But blessed be God, we are now full: and I wish it may neuer be said vnto vs, Woe be vnto you that are full.
Amongst many Cities in this fa∣mous Kingdome, beholding vnto God for the Ministery of the Word, you in your Citie are not the least beholding. Euery Sabbath day, in many of your
 Churches is the Word preached, and almost euery day in the weeke, the preaching of the same is painfully con∣tinued.
And surely, when I consider the paines required of your Citie preach∣ers, the vncertaine allowance proui∣ded for them, the meane estate they must euer needs liue in, and that sound Learning which hath beene, and is now in many of them, I beginne to thinke, that it is eyther the sweete∣nesse of the ayre, or the ciuilitie of your people, or the contentednesse of their mindes, or their desire to doe good, or the special blessing of almigh∣ty God, that continues thus amongst you the great meanes of saluation.
But howsoeuer the Arke of Gods Couenant be beautifully set vp in your seuerall Temples, yet to you of S. An∣drewes hath God appeared in excee∣ding beauty. How many hungry soules
 in that Citie are almost daily fed at your table? How many thirstie spi∣rits doe drinke ordinarily of your Ci∣sternes? And I doubt whether any one Parish in the Kingdome hath been so successiuely blessed with learned and laborious Ministers, as you haue beene, for almost threescore yeeres.
If you forget that faithfull Seruant of Christ Mr. More, who for twentie yeeres together preached amongst you almost euery day in the weeke, besides his priuate conferences in your seuerall families, surely then I feare me there is a state risen vp amongst you, like vnto that of the Egyptians, whose King knew not Ioseph. But I know you remember both him and his.
And can you then forget this wor∣thy man, who for the space of foure∣teene yeeres past, liued partly a Prea∣cher, and partly a Pastor in your Congregation? Concerning whom I
 might say much (and if a learned Fa∣ther doth not deceiue me, it is pietie to commend the dead,) but I must not make an Epistle larger then the booke. I liued with him in a famous Col∣ledge, I laboured with him in your holy Citie, for the space of fiue yeeres and more: and I euer obserued him diligent in his studie: wittie in dis∣course, apprehensiue of truth, deepe in knowledge, powerfull in preaching, vigilant in practising, and a perfect patterne of grauitie and sobrietie in the whole course of his life and conuer∣sation. And if the spirit of that iudi∣cious Mr. Perkins might be found in any Diuine, I thinke it appeared in him.
It is the Art of Arts to preach well, to diuide the word, and to saue soules: hee excelled in this Art: and that he might grow in this knowledge, he tooke such paines, that like vnto a
 seruiceable candle, in giuing light to you, he consumed himselfe.
Though there be too many Bookes in this scribling age, and the paper is worth more then the things that are written in them, (as Socrates once said, when he would write nothing) yet of some mens Labours there are too few. For though they should write but that which before hath beene written, yet by reason of their credit in the Church, the soundnesse of their iudgement, the vprightnesse of their life, their experience in cases of con∣trouersie and conscience, and that loue which their auditors haue had to them and their doctrine, they might by wri∣ting doe much good.
Wee reade not indeede that our Sauiour Christ committed of him∣selfe any thing to writing: yet his Apostles hee made as his Hand and Secretaries, to commend the
 New Testament to the Church of God.
Our aduersaries the Papists, daily doe assault the Church with deadly weapons; the poyson of Aspes is vnder their pennes: if these Fooles were not answered to their Folly, they would be too proud.
Our Aduersary the Diuell casteth daily new deuised darts into the minds and Consciences of people: if he should not be resisted by the Sling of Dauid, hee would soone triumph ouer the Is∣rael of God.
True it is indeede, that by the mouth of the Preacher wee receiue much good, and the liuely voyce giues much life to discourse: but when, after hearing, wee may with our eyes peruse that which our eare hath heard, wee shall the bet∣ter ponder, and know, and remem∣ber, and affect that which other∣wise
 we might vtterly forget: and make our hearts as rich in grace, as our Bookes are full of goodnesse.
To this end, that which was preach∣ed vnto the eare, in the assembly of many learned Diuines, and by name, before that Reuerend Doctor Red∣man, late Bishop of your Diocesse, I am bold to publish to your view: that by the finger of this Herculean labourer, you may know what the whole man was.
And the same I am bold to dedi∣cate to your Worship, as a testimonie of your long loue to me, and my desire to be thankfull to you.
When I liued in your Parish a pain∣full Preacher, I found seeming fauor at the hands of some curious, but substantiall fauour of diuers courte∣ous and true meaning people.
How in the first yeere of my com∣ming, I was entertained by that graue
 Senator, Mr. Francis Rugge, then the third time Maior of that happy Citie, I cannot forget, whose house was vn∣to me rather an habitation then an Inne: How euer after I was welcome to you, and continually was fed at your table, I must not forget, vnlesse I would be thought an vnthankfull man.
I acknowledge all with much thanks, both to God, for such a friend, and to you for such friendship: and desire that when both you and I shall haue gone the way of all flesh, the kindnesse which you haue shewed to me, may (of all into whose hands this little Booke shall come) he had in remembrance.
I am now at an end. I present vnto you this learned Sermon of the Iusti∣fication of a sinner before God, with an excellent Prayer which Mr. New-house gaue me, written with his owne hand. I doubt not of your kinde accep∣tance
 of them both: and I trust they will be a welcome New-yeeres gift to the whole Citie, who I hope will euer obey them that haue the ouer-sight of them,Hebr. 13. and submit themselues to them: for they watch for their soules, euen as they that must giue accounts: that they may doe it with ioy and not with griefe: for that is vnprofitable for them.
Now I pray, that as the true feare of God hath so encreased your happy dayes vpon earth, that you haue attai∣ned to the age of fourescore yeeres, and for aboue fortie yeeres past haue liued a worthy Senator of a most wor∣thy Citie; so it would please God, when your glasse is runne, and Death shall call for you, you may with old Si∣meon depart in peace; with faithfull Samuel be lamented for, and after receiue the end of your Faith, which is the saluation of your Soule.

Thus crauing pardon, recommen∣ding you, your vertuous Wife Mris. Anne Layer, with that bountifull and godly Widdow Mris. Anne Rugge, to the protection of the Almighty, I hum∣bly take my leaue.
From Mr. Andrew Curwaynes house in Salisburie-rents, at S. Mar∣tins in the Fields. Decemb. 3. 1611.

