


AT what time King Darius in∣uaded Scithia, the people of the same did retire and gyue back so much from the force and first brunt of the inuador that in a maner they seemed to giue ouer and relinquishe the defēce of that part, which was of best fertility, and were nowe entring into their desert of their land. Darius sent to knowe what they meant and how farre they purposed to flie, they aunswered wee haue no Citties to fight for, but as soone as Darius shall beginne to medle with the Townes, and Monumentes of our fa∣thers and auncesters, hee shall knowe whether the Cittizens can fight. It is nowe more then twenty yeeres space, since it hath been my fortune to beare the assaultes, dammage, iniury, discom∣fortes, and vnkindnesse of a stepdame, by her o∣uermuch preuailing, which oftentimes is found to bee as puissant in vanquishing as the strong ar∣my of Darius. All this I thought to haue put vp
and giuen place vnto by silent patience, as a crosse ordained for mee, vntill at length shee proceeded so farre in malignity, as I thought it intollerable: and that was by an vtter supplanting and disheri∣ting of mee in some meane or competent porti∣on, her driftes thus extending to the spoiling mee of my birth-right, which to euerie man is the best Monument of his parent, I could not but be mo∣ued with that pricke or instinct of Nature, which sheweth it selfe in the leaste creatures, of which it is saide: Habet musca splenem & formicae sua bilis in∣est. The Flie will resist and the Ant will turne a∣gaine. Nowe for that some purpose or ende of knowledge and insight is to drawe good out of e∣uill, and to make medicines of diseases, I thought it good with some labour bestowed to conuert the harme of my owne calamitie, to the instruction of some and benefit of others, in no small number. And because the subiect of the whole matter, see∣meth to shroud it selfe most vnder the nature, pro∣pertie, and maners of a stepdam, which perswadeth as much by night as by day, shee is vulgarly called the Nightcrow, best worthy to be my childs God∣mother and to haue the preheminency of the name. And although all sorts of fowle Coruini ge∣neris) of crowes kinde, were forbidden to the chil∣dren of Israel, which argueth some ill property, vn∣wholesome, or vnsauorie taste of the flesh of that kind, yet I hope there is nothing in this intellectu∣all or spirituall bird, that may offende or dislike the taste of any good Christian or true Israelite. The
Diuines howsoeuer it commeth to passe make the Crowe a figure of procrastination, and deferring to doe good. It may be of his crie or voice, and the continual iterating of this worde, cra cra, put to it one letter, it is cras, so is there nothing in her mouth (if she could speak English) but to morrow, to morrow. Therefore it pleaseth some of them (when they woulde counsel vs to beware of defer∣ring repētance, or the performing of good deeds) to bid vs beware wyth the Israelites to eate Crows flesh: as though Crowes by property or nature be hinderers in al goodnesse, and no furtherers. They that by the like hap are brought into the aduerse condition of disherison, be not many, nor yet ve∣ry few, the most being of some honest valure, how∣soeuer affection hath wrought to the verefying of that saying, Prou. 13. Some men are rich, though they haue nothing, & some men are poore, hauing great riches. This notwithstanding no man is na∣turally willing to giue place vnto wrong. Appetere proprium bonum est omnibus naturale. To desire our owne good is naturall to all men, saieth Aristotle. And therefore that wise Prince and louing Cap∣taine of the Lacedemonians: Agesilaus seeing a childe taking a mouse by the taile, and pretilie to pull him out of his hole, the mouse turning againe, bit the childe by the fingers, & so escaped. Which small and childish matter, he applied to waightie and sadde purpose: bidding indeede the best of his Captaines to take an example hereof, saying: If so little a beast will resist iniurie, what should men of
valure do if they be prouoked. God of his infinit goodnesse giue grace vnto all wrong doers, & such as haue erred in this behalfe, through ill counsel, or other illusion, to remoue from themselues, & their way to eternitie, that blocke of iniurious misdoing, and in the meane time to sende likewise the grace and gift of Christian patience to the iniured of this sorte till remedie be vouchsafed.
Thus not with the least of your well willers nor with the last of your vndeseruing accomptance, I wish you long life with the accomplishment of true happines, presuming to dedicate to your ac∣ceptation and patronage, the homely fruites of this my rusticke labor.

