



RIght Worshipfull, that speech of the Poet, viz. scribimus indocti doctique, &c. was neuer so true as now in this our scribling age, wherein so many are possessed with a brainsicke humor of being seene in print. I touch not any of those (the searcher of all hearts knoweth) whose writings are of good worth, and vsefull to helpe forward the spirituall building; yea,
Iames 2.17. rather I much blesse that God the fa∣ther of lights, whose spirit hath of late so clearely shined in the workes of di∣uers, for hereby the trueth which be∣fore
(as an vnknowne treasure) lay hid is notably discouered, error con∣futed, vertue much furthered in the hearts and liues of men. But of such onely I speake, who being bigge with conceit of their owne conceits, must needs vent and set them a broach, though neuer so froathie, and in truth being ballanced in the scoale of a iu∣dicious Reader, found altogether ligh∣ter then vanitie it selfe. Their works I may fitly resemble to the Spiders web, for though they seeme to be spun with some curiositie, yet in truth they be deuoide of all substance and solidi∣tie: or to the airie Meteors, for as they very suddenly vanish out of sight, so these (being as it were of an airie nature) doe euen in the reading, quasi abire in fumum. Alas, little is the gaine a man gets by them: with such superficiall and slightie stuffe our age so abounds, that many complaine of a sacietie, yea of a surfit, and there∣fore for my part I wish that men were more modest this way, and would keepe in their pennes from blotting so
much paper in vaine; most excellent is the rule of Euripides for this pur∣pose, viz.  i. ei∣ther speake that which is better then silence, or else keepe silent still.
The workes which here I am bold, right Worshipfull, to publish to the worlds view, are not (as in reading you shall see) any vaine or idle dis∣courses sauouring of an empty braine, but most heauenly and diuine truths, breathed forth by the breath of an holy and sanctified heart: they bee a few of those sweete blasts, that were sounded forth in your hearing, by that siluer sounding trumpit: I meane the learned lectures of that famous and most iudicious diuine Master Thomas Newhouse, late Preacher of Gods word among you: who (as you know) like a faithfull seruant of Christ, thought not his life too preci∣ous to lay downe in his Masters ser∣uice, but willingly as it were sacrificed himselfe to God in his ministerie, and as the candle, spent himselfe to giue you light.

When I seriouslie consider how compleate this holy man of God was, how fitted and furnished with diuine gifts for his heauenly function, I can∣not (and I thinke no more can you) but much bewaile) our grieuous losse; can a man lament the losse of his box full of precious and costly iewels, or a Marchant the wracke of his shippe fraught with earthen treasure, then surely may we much more, the losse of this box, the wracke of this ship, so fil∣led and fraught with such spirituall and diuine riches? What a masse of knowledge God stored vp in this his earthen vessell, your thursday Lecture in part bewrayed, wherein he did v∣sually vent so much diuinitie, as that his learned brethren seldome went a∣way (by their owne confession) with∣out insight into some speciall things they neuer knew before: and for his excellent skill in Case-diuinitie, whereby he was able to settle the wa∣uering and doubting Conscience, I may truly say of him as Isaiah doth of himselfe,
Isaiah 52.4. The Lord gaue him
the tongue of the learned to speake a word in season to him that was weary.
Againe for that singular gift God gaue him in vnfoulding and explai∣ning most mysticall and infoulded truthes, in vnloosing most intricate and knottie doubtes (whereof there bee many twixt vs and that Romish Church, as also for his marueilous dexteritie in selecting, contriuing, but especially in acute and solid iudg∣ing, who euer almost did heare him, but will acknowledge his excellencie in all these things with admiration?
And yet moreouer what a great measure of sanctifying grace, it plea∣sed the diuine spirit (which bloweth where it listeth) to beautifie this his instrument with, what rare and ex∣cellent vertues did appeare and shine forth in the course of his life, it is not (I appeale to them that knew him) an easie thing for me to declare; I haue much mused to see how assiduous he was in his painefull calling, how care∣full alwaies to put men forward in the
way of life, how careles of the world, not seeking the gaine thereof couete∣ouslie, nor the glorie thereof ambiti∣ouslie, a vertue in these our times not commonly seene in so great measure, in men of so great gifts and learning. I neede not speake of his meeke, lowly, courteous and affable carriage euen towards his inferiours; how wise and gracious he was in his behauiour, how graue, sober, amiable and louely in all his demeanour, all such can say that knew him, and I am sure that none of you that knew and entirely loued him can easily forget, nor yet remember, without some sigh or signe of sorrow for the losse of so sweet and ingenuous a friend. Thus out of the abundance of my hearty affection towards this man of God, I thought it meete accor∣ding to that certain knowledge which I, and many of you yourselues had of him, to record these things which tract of time would haue worne out and buried vp in the graue of obliui∣on, & hope no man is so enutous as to grudge the dead shuld haue their due.

Bethinking my selfe (Right Wor∣shipfull) what course might bee taken to recouer the publique dammage which the Church hath sustained in the death of this worthy man, I finde no way better then the publishing of such manuscripts as hee left behind him, among which I commend these few (as first fruits) to your Wor∣ships patronage. The reasons of my so doing be these, I know that his mini∣stery (as it was meet it should) was a∣mong many of you much set by, you receiued him as an Angel of God, e∣steemed and heard him as an Inter∣preter one of a thousand, you loued and reuerenced him in his life, and in his death lamented much (as cause you had) your publique losse, yea and still I see how fresh his blessed name remaines among you, pleasant as an oyntment powred out, sweet as a bundle of myrrhe which sendeth forth most fragrant smels; vpon these, and such like grounds I am led to thinke, that these his endeuors cannot misse of your courteous acceptance
and tuition, and therefore if I so farre presume as to shroud these orphan writings vnder your protecting wing, I hope you will easily giue leaue to this my bold enterprise; wherein I haue but signified my duty to your selues, and my loue vnfained to him that is gone.
In these two treatises which in spe∣ciall wise I present vnto your view, you shall finde (Right Worshipfull) these two pointes very soundly and plainely handled; the first is the most wise, and eternall decree of God, the second is the freed, and also the vn∣changeable estate of Gods childe, both of them matters of great waight and moment, needfull to bee knowne in some sort of all, and no way vnworthy to be read and vnderstood of the most worthie. I wish I might haue spoken somewhat of each of them: but least I should exceede the bounds of an E∣pistle, I will (your patience permit∣ting) onely spend a few lines in setting downe how lawfull and meet a thing it is to preach & publish the doctrine
of predestination.
As it was horrible presumption in the Bethshemites to peere into Gods Arke, 1. Sam. 6.19. So it hath been, and still is esteemed by many: for a man to diue though neuer so little into the doctrine of Gods decree, some holding it should not bee medled with at all: others that it may be sparing∣ly handled, but onely in schooles be∣fore the learned: but by their leaues they are much deceiued; for though we may not curiously search into such things as be hidden and wrapt vp in the secret counsell of God, yet are wee not forbidden to seeke the knowledge of those things which bee reuealed. The Lord saith, Deuter. 29. Secret things belong vnto God, let vs haue nothing to doe therewith: but fur∣ther he saith, reuealed things belong to vs and to our children; surely those may we safely meddle with, and en∣deauour to know; nay wee are bound both to know and publish, so be it wee keepe within the limits of wisedome and sobriety: for if God who is wise∣dome
it selfe, thinkes it a meete thing to open this doctrine to his Church, (as hee doth in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles) how can we conceale it without guilt of sacrilegi∣ous follie? Shall wee bee so bold as to seale vp that which God hath opened? God forbid. But how iniurious they bee to the Church of God, who would haue this doctrine smothered from the people, and canuased onely in schooles of learning, will easily ap∣peare, if we doe but consider the great good it brings to the people of God, being perspicuously and plainely taught. Our Sauiour Christ saith, Luke 10. Reioyce in this, that your names are written in heauen: which place importes, that the enrolling our names in the booke of life: i. electi∣on, is a matter of great ioy. And in the 6. of Ioh. 3. All those saith Christ, that the father hath giuen mee; i. in election, shal come vnto me, and those that come to me I cast not away; i. they shal not perish. So that a beleeuer may hence assure himselfe, that being ele∣cted
bee cannot perish. Were it not much then (by concealing this do∣ctrine of predestination) to depriue Gods people of this ioy, of this comfor∣table assurance?
Againe, in this doctrine of Gods decree, soundly and plainely taught, a beleeuer shall finde that his appoint∣ment to saluation is not grounded vpon any thing in himselfe, neither his will, nor faith, nor works, nor wor∣thinesse foreseene, but onely the good will and pleasure of God. As Ephes. 1.5. Who hath predestinated vs ac∣cording to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace; now were it not sinfull to hide from people this heauenly doctrine, whereby they are taught to ascribe all the glory of their saluation to the free fauour and loue of God in their ele∣ction? Yes surely. Yet moreouer in our predestination to eternall life, wee plainely see as in a glasse an Ocean sea of Gods loue and fauour towards vs, in that God passing by so many thou∣sands as vessels of wrath set apart to
perpetuall shame, would select and ap∣point vs to the obtaining of eternall life by Iesus Christ. Now how can it be (loue being the loadstone of loue) but that the liuely sense, and feeling of this loue of God in our election, should enkindle in vs a loue to him that hath so entirely loued, vs and therefore it cannot but be very iniurt∣ous to depriue people of the doctrine of election, which might bee as the bel∣lowes to blow vp in them this little sparke of heauenly loue to God.
But peraduenture some man may say,
 though the point of election may in some sort be taught, yet reprobation (which is the passing by of many thousands and the appointing them to eternall wrath) being a matter so full of horror (as indeed it is) were better concealed.
No,
 for God thinkes good to pub∣lish it in the scriptures, shall wee shut vp where God will open? Againe, what is the point of reprobation but an illustration of the greatnes of the grace of election, as contraries (wee
know) laied one by an other are more perspicuous: and how can we feele the sweetnes of Gods loue in our owne e∣lection, till we see the terrour of his hate in the reiection of others? To this purpose August. tom. 4. li. 1. ad simp. q. 2. saith, that God sheweth by the punishment of the one what hee giueth to the other.
Yea but this is a matter full of terrour.

Polan. in epist. libell. de Pre∣dest. Hereto I answere as a learned diuine of our times doth: so that their harts are too tēder, their eares too nice which cannot brooke this point. And if this were a good reason, it is a ter∣rifying doctrine: Ergo, God may not be taught, then might we not preach of Gods iudgements, doomes day, the torments of hell; all which be matters full of terror. But to giue more full satisfaction in this point, the doctrine of reprobation is fearefull: to whom? either elect or reprobates, not to the elect, for God assureth them that they be not reiected: Ergo, to reprobates as Cain, Iudas, and the like, Now must we for their sakes abstaine from tea∣ching
necessarie truthes?
Isaiah 8.14. Isaiah foretold long since that Christ him∣selfe should be as a stone for these to stumble at, and as a rocke of offence for them to fall vpon, yet who will say that; Ergo, Christ should not bee preachea? nay Christ must be taught though all the world should be offen∣ded thereat.
Yet moreouer there be some (who being giuen to picke quarrels) sticke not to auouch that we in our doctrine of reprobation, (wherein wee teach that God hath ordained some men to be damned) charge God with a mer∣cilesse disposition, which God forbid we should once imagine to be in him, who is indeede euen mercy it selfe; wherefore I pray you giue leaue in a word or two to wipe away this slaun∣der.
First it must bee remembred that we teach not that God doth simplie ordaine any man to hell fire, but thus we teach, that God hath decreed and purposed to glorifie his name in the due and deserued damnation of some,
for in mans Reprobation, God hath two actions: First, he decrees to passe by some without shewing his eternall mercie vnto them, and onely to de∣clare his iustice vpon them; which thing hee may well doe without con∣trole, for he is tyed to none, then fur∣ther he decrees to inflict vpon some (when by themselues they be fallen into sinne) their iust and deserued damnation. So that God decrees a man to hell, not simply and absolutely without all respect to sinne, but with a reference thereto. This point I take it, being well weighed, Gods iustice in reprobation is much cleered, and our doctrine freed from casting the guilt of cruelty vpon the most high.
Secondly, I wish it might bee well considered how that in some cases a∣mong our selues we giue liberty one to another to doe this or that as we will, and we think the action so done, both iust and lawfull; then ought we not much more to giue to the most wise and righteous God, a liberty in his actions to do euen as he will without
all impute of cruelty or iniustice what∣soeuer?
Lastly, we doe but require that in this case of reprobation, so much so ueraignty may be giuen to God euer men (which is most equall) as a silly and mortall man assumes to himselfe ouer the creatures: we allow to a man so much power and libertie, as to kill a flie, or a worme at his will, to slay a sheepe or an Oxe for his lawfull vse and pleasure, and all this without the least tincture of cruelty, why then should wee thinke much, to grant to God (the absolute Lord of the spirits of all flesh, and soueraigne King of the whole world) a liberty to appoint some men to bee passed by, and so to runne on to deserued death, vpon his meere will and pleasure?
Thus hauing ouermuch presumed on your patience, least I should seeme iniurious in detaining you too long in this my rude and wearisome discourse I here surcease, desiring that what I haue here with a single heart offered vnto your worships, may finde your
most kinde and curteous acceptance.
The God of all mercy and goodnes who hath enriched your Citie with manifold blessings, and made it very famous for his Gospell and good go∣uernment, perpetuate these his vnde∣serued fauours among you, with the further inlargement of your prosperi∣tie, and grant that as hee hath made you his vice-gerents, and hath put his sword into your hands, so hee would please to double his spirit of wisedome, and courage vpon you all, that when you haue faithfully finished your work for God, in a Zealous executing of iudgement and iustice here on earth, you may be rewarded with the life of glorie in the Citie of the most high. From Norwich, Nouemb. 7. 1613.

