



RIght Worshipfull, and my beloued Coun∣triemenNow more then twenty yeeres since. the Citizens of Norwich, when in the house of my friend, among other Bookes I found (vnlooked for) this Trea∣tise written in Latine, by one Alexander Ne∣uil an English man: The very Title of the Booke drew mee into a farther desire of looking into the matter: the rather because lying at that time, and in that place where these Furies were committed, I beheld some∣thing with my young eyes: and receiuing many strange things from the report of others, I desired, and was glad to see the thing in order▪ which when I entred vpon, the elegancie of the Phrase, together with the Argument, promised mee a double fruit, viz. not only to know the Storie in order, but also to reuiue, and sharpen my poore skill in that Tongue, now through disuse and tract of time declining: so as I made it from my other Studies, my recreation. In the pursuit whereof, I found (as the Queene of Sheba saith of the wisdome of Salomon) that the one halfe of the calamities, and miseries of this wor∣shipfull Citie (my Mother) was neuer sufficiently

knowne vnto me: Neyther the miraculous deliuerance, sufficiently acknowledged by mee, for I finde it farre greater then I thought. Wherefore reading it ouer now once, and againe, and communing with diuers of my friends about the matters therein contained: I found a generall desire in them all to haue it in English. Whereupon, my selfe hauing found such pleasure mixt with profit in the reading heereof (if I should not bee enuious: hauing also certaine in∣telligence that it was not extant by any particular Treatise) thought good to satisfie their expectation, though of many the vnfittest: That so prayse might be giuen vnto God of many. And as the benefit increa∣seth in our eyes, so our thankesgiuing might grow, and abound. Wherefore vnto that godly order taken, alrea∣die for the yearely remembrance of this deliuerance, and solemnitie of Thankes giuing, as the Poet sayth in the like.
Annuus assuetum Domine natalis honorem,Tristibus Elegia. 6.
Exigit: ite manus ad pia Sacra meae.
Goe thou the labour of my hands, and receiue vnder your Worshipfull protection, the good meaning of a poore friend, which wisheth well, as hee hath good cause, to your Worships, and this Citie.

