



IT is a matter of great waight, and necessa∣rie duety, Right Ho∣norable, to consider wisely, and to iudge rightly of the workes of God, in the euent of thinges which happen vnto
men. For as it is written in the Psalmes:
Psal. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his waies, and holy in all his workes. And againe:
107.43. VVho is wise that hee may obserue these things? for they shall vnderstand the louing kindnesse of the Lorde. And againe:
92.6. An vnwise man knoweth it not, and a foole doth not vnderstand this. And seeing
Rom. 11.36. all thinges are of him, and thorow him, & for him, and
1. Sam. 2.9. in his owne might no man shall bee strong: but
Psalm. 75.7. & 33.11. God is Iudge, hee maketh low, he maketh high; and that the counsell of the Lorde shall stand for euer, & the thoughtes of his hart,
Gods proui∣dence in all things is to be obserued. thoroughout all a∣ges: euery man ought carefully to regarde the prouidence of
God, in the thinges befalling to himself and others, which I find very fruitfully obserued by the holy seruaunts of GOD in the Scriptures. As Ioseph, when he sawe his Fathers house, in the time of the greate famine, to come into Egypt to buy foode, comforteth his brethren, who of enuie had solde him thither, with this obseruation, saying:
Gen. 45.5. Bee not sad, neither grieued with your selues, that ye sold me hither: for God did sende me before you, for your preseruation. And Dauid comforteth himselfe, and stay∣eth the rage of his seruaunt, a∣gainst the cursing of Shimei, by this consideration, saying,
2. Sam. 16.12 Jt may bee that God will looke vpon
mine affliction, & do me good for his cursing this day. So Mordecai en∣courageth Ester, to make sup∣plication to the king (though it were contrarie to lawe, and in hazard of her life) in the behalf of the Iewes, who were appoin∣ted to die by wicked Haman: by such a wise collectiō among other wordes, saying:
Ester. 4.14. VVho knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdome for such a time? In like sorte, when I thinke vpon your honor, remembring what I haue heard of your noble Fa∣ther, that good Erle, in the time of his last sicknes, & of his godly care ouer his children: compa∣ring thereunto how God hath preserued you vnto this time,
what speciall fauour you haue attained before so gracious a Prince, in what an high & waigh tie place you are set, & in what yeares of your age these things are befallen you, together with the blessed giftes by which you are fitted thereunto: mine hart is touched with a comfortable hope, that the Lords grace wor∣king effectually in you, and his heauenly spirite directing you: you might be a worthie instru∣ment, in faithfull and wise ser∣uice to her maiesty for the good of this common-wealth, & the churches of Iesus Christ among vs. For if
1. King. 18.4. Obadiah vnder wic∣ked Ahab, could keepe from Ie∣zebel, and feede an hundreth
Prophetes: and
Iere. 38.8.9. Ebedmelech could obtaine of that euill king Zedekiah, to deliuer Ieremie out of the dungeon, into which he was cast by the Princes with the kings consent: and
Nehem. 2. Nehe∣miah could apply the fauour he had with that heathenish King Artashasht, to the building of the walles of Hierusalem: who can tell? but that much more, such a noble man of Christian knowledge, aduanced by God into the fauour of so Christian and religious a princesse, may likewise performe some seruice of great importance, to the Church of God and his coun∣trie.
And verily if God
Pru. 18.4. made all
for himselfe,
Euery man ought to serue God, accor∣ding to his place & giftes. and his elect
Ephe 1, 6. for the glorie of his grace,
Act. 17.26. assig∣ning the times, which were or∣dained before, and the bounds of mens habitation, that they should seeke the Lord: and if he haue
Math. 25.14. giuen euery man a ta∣lent, whereof hee must render an account; then ought euerie man
1. Cor. 7.17.24 so to walke, as God hath distributed to euery man, as the Lorde hath called euery one, and therein to abide with God. Therfore
1. Sam. 15. Saul, without reser∣uing of any spoyle, by any pre∣tence, must bee obedient to the voyce of the Lord, in the vtter destroying of Amalecke; be∣cause God had annoynted him to be king, & called him there∣unto.
And Dauid,
2. Sam. 12. though hee were a man after Gods heart: yet because he forgate his ad∣uancement by God, & his great benefits, and by deflowring his neighbours wife, &c. disobeied God, and caused the enemies of God to blaspheme: was repro∣ued sharply & punished seuere∣ly. And thou O meeke
Num. 30.12 Moses, what kept thee out of the lande of promise? And thou O wise
1. King. 11. Salomon, what made thy lat∣ter dayes troublesome, and a breach in thy kingdome? And thou O good
1. King. 22. Iehoshaphat, what brought thy life in ha∣zard? was it not, that God, who exalted you in honour,
Who so honor not God are plagued. was not sanctified by your seruice? If
God thus deale with his owne
1. Pet. 4.17. house, where shall the vngodly and sinners appeare?
Philip. 3.19. whose God is their bellie, who
Haback. 1.16. sacri∣fice to the net of their own po∣licies, and honour the
Luk. 16.13. God ri∣ches, but
Exod. 5.2. know not the Lord, who giueth them all things a∣bundantly to enioy?
Rom. 1.24. God gi∣ueth them ouer to their owne lusts,
Iob. 5.14. they meete with darknes in the day time, and grope at noone day as in the night, some by
2. Sam. 17.23 their policie make an halter to hang themselues, some in the
Dan 5. middest of their iolitie, haue the ioynts of their loynes loo∣sed and their knees smitten one against another, and some are
Psal 53.5. Prouerb. 28.1. afeard where there is no feare,
and flye when no man pursueth them. And
Esay 5.24. as the flame of fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the chaffe is consumed of the flame; so their roote shall bee rottennes, and their bud shall rise vp as dust, because they haue cast off the lawe of the Lord of hosts, &c. that it might stand as an vnchaungeable de∣cree of the hie God, the posses∣sor of heauen and earth; con∣cerning the wicked & the true seruants of God:
1 Sam. 2.30. The feare of God rewarded Them that ho∣nor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be despised. So did the Lord aduance vertuous
Gen. 45. Io∣seph, before all his brethren, he
Exod. 1.21. made houses to the widowes, who feared God in Egypt, and
deliuered
Iere. 39.16. Ebedmelech in the day of euill. Therefore, for the comfort of all them, that walke according to their gifts & cal∣lings with God, it is written:
Psal. 33.18. Be∣hold the eye of the Lord is vpon thē that feare him, and vpon them that trust in his mercie, to deliuer their soules from death, and to preserue them in famine. For this cause (right Honorable) haue I pre∣sumed to dedicate this small booke to your Honour, not onely because I am perswaded of your fauorable acceptation, but also that by mee being one among many, you might know what hope and expectation there is, among her Maiesties most faithfull subiects concer∣ning
you: that your yong yeres being sanctified, and (
1. Ioh. 2.14. as S. Iohn saith) being strong & the word of God abiding in you, and ha∣uing ouercome the wicked, you might amōgst other graue and wise counsellors, bee a ioy∣full labourer in all good cau∣ses, and a prosperous furtherer of things concerning God, to the great ioy, peace and honor, of her most excellent maiestie, and that by the mouthes of ma∣ny her louing subiects, prayses may redound to the glorie of God, and that you may glorie in his praise. And here I hum∣blie craue your Christian fa∣uour, to giue mee leaue to tell you, what the Lorde speaketh
vnto you. For me thinketh I heare him speake vnto you, as he did vnto Ioshuah and Abra∣ham:
Ioshu. 1. Be thou strong and of a most valiant courage, that thou mayst obserue and doe according to al the law, which Moses my seruant hath commanded thee: thou shalt not turne away from it, to the right hād, nor to the left, that thou maist prosper whither soeuer thou goest. I will be with thee, J will not leaue thee, nor forsake thee.
Gen. 15.1. & cap. 17.1. Feare not, J am thy buckler and thine excee∣ding great reward. J am God al∣sufficient, walke before me and bee vpright. Now this little booke of houshold instruction, I ten∣der vnto your Honors protec∣tion; nothing comparable to
the profound works set foorth by rare and singular men, but as a little candle to bee placed in the midst of the house, to giue light to all them that are there∣in. And as in the worke of the materiall Temple vnder Salo∣mon,
2. Chron. 2.2. hewers of stones had a necessary vse: so this little book may bee some good helpe, to prepare the seueral members of the familie, for the skilfull buil∣ders, that is, the
1 Pet. 2.5. faithful mini∣sters, to be ioined as liuely stons in the spirituall temple of God. For as the Psalmist doth testifie:
Psal. 119.130 The entrance into Gods wordes sheweth light, and giueth vnder∣standing vnto the simple. And our Sauiour teacheth, that there is a
secret working in his kingdom, like the growing of the
Mat. 13.3. small graine of mustard-seed, and as a little leauē hid in three pecks of meale: So
1. Cor. 1.27. God hath chosen foolish thinges of the world to confound the wise, & God hath chosen weake thinges of the world to confound the mighty, &c. And to whom should I of∣fer the booke of teaching the familie? but euen to him, whose houshold being well instructed, ordered, & guided, may diuers waies doe good vnto many of all estates and degrees: yea e∣uen to him, who knoweth verie well, how needfull a thing it is in regarde of the Common∣wealth: which in troublesome
times doth find, that a Christian Prince cannot be sure of such a peoples faithfulnes, in dayes of triall: whose bellies being fedde with the fatte of the earth, haue mindes vnsetled; and for lacke of the knowledge of Christ, and the feare of God, are apt to go after the sway of time, and to bee led as beastes by the bellie, where most ease, gaine, & plea∣sure shall draw them. Therefore nothing doubting, but that your godly wisedom, and good knowledge of Christ Iesus, will graciously receiue any thing, that may be helpful to Christi∣an religion and godlines: I pre∣sent this little booke vnto your Honour, with al humblenes and
good will in the Lord; leauing the successe vnto him, in whose handes are the
Psalm. 31.15. times of all things, and
1. Cor. 3.7. who onely giueth increase. Most meekely pray∣ing his diuine goodnes to make you honorable in this world, in all pietie and Christian vertues, to the glory of his name, the ho¦nour of your Prince and coun∣trey, and to the reioycing of all good christians: & in the world to come, to bee partaker of his glory: who shall be glorified in his Saintes, and made maruei∣lous in all that beleeue. Amen. At Eastwell in Kent this 26. of Februarie. Anno 1596.

