


NO Nation euer vnder heauen,English men grealy bound to praise and serue God, for his rich bles∣sings in & by the Gospell, vnder the hap∣pie raigne of her maiestie. more bound to praise & serue God, then we English men; now aboue fortie yeares, vnder the happie raigne of our deare Soueraigne and Ladie Queene Elizabeth, (whom God long preserue) tasting & enioying the sweet goodnes & fauor of God most kindly shewing it selfe, and shining into our harts, by his most blessed and ioyfull Gospel. No nation euer vnder heauen hath had more cause of ioy, and comfortable en∣couragement vnto godlinesse and honestie, then we Eng∣lishmen, all these yeares: when God most miraculously by a maiden Queene, (the weaker vessell) hath made his name knowen, and his Saintes glorious by deliueraunce: when mightie potentates could not stand in battaile, hee hath raised health by a woman, and made the weake to confound the strong. No nation euer vnder heauen, hath had more sure and perfect experience of the truth of God and his worde, and of the certaine knowledge of the holy faith and pure religion, then we Englishmen (whose eyes the God of this world hath not blinded) most abundantly haue had, that we might glorie in our God, and magnifie the rich grace of Iesus Christ, and the effectuall power of his holy and blessed spirit. For we haue seene the breath

of Gods mouth, mightie to consume Antechrist, and the light of his word to make all things manifest: that it might be said of vs, as by prerogatiue it was once spoken of Isra∣el:Psal. 147.19. He sheweth his worde vnto Iacob, his statutes & his iudge∣ments vnto Israel, he hath not so dealt with euerie nation, &c.
The entrance of her Maie∣sties raigne a most blessed day vnto Eng∣land.There was a day of darkenesse, a day of great blacknes & sorrow, when the people of this land were made slaues, vnder the thraldome of spirituall Aegipt and Babilon: when they knew not aright the true and liuing God, nor the power & grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, but were led after vaine things, in whom there was no helpe; and men by a iust plague of God, were giuen ouer vnto their owne lustes and fancies, yea euen vnto most abhominable ido∣latrie. But the day of her Maiesties most royall coronati∣on was a day of light and glorie, a day of cleare and per∣fect ioy: in that day did the sunne of righteousnes arise & shined from on hie, hee cast forth his bright and pleasant beames, and enlightened all the land. Then fell away the grosse misse of palpable foolishnesse and ignorance, and the vaile of mans presumption was taken from our hartes. Then humane deuises, and the greeuous yoke of the apo∣staticall bondage in tradition & voluntary seruice of men, was taken from our necks. Then were our hearts opened and the light of the knowledge of the glorie of God, and his bright shining countenance in the face of Iesus Christ did shine into our soules. It was a day that the verie An∣gels of heauen did reioyce and sing, because of the sweet & blessed tidings of great ioy vnto al the people of this land. For the grace of God, which bringeth saluation vnto all men, did then appeare: and the beautifull feet of the mes∣sengers of peace, which brought tidings of good thinges, and said vnto euery elect soule, Thy God raigneth; had then a merrie and comfortable passage and safe trauell ouer all the land: the embassadors of God brought vnto vs the wholsome word of reconciliation. Then did the Lorde plant his vineyard, and build his holy temple among vs,

and hee became our strong sanctuarie, and visited vs with his rich mercie and saluation: his blessings spirituall and corporall most plentiful, flowed down from heauen vpon our land. So that our enemies being Iudges, it must needes be said: God hath done great things for vs, and hath giuen vs all things aboundantly to enioy. In which time many nations round about vs, in greeuous darknesse and bloudy miserie, euen mourning dayly before our eyes, might well haue counted themselues happie, if they had part of our peace. We haue lent and not borrowed, wee haue giuen and not taken: we haue beene a refuge for the poore, and a place of succour for the persecuted: our men and money haue beene a reliefe to the oppressed and deliueraunce to many in great daunger and distresse. Our prince hath bin an hyding place from the wind, & as a refuge for the tem∣pest, as riuers of waters in a drie place, and as the shadow of a rocke in a wearie land. My pen is insufficient, and I am vnworthie and vnable to rehearse the manifold and constant goodnesse and fauours of God vpon vs these many yeares: O let vs loue the Lord and serue him, let vs praise and glorifie him, who hath beene so beneficiall and bountifull vnto vs. Hee hath deliuered our soules from death, our eyes from teares, and our feet from falling, hee hath brought vs out of the horrible pitte and mierie clay, and set our feet vpon the rocke and ordered our goings, & hath put in our mouthes a newe song of praise vnto our God: many that haue seene this haue reuerenced the Lord, and put their trust in our God.All Englishmē are bound to loue the Queenes most excelent Maie∣stie. And who can but loue the blessed and worthy instrument of our peace and ioy? whose heart is not inflamed with her desire? If wee were tenne thousand times more then wee are, and euerie man had a thousand liues, who would not willingly lay them downe at her feete in the cause of truth, to shewe his thankfull mind vnto her Maiestie: who hath con∣stantly passed through many hazardes of her life for loue of Gods truth and care of his Church? whose hart is

not greatly moued to glorifie God, who hath giuen vs, so faithful & constant a nurse & louing mother, & so wō∣derfully defended and preserued her, and by & vnder her most happy gouernment hath made vs so many yeares to∣gether, without feare the free possessors of most vnspeak∣able ioy, in the participation of incomparable heauenly treasure and most flourishing earthly prosperitie.
We are to consider whe∣ther we haue rendred to the Lord accor∣ding to his kindnes to∣ward vs.But O my deare mother, my good & reuerend fathers and brethren, haue wee rendred to the Lorde according to his kindnesse? haue wee with reuerence receiued, with thankfulnesse acknowledged, and with care & conscience vsed these mercies of our good and louing God and mer∣cifull father in Iesus Christ? O that I could boldly and faithfully so say; & that our siluer were not become drosse, and our wine mixt with water. And that the vine which God hath planted with good and pleasant plants, did not in stead of grapes bring forth wild grapes: and men did not neglect yea forsake the word of the Lord, and follow the foolish imaginations of their owne heartes. O that it might not be iustly said, that the Lord hath a controuersie with this lande, because there is no truth, nor mercie, nor knowledge of God in the land. By swearing and ly∣ing, and killing, and stealing, and whooring, they breake out, and bloud toucheth bloud. And that men did not encourage one another, in their wicked and vicious liuing, saying: come and let vs bring wine, and wee will fill our selues with strong drinke, and to morrow shall bee as this day, and much more aboundant, let vs eate and drinke for to morrow we shall die. O that men would consider and that their hearts would smite them, in remembring and forethinking what a fatherly watch word, our tender and louing God hath giuen vs, by many and sundry most mild and kindly tempered corrections and chastisementes, at many times: but especially within these eighteene yeares last past, when hee beganne at his sanctuarie, and lightly touched his holy remembrancers, when he caused a

great and cloudie mist to couer the verie heauens, so that many bright starres were not seene to shine for a certaine season. Then did the windes burst out shaking our hou∣ses ouer our heades, as vnworthie to dwell vnder so good and plentifull grace: our bodies and liues were assailed with grieuous pestilence, dearth, scarsitie, and the threat∣ning sword did aduance themselues against vs. Thousands haue gone forth and returned but by hundreds. And now seeing all these things haue not made vs to turne to him that smiteth, neither do men seeke the Lord: behold euerie man seeth how his anger is kindled more and more, and how neere his sword is come vnto vs, that the Lords wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. But yet if it please thee O God and mercifull father, bee thou entreated by thy poore seruants, (who seeing the plague, call night and day vpon thee) that thou take not so great vengeance of our sinnes, as to make the sweete streaming fountains, which water all thy holy temple and the garden of thy delight among vs, to be salt and vnsauourie: or to let that burning starre of wormewood, which is fallen from heauen to touch our riuers of waters: or that thou shouldst make the heart of this people fat, and their eares heauie & shut their eyes, least they see with their eies, and heare with their eares, and vnderstand with their heartes and conuert and thou heale them. Why should we be as men of ano∣ther generation, which know not and remember not thy great workes, which thou hast done, by our princely Ieho∣shuah, and the great victorie ouer the Cananites of the land, by thine annointed handmaid our renowned Debo∣rah: that our eyes should looke backe to the flesh pots of Egypt, or that wee should returne to ioyne in friendship, with that wicked Babilon, whom thou hast commanded vs to reward with double, as they haue rewarded vs: and learning their maners, & being partakers of their sinnes, we should be partakers of their punishmentes, and thou shouldst giue vs ouer to the enemie, and they which hate

vs should be Lords ouer vs: and then al these good things and the light of thy countenance should bee quite turned from vs, and our glorie forsake vs. We haue indeed sinned most deare father, and our offences are many: yet is there mercie with thee that thou maiest bee feared: Teach vs therfore thy way O Lord, that we may walk in thy truth: and knit our hearts vnto thee, that we may feare thy holy name, euen for thy holy Son sake our deare Sauiour Iesus Christ Amen.
When men waxe rich they begin to bee carelesse: and by aboundance of peace,Deut. 32.15. men forget themselues and fall away: as it is written: When he waxed fat, he spurned with the heele. For this cause hath God set vs ministers as watch∣men to see the plague when it commeth, and to admonish the people, that they die not in their sinnes and to say vn∣to them: Take heed, you forget not the Lord your God which hath done all these good thinges for you, but feare ye the Lord your God,The cause mat¦ter & purpose of this booke. and serue him, thou shalt cleaue vnto him and sweare by his name. And this is verily the reason of the publishing of this treatise: wherein I shew that the religion and faith publikely professed in this Realme, and maintained by the righteous scepter and sword of our dread soueraign and gracious Queene Eliza∣beth, is of the onely truth, most auncient, catholicke, and vnchangeable; out of which none euer haue beene saued, from the beginning of the world, neither can or shall bee. And that the faith and religion, vnder the pretence and name of Christ, Peter and Paul, and of the glorious shew and title of the Church, which is now professed at Rome, and followed by the vassals of the pope, is but a new, vp∣start, hereticall and superstitious deuise of man, contra∣riant to the faith of Gods elect, & of the ancient couenant which God gaue & taught Abraham both for Iewes and Gentils, and which Moses and the prophets declared & expounded, and Christ fulfilled and established, and his

holy Apostles published to all the world, and taught all nations by Christes commandement. For I thought my duetie first vnto God, and then to my gracious prince, to shew some token of my thankefull mind, and secondly to acknowledge my bounden duetie to Christes Church here among vs, my deare mother, in whose wombe I free∣ly confesse my selfe to be bgotten and borne one of Gods children, and though of thousands the most vnworthie yet one of the seruants of Christ and of his congregation in the ministerie of his Gospell. And especially that I might call to remembrance and set before the eyes of my louing country men, my louing and faithfull brethren and sisters in Christ, the assurednesse of truth and the good treasure of God among vs: namely that wee are lighted vpon that heauenly pearle (blessed be God) for which a man would sell all that he hath: that this might bee some meanes to blow away the ashes from the cooling zeale of some: stirre vp and awake some that are now readie to sleepe, and bring backe againe some, (if it please God) which are readie to go out of the way: and that I might ad∣monish others that they receiue not the grace of God in vaine. For when a man shall thinke with himselfe (and well way it in his heart) that we haue the true faith which is vnchaungeable, by which all Gods elect are saued: will it not moue him to bestir himselfe, that he neglect not so great saluation, and that he trie euerie spirit, before he be∣leeue, and that he be not caried away with the vaine shew of ostentation in men of schoole learning: but whomso∣euer he heare with the men of Berea to search the Scrip∣tures whether those things be so? yea though it were Paule or an Angel from heauen should preach another doctrine then that wee haue receiued, we should hold him accursed. I pray God for Christes sake to bee mercifull vnto mee, that as he put into mine hart to take this worke in hand, &

hath graciously assisted me and strengthened me to finish it, and now to publish it. So it would please him to vouch∣safe his blessing to accompanie the same, that it may bee accordingly profitable to many, and haue an effectuall fruit to his glorie and the good of his church, in the encou∣ragement and strengthening of weake Christians. I hum∣blie beg this at his fatherly hands in and by the mediation of his son Iesus Christ euen for his holy and blessed name, to whom with his holy spirit be all praise power and dominion for euer. Amen.
From Eastwell in Kent the 26. of March. 1602.
