


ALbeit (right Honorable) the indeuours of best deseruers, and of men qualified with highest gifts of all kinds of ver∣tues, be subiect to deprauing censures, I, the meanest of many other, am mo∣ued by the loue I beare to my countrie, in all reuerence and zeale, according to my portion of knowledge (sith the better able affoord it not) to aduenture some thing to the incouragement of men trained and to be trai∣ned to the field in Militarie seruice: not as teaching them the art of warre, but inciting them to obedience to God, their Prince and Commanders, to vertuous and diuine exercises, to the practise of profitable, and of praise worthie actions, and to the auoyding of things offensiue, hurtfull and fruitles. For if none should speake because they haue captious hearers: if none should write because they haue deprauing readers; what would become of the vse of the tongue or practise of the pen? If none should vndertake but what they were assured should please all men, there would follow speedie ruine of all vertuous indeuours in whatsoeuer kinde. For none is so absolute by art or nature, but that some being meere naturals without art or vertue, will struggle to glorifie their own

nothing, by deprauing the something of others. No good inde∣uour (intended to Gods glorie) can be so simple and fruitles, but it will yeeld some profite to the well disposed: and no worke is so excellent but is altogether fruitles to the euill affected. Best things haue least grace among the worst, and the prophanest workes best welcome to prophane men. But such as sauour of diuine reason will imbrace the good fruites euen of poorest knowledge, and will reiect the most absolute worke of a carnall conceit. And if I had not hope grounded vpon mine owne, as al∣so vpon publique experience of your honorable clemencie, to accept of vertuous indeuours at the hands of the meanest, I could not (at this time) affoord scope vnto my sorrowing thoughts, daunted, dulled, and dismaied at the dismall issue of former hope, to expose vnto a generall gaze, this sillie Mirror, which vnder your Honorable protection, I know may safely passe through the pikes with profit to many, preiudiciall to none, but behoofull to all. And it craueth at my hands no safer shelter from the malice of the worst, nor better warrant to passe currant among the best, than your Lordships allowance, which in discretion I cannot denie it, though I cannot assure it. Yet I am vrged to aduenture my selfe for it, and it for me, vnto your Honorable considera∣tion. And while I waite in hope, I doe and will euer rest a dutifull petitioner to the God of hoasts, to fur∣nish your Honor with all happines, and happie issue of all your Hono∣rable enterprises.

