



IF I were demanded (Right Ho∣nourable) I could yeeld a reason why I giue your Lady-ship this little plaine Poeme, vnder the ty∣tle of a Pensiue Soules delight, but that your Ladiship is not altoge∣ther vnacquainted with some causes that may right well worke me pensiue. The cause is no∣ted and obserued of many, but felt of my selfe and mine only. The cause of my delight is pub∣lique, common, and knowne to all, but felt (with effect) of the faithfull and loyall onely. Can any faithfull soule but sigh (my good La∣die,) to see and consider, the sundry daungers, that haue bene, and are daily plotted and prac∣tised, against her highnesse most innocent per∣son, and Royall state? And againe, can any, but reioyce and delight to see her still blessed & de∣fended,

and the practizers still found out, cen∣sured and condemned? And who seeth with∣out pensiuenesse and sorrow, her Maiesties na∣tiue subiects, our owne country-men, brethren and kindred, to become Traytors, to their, and our most gratious Queene, & treacherous to vs their country-men & allyes? And againe, reioy∣ceth not to see & obserue, how all their deuises come to nought, her Maiestie preserued, & our selues deliuered? And again, who greeueth not to consider from whom these practises and the grounds of these treasons proceed? From a man pretending to be the high and sole Vicar of Christ in earth, who cannot erre in his purposes and proceedings, because they are all couered, (euen murthers of innocent men, yea Princes, raising warre within, and between kingdomes,) with the pretence of religion and glorifying God, the highest point of blasphemy. But who reioy∣ceth not to see him discouered Antichrist, the man of sinne? and his vndermining and treasonable messengers, Locustes? And who reioyceth not to see them in some measure abandoned, sith they will not be reclaimed? But more, who reioy∣ceth not to see and consider her Maiesties im∣moueable constancie, in louing, in imbracing,

and in maintaining the infallable trueth? and our selues vnder her, and by her, to enioy the same? A subiect worthie of a more serious la∣bour. But because many worthie workes are extāt of their discouery, some too great of price for poore men, and some too learned for the simple. And such serious Treatises oftē neglec∣ted, because they delight not all humours, I thought it not vnfit to put the inferiour multi∣tude in minde, in this kinde of writing, what causes they haue to sighe and to sing, to grieue and reioyce: And that with mee they may haue all will, as they haue cause, to pray for the continuance of the true causes of our re∣ioycing, the maintenance of Religion, and pre∣seruation of her highnesse. The length of dayes, vouchsafe her length of dayes: the Lyon of Iudah rent her enemies in peeces: And high Iehouah, graunt that vnder her we may all liue in true loue, towards her, that loueth him, who in his loue gaue her to vs. That we in her might ra∣ther sorrow to see the falles of traytors in chari∣tie, then traytors to tryumph in the successe of their attempts in insolencie.

