



AS ther are many enimies of the truth of the
gospel, and many that write to broach and
spread their errors: so is it needful that some
write against them, least troden truth be quite
forsaken; and silly sowles be wrapped in error,
vnto perdition. It is not easy for al men to espie Satans
subtilties, nor the deceitful sophismes of his ministers:
both he & they, can trāsforme themselves like Angels of
light. Such therfore as discern them through the grace of
God, should give warning vnto others; that as the foolish
womā isPro 7. 11. & 9. 13. 18 troublesome, babling & lowd, inviting her ghests
to the depth of hel: so thePro. 9. 3. maidens of wisdom, may lift vp
also their voice; and make their crie be heard, on the
highest places of the citie.
What wormwood and bitternes & even deadly poi∣son,
is sparsed abroad in Henry Nicholas his writings, (who
caleth himself the 1 Exhort. cap. 11. See. 1.Father of the Family of Love;) the chil∣dren
of wisdome that do read the same, may by the light
of Gods law soon perceive: yet with faire and flattering
speeches, he hath beguiled many vnstable sowles; & such
as have had no love to the truth, have been givē over vn∣to
his lies. And never had Satan a fitter time to work his
malicious wil on the sons of Adam: then in these last
evil dayes, when Atheisme and iniquity, doe so much
abound. Never had he a fitter religion for Atheists and
carnal hypocrites, then that which H. N. out of his cor∣rupt
and fleshly hart hath set abroach. It taketh away
the crosse of Christ, & persecution for righteousnes sake:
and teacheth men to cōmunicate with al religions, servi∣ces
and ceremonies; so as they cleave in hart to his feigh∣ned



service of the Love; It maketh them pure and without
al syn, in their own foolish imaginations; yea (more then
which the Serpent himself did never teach,) it deifieth
them with God. In a word, it bringeth a fretting lepro∣sie
vpon al religion, & overthroweth the grounds of faith
layd in holy scriptures, which H. N. by foolish allegories,
perverteth to the destruction of himself and his Family.
And for the principles of theologie, he hath written more
blasphemously and absurdly then ever did Mahomet in
his Alcoran. For this cause, in answering this his letter,
(as I was requested by some that heard how much it was
boasted of, among the Nicholaitans;) I have touched by
the way some of the impious heresies that are in his other
writings, without knowledge wherof, his frawd in this
Epistle cannot easily be perceived. For as a child of dark∣nes,
he laboureth to be obscure in his words, yt men may
admire the deepnes of Satan by which he speaketh; and
himself when he is folowed, & can no other way escape,
may have this for his last refuge, that men vnderstand him
not. ButEphe. 5. 13. al things when they are reproved of the light,
are manifest: for the light is that which maketh al things
manifest. Now the Ps. 119. 105 Pro 6. 13.word of the Lord is a lantern, & his
Law a light; by it therfore have I assayed to discover the
snares of this seducer: not doubting but God, who cau∣seth
the Morning to know his place, that it may take
hold of the corners of the earth, Iob. 38. 13& that the wicked may
be shaken out of it; wil, notwithstanding al the dark
delphick speeches, and glozing allegories of these falsers,
declare their works and manifest their impieties, and wil
Iob. 34. 25.turn the night, (in the darknes wherof they think to be
shrowded) and they shalbe destroyed.
Let therfore the prudent reader, make trial of that



which on both sides is said, by the word of truth: least,
as the serpent beguiled Evah through his subtilty, so their
harts be withdrawn from the sincerity of Christ. And
the Lord give them vnderstanding in al things; and pre∣serve
them Ps. 12. 7. 8.from this generation for ever;
for the wicked walk on every side,
whiles vilenes is extolled
among the sons
of Adam.

