


AFTER my departure oute of Brabante, (myne owne naturall Countrey) into youre Maiesties Re∣alme of Englande (moste gracious Lady) as well for that I would not beholde the abhominations of the Romyshe Ante∣christ, as to escape the handes of the bloud-thirsty: In the meane space for the auoyding of idlenesse (the very mother and nourice of all vices) I haue among other my trauayles bene occupied aboute thys little Treatyse, wherin is sette forth the vilenesse and base∣nesse of worldely things, whiche commonly withdrawe vs from heauenly and spirituall matters. To the ende that vnderstanding the vanitie and basenesse of the same, and there∣withall consideryng the miserable calamities that ensue therupon, we might be moued the

rather to forsake them, and gyue oure selues to the knowledge of Heauenly and eternall things, whence all true happinesse and feli∣citie doth procede. And for as much as the matter of it selfe is very good (deseruyng in dede to be handeled by men of farre better skil thā I) I could not deuise how any things whatsoeuer, of lykenesse and conueniencie mighte more properly bee resembled one to the other, than this boke for the aptnesse & conueniencie of the argument might be de∣dicated to your Maiestie, a most blessed and happie prince. Happy I say, not so much for that youre grace is lineally descended by the most high, puissaunt, mightie & victorious prince Henry the eight of famous memorie, from so many myghtie and puissant princes of this Realme, your Maiesties moste noble progenitours: which haue long agone, most valiantly & victoriously cōquered al France, and by dint of sword daunted their enimies, so that youre highnesse beareth in Armes as right inheritour thereunto, the royall scepter and Croune imperiall, most triūphantly, and the titles of Englande, Fraunce, and Irelande ioyntely in youre maiesties stile. Neither for,

that your highnesse as a rare Phoenix of your time, are singular and peerelesse in honoure and renoune, in princely maiestie, wisedome, skil, beautie, fauour, mildenesse, curtesie and gentlenesse: to be short, excellent in all kind of vertue. Nor in respecte of youre learning, knowledge, counsell, iudgement, and elo∣quence, as well in the Greeke, Latine, Italian, Frenche, Dutch, as in your owne natural En∣glish, and other languages, wherin your grace may be resembled not onely to Tullie, and Demosthenes, but to Mercurie, the God of e∣loquence, as is apparant by youre Maiesties most apte and wise aunswers giuen in your own person to al Embassadours, and to eue∣ry of them in their owne naturall language with a singular dexteritie and princely maie¦stie, & with maruellous swetenesse of tong. Nor bicause your grace is expert in song, & in the arte of Musike, skilful in al kindes of musical instrumēts, and according to the ex∣act proportiōs of geometrie exquisite in the measures of the daunce: and besides al these, embraced of Apollo, and his nine sisters, by whome your grace is so instructed in the di∣uine Arte of Poetrie, that you may woor∣thily

be called the seconde Sappho. Neither for your great skil & iudgemēt in painting and imagerie, bothe for the cunnyng of the workmanshyp and the deuise and storie. In summe, perfecte in all good exercises of the wit, namely the artes and liberall sciences. Fi∣nally, not alonly for that nature of hir boū∣tie and goodnesse hath shewed suche grace and speciall fauour toward you, by enduing youre grace moste plentyfully with infinite graces and vertues more abundantly than a∣ny other Prince or Princesse in the worlde, so that it might serue me for a sufficient ar∣gument to fill large volumes, only to stande in commendation of your maiestie, not an∣nexing therto any deuise of myne owne, of fained Emblemes or Poetical fables, and that without vsing flatterie or glosing, as they do most comonly, that ambitiously seeking af∣ter prefermentes and honoure, disguise ra∣ther than describe noble and honorable per∣sonages, whome they sette oute many tymes beyonde al truth, yea sometime aboue mea∣sure, and with as great inconueniencie as yf they should paynt an Asse tuning of a harp. For I do not accompt your grace happy for

these alonely (thoughe many and singular) giftes and graces, which your grace enioyeth in great plentie and abundance, consideryng they bee transitorie, and can not make any man or woman happie (albeit they seme di∣uine and supernaturall,) excepte they be ac∣companied wyth the loue and feare of God, according to the saying of King Lamuell, in the thirde of the Prouerbes: Fauour is decei∣uable, and Beautie a mere vanitie, but the wo∣man that feareth the Lorde, is to be beloued. But chiefly and principally when I consider that God intendyng to bestowe an excellent benefit peculiarly vpon your Maiestie more than vpon any other Prince or Princesse in the worlde, hath besides al the other forena∣med his manifolde giftes and graces, lighte∣ned your vnderstanding with his holy spirit, and hath vouchesafed (by enclinyng youre graces heart, spirite and minde to humilitie, peace, mildenesse, and all kinde of louable∣nesse) to chose your maiestie, especially to be his champion to defend his beloued church. And in this respect, (like as all faithfull and true Christiā princes throughout all Europe do esteme and repute you) do I also, and that

of good right call your grace a moste happie and blessed Prince. Consider I beseche you, how God hath blessed your maiestie in thys worlde more than he hath done any of your progenitours. For neuer was it seene in any age or time heretofore, that this your realme of England hath flourished as it dothe at this present vnder your Maiesties moste happie gouernement. Firste in all kinde of liberall Artes and sciences. Secondarily in the abun∣dance of treasure, as well golde and siluer, as all sortes of riche and precious iewels and or∣namentes. Thirdely, in the free passage and trafike of all kinde of marchandise: Besides this, in good and politike lawes and ordinan∣ces, namely in the due execution of iustice, according to law and equitie. The worde of God is purely preached here in six or seuen languages. The Sacraments of Baptisme, and the holy Supper, sincerely ministred accor∣ding to Christes institution. Christian disci∣pline in due force in many places. Finally e∣uery countrey and nation that will liue here according to his holy worde, is receiued, and findeth good entertainement. O how happy and blessed is that King or kingdome, where

these things are in force Contrarywise most vnhappie are those princes, that banishyng and reiecting Christ, receiue that Antechrist, the sonne of the Diuell, and forsakyng the truth, embrace errour: To be short, that do al things ouerthwartly & clean against the hair For it is moste certaine and sure, that sodaine ruine and destruction shall fall vpon all wic∣ked and vngodly persons, as well nowe as in tyme paste, as experience hath well proued heretofore: Namely vpon Pharao, and hys kingdome of Egypt, vpon Ieroboam, Achab, Iezabell, and infinite other mo. Wher on the other part, the good kings & princes which feare the Lord, shal haue peace and comfort bothe in this worlde, and in the worlde to come: Like as had Iosua, Iuda, Gedeon, Dauid and diuers other in those days, and is also to be seene at this day most euidently in the re∣almes and countreyes vnder youre Maiesties dominion, whiche God hath blessed in suche sort, that it may truly be sayd, that the king∣dome of Saturne, and the Golden worlde is come againe, and the Virgin Astrea is des∣scended from heauen to builde hir a seate in this your moste happie countrey of Englād.

For here is peace and quietnesse, where as the moste parte of foraine countreyes are full of great tumultes, and that (more is the pitie) with the sheding of much christian bloude. And where as many myghtie kings and po∣tentates of the earthe haue banded and con∣spired together, & fight euery where against God his anointed, and his holy churche, ben∣dyng their force vtterly to deface hys name, his glorie, and his Churche: Almightie God of his diuine prouidence hath nowe also in these days (like as he hath in all ages hereto∣fore) raised vp diuers good and godly prin∣ces and states, and prouided certaine places, wherto the elect and faithfull haue resorted & bene preserued, during the time of perse∣tion, to the ende that his holy name myght there be glorified, his worde purely and sin∣cerely preached, and his Churche dispersed, in a manner restored. As it is also come to passe in these our most miserable days, in the whiche suche as syncerely loue and esteeme more derely the honoure and glorie of God than they doe their owne commodities, ease, and welfare, (after the counsel of Christ, say∣ing in this wyse: Yf they persecute you in one

citie, flie ye vnto an other) haue bene cōtent to depart their owne naturall countrey, wholly to forsake their landes, inheritances, possessi∣ons, and dwellyng places, yea and some also, to urrēder their offices, dignities, & worldly preferments. An other sort with their wiues children and parentes are departed into Ger∣manie, namely into the territorie and domi∣nion of Frederike prince Elector and coūtie Palatine, the floure of all Christian Princes in these dayes (that I knowe) in the feruent zeale and true feare of God, a man worthy to be compared with Dauid, or Iosias. Others are fled into other places elsewhere, some to one cuntrey, some to an other, euery one ac∣cording to his abilitie, estate, condition, and facultie. But we a numbre of vs are arriued in saftie in this your maiesties realme of En∣glande, as into a moste safe and sure harbo∣rough, where we liue (God be thanked) vn∣der your Maiesties protection and safegarde in greate libertie to serue God in eyther lan∣guage, the French or the Dutche, without al feare of tyrantes, or daunger of the gapyng throates of greedie rauening wolues. After the same maner hath God in time past pre∣serued

& deliuered his elect out of the hāds of their enimies & persecutes by the mini∣sterie of dyuers vertuous women. As is to be sene in the .4. chapt. of the boke of Iudges. How God deliuered his people of Israel out of the hāds of Iabin king of Chanaan, by De∣bora the prophetesse, by selling Sizara chiefe captain of his armie into the hād of a womā called Iahel. As he also preserued Dauid frō the furie of Saul, by Michl Sauls own dau∣ghter. As he deliuered the citizēs of Bethulia, frō the tiranny of Holoernes, by the hand of that most vertuous Ladie Iudith And as the childrē of Israel, were saued by the counsel of Mardocheus, at the instāce & request of the most gratious & humble Hester where they were lately before in peril of death & presēt destructiō by the conspiracie of wicked Ha∣man. The like hath ben brought to passe by diuers other renoumed Ladies, whose fame shal endure for euer. And surely the graces & mercies that God hath shewed to his affli∣cted church in these later days by your maie∣sties means, ar no lesse thā those he hath she∣wed tofore by the late rehersed ladies: so that your grace deserueth equal praise and cōmē¦datiō

with them, cōsidering with what gētle∣nesse & with how louing & charitable affec∣tion you haue receiued the poore scattered flock of Christ. Is not your Maiestie then to be estemed infinitely more happy & blessed that are so specially elect of god to serue him for such an instrumēt, & in such a quarel, & that maugre the beards of the enimies, being enraged through the malice and obstinacy of their hearts do persecute the church of God? Yes assuredly, most happy, christiā, and ver∣tuous princesse, euen in the highest degree. Howe shall I be able then to expresse with tong, or to endite with pen your praises suf∣ficiently? verily I am confounded and put to silence, and do confesse my self to be altoge∣ther insufficient. Wherfore (moste gracious Ladie) I rest with my heartie and continuall prayer vnto God for your maiestie, that he turne not his face from you, but that it wold please him to continue and daily to encrease his grace and fauor towards you, and his ho∣ly spirite within you, as also in and towardes those that be of your Maiesties counsel, and all other Magistrates and officers whatsoe∣uer hauing authoritie vnder your highnesse

within your maiesties realms and dominiō that walking in the fear & loue of him they may do al their endeuour through the prea∣ching of his holy word to aduaunce his holy name, and aboue al things especially to seke the safetie and weal of his church. And ther∣fore for the great benefit & good that God hath don vnto his church by means of your maiesty (most gracious prince) al tru faithful whatsoeuer they be, as wel strangers as your natural subiects seke to do vnto your maie∣stie most faithful and honorable seruice, ac∣cording to their power. Besides, in al their as∣sēblies & in euery congregation they make their hartie & feruēt prayers vnto almightie God for the helth of your soule, the safegard of your most royal person, & the prosperous estate of your realm long to cōtinue. And I especially for mine own part, bicause I wold not be vnthākful for the great benefits I en∣ioy by your grace, abiding vnder your maie∣sties protectiō (forasmuch as ingratitude is a a most horrible and detestable vice) in con∣sideration thereof (moste gracious Lady) I present your highnesse with this smal Trea∣tise of mine, as the best Iewel that I haue in

store at this presente, in signification of my good wil, and for declaration of my duetie in this behalfe, beseeching youre highnesse moste humbly to accept it in good parte as (considering your maiesties natural bountie and your accustomed goodnesse) my trust is you will vouchsafe to doe. For I am persua∣ded (albeit the stile be rude) that the matter shall be fitte for your Maiestie to reade, and that the same shall not be vnpleasant vnto you, but minister vnto your grace great oc∣casion of much ioy, peace, and contentation of minde and conscience. And these be the causes and respects for the which I presume to present the same to your maiestie, in most humble maner beseching your highnesse to accepte the same, and praying to almightie God to graunt vnto your Maiestie a moste happie reign in this world: and after this life to reigne with him for euer, for his only son our Lorde Iesus Christes sake.
At London your Maiesties Citie and seate royal.
The .25. of May .1569.

