



IT is a wise, and not so wise as true a saying of a trauled writer (Right Honorable and Noble) vttered vp∣pon his owne experience, that hee was alwaies of opinion and minde, that the perfect prayse of wisedome and learning, is not to be sought for in bookes, but to be gotten by verie vse and practise▪ They therfore that by continuall studie, and incessaunt reading do vsurpe & chalenge to themselues the title of know∣ledge, are not alone to be iudged wise; but they rather muche more are to be esteemed such, who setting apart al other their priuate businesses and affaires (though to them very aduaunta∣geable) are conuersant in this worlde as in a Theater of mans life, and by due triall are taught the diuersities of countries, the differences of peoples manners, the examples of life, and mani∣fold thinges besides, which Trauellers doe comprehend with their eie, and compasse by their wit. For what is more discom∣mendable, what more vnbeseeming a man that is studious, spe∣cially being nobly borne, than alwaies to aide at home like a snaile in the shel, to waxe olde in vayne pleasure without praise,

and vnnecessary leysure, without profit, and not to meditate & thinke that at one time or other it is meete to hoouer with the winges, to leaue the nest, and to flie abroade, that they may aspire to the knowledge, and attaine to the sight of great mat∣ters, wherwith they shal neuer be acquainted, otherwise than by the booke or the map, which differ as much in mouing the imagination and other faculties of the mind, as the represen∣tation of a thing in a glasse or a paynted table, doth vary from the thing represented? To vndertake trauelling, the vtilitye (which is not small) springing from thence, shoulde inuyte all liberall mindes and free natures. And in truth none are so muche adorned and benefited by peregrination as Noble and Great men; though doubtlesse it is not deniable, that common men, (I meane not triobular mates) men I say, of base descent and linage, haue thereby not only bin commended to the Ho∣norable; but also their owne experience and triall of occur∣rents in trauelling, doth procure thus much more than ordi∣nary vnto them, that they are among men vntrauelled as Hes∣perus among the smaller starres. For when wee eyther heare or reade of fruitefull countries, of well gouerned common∣wealthes, of true religion and diuine worship, of learned men, of trayning vp youth, of manners and behauiours &c: is it not sweete in euery ones eare, is it not woorth the vnderstanding, doth it not deserue diligent marking and remembring? But yet much more pleasaunt, and profitable is it to view the very things them selues, to behold them, and to see them with satie∣tie, as the Poet very aptly saith:
That which we heare with outwarde eare,
moues not the minde so much,
As that which beames of rowling eyes,
atteine vnto and touch.
A certaine Traueller, but (as maye bee suspected by the course of his writing) superstitious, according to his time, spea∣king of a voyage of his owne, saith thus: Shoulde it grieue or repent me of my peregrination to Rome, specially in the yeare of Iubile? No in truth. For such thinges as were doubtfull to

me, before vncertaine, & as a shadow, are now, by the infallible testimonie of mine eies assured vnto me with singular credite, and haue raised vp in me an exceeding delectation & astonish∣ment. They therfore at no hand deserue the hearing, which be∣ing induced by an argument drawen from the greatnesse of the labors, & the dangerousnes of circumstances incident vnto tra∣uelling, suppose that the same is to be laide a eepe, to be omit∣ted, & not medled with at all. But what (think we) may be obie∣cted against those shelsnailes? This truly, that people are borne to paynes taking, as birdes to flying. Aristotle in his Ethicks re∣quiring a capable hearer of his morall preceptes, reiecteth infantes and olde men as insufficient: which two degrees of age do seeme (in some mens thinking) vnfit for trauelling: be∣cause the one, by reason of their multiplied yeeres; are to be released from the tediousnesse thereof; the other also, in re∣spect of want in iudgement, vnderstanding and strength, are wholly to be sequestred from it. But I do much mislike their o∣pinion, and the reasons likewise thereto anned. For though infantes are vnfit for peregrination, yet to exclude olde men, as vnapt, is (in my poore cōceipt) palpable erronous. For in a mat∣ter nothing doubtfull to vse needlesse proofe as Tullie neatly saith) we haue an example of Iacob, an old man, & ful of yeres, who notwithstanding trauelled out of his own countrey into Aegypt, partly by constraint of famine, and artly also for hys sonne Iosephs sake, whom naturally he loued▪ Agayne, if olde men are condemned as vnfit for peregrination, then truely (by the same comparison) women much more whom the same Ari∣stotle tearmeth vnperfect creatures. But the Queene of the South, hearing of Solomons wisedome, glory, and mightinesse left the territories of her owne dominions, o see him wyth her eyes, whose incomparable renowme had amazed her hearte. So then by these instaunces the former reason see∣meth too halte, and the Authour thereof to haue saide some∣what▪ but yet with little aduisement and to small purpose.
I might adde to these Hagiographicall examples, other tsti∣monies deduced and brought out of prophane Chronologies,

both auncient and moderne; were it not that I feare the cen∣sure of some politike Hanniball, and incurre deserued blame for talking fondly of a thing wherein I haue no practise, as som∣times did foolified Phormio. Onely this I say, that the greatest commendation and praise of a traueller is, not onelye to talke by knowledge roundly of such famous Cities, Countries, peo∣ple, and other straunge obiectes as he hath seene; but also to speake their language redily, to learne their manners desirous∣ly, to know their religion perfectly, their pollicie throughly, their gouernment absolutely, and all thinges els, that hee may imploy himselfe about profitably; as it is recorded of Vlisses▪ whom Ascham out of Homer commendeth in these words:
All trauellers doe gladly report great praise of Vlisses,
For that he knew many mens manners, and saw many cities.
And as histories beare witnesse of Mithridates the King of Pontus, whose peregrinations and expeditions into forreyne landes was so beneficiall, that (besides a number of vnnamed commoditities) he had the exquisite vse of two and twenty sun∣dry tongues. But nowe (Right honorable and Noble) to stop this flowing streame of wordes, I leaue to the leuell of your ex∣act considerations the manifold vtilities of peregrination, be∣cause you are completely furnished with knowledge and expe∣rience in that behalfe, not seuered, but vnited. Beseeching you to accept at my handes, with no lesse fauour and well liking, than is presented with hearty goodwill and honest meaning, a work extant in French, published in Duitch, & now printed in English at my costes & charges for the general profite & plea∣sure of the studious, and al such as delight in nouelties. Wherin thinges no lesse straunge and true are remembred, than eyther Christopherus Colonus noteth in his voyage to the Indies, or Petrus Martyr de Angleria mentioneth of the West Ocean y∣landes, or Gonzalus Ferdinandus Ouiedus specifieth of the oc∣cidentall Indies, or Ludouicus Wertomannus rehearseth of A∣rabia, Aegypt, Persia, Syria, Aethiopia, &c. or Maximilian Tran∣siluan recordeth of the wonderfull nauigation of the Spaniards rounde about the worlde, &c. Hoping that your Honorable

wisedomes wil esteeme of it, as the commendable labours of an aduenturous and skilfull trauelled Gentleman, doth requyre: which is the vttermost, and indeede all in all▪ that I can wish; sauing health, and happye dayes to your Honors, with the ful∣nesse of all vertue, and perfect noblenesse.

