



Most Honorable Lord,
I Haue bin long ballanced betweene Desire, and Feare: The first inclining vnto: The second swaying me from, the publishing of these vnworthy lines: especially vnder so honorable a Name. But the first beeing a passion, in counterpoysible preuailed. Onely Feare remayneth, least your high prudence, and admired grauity, should disesteeme the gracing of seeming Letlie. Because many friuolus Poems, are dayly begotten and brought forth, worthy to be abandoned. Yet many worthy subiects haue been handled in verse, much graced and imbraced of the wise. And howsoeuer these silly lines, may seeme vnworthy the hand, or eye, of so worthy a Patron, there is vse in some of them, to be made by men of whatsoeuer condition: If it be but to the chasing a∣away of that common enemy Idlenes; And to preuent thoughts lesse beseeming mindes inclinable to vertue. For, where vertue is a stranger, vice is a dayly guest.

 tue, the Mther, , and guide to most solide content: Containing the Appetite, euer within the circle of Sobrietie. Obseruing that the more Concupiscence is sa∣tisfied, and fed, the more irregularly it runnes, from one voluptuous experiment to another; neuer satisfied with the admired varieties, of abhorred vanities. Men enter this life, as into a Labyrinth, or fatall Desert of changes, and miseries. And none escapeth the incoun∣ter of those hideous Minotaures, Vice, or Enuy, whose dangers are as Silla, and Caribdis, by shunning the first, he fals into the second. Democritus laughed to see the folly of men: But much more might Heraclitus weepe to obserue the miseries, whereinto they are subiect to fall by Vice, or Enuy. Onely that Diuine Ariadne (ver∣tue) giueth vnto euery prudent Theseus, the line of Right Reason, to cōduct him, through all the ambiguous Angles, and crooked turnings of this lifes Labyrinth, wherin Vice and Enuy, couch to snare & surprise the wi∣sest. Common experience the Mother of best vnder∣standing reueileth this, as in the glasse of the risings and fallings, of men, which I haue endeuored, in some weake measure, in these simple Elegies to dilate: not to teach, but to put men in minde, of the vncertaintie of all estates in this mortalitie, wherein there is nei∣ther safetie, or content, without adhering to Vertue, whose companion is Enuy, which euer followeth, but neuer fayleth the vertuous. Sola virtus inuicta.

