



SIR,
EVER SINCE, through your fauour, I haue had accesse, vp∣on occasions, vnto your house: And ha∣uing seene the religious or∣dor, which you obserue in

the course of your diuine exercise of prayer with your people; I haue studied to giue some testimony of my thāk∣fulnesse; that you were plea∣sed to admit me an often par∣taker of the same with you: as also of your immerited fa∣uours, in many other kindes, not being able to recompēce the least of them. Now, to shew my selfe in some mea∣sure mindfull that I owe you thankfulnesse; I am bold to leaue with you this silly pawne, the Pensiue Soules De∣light, consisting of Motiues vnto, and Prayers for diuine purposes, to stirre vp such as haue any holy desire to that most sweet exercise: for, in

nothing doth true godlines shew it selfe more, then in faithful prayer, with the sin∣cere practise of a holy life. And no action produceth more solide comfort, in all occasions of the hearts hea∣uines, then doth the practise of true prayer, and supplica∣tion in the spirit to God, who is more moued therby, then with any other, whatsoeuer, sacrifice of man: and the neg∣lect of this most holy duetie, is more inexcusable, then a∣ny other diuine action what∣soeuer. Euery man cannot giue almes, by reason he wan∣teth the meanes; yet may he Pray: many godly duties may be omitted by necessitie:

but Prayer neuer: nothing pleaseth God more, nor ap∣peaseth him sooner then Prayer. And nothing more woundeth, and resisteth that spiritual enemie, then it. And that maketh him seeke, and execute all meanes, to pre∣uent, peruert, & hinder it. As long as a māliueth carelesse∣ly, carnally, and sencelesse of the necessitie of this diuine duty, Satā neuer trobles him; he is at peace with him: but let him begin to addresse him∣selfe to God in Prayer; then wil that subtile Serpent thrust in a thousand opposite thoughts, to crosse his holy intention. Prayer is a most ir∣some exercise to Satan: he ne∣uer

hath or wil permit a man truely to serue God, but hee will peruert his will and holy affections, as much as in him lieth: and therefore must e∣uery man that wil liue in this sacred seruice of God, arme himselfe to the combate, as eue∣ry true childe of God well knoweth by experience. The reading of prophne bookes, gaming, surfeting, drun∣kennesse, whoredome, corporall, and carnall delights, and world∣ly affaires, passe without breach of league with Satan; neyther troubleth it the minde of the secure man. But Prayer so farre troubles and disquiets the Serpent, that he roares like a Lion against it;

which argueth Prayer to bee the onely and safest defence against Satan and Hel, and the vanities of this life to be the weapons which mortal men beare, and vse to fight for S∣tan against God. A fearefull condition it is to bee bewit∣ched with these corporall, carnal and worldly inchant∣ments, which so possesse the hearts and soules of such as neglect Prayer, as they are alreadie dead in their soules, being yet aliue in their bo∣dies; they are alreadie parta∣kers of that blacke and infer∣nall darknesse heere, onely weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth, futurely attend them. Happie therefore is

that man, and happie is that family, that haue the holy exercise of prayer in conti∣nuall vse, though in continu∣all warre with Satan, and his Angels, and instruments. It is frequent in your family, let no worldly occasion discon∣tinue it. It seasoneth all your actions, and maketh them acceptable to God, helpfull to men, & profitable to your selfe. God hath giuen you a rich taste of his blessings: let him still smell that sweete sauour of your continuall supplications and thankful∣nes, which you haue begun: you runne well, continue to the end. Looke not back, lest you lose the rich prize you first

aimed at, for a vanishing sha∣dow, that will flie from you, and faile you, when you come to your race end. I need not aduertise you, that there are in euery man two cōtrarie substances, the Soule, and the Bodie: and that eue∣rie man is euen so capable of two contrary and incompa∣tible pleasures, the spirituall and the carnall; and so farre as doth the substance, so far doth the pleasure of the soule exceed that of the bo∣die, which being but a pain∣ted and temporarie pleasure, is neuer desired of those that are truely acquainted with the delights of the soule, which are eternall. Thus I

write (Right worshipfull) not to teach you, but as a lo∣uing Prompter, to put you in minde of your first loue to him that loued you first: loue him and serue him still and hee will blesse you still; and so I wish, in him, whom he loueth best, Christ, our common Sauiour and Redee∣mer.
Hendon, this 6. of May, 1615.

