



GReate cōforte is it to Chri∣stes pore floceke (right wor∣shipful syr) among so manie hudge Rockes and wylde seas, as oure weste partes are compassed with all: to haue some porte or ha∣uē wher Christes shippes mought cast ancre, and for a space haue suc¦coure, tyl ye stormes be paste. This fatherlie prouision maketh the al myghtie and most mercifull Lorde al waies to helpe thē that be hys. And though Ionas sincke yet is ye whale redie to kepe him frō perish∣ing & to brynge hym to land, as a∣monge so manye greate stormes, no meruaile thoughe some haue ben pluged vnder the water but of suche, gloriouse shall the resur∣rection

be. But in my contrey (my right deare sir) where most dayn∣ger appeareth to be: scantly hath ther any wette their feete, praysed may the name of God be therfore, yt so prouideth for yong suckelinges whiche else shoulde be ouer whel∣med before they were weaned frō their milke. Your pure and yer∣nest zeale toward gods truth and paynefull laboures infendeynge innocentes is not vnknowne to a great menye. But would to God it were farther knowne, euen tho rowe out. Not that you shoulde haue the prayses of men for your laboure, for they belonge to God and it is wickednesse to seke them from hym, but that it myght pro∣uoke other mē of worship, and ho∣nour also in all places, to so feruēt and godlye desire of Christes doc∣trine, to be publisshed among vs, Namely the whole bible, the scrip∣tures of God, the newe and olde

testament. Which onely doctrine is a lone sufficient to teache vs the true worship of God, fayeth in his promises, and in all good workes, to walke the waye to euerlastinge lyfe. To the defence of thys hea∣uenly doctrine (I saye) woulde I prouoke all mē of honour and wor¦shipe, by your ensample, if wit and learneing failed not. Your gentle∣nesse and liberalitye, towardes me and al those that longe for that heauenly doctrine: I passe ouer wt silence, to cut awaye occasions frō iuell tonges, althoughe the exam∣ple be greatly to be desired, in all men of worshippe, yea in all them that professe Christe accordinge to theyr power.
Al these thinges nowe conside∣red, besyde the manyfolde labours and daylye trauaile that you take diuers waies to haue the veritye knowne, to bannyshe lieinge and cloked holinesse, to haue the Lorde

truly worshiped, and to rote cut Idolatrie. Consideringe also your yerneste desier to thys my smal la∣boure in writing to maister Chris∣pyne a simple letter, for asmuch as I perceyued that you were deter∣minatly mynded to put it in print I thought I coulde not bestowe my laboure better, then to set it furthe in your name chiefely to purg me from that euel suspicion that is lyke to ensue the printinge of it. For seinge they begin to byte me priuilye all redye, for exhibi∣tynge certayne Articles preached of oure learned men, and woulde perswade men that I dyd it of a pretēced malice, sekeinge their de∣struction: I knowe well they shall saye much rather, that it was my suite to haue this my letter spread a broad, and that I dyd it to seeke prayse, as they alwayes seeke most preise to them selfe, ye least deserue it, or that I stād in mine owne cō∣ceite

as to thinke yt I haue done a∣great acte, wheras I acknowe∣ledge it in deede to be but counter∣faite, in cōparison of a great nūbre that be wel leraned. Which if they had the matter in handlyng: these men myght haue been a shamed to shew their faces in a pulpit, to declare any suche matter agayne Nowe to preuente these biteinge serpentes of thys poisone the lord knoweth whether it be my faute or no to haue it printed, and you partly can testifie. Notwithstand∣ynge▪ it shal not greue me to haue it prynted, but rathere I shalbe glad of it thoughe it were but for thys cause onelie. To declare vnto all other contreis, that deuensher lacketh not some well wyllers (at the leaste) as well amonge the pore creatures, as the riche and wor∣shipfull, ye desier the glorye of God and furdraunce of hys word. As touchinge the articles offerred to

the visitours, which they say to be done of malice, hatered, and manie other good morowes, let suche mē knowe that I hate theyr doctrine in dede. As for any malice that I owe to the men: I axe no more grace and fauour of the Lorde, to be geuen to my selfe, then I wysh to the vilest of them all, if it might so come to passe and please God. For I knowe there can no suche ranckor and malice dwell in any christen herte, as they iudge other men by them selues.
And thys I saye more ouer, that I am assured of these mini∣sters and of the kynges counsayle also: that they be no suche bloude thurstye tirantes, as haue pleasur in shedynge of bloude. For if they were but as cruell in punisheinge the blynde wycked and sedici∣ouse. I nought saye, preachers, as the popes ministers haue beene in tormentyng innocentes: I take

God to wytnesse, I woulde neuer haue declared so muche as I haue vnto them, though I should haue smarted for it. This much haue I sayde, to declare vnto all honeste hertes myne innocencie in suche thynges as they begin to laye to my charge: and to stope the mou∣thes of them, that can do naught elles but slāder, flatter, and dissē∣ble, euen with theyr frindes, that they mought holde theyr tongues lest if they passe theyr boundes. I opē them to theyr shame let them take thys for a warning. Neithere let them thynke this spoken of ma¦lice, for I spake it for theyr hone∣stie and quietnesse, as wel as mine owne commoditie.
Now, to conclude in fewe wordes I haue added to thys my letter, a little appologie or defence, the bet¦ter to wythstande theyr cruel and subtyle deceite. And because, they lye alwaye lurckynge in bulwor∣kes

and wyll not come furth into the open fielde, I haue in the ende made a little bulworke, out of the whyche I haue shotte a fewe of theyr owne pellettes. Not that I thinke them necessarie to confoūd them wyth all: but euen to shame them whē they shal se them selues striken with theyr owne weapons
Esai. xxix.Beholde, nowe appeare those meruailouse thynges that Esaye speaketh of so ernestlie, in so much that he repeteth it agayne. Yea e∣uen meruailouse thynges and a wonder, sayth he, and what is it? It foloweth. For the wysdome of the wyse shal perishe, & the vnder¦standeinge of the wyttye, shal hide it selfe. But wherefore happeneth thys? Loke you a little before and you shal easelye perceiue the cause No man can open it more playne, then the prophet doeth hym selfe. Read the place.
After this will I poure out my

spirite (saieth Ioel) vpon all fleshe,Ioel. ii. and your sonnes and daughters shal prophecie your olde mn shal dreame dreames, and, your yonge men shall se visions. Yea in those dayes I wil poure out my spirite vpon maidens and seruaūtes. & ct
Nowe therefore,i. Pet. . seynge that S Peter affirmeth after the Pro∣phete Esay, that al fleshe is grasse,Esaie. xi. and al ye glorye of mā is as ye floure of grasse, the grasse withereth and the flower falleth a waye, but the worde of oure God abydeth for e∣uer: I woulde exhorte in you (ryght worshippefull syr) all men frome the hygheste to the loweste, to cleaue faste to the word of god. For it wyl come to passe, that who soeur calleth vpon the name of the Lorde shall be saued. Who e∣euer defende you Amen

