



AL aūcient Historiographers (my singuler good Mayster) for theyr difficult trauayl, merite most hye laud, whose famous woorkes re∣ueleth to our memory the secrete doinges of tyme past: and also bewrayeth to tyme pre∣sent, the vnknowen actes of oure Elders. For although by ye course of Nature, their bodies are kylled: yet lyueth theyr good or euyll deedes, in the euerlastyng report of let¦ters. Amonge these none deserueth more praise, nor worthy of more veneracion, then the most noble writer Sebastian Moūster: whose large labour greatlye surmounteth the doynges of any other. Thys Mounster both compendiously & briefely (and yet elo∣quently and truly) entreateth, not onely of one, & hys own natural soyle: but generally
of al Nacions, the situacion of their Coun∣tries, the maners of theyr people, wyth the ryghtes and vsages of their Princes. In whose volume it was my fortune to reade the description of Swedlande, Gothland, & Finland. And findyng these Countries to be so large and fruitefull, theyr Kynges so noble and auncient, & theyr people so migh∣ty and valiaunt. Consideryng the vertue of Princes to be a myrrour to looke on, & their vices a terrour to thynke on, & also for that swyft Fame hath published the reporte of these people vnto vs: I thoughte meete to reduce the same hystorye into our vulgare tounge, thoughe not so copiouslye and elo∣quentlye as any learned myght haue done. The situacion and naturall lying of theyr great and large Countries, the rytches, fer¦tillitye and fruitfulnes of the same, wyth theyr noble & notable Cities, I haue brief∣ly ouerpassed. The old estate and auncient raygne of theyr Kinges, with theyr diuers and sundrye alteracions, sometyme by the Danes, sometyme by the Norwayes, and sometyme by deuision among them selues.
I haue in few words collected. But the hor¦rible and cruel tyranny of the second Chri∣stiern kyng of Denmarke, against the Swe¦cians, and hys iust reward for the same, the poleticke attaining of King Gostaue to the crowne, hys triumphant Coronacion, hys prudent gouernyng, with the vertuous pro¦uidyng for the education & learned instruc∣tion of the moste noble Eric nowe Kyng of Swecia, I haue most amply declared. Ga∣thering the report hereof out of sundry Aut¦thors, as Iohn Magnus, Archbishoppe of Vpsalen, Saxus Grammaticus, and Seba¦stian Mounster, whose authoritye I haue chieflye folowed. Proferynge the same (to your worshyp) as the fruites of my trauail in your absence: acknowledging herewith∣al the remembraunce of my seruiceable deu∣ty and good wil to your Mastership, whose large & ample benefites I haue not seldome tymes receyued, with your fauorable good∣nes, not onely to me, but also to euerye one, whose nede you knew to want your reliefe. More, what friend remaynes vnrecompen∣ce? any friendshyp towardes you? What
stayed hand hath wythdrawen any gyft of yours from him who desyred it, and whom you thought worthy to receiue it? Besydes these your liberalities, your own trauel in foreyne & straungenacions wyth the per∣fect vnderstandyng, & almost natural spea∣kyng of theyr languages: importeth you to be as trym a Courtier, as you are knowen to be a worthy Soldiour. I woulde dilate your seueral vertues, but I feare to incurre your displeasure thereby, whose eares enui∣eth the hearing of your own praise, & whose tounge thundreth oute the good fame of o∣thers. Also some sclaunderous Sicophāts would saye my pen dyd flowe rather wyth affection and flattery, then wyth troth and veritye. But to suche (as neuer learned to speake wel) I answer (that besides the part of a Seruaunt) I haue wayed more your inward natural inclinacion, then your out∣warde franke doynges, althoughe they are sufficient wytnesses wyth me of thys my reporte. Most humblye desiryng you to ac∣cept in good part thys my vnlearned labor, that I haue vnder the defence of your good¦nes
putin publycke prynt, whyche if it bee thankfully taken, may encourage me here∣after to attempt larger workes, whereby I truste as well to profyt my Countrye, as to content my selfe. Wyshinge the prosperous successe of Fortune to cal you to your harts desyre, wyth the fruitfull continuaunce of helth betwene you and my Mystres, whose goodnes both I and myne haue oftē tymes aboundauntly tasted, to whom I wysh lyke prosperitye. Whose mynde is frayted wyth a nomber of sober vertues.

