


MOST DREAD, AND GRACI∣OVS SOVE∣RAIGNE,
I know not to whome I should more fitly present these Disputes in matters of Controuersy, then to your Highnes, who hath Learning to vnderstād, Wisedom to discerne, and Authority to commaund, that Faith and Religion be obserued in your Realme; which is most conformable to the Scriptures, and consonant to the do∣ctrine of the Primitiue Church, to which you haue beene pleased long since to sub∣mit

your Royall Iudgment, & now of late most prudently forbidden those newfan∣gled writers, who spurning at the Testa∣mentes of their Forefathers, call the Be∣liefe of all Antiquity in question.
Therefore I haue heere laid open to your Princely View, that vnspotted truth, which the Lambe of God deliuered vpon earth; which the Apostles preached, and committed to writing; which the Aunci∣ent Fathers in the first fiue hundred yeares sincerely taught, and inuiolably mantey∣ned; as I proue, not only by their owne irrefragable testimonies, but by the con∣fession also of the Aduerse Part: which if your Gracious Clemency would giue vs leaue, vnder your fauourable winges, pea∣ceably to enioy, and freely to professe (at least in secret without the offence of any) it must needes oblige vs more fast to our dutifull Allegiance (of which howsoeuer in our greatest extremities we shall neuer be wanting) then all the lawes of Confor∣mity, Oathes of Fidelity, or other Punish∣ments can inforce.
For what more sure band then the tye

of Conscience, the obligatiō of Religion, the seale of Fayth, and promise we owe to God? which being truly kept, as our Ca∣tholike Profession strictly bindeth vs, no daunger of Treason, no fewell of Sedition, no alienation of Minds from Prince, or Countrey, can be feared. On the contrary side, if those heauenly bandes be once vi∣olated by any, in taking an Oath hurtfull to their conscience, preiudiciall to their Religion, what trust or security can be re∣posed in them? what hope of fidelity in ci∣uill affayres, who in matters diuine, in the most weighty affayres of their Souls, haue openly committed the deepest disloyalty?
Wisely was this obserued by Princes in former tymes. When Hunnerike the King of the Vandalls had guilefully proposed an Victor Vticen. lib. 3. de persec. Vandal. paulo post initium. entrapping Oath to the Catholique Bi∣shops of Africk, those, who refused to take it, he presently banished from their Seas, as enemyes to the Crowne: Such as con∣descended to his will, and bound them∣selues by oath to performe his desire, he mistrusting their fidelity, commaunded likewise to depart from their Churches,

and neuer to see them more; because con∣trary to the law of God, or commaunde∣ment of his Ghospell they presumed to sweare. A subtile, yet pernicious deuise.
More cōmendable was the fact of Theo∣dorike Nicepho. l. 16. c. 35. Zonaras, Cedrenus, & Theod. lect. 2. collectan. King of the Gothes & Conquerour of Italy. For when a fauourite of his, very deare vnto him, to be more endeared, fell to Arianisme which the King imbraced, he straight way commaunded him to be be∣headed, with this cause of condemnation pronounced agaynst him; How should I look thou shouldest be true to me a man, since thou hast not beene faythfull in thy promise to God? Eusebius l. c. 12. de vi. Const. Zo∣om. l. 1. bist. c. .
But most prudent, and fittest for my purpose was that of Constantius, Father to Constantine the Great; Who to discouer the harts and affections of his Subiectes, caused it to be promulgated to all of his Court at home, & Family abroad, that free choice & liberty was graunted thē, either by sacrificing to the Idols to continue his Fauour, & enioy their wōted honours; or spoyled of them to leaue his Pallace, his friendship & familiarity for euer. Here∣upō, when his Nobles & other of his reti∣nue

had parted thēselues into two seuerall companies, the one yielding, the other re∣noūcing to sacrifice; the wise Prince sharp∣ly rebuked their timidity & basenes who were ready to prostitute themselues tovile Idolatry, for preseruing of their temporal dignityes; & exceedingly commended the Constancy, & noble Resolution of the o∣thers, who rather chose to forsake their preferments thē their religiō. The former he cassiered as Traitours to God, and vn∣worthy his Imperial Seruice, For how (sayd A notable saying of of Con∣stantius, Father to Constan∣tine the Great, & his fact ensuing as worthy. he) can they keep their fayth inuiolable to the Emperour of the earth, who by so manifest a signe haue shewed thēselues perfidious to the great Mo∣narch of Heauen? These therfore he reiected & banished his Royal pallace. Those who by such an apparent triall & profession of Truth were foūd worthy of God, he adop∣ted into the number of his dearest & most familiar friendes: those he placed about him as Gardiās of his person: those he more esteemed then Exchecquers ful of inestimable trea∣sures; affirming, that they who had been so loyal vnto God, would be most faythfull also and loyall vnto him.

O that your Princely Wisdō would imi∣tate herin the Father whose sōne you wor∣thily praise; & set before your Royall eyes, as a president to behould, in the supreme Gouernement of your Soueraigne Estate! I would to God you would (as you may se∣curely) make the like account of such cō∣stant Recusants, who vpon iust feare of o∣ffending God, forbeare to yield in points of Faith, to the lawes of mē! I would their Dutifull Hearts were so well knowne vnto your Highnes, as their cause deserueth. Then with that famous Constantius, you would, & might iustly esteeme thē, as the true Friends of God, Souldiers of Christ, Treasures of your Kingdome, Suppliants for safety, & surest Guards of your Crown and Scepter. In whose persons I humbly prostrate my selfe at your Maiesties féete; beseeching the diuine Maiesty so to pros∣per your earthly Raygne, as after many happy yeares of peaceable gouernement, you may passe from this Transitory to his Eternall Kingdome.

