



RIGHT HONOVRABLE
THese Sermons, the first fruits of my la∣bours in the Ministery, preached many yeares since in the publique assemblies of this famous Vniuersity, do now at length adventure to go into the Country, to see what entertainement they can finde there. There they doubt not of respect, if they may be graced with the counte∣nance of some worthy patronage. It is my part to seeke it for them. And of whom shall I rather seeke it, then of your HO∣NOVR? They were studyed, penned, and delivered in that re∣nowned Academie, whereof now, when they are published, your HONOVR is the chiefe ruler. To your HONOVR ther∣fore do they of right belong. Receiue them much-Honoured Lord into your protection, & shield them against the tongues of railers. They will say: Is this the myrrh, the incense, the gold? are these the pearles, we looked he should bring to the buil∣ding of the Tabernacle? I reply, that Goats haire,Ex. 35.23 and the skins of Rammes, and Badgers, are welcome to that worke: and doe wish, that some willing offering of theirs may further it. If it be demaunded, why at this time I offer so simple a present to your Honourable view? My answere is; I do it to testifie that dutifull observance, & thankfulnesse, which I owe vnto your HONOVR. We Schollers, of all others must acknowledge
 our selues obliged to your HONOVR. Many, as well in this, as in that other Vniversity, might bury their bones in their cloysters, did not your HONOVR daily send them forth to la∣bour (God graunt they all proue labourers) in the vineyard of the Lord.Mat. 9.38. For mine owne particular; your Honourable counte∣nance was of late most ready to settle me in the Divinity Le∣cture for the Lady MARGARET, and was within these few weekes as forward to advance me to a higher preferment; but it pleased God otherwise to dispose of that. This your Honours more then credible benignity towards one, whom your HO∣NOVR never saw, can I forget? Its impossible. My right hand should deserue to loose her cunning,Psa. 137.5 would shee not take her first opportunity to write of so great bounty. For this cause, at this time, is this poore talent of mine presented to your HO∣NOVR. Accept it Honourable Lord, as the sincere testimony of my thankefull heart; and vouchsafe me still your Honourable favour. God Almighty showre downe plentifully of his best blessings vpon your HONOVR, and make you happy, and blessed in all your waies: and after fulnesse of age and felicity in this world, crowne he you with everlasting glorie in the Highest Heavens. From my Study in Corpus Christi College in Oxford, Iuly 2. 1614.

