


¶ To the right reuerende father in God, William, by the mercifull prouidence of God, through Iesus Christe, Bishop of Excester, Jhon Northbrooke wisheth all health and godlinesse long to continue, with the encrease of vertue, and zeale in religion.
COnsidering with my selfe (ryght reuerende father in God) the daun∣gerous practises of the Papistes, in these our dayes: who are euer redyer to put men in doubt, then to esta∣blishe them in the true Christian faith: more apt to bring them to des∣peration, then to true consolation by faith in Christe: more diligent to moue them to beleue man, then God: antechrist then Christ: the Pope, then the Scriptures: to trust to our owne workes then his merites: the massing sacrifice then, Christes oblation: po∣pishe pardons then free forgiuenesse in Christe: to honour a wafer cake for Christe, geuyng to the creature that is due vnto the Creator, making more of Sacramentes, then the nature of Sacramentes require: not vsing them, but abusing them: not referring nor applying them, but adoring them, turnyng reli∣gion into superstion: faith into opinion: and the true seruing of God into idolatrie: hauing vnder the visour of their vowed chastitie, adulterie: vnder the cloke of professed pouertie, all the goodes of the temporaltie: vnder the title of being dead vnto the world, they ruled the worlde: vnder the keyes to hang vnder their girdle, they brought all estates into the gulfe of ig∣noraunce, whereout commeth all heresies and errours, (saith S. Augustine) and yet as saint Paul saith, habentes speciem pietatis,Aug. de ci∣uit. dei. lib. 22. cap. 22. Psal. 119. sed vim eius abnegantes. Whereby they may abuse the simple peoples iudgementes, that they in no wise may knowe or vn∣derstande (through their hypocrisie) Gods holy worde, which lighteth our feete: stayeth our goinges: ordereth our mindes: gouerneth our bodies: directeth all our workes and affaires: tea∣ching

vs what we ought to do, and what we ought not to do, without which worde, neither king can raigne, lorde nor ma∣gistrate rule: nor subiect truely obey, as they ought to do: nor yet order well those things that are committed to their charge. And for that the simple ignoraunt people are caried so easily away, with the only sounde and voyce of the Papistes, by the names of the auncient Fathers and Doctours, from the true re∣ligion of Christ Iesus, made me to enterprise and take in hande, (although of all others moste vnmeete) this rude and simple worke: and the rather for that those that daily crie out that this religion is a newe religion, which was neuer allowed by the ho∣ly and Canonical scriptures: fathers, and counsels, that we nowe preach and mainteine in these our dayes. Whose mouthes, to stop & stay their cryinges out (if it may be) I haue here gathered (reuerende Father) together, certayne places of holy Scriptures, Fathers, and Counsels, (as concerning the principall pointes of relgion) wherein the simple and ignoraunt may playnely, and clearely see, as it were in a glasse, what side holdeth of Christe most truely: who preacheth Christ most faithfully: whose religi∣on is best allowed by the Scriptures: confirmed by the Martyrs▪ mainteined and taught by the Fathers, the Papistes or the Pro∣testantes: wherein they shall easily perceiue and vnderstand, that our religiō is the olde, true and catholique religion. And that the Papistes religion (which our late Louanistes, and Hardonians so stoutely mainteyne) is but a newe start vp, and deuised religion, (cleane cōtrary and against the word of God: godly Fathers, and good counsels) by certaine whoremaisters, Coniurers, Sorcerers, Traytors, Bastardes and Sodomites, Popes of Rome, with others. And although it is to be lamented to see the corrupt na∣ture of man, who is giuen, not to beleeue Christe, without the ancthoritie and witnesse of man, (who may rather therefore be called Patrologie then Theologie) yet for that God hath geuen suche light vnto men, to be as witnesses of his trueth, I haue here put downe, first the Scriptures, the number of euery verse: and then followeth the consent of the Fathers, Counsels: yea, euen the Papistes owne doctours, decrees, and sentences, euen to the very lowest degrees of the Popes champions, Maister

D. Harding, whereby all men may see that Baalams Asses of Rome, speake trueth many tymes, although against their wylles. There are in deede many notable learned men (as your Lordship well knoweth) which haue gathered certen bookes of common places in the Latine tongue: but that is to the ignoraunt that vnderstandeth it not, as the kernell within the shell to a litle weake childe. Wherefore, I haue by earnest re∣quest made by certayne of my freendes (whom wel I oulde not denye) taken this labour in hande: only for Gods honour and glories sake, and helpyng forwarde of my poore brethren, and countreymen, to the knowledge of Gods trueth in religion, that haue bene, and dayly are abused by the Papistes, with the names and titles of Fathers, and Counsels, to minister them weapons out of the Scriptures, and Doctours, wherewith they may beate downe their enimies, whensoeuer they shall seeme to open their mouth against Gods true religion, noweset foorth and taught of all the godly Bishoppes and Preachers. In this worke (reuerende Father) I haue not corrupted the Doctours wordes willingly: but simply and playnely set them downe, as I reade and finde them in their owne bookes: rather shewing my selfe homely and playne according to my skyll, then by ouer∣much finenesse aboue my reache, to dissent from the minde of the Scriptures and Fathers.
Nowe what thing shoulde I deuise to pleasure your Lord∣ship better: and that whiche agreeth so well with your estate and callyng, to be a Father in Christ his Church, then the ma∣nifestation of the holy Scriptures and Fathers, whiche fully allowe and mainteyne the religion nowe set foorth, whiche alwayes (as I haue vnderstanded) you haue sought: and of all true professours thereof, you haue bene a louer and defendour. Therefore I do here present, and dedicate this simple worke (of the poore mans Garden) vnto your Lordship, taking your name for a patrone and defendour against the bityng furies of snuffyng detractours: and momishe affections of bityng zoi∣lous persons, and heretical papistes, who dayly do enuie al good and godly doinges and exercises. And also to declare my hear∣tie good wyll towardes you, and the naturall loue I beare to my

natiue countreymen of Deuonshire. Most humbly beseeching your Lordship therefore, to take this poore and small rude la∣bour of mine in good part, and accept my good meanyng here∣in, which tendeth to the only glory of God: aduauncement of his kingdome, profite of my sayde countreymen, and to the ouerthrowe of all Gods enimies the Papistes, which haue kept the people in darknesse palpable, in horrours infinite, and in feare miserable, beseeching the Lord God, that if the greatnesse of feare wyll not incite them, yet the hope of saluation maye alure them from their wickednesse, to his glorie, and their owne saluation, through Iesus Christ. And that in the meane tyme, your Lordship with all other godly preachers & teachers, may reproue sinne and poperie sharply: preache Christ sweetely: im∣pugne errours pithily: and to perswade to good life ear∣nestly. Thus I leaue, any further troublyng you with my rude and homely stile and phrase of writyng, beseching God to blesse, kepe, and maintayne you in his feare: enriching you with al good blessinges: and alwayes gouerning you in all your affaires and doings, by his holy spirite, vnto the ende, and in the ende.


¶ Augustine in his. 7. Epistle.
¶ I confesse my selfe to be one of that number which write in profiting, and profite by writing.

