



WHen I cal to minde (right worshipful) the excel∣lent saying of the diuine Philosopher, that saith, Non nobis solū natisumus,Cicero. Lib. 1. de offics. ortusque nostri partē patria vendicat, partem parentes, partē amici &c.,1. Cor. 10.24. we be borne not for our selues alone: but some parte of our birth, our countrey, some part our parēs, some part our friends do claime, &c. (Plato did know only, by the light of natural reason, that al ex∣cellente and good giftes came of god, and were giuen to the intente that a man shoulde therewith helpe and profite others.Iames. 1.17. Of like opinion were all the Philosophers: which had tasted of honest discipline and learning made me to enterprise and take this treatise in hand, that I mought therby helpe those that are diseased with any of these diseases, either of diceplaying, dauncing, or vaine playes or enterludes, whiche raigneth too too much by so much amōgst Christiās, (especially in these dayes and light of the Gospel of Christ &c.) who soeuer therfore doth hinke him self to be a member of the commō wealth of Christ, (which is his mistical body,) he must nedes much more be inforced of Chri∣stian knowledge and charitie, to imploy his labours in bestowing those giftes which God hath giuen him, to the profit of others, than those Philosophers, which knew not god aright in his word, through Iesus Christ.
Saint Paul verie aptly (by a similitude) compareth the churche of Christ to a natural bodie.1. Cor. 12.12.14.20. Col. 1.18. Rom. 12.4.5.6.7 &c. As in the natural bodie euerie mem∣ber helpeth the whole: for we see, that there is in a natural bodie such an affection and desire of euerie member to helpe and maintaine the o∣ther,2. Cor. 11.15.16.17.21.22.27. that not only the senses be readie to do their part and office: as

the eie to see, the eare to heare, the nose to smel, the tong to tast, &c. & so likewise in the rest of the senses: but also al the other parts of the bodie do so much care for the whole,1. Cor. 12.26. that they refuse no danger (though it be neuer so great) to helpe and succour the same.
If anie man then, which beareth the name of a Christian, and of a Gospeller,Gal. 6.12. Col. 3.16. Prouerb. 27.23. Col. 1.18. Ephe. 5.23. shal espy forth anie thing, that may conduce and benefite the mystical bodie, and doeth not his endeuour to the vttermost to bring the same ther vnto: verily he is to be thought an vnprofitable member not worthy (in my iudgemēt) to be accompted of that mēber of whom Christ Iesus is the head: And also that he had not tasted of the spirit of god, which neither moued with example of the heathen, nor with loue towards the brethren, considering the great daungers that might ensue here vpō, would take some paines, and endeuour to procure medicines, so farfoth as in him lieth, to ease & help the same. VVhich (according to my exiled and slender learning) haue made this little treatise againste Diceplaying, Dauncing, and Vaine playes or Enterludes, giuing herein medicines and remedies against these dis∣eases which most of al trouble the whole mébers of the body: although at the first it seeme not toothsome, yet I dare auuch, it is holesome. VVe can be content (for the health of our bodies) to drinke sharp po∣tions, receiue and indure the operation of extreme purges, to obserue precise & hard diets, & to bridle our affectiōs & desires &c. much more shold we so do for the health of our soules. And wher should we seeke for this helth of our soules,Esay. 53.4. Luke. 9.17. Cap. 11.28. Numb 21.9. Cap. 3.16. 1. Cor. 6.11.12. but only at Christ Iesus, who is our only Phisitiō, who calleth eueryone to himself that is burdened & he∣vy lode and he will refresh thē: ths is that syrie serpent, that as ma∣nie as toke vpon him should liue. this is that I sope which purgeth vs: this is that red Cow without blemish not vsed to the yoke, that ma∣keth vs white. This is that sparrow which was staine &c. to set vs at libertie. This is the Lambe that taketh awaie our sinnes, original and actual. This is that Peliā which giueth out his own hart bloud to re∣main as his yong ones that haue ben stoong to death by the poyson of Satā.Ambrosli de Virgen bus. As S. Ambrose saith. Omnia Christus est nobis Sivulnus curare desideras: medicus est. S febribus estuas, sons est. Si gra∣uaris inquitate: iusticia est. Si auxilio indiges virtus est. Si morté times: vita est. Si coeū desideras: via est. Si tenebras fugis: lux est.

Si cib̄u quaeris: alimentū est. Gustate igitur et videte quam suauis est dominus, beatus vir qui sperat in eo. That is: If thou desire to be healed (of thy disease) Christ is thy Phisition: if thou wilt haue awaie the burning ague (of sinne) he is thy colde fountaine. If thou be grie∣ued with thine iniquities, he is thy righteousnesse: if thou be weake, he is thy strength: if thou fearest death, he is thy life: if thou desirest hea∣uen, he is the way: if thou wilte auoyde darknesse, hee is light: if thou be hungry, he is thy nourishment. O taste therefore and see, how sweete the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusteth in him. After I had ga∣thered togither this simple worke (which lay far abroad) & so had fini∣shed this treatise, I mused with my selfe, vnto what Patron I mought best direct the same. In fine, I found none more fit than your worship, cosidering your vertuous and godly dispositiō, which answereth your zelous and true profession of the gospel (for I am assured you vtterlye defie and detest al kinde of Poperie whatsoeuer) and for that I perceiue my selfe something addict and tyed with the bondes of singular & great friendship flowing from you to me, In recōpence wher of (bicause I haue none other treasures to exhibite vnto you, but onlie this little talent of my base and simple learning) I do here dedicate vnto youre worship this hooke (named a treatise against, Diceplaying, Dauncing, and vain playes or Enterluds) although rude & homely, yet (I doubt not) plaine & profitable for these times of ours wherein we liue: wher∣in I haue to craue (that nothing more hartily I can obtest) then your friendly acceptance of the same, for it is a token of my hearty good wil, remembring the worthy deed of the famous Persian Prince Artaxer xes, so much of euerie one commended. I humblie obtest your friend∣lie countenance: and by my strong bulwarke against the fuming frea∣tes and belching ires of saucie sicophants, Diceplayers, Dauncers, & Players, which if you do, I haue my whole desire, and crōinuallie I wil poure out prayers vnto the Lord of heauen and earth, to sende you in this earthlie mansion continual encrease of faith, knowledge and zeale in the gospel of Christ Iesu: with prosperitie, and accesse of manie bles∣sed and happie yeares: with your good ladie (Sarah.) And after this life, neuer ceassing & endlesse ioyes in the heauenly seniorie.
At Bristow. 
