


THERE is no kind of learning (right Honourble and Learned) which more conduceth to mans benefit (as in∣structing him in the way towardes heauen) then the sacred knowledge of Diuinity. There is no part of Di∣uinity more expedient in these our contentions and misbelieuing Times, which threaten shipwrack of our auncient Christian Faith, then the study of Con∣trouersies. There is no Controuersy more to be insi∣sted vpon, then the question concerning the Iudge of these Controuersies; since the proofe of it inuolues within it selfe, by force of necessary illations, the proofe of all other controuersiall points. For wheras most of the doubts betwene the Protestants and vs, being conuincingly demonstrated for certaine & in∣fallible; yet such proofes do but force the iudgment of the Reader only in those particulars. But it being heere once cōcluded & acknowledged on both sides,

what, or who is this Iudge, it then ineuitably fol∣loweth, that all those articles of faith are most true and Orthodoxall, which are found to be decreed, and defined by the sayd Iudge. Besides daily experience telleth vs, that the particular discourse of any dogma∣ticall point in Religion, being fortified and confir∣med either by vs, or our Aduersaries (according to the state therof differently maintained) with seuerall au∣thorities of Gods word, doth finally resolue into this point, to wit, who is to iudge of the sense and true meaning of the foresaid alledged testimonies. In so much as that we may iustly pronounce the question of this Iudge to be both the Center & Circumference of all other questions; since no lesse the lynes and deductiōs of all controuersies do (for their last resolution) meet and concurre in this one common poynt; then that it selfe being cleared and made euident, doth include & containe by demonstrable inferences, the proofe of al the rest, within the capacity and largnes of its owne Orbe.
The difference betwene vs and our Aduersaries herein is this. That we do ioyntly Cncil. Trident. sess. 4. teach, that the whole Church of God by the mouth of the chiefe pa∣stour alone, or otherwise seconded with a lawfull ge∣nerall Councell, is ordayned in appealably to define either from Scripture, or from the ancient practice of Gods Church, what is the vndoubted and Orthodo∣xall faith of Christians, what is Schisme and Heresy. But our Aduersaries Lu∣th. prae∣fat. asser∣tionis suae. Melancth∣locis de Ec∣clesia Cal∣uin. l. 4. Instit. c. 9. Chemni∣tius in exam. Cō∣cil. Tridēt. sess. 4. do with one consent main∣taine, that all Controuersies of faith are to be tryed by the touchstone of the holy Scripture; so as the Scripture it self is to become the sole iudge, since no∣thing (they say) is to be receaued, as an article of

fayth, but what hath it expresse warrant from the wrytten Word of God.
The sentence of the Catholiks in his Controuersy I forbeare to handle in this Treatise, since it is already discussed very painfully by diuers Catholike writers, and particularly in seuerall Tract. 1. sect. 4. subd 14. & tract 3. sect. 7. passages of that most learned worke of the Protestantes Apology of the Roman Church; the very store-house of reading, or the Ar∣mory, wherin are layed vp the weapons vsed by vs, and taken from our Aduersaries owne sides. There∣fore I will spend these ensuing leaues in refutation of our Aduersaries Doctrine, which consisteth in ma∣king the Scripture the sole iudge of Controuersies; a subiect not so frequently written off in particuler, though otherwise the reprouall therof be potentially and implicitly included in the confirmation of the Catholike contrary Doctrine.
Now (Graue & learned Sages) the reason embold∣ning me to dedicate this Treatise (otherwise vnwor∣thy your iudiciall view) to your selues, though of a different religion from me is the consideration of the subiect here discussed, which is indeed of that nature, as that you may iustly seeme to challenge a particuler interest therin: for since you are worthily placed in the ranke of those, who (to speake in the Psalmists Psal. 8. phrase) In vij institiae ambulant, & in medio semitarum iudicij; And since a true apprehension of temporall Lawes maketh way for the better vnderstanding of Gods eternall and immutable law; those being but as branches deryued out of this, and as it were certaine adumbrations of the same, according to those words, Vnus Iac. 2. est Leg slator & index; And since the question discussed in this treatise consisteth in the vnchangea∣ble

law of God, which principally consisteth in this sacred writ, and disputeth who is to iudge therof, & to determine difficulties according to the square of the same: Therefore who can better iudge of this point (speaking of the Laity) then you, who are Iudges? Or who can with a more cleare & impartial eye discerne the may ne absurdities attending on our Aduersaries Doctrine, then you, if you will but vouchsafe to glasse the same, or like (by supposall only) in the spe∣culation of your owne lawes?
1. You (for example) acknowledge, and there∣fore for your particuler worthines are deputed to the honour and dignity of Iudicature, that in regard of the ambiguity of your owne law, there must be an ex∣ternall Iudge or Interpreter distinct from the law it selfe, for the manifesting of it true sense: Our Aduer∣saries Luth. Caluin. Chemnit. &c. vt su∣pra dicitur do constitute the Scripture, not only as the law, according to which all controuersiall poynts of fayth are to be decyded, but withall as Iudge; so con∣founding the law, and the Iudge.
2. You not only graunt, that there ought to be a iudge or interpreter of the law, but also you mayn∣taine, that this prerogatiue of iudging, doth not be∣long to euery priuate man, but only to certaine sele∣cted and publike persons, appointed to the same end: Yea you (no doubt) are assured, that if liberty were giuen to ech man to interprete the nationall lawes of England, that suites and contentions would neuer be determined by the sayd lawes, euery one interpre∣ting them in fauour of this owne cause. Our Ad∣uersaries teach, that euery priuate Man VVhi∣tak. Con∣trou. 1. q. 5. c. 3. & q. . c. 11. Caluin. In∣stit. Brent. in Prolog., which they stile the reuealing spirit, and with whome we may well expostulate in the wordes vsed to Moyses Exod. 2.,

Quis constituit te Iudicem? enioyeth the priuiledge of hauing the vndoubted sense of the Scripture infalli∣bly reuealed vnto him, and so is to become his owne expositour; from whence it followeth (as being war∣ranted by all experience and reason) that different spi∣rits (by this their Assertion) differently interpreting the Scriptures, can neuer come to any finall attone∣ment or reconciliation.
3. You deliuer, that in a well ordained Cōmon∣wealth, the Iudg ought to be such, as euery Man may haue free accesse vnto him, as also to haue power not only to interpret the law, but also to haue a coactiue authority to force the delinquent to subscribe and o∣bey vnder paine of seuere chastisement: and (which is more) you would hold it ridiculous, to constitute that as iudge or law, to the which all delinquents (stil continuing delinquents) would chiefly couet to re∣payre, as to their best refuge, fort, and sanctuary: Our Aduersaries constitute the Scripture for Iudge, to which many cannot haue resort, since many cannot read; It cannot impose any obedience to the errone∣ous party, since it is the proper scene of all Heretikes to maintaine their errours, after their appeale to the Scripture, more pertinaciously, then euer afore: finally it is that, wherin (as herafter shalbe proued in this trea∣tise) all Heretikes This is confessed euen by Tertul. de prae∣script. Hie∣rom epist. ad Pauli∣uum. Vin∣cent. Lyri∣nens. ad∣uers. haer. haue accustomed to repose their chiefest confidēce & refuge, according to that of Ter∣tullian vbi su∣pra.: Obtendunt Haeretci &c. Heretikes do pretend Scripture, and by their boldns, in the conflicts of their disputes, they weary the strong in fayth, the weak they o∣uercome, and the wauering they dismisse with scruples.
4. You, I know, cannot be persuaded, that the lawes of this Realme are able to proue themselues,

from thēselues alone, to be the lawes of the Realme, without any further warrāt or attestation of history or other authority. Our Aduersaries auouch, cōtrary to the Fathers, Aug. Tom. 6. contra ep. Fund. Vincent. Lyrinens. aduersus haer. & Aug. tom. 7. contra Croscon. that the Scripture (wherin is con∣tained the law, of God) can proue it self, out of it selfe alone, to be true & vndoubted word of God (among so many other obtruded and counterfeyted wrytin∣ges) without the explication of the Church of God.
5. You hold it most dissonant to reason to iusti∣fy, that when you vnfold and deliuer the meaning and sense of the law, you in so doing, are aboue the law, but you doe willingly acknowledge, that the law is law, whether your sentence be giuen of it or no; only by your learned Demurres, you pronounce your iudgement, not that therby, that which afore was not law, should by your sentence giuen become the law, but only that others not learned in the law, should by such your Reports, take notice and distin∣guish the true meaning of the Law, from all obtruded and mistaken senses therof: Our Aduersaries Luther. l. de Con∣cilijs, Illy∣ricus l. de norma & prax. Cō∣cil. Tridēt. Chemnit. in exam. Concil. Trident. do idly charge vs in great estuation and heat of speach, that we do aduance the vniuersall Pastour of Gods Church, or a lawful general Coūcel aboue the Scrip∣ture, because to them both we ascribe a definitiue au∣thority, for setting downe which is Scripture, and which is the true and vndoubted sense of it. And heereupon they auerre, that the Pope, or a generall Councell by assuming this prerogatiue, presumes to make that Scripture by such their declaration, which afore was not Scripture; and to disauthorize that for not Scripture, which afore was Scripture; and last∣ly to impose that sense of Scripture for the meaning of the holy Ghost, which before such their imposi∣tion

was not his meaning: wheras indeed all that the supreme Bishop or general Councel performes (both which reuerently submit themselues to the Scripture) is, to declare Canonicall Scripture from Apocryphal and forged wrytinges; and among many adulterate and false senses of confessed Scripture, to manifest which is the genuine and true sense of it; all which prerogatiues that the Church and her Head do enioy, is euident both from the words of our Sauiour Math. 18., and from his great Apostle S. Paul 1. Ti∣moth. 3..
6. You voluntarily confesse, that besides your lawes left in wryting, our Realme enioyes (as all o∣ther good States and Commonwealths do) certaine vnwrytten and customary lawes (as I may tearme them) which receaue their force from an vndiscon∣tinued practise and long hand of tyme. And you cannot be induced to thinke, that the customes not crossing your wrytten lawes, doe by their being, in any sort indignify the same lawes: Our Aduersaries Caluin. Instit. 4. Chemnit. in exam. Concil. Trident. besides al∣most all others. doe so admire the wrytten Word of God, as that they reiect and betrample all Apostolicall Traditions whatsoeuer, though they in no sort impugne the sa∣cred Scripture, boldly pronouncing that all such tra∣ditions doe mightily wrong and dishonour the sayd Scripture. So forgetfull they are of those wordes of an auncient Father Tertul. vbi supra. touching traditions: Id ve∣rius quod prius, id prius quod ab initio, id ab initio quod ab Apostolis.
7. To conclude you would repute it most strāge, to fynd any man, that should affirme the present lawes of England to be the only square, according to which all suites ought to be decyded, and yet the same person withall to auerre, that at this tyme we

enioy no true Originall, or Translations of those lawes, all of them being by his censure depraued with many falsifications and alterations; since from this it would follow, that not the true auncient lawes of the Realme, but certaine falsifyed lawes & constitutions should adiudge all depending causes: Our Aduersaries mayntaining the Scripture for sole Iudge of Controuersies (as often we haue sayd) do withall maintayne (so wonderfully doth innouation and nouelty in Religion darken the very light of rea∣son) that at this day, there is neyther Originall of the holy Scriptures, Se heer∣of Beza in resp. Ca∣stal. Caro∣lus Moli∣naeus in sua transl. part. 12. fol. 110. Castalio in defensio. transl. p. 117. VVhita∣ker against Reynolds p. 25. The mini∣sters of Lincolne diocesse in their booke. p. 11. or translations of them into the Greeke, Latin, or our owne vulgar Tongue, which are not by their expresse assertions and wry∣tings fraught with diuers corruptions and depraua∣tions, as most largly we will demonstrate in this en∣suing discourse.
Now the matter standing thus, as that you are able euen out of the grounds of your owne profession (in regard of the great resemblance found betweene it, and the question heere disputed) particularly to discerne the absurdities and grosse inconueniences attending the Doctrine heere impugned, to whome may this discourse more iustly seeme to be presented, then to the mature and graue Iudgements of your selues? And thus much concerning the peculiar in∣ducements of this my dedication And yet before I re∣mit you to the perusall of this small worke, I will make bold (a boldnes humbly vndertaken for your owne spirituall good) to put you in mynd to haue a reserued eye, and intense circumspection ouer our moderne Pseudoscripturists (so to call them) that is to say, Men who fasly abuse the holy Scriptures, and

who as familiarly and peculiarly interest themselues in the Scriptures, as if they had begotten them on their owne brayne (as the Poets doe faigne that Iu∣piter did Pallas): And yet when these men vnder∣stand the Scripture in it true sense (as the deuil some∣tymes hath de) seing they giue credit therto, not by reason of the Churches authority, but of theyr owne priuate conceit, (which euer stands obnoxi∣ous to errour) what other thing els do they, then belieue a truth falsly? But when they interpret Gods wrytten Word in a different construction from the vniuersall and Catholike Church of God, I see not how they can auoyd that Dilemma of an anciēt Father Tertul. l. de prae∣script.: Si alium Deum praedicant, quomodo eiusdem rebus & literis, & nominibus vtuntur aduersus quem praedicant? Si eumdem, quomodo aliter? So truly and deseruedly are such men included within the sentence of Saint Austin (a Father whome of all the Auncients, the Protestantes (not liking) yet least dislyke) Omnes Aug epist. 221. ad Consen∣tium. qui Scripturas in authoritate &c. All those spea∣king of the hereticall Scripturists of his tyme who alledge Scripture, for authority make shew to affect the Scripture, when indeed they affect their owne errours.
And thus (Graue Iudges) in all humility I take my leaue, beseeching you, euen for your owne soules health, that in your seates and tribunalls of Iudica∣ture, you doe so iudge, as that hereafter your selues be not iudged; especially I meane when Gods an∣noynted Priests or poore distressed Catholikes (guil∣ty only of treason (if so it must needs be tearmed) cōmitted in professing the auncient faith of Christ & his Apostles) shall become the subiect of your iudg∣ments: but euen thē remēber, that your selues as being

herein deputyes to Gods deputyes, are to giue a strict account to that supreme Iudge of all: Qui Gen. 18. iudicat omnem terram; or (with peculiar reference to terrene Iudges) to vse the wordes of the Prophet Dauid, Psalm. 81. Qui inter Dos dijudicat.

