


ARISTOTLE in penning his Morall Instructions ofArist. l. r. Eth. cap. 1. Philosophy, thought all his endeauours well bestowed, if he might profit (as he saith) any one thereby; much more if Townes, and Citties: How happy then

may I thinke my labours imployed, if by these small paines I may rightly instruct some few of You, not in Morall Vertues, but in Diuine and Heauenly Verities: not in Precepts of Manners only, but in Ar∣ticles of Faith, in Mysteries of true Beliefe, on which, I will not say the ciuil Nur∣ture, or gay Deportment of the outward man, but the inward Carriage, & Grace of the Holy Ghost, the life of your Soules, the loue of God, and hope of all eternity dependeth. By instructing You, I shall cleere the beames, which giue light to thousands: I shall purifie the Waters and purge the Fountaine of which many must drinke. You are the Seedes, you are the Lights of the Kingdome: you are the Mi∣nes, whose treasures are to be dispensed, & riches of learning hereafter deriued to the whole body of the Realme. Wherfore least you should both beguile others, and be your selues deceiued with counterfeite drosse, in lieu of true and perfect mettall; I haue opened vnto you these veines of Gold, with which, if you couet to enrich

your soules, two things I request at your hands. The one is, not to frame an ouer∣weening conceit, or beare too partiall Af∣fection to the men of your own side: the other, to peruse this Treatise with an in∣different and single eye, and with a greedy zeale of imbracing Truth, from whose mouth soeuer.
2. You are not (I hope) of Agesicles the Lacedemonian his mind, who taking great pleasure to heare smooth & eloquēt dis∣courses, would not intertaine PhilophanesPlutarch in his La∣conike A∣pophtheg. the famous Rhetoriciā, being a strāger vnto him, because (as Plutarch reporteth) he would be Scholler only to them, whose sonne he was: that is, he would learne of them alone, a∣mongst whom he was borne. Much lesse can I thinke you bewitched with Philostor∣gius the Eunomian his folly, who was so be∣sotted of his Maister Eunomius, as he ad∣mired his very naturall defects, & set the glosse of vertue on them. For, his faltering tongue (as Nicephorus writeth) he vainelyNiceph. l. 12. c. 29. commended, as the Key of Eloquence; his flow words he prized as precious Margari∣tes:

the spots and blemishes of his leaprous face, what did he account them, but the rarest markes and ornaments of beauty? If any of you shold be infected with these bastardly humors, if you would heare none but those, in whose bosomes ye haue beene bred, or be so farre enamoured of your first Teachers wits, as to loue their errours, applaud their forgeries, & praise the beauty of their deformed writings; little hope should I haue to gaine your soules. But if yee be (as I trust ye are) lo∣uers of truth, enemies of falshood, desi∣rous of your owne saluatiō; then here you may discouer that Euangelical Pearle, whichMa. 13. vers. 4. he that findeth, selleth all that he hath to buy so rare a Iewell.
3. I know the subtilty of Sathan, and snare of Heretikes hath euer beene, as theRom. 16. v. 18. 2. Petr. 2. v. 3. Apostle saith, By sweet speaches and benedicti∣ons to seduce the hearts of Innocents. By faigned words to make merchandize of You. Their chiefest proiect and principall study is with meretricious and painted eloquence to intertaine their followers: and whilest

they fill their eares with delight, to instill into their soules most poysoned doctrine. But a great The say∣ing of De∣mosthenes, mentio∣ned by S. Aug. con. Crescon. Gram. l. 2. cap. 1. 1. Cor. 2. v. 1. 4. 5. & ver. 13. Oratour can tell you: That the riches of Greece consist not in words. And the Apostle pronounceth: Not in loftinesse & sublimity of speach, not in the perswasible words of humaine wisedome, are the Mysteries of Christ; but in the power of God, and Doctrine of the spirit. Be not therefore, be not (I be∣seech you) inueagled with the smooth tongue, or filed stile of your flourishing Sect-maisters, but cōsider the matter, weigh the reasons, examine the proofes they al∣ledge, and you shall find such silly argu∣ments,Aug. l. 5. confes. c. 2. such slender stuffe, as S. Augustine espied in the eloquent and lofty discour∣ses of Faustus Manichaeus, and the rest of his crew: when not regarding (as he saith) what gallant dish, or vessell of speach, but what food of knowledge he propounded vnto him; not harkening to the sound of words, but to the pith of matter. Albeit they bragged much, and promised no∣thing more then Truth, Truth: yet he dis∣couered, as he witnesseth, No truth amongstIbid. l. 3. c. 9.

them: nothing but Lies, Vanities, and vile Superstitions.
4. The like shall you discerne in the Ghospellers of our time. For although they vaunt of the word of God, vaunt of Scriptures, and Scriptures only seeme to fol∣low:Ambr. in c. 3. ep. ad Titum. yet because, as S. Ambrose teacheth, By the word of the law they impugne the law, fra∣ming their priuate sense and construction to coū∣tenance the peruersity of their minds, by the au∣thority of the law, it is more then euident they follow not the Oracles of God, but rather the Fancies of their owne braine, the suggestion of Sathan. For by peruerse interpretation (as S. Hierome testifieth) ofier. l. . in . 1. ep. ad Galat. the Ghospell of Christ, is made the Ghospel of man; or which is worse, the Ghospell of the Di∣uell. And Martiall the Poët speaketh to this purpose.

Quem recitas meus est,  Fidentine, libellus:
Sed malè cùm recitas, incipit esse tuus.

The Booke thou doest recite, o Fidentine, is mine: Reciting it amisse, it groweth to be thine.
5. Secondly, they boast of the pure

preaching of the Word, whereas you shall discouer in my third Part, that they haue no authority to preach, no mission, no vo∣cation at all: They are Theeues, who enterIoan. 10. v. 2. & 10. not by the doore, but climbe another way to steale, kill, and destroy your soules. They are theEzech. 13: v. 3. 6, & 7. false Prophets who crie: Thus saith our Lord, when our Lord said it not, nor sent them, nor gaue them commission to speake. And the purity of which they crake, is (as HieremyHierem. 14. 1 v. 4. declareth) A lying Vision, and Diuination, & Deceit, and Beguiling of their heart, which they prophesie vnto you. Thirdly, they glory to haue purged and reformed the Church of many errours, which by little and little haue crept into her, and restored her a∣gaine to the ancient integritie of the A∣postolike Faith: But you shall see their Reformations haue beene al corruptions, abuses, innouations: they haue broken the peace, departed from the vnity of the flocke of Christ, & are indeed no Church at all, but a Rebellious Faction, an Hereti∣call Assembly. You shall finde their An∣cient Faith, a new Beliefe, as S. Gregory Na∣zianzen

said of the Arians; their refinedGreg. Na∣zian. orat. in Aria∣os. Doctrines meere nouelties, new broached Heresies, which I pray God both you, and all others may haue grace to discerne in time, least you open your eyes, and begin to lament these things to late, as Constanti∣us the Emperour did, of whom the same S. Gregory Nazianzen writeth: That lying on his death-bed, he repented him of three things:Greg. Na∣zian. in Laudem Athanas. First, that he had commanded his Sonne- in law to be slaine: The other, that he had nominated Iuli∣an the Apostata to succeed him in his Imperiall Throne: The third, that he had giuen eare to new deuised Doctrines. And with these words he yielded vp his ghost.
9. O yee flourishing Academians! But what should I restraine my speach to you? O England, my dearest Country, I would to God this fearefull president might so mooue thy Heart, as to make Thee, now whilest time serueth, and grace is offered, more fruitfully bewaile the like, or more grieuous crimes committed by Thee! Thou perchance hast not murdered thy carnall Kinsfolkes or Allies, but thy spi∣rituall

Pastours, Guides, and Curates of thy soule. Some thou hast spoyled, vex∣ed, imprisoned, and pined away with ex∣treamest misery: some thou hast arraig∣ned, executed, and barbarously massacred as Rebels to thy Prince, and Traytours to thy Crowne: their bloud like water thouPsal. 78. v. 3. hast powred forth, round about Hierusalem: & their quarters thou hast set vp as preyes to be deuoured by birds and foules of the aire. Thou hast vniustly nominated and entitled others to inherite their roomes, possesse their benefices, discharge their functions; many of them reuolted Apo∣stata's; many mercinary Hirelings; all tyrannicall Vsurpers; who seeke not so much to oppresse the bodies, as exercise their tyrannie ouer the soules of thy sub∣iects, and pittifully enthral them to euer∣lasting seruitude. Lastly, thou hast dam∣med vp the passage, by which the cleere waters of Antiquity should flow into thy Kingdome, & thou hast opened the sluse to the puddles of nouelty, to new flouds of Doctrine, new fayned Sacraments, new

Articles of Faith, new worship of God; which I beseech his Diuine Piety thou maist haue grace to detest, & learne of the Lacedemonians (who would not permit any strang merchandise, or vnusual wares to be transported into their Citty) to banish and abandon these vnwonted Doctrines: and imbrace againe that ancient Faith, which once thy whole Realme, then hap∣pie Iland, daughter of God, and Dowry of the B. Virgin, deuoutly sucked from the breast of Rome; which all thy former Kings and Princes, vntill now of late, supported, thy Lawes established, thy People honoured, thy Vniuersities de∣fended. To this end I present you (Noble Students) with these first fruits of my la∣bours, and will not cease to sacrifice vn∣to God, my continuall praiers.
