



IF my power and abilitie, were aunswereable to my good will (right reuerende father) this token of myne humble dutie, which I doe now offer vnto your honour, shoulde be as greate and precious, as by reason of the contrarie, it is base and slender. VVherfore I most humblie beseche your honour in no worse parte to accepte this litle offer, then as the present of hym, that is bound of duetie to loue you, whiche would haue brought better, if his power had beene thereafter. But followyng the example of the poore widowe,Luk. 21.. whiche is so highly [of our Sauiour] commen∣ded in the Gospell. I offer vnto your honour, parte of suche fruictes, as haue growen in a poore studentes Garden. I haue al∣waies been assured of your L. that you will accepte that, that a man hath,2. Cor. 12. and not that he hath not, and this Sainct Paul geueth for doctrine, whereby to encourage the godly forwardes, in the Lordes busines. For all are bydden to the buildyng of Gods house,Exod. 25.3▪ for when the Tabernacle of the lorde was made by Moy∣ses, euery one brought suche as he had:4 some brought golde and siluer:5 other some brought precious stones: others brought clothe:6 others skinnes and heere of Goates and weathers: others brought woodde.7 And the poore and meanest sorte, brought somewhat also,8 for they brought stones: and all this was put to the worke. Euen so I iudge, for the buildyng of this house of the Lorde,1. Cor. 3.17. Ephe. 2.21. Cap. 5.26. whiche is his Churche, euery one shoulde and ought to bryng suche as they haue: some more, some lesse, accordyng to the talentes whiche the Lorde of the house hath geuen them to profite withall.Matth. 25.15. I wil content my selfe, to bring the litle stones of the common sorte for this buildyng, and I hope that the mai∣ster

of the worke, will not refuse my seruice, nor my litle stones, (although they be not hewen of the finest sorte, yet I truste they be all hewen out by the Square and rule of Gods worde) foras∣much as they may be a furtheraunce to the buildyng (as I hope they wilbe with gods helpe.) For, as many as are christians, haue geuen their faith vnto Christe in their baptisme, to forsake the deuill, the worlde, and the fleshe, and to continewe Christes faithfull souldiers and seruauntes, to fight vnder his Banner, all the dayes of their life, to the healping and mainteynyng of the warring,The causes that made the aucthour to set foorth this booke. First cause. Matth. 3.12. and striuing faith. All this well considered, three causes hath moued mee, to set foorth this litle treatise of my faith, at this tyme. The first is, for that the Lorde hath in his handes, to fanne, examine, and make cleane againe his Churche. To whom also it were verie good (in my iudgement) that the faith of euery one shoulde bee knowen, and especially, of those whiche make profession of the Gospell, to instructe others, as the Doctours, Pastours, and Ministers of the worde and Sacramentes, to the ende that the false Prophetes and Papistes, whiche nowe bowe downe their shoulders, and stretche out their eares to the false papisticall doctrine of that Antichriste of Rome, were knowen, driuen awaie, and caste out from among the godly and faithfull. For as Barnarde saieth:Barnard super cant. Serm. 66. Plus longè nocet falsus catholicus, quàm si verus apparcat haereticus: Therefore, Christe gaue vs warnyng to be ware of them that come in Sheepes clothyng, but inwardly are rauening woolues,Matth. 7.15. Matth. 23.27. 2. Cor. 11.13.14. Iosua. 9.3.4. comming and liuyng amonges vs, as the Angels of light, but all is to beguile the innocent and simple people, to make them twise the children of hell worse then them selues are. How Iosua was deceiued by the dissemblyng Gibeo∣nites through their fained and cloked holines, saiyng: VVe be∣come from farre, for the name of the Lorde thy God, the histo∣rie declareth: So (right reuerende father) in these our daies, wee haue many, and specially of the Cleargie, that can saie nowe to our godly Bishops, how thei are come from Rome, for the name of the Lorde our God, with their moulded and wafer cake bread, olde ragged garmentes and shoes, when in deede it is but meere dissimulation that they doe, to enter into the Churche for li∣yng, to mainteine ignoraunce there, and to keepe out Godly

preachers. And these men haue learned Arius practise, to con∣uey all their beleefe of the Romishe faith, into their secrete bo∣somes: and yet wil with hande and penne declare by subscribing and swearyng, as though they were throughly perswaded and conuerted. They drawe nye with tongue and penne vnto vs, but their heartes are to Rome:Papistes haue Iacobs voyce, but Esaus hart and handes. Eusebius. a number of them haue gospell talke, but yet a Romishe faith, an Englishe face, but Spanishe hearts. VVe reade in Eusebius Caesariensis: that writeth how that Con∣stantius, the father of Constantine, fained vppon a tyme that he woulde put out all the christians, whiche woulde abide in their faith and religion, from their honours and offices, but in deede the Godly woulde in no wise denie, but rather choosed the losse of promotions and honour: but the others denied the true faith bicause they would not loose their dignities.Woulde all princes were of this minde. Vpon which triall, he excluded these dissemblers, and double faced neuters, out of his realme, saiyng: They woulde not be faithfull to hym, which had broken their faithe vnto God. So no doubt, if these men in our daies were tried, we should finde of them the lyke. Therfore, if they were called, not onely to confesse their faith, with worde and penne,1. Peter. 3.15. but also to geue a reason of their faith, to proue, and openly to shewe by textes of the holy Scriptures, and mani∣fest reasons builded thereon, in whom thei beleue, what thei be∣leue, wherfore they beleue, and how they beleue, in open pulpit, and also in writyng, shoulde do a thousande tymes more good, then that they now doe. For they thinke nowe, that if they sub∣scribe, obserue the order of seruice, and weare a side gowne, a square Cap, a Cope, and a Surples, none can saie blacke is their eyes, but that they are good protestantes: yet all this while they run into hugger mugger a whispering in corners, saiyng to the simple people:Order fit for papistes. beleue not this newe doctrine, it is naught, it will not long endure, although I vse order among them outwardly, my hearte and profession is from them, agreeyng with the mo∣ther Church of Rome. No, no (saie they) we do not preache nor yet teache openly, we reade their newe deuised homilies for a co∣lour, to satisfie the tyme for a season.The fruits of time seruyng hypocrites. By reason whereof, the poore seelie people are kept backe from commyng forwardes to Christe: whereas if they were vrged, both publiquely▪ by prea∣ching,

and also with their owne hande writing, to render accoūt of their faith,They wyll dissemble a point with Leontius. to the hearyng and vnderstandyng of all the peo∣ple, it would driue them for very shame of them selues, from runnyng into corners a whisperyng, to perswade, when as they openly haue preached to the contrary. And by this meanes, thei shoulde be easely tried out, and those that are not sounde, nor yet meete, driue them out of the Church, and make them wood-cariers, and water bearers, in the common weale, as Iosua did the Gibeonites, teachyng by their example, others to beware to dissemble in their profession,Iosa. 9.21. although in deede we knowe no mans hearte, yet let vs vse that meanes that holy Scripture ge∣ueth vs to trie the spirites,1. Iohn. 4.1. whether they be of God or not. For we may easely perceiue what daunger it is to haue suche dissem∣blers, and also dumbe Idols, I meane, those Pastours that the Prophet Zachary calleth Idoll Shepheardes,Zach. 11.17. Ministers shoulde be preachers. that haue mouthes and cannot teache: feete and cannot go to preache: eyes & can∣not see the wickednes of the people: nor how to reade the scrip∣tures: handes that cannot minister nor distribute the Sacramēts a right: therefore it was well saied of Barnarde: Successores omnes cupiunt esse,Barnard. Sermo. 8. imitatures pauci. And if your L. woulde this doe as I haue before saied, you should make them to take heede to them selues,1. Tim. 4.16. and to learnyng, to continue therein. For in so doyng, they shal saue themselues, & those that heare them. The second cause that moued me,Seconde cause. is, certen bokes being abrode, which came from Louane, bookes full of scurrilitie and papistrie, wonderful∣lye enuiyng and slaunderyng the godly Bishops and ministers of the Churche of God, here in Englande: and amonges all, they name mee in their booke, thinkyng thereby to discredite the doctrine that we teache. For this is the nature of all Papistes, when as they cannot staye vs from preachyng, neither yet denie the doctrine we teache: then thei will alwaies reare vp some false reportes and sclaunders vpō the preachers, or els if these mon∣strous Papistes, do knowe or see, any olde crimes or vices, which haue been in them before (whiche now is mortified and dead in them) they will rake it vp out of the filthy enuious dounghill of their Romishe heartes,2. Sam. 16.5. like vnto railyng Simeis, whiche com∣myng out of Saules house of Rome, against the godly Dauids,

that go in the Lordes busines, thei cast out stones, to stone god∣ly Stephens, they curse them that go in the Lordes iorney, they call them murtherers, that warre in the Lordes battaile, thei call them vngodly, that liue and preache vertuously, but notwith∣standyng all their false and wicked reportes, we must learne with Dauid to possesse our soules with patience, for that it is doen for our better triall and comforte.Matth. 5.1. As Christe saide: Blessed are ye when men reuile you, and speake all maner euill againste you for my sake, reioyce and be gladde, for greate is your rewarde in heauen: for so did they to the prophetes which were before you: for the seruaunt, is not aboue the maister. Did not alwaies the enimies of God, raise vp suche rumours vpon Christe, and his Apostles? to that only ende, to drawe the people from beleuyng or credityng them, and therby to discredite their heauenly doc∣trine that they taught, by the wil of God. They made as though they had been carefull for godly men to enter into the Church, but they meant nothyng lesse: for, they passed not how wicked∣ly any liued against gods commaundements,Matth. 15.3. so that theirs were obserued and kepte. So likewise, our Papistes of Louane, the Pharisees schollers, they seeme in all their bookes to be verie carefull for Church men (as they tearme them) when as in verie deede, they passe not what they are in life, so thei continue with them in their filthy religion. Doe not we see, at this daie that many of them, whiche are now conuerted to the Gospel, are re∣proued by our papistes & Louanistes, of some vices and faultes, that haue been doen by them, in their papistrie and blindnesse, and all for to sclaunder the doctrine and religion withall, which during the time they were papistes, thei were coūted no faultes, but vertues? Do not we see, that if any of them kepe whores and harlots, it is counted no fault nor synne among them, but as one that liueth chaste and well: if once he forsake them, and take a lawfull wife, doe they not crie out of him, and say he is a flesh∣ly man, a carnall man, and one that is vnchaste, and now he can∣not serue God, bicause he hath broken the yoke of chastitie, and liueth in the fleshe? The marke then that they shoote at (right reuerende father) is not our life, but to our doctrine and religi∣on, that they may discredite it, to drawe the simple people from

beleuyng it. Alas, with what faces can these papistical Pharisees, thus write againste vs concernyng our liues, and what men we were?Matth. 7.3. Turpe est doc∣tori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum. Can they see litle motes in our eyes, and cannot perceaue the greate beames in their owne eies, and yet not in the meanest only, but in their cheefest heades? yea euen in those heades that they call, Lorde of Lordes, Kyng of Kinges, God of Gods, their holy father the Pope (as they call hym) whiche cannot erre, nor yet sinne, as they affirme. In steede of many, I will recite a fewe of them, that by those, the residue maie be perceaued: for they are all Herrynges of one Barell. I praie you, what was Pope Bo∣nifacius? was it for his holines,Pope Boni∣facius. that it was written of hym, In∣trauit vt Vulpes: Regnauit vt Lupus: mortuus est vt Canis? He en∣tered into the Popedome as a Foxe: he raigned as a woolfe: and died as a Dog?A whore Pope. Pope Ioane, was she not an arrant whore? be∣gotten with childe by one of her Cardinals, which these olde verses besides infinite mo testimonies witnesse. Penes portum Pe∣tri Pauli peperit Papa pater patriae, paruulum puerum. VVhat was Pope Iohn the. 12?Pope Iohn. 12. not a most vile damnable man, did not he keepe Rainerath, his mans wife? did not he keepe one Stephana, and her sister? whiche had been his fathers concubines before? did not he keepe one Anna a widowe and her daughter? He spa∣red (saieth the stories) neither high nor lowe, olde nor young, poore nor riche, faire nor foule: so that no women durst come vnto Rome on pilgrimage in his tyme: he spared no place, but woulde vse his filthy whordome, vppon their holy aulters: he would geue to his whores, benefices, golden Chalices & crosses, he would daunce, leape, dice, carde, sweare, fight, runne abrode in the night, breakyng vp dores and windowes, and burne mens houses: one of his Cardinals he gelded, he put out anothers eies, whiche was his Godfather, he cut of ones hande, of a nother a tongue, of others a finger, a nose & an eare: in his dice plaiyng he woulde call vpon euil spirites, and drinke to the deuil: beyng thus Pope and an vnholy father, nine yeres, & three monethes and fiue daies, was striken of the deuill (as they saie) as he was a bed with a nother mans wife, and so died within eight daies af∣ter, most miserablie.Pope Sergiu. So of this fathers godly life, came that pro∣uerbe vp (as merie as Pope Iohn.) VVhat was Pope Sergius▪

not a man without al vertue and learnyng? kept not he a whore, in the tyme of his Popedome, called Morozia? and had by her a bastarde, whiche was Pope long after hym, called Pope Iohn the .11. This filthy tyraunt did many villanous actes. VVhat was Pope Marcellinus,Pope Marcel∣linus. Pope Syluester Pope Libe∣rius. Pope Leo. Pope Caelesti∣nus. Pope Hono∣rius. Pope Ioh. 22. Pope Hylde∣brand. not a greate Idolater? what was Syluester the .2. not a greate coniurer, and gaue hymselfe body and soule to the deuill, and by the deuils procurement, was made Pope? was not Pope Liberius an Arrian heritique? was not Pope Leo likewise an Arrian? Pope Caelestinus, was he not a Nestorian he∣retique? was not Pope Honorius a Monothelite heretique? Pope Iohn the .22. was not he reproued as an heretique at Pa∣ris, concernyng the soule of man? I praie you, what was Pope Hyldebrande? was he not an aduouterer, a Churche robber, a peiured man, a murtherer, who poysoned sixe other Popes his predecessours, to make hym selfe roome to the holy seate? was he not a greate Sorcerer, and a reneger of the faith? was not Pope Vrbanus a tyrannous murtherer? that tooke fiue of his Cardinals aliue,Pope Vrba∣nus. and put them into Sackes, and threwe them in∣to the Sea? I coulde speake of Pope Stephen, of his handlyng of Formosus,Poe Stephen. his predecessour, in cuttyng of his fingers and heade, and threwe his carkasse into Tyber, and of many others of them, but that I should occupie and consume muche ynke and paper, about a sorte of filthie liuers: therefore Pope Adrian the .4. was wont to say, Succedimus, nō Petro in pascendo, sed Romulo in parrici∣dio. VVhat should I speake of their holy Cardinals, are thei not Ruffians, tosse pottes, whore maisters, and buggerers with yong boies like vnto the Sodomites? al the world knoweth it. VVhat should I saie of others their Priestes, how shamefully thei liued in their holy orders, were not a nomber of them theeues, per∣iurers, murtherers, buggerers with boyes, Mares, and Sowe pig∣ges: some of them haue been arained at the Barre for it, in Ex∣cester and els where, as the recordes can testifie: & some of them were no small chickens in the Popes Coube, what saie you to those holie Fathers, at the last councell of Trydent, whiche were solemply gathered together (as thei saide) to reforme matters of religion, and suppressyng of vice, was not two of those holy fa∣thers, taken at that tyme in whordome? the one was striken

downe with a Club, the other taken with the maner, by the hus∣bande, and hanged by the necke out of a greate Lucane window in the streete. VVhat shoulde I saie, not long agone of one in VVinchester, a great D. of the Papistes, who would drinke, no∣thing but water thrise a weeke, who vnder the colour of virgini∣ty, of wearing a shurte of heere, and hanging his shrowde at his beddes feete, and mortifiyng his body, with straightnes of life, kepte three whores at once in his Chamber, to serue him and his fellowes at neede, whiche whores were fetched out by certaine Iustices of peace. This is as true, as men vse to eate meate vpon a Boarde.D. Boorde. To conclude, and leaue troublyng, of your Lordeships chaste and Godly eares, we will saie of their whole Cleargie, as some of their owne doctours haue written: Venalitate Curiae Ro∣mane inanitèr praeficiuntur Lenones:Aureum. Spe∣lū in An∣tilogia. Coqui, Stabularij equorum, & pueri: Through the briberie of the Courte of Rome, Bawdes, Cookes, Hostlers, Horsekepers, and children are placed in offi∣ces, to gouerne the Churche. Thus I haue, rather geuen an inke∣lyng hereof, then opened the particuler secretes of the matter, for as saint Barnarde saith:Barnard ad Clerum, in Sino. Rhemē. The thirde cause. The .vi. of August. Anno. 2591. . Cor. 5. Qu in occul fiunt ab Episcopis, turpe est vel dicere. The third cause is, for that of late one Ihō Blackeal, borne in Excester, did open penaunce at Powles Crosse, And then, and there, before all the congregation openly (for that I detected his horible vices, and manifested thē to certaine of my friendes, to the ende that he might be better reclaimed from his lewde and wanton life, and so to satisfie the whole congregation with open repentaunce, crauyng their praiers vnto god for him) cried, and breathyng out against me, many foule and sclaunde∣rous reportes, to the greate griefe of the godly, and ioye of the wicked Papistes. But hereby easely appeareth the nature of the wicked & malicious. For when any cōuersion is made (through gods spirite) by any sinner,Luk. 15.1. Matth. 9.11. they will enuy, and vse railyng words againste that conuert, as the wicked Scribes, and Pharisees did. And will speake euill of them, bicause (saieth Peter) they runne not with them vnto the same excesse of riote:1. Peter. 4.4. therefore speake thei euill of you. If I had been altogether as wicked, as he decla∣red openly: yet, he and all other enuious men, ought not to haue sorrowed:Luk. 15.10. but ioyed, not to haue enuied▪ but loued Gods good

workyng in mee, with the aungels of heauen. This wicked man, will not light a Candle to seeke a sinner: but rather will bryng a fier brande to consume his brother, with his flamyng wordes: but as Dauid saieth, who burning Coales shall consume that same tongue,Psal. 114.10.11. that will bee the portion for euer, for all suche ly∣ers and sclaunderers. A sclaunderer is worse then a Rauen, who eateth men beyng dead: but a wicked slaunderer eateth men be∣yng a liue. But let vs examine (Reuerend Father) howe this lewde man followeth the Counsell of Salomon,Eccle. 8.5. that saieth: De∣spise not a man that turneth hym selfe awaie from synne, nor cast hym not in the teeth with all: but remember that we are all worthy blame:Galat. 6.1. the like doctrine Paule teacheth. Brethren, if a man be fallen by occasion into any faulte, ye which are spiritu∣all, restore suche one with the spirite of meekenesse, considering thy selfe,Ezech. 18.21. lest thou be tempted also. The Lorde saith, by his pro∣phet, that he will not remember, nor make mention, of the for∣mer life of a sinner, after his conuersion. But this enuious, and sclaunderous man, will haue in remembraunce thinges past, and make mention of that was neuer doen, spoken, no saide, to the greate infamie of the Gospell, bicause I am called (although vn∣worthy) to be a preacher thereof. Vpon which reportes, and ma∣nifest sclaunders spoken, the Queenes maiesties commissioners immediatly sent for mee to come before them, and vppon my apparaunce (he then beyng in the Marshal see a prisoner) founde suche subtill and craftie meanes, that he stole awaie from his ke∣per: knowing wel in his conscience, that he falsely (for the most parte) had accused mee, and wickedly sclaundered mee. So that I could not haue hym face to face, before the commissioners, to trie whether it were all true he spake at the Crosse: thus he ranne awaie, and lefte the infamie to mee, bihinde hym. So now I must referre my cause to God, who shall call vs both to accomptes one daie, from whom, there shalbe no runnyng, nor scapyng a∣waie. This Blackeall (reuerende Father) did open penaunce at Powles Crosse,Blackeall hath foure wiues aliue at once. for that he had at that present foure wiues aliue. And also, for that he thrust hymselfe into the ministerie, for the space of .12. yeres, and yet was neuer lawfully called, nor made by any Bishop accordingly. Foure daies after his penaunce at the

Crosse,Blackeall is a Pillorie knight.
Blackeall v∣seth eales to counterfeit Cōmissions. Blackeall is a chopper of benefices. He is a raker for mens money.
He is a com∣mon caryer about of whores and harlottes. He is asha∣med of his owne name. Matth. 3.7. he was set in the Pillory in Chepeside, with papers on his head, for takyng the Bishop of Canterburies Seale from one writyng, and set it to a counterfeict Commission, wherewith he polled and pylled greate summes of mony from the poore sim∣ple ministers, that dwelled in the countrie: he is one that chop∣peth and chaungeth benefices, passyng litle what meanes and waies he may practise, so that he may haue, and get mony from any man. He hath and doth runne, from countrie to countrie, from towne to towne, leading about with him naughty women, as in Glocester shire, he led a naughty strompet aboute the countrie, called greene Apron. Also, he altereth his name wher∣soeuer he commeth. Sometyme he is called Blackeall (for that is his right name) sometyme Barthall, sometyme Dorrell, some∣tyme Barkeley, sometyme Baker, sometyme one name, some∣tyme another. This is that man (Reuerende Father) that hath Lynxes eyes, to see Motes in his brothers eye: but cannot see greate beames in his owne. He looketh to his brothers synnes that are past: but not to his owne that are present and emminent to all mens eyes. He casteth that ende of the wallet behinde him, but other that come after hym, can and will see it truely: and re∣proue it godly, and christianly: and not enuiously. For this enuy, as Barnarde saieth,Barnard in Serm. 4. is a bablyng euill, a secrete poyson, a hidden pestilence, the worker of crafte, the mother of dissimulation, the beginning of vices, a deuouring canker of holynes, the blinder of heartes: making diseases of remedies, and griefes of medicine. But I will leaue hym nowe to the Lorde, desiryng hym, to con∣uert him, that he may amende his naughty life, and turne to the Lorde with faith and true repentaunce, and make his members to serue God, in righteousnes and true holines, all the daies of his life. This made mee (Reuerende Father) accordyng to the talent which God hath geuen mee, so in these euill daies and ty∣mes to apply my labour, that all men (notwithstandyng their filthy bookes, and railyng wordes) may throughly see and per∣ceiue what I am and haue been since I was called into the mini∣sterie, thereby to satisfie a number of fickle heades, and vnstable people, whiche knowe mee not in person: yet by this meanes, I shall seeme to be present to them, when thei shall reade this my

litle treatise of my faith, for as Sainct Hierome saieth: Letters and Epistles make men present, yet beyng absent, not doubtyng but that litle, with whiche GOD hath indued mee by his free mercie, may shine through the Clowdes and Mistes of errours, whiche the Prince of darkenesse hath blowen abroade. And for that I was one of the first ministers that euer your lordship laide handes on, and also for that God hath made you one of good will, desirous, and of aucthoritie, able to defende the profession of a christian man: I coulde not but choose your Lordship, vn∣der whose name, my litle labour should appeare, both for a te∣stimonie vnto all men, that you are one, in whom the godly doe reioyce, and a prouocation vnto others, to goe forwarde in all godlines, in the buildyng vp of Gods Churche, whiche he hath purchased to hym selfe,1. Pet. 2.5. Rom. 12.1. to be a spirituall and holy Priesthoode, to offer vp spirituall sacrifices, acceptable to God, by his preci∣ous death and passion. Humbly beseechyng your honour, to take this my small talent in the beste parte, not lookyng in this worke of myne, for the pleasaunt speache of Isocrates: nor the high style of Demosthenes, nor yet the excellent dignitie of Plato, nor the reuerende maiestie of Theucidides: but a bare and homely style, accepte my good meanyng yet, whiche tendeth to gods glorie, and aduauncement of his kingdome. VVho pros∣per and mainteyne your Lordship, in his feare, knowledge, and wisedome, long to continue, enrichyng you with all good bles∣singes, and gouerne you by his holy spirite, in all your actions and doinges, to the maintenaunce of his glory, and comfort of his poore afflicted and warryng Church, vntyll he shall call you to come vnto him selfe, there to continue in his glorious king∣dome, for euer and euer, Amen.
From Redcliffe in Bristoll.


¶ August. ad Marcellinum Epist. 7.
¶ Ego proinde fateor me eorum numero esse conari:
qui proficiendo scribunt: & scribendo proficiunt.

