



RIGHT REVEREND,
THis little Sermon preached by your Lordships appoint∣ment in the chiefe Citie of that Shire, wherein I first drew breath, now seeth the light. The religious desires of some of my Countrymen there, wishing, that what I then vttered might not through obliuion perish in the aire, haue brought it forth. Now they, who heard it, may record it; they who heard it not, may read it; all, I hope, wil be satisfyed. My then endeavours were to arme my selfe, and that devout Auditorie with pati∣ence against the day of affliction; that day,
 which we must looke for, if we be the sonnes of our Heauenly Father. St Hierome in his E∣pistle to Eustochium hath these words: Quis san∣ctorum sine certamine coronatus est? Quaere, & inve∣nies singulos adversa perpessos; solus Salomon in de∣litijs fuit, & forsitan ideò corruit: Who of all the Saints was ever crowned without a combat? Seeke, and thou shalt finde, that every one of them suffered aduersities; onely Salomon was lulled in delights, and therefore perchance hee perished. It is but FORSITAN, perchance he perished. His booke called Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher, argueth his repentance, and perswa∣deth me of his remission and salvation with the LORD. And why might not Salomon in his time be, as many in our time are, inwardly in conscience for sinne afflicted? It's true; the stone hath no honourable place in a faire building vn¦lesse it be much hewed and hammered; neither can wee the liuely stones of Christs Church haue any place of credit in the Celestiall building vn∣lesse we, like the chiefe corner stone, Christ him∣selfe, bee hewed and hammered with adversitie. To the patient enduring whereof this little
 Sermon hath a desire to perswade. Giue it (My good Lord) your fauourable countenance, that it may cheerefully goe abroad: and the Author of it shall heartely wish to your L. much encrease of grace and honour, with a daily influence of blessings from Heaven vpon your gouernment in the Church.
From my study in CORPVS CHRISTI COLLEGE in OXFORD, August 27, 1613.

