



THIS, that I dedicate to your Wor∣ship (right reuerend Doctor) is but small in bulke and matter, but great in estimation and respect. And although the bulke appeareth of it selfe, and of it owne accord sheweth it selfe to ech beholder: neither is the labour any other, then a Translation out of the mother-tongue into Latine, and that almost word for word, without any ornament of style: yet Respect and Estimation doe adde an honour and grace to the bulke and labour: that euen therefore I hope the worke will be acceptable and pleasant when you reade it. Acceptable ve∣rily, because I offer it to you with all singular affection, and bending submission to your grauitie: Pleasant certainly, for that therby you shall know the profitable proceeding of the sincere Gospel in Holland, as also the tottering and extreme ruine of the new vpstart Arminians. For who among these was euer either a greater or bitterer enemie to our naturall Al∣lies, then this same, not so truly Olden-Barneuelt, as Berneuelt?

Hitherto verily we feared, and trembled at him, as oft as any mention came vnto vs of that lamentable and noysome Schisme to vs, out of Gelderland, Holland, Vtreicht, Ouer-Isle, Fries-land, and the other vnited Prouinces: and wee vnder∣stood him among many to be the onely One, who durst au∣daciously oppose himselfe vnto the Ministers of the sincere Word: the onely One, that, beyond the rest, malepertly and malitiously affirmed the secular authoritie to be aboue the Ecclesiasticall, and all and any assembly whatsoeuer, or law∣full meeting together, at the least of Doctors end Diuines: the onely One, that could and durst represse and keepe vnder Prince Maurice his Excellency, now Prince of Orange (whom God graunt shortly to be Prince of all Holland also,) that hee should not restraine from their course those false brethren, false teachers, euen farre worse then the Papists, and stoppe their pestilent doctrine concerning Predestination and Iustifi∣cation: that he should not hinder by strong-hand and warlike prowesse all their conuenticles, nor compell them to come to more wholesome Sermons, nor put to death those babblers and praters, who seditiously often repeate, and cry out for li∣berty of conscience: Lastly, the onely One, whom no man durst offend, vnlesse he himselfe would grieuously offend, and at once ouerthrow himselfe and all his fortune. And yet this Champion is now driuen to that streight by the secret vnder∣minings of some Protestants of sincerer note, being disrobed of his accustomed authoritie and desire of bearing rule, rather then any abilitie at all, that he hath that way, that he must be∣come a suiter to the meaner sort, and craue their ayde, whom heretofore he domineered ouer. Reioyce, O worthy Doctor, and be glad O deere Brother: and so much the rather, for that not he alone is throwne downe, but because he hath also drawne downe with him other of the chiefest followtrs and heretickes of that most desperate Arminian sect, whose con∣demnation long since slacketh not, and their destruction slee∣peth not. For Maurice the Prince of Orange his Excellency, who vouchsafeth neither to see nor speak with him, and most resolutely fighteth in defence of the Gospel which wee pro∣fesse,

hath this yeere the first of Ianuary remoued all the Ar∣minians from the Senate at Nimmeghen, and hath put away the false Ministers of the Word, and from Zutphen called foorth Damman, a man not easily to be seduced, and most constant for our true Doctrine; he hath called foorth others also from other places, appointing them to their former roomes, these deeds of his he afterward approued in the next Parliament of the Dutchie of Gelderland: So with the like courage and religious industrie, he depriued from all honour and authoritie, wherein he much excelled in the Councell of the States, the noble Lord Henry à Brinen, who had likewise opposed himselfe to the Court of the Hage, and fauoured the Arminians: And so hath he brought to order all them of O∣uer Isle; who, except Deuentrie, were already wholy bent to Arminianisme: and especially those of Campen hee hath so daunted, who whilome since were vtter heretickes, making merchandize of the word of God, that scarce any one dare so much as whisper against the sound and sincere doctrine of the Gospel, as it hath beene taught by that most learned and elo∣quent Doctor Iohn Caluin. So that we hope assuredly that those Innouators of Campen, and false Ministers of the Word, Thomas Goswin, Iohn Schotler, Euerhard Vosculinlus, Assuerus Matthisius, Satans owne excrements, who in the moneth of October in our consecrated secular yeere 1617. published their diuellish Confession (that they might pollute and defile the common ioy, almost through the whole Empire, and ther∣by giue occasion to the Papists to write) against the Word of God, which endureth for euer: in which Confession beside other horrible matters,
They haue branded euen the best and religious men.
To alter a little from the words of our excellent Poet (happi∣ly as I suppose:) for I trust that thou, the Muses darling and the worlds delight, art still of the same integritie, whereof thou wert, when we reasoned so pleasantly together of our mutuall studies: and hast not blemished thy faire conditions with that same foule Goddesse of Daniel Hensius: who by reason of his in-bred want of audacitie concealed his name,

that published excellent Epigrams against them out of a city in Holland; and set himselfe against a certaine shamelesse Li∣bell of those or some other Arminians, called the Scales or Ballance. We hope (I say) that those seruants of Hell shall shortly be restrained, driuen out, or by the helpe of God com∣pelled by strong-hand to be of our opinion, and to make a better Confession. The like we desire also with our heart, to heare and vnderstand concerning Greuenchouius, Bertius, Vorstius. Grotius, Vtenbogartius, Slatius, Episcopius, Venator, Iohn Arnoldi, and other such like fore-runners of Antichrist, whose dismall enterprises and horrid blasphemies doe too of∣ten trouble our eares and mindes. Bee glad and reioyce (my Pareus) that those former ring-leaders being subdued, with∣out all doubt a Nationall Synod must be assembled: and hap∣pily by your aduice declared in your Irenicon. Will it not be an honour to thee? and a commoditie verily to vs all. Espe∣cially if the warlike prince Maurice sit as President therein, who will be able by his owne power and presence so to terri∣fie the aduersaries, and aboue all, if Sir Dudley Carleton Lid∣ger for his Maiestie of Great Brittaine, a most heauie friend to the Arminian-asses, be his Assistant, that no man dare vtter a word, that he knoweth will displease them, and so will there be a most excellent peace, and great quiet in our inuisible Church. Reioyce at leastwise, for that the first yeere of our New hundred after the yeere of Iubilee both begin prosperously. For as in the former yere we doe of right solemnize a Iubile, from the first reuolt of the renowned Doctor Martin Luther out of his irregular Cloister, and from the hard maiden-bed of the Augustines, to the pleasing marriage of his chaste Ca∣therine, and from his first disputation at Wittenberg against Indulgences, which gaue the Pope (whom we by our law tearme Antichrist) the first wound: so our posteritie may one hun∣dred yeeres hence reioyce, for the vanquishing and subduing of Berneuelt, Brertius, Grotius, and the rest, the first whereof was in a manner the very same among the Arminians, which that Bishop of Rome was amongst the Papists. Oh good Lord! what an occasion haue we from hence to speake and

fight against the Iesuits and hissing Popelings (for so I had rather name them, then by any other counterfeit name what∣soeuer, lest I also with that most learned Goclenius bee com∣manded by I know not whom, some new scoffing Iohn Ro∣berts by a marueilous Metamorphosis, to metempsychize and turne my selfe into a Swine or Giezi: though that also wil not goe scot-free, if I knew Raph aright?) What an occasion hast thou (my Pareus) against the Iesuit Adam Contzius, and Ma∣ximilian Sandie? Shake them vp roundly, I pray thee, and let them vnderstand that we haue cause to reioyce, and to con∣secrate the hundred Yeere; but neither leisure nor heart to weep. For else I shrewdly feare, lest many guesse amisse of thee, (par∣don the truth) and of thy abilitie, and of our whole cause: and fall away to that side, where we are assaulted with vnre∣torted weapons. Especially seeing many of our curious Pro∣testants so eagerly reade pratling Contius his Iubile of Iubilees, and the Thema seculare of saucie Sandie the Hollander, and confesse themselues vnable to contradict them without one to instruct them: and moreouer, that there is small efficacie in the Chronologie of the Euangelicall Iubilee, not very adui∣sedly published vnder the name of the Students of Nuiss by our N. N. a man very well beloued to thee and mee: so that if it be sifted indeed by the Iesuits (whom yet I trust are so busied about the ouerthrow in Bohemia, that henceforth they neither list to write, nor speake any thing against vs) we may much blush thereat: yea euen as much as we patiently did for your Syncretisme, after it lighted into the hands and style of Moguntinus the Iesuit. Which Iehouah the great God forbid, in whom I wish thee well to fare, and to take this my small gift in good part. From my Studie at Francfurt this 27. of Iune. 1618.

