



Right Honourable,
I Humbly beseech You to accept this poore model of my labours, as did Ar∣taxerxes a cup of cold water at the hands of silly Synaetus, euen from me, the meanest of Leuie his sonnes: It shall bee much honoured if it please your Lordship to pardon my pre∣sumption,
and to afford your patronage thereunto.
The subiect is worthy your Lordships consideration in it selfe, if the euill cooking of it by my vnskilfulnesse, detract not from the lustre thereof; but if I had inioyed either that Academick leisure,
 the be∣nefite of some Amaraean Li∣brary, or conference with men of excellent both parts & gra∣ces, I might haue produced a more cōpleat Minerua; but be∣ing pressed with the care of a large family depēding (though not vpō tent-making, as Paul) yet vpon my industrie, now these seuen yeares, without a∣ny annuall revenue from the Church, besides my weekely labours in preaching too, and catechizing my people, denyes me to furnish it as I would. If I bee asked, why I publish a
Treatise of this subiect:
1 Iohn. 2.18. I an∣swere with S. Iohn, these are the last times, wherein our Saui∣our sayth,
Mat. 24.12. Because iniquity shall abound, the loue of many shall waxe cold.
 Aristippus and Aes∣chinus being fallen out, one asked the other, what was be∣come of their friendship, the an∣swer was, it was asleepe, but hee would awake it. Now Right Honourable, seeing the most lye like the people of Laish,
Iudg. 18.7. wretchlesly and securely vp∣on their lees, that neither our owne sinnes, the sinnes of the times, afflictions of the Chur∣ches of God abroad, nor the consideration of the signes and symptomes of Gods Iudge∣ments, dependant or powred out vpon vs (especially spiri∣tuall vengeance at home) can awaken, I thinke it my duty, to make an experiment by this
poore Worke to stir vp and prouoke this frozen age to humble thēselues before God in the sense both of their own & the sins of others.
This point (my much ho∣noured Lord (though sacred, yet a paradoxe and aeaigma to nature, and the world, the na∣turall man not perceiuing the things that bee of God, because they are spiritually discerned. I may truely apply that saying of Themistocles to this pur∣pose,
 who beiog exiled his na∣tiue Country, & being better intertained in the Persian Court, said; I had perished, if I had not perished: that whereas this simple World are opinio∣nated, that to mourne vnder the sense of sin, is most vncō∣fortable, & the way to depriue thēselues of all solace & joy, e∣uery true Christian is assured,
and may say, perijssem si non pe∣rijssem, that if he had not sor∣rowed, he had forfeited his joy and his soule also.
Right Honourable, In your absence & affliction, this Cō∣monwealth & Church of Ire∣land, doubting of the successe & issue, & experimentally sen∣sible of the want of your Lord∣ships indefatigable labours in the execution of justice impar∣tially to al, many of her faith∣ful children were not wanting in their daily supplications to God, waiting your Lordships happy return, as for the
Iob 29.23. raine, gaue me assurce of Gods spe∣ciall blessing to honour your Lordship; as Ambrose said to Monia the mother of August:
Non potest perie tanta∣rum lachry∣matum filius the child of so many prayers and teares cannot possibly perish; the most High hath pleased to heare their prayers (blessed be
his most sacred name) in your Honours safe returne, with a largesse of honour. Faile not then (my deare Lord) the expe∣ctation of the spouse of Christ, and that trust which the most High and his Majesty hath cōmitted to you to be a faith∣full seruant,
Heb. 3.2. as Moses in the house of God, for the eyes of men are not onely cast vpon you (my noble Lord) and the whole land intent to be hold your life,
In re vnum cunctorum o∣culos &c. Hier. ad de. but God & Angels expect your faithful seruice, to which end my daily praiers shalbe to the most omnipotent, that hee wil not faile you with his spi∣rit; being assured that your Lordsh:
 intēds to imitate that saying of Alexāder, It profiteth not to possesse all things, & to do nothing, as appeares by your Lordships painefull industrie (in the judgement of all that behold your insupportable af∣fairs
beyond humane strēgth, I am bold to exhort your Ho∣nor in the words of an Apostle, (not to be weary of wel doing, for in the end you shall receiue the crown, if you faint not: assuring my selfe that that Proverbe so oft inculcated by Hierome of Cicile wil for euer be your dis∣position:
 That none who spake freely to him, did importune him, or was vnseasonable.
Thus crauing pardon of my boldnes in dedicating this tre∣tise to your Lo: to which my affection are loue and duty to your Ho: the zeal of the glory of God, & the care of the pro∣sperity of this church & com∣mōwealth, with the particular comfort of hūbled & afflicted consciences, hath transported me: I hūbly beseech your Lo: & this whole church, to accept this poore mite at my handes, most hūbly & heartily intrea∣ting
the most high to water it with the dew of his blessing, who only can make the labor both of minister and people fruitful: Rebeeca may cook the venison, but Isaak must giue the blessing: wee, nay Paul can but speake to the eare, it is the Almighty that must speake to the heart & conscience by his Spirit, and perswade Iapheth to dwel in the tents of Shem. Thus wishing my much esteemed Lod, to your selfe, your noble Lady, & posterity, not onely with the Philosophers prospe∣rity, physitiās lēgth of daies with health, the cōmon people ioy, Ro∣mās safty, & increase of honor, but with that blessed Apo. Paul, the peace of God which passeth vn¦derstāding, with eternall glory in the highest heauēs, I remain

