



All grace, peace and comfort from God the Father of mercy, through Iesus Christ our loving Lord and Saviour be multiplyed unto you, and so lead your Majesty by his H. Spirit through this world, as a wofull wil∣dernesse, and bring your Highnes at the last into his Heavenly Canaan, which is the day∣ly desire of your Majesties poore petitioner THOMAS ODELL Englishman.
HAving hard and min∣ded the manifold tryals & troubles, wherein the Lord hath exercise your Maje∣sty, I have ofttimes purpo∣sed some part of my poore labour, to presēt unto your Lord and King (now at rest) but I was oftentimes hindred in things concer∣ning myself, and most of all through the grieveous afflictions that befell your

Majesty. Your Highnes with many other may thinke it strange, that one so bace should be so bold or presume to present any thing to your Highnes hands, wanting lear∣ning, which thing I willingly confesse, for hee that giveth out his beste tallents, giveth to one five, to another two, and to another one, and yet may not that one be buried, but brought to the banke to the Lord, and owners prayse, and good of whomsoever it shall him please. I minding these things, and withall your Majesties lowly and lovely behaviour towards our country-men or women of meane estate, have bene emboldened now at the last to present unto your Highnes this small Treatise, shewing unto all, that the life of a true Christian, is no other then a Pilgri∣mage through this wildernesse unto our Heavenly Ca∣naan. And these things have I written in sundry parts, first for such which through the great strife and contention in these dayes are forced to runne too and froe, seeking the truth. Secondly the Pilgrimage of Abraham & Sarah, our faithfull parents, and other of bace estate: Also of Hester, with hir Unckle Mordicai. And lastly some part of the worke of our loving Lord and Saviour Christ Iesus in his Pilgrimage, to worke out our Redemption. These things have I brought forth according to the grace of God, gi∣ven unto me, and acknowledging that my sight but dark, & my knowledge but in part, I doe humbly entreate your Majesty, and ech Godly Reader, through Christian love, to beare with my weaknes herein, and so commit the issue to the Almighty, who preserve your Majesties person from all your enimies, secret or open, strengthen you in all cumbats inward & outward to the end; and then give your Highnes a Crowne of glory in Heaven for ever and ever, Amen. So let it be, ô Lord.
