



GAlen one of the most famous Well-springs of Phylosophie and Physicke (Right Ho∣nourable) compareth,Lib. de praecog. ad Post hun qui rep. Tomo quarte. vnlettered Empe∣rickes and Quack-saluers, vnto Theeues, and Robbers; making this only difference betwixt them, Quod hi in Montibus & Syl∣uis, Illi, in confortiss. Vrbibus insidientur. That is, they take a Purse by the high-way, in Woods or Forrests, but these do it in the most frequented and Populous Cities. This graue, Iuditiall, and Peremptory verdit and sentence, of that great Phylosopher, and renowmed Physition, dooth more closely attach, and strongly arrest our ignorant Intru∣ders, and bolde Periclitators in the Practise of Physicke, then all the world is aware of. This (I hope) shall euident∣ly appeare vnto your L. by the two Treatises ensuing, the one of them, being written in Latin by a Learned German, and by me put into an English Coate, for the good of my Country-men: and the other, a short Obseruation of mine owne.
It is a Maxime among Diuines, that Simulata Sanctitaes, est duplex Iniquitas. In like sort it may be said, that fained know∣ledge

is double Ignorance, both because it is Ignorance, and because it lyeth, and counterfeiteth Skill and Science. For if it be a point and part of good wisedome, for a man to see and acknowledge his owne weaknesse and insufficiency, and therevpon, to keepe within Compasse, and meddle not (with the Shoe-maker) Vltra Crepidam: It must needs be an increase of Folly, Vanitie, and Arrogance, for any, to pre∣tend Skill and knowledge in those Things wherein they are altogether vnacquainted, and to professe those Arts, which they neuer learned. But our Emperickes and Impostors, as they are too ignorant either to Teach or Practise Physicke (which they neuer saluted from the threskhold) and too in∣solent, and arrogant to learne of the Maisters of that Facul∣tie, or to be reduced into Order; so are they most dangerous and pernitious vnto the Weale-publike. Among wild Beasts (saith one) Enuy is most Sauadge & exitiall, and among ta∣med Beasts Flattery. The reason is, because the Sycophant is least of all feared, and most difficultly discerned and discoue∣red. These Crocodils, disguised with the vizard of fained Knowledge, and masking vnder the specious Titles of Phy∣sitions, and Doctors, not attained in Schooles, but imposed by the Common people, do with their Absolonicall Saluta∣tions steale away the affections of the inconstant Multitude, from the Learned Professors of that Facultie, and with their Loablike Imbracings, stabbe to the hart their poore and silly Patients, ere they be aware, or once suspect such vncouth Trechery. The more worthy & excellent the Obiect of any Art is, the greater, and more daungerous is the Error of the Artist, if he faile in his Office. If a Taylor marre a Garment, or the Potter breake the Vessell he should make, the matter is not great. But as he said in the Comicall Poet, Graue est Pe∣riculū in Filio: So great is the Hazard, and greater is the Fault committed in the Bodie of Man, the Domicil and Palace of the immortall Soule, and (as Zoroaster calleth it) audacis Na∣turae

stupendum Miraculum. I omit as small matter, their li∣uing vpon the Spoile, and deceiuing the People of their mo∣ny and substance (which yet the good Magistrate doth vn∣doubtedly respect) but their hainous offences against the pretious Health and Life of Men, (whereof London hath many wofull Experiments in a yeare) are altogether intolle∣rable, and in no wise to be silenced or pretermitted. Neuer∣thelesse it is straunge to behold, and consider, how these cir∣cumforanian Impostors are dignified by the People, flocked and resorted vnto in whole Troupes, sought out far & neare, and equalized with, nay (which is the greatest Indigni∣tie of all other) preferred & extolled before the most Graue, Learned, and best Experienced in that Profession. If a man haue a scruple in Conscience, hee will not repaire vnto an Hedge-priest (as they are called) or bare Reader, hauing no more Diuinitie thē a Child of ten yeares old, for resolution, but to some Learned, godly and Iuditiall Diuine. If a Suit in Lawe, he will not resort to a Husbandman or Artificer, for Counsell and Direction, but to a Skilfull, well studyed, and approoued Lawyer: And yet (such is the extreme folly and madnesse of many Men), that in case of Health and Life, (Things most pretious) they think euery Tinker, Bankerupt, or wandering Fugitiue, who hath ouer runne his Creditors, forsaken his Trade, and seeketh to liue (like a Droan without any Calling) a sufficient and compleat Physition, to aduise, counsell, and direct them. It will be said, that these Good-fellowes haue bene obserued to performe some Cures, and to haue good successe in their Actions. It hath bene likewise knowne, that a common Mariner, the Maister and Gouernor of the ship dying, or miscarying by some Accident, hath safe∣ly brought the Barke to shore, and arriued at the wished Ha∣uen: and yet no man (if hee may chuse) will willingly sayle with such a Pylot. A Company of vntrained and rawe Soul∣diers, which neuer saw Field or Warre before, haue vanqui∣shed,

and put to flight a Band of Veterans, invred for many yeares, and well exercised in martiall Affaires. And yet no Commaunder will prefer the punee, and fresh-water Soul∣dier, before the auncient, tryed, and well-disciplined Warri∣our. Vna hirundo non facit Ver, Though that bee admitted (which notwithstanding if the Instances be well scanned) will be a difficult matter to proue) yet I hold firmly (with in∣comparable Galen) my former Position, that they are bad and dangerous Members of the State, and in no sort sufferable in any well-ordered Common-wealth. I do therefore presume to offer these my slender trauailes vnto your L. who as you are a zealous Louer of your Country, a for-ward Professor of the Gospell, an incorrupt, and vpright Iusticer, a Friend to Vertue and Men of Desert, a professed Aduersary to all Ma∣lefactors: So I nothing doubt, but you wil take vpon you the Patronage, of the Learned and honest Physition, against the Ignorant and Couzening Mounte-banke. Among your other manifolde, and Honourable seruices, performed to your Prince, and Country, (wherby you haue commended your Name and Memorie to all Posteritie), it is not the last nor least, that by your watchfull Prouidence, and healthfull Iu∣stice you haue cut off great numbers of Grassators, and Rob∣bers, and in a maner, clensed, scoured and rid the Realme, of those Monsters, and sauadge rauenous Beasts in the shape of Men. And I am perswaded, that your Ho. Endeuours in fur∣thering and contenancing the catching and suppressing of these tame Beasts, or rather wily Foxes and Panthers, who with their subtile fleights, sugred words, and sweet sents, do allure, entrap, and circumuent the Simple, and pray vpō both their Goods and Bodies at their pleasure, will be no lesse ac∣ceptable to God, profitable to your Country, gratefull and commendable vnto all succeeding Ages, then the former. But I need not spend words in perswading your L. who haue alreadie declared, your Honourable Inclination and

forwardnesse vnto that Businesse. Therefore fearing to be te∣dious, I desire only the continuance of your Honourable fa∣uour vnto the Societie whereof I am, in their iust and honest Causes, & Affaires, and wish vnto your L. from my most in∣ward affections, increase of Honor, Length of Dayes, pros∣perous successe in all your Honourable Enterprises for Gods Church, and your Countries Good, Health of Body, Tran∣quillitie of mind, compleat Faelicitie in this world, and Eter∣nall Happinesse in that, which is to come.

