



THere are not a few, who with NAAMAN the Syrian take greater delight in Abana and Tharpar, rivers of Da∣mascus, than in Iordane, wherein our Saviour was baptized, than in the waters of Israel, the holy waters of Sailo, which run gent∣ly; than in the living waters of the Sanctu∣arie;Ezek. 47 9. which given  to them which
mooue therein. These are they who after the vulgar estimation, preposterously judge the fine meale of pure literature to be course bran, and their own course bran of humane knowledge and observation to be fine meale: who with Aesops Cocke refuse the pearle, and choose the barley corne. Such I desire not to please, but those who are meliore luto, of a better mould and temper, of sounder resolution and judge∣ment. The argument of perfection, wor∣thy to be intreated of, is handled by me, not as I would, much lesse as it requireth, but so as by reason of my bodily infirmi∣ties and other defects I could. I haue propounded this briefe indigest worke, as a short modell and briefe draught to be curiously polished and embellished by some others, to whom God hath beene pleased to giue a greater measure of know∣ledge, with more health and strength of bodie, and withall a richer Librarie, a spe∣ciall helpe not in the last place requisite. For surely as in other Sciences and arts, so also in our transcendent Science of Theologie, the Philosophers rule is true,
:Arist. polit. li. 3. ca. 12. He that shall excell in his worke, must haue excellent tooles to worke withall.
In the meane time, I am bold to pre∣sent unto your Grace this imperfect worke of perfection, in token of my dutifull and hum∣ble respect to your Lordship, our most wor∣thy Metropolitane and Diocesan. To whom wee under your Graces jurisdiction doe by good right owe all canonicall obedience and observance: unto whom I in parti∣cular doe earnestly desire and wish all spi∣rituall and corporall happinesse here on earth; and after, everlasting fruition of eternall glorie and felicitie in the Hea∣vens.

