



REnowmed Greece in elder age, with learned dames did shine,
Whose written workes remaine as yet, with phrase mellifluous fine:
Of Muses bright besprinckled, drawne out of Parnassus spring.
Of female sexe, erst mighty Rome, a hugie troupe did bring▪
All expert in the Latine tong, how heit they lesser prayse,
Adornd with natiue language wanne, their fame to heauen, to rayse,
And euerlasting memorie, by writing to attaine:
Than due is to those Noble Nymphes, which seuered farre remaine,
In externe Regions wide, in tender yeares, whose natiue tong,
Is to be learnd, the Romayne then, by toiles, and labours long,
Of forme renewde, with limites straight, and bondes incompast round,
As English Ladies, many may of worthie name be found,
Which florish at this day, which through the world swift Fame doth blase.
Who ioyne, like learned men, the Greekish tong, with Latine phrase.
Yea which is more, like skilfull Poets, in dulcet verse they floe,
Wherewith Homerus frought his bookes, or Mantuan Maro.
If cause requirde, ex tempore, their meeters framing fine.
O Nymphes, O noble Sisters foure, but (Myldred) vnto thine
High fauour, as the chiefest, I appeale, be thou mine aide,
And like an other Pallas, let thine Aegis strong be laide:
Before my brest, that this my booke, feele not the byting i, Aegis the shield of Pal∣las.
Of Theon, Viper fell, or carping Zoils slaunderous flawes.
If me beholding with thy shining lookes, thou wilt defend:
The Enuious, and Malicious crue, dare not me once to rend.
So, as in sanctuary shut, I shall no daunger feere,
Inferiour farre I know my Muse vnto the vertue cleere.

Of the renowmed Prince, howbeit the will of subiect true,
May here appeare, if that the iust, and courteous reader view,
And pondering way the worke aright▪ and not with censure hard.
If that this long, and prosperous peace, hereafter  clarde
By trompe more shril, I wish, and b, these writinges vnto nought
By sparkling flames to be consumde, meane time, I them haue brought
Renowmed Lady to be shrinde, vpheld, and set in stay,
By your high honour, turne not from your Clyent I you pray,
This doth your true Nobilitie, and manners meeke, in brest
Ingraft, this doth your Godlines, require, aboue the rest.


