


LOth I am (right Wor∣shipfull and truely Hono∣rable) that this rough & unpolished discourse of mine, should unfortu∣nately renew Your former griefe, or fill those Eyes againe with teares, which were never fully dried sithence

this heavy Accident befell this Noble Plant, so neere, so deere unto you. For sorrow (I know right well) is of a quick and apprehensive nature, & that the least touch maketh the Vessell easily o∣verflow. How ever, I humbly intreate, that mine innocency herein, may answer for me: my ayme beeing chiefly this, to strew onely some few flowers upon the Hearse of this my honourable friend, such as in his life time, his owne Hand ga∣thered, pleasant unto the Eye, and of a most odoriferous Sent. Neither is this Treatise of mine otherwise inten∣ded, but to bee a true Remembrancer, to tell succeeding Ages the greatnesse of the losse; when your renowned Fa∣mily, was by the Untimely Death of this so Hopefull a Young Gentleman, thus fatally smitten, if not quite over∣turned.

This Towne which now af∣fordeth me my being, formerly affor∣ded mee my first breath. And foure generations of your honourable Fa∣mily, haue I seene here upon the Stage, successiuely acting their several Parts. Angels and Men were the lookers on, and with great applause, highly com∣mended their true Action, & generous demeanour. But now alas, the Theater is wholy empted, and all the Actors quite gone, the Stage hourely expec∣ted to be pulled down; and if it stand, yet little hope there is that ever our eyes shall see such Actors any more up∣on it, to play their parts so commen∣dable, as those Antients did. The consideration whereof, as it carrieth with it not onely trouble, but indeed a kind of amazement, so is there much

wisedom required in censuring and pa∣tience in induring what is hapned. My humble request therfore (unto you right Worshipfull) is, as those that haue the greatest share in this unvaluable losse, that in the middest of so many diffe∣ring Thoughts in searching out the true cause and end that the Almighty hath in doing this, you would be plea∣sed to remember these three Things: First, that there is in God an unboun∣ded will, that his Judgements are Vn∣searchable, and his Waies past finding out. Secondly, that You would bee pleased to looke backe upon the hap∣pinesse, and glory of your Family, which formerly, You have both seene and ta∣sted. Beleeve mee, right worshipfull, the sight thereof will be a Soveraigne preservatiue against Repining. Lastly,

that seeing it was determined, by an e∣ternall, and inevitable decree (that the Sirnames of your Family, should heere fatally end) that you would bee plea∣sed to solace and cherish your Hearts, that it is done without the least spot and blemish to the same. And that this young Gentleman so honourably concluded, and closed up all so happi∣ly, as Hee hath done, to his immortall praise.
But I desire not to tell the Travai∣ler the way hee knoweth so well al∣ready; or light a Candle when the Sunne is up, or leade the hand of the skilfull Artist. Here therefore I doe humbly take my leaue, desiring You to accept of what is done heere∣in, as the Fruite of that unfeigned Loue, and dutiful Respect which was

alwayes borne by him, to your Honourable and worthy Family, who still re∣maineth

