


Right Honourable:
I Penned this insu∣ing Treatise in the time of your great affliction, intending it onely for your priuate vse, by the diuine documents contayned therein, to lead your Honour through the waters of Marah, into Elim the sweete waters of spirituall ioy and consolation, not purposing euer to make it publike; but shewing it to the most Reuerēd Lord Primate, he desired the publishing of it to the view of the Church.
These poore meditations shall be
much honoured, if you vouchsafe as gracious an aspect to them written, as you did an honourable zealous, and re∣verend attention to them vttered by voyce; though as a picture expresseth not the life, so neyther can writing demonstrate the liuely Energie of the voyce which consists in vtterance & action the two ornamēts of speech.
I know you delight not to haue your goodnesse diuulged but rather be good then seeme so, and that you account vertues fairest Theater to be a good conscience those who shall receiue any instruction, refreshing, or consolation, by this poore worke, owe the acknow∣ledgement (next vnto God) to your Honour, who haue so watered, and in∣couraged my poore studies with your beneficēce, that my barren heart hath (blessed be God) both by preaching & writing yeelded some fruite.
I hate to be a Sycophant and flat∣terer, yet frō my heart I wish that all the world vnderstood your Honours disposition both to my selfe in parti∣cular, and the Common-wealth in ge∣nerall, that all other might be instiga∣ted by your right noble example. First
for my selfe, I acknowledge to haue receiued, out of your free bountie my meanes and maintenance for which I humbly blesse the most high God, and your Honour.
Lysippus the Caruer worthily reproued Appelles that exact painter because bee had pictured Alexander with a thūderbolt in his bād as a God, the other vvith a Speare in his hand as a valiant Prince, I am perswaded they are more pleasing to your honour that only giue you your due, thē which ascribe to you that which your Hon:
 will not assume. Enuy followes ver∣tue flattery nourisheth vice. The first Themistocles well perceiued vvho being yet young, said hee had done no excellēt thing, because he was not enuied. That memorable worke of your Honour worthy to be recorded in pillars of Marble, cleansing & pur∣ging (like a happy Physitian) this countrey, with some partes of Vlster frothose cursed vipers, & Cockatri∣ces the rebellious kearne who so infe∣sted the Countrey, that no man had any securitie, that eyther his goods, life, wife, or children in the euening
could be in safetie vntill the morning. insomuch as that night truely be ap∣plied to those partes of the Countrey where they ranged and raigned, for foure yeares space, which Deborah expresseth of Israel in her song: In the dayes of Shamgar the sonne of Anath,
Iudg. 5.6.7. in the dayes of Iael the highwaies were vnoccupied, & the trauellers walked through by-wayes, vntill you rose vp an honourable Father in this our Is∣rael.
How did those rogues & villaines runne vp and downe the countries, robbing & spoyling all, delighting and satiating their greedy & vnsatiable lusts in rapine, bloud, murthers, thefts & burning the Kings Maiesties most loyable Subiects, & if the State by your Honours indefatigable labour, both of minde and body, had not care∣fully preuented that mischiefe, long ere this time, our blouds had runne downe the streets, our wiues, children and goods made a prey to those mer∣cilesse, and greedy villaines.
Right honourable, let your me∣mory be blessed vpon earth, and le
these lines keepe the remembrance thereof to sacceeding ages; yet in this so prayse worthy and blessd a worke, so prospered by the prouidence, and good hand of the Almighty, your Honour escaped not the blacke nouth of cankered enie, like Shimei his rayling at Dauid,
 but these are blowne ouer, and they are now asha∣med of their wicked scandals.
The other Phocion knew well, to whom when the people gaue a plau∣dite for his Oration, sayd, haue I spoken any thing amisse vn∣awares, intimating that popular applause, and flattery workes vpon some infirmitie. Many haue preuen∣ted treachery that could neuer beware of flattery, Dauid whom the valor eyther of Aner or Amasah,
2. Sa. 16.3. or the wisedome of Achitophel could van∣quish,
2. Sam. 11. was yet seduced by Ziba his false tale to iniure honest and plaine hearted Mephibosheth, yea how did smiling ease & prosperity corrupt that man,
Neh. 6.10.14. according to Gods ovvne heart. Nehemiah could well be∣ware of Tobiah and Sanballat ray∣ling & menacing aduersaries, but hee
was greatly in danger by Shemaiah and Noadiah dissembling Prophets.
The way Right Honourable to be safe from the sting of these Farantu∣las, Syrens & sycophants is, to take Dauids counsell,
Psal. 101.6. to haue faithfall associats, seruants, & followers. The faithfull in the land shall dwell with mee, the vpright in heart shall serue me. And to desire with him let the righteous smite mee, for that shalbe a precious balme.
Thus humbly crauing of the most high long to continue you vnder his Maiestie by your faithfull counsell a muniment to the decayed estate of this poore Church, n oritament to the Commonwealth, a proppe to Religion a pillar of Iustice, a Father to Or∣phanes, a comfortable succour to di∣stressed widdows, a sweet & delight∣full husband to your noble Lady, & a directing father to your beloued chil∣dren. And the same God preserue you all vnblameable in your spirits, soules and bodies, vntill the appearing of Iesus Christ: So I remaine bound to

