



WHen as at the request, and earnest instigatiō of some of my frends, (worshipfull M. ESTMOND.) I had done into English meeter, the two first bookes, of that Poeme, of C. O. cōtainyng the battailes, & high aduentures, of the English Nation. I was determi∣ned there to stricke sayle, and to cast myne anker: knowing, that the longer my craced keele scoured the seas, the more water she would leake: & fearing, least that Scilla escaped, I should be sunke in Charibdis, or Libia shunned, I should be swallowed in Syrtes. If Cherilus that fielie Poet, had brought but a brief Pamphlet, when he dedicated a huge Volume, vnto the Macedonian kyng Alexander, his gayne peraduenture had bene the more, his paine vndoubtedly the lesse, in escaping a great many lashes, whiche he suffred, to his extreme grief and endlesse infamie. Euen so was I perswaded of my selfe, that the more I wrote, the more want of skill I shewed, whereby I might heape the more dislike, and so by a consequēce the more reproch. But when I called vnto mind (Gentle Syr). How greatly I should dye in your dett, for your manifold benefites, & frendly, yea rather fatherly affection, where with you did imbrace me, beyng your pupill in Oxon, to my no lesse comfort, the commoditie: It were incredible, to thinke, with what celeritie, and disdayne, I shooke of those terrifying causes, & how ardently I burned, with a vehement desire, yet at the least by this kinde of writtyng, (in as much, as I cannot otherwise suffici∣ently expresse my zeale and true affectiō) to testifie my good wil, and my hart full of all humilitie, and sinceritie towardes you, and

to bring to passe if I might, that in all ages, and posterities, as long as euer these my watchynges, and writtynges, shall liue amongst men: your name should neuer dye, but remayne as a patterne, to our nephewes, and ofspring, of all gentilitie, courtesie, and hu∣manitie. and that as euery fautor, and maintainer of good letters, is called ALTER MAECENAS, an other MAECENAS: so euery one which imbraceth his frend with faythfull loue, hateth no man, & is free from all basenes and slauerie of the mynd (as beseemeth a gentleman) might be named ALTER ESTMONDVS, an other EST∣MOND. Take therfore well in worth (deare Syr) these my simple indeuours, beyng a compendious declaration, and treatise, of the peaceable raigne, of our renowmed Lady ELIZABETH, compiled by Maister O. & by me metrized, as a certaine testimo∣ny, and the expresse tipe of my good will. Communicate them with your frendes, shroude them from my foes. This is all I doe request, this me thinkes I already see your Cour∣tesie, and gentlenes to graunt me. The Lord preserue you in health, wealth, and felicitie. AMEN.

