



RIght Honorable, the warres, rumors
of warres, breach of brotherly loue,
manifolde troubles and dissention
growing euerie where through Eu∣rope,
which is the part of the worlde
professing Christ, argue the dissolu∣tion
of all things premonished by
our Lord not to bee farre hence di∣stant.
It behooueth therfore all good
Christians considering the time, to be circumspect to watch
and pray accordingly as vve are commanded by our Sauiour
in these words. Vigilate & Orate: againe, Estote prudentes, si∣cut
Serpentes. Be ye wise as Serpents, And we are deeplie to
consider, from whence this venome and poyson floweth,
which drunk and sucked in, by the space of many years pas∣sed,
hath transformed, and as it were charmed the braines
and sences of many men, that according to the words of the
Prophet, seeing they see not, hearing they heare not, and vn∣derstāding
they vnderstand not in matter concerning prin∣cipally
the saluation of their soules. The remedie of which
mortall maladie consisteth in this, to knowe and search out
the cause, and that knowen, to remooue the same, and
then to apply medicine for curing of it. In all which pointes,
(Right Honorable) I shew briefly in this small treatise, fol∣lowing
the doctrine of S. Peter the Apostle, and the best lear∣ned
and most approoued Authours opinions consenting &
deliuered from age to age, which open the sinfull man, and
misterie of iniquity, the onely cause of troubles, and not yet
well perceiued, neither vnderstanded of the greater sort.
Committing these my labours to your Honors tuition and

protection, whose zeale to true and sincere Religion, atten∣tiue
eare giuen alwaies to the Preaching of Gods worde, and
laudable life concurring as sure testimonie, well knowen to
the world, makes me bolde to dedicate vnto your LL. this
Pamphlet, hoping that the booke beeing your own (as it is)
and therefore the more to be desired to be read, and to come
into many mens hands, whome all in generall, for your singu∣lar
vertues, do reuerence, honour and loue, may profite, doo
good, and perchance, conuert not a few from their obstinate
opinion in cleauing to the woorishe Babilonicall Church,
wherein rather of selfe-wil, than of any grounded reason they
dwell and persist. And on the contrarie side, confirme and e∣stablish
the others, whose hearts alreadie conducted by the
holy spirite, see the light of Gods truth, and ensue it▪ And
herein, withall humblenes, I make manifest my conscience,
according to the small talent which vnto me is lent, & hope
that my dutie, obedience, and good vvill to her Maiestie,
Lords of her Counsell, and my Countrey, may in the sequel
sufficiently appeare, Praying God to send both your Lord∣ships
long life with encrease of honour.

