



OF all the faultes that we fall into, in these dayes of our vanity, (right honorable & my very good Lord) I know none that de¦serue greater blame, than to be vnthankfull where we haue receaued benefites. And this is the cause yt I hauing takē some paines in this pro∣fitable worke, (which I am bolde vnder your honours name, to offer to the whole Church of God:) I thought good to leaue it in lieu of thankefulnesse, as a testimony both of your honours loue towards the truth of God, and of my humble duety againe towards your ho∣nor

and the whole Church of God to all posteritie: for who am I that I should not, whiles life lasteth, liue to the pro∣fite of the Church? and who are you with all your honour, auctority, wealth, and libertie, & all the gifts which God in mercie hath bestowed vpon you, yt you should not employ all to the mainte∣nance of the truth, and defence of the Church, vnder her Maiestie, wherein both high and lowe, receaue the assu∣raunce of spirituall blessings, sealed in the hope of an euerlasting kingdome? And as ye glory of God, is shewed most herein, that he defendeth his spowse, & hath bewtified her with giftes from a¦boue, that she might be a pure and vn∣defiled spowse, chast and holy vnto him selfe: so this is our greatest glory of what state or condition so euer we be, to be members of this Church, by the Com∣munion whereof, we are his members. For he is the onely head of his Church, to giue it gifts, to gouerne it, & to lead it, to that great and euerlasting saluati∣on. There is no life, but from this head, nor any saluation but in this Church:

wherein as syncere doctrine is professed and out of his worde shineth and dwel∣leth, so that holy obedience, of children towards their father, and of seruauntes towards their Lord, framed and confor∣med to his will, alwayes appeareth and sheweth it selfe, And therefore it is cal∣led his howse, because he is the husband of it, the housholder and master that ru∣leth in it, setting down his owne orders to his children and familie: wherein it is intollerable presumption, (if not blas∣phemie) for any man to dare to alter or chaunge the least iote against his will. He is the Kinge and Pastor of it,Luke 12.4. and his friendes stande and heare him:Io. 10.4.5. his sheepe followe his voice, and will not goe after a straunger. They loue him that keepe his wordes, and he beautifi∣eth them, not onely as guestes & stran∣gers, but as Citizens and Saintes,Ephes. 2.19. and such as are of his owne housholde. These are they that flie as the cloudes, (such is the multitude of them dispersed vpon the face of the earth) and they mounte vp as Doues to his windowe.Esay. 60.8.

And this is both called & is the Church of the liuing God,1. Timot. 3.15. the foundation and piller of truth, the body of Christ, the house of the highest, the keeper & tea∣cher of the Gospell, the mother of the faithfull, clensed of Christ and pretious vnto him. This is no particular syna∣gogue, whorish and disobedient, im∣pure and filthy, full of rebellion and falsehood, as is that synagogue of Rome which hath departed from her first faith and loue: which although the Papists would aduāce aboue the skies, (alwaies like Cuckowes singing one & the same songe, and shamelesly begging yt which they shoulde chiefly proue:) yet they shall neuer be able, though they burst their harts for it, to proue it to be either the Catholique Church of Iesus Christ, or a member of it. For they maintaine another head besides Christ, another worde besides the worde of Christ, vn∣written verities or rather absurde vn∣truthes, preferring the commaunde∣ments of a sinnefull man, before the vn∣chaungeable and euerlasting trueth of God. And truely, I do not a little won∣der,

what madnesse is entred into their braines, that with such Owles faces, they dare in the open lighte of the Gospell, schritch forth their olde absurdities, as though now after the great instruction of the truth, they were able to thrust forth vnto vs (as in times past when they lead vs in the darke) their counterfaite ware, to deceaue vs, and so turne vs a∣way from the glorious lighte of our sal∣uation. We had thought they had recei∣ued their aunswere long agoe, & would neuer haue durste to looke the trueth in the face againe: but nowe as they are continually instructed from that same enemy of truth, so they bring forth their olde rotten stuffe, and their new Iesuites haue furbushed ouer their olde argu∣ments of their blinde predecessors, & as if they were spicke & spanne newe, they offer them vnto vs. But we finde them all of one metall. This onely is the diffe∣rence, that whereas they were wont to speake in their owne language and like themselues, nowe they speake in an o∣ther dissembling voyce, and being in case to couch for feare of the whippe,

they haue turned their rustie roughnes into some smoothnes, and like Angels of lighte, that they may haue some en∣tertainment amongest vs: and to the end they may infect the lande againe with their idolatries, and turne vpside downe the quiet peace the blessing of the Gospell hath brought vs, and drinke vp our bloud, (as together with Anti∣christ their head they haue done in times past, and in the countries, where they haue had entertainment rounde about vs;) with strong flatterie, they prepare euen to creepe into our bosomes. And hēce are those speaches vsed by Parsons Howlet, in yt fraudulent and doubling Epistle, that he of late hath presumed to whoope in the eares of her Soueraigne Highnes, wherewith because I haue dealt more fully in another place, now I do but touch it. But as there is greatest daunger when foes beginne to faigne, so haue we greatest cause to distrust these enemies of God and of the com∣mon weale, when they haue made their tongues most glyb and smoothe to de∣ceaue withall,August. in Psal. 9. that as one saith verie

well, they may binde mēs soules in their sinnes. For a sinner delighteth to doe those things, wherein not onely the re∣prouer is feared, but also the praiser is heard. There are therfore more dangers vnder ye tongue of a flatterer, then vn∣der the hand of a persecutor. For where as the hande reacheth but to the bodie, the false praise and faigned loue of a flat¦terer, turneth mens hearts from the syn∣ceritie of the truth. And therefore we ought to take heede of these flattering Papists, as of the enemies,August. ad Demetria∣dem. Epist. 142, not of our bo∣dies, but of our soules, whose softest spe¦ches and glauering praises, which they pounce out to the vttermost, to steale in vpon vs, & to gain against ye truth, are so many swords & darts to our soules. Thei corrupt light mindes with their faigned praises, & in the mindes of those that are light of credite, they giue gentle woūds. Thei couer their poison with hony. And this vice hath so encreased in this our age, yt it stands at ye last stint & cannot be encreased: euery mā applieth this study, & giueth himselfe wholy to follow this schole, yt he may deceiue & be deceiued.

we receaue that willingly of others, which we offer as a gift to others, & the hope of receauing praise maketh vs to praise those to their faces of whom we would be praised. We oftentimes refuse the praise of flatterers, when they speake to our faces, and yet we nourish their flatteries in our mindes, and thinke we haue gained much with men, when God knoweth & our consciences tell vs that they are forged and faigned. We do not thinke what we are our selues in deede, but what we seeme to be to others. And hence it is, that the most men push at the opinion of the worlde: they labour to be well thought of, fetching the te∣stimony of their credite, rather from a lying fame, than a sounde conscience. But happie are they that perfectly ouer∣come this vice, that neither flatter, nor beleue those that flatter, that depend not vpon the blasts of mens mouthes, but studie to approue themselues to God, whose iudgement is according to truth. And I beseech the Lord, that her Highnes with all her Coūsel & Nobles, may be indued with this wisdome from

aboue, (because such as they are, are in most dāger of these sweete poisoners) yt they may shun & auoyde their pleasant hissings. For albeit now they creepe, be∣cause they can not goe, yet the time was when they ran & made deepe furrowes euen vpon our backs: when her maiestie should haue found curtesie, they execu∣ted crueltie; when all should haue found truth and loyaltie, they bent themselues and their whole powers to kill both soule and body. But I see Sathan is like himselfe, and his children beare his re∣semblance: that which they can not compasse one way, they wil attempt an∣other. And therefore I wonder not, that they are sodainly turned for a time from yt rough course which yet lurketh hiddē in their bones, and which in times past was wont to be their way,That traitor Storie said it openly in the Parlea∣ment house. Ann. prim. of her High∣nes most gration raigne. that now they flatter her whō they then persecuted & put in daunger of life; whom they so vn∣curteously entreated, & some with such sorow repented yt they had not grubbed vp the stock, & passed ouer the brāches: against whom they haue moued so ma∣ny rebellions, and entred into such trai∣terous

and curssed practises, some of their greatest Clarkes, appearing in ac∣tuall rebellion, and inuading her ma∣iesties terretories and countries: I won∣der not I say, that now they call her highnes Christes substitute, their soue∣raigne princesse, so extolling her ver∣tues, as though her highnes gouerne∣ment, the establishing of Christian reli∣gion, and the execution of her highnes lawes against such traiterous offenders were inforced and against her will and purpose. Thus they kisse and kill togea∣ther. The Pope their god in earth hath excommunicated her highnes, and San∣ders (as it were their own mouth) to wit¦nes their persuasion, by vertue of that Bull which Mourton procured, and Fel∣ton (whom with Thomas Becket for treason they make a martyr) set vp, hath pronounced them all free from all du∣tie and allegeance: and yet forsoth now they will needes be counted faithfull subiectes. Allen in his seditious Apolo∣gie of his english Seminarie, speaketh faire for obedience, and yet malapertly presumeth, to confute her highnes pro∣clamatiōs,

made against such runagates. Their going beyond sea, is for nothing but religion, & yet from them, & out of their schooles hath spronge, the ground of al seditious practises, ye stirring vp vn∣to sedition & rebellion, in diuerse places both at home and abroade, the attemps of compassing her maiesties life, which ye lord long preserue to the maintenance of the gospel, & their cōfusion. And be∣cause ye man is so hot, for yt we assure all ranke papists to be right traitors: he tel∣leth vs yt those priests & Iesuits, haue ex¦presse cōmandement frō their superiors, not to moue any sedition, or to meddle with matters of state or tēporal gouern∣mēt,Allen Apo∣log. Cap. 6. Fol. 72. but only by their priesthood & fun∣ctions, to do such duties as be requisite for christian mens soules, which cōsisteth in preaching, teaching, catechising,Howlets auctor saith in the 7. rea¦son, that none can be called Prie∣stes, but in respect of that sacri∣fice. mini¦string the sacraments & such like. First therefore we answere, that preaching, teaching, catechising, and ministring the sacraments is no part of popish priestes office. For they are in deede (as also he will haue them called) masse priestes, in respect of their abhominable sacrifice.

And as they scarse knew any practise of these he nameth, so for Catechising or teaching the principles of Christian reli∣gion, they neuer knew what it ment. For they could not so much as abide, ye Lords prayer, or creede, commonly called the Creede of the Apostles, to be in our mo∣ther tongue. As for ministring ye Sacra∣ments, they had neither calling so to do, neither yet kept any right forme in the administration, or taught the vse of thē. And if their commission from their spi∣rituall superiors there, be sufficient cal∣ling to enable them to entrude them selues here, or to go into other coun∣tries, like gadding Circumcellions: to disturbe both Churches and common weales, where they haue neither place allotted, nor beinge assigned, either by God or man: how can they shew vs the seale of these commissioners commissi∣on from aboue? But if they will draw all auctority from that stranger, that man of sinne and perdition, who as he taketh v∣pon him to giue a spirituall commission, (I should haue saide a spitefull) In foro conscientiae to excommunicate and to ab∣solue

from all sinnes: then they should first proue that he receiued his auctority from God, and so they might haue some better allowance. But what auctority can this straunge vsurper challendge o∣uer the Lords inheritance? How can he absolue from sinnes, who is the verie sonne of perdition? And what auctori∣ty can these substitutes haue, to free from schisme and heresie, who are the greatest schismatiques and heretiques of the worlde, renting themselues from the spowse of Christ, from Christ him∣selfe, and ioyning so fast to Antichrist? Let them shewe vs by what tenor they holde this priuiledge, whether in Fee farme, in Socage, or in Capite. Sure I am that these spirituall keies, in their se∣uerall priuiledges are annexed to ye true ministerie and ministers of Christ. And though Master Allen now be somewhat abated in his reconing, who fraudulent∣ly beginneth to distinguish betwixt the Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction and Tempo∣rall, and would persuade vs, that these newe creatures of the Popes making, take vpon them no dealing in state mat∣ters,

and therefore, that they are farre from being traitors: yet he knoweth, and all ye worlde knoweth who it is that hath vsurped the auctority of both swordes; and who they are that thinke both vn∣lawfull without his allowance; and whe∣ther they haue a Bull or no Bull, yet he can not be so ignorant, or rather impu∣dent to deny the Pope, and Papists en∣termedling by their Buls euen with our Princes person and state. Her person crowne and dignity, her right ouer all persons in gouerning them according to Gods word, and keeping her subiects in order, are matters of state. And therfore the matter is not mistaken, concerning the Bull of Pius Quintus, that hath, if it be of force, taken the crowne which God hath set vpon her highnes head, frō her, and discharged all her subiects from her obedience. And howsoeuer he flat∣tereth, yet he insinuateth too plainly, yt our Parleaments are no Parleaments, our ciuill Officers & Church Ministers, no Officers and Ministers, because they haue not the approbation & allowance of his holy father. And yet forsoth, these

Romish Romanistes, though they tugge with tooth and naile for to bring in this Romish iurisdiction which is forreine, a∣gainst the word of God, and against the lawes of this realme, which the Pope challengeth Iure diuino, & yet can shew no euidence out of that lawe for it, and that ouer al causes & persons, bereauing her Highnes of that principall part of her office, which is to looke to Gods matters, yea though he excommunicate her as a schismatique, laying her as a pray open to the swords of her enimies, yet must they be friendes and no eni∣mies, loyall and not traiterous. If this be their truth, what is their treason? Nei∣ther doth the example of Christ and his Apostles suffering for the truth, nor of Daniel seruing the true God, helpe their cause one whit. For Christ and his Apostles were wrongfully charged, and these truly. They stoode for the truth & glory of God, and these against it, and therefore all other idolaters, and false worshippers of God, may aswell chal∣lendge Christ and his Apostles for their patrons, as they, & with ye same truth.

Besides, Daniel serued the true God, & was faithfull to an heathen Prince; these serue a false God, and are vnfaithfull to their Soueraigne a Christian Prince. And albeit it were to be graunted, yt Masse, Mattins, Confession, Absolution, Beads, Agnus Deies, and such consecrated to∣kens as they call them, indeede super∣stitious trash, and idolatrous trumperie, were in themselues no matters of trea∣son, yet when runagates, enimies to her Highnes, maliciously bring them in as tokens of reconciliation to the Pope, withdrawing her people frō the dutiful obedience they owe her, disturbe her state, and hazard her Crowne and dig∣nitie;The Bul frō Mourton, from Cut∣bert Maine executed in Corne∣wall, from Strāguidge obtained for the Queene of Scottes, proue al this to be true. they doing all by the commission of a forreine vsurper, breaking in tyran∣nously both vpon the Church and ciuill gouernment, which alwaies in it owne nature hath bene deemed treason by the lawes of this Realme, & so standeth ad∣iudged, hauing neither place nor cal∣ling, roaring out against her Highnes rightfull possession by their Bulls; these superstitions cōsidered in these circum∣stances, can no more be sundred from

treason, than lighte from the Sunne, heate from the fier, or moystnes from water. And as true religion is an enimy to all vices, so superstition most com∣monly is friendly, & a companion with them. Truth and treason hardly agree, but falshood and treason are concea∣ued in the same wombe, and nourished vp with the same milke, and this is the cause that Poperie hath had in all ages, her greatest maintenance by treason, & treason by it. How wickedly soeuer this runagate, to discredite her highnes most honorable and trustie Counsailors, would beare the worlde in hande, that she and hr gouernment are parted, that she is enforced, and as it were rauished by some about her, of her free right and power of ruling, so malapert is this per∣king proctor of the Popes, that vpon the suddaine is become so loyall, and yet feareth not to shew his traiterous heart, by such ouert and manifest treasons. In deede it were an easie thing here not to finde a staffe, to beat this dogge, (that I may vse his owne word) but a sword, or rather being vnworthy of the honour

of heading, a rope, to put an ende to his wicked attēpts. It had bin an hapy thing both for our church & country, if he had bin in his mans place in the late rebel∣lion & inuasiō into Ireland, procured by such dutiful subiects as himselfe to haue excused him. I doubt not but our Lions, would haue found out his hornes, what soeuer vizard of eares, he and such haue put on. True it is, yt the temporal state & Ecclesiastical are distinguished. And as a man may be a good ciuil man, & yet no godly man, so a man may be a ciuill subiect, & yet is not a faithfull & religi∣ous subiect. But yet euē as the church & common wealth are twinnes, and the happines and florishing of the elder, giues comfort and glory to the youn∣ger, so is it in these two states. If the mi∣nisterie, the onely meane to ye felicitie of the Church, cause it to florish: the com∣mon wealth is the better. The soule is ye life of the body, and whilest they conti∣nue together in perfecte state, it goeth well with the whole man, and so is it with whole mankinde. No soule hath true life, that is separated from Christ

the life thereof, neither are bodies any thing else, but dead carcasses & carriōs, frō which ye soule is departed. First ther∣fore the Ecclesiasticall state is occupied about ye soule, & ye Ciuill about ye body. Eche keepe them within their listes to ye preseruatiō of both, & intrude not one into an others office. The Churche state and gouernment is wholy occupied in Church matters, and the Ciuill in com∣mon wealth matters. And albeit ye Chri∣stian Prince hath auctority from God, o∣uer all persons; yet the Prince enforceth no lawes in Gods matters to binde the conscience against his lawes. The Chri∣stian Prince, looketh that Gods lawes be had in price, that all estates keepe themselues in order, that euery man do his duty according to his order, and in∣flicteth bodily punishments vpon ma∣lefactors and offenders: and the other execute that spirituall sworde, that pier∣ceth further than the temporall, euen to the soule and conscience. When both these meete together, dwell in one king∣dome, and kisse ech other, there is a bles∣sed state; and in regarde of Christian

Princes, though treason against the one, can not be with any loyaltie to the other; yet we exempt such ignorant and seduced Papists from the gilt of treason; as (being led by such Capitaine Roma∣nists, as Sanders and Allen are) onely haue a dislike of ye truth, & yet bear du∣tifull hearts to their Prince and Coun∣try, hauing not in such ouert and actuall manner, hatched forth that cursed and treacherous seede. But I wish these with all my hearte in time to take heede, lest whilest they nourish and foster this con∣ceaued superstition in them, they growe to the same wretched attempts, that they see others haue done & do daily to their great cost, & they pay (as they are worthy) the same price for it. Let them in time therefore feare God, and honor the Kinge, obey God that they may obeye their Prince.
Poperie is the nurce & mother of trea∣son, rebellion, and confusion. Poperie hath alwaies been a perker and prier in to princes greatest secretes and inten∣tions, for the maintenance of it owne kingdome. True religion in deede tea∣cheth

all estates, and taketh knowledge to reproue, whatsoeuer is contrary to the light: But poperie, rusheth into all matters and causes, and chalengeth and vsurpeth authoritie ouer all persons, it taketh vpon it the alteration of king∣domes, ouerturneth Princes crownes, a∣lienateth inheritances, & intermedleth vniustly in al things: as I wil (if god assist me) shew further if I be further vrged. I beseech your Honor pardon me, that I haue passed the boundes of an epistle. These creaking papists euē compel me, who are so shamelesse, in ye cleere light of the gospell, still to prouoke vs: But a day shall come, yt shal reueale al things: in the meane time I nothing doubt of his mercifull goodnes (if we go cheere∣fully forward, and draw not his iudge∣ments vpon vs by our slacknesse & cold¦nesse towards the synceritie of his truth) towards his poore Church, towards her Maiestie, and the whole body of this cō∣mon weale. And thankes be to God, for that rich and vnspeakeable knowledge of his truth, wherby he hath enabled vs to discerne and see their errors. Of all

benefites this is most precious; and I be∣seech your honor in your place, to seeke the aduancing of it. Let them not be a∣ble to preuaile with you, that bewray their owne shame, whilest with boast∣ing words, they would seeme to mount vp to heauen, and yet lie flat groueling vpon the earth, hauing no sparke of hea∣uenly wisedome, or vnderstanding from the word of God. Onely they haue a few waste words, & a little lauish latine, wherewith they thinke to ouergoe and ouerthrow the setled truth of God. We looked for high matter from our chalin∣ging champion, at the least, seeing he cō∣meth after al others; we looked for som shew of weightie and grounded argu∣ments▪ but alacke, our hope is frustrate, for nothing appeareth, but that a man may finde in these goldē daies of know∣ledge, euen in those youthes and boyes that yet haue scarse a farre of saluted di∣uinitie. His ten arguments are nothing els, but so many paralogismes, all taken frō others, that wrote long before him; onely he hath turned the wrong side of heir coates outwarde. Because some

men haue refused certaine bookes to be numbred in the Canon of the scriptures; for which yet they are not destitute of some testimonies, and yet some of those books haue not bin denied of vs: there∣fore we flie the scriptures, and Campion hath woon the fielde already: because the sense and meaning of the scriptures haue been diuersly taken of some parti∣cular, men in some controuersies, ther∣fore the meaning of the scriptures are on his side. Thus he braineth himselfe with his owne hammer, and cutteth his owne throte with his owne sworde. As though all that professe papistrie, keepe one sense and meaning in the interpre∣tation of ye scripture: because they boast of the name of a Church, & the name of the Church is glorious, we loke wan at it, and must needes flie, because they com against vs onely with ye bare name. We make a church of our owne fashiō, a Platonicall Idea, and an idle fancie. In di∣scribing a church, we vtterly ouerthrow it &c. All the heretiques that euer were, are our predecessors, because papists say so; & we must subscribe to their church,

or else to a church that is no where. Thē forsooth al general Councels are theirs, and we refuse all: because some haue er∣red, and many haue byn contrary one to another. The Coūcel of Trent shal liue, whē Kemnitius shalbe buried (if he take not heede) with Arrius, & now we may trust them; for Iohn Hus brake the con∣ditions that the Emperour had set him, and running away, which the Emperour had forbidden vpon paine of his head, was iustly not headed, but burned: and yet the Councel of Constance debated specially of this matter, & thought they were not bound to the Emperours pro∣mise. Hierom of Prage, spake freely in ye Councell, & recanting, departed freely, but falling into his heresie again, drunk of the same cup. We refuse all fathers, he alloweth all and refuseth none, tagge and ragge are welcome to him, all their errours shalbe defended for manifest truth. Not so much as Dionisius & Hyp∣polytus, but must be ranked amongest the Doctors. And if euer any searched the scriptures, these did it, and spent their whole liues in it. And all histories

make for them, and our historiogra∣phers, for 1500 yeares together, are emptie of all matter, sauing of that they write for them and to maintaine their cause. And we can not deny but that Rome was an holy Church, that their faith was famous, that Paule preached there, that a Church was gathered in yt Babylon, where Peter ruled,Whether Clement suc¦ceeded Pe∣ter or Linu I would faine haue determined. and Cle∣ment succeeded, &c. therefore all are his & for his religion. We further main∣taine nothing but Paradoxes, and mon∣strous opinions, of God, of Christ, of man, of grace, of righteousnesse, of man∣ners, &c. And we must needes speake and be vnderstood as this lustie challen∣ger will haue vs to speake and be vnder¦stoode. Our Sophistications are palpa∣ble, and our barenes in testimonies are miserable, he hath from heauen, from ye earth, from Roses, from Lilies, the one purpuled with martyrdome, the other whited with innocencie. They haue those that were shepeheardes to all landes, and all flockes of all faithfull, all were theirs, of all sortes, and none ours. And thus we are confuted. But,

my Lord, it hath ben an old said saw: The greatest barkers are not the best biters, nor ye greatest boasters ye best fighters. I doubt not but he shal receaue a ful an∣swere in time. In meane time let him & al the papists in the world, if they can, o∣uerthrow ye truth of doctrine which we hold, ye articles of whose faith & religiō, depēdeth not vpō any man or mans au∣thority, but vpō ye vndoubted scriptures. If they can shew better warrant for that they holde, let vs heare their euidence, but if their stoare be so beggerly, that ye richest of them, and he that comes so ap∣pointed to challendge all in the name of al the rest; writing, (which is with grea∣ter aduice than any sodain speaking can be) be faine to limpe, & sinke in his en∣try; what shal we thinke wil be done ere the battell be fought? Surely if we came with carnall weapons, it is like he would ouermatch vs, hauing mans wisedome, the world and the diuell on his side: But thankes be to God, we come appointed with spirituall weapons, we come in the name of the Lord, armed with the migh∣tie word of God, against all counterfait

catholiques and heretiques. And if God blesse her Maiesties gouernment, so that the Gospell may proceede in a ful mini∣sterie, that the youth may be catechised & seasoned with such sound instructions as this booke yeeldeth, & those that are ancient may be confirmed, and the fro∣ward by an holy discipline ordered: our youth, our aged, our common people of al sorts, shalbe able to vāquish & put to flight all such emptie & vaine boasters. And this is the thing that I sought for, in trāslating this excellent & sound worke. Which I hope your honor will accept, according to that humble dutie and ser∣uice wherewith I haue euermore helde my selfe specially bounde to your good Lordship as my singular patrone, & as a principall member in ye church of God. The Lorde Iesus establish your honors heart, & giue you a setled persuasion in that euerlasting trueth, yt euermore you may feele the cōfort & assurance of that blessed kingdome, which he so freely hath purchased for you. Amen.

