



I DOVBT not (Dread So∣ueraine) but that by some meanes the reporte of the straunge, and wonderfull things which lately haue happened in these Nether∣lands are come to your gra∣ce, knowledge, where at all the world bere stādeth so much amazed and astonished: but whether your Maiestie hath bene informed of at the partiulari∣ties, I iustly doubt, because I can not by any waies vnderstand, that your Highnes is any whit mouedMetali. 1. tex. 1. therewith. Aristotle saieth. Omnes hommes naturaliter scire desiderant. All men haue a natural desie to at∣taine to the true, & perfect knowledge of things: but the wiser, and learneder sorte are especialy adicted there-vnto, principaly, when the obiect is admira∣ble, of weight and importance: for then as it

yeeldeth vnto their spirits extraordinate content∣ment and perfection, so to be ignorant thereof, putteth them in hazard of error, noble domage, and confusion. Whence hath proceded the exquisit diligence and curious inquisition, which we haue seen vsed in this present matter, not onely by our Prelates, Doctors, and Professors of learning, vnto whom the direction of our soules in the way of God doth chiefly appartaine, but also by the tēporal Prin∣ces, Nolie, and men of ciuil polcie, whose wis∣dome and due regard of their own credites, dsdai∣ned, to prmit them selues to be led by the noses, to the future peril of their soules, together with the present disparagement of their honours, and sepu∣tations. The whch manner of these mennes proce∣ding in this affaire, gaue me occasion to suspect, that your Maiestie was not sufficiently informed hereof: for other wise, it is not to be imagined (consideration beeing had of the common and general opinion which men here conceiue of your Graces singuler prudence, and litearure) that your Royal wisdom would passe ouer these things as though your grace had no apprehensin or esteeme thereof, which of very many are held as most pericious, & abomina∣ble, in the sight both of God and mn: and of innu merable others are reputed as most venerable, and glorius demonstations of our Lord his sweet loue care & prouidence owardes his louing Spouse his Church▪ which he vouchsafeth to adorne in this honorable and admirable māner.
Vpon which coniecture my Gracious lord and souueraine I haue aduentured to send vnto your Princely view the authentical elat on of diuers things, which in these last yeares haue happened amongst vs: a subiect vndoubtedly not vnwoorthy

your mare consideration, and exquisit iudgement. And I haue laboured to translate it out of the Fiēch copie, not that I thinck your Maiestie ignorant of that language, but that by the way I might also sa∣tisfy the greedie desire of many your maesties lo∣uing subiects, who haue alredie hard the buit but yet haue not had the assured & certaine knowledge of the matter. And I am the more bold to write vnto your Maiestie of these things, considering what by others hath bin done vnto great Emperours, and kings in the like case. For I read that PomesDiuers authors vvho haue vvrtten to Prin∣ces of mircles Pilate wrote vnto Tyberius Caesr touching the miracles of our Lord and Sauiour. I note how the famous. Nicephorus dedicated his Ecclesiastical hi∣storie to Andronicus Paleologus the Emperour, in which historie, (amongst other things) sundrie worthie miracles are comprised. I fynd that our renoumed contrieman Venerable Bde directed vnto King Coo∣lulphe his miraculous histore of our English Sax∣os conersion to the saith of Christ. I haue seen (to omitt poliitie in this matter) the book which the Abbor & cōgregatiō of the monks of Mōt Sorr∣to offred vnto the French king now liuing cōtaynig a narration of certaine miracles wrought at the said mont Serrto. Againe I haue bin much hartned to present this relatiō nto your Maiestie, in regard of the great opinion & esteeme the worthie, godly, and Prudent Princes of these Contries haue of this mat∣ter, which they haue manifested by theyr often Pil∣gnmages to the place of Montaige, where also by their goodly, rich, and stately ornaments and obla∣tions they haue giuen al the world to vn 'erstand the high regard, and account they make hereof. But chiefly I haue ben animated here vnto, for that it is not vnknown, what extraordinarie pleasere

and contentment, your Maiestie taketh to imploy your Roial labors in those things, that appertaine vnto God.
What thing do more apertaine vnto God (Gra∣cious Soueraine, then miracles▪ which is as much to say, as those workes which can be wrought onely by God, of which ranck these (where of here relation is mad) are beleeued to bee, as beeing semblable vnto those diuine operations, where by the Sauiour of the world did manifest hs Godhead to the world. For here your Grace may behould, how the blynd see, the deaf heare, the lame walk, the deuils are ex pelled he leaporous are made cleane, and many other painful, deformed and desperate maladies are cured.
I know it would be a great miracle yf these works would be admitted f all men for miracles. Wherefore I am humbly to intreat your gracious patience, to peruse what here I haue set down in an swere of those obiections, whereby I find them or∣d narilie to be oppugned I feare that I shal be dee∣med of many to be ouer prolix, but I beseech them to consider, that it is Gods cause which I handle, and that I endeuour to informe my gracious Lord and Prince in such sorte of the veritie hereof, that with greater light and assurance he might pro∣nounce his expected royal sentence, to the glore of God, his own honour, & inestimable commoditie of many thousands. And although I haue not here so conuenient place to vtter the hundreh parte of those things which otherwise I woud therefore I in∣tend (by our Lords hlp) here after more to inlarge my self herein as occasion shal b offeed▪
Who is he (gracious Soueraine) that hath but half an eye and seeth not of what consequence it is for any Societie of people to be assisted with the pre∣sence of miracles? For where miracles are seen to fa∣uour

the persons, o things that appertain to their Congregation, who can deny but that God is wel pleaed which them, and wel a lowth of their ites,Psal. 71. faith and profession? Miracls ae works that sur∣passe the power of an creature Benedictus Dominusvvhat authori∣tie mira∣cles haue to proue Religiō. Deus Israel, qui facit mr bilia solus. Blessed be the lord God of Israel vvho onely vvorketh maruclous things or miracles as the Prophet sayeth. When therefore he vouhsafeth to work any miracle i the desence or honour of any person o any point belonging to any Reigion, or beleef, such a miracle is as it were his very woord, and souetaine iuine sentence, giuē vpon the same, which nne may dny, gainsay, or doubt of, without note of infidele, & saculegious blasphemie. The hoy Sciptures by the deuil him∣self, and many Heretickes both are, and haue bene fowly and wickedly cited, and interpreted: the tes∣timonies of the auncient holy Fathers are by diuers sects diue sly abused: the old amou Martys Con∣fessos, and Virgins are chalenged of many, and as it were violently hailed into their Congregations, as yf they had bin of their churches, and professious: forme general Councels, Canons of Popes, and decrees of Sinods are of sunde sactions alleaged as fauuing then sundrie inentions: in fine, thee is no proof vsd by he Catholiks, which the impug∣ners of the Catholick Church daw not into their books, sermons, and disputations, but at miracles al parties must mk a stand, and be silent; there, God him self alone must speak, and shewe himself, for such woorks are out of all the reach of ay fite and created power, none beeing able to rule the cha∣riot of this Sunne, but onely such losuaes, as vnto whome our Lord wil vouchsafe to graūt so great au∣thoritie, and commaunde. Which the wisdome of

God our Sauiour Iesus Christ wel vnderstood, and therfore he vsed this medium, proof and argument for the authoritie, and veriit of his doctrine and in. 15. condemnation of the Iewes inereduitie saying: Si opera non fecissem in ijs qua nemo ls fecis, peccatum non haberent. Yf I had not done among them wor∣kes that no other man hath don, they should not have sinne. In like manner the same Lord beeing to send his Apostles to instruct the world in a Reli∣gion1. Cor. 1. which to the Iewes was eandalous, to the Gentiles meere foll. & to all men passing the com∣passe of reason, he furnished them with the same mea∣nes, whereby to make their hearers capable of their doctrine, and to induce them to subiect their heads and harts there-vnto. And by what eloquence or forcible persuasion was this to be effectuated? Verily by no other meanes, then that God himself should affirme, and auerre their preaching by his miraculousMat 11. mae. 3. Lu. 9. working, as it is said: Conuocatis duodcim distipu∣is suis, dedit  potestatem spirituum immundorum, vt cerent os, &  omnem languorem & omnem infirmitatem. Hauing called his tvvelue disciples toge∣ther, he gaue them povver ouer vncleane sperus, that they should cast them out, and should  al diseases, and al infirmitis. Which vnspeakeable goodnes and prouidence of God, if we wil duely consider, we my euidently see his incomprehensible wisdome, & loue towards vs his most vnworthie Creatures, in pro∣uiding for our instruction in his wayes such affored meanes, whereby, to ieaine the truthe, and to auoid al erour: that if al the world would haue layed their heades together to inuent a way▪ they could notGod can not vvor ke mira∣cles for the proof of any fals religiō. haue found a more perspicuous▪ more profitable, or more glorious then this, which he of his blessed mer∣cie hath vouche safed vnto vs, for God being he

truthe it self, he cā not by his omnipoēcie giue his estimonie to any error or falshood: & beeing very goodnesse it self, it is impossible that he wil permit vs to be seduced by any his extraordinarie supernatu∣ral operations, neither can he or wil he yeeld ay ho∣nor to that, which in it self is euil. For as truthe is a thing perfectly good and the chyld of God, so falshood is detestable and naught, and the wicked impe of the deuil. Of which thing that renoumed & famous champion of Gods Church Sainct AugustinAug. q. 114 de quaestio∣nibus no u & ve∣eis te∣stamēti. had a true and perfect conceipt, Who savd: Ownes Philosophi, & sectarum inuentores, sis desputationi∣bus mucem se confuderunt. Nullus  alterum transies, quia vnusquisque in quo imbutus fuert permanebat. Al the Philosophers, and sectmaisters, cōfounded each other by sundrie disputes. Neuer any one of them yeelding to the other for euery one held to that vvhich once he had aned. Behold the ordinarie issue of awranglings and contentions, euen amongst the wittie and lear∣neder sorte. But he proceedeth: Hinc sactumest vt Dei prouidenti (cuus sensus inuestigari non potest) pr∣dications suae virtutem adiungeret, vt veritas predicatio∣nis virtutis testimonio probaretur: vt qui verbis contra∣dierent, virtutibus non auderent. Hence it came to pas that the prouidence of God, (whose sense no man can fyud out) oed power to his preaching, that the truthe of his preaching might be prooued by the te∣stimonie of his power: that if any would ganey his woords, they should not date to contradict his powerable woorkes. And that glorious doctor S. Gregorie for his rare learning and wisdome surna∣med the great, speaking of the miracles of God andGreg. hom. 1 in Esch his Saincts confirmeth the same saying. H quam vera de Deo dixerint, testantur miracula, quia tala p llm non facerent, nisi vera de illo nrarent. Hovv tru∣ly

these people haue spoken of God, their miracles be vvttes for they could never vvork such things by him, if they had not spoken truly of him. Whereby we see of what force & authoritie miracles are to persuade men to accept of that doctrine, which otherwise by their reason they can not comprehend. And the sayd holy Doctor proceedeth, adding an other point worthie the noting. S gitur de side tentamur, quam ex illorum prdications concepimus, loqutium miracu∣la conspici. & in side qu ab ers accepmus confir∣mur: quid erg illorum miracula, nisi ipsa sunt nostra prepugnacula If therfore vve be tempted about our faith, vvich by their preachg vve haue learned, vve behold the miracles of our Preachers, and thereby  confirmed in the faith, vvich from them vve haue re∣ctied therfore vvhat other things are their miracles but that they are our fortresses! Which conclusion seemeth to be so iust, and sounded in reason, that I thinck there is none that dare so much as doubt of it, much lesse deny it.
Yet I confesse though the deuil cannot make mē to deny this euident principle, notwithstanding he endeuoureth to make voyd the force and authoritie thereof. For when he dare not coap with his armed aduersarie, if he can persuade him to cast away his weapons, he nothing doubteth but that then he shalPrae∣lus de viis H e. lib 14 n. 13. easilie subdue him. So I read that he dealt with a certayn kynde of miscreās called vvdenses or Poor men of Lions, who amongst diuers other their wd blasphemies and heresies, were persuaded to auoue he that God neuer wrought any miracles in his Church: whereby the sbtil enimie iuducing them, nd others by them to dispoile the Church of her mi∣racles, it was veie easie for him afterwards to make men dispise, what-soeuer vpon the credit of miracles

the sayd Churche might argue against them. Vnto which poor wittles people certaine others do neer∣ly approache, who although they wil perhaps con∣fesse al such miracles as are cōtained in the bookes of holy Scripture: Yet because they thinck that not long after the tyme that those bookes were written, either el gates preuailed against the rock of theCōt to our sauiou∣res pro∣mis and vvarrt. Math 16 Math. 5. Church, or that the Citie builded vpon an hil, was ouer couered with some Aegyptian duskie darcknes, or els shut vp in some vnknowne caue and valley: consequētly they inferr that there neuer apeared mi∣racles since that chāge whereby they wil haue vs be∣leeue that either they haue quite perished, or els haue bene wrought in ugger mugger & in great secret. For as they know where smoke is there comonlie is some fier, and where they see a shadow they must confesse the presence of some bodie: so if they should graunt the perpetual course of miracles, they must also graunt the perpetuitie of that Church for which and in which they haue bin wrought.
In the discouerie of which their absurditie I mightFo in his Actes & mo∣numētes. first alledge them the testimonie of their own Fox, who telleth vs of diuers miracles appertaining to his martyrs.. But they may answer me, that Fox is fabulous, I yeeld he is so, for that he is easilie prooued so to be, and I know it would be lost and lewd la∣bor for any to endeuo to prooue the contrarieIn his vvatche∣vvord. Yet would I learne what they repute those benedic¦tions to be, which Sir Francis Hastings, and al¦most euery preacher and gospeller affirme that God hath heaped vpon our Realme, since the alteration of Religion was made therein Yf they be but the ordinarie mercies of God, as he maketh his SunneMath. . to rise vpon the good and bad, and sendeth downe his rayne vpon the iust and vniust: then they make

no more for their Gospel, then the like do for the Turkes : or els they can poue vnto s that God hath supernaturally blessed them onely in re∣gard of their Religion, thereby manifesting vnto them and others, that England professeth his true faith, and that his true worship onely flosheth therein: which when I see them do, then both I and they must graunt them as many miracles, as they can score vp their supernatural blessings, and conse∣quently we both must conclude that miracles are not yet decayed. But because I know the things whereof they make this bragge e of the wiser soie esteemed presumptions, phantasies, inuentions, and meet sopperie therfore I leaue it to each mannes wis∣dome to inferr hereof the continuance of miracles  be pleaseth. And I wish them rather to peruse the writings and volumes of those that haue set down the infinit miracles which by diuers holy Persons & in diuers holy places amongst Catholicks haue bene wrought. To recie here the onely bare names of those that haue most laudably emploted their labors etem, would be an dles trauaile: where thē should I begin? how shal I proceed? and when shal I make an end, if I would vndertake to reherse the sundrie particulatities touching this matter which in these Authors I finde registred?
But I know as they blesh not to deny so eui∣dent a truthe as is the continuance of miracles so wil they not be ashamed to conteme, disgrace, and scorne al such as haue recorded them, nothing regarding the opinion o esteeme▪ that either the Christian world now hath, or euer had of their wisdome, sancte, learning, sinceritie, and discretion. Yet if they wil not credit those writers who haue penned the gestes and miracles of particuler persons, & places, at least∣wise

let them not disdaine the publick records, and Cronicles of whole Kingdomes and nations: espe∣ciallie in such things as by the people of the said king∣domes and nations are generally held and confessed to be true; yea, which often tymes the Croniclers of other Realmes and cōmon wekhes do acknowledge & aoche with them, without any differēce, doubt, or contradiction.
In those publick monuments they may read how the said dominions and countries receaued first their Christianitie, & withall they shal finde, that miracles were stil a principal motiue and instigation there ∣o. It is not vnknown how the faith of Christ was preached in Iurie, how it was aftervard spred through Grece, Italie, Spaine and other Cuntries, where the Apostles, ad Disciples of Christ preached. I suppose few wil deny but that they did worke miracles in all places wheresoeuer they came to teach the Gospel for so it is written: Illi autem profecti prdicauerunt vbi∣que: Domino cooperant, & sermone confirmd to seqē∣tib signis. But they going forth preached euery vvhere, our Lord vvorking vvithal, and confirming the vvord vvith signes that follovved. Let them onely peruse the later ages, and let them passe through them succes∣siuely, by euery Nation as t was conuerted. And if it please them they may began with that people which now we call French, and they shal see, that the French men hold that they receiued their faith byHic∣rus in e∣ius vita. Heda  Hist See o: de signis Ecclesi. the preaching and miracles of S. Remigius, & others: likewise we gsh say that our conueion was first wrought by the cuors and miracles of. Sanct Augusti the monke, & of his fellowes. The Danes and Suctns affirm that S. Rembertus by preaching, and working of miracles made them Christians. The

People of Bahemia tel that they were conuerted by. . cap. 1. & 2. the miracles first of two Brethren called Cirillus and Methodius, & then of the holy Dutches Ludmilla, and of their king Vencselus. The Sclauonians haue in their records that they were brought to the faith by the labors & miracles of S. Bonifacius The Polo∣nians with their Prince Miesc by meanes of a mi∣racle were first baptized. The Hungarians by mi∣racles, and the industrie of Adalbertus bishop of Prage and of their Prince Gisa became Christians. The Tartaās with their king Cassanus submitted them selues to the faith of Christ, being moued there unto by a notable miracle Almost in our age the vvest Indies began by the miracles of Martinus Valentinus and Alsi Bertrandus to admitt the Christian be∣leef. And to conclude the East India by the mira∣cles of Consaluus Silerius. of the blessed Francis Xa∣erius, and of Gasper surnamed Belga al th of the Sociie of the holy name of Iesus began lykewise to forsake their Paganisme, and to imbrace the doctrin of Christ Iesus.
What may any reasonably answer to this Historical demonstration and Chronical deduction of the perpetuitie and continuance of miracles? Wil this opposit people say for al this, that these heathens were neuer brought to make acceptance of Christ his Gospel by miracles, can they by any sufficient authors or conuenient proofs shew vs the contrarie? wil they  vs in the mouthes that al these are fictions, and standing stil vpon their bare & incredulous denial, giue thely to al the monuments, traditions and writers of al these kingdomes and Nations? Be it so if of force without any reason they wil haue it so, yet I wil demonstrate vnto thē (yf they wil not eny theyr own wtes) that they must necessarilie graunt

so manie successie miracles as there haue bin cuni∣tries and People who haue imbraced the faith with∣out the motiue of external miracles.
For what can be more miraculous then to see so many great & barbarous nations with their Kings and Nobles, settled in a Religion by themselues and all their aunceers, inde whith great Honours, riches pomp and preuileges, taught and magnified by their own Priestes, whose credit and necessarie maintenance de ended thereon: by which their pa∣gā religion they were licē edo cōmitt almost what seuer their proude, vnbrieled licentious sensual appetites could desire? What could be more miracu∣lous I say, then to see these people at the bare prea∣ching and assueration of some Bishops or Priests, (yea imagin & say of some superintendēts & mini∣sters) who should teach them, that the God which they ought to beleeue & adore, i three persons and yet but one God: that one of these persons is both man and God, two natures but one person: whose mother both before his birth, in his birth, and after his birth was alwayes a pure virgin, and an immacu∣late mayd: and that this God fer he had for the space of some yeares indured many misees, indig∣nitie, sclaundes, and persecutions of certaine men that maligned him, was afterwards betaed to them and atached by them, and after sundrie disgracs and afflictiōs most cruelly and shamefully haged▪ & put to death. Yea supoe that these preachers should haue ould then, that this God in his life tyme wrought manie miracles▪ and that fe his death he did se againe to life, and ascended vp o heauen: whether also these Pagans & Siluaoe should come, if they would throw down their Goddes, est oy their emples, fortake their Priestes, abnor then sac fices

suffer their eades to be washed in the name of God, for the remission of their sinne, and wthal if they, would imbrace chastitie, mknes, patience, pen∣nn, humilitie, and beleeue many things surpas∣sing their understanding and submit them selues to diues other things contratie to their sence, yea alto gether opposit to their pride, and ertie which be∣fore they enioyed. He that wil say that such people as these were brought to this, without an exceeding great miracle, yf not by many miracles, I wil not say that he is a miracle, but surely I think your Royal wisdome wil deeme and iudge him a wondeous monster.
Furthermore I beseech your Maiestie to consi∣der if a reprobate Iewe were to demande of these negatiue people, whether they thought our Lord God did more honour, or gaue more preuileges to the new law, or to the old, that is, (as true Christians would say) to the woork of Christ, or to that of Moyses: to that which was in ee substāoeAlvvai∣es mira∣cles in the ty me of the ould lvve. or to the figure thereof: to that which was the per∣fection, or to that which was to be perfected? What answer I pray your Grace wil they shape him? A shame on thē if they would giue the sinagoge the vpper hand, and shoulder down the Gospel, for that were avery vnciuil or rather vngodly tick of a Gos∣peller. And yet the Iewe wil demonstrate vnto thé, how out Lord adomed and assisted his people and auncestours with miracles, and powrable workes aboue the force of Nature al the tyme of Moyes, of their Iudges, of their kings, of their Prophets euen in the tyme of their captiuitie, n the tyme of their Machabe yea and of our Sau our Christ him self, as is manifest by the perpetual miracle of the Pric Pisina Yea what if the sayd Iewe stan∣ding

vpon the proof and prerogatiue of miracles ould therein preferre the state of those that liued onely vnder the law of Nature before vs that liue in the law of grace: For he wil tel them of the mi∣raculousMiracles in the first state of natu∣re. sacrifice of Abel, of the translation of Ech of his perpetual miraculous conseruation in Paradise euer since, of the cōming of al kyndes of liuing crea∣tures to N his Ark of their more then admirable manner of nuriture, agreement, and abode in the same, of the waters of the vniuersal deuge, of the confusion of tongues, of the destruction of Sodom and Gonorha, of the preseruation of Lot with his daughters, of the metamorphosis of his wyf into a piller of ault, of the vocation of Abraham, of l is visions, of the often apartions of Angels both to him and others, of the generation of Isaac, of his miraculous deliuerie, of so many miracles wrought in the behalf of Iacob, Ioseph, Moyses, and the people of Israel both in Egipt, & when they were departed thence, ntil the tyme that the law was deliuered them. When the Iewe hath thus out-braued the Church of Christ with their miracles, wil these peo ple that can not disgest the perpetual course therof amongst Christians, brook that the Church which our lord & sauiour chose as his most loong spowse, wherein he promised to abyde to the end of the world, which he bought with his most precious blood, and adorned with so great and most worthie Sacramēts, should be destitute of such a grace, should be bereaued of so necessarie a strength, should be de∣priued of so conuenient and needeful a glorie?
Yf they wil not be a shamed to play thus the base cracs, and so much to disgrace the honor of the Christian Religion, and the most honorable worke of Christ Iesus, then I chalendge them to shewe vs

some auncient & authentical Writers. Chronicles, Records. Doctors, or learned writers that euer noted the tyme when God withdrew his powrable hand from these kinde of supernatural wokes or that euer they should end so long as his Church should last. But they can neuer do it, as we on the other side are able to shewe them the perpetual course nd succes∣sion of miracles in the Catholick Church, een from the Apostles dayes to ours, as that learned and elo∣ouent Father I evvis Richeo hath aledy done inLouys Richco me au discours des mi∣racles chap 16. num. 2 his discourse of miracles, dedicated to the Frēch king now liuing: and I hope ere long they shal further perceaue by that huge and nfinit masse of hese mat∣ters, which th Reuerand▪ learned, and worthie Father Giles Scondnck Rector of ur English Seminarie in Sainct Omers hath gathred together, and that onely of such things, as in this kind haue happened in these two latter ages: whichf the world shl once see him publish in that authentical manner as he intendeth, it wl not be a little astonished to thinck that euer there should haue en amongst men men so braē faced, or blockishignorant, that either durst or could make so shameful a doubt, much lesse so desperate a de∣nial f this euer flowing current of miracles.
But it maybe these good so lea thus scrupu∣lous n acknowledging this cuetn regard of the word of God: f as te take themselues to be the onely champions and protectors of the word▪ so haue they solemly and srouly told vs, that they wil neither teache or learne or bue any thing, which is not expessy, or by nessae ncrpta∣tion in the wd. e it so, let vs enter with them into the word. There we read that the power of working miracles was giuen to the first Pastors of the Church. I confesse it. Now let them shew me

by the word, or any good glosse of the word, that this power was recalled, yea or that ee it was to beMath  Marc 6.  uc. 9. 10. recalled. I fynd in the word and book of God, that when our Sauioure gaue power of working mira∣cles vnt his Apostles, he gaue t vnto them toge∣ther with their power of preaching, which power to preache he also gaue in them vnto al their succes∣sors, who neuer were to haue an end vntill the world did end: Euen so when our Sauiour gaue them authoritie to work miracles, vnder the likeEphes. 4. forme of words, it is not to be doubted but in them he indued their successours with the same miracu∣lous power, acording to the exigēce of his Church, which power should neuer expire, orl l them y the text shew vs the contiarie. Again I read tha rMah. 2 vv things promi∣e by Christ tht should perpetu∣all re∣maine in his Church Lord said: Ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus dbus vsque ad consummationem sacul▪ behold I am whith you l daes enen vnto the consummation of he world VVhere our benigne Lord promieh that his Ao∣stles and disciples should continue to the end o the world & he with them, not with them in their wn persons for they are dead and departe hence, her∣fore with them in their succssors with whome ao his perpetual fauourable assistance was to reman without any diminution or limitation, and that by them he would adorne and fortifie his Church with the self same power of miracles, where with at the beginning in his Apostles he establishe it. By which promise we may concee inestimable comfrt▪ in beeng stil assured of his diuine esece amongst vs in al our losses and crosses, and therfore we can not imagin how it is likely that when the paan pese∣cutors, and Heretikes▪ should oppoe, chatie wa cold, faith be scarce found in the world, that then our most louing lord would walk vp & down  ∣lesly

in heauen, and seeme to haue little regard how his honor should be abused, his Church afflicted, his louing fendes and children trodden vnder foot, and the deuil with his followers to seduce the world at his pleasure.
Yes forsooth say they: Antechrist when he shal come he shall doe strange wnders. And I tel them that the Aegyptian magicians wrought strangeExod. 7. 8. Act  wonnders, and Simon Magus wrought strange wonnders, did therfore Moyses and Aon work no miracles? Did sainct Peter and the rest of the Apostles and Disciples no miracles? shal Ench and Elias hauApoc. 11 no hand in miracles? It is impious to say or thinck, that when Antechrist the man of sinne, the chief of al Heetikes and falce prophets shal seek to outface the Church of Christ with his diabolical woūders, that then the true miracles of God shal no where apeare to confront his vngodly mallice. Our lord hath alredie reuealed the contrarie, to witt that euen in the ruffe and pride of Antechrist his raigne, twoApoc. 11 witnesses shal be sent, who in miracles shal so put down Antechrist and al his, that in their life tyme they shal plague the world at thir pleasure, and after their death shal mount vp to heauen as conquerours euen in the eyes of their verie enimies.
Yet perhaps our contradictors wil say, that mi∣racles are not now needful. It is quickly sayd. I would to God the contrarie could not be so easilie & perspicuousely prooued, yea demōstrated. Were mi∣racles necessarie to conuert Infidels, & to induce thē to enter into the Church, and are they not necessarie to confond Heetikes, and to reduce them back again to the Churh which they haue forsken? Is a kings powr and assistance onely to be rejoed in conquering his forrein foes, and is it to be neglec

ted in the repressing of the mutenous rebellion, & intestin sedition of his own subiectes against him? See the opinon of the Apostle Sainct Paul, who persuang the Corinthians to giue credit vnto him, & his doctrin, & to reiect those whome he termethMiracles are ul necessa∣tie for the Church. 2. Cor. 12. falce Apostles, craftie workers, transfiued into the Apostles of Christ; after he had recounted many thngs that touched himself, after he had declared vnto them his high reuelations, and visions, at last he saieth. Signa Aposolatus met facta sunt super vos in omni pantia: in signis & prodigus & virtuibus. The signes of my Apostleship haue bendn vpon you in al pance, in signs and vvounders and migtie deedes. By the memorie of which miracles he endeuoured to grace his doctrin and to confirm the faithful therein, and perchaunce to recall those that might haue ben seduced Did not almightie God shew straunge mi∣raclesNum. 16 and dreadful powrable workes against Core, Dathan, and Abron, who preached no new doctrin but onely endeuoured to raise a schisme and faction against those heades and rulers of Ecclesiastical cau∣ses, whom God had apointed? And to the end the memorie of thoe miracles might not d, he caued the incensors of the seditious Schsatkes to be beaten into plates, and so to be fastnd to the very alter of God, to forewarn thereby heir afer co∣mers, and to detere them from committng the ke sinne, least God should work again either corporalie, or spiritually the like exterminat on and reuendge.Diuers nies infecte vvih di uers fl∣ce sectes & here∣sies. O Gracious Souueraie, who seeth not the Maho∣metaines in al the Turkes Empire the Iewes in most Cities and Cntres▪ the infected Grecians in the call Church? the Pollitick or Parlementarie Prote∣stanes in our own Cuntrie? diuers srtes of Luthe∣rans in Denmarck, Sanie, & other Preuinces in

Germie, the Puritane or rigid Caluinists in G∣neua, Scotland and many partes of Frace, the Zum∣gltans n Zuiszerland? the Anabaptists in Moraua, Holland▪ and diuers other Prouinces of the low Cuntries▪ the uenckfildias in Suthland▪ the Stan∣aians n th lesse Poland▪ the Osiandrins in Prus∣sia and in both these and diuers other Cuntries innu∣merable oher sectes, not onely banded aganst the Catholicks, but also bitterly bickeing amongst thē selues? Who readh not their vehement iuectiues and most eu re enactd lawes? who is he that can dissemble so many bloudie battailes? such open Re∣bellions? suh burins? sch quarterings? such mas∣sacings▪ such ffsion of Christian bloud? ea of most Christian Prnces bloud? as the doleful and tragical endes of diuers your Maiesties neerest and deeest in bloud do wittes & testifie to al the world. Thefore can any iustly say that this world had euer me need that God should miraculousely shew himself where he resideth, and in what Congrega∣tion o Church his oney true sauing faith and wor∣ship is to be ound, seing all these oppsitions and hribe hrbilis stil ae, and eue it were pre∣tedd to haue ben raised for him, and for his onely cause?
But wil ay know why the for wil eate no gra∣pes? surely because he can not get them; and wil they vnderstand wy heeikes thk miracles super∣fluous, & wh hy do not care or thē? verely because they see that neuer ny flc sect or Herfie could euer haue the honor or comfort to haue any one mi∣racle for thē Whee as we Catholicks by the good∣ne of God so abod with thē, that except we wil de∣nie our very sences, we can nt so muh as doubt of them, & therfore (as it becometh reasonable & mo∣dest

men) wee necessarilie acknowledge their beeing and continuance, acording to that Philosophical axiome: Ea sunt, que negane ultitia & pertinacia non possunt. Thse things are, vvhich vvithut foll & frovvard obstinacie can not be denied to be▪ For do not we see the deuoton that Christian people generaly haue to Sainct Sebastm and Sainct Roch to be preser∣ued from the plague? the vsual floking f people to the bodie of Sainct Hubert in the Cuntrie f iege & especialy of thse that are bitten with mad dogs? heSainctes caled v∣pn for the cu∣ring of diers diseses. perpetual concours made to h shne of S▪ Marcon in France by those hat are a tae with th kigs euil, so cōmonly called for that the kings of England and France you Maiesties most  & duout progenitours haue alwaies miraculusely  that disease Do we not also behold how ocae Sainct Blasius for the paine & swllng of the throat? Sainct Erasmus against the griefs o the bowels, and inalls? Sainct Laurence against he dauge of fie? Sainct Nicholas in the peril of shipwk an drown∣ing? Sainct Anthonie against the disease calle the wylfier? Sainct Apollonia agat the he? Sainct Anthoe of Padua for the recouee of thngs lost? and finally duers other patcule Sancte▪ for diuers other atiuler helps and benefits, as ou En∣glish in their battas cal vpon Sanct George, he Scoish nation and Burgundans vpon S▪ Andrevv, the French vpon Sainct Denis, the Spaads vpon Sainct Iame ad I hk there i not  kgdome or Commn weth but they hau o saict or other for their Protecou and defedour with alighte God Now wh so wil say that thse pople King∣doms and Nation haue done this withou hauing had or receiued any benefit by these Sainces, besides that most unodestly they oppose them seles

against the common voice & asseueration of al these people Kingdoms and Nations, so they most igno∣rantly goe about to controule their long sual and assured experience, not aleaging any sollid thing to the contrane, but either Ahestical scoffs, or bare doubtes, or wilful denials, or at the most, friuolous and blynd coniectures, which wil neuer ooue, much lesse satisfie any that hath either witt, learning, or care of his soule. And to conclude, do not we be∣hold the most frequented pilgrimages from all the coastes of the world for all kyndes of helps, to our ladie of Lette in  to our ladie of Montserrato, and to the body of S. Ias in Spaine? to our ladie f Mndoui in Sie? to our ladie of Lss in Franc? and to be brief (for it would be an endles matter toOur la∣dies vvorking miracles in diuets cntries. recount al thee fountaines and heades of miracles) I onely desire them to cast their eies vpon these Ne∣therlands and amongst other places therein atten∣tiuely and seriousely behold Huer, Hll, & the place called Montague where they shal see how Almightie God at the intercession of his most worthie and glo∣rious Mother doth as it were powre down from heauen whole showres and streames of heauenly miracles, & so if they be not altogether starck stone blynd they shal udently see that miracles are not yet ceased.
Yet say what we wil, or can say; I fynd by ex∣perience that there is nothing so clee and manifest, but if men list not to behold i they wil not onelyGreate obsti∣cie. stil deny it, but wil frame to them selues (a merue∣lous thing) a quite contrarie conceit, and vnderstād it in a quite opposit manner to the nature thereof like to thse absurd people vnto whome the Prophet speaketh in such bitternes saying: Va qus dicitis ma∣ bonm, & bonum malum: ponen nebrs luce,sai. 5.

& lucm tenebras: ponentes amrum n dulce, & dulce in amarum. Va qui sapientes esiis in oculis vestres & coram visetipsis prudentes. VVo be to you that say euil is good, and good is euil: setting darknes to be light, and light to be darknes: putting that thing vvhich is bitter into that vvhich is svveet, & the svveet into that vvhich s bitter. VVo be to you that are vvise in your ovvn sight, ad are prudent in your ovvn conceites. For these con∣ceed wisards wil haue men persuaded that these workes of God are the operations of the deuil, that these miracles are tricks of sorcerie, that these euident demonstrations of our lord his supernatural power are secret collusions of infernal feyndes, that the be∣nefits which haue descended down vpon vs from heauen, are certain pestilent pernicious contagions that are vamped out of the accursed dungeon and pitt of hel; whereby they affirme good to be badde, light to be darcknes, God to be the deul. And whence cometh all this mistaking but because they account them selues more learned and wise, then all those of the Churche of God: because they preferre their own iudgement before the knowledge of all their learned vertuous & graue auncestours; because they are of opinion that the wisdome of all ages, of al Pastors and Prelates, of al the vniuersities of the Christian world, of al the Prouincial National and general councelles, must stoop & adore their blynd∣ouer weening capihes.
It is a plage that God sendeth vnto the prowd,A Punni∣shment that God inflic∣eh po tho∣se tht are to much cōceied of thir o iud∣gement. to deprie them of the little light he hath giuen thē, thereby to punnish their haughtie aoitie, and to epose them to the corne o rather pitie of al those that be hould thē how they goe peakng alone with a self imagination and adiation of their own ub∣lit, or rather stupiditie. For so it fared with ou first

Parents, who cast them seues and all their mise∣rable posteritie into icredible ignorance and dark∣nes, onel for presug r endeuourg to attaine to greater witt and knowlede, then God had be∣stowed vpon them o though sit fo them▪ in so much as the Prophet could ay of man ComparatusPsal. 48. st lumntis insipientibus & silis factus est illis: He became to be compaired to the foolish beastes and vvas made like vnto them. It is an old prouerb that Here∣sie and Frenie alwaies goe together. For euery He∣retike being naturally roud, will eeue none but himself, & therfore Antiquitie, Consent and vniuer∣salitie (things of high regard to the ancent learned holy Fathes) are by him contemned as strawes, and estemed as rediulous trifls, wherein they contra∣ie his phantasie, according to the saying of the wise man▪ Non rcipt iulius vrba prudentia, nsi ea dixris, qua vrsantur in corde eius. A fool recueth not thePro. 18. Math 9 Ma. 3. Hovv di∣uers mis∣creant attribu∣ted Gods miales to the deuil. Linda∣u du bi dia∣log. 2. . 4. Aug de iui l. 21. c.  4▪ Reg. 20. Iosue 3. vvords of vvisdome except you tel him those things that are i his ovvn hart. Yea le God speak vnto him by miracles fom heauen, asha be estemed witch∣craft, and damnable deuilish practes. For o the Ie∣wish Scribes intepeted the workes of our Sauiour, so afterwards Porpirius, Eomius, Eutthius, Vigi∣lams and other old condemned Apostes & He∣eikes epoted of the miracles of hs Sainctes, and mays. So seemed te heathen Poet Virgil (as sayeth Sainct Augustin) to haue interpreted the miracles that were wrought amongst the ancient Israelites, and in particuler the staying o th flod Iorda whyle Iosue whih his people passed dt through thesa∣me, & the turnng back of the  in his ordinarie, course at the prayer of Isa the prphet As though these two great Sainctes could not but by the help of socerie. Sir aqu fls, & vertr syd a rer.

To stay the rnning streames of riuers and to turn bakwardes the very starres of heauē. And now there is no sect, ither by vs, o by any our aduersaries estee∣med as erroeous, falce ad deulish, but it hol∣deh and beleeueth that the miracles of the Catho∣likeThe mi∣rcles of the C∣tholick Church can not be of the deuil. Churche are upestitious, the works of Satan, and consequently to be ahored and detested of euery one: Which is an eudent proof of their puri∣tie and excellencie. For moste or all of these sctes being of he deuil as both they & we suppose, I can∣not imagn howe these people can reasonaby thinck that th duil wil band o enestly against him self, & that he il either prouoke or permitt his vasailes, by impuning our miracles to seek the overthrow of so principal a pile and suppotte of his kingdom: suposing I say that our miracles are of him as these marers of miacles together whith other sctes would haue the world t beleeue. And that this dif∣ficulte may be the bet cleered, I beseh them to perue the huge list of these sayd different and oppo∣sit sectes, which they shal finde in mdanus, Hoiu, Staphilus, and Prateolus: where they sha fynd whih what warnes of▪ hee nfdelities and Heesies the word is mightely pestid at this day Thee shal they behold the Mahmetanes▪ levves, utherans Cal∣insis, Zuglians▪ Anabaptists, Tritarians, Stanca∣nans, Manivvuers, Hozzlers, Hemiters, Bypers, Signifiers, Figurers, Demonacals, to say othg of the sndie repgant professons of ath aey pg vp i our Brytanie, besides innuerable others els where too too edious and loahm hee to be reci∣ed: all which vdoubtedly proceedng from the deuil, as from the fist paent and autho of al ifi∣delitie & dsseniō▪ it seemeth a thing most stange, yea altogether vintelligible, (if the enie be

able to performe such miracles which we affirm to be wrought in the Catholick Church) that either amongst all, or the most, o at least among some ofnote this vvell. these, he wil not shew what he is able to do in this kynd, for the establishing and gracing of their errors, or els by prophaning the credit and honour of mi∣racles, that he wil not assist euery sect with his secret admirable working, thereby to bring the world in doubt what faith to imbrace, or els therby to dispaire euer to come to the knowledge of the only sauing truthe and religion.
Furthermore yf the deul be able to work such miracles as these, it is strāge that he would not there in haue concurred with Nero, Simon Magus, Por∣phrius, Ilian the Apostata, and Mahomet his most potent instruments, who wanted nether power not mallice to haue eceedingly aduanced his partie. And surely by nothing more could they haue so born down the Gospel of Christ, then if they had bn able to haue performed those miracles (as vndoubtedly they greatly desired) which our Sauiour, his Apostles, and Martys wrought in such aboundance.
But because these wretches saw how no power either of tht own or of their seyndish Gods could extend it self to such works, they were forced (there∣by to shroud their own nakednes and urpitude) o condemne all these admirable effectes & operatiōs, saying they proceeded from witchcraft, orcene, and the ate Magck Wherefore I would intreate the impugers of our Miracles to teach vs, y what good reason we or they may defend the putie of the aun∣cient miracles of Christ, of his Apostles and martyrs against theise their calumniatos; amongst whome some were so fatt persuaded that Christ himself was a Magician, that they blshed not to affirme, that e

had compiled a book of that accursed atte, and hadAug. de cōensu Euang. cap. 9 & 10. dedicated the same to his two chiefe Apostles Peter and Paul. And this they did to disgrace and deface the miracles that were obiected against them by the Christians, in defence of their faith.
But it is much to be feared that we shal haue little help of our aduersaries in this matter, but that they wil rather beare vp those Pagans, Iewes, and maho∣meanes by answering for them, and shewing that the miracles aleaged by our forefathers were tricks of magick, and sorcerie, for whatsoeuer they can in∣ent or imagin against these later miracles that are now wrought in the Catholick Churche, ndoub∣tedly a Pagan Turk or Iewe wil in like manner op∣pose against those former of the Primitue Church, so that the argument of the old Doctors, Martys, Apostles, and of Christ himself, drawn from the authoritie of miracles shal be quite ouerthrown, and shal serue for no proof of the veritie of our Religion. It may be perhaps they wil confound the Turks, Iewes, and Gentiles with scriptures, and out of them they wil conuince that the miracles of the Pri∣mitiue Church must be beleeued I know not what these worthie Scripturians may more then miracu∣lousely worke with these miscreants when they shal once com ouer them with their Scriptures, especially with the Pagans, who hitherto haue made no more esteeme of the Bible, then of Asops fables, o Ouds Metamorphosis. But this I dae say, f the Iewes and perhaps the Mahometanes once chāce to buckle with the in hose parts of the holy Scripture which they admitt, these goodly Bible-claks shal finde them to haue as hard eades, to be as peust stiff∣necked, and as wl conceited of that own spirit in interpreting Gods ook as the prowdest Gos∣peller

that date once to coap with them. And ther∣fore the wisdō of God who knew what would best conuince the pertinacitie of the Iewes, although he had aleaged sundrie Scriptures for his mssion, yet did herather cōdemne them as reprobate for not be∣leeuing10. 15. him in regard of his miracles, then in regard of the manifest places of scripturs so often b hm10. 5. produced for himself, & against them. And althogh he willed them to search the Scriptures, and to exa∣min them about his mission and authorit; that was because vpon former miracles they were wel persuaded of the veritie of the scriptures; but when the Gentiles were to be conuerted, miracles were there Scriptures, and onely in them did they read that the Christian doctrin came from God. So that mi∣racles are more euident proofes of a true religion tē are the Scriptures, especially considering how Scri∣ptures are so subiect to falce misconstruing▪ sde lsh bad interpretation, as experience most manifestly demonstrateth. Whereby al the world may see and laugh at the absurditie of those that say▪ we know your miracles are not of God, and yf we demand, why so? they wil answer because your doctrin which they approoe is not of God; and if we would know of them the reason of so resolute an assertion they wl tel s because our Religion is not acording to the word of God. A reason forsooth that the Iewes, and Mahomtans (as I said, may in like manner frame against  Christian faith, & all the Heretikes that either re, or haue bene, or eer hereafter shal be may with as good proof aleage against whatsoeuer they shal not please to admitt, because it is not accor∣ding to their glosse and interpretat on of holy Scri∣pture.
As the Catholick Church hath certain assured good

meanes to attaine to the true intelligence of holy Scripture thereby to au in all danger of error and Heresi, so hath it most cudent notes whereby to discerne falce deling from true miracles, that theeby she may nobd cerued with witchcraft and sorce∣rie, so that as vpon those groundes she buileth her assurance of her true nderstanding of the word of God, so by these mackes she cometh to the assured knowledge of the powerable workes of God For ourHovv to knovve true mi∣racles from the vvorkes of sorce∣rie. Math 12 blessed Sauiou himself hath deliuered nto her, one most, cleee sine hereof, when he was forced to de∣fend his miracles from the Iewisn calumniation, by which they were attributed to the deuil For he sayd Omne regnum diuisum otra se, desolatur. Euery king∣dom diuided against it self, shal be deiate. As f he sayd the deuil w not wok any thing against him∣self that thereby h kingdom may be destroyed But when we consider who they are, vpon whome these miraclos benefits are bestowed, we fynd them to be thse, that first pepare their way hereun∣to b tue and zeal us repentance of their sinnes, by labouring to ex el out of their soules whatsoeuer may be dupleasing to God or any way pleasing to the deuil, who e dnur to raise in the selues true loue and ffect on towardes their maker, & perfect resig∣nation with l patience to his holy wil, desiring nothing more  that the wil of God should be fulfilled in the , to his greatest honor and glorie. All which things (with many pointes  sides that their faith and el gne chh be beeing most accep∣table vnto Go and highly mking for his honor, & consequently mos   he deul, f he should second with his wokes, and emune at his enmies with so sigulr faours as we see the ede ot peo∣ple dayly blessed withal, what oth thing doth e,

but thereby ruyn & subuert his infernal kingdom Likewise the Church discrneth true miracles from witchcraft by an other sentence of our lord in the same place. For he saith: Qu non est mecum▪ contra  est: & qui non congregas mecum, spargit. He that is not vvith me, is against me: and he that gathereth not vvith me, dsperseth. As if he would haue sayd: the deuil who is mine enimie, and consequently is not with me doth nothing but that which he knoweth is most displeasing to me: and al his studie beeing how he may disunite. whome I haue gathered toge∣ther in true concord and charitie, the end of his work is to seuer soules from God by sinne, and to break the mutual peace of my flock by sowing his seed of contention and discord amongst them. ForThe vvor kes of God and of the deuil haue cō∣trarie ades. as the workes of the deuil are to disturb al cōcord in saith and teligion, and by leading men in-to sinne to make them rebells & enimies to God his diuine maiestie, so the miracles of God are wrought for the producing and maintenance of vnitie in faith, & per∣fect vnion with almightie God in vnfained charitie, which we see performed by these miracles, which are onely wrought in the Catholick Church, which Church in matter of beleef is and alwayes hath bene perfectly vnited in it self, and whose doctrin alloweth of no vice, but rather teacheth all vertue, and hath the best yea the onely meanes to aduaunce mennes soules to their spiritual and cheifest perfectiō. Again, the Church discouereth the collusion of the deuil from the working of God, by noting the meanes that are vsed in the purchasing of these miracles, which are nothing els, but most serious prayer vnto almightie God▪ oined with fasting alnes deedes, honoring of God his mother, and his holy saincts his decrest and most honorable frendes: Which ho∣nor

they doe to them, for the more honor and reue∣rence they beare to God himself: Which thns in holy scripture are singulery commended whereas the contrarie are the euident workes of the deuil, & whosoeuer is adicted to them▪ oy per∣seuereth in them, (be he of what religion souet) can neuer be made pertaker of God his sweetenes in his necessities by these miracles. Moreouer, the Ca∣tholik Church seeth that these miracles are sub∣stancial woorkes, notably and perfectly profiting the bodies and soules of those vnto whome they are imparted: Whereas the workes of our hateful enimie are rather hurteful and domageable to the creatures of God, then any wayes confortabe vnto them in their miseres and afflictions. We likewise note that these miracles are in themselues perfect, and intiere; where as the workes of the del are most commonly defectiue in many things. Also the workes of the deuil are done for vaine or pernicious endes, as that the workers (who are alwaies ad vn∣godly people) may be woundred at, or that they may thereby obtain some gayne or filthy pleasure, or wreak their hatred and reuenge against their eni∣mies: they are commonly wrought by certain se∣cret, absurd, ridiculus, superstitious prayers, char∣mes, signes, or circumstances: Which neue do accompaine the Catholik miracles. And finally (for it is not necessarie to recount al the differen∣ces) if euer God permt the deuil to work any h deceitful wounders in the behalf of any sect or he∣resie, they are soon bewraied, if they be duely eami∣ned, they vanish away at the presence either of faith∣ful people, or of other true miracles, and they are fully discried in that they oppugn the Religiō that hath bene alredy established, and confirmed by infi∣nit

most euident and assured miracles, by the confes∣sion of al antiquine, by the consent of al nations, by the censure of al General Councels by the assertions of al holy Fathers of all Histories of al Schooles, of al vniuersities, by the triumphant deathes of innu∣merable Martyr, by the profession of infinit Confes∣sors, Virgins, Lay & Religious people, of al estates, degrees, and ages.
As the old saying is true, that cunning hath noVVho they are that most cōdemn the Ca∣tholik saith. 2. pet. 2. enimie but the ignorant so we daily euidently expe∣rience that the Catholik Church is by none more oppuged then by those that are most ignorant of her wayes and doctrin. Which thing the Apostle S. Peter did soretel of the hereikes which were to bād against the Church, whome he termeth Irratio∣nabela pecora, naturaliter in captionem & in pericem, in his qua ignorans blasphemantes. Vnreasonable beastes, naturally tending to the snare, and into destruction, blas∣pheung in those things vvhich they knovve not. For wee see none more forward to condemn the Catho∣lik Religion then they, that onely vpon their own conceired surmises, or vpon fraudulent falce reportes of their own doctors & teachers impugne it. Which their blynd fe as they exercise against euery point of our faith, so perticulerly in this, that they are not ashamed to assigne our miracles to sope sttion andHovv hateful al sorcerie and su∣perstitiō is to ca∣tholiks. sorcerie. Wherfe I pray them to tel me, who is he that hath but onely read or hard the forme to make his Sacramētal Cofession (a thing dayly yea allmost howely pactized amongst Catholiks) but he hath also learned amongst other things, that wichcraft, sorcerie, & al kyndes of superstition are accompted for g us sinnes, as being directly against the commaundement of almightie God? And those that haue made more progresse in learning, if they haue

bene but slenderly acquainted with Catholik wri∣ters, can not be ignorant what volumes haue bene writtē and diuulged in particuler against these ice, as also to discouer then fraud mallice and impetie.Ioan∣nes or instit. morl. lib 9 cap 26. q 2. & . And as for the Canon, Imperial▪ & Ciuil lawes, how seuerely they haue bene and are enacted against these enormities, and how rigourousely executed in euery Catholik Cuntrie against the offndors, I am sure none but the deafe and blynd can be vnwitting thereof. Yea, what a perticuler and zealous hatred Catholiks beare against al superstition, is man estR gul indicis librorū prohibi∣trum concil. Trid Reg . & 9. in that the children of the Catholik Church are by their Pastors and Prelats strictly forbidden, so much as to read, sel, or retaine any books or treateses (though they do not beleeue them) of magick, sor∣cerie, chyromancie, iudiciarie astrologie, or of any art what soeuer which includeh any expresse or secret pact, couenant, interuention, o familiar e with the deuil. Moreouer, the bookes whoe argu∣ments are otherwe good and lawfl, yet if theyBulla  . b. containe any thing that tendeth to superstition and vaine obseruation are in lke manner forbidden vnder paine of mortal sinne, and the persons clpabe are to be otherwise punished▪ as their Bishops snal thinkThe ru∣d  s∣creon o Ca∣tholiks expedient. Yet because there ae mny strae and secret things that may be effectuated & wought by natural power, without any co course of the duil, which to the expert in Physick & natural hyloo∣phie are not vnknown: many things also that are meere superstitious and diabolcal, and many thngs again that are diuine and supernatural fune of our Catholik writers haue worthely vaied to dis∣couer and cleere ech part, for he beter direction hoth of the spiritual and tempoal magistrate here∣in that these things might not ly so hudded vp n

confusion, that by their ignorance any inconuenice or indignitie might happen: Where in amongst others the learned Martin Dlrius hath in three cō∣petentDisqui∣sition Magico∣rum. Tomi tes Mat tini Del∣i. tomes or volumes shewed his erquisit dili∣gence & skill. So that hereby all men may see how litle daunger there is to be feaed that Catholik mi∣racles haue any affinitie with superstition and lorce∣rie, both through the vigilant diligence that Ca∣tholiks haue to sift euery point and particuler cir∣cumstance in them, as also in regard of the ingrafted hated and disdaine that the Catholik Church bea∣eth against the deuil, and al his recrable workes, as being contrarie to God, and all goodnes.
If these your pretended miracles (say our aduersaires) calū∣niation vvith the an svver. be not workes of sorcerie, then are they cooening tricks of your priestes & clerge men, who cunning∣ly decerue the world, for their own lcre and gayne. But this calumniation is soon wiped away, if they would consider, that many of these misacles are wrought vpon people that neuer were at the miracu∣lous place: diuers vpon strangers who onely vowed or intended to goe thithes, many vpō the poor who were not able to giue contentment to such inordi∣nate auarice: many were donne in the vew of hun∣drethes that were present: they haue bene all most diligently and curiously examined by the Princes au∣thoritie, and Ciuil Magistrates in many Cities, townes, and other places, who neuer hetherto could fynd the least suspicion in these matters of any such abhomnable euil dealing. And the like may be answered to those, who so confidently leag, that these things were performed by way of Physick, & in particuler by the help of the Phylosophers stone,Follie in incre dulitie. (good lord what doe not men nuent when they would blynd themselues that they might not see the

truthe) whereby they shew their stonie harts and heades.
Vpon thee men I feare that Apostolical sentence wile verified if they do not repent them, Relatio ra De de caelo, super omnem impetatem & intustitiam hominum eorum qui veritatē De in iniusticea detinent. The vvrathe of God from heauen is reuealed vpon al impeetie & iniustice of those men that detene the veritie of God in iniustice. For how vniustly they haue sought to keep both from their owne and other mennes knowledge the truthe of God, your Royal wisdome may sufficiently perceiue, first in not credi∣ting God his miracles, nor God, by his miracles, again, by wholy denying his miracles, afterward, Iudacally that is impiousely attbuting them to the damned deuils of hel, and finally vncharitably and iniuousely condemning those whose innocencie & sinceritie neither the diligent and ware Catholik, nor the curious prying mallicious Herenke could euer yet iustly touche. Therfore I say vnto thē with th Prophet Hodie si vocem Domini audritis, nolie obdurare corda vestra. If you wil heare the voice of our Lord by miracles speaking & prea hng vnto yo▪ cē in ou dayes, & proclaming where he doth reside, denouncing vnto you where you shal fynd him beware that you harden not your hates, as those old crasperating people did, vnto whome ou lord did sweae being moed with his iust angt and dis∣daine against their stubbernes and du te, that they should neuer enter into his rest, that they should neuer haue parte of his eternal felicitie.
Which heauy and dreadful oome they may auod if aying asyde all animositie and pae affec∣tion, they would mekely, that is, with Chri∣stian modetic, patience, and humilitie for Christ

his sake and for their own soules saluation take the paines to vewe either with their corporal ees, or with the attentiue eies of their mynde what is doune in the mountaine of Montaigue Where they may see a most famous and frequent Pilgimage to a picture of the Mother of God, or to a place chosen out by e, wherein shee sheweth her gracious fauours to humble and distressed suppliants: where they shal behould troupes of penitent sinners prostrate before the feet of their confessors, and declaring vnto them their respasses: where they efrsoones deuoutly adore and receiue the bodie of God in the forme of bread: where they are present at the continual celebration of Masses: where they hear perpetual and reuerent inuo∣cation of our Ladie, & of other Sainctes: where they attentiuely hake to innumerable sermons and ex∣hortations, persuading those things which either the Catholik Church commaundeth, or counseleth to be beleeued and imbraced, or meiting them to auoyd those things which the sayd Church either in faith or manners mslketh or condemneth. And whileThe as∣suednes of the Catho∣lik do ctrine. these things and many other such like, are in doing, they shal often tymes espie the power and sweet goodnes of God to discend vpon the holy assembly, whereby some that are blynd receiue their sight, some that are deaf recouer their hearing some that are leapeous are clēsed some that are possessed with vncleane spirits are reed from their tyrane, others that are lame walk strong homeward, leauing their crutches and siltes at the place for a memorie, and many other such supernatural miraculous operations to be their atcheued: where-by they may with vs iustly and with verie good consequence inferr, that holy Pilgrimages, honoring of holy Images, con∣fession of our sinnes to the priest, acknowledging of

the real presence of Christ his bodie in the blessed Sacramēt, celebration of Masses, praying to sainctes, yea (in brief) they may insert the whole oct in and pctis of the Catholik Apostolik and Romaine Church to be grateful and highely pleasing vnto the Maiestie of God: for otherwise if these things were so wicked, blasphemous urious abhominable, and execrable no him, (as our aduertanes would per∣suade men) it is to be thought, that in his iust and zealous indignation he would rather cause the earth to swallow down euen into hel both the place and people, then to permitt them to departe thence fraught with such vnspeakable coforts and laces both of their bodies and soules, as we dayly perceaue they doe.
So that hereby euery one may see, in what price and esteeme the Catholik Church is to our Lord, whose children he thus particulerly & onely blesseth, and as it were vphouldeth in their faith with the hād of his powrable celestial operatiōs, which he vouch∣safeth to impart vnto them euē by the meanes of o lesse then of his most louing and glorious Mother, and for her glorie, a circumstance ding al cause of doubt that the deuil should hae any claw in this matter. For our lord hath said: Inimiitias ponam interGen. 3. to & mulierem. I vvil put enmtie betvvxt thee and the vvoman. Whereby we may vnderstand that as the deuil wil neuer to his power permit her to be honored, much lesse wil he worke wouders to pro∣cute or inca her honor. Neither wil this blessed woman permitt her enimie euer to abuse her due honor, or to circumēt those that desire for her sn∣nes sake, and for her own sake, to serue & honour her; but let him vse al the craft he can inent, and al the force he hath, yet shal our trumphant Iudith haue





the perfect victorie oue him. For, Ipsa contret cap tuum She shal crush thy ad vvicked and eends  serpnt, sth our God Great is the force vndoubtedly of the mother of God; who not onely was and is able to comate with the deuil, but to crush him. & domineee ouer him, as oer a poor worme whose hea is bused and squised to dut. Therfore it is no meruail if iracles are achiued by her meanes, who was able to being vnder her fo that fndsn Leua∣than, of whom our Lord saith▪ Non est super terrmIob 41. potestas qu comparetur  qui factus est vt nullum im∣re: There is no povver vpon earth that may be compared to him▪ vvho is so made that he might feare none
Come, come and see how this miraculous mother ofThe po∣vver of our bles∣ed La∣die vvith almigh∣tie God. Ge. 1. our God hath power to procure miraces to proceed from God at her word, as beeing the mother of the eternal word and the oe was she onely preuedgd to vse the most forceble word▪ that euer God vsed towardes his creatures For or ord said Fiat: & this his mother repeated the said Fiat. Fiat lu, said he, Fiat firmamentum▪ Fian luminara, &c. let the light be made, let the firmament be made. lt the starres ofPl. 2. heauen be made. Ipse dixit & facta sunt He said the vvord and they vvere made This holy virgin said to the Angel▪ Fia inti secundum verbum uum. Be itLuc. 1. 10. 1. donne to me acording to thy vvord. Et vebum caro fa∣ctum est. & habitait in nobs. And the vvord vvas made flesh, and dvvels in vs. The word Fiat procee∣ding out of the mouth of God. was the cause that the world was created: the word Fiat out of the mouth of this blessed virgin▪ was the cause that God himself was incarnate: By his Fiat, he made the world and man, by her Fat, God entred into the world, and became man. Which being so great a miracle, the futes whereof the faithful still reap

vpō earth, & the continuance whereof the Angels & sainctes perpetuall▪ enoy in heaen, no  f these miracles (which in this book are related) be wrought in her fauour, & at her word, eing that n dignitie & perfection they are infinitly inferiour to those, which by her and o her, hue areie bne performed. And verily i we consider who this Vir∣gin is, what is her degree and dignitie, we can not much wounder at this her preogatue. For in one word she is the mother of God, who did beare in her sacred wombe the second person in Trinitie our lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ the Souraine King and Iudge of Men & Angels. With whom this blessed Virgin had not onely domestical familiaitie for many yeares, but had motherly authoritie ouer him,Lc. 2. The most m∣rcuon. se preui∣lege of our . Ladie. fo he was obedient vnto her, yea subiect vnto her, yea subiect to Ioeph for heake, which truly was a power aboue all power, a miracle aboue all miracles, to haue in pios and reuerend subiection the high Maiestie of han, the author and pree worker of al miracles Who had ch admirable respect to this his most honorable moth, a a in his life tyme he alwaies yede vnto her authoritie, o euen at the instant of his death while he was performing that great and dreadful bloode acfise on the altar of the Crosse, euen in the vey act of the reconcilia∣tion of manknd to his heauenly Father, he could not then neglect or be vnmyndeful of his most wor∣thie mother, but must needes of his sonnely pee apoint his best belooued Apostle to be her carefull sonne in his teed▪ wherfore now that this our Lord is settled n his throne of maiestie▪ now that he ai∣gneth in his kingdom of glorie, where, (as he pro∣mised) he ministreth to his seruants▪ wih what res∣pect doth he behaue himself to his glorious best be∣loued

and best deseruing mother? let vs behold king Salomon in this point, who so honored his mother Bersab, that he adoed her▪ that on his right hand he3. Reg. . placed a throne for her & spke these dutiful wordes vnto her Pee maer a: neue enim fas est vt auer∣tm facim tuam. Mother shvv your request: for it is not lvvful that I should turne your face from me.
That is: that I should suffer you to depart disconten∣ted from me. Which Salomo did & said vndoubtedly in regard of the natural duty which he knew he did owe to his mother. For he had before his ees thatExod. 0 commaundement of God. Honora Patrem tuum▪ & matrem tuam. Honor thy Father, and thy mother. This precept our Sauiour Iesus doth incomparably more respect and obserue, then Salomon eithe did or could: for that it was his own law, as also for that it is a law meeely natural, & consequently indispen∣sable, the which God himself the Author of nature can no more violate, thē he can dee or hate himself, or be subect to the deuil.
Let therfore no mā wunder (Gracious soueraine) that both your subiects at home, and all Catholik Princes, People, & common wlthes abroad persua∣ded themselues, that the sayd Catholks in our cun∣trie should cease to be osted with the furious waues of perscution, so soon as they saw your Maiestie to be settled at our sterne For this their persuasiō grew not onely of that they had seen your Graces carage alwaes to haue bene free from alrigor & seuere; not for that your royal elemencie alwayes hated the odious & infamous name of a persecutor, not for that they knew you needed not to maintaine your iust and vndoubted tle by those meanes, which to your Predecessor seemed necessarie for hers, not for that they thought your Princely wisdom would not

exasperate and dishonor other Christian Princes and People, by perseuting your subiectes, for being of the same fath and religion with them: not for that diuers your subiectes had reported this your myld disposition and intention in euery forene Princes Court and Ctrie, and which very many of them affirmed to haue had it from your Graces self, not for that they held your Maiestie for wise and learned, and that therfore the right of the Catholik cause should be seriously and maturely examined, before it should be condemned: not for that they did thinck, that your Royal wisdome would easilie see that by persecution our faith hath been no whit diminished, but rather admirably increaced: not for many other reasons which they deemed would withhould your Grace from so disgracious, daungerous, hateful, and vngdly a course: but they were especially moued vnto this honorable and pious conceite of your Ma∣iestie, for that they thought it would neuer enter into your Princely breast, to arme your royal hand against the professors of that faith, which all your Maiesties must honorable Progenitors in England, France, and Scotland euer most zelosly and religiously im∣braced▪ since first those Cuntries receiued their Chri∣stianitie▪ but especially in regard of your Graces most famous & renumed Mother, who (as all the world knwh and to her honour protesteth) most zelou∣sely protested the same in her life, and herocaly sea∣led this her profession with the effsion of her royal blood at her sacred death. And their godly persuasion was foūded vpon this, that they hold this pious pre∣cept to be deeply gauen in your royal hart: HonoraEccl. 7. patre tuit▪ & geus matris tune obliusaris Honour your Father and forget not the sobs of your Mother. They thought your Graces deerest mothers manifold sobs

teares, and direful groanes in bringing you foort into this world in her restles cares, cogitations, and prayers to God for your preseruation, in the sundrie vndutiful perilous insurections of her own sub∣iectes against her in her most coacted exile & expul∣sion out of her owne kingdom, in her long restant and vnust captiuitie, and finally on the tragical seaf∣fod where the innocent Queene your graces kyn∣dest Parent was bloudely depriued of her life: they thought (I say) these focble groanes and showres of teares of so deere a Mother would not onely haue inclined her most beloued Chyld with all dutiful re∣uerence, but would euen naturally that is, most for∣ciby haue complled him to respect her, and her cause, that is, the Catholik cause, for which she su∣stained these calamities and indignities. And vndoub∣tedly all the world could not but haue ustly con∣demned that person as very iniurious to your Maiestie, who euer should haue daed to haue had as much as a thought that your Highnes would eues (I do not say) commaund, but so much as permitt that the Catholiks▪ your mothers chiefest if not her onely frendes should be any wayes molested▪ and much lesse indamaged, impouerished, in prisoned, condemned and put to death for the profession of her faith. For the world hath not yet forgouen, neither can the memorie thereof euer decay▪ how that Ca∣tholiks haue bene hampered, fortured, spoiled of their goodes, hanged, boweled and mangled, yea, for∣eine nations do stil behould the exe and pouertie of diuers, who at this present remaine depriued of their lands and liuelihoods, for hauing loued, ho∣nored, pied, or affectionated the afflicted innocent mother of King Iames our redoubted lord WherebyPluar∣chu. the dutiful behauiour of that heathen Roman Coro∣lans

cometh into mennes myndes, who was so na∣tural as for his mothers ske to depose the seuere cha∣stsment and reuenge which he had prepared against those that were so vnkynd and vngrateful towardes him: by which example they conclude, that your Maiestie being a Christian and the sonne of a most glorious Christian martyr can not but graunt vnto your Catholik subiects, the most lous & sincere frends of you both, their long desied comfort, and the iust feedome from their vniust distresses and op∣pressors But let others conceiue what they st of this old Pagan example: we rather think this Phi∣loophical sntence shal haue more  your gra∣ces hart: Sequere Deum▪ Follovv your God sayd the wse man. Which that your maiestie may the better be animated vnto▪ here in this insuing relation is ds∣plad the admirable honour which our God himself doth to his Mother, & to mortal people for her sake. Vnto whome he beareth so great reuerence, that not onely he heareth her for her frends, but of his esti∣mable pietie is most gracious vnto her for his own verye enimies: as our famous learned and deout Archbishop of Cantuburie Sainct Anselin hath no∣tedAnsel in Medt. sayng▪ O foelix Marie sicut omnis peccator ate auer∣sus & ate despectus necesse est vt intereat, ita omnis pec∣cator ad e conuersus & a te respectus impossibile est vt per O Happie Marie as euery sinner auerte from thee and dispised by the must necessarilie dy so euery sin∣ner conuerted to the and regarded by thee can not perish possibly. O the rare preuilege wherewith by her Son̄e this Mother is ths honoured, wherein▪ if Christian people abroad may once chance to see your Maiestie to imitate the oueraigne King of aeternal glorie to your Catholik subiectes at home, who (as all the world knoweth) were neuer enimies but most affe∣ction

and loyal vnto your Royal Maiestie, as this your Godly imitation wl e great solace vnto vs, so wil it yeeld an vnspeakable contentment vnto thē, and withal be most honorable to your Highnes, & vnto Gods diuine Maiestie exceedingly grateful. And to the end in honoring your natural Mother,Io. 15. your Grace may not feare to dishonour and displease your aeternal Father, behold his supernatural pow∣ableIo. 5. woke in approbation of that faith in which she liued, and for which she dyed For not beleeuing the like workes our God held the Iewes inexcusbe, so in crediting these your Maiestie shal not need to feare to displease, but rather to please him highly. Who onely for the temporal and euerlasting benefit of his creatures, and for the amplification of his own Soueraine honour & glorie vouchsafed thē I know that they wil be vehemently cōtradicted & imug∣ned, befoe they shal obtaine their de esteeme & credit, and therfore I haue endeuoured to cleee the chiefest difficulties which I perceiue to be o diuarilie obiected against them. I graunt my discous hath bene very prolix, your Maiestie seeth the mate is important, & I was very desirous your Royal wisdom might be eactly informd hereof. God graunt that what I haue done may be iudgd sufficient. Yf I shal hereafter vnderstand that ought is wanting or omit∣ted herein it shal by the help of God be added & up∣plied. Meane while cōmiting the whoe to the sweet disposition of Almightie God I do withal commēd your Maiestie to his best guidance and protection.

