



KNowing well (right Worship∣full) after the dispatch of much weighty busines, which for the good of others you willing∣ly vndertake, and, by report of the shire, with very great dis∣cretion, and all vprightnes per∣forme, that as it were for your recreation, you perused often bookes of Geogra∣phie: some while since I sent the manner how three or foure problemes Geographicall might bee wrought vpon a plaine with Ruler and Compasse only. At my leisure afterward taking that subiect in hand againe, I followed it so farre, that I deuised af∣ter the like way to handle most conclusions of the Astrolabe, or problems Astronomicall concerning the Primum mobile. When I had almost brought my purpose to effect, it was my chaunce to light vpon Clauius his Astrolabe, where I found as much pro∣mised, and performed euen by Ptolomeis Analomma,
the very modell of Iohannes de Roias his Planisphere, as learned Guidus Vbaldus hath fully proued, and al∣so the ground vpon which I haue framed much of my worke. Notwithstanding, perceiuing (as by comparison euery one may see) that except the 5. and 28. taken out of Manrolycus, the 14. and 23. out of Commandine and Vbaldus, my constructions were very farre differing from Clauius, amending those defects which Gemma noteth in Roias his worke, be∣sides taking the matter to be commodious, and not vnpleasant for trauellers, and all such in generall as delight in Astronomicall and Geographicall deui∣ses, I set light the reproachfull name of an English Scribler, and tooke courage by publishing it to the view of the world, to hazard my selfe to euery rea∣ders censuring. Vpon this resolution I am bold to vse your Worships name in the front of this booke, testifying therby the earnest and vnfained affection which I beare, and long haue borne both to you and yours: in regard whereof making no doubt, but that this little mite shall be gently accepted, with remembrance of my dutie to your Worship I take my leaue. S. Edmunds Bury in Suffolke, 6. Ian. 1600. after our English accompt.

