


NOT without immortal prayse, & euerlasting re∣nowme ar the actes and monumentes of learned men, cōmended to poste∣rity. For if life wtout lit∣terature is (as Seneca sayth) a death or sepulture of the lyuely man, & the body (as Plato wytnesseth) no body, but a sepulture, cohibiting the minde from hys natural vigour: how much excelleth he (ryght honorable and my syngular good Lord) in thys frayle e∣state, who wyth studies of humanitye garnished, & wyth diuine knowledge adorned, hath not onely enriched his natural vnderstāding: but also made the same almost equiualent to Aun∣gels, comprehēding the glorious mi∣steries of the eternal Father, and his

Sonne Iesus Christ. Among these, how much Martine Luther excelled, his holy woorkes & prophane monu∣mentes, besides the learned testimo∣nies of many famous Clarkes, abun¦dantly deciare. Reading therefore of late tyme, the history of hys Lyfe and Actes, setfoorth by the incomparable ornament of good learnyng Phillyp Melanethon: I was therein maruay∣lously delighted, & efrsones perusing the same. I was rauished with incre∣dible desyre to bestow somtime in the translation therof. Many vrgent cau∣ses moued me, whereof y• principal be these. Fyrst, hys integrity of life, god¦ly conuersacion, & zelous affection to¦wardes the propagacion of Gods ho∣ly word. Secondly, his animosity pro¦fessyng Christ hys Maister, hys lear∣ned conference wyth the temporall & Ecclesiastical Estates of Germany, & his contempt of al worldly felicitye & transitori pompe, in respect of Christ hys Maister, whom he purely profes∣sed, and sincerely preached. Lastly, y• lamentable verses, & funerall Oraci∣ons of diuers, bewayling the losse of this pearle of Christianity, & the tra∣duction

of this present historye into the Germaine, Frenche, Spanish & Ita∣lian tonges by certayn godly persons exiled their natural country, and dis∣persed in sundry Christian Territo∣ries, wher Gods word is purely prea¦ched, and all papistrye abolished. By whyche it appeareth he was no lesse treasure and glory of hys Countrye, spectacle and absolute Image of god¦ly wysedome, then terrour to all Pa∣pisme, and such as builded the laud of theyr lyfe, on the snde of ambicious seekyng. My rude translacion & sym∣ple trauayle, I dedicate vnto your good Lordship, as to the very Patron and fauourable Mecenas of all poore Studentes. Whose honorable perso∣nage to pouder with condigne praise  a thing more due to your desertes, the easy for my rude pen, and more ap¦pertaineth to my duty, then it stādeth wyth myne ability. For who know∣eth your Lordship, and is ignoraunt of the rare gyftes that harbor in your head, & of the natural bountye that so brightly shineth in your countenaūce Who hath not hearde the renowmed brute of your constancye in Christian

religion, euen in these late wretched dayes, whose noble hart, neither tedi∣ous and long imprisonment, neyther flowing heapes of worldly aduersity could fraight with feare, or mooue to deflect to any sinister way, and whose vertuous mynde in greatest troubles euermore aspired to the hygh temple, where God in glorye is in throned. I passe in silence your bounty towards al such as professe God vnfaynedly, & publishe abroade the fruites of theyr studies. All which most heauenly de∣sertes, do not onely merite to be regi∣stred in the booke of Fame, but also ministre ample occasion for your ho∣norable personage (whē the fatal La∣dies shal spyn out the thre of mortal life) to be calendred in the Catalogue of those vertuous wyghtes. Who for sundry their prowesses, woorthye ex∣ploictes, goodly graces, and syngular giftes, were by antiquitye consecrate to immortality. And though your ho∣nour, whose lyfe lightneth hys pro∣fession, and whose profession purelye aduaunceth the glory of God and his sacred word, disdayneth to be setforth wyth my rude penne: yet your Lord∣shyp

must beare with him that of good wyl pronoūceth this of your good de∣series. I coulde wade further in your honours commendacion, but that I haue a certayn reuerence to trouble wyth my prolixitye your grauer af∣faires. And partlye feare pulleth me back, least I be spoiled with the nose of adulacion, whose honorable eares abhorres to hear your proper praise, and whose iudgement woulde con∣dempne my temerarious attēpt here∣in. Therefore sparing to speake that inwardly I conceiue, I remyt this ar¦gument of blasing your heroiacal ver¦tues, to such excellent Rethoricians, as far surmounting me in eloquence & good lytterature, as Phebus wyth hys bryght beames, the lesser celesti∣all bodyes.
Thus humbly besechyng your ho∣nour to take in good parte, the base and symple trauayle of a poore Cal∣lisian, and also vouchsafe the Patro∣nage of thys Christian history, or ra∣ther myrrour of Christian lyfe. Vn∣der whose protection I publyshe the same abroade. I beseche the eternall God, and hys Sonne Iesus Christe,

to preserue your Lordshyppe, and the ryght honourable and vertuous La∣dy your Wyfe, sende ye encrease of muche honour, and graunt ye the accomplishment of your gentle hartes de∣syre.
From London thys.. of Nouember. 1561. (∴)

