



IF Maroes Muse, if Homers sacred vaine,
(VVhich auncient Poets, intombed lye in molde:) Virgil  neth the  deeds of Ae s. er bla seth the ac of Achilles  sonn to Th tia.
Parnassus Nimphes had bett into my braine:
If that their skill, my slender quill did hold:
Then (worthy sir) your prayses manifold,
VVith Troian Dukes should lifted be to skie,
Or Thetis Impes, whose fame shall neuer die.


But bitter Fate, and cruell destinies doome,
Such cunning rare, denide haue to bestowe,
On me poore lad, to Homers lofty roome
I may not clime, but cowching lye full lowe, Cher   
VVith Cherilus, and Virgills vaine forgoe.
They of their store, did spred and blase their skill,
I of my want do testifie my will.


VVherefore in worth accept my willing hart,
VVhich what I could, not what I would, haue brought,
Of Artaxerxes play the princely part,   y ki  
Of fountayne flouds, who drunke a harty drought,
VVhich to his mouth with handes Synaetes rought. Syntes  poore  Phillipp  oble  of 
Let Macedonian Phyllips courteous minde,
(Right worshipfull) within your brest be shrinde.


The Persian king in bosome shrouded close,
A silie bird, which shund the hawke by flight,
And did her selfe for safetie there repose,
Till that her foe were soared out of sight.
So these my toyles accept with countenaunce bright,
VVhich I present here humbly to your hand,
Your like, or loth, may cause them fall, or stand.


Here Martiall feates by valiant Brutes atchiu'de,
Here hard exploites, here battailes fiercely fought,



then the valew of the gift. Howbeiti the toyle and labour in trnaslatyng was myne, t ectation and pleasure in reading shall be yours, if any be, which I would it were as much as I could wishe, to your contentation, and good like: and to my great cōfort, and hartes desire: Both incouragements to incense me hereafter, to attēpt some other thing which shall be peraduenture more pleasant, I will not say more profitable vnto you for besides the notable gestes and high exploites, of our Britaine kings, and other particular personages deciphered in this small volume, here also are liuely expressed, & blased forth, the haut stomackes, & famous actes, of our English natiō in generall, their cōquests in Fraunce, their victorious bales in Scotland, their memorable aduētures in Spaine, their valure in Iustes & combates at home, their order of bat∣taile, their kinde of munition, & Artillery, whereby they haue atchieued so many cō∣quests, and haue bene most redoubted, and terrible to their enemies: I meane Arche∣ry, which laudable, and martiall exercise, how greatly it is now in these our dayes, falne into decay, we shall I feare me, if constrained to indure those bruntes, and attēpt those aduentures, and perills which our forefathers haue done, to soone for our selues, though it to late repent. I haue not presented it here, as a thing exquisitely done, but as a worke rudely ouerranne, rather then curiously absolued and perfited. If any one hereafter to the better explication of the Poets meaning, to the liuelier bewtifiyng of his Countries exploytes, and famous attempts, and to the greater delight, and vtili∣tie of the reader, shall in a more loftie vaine, and heroicall stile polishe and publish this Authour a new, who I confesse deserueth a trāslatour farre better then I am, then let these my toyses be brent and cōsumed to ashes, deuoide of farther name & memory. In the meane space if you vouchsafe to turne them ouer, for your solace at vacant times I hope you shall reape some vtility be the matter, though not by the meeter, in which, though you here, and there finde a scape, I beseech you passe it ouer with patience, and perswade your selues, that if God send me lyfe and health, vpō information thereof, it shall be in the next Aeditiō reformed. As for you my Maisters, and Teachers which read this Author in skoles, you must not be offended, though euery verse aūswere not your expectation, according vnto the Latin, for as the worshipfull Tho. Phaer in his Preface to his Aeneads affirmeth, beside the differēce of a construction, & a trāsla∣tiō, there are many things which seeme delectable, and pleasaunt, in the Latine tong, which cōuerted into English, would either be so intricate that none could vnderstād them, or so vnpleasaunt that none would vouchsase the reading of them. Wherfore I haue Imitated the counsaile of Horace, in his booke intituled De Arte Poetica, where he commendes and allowes him as a good interpretour, amongst other pointes
Qui quae non sperat nitescere posse, relinquit.
and haue somewhat in some places omitted, though i but little, and somewhat alte∣red, though not much, altogether for the ease of the reader and the better vnderstan∣ding of the whole worke. The Authors meaning as neare as I could I haue kept per∣fect and inuiolate. And so fare ye well most frendly Gentlemen.

