


WHen I had throughly ruminated of that saying of Plato, That we were not made for our selues, but to doe good to our Countrey, and friends, I was euen out of heart) my most respected friend) euen as if my powers had fayled me, and as one stroken with amazement. And as that first Monarch of the Romane Empire, when he first saw Alex∣anders statue at Gades, lamented for that he himselfe had done nothing worthy the remembrance: euen so I, because I haue done no such thing, did euen lament; considering that beauty, pleasures, age, health, and delicacies doe fade away, Sed famam extendere factis, hoc vir∣tutis opus. Wherefore after many harty sighes, taking heart againe (though I were tossed with many flouds of Cares, many gusts of aduersities, and many stormes of diuers perturbations) yet began I to thinke what I should leaue to posteritie for witnesse that I had liued. Now my mind being turned hether and thither, in the end I chose the learning of Harmony; both because it is fit for morall educati∣on, and also because it is the seruant of Gods praise. For amongst all Scholler-like Arts, (which they commonly call Liberall) none is more morall, more pleasant, more diuine, than Musicke. Whereof although there be many Professors, yet be there very few writers (I know not whether it grow out of hatred to the Art, or their owne slothfulnesse) that haue deliuered the Art in a good forme. Hence is it, that excepting those which are, or haue been in the Chappels of Princes, there are none, or very very few true Musitians. Wherupon the Art it self doth grow in∣to contempt, being hidden like a Candle vnder a bushel, the praising of the almigh∣ty Creatòr of all things decreaseth, and the number of those which seeke the ouer∣throw of this Art, doth dayly increase throughout all Germany. By this occasion stirred vp, & further relying vpon your kindnes, most worthy Sir, (a great testi∣mony wherof you gaue me, when I came frō the Vniuersity of Tubyng, & turned in at your pleasāt (indeed most pleasant house) which you haue of your Princes gift) I turned my pen to the writing of Mensural Musick, hauing before writtē of Plain-Song. And what flowers soeuer other mens volumes had in them, like a Bee I sucked them out, and mad: this second Book the hiue to lay them vp in. Now as I haue dedicated it in your name, so doe I subiect it to your censure, that you may both mend those faults you find in it, and detect it from the barking of those who doe commonly defame all good men. For hauing a fit iudge of these things which I write, I doe fitly submit my selfe to his Censure; euen his whom alrea∣die both my owne experience hath found, and all Sueuia doth acknowledge, and all high Germanie doth honour, for a godly, vpright, and learned man. Farewell, (most learned friend) and defend thy Andraeas from the tooth of Enuie.
