



THe Historyes of auncient me∣morie doe giue sufficient testi∣monie (right noble Earle) that many haue bene for their mani∣folde giftes, and noble vertues right worthily cōmended to po∣steritie. Some, for that they were the first inuen∣tours and finders out of Artes and Sciences: some, for that they ordayned good Lawes & statutes, for the restrayning the vnbridled desiers of men, and the abandoning all barbarous crueltie: some, for their magnificence, bountie, & franke nature: some for their inuincible minde, exceeding greate prowesse, puissaunce, & magnanimitie. But how much prayse, how great honour & renowne hath bene in all well gouerned commonwealthes giuen to such as haue bene patrones of Iustice, maintey∣nours
 of learninge, defendours of truth and ho∣nestie. For why, the fame of many worthy wryters, the credite and estimation of learning, the loue & honour due vnto vertue it selfe and Godlines, had lōg ere this time ben vtterly put out, & rakte vp with their cinders, had not the patronage of Prin∣ces propt vp their painefull labours, had not some vnmoueable and royall rocke beene a sure defence and bullwarke of liberall Artes, had not the gra∣cious countenaunce of moste worthye and noble men puissauntlye repelled the force and rage of impietie. In like maner the fames of mightie Kinges had died and beene intumbed wyth theyr bodyes, the very Crownes & Scepters of the most famous and noble Monarches, had been rustie & warpte wyth obliuion, had not learned men (yel∣ding curteous acceptaunce to labours full of peril) celebrated and painted foorth their memorable actes and noble enterprices. So that it may ap∣peare moste manifeste, that neither Princes maye liue cleare and knowen to posteritie wythoute the penne and helping hande of learneds Arte: ney∣ther men excelling in learning, woulde be eyther in lyfe reputed or spoken of after death, withoute the countenaunce, defence, and patronage of no∣ble Peeres. VVherfore sith no small prayse hath
 beene giuen in all ages to patrones of learninge, and also wheras learned men haue yelded to their patrones such dutie and obseruaunce as might bee required at their handes: I do as litle doubt, that your honour will refuse to entertaine Osorius, who would become familiar wyth vs Englishe men, as it is most certaine that this Gētlemā for his part in these his bookes of Nobilitie, hath most highlye commended you. For thoughe Osorius do treate of Nobilitie in generall, yet principallye and as the Greekes terme it,  hee seemeth to de∣scribe the worthines of your excellent nature and noble minde. So althoughe there is no doubt but that all noble mē will take the Patronage of him, yet he in this kinde of argumente being very pre∣cise and making as it were great choise of the ex∣cellencie and surpassinge clearenes of many noble natures, seemeth to reste in your worthines, and therfore coueteth greatly to creepe vnder the bā∣ner of your protection. And verely it were an vnseemely thinge, that wheras Osorius is in Por∣tugale highely priced, in all Spaine praysed, in Ger¦manie generally commended, in Italy honourably reported of, that he arriuing in Englande (the in∣habitaunts wherof beinge of all other Nations e∣specially praysed for their singular humanitie, &
 great curtesie) that he (I say) arriuing in a straūg countrye, and turned as it were oute of his coate, shoulde masterlesse gad abroade, and not be har∣boured by some noble personage, and especially of such, of whom vndoubtedly he hath well deserued. VVith which staine of dishonour, no gentle & no∣ble nature wilbe blemished, much lesse those which are placed in the toppe of honour and dignitie. This being so, I most hūbly craue of your Honour that not onely Osorius himselfe for his owne sake, maye be welcome vnto you, but also his guide, con∣ductour, & interpretour, who hath (if not trim∣ly, yet truly, if not finely, yet faithfully) expoūded his learned and graue inuentions. VVhich office of safe conduct, sith it is happened vnto mee, I doe in our mother tongue most humbly recommende vnto your Honour so well my charge as my selfe: hoping that as messengers of euill tidings are ex∣cusable, so hee that happely bringeth to lighte any secrete and hidden treasure, maye accordingly be well intreated.
At Newberie the vi. daye of Ap 1576.

