


WE read, that Socrates (hee that was by Apollos Oracle famoused for the wisest man in the world) was wont to say, That it had been fit mens hearts, should haue windowes, that so the thoghts might be discerned. This pow∣er if we now had, honourable Lords, beleeue it, you should discern my loue towards you and yours. But be∣cause speech is the mindes interpre∣tour, and you cannot know men, and their thoughts, but by their words or writing, I am to intreat that you would take in as good part these words, which in my absence I vtter, as if I had in presence deliuered them.
It is not out of any humor of arrogancy or vain ostentation that I do this: but that vpright, gentle, and religious fashion of yours, wherin you excell more than any Easterlings that border these Baltick coasts, these make me assay the art of Harmony, which the Grecians call Musicke; Musicke the nurse of Christian Reli∣gion, and mother of good fashions, of honesty, of Common-wealths, if in any thing we may giue credite to the ancients.
These made me commit my sayles to the furious windes; these made me giue Zoiles and Thersites power to rage ouer me; these made me trauell many Coun∣treys not without endamaging my estate, to search out the Art; these made me many a time to sustaine wearinesse, when I might haue been at rest; greefe, when I might haue solaced my selfe; disgrace, when I might haue liued in good reputation; pouertie, when I might haue liued in plenty. But also these things (right Worthies) seemed to me not worthy the regarding, when I sought how I might whilest others slept, whom your state doth nourish (before all others) pro∣fite your youth, and so consequently the youth of all Germany, drawing them to good fashions, recalling them by the honest delights of Musicke from vnlawfull attempts, and so by little and little stirre them vp to vertuous actions. For Socrates, and Plato, and all the Pythagoreans did generally enact, that young men and maides should be trayned vp in Musicke, not to the end their mindes might be incited to wantonnesse by those bawbles, which make Art to be so vilely

reputed of: but that the motions of the minde might be ruled and gouerned by law and reason. For seeing the nature of young men is vnquiet, and in all things desiring delights, & therfore refuseth seuerer arts, it is by the honest de∣lights of Musick brought to those recreations, which may also solace honest old age.
Among those things wherwith the mind of man is wont to be delighted, I can finde nothing that is more great, more healthfull, more honest, than Musicke: The power whereof is so great, that it refuseth neither any sexe, nor any age, and (as Macrobius a man of most hidden & profound learning saith) there is no brest so sauage and cruell, which is not moued with the touch of this delight. For it doth driue away cares, perswade men to gentlenesse, represseth and stirreth anger, nourisheth arts, encreaseth concord, inflameth heroicall minds to gallant attempts, curbeth vice, breedeth vertues, and nurseth them when they are borne, compo∣seth men to good fashion. For among all those things which doe admit sence, that onely worketh vpon the manners of men, which toucheth his eares, as Aristotle in his musicall problemes doth more at large discourse. Hence was it that Aga∣memnon being to goe Generall for the Troian warres, as Philelphus reports, left a Musitian at his house, who by singing the prayses of womens vertues might incite Clytemnestra to a chaste and honest life, wherein he did so farre preuaile, that they say she could not be ouercome by Egistus his vnchaste attempts, till the vngodly wretch had made away the Musitian, who onely hindred him from his wicked purpose. Besides Lycurgus, though otherwise he enacted most seuere lawes for the Lacedaemonians his countrey-men; yet did he very much embrace Musicke, as Quintilian writes. I omit those ancient Philosophers, (for so they rather chose to be called, than to be named wise men) who did repose the summe of their studies in this art as in a certaine Treasure-house. I omit those princes who for the admirable sweetnesse of this art spend many talents. Lastly, I omit the most religious of al men, who though they estrange themselues from al worldly pleasure, yet dwell vpon this delight, as if it were the onely heauenly one. Since therfore this Art is both holy, and sweet, and heauenly, participating of a diuine, faire, and blessed nature, I thought good to dedicate this booke, wherein all the knots of practicke Musicke are vntied, to the gentle youth of your Citie, after it had been first brought forth at Rostoch, that famous Vniuersity of the Baltick coast, and since amended by the censure of the Elders, and publikely read in three famous Vniuersities of Germanie, the Vniuersitie of Tubyng, Heydelberg, and Maguntium. That by their deserts the after ages being helped, might pay the tribute of thanks not to me, but to them, as to the first mouing causes.
Wherefore wise Fathers, I beseech your wisedomes to deigne this booke your gentle fauour and acceptance, not contemning the base stile or little volume of that, which is rather holy than pleasant, and set out not vpon any rash humour, but vpon a true deuotion. For it is written for them that fast, not for them that are filled with delicacies, though euen they may find here that which will fit their stomackes. And since great things fit great men, small things small men, I acknowledge my selfe small; and therefore giue small gifts, yet promise greater whensoeuer I shall grow greater. Farewell most happy, most worthy, most wise.
