


AFter I had obtayned throughe your good meanes, & fauoura∣ble helpe (Lewes moste renow∣med Prīce) to haue recourse a∣gaine, vnto my accustomed ex∣ercises of studie, I employed my selfe more dilligētlye then I did before in the searche of know∣ledge and wysedome. For in my first entrie being mo∣ued onelye wyth the instincte of nature, I moderately folowed my studies, wherby reaping at the length some fruite, I might imparte parte thereof, to the profite & commoditie of my natiue country. But now whereas I haue alreadie proued sufficientlye your bountefull harte and clemencie, and therefore am alwayes mind∣full of your honour and worthines: it lyeth mee vppon, to bend therunto all the force & vehemēt intentiō of my minde, that I may in some case seeme worthy to be reckoned of & esteemed, for knowledge & learning. Neither do I seeke herein the praise of mine own wit, but that I may if not rēder due thanks, yet declare my greate good will, and dutifull hart, ready alwayes and glad to accōplish your good desire. VVherfore I wil in no
 wyse  to set forth in this kinde of wryting the full meaninge of my good disposition, and will bring to passe, that my obseruaunce towards you, shalbe knowen in all places. And I am fully perswaded, that whatsoeuer I do in she∣wynge my singular loue towards you, wherewith I am maruelyously inflamed, it is notwithstanding in it self but smally to be accompted of. But it behoueth them not to bee squemish in geuinge a small & simple gift, who may not, throughe vvante of abilitie bestowe of greater valewe and estimation: and they which in matters of greater importaunce cānot stand their so∣ueraignes in steede, should not therfore by not geuing a trifle, slacke their dutye towards such, whom they a∣boue all other honour and reuerence: especially where∣as in euery kinde of duty and curtesie, not so much the valewe of the rewarde, as the bountifulnes of a true meaning minde is generally allowed of, and accepted. VVhereas therefore the rather to discharge my dutie towards you (most noble & renowmed Prince) I haue taken in hand for exercise of my stile, after the maner and fashion of Aristotle to dispute of many questions, I thought principally to entreate of true Nobilitie. And because that so high & stately an argument, see∣med vnto mee most meete for a worthy & noble per∣sonage, and for that these my discourses, and treatises of Nobilitie, were more curiously compyled, and wyth more laboured studie, I determined to present thē vn∣to your maiestie. And so muche the more readily was I induced so to do, by how much the more eminētly ap∣peared in you, the glistering gleames of true, and aū∣cient
  deserue due prayse and cōmendation, then there is no∣thing amonge men more honourable then the title & name of a king: & of them especially, which according to the will and pleasure of God vseth theyr auctoritye and iurisdiction, such as were truly the predecessours, from whom issueth the fountayne of your Genealogie. If renowme be obteyned by vertue, who is more vali∣aunt then you, who more bountefull, who more endued wyth wysedome and pollicie? I omitte to speake of the great loue and amity betwixt your brother, and you, a king endued wyth much honour & Nobilitie, a iust Prince and louer of his country: againe of your great curtesie towards all men, & lastly (which is principall) of the rest, of your feruent and most earnest desire to set forth and aduaunce Christian relligion. But I will here stay my selfe. For I thincke it not at this present meete, the goodly giftes and indumēts of your minde to set forth and describe wyth due prayse and commē∣dation. Now therefore I am to beseech you (most va∣liaunt and renowmed Prince) that you will vouchsafe to take these my trauayles curteously, and most grati∣ously bestow some leysure & time in readīg my doings (such as they are) accordinge to your accustomed gen∣tlenes and clemencie. VVhich if I may vnderstād to be fauourably receyued, I shall enforce my self t wade farther, neyther shall I wyth any maner toyle bee wearied, so that I maye be assuredly perswaded, these my endeuours vnto your highnes not to be vnpleasaunt.
