



THE famous Philosopher Aristotle
being demaunded what benefit he
hadde obtained by the studie and
practise of Philosophie, answered,
This, that vncommanded I can doe
that I ought, and auoide the doing
of that I should not. For (saith he)
the ignorant and ruder sort abstain
from euill, compelled, for feare of
punishment: but the wise and learned doe shun the same,
of their owne accord, because it is euill. A worthie saying,
and well beseeming the excellencie of so noble a Philoso∣pher.
For what is there that can more effectually expresse
the benefit that ariseth by the studie of any thing, then to
shew the effects that it worketh in them that applie them∣selues
therevnto? And what effect is there equall vnto this
when a man vncommaunded, can conforme his iudgement,
frame his will, and order his actions, according to the rule of
reason, and auoide whatsoeuer is contrarie to the same? And
as the studie of Philosophie worketh this in the followers
thereof: so doth the studie of other laudable things also,
bring foorth verie commendable effectes, eche one in their
owne kinde. For which cause sundrie men in times past haue
penned with great labour, the laudable workes of antiquitie,
and some also in these our daies, imitating the painefull dili∣gence
of those auncient writers, haue with no lesse trauaile
written Histories of later yeeres, which by the reading of thē
might be aswell profitable to repell other vaine delights, as
pleasant to passe away the tediousnesse of the time. Among
which, I haue caused this [Third part of the first booke

of the Mirrour of knighthood] to be translated out of the
Spanish tongue, moued thereunto with the earnest request
of sundry persons, as also being willing of my selfe to further
so worthie a worke, adorned with all good examples of ho∣nour
& magnanimitie, that may serue to the exalting of ver∣tue
and weldoing, and to the repressing of vice. Which be∣ing
done, I aduised with my selfe where I might finde out
an English Patron of conformable qualitie, & hauing heard
of your vertuous and euerie way Gentlemanlike dispositi∣on
by others, as also had tryall of your great & singular cur∣tesie
in my selfe: I thought good to Dedicate this woorke
vnto you, Maister Richard Morris, in lieu of better, to te∣stifie
my thankfull remembrance of your great good will
shewed vnto mee, desiring you to accept in woorth the pre∣sentation
hereof, if not for the worthinesse of the thing offe∣red
(and yet I trust you shall not finde it altogether vnwor∣thie
of the good fauour and acceptaunce) yet as a testifi∣cation
of my affection which by this I here present
vnto you, declareth what I would if I had better
to giue. Thus hoping that you will friend∣ly
accept of this my doing, I take
my leaue.

