



RIGHT honorable, I was drawen with no little curiosety and desire, to read this booke when it came to my hands in the Spanish tongue, therly to gather the trewe causes, why the Spaniards fauor so much our Inglish Catholique fugeti∣ues, and what hartes they cary to their country, euen these which for Religion, leaue it, to lyue in Seminaries abrode. And for as much as the relacion of these solemnityes written by a straunger, and published in printe, to be read by so many gratie persons as had bene present, must nedes be writ∣ten with all truthe and sinceritie, It could not choose (giuing notice of many particular speches and actions) but discouer vnto vs the secret affects, of both parts. And therfore hauing seene it with attention, I was drawen with no lesse desire to put it in Inglish, that it might be read by your honor and the rest of my good lords of her M. Councel. For yf the good will of the King of Spaine and his people to our countrymen, and their correspondence to him and his, be founded in these honorable respects of conformity in Religion on the one side, and of piety and gratitude on the other, as by this relation

may be gathered (far different from the surmises which by other wayes I haue heard) me thinke the assurance of good meaninge, and knowen continuance of good will in them that were wont to be our best frends, though of late prouoked to be our enemyes, should encorage vs much to Peace, and to renew the old confederations which our forefathers with so great wisdome procured so many ages, with so great benefit of the land, especially with those in whom yet (vnder the profession of hostility and exercise of war, wee fynde far better harts and more true affection to our Country and Countrymen, (as in this occasion may besene) then in others, whom with great care and cost we labor (I feare in vayne) to make of old enemyes, new frends. And this I beseeke your honor to consider, and to be a meane that it may come to her M. Knowlege. And so I take my leaue from Paris the 2. of December. 1600.

