



I Formerly considering (wor∣thy and honourable) what a bountifull Patrone your honourable father hath beene (and still is) to me; not onely in giving me freely a presentation to the place where I now am, when I had little or no re∣lation to his Honour; nor yet desiring any such fa∣vour from his Lordship: But also by a continuall supply of his many bounties and favours to me, and mine; consulted with my selfe to testifie my grati∣tude to him, as Elisha with his servant to the boun∣tifull Shunamite, 2 King. 4. 13. And finding my selfe as unable to pleasure him by speaking, &c. As that is needlesse, he dwelling among his owne
 people, being knowne and honoured, in Court and Countrey. Yet considering that something was to be done for him, as Elisha for her, Ver. 14. I re∣solved to shew my thankfulnesse to him (as Elisha to the Shunamite in a child) in you his children, by fore-warning you of, and fore-arming you a∣gainst the Sirenian and sinfull inchauntments of Sathans instruments, to draw awry your young and flexible yeares into wayes uneven, and unequall. For this cause I gave you in writing, an Epistle perswa∣ding you to imitate your vertuous Parents in their many pious and praise-worthy practices: to which I adjoyned this Discourse of Spirituall Goodfel∣lowship; not then intending any further publicati∣on: Yet now I have presumed to publish the same (be∣ing perswaded and incouraged thereunto by many Divines, especially two Batchelours in Divinitie; (M. Robert Boulton, and M. Nicolas Estwicke) Lecturers at Kettering, who heard the Sermons preached, and perused my Booke. They being knowne in the Vniversities where they have beene Students and Fellowes of Colledges; in the Countrey where they live, and elsewhere; to be grave, reverend. god∣ly, and judicious Divines) under your patronage, and protection. Perswading my selfe, that I adven∣turing to divulge this little Treatise in an age so
 learned and judicious, shalbe questioned like the Wise mans poore man, What fellow is this, &c? And Christ Iesus my Lord and Master is not this, &c. that disgracefull disesteeme of good things by mean men, of which Iesus the son of Sirach speaketh, Ecclesiasticus 13. 23. saying, When a rich man speaketh, every man holdeth his tongue, and looke what he saith, they extoll it to the clouds; but if the poore man speake, they say what fellow is this? And Iesus the Sonne of God found verified in himselfe, of whom they said, Is not this the Carpenter, the sonne of Mary?—whence hath he such wisdome, &c? Marke 6. 3. Being more now then heretofore. As for mine Epi∣stle which I gave you to be as a glasse whereby you may more easily take notice of, and as a booke of re∣cords to further your remembrances of the many worthy examples of your renowned Parents, al∣though I have kept it (though unwillingly, it being fitted for this Tractate, opening somethings in the same, and perswading by practice and examples, as this by Doctrine and Precept: it having had the ap∣probation of my betters by farre to accompany the same (being accommodated thereunto) aswell in pub∣lique as in private) from publique view. Yet my hope and earnest desire is, that you (right noble
 and vertuous) will profitably peruse both that and this to practice both, assuring you, that by walking in those wayes trac'd out by your religious Parents, and describ'd in this Discourse, you shalbe sure to please God, glad the good, put to silence the contrary minded, declare your reverent esteeme of your godly Parents, in not degenerating from their Christian courses, and manifest your selves to be true and li∣ving members of this incomparable goodfellow∣ship with all true beleevers, the Father, and his Sonne Iesus Christ. Thus desiring you, and all good Christian Readers to give God the glory, and me your prayers. I leave them, and you, to read for your direction this following Discourse in few houres, which I have painfully collected for the good of Gods Church, not without great labour, and much time; beseeching the Lord Iehovah, blessed for ever, to grace my honourable Lord, his vertuous Lady, and all his noble Children with all spirituall blessings, untill he bring them to glory, the perfection of grace.

