



IT is a notable policie, Right Ho∣norable, yea the very cunningest stratageme the deuill hath, to  transforme himselfe into an Angell of light, he being a fiend of darke∣nesse. And the same is, and euer hath beene the policie of his ministers and instru¦ments in all ages. For, the idolatrous Iewes, there∣by to inueigle simple soules, shrouded themselues vnder the glorious titles of the  Children of Abra¦ham, the  Schollers of Moses,  the temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord. And the false Apostles in Saint Pauls time,  transformed themselues into the Apostles of Christ, as though they were the Ministers of righte∣ousnesse. As for the false teachers in the times next after the Apostles, they did all set a faire glosse vp∣on a foule matter, and bare the world in hand, that the  Scriptures, the  Church, and all the Orthodox Ego babe testimonia san∣ctorum patrum ego defendo patrum dogma∣ta, &c▪ Dioscorus in Concil. Chalced: Act. 1. Fa∣thers

thereof, were on their side. And this their dea∣ling may fitly be paralleled by the practise of po∣pish teachers at this day, in taking vnto themselues the title of the Catholique church, and in making greate brags, that their Catholikes in their suppli¦cation to the kings maiesty. religion was beleued by all Primitiue Pastors, established by all oecumenicall Coun∣cels, vpheld by all auncient Doctors, and agreeable to the sacred text of Gods word and Gospell. And by this very practise haue the Iesuites and Seminarie Priests (who compasse sea and land, to make many Proselytes) ensnared many a seely soule in this land: and no marueile, seeing that these are the times of which Christ foretold, that there should Math, 24 24. arise false Christs, and false Prophets, and should shewe great signes and wonders, so that if it were possible, they should deceiue the very elect: and of which Saint Paul prophecied, that Antichrist should come 2. Thes▪ 2. 9▪ 10. through the efficacy of Sathan, with all power, and signes, and ly∣ing wonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of vnrighteous∣nesse, among them that perish.
Nay, they haue not not onely set the marke of that Antichristian beast in theire forheades, and made them the children of errour, as deepely as them∣selues: but they haue also sowne the Cursed seeds of sedition in theyr heartes, and doe seek to make them as very Machiavelians, or rather as matche∣lesse villains, as themselues,
With what cordes of Papisme, and with what cartropes of machiavelisme, they draw men to this their faith and faction (I should say, to their faith which is faction), I haue shewed at large, in these two treatises following: which I haue thoughte

good to publishe for no other purpose, but onely (if the will of God so bee) to estrange peoples minds from them▪ to alienate their affections, and to bringe them quite out of loue of their doctrine, and out of liking of their persons. And I doubte not but these my labors will greatly mooue them thereunto, the rather, if it will please your Honour to vouchsafe them your countenance: to whose Patronage I heere commend them both, as sainte Luke did both his Histories to the moste Noble Theophilus: desiring hereby to testifie my humble duty vnto your Honour, and my thankfulnesse to God for reseruing youre Honour (who hath reli∣giously vowed nec deo, nec patri, nec patri patriae vn∣quam deesse) vnto these times, wherein so many beare a forraine and vnnaturall conceipte, tou∣ching the god we serue, the Prince we obey, & the Country we liue in: yea, wherin Satan stretcheth al the strings of his wit, reneweth al his heresies, reui∣ueth al his pollicies, & practises al his treacheries. And so fearing to hinder the course of your serious cogitatiōs & actiōs, I humbly take my leaue; besee ching the lord lōg to preserue your Honor, that the cōmon-wealth for many yeares may enioy such a Counsailour, our Vniversitie so Honourable a Chauncellour, and poore Schollers (whome po∣uerty constraineth to leaue the Vniuersity, and to wander vp and downe, and offer their seruice, and serue for ten shekels of siluer by the yeare, and a suite of apparel, and meate and drinke, as the poore LeuiteJudg. 17. 10, did in Michahs house) so fauourable a Mecoenas.

