



MADAM
The Sonne of God, the supreame wisdome of the Father, setting vp his diuine conclusions, and da∣ring (as it were) the greatest wit∣tes of all the worlde, to enter in dispute against them, saith.
Doe men gather grapes of Thornes, or Figges of thistles? What shall we say to this demande? Must it nee∣des be granted, and can it no way be denied? Surely yes, me thinkes it may. First therfore I say (with my Lord and masters leaue) thathe himselfe being perfect man, doth gather from many sinful men sonnes and daughters, of whom he maketh glorious Saints: but this is to gather grapes of Thornes, ergo. Secondly, who may better helpe me to maintaine this assertion, (Madam) then your selfe? For from whence hath he gathered your selfe (so worthie a grape) but of a Thorne? A grape so rare (albeit gathered of a very Thorne) that hauing bene pressed by him in his sacred presse, hath yelded such store & plentie of pretious liquor, as hath not only filled his house with the odor therof, but hath fur∣ther kindled and enflamed, yea plainly inebriated the harts of ma∣ny cold ones in his burning loue.
The presse wherin this Lord doth presse such pretious grapes,as your selfe, what other is it then the pressor of persecution. The pretious iuyce which is pressed out of these excellent grapes, are those most pretious and excellent Chri∣stian virtues, which manifest thē selues amidst persecutions. The glorious Apostle S. Paul, desirous to giue vnto vs, a proofe and tast of that pretious liquor which was pressed out of him selfe, after his conuersion to the faith of Christ, saith. Vntill this houre, we doe both hungar and thirst, and are naked, & are beaten with buffets, and are wan∣derers, and labor working with our ovvne handes. And which is there of all these, that you may not truly say as well as he? Verely it see∣meth to me, that God would in some sort, paragonize you Lady∣shipp, with this glorious Apostle,and make you a spectacle, or ra∣ther patterne to women, as he was to men, in eache of these proba∣tions and persecutions.
First therfore, in hungar and thirst as well as he, hauing bene reduced to that extremitie, as to be forced to send to the Spanish and Venetian Embassadors to beg your bread: and on Fridayes and Satur∣dayes, to be taxed to the allowance of three pence a day, for the main∣tenance of your selfe, your man, & your maide. In nakednes as well as he, as being not only despoiled of your plate, ie wells, and rich ap∣parell, but also to be stript so nere, euen of necessaries, as to be forced to set in your chamber in your na∣ked sleeues, not able to goe out of doores, for lack of clothes. In being beaten with buffets as well as he,pittifully swollen with black and blue, yea trailed by the haire of the head, and trodden vnder foote: treatment truly fitter for a dog, then for a Christian Lady: which yet for the loue you still beare to your abuser, I ommit to enlarge. In wandring as well as he; who haue bene forced to trauell many miles (not in the day time, and in your Coache, as your custome was, and your ranck requireth) but on foot, in the dead of the night, and to fli from place to place, thorough vn∣coth and vnknowen wayes: and last of all, to flie the lande, to liue in a strange and forrein contrie. In labor and working with your own handes to get your liuing: wherof many gentlemen of worth can yet beare witnes, who coming to visit you in that poore estate, found you labouring with your handes to get your liuinge.
But to say in a word with what incredible patience and inward confort you sustained and suffered the pressures aforsaid, let this re∣maine for an euerlasting memory, that to as many of your acquain∣tance as you met with all, with great pleasure and contentment you said, that you could tell them great good newes, to wit, that you were now no more a Pro∣testant, but were become a Ro∣man Catholique; Which you vt∣tered to all with such alacritie of minde, that many who heard you, deemed you mad for making that answer; like as the Apost∣les, for their enflamed feruor in the faith of Christ, were estee∣med drunke. But o happie foodewhich causeth such a happie fren∣sie! And o happie drinke, which so makes drunke!
I neede not (Madam) the pre∣misses considered, frame any apo∣logie for my selfe in this place, why I made choise of your Lady-ship, to protect and patronize this pre∣sent treatise, intituled,
The true Christian Catholique: for eache one may easily iudge, that a booke of this title, meriteth to be dedicated to none other, then to such a true and virtuous Christian Catholi∣que, as your haue manifested your selfe to be by so euident triall: assuring my selfe, that of all the bookes which euer you saw, you neuer met with anie of so smale a bulke, which doth ex∣presse with more liuelye exam∣ples, the virtues meete for a
true Christian Catholique, nor yet set forth with more fearful pre∣sidents the punishments inflicted by God, vpon such as are vicious. Receiue the same then, I doe be∣seeche you, into the armes of your protection, and I shall neuer cease to pray, that you may become pee∣reles in the practise of the virtues and be perpetually preserued from the vices: and finally of a Thorne in this life, you may become an e∣uerlastinge Lillie in the life to come. Amen.

