



WORTHY and Noble Catholiks: My charity towards the aduancing of the spiritual good of your soules,  is the mayne Allectiue, inuiting me to write this small Treatise, (pardon I pray the boldnes of my Sexe heerin.) The subiect ther∣of is, First, to inculcate, & make deep impressiōs in your minds, of the horrour, and most dreadfull torments of Purgatory: Secon∣darily, to set before your eyes, the best meanes to preuent, at least to asswage, and mitigate them: gratū opus agricolis; A labour (I hope) pleasing to such, who are desirous to cultiuate their owne Soules, for gayning their spirituall and expected haruest.
That you belieue there is a Purgatory, your owne Catho∣like Faith teacheth you; there∣fore  presuming that you rest im∣moueable therein, without the least fluctuation of iudgment, I hould it were but lost labour, to spend any tyme in prooffe there∣of. Only I heere couet, that you would deeply consider and medi∣tate thereof; and thereupon that you would withall meditate and put in practise the meanes of a∣uoiding the same.
Touching the terriblenes of the Torments of Purgatory, I haue insisted in the Authority of the most Blessed Cardinall Bellarmine; out of one of whose spirituall bookes I haue transla∣ted a whole passage concerning this subiect, as hereafter I shall  more fully shew. Thus I make him the foundation or ground∣worke of this my ensuing Dis∣course; and the rest following I do build, and erect vpon this foundation: so as this Misce∣lene worke of myne, may per∣haps resemble the statua of Na∣buchodonozor, of which, part was gould, part siluer, and part of baser mettall. So I am sure, that what is taken out of the learned Cardinalls writings in this my Treatise, is perfect gould or siluer; what is adioyned there∣to by me, must (I willingly yield) endure the touch of the learned, to proue what mettall it is.
But now, to proceede a little  further: I could wish you (wor∣thy Catholickes) that you would haue a feeling apprehen∣sion of the paynes of Purgatory, though yet to come. True it is, that the Time present, and the Time future are in nature dif∣ferent; yet if a man could in some case, so liuely paint to him∣selfe the face of the Time fu∣ture, as that it might appeare to him, to be the Time present, it were, felix Error, a happy mistaking or confusion of tymes, (to vse the Catholike Churches like
Dialect of the sinne of Adam, calling it, felix Cul∣pa:) For then would men ap∣prehende the Future paynes of 
Purgatory, as present, (and certainely once they must be pre∣sent;) and consequently, would have a greater feare and dread of them, then cōmonly they now haue. It is not in mans power to depriue God of his incommum∣ni∣cable Attribute of Iustice, being euen of the Essence of God.
This then being so, why will you not seeke to appease this his Iustice in this world, when small satisfactions will serue, rather then to performe those satisfactions incomparably far greater in a more horrible man∣ner, in the next world, by endu∣ring those Torments, which are not to be endured? And there to  endure them,
donec reddas nouissimum Quadrantem, Matth. 5. These are the words of holy Scripture, and are vn∣derstood in the iudgment of the Ancient Fathers, of a Soule ly∣ing in Purgatory, and there∣fore must be performed: which forcing words, since they ought to be most dreadfull to ech Ca∣tholicke, not performing his sa∣tisfaction in this life, I haue therefore thought not amisse (though I grant in a most vnu∣suall manner) to set downe in the lower part of euery page; that wheresoeuer the Reader shall open these few leaues, his eye shall instantly meete with the  said moouing words, thereby to cause him to haue a more intense and serious meditation of them.
It is certaine, that God is pit∣tifully cruell (as I may say) since he is content to turne Eternity of punishments, into temporall paines; But withall it is no lesse certaine, that a soule not perfor∣ming its penance in this life be∣fore its dissolution from the bo∣dy, can no more immediatly as∣cend to Heauen, then the Pa∣triarchs which dyed in
Egypt, could be buryed in the land of Promise.
Well now, the chiefest help for the preuenting of the paines of
Purgatory, is the practise of  Workes of
Almes-deeds, and such other actions of Mercy, as hereafter in this short Treatise wil more fully be proued. Workes of this nature are the only Oyle, which is to be powred into a Re∣penting soule, whose full satis∣faction for its former sinnes, is not yet accomplished.
Gods sacred Word assureth you, that you may buy Heauen with
Good Workes: Venite possi∣dete paratum vobis regnum; Esuriuienim, & dedistis mā∣ducare &c▪ Matth. 25. Much more then, may you with Good Workes (dyed in the bloud of our Sauiour, and not otherwise) buy out the paynes of Purgato∣ry.  And though you do find a reluctation in your naturall dis∣positions to relinquish a part of your state to that end, now in your lyfe time; yet let that be made easy to you by Grace, which is hard and difficult by
Nature; that so it may be said of you, as was said of
Cornelius the Centurion, Act. 10. Elee∣mosinae vestrae commemora∣tae sunt in conspectu Dei. For assure your selues, that the Grace of God euer seeketh a charitable Hart.
And by this meanes, you may become more rich in your graues, then you could haue beene in your life tyme: Since to giue a∣way  riches, in a mans lyfe, for the good of the soule, is to carry them away after his death. And in this sense, they hould most, who haue the most open hand in dispensing of their riches; So true is that sentence, to wit,
It is no small riches, for Gods sake, to abandon riches.
But (alas) such are the pit¦tifull tymes, wherein we liue, & such is the scarsity of Vertue a∣mong vs, as that insteed of pra∣ctising Workes of Charity, men are commended and praysed, if only they forbeare to practise workes of Iniustice and Wrong. And thus we are glad to accept of a meere Priuation of Vice,  in place of a Positiue, and reall Vertue. O the miserablenes of our dayes! The very Beasts do not, nor can sinne, nor can they do any wrong; are they there∣fore vertuous?
Well, I humbly besecch you to haue a setled eye vpon your soules good, for the preuen∣ting of future punishments; and remember, that our Sauiour in the Ghospell (Luc. 17.) com∣mended the vniust Steward for hoording vp for the tyme to come; and shall then the slouth∣full carelessnes of Catholikes be vpbrayded with that vniust stewards diligence? God forbid! But before I do remit you to the
 perusall of this ensuing Dis∣course, I will put you in mind, that all Good Workes streame from Charity, & that without it, there are no Good Workes.
Now, how necessary and effi∣cacious Charity is in its owne Nature, it being the Queene of all vertues (the which who hath it, cannot be damned, and who wanteth, cannot be saued) I will not only refer you to the
Apo∣stles iust prayses giuen thereof (1. Cor. 8.) but also to the learned and graue Iudgment of Cardinall Bellarmine herein, who thus writeth (lib. 5. de ae∣terna Felicitate cap. 6.) Au∣deo dicere, si oleum charita∣tis  in animas damnatorum &c. I dare be bould to say, that if the oyle of Charity could distill downe into the soules of damned men, or in∣to the Diuells, we instantly should behould, both the damned Soules and the Di∣uells, to ascend out of their torments. As on the contra∣ry side, if this oyle of Chari∣ty should forsake the holy Angels, Apostles, Martyrs, Virgins, &c. they instantly would become lumpish and heauy, & thereupon would descēd into the lowest parts.
Thus you see, what this lear∣ned Cardinall censureth here∣of.  Do not then sleight and ne∣glect the worth of this Noble Vertue of Charity; and parti∣cularly the most healthfull and fruitfull effects, proceeding from thence; I meane Good Workes, Mercy, and pious Liberality im∣ployed vpon others; ascertayning your selues, that the next and most speedy helpe to procure God, to be mercifull, in mildly chastizing the relickes of your sinnes, & to mitigate your tem∣porall punishments, is to shew your selues mercifull to others; Beati misericordes, quoniam ipsi misericordiam conse∣quentur, Matth. 5. I meane prompt and ready in exercisng  the Workes of Charity; since siluer in a large degree bestowed in this manner, is the spirituall Water, which quencheth the fla∣mes of Purgatory.
One thing heere I wish you to remember, that euery man (how yong soeuer) through the wingy speedines of timc, is euen flying towards his graue. And when he is once thither come, then hath he bidden his last
A∣dieu, or Good Night to all the world. Therefore whiles the day lasteth, employ your selues busily in Good Workes: So true (and withall wholesome) is that Coun∣sell in Holy Writ. Eccl. 9. Quodcumque facere potest  manus tua, instanter operare &c. Whatsoeuer thy hand can do, do it instantly; be∣cause neither any worke, nor reason, nor knowledge, nor wisdome, is beneath whither thou hastest.
And with this (Worthy & deare Catholickes) I remit you to the perusing of this litle Treatise; Humbly beseeching his Mercy, that the reading of it may beget great and worthy ef∣fects in you; And then I shall hope, that you will vouchsafe me now and then, your charitable prayers; not only for the remit∣ting of the guilt of eternall dam∣nation, due for my infinite sin∣nes;  but also, if so his Diuine Maiesty would vouchsafe me, (though most vnworthy) so much fauour and grace, that I may escape this most dreadfull fyer of
Purgatory.

