



IN addressing of my booke (right honorable, & my very good lord) it is necessary, that the geuer there∣of should consider, vvhether the gyfte be a present meete for the patron or not, least in presuming ouerbouldly to of∣fer the same, he purchase great dyspleasure in stead of desyred fauor. VVhich consi∣deration debated so long of this voorke in my braine, that I determyned it a thinge ouerbase to be profered to your excellent honor: not for the vnvvorthinesse of the vvorke vvhich is very vvytty, but for the simplenesse of the translation vvhich ill besemeth the same: yet I vvas comforted
againe, vvhen I vvayed diligently the cur∣tesy, by the report of all men bruted to be in your Lordship, vvhich is accustomed to accept, not so much the quantitie of the gyft, as the vvyll of the geuer. And this is the propertie of a gentle nature, vvhich al∣so caused the hauty Persian king to take in gentle part a cuppe of troubled vvater at one of his souldiers handes. Receaue this therefore (my singular good Lorde) if not for the translators sake, vvhich I graunt to be vnvvorthy, yet for the authors sake O∣uid, vvhose excellēcy I dare compare vvith any saue VIRGYL, if not in this vvyse, yet as the Macedonian kinge Philip dyd heare an vnlearned Orator. VVho blamed by his councell for so doing ansvvered, be content my lordes, after I haue heard him I shall lyke the better of my learned men. I say that the skilfulnes of your honors head, (vvhich I knovv to be pereles in our dayes) if at idle hovvers it vvill vouchsafe to reade the same, shall haue better fancy to apply such as be more learned, and of riper iudge¦ment aftervvard. All vvhich thinges con∣sidered (and othervvise by mine ovvne pri∣uate
devvty bounde, for the good affection your honour hath had to my deere father, Steuen Vnderdovvne, vvhich I pray God longe to continue) I am bolde to aduenture to profer you this boke, vvhich by leasure I haue translated into Meeter, and because the sense is not easy othervvise to be vnder standed, I haue dravven a briefe draught of all the storyes and tales contayned therein, vvhich are so many, as I dare affirme in the lyke volume, a man may not reade any vvhere: so that I doubt not, the readinge therof vvilbe very pleasant to your honor, and perhaps profytable also. But vvhat nede I make many vvordes hereof, seinge it is at hande ready to performe I truste, vvhat I haue sayde? but hovvsoeuer it fall out, the good vvill of the geuer is neuer the lesse. VVho prayeth to the liuing God, al∣vvay to encrease your honor here, and after this life to send you eternal ioy vvith bles∣sed soules.

