



WORLDLY riches haue I none where with to ren∣der the shew of a grate∣full hart, but of such me∣niall stuffe as God hath lent me, I present & de∣dicate vnto your good name, & friend∣ly acceptation this litle booke (as the first fruits of my study) intituled, Iacobs troublesome iourney to Bethel. His brother Esau came against him with foure hundred men. Whereby is signi∣fied by these two brethren, the misera∣ble troubles betweene the malignant Synagogue of Sathan, and the militant Church of Christ: as also other matter very necessary to be considered in this piece of Scripture. And though it bee litle in quantitie, and in habite sutelike according to the hability of the au∣thor:

yet when I gladly cal to minde, & with no small comfort remember your vnfeigned friendshippes, and fauours towardes mee heretofore at Ilming∣ton, I cannot but be ashamed of my selfe, that abilitie doeth not afforde my hande so much to write, as my heart willeth my tongue to vtter howe deepely indebted I am to your great curtesie. But considering that your due and full rewarde is laide vp vntill ano∣ther day, in an other place, by another man, of al fulnesse, & habilitie, Christ Iesus the high Steward, and paie-ma∣ster of all, I am to request you til that time come, which I trust shall not be long, to accept my good heart, which in all possible dutie is and shall bee yours bounden to command. A smale rewarde for such benefites, I confesse, yet as kinde, and dutifull a mite, as the greatest valure of a farther summe. And sith that the most precious iewel in this worlde, which man can shew, or giue to man, is vnfeigned loue, then truely the loue that creepeth when it cannot goe, is aswell to be accompted of, and esteemed, as loue,

nay perhappes the rather than when it carieth a higher looke, and a loftier countenance: for to say the trueth, be∣nefites which are liberall for the gyft, & grateful for the repay, are in that re∣spect said to bee great, or litle, as the affection of the heart is great or litle. But weying my vnhability, I am forced to say with Virgil: Grates persoluere dig∣nas non opis est nostroe.
This consideration therefore, as al∣so your zeale in religion, and loue of learning, did altogither moue mee to pen this worke.
And in this treatise is this especial∣lie to be obserued, how Iacob, where∣by is signified the Church of Christ, hath beene maliced, & griuouslie bur∣dened by Esau, the malignant Church, from the beginning. All places are so fraught and full of examples here∣of, that wee neede not experimentes from farre. Only the Church of Rome in this place shall serue vs in steede of manie: which as long as shee was vnder persecuting TYRANTS, and sharpened as it were vppon a grynd∣ing whetstone, shee was found, and

truely called the only nurse, or mi∣stresse of all godlinesse, and continen∣cy: in whom all the giftes of Christian religion, and honest life did most abun∣dantly excel, & most brightly shine. But afterwards (the case being quite altred) she began to malice Iacob, and to laie grieuous burdens vpon his shoulders, chiefly, when in steed of danger, perse∣cution & vexatiōs; Riches, pride, sump∣tuousnes, & alielenes their companion came in place, & crept into the Church. And when as Byshops in steed of mar∣tyrs began to be persecutors of Martyrs themselues: and the strength, and force of the gospel decaied, & weakned more & more, into what wickednes & abo∣mination that church did run, & fall, let euery one consider, & iudge with him∣selfe: I am not able sufficiently to ex∣presse it according to the indignity, & hainousnesse thereof.
This example, and note (by the way) shalbe sufficient for my purpose, especi∣allie, for that the matter appeareth so plaine, and manifest in al the bookes of the godly.
And thus submitting my selfe & this

smal treatise vnto your frindly protecti∣on, & wonted fauor, referring the faults rather to the simplenes of my skil, then to my willing mind, and wishing you as great pleasure, & liking in the reading, as it hath bin some paine, and trauell to me in penning: I commend you to the direction and guiding of God his holie spirite, who grant you prosperous suc∣cesse in all godlines. From my studie at Welsborne, the first day of April, 1586.

