



MANY and excellent were the bles∣sings, which it pleased Almightie God to bestowe vpon this Nation, by the Ministery of his chosen ser∣vant our late Soveraigne; yet none of thē were comparable vnto these, the Purity of Religion, perpetually supported by one Vniforme most ancient kind of commendable Church government; and the plenty of al manner of good learning, abundantly de∣rived from the two Welsprings therof, into al the parts, both of the Church and Common-wealth. For the con∣tinuance, both of them and the rest, it was her wise and happy care, to select and take neere vnto her successiuely
 Men of rare Endowmēts & personal gifts, men of deepe iudgment, long experience, great moderation, loving learning and fearing God. Whome therefore shee did place in chiefest authority vnder her, that vnder her they might be the greater comfort to the Ministery, the bet∣ter encouragement vnto learning, the more noble coun∣tenance to Religion, and as the Prophet speakethPsal. 21.6. set as blessings to the whole land.
In this honorable rancke we cannot, (Most Reverend & Right Honorable) without open wrong, but acknow∣ledge your Lordships to be second vnto none of all your predecessours. The long experience that this kingdome hath had, of your honorable Imployments for the main∣tenance of Religion and learning, as your severall places doe speciallie require, would checke our want of duty, if wee did dissemble it; and silence the detraction of any o∣ther, that should goe about to impeach it.
Which as wee recount with singuler comfort, for the daies that are past; so for the present, it is the very stay of our harts, that the same od, of his accustomed goodnes, hath given the same minde, vnto our most gracious and dread Soveraigne, to preserue and propagate the same things in Church and Common-wealth, by the Godly care & prudent counsaile, of the very selfesame Persons. For had we not vnder his Princely wisedome & clemen∣cy, such immediate Patrones, (which now with long vse, are growne into a very sympathy of our estates;) to whō we might resort in our needful times of trouble: it would amate our mindes, and vtterly astonish vs in our vnder∣standdings, to see the insolent endevours & straunge at∣tempts, of sond Familists, absurd Brownists, & perfidious Papists; all of them with importunity, and selfe-concei∣ted
 confidence, intending and expecting the innovation of Religion, through the overthrow of the Cleargy, and ruine of the Vniversities.
All which notwithstanding, had not opened the dores of our lips, nor made way to this our iust complaint; but that there came to our sight long since, An humble peti∣tion of a Thousand Ministers at once: Which wee may well resemble vnto still running streames, which are dee∣pest there, where they seeme to be most calme. This wee beheld with great sorrow of heart: considering how it is repleate, with vnthankefulnes towards God for his mer∣cies towards vs; with iniury to Her gracious governmēt, (whose Memory be precious vnto all posterity;) with re∣proach to their Fathers that begot them in the Gospell; with preiudice to the Breasts, that (if they be any thing) did give them sucke; with contempt of their Brethren, and fellow Laborers (at the least) in the Lordes harvest. Howbeit as long as it passed in private, vnder the name of a particular motion, made to his most excellent Maie∣stie; we lid our handes vpon our mouthes, and with due reverence expected in silence, the wise resolution of His religious heart.
But these men (as they are impatiēt of delay, or els to  gaine credite with the people, on whom they greatly do rely) soone after, send forth into al quarters of the Realm, store of these pretended Petitions: accompanied vvith such lewd, false, and absurde suggestions, as if our noble King, had lent their motion a favourable eare, and given it some kind of consenting intertainment; as if in all this, they had done nothing, whervnto they were not anima∣ted and encouraged, by some of speciall credite with his Highnes; as if some busie headed strangers, had vnderta∣ken
 their cause, and ensured the safe conduit of their wea∣ther beaten barge, to the haven of their hope. Were there any such, wee would request them to remember, that it is neither manners nor discretion, to take vppon them in a State, wherein (for ought we know) they haue nothing to doe. It may suffice, that they are partakers of the good things of the land; let them thanke God and the King, and be quiet. But wee are verily perswaded, there are none such; that this, as all the rest, is given out vnder hand among their credulous adherents, onely ad facien∣dum populum. A tricke of theirs, with which we have bin long acquainted.
This course (Right Honorable) did make vs thinke, that nowe they had altered the nature of that foresaide Schedule; and of an Intitled Petition to his Maiesty. Had made it a covert kind of libell. Wherby (securely as they thought) they might depraue and slaunder, not only the Communiō booke, but the whole estate of the Church, as it standes reformed by our late Soveraigne. VVhich vndue & dishonest practise, having so changed the qua∣lity of their Petition; whether it hath brought the Con∣trivers and Preferrers of it within the compasse of that statute. 1. Elizab; and made them lyable to the Penalties of the same: we take not vpon vs to determine. Howbeit hereof we could not but take notice; that by their impu∣nity, diverse other very lewdly affected, haue in diverse parts of the kingdome, presumed to trouble his Maiesty, and taxe the state, with the like clamorous libelles, and defamatory supplications.
The consideration whereof beganne to admonish vs, that now it sorted with our duty, to shewe our selues, as truly zealous, & carefully religious in the defence of the
 Church, for the quieting of mens mindes, and setling of their consciences, by some shorte animadversions vpon their proceedings: as these factious persons haue beene audatiously venterous, & praeposteriously heddy, to ma∣nifest their malice; thereby to distract and draw the peo∣ple, from their loue & liking of the present state. Where∣vnto wee were the rather invited, by the commendable example, of our Reverend brethren of the Vniversitie of Cambridge; who to make knowne their dislike of these & such like factious Schismatikes, haue passed a grace in their publicke Congregation to this effect.
Placet vobis,A grace pas∣sed in the Vni∣versity of Cā∣bridge Iun. 4. 1603. against factious Puri∣taines. vt quicun{que} doctrinam vel disciplinam Ecclesiae Anglicanae, vel eius partem aliquam, dictis aut scriptis, aut quocun{que} alio modo, in Academiâ Cantabrigi∣ensi publicè oppugnaverit: ab omni suscepto gradu suspen∣datur, & à suscipiendo excludatur ipso facto.
By which their wise and necessary Decree, they haue not only encouraged vs, vnto this our Apology; but with all assured vs, that both they themselues, and (as we con∣ceaue) many thousands moe, of the iudicious and obedi∣ent Ministers of this land: are readie to giue vs the right∣hand of fellowship in this worke, and willing to subscribe vnto the same, if the cause did necessarily require it, or the time would permitte.
But your Lordships know right well, that Truth ob∣taineth no great auctoritie, by the many voices that ac∣knowledge it at once. And for our parts we vtterly con∣demne the course, that these Schismatikes have therein taken. Who to bolster out their stale obiections and false calumniatiōs, have trudged vp & downe diverse Shires, to get the consent, of they care not whom; so they may make vp the tale, and pretend a number. In which kind,
 that was a notable Stratageme which (farre besides the Authors purpose) we did light vpon of late. May it please your Lordships to haue patience, while wee propose it, and so leaue it to your Honorable censure.
 H. I. a man that was of ordinarie partes, & of as or∣dinary place, when he lived among vs; is now, it seemes, become a principall Agent, and a speciall Procurator of the publicke cause among the factious. He, (much mista∣king in his strong conceipt, that to insinuate with a man of wisedome, woulde bee sufficient to fetch him over to that side.) Writes vnto one of eminent sorte among vs, after this fashion.

MOreover I am to let you vnderstād, that many lear∣ned and godly Ministers,Scilicet in Iune, when their Petition was Exhibited in April before are about to exhibite to the Kings Maiestie, a Petition for the Reformatiō of things amisse in our Church; wherevnto a consent of as many, as cōveniently we can get, is very behooueful. My opi∣niō & trust is cōcerning you, that you will be, not only a par∣taker, but also a furtherer of this Christiā duty. I have sēt you here inclosed the forme to be subscribed, by all such, as have good will to this purpose I pray you let me have an an∣swere hereof from you, as soone as you may; vvith so manie of your well affected friendes handes therevnto, as shall bee (thought) good. It is not intended that your names shall bee rashly shewed, to any mans preiudice, but be reserved to a fit opportunity; if we shall perceive, that they altogither being brought forth, will further our desires & suite. Of the good successe whereof, we conceave good hope, thanks be to God. Thus beseeching God to keepe and sanctifie vs for his ser∣vice, and to give vs vvisedome in all thinges: Ibid
 you hartely farewell. VVoodstreete in London the XXX. of Iune. 1603.


Post script. I could wish you to conferre with D. A. about this matter.


Thus much of the Letter.
Now the Forme to be subscribed vnto, is this.
VVe whose names are vnder written doe agree to make our humble Petition to the Kinges Maiestie, that the pre∣sent state of the Church, may bee farther reformed in all things needefull; according to the rule of Gods holy worde, nd agreeable to the example of other reformed Churches, which haue restored both the Doctrine & Discipline, as it was delivered by our Saviour Christ, and his holy Apostles.
Your Lordships see the manner of the men. This col∣lusion and coven, were very base betweene man & man. But for them, thus to vse their Soveraigne; first to give him a Petition in the name of a Thousande, and then to scatter it abroad with this glosse,, Of the good successe of our suite, we do conceaue good hope: thanks be to God; Ther∣by ex post facto, to begge and steale as many hands to it, as could be got: this is such stuffe, as wee will passe over with reference to that of Tully vnto Antonie;Philip. 2. Tu autem eò liberior, &c. It is the advantage some Men have, that they dare to do such things, as a modest Adversarie can∣not well reprove. But it is suteable to the Imputations they have laide vpon their late Princes governement. And now also, whē his Maiesty shall frustrate their vaine
 imaginations; they have lefte their olde wont, if some of them doe not verifie that of the Poet,
— Fermentum, & quae semelintùs
Pers: Satyr. 1.Innata est, rupto iecore, exibit Caprificus. Howsoever; the Thing that we would specially obserue out of this Script; is in the māner of Subscriptiō. Where hence it doth most plainely appeare, that the particulars specified in the Petition; are not the vtmost End whereat they aime; they haue another marke.
"All thinges needefull according to the rule of Gods VVord & agreable to the example of other reformed Chur∣ches; is their Vp-shot. But is it so indeede? Why, They of the Petition desire (onely) Reformation of certaine Cere∣monies and Abuses: They neither as factious men, affect a Popular Paritie in the Church, nor as Schismatickes, aime at the dissolution of the State Ecclesiasticall: their humble suite is, that the offences follovving may bee re∣moved, amended, qualified: They (good men) desire That vvhich shall be preiudiciall vnto none, but &c. It is true; The voice of the Petition, might seeme to be the voice of Iacob, though the hands of the Subscription appeare plainely to be the hands of Esau; were it not that there is also a Clause in their Petition. (Now that we have their owne exposition of it, we can observe it; and, that it is re∣peated thrice for failing, viz. These and some other vsed; These and other such like; These vvith other such Abu∣ses;) which houldeth very good correspondēcy with the forme of Subscription. Heeretofore, we could not tell what to make of those wordes, and therefore made them no answere. They seemed vnto vs a very Nemo Scit; a Mathematike Line, diuisibilis in semper devisibilia: but now vpon this new Advertisement, having cōpared thē,
 we finde them Paralele, to those All things needfull &c. in the Subscriptiō: Which tell vs plainly, They wil never have an end, till either they have set vp the Presbitery, Or else be cut of by Authority.
The third & last remarkeable matter, which we hum∣bly  referre vnto your Lordships due regard, is a certeine Semblance, which in this our halfe yeares silence, vvee haue observed in two contrary Factions, that haue shew∣ed themselues by their Petitions, discontented with the praesent State, & Ecclesiasticall Government: namely in the Papists and the Puritants. VVe will vse their owne style, and come as neere as we can, to their very words.
1 They Both intitle themselues the Kinges afflicted subiectes, and aboue all other, his devoted servants.
2 They Both pretend an enforcement of a speedy re∣course to his Maiestie, for a present Redresse and Refor∣mation.
3 They Both cōplaine, of being overwhelmed with enduring persecution through losse of Living & Liberty.
4 They Both ground their Doctrine and Discipline vpon the sacred text of Gods word and Gospell.
5 They Both condemne the obedience of Prote∣stantes to the Lawes Established, to bee, not for Consci∣ence and zeale: but for Morall honestie, and feare of tem∣porall punishment, saith the Papist; For their owne quiet, credit, and profit in the world, saith the Puritaine.
6 They Both renoūce a publicke alteratiō, & dissolu∣tiō of the State Ecclesiast. but the one pleads for a private Toleration, the other (forsooth) for a Godly Reformation.
7 They Both deny that they exhibite their Petitiōs, with a tumultuous spirit, or with a disloyall & Schismatical minde. Of vvhich their Semblable Assertions, in argu∣ments
 so opposite, we might say in a word, as the Orator doth of contrarie Opinions; It cannot be that more then one of them should possiblie bee true, but it is very possible, that both may bee false. Yet we rather take vp that in the Booke ofIud. 15.4. Iudges, and say of them and their designes:
Verily these men are like Samsons Foxes. They have their heades severed indeed; the One sort looking to the Papacy, the Other to the Presbiterie. But they are tyed to∣gither by the tailes, vvith fire brandes betvveene them. Which if they bee not quenched in time, are able to set the whole Land in a Combustion and Vprore.
IF in any of these, or in them all, there do appeare vn∣to your Lordships such matter of moment, as might move men of care, & some discretion to write in defence of themselues, and the present State; if in our manner of writing, wee haue held that hand, (not by way of large discourse, but as the brevity of Notes will suffer,) which doth beseeme a modest and ingenuous answere; if in nei∣ther of them there be any thing so offensiue, or defectiue, or impertinent, but that, vnder the winges of your Ho∣norable Patronage it may passe into the Presence of his Excellent Maiestie, and there attend his most iudicious and learned Censure, yet so attempered with his rare & singuler mildnes, as in it he is wont to accept the duty & service of his meaner Subiects: then (and not otherwise) we beseech your Lordships that of your wonted favour, you will accompany it with your gracefull Presence, and as the Argumēt of our religious Affectiōs in al humility present it to his Highnes: then wee entreate, that in the Honorable regard you have of those Noble partes of this Church, which God hath specially betaken into your Protectiō; in the loyal remembrance you retaine of Her
 Maiestie that late was, and her happie Government; in the bounden dutie you owe to his Maiestie that nowe is, and the Well doing of his whole Kingdome; in the Pie∣tie and zeale which you beare to God, his Church, and to his sacred truth: you will take occasion heereby, All as one man, ioyntly to imploy that great Grace, and high Favour, which God hath given you in the eies of your Soveraigne; to the present supporte of Religion, maintenaunce of Learning, defence of the Church, strengthening the State, setling the mindes of the Peo∣ple, establishing peace and tranquillitie in the Land: by taking the Foxes, the little Foxes, vvhich marre our Vines, that they beare small Grapes; and by chasing a∣way the wilde Boare of the Wood, and the Beastes of the Forrest; that otherwise would eate them vp, and vtterly destroy them. So God shall take Pleasure in your Care and Conscience; the King in your faithfull Service; his Subiects shal dwel safe, vnder the shadow of his Wings; and we your Clients shall send this testimony after you: Many Patrones of the Clergie, many Chauncelours of the Vniversities, have done vertuously, but These surmoū∣ted them all.
Now the God that giveth both Glorie, and Grace, give your Lordships all manner of Graces fitte for your High Callings in this World; and That farre most ex∣cellent and eternall waight of Glorie, in the World to come.

