



BY your leaue Sir, (Your ordina∣rie extraordinarie occasions haue taught mee so much manners:) May it please you to be Godfather to the child, vnto which your selfe plaide the Grace-wife, by assigning your place to a person so vnworthy. At the Birth, you seem'd to smile on it; Nay, I will not spare to speake, what you did not spare to doe, to commend it. It is now (as you see) learning to goe, and craues your hand, being otherwise weake of it selfe, to support it. If it grieue not you to Patronise it; it cannot repent me to haue begotten it. I denie not, but that this ayre is an enemie dangerous and deadly; yet, I see not why this may not liue, if you mislike it not: For, as for the body, I am sure it is strong and sound; The parts, if not well fashioned, yet not ill fauou∣red; The complexion, if not such as may draw delight, yet such as cold Countries commonly afford. There will not doubtlesse, want some to maligne it, and to call it foolish Bratte, enuying my place in your affections, yet those some (I thinke) of the ruder sort, who feeling themselues touch'd,

will perhaps begin to kicke: Will you not giue them leaue to show what creatures they bee, Quis recalcitrabit asi∣num? I am already hardned against their censures. For the more iudicious, if they will not loue the Father for the Childs sake, yet I hope they will not hate the Child for the Godfathers sake. To whom, how much the weale of our Northerne Church doeth owe, who haue knowen the North, and can be ignorant, you hauing (though not alto∣gether) for that is more to bee wished for, then hoped for, yet as much as in you did lie, freed it from the tyrannie of two, no little troublesome enemies, the precise Brownist, and the peruerse Papist, which worke is so much the more worthy, by how much the Persons, with whom you had to deale, were resolute, and mightie, that age being now cald by some, for the villanie executed then, THE MANS WORLD.
But what neede I talke of that, which both that, and this world can tell off: Goe on still (good Sir) to oppose your selfe against the deprauers of the trueth, As you haue beene forward in the dayes of danger, so faint not now in the time of Peace: you haue at length with your lewde cries wakened Iustice, that for a long time had slept; suffer her not now againe to slumber. Bee still a friend to those that fauour, and follow learning; Beleeue me, it is no small de∣sert, to deserue well of such. To conclude, and say, as much as I can say, Be your selfe still, I know your occasions, and I cease to be troublesome, wishing to you and yours, your best wishes and dayly furtherance in all spirituall graces. From my Chamber in New Castle. This 10. of May. 1609.

