



KINDE Bro: after many dayes not hauing visited you by any let∣ter, nor lykwise receaued any from you, I thought Good, and now high tyme, to wryte these few vnto you, not so much to acquainte you with any now matter worth labour, as to make knowne more at large, and manifest what hath be fallen me longe since my arriuall in these partes. Neither take it in ill part that I haue not certi∣fyed you so much ere now: euen then (perchan∣ce) when you first heard some rumor of me con∣cerning the Catholicke faith, for I would not ra∣shly moue such a matter, or with out firme foun∣dation acquaint you with that, which I should not be able to defend. for you may not think me ignorant of what opposites I may suspect in such a case, wherefore I thought it more secure for

both parties, to deferre it vntill this tyme. Maruail not therefore, I pray you, either at my matter or manner of wryting, but patiently attend the end, and I doubt not but the sequele will giue you better content, or at least no iust cause of offence. The dutie to our Mother, loue to your selfe, and the rest our poore Brothers and Sisters is cause of both, and therfore though I beginne more abruptlie then I would or had intended, it is to avoyd prolixite where the matter it selfe is so vr∣gent.
Most trulie therfore was it sayd of an auncient Sainte: Oft tymes that vvhich vvee knovv not through our sloth the sa∣me by teares is made knovvne vnto vs. and an afflicted mynd more certaynly findeth out a fault comitted; and the guilt vvhich she remembred not in security, shee clearlie perceaueth being troubled. This is the cause why almightie God, in holy Scri∣pture so often admonisheth vs,Iob c. 4.9. whoe as Iob saith, dvvell in hovvses of clay, to pull dow∣ne our plumes and enter into consideration what state wee stand in which certenly me thin∣kes may most aptlie be applyed vnto vs, for who (to omit the relation of our goulden age, and dayes wherin wee dranke full cupps of pleasure and delight with all content and least remembrance of God, and thankes for his benefits as wee ought) with these worldly afflictions so depressed as wee? Who of his, most supposed sndes so forsaken as wee? Nay who by his owne blood and nearest kindred so

hardly dealt with all as wee? But what?Iob 2.9. shall wee hearken to Iobs wyfe, and blesse God and die? No but rather with patient Iob in the next verse answeare, thou hast spoken lyke one of the foolish vvomen, if vvee haue receaued good thinges of the hand of God, evill thinges vvhy should vvee not receaue? Also the Prophet Esaie thundereth out the most terrible comparisons he could deuise, to a wake vs out of this damnable Lythargie of carelesse inconsidera∣tion of our state, and telleth vs saying: And behold he shall come in hast speedely &c. he vvill not slumber nor sleepe &c. all which threatninges in my vnderstanding seeme to haue some peculier reuerence more vnto me then you for as much as God hath not once or twice moued me by often conference,Esaie 5 27. of the Catholicke faith but also I haue had Catholicke bookes which might haue satisfied any man not altogether per∣uerse, as indeed at that tyme I was; for when at my frindes request I began to read, to witt, The Suruey of the nevv Religion, and that there did many thinges occure repugnant, or rather confuting my affectionate religion in which I was nourished, my patience by no meanes would search any further into it, but with all contempt did vt∣terly reiect it., which how foolish a thinge it was I appeall to your owne iudgment. for admitt there were a Turke and a Christian contending about religion, and (as sure it is) no way to be saued, but by the one only true Christian and Catholicke faith notwithstanding will obstinatlie content himselfe with his Turcisme in which he had his being and

bringing vp, and not heare the contradiction of his Alchoran by the knowledge of any other reli∣gion, how vniuersall or warrantable soeuer would you not repute him a madd man, and altogether inexcusable? certenly you could not doe lesse; much more an astrauagant Christian, bred out of the Catholicke Church, which not withstan∣ding he hath heard of by the generall cōsent of all, yea of her most spitefullest enemies to haue bee∣ne the Romane Church, are so to haue continued the first six hundred yeares pure and vnspeted, with out stayne or corruption, yet not witstan∣ding he will not geue eare to this faith or religion, or vnderstand the cause iustly why he should re∣fuse it, would you not, I say, condemne this man as worthy of double punishment? certenly such an one was I but God for his longe patience and suf∣ference whoe out of his infinite goodnes and cle∣mencie hath thus, through so many troubles and straunge accidentes at length brought me to the true knowledge of his seruice, and porte of salua∣tion, I render all humble thankes, earnestlie im∣ploring his grace of perseuerance, and if it be his good will and pleasure, to seal the profession there∣of, with my blood and life.
Now therefor Lo: Bro: not to detayne you longer from my intended scope, if you approue of that comparison, borroweed from a christian and a Turke, then I pray let me craue the same of you that you will at least graunt me that fa∣uour, as vprightly, not passionate or led with affe∣ction; to peruse this my labour, it being awork indeed conducing to no momentary pleasure or profit but taken in hand for your eternall good

and future ioye and glorie in the world to come where no sinister chance or froward fortune can euer bereaue you of it. In this labour (I say) my trauells first present themselues vnto you for some speciall causes hereafter notified; which verily I may account a trauell to Damascus,Act 9.28. wherin a good Annanias (by our Sauiours ap∣poyntment) hath caused to fall from myne eies those scales of ignorance where with I was for∣merly blinded so that I may rightly say truth is great and preuaileth.. Esd. 4 41. and least you should thinke me heerein not to haue dealt prudentlie, I intreat you, euen for the loue of your owne soule, approue or disproue of my proceedin∣ges as your owne iudgment (not forestaled with aslat resolution to condemne me vnheard) shall passe sentence,Deut. 12.31. for my case being like to that of Moyses, I dare say with Moyses, and our very enemies are iudges. It is agreed vpon betwixt vs both how necessarie a poynt our saluation is, being for all eternity, and therefore I will saue labour to cite scripture in proofe of that which is by neither part de∣nied; but in vaine is the scope and end of a thing granted, if wee differre in the mea∣nes to attayne it: the meanes I assure my selfe you will say is the word of God which I deny not: but let vs not thinke the Ghospell to be in the wordes of the scripture, but in the sense; not in the out side, but in the inside or marrow; not in the leaues of the wordes, but in the sapp pith, or root of reason, other wyse euen the Deuill himselfe speaketh Scripture;cap 1.1 and all heresies according to that of Ezechiel make

vnto them selues pillowes which they may lae vnder the elbow of euerie age, and to guy you a tast hereof (for this matter concer∣ning my soule nerely, I haue bestowed some diligent search herein) consider with me I pray you, how of auncient tyme the old he∣reticke Marcion found meanes to reiect both Moyses and all the Prophets, and what did he pretend?cap. 10.7. Surelie Scripture: to witt that of Sainct Iohn, hovv many soeuer haue come before me are theeues and rob∣bers. the Armenians also taught that the whole femal sex of women should be wholy ex∣tinct, and that vvee should all ryse in the last iudgment in the state of man and what vvas their ground?cap. .13. Scripture also: to witt, that to the Ephesians: vntill vvee all meet in the vnitie of faith, and knovvledge of the sonn of God into a perfect man. The Mainchers also proued our Sauiour to be this materiall sunne vvhich vvee dayly see with our eyes, and what colour had they? scri∣pture also,Iohn 8.12. to vvitt where our Sauiour saith: I am the light of the vvorld how did the Waldenses proue that euen a lavvfull iudge or Magistrate could not put to death the greatest Malefactour that vvas?Exod. 20.13. by scri∣pture: Thou shalt not Kill, by Scripture also the Circumcellians held that euery Chri∣stian might not only murther his fellovv, but lay violent hands vpon himselfe, for (say they) it is vvritten;Iohn 12.25. he that hateth his li∣fe in this vvorld, doth keepe it to lyfe euer lasting.
Thus out of these few to omitt many moe, wee see how all heretiques like serpentes, in imitation of that old serpent the Deuill, who came with scripture euen to our Sauiour him∣selfe, do lurks vnder the tree of knowledge (I mean the scripture) that so they may more cunningly conueigh their deadly poyson; and surely though these examples of auncient ty∣mes were sufficient to teach euery man humi∣lity, seeing as a prudent man doth well ob∣serue, he that will need be his ovvne Scholler hath commonly a fooll, to his master; yet wantes there not neither sufficient occasion euen in our tymes to be carefull in this so waighty a businesse: for how shall I thinke the protestantes in these dayes to agree vpon the true sense of scripture, when they cannot a gree about the translation it selfe, which must be the grownd where vpon they worke: by which dissention also they shew them∣selues to haue descended in doctrine from the∣se old heretiques in the primitiue church. For doth the protestant beleeue the scriptures not to be receaued so fully and wholy as the Catho∣licke, or (as it pleaseth him) papist doth but rather certayne chapters and bookes, which seeme to him (or rather indeed, to this braine sicke phansie) not so a greable to the purity of the ghospell, to be cutt of and excluded the num∣ber of holy writt? the same did the Carpocra∣tians. Seuerians and Manichees who con∣demned all the old testament as a thing fayned from an euill beginning ad yet certainlie not without scripture, as you may set in the

example of Marcion first produced. In lyke manner Cerdon denyed all the Euangelistes except S. Luke; Cerinthus all except S. Ma∣thevv; the Seuerians also tooke away the Actes of the Apostles, and with the Ebionites all the epistles of S. Paul; the Alogians likewise estee∣med the Apocalypse of S. Iohn for an inuen∣tion of Cerinthas. Now that you are one with these (at least in this point of mayming scripture) is manifest, for do not the most excellent of your whole clergy, and first publishers of your ghospell, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Illiricus, and the Magdeburgenses exclude many of the Apostles epistles from all communione of holy scripture, vnder pretence of examining it by the rule of the deuyne worde? Certainly they can by no meanes dissemble it, in the epistles of S. Iohn, Iude, Ia∣mes, and S. Paul to the Hebrevves, which in this my compendium, were to longe to proue at large; but to come yet more nere you. Do not also your later Doctoures in this especially imitate these their predecessours? yes most exactly, as heere is sufficiently confirmed. In the fourth disputation had with F. Campian the Iesuit in the tower of London, your Doctoures did expresly censure these bookes (by the authority only of fower or siue) to be Apocriphall, to witt, the booke of vvisdome, Syrach, Iudith, Toby, the 4. bookes of Esdras, Baruch, Ecclesiasticus, Hester, and the Machabees, in the new testa∣ment; the ghospell of S. Luke, S. Paul, to the Hebrevves, the second epistle of S. Peter, the tvvoe last epistles of S. Iohn, S. Iames, and the Apocalypse, Luther also calls the epi∣stle

of S. Iames a strawen epistle, and of no truth, and not worthy the spirit of an Apostle. All which compared together your Doctours in this opinion of paring scripture, cannot but drinke of the same cuppe with those old condemned hereti∣ques.
But after; seeing their folly, and that they could by no means defend, what thus rashly they had enterprized, by often mutation and change they came to that text which you now haue; but yet euen to this day, with what dubitation this is done and correction (or rather to speake truth corruption) their often impressions doe manife∣stly testifie, and I thinke you are not ignorant, how many seuerall translations there haue beene within these few yeeres, I can remember thee since my first acquaintance with London; which mutabilitie plainly argueth they are those fond builders of whome our Sauiour maketh men∣tion are shaken with euery blast, because they build not vpon the rocke which is the church, The piller and firmament of truth.1. Tim. 3.15. But vpon the shallow sandes of their owne vnsetled braines: and this I speake not of my selfe, but by the testimony of themselues, which you may see more conuenient and at large hereafter, yet it shall not be discomodious if in the meane ty∣me wee examine one of their chiefest linguists in England; M. Broughton therfore in his epistle to the Lordes of the councell desireth them to procure speedily a new translation, because that (saith he) vvhich is novv in England is full of errours. And in his aduertisment of corruptions to the protestante Bishops saith:

That there publicke translatiō of scriptures into English is such as it peruerteth the text of the old testament in eight hundred forty eight places, and that it causeth millions of millions to reiect the new testament, and to runne to eternall flames; will not then euery man, that hath but any feeling of his soule looke about him, seeing as I said before. Euen our ene∣myes are iudges on my side; neither can it be excused by saying they are but smale differen∣ces, seeing M. Broughton heere saith that it Cau∣seth Millions of Millions to runne to eter∣nall flames.
Wherefore good Bro: as you loue your owne souls healthe, and would avoyde these eternall flames, passe not ouer these slightly, or with me (as I once did) reiect the farther search this, because it doth so manifestly detect your horrible abuses, which may seeme incredible; but if you will exa∣mine any one of them you shall find it as euident & much more at large: this concerns eternity, this concerns your soule, yea this doth admonish you of the eternall glory or perpetuall misery both of body and soule in hell flames without redemption; wherfor once more I beseech you, as you tender your eternall weale or woe, and haue some feeling of Gods fearfull iudgments,Matth. 25.41 as this dreadfull sen∣tence from our Sauiour: get you avvay from me you cursed into fier euerlasting, which was prepared for the Deuill and his An∣gels. Neyther may you thinke (as some in England, I speake what I haue knowne) that a man may be saued by any religion for to such our Sauiour will say:Matth. 7.11. not euery one

that saith to me Lord, Lord shall enter into the kingdome of heauen: but he that doth the will of my father which is in hea∣uen.
Deere Bro: if this be true as it cannot be false, proceeding from truth it self, then I pray with all attention and diligent study seriously examine this laboure, for S. Paul doth likewyse tell you, that there is one Lord one faith one Baptis∣me, one God and father of all;Ephes. 4.5. wherfore vpon due examination being conuinced in conscience, let not a swne of this world, or any momentary affliction, yea though an other Nero, Domitiā, or Dioclesian should tyrannice in this your per∣secution, cause you to smother your pretious soule in hells blacke flames (from whence no ransome may euer free you, or penance ease your torment) by denying his faith and church, who hath layd his life, and most pretious blood for your re∣demption from this eternall woe, und misery: no I say, in despite of all such cruelty be resolued and with a resolute currage say with S. Paul, None of all these do I feare;Act. 20.2. neither do I make my life more pretious then my selfe so that I may finish the course & ministerie which I haue receaued of our Lord Iesus to testifie the ghospell of the grace of God: yea especially, I say,Matth. 12.10 take courage when as our Sauiour saith he which is not with me, is against me, and he which gathereth not with me scatte∣reth. And in an other place he bides vs enter by the streight porte: because the broad gate,Matth. 7.13.14. & spatious way leadeth to perditiō, & many the¦re are which enter through it, how narrow is

this Porte, and vvay streight vvhich leadeth to life, and fevv there are that finde it?
2. Tim. 4.Wherefore do but inuocate S. Paul with a sin∣cere hart, that he would obtayne for you grace to confesse and dy in this one faith, and you shalbe heyre to the king of heauen, and haue a crowne of glorie with the same S, Paul, which I hope you will, and with euery magnanimous Christiā avert that dismall sentence of our Sauiour where e saith:Matth. 10.2 Euery one therfore that shall confesse me before men I also vvill confesse him be∣fore my father vvhich is in heaue, but he that shall deny me before men, I also vvill deny him before my father vvhich is in hea∣uen. And what other thing is it (I pray you) thus to be denied, then vndoubtedly adiudged to hell; there to remaine with weeping and gnashing of teeth for all eternity.
But to our purpose thus longe interrupted lea∣uing these rather to your pious consideration to enlarge at your pleasure, then other vvyse longer to insist vpon them; If therfore you aske me what translation then is best, I ans∣were the old, commonly called S. Hieromes; if you say he was a papist; listen I pray not vvithstanding what Beza your chiefe transla∣tour of scripture,See Beza vpō the first of S. Luke, and first verse de at. interpre∣tat. lib. 1. pag. 74. saith of him: the old in∣terpreter (saith he) seemeth to haue in∣terpreted the holy bookes vvith maruelous sincerity and religion: And Doctor Humfrey our countrey man, speaketh thus of him: the old interpreter seemeth sufficientlie bent to follovv the proprietie of vvor∣des, & he doth it indeed to carefully vvhich

notvvithstāding I suppose him to haue do∣ne not out of ignorance, but of religion and conscience. So that you see if there were any fault in our old interpreter, it was because he was to scrupulous ond carefull, to full of conscience and religion in following the exact signification of the greeke, which is a verie good fault, if it must needes be called a fault, and also cōmended and iustified els where by Doctor Humfrey him∣selfe in these wordes:Ibid. pag. 179 In prophane vvritinges a man may rainge more freely, and depart from the vvordes, in Canonicall scripture no such licēce is tollerable for it is not lavv∣full for man to alter the tongue of God? and by way of exposition to make this more perspi∣cuous, I oppose Caluin to our old interpreter, and obserue I pray what censure a protestant also gi∣ueth of Caluin: Caluin in his harmonie (saith Charles Moliuers in his translation of the new testament parte 11. fol. 110.) Maketh the text of the ghospell to leap vp and dovvne as the truth it selfe declareth. He vseth violence to the letter of the ghospell, and in many pla∣ces clean transposeth it, and besides this he addeth to the text; The lyke censure I find giuen of Luther, not by a Papist, but a Protestant,tom. 2. d Luther. lib. de Sacram. fol. 412. 413. and one of the chiefest in his tyme, to witt, Zuinglius who after detection of many corruptions, Thus concludeth. See hovv thy case standeth (Lu∣ther) that in the eyes of all men, thou art see∣ne to be a manifest and common corruptour of scripture, vvhich thing thou canst neuer deny before any creature, hovv much are vvee a shamed of thee, vvho hither to haue

esteemed thee beyond all measure, and novv trie thee to be such a false fellovv? To conclude therfore this point of translation, attend what Beza saith:in praeface new, test. anno 1556. hovv vnvvorthily (saith he) and vvith out cause doth ∣rasmus blame the old interpreter, as dis∣senting from the greeke; neither ought you thinke that therfore I commend Bezas translation, because I bring him in commen∣ding yours; for wherein he swarned from vs in Doctrine, he swarued also in translation, though with out grownd; and therfore he is also reprehended by his fellow protestantes, as namely Castalio saying;in defens. translat. pag. 170. to note all errours (saith he) of Beza in traslating the nevv testament, the vvorke vvould require to great a volume. So that how shall a man build his faith vpon these men, who in the very grownd worke it selfe a gree no better then the confusion of tongues in the Tower of Babell, which that you may with more facility & ease apprehend, I haue written more in particuler hereafter.
But heere perchance you may further mo∣ue a question, vvhat my intent and scope may be in vvritting all this, and making such collection, of places; I ansvvere, only that you may haue some sight and knowledge of the Catholique faith, vvherby you shall the better iudge of me and see your ovvne estate, vvithout vvhich faith there is no sal∣uation by our Sauiours ovvne vvordes.Matth. 12.0 Hee that is not vvith me is against me, and he that gathereth not vvith me scatte∣reth.

And as S. Paul saith:Rom. 10.14. Hovv shall they beleeue in him vvhome they haue not heard? which I suppose you as yet neuer truly vnderstood, wherfore if this be true, I pray grant me this reasonable request, that you will at least read my endeuours,Phil. 3.8. and say with S. Paul; I esteeme all thinges to be detriment for the passing knovvledge of Iesus Christ, for vvhome I haue made all thinges as detriment, and esteeme as do∣unge that I may gaine Christ. And su∣rely no maruaile seeing the mouth of Christ hath vttered:Matt. 16.26. vvhat doth it profit a man, if he gaine the vvhole vvorld, and su∣staine the dommage of his ovvne soule; in this being that (one thing) which he insinua∣tes wher he saith. Martha, Martha,Luc. 10.41. thou art troubled about very many thinges, but one thing is necessarie. So that seeing this one thinge is so necessary, vvher vpon all other thinges depend, happy yea thrice happy is that man that doth attayne vnto it, but by reason the breuity of a Brotherly let∣ter will not permit so large a discourse, let your discreet and religious iudgment, I be∣seech, be the comment vpon so smale a text, and what in wordes is wanting suppose in effect to be most aboundant.
But of that common humour of setting light by thease thinges, and reiecting vvhat∣soeuer is not ansvvereable to your affection, do raigne in you, and vvilfull passion ouer∣svvay reason, a common deceipt euer in such

cases practysed by the Diuell to lead poore sou∣ls captue to eternall perdition, if (I say) this venim haue so seased vpon you, and in∣fected your senses, that you haue no feeling or care of that, to witt, your soules health, the verie remembrance vvhereof made the son of God our Deere Sauiour svveat drops of blood,Luc 22 42. desiring his father if it vvere pos∣sible that chalice might passe from him. Yf, (I say) you are thus possessed vvith a reso∣lution to forsake and reiect all good aduise, vvhat is left forme, but only vvith the Pro∣phet Hieremie, to lament your miserable case? But vvhat? is it true? vvas your redem∣ption so great an agonie to our Sauiour, that the only remembrance thereof made him svveat blood, and vvill you esteeme it a thing of so smale moment, as rather to con∣tent your selfe vvith that estate, I say, with that religion, vvhich you receaued from an Apostata Monke Martin Luther not yet a hundred yeeres since, then to seeke the true knovvledge of God, and his seruice, in the Catholicke church, vvhich our Sauiour promised should neuer erre,Matt. 16.187 and that the gates of Hell should not preuaile against her? yea vvhich vvilbe to your greater dam∣nation, your ovvne Doctors and Mini∣sters graunt, the true Apostolicke Doctrine to haue beene taught in the Roman Church vvith all sinceretie the first six hundred yee∣res, and can it be that the corruption of on∣ly one hundred, by a dissolute Apostata Monke may violat our Sauiours credit with

six hundred yeeres practyse? I cannot think it, at least in you for vvhat can there be more vvicked and deuoyd of human reason then God to be solicitous for mans euills, and he himself nothing regard them? if other wy∣se, and that I am herein deceaued,Matt. 26.21. Oh horride and dreadfull sentence, it vvhere good for him if that man had not beene borne. yea verily Hell it self vvill roare, and craue his right saying: vvhy doe I not deuoure and excruciate this vvretch in our eternall flames, longe since there due? My good Bro: if I seeme more earnest then is meet, excuse me, I pray you, it proceeds from no ill affection, but that tender bro∣therly loue, and zeal vvhich I beare to vvardes both your bodie and soule. not he vvhich desireth (vvith Baal) to die the death of the righteous, or shall crie Lord,Num 23.10. Matt. 7.21. Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of hea∣uen, but he vvhich doth the vvill of his fa∣ther which is in heauen, and liueth the life of the righteous.
Yf you thinke my manner of writing strange and from my accustomed style suppose my con∣dition to be altered, and that with holy Iob I humbly thanke God for all his afflictions and cros∣ses layd vpon me, as peculier blessinges and pled∣ges of his further loue, whereby he hath taught me in some sort to know my self, and that mi∣serable state of blind ignorance, in vvhich I haue hitherto liued in: Novv therefore vnderstand that hauing chaunged master, I haue also chaunged liuorie, no more a

protestant but now a Catholicke, no more a vassale or bondslaue to Sathan and his mini∣sters, but now a seruant and follower of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, and his Apostles, who∣me I earnestly beseech in my dayly prayers, that God wilbe no lesse mercifull vnto you, then he hath beene compassonate on me, that he will heere also teach you your haruist, that in the world to come, wee may ioyfully rea∣pe eternall blisse together but S. Austin saith: he which made thee without thee will not iustifie or saue thee without the wherefore once more I pray you, vvith true zeal and harty deuotion bestovv your labour vpon this my trauell, and I doubt nothing of Gods grace, heere is the life you must make your incorruptible treasure, in the next is nothing heard but immutable e∣ternity, vvhere all thinges passe according to this life vvell or ill if vvell, happy man that euer hee vvas borne; if ill, vvoe and not temporall but eternall misery, yea according to that of our Sauiour; it vvere good for him if that man had not bene borne, because the∣re is no place (for such as departe not this life in state of grace) of sorrow to amendment vvherfore in vayne shall you then lament, vvoe vvretch that I am, vvhat shall I doe whi∣ther shall I goe? I that haue lost so great oppor∣tunity of reconciling my self vnto God? I that haue contemned, reiected, and despised all good admonitions to eternall blisse? final∣ly I that haue lett slipp so larg a benefitt as to do penaunce and satisfaction for my sin∣ne vvhither shall I novv fly? vvho vvill

receaue me? the guilt of my ovvne conscien∣ce is as thornes to my hart, my ovvne mem∣bers accuse me, and incessantly call for reuen∣ge. These me thinkes vvell examined should moue any hart if not obdurate to a most seri∣ous examination of his estate.
But what do I trouble you with all these? you are not the principall obiect of this my study. No it is you Deere Mother, who is the speciall cause of all this endeuour, and for whose eter∣nall future happines (to requit in some part your motherly care, and trouble for vs in our infancy) all our thoughts and vitall spi∣rits doe labour with dayly and earnest prayer that God will at lenght haue mercy vpon you, and that you may be not only a common mother of nature,2. Machab. cap. 7.2. but rather such a Mother of Mar∣tyres as vvee read of in holy scripture, if you should be hold me your sonne vnder the hand of some Antiochus, ready either to suffer death, or violate the lawes of our fore¦fathers, you would with a true Christian Mo∣therly courage stepp forth and say: I beseech thee my sonne that thou looke to hea∣uen and earth &c. and vnderstand, that God of nothing made them and mankind, so shall it come to passe that thou wilt not fea∣re this torment &c. take that death that in that mercy I may receaue thee againe: for then should you find me an answereable son to that of hers, and heare me say (by the grace of God) with him: My brethren (I mean all Cotholicke martyrs) hauing now susteined short payne are become vnder the testa∣ment

of eternall life and I as also my bre∣thren,v. 36.37. doe yeeld my life and my body for the law of our forefathers: inuocating God to be propitious to our nation (England) quickly.
In that I rather choose to come thus me∣diatly vnto you, impute it not I pray you, to any forgetfullnes of dutie or want of filial af∣fection, but only the tender respect I haue of that daungerous estate in which you dayly sleepe, yea rather dye then lyue, which when I duly consider and looke into, I confesse I am in a manifold mynde, and as perplext as he that encountreth diuers wayes and knowes not which to take. My dutie to your person and desire of your saluation, bides me be bold and perswades that I cannot performe a better office (yea an office by the law of nature bound vnto) then to aduertise you of so eminent a daunger, but on the other si∣de I feare least my dutie be thought ambi∣tion, to instruct her from whom I had my first being; and because, truth breedeth hatred; I feare I may force: an vnwelco∣me dutie in place of a filial office, and so may incurre the same displeasure which S Paul did by his playne dealing saying:Gal 4.16. I am become your enimie telling you the truth: and be esteemed a foe in that office wherin I meant to shew my self most dutifull: but at length rather resolued, that I should do best as good Surgeans and Phisitians do; force a bitter pill, or smarting salue then suffer a patient to pe∣rish. Moreouer I presume that your true

zeal (though wrong imployed) wisdome, and discreet iudgment will more esteeme the gentle reproofe of one wishing you all happines, then the smothe flaterie of a foule deceauer, and that you will not interpret that in an ill sen∣se, which is meant with all sinceritie and true affection: wherefore the same that I craued of my brother, in these few words I hum∣bly intreat of you, that you will not despise, tis my dutie, as a matter of smal or little moment, which I haue already sufficiently pro∣ued to be other wyse? but that with all atten∣tion and patience you will receaue it, and so to your future glorie and eternall comfort make the best vse of it:Apoc 2.2. Therefore as vvith S. Iohn I may say: I know thy workes and labour and thy patience▪v 4. so lyke wise. But I haue against thee a few thinges, thou hast left thy first Charitie (which once our auncestors had in the Catholicke church) be myndfull therefore from whence you are fallen (to witt; from that church our Sauiour promised should neuer fall) and doe penaunce and the first vvorkes;Matt. 16.18. that is, the vvorkes first practys d and preached by the Apostles, not lately inuented by Apostataes: haue regard also I pray you to the vvhole chapter follovving and com∣pare it vvith the arrogancie (vvhich also you shall find hereafter vvritten) of these our moderne heretiques, Luther, Cal∣uin and Zuinglius, and you shall find them to be the verie persons, to vvhome it may most sitly be applyed, and conse∣quently

to your Church of England, for these (as you all with one consent acknowledge) arre the men that first illuminated our land with the light and true knovvledge of the vvord of God, vvhich light notvvitstanding (as is most apparent) brought vvith it a foule spirit of dissension, for who knoweth or seeth not how you are diuided amongst your selues.
Deere Mother being by heresie cutt off from the Church, vvhat hope can you haue of saluation? if I should alleadge the terrible threatninges of auncient fathers against such as are out of the Church (notwithstanding you least account of their authoritie) I feare, that endeuouring only to beat into you a feare of damnation, I should driue you to vtter des∣paire. And certenly although God and his Church be alwayes ready to receaue you to mercy, yet if you resolue to dye out of the Church, liue you neuer so well morally, you ha∣ue iust cause to expect no part in the Church triumphant, 1 17. who dye no member of the Church militant: for what saith our Sauiour: if hee vvill not heere the Church, let him be to thee as the heathen and publican. And in an other place speaking of those which will not heare nor receaue the Apostles (and in them the Catholicke Church) he saith. p. . Amen I say vnto you it shalbe more tolerable for the land of the Sodomites and the Go∣morheans in the day of iudgment, then for that Cittie: Also you may heare S. Cy∣prian vvhat the primitiue Church taught in his tyme concerning those that vvere not

of it. They cannot liue with God,lih. de vnita∣te Ecclesiae. that will not liue in vnitie and concord with his Church, and although they burne in flames and being deliuered to the fier, or cast to wild beastes, doe lay downe their life for Christ, there shalbe no crowne of glorie for any such, but the punishment of his infide∣litie. such a man may suffer death but crow∣ned he cannot be. And agayne: What? those that are assēbled to gether out of the church of Christ when they shalbe so assembled, doe they thinke Christ is with him? such al∣thouh they dye for the confession of the nam of Christ, that deadly spoot & grieuous fault of discourd neither is it washed a way by his blood nor purged by suffering, a Mar∣tyr he cannot be which is not in the Church neither shall hee come vnto the kingdome, who hath foresaken her who shall raigne.tom. 7. de gestis cum fine ric. hither to S. Cyprian. S. Austine tells you that you may haue honour, seruantes, you may sing Alleluya, ansvver Amen, you may haue the ghospell, you may beleeue, and preach in the name of the Father, the son and the holy ghost, you may haue althinges vvith out the Catholicke church except saluation. but alas what (all) is that which comprehendeth not that which is as in all. And againe in an other place he saith:lib 4. de Symb ad Catechu. tom. 9. cap. 12. neither shall he haue God for his father, that vvill not haue the church for his mother neither shall it profitt him that he hath belieued, or that he hath done such aboundance of good vvorkes vvithout the end of the chiefest good. S. Hierome also

saith:Epist. ad Dam. & 24. q. 1. cap. quo∣niam. who soeuer shall eat the lambe with out this howse, he is profane, if any man be not in the Arke of Noe, he shall perish in the deluge, much more concerning this poynt might be said,lib. 4. instit. c. 2. q 4. but to conclude with Caluin himself who saith; that out of the bosome of the church no remission of sinnes is to be hoped for nor any saluation yea S. Au∣stine saith:Serm 181. de tempore. he is no Christian, that is not in the church of Christ. Wherefore good Mo∣ther you that haue liued all your tyme in here∣sie, and consequently offending God, I humbly beseech you, for your owne eternall good, and your Childrens saluation, examine well what I haue taken paynes in, and as I assure you out of S. Paul,Phil. 3.8. you shall not think your labour ill be∣stowed.
After all, being inconscience conuinced let not the feare of the losse of your princes fa∣uour, depriuation of liuinges, or temporalé commodities hazard eternity and spirituall sal∣uation, but in the midest of so many sectes and heresies, maugre the Diuell and his mini∣sters,Ibidem. in despite of tyme one swaying authoritie say with S. Paul, I esteeme them all as dung that I may gaine Christ. Also the same Apo∣stle willbe iudged by your selfe whether it be bet∣ter to obey God then man. Moreouer the king of heauen himself doth promise you,Matt. 19.29. that if you leese, howse or brethren, or Sisters, or father or mother, or wife or Children or lands for his names sake, you shall receaue an hundred fould, and shall possesse life euerlasting: Also that in this

life you may not suspect his fatherlie care and prouidence to be wanting vnto you in such tem∣porall necessaries as you shall need he bidds you not to be carefull what you shall either eat or drinke,Matt. 6.25. or what rayment you shall put on, but first seeke the kingdome of God and these thinges shalbe cast vpon you: All which promises S. Paul hath experienced saying:2. Cor. 48. In all thinges vvee suffer tribulation, but are not in distresse: vvee vvant, but are not destitute; vvee suffer persecution but are not forsaken: vvee are cast dovvn, but vvee perish not: King Da∣uid saith also that he neuer knevv the right∣eous forsaken nor their seed seeke their bread wherfor hauing so good warrant of com∣fort and reward in this seruice,Psalm. 36. v. 25. as from the Lord of Lords himself our Deere Sauiour, who to re∣quit you as S. Paul saith will adopt you heire of his inheritance; resolue then at length to feare God more then man, Hell, then tem∣porall losse separation from Gods Church, then leauing of landes, liuinges, Countrey, yea life it self, for as S. Austine saith:Tract. 27. in Ioan. their is nothing that a Christian man ought so to feare, as to be separated from the body of Christ, which is the Church, as it is one Catholique Church for if he be se∣parated from the body of Christ, he is no member of him, but who soeuer hath not the spirit of Christ, he is not of Christ. par∣don me good mother in this my so longe and te∣dious a discourse, I know your feruent zeal

and feare of God (but what? misled) required none at all, the nature of an epistle, a much shor∣ter: But the daunger in which you liue, and the desiere I haue of your saluation, with the rest of your whole family in the same state of perdition, could not, as I thought be satisfied with a briefer.
Excuse, I humbly beseech, you my so plaine dealing, I doe (as I tould you in the beginning) but as good Surgeans and Phisitians are wont, who are most loueing to their patients, when most cruell to their diseases, and loue no lesse when they Cherish by fomentations, oyntments, and resto∣ritiues, then when they chastice by bitter potions, cutings, and cruell launcinges, because both-heale. I once more beseech you therfore, and as farre as I may presume coniure you, that for the glorie you are to giue vnto God, the dutie you owe his Church, the ioy you may purchase to his Saincts and Angles,Luc. 15.7.10. which reioyce more at the con∣uersion of one sinner that doth penance then at Ninty Nine iust which need no penance▪ yea for the example you may and ought to giue your family, and the whole world, the comfort and eternall crownes of glorie, which by your con∣uersion your frindes and Children shall reap, the feare you ought to haue of Hell, the hope of hea∣uen, and desire of your owne saluation you would vouchsafe to weigh and penetrate the daungers where with you are inuironed. I will not vrge you any farther in this kind, but only craue of you to propose to your self death, Hell, Heauen, Iud∣gment, Eternity, and that you would not preferre your owne priuate opinion, seeing as, a prudent man did well obserue: he that vvilbe his ovvne

Scholler hath cōmonly a foole to his master not I say to preferre any iudgment before Gods Church which he promised should neuer erre in all antiquitie. Neither let vs so esteeme of this life (which as the scripture saith is a vapour, a fu∣me, yea nothing) that wee forget heauen and eter∣nity: Alas, Deere Mother, as our Sauiour saith vvhat doth it profitt a man to gayne the vvhole vvorld and susteine the losse of his ovvne soule?Matt. 29.19. Old age tells you that you are in the wayning of your dayes, that your glasse is al∣most runne, that your spring, yea sommer is spent, you are in the fall of the leafe and your winter is at hand; the axe is laid, to the root, and where soeuer the tree shall fall, there it will a bide, you haue serued the world hitherto in sin and he∣resie, to leaue it novv, is not so much to leaue it, as to preuent it, for shortlie it vvill leaue you for the vnexpected coming of death, you vvant not of your neerest knired whose suddayne departure may be sufficient examples, yea the only death of our father (nosmale griefe to me) may suffice vs in this.
To haue erred hitherto is humane, to perseuere (as I may tearme it) is beastly: you haue giuen your life past, to heresie and her accomplices, giue at least the remnant and surplus to God and his Church: you haue giuen as one saith the maine croppe io the enimie of mankind the redeemer let at least glean the reproofe of your haruest, and he will requite you as he promiseth a hundreth fold, and with life euer lasting.
O Mother, Pardon yet once more I earnestly beseech you, my bouldnes and rough manner of

writing;2. Cor. 116. I confesse with S. Paul I am rude in speach, yet tolerable in opening to you the meane how to escape so great a daunger, as the eternall perdition both of body and soule, in which perill (as I said) you dayly sleepe in, your tyme there∣fore is but short and you haue a great account to render; your conscience (vpon the vnderstan∣ding of these) cannot but vrge you, your sinnes call vpon you, the iudge expecteth you, imbrace then the Roman Catholicke church for your mo∣ther, and God will euer be your father, accuse your self and God will excuse you, be sorrie for your sinnes and they shall not be imputed vnto you, permitt the priestes sentence to passe on you, and Gods wrathfull sentence shall not touch you. If you will mount the hills of Armenia, enter the arke of Christes Church, if you will ascend the higher heauen, enter this lower, yea this is the way and only meane. To haue liued hitherto in sin and heresie is daunger, to dye in this estate (as our Sauiour and his Apostles witnes) is cer∣tayne damnation.
But I haue beene to longe and therfor must ra∣ther abruptly conclude, then any way finish this my present discourse wherfor as my last greeting and farewell I humbly beseech you, for the tender good of your owne soule, and so many which de∣pend vpon you (a great account to answere for) to wouchsafe the reading, or at least relating by some other, these my paynes and trauells taken in your be halfe; that so at length (all poyntes and doubtes clearly proued) you may with the people in Esdras say:. Esdras 4.2. truth is great and preuaileth: and that I as S. Ambrose at the conuersion of S.

Austine, may sing. Wee prayse thee God &c you assuming the part of S. Austine with a cheerefull countenance and heauenly responsorie answere, wee confesse thee our Lord &c. and finally be incorporate a member of Christes my∣sticall body heere on earth, his church in which an obedient child, concluding your last daye, as the soule of poore Lazarus was by his good An∣gel conueighed into Abrahams bosome so your guarden or good Angel with a triumphant victo∣rie from that roaring Lyon, enemye to man kind the Diuell, may present your glorious soule: a sweet smelling odor to our Lord Iesus Christ, and there, with the whole court of heauen his fellow Angels,Luc. 15.7.10▪ (as our Sauiour saith) reioyce at so glo∣rious a conquest which that it may sort according to my desire and that I may, as Iob saith,Iob 19.27. see you with these my eyes in that eternall glorie, I most earnestly and humbly beseech our Sauiour, who hath so long expected you to mercy, that you may make your chiefe commoditie of this exhortation and some vse also of this my no lesse painfull then long admonition that in this life you may so pur∣chase is grace, as in the next eternall glorie. Amen.

