


AFter I had ga∣thered and transla∣ted certayne chapt∣ters of this fruytful and vertuous boke Lady moost excellent: I with my selfe imagynyng and reuol∣uyng to whose tuition & defense I shuld gyue or cōmit the same, youre excellence apeared to my mynde most metest, and among all other the moost apteste, and for this thinge moost cōuenient For who can denye but y• youre grace thus well lerned (as in

dede ye are) & thus inclyned to the obseruaciō of Chrystes law∣es, is a ryght good bulwarke, & a sure defence agaynst the gna∣wers of other mens labours & this proper boke replenished wt all godly and spiritual lerning? I dare bebolde to say, that your grace (ponderyng the sayenges & intent therof) neuer red thyng in englishe, that aluerde or styrd you more to deuociō, to the loue of god and your neyghbour, to fulfyl his swete & easy cōmaūde¦mentes, to exchue and vtterly a∣uoyde all wantonnesse, all ydel∣nesse, all vanite, al trifelyng, da¦lyance, all worldly pastyme and pleasure, then dothe this boke, the whiche. S, Bernarde at his systers request cōpiled & made, exhortynge her, and all other to

goddes seruice, to his feare and loue, & to the complement of his moost swetest preceptes & com∣maundementes. Consyderynge then, the vtilite, the deuoute pre¦tence, and swete argument of this treatyse, remēbring also the integrite of hym that made it, & agayne the deuoute purpose of her it was made for, pōderynge also your graces moost curius and exquisite insuynge of theyr vertues and heuenly liuynge, coulde I haue dedicate this my simple & rude translaciō (rude it is and not eloquētly paynted, bi¦cause I wolde be playne) to any other, then to youre excellence a very mirour & glasse of all good¦nesse, of all vertue, of all deuoci∣on, and perfet fayth? Meruell it is to heare how men ertoll your

pure and vertuous liuyng, and there with your constancy in all goodnesse, your boūtifulnesse & opende hande to the poore, ver∣teous mooste cōmendable, & the trewe pathway to conducte and brynge al suche as truely & cu∣stomably vse thē, to eternal bea∣titude. I wyll not at this tyme expresse youre many folde other vertues, and gyftes of nature, nor speake of youre diuine and humayne knowledge, of youre pacience and lowly behauoure, nor of your humilite & chastite, thynges (consideryng your gra¦cys estate and age) to be wun∣derde at. But by this your clene liuynge and longe contynuance therof men maye nowe se, per∣ceyue and fele, the effecte of god¦ly and vertuous educacion the

very rote and spryng, of all god¦ly operacyon, of all vertue and clene lyfe. What nedeth me (I say) to speake of your beutyful∣nesse, of your most amiable and lowly coūtinance, of youre wyse and chaste cōmuninacyon, or of your well proportioned body in euery behalfe? The which gyft{is} of nature to many other, are as ī¦ticementes and occasiōs of euyl disposicion. But to your grace, they are (as I coniecture) ver∣tuous prouocations, & the fresh remembraunce of the hygh and marueylons work{is} of almigh¦tye God, whome I hartely beseche, and pray to con∣tinue your grace this newe yeare & euer in vertue, and to sende you longe lyfe to his pleasure.
