


AFter I had called into my remēbrance your worships great libera∣litie and bountifulnes towards me at sondrie times; and on thother side my own ingratitude & vnthankfulnesse for the same: I began to thinke with my selfe that there was some chri∣stian duetie neglected of me, which ought of necessitie to haue beene performed. The consideration whereof hath moued me to put my penne vnto paper, and to write as foloweth, hoping therby (although not fullie to recompēce your good∣nesse towards me, which I am neuer able:) yet to discharge some parte of christian duetie by shewing my selfe thankfull vnto you againe for the same. Not by presēting anie arthlie gift which I am not able;
 neither (sure I am) do you looke for anie such thing at my hand, but rather by bestowing vpō your wor∣ship a litle handfull of spirituall and heauenlie crommes, which I, (who am a poore wretch) haue through earnest prayer found and gathered vp vnderneath the table of the Lord. And therefore, although they be but fewe and verie smale, yet be cause they are such as were onelie takē from his Table: I do not doubt but that you will accept of them. Crommes also I call them, because they are nourishing, and such as do feede, although not the bodie to a temporal life; yet both soule & bo∣die vnto a spirituall and heauenlie life; which is not for a time but e∣uerlasting, if they be eaten with the teeth of a true faith which worketh by loue, & disgested in the stomake by the heate of perfect patience, & constant perseuerance therein vnto the end. And thus being receiued, it is no matter how small the quan∣titie bee which we receiue of it. Knowe you not what is written, a
 litle Leauen leaueneth the wholeMath.  lumpe of down? What is smaler in the whole world thē a litle graine of mustard seede? & yet if the same be sowne in fruitfull grounde, the increase is wonderfull: for it gro∣eth vp to a great tree, that the fowl of heauen maie make theire nestes in the branches thereof. To these & such like similitudes is the worde of God compared, which sheweth vnto vs the efficacie & strēgth ther∣of. For the seede of the worde of god is so pretious & of such power, that if neuer so small a graine there∣of do fall on the ground of an hūble heart, it bringeth forth fruit verie plentifull 30. 40. 60. 100. fold. &c. according to the wisdome of the sower, & the goodnes of the groūd which it is sowed vpon. For let vs hold this alwaies as a certaine rule, that there is neuer anie fault to be found in the sower, nor in the preti∣ous seede of the worde which is sowne: but the fault (if there be a∣nie) must needes be founde out in the grounde which receiueth it,
 which if there be path waies it ly∣ethLuke. . a loft and can not enter, but the foules of heauen take it awaie: or if it be stonie ground which receiueth the same, it hath a litle ētrance, but lacketh roote, & therfore as soone as the sunne of persecution cōmeth vpon it, the same withereth also, & can not prosper: or els if the groūd be thornie, the thornes growe vp with the seede & choake the same, so that it can not bring forth fruite accordinglie. By the path waies is ment, either those Papistes vvhose heartes are so hard troden with the feete of mens traditions, and are so farre ouertaken with the credite of man his vaine imaginations, that the worde can take no place in thē: or els those Atheistes, which are of no religion and therefore come to the seruice of God rather of cu∣stome then of conscience to profit thereby. By the stonie grounde is ment, those mouth gospellers which seeme in the time of peace to bee verie religiouse, but when ani trouble or daunger commeth, then
 they fal awaie and do not continue, because it was onelie in theire mouthes and not in theire heartes; which is the rooting place & where it ought chieflie to haue bene. And by the thornie grounde we vnder∣stand those couetous men of the world, which haue a greater care to become rich then righteous: and therefore oftentimes preferre theLuke 5. ve trieing of theire Oxen before the Lordes table; yea and they desire Christ to depart out of their coastes before they woulde beare the losseMark. 5. ver. of theire swine. Well, then these things being well weighed and considered vpon, maie bee a good meane to procure vs vvith more circumspection to looke into our selues and search out the ground of our owne heartes, before we come to the reading and hea∣ring of the vvord preached, lest we beinge anie of these vnfruitfull groundes shoulde returne without profitte, nay that which is more, e∣uen worse then when we came vnto it▪ for it is vnpossible that the word
 light for vs to examine ou affecti∣ons by, frō the which euerie worke doth proceed: and so we findinge the Lord to be the heade Springe from whom floweth all the good vvhich vve doe: may in euerie of our vvorkes, confesse our ovvne vnpro∣fitablenesse, and so bring vnto him in all and euerie of our vvorks that acceptable Sacrifice of a contrite & broken heart which he vvill neuer despise &c. 1. 1
The Lord (vvho is rich in mercy & greate in glorie,) heape vpon your worshippe the riches of his grace, blesse and sanctifie you both in bo∣dy and soule, and happely finish that which he hath in you so gratiously begonne, to the glory of his name, and your owne comforte in Iesu Christ our Lord.
Amen.
London. 1582. May. 26.

