



THere was a Law (Dread Soueraigne) among the Romans,
Gueuara in his Epistles. That vpon paine of death, none should presume to approach the Tent where the Emperour did eate & sleepe, except such as did serue him by day, and guard him by night. The Emperour Aure∣lius being in the warres in Asia against Cenobia, in the night a certaine Greeke Souldier entred the Emperours Tent, who being taken to be executed for the same, the Emperour from his bed cried out with a loude voyce, If his man did come to sue for any thing for himselfe, let him die; but if for another, let him liue. The matter being examined, it was found that the poore man came to sue for his three com∣panions that were taken sleeping in the watch, who there∣vpon were then all saued: whereby that good Prince got to himselfe an immortall name of clemencie. Novv seeing I also (a common Souldier) come not to sue for my selfe, but my Sauiour, nor in my ovvne Name and vvords, but in his Confession and Complaint; and aboute those, who if not in your Maiesties ser∣uice, yet in Christs Camp, haue been taken asleep being of the watch, no man will (I hope) be so rash, as to con∣ceite that your Maiestie a Christian King should not ouercome a Pagan Prince, in that much honoured vertue; much lesse so far to forget the duty of a sub∣iect, as to infer from this example, that we vnder the
Gospell of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, haue li∣ued to a time, vvhen it should be accounted a crime in any Christian, to confesse and defend the faith of Christ crucified.
Idē in orat. ad Crol. 5. inter Epist. Youre Maiestie by youre Roiall title is De∣fender of the faith; and consequently of all those youre Maiesties subiects that professe and maintaine the sa∣me. Then, saith Gueuara, is the Prince naturall of the King∣dom when he doth obserue and defend the Gospell of Christ.
I confesse, right high and mightie Monarch, youre Maiesties affaires are many & important; that amonge many things offered to youre Princely cōsideration, some may be of greater consequence in the conceite of the preferrers, then in true substance, and may per∣haps be therefore answered with parturiunt montes, nas∣cetur rediculus mus, or with that, Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Ioui. But this Confession, amonge other things, manifesteth that the successe and safety of temporall Kingdoms, depende on the due receiuing and main∣tenance of Christs, and extirpation of all the open & secret enemies thereof. Knowing then, that in this Island, Christ hath had a Kingdom theese seauenty yeares or vpwards; that there is noe true Christian, nor good subiect, but would be loth to see it eaten out by Iesuiticall or Pelagian practises; what honourable or loial Seruant is there in youre Maiesties Court, that if a man,
Ieh. 9.1.30. as weake, as he that was blinde from his birth, should, by Gods assistance, pleade Christs cause to the Rulers with good proofes, would not take that of our Sauiour into consideration,
chap. 12.48. He that reiecteth me and receiueth not my words, bath one that iudgeth him, the Word that I haue spoken, the same shall iudge him in the last day?

The first part vvhich conuinceth the Iewes, may seeme at first sight, to make nothing for, or against, any here, nor much to cōcerne; Christs cause in this; Island; but as it like a greate wheele moueth all the lesser, and like a Roote yealdeth sap and life to all the branches: the worke it selfe is but litle, and that sub∣iect fills not a fifth part of it; vouchsafe therefore, greate Kinge, youre Roiall and Princely patience, and youre Maiestie shall soone see how reuiued heresies doe eate at the roote both of Church and State, and that vvith noe ordinarie danger. Yet doe I not strike at the Arminians, but through the sides of the Pe∣lagians, nor soe much at theire tenets, as at theire practises: nor at them, but as they are against the Kingdom of God, the honour of youre Maiestie, & the peace, safety, and strength of youre Kingdoms: Nei∣ther is that donne by me, but by Christs owne Con∣fession and Complaint, and such consequences as neces∣sarily follow frō the same: the examples out of holy writ, and other Histories, here gathered, beeing only Instances of the neuerfailing truth of that, which Christ in his Confession denied or affirmed: Now therefore, the greate God of heauen and earth, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, giue youre Maiestie to see, embrace and establish the things that belonge to the peace of youre Kingdoms,
Luk 19 42. and now perplexed subiects, which, is the thinge herein desired, and daily begd of God in continuall prayers, by youre Maiesties most humble subiect, and Vassall,
