



PYthagoras the Philosopher expressing the double course of mans life by the letter Y, intimateth that which our Sauiour Christ hath more plainly set downe concerning the double way; whereof one hath a strait passage and narrow gate at the first, which few do embrace; but in the end thereof, there is great comfort and rest, for it gui∣deth the passenger vnto eternall happinesse and saluation: The o∣ther is wide and spacious at the
 beginning, wherby many trauaile, but in the end they find great trouble and straitnesse, for it leadeth vnto euerlasting woe and destruction. Both these waies are set before our eies as life and death; for we may not be idle, but of necessity must walke, seeing our life is a pilgrimage, and choose either to trauell the narrow way vnto life, or to runne the broad way vnto death. The way of life, is a religious profession, a vertu∣ous and conscionable carriage, when wee giue vnto God, that which is Gods; and to Cesar, our Magistrates and Masters, that which belongeth vnto them. The gate of this way is narrow, and the passage strait: for the liber∣ties of flesh and blood must be re∣strained, our affections bridled, and the whole man captiuated vnder the yoke of the obedience
 of Iesus Christ, as also such whom we are to obey & serue vnder him. The way of death, is a sinfull and licentious life, when we serue sin and Satan, and make no consci∣ence of obediēce neither towards god not man. The gate of this way in the beginning is broad, and the passage easie, giuing liberty & full head to our youthy affections and lusts of the flesh, but the end is vt∣ter perdition and straitnes. Wher∣fore let euery yong man, behol∣ding these two waies, choose that which leadeth vnto eternall life in heauen, by a sanctified life for a time on earth, walking sincerely with him who is the Way, the Truth and the Life. To this end I haue penned this insuing. Tractate, which, welbeloued Brethren, I haue commended vnto your fa∣uourable acceptance, that therin you might see which is the nar∣row
 way, the way of life, & learne how to trauell therein, neither let that diuellish prouerb, a yong Saint an old Diuel, direct your course, but endeuor being yong to be Saints of God, & to dedicate your youth to him and his seruice onely, who vndoubtedly will giue you con∣stancie to perseuere, that you may become Old Saints on earth, and at last a ioyfull end, that you may be Blessed Saints in heauen, & liue with him for euermore: to whose gracious & mercifull protection, in the meane time I commend you all. Amen.

