


Right Worshipfull,
SHould the exercise of Armes be generally laid aside, that Respond in our English Liturgie, might bee taken in the strictest acception of a literall Sense. There is none that fighteth for us, but onely Thou O God. There∣fore as Moses wished that all the Lords People were Prophets: So Gods Prophets
wish that everyone of the Lords People were a Moses, An able Souldier, a compleat Warriour to fight the Battels of the Lord of Hosts. His Maiesty hath granted, and by his Counsell confirmed a Freedome unto your City, for your practise of Martiall Dis∣cipline: It was your owne Petition. Then let not your Omission of Exercise returne a Quod petit spernit unto so gratious a Commission. Saul armed David, as you shall finde in this discourse. And David im∣mediately put himselfe into action Our King hath in like manner armed you, that you may gird on your Swordes, and exercise your Armes with safety. You that are Starres to fight in your course against Sise∣ra, prove not falling Starres: Fall not from the diligent prosecution of such an Honoura∣ble intendment. A house begunne, and ne∣ver finished, is called the Founders folly. Proceede then upon this Honourable founda∣tion: Least that become your folly, which is your Glory. Let your Councell house give incouragement to your Campus Mar∣tius; your field of Martiall exercise. Let
it not bee said of any in your Cittie, Hee is a good Merchant, but a bad Souldier. As they pay unto their King the Custome of their Goods; let them pay unto their Coun∣trey, the Custome of their Bodies, in the Customary Practice of Armes. It is pro∣bable that they that will not, dare not beare Armes. And when neede requires, will prove rather a burthen, then a help unto their Coun∣try.Judg. 5.23. Liable unto the curse of Meros, and the Inhabitants thereof, because they come not out to help the Lord against the mighty. Improve your service on the Land, to be answerable to your experimented dexterity on the Sea; and J shall not easily finde your Parallell. I am sure thas in your Spirituall Service,Especially Redcliffe, which for a Parochi∣all Chappell is not paralleld by any Church in our king∣dome. Ecclesia∣rumvmnium pa∣rochialium (quas unquam vidi) e∣legantissima. Cambden. for the state∣lines of your Churches,For our con∣formity, we are generally obli∣ged unto the religious care of our Reve∣rend Diocaesan. and the generall cofor∣mity both of Clergy and Laity, you give place unto none. Both your Policy and Religion have imboldned mee to dedicate this sling of David, to your Nursery of Armes. And my selfe to be

