


PROVOKED, or rather vehe∣mentlye incited & moued, I haue bene (right hono∣rable my verye good Lorde) to ymagine and de∣uise all meanes possible to auoid that vglie vice of Ingratitude (whi∣ch as it is abhor∣red amonge crea∣tures voide of reason and diuine knowledge, so of mē indewed and full possessed with both, it is speciallye to be detested.) And to the intent I myght not be touched with that vnkinde vice, odible to God and man, I haue many times, with my selfe debated how I might by anye meanes shewe my selfe thank∣full and beneuolent to your honor, which hath not onely by frequene talke vnto my friendes priuate∣lye,

but also vpon my selfe openly imployed bene∣fites and commendacion vndeserued. The one I haue receyued by friendely reporte of your dere and ap∣proued friendes, the other I doe feele and taste to my great staye and comfort. For when it pleased your Honor, of curteous inclination, vpon the first view, willingly to consent and agree to the confirmation of that which I doe inioye: for that bountie then, euer sithens I haue studied by what meanes I myght commende my good wyll and affection to the same. Wherfore incensed with the generositie, and natural instinct of your noble minde, I haue purposed many times to imploy mine indeuor by some small begin∣nings, to giue your honour to vnderstande outward∣lye, what the inwarde desire is willing to doe, if abi∣litie thervnto were correspondent. And as opportu∣nitie serued, (respiring as it were from the wayghtie affayres of that Office wherein it hath pleased our moste dradde Soueraigne Ladie worthelye to place you the chiefe and Generall) I perused such volumes of Noble Authors, as wherwith my poore Armarie is furnished: And amongs other, chaunced vpon that excellente Historiographer Titus Liuius. In whome is conteyned a large Campe of noble factes and ex∣ploites achieued by valiaunt personages of the Ro∣mane state. By whome also is remembred the begin∣ning and continuation of their famous common wealth. And viewing in him great plentie of straunge Histories, I thought good to select suche as were the best and principall, wherin trauailing not farre, I oc∣curred vpon some which I deemed most worthy the provulgation in our natiue tongue, reducing them into such compendious forme, as I trust shall not ap∣peare vnpleasaunt. Which when I had finished, seing

them but a handefull in respect of the multitude, I fully determined to procede in the rest. But when I considered myne owne weakenesse, and the maiestie of the Author, the cancred infirmitie of a cowardely minde, stayed my conceyued purpose, and yet not so stayed as vtterly to suppresse myne attempt. Wher∣fore aduauncing agayne the Ensigne of courage, I thought good (leauing where I left in that Author, til I knew better how they would be liked) to aduen∣ture into diuers other, out of whome I decerped and chose (raptim) sundrie propre and commendable His∣tories, which I may boldly so terme, because the au∣thors be commendable and wel approued. And ther∣vnto haue ioyned many other, gathered out of Boccac∣cio, Bandello, Ser Giouanni Fiorentino, Straparole & other I∣talian and French authors. Al which I haue recueiled and bounde together in this volume, vnder the title of the Palace of Pleasure, presuming to consecrate the same and the rest of my beneuolent mynde to your honor. For to whom duely appertaineth mine indus∣trie and diligence, but to him that is the Patrone & Imbracer of my well doings? Wherevnto also I may applie the words of that excellent Orator Tullie in his first boke of Offices. De beneuolentia aeutem, quam quis{que} hae∣beaet erga nos, primum illud est in officio, vt et plurimum tribua∣mus, à quo plurimum diligimur. Of beneuolence which ech man beareth towards vs, the chiefest duetie is to giue most to him, of whome we be most beloued. But how wel the same is done, or how praise worthy the trans∣lation is, I referre to the skilfull, crauing no more praise therfore, than they shal attribute and giue. To nothing seke I to aspire by this my presumptiō (right honorable) but cherefull acceptation of the same at your hands: desirous hereby to shew my self studious

of a friend of so noble vocation. And where greater thinges cannot be done, these small I trust shall not be forsaken and comtempned: which if I doe per∣ceyue to be fauored, hereafter more ample indeuor shal be imployed to achieue greater, if abilitie ther∣vnto be consonant. In these histories (which by ano∣ther terme I call Nouelles) be described the liues, ge∣stes, conquestes and highe enterprises of great Prin∣ces, wherein also be not forgotten the cruell actes and tiranny of some. In these be set forth the great valiance of noble Gentlemen, the terrible combates of coragious personages, the vertuous mindes of no∣ble dames, the chaste hartes of constant Ladyes, the wonderfull pacience of puisaunt Princes, the milde sufferance of well disposed Gentlewomen, and in diuers, the quiet bearing of aduerse fortune. In these histories be depainted in liuely colours, the vgly shapes of Insolencie and Pride, the deforme fi∣gures of Incontinencie and Rape, the cruell aspectes of Spoile, breach of order, treason, ill lucke and mis∣chiefe of States, and other persons. Wherin also be intermixed, pleasant discourses, merie talke, spor∣ting practises, deceytful deuises, and nipping taūtes, to exhilarat the readers minds. And although by the first face and view, some of these may seme to intreat of vnlawfull Loue, and the foule practises of the same, yet being throughly read and well considered, both olde and yong may learne howe to auoyde the ruine, ouerthrow, inconuenience, and displeasure, that lasciuious desire, and wanton will, doth bring to the suters and pursuers of the same. All which may render good example for all sortes to follow the best, and imbrace the vertuous, contrariwise to reiect the worste, and contempne the vicious. For

which intent and purpose be al things, good and bad recited in histories, Chronicles, and monuments, by the first authors and elucubrators of the same. To whome then may the same (wherein be contayned many discourses of nobilitie) be offred with more due desert than to him, that in nobilitie and pa∣rentage is not inferior to the best? To whome may factes and exploites of famous personages be consig∣ned, but to him whose prowesse and valiant actes be manifeste and well knowen to Englishemen, but better to straungers, which haue felt the puissance therof? To whome may the combats, gestes, and courses of the victorious be remembred, but to him, whose frequent vse of mighty in countrie & terrible shocke of shield & Launce: is familier in the Court, & famous in the towne and countrie? In whom may pacient bearing of aduersitie, and constant suffrance of Fortunes threates more duly to the world appere, than in him that hath cōstantly susteined & quietly passed ouer the bruntes of the same? To whom may be giuen a Theatre of the world, and stage of hu∣maine miserie, more worthily, than to him that hath with comely gesture, wyse demeanor, and or∣derly behauiour, bene an actor in the same? Who is he that more condignely doth deserue to be posses∣in a Palace of Pleasure, than he that is daylie resiant in a pallace of renowmed fame, guided by a Queene adorned with most excellent beautie and shape, in∣dewed and garnished with great learning, passing vertues and rare qualities of the minde. To whom (I say) may constancie of Ladyes, and vertuous dedes of Dames, nore aptly be applied, than to him that hath in possession a Lady and Countesse of noble birth (whose sire was the olde Earle of Bedforde,

a graue and faithfull councelor to her Maiesties most noble Progenitors, and father is the same, in deare estimation and regard with her highnesse, vnder whō he trustily & honorably serueth) whose curteous and coūtesse like behauior glistereth in the court amongs the troupe of honorable Dames: and for her towarde disposition, first preferred by the Quenes Maiestie, into her secrete chamber, and after aduaunced to be Countesse of your noble Earledome. Besides al which rare giftes, by Nature ingrafted in your honor, and by her bountifully bestowed vpon the same, the per∣fect pietie and brotherly loue betwene you and the right noble and vertuous the Earle of Lecester, your honorable brother, is had in greatest admiration. Whose noble courage in dedes of honor and passing humanitie to his inferiours, is very commendable to the worlde. But here I will stay my selfe, lest whilest I goe about to extoll your fames, I doe (for wante of skill in due praise) seme to diminishe that which a∣mong all men by daily experience is sufficiently re∣nowmed. And as your honor dothe with great pru∣dence gouerne that office of the Ordinance (wherof I am a member) euen so, the same hath with great care and diligence commended suche to the Quenes Ma∣iestie, to ioyne and serue in the same, as officers right worthy their vocations, specially the worshipfull Edwarde Randolfe Esquire, Lieutenaunt of that office, a man for his experience and good aduise rather fos∣tred in the bosome of Bellona her selfe, than nourced in kentish soyle (although in the scholehouse of cur∣tesie and humanitie he appeareth full carefully to haue bene trayned vp by his vertuous parents) which is familiarly knowen vnto me and other that domes∣tically (as it were) doe frequent his companie. But

alas my Lorde, amonges the midde of my reioyce of those before remembred, I can not pretermit the la∣mentable losse of the best approued gonner that euer serued in our time his Prince and countrie, Robert Thomas, the Maister Gonner, who for skill and ser∣uice both, a title of Prince of Gonners iustlye did de∣serue: And see the luck, when he thought best to sig∣nifie his good will, to honor Hymeneus bed, at Nupti∣all night, a clap of that he neuer feared did ende his lyfe. Such is the dradfull furie of Gonners arte, and hellish rage of Vulcanes worke. And therefore that daungerous seruice in skilfull men is specially to be recommended and cherished. Wherevnto as your honor hitherto hath borne singuler affection, by pre∣ferring to her Maiestie suche as from their infancie haue bene trained vp in that necessarie seruice, and very painefully haue imployed the same, in the time of the Quenes maiestie that nowe is, and her proge∣nitors, euen so I humbly besech your honor for con∣tinuaunce of the same, specially in those, that be in∣dewed with greatest experience, in whome onely res∣teth the brunt of our defence. A seruice so commen∣dable and needeful, as none more. But what neede I to prouoke the willing mynde, whose honor is more prest to cherish such, than I am able by wishing heart for to conceyue. Finallie yet once againe, I humbly besech your honor gratefully to accept this boke, & at your leisure & conueniēt time to reade & peruse the same. By reuoluing wherof your honor I trust shal be delighted with the rare histories & good examples therin cōtayned, such as to my knowlege heretofore haue not ben made cōmon to our countrimen, which with al my good wil & indeuor I duetifully exhibit.

Beseching Almighty God fauourably to defend and gouerne your honor, prosperously to maintayne and kepe the same, godly to direct my right honorable Lady in the steppes of perfect vertue, bountiful∣lye to make you both happie parentes of many childrē: and after the expence of Nstor yeares in this transi∣torie lyfe, mercifully to conducte you to the vnspeakable ioyes of his king∣dome.
Nere the Tower of London the first of Ianuarie. 1566.

