



EVerie Science hauing hys peculiar cōmoditie, and conducing to the trauailer and diligent searcher, a due de∣serued benefite (bysides the exercise and shunning the pestilent monster Idlenesse) discloseth the miraculous effect of the Di∣uinitie and the excellencie of his Creature: Who breathing life into that sencelesse work, framed within the mould of humane Conception, forceth in him by Nature and timely institution, such capacitie of Science, as not only by that knowledge he glo∣rifieth his Creator, but also besides himselfe, helpeth and dothe good to other. For profe wherof, the Science of that surpassing and delightsome pasture of Theologie, is profitable to teach, argue, reproue, and instruct, that by paciēce and consolatiō, we may conceue hope of Eternitie. The knowlege of Philosophie cureth the minde, auoideth childish care, expelleth feare, and shunneth fonde desires. O Philosophie, the guide of life (excla∣meth Tullie) the inquisitor of Vertue, and expeller of vice. Rhetorike (affirmeth he) causeth vs to learne that we knowe not, and that we know, to teach to other: By the same we ex∣hort, with that we persuade, with that we cōfort the afflicted, by it we incourage the astonned, and appease the outragious. Musike easeth the troubled mind, lenifieth sorowe, comforteth the heauie hearted, and erecteth a contemplation of heauenly things. Astronomie reuealeth the nature of the Starres and Planets, presageth dayes and times for the helpe and mainte∣nance of life. Poesie teacheth amendement of maners, direc∣teth what things be mete for imitation, and with what detri∣ment wantonnesse anoyeth the bodie of man. By meanes of it

(Saint Augustine saith) he learned many good lessons to  fite himselfe, and doe good to other. To be short, euery  so necessarie, as the same taken away, Reason is depriued,  the Life of man, of due order and   Thinke (sayth a Greke Orator) the knowledge of many  to be more precious and excellent, than a chest heaped vp  abundance of money: for the one quickly faileth, and the  for euer lasteth. For, Scientia (affirmeth he) is the onely  mortall storehouse of all possessions: Amongs which troupe  Sciences the knowledge and  of Historie deserueth  place in the chiefest ranke, and is for example of humane  faires, a Christall light to shew the pathes of our . The same displayeth the counsels, aduises, policies, acts,  and ends of Kings, Princes, and great men, with the order and description of time and place, And like a liuely image represen∣teth before our eyes the beginning, ende and circumstaunce of eche attempt. The same (like a Mistresse of our life) by proba∣ble examples, stirreth vp our sluggishe mindes, to aspire the e∣ternall glorie of praise and fame, and terrifieth the  and aduēturous, from enterprise of things vnsemely. The same is a passing picture of Veritie, and an absolute Patern, framing the matter, greater nor lesse than it is. And bicause I am not ignorant what Encomia innumerable Authors in time paste, and writers of oure time doe attribute vnto that Science, and with what titles the Prince of them all decketh the praise of Historicall knowledge, I onely referre the worthinesse, to the practisers, and the singularitie of Histories trauell and de∣light, to eche willing mind that imploy their leysure and time therin. And I for my part  confesse (that by reading of Hi∣stories) I find the saying which Tullie aduoucheth of Publius Scipio to be true: That he was neuer lesse idle, than when he was idle, and neuer lesse alone than when he was alone: Mea∣ning thereby, that when he was at beste leisure, he was  idle, nor when he was alone, vnoccupied. For when Labour re∣steth

him selfe in me, and Leisure refresheth other affaires, no∣thing delights more that vacant time, than reading of Histo∣ries in such vulgar speche, wherin my small knowledge taketh repast. And for that my priuate reding might not delight and pleasure me alone, to auoide the nature of that cancred chorle and foe of humane companie, Timon of Athenes, that liued but for him self, I haue (after my skill) culled some floures and fruites from that pleasant store of those my readings to impart for vniuersall gaine and , choosing rather hereby to fol∣low the liberalitie of Cimon a Gentleman of that Citie, who knowing himselfe to be borne to profite other, and for the enri∣ching of his countrey, not only atchieued marueious matters for furtherāce of Cōmon wealth, but left his Gardens and Or∣chardes open for all men to participate the fruits of his plesure and trauell. Wherby (so well as I can) I follow the tracte and practise of other, by whose meanes, so manifold sciences in our knowne tongue, and translation of Histories bee frequent and rife amongs vs. All which be done for our commoditie, plea∣sure, solace, preseruation and comfort, and without the which we can not be long sustained in this miserable life, but shall be∣come not muche vnlike the barbarous,  discrepant from the sauage sort. The inuestigatours and bringers to light wherof, direct their eyes and mening to none other end, but for the be∣nefite of vs and our posteritie, and that our faces be not tain∣ted with the blushing color, to see the passing diligence of other Coūtreys, by curious imbelishing of their states, with the trou∣blous trauaile of their brain, and laborsome course of penne, Who altogether imploye those paines, that no Science lurke in corner, that no Knowledge be shut vp in cloisters, that no Hi∣storie remain vnder the maske and vnknowne attire of other tongues. Amōgs which crew (I say) I craue an inferior place, and haue vndertaken the vnfolding of sundry Histories, from the couerture of foren language, for none other purpose and in∣tent but to vniuersall benefite. Parte wherof, two yeares past

(almost) wer made commune in a former boke, now succedeth a seconde, furnished with like ornaments that the other was. The first (by dueties chalenge) was addressed to the right ho∣norable the Erle of Warwike, for respect of his honor, and my calling. This the second, by like band, your worship may iust∣ly claime as a iust tribute, nowe this moneth of Nouembre, payable. Or if your Curtesie woulde not deale so roughly with your bounden creditour, yet for dutie sake I must acquite and content that which hath so long ben due. Thesame I offre now, not with such vsurie and gaine as your beneuolence and singu∣lar bountie, by long for bearing hath deserued, but with suche affected will and desire of recompence, as any man aliue can owe to so rare a friend. Your worship I haue chosen for the first person of this boke, and the protectour of the same (the matter most specially therin comprised, treting of courtly fashions and maners, and of the customes of loues galantise, and the good or yll successe thereof) bicause you be an auncient Courtier, and one of the eldest Traine, and suche as hath ben imployed by sundrie our Princes, in their affaires of greatest weight and importance: and for that your self in your lustiest time, (euer bred and brought vp in Court) haue not bene vnacquainted with those occurrents. If I should stande particularly to touch the originall of your noble Ancestrie, the succession of that re∣noumed line, their fidelitie for graue aduise and counsell, your honourable education, the mariage of a mighty King with one of your sisters, the valiant exploites of your parentes against the French and Scots, the worthie seruice of your self in field, whereby you deseruedly wanne the order of Knighthode, the trust which hir Maiestie reposeth in you, by disposing vnder your charge the Store of hir Armure, and your worthie pre∣ferment to be Maister of hir Armarie generall. If I shoulde make recitall of your carefull industrie and painfull trauell, su∣stained for answering hir Maiesties expectation, your noble cherishing of the skilfull in that Science, your good aduaunce∣ment

of the best, to supplie the vacant romes, your refusall of the vnworthie: and finally of your modest and curteous dea∣lings in that office, I feare lacke of abilitie (and not of mat∣ter) would want grace and order by further circumstaunce, to adde sufficient praise: Yea although my self do say nothing (but reserue the same in silence to auoide suspect of adulation) the very Armure and their furnitures do speake, vniuersall testi∣monie doth wonder, and the Readinesse of the same for tyme of seruice doth aduouche. Which care of things continually re∣sting in your breast, hath atchieued suche a timely diligence and successe, as when hir Maiesties aduersarie shall be ready to molest, she shal be prest (by Gods assistance) to defend and marche. But not to hold your worship long by length of pream∣ble, or to discourse what I might further say, eyther in fauour of this Boke, or commendation of your selfe, I meane (for this instant) to leaue the one to general iudge∣ment, and the other to the particular sentence of eche of your acquaintaunce. Humbly making this only sute, that my good will may supplie the imperfec∣tion of mine abilitie.
And so with my heartie prayer for your preserua∣tion, to him that is the Author of life and health. I take my leaue.
From my poore house besides the Toure of London, the fourthe of Nouember 1567.

