



HAuing duly and dutifully considered the powerfull prouidence of the Al∣mighty, I finde of al creatures in the earth, that are humble and harmeles his Maiesty hath recommended vnto vs the Lambe, to signifie Iesus Christ our Redeemer: Of all Creatures in the Ayre, that are mylde and chast, he hath recommended vnto vs the the Doue, to signifie the Holy ghost, our sanctifier. Euen so (right Ho: Lady) of all bookes that are Authenti∣call and ancient, and of all books that are profitable and true, this maiestical Creator hath recommended to our studies, for the ground-worke of Religion, the book of his Couenant comprehending all things that euer was, al things that now is, & al thinges that euer wil bee to come; in heauen, cōcerning his Dei∣ty: in earth, cōcerning his elect▪ & in hel, concerning the damned. There was two waights in the holy san∣ctuary; the one called Stater, a ballance to weigh all things belōging to the common weale: the other Si∣clum, a sickle, which was to wey al things belonging to the Temple: shewing thereby, that al things what∣soeuer, do apertain either to gods glory, or our good, are to be mesured & proportioned by the same book. God said to Moses, Take sweet spices, pure Mirth, Ca∣lamos, &c. then offer: wherein also he plainly shewes, that al kind of seruing his Maiestie, & all professions wherby we liue & haue our beeing, are excluded, as things not sanctified according to this book. And yet good Ho: Lady & mistresse, I say, & most wise mē see, that few do read it, fewer regard it, & fewest of al do frame their liues according vnto it. It is as rare a a thing to see noble womē, & men of great place, to haue the Bible in their hands, & to order their cōuer¦sation accordingly, as to see a man of plesant posses∣sions, sel all he hath and giue it to the poor: or to see a Camel go thrugh the eye of a needle. By how much the more right Ho: are you to be admyred and had as a wonder in this world, for your darely endeuours after Diuinity for your knowledge in the holy tongs: & especially for your careful practise therof, at home amongst your houshold: and abroad amongest the distressed Saints. As the people of the captiuity could not discerne the sound of the shout for ioy, from the noyse of the weeping when the foundation of the tē∣ple was laid; euen so the greatnesse of your greese, with continual study at home, cannot be discerned from the greatnes of then ioy whome yee releeue a∣broad. Your Ho hath constantly continued hither∣to, proceed, I pray you, Rule on right Ho: good luck haue you good La: in the name of the Lord. As the Iewes finished the Temple, with weapons in one hād and nowels in the other hand, so I pray god you may finish your faith vnto death: with your booke moue hand, & your aliues in the other. I must be forced to cease keeping the limitation of the Printer. Only de∣siring your Ho: to accept of this my labor, which I of∣fr vnto your La: before all others, as a token of my humble duty, Protesting that I haue to the vttermost of my power, truly tanslated the same: not intēding your Ho. instruction therein (though the original be very profitable for the vnderstanding of the Bible) but to instruct the ignorant multitude: for whose sake I know your Ho: wil patronize it. The spirit of him that raised up Iesus, from the dead, sanctifie you and saue you.
London
Ia: 20 1597.

