





NAoman, Captaine of the hoast of the King of Syria, (Right Honourable) a great man with his Master, and Hono∣rable, hearkening to the report of a little captiue maid of the land of Is∣rael, obtained not onely the cure of the leprosie of his bodie, but also of his soule: and therefore he did not only confesse the God of Israel to be the onelie true God, but he required two mules burthē of the earth of that land, vowing he would neuer after of∣fer burnt offering or sacrifice to other gods, but vn∣to the Lord.
The good acceptance whereof, with the mercie and prouidence of God therein considered, (Right Honourable) mooued mee the rather to make an∣swere vnto some such demands, as haue been pro∣pounded vnto me here in my fatherland, about the

fruitfulnesse of that good land, where are the vpper springs and the nether springs, which it hath pleased God to alot to the Othoniel and Achsah of our times, the sonne in law, and daughter to Caleb, the the noblest Prince and longest liuer of all the peo∣ple of Israel, who hath seene the Lords wonders and deliuerances, in Egypt, the red Sea, Wildernes, and land of Promise, (Preserue them still, O Lord, from all the Canaanites, &c. among whom they liue, and make them all for strength of body, wise∣dome, constancie and yeares like vnto Caleb, and with Othoniel to subdue the enemies of Israel.) And not hauing any better meanes then this, whereby to giue content, I haue now presented my little cake, and offered my two mites, to the Lords ser∣uants and treasurie, being all that I had. The former being, A faithfull Admonition of the Prince Ele∣ctor Palatines Churches, aduising to vnity. And this, A full Declaration of their faith. So as that this is not onely an Apollogie of the former, as appea∣reth in the 8. Chapter: but is able to giue full satis∣faction to all such honest people as desire to know what to trust to in them For which end they first published the same, as appeareth in the 1. Chapter, and which I only aimed at in translating it. For as for peace haters nothing wil satisfie them, God-fea∣ring people then finding what they seeke for, I trust none will blame mee for that I haue taught it to speake English in so plaine a stile; the Lord know∣ing that I haue done it so faithfullie as possibly I could.
The causes moouing me to bee so bold as to put your Honors cognisance vpon this Prince Electors man, are for that it hath pleased God to mooue the heart of our dread Soueraigne to assigne your Ho∣nour a generall charge to doe iustice to the oppres∣sed, and to defend the fatherlesse, the widow, and the stranger. And therefore as I serued in the for∣mer to the Table of the Right Honourable Oliuer Lord S. Iohn, as a dish of Renish Grapes, that so o∣thers might the more willingly taste thereof, so by your Honours good acceptance also of this tree in∣to your Orchard, it may spread it selfe the further in the vineyard which God hath planted in this Ise∣land. And so that good land may haue, two faith∣full and Honourable witnesses sufficient to auouch the truth against any that shall bring an euill report vpon the same. And though he be now so homely apparrelled in an English shepheards weede, the fault thereof is to be ascribed to me, for I assure my selfe had a Ionathan got his acquaintance he would haue honoured him more, yet as he now is, I trust your Honour shall reape no disgrace by him, for he was borne in Ishaies house, and he is strong, valient and wise, and the Lord is with him: where∣fore as he fought with the Lion and the Beare in his father-land, so dare he (with his 5. smooth stones ta∣ken out of the Lords brooke) encounter Goliah a∣abroad, if he heare him blaspheme the Lord and his hoast: which he shall be the better able to doe, and himselfe take no harme, being so honourably har∣nished. And no doubt but he shall find some oppo∣sition

abroad, it so being that his brethren (the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah) hate him at home, because his father loueth him more then them: and because his workes are good, (which is the common case of all the dearest children of God.) Who now also is more feeling of a strangers case then your Honor? But why doe I still call him a stranger? the whole citie knowing that hee is a vertuous man, and a pro∣solite, and therefore hath not onely taken our God for his God, but our people for his people: surely the heart of none but Marah will refuse him. Yet whatsoeuer entertainment he finds, yea although it should bee such as may discourage him, hee hath kept the words of Gods patience, and done that which appertained to him: and he will not for all that dispaire, or renounce the confession of the truth (as Prince Frederick of blessed memory did formerly answere those that thought to daunt him) though the whole world should leaue him. Now the God of Israel vnder whose wings he is come to trust, recompence his workes more and more with a full reward. And the same al sufficient God, re∣member your Honor, and wipe not out the kindnes that you haue shewed on the house of our God, and on the offices thereof.

