



I Hold it a ground apparant in rea∣son (good Mr Maior) that eue∣ry euil is so much the greater euill,Tanto aliquod malum est pe∣jus malum, quanto magis adimit de bo∣no. Aug. by how much the more it with-draweth from good;
from which principle then, may vn∣doubtedly be drawen this following trueth, That they deserue ill of the Chri∣stian common wealth, who oppugne the faith by bringing in heresies, or when brought in by others, defend them, because the foundation being ruinous, it is of ne∣cessity, that whatsoeuer is thereupon built doeth fall; Insomuch, that the most wi∣sest adviser of mankind, our Lord and Saviour, willed his weake Disciples to beware of the Leauen of the Phari∣sies and Saduces,Mat. 16.11. which is interpreted to be the doctrine they taught. From all which, thus much will appeare to all men, that they must bew are what, and of whom they heare: for as it is not possible to gather grapes of thornes,Mat. 7.16. or figs of thistles, no more is it of new teachers wholesome doctrine.Ipsa doctrinae novitas est de se suspecta, quoniam Christus & Apostoli ejus sufficientem doctrinam ad vitam aeter∣nam conse∣quendam de∣derunt. Et re∣ctè Tertullia∣nus, Rectum est quod om∣nium est pri∣mum, adulte∣rinum veró, quod novum est & posteri∣us. Joh. 20.31. Fides Catho∣lica, quam in∣dubiè tenere oportet, est ea quam sacrae literae tradūt. —quas Deus ipse manibus hominum scripsit. As they are new teachers, so is their do∣ctrine noveltie, which euen in it selfe is to be suspected, because Christ and
his Apostles deliuered sufficient do∣ctrine for the attaining of euerlasting life: And as the holy Evangelist saith, These things are WRITTEN, that ye might beleeue, that Iesus is that Christ that Sonne of God, and that in beleeuing ye might haue life thorough his Name. Thus is that Catholike faith, which ought vndoubtedly to be held, that which the sacred Scriptures doe deli∣uer: With these we must sight against all novell doctrines. Those are the weapons, with which we must profli∣gate and repel all humane inventions, God writing them by the hands of men. All Decrees of Councels, De∣cretals of Popes, Traditions of Chur∣ches, and all Writings else whatsoe∣uer, must giue place to them. The ho∣ly Scriptures are that Torrent or Brook,1. Sam. L 7. out of which DAVID tooke the stones, with which he ouer-threw the mighty Goliah; other testimonies
without these, are as Sauls armour, more combersome, than serviceable; as arguments drawen from humane wisdome: Finally, according to those Bookes of the Scriptures, (saith S. Augustine) we judge frankly of all o∣ther writings,Cont. Cres∣con. Gram∣mat. lib. 2. cap. 31. whether they be of the faithfull, or vnfaithfull. Which if it be so, there ariseth yet another maine point to be marked; That where the Scriptures are either locked vp from the people, that they may not exer∣cise them by reading and meditating on them; or where they are neglected & not opened by preaching, through the idlenesse of Pastors, there must needes appeare grosse ignorance in those that ought to be taught, and great sinne remaineth to them which should teach; for those which do not heare, cannot learne; which wanting, presently that evill enemy the Devill, ever ready to hurt, first perverting the
affection, and then blinding the vn∣derstanding, drawing all men into all errors. This is so farre from any possi∣bility of gaine-saying, that both sides, I meane, Papists and Protestants sub∣scribe vnto it. And although (God be praised for it) that darke eclipse of the body of the Sunne, doeth not ap∣peare in our Horizon, (I meane in this famous Church of England) yet are there parts beyond the Seas, which suffer that darknesse, and lye plunged in all those calamities, which are con∣sequents of it.Contra heares: lib. 1. cap. 13. Touching this matter (saith Alphonsus a Castro) our owne Countrey of Spaine may minister vn∣to vs plentifull testimonies, in which, not aboue ten yeeres since,citra decem annos. He wrot this a∣bout the yere 1534. in that part of Cantabria, which now is called Na∣varra, and Biscaya, amongst them which inhabite the vplands, sundry er∣rors are found, many superstitions, di∣vers idolatries, insomuch that they
worship the Devill himselfe, appca∣ring vnto them in forme of a Goate, which for certaine is knowne to bee practized by them in secret, these ma∣ny yeeres. In which matter there are more weon en than men; for that evil enemie knoweth by the first man, that it is easier to deceiue a woman than a man, and that she will faster hold the ill, to which at once she cleaueth. This same mischiefe, though not so great wee finde likewise in other parts of Spaine, in which the word of God is very seldome preached; for there are a∣mongst them many superstitions, heathenish customes, through no o∣ther cause appearing, but for want of Preachers. Thus farre he. By which relation, you and all men else may see the great miseries that follow the want of the word of God, where true Religion is asleepe, and the arch-ene∣my the Devill ruleth the affections,
Practize the Word then by often rea∣ding.Lectio lecta placer, decies reperita pla∣cobit. Be exercised in hearing it prea∣ched. By which doing you shalbe the better able to discerne and judge of all doctrines propounded; for where do you reade in the holy Scriptures, or can you from thence conclude, That Lay men (all except the Clergie) should bee debarred from receiuing the Communion in both kindes,Thinke of these points, and in∣quire of them. of Bread, and Wine? Or, that God euer commaunded Images to bee placed in Churches, to the intent they should be worshipped? Or, that any sinne, as it is sinne, in its owne nature is ve∣niall, and not worthy of eternal death? Or, that wicked men miscreants and vnbeleevers, are true members of the Catholike Church? Or, that they in receiving the Sacrament, doe feede v∣pon, & eate the true Body of Christ? Or, that there is any fleshly and orall eating of the naturall Body of Christ
in the Sacrament. Or, that Ignorance should be the mother of Devotion, that is, the more ignorant, the more devout. Or, that it belongeth to the Pope to graunt Indulgences and par∣dons to sinners,condonando illis poenam ad cuius tole∣tantiam pec∣cator obliga∣batur etiam remissa culpa. pardoning them the punishment, to the enduring where∣of the offender is bound, even after the fault is forgiuen. For these I say, and a swarme of such new vpstart do∣ctrines, thrust vpō you by the Church of Rome, consult with the Word of God, contained in the Bookes of the Old and New Testament, and you shall find no one step leading to them, but all the contrary, so neere are they to the curse that teach thē. Touching some which points, and divers other maintained against vs, by the contrary erring partie, I haue for your further knowledge and instruction in this small treatise rested my selfe only vp∣on two famous Doctors of the
Church St Gregory called the great, sometime Bishoppe of Rome, and St Bernard another Father though of la∣ter time, shewing that both these in many of the maine differences, and some of those of hie consequence, taught the same doctrine to their churches & hearers, which the church of England teacheth to hers. For the perfection & sufficiency of the Scrip∣ture without tradition. In the doc∣trine of merits, that no workes are meritorious, or worthie of the blisse of the life to come. That there is no faith without workes, and that faith only instifieth. That concupiscence is sinne in the first motions of it. Of the certainty of salvatiō in the elect. That there is no freedome in the will to good and holy actions, except it bee made free. Of the frivolous and vaine vsurped title, that the Pope should bee called Vniversall Bishop. That the Ca∣tholike
Church which we beleeue in the Creed is the whole company of the elect only. Of the impossibility for any man how regenerate soeuer, to fulfill the law, now in his corrupt na∣ture. That there is no inherent righte∣ousnesse. in man, wherby he may be iustified before Gods tribunal, but the righteousnesse of Christ is imputed, being apprehēded by Faith. Meditate by reading I pray you vpon these pointes, and you shall plainly see that the contrarie doctrines are at this day taught by the Church of Rome, not so much contrarie to vs, as they are to those which were taught formerly in lesse corrupt times, euē by the Church of Rome it selfe, so that it resteth strōg on our parts to be maintained That we haue noe otherwise departed from the Church of Rome, than Rome hath from it selfe. Gregorie was Pope of Rome a∣bout the yeere of our redemption by
Christ 600. so that whatsoeuer wee shall teach and find in him, we and he may well make it good against them. If he had his escapes & ouersights in some points of Doctrine, according as they were then creeping in, & doubt∣fully held, being of lesse moment and waight than those before mentioned; & law no further cause of dissiking or disallowing them, than that time af∣forded him, in his owne iudgment: as we may not ioine with him, in the ap∣prehending of them; so are we not willing to giue any hard or vniust cen sure touching his person for teaching them; But leauing both the builder, & that which he builded to their owne Master to stand or to fall, we are hum∣bly to thank our great God for direc∣ting his knowledg such that it kept the maine foundation by Iesus Christ. Ch how sweetly doeth he sing that Gos∣pel-like song! The felicitie of the Saints
is mercy God rēdreth according to works,Mercy, not workes. Not for works. though not for the workes. To that blessed life wherein we shall line with God and of God,Our labour is not worthy our glory. no labour can be equalled, no workes can be compared. Our iust aduocate will in iudgment defend vs for iust, because wee know and accuse our selues to be vniust. Know you this readers, that this is Gregories doctrine, and you will not know the doctrine of the Councel of Trent, some 60. yeres since establish'd, and now held and maintained by Pau∣lus Quintus the now Pope. St. Bernard the other Doctor proposed, liued in a time far more corrupt, yet still held & preached the maine points that wee doe. He was (saith Bishop Iuell) a Monk,anno Domini 1117. about 500. yeeres since. Iuel. art. 21. divis. 8. & lived at Claravallis in France about the same time that Thomas Becket liued in England. At which time, as it appeareth by his often cō∣plaints the Church of God was mise∣rably defaced. For thus hee writeth,
namely touching the Cleargie of Rome, Nihil integri est in Clero &c. In the whole Cleargie (wherein hee concludeth the Pope,In Psalm. Qui habitat. the Cardinalls, the Bishops, and all the rest) there is no part left sound. It remaineth now that the man of sinne,De converfio∣ne Pauli. that is Anti∣christ, be revealed. From the toppe to the toe, there is no health. The ser∣vants of Christ, now serue Antichrist.In Cant. Can∣tic. Therefore Bernard, living in a time of such corruption, and being carried a∣way with the violence and tempest of the same, must needs in some things not see all. The most reverend Arch∣bishop that now is,In his Graces answere to D. Hill. reas. 1. § 30. pag. 60.61. and reas. 5. §. 28 saith thus also of him. Although hee saw not all things yet we finde in him saniorem partem a liberall profession of many good and sound points agreeable to the Gos∣pell. Touching the matter of merit by good workes, for iustification by faith alone in Christ, for freewill, for cer∣taine
assurance of salvation in the death and by the strength of our Sa∣viour, and for disliking then the vile life of the Cleargie, how cleare, how pregnant, how copious is he? These things wee teach together with him, and notwithstanding his other slipps, we doubt not but his soule is with the Lord. He held the foundation by on∣ly faith in Christ, and that our best deeds are but via regni, non causa reg∣nandi. The way to the kingdome, not the cause of raigning.Digress. 43. §. 42. pag. 298. Dr White in his Treatise of the way to the true Church, saith Bernard knewe not the present Romane faith. Hee was a Pa∣pist in none of the principall points of the religion. Hee held the sufficiencie of the Scripture without traditions. Iustification by faith alone. That our workes merit not. That no man can keepe the law. That a man, by the te∣stimonie of Gods spirit within him,
may be certaine of Grace. That there is no such freewill as the popish schoolemen teach. These, and such o∣ther testimonies haue these worthie pillers of our Church giuen, vnto that worthie and religious man Bernard. The places touching these points al∣leaged, you shal finde quoted at large by me, transcribed by my paines out of his owne workes, as they lie word for word, led there vnto by the lear∣ned workes, especially of your late right Reverend Bishop in his severall writings against Dr Bishop; touching whom, since it did please God to call him so soone from you, I will say no more at this time but as Salomō saith:Prov. 10.7. The memoriall of the iust shall bee blessed;Psal. 112.16. and the righteous shall be had in an ever∣lasting remembrance; And for your parts carry about with you this sen∣tence of the wise man.Sapient. 4.13. That though he departed from you soone, yet fulfilled he
much time:Ostendēt ter∣ris nunc tantū fata, neque vl∣tra esse sinent. Aeneid. lib. 6. God as it were but shew∣ing him vnto you, & then taking him away. The learned paines also taken by Dr Morton, the reverend Bishop of Chester in his treatise called the Protestants appeale, I haue vsed herein. Which two, haue for you and me, & all men else of our condition, trode such a beaten path, that it leadeth to the discovery of all the by-waies in∣vented by the Church of Rome to hide that truth, which the Church of God hath ever found in the holy Scriptures, Councells, and Fathers, to the depressing of heresies. O blessed Bernard,Obserue Bern: Spirit. the spirit of God taught thee to teach, That eternall life is purcha∣sed by no merits, but is freely giuen. That the merits of men are such, that life everlasting is not due for them by right; or that God should bee said to doe iniurie, except hee yeeld it them. Surely (saith hee) whatsoever is want∣ing
to me of my selfe, I boldly take it vnto mee out of the bowels of my Lord, because they flowe out with mercy. My merit is the Lords mercy. Read O man in thine owne hart, read within thy selfe concerning thy selfe, the witnes of truth, & thou wilt iudge thy selfe vnworthy of commonlight. These and such other spake devout Bernard, but say the Papists so? No, they write in a more loftie stile, they scorne intreatie or supplication. The Rhemists in their Annotations on the new Testament,Annot. in Mat. 6. v. 4. in Marc. 12. v. 21. in Rō. 2. v. 6. in Cor. 3. v. 8. & in Tim. Epist. 2. c. 4. v. 8. doe nothing so much as contrary this doctrine, pleading their workes to bee meritorious. Workes (say they) are the very cause of salvation, and fully worthie of e∣verlasting life.Obserue the spi∣rit of these men. The ioyes of heauen is the hire, wages for workes, which workes can bee no other, then the va∣lure, desert, price, worth, and merit of the same. Againe, Heaven is our own
right, bargained, and wrought for, & accordingly paid vnto vs, as our hire at the day of iudgement. Marke these, and tell me, whether there can be any greater oppositiō. It sufficeth for me∣rit (saith Bernard) to knowe that me∣rits are not sufficient; nay, say the Rhe∣mists. Know that good workes are so farre meritorious,Annot. in Hebr. 6. v. 10. that God should be vniust if he rendred not heauen for the same. Is this agreement with the Doctors and ancient Church? O no beloued, they are seducers that teach such doctrine, and seduced are they that harken vnto them. Thus much I now thought good to say, to giue you some light, before you enter to reade the whole. Marke and obserue the margent notes with the text, and you shall discouer a number of blasphe∣mies vttered by them against the Ma∣iestie of GOD, as though they were men that knowe none of the mercies
of God in Christ; or if they doe know them, as if they needed them not, e∣stablish, as if they were ashamed to acknowledge them, a doctrine of the devise of their owne braine, as full of pride one way as it is of feare, anxiety, and doubt another way. J may not in this bee tedious vnto you, desirous to ende this speech I heartely pray the God of heauen to powre into your hearts the true feeling of all holy cō∣fort in the holy Ghost; and multiplie his temporall blessings vpon you and yours, make your affaires quiet and peaceable to the increase of your out∣ward welfare; so to liue, that you feare God, and honour the King.
From the Close at Sarum this 24 Iunij. 1618.

