



IT was an observation of our late Soveraigne Lord, King James: that VVheras the Ro∣manists cannot con∣firme their Faith, ei∣ther by sacred Scripture, or ancient Traditions; Their manner is to crie up the Visibilitie of the Church, and Authoritie of the same: And thereby they delude many of the ignorant and unlearned, bearing them in hand, that there was no such thing in the
world as a Protestant, before Luther: And that before his time, all the world beleeved as they doe: And that their Church hath not onely beene visible in all ages, and all times, but eminent∣ly conspicuous, and illustrious. And to this purpose one of that Sect lately delivered to a person of qualitie, this writing following, viz. It is plaine in holy Scripture, and confessed by the Pro∣testants, that the Church of God should be alwaies visible, and it was agreed by D. White, and D. Featly, to Mr. Fisher, and Mr. Sweet, to proove a visible succes∣sion in the Protestant Church, that they both could and would in all ages, from Christ to Luther by name, out of good Authors produce Doctors and Pastors professing the Religion, which the Church of England, and Protestants professe. This was promised, This is now required, without shifts, and idle delayes, &c.

VVhereas in this writing, an abso∣lute promise is pretended to bee made by your Lordship, and D. Featley, to Master Fisher, and Master Sweet: I finde in the relation of the conference (testified and subscribed by Honora∣ble personages, and others,) The said promise to bee made but upon condi∣tion onely:Conference. pag. 7. That the forenamed Iesu∣ites would shew visible professors of the intire Doctrine of the Romish Church, (as yet it is comprised in the Councell of Trent) in all ages, and name them out of good Authors, e∣specially for the first 600. yeeres.
And in particular your Lordship required them to prove, by Christ and his Apostles,Conference. pag. 22. or by any of the Fathers for the first 600. yeeres, these sixe Te∣nets of the Roman Church, viz.

1. That all power of Order, and Juris∣diction, in respect of the Churches, is to bee
derived from the Church of Rome.
2. That no Scripture sence, or Transla∣tion thereof, is Authenticall, unlesse the same were received from the Church of Rome.
3. That the Roman Church onely was, and is the Authenticall Custos of unwritten Traditions.
4. That all generall Councels were cal∣led by the sole Authoritie of the Pope, and that hee might ratifie and disanull whatsoever pleased him in them.
5. That the Pope hath power to Cano∣nize Saints.
6. That the Pope had or hath power to depose Princes.

Likewise,Conference. pag. 7. Doctor Featley required of them, to produce out of good Au∣thors, not any Empire or King∣dome, but so much as any Citie, Pa∣rish or Hamlet, within 500. yeeres after Christ, in which there was any
Visible assembly of Christians to bee named, maintaining and defending either their Trent Creede in generall, or these points of Popery in speciall,Conference. page. 9. to wit:

1. That there is a treasurie of Saints merits, and super abundant Satisfactions, at the Popes disposing.
2. That the Laiety are not commanded by Christs institution, to receive the Sa∣crament of the Lords Supper in both Kindes.
3. That the publicke service of God in the Church, ought, or may be celebra∣ted in an unknowne tongue.
4. That private Masses wherein the Priest saith (edite & bibite ex hoc omnes) and yet eateth and drinketh himselfe onely, are according to Christs in∣stitution.
5. That the Popes pardons are requi∣site, or usefull to release soules out of Pur∣gatory.

6. That the effect of the Sacrament dependeth upon the intention of the Mi∣nister.
7. That extreme unction is a Sacra∣ment properly so called.
8. That we may worship God by an I∣mage.
9. That the sacred Hoast ought to bee elevated, or carried in solemne procession.
10. That Infidels, and Impious per∣sons, yea Rats and Mice; may eate the body of Christ.
11. That all Ecclesiasticall power de∣pendeth on the Pope.
12. That hee cannot erre in matter of Faith.
13. That he hath power to cannonize Saints.
14. To institute Religious orders.
15. To depose Kings, &c.

He also urged Master Fisher, and Master Sweet, to name but one Father
or one writer of note, who held the particulars above named, for 500. yeres after Christ: which they would not, nor could doe.
VVhereby any man may see, that they who call for a Succession in our Church, cannot shew it in their owne.
Moreover, it is not a succession of persons, or catalogue of names, that maketh a true Apostolicke Church; But the true primitiue Faith once given to the Saints, set downe in holy Scripture.
Our Lord himselfe telleth us, that he that is baptized, and beleeveth, shall be sa∣ved:Marke 16.16. now to perswade such a one that is baptized, & beleeveth, that he is no member of Christs Church, except he can also set downe a catalogue of the names of his spirituall parents, since Christ, is all one, as to perswade such a
one that he is no man, because he can∣not reckon up his naturall parents, and fetch his pedigree from Noah or Adam.
Lastly, whereas they clamour for a catalogue of names (as in this wri∣ting) without all shifts and idle de∣layes, they have catalogues plentie, written both by strangers, as by Jlly∣ricus, by Symon de Voyons, Mounsier Plessis, and others, and by our coun∣trymen, as by B. Jewell for the first 500. yeeres, by the Primate of Armagh for the next 500. yeeres; and by the late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, for the last 500. yeeres, with divers o∣thers, to which they have returned no answer, as I can heare of, but they lie upon their hands: also of late, Mr. Birckbeck hath written a catalogue, who acknowledgeth Doctor Featlies great furtherance in it, (as I also doe)
but most especially, I acknowledge my selfe bound unto your Lordship, for your helpe and incouragement, which imboldened me both to write, and publish this Treatise.
Now although the contents of the former writing have beene sufficient∣ly answered, againe, and againe, and neede nothing of mine, being one of the meanest of all my brethren: Yet I shewed them that brought it me, that in stead of a Catalogue of Names, I would shew them a Catalogue of Churches, in which there now are, and have beene many millions of Christians, who have generally borne witnesse, and now doe, to the truth professed by us, and our Religi∣on, in the principall points in contro∣versie betweene the Roman Church and us, as the Greeke Church, which hath foure great Patriarches.

The first of Constantinople, whose succession I have set down from Saint Andrew to Cyrill, the now Patriarch: which succession,The Cophti have also a Patriarch of Alexandria: Alexandria was inhabited with Greekes, and also many other great Cities and Pro∣vinces, both A∣frica and Asia, have at this day many Greekes in them. hath not beene so interrupted with so many Schismes, as the Romish succession hath beene.
The second of Alexandria.
The third of Antioch.
The fourth of Hierusalem: which Greeke Church, is much bigger then the Romish Church in Europe, and more ancient; The Romish Church having received Christianity from them.
Againe, the Moscovite or Russe Christians, who inhabit many coun∣tries not onely in Europe, but also in Asia, as the great Kingdomes of Casan, and Astracan, and other great Provinces, all which together are of greater extent then all Europe besides; As also the Christians under the Pa∣triarch
of Musall in Asia, which Christians Vitriacus the Cardinall reporteth to live in severall,Vt de his qui seor∣sum habitant quo∣rum infinitus est numerus, tacea∣mus, inter Sarace∣nos non pauciores, ut dicitur, sunt Christiani infide∣libus. Vitria. histo. orient. cap. 77. in in∣finite numbers with their King, and also where they live mingled with Saracens, they are not fewer then they: and howsoever some say that these Christians are decayed since Vitriacus time, yet Postell repor∣teth,idem pag. 76. de Iacobitis. that they are yet more then the Latine Church.Postel. Compend. Cosmog. pag. 69. Dico pauci, com∣paratione priorum temporum, on in se, namsunt nobis latinis multo plu∣res. As also the Ja∣cobites dispersed in fortie King∣domes. The Armenian Christians in Europe, Asia, and Africa, who have a thousand Bishops, as Cardi∣nall Baronius reporteth, out of Otho Frisigensis; and also the Abissin Christians in Aethiopia, under their Emperour, who hath many great Kingdomes of Christians vn∣der him. All these, and many more hereafter set downe; as they doe agree
with us in the maine points of Religi∣on, being all baptized in the name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, &c. so also,

1. They deny the Popes Supremacie, some of them excommunicating him yeere∣ly for an Hereticke, or Schismaticke, ac∣counting him, and his Church hereticall.
2. They receive the Communion in both kindes.
3. They have no private Masse.
4. They hold no Transubstantiation.
5. They offer no sacrifice for the quicke, and the dead, in their Liturgies.
6. Married Priests doe administer amongst them.
7. They know no Purgatorie, nor use any Prayers, nor sell any Pardons to re∣lease soules from thence.
8. Most of them have their Service in their owne tongues.

Now howsoever the Romanists ac∣count
no more of the testimonies of these Christians, then of the testimo∣nies of Iewes & Turkes, and esteeme them damned persons, as they doe us; yet let them know, that these Christi∣ans are baptized, & beleeve in Christ; and also live devoutly to God, obe∣diently to Princes, and sincerely to men: yea many of them, suffer very much for Iesus Christs sake, which they might free themselves of, if they would renounce their Religion, and obtaine great honour, and estate; for the Turkes Janisaries, and Basha's, are most of them renegado Christians, but these poore Christians account their Saviour more deere to them, then all the honours, and riches of the world.
Therefore farre bee it from any Christian Soule to account these men damned, as the Romanists doe, onely
for not being subiect to the Bishop of Rome,Bonif. 8. in ex∣trar. de major. & obedi. cap. unam sanctam, &c. according to their Tenet: That every Soule must of necessity of Salvation be subject to the Bishop of Rome.
As for the Dedication, in regard I have received many kindnesses from your Lordship, both when you were my neighbour, and since: I am bold to present this Treatise to your Lordship, desiring your patronage and protection; and also most humb∣ly intreating Almighty God to mul∣tiply his blessings upon you, to your owne Comfort, and good of his Church.

