



 I Haue read it reported (Reue∣rend Fathers and Brethren)
Reyn: in the beeginning of his 6. conclusi∣ons. And also in his apology of them. Quid opus est vt properes pe¦riculum susci∣pere condem∣nationis loquē¦do, cum tacē∣do possis esse tutior. Ambro. offic. l. 1. c. 2. that it was the fortune of
Au∣lus Albinus, to bee reprehen∣ded by Cato the censor, be∣cause being a Romane, and writ∣ing his historie in Greeke, he did seeme to aske pardō, if he did therin amisse, whē with lesse adventure hee might haue kept himselfe from all fault in not medling with such a businesse at all. My case at this time is euen as his in this matter taken in hand; I would both adventure it, & will also praie your pardons, if I haue either done amisse, in medling with a businesse, that beelongeth to right approued schol∣lers, or haue not proceeded so soundly against the ad∣uersaries, as the waight of these questions doth requi∣er. My defence in both cases is by waie of excuse; for seeing I haue for some fewe yeares past, bin conuersāt in al your writings that J could harken out to be print∣ed against the adversaries, to whom rather shoulde J giue an account, then vnto you, either of the profit I haue made by them to ouerthrowe the contrarie part or incite you to continue yet your further labours tothe building vp of the spirituall house of the Lord, and better accomplish, all could doe, & that by this kinde of dedication?

Illustres & prae¦stantes viri di∣scipulorumcer taminibus, nō¦minus quā suis vincunt. Amb. offic. l. 1. c 41. Si pro otioso verbo redde∣mus rationem videamus ne reddamus pro otioso si enti Amb. offic. l.
1. c. 3. The truth hath spokē it, we shall render an account for euerie idle word, and so shal we for our idle silence. J freely confesse vnto you al, that next the booke of God, your volumes and treatises haue espe∣cially tied mee at home, when some other my compa∣nions haue bin walking abroad. The holy truth, which in your consciences you knowe you doe vphold, is the waightiest assurance of well doing that maie bee; The consent of nations & Churches abroad is a great mo∣tiue to pricke you forward; but when by the particular travel of any on man, it may also appeare, that hauing had your writings tried by the Canō of holie scripture and some antiquitie else, & hauing it found that there is a true Diapason, & concord in al your voices, in ar∣guing the truth of the Lords cause, this to bee testified by others that are of the Laitie, as children ioining with you Fathers, wil J suppose bee noe smal ioie and gladnesse vnto you. Macte virtute. Go forward J bee∣seech you with good courage, the aduersarie is insolēt but verie weake,
Lactant, instit. lib. 5. c. 20. fol.
465. iam profecto ab amculis quas contem∣nunt, & à pueris nostratibus error illocum ac stultitiae irridetur. euen of old wiues and yong children which they most contemne, is their verie religion derided.
Illa enim reli∣gio muta est, non tantū qui∣a mutoum est sed quia titus eius in manu & digitis estnō in corde aut lingua sicut nostra ibid. l 4. c. 3. fol. 303. They can tel now as wel as their teachers▪ that their religion is dumbe, as done vnto stockes and blockes, and also is idle as beeing placed in the hande and fin∣gers, scarcelie comminge into the tongue, but neuer into the heart, as the auncient father Lactantius saith by the Gentiles, which aptly sheweth the vanitie oftheirs also, for by euens & ods, they make their prai∣ers long or short.
Their Beads. Iuell. Nolo nūc aut Oxonienses Cātabrigien∣sibus, aut Can∣tabrigienses Oxoniensibus anteponere: vtrosque con∣stat & ingenio & eruditione vauisse. Sic. Melc. Canus de Graecis & Latinis, l.
7. fo. 231 a. not the one before the other, but either of them before the best in the world. Lilly. Fulke. Whita. L. B. Winchest Reynoldes. Besides, lib. de Rom. Ecclesiae Idolol. & Apo∣log. Thesium. Humphrey. Erat enim in∣genio facili. co pioso, suavi, & (quae sermonis maxima vir∣tus) aperto, vt discernere ne∣queas, vtrum ne ornatior in eloquendo, an faciliot in ex∣plicando, an potentior in persuadendo fuerit Lac. de Cyp. lib. de iu∣stitia. c. 1. To incite you to this holy conflict I wil cal to your remembrances, the paines of very wor∣thy men both aliue and dead. Let it bee the honor of Bishop Iuell once bishop of Sarum, that his reply, & A∣pology stand safe without iust reprehension, when his direct adversary D. Harding, reioined but to one of 27. articles. Stapleton returned but to 4. & those so mean∣ly cloathed, that himselfe might haue bin ashamed, not answering the 10. part of the bishops text leauing out whole sheetes, to which he hath not said a word; Dorman delt also against the Bishop, in 4. articles too, but too too porely. Propose to your sights the industri∣ous toiles of D. Fulke, and VVhitakers; the one for his answere to the Rhemish testament, as also his defence of our translatiōs against Gregory Martin, his answere to Bristow, Allen, and others. The other for his paines against Champion, Stapleton, Dureus & Bellarmine. But in this, are the liuing to be preferred before the deade, in that it hath pleased God, to reserue two of the strō∣gest, in out liuing their first labours more thā 20. years, the most learned and iudicious Bishop of Winton, & D. Reynolds, the one for his dialogues against the Iesuits the other for his conference with Hart, wherein they see their desire on their enimies, no aduersary daring to propound against either of them. Who doth not thinke the memory of D. Humfrey is yet fresh, and lau∣dable in the highest degree, for his answere to Campi∣ans chalenge; for elegancy of stile, exactnesse of me∣thod, and substance of matter, without all cast of the dice, as Lactantius said by St.
Cyprian? D. VVillet hathbin very painefull as his Synopsis and Tetrastilon doe plainely shew. The venerable Deane of Exeter
D. Sut∣cliue, may not in this page of praise be omitted, for an∣swering aswel the most learned amōg the aduersaries, as those that haue the most dissolute tongues, Bellar∣mine and
Gifford: It woulde be too long to reakon all, therfore I cōtent my selfe, with picking out the choise. It shal alwaies be my praiers vnto Almighty God, that whensoeuer it shall please him to call these, or any of these to him selfe out of this wearisome life, there may others arise in your places, to goe on with the cause, as the Poet speaketh of the Golden bough, primo avulso non deficit alter,
Aeneid lib 6. one being taken away there wanteth not an other, and so giue the aduersarie not so much as a breathing time. And when you of the Cleargie, and Schollers haue thus discharged their duties to God & the Prince; what rests for the Laity to doe, but to take vp and read, and hauing read as the men of Baerea in the Acts, to compare both sides with the scripture, & then resolue to iustifie the truth in all sinceritie?
Act. 17. And to you I say this againe; the clearnesse and perspicuitie of your writings hath added such a plainenes to my vn∣derstanding, to the finding out of the truth, that if I should not absolutely averre that the doctrine this day taught and professed in this Realme were the true and sincere doctrine of Christ and of his Church, I should surely sin against mine owne conscience: the contrarie, of the Church of Rome beeing only built on the rub∣bish of contradictions, impieties, gloses, slights, falsi∣fications, and forgeries, as by the samplar which I haue drawne out of their bookes, for that purpose, wil mani∣festlyappeare, I say not to you, who are mighty in knowledge that way already, but to euerie meane rea∣der, for whose sakes only, I vndertooke this labour.
Ignoscant sci∣entes ne offē∣dātur nescien∣tes, satius est offerre habēti quàm differre non habentē. Aug. de bapt. contra Donat. lib. 2. cap. 1. The Lord Iehova continue the Kings Maiestie in his holie intention of furthering and fauouring the doctrine e∣stablished, and blesse & prosper the Reuerend Bishops and Cleargy, to be watchfull against the common ad∣versarie the Papist; And to giue the rest of the King∣dome sound resolutiō to ioine strongly togither to the discountenauncing of Antichrist and all his designes.
From Tydworth
the 1. of Nouember. 1607.

