




WHē Iphigenia (righte vvorshipfull) shoulde be killed and offered in sacrifice vn∣to Diana, to appease hir long conceiued ire to Agamemnon, and all Grece for his sake: Timanes the payn∣ter vvas sent for to describe this heauie and turbulent tragedie, done as it vvas. But comming vnto the discription of Agamemnon his face, he founde it so sad, sorovvfull and mourning-like, that vvith all the cunning he had, he coulde not in paynting represente the same. VVhere∣fore
couering his face vvith a veyle, he lefte the sorovvfulnesse thereof vnto the imagination of men.
Lykevvyse I, vvho in descrybing of persons am nothing so cunning as vvas this Timanes in portraying of Pictu∣res, bycause I can not condignely ex∣presse the godly vertues, and vertuous godlynesse, vvith other good gyftes and qualities, that GOD, nature and for∣tune hath indued you vvithall: I vvill co∣uer them vvith the veyle of scilence, and leaue them to the iudgement of them that knovve, and canne better expresse them. And so leauing to hang a garlande of greene Iuie at the tauern dore, vvhere the vvyne is so good, famouse, and ven∣dible, I meane to spare penne, paper, and paines, and returne to my purpose.
VVhilest God gaue life to D. Spenser, of moste wortshipfull memorie, I (for the loue he bare to good letters) founde hys worship, not in words, but in deedes, not in one or two things, but in many moste beneficiall, a father rather than a master vnto me. I was glad then, and do reioyce yet, that it was my fortune to dvvell with
so vvorshipfull and vertuous a master. VVhose singular vertues, If I shulde goe aboute to expresse or number, as I myghte lightly finde to my oration a beginning: so shoulde I hardely make thereof any conuenient ending. VVher∣fore I meane not at thys tyme (though I shal seeme scantly to performe my dutie) to blase or aduaunce his vertues at all, onlesse it be in affyrming, that he vvas a manne, not vnvvorthy to be the succes∣sor of Doctor Tailer, vvhose offyce and cure he supplied. VVhat commendation is comprised heerein, iudge they that knovve, or haue read of the goodly and godly qualities, the authoritie and wise∣dome that this Tailer vvas indued vvith. Nam sua cūct is nota est agricolis pietas, & candida metis simplicitas. VVel this good doctor Spenser, as in al things he vvas my very friend, so chefly (as in a thing of che∣fest price) he had a singular and earnest care to instruct me vvith lerning and ver∣tue. It hapned about this time twelue mo∣neth, that vvayting and vvalking abroade in the fields vvith him, at his cōmaunde∣ment, I began to reade in the beginning
of the Christian Poet Pallingene, vntill I came vnto this inuocation of the Poet:
Et vos Castalides nimphae. &c.
Tradite me famae ne prorsus inutilis olim,
Ʋixisse hie videar: peream{que} in funere totus:
At vvhiche vvordes he caused mee to stay, and beganne to declare vnto me the frailtie of our life, and that vve knevv not vvhen death should call vs. And therfore exhorted me, and vvished all others in their vocatiō to leaue some fruite of their studie. And bicause he sayd that he knevv the disposition of yong men to be fanta∣sticall, inconstante and full of conceipts, to the intent that I should not vvander, and go about I vvot not vvhat, he vvould tell me, vvherin fruitfully to my selfe, and profitably to others I should imploy my studie. VVilling me to take my shorte notes (vvhich I had for my ovvne vse col∣lected out of master Fox) and orderly to reduce them into an Epitome. A grateful vvorke, as he supposed, for the common people, vvhich can not, and vvoulde fayne haue some sight of that vvorthy vvorke. Moreouer, bicause that there in Essex and
Suffolke, vvere many vvelspoken Mini∣sters, vvhich by the exercise of Prophe∣sying, and the knovvledge of the Frenche tong, were able well to iudge, and sound∣ly to preache the Gospell: and only their defecte was, that (for vvant of the Latin tongue) they could not induce any mo∣rall example or hystorie, which beeing rightly applied, giueth a goodly illustrati∣on and grace vnto a sermon, or any other exercise: he thought I should please them and profit my selfe, if I vvould take Bru∣sonius and Licosthenes, and translate some of their examples into Englishe. Hys motion, bothe for authoritie and good vvill, was a sufficient commaundement vnto me to satisfie his pleasure in accom∣plishing his aduise and behest. And albe∣it he be gone, yet was not I so obliuious to forget, or so vncurteous to neglecte his wordes. VVherfore I haue vvith such diligence as in me lay, and vvith the smal learning that God hath lent me, patched it vp as I could, and as you see, I haue re∣duced it into an Alphabet of common places, conferring as the reader may see, Lycosthenes and Brusonius togither, cho∣sing
out such examples and Apothegmes as I thought moste necessarie, and omit∣ting (as neere as I coulde) all vnnecessa∣rie superfluitie. And thus hauing longer here continued my laborious style, than reason requireth (for auoyding of tedi∣ousnesse) vvith so vnperfecte an ende I vvill surceasse, moste humbly beseeching your vvorship to take in good parte this my simple trauayle. And then shal I little esteeme of the fonde surmisinges of the scornefull company: nor the rashe re∣porte of so fonde a felovvship. VVishing them rather to proue the lyke labour, than haughtily to reproue my vvell mea∣ning minde.
God long preserue your vvorship in prosperous estate and felicitie.
Datum Bracklei. Anno salutis humanae. 1572.

