



SYR, it was my pur∣pose when I first vn∣dertooke to translate these diuine and com∣fortable Meditations on the Lords Passion, and Motiues to Morti∣fication, (selected out of the workes of S. BERNARD, and other auncient Writers, not verbally turned into English, but aug∣mented with such other Meditations, as it pleased God to infuse into my minde) to haue dedicated them vnto your worthy Father, who (both in respect of his neere alliance, and other reasons of moment)
 might by his owne right haue challenged that duty at my hands.
But since it seemed good vnto the Di∣uine Maiestie, to remoue him from earth, out of the societie of mortall men, to liue for euer in the company of the blessed An∣gels in Heauen, before I could attaine to the accomplishment of my wished desires: I could finde none more neere and deere vnto me then your self, who might vouch∣safe to giue the first kinde entertainement to my well-intended labours, when they should come forth into the light. For as the Lord hath blessed you with a peaceable fruition of your Fathers possessions: so no doubt you are also a true heire of his com∣mendable Vertues.
My desire is to profit all, yet I am obli∣ged by many priuate respects, to com∣mend my labours, (such as they are) in a more speciall manner vnto your selfe, that thereby I might seale vnto you, a true as∣surance of my gratefull affection towards you, For farre be it from my thought, that eyther I should forget your kind speeches, or bury your good deed in the darke graue of Obliuion, expressed to mee, and exten∣ded towards mee at my last conference with you.
I know you cannot but kindely accept my small mite, if you ballance it with the
 willingnesse of my minde: and I am assu∣red you will not mislike it, in regard of the matter, though happily you may finde some distaste in respect of the stile. For what can be more fit for these times, then Motiues to Mortification? or more com∣fortable to the soule of a sorrowfull sinner, then a serious Meditation of the bitter Passion of our Crucified Redeemer, who being God, became man for our sakes: suffe∣red a most cruell death on the Crosse for our sinnes: and being buried, rose againe for our iustification?
But it is not my purpose heere to relate what sweet streames doe flow from this christall and pure Fountaine, what whole∣some fruits may be gathered from this fruitfull Tree, or what rich Treasure may be found in this golden Mine. I desire to containe my lines within the bounds of Mediocritie: especially when the Current of my words turneth towards One whom God hath blessed with capacitie, able to conceiue the great commodities which doe proceed from such Christian exercises: Yet before I make a full period, giue mee leaue (I pray you) to let you vn∣derstand, that I haue much endeauoured, so to expresse the grieuous Passion of our gracious Redeemer, as if it were now in present action before our eyes, that I might
 the better stirre vp feruent motions of Pietie in the minde, and kindle the sparkes of true deuotion in the heart of the Rea∣der. For indeed, the full scope of my de∣sire is, to glorifie GOD, and benefit my brethren. And that your owne soule, (as also the soule of euery religious Reader,) may be the more neerely and deepely tou∣ched, and wounded with a feeling consi∣deration of our Sauiours death, I suppose it the best way, after a due preparation thereunto by prayer (without which no∣thing can be sanctified vnto vs,) to be∣ginne at the first Meditation, and so ta∣king the History of his Passion before you, to proceed vntill you come vnto the yeel∣ding vp of his Ghost vpon the Crosse.
In the progresse whereof, it may please God so to touch your heart with sorrow, that your eyes, (with those in the Gospell, who came to see his death, Luke 24.48.) may gush forth Teares for griefe, that so innocent a Lambe should be so despight∣fully and cruelly tortured, tormented, and crucified. Where also you (in whose per∣son I speake vnto all) may iustly conceiue a double griefe.
First, that Iesus Christ (the Righteous,) was killed for sinne.
Secondly, that hee was killed for our sinne.

The consideration whereof, should moue all, with weeping Peter, Luke 22.62. to shed salt and brinish teares of contri∣tion, in remembrance of our offences, that being therewith pricked at the heart, Christ Iesus may say vnto our sorrowfull soules, as sometimes he did vnto the Israe∣lites, I haue heard your groaning, and will haue compassion on you, Iudg 2.18. And may also thereunto adde, Sonne, be of good cheere, thy sinnes are forgiuen thee, Matth. 9 2. Come hither and taste how sweet I thy Lord am: with mee there is plenteous re∣demption.
And as in matter of sorrow, it more deepely pierceth the soule of the hearer with griefe, or in matter of delight, more affecteth the minde with ioy, to heare the particular relation of some Tragical euent, or the parts and particles of some delight∣full accident reported, then onely to heare a bare narration of either in grosse, with∣out expressing the parts thereof: so like∣wise it cannot chuse, but more deepely wound the soule of euery Christian, to heare, or read, the speciall and seuerall suf∣ferings of Christ in his Passion, then if it were onely sayd thus, Christ died for vs.
But least I draw my lines beyond the limits of due measure, I heere conclude: desiring the LORD to blesse you, and
 the rest of your Fathers issue, with many happy dayes vpon earth, and when they are ended heere in peace, to receiue you all into his heauenly Kingdome of euer∣lasting Glory.

