



Right Worshipfull,
I Haue done my best endeauour to lay open be∣fore mens eyes what Conscience is, be∣cause I gladly would haue euery one to be acquainted with Conscience. For the
 too much neglect thereof it may bee said to most, as once Christ spake to Ma∣ries Sister (when hee saw her ouer much busied a∣bout prouision for the bo∣dy) Martha, Martha, thou art troubled about many things, but one thing is needfull. Many men know much, and are toiled in the world with a croude of cares and earthly vnderta∣kings. They seeke after these fraile, fading, and transitory things, and some after meere speculatiue knowledge. But most neg∣lect this most needfull point: whereupon it hap∣peneth, that for the most part men generally slight the practise of that which they daily heare and vn∣derstand:
 and the onely reason is, they are vnwil∣ling to be acquainted with Conscience. This Fellow Conscience is too precise for loose Libertines; Hee will marre the Market of couetous worldlings, of ouer-cunning Crafts-men, deceitfull Trades-men, and fraudulent Merchants. He is to waspish to be in com∣pany with merry Mates, and too sullen for such as cannot endure to become sorrowfull for sinne. Con∣science, they thinke, will cast them into a Melancho∣licke fit, and moue their se∣cure hearts out of their bed of rest; therefore wil they take no knowledge of it, till they needs must: which will certainely bee at one
 time or another. For it is in euery man, and will haue to doe with vs, sooner or later, here or hereafter, and that whether wee will or no. But better it were for vs voluntarily to bee ac∣quainted with it, then of necessitie.
All holy bookes tend to informe vs of Conscience, to reforme the euill, to di∣rect the good, and so to re∣ctifie vs: for effecting of this, the Booke of Nature, the Law written in the heart, the Law of the tenne Precepts, the Law of Faith, the holy Gospell, are all helpes. All these are for instruction of Conscience, and to make vs consciona∣ble.
Not onely these bookes
 of Gods owne making, but also Bookes, Sermons, and pious Labours of all holy men doe aime at this, to worke Conscience in vs.
Conscience is it selfe aThe excel∣lency of Conscience. Booke, whereof all other Bookes are expositions: It is as the Text, they the in∣terpretation. In reading therefore these, wee must haue an eye to it: our knowledge in them must informe vs in this; else we reade them to no purpose. They that grow cunning in the Booke of Consci∣ence by reading Gods and good Mens Books, are vn∣doubtedly the best Chri∣stians, the best Lawyers to pleade their owne Cause, and the best Iudges to Iudge of themselues aright.

This book is of Gods own hand writing; it is also ve∣ry legible to any that will giue themselues to reade it.
If we open this booke, marke it, and consider well what it aduiseth, what is it that shall not then be refor∣med? It is the fashion of people generally to cry out of the world, and the man∣ners thereof, in the meane space they know not the cause, or will not know it, and yet is it neere them, and within them; and that is the badnesse of mens Consciences. For amend these, and the world shall not be blamed; for as mens consciences be so is it also: reforme these and reforme it; better them, and the World will bee good e∣nough,
 and the complaint will cease.
Conscience as it is good or euill, so it makes or mars a man: by a good Consci∣ence he becomes good, thinks, desires, affecteth, and speaketh of good things; and doth them: by a bad Conscience hee turneth a cleane contrary course: For as our Con∣sciences be, euen so are we: if it be naught, we are vici∣ous, we are vaine, lewd and naught too: if it be good, we fly from sinne as from a serpent, and feare to offend God and our Neighbour.
Conscience is appointed by God to bee our carefull watchman, to eye vs well, to record all our thoughts, sayings, and doings, & so to
 witnesse against or with vs vnto God, when he shall call vs to an account. It at∣tendeth when God shall summon us; then will it plead hard, howsoeuer it seemeth now to be silent in most.
By Cōscience we become well acquainted with our selues, else to our selues we remaine meere strangers; for nothing within vs but it can make vs to know our selues, which is the most excellent point of know∣ledge. To see themselues many looke into glasses; Let us looke then into this glasse of Conscience, that we may see our selues, and that not only in some outward part, as by the Ar∣tificiall glasse we do, but
 by this also as well inward as outward. By the artifici∣all a man may see himselfe, and soone forget what manner of one he was; but this will not only shew vs what we bee, but will also keepe vs in remem∣brance of our selues, that in no businesse we shall for∣get our selues.
Conscience is a thing so diuine, and hath such ac∣quaintance with God, as it can and will tel vs whether God be with vs or against vs, whether he be friend or foe, and how our case stan∣deth betweene him and vs: which to know, is so neces∣sary and behoouefull, as all knowledge in respect of this is but vaine, and in the end to little purpose.

Conscience next vnder God, is that to which we may most safely commend and commit our selues, our whole estate, the disposing and ordering of all our af∣faires: It is a good coun∣sellour to vs aliue, and a most faithfull Executer of our last will and Testa∣ment, left in other mens hands for our Children and posterity.
Conscience is onely that which will and can make vs honest men, and of cre∣dit among men: for as our Conscience is knowne to be, so are we reputed, and so shall we be trusted. It is that which alwaies wee must bring with vs for our suretie in all promises, contracts, and bargaines, or
 else none will credit vs. The word of Conscience, when it is once knowne, wil procure vs more credit, then we for the present are worth. The honesty of it is aboue all bonds: It will carrie great matters in few words, when without it by many words we shall not be trusted for trifles: For Conscience will not giue it word for any dishonest man, though clothed in silk and satten, yea, though he haue Lands and large reuenues, Conscience will not be bound for him. It onely will be surety for ho∣nest men, whom it both may vrge, and will make them keep day with others punctually.
As for Time seruers,
 loose companions, shifting Fellowes, Hypocrites, cog∣ging Merchants, and irreli∣gious persons: it will haue nothing to do with them; which appeareth by this, for that it forbiddeth such to vse their wits to coozen and to defraud one ano∣ther. But for whom it once giueth its word, it is still calling on them, and char∣ging them to remember honesty, equitie, fidelitie, and to doe as they would be done vnto.
Conscience is the chiefest maintainer of iustice and e∣quity among men: And men generally are content with what it decreeth, con∣cludeth, and alloweth, as may appeare by such spee∣ches as these, In Conscience
 giue what you thinke fit; I ap∣peale to your Conscience in this and that: betweene God and your Conscience be it.
From Conscience do a∣rise all the commendations of all our actions, or the discommendations. If any do ill, straightway Consci∣ence is questioned, Is this your Conscience? Can you do this of your Conscience?
Conscience is a mans best friend, or his worst foe, in trouble & distresse, here in this life, at death, and at the last iudgement. It will speake with or a∣gainst a man, as the cause requireth; It pleads with∣out fee; it respects no per∣son, be he Poore or Rich. It will side with none, it ha∣teth to the death partiality,
 lying, equiuocating, flatte∣ry and all falshood.
Conscience is the con∣sort of charity, of faith, of truth, and of vprightnesse; It is the Caske wherein to keep the mistery of faith and true godlinesse: with∣out which all these perish. A man making shipwracke of Conscience loseth all power of religion, of which he hath no more, then he maketh Conscience of.
Conscience, is that whose aduise a man must first take in all his actions, before he vndertakes to do them. For if it be either ne∣glected, or opposed, or carelesly slighted, the act will turne to sinne.
Conscience in a word is Gods Record, out of which
 hee will take notice of euery man: and as there he finds him, so will he iudge him, and thereafter pro∣nounce sentence, either of absolution or condemnati∣on, at the last day.
And therefore by this so large an Epistle (Right worshipfull) you may see how it is not onely fit, but very necessarie also to be acquainted with Consci∣ence; which in most is without all authority to bind them to the good be∣hauior, so loosely, so licen∣tiously do most men liue. But blessed be God, that you haue better learned Christ, and haue felt the commanding power of the word, and the comfort of a good Conscience by shew∣ing
 your selues Patternes to that your wel reformed Family; In which true pie¦tie is attended vpon with loue vnfaigned one to∣wards another, and your profession adorned with workes of charitie abroad. Your frequent reading of holy Scriptures, I well know, affords you exam∣ples not a few of holie du∣ties: but you want not a rare president at home, that most honorable Ladie Marchionesse, your noble Mother. Whose singular humility, great bountie, desire to please God, loue to his word in the power∣full plainnesse thereof, and performance of good du∣ties are much to be admi∣red especially in so great a
 Personage, in one so verie aged & full of daies, in one so long brought vp in her former yeares in the most eminent place of royall ser∣uice vnder that famous Queene Elizabeth. I hope I need not to stirre your readie minds to a thankfull acknowledging to God of this and other his mercies, nor to excite you to striue for the euerlasting hope of blessednesse; seeing that your iustifying Consci∣ence, accompanying your iustifying faith, as I am per∣swaded, giueth you good assurance in your waies of well doing. For your hap∣pie continuance wherein, I am bold in this ample man∣ner to present vnto your courteous acceptance the
 excellencie of Conscience and to commend the same to your Christian medita∣tions. And so I humblie take leaue, in my heartie prayers commending that right Honourable Lady, with your worthy Selues, beloued Children, and all your religious houshold to the fauour and guidance of the Almighty; euer resting,

Batcomb. Calend. Ian. 1630.
