



WORSHIPFVLL,
AFter I had made an essay in your Family, of this manner of Catechising, it plea∣sed you so well to approue thereof, as to desire a written Coppie to instruct your Houshold, I promised it: but for that some other haue also requested the like of mee, I thought it fit (being thereto also intreated) to publish it for the greater benefit.
This is easily learned of any that can say the words of the common Catechisme, so much neglected. This bindeth the Learner strictly to the words of that Ca∣techisme, in answering to the Questions here propoun∣ded: And serues more to direct the Master of the fami∣ly, to make questions out of that Catechisme, then for other to learne to make answere thereunto, if they, can but say the words, except in some few places.
This manner of questioning to draw answers from the words as they lie in order, may bee obserued not onely in Catechismes, but also in reading holy Scrp∣tures, as is not vnknowne to my people here at home, with good fruit.
This my labour such as it is for the present, I present you with. For I acknowledge your good fauour towards
 my sonne, and I am very thankfull in his behalfe, as he also himself is, being r ready vpon any occasion to expresse it to your selfe, as also to that worthy honou∣red Knight, Sir. Walter Earle, at whose request it pleased you so fauourably and freely to bestow the liuing.
I cannot but make mention of him, when I write of Catechising to you, for his more then ordinary religi∣ous care in the well trayning vp of his family this way. In all my dayes, among all my acquaintance I haue not seene the like: and I rather admire it, when I consider his daily imployment sundry waies otherwise in publik businesses, the least wherof doth commonly draw most men from almost alea of instructing their housholds. But what cannot a setled resolution, an industrous na∣ture, a holy zeale, and a godly care to haue religion in honour, make a pious and deuoted heart to doe.
Sir, I pray you accept this vnaigned witnesse of my thankfulnesse, and a some little furtherance for the in∣struction of your familie, vpon which I heartily wish a blessing from God the Author of all good; to whose gracious guidance, I commend you and all yours, and so in all due respectfulnesse I take my leaue.
 Batcomb.
