



RIght Worshipfull, Satans subtilties are of old; it is no newes to relate them. CHRIST Iesus is that Lambe, who loueth his dearely, and is beloued againe of his vnfeinedly; but the diuell is that Lion, roaring in his inueterate hatred, seeking to dishonor
 the one, and to deuoure the other. The fearefull hee affrighteth with dread of torment: whence it is, that Peter for∣getting his profession which he made so boldly, for sweareth his Sauiour, euen with cursing most vnfaithfully. Thus many miscarrie in time of triall: they either presuming, and God not assisting, or they formerly seeming to be what they were not, are then manifest to be as they were in deede.
But where by feare hee cannot make afraid, he turneth his shape: of a Lion roaring, he would seeme a lambe lamen∣ting: when by force hee cannot winne, he endeuoureth by deceit to beguile: thē Satan would be a Sauiour, and perswa∣deth Eue that following his counsell, she shall be more like God then before, whilest hee intendeth to make her as himselfe, hopelesse of heauen. If hee can∣not, as an Angell of hell, make men ouer wicked: yet in the shape of an Angell of light, by a preposterous zeale, hee will
 set them on to become ouer iust, as Sa∣lomon speaketh. Sometime hee doth leade men into a superstitious volunta∣rie worship without Scripture on the left hand. Sometime to runne with nothing but pretended allegations of Scripture, into by pathes of error and schisme on the right hand. Thus Manasseth is a∣gainstEsay 9. 20. 21▪ Ephraim, and Ephraim a∣gainst Manasseth, and both against Iu∣dah, amongst vs. The Schismaticall Brownist, hee snatcheth at the right hand, and is hungrie: the Antichri∣stian Papist on left hand, and is not sa∣tisfied. What safetie to Sion? It is time to see and consider.
We sland (Right Worshipfull) in the middest, behold wee may matters of feare, malice and iustice: the iustice of God for sinne, the malice of man and Satan encreasing transgression, to force still iustice to wrath: should wee regard lightly these things? Is it enough for vs, as many do no more, to condemne the
 one side, and to abhorre the other, as carelesse Securitanes? Farre be it from vs: except we repent, wee likewise shall perish. Shall we leaue our standing, and by stumbling at such stones of offence, fall from our well doing? God forbid: walke we must, more warily; neither goProu. 4. 27. on this side, nor on that, but remoue our feete from euill. Aske we should for the Word promised, on which if we humbly depend, wee shall heare it behind vs, when we are going on either hand, say∣ingEsay 30. 21. vnto vs; This is the way, walke in it.
It grieueth me much (Right Wor∣shipfull) to see this breach made a∣mongst vs; losse it is to the Church, gaine to the enemie, and then what true good to themselues? Many laugh at it, some account it a matter scarce wor∣thie thinking vpon, and so few or none lament it: to me hath it been iust cause of sorrow, and therefore could I not lightly passe it by: but in loue to such as
 yet abide with vs, and in desire to doe my best to recouer againe mine owne, whom God once gaue me, I haue publish∣ed these things.
My labour (Right Worshipfull) I offer vnto you as a testimonie of a neuer forgetfull remembrance, with a minde hartelie thankfull for your Worships cō∣tinued fauours, and bountifull libera∣litie towards mee. By your worke of mercie, in the Vniuersitie was I brought vp, whereby through the good grace of God, I am that I am. Accept therefore this I beseech you, not as any recom∣pence (for how can euer a child repay a due fullie equall to parents deserts?) but as a continuall witnesse of my bounden seruice. Our will is of God the Father accepted for the deede, where there can be nothing better: the like measure of mercie I am sure his children will mete vnto me. In perswasion whereof, with comfort already wel experienced, I cease further herein to trouble you: beseech∣ing
 the mighty God of heauen to be with you, and to blesse you after his abun∣dant loue to the Saints in Christ e∣lect, the verie Israel of God, I humblie take my leaue. From Worsop in Not∣tinghamshire.
Iun. 18.

