


SYR, I had no sooner taken a sight of your last Booke, entituled: The fifth Part of Reportes (vvhich vvas some number of monethes after the publi∣cation therof in England) but there entred vvith the reading, a certaine appetite of ansvvering the same, and this vpon different motiues, as vvell in regarde of your person and place, abilitie and other circumstances depending theron; as also of the subiect and argument it selfe, vvhich yovv handled, and manner held in handling therof, to he greatest preiudice, vvrong, and disgrace of Catholickes, and Catholicke religion that you could deuise.
And first in your person and place, I consi∣dered your facultie and profession of the com∣mon lavves of our Realme, your long standing, and speciall preferment therin, your experience, and iudgemēt gathered thereby, your estimation and credit in the Common-vvealth, and your au∣thority, honour, and riches ensuing thervpon; all



vvhich drevv me to the greater consideration of your Booke, but principally your said profession of our Common temporall Municipall lawes, vvhich science aboue all other, A strāge attempt to im∣pugne Catho∣licke religion by Ca∣tholicke Princes lawes in Englād. next to Diuinitie it selfe, doth confirme, and conuince vnto the vnder∣standing of an English-man, the truth of the Ca∣tholicke Roman religion. For so much as from our very first Christian Kings & Queenes, vvhich must nedes be the origen, and beginning of all Christian common lavves in England, vnto the raigne of King Henry the eight, for the space of more then nyne hundred yeares, all our Princes and people being of one, and the selfe same Ca∣tholicke Roman religiō, their lavves must needes be presumed to haue byn conforme to their sense and iudgment in that behalfe, and our lavvyers to the lavves: so as novv to see an English tempo∣rall lavvyer to come forth, and impugne the said Catholicke religion, by the antiquity of his Com∣mon-lavves, throughout the tymes and raignes of the said Kings, in fauour of Protestāts, Luthera∣nes, Caluinistes, or other professors not knovvne in those dayes, is as great a nouelty and vvonder, as to see a Philosopher brought vp in Aristotles schole, to impugne Aristotle by Aristotles learning, in fauour of Petrus Ramus, or any other such nevv aduersary, or lately borne Antagonist: Or as to behold an ancient Phisitian, trayned vp in Galens

tents, to fight against Galen and Galenistes, out of their ovvne bul-vvarkes, or fortresses, yea and this in ayde of Paracelsians, or any other fresh crevv of Alchimian doctors vvhatsoeuer.
3. This first consideration then, of your person, place, and profession, did inuyte me strongly to come, and see vvhat you said in this behalfe, but no lesse did the argumēt or subiect of your booke, togeather vvith your māner of treating the same, of vvhich tvvo points I shall speake seuerally; for that they haue seuerall ponderations, & all in my opinion both important, rare, and singular. For vvhat more important matter can be thought of among Christiās, The im∣portance of M. Attor∣neys Plea. then to treat of Spirituall Power, & Ecclesiasticall Authority, being the kinges bench of Christ on earth, the table of his scepter, the tri∣bunall of his dominion & iurisdiction, vvhereof dependeth the vvhole direction of soules, the re∣mission of our sinnes, the efficacy of his Sacra∣ments, the lavvfulnes of all priesthoode and mi∣nistery, the gouernment of the vvhole Church, and finally the vigour, frute, & effect of all Chri∣stian religion. This is the importance of your ar∣gument M. Attorney, and consider I pray you, vvhether it standeth vs not much in hand, to be attentiue vvhat you say, and hovv substantially you pleade in this matter.
4. And as for the other tvvo circumstances of



rarenes, and singularity, vvhere may they more be seene, then in this so vveighty a case, contey∣ning the vvhole povver of the sonne of God, both in heauen, and earth, for so much as belongeth to remission of sinnes and gouernement of his earthly inheritance, vvhich is heere handled and ouer-ruled by a temporall lavvyer, and by him giuen to a temporall Lady and Queene; and this not only by force of a temporall Statute, made in Parlamēt to that effect, the first yeare of her raigne, vvhereby Ecclesiasticall Supremacy vvas ascribed vnto her, The sin∣gularity of M. Attor∣neyes pa∣radox. but by the very vigour of her temporall crovvne it self, vvithout any such Statute, and by vertue of the ancient pretended Common-lavves of our Realme, vvhich Common-lavves being made, receaued, introduced, and established by Catholicke Kings and Queenes, as hath byn said, maketh the matter so strange and rare, the vvon∣der & admiration so great, as neuer paradox, per∣haps in the vvorld, seemed more rare & singular in the eyes of Philosophers, then this in the iudge∣ment of learned Deuines. And vvho then vvould not be allured vvith this singular nouelty to se∣arch somvvhat after the depth of so nevv deuised a mystery?
5. After this ensueth, as considerable, your me∣thode, & manner of handling this subiect, vvhich to me seemeth nothing vulgar, and consequently





to you and  particularites ∣cero; Ci. Tus∣cul q. 3. That yo ∣uersies, and  forth. All that  gre rep  your side,  vse your  the truth for  modesty, and 
7. All th hin  encourage  reuievv o  hope to my  modesty, and  so much comm∣ued and inten  cleere face  in your  M. At∣torney chalen∣ged of his pro∣mise. you vvill doe ∣cile cedes.  your self  the  animo dig ∣se sua spote,  in deed to confess  & fortitude but ∣ner goeth grea  soules, neuer-dying 

e accompted our highest interest, for that the uestion novv in hand betvveene you and me, ōcerneth the same most neerly, as in the sequent reface vvill more largelie appeare.
. Novv only I am to say & promise also on my ehalfe, that I meane to proceed in the prosecu∣ion of this vvorke, according to your foresaid rescriptions of truth, temperance, modesty, and vr∣anity, and this both in center, The Au∣thor promi∣seth all modesty in this answere. and circumference, s neere as I can, and if necessity at anie time, or pon anie occasion, shall enforce me to be more earnest, it shall be rather in the matter it self, then against the man, I meane your self, vvhose person and place, I shall alvvaies haue in devv regard, though I may not omit to tell you, that in some partes of your booke (especially tovvardes the end thereof) you vvax so vvarme in your accusa∣tions against Catholickes, & Catholicke religion, (vvhich your progenitors and auncestors did so highly reuerence, honour, and esteeme) as the indignity thereof, and the leuity, and open vn∣truth of the cauillations, & calumniations them∣selues (for so in deed they are to be accompted ra∣ther then graue accusations) did enkyndle in me some extraordinary heat, for their reiection, and depulsion, as you vvil see in the places themselues, but especially in the last chapter of my expostu∣lations against you.

9. Out of vvhich I must here againe repeat one thing briefly, vvhich there I haue more at large declared, and more earnestly vrged, to vvit the obligation you haue both in honour and consci∣ence, according to the rules of all true Christian diuinitie, to enforme rightlie his Maiesty in cer∣tayne pointes, vvherin your self being at that time deceaued, misinformed also his highnes, at the first presentation of your Booke vnto him, if my information thereof be true. And for that the point it self is of very great consequence, M. At∣torney bound in con∣science and ho∣nour to enforme a nevv his Ma∣iesty. and that the misconceat or vvrong impression of his Maie∣sty, mae be to the great preiudice of manie of his dutifull subiectes, I am the more earnest to vrge this obligation vpon you, especiallie for that I vnderstand, that since the edition of your booke, you haue in a certayne publicke Act, solemne as∣semblie, and most honorable auditorie, repeated againe, and auouched the said iniurious assertion, concerning Catholickes, that their Recusancy began vpon disloyaltie, by occasion of the ex∣communication of Q. Elizabeth by Pope Pius Quintus vpon the eleuenth yeare of her raigne, and for that cause, and not before, nor vpon anie other motiue.
10. VVhich iniurious charge, though it vvere suf∣ficientlie refuted there in presence, by the M. Garnet. priso∣ner at the barre, to the satisfaction of al indifferent



people, that might easilie descrie your passion erin; yet haue I shevved the same more at length  my said last Chapter of this booke, vvhich I ould vvish you had read, before so confidentlie ou had repeated the same charge againe in the id assemblie, auouching vpon your fidelitie, and ervpon challēging anie Recusant vvhatsoeuer, at noe Catholicke, or other refused to repaire to our seruice, vntill the said eleuenth yeare of the Queenes raigne: but I haue shevved out of pu∣licke testimonies that you ar deceaued therin, & at both manie Catholickes, & Puritanes vvere pen Recusants before that yeare, and neither of em vpō that cause vvhich you suggest: & so you e hovv farre your fidelitie, vvhich you pavvne or the matter maie hereby come in question.
. I could further put you in mind, of manie ther ouerlashing speaches, tending to the hurte nd dāmage, yea bloud and death also, of diuers sed by you in that great assemblie, M. At∣torneyes ouerlas∣hing in speech. if I thought ou vvould take it frendlie, and helpe your self ereby to the right examen of your conscience etvvene God and you, vvhen you are alone, as atholicke doctrine teacheth men to doe, espe∣ally of iniurious vvordes against their brethren, herof our Sauiour Christ in S. Mathewes ghospel ronoūceth so seuere a sentence, as he appointeth oth iudgment, counsaile, Math. 5. & hel fyre for punishmēt



of the same; and addeth further, Math. 12 that no idle word shall passe from vs, whereof we shall not giue accompt in the day of iudgement: and if not idle vvordes, hovv much lesse slaunderous, calumnious, and infa∣matory? vvhereof you vsed store against manie innocent men that day, especially against Fa: Garnet, and his ovvne Order of Iesuites, vvherof some I may not pretermit in this place.
12. You said at the very first entrance vnto your speach in that place, that you vvould speake of nothing but of the late most horrible treason, vvhich for distinctiōs sake you vvould call the Ie∣suits treason.
For if it be iust (saie you) that euery thing be called by the name of the Author, then seing the Iesuits haue byn the Authors of this trea∣son, you vvould not doe them the iniurie, to take from them anie thing vvhich is theirs, or to mis∣call anie thing vvhich appertayneth properlie to them, especiallie seing in euery crime: plus peccat auctor quàm actor;
the author is more culpable and blame-vvorthie then the actor, as is apparent by the example (saie you) of Adam, Eue, and the Ser∣pent, where the Serpent for that it was the first author of that attempt, The Di∣uels sinnes in pting Adam. committed three sinns, Eua that was tempted, two sinns, and Adam that was the chiefest a∣ctor, but one sinne. This vvas your eloquence at that time, & I doubt not but that the learned prisoner standing at the barre, vvhome you othervvise so



highlie commended for this talents, if other cir∣umstances had giuen him leaue, could haue smi∣ed at your exact enumeratiō of the diuells sinnes, vvho yet, for that it is not read, that he did eate nie of the apple vvith Adam and Eue, it is like you vvould be much troubled to finde out his three eueral sinnes in that matter, if you vvere put vnto he proofe, and you knovv vvhat our common aying is: That it is a shame to bely the Diuell.
13. But to leaue this point to be discussed be∣tvveene you, I must needes saie, that you offer the Iesuites an apparent iniurie, in making this last reason so proper and peculiar to them, as that you vvill needes haue it called the Iesuites treason, M. Gar∣netts case. nd they to be the principall Authors; vvhereas notvvithstanding, vvhen all came to all, no other hing (I vveene) vvas proued against them, but hat the prisoner there present, had receaued only a simple notice of that treason, by such a meanes as he could not vtter, and reueale againe by the lavves of Catholicke doctrine, that is to saie, in Confession, and this but a very fevv daies before the discouerie, but yet neuer gaue anie consent, helpe, hearkening, approbation, or cooperation to the same; but contrari-vvise sought to dissuade, de∣horte, and hinder the designment by all the meanes he could.
14. And is this sufficient M. Attorney, to laie the



denomination of this foule fact, vpon the vvhole order of Iesuites? that one of them, or tvvo at the most knevv thereof by such a vvaie, as proba∣blie they could not auoid, Hovv things heard in confes∣siō may not be vttered by Ca∣tholick doctrine. or preuent the knovv∣ledge, not fore-seeing vvhat he penitent vvould confesse, and once hauing heard it in that man∣ner, remained bound by the inuiolable seale of that Sacrament not to vtter the same, but in such manner as the confitent should allovv of, though neuer so great temporall dammage vvere immi∣nent for the concealement. And this is the sacred band of a Catholicke priestly conscience, much like to that of Angells, vvho though they knovv manie great hurtes or dangers to hang ouer king∣domes, States, Common vvealthes, or particuler men, & be desirous out of their loue to mankinde to preuent the same; yet are they not free to re∣ueale vvhat they knovv thereof in regarde of anie future good or hurt vvhatsoeuer, but onlie vvhere they are permitted, and licenced in particular: & yet ar they not iustlie to be accompted accessa∣rie to the euills that fal out, & much lesse authors of the same for their silence, or not reuealing, as in this case of the Iesuits you labour to inferre.
15. But in truth Sir it seemeth that you attended more to the art of Oratory, then to the coherence of Truth in that your speach, for that presentlie after your former vvordes you added these for



the beginning of your declamatiō. In this discourse I will speake (saie you) of no other circumstances but of treason, A parti∣tion not after∣ward perfor∣med. and of no other treasons, but the Iesuits trea∣ons, & of no other Iesuits treasons, but such as shal par∣iculerly concerne this prisoner. VVherin notvvith∣tāding verie soone after contradicting your self, you brought in a long discourse of the antiquity, nd inuisibilitie of your Church; as also of Equi∣ocation, and manie other things, vvhich are no ircumstances of treason. You handled also of he Northerne Earles, Excommunication of the Queeene, and diuers other such things as hap∣ened before the Iesuits came into England, and onsequentlie could be no Iesuits treasons. And vvhen you come to treat of the prisoner him∣elf, and to proue him a traitor, you begin vvith  Statute set forth in the 23. yeare of the late Queenes raigne, vvhich made all Iesuits, and other Pristes traitors, that came into England, or remained in the same, and consequentlie con∣cerned not the prisoner in such speciall māner, as you vvould seeme to promise: or if it did, yet ma∣nie other things you bring in and handle, as that of Lopus the Ievv, VVilliams, York, Squier, Colen, par∣tlie Protestants, and partli Catholickes, vvho vvhatsoeuer their causes vvere (vvherof somvvhat shal be spoken after) yet touched they nothing at all that prisoner, vvho yet neuer dealt vvith



them, nor euer vvas accused concerning them. VVherevpon is inferred, that no one of your three-fold members before mentioned vvas per∣formed by you: to vvit, that you would speake of no other circumstances, but of treason, and of no other treasons, but of Iesuits treasons, & of no other Iesuits treasons, but such as should particulerly concerne the pri∣soner at the barre.
16. But this defect I suppose that all your audi∣torie did not obserue, by reason of the multitude of other tumultuary matters, dravvne in by you against the said prisoner, but yet your Rhetoricke in amplifying one point, about the first lavv al∣leadged against the comming in of Priests and Ie∣suitts, vvas so markeable, as no man I thinke, vvas so dull, as did not obserue it, and beare it avvay. To vvit, that vvhereas the said lavv did forbid all Priests, vnder paine of death and treason, not to come into England, or execute anie parte of their priestlie function vvithin the Realme, as to pre∣ach, teach, offer sacrifice, heare Confessions, ab∣solue from sinnes, reconcile to God, and to the v∣nion of his Catholicke Church, dissuade from sects and heresies, and other like offices; you in commendation of that lavv, protested to proue it, to be the most myldest law, the sweetest law, the law most full of mercy and pitty, that euer was enacted by any Prince so iniuriously prouoked. And you added



in the heat of your eloquence, that if you proued ot this, then let the vvorld saie: M. Gar∣net an ho¦nest man by M. Attor∣neyes warrant. That Garnet is an honest man. VVhich vvas a vvarrāt to al the hearers, up hold him for such; for so much as no man vvas there so simple, but savv it impossible for you to roue that assertion, and consequentlie that in all their hearings you canonized his honesty.
. For hovv did you go about to proue (M. Attor∣y) that this lavv was so myld, so ful of pitty, & lenity? or sooth, for that you saie, the meaning was by kee∣ing Priests of, and expelling those that were within, M. At∣torneyes wit in making a bloudy law to be a sweet lavv. to are their bloud, though if they retyred not to spill it. magine that then if in Queene Maryes dayes (for xample) such a lavv had byn made against Prote∣tant-Ministers that came from Geneua and other laces of Germany, vvould you (M. Attorney) haue eemed that lavv a gentle law, a sweet & myld law, a aw ful of mercy, pitty & clemēcy? I presume you dare ot saie it. But let vs vse an other example of much ore moment. If in the Apostles time, such a lavv ad byn made by anie King or Emperour of con∣rarie religion to them, that if anie of the said A∣postles or Priests (for so they vvere) should enter nto their dominions to preach a contrarie do∣trine to the religion there receaued and establis∣ed, and to exercise anie of their Apostolicall or Priestlie functions, it should be treason and paine of death: could this be called a myld law? a sweet



lavv? a lavv ful of pitty & compassion? a lavv made for not spilling their bloud? or vvould, or could the Apo∣stles, or their follovvers haue obeyed this lavv? or did they obey the Gouernours of the Ievves (o∣thervvise their lavvfull Superiours, vvhen they cōmanded them to preach no more in the name of Christ, or to disperse Christian doctrine, vvhich they called seditious, or to reconcile anie to Chri∣stian religion, vvhich they held for treason? or did they flie, though Princes & Emperours after∣vvardes by publicke Edicts did commaund them out of their dominions? or is there not another bloud to be respected, called by the Prophet, the bloud of the soule, vvhereof the Pastor shall be guil∣tie if he flie for feare, or forsake his flocke in time of daunger and persecution? is not all this so? or can it be denyed? or haue not English Priests the same obligation of conscience to help their Coū∣trey, and countrymen in spirituall necessities, as had the Apostles and Apostolicke men to stran∣gers, for vvhose helpe yet they vvere content to offer their liues and incurre anie daunger vvhat∣soeuer? VVherefore M. Attorney to speake a truth, if you deale vvith men of vnderstanding, it is but fond; and if of Christian courage, it is but tri∣fling eloquence, all that in this point you haue vsed about the myldnes, svveetnes, mercy, and com∣passion of this cruell, and bloudy lavv of Queene



Elizabeth. Children maie be delighted, and de∣uded vvith such bables, but vvise-men doe laugh at them.
18. Concerning the other heads of doctrine, vvhich pleased you to handle in this arraignemēt t the barre, vvith no small ostentation of vvor∣es, as being in your ovvne Center, namelie: Of the Antiquity of your Church, Equiuocation, and some ther such points, as they vvere not much ad rem, in that assemblie & busines, so could your friends aue vvished, that either you had omitted them al∣ogeather, or handled them more substantiallie: or as for Equiuocation, About Equiuo∣cation. or mentall reseruation of a ne sense in a doubtful speach, it seemeth plainlie at you vnderstād not the Questiō, nor the mea∣ing, vvhich both ancient and moderne learned en haue, in holding that true, and necessarie octrine; & no marueile, for tat it hath not byn (I inke) your educatiō to be troubled much vvith scrupulositie of vvordes, to vvit, vvhat sense maie e held therin vvithout sinne, & vvhat not, the amen of vvhich matters belong to more tender  timerous cōsciences then Kings Attorneyes cō∣onlie are presumed to haue, vvho must speake o the purpose, hovvsoeuer it be to the truth. And  it vvell appeared in that arraignment, vvherof e novv treat, but intend to proceed no further erein, for that the prisoner himself ansvvered



this point sufficientlie at the barre, as also to the Lordes before in the tovver, and a more large dis∣course maie be made therof hereafter, if neede shall require.
19. As for your other article, about the Anti∣quity and continuance of your Church, a man maie ea∣sily see, that you sought an occasion to bring it in, by making an obiection on the behalfe of Iesuitts against the same, About the anti¦quity & vniuer∣sality of the Pro∣testant Church. and thereby to shevv your skill in ansvvering. They hold their religion (saie you) to be the old Religion, where ours is the new, confyned to England; where on the contrary side their Religion is vniuersall, and embraced in the greatest part of this Christian worlde. And thus for the maintenance of their rotten Religion, doe they seeke to disgrace and blemish our Ghospell. But (good syr) if your ghospell be that of the foure Euangelistes novv receaued, vve pretend that it is as much our ghospell as yours, and more also, for that you receaued it from vs, and vpon our Churches credit, and for that you call rotten Religion, if euer it vvere Religion, then neuer can it rott, except you put no difference be∣tvvene apples and religion. But let vs heare hovv you vvill ansvvere this obiection in your ovvne vvordes, as they came set dovvne vnto me from your ovvne mouth.
20. But to this (saie you) I will answere, that if our Ghospell be as ancient as Luther, it is more ancient then



the Iesuitts are (though not I trovv then Iesuitts religion) albeit it be not conteyned in these narrow li∣mitts of place, A strāge discourse of M Attorney about his Church. nor bands of time, which they feignedly imagine, hauing byn euer since the time of Christ, and his Apostles. For we doe not deny but that Rome was the mother-Church, and had thirty two virginall mar∣tyrs of her Popes a-row, & so continued til in succeeding ages it brought in a masse of errors, and idle ceremonyes. But you will aske perhaps, where our Church lurked be∣fore Luthers coming, for some hundreds of yeares? But I say it makes no great matter where it was, so that I m certaine it was, for as a wedge of gold, if it be dissol∣ed, and mixed with a masse of brasse, tinne, and other metalls doth not loose his nature, but remaineth gold still although we cannot determine in what part of the masse it is conteined, but the touch-stone will fynde it out: so though our Church hath euer byn since Christes time in the vvorld, yet being mixed, and couered vvith innoua∣ons, and errours, vve cannot tell in vvhat part it vvas. And I dare say, that it is novv more extended then theirs : for vve haue Many alls. all England, all Scotland, all Ger∣many, al Denmarke, a great part of France, al Poland, & some part of Italie. These are your vvordes, if the Relators haue byn exact in setting them dovvne, as they saie they haue byn. And then is there o maruaile, though you impugne so much the doctrine of scrupulous reseruation of true sense in ambiguous speeches, vvhereas so manifestlie you



ouer-lash in all those periods, vvhich heere you haue layed before vs.
21. But to the matter it self, about the Antiquity Continuance, Succession, Visibility, and Assurance of the Church, vvhereas you graunt, that the Roman Church, vvas the true mother-Church from the be∣ginning, and had two and thirty virginall martyrs (for so you call them) for her Popes one after the other, vvithout interposition of anie one Bishop, that vvas not martyr, for more then the space of three hundred yeares; you graunt vs so much in this assertion, if it be vvel considered, as it vvill be hard for you to take it from vs againe aftervvard in your sequent negation, vvhich I shal shevv you brieflie by tvvo conuincing Arguments, the one Theologicall, the other Morall.
 A theo∣logicall argumet for the Roman Church.22. The first is, that if the Church of Rome vvas the true mother-Church of Christ, and Christian religion for so great a space as you assigne; then no doubt vvere all the predictions, and promises of Pro∣phets for the greatnes, eminency, honour, cer∣teyntie, & florishing perpetuitie of the said Chri∣stian Church fulfilled in her: Christes peculier promises in like manner, Mar. vltimo Ian. 14. & 10. Mat. 10. that he would be vvith her to the end of the vvorld, that the holy ghost should lead her into all truth, that hell-gates (vvhich properlie signify errours and heresies) should neuer preuaile against her, that she should be the piller, and foundation



of truth, & all men bound to obey and beleeue her, 1 Timo. 3. Mat. 18. vvas eant also & performed in this Roman-Church for three hundred yeares and more, and promised  be performed to the end of the vvorld: vvherof sueth, that either God is not able to performe what he promiseth (for of his vvill there can be no doubt, seing he hath promised) or else it can∣not vvithout impiety be conceaued, and much se beleeued, that this Roman-mother-Church, so anted in the beginning by Christ, and his Apo∣es bloud, and so vvatered for three hundred yeares togeather by the bloud of all her Bishops,  spread ouer the vvorld, Rom. 1. as S. Paul of his ovvne time testifyeth that her faith & religion vvas, and aftervvard all Ecclesiasticall histories vvithin the time prescribed & after, doe declare, that all other Churches commonly, at least-vvise of the vvest-world, vvere her daughters by foundation, & our reat-Britany among the rest; it is impossible (I say) to imagine vvith piety, hovv this Queene of the vvorld, hovv this florishing Church, hovv this golden vvedge (to vse your ovvne similitude) should so be dissolued & mingled vvith brasse, tinne, cop∣per, & other such contemptible mettalls, vvhich you cal Errours, & innouations, as that her Religion should become rotten, according to your phrase, & her self in steed of being the true kingdome, in∣heritāce & spouse of Christ, become his enemy his



aduersary, an aduovvtresse, and the verie povver of Sathan himself against him, as you M. Attorney doe make her.
23 Hovv, I praie you can this be thought? by vvhat reason or probability maie it be imagined vvhen? hovv? by vvhat meanes might this meta∣morphosis be made? The very next age after the for∣said Martyr-Popesliued S. Augustine, Epist. 105 contra lit. Peti∣liani. vvho reciting the said Popes, and their Successors vnto his daie called them all holy vvithout distinction, and by their lineal succession in the said Church of Rome did persuade himself to haue demonstrated the truth of all Catholicke Religion, as vvell in A∣frica vvhere he vvas, as throughout the vvhole vvorld, against all heretickes.
24. And after him againe liued in the same Sea, as Bishops thereof S. Leo, and S. Gregory, both of them surnamed Great, in respect of their great san∣ctitie, great learning, and famous acts: and vvith them, and after them concurred and suceeeded in other Christian Churches of the vvorld, as Fathers and Doctors S. Maximus, S. Prosper, Vincentius Lyri∣nensis, S. Gregory of Tovvers, S. Fulgentius, S. Bene∣dict, and others, all making the same accompt of the Roman Church, doctrine, sanctity, and autho∣rity thereof, as the former Fathers did. And hovv then could come in this transfusion, and trans∣mutation of gold into lead, vvhich you dreame



of M. Attorney, and are content to deceaue your f and others, to your eternall perill of perdition  this nevv inuention of a golden wedge, vvhereof n saie that you are a fast friend: but this apper∣yneth rather to my second argument, to shevv the morall impossibilitie also of this seelie fiction.
For let vs suppose that there vvere a wedge  gold so dearelie bought and purchased, The mo∣rall ar∣gument of im∣possibi∣lity for the vni∣uersall Church to fall, or vanish away. so care∣lie deliuered, and o earnestlie recōmended to the possessors as the Church of Christ vvas vnto his disciples and follovvers, and that there vvere so any vvatch-men appointed to looke continu∣lie vpon this golden wedge, and so sure a guard al∣lovved them for defence of the same, as Christ ap∣pointed Pastors ouer his Church, offering them for guard his vvhole povver and omnipotencie o defend it; and if this vvere so, hovv could this edge, that from the beginning vvas pure golde, e imagined to loose her nature, and passe into o∣ther baser mettalls, or be melted, mingled, dissol∣ued, or changed into the same, vvithout that any ne of the foresaid vvatch-men should open his outh, resist, or testify this chaunge? Are not hese morall impossibilities, and metaphysicall imaginations onlie, to delude your selues and others?
6. Let vs compare then brieflie these matters togeather. VVe read in all Authors, and see by



experience, that in sixteene hundred yeares sin Christ his Church vvas founded, and set on foot that in euerie age the Doctors, Prelates, and Pa∣stors, Applica∣tion of this mo∣rall ar∣gument. that vvere vvatch-men of the Church for that time, vvere so diligent in their vvatch, as  least errour or heresie appeared in their daies bu presentlie they cryed out, made vvarre against i and finallie by help and assistance of their guard and Captaine, in the end ouercame, and vangui∣shed the same. Let the examples of Simon Magus Philetus, Hymenaeus, Cerinthus, Ebion, Menander, and other heretickes rising vp amongst the Apostle be examples for the first age: Saturninus, Basilide Carpocrates, Cerdon, Valentinus, Marcion, Apelle and others for the second: Nouatus, Sabellius, Ma∣nes, Noetus and their follovvers for the third: Ar∣rius, Aerius, Photinus, Iouinian, Donatus, Apollina∣ris & their adherents for the fourth: & so in euerie age vnto our dayes, vvherein no man vvas spared though he vvere neuer so great, no former meritts respected though neuer so many, if he vttered any thing against the common receaued vniuersall Catholicke faith. And so vve see that both Origen and Tertullian most rare learned men vvere con∣demned; Osius and Lucifer Calaritanus tvvo famous Bishops noted; S. Cyprian also one of the oracles of the Christian vvorld called in question for points of doctrine different from the vniuersall Church



VVhereof vve doe inferre most euidentlie and ainlie, that if any Fathers in the eusuing ages  vttered anie thing in their speaches, sermons, vvritings, that in any least point had byn dif∣ferent from the said vniuersall Catholicke do∣ctrine, it vvould haue byn resisted in like man∣ and noted in one Countrey or other, and er vvould haue passed for Catholicke do∣ne to their posteritie, vvithout note or repre∣sion at all.
As for example, to take one for all, for that one all maie be iudged of. A most euident demon∣stration. If S. Augustine that  more then a hundred yeares after those mar∣ Popes of Rome, vvhich you mention, did th preach and vvrite in so manie places of his orkes, of Purgatory, of the Sacrifice of the Masse,  Iustification by good vvorkes, of Praier for the d, of the single life of Clergy-men, of the Perfection religious life, of the Preheminencie of the Sea of me, and manie other such articles expreslie posite to that you hold commonlie in England, hich he handleth so plainlie as anie of vs can e in these our dayes; if anie of these pointes d byn strange or nevv doctrine at that time,  so much as suspected of error, heresie, or fal∣ood, no man of common sense can imagine, ut that they vvould haue byn contradicted, or oted by some man or other, so manie learned



godly men liuing vvith him, and after him: b this vvill neuer be proued to be so, or that the points, or the like vvherein vve differ from  Protestans vvere either in him, or other, noted  condemned for heresies, and consequentlie b this argument of morall euidence it is conuince that they vvere neuer accompted either errors,  heresies, before the hereticall contradictions  these later ages sprang vp, & that by such as vve accompted and condemned by the vniuersal Church of Christ for hereticks themselues.
28. And as for the comparison of the true Ca∣tholicke Church of Christ vnto a wedge of gold so min∣gled vvith lead copper & baser mettalls, as it can∣not be knovvne vvhere it is, is a verie base and leadden comparison by M. Attorneyes leaue. For if the Church must baptize, the Church must in∣struct vs, the Church must gouerne vs, and mini∣ster vs Sacraments, resolue our doubts, and giue vs directions to life euerlasting, hovv can men re∣paire vnto her that is so hidden & couered as she can neither be seene, nor found? Nay you saie, it makes no great matter where she is, so you be certaine that she be. By vvhich doctrine a man in England may be as vvell saued by a Church in Constanti∣nople or in the Indyes, as in England it self, seing there is no conuersation necessarie vvith it, no cōference, to treaty, no recourse, no dependence



of it, no obediēce vnto it, nor importeth it vvhere t be, so I be sure it be in some place, though I knovv not vvhere, or in vvhome. Stange and Chi∣mericall imagi∣nations. And vvhat doth his certaintie auaile me M. Attorney, if I haue no enefit from her? These be those monstrous and strange Chimeraes in deed, floating in vncertaintyes, vvhich you mention in your Preface to the Rea∣er, for that these are euacuations, and exinanitiōs f all fruite of Christian doctrine, dravving all to eere fancyes of idle conceites, vvithout effectes f anie substantiall fruite, or spiritual helpe vvhat∣oeuer. For vvhereas all the ancient Fathers in all eir vvorkes doe labour to set forth vnto vs the finite real benefits, vvhich vve receaue by being in the true Catholicke Church, as all those before mentioned, of instruction, gouerment, grace y Sacraments, remission of sinnes, and the like, and that it is impossible to be saued vnles a man e in her, reuerence her, heare and obey her, feare  go out of her, and consequentlie haue daily and ourlie treating vvith her, and dependance of er, vvvhich cannot be vvithout certaine knovv∣dge vvhere she is, or euident signes hovv to knovv and discerne her from all others; you by a contrarie nevv deuise, neuer heard of I thinke be∣re, doe affirme, that it importeth not where your church was for many ages, and hundreds of yeares, so at she were at all.

29. And thus much for her inuisibilitie in those ages, but novv she is become visible in our daies: Nay you doe set her forth vvith so great an en∣largement of greatnes and glorious apparence, as you say she is more extended now then ours; For that (quoth you) vve haue all England, all Scot∣land, all Germany, all Denmarke, all Poland, a great part of France, and some part of Italie. VVherein your large extension of your Church in this se∣cond parte of your Relation (if vve could be∣leeue you) is no lesse strange, then vvas your re∣striction of her secresie and inuisibilitie in the first. For vvho vvil graunt you al England for Pro∣testants, vvhen they shall see so many prouisions made against both English Catholickes, & Purita∣nes, vvhich later part of men, as vvel as the former; that they cānot make one Church vvith you, shall presētlie be shevved in the Preface of this vvorke.
30. Hovv you haue all Germany for youres, there being so manie religions, and the greatest parte Catholicke, and other different Sects greatlie dis∣agreeing from you, I knovv not by vvhat figure you can make your Reader to beleeue that you speake truth The like I saie of Denmarke,  vvhere al are Lutheranes, and not of your Church, nor vvill it admit Caluinistes to dvvell, or dy, or be buried amongst them. Of all Poland, it is a no∣table hyperbole, for so much as both the King



d State professe publicklie the Catholicke reli∣on, and the Sectaryes that are in that kingdome e Trinitarians, Arrians, Anabaptists, more perhaps nuber then Caluinistes. I marueile you omitted ecia and Noruegia, vvhere, as they are not Catho∣kes, so are they not of your religion or Church;  nor those of France neither, though they be luinistes (for as for your some parte of Italie, I old to be no parte at all, nor vvas it anie thing se but a certaine ouerflovving of your speach to ake the full sound of a greater number) the Pro∣stants of France (I say) cannot make one Church ith you; as neither those of Scotland, vvith the residue of Holland, Zealand, and other of ose Prouinces vnited of Geneua, as their Mo∣er-Church: these (I say) being all Puritanes d Precisians, cannot make any Church vvith ou in that vnion of faith and doctrine, vvhich e vnity of a Church requireth, as by your, and eir ovvne confession, vvritinges, testimonyes, d protestations is extant in the vvorld to be ene.
Wherefore I shall desire the intelligent Rea∣r, to make vvith me a briefe recollection about . Attorneyes doctrine for his Church. First he aunteth, as you haue heard, the Roman Church  haue byn the true Mother-Church for diuers ges togeather, spread ouer the vvhole vvorld,



dilated throughout all Prouinces, perspicuous eminent, and admirable in florishing glorie by the greatnes and multitude of her children, pro∣fessing Christ euery-vvhere in vnion of faith, do∣ctrine, and Sacraments, as the holie Fathers i those ages, and others ensuing doe testify vnto vs
32. Secondlie he vvill haue this glorious Churc so to haue fallen sicke, pyned and vvithered vvay vvithout groaning, and so to haue vanishe out of mens sightes, as she could not be knovvn vvhere she vvas for many hundred yeares togea∣ther: nay he vvill haue her to be like a wedge o golde, so corrupted and mingled vvith lead an tinne, as no man can tell vvhere the gold lieth except he try it vvith the touch-stone, vvhich touch stone in our case, he saith to be the scripture, vvhe∣reby the Church must by euerie man be tryed and touched: so as ech one that vvill knovv this Church, and haue benefit from the same, mus touch her first, & see vvhether she be the Church or no, and so in-steed of submitting himself vnto her, and to be directed by her, he must first mak himselfe touch-maister and Iudge ouer her.
33. Thirdlie M Attorney hauing shifted of this time of the inuisibility of his Church in this sort he novv in this last age maketh her so visible a∣gaine vpon the suddaine, as that she comprehen∣deth all the Churches of the aforenamed King∣mes,



of vvhat Sect or profession soeuer, so that y differ from the Catholicke, vvhich are some ne or ten Sectes at the least, al dissenting amōg mselues, & professing in their vvritings, actes d doings, that they are not of one religion, nor nsequentlie can be of one Church; and yet e∣ie one goeth vvith his touch-stone in his hand  vvit the Bible) as vvell as M. Attorney, The dif∣ferēt vse of the touch-stone for fin∣ding out the Church. and are eady to touch him, and his Church, as he them d theirs, but vvith different effect and successe:  he fyndeth by this touchstone (as you haue ard) that all they are of his Church, but they d euery one of them by the same touch-stone, e fynde the contrary, and not one of them vvill unt (I saie not one) of all the vvhole number of nevv Sectes, that the Church of Englād as novv standeth, is either the true Church of Christ, or eir Church; and in this I dare ioyne issue vvith  Attorney, out of their ovvne bookes, assertions, d protestations.
So as novv M. Attorney, that vvhich in the iptures is so memorable of it self, so commen∣d by Christ our Sauiour, The ba∣senes & contem∣ptibility of M. Attor∣neyes Church. so respected by the A∣stles, so testifyed and defended by the primitiue artyrs, so magnifyed by the ancient Doctors d Fathers, and by all good Christians so reue∣nced and dreaded, I meane the glorious name f the Catholicke and vniuersall Church, and the be∣nefit



to be in her, and of her, vvithout vvhich no saluation can be hoped for of Christ, but ineuita∣ble and euerlasting perdition, by vvhich on the other side, and in which, saluation onlie maie be attained; all this (I saie) is come to be so poore, base, and contemptible a thing vvith you, and so vncertayne, as you knovv not vvhere your Church is, nor greatlie care, so that at all she be; and vvhen you name your Sectary-brethren, and associates therein, they denie you and your alli∣ance, as you see; and vvhen you assigne your touch-stone of scriptures, they vse the same a∣gainst you, and proue thereby youres to be no Church, and ech one of themselues in seuerall to be the onlie true and Christian Church. And this haue you gained by leauing the Roman, vvhich you graunt in old times to haue byn the holy mo∣ther-Church: see vvherevnto you are come, and this shall suffice for this matter.
35. This epistle vvould grovv ouerlong, if I should entertaine my self in all the impertinent speeches, vvhich you had that daie (in your glo∣rie as it semeth) against Catholickes, the least parte vvhereof, did in vvise-mens sightes, con∣cerne the prisoner at the barre, though by your Rhetoricall application, all vvas dravven vpon him by hooke or by crooke: for that Yorke, VVilliams, Colen, Squiar and Lopus vvere brought



in squadron, to muster there to that effect, vvher∣of all notvvithstanding, except the last, are de∣fended, and their conspiracies most euidentlie proued to haue byn feygned, M. T. F. in his A∣pologie an. 1599. by a learned, vvor∣thy, and vvorshipfull gentleman of our Coun∣trey, dedicated these yeares past to the Lords of the late Queenes priuie Counsell: and vvhe∣ther they vvere true or false, yet touched they not Fa: Garnet, vvho neuer had acquaintance or treaty vvith them.
36. And vvhereas you saie that he came into En∣gland, with purpose to prepare the way, against the great compounded nauy that followed in the yeare 1588. It is euident that his comming into England, A mani∣fest calū∣niation against M. Gar∣net. vvas tvvo yeares and a halfe, at the least, before the saied time, vvhen there vvas neither notice, nor speach, nor perhapps so much as a thought of that nauie to come: and vvhen aftervvard it ap∣peared on our seas, it had not so much as one En∣glish Priest or Iesuit in all that multitude of men, vvhich is like it vvould haue had, if M. Henry Garnet, and M. Robert South-well that came in togeather, had byn sent to prepare the vvaie for the same. Your combinations also of bookes and attemptes, the one allwaies (as you saie) ac∣companying the other, though you esteemed it perhaps a vvittie fine deuise, and probable to the vnlearned hearers that cannot distinguish of



times or things; yet others that looked into the matter more iudiciouslie, and found neither co∣herence of time, or subiect, betvveene the booke by you named, and the attempts pretended, lau∣ghed in their sleeues, remembring the saying of the Poet: rent.  An∣i. Non sat commodè diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec. I vvill reapeat your vvordes of one onlie comparison, and thereof let the rest be iud∣ged: Then cometh forth Squiar (saie you) with his plot of treason, but this not alone neither, but was ac∣companyed with another pernicious booke written by Dolman:  seely uen∣n of ookes and trea∣ons. vvhich vvordes importe that Dolmans booke did accompanie Squiars treason, but he that shall examine the order of Chronologie, shal fynde in this matter, that Dolmans booke vvas in print foure yeares (at least) before Squiars treason (if he committed treason) vvas euer heard of; nor hath the argument of the booke anie more affini∣tie at all vvith Squiars fact, then hath a fox vvith a figg tree, but onlie that your floating Chimeraes, intoxicating (to vse your ovvne vvordes) your hea∣rers braynes, doe make you seeme to speake often∣times mysticallie, vvhen in deede you speake mi∣serablie.
37. Yovv remember (I thinke) hovv the afore∣said gentleman in his booke (for others doe not forget it) gaue you a friendlie reprehension, by the vvordes of the famous Orator Catulus, or ra∣ther



of Cicero in his name, Cicero de Oratore. for a ridiculous fact of yours in vveeping, and shedding manie teares in follovving the fiction of Squiars conspiracie at the barre, therebie to vvynne credit, and shevv your self admirable at that time to the Earle of Es∣sex, and others in authoritie: but novv I am to ex∣postulate vvith you vpon this occasion, for ano∣ther no lesse patheticall excesse, vttered in plea∣ding against M. Garnet, vvherein not so much your teares did run, as your haires did stand and stare, and your eares glovv, to heare blasphemie vttered by him in a certaine letter of his intercep∣ted: VVherein (saie you) was conteyned one of the most horrible blasphemyes that euer I heard proceed from any Atheist, and maketh my haire to stand on end to thinke of it. So you saie.
38. And vvhat vvas this horrible blasphemie (good Syr) that put your tender, and religious hart in such a pittifull plight and horror? It fol∣lovveth that he had written with the iuyce of a lemmō to his friendes abroad out of the tower, that he had byn often examined, but nothing was produced against him, but yet, necesse est, vt vnus homo moriatur pro populo. A fond fayned blasphe∣my. So you alleadged the text, and added presentlie: See how he assumeth most blasphemously to himself the wordes that were spoken of Christ our Sauiour, but I hope ere he dy, he will repent him of this blasphemy.
39. But (good Syr) did you looke vpon the place



of S. Iohns gospell, before you recited the same, and plaied this pageant in so solemne an essem∣blie? Yf you did, then vvill you fynd that these vvordes vvere spoken by an euill man, Ioh. 11. vnto an euill sense in his ovvne meaning, to vvit by Cai∣phas, The meaning of Cai∣phas in speaking of the death of Christ. that persuaded first in a Councell gathered vpon the resuscitation of Lazarus, to put Christ to death, thereby to content the Romanes, vvho had the vvhole Ievvish nation in iealosie of their loy∣altie tovvardes the Emperour, and that novv by putting one to death that vvas accused (though falslie) to denie tribute to be paied to Cesar, they should cleere their credit vvith the said Empe∣rour, and by his onlie death preuent the destru∣ction of the said Ievvish people by the Romane armies, and therefore he said: Expedit nobis, vt vnus homo moriatur pro populo, & non totagens pe∣reat. Luc. 13. It is expedient for vs, that one man dy for the people, to the end the vvhole nation be not destroied. And therefore he saieth not necesse est, as you cite the vvordes, but expedit, to shevv his politicall drift therein.
40. And this being Caiphas his crastie and vvic∣ked counsaile, and his vvordes in his sense, bea∣ring this meaning, the holie ghost (vvhich as S. Chrysostome and other holie Fathers doe affirme,  4. n Ioan∣ne. ostantum, & non scelestum eius cor attigit, moued his tongue and not his vvicked mind, and vvas in



his vvordes, not in his sense) made him vnvvit∣tinglie to vtter a prophesie, and a great high mi∣sterie, that except one man (to vvit Christ) should die for the sinnes of the people, none could be saued. Novv then (Syr) this sentence of Caiphas hauing tvvo meanings and senses, The meaning of M. Garnet in vsing the wor∣des of Caiphas. as you haue heard, let vs examine vvhich vvas most probable to be vsed and alluded vnto by M. Garnet, vvho gathering by manie coniectures, that you, and some other of his good friendes, had a great de∣sire to bring the Iesuitts vvithin the compasse of this late odious treason, or at least-vvise vvithin the suspition or hatred thereof, for that the lay-gentlmen partakers of the fact, vvere thought to be deuoted tovvardes them, and their Order; and seing that God vnexpectedlie had deliuered him into your handes, he might verie vvell thinke, that he at least should paie for the rest, and die also of likeli-hood for disgracing the rest, and in that sense alluded to the vvordes of Caiphas, tending to like po∣licie.
41. But novv for the second sense, vvhich par∣ticularlie designed the death of Christ our Sa∣uiour, for the redemption of man-kinde, none I thinke is so simple, as vvould imagine M. Garnet to applie to himself, though in this point also M. Attorney is to be taught out of true



diuinitie, that diuerse places vttered litterallie of Christ in holie scripture, maie secondarily also by allusion be applied vnto men, and this vvith∣out all horror of blasphemie, or imputation of Atheisme, vvhich are M. Attorneyes passionate accusations in this place. As for example, vvhere the Prophet vvriteth of him: Isa. 60. Et cum iniquis re∣putatus est: he vvas esteemed vvith the vvicked; vvhich vvas meant immediatlie and principal∣lie by the holie-ghost of Christ, and yet by al∣lusion it maie be applied to anie of his seruants. And that other place; Psal. 109. De torrente in via bibit, prop∣terea exaltauit caput: and infinite other through∣out all the nevv and old testament, spoken lite∣rallie of Christ, and yet by allusion applied to good men, as the ancient Fathers doe testifie in their vvorkes, applying to the members oftentimes that vvhich belongeth principallie to the head: so as herein M. Attorneyes haires needed not to stand vpon end, nor trouble themselues or their maister; neither vvas it nedefull that M. Attorney should praie for M Garnet to repent himself of this blas∣phemie (vvhich vvas none at all) before he dyed. God graunt Syr Edward Cooke be in state to make so cleere, and easy an accompt at his departure from this vvorld, as the other vvas, vvhich hardlie maie be hoped, considering their great difference of life & functions, except God vvorke a miracle,



or that solifidian iustification doe enter for smoo∣thing of all, vvhich maketh all men equall, and equallie saincts.
42. But to dravve to an end, one of your last triumphant speeches touching all Iesuits vvas, that they vvere Doctors of foure different do∣ctrines; the one of dissimulation; Sundry calum∣niatiōs. the second of depo∣sing Princes; the third of disposing of Kingdomes; the last of deterring Princes with feare of excommunica∣tions: and of all foure you discoursed vvith great resolution, and peremptorie determination, vvel assuring your self, that none in that place should haue meanes to ansvvere you, though there vvan∣ted not manie, vvho out of their discretions, did note vvhere and hovv you might haue byn an∣svvered vvith no small aduantage, as perhaps you may be hereafter more at large, vpon some other occasion.
43. Novv onlie I thought good to put you in mind, that these, and other your discourses, foun∣ded commonlie vpon diuisions, and little con∣cerning the prisoner, or matter in hand, vvere noted and borne avvaie, and this among the rest, vvas obserued; that you vvere more fertile in set∣ting dovvne diuisions, then fruitfull aftervvard in prosecuting the same; yet in the last parte of this four-fold partition, about terrifying Princes with excommunications, you flovving novv vvith



full sea tovvardes the end of your accusations, men saie, that you insulted greatlie ouer Catho∣licke religion, & brought forth a booke of your ovvne compyling (to vvit your Reportes) preten∣ding to shevv out of the same, that our English Kings in former ages, were nothing afrighted with the idle menaces of Papall excommunications; that one was condemned of high treason for bringing in a Bull against a subiect without the Kings licence: that the King was neuer reputed subiect to any Pope in Ecclesiasticall mat∣ters, but that himself was absolute: how the Popes Le∣gates were often times stayed at Calles, vntill the King had giuen them licence to come into England, M. At∣torney in his vaun¦ting vayne. vvith manie other such points, partlie true, partlie false, partlie impertinent to the matter, partlie prouing de facto, and not de iure, partlie misalleadged, par∣tly miscōstred, but altogeather misapplyed to the disgrace of that religion, for vvhose seruice al your lavves in those times & ages vvere instituted, and honoured: & yet you protested in that vaunting vaine of yours; that you were exceeding glad to see your moderne religion in this point, so agreable to the ancient lawes of the Realme, which lawes (quoth you) if they were exactly looked into, would restraine our Romish Catholickes for growing any further, as you hoped they would be.
44. But Sir, hovv little ground of truth or sub∣stance all this hath in it, & hovv contrary effectes



the devv cōsideration of our English lavves may, & must needes vvorke in the mindes of al discreet men, tovvardes the setling of a stable iudgement and firme persuasion in fauour of Catholicke reli∣gion, All an∣cient En¦glish lavves in fauour of Ca∣tholicke religiō. in that the said lavves proceeded al from Ca∣tholicke Princes (though alvvaies I except such as doe frame their iudgement to the current of the present time, & doe subordinate their vnderstan∣ding to their vvealth and honours) this (I saie) shal aftervvardes be so euidentlie declared in this An∣swere of ours throughout the vvhole booke, as no mā I suppose vvith any indifferēcy, or probability of reasō, shalbe able to deny or cōtradict the same.
45. And in particular the Reader shall see refu∣ted the seuerall members by you heere set dovv∣ne, as namelie, hovv great and harty reuerence and respect our Catholicke Kings did euer beare vnto Ecclesiasticall Censures, not onlie of the Pope as supreme, but of their ovvne home-Bis∣hopps also: and that no King in all that ranke for almost a thousand yeares, did euer hold himself absolute in Ecclesiasticall povver, vntill King Henry the eight; and that it cannot be true, The par∣ticulers brought in by M. Attorney refuted. vvhich heere & elsvvhere you so much bragg of, & bring forth vpon euery occasion (as the archer that had but one arrovv in his quiuer that vvould fly) hovv that in the raigne of King Edward the first, it was trea∣son by the common-law for a subiect to bring in and



publish a Bull from Rome against a subiect, without the Kings licence; vvhich is your first obiection in that Kings life, and ansvvered by me after in the ele∣uenth Chapter of this booke.
46. And as for the obiection of the Popes Le∣gats or Nuntij detained somtimes by the Kings order at Calles, from entering the Realme, vntill some difference betvvene Popes and Kings vvere accorded, though it be so vveake a thing as deser∣ueth no ansvvere, yet haue I ansvvered the same vpon diuers occasions, and shevved amongst o∣ther, that by this argument, if it vvere good, King Philip and Queene Mary might be said not to haue acknovvledged the Pope his spirituall authoritie, for that they deteined in Calles the messenger of Paulus Quartus, Paulus Quar∣tus Cdi∣nall oole. vvhen he brought the Cardinalls hat, and Legacy of England for Friar Peto in preiu∣dice of Cardinall Poole, vvhich the said Princes vvould not suffer to be put in execution, vntill they had better informed the said Pope, vpon vvhich information & their intercession the con∣trouersie ceased.
47. Much other matter I doe vvillinglie preter∣mit (M. Attorney) vvhich you vttered that daie in contempt, & derogation of that religion, vvher∣by all your progenitors, yea all the Peeres and Princes of our Realme in precedent ages thought themselues both happie and honourable: and if



they had imagined that in future times an Attor∣ney vvould haue stept vp to raile, and reuile that religion, calling it rotten and contemptible, & them all blind and deceaued people; vvhat an opinion (thinke you) vvould they haue fore-stallen of you? and hovv base and odious a conceit vvould they haue preconceaued against you? especiallie if they had seene you (as others did that stood neere) so caried avvaie vvith hereticall humour, as to vvander, and range, and runne from your matter in your pleading, to seeke occasion of in∣solent tauntes against them in such sort, as your vvhole subiect by your ovvne confession, being of treason, the most of your inuectiue speach vvas against their religion.
48. For vvhich cause I thought my self bound to saie somevvhat in this behalfe, principallie to that vvhich is proper to the argument of your late booke of Reportes, heere by me ansvvered. For as for the other parte concerning treason, and the vvhole Act of the late arraignement about the same, I haue of purpose forborne to speake, as vvell for that it is a matter not appertayning to my facultie; The ar∣raign∣ment of M. Gar∣net. as also in regarde of the devv respect I beare both vnto the lavves, and customes of my countrie, my Princes person, and the honour of that great assemblie: in all vvhich I haue nothing to complaine of (all hauing passed by order) but



onlie of your extrauagant excursions, to confoūd religion and treason togeather: nay to make reli∣gion the fountaine of treason, and therby to in∣uolue vvithin the hatred of treason, all those that by conscience are tyed to that religion, be they neuer so innocent; than vvhich there can be no greater iniquitie imagined.
49. VVith M. Garnets particular cause I vvill not meddle in this place, he is gone to his last Iudge, before vvhome also you, and others that haue had parte in the handling therof, must finallie appeare, to see confirmed or reuersed vvhatsoeuer hath passed in that affaire. As for that vvhich you & others so often vrged against him, to confesse, that he vvas lavvfullie condemned by the tēporal lavv of the land, importeth little for the impay∣ring of his innocencie before almighty God. You knovv vvho said in a farre vveightier cause, con∣cerning the tryal of our Sauiour himself: Ioan. 19. VVe haue a law, and according to this law, he ought to dy, for that he hath made himselfe the sonne of God; The law misap∣plyed a∣gainst Christ our Sa∣uiour Let 24 and their error vvas not so much in the obiect, as in the subiect: for as for the lavv it self, vve fynd it in Leuiticus that blasphemie (vvhereof the highest degree vvas for a man to make himself God) vvas punishable by death; but the subiect, to vvit, the person of our Sauiour vvas mistaken, they esteeming him to be onlie man, vvhereas they ought to haue knovvne,



that he vvas God and man, as vvell in respect of the predictions of al the Prophets, foretelling that Christ should be the sonne of God; as also of his stupendious actions, that proued him to be trulie Christ: so as though the lavv alleadged by the Ievv∣es against blasphemie & blasphemers, vvere true and in force of it self; yet held it not in the person of Christ, but vvas in the highest degree iniurious, as all Christian-men must confesse.
50. Let vs see then hovv from this case of the maister, some light may be dravvne to that of his scholler and seruant. You, M. Attorney, pleaded a∣gainst him, as the Ievves Attorneyes did against our Sauiour and said; Nos legem habemus &c. vve haue a lavv, that vvhosoeuer reuealeth not treason by such a space, shall be accessarie of treason, and dy as a traytor: nor do vve deny the lavv, or com∣plaine thereof; but yet if this case vvere pleaded in a forrayne Catholicke countrie, vvhere the pri∣soner also shoulde haue his Attorney allovved him, he vvould saie on the other side: The pri∣uiledge of secre∣cy to be obserued in Con∣fession. Nos legem ha∣bemus superiorem, Ecclesiasticam, Diuino iure intentam, qua sacerdos ne{que} mori, ne{que} puniri debet, ob proditionem sub confessionis figillo cognitam, & non reuelatam: vve haue a contrarie lavv, to vvit, an Ecclesiasticall and spirituall lavv, higher then your temporall, and a lavv founded on the lavv of God, vvhereby it is ordeyned, that a Priest shal neither dy, nor be



punished, nor be accompted traytor, for treason discouered vnto him vnder the seale of confes∣sion, and not by him reuealed; nay he shalbe pu∣nished, & that most grieuouslie, if he doe for anie cause reueale the same.
51. And this plea of the prisoners Attorney (vvhich by Catholicke doctrine and schooles is easilie proued in all the partes or members heere set dovvne) vvould presentlie haue bene admitted in all Catholicke Countries and Courtes, and in ours also, vvhiles our Kings and people vvere of that religion, and your temporall lavv vvould haue byn put to silence. Oh, you vvill saie, but novv it is othervvise, and vve care not for your Ecclesiasticall lavv. VVherevnto I ansvvere: Gods truth al¦wayes & euerie where one. Psal. 116. Ve∣ritas autem Domini manet in aeternum. If this lavv be foūded in Gods truth & vvas left vnto his Church by Christ himself the fountaine of al truth, for the honour and defence of his Sacrament of Confes∣siō, as al ancient diuinitie doth affirme; then must it for euer endure immutable: and novv and then, heere and there, this countrie and that countrie, this and that alteration of religion, or Princes tem∣porall lavves, must not alter the case or substance of truth, either in Gods sight, or vvise mens eyes; and so M. Garnets case, dying for this truth in En∣gland novv, is no vvorse, then if he had dyed a thousand yeares gone for the same, either in En∣gland

or any other Cath. countrey, that is to say, he dying only for the bare cōcealing of that, vvhich by Gods, and the Churches Ecclesiastical lavvs he could not disclose, & giuing no cōsent or coope∣ration to the treasō it self, should haue byn accōp∣ted rather a martyr then a traytor, & no lesse novv.
52. VVhich being so, cōsider I besech you M. At∣torney, vvhat a different reckoning there is like to be betvveene you tvvo, at your next meeting in iudgement: you knovv somvvhat by experience hovv dreadful a thing the forme of publicke iud∣gement is, but not so much as some others, for that hitherto it hath byn stil your lot to be actor & not reus, predominant both in vvordes & povver, and consequently terrible & nothing terrifyed: but vvhen the time and case shal come, vvherof the holie-ghost foretelleth vs: Sap. 5. Stabunt iusti in magna constantia, aduersus eos qui se angustiauerunt. Iust men that vvere ouerborne in this vvorld shal stand vp boldly vvith great constancy, against those that ouerbare them: and vvhen the saying of our Sauiour shalbe fulfilled: Math. 7. that euery man shal receaue, & be treated according to the measure wherby he hath measured to others; then vvil be the day of woe: neither doe I say this, M Attorney, to con∣demne your office, I knovv that in all tymes, vnder all Princes your office of Fiscal-Aduocate or Attorney hath byn in vse for the Princes seruice



and good also of the Common-vvealth if it be vvell and moderatelie vsed; but yet I cannot but friendlie put you in mind of that, vvhich holie S. Gregory doth admonish, vvhere he handleth the cause and reasons vvhy S. Peter, S. Andrew, S. Ia∣mes, and S. Iohn retourned to their art of fishing, Gregor.  in  ngel. oan. after the Resurrection of our Sauiour, but not S. Matthew to his Custom-hovvse; to vvit, that cer∣taine artes and occupations there are more dan∣gerous farre, the one then the other, as more sub∣iect and incident to greater sinnes.
53. In vvhich kinde trulie, Sir, if any office in the vvorld be daungerous in deed, yours may be ac∣compted in the highest degree, that hath euery day almost his finger in bloud, or in particular mens afflictions, and ouerthrovves. And albeit the act of iustice be laudable & necessarie; The dan¦gerous state of r En∣lish tor∣neyes office. yet the Actor oftentimes runneth no small daunger of his soule through the passions of anger, hatred, reuēge, vain-glorie, couetuousnes, appetite of ho∣nour, and the like affections of mynd, vvhich per∣uert iustice, and vvherof most strait accompt must aftervvard be rendred for the same.
54. And if in any part of the vvorld this Fiscall office and authority be full of perill, much more in England, vvhere his povver is much more abso∣lute then in any other countrey vvhatsoeuer. For that in other Realmes the defendant for his life,



hath other Attorneyes, and learned counsell al∣lovved him, as hath bene said; but in England all is committed in a certayne sort to the Kings Attor∣ney onlie, vvhere the matter any vvay concerneth the Princes interest: and albeit he be svvorne to be equall, and indifferent betvvene the Prince and his subiect, especiallie in matters of life and death; yet doe all men see, hovv that is obserued, the At∣torney thinking it his greatest honour to ouer∣throvv any man that commeth in his vvay by all manner of opprobrious proceeding, by scoffs, iestes, exprobrations, vrging of odious circum∣stances, tales, inuentions, cōparisons, rhetoricall exaggerations, & the like; vvhich seemed in old time so vnciuill, and inhumane against men in misery, that diuers States and Cōmon-vvealthes, though Pagan and Gentile, did forbid them to be vsed by the Actor, notvvithstanding the lavv allovved them a defender and tvvice as much time for the defence, as the Actor had for his ac∣cusation.
55. All vvhich points of ayd and comfort doe faile in our English tryall of life and death, and one more besides of singular importance, vvhich is, that the Iury commonlie is of vnlearned men, and therby easilie, either deceaued by crafty and coloured arguments of the accuser (not hauing time to examine, or iudgement to discerne them)



or led by false affectiōs, or terrifyed by force of au∣thoritie, vvhich in graue learned Iudges vvere not so much to be feared. And by this may M. Attorney acknovvledg vvith me some part of the danger of his office, vvho by one onlie vvorde, looke, signe, or action, may oftentimes preiudice the bloud of the prisoners, that stande at the barre, & much more by so many exaggerations, reproa∣ches, and insolencies vsed against them. VVho remembreth not that late hateful exprobration to the vnfortunate Earle, to vvhome it vvas obiected at the barre: that he thought to be the first King Robert, and novv he vvas like to be the last Earle of that name and hovvse. And the other yet more bitter vnto his Secretary Cuff, that you vvould giue him at length such a cuff, as should make his head to reele against the gallovves: these things to men in misery, are great encreasmētes no doubt of their calamityes, and so much the more, by hovv much they tasted of insolency, neuer al∣lovved of by vvise and moderate men, to∣vvardes those that be in affliction or distresse. And thus vvill I end this my first speach vvith you, re∣ferring my self for the rest to that vvhich ensueth throughout this vvhole Answere.
Cath. Deuine.
