



RIGHT HONORABLE LORD,
KING Saul being brought in∣to such a straight, that to escape the hands of the vncir∣cumcised Philistimes, hee laid violent hands vpon himselfe, fell vpon his owne sword and died 1. Sam. 31.4.. Dauid in his Funerall Elegies, in his Lamentations wherewith hee lamented ouer Saul and Ionathan, cryeth out, Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistims reioyce, lest the daughters of the vn∣circumcised tryumph2. Sam. 1.20.. But when a better then
Saul1. Sam. 15.28., to whom God hath giuen the Kingdomes of great Brittaine, being so brought into the snare of those mightie Hunters, Nimrods, vncircumcised in heart, the Earle of Gowry and his brethren, that the sorrowes of death compassed him, the floods of the vngodly made him afraid Psalm. 18.4., and hee was ready to say with King Hezekiah, I am depriued of the resi∣due of my yeares, I shall not see the Lord in the Land of the liuing, I shall behold man no more with the Inhabitants of the worldEsa. 38.10.11, was notwith∣standing so deliuered out of the snare of those Fow∣lers, that not an haire of his head fell to the ground; It is a good thing for vs that are the Lords Prae∣conesEsay 58.1., in our Panygyrickes that wee speake vnto the Lord in the day of the commemoration thereof Psal. 18.1., to cry it in the streetes, in the chiefe places of con∣course, in the opening of the gates Prou. 1.20., and in the Tem∣ples of the Lord that both Sion hearing of it, may reioyce and be glad Psal. 96.8.; and all the daughters of Baby∣lon that beare euill will at Sion, all treacherous Zi∣bahs, that could find in heart to blow the Trumpet of rebellion against their Soueraignes 2 Sam. 20.1., may bee con∣founded, and hang downe their heads for shame. Now though my tongue be not as the pen of a ready writer, though mine hand want Apelles Art to paint out this our Alexander in his great deliue∣rance; yet I haue made bold, in mine heart to endite some good matter, with my tongue to speake, and with my pen to publish the things that I haue made touching the King Psalm. 45.1. And albeit it might be said to mee, being little both in mine owne and others eyes,
What art thou? Whence commest thou? yet I haue like Hester, aduentured to come wth these my raw medi∣tations into the Courts of your Honors house without calling thither Hest. 4.10., hoping as Dauid shewed kindnes to Mephibosheth for Ionathans sake 2. Sam. 9.7., so you will vouch safe to receaue it into your fauourable protecti∣on for the subiects sake whereof it intreateth, his Highnesse happy and wonderfull sauing, in whose safety at that time consisted, both in generall, the pre∣seruation of these two famous kingdomes, and also in speciall, the continuance of your honours prosperi∣tie and dignitie vnto this day; you being one of the foules of the aire that haue their habitation in the branches of this great tree Dan. 4 21.. Againe, my perswasions are strong, that any thing spoken of his Maiesties wonderfull deliuerance, shall be welcome to him, in whom haue bene obserued to meet, and be conioyned, those seuerall commendations that Alexander the Great gaue to two of his seruants, commending the one (Craterus) to be , a louer of the king in the things that concerned his crowne and dignitie: the other (Hephaestion) to be , a louer of Alexander in a priuate respect & affection towards his person: and that the basest earthen vessell, that bringeth in it any of the heauenly treasures, shall finde fauour in his eyes, who (as it was sayd of Sce∣uola that he was Iurisperitorum eloquentissimus, of all the Lawyers the most eloquent man) is , of our Nobles the most skilfull in Diuinitie, who hath made Gods testimonies his counsellers, ta∣keth more delight in them then in thousands of gold
and siluer, and thinketh it a greater honour to bee a member of the Church, then a Peere of the Realme. All which hath made me put on the spirit of bold∣nesse, to dedicate vnto your honorable protection, this  song of triumph, wherein the highest note is concerning the Mercies of the Lord, and the faith∣fulnesse that he hath shewed vnto our Dauid his an∣nointed. Pardon then (I beseech your Honour) my boldnesse, accept it with gracious fauour, and protect it vnder the shadow of your roofe (as Lot did the Angels) that miscreants may doe nothing vnto it. And in my poore measure I wil not cease to fall down an humble suppliant before the Throne of grace, to make request, that God which hath blessed you with the blessings of heauen aboue, and of the deepe that lyeth vnder neath, would also blesse you with all spi∣rituall blessings in heauenly things in Christ; who hath giuen you a name vpon earth, would giue you a name and place within his house and his walles; which hath made you happy in standing before an earthly Salomon, would giue you the fulnesse of ioy in his presence; and which hath set you with the Princes of his people, would in his good time set you at his right hand where there are pleasures for euermore.

