



RIGHT Worshipfull, it is written of one, a kings sonne, that he as∣ked 3. things at Gods hands, outward pros∣peritie, inward com∣forts, and such glorie as shold be neither false nor fained. What more to be happy? The first of these you haue by birth, and your parents wealth & honor: the second, Salomon tels you, how you may haue, by the getting & keeping a good conscience, which is a continual feast: and the third is purchased for you by Christ, if you by faith can take hold of him, by whom (which is the true and greatest glorie) we are made the sonnes of
 God, and coheires with him of the Para∣dise of God, and the vnspeakable ioyes thereof. All these three must concurre to make a man blessed: no happinesse in the first without the second: no soundnesse in the second to abide without the third. Loose Christ, a dew conscience comforts: and outward goods and honour without inward health of grace, is an estate car∣nally of estimation, but indeed hopelesse of the Saints blessed condition. Great wealth, & noble birth, without the soules spirituall breath, is as a shippe vnder full saile in a tempestuous Sea without sterne or Pylote: a case most daungerous: more like it is there should be shipwracke, than that it should come in safety to the hauen. Your ship is not yet at the sea, you are but launching out, hitherto you haue lyen in harbour: ballance your soule with sound knowledge, and holy affections before you aduenture: take with you your pro∣uision, and be sure you season your flesh with the salt of Gods word, lest it corrupt at sea, and you want necessaries, and be forced to go a shore before you come vnto your determined place.
Salomon telleth vs, that the young man which cheareth his heart vp in the dayes
 of his youth, to walke in the euill waies thereof, and in the sight of his eyes, must know, that for these things God will bring him to iudgement: and therefore he adui∣seth him to remember his Creator in the dayes of his strength, before the time come, when he shall confesse, that sinne hath as much left him, as he it. Surely, Sir, if you betimes, as I hope you do, remem∣ber the Lord, and seeke him, as Dauid said to the child Salomon, he will be found of you: which he of his mercy graunt: but if you forsake him, he will forsake you; which God of his goodnesse forbid. The aduancement of Ioseph amongst Pharaoes Princes, and Daniels honour aboue the great Bassaes of Babylon, may shew you the truth of the one: and that young mans miserable end, beautifull Absolon, and Dauids deare sonne, may ratifie the cer∣taintie of the other. Gods fauour is the fountaine of blisse, and in those onely he delighteth that feare him.
The good tokens of your good affectiō towards me, and towards the preachers of Gods word, the loue you do shew to further the passage of the Gospell, both in word and liberall deeds, hath mooued me to offer this my labour vnto you: both
 to testifie my thankfulnesse, and to mani∣fest vnto the world our good hopes of you, which I desire that you may daily occasion by holy fruites of obedience to be iustified of many, to Gods glory and your owne welfare.
The Lord Almightie protect you and that honorable house whereof you are, and enlarge the name thereof, as with earthly renowne, so euer much more with spirituall blessings, that it wishing well to the Israel of God, peace and mercie may be vpon it: and the louing counte∣nance of God now shine vpon all there∣in, that hartily desire the welfare of Sion, and the peace of Ierusalem for euer.
A∣men.
Worsop, the 28. of Nouember.

