



WORTHY SIR,
HOly Iob being about to vttter a divine medita∣tion concerning the fu∣ture resurrection, cryeth out, Oh that my words were written now, Oh that they were printed in a Booke. Iob. 19.23. And you of late being the Principall Auditor, where according to the gift giuen to me, J vttered this follow∣ing Meditation, conceived vpon an excellent patterne in my Text, both of good workes in generall, and of
Almes-deeds in speciall, the best of workes, which shall be remembred and rewarded at the last resurrection afore and aboue all other workes, walked in the same Spirit with that righteous man, in desiring that these same words might be written vnto you, and not vanish away in the houre and aire wherein they were vttered: J haue therefore transcribed this co∣py, and doe willingly and deseruedly Dedicate to your selfe this piece of my labours. And so much the rather J present it to you, because as face an∣swereth to face in water, Prov. 27.19. so both your selfe & your worthy Lady answere fully to this face of charity and almes-doing represented here to you in this Disciple Dorcas, in the sowing plentifully and solemn∣ly
at the set times weekely, the seede of your almes at your gates to the poore round about yuo: which J write not out of any flattery: (from which both by nature and conscience J am averse,) but as Paul said of the Ma∣cedonians in alike case 2. Cor. 8.1.3. to beare witnesse of the grace of God bestowed on you both, who are mette together in another Corneli∣us and Dorcas abounding in this worke of the Lord. As you haue ther∣fore worthily begunne; so happily goe on in sowing the seed of your almes plentiously, that you may reape plen∣tiously in the day of the Lord. For though you seeme to the world to cast your bread vpon the waters, where it is lost, yet after many dayes you shall finde it againe, even in the great day
of the Lord. The poore may say vnto thee, that I in receiving of Almes giue no lesse vnto thee, then thou in bestowing them giuest vnto mee. For if there were not some to receiue thine Almes, thou couldest not giue earth and receiue heaven, as St Austin sayth. And in the meane season, God that is rich to all, will so blesse your basket and your store, that alwayes hauing sufficiencie in all things, you may still abound in this worke. For as St Chrysostome sayth, Almes-doing maketh not any man poore, but enricheth him, for it is promised, giue, and it shall be giuen you: and againe, that thou mai'st be rich, giue thy goods liberally: that thou mai'st
gather, scatter: follow the sower, sow in blessings, that thou mai'st reape in blessings: in his 53. and 68. Homilie to the people of An∣tioch.
Now the God of Heaven blesse You, and your worthy Lady, not one∣ly with the blessings of Heaven a∣boue, and Earth beneath, but also with all Spirituall blessings in Christ Jesus; that when you haue finished your course happily in this world you may raigne eternally in the World to come; So wisheth

From my house at Collingborne April 1. 1631.
