



GEnerous Sr, at the time of your happie Nuptialls, when your friends and invited guests filled you with presents of all sorts, I amongst the rest had provided such as I haue to giue you, even this poore spirituall
mite to haue beene cast in amongst your o∣ther great gifts, had not the lot of that boxe of oyntment powred on our Saviours head in some sort falne vpon it. But as little Currents by being stopped, rise higher and swell to greater streames, so this not finding vent then to runne for that houre, is now swolne to that bignesse to become a Torrent and runne some longer time. The Presse is now become as the MidWife to deliver this Childe, which was then come to the birth, had there bin strength to bring forth. Yours it was then in the preparation, and yours it must be now in the dedication, it being at first intended for you, could in no good fa∣shion purchase any licence of Alienation to be conveyed from you. In it you may see that as stronger blessings then ordinary were powred on the head of Joseph that was se∣parate from his brethren Gen. 49.26. so most powerfull and prevalent blessings are pow∣red on the head of her that was separated from her brethren and fathers house, and ioyned to the God of Israell, had professed that he should be her God & his people her
people. Ruth. 1.16. even of Ruth a Moabi∣tesse, who hath the priviledge not onely to be admitted into the Congregation of Gods people Deut. 23.3.The Hebrew Rabbins say that they haue a tradition of Moses from Mount Sinai that the males of the Ammo∣nites & Moa∣bites not the females are forbidden to enter into the Congregati∣on of God. Maimony. but also the Honour to haue the Saviour of the world come of her according to the flesh, and to be named in the line of his Genealogy Mat. 1.5. and of Boaz as godly in life, as mighty in wealth Ruth. 2. And when such great and good per∣sons blesse such godly persons, they are bles∣sed in deed, when such faithfull and holy el∣ders sitting in the gate blesse in the name of the LORD such religious and devout Prose∣lites, it availeth very much Jam. 5.16. yea & they shall be blessed, as Jsaacke said of his blessing Iacob, Gen. 27.33. How much more then may you both be confident, that you shall receiue blessing from the LORD vpon this your coniugall vnion both of namesPeregrine Thistlethwait Dorothy Thistlethwait. and houses, sith ence Deus est in vtro{que} pa∣rente, you are true Israelites on both sides, neither of you new Proselites drawne out of Paganisme or Idolatry, but may with an holy boasting glory as Paul doth for Timothy, 2 Tim. 1. of an vnfained faith that dwelt first
in their Grandmothers and Mothers, & not only so, but also in your line and gene∣ration on both sides? neither is your match like the marrying together of the thistle in Lebanon with the Cedar in Lebanon 2. King. 14.9. an vnequall coniunction, but like the joyning together of Jsaacke & Rebeckah, two persons of one kindred and family (yet Without breaking downe the Pales of de∣grees prohibited) of two Cardui benedicti, that may grow into a multitude and an ho∣ly seede in the LORD. God hath already be∣gunne to make good this blessing vpon you in giuing you seede, and if you feare him & keepe his commandernents and dwell to∣gether in coniugall vnity, hauing one heart and one soule, he will command his blessing and life for ever more, you the wife shall be as a fruitfull vine, your children like oliue plants round about your table, & you shall see your childrens children and peace vpon Israell. I giue you then this gift willingly, and desire you to accept it louingly, follow∣ing that divine rule, it is accepted according to that which a man hath, and lay it vp not
only in your chest but also in your hearts. And the God of Heaven prosper it to you, that it may be a faithfull Monitor to you & speake words whereby you and your chil∣dren may be saued, which shall bee the Crowne and rejoycing of him that longeth after you in the bowels of Iesus Christ, and desireth to be esteemed

