



RIGHT HONORABLE
ALthough my meanesse of conditi∣on, my bashfulnes of disposition be very strong Remoraes to stay me from pressing like Iosephs brethren, with a present, of such poore Fruits as my barren soyle yeeldeth into the presence of your Honor, whom not a Rex gentium only,Gen. 43.11. a Pharaoh, Assuerus, or Nebuchadnezar, but such
a King as for his Intellectuall, Morall, Politi∣call and Theologicall Vertues, and Endow∣ments, the Globe of this Earth hath not borne till this present, hath made a great man in his Kingdome, giuen many great gifts vntoDan. 2.48. and whose seate hee hath set aboue many other of his Nobles, because hee findeth the spirit of God, euen an excellent spirit of Wisedome and Discretion in you,Gen. 41.38.39. which hath a Magneticall Virtue to draw the fauour of a King towards it by the testimonie of the wisest King that GOD gaue to his old people of the Iewes:Dan. 1.17.18 19. c Prou. 14.35. Yet my second (and I hope my better) thoughts yeelde mee motiues, to counteruaile these retractiues and incouragements: to preponderate these discouragements. For to presume so farre, and soare so high in this Dedication, I am not a lit∣tle emboldened by the generall, and constant Fame of your Honors Heroicall, and Benigne disposition, who (according to that of Antist∣henes: That Virtue and true Nobilitie goe toge∣ther Laortius lib. 6. Labor to excell others, as well in good∣nesse of minde: as greatnesse of place; and to vse that fauour and grace which God hath gi∣uen you with his royall Maiestie, not with Ab∣salon to popular insinuations & applauses:Sam. 15.16. nor with Haman, to make your selfe terrible by pro∣curing decrees against oposites,Est. 3.8. but with Ne∣hemiah, to doe good amongst your people, and seeke the welfare of them,Neh 2. with Ebedmelech, to deliuer those that are in distresse,Ier. 38. and with
Daniel to become a suitor, for the setting of men of Wisedome and Vnderstanding ouer the af∣faires of the Realme,Dan. 2.49. who not only standing be∣fore so gracious and clement a King, but also tasting so deepely of the fountaine of his Fauors cannot but imimate so glorious; and resplen∣dent a patterne: As they that walke in the Sunne must needes be coloured by the Sunne, and as that woman in the Gospell, to whom much loue was shewed in the forgiuenesse of hir many sinnes, could not but shew much loue againe in pious Offices.Luke 7.37. As then Alexander the great determined about the relinquishing of his Kingdome, when hee was readie to die, that it should bee Optimo et generestssimo, fo I (si parua licet componcre magnis) about the dedi∣cating of these my vnpolished Labours, that it shall be to him, that is so good and generous. A∣gaine the dignity of the subiect ministreth fuell to the fire of my boldnesse in this kinde. For if Dauid durst speake of Gods Testimonies be∣fore PrincesPsal. 119.46. happily those Princes that did sit and speake against him, and persecute himIbid. v. 23. & 161. for his loue to Gods Law; how much more may wee that are Ambassadors for Christ, dare both to speake and wright of any of the glad tidings of his Gospell to a Theophilus, a friend of God, that is perswaded of the certainty of themLuke. 1.4. and to whom, they are the very Ioy and reioycing of his heart? And if Paule thought it no pre∣sumption but happinesse, to speake in defence
of his religion before king Agrippa, who could bee but almost perswaded to bee a Christian,Act. 26.28. how much more may euen a minimus Aposto∣stolorum be bold in the Lord to declare (Voce aut Scripte,) any part of the Gospell of Christ to a Sergius Paulus, a prudent deputy, who both de∣sireth to heare the word of God, and beleeueth it.Act. 13.7.12. who is all out a Christian, and beleeueth the Prophets, euen all the holy men of God that wrote by diuine inspiration. 2. Pet. 1.21.
As then that Euangelist whose prayse is in the Gospell, specially dedicateth both his bookes (which yet were published for the ge∣nerall benefit of all the houshould of Faith) to that excellent Theophilus, who was (as the Greeke Scholies say  a Gouernour, (for so that stile of Excellent giuen to the Gouernours Felix and Festus) euineeth:Act. 23.26. & 26.25. So I who haue ad∣dicted all my paines to the Gospell of Christ, haue trodden in his steps, in tendring a part of them (which I now make publicke to the Chur∣ches that are in Christ) to your Honour; who with Zabud are a principall Officer about our Sa∣lomon.1. King 4.5.
And it cannot bee but that your Honour, standing a seruant before the Throane of our Salomon,1. King 10.8. who is aswell an Ecclesiastes, as a Rex in our IerusalemEccle. 1.1. and whose wisedome excel∣leth not only the wisedome of the children of the East and of Egypt,1. King 4.30. (the perishable wise∣dome of this world) but euen the wisedome of
the sonnes of the Prophets amongst vs, in dis∣soluing of doubts, deciding of controuersies, impugning of the common aduersarie, ex∣pounding of Prophecies, interpreting of diffi∣cult places, and discoursing readilie vpon any Probleme proposed concerning the great things of Gods Law, must be both in lightened with a great measure of vnderstanding therein, and inflamed with a feruent zeale and affection thereto. For such is the rauishing beautie of diuine learning, that the more it is seene, the more it is admired, the more you vnderstand with DanielDan. 9.1. the more you will set your heart to vnderstand, and to question about these sa∣cred misteries,Dan 10 & 12.8. which maketh mee hope that your Honor will vouchsafe to taste of this Manna, though dressed after the contrarie fa∣shion, to listen to these Songs of Sion, though sung out by my harsh voice, and played to on the Harpe by my vnskillfull hand, and to enter∣tayne these Meditations though vttered by a slow tongued Moses, not one whose tongue is as the penne of a ready writer, by a country A∣mos, not a courtly Isaiah, and by him that is rude in speech, not one that commeth with excel∣lency of words.
And so I tender them to your Honour in all humilitie, with that farewell benedi∣ction of Iacob to his Sonnes going into Egypt, God Almighty giue you Fauour in the sight of the Man.Gen. 43.4.

Now the Lord of Lords, who hath brought your Honour hitherto, fasten you as a nayle in a sure place, blesse your House, that it may continue for euer before him, and after ful∣nesse of Dayes, Ritches and Honour, heere on Earth, giue you the fulnesse of Ioyes in his presence in Heauen.

