


ABowt three yeres past (good reader) a certaine learned and deuout gentilman, consideringe the greate want of spirituall bookes in Englande, for the di∣rection of men to pietie & de∣uotic̄ (whiche ought to be the cheefest point of our exercise in this lyfe) tooke the paines to translate a godlye treatise to that effect, named, the exercise of a Christian life, writen in the Italian toung, by a reuerende man of the socretic of Iesus, named Gasper Loartes, Do∣ctor in diuinitie, and of greate experience in the handlinge and managinge of sowles to that purpose. VVhiche booke because I vn∣derstande of certaintie, to haue done greate good, & to haue wrought forcebly in the har∣tes of manye persons, towards the foresayed effect of pietie and deuotion: I was moued to cause the same to be printed againe, and that in muche more ample manner than before, hauinge added vnto it, two partes of three, which were not in the former booke.
The reason of this so large an additiō shall

appeare in the Induction followinge, where snalbe shewed the partes of this booke, with the causes and cōtentes therof. But the prin∣cipall cause and reason was, to the ende our countrye men might haue some one sufficiēt directiō for matters of life and spirit, among so manye bookes of controuersies as haue ben writen, and are in writinge dailye. The whiche bookes, albeit in thes our troubleso∣me & quarrelous times be necessarie for de∣fence of our faithe, againste so manye sedi∣tious innouations, as now are attempted: yet helpe they litle oftentymes to good lyfe, but rather do fill the heades of men with a spirite of contradiction and contention, that for the most parte hindereth deuotiō, which deuo∣tion is nothinge els, but a quiet and peaceble A descri∣ption of deuotiō state of the sowle, endewed with a ioyful promptnes to the diligent execution of all thinges that appartayne to the honour of God. In respect wherof, S. Paule geeueth this counsayle to his scholer Timothie: contende not in vvordes, for it is profitable to nothinge, but 2. Ti. 2. to subuert the hearers. The lyke counsayle he geuethe in diuers other places, in respect of this quiet deuotion, whiche is trowbled by contention.
But yet (as I haue saide) these bookes of Bookes of  ne cessarie. though  to . controuersies are necessarie for other consi∣derations, especialie in thes our tymes, when euerye man almost is made of a fancie, and apte to esteeme the same greate wisdome, except it be refuted. Suche are our dayes, most vnhappie truelye in respect of our fo∣refathers,

whoe receauinge the grownde of faithe peaceably, & without quarelinge from their mother the Chuche, did attend onlye to builde vppon the same, good woorkes and Christian life, as their vocation required. But 1. Cor. 3. we spendinge all the tyme in ianglinge abowte the foundation, haue no leysure to think vpon the building, and so we wearye out our spirites without cōmoditie, we dye with muche adoe and litle profit, greate dis∣quiet & small rewarde. For whoe knoweth not, that what faithe so euer a man hathe, 1 a co. 3. yet without good lyfe it helpeth hym litle? 1. Co. 1.
I am therfore of opinion (gentle reader) that albeit trew faithe be the grownde of Christianitie, without which nothinge of it Heb. 12. selfe can be meritorious before God: yet that one principall meane to come to this trew Good li∣fe a mea∣ne to ri∣ght fai∣the, faithe, and right knowledge, and to ende all thes our infinite cōtentions in religion, were for eche man to betake him selfe to a good & vertuous life, for that God could not of his vnspeakeable mercie suffer suche a man to erre lōge in religion. VVe haue a cleare exā∣ple of Cornelius a Gentile to whome God in respect of his religious lyfe, prayer and almes Act. 10. deedes, (as the scripture affirmeth) sent his Apostle S. Peter to instruct him in the right faithe So mercifull is God to those whiche applye thē selues to vertue and pietie, albeit they erre as yet in pointes of faithe.
And on the contrarie side, as loose lyfe and worldlye ambition, was the first cause of all heresye in Christian religion from the be∣ginninge:

so is it the cōtinuance of the same. and it is verie harde for him that is so affected to be recalled from his error. For that (as the scripture saithe) the vvisdome of God vvill not Sap. 1. entre into a malitious minde, nor dvvell in a bo∣dye subiect to sinne. And our Saueoure in the gospell askethe a question of certaine am∣bitious worldlynges, whiche geeuethe grea∣te light to the thinge we talke of: hovv (sayeth Ihon. 5. he) can you beleeue, vvhich seeke glorye one of an other? as whoe woulde saie, that this worldly ambition and euill life of theirs, did make it impossible for them to come to the trewe faithe.
VVherfore (gentle reader) if thow be of an other religiō than I am, I beseche the most hartelye, that layenge a side all hatred, malice and wrathfull contention, let vs ioyne toge∣ther in amendmēt of our lyues, and prayeng one for an other: and God (no doubt) will not suffer vs to perishe finallye for want of right faithe. And to Catholiques I must saye further withe S. Paule and S. Iames, that all 1. Co. 13 their faith will profitt them nothinge, except Iaco. 2. they haue charitie allso, bothe towardes God and man, and therby doe directe their lyues accordinglye. VVhiche God of his holye mercye geeue them  to doe, to his ho∣nour and their eternall saluation. And I most humblye request the (good Christian reader) to praie for me allso, (if thow take any com∣moditie by this booke) that I be not like the Conduit pipe whiche bringeth water to the citie, without drinkinge anye it selfe, or as

S. Paule withe muche lesse cause than I haue, 1. Cor. 9 feared of hym selfe, to witt, lesse that after preachinge to other, I become perchaunce a reprobate my selfe. Remēbre allso I beseeche the, that most vertuous good gentilman, whoe by his first translation, was the cause of this labour now taken againe. He hathe suffered much sence for the cause of his con∣science, and is at this present vnder indurāce for the same, and by that meanes, so muche the more in disposition to receaue fruite by thy prayer, by howe muche the more he hathe suffered for righteousnes sake, and is nearer ioined to God by his separation from the world. Our lorde blesse him and the allso (good reader) and sende vs all his holy grace, to doe his will in this woorld, that we maye raigne with him in the world to come. Amen.

