




RIGHT HONOVRABLE, RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL:
SIx diuided equallie to two, is three, or three to either. Three is all, so many to euerie one, no
 lesse to any. A man is either of God by regeneration, liuing in goodnesse, going to heauen; or of the diuell by corruption, practising wickednesse, and running headlong to hell. Two generations, the heauenlie race or the Serpents seed: two Regiments, some slaues by sin to Satans controulement; some in voluntarie subiection by grace to Gods gouernemēt: two places to goe vnto, the in∣fernall bottomlesse pit, or the celestiall endlesse paradise. There is but one Conductour, God in the spirituall bright∣nesse; but one seducer prin∣cipall,
 the diuell in spirituall darkenesse. One onelie true Religion, the rest Idolatrie and Superstition. There are no men Miscellane, one betweene two of either, and yet neither. There is no meane or third place betwixt Hell below and Heauen one high. The Pope with his Priests may teach a Purgatorie, to picke the pur∣ses of foolish Papists: but be∣leeue them those that list, the word yeelds no such war∣rant, to cause a iudicious and sound Protestant to feare or force of it. Yet is there one, an ill meane among men, that
 loathed creature, that Luke∣warme Gospeller: a time ser∣uer professing after his plea∣sure, as may stand with his profit: this is the Miscellane man. But is hee good? then of God; then goe such to heauen: but God saith hee will spue them (a tearme of loathing) out of his mouth: if bad, then of the Diuell, and so belong to Hell. Three and three then, God, Goodnesse, Heauen: the Diuell, Badnesse, Hell; my subiect matter empin∣folds all: none not with∣in the compasse of these. God either guides men by his holie
 spirit, settles them in grace, and rewards them in heauen with infinite glorie: or the di∣uell beareth swaie in their hearts and holds them in wic∣kednesse, for which in hell they receiue wages due, euen vn∣speakable miserie.
Heere therefore (RIGHT HONOVRABLE, RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,) of all these are certaine pictures, not Popish and sensible for super∣stition; but mentall for Di∣uine contemplation; whereto are added wholesome Precepts for direction after godlie me∣ditation. Gods Picture, to be∣hold
 him, that is so good; to admire his excellencie, to feare his Maiestie, to praise his bountie. The Diuels portrai∣ture, that he may be seene, that is so euill, to wonder at his wic∣kednesse, to loath his vilenesse, to detest his wretchednesse, and to beware of his deceitfulnesse. Good is set forth, to behold the comelie beautie of celestiall grace, to embrace it with loue. Badnesse is discouered, that the vglie morphew of sinne may be seene, to abhorre it. Heauen is described to worke ioy in wel-doing by conside∣ring so great a reward of hap∣pinesse
 and that eternally. Hell is deciphered to restraine from sinne, by fearing the re∣compence of vengeance in in∣ternall torments euerlastingly. He that doth good, may turne and read of God, his blessed guide; and of heauen, how in the end he shall bee in felicitie. He that doth euill, may read of the diuell, his accursed leader; and of hell, and behold his fu∣ture and dreadfull miserie. This is the practicall vse of these pictures.
Right Noble Lord; Still let the honouring of the gos∣pell, and hatred of Poperie
 praise your zeale: this is of God. Let still your speedie execution of iustice make re∣nowned your seat of equitie: this is goodnesse. Your Ho∣nours loue to the truth and regard of the ministrie is not vnknowne: your godly hate of Antichristianisme is no lesse manifest; and is not a care in iust proceeding betweene these two words, mine and thine, commended? These giue sure hope by Christ of heauen. My praier is for your Honours constant footing in this happie path. Indeede the way of wel∣doing is strait, and as narrow
 as strait: hard to enter, and as difficult to endure therein: whereunto is required the wisdome of a Serpent, and a Doues innocency. Godlie sinceritie now adaies with A∣chitophels is held an affection from follie: iust and resolute dealing, but a desperate at∣tempt. The dislike of Luke∣warmenesse, and hate of a false religion with Machiauellian Time-seruers is iudged but a passionate rashnesse, the heat of a spirit apt to Sedition.
What if this be the wicked mans censure? What if the world, the Schoole of Satans
 policie, do thus condemne true Christianitie? Must noble spirits set vp to aduance pie∣tie, yeeld to such hellish Hags, and become slauish to the froth of vanitie? A true childe of the Church instructed in the Schoole of Christ, can not en∣dure it: his high spirit, eleua∣ted beyond the low pitch of cor∣rupt reason in confederacie with flesh and blood, possiblie cannot so debase it selfe. This were to separate wisdome and innocencie: to leaue religious sinceritie, and to take vp other godlesse mens impietie. Hee that can put in practise our
 Sauiours lesson, to be as wise as a Serpent, and as harm∣lesse as a Doue, he may doe well. Together are they good; it is not seasonable to be in act, while they bee asunder. The first alone is but diuellish de∣ceitfulnesse: the latter, by it selfe, is but a good meaning sillinesse: Hee that conioines them rightlie, seekes his owne safetie. Conscience will plead for innocencie, God will defend it: and prudent practise keeps an estate good, maugre the e∣nemies malice. Where these two like to lodge and harbour in one heart, that, as rare, as
 excellent a person, may liue within himselfe comfortably, among men peaceably, and in the end die ioyfully: my vn∣feined wish to your Honour and to all that walke with God vprightlie.
Right honourable Lady, Right Worshipful and Ho∣nourable ofspring: My at∣tempt may seeme a wonder; but the conceit of the wonderment ceaseth where iudgement sear∣cheth out the cause, & prudēce doth guid wisdom to weigh the circumstance. A Lady is Ho∣nored in her Lord, children are dignified in the due fame, and
 high promotiō of their parents. The first are vnited by Gods ordināce, the latter by natures influence. Whom God then and nature hath cemented, I, in my due honoring of al, presume to conioine. Right Honourable Madame, and to you Ladies, I wish all welfare vnder God, on earth true goodnes, in heauen enduring gladnes; a time to read good things, but all times to practise, commen∣ding to your heartie assent this memorandum: Wo∣men are but weake, their strength is to bee vn∣der gouernment, excellent
 praise is gotten by their wise silence, but their principall glory stands in their awe, and cheerefull obedience. This per∣haps may not seeme a plausible sentence to your Sexe; but (good Ladies) he cannot flat∣ter, that indeede doth giue you true Honour.
I present your Honours, your Worships, with these spe∣ciall meditations, the first part of my Pictures and Pre∣cepts. Tho I bee troubled with controuersies and called into such matters of contenti∣on; yet intermix I my studie sometime with these better mo∣tions.
 I finde that Questions curiously contriued doe more exercise wit, to informe iudge∣ment, then to make the heart deuout in our pilgrimage and this earthly exilement. By troublesome disputations men get knowledge to approue of good, but by quiet meditations men grow to more conscience in their waies, and do increase in grace. Hence is my inter∣change, and a cause of some stay of my answer both to Ma∣ster Ainsworth the Separa∣tist, and to Master Smith that Anabaptisticall Se-Baptist: but now the time wil
 not be long, ere I publish my re∣plie. This present labour, in the view of words, may seeme but litle, but the weight of the matter rightly valued makes it more. The heads here hādled are but few, yet comprehend much: the words not many; I haue studied breuity: It is irke∣some to be tedious, it is delight∣som to be short and perspicuous.
It is (Right Honourable, Right VVorshipfull) what it is, euen my good meaning, my first and best endeauour in this kind; whatsoeuer it bee, be it not, as it should be, my will yet wisheth it to bee well, and
 my thankfull heart offers it vp with all due respect vnto ou, and craues your honoura∣ble and worshipful acceptances f the same. If I haue offended by tendering so small a worke, o so great and worthy Perso∣nages, I begge pardon for my oldnesse: and so praying for our euer-prosperous estate and true happinesse, I hum∣bly take my leaue.
From Worsop in Notinghams. Nouem. 6.

