



MY MOST Excellent and soueraygne dread Ladye and Princesse: two causes induced me, to direct vnto your royal person, and most graciousTwo causes of dedication. Maiestie, this present Treatise, after I had read and considered the same. The one, for that it séemed to me, both conceued and penned, with such modestie and humilitie of spirite to∣gether with al dutiful respect, to your highnes, to your honorable Lordes of the Counsaile, and to the whole estate of your noble Realme, (contrarye to the spirite and procéedings of al :) as none might iustely be of∣fended therewith, but onely, in respect



of the wryters zeale and opinion in religion: which notwithstanding, ha∣uinge bene from tyme to tyme, the common receaued religion of vni∣uersal Christendome: can not be soe soone abandoned by the disfauour of any one countrye, nor lacke men to speake or wryte in defence of the same, as longe as there is, ether head or hand remaining loose in the world.
The other cause was, for that it séemed to me, to contayne matter of great and weightie consideration, and much important, not onelye to the cause of God, but also to your Maies∣ties soule, estate, and Realme, and vnto the state of many a thowsand of your graces most louing, faithful, and dutiful subiectes: who being now af∣flicted for their consciences, and brought to such extremitie, as neuer was hard of in England before, haue no other meanes to redresse and ease their miseries, but onely as confident children to runne vnto the mercy and clemency of your Highnes their Mo



ther, and borne soueraigne Princesse: before whom, as before the substitute and Angel of God, they laye downe their gréefes, disclose their miseries, and vnfould their pitiful afflicted case, brought into suche distresse at this time, as ether they must renounce God by doinge that, which in iudge∣mente and conscience they doe con∣demne: or els sustayne such intolle∣rable molestations, as they can not beare. Which your Maiestie by that which followeth, more at large, may please to vnderstand.
There are at this day in this yourFower religi∣ons. Maiesties Realme, fower knowen religions, and the professors thereof, distinct both in name, spirite, and doc∣trine: that is to say, the Catholickes, the Protestants, the Puritanes, and the howsholders of Loue. Besids al o∣ther petye sects, newly borne, and yet grouelinge on the ground. Of these fower sorts of men, as the Catholiks are the first, the auncientest, the more  number, and the most beneficial to



al the rest (hauing begotten and bred vp the other, and deliuered to them this Realme, conserued by Catho∣licke religion, these thowsand yeares and more:) soe did they alwayes hope to receaue more fauour then the rest, or at leaste wyse, equall tolleration with other religions disalowed by the state. But God knoweth, it hath fallen out quite contrarye. For other religions, haue bene permitted to put out their heades, to growe, to ad∣uaunce them selues in cōmon speach, to mount to pulpites, with litle or noe controlement. But the Catho∣lique religion, hath bene soe beaten in, with the terror of lawes, and the rigorous execution of the same, as the verye suspition thereof, hath not escaped vnpunished.
The Lawe made by Protestants, prohibitinge the practize of other re∣ligionsStraitnes to Catholiques. besides there owne, allot∣teth out the same punishment to all them, that doe any waye varye from the publique communion booke, or



otherwise say seruice then is appoin∣ted there, as it doth to the Catho∣liques for hearinge or sayinge of a Masse. And althoughe the worlde knoweth, that the order set doune in that booke, be commonlye broken by euerye minister at his pleasure, and obserued almost noe where: yet smal punishment hath euer ensewed ther∣of. But for hearinge of a Masse, were it neuer soe secret, or vttered by ne∣uer so weake meanes: what impriso∣ninge, what arrayninge, what con∣demning hath there bene? The exam∣ples are lamentable, and many freshe in memorye, and in dyuers fami∣lies will be to all posteritye mise∣rable.
To this now if we adde the ex∣treme penalties, laied vpon the prac∣tize of certayne particulers in the Catholicke religion, as imprisonmēt perpetual, losse of goodes and lands, and lyfe also, for refusal of an othe a∣gainst my religiō: death for recōciling my selfe to God by my ghostly father:



death, for geuing the supreme Pasfor supreme authoritie in causes of the Church: death, for bringing in a cru∣cifix in remembrance of the crucified: death, for bringing in a séely payre of beades, a medal, or an agnus dei, in deuotion of the Lambe that tooke a∣way my sinns: which penalties haue not bene layed vpon the practise of o∣ther religions: your Maiestie shal ea∣selye finde to be trew, soe much as I haue sayd, which is, that the Catho∣like religion, wherin we were borne, baptized, and brede vp, and our fore∣fathers lyued and dyed most holyly in the same, hath found lesse fauour and tolleration, then anye other newer sect or religion what so euer.
And albeit the world doth know, how that the great mercye and cle∣mencie of your Maiestie, hath stayed often times, and restrayned these pe∣nalties, from their execution, and from the ouerthrowinge of  men, whome otherwise they myght and would haue oppressed: yet not∣withstanding



(as I haue sayd) there wante not verye pitiful examples a∣brode, which would moue greately, and make to bléed that Princely and compassionable harte of your High∣nes, if their miseries in particuler were knowen to the same: especially it beinge in such subiectes, as loued and doe loue most tenderly your Ma∣iestie: and for such a cause, as lyethe not in them to remoue, that is, for their conscience and iudgement in re∣ligion.
But now, these afflictions, how gréeuous and heauye soe euer they were, yet were they hythertoe more tollerable, because they were not common, nor fell not out vppon eue∣ryeGeneral cros∣ses of Catho∣lickes. man: and if there were anye com∣mon crosse layed vppon them, (as there wanted not) they bare it out with patience: as their discredit in their countryes, whoe were borne to credyte and countenance in the same: distrustefull dealinge with all of that relygion, notwithstandinge



their resolute redines, to spend their lyues in your Maiesties seruice, and other the lyke afflictions: which they shifted out with, as they might. But at this time present, and for certaine monethes past, the tempeste hath bene so terrible vppon these kinde of men, and their persecutions so vni∣uersal, as the lyke was neuer felte, nor feared before. For besides the ge∣neralParticuler ex∣tremities. molestation, and castinge into geales, both of men, women, and children, of that religion, throughe out all partes of your Maiestyes Realmes: there are certayne particu∣lers reported here, which make the matter more afflictiue. As the disioy∣ning of man and wife in sondrye pri∣sons: The compelling of such to dyeAs M. Dim∣mock was by M. Couper. in prison, which could not stande or goe in their owne houses: The sen∣dinge of virgins to Brydewell forAs yong Mais tres Tomson was by M. El∣mer. their consciences: The rackinge and tormentinge of dyuers, which was neuer harde of before in anye coun∣try



for religion. And that which a∣boue all other thinges is most grée∣uous, iniurious, and intollerable, is, the geuinge out publiquelye, that all Catholiques are enemies and traytors to your Royall Maiestye: and this not onely to vtter in speach, but also to let it passe in print, to the vewe of the worlde, and to the ren∣tinge of Catholiques hartes, which are preuye of their owne truthe and dutifull affection towardes your Highenes, estate, and person. This was wryten and putt in printe thisIohn Feild in his epistle de∣dicatorye of Philip of Mor neis booke to the Earle of Leycester. Sommer paste, to a Noble man of your Maiesties preuye Counsayle, for the excitinge of him to the perse∣cution of all Catholiques, by a straunge braynesicke felowe, whom Newegate possessed a longe tyme, for his phantastical opinions: wher∣in he is soe pregnant (if men re∣porte truelye,) as he can deuyse a∣nye newe religion, vppon a wéekes warninge geuen him at anye tyme.



This Felow affirmeth there, that al Papistes (as he termeth them) are enemies to God, and to your Roial Maiesty. The which in his meaning, toucheth soe néere, soe manye thow∣sand good subiaes in this Lande, as I meruayle that ether his audacitie serued him to write it, or M. Elmers officers would allowe to printe it. But it séemeth that Catholiques at this daye, are made according to the Philosophers prouerbe. Praeda My∣sorum. That is, layde open to eueryArist. li. 1. mans iniurie, a pray for euery one toRethor. bayte vppon: and a common place for euery rayler to ruffle on, and to rubbe his cankered tongue in their slaunder. In al which great wronges they haue no appeale but vnto God, and to your Maiestye as Uicege∣rent in his place: before whom they desire, aboue all other thinges, to cleare themselues, from this grée∣uous obiected crime of dissoyaltie, by protesting, and calling, the omnipo∣tent knowledge of our great God and



Sauiour to witnes, that they are déeply slaundered in this poynte, and that they are as readye, to spend their goods, landes, liuinges, and lyfe, with al other worldly commodities what∣soeuer, in the seruice of your Maies∣tie and their Countrie, as their aun∣citours haue bene to your Noble pro∣genitours before this, and as duti∣full subiectes are bound to doe vnto their soueraine Princesse and Quene: onlye crauing pardon, for not yeel∣ding to such conformitie in matters of religion, as is demaunded at their handes: which they cannot doe, but by offence of their consciences, in∣duced by those reasons, which more at large are declared in this Treatise following.
And that the Catholique reli∣gyonThe Catho∣lique faythe teacheth obe∣dience more then other re∣ligions. in general, (for I medle with no mans particuler facte,) is vn∣iustlye towched by anye secte of our time, for teaching disobedience, or rebellion against their Princes: it maye appeare playnly, by the diffe∣rent



doctrine which ech part delyue∣rethCon. Const Sess 8. Co∣cleus. vnto his folowers. First John Wikliffe, one of their progenitours, teacheth. That a Prince if he rule euil or fal into mortal sinne, is no longerLi. 1. &. 3. Hist. Huss. Wicklif. li. 4. trial. ca. 3. Prince, but that his subiectes may rise against him and punishe him at their pleasures. Secondly, Martin Luther folowing the same sreppes, teacheth.In Bulla Le on. 10. &. in asser. art. ibi damnat. That Christians are free & exempted from al Princes lawes. Wherof fol∣lowed immediatly that famous re∣bellion of the countriemen againstCocleus in. vita. Luth. &. Sur. in. hist. huius. anni. their Lordes in Germanye in the yeare 1525. and in the same, two hundred thousand slayne in one daye. Thirdly, John Caluin not dissenting from the rest, teacheth. That Prin∣cesLib. 4. inst. cap. 10. lawes binde not subiectes to obe∣dience in conscience, but only for ex∣ternal and temporal respect. Wher∣of enseweth, that if by anye occasi∣on, this externall feare, (for the which onlye the subiect obeyeth,) be taken awaye: as when he were able to make his partie soe stronge,



as he feared not his Prince: then he should not sinne in rebelling againstLib. 3. insti. cap. 19. him. And in an other place, holding plainlye the doctrine of Luther, he saythe. That the consciences of the faythfull, are exempted from the po∣wer of all men, by reason of the li∣bertye geuen them by Christ. LastlyGoodman. the writing against the regiment ofGilbye. Women in Quene Maryes tyme, for that the gouernment then, lyked them not, all men can remember.Rom. 13. Which errours all, the Catholique Churche vtterlye condemneth: tea∣chinge her children, together with the Apostle, true obedience to theirVide om. Princes, for Conscience sake, euenDoct. 2. 2. a. quest. 90. de Leg. as vnto God him selfe, whose roome they doe possesse, and to whom they are bounde, vnder the payne of mor∣tallAug. in ps. 70. sinne, and eternall damnation, patiently to obey, how hardly soeuerCrysosto. & Ambro. in. cap. 13. ad Rom. they deale with them in their gouern∣ment otherwise. By the which your Maiestie may perceaue, how falslye the Catholique religion is charged



by her enemyes, of the  crime.
Besides this, if your  wis∣dome shal but enter into a  con∣sideration, of the  of Catholiques, and of other of newer relygions, towardes their Princes, this daye in Europe: it shal easelye appeere, which of them are of the qui∣eter spirits, and  in obedience. I wil not make mention of greater matters: but only, to quite this a∣fore sayd puritance, which soe falslye hath infamed vs. I  set  here certayne propositions, gathered out of two sermons of two of his prea∣chers, by a minister present there, in Stamforde at the generall fast this last sommer. Which fast being pro∣hibited, with the preachings at the same, by the expresse letters of the Lorde Superintendent of , bearing date the 5. of September, to the Alderman and Comburgeses of the sayde Lowne: the preachers would not obey, but stepping vp in∣to



the pulpit, vttered as followeth.The first Pren cher.

1. In such actions as may further the publique fast, flesh and blood must not be called to counsayle, to doe the Lordes commaundement, but they must be vndertaken without suche warrant.
2. The religion that Jonas prea∣ched, did not (as ours nowe dothe) depend and hange vppon Actes of Parliament. For we, when we goe about such actions, as God is to be glorified in, doe first enquire, whe∣ther ther be any Acte of Parliament, to warrant our doinges, or no.
3. It is the manner of her officers and Counsailers now a dayes, to re∣forme matters by Actes of Parlia∣ment, and by polycies, and not by Jonas his preachinges.
4. Her Counsailers neuer in∣quire, what newes at Poules ser∣mon, but what reportes are a brode, that if anye dislyking thing should come to the Kinges eare, they might stopp it from thence.







1. He is of no spirite, that wil notThe Seconde Preacher. promote that which God commaun∣dethe, thoughe al Edicts be contrarye for we must not obey flesh and blood.
2. They that are ruled by the Edi∣ctes of men wil change their religion with the Prince, and they are of noe conscience, though they be neuer soe much grounded in diuinitie.
3. What if nether the Quéene, Counsayle, nor Bishoppe, haue bene present at the Fast, nor alowed ther∣of? yet we ought to vndertake it. Put case, it is not in the Quéens chappel: what then?
4. This Fast hath bene hindred, by certayne prophane and carnall wre∣ches.

Here loe, your Maiestie may sée, with what temperate spirite these men doe procéede, and what they would teache or doe, if they should be contraried in great matters, séeinge they boult out such doctrine againste their Magistrates, for crossinge their appetites in soe smal a matter, as



is a litle phantastical rage of fasting, sodainlye come vpon them, for a de∣sire they haue, to heare them selues speake ten or twelue howres toge∣ther, after their continuall raylinge against fastinge for these twentie one yeares past. But this is their spirite, to rushe into euery thinge with inor∣dinate violence, and to lyke of no∣thinge that order and obedience lay∣ethe doune vnto them. The which your Maiesties great wisdome consi∣dering, together with the quiet and modest procéedings of the Catholicke parte, shal, I doubte not, easely per∣ceaue, what daunger it were to per∣mit much to such kind of spirites: and to bereaue this your Realme, of soe important a stay as Catholiques are in euerye of your countryes, against the perilous innouations of thes and the lyke men, whose final ende is (as their doctrine declareth) to haue noe gouernour or ruler at al.
And this maye be one greate Motiue vnto your Maiestye, in re∣respect



of the safetie and quietnes of your whole Realme, to extend someA Weightye motiue. more mercye and fauour, to your trustie and afflicted subiectes the Ca∣tholickes. Whoe, as they were most redye at the beginning (accordinge to their bounden duties) to place your Highnes in that Royal roome, wher∣in nowe by the fauour of God you stand: Soe are they, and wil be al∣wayes in lyke sorte redye, with the vttermost droppe of their blood, to de∣fende the same in all safetie, peace, and quietnes vnto the ende. In con∣sideration of which good wil and ser∣uice, they can not imagin to aske of your Maiestie, any so great gifte, re∣compence, or benefite in this world, as should be to them, some fauorable tolleration with their consciences in religion, the which consciences, de∣pendinge of iudgement and vnder∣standing, and not of affect and wil: can not be framed by them at their pleasures, nor consequently reduced alwayes to such conformitie, as is



prescribed to them by their Superi∣ours: and yet this nothinge demi∣nisheth their dutiful loue towardes the same Superiours, séeinge consci∣ence (as I haue saied) dependeth of iudgement, and not of wil.
Now because as the Philosopher sayeth, that is onely good vnto euerye man, which eche mans vnderstan∣dingArist. lib. 1. Rhet. telleth him, to be good: vnto the which the Scripture and Diuines a∣grée, when they say: that we shal be2. Cor. 1. iudged at the last day, accordinge to1. Ioan. 3. the testimony of our conscience: here∣of it foloweth, that what soeuer weAug. li. 3. de doct. Chri. ca. 10. & lib. 1. ca. 40. doe contrarye to our iudgement and conscience, is (accordinge to the A∣postle) damnable. Because we decerne it (to be euil) and yet doe it. So that,Rom. 14. how good so euer the action in it selfe were, (as for example, if a Gentile should for feare, saye or sweare that there were a Messias,) yet vnto the doer, it should be a damnable sinne, because it séemed nought in his iudg∣ment and conscience: and therefore



to him, it shal be soe accounted at the last day. Which thinge, hath made al good men from time to time, to stand very scrupulously in defence of their conscience, and not to commit anye thing, against the sentence and appro∣bation of the same. Al Princes also, and Potentates of the world, haue abstayned from the beginninge, for the verye same consideration, fromActes of reli∣gion not to be enforced. enforcinge men to actes against their conscience, especially in religion: as the Histories both before Christ and since, doe declare. And amongest the very Turkes at this day, no man is compelled to any act of their religion, excepte he renounce firste his owne. And in the Indies and other farre partes of the worlde, where infinite Infidels are vnder the gouernement of Christian Princes, it was neuerVide Di. Tho. & ōes. doct. 2. 2. q. de fide. yet practized, nor euer thought law∣ful by the Catholicke Church, that such men should be enforced to anye one acte of our religion. And the rea∣son is: for that, if the doinge of such



actes should be sinne vnto the doers: because they doe them against their conscience, then must néedes the en∣forcement of such actes be much more gréeuous and damnable sinne, to theHeretiques maye be en∣forced. enforcers. Marye notwithstandinge this, when a man hath receaued once the Christian Catholique religion, and wil by new deuises and singula∣ritie, corrupte the same, by runninge out and makinge dissention in ChristCy. de Ex∣Mart. ca. 5. Ieron. in ca. 5. ad Ephe. Optat. li. 3. con. Dona. Augu. lib. 1. cont. Parm. ca. 7. his body, (as al Hereticks doe:) then, for the conseruation of vnitie in the Church, and for restraint of this mās furye and pryde, the Church hath al∣wayes from the beginninge allowed, that the ciuil magistrate should recal such a felowe, by temporal punish∣ment to the vnitie of the whole body agayne, as al the holy Fathers writeLeo ep. 67. & 91. Greg. lib. 1. ep. 32. to be most necessarie, especially such, as had most to doe with such men, as Cyprian, Ierome, Optatus, Au∣gustine,Bern. ser. 66. in cant. Leo, Gregorie, and Ber∣nard. And S. Austin in diuers places, recalleth backe agayne his opinion,



which he some times held to the con∣trarie.Aug. lib. 2. Soe that we, kéeping stil ourRetract. ea. 5. & episto, 48. & 50. ould religion, and hauing not gone out from the Protestantes, but they from vs: we cannot be enforced, by anye iustice, to doe anye acte of their relygion.
Besides this, as no wise Noble man, after manye Ages of quiet pos∣session, would suffer another to reco∣uer his Barronie, without shewing of verye good : soe we, in rea∣son are not to be blamed, if we, (ha∣uing held the possession of the Catho∣lique Church in England for these thousand yeares, by our aduersaries confession): doe stande with them yet and require some euidence, before we consent to geue vp the same. He∣therto they haue shewed vs none, but onlye woordes and forgery: they en∣teredLawles proce∣ding. into possession, without tryall of the title: they thrust vs out, before sentence or proufe: we crye out of the ryot, & complayne of the wronge, and desire still that the matter maye



come to lawfull pleading. And euen nowe of late since our new persecu∣tion begane, we haue made vnto thē dyuers offers with great oddes, not pretending therby anye recouerie of our losses, (for that we suppose to be vnpossible,) but onlye for the iusti∣fying of our cause, wheruppon the honour of God dependeth, and wher∣in we know we cannot be vanqui∣shed.
And to tell your Maiestie more in particuler, there hath bene diuers earnest meanes made, and most humble petitions exhibited by the Catholiques: that, séeing those men, whiche first challenged at Poules Crosse, al the learned of our side that might be found, ether to writing, or disputing: afterward procured your Maiesties prohibition by proclama∣tion, that no bookes should be writ∣ten or read of that parte in England: their petition was (I saye) that at the least, there might some publique disputation be admitted, wherby



mens doubtes might be resolued. This petition, hath bene exhibited by dyuers men, in the name of the whole, both in writing and in printe, and they haue bene vrged by sondrye meanes, by all kinde of frendship that we could make, by humble re∣quest, by earnest letterrs to diuers preachers to further the matter: and (if I be not deceaued) to my Lord of London him selfe, for the bring∣inge of the matter to your Maiesties vnderstanding, and to the considera∣tion of the Lordes of your Highnes preuie Counsayle. And if by anye mischaunce, these former supplyca∣tions, came not to lighte, or expressed not fully the Catholiques plaine and simple meaninges: I beséeche yourAn humble demaund of disputation. most gratious Maiestie, yt this maye serue, ether for a replication, or ex∣planation of the same: wherin I, in their names, most humblie on my knées, euen for Gods cause, and the loue of his truthe, aske at your Ma∣iesties handes, that some such indif∣ferent



triall maye be had, by pulique disputation or otherwise.
And as for the particulers, we shal easely agrée with them. For we,Three wayes of Conference offered. offer al thes thrée wayes, both ioynt∣ly: and seuerally: that is, ether by try∣ing out the truthe by bréefe scolasti∣call argumentes: or by continuall spéeche for a certayn space to be alot∣ted out, and thother parte presently, or vppon studye, to aunswere the same: or finally, by preaching before your Maiesty, or where els your Ma∣iestie shall appoynt. And for our saf∣tyes we aske nothing else, but onlye your Maiesties woorde set doune vn∣to vs, in no ampler manner, then the Counsayle of Trent made the safconduct to our aduersaries, which they notwithstanding refused to ac∣cepte. But I hope they shall sée, that we will not refuse or mistrust your Maiesties woorde, if we maye once sée it sett doune by proclamation, or otherwise by letters patents, for our safetie, but that within 80. dayes af∣ter,



by the grace of God, we shal appeare before your Highnes, with what daunger soeuer to our lyues other, wise, for the tryall of Gods truthe, which we make no dout but to be cléere on our side.
If our aduersaries refuse this of∣fer, they shall shew to much distrust in their owne cause: for it is with great laboure, perill, and disaduaun∣tage on our partes, and on their sides nothing at all. I would they durst make but halfe the like offer, for their comming hither on this side the Seas, it should be most thankfully taken, and they with great safety and all gentile intreatie disputed withal, and made to sée as I presume their owne weaknes. But séeing this is not to be hoped, we relye vppon the other: beséeching your Maiestie most humblye and instantlye, that our iuste demaunde maye be graunted, for the tryall of Gods truthe, most necessarie for vs all to our eternall saluation.

And nowe to leaue all these thinges to the holye prouidence of God, and to the highe wisdome of your most excellent Maiestie to con∣sider of: we are humblye to craue at this time, and most instantlye to request, that your Highnes will not take in euill parte, this our boulde recourse vnto your Royall Persone, in these our afflictions, and passing great calamyties. You are borne our souerayne Princesse and mo∣ther, and we your natural subiectes and children. Whether then shouldGreat cause of recourse to her Maiestie. children rōne in their afflictions, but vnto the loue and tender care of their deare mother, especiallye she being such a mother, as her power is suffi∣cient to reléeue them in all poyntes, her good will testifyed by infinit be∣nefites, and her noble and mercifull disposition knowen and renouned thorough out the world?
If your Maiestie were abrode in manye partes of your Realme to vn∣derstand the miseries, hear the cryes,



sée the lifting vp of hands to heauen, for the present afflictions, which this persecution hath brought: I knowe your Maiestie would be much mo∣ued, as all men are here by the onlye reporte of the same: I could touch certayne particulers of importance to that effect. But I will kéepe the lawe of Areopagus: I will saye no∣thing to moue my Iudge, whose wis∣domeThe lawe of Arcopagus. I well know, and whose good∣nesArist. lib. 1. Reto. I nothing at all mistrust.
If your highnes were of that dis∣position (from which you are most furre of) as to take pleasure in  afflictions, delite and comforte in our calamities: we could be contente to beare this, and ten tunes more in soe good a cause as we suffer for. And if there be anye other of such cruell appetite, whom your Maiesty should think good to be satisfyed with blood: there wante not Catholiques bothe there and héere, which would most willyngly offer them selues, to pur∣chase



quietnes vnto the rest. Diuers are in bondes there, most readye (I am sure) to accepte such an of∣fer: and if that nomber will not suf∣fice, let the woorde be but spoken, and manye more shall most ioyful∣lye present them selues from hence, hauing reserued our selues to no o∣ther ende, if God would make vs woorthye of that: and that by our deathes, we might geue testimonye to the Catholique cause, and redéeme the pityfull veration, of soe manye thousand aflicted people at this daye in England.
IESVS Christ, in aboundanceThe conclu∣sion. of mercye, blesse your Maiestye, to whome (as he knoweth) I wyshe as much good as to mine owne soule: perswadinge my selfe, that all good Catholikes in England do the same. And they which goe about to insinu∣ate the contrarye, are, in mine opi∣nyon, but appoynted instrumentes



by the common enemie, to dispoyle your Maiestie of your strongest pil∣ler and best right hand, as (soone after their purpose had) it would appéere, & shalbe more manifest before the last tribunal seat, where we all shall be presented shortely, without diffe∣rence of persons, and where the co∣gitations of al hartes shal be reueled and examined, and in iustice of iudg∣ment, rightfully rewarded. Now matters are craftely clowded vp, and false visards put on, vppon euerye action. Then all shall appeare in sin∣ceritie and truthe, and nothing a∣uayle but onlye the testimonie of a good conscience. The which Catholi∣ques by suffering, doe séeke to re∣tayne, and which God of his infinit goodnes, inspire your Maiestie, gra∣ciously without enforcement, to per∣mitt vnto them still.

