



IN as muche as myne
acquaintaunce is but ve¦ry
raw, and slender with
youre Mastershyp: and
that I of a certayne cu∣stome
haue euermore required the cō∣pany
and familiarite of learned and
poletyke men, although I my selfe be
vnlearned: yet through the admonitiō
and counsell of gentle Master Ergal,
a fauourer of Gods true worde, and of
good letters a mayntayner, I purpo∣sed
by some vertuous meanes, to
winne your loue and fauour, and with
some goodly & delitius presēt, to winde
my selfe in to your Mastershyppes fa∣miliarite
and further acquayntaunce.
Golde and syluer with other Iewels
I haue none: such as I haue, I louing¦ly
sende vnto you: that is, this fyn and

vertuous boke, named the Pandectes
of y• Euangelical law: comprehending
y• whole history of the foure Euangeli∣stes
in one, recitynge y• of euery one of
thē is spoken: & contaynyng the tyme &
place of Christes supernaturall nati∣uite
and actes, his godlye and prudent
aunsweres, his celestiall lyfe and con∣uersation,
his moste easye yoke and cō∣maundementes,
his pleasaunte and
most swete Sermones, wyth hys most
bytter deathe, the onely redemption of
mankynde, worthy to be beleued, em∣brased,
ensued, and cōtinually thought
vpon. This gyfte ryghte worshipfull
syr, although it be inrolled in paper le∣ues:
yet I dout not but vnto you a wor∣thy
champion of Gods holye gospell, a
fauorer of Christes true religiō, a defē∣der
of his preceptes and commaunde∣mentes,
a shylde and buckeler of the
ensuers and faithfull folowers of the
same, it shall bee a greate deale more
welcome, more estemed and ac∣ceptable
than a greate heape of de∣ceyptefull
ryches, or glytterynge
Golde and syluer: the whyche as of
it selfe, it is fadynge and corruptible

o it corrupteth man, whiche is natu∣rallye
frayle and brittell, wauerynge,
inconstant, neuer satisfied, neuer con∣tent:
Suche is the insaciable mynde of
man, drowned in these earthlye and
corruptible treasures, delytes and
worldely pleasures. For thys my gyfte
is from heauen, heauenly, hauynge no
taledge at all, or sente of earthly thyn∣ges,
but redolent wyth al vertous pre∣ceptes,
wt the moste flagrant & odorife∣rus
worde of God, contemnynge the
worlde, wyth the caduke delytes and
pleasure thereof, erectynge the earth∣lye
mynde and hearte of man to thyn∣ges
celestiall and incorruptible, and
hys inconstante affectyons frome
mortall and vncertayne thynges to
immortall: Frome iniquitie and vice,
to vertue. From wycked Mammon, to
oure Sauyoure Iesus Christe: In
whome, and in hys holye and onelye
worde shoulde consiste oure whole de∣lyte
and pleasure, and not in brutyshe
and beastlye carnalite, vppon whome,
as vppon the moste surest ancker and
corner stone, we shoulde take holde,
and staye our selues, and haue oure
onelye refuge and confidence. For it

is he alone that hathe created vs, rede∣med
vs, and frome all parylles defen∣ded
vs, and not we oure selues. It is he
that offereth vnto vs saluacion, & that
vnburdeneth vs of al y• whole lmpe of
synne, and not we our selues. It is he
that hath promysed vs eternall lyfe, yf
we kepe hys holye lawes, and folowe
the trade of hys godlye and vertuous
lyuynge, and not we our selues. For as
muche then as thys my gyfte doeth ad∣monyshe
and instructe vs of all these
thynges, howe to declyne frome the
worlde, and the pryde therof: Howe to
please the Lorde our God, and howe
to accomplyshe and fulfyll hys com∣maundementes:
Is it not worthye
(I saye) to be embrased, and magnifi∣ed:
Worthy to be thankfullye accepted
and folowed? It is (I confesse) but pa∣per,
but yet it contayneth the precious
worde of God, hys wonderful workes,
and ye misteries of oure saluation, the
whiche shoulde be grauen in the hear∣tes,
wordes, and dedes of men, and not
in bookes of parper and parchement
onelye. Readers and hearers of thys
moste holye woorde are manye. But
(alas) howe manye worthye folowers

are there? Shall the hearer be saued, or
the doer God geue vs grace to do that
we reade, & so to reade Gods holy word
that by hym and his tender mercye we
may be saued, & not to be praters and
babelers there of onelye, deccauynge
oure selues. Thus I commende youre
Mastership to almightye God,
desyrynge yere goodnesse
at this present, to accepte
thys my laboure and
trauel in godd part,
and my gyft, as
ye shal thinke
it worthy.
