


To the learned Schole-Deuines and Lawiers of both faculties in the Vniuersities of England.
IT was no part of my purpose (learned Countrey-men) when I tooke this Trea∣tise first in hand, either to wade so farre therin, as now I haue byn compelled; or yet to prefix any other Epistle Dedica∣tory before the same, then the large common Preface it selfe that doth ensue, which may partly appeare by the argument therof, as namely also and principally, by that which we haue set downe in the third Chap∣ter of this Treatise: for that taking in hand, but to point, as it were, at the exorbitant number of some monstrous, and malitious lyes, and slaunders cast a∣broad this last yeare in a certayne small contemptible, but wicked and hatefull libell, vnder the tytle of A dis∣couery of Romish doctrine in the case of Conspiracy and Rebellion by T. M. I thought it sufficient to that purpose to shew not only the cankred vntruthes of those most false & virulent calumniations; but the many inōueniencesThe Au∣thors first intention. also, and publicke hurtes, which do, and must needes ensue to any Common wealth, that suffereth such ve∣nemous tongues to sow hatred, dissention, diffidence,

and the seedes of perpetuall emnity and alienation a∣mong the Subiects therof.
2. Which point hauing to my iudgment sufficiently performed, I saw a farre greater booke published from the same Author stuffed with Marchandize of like marke, but yet imbracing more matter, to wit, n t only the former argument, or inuectiue of heynous Rebellion; but (to vse the writers wordes) of heathenish, hellish, and execrable Equiuocation, chargin Catholicke people so deeply and desperatly in them both, as tat in these two respects, they are not only in his censure insociable, & intractable, but also insufferable in any Protestant common wealth: whervpon I was enfor∣ced as well to reassume againe that which before I had done and layd aside, vpon certayn causes whih afterwards are vttered; as also to dilate my selfe much further, for defence of equity and truth, and for the repressing somwhat this violent rayling  and4. Reg. 18. for rendering some euident reasons of Catholickes in∣nocencyEsay. 36. and integrity in them both. Wherin what I haue performed for their iust and lawfull defence, I leaue it to the Iudgement of yow my learned Coun∣trey-men, after yow shall haue read ouer this our An∣swere, presuming that your learning and vnderstan∣ding is accōpanyed also with such ingenuity of good nature, and maturity of Iudgement, as yow will not be carryed away with the wynd, and sound of wordes only as others of lesser capacity; nor yet be much mo∣ued with the false outcryes of perfidious Make-bates, who inraged with the imaginations of hate and auer∣sion, do like  houndes runne-counter vpon euery false sent they apprehend, or frame vnto them∣selues; but rather will stand firme, and weigh the substance, and proofes of matters with their due cir∣cumstances. of hearers. Which if yow performe, yow shall fynd all these odious and clamorous accusations, and exag∣gerations

of this fyerie Minister to be nothing els, but euaporations of a hoate distempered brayne with aboundance of hatred and want of Christian charit.
3. And to say a word or two of the reasons that moued me to present this worke to yow the learned of our English Vniuersities in the foresayd sciences of Schoole- Deuinity and Lawe, both Canon & Ciuill, wherof the first is, that the question of Equiuocation (wherof our chiefe contention is) being a matter handled in these three facultyes, (though vpon diffe∣rent occasions) yow can far better  therof thenReasons of the de∣dication. others, who apprehending only the name togeather with their owne conceipts therof without true knowledge of the groundes, reasons & circumstances wherby it is made lawfull, doe not so eagerly, as ig∣norantly, cry out against it, condemning & detesting that which they vnderstand not, as largly is declared in the 7. Chapter of the ensuing Treatise, which is the first concerning that argument. But such as are more conuersant and better studied in the said sciences, and know the true principles wheron the question stan∣deth, are not so rash nor headlong, but goe more re∣seruedly therin, distinguishing betweene  and vnlawfull, Amphybologie or Equiuocation, as signing to  one their tymes, cases, causes, reseruations and limi∣tations, according to the obseruation of Aristotle: Pru∣dentis est distinguere; It appertayneth to a wise and dis∣creet man to distinguish; wheras the ignorant and vn∣learned doth commonly confound all without dis∣tinction.
4. My second reason was, for that forreine Vniuer∣sities, and learned men therof, vnde standing such a booke to haue byn set forth by an English Vniuersity man, and not without direction (as he saith) from his Su∣periors, wherin all vse of Equiuocation or Amphybology in any case whatsoeuer is condemned as vnlawfull, im∣pious

execrable, hellish, heathenish, the black-art, and other such tearmes, without respect or regard, that in all o∣ther Vniuersityes in Catholicke Coūtreyes through∣out the world, in all Courtes and Tribunalls, and in all learned Authors & professors of the foresaid three faculties, for many ages, some vse therof hath byn taught and allowed: diuers learned (I say) haue won∣dred therat and laughed also, especially being aduer∣tised that this doctrine of Equiuocation is ascribed, as a new thing to the Iesuits, wheras many ages before their name was heard of in the world this doctrine was known, taught, and held. Wherfore these stran∣gers are wont to demaund, whether there be any lear∣ned men indeed in these three facultyes now in our Vniuersities, and whether any be studyed in Schoole∣Deuinity and the Lawes, either Ciuill or Canon; for if there be, it seemes impossible to them that such a booke should be suffered to come forth so full of igno∣rance as this is. For (say they) if they had read or loo∣ked ouer but these heads in the said sciences, to wit, of the nature of truth and lyinge of the lawfullnes of dis∣simulation in certaine cases both in wordes & works, as namely, in stratagemes of war, of the lawfulnes of couering some truth vpon iust occasion in the Canon law out of S. Augustine, of  malus and Dolus  orSundry heades vvherin Equiuoca∣tion is touched both in Lavv and Deuinity. vtilis in the same law out of S. Hierome, and other Fa∣thers; of the cases wherin a man may sweare, or not sweare lawfully, or not be bound to keep his oath; of the question whether God can deceiue, or any man else by his spirit, of the limitations of an accuser and defendant; of the obligation of a witnes to vtter, deny or dissemble the truth; of the office of a Iudge, Ad∣uocate, or Solicitour in accusation or defence of any body; of the cases wherin secresy is necessarily to be obserued by all lawfull meanes, both in & out of con∣fession, and diuers other such like heades of doctrine,

as occurre daylie in all the foresaid three faculties, and in the common vse of mans life; these learned men affirme, that it is impossible for our Vniuersity-Do∣ctors to haue read and weighed them, but they must confesse the lawfulnes of Equiuocation in diuers cases, and that it may be without lying (which is lawfull in no case, nor for any cause whatsoeuer.) Wherof they inferre that either their sciences are not studyed in our Vniuersites, or that the students profit little in them, or that the worst learned of all are suffered to write bookes: which thing for that it appertayneth to the disgrace of your so famous Schooles; I thought it one sufficiēt cause amongst the rest, to dedicate this Answere vnto yow.
5. My third reason was to moue yow by this occa∣sion, to consider more attentiuely what manner of men they be for the most part, that write in England at this day; how shallow in the matters they take vpō them to make bookes of; but especially to wish yow, that when any booke commeth forth, yow would but examine the truth of the citations which are al∣leadged by them, for this only would be sufficient to informe and satisfie yow where the truth is. And so I desire no more but your attention in this one point, for the decision of the controuersie betweene me and Thomas Morton: for if yow find him to haue dealt sin∣cerly in alleaging his Authors, I am content he haue the victory, though he haue behaued himself other∣wise neuer so weakly. For triall of which point, I re∣mit my self to that, which I haue handled afterward more plentifully and perticularly in the 2. 6. and 12. Chapters of purpose.
6. But yet for that since the writing of the ensuing Preface, I haue read and pervsed two Epistles of his last booke intituled, A full satisfaction, the one to the Kings Maiesty, the other to the seduced brethren, as

scornfully he calleth the Catholickes, which Epistles haue as much gaule in them as the mans dispitefull stomake could vtter, I shall pray yow to haue patience with me, if I runne ouer briefly certaine notes out of the said Epistles, wherby yow may partly take notice of the mans talent in writing, but especially in ray∣linge, vntill yow come vnto a more full view therof in the sequele of this our Answere that doth ensue.
7. Thus then he beginneth with his Maiesty with∣in some halfe dosen lines after the entrance of his E∣pistle.T M his appale to his Ma∣iesty Epist, . initio. Innocency, (saith he) which though naked was neuer ashamed, hath charged me to manifest my self vnto your High∣nes, and togeather with my Aduersarye to appeale vnto your in∣cōparable wisdome, which I doe in so constant assurance of an vp∣right cōscience as that I shal willingly remit that iust aduantage, which the difference of comparison both betweene a legitimate or conformable subiect, and a person suspiciously degenerate, as also betweene a Minister of simple truth, and a professed Equi∣uocator doth offer vnto me. Heere yow see him vaunt of sundry points; as first of his naked innocency, which we haue afterwards to his greater shame, so cloathed with the foule ragges of his lying and most deceipt∣full dealing, as she may no more be called a naked, but rather a clouted innocency, if innocency at all, and not rather malicious nocencie, intending to wound and iniury the iust, and such as are faultles and inno∣cent in deed.
8 Secondly he appealeth to his Maiestyes incōparable wisdome, as yow see, in the constant assurance of an vpright conscience; but we haue shewed throughout this whole worke, that nothing is further of from this fellow, then any conscience at all: for that we haue taken him in so many wilfull falsifications and corruptions (wherin he could not but know that he did lye and falsify;) as besides all other examples layd forth in sundry seuerall partes of this Answere, I haue byn

forced to make a speciall Chapter therof, which is the sixt of this ensuring worke, where as also in the 4. Paragraph of the 2. Chapter and els where, the Rea∣der shall fynd such store of testimonyes against the vprightnes of this mans conscience, as I dare assure my selfe, he will leese, with indifferent men, the con∣stant assurance of honesty, howsoeuer in his owne opinion he may hold the same assurance for other matters.
9. Thirdly he saith to his Maiesty he doth willingly re∣mit that iust aduantage which the difference of a legitimate and conformable subiect, and a person suspiciously degenerate doth offer vnto him: wherin what he would say I do rather ghesse by discourse, then vnderstand by the sense of his wordes. For I imagine that the Minister wouldThe con∣formity of T. M. say, that he is ready and prest to conforme himselfe to any thing, that the State or Prince shall appoint him, as well in Religion, as in other matters whatsoeuer, and that therin cōsisteth his vprightnes of conscience, to wit, to be conformable. And for that his aduersary shewing himselfe (perhaps) more scrupulous and ti∣merous in certayne pointes concerning his soule or conscience, and not so conformable: therfore he cal∣leth him suspiciously degenerate, and no legitimate, and confor∣mable subiect, which whither it tendeth, and towardes what gate of Atheisme, or Herodianisme, euery man that hath Iudgement and conscience in deed will ea∣sily discerne.
10. But of all the rest, the fourth point is the most ridiculous, wherin he intituleth himselfe, A minister of simple truth, and his aduersary A professed Equiuocator, wheras I haue shewed in the 7. and 12. Chapters of this Answere, first, that such as grant the lawfulnes of Equiuocation in some limited cases, are farre more seuere & rigorous against al kynd of lying in the least things that may be (as appeareth by their knowne, and con∣fessed

doctrine by vs set downe,) then are their ad∣uersaryes in the greatest; yea highest kind or degree of that sinne, I meane of lying: and in the second, be∣sides the multiplicy of conuictions, wherby I haue made demonstration of this mans falsity euery where, I haue shewed in the foresaid 12. Chapter, that he (this Minister to wit of simple truth) as also his fellowesA Mini∣ster of simple truth. which professe themselues such enemyes of lawfull Equiuocation that may be vsed without lying, do Equiuocate euery where in the worst & most sinfull sort of flat lying that may be imagined, without any reseruation or veile, or substance of truth at all. For proofe wherof I  me to the said 12. Chapter, and shall returne to follow this fellow somwhat further in the said Epistle to his Maiesty.
11. For not many lynes after the former passage, by occasion of certayne wordes of him that first answe∣red him about a march of apes; he taketh vpon him to set forth a certayne march of Soldiers cōming against his Maiesty and other Protestant Princes from the 7. hills of Babilon, to wit Rome, saying thus: May itEpistle to the King. please your sacred Maiesty, to see how exactly they imitate Souldiers in their march? Parsons, teaching persecution against all Kings and States Protestant, doth propound for his imitation the example of DauidA sayned march a∣gainst his Maiesty. in his conflict against Goliah: Allen, the example of Eliah in calling, if it were possible, for fyre from heauen to consume the Messengers of Kings: Reynolds the exam∣ple of Iabel to knock Generaels on the head: Bellarmine the example of Iehoida, and other Priestes for murthe∣ring of opposite Queenes: Sanders, the example of Mat∣tathias, who fought against King Antiochus: Simancha the example of Heathenish Scythians, who murthered their naturall King Scyles: Boucher the example of Sampson, to kill, if they can, a thousand of his supposed Philisthians with the iaw bone of an Asse.
12. So he. And doth not the man deserue to haue a iawe-bone of an Asse for his dinner, that hath so la∣boured to lay togeather these impertinent examples, without head or foote, ground or proofe, purpose or coherence, truth or similitude with the matter in hand? For where doth he fynd these marchinges a∣gainst his Maiesty? why had not he cyted some place or testimony wherby might appeare this to be true that he obiecteth heere to these mē against his High∣nes? Nay if his Maiesty will remember marchinges a∣gainst him indeed, not imaginations in the ayre as these are, he will consider what manner of men they haue byn, either Protestants or Catholickes that haue marched and machinated against him and his, for more then 40. yeares togeather, while he was in Scot∣land; what royall bloud was shed of his neerest and dearest in kynred; what violence vsed and practised vpon his owne person, and parents; who were the Authors, incensers, fyre-brands, & bellowes of theseA  march a∣gainst his Maiesty. enraged flames; Priests or Ministers; those that came from the hills of Rome, or such as had their spirite from the valley of Geneua: and then if we would frame a squadron of all those turbulent & lawlesse Protestant people, that vexed and afflicted his Maiesty in Scotland, and marched against him, and his noble Mother, and grand Mother with banners displayed: and that we should place before these againe, a Vanguard of prea∣ching-Scottish-Ministers,Vāguard as Knox, and all his , exhorting, in cyting & sounding out the trum∣pets of these rebellions; and a Rereward againe of En∣glish-Ministers standing behind them, and clapping their handes to their encouragemēt, writing bookes and sending them all ayde both in words and workes that possibly they could procure; whilest in the meane space both Catholicke priests & people in En∣gland, Rome, and els where, prayed hartely for the good

successe of his Maiesties said parents, and for his in theirs: this (I say) was a true and reall march in deed, & that other imaginary, which our Minister to make vs odious hath heere deuised.
13. And to speake one word more of this matter, for that it is of much importance, and the truth therof notorious to the world: When vpon the yeare of Christ 1586. fourteene principall and zealous yongCatho∣Iicke Gen∣tlemen suffering for his Maiesties title. gentle-men were most pittifully put to death in Lon∣don, and diuers others condemned, and their goods confiscated for an imputation, that they would  deliuered his Maiestyes mother  of prison, and fa∣uoured her succession to the Crowne; did not  ra∣ging Ministers then, no lesse fyerie  MORTON now, raue out of euery pulpit, not so much against them, as againste the cause and obiectes of their calamity, which was the loue they bare both to mo∣ther and sonne in that behalfe? Against  also they neuer ceased to crye vntill they had gotten the life of the one to be taken away, and the Statute of Association to be made for endangering the other.
14. And when before that againe, vpon the yeare 1581. fourteene learned priests and Iesuites, were ar∣raigned & condemned vpon pretence that their com∣ming into England was for some designement against the State; was not the greatest, and most odious part of their arraignment (and most amplyfied by the At∣torney Popham at that time) for that they were deuout to the Queene of Scotland, and her tytle, and prayed for ac∣cused for their de∣uotion to the title of Scot∣land. her in their Masses, Letanies, and other prayers? Yea when some of them came to dye at Tyborne, and prayed at their death for the Queene of England, did not some principall men demaund them publikly from among the people, what Queene they meant, Elizabeth, or Ma∣ry? And was not this an ordinary Equiuocation, which Ministers cryed out that Catholickes then vsed, and

especially priests? And how then doth this fond, and malicious Minister bring in such Marchinges of Ca∣tholicke Soldiers against his Maiesty, who euer  for him? How doth he talke of such kylling of supposed Philisthines by the iaw-bone of an asse? The asse in deed we haue found, but the iaw-bone as yet we see not.
15. But let vs heare him go forward in vaunting to his Maiesty of his goodly workes. After the reply is finished (saith he) there is presented to your Princely, and most religious iudgement, A confutation of the rea∣sons of two of their more then vnreasonable positiōs; as namely of haynous Rebellions, and execrable Equiuocations: both which are refelled (I hope) sufficiently by the testimonyes of their owne most principall Doctors; A course which I professe in all disputes; knowing that by no better wisdome may this new Babylon be confounded, then wherwith God wrought the destruction of the old, euenGen. 11. 7. & 9. The diuision of their tongues. So he.
16. And yow must know, that this diuision of our tongues is nothing els but that he alleageth some tymes different opinions out of some of our Schoole∣Doctors (which our men do for him, he hauing nothing heerin of his owne industry) in matters that be disputable, and not determined by the . And is not this a great point, for so great a Rabbyn to bragge of, as of a course which he  in all his disputes? How doth foolish vanity discouer it selfe in all these mens wordes & actions? And yet let the Reader note attentiuely that notwithstanding this bragge, he hath no one Catholicke Author in all this controuersy a∣bout Equiuocation, that absolutly denyeth the thing, orThe vani∣ty  T. M in de∣uidinge our ton∣gues. holdeth it for vnlawfull in all pointes as he doth, al∣beit some do differ in opinion concerning the cases, causes, tymes, meanes, maners, limitations, and cir∣cumstances of the same, as after is largely by vs decla∣red. So as heere he hath no diuision of our tongues,

but which himselfe maketh, to wit, where somtymes to seeme to finde a difference where none is, he be∣lyeth our Authors flatly, and forceth them to speake one against an other, as in many places we do demon∣strate and leaue him with the shame.
17. Wherfore to say as he doth that our execrable Equiuocations are sufficiently refelled by him with the testimonyes of our most principall Doctors is as true, as that he is a Minister of simple truth, and naked innocency, and of constant assurance of an vpright conscience: all which are ri∣diculousA fond vaunt of T. M. re∣fated. antiphrases in deed, for he hath no one Doctor of ours, either most or least principall with him in his opi∣nion, or that calleth Equiuocations, vsed with due cir∣cumstances or limitations, execrable, or vnlawfull, or not necassary in some cases; nor hath he any one sentence, or testimony of theirs to the contrary, as after is made euident. And consequently this course of Tho. Morton in all his disputes, is a lying course, a vaunting course, a ri∣diculous course. And as for his disputes, I do shew him after to be so sylly a disputer, as that he knoweth not how to make a true syllogisme, and therfore am for∣ced to send him backe againe to Cambridge to re∣forme his Logicke, or to learne more: about which point I remit the Reader to that which is handled in the 11. Chapter and els where of this Treatise.
18. Next after this he layeth before his Maiesty a certayne obseruatiō about Popes names, as ful fraught with malice, and deceiptfulnes, as the former with vanity; and he layeth the obseruation vpon Polydor Virgil, though cyting no place for it. Polydore obserueth (saith he) that the Popes a long tyme in their election had theirEpist. ad Regem. names changed by Antiphrasis, videl. the Elected, if  were by naturall disposition fearefull, was named Leo, if cruell, Clemēt, if vnciuill, Vrbanus, if wicked, Pius; if couetous, Bonifa∣cius; if in all  intollerable, Innocentius: And with this he thinketh to haue layd downe an obseruation

of importance. But why had he not adioyned also, that if he were careles of his flocke, then Gregory must be his name, which importeth a vigilant pastor?
19. But now let the iudicious Reader obserue the malice, and falshood of this obseruation, and therby iudge, whether the Author therof be a Minister of simpleA false and mali∣tious ob∣seruation of T. M. against Popes re∣futed. truth or no. Polydore saith only that sometymes Popes, as other Princes in like manner, haue had names, that haue byn different, or rather contrary to their nature & manners, which is an ordinary case if we examine the signification of men and womens names; but that Popes names were changed of purpose by Antiphrasis, or contrary speach to couer their defectes, as heere is set downe, this is a malicious lye of the Minister, and hath neither simplicyty, nor truth in it, for that all these names heere mentioned of Leo, Clemens, Vrbanus, Pius, Bonifacius, Innocentius, and Gregory, were chosen by the Popes that tooke them for the great reuerence, and estimation they had of certayne excellent men of that name that went before them; as also for the good a∣bodement of their future gouernment, and to be styr∣red vp the more by the memory of those names to the vertues signified by them; but especially for the honor and imitation of the first Popes that bare those names. As for example of S. Leo the first, who how ex∣cellent a man he was, both for learning and sanctity, appeareth by the acknowledgment of the Protestants themselues. M. Iewell making this Apostrophe vnto him in his chalenge, O Leo, O , O Paul, O Christ!
20. The like may be said of S. Clement the first and next Pope after S. Peter; and the same of S. Vrbanus Pope and Martyr, in the second age after the Apostles: and the like of Pius the first Pope and Martyr, in the first age after the said Apostles; and no lesse of S. Bo∣nifacius the first that liued in the beginning of the fourth age, and a little before him againe in the same

age S. Innocentius the first, so highly commended by S. Augustine for a great Saint: and after him againe S. Gre∣gory the Great, and first Pope of that name most admi∣rable both to those of his time and all posterity for many excellent vertues, who though lyuing some ages after all the former; yet haue there byn 13. Popes after him, that for reuerence of his vertues haue ta∣ken his name, and ten of S. Leo, 7. of S. Clement, 6. of S. Vrbanus, 4. of S. Pius, 7. of S. Bonifacius, and 8. of S. In∣nocentius, wherof none had that name by , but all by choise after they were elected Popes, for the causes now touched. Which being so, it is euident what a wicked lost conscience this Minister hath, to auouch vnto a King, and by him to all others, so ma∣nifest, and malitious a calumniation.
21. But he goeth further yet in folly to magnify his owne learning and to compare the same with no lesse then Aristotle.  haue so framed this dispute (saith he) that it may seeme, I hope, to be like Aristotles bookes of naturall Philosophy, so published, as not published, &c. And his reason is. For that as he saith, he alwayes putteth downe the clause of ment all reseruation in Latin: which yet is not true, as the Reader wil see by pervsing this booke, he hauing to my remembrance set downe the same in Latyn but once only throughout all his booke, and that in fower words in his second page, the said reseruation being mentioned in English, more perhaps then forty tymes, nor were it of any importance if it were al∣wayes put downe in Latyn. For that any man lightly whether he vnderstand Latyn, or no, if he see or heare the precedence both of question and answere, will ea∣sily ghesse what the reseruation is, if he suspect any to be at all, as if a man doe heare or reade the premisses of a syllogisme in English, he will easely ghesse at the conclusion, though it be in Latin; yea if he be of any meane capacity, he will gather the inference himselfe

by naturall discourse. Wherfore this of Aristotles books was brought in only by the vayne Minister to com∣pare them with his bookes, or, as he calleth them, his disputes, so published (forsooth) as not published, for that he imagineth that the common capacity of men cannot reach vnto the depth therof, he wadeth so profoundly in his owne folly. But yow will see afterwardes thatHovv T. M. his bookes are so publis∣hed as not published. he is vnderstood, and so decyphered, as he may be vn∣derstood, and pitted also by others. And I know no sense wherin he may say, that his workes are so publis∣hed, as not published, but that they are not worthy indeed the publishing and much lesse the readinge, wherin they doe differ much from those of Aristotle.
22. It followeth in his said Epistle to his Maiesty:Epistle to the King against E∣quiuoca∣tion. For that this doctrine of Equiuocation (saith he) acknowledged by your admirable wisdome to be in religion most  and detestable, in politike State most pernicious and intollerable, and in euery actor most banefull to the soule of man; it may please your Excellent Maiesty to prouide in this behalse for your faithfull and religious Subiectes, that they neuer be so intoxicated with this Antichristian spirite, as either to deceyue, or be deceyued therby, &c. Would God it might please his Highnes in his ad∣mirable wisedome to pervse ouer but two, or three Chap∣ters of this Treatise about Equiuocation, and the reasons of the lawfulnes and necessity therof in some cases, togeather with the grosse, monstrous, sacrilegious, and detestable licence of lying, taken vp, and vied by the impugners of lawfull Equiuocation, and especially Ministers, that most talke, and make profession of simple truth; I do not doubt, but his Excellent Maiesty out of his Christian piety would prouide in this be∣halfe, for his faithfull and religious Subiectes that they should not be so much deceyued by , as they are, nor intoxica∣ted with their Antichristiā lying spirite, to their eternal perdi∣tiō. And this is so much as I haue thought good to re∣ply in this place cōcerning his Epistle to his Maiesty.
23. As for the other which scornfully he directethT. M. his idle Epi∣stle to the deceaued brethren. to the deceyued brethren, it is so short, fond & ydle a thing, that it deserueth no answere at all, the principall point, whervpon he standeth therin, being this, that Catholicke people are seduced by their priestes, who1. Tim. 2. will be Doctors (saith he out of S. Paul to Timothy) and yet vnderstand not what they say, nor vvherof they affirme. But whether this description of fond presumptuous Do∣ctors touched by S. Paul do agree rather to Protestant∣Ministers, or to Catholicke priestes, will appeare in great part by reading ouer this booke, especially the 5. 8. and 10. Chapters, if by Thomas Mortons errors and ig∣norances, a scantling may be taken of the rest. But now let vs  how he doth go about to proue that our priests are such bad Doctors, as S. Paul speaketh of.
24. His chiefe proofe consisteth in a certayne com∣paring of them with those Iewish priestes of the old law in Christes tyme, who taught the souldiers that watched at the Sepulcher of our Sauiour, to say, that whilest they were sleeping, his disciples came & stole him away; Common sense (saith he) might haue replyed, how could yow tell, what was done, when yow were all a sleepe? But myndes enthralled in the opinion of a neuer-erring priesthood (which confirmed that ) could not possibly but erre with their priestes; such (alas) is the case of all them, &c. Do yow see how substantially he hath proued this matter? Let vs examine the particulers:  the story, then the inference.
25. About the story, S. Mathew recounteth in the 28. chapter of his Ghospell, how Christ our Sauiour being raysed miraculously from death to lyse, with a great and dreadfull earthquake, and discent of an An∣gels, so as the souldiers that kept the sepulcher were astonished, and almost dead for feare, some of them ranne and told the chiefe priests therof, who making a consultation with the Elders, deuised this shift to

giue them store of money and to bid them say, that in the night when they were a sleepe his disciples came and stole him away, and so they did. And S. Mathew addeth, that this false brute ranne currant among the Iewes, euen vntill that tyme, wherin he wrote his Ghospell. This is the narration, what hath now Thom. Morton to say to this against vs, for therunto is all his dryfte. First he saith as yow haue heard that this de∣uise was improbable, and against common sense it selfe. Common sense (saith he) might haue replyed (to the souldiers) what could yow tell what was done when yow wereThe diffi culty of . M. hovv men may knovv vvhat is done  they are a sleepe re∣solued. all a sleepe? Se heere the sharpenes of Tho. Mortons wit, aboue that of the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisies. But what if one of the souldiers had replyed to him thus: VVe saw it not, when we were a sleepe, but afterward when we were awakened, we perceyued that he was stolne away. What reioynder would our minister make? As for example if Tho. Morton were walking with a cōmunion-booke vnder his arme through a feild, and wearyed should ly downe to sleepe with his booke by his syde, and at his awaking should see his booke gone, were it against cōmon sense for him to say, that his booke was stolne from him while he was a sleepe? Or is not this an as∣sertion fit for one of those Doctors wherof S. Paul talketh, that vnderstand not what they say, or wherof they affirme. But this will better yet appeare by the second point which is his inference. Wherfore we must a litle also examine that.
26. But  (saith he)  in the opinion of a ne∣uer-erring priesthood (which confirmed that answere) could not possibly but erre with their priestes, such (alas, is the case of all them, &c. The malitious man would deface Christian priesthood by the Iewish priesthood, and our Priests by theirs: but consider how farre he runneth from the marke in both: Myndes enthralled (saith he) in the opi∣nion of a neuer-erring priesthood, which confirmed this answere:

Did the Priest-hood of Iury confirme this Answere? Who saith so? We read that the Priests with the El∣ders did deuise this answer, and they knew they did euill, and lye therin, and so did the souldiers also that published the same. But this was a matter of fact, not a determination of faith. Neyther among the Iewes nor Christians was there euer opinion that Priests, or Priesthood could not erre in matters of fact, lyfe, or their maners. How then is this to the purpose? Or doth not this also proue him to be one of those fore∣named Doctors, that vnderstand not what they say, or wherof they affirme? How much more modesty and piety had it byn in Thom. Morton to haue followed the example of Christ and his Apostles, who though persecuted by those Priests; yet both thought and spake reuerently of the Priesthood.
27. S. Iohn the Euangelist setting downe the speach of wicked Cayphas the High-Priest about the death ofIohn. 11. Christ, to wit, that it was necessary sor one to dye for the people; addeth presently: that Cayphas spake not this of him∣selfe, but prophesyed as being High-Priest of that yeare. S. PaulPriest∣hood of the old Testamēt derided by T. M. greatly honored by Christ and his Apostles. in like manner being apprehended, and brought into a Counsell of the Iewes, and vniustly stroken on the face by the commaundement of wicked Ananias the High-Priest, whome thervpon in his  called Paynted-wall, as soone as euer he was  that he was the High-Priest, he excused himselfe, that he knew it not. I did not know brethren (saith he) that he wasAct. 23. Chiefe-Priest for it is writen,  not speake  of the Prince of thy  And when the said Apostle doth af∣terwards handle in his Epistle to the Hebrewes this Iewish Priesthood, as a figure of that of Christ our Sa∣uiour, and of the new  he speaketh very honorably therof, saying: That  Chief-Priest taken out from men, is appointed for men in those things that belong toHeb. 7. to God, to offer giftes, and sacrifices for , &c. But Christ

himselfe most honorably of all other gaue to his dis∣ciples, and to the people this aduertisement: Vpon the Chayre of Moyses haue sitten Scribes and Pharisies; all things therfore whatsoeuer they shall say vnto yow, obserue, and do them, but do not according to their workes.
28. And if vnto the ancient Aaronicall Priest-hood of the old Testament, so much honour, so much credit, so much obedience was to be performed (which yet was not so sanctifyed by the diuine person of Christ himselfe, nor yet so adorned with the promise of his infallible assistance, as ours of the new Testament is, according to the Order of Melchisedech) what impiety is this in Thomas Morton to go about to discredit the one by the other? yea to ascribe the lying of the Iew∣ish souldyers and their talking against common sense (as he will haue it) vnto their enthralled opinion of a neuer-erring Priest-hood? Is not this sensles? Had these souldyers an opinion perhaps that their Priests could not sinne? Or did they hold this for  point of do∣ctrine, determined vnto them out of Moyses chayre? Or if te y did not, how is this their fact attributed by Thomas Morton vnto that ?
29. But he goeth , and  all our errors  to the same  : for  wher∣of1. Thes. 2. , that God in  to  lyes and , and  examples the deliuery ofFalse ca∣lumnia∣tions.  soule out  the : The donation of Constantine; the  of our Lady; the  of a  by S. ; the  of Christians amongst the Indians &c. But heere now Thomas , if he would shew  a man of  and iudgment indeed, & to deale really and not by calumniatio, should proue three thinges. First that all these positions are held by vs as he setteth them downe: Secondly that they are all false indeed as we hold them: and thirdly, that

therfore we erre in them, for that we belieue our Priest-hood cannot erre; so as the causality of these errors must fall vpon the enthralled opinion of our ne∣uer-erring Priest-hood.
30. Of which three pointes he proueth neuer a one, nor goeth about to proue it: and we deny them all in the sense that he obiecteth them: For as for Traians soule, no learned Catholicke man doth hold it, either for true or likly: and it is at large refuted by Baronius a Catholicke writer. Constantines donation is aBaron. tom. 2. anno 100. sub finem & in tom. 8. anno. 604. fusè. matter of story disputed to and fro by learned men of our religion. The assumption of our B. Lady hath more groundes for it, then either Morton or a thousand Mor∣tous will be able to impugne, for that he can not deny, but that for many ages togeather it hath byn recea∣ued through out all Christendome for an ancient tra∣dition, and from the time of the most learned S. Iohn Damascene, (that liued in the East Church, almost mine hundred yeares gone, and expresly recordeth the saidThe de∣fence of the bodily assumptiō of the B. virgin. tradition to be held for ancient in his time) T. M. must needes graunt the same; and then how many thou∣sandes of more learned, godly, vigilant, and prudent Christian men then Morton is, haue belieued the same in so many worldes throughout all Christendome, asSee S. Ber∣nard in his 5. Ser∣mons of the As∣sumption of our B. Lady & alibi. namely S. Bernard and others, euery man may easily see, as also consider this one reason amongst the rest; that if the sacred body of that Blessed Virgin, Mother of God, had byn left any where vpon earth, as other Saintes bodyes were, ther would haue remayned at least some memory, some testimony therof, or some deuotion to the place.
31. And for so much as by Gods holy prouidence so great concourse hath byn made euer vnto the bodyes of S. Peter, S. Paul, and other of the Apostles, Martyres and Saintes of God, in different places, though neuer so remote, it is more then probable, that some would

haue byn made likewise vnto this sacred body of our Blessed Lady: but the malice of these people is such to the holy memory of this blessed virgin vpon earth, and their precipitation to  so hasty and in∣considerate, as whatsoeuer they see not with their eyes, they deny as absolutly false. For what certaintyMiracles vvrought by God for the cō∣uersion of the Indi∣ans scof∣fed at by T. M. can T. M. haue (thinke yow) against the bodily  of our Blessed Lady, his assertion being a bare negatiue? What certainty against the miracles wrought by God in the Indies? Is the hand of God shortened? Is not Christ as powerfull now, as he was in the Primitiue Church, when he extended his hand to mi∣racles,Act. 4. as his Disciples with exultation ? Are not these Indians new Christians as the other in Iury were? Did not Christ euen then when he gaue power to worke miracles, expressly say, that he would be withMarc. vlt. them (not for this or that age) but vnto the end of the world? How then doth this arrogant-sylly-gras-hopper in∣sult here in fauour of Infidels, and disgrace of Chri∣stians, calling them, lying miracles amongst the Indians? Hath he perchance euer byn there? Hath he aduen∣tured his life to gaine those soules vnto Christ, that dyed for them, as others haue donne? Hath he suffered hunger and thirst, could and heates, persecution and affliction with losse of his bloud for gayning of those poore Indian , as others haue suffered, and  dayly? Noe. He hath done nothing of this, but con∣trary wise stood a farre of in England, hath attended to good cheare and ease, procured benefices and fauour of the State, and now vpon the suddaine is become an aduocate for the Indian Pagans, to scorne at the Christian miracles wrought by Gods power among them, though testified by neuer so great and graue Au∣thority vnto vs. And is not this a pious man thinke yow.
32. As for S. Francis louse, I neuer heard of that scorne

before, and I meruaile in what part of our Theologi∣callThe con∣tumely of T. M. a∣bout S. Francis louse. assertions he  place , or how he will deduce the  of this louse from our enthraled opi∣nion of our neuer-erring Priest-hood. For soe he must, if he talke to the purpose. And when he will or can doe this, euery man seeth. In the meane space, I leaue it to that glorious Saint now in heauen, where no lise be, to answere the contumely, if he thinke good, either vpon earth or else where. Sure I am that I haue reade of strange euentes in some vpon lesse pride and in so∣lency vsed towardes the Seruautes of God then this. The examples most knowne are of Herods lise, that deuoured him; and if we belieue Doctor Bolsacke the Phisitian of Geneua, Iohn Caluin dyed of the like disease. God defend all good men, and T. M. also from like chastisement, and cure  rage of his cōtumelious & blasphemous tōgue, whilest he hath time of . 33. And now for that this Epistle groweth ouer longe, and we shall haue large occasions afterwàrdes to  open this mans defects in these behalfes, we shall goe no further in examining of matters heere, but passe to the treatise it self designed to procure (if it be possible) some Mitigation of affliction & persecution towards Catholicke Subiects, drawne into publique hatred, exulceration and exceration by such diuellish Syco∣phancy and odious Calumniations, as this fellow and his like haue cast forth against them, without al groūd, but of malice & hatred, as by his accusations and our answeres, I doubt not, yow wil manifestly perceiue. I beseech Christ Iesus our Sauiour to turne all to his greater glory, & then happy are our suffrings: & so to his holy prouidence & protection I cōmit the whole.

