


NOtwithstāding that this my collection of Scrip∣ture moste excellente and vertuous Ladye, hathe no nede of any mans tuition or defense, forasmuche as it contayneth onelye the simple and very true worde and sayinges of god: yet after I had finished and ended the thyng, and purposed by the counsell of a ler∣ned man to publyshe it, for mans consolaciō and learning: youre graces fyery and euēt mynde to vertuous and godly liuing, youre true intente and naturall inclinacion to the same: your liberal hand and fauour to those, whiche diligently do exercyse themselues in the spirituall and morall study of the sincere worde of god, and agayne youre Graces be∣nignitie and gentilnes of long tyme bounte fully to me declared: enforced me to publishe it in your graces name. Accept therfore this my labour moste excellant Lady, as sente of your daylye Orator and moste humble ser∣uaunt to your grace. Rede the fruiteful les∣sons therof and digest them thorowly, prac∣tyse and proue in very dede, howe swete the
Lordes wordes be, vse the profitable doctri∣nes of this litle boke: for so doynge, youre grace shall learne dayly more and more, truly to know the Lord, to tast, releafe and to en∣sewe his holye and swete worde, to loue and feare him, to be his faithfull and obsequines handmaydē▪ and a diligent ensuer of his wil and seppes moste pleasaunt and voluntari∣ously to beare the yoke of his most comfor∣table and swete commaundementes.
Thinke nor esteme not, I moste hum∣blye beseche youre grace, this my gifte to be slēder in valure, although of it selfe it be but litle: for precious stones are of themselues in quantitie but lytle and yet for theyr natu∣rall operacions and proprieties, of greate e∣states moste hyely estemed. Esteme the con∣tent of my boke and gifte, that is the worde of God, and not the slendernesse thereof: e∣steme my faythful and true heart vnto your grace, and not my simple and slender gyfte. And yet yf this my poore and slender gyfte, maye be wel and exactly wayd and pendred, what thyng (although it comprehende not al the fruiteful lessons of Scripture) maye be compared vnto it? For what is more excelēt, or more precious then the word of god? what thyng maye be estemed equall vnto it? what ought to be more embraced of a christian thē Christes wode: then a pure and a christian lyfe? then chastitie, then hume, then godly
wisedome and pure doctrine? the which with other vertuous and heauenly lessons, are in this my briefe collection, compendiously and fruitfully comprised. Wherfore I euen hum¦bly desire youre noble grace to accepte this my labour and small gift in good parte. Ac∣cept, I saye, and embrace the worde of God, for that truly vnderstanded, and seriously en¦sued and folowed, shalbe to your graces spi∣rituall encrease mooste comfortable com∣forte.
