



IN auncient tymes passed (MOST HO∣NORABLE LORD) it hath been the cou∣stume, as witnesses Flau. Veg. in Prol. lib. de re milit. To dedicat, & present Books, vnto Princes, and great men; the reason is, saith he, forsomuch as any thing is not well begūne, except (first vnder God) Princes, and noble men, fauour, protect, and commend it; neyther doe any thing
beseeme Princes, and noble men better thē books; who as they are the heades, and Gouernours of o∣thers, it agreeth with reason (if it were possible) that they should know all things: because, that as in the head, consist the senses, which gouerne, & ruell the whole body; euen so in lyke maner, Princes & Potētates, who are the heades & Gouernours of fa∣milies, & other people, should be seen in all sciēces, and vertues, for the gouerning of others. For if the Planetes, which guyde, & rule this inferior world, are replenished with greater influence of light, and vertue, then the other starres in the firmamēt, euen so are Princes, and Nobles, the planetes, & gouer∣nours of this world, more illuminated with greater light of wisdome, knowledg, and power, for the go∣uerning of others; that by the influēce of wisdome, & knowledg in thē, wherwith they are replenished of God, they might ruell, and guyd others; for as Cyrus sayth, he is not worthy of any dignity, and authority, that is not better, then others: & if A∣ristole met saith, that all men desyres naturally to know, & this naturall disposition, dependes on reason, it followes that Princes, and Noble men, should haue this knowledg in thē perfect, for that
which all mē naturally desyres to know, the know∣ledg therof is more proper specially to be in Noble Men, and Princes. And therefore seing your L. is one of these Princes, & Noble men, in whom as in a planet consists the gouerning, and rulling of a most auncient family, and surename of Cambell, with the authority, and dominion, ouer the sherif∣domes of Argyll, and Tarbet, with the preeminent dignity, honour, & power of an Earle, in the aun∣cient kingdome of Scotland: Whose wisdome, ver∣tue, and nobility, hath been the occasion to pre∣sent vnto your L. these my labours, lieuing vnder hope so to esteeme of them as well becometh your L. Honour, wisdome, & vnderstāding: for it is not vnknown to all the nation, the estate, & quality of the Earles of Argyll, to haue been prudent, wyse, noble, and liberall, maintayners of Vertu, prote∣ctors, and commenders of the same, whose fame is immortall. & to report the verity it cannot be de∣nyed, but that the Earles of Argyll are amongst the principall Noble men in the land, equall in e∣stat, in antiquity very auncient, in linage & suc∣cession without interruption, of Mariadge descē∣ded of most Noble progenitors, very honourable
in fame, vnspoted in loyalty, fidel to there Prince, true to there country, honest in conuersatiō, Ca∣tholickes in profession, friendly to there genealo∣gie, loueing to their nythbours, liberal to their ser∣uants, fearefull, and mercifull to their enemies, boūtifull to the poore, charitable to strangers, dis∣cret, honest, & amiable to all persons, the renowne of them is for euer; what vertue could be in hu∣mane nature, that was not manifested & approued in thē. And as for wordly prefermentes to whom were they inferiour, vnto which preeminent digni∣ty, honour, and authority, your L. (iu. e) succeeds, & inioyes. Is not your L with the principal Earles equall & in nothing inferour? Is there any almost hygher honours, and more excellent, or famous, the to be one of his Ma••es Counsellers, & fami∣liars, great Cōmander of his Ma••es house, Sheriffe, and Lieutenant of two ample Sherifdomes, hvghe Lord iustice of Scotland, in Parlaments, also to beare the sword of honour, as for preuiledges, and iurisdictiō, no Prince, or Noble in Scotland is cō∣parable: And for dominions, terretories, Castels, and palaces, pastures, hunting fowling, & fishings, more rightly your L. may be called a litle Regu∣las
then a subiect. And therfore in respect of your L. antecessors & their progeny, vnto whom your L. hath succeeded, being a branche of the same stocke, indewed with them in all naturall giftes, & full of morall vertues, with equallitie of estat: It must follow with reason to liue, and die, with thē, in the true religiō, & in the true worship of Christ, and to approue your L. self to be the true issue of such loyal parēts; & a myrror to others in tymes to come; yt who already hath knowne your L. course of lye & cōuersation, and present exemple of lyfe may thereby glorify God, & in that your L. haue been an persecutor, now to giue a true testimony of a confessor, & to acknowledg your L. vocation to be extraordinary of God, who now hath illumi∣nated your L. vnderstanding in the knowledge of his truth, & how he hath wrought in your L. ac∣cording to the multitude of his mercies, a strange alteration, much from the nature of your L. edu∣cation, and profession to which the whole King∣dome of Scotland can beare testimony of your L. profession in Heresie, and of the monuments of your L. Yeall, & Valour, which are yet to be seen extant in the land, Symtomes proceeding from an
euill cause, whose feruour, yeall, and temerous presumption was greatly to be regrated to see the issue of such noble Carholicke antecessores dege∣nerat, indewed with so many good parts of nature to follow such irrationall courses of Heresie, in wch your L. was nourished & instructed, brought vp at the feet of Gamaliell, weell versant in the cir∣cumstances of puritanisme, perfect in the oppi∣nions of Caluin, yealous and feruent in professiō, in lyfe an another Solon, in grauitie conformable with the Rabbies of the new Ghospell in litle Isra∣ell, in yeall most firy, in spirit repugnāt, in will per∣uerse, in knowledge ignorant, to wraith sodainly moued, in reuendge foreward, in execution most ready, with Saull making hauock, puting cōfidēce in the multitude of men, and in polyce of wordly wites, more then in the truth, esteeming more the honour of the world, then the glory of God, or the honesty of the cause. & albeit there is no polyce or strenth against God, who out of euil bringes good, who gouern otherwayes thē man disposeth, which may be seen in the conuersion of your L. to the Catholick Faith; who in end hath disposed, all; for the best, to bring your L. an other Paul, out of
Saull, and of an veshell of dishonour, an veshell of honour, that in tyme comming your L. may re∣call to mynd the infinit goodnesse of God, your L. former estat, and perill: his vocation and coopera∣ting grace. And therefore in consideratiō, of Gods manifold benefits towards your L. and of the wis∣dome; and graces wherewith your L. is indewed, hath moued me more bold to dedicate this Trea∣tise, called, The Protestantes Theologie to your L. partly for your L. comfort, and vtility, that whē vacant tyme shall present, your L. may reade, and peruse this Booke, in which your L. shall perceaue the miserable estat, and condîtion of all Heretiks out of the Church of God; and now hauing op∣portunatie to redeeme the tyme past, your L. may make profit, and lay vp in Heauen a treasure, that shall not faill, approuing your L. self lyke another Iulius Caesar, of whome ît is sayd, that at all tymes eyther he had a lance in his hand, or the Iliades of Homer, that when the wares impedite him not, thē was he reading Homers Iliades, that out of the I hilosophers sayings, he might learne wisdome; e∣ue so I doubt not, but when your L. shallbe va∣cant of wordly besines, your L. will follow that
renowmed Caesar, in which litle Treatise, I Hope your L. shall finde great contētement of mynd, & sufficient matter to discouer the Heretickes Hy∣pocrysie, and false Religion, and also shalbe an helpe to others to come to the knowledge of the truth, who (allace) are lyke the Israelites in Ae∣gypt, more willing to liue in slauery of Pharao, then to suffer paynes to goe the Land of Cha∣naan, and preferes more the wraithfull contenāce of Pharao, rhen the holy Land: and lykewyse for the good of these, who are morall and desyrous to know the truth, who in end are lyke the Iewes, who loued more the honour of the world thē the glory of God. And lykewyse for the good of such who lyke Atheistes, liue lyke the Prodigall sonne, con∣tented to liue miserable, and to full their bellyes with the huskes of error, instead of other fruictes of verity, considering with themselues their mi∣sery and condition in Heresie as in a farre Coun∣try from their Parentes, and naturall soyll, may come to remorse of conscience to condemne their owne prodigall course, and ignorance of lyfe, and to make recourse to there parentes, whoe pities the misery of their childrē. And lykewyse for all sortes
of persones who knowing no better, and are ready to imbrace all noualties, whose eares are filled with descant of Religions, and the innumerable Sectes, that euery day appeares: or with the vntouned harmony of blasphemy against the Papists. And therfore for the good of many aswell as of your L. and vpon the ioy of your L. conuersion, and fer∣uent yeall in profession, with hope of perseuerāce, and in congratulation of Gods benefits towards your L. and in calling your L. to the knowledg of the truth, and in making your L. an child of God, and one member of the Catholicke Church, who lykewyse hath illuminated your L. eyes with the oile of his grace, that the ignorant blindnesse of he∣resie may be expelled, and in pulling you out of the golfe of perdition, from the slauery of Aegypt, and the basse captiuity of Babylon, from the wo∣rish Ielousie of Heresie, and from eternall dam∣nation, vnto saluation, for the Ioye of the Angels, for the perfection of lyfe, comfort of Catholickes, conuersion of heretickes, and in end for the parti∣cipation of glorie, hath ministred the occasion of boldnes to present this Treatise to your L. for the subiect of this Treatise requyres such a patrone
whose yeall in Heresie affore tyme without the knowlege of Godes truth, may be in the verity, & with the true knowledg of God: may not only pro∣tect, and accept of this Treatise but also by your L. magnificent liberality to giue a testimony of your L. yeall to assist and concurre, for the affecting of the secōd Treatise, in which fyftie questions shal∣be intreated. Reposing confidently this Treatise in the meane tyme to be acceptable to your L. to an other occasion, wishing your L. with all my hart, all Heauēly blessings with incresse of wordly Ho∣nour, and the successe of good fortune. Farewell

