

VNto the right honorable Syr VVilliam Paget, knyght of the most noble order of the Garter, Comptroller of the kynges Maiesties housholde, one of his hyghnes priuie counsaill, Chauncellor of the duchie of Lancaster, and his moste benigne Fautour and Patrone, VVil∣liam Patten, most hartely vvisheth felici∣te.

HAuynge in these last warres aga∣inste Scotlande (that neuer wear any with better succes acheued) made notes of actes thear doon, and disposed the same since my cummynge home, into order of diarie as followeth. As one that woulde showe sum argument of remē∣braunce (right honorable Sir) of your moste benign fauour, that aswel while I was with ye right honorable my very good lord and late master the erle of Arundell, as also since, ye haue vouchsafed to bear me, I haue thought metest to dedicate my trauail vnto your honor. How finally I either am or haue ben by ony meanes able to merite the

same your gētelnes, by so moch the lesse haue I nede here too shewe: as your humayne gene∣rosite, your willyng benignite, and promptnes to proffit all men is vnto all mē so cōmonly knowen, for the whiche youre name and honor is so familiar and well estemed with forein princes abrode, & so woorthely welbeloued of al estates at ho∣me, for who was he of ony de∣gree or cūtree that had ony iust sute, or other a do with our late souereign lord the kinges Ma¦iestie deceased, when his high∣nes, in these his latter yeres for your approued wysdome, fide∣lite, trust, and diligence had cō¦mitted the speciall ministerie & dispatch of his weyghtie affai∣res vnto your handes, that felt

not as moche then as I haue foūde since? or who findeth not still a constant continuaunce thearof whear the equite of his sute may bear it? Ryght many sure of the small knowledge I haue, could I my selfe reken both of than and since, whiche here all willyngly I leaue vn∣attempted to doo: both bi cause my rehersall shoulde be very vnnecessarie & vaine to you yt know them better then I, and also that I should tell the tale to your self: Whoō for the res∣pect of your honour as I haue a reuerence wyth vanitees frō your graue occupacions to de∣teyne, so haue I for honesties sake a shame to be suspect by ony meanes to flatter. That same your syngler humanitee

wheare wyth ye are woont also so gently to accept all thyng in so thankefull a parte & whear wt ye haue boūd me so straight¦ly to you, dyd fyrste (to saye the truthe now) emboldē me in this theame to set pē to the book, & nowe after in thys wyse to pre∣sent my worke vnto you. The which if it shal please your ho∣nour too take well in woorthe and receyue in to your tuicion, As the thing shall more indede be dignified by hauing suche a Patrone, then your dignytee gratifyed by receyuinge so vn∣worthy a present, euen so what fault shalbe founde thearin I resume as clerely cummyng of my selfe. But yf ought shalbe thought to be aptly sayd, plea∣saūt, ony thing sauering of wit¦te

or learnyng, I woold all mē should know it, as I acknow∣ledge it my self, that ye must ho∣ly be referred to you, then cou∣raging of whose fauour hathe ministred suche matter to my witte. That lyke as Ouyde sayd to Cesar of hys, so may I say to you of myne, Ingenium vultu stat{que} cadit{que} tuo.Faustor .i. But now no further with my talke too troble you. Thus wt encrease of honour vnto your woorthi∣nes most hartely I wishe the same continaūce of health and wealth.

