



Sr. Iohn Wal∣ter, Knight, Lord chiefe Baron of his Maities Court of Ex∣chequer: and Sr. Iohn Den∣bam, Knight, worthy Baron of the same Honourable Court.
The Reuerend and Rligi∣ous Iudges in this We∣sterne Circuit,
That wisdome from aboue, with power and courage, be in and vpon them from the Lord in all cau∣ses before them, to their due praises and end∣lesse comfort.

Right worthy Iudges,
SInce your Lordships sate at Tanton the last Summer Assises, I haue (as time and leasure from other studies,

and the execution of Diuine duties in my function would permit) giuen my selfe to the reading of many approued re∣bations touching the arragine∣ment and condemnation of Witches: as also treatises of learned men, concerning the deuilish Art of Witchcraft, adding withall not a few things, which otherwise I haue learned and obserued.
The occasion offered and the reasons drawing mee to this studie, were the strange fitts then, and yet continuing vpon some iudged to be be∣witched by those which wre then also condemned and ex∣ecuted for the same: My vp∣right meaning in my paines∣taking with Bull mistaken, a rumour spred, as if I fauou∣red

Witches, or were of Ma∣ster Scots erroneous opini∣on, that Witches were silly de∣ceiued Melancholikes.
This my labour in all these will cleare mee: which I am bold to present to your Lord∣ships, as a plaine Countrey Mi∣nisters testimony of his hear∣ty reioycing, that God hath sent vs such wished-for vp∣right and religious Iudges.
I hope it shall not bee impu∣ted as euill vnto me, that I haue chosen such worthily-ho∣noured Patrons, so learned in our Lawes, of so great autho∣rity in the execution thereof, so iudicious in discerning of causes, so iust in punishing sin, and so religiously disposed to aduance Vertue and Religi∣on.
I doe the more herein pre∣sume, for that I haue obserued your Lordships holy attention to the Word deliuered befor you, and your worthy respect vnto Gods Ministers; and therefore I doubt not of a fa∣uourable acceptance of my best seruice honestly intended for publike good. Yet humbly ne∣uerthelesse crauing pardon, if in any thing herein I haue ta∣ken too much vpon mee, and o praying hartily for your happy dayes, and your redou∣bled honour in your seruice of God for our King and Coun∣trey, I humbly take leaue.
Batcombe. Feb. 24.


