


SYRE,
It haith euer bean the custome of England, at the Marriage of the Prince, to present vnto hym a contribution, beneuolenc, and a free-vvill offring, as a token of ther ioye. And therfor I haue presumed, emong the rest, to offer to your Highnes the poor oblation of Virgils Shepehard, mitia poma, Castaneas nuces; ovt of my devvtie, seruice, and loyaltie to yovv. and the rather, bycause this first Scene: of your actions abroad in the vvorld, vpon the high stage of glorie (your iournie into Spayne, and your marriage in a familie vnde nescit aliquid mediocre nasci: haith affoorded hear, manie occasions of discouse to euerie man in his humor, (for it is proper to the multitud to talk de ente & non ente, and to be curious to knovv anie thing but that they

should knovv.) And bycaus also at your return, yovv may peraduentur fynd manie that like vvatermen, vvil look forvvard and rovv backvvard: apter to censure that vvhich is best doon, then able to apprehend the reasons vvhy it is doon. Therfor to flopp the mouth of Poli∣pragmus, and dravv this stood of discourses into the right chanel, that neither the course, nor the cavvse may be mistaken: and that men may learn rather to obey, then dispute of Arcana Imperij: I haue bean hould to touch voon some poynts and reasons for the match, (quod faelix faustumque sit.) Astorm of tongues, can not shake vertue, nor cancel the records of fame: and vnpartiallie suum cui que pretium posteritas rependet. Great persons ar like the planets, the more glorie they haue, the less rest they haue: clovvdes ofe overshad ovv them, but the beams of vertue breakovvt at last. And bycaus that building is perpetuall, vvhear God layeth the foundation: your H. can not doe a more heroicall act, then to be a Mecaenas to religion, (yf not to geue it priuilege, yet to get it libertie:) and sollicit Cyrus, that Israel may return, and build vp ther temple. So shall they be obliged to pray for the lyfe of Cyrus and to vvrite your H. name, vpon ther alters and Churche doores, that Deus nobis haec otia fecit.

