



AMong the controversies of this time, Most worthy Knights, it is not of the least importance, which some of the brethren of our Church haue made about the gesture of kneeling in the act of receiving the Lords Sup∣per. For as it vniversally concernes all, and every Christian must of conscience hold himselfe ingaged therein the one way: so the manner and effect of op∣posing is such, as to him who considers the same in good earnest is admirable, and who considers not is incredible. To those cannot bee vnknowne with what confidence, bitternesse, & resolution this quar∣rell hath beene maintained, & (though a spark) hath kindled such combustion amongst men, as God onely knowes how it is possible to be quenched. I remember

what Salomon saith: A brother offended (defe∣ctione provocatus, as Tremel us reader it) is harder to be wone then a strong City, and their contentions are like the barre of a Castle. I know it is much more to be lamented, that the beames of the heavenly truth seeme to be clouded vn∣to vs by the obfuscation of worse errours then this. Alas! the lusts which warre in our owne members at home haue made such warr in all the members of hu∣mane society, that the Edomites seeme to bee heard againe, Downe with it, downe with it, even to the very foundation. And what ese can we looke for in this disioynting of the parts and tenents of our building, but woefull ruines in the end; without the timely and effectuall repaire of such, to whom this weighty care especially apperteineth. Truely the thunder-bolts of Romes cursing, the bloody attempts of forraigne Princes, the divelish machinations and vnderminings of our Traytours at home, or what else hath happened to this Land, (since the Gospell hath beene established) of most dangerous consequence, haue not (any one of them) by the mercy of God, gi∣ven such a wound to the Church of England, as the vncivill dissentions of her owne children, whose doc∣trine (like that of Hymeneus & Philetus) eats like a Gangrone into the bowels of their dearest Mother.

The thing is so plaine & publick, that as it cannot be dissembled: So there is cause therefore, that we should turne our mirth into mourning, and our in∣struments of musick into the voice of them that weep. For my part I say with the Apostle, Vtinam abscin∣dantur; or with the Prophet, Let them be asha∣med ô Lord, that haue evill will at Sion. But whiles such as I can onely wish and pray for Ierusa∣lems peace, blessed shall He be, to the vttermost purts of the Earth, and all descents of posterity, by whose meanes it shall come to passe, that our eyes may see Ierusalem a quiet dwelling place, a ta∣bernacle that shall not be taken downe, one Isai. 33. 20. stake whereof shall not be removed, nor one cord broken. We cease not to pray for your honou∣rable Assembly, that, that vnguentum optimum, the choicest ointment of true peace, being powred vp∣on the head, may fall vnto the beard, not staying till it haue descended, vs{que} ad oram vestimenti Ec∣clesiae.
Concerning the controversie of this boooke, sorry I am, that it is my hap to seeme to be an adversary to them, whom I haue ever had, and yet haue in great estimation, and (I speake sincerely) so great, that if the singular evidence of the truth, and continuall sup∣ply of divine assistance, (beyond expectation) had not

supported my minde in all the skirmishes of this war fare, I confesse I should haue laid downe the buckler long since, and given over the cause, which I saw to be pressed with a world of preiudices. But now I must say of them as Aristotle of his friends, Amicus So∣crates, Amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas. God hath taught me to be content to passe through good and ill report for witnesse-bearing to his truth revealed. Nor am I discouraged with the common imputation of being a defendour of Popish Ceremo∣nies; for besides that they vniustly call kneeling a Ceremony, more then standing or sitting; they doe vnworthily disgrace it by putting it into that ranke, which God himselfe hath never warranted to his ser∣vice, neither did I iudge it enough to keep me back, that I am conscious to my selfe of so much infirmity, learned men being also so many; for as their wor∣thier parts and abilities are fitter for vndertakings of greater weight, wherein the Church hath need of them all▪ so for my selfe I haue had more occasion per∣haps then many others to be versed in this controver∣sie, and considering our brethren teach, that every Abridg. lawfull Minister hath a voice for determining of Church orders, I cannot fairely be denied to tender my service, (such as it is) to God & his Church, for the defence of the publick order established. Especi∣ally

when I owe the fruits of my some what more-ma∣ture vnderstanding, for a due compensation of the errour of my younger time, too flexible to the resolu∣tions of well-meaning ignorance, worthy, which I should repent of. I know it had beene a quieter way for me to haue reserved my thoughts to my selfe, & gone in a more private course of serving God, for how hard measure I shall finde of some that are con∣trary-minded, I doe plainly foresee; but God will never cease to vindicate his glory & worship from the iniuries which even his owne servants shall offer thereunto with what pretext soever they labour to beare it downe. And this advantage we haue, that their opposing of kneeling to the Lord in his owne ordinance, seemes to be a great indecorum in them, which make profession of the greatest devotion & mortification. What would they say to blessed Bradford, of whom it is reported, that his conti∣nuall study was vpon his knees.
Now (most noble Gentlemen) that I presume to present my thoughts to the world in the countenance of your worthy names, I had reason good enough: for besides some more private respects inducing, and that such Patrons I had neede of who are able to iudge of the cause which: I handle, and them∣selues plentifully defend it; (as in truth the counte∣nance

of learning and iudgement is beyond the coun∣tenance of an eminent place) This in speciall I haue desired, both to giue some testimony to the world of mine honourable esteeme of You, as likewise to con∣gratulate those Countries you liue in, for their happi∣nesse in You both; who are, (and let me speake it without the envy of any man) most worthy orna∣ments to Religion, Learning, & Iustice among them in these wretched times. Go on (ever honoured Knights) in seeking the glory of Almighty God, the good of the Church, the welfare of your Country: and grow (which is not ordinary in great men) in the ex∣emplary practise of a godly life; the comfort whereof will be your owne, both in your consciences at that day; and in your names, which shall be sweet and ho∣nourable by this meanes, as in other monuments of time, so in your noble posterity: Fox which shall e∣ver pray▪

