



WHat tyme, right Wor∣shipfull, the moste excel∣lent Philo∣sopher of ye worlde, Democritus was de∣maunded of a frend, what was the chiefeste beste a∣mongeste men in all the worlde, verely (quoth he)

a pacient man in miserie. The other replying, and demaunding the cause of that his assertion, he an∣swered and sayde: eyther he is not in miserie at all, or else armed most strong∣ly and surely agaynste all aduersities what so euer they be, that shall happen vnto him. By pacience, sayth he, of a thousande euilles he is not at all any whit molested. Anaxagoras the Philosopher, borne of a noble stocke, and sonne to Eubullus, who in Philo∣sophie

dyd exceede, sayeth that he himself could find nothing more excellent in war, than this one thing, that is, a Souldier to be hardy, and also chiefely a∣boue all other things, the same to be like wise trustie and pacient to indure tra∣uayle, payne, and other kind of miseries that shall happen or befall vnto him in that conflicte of war in which he then is conuer∣saunte. Alexander I meane the greate, hauing made war against the Persians

and of thē had made gret slaughter, the king of Per¦sia being of a noble corage bolde, stoute, pacient and hardy, hauing taken a ca∣stle or hold for his defence, & beeing in tyme brought in subiection to the Mace∣donians, was demaunded of Alexander in what poynt he sawe himselfe not to be ouercome, to whome the King of Persia answered on this wise: Sir king, in no point at all am I ouer∣come. Alexander hering him saye so, demaunded if he

had not lost both friends, cūtries, castles, townes, & all thinges else, yes verily (quoth he) & yet am I not ouercōe: for though they al be gone, yet can I with pacience beare the losse of the same. Oh greate was the pacience of this King, yet verily nothing in com∣parison of his, whome I haue taken to write vpon. Therefore I deeming no∣thing more fyt for a good nature than to set forth so notable a fact of pacience, as this was, haue at the

request of a speciall friend of mine, drawen the same though rudely yet hoping not without some profite, eyther of my self, or of som other. And bicause that to euery castle, towne, ci∣tie, worke or workeman∣shippe, there belongeth de∣fence: and knowing that defence canne not be made wythout some one defen∣der, I am so bolde (consy∣dering mine owne weake∣nesse) to dedicate this my simple worke vnto youre worship, that your wise∣dome

may bee the defence thereof agaynst the ranco∣rous Zoilictes, whiche at all tymes from the begin∣ning haue bene readie to breathe the fylth of their cancred stomackes vpon those most famous works of the excellentest clearkes that euer were, whose bo∣kes I am not worthye to beare, knowing likewyse that if those went not fre, mine can not. Therfore I hoping of your worships defence, am boldened the more in prosecuting of the

same. Thus trusting to your goodnesse, I end, de∣siring God to mayntayne your estate, and sende you long life and good health, to his pleasure and your heartes desire.

