



Right Worshipfull,
SInce your depar∣ture, and now re∣turne to Long∣leate, (where the poore feele your mercies in set times of releefe and daily almes, and your tenants and common neighbou∣ring Inhabitants good en∣tertainment at the generall

time of great house keep∣ing) it was my hap to tra∣uell into, and thorowout the whole Isle of man: now its vsuall with Trauellers to discourse of their iour∣neying, and to relate their Obseruations. And there∣fore let none obiect & say vnto mee that of Persius, Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter: For I found good in my paines taking: and bonum is com∣municativum & sui diffusi∣vum, and so quo communi∣us, eo melius. In my very entrance, and afterwards euery where I found writ∣ten that old ancient pre∣cept, Nosce teipsum. This : The scope of this booke for one to see and know himselfe. lesson I began to take out with diligent obseruation.

And it brought to my mind the Apostles charge, Quisque explorat seipsum, which I laboured to put in practice, and so sought my selfe in my selfe; for I re∣membred that saying long since learned, Orbis quis∣que sibi, nec te quaesiueris ex∣tra. Thus my trauell be∣came very profitable to mee; and the variety of sights withall procured de∣light, and turned my paines into pleasure.
In my trauelling, I came to the County Towne, or chiefest Seat there, called Soule: Where I rested for some time, because it fell out to be the Assise weeke for all that Iland. Where I specially marked how in all

things they proceeded a∣gainst Malefactors, accor∣ding to the Lawes of Eng∣land: in this onely lyeth the difference: there is ne∣uer but one Iudge, where∣as wee haue euer two ap∣pointed in euery Circuit, as wee haue now in this Westerne, very honora∣ble and religious Iudges, quos honoris causa, non pos∣sum non nominare, Sir Iohn Walter, Lord Chiefe Ba∣ron, and Sir Iohn Denham, another worthy Baron of the Exchequer, louers of vertue and Iustice.
And indeed, such ought Iudges to be, as was and is this Iudge in Man. He is a Iudge of Iethroes choice, Exod. 18. & verax, & Dei timens,

& osor turpis lucri. Hee is diuinely giuen, prudent, impartiall, and very quicke (vpon good information) in dispatch of Causes. Hee was worthily attended, as he ought euer to bee, with a worthy Sheriffe, with Iustices of Peace, Knights and Esquires, Gentlemen of singular note and fame in that Countrie. This I heard of them, and it appeared by their pra∣ctice, that they all stand for the maintenance of the lawes, they see their Soue∣raigne well serued, Iustice duly obserued, and iudge∣ment executed accor∣dingly.
They neuer side with any, for they hate faction:

Pride and Enuy, two rest∣lesse Make-bates, who for notorious misdemea∣nour, I saw bound to the good behauiour. So as now there a Caesar-like spirit, patitur superiorem, & a Pompey suum parem. They runne all one course, and as true Israelites, quasi vir vnus, for publike good. Therefore doe the people liue in peace, the land pros∣pereth, Iustice flourisheth, vertue is exalted, vice sup∣pressed, and the enemies at home and abroad made to feare.
The whole discourse of this excellent order, and carefull proceedings there by me obserued, from my first entrance vnto the

end, I am bold here to pre∣sent vnto your Worships, whom I haue now found diligent Readers of holy Scripture, addicted to pri∣uate prayer, besides set forme for the whole fa∣mily, to be entertainers of the Preachers of Gods Word, giuing freely to such, Benefices as they hap to be void, not being seduced by mens offering large summes to procure Aduousons afore hand, as too many Patrons bee in these daies. Now the Lord God Almighty hearten you in, and to these things more & more, and to eue∣ry other good grace, that may liuely demonstrate to the world the power of

sauing knowledge, in the vse of Gods abundant earthly blessings so largely bestowed vpon you, with which earnest prayer vnto God for you, and for a bles∣sing vpon these my ende∣uours to further the same, I humbly take leaue.

Batcombe, May 21.
