


WHat Motiue (Noble Sir) may
induce others in their Dedi∣cations,
I know not: sure I am
none other hath incited me,
then the regard of your owne
worth, and that natiue inge∣nuitie
and goodnesse of Spirit,
I haue euer perceiued in you, since it was my
good hap to enioy your acquaintance, and to
spend some houres with you at your Booke in
Norwich; where at this present you haue your
education vnder the Reuerend, Religious, and
my Honorable good Lord, the now Lord Bishop
of Norwich. And indeed, to whom rather of
right should appertaine these my Instructions, in
regard of their subiect, which is the fashioning of

Nobilitie after the best Presidents, then to your
selfe euery way so Nobly descended. Beside, it is
affirmed, that there are certaine sparkes and se∣cret
seeds of vertue innate in Princes, and the
Children of Noble personages; which (if che∣rished,
and carefully attended in the blossome)
will yeild the fruit of Industry and glorious Acti∣on,
not onely aboue the strength of the vulgar,
but euen in the scient, and before the time Nature
hath appointed.Pindar. in Ne∣sis, Ode 3. So Achilles, while hee was yet
very young, vndertooke to shoote the fiercest Li∣ons
and Boares, and was so nimble on foote, that
he was able to take a wilde Beast without either
oyle or Dogge.Ioes Mo∣nach. in vita Alexandri. Alexander also, when an E∣gyptian
Priest saluted him, being very young, by
the names of Son and Child, replyed; But you
shall finde me a Man before the walls of Athens.
But to omit Heathenish examples,Regum 1. cap. 3. ver. 9. Salomon wee
reade, when he was but euen a child, begged wis∣dome
of God, and grace to gouerne well: and
Ignatius,Ignatius lib. Epist. cap. 3. that holy Martyr writeth, Salomon was
scarce 12. years of age, when he decided that hard
controuersie betweene the two Harlots: so Iosias
was but eight years old, when he walked religi∣ously
before God. And mee thinkes (Sir) as in
that Cornelian Stemme (whereof Scipio was said
to be the top, and In quo (vt plura genera in vnam
arborem) videtur infita multorum illuminata sapi∣entia:Cicero.)
already you grow apace, reflecting as from
a faire Glasse, that Princely Moderation and Ho∣nesty
of heart, of the good Duke your great
Grand-father, the Honourably disposed mind of

my Lord, your Noble Father, together with his
loue and admiration, of whatsoeuer is honest or
excellent: so that verily you need no other pat∣terne
to the absolute shaping of your selfe, then
the Images of your fore-fathers.Arist. in Ei∣cis. But as Aristotle
saith of the Vine, by how much it is laden with
Clusters, by so much it hath need of props: so
say I of Greatnesse and Nobilitie, euer fruitfull,
and apt to abundance, it hath hourely need of
support and helpe, by all timely aduice and instru∣ction,
to guide and vphold it from lying along.
Wherefore, since the Fountaine of all Coun∣sell
and Instruction, next to the feare of God, is
the knowledge of good learning, whereby our
affections are perswaded, and our ill manners mol∣lified,
I heere present you with the first and plai∣nest
Directions (though but as so many keies to
leade you into far fairer roomes) and the readiest
Method I know for your studies in general, and to
the attaining of the most commendable qualities
that are requisite in euery Noble or Gentle-man.
Nothing doubting, but that after you haue here∣in
seene the worth and excellence of Learning,
how much it addeth to Nobilitie; what errors are
hourely comitted through Ignorance; how sweet
a thing it is to conuerse with the wisest of all
Ages by Historie; to haue in-sight into the most
pleasing and admirable Sciences of the Mathema∣tiques,
Poetrie, Picture, Heraldrie, &c. (where∣of
I heere intreat, together with the most com∣mendable
exercise of the body, with other gene∣rall
directions for Carriage, Trauaile, &c.) you

will entertaine this Discourse, as Vlysses did Mi∣nerua
at his elbow your guide to knowledge; the
ground, not onely of the sweetest, but the hap∣piest
life. And though I am assured there are num∣bers,
who (notwithstanding all the Bookes and
Rules in the world) had rather then behold the
face of heauen, burie themselues in earthly sloath,
and basest idlenesse; yet Mr. William Howard at
the least, let vs recouer you from the tyrannie of
these ignorant times, and from the common Edu∣cation;
which is, to weare the best cloathes, eate,
sleepe, drinke much, and to know nothing. I take
leaue, from my house at Hogsdn by London, May
30.

