


MVCH more then one yeare is not yet past (learned Coū∣try-men) since I presēted vn∣to you a Treatise, intituled of Mitigation, in answere of an other most bitterly writtē by M. Thomas Morton Mini∣er, about Rebellion & Equiuocation. In which Treatise of myne, besydes the two said poynts of principall argument handled at large (especially the later, as more capable of varietie in the Treatise therof) a great multitude of falsities were layd open, as vttered by M. Morton; and those so frequent, grosse, and palpable, as they must needes be thought to haue beene both

willfull and witting: the censure wherof not∣withstanding, I was content to remitt vnto yow, as presuming more of the integrity of your iudgments in poynts of learning, and matter of fact, then distrusting the sequele of your vnequall, affections, by reason of our difference in religion.
2. This Treatise M. Morton perusing & fyn∣ding himselfe, as it seemeth, not a litle strayned therein, was carried therby into so great & ex∣orbitant a streame of passion, as neyther he could stay himsele from answering somewhat out of hand (therby to preuēt the Readers pre∣iudice, as himselfe confesseth) nor yet daring to ioyne yssue vpon my booke and argument therof as it lay;In his Epistle dedicato∣ry. did after a strange new fashion deuise to set forth a Preamble (for some present remedy) accompanied with a promise of a lar∣ger booke, & Reioynder to ensue afterwards. And I do call this a strange deuise, not only, for that I haue not seene the same often practized by any writer lightly, except Syr Edward Cooke (who perhaps by this mans imitation hath an∣swered of late with a Preface of lesse then foure leaues in quarto,La preface de la sixies∣me pat des Reports. his Aduersaries booke of more then two hundred against him:) but also for that in this Preamble, which inlargeth it selfe to aboue two hundred & twentie pages, there is not the tenth part bestowed vpō the two chiefe Questions of Rebellion, & Equiuocation, but rather vpon other matters & subiects framed by

himselfe of nw, wheof th most may iusly be demed wholy impertinent.
3. As for example, to ptermitt his two pi∣stles, the one to my L. of Salisurie, the oter to my selfe (wherof I may chance to haue oc∣casion to speake more in my next ensuing Epi∣stle to him) he duideth this whole Preamble in∣to three seuerall parts,Preamb. pag. 2. which he termeth Inqui∣ries. I do deuide (saith he) this Preāble into three Inquiries:M. Mort. diuisiō of his worke
The first is, what sufficiency & ex∣cellency there is in P. R. to make so great an in∣sultatiō: the second, whether he may be thought a sufficient Proctor in this case or no: the third, whether he hath sufficiently performed his taske, eyther for the defence of his cause, or iustification of his cōscience; with a Challenge against him for them both.
4. This is the diuisiō of his Worke, wherby I doubt not, but you will discouer also the vani∣ie, though I should say nothing therof. For hat he being pressed with a Worke of such eight, as the argument of my former booke did import, & vrged therin, not only with an ouerthrow of his whole cause, but charged fur∣thermore with a monstrous number of playne wilfull vntruthes, not possible, as they seemed, to be answered, or excused; the iudicious Rea∣der will easily consider, whether this were a tyme to tryfle as he doth, making himselfe an Inquisitour (without commission) & to rame his first Inquiy of the sufficiency & excellency

of his Aduersarie, and to spend eyght whole Paragraphes, as he doth, therin:Imperti∣nent pro∣ceeding. Inquiring first of his witt, then of his memorie, thirdly of his learning in Logicke, fourthly of his skill in Greeke & Hebrue, fifthly of his kind of charitie, sixtly of his modestie, with other like poynts, spēding large discourses vpon eue∣ry one of them. Is there any man (I say) so simple or sottish, as not to see the impertinency of this manner of proceeding?
5. His other two Inquiries are as wisely im∣ploied, and prosecuted as this. For that the se∣cond, Whether P. R. may be iudged a competent Aduocate or no, is but a silly discourse, contey∣ning not full two leaues in all: and the argumēt therof is a ridiculous Dialogue feigned between the Mitigator, and the Moderate Answerer The third cōprehēdeth the rest of the booke (which is, of foure partes, three) which may be not vnfittely deuided into the termes of offensiue and dfensiue warres. For that first to impresse some opinion of manhood in defending him∣selfe from the imputations layd against him of wilfull falshoods, he taketh vpon him (quite from the argument of the controuersy in hand) to impugne others of like dealing, as namely Cardinall Bellarmine, my selfe, and others: and then hauing made this florish, he cōmeth lastly to his owne defence, in fourteene vntruthes layd against him, and culled by himselfe out of more then fourty obiected by his aduersary, and

no one of them well dissolued by him, as after will appeare. And after all his, he imagining the feild to rmayne wholy to himselfe, he con∣cludeth all with a new vaunt and fresh Challēge in the ninteenth, and last Paragraph of this his booke, phantasying himselfe to haue had the victory in euery thing that he hath taken in hād to treat. And this being the sūme of M. Mort. new worke, I shall breifly lay forth to your iudg∣ment the methode which I haue thought good to vse for his confutation.
6. First I haue bin content to follow him into those follyes of his first Inquiry,The me∣thode vsed for M. Mort. confutati∣on. about my wit, memory, learning; skill in Logicke, and the like, confessing willingly the medio∣crity therof in all things: but yet shewing by the substance of the ponts handled, if I be not de∣eyued,First In∣quiry. that if M. Mortons wit had byn excel∣ent, or learning eminēt, he would neuer haue yn drawen to haue leapt ouer grauer matters, to handle such light toyes as these be. For what mporteth me the disestimatiō, which M. Mort. rofesseth of my wit, memory, or learning; for o much as the things themselues that are hand∣led (wherin wit and learning are to be shew∣ed) will be better witnesses,Witlesse contentiō about wit. and of more cre∣dit with the prudent Reader, then eyther his or my bare wordes or vaunts? Wherfore to them I remit me.
7. In the second place,Second Inquiry I haue had pacience in like manner (for without pacience it could

not be done) to peruse ouer his second Inquirie consisting of a meere idle fancy and fiction of a Dialogue (as hath bene said) deuised betweene me, & his Aduersary the Moderate Answerer, as though he had fallen out about answering his booke: and me he bringeth in speaking very rudely and vnciuilly thus:See his Pre∣amble pag. 31. Nay, I haue not beene arrogant, but thou hast beene rash and prcipitant. For is thou by thy former Answere migtest haue beene thought sufficient for a reply, what needed such posting to me beyond the seas, for a supply of a more exact, and learnd Reioynder? Thus goeth his fi∣ction, and it is a very fiction indeed. For the truth is, that when I began my Treatise of Miti∣gation against M. Mortons fist exasperating dis∣couery, I knew of no other that was in hand to answere the same: as more largely I haue she∣wed in the third Chapter of my sayd Treatise.
8. Moreouer he feigneth vs to reason togea∣ther about itching and scratching, as though the Moderate Answerer had vsed these wordes:Preamble pag. 32. I thinke yow are troubled which the disase of sme of our Catholicke lawyrs, of whome you haue said, they itch to be doing and answering M. Attorney: this was also my disease, but I after found a scratch, and so may you. Wherby he seemeth to insinuate as you see, a certayne threat of scratching his ad∣uersarie,Threates of scrat∣ches. wen other weapons of more force do faile him. But this I haue answered afterwards in due place, & shewed, that aswell these scrat∣ches (meant perhaps of those scolding skirmi∣shes

before mentioned about witt, mmorie, lear∣ning, and the like) as also deeper wounds of con∣uiction of falshoods, and manifest impostures, are like to fall vpon himselfe: and that in so eui∣dent a sort, as all the standers by may cleerly see it, and take compassion on him, and of his mā∣ner of fight: wherof I am content to make your selues also, my learned Countrymē, both Iud∣ges and vmpires.
9. Wherfore fynding so litle substance in these two former Inquiries (for what is added and brought in by me in the second, which are but two particuler cases only concerning our subiect and argument of Rebellion and Equiuocatiō, was borrowed frō the third to make vp some matter wherof to treate:) I do passe to the said third Inquirie, wherin one only exploit being requi∣ed on M. Mortons behalfe, two are attempted, ut with very euill successe in them both. The xploit required was, that for so much as M. Morton in this his last Preamblatory reply by abā∣oning the principall argument and subiect of ur former controuersy,What was prin∣cipally re∣quired of M. Mort. and what he perfor∣meth. had changed the whole state of the Question by occasion of great mul∣titudes of witting vntruthes obiected against him, he should now haue gone roundly to the matter, and directly, plainly, & substantially haue answered the said imputations: but I foūd him to take a farre other course, allowing to himselfe a more large feild to walke and florish in. And this was first, to seeke out, what like∣lihood

or appearance of falsities he could fynd in any Roman writer whatsoeuer: then of what Popes in particuler; then of Councels, & their Interpreters: after this againe, against Cardinall Bellarmine, and that in diuers kindes, as namely for calumniating his aduersaries for false allega∣tion of the Fathers, for differing in his opinions frō sundry writers of his owne religion, wher∣of notwithstanding no one can be proued as af∣ter you will see.
10. Fynally then after all this, he falleth vpon my selfe, pretending to shew that in fourteen se∣uerall poynts at least he hath taken me tardy, which if he could proue, (as in no one he can) yet all this while, as you see, he walketh with∣out the list of our controuersy cōcerning the de∣fence of his owne falshoods, which he driueth of as long as may be, according to the fashion of those that hauing many deepe woundes are loath to discouer them, or haue them handled. Wherfore this poynt of his owne defence or ex∣cuse, which was first in his intention (for this was the cause that made him so hastily to shape out this Preamble) was the last in execution, as least gustfull vnto him: and so he dispatcheth it only in one Paragraph, of ninteene, that he hath in this Preamble, to wit the eyghtenth only: and by all liklyhood would haue pretermitted it wholy if handsomely he might.
11. But perhaps you will imagin, that he hath holpen somewhat his cause by seeking these di∣uerticles

frō the purpose, in that he hauing wea∣kned first his aduersaries credit may find better passage to the defence of his owne. But indeed this reckoning falleth not out so, but rather the quite contrary,The con∣tary suc∣cese of M. Mort. expectati∣on. for that not being able when it commeth to the tryall to fasen any one vntruth vpon his aduersary, I meane in that nature that it may be thought witting and willing, which is our only question; he commeth by cōsequence to confirme, and authorize extraordinarily the credit of their integrity in their writings, who haue not giuen place to any least touch of iust reprehension in that behalfe: and by this meanes contrary to his meaning he becōmeth their En∣comiast or Prayser, who endeauored to be their calumniatour, rectum ab errore, as oftentimes by Gods prouidence it falleth out.
2. Wherfore I seeing M. Morton take this ourse,The sūm of all this my An∣swere in 10. Chap∣ters. after I had examined the first two In∣uiries in two seuerall Chapters of mine, I was orced to bestow seauen or eight more vpon his hird. Wherfore the first is to answere all the articuler obiections, which he hath against o∣ther  Catholick writers, namely Card. Bllarmine and others. The second, for answering the like  obiections, and calumniations made by him a∣gainst my selfe in fourteene seuerall imputations layd against me. The third, how insufficiently  M. Mort. defēdeth himself in other forteen char∣ges produced against him, which he thought good to choose out as defensible amongst a farre

 greater nūber. The fourth how he pretermitteh more then other twice fourteene, farre more vr∣gent and eminent then the rest, without euer so  much as once mentioning them. The fifth con∣tayneth sundry other important omissiōs or pre∣termissiōs of his, aswell in slipping ouer matters belonging to himselfe, as to the defence of sun∣dry Clients of his, whome he ought to haue de∣fended, especially Syr Edward Cooke now L. Chiefe iustice of the Cōmon Pleas: with whome  there is made a peece of a euerall reckoning in like manner in a seuerall Chapter, aswell about some things of his set forth before, as also con∣cerning two new Prefaces lately published and prefixed to the sixt and seauēth parts of his Re∣ports.  The seauenth, how in place of clearing himself from aboue fourty old imputatiōs of fals∣hood, he is cōuinced of more thē fifty new, su∣peradded  to the former. And fynally, my eyght Chapter, (which is the tenth and last as they lye in order) doth handle new strange vauntes and challenges of M. Morton, after all this bat∣tery, as though nothing had byn sayd against him: wherin I can commend nothing, but his courage, remitting the rest to your better discre∣tions, when ye shall haue read both parts, this being the summe of our whole Concertation.
The reasō of the ty∣tle of this booke.13. There remayneth to say a word or two, cōcerning the reason of the tytle of this my An∣swere, which is, A quiet & sober Reckoning: wher∣of I know that your Wisedomes will easily ghesse

the cause, but much more will haue seene it, if ye haue perused ouer this Preāble of M. Morton which is so bitter and sharpe, and ouer eager in many places, as doth easily shew that the man was in great choler when he wrote it. And though I could alleage many exorbitāt speaches of his to this effect throughout the whole booke, yet the beginning and ending shall only serue for proofe therof: the begnning, for that he be∣stoweth seauen or eyght whole Paragraphs of his first Inquiry (as already I haue sayd) to ex∣amine my wit, memory, skill in Logicke, ignorāce in Greke and Hbrue, modesy, charity, and the like, which hardly could poceed but from im∣patience. The last Paragraph also of his new challenges declareth the same more aboundātly where he auouching me first to be a man with∣out all conscience, lame in hands, dumbe in peach, dead in sense & feeling of all cōtrition; e passeth on to the most extrauagant, and ridi∣ulous termes of impatience, that euer I read in y Author, that valued his owne credit, or you eyther perhaps.
For he saith, that if he do ot manifest me to be so malignant, as if the Capital letters P. R. did iustly betoken Princeps Rabularum: and so vayne, as if they signifyed Phormio Romanista: so dissolute in my cause, as if they might be interpreted Praeuaricator Rasus: so impudently vniust, as that they might import Persidiae Reus: then is he content that his Treati∣ses be purged with fyre, and himselfe challēged

to a Recantation.
And will ye not take pitty of this mans passion? Or can ye meruayle, why I tooke this tytle of A quiet and sober Reckoning?
14. Truly, if I should haue suffered my selfe to be crryed away with the same passion, & with the like impatience haue returned him an An∣swere in his owne veyne, & character of wri∣ting; you do easily see, wherunto this conten∣tion would haue growne: but I haue thought best to endeauour the pacification of M. Mortons choler, by a more moderate kynd of conferēce, if it may be, where heat of wordes layd asyde, the truth of matters may peaceably and more calmely be cōsidered. Wherin (as before I said) though I may haue iust cause to suspect your af∣fections: yet can I not distrust your iudgements in a matter of such apparent euidency, as this is, now committed vnto you. Wherin Christ Iesus direct you, to the discouery of that truth in Re∣ligion, which only can saue vs all. And so to his protection I commit yow, this 19. of De∣cember, 1608.

