


Gerard Wood, Doctor of Di¦uinity, and Archdea∣con of Wells: and Arthur Duck D. of the Ciuill Law, & Chan. to the Right Reu. Fa. the L. Bishop of Bath and Wells.

Right worshipfull,
FOR two books haue I made a dou∣ble choice of Patrones for potecion: because a Treatise of this nature, nee∣deh shelter vnder both, an that which is fortified, am Ecclesiatico, quàm scu∣laribrachio,

will be more a∣uaileable, and passe more acceptably among all sorts. The sin of witchcraft, and the diabolicall practice thereof, is omnium scelerum atrocissimum, and in such as haue the knowledge of God, the greatest apostacie from the faith, they re∣nouncing God, and giuing themselues by a coue∣nant to the Diuell. Bad Witches many prosecute with all eagernesse; but Magicians, Necroman∣cers, (of whom his late Ma∣iestie giueth a deadly cen∣sure in his Daemonologie) and the Curing Witch, com∣monly called, The good Witch, all sorts can let a∣lone: and yet bee these in

many respects worse then the other. Would God my endeauours might so pre∣uaile with men bound by solemne oath, that they would make conscience to present vnto you the Eccle∣siasticall Iudges, both the Witches themselues, as al∣so all such as resort vnto them. Impunitas peccandi li∣centiam peperit. Yet the e∣uils growing hereupon, both to bodies and soules, cannot sufficiently bee ex∣pressed. I neede not, I hope, with many words intreate your good care to suppresse such foule and damnable courses: For I know, that citò dicta & percipiunt sapiē∣tes, & viris rerū suarum sata∣gentibus non placet vrgeri:

and what need is there cal∣car currentibus addere?
I haue heretofore pur∣posed somtime or other to expresse my due respect vn∣to you both, as being my worshipful good friēds. To the one, as iustly clayming a thankefull remembrance for his so long continued loue, and for not a few fa∣uours, the true fruits of a good affection: who is to mee, quia filio meo, bengnissi∣mus & incorrupte patronus, to whom wee remaine euer obliged. To the other, for so kind and euer louing tenance, with a readinesse, vpon any iust occasion, to doe me any lawfull fauour. Let it please you now, eo vuliu sereno, quo meipsum so∣letis,

tractare, hoc qualecun∣que munusculum accipere; and  shall reckon so fauorable n acceptance, as a suffici∣nt recompence for my la∣our and paines. And so with due and dutifull re∣spect I take leaue,
Batcombe. Feb. 26.


