



RJght Honorable, my singular good Lord and Lady; your Ho∣nours both hauing from time to time ex∣ceedingly comforted, and encouraged me in my labours of this kind, J rest assured, you will gladly accept and pro∣tect to your vtmost, this sermon of mine published, my good Lord, at your com∣mand. Whereas some of good sort, and iudgment, moued your Lordship to put
me to it, for a further good to Gods Church; and whereas also your Lord∣ship out of your honourable and reli∣gious care, procured the right reuerend father in God, the Lord Bishop of London, my especial good Lord, to require it of me; and seing hereupon his Lordship hath vouchsafed to peruse it, and by his authoritie hath allowed it; hauing duely waighed all this, J professe that I accompt, God hath had a directing and a work∣ing hand in all, and haue therefore o∣beyed, leauing all excuses, which I might probablie haue made: euen so Gods will be done. When a publique good in a mans calling, is likely to be effected, excuses for priuate respects, in my conscience haue no place.
Had I but imagined in time, that it should haue come to this at length, by
Gods help it had beene better, and yet his goodnesse it is, that it is no worse: it is truth, and it is needfull, that J dare and do auouch for my part: to take it well, and to vse it wel, may make it good and profitable, for your Honors first, and so for others, to whom God shall giue opportunitie and grace.
J haue beene earnestly moued to set it out as I preached it; of the words (I am sure) I haue mist very few, of the matter nothing.
Your Honours are well knowne to to pray together, to heare sermons to∣gether, to receiue the communion the blessed body and bloud of Christ Ie∣sus, and that in your publique Parish-Church together; God grant more of your state, for examples sake, for their owne soules sake, and for Gods glorie sake, to do the like. If together
also your Honors wil be pleased, some∣times to reade and conferre seriously of this diuine matter, heer consecrated to your Soueraigne good, let me be blamed, and most seuerely censured, if you finde cause, to repent your well bestowing time, and paines this way.
The Lord God of mercies fill your noble hearts with heauenly graces, and powre vpon both your Honours, and all yours his richest blessings, for his deare sonne Christ Iesus his sake. Lon∣don the 25 of Nouember. 1607.

