



Worthie brethren,
GIve mee leave to speake unto you in this title and appellation. All that know you, know that I speake the Truth, and that the hand of Gods Divine Pro∣vidence hath beene very open unto you, and crow∣ned you with the aboun∣dance of his blessings. In steed of an Epistle to the Reader: I am bold to in∣treate
 you in speciall to be the Readers. I did per∣ceive by that late confe∣rence that I had with you, that you love not to have your mercies magnified and proclaimed before others, much lesse before your owne selves: you would not have the left hand know, what the right hand doth, nor any Trumpet to bee blowne at the distribution of your Almes. You doe well to follow the good advice and Precept of the Sonne of God. But your worke of Pietie, in providing for mens soules; and that other of Charitie, in re∣lieving the bodies of the truely indigent and penu∣rious
 together with the education and instruction of poore mens Children, (all which you have done in the place of your Nativitie, knowing right well that Charitie ought to beginne at home.) I say, these reall practises, and visible expressions of your Christianitie, are so obvious to the eye and view of this your Native Countrey, that they can no more bee hid, than the Sunne at Noone-day. I hope this my labour and discourse of Almes-giving will not any way coole the fervour of your Chari∣table affections; but ra∣ther animate and enflame you to the practise of
 more good deedes, and good duties, and to a fur∣ther proficiencie in the Schoole of grace. There are many strong and de∣monstrative arguments, treasured up in this Trea∣tise, which if soberly, and seriously considered, may serve as so many keene spurres, and sharpened prickes to quicken and provoke you, to love, and to good workes: I have found it with many happi∣ly successefull, especially in that my Counsell of laying aside weakely eve∣ry Lords Day: for the performance of which du∣tie, I did principally set my hand to this worke. It is the readiest way that I
 finde prescribed by the Wisedome of the Holy Ghost to bee largely libe∣rall, and chearefully Cha∣ritable: my old eyes have beene well holpen by the Transcriber, one now resi∣ding with me, unto whose hopefulnesse, I wish an∣swerable happinesse. I well know, that truth hath na∣tive beautie and bright∣nesse of her selfe, and nee∣deth not any adventitious and borrowed adornati∣ons to tender her worth to such as love her, but be∣cause comely attire will not be unbeseeming a bo∣die of it selfe beautifull: therefore though it fit not to let this admired Grace of Charitie to come forth
 unclothed, bare and naked But with some decent and comely ornament befit∣ting her Glorie. If you now (Gentlemen) will be pleased kindely to accept it, I shall hold my selfe be∣holden to you therein; but you, in performance of the dutie, much more unto God, the fountaine of all our good; To whose bles∣sing I commend you, and all yours, and this my worke to your charitable reading, and charitable practise.
Barcomb. Oct. 20.

