


Most Excellent Ladie.
SIthence it hath pleased your Highnesse, heeretofore to take notice of me, and my labours, such as they were, nothing hath been oftner in my wishes then abilitie to pay the debt I owe to the respect of so peere∣lesse a Prince, and Princely a Patronesse. But since the more I striue, the more I

am entangled by mine owne weaknesse, I submit to my Fortune, and must rest Captiued in the bands of your gracious mercie. Yet so to be bound, is sweet libertie, and beholding the face of such a Iudge, I read my pardon vpon a brow of Iuorie. But as Fa∣uour is woont to make offendors bolde, so truely I confesse your Fauours haue drawne mee into this, and your Bountie hauing watered some flowers, hath brought vp I feare moe weedes, which perhaps by their ranknesse will rather giue offence, then with their smell or beautie breede you delight. I now present your Highnesse, with a Genethliaque or Birth Poeme, done by mee aswell in Latine, as English Verse, in Honour and the behalfe of young Prince Henrie your sweete and deerest Sonne, the most part in my trauailes heere in the Low Coun∣tries vpon the way, without other helpe then a bad memorie, and my Table booke, and now ended vn∣der the aspect of that star of honour, and Honourer of your Grace and all vertuous Excellence, Sir Iohn Ogle Lord Gouernour of Vtrecht, my noble friend. If any aske why it came no sooner and had not the beeing with the Princes birth, I answere a Poeme is a fruit that had need of a winter to ripen it, I could say with Horace nine yeares, neyther am I one of those, who haue their wits au bout des doigts,nonumque pre∣mantur in an∣num. as Du Bartas saith. Last of all it is a ioy that can neuer come out of season. Yet had these excuses, I confesse bin of no force, had the way to Heidelberge beene free

from danger, during eyther Armies lying at Rees and Wesel, for so farre I was come on my Pilgrimage with this little, lesse then a candle toward your Highnesse the Saint and Soueraigne of my deuote affection, whome since it is papistrie to pray vnto, I cannot, as I am bound, but pray for so long as I liue. I most humbly take my leaue of your Grace: From Vtrecht, the of
Vnto your Highnese, the most deuoted in all dutie,

