



Right Worshipfull;
ALthough the Scripture be in its selfe mostPsal. 19.7. perfect, both for2. Tim. 3.16, 17. sufficiencie andPro. 8.9. Ps. 119.105. perspicuity; yet in respect of us, cleere and familiar Expositions have bin, even from anon after the Apo∣stles times, held of use and profite in the Church of God. For the same God who gave the Scriptures to be the2. Tim. 3.16. Rule of Faith and Manners, gave alsoEph. 4.11, 12 Doctors and Pastors, for the worke of the Mini∣stry, to the edifying of the Church: the Scriptures to be as the materials, Pastors as the1. Cor. 3.10. builders. The Scriptures, I know, are dark to many, because they are2. Per. 1.9. blinde, to some because they are2. Cor. 4.4. blinded, and to all in sundry places, because our sight is dimme
and but in1. Cor. 13.9. part. A darke eye (wee know) hath need of a spectacle, be the light ever so cleere, and the letter ever so plaine; and the explanations of the godly and learned on the Text, are as a spiri∣tuall spectacle, to helpe to perfect the imperfect sight of our minds. Now the Scriptures are opened to us, not onely by the publicke preaching of the Word, but, in its kinde and place, also by the Wri∣tings and Commentaries of the Learned; whose pens and hands are, I doubt not, guided by a sweete influence of the providence of God, and some in∣stinct of his holy Spirit: this difference being ever observed, That the Writers of the Scripture were so2. Pet. 1.11. moved by the Holy Ghost that they could not erre; but Commentators and Expositors lye open to some errours, they sometimes speake as men, and not onelyRom. 3.4. may, but now and then they doe, andRom. 8.28. Quia humilio∣res redeunt & doctiores. Aug. de correp & grat. c. 9. cum Rom. 12.3. Rainold. Thes. 2. sect. 12 must mistake. Tis true, that the Word of God is so briefe, that none can say he wants leisure to read it; and so plaine (in necessaries to salvation) that none can pretend hee cannot understand it: but withall tis most certaine, that as there are plaine places to feed us, so there are obscure places to ex∣ercise us. which harder bookes and places the bet∣ter to understand, its our wisedome, first, to be qua∣lified with aPsal. 19.7. simple and aPsal. 25.9. meeke heart, and then to acquaint our selves not only with the publicke
Ministry, but also with the printed Expositions of such Writers as are sound and cleere. Now a∣mongst the hardest bookes of Scripture the Pro∣phets may have place, and amongst the Prophets Zachary is a Deepe wherein an Elephant may swimme; and therefore I cannot but commend the wisedome of that man of God (the Author of this Booke) who bestowed his learning and his paines to open the mysteries of this Prophecy. Death en∣ded his dayes ere hee could quite finish his Worke, and great weakenesse hindred an intended supple∣ment: tis even pitie the Church should want it any longer, and therefore I make bold to publish it un∣der your name, desiring God to giue a blessing to all that reade it, but chiefly to your selfe, whom the Lord in mercy hath made a sincere lover of the Word of God.

