


AS I highly esteeme of my mother the Church of England, which at this day is renouned in the Christian world, howsoeuer many with an enuious eye looke vpon her prosperity; and for the e∣uill will they beare to her welfare, vtter many vnsauory things against her: so I also blesse God for the happie Policy of the Ciuill state, wisely established, and most succesfully maintained, in peace and iustice, beyond all comparison of other kingdomes. The praise whereof, (next vnto God, and true religion) is to be ascribed to the most iust and wholesome lawes of this Nation; byLeg. sanct. Edw. cap. 19. which very tenderly and watchfully, the prerogatiue Royall is preserued, the Supremacie is giuen to Soue∣raigne authority, and the Bishop of Rome quite shutout,Edw. 1. 19. E. 3. tit. for hauing any thing to doe with the regality of the Crowne, or within the dominions of our Lord and King;K. Rich. 2. An. 16. ca. 5. as his Maiesty himselfe fully hath shewed, in the Pre∣monition
 to all Christian Monarches, free Prin∣ces, and States. Albeit that Iupiter of Olympus, and rauening Wolfe, (as once Boner, that bloody butcherPreface be∣fore Gard. b. de vera obed. Rom. 13. 1. of Gods Saints, called him) chalengeth Saint Pauls sword, but altogether contrary to Saint Pauls doctrine, to shake off all obedience to the higher powers, and also by the same, to bee as God aboue all that is called God,The second part of the Catho. Apol. and so to claime the right to depose Kings, and to dis∣pose of kingdomes, (which the Popes lawes maintaine, and chalenge most wickedly, vpon these words, pasceC. praecipuè XI. q. 3. Can. alius. 15. q. 6. Clem. vnic. de Iureius. oues meas), hauing claues regni coelorum, to v∣surpe authority, and enterprize against all the Kings in the world; which made that proud beast, Alexander the third, set his feet vpon the necke of the Emperour Fredericke Barbarosse, saying, tu es Petrus, &c.C. venerabi∣lem ext. de elect. adding withall, ecce constitui te super Gentes & regna, the saying of God to Ieremie; and that of the Psalmist, Super aspidem & basiliscum ambulabis, & conculcabis leonem & draconem. In this pride, Pope Coelestine the fourth, crowned the Emperour, Henrie the sixth, with his foot; Gregorie the seuenth, made Henrie the fourth, with the Empresse, and their son, to stand waiting long at the gates of the Popes pa∣lace, to speake with him; and Adrian wil haue the Em∣peror Fredericke the first, to hold his stirrup. Oh dam∣nable pride, to be abhorred of God and men! But yet this is not all the ill fruit of this Antichristian vsurped power, but also treasons, open rebellions, and bloody warres, making thereby these parts of Christendome a very butchers shambles of Christen men; and yet mustReade Acts and Mon. pag. 719. A summe of the Popes lawes for this. his flatterers still stand for the same. So as Bellarmine, and his Ghost dare boldly affirme, that this supremacie
 of the Pope is one of the chiefest points of their faith, andBel. epist. ad Archipresb. apud Matth. Tort. of the very foundation of the Catholicke religion. Marke heere then, you my Lords the Iudges, and you the learned in our Lawes, how vnsafe that religion is for Kings, whose foundation is for the Popes authority to throw them out of their Thrones; how dangerous Iesuites, Priests, and all other Papists bee to our State, which be acquainted with the foundation and principles of that their hellish profession. For they cannot possibly be good subiects, entertaining such a religion, builded vpon such a foundation. And hence may it appeare, that it is no maruell, why Papists are such enemies to the common lawes of England; by which the lawfull authority of Kings is maintained, the Popes pride and vsurped power flatly troden vnder foot; such traitrs as Campion, Sherwin, and others, haue been indi∣cted, arraigned, tried, adiudged, and executed; and so the very foundation of that Antichristian heresie by our common Law vtterly raced, the Supremacie of our So∣ueraigne maintained, and subiects hept in due obedience, to the great tranquillity and happie peace of our present State, and welfare of the Common-wealth.
Neither are these Lawes for ciuill policy, for Prince and people onely, as they bee in a body politicke, but also for the singular benefit of the Church of God; the rights and liberties whereof the common Law maintaineth in∣uiolably: being (as one defineth the same) sanctio san∣cta,Iudge For∣tiscue. Lib. 2. de natu∣ra deorum. iubens honesta, inhibens contraria: the same in effect which Cicero saith; Lex est recti praecep∣tio, praui est depulsio. And indeed, when the Pope, with his pretended keyes of Peter, ut contrary to Saint1. Pet. 5. 3. Peters precept, would lord it ouer Gods heritage, in his
 cursed lawes and decrees, in his vncharitable vsurpati∣ons, and intolerable exactions, in his prouisions vpon the collating of benefices in his legatiue iurisdictions, in his most vniust excommunications, and in forcing such a continuall posting to Rome, and a thousand such intole∣rable burthens, and Egyptian bondages; what stayed the current of this streame? what dryed vp this corrupt fountaine, and filled vp this deouring gulph, and whirle-poole, that no more men might perish, in passing any longer too and fro, but the course of the common law of England? The Clergie was in great thraldome, and by the Popes lawes so bound and fettered, as slaues in the Turkes gallies, that they durst not so much as mutter a word against his vsurpations, encrochments, and most mercilesse cruelties; so as his power was onely opposed, and his proceedings hindred by our owne lawes, as may be seene in the booke intituled, de iure Regis Ecclesi∣astico, set out by that most learned and iudicious in the lawes of England, Sir Edward Coke, Knight.
As therefore, I vnderstanding hereby, the excellency of these our lawes, and how forcible they haue euer been against Antichristian tyrannie, not only to shake off that heauie yoke of cruell bondage, both from off the Church, and common-wealth; but also still to maintaine the ab∣solute power of Soueraigne authority, and the laudable customes and liberties of our Church, against all vniust innouations, and vsurpations: I could not (next after the highest honour to Gods law, to his Church, and to some such worthie of honour, as be in the chiefest places of au∣thoritie therein), but doe this duty of honour vnto you, my Lords the Iudges, and the worthie Societies, conuer∣sant in, and about such lawes, as (next to the law of Al∣mighty
 God) are most Christian and iust, and most pro∣fitable for our Church, (her priuiledges euer preserued entire), and for this our most happie and flourishing Common-wealth: if, if (I say) the equity of the lawes themselues (which the Lord moue you euer to obserue with vpright minds, that howsoeuer some grow despe∣rate, and bloodily disposed, yet your consciences may euer plead for you) be truly kept, and the proper and right end of them, without by-respects, only aimed at.
But here, it may be, it will be said, as some vnaduised perhaps haue already said, that this book of the Reuelati∣on little concerneth you, and therefore that this my la∣bour will not bee so acceptable to you, as I wish it might be, and indeed as I desire to haue it. Surely, except I mistake, (and, we thinke, I should not lose my aime so much, when I know of you, both religious and very ver∣tuously giuen), I write to the seruants of our heauenly Sauiour, as well as of our earthly Soueraigne; and to such as doe as well studie the lawes of God, (else farre be their counsell from me, and all men of peace), as the lawes of man: and if so, how can this booke but concerne you,Chap. 1. 1. being sent to bee shewed to the seruants of God? whose you are, and whom it shall very greatly profit, to vnderstand, what the Lord hath herein reuealed to his Church. For you (Right reuerend, the Iudges) doe see the due execution of iustice, vpon the enemies of our God and King: and you, the rest of those worthie socie∣ties, learned in our lawes, study cases, plead causes, and vrge reasons for sentence according to law, that due iu∣stice may be executed vpon Priests, Iesuites, and other traiterous spirits, set on worke by them, when they come to the barre of iustice. Now that you may euen before
 God, without any scruple, in a good conscience, iustifie the equitie of our lawes, against these enemies of the Go∣spell, and execute the due deserued punishments vpon such malefactors, as the Law in such cases hath proui∣ded, for the preseruation of the Gospell, and the safety of our King and countrey: this booke will tell you, that there is no cause, why any mans spirit should quaile in him, to aenge the Lords quarrell, in the cause of religi∣on; and our King and countreyes quarrell, in cases of high treason, and other vnmatchable villanies, vpon the heads of all those wicked ones, which carrie such trai∣terous hearts against their naturall leige Lord and So∣ueraigne. They pleade conscience of their Catholicke, as they call it, religion: which, indeed, is nothing else, but a patched profession, framed of Iudaisme, Gentilisme, and superstitious inuentions of man; a very counterfait of Christianity, but is Antichristianity it selfe. And where∣as they call themselues, the Catholicke Romane Church, they speake most absurdly, as to say, an vni∣uersall particular Church, and more absurdly, then falsly: as that right reuerend Father, the now Lord Bi∣shop of Salisburie, (Nonnullis sui ordinis praecla∣rum exemplar, cûm regendo, scit enim regere pru∣denter; tûm docendo, nam diligit Christum, vult igitur fideliter ouiculas Christi pascere), hath pro∣uedCounterproof. in the 1. part. chap. 1. against Doctor Byshop, by an argument thus fra∣med; No particular Church can bee the Catho∣licke Church: But the Church of Rome, is a parti∣cular Church; Therefore the Church of Rome, cannot be the Catholicke Church. The maior hee proueth thus: No particular Church can bee the vniuersall Church: But the Catholicke Church is
 the vniuersall Church: Therefore no particular Church can be the Catholicke Church. This false pretended title therefore, should not hoodwinke any, to blind mens eyes from beholding that Church, to be that which indeed she is, euen the very whore of Babylon, mentioned in the seuenteenth chapter of the Reuelation, as is after proued at large. So then the Church of Rome, is not Catholicke; much lesse, the Catholicke Church, and spouse of Christ. Neither is the Pope Pe∣ters successour, as he would be accounted: nor Papa, aBro. in his com. vpon chap. 9. father; but Popes, (which is in Eustathius, daemon) a diuell. In a word, that no man may mistake the Pope, and Papists, but iudge so of them, as they be, Saint Iohn telleth vs, that that company in a body (as I may say) and gouernment, is a foule monstrous Beast, like a Leo∣pard,Chap. 13. 2. Beare, and Lion, substituted by the Dragon. The Head thereof, the Pope, is the lamb-like beast, and falseChap. 13. 11. and 20. 19. Chap. 9. 1. 11. prophet, the very Antichrist, the angell ascending out of the bottomlesse pit, the starre fallen from heauen, and king of Locusts. The Iesuites and Priests, his emissa∣ries,Cap. 16. 13. 14. the very vncleane spirits like frogs, the spirits of diuels; Incendiaries, setting on fire the hearts of de∣sperate cōpanions, to do one mischiefe or other, to further their defignmēts, hardening their harts to an vnheard▪ of hellish urie, euen to blow vp at once, a whole State with gun-powder. The religious orders of those MonksCap. 9. 7. 8. 9. and Friers, the fearfully deformed and mis-shapen Lo∣custs.Chap. 11. 2. 10. The Papists, those Gentiles, and Inhabitants of the earth, which wonder after the beast, and reioyce at the murthering of Gods faithfull messengers. That Church, the whore. That City, Babylon; yea Se∣dome,Cap. 17. and 18. and 11. 8. and Egypt; at the length utterly to be destroyed.
 Let ther  good les passe in their full power and strength, against those Iebusited, rather then Iesuited, disloyall Ignatian Locusts; against the Priests pleading for their Baal, and Balaam of Rome: that these seeds-men of the mysterie of iniquitie being cut off, there may be lesse perill to our State, and lesse danger to the person of our dread Soueraigne, whom the Lord in mer∣cie preserue still from their bloody hands. Let the law al∣so, haue the due course against those obstinate Recu∣sants, which after all meek and gentle vsages to reclaime them, will not be wonne; especially such wicked Apo∣states, as doe fall from vs, in so cleere light of the Go∣spell, whose example, (if they be not made an example of iustice, according to our lawes) will doe very much harme. These, with impudent faces, discouer their who∣rish hearts to that idoll-seruice. These are they, that (a∣boue other) disgrace our religion, turning their backes vpon it, like Zimries, carrying their Cozbies, before all our Israel, into their habitations, highly prouoking Gods wrath against vs. These are they, that contemp∣tuously tread vnder foot the blood of Christs Martyrs, suffering for our religion; and that with a high hand, offend against our King and his lawes, intolerably abu∣sing his Maiesties singular clemencie; and therefore are these most sharpely to be dealt with; yet euer accor∣ding to iustice, that they may not (as wickedly and false∣ly some of them doe) complaine of cruelty. In thus do∣ing, the lawes of our kingdome shall bee to our religion a great furtherance; to Antichrists kingdome, a ruine; to our King, glory; to our Church, peace; to our Coun∣trey, safety; and to all true-hearted subiects, cause of great ioy and reioycing, when the traiterous-hearted are
 remoued from among vs. And you, the right Reuerend Iudges, and sages of the Law, shall proclaime to all men, your Zeale to religion, your hatred of Poperie, your loue to Gods people, and speciall respect to the glory and praise of God, and cause such honourable esteeme of our lawes. as is meet; and thereupon the like loue to the study there∣of, and such worthie regard vnto your persons, as shall procure a name of honour and eternall praise to all po∣sterities. The Almighty God, by the law of his spirit, in the mouthes of his messengers; and by the law of our kingdome, in the mouthes of all such as bee aduanced to high place of iustice and iudgement, consume and vtter∣ly extirpate the aduersaries of the Gospell from among vs, that we may (in peace and piety) enjoy thankfully, the blessings which the Lord in mercy, hath plentifully en∣riched this noble Iland with, and sing to his holy name all praises for euer.
 Batcombe in Somersetshire: March, 14.
