



WHat furtherance your places of Iustice bee to Iudges, sitting in the seate of iudgement, is better knowne vnto your wisedome, and learned selues, then I can any way imagine or think. Yet I, by my light obseruation, perceiue thus much, that without your vigilancie and faithful∣nesse; the Iudges cannot do, what either their pla∣ces require, or themselues desire to doe, for the good of our countrey. As therefore I haue been bold, in the zeale of God, and cause of religion, humbly to petition them: so in like manner, I be∣seech you, in your places; to doe this good for Gods Church, to search out these walking spirits of Antichrist; I meane, the Priests and Iesuites, that they may bee coniued downe by the power
 of the law and sword, which do so audaciously rise vp, with contempt of the word and spirituall po∣wer of Christ. Likewise that the statutes bee exe∣cuted vpon open Recusants, who too boldly dare to professe themselues of the Popish Church. And withall, that a circumspect eye bee had of our Church-Papists: such, as for all their open com∣ming to our assemblies, doe sufficiently in many particulars, declare themselues to be in their com∣ming to Church, the very meere seruants of men; their course at home, and abroad, being duly exa∣mined. And that you may see, what may truly, and without breach of charity, bee thought of these, IMr. Ro. B. will be bold with a godly learned friend of mine, to set downe vnto you, what he, concerning these Church-Papists, openly deliuered, as a preface be∣fore his Sermon once, at Pauls Crosse, word for word, as neere as may bee. His affirmation was this:
Conformity to the Oath of alleagianed, and other out∣ward formall satisfactions of the State, concurring with a resolution to continue in Poperie, is farre more perni∣cious to the State, then open and profest Recusancie.
I say it againe (saith hee), A follow which hath taken the oath of allegiance; first, either by power of some popish dispensation, which great men especially may easily procure, because by their wit, or worth, or high roome, they may be more horo∣riously seruiceable to the Church of Rome; or se∣condly, by proportionable deduction of some war∣rant to their consciences in that case, from that briefe of Pius Quintus, in the Queenes time, men∣tioned
 before, which any vnderstanding Papist will easily apprehend: or thirdly, by the cousoning art of mentall reseruation, of which (perhaps) some of their Priests and cunninger sort, especially of the equiuocating generation, will bee ready to make aduantage of; or fourthly, by reason of wide∣nesse of conscience, euen directly and grosly a∣gainst the corrupt notions and instructions there∣of; which is much incident to the more ignorant & inferior rank of Papists, who through basenesse and lownesse of state, are exempted from intelli∣gence with the Consistorie of Rome, and acquain∣tance with the liberty of many popish resolutions in such cases; and hauing no grounded and reall as∣surance of saluation in that profession, (which is an inseparable miserie to popish heresie), dare not hazard their temporall happinesse, for any hope of future comfort they are euer like to haue, or reape by such a miserable religion: I say, a fellow hauing thus taken the oath of allegiance, either by popish dispensation, mentall reseruation, or di∣rectly and grosly against the checke and contra∣diction of his popish conscience, is by accident, and by consequent, farre more pestilentiall to the State, then he was before, for such reasons as these:
By this formall outward false hearted-conformitie, First, he diuerts and declines the watchfull eye of state-iealousie, from ordinary excubation and vi∣gilancie ouer his popish villanies and machinati∣ons; from a more narrow particular insinuation into his vnder-ground vaults, and timely obserua∣tion of his engrossing too much gun-powder; and
 so, workes a great deale of mischiefe vnobserued∣ly; fearfully vndermines, without any countermine of policie; and concurres most dangerously with the outraged malice of that man of sinne, for the wasting of our Church, and dis-strengthening the Ste, without sense or suspition.
Secondly, he is vnworthily armed with the re∣spect and reputation of a good subiect; and so may more boysterously, and with greater brauery, wound and weaken the better side; vexe good∣nesse, and good men, more boldly without con∣trolment; and secretly promote Poperie, and hin∣der proceedings against Papists, euen with autho∣rity, and some colourable ostentations of safer po∣licie, and flourishing pretences of deeper reaches into the mysteries of State.
Thirdly, hee may thereby giue deeper wounds into the heart of the truth, through the sides of those they call Puritans; and ouer their heads doe his worst to knocke out the braines of the blessed Gospell of the Sonne of God. It is incredible, what a world of wrong and mischiefe is wrought vpon the truth which we professe, and true professours thereof, by politicke conformable Papists, vpon the wofull aduantage of certaine Ministers incon∣formitie. If such a fellow spie out a conscionable painfull Minister, and finde him obnoxious to the rigour of the law, but in the least point; and that (perhaps) out of a peacefull tendernesse of con∣science, while himselfe is in heart a ranke traitor to the State: O then he plies the aduantage with much malice and bitternesse, by informations, ag∣grauations,
 exasperations, fawning concurrence with Ecclesiasticall Courts, vntill hee haue procu∣red the putting out of that burning and shining lampe, (for he well knowes, when such lights ex∣pire, the noysome snuffe of Poperie is like e∣nough to infect that darksome place): and God knowes, all this is done, not for preseruation of peace, as he publikely pretends; but for promoti∣on of poperie, which he secretly intends. I would to God, the reuerend Bishops and Fathers of our Church, would wisely thinke of this point, before it be too late. I speake not heere any thing to har∣ten the Separatist, or any truly tumultuous; but to point out a dangerous depth of the mysterie of iniquitie, which worketh pestilently vpon such ad∣uantages. I rather pray, that all the blessings of the God of peace, both in this world, and in the world to come, may be heaped vpon his head, whosoe∣uer he be, which doth any way (with holinesse and good conscience) labour to further the peace of our too much distracted Sion.
Fourthly, he that conformes, in outward obedi∣ence, to the State, by warrant of popish dispensati∣on, must labour to recompence the Popes liberali∣ty in that kind, with some more remarkable and notorious seruice to the See of Rome. Hee shall find himselfe, out of a sense of such extraordinary fauour from that vnholy Father, bound in consci∣ence, and ingaged in congruitie, to be more ready & resolute vpon occasion or aduantage, vpon any desperate aduenture and high attempt, for the ad∣uancement of his triple infernall crowne.

Fifthly, hee that with wilfull inlargement of conscience, and secret sturdie resolution, takes the oath, will easily and naturally grow reuengefully inraged against the righteous Torturers, & cōfor∣mers of his corrupt and exorbitant conscience.
The conscience receiuing a sting, transfuseth the smart into the affections. Which when they feele, they are presently furiously inraged against the occasioners of that their bitter miserie. And therefore I am perswaded, such a fellow, so taking the Oath, howsoeuer he may beare himselfe reser∣uedly, is afterwards transported, with more vio∣lent and implacable spite, against the power of that truth, and patrons of that profession, (a sacred zeale where of hath iustly brought a racke and vexation vpon his misguided conscience), then he was before. And assuredly, if the times should turne, (which God forbid) wee should finde the Church-Papist, and the politicke conformable Psendo-Catholicke, more mercilesse and blood-thir∣stie against vs, then the Recusant. Though the best of them, no doubt, at that day, would bee as a brier, and sharper then a thornie hedge; nay euen as a woolfe in the euening. For there is no malice neere vnto the malice of Poperie, faue the malice of hell.
Vpon these grounds also, I haue thought, that as the state of a Church-Papist, obstinated in po∣perie, is most damnable in it selfe, (euen the po∣pish Doctours themselues being witnesses), as I haue proued elsewhere: (see my book of legall re∣pentāce, p. 59.) so it is most dāgerous to the State.

I speake not this to driue or deteine any Papist from the Church; for I pronounce vnto him, out of the word of life and truth, hee must flie out of Babylon, into Sion, if euer hee will saue his soule: but to let him know, that comming to our con∣gregation, he ought with humility, reuerence, and prayer, to submit his vnderstanding to illuminati∣on with truth, and his heart to sanctification with grace, both for the procurement and comfort of his owne saluation, and the contentment and safe∣ty of the State. Otherwise, as his dangerousnesse to the State is euident and extraordinary: so his owne damnation sleepeth not. For, if poperie were truth, as it is not, but the very doctrine of di∣uels; yet his state is dānable, because he should so, denie Christ before men: if it be false, as indeed it is, and most accursed from heauen, then hee iustly perisheth in his heresie.
But, it may be, some will here reply; what can possibly be more required, and exacted from these men, then conformity in outward obedience to the State? what better security, or surer bond, can be thought vpon, then an oath, the sacred and soueraigne instrument of all iustice and obedience amongst men? what further inuention of State, shall be able to stay the fearfull mischiefes, that hang hourely ouer our heads, from this malicious and murtherous generation?
I answere, none in the world, while they stay a∣mongst vs: not the most exquisite and quintessen∣tiall policie of all the wisest Sates, that lie vnder the face of the Sunne, can affoord helpe in this
 case. Idolatry is euer attended with this insepara∣ble curse, that it will plague the kingdome that nourisheth it, and pay it home at length with a witnesse, except some right round, and resolute course be taken in the meane time, for the rooting of it out. And indeed the depthes of the mysterie of iniquitie are so vnfathomable, that they cannot bee sounded by the plummet of any honest and Christian policie, without diuing into the bot∣tome of hell.
It is a right iust and holy thing, to giue them the oath, and to bring them to the Church. But their violations of oathes, dispensations, equiuo∣cations, mentall euasions, corruptions of consci∣ence, and execrable transgressions of all lawes, both of God and man, of nations and nature, are so infinite and endlesse; and they so mingle their conclusions of Sate, with the very confusions of hell; that it is euen in proportion as easie, to chaine vp those damned spirits, from tempting men vp∣on earth; as to bridle those blood-thirstie mon∣sters, from vndermining and ouerturning those States, which professe the truth of Christ, if power and meanes were answerable to their malice and reuengefull humours.
It was a royall prouidence of our gracious So∣ueraigne, in his first speech in the parliament, to admonish the Papists, that they would not so far presume vpon his lenitie, as thereupon to thinke it lawfull for them, daily to encrease their number and strength in this kingdome: whereby, if not in his time, yet at least in time of his posterity, they
 might bee in hope to erect their religion againe. But it is more then manifest, by daily and wofull experience, that their maine end, all their plots, practises, strange insolencies, & the whole sphere of a world of Papists, that swarm amongst vs, hold a strong opposition and counter-motion to that gracious counsell and first motion of his Maiesty. A blessed and happy thing had it been, had his Princely pleasure been followed in that point. For assuredly, were we rid of the Papists; and were I∣dolatry banished out of the kingdome, as in con∣science, and policy, reason, and religion, it ought: the King and his posterity, by the mercies of God, might sit vpon the throne of England, as fast as the strong and mighty mountaines vpon their sure foundations. Oh, then would the for∣raine mint and forge of popish mischiefe, discon∣tinue and expire. Iesuites, the diuels Iourneymen, would take breath, from hammering any more, their hellish powder-plots in hast. That malici∣ous and murthering generation would grow dis∣hartened and vnspirited, for matter of proiect, and conspiracie, against this noble Sate. The royall person of the King would haue none about it, but Angels, and good subiects. The concurrent furie of the greatest enemies in the world, durst not en∣tertaine a thought of inuasion, or stirre a finger a∣gainst the vnconquerable glory of our peace. For certainly, the crowne of this kingdome is incircled and surrounded with such infinite and endlesse va∣riety of popish insidiations; and stands farre more liable to the furious thirst of forraine ambitions,
 vpon this ground principally; because they hope, when time serues, to finde amongst vs, a side and faction of Papists, to serue their tume. Cut the thred of this hope; and cut the throat of all plots against the Kings person; and crush the Popes heart, for any probability, or possibility, of euer re-establishing, and erecting his accursed ty∣rannie, in this Iland againe.
Now this blessed businesse of most important and highest consequence, for the pleasing of God, security of the State, and preseruation of his reli∣gion, and royall seed, that now sits with incompa∣rable glory vpon the throne, would bee happily furthered.
First, if lawes worthily prouided in such cases, might haue their course and current, without op∣position, diuersion, partiality, interception by false friends, or any cunning defraudations and delusi∣ons of the holy intentions thereof.
Secondly, if on our side there were but halfe the care and conscience, for the maintenance of Christs truth, and extirpation of the infectious he∣resies of the man of sinne, which are incompati∣ble, both with saluation of mens soules, and the safety of imperiall Crownes: as there is curious∣nesse, and cruelty, in popish kingdomes, for the continuance of Antichristianisme; and, by a bloo∣dy inquisition into the very thoughts of men, (the greatest slauerie that euer the sunne, or the world tasted), for the banishing and barring out, euen of all possibility, (so far as in them lies) of reformatiō, plantatiō of primatiue truth, & professiō of grace.

Thirdly, and aboue all, the plantation and pro∣tection of a conscionable learned ministery, must doe the deed, when all is done, and strike the dead∣liest and irreuocable blow into the heart of the Pope, if the neuer-erring Spirit of God haue told vs the truth, 2. Thess. 2. 8. The Lord will consume the wicked man, with the spirit of his mouth. Po∣licy, State, wisedome, confederations of Christi∣an States, inuention and execution of good lawes, the disarming and disabling of the Popes vassals, and the like are very notable and needfull meanes, glorious attendants, and assistants vnto this holy worke. But the sword of the Spirit, managed by the hand of a powerfull ministery, must strike off Holosernes head; and knocke out the braines of that great Goliah of Rome, which with intolerable in∣solencie doth reuile the host of the liuing God, and trample vpon the neckes of the Lords annoin∣ted. The champions of Christ, in the battell of the great day of God Almighty, at Armaged don, may beare themselues brauely, and triumphantly: but the spirit of the mouth of the Lord Iesus, shall carry away the chiefest glory of the day, in that conquest and confusion of Antichrist, and in lay∣ing his triple crowne in the dust.
But in the meane time, (vntill the Lord put to his helping hand, for setting those means on foot, with resolution and constancie) it is a matter of prodigious amasement, to consider, how mightily impunity of popish idolatry prouokes the wrath of God against vs, & in what danger we stand; the State, the Gospell, the royall person of the King,
 the daily inualuable hope of the succession of his children, and particular welfare of euery loyall subiect in the Land. For, if any man be so void of braine, to doe himselfe and the State that wrong, as to thinke that there are not still new mischiefes on foote, and secret workings against vs still, by powder-plots, Parisian Massacres, or some pro∣portionable vilanies: let him thinke there is no diuell in hell, no Pope at Rome, no malice in the heart of a Iesuite.
Me thinks, it is an astonishment beyond the com∣prehensions of nature, reason, religion, policies of State; that such an intolerable generation, so odi∣ous both to heauen and earth, with abominable I∣dolatrie; so visibly infamous, both to this, and the other world, with many capitall characters of blood; so endlesse and implacable, in their rage∣full designments, against the crowned Maiesty of the Kings Throne; so prodigious in their plots, that they haue cast an inexpiable and euerlasting aspersion, vpon the innocency of Christian religi∣on; such furious Assasins and Incendiaries, for murthering of Princes, butchery of people, and fiering of Sates; so iraged, euen like Wolues in the euening, to swallow vs vp quicke (if the time did serue); I say, that such, in so orthodoxe a Church, and noble a State, should by allowance, toleration, conniuencie, or remissnesse, and para∣lyticall distemper of the arme of iustice, or some thing, be suffered to receiue encreasement, and multiplication, both in number, and insolencie, to the great dishonour of God Almighty, the conti∣nuall
 vexation of Gods people and good subiects, and the most certaine hazard of the whole State, and the peacefull succession of the Kings posteri∣ty. It would neuer bee, but that the Lord in his iust indignation, intends, and prepares vs for some dreadfull iudgement. And I am afraid, Papists will bee the men, to execute Gods heauie wrath vpon vs: because they are a principall matter in the meane time, of high offence against his Ma∣iesty.
To let passe infinite more of very speciall, and materiall ponderations, to this purpose; consider, I pray you, but this one point, with feeling appre∣hensions, which is able to inflame the heart of an ingenuous Heathen with extraordinary indigna∣tion. I am perswaded, there was not a Papist in this land, whatsoeuer may be pretended, or prote∣sted to the contrary, but did heartily reioyce, at the taking away of that thrice, nay thousand times noble and blessed Prince, of sweetest memorie, for which the heart of euery true subiect, did shead most worthily, euen teares of blood. Now, what a rufull case is this, that such vipers should bee nou∣rished in the bowels and bosome of this king∣dome; the breath, heart, and life whereof, they har∣tily wish, and would reioyce to haue extinguished? To conclude the whole point for the present: it is the generall ioynt consent, and current conclusi∣on of all the Christian orthodox reformed Chur∣ches vpon the face of Europe; and it is worthily, and vnanswerably demonstrated by our gracious Soueraigne, that the Pope is Antichrist; and
 Rome, mysticall Babylon. Some particular men, (out of curiosity and conceit of their owne wit, af∣fectatiō of singularity, doting addictiō to popish writers, want of further illumination in the point, partiall inclinations towards the diuinity of Rome, or the like), may dissent, without preiudice of a truth, so vniuersally resolued vpon, by Diuines of best learning, and sincerest iudgement. If so; then tell me the meaning of such places as these, and to whom the spirit of God directs the edge and execution thereof.
Reward her euen as shee hath rewarded you, and giue her double, according to her works: and in the cup that she hath filled you, fill her the dou∣ble; Reu. 18. 6.
And the ten hornes, which thou sawest vpon the beast, are they that shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eate her flesh, and burne her with fire, Reuel. 17. 16. This prediction, by the iudgement of the best diuines, hath the power, and passeth into the nature of a precept, and therefore is charged as a commande∣ment, vpon those of whom it is spoken.
These, and the like, doe indeed strongly con∣firme, and make good those three propositions of that learned man, and excellent light of Heidel∣berge, in his booke de iure regum, pag. 6. & sequ. The summe whereof may bee contriued into this conclusion: Princes and Magistrates, with their swords and scepters; Preachers, by the word and writings; priuate men, by prayer, and all lawfull opposition, ought to doe their best and vtmost, to
 bring confusion vpon that man of sinne, and his ac∣cursed doctrine. And thus to follow the counsell of the blessed Spirit, in rooting out the limbes of Antichrist, and Antichristianisme, is so farre from being persecution, that it is a very glorious ser∣uice vnto the Maiesty of the God of heauen. The neglect whereof, and impunity of Idolatry is able in short time, to shake the pillers, and distreng∣then the sinewes, to decrowne the head, and shor∣ten the raigne of the strongest State, and most po∣tent Prince in the world. Delayes are dangerous; policy to the contrary is pernicious; and conni∣uencie, cruelty; in such places where these sayings haue place, blessed shall he be, that taketh and dasheth her children against the stones, Psal. 137. 9. All yee that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrowes: for she hath sinned against the Lord, Ier. 50. 14. In as much as she glorified her selfe, and liued in pleasure, so much giue you to her, torment and sorrow, Reuel. 18. 7.
In the meane time, vntill the holy Spirits coun∣sell and commandement to this purpose, be taken to heart, and throughly put in execution, I pray the Lord to stay their rageful malice, and to turne their popish murtherous hearts, from whetting a∣ny more swords, to shead the blood of the Lords annoynted: or else, to returne the sharpest swords from the poynt, with a cutting edge on both sides, in vp to the very hilts, in their owne hearts blood. And in despite of hell and Rome, good Lord, wee pray thee, let King Iames flourish still, with a crowne of glory on his head, and a scepter of triumph in his hand; and still wash his Princely
 feete in the blood of his enemies.
Thus much I thought good to preface at this time, from this place, for the discharge of my owne conscience, and the needfull refreshing your me∣mories, with the apprehension of those dreadfull dangers, which howerly hang ouer our heads, by reason of the impunity of popish Idolatry, and the endlesse ineuitable malice and machinations of the Papists. We haue had prouocations, and war∣nings enough; from this place, from the Parlia∣ment house: from heauen, by Gods messengers; from hell by the powder-plot; from Rome, by the roring of their Buls; from France, by their massa∣cres, and butcherie of their Kings: by more me∣diate, and politicke; by immediate and miracu∣lous reuelations, discoueries, deliuerances: by a blacke and bloody catalogue of most hatefull and prodigious conspiracies, which runne parallell with the golden fine of Queene Elizabeths life; by the daily villanous libels of the swaggering run∣agates of our countrey; base and illiterate pam∣phlets, stuft with ribaldrie, and railings, and per∣sonall slanders, impudencies, out-facings, vtterly without any passage or impressions of grace, or gracious spirit. A thousand times, a thousand waies. And yet what good haue they done, sith nothing will serue the turne? Gods will must bee done. For mine owne part, I haue deliuered mine owne soule. If any will not take warning, whom it concernes, his blood be vpon his owne head.
But blessed is he, who fore-sees the storme, and hides himselfe in the meane time, vnder the wings
 of Christ, and shelter of a good conscience. With which Conclusion as hee ended, I also conclude, commending this pithie speech of my so learned a friend, to your wisedome and godly considerati∣on, your selues to Gods holy protection, and all your iust proceedings to his gracious blessing; that you may confidently looke for a reward of your well doing in the end of your dayes.
 Batcombe, March, 14.
