


Right worthy Sir,
I Reade, that in ancient times among the Ro∣manes, those were ador∣ned with the dignity of Knighthood, which had with valorous mindes ex∣ercised themselues in the warres, men of cou∣rage, and of life honest. These so qualified, were much honoured, and had many priui∣ledges granted them by the Vt fusè docet Claud. Coteraeus. de Priuilegijs, & iure Militum. Ciuill Lawe; their deserts meriting such an esteeme and their worth reward due for the same. Now,
 in a Christian Knight what can be more ex∣cellent, then by a vertuous life to worship the true God, and out of a valorous Spirit to expose himselfe vnto imminent dangers for his Countries honour and safety?
Your dignity you haue obtained in the ser∣uice of your Soueraigne, to the perill of your person, and to your large expences, in main∣tayning your choice company of Followers, in their distresses. For this your bounty haue I heard them praise you worthily, and pray for you heartily. Sure I am, you went out with a resolute band, and more then so, with a Companie, by meanes of good instruction, well ordering themselues. Your glorie stan∣deth not in the issue of the designement, being so warrantable, and honorable; howbeit it lay not in your power to make it prosperous: but in your noble resolution, wherein you may receiue comfort, Nam Con∣scientia rectae voluntatis max ima consola∣tio est rerum in∣commodarum. Cic. Fam. 6. ep. 4. and so much the more, hauing such impediments, as might seeme able to countermand you otherwise to resolue: as the gray haires of that wise Lady, your aged Grandmother, laying it to heart; your loue of that worthie Lady, your second
 selfe, so tenderly affectionated towards you; your so high esteeme and reuerence to your naturall and deare Father, so well be∣loued of his Countrey deseruedly: whose very life, I may say, (as Iudah spake to Ioseph, of his Father Jacob, concerning Beniamins returne;) was bound vp in your life, being his only Sonne, the hopefull Heire of so great an estate.
This threefold cord so strongly tying you, besides the infolded louing twists of Vn∣cles and Sisters, could not possibly haue bin vnloosed, if Generosity of Spirit had not bin predominate, and your obliged faithfulnesse to that euerlastingly-renowned name of an afflicted Princesse, bin of that commanding power to haue pressed you forward.
As at your departure, for your so praise∣worthy resolution, I did my best seruice, ac∣cording to my calling: and as at your returne, I could not neglect my dutie: so now hauing so good an occasion againe to expresse my truly honoring of you, I desire you to accept this, as a Memoriall thereof for the time to come. For, though I know my selfe by pro∣fession
 to be a Preacher of Peace, yet, in∣deed, as I euer haue, so still I cannot but mag∣nifie a valiant mind, and a Martially Spirited Gentleman, especially, if the same be accom∣panied with true piety, the Crown of Knight∣hood. Of which so qualified, the Lord, the God of hoasts, increase the number, in these dayes of warlicke imployments. And thus, in all dutifull respect, I for this present humbly take leaue.
 Batcombe, May. 22. 1626.
