



RIGHT Worshipfull: man was made for his Creators glorie; the way is to know him, to obserue his good pleasure, and with alacrity of spirit to doe his will; Though all receiue Being of him, yet most, as the Heathen, know him not at all. Some sort in the world professe him: but are little obseruatiue of his will: these onely say, Lord, Lord; and therewith rest so con∣tent: other doe aske, what he would haue done; and when they know his pleasure, they haue it onely vpon their tongue, but far from practise. Very few know with faith, and doe what they be∣leeue and know, with conscience. Turks for their liues, are as good as many Christians: and these
 no better then other, but for an idle profession. Meanes sure haue we many to amend this; as his holy word, his multitude of mercies and ma∣nifold chastisements: But the first is despised, therefore it preuaileth not: the second is vn∣thankefully abused, and mercies mooue vs not: and the last is contemned, we grow hard, and therefore o Lord saue vs, for iudgements re∣claime vs not. But the godly wise, will I hope, lay these things to heart, though most be carelesse: lest correction turne to destruction, mercies be remooued, and of the Gospel we be vtterly de∣priued. The Lord may thus doe, it is our deser∣uing; that by iustice he reuenge not himselfe of vs, it is mercy still without any mans merit God make vs thankefull, that our knowledge may cause an acknowledgment heartily, with a∣mendment seriously, so shall we enioy what we haue, and haue what yet we possesse not, for our greater good.
My words of complaint and my heartie wish tend to stirre vp some to well doing, that, if so. God please, in a world of wickednesse, there may be found Noahs preparing the Arke, and god∣ly Lots dwelling in Sodome, that when de∣struction commeth, such may find in that day fauour in Gods sight for themselues and their families. For this end I haue sent forth, with the principles of religion, and the points of Cate∣chisme,
 certaine instructions deliuered Dia∣logue wise, teaching and perswading all Chri∣stians, to a mutuall care of one an others saluati∣on, & euery houshold gouernour, with the mem∣bers thereof, to an orderly disposing of them∣selues, that Iesus Christ may dwell amongst them, and that the houses of Christians may be lodgings for the Lord, and not dennes of infidells, or habitations of diuells.
What hath bin deliuered after an other ma∣ner, the same changed for a more easie informa∣tion, I now offer (right Worshipfull) thankefully vnto you: let it please you to accept my litle la∣bour for your Worships so large kindnesse alrea∣die shewed. I do acknowledge my selfe beholden: I professe readinesse, to expresse still more thank∣fulnesse, as time shall afforde fit occasion. In the meane space I shall not cease to pray for you, that Iosuahs resolution may be euer in you, that you may follow the steppes of Father Abraham, and your good Ladie imitate the holy graces of Sarah, to your housholds happinesse, and both your endlesse comforts here and in heauen,
A∣men.
Worksoppe, August. 1.

