



THree occasions did somewhat mooue me to the publishing of this priuate Musicke; I call it priuate, for that here are Songs for one with a Violl, or 2. or 3. 4. 5. or 6. besides the portablenesse of the Booke: The first occasion was, the wandring of diuers of these Dia∣logues from hand to hand in vnperfect Coppies, neither as I meant, or made them: The second, they falling thus vnperfectly into the hands of some vnperfect practitioners, thy haue taken vpon them to mend them, (or indeede rather mard them) and haue put their names vnto them, as the original authors of them: The third occasion was, that some of my Labors in this kind, haue thus vnperfectly stolne vnto the Presse, without my will or know∣ledge; by meanes whereof, neither the hearer, nor the Authour had or hath their due right. These occasions did a little stirre me to the deliuery of my true meaning in this little worke. But a fourth occasion I confesse, did more powerfully preuaile with me then these before recited, and that was, your gracefull good likings, and louing fauours to these, and other of my harsh and vnformall Tones; following herein your honored Parents steppes, no lesse gently and mildely respecting the pouerty of the Compositions, then not neglecting the good will of the Authour; gracing me and these with your often hearing, and sundry times performing them with your owne voyces and fingers: you both being so equally iudici∣ous and exquisite in this admirable Art of Musicke, surpassing the most, and inferiour to none that euer I heard of your sexe, and in 3. or 4. seuerall sorts, besides all other your ex∣cellent gifts and parts of learning, fitting your places and callings, as I protest I was not a little troubled, (saue that there must be in each number a priority of order, you being in eue∣ry degree of perfection equall) which of your Names I should first write in this Booke.
These fauours I freely acknowledge, to be the true causes of this vndertaking, I hating ingratitude, and hauing no other meanes in part to require your goodnesse but this, doe in all humility and thankfulnesse, (and to the rich worth of your rarest perfections) dedicate this poore worke to your kinde acceptances as a testimony of my thankefull heart, for all your graces and good regards had of me for these, and these for me from time to time And if it please you, still to respect and accept my humble heart (in this Action) according to my hope, in protecting this poore and vnpollished peece, it shall be none of the least of your loues, you gracing this endeauour with your Names, I shall not doubt but that your reputations (being knowne to be full of all vertue and modesty, as also of iudgement equall to your practise in this learned science,) will stop the blacke mouth of each rashly forward ignorant, who being not able to doe any worthy thing himselfe, will not be pleased with others that striue to doe their best; and out of pride and arrogant boldnesse would assume his owne greatnesse, with pressing other mens supposed disgraces. Thus, presuming of your gentle mildnesse, together with your sweetest tempered construction of this my bold ad∣uenture, I leaue you to the ensuing sounds, as also to the hope of the heauenly harmonies hereafter; neuer leauing to be the true admirer of all your reall vertues
Bassingshaw in London this 15. of May, 1620.

