




THE wisdom of God doth thus professe and pro∣claime to the sonnes of men;Prou. 8.15, 16. By mee Kings raigne & Princes de∣cree iustice. By mee Princes rule and Nobles, euen all the Iudges of the earth. Hereby giuing man to wit, that the higher powers,Rom. 13.1. or
eminency of authoritie, and order of magistracy, supreme and subordinate, 1 Pet: 2.13. is the ordination of God. Which how∣soeuer it be called an ordinance of Man in respect either 1. of Man the subiect, by whom it is exercised. or 2. of Man the obiect, about whom it is conversant. or 3. of Man, the end to whose good it tendeth; yet is still the gift and in∣stitution of God, the primary author and prouident ordeiner. For there is no power,Rom. 13.1. but of God: The powers that be are ordeined of God, to which submission must be yeelded by inferiors for conscience sake to God.v. 5. Which well-ground Maxime whosoeuer shall denie, he is worthy to be thrust out with Nebuchadnezzar to liue among beasts,Dan: 4.32. (vnworthy the society of men) vntill he know that the most High ruleth in the kingdome of men, and giueth it to whomsoeuer he will. He that is higher than the highest,Eccles. 7.8. the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,1 Tim. 6.15. the most mighty Creator and most wise disposer of all things,Dan. 2.21. who remoueth Kings
and setteth vp Kings, hath instamped his image of soueraigntie in Kings and Caesars, set the Crowne vpon their heads, put the scepter into their hands, and created them chiefe Monarches, in their territories and dominions, ouer all others, next vnder himselfe. And from and by them (through the like impression made) God deriues vnto other Prime persons vnder them, their eminent di∣gnitie, in places of lawfull authoritie. So that Vice-Royes, and all others, in their seuerall rankes of gouernment, do beare the stampe and impression of God, and the King, more or lesse, accordingly answerable to their distinct and seuerall orders and degrees.
Moreouer; the better to establish and ratifie this wholsome ordinance, in this excellent eutaxie, and to grace and safe∣guard the persons of these Delegates, as sacred and inviolable, in their com∣missiue authoritie. God honoureth them with his owne stile and title of Gods;Psal. 82. v. 1.6. v. 7. not as if they were such of their owne nature and being (for so they are but
men, and die they must like men, and remaine accountant to him, the great God, for their dealings towards the meanest man) but through his grace communicating thus farre his regencie vnto them. And so they are as Gods among men (as bearing Gods image in their power ouer men) and Gods vnto men,Hom, homini Deus. . as a common good of Gods pro∣uiding (in faithfull dispensation of their function) for the good of men.
Yet further; as Magistrates are Gods creation, and ordination, in regard of their function; so are they dependant on God, for abilitie to the execution of their function, which they receiue from his effectuall dispensation & prouidence. Counsell is mine (saith wisdome) and sound wisdom:Prou. 8.14. I am vnderstanding, I haue strength. Mortall men must in no wise glory in any their owne strength or wisdome, with the proud King of Assyria, lest it proue costly to them as it did vnto him.Isai. 10.12, 13. From Gods gracious gift they receiue their annoynting, other hearts with Saul,1 Sam. 10.9. vnderstanding
hearts with Solomon to iudge the people.1 King. 3.9, 12. And thus invested with these singular endowments, as with princely diademes,Job 29.14. and richly furnished with those heroicall virtues, of wisdom, coun∣sell, fortitude, and feare of the Lord, they grow vndaunted for courage, and constant for resolution, in vndertaking & vndergoing of weighty imployments; faithfull in dispatch of worthy serui∣ces; vnweariable for indeuour in spee∣dy performances; and invincible for patience, in induring oppositions, and clamors, of all those sons of Belial, who despise dominion,Jude v. 8. 2 Pet. 2.10. speake euill of dignities, or will not yeeld obedience to wholsome lawes, nor submit their necks to needfull discipline.
Finally; that all may be well, and all, say we, is well that ends well. The good∣nesse of the end doth highly commend the goodnesse of the act. Now the end of all acts in Magistracy (aswell as in Ministerie) must be squared by that the Apostles Canon, let all things be done vnto edifying: and nothing must
be done idly or vnprofitably,. Basil. tending to no good end and purpose. Gouernors must therefore in all their acts and de∣signes, ayme at the right end and scope of gouernment, the glory of God in the good of men. Which end shall be most happily atchieued, if they shall princi∣pally eye and respect both the Tables of Gods law, whereof they are the Great-Lords Keepers. Religion or piety to God, in the first Table, the basis and foundation of a truly-prosperous politie: And equitie and iustice to man, in the second, the nerues and sinewes of hu∣mane society. Thus when Magistrates ayme at these ends in gouernment; that religion be entertained, the Gospell coun∣tenanced, and piety promoted; and, that innocencie be defended, right preserued, and vice punished; and, that all be righted, none wronged. Then shall Church and Common-weale ioyntly and mutually liue and loue, grow prosperous and renowmed, and God shall haue glory from the well-orde∣red communities of men, and men
felicitie in blessed communion with God.
Now all prosperous successe, in vse of best meanes for atchieuing these ends, must be expected and fetched from the blessing of God,. Joh: 3.27. without whom no mortall man can euer proue happy. For a man can receiue nothing vn∣lesse it be giuen him from heauen: No counsells of man proue healthfull and successfull, vnlesse God assist, and giue a blessing. Which meditation is the argument of that heauenly hymne, com∣piled by Dauid for his son Salomons vse, or by Salomon himself,Psal: 127. instructed of God with deep wisdom-politicall, for his owne:v. 1. Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vaine that build it; except the Lord keep the Citie, the watchman waketh but in vaine. It is in vaine for you to rise vp early, to sit vp late, to eat the bread of sor∣rowes; for so he giueth his beloued sleepe. The building of the house, the watching of the Citie, early vp-rising, and late downe-sitting, assiduous labour,
and carking care are all in vaine, vnles God assist and giue a blessing. And so doth Gregory Nazianzene most ele∣gantly paranomaze the summe and sub∣stance of that diuine Psalme.

.
which memorable Distick I thus, in homely English, expresse.
If God giue good successe, enuie can not preuaile.
If God denie successe, labour can naught auaile.
If God from heauen shall blesse and prosper, what force or fraud below can crosse or controll? But, if God from heauen shall crosse and curse, what power or wit of man shall not proue vaine and frustrate? The fencing of Kingdomes, and safe-guarding of Coun∣tries with wholsome lawes and politicall constitutions, with Armies and Nauies, with trenches & bulwarks, with leagues and alliances; yea, with infinite heapes
of gold and siluer (which Dionysius esteemed the adamantine bonds of Empires) is all in vaine,Adamantina vincula imperi∣orum. vnlesse God assist and giue a blessing. Most deliberate counsels and best designed attempts faile of good successe, for want of Gods bles∣sing; to rebuke the pride of mans pre∣suming weaknesse. And weaker meanes vsed, in want of stronger, through di∣uine assistance, work wonderfull effects; to correct mans diffidence, and to worke dependance on God: according to those precepts and promises.Psal. 37. v. 3. Trust in the Lord and doe good: so shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed.v. 4. Delight thy selfe also in the Lord, and he shall giue thee the desires of thine heart. Commit thy way vnto the Lord;v. 5. trust also in him, and he shall bring it to passe. And according to that most memorable practise: we know not what to doe, but our eyes are vpon thee.
And that the flourishing state of Common-wealths springs out rather from the blessing of Gods diuine proui∣dence,
then from the best fore-cast of humane prudence, History, the witnes of times, and light of truth, doth plainly testifie. To which also Heathens doe giue their suffrages from the dim sight of humane obseruation.Vbi non Deus sed mortalis ali∣quis prae st, ibi malorum nullū est effugium. . 4. Dei ope & aux∣ilio multò magis Rmpubl. Rema∣nam quam ra∣tione hominum & consilio gu∣bernari. Cic. pro Rabitio. For so Plato professeth of Common-weales in com∣mon: Where not God but some mortall man is president, there's no auoydall of any euill. And Cicero of the Romane state in speciall: The Romane state was prosperously go∣uerned much rather by the aide and helpe of God, than by mans reason and counsell humane.
And in a word, that nothing can be well done, and happily succeede in Citie or familie, Church or Common-wealth, without the good will and good worke of God,Ephes. 1.11. who worketh all things after the counsell of his own will, S. Paul doth intimate, when he earnestly ex∣horts, That first of all supplications,1 Tim 2. v. 1. v. 2. prayers, intercessions, and giuing of thanks be made for all conditions of men: for Kings and for all that are
in authoritie, that, through Gods good blessing on their good indeuours, we their subiects, in our inferior condition, may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godlinesse and honestie.
The summe of all, in short, is this: Kings as supreme, and other gouer∣nors as sent by God and them,1 Pet. 2.13, 14. doe re∣ceiue their high places, and princely gra∣ces, their function and execution, voca∣tion and dispensation, authoritie and abilitie, and all happy successe and good fruit in gouernment, for the weale and welfare of themselues and theirs, from that all-wise and all-ruling Monarch, great Counsellor, and Law-giuer, the essentiall wisdome, the son of God,Isal. 9.6. Jam: 4.12. who (with the Father, and Holy Spirit, one true God) is the blessed and onely Po∣tentate, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords,1 Tim: 6.15. the King eternall, immor∣tal, invisible, and only wise,1 Tim. 1.17. to whom from them all in all their designes is to be giuen, as the maine end of their go∣uernment, all honor and glory for euer and euer. Amen.

Now, Right Honorable Lord, and Reuerend Sages, most wise and worthy interpreters of Law, and Dispensers of Iustice, great Guardians, vnder God and King, of Church and Common-wealth, as I freely acknowledge to the glory of God and honour of the King (for which I blesse God on the knees of my heart) that God hath blessed this Land with many true Worthies, on Benches in Courts of equitie and iustice (bright∣shining stars, restlesse in motion, in their orbe of gouernment:) so I most hum∣bly beseech you to giue leaue to me, your seruant in the Lord, (without your cen∣sure) from sincere affection, and duti∣full respect to your persons, to put you in minde of that which you know right well (being so well furnished with wis∣dome humane and diuine) and I am well assured (on my small obseruation, and short experience) you endenour to practise (through the spirit of grace in∣spiring and inabling you) for discharge of that trust reposed in you in your pub∣like imployments, in this body politique,
by our gracious GOD, and our religious KING.
The thing is this.
Sith the God of heauen and earth is the first mouer, in his supreme orbe of gouernment, all you his secondarie mouers, in this your orbe of gouernment, in this heauen of our politie, ought to moue after the will and ordination of God, and not (as in that other Heauen) by any rapt motion from your priuate affection, nor yet irregular from inor∣dinate passion, nor by that of trepidation for feare of mortall man. You must in your motion run the same course, or vse the same end with God himselfe; name∣ly, the glory of God, in our good of Church and Common-wealth, which, as the lower earth, are preserued and che∣rished, with heauenly influence, through your well-ordered and well-ordering motion. And such subordination will surely cause an heauenly harmony, and heart-pleasing consent, in a circular re∣uolution thus.
God is the ordeyner of our King,
the King the image of God, the Law the worke of the King, Iudges interpreters of our Law, Magistrates with them di∣spensers, Iustice our fruit of Law di∣spensed, this fruit of iustice the good of the people, the good of the people the honour of our King, this honour of our King, the glory of God, the ordeiner, orderer, and blesser of all. And so in this regular and circular revolution, all mo∣tion begins in God, and ends in God, for mans felicitie, and Gods glory, infinitely, and eternally.
Great, you see, is your honour: as great is your charge. A double charge; from God,Deut. 17. v. 18, 19, 20. from King. God chargeth the King: God and King (whose Mi∣nisters and sword-bearers you are) haue charged you.Rom. 13.4. Your office then of Magistracie (as ours of Ministery) is not so much nomen honoris as oneris.Aug: de Ciuit. Dei l. 19. c. 19. Your desire must therefore be, not so much praeesse, as prodesse, to beare rule as to profit,. Luc: 21.25. to be benefactors, for the good of men; that is your end, who are publique Patrons, & oracles of your
Country, Hauens, and Refuges to poore distressed ones. Your symbole must be that of Alphonsus,Alphons. Nea∣politan. Rex. The Pelican with her own bill picking and drawing bloud out of her owne breast, with this inscri∣ption, Pro lege & pro grege:Magistraus virio ostendit. Arist. ex Bi∣ante. Herein will Magistracie shew your man∣hood.
Lastly, where as these matters of iudg∣ment are disposed and dispensed not by your selues alone, but by many other in∣ferior organs and instruments, who need due inspection and daily information;. Hom. . as interpreters of Law instruct them; as Moderators of Iustice direct them; as charged your selues of God and King to doe iustice, lay great charge on them; yea, as armed with power coactiue, by vertue thereof (as far as shall be law∣full and needfull) as Guardians of equi∣tie, vrge them to doe, what God and King, law and conscience, equitie and honestie exact at their hands; that this chaste Virgin Iustice be not by them deslowred,Hesiod. that conscience of crime (in vnrighteous dealing) may not in∣wardlyHieron. epist.
wound their consciences at home, nor their name and familie outwardly besmeared with iust re∣proch and ignominie abroad: But that good right be maintained, good conscience discharged, good name preser∣ued; that God may be honoured,. Gods people benefited, the Common-wealth cherished, the Church inlarged, our com∣munion with God and society with men may become most comfortable, happy, and blessed, while iudgment and iustice are equally dispensed of all manner per∣sons vnder God and King, as from God, by God, and for God; as is more largely declared in this insuing Treatise; which, being heretofore once vttered by me, and now drawne into publique by effectuall perswasion of others, I now make bold to present to your Honours, and Worships, because it concernes you all, though for manner not so worthy (as I well could wish) your learned wis∣domes view and approbation. Well ho∣ping, that, in your priuacie and retired∣nesse from your weighty imployments,
you will please to peruse it, couering what faults and slips you espie therein, with your robes of loue, and Christian Charitie,1 Pet: 4.8. not looking at my want of discharge of my dutie (which I ingenu∣ously acknowledge, and sue for pardon thereof at the hands of God and you) but at the better discharge of your owne (whereto this my poore labour, as a weake meane, would further): For so you stand charged of God, and the King: Take heede therefore what yee doe,2 Chron: 19.6. for yee iudge not for man but for the Lord. And the Lord be with you in the iudgment. Amen.

