


MOST EXELLENT PRINCE. Hauing by more then ordinarie sig∣nes, tasted heretofore of your gra∣tious favour: and evidently knowen your Princely and Generous inclinati∣on, to all good Learning and excel∣lencie. I am emboldened once aga∣ine, to offer vp at the Altar of your gratious acceptance these mine Em∣blemes: a weake (I confesse,) and a worthlesse Sacrifice, though an assured pledge, of that Zeale and Duetie, I shall for ever most Religiouslie owe vnto your Highnes: shewing herein rather a will to desire, then worth to deserue, so peerelesse a patronage. Howsoever the world shall esteeme them in regard of their rude and homely attire, for the most part they are Roially discended, and repaire into your owne bosome (farre from the reach of Envie) for their protection. For in truth they are of right your owne, and no other then the substance of those Divine Instructions, his Ma∣iestie your Royall Father praescribed vnto you, your guide (as that golden branch to AENEAS,AEneid 6.) to a vertuous & true hap∣py life. It is now two yeares since I presēted vnto your High∣nes some of them, then done by me into Latine verse, with their pictures drawen and limned by mine owne hand in their liuely coulours; wherein, as neere as I could, I obserued the Method of his Maiesties BASILICON DORON, but by reason of the great number I had since that, newly invented: with some others collected, (tieng my invenon to o one

Subiect as before) I am here constrained aswell of Necessitie as for varietie sake, to intermixe (as it were promiscuè) one with the other in one entire volume, the rather because of their affinitie & end, which is one and the selfe same, that is, the fashioning of a vertuous minde. I dare not discourse at large vnto your Highnes, of the manifold Vse, Nature, Li∣bertie, and ever esteemed exellencie of this kind of Poesie: it being the rarest, and of all others the most ingenious, and wherein, the greatest Princes of the world, many times haue most happily exercised their Invention: because I doubt not, but your Highnes already knoweth whatsoever I might speak herein. Onely what I haue done, I most humbly offer vp the same vnto your gratious view, and protection. Desiring of GOD to beautifie and enrich your most hopefull & Heroique minde, with the divinest giftes of his grace, and knowledge, heartily wishing, there were any thing in me, worthy of the least favour, and respect of so excellent a Prince.
To your Highnes, The most sincerely and affectionately devoted in all dutie and service.

