



MAy I be bold (you valiant men of warre, and Souldiers of Christ) to speake vnto you? Then prepare your selues a∣gainst the Romish Midianits, and shoute with courage, say∣ing; For the Lord, and for our Gideon, at the day ap∣pointed: for the time draweth on, to auenge the bloud of the Saints vpon Babylon, that where of Rome. Be∣hold the progresse, and whereto wee now are come, that you may looke for the ruine of that mother of where∣domes, and abominations of the earth. The Angell sworeChap. 10. 6. solemnely, long since, that there should be time no longer; and the kingdoms since then, are become the kingdomsChap. 11. 15. of our Lord, and of his Christ, so as he shall reigne from this time forth for euer. The Church shall florish more
 and more: but the enemies power shall be diminished. Wrath is vpon them, though they see it not. For this is the time of the pouring foorth of the vials, the last plagues of God, vpō that Antichristiā state; and they areChap. 16. to be poured out, by such instrumēts of the true Church, as God shall raise vp. And though I cannot conceit, that this prophecie pointeth at any one particular kingdome, or person, to say, this is the man, this is the Countrey, that shall sacke Rome: yet when we see what hath already fal∣len out, according to things foretold, and by whom the Lord hath effected the same, wee ought to giue glorie to God, and also acknowledge those his instruments raised vp, either in other places, or here among our selues, to do his will; and by former acts of God done by any of our Nation, wee may (and not without reason) coniecture, what may after be effected by vs, the prophecie it selfe speaking rather for, then any way against the same.
The destruction of the Popedome must be by degrees, and the same effected by the power of God in vs of the reformed Churches. For the Angels that must plague that earthly state, come out of the Temple, the type of the true Church, as is cleere by the prophecie it selfe. These,Chap. 15. 6. and 16. 1. all of them, are commanded to poure out their plagues vpon the Earth, which is the generall tearme giuen to set out that worldly and Antichristian state. Which commandement they fulfill, and execute the decree of God vpon the seuerall parts thereof, one after another. As first, vpon the Earth of that Earthly state. And in this worke, the Lord employed, as in Bohemia, and else∣where, others; so specially in this our Realme, that va∣liant Iehu, the renowned King, Henry the eight, who tooke away the lands and possessions here, from the Anti∣christian
 Locusts, dissoluing Abbeyes, and Monesta∣ries, sending that hellish rabble packing home againe to their grandsire the Pope, that king of the Locusts. Then in the next place, wrath is poured out vpon the Sea of that Earthly state, which is the Ecclesiasticall part there∣of, touching the idolatrous seruice, and worship of that man of sinne. And in this thing, the Lord vsed (I ex∣empt not here Gods worke by men in other places) that our blessed Iosias, the noble Prince, Edward the sixth, renouncing that false seruice and idolatrous worship, establishing Gods true worship among vs. In the third place, is the viall of wrath poured vpon the Riuers and fountaines of that Earthly state, that is, both vpon the heretical, and traiterous doctrines of that Sea of Rome, full of poyson, and plots of villanies; and also vpon the Teachers thereof, which come like riuers and fountains from thence, and returne backe to the same againe: all tending, to seduce people from the truth, to withdraw subiects from their allegiance, that the Romish state, whorish religion, and Sea of Rome might still be main∣tained. In this the Lord our God set on worke, that most high and mightie Princesse ELISABETH, Semper eandem, a Queene of euerlasting memory, (their name rot, that doe her not honour) a zealous professor, a true defender of the faith, a succour to all her friends and fa∣uourers of religion, a hater of Poperie and Romish pope∣lings, enemies of the truth, a myrrour to the world, and a terror to all that bare ill will to Sion, and against whom she had to doe; blessed be her name for euer. Her Ma∣iesties royall authoritie made these Riuers and foun∣taines, bloud; by causing it (and that most iustly) to be death for any Iesuits or Priests, to come with their he∣resies,
 and treasonable purposes, into her dominions; and for any of her subiects so to receiue them, duly executing the lawes vpon them: who so therefore had (as they wor∣thily deserued, and according to the words of this pro∣phecie)Chap. 16. 5. 6. bloud giuen them to drinke, for shedding the bloud of the Saints & Prophets of God. In the fourth place, the wrath of God is poured vpon the Sunne of that Earthly state; that is, vpon that, which, as the sunne in the firmament, is in that state most glorious, giuing that lustre and shine vnto it, as the Sunne vnto the Earth. And this is the Popes supremacie, vpon which wrath is come, and the viall of contempt is begun to be poured vpon the same. And in this hath our gracious God set on worke, the most high and mightie Monarch of great Brittaine, our now dread Soueraigne, our wise Salomon; whose most learned penne, in his Maiesties owne Preamble to his reprinted Apologie, hath made knowne to the Christian world (for which I say, and all Gods people; O King, liue for euer), that the supremacie of the Pope, is a proud vsurpation; that hee hath been (and of due, still ought to be) subiect to Em∣perours and Kings, who are to challenge their right of him, and to take it out of the hands of that Antichristian Tyrant, that blasphemous vsurper of Gods place; who will be as God in the temple of God, yea the most greatSee Morneus his preface to the mysterie of iniquitie. and excellent God on earth, as the stile must runne of Paul the 3. Horrible blasphemy! Marueile it was, that the thunder bolt of vengeance smote him not dead from heauen. But great is the Lords patience: therefore will these monsters of men still exalt themselues, and Paulus Quintus will euen now be Vice-God; and boast of hisLib. Benedicti de Benedictis Bouoniae excuss. Anno 1608. power, being called the inuincible Monarch of the
 Christian Common-wealth, and the most valiant Protector of the Pontifical power. But oh! how sud∣denly should he perish, and come to a fearefull end; if the Lord would make a combination of the hearts of Chri∣stian Kings against him, and his inuincible Monarchi∣call power in his pontificality? He would then, like Zid∣kijah, that false Prophet, runne from chamber to cham∣ber, seeking where to hide himselfe. But let him boast, and presume of his preuailing, till the time come, that the Beast be pulled out of his throne, and his kingdome become full of darknesse; which indeede is now the next thing, after the viall poured vpon the Sunne, that must come to passe. For the fifth viall must be poured vpon the Seate of the Beast, which is Rome it selfe, for thereChap. 16. 10. the Beasts seate is; as it was before, the seate of the Dra∣gon,Chap. 13. 2. which he gaue vnto the Beast.
They are vnder, we see, now, the fourth viall. The fift therefore is the next, euen Romes ruine. Looke for it, in the due time, (O you valiant hearts). And when the houre commeth, feare not: but, I say, as did Ioab to Dauids armie, going to battell against the enemies of God, and their King, Be of good courage, and play2. Sam. 10. 12. the men; let your swords then doe seruice for God, and his Church: and take heed (you hoste of God) of that say∣ing, which Ieremy pronounceth in the like case; Cur∣sed be he, that doth the worke of the Lord negli∣gently, or deceitfully: and cursed be hee that kee∣peth backe his sword from bloud. These be the A∣malekites, which God hath determined vtterly to roote out. Fight ye therefore valiantly, and with stout coura∣ges. The cause is Gods. Hee will be with you, and vn∣doubtedly fight for you. Reward her (saith the Lord)
 as she hath rewarded you, and double vnto herChap. 18. 6. double, according to her workes: and, in the cup she hath filled, fill to her double; onely, in the Zeale of God, for the cause of religion, and hate of Antichri∣stianisme. Let not (you Sonnes of valour) iust pietie lose her perfect worke, for fleshly and foolish pitie. For thus to repay her, is the Lords owne commandement, which may not be transgressed.
But it may be, you will say to me, that you perhaps shall not be employed herein. Well, for this, know for your comfort (you that desire this honor), that this most noble Iland shall not haue the least hand in this glorious enterprise, when the time appointed shall come. For what kingdome in all Christendome, hath God made so renow∣ned in the cause of religion, as this? Was it not our Constantine, that made a world of Christians? Our Lucius, that was the first Christian Monarch? Who was so valiant and powerfull a Champion for Christ, in the time of darknesse, before him, as our Iohn Wick∣liffe? You haue heard, how the Lord hath set on worke, our valiant Henry; our noble Edward; our famous Elizabeth; and now, our most learned and renowned King. What Nation gaue euer the Pope, and Spanish power, such an ouerthrow, as this did, in the yeere 88? Hath not the Lord hitherto, euer made vs one, for his name, Church, and people, against that Antichrist? and can you thinke, he will passe vs ouer in the last act of the tragicall end of Rome? Are not we one of the ten hornes,Chap. 17. 11. 12. that gaue our kingdome once to the Beast? For who went at the Popes commaund, to the holy Land, sooner then we? Who defended the Pope, more then we? What kingdome, according to the power thereof, enriched the
 Popes coffers, so much as we? What King yeelded vp his Crowne to the Popes Legate, but ours? Thus were wee for him, and so shall wee be against him. And, as theChap. 17. 2. Where made our Kings to loue her, and to commit for∣nication with her: so haue they begun to hate her, andChap. 17. 16. still shall, and be with those, as chiefe, that shall make her desolate, and naked, and eate her flesh, and burne her with fire. Consider this, you that be wise hearted, why aboue all other Nations, they haue sought to inuade vs: and why they assay by vnheard of, and vnmatchable villanies, to roote vs out from vnder heauen, if it were possible. Why the Popes Bulls so terribly rore against vs. Why those spirits of Diuels busie themselues so much a∣bout vs. Can any other reason be giuen, thē this, that the Diuell their Lord, and our deadly foe, suggesteth into them, that wee are, and shall be, one of the greatest meanes, vnder God Almightie, to bring an vtter ouer∣throw and desolation to that Antichristian state? And doe wee not all know, that there is a miraculous prote∣ction of the highest, in soueraigne authoritie? Who durst once touch King Henry the 8, who shaked that Romane state, and made it to totter? What fiend durst be-bloudie his murthering hands in Prince Edward, though hee young, did tread popish religion vnder foote? But won∣derfull was the preseruing hand of God vpon the late Queene; and no lesse ouer our now dread Soueraigne, when other haue elsewhere been cut off. And surely so long as we soundly maintaine, and vphold the faith, and truth of the Gospell, not fearing what the man of sinne can doe against vs, in spite of hell and Rome, of the Pope and all his power, we shall stand safe and sure, vnder the Almighties powerfull protection; till gloriously, in that
 day of Romes vtter ruine, we triumph ouer them. Euen so, Amen. And till then, for all you, that be readie to draw your swords in this quarrell of Christ, for Christ, our King and Countrey, I heartily wish, fauour with God, honour with our King, a faithfull and holy resolution in your selues, victorie ouer the enemies, praise of the Saints, and after this life, the reward of eternall glorie in heauen, for euer and for euer.
 Batcombe in Somersetshire: March, 14.
