



OVr blessed day of Grace, (Right honourable Lord) in this bright sun-shine of the Gospell in this Land, as it affordeth vnto vs happie opportunitie, so it exacteth of vs studious endeauour for prudent foresight, and timely prouision of things most be∣hoouefull for our future vse.Luc. 19.42. And oh that we would know, euen we, at least, in this our long and faire Summers-day, the things which belong to our eter∣nall peace!
We fairely beare our selues and others in hand, that our Couenant with God of life and peace,Mal. 2.5. is firme and sure, euen euerlasting: because the word of this couenant is still remaining with vs,
and that God will not turne away from vs to doe vs good:Iere. 32.40. because the Lords goodnes is yet magnified toward vs. And surely the Lord will not be vnmindfull of his Couenant with vs, nor vnfaithfull in performance of his promise to vs,Psal. 103.17.18. if we start not backe, and prooue vnfaithfull, but keepe couenant and promise with the Lord our God.2. Chro. 15.2. The Lord is with vs, while wee are with him: if wee seeke him, he will be found of vs: but if wee forsake him, he will forsake vs. Are our hearts then vpright toward the Lord? and is the feare of God (euen godlinesse) with∣in our hearts?Esa. 55.3. If this be so, O happie wee, and euer blessed! for then shal our soule liue, and the Lord will make his Co∣uenant euerlasting with vs, euen the sure mercies of Dauid.
True indeede (Gods name be praysed) Christs true religion (the Doctrine of Godlinesse) is by wholsome lawes of our most gracious Soueraigne, constant De∣fender of the true Faith, most firmely established: by a good part of his Maiesties most loyall subiects sincerely embraced:
and generally approued or formally profes∣sed of all, vnlesse of those vnhappie Ro∣mish Nurselings, who haue more deepely drunke of the golden cup of that Babi∣lonish strumpet,Reuel. 17.4.5. whose soule-killing poi∣son doth secretly spread to more dangerous infection, within the wombe of our com∣plaining Mother; complaining (I say) be∣cause her life is in daily hazard by them, and yet she can neither cure and heale them as her heart desireth: nor yet be cured and eased of thē, as her safetie would require. God graunt her mildnes toward them cre∣ate not new dangers against herselfe.
Did the power and practise of Godli∣nesse in the rest, attend the forme and shew thereof, then had she not cause of so great complaint, but matter of ioy and good contentment, to see her children grow and prosper in Godlinesse, though this vipe∣rous broode lie still crawling and gnawing within her bowels. But, alas! alas! our times are perilous, our estate dangerous:2. Tim. 3.1. the world is a gainer: God a looser. And howsoeuer God hath graciously giuen all things that belong to life and god∣linesse,2. Pet. 1.3.
yet is there but little increase, or embrace of Godlinesse, either in heart, or life. Many through blindnes are sottishly ignorant of it, and cannot be brought to sight of their miserie without it. Many through securitie are carelesse of it, and will not be affected with any liking to it. Some through weakenes grow ashamed of it, and are affraid to vndergoe any hard∣ship for it. Many through lewdnesse are a shame vnto it, and by their inordinate li∣uing bemire and deface it. And it is well, if some through profanesse would not out∣face and shame it, and by their gracelesse impietie oppose against it. Many by an art of seeming haue painted their faces, but want the trueth and substance of being in the heart. Many through sacietie grow weary of this Manna, and their full sto∣macks begin to loath this honie-comb.Numb. 11.6. Prou. 27.7. And many hauing walked with God on earth, are daily taken hence to liue with Christ in heauen. Now while so many are seduced by the errour of the deuill: so many are enthralled by the lusts of the flesh: so many are insnared with the allurements of
the world: and many of the best are remo∣ued from earth to heauen: where doeth the sound Christian, and true godly man ap∣peare? or if he be seene, as (God be than∣ked he is) yet his life and courage is not such, it may be feared, as once it was, or now ought to be. Oh, what shall become of Religion in this land, if our first loue to religion shal languish in vs?Reu. 2. v. 4. or what shall become of vs in this land,verse. 5. if our Candle∣sticke be once remoued from vs?Iere. 9.1. Psal. 119.136. Foun∣taines & riuers of heart-bleeding teares suffice not to bewaile our sinnes, which threaten our miserie; nor to preuent our miserie, deserued by our sinnes. The Lord in his great mercie graunt vs grace to know the time of our gracious visitation;Luc. 19.44. and to bethinke our selues of the things that belong to our peace, last hereafter they he hidden from our eyes.
Oh that we could, in time, grow wise in heart, and rich in grace, and nourish the feare of God (euen godlinesse) within our hearts! Then would the Lord surely re∣ioyce ouer vs, to doe vs good,Iere. 32.40. and still plant vs in this land with his whole
heart, and with his whole soule. No power nor plot of wicked enemies shall pre∣uaile against vs, if the God of power and wisedome be loued and embraced of vs. The Lord will soone subdue our ene∣mies,Psal. 81.14. and turne his hand against our aduersaries. No want of good or sense of euill shall discontent vs, if this gaine of godlinesse be fully possessed of vs. Where∣fore it behooueth all, from the highest to the lowest to giue care to that godly exhor∣tatiō of that religious Ruler Iosua, Feare the Lord,Iosh. 24.14.15. and serue him in sinceritie, and in truth. Or if the foolish and vnhap∣pie multitude will not embrace such bles∣sed counsell; but it seeme euill to them to serue the Lord, yet must euery wise and couragious Iosua put on this constant resolution, as for me and my house, we will serue the Lord. What is that seruice of God in that holie resolution of that cou∣rageous Captaine, but the exercise of that Godlinesse which ruled in the heart of that religious Ruler? What was the groūd of his resolutiō, but godly contentmēt; whereby he rested wel-pleased in his sound
Religion, and estate now enioyed in this seruice of God? And what was the benefit he thence expected, but this great gaine of Godlines; euen fruitiō of blessednes, in communion with the true God? This is that oyle (the oyle of Grace) which those wise virgins prouided in the ves∣sels of their hearts,Math. 25. v. 4. and did furnish their Lamps of their profession therewithall. This cheered their hearts with sweet con∣tentment in their tedious expectation of the tarying bridegrome, and readily guided them to the wedding chamber, where they did enioy this great gaine of godli∣nesse, the joyfull companie of their blessed bridegrome, in eternall societie of felicitie and glory. Our profession is the same with theirs: our practise also should be the like. Let vs therefore hold fast our professi∣on,Hebr. 4.14. that outward professiō of our hope,Hebr. 10.23. without wauering: but not a seeming semblance without the truth & substance in the heart.Hebr. 13.9. It is good that the heart which is naked to God, bee establi∣shed with grace, and that the life also which is open to men, be holie and vn∣blameable,
as becommeth Saints. That the glorious excellencie of grace in the heart,Psal. 45.7. being adorned with the ve∣stures of golden profession and practise of life, the kings daughter may be a fit spouse for her bridegrome. God cannot approue of the truthlesse shew of godlinesse in our life, when the heart is not inwardly sound and sincere. Neither can we gaine ought by seeming rich in grace, when we are,Apoc. 3.17. indeede, both poore and miserable. But if we shall sincerely endeauour, that God may haue the possession of our gra∣cious hearts,Prou. 23.26. and men the benefite of our religious liues, then shall God haue glory from vs, we comfort from God, and glory with him.
And all this shall, by Gods grace, be po∣werfully effected, shall we finde and feele in heart and life the truth and efficacie of this short sentēce, Godlinesse with con∣tentment is great gaine. Of which words I spake (as it pleased God to direct and inable me) in that solemne assemblie, whether I was, by authoritie, called to this seruice of God, and his Church: and where
I endeauoured to become helpfull to my present Auditors, in their spirituall good estate, by labouring to perswade them (vn∣der the Title of Godly Merchants) to make sure purchase to themselues of this great gaine of godlinesse: which as it is most comfortably attended of sweete contentment, so it will aboundantly en∣rich the possessor thereof, with all suffici∣encie of most precious treasures.
What I then deliuered by speach, I am now induced, at the earnest intreatie of sundry religious and wel affected, to com∣mit by writing to the publike view. The ground of their request (as they well assu∣red me) and of my assent thereunto (as the Lord doeth witnesse with me) is de∣sire and hope of further benefite thereby, through Gods blessing, to redound to Gods people. If God in mercy graunt this suc∣cesse vnto it, I shall much ioy in fruition of my desire, and end of my labour.
I haue withall inserted some things, which I had prouided to speake, but did purposely omit, for want of time. As for the allegations of some Authors, now in
the margent, as I did not iudge it fit, then to trouble the hearers with them; so may the readers at their pleasure passe by them.
Let my earnest request, to the christian Reader, be this: that he will kindly accept, fauourably interpret, diligently peruse, & religiously vse, this little helpe (a poore mite cast into the Treasury of the Church) to the furthering of his purchase of God∣linesse, and nourishing of Contentment within his heart.
And now▪ (Right honourable) I am bould to commend to the vse of the godly Reader, these first fruits of my labours, vnder the Patronage of your Loe worthy name▪ Humbly beseeching your Honour to accept of them, as a small testimonie of that great thankfulnes, which, from my heart, I desire to returne, first to God the gracious Author, and then to your Honour, as the ready instrument of a good blessing besto∣wed vpon me.
It pleased your Hon. long since to con∣ceiue well of me, and to reteine a purpose to do me good, & vpon sit occasion offred, by most kind letters to testifie your pleasure,
yea, and earnest desire to become my Pa∣trone, and therein the happie meanes of my free and comfortable entrance into my Charge, and Ministerie. For which sweete blessing of God, my soule doeth daily blesse God: and it may well be vnto me a good encouragement vnto constant endeauour, in that holie businesse, and waightie im∣ployment, for the glory of God, the edifica∣tion of his people, the comfort of my owne soule, and the better encouragemēt of your Honour, in the constant prosecution of your religious and carefull course, of vpright discharge, of that great trust, of a faithfull Dore-keeper in the house of God: that, as much as in you lyeth, Gods Church may be prouided of a supplie of learned and godly Pastors, who by sound doctrine and holie life, may promote the glory of God in the saluation of many soules, while they enrich them with this great gaine of godlinesse, by faithfull dispensation of the treasures of Christ.
The holie companie of these Godly Merchants, whereof this present Sermon doeth intreate, doeth greatly reioyce to
reckon your Honour among the chiefe of their Societie. And it doeth hartily prayse God, for his goodnesse to you, in your large portion of temporall blessings, (as of wise∣dome, honour, authoritie, and good estate) but especially in Gods rich bountie to you in his spirituall talents (of sauing know∣ledge in the mysterie of godlinesse, faith in Gods promises, zeale for Gods glory, loue to Gods Saints, Christian humilitie, and studious indeauour to benefit the Church of God, with other precious graces of Gods sanctifying spirit) those most durable ri∣ches, and inualuable treasures of the best returne of Godlinesse.
And this ioy of this happie Companie shall be much enlarged, to obserue your wise employment of these goodly gifts of your person and estate, for your more hap∣pie growth in your heauenly wealth, for the greater increase of the sweete Content∣ment of your heart, for the farther ador∣ning of your holy profession, and the ad∣uantage of your Lord and Maister, and aduancement of his glory, in the propaga∣tion of his trueth, vnto still succeeding
times and persons. And all this shall be happily effected, as by constant prosecution of all other your godly courses, wherein the Lord expecteth your daily progresse: so in maintaining still your deserued Honour, of an vncorrupt Patrone, and crowning your good proceedings with constant per∣seuerance. That while too many enrich themselues with the price of blood, your Honour may still remaine in the blessed number of such truely Honoured Pa∣trones, as (through faithfull discharge of that weightie trust) purchase true wealth, and enriching treasures, in furthe∣ring the gaine of soules, both their owne, and others.
The Lord, for his mercie, adde to this number of vncorrupt Patrones, make a daily supply of godly and learned Pastors: blesse and multiply the companie of sincere professors, (these Godly Merchants) and glorifie his great name, in propagation of his Trueth, and enlarging of his king∣dome. The Lord doe good in his good pleasure to this our Zion:Psal. 51.18. The Lord build the walles of this our Ierusalem.Psal. 122.7.
Peace be within her walles,Psal. 122.7. and pro∣speritie within her pallaces.Psal. 128.5. Let all that feare the Lord see the good of our Ierusalem all the dayes of their life.Nehe. 13.14. And the Lord, in goodnes, remem∣ber you herein, and wipe not out your kindnesse which you haue shew∣ed vnto the House of your God, and for the Offices thereof. The Lord grant vnto your Honour long and comfortable life; make you thrice happie and honou∣rable, in your person and posteritie; and giue you a blessed increase in this great gaine of Godlinesse; that you may assu∣redly finde much prosperitie in this life of Grace, and fruition of felicitie in that king∣dome of glorie.

