



THe gracious promises of God (Ho∣nourable and most worthy Gen∣tlemen) made to the holy Patri∣archs, touching the Land of Cana∣an, were singular comfort to the belieuing Israelites, in their bon∣dage of Egypt. And the renuing of the same by the hand of Moses (whose words God con∣firmed by so many miracles) must needes augment their ioy aboundantly, although their bonds at that time en∣creased. But, the pledge of Gods presence in the cloudie pillar, whereby he led them in the wildernesse both night and day, did so farre exceede all his promises for matter of consolation, that euen Moses himselfe desired rather

to be detained from the promised Land, than depriued of the comfort of that his presence in the waie:Exod. 33.15. 1. Cor. 10.6 If thy pre∣sence (sayth hee) goe not before vs, bid vs not depart hence. Now, these things being ensamples vnto vs, and euident types of our estate who liue vnder the Gospel, shew apparantly, that howsoeuer Beleeuers bee greatly cheered in their spirituall trauell, by the gratious pro∣mises which God in Christ hath made vnto them; yet, this their ioy is much increased, by the viewe of those that haue gone before them in the waie of faith; who are vnto them as a Cloude of Witnesses, or a cloudie Pil∣lar. For, howsoeuer the truth of God be the only ground of sound consolation: yet, because we are a-kin to Tho∣mas, and will not beleeue vnlesse wee see, and feele; therfore it is, that by the example of Beleeuers (wherin is some sensible euidence of the comfort of Gods truth) we are farre more cheered, than by the promise it selfe a∣lone.
Heere then beholde what great cause wee haue to cast our eyes vpon this Cloude of Witnesses; which the ho-Ghost hath erected as a pledge of his presence, & a direc∣tion to all those that shall followe their steps in the prac∣tice of faith, til the worlds end. Shall Moses affect that Cloude so much, which led them only the waie to a tempo∣rall inheritance: and shall not we much more be rauished with delight in this Cloude, which leades vs to the king∣dome of heauen?Heb. 10.38 2. Cor. 5.7 In al estates the Iust must liue by faith: For, We walk by faith, and not by sight. And what is the hope & happinesse of a Christian man, but to receiue at last the saluation of our soules,1. Pet. 1.9 which is the end of our faith, and period of this walke. But any faith will

not support vs herein: some begin in the Spirit,Gal. 3.3 who end in the Flesh, going out with Paul for a while; but at length returne with Demas to the world,2. Tim. 4.10 neither can they doe otherwise: for, Apostasie is the Catastrophe of Hypocrisie. He that would deceiue in his profession is vsually deceiued of his saluation.
Wherfore this shal be our wisedom, to see to our soules that our faith (as the beloued Apostle sayde of loue) be not in word, and tongue; but in deed, and in truth.1. Ioh. 3. And for our better direction in trying the truth of our faith, we haue here many notable precedents in this Cloud of Witnesses, consisting of most worthy Beleeuers in all a∣ges before CHRIST'S incarnation: all which shewed the life of faith by their workes; and we in them may see how to put our faith in practice. Now, the rather must we attende hereunto, because in all estates we must prac∣tice faith. For, Without faith it is impossible to please God. And what estate of life cā possible befall vs,Heb. 6. wher∣in we haue not a liuely patterne and forerunner leading vs the way to Heauen, within the compasse of this Cloud? Art thou a King or Magistrate? beholde DAVID, HEZECHIAS, and the Iudges: art thou a Courti∣er? Looke on MOSES: art thou a Martiall-man? Beholde SAMSON, DAVID, IOSVAH. Heere is E∣NOCH, NOE, and the Prophets for Ministers: the Patriarches for Fathers: SARA and the Shunamite for mothers: ISAAC and IOSEPH for children: Heer is ABEL for Shepheards, and RAHAB for victual∣lers: Heere are some that liued in honour, in peace, and plenty, some in want, & some in sicknesse: but most of all in persecution; because therein is the greatest tryall

of faith.1. Pet. 1.7 So that, which way soeuer we turne vs, if wee walke by faith, we haue heere some faithfull witnesse to goe before vs. And to cleare their steps the better to our sight, that so we may follow hard towards the mark without wandring,Phil. 5.14. we haue heere a notable light in this learned Commentarie; which, we must confesse, is much obscured, for lacke of the refining hand of the godly Au∣thor himselfe: but now, seeing that shining light is quen∣ched, vse this our Lampe; it is fed with such oyle as wee receiued in the Lords Sanctuarie, from that Oliue Tree, whence many a one did fill his vessell. And, being im∣portuned to expose the same for the Common good, wee haue presumed to place it vnder the shelter of your Ho∣nourable names; beseeching God it may helpe to guide your feete in the way of peace.Luke 1.79.
The religious precedents of your Honourable Pa∣rents (Right Noble and hopefull Gentlemen) must per∣swade you much to be sound, and constant in the faith: for, declining in religion brings Ier. 22.15 &c. to the end. staine of honour, and decay 1. King. 11.11 euen of temporall portion. But, labour you to en∣crease in grace, and trust the Lord with your outward greatnesse. Honour him, and hee will honour you: de∣light in him,1. Sam. 2.30. Psal. 37.4. and hee will giue you your holy hearts de∣sire; his faithfulnesse will bee your shielde, to the griefe of those that enuie your happinesse. But, beware of bad example, and euill counsell, which are the bane and poyson of younger yeares. Walk with God like Enoch: vse the world as Abraham did,Heb. 11.5. and followe Moses in the matters of delight,Verse 10. forsaking them when they be∣come the pleasures of sinne.Verse 24. &c. So shall you obtaine

good reporte,Heb. 12.39 and your memories shalbe blessed with your Posterities, like these faithfull Wit∣nesses. NOVEMBER. 10. 1607.

