


RIght Worshipful, it is a notable pollicie of the deuil, which he hath put into the heades of sundrie men in this age, to thinke that our religion and the religion of the present Church of Rome are all one for substance: and that they may be reunited as (in their opinion) they were before. Writings to this effect, are spread abroad in the French tongue, and respected of English protestants more then is meete; or ought to be. For, let men in shew of moderation, pretend the peace and good estate of the Catholike Church as long as long as they will; this V∣nion of the two religions can neuer be made, more then the vnion of light & darknes. And this shall appeare, if we doe but a little consider, howe they of the Romane Church haue rased the foundation. For though in wordes they honour Christ, yet in deed they turne him to a Pseudo-Christ and an Idol of their owne braine. They call him our Lord, but with this condition, that the Seruant of Seruants of this Lord may chaunge and adde to his commande∣ments: hauing so great a power, that he may open and shut heauen to whome he will; and bind the verie conscience with his owne lawes, and consequently be partaker of the spiritual kingdome of Christ. Againe they call him a Saui∣our, but yet in Vs: in that hee giues this grace vnto vs, that by our merits wee may be our owne Sauiours: and in the want of our own merits, wee may per∣take in the merits of the Saints. And they acknowledge that he died and suf∣fered for vs, but with this caueat, that the Fault beeing pardoned, wee must sa∣tisfie for the temporall punishment either in this world or in Purgatorie. In a word, they make him our mediatour of Intercession vnto God: but withal his Mother must be the Queene of Heauen, and by the right of a Mother com∣maund him there. Thus, in worde they crie Osunna, but in deede they crucifie Christ. Therefore wee haue good cause to blesse the name of God, that hath freed vs from the yoke of this Romane bondage, and hath brought vs to the true light & libertie of the gospel. And it should be a great height of vnthank∣fulnesse in vs, not to stand out against the present Church of Rome, but to yeeld our selues to plottes of reconciliation. To this effect and purpose I haue penned this little Treatise, which I present to your Worship, desiring it might be some token of a thankfull mind, for vndeserued loue. And I craue withall, not onely your Worshipfull (which is more common) but also your learned protection; beeing well assured, that by skill and arte you are able to iustifie whatsoeuer I haue truely taught. Thus wishing to you and yours the continu∣ance and the increase of faith and good conscience, I take my leaue.
Cam∣bridge, Iun. 28. 1597.

