


RIght Honourable, it can not be vnknowne to your selfe, or to any man of a daies experience, that it is thought a smal matter to commit a sinne, or, to lie in sinnes against a mans owne conscience. For many when they are told of their du∣tie in this point, replie and say, What, tell you me of Conscience? Conscience was hanged long agoe. But vnlesse they take better heede, and preuent the danger by repentance, Hanged conscience will reuiue and become both gibbet & hangman to them either in this life or the life to come. For Conscience is appointed of God to declare and put in execution his iust iudgement against sinners: and as God cannot possibly be ouercome of man, so neither can the iudgement of Conscience beeing the iudgement of God, be wholly ex∣tinguished. Indeede Satan for his part goes about by all meanes he can, to benumme the conscience: but all is nothing. For as the sicke man, when he seemes to sleepe and take his rest, is inwardly full of troubles: so the benummed and arousie conscience wants not his secret pangs and terrours, and when it shall be roused by the iudgement of God, it waxeth cruell and fierce like a wild beast. Againe, when a man sinnes a∣gainst his conscience, as much as in him lieth, he plungeth himselfe into the gulfe of desperation: for euery wound of the conscience, though the smart of it be little felt, is a deadly wound: and he that goes on to sinne against his conscience, stabbes and woundes it often in the same place: and all renewed woundes (as we know) are hard∣ly or neuer cured. Thirdly, he that lieth in sinnes against his conscience, can not call vpon the name of God: for guiltie conscience makes a man flie from God. And Christ saith, God heareth not sinners, vnderstanding by sinners, such as goe on in their owne waies against conscience: and what can be more dolefull then to be barred of the inuocation of Gods name? Lastly, such persons after the last iudgement, shall haue not onely their bodies in torment, but the worme in the soule and conscience shal neuer die: and what will it profit a man to gaine the whole world by doing things a∣gainst his owne conscience, and loose his owne soule.
Now that en on this manner carelesse touching conscience, may see their folie and the great danger thereof and come to amendment, I haue penned this small trea∣tise: and according to the auncient and laudable custome, as also according to my long intended purpose, I now dedicate and present the same to your Lordship. The reasons which haue imboldened me to this enterprise (all by-respects excluded) are these. Generall doctrine in points of religion is darke and obscure, and very hardly practi∣sed without the light of particular examples: and therefore the doctrine of consci∣ence, by due right pertaines to a man of conscience; such an one as your Lordship is, who (others of like place not excepted) haue obtained this mercie at Gods hand to keepe faith and good conscience. Againe, considering that iustice and conscience haue alwaies bin friends; I am induced to thinke that your Lordship beeing publikely set a∣part for the execution and maintenance of ciuill iustice, will approoue and accept a Treatise propounding rules and prcepts of conscience. Thus therefore crauing par∣don for my boldnes, and hoping of your Lordships good acceptance, I commend you to God and to the word of his grace.
1596. Iune 14.

