



GEntlemen, I vvish you vvell, I hope you doubt not; in my loue to you all I offer this my labor: to some, as desired, in lieu of good vvill and kindnesse recei∣ued. My best thoughts are tovvardes you in the best things. Naturall fauorits, vvorldly friends, wish good to the body: that doe I; but vvithall, the soules safety: vvithout vvhich, no good.
You do heare the excellent truths of God, by one of whom it hath been said, He doth regnare in pulpitis. I doe graunt it, vvho can deny those gifts? yet let your loue pardon my folly; and reiect not my well meaning, though I set before you a candle at noone. The matter is not amisse, if the rudenesse of speech make it not distastefull: if so, it were a fault.
 Loue doth not loath vvhat is good: wholsome meat meanely cookt, is acceptable to a hun∣gry stomacke. What hath been heard vvith the eare, may nowe bee seene with the eye: a double remembrance; the other lesse, this of more continuance. I hope the fruit vvill bee answerable.
The text is a speciall iewell, set forth with precious pearles. The argument is of weight, How a poore sinner may haue assurance of the greatest happinesse. The exhorta∣tion sheweth our slowness, but the necessity of the thing requireth our diligence: good rea∣son therefore. What matter so vvoorthy our trauel? to gaine all vvithout this, is but loss. We liue here in pleasure and ease: is this our comfort? are vve at home then? is there not to come a weal vnspeakeable, or a woe into∣lerable, vvith sorrovve to liue in paine, both in time, and euer beyond all time? Sinners vve be: hence conclude vve must death, and that double. By this apprehension, is nothing but horror of Hell. Assurance of happinesse, concludes safety, and ioy of Heauen: One of desert; but this not vvithin compasse of me∣rit: it is Gods gift in mercy, comfortable, a ioy vnspeakeable.
Wee all shall see the Lord in the last day (al∣beit
 Atheisticall Athenians mocke at the doctrine of the Resurrection): but we al shal not alike behold him, as vvee doe not alike desire his cōming. Some shall see him a lamb, and apprehend fierce vvrath, and say; Oh mountains couer vs. Some the lyon of Iudah, and conceiue ioy; and in comfort, cry aloude, Hosannah. Good cause vvhy: they haue peace by assurance of pardon and it is the day of their redemption; that did they seeke for diligently; this they expected, & desired ear∣nestly, and in the end enioy the revvard.
To stirre you vp heerevnto, is the drift of my present endeuour. VVe all need spurring; heauie harts, and leaden heeles, loaden we are with iniquitie: so slovve to goodnes, that all our daies vvee hardly get any grace perma∣nent.
Gentlemen, accept I pray you my kindness: read vvith a mind ayming at the end which I propose. Serious meditation helps memory, and settles iudgement; but in practise stands the life, vvhich getteth also commendations. You are in eminent place: tongues on both sides talke at liberty; our defence is innocen∣cie. No way can ye so glorifie God, as by prac∣ticall professiō; nor advaunce, before the ene∣mie, the honour of the most Reuerend your
 Lord and Maister more, then by a holy con∣versation: so doe, and it shall bee also your glory. If heerein my labor further any thing, it shall be my ioy: and if we continue in vvell dooing, it it doubtlesse wee shall obtaine mer∣cie. Which the Lord grant, euen so. Amen. From my Studie at Worsop. Nouemb. 12.

