



RIght Honorable; Among
al the Societies & States,
wherof the whole world
of mankinde from the
first calling of Adam in
Paradise, vnto this day, hath consisted,
the first and most ancient is the Fami∣lie.
For if we looke into the Scriptures;
The writings of Moses, which in time
goe beyond all the Histories and Re∣cords
of men, doe euidently declare, it
was the will of God, to sanctifie that
first coniunction of Adam and Eue, as
the roote wherein mans whole posteri∣tie
was virtually contained, and whence
in the ages succeeding, both Church
and Common-weale should spring



and grow to their perfection. And all
those nations and Countries before the
Flood, the Heads whereof lineally de∣scended
frō the two first houses of Seth
and Cain, had no outward forme of ci∣uill
gouernment, by which they were
ruled, nor any visible face of a Church
whereto they had relation, but the
whole frame of their policie both Ci∣uill
and Ecclesiasticall was confined
within the precincts of priuate fami∣lies.
And from the flood, the house of
Noah became the common Mother, in
which the other two states were inclu∣ded,
and out of whose bowels they is∣sued
afterward in the multiplication of
posteritie, for number, equall to the
starres of the skie, and the sands by the
sea shore.
Answerable to the voice of the scrip∣ture,
hath been the verdict of the Hea∣then
in this point. Some of the lear∣ned
among them, haue called the Fa∣milie, the first societie in nature, and the
ground of all the rest. Some againe haue
compared it to the Bee-hiue, which we
call the Stock, wherein are bred many



swarmes, which thence doe flie abroad
into the world, to the raising and main¦taining
of other States.Xenoph. ibid. Others do not
vnfitlie resemble the same to a Metro∣polis,
or mother Citie, which first trai∣neth
vp her natiue inhabitants, and
then. Cic. 3. de Nat. Deor. remoueth some of them to other
places of abode, where they may bee
framed as members, to liue in obedi∣ence
to the lawes of their Head.
Vpon this condition of the Familie,
being the Seminarie of all other Socie∣ties,
it followeth, that the holie and
righteous gouernment thereof, is a di∣rect
meane for the good ordering, both
of Church and Common-wealth; yea
that the lawes thereof being rightly in∣formed
and religiously obserued, are
auaileable to prepare and dispose men
to the keeping of order in other go∣uernements.
Hence it is, that the Holie
Ghost in the booke of the Scriptures,
hath in great wisedome commended
both Rules for direction, and examples
for imitation, to Husbands and Wiues,
to Parents and Children, to Masters
and Seruants in euerie point of Chri∣stian



carriage touching God and man.
For this first Societie, is as it were the
Schoole, wherein are taught and lear∣ned
the principles of authoritie and
subiection. And look as the Superiour
that faileth in his priuate charge, will
proue vncapable of publike employ∣ment;1. Tim. 3. 5
so the Inferiour, who is not fra∣med
to a course of Oeconomicall sub∣iection,
will hardly vndergoe the yoke
of ciuill obedience.
Againe, the corruption or declina∣tion
of this first gouernment, must of
necessitie giue way to the ruinating of
the rest. For an error in the foundation,
puts the bodie and parts of the whole
building in apparent hazard. In the old
world,Gen. 6. 12. before the flood, though all flesh
had corrupted their waies; yet the first
ground of that vniuersall ouerflow of
sinne, issued out of the state Oecono∣micall,
and thence was deriued into
the whole earth. It was the fault of the
priuate gouernment of Eli the Priest,
that made his sonnes Hophni and Phi∣nehas,1. Sam. 2. 12. 23, 24, 25. of vngratious children, vngodlie
Church-men. It was the error of Da∣uid

in the administration and guidance
of his owne house,2. Sam. 14 33. which incouraged
Absalom and Adoniah his sonnes,1. King. 5. 6. vpon
presumption of their Fathers indul∣gēce,2. Sam. 15
to become ill Common-wealths
men,1. King. 1. to aspire, and vsurpe the kingdom
by plots and practises of Rebellion.
To forbeare further matter of in∣stance
in this kinde; by the due consi∣deration
of the premisses, I hold it a
thing both necessarie and behoofefull
for al estates, to be throughly informed
of the right manner of erecting and or∣dering
the priuate condition of the Fa∣milie,
whereby they may be furnished
with fit grounds for the commō good
in more publike and open courses. For
which end this present Discourse of
Christian Oeconomie, was first contri∣ued
by the Author, and now thought
fit to be set foorth, for the instruction
and edification of ye multitude. Which
as it commendeth it selfe by the short∣nes
and perspicuitie, both which being
applied to vnderstanding and memo∣rie,
may giue contentment to euerie
well-disposed Reader; so it carrieth a



kinde of eminencie aboue other Trea∣tises
of this nature before published, in
sundrie regards.
First, whereas Experience teacheth,
that the Questions of conscience in
matrimoniall affaires, are very many in
number, and difficult in nature; here
we shall finde either direct answeres to
some of them, or at least the grounds of
resolution in diuers cases, warranted by
the word, in such sort, as little or no∣thing
will appeare, vpon the triall, to
be vntouched, making for the Readers
satisfaction.
Secondlie, the maine scope of the
Author in the seuerall branches here∣of,
is, to make plaine this truth in parti∣cular,
That no Familie can bee interes∣sed
in the blessing and fauour of God,
which is not founded in his feare, and
ordered according to his reuealed will.
For though the Heathen in their wri∣tings
of the like Argument,Aristot. Politic. Xenoph. in Oecon. doe shew,
that Nature by her dimme light may
affoord some good directions to this
purpose, and that men meerely natural,
haue prospered in the practise of Oe∣conomicall



vertues; yet the true hap∣pines
of houses and inhabitants whol∣ly
dependeth vpon the speciall grace
of God, and issueth out of his promise;
and that is directed onely to them that
feare him and walke in his waies;Psal. 128. 1 it being
godlinesse alone which hath the promises of
this life and the life to come.1. Tim. 4. 8 Therefore to
dreame of a blessing in any other state,
which is not seasoned with godlinesse,
and ordered by direction of diuine
lawe, is but a witlesse presumption;
considering that the familie it selfe
from whence they grow, hath no fur∣ther
assurance of blessednesse, then
it hath right and title in the pro∣mise.
Lastly, it containeth here and there,
some speciall grounds of trueth, ten∣ding
to the discouerie of diuers er∣rors
of Popish doctrine in points ap∣pertaining
to Mariage; as namely these;
I. That this estate is free to all men,
euen to such as haue the gift of conti∣nencie▪
and for those who haue not the
power to abstaine, it is expressely en∣ioyned
by God as necessarie.1. Cor. 7. 1. 2. 8. 9. Which



discouereth that error of absolute inhi∣bition
thereof to some sorts of men,
without the least exception of abilitie
to forbeare. And in this case, though
the Church of Rome prescribeth an
helpe by prayer and indeuour, where
the gift is wanting; yet herein, she ad∣deth
two more absurdities to the for∣mer;
imposing a necessitie of contai∣ning,
by her lawes, where God hath
giuen libertie, by his word; and cau∣sing
to flee from that onely Remedie
which himselfe hath sanctified, to ano∣ther,
whereunto hee neither giueth
charge by his will, nor incouragement
by promise. II. That Marriages con∣summate
without the free and aduised
consent of Parents, either explicite in
tearmes, or implicite by conniuence, are
in the court of conscience, meere nulli∣ties.
A doctrine cleered in this Booke,
both by Scriptures, and by consent of
Antiquitie. Wherein is challenged the
Iesuites proposition, That the sole con∣sent
of the parties is sufficient,Bellarm. de Matrim. Sacram. libr. c. 19. ad Ma∣trimonium
firmum ac ratum efficiendum.
As also that decree of the Councell of



Trent,Concil. Trident. Sess. 24. Decreto de clandest. Matrim. which professeth a detestation
of clandestine contracts, and yet with
the same breath pronounceth the curse
of Anathema vpon them, who affirme
that Parents may ratifie or make voide
Mariages contracted by their children,
without their allowance. III. That
Matrimonie lawfullie begun and con∣summate,
is made voide onely by way
of diuorce in the case of Adulterie. So
saith our Sauiour;Matth. 5. 32. Whosoeuer shall put
away his wife, (except it be for fornication,
&c.) And this liberty granted by Christ
both to dissolue, and to marrie againe,
cannot be restrained or cut off by any
humane ordinance. A point directlie
impugned by two other Rules of that
Councell. One, that the Church of
Rome erreth not, when she teacheth
(as they professe,Concil. Trid. Sess. 24. Can. 7. Iuxta Euangelicam &
Apostolicam doctrinam, but in truth ex∣pressely
contradictory thereunto) That
the knot of mariage cannot be broken
because of adulterie, and that neither
partie may vndertake to be maried a∣gaine,
during the life of the other, after
the dismission. The other, that the vow



of Chastitie and entring into holy Or∣ders,
is of force to loose the bond of
Mariage. And in this case, separation is
made and allowed de facto, by the sole
authoritie of the Pope, notwithstan∣ding
the refusall of the setled partie to
yeeld consent. IV. That the iudge∣ment
and determination of causes ma∣trimoniall,
as of Contracts and their
impediments, of degrees of kinred, of
diuorces, &c. resteth originally in the ci∣uill
Magistrate, in whose power it is, to
ordaine and establish lawes touching
them, agreeable to Gods word, and to
cause them to be put in execution. For
this purpose, in doubtfull and difficult
cases, theSee the Code in sundrie places. Lib. 5. tit. 4 de Nuptijs, tit. 5. de in∣cesto, &c. ancient Church hath not
absolutely rested in her owne decrees,
but hath made recourse to the seate of
Iustice, specially vnder Christian Ma∣gistrates,
submitting her selfe to their
lawes and constitutions in that kinde.
Whereas theConcil. Trid. sess. 24. can. 12. Church of Rome hath
determined, that these causes doe sim∣plie
and only appertaine to Ecclesiasti∣call
Iudges; and therefore hath conclu∣ded
Mariage to be a Sacrament; that



the definition of cases coniugall, be∣comming,
vpon this ground, an action
of a spirituall nature, might be transfer∣red
from the Ciuill to their spirituall
Courts. The soueraigntie whereof; in
these affaires, by their owne constitu∣tions,
is greatly inlarged. For though
they admit, that politike Princes haue
some interest in them; yet they must
hold it,Bellarm. de Matrim. Sacram. cap. 32. with subordination to the autoritie
of the Church-Magistrate; and when the
Rector of the Prouince maketh a law
hereof, hee must doe it approbante Prin∣cipe
Ecclesiastico, by the allowance of
the Pope; otherwise his lawes are
meere nullities. And among their
reasons of policie, this is one of the
principall, that they might by this
meanes raise a commoditie to the Sea
of Rome, by the sale of their dispensa∣tions.
Now these points, together with the
substance of this small discourse, I wil∣lingly
commend vnto your Lordship,
desiring that vnder the wings of your
Honourable protection, it may safelie
walke abroad in the world, to the view



and benefit of others. The true report
of your ancient loue of the truth, and
fauourable inclination to the Ministers
and dispensers thereof, hath giuen mee
incouragement in this action; the ra∣ther,
for that the Argument fitteth in
some sort your present estate, whose
house God hath adorned with oliue
plants,Psal. 128. 3. a vertuous and hopefull issue,
whose young yeeres being seasoned
therein, by the sweete sauour of their
fathers vertues, may yeeld in time a
plentifull increase of Honour in this
Common-wealth; and consequentlie
aduance your Name in themselues and
their posteritie. To this may be added
mine own desire to giue some testimo∣nie
of dutie to your Lordship, as hol∣ding
it your due, to be had in Honou∣rable
tearmes with men, whose care
hath been to maintaine the Honour of
the Highest by your constant profes∣sion
and practise of Religion. And thus
emboldening my selfe vpon the per∣swasion
of your Lordships fauour and
acceptance, I humblie take my leaue,
and commend you to the grace ofAct. 20. 32

God, who is able to build you vp fur∣ther,
and giue you an inheritance a∣mong
them which are sancti∣fied.
Finching-field, Sep∣temb.
26. 1609.

