



RIght Honourable. It vvas not vvithout speciall cause, that the fa∣mous Apostle of the Gentiles, en∣tring into a serious meditation of the Calling and vvke of the Mi∣nisterie, and grovving at length to some issue of his thoughts, crieth ut (as it vvere) in tearmes of Com∣plaint; And who is sufficient for 2. Cor. 2. 16. these things? For if nquirie be made into the reason of his demand, th Scripture shall ansvver for him; That Mi∣nisters are the Angels of the Lord of Hosts; the Inter∣preters Mal. 2. 7. Iob 3. 23. Math. 5. 13, 14. of his vvill; th Salt of the earth; the Light of the World, And their Calling is, to carrie the Embassage of Reconciliation; to manifest vnto man the pleasure of the Highest; to season the corrupted heart instrumentally vvith grac; to inlighten the darkened minde, by the di∣spensation of sauing knovvledge, as the Sunne doth the Aire by the brightnesse of his beames.
Novv these high Tiles and greatvvorkes, euidently de∣claring the vveight and vvorth of that Honourable Com∣mission, are not either giuen or assigned, onely in respect of publike and ordinarie duties, vvherein by Diuine ordi∣nance they be made the mouth of God vnto Man by prea∣ching, Ierem. 15. 19. Nehem. 8. 7. and againe of Man vnto God by prayer. For these are determined vpon certaine times and places, vvhen and vvhere they are to be put in execution, according to the laudable Constitutions and Canons of particular Churches:

But in a further regard, as they haue receiued from God the Tongue of the Learned, and are indued vvith knovvledge and abilitie, to informe the Consciences of men touching euery action, vvhether personall appertaining to particular states, or relatiue emploied in the vvorshippe of God, and practise of Christian vertues, A gift, as no lesse necessarie, so of a farre larger extent then the other, and consequently performable vvithout limitation of time or place, in season, out of season, vvhensoeuer the minde requi∣reth resolution in Case of doubt, or Comfort in distresse. The light of this candle is therefore erected vp on high, and set in open vivv, that it may communicate it selfe not to all in grosse, but to euery one in person. The Lords Inter∣preter in this sense, is to dispense his vvill in euery place & Matth. 5. 15. time, to the poore vvidovv of Sarepa at her ovvne home; to the Noble uch of Ethiopia in his trauell; to Dauid, 2. king. 17. 9. Act. 8. 30. 2. Sam. 12. Math. 26. 75. that he may be dravvne to Confession of his sinne; to Peter, for his restoring after his fall; to the vveake, that they may be supported; to the strong, that they may stand; to th VVauering minde for resolution; to the Troubled soule for comfort and releefe.
Hence it is apparent, that this Messenger of God must be (as Paul saith) a . complete man, in euery respect, armed 2. Tim. 3. 17. and . well appointed vvith necessaries appertaining, for all purposes, to the honour of his Lord, and the credit of his Calling. He should be not onely a learned Text-man, mightie in the Scriptures; a positiue Diuine, established in the truth; a man prouided ad oppositum, to vvithstand and con the Aduersarie; but a skilfull Casist, readie at all assaies vpon good grounds of knovvledge and obser∣uation, to giue a Rule, to yeelde a Reason, to speake a vvord in time to him that is vvearie.
VVhich last propertie, to omit the rest, beeing so essential (as it is) to the Calling and condition of a Minister; yea of that importance (as heretofore I haue declared to your Lords.) it seemeth strange, at least in my poore conceit, that among so many graue and learned discourses, published by vvay of Definition and Disputation in matter of Religion, evv or none haue beene framed and conriued to this pur∣pose; that in this florishing estate both of our Church and

Commonvvealth, none haue emploied their indeauours in the vnfolding and displaying of this Subiect; yea, vvhereas they of the Popish Church haue beene so plentifull, or rather lauish in their Ioannis de Thabia. Angell de Clavasio. Raymundi, &c. Summes, Martini Az∣pilcust. Navar∣ri, &c. Manuels, Emanuelis Sa. &c. Aphorismes, Franci. To∣let. &c. Instructions, Iacobi de Graphii à Ca∣pua, &c. Determinations, &c. for direction of their Confessours in Case-points; that our Protestant Diuines for the most part, haue been so sparing and silent in speaking or vvriting of this Argument.
Hovvbeit, the Lord in his most vvise prouidence, hath not vvholly denied this benefit vnto our Church. For not∣vvithstanding so great silence and forbearance in matter of Deuotion, as touching the rectifying of the Coscience, there hath beene of late yeares trained vp to this ende, a M. R. Green. ha. speciall Instrument of his glorie, vvho beeing in time throughly grounded in the principles of one part of the Coses; by many graue Counsells, and comfortable directions, fetched from the vvord, and gathered by long obseruation, hath cured the vvounds of many a distressed soule. And those diuine Tractaes of his, novv gathered together since his death, and communicated to the Church of God, are full of hea∣uenly meditations to that purpose. And as himselfe desired to leaue vnto posteritie, some memorie of his knovvledge in that kind, so the talent he receiued vvas not buried in his graue, but againe reuiued in the person of that faithfull Minister of Christ, the Author of this Booke, a man both for learning and pitie deseruedly reuerenced and renovv∣ed in the iudgements of all those that loue and embrace the Truth. VVho happily attempting the same course, and referring the vvhole bodie of his labours in preaching and vvriting thereunto principally; proceeded vvith much ad∣uantage, added vnto the Cases of Distresse other Heads of Questions, and in his latter time reduced them into such a Frame and Order, a might best serue for an Introduction of Case-diuinitie, for the helpe and incouragement of o∣thers.
The first Part of vvhich Frame being formerly commen∣ded by me to your Hon. I haue againe emboldened my selfe to present you vvith the rest, that so the vvhole may haue the freer passage from you, to the common vse of others. VVherein I haue taken vp no nevv shion, but kept my

self to the commendable custome of vvriters in auncien∣tr ties, vvho haue betrusted the Church of God vvith the fruits of their indeavours, vnder the patronage of Honou∣rable and vertuous Nobilitie.  namely of that renoun∣ned Coloss 4. 14. Hieron. pro. log. in Lu &  Catalog. Scrip∣tor. Ecclesiast. Nicep. l. 6. c. 16. Luc. 11. Act. 1. 1. 2. Io. 1. Phisitian of Antioche, and of S.  vvho dedica∣ted their sacred vvritings, the one to the Noble Theophi∣lus, the other to the elect Lady and her children.
And that vvhich mooued these holy penmen of Scripture to this practise, hath also incouraged  vpon the same respects, to offer this Treatise to your Honourable fauour: First, because your Lordship hath beene long So was Theo∣ph. with Lukes copies. Act. 1. 1. acquainted vvith th person, life, and labours of this man, and vvell grounded in t truth of Religion, the maine subiect of all his discourses. Secondly; the Lord hath inlarged your heart by his grace, to yeeld So did Theop. Luc. 1. 1. 4. and the Lad and ers. 2. Ioh. v. 4. entertainment to that truth vvhich he did teach and vvrite: and the manifestation of your vvilling minde to accept of any Treatise compiled by him, giueth sufficient proofe of this point, uen i mine ovvne knovvledge. Thirdly, you haue not contented your selfe to be barely informed in the knovvledge of the truth, but haue further desired This was also Theoph. his de∣sire. Luk. 1. 4. confirmation and assurance in the same. One instance hereof I must needes remember in this place: Tha sundrie yeares since, it pleased you to set him a speciall Taske, the interpretation of that golden Text touch∣ing the Gaine of the greatest commoditie in the vvorld, (Phil. 3. 8.) for your further vnderstanding of the same, as himselfe reporteth to your great commendation: And great reason, you should tast both of his former and Epist. dedicat. before the True Gaine. Latter fruits, who by your motion vvas incouraged to take the paines, and no doubt revvarded for his labour by a plentifull measure of your loue.
Vpon these motiues, I haue novv at length exhibited vnto your Lordship the remainder of this present Introdu∣ction, my debt by bond of promise, and your due, by speciall right of patronage. If I be haply challenged of slacke pay∣ment thereof to this time, I desire to be holden excused. First, for that the totall Summe vvhich remained behinde vnpaied, vvas the greatest part, and therevpon required further respite, that it might be more easily collected, and more fully defraied. For though it be but one intir heape,

yet it consisteth of sundry particulars, all vvhich vvere to be throughly examined, that vpon the Account, there might be a mutuall agreement of the vvhole and the parts. And further, it vvas my desire, that seeing the debt must needes be discharged, and that to an Honourable person, it might be tendred in pure and Currant Coyne, vvhich might beare the triall of the touch-stone: A thing necessarie in these times, vvherein so much corrupt stuffe in this kind, passeth abroad from hand to hand.
And thus heartily vvishing that these holy Rules of Religion and vertue, may be perused at your Lordships best leysure, and entertained in practise for your daily comfort and direction: craing also your Honourable acceptation of my carefull indeauour in publishing them to the common veivve of the vvorld, I most humbly take my leaue: Besee∣ching the Almightie, vvho hath alreadie graced you vvith the true revvards of Uertue, Honour, and Nobilitie, to e∣stablish the same both in your person and issue in this vvorld, and after this life ended, to giue you that eternall inheritance of honour and happinesse, in the kingdome of glorie. From Eman. Coll. in Cambridge. Novemb. 20. 1606.

