



THere is no one doctrine re∣uealed in the word of God, or dispensed by the Prophets and Apostles, of greater vse and consequence in the life of man, then is that, which prescribeth a forme of relee∣uing and rectifying the conscience. The benefit, which from hence issueth vnto the Church of God, is vnspeakable. For first, it serueth to dis∣couer the cure of the dangerousest sore that can be, the wound of the Spirit. Which how great a crosse it is, the wise man reporteth out of true experience, when he saith, that the Spirit of a manProu. 18. 14. will sustaine his infirmitie, but a wounded Spirit who can beare it? And his meaning is, that no outward griefe, can fall into the nature of man, which will not be with patience indured, to the vtmost, so long as the minde is not troubled, or dismay∣ed. But when once the Spirit is touched, and the heart, (which, beeing well apaed, is the very foū∣taine of peace to the whole man,) smitten with feare of the wrath of God for sinne; the griefe is

so great, the burden intolerable, that it will not by any outward meanes, be eased or asswaged. Secondly, it giueth for all particular Cases, special and sound direction; whether man be to walke with God, in the immediate performance of the duties of his seruice, or to conuerse with man ac∣cording to the state and condition of his life, in the familie, in the Church, or in the Common∣wealth. The want of which direction, of what force it is, to turne the actions of men, which are good in themselues, to sinnes in regard of the a∣gents, S. Paul affirmeth in that generall conclusi∣on, Whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne. Wherein heRom 14 2▪ would teach vs, that whatsoeuer is done, or vn∣dertaken by men in this life, whether it concerne the knowledge and worship of God, or any par∣ticular dutie to be performed, by vertue of their callings, for the common good; whereof they haue not sufficient warrant, and assurance in conscience, grounded vpon the word, that it is to be don, or not to be done; to them it is a sinne. Thirdly, it is of all other doctrines, (if it be right∣ly vsed) the most comfortable. For it is not foun∣ded in the opinions, & variable conceits of men, neither doth it consist, of conclusions and positi∣ons, that are onely probable and coniecturall: (for the conscience of the doubting or distressed partie, cannot be established and rectified by them:) but it resteth vpon most sufficient and certaine grounds, collected & drawne out of the very word of god, which, as it is mightie in opera∣tion, earcing the heart, and discerning the thoughtsHeb▪ 4. ▪ and intents thereof, so is it alone auaileable and

effectuall to pacific the minde, and to giue full satisfaction to the conscience. And as the benefit is great; so the want of this doctrine, together with the true manner of applying the same, is, and hath beene the cause, of many and great in∣conueniences. For euen of those that feare God, and haue receiued to beleeue, there be many, who in the time of their distresses, when they haue considered, the waight and desert of their sinnes, and withall apprehended the wrath of God, due vnto them; haue beene brought vn∣to hard exigents, mourning, and wayling, and crying out, as if God had forsaken them, vntill they haue beene releeued by the Spirit of Christ,Psal. 119. v. 49, 50. in the meditation of the word, and promise of God. But those especially, who haue not beene instructed in the knowledge of the truth, nor beene acquainted with the course of Gods dea∣ling, with his distressed children, by reason of ig∣norance and blindnes, in matters of religion and pietie, when the Lord hath let loose the cord of their consciences, and set before their eyes, both the number of their sinnes committed, and the iust anger of God purchased thereby, what haue they done? surely despairing of their owne e∣states, and of the mercie of God, they haue either growne to phrensie, and madnes, or els sorted vnto themselues fearefull ends, some by hang∣ing, some by drowning, others by murthering their owne selues. And if not in regard of griefe and trouble of minde; yet for want of better re∣solution in particular cases, within the compasse of their generall or personall callings, though o∣therwise,

men indued with some measure of knowledge and obedience, herein they haue fai∣led, that they haue either abused, or els quite re∣linquished & forsaken their callings, and thereby haue become scandalous, & offēsiue vnto others.
Now as this is a matter of great waight & im∣portance, so is it most meete, that the best and fittest course should be taken, in the teaching and inforcing of the same. In which regard we haue iust cause, to challenge the Popish Church, who in their Case-writings haue erred, both in the substance and circumstances of this doctrine, as shall appeare in the sequele. First, because the dutie of releeuing the Conscience, is by them commended to the sacrificing Priest, which, though according to their owne Canons Decr. de penient: dist. 6. cap.  Cauet spiritualis iudex, vt sicut non cō∣mi crm nequiti,  non care t mu∣nere scienciae. he should be a man of knowledge, and free from imputation of wickednes, yet oft times it falls out that he is either vnlearned, or els wicked and leud of conuersation, and consequently vnfit for such a purpose. Secondly, they teach that their Priests appointed to be comforters & releeuers of the distressed, are made by Christ himselfe Iudices in caus poeniten∣tium. Bella. d paen. lib. 3. ca. 2. Concil. Tid. ess. 14. can 9. iudges of the cases of conscience, hauing in their owne hands a iudiciarie power and authoritie, truly and properly to binde or to loose, to remit or to retaine sinnes, to open or to shut the king∣dome of heauen. A blasphemous doctrine. Con∣sidering that Christ onely hath the keyes of Da∣uid,Mark. 2. 10. which properly and truly openeth, and noRu. . 8. man shutteth, and properly and truly shutteth, & no man openeth. And the Ministers of God, are not called to be absolute Iudges of the Cōsci∣ence,

but only Messēgers & Embassadors of re∣cōciliatiō;2. Cor. 5. 20. wherupon it followeth, that they cānot be Theophylact. comment in Ioan. 8. 34. & Hieron. lib. ▪ comment. in Math. super verba. Tibi da∣bo claues. the authors and giuers of remission of sinnes, but onely the Ministers and Dispensers of ie same. Thirdly, the Papists in their writings haue scattered here and there, sundrie false and erroni∣ous grounds of doctrine, much preiudiciall to the direction or resolution of the Conscience in time of neede, as namely, I. That a man in theEmanuel Sa. in Aphori. con∣fessatio. course of his life, may build himselfe vpon the faith of his teachers, and for his saluation rest conten∣ted with an implicite & vn-expressed faith. Which doctrine, as it is an onely meane, to keepe men in perpetuall blindnes and ignorance, so it serueth to no other purpose in the time of temptation, but to plunge the heart of man into the pitte of despaire, it being vncapable of comfort, for want of knowledge and vnderstanding of the word and promise of God. II. That euery man ought to stand in feare and doubt of the pardon of his sinnes,Concil. Tid▪ ses. 6. Cap. 9. and that no man can be assured by the certentie of faith, either of the present fauour of God, or of his owne saluation. True it is, that in respect of our owne vnworthines and indisposition, we haue iust cause, not onely to doubt and feare, but to despaire and be confounded before the iudgement seat of God. Yet that a man should not be certainely resolued by faith of the mercie of God, in and for the merit of Christ, is a com∣fortlesse doctrine to a distressed soule, and con∣trarie vnto the sauing Matth. 14 31. Iam 1. 6. Rom. 4. 0. word of the Gospel, which teacheth, that certentie floweth from the nature of faith, and not doubting. III. That e∣very

man is bound in conscience vpon paine ofConcil. Trid. e. 14. can.  damnation, to make speciall confession of his mor∣tall sinnes, with all the particular circumstan∣ces thereof, once euery yeare to his Priest. This doctrine and practise, besides that it hath no war∣rant of sacred writte, nor yet any ground of Or∣thodoxe antiquitie, for 800 yeares more or lesse after Christ i maketh notably to the disturbing of the peace of conscience▪ in time of extremitie, considering that it is impossible either to vnder∣stand or remember all, many beeing vnknowne,Psal. 19 . and hidden and the minde beeing informed that forgiuenesse dependeth vpon such an enumera∣tion▪ may thus be brought into doubt and di∣strust, and will not be able to rest by faith in the sole mercie of God, the onely soueraigne medi∣cine of the soule. Againe, the griefe of the minde, doth not alwaies arise from all the sinnes that a man hath committed, neither doth the Lord se before the sinners eies, whatsoeuer euill hath bin done by him▪ but some one or more particulars; and these are they, that doe lie heauie vpon the heart and to be eased of them, will be worke e∣nough▪ though e doth not exhibite vnto the Confessour▪ a Catalogue of all the rest. IV. That some sinnes are veniall, because they are on∣ly besides the lawe of God not against it and be∣cause  ve∣niale, quod non olli or sinem d vltimum fi∣nem, vnde non mertur poenam ernam, sed tmpoalem. Ia∣cob. de Graphi∣s: Decision. au∣rar Ca. Conc. lib. 1. cap. 6. they in uer the sinner onely to temporal, and not to eternall punishments. This conclusion, first is false; For though it be graunted that some offences are greater, some lesser some in an high∣er degree, others in a lower: againe, that sinnes in regard of the euent, beeing repented of, or in

respect of the person sinning, beeing in Christ, and therfore accounted iust, are pardonable, be∣cause they are not imputed to condemnation; yet there is no sin of what degree soeuer, which is not simply, and of it selfe mortall, whether we respect the nature of the sinne, or the measure & proportion of diuine iustice. For in nature it is an anomie, that is to say, an aberration from the1. Ioh. 3. 4. perfect rule of righteousnesse, and therefore is subiect to the curse, both of temporary and eter∣nall death. It is an offence against the highest Maiestie, and consequently, man standeth by it ingaged to euerlasting torment. Secondly, it is a weake and insufficient ground of resolution, vn∣to a troubled conscience. For whereas true and sauing ioy is the daughter of sorrowe, and the heart of man cannot be lifted vp, in assurance of Gods fauour, to the apprehension and conceipt of heauenly comforts, vnlesse it be first abased, & by true humiliatiō, brought to nothing in it self. The remembrance of this, that the offence com∣mitted is veniall, may in some cases too much in∣large the heart, and giue occasion to presume, when haply there will be reason to the contrary. And if not that yet in the case of falling by infir∣mitie, after grace receiued, the mind beeing fore∣stalled with this erronious conceipt, that the sin is lesse, then it is indeede, because veniall, may in the issue be lesse quieted, and more perplexed.Concil. Trid. i. 14. can. . V. That a man may satisfie the iustice of the God, for the temporall punishment of his sinnes commit∣ted. To omit the vntrueth of this position, howe it maketh to the easing of the heart, or the asswa∣ging

of the griefe of minde in temptation, I ap∣peale to common experience. For when a man, beeing assured of the pardon of his sinnes, shall yet cōsider, that there is something more behind to be done on his part, how can he in probabili∣tie, rely himselfe wholly vpon Christs satisfacti∣on? How can he reape vnto himselfe frō thence any assurance of reconciliation to God, whome he formerly offended? If we may and must doe something in our own persons, whereby to ap∣pease the wrath of God, why hath our Sauiour taught vs for our hearts releife, wholly and onely to make the plea of pardon for our sinnes? True it is indeede, that Popish Confessors doe teach their Penitents, when they feele the wrath of god vpon them for sin, to stop the mouth of Consci∣ence, by performance of a formall humiliation and repentance, yea to offer vnto God some ce∣remoniall duties in way of satisfaction. But when sorrow seazeth vpon the soule, and the man falls into temptation, then it will appeare that these di∣rections were not currant; for notwithstanding them, he may want sound comfort in Gods mer∣cy, and run into despaire without recouerie. And for this cause, vpon experience it hath bin proo∣ued, that euen Papists themselues, in the houre of death, haue bin content to renounce their owne workes, yea the whole body of humane satifacti∣ons, and to cleaue onely to the mercie of God in Christ for their saluation.
By these instances, and many more that might be alleadged to this purpose, it is apparent, vpon how weake and vnstable grounds the Case-diui∣nitie

of the Popish Church standeth; and how in∣direct a course they take, for the resolution and direction of the troubled Conscience.
Now by the benefit & abuse of this Doctrine, we see how necessary it is, that in Churches which professe Christian religion, it should be more taught, & further inlarged then it is. And to this purpose it were to be wished, that men of know∣ledge in the Ministerie, that haue by the grace of God attained vnto the Tongue of the learned, would imploy their paines this way: not onely in searching into the depth of such points as stand in bare speculation, but in annexing thereunto the grounds and conclusions of practise, where∣by they might both informe the iudgement, and rectifie the conscience of the hearers. By this meanes it would come to passe, that the poore distressed soule might be releeued, pietie and de∣uotion more practized, the kingdome of Sinne, Satan, and Antichrist weakened, & impayred, & the contrarie kingdome of Christ Iesus more & more established.
What the Author & cōtriuer of the discourse ensuing hath done in this behalfe, it is euident by the whole course of his writings, that he hath left behinde him: all which, as they doe openly shew vnto the world, howe great a measure of know∣ledge & vnderstanding, with other endowmēts both of nature and grace, the Lord had inriched him withall, so doe they carrie with thē the sweet sauour of pietie and sanctification, wherewith he approued his heart vnto god, & his life vnto mē. Wherin also vpō occasion he hath propounded,

and explained sundrie notable rules of directiō & resolution of the conscience, as wil appeare to the view of the learned and well-aduised reader.
To let passe all the rest: this present worke doth affoard very sufficient testimonie, of his knowledge and dexteritie in that kind, attained vnto, not without great paines, much obseruati∣on, and long experience. A labour which com∣mendeth it selfe vnto the Church of God in two respects principally. One, because his grounds and principles, whereupon he giues direction, are drawne either directly, or by iust consequēce out of the writtē word, & so are of greater force, to giue satisfaction to the mind, either doubting, or distressed. The other, for that it is deliuered with such perspicuitie, and disposed in such or∣der and Methode, as fitteth best for the vnder∣standing and memorie, of him that shall peruse it.
Now this whole treatise of the Questions, I haue made bold to present vnto your Worship, and to publish abroad vnder your patronage and protection, as one to whome they doe iustly belōg. First, because God, who honoureth those that honour him, hath adorned you, not one∣ly with ciuill authoritie and dignitie in the Com∣monwealth, but with the honourable name of a Friend to the Church of God; a thing directly confirmed by your vnfained loue of the truth, and your continuall fauours to the teachers of the same, the Ministers and dispensers of the Gospel. Secondly, because as the Author of these Cases, was himself in many respects, bound vnto

you, while he liued; so his wife and children for his sake, haue receiued much kindnes at your hands, since his death; a manifest proofe of the truth and sinceritie of your affection towardes him in the Lord. And in the last place, it was my desire, by setting forth this and the other two parts that shall follow, vnder your name, to giue some testimonie of dutie to your Worship, pre∣suming that as you loued the Author, so you wil be pleased to patronize the worke, and fauou∣rably to interpret, of the paines and good inten∣tion of the publisher. And so ceasing your fur∣ther trouble, I humbly take my leaue, and com∣mend your Worship to the grace and fauour of God in Christ. From Emanuel Colledge in Cambridge. Iun. 28. 1604.

