



RIght Honourable: There is no one Doctrine, reuealed in the Word of God, or dispensed by the Prophets and Apostles, of greater vse and cōsequence in the life of man, then is that, which prescribeth a Forme of releeuing and rectifying the Conscience.
The benefit, which from hence issueth vn∣to the Church of God, is vnspeakable. For first, it serveth to discouer the cure of the dangerousest sore that can be, the wound of the Spirit. Which how great a crosse it is, the Wise man reporteth out of true experience, when he saith, that the Spirit of a man will su∣staine Prou. 18. 14. his infirmitie, but a wounded Spirit who can beare it? And his meaning is, that no out∣ward griefe, can fall into the nature of man, which will not be with patience indured, to the vtmost, so long as the minde is not troub∣led, or dismaied. But when once the Spirit is

touched, and the heart, (which beeing well apaied, is the very fountaine of peace to the whole man,) smitten with feare of the wrath of God for sinne; the griefe is so great, the burden so intolerable, that it will not by any outward meanes, be eased or asswaged.
Secondly, it giueth for all particular Ca∣ses, speciall and sound direction; whether man be to walke with God, in the immedi∣ate performance of the duties of his Seruice; or to conuerse with man, according to the state and condition of his life, in the Familie, Church, or Common-wealth. The want of which direction, of what force it is, to turne the actions of men, which are good in them∣selues, to sinnes in regard of the agents, S. Paul affirmeth in that generall Conclusion, Whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne. Wherein he Rom. 14. 23. would teach vs, that whatsoeuer is done, or vndertaken by men in this life, whether it concerne the knowledge and worship of God, or any particular dutie to be perfor∣med, by vertue of their Callings, for the com∣mon good; whereof they haue not sufficient warrant, and assurance in Conscience, groun∣ded vpon the Word, that it is to be done, or not to be done; to them it is a sinne.
Thirdly, it is of all other Doctrines, (bee∣ing rightly vsed) the most comfortable. For it is not founded in the opinions, and varia∣ble conceits of men, neither doth it consist, of Conclusions and Positions, which are one∣ly

probable and coniecturall: (for the Con∣science of the doubting or distressed partie, can not be established and rectified by thē:) but it resteth vpon most sufficient and cer∣taine Grounds, collected and drawne out of the very Word of God, which, as it is mightie Hebr. 4. 12. in operation, pearcing the heart, and discerning the thoughts and intents thereof, so is it alone a∣uaileable and effectuall to pacifie the minde, and to giue full satisfaction to the Consci∣ence.
And as the benefit is great; so the want of this Doctrine, together with the true manner of applying the same, is, and hath beene the cause, of many and great inconueniences. For euen of those that feare God, and haue recei∣ued to beleeue, there be many, who in the time of their distresses, when they haue con∣sidered the waight and desert of their sinnes, and withall apprehended the wrath of God, due vnto them; haue beene brought vnto hard exigents, mourning, and wayling, and Psal. 6. 6. and 22. 1, 2. crying out, as if God had forsaken them, vn∣till they haue beene releeued by the Spirit of Christ, in the meditation of the word, & pro∣mise Psal. 119. v. 49, 50. of God. But those especially, who haue not beene instructed in the knowledge of the truth, nor acquainted with the course of Gods dealing, with his distressed children, by reason of ignorance and blindnes in matters of Religion and pietie, when the Lord hath let loose the cord of their Consciences, and

set before their eyes, both the number of their sinnes committed, and the iust anger of God purchased thereby, what haue they done? surely despairing of the mercie of God, and their owne saluation, they haue ei∣ther growne to phrensie, and madnes, or els sorted vnto themselues fearefull ends, some by hanging, some by drowning, others by embruing their hands in their owne blood. And if not in regard of griefe and trouble of minde; yet for want of better resolution in particular cases, within the compasse of their generall or personall callings, (though other∣wise, men indued with some measure of knowledge and obedience,) they haue either abused, or els quite relinquished and forsaken their callings, and thereby become scanda∣lous, and offensiue vnto others.
Now then, as by these and sundrie other Instances of proofe, the matter it selfe ap∣peares to be of great waight and importāce, so it is most meete, that the best and fittest course should be taken, in the teaching and inforcing of the same. In which regard we haue iust cause, to challenge the Popish Church, who in their Case-writings haue er∣red, both in the substance and circumstances of this Doctrine, as shall appeare in the se∣quele.
First, because the dutie of releeuing the Conscience, is by them commended to the sacrificing Priest, which, though according

to their owne Canons Decret. de poenit. dist. 6. cap. 1. Caueat spiritual is iu∣dex, vt sicut non commisit crimen ne∣quitiae, itâ ō careat mune∣re scientiae. he should be a man of knowledge, and free from imputation of wickednes, yet oft times it falls out that he is either vnlearned, or els wicked and lewd of conuersation, and consequently vnfit for such a purpose.
Secondly, they teach that their Preists ap∣pointed to be comforters and releeuers of the distressed, are made by Christ himselfe Iudices in caufis poeni∣tentium. Bell. de poen. lib. 3. cap. 2. Concil. Trid. sess. 4. can. 9. Prolog. in Summ An∣tonni. Archi∣cpisc. Flo∣rentini. Mark. 2. 10. Reu. 3. 8. iudges of the Cases of conscience, hauing in their owne hands a iudicarie poer and authoritie, truly and properly to binde or to loose, to re∣mitte or to retaine sinnes, to open or to shut the kingdome of heauen. Whereas the Scrip∣ture vttereth a contrarie voice, that Christ onely hath the keyes of Dauid, which proper∣ly and truly openeth, and no man shutteth, and properly and truly shutteth, and no man openeth. And the Ministers of God are not called to be absolute Iudges of the Consciēce, but onely Messengers and Embassadors of re∣conciliation; 2. Cor. 5. 20. wherevpon it followeth, that they cannot be Theophl. comment. in Ioan. 3. 34. & Hieron. l. 3. comment. in Math. super verba. Tibi dabo claues. the authors and giers of remission of sinnes, but onely the Ministers and Dispen∣sers of the same.
Thirdly, the Papists in their writings haue scattered here and there, sundrie false and er∣ronious Grounds of Doctrine, much preiudi∣ciall to the direction or resolution of the Emanuel Sa. in Aphor. cō∣essarorum. Summa An∣gelica. capit. ides. paragr. 6, 7. Conscience in time of neede, as namely, I. That a man in the course of his life, may build himselfe vpon the faith of his teachers, and for

his saluation rest, contented with an implicite and vn-expressed faith. Which doctrine, as it is an onely meane, to keepe men in perpetuall blindnes and ignorance, so it serueth to no other purpose in the time of Temptatiō, but to plunge the hart of man into the pit of de∣spaire, it being vncapable of cōfort, for want of particular knowledg & vnderstāding of the word & promise of God. I. That euery man ought to stand in feare and doubt of the pardon of Concil. Trid. sess. 6. cap. 9. his sinnes, and that no man can be assured by the certentie of faith, either of the present fa∣uour of God, or of his owne saluation. True it is, that in respect of our owne vnworthi∣nes and indisposition, we haue iust cause, not onely to doubt and feare, but to dispaire and be confounded before the iudgement seat of God. Yet that a man should not be cer∣tainely resolued by faith of the mercie of God, in and for the merir of Christ, is a com∣fortlesse doctrine to a distressed soule, and contrarie vnto the sauing Matth. 14. 31. Iam. 1. 6. Rom. . 20. word of the Go∣spel, which teacheth, that certentie floweth from the nature of faith, and not doubting. III. That euery man is bound in conscience vpon paine of damnation, to make speciall confession of Concil. Trid. ess. 4. can. 7. his mortall sinnes, with all the particular cir∣cumstāces therof once euery yere to his Priest. This position & practise, besides that it hath no warrant of sacred writte, nor yet any ground of Orthodoxe antiquitie, for 800. yeares, more or lesse after Christ: it maketh

notably to the disturbing of the peace of Conscience, in time of extremitie, conside∣ring that is impossible, either to vnderstand or remember all, many beeing hidden and Psal. 19. 12. vnknowne. And the minde being in this case informed, that forgiuenesse dependeth vpon such an enumeration, may thus be brought into doubt and distrust, and will not be able to rest by faith in the sole mercie of God, the onely soueraigne medicine of the soule. A∣gaine, the griefe of the mind, doth not al∣waies arise from all the sinnes that a man hath committed, neither doth the Lord set before the sinners eies, whatsoeuer euill hath bin done by him; but some one or more par∣ticulars. And these are they, that doe lie hea∣vie vpon the heart; and to be eased of them, will be worke inough, though he doth not exhibite vnto the Confessour, a Catalogue of all the rest. IV. That some sinnes are veniall, because they are onely besides the Lawe of God, not against it, and because Peceatum ve∣niale, quod non tolt ordinem ad vltimum fi∣nem, vnde non meretur poenā aeternam, sed temporalem. Iacob. de Gra∣phiis: Decision. aurcar. Cas. Consc. l. 1. cap. 6. they binde ouer the sinner onely to temporal, and not to eter∣nall punishments. This conclusion, first is false; For though it be granted, that some offences are greater, some lesser, some in a higher de∣gree, others in a lower. Againe, that sinnes in regard of the euent, beeing repented of, or in respect of the person sinning, beeing in Christ, and therefore accounted iust, are par∣donable, because they are not imputed to condemnation; yet there is no sinne of what

degree soeuer, which is not simply, and of it selfe mortall, whether we respect the nature of the sinne, or the measure and proportion of diuine iustice. For in nature it is an anomie, that is to say, an aberration from the perfect 1. Ioh. 3. 4. rule of righteousnesse, & therefore is subiect to the curse, both of temporarie and eternall death. It is an offence against the highest Maiestie, and consequently, man standeth by it ingaged to euerlasting torment. Secondly, it is a weake and insufficient ground of reso∣lution, to a troubled Conscience. For whereas true and sauing ioy is the daughter of sorrow, and the heart of man cannot be lifted vp, in assurance of Gods fauour, to the apprehensiō and conceipt of heauenly comforts, vnlesse it be first abased, and by true humiliation, brought to nothing in it selfe; The remem∣brance of this, that the offence committed is veniall, may in some cases too much inlarge the heart, and giue occasion to presume, when haply there will be reason to the con∣trary. And if not that, yet in case of falling by infirmitie after grace receiued, the mind bee∣ing forestalled with this erronious conceipt, that the sinne is lesse, then it is indeede, be∣cause veniall, may in the issue be lesse quie∣ted, and more perplexed. V. That a man may satisfie the iustice of God, for the temporall punish∣ment Concil. Trid. sess. 1. can. 13. of his sinnes committed. To omit the vn∣truth of is position; Howe it maketh to the casing of the heart, or the asswaging of the

griefe of minde in temptation, I appeale to common experience. For when a man, bee∣ing assured of the pardon of his sinnes, shall yet consider, that there is something more behind to be done on his part, how can he in probabilitie, rely himselfe wholly vpon Christs satisfaction? How can he reape vnto himselfe from thence any assurance of re∣conciliation to God, whome he formerly of∣fended? If we may and must doe something in our owne persons, whereby to appease the wrath of God, why hath our Sauiour taught vs for our hearts releife, wholly and onely to make the plea of pardon for our sinnes? True it is indeede, that Popish Confessours doe teach their Penitents, when they feele the wrath of God vpon them for sinne, to stoppe the mouth of Conscience, by performance of a formall humiliation and repentance, yea to offer vnto God some ceremoniall duties in way of satisfaction. But when sorrow sea∣zeth vpon the soule, and the man falls into temptation, then it will appeare that these directions were not currant; for notwith∣standing them, he may want sound comfort in Gods mercie, and runne into despaire without recouerie. And for this cause, vpon experience it hath bin prooued, that euen Pa∣pists themselues in the houre of death, haue bin content to renounce their owne workes, yea the whole body of humane satisfactions, and to cleaue onely to the mercie of God

in Christ for their saluation.
By these instances, and many more that might be alleadged to this purpose, it is ap∣parent, vpon how weake and vnstable Grounds the Case-diuinitie of the Popish Church standeth; and how indirect a course they take, for the resolution and direction of the troubled Conscience.
Now by the benefit and abuse of this Do∣ctrine, we see how necessary it is, that in Churches which professe Christiā religion, it should be more taught, and further inlarged, then it is. And to this purpose it were to be wished, that men of knowledge in the Mini∣sterie, that haue by the grace of God attained vnto the Tongue of the learned, would imploy their paines this way: not onely in searching into the depth of such points as stand in bare speculation, but in annexing thereunto the grounds and conclusions of practise, wherby they might both informe the iudgement, & rectifie the conscience of the hearers. By this means it would come to passe, that the poore distressed soule might be releeued, pietie and deuotion more practised, the kingdome of Sinne, Satan, and Antichrist weakened, and impayred, and the contrarie kingdome of Christ Iesus more and more established.
What the Author & Contriuer of the Dis∣course ensuing hath done in this behalfe, it is euident by the whole course of his writings, that he hath left behinde him: all which, as

they doe openly shew vnto the world, howe great a measure of knowledge and vnder∣standing, with other endowments both of nature and grace, the Lord had inriched him withall; so they doe carrie with them the sweet sauour of pietie and sanctification, wherwith he approoued his heart vnto God, and his life vnto men. Wherein also vpon oc∣casion, he hath propounded, and explained sundry notable rules of direction and resolu∣tion of the Conscience, as wil appeare to the view of the learned & well-advised Reader.
To let passe all the rest: this present Trea∣tise giueth very sufficient testimonie, of his knowledge and dexteritie in that kinde; which could not be attained vnto, without great paines, much obseruation, and long ex∣perience. A labour which commendeth it selfe to the Church of God in two respects principally. One, because his grounds and principles are drawne either directly, or by iust consequence out of the written Word, and so are of greater force, to con∣vince the conscience, and to giue satisfaction to the mind, either doubting, or distressed. The other, for that it is deliuered with such perspicuitie, and disposed in such order and Methode, as fitteth best for the vnderstan∣ding and memory of any, whosoeuer shall peruse it.
Now this whole Treatise of the Questiōs, I haue made bold to present vnto your

Lordsh, and to publish abroad vnder your protection. First, because God, who vouchsa∣feth speciall fauour to them that honour him, hath adorned your estate with Honour, your person inwardly with many rich graces of his Spirit, and outwardly with the professi∣on and practise of true Religion; a thing di∣rectly confirmed by your vnfained loue of the truth, and continuall fauours to the Tea∣chers of the same, the Ministers and Dispen∣sers of the Gospel. Secondly, because as the Author of these Cases, was himselfe in many respects, bound vnto your Hon. while he li∣ued; so his wife and children for his sake, haue receiued much kindnes at your hands, since his death; a manifest proofe of the truth & synceritie of your affection towards him in the Lord. And in the last place, it was my desire, by setting them forth vnder your name, to giue some testimonie of dutie to your Hon. presuming that as you loued the Author, so you will be pleased to patronize the Worke, and fauourably to interpret, of the paines and good intention of the publi∣sher. And thus crauing pardon for my bold∣nes, I humbly take my leaue, and commend your Lordsh, to the grace & fauour of God in Christ. From Emanuel Colledge in Cambr. Novemb. 20. 1606.

