


AS the giuing of a gift vnto any one (my good Scholler) on hope to receiue for it a greater gift, is a kinde of vsurie: So to giue none at al for feare of losing reward, is a degree of auarice.
Againe, as to repent the giuing of a gift after it is giuen, is a testemonie of imprudencie: So to giue one per∣force without receiuing satisfaction for it from thē that receiue it is an vnwise bargaine. But who so cōside∣reth in his giuing of any gift, what he giueth, when he giueth, to whom he giueth & how much he giueth, may not onely be thought a true, but also a liberall and discreet friend.
Now I thy Tutor, louing thee faithfully, doe giue vnto thee with a most hartie & Zealous good will, this

little Pamdhilet, intituled: A strange Contentiō betweene three brethren &c. And therfore euē as the right gi∣uing of a gift, is an act of liberalitie, so a little remuneration is a manifest token of a thankful minde. Now the recompēce that I request (for this) at thy hāds, is no other, thē first to haue thee courteously to accept it, next willingly to read it, & lastly, wisely & discretely to cōsider of it. And so do∣ing, although it beareth outwardlye the badge of brauling betwene bre∣thrē, yet by meanes of the same, thou shalt see theree execrable vices so pi∣thily deciphered & set foorth, that is to say, Whoordome, Dronkenness, & Diceplaying, as I haue no doubt, but it shal both turne to thy pleasure, and others Profite. For what greater Plea∣sure may be presented vnto the, or what sweeter profit vnto other, then to see, (by sundry exampls, valeable reasōs, & inuincible argumēts) those dangerous shelues, & Perilous rocks laid open (thereby the better to shun & auoid them) on which many earst

haue made, & diuers yet dayly doe make most shamefull and grieuous shipwrake. Well as I saide, touch∣ing this my gift, my request once a∣gaine is, that you first courteously ac∣cept it, & thē that you request others vprightly to iudge of it. By dooing wheroff they whom you request shal do wisely to themselues, & thākfully to you, & you curteously vnto them, & thankfully vnto me, & I lo∣uingly, liberally, & curte∣ously vnto you all, which am yours in all I may to do you good.

