


CHristian Reader, there are at this day foure seuerall opini∣ons of the order of Gods di∣uine Predestination.
The first, is of the old and newe Pelagians; who place the cause of Gods Predesti∣nation in man: in that they hold, that God did ordeine men either to life or death, according as he did fore∣see, that they would by their naturall free will, ei∣ther reiect or receiue grace offered.
The second of them, who (of some) are termed Lutherans; which teach, that God foreseeing how all mankinde being shut vp vnder vnbeliefe, would therfore reiect grace offered, did hereupon purpose to choose some to saluation of his meer mercy with out any respect of their faith or good works, and the rest to reiect being moued to do this, because he did eternallye foresee that they would reiect his grace offered them in the Gospell.
The third, of Sempelagian Papists, which a∣scribe Gods Predestination, partlye to mercye, and partly to mens foreseen preparations and meritori∣ous workes.
The fourth, of such as teach, that the cause of the execution of Gods Predestination in his mercye in Christ, in them which are saued, and in them which perish, the fall and corruption of man: yet so, as that the decree and eternal counsell of God, concerning them both, hath not any cause beside his will and

pleasure. Of these foure opinions, the three former, I haue laboured to oppugne as erronious; and to maintaine the last, as being a trueth which wil beare weight in the ballance of the Sanctuary.
A further discourse wherof, here I make bold to offer to thy godly consideration: in reading wherof regard not so much the thing it selfe, penned verye slenderly, as mine intent and affection: who desire among the rest to cast my myte into the treasurie of the Church of England; and for want of gold, pearle and precious stone, to bring a Rammes Skinne or twaine, and a little Goates haire, to the building of the Lords Tabernacle. Exod. 35.23.
The Father of our Lord Iesus Christ graunt that according to the ritches of his glory, thou maiest be strengthened by his Spirite in the inner man, that Christ may dwel in thy hart by faith, to the end that thou being rooted and grounded in loue, maiest be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth and length and deapth, and height thereof: and to know the loue of Christ which passeth know¦ledge, that thou maist be filled with all fulnes of God. Amen. Farwell. Aprill 18. the yeere of the last patience of Saints. 1591.

