



RIght Worshipfull, amongst the manifold points of Chri∣stian Religion, the trueth of the Doctrine cōcerning Pre∣destination is worthy serious and sober study for the sound vnderstan∣ding thereof. For first, it is something diffi∣cult & obscure. Secondly, because it is by some eagerly impugned, as a friuolous and forged inuention of mans braine. Thirdly, diuers opinions haue passed from diuers mē diuersly about this one point; whereas



notwithstanding there is but one truth, and one definite and constant sentence to be found in holy writ concerning it. Fourthly, this one doctrine doth giue very good eui∣dence, and an ample demonstration of Gods infinite mercie and exact iustice. Fiftly, it affordeth some taste of his pro∣found and impenetrable counsell. Sixtly, it doth notably manifest his admirable wisdome and policie, and the incorruptible purity of his nature, who wisely disposeth all things, and vseth euen euils without in∣iustice, and the least receipt or infusion of corruption; and all for the manifestation of the glory of his Name, and of the splen∣dour of his renowmed properties. Se∣uenthly, it confoundeth the common ca∣uill of many desperate and infatuated A∣theists, who would make Gods predestina∣tion the pillar of their sensuall security, and secure sensualitie. Lastly, it ministreth ex∣ceeding comfort vnto those, who renoun∣cing the kingdome of Sinne, do liue like



Saints in the kingdome of Grace. First, because it is not possible for any such to sinne with full consent of heart. Second∣ly, because no personall merits are re∣quired of them. Thirdly, because the Spirit of God abideth in them, who is busy within the hiue of their hearts as a Bee, and worketh them like waxe. Fourthly, because God hath eternally predestinated them to eternall ioyes, and those also incomprehensible and inef∣fable. Fiftly, because God hath in abun∣dance vouchsafed that to them being but an handfull, which hee hath denyed to whole heapes besides. Sixtly, for that they being elected, can in no wise perish, for the counsell of the Lord shall stand for euer, Psal. 33. 11. And hee loueth them with an euerlasting loue, Ieremy 3. 4. Though a Mother should forget her Child, yet he will not forget them, for he hath grauen them vpon the palme of his hand, Isay 49. 15, 16. therefore hee



will confirme them vnto the end, 1. Cor. 1. 8. and by his power keepe them vnto saluation, 1. Pet. 1. 5. He will loue them cōstantly, though he visit their transgres∣sions with rods, Psal. 89. 32, 33. He will neuer turne away from them, though he Iere. 32. 40. Ioh. 16. 12. take them by the neck (as Iob speaketh) and beat them, though he cut their reines and breake them, and though he pow∣reth their gall vpon the ground, and run∣neth vpon them like a Gyant. Ioseph did affect his brethren entirely, though hee spake roughly to them. Hee may also sometimes let them fall, as a louing Nurse may her child, but he will lift them vp a∣gaine; therefore howsoeuer they may fall, yet they shall not fall away. Indeed Piptein. they may leaue their first loue, as the Ecpiptein Church of Ephesus did, but they shall ne∣uer leaue to loue at all, if euer they loued Reu. 2. 4. truly. For (as Paul sayth) Loue doth neuer fall away, it may be lessened, but it cannot 1. Cor. 13 8. be lost. In like manner, their faith may



be couered, as the Sunne with a duskie cloud in a gloomy day: or as the trees are with snow sometimes in winter; but yet it continueth firmely fixed (though now and then eclipsed) in the sphaere of the heart, and keepeth sap in the roote. For the righteous man is as a tree planted by the riuers of waters, Psal. 1. 3. and is built by that great builder of heauen and earth vpon a rock, Math. 16. 18. These comforts will this one doctrine affoord, being throughly pondered and vnder∣stood. And no doubt these and the like considerations mooued that holy and learned man of blessed memory, to pub∣lish this present treatise for the benefit of the Church, and the same haue also inci∣ted vs to turne it out of the toong where∣in he wrote it, into the English, for their profit who are ignorant in the other; and the rather, because it is contriued and penned very plainely, soundly, and suc∣cinctly, as the subiect will permit. The



which (Right Worshipfull) assuring our selues of your vnfeigned loue vnto the truth, we do present and dedicate to you, in token of deserued gratitude for vnde∣serued kindnesse, not doubting of your courteous and kinde acceptance. And thus we humbly take our leaues, recom∣mending you and all yours to the pro∣tection of Iehoua. Rochester, this 19. of February. 1605.

