



RIght Honourable: The
word of God that one∣ly
Oracle of truth, hath
pointed out the Ene∣mie
of mankind, by his
proper Characters, in
sundrie places. Our Sa∣uiour
tearmes him, the
Prince of this World;Ioh. 12. 11.
& aIoh. 8. 44 murtherer from the beginning▪ Peter com∣pares
him to1. Pet 5. 8. a roaring Lyon, that rangeth a∣broad
in the earth, seeking whō he may deuoure.
His attempts in regard of their quality, are cal∣led
2. Cor. 2. 11. ▪ subtill & deepe deuises; yeaEph. 6. 11. 
plots exquisitely contriued, and orderly
framed, as it were in Methode. The meaning
of the holy Ghost in these and such like attri∣butes,
is, to expresse that measure of policie and
power, which Satan hath reserued vnto him∣selfe
euen in the state of his Apostasie, improo∣ued
by long experience, and instantly practised

vpon the sonne, of men, that he might set vp
in the world, a spirituall regiment of time, as a
meane to encounter the kingdome of grace,
and  it were possible, to bring the same to ru∣ine.
To forbeare instances of open force
made against God and his Church by other
courses, for the compassing of his dec, how
skilfully he worke, his owne aduantage, by se∣cret
opposition in the exercise of that cursed
Art, which is the Subiect of the present Dis∣course,
is a point not vnworthie your Honou∣rable
consideration.
The Power of this Prince of darknesse, bee∣ing
aboue the might of all sensible Creatures,
and euery way seconded by the greatnesse of
his knowledge and experience, manifeseth it
selfe herein, for the most part, by workes of
wonder, transcendent in regard of ordinarie ca∣pacitie,
and diuersly dispsed by his chosen in∣struments
of both text▪ sometime in matter of
Diuination, sometime by Inchantment, some∣time
by rare  and delusions; otherwhiles
by hurting, by cuing, by raising of Tempests,
by speedie conuayance and transportation from
place to place, &c. and all to purchase vnto
himselfe admiration, feare, and faith, of the
creduous world, which is vsually carried away,
with affectation and applause of signes and
wonders. His policie, appeareth in a wise
and exquiite manner of framing and concei∣uing
both his practises and grounds; the one to
procure credit and intertainment, the other,

that he may not faile of his purpose, but pro∣ceede
vpon certenties.
Touching the manner of his practise. He
stands resolued, that the world hath taken no∣tice
of him to beIoh. 8. 4. a lyar, and the father thereof:
and therefore if he should offer to speake in his
one language, or informe an Art by Rules of
his owne deuising; he might haply incurre su∣spicion
of falshood. Hereupon he composeth
his courses , by way of counterfait and
imitation, not of the actions and dealings of
men, but of the order of Gods owne procee∣ding
with his Church; holding it a sure princi∣ple
in policie, That actions will be much more
effectuall, when they be framed vnto the best
presidents, then when they are suted to the di∣rection
of meaner examples. To this purpose,
as God hath made a Couenant with his
Church, binding himselfe by promise to be
their God, and requiring of them the conditi∣on
of faith and obedience; so doth Satan in∣dent
with his Subiects by mutuall confedera∣cie,
either solemnly or secretly; whereby they
bind themselues on the one part to obserue his
Rules, and he on the other to accomplish their
desires. Againe, God giues his Word, the In∣terpreter
of his will, and his Sacraments, the
eales of his promises, to which beeing rightly
administred and receiued, he hath tied his own
presence, and the worke of his grace in them
that beleeue. Answerably to this, the Deuill
giues a word of direction to his Instruments,

and addeth vnto it, Charmes, Figures, Chara∣cters,
and other outward Ceremonies, at the
vse whereof he hath bound himselfe to be pre∣sent,
and to manifest his power in effecting the
thing desired. Furthermore, God hath re∣uealed
his will to the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, by familiarGen. 18. 17. conference, byNum. 16. dreams,
byA∣mos 3. 7. inspiration, byAct. 10. 10. Trances: In the same ma∣ner,
Satan hath his Diuinors, and Soothsayers,
his Pythonisses, his Cassandras, his Sibylles, to
whome he maketh knowne things to come, by
familiar presence, by dreames, &c. To con∣clude,
God had in the Old Testament his
Temple at Ierusalem, yea hisExod 25. 22. Nmb. 7. 89. Oracle, from
whence he spake, and gaue the answer vnto
Moses: So of auncient times, the deuill ere∣cted
his Temple atHerodot. Euterpe. Dodona, and Delphos,
whence he gaue his answers, for the satisfacti∣on
of the superstitios Heathen. Yea, and at
this day, as the Ministers of God doe giue re∣solution
to the conscience in matters doubtfull
and difficult: so the ministers of Satan, vnder
the name of Wise-men, and Wise-women, are
at hand, by his appointment, to resolue, direct,
and helpe ignorant and vnsetled persons, in ca∣ses
of distraction, losse, or other outward cala∣mities.
Now the Grounds whereupon he buildeth
his proceedings for certentie, are cunningly ga∣thered
from the disposition of mans heart, by
naturall all corruption, and that in three speciall
instances. First, he knowes that Man naturally

out of the light of grace, hath but1. Cor. 2. 14. . a meere
Saule, indued onely with some generall and
confused notions; and as for matters of deeper
apprehension touching God and heauenly
things, there is a vaile of ignorance and blind∣nesse
drawne ouer the eyes of his mind. Wher∣upon,
though he be apt to know and worship
a God, and learne his will, yet for want of in∣formation
by the word, he is prone to erre in
the practise of his notion. Here Satan applies
himselfe to mans measure, and at his owne will,
drawes the minde into error, by his delusions,
and impostures. This made the2. king. 17. 29. Ih 4. 21. Samaritants in
the Old Testament, and the superstitiousAct. 17. 3. A∣thenians
in the New, to worship an vnknowne
God, that is the1. Cor. 10. 20. Deuill. Hence it was, that the
greatest Clarkes of Greece,Diog. La∣ert. lib. 1 in Thaltis e∣pist. ad Phe∣recid. & l. 3. Strabo Geo∣gr. l. 17. Thales, Plato,
and the rest, for want of a better light, sought
vnto the Wizzards of Egypt, whome they cal∣led
Prophets, men instructed by Satan in the
grounds of Diuination. And of this sort
were Iannes and lambres mentioned in the
2. Tim. 3. 8. Scriptures. Hence it was also that the aun∣cient
Heathen, hauingba 8. 19, 20. no Law and Testimo∣nie
from God, inquired at Soothsayers, and mur∣muring
Inchanters; others betooke them∣selues,
in matters of doubt and difficultie, to
the old Oracles ofDiod. Sic. l. 17. Plin. l. 5. c. 5. Iupiter Ammon in Libya,
ofHerodot. Euterpe. Strabo Geo∣gr. l. 16. ex Hom. Odyss. . Iupiter Dodonaeus at Dodona in Epirus;
ofPasan. in Phocicis. Herodot. Euterpe Str Geogr. lib. 9. & l. 16. Apollo at Delphos, ofPasan. in Hoeoticis. Strabo Geo∣gr. lib. 9. Iupiter Tropho∣nius
in Boeotia, and the rest; where the Deuill
gaue the answer, sometimes one way, and

sometimes another. Secondly, Satan by ob∣seruation
perceiueth, that man vpon aOmn su∣perstiti i∣becilli ani∣mi atque a nilis est. Cic. de Divin. weake
and ignorant minde, is prone superstitiously to
dote vpon the creatures, attributing some di∣uine
operation or vertue to them, without any
ground of Gods word, or common vnderstan∣ding;
and consequently disposed to worship
God in some worke of man, or to ioyne to the
sme worship the inuentions of man, which he
hath not commanded. Vpon which ground he
made the Heathen to dote vpon their wise∣men,
to regardLevit. 19. 31. Soothsayers, and them that
wrought with Spirits; The ChaldeanCle Al. . lib. 6. Strabo Geo∣gr. l. 15. Philoso∣phers
renowmed for their superstitions and
Magicall courses, to make the Heauens, fatali∣um
Legum Tabulam, ascribing that to the ver∣tue
of the Starres, which was knowne and done
by Satanicall operation; The Magicians of Per∣sia,
to admit of corruptions in their auncient
good learning, and to giue themselues, vpon
reading the fabulous writings of the Chaldean
Sorcerers,Dan  2. Matth. 2. 1. to the sludie of vnlawfull Arts in∣uented
by himselfe, both before and after the
times of Daniel the Prophet: Lastly, the n∣cient
Romanes vpon a superstitious doage, ne∣uer
to vndertake any businesse of weight, isi
auspicatò, vnlesse they had luckie consent and
warrant from the Colledges of their Augurors
erected by Romulu. Thirdly, there is a na∣turall
Distemper in the minde of man, shewing
it selfe in these particulars, That he cannot en∣dure
to stand in feare of imminent daunger;

That he swells in an high conceit of his owne
deserts, specially when he is in lower estate,
then he would be; That he will not beare a
wrong done, without reuenge; That he rests
not satisfied, with the measure of knowledge
receiued, but affecteth the searching of things
secret, and not reuealed. When the minde is
possessed with these troubled passions, with
care to helpe it selfe; then comes the Deuill,
and ministreth occasion to vse vnlawfll means
in the generall, and forceth the minde by con∣tinuall
suggestion, to determine it selfe in par∣ticular
vpon his owne crafts. It was the case
of1. Sam 28. Saul, and ofDan. 2. 1, 2. Nebuchadnetsar. It caused
many of the Heathen Philosophers, to go from
Athens to Memphis, from Grecia to Syria, from
men on earth to wicked Spirits in hell, to get
more illumination at the hands of the Prince of
darkenesse. It mooued sundrie al-contented
Priests of Rome,Platina in Sylv. 2. &c. Fascie. tem∣porum. to aspire vnto the chaire of
Supremacie, by Diabolicall assistance; yeaBenno Cardinal. de Sylvest  & Gregor. 6. Act. 8 9. to
exercise Magicall arts, when they were Popes:
and thereby to manifest indeed, that they were
not the true Successors of Simon Peter, but
heyres of the vertues of Simon that Magus,
who bewitched the people of Samaria, and
professed to doe that by the great power of
God, which he wrought by the ayde and assi∣stance
of the Deuill.
If any doe thinke it strange, that Satan
should in this sort oppose himselfe to the king∣dome
of God, and maintaine his owne princi∣palitie,

by such vngodly arts and exercises;August. En∣chirid. cap. 95. & 96.
They must knowe, that this and all other euills
come to passe euen by the will of God, who
hath iustly permitted the same; To punish the
wicked for their horrible sines;1. Sam. 28. as Saul for his
wickednesse: To auenge himselfe vpon Man for
his ingratitude;2 Thess. 2. 10, 11, 12. who hauing the truth reuealed
vnto him, will not beleeue or obey it; To wa∣ken
and rowze vp the godly, who are sleeping
in any great sinnes or infirmities; Lastly, to
trie and prooue his people, whether they will
cleaue to him and his word,Deut. 13. 3. or seeke vnto Sa∣tan
and wicked Spirits.
Now from the consideration of the pre∣misses,
we conclude it a necessarie thing for the
Church and people of God, to be acquainted
with the dealing of Satan in this kinde, that
knowing his subtill deuises, they may learne to
auoyd them. For which purpose this Treatise
was first framed, and now exhibited to your
Lordship. The iust commendation whereof,
aboue others formerly divulged touching this
Argument, appeareth herein, that it serueth to
the full opening and declaration of Satans Me∣thode
in the ground and practises of Witch∣craft.
Wherein among many other remarkable
points, it may please you to take speciall notice
of these particulars. I. That they doe grossely
erre, who either in expresse tearmes denie that
there be Witches, or in effect, and by conse∣quent;
auouching that there is no league be∣tweene
them and the Deuill; or affirming they

can doe no such miraculous workes, as are
ascribed to them. The former issueth plainly
our of the bodie of the Discourse. And for the
latter; That there is a Couenant betweene
them, either explicite in manner and forme, or
implicite by degrees of superstitious procee∣ding
in the vse of meanes insufficient in them∣selues;
is plainely taught and confirmed in the
same. That Witches may and doe worke won∣ders,
is euidently prooued; howbeit not by an
omnipotent power, Reignald Scot, epist. . (as the  hath
vnlearnedly and improperly tea ) but by
the assistance of Satan their Princ ho is a
powerfull Spirit, but yet a Creatu well as
they. And the Wonders wrough  them are
not properly and simply miracles,Miravel mi∣rand, non Miracula. but workes
of wonder, because they exceede the ordinarie
power and capacitie of men, especially such as
are ignorant of Satans habilitie, and the hidden
causes in nature, whereby things are brought to
passe. II. That the Witch truely conuicted,
is to be punished with death, the highest de∣gree
of punishment; and that by the Lawe of
Moses, the equitie whereof is perpetuall. Yea
euen the better Witch of the two in common
reputation, because both are equally enemies
to God, and all true religion; and it is well
knowne by true experience, that all professed
Sorcrers, are guiltie of many most monstrous
impieties. III. That the Miracles of the
Popish Church at this day, are indeed either no
Miracles, or false and deceitfull workes. Touch∣ing

corporall presence in the Sacrament, which
they affirme to be by miracle; If it were true,
then miracles were not yet ceased, but should
still be as ordinarie in the Church, as are the Sa∣craments.
A point not onely confuted in the
latter part of this Treatise,Lib. de civ. Dei. 22. c. 8. but also by the
testimonie of purer Antiquitie. Augustine
saith, That miracles were once necessarie to
make the world beleeue the Gospel; but he that
now seekes a signe that he may beleeue, is a won∣der,
yea  monster in nature. Chrysostome
conclude  on the same grounds,Homil. 19. ope. im∣perfect. that there
is now in the Church, no necessitie of working
Miracles; and calles him a false Prophet that
now takes in hand to worke them. Againe, if
there be a miracle in the Sacrament, it is con∣trarie
to the nature of all those that were
wrought, either by Moses and the Prophets, or
by Christ, and his Apostles. For they were
apparent to the eye, but this is insensible; and
therfore neither of orce to mooue admiration,
nor to conuince the minde of man, and make
him to beleeue. As for those, which are pre∣tended
to be wrought by Saints in that church;
if we make recourse to the Primitiue times,
wherein God gaue the gift, to breede faith in
the Gentiles; we shall finde that the power of
producing such workes, was neuer actually in∣herent
in the Apostles,Act. 3. 12. 16. but dispensed by their▪
in the Name of Christ: Neither was it in their
libertie, to worke miracles, when they would,
but when it pleased God, vpon speciall cause▪

to cal them thereunto. And i neither the
power nor the will was in them, much lesse
is it likely to be sound in any of the Saints.
And for their Reliques, of what name so∣euer,
so greatly magnified and resorted vnto;
we denie there is any such vertue in them. For
they may not be thought to be more effectuall
then the hem of Christs garment, from which
the power of healing the woman did not pro∣ceede,
but from himself:Luk. 8. 46. Or, then the Napkin
of Paul, which did not cure the sicke, but the
power of God onely, dispensed by the hands of
Paul.Act. 19. 1. 11. Miracles therefore, auouched by them, to
be wrought at the Tombs & Statues of Saints,
and by their reliques and monuments, are but
meere Satanicall wonders, seruing to maintaine
Idolatrie and superstition; and are in truth, no
better then the wonders of the Donatists in S.
Augustines time,Aug. lib de vnital. eccl. cap. 16. aut figmenta mondcium ho∣minum,
aut portnta fallacium spirituum.2. Cor. 4. 4. IV.
That the light of the Gospel purely preached,
is a soueraigne meane, to discoue & conound
the power and policie of San in Witch-craft
and Sorcerie. The wod of God preached, is the
weapn of the Christians warfare, and is migh∣tie
through God to cast downe strong bolds.2. Cor. 10. 4. At
the dispensation of i by the disciples of Christ,
Satan fall from heauen a lightning.Luk. 10. 18. After the
ascension of Christ into Heauen, in the times of
Claudius CesarIust. Mart. Apol. ad An∣ton., the Deuill stirred vp sundrie
persons, who in regard of the admirable works
which they did, by the helpe of Magicke and

Sorcerie, were accounted as Gods, and their
Statues erected and worshipped with great re∣uerence.
Amongst the rest, one Simon, called
by a kinde of eminencie; Magus, practising his
trade with successe, to the admiration of the
multitude,Act. . 10. was holden to be the great power of
God. Whose dealing was first discouered by
the light of the word, shining in the Ministery
of the Apostles, and himselfe conuicted with
such euidence of truth, to be an Instrument of
Satan, that he was forced at length to flie ou
of Samai into the Westerne parts,Euseb. Eccl. hist. lib. 2. cap. 12. as Eusebi∣us
recordeth in his Ecclesiasticall Historie. By
this, Christ the true angel of the Couenant, lo∣ked
and bound vp Satan for a 1000.Rev. 20. 2. yeares af∣ter
his ascension, that he might not be so gene∣rally
powerfull in seducing the Gentiles, as he
had beene before his incarnation. But toward
the expiration of those yeares, when corrupti∣on
began to creepe into the Papacie; when the
Bishops affected that Sea, and aspired vnto it
by Diabolicall arts; when the Canons, Decrees,
Sentences, Synodlls, Derialls, Clemenines,
Extrauagants, with other Laws and Constituti∣ons,
preuailed aboue the Scriptures; then began
Satan againe to erect his kingdome, and these
workes of iniquitie to be set abroach.
Thse points together with the whole work
ensueing▪ I humby commend to your Hono∣rable
patronage, that vnder your protection
they may freely passeth the common view of
the world. Wherin if I seem ouer-bold, thus to

presse vpon your Lordship vnknowne; my an∣swer
in at hand; That all by-respects  part,
I haue beene hereunto induced many waies.
First, vpon a reuerent opinion of those rare gifts
of knowledge and pietie; wherewith God hath
beautified your person, nd thereby aduanced
you to high place, and estimation in this Com∣mon-wealth;
Whereof those your graue and
indicious speeches, euen in the weightiest mat∣ters
touching God and Cesar, as also those ma∣ny
learned writings, haue giuen large testimo∣nie.
Frō which hath issued the greatnes of your
Name, both in the present iudgement of the
world, and in future expectation. Next out
of a resolued perswasion of your Honourable
disposition, as in generall to the whole house of
Leui, so particularly to those, whose labours
haue fruitfully flowed out of the Schooles of
the Prophets, amongst whome the Author of
this booke, in his time, was none of the mea∣nest.
Lastly, by the consideration of the Ar∣gument
arising out of a Law Iudiciall, agreea∣ble
to the calling and qualitie of a Iudge. A
Law penall in regard of the offence, and there∣fore
sutable to his proceedings, whose office is
to heare with fauour, to determine with equi∣tie,
to execute iustice with moderation. A law
of the highest, and greatest weight, immedi∣ately
concerning God and his Honour, and
therefore appertaining to him,Det. 1. 16. 2. Chron. 19. 6. that sits in the
place of God, to maintane his right, that he may
be with him, in the cause and iudgement.

By such Motiues, I haue incouraged my ,
vnder assurance of your Lordships pardon, to
present you with that, wherein you are most
deseruedly interessed; further intreating your
fauourable interpretation and acceptance, both
of the qualitie of the Worke, and of the paines
of the Publisher. And thus heartily wishing
to your Lordship increase of grace and honour,
with a daily influence of blessing and direction
from heauen, vpon your graue consultations
and employments, I humbly take my leaue, and
commend you to the grace of God, by whome
doe rule all the Iudges of the earth.Prov. 8. 16. Finching∣field.
Octob. 26. 1608.

