



SIR, many and ex∣cellent benefites hath the Lord in mercy vouchsafed to vs these eight and fortie by-past yeeres together: of which this is not the least, if not the greatest, that hee hath dispelled the duskie clowdes of Popish darknesse as palpable as that of Egypt, and hath caused the Sun∣light Exo. 10. 21. of the Gospell to shine cleerely in all our coasts. Hee sheweth his



word vnto vs, as he did vnto Iaacob, Psa. 147. 19 his statutes and his iudgements, as he did sometimes to Israel. He hath gi∣uen vs his Prophets and Embassa∣dours, which doe serue like that cloude and pillar of fire to direct vs Exo. 13. 22 in our pilgrimage through the wil∣dernesse of this wicked world into celestiall Canaan. Hee hath thrust forth many faithfull and industrious labourers into his Vineyard to prune and to dresse the vines of our soules, that we may bring foorth the grapes of pietie and the clusters of iustice; (vnlesse we will needs be like to the Cypresse, which, as Plinie saith, can indure no husbanding, but maketh that her maladie, which is a medi∣cine to other trees) Amongst whom the Author of this learned Tractate did shew himselfe with the formost; carrying alwaies with him a Light of learning, and a Lampe of godly



liuing. And, qualis vita, finis ita; As he was a Lampe whiles he liued, so like a Lampe, alijs inseruiens seipsum con∣sumpsit. His whole life was labour, seribenda dicens & legenda scribens. One whereof was this present dis∣course and platforme concerning the true vnderstanding and vsing of the Scriptures, written in his yonger yeeres: which I am bold to present and dedicate to your Worship in this plight you see; partly because it is a Thesaurus and store-house of ex∣cellent precepts, (as Domitius Piso saith that bookes should bee such) hauing in it , sufficient fur∣niture to further perfection in that sacred science: and partly to de∣monstrate my gratitude, and deuo∣ted affection to you, who haue al∣waies bin a constant patrone (etiam minitante Fortuna) to my neerest and dearest friends.


Thus I take my humble leaue, de∣siring your kinde acceptance, and so commend your Worship with your whole progenie to the prote∣ction of the Lord. Lon∣don, Ian. 1. 1606.

