



Most Reverend Father in God;
THis following discourse which I make bold to commend to the World under your Graces most favourable protection, containes the summe and substance of a Smon purposly studied to have been preached in your Mtopolitane Church of S. Peters in Yorke, at the summer Assize, 160. To the publicat on whereof, besides the generall zeale which I of duty beae and owe to Gods house and inheritance, I have been the rather in∣duced for these reasons following;
First, tht I might testfie my thankefulnesse to God for that portion of inheritance he hath allot∣ted me amongst the sonnes of Levi; that among so many that have of late endeavoured the repaire of his decayed Sanctuarie, and to restore unto

him and his Ministers that portion o inheritance he hath reserved to himselfe for them, I might bring at least stones and morter to helpe forward and further so great and necessarie a worke.
Secondly, that the greater Volumes of Doctor Tilseley and Mr. Mountague, which in regard of the greatnesse of the price, and manner of hand∣ling, are not obvious to all mens hands and un∣derstandings, may by this smaller worke, and plaine discourse become common to all men; and so that great opinion that most men have of the unanswerablenes of Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, may be in some measure, if not fully satisfied.
Thirdly, to stirre up not onely your Grace with the rest of the Reverend Fathers of the Church, but all other true-hearted Christians to further the repaire of Gods house, and the redu∣cing and bringing backe that portion of inheri∣tance, by Impropriations and other meanes so long detained from God and his Ministers, and so procure unto him and them that due honour, love, respect, and maintenance, which his mercies, their paines and places doe justly challenge at all mens hands. Never had the Ministers of God more neede to urge this point then in these times, in regard both of the generall opposition of men of all sorts against it and them, as also of those manifold strange disasters which have already sazed upon this our Kingdome, and suspiciously hng over our heads. I know the seeming impos∣sibility

of reducing Impropriations and other Churches rites, due to Gods house and Ministers, without great losse & dammage to many particu∣lars, hath beene a just cause to hinder all wel-di∣sposed persons from attempting this so worthy and necessary a worke: But if it will please your Grace, with the rest of our Reverend Bishops, now at last to assay it, I doubt not but the project may be so made, that in a short time the matter may be effected, and all Impropriations restored to the Church (this conclusion held, that all Tithes may bee payed in their proper kinde) without any losse or dammage at all to the Lai∣tic who now enjoy such Impropriations, without any hurt to the Church or Churchmen in gene∣rall; to few, if any, in particular: but so done, that God shall bee much thereby glorified, the King and Kingdome not oney much honoured, but the revenewes of the Crowne increased, the Church of God in all places of these Kingdomes in a short time supplyed with a sufficient and able preaching-Ministerie, the thing so much to be desired; the Gospell thereby in all places most plentifully propagated, to the rooting out of Po∣perie and superstition, and to the daly increa∣sing of Gods Church and Kingdome, which without this course can never be expected.
Fourthly, to make answer to two particulars of moment, specified and much mistaken by Mr. Selden in his Historie of Tithes; the one a custome

within mine owne Parish, grounded upon a do∣nation of Robert de Hessell to the Monastery of Gisburne; the other within the East-riding of Yorkeshire, grounded upon a customary payment of Threaves; whereby it will appeare that Mr. Selden hath not been so curious and carefull in this his Master-piece, as he would have the world beleeve he hath beene.
Fiftly, that I may give the World notice, who, and of what condition those Ministers have been, and still are in the Church, that have op∣pugned Gods ight in his House and Tithes, and that fill the world with such like strange and idle positions. And that those men mght againe know, that howsoever the pure woldlings fawne upon them, as the onely true sanctified Church∣men in these times; yet it is not ou of any such true conceit thy have of them, but onely to hu∣mor them up in their froward positions and doctrines; well knowing that by this meanes they may not onely with more freedome abuse their owne Pastors whom God hath set over them, detaining from them what of right and due appetaines unto them; but they know that by these factious doctrines and practises, there is a gappe and way made for them for time to come, to enter upon the rest of God; inheritnce, yet remaining to his poore Mnisters, the onely for∣bidden fruite so much desired on all hands in these dayes.
And, though last named, yet neither least nor last in my intention, that I might tender some thankefull dutie and service to your Grace, for those manifold favours I have from time to time received from you both before and since I was your servant, as beeing he alone by whose love and protection, next under God, I have not onely peaceably enjoyed mine owne, which otherwise had been violently extorted from me, but I have been able to helpe and succour my friends against the factious abetments of their adversaries and enemies. For these reasons (most Reverend Father in God) have I made bold to publish this following discourse, the which to∣gether with my person, I commend unto your Graces protection; no wayes doubting but as it hath alwaies pleased your Grace ever since my comming into your Diocesse, even before I was your servant, to countenance me and my poore labours farre beyond their desert; so now you will double your favour and protection both upon me and them: for which I shall bee ever bound to double my most hearty prayers to God for your Graces health and happines: that God would grant you long life, and happy daies on earth; and after this life fulnesse of joy at his right hand for evermore. In the meane time I shall ever rest

Bihop-hor Kal. Ma Ann. Salut. 1621.
