


MY very good Lord, this Historie doth rightly belong vnto you, and you may challenge it as your due for many reasons. First because the most populous Churches of the Waldenses are within the circuite and enclosure of your gouernment, & they haue had no time to breath in with libertie, but onely then, when about some fortie yeares since you defended them from the outrages of their enemies both within and without the Realme: God chearing them vp by his goodnesse, they haue had a sure protection by your loue and fauour, and a strong bul∣warke vnder your name. Besides the proofes of the sufferings of their forefathers in passed ages, are the holy booties and spoyles that were made in the taking of Am∣brun, when you reduced that City to the obediēce of the King. The Archbishops of that place haue carefully kept for aboue these last 4. hundred yeares, the processe and proceedings against the said Waldēsian Churches, which hath brought vpon those that persecuted thē an euerla∣sting

shame and dishonour; and contrarily haue eterni∣zed the pietie and iudgement of that follower of yours, that kept the bagge of the said processe from the fire of the Archbishop of the said place, whose accesse to the Tower where they were saued, the enemie endeuoured to withstand.
It was the Lord of Vulcon Counseller to the King in the Court of Parliament at Grenoble, that recoured them and brought them to our hands, contenting himselfe in all that conquest with that onely bagge, which inditeth the diuell himselfe with all his adherents, being reserued for the good and edification of the Church of God. All which being well considered, this benefit comes from you (my Lord) and the fruite of your armes.
Hauing therefore resolued with my selfe, to bring this historie to light vnder your name, I haue but brought it to it first originall, by restoring it to it first be∣nefactor, and dedicating this edifice to him that hath furnished it with the most substantiall matter. And herein I haue wrought the more certaintie vnto it, in that I haue dedicated it to him that hath seene and knowne more of the state of the said Waldenses then I can write. And herein especially doth the worke of God shew it selfe, when men of one and the same name, and one and the same Prouince, haue bene so different in their designes. For it is aboue three hundred yeares since, that the noble Arroas de Bonne persecuted in Dau∣phiney the fathers and grandfathers of those whom our noble and great Francis de Bonne hath restored. Thus doth the eternall God know, when it pleaseth him, how out of one and the same stemme to make the light of his mercies to shine, from whence heretofore sprang no∣thing but darknesse. Long and many happie yeares may

your Honour continue in the same purpose and intent, to preserue and to loue that Church for which Christ Iesus died, and to dedicate the rest of your dayes to his glory, and the edification of those flockes for whom he hath shed his most precious bloud. Herein consists all your glory. And that your felicitie may spring from hence, I begge at Gods hands from the bottome of my heart, euen with the same affection, which binds me euer to continue

From Nyons in Dauphiney, Ian. 1.
