


RIght Honourable, it can not be vnknovvne to your selfe, or to any man of a daies ex∣perience, that it is thought a small matter to commit a sinne, or, to lie in sinns against a mans ovvne conscience. For many vvhen they are told of their dutie in this point, replie and say, What tell you me of conscience? Conscience was hanged long agoe. But vnles they take better heed, and preuent the danger by repentance, Hanged-conscience vvill revive and become both gibbet and hangman to them either in this life or the life to come. For Conscience is appointed of God to declare and put

in execution his iust iudgement against sinners: and as God cannot possibly be ouercome of man, so neither can the iudgement of conscience be∣ing the iudgement of God be wholly extinguished. Indeed Satan for his part goes about by al means he can, to benumme the conscience: but all is no∣thing. For as the sicke man, vvhen he seemes to sleepe and take his rest, is invvardly full of trou∣bles: so the benummed and drousie conscience wants not his secret pangs and terrours; and whē it shal be roused by the iudgement of God, it wax∣eth cruell and fierce like a wild beast. Again, whē a man sinnes against his conscience, as much as in him lieth, he plungeth him selfe into the gulfe of desperation: for euery wound of the conscience, though the smart of it be little felt, is a deadly wound: and he that goes on to sinne against his conscience, stabbes and vvounds it often in the same place: and all renewed wounds (as we know) are hardly or neuer cured. Thirdly, he that lieth in sinnes against his conscience, cannot call vpon the name of God: for guiltie conscience makes a man flie frō God. And Christ saith, God heareth not sinners, vnderstanding by sinners, such as goe on in their owne waies against conscience: and what can be more dolefull then to be barred of the invocation of Gods name? Lastly, such persons after the last iudgement, shall haue not

onely their bodies in torment, but the vv in the soule and conscience shall neuer : and what will it profit a man to gain the whole world by doing things against his owne conscience, and loose his owne soule.
Now that men  this manner carelesse tou∣ching conscience, may see their follie and the great danger thereof and come to amendment; I haue penned this small treatise: and according to the auncient and laudable custome, as also ac∣cording to my long intended purpose, I now dedi∣cate and present the same to your Lordship. The reasons vvhich haue imboldeed me to this en∣terprise (all by respects excluded) are these. Ge∣nerall doctrine in points of religion is darke and obscure, and very hardly practised vvithout the the light of particular examples: and therefore the doctrine of conscience, by due right pertaines to a man of conscience, such an one as your Lord∣ship is, who (others of like place not excepted) haue obtained this mercy at Gods hand to keepe faith and good conscience. Againe, considering that iustice and conscience haue alwaies bin friends: I am induced to thinke that your Lordship beeing publickly set apart for the execution and main∣tenance of civill iustice, will approoue and accept a Treatise propounding rules and precepts of conscience. Thus therefore craving pardon for

my boldnes, and hoping of your Lordships good ac∣ceptance, I commend you to God and to the word of his grace.
1596. Iune 14.

