



RIght Honorable, as it cannot be but true, which Truth it selfe hath vttered: 1. Sam. 2.30. Him that honoureth me, I will honour; no more can it be but sure pay∣ment which such a creditor hath vndertaken, and not by any suretie, but by himselfe to be per∣formed. Bootlesly had the world been betrusted with such a charge; which by suffering some to walke through dishonour, and by powring out contempt vpon others, vnwittingly suiteth the condition of the ser∣uants to the case of the Sonne, who said: Ioh. 8.49. I honour the Father, but ye dis∣honour me. Well then is it with vs, that he whose bare word is aboue all bonds, hath said, I will honour: not those who by treading downe his honour, honour themselues, neither whom men honour, nor who ho∣nour men; but those who honour him: by Mal. 1.6. louing him as a Father, and eaing him as a Lord. Not that any man can inlarge his honor; the Iob. 11.7. in∣finit perfection whereof is in it selfe vncapable of any accession: nor hat any can of himselfe expresse this honour; seeing himselfe Philip. 2.13. worketh th such willes and deeds also, of his owne good pleasure: neither that if any ould, hee might merit the returne of honour; for all that Luk. 17.10 were but his utie: nor that if any could and would, hee should thereby profit God, o whom Psal. 16. mans goodnes is not extended: nor lastly, if any could, and ould not; God should thereby be disprofited; for Iob. 35.6.7. if one be wicked he teth not him: but because the Lord, who delighteth to be the portion f Iacob, is pleased to accept the broken and homely seruice of his chil∣en, as an high honour done vnto himselfe; and themselues as honorers f him, and such as he (by crowning his owne worke in them) cannot ut honour.
But Ester 6.6. what shall be done to the man whom this King will honour? Ans. If Baltazer King of Babel were to promise his highest honours:Dan. 5.7. if Ester 6.8. Ha∣an were to aduise Ahashuerosh King of 27. Prouinces, in the bestowing  what honours himselfe could wish or hope: if Gen. 41.43. Pharaoh should call gaine his Nobles to consultation, how to enlarge Iosephs aduance∣ents: no more could be either promised, expected or performed, than at such a one should be arraied with royall attyre, as cloath of purple,  fine linnen; with a golden chaine about his necke, the Kings Ring  his hand, his princely Diadem set vpon his head, and withall by pro∣mation published the third man or Viceroy in the kingdom. Which

