


RIght Worshipfull, as the Patriarch Iacob had Gen. 42.1 . twelue sonnes, so Christ the Messiah had Mat. 10.1. twelue disciples: but as Ioseph was beloued aboue Gen. 37.3. all those sonnes; so Iohn was beloued aboue Ioh. 21. all the disciples. Ioseph was appar∣relled better than the rest, and Iohn was inspired farre better than the rest. Gen. 41.38. Had it not been for Ioseph Egypt had wanted her food temporall, and had it not been for Iohn, the Church had wanted her food eternall. Gen. 41.25. The future state of Egypt was reuealed to Ioseph, and the future state of the Church was reuealed to Iohn. The one was Gen. 37.4. exiled, because his father loued him; and the other ex∣iled, because his maister loued him. The place of his exile was into the Reuel. 1.9. Island of Pathmos, being before by Traian put into a vessell of Fasticulus tem∣perum▪ scalding oyle. But that God who shewed his visions to Gen. 22.12. Abraham in the mount, Gen. 28. to Iacob in the field, Gen. 40. to Ioseph in the stockes, Exod. 3. to Moses in Midian, Ier. 38.14. to Ieremie in the prison, Dan. 2. to Daniel in Babylon, Act. 10. and to the Apostle Peter in the house of a Tanner, euen he sheweth his visions to Iohn in his exile.
He is not bound to persons, he can aduance whome he list, he is not boun∣den to place, he can reueale where hee list. For persons, hee can preferre Gen 4. Abel before Cain, Mal. 1. Iacob before Esau, 1. Sam. 16. Dauid before Eliab, Act. 1. Matthias be∣fore Iudas. He can make Exod. .10. Moses a Courtier, Iob. 1.1. Iob a Potentate, Act. 7. Samuel a Iudge, 2. Sam. 2.1. Dauid a King, Prou. 1.1. Salomon a Soueraigne, 1. Kin. 19.19. Elysha a plowman,Amos 1.1. Amos a Neat heard, Ierem 1.1. Ieremie a Priest, Dan. .6. Daniel a Prince, Isay 1.1. Isaiah of the bloud Roy∣all, Math. 9 9. Matthew a Publicane, Matth 4.1. Peter a Fisher, Acts 1 2. Nullum tempus occri Regi. and Paule a Tent-maker, to be penners and preachers of the word of God. For place, as no time can pre∣scribe against the King of a nation, so no place can prescribe against this King of all nations. Iohn 5. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and the Spirit worketh where it listeth.
It pleased Christ, who is called in this Reuelation, 1. Reu. cap. 15. that faithfull witnesse, that first begotten of the dead, Vrs. 8. that Prince of the kings of the earth,Vers. 18. Alpha and Omega, the first and last, Ves. 16. he that hath the keyes of hell and of death,Vers. 14. which hath that sharpe sword, Vers. 15. his eyes like fire, Chap 2.1. his feet like brasse, Chap. 3.1. the seuen Spirits of God, the seuen Starres in his hand, Ves. 7. the key of Dauid, who is called here Vers. 14. Amen, the beginning of the creatures of God; and in Daniel, hee that Dan. .22. reuea∣leth secrets, it pleased this Christ to reueale secrets to Iohn. Not by dreame as to Gen. 28. Iacob, or apparition, as to Exod. 3. Moses, or by voice as Gen. 3 to Adam; but partly by vision, and partly by voice, as he did when he turned Acts 9. Saule into Paule. This Iohn was Legatus à Latere, that embassadour who leaned on his Lords breast. He writeth Christs historie, there he sheweth his loue to Christ: hee writeth the Churches historie, Gospell.  Reuelation there Christ sheweth his loue to him: especially in this, that he will doe nothing, which he doth not reueale to his Amos 3 7. seruant this Prophet. For the Church in his time, wee may see how it stood, in the three first Chapters: and what condition it should haue for the time to come, it is plainely set downe in the rest of this booke.The cotets of the whole Reue∣lation. If we respect the generall estate of the Church, after Iohn had described the authors of this Reuelation, which are God the Father, chap. 4. and Christ his Sonne, chap. 5. hee commeth to the workes of God, which are predictions, chap. 6. obsignations, chap. 7. in∣dignations, chap. 8, 9. Predictions of things to come, obsignations of such as must be saued, and indignation on things to be destroyed. And for the more particular estate of the Church, hauing (chap. 10.) shewed his warrant to write, he commeth to her actions: first, in her Prophets: secondly, in her bodie. In her Prophets, their fighting, falling, rising, chap. 11. In her bodie, comparing her to a woman clothed with the Sunne, chap. 12. and describing her by her combats, conquests, triumphs: her combats defensiue, chap. 13. and offensiue in Christ, by words, chap. 14. threatnings, chap. 15. and iudgements, chap. 16. her victories gotten against that The Church of Rome. whore, chap. 17. and 18. the The Romane Empre. Beast, chap. 19. and the The dll. Dragon, chap. 20. And all that glorie which shee shall haue in the kingdome of God, is vnder the type of Ierusalem most comfortably set downe, chap. 21.22.
The things in this booke were (I grant) very darke to them that liued in the dayes of Iohn, as the Prophecie of Daniel was to them who liued in the time of Daniel. But as that Prophecie being fulfilled, wee can now tell what was foretold in it: so many things being fulfilled which were foretold in this booke, we may easily see what is meant by it: and the posteritie to come shall better vnderstand this booke than wee doe, because it may bee all things are not yet fulfilled. Neither is this booke like the cities of the Num. 13. Anakims, or the Gen. 3. tree of knowledge which may not be reached to: for Reuel. 1.3. blessed is hee that rea∣deth the words of this booke. But to come to these three Chapters written by Iohn surnamed the Diuine, and expounded by one a most worthie Diuine. The first Chapter is a Proeme or Preface to the booke: the two latter are Epistles dedicating this booke. The dedication is made to Reuel. 2.3. seuen seuerall Churches, and by name to the Ministers which are called Angels. In the word of God Ministers haue many excellent titles giuen them, (though now they are scarcely graced with titles) they are called Gen. 20. Prophets, 1. Sam. 9.. Seers, 2 Pet. 1.13. Re∣membrancers, Isa. 58.1. Trumpets, Ex. 3.1. Watchmen, Cor. 3. Husbandmen, Luk. 12.14. Stewards, Prou. 9.4. Maydens, Ezec. 47. Fishers, Mah. 23.24. Leaders, 1. Pet 5.1. Elders, Mar. 9.50. Salt, Dan. 12.2. Starres, 1. Cor. 11.10. Angels, and Ezec 14.2. Shepheards. Prophets to teach, Seers to foretell, Remembrancers to put in mind, Trumpets

to sound, Watchmen to admonish, Husbandmen to plow vp, Stewards to distri∣bute, Maidens to keepe pure the doctrine of truth, Fishers to catch men, Lea∣ders to goe before, Elders to gouerne, Salt to season, Starres to giue light, An∣gels to declare, and Shepheards to feed: to feed (I say) soundly by doctrine, liberally by charitie, and religiously by life. By doctrine: for Sacerdos sine doctrina, est nauis sine velis, a Priest without knowledge, is a ship without sailes. By liberalitie: for Naz. in ora. de pauper. Nihil habet homo adeò diuinum quàm benefacere, Man is in nothing more like God, than in doing good. By life: for cuius vita despicitur, eius oratio contemnitur: his words are not esteemed, whose life is not approoued. And that it may be said of them as it was of Origen: Quale habuit verbum, talem habuit vitam: as his words were, so were his workes. They must not be barren like mount 2. Sam. 1.21. Gilboah, but 1. Sa. 1.24. weaned as Samuel was, before they be offered vnto the Lord They must be pure water if they will cleanse others, and more than whetstones, if they will sharpen others. They must bee in Gen. 19. integritie Abrahams, Num. 12.3. in meekenesse Moses, Exod. 4.14. in knowledge Arons,2. Cor. 11.23. in paines Paules, 1. Sam. 12. and in praying Samuels: and remember, that as Augustine sayd, Manus pauperum sunt gazophylacium Christi, The hands of the poore are the treasurie of Christ. I need not speake much of the dutie of a Minister: for euery one will teach him his dutie, that will not bee ranged within any dutie himselfe.
These Churches were then like 1. Chr. 12.14. Dauids Worthies, excellent aboue all the Churches of the world: but because they lost their first Reuel. 2.4. loue, Vers. 10. were not faithfull to the death, Vers. 14. maintained the doctrine of Balaam, Vers. 20. suffered women to teach, Cap. 3.1. bare a name onely to liue, Vers. 8. had but a little strength, Vers. 16. were neither hote nor cold, and Cap. 2.21. repented not as they should haue done, of all their sinnes, they are reprehended by Iohn, threatened by Christ, and the Candlesticke of the Gos∣pell is now taken away from them. Iam seges est vbi Troia fuit: Now Ma∣homet rageth, where Messiah did raigne. Are they reprehended? let vs hear∣ken: are they threatened? let vs feare: are they fallen? let vs labour to conti∣nue. From Iohns reprehension we see, that (as one said) hereof our Elders haue complained, hereof doe we complaine,Seneca. and hereof they which liue after vs will com∣plaine, that men waxe worse, and liue not according to the doctrine of Gods word. From Christs threatning we see, that God is mercifull, Deut. 20 10. who first offe∣reth peace before he fight against vs, that we being forewarned, might be fore∣armed. And by the wofull downefall of these seuen Churches, let 1. Cor. 10.12. vs that stand take heed that we fall not: for if God spared not the 2. Pet. 2. old world who de∣spised Noah, the Sodomites who vexed Lot, Mat. 23.3. Ierusalem which abused the Pro∣phets, Orosius sayth that these cities for  cause, fell by an earthquake. Colossa, Hierapolis, and Laodicea, who reiected Paule, and these Asian Churches who did not grow in righteousnesse as they did in riches, how shall wee escape Heb. 2.3. if we neglect so great saluation? and for this cause these Sermons are most worthie to be considered of in this present age. O then let vs now Rom. 13. consider this season: Rom. 12.11. redeeme the oportunitie, Heb. 3. & Psal. 95. not harden our hearts, but re∣gard the time of our present visitation. As the day openeth and shutteth with the Sunne, so saluation openeth and shutteth with the Gospell. Heb. 3.13. Whilest it is called to day let vs heare his voice: Prou 10 5. He that laboureth in Summer is the sonne of wisedome, but he that sleepeth in haruest is the sonne of confusion.
All things in the world doe take their time, the bird to build her neast, the husbandman to sow his seed, the mariner to goe to sea, the gardener to set his trees, the sicke patient to take physicke, the cooke to season meats, and the dresser of the vineyard to gather his fruit. It will bee too late to build in Summer, to

sow in haruest, to go to sea when the ship is launched, to transplant trees when they are old, to take physicke when we are dying, to season meates when they are vnsauorie, and when winter is come to gather fruit. The Mat. 25.10. fiue foolish vir∣gines came too late, Diues Luk. 16. in hell repenteth too late, the time present is onely ours.Solum tempus presens est no∣strum, Seneca. Is the figge-tree fruitlesse? it shall heare that sentence, Luk. 13. Neuer fruit grow on thee any more. Eccl. 18.18. Get thee then righteousnesse before thou come to iudgement: vse Physicke before thou be sicke, and whilest thou maiest yet sinne, shew thy con∣uersion, as the wise man exhorteth euery man. But alas, whereunto shall I li∣ken this generation? We are like the Ephesians, wee haue Apoc. 2. lost our first loue; or the Laodiceans, we are Apoc. 3. neither hote nor cold: or the twilight, neither day nor night: or the Autumne, neither faire nor foule: or one sicke of an ague, one day well, another ill: or a man in a Lethargie, neither aliue nor dead: or Hermaphroditus, neither male nor female: or to those creatures called , which liue in water or on land: or the Lionesse, which the oftener shee breedeth, the fewer cubs she beareth: or the Mariner, who is onely good in a storme: or the Marigold, that shutteth and openeth with the Sunne: or the Mermaids, which are halfe flesh, halfe fish. I would to God wee were either hote or cold: that as the hotest regions bring foorth sweetest spices, so most zealous people might be most fruitfull in good workes: that as the Sunne in the heauen is swiftest at her setting, so the sonnes of God might bee best at their ending. But is it so? no: the more wee are taught, the more ignorant are many; and the older we are, the colder in religion. We haue indeed many of vs, as it was said of Aristogiton, Martem, or rather religionem in lingua, religi∣on in tongue: but when triall is made of vs, euery Plutarch in Phcion. Phocon can espie our hal∣ting: and then with Theatrum Phi∣los. lib. 5. cap. 30. Archilochus we thinke it better clypeum abiicere quàm in∣terire, euen to cast off all religion, than to vndergoe the least disgrace for re∣ligion.
Treatise of A∣postacie, cap. 2.The Moone desiring to be apparelled as the rest of the Planets, answer was made her, That her diuerse chaunges could admit no kind of habite: and we desiring to be attired with the robes of Christians, it is to bee feared, that since we tread Apoc. 12.1. That is, all earth∣ly vanities. not the Moon vnder our feet, we shal neuer be clothed as the Church was, with the Apoc. 12.1. That is, Christ the Sonne of righte∣ousnesse. Sunne. Ho. 14.10. Who is wise, and he shall vnderstand these things; and pru∣dent, and he shall know them. Let vs therefore labor to 1. Pet. 3.19. grow in grace, to abound in knowledge, to be full of good works, and to ouercome all the vnderminers of our future saluation. Then shall we See Reu c. 2.23 eat of the tree of life, not be hurt of the second death, tast of the hidden Manna, haue power ouer nations, bee clothed in white, made pillars in Gods temple, and sit with Christ Iesus in the throne of his fa∣ther. And though the 1. Sam. 22.7. sonne of Ishai cannot make vs Captaines of thousands, yet that Sonne of Dauid will Gal. 3.27. make vs the sonnes of God. That we may doe so, we must beleeue the Gospell, put on Christ Iesus, and bee renewed by repentance; The first is necessarie, the second comely, the third profitable. To come to the first; it is necessarie we should beleeue: for hee that Ioh. 3.18. beleeueth not, is condemned alreadie, he is condemned in the counsell of God, in the ministery of the word, and in his owne conscience, & he shall be condemned in the day of iudgement; for Ioh. 3.38. the wrath of God abideth vpon him. The more I consider the fruits of faith, the more I see the necessitie of faith. Eph. 2.. Through it we are saued: Rom. 5.1. by it we are iustified: Heb. 1.4. in it we liue. We are saued from Sathan, iustified before God, & liue in the Church. In the Church? nay, by it we liue in heauen: for Ioh. 3.16. hee that be∣leeueth in the Sonne of God, hath euerlasting life. Faith is that which Act. 15.9. purifieth the heart, maketh the whole man to Psal. 119.32. run the wayes of Gods commaundements,

Rom. 5.2. giueth entrance to grace, Heb. 10.3. accesse to God in prayer, Heb. 11. made the Elders well reported of, and each Christian to 2. Cor. 1.24. stand to the profession of Christ. It is that Eph. 3.17. hand by which wee must apprehend Christ: that Eph. 6.16. shield by which wee resist all the fierie darts of the diuell: and that Mat. .13. meanes by which we do good to others. Gal. 3.7. By faith we receiue the spirit: Rom. 8.1. are members of Christ: Col. 3.12. we are risen with him: Eph. 3.17. he dwelleth in our hearts: Ioh. 6.35. we feed on him continually: 1. Pet. 5.8. resist Sathan: Ioh. 1.13. are the children of God: Heb. 4.2. and the word which we heare becommeth profitable. And what shall I say? faith is of such a qualitie, that it Colos. 2.7. vniteth vs to Christ, 2. Cor. 13.5. Rom. 8. maketh vs certaine of our saluation, 1. Tim. 3.13. bold in our profession, ministreth Phil. 3.28. true ioy, Mat. 15.28. gi∣ueth temporall blessings, Luk. 17.19. sanctifieth our gifts, and maketh vs refuse the Heb. 11 24. plea∣sures of this present world. In a word, no sinne can condemne him who hath this true faith, and no vertue can saue him who wanteth it.
To come to the second, which is Christ, the obiect of faith. The most comely garment that euer we can weare, it is to be couered with the Rom. 13.13. robes of Christs righteousnesse. Gen. 27.15. Iacob was blessed by Esaus garments; and we are bles∣sed by Christs garments. What wee see through a greene glasse, seemeth all to be greene: and what God seeth through Christ it is all amiable. We must put on this apparell, not as the Church in the Canticles: Cant. 5.3. How Christ is to be put on. I haue put off my clothes, how shall I put them on againe? or as a gowne, that wee cast off when we come to our home: but we must so put him on, that we neuer put him off againe. Wee must put him on by imputation, imitation, infusion, and pro∣fession: by imputation of his righteousnesse, imitation of his vertues, infusion of his spirit, and profession of his name. Thus we must labour to get Christ: for what though a man could command the earth with Alexander, the Exod. 14. sea with Moses, the 2. King. 1. fire with Eliah, and the Ios. 10. Sunne with Iosuah? What though he were as rich as 1. King. 4. Salomon, as wise as 2. Sam. 16.23. Achitophel, as strong as Iud. 16. Sampson, as swift as 2. Sam. 18.19. Ahimaaz, as beautifull as 2. Sam. 18. Absolon, as fortunate as Theatrum Philos. lib. 2. cap. 33. Metellus, and de∣scended as Phi. 3.8. Paul was of the bloud royall of Princes, yet hauing not Christ hee hath nothing. Yea say a man had the abstinence of Aristydes, the innocencie of Phocion, the holinesse of Socrates, the almes deedes of Cimon, the modera∣tion of Camillus, the honestie, iustice, and faithfulnesse of both Catoes, all these out of Christ, were but Augustine. splendida peccata, and to be esteemed as Phil. 3.10. dung, in re∣gard of Christ. For haue him and haue all things, want him and want all things: he is in, at, and after death aduantage. I come to the last, it is profitable to repent: for if we Ier. 4.1. Reasons of re∣pentance. turne to the Lord, he will turne to vs: and that wee may turne, consider his Rom 2. mercies in forgiuing, his Gen. 30.9. benefits in giuing, his Rom. 2.5. patience in forbearing, and his Isa. 26.9. iudgements in punishing. Act. 17.30. The word preached, 1. Pet. 4.3. sinnes committed, and that Luk. 13.24. few shall be saued: Eccl. 12.1. the shortnesse of life, Psal. 90.12. the vncertain¦tie of life, Heb. 9.26. and the certaintie of death: 1. Cor. 2.9. the ioyes of heauen, Mat. 25.46. the torments of hell, the Luk. 15.10. comfort of the elect, and that else wee can haue no Eccles. 41.1. com∣fort in death: Ier. 7. pray wee cannot vnlesse wee repent, and Luk. 13 2. Act. 2.40. perish wee shall vnlesse we repent: but blessed shall we be if we do repent. But manum de tabula Magister adest: this discourse following will teach vs these things: and it am I bold to present to your worships. Iohn sent his Reuelation to manie Churches; and I present his Epistles to manie worthie personages: and to whom may I better present them then to you. Iohn was a Disciple full of loue, and you are brethren full of loue. The Preacher of these Lectures was well knowne to manie, but to none better than to many of you, especially to those who were in my time worthie members of that most worthie Christs col∣ledge. Colledge with him. And the rather I do it, that times to come may reioyce in the

Lord, that from one honourable roote haue issued so manie profitable branches to the Church. You are six brethren as pillars of your house, there were three sisters as fruitfull vines of the same: one is not, but is with the Lord, and her I knew a Ladie of admirable vertues: Aleader. The Lady Wray. the other two are, and long may they be so. You are all brethren by nature of one venter, nation of one coun∣try, grace of one spirit, affection of one heart, fortune in great fauor, and of one hope by your holy behauiour. And 1. Thes. 4.9. concerning brotherly loue, I need not to write vnto you: for you are taught of God to loue one another. Your Which had  sonne. Plutarke. Scilu∣rus at his death need not to teach you concord, by giuing to each of you a sheafe of arrowes, which cannot well bee broken whilst they are conioyned: for you by your amitie make your selues inuincible. IfThetrum . pag 294. Chilo the Lacedemo∣nian died for ioy to see one sonne crowned at Olympus, and ul. Gel. lib.  . Diagoras Rhodius did the like, when his three children got the garland at a wrestling: and Gen. 45.28. Iacob so reioyced to heare of his sonne Ioseph, to bee aduanced greatly in the king∣dome of Aegypt: how might that happie father of yours reioyce, to see at one time, one son sitting as high Sheriffe of the shire, another preaching before the Iudges of Assize, and the third pleading as Councellor at the barre, and all the rest of great expectation in the kingdome? Thus Pro. 10.1. wise sons are a ioy to their pa∣rents, and all may Psal. 133.1. behold how good and comely a thing it is for brethren to dwel together in vnitie. Aristotle could say, that parents were not blessed, vnlesse they were after their death blessed in their children.Lib. 10 . And surely it is no small part of a fathers blessednesse, to see his children like to flourish when he is gone. Nay of all monuments that parents can leaue behind them, there is none (as one saith) like to a vertuous son. But all parents are not to be blessed.Genes. 4. Adams two sonnes could not agree in one field, Gen. 21.9. Abrahams in one house, Gen. 25. atrum gratia rar. Isaaks in one wombe,2. Kin. 1. Dauids in one pallace, nor Luk. 12.13. two brethren in the diuision of an inhe∣ritance. And though concord amongst brethren (especially such as deuide the inheritance) be very rare, yet do you, euen in this, most comfortably agree. You are not as Simeon & Leui, Romulus and Remus, Eteocles and Polynices, Atreus & Thyestes, Aeta and Perseus: but as Castor and Pollux, Dauid and Ionathan, Ioseph and Beniamin; and (as a true friend is described to be). one soule in two bodies: It seemeth that as Agrippa the brother of Augustus was beholding to Salust for that one sentence, Small things increase by concord, but perish through discord: so you haue all learned the same lesson, as being persuaded, that as the members of a body being once dismembred, they cannot possibly be ioyned againe: so if naturall brethren be once vnnaturally disioyned, no glue will conioyne them fast againe. It were infinit to shew examples of brotherly loue and hatred,See French Academ pag. 542, &c. and othes haue eased me of this paines. Now that good God, who hath brought you from one roote, placed you in one countrey, aduanced you to like cre∣dit, and giuen you one heart, giue you also one inheritance in the kingdome of heauen. Thus right worshipfull, I am bold to speake vnto you, and the world knoweth I speake the truth, and the Lord knoweth I desire not to flat∣ter. Go on therefore I beseech you, continue in loue, bee setled in the truth, and labour to honour him who thus honoreth you. Be not caried away with the Ludmur he  blad a fallentis image mundi. shew of this world, but thinke religion the best nobilitie, and that as Prudentius . Prudentius sayd:
Generosa Christi secta nobilitat viros,
Cui quisquis seruit, ille verè est nobilis.
He noble is that comes of Christ his race:
Who serues this Lord, he surely is not base.

And this made Theodosius more to thanke God,Hst Eccles. that he was a Christian than a king; considering that hee must lose the one, hee could not lose the other. Now as to one of you I am bounden in parcicular, and by him, being a Mi¦nister, the despised ministerie is not a little graced: o for him I pray,M. Doctor Montagu. that hee may be an Gen. 20. Abraham to our Abimelech, a 2 Sam. 12. Nathan to our Dauid, a 2. Kin. 11. Iehoida to our Ioash,Ier. 38. an Ebedmelech to Ieremiah, an 2. King. 4.1. Elisha to the widow of this Prophet deceased, a light in the Court, a trumpet in the Church, and that sther. 5.2. Aha∣shuerosh may long hold out his golden Scepter vnto him: that by his meanes  regis, deest regibus qu verum dicat. great men may not want such as will tell them the truth: no Plu. in vit Alex. reports, that Iupiters Priests called Alexander by the name of Iu∣piters sonne. earthly Alex∣ander accounted a sonne of Iupiter, and that no man may be more respected than a good . pag. 42. Pastor: and that he may euer remember that saying of wise Sa∣lomon: Prou. 22.11. He that loueth purenesse of heart, for the grace of his lips the King shall be his friend. His Cyrus will not be spoken to verbis bissinis in silken words, to his Alexander he needeth not speake , either sweet words or no words. For if one Antiochus might bee surnamed holy, and another good Prince called the Good King: much more may he, whose religious know∣ledge surpasseth all the Princes that haue beene of this nation: and whose hu∣militie is such, that hee will haue his sonne to remember, . pag. 95. O dictum ver regium. that hee differeth not in stuffe, but in vse from the rest of his people, and that by Gods ordinance. I am the bolder for that one to make choyce of all in the dedication of this booke: no man knew, loued, conuersed with, and respected this Author more than he. He resorted to him in his health, visited him in sicknesse, and preached a learned Sermon for him at his death. Concerning this author, as he sayd of Carthage, I had rather bee silent then say little, and his worthie labours doe speake enough for him, by name that his Problem Theologicum. Posthume, dedicated to his excellent Maiestie, by Maister Sa∣muel VVard, Fellow of Im∣manuel Colledge. an excellent Diuine. In a word therefore, whatsoeuer this man did, he desired to profit others by it: he thought (as it is written Autor vit Br. l. 2. cap. 4. & 7. of Bernard in his life) that hee was not his owne man, but depu∣ted to the seruice of others. He was neuer idle, but as Hieron ad Marcellam. Hierome reporteth of Ambrose, and Bernard of himselfe, he did either reade, or meditate, or pray, or conferre, or counsel, or comfort, or write, or preach. And thus (as the Aliis ineri∣s, meipsam consum. Embleme is of a faithfull Teacher) he, like a waxe candle, in giuing light to others, in a short time extinguished himselfe. Yet in this short time of his, what art was he not maister of? what vertue was hee not endued with? He was a complet Diuine, and hath his blessings in the Church, that no mans writings are read of all sorts, and in all countries with greater grace and profit than his. Hee was peaceable in the Church, patient of wrongs, and free from ambi∣tion. For as Ierome sayd of Nepotian, Aurum calcans, scheduls consecta∣batur: hee regarded not his purse, but followed his booke, and as Bernard sayd, he liued in terra auri sine auro, in a kingdome of gold without gold. An excellent gift he had to define properly, diuide exactly, dispute subtilly, answere directly, speake pithily, and write iudicially: and how hee preached, if these Sermons doe giue a testimonie, what witnesse had they who often heard him themselues? I haue published of his now two Discourses, and I onely did it, that these his labours might not perish: I haue no benefit by them, but exceeding great paines. And since I vnderstand that his other labours are in the hands of his friends, to make benefit for his children, I will ease my selfe of the like labour, and be a meanes that they may haue the benefit of the fu∣ture impressions of this booke: the which, how faithfully I haue published, I appeale to the godly and indifferent Reader, and I hope no honest minded

man will be hired to calumniate it. Thus as one desirous to be seruiceable in my calling, profitable to the Church, not forgetfull of my friend, and to testi∣fie the happinesse of your house, which was in your fathers time, and is now (as it is sayd of Aurelian the Emperours,) Refertapis & Ecclesia Dei, repleni∣shed with the godly, and a Church of God, and withall to leaue a monument of my duty to you all, I haue as you see, published this exposition of seuen E∣pistles vnder your eight names, nothing doubting but it will bee as welcome to you, as by your countenance it may bee profitable to the Church. The God of heauen giue you all that blessing of blessings,Epist. ad Iulia∣num. which (if Ierome say true) few men haue, that you may transire à deliciis ad dilicias, go on from grace to grace, and be a long time happie in this life, and euer for happie in the life to come. London: Saint Martins in the fields, from my worship∣full friend Maister Oldisworths house,2. Tim. 1 16. by which familie (as Paul was by the house of Onesiphorus) in the time of this late (and I wish I may say) the last visitation, I haue re∣ceiued no small refreshing.
March. 12. 1604.

