



IVST cause there was (Right worshipfull) as well in respect of the reuerend Author, whose rest is now in glory; as also of the godly Reader, whose good herein claimes speciall stroke; that some refining hand should recommend vnto the Church of God, a more perfect coppie of this godly Exposition, than the first edition hereof did affoord: and yet no cause I find, why your worthie children, who no doubt for the Authors sake, did more gratefully accept the former dedication, should by me be depriued of their right: Nay rather, as they in heart (I am persuaded) did highly honour the Author, for his double labor in Christs vineyard; so do I reioyce, this recompence is returned for their loue, That with this worke, their memorie with posteritie shall long endure. And sith my paines herein yeelds me this right, to make choyce of some, to whom I also may commend the patronage hereof; I presume to present the same vnto your Ladiship. If this bee any kindnesse on my behalfe, I confesse it is farre short of your desert, and of my desire: some others (I know) may challenge me herein, as vnmindfull of their loue; yet because God may offer me opportunitie hereafter, to giue them good content this way, I will intreat their patience for this time, that I may ioyne the mother with the children, in this worke of loue, to affoord tuition to these godly labours of the dead. It fits you best (good Madam) in many respects, for neither will your children complaine of your admission into the society of their right, nor you esteeme the lesser hereof, because of their claime hereto by former possession. They are your owne, and you theirs; this comes vnto you all, as vnto one, accounting your vnited loue for greater safetie: and looke what grace it finds by your protection, like grace it yeelds by many a good instruction. Salomon saith, Prou. 13.15. Good vnderstanding maketh acceptable, (meaning to such as feare God, for Prou. 1.22. fooles hate knowledge) how welcome then will this be vnto you, who Prou. 7.4. haue sayd vnto Wisedom, thou art my sister, and do esteeme the words of her mouth, Ier. 15.16.The ioy and reioycing of your heart; sith herein you shall find on euery leafe, some pleasant fruit of the tree of life: a tast whereof I will here set before you, that you may iudge the better of the store. When the Disciples harts were full of greefe for Christs departure then at hand, Philip sayd vnto him in the name of all, Ioh. 14.8. Shew vs the father and it sufficeth. Loe Chap. 1. ver. 4▪ here, behold and you shall see, not the

father alone, but with the father, the spirit of grace; and with them both the Vers. . Son of God, so liuely described to your view, that you may truly say of this knowledge (God sanctifying the same vnto your soule) Ioh. 17.. It is eternall life▪ When Christ would harten his Disciples for the great worke of their ministerie, hee doth it by the pro∣mise of his presence, saying,Mat. 28 20. Be hold I am with you alway. The euidence and fruit whereof, you shall Vers. 1. hereby so well perceiue, that hereupon I trust, both you and many moe, will learne to say with Dauid in temptation, Psal. 16.8. I haue set the Lord be∣fore me alway; for he is at my right hand, therefore I shall not slide: And with Ieremie in affliction, Ier. 20.11. The Lord is with me like a mightie Gyant, there∣fore my persecutors shall be ouerthrowne, and shall not preuaile. What shall I say more? It would be too long to speake of the dignitie of Christs Church and mi∣nisterie here handled at large: and to instance in particulars through the seuen E∣pistles to these seuen Churches of Asia: onely this, in the Preface of each Epistle learne what Christ is in himselfe, and to his Church; In the Matter, behold the state of euery Church, and see what Christ approueth, and what his soule detesteth; In the Conclusion, see his bountie towards his children, and the dutie of all to him againe. The handling of these things will much delight your Christian heart: for beside the 1. Cor. 2.4. Plaine euidence of the spirit, in opening the text, which is best pleasing vnto God, and most profitable to his Church (wherein this godly Author had a spe∣ciall grace) the application is so fit and pertinent to our times, that I had welnigh sayd, He did foresee what we now behold; and hath foretold, what we for our luke∣warmenesse, and decay in loue, may iustly feare: 2. Tim. 1.7. Consider what I say, and the Lord giue you vnderstanding in all things. Hold fast that which you haue, bee faithfull vnto death, and the Lord will giue you the crowne of life, Heb. 6.10. For God is not vnrighteous, that he should forget your workes and labor of loue, which you haue shewed towards his name, in that you haue ministred vnto the saints, and yet do minister. Now the God of hope, Rom 15.13. fill you with all ioy and peace in beleeuing, and increase your ioy by the constant 2. Ioh. 4. walking of your chil∣dren in the truth: Yea the same Lord, 2. Co 9.. make all grace so to abound towards you all, that alwayes hauing all sufficiencie in all things, you may abound in euery good worke, Philip. 1.11. which is by Iesus Christ vnto the praise and glorie of God; vnto whose gracious protection both now and euer, I humbly com∣mend your Ladiship, with your godly familie. 
London, December 10. 1606.

