



THe sacred Scriptures (Right Honoura∣ble) are so plainely styled by the spirit of truth to be all and wholly Prov. 8. 8. righteous, Psal. 19. 7. perfect and Prov. 30. 5. pure, yea most Psal. 119. 140. ellar. lib. 2. de verb. dei. cap. 15. par. 31. pure, that it must needes sauour of the spirit of An∣tichrist to iudge any part thereof (as the Papists doe) vnmeete for Gods people to be acquainted withall. And yet I doubt not but that on our behalfe for some respects, a kinde of preheminence may be yeilded to some parcels of Scripture aboue others, with∣out any derogation therefrom-: els the 2. Cor. 3. , 9, 11 13. 18. 2. Pet 1. 19. Apostles should haue wronged Moses and the Prophets, by preferring the Gospel farre before them in glorie and euidence. And there∣fore as Paul gaue a speciall charge to 2. Tim. 4▪ 1▪ Timothie of his parch∣ments aboue his bookes, as beeing, though not for matter more pretious, yet for present vse at least, more expedient: so may our hearts, embracing with reuerence the whole truth of God as pure and perfect, in regard of fitnesse to our peculiar estate, cleaue more nearely to some portion thereof then vnto others: for seeing herein is both milke and strong meate, who will doubt, but that according to our age and growth in Christ we should affect? But I may not here dilate of this difference of Scripture, and therfore will come

directly to that portion of it, Christs Sermon in the Mount, which is here explaned in this Commentarie; endeauou∣ring briefly to shew some notes of eminence in these three Chapters, for which they deserue among all the Lords Wor∣thies to haue the name of the first three. And to omit the Au∣thor hereof, though Iesus Christ the Sonne of God, because the 2. Tim. 3. 16 whole Scripture was giuen by inspiration from the same spirit; as also his preparation hereunto (though extraordinarie) by Luk. 6. 12. prayer to God the whole night before, which must needes im∣port some consequence of great importance; I will onely point at the manner of penning this Sermon, and the matter which it containeth.
For the first: when the beloued Apostle saith of Christs sayings and doings, that many things were not written, and yetIoh. 20. 3, 31 some things were written for the ground and confirmation of our faith, none (I hope) will denie, but these things which were written, were by the H. Ghost iudged more behooue∣full for the Church, thē those which were omitted, whence by good collection it will follow, that things more largely penned were also deemed the more expedient: for why should the holy Ghost in penning be more copious, vnlesse the things propounded were (to vs at least) more pretious? Now search the holy records of Christ throughout, and see what Sermon is so fully registred as this is; vnlesse it were his Ioh. 14. 15. 16. 17. chapt. consolation vttered to his Disciples, with his prayer vn∣to his Father a little before his passion: This beeing his wel∣come to them into their Apostleship, and That, his farewell at his death.
The matter of this Ser∣mon.But to come to the matter it selfe. This Sermon contai∣neth 12. seuerall heades of Doctrine, answerable indeede to the number of the 12. Apostles, to whome it was princi∣pally intended, vpon their calling to that office, although I dare not say, particularly to be applied part to person, but ra∣ther generally the whole to euery one; vnlesse it may be, in

the last parcell by the great ruine of the house vpon the sandes, Christ had a speciall ayme at the fearefull fall of Iudas that betraied him. Now the first of these concerneth mans chiefeChap. 5. v. 3. to the 13. good in true happinesse, which is here so plainly declared in eight seuerall rules, as they lead euery man hereto, and giue the child of God most comfortable assurance hereof, euen in his greatest miserie. The second doth more peculiarly re∣spectVer. 13. to 17 the function of the ministerie, the ordinarie means of at∣taining the former happines. The third restoreth the morallVers. 17. to the end of the Chapter. law to his true sense and meaning, which the Iewish teach∣ers had shamefully peruerted, so as now wee may make straight steps vnto our feete in the way of obedience. TheChap. 6. v. . to the 19. fourth directeth vs in the right manner of doing good workes, by speciall instance in these three, Almes, Praier, and Fasting, wherein the hypocriticall Pharisies had spent much labour in vaine. The fist prescribeth that moderate care and desire ofVers. 19. to the last. earthly things, which doth stock vp couetousnesse, the root of all euill. The sixt reformeth the practise of rash iudgement,Chap. 7. v. 1. to the 6. for the better euidence of humilitie in our selues, & of loue vnto our brethren. The seauenth prescribeth ministeriall dis∣cretion,Vers. 6. in the dispensation of the holy things of God, for the pure keeping of the things themselues, and the safe-beeing of the dispensers thereof. The eight doth notablie incourageVers. 7. to the 12. vs both by precept and promise, to the holy exercise of prai∣er and inuocation. The ninth doth furnish vs to the practiseVers. 12. of iustice and equitie in our ciuill conuersatiō. The tenth dothVers. 13, 14. effectually vrge vs vnto care of our saluation, by walking in the straite way of life, and shunning the broad way that leadeth to destruction. The eleuenth doth forewarne vs of false teachers,Vers. 15. to the 21. who bee the maine seducers out of the way of life. The twelfth and last, with the conclusion, doth knit vp all, per∣swadingVers. 21. to the nd. vs both by promise of happinesse eternall, and of securitie, most comfortable; as also vpon perill of vtter ruine irrecouerable, with outward profession to ioyne answerable

obedience, both in heart and life.
Now all and euery one of these (Right Honourable) are of that importance in the life of a Christian, that none of them can be neglected of him that with comfort and safety would liue godly in Christ Iesus. For the better euidence whereof, I must referre your Honour, with the Christian Reader, to this godly and learned exposition ensuing; wher∣inProv. 10. . the reuerent Author, of blessed memorie, hath faithfully la∣boured vpon sound interpretation of the Text, to laie down wholesome instructions for the obedience of faith. My paines herein hath beene chiefly this, as neere as I could, out of mine owne and others notes, to commend vnto the publike view, the authors faithfull labours in his own mea∣ning. Onely I haue here and there vpon good occasion (though priuate to my selfe) added some references in the margent vnto classicall popish writers, for such opinions as are herein charged vpon them. Mine interest for the publi∣shing of this worke, I hope I shall approoue vnto any gain∣sayer. Now whatsoeuer it is, in all bounden dutie & seruice, I humbly commend it vnto your Lordship, and vnder your Honourable protection, to the houshold of faith. And be∣cause I doubt not of your diligence in the faithful and fre∣quent perusall of it, I wil turne my perswasions towards you this way, into praier to the Almightie for you, that by the e∣difying of your faith, and other graces of God herein, you may more and more abound in the fruits of righteousnesse, inioying here much true honour, with long and happie daies, in the peace of our Syon, and the prosperitie of your familie, and in the ende eternall life through Iesus Christ. 

Maie. 1608.
