



IT is a Conclusion of our
religiō worthy to be cō∣sidered:
That Christ
alone is our Mediator,
Iustifier, Propitiatour,
Sauiour, by workes and
merits which he him∣selfe
wrought within himselfe, and not by
any works or merits which he worketh in vs
by his spirit. The scripture saith thus much
in expresse wordes. Iustified freely by the
redēption THAT IS IN CHRIST
IESVS. Ro. 3. 24. He hath by HIM∣SELFE
purged our sinnes. Hebr. 1. 3.
He was made sinne for vs that we
should be made the righteousnesse of
God IN HIM. 2. Cor. 5. 21. IN
HIM are yee complete. Coloss. 3. 10.
By his OWNE BLOOD he entred
once into the holy place, and obtained

eternall redemption. Heb. 9. 12. Againe
Christ is said to purge our consciences
from dead workes by his blood: because
he offered himselfe by his eternall spirit
without spot to his father. v. 14. And cō∣mon
reason tels vs as much. For if men be
mystically vnited to Christ, and by this vni∣on
receiue the spirit of Christ, and by the
spirit doe good workes, and consequently
merit eternal life, they are thē becom part∣ners
with Christ, and are receiued into fel∣lowship
with him in the worke of mans re∣demption:
whereas he in the Act of our re∣conciliation
with God, admits neither de∣putie
nor partner.
This conclusion beeing thus of infallible
trueth, it serues greatly to exalt the grace
of God, to abase nature, and to beate downe
the pride of all Iustitiarie persons and reli∣gions.
And for the further explaning of
it, serues this Treatise following: which I
present to your Worship. And the reason of
my doing is this. I remember, almost two
yeares agoe, in speech you entred into com∣mendatiōs
of that golden text, Phil. 3. v. 7.
and withall gaue signification of your desire,
that some thing might be set downe, where∣by

you might be brought to a further vn∣derstanding
of that place of scripture. Ther∣fore
to satisfie your desire, I haue here pen∣ned
a short exposition of it. And I haue
further presumed to publish it in your name
desiring it may be a testimonie of a thanke∣full
minde, for your loue & fauour towards
me.
Thus wishing to your Worship continu∣ance
and increase of loue to the holy worde
of God, I take my leaue. Anno. 1601.
Ian. 20.

