



Right Honorable:
THey were the words of the wisest King & best know∣ing man, Pro. 11:14. That where no Counsest is, the peo∣ple fall, and where many Counsellors are, there is health: Which words he almost reiterates to strengthen that position: Chap. 15.22. With∣out Counsell thoughts come to nought, but in the multitude of Counsellors there is stedfastnesse. And it was the saying of Cicero, the excellent Orator, and Statesman of Rome: Non vi∣ribus,

aut velocitate, aut celeritate corporum, res magnae geruntur, sed confilio authoritate, & prudentia. Cermenatus lib reg. & rer. &c. cap. 18. telleth vs, that it was obserued by the most skilfull Architectors of the ancient times▪ The broader and higher they propo∣sed their buildings, the more solide and deepe they layd their basses: so (saith he) since none are more eminent amongst men then Princes, or beare more waight vpon their shoulders then Kings, meete it is they should haue the best Counsellors, on whom to leane as vpon a firme and stedfast foundation, to dispose as well of matters which belong vn∣to State as Religion: And such Osorius tells vs, lib. 7. de Reg. instit: Ought to be maximo ingenio praediti, bonis Artibus exculti, longo re∣rum vsu periti: In Historijs diligentissime ver∣sati, neque praesentia tantum sagaciter odoran∣tes, sea longe in posterum, quod vtile futurum reipub. sit, coniectura prouidentes. With a graci∣ous King are we blest: with such a Coun∣cell is he furnisht: who (as Rabanus in one of his Epistles informes vs:) in plaine things search what may be mystical and obscure.

In small (seeming) matters what may be of moment, by what is neare, to coniecture of things remote; and out of parts, to gather a whole, by which mature consideration they know as well readily to vndertake them, as speedily to dispatch them: Now knowing your Lordship to be such an one, namely, a Counsellor and Statesman, euery way accomplished; After transferring these Remarkeable considerations, for the management of publique Affaires; from the naturall French into our moderne English: And further be∣ing most assured, that your Greatnesse hath euer bin accompanied with Goodnesse, and your Wisedome with Clemency, it hath bin a great imboldning vnto me, to make a duti∣full presentment thereof to your Gracious perusall and Patronage, not to the purpose that these can be either your Direction or In∣struction, (as being frequently conuersant in all the passages of this Nature) but rather to expresse such things to your view in our Natiue Dialect, which I know you to bee most expert in, in the Originall. Needlesse it were to teach Typhis how to steare a Ship,

or instruct Antomedon to guide a Chariot, should I apprehend any such ambition, I must necessarily incurre the aspersion of im∣pudence, or expresse such palpable Igno∣rance as might draw me into a iust im∣putation of folly: But Right Honourable, such is my Modesty, that by studying to bee free from either, I may euade the aspersion of both: onely desiring your Lordships best construction of these my weake and vnpoli∣shed labours, which present themselues so rudely into your presence, whose more weighty imployments can scarcely allow a∣ny retyred Houre, to cast a second Eye vpon that, (howsoeuer Naturaliz'd) which (no doubt) you haue formerly perused in the Natiue. Notwithstanding, Honourable Sir, presuming vpon your knowne Gentlenesse and Generous Disposition, I humbly prostrate my selfe with these my imperfect labours to your most Iudicious Censure, whose least distaste is able to stifle the hope of the surui∣uing thereof euen in the Infancy, and whose fauorable approbation hath power to giue it life vnto all posterity▪

