



RIGHT Worshipfull, as the Pa∣triarch
Iacob hadGen. 42. 13. twelue sonnes,
so Christ the Messiah had
Mat. 10. 1.twelue disciples: but as Ioseph was
beloued aboueGen. 37. 3. all those sonnes:
so Iohn was beloued aboueIohn 21. all the
disciples▪ Ioseph was apparelled bet∣ter
then the rest, and Iohn was in∣spired
farre better then the rest.Gen. 41. 38. Had it not bene for
Ioseph Egypt had wanted her food temporall, and had it
not bene for Iohn, the Church had wanted her food eter∣nall.
Gen. 41. 25.The future state of Egypt was reuealed to Ioseph,
and the future state of the Church was reuealed to Iohn.
The one wasGen. 37. 4. exiled, because his father loued him; and
the other exiled, because his Maister loued him. The

place of his exile was into theReuel. 1. 9. Island of Pathmos, being
before by Traian put into a vessell ofFasciculus temporum. scalding oyle. But
that God who shewed his visions toGen. 22. 12. Abraham in the
mount,Gen. 28. to Iacob in the field,Gen. 40. to Ioseph in the stockes,Exod. 3. to
Moses in Midian,Ier. 38. 14. to Ieremie in the prison,Dan. 2. to Daniel in
Babylon,Act. 10. and to the Apostle Peter in the house of a
Tanner, euen he sheweth his visions to Iohn in his exile.
He is not bound to persons, he can aduance whome
he list, he is not bounden to place, he can reueale where
he list. For persons, he can preferreGen. 4. Abel before Cain,
Mat. 1.Iacob before Esau,1. Sam. 16. Dauid before Eliab,Act. 1. Matthias be∣fore
Iudas. He can makeExod. 2. 10. Moses a Courtier,Iob. 1. 1. Iob a Po∣tentate,
Act. 7.Samuel a Iudge,2. Sam. 2. 1. Dauid a King,Pro. 1. 1. Salomon a So∣ueraigne,
1. Ki. 19. 19.Elysha a plowman,Amos 1. 1. Amos a Neatheard,Jer. 1. 1. Ie∣remie
a Priest,Dan. 1. 6. Daniel a Prince,Isay 1. 1. Isaiah of the bloud Roy∣all,
Math. 9. 9.Matthew a Publicane,Mat. 4 18. Peter a Fisher,Act. 18. 2. Nullum tem∣pus occurrit Regi. and Paule
a Tent-maker, to be penners and preachers of the word
of God. For place, as no time can prescribe against the
King of a nation, so no place can prescribe against this
King of all nations.Ioh. 5. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and
the Spirit worketh where it listeth.
It pleased Christ, who is called in this Reuelation,
Reuel. cap. 1. 5.that faithfull witnesse, that first begotten of the dead,Vers. 8. that
Prince of the kings of the earth,Vers. 18. Alpha and Omega, the first
and last,Vers. 16. he that hath the keyes of hell and of death,Vers. 14. which
hath that sharpe sword,Vers. 15. his eyes like fire,Chap. 2. 1. his feete like brasse,
Chap. 3. 1.the seuen Spirits of God, the seuen Starres in his hand,Vers. 7. the
key of Dauid, who is called hereVers. 14. Amen, the beginning of
the creatures of God; and in Daniel, he thatDan. 2. 22. reuealeth se∣crets,
it pleased this Christ to reueale secrets to Iohn. Not
by dreame as toGea. 28. Iacob, or apparition as toExod. 3. Moses, or by
voice asGen. 3. to Adam; but partly by vision, and partly by

voice as he did when he turnedAct. 9. Saule into Paule. This
Iohn was Legatus à latere, that Ambassadour who leaned
on his Lords brest.Johns Gospell, Iohns▪ Reuela∣tion. He writeth Christs historie, there he
sheweth his loue to Christ: he writeth the Churches hi∣storie,
there Christ sheweth his loue to him: especially
in this, that he will do nothing, which he doth not re∣ueale
to hisAmos 3. 7. seruant this Prophet. For the Church in his
time, we may see how it stood, in the three first Chapters:
and what condition it should haue for the time to come,
it is plainely set downe in the rest of this booke.The contents of the whole Reuelation. If we res∣pect
the generall estate of the Church, after Iohn had de∣scribed
the authors of this Reuelation, which are God
the Father, chap. 4. and Christ his Sonne, chap. 5. he
cometh to the works of God, which are predictions, cha.
6. obsignations, chap. 7. indignations, chap. 8. 9. Predi∣ctions
of things to come, obsignations of such as must be
saued, & indignation on things to be destroyed. And for
the more particular estate of the Church, hauing (chap.
10.) shewed his warrant to write, he cometh to her acti∣ons:
first, in her Prophets: secondly, in her bodie. In her
Prophets, their fighting, falling, rising, chap. 11. In
her bodie, comparing her to a woman clothed with the
Sunne, chap. 12. and describing her by her combats, con∣quests,
triumphs: her combats defensiue, chap. 13. and
offensiue in Christ, by words, chap. 14. threatnings,
chap. 15. and iudgements, chap. 16. her victories gotten
against thatThe Church of Rome. whore, chap. 17. and 18. theThe Romane Empire. Beast, chap. 19.
and theThe diuell. Dragon, chap. 20. And all that glorie which
she shall haue in the kingdome of God, is vnder the type
of Ierusalem most comfortably set downe, chap. 21. 22.
The things in this booke were (I grant) very darke
to them that liued in the dayes of Iohn, as the Prophecie

of Daniel was to them who liued in the time of Daniel.
But as that Prophecie being fulfilled, we can now tell
what was foretold in it: so many things being fulfilled
which were foretold in this booke, we may easily see
what is meant by it: and the posteritie to come shall bet∣ter
vnderstand this booke then we do, because it
may be, all things are not yet fulfilled. Neither is this
booke like the cities of theNum. 13. Anakims, or theGen. 3. tree of know∣ledge
which may not be reached to: forReuel. 1. 3. blessed is he that
readeth the words of this booke. But to come to these
three Chapters written by Iohn surnamed the Diuine, &
expounded by one a most worthie Diuine. The first
Chapter is a Proeme or Preface to the booke: the two
latter are Epistles dedicating this booke. The dedication
is made toReu. 2. 1. seuen seuerall Churches, and by name to the
Ministers which are called Angels. In the word of God
Ministers haue many excellent titles giuē them, (though
now they are scarcely graced with titles) they are called
Gen. 20.Prophets,1. Sam. 9. 9. Seers,2. Pet. 1. 13. Remembrancers,Isa. 58▪ 1. Trumpets,Ez 3. 1. Watch∣men,
Cor. 3.Husbandmen,Luk. 12. 24. Stewards,Pro 9. 4. Maydens,Ezec. 47. Fishers,Mat. 23. 24. Lea∣ders,
1. Pet. 5. 1.Elders,Mar. 9. 50. Salt,Dan. 12. 2. Starres,1. Cor. 11 10 Angels andExec. 34. 2. Shepheards. Pro∣phets
to teach, Seers to foretell, Remembrancers to put in
mind, Trumpets to sound, Watchmen to admonish, Hus∣bandmen
to plow vp, Stewards to distribute, Maydens to
keepe pure the doctrine of truth, Fishers to catch men,
Leaders to go before, Elders to gouerne, Salt to season,
Starres to giue light, Angels to declare, and Shepheards
to feed: to feed (I say) soundly by doctrine, liberally
by charitie, and religiously by life. By doctrine: for Sa∣cerdos
sine doctrina, est nauis sine velis, a Priest without
knowledge, is a ship without sailes. By liberalitie: forNaz. in era. de pauper. Ni∣hil
habet homo adeò diuinum quàm benefacere, man is in no∣thing

more like God, then in doing good. By life: for cu∣ius
vita despicitur, eius oratio contemnitur: his words are
not esteemed, whose life is not approued. And that it may
be said of them as it was of Origen: Quale habuit verbū, ta∣lem
habuit vitam: as his words were, so were his workes.
They must not be barren like mount2. Sam. 1. 21. Gilboah, but1. Sa. 1. 24. wea∣ned
as Samuel was, before they be offered vnto the Lord.
They must be pure water if they will cleanse others, and
more then whetstones, if they will sharpen others. They
must be inGen. 19. integritie Abrahams,Num. 12. 3. in meekenesse Mo∣ses,
Exod. 4. 14.in knowledge Arons,2. Cor. 11. 23. in pains Paules,1. Sam. 12. and in pray∣ing
Samuels, and remēber, that as Augustine said: Manus
pauperū sunt gazophylaciū Christi. The hands of the poore
are the treasurie of Christ. I need not speake much of the
dutie of a Minister: for euery one wil teach him his duty,
that wil not be ranged within any dutie himselfe.
These Churches were then like1. Chr. 12. 14. Dauids Wor∣thies,
excellent aboue all the Churches of the world: but
because they lost their firstReuel. 2. 4. loue,Vers. 10. were not faithfull to the
death,Vers. 14. maintained the doctrine of Balaam,Vers 20. suffered women
to teach,Cap. 3. 1. bare a name onely to liue,Vers. 8. had but a litle strength,
Vers. 16.were neither hote nor cold, andCap. 2. 21. repented not as they should
haue done, of all their sins, they are reprehended by Iohn,
threatened by Christ, and the Candlesticke of the Gos∣pell
is now taken away from them. Iam seges est vbi
Troia fuit. Now Mahomet rageth, where Messiah did
raigne. Are they reprehended? let vs hearken: are they
threatened? let vs feare: are they fallen? let vs labour to
continue.Seneca. From Iohns reprehension we see, that (as one
said) hereof our Elders haue complained, hereof do we com∣plaine,
and hereof they which liue after vs will complaine, that
men waxe worse, and liue not according to the doctrine of

Gods word. From Christs threatning we see, that God
is mercifull,Deut. 20. 10. who first offereth peace before he fight a∣gainst
vs▪ that we being forewarned, might be forear∣med.
And by the wofull downefall of these seuen Chur∣ches,
let1. Cor. 10. 12. vs that stand take heed that we fall not: for if
God spared not the2. Pet. 2. old world who despised Noah, the
Sodomites who vexed Lot,Mat 23. 38. Ierusalem which abused the
Prophets,Orosius saith that these cities for this cause, fell by an earthquake. Colossa, Hierapolis, and Laodicea, who reiected
Paule, and these Asian Churches who did not grow
in righteousnesse as they did in riches, how shall we e∣scape
Heb. 2. 3.if we neglect so great saluation? and for this cause
these Sermons are most worthie to be considered of in
this present age. O then let vs nowRom. 13. consider this season:
Rom. 12. 11.redeeme the oportunitie,Heb. 3 & Psal. 95. not harden our hearts, but regard
the time of our present visitation. As the day openeth
and shutteth with the Sunne, so saluation openeth and
shutteth with the Gospell.Heb. 3. 13. Whilst it is called to day let vs
heare his voice:Prou. 10. 5. He that laboureth in Sommer is the sonne of
Wisedom, but he that sleepeth in haruest is the son of confusiō.
All things in the world do take their time, the bird to
build her nest, the husbandman to sow his seed, the mari∣ner
to go to sea, the gardener to set his trees, the sicke pa∣tient
to take physicke, the cooke to season meates, and the
dresser of the vineyard to gather his fruite. It will be too
late to build in Sommer, to sow in haruest, to go to sea
when the ship is lanched, to transplant trees when they
are old, to take phisicke when we are dying, to season
meates when they are vnsauorie, & when winter is come
to gather fruite. TheMat. 25. 10. fiue foolish virgins came too late,
DiuesLuk. 16. in hell repenteth too late, the time present is on∣ly
ours. Is the fig-tree fruitlesse? it shall heare that sen∣tence,
Luk. 13. Solum tempus presens est no∣strum. Seneca.Neuer fruite grow on thee any more.Eccl. 18. 18. Get thee then

righteousnesse before thou come to iudgement: vse Physicke
before thou be sicke, and whilst thou maist yet sinne, shew thy
conuersion, as the wise man exhorteth euery man. But a∣las,
whereunto shall I liken this generation? we are like
the Ephesians, we haueApoc. 2. lost our first loue; or the Laodi∣ceans,
we areApoc. 3. neither hote nor cold: or the twilight, nei∣ther
day nor night: or the Autumne, neither faire nor
fowle: or one sicke of an ague, one day well another ill:
or a man in a Lethargie, neither aliue nor dead: or Her∣maphroditus,
neither male nor female: or to those crea∣tures
called , which liue in water or on land: or the
Lionesse, which the oftener she breedeth; the fewer cubs
she beareth: or the Mariner, who is onely good in a
storme: or the Marigold, that shutteth and openeth with
the Sunne: or the Mermaides, which are halfe flesh half
fish. I would to God we were either hote or cold: that
as the hotest regions bring foorth sweetest spices, so most
zealous people might be most fruitfull in good workes:
that as the Sunne in the heauen is swiftest at her setting,
so the sonnes of God might be best at their ending. But
is it so? no: the more we are taught, the more ignorant
are many; and the older we are, the colder in religion.
We haue indeed many of vs, as it was said of Aristogîton,
Marte, or rather religionem in lingua, religion in tong:
but when trial is made of vs, eueryPlutarch. in Phocion. Phocion can espie our
halting: and then withTheatrum Philos. lib. 5. cap. 30. Archilochus we thinke it better
clypeum abjicere quàm interire, euen to cast off all religi∣on,
then to vndergo the least disgrace for religion.
Treatise of Apostacie. c. 2. The Moone desiring to be apparelled as the rest of the
Planets, answer was made her, that her diuerse chaunges
could admit no kind of habite. And we desiring to be at∣tired
with the robes of Christians, it is to be feared, that

since we treadApoc. 12. 1. that is, all earthly vani∣ties. not the Moone vnder our feet, we shall ne∣uer
be clothed as the Church was, with theApoc. 12. 1. that is, Christ the Sunne of righteousnes. Sunne. Who
is wise,Hos. 14. 10. and he shall vnderstand these things; and prudent, &
he shall know them. Let vs therefore labour to2. Pet. 3. 19. grow in
grace, to abound in knowledge, to be full of good works,
and to ouercome all the vnderminers of our future salua∣tion.
Then shall weSee Reu. ca. 2. 13. eate of the tree of life, not be hurt of
the second death, tast of the hidden Manna, haue power ouer
nations, be clothed in white, made pillars in Gods temple, and
sit with Christ Iesus in the throne of his Father. And though
the1. Sam. 22. 7. sonne of Ishai cannot make vs Captains of thousands,
yet that Sonne of Dauid willGal. 3. 27. make vs the sonnes of God.
That we may do so, we must beleeue the Gospell, put on
Christ Iesus, and be renewed by repentance. The first is ne∣cessarie,
the second comely, the third profitable. To
come to the first: it is necessarie we should beleeue: for
he thatJoh. 3. 18. beleeueth not, is condemned alreadie, he is con∣demned
in the counsell of God, in the ministerie of the
word, and in his owne conscience, and he shall be con∣demned
in the day of iudgement; forJoh. 3. 38. the wrath of God
abideth vpon him. The more I consider the fruites of
faith, the more I see the necessitie of faith.Eph. 2. 8. Through it
we are saued:Rom. 5. 1. by it we are iustified:Hab. 2. 4. in it we liue. We are
saued from Satan, iustified before God, and liue in the
Church. In the Church? nay, by it we liue in heauen:
forIoh. 3. 16. he that beleeueth in the Sonne of God, hath euerlasting
life. Faith is that whichAct. 15. 9. purifieth the heart, maketh the
whole man toPsal. 119. 32. runne the wayes of Gods commandements,
Rom. 5. 2.giueth entrance to grace,Heb. 10 3. accesse to God in prayer,Heb. 11. made the
Elders well reported of, and each Christian to2. Cor. 1. 24. stand to the
profession of Christ. It is thatEph. 3. 17. hand by which we must
apprehend Christ: thatEph. 6. 16. shield by which we resist all the

fierie darts of the diuell: and thatMat. 8. 13. meanes by which we
do good to others.Gal. 3. 7. By faith we receiue the spirit:Rom. 8. 1. are
members of Christ:Col 3. 12. we are risen with him:Eph. 3 17. he dwelleth in
our hearts:Joh. 6 35. we feed on him continually:1. Pet. 5. 8. resist Satan:Ioh. 1. 13. are
the children of God:Heb. 4. 2. and the word which we heare becometh
profitable. And what shall I say? faith is of such a qualitie,
that itColos. 2. 7. vniteth vs to Christ,2. Cor. 13. 5. Rom. 8. maketh vs certaine of our
saluation,1. Ti. 3. 13. bold in our profession, ministrethPhil. 3. 28. true ioy,
Mat 15. 28.giueth temporall blessings,Luk. 17. 19. sanctifieth our gifts, and
maketh vs refuse theHeb. 11. 24 pleasures of this present world. In a
word, no sinne can condemne him who hath this true
faith, and no vertue can saue him who wanteth it.
To come to the second, which is Christ, the obiect of
faith. The most comely garment that euer we can weare,
it is to be couered with theRom. 13. 13 robes of Christs righteous∣nesse.
Gen. 27. 15.Iacob was blessed by Esaus garments; & we are bles∣sed
by Christs garments. What we see through a greene
glasse, seemeth all to be greene: and what God seeth tho∣rough
Christ it is al amiable. We must put on this aparel,
not as the Church in the Canticles:Cant. 5. 3. How Christ is to be put on. I haue put off my
clothes, how shall I put them on againe? or as a gowne, that
we cast off when we come to our home: but we must
so put him on, that we neuer put him off againe. We must
put him on by imputation, imitation, infusion, and pro∣fession:
by imputation of his righteousnesse, imitation of
his vertues, infusion of his Spirit, and profession of his
name. Thus we must labour to get Christ: for what
though a man could commaund the earth with Alexan∣der,
theExod. 14. sea with Moses, the2. Kin. 1. fire with Eliah, and the
Jos. 10.Sunne with Iosuah? What though he were as rich as1. King. 4. Sa∣lomon,
as wise as2. Sa. 16. 23 Achitophel, as strong asIud. 16. Sampson, as
swift as2. Sa. 18. 19. Ahimaaz, as beautifull as2. Sam. 18. Absolon, as fortunate

asTheatrum Philos. lib. 2. cap. 33. Metellus, & descended asPhil 3. 8. Paul was of the bloud roy∣al
of Princes, yet hauing not Christ he hath nothing. Yea
say a man had the abstinence of Aristydes, the innocencie
of Phocion, the holinesse of Socrates, the almes deedes of
Cimon, the moderation of Camillus, the honestie, iustice,
and faithfulnesse of both Catoes, all these out of Christ,
were butAugustine. splendida peccata, and to be esteemed asPhil. 3. 10. dung
in regard of Christ. For haue him and haue all things,
want him and want all things: he is in, at, and after death
aduantage. I come to the last, it is profitable to repent:
for if weIer. 4. 1. Reasons of repentance. turne to the Lord, he will turne to vs: and that
we may turne, consider hisRom. 2. mercies in forgiuing, hisGen. 39. 9. be∣nefites
in giuing, hisRom. 2. 5. patience in forbearing, and hisIsa. 26. 9. iudg∣ments
in punishing.Act. 17. 30. The word preached,1. Pet. 4. 3. sinnes commit∣ted,
and thatLuk 13. 24. few shall be saued:Eccles. 12. 1 the shortnesse of life,
Psal. 90. 12.the vncertaintie of life,Heb 9. 26. and the certaintie of death:1. Cor. 2. 9. the
ioyes of heauen,Mat. 25. 46. the torments of hell, theLuk. 15. 10. comfort of the
elect, and that else we can haue noEccles. 41. 1 comfort in death:
Jer. 7.pray we cannot vnlesse we repent, andLuk. 13. 2. perish we shall
vnlesse we repent: but blessed shall we be if we do repent.
But manum de tabula Magister adest: this discourse follow∣ing
will teach vs these things: and it am I bold to present
to your Worships. Iohn sent his Reuelation to many
Churches, and I present his Epistles to many worthie
personages:Act. 2. 40. and to whom may I better present them thē
to you. Iohn was a disciple full of loue, and you are bree∣thrē
full of loue. The Preacher of these Lectures was well
knowne to many, but to none better then to many of
you, especially to those who were in my time worthie
members of that most worthieChrists col∣ledge. Colledge with him. And
the rather I do it, that times to come may reioyce in the
Lord, that from one honorable root haue issued so many

profitable branches to the Church.: Menander. You are sixe brethren
as pillars of your house, there were three sisters as fruitfull
vines of the same:The Lady Wray. one is not, but is with the Lord, and her
I knew a Ladie of admirable vertues: the other two are,
and long may they be so. You are all brethren by nature
of one venter, nation of one countrie, grace of one spirit,
affection of one heart, fortune in great fauour, and of
one hope by your holy behauiour. And1. Thes. 4. 9. concerning
brotherly loue, I need not to write vnto you: for you are
taught of God to loue one another. YourVVhich had eightie sonnes. Plutarke. Scilurus at his
death need not teach you concord, by giuing to each of
you a sheafe of arrowes, which cannot well be broken
whilst they are conioyned: for you by your amitie make
your selues inuincible. IfTheatrum Philos. pag. 294 Chilo the Lacedaemonian died
for ioy to see one sonne crowned at Olympus, andAul. Gel. lib. 3. Nat. At. Dia∣goras
Rhodius did the like, when his three children got the
garland at a wrestling: andGen. 45. 28. Iacob so reioyced to heare of
his one Ioseph, to be aduanced greatly in the kingdome
of Egypt: how might that happie father of yours reioyce,
to see at one time, one sonne sitting as high Sheriffe of the
shire, another preaching before the Iudges of Assize, and
the third pleading as Councellor at the barre, and all the
rest of great expectation in the kingdome? ThusPro. 10. 1. wise sons
are a ioy to their parents, and all mayPsal. 133. 1. behold how good and
comely a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in vnitie.
Aristotle could say,Lib. 10. Ethni. that parents were not blessed, vnlesse
they were after their death blessed in their children. And
surely it is no small part of a fathers blessednesse, to see
his children like to flourish when he is gone. Nay of all
monuments that parents can leaue behind them, there is
none (as one saith) like to a vertuous sonne. But all pa∣rents
are not so blessed.Genes 4. Adams two sonnes could not

agree in one field,Gen. 21. 9. Abrahams in one house,Gen. 25. Fratrum gra∣tia rarum. Isaaks in
one wombe,2. King. 1. Dauids in one pallace, nor thoseLuk. 12. 13. two bre∣thren
in the diuision of an inheritance. And though con∣cord
amongst brethrē (especially such as must deuide the
inheritance) be very rare, yet do you, euen in this, most
comfortably agree. You are not as Simeon and Leui, Ro∣mulus
and Remus, Eteocles and Polynices, Atreus and Thy∣estes,
Aeta and Perseus: but as Castor and Pollux, Dauid &
Ionathan, Ioseph and Beniamin; and (as a true friend is de∣scribed
to be). one soule in two bodies. It seemeth that as
Agrippa the brother of Augustus was beholding to Salust
for that one sentence: Small things increase by concord, but
perish through discord, so you haue all learned the same les∣son:
as being perswaded, that as the members of a bodie
being once dismembred, they cannot possibly be ioy∣ned
againe: so if naturall brethren be once vnnaturally
disioyned, no glue will conioyne them fast againe. It
were infinite to shew examples of brotherly loue and
hatred,See French Academ pag. 542. &c. and others haue eased me of this paines. Now
that good God, who hath brought you from one roote,
placed you in one countrie, aduanced you to like credit,
and giuen you one heart, giue you also one inheritance
in the kingdome of heauen. Thus right worshipfull I am
bold to speake vnto you, and the world knoweth I speake
the truth, and the Lord knoweth I desire not to flatter.
Go on therefore I beseech you, continue in loue, be set∣led
in the truth, and labour to honor him who thus ho∣noureth
you. Be not caried away with the shew of this
world, but thinke religion the best nobilitie, and that as
Prudentius said:
Generosa Christi secta nobilitat viros,
Cui quisquis seruit, ille verè est nobilis.

He noble is that comes of Christ his race:
Who serues this Lord, he surely is not base.
And this made Theodosius more to thanke God,Hist. Eccles. that he
was a Christian then a king; considering that he must
lose the one, he could not lose the other. Now as to one
of you I am bounden in particular,M. Dector Montagu. and by him, being a
Minister, the despised Ministry is not a litle graced: so for
him I pray, that he may be anGen. 20. Abraham to our Abime∣lech,
a2. Sam. 12. Nathan to our Dauid, a2. Kin. 11. Iehoida to our Ioash,Ier. 38. an
Ebedmelech to Ieremiah, an2. King. 4. 1. Elisha to the widow of this
Prophet deceased, a light in the Court, a trumpet in the
Church, and thatEsther 5. 2. Ahashuerosh may long hold out his gol∣den
scepter vnto him: that by his meanesDictū regis, deest regibus qui verum dicat. great men may
not want such as will tell them the truth: noPlu. in vita Alex. reports, that Iupiters Priests called Alexander by the name of Jupiters son. earthly Alex∣ander
accounted a sonne of Iupiter, and that no man may
be more respected then a good. pag 42. Pastor: and that he may
euer remember that saying of wise Salomon:Prou. 22. 11 He that lo∣ueth
purenes of heart, for the grace of his lips the King shall
be his friend. His Cyrus will not be spoken to verbis bissinis
in silken words, to his Alexander he needeth not speake
, either sweet words or no words. For if
one Antiochus might be surnamed holy, & another good
Prince called the Good King: much more may he, whose
religious knowledge surpasseth all the Princes that haue
bene of this nation: and whose humilitie is such, that he
will haue his sonne to remember,. pag. 95. Odictum verè regium. that he dissereth not
in stuffe, but in vse from the rest of his people, and that by
Gods ordinance. I am the bolder for that one to make
choice of you all in the dedication of this booke: no man
knew, loued, conuersed with, and respected this Author
more then he. He resorted to him in his health, visited
him in sicknesse, and preached a learned Sermon for him

at his death. Concerning this author, as he said of Car∣thage,
I had rather be silent then say litle, and his worthie
labours do speake enough for him, by name that hisProblema Theologicum. Po∣sthume,
dedicated to his excellent Maiestie, byMaster Sa∣muel VVard, Fellow of Im∣manuel Col∣ledge. an ex∣cellent
Diuine. In a word therefore, whatsoeuer this man
did, he desired to profite others by it: he thought (as it is
writtenAutor vitae Ber. lib. 2. cap. 4. & 7. of Bernard in his life) that he was not his owne
man, but deputed to the seruice of others. He was neuer
idle, but asHieron. ad Marcellam. Hierome reporteth of Ambrose, and Bernard
of himselfe, he did either reade, or meditate, or pray, or
conferre, or counsell, or comfort, or write, or preach. And
thus (as theAliis inser∣uiens meipsam consum. Embleme is of a faithfull Teacher) he, like a
waxe candle, in giuing light to others, in a short time ex∣tinguished
himselfe. Yet in this short time of his, what
art was he not a maister of? what vertue was he not en∣dued
with? He was a complet Diuine, and hath this bles∣sing
in the Church, that no mans writings are read of all
sorts, and in all countries with greater grace and profite
then his. He was peaceable in the Church, patient of
wrongs, and free from ambition. For as Ierome said of Ne∣potian,
aurum calcans, schedulas consectabatur: he regarded
not his purse, but followed his booke, and as Bernard
said, he liued in terra auri sine auro, in a kingdome of gold
without gold. An excellent gift he had to define proper∣ly,
deuide exactly, dispute subtilly, answer directly, speake
pithily, and write iudicially: and how he preached, if these
Sermons do giue a testimonie, what witnesse had they
who often heard him themselues? I haue published of his
now two Discourses, and I onely did it, that these his la∣bours
might not perish: I haue no benefite by them but
exceeding great paines. And since I vnderstand that his o∣ther
labours are in the hands of his friends, to make bene∣fite

for his children, I will ease my selfe of the like labour,
& be a means that they may haue the benefit of the future
impressions of this booke: the which, how faithfully I
haue published, I appeale to the godly and indifferent
Reader, and I hope no honest minded man will be hired
to calumniate it. Thus as one desirous to be seruiceable in
my calling, profitable to the Church, not forgetfull of my
friend, and to testifie the happinesse of your house, which
was in your fathers time, and is now (as it is said of Aure∣lian
the Emperors,) Referta piis & Ecclesia Dei, replenish∣ed
with the godly, and a Church of God, and withall to
leaue a monument of my dutie to you all, I haue as you
see, published this exposition of seuen Epistles vnder
your eight names, nothing doubting but it will be as wel∣come
to you, as by your countenance it may be profita∣ble
to the Church. The God of heauen giue you all that
blessing of blessings,Epist. ad Iu∣lianum. which (if Ierome say true) few men
haue, that you may transire à deliciis ad delicias, go on
from grace to grace, and be a long time happie in this life,
and for euer happie in the life to come. London:
Saint Martins in the fields, from my worshipful friend
Master Oldisworths house,2. Tim. 1. 16. by which familie (as Paul was
by the house of Onesiphorus) in the time of this late (and I
wish I may say) the last visitation, I haue receiued no
small refreshing. March 12. 1604.

