



RIght Worshipfull, it is a notable pollicie of the de∣uil, which he hath put in∣to the heades of sundrie men in this age, to thinke that our religion and the religion of the present Church of Rome are all one for substance; and that they may be reunited as (in their o∣pinion) they were before. Writings to this effect, are spread abroad in the French tōgue, & respected of English Protestants more thē is meete, or ought to be. For, let men in shew of moderation, pretend the peace and good estate of the Catholike Church as long as they will; This vnion of the two religions can neuer be made, more then the Vnion of light & darknes. And this shall appeare, if we doe but a litle consider, how they of the Ro∣mane

church haue rased the foundation. For, though in words they honour Christ, yet in deede they turne him into a Pseudo-Christ and an Idol of their owne braine. They call him our Lord, but with this condition that the Seruant of Seruants of this Lord may change and adde to his commaundements: hauing so great a power, that he may open and shut heauen to whome he will; & binde the very conscience with his owne laws, and consequently be partaker of the spirituall kingdome of Christ. Againe they call him a Sauiour, but yet in Vs: in that he giues this grace vnto vs, that by our merits we may be our owne Sauiours: and in the want of our owne merits, we may partake in the merits of the Saints. And they acknowledge that he Died and Suffred for vs, but with this ca∣ueat, that the Fault beeing pardoned, we must satisfie for the temporall punishment either in this worlde or in Purgatorie. In a word, they make him our Mediatour of In∣tercession vnto God; but withal, his Mother must be the Queene of heauen, and by the right of a mother commaund him there.

Thus, in word they crie Osanna, but in deed they crucifie Christ. Therfore we haue good cause to blesse the name of God, that hath freed vs from the yoke of this Romane bon∣dage, & hath brought vs to the true light & liberty of the gospel. And it should be a great height of vnthankfulnesse in vs, not to stand out against the present church of Rome, but to yeeld our selues to plottes of reconciliati∣on. To this effect and purpose I haue penned this little Treatise, which I present to your Worship, desiring it might be some token of a thankefull minde, for vndeserued loue. And I craue withall, not onely your Wor∣shipfull (which is more common) but also your Learned protection; being wel assured, that by skill and arte you are able to iustifie whatsoeuer I haue truly taught. Thus wish∣ing to you and yours the continuance and the increase of faith and good conscience, I take my leaue. Cambr. Iune 28. 1597.

