


THat common place of diuinitie, which con∣cerneth the framing of Sermons, is both weightie and diffi∣cult, if there be any other throughout all that sacred science. For the matter, which it is to explicate and treate on, is Prophecie; an excel∣lent gift indeede, whether we consider it in respect of dignitie, or of vse. The dig∣nitie thereof appeareth, in that like a La∣die



it is highly mounted and carried a loft in a Chariot: whereas all other gifts, both of tongues and arts, attend on this like handmaides a loofe off. Answerable to this dignitie there is also a two folde vse: one, in that it serueth to collect the Church, and to accomplish the number of the Elect: the other, for that it dri∣ueth away the Woolues from the foldes of the Lord. For this is indeede that Flexanima, that allurer of the Soule, whereby mens froward mindes are miti∣gated and moued from an vngodly and barbarous life vnto Christian faith and repentance. This also is that Engine, which as it hath shaken (the foundation of) auncient heresies, so it hath in these few by-past yeares, cut asunder the sinews of that great Antichrist. Wherefore if it be demaunded which is the most ex∣cellent gift of all, doubtlesse the praise must be giuen to Prophecying. Now by how much the more excellent euery thing



is, by so much the more diligently it ought to be adorned with varietie and plentie of precepts. Therefore, when I saw this common place so handled of ma∣ny, as that it would remaine naked and poore, if all other arts should call for those things, which are their owne: I perused the writings of Diuines, and hauing gathered some rules out of them, I haue couched them in that methode, which I haue deemed most commodious: that they might be better for vse, and fitter for the memorie. I doe also publish them, that they might be approoued, if they bring with them that which is good: if any euill, that they may receiue their de∣serued punishment. And whosoeuer thou art that pleasest to reade them, where thou art perswaded of this order of Prea∣ching, which here I handle, walke on with me: where thou standest at a stay, inquire with me: or when. where thou perceiuest thine owne errors, returne to me: where thou



seest mine, call me back to thee. For that, which now liketh me, shall dislike me, if it like not gadlie and moderate minded men. But if any man shall carpe at this my trauaile, though very small, let him know, that my onely meaning is to bene∣fite the Church of God: and that the conscience of my fact is a sufficient mu∣ment against all calumnies. I doe now betake you to God, and this (tractate of the) art of Prophecying, both to you and to God. Anno 1592. Decemb. 12.

