



RIght Honourable and W.
how famous in all writers
the yeare Eightie eight, and
how fatall it was made by
all the old and later Con∣iecturers,
is not vnknown
to any of you: but how the issue answered
the expectation, I see not, saue only in that
notable ouerthrow of the enemies of god,
the Papists: whereupon our reuerendFulk. in pr in Tst. Rhe countreyman, and Christs Champion
for England, said very well:
Octogesimus octavus, mirabilis annus

Clade Papistarum, faustus vbi{que} pijs.
But if euer yeare deserue to be famous in
English Chronicles, it is this yeare, I can∣not
tell whether I should say 1602, or
1603: wherein, whether Gods anger was
more, in taking from vs such a Queene (as
for ought I reade) the world neuer had: or
his mercie, in giuing vs such a King, as
England neuer had, I leaue it to better
heads to be determined. How is the name
of our God to be magnified, by whose
mercie so great a losse is made no losse,
but a gaine vnto vs? for who seeth not, that
all her Princely vertues, doe not only liue
in him, but are also in him (beeing a man)
more perfect and accomplisht. Shee is
dead, but her Heroicall zeale and loue to
Religion is aliue; shee bequeathed it with
her kingdome to his Highnesse, who
doubtlesse will make both her Religi∣on,
and her Kingdome, to flourish as
much more, as a man doth excell a womā.
And who knoweth not, that the enemies
of our Religion, and our peace, (notwith∣standing
all their politik dissembled brags
to the contrarie) doe finde his Maiestie so
little for their purpose, that now they
would sing a thousand Masses to haue
her aliue againe, against whom they thun∣dred

outPius Grego Sixtus  so many Curses and Excom∣munications,
and after whose blood they
so thirsted whilst shee liued: what straights
are they driuen into? who would wish her
aliue againe, at whose hands (though a wo∣man)
they neuer gained, nor got one inch
of ground in 44 yeares;Paulus ius 4. Pius 5. Gregor Sixtus 5 Vrbanu Gregor. Innocen Clement though nine or
ten Popes, and 10000 of their slaues, wra∣stled
with her all the while, with all the
power, and policie, craft, and trecherie,
which the Deuill could lend them. Nay,
her end was as glorious as her beginning,
and her last Proclamation against them,
was more to their shame, and lesse to their
comfort, then euer any, in her life before:
and so farre was shee, from allowing them
a Toleration, of their intolerable religion,
in her old, and therefore weakest age, as
that it neuer entred into her royall heart:
nor euer thought shee it worthie to be
made a question, whether it should be or
no. No, shee halted not betwixt two reli∣gions:
but to her Baal was Belial:1. King. 18▪ & ther∣fore
shee banisht him; and God was the
Lord, and therefore shee serued him. Shee
was resolued that Dagon must downe,1. Sam. 5. 2▪ if
Gods Arke stand; or els if Dagon stand,
the Arke must away. For both together
cannot stand vpright. Shee held that as,

when the enemies themselues brought the
Arke into Dagons temple, Dagon fell
downe: so if the Israelites should haue ad∣mitted
Dagon into Gods temple, that the
Lord himselfe would haue remooued his
Arke from them. Blessed was shee in her
life, & twise blessed in her end: she lost not
her first loue, 4, 19. and her works were more at
the last, then at the first: and blessed are
we that enioyed her so long: and more
blessed, who vnder her enioyed such 44
yeares, as all the bookes in the world can∣not
shew vnder a woman: but most bles∣sed
of all, in that after such a Dauid, God
hath sent vs such a Salomon, after such a
woman, such a man, after such a Queene,
such a King, who will make an ende of
many a Ioab, and many a Shimei, which
shee could not so well doe, and finish that
Temple which shee so well beganne: and
who (I doubt not to affirme it) doe the
Deuill, and the craftie Papist, all they can,
is the chiefe Champion of Christ Iesus
vpon the face of the earth.
And how happie a yeare shall this be, if
the losses which learning hath sustained
be as well recompenced. Iunius of Leiden,
Tossaine of Heilderberg, Perkins of Cam∣bridge,
haue this yeare bin taken from vs,

besides many other, of inferiour note:
happie should those three famous Vni∣uersities
be, if the like were seated in their
roomes. Let vs leaue the first, to the low∣er,
the second to the higher Germanie, to
praise them, to lament them, and to make
supply for them. It is the third who especi∣ally
concerneth vs: what losse the Church
of God, and in the Church, England: and
in the Church of England, the Ministery:
and in the Ministerie, the Vniuersities: &
in the Vniuersities, the younger students
haue sustained by the vntimely death of
that Reuerend man, I thinke is not vn∣knowne
to any of you. For how should he
be vnknown to any (of any note) in Eng∣land;
whose name and estimation is such in
other natiōs, as that at oneNund ver. 603. Mart we find,
that in one halfe yeare, two ofCatho reforma de mort de vita. Prophet his books
were translated into Latine, & foure were
were printed beyond the seas. The best re∣compence
of this losse, is the fruit of his la∣bours,
which he hath left behind him,
whereof some were written by himselfe,
and others taken by other men from his
mouth: all which, at least so many of them
as may be perfected, there is hope we shall
intime inioy. Had not Iohan. Budaeus,Calr. in. and
Carolus Ionvillaus done so to Calvin: Vi∣tus

Theodorus, Ioh. Frederus, and Iustus
Ionas done so to Luther, many worthy
workes of those two great instruments of
God had vtterly perished: and had not
some done so to this worthy mā, no doubt
many sweet blasts of that siluer trumpet
of God, had vanished away. For my part,
though time be pretious vnto me other∣waies,
yet thinke I that time well spent,
which I may bestowe in preparing to the
Presse, any thing of his. This discourse of
Equitie now made readie, as a child borne
after his fathers death, I present to your
Honourable viewe and patronage. If any
aske why I dare tender so small a gift, to so
great personages, my onely answer is, I
make the Iudges of Equitie, the Patrons
of Equitie. God graunt you a long and
Honourable state, vnder our worthy Sa∣lomon.
Amen. From my studie, Sept.
10. 1603.

