



ALL good counsell comes from God. Humane consul∣tations are as fraile; as themselues are feeble. Nature hath her cour∣ses and corruptions in all the accidents of this world. Mans aduice re∣lyng onely on it selfe, is
 like his actions, some∣times prosperous, often perillous, & many times pernitious. The most sure and sase helpe that vvee haue, comes from the gouernour of Heauen & Earth. The defence of his truth is our best buckler, and his seruice our chiefest safety. Pray∣ers and Petitions vnto God, are the Harbin∣gers, which prepares a place for our heauenly habitation, and makes firme our earthly posses∣sions. This small and
 slender Treatise, which J haue now puhlished concerning Prayer, was first written ahout 27. yeares since, then penned for mine owne practise: since which time, it hath beene concealed, and in a manner cast away, a∣mongst many my other loose Papers, vntill of late finding it vnlooked for, J shewed it to some of my priuate Friends, whose desires vvere; it should be made publicke. To that J yeelded, not for any worth J could
 conceiue to bee in the worke, comming from one so weake, but to sa∣tisfy those who J knew would beare with my faults. Of all our acti∣ons, the world is as it were the Theater, our selues the Actors; where∣in some play their partes with skill, others in sim∣plicity, most with errors: the greater part are cen∣surers, more ready to finde fault with others, then to search into them∣selues: whatsoeuer they are, or J am, J see my
 selfe subiect to censure▪ This subiect is Prayer, the pathway to happi∣nesse: the handling and carriage of rich Roabes by poore men, makes not the garments meane, but it may be more meanely valewed, it is that in at∣tyre as in Physicke; the Materials of the one, and ingredients of Medicines in the other, beeing of themselues good, yet not well by the workers ma∣naged, composed, and mixed; makes their shew of lesse esteeme; and
 indeede their substance of lesse vse. Such may be the state of this Trea∣tise touching prayers, the subiect in it selfe holy & heauenly; but by mee not well handled; may so fall out to be lesse valewed, then the dignity of it wel set forth, would shew it selfe to be. Howsoeuer, I offer this small Widowes Myte into that Treasu∣rie where true Christi∣ans by Prayer and Pie∣ty, makes their oblations and tribute in the San∣ctuary of GOD, vnto
 whose gracious and good guidance, I commend all your good consultations, with all others that by faithfull prayer and fer∣uent deuotion, desire to serue his Diuine Maie∣stie.

