



VPon that strangeReuel, 12. 7. battel in heauen, betweene Mi∣chaelDan. 12. 1.
the great Prince, and Satan that olde Ser∣pent,
was heard a loud voice sounding foorth ioy
and woe: ioy to the heauens and to them that dwell
therein: becauseReuel. 12. 12. the accuser of the brethren is cast
out thence: but woe to the inhabitants of the earth
and of the sea, (that is, to the sonnes of men in this
vale of teares) for the Diuell is come downe vnto
them with great wrath, knowing that he hath but a
short time.
In this voice (right Honourable) are two things affirmed, touching Satans▪
first, that his casting out of heauen is ioifull to the Saints; next that his com∣ming
downe on earth is wofull vnto men. Is the matter of our woe, ioy to
the Saints? Nothing lesse; but that the Diuell might be knowen to be an
euill guest where euer he comes, the heauens doe reioice for his departure,
and sea and earth ought to mourne for his approaching; so that he is, or at
leastwise ought to be, no where welcome, except it be in hell; and all such
persons may well perceiue themselues, not heauenlie but plainly hellish min∣ded,
as giue more kinde welcome vnto Satan in their cheerefull practise of
the works of darkenesse, then they do vnto Iesus Christ, whoReuel. 3. 20. knockes at the
doore of their hearts promising to come in and suppe with them, if they will heare
his voice and open vnto him.
But what do the heauens gaine by Satans casting downe? And how doth
his descending to the earth work man such wo? Ans. For heauens gain,Reu. 12. 12. they
are wel rid of the malitious accuser of the brethrē. Who would know more, must
striue to get to heauen, and if more be needfull, there his information shalbe
certaine. As for mans woe by Satans company here on earth, who so doubts
heerof, may well suspect himselfe to haue already receiued of him that deadly
hurt, in blindnesse of minde and hardnesse of heart, whereof none saue Iesus
Christ the good Physitian of our soules, by theReu. 3. 18. eie-salue, and Iob. 2. 27. anointing of
his spirit, can worke the cure. Is it not wofull to the flockes and to the heards,
when rauenous beasts do frequent their pastures? then wo to man because of

Satan: for the perill of the lambe from the woolfe; of the kid from the leo∣pard;
of the fat beast from the Lion; and of the sucking child from the Aspe,
is nothing comparable to the danger of man from this olde serpent, who in
craft and cruelty, yea in euery hurtfull property goes beyond them all. O∣ther
deuouring creatures keepe their circuites and obserue their times; they
are sometime weary, and not alwaies hungry; some are vnfit for the darke,
and others afraid of the light, whereby their sillie pray gets some respite: but
Satan is a princeEphes. 6. 12. of the darknesse of this world, who yet for his aduantage
2. Cor. 11. 14.can transforme himselfe into an Angel of light, so as the day and night are to
him both alike for the working of our woe: he is euer greedy, and neuer
weary, and therefore alwaies seeking; and if wee dreame of any restraint to
him for time or place we deceiue our selues, for he was aIoh. 8. 4. murtherer from the
beginning, and so will continue till time shall be no more; and heIob. 1. 7. compasseth
the whole earth walking in it to and fro, euen1. Pet. 5. 8. like a roaring Lion, seeking whom
he may deuoure. With other creatures wo is ended, when the pray is once de∣uoured;
but to Satans pray it is not so, for vnlesse his snare be broken and they
deliuered in this life, their woe continues easelesse, endlesse and remedilesse
after naturall death. Indeed the naturall man doth not perceiue that working
of Satan which doth procure his woe; it may be he hath seene the plaiers and
the painters Diuels, some blacke horned monster with broad eies, crooked
clawes or clouen feet; and till some such thing appeare vnto him, he neuer
feareth hurt by Satan: little doth he thinke that ignorance in the scriptures,
neglect of Gods worship, profaning Gods sabbaths, with greedy affecting
the wealth, pompe, and pleasures of this world doe giue aduantage vnto
Satan against his soule; and therefore while the matters of this life do
answer his desire, he can sing to himselfe this pleasant requiem;Luc. 12. 19. soule, soule
take thy rest. But our voice from heauen cries woe to all such inhabitants of
the earth because of Satan; for they are of this world, and he is2. Cor. 4. 4. their prince,
and theirIoh. 14. 30. God, who hauing blinded their minds,Ephes. 2. 2. worketh in their hearts,
and so keepes them sure in his possession: Indeed like a seeming friend he suf∣fereth
allLuk. 11. 21. things to be in peace; but woefull peace, like to Absalons wine
which he gaue to Ammon, that2. Sam. 13. 28. when his heart was most merrie therewith,
his least suspected deadlie wound might light vpon him. Euerie oneEphes 2. 3. by nature
is the childe of wrath, and so of himselfe ful of all miserie; but mercilesse Satan
seekes the increase heerof, by causing the root of mans corruption to spread
foorth the branches of all transgressions: indeed he is not the beginner of e∣uery
sinne, for much impiety flows from mans inbred impurity; yet so sure a
friend is Satan to corruption in the workes of darkenesse, that if nature doe
but stretch foorth the hand, Satan will thrust at the elbow: doth Caine hate
Abel? then will Satan bring this hatred from the heart to the hand, and
causeGen 4. 8. Caine to kill Abel: Is Iudas couetous? then wil Satan for the satisfy∣ing
of that desireIoh. 13. 2. make him traiterous: let him find but a sparkle, he will
soone kindle it to a flame; so that wofull is his comming to all naturall men.
But doth the child of God escape his hands? no verily; Satan is a professed
deadly foe to all such, he is theirRen. 12. 10. aduersarie and1. Pet. 5. 8. accuser: that which should
procure them good he seekes to hinder; and what euer may worke them
woe, he will be sure to further: if they fall into sinne, he seekes to bring them

to despaire; and when they endeuour to do good, he moues them to be proud:
they are no sooner conuerted to the Lord, but he hath someAct. 13. 8. Elymas to turne
them backe to the world: and though they stand against that assault, yet he
will pursue them still, by troubles without and terrours within; by raging
foes, and flattering friends; so as in regard of Satan aduantaged by their flesh
and his world, they shall find this to bee true,Iob. 14. 22. while their flesh is vpon them,
they shalbe sorrowfull; and while their soules be in them they shall mourne: Sa∣tan
is a mightieIoh. 12. 31. prince, and a wilie2. Co. 2. 11. serpent, and if either force or fraud may
worke them woe, no child of God shall escape his hands; he spared not the
greene tree, what then will he do to the dry?
But is there no remedy to man for all this woe that comes by Satan? Yes,
blessed be our God who hath not left vs for a praie vnto his teeth, but to
shew the exceeding riches of his grace and loue to the world,Ioh. 3. 16. hath giuen
his onlie begotten sonne to be our prince and our deliuerer; who in no sort
Heb. 2. 16.tooke the Angels, but the seede of Abraham: and because they wereVers. 14. partakers
of flesh and bloud, he himself took part with them, that hee might destroy through
death him that had the power of death, that is, the diuel. For the euidence and
application of which deliuerance, he hath ordained in his church an holy mi∣nistery,
whereby naturall men are broughtAct. 26. 18. from darknesse vnto light, and
from the power of Satan to himselfe; and his owne children doeEphes. 4. 15. grow vp into
Christ their head, and be edifiedIud. 20. in their most holie faith, through1. Pet. 1. 5. which they
are kept by the power of God vnto saluation. Yet we must so conceiue of this
deliuerance, that as Israel being brought out of Egypt, was not presently set∣led
in the land of Canaan, but for the space of forty yeares was exercised with
sundry temptations in a barren and drie wildernesse, where they met with
Num. 21. 6.fierie serpents, and were encountred with many and strong enemies, who
sought to debarre them from the promised land: so the children of God,
though redeemed by Christ, are not presently translated from the bondage of
corruption, to the full inheritance of perfect glory in the heauens; but must
passe through this vale of teares, and in the wildernesse of this world meete
with that crooked serpent the Diuell who will seeke to stinge their soules to
death, and also stirre vp many an1. Sam. 15. 2. Amelec to entrap them in the way, that
either through disobedience or vnbeliefe they may be depriued of their hea∣uenly
Canaan. True it is, this match is farre vnequall, for flesh and bloud to
fight against spirituall powers; yet heere is comfort, that we haue him for our
Captaine who in hisColoss 2 15. deepest humility spoiled our strongest aduersary,Heb 2. 14. and
is nowHebr. 2. 7. crowned with glorie and honour, being highlie exalted1 phes. 1. 20. far aboue all
might and domination at his fathers right hand, where he1. Cor. 15. 25. must reigne till he
hath put all his enemies vnder his feet; yea till he hathRom. 16. 20. troden Satan vnder
the feete of all his members: only this he requireth that we should bee valiant
andEphes. 6. 10. quit our selues like men in the power of his might, knowing that the battel
is the Lords, and so the victory sure before we strike a stroke. Now for the
manner of our fight (a matter indeed of great moment, because a1. Sam. 17. 49. smooth
stone out of Dauids sling wil foile to the ground great Goliah) wee haue in this
combate between Christ and the Diuell, so pregnant direction set before vs,
that vnlesse wee doe wilfully shut our eies against the light, in this behalfe
wee cannot be ignorant of our duty:Rom. 15. 4 whatsoeuer was written aforetime was

written for our learning; and therefore the recording of this combate is as
much from Christ to euery Christian, as the speach of Gideon to his soul∣diers,
Iudg. 7. 17.looke on me and doe likewise; euen as Idoe, soe do ye; for Christ left him∣selfe
an example that we should follow his steps, though not in his miracu∣lous
fast, yet in his couragious fight against sinne. The view heereof hath
formerly beene presented to your Honors, by Master Robert Hill, bachelor of
Diuinity, vnder this title, Satans Sophistrie answered by our Sauior Christ. And
now at the intreaty of M. Perkins executors, I have published it againe; yet
vnder a new title, and more large almost by one third part. Mine endeuour
hath beene that this poore Orphane might imitate his brethren, who were
the messengers of loue vnto our Church, while their happy father liued a∣mong
vs. What is wanting heerein, or may deserue a iust reproofe I willing∣ly
take to my self,Aenead. 9. me me adsum qui feci-&c. What I haue beene able to doe,
I humbly commend to the church of God vnder your Honourable prote∣ction.
If heerein I seeme presumptuous, because I am vnknowen vnto you,
I humbly craue this fauourable construction; that I chose rather by pre∣suming
to wrong my selfe, then to alienate this booke from your Honours,
who had right heereto by former dedication. When your Honourable im∣ployments
in time past required your wisedome and courage, for the iust de∣fence
of our Soueraignes right, I make no question, but as well the messen∣gers
of victory ouer rebels, as the counsellers of peace, were alwaies wel∣come
to your Honour: why then should I doubt, whether this ensuing di∣splay,
being as wel a counseller of peace with God, as an Herauld of triumph
through Christ ouer Satan, the Arch-enemy of our soules, will be gratefull
vnto you, who haue learned long since, that whosoeuer will keepe a good con∣science
towards God or man must endure manie a conflict with Satan?
Now that God of peace who is able to doe exceeding abundantly aboue
all that wee can aske or thinke, graunt vnto your Honours according
to the riches of his mercy, so to fight the good fight of faith on earth, that
you may receiue the crowne of glorie in heauen. Cambridge, Emmanuel
Colledge, 25. of Iune. 1606.

