



AFter long & muche strife within my selfe betwene dred and desyre, dred of presumpcyon in so hard an enterprise, and desyre to satisfie your most earnest & moost īportune desire (dear belouid susters in Christ our sauior) I haue now at the lenght set forth here in wrytinge certaine spyritual meditacions or ex¦ercyses (yf I be not disceauyd) very gostly and godly, wherein as ye de∣syre ye may be ryght wel & very god¦ly exercised & occupied in the vacant

tymes from your diuine seruyce and iust obediens. Thes I haue gatherid and collectyd of dyuers, but specyaly of ye deuout father Nycholas Eschi{us} who set forth in laten .xiiii. exercyses (as he namyth the) whiche are very godly & gostly meditacions, ye which I haue not only translatyd in to en∣glyshe, but I haue also cōtracted thē in to fewer in nūber, of .xiiii. making ten, and haue moreouer turned the same into the forme and maner of peticions and praiers whom I haue named the practyses of these same exercyses, so that to euery of the ten exercises is addid one practise corre∣spondēt and agreable to the exercise. I haue also ioyned vnto euery exer∣cyse certayne aspyracyons or briefe and burning desyres according vnto the exercyse. That after the deuoute meditacions of the gostly exercise, ye might most earnestly aske the grace

of almyghty god to comme to suche poyntes of vertue and perfection as ar taught you in the present exercise. For (as the iudgement is of al holy and goostly wryters) there are thre special means to optain of almighty god the grace of perfectyon. That is to say. Holy medytacyon, Deuoute praier, & feruente desyre. For ye first I haue set forth thes exercyses. For the second, are the practises. And for the thurd I haue apoyntyd ye briefe aspyracious. Ther is no meane that doth so sone opteine grace of almigh¦ty god as doth thes louely, deuoute, and feruent aspyracyons. And lyke as it is very necessary for hym that purposyth and wolde fayne spedely and affectuously achieue or wynne any thyng by mastry and labour, to knowe what are the thynges that myght hynder or let his purpose or procedinges, that he might remoue

them and put them out of his way, euen so, that ye myghte spedely and and affectuously attayne perfeccion by gostly trauel & spiritual industry I haue discrybid vnto you the most specyal and greatest impedimentes vnto perfeccion, about the remocion and takynge awaye of the whyche, shalbe the greatest (yea in maner) al the busnes and labour that ye shall haue, eare ye can attaine and achiue that heauenly and most blessed state of perfeccyon. And that ye myght al so se and know what spede ye make and how neare, ye drawe vnto that whiche ye seke & trauel to (for that often tymes helpyth much) for if we perceiue our selfes to be behind, thē we take occasyon to make the more hast, if we go forward, it encoragith vs lustely to procede. Therefore I haue describyd heere also certayne steppes, by the which we ascend vn¦to

perfeccyon. Thes are the chyefe thynges that I haue set forth here for to satysfie somewhat your verye godly and importune desyre. Other compendius I haue put vnto thes, not that I thought thes not to suf∣fice, but that those that can not cary awaye the longer rules, they maye beare away these shorter. Notwith∣standynge these exercyses are so pro¦fitable to suche that desyre to come vnto perfection and lyfe contempla∣tyue, that they only myght so suffise you (if they be earnestlye and dyly∣gently vsed and practysed) that you shall not nede any other rules or in∣structions. For these conteine the ab¦solute doctrine, the whole summe and trade vnto perfection. Where∣fore I mooste humblye desyre you, if ye haue not as good or better, ye maye thankefullye take these, ge∣uynge all thankes vnto almyghtye

god, who hathe of his mercye putte into my hart a desyre and good wyl to helpe and further you and all o∣ther that myndeth perfection in all that I can, bycause I can not, or am not worthi to at¦taine vnto it my selfe. Thus I commēd you both to al¦mighty god, and me vnto youre daye∣lye deuoute prayers. The laste of De∣cember. Anno. Do. M.D.L.iiiij.
