



Right Honorable,
I Present vnto your Lordships view this short Discourse of the trade of Fishing: Fishing for Men, the best trade that mortall men can spend their time in, though all come not to it with the best mindes: for some are fishers of Saint Peters trade, for this hope onely, that they may haply speed, as once Saint Peter did,Math. 17. vlt. to cast an angle into the sea, and pull vp a fish with mony in the mouth of it. Such seeke their owne, and not the things of Iesus Christ.Phil. 2.21.
But howsoeuer, they that come with good affe∣ction to the work, and perform it with good effect, cannot be free from the poison of Aspes that lieth
 vnder the lips of some men. For if any exorbitan∣cie be sound in any of our coate and calling, it is strange to see how our aduersaries insult there∣upon, and exclaime against all of the Clergie; from the highest to the lowest, as if thereby there were cause enough giuen to pull downe the whole fabrik of our Church, and for themselues to take vp that crie of the cursed Edomites, Downe with it, downe with it,Psal. 137.7. euen with the ground. VVe all haue our faults, and too many of vs too many: but what then? shall the innocent beare the re∣proach with the nocent? Or shall the reuerend Fa∣thers of the Church be taxable for the crimes of some Church-men, which they cannot mend?
Shall the Maister beare the blame, because some of his Disciples eate with vnwashen hands?
I doubt not, but many a thousand in the Land, Prelates, and other good Pastors, that stand in peaceable conformitie with the Church, can as ill brooke scandalous life and vnsound doctrine in a Minister, as any of those fiery spirited declamors.
The Gouerners of the Church cannot be so cir∣cumspect but through the craft and malice of man and Satan, some such may craftily creep in; that shall dishonor God and defile the priesthood.Nehem. 13.20.
Since by the prouidence of God, and his Ma∣iesties
 most iudicious choice, you are called to so high a place of honour and weightie emploiment for the Church and Kingdome; it is the hope of good men, that the Church shall haue cause to reioyce much in your Honours aduancement: and that goodnesse in you shall receiue no losse by the accesse of greatnesse, but rather much gaine, In te factam esse hanc mutationem confido,Bernard. ad Eu∣gen. non de te, nec priori statui tuo successisse hanc promotionem, sed accessisse. It is the confidēce of them that conuersed with your Lord∣ship whilest you liued in these parts, and in this confidence haue I bin bold to present your Honor with this little Treatise. I can say nothing for my selfe, why I should be so bold, sauing that the subiect requireth such a Patron, and my selfe am yours in the seruice of the Church, hauing pasto∣rall charge in your Lordships Diocesse. It was first made publike, I confesse, by deliuery in the Prouince and Diocesse of that most reuerend Archbishop of Yorke, to whom I am much obli∣ged for many courtesies, according to his accu∣stomed benignity towards all, euen of the least de∣seruings in the cause of the Church: yet herein I thought to make somewhat an equall diuision betwixt his Grace and your Honour, since you
 both haue interest in me: that as it was preached by his Graces appointment; so now it may be pub∣lished vnder your Honours protection. Thus humbly crauing your Lordships acceptance, I com∣mend you to the God of grace and glorie. From Althorpe in the Isle of Axholme.

