


LIterature being the greatest or∣nament of your dignitie, (Princely E∣berard) though it be but in∣different; yet that especially, which comprehends in it the Acts of all ages, suits best to your Condition: And a∣mongst vs that professe the
name of Christ; the holy Scriptures challenge the highest place in this kinde, which both set forth the ori∣ginall of mankinde, shew vs Gods will, & affoord vs ma∣ny examples both of his mer∣cy and wrath. Next to them wee ought to know, what is deliuered to memorie concer∣ning other Nations. For scarce can that accident happen, whereof there is not some patterne extant, and in sormer times practised. In which behalfe, those that gouerne a Common-wealth, haue an exceeding great helpe and furtherance, if they neglect not this kinde of learning. Now that way is most commodious, which diuides the whole course of
this world into foure Mo∣narchies. As concerning the first of them, we want Books necessary, hauing besides the Scripture, almost nothing credit-worthie, or whereup∣on we may relie. That age questionlesse was altogether heroicall & most illustrious, for surpassing and memora∣ble exploits. But what part thereof came to our hands? Semiramis, Babylon, and Sardanapalus are memori∣zed, and almost nothing else. But for that dreadfull, and neuer yet paralleld, terrible, and dire spectacle seene in any one man, which Nabu∣chodonozer relates of him∣selfe, as Daniel hath it; who euer toucht vpon it? that a King of such puissance,
should bee brutified, cast out of his Kingdome, banished from his ancient habitation, thrust out of doores, exclu∣ded from all humane society, haue his nature metamor∣phosed, and feed with other bruit beasts, and be quite de∣generated into a beast. This is there related plainely; but with what astonishment think we, were they strucken, that beheld this lamentable example of Gods Maiestie and furie? Therefore I haue briefly runne ouer the Assy∣rian or Babylonian Monar∣chie, because it must be whol∣ly bounded within the com∣passe of holy Scriptures; but the other three that follow, are very famous by many Authors workes; especially
the Greek and Roman. A∣mongst which writers, those (of the Greeks) challenge the first rank, Herodotus, Thu∣cidides, Zenophon and Polybius: for those other that Cicero mentions, Phe∣recides, Hellanicus, Acu∣filas, Phyllistus, Agatho∣clis, Theopompus, Epho∣rus, Calisthenes, Timaeus, Clitarchus, Silenus, are lost: as also those Latines that wrote the ancient Romane historie, whom the same Ci∣cero nominates, viz. the Pontifies Annals, Fabius Pictor, Marcus Portius Cato, Lucius Piso, Caeli∣us Antipater, Caius Van∣nius, Vennonius, Clodius, Asiso, Accius, Lucius Si∣senna. And those indeed
were the Authors, out of whom, Titus Liuius, who is better halfe dismembred, and before him, Salust, im∣perfect also, collected their workes. Cicero indeed vsed not this kind of writing, but was most studiously verst in it, as his Bookes witnesse, which are euery where be∣sprinkled and inameled with remembrances of all antiqui∣tie: but hee was a most dili∣gent obseruer of the course of times, so as by him, one may attaine to the orderly know∣ledge both of persons, ages, and the times of accidents. For otherwise all writings are obscure: and because hee was wont to say, that the writings of histories (especi∣ally after the Greek fashion)
was very much Oratoricall: therefore Pomponius Atti∣cus counsailed him to this kinde of writing, complai∣ning that historie stood in need of the Latine tongue: and alledging, that hee was able to effect that, which, euen in this kinde of writing also, would make Rome not inferiour to Greece. So hee writ a Commentarie of his Consulship in Greeke, and begunne another in Latine, as he saith himselfe. For hee was very desirous to haue that yeare, wherein hee was Consull, celebrated by other mens pennes: insomuch that he professed, that if they for∣bare him, he would not for∣beare himselfe, but would write concerning himselfe.
Caius Caesar onely, writes of his own exploits, and bor∣rowed nothing from any of those before him. Then also flourisht Diodorus of Sici∣lia, and a little after, Dio∣nysius of Halicarnassus: then Plutarch, Suetonius, Cornelius Tacitus, Appi∣anus, Herodianus, Trogus Pompeius, Aelianus, Quin∣tus Curtius: but many of those are either wholly, or the greater part of them lost. After those, many more fol∣lowed, who (each one conti∣nuing the historie of his time, or of his Country) held on, euen till within our me∣morie. And we must be seene in all those, or at least a good part of them, to furnish our selues with that abilitie
which is required. Some also we must read for the matter it selfe; others, for the mat∣ter, together with the stile and form of speech. In which ranke, Caius Caesar alone, iustly challenges precedency among the Latines: for none are more pure, none more ele∣gant then his: who for a de∣lectable style, farre excelled not only those that came not long after him, but also all of his time. Besides those before mentioned, we must likewise turne ouer such Ecclesiasti∣call Authors, as treat of the conuersion of Religion, the afflictions of the godly, or the lawes and decrees of Councels and Bishops. And because the holy Scriptures foreshew the Papall king∣dome,
wee must search out the beginning, together with the progresse and increase thereof; thereby to inable our selues, to compare it with those marks and signs which the Scripture hath chalkt out. But because this large argument which wee haue propounded, is various, ma∣nifold, and combersome, and this field so exceeding spaci∣ous, not to bee gone ouer in any short time: some nearer way must be taken, by a me∣thodicall course, for the help of yonger Students: as for those of deeper experience, they may well enough by themselues, as they say, swim ouer the whole streame of Writers. And for this end haue I vndertaken this task,
that the Neoterie may haue a tract and path-way leading to their further learning, by which in the meane time they may trace, as by a line, till they bee growne riper schollers, and come to that proficiency, as to bee able to cast away and despise those rudiments. For I haue not writ this, that they should be content with, or confine themselues to these bounds, but to giue them a tast of their future reading: when being inuited by variety of matter, they may bee more spurred on, hereafter to per∣lustrate the Authors and Bookes themselues, from whence these are culled. But this kinde of studie properly appertaining to those, that
are appointed to the gouern∣ment of a people, as I said before, I suppose (most Noble Duke) I shall not misapply, to your age and condition, in offring vp those my small watch works to your High∣nesse: so that by you, and through your hands as I may so say, the residue of yonger Students may receiue some fruit thereof, if any may redound from thence. And albeit, those most wor∣thy men, your Tutors, Iohn Sigismund and Sebastian Cox, vse their best dili∣gence about your instruction and erudition: yet as in the culture of a little garden plot, which we desire to haue exquisite and arraied with all kind of flowers, we scorne
not any little plants & herbs brought vs from another ground; so likewise I hope this small present of mine, sent to the manuring of the seed-plot of your learning, will not be inacceptable, be∣ing but onely offred vp for a time, tilyou your self, hauing gotten strength, as I said be∣fore, be able to walke abroad, and course vp & down these open fields & flowrie meads. For which course, you haue that most renowned Prince, your Fathers vertue, for a resplendent patterne: who by his elegant learning, ad∣ded no small ornament and lustre to his Noble birth; and that which is all in all, hee made right vse of this his facultie: to wit, that the
name of God should bee cele∣brated, Churches & Schools well ordered, godly teachers prouided for, and a compe∣tencie allowed for mainte∣nance of Schollers. For this dutie God chiefly requires at the hands of you Princes; and as he seuerely punisheth the neglect thereof, so also he remunerates, those with most bountiful rewards, that shew themselues faithfull Stewards herein. Those ex∣amples of your illustrious Fathers pietie, constancie, and fortitude, might bee mentioned by name: but you will read them in good time hereafter, imblazoned at large, & shall know the pro∣per ornaments of Nobilitie. For hee that is benigne to
good wits, how can it be, that hee should not at one time or other, be repaied by them, with the descrued fruits of gratitude, and bee celebrated to posteritie? Therefore vnderstanding both the dignitie of his place, and the charge laid vpon him by God; hee made it his chiefe care to haue your minde trained vp to godlinesse and learning, euen from your young and tender yeeres. And that which is the feeling pulse of a Fathers loue, nothing euer ioyd him more, then to see his expecta∣tion bettered by your indu∣strie. And I doubt not of your owne voluntary propension that way (as much as your age can beare) and your Tu∣tors
their diligent vigilan∣cie. Wherefore Illustrious Prince, proceed auspiciously, and as you are borne to the gouernement of a Common∣wealth, so furnish your selfe with such ammunition, as is both perpetuall, and will affoord infallible aid: and not onely extenuate the la∣bour, which you must some∣times vndergoe in gouer∣ning an ancient Prouince, but also make it easie and pleasant.
From Strasburg, Anno Dom. 1556.
