



THinges that bee called
new things namely be∣ing
of great importance
and certaine true, ought
not to be reiected, con∣temned,
nor despised, but
soul with great reuerence be estemed,
set by, and regarded of euery Christian:
and chieflye when they concerne suche
thinges as may rouze vs vp in these dan∣gerous
dayes, from the secure carelesnes
of our condition and calling, to the dili∣gent
worshipping and zealous honouring

of our God: from sinne to puritie, fro
hell to hauen, from destruction of 
and soule in the bottomlesse lake of euer∣lasting
tormentes, to saluation and bles∣sedesse
through fayth in Christ Iesus,
in his kingdome of euerlasting righteous∣nesse.
But (alas) right worshipfull, for the
most part of vs, wee seeme though we
be called by the preaching of the Gospel.
to bee partakers of those ceaselesse ioyes
prepared by the bloodie death and passion
of the innocent Lambe Christ, prophaners
of his religion, faynt earted souldiers, &
readier to yeelde lyke cowardes, then to
resist or endure the skirmish again our
daungerous enemies: namely, the world,
fles be and sathan, who glorie in our per∣dition.
If this be not true, the time 
and experience openly voucheth it: How
pride flourisheth in all estates, euen from
the hyest to the lowest it is too euident,
ow harlots are haunted, who beholdeth
it not, howe drunkenes is esteemed, who
see it not▪ howe the glorious name of our
God is generally blasphemed amongst vs,
who beareth it not? how vsurie the spoil

of common weale is enter tayned for pri∣ate
commoditie in all places? who fee∣leth
it not? how couetousnesse hath buri∣ed
good conscience, who perceiueth it
not? how charitie is conuinced by cruel∣tie,
who tasteth it not? ow neighbourly
loue is vanquished by dissimulation, who
findeth it not? how hypocritic all flattery
defaceth true and farthfull friendship?
who seeth not how plaine dealing is de∣faced,
and iuste dealing pluckt vp by the
rootes amongst vs: and in fine, howe for
the most part all goodnes is quenched in
a nūber of counterfetted Christians, eue∣ry
man may plainly as it were in a glasse,
bebolde, it▪ how readie Dathan, Coran, and
Abiram, is to rebell against God & his A∣noynted,
who beareth not? howe Baals
priests are redy to stand vp againct Elias,
the Prophets, Patriarks, and Christ him∣selfe
it is euident. God like a louing fa∣ther▪
though he haue bent his ow of dis∣pleasure
against vs, fethered the consu∣ming
arrowes of our destruction, whet his
sword, and set in the fulnes of his furie a
dull edge on the same, to cut and crop vs

downe that are wilde Oliues, fruitles ig∣trees,
very stubble, and no good corne. Let
vs humbly with Peter that haue with
him in our deeds denyed our master, turne
back againe with teares, and loke fayth∣fully
von Christ, and he will bring vs to
the blessed foulde of his sheepe, feede vs
with the foode of lyfe in the gadsome
pasture of his grace: ye, and by this pre∣sent
example, not far ence, but within
the borders of Suffolke, giuen by a childe
of x▪ yeres of age, who with great vehe∣mencie
cryth, that the end of al things
is at bad, threatning our dstrutiō, ex∣cept
wee speedely repent, the which God
graunt for his sonnes sake. Thus ceaing
further to trouble your worshp, I cōmit
you to the safe preseruation of the Al∣mightie,
bseeching him of his infinite
goodnes to prosper you in al your affaires,
to send you long life, health, and great in∣rease
of worship in this life, and in the
world to come, life euerlasting.

