



IT is an vsual thing among men of our time, like as they haue learned of the former age, (Right worship∣full and my deere freend) to expresse and make manifest their good will towardes such as they accompt most deere vnto them, by offering or presenting vnto them, some fruite of their labour and stu∣die. Among whom if I had perswaded my selfe, that the minde of the giuer were not more re∣garded and esteemed of men, then the moitie of the gift offered, I would not presume to haue any place. But beeing already sufficiently perswaded of your good will towardes me, diuers times and many waies heretofore expressed, (though mine insufficiencie to requite the least part of your

freend ship would holde mee backe▪ I haue beene bold vnder your name, as a defence to publishe this little booke, containing. A rule to finde out Ea∣ster day & other moueable feastes with the Domnicall Letter for euer. &c. Therby min∣ding to witnes vnto all, how ready I am to shew my selfe thankeful vnto my well willers, and freends Among which I accompt your worship not the least, by whō I was also procured to set foorth that, which otherwise for the smallnes & simplenes therof, I should haue wrapped vp in a paper, neuer to haue felt the Presse. So that bee∣cause you seemed desirous, that I should make that common, which heeretofore I had priuat∣ly acquainted your worship withall. Beeing per∣swaded that it would be well liked and accepted of some men, as you best know. And also for that (as I perceiued by an olde table which I some∣time found in Ireland, made to the selfe same ende.) This rule was practised aboue 100. yeeres agoe, as wel, to satisfie your request as to correct that which was so longe agoe attempted, and left very false and vnperfect, I am bold to offer the same vnto you in such sort as I could in re∣spect of mine other busines, conueniently rid it
out of my handes. VVhich is the cause that it is not so large as I had sometime purposed. The vse heereof I will not in many words commend especially vnto you, who knoweth best howe far and to whom it is profitable, euen for such as would ease them selues of being alwaies tyed to their Almanake or Kalēder. And would reade∣lie knowe the dayes as well feastes as other, and such like thinges, without the helpe of any Ka∣lēder. And I will onely desire you as my speciall good freend. To take in good part my good mea∣ning, in token of thankefulnes towardes you & of good will towardes those that shall vouch∣safe their paines to peruse. God almightie blesse you and yours, in or through his Christ to whose safe protection I commend you. From my house at Seuenock in Kent this.

