



AL thoughe yt ye corrupt state & malingnytie, of thys present tyme (ryght ho¦norable Lorde) be a spurre, sharpe & quicke ynough, to stur¦re vp & to pro∣uoke, a christane hart (in whome is any sparke of loue and zeale, eather toward the syncere christiane faythe, eyther to∣warde the spirituall or goostly weale of this our naturall contraye) to bende and force hym selfe in the defence of the fayth catholycke, wyth awyt and studye agaynst the vyolent, and many∣fold

pestyferous stormes of heresie. Yet I hauynge also in consideracyō, ye great accompt, that I haue to render vnto my lorde Christe, for the lytle talent deliue¦red vnto me, to employ (no doubte) to the edyfyenge of his mysticall bodye, ye churche, here vnto added also, the im∣portune postulacyon, and request, of cer¦tayne catholyque parsons, my frendes I am (in maner) forced, to dyuulgate, & set forth, a part of my smal and slender studye, taken here before abought cer∣tayne sermons, that I made of ye most blessed and venerable sacrament of the aulter. Where vnto I was moued, by a certayn rumor delated, and brought ve¦ry oft tyme, vnto my eares, (whyche at the length I fered and founde it to be, to trewe) that the horryble heresie, of Berrengary and Wykclyfe (sacramen∣taryes abhomynable) was raysed a∣gayne, of late, and by meanes of euell & pestyferous bokes, crepte secretly in to the hartes of manye of the yonger and carnall sort. The which heryse, I had well hoped to haue bynne, to deapelye buryed (wyth the ashes of Frythe, and Nicolson) to haue ben reuyued and ray¦sed vp agayne, in this realme. Where¦fore I, fearyng the encresse of that mis¦cheuous  lady (amonge the vnstable & vulgare people) thought some what

to breke, ye great vyolens, of suche pesti∣lent blastes (amonge the vnlerned sort) as moche as lay, in the weake power, & tenuyte, of my simple & smal talent: vn∣tyll more better reskew, and resystens, (by great lerned men) shulde come. And thus I preched in foure dayes, foure se¦uerall sermons, onely, and specially, of the mooste venerable and blessed sacra¦ment. Intendyng here by, (amonge ma¦ny) either to reclaime, and recouer, such as were not to farre gone, or irreuoca∣ble, (yf ther were any suche in myne au¦ditory), eather to corroborate, & strēgth the weaker, and suche as semed to stag¦gar, wyth ye huge stormes, of these craf∣tye persuasyons, in the synceryte of the catholyke faythe. Remembrynge wyth what sedulyte and indeuore, they (that are presently poysioned all redye) go a bought craftely, to breath, and to blow theyr venomus contagion (where they may and dare) in to the bosome, of such that wyll secreatly receaue, and abyde their smoky communycacyon, to the in∣fection (I feare) of a great number. And for as moche as I stode in feare, that this dangerous contagyon drewe to∣ward none ende, but rather semed to take secretly force, and strengt & was lykely to fastē dayly, vpō moo and moo (as thys tyme dothe declare to euydent¦ly)

I was the sonner and the rather en∣treated, to communicate this my smale industrye, and slender labor vnto al such yt wold vouchsafe to reade, this my rude (yet syncere and catholyke) doctrines, and lessons. The whiche I haue com∣pyled, in homely and playne sentens, by cause that I haue cheflye prepared them (all onely) for the vnlearned. And the veryte (beyng delectable and bewti¦full of herselfe) nedeth not, the gorgius ornamentes, of eloquens. Also the mat∣ters of our fayth, hath moche lesse nede of rethoricall perswacyons, hauynge theyr grond, and fundacyon, vpon the infallyble verite, of goddes holy worde Thus I haue now enterprysed (my spe¦ciall good lorde) to set forthe thre ser∣mons ye which I preched. Not by cause that I wold thinke so basse, and weake a thynge, to be a sufficient defence, and a very present remedye, agaynst ye great vyolens, of so pestylent a poysone, my∣nistred of so craftye wyttes, or that I wolde hope, here by, to recouer euerye man, that is or hathe ben, infected, for there be some so obstinate, that they seme, and be irrecouerable. But that I truste, by this symple (yet catholyke) thyng ther to comfort, and stablyshe eather to recouer, or staye some, among so many. Or els it myght stande in vse

& in steade, (amonge the busy readers) of the venomous boke, of Fryeth, or the blasphemus boke, of frear Bale, vpon the reuelacions of Iohn̄. And of al such other pestilent bokes, whych were day¦ly, and very oft had in hande, secreatly where they durst, that delyghted, in suche swete poyson. Wherfore (my spe¦ciall good lorde) I haue dedicate thys simple and rude thyng, vnto your good lordeshype. That suche rude thynge (of it selfe vere base) myght take, (by the tytle of youre good lordeshypes fauore and auctoryte) not onely acceptacyon and place, wyth the catholyke people, but also, no smal ornament and dignite of so godly and catholyke a patrone, whome they maye, and do ryght well perceaue, to fauour tenderly the syncere catholyke faythe & pure worde of God, detestinge heresyes. And also with that a mooste charitable exhorter, refor∣mer, & recouerer (wher is any hope of reformacyon) of suche, as are infected wyth these euyl errors and horryble he¦resyes. Mooste humbly besckynge your bounteful goodnes, to take in god part this my slender and smal industry, that hath procedeth (vndoubtedly) of a sin∣gle and a sincere mynd. And yf that I shal perceaue, that this my talent (in this maner put forth vnto spiritual vse

tye) do growe to any aduantage of my lordes goodnes glorye (in wynnynge & lucre of mine euē cristiane) I shal most louly geue thankes vnto god (the auc∣tor of all goodnes) and take the more audacyte and corrage, to employe my industrye and labor, to set forth here after (hauynge lyke occasyon) some other thynge, to the glo∣rye of almyghtie God, who haue you nowe and for euer, in hys mooste gracyous tu∣ition.
