


SEynge, Duke Eberard, that all knowledge of letters, howe base so euer it be, doth great∣ly adourne and set forth your estate and dig∣nitie, then truely that knowledge which com∣prehendeth in it selfe the Histories of al times and ages is most peculier and proper vnto you.The know∣ledge of Hi∣stories is ne∣cessarye. And amongst vs, who make professiō of the name of Christe, the Bible ob∣taineth the firste place amongest suche kindes of writtinges, the which in deducting the originall beginning of man kynd, doth both declare vnto vs the will of god, and also giue vnto vs many examples aswell of the mercye as of the yre & wrath of God. After the Bible it consequently behoueth to know all that which is writen of other nations.Nothinge comineth to passe, whiche is not found prefigured in the histories, For nothing almost cā come to passe but thereof is, & a great while agone hath bene, set out some resemblaunce. Wherin the gouernours of com∣mon weales haue great ayde and succour, prouided that they be not careles in this kind of instruction. Now the way, wher∣by ye whole course of ye world is deuided into foure Empires, is most to the purpose. As for the first Empyre, we are desti∣tute of necessarie bookes, and sauing the holy Scriptures we haue almost nothing worthy to be credited, or wherevpon we may grounde our selues. That age no doubt was altogether heroicall, and most notable in excellent things and worthy of Memorie: but how much thereof is come to our knowledge? Semiramis is greatly renoumed, and Babilon, and Sarda∣napalus: and what? That is almost all. But who is he that maketh mention of that horrible spectacle, and so terrible and monsterous as euer happened vnto man, which Nabuchodo∣nosor (according as it is writtē in Daniel) reciteth of himself?Nabuchodo∣nosor a terri∣ble spectacle, To witte that so mightye a kinge & Monarche became madde was cast out of his kyngdome, bannished the throne of hys
ancesters, driuen from and excluded the companye of men, and so to alter nature that he fedde wyth wylde beastes, and was tranfourmed into their lykenes? The things are there but simplie mentioned: but how greatly thinke we were they astonished, that dyd sée thys so pitifull an example of the maiestie and wrathe of God? The Empyre therefore of Assi∣ria, or of Babilon, is briefely discribed, because it is requised to kéepe wythin the bandes of the holy scriptures. The thrée o∣thers folowing, chiefly that of Grecia and of Rome, are great¦ly illuminated by the writtinges of Herodotus,Greke histo∣riographers. Thucidides, Xenophon, and Polibius. For Pherecides, Hellanicus, Accu∣silas, Phillistus, Agathocles, Theopompus, Ephorus, Ca∣listhenes, Timeus, Clitarchus, Silenus, of whō Cicero ma∣keth mention are perished. The Latins also that did wrytte the ancient Romain Historie, & who are named by Cicero, are not to be found: as are the Annales Pontificum, Fabius Pictor, M. Portius Cato,Latin Histo∣riographers. Lucius Piso, Celius Antipater, Caius Fannius, Vennonius, Clodius, Asilo, Accius, Lucius Sisen¦na. These are they out of whom T. Liuius, for the most part mutilate, and Salustius more ancient, also vnperfecte, haue collected their Historye. Cicero truly did neuer write Historie, albeit that he diligently laboured therein, accordinge as hys bookes doe testifie, out of the which we maye aptely gather all that hath bene aunciently done: yea, he hath bene meruelous curious to obserue the time, so yt we may orderly gather out of him, both the time of things & persons, without the which all that is writen is obscure. And for because that the said Cicero was wont to saye, yt it specially appertained to an Oratour to write an History, chiefly according to the maner of ye Grekes, Pomponius Atticus exhorted him thervnto,Cicero solici∣ted to wrytte Histories. saying in maner of a complainte, yt it was yet wanting vnto the Latins, & that it lay in Cicero to bring to passe that in such stile Rome should not be inferiour vnto Grecia. It is certaine that he composed in Gréeke the Historie abridged of his consulshyp, & beganne it in Latin, as he saieth. For he greatlye desired that that hys
yeare should be renoumed by the writings of others: in suche sort that he said that if others wold not put to their handes, he wold not faile, & wold write of himself. C. Cesar treateth on∣ly of his owne actes,Iulius Caesar, did writte his actes. not borowing any thing of the aboue said ancient writers. Then also was Diodorus Siculus, & shortly after, Dionisius Halicarnasseus, afterwardes Plutarcus Sutonius, Cornelius Tacitus, Appianus, Herodianus, Tro∣gus Pompeius, Alianus, Q. Cursius: but amongest them some are vtterly loste, other some are for the most part. Since these, diuers others haue written the Historie of their time, or of their nation, and reach euen vnto this our age.The vtilius of Histories These truly ought to be redde, or at the least the most parte of them, to get by them the knowledge which is requised and necessarye. It behoueth to know some for the thing it self, other some for the thing & for the style: amongest whom C.Iulius Caesar. Cesar maye almost onely haue to himself the first place of the latins, yea and that rightlye. For there is nothinge more pure nor more eloquent then he: so that not onely he hath surmounted them who short¦ly after folowed him, in pleasantnes of speach, but also all thē of his time. Besides the aboue specified,The ecclesia∣sticall Histo∣ries. it behoueth also to read ouer the ecclesiasticall Histories, whiche doe writte the mutation of religion, or afflictions of good men, or the lawes and decrées of counsells and Bishoppes, And because that the kingdome of the papacie is also foreshewed in ye holy scripture it behoueth diligently to search out the beginning, aduancing and increasing therof, to the end to conferre the same with the markes & signes that the scripture giueth. But because thys whole argument, wherof we haue spoken is diuers and hard, and that ye fielde is very great and large, so that it is not possi∣ble to compasse the same in short space:Why the au∣thour did take in hand this worke. It is nedefull to helpe the studies of yong men by some certaine abrigement, to the end that, when they become great, they might fréely of them selues make a discourse by all sortes of Authours. This is yt which moued me to take in hand this worke, to the ende that that age might haue a patrō & note of those things that are to
be learned, the which it may folow as a threde, whilest by li∣tle and litle it taketh encrease in learning,This worke  chiefly ritten for outh. & profiteth in suche sort, that it may lay a side and set nothing by such writing. For I haue not writen this to the entent that they should be satis∣fied therewith, or should kepe themselues shut within these limites, but for to giue them the taste of that, which they shall read afterwards: to the end ye being allured, or enticed, by the diuersitie of things, they might be stirred vp sometimes dili∣gently to search the Authours & the bookes, out of whom these things are gathered. But seing that this kinde of studye doth properly appertaine (as it hath bene said in the beginning) vn∣to them who ought to haue the gouernement of the people, I thought I should doe according to your age and estate, Duke Eberard, if I did make you partaker of this my litle labour: to the end that (yf it be possible) other yonge men mighte take some profite by your meanes, & as it were by your hands. For albeit that Iohn Sigismond, & Sebastian Coccius, your most honozable maisters, doe with all diligence employe thēselues to instructe & teach you. Yet notwithstanding, as our accusto∣med maner is, whan a garden is to be dressed, which we desire to be exquisite and decked with sondry flowers, not to despyse the litles plantes & herbes brought vnto vs from other places: so likwise I hope that the litle present which I offer vnto you to garnishe ye ground of your wytte, shalbe very acceptable vn to you. And truely I present it onely vntil such time as hauing gotten more strength (as it hath bene said) you might rightlye walke through the wide fieldes & grene places. Which to doe you haue an example of your owne kinred, to witte ye vertue of your father, a prince of most worthy praise, who hath great∣ly augmented and decked the noblenes of his race by an elo∣quent doctrine: and which is the chiefest he hath brought thys knowledge to her right ende:The trewe scope of all sciences. that is to saye, that the name of of god might be sainctified: that the Churches & scholes might be well ordered: that good teachers & scholers might be nou∣rished and interteined. This is the duetie that god requireth
chiefly of them of your estate: and as he auengeth the neglec∣ting thereof with great plagues, so likewise he doth rewarde them with great giftes, that behaue themselues therein as faithfull stuardes. Diuers lessons might be recited of ye godli∣nes, constancie, & valiantnes, of your most noble father: but you shall hereafter read them handled more at large, and shall know the ornamentes of your noblenes. For how can it be, ye he who so much fauoureth good wittes, should not finally re∣ceiue of them such fruite of their thankfulnes, as he deserueth and should not be renoumed in the time to come? Seing then that he vnderstandeth the worthines of his estate, & the charge that god hath committed vnto him, his chiefe care hath bene ye your mind shuld be instructed in godlines and in learning frō your youth: neither can any thing happen more pleasant vnto him (such is the affection & motion of his fatherly loue) then to sée his expectation inferiour to your diligence.The office of a true father. I doubte not but you are thereto inclined of your owne accord, as muche as this age may suffer, & that your instructours do their whole indeuours. Wherefore goe forewarde in good time, Prince Eberard: and seing that you are borne to minister the publyke weale, get you suche helpe and ayde as is perpetuall,Aydes which serue vnto the gouerne∣mētes of pub∣like weales, and as giueth certaine & sure succour: yea, such that not onely lighten the labour whiche you muste hereafter beare, when you shall come to gouerne the coūtrie of your ancesters, but also make it pleasant and easie. fare well.
