



Right Worshipfull & Beloued:
IT is a knowne truth, that in all Acts, there are certaine principles or grounds, vpon which they rest, as vpon a sure foundation. And in that re∣gard,

all Students in any kind of literature, doe in the first place settle themselues vpon that rest, conceiuing it (and that rightly) to be the most compen∣dious way to attain knowledge, and the best art of memory to retaine it.
This being an vndeniable truth in the light of humane rea∣son, is much more preualent in Diuine learning. See we not that the best Instructor doth inti∣mate so much by his own briefe methode of teaching? for doth he not conclude all Morall du∣ties in one short Decalogue, that is, as Moses speakes, in Tenne words? Haue wee not a perfect patterne of Religious deuotion, giuen vnto vs of our Lord, comprizing all the requisites of true prayer, in a briefe forme, consisting but of sixe or seauen petitions?
What else import all those titles in sacred Scripture, The

forme of knowledge.Rom. 2.20. The pattern of wholesome words.2 Tim. 1.13. The first princi∣ples of the Oracles or word of God. The principles of the doctrine of Christ,Heb. 5.12. Heb. 6.1. or the word of the beginning of Christ, trmed by the Apostle, The laying of the foundation▪ doth he not there reduce all to sixe heads, viz. Repentance, Faith, Baptisme, Imposition of hands, Re∣surrection of the dead, and eternall iudgement?
Is there not a common Rule of Christian Religion, which we call the Apostles Creed, according to which whosoeuer shape not their profession, we ffoord them not so much as the name of Christianitie? And though they professe it in word, yet if they hold not the truth in the an∣tique sense of it, doe wee not iustly taxe them of vnsoundnes?
Looke into the coure and practise of the Christian Church in all ages, and w shall finde that they did not giue to

babes in Christ,Heb. 5.13.14. strong meat by and by: but did first feede them with the milke of Catechisticall instruction.
Hence it is, that we reade of the Catecumeni in the Primi∣tiue Church, that they were held so long in the schoole of instru∣ction, as it were in the threshold of Christianitie, lest they should enter the Sanctuary, and arriue at the summitie or top of Chri∣stian prosession vnseasoned; or being not well grounded, might easily fall away from the truth, in those dangerous times of triall.
It is greatly to be desired, that this course might be constantly continued, both in the teacher and in the hearers, that the one may the better lead the way, and as the Psalmist speakes, guide them with his owne eye of know∣ledge.Psal. 32.8. And that the other may the better follow their good guides with stayed iudgement,

receiuing the truth, not as the word of man, but as it is in deed the word of God.
Let it be obserued what ad∣uantage the common Aduersa∣rie hath gotten by their pettie Pamphlet, in this kinde: who though they keepe their blind∣fold followers in so palpable darkenesse, that they neither suffer them to looke into the light of Gods word, nor so much as to vnderstand their Liturgies, Masss, Prayers, or other seruices in their publique assemblies, yet they politikely hold them in by this strong band, insinuating vnto them, that resting vpon the implicite faith of what their Church be∣leeues, it is sufficient for their saluation, that for faith, they can repeat their Credo: for deuoti∣on, that they can turne their Beads, say the Pater-noster, the Aue Maria, &c. for morality, if they know he seauen deadly

sinnes, the eight beatitudes, the Comandements of the Church, the workes of mercy ghstly and bodily, together with the De∣calgue, prouided alwayes that they bawke the second Com∣mandement, lest thereby their abhominable Idolatry should be detected.
Againe, note we to our griefe (if wee haue any feeling of the state of our Church) what dis∣paragement this vnskilful, or at least incautious building must needs be vnto vs, when our teachers doe not with S. Paul as a wise Master-builder,1 Cor. 3.0 lay the foundation: which did they re∣spectiuely obserue, both in their priuate course of study, and publique imployments, neither should they themselues so easily diuert from the infallible rule of Diuine truth in holy writ, and from the sound doctrine and tenet of their deare mother, The Church of England: nor

prostitute the soules committed to their charge, to the daily se∣ducement of Romish Impo∣stors, and insinuations of sub∣tile Schismaticks.
Great is the praise of our Christian Church of England herein, not only in that it doth propound Orthodox princi∣ples, whereunto it requires the vnanimous consent of all her Clergy; but doth withall en∣ioyne, that there be a constant course of acquainting the peo∣ple therewith, by way of Cate∣chisme.
And well did his most ex∣cellent Maiestie King Iames of blessed memory, second this good worke, by his Royall charge giuen in speciall letters directed to the Ministery of England, for the respectiue handling of the grounds of Re∣ligion euery Sunday in the af∣ter-noone.
Neither hath our Princely

and pious King Charles beene herein wanting, as we may see by his Royall and religious care in causing the articles of Reli∣gion to be reprinted: besides other expressions both of his owne constancy in the truth, and desire that the discreet and painefull ministery, teaching pi∣ety towards God, and loyalty to their Soueraigne, should bend their force against the common enemy.
Amongst others, I haue for my part endeauoured in all sin∣cerity of heart, according to the measure of grace giuen vnto me, to set forward the building of Gods liuing Temple. And my labour herein (blessed be the name of him that giueth the successe) hath nor bin in vaine.
I haue bene a seruant and labourer in the Lords vineyard by the space of 30. yeares. Whereof I haue arriued at the 24th. yeare amongst you. In all

which time my speciall care hath beene to ground you in the maine principles of Christi∣an Religion. Among other me∣thods, which I haue vsed, to allure you with variety, this Alphabeticall forme hath been one. I haue found it very aecep∣table vnto you, and much desi∣red that it might come into the light. And my desire is, that you would accordingly accept it, as a second token of my loue and due respect vnto you all.
For the warrant of this me∣thod, wee haue the expresse word of God: There are all these Alphabeticall Psalmes. viz. Ps. 25.34.37.111.112.119.145. Besides the Lamentations of Ie∣remy, and the Catechisme or In∣struction, which Solomons mo∣ther taught him, her Lemuel. My only sute vnto you is, that you would not let this little booke be a Curranto, or as an Almanacke for a yeare, but in

your families make daily and constant vse of it, to the buil∣ding you vp to a perfect house and Temple of our Lord Iesus Christ, to whose gracious pro∣tection recommends you,

