



RIght honorable, when I call to memory how apt and redie wee are of our selues to fall into the

filthy quagmire of the olde Adams corruption, wherein wee are moste monstrously soyled with all kindes of wic∣kednesses, which make vs de∣tested in the eyes of our hea∣uenly father, whose loue wee by the exercise of our notori∣ous euils, dayly committed a∣gainst his deuine maiestie, we most wilfully conuert to ha∣tred, I am driuen into no small admiration. But truly as these are the dangerous dayes of wickednesse wherein sinne aboundeth and iniquitie hath obtayned the preheminence and vpper hand, so it is ex∣pedient for all those that haue the feeling of GODS

grace in their consciences, to arme thēselues in this world∣ly Laberinth of vncleannesse with a liuely faith and earnest repentance, and to continue in prayer and supplication to the almightie, to abridge these dayes of wickednesse, and to hasten his comming. For vnlesse this perillous sea∣son as Christ himselfe hathe foretolde vs, should be short∣ned, wherein sinne is exalted to the subuersion of vertue, there shoulde no fleshe be sa∣ued. It shall bee necessary for vs therefore, that seeke dayly and hourely, by the vsuall practise of our innumerable euiles, to offend the Lord our

gracious God, whose heauy indignation we haue worthe∣ly heaped vp vnto our selues, and whose vengeaunce wee haue iustly deserued. Nowe euen nowe and hencefoorth for cuer to return with Dauid from our impieties, to mourn with Magdalin for oure ini∣quities, to weepe with Peter for our offences, and to crye out with the prodigal child, for the mispending of oure portions ryotously. Yea and thē the Lord our God whose wrath we haue kindled vp a∣gaynst vs, like consuming coales of fire, beholding the sorrowes of oure contrite hartes, the grieuous gronings

of our sinful soules, and our wet and blubbered eyes, wee∣ping for oure wickednesses, wil repēt him of these plagues that he had prepared to poure forth vpon vs for our destruc¦tiōs. Yea he wil cast aside the vioals of his wrath, yea hee wil in his mercy quenche the burning coales of his furie. Yea he will vnbend the bowe of his anger and breake asun∣der the arrowes of his displea∣sure, wherewith he had in his diuine iustice prepared to wound vs: For faithful praier and hartie repentance are ac∣ceptable to God. The which weapons if we wil take vpon to vse, vndoubtedly in steede

of cursinges wee shal obtayne blessings, in steed of penury, we shal reape plentie: in steed of battel wee shal haue peace: in steed of sicknesse wee shal finde health, yea and at the last of vncleane vessels, we shalbe made vessels of honor and heires of his heauenly kingdome. God for hys sonne Christ his sake giue vs the grace therefore whilest mercy as yet keepeth his in∣dignation at a baye, to conti∣nue in prayer, and to shew vs hartie repentant for our sins, for the day of oure visitation draweth nigh. Thus ceasing right honorable, I leaue you to the merciful protection of

the almightie beseeching him in this life to blesse and de∣fend you from al peril and daunger, to continue your health to his good guiding wil & prouident pleasure, to giue you victorie ouer al the enemies of God and hir royal maiestie, and in the world to come to crown your head with honour and glorie.

