



THAT noble Stoicke Se∣neca (right vvorshipfull) to vvhome all the ancients past yelded place & prin∣cipalitie for Morall Phi∣losophie, shut vp in this shorte sentence reasons of great substance, saying: For∣tune is euer fleting, for she neuer giueth ioy vvithout heauinesse, svveete vvith∣out bitternesse, rest vvithout trauell, re∣noume vvithout enuie, and generally, no felicitie vvithout some sequele of ad∣uersitie. This I presently find verefied in myself, vvhile motioned by glad minde and duetifull good vvill to shroude this little labor vnder the protection of your

vvorships fauoure, I feele double feare to front my proceeding: youre noble vvorthy nesse and my bashfull rudenesse, vvhich both are repugnant to my hum∣ble desire: yet matching the firste vvyth the goodnesse of youre nature (compel∣led to encounter force vvith force) and mating the last vvith the profoundnesse of my Author, I presume to present the same vnto you, entituled the Philosopber of the Court, and dedicated to his Ladie a louer of vertue. The name and dedicatiō seemeth of some credite, but the circū∣stance and conclusion I can not suffici∣ently commende. Great volumes haue large fieldes to marche in, and so muche the more laborsome to peruse: but if it please youre vvorship to tread ouer this little Treatise, I dare aduouch, you shall finde in it, both floures and fruite (not to supply the scarcetie, but to encrease the plentie and pleasaunte purposes) of Courtly Philosophie. VVherein as my ignorance shall eclipse or shadovve the vvorthynesse of the vvorke: Spread (I

humbly praye) the gladsome beames of your fauourable and vvell liking cheere vpon it: so shall you render to the reader my Author much betterd, make him of other gentlemen Courtiers more accep∣ted, my pen to further trauell encoura∣ged, and my selfe in this enterprise most glad and pleased. Heere some curious man may controll me for presuming to translate, professing (as necessitie com∣pelleth) a harder condition, and saye: a vvriter of a Souldier? vvhy? the pen and pyke doe differ, Mars and Minerua are contrarie, Bellona is nothing pleased vvith bokes: yet Poets haue oft painted Pallas that Academicall Goddes to be armed vvith speare and shield. Time, and the intent vvell employed, is not to be re∣proued. And Cicero pleading pro Planco saythe: Otij non minus quàm negotij ratio extare debet. Therefore to encounter any suche callendge, I enforce my best endeuer vvith the assured supply of your noble fauour, and remaine for euer (in either fortune) proposse, your vvorships humble Souldier.

