



RIght Worshipfull, although presump∣tion merite pennance in dedicating such rude and vnpollished lynes, to the protection of so worthy a perso∣nage: yet I hope your wonted fauor and clemencie will priuiledge mee from blame, and accept of the giuer, as one who woulde hazard life to moue your Wor: the least iot of content. Yf it be thought a point of wisdome in that impouerished soule, that by ta∣king sanctuarie, doth free himselfe from many dangers: then impute no blame vnto my selfe, that seeke for safegard, being round beset with many enemies. No soner had re∣port made knowen my harmeles Muses first progresse, how she intended to make tryall of her vnfledged plumes; but (my selfe being present where that babling dame was pra∣ting) I heard iniurious Enuy, reply to this effect,
Dares she presume to flie, that cannot goe?
We'le cut her plumes said they, it shall be so.

Then with a snarle or twoo, these euer medling Car∣pers betooke them to their cabbins. At the next rowsing; I expect no other fauor, then Enuies extreamest furie, which to withstand, if I may purchase your Wor: safe protection, no better guarde will my fearefull soule desire. To make the cause manifest vnto your worthine, why Enuie thus bar∣keth at mee, I intreat your wisedome to consider the sequel. This Historie of Hero and Leander, penned by that admired Poet Marloe: but not finished (being preuented by sodaine death:) and the same (though not abruptly, yet contrary to all menns expectation) resting like a heade seperated from the body, with this harsh sentence, De sunt nonnulla. I being inriched by a Gentleman a friend of mine, with the true I∣talian discourse, of those Louers further Fortunes, haue presumed to finish the Historie, though not so well as diuers riper wits doubtles would haue done: but as it is rude and not praise worthy: so neyther doe I expect praise nor com∣mendations. This therefore is the cause of their sodayne enmitie, that I being but a flie dare presume to soare wyth the Aegle. But how-euer they dislike it, maye your wothines but grace this my first labor with your kind acceptance, my hart shal enioy the depth of his desire: And your Wor: shall conti∣nually bind me in all seruiceable dutie to rest vnto your worship alwaies deuoted.

