



RIGHT WORTHY; and most worthy to bee so stiled, Right Worthy:
COlonell, Captaines, and Souldiers; Your gene∣rous dispositions, in the most louing and kinde ac∣ceptation of these few Lines, which

some ten Weekes since, I Dedicated to your noble Patronage concerning our Foster Mother LONDON, enti∣tuled London Sicke at Heart, or, A Caueat for Run-awayes, hath much encouraged me to spend some of my best bestowed houres, in another kinde and Garbe of writing, yet to purpose and according as these dayes and times re∣quire: And my desires are, that I may shrowde these my Labours vnder the Banner of your protection, against all opposition. Be you therefore pleased (my Noble Martiall Patrons) to vayle me vnder the covert of your neuer vanquisht Ensigne, and then no other Colours shall daunt me. I write no Fa∣bles, nor Imaginary Toyes, but lamen∣table Experience shall justifie my writ.
London was neuer more Sicke at

Hart, then she hath beene lately many Moneths together, her Lamentations will be remarkable to the end of Poste∣ritie. I treat now in part, of a Coun∣try Ague, or of an Ague in the Coun∣trey: They which haue gusted of it, and escaped, may thanke God for their deli∣uerance; But many that fled from their Mother London, from the Vi∣sitation which the Almightie imposed vpon her, haue felt the anger of the highest omnipotent Power, & were re∣turned Coacht, not with Life, but struck with the arrow of Death by that Pesti∣lent Ague. I dare not say, that the same Aguish visitation, was or is the Plague or Pestilence: The Countrey timorous Gallants will then be frighted, & leaue their Mother Rus (like Rusticals) and Winter themselues vnder the Roofe

of our euer tender and louing Foster Mother London. Which if they should? I beseech you noble fellow Souldiers, to deigne them Courtesie, and kinde entertaynment; and let them know, that although they contemned and despised the very Name of one of vs, and would not vouchsafe so much as to looke vpon a Londoner: yet for Charities sake, doe you bid them Wel∣come. Wee will not lodge them in Barnes and Hovels at the Townes end, though they bring the Ague with them; but, on the best Beds our chie∣fest Innes can affoord. Pardon me (braue Souldiers) if I answer for you; for I know the nature of a true Soul∣dier, is to be pitifull and to shew mercy, where imbesilitie and weaknesse resteth. Therefore (noble Souldiers) you that

are the trusty Guardians of our famous Citie, (vnder our Soueraigne, his Lieu∣tenant, and the rest of her graue Sena∣tors) be pleased to lay downe your Armes, and make no opposition aginst any whatsoever he be; But let all our Foster Mother London her Gates stand wide open, to entertayne all of what degree soeuer, Gentile, or Hindes, Clownes or Peasants, any, and all who∣soeuer they be, that they finding (as euer heretofore they haue done) Lon∣doners, their goodnesse, loue, courtsie, and great respect: may blush for their ingratitude towards th mn the Coun∣trie. To which I presume, your no∣ble and charitable Spirits will condi∣scend, And so I rest:

