



AMonges all other wryters, that compile Bookes for the knowledge and instruction of others (right honorable and my singular good Lord) thei in my opinion) deserue best of the common welth, which commit to wrytinge, stories, wherby men maye learne by thexamples of others set before their eies, how to guide and gouern theyr life, what thinges to embrace or eschue, and to iudge by matters past, what shalbe the consequent, and end of things to come. For which cause the most eloquent orator Cicero calleth an history, the mystres of māners, the guid & light of life, the sercher out of vertues, & driuer away of vi¦ces, with many such other like goodly titles, which he attri∣buteth to the same: And certenly if ther wer euer any story written: whereof men might reape frute and commodity, or worthy to be had in hand, & practised in the common vse of mans life, ether for the worthines ofihargumente, which is concerning the state of religion, and common wealth, or for the report of things done lately of fresh memorye: it is thys same work of Sleidane. For he treateth not only of thenter∣prises of men, with the casuall chaunces of things that hap∣pen.

But climing higher, and auauncing the minde of man vp vnto heauen, constraineth the same to maruel at the wō∣derful prouidence of the liuing God, touching the gouerne∣ment of the Churche: And induceth men to wonder at the vnsearchable counsel of God almighty, who hath preserued the same in somany troublesome stormes, and tempestes ful of pearil and daunger. And as concerninge the author, the dilligence and fidelity that he hath vsed, deserueth doutles to be highly commēded of all men: for so much as he, hauing more respect to the common wealth, than regard to his pri∣uate commodity, hath wholy imploid him self to consecrate the best and most excellent matters that maye be to euerla∣sting memory. It is said how Thucidides was so desyrous of the verity, and so doubtfull and scrupulous in wryting of his story, that he gaue a great some of monye, euen to his enne∣mies, to haue the truth of matters, & to know how all thin∣ges went. Assuredly the same may we say also by Sleidan: who (as he him selfe confesseth) not content to go by heare say, or by common report of people, hathe fished for the cer∣tenty of his Story out of common recordes, or at the least by report of men worthy credit, and herein hath spared nether cost nor paine. For although he hath wrytten many thinges which he him self hath sene in Germany, Fraunce, Italy, & other places, yet muste he of necessitye be holpen herein with the eies and eares of many, to compact an history of so many seuerall nations, and places so far distante one from an other. Seing therefore that thys story of Ihon Sleidane is compiled of matters of so singuler and excellent perfection, worthy of perpetuall memory.

J haue thought it expediēt for sondry causes to present your honoure with the same. And that as wel for the great good wil & zeale that your good Lordship beareth towards ler∣ninge & christen religion, and common wealth of your na∣tiue country. As also for the place and dignity, to the which (by the iudgement of al mē) you are most worthely called, cōsidering how it shalbe neither vnprofitable nor vnnedeful for your honor to vnderstand the state of other realmes and cōmon welthes, with the tormoils of the church in the same, which things do here aboundantly and sufficiently appear. And to thend it may be easely knowen, in what place euery matter may be found, I haue set before the beginnyng of e∣uery boke, the some or argumēt conteining the most matters comprised in the same, most humbly beseching your honour to accept this simple translatiō, dedicated to your good Lord ship, and wrytten for the vtility of our common coūtry, into your honorable tuition, that throughe your good Lordships authority, the tonges of euil speakers being repressed & put to silence, all others that are disposed may receiue commodi¦ty and profit by readinge of the same. For doutlesse a more profitable boke than this is, hath not ben setforth in theng∣lish tong now of many yeres. Thus the liuing God preserue and increase you in honor, and so replenish your noble mind with the light and grace of his holy sprite, to perswade and treat with the Quenes highnes moste honorable in such wise, that all thinges ther condescended and agre∣ed vpon, may wholy redownd to the glory of Gods holy name.
The Kalendes of August, Anno. 1560.
