



MAdame, when at the request of my worshipfull and godly friend, Ma∣ster Iohn Bailiffe, thē Maior of Marl-brough, I had there preached these two Sermons; I purposed euen thē (though thwarted til now by some occasions) to offer the same
vnto your Ladiship, in part of pai∣ment of a much greater summe, which for many your benefites (as manie knowe, and my selfe most willinglie acknowledge) is due vnto you. And the rather I haue done this, and in this kinde sought some part of recompence, because as Dauid sayth vnto God, One day in thy Courts, is better then a thousand:Psal. 84.13. So your whole life tel∣leth vnto others, and to mee espe∣cially, that one Sermon, yea one sentence of the Lawe of GOD, is dearer vnto you then thousands of Gold and Siluer.Psal. 119.73 And therfore this spark of Gods grace, howe little so euer it be, (if any at al it be) I know wil be accepted of your Ladiship, and all other of like spirite: in which
hope I haue beene bold to make it publike: desiring it may worke that good in others, which the like labours of others by Gods grace, (and I humbly thanke him for this grace) in some measure hath wrought in mee. And I pray God this zealous care may still be in vs, & chiefly in those that haue receiued most, to helpe thē which especially haue neede thereof, as lacking the liuelie voyce of theyr owne pastours. In the want of which duetie in many most lear∣ned (of whome, howe many, haue receiued how many talēts, which go not abroade, or so broade as they might?) euen he, which hath receiued a little (I speake for my selfe) may, I trust, bee allowed to
giue a little. VVhich if there be a wil∣ling minde first (as sayth the Apostle) it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not.
The Lord Iesus preserue your good Ladyship, with my honou∣rable good Lord, and your happy children (happie, if they knowe their happinesse of such their pa∣rents:) and increase in you the graces of his holy spirite. Amen. From London the second of Au∣gust. 1597.

