



HOW necessarie and requisite Chronologie is in the studie of all Historie, Diuine or Humane, it being the right eye thereof, as Geographie is the left: there is no man, vnlesse he be blinde of both eyes, but may easily discerne and will freely confesse. Without which we cannot but wander in the estate & affaires of the world as Polyphemus in his caue, and be tossed in the vast Ocean of Historie, as a Pilot without the Northstarre, discerning nothing in the mayne course thereof, but an huge heape of diffused matter. For which cause Athe∣naeus is so sharpe in reprehending both Plato and Xenophon, for misnoting the times of some stories; and Thucidides findeth the same fault with Hellanicus, Dionysius with Fabius Pictor, Plutarch with Thucidides, for misdating the Ostracisme of Themistocles, and the Raigne of Artaxerxes; and Tullie with certaine before him, which made Numa to be the schol∣ler of Pythagoras, who was borne not a fewe yeares, but whole ages after Numa. And therefore it is the more straunge that

Ouid after him should fall into the same errour.Hieron. ad Nepot. de vica cleri∣cali. Hierome wri∣ting to Nepotian of vnlearned preachers in his time, alleageth this example out of an Oration of Tully for Quintus Gallus (which now is not extant:) Quidam Poeta nominatus, homo perliteratus, cujus suntilla Colloquia Poetarum & Philoso∣phorum, cum facit Euripidem & Menandrum intersese, & a∣lio loco Socratem & Epicurum disserentes, quorū aetates non annis, sed saeculis scimus esse disiunctas; quantos is plausus & clamores mouet? multos enim condiscipulos habet in Thea∣tro, qui simul literas non didicerunt. Doubtlesse, had Tullie himselfe beene there, or at the sermons of Hieroms vnlearned preachers, (I would God our age were voyde of the like,) he would haue exclamed,Ad Atti∣cum. li. 6. as he did of one Metellus,  tur∣pem! Oh foule ignorance of Historie! It is a wonder to see the Beauperes of the Lawe, Bartolus and Paulus Castrensis, rouing at Randon about the time and age of Papinian and Dio∣cletian, and that when they handle the same of purpose for the reconciliation of certaine lawes: and a verie world to behold the great Antiquaries of the Saxons,Specul. Saxon. li. 3. ca. 43. Alb. Sta∣denfis ad annū 917. Epiph cont. haer. l. 7. tom. 3. Socrates li. 5. ca. 21. Lact. di∣uin. instit. li. 4. ca. 5. Aug. de doctr. Ch. li. 2. Re∣tract li. 2. De ciuit. Dei li. 18. auerring that their first aun∣cestors were Alexanders Macedonian companies, which assoone as Alexander was dead, arriued in Germanie, euen iump at that time, when Theodorik king of Frankes had warre with Ermifrid king of Thuringians; which was little lesse than a thou∣sand yeares after Alexander: and the great Historicians of the Danes, Iohannes Magnus Archbishop of Vpsala, Pantaleon and Heminges, making Dan the Archege and Grandsire of the Danes, to be equall in antiquitie to Gedeon, who was at the least a thousand yeares after Gedeon. And therefore the lesse maruell, that the great Fathers in Diuinitie are sometime out of their numbers too; as Epiphanius, mistaking the death of Iustin Martyr to be vnder Adrian: Socrates, misplacing the martyr∣dome of Polycarpus to be vnder Gordian: Lactantius affir∣ming that Moses was 900 yeare before the Troian warre: and Augustin himselfe likewise, auouching that Plato went into Ae∣gypt in the time of Ieremie the prophet; and producing Am∣brose for a witnesse thereof, though afterward he both confesse

the misciting of Ambrose, and also acknowledge that Plato was borne after Ezra his time.
But it is not my purpose here to imitate Castor Rhodius; who as Suidas recordeth, hath written in large volumes , Errours of time and Ignorances of Historie.
In ancient time, the Pagans so out faced and ouerbore the Christians with such mistaken Histories, antedated and forged authorities, worne and worme-eaten antiquities, that the Chri∣stians were constrained to bestow more time and diligence in that studie: as among other Eusebius, and before him Clemens A∣lexandrinus haue performed that part most painfully and profita∣bly; whose tract other since haue diligentlie traced.
And albeit many in our time haue laboured in this argument, with great paines and no lesse praise, whose candle my selfe  scarse worthy to hold; yet finding none of them all, fully to con∣tent me in the mayne Computation of the yeares of the worlde, or thorowly to cleare that principall account, being the grounde of Chronologie, and as it were the maine bodie, whereout all o∣ther Computations as branches doe spring: no man, I hope, will blame my indeuours, eyther for wading further in the broken yce to finde out the trueth, or for diuulging my opinion and reasons in this naked shadow and short delineation: since it is done to this ende, that the iudgement of the learned may be had thereof, not that the coniectures of other should be preiudiced thereby, as I would not haue the conceites or authoritie of any to preiudice or forestall the trueth. It was truely said of Seneca to Lucilius, of all partes of learning generally, and it is verified of this specially,Epist. l. 8. ep. 7. Multum egerunt qui fuerunt ante nos, sed non peregerunt.
Besides this, great men imployed in great matters, busied with waightie affaires, and bestowing their studie in the greater partes of learning, haue not that libertie and quiet leasure, which these  and lesser studies doe require. Which since the Al∣mightie hath vouchsafed me, as I take it for no small benefite of his goodnes, especially in these euill times, and very dogdaies of the Church and Religion, which now lie together in a desperate paroxisme and most dangerous fitte, ioyntly shaken and assaulted

by Poperie and Atheisme, and daily weakned, yea hazarded by both, but that the zealous care of her sacred Maiestie, and the carefull foresight of her Honourable counsaile holdeth in life: so I thought it my duetie to imploy some part thereof in these smal∣ler and lower argumentes, which greater matters will not suffer other men to stand about and thorowly to looke into. Which la∣bours of mine (if the lownesse thereof in regard of your Highnes breede not too great a disparage) I hight as wholly due to your Grace, in respect not onely of the common right, in that you are the highest person and chiefest patron of my profession; or of that speciall interest, in that you are the Visitor and Ouerseer of Mer∣ton Colledge my tender parent, but also euen of a certaine pro∣pertie, which your Grace in regard of many benefites aboue other hath in me, now that I am bereft of that Reuerend Father D. Bickleie late L. Bishop of Chichester, Qui nobis haec otia fecit. Wherefore crauing pardon for my boldnesse heerein, I humblie submit this short treatise to your Graces censure and fauour, and with daily prayers commit your Grace to all the blessinges of the Almightie. September. 1597.

