



RIGHT worshipfull, or rather Right worthy Lady: the title of the former, being made more il∣lustrious by the fruition of the latter. For honours and digni∣ties are not the precedent cause of vertue, but vertue of them: I haue, I feare, assumed too much vpon me, and broken the bounds of that old prouerbe; e sutor vltra cre∣pitum: yet, worthy Lady, on whose fauourable accep∣tance, not on my owne deserts, I altogether rely: doe humbly craue your Ladiships most gratious protection, to shelter me from those malignāt, which might oppose themselues against me: I know it wants that beautie, hue, and amiable aspect, which should externally a∣dorne it, and make it pleasing in your eyes. Yet if your Ladiship please to take a view of the inward truth and

sincere deuotion of the heart, it may proue as true be∣gotten, though not so fairely featured as the rest. For as it is in nature, so it is in arte, much vice may lie hid in faire complexions, and much hypocrisie in arte. I speake not this, good Lady, to derogate ought from learned Arts, or worthy wits inriched with eloquence, whereby my impouerished and naked lines should bee clothed with their garments; but that I feare the hard cēsures of these ill spokē times, as much as I hope to re∣ceiue some fauorable cōstruction frō your worthy selfe.
If any put out a Quaere, and aske me why I wrote this booke, I could alledge many reasons: but I cease to erect too large a portall to so small a structure; I had rather my booke should be abstracted then detracted. Giue me leaue therfore, rather in few words to expresse what I would, then in many what I could speake. Since so many, whose loues depend vpon your Ladiships de∣sarts, doe offer vp gifts, a testimony of the loue they owe, which haue of long time knowne your most free and gentle dispotions, and seene the vertuous inclina∣tions of your minde. I could not chuse, nor in common Christianitie do any lesse, if no other bound affection, nor duetie had moued me, but shew some thankfulnes with the rest, though satisfaction I cannot giue with the best. I haue therefore presumed to present vnto your Ladiship, not such as your honor doth deserue, or as I desire, or as my duety and the subiect of my booke doe require, but such as my small ability, or rather in∣abilitie,

could prepare to offer vnto you: for hauing no need of externall gifts, I giue the internall gifts of the minde, as a free thought, a lame sacrifice not worthy to be recorded with those great ones, which could cast aboue a widowes mite into the treasurie, or offer vp vnto their master more then a cup of cold water. Reade it, most pious Ladie, if ought be in it worthy the least respect or fauour, it is not mine, but her honors and your Ladiships, from whose most pure & eminent ver∣tues this dimme and darke candle of mine tooke her first light. Some may hold it a disparagement to her honor, because est ab indigno, others may iudge I write truely, but not sufficiently, both are right: for silent duety, though in it selfe it is commendable, yet in respect of others, it winnes more loue being actiue, laus virtutis actio; and for the other, what my weake skill doth deny, yet my vrging will supply: vltra pos∣se non est esse. What should I speake of your Ladi∣ships free and bounteous disposition? What should I speake of those ornaments and graces you are both in∣wardly & outwardly indued with? which with as ma∣ny tongues as Argus had eyes, spread abroad your de∣serued worth, that I cannot tel whether our soyle more iustly admires you, or inwardly desires you:
Where vertuous life, faire children, happie state,
Doe all concurre to make you fortunate,
And whereas many will hereafter minde you,
Blest in the issue that you left behinde you,
In which most fruitfull buds as may out-liue you,
Your worth and yours a double life may giue you,
Where though your soule had reacht eternitie,
Your name on earth may liue and neuer die.
So thriue faire Lady, and flourish euer in those faire pathes of vertue, that as it was a blessing to Dauid that one of his seed did inherite his earthly Throne, so it may be a greater blessing to your Ladiship, that many of your seed, should inherite the Throne eternall. It was not so great a glory for Salomon to inherite his Fathers Kingdome, as his Fathers holinesse and ver∣tues: Then how much, Madam, may you reioyce in ey∣ther, that yours enioy not onely much temporall ho∣nors and blessings, but also are indued with many gifts and graces of the Spirit, great louers of vertue, and imbracers of true religion and piety. Long may they so continue to your Ladiships full ioy. Long may they all liue and grow old in honors and vertues, and with that Poet euer wish:
Fortunati omnes, si quid mea carmina possunt:
Nulla dies vnquam memori vos eximet aeuo.
Thus humbly intreating your good Ladiship to accept this my first and meane labour, vnder whose wings it most hopefully trusts, I rest.

