



WIth how great endeuor & subtilly deuised and wri∣thed Sophismes, Robert Bellarmine Iesuite, hath studied to cloake and de∣fend the Popish errours: and contrariwise, to ca∣luminate and refute the doctrine of the true teachers of the Gospell a∣bout Christian faith: it is knowne to them that haue read with iudgement, his disputations of the articles in controuersie betweene the Pa∣pists and the Gospellers, whom he falsly calleth hereticks. These disputations, whē not long since they came also to my handes. I read them desi∣rously, and was not a litle greened, when I sawe the truth of the Gospel to be with such a shewe oppugned. And whē I remembred how I heard of a credible man, that learned men addicted to the Popish religion, so greatly boasted of this
Bellarmine, as if he were some Goliath of the Papists, that they feared not to say he was in∣uincible: I began earnestly to desire that God wold stirre vp many of the teachers of the Gos∣pel, valiantly & happily to withstand the enter∣prises of this Goliath, & with the stone of Gods word handsomely throwne out of the sling of true Logicke, to fell him downe, and finally, to kill him with his owne sword. And I gaue God thankes, that euen then he had stirred vp some learned men which had prosperously begun this fight with him: among whom first was knowne vnto me, that famous man William Whita∣kers, who fought with him manfully and happi∣ly about the holy scripture, and purposed also to dispute against him about other chiefe points in controuersie. God the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, graunt that what he hath holily purpo∣sed, he may prosperously bring to effect.
But when as about the same time I was to write and propound for publicke disputation in the famous schoole of Nassouia Herborne, positions of Iustification, I thought it would be worth my labour, diligently to inquire into Bel∣larmines sophismes, published concerning that article of faith, and to endeuour briefly & plain∣ly to refute them. And by this occasion was this my writing brought forth, which now I publish abroad. Which when for the length thereof I
saw not meet to be proposed for Positions pub∣likely to bee disputed of in the schoole, I then wrote and set out other positions of Iustification: and reserued this writing for a more fit time. It fell out about the same time, that the learned man Corradus Vorstius Agrippensis, crea∣ted among you and of you a while after. Doctor of Theologie, desired by Letters mine opinion a∣bout soluting one or two of Bellarmines sophis∣mes in the controuersie of Iustification: vnto whom I sent to that end this writing: and with∣all, requested him to communicate it with lear∣ned men, of which your Vniuersitie hath store, and to knowe their iudgements of it, and write me word. He therefore of late about Francfurt Mart, passing by Sigena, and for the friendship betwixt vs, saluting me, told me how he had gi∣uen you this writing of mine to reade; and that you hauing read it, affirmed vnto him that you liked all therein, and would exhort me to set it forth, distinguished into two Bookes and certain Chapters: which thing also hee wrote of to me not long after from Heidelberg, and so stirred me vp a fresh to diualge this writing. Now ther∣fore commeth this my writing forth in the name of the Lord: and it commeth forth vnder your excellent name: for that I thought I should doo conueniently, to offer this doctrine to be defen∣ded by them (togither with my selfe) which had
once approoued it for a good and right opinion: and therwithal publikely to testifie our holy con∣sent in this heauenly truth. You therefore reue∣rend brethren, take this my doing in good part: and valiantly defend as oft as need shal require, togither with me, the trueth of Christian doc∣trine deliuered in this writing: to the glorie of Gods name, and profit of Christs Church. To conclude, I commend you and your holy labours to God, the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ. At Sigena, from the famous Schoole of Nasso∣uia, the 18. of December, 1594.

