



THere haue bene ma∣nie excellent men in our Church, Right Honourable, that haue written excee∣ding well against the common, but crying sinne of Usurie, a∣mong other (whom for Honors sake I name) the Reuerend Praelate I. Iewel, L. Bishop of Sarum; the most accomplisht Diuine, D. Humfrie, publike Reader of Oxford; and the sage Counsellour and wise States-man, D.

VVilson, Secretarie to our Queene Eliza∣beth of aeternall memorie. All whose learned discourses, sound reasons, impregnable ar∣guments, godly admonitions, and seuere cōminations, little prevailing with the deafe Usurers; for that the same are over growenMath. 13. and choked in their thornie hearts with the deceitfulnesse of riches; that they could not yeeld their due and wished fruite: it hath seemed good to some, other since them, to deale with Usurie by course of Law and judi∣ciarie proceeding. Whereupon at Oxford, Usurie wasPotions concerning Usury by G. Powell. set upon and apprehended; at London,Examination of Usurie by M. Smith. examined;Arraignmēt and conuicti∣on of Usury by M. Mosse. arrained, and convi∣cted at S. Edmondsburie: and lastly at Cam∣bridge, executed and put toThe death of Usury, prin∣ted at Cam∣bridge. death, and yet notwithstanding all this, Usurie is as rife in this land, and as commonly and cruelly pra∣ctized, as euer, I thinke, in any age before: as Iewishly, as when the Iewes were heere in their prime: as unmercifully, as when the cursed Caorsini, the Popes factors, by his holie countenance, were here in their pride. Which thing, (as I conceiued) could not o∣therwise be, after Usuries death, but that his

ghost or spright did walke. Wherefore ta∣king my Bookes in hand, I thought good to conjure this spright: and therein haue gone so farre (as your L. may see in this short dis∣course) that I haue made the spright to speak, and to tell both his name and nature, who called him vp, and what makes him walke. But to bind the spright, or to laie him, Hic labor, hoc opus est: not unwoorthy the la∣bour of great Hercules, that could binde the three-headed Cerberus, & shoot thorow the fell eagle which fed vpon Prometheus bowels; or the cunning of the great Miracle-maker and diuel-driuer, Gregorius Thaumaturgus, which couldGregorius Sa∣tanae. Ingredere. Niss. mesus vi∣ta. Caes. Bar. annal. tom. 2. Anno. 253. nu. 137. write the diuel himselfe apasse∣port, and send him packing, whence and whi∣ther he pleased. Indeed, I finde and confesse, that it passeth my cunning and power, with∣out the aid of some greater skill and abilitie. Wherefore, right Honorable, seeing Al∣mighty God hath blessed you with great ad∣vauncementes both of dignitie and honor, and also of autoritie and power in this com∣mon-wealth; and that by your great office of high Treasurer, you haue many imploy∣ments

and daily experience in the vertue,  (as Aristotle termes it) whereof Usurie is a deadly enemie:Arist. Eth. lib. 4. c. 3. Idem. Polit. l. 1. c. 7. I make bolde to craue your Honorable helpe heerein, that you use the meanes of the great fauor, which God hath giuen you in the eies of our grati∣ous King, of your high place and authoritie in the State, and of that estimation, which the whole land hath of your wisedome, to the suppressing of this horrible sinne, which like a fretting canker eates up and consumes manie notable members, and great portions of this common-wealth: one part losing or indaungering their goods and state, and the other part their soules. As we haue had ma∣nifold experience of your wisedome in ma∣naging matters of great importance for the common good of us all: so if by your like care and prudence, this canker may be cured; undoubtedly the whole common-wealth wil receiue an exceeding great benefite by you, being freed from the burthen of Usurie, whose nature is such, that it is compared by the wise PhilosopherPlutarch. lib. de non foene∣rand. Plutarke, to Vultures which gnaw the guttes out of a mans bel∣lie;

, as Homer saide: by the expert antiquarieAntiq lect. l. 12. c. 24. Coelius Se∣cundus, upon the experience of the poore old forlorne debtorLiu. Dec. 1. l. 2. in Liuie, to a con∣sumption, which is contagious and infecti∣ous, and which creepeth from the goods to the body it selfe: by the excellent CiuillianBald. cons. 440. Baldus, to the worme Teredo, which hand∣leth as soft as silke, but will bite thorow tim∣ber: by the autentique CanonistSext. decret. Gregorie the tenth, to a whirlpoole, because it swal∣loweth up wealth and soules; by the noble and learned KingLycosth. apopht. tit. usu∣rae. Alfonsus, to the Harpyes, which deuoured the needy Troians suste∣nance; by the ancient father S.Chryst. in Math. 5. Chrysostome, to the serpent Aspis, whose stinging casteth a man into a pleasant sleepe & so killeth him. God who is rich in grace, and of infinit glo∣rie, increase his graces upon you in this life, to the aduancement of his Church, and com∣fort of the common-wealth, & reward them with eternall glory in the life to come, tho∣row Iesus Christ our Lord. Bexhil March 30. 1604.

