



YOVR worships remember, that at
the beginning of the last newe yere,
I presented to you in wrighting, that
which the Lorde a little before, had
giuen me to speake, in two short Ser∣mons
at BURI, adding not muche to that which
was then vttered, as the diligent hearer of me can te∣stifie.
The reason of my so doing I alledged (as the
trueth was:) that I might haue somevvhat (according
to the maner of that time) vvherewith to testifie the
good affection vvhich of duty I owe vnto you both:
as vvel for the manifold blessings, vvhich the church
of God and the common wealth in these partes of
Suffolke, enioyeth by your meanes: as for your care
for my particuler safetie, and for the great comfort
which by you, from time to time, I haue had sithence
my comming into this countrie. The Lord register
them in his booke, that they may come into your
good accounts in the day of his sonne. And because
it pleased you then, to giue such liking of the treatise,
that both of you desired to reteine the coppie, and
requested the same at my hands, vvherof also I made
promise: the best vvay for the performance of this,
I supposed vvas the putting of it in print: which I was
the rather contented to do, because the matter deli∣uered
in it, beeing necesarie to be taught & belee∣ued,

I hoped might be profitable and comfortable to
others: vvhich also vvas the iudgement of some god∣lie
and learned men that reade it ouer. My purpose
when I preached of the text, was to sturre vp my self
and the hearers, to beare patiently, comfortablie, and
profitablie al afflictions that might fal out for a good
conscience sake: my purpose in sending it a broade,
and in making it more common to the churche of
God, is the same. The doctrine is necessarie to pre∣pare
vs for those times of trouble, which the abusing
of our peace, the contempt of the gospell, the euill
handling of the ministers, & the infinite abhomina∣tions
of the land, haue most iustly deserued. accor∣ding
also as vve haue these many yeares beene vvar∣ned
and threatned, not only by our prophets & tea∣chers,
but also by fearefnll signes in heauen & earth,
that fortesl vnto vs further euils, vnlesse in time from
the highest to the lovvest vve repent, take a better
course, and turne from our disobedience. Yea, in re∣spect
of the time present, this argument is not alto∣geather
vnnecessary: for although we haue iust cause
dayly vpon our knees, to praise God for her maiesty,
the most honourable of her counsell, and the rest of
the gouerners in the Churche & common wealth:
by whose gracious meanes wee haue good lawes e∣stablished
& executed, for the liberty of true religi∣on,
& for the comfort and incouragement of such
as meane well: yet wee see howe in euerye
place where the worde is taught: cold protestantes,
earthly minded men, papistes and Athiests, seeke &
deuise all possible meanes they can, to hinder the
course of the gospell, and to disquiet the preachers &
professours, which oppose them selues againste their
corruptions, and refuse to ioyne with them in their
disorders. A matter too to vsual in these euil dayes,

as the faythfull seruants of God knowe, and in ma∣ny
places finde true by miserable experience If the
preachers in any towne be carefull to do their duty,
what quarrelles doe wicked men pick, to stop their
mouths, weary them, and to driue them away? and if
any of the flocke take part with their teachers, and
professe obedience to the trueth, they want no euill
words, frovvning lookes, and hard practises againste
them, from popish, vvorldly, & irreligious men. The
practises of our country of Suffolke, (to let pase o∣ther
parts of the lande) witnes this to be true, & cry
alowde for vengeance in the eares of the Lorde of
hostes, as your vvorships very vvell know. VVe haue
many godly, learned, wise, faithful, & painful pastors,
I suppose that diuers Counties of the Realme being
put together, can scarse afforde so greate a numbe.
They teache the trueth of God, vvith all manner
so dutifulnes and holy loialty to her maiesty and the
state, they be carefull to liue vvell to the vttermoste
of their povver: and the Lorde be thanked, that hath
giuen them some good measnre of grace, in that be∣halfe.
They lacke not countenance, comfort, and re∣liefe,
from the honorable and worshipful in the com¦mission
of peace for the shire, so farre as they maye
with a good conscience, and according to the lawes
of our most gracious souereigne. VVee prayse
God therefore, and thinke our selues bound to pray
daily for you all. But I pray you, what impes hath Sa∣than
sturred vp amongst vs, almost in euery Towne
vvhere the vvorde is preached, to hinder this vvorke
of the Lorde? hath there bene any vvay vnattemp∣ted,
to shake some of the preachers, and in them, no
dout al the rest? They vvhich seeme to make any ac∣count
of the teachers, and to professe more holinesse
then others, (though alas not so much as they should

doe) escape not the vennom of poisoned tongues.
The pore people here and there in the country, that
be more carefull then the rest, to resort to sermons,
to heare the vvoorde, learne their dutie, and vvith a
good conscience to discharge such duties as by oth,
are layd vpon them, bee not vvithout their crosses.
Some (by the malice of naughty insufficient mini∣sters,
& other vntovvarde men), to redeeme peace,
glad to leaue the tovvn vvhere they dvvelled: Others
frovvned vpon, for doing othervvise, then their su∣perstitious
landlordes doe, & vvould haue them: O∣thers
maliced for indicting, and complaining of pa∣pists
& other vvicked men, for not resorting to the
church, not comming to the Communion, and for
misusing of the prechers, & some molested one way,
and some another. And this I speak not of any thing
done, by any magistrate or gouernour in the church
or common vveale: let no man take me so: but by
vvicked papistes and godlesse persons that be scatte∣red
abroade in the counrry, as Goates among the
sheepe, and darnell among good corne. VVho con∣trary
to the lavves, peace, Crovvne, & dignity of her
highnesse and the kingdome, purpose and practise
michife and violence, sometime couertly, and som∣times
openly, against suche as mean most faythfully
to God, and their Counrrye, and desire to take that
course in euersy thing, that might bee acceptable to
him, that shall iudge the quick & the dead. VVe haue
good cause to pray continually for the long preser∣uation
of our renouned princes Elizabeth our grati∣ous
Mother and Nsse, vnder the shadow of vvhose
vvinges (as of the Lorde annointed) by the meanes
of her good lavves and Lieetenauntes, in her
ovvne courte and in the country, there is reliefe for
all the good people of the land, against such vexati∣ons
of the vvicked. Othervvise assuredly it should go

hard, vvith them, that of all others ought most to be
made off: because the deuill vvill not cease to sturre
vp enemies against them. For the instruction & com¦fort
of such as be any vvay troubled for vvel doings,
I confesse that I labour somvvhat in this litle booke.
Praying the Christian reader, if hee reape any small
good thereby, to giue the praise vnto God to whom
only it is due: and to pray for me, that my selfe, (ac∣cording
to my need, either present or to come) may
be partaker of the doctrine & comforts herein men∣tioned.
Concerning your good worships to vvhom
I am so muche beholden: euen as openly and to the
view of the country, you haue declared your readi∣nes
to further me, in my good and lavvfull causes, &
(so much as in you haue liē) to restrain thē that haue
soght to vex me vniustly & intēded my hurt: so haue
I thought my self in duty bound, to giue forth some
publike testimony of thankfulues to you. In regarde
vvhereof, if it may please you to accept this my pore
trauell, it is an especiall thing that I desire. I am bold
to ioine you both in one: because the Lord hath knit
you fast together, not only by the bond of kindred
& perfect friendship: but also in care of my good e∣state,
& that vvhich is principall, in an holy desire to
further true religiō, & to procure the peace, vvelfare,
and prosperity of the prince, and the country vvhere
you dvvel. The Lorde increase in you all his graces,
that being zealous according to knovveledge, you
may become yet more glorious instruments for the
furthering of his kingdom, & may go forvvard in the
profession of his gospell euen vnto the ende, to his
immortall prayse, the sturring vp of manye other
knightes and gentlemen, to be of this your christian
order, in the true obedience of Gods vvord: & to the
euerlasting saluatiō of your souls in the life to come:

vvhich graces in like manner I praye him to povvre
dovvne from heauen, vpon the right vvorshipful the
Ladies of both your houses, vpon your children, and
all your company for Iesus Christes sake, our only &
omnipotent Sauiour. Amen.
At London this sixt day of April. 1582. the day
vvherein the great & fearfull Earthquake vvas tvvo
yeares before: a day to bee called to oure remem∣braunce,
because, of the greatest number, so rare and
terrible a thing is quite forgotten, and so certeine a
forerunner of other iudgements, is not regarded.

