



RIGHT HO.BLE
TAKE serious notice of this rare Copunct. Heere true Contri∣tion is deciphered in its practise, to the life. See this afflicted with arpe anguishes. & most direfull agone Se this ouercast with darknesse, as trpasses, and in suh plight, as u

horror, now  of comfort to th height.
Reade him again, For heere appeareth hee, and most assuredly, through the beni∣gnitie, sweete grace, and boundelesse mercie of The Allmightie, a Man glorified, a Man (though formerly a greiuous sinner) sanc∣tified.
Attentiuely then obserue, the curious Theorie, which from him a Patterne may bee well extracted: For it rightlie teacheth what; and of whom is to bee craued aught, and earnestly besought; and when soe it; and how; then what is true felicity; then solid rules as to conseruation of such pos∣sessed dignitie.
The Penitentialls of the Kingly Pro∣phet, as they are found by him penned, are by diuers iudged to be parcell difficult, nay each of them abstruse, and hidden. To other some, they make shew indeed, of being oo succinct. Verily therein I doe not mer∣ile muh at the vulgar since that in th

soe sublime mysteries are deliuered, and with such breuitie. Therefore for the better satisfying, and enlightning them to their end: They are heere by Paraphrase layed open both perspicuouslie, & at large: which primarily was compiled, and divulged in the Italian tongue, by a Florentine as well literate, as elegant. I lately (to my power) haue made it English. The learned kinde of Commentators, often giue light vnto their Authors. Too frequently doe Trans∣lators eclipse diuerslie, the genuine meanings of what they wrote. For the most part at least, they are deficiēt in the rendring them, with a curious manner of expression, and eake lustre.
I cannot but mise-giue: that I much faile therein. Reallie I misdoubt: that I am too farr out, not nigh alas, the grace, & puritie of his stile soe worthie. Nay that the me appearing vnto mne, will clearely shew y weakenesse. And yet truely it admitteth ot aught of strange to me: since I well

perceiue; that low are my talents: then no lesse that the taske is hard, for any one, though of what soeuer rare endowments, to giue an Author his embellishments. But I will hope that in the version of this Treatise into our owne speach, I haue rendred its true sense. For the rest; I assume confidence in your Honors connivence, at my defects in cloquence: since well its Knowne to me, and many more, that yur right Noble, and sublime spirit, doth cheifely valiew what in reall substance, nay, little, careth it for aught of shadowe, which solely doth conferr, to an attraction of some sort of Readers to attention.
And emboldned thus; humblie I ffer vp This Piece vnto your Honors charitable intention, to our Nation. By this, many ay prooe enabled diverslie to perfection: who likly will from hence with much fa∣ciliti vnderstand the matter in hand, an its consequence: and heereby discerne th meanes, and manner how properly, they

may breathe out sighes of inward com∣punction, and send forth words from sincere deuotion, to their vnexpressible releifes; as euen thence to the winning of Deine grace; thence to the obteyning of pardon of their severall delicts; yea and thene euen to the compleate acquisition of Beatifique vision.
Syr,

