



Right Worshipfull,
THe florishing Almond tree,Eccl. 12. ver. 3. 5. hauing
displayed her siluer colours on my
temples, and brought forth her ar∣gent
blossomes; the strong men
bowing themselues, & the Gras∣hopper
beginning to bee a bur∣then:
(as that mirror of Wisedome
aenigmatically describeth old age) might (perhaps) plead a
supersedeas for me, to say with the Poet:
—Solue senescentem maturè sanus equum.Her.
Thy horse with age and toyle opprest,
Let loose betime, to take some rest.
This hath enforced mee to retire my selfe a little, and to
thinke vpon some conuenient recreation, whereby my droo∣ping
spirits being refreshed, I might be able with the more
alacrity to vndergoe the burthen of these graue studies,
which my function incessantly requireth. In the interim
this little booke chancing into my hands, I perused it; and

finding it to containe matter of pleasure and profite, I
thought it a fit subiect for my exercise, to employ these
tempora succisma, & sublecundaria (which I could
spare or steale from my grauer studies) in the translating
of it into the English tongue, taking more delight in these
ludicris literatijs, then in any other recreations what soe∣uer,
which might yeeld vnto mee lesse profit or content.
It was first penned and published in the Latine tongue, by
that famous & learned Noble man, Bilibaldus Pirckhei∣merus,
sometime Councellor vnto two mighty Emperors,
Maximilian the first, and Charles the fift, and by them
employed in diuers weighty affaires of the Empire, among
forraine Princes, which he managed with great wisedome
and credit. Hee was for the space of many yeeres pestered
with the force of Dame Podagras furie, and repented that
he was deluded, or rather befooled by foolish Physicians,
(to vse his owne words in his Epistle) Quod stultus ego
à stultis persuasus medicis, &c. That as a foole perswa∣ded
by foolish Physicians, I abstained in vaine for the space
of 7. yeeres from the vse of all wines, and that in my often
trauailes and Ambassages, when I was constrained to follow
my Souereigne Lord Caesar Maximilian, and sometimes
through these Countries where the waters were corrupt
and contagious: sed tandem resipui; but at last I became
more wise, and found more ease, &c. What I haue done in
the translation, he that will compare the Latine Copie with
this, may easily perceiue: what was superfluous, I haue
pruned: what was vitio Impressoris, defectiue, I haue
supplyed: some things, as little pertinent, I haue changed
for other more agreeable for these times, &c.
If any curious carping Criticke (as that malicious Ru∣fus)

shall obiect, that such a subiect beseemeth not my gra∣uity:
let such know, that I herein follow the example of
great learned men: of which, one hath written in the
praise of Tyrannie, another of Baldnesse, another of the
Feuer,Dulce est er∣rare authorib{us} illis. and that famous Clarke Erasmus, of the prayse
of foolishnesse, and shewed therein great accutenesse of
wit, and not the least of their learning.
You see here, that men of eminent gifts in all kinde of
literature, haue thought it no disparagement, Ineptiendo
non inconcinnè nugari, and to haue linked pleasure and
profit together: for,
Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci.
For my part,Horat. as a Translator I haue but taught Dame
Podagra to speake English, and do send her abroad in a
new suite out of her worky daies clothes, to apologize for her
selfe: Humbly submitting both my selfe and my labours
to your Worships censure and good liking, which to me shall
be instar omnium, as the iudgement of all men.
Oro, clementi aspicias munuscula vultu
Quae lusi nuper, postponens seria ludis.
And so I commit your Worship to the Almighties prote∣ction,
incessantly beseeching him (from my very heart)
euer to defend and free you from the force of Podagras
disease.

