


SIr, it may be marveiled of some, if not of your selfe, that I should bee thus familiar, as you see, & cannot but be seene of many. Whom I pray to take this for my excuse, (which vnfainedly I speake, and from my ve∣ry hart.) That a desire, conceiued now a good while since, engendered by a report of your godly friendes & mine, is now come vnto the birth, by speech with your selfe: and this it was; that I wished once to know you, as novve in part I do, and shal, I trust, more fully in time to come. For why should you de∣priue mee of the farther fruite of that, (and call it I must your godlinesse by the very name:) which so tasted in part already, I could not but forth with tel and testifie vnto others also, that so
great zeale of true Religion hath sel∣dome bin planted in so tender yeares: and I looke to the time of the first re∣port. For the watering, and groweth whereof (as much as my poore penne & pensil can performe herein) behold againe the gaine of godlines, presented to your eie; and yet vnpresented: for what pen, or pensill can deliuer her as shee is? whom (as Cicero saith of ver∣tue, their vertue, a weake shadow ther∣of) if with the eies of our body wee might beholde, it woulde make vs to loue her, not without wonder. But we must tarry the time, till we see her, and him togither, of whom S. Iohn saith, Dearely beloued, now are we the sonnes of God;Ioh. 1.3. but yet it appeareth not what we shall be: howbeit we know that when he shall ap∣peare, we shall bee like him: for we shall see him as he is. And then, and there also shall we see this godlinesse, which wee desire: which, till that appearing, (and now in this age of so great vngodlines, whose spreade hath overshadowed so much of this land) so little appeareth,
that shee dareth not almost be known by this her name of godlines, for fear of the flouts, which without fear do flow so fast from the vngodly; of which this is not the least, when they say to anie person, whom they most despise, O you are very godly. Whose mouthes must be stopped, which speake prowde thinges, as Iude saith, hauing mens persons in admira∣tion,Iude. 16. because of aduantage. And to stoppe their mouthes; or if not that, to open the mouth of godlines to speak for her selfe, I say not, how praise-worthy she is, vnto whom al praise is due; but, how profitable vnto vs: I then preached, & now haue published this litle Sermon. Accept it, as you finde it; and my selfe, by it. The Lord Iesus preserue you, & encrease in you the graces of his holy spirite, Amen. From Wotton Basset the 23. of Iulie. 1597.

