



THat our life is a fight and battell vpon the earth, (my very good vncle) both the holy Scriptures, & our daily ex∣periēce doe teach vs, but how litle wee regarde the warre whereunto we are waged, the sacred & honorable vow and profession of Souldiers that we haue taken, the noblenes & excellēcie of the Generall that commaundeth vs, the iustnes and importance of the quarrell entred into by vs, the inexplicable reward and tri∣umph

(if we conquere) proposed vnto vs, the might, malice, and pollicie of the forces bent a∣gainst vs, the endlesse dishonor and ruine that we run into if they doe vanquish vs, the am∣bushes that to that ende they lay for vs, the stratagems that they vse towards vs, the hote and violent charges that they geue vs, the vo∣lue of mischiefes that they discharge at vs, the defection that they practise in vs, the bat∣tery that they plāt against vs, the breach that they make in the innermost houlde of vs, and the fierce nd furious assaults wherewith they assaile vs, their ample and often conquestes, & our most miserable captiuities do too too much testifie. From the which, though dayly raunso∣med by the bountie of our Generall, to allure vs to more value and vigilancie: wee vn∣gratefull, and vngratious, to our perpetuall shame (if we amend not) become more dastard∣lie and secure. Whereof foure causes pro∣ceeding from one Fountaine (the wante of Gods grace) may me thinkes be aptly produ∣ced.
The first, ignorance of the warre, and ene∣mies that doe encounter vs. The second, de∣fect of fortitude & resolution in the function

vndertaken by vs. Thirdly, the lack of ar∣mour and weapon, and other necessaries that should furnish vs. Fourthly, the want of mar∣tiall skill and discipline, that in any part and action of our seruice should direct vs.
For the first, we ought to consider that there are three mightie campes enuironing of vs: the flesh, the world, and the infernall forces, for we fight not onely against flesh and bloud, but also against principalities, against powers against the worldly gouerners, the princes of the darkenes of this world, and against spiri∣tuall wickednesses which are in the high pla∣ces. These, vnder Sathan their soueraigne, whose kingdome is calamitie, whose scepter is sinne, whose lawes are lies, whose triumphe is torments, whose wages to his souldiers is eter∣nall woe, and curtesie to his captiues is endlesse death and destruction: doe warre with vs in foure seuerall places. First generally, against our head and hole armie: then particularly, a∣gainst the legion and Phalange wherein wee are inrolled: next peculiarly, against the statiō which we are appointed vnto: lastly, they rayse ciuill warres in our selues. Our Sauiour and soueraigne Christ Jesus (whose kingdome

is euerlasting blisse, whose scepter is righteous∣nesse, whose law is trueth, whose triumphe is glorie, whose wages is celestiall ioy, and whose mercie to his elect is eternall life and saluati∣on) hath himselfe in person encountred with these our enemies, and breaking their force & strength to the r confusion and ouerthrowe, hath after his most royall and blessed victory, ascended into the Capitoll, and triumphant part of his kingdome, the heauenly and celesti∣all Hierusalem: leauing vs such directions, as if we follow, we shall also become through him, victorious, and so accompanie him euerla∣stingly in his triumph. Jn the meane time (as it is laide downe by the Cronicler of this con∣quest, S. Iohn Reuel. Cap. 12.) The dragon in his rage and furie, preuayling neither against the head, nor against the whole bodie of this armie, the better part whereof (now in triūph with their Generall) is out of gunshot, pursu∣eth his malice against the remnant of the host which keepe the commaundements of God, and haue the testimonie of Iesus Christ. These he assayleth first in a generalitie, euen the whole Militant Church, for whose good estate wee ought to labour and striue in praiers and sup∣plications

vnto God, & both defend and en∣large the boundes thereof to our vttermost po∣wer. Next, with force and fraude, by himselfe, and his instruments, his vicar generall, Anti∣christ, and his deluded kings and potentates: he attempteth the ouerthrow of euery principall part and phalange of her most excellent maie∣stie, and her dominions, her highnes being in the same the Lords lieutenant, in whose most blessed gouernment and legions most conspicu∣ous we are enrolled: wherein we ought with all care, fortitude, and industry, to resist both his practises secrete, and his open hostilitie. Third∣ly, in the station appointed vs, and functiō that we are called vnto, he stirreth troubles to afflict vs, enuy and malice to spight vs, detraction and slaunders to annoy vs, perils to enuiron vs, the flesh to puffe, and yet to pine vs, the world to allure, and yet to abhorre vs: troubles we must ouercome with patience, enuy and ma∣lice with vertue, perils with magnanimitie, the flesh with the spirite, the thornes and nettles of this world with the lillies and roses of the fu∣ture, & the hatred of men with the loue of God. Lastly, he worketh a rebellion in our selues, stir∣ring vp the vices and corruptions of the first

Adam, of whom we are borne in the flesh, whose workes are adulterie, fornication, vncleannes, wantonnes, couetousnes, idolatrie, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, enuy, murders, drunkennes, gluttony, and such like: against the vertues and perfections of the second Adam, of whom wee are regenerated in the spirite: whose fruite is loue, ioy, peace, long suffering, gentlenes, good∣nes, faith, meekenes, and temperancie. He besie∣geth vs from without with an army of tempta∣tions, vnder the banner of worldly vanitie: and assaultetb vs within with our owne sclanes, vn∣der the ensigne of fleshly frailty. Against these villaines let vs redouble our vigor with indig∣nation, and slaying them with the sword of the spirite, let vs sally out and discomfite vnder the standard of our Soueraigne, both the worlde and the deuill, and all their complices: let vs herein shew our selues resolute, vertuous, and valyant, and say with the Spaniard, No vir∣tud sino vencar, no verdadera gloria sino victoria. There is no vertue but in vanqui∣shing, there is no true glory but in victorie. Let vs labor to be endued with perfect fortitude, let vs consider that it beseemes not a noble

and generous minde to ground his value ei∣ther vpon hope of gaine, for that is marchant-like and mercenarie: or vpon feare of punish∣ment, for that is abiect and compulsarie: or vpon perswasion of aduantage for that is fox like and subtill: or vpon rankor and rage, for that is diuelish and passionate: or vpon foole hardines and temeritie, for that is inconside∣rate and sencelesse: but vpon discharge of due∣tie, loue of vertue, iustice of the quarrel, digni∣tie of the generall, and honor of the conquest. Let vs propose euen before our eyes the ex∣quisite skill, the singular vertue, the ineffable authoritie, and the felicitie inexplicable of our king and soueraigne Christ Iesus. Let vs stu∣dy to learne the first, to imitate the second, to depend vpon the third, so shall we participate of the fourth. Let vs take vnto vs the whole armour of God, let our loynes be girded about with verity, let vs put on the brest plate of righ¦teousnes, let our feete be shod with the prepara∣tion of the gospel of peace: aboue all let vs take the shielde of faith (which is Christ Iesus by faith apprehended) wherewith wee may quench all the fierie dartes of the wicked. Let vs take the helmet of saluation, and the sworde of the

spirite, which is the word of God. Let vs pray alwayes with all maner prayers and supplication in the spirite, and watch thereunto with all per∣seuerance.
Scipio Affricanus, as we reade in Liuie, for the better trayning of his Souldiers, prescri∣bed them the first day to runne certayne myles armed, the second before their Tent doores to trimme and dresse their furniture, the third day to exercise them selues in a fayned velitation and skirmish one with the other, the fourth day to rest, the fift day to returne to the first dayes prac∣tise: and thus to continue while they had leysure from true battels and conflicts.
But sith this spirituall warfare is continuall, we may neuer lay off our armour, but must (like expert Souldyars) make it as familiar vnto vs as our skinne, especially sith it is of that necessity, that we cannot conquere without it, and of that mettal that it wil rust with no wether, & of that nature that it wil wax the brighter the more that we weare it: We shall neede no counterfet skir∣mishes, that are euer present with serious com∣bats, wherein to winne is not wearisome, but to lose is laborious: the one carrying with it solace, the other sorrowe. Let vs learne carefully, and

obserue faithfully, the directions geuen vs by our Generall, for his doctrine is our discipline. Let vs carry alwaies in minde his cohortati∣on, which is the whetstone of martiall vigor. Let vs imitate his example, who is the perfect patterne of all goodnesse and vertue. Let vs be allured by the exploites of famous Souldiers that haue beene before vs. Let vs follow their course, their coūcel, their cōfort, in this spiritu∣all fight, wherein among many I greatly cōmend the instructions and practise of that most rare, learned, vertuous and noble Gentleman, Iohn Picus, Earle of Mirandula, whose aduice herein so well pleaseth me, that I thought good to communicate it to my friends, and to dedi∣cate it vnto you (my very good vncle) toge∣ther with a briefe exposition of his vpon the six∣teene Psalme, with two Epistles vnto his Ne∣phewe, a most honourable, vertuous and lear∣ned Prince Iohannes Franciscus Picus, Earl of Mirandula, and Prince of Concordia: which I present vnto you as the fruytes of mine idle houres, which being not many, their labour can be neither great nor exquisite. It resteth that I recommend you to his most blessed tuition that

hath hetherto led you a long and honourable race thorow the warfare, both secular and spi∣rituall: ioyning with you in most feruent prayers to his diuine Maiestie, to establishe your trauayles in the one throughout all poste∣rity: and your triumphs in the other, tho∣rowout all eternitie.
From the castle of the Iland, this tenth of December. 1588.

