


YOu that weare out your liues and weary your bodies,
in Discouery of strange Countries, (bee it for
pleasure or profite) Rig out a Fleet, and make a Voi∣age
to an Iland which could neuer be found out by
the Portugals, Spaniards, or Hollanders, but on∣ly
(and that now of late) by Englishmen. The name of it is Pim∣lyco,
Here haue I drawne a large Map of it: by this Chart, may
you in a few houres, and with little or no winde, ariue in the very
mouth of the Hauen. Some that haue trauelled thither, affirme it
to be a part of the Continent, but the better sort of Nauigators
say, it is an Iland: full of people it is, and they are very wilde, the
women beeing able to endure more, and to doe better Seruice than
the men. Diuers are of opinion, that it is an inchanted Iland, and
haunted with strange Spirits; for the people there, once euery Moone,
are either starke mad, or else loose their owne shapes, and are trans∣formed
into Beasts, yet within twelue houres, recouer their wittes
and shapes againe. The Pimlyconians are most of them Malt-men,
and exceeding good fellowes, all their delight beeing in Eating and
Drinking; they liue not long, for a man can hardly star amongest
them two dayes: if he doe, he is in great danger, by reason of a cer∣taine
disease, (which the Iland naturally breedes) called the Stag∣gers,
through which, many of them come to their Downe-fall, or
if they scape that, then are they in feare to be made away by Small∣shot,
in discharging of which, the Pimlyconians are very actiue
and cunning.

The Iland begins now to be as rich as it is populous: fish hath bin
sldome taken there, but flesh is better cheape then Mackrell here.
Wilde Duckes and wilde Geese flie there vp and downe in aboun∣dance:
you may haue a Goose sowe'd in Pimlyco, for the value of
twelue pence sterling. Woodcockes (in many moneths of the yeere)
are to be catched there by whole dozens. It is full of fatte pasture,
and thats the reason such multitudes of young Colts runne there.
A hot Climate it is, and by that meanes the people are subiect to in∣fection,
which takes them first in the Head, and so falls downe into
their legges, and those fayling, they are (in a maner) gone. The
Gouernour of the Iland hath much adoe to keepe himselfe vp∣right,
so that he is compelled to giue those that are vnder him, often
times very Hard measure, yet are they so vnruly, that euery houre
one or other goes to the Pot.
Thus haue I giuen you a taste, both of the People and of the
Countrie; if you sayle thither, you may drinke of deeper knowledge.
But take heed you take a skilfull Pilot with you; be fraighted with
as much wit as you can carry aboord, for all will be little enough to
bring you from thence, and take heede what Lading you take in
there, for the commodities of Pimlyco haue suncke many
Merchants. Pay thankes for my Councell,
and thinke well of my Pimlyconian
Discouerie.
Farewell.
