


MAdame, it is reported, that Demonax hauing his head broken with a stone, and being aduised to com∣plaine to the Proconsull of that iniurie, answered, that he had more need to goe to a Chyrurgian to heale his head, then to a Magistrate to re∣dresse his wrong. I must also confesse, I had rather haue had my head broken, then my Sermon so mangled. For this Sermon hath

beene twice printed already without my procurement or priuitie any manner of way; Yea, to my very great griefe and trouble. Neuerthelesse, I haue thought good to com∣plaine of no man: For in whom the fault re∣steth, I cannot learne certainely; This I am sure, n any whit in my selfe. Clinius a Hi∣storiographer, hauing written the story of Virginius, and meeting with him vpon a time, said; If you finde anything amiss in your story, I pray you pardon it. To whom Virgi∣nius answered; what Clinius, dost thou not know I haue done as I did, that such fellowes as thou art might write as you would? And so, it was my part to take such paines as con∣ueniently I could, in furnishng and prouiding this Sermon against the appoynted time. But afterward, what others, either by reporting, or printing, would make of it, that was not my fault, that was not in mee either to helpe or hinder. Therefore I haue not gone vnto any Magistrate to complaine; but though it bee one of the greatest iniuries that euer was of∣fered mee, yet because I know not what secret purpose the Lord had in laying this affliction vpon me, I doe most willingly pardon it. Yea euen as Moses, when the first Tables were broken, was content to make a new; in like man∣ner,

finding in the first Editions so many bro∣ken-ended sentences, I haue, as it were, gone to a Chirurgian, or rather indeed I haue played the Chirurgian my selfe, and by setting out the Sermon anew, haue salued the matter as well as I could.
Diogenes seeing the Citie of Myndus very little and poore, but the gate therof ve∣ry large and stately, said, You of Myndus, shut your gate, and keepe in your Citie, that it runne not away. After the same sort, the gate (as I may say) and the first entrance into this Sermon, was before very loftie and state∣ly, the Sermon it selfe very simple and poore. Such a stirre they kept in terming it, very vainely, and most fondly, A most Excellent Sermon, as if they would haue cast the house out of the window, or the Citie out of the gate: wherefore I haue made the gate lesser, and the Citie greater: the gate lesser, by entitu∣ling it, The Meane in Mourning, which is the very drift indeede, and the right scope of the whole Sermon: and the Citie greater, by adding diuers notes in sundry places of the Sermon, as I haue since thought best. So that if any which heard it preached, bee disposed to reade it, hee shall not, I hope, altogether loose his labour. For though he haue all here

which hee heard then, yet he heard not all then, which hee hath heere. But how it will please God to affect others, I know not; This I wt well, that many a time and oft I haue beene much moued my selfe with the medita∣tion of some poynts in this Sermon. And now of late, next to God, and to his holy word, I could take comfort in nothing so much, as in reading that which I haue written in the seuenth part, the first Section thereof. Occasioned thereto by the certaine report of the death of my most deare Father, who was well knowne for his place and calling to be as good a man, and as sincere a Christian, as any hath liued in this age. But for conclusion, I humbly desire your Ladishippe, that as I haue dedicated the Path-way to Perfection to my very Honou∣rable good Patron, Sir George Carey: so it would please your Ladishippe, to let this Sermon passe vnder the countenance and credit of your name. For if your Ladishippe will deigne to reade it ouer, then I doubt not but diuers other Ladies and Gentlewomen which haue vertuous and noble mindes, will vouchsafe also to learne thereby, how they ought (with the daughters of Ierusalem) not to weepe for Christ, but to weepe for themselues, especially hauing such a singu∣lar

example before their eyes as your La∣dishippe is, whom God hath endewed with all ornaments and gifts both of Nature and Grace. From Saint Iohns Colledge in Cambridge the first day of Fe∣bruary. 1595.

