




GLorious, gratious;
It is our crowne and
the highest toy of our
heart, that the
crowne of this king∣dome
is to be set vp
on your royall head.
Otherwise, nothing in the world could
haue coneruail'd th'excessiue sorrow,
that her late Maiestie departing hence
left behind her, but the vncomparable

ioy and triumph which your expectation
sent before you, and now your princely
presence bringeth with you. When Salo∣mon,1. Reg. 1. 40.
after his father Dauid, was an∣nointed
king, they blew the trumpet, and
all the people said, God saue king Sa∣lomon,
and reioyced with great ioy, so
that the earth rang with the sound of
them. We haue thought, no trumpets, no
proclamations, no bonefires, no bells suf∣ficient;
neither haue we heard the earth
onely ring-out, but also the heauens re∣double
and ccho-backe againe the ac∣clamations
and applauses of all men,
which hau showted and said, God saue
King Iames. Now also, when your
Highnes approacheth nearer, the straight
charge which hath bin publikely giuen to
the contrarie, cannot restraine your peo¦ple,
but that out of all countries & shires,
they runne and flocke together, to behold
and attend your Maiestie, as some
bright and beautifull starre,Tanquā clarū ac beneficum ydus. Sen. de Clemen. l. . c. 3. which by his
diuine-sweete influence worketh a gene∣rall
prosperitie and peace. For what loy

all subiect doth not blesse God, and blesse
himselfe that he liues to see this happie
time, which was feared would prooue full
of great disorder and trouble, so wisely
and wonderfully caried (God as it were
from heauen stretching out his holy hand,
and holding the mindes of all men in ae
and obedience) as that in it the peaceable
vniting of two mightie kingdomes, ma∣keth
vs inuincible against all our ene∣mies,
and all our enemies contemptible
to vs? Wherefore at this time, when all
your liege people striue to shew the glad∣nesse
of their hearts, by tendring such
seruices, as are sutable to their possibilitie
and performance, I also among the rest
haue taken occasion humbly to dedicate
vnto your Maiestie such a poore present
as I had in a readines.Nulli ita deo familiares sun, sicut boni re∣ges. Emissenus. Dom. 21. post enecost. Assuring my selfe,
that as none are more familiar with God
then godly Kings: so no treatises can be
more welcome to godly kings, then such
as may draw them into greatest familia∣ritie
with God. And I doubt not but
that your Highnes hauing hitherto had

your heart's desires giuen you, because
you haue delighted in the Lord, wil here
after, if it be possible, much more delight
in the Lord, that he may yet giue you
more desires of your heart. Nay I am so
farre from doubting of this, that I dare
be hold to conclude with the Psalmist.
The King shall reioyce in thy
strength,Psal. 21. 1. O Lord: exceeding glad
shall he be of thy saluation.
Thou hast giuen him his hearts
desire: and hast not denied him the
request of his lippes.
For thou shalt preuent him with
the blessings of goodnes: and shalt
set a crowne of pure gold vpon his
head.
His honour is great in thy saluati∣on:
glorie and great worship shalt
thou lay vpon him.
For thou shalt giue him euerlasting
felicitie: and make him glad with the
ioy of thy countenance.

And why? Because the King put∣teth
his trust in the Lord: and in the
mercie of the most High he shall not
miscarie.


