



GLorious, Gratious; It is our Crowne and the highest ioy of our heart, that the Crowne of this kingdome is to bee set vpon your royall head. Otherwise, nothing in the world could haue counteruailed the excese fine sorrowe, that her late Maiestie departing hence left behinde her, but the vncomparable ioy and triumph which your expectation sent before you,Reg. 1.40. & now your princely presence brin∣geth with you. When Salomon, after his fa∣ther Dauid, was annointed King, they blewe

the trumpet, and all the people saide, God saue King Salomon, and reioyced with great ioy, so that the earth rang with the sounds of them. Wee haue thought, no trumpets, no pro∣clamations, no bone fires, no bells sufficient, nei∣ther haue wee heard the earth onely ring out, but also the heauens redouble and echo backe againe the acclamations and applauses of all men, which haue showted and saide, God saue King Iames. Now also, when your Highes approacheth nearer, the straight charge which hath b publikely giuen to the contrary, can∣not restraine your people, but that out of all countries and shires, they runne and flocke to∣gether, to behold and attend your Maiesty,Tanquam cla∣rum ac benefi∣cium sydus. Sen. de Clemen l. 1. cap. 3.  some bright and beautifull starre, which by his diuine sweete influence worketh a general pro¦sperity and peace. For what loyall subiect doth not blesse God, and blesse himselfe that hee liues to see this happie time, which was feared would prooue full of great disorder and trouble, so wisely and wonderfully carried, (God as it were from heauen stretched out his holy hand, and holding the mindes of all men in awe and obe∣dience) as that in it the peaceable vniting of two mighty kingdomes, maketh us  against all our enemies, and all our  c∣temptible to vs? Wherefore at this ti, 

all your liege people striue to shew the gladnes of their hearts, by tendring such seruices, as are sutable to their possibilitie and perfor∣mance, I also among the rest haue taken occa∣sion humbly to dedicate vnto your Maiesty such a poore present as I had in a readinesse. Assuring myselfe that as none are more fami∣liar with God, then godly Kings: so no treti∣ses can bee more welcome to godly Kings, then such as may draw them into greatest familia∣ritie with God. And I doubt not but that your Highnes hauing hitherto had your hearts de∣sires giuen you, because you haue delighted in the Lord, will hereafter if it bee possible, much more delight in the Lord, that he may yet giue you more desires of your heart. Nay, I am so farre from doubting of this, that I dare be bold to conclude with the Psalmist,
The King shall reioyce in thy strength,Psal. 21.11. O Lord: exceeding glad shall hee bee of thy saluation.
Thou hast giuen him his hearts desire: and hast not denied him the request of his lippes.
For thou shalt preuent him with the blessings of goodnes▪ & shalt set a crowne of pure gold vpon his head.
His honour is great in thy saluation:

glory and great worship shalt thou lay vpon him.
For thou shalt giue him euerlasting fe∣licitie: and make him glad with the ioy of thy countenance.
And why? because the King putteth his trust in the Lord: and in the mercie of the most high he shall not miscarie.

