


THe friendly acceptance which T. Livius of Padua, hath found in this Realme, since time hee shewed himselfe in English weed vnto her sacred Majestie, hath trained over vnto him his neighbour Plinius Secundus, from Verona. Whome, being now arraied in the same habit, yet feare∣full to set foot forward in the forreine ground, without the countenance of some worthie personage, who might both giue him his hand at his first entrance, in token of welcome, and also grace him afterwards with a fauoura∣ble regard to win acquaintance, I humbly present vnto your Honour. For considering the qualitie of the man, a Philosopher discoursing so deepely in all Learning, where may hee looke for better acceptance than of him, who is most iustly styled, Patron of Learning? Which dignitie conferred of late vpon your H. by the generall suffrages of a Noble Vniuersitie (and that for your singular insight in all litera∣ture) as a complement to those high places vhereunto the favour of a most prudent and judicious Princesse hath advanced you, and the same correspondent to the same wisedom, justice, and eloquence, which concurre in your person, like the seuerall beauties of the Rubie, Amethyst, and Emeraud meeting in one faire Opal, giueth a louely lustre to your other titles, no lesse, than if the nine Muses and Apollo, represented naturally in that rich Agat of K. Pyrrhus, were inserted therein. Now if, as wee read of Magnus. Alexan∣der and Polyorcete. Demetrius, two mightie monarchs, who amid their desseines and making con∣quests and besieging cities, beheld otherwhiles Apelles and Protogenes how they hand∣led their pencils; it may please your Honour betweene the managing of State-affaires vnder her Majestie, to cast your eie eftsoones vpon Plinie for your recreation, and see how liuely hee depeincteth, not Venus Anadyomene, drawne haply to the patterne of Campaspe a courtizan; nor Ialysus with his dog, in which picture, fecit Fortuna na∣turam; but euen Nature her selfe, the immediat mother and nource of all things vnder the Almightie; I shall not onely thinke him patronized thereby and sufficiently commended to the world, but also acknowledge my selfe much deuoted to your H. and bound for euer to pray for the encrease thereof, with long life and true happinesse.
Your Honours most readie at command,
Philemon Holland.
