




RIght Honourable, beeing appointed to preach the last La, I deliuered so much as filled vp the or∣dinary time of an houre: but that was scarce halfe this Sermon. I vttered no more, to auoid the offence of the hearer; I write  lesse, to procure the profit of the reader. For as tediousnes without regard of due time, espe∣cially in so high a presence, soonest offendeth: so fles, where the reader may peruse more or lesse at his pleasure and leisure, best of all edi∣fieth. Therefore I thought good in publishing this Sermon rather to inlarge it to the com∣prehension I had conceiued and meditated in my minde, then to scans it according to that strict compasse of time which I was ed to in the pulpit. For by this meanes all that will

vouchsafe to looke into it, may make their pro∣fit thereby. They fih were present by vtter∣ing the whole, whereas they heard but halfe: they which were absent, by hauing the prea∣chers meaning, though they bee vnacquainted with his affection. And yet perhaps it may please God to blesse this poore exercise to di∣uers heauenly minded men in such sort, as they may take occasion by some things here intited, not onely to conceiue ore then they find directly specified, but also to e ore diely in∣spired & sweetly affected, thē it pleased God in vouchsafe  of his grac either at the prea∣ching or  of us. Howsoeuer, seeing this discourse exhorteth principally to repennts and patience in the time of sicknes, & to a pre∣paration of our selues by a good life vnto a happie death, which is a doctrine most necessa∣rie in this great mortality, that hath lately bin, and is yet feared: especially also for that the great part of it. I neuer preached any where, but onely penned in my study, I thought my selfe so farre bound in duty to this blessed Church wherein wee liue, as not to hide it in a napkin, but according to the Apostles rule, if I haue found comfort my selfe by some meditations here opened, then to comfort them that are afflicted by the same comfort wherewith

 our selues haue bin comforted of God. And bethinking wee of one vnder whose protection it might passe in publicke, I thought best to make bold with your Lordship. For though all sorts peraduenture may bee fitted with some thing or other in this pla sermon, which they may make vse of, yet those I am sure will conne me most thanke for my well meaning endea∣uour, which haue had most experience and triall of Gods louing mercies in this kind. Now your good Lordship hauing bin deliuered more then once or twice from dangerous sickenesse,  learned such patience, such meekenesse, such vnfeined repentance, such true mortifica∣tion: such assurance of Gods loue, such confi∣dence in Christ, such other good vertues of a right sanctified spirit, by this fatherly visitati∣on of the Lord which is not wanting, euen often∣times to his dearest childrē, as you could neuer haue learned, at least wise in the same mea∣sure, in health. Besides, I haue bin so especially beholding to your honour, euen since you were first of S. Iohns colledge, that I could not satis∣fy my selfe with the inward duty and thank∣fulnesse towards you which I haue euer faith∣fully laid vp in my breast, except I also shewed the same by some such outward testimony, as might cleare mee to you and the world of vn∣gratefulnes.

Wherefore I doe so presume to de∣dicate this small labour to your good accep∣tance, as withall I heartily desire all those that shall receiue edification thereby, to pray toge∣ther with me for the continuance of your Lord∣ships good health and well s, that long you may euen in this world enioy this your  honourable addition, and all her good gifts of God, and fauours of our gratious Soueraign to the benefit of this Church, and ∣wealth.
From Cambridge the 28. of , 1605.


The quotations in the margent with figures, were, or should haue bin, deliuered at the preaching: the rest with letters, are only for the printing.
