



RIght Honorable, beeing ap∣pointed to preach the last Lent, I deliuered so much as filled vp the ordinarie time of an hower. But that was scarse halfe this sermon. I vttered no more, to auoyd the offence of the hearer; I write no lesse, to procure the profit of the reader. For as tediousnes without regard of due time, especially in so high a presence, soonest offendeth: so fullnes, where the reader may peruse more or lesse at his pleasure and leysure, best of all edifieth. Therefore I thought good in publishing this sermon rather to enlarge it to the comprehension I had conceiued and meditated in my mind, then to scant it according to that strict compasse of time which I was tied to in the pulpit. For by this meanes all that will vouchsafe to looke into it may make their profit thereby. They which were present by veiwing the whole, whereas they heard but halfe: they which were absent, by hauing the preachers meaning, though they be vnacquainted with his af∣fection. And yet perhaps it may please God to blesse this poore excercise to diuers heavenly minded men in such sort, as they may take occasion by some things

here intimated, not onely to conceiue more then they find directly specified, but also to be more diumely in∣spired and sweetly affected, then it pleased God to vouchsafe mee of his grace, either at the preaching or penning of it. Howsoeuer, seeing this discourse exhor∣teth principally to repentance and patience in the time of sicknes, and to a preparation of our selues by a good life vnto a happie death, which is a doctrine most ne∣cessarie in this great mortalitie, that hath lately bin, & is yet feared: especially also for that the greater part of it I neuer preached any where, but onely penned in my study, I thought my selfe so farr bound in dutie to this blessed church wherein we liue, as not to hide it in a napkin, but according to the Apostles rule, if I haue found comfort my sefe by some meditations here opened, then to comfort them that are afflicted by the same comfort wherewith we our selues haue bin com∣forted of God. And bethinking mee of one vnder whose protection it might passe in publick, I thought best to make bold with your Lordship. For though all sorts peraduenture may be fitted with some thing or o∣ther in this plaine sermon, which they may make vse of, yet those I am sure will conn me most thanks for my well-meaning endeauour, which haue had most expe∣rience and triall of Gods louing mercie in this kind. Now your good Lorship hauing bin deliuered more then once or twice from dangerous sicknesse, haue lear∣ned such patience, such meekenes, such vnfeined re∣pentance, such true mortification, such assurance of Gods loue, such confidence in Christ, such other good vertues of a right sanctified spirit, by this fatherly vi∣sitation of the Lord which is not wanting euen often∣times to his dearest children, as you could neuer haue

learned, at leastwise in the same measure, in health. Besides, I haue bin so especially beholding to your Ho∣nor, euen since you were first of S. Iohns college, that I could not satisfie my selfe with the inward dutie and thankfulnes towards you which I haue euer faithfully laid vp in my brest, except I also shewed the same by some such outward testimonie, as might cleare me to you and the world of vngratfulnes. Wherefore I doe so presume to dedicate this small labour to your good acceptance, as withall I hartely desire all those that shall receiue edisication thereby, to pray together with me for the continuance of your Lord-ships good health and wellfare, that long you may euen in this world enioy this your late honorable addition, and all other good gifts of God, and fauours of our gracious So∣ueraygne, to the benefit of this Church, and common∣wealth. From Cambridge the 28. of Iune, 1605.


The quotations in the margent with figures, were, or should haue bin, deliuered at the preach∣ing: the rest with letters, are only for the prin∣ting.

