



SIR,
YOur suit is unproper for my age, but to your owne repug∣nant. For in an argu∣ment of love, what can I who am almost fortie write, or you who are fiftie with conveni∣ence heare? It is a thing which delights young spirits, and tires upon tender brests; but old men are as unfit auditors of Loves, as

young men are of Moralls. Nor is there any thing more ugly than age, which shall serve Venus with an impotent devotion. Yet shall you finde some of these old ones in love, but not relo∣ved, for they are equallie con∣temptible both to maid and matron, nor was Woman ever taken but by the flourish of our yeares. If you shall bee taught otherwise, it is but a covert illu∣sion. But I know that an amou∣rous tractate doth extreamely misbecome mee, who having passed the Meridian of my time doe now post to my evening; yet is it not a greater indecencie for me to write than for you to sol∣licite

me. It is my dutie to obey, let it bee your care to see what you impose; for as there is the greater ripenesse of yeares in you, so it will be the great requi∣tie in mee to subscribe to the Lawes of friendship: which if your justice feares not to violate by an injunction, my follie shall not doubt to transgresse by an obedience. Your good graces to mee have beene so many, that I cannot dare to deny you, al∣though some looser wantonnes were implyed in the request, I shall therefore condiscend to your petition so often reitera∣ted, nor any longer oppose that which hath beene sollicited

with so much vehemencie. Yet shall I not, as your desire was faigne any thing, nor will I there be a Poet where I may bee an Historian. For who is so mad as to make use of a lie, who hath a truth can justifie him? Because your selfe have beene amorous, and have not yet that fire extinct, it is your pleasure I should com∣pose the History of two Lovers.
This game somnesse doth hold
You from being reckond old.
I shall submit my selfe to your desires, but will not present you with fiction in so great a varie∣tie of truths. For what hath the World so universally common? What Cittie, Hamlet or Family

is barren of examples? What man arrived to thirtie hath not exploited something for love? I ground this conjecture in my selfe, whom love hath a thousand times ingaged, and Heaven hath disingaged a thousand times; in that happier than Mars whom Vulcan captivated in an Iron Net, & exposed a scorned spectacle to the Gods; but I shall rather touch at others loves than mine owne, least while I stirre up the Em∣bers of my antient fire, I disco∣ver a sparke still living. Yet will I give you the relation of a strange and almost incredible love, with which a noble paire were mutually inflamed, nor

will I make use of old, and obso∣lete examples, but discourse of the wanton fires of our owne age, which I will demonstrate to you in our owne Cittie, not Babylon or Troy, although one of the lovers was borne in a Nor∣therne Climate. And perchance the story may furnish us with this benefit. For sithence the Lady which is our Theame, when shee had lost her love, breath'd out her soule in a mixt passion of sadnesse and indigna∣tion, and the Knight was never after the master of any true con∣tentment, it may bee a faire ad∣vertisement to youth to desist from such vanities. And the ten∣der

virgin may bee informed by this accident not to lose her selfe in the pursuit of another. The narration may tutour young Gallants, that they ad∣dresse not themselves to this kinde of war, where the Gall is so much predominant over the Hony, but that renouncing lasci∣viousnesse which doth infatuate them, they would rather make vertue their designe, which is the onely possession that can make its possessour happy. If any man be a stranger to that infinitie of miseries Wch lie conceal'd in love, let him from hence correct his ignorance. Farewell Sr, and with attention heare that story which I by compulsion write.
