



RIGHT Worshipfull and Right Christian Friends, as I am wil∣ling to acknowledge Gods gracious Pro∣uidence, and therein the manifold fauours receiued of and
in the Citie of Norwich, for the space of no lesse then 14. yeeres, both from priuate persons Christianly af∣fected in the time I was a poore Grammer-scholler, and from publike Magistrates, godly and religious, who haue shewed me more then ordinarie fauour, partly in freely allowing me a yeerely pension during the time I con∣tinued and proceeded in Cambridge, and partly in bestowing vpon me, that painefull place which now by Gods blessing I doe enioy; I say, as I am willing to acknowledge these benefits with a thankfull minde, so I am as forward to expresse true and reall thankfulnesse to euery one of you. I know very well that you will thinke your loue and cost well bestowed, if you may but see my profiting answer your expectation. And thus much I vnderstand to my greater encourage∣ment, that my poore endeauours al∣ready shewed haue been of you, most
louingly accepted; which I wish may be a testimonie vnto you, that I haue endeauoured (in some measure and de∣sire) to be faithfull in a little: And of all my meditations I know none haue had better acceptation, then this which I name the Fauourite; which kinde acceptance I may truly say, was the cause of publishing this little Trea∣tise.
 But I ought not to be ignorant that this worke now must passe through the hands and censures of many stran∣gers, who peraduenture will not so kindly accept, nor so fauourably beare with the slips they meete with as you haue done.
 I hope all Readers that are well∣minded, will easily bee entreated to take in good part my willing endeauor in this necessary Argument,In magnis volitisse st est. and the ra∣ther, because in the whole discourse they shall not be able to finde any one line which may make the heart of the
righteous sad whom God hath not made sad;Ezech. 13.22. or strengthen the hands of the wic∣ked, that he should not returne from his wicked way: And now, all that I will say to you, to whom I owe so much, is this, If there bee any thing in this short Sermon, (which God hath brought to my hand by his gratious Spirit) whereby any of you may bee furthered in the way of righteousnes, I humbly praise Almightie God, and send it vnto you all as the first fruits in this kinde; the best New-yeeres gift that I haue, being the fittest token and testimonie of my vnfeined thankful∣nesse. Further commending to your Christian consideration a place of Scripture, viz. Ezech. 33.12. &c. vnto the 20. verse, And adding this petition to the Father of lights from whome commeth euery good and perfect gift,Iam.
1.17. that he would be pleased to make you and me abound more and more in e∣uery good word and worke,2. Thess. 2.17. causing
our pathes as the shining light to shine more and more vnto the perfect day,Prou. 4.18. I rest and remaine. London this first of Ianuary, 1621.

