


WRITTEN BY C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS.

THese bookes containing the Historie of Nature, which a few daies since I brought to light (a new worke in Latine, and namely among the Romanes your Citizens and Countrymen) I purpose by this Epistle of mine to present and consecrate vnto you, most sweet and gentle Prince [for Suavissim. this title accordeth fittest vnto you, see∣ing that the name of [Maximus. Most mighty] sorteth well with the age of the Emperor your father:] which haply might seeme boldnesse and presumption in me, but that I know how at other times Namque t solebs, M esse aliq  gas. you were wont to haue some good opinion of my toies and fooleries. Where, by the way, you must giue me leaue to mollifie a little the ver∣ses which I borrow of my countryman Catullus. (See also how I light vpon  a word vsed among souldiers, which you are acquainted with, since time we serued both together in the camp:) For he as you wot full well, changing the former sillables It seemes that Pliny read thus in ,  ptare nam{que}▪ Ngas esse ali∣qud meas sole∣as, whih in∣deed was but an had com∣position and couchg of the wods. of his verses one for another, made himselfe somewhat more harsh than he would seeme to be vnto the fine eares of his familiar friends, the Veranioli & Fabulli. And withall, I would be thought by this my malapert writing vnto you, to satisfie one point, which, as you complained in your answer of late to another rude & auda∣cious letter of mine, I had not performed, to wit, That all the world might see (as it were vpon record) how the Empire is managed by you and your father equally: and notwithstanding this imperial majestie wherunto you are called, yet is your affability and maner of conuersing with your old friends, fellow-like, & the same that alwaies heretofore it had been. For albeit you haue triumphed with him for your noble victories, bin Censor in your time, and Consull , or ra∣ther Septies, out of Sueto∣nius. six times, executed the sacred authoritie of the Tribunes, Patrones, and protectors of the Commons of Rome, together with him: albeit I say you haue otherwise shewed your no∣ble heart in honouring and gracing both the court of the Emperor your father, and also the whole state of Knights and Gentlemen of Rome, whiles you were captaine of the guard, and grand-master of his house and roiall pallace (in which places all, you carried your selfe respectiuely to the good of the Commonweale) yet to all your friends, and especially to my selfe, you haue borne the same coun∣tenance as in times past within the campe, when wee serued vnder the same co∣lours, and lodged together in one pauilion. So as in all this greatnesse and high estate whereunto you are mounted, there is no other change and alteration seene in your person but this, That your power is now answerable to your will, & able you are to doe and performe that good which you euer meant, and still intend.

And howsoeuer this great maiestie, resplendent in you on euery side, in regard of those high dignities aboue rehearsed, may induce the whole world besides to reuerence your person in all obeisance; yet I for my part am armed onely with a kinde of audacitie and confidence to shew my dutie and devoire vnto you, after a more familiar manner than others: and therfore, this my aduenturous rashnes, whatsoeuer, you must impute vnto your own courtesie: and if I chaunce to fault therein, thanke your selfe therefore, and seeke pardon at your own hands. Well, bashfulnesse I haue laid aside, and put on a bold face, and all to no purpose. For why? although your gentlenesse and humanitie be one way attrectiue, and indu∣ceth me to draw neare vnto your presence, yet another way you appeare in great maiestie: the sublimitie I say of your mind, your deepe reach, high conceit, and rare perfections, set me as far back: no lictors & huishers marching before you, so much, that I dare not approach. In the first place: was there euer any man, whose words passed from him more powerfull, & who more truly might be said to flash forth as lightning the force of eloquence? What Tribune was there known at any time to persuade & moue the people with good language, more effectually? How admirable was your vtterance in those publicke Orations, wherin you thundred out the praise-worthy acts of the Emperor your father, that all the grand-place rung therwith? what a singular testimonie shewed you of rare kindnesse & affe∣ction to your brother, in setting out his praises to the full? As for your skill in Po∣etrie, how excellent, how accomplished is it. Oh the bounty of your mind! Oh the fertility of your pregnant spirit! that you should find means to imitate, yea, and to match your For Domitian Vespasian was reputed an ex∣cellent Poet. brother in that kind. But who is able boldly to gie an estimate of these gifts to their worth? How may a man enter into the due consideration ther∣of, without feare of exquisit censure, and exact iudgement of your wit, especi∣ally being prouoked and challenged thereunto as you are. For to say a truth, the case of them who publish a worke in generall tearmes, is farre vnlike to theirs that will seem to dedicat it particularly, and by name, to a Prince so iudicious as your selfe. For had I set forth this my booke simply, and staied there without any perso∣nal dedication, thē I might haue come vpon you & said, Sir, what should a migh∣tie Commander and Generall of the field, as you are, busie himselfe to read such matters? written these treatises were to the capacitie of the vulgar people, for base commons, rude husbandmen, and peasants of the countrie, for poore artisans; and in one word, to gratifie them who had no other means of great emploiment, nor time & leisure but to studie vpon such points and nothing else: What should you make your selfe a censor of this worke? and verily, when I made first shew of this enterprise of mine, I never reckned you in the number of those iudges that should passe their sentence vpon these writings; I wist full well, that you were a greater person far, & I supposed that you would neuer abase your selfe nor stoupe so low as to read this booke of mine. Ouer and besides, a common case it is, and incident to men of deepe learning and great conceit, that otherwhiles exception may be taken against them, and their iudgement reiected in this behalfe. Euen M. Tulli∣us that renowmed Orator, and who for wit and learning had not his fellow, ta∣king the vantage of that libertie, vseth the benefit thereof: and (whereat wee may well maruell) maintaineth the action by an aduocate, and taketh example (for his defence) from Lucilius: for in one part of his workes thus bee saith, I would not haue learned Persius to read these bookes of mine, loth I am that hee should censure mee.

As for Laelius Decimus, I am content to submit them to his opinion. Now if such an one as Lucilius, who was the first that durst controule the writing of others; and tooke vpon him to scoffe at their imperfections, had rather thus to say; if Cicero tooke occasion to borrow the said speech of him for to serue his owne turne, and namely in his Treatise of Politiques, where he wrote of a Common∣weal; how much greater cause haue I to distrust my self, and to decline and auoid the censure of some judge of deepe vnderstanding? But cut I am from this refuge and meanes of defence, in that I expressely make choise of you in this dedication of my worke: for one thing it is to haue a judge, either pricked by pluralitie of voices, or cast vpon a man by drawing lots; and a farre other thing to chuse and nominate him from all others: and great difference there is between that cheare and prouision which we make for a ghest solemnely bidden and inuited, and the suddaine fare and intertainement which is ready for a stranger who commeth to our house vnlooked for. Cato, that professed enemie of ambition, vain-glory, and indirect suit for offices, who took as great contentment in those estates and dig∣nities which he refused and reiected, as in them which he enioied, attained to this good name of vprightnesse and sinceritie, that when in the hottest broile about election of Magistrates that euer was in his time, they that stood therefore, put in∣to his hands their mony vpon trust, as a cautionary pawne and assurance of their integritie and fidelitie that way; they professed that they did it in testimony of their conceit of his equitie and innocence, the chiefe and onely thing that a man is to regard in this life: whereupon ensued the noble and memorable exclamati∣on of M. Cicero, who speaking of the said Cato, brake out into these words: Oh gentle M Portius, how happy and blessed art thou, whom no man was euer so hardie as to sollicite to any leaud thing, or contrary to right and honestie! L. Sci∣pio, surnamed Asiaticus, at what time as hee appealed vnto the Tribunes of the Commons, and besought their lawfull fauour (among whom, C. Gracchus was one, a man whom hee tooke for his mortall enemie) presuming vpon the good∣nesse of his cause, gaue out and said, That his very enemies, if they were his iud∣ges, could not chuse but quit him, and giue sentence on his side. Thus wee see how euerie man maketh him peremtorily the supreme and highest iudge of his cause, whom himselfe chuseth and appealeth vnto: which manner of choise the Latines call Prouocatio. As for your selfe verily, who are set in the most emi∣nent & chiefe place among men, and otherwise endued with singular eloquence and profound knowledge, no maruell is it, if those that doe their dutie vnto you, salute you, kisse your hand, and come with great respect and reuerence: In which regard, exceeding care aboue all things would be had, that whatsoeuer is said or dedicated vnto you, may beseem your person, and be worth acceptation. And yet the gods reject not the humble prayers of poore countrey peasants, yea, and of manie nations, who offer nothing but milke vnto them: and such as haue no Incense, find grace and fauour many times with the oblation of a plaine cake made onely of Meale and salt; and neuer was any man blamed yet for his deuo∣tion to the gods, so he offered according to his abilitie, were the thing neuer so simple.
For mine owne part, challenged I may be more still for this my importune and inconsiderat boldnesse, in that I would seeme to present these bookes vnto you, comprised of so slender stuffe and matter as they be: for therein can be touched no

great wit (which otherwise in me was euer meane and simple) neither admit they any digressions, orations, speeches, and discourses, ne yet admirable cases and va∣riable chanses, or any other occurrent, either pleasant to rehearse, or delectable to heare. The truth is this, the nature of all things in this world, that is to say, matters concerning our daily and ordinarie life, are here deciphered and declared, and that in barrein terms, without any goodly shew of gay and glorious phrases: and whatsoeuer I haue put downe, concerne it doth the basest points thereof, inso∣much as for the most part I am to deliver the thing in hand, either in rusticall speech, or else in forraine, nay, in barbarous language, such also as may not well be vttered, but with reseruing honour to the hearers, and reuerence to the readers.
Moreouer, the way that I haue entred into, hath not bin troden beforetime by other writers, being indeed so strange and vncouth, as a mans mind would not willingly trauell therin. No Latin author among vs hath hitherto once ventured vpon the same argument, no one Grecian whatsoeuer hath gone through it and handled all: and no maruell, for many of vs loue not to take any paines, but study rather to pen matters of delight and pleasure. True it is, I must needs say, that o∣thers haue made profession hereof, but they haue done it with such subtiltie and deepenesse, that all their trauels and writings by that means, lie as it were dead and buried in darkenesse. Now come I, and take vpon me to speak of euery thing, and to gather as it were a compleat hody of arts and sciences (which the Greeks call ) that are either altogether vnknowne, or become doubtfull, through the ouermuch curiositie of fine wits: again, other matters are deciphered in such long discourses, that they are tedious to the readers, insomuch as they loath and abhor them. A difficult enterprise it is therfore to make old stuffe new, to giue au∣thoritie & credit to nouelties, to polish and smooth that which is worne and out of vse, to set a glosse and lustre vpon that which is dim and darke, to grace & coun∣tenance things disdained, to procure beleefe to matters doubtful; & in one word, to reduce nature to all, and al to their own nature. And verily to giue the attempt only and shew a desire to effect such a desseigne as this, although the same be not brought about and compassed, were a braue and magnificent enterprise. Certes of this spirit am I, that those learned men and great students, who making no stay, but breaking through al difficulties, haue preferred the profit of posteritie before the tickling and pleasure of itching eares in these daies; which I may protest that I haue aimed at, not in this worke only, but also in other of my bookes alreadie: and I professe, that I wonder much at T. Livius, otherwise a most renowned & famous writer, who in a preface to one of his books of the Roman history which hee cō∣piled from the foundation of Rome, thus protested, That hee had gotten glorie ynough by his former writing, and might sit still now & take his ease, but that his mind was so restlesse, and so ill could abide repose, that contrariwise it was fed and nourished with trauel, & nothing else But surely me thinks, in finishing those Chronicles, he should in dutie haue respected the glory of that people which had conquered the World, and aduanced the honour of the Romane name, rather than displaied his owne praise and commendation: Ywis, his demerit had beene the greater, to haue continued his story as he did, for loue of the subiect matter, and not for his priuat pleasure; to haue I say performed that peece of worke more to gratifie the state of Rome, than to content his owne minde and affection. As touching my selfe (forasmuch as Domitius Piso saith, That bookes ought to be


treasuries & store houses indeed, and not bare and simple writings) I may be bold to say and averre, That in 36 bookes I haue comprised 20000 things, all worthie of regard & consideration, which I haue recollected out of 2000 volumes or ther∣about, that I haue diligently read (and yet very few of them there be that, men learned otherwise, and studious, dare meddle withall, for the deepe matter and hidden secrets therein contained) and those written by 100 seuerall elect and ap∣proued authors: besides a world of other matters, which either were vnknowne to our forefathers and former writers, or else afterward inuented by their poste∣ritie. And yet I nothing doubt that many things there be, which either surpasse our knowledge, or else our memorie hath ouerslipt: for men we are, and men em∣ploied in many affaires. Moreouer, considered it would be, that these studies wee follow at vacant times and stolne houres, that is to say by night season onely; to the end that you may know, how wee to accomplish this haue neglected no time which was due vnto your seruice: The daies we wholly employ and spend in attendance about your person; we sleepe onely to satisfie nature, euen as much as our health requireth, and no more; contenting our selves with this reward, That whiles wee study and muse (as Varro saith) vpon these things in our closet, we gaine so many houres to our life; for surely we liue then only, when we watch and be awake. Considering now those occasions, those lets and hinderances aboue-named, I had no reason to presume or promise much; but in that you haue emboldened me to dedicate my bookes vnto you, your selfe performeth what∣soeuer in me is wanting: not that I trust vpon the goodnesse and worth of the worke, so much, as that by this means it will be better esteemed and shew more vendible: for many things there be that seeme right deare and be holden for pre∣tious, only because they are consecrate to some sacred temples.
As for vs verily, we haue written of you all, your father Vespasian, your selfe, and your brother Domitian, in a large volume which wee compiled touching the historie of our times, beginning there where Aufidius Bassus ended. Now if you demand and aske me, Where that historie is? I answer, that finished it was long since, and by this time is iustified and approued true by your deeds: otherwise I was determined to leaue it vnto my heire, and giue order that it should be pub∣lished after my death, lest in my life time I might haue bin thought to haue cur∣ried fauour of those, whose acts I seemed to pen with flatterie, & beyond all truth. And therfore in this action I do both them a great fauour who haply were min∣ded before me to put forth the like Chronicle, and the posteritie also which shall come after; who, I make reckning and know, will enter into the lists with vs, like as we haue done with our predecessors. A sufficient argument of this my good mind & frank hart that way you shal haue by this, That in the front of these books now in hand, I haue set down the very names of those writers, whose help I haue vsed in the compiling of thē: for I haue euer bin of this opinion, That it is the part of an honest minded man, & one that is ful of grace & modesty, to confesse frank ly by whom he hath profited & gottē any good: not as many of those vnthankful persons haue done, whom I haue alledged for my authors. For to tell you a plain truth, know thus much from me, that in conferring thē together about this worke of mine, I haue met with some of our moderne writers, who word for word haue exemplified & copied out whole books of old authors, and neuer vouchsafed so much as the naming of them, but haue taken their labors & trauels to themselues.

And this they haue not done in that courage and spirit to imitate, yea & to match them, as Virgil did Homer: much lesse haue they shewed that simplicitie and apert proceeding of Cicero, who in his bookes of Policie and Common-weale pro∣fesseth himselfe to hold with Plato; in his Consolatorie Epistle written to his daughter, confesseth and saith plainely thus, I follow Crantor, and Panaetius like∣wise in his Treatise concerning Offices. Which worthy monuments of his (as you know well) deserue not onely to be seene, handled, and read daily, but also to be learned by heart euery word. Certes, I hold it for a point of a base and ser∣uile mind, and wherein there is no goodnesse at al, to chuse rather to be surprised and taken in theft, than to bring home borrowed good, or to repay a due debt, es∣pecially when the occupying, vse, and interest thereof, hath gained a man as much as the principall.
Now as touching the titles and inscriptions of Bookes, the Greekes therein haue a wonderfull grace and great felicitie: some haue intituled them , whereby they would giue vs to vnderstand of A sweet hony-combe: * others  issus. , that is to say, The horne of plenty and store: in such sort, that who∣soeuer readeth these goodly titles, must needs hope for some great matters in such bookes, and as the proverb goeth, looke to drinke there or else no where, a good draught of hens milke. You shall haue moreouer their bookes set out with these glorious inscriptions, The Muses, The Coutaining al gs, as Ty Tullus did Pandects, A manuel to be carried al∣waies in hand. Enchiridion,  , A Table or Index. : Goodly names all, and such, as who would not make default of ap∣pearance in court, and forfeit a recognisance or obligation, to vnclaspe such books and turne ouer the leafe? But let a man enter into them and reade forward, Lord! how little or no substance at all shall he find within the verie mids, answera∣ble to that braue shew in the front or outside thereof? As for our countreymen (Latines I meane, and Romans) they be nothing so fine and curious as the Greeks, grosse are they in comparison of them in giuing titles to their books: they come with their Antiquities, Examples and Arts, and those also be such authors as are of the most pleasant and finest inuention amongst them all. Valerius who (as I take it) was named Antias, both for that hee was a Citizen of Antium, and also because the ancestors of his house were so called, vvas the first that gaue to a booke of his owne making, the title of Lucubratio, as a man would say, Candle∣worke or Night-studie. Varro, he tearmeth some of his Satyres Sesculyxes and Flexibulae. Diodorus among the Greekes was the first that laied aside toyish titles, and because he would giue some braue name to his Chronicles, entituled it Bib∣liotheca, i. a Librarie. Apion the famous Grammarian, euen hee whom Tiberius Caesar called the Cymball of the world (whereas indeed hee deserued to bee na∣med a Timbrill or Drum rather, for ringing and sounding publique fame) was so vain-glorious, that he supposed all those immortalized, vnto whom hee wrote or composed any pamphlet whatsoeuer. For mine owne part, although I no∣thing repent mee that I haue deuised no pretier Title for my Booke than plaine Naturalis Historia, i. The reports of Nature, without more ceremonie; yet be∣cause I would not be thought altogether to course and rate the Greekes, I can be content, nay I am willing to bee thought in this behalfe like vnto those excel∣lent grand masters in Greece, for Painting and Imagerie, whom you shall finde in these Reports of mine, to haue entituled those rare and absolute peeces of worke (vvhich the more wee view and looke vpon, the more wee admire and

wonder at for their perfection) with halfe titles and vnperfect inscriptions, in this manner, Apelles Apelles facie∣bat. went in hand with this Picture: or, Polycletus was a making this Image: as if they were but begun, neuer finished and laid out of their hands: which was done (no doubt) to this end, that for all the varietie and diuersi∣tie of mens iudgements scanning of their workemanship, yet the Artificer thereby had recourse to make excuse; had meanes (I say) to craue and haue par∣don for any faults and imperfections that could be found, as if hee meant to haue amended any thing therein amisse or wanting, in case hee had not beene cut off and preuented by death. These noble workemen therefore herein shewed right great modestie, that they set superscriptions vpon all their painted tables, pour∣traitures and personages, as if they had beene the last peeces of their workeman∣ship, and themselues dissabled by vnexpected death that they could not make a finall end of any one of them: for there were not knowne (as I take it) aboue three in all, which had their absolute titles written vpon them in this forme, Ille fecit, i. This Apelles wrought: and those pictures will I write of in place con∣uenient: By which it appeared euidently, that the said three tables were fully finished, and that the workeman was so highly contented with their perfection, that he feared the censure of no man: No maruaile then, if all three were so much enuied and admired throughout the world, no marueile if euerie man desired to be master of them.
Now For my selfe, I know full well and confesse freely, that many more things may be added, not to this story alone, but to all my bookes that I haue put forth alreadie: which I speake by the way, because I would preuent and auoid those fault-finders abroad those correctors and Homeromas∣ges. scourgers of Homer, (for surely that is their very name (because I hear say there be certaine Stoike Philosophers, pro∣fessed Logicians, yea, and Epicurians also (for at Grammarians hands and Cri∣ticks I neuer looked for other) who are with child still and trauaile vntill they be deliuered of somewhat against my bookes which I haue set forth as touching Grammer: and for this ten yeares space, nothing is come to light, but euermore the fruit miscarieth belike before the full time, as the slip of an vnperfect birth; whereas in lesse space than so, the verie Elephant bringeth forth her calfe, be it neuer so big. But this troubleth me neuer a whit, for I am not ignorant that a silly woman, euen an harlot, and no better, durst encounter Theophrastus, and write a booke against him, notwithstanding hee was a man of such incomparable elo∣quence that thereupon hee came by his diuine name Theophrastus: from whence arose this prouerbe and by-word, If women may be allow∣ed to controll mens writings, we may be wearie of our liues and goe hāg our selues well enough. Marie then go chuse a tree to hang thy selfe. And surely I cannot containe and hold my tongue, but I must needs set downe the verie words of Cato Censorius, so pertinent to this purpose; whereby it may appeare, that euen Cato himselfe a most worthy personage, who wrote of mili∣tarie Discipline, who had beene brought vp and trained to feats of warre vnder Great Scipio Africanus, or rather indeed vnder Anniball, who in the end could not endure Africanus himselfe, but was able to controll him in martiall affaires: and who besides hauing the conduct as L. Generall of the Romane armie, at∣chieued the better hand ouer his enemies in the field, and returned with victorie: this Cato (I say) could not auoid such backbiters and slanderers, but knowing that there would be many of them readie to purchase themselues some name and reputation by reprouing the knowledge and skill of others, brake out into

a certaine speech against them: And what was it? I know right well (quoth hee, in that booke aforesaid) that if these writings of mine come abroad once and be published to the view of the world, there will be many step forth to quarrell and cauill therewith; such fellows soonest and most of all who are quite void of vertue and honestie, and know not what belongeth to true honour. But surely say what they will, I let their words runne by, like raine water. It was a prettie speech also and a pleasant apothegme, that Plancus vttered in the semblable case: for being informed that Asinius Pollio was deuising and framing certaine in∣vectiue Orations against him, which should be set forth either by himselfe or his children, after the decease of Plancus and not before, to the end that they might not bee answered by him; hee said readily by way of a scoffe, That none but vaine bugs and hobgoblings vse to fight with the dead: with which word hee gaue those orations such a counterbuffe, that (by the iudgement of the learned) none were accounted afterward more impudent and shamelesse than they. For mine owne part, being sure that these busie bodies shall neuer be able to bite me (and verily Cato hath giuen such fellowes a proper name, and called them Vitili∣gatores, by a tearme elegantly compounded of vices and quarrels: for to say a truth, what did they else but picke quarrels and make brawls?) I will proceed and go one still in my intended purpose.
Now to conclude and knit vp mine Epistle: knowing as I doe, that for the good of the Common weale, you should be spared and not impeached by any priuat businesse of your owne, and namely in perusing these long volumes of mine; to preuent this trouble therefore, I haue adioyned immediatly io this Epi∣stle, and prefixed before these books, the Summarie or Contents of euery one: and very carefully haue I endeauoured, that you should not need to read them throughout, whereby all others also after your example, may ease themselues of the like labour: and as any man is desirous to know this or that, he may seeke and readily find in what place to meet with the same. This learned I of Va∣lerius Sorranus one of our owne Latine writers, who hath done the like before me and set an Index to these Bookes which he entituled .
