



SIR, as soone as I had
preached this Sermon,
it pleased the L. Bishop
of London last decea∣sed,
both by his letter,
and by word of mouth,
to request a copie of it for the presse. The
like did diuers other also. But in trueth I
had then no coppy of it. Or if I had beene
possessed of any, yet I was resolute to yeeld
to no such motion. VVhich some (I knowe
not who) vnderstanding, that being by so
many, and so many times importuned, to

print this, or some other Sermon, I alwaies
vtterly refused so to doe, haue presumed to
print the Meane in Mourning; altoge∣ther
without true iudgement, or calling me
to counsell therein. And that so falselie,
and in most places so quite contrary to my
meaning, that I may say to him, whosoeuer
was the procurer thereof, as Martiall the
Poet sayd to one,
Quem recitas meus est, ô Fidentine, libellus:
Sed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.
O Fidentine, a booke of mine
Thou printst against my will;
And yet not mine, but it is thine
Because thou printst it ill.
VVhen in the triumph of Iulius Caesar,
the Romains had carried about the modell
of those Citties, which hee had subdued,
grauen in yuorie, and not long after in the
triumph of Fabius Maximus, they shewed
 description of his Citties, carued in
woode: Chrysippus beholding the diffe∣rence,
saide merrily, that Fabius citties
were but the sheathes of Caesars Citties.
And certes I may be bold to auerre, that as
much diuersitie as there is betweene yuorie

and woode: so much there is betweene that
Sermon which was first once preached, &
that which was afterward twise printed.
For those two editions were but woodden
sheathes. Or if there were any mettall in
them, yet it had not an yuorie but a dud∣gin
haft, beeing blunt and dull, without
any poynt or edge.
Therefore after I was, not onely perswa∣ded
by the aduise of all my friendes, but
euen enforced by the necessitie of the thing
it selfe, to print that Sermon as it was prea∣ched,
I thought good likewise to let this goe
with it. That as the grauer of images in
Aesop telleth Mercurie, if hee would giue
a groate for the image of Iupiter, hee
should haue his owne image for nothing:
so if any one who hath cast away his mony
vpon the former editions, will bestowe a
groate vpon the true copie now sette out by
my selfe, hee may haue this sermon with it
for nothing, in surplussage ouer and besides
the bargaine. VVhich if it shall please you
out of your true woorth fauourably to pa∣tronise
and protect, then all that reape anie
benefit by perusing it, shall haue good cause
to honour your most noble minde, by whose
munificence and bountie my studies haue
beene hetherto continued. And so crauing

your honourable acceptance of my faith∣full
endeuours I humbly take my leaue.
From Saint Iohns Colledge in Cam∣bridge
the first day of Fe∣bruary. 1595.
(∴)

