



TO write against Vsury (Right worshipfull) is no noveltie; & to giue the Vsurer notice of the daungers wherein he wal∣loweth, is a thing necessarily per∣formed in all Ages; begunne by our Fathers, who gaue the first
on-set, seconded by Vs, who con∣tinue the skirmish, and to be pra∣ctised of our Posterities, whoe doubtlesse will willingly followe their Fathers, wherein we haue so happily followed ours. The Sin is hainous, and the daunger despe∣rate; yea so much the more dan∣gerous, whē it is covert & shrow ded; as a consuming feaver, that cannot be espied before it growe incurable. I know there be many, otherwise good Christians, that entertaine this vgly monster, who would not doe it to gaine all the worlde, if they knewe their trade were damned-vsury. Giue me leaue therfore (Right worshipful) to de¦cipher the deceiptfullnes of this
Sinne, by pointing at some vsura∣rious practises, which are vtterlie vnlawful though commōly they be not so accompted. I wil touch but some fewe of the principall, least I shoulde treade an endlesse maze, & enter a labirinth out of which Theseus himselfe were not able to reduce me.
FIRST thē, this covert & shrow ded vsurie is committed in buy∣ing and Selling.
1 I buy barly afore hand for 4r. a combe which at the time of the delivery (I know) will be worth 6r. or a noble.
This is cloaked Vsurie. Because that for payment before hande, I buy a great deale the cheaper.
2 I sell my wares: I giue a day of
payment, and for that I am to forbeare my money so long, I sell aboue mine ordi∣nary price, or aboue a reasonable gaine.
Herein (no question) I com∣mit vsury. Because I sell the time, and make a gaine of lending.
3 A man comes to me to borrowe money: I answere, I will lend him no mo¦ney for vsury. But if he vvil buy a horse of me for 10li. (which is scarce vvorth 20s.) I will lend him so much mony for such a time.
This is vsurie. Because the mo¦ny which surmounteth the price of the Horse, is a ful recompence for the loane.
SECONDLY, It is cōmitted vn∣der pretence of Letting.
1 One comes to mee to borrow an
100li for 7. yeeres. I answer, He shal haue it; if he will hire a house of me for 10li. yeerely, (which is scarce worth 10s.) and take a lease of the same du∣ring the saide tearme of 7. yeeres.
This is plaine Vsurie. Because the rent of the house payeth for the loane of the money.
THIRDLY, It is committed in Lending.
1 I come to a man to borrow mony. He will lend me so much as I aske, but in light gould, in crackt angels, or such like. Yet he vvill haue payment in good currant money.
This is Vsurie. Because he ma∣keth a manifest gaine of Lending
2 If in consideration of a piece of money sent I take a piece of ground, a
house, or cattel, or any fructifieng thing, vntill the mony be paide againe.
This is Vsurie. Vnlesse that the fruite I reaped from the pledg be diducted from the principall.
3 If for such a consideration, I take for pleadg apparell, plate. &c. and vse the same vntil paiment be made.
This is Vsurie. Because I reap comodity by the vse of the pledg for the Loane onelie.
4 I deliver 20li vppon condition to haue 22li at the yeares end, if I be thē living, but if I die to haue but 18li resto¦red againe.
This is plaine Vsurie. 1 Be∣cause the gaine is certaine, in res∣pect of the Lender, and that for the Lone onely. 2 Because there
is no respect had whether the bor¦rowers gaine be lawful or not, yea whether he gaine any thing at all or no. 3 Because the Lender doth not adventure the Princi∣pall. 4 Because he doth not re∣lie vpon GODS providence for disposing, and ordering of his Goodes: but is sure of Gaine (if he liues,) howsoever it goeth with the Borrower.
5 I deliver 20li. vpon condition to haue 22li at the yeares ende, if either my selfe, or one other whō I shal name, be then living, but if we be both deade at the same time, then no part of paiment at all to be made, neither of gaine nor of principall.
This is Vsurie: for the reasons
house, or cattel, or any fructifieng thing, vntill the mony be paide againe.
This is Vsurie. Vnlesse that the fruite I reaped from the pledg be diducted from the principall.
3 If for such a consideration, I take for pleadg apparell, plate. &c. and vse the same vntil paiment be made.
This is Vsurie. Because I reap comodity by the vse of the pledg for the Loane onelie.
4 I deliver 20li vppon condition to haue 22li at the yeares end, if I be thē living, but if I die to haue but 18li resto¦red againe.
This is plaine Vsurie. 1 Be∣cause the gaine is certaine, in res∣pect of the Lender, and that for the Lone onely. 2 Because there
is no respect had whether the bor∣rowers gaine be lawful or not, yea whether he gaine any thing at all or no. 3 Because the Lender doth not adventure the Princi∣pall. 4 Because he doth not re∣lie vpon GODS providence for disposing, and ordering of his Goodes: but is sure of Gaine (if he liues,) howsoever it goeth with the Borrower.
5 I deliver 20li. vpon condition to haue 22li at the yeares ende, if either my selfe, or one other whō I shal name, be then living, but if we be both deade at the same time, then no part of paiment at all to be made, neither of gaine nor of principall.
This is Vsurie: for the reasons
before alleadged.
OBIECTION. I aduenture to loose not onely the profit of my mony for a whole yeare, but also to loose the prin∣cipall it selfe.
ANSWER. No, no: Here is no aduenture at all. 1 For if the Vsurer liues his gaine is certaine howsoever the Borrower shal do 2 The aduenture must not onely be in respect of the Lender, but al so and that principally in respecte of the Borrower, whoe vseth the money.
FOVRTHLY It is committed in laying to pawne.
1 I lend 20li for ayeare, and for assurāce of mine ovvne, I take a pawne worth 30. or 40li vvith a bill of sale,
that in desalte of payment at the day ap¦pointed the pawne shall be my owne.
This is Vsurie: If either I hope the pawne shall be forfeited; or it I take the aduantage of the for∣feiture, if it so fal out.
I am to bould to trouble your Worships with recital of particu¦ler Practises: yet, because I know it is the custome of many men ra∣ther to scan over Epistles & prefa¦ces, thē diligently to peruse whol books; I thought good to reserue evē this place, for these few cases that al Mēmay see thē briefly cen∣sured, & proved to be within com¦passe of manifest Vsurie.
Many learned Diuines haue written concerning this point. I
haue read all that euer I coulde come by, Fathers, Canonistes, and moderne VVriters: & made choice of what I iudged best out of them al, which I haue couched together concisely, and methodically: so as the Reader may compendious¦ly as it were with one proiect, take a view of the whole, what hath bin written concerning VSVRIE.
This Labour (how greate or how small soeuer) I humblie pre∣sent vnto your Worships ioyntly, and seuerally, as a token of the dutiefull regard, and louing affe∣ction I beare vnto you: being not otherwise any way able to declar my thankfulnes, for the great and manyfolde favours & benefites
which from time to time I hauē re¦ceiued from you hartely beseech¦ing your VVorships, so to accept this small gift, as it is consecrated and dedicated vnto you; that is, with a willing, chearful, & Chri∣stian minde.
The LORD IESVS blesse and pre∣serue your VVORSHIPS and perfect the good work he hath begun in you, that you may appeare blamelesse in the day of the LORD. 
OXON. From St. Marie Hall; this 1. of Aprill, An. Do. 1602.

