



IT is recorded of a certē merry fellow (right W.) who passing by Zeno the Philos. his schoole at such time as the olde man was reading le∣cture to his schollers a∣bout the definition of vertue, merrily asked one in the company, how long he thought it would be, ere the Philoso∣pher would vse vertue, that at these yeres had not learned what it was. This apothegme though vttered in iest (according to a pro∣uerb we haue, Ridentem dicere verum quis vetat: a man in merriment may meane good earnest) may both serue my turne for a iust a∣pologie, and also meete with the braine-sicke humour of this scribling age (whereof I may vse the Poets words (Tenet insatiable mul∣tos
Scribendi cacoethes, Men are madde vp∣on booke-making) that doth nothing els but write, & nothing lesse thē vse aright, the things already extant. For albeit the great respect of your honourable descēt, selfe worthines, & de∣serts to me: besides the affinitie of both out houses by my Fathers matching with the ver∣tuous gentlewoman your sister, or the cōside∣ration of mine own place & calling (thus farre furthered by your VVorships care and kind∣nes) might iustly exact somthing of mine own invention; yet partely the vnnecessarines of sē∣ding newe bookes abroad, without caring of profiting by the olde, and partlie the disabili∣tie of my owne witte that way, altogither in∣sufficient to produce any thing, that is able to passe the censure of mine owne quill, much les the iudgement of anothers coale, hath indu∣ced me rather to carrie other mens books, thē exhibite any of mine owne, giue the spurres to another then stirre my selfe, and commend to my friends such as I finde sappe and sound∣nesse in rather then fill the world with newe or newefangled stuffe my selfe. Let such as the Lord hath imparted a greater measure of his grace vnto that way, imploy their talēts; I, who am the least of all my masters seruants, thinke it sufficient with Ahimaaz, 2. Sam. 18.19. to be sent second, seeing he thinketh me vnworthie to carrie the first tidinges with Cushi, kno∣wing the Lord may so blesse my indeauoure that I may ouertake if not outstrip the firs
messenger, that is, doe as much good by tran∣slating, as some doe by first inventing. But to the point. The blindenesse of former ages hath beene so grosse and palpable, that they would straine at gnattes and make such bones at a greeke worde, that they would balke it with a Graecum est, non potest legi, its greeke, I can∣not skill of it, but in points of deeper learning especially diuinity, and especially the point of Predestination, it was esteemed the highest braunch of all impietie, and praesumption sur∣moūting that of the Bethshemites, 1. Sā. 6.19. that would peere into the arke, to diue neuer so little into that doctrine. Contrariwise our daies haue hatched such pregnant wits, that learning seemes to goe a begging, so that both children and chapmen, martiall and mechani∣call, that neuer set foote within the schoole gates can as roundly talke of Predestination and vniversall grace, as any point in their own trade. But as I must needes mislike the neevish nicenesse of the one, that would tie our faith to the ring of the Church doore; and with the good collier to beleeue as the church beleeues and the Church to beleeue as he beleeues, by an intricate and implicite saith, so cannot I ap∣prooue of their rotten ripenesse and overripe rottennesse, that vnreverently do handle holy thinges, and lay profane handes on Gods arke. There is a modest wisdome taught in Sion, to be wise, but with sobrietie, and the language of C must be learned, but with this memen∣to,
that it is a holy language. VVhether so deepe matters be to be dealt in, I doe not now dispute, mine author shall decide that contro∣versie. To returne therefore vnto your VVor∣ships, for your owne and others instructions in this no lesse dangerous then deepe a point, I haue done into English this treatise of ano∣ther mans, that you whome God hath advan∣ced to great place in your countrey, may both haue your selfe what to hold, and also counte∣nance the Orthodoxalliud gements of the lear∣ned about you, as occasion may serue: your VVorships owne lone to religion, and the for∣wardnesse of the excelēt lady your wife haue imboldened me thus farte. It remaineth that I craue of your VVorships, that as I haue presu∣med to publish this abroad vnder your prote∣ction, so my endeavoures might be accepted by you both, that, whome for your vertuous dispositiō the world doth agnize for a blossome of true nobilitie & for the excellent ornamēts of all gentilitie, that you are beutified with, all men admire for a mirrour of men, I among other may also haue cause to admire for vouch∣safing me regarde the least of all men. And thus resting in your fauour I commit you both to the grace of the almightie, which as it hath hitherto bin your direction so he grant it may still be your VVor. load-starre to euerlasting happines.
Camb. this 24. of Ian. 1598.

