



RIGHT VVORSHIPFVLL,
I Knowe there are many that will wonder at me, and those most that knowe me best, that after no lesse then tenne yeares labour and toile in the Lords harvest, I should hope to approue my paines, or improue my praise or profit with these few scattered eares, in such a plentifull crop of all kind of fruit∣full bookes that are dayly brought into the Lords barne. To these I may professe, and if need were protest, that it is nei∣ther my praise, nor profit that I aime at; and whatsoever my toile hath beene for these ten yeares, yet this little crop was both sowne, and ripe, and reapt, and brought into the barne, within lesse then the compasse of halfe ten daies, and

therefore I cannot looke either for praise or profit for such small paines, Others perhaps will pull me by the eares and put me in mind of that position, lately maintained in that great assembly of the Act at Ox∣ford 1613. doctior quis∣{que} fuit in scri¦bendo parcis∣simus. Handled the same Act. learned, that the more learned are the moreloath to leaue any thing in print to the view of the world. To such I answer, that it is my loue not my learning that I would shew, and therefore I hope the lawiers position will satisfie such, amor excusat in delic∣tis, those actions that proceed from the passion of loue are not liable to law, at least pardonable in reason. Vnto both these obiections I say that I had rather the world should condemne me as vniust, and the whole Vniversitie as vn∣learned, then you should so much as thinke mee vnthank∣full. For since you first fetcht mee from the bosome of my mother the Vniversitie, and ever since with extraordinary kindnesse haue harboured me in your house, that counte∣nance you haue continually given to my weake ministery, that comfort I haue taken from your continually frequen∣ting the meanes of salvation, the preaching of the word, & your willing conformitie vnto it, that extraordinary re∣spect which I haue found, not from your selues only, but for your sakes from the most and best of the country about you, whether I came as a strangermay iustly chalenge a greater returne of thankfulnesse, then these few indigested medi∣tations; which as they were first preached, and now publish∣ed at your earnest entreatie (whose will should bee worth a command to me) so must I now entreat that they may passe vnder both your patronages, whose very names, for the loue you haue of all sides from all sorts in your country, will quickly procure them a quiet passage. If the curious or cap∣tious

carpe at them I care not, so the faithfull Christian may receaue some comfort by them. If your remembrance, with this honourable Baronets (whose buriall it is) may liue a little longer by these lines, if the day of your death, now af∣ter that great pompe and height wherein you haue passed the heat of your honourable imployment may bee renewed, and in all these my thankfulnesse testified I haue my desire. Whatsoever these short meditations be, both ihey & their author desire to be yours, who will not cease when he prayes for himselfe, to beseech God for the increase of his heavenly graces here, and eternall happinesse hereafter, both to your selues, and all such as are deare vnto you.
From your house at Bowdon, Aug. 24. 1613.

