



THE VEHEMENT affectiō that I haue to you, impellyth me often tymes to deuise with my selfe what plesure or ser∣uice my symplenesse myght do, ac∣ceptable vnto your moste gentylle goodnes. But whan I consydred my small abilitie and your greate diligence towarde wysedome & ex∣cellent good qualities, that apper∣teyne to your astate, I was in ma∣ner cleane discoraged to attempte any thynge to presente vnto your maistershyp. Neuerthelesse whan

I agayne remembred your greate goodnesse, and mooste gentyll fa∣mylyarytie shewed to me in youre yonge age, whiche by outewarde sygnes appereth stablysshed nowe in your moste gentyll harte, I am encouraged to wryte some thyng, to be a testimony of the loue & affe∣ction that I beare vnto you. And amonge many other I choase out to translate this lytel treatise, The commendation of Matrimonye, that you beinge coupled in mary∣age to so noble, so good, and soo vertuous a lady, & leadynge your lyues in suche honeste and chaste wyse (whyche thynge ouer manye nowe adayes neglecte, lyttell re∣gardyng this holy and honorable sacrament) maye clerely perceyue your selues in the same greately commended and praysed. And o∣ther,

that haue not this holy band of wedlocke in so great veneratiō and honoure, as you haue, shall take occasion, partely at your ex∣ample, and partely of this Decla∣mation, to repent, that they haue transgressed ageynst so hyghe and so holy a sacrament, to the greate ieoperdy of theyr soules. For the apostell sayth: God shall iuge for∣nicatours 1. Cor. 6 and aduouterers. And, The brekers of wedlocke shall not Gala. 5. Ephe. 5. inheryte the kyngedome of god. Wherfore I thought that this lyt∣tell queire shulde do moche good, to perswade suche as are wedlocke breakers, to leade their lyues ver∣tuously within the bondes of this holy sacrament, accordynge to the apostels saying: Let wedlocke be Hebre. 13. kept honorable in al poyntes, and let the chamber be vndefyled. And

as I supposed, that this treatyse set forth in englyshe wold do moch good, with the witty argumentes, quycke reasons, and weighty au∣thorities therin conteyned: So I verily thynke, it shall no lesse far∣ther, to dedycate the same to you, that are a very true patrone of ho∣nest life in wedlock. Wherto shuld I speake of your vertuous educa∣tiō, for the which your right hono∣rable father my good lord, hath be very diligent? And surely his care in that behalfe hath not ben onely for you, but for manye other: yea the thing that he specially wisheth and desyreth is, that the youthe of this hole realme of Englād shulde be brought vp vertuousely, name∣ly the noble mens chyldrē, in good litterature, & the other after theyr abilities, wyttes, and aptenes, in

sciences and craftes, wherby they shall highly profite them selues, to the great aduancement of the com¦mon weale, and aboue al thinges, he wolde, that with theyr lernyng of good letters, sciences, and craf∣tes, they shuld be ernestly taught, obedyence to god, to the kynges hyghnesse, and to suche rulers and lawes, as his maiesty shal ordeyn. In whiche good mynde, that he beareth to the common welth almyghty god longe pre∣serue hym, and sende you bothe moche welthe and pros∣perytie.
Amen.
FINIS.
