


RIGHT HONOVRABLE;
AS I intend nothing by this Discourse, but the glory of God, the good of my Country, the ob∣seruation of Princes, and the seasoning of hu∣mors: so doe I propose no man fitter to Patronise the same, then
 your selfe, sprung from so illustrious a fami∣ly, that our moderne Stories reioyce againe in the illustration of the name and actions of Herbert: but aboue all, my motiues arise from your Noble disposition toward Eng∣lands glory, and pious zeale to propagate the cause of Religion, which at this day is set vpon by viperous calumniation, as if either God meant not to performe his promise, concerning the stripping the Strumpet naked, Apoc. 18. 3. who hath made drunke the Kings of the earth with the cup of abomination: or pol∣licie determined, like Prometheus his Vulture, to feed vpon the heart of Religion, and eat out the bowels of sanctitie, and truth But O thou God of heauen, thou laughest the Psalme. deuises of men to scorne, and wilt main∣taine thy owne cause in despight of Aposta∣cy: and O ee Princes of the earth, looke yee Psal. 2. 12. kisse the sonne, least he be angry, and yee perish in the Way, when his wrath shall suddenly burne.
Wherefore great Lord, made so much the greater by all the Concomitants of Noble birth, and remarkeable deseruing, accept I pray you of this poore Tractate, wherein though
 I come strangely toward you with a dutie from an vnknowne name, and vnfortunate man, as we prophanely abuse the Character, yet with so good a heart, that in regard of the cause, which is Gods, and your selfe, who haue answered reputation with suffi∣ciency, I am cheerfully animated to wade out of this streame, by the supportation of so noble an arme, which can keep me from sinking, though there were some whirle∣poole to fall into.
As for aspersion of presumption, stepping out of my own Circle, medling with trans∣cendent matters, tenuity of wit, or deficien∣cy of knowledge, I wipe all away with a Principle in Euripids.—Nullus sibi similis in peri∣culis Iphigenia in Tauris. homo, quoties ad audaciam ex metu venerit.
But indeed what should I be affrighted with the Popes fulmination, or curses, Lucan answers;
Tollite signaduces, fatorum impellite cursum, Lib. 5. Pharsl. spem vestram prestate diis, fortuna{que} tantos det vobis animos, quantos fugientibus hostem causa dabat.
The blastings of opinion, or windy cen∣sures.

Impia laetatur vulgatae nomine famae,—Thessaliis. Luc. o. Lib. 5.
The displeasure or contracted brow of a Prince? No, no.
Caesaris aduentu tuta gladiator arena, Lib. 6. de Pon∣t, Ovid. exit, & auxilium non leue vultus habet.
The imputations of iudicious men?
—Simplex oratio veritatis est;
Ne{que} variarum habet vtrin{que} interpretationum, Eurip. Phaenissae. habet enim ipsa congruentiam, sed iniquus sermo aegrotans in seipsum, medicamimum habet opus sapientiam.
The desertion of friends? who be they?
Amicos in rebus aduersis conuenit amicis adesse, Eurip. Orestes. Nam cum Deus faelicitatem dederit, Quid opus est amicis? Sufficit ipse Deus prodesse volens.
In a word, so I haue your fauour and my owne ends, I am startled at nothing, but in∣sufficiency in so great aduenture, and vn∣worthines to put polluted handes into the waters of life: which as I hope the God of heauen will pardon, because of my honest desires to magnifie his greatnes: so your Honor will graciously admit, because of my willing heart to exemplifie your good∣nesse.
