



IN this generall joy of affectionate and loyall subjects, testified by their frequent confluence from all parts, longing for nothing so much as the full fruition of that beautiful starre, which lately upon the shutting in of the evening with us after our long Summers day, immediatly by his radiant beames mainteined still a twi∣light from the North, and within some few houres appeared bright shining above our Horizon, suffering nei∣ther the dark night and confused Chaos of Anarchie to overspred and subvert, nor the turbulent tempests and bloudy broiles of facti∣ous sidings to trouble and pervert our State: I also, for my part could not stay behinde, but in testimony of semblable love and alle∣geance shew my selfe; and withall, most humbly present unto your Highnesse, This Philosophie of PLUTARCH: which being first naturally bred in Greece; then, transplanted in Italie, France and other regions of the continent; after sundry Nativities, if I may so speake, reserved (not without some divine providence) unto these daies, is now in this our Iland newly come to light; ready both to congratulate your Majesties first entrie upon the inheritance of these Kingdomes, and desirous also to enjoy the benefit of that happy Horoscope and fortunate Ascendent, under which it was borne; even the favourable aspect of your gracious countenance: by vertue whereof, it may not onely be marked to long life, feeble otherwise of it selfe, but also yeeld pleasure with profit to the English nation.
Vouchsafe therefore, my deere Lord and dread Soveraine, to

accept that now at my hands, whole & entire, which in part Traja∣nus the best Romaine Emperour that ever was, received sometime from the first Authour and Stock-father himselfe: Protect the same in English habit, whom in French attire Amiot dedicated to the late most Christian King: and deigne unto her no lesse favour and grace, than her yoonger sister, to wit, the History or Parallele Lives, hath already obtained: which being transported out of France into England by that woorthy Knight Sir Thomas North our countryman, was patronized by our late Soveraigne Lady of famous memory Elizabet. And the rather, for that con∣sidering the prerogative of birth-right, and the same accompanied with more variety and depth of knowledge, I may be bold to pro∣nounce as much in her commendation, as the Poet wrote of Iupiter in comparison of his brother Neptune:
 Homer. Iliad. v.

These regards, albeit they were sufficient motives in themselves to induce me, for to attempt none other patronage than the Name of my Liege Lord so gracious; nor so submit my labours to the censure of any person, before a King so judicious: yet was I more animated to enterprise the same, by the former experience that I had of a Princes benignity in that behalfe: what time as I consecrated my English Translation of the Romane Historie written by Titus Livius, unto the immortall memory of the said Noble and renow∣med Queene. Now, seeing that with her Realmes and Domini∣ons, the best parts and gifts that were in her, be likewise haeredita∣rily descended upon your roiall person, and the same multiplied in greater measure, proportionable to the dignity of sex, the addition of scepters and diademes, and the weighty charge of so puissant and populous an Empire; it were in me a grosse absurdity, if not meere impiety, to make any doubt of that excellent vertue of all others, whereby Princes come neerest unto the Nature of God, whose Majesty heere upon earth they represent. To say nothing, how the world hath taken knowledge already, as well by your vertuous life and politicke regiment hitherto, as also by the prudent and religious designements delivered in those sage and learned Compositions of

your Highnesse penning, That your blessed intention is to holde on the same course still, not onely  a point that the Indian Poten∣tate Plutarch. De fortun. vel Virtut. Alexandri. Orat. 1. Porus required of Alexander the Great: but also  the singular note that our present Author set upon all the actions of the said mighty Monarch; 
Since then both these attributes concurre in your Noble person, just cause have we, in all devout thankefulnesse to acknowledge the goodnesse of the Almighty, who from heaven above hath sent us so wise a Prince, under whose reigne we (if ever any Nation under the Sunne) may assuredly expect that felicity and happinesse, which the divine Philosopher Plato so much recommendeth: and in due Dialog. 5. Derep. reverence unto your Majesty, with one heart and voice, both sing and say:
Hîc ames dici Pater at{que} Princeps: Horat. 1. Carm. od. 2.
Serus in coelum redeas, tuo{que}
Laetus intersis populo, Britannûm
Prime Monarcha.

