


GEntlemen, wee are all borne by nature to so much po∣uerty,
and inuolu'd in so many miseries, as there is
no worke of Man, how small soeuer, which giuing
order to his meanest actions, doth not minister oc∣casion
of some Esteeme. So as whereas his diligence
guided by reason, shall finde it selfe crost, I know not by what power,
which commonly fortune vsurpes ouer the iudgement and considera∣tion
of Man, wee may (as we thinke) iustly blame it, in excusing
with compassion the workeman and his misfortune. And if on the
other side, to shew her great magnificence and bounty, she imparts
her fauours  r∣der
or faire course, seekes to bring some Enterprize to an end, so as
that notwithstanding his ouer-weaning and folly shee makes it per∣fect:
Then we hold her prodigall, detesting her vnreasonable and
inconsiderate bounty, grieuing at her benefits so ill imployed.
Behold how, (I know not by what law receiued among men) wee
commend or blame euery one in his profession and workes, so farre
forth as they see his industry and diligence imployed or defectiue.
If wee haue reason then in so great Esteeme, as wee seeke it in all
our actions, and in matters of the smallest consequence, blaming
him that neglects it: How infamous wee hold the carelesnesse and
neglect of a man in the order and conduct of affaires, wherein not
onely the ruine of his estate, life and honour, but also that of his
Countrey, Parents, and Friends, and finally of his Prince and
Soueraigne, is many times brought into great danger? But if there
be no Enterprize among those which Men pursue, wherin such things
ought to bee drawne into Consideration, as proper and ordinary vn∣him,
and without the danger whereof hee can reape no benefit, I
am of opinion that that of warre ought in reason to bee preferred be∣fore

all others: Although there bee many, which cannot alwaies be
brought to a good end, without the hazard and danger of those
which pursue them. In truth it is a profession, which experi∣ence
hath taught in all Nations, to bee so rough and fierce, and
finally so difficult to mannage, as neuer man could carry him∣selfe
so discreetly, nor with so great fortune, nor recouered such
rich spoiles, nor obtained such Triumphant victories, but they
haue purchased him new causes of Care and feare, not onely of
great Enuie, and of new Enemies, but also losse and ruine. I
will not speake of the irreparable defeate of the brauest Men in
an Armie, which a Victory worthy of renowne requires, as
it were by aduance, when as the Enemies performe the Duties
of good souldiers. The Carthagians thrusting an Army into Sicily, at
their first entry obtained some Conquests, so soone after they prouoked
hatred of the Romanes: which was but the beginning and
prefage of a future ruine. But when as the fortune of the warres
beganne to smile vpon Hanibal, and to giue him a full Gale,
so as his exploits were so great in Spaine, as afterward hee
presumed to force Nations, Mountaines, and riuers, and in
the end to fight with the Extremity of the weather for the Con∣quest
of Italy: Then, as it were, fearing her owne power, to bee
in a manner vanquished, shee beganne to practize and forge
meanes, not onely to ruine her so much fauoured Hanibal, but
the whole Carthaginian Empire. And therefore it is credible,
that (I know not by what inconstancy, or rather extrauagant
and sauage Nature) shee makes friends of Enemies, and ene∣mies
of her owne friends; so much shee feares (as I imagine)
the ease and rest of those whom shee fauours. It is true that traf∣fique
by Sea is not without great terrour, amazement and hazard,
for the danger of the waues, Tempests and stormes, with a thou∣sand
other accidents. But if warre once set vp her sailes, being
accompanied with rage, fury, and many other disasters, which
the malice of Men haue inuented to make vse of, beleeue mee
that these other furies, which the winds procure at Sea and
in the Aire, which many times are more fearefull than mortall,
will not seeme in regard of those of warre, but a light amaze∣ment,
and, as it were, a false allarum. What torment at ea,
or violence of the winds hath euer beene so soddaine, which the

long experience of a wise Pilot, could not by a thousand
signes and tokens foresee, deuising sufficient remedier to auoid
it? But when a warre is mannaged by Iudgement and discre∣tion,
as it is requisite, the shewes are commonly contrarie,
to that which they pursue. Wherefore the more an Enterprize
is dissembled and keept secret, the more easie it is to put in
execution. Finally, if wee will confesse the truth, it is a pro∣fession
which among all others, requires the greatest vigilan∣cie;
a continuall Care, with an incredible diligence: where∣of
a good Iudgement must haue the conduct, that by con∣iecture
drawne from things formerly practized, or from a
probability of that which hee sees, hee may soone after iudge
of the Enemies resolution, and finally attempt and hope for a
victory.
And although it hath beene alwaies held, that Money is the
sinewer of Warre; yet I hold its force without Conduct▪
like vnto that of a strong, able Man, opprest with a deepe
sleepe, whose senses haue made their retreate for his rest. So
there is nothing so strong, nor so quicke in this world as the
sense of man: Nor any thing so powerfull and terrible,
which the vnderstanding doth not master and subdue. And
therefore wee say commonly in France, that wit is better
than force. Yet I know that Courage is a great aduantage;
and necessary for a souldier, but especially for a Generall:
But I feare that for want of Iudgement and a good conside∣ration,
it makes them not sometimes ouer-weening and care∣lesse
of danger. So as many times it giues occasion to a
weake and cowardlie Enemie, to vndertake a Victory, and
to performe the Act of a valiant man. Wherefore courage
without conduct, and vigilancie, is alwayes subiect to Am∣bushes
and shamefull flights: which are inconuentenees,
whereof a Coward is alwaies warie, for that feare makes a
Man vigilant and carefull. But was there euer Nation
more hardie, nor more warre-like, nor that more care∣fully
obserued the ordinances of warre than the Romanes?
How then did Hannibal defeate them so often, not onely
in Encounters, but in pitcht Battailes, and in the open

field, by his great Iudgement, and his subtile pollicies? In
what feare, and with what admiration hath the fury of the
Gaules, beene held in old time by all Natios, who parting
from their owne Countrey and Townes, to seeke new habita∣tions,
haue conquered land in diuers Countries by Armes,
building Townes not onely in Italy their Neighbour, but also
in Germany, and in the end in Greece, and Asia? Who
hath defeated and quite ruinated them in a short time, but
their owne Consideration, and an ouer-weaning confidence
in their force and courage? I hold for certaine, which you
know well, that it is not sufficient for a Prince or Generall to
haue his Armie compleate with foote and horsemen, how reso∣lute
soeuer, and with all necessary prouisions for a warre: No
more than for a Souldier to haue youth, strong and actiue
Members, a daring courage, and compleate furniture. Hee
must haue to vanquish (the which many times the vanquish∣ed
improperly call mis-fortune) that piece of harnesse so well
steeled, which wee call Iudgement▪ or a good conduct. Beleeue
mee that like vnto a horse, when hee hath taken the it be∣twixt
his teeth, forcing his Master, flies without feare tho∣row
Woods, Rockes, and Precipices, with the danger of his
life, bee hee neuer so nimble and couragious; so a hardie and
resolute souldier doth easily his owne ruine, if hee wants con∣duct
and Iudgement. You must vnderstand that as the body
requires Exercise to preserue in health, and to make it actiue,
and hardened to indure labour and paine; so the vnderstand∣ing
in like manner desires to bee exercised and imployed, ei∣ther
by the consideration of things past, or by those which are
visible.
It is true, that those which are seene by the eye, haue a
greater viuacitie, and a stronger impression, than those which
are past: For that liuing things are of greater force than
dead. Yet, if we shall duely consider the length of time, which
the experience of a thousand kind of pollicies, which warre
requires before that a wise Man will dare to aduenture
himselfe in a bold and hardie Enterprize, wee shall finde
that the knowledge of the antient warres, which haue beene

left vs in writing, will bee of no small consequence vnto
him. For besides the assurance of danger, hee may in a short
time see by Historiographers, the great and wonderfull exploits
of the Antient in a manner since the Creation of the world,
to pleasure and contentment from them, with some Encourage∣ment
to doe aswell or better hereafter. You know well that
the warre which is seene by the eye, is not alwaies made be∣twixt
warre-like people, nor vnder resolute Commaunders,
that are skilfull in their profession: so as it is a difficult
thing vnder such to see any valiant exploits, nor Enterpri∣zes
attempted with good inuention, nor well executed. Wee
say commonly in France, that the Combate is dangerous,
when as courage fights against courage. So is it credible▪ that
when an Army consisting of warre-like men, is vnder the
leading of a wise and resolute Commander, hauing in front
an Enemy equall vnto him in all degrees, there must needes
bee valiant exploits performed, with hardy Enterprizes wisely
mannaged.
If there haue beene any warres, attempted by fierce
and warlike Nations, and gouerned by wise and famous
Captaines, beleeue me this present Historiographer hath vsed
great diligence to set them downe in writing: Labouring on∣ly
to mention the deedes and valour that was most worthy of
Relation, that with the pleasure and contentment which they
may reape in reading them, they may draw some instructions
and meanes, not to fall into the inconuiences of warre, into the
danger whereof many times both Captaine and souldiers may
bee ingaged, through want of experience, good aduice and coun∣cell.
So as among others, you shall see Enterprizes of the Ro∣manes
against the Carthaginians for the conquest of Sicily.
During the which there were many Encounters and cruell bat∣tailes,
as well by Sea as land. You shall likewise reade
the furious Combat of the Gaules against the Romanes:
And moreouer the warre betwixt Cleomenes and Antigo∣nus,
for Morea, the which Philip the Sonne of Deme∣trius
tooke afterwards. And besides many other notable
exploites, (which at this present I will forbeare)

you shall see the Conquests which Hannibal made in Spaine,
with his incredible voiage into Italie, performed in his
younger yeeres, and his victories gotten of the Romanes
with such pollicie and wisedome, as it is a difficult thing (if
wee shall consider the people and number of his Armie, ha∣uing
regard to courage and power of those with whom
hee had to deale) to iudge truely, whether there were euer
Captaine in the memory of man, that may with reason bee
compared vnto him. Finally my Masters, I doe not promise
you in this History, those miraculous Battailes, which ex∣ceed
the apprehension of man, performed in the Kingdome
of Logres, nor I know not what Quest of that barking Beast.
Make your accompt that you shall not finde any Tract or
marke of a Beast, nor finally any thing that holds of it.
Beleeue mee in times past, Men did not feede their vnder∣standings
with dreames, nor fables inuented in barbers-shops,
without any colour of Truth. It is impossible an ignorant
Master should make a learned disciple. Finally they are dis∣courses
fit for old womens tongues to entertaine little child∣ren,
whilest that for weakenesse of their Age, their vnder∣standing
hath no apprehension, nor sufficient Iudgement of rea∣son,
Wherefore wee may with reason say, that such as co¦sume
their yeeres, and grow old in such dreames, haue a
will to continue still children. And although they commonly
saie, that warre is mannaged by the eye: So as it seemes
they will thereby inferre, that wee must not thinke of it,
but when necessity doth force vs: And that peace should
procure no benefit to a Souldier, but idlenesse; yet he must
fore-see long before, part of that which afterwards he must
gouerne by the eye. And as a horse which is pampered
and not ridden, growes restit; and proues vnprofitable to
his Master for trauaile: so the vnderstanding of a souldi∣er,
idle during peace, or fed with dreames and foolish in∣ventions,
will faile him at neede; and in the end purchase
him dishonour and shame; Yet do not imagine my Masters,
that I haue vsed this speech as blazoning you, and hold∣ing
you for men of so poore an Enterprize, whose principall

study and affections is the reading of such Bookes, rather then
in some worthy recreation and exercise. My meaning was
onely to aduertise you, that Histories, from whence with
pleasure you may draw great profit, as these are which this
Historiographer imparts vnto you ought to bee in greater
recommendation than those Fables, which haue no grac,
but when they are most without reason or any shew of
truth.
Finally, I hope you shall finde such sufficiencie in our
Polybius, as you will make no question to preferre him
as the paragon before all others, aswell Greekes as La∣tines,
which are come to the knowledge of men. Of whom I
haue presumed to translate in the best sort I could, those fiue
first Bookes, which of Fourty which hee hath written,
haue beene preserued halfe ruined by the negligence of time:
Hoping you will receiue them as willingly, as I offer them
with a good heart.
When as after the Printing of these fiue first Bookes,
I had recouered some Latine Translations, of three par∣cels
of the sixt, whereof the first and the third had not a∣ny
GREEKE Coppie, And likewise afterwards an∣other
of the sixteenth, both in Latine and Greeke, I
imployed my selfe to put them into French, adding there∣unto
the forme of the Romanes Campe, as I could con∣iecture
it, by the discription which Polybius maker, in
the parcell of the sixt Booke. And when as the Printers
successor had a desire afterwards to print the whole, and
intreated mee to spend some time in the Remainder of that
which was newly published of Polybius his workes, which
are certaine parcells, and as it were Reliques (besides the a∣boue
named) of the seuenth and eighth, and of all the sub∣sequent
Bookes vnto the seauententh inclusiue, it was not in
my power to deliuer him any other but those of the seuenth
and eighth, being afflicted with a quartane Ague, besides his
obstinacy in vsing a small Character, for the sparing of
Paper distasted mee: Expecting that which afterwards fol∣lowed,
that few men would rest satisfied, for that all things

how good and excellent soeuer, are thereby found without
grace, dull and vnpleasing. For this cause desiring that so
excellent a writer, should not remaine disdained and with∣out
grace for want of an honourable Impression, and that
the studios of Histories should bee the more incouraged, I
resolued to adde the remainder of that, which at this day is
come to our knowledge, assuring my selfe that the Printer
for his part will haue a care that for the sauing of his mo∣ney
hee will not doe wrong to his honour, nor loose his char∣ges
instead of gaine.
TO GOD alone be all honour and glory.
