



MAy it please your HH. to vnderstand, that hauing by my fathers appointmēt for exercise sake, accor∣ding to my poore skill, translated out of Latin into English, this worthy worke following: and God ha∣uing besides prepared a way (when I did neither thinke nor know of it) to bring it to light & sight of men, by putting it into Print, I bethought my selfe, as well as my want of yeares & discretion would suffer me, of some worthy persons & patrōs to whom I might dedicate these my simple labours. Amōgst many none came more
oftē & more iustly into my remēbrance, thā your HH. whose affectiō in the Lord to my father, and some measure of Chri∣stian care for me in the world, haue made me bold, & euen as it were to presume, to dedicate these simple fruits of my first tra∣uailes vnto you. What reasons I haue besides those alledged to lead me thereto, I shall not need largely to lay out. Your HH. zeale to Religion: your fauours to me, as also some declaration of all du∣tifull thankefulnesse from my selfe to∣wards you for the same haue greatly pro∣uoked me. In whō though there be no∣thing as in regard of my selfe and paines taken herein, that may commend it, yet as in respect of the worke it selfe, sure I am, not by mine owne iudgement I pro∣test (for how weake and childish that is, I very well know) but by the sentence of sundry very learned men, both for the soundnesse and sufficiencie of the things therein contained, as also for the metho∣dicall maner of handling the same, there will be found much that may well be∣seeme your HH. profession and place. And so earnestly praying the good ac∣ceptation
of that which is done, that vn∣der your HH. patronage it may be the better receiued amongst men: and hum∣bly beseeching the continuance of your HH. fauours, that so I may the better proceede in godlinesse and learning, whereunto my parents, though not able indeede of themselues to maintaine me therein, haue vnfainedly dedicated me, & I my self haue willingly vowed my selfe; and hartily crauing pardon for my bold∣nesse & scapes this or any other way cō∣mitted, I humbly end.
At Londō the first of this Ianuarie. 1595.

