



VNDER hope of your highnes gratious and ac∣customed fauor, I haue presumed to present here vnto your Maiestie, Plutarkes lyues translated, as a booke fit to be protected by your highnes, and meete to be set forth in Englishe. For vvho is fit∣ter to giue countenance to so many great states, than such an highe and mightie Princesse? vvho is fitter to reuiue the dead memorie of their fame, than she that beareth the liuely image of their vertues? vvho is fitter to authorize a vvorke of so great learning and vvisedome, than she vvhome all do honor as the Muse of the vvorld? Therefore I humbly beseech your Maie∣stie, to suffer the simplenes of my translation, to be couered vnder the amplenes of your highnes protection. For, most gracious Souereigne, though this booke be no booke for your Maiesties selfe, vvho are meeter to be the chiefe storie, than a student therein, and can better vnderstand it in Greeke, than any man can make it Englishe: yet I hope the common sorte of your subiects, shall not one∣ly profit them selues hereby, but also be animated to the better seruice of your Maiestie. For amonge all the profane bookes, that are in reputacion at this day, there is none (your highnes best knovves) that teacheth so much honor, loue, o∣bedience, reuerence, zeale, and deuocion to Princes, as these liues of Plutarke doe. Hovve many examples shall your subiects reade here, of seuerall persons, and vvhole armyes, of noble and base, of younge and olde, that both by sea & lande, at home and abroad, haue strayned their vvits, not regarded their states, ventured their persons, cast avvay their liues, not onely for the honor and safe∣tie, but also for the pleasure of their Princes?
Then vvell may the Readers thinke, if they haue done this for heathen Kings,

vvhat should vve doe for Christian Princes? If they haue done this for glorye, vvhat should vve doe for religion? If they haue done this vvithout hope of heauen, vvhat should vve doe that looke for immortalitie? And so adding the en∣couragement of these exsamples, to the forvvardnes of their ovvne dispositions: vvhat seruice is there in vvarre, vvhat honor in peace, vvhich they vvill not be rea∣dy to doe, for their vvorthy Queene?
And therefore that your highnes may giue grace to the booke, and the booke may doe his service to your Maiestie: I haue translated it out of French, and doe here most humbly present the same vnto your highnes, beseeching your Maiestie vvith all humilitie, not to reiect the good meaning, but to pardon the errours of your most humble and obedient subiect and seruaunt, vvho prayeth God long to multiplye all graces and blessings vpon your Maiestie.
VVritten the sixteene day of Ianuary. 1579.

