



RIGHT HONORABLE,
LET it stand (I beseech you) with your fauours whom profession of the same true Religion to∣wards God, and so great loue hath vnited together in one, Jointly

to accept the Protection and Patronage of these my labours, which not their owne worth hath encouraged, but your Worthi∣nesse hath enforced me to consecrate vnto your Honours.
To you (Right Honourable my very good Lord) of Right doe they belong: for to whom shall J rather present the first fruits of my learning then to your Lord∣ship: who nourished then both mee and them, when there was scarce any being to mee or them? And whose iust and vp∣rght carriage of causes, whose zeale to Justice and Honourable curtesie to all men, haue purchased you a Reuerend and worthie Respect of all men in all partes of this Kingdome, where you are knowne. And to your good Ladiship

they doe of great right belong likewise; Whose Religion, Iustice, and Honoura∣ble admittance of my Vnworthie Seruice to your Ladiship doe challenge at my handes the vttermost of what euer J may bee able to performe.
Here is nothing of my own act worthie to bee commended to your Honours, it is the worke, of those Reuerend Ma∣gistrates, His Maiesties Iustices of Assizes in the North partes, and no more then a Particular Declaration of the proceedings of Iustice in those partes. Here shall you behold the Iu∣stice of this Land, truely administred, Proemium & Poenam, Mercie and Iudgement, freely and indifferently bestowed and inflicted; And aboue all

thinges to bee remembred, the excellent care of these Iudges in the Triall of of∣fendors.
It hath pleased them out of their res∣pect to mee to impose this worke vpon mee, and according to my vnderstanding, I haue taken paines to finish, and now con∣firmed by their Iudgement to publish the same, for the benefit of my Countrie. That the example of these conuicted vpon their owne Examinations, Confessions, and Euidence at the Barre, may worke good in others, Rather by with-holding them from, then imboldening them to, the Atcheiuing such desperate actes as these or the like.
These are some part of the fruits of my time spent in the Seruice of my Coun∣trie,

Since by your Graue and Reuerend Counsell (my Good Lord) I reduced my wauering and wandring thoughts to a more quiet harbour of repose.
If it please your Honours to giue them your Honourable respect, the world may iudge them the more worthie of accep∣tance, to whose various censures they are now exposed.
God of Heauen whose eies are on them that feare him, to bee their Prote∣ctor and guide, behold your Honours with the eye of fauor, be euermore your strong hold, and your great reward, and blesse you with blessings in this life, Externall and Internall, Temporall and Spirituall, and with Eternall happines in the World to come: to which I commend your Ho∣nours;

And rest both now and euer,
From my Lodging in Chancerie Lane, the six∣teenth of Nouember 1612.

