


BEING THO∣rovvlye persvvaded (Right Honorable, woorshipfull, and dearely beloued in our Sauiour Christ) that other Citizens and folk of tovvnes and Countries tho∣rovve this vvhole Realme, doe take (as it vvere) light and in∣structions at you of this honourable Citie: I haue thought it most meete to direct this my simple vvorke to you, and you to be defenders thereof against the aduersarie, to the ende that those, vvho take ensample of you, maye see,

that you doe not allow of those things: which are condemned by this worke, whereof you are willing Patrones.
And I call you willing Patrones of this my worke, bicause that (after I had prepared the same for the Crosse, and preached it to you in the Church, by occasion of raine) I was im∣portunatelye prouoked by many worshipfull Citizens to write and put in print the same Sermon, specially that which I had sayde con∣cerning vsurie. Which earnest requests of theirs hath drawne mee (as it were) to doe that: for which the aduersaries, perhaps will accuse mee both of superfluous folly and rash trauayle, bi∣cause after so many great Clarkes of olde time, and also of late dayes, hath handled this mat∣ter of Vsurie at large: I take in hande to write of the same, and make certaine trades subiect, to the definition of forbidden Vsurie: which none of those godlye and great learned men, hath once mentioned in their writings.
But to excuse my selfe from vndiscrete fol∣lye, in calling that Vsurie, which so manye godly & learned writers make no mention of in their doings: I say either men in their times, and in their countries, haue not so openlye shewed themselues to the worlde, to bee V∣surers, nor defended that vile trade to be ho∣nest trafficke, as men past all shame doe at

this time: and in this our lande. So that I be∣ing (as I thinke) further occasioned, haue spe∣cially named that: which these men haue but in generalitie condemend.
And as many of great worship haue required me thus to doe: so were they content, yea, and (that which is more) my Lord Maior willing∣ly to be patrons herof. And my hope is to haue more defending members than aduersaries in this bodye pollitike, seeing I haue spoken the truth.
I knowe that many haue exclaymed and doe exclayme against this Citie for Vsurie, and I would there were no cause. But when those exclaymers are themselues also Vsurers, and will not see it, but colour it by selling of time, they may blushe with shame ynough, and ey∣ther first amende themselues, or else cease ex∣clamation. For it is shame for one to rebuke an other of that fault, wherein the rebuker him∣selfe is guiltie.
But I speake not this to quallifie anye vice committed by Citizens, be it Vsurie, or other: For my earnest desire is to haue a redresse of faultes in Citie and Countrie.
And therfore, as you of this Citie, are giuers of light or darkenesse to others through this Realme, so I beseeche you for Gods loue, first to beginne a redresse, and euen with all speede

shine foorth light of good conuersation, and honest lawfull trade, whereby others maye followe your good example, and that God may be glorified. Let euery man put to his helping hand, the Magistrate with power, and the in∣ferior with prayer to God. There wanteth but only good will. We haue but a short race here to runne, and how short god onely knoweth, happy is he that runneth a good course to the ende. Let vs be moued while God doth yet call and beseech vs, least he kepe silence & scurge vs.
And though the wicked, who regarde not God, will giere, cauill, scoffe, slaunder, kick, and will not be moued with any thing to leaue e∣uill: yet I know the godly and wise (for whose sake I haue chiefly done it) wil be content with this my trauayle, and will gladly and thank∣fullye embrace the truth, and endeuor to re∣dresse faultes without delay. To whome God for Christes sake giue strength: and persite his woorke in them, and deliuer our Queene, this our Citie and Realme, from plagues now im∣minent, and blesse and defende the godlye inhabitants to the glory of his holy Maiestie, and destruction of Satans kingdome.
Amen.
