



IT is a speci∣all point of the duty of Chil∣dren towards their Parents, as in pre∣sence by seruicea∣ble offices, so in ab¦sence
by other effe∣ctual significations, to yeeld proofe of their thākful minds: which neither any Child can omitte, without touch of ingratitude; nor a∣ny Parent forbeare, vvithout iust re∣proofe. Wherefore (most louing and deare Mother) lest I should seeme to neglect the roote, out of which I brā∣ched,
to forget the secondary Auctor of my being, or not to remēber her, to whō I owe my selfe; after a long pursuite in a painfull chace, I now returne you such a pray, as you were wont to loue, desiring therby, to procure your Bles∣sing. You are not ignorant, that these many yeares past I haue studied and
practised spirituall Physicke, trauelling in the Scrutinie of the maladies & me∣dicines incident & proper to Soules: & heere I offer vnto you a present of my profession. I haue prepared abundāce of the bread of An∣gels, for the repast of your Soule, that your kindnesse in some part my bee counteruailed, and
my dutie in some sort not left vnper∣formed. Hitherto I haue principallie labored for others: but who hath more interestin the grape, then shee that plan∣ted the vine? & who more right vnto the crop, then shee that sowed the corne? Despise not the tē∣dernes of my years, neither deeme that God measureth his
indowments by nū∣ber of daies. Hoarie senses are oftē cou∣ched vnder greene lockes; & some are riper in the Spring, then others in the Autumne of their age: a litle cloud may cast a large showre, and often∣times GOD reuea∣leth that to Babes, which he cōcealeth from the VVisest: which I alleage not
to clayme any pre∣rogatiue surmoun∣ting the rate of vsu∣all habilities, but to auoide all touch of presumption, in ad∣uising my Elders. You haue the pre∣heminence in car∣nall consanguinity; but in spiritual alli∣ance, wee are of e∣quall proximitie to our heauenly Fa∣ther. And hee may bee a Father to the
Soule, that is a Son to the Body, & re∣quite the benefit of his temporarie life, by teaching his Pa∣rent how to eschew eternall death. Nei∣ther do I speak this, as if I were ignorāt you were alreadie impathed in your voiage towards the Celestiall Hierusa∣lem, the first steps wherunto your self taught me, but that
there may be some rubbes in the way, which I happily, by reason of my more diligēt search ther∣in, being a profes∣sed Guid, may soo∣ner descry, & with∣out dishonour to your age, or dispa∣ragmēt to your per∣son, giue you war∣ning to auoid thē. Thus, dear Mother, recōmending vnto you my most boun∣den
duty, and hūbly desiring that my sincere affectiō may finde excuse of my boldnes, I take my leaue.
From LONDON-HOVSE, this 18. day of Nouember, 1606.

