



MADAM,
THere is an old Pro∣uerbe v∣sed among vs, and no lesse true
then old, that Wheresoeuer God buildeth his Church, there the Diuell buildeth his Chap∣pell: This Prouerbe hath beene found true in euery age, euen from the begin∣ning of the world, and is found true at this present day: For as God began to build his Church in righte∣ous Abell, so likewise the di∣uell began to build his Chappell in wicked Caine, the brother of Abell; and as God in these our dayes, doth build his Church, in Christian Princes, vertuous rulers, holy, and reuerend Church gouernors, learned
writers, and zealous Prea∣chers, (whom the enemies of God call Lutherans, Zwinglians, Caluinists, Here∣tiques, Schismatiques, Teachers of new learning, confoun∣ders of good order, &c.) So the diuell ceaseth not to build his Chappell in the Papists, in the Adiaphorists, in the Anabaptists, in the Ar∣minians, in the Libertines, in the Epicures, & in other such horrible monsters of wic∣kednes: Nay more, in what field the good man soweth his wheate,Mat. 13.24.25. in the very same field the enuious man soweth his tares: And albeit this Sa∣thanicall
dragon by Luci∣ferian limbes, and hereticall Hypocrites, hath euer la∣bored to enlarge his house; yet in this our age, (because his kingdome draweth to an end,) he carketh, and ca∣reth, rageth, and roareth, & like a right diuell bestir∣reth himselfe, to make his Den of theeues more ample, and large, not only among Infidells, but also among those that professe Christ; which is lamentable to see and heare. I let passe to make you acquainted with the great swarme of Secta∣ries, which almost couer
the earth like Egyptian flies,Ex. 8.21.22 being indeed those Locusts which came out of the bottom∣lesse pit.Reu. 9.2.3. Neither need I re∣cite how large, and wide a Synagogue the diuell hath built him in the pernicious sect of the bloud-sucking Papists, who are the more pestiferous to the Church of Christ, because, that being inwardly rauening Wolues,Mat. 7.14.10.16. they cloathe thēselues in sheeps apparell. No sect that euer Sathan brought into the world, is more iniurious to the blood of Christ, more despitefull to Gods word, more cruell to the Saints of
the Lord, more hurtfull to true Religion, then that sect of the Papists▪ They ouer∣throw holinesse of life, and Gods power of remiting sinnes, by a distinction of veniall sinnes, by a concei∣ted Purgatory, by saying o∣uer a Pater noster, an Aue Maria cortaine times toge∣ther; by Indulgences, Tren∣talls, Diriges, Pardons, and such like trumperies▪ They make the obedience of Christ, of no force by their merits, his sufferings of no value by their satisfactions, their pennance, whippings, eremitical progressions, &c.
They ouerturne the institu∣tion of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by their idolatrous sacrifice of the Masse.
To instance in some par∣ticulars: Christ fare at the table when hee instituted his last supper, and turned his face to his Disciples the Papists stand at an Altar, & turne their backes to the people. Christ spake open∣ly and in a plaine manner, the papists either whisper to themselues, or speake in such a tongue as cannot bee vnderstood. Christ gaue the Sacrament of his body and
blood to his Disciples for to eate and drinke; the Pa∣pists (vncharitable Hel∣luones) giue nothing to any man, but eate and drinke all alone. Christ ministred the mystery of his body in com∣mon bread, the Papists mi∣nister printed waser-cakes. Christ ministred pure wine, the Papists wine (if they mi∣nister any) mixt with wa∣ter. Christ gaue the sacra∣ment into his Disciples hands; the Papists put it in∣to the peoples mouthes, as if their fingers were too base. Christ deliuered the sacrament to his Disciples,
saying, Take ye, eate ye, drinke ye: the Papists deliuer it not, but say, Behold, honour, wor∣ship, reuerence your Maker here: and then they hang it vp in a pixe, or a boxe, in so much, that often in the interim of the priests ab∣sence, a mouse creepeth into the boxe, and eateth vp their great Creator. Christ gaue the sacrament vnder both kindes, the Papists but vn∣der one kinde; they steale a∣way the wine. Christ com∣manded his Disciples to eate his Supper in remem∣brance of him, the Papists say they haue him already
in their hands, in their mouthes, in their boxes, in their pixes, &c.
These, and other such er∣rours (else-where met with-all) hath the diuell brought into the Church of Christ by the Papists, about the do∣ctrine of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: And (such is their impudency) they shame not to father them vpon the word of God, and ancient Fathers; when as both the word of God, and the wri∣ting of ancient Fathers are extreame enemies vnto thē I cease to speake how they
hinder the liberty and dig∣nity of the Word; how they inuert the order of the institution of the Lords Supper, how they peruert the meaning of our Sauiors words, how they trouble the Church with a late de∣uised, but not their least re∣spected errors of Transub∣stantiation. Your Ladiship cannot bee ignorant how Satan by these his hellish in∣struments, and by all means which they put in practise, endeauoureth to pull down the sides of Gods house, that the walls of his owne Chappell might be the big∣ger.

Who then must stand in in the gap, rolle away this stone, preuent this euil, stop those wide mouthes, pluck the venome from vnder their tongues, and bee able to keepe in Grace, the ordi∣nances of the Lord, but you, & such as be of your worth, ranke, and profession? Ther∣fore I haue made the more bold to prefixe your Ladi∣ships name in the front of this my weake Infant, as a Patronage of it against al its enemies. And though it be a recompence too mean for your good word, and coun∣tenāce toward me; yet it be∣ing
the best gift that my po∣uerty can affoord, I doubt not but according to your milde disposition, you will accept of of it. The matter it brings, is the Doctrine of the Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per, opened in a plaine and familiar manner, not sutable to the nice curiosity of our times, not elegant in words, and without all affectation, vnlesse of plainnesse, which in preaching I euer counted the best eloquence: The na∣ked and naturall sense of the Text (if I be not much mis∣taken) is truely and faithful∣ly embowelled, and withall
so thorowly applied, that Gods Church and people may thence reape much be∣nefit.
Whatsoeuer it is, I thought good to publish it: and id many respects me mouing to commend the protecti∣on of it to your Ladiship. 1. In respect of your zeale, and loue to the truth: therein i∣mitating that patterne of pi∣ety, the vertuous, godly, and holy Gentlewoman, Mistris Mary Pemberton your hus∣bands mother, whom the whole countrey (as I haue beene tolde) hath highly e∣steemed for the soundnesse
of true religion, and for her cōstant perseuerance there∣in. 2. In respect of your con∣uersation, which (I speake to Gods glory) is such as may be accounted a mirror of vertue: for to your great∣nesse you ioyne goodnesse, to your worthinesse good workes, to your knowledge Christian kindnesse and be∣nignity, &c. Besides, your care to bring vp your sweet children (the Lords bles∣sings, and his rich inheri∣tance) in the awe of the Lord, is so great and conti∣nuall, that no day ouer-slips you to sanctifie them. Other
godly and heauenly carria∣ges, wherby you haue ador∣ned your holy profession, and wherein you haue ex∣celled many daughters that haue done vertuously, shall praise you in the gates. 3. In respect of your singular loue to al Gods Messengers, welcoming them like An∣gells, though but strangers, into your house: hereby a good euidence is ministred to your owne heart, that you are translated from death to life. 4. Lastly, in regard of your countenance, good will, and fauour to mee, which on my part is euery
way vndeserued. I must needes confesse that I am so deepely obliged vnto your Ladiship, that the significa∣tion of my thankefulnesse doth in equity belong vnto you.
These are the motiues that drewe on this my pre∣sumption to dedicate this my poore labour to your Ladiship. In publishing it I am sure to meete with the censures of carping readers, who will taxe me much of rashnesse: Yet let such con∣sider that at the making of the first Tabernacle, not on∣ly such as brought blew silk,
and purple, and scarlet, but e∣uen the poorest sort, that brought Goates haire, and Rammes skinnes, were accep∣ted. How meane soeuer it be, if it may any way benefit Gods Church, especially if it may be any small meanes to further you to the right vnderstanding of the Sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper, & to build you vp towards the Kingdome of heauen, I shall gaine that I most de∣sire.
Thus crauing pardon for my boldnesse, I commend your Ladiship to the Grace of God, who protract your
dayes and yeares, according to his graces bestowed on you; and prosper and finish the good work that he hath begunne, by adding that which is yet lacking to your faith and graces, till he haue fitted you vnto, and filled you with glory and immortality. Amen.
 Rushden;March 19. 1621.
