



SIR the mistery of iniquity doth now worke.Gr. l. 4. ep. 38. Never was Antichrist and his army of Priests (as Gregory cal∣leth them) more enraged to op∣pugne the true Church thē in these daies, conceauing in likely hoode that he hath but a short time,Rev. 12.12. and that the time is at hand, which the Lord hath promised, shal bring vpō Babel the vengeance of the Lord and the vengeance of his temple.Ier 51.6.11. Rev. 18.20. The Lord make good his word & hasten his worke that the heavens may reioice, and the Apostles and Pro∣phets. Rome was sometimes famous for her faith, but now it is become Babylon as Ierome in his time confessed,Hier. ad Mar∣cell viduam & praef. l. Didimi de Spir. Sancto. Euseb. l. 3. c. 26. & l. 4. c. 21. praising God, that he was freed from it. It cōceived about the times of Traian saith Egesippus, and now hath brought forth the man of sin whose pride, doing reverence to no mortal man. Cerem. Rom. l. 3. Sect. 1. fol. 120. and his challendge of the ti∣tle of supreame and immediat Pastour, are badges of An∣tichrist Gr, l. 6. ep. 30. This purple Idoll,Reg. Indict. 15. causeth traditions to be matched with the written word of God, and is therein iniurious to the wisdome of God; he causeth mans merits to bee mingled with the merits of Christ therein iniurious to the grace of God; he causeth divine worship to be communi∣cated to stockes and stones, therein iniurious to the glory of God. Thus the daughter of Syon is become the Whore of Babylon. In the councell of Lateran strict charge was gi∣ven to all Preachers that none should speake of the com∣ming of Antichrist,Caranza sess. 11.19. Dec. 1516. Praeside Leone. 10. which prohibition argued the guilt of their consciences. But now the Pope hath his followers in tri∣umph to giue him the number of the beast as those books of Benedictus de Benedictis Bononiae excus. Anno. 1608. and
Theses Caraffae Neapoli excusae 1609.Take the nu∣meral letters V. 5. L. 50. V. 5. V. 5. l. 1. C. 100. D 500 & it is the num∣ber of the beast 665. Rev. 13.18. dedicated vnto him with this inscription PAƲLO V. ƲICEDEO, do suffi∣ciently proue, as is vrged by that Noble Phillip Mornai; Some would haue Antichrist to be but one man standing vpon the greeke article . 1. Ioh. 2.18. It is in Bell. l. 3. c. 2. de Rom. Pont. By as good reason there should bee but one Davell because Christ saith , The Adver∣sary came & sowed tares, Mat. 13.25. & but one righteous man, because S. Paul saith, that , The man of God may be absolute.2. Tim. 3.17. How truely many Popes of Rome haue deserved this name I haue laboured to prooue in this Sermon which I present vnto your Worship. I confesse the argument is great & know that the blame of imperfection is so much the more when it lighteth vpon a high choise.D. Sutcliffe D Abbot. D. Downam. Mr G. Powel. But this subiect being handled so plentifully by many worthies in our Church, I vndertooke the burthen the more willing∣ly, and now offer this mite (Talents I haue none) into the publique treasury. I was importuned to publish this Ser∣mon by some learned and religious friends, leasure fitted not since the preaching of it so opportunely as now. I dedi∣cate it to you as the chiefe Patron of my studies by whose means I obtained my setled abode in this place. That Hon. Iudge your Reverend Father did countenance & encourage, my aged and painfull Father in his Ministry in that flow∣rishing towne of Shrewsbury. Since, your favours haue beene extraordinary and bountifull. Accept from me, I beseech you these small fruits of my studies, as a pledge of my true observaunce, vnto you, being a sincere lover of the truth, & generally honoured for your excellent learning. So wishing to your good worship the encrease of all good gra∣ces and blessings, as also to your elect Lady & sweet oliue-branch, I take my leaue.
From my study at Exeter Colledge, Oct. 28.1614.

