



Right Honourable,
IT is the great worke of God, to reclaime from their offences, those whom he loueth, by corrections: To this end as he bestoweth fauours vpon some in anger, as he did Quailes vpon the Israelites: so stri∣keth he others in mercie, that they may be zealous, and re∣pent. The late Pestilence amongst vs of this Citie,Re, 3.19. and the other infected parts of the Kingdome, bringing wonderfull Plagues, and sore sicknesses: came rushing with such vio∣lence,De. 28.27.58.59. because wee did not serue the Lord our God with ioyfulnes, hauing aboundance of all things; and because we did not feare this glorious name, The Lord: yet mercie she∣wed it selfe stronger then Iudgement,2. Sa. 24 16. and vpon our weake and vnworthy humiliation, the destroying Angel hath in a great measure stayed his hand: Beautie therefore being giuen vnto vs for ashes, the oyle of Ioy for mourning, & the garment of praise for the spirit of heauines,Js. 61.3. The Lord is to be praised. To this end hath our Royall zealous annointed Soueraigne, sent forth a solemne command: This, to fasten as a memorandum in the eares and hearts of those commit∣ted to my poore charge, I endeauoured, By King Dauids

memoriall, of what God had done for him. A subiect fit for an Angell from heauen to comment vpon.
A THANKSGIVING: All the workes of the Lord praise him: Angels, Heauens, Sunne, Moone, Starres, showers, dewe, winde, Winter, Summer: Wels, Whales, Fowles, Beasts: All holy and humble men of heart desire to remember the Lord. This is here pressed, wherein my on∣ly ayme was to speake what was plaine, profitable, neces∣sarie to the glory of God, and good of the people. This Mite I now offer to the Treasurie (Talents I haue none) Knowing that in a willing minde, it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that hee hath not, 2. Cor. 8.2. Whatsoeuer it is, I am emboldened, by your late Noble encouragements, to present it to your Honours acceptation, protection, perusall. It is the ioy of many, that God hath giuen you a large, iust, and faithfull heart: a desire rather to be an vmpire of equity,Amb. de Theo∣dosio Aequitatis Iudex nonpaenae arbiter. Ps. 82.1. then a Decreer of seuerity; and as God hath exalted you, so you remem∣ber by your resolute, yet meeke carriage, that God standeth in the Congregation of the mighty, he iudgeth among the Gods. I shall still rest a continuall Peticioner to the throne of grace, that in these slipperie times, all the foundations of the earth being out of course, you may be kept by the po∣wer of God, through faith vnto saluation.
New Rents 1626. Febru. 10.

