



RIGHT HONORABLE.
THat Speech of Salomon is,Eccl. 12.12. lc. Alex. l. 1. str. p. 1. Hic scripto, ille vece praedicat. Animae sunt soe∣tus Orationes. Id. ib. Mar. 12.41, 43. Cyp. Tr. de op. & elcemos.  and must continue true: of making many books there is no end; while the world con∣tinueth, occasion will not bee wanting of speaking and writing. Our Church hath many deseruing Labourers, who by voyce and pen seeke to build vp the walles of Ierusalem. My desire is to cast my Mite into the Treasury, as that poore widdow did, whom our Sauiour commended, not considering quantum, sed ex quanto de disset; how much, but of how much she offered: respecting rather the affection of the giuer, then the quantity of the guist. This Sermon (by the earnest sollicitati∣on of some religious hearers and my deare fauorers) was brought from the Crosse to the Presse, and is now licenced to be a generall Remembrancer of all those who shall read or heare it;Spartian. in vita Adrian. Imp. to whom I wish as happy a memory as that of Adrian, who perfectly
(euer afterward) knew them that had but once spo∣ken vnto him. In Morall actions and ciuill affaires feare oftentimes hath hindred the memory of the wisest; as it is recorded of Demosthenes, that hee was at a Nonplus beeing to speake before Philip King of Macedon: and as it fell out to Theophra∣stus before the Areopagites of Athens. But a holy feare of Gods name, must bee the ground of our Re∣membrance and Repentance. Your Honour hath obtained a blessed report for your Noble Vertues, and imitation of your Heroicall Brother.Sir Phil. Sidney. I haue therefore aduentured to dedicate this poore labour vnto your protection, to lodge safely from the snarling of biting censurers, as vnder the couert of Minerua's shield. Your honorable countenance so lately and cheerefully ready to call me (from this stipend which I enioy amongst many louing and wor∣thy friends) to a more ample maintenance (though God disposed otherwise of it) hath obliged mee to ac∣knowledge by that little cunning which my right hand hath;S. Olau. in Southwarke. so great a Kindnes. I can seale my thank∣fulnes by no better a testimony then this;Ps. 137.5. crauing still the continuance of your honorable fauour. God the great rewarder continue his blessings vn∣to you and your Honorable Lady and hopefull chil∣dren, and at the resurrection of the Iust, crowne hee you all with euerlasting glory.

