



RIGHT honorable my singu∣lar good Ladie, I can write no pleasant thinges, the which the great states much desire, neither anie eloquent termes which this world doth require: but as your honour doth know my rude simplicitie (yet through Gods great mercie alwaies grounded vpon his in∣fallible veritie) it pleaseth your honour to giue me leaue sometimes to write vnto you. And now ha∣uing gathered some profite my selfe, by a booke of that excellent man Theodore Beza, written in La∣tine, and dedicate to my most honorable Lord: so am I bold to put foorth some part of the same into English, which I thought most expedient for you, and to present it to your honour with this short pre∣face. The which though it be short and rude, yet do I beseech your honour to consider it, as a preparatiue to moue your godlie mind to the more diligent me∣ditation
 of these Arguments of the Psalmes, which are verie profitable, and to this Paraphrasis, which is a briefe and a plaine declaration of the meaning of the holie Ghost, who did endite the Psalmes, and set them foorth by his secretaries, Dauid and others, as shal appeare in their places. First then I beseech your Honour to consider the state of our time, and compare it with former times, that we may see what is like to come vpon vs, vnles we do watch and pray, and bring foorth the fruites of vnfeigned repen∣tance. We do reade in the histories of the Kings of Iudah, who were the deare people of God, how that after the death of Manasses, that idolatrous and cruel King, who had brought in idolatrie againe af∣ter that his father Hezekias had reformed religion, Amon reigned but two yeares, when God in mercie stirred vp good Iosias, who restored the religion, and brought it againe to ful perfection, and made a co∣uenant betwixt the Lord and the people, and al the people stoode to the couenant, 2. Kings. 23, 3. the which true religion was continued 31. yeares, euen al the time of Iosias, yet is it written in the 2. Kings 23. verses 25, 26, 27. Like vnto Iosias was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with al his heart, and with al his soule, & with al his might, according to al the lawe of Moses, neither after him arose there anie like him. Notwithstanding, the Lord turned not from the fearcenes of his great wrath, wherewith he was angrie against Iudah, be∣cause of al the prouocations wherewith Manasses had prouoked him. Therfore the Lord said, I wil put Iuda also out of my sight, as I haue sent away Israël,
 and wil cast off this Citie Ierusalem, which I haue chosen, and the house whereof I haue said, My name shal be there. Againe 2. Kings 24.3. Surelie by the commandement of the Lord came this vpon Iu∣dah, that he might put them out of his sight, for the sinnes of Manasses, according to al that he did, and for the innocent bloud that he shedde (for he filled Ierusalem with innocent bloud) therefore the Lord would not pardon it. The which terrible words and threatnings against Gods chosen people, when I read them, they cause me to tremble and feare for our state here in England. And I do earnestlie request your honour, and al that feare God, diligentlie to meditate these and such like places of the holie hi∣stories, which I omit for breuitie sake. For besides that our religion is not yet brought to ful perfection in these 22. yeares (the which thing I feare wil be laid to our charge) the horrible sinnes of former times are not yet purged with true teares of repen∣tance. For manie do yet carie their idols in their hearts, manie do waite for the occasion to shew the like crueltie that they did before: few do feele how horriblie they did offend Gods sacred maiestie in e∣recting of idols, contrarie to Gods holie comman∣dement, especialie in kneeling downe and worship∣ping that wafer cake, the vilest and weakest idol that euer was imagined vpon the earth, both for the smalnes of the substance, and the huge heapes of er∣rours therein maintained. The most part make that their reuolting vnto Antichrist, and renouncing of the Gospel of Christ in Q. Maries time, but a laugh∣ing matter. Two or three or none, do worthily lament
 their fal with Peter. Wherefore I can not but feare I saie, least the like punishment wil come vpon vs for the like sinnes committed in the daies of Q. Ma∣rie, for al our outward shew of religion, as came vp∣pon Iudah for their former sinnes committed in the time of Manasses. Therefore haue we great cause to praie vnto the Lord our God to be merciful vnto vs, to our Queene, and Countrie: that so by earnest praiers, either we may turne awaie his fearce wrath from vs altogither, or at the least with our Hezekias (our gratious Queene I meane) to obteine that it come not in our daies.
To this purpose is this Booke of the Psalmes most necessarie for euerie Christian, not to reade them for fashion and custome onlie, either in a knowne or vnknowne language, which were to take the name of God in vaine: but to meditate them in their hearts, and so by earnest and continual inuocation and hartie praiers to moue the Lord our God to mercies, as his holie seruants haue by the like meanes alwaies found mercie before vs. For where∣as al other scriptures do teach vs what God saith vnto vs, these praiers of the saints do teach vs, what we shal saie vnto God, and how we must prepare our selues to appeare before his maiestie, both in pro∣speritie and aduersitie: and therefore are they dailie to be vsed with great reuerence and humilitie. And surelie these Arguments, & this Paraphrasis of the psalmes, set forth of late by that great learned man Beza, do so liuelie paint forth the zealous and fer∣uent praiers, which both the whole Church genera∣lie, and the saints of God particularlie haue vsed
 from time to time, that we haue great cause to praise God, that hath giuen vs such patternes and examples at this present, to stirre vp our dul hearts to the sense of our sinnes, to feare Gods iudgements, and to seeke for mercie betimes. And if it please God to giue vs this grace, thus to do vnfeignedlie, and without al hypocrisie, of this are we sure, that though we can not turne awaie the general plagues that are threatned and seene to hang ouer England: yet that al we that can be stirred vp with like affections with these saints of God, our fathers and brethren of old, to vtter our misliking and loathing of our owne sinnes, and of the sinnes of the people, and so seeke for Gods mercies, shal be marked to saluation, when the plague commeth, as God himselfe hath promised. Ezekiel, 9. Yea, though the perusing of these Psalmes can worke no more in vs, but to cause vs to consider how far we are from that zeale of Gods glorie, that desire of building his house, that comfort of his word and sacraments, that vprightnes of life, that faith, hope, and patience in afflictions, that was in Dauid and the other seruants of God, that made these Psalmes, and so bring vs to some more earnest de∣sire, and longing for the same vertues: yet wil they be verie profitable vnto vs, to be diligentlie read and wel weighed in our mindes. And these Argu∣ments and Paraphrasis giuing the true sense of the psalmes in so plaine words (as no man hath done be∣fore) wil greatlie further vs to such godlie medita∣tions. Now as the latine Psalmes of Beza belong to my most honorable Lord by right, as dedicate and sent vnto him from farre: so these english Psalmes
 translated at home by one of your seruants (who is wholie my Lords and yours in the seruice of the great Lord) do by as good right pertaine to your honour, who but by some such meanes of translation can haue smal commoditie of the others, although you haue some propertie therein, because it is my Lords your husbands, to whom if mine old forworne rude simplicitie, vnfit for this fine world could haue brought forth anie thing worthie his honour, I would not haue bin so long silent. But I humblie beseech both your honours to take thus in good part this poore mite, as that of the widowe, which did testifie hir great good wil in a right smal matter. And as I am most bound, I wil praie for you both, that God our merciful father, for his Christes sake, would vouchsafe to graunt you to reade the Psalmes of Dauid, and to meditate them by the same spirit with Dauid, whereby ye may feele true comfort in al troubles of mind and bodie, as did Dauid, and so in the end be crowned in the heauens with Dauid, and reigne for euer with Christ our spiritual Da∣uid in euerlasting glorie, Amen. Ashbie 7. of March. 1579.

