


THE Prophet Isaiah by the motion of Gods holie spirit, did long since in great zeale vtter this holy saying. The righteous perisheth,Isa. 57.1. and no man considereth it in heart, and mercifull men are taken away, and no man vn∣derstandeth that the righteous is taken away from the e∣uill to come. Which, as it hath in former times bene true, so is it prooued most true in these our misera∣ble and desperate daies: as may hereby appeare, for that although the Lord withdraweth and taketh out of this world by death many of his principall and ex∣cellent seruants, thereby setting vp (as it were) prodi∣gious Comets, to premonish all men not only of the vncertainty of this natural life, but also that his iudge∣ments are neare hand: yet few doe so much as once turne their eyes toward this hand of God; and few∣er doe make vse thereof, and applie it to their heart, for the increase of true godlinesse and reformation of life.

Against which estate & disposition gracelesse, and more then brutish, some what was vttered at the Fu∣nerall of your said worthie Parents: which although it hath hetherto lyen in silence, and beene whollie suppressed, yet nowe by the grace of God it is come to light.
The discourse (I confesse) is homely & rude: and the rather, because that in the extreame colde when it was deliuered, the naturall instruments and partes of the Preacher, did performe their duties not so wel as at other times. But seeing it doth containe no∣thing but the plaine & simple truth, there is no cause whie it should feare the curiositie of proude carpers, and deprauers. Whatsoeuer it bee, I doe heere pre∣sent it to you all ioyntlie, and that for diuers reasons.
The first is, in regard of the manifolde benefites and fauours, which I and mine haue enioyed both from your selues, and at the hands of your saide de∣ceased Parents: which because I can in no wise re∣quite, I content my selfe with this slender significa∣tion of thankfullnes (following therein the example of manie in all times, who haue by small gifts, as of a roote, or water taken vp in the hollowe of the hand, expressed their loue, and dispatched dutie towards great persons) and doe by prayer commit a fuller re∣compense to bee made by him who hath promised not to forget a cup of colde water bestowed vpon a∣nie of his.
Secondlie, for that the treatise doth not onely put you in minde of your fraile and mortall condition,
euen nowe in this your youthfull and flourishing e∣state; that so you might walke in feare, and euerie houre fitte your selues for the Lordes calling of you away by death: but also containeth, or rather brief∣lie toucheth diuers necessarie pointes of Christian doctrine and religion: which may serue as a remedie against the horrible prophanenesse, Atheisme, and contempt of GOD, which (as some great floud) doth at this time, ouerflow the bancks of this whole Land.
Lastly, to stirre you vp (although forward of your selues) to followe and treade in the holie steppes of your worthy Parents gone before: the traces wher∣of, are in this Sermon trulie and faithfully set downe, without all flatterie or ostentation.
They were both of them carefull in their life to prouide for your good and happy estate, both in this life, and the life to come. If therefore you shall after their death, runne on in the course of righteousnes, & holines, of wisdome, temperance, zeale, and loue to religion, with all other good vertues: you shall not onely honor them heere, but also shall shortly meete with them in the kingdome of heauen; where chil∣dren and Parents shall incessantlie together praise & glorifie God for euermore.
You are (as it were) set vpon a stage: the eyes of manie are fixed vpon you. If you doe well, you shall satisfie the expectation of your friends, & make their hearts reioyce: if you doe ill, your enemies wil be glad, and your wel willers lament.

In the meane season, receiue, I beseech you this small gift, with the same affection wherein it is deli∣uered by his hand, who doth daylie in his vnworthy prayers, craue earnestlie of our mercifull Father, all good blessings and graces in your behalfe: & (when they are according to his promise, performed to you) will thinke all labours & indeauours, in what respect soeuer, fullie satisfied. And thus in hast, I com∣mend you to the blessing and tuition of the same Almightie God.
 Denham in Suff. Septemb. 1606.
