



WHat your Honour commanded, I haue performed, as God en∣abled. This Sermon which by your powerfull Authoritie I preached, is now at the request of many religious friends prin∣ted, and beggeth shelter and protection vnder your Lord∣ships iudicious and reuerend approbation. It was harkened to attentiuely by the Honourable Lord MAYOR, and the publishing of it afterwards earnestly requested by him, whose true loue to learning, may challenge a greater duety from more worthy hands, then these rude first-fruits of my paines at the Crosse. Besides, my excuses may be, the raritie of Sermons in
this Argument which is so necessary, the manifesting of my desire of doing good to my vttermost poore pow∣er in Gods Church, the testifying to the world that I desire to giue some testimony of my vnfained thank∣fulnesse to your Honour, who countenanced mee in the Vniuersitie, where you were a zealous, religious, and worthy Gouernour. Sinne is more powerfull, now, in the dottage of the world, then it was in the nonage, so that there is neede of Pulpit and Presse, to represse it. I know your loue to the truth, which hath encouraged many, and now is so necessary to be manifested, the loue of many growing cold. My weekely labour, in that Pastorall charge, which re∣quireth much paynes, constrained me to take vp those plaine notes, which I deliuered, and now haue retur∣ned them, with an acknowledgement of the Authors names, which is the best reward that can be giuen to them in the iudgement of Patritius,Patrit. ep. l. de instit. resp. Bas. p. 1. ad Gr. Ier. apol. adu. Ruff. Gr. de Basil. and the aduise of Basil to Gregory: Whose names concealed may brand a man with the note of theeuery, as Ierome speaketh. God hath made your Honour a Kingly Pallace of Elo∣quence, and placed you, in the eye of this Land, ouer this Honourable Citty: goe on in defending Reli∣gion; so the Lord shall continue his graces to your Honour in this life, and multiply them with greater glory in a better life; for which I shall pray while I liue, and rest

