



MOst reverend, religious, & right∣ly honourable, so small a present for so great a Patrone is not tolle∣rable by the rule of proportion, es∣peciallie when so great weaknesse lyeth open to the eie of so great worthinesse. My apprehension at the first conceited mee so strongly that I designed this to aternal oblivion & resolved that it shoulde haue dyed and beene buried in the place it first breathed, but fearing lest an action of presumption would bee commenced against mee, for burying so poore an Orphan in so princely a place as the Kings Chappel, I adventured to lay it in the graue of the presse, wrap∣ping it in these sheetes, as in a Syndon, & mantling it on a sable letter, as in a hearse, and yet after foure aates pressing to death, it revived, and is crept to present it selfe vnto your Grace presuming that as you affoorded it gratious attention at the preaching, so you will affoord it gratious acception in the printing. If there bee anie thing worthy Patronadge in it, or in mee, I humbly pro∣strate it, reioycing much I may tender any observāce vn∣to him, whom his roiall Maiestie, the gracious Queene,
my Princely Master, the noblest Personadges, the grea∣test schollers, both the Vniversities, the Church, Commō wealth, arts and schooles, doe for his studies, conferen∣ces, labours, & imploymēts, acknowledge, reverence, and preferre to the Confluence of all honour. I must confesse it had manie verie honorable friends who desired after the preaching to bee acquainted with it, but I was then doubtful whether I should publish it or no, somtimes dis∣solving it, sometimes resolving for it, til now at length I haue adventured to let it see the sunne. It is the first tender of my dutie, and the first dedication frō our Vni∣versity Presse, since the time your Grace was pleased to entertaine the protection of vs. The Lord preserue your Grace to continue for manie and manie yeeres, that the Church may long enioie so worthie a Piller, the Common wealth so wise a Counseller, and this famous Vniver∣sity so honourable a Chauncellour.
Exeter Coll. this 19. of June. 1608.

