



RIght honorable, and worthily renowmed Lords, such is the mutabilitye of times vnconstant motion: as that things wel done cannot challenge, to themselues, the cer∣tainty of their euent, nor without suspect of euill (misconstrued inputation) build their hope. And when the wel meaning actions of mighty men cannot (in perma∣nent stability) stand cleared from the after-rays'd-vp misty Meteors which may encomber them: what then shoulde I expect (being no other then pouerty it selfe) but that this work, by me aduentured should with my self dangerously run vpon vncertaine hopes? although the vprightnes of my conscience vowes, I haue not herunto bin lead by any parti∣cular inuectiue spleen or turbulent affection: only a priuate consideration made me thinke, that it might now be a time in which the praise of honours worthines might haue his place, and not any longer by a violent imposition be taxed with vndeserued euill. It were inhumane tyranny, to forbid the vertues of the dead to be cōmended: and no lesse cruelty to charge the deceased with vncōmitted offences. There are certain polititians in this age, not vnlike the Grecian Ora∣tors, which Diogenes called , thrise double men: their tongues and pens are miserably valiant: they may well

be tearmed three times thrise double minded men: theyr ayery statiōs tottering stands aloft; like windmils placed vp∣pon a mountayns top, whose sayles can turne themselues to imbrace the benefit of each variable blast: but, being climbd vnto an extraordinary height, are oft times by an vnex∣pected storme sodainly throwne headlong downe, and bro∣ken at the mountains foote: leauing their recuerlesse ruines to remayne vnmoaned monuments of their presumptuous mounting. Some goulden mony mouthed eloquence, that v∣seth a detractors Oratry, may stop the vnequall current of his fine wits most grosse ingendred flux, by fetching from the Tyrant Nero a very wel prescribed documēt. For plain∣ly thus his affirmation sayth: that it is no part of a wise man thence to drawe credit to himselfe, from whence proceedeth discredit to his friend. Is it not maruell that a rhetoricall politician should be lesse wise then wicked Nero was? & that his sentence shoulde directly call him foole? yet thus it hap∣peneth, when with the change of time, Time seruers vse to say, Hac non successit: alia aggrediendum est via.
When honor and vnstaind nobility, by ill aduise and in∣considerate thoughts, vntimely falls into some daungerous accident: then though the lawe, in robes of iustice armd, with quick pursuite doth follow euils amisse: yet should no minde on such dependance dwell: as if his wisht▪ for time of triumph were imbrac't, when he might glory in honored vertues fall: and like a lumpe of proude degenerate brasen insolence, e∣uen in the gall of enuie, hate, and malice steept, scornefully impugne the honor of a Lands renowmed noblenesse. God, with my soule, an vncontrowled witnes beare: I not desire to speake against the iustice of the lawe, nor any honorable ma∣gistrate in place of Councel or of gouernment: only my words may neerly glance at such whose proud demeanour, & insul∣ting

violence, made to the world an apparant demonstration that they were most ioyfull actors in a mournefull tragedy: but now the iustice of the heauens decree hath most iustly throwne themselues vnto the stroke of the selfe same iudge∣ment. And now, my honorable Lords, when I looke back vnto my owne vnworthinesse, my Muse doth sound retrayte, and bids me stay the further occurrence of some other thinges, which wold most willingly be issuing forth. And for this lit∣tle worke already done by me, with lowe submission I intreate your pardon: and do solemnly protest, that the vnfained loue I beare vnto the late Honorable, and yet still honored Earle of Essex, hath with an ineuitable force caused me to make this briefe description of his life and death. And though I desire to be freed from a Poets name; yet because the musick of a mourning verse doth best consort with sorrowes passion, I haue made choyse thereof, in hope your L L. will be plea∣sed to excuse my vnpolisht, rough, vnsmoothed Poe∣try. My greatest studie with religious care hath sought to build my words vpon the ground of truth: & hauing brought my labor to an end, I knew not better vnto whome to dedi∣cate the same, then to your Honors. Not for my sake then, but for his, whose vertues I desire should liue, be pleased to receiue this well meaning worke into your loues protection: and thus, with all submissiue humblenesse, a souldier humbly throwes his liues seruice at your Honors feet.

