



RIGHT WORSHIPFVL,
IT may seeme strange that I haue
ioyned you all together in one In∣scription,
when euery one of you
seuerally are worthy of a better
gift then here is exhibited, or by
me can be giuen; yet herein I haue
done no more then nature, brother∣ly
affection, and Christianity hath
done. That I haue clothed this in the liuery of your Pa∣tronages,
I might haue giuen many reasons: First, for
that you are louers of true religion, and fauourers of all
true professors. Secondly, because it was preached at the
interring of your deere brother. Thirdly, because I had
rtaher the whole world shold condemne me as vniust, &
the curious and captious carpe at me, then you should
so much as thinke me vnthankfull. I owe vnto you all a
double debt, of Loue, and of Seruice. Of loue, the
more I pay, the more I owe; though a debt once paid, be

no more due, yet loue being paid, is still due. Seruice I
will bee ready to pay to the vttermost, though it come
short of your great deserts, and of my manifold desires: I
that yeeld to all in learning, will yeeld to none in loue
and seruice to you. But to you right worshipful and wor∣thy
Patron, I owe a treble debt, of Loue, of Seruice, and
Thankfulnesse: Of loue, for your extraordinary kind∣nesse
in preferring me, and for that countenance you
haue continually giuen to my weake Ministerie: Of ser∣uice,
such as I can performe, I will not faile; daily besee∣ching
God for the increase of his spirituall graces here,
and eternal glory hereafter, both to your selfe, and al such
as are dere vnto you. Of thankfulnesse, in patronizing
me being absent, kindly entreating me present, and for
affecting me long before I was by you preferred. Of some
I shall be hardly censured, of others thought ambitious in
seeking mens fauours. For this I care not, so the well-affected
Christian may think of the shortnesse of his life,
and thereby prepare to dye; and being ready, to bee wil∣ling
to dye, and you be pleasd to procure a quiet passage
vnder your patronages for those few indigested medita∣tions,
which were by Gods permission, and his assisting
Spirit, first preached, and now published: I ascribe the
patronage to you, the vse to the godly, and the successe to
God. The God of peace giue you the peace of God which
passeth all humane vnderstanding, and affoord you ma∣ny
comforts and ioyes in this life to the end, and in the
next his ioy without end.

