



RIght worshipfull,
These two follow∣ing Sermons, being preached before an honored assemblie whereto I was a stranger, I could not conueniently dedicate them to any person, or particular partie thereof, least
ignorance of their conditions, and want of knowledge and acquaintance should accuse me of presumption, and too much boldnesse: The remembrance therefore of your selfe, of your countenance, and fauour towards me became a sudden ob∣iect, emboldening me to send them a∣broad vnder your name: because (as I am conscious of your pious practises, so) I haue and doe know you a Patrone of Religion, and godlinesse, esteeming it your greatest gaine to know Christ Ie∣sus, and to be found in him.
In these Sermons you shall find nothing sauouring of Affectation, or inclining vn∣to ostentation, but rather affection to the soules of the Flocke, for from the heart-roote in Iesus Christ doe I desire their saluation. The subiect of them is, The godly Mans Inquisition, wherein you shall see the estate of man by reason of sin and corruption layd open, viz. that he is a stranger to the Lord, a vagrant from the Common-wealth of Israell, a lost sheepe, in bondage vnto sinne and Sathan, with∣out Christ, a child of wrath, a prodigall,
&c. And because to loose the fauour and countenance of God, is of all conditions the most miserable, a vassallage without exception, I haue in the second place set downe the meanes how to get out, which is diligent seeking of the Lord in prayer, faith, feare, repentance, holinesse of life. Wherein also, that the dutie may be the more set forward, the place, the matter, the way, the manner, the measure, the end and time of seeking are in their due places propounded. And whereas there be certaine times when the Lord will specially be found, and certaine times when he will not be found, I haue in the last place laid downe both, exhorting all men in the conclusion, to take the pre∣sent day, least the ouer-passing of it through negligence, keepe them eternal∣ly from it, and so bring them into euerla∣sting separation from the presence of God. This is an Abbreuiation of the se∣quents, which I haue presumed as shad∣dowed with your allowance to publish. Be you pleased to accept it, be no seuere examiner, but a mild pervser, and also a
practiser of the continents, and let affec∣tion to the matter, somewhat mediate with your iudgement to censure not as you see, but as I meane. I confesse of my selfe, that I am vnable to carry the least sticke to the Altar, and vnworthie of all others to prescribe either dyet or directi∣on to any, that hath but touched the hem of Christs garment, yet am I not ashamed to humble my selfe to others view, that by the mercie seene on me, who haue beene thus sarre led into the secrets of God, they may be likewise encouraged to presse within the border of the Mount, when the horne of saluation shall be blowne. As I am I craue your pardon for my boldnesse, and the conti∣nuance of your fauour, leauing these Ser∣mons to your vse and practise, and your selfe to the Lord, in whom I rest euer

