



COnsidering with my selfe (most deare and louing mother) the great care that is committed vnto the Gouernours of Families (namely) not onely to prouide things necessa∣ry for the wel-being of the1. Tim. 5.8. bo∣dies of their Families, both chil∣dren and seruants,Deut. 11.19. but also to teach and instruct them in the knowledge of God his will, and the right com∣munication with him, in the parti∣cular parts of his worship and ser∣uice: the performance of which
thing maketh the
 bee bothPro. 31.15.30. commended of the people of God, and also approoued of God him∣selfe.Ester 4.16. Gen. 18.19 And also considering, that in regard of the great imployments of my Father, by which he is neces∣sarily with-held from a constant a∣biding with his Family: In which respect, the greater both care and paines lieth vpon your selfe. I haue therefore (as a helpe to you in the weightiest of those your charges) here sent vnto you certaine Questi∣ons and Answers, opening and ex∣plaining both the nature and also the vse of both the Sacraments of Christ his Institution, entreating you in the absence of my Father1. Cor. 14.35. (for in his presence you remaine as a learner, not an instructer) you would make it your practise to in∣struct your Family in the know∣ledge of them. I hope I shal not need
to alleadge
 to per∣swade you to the performance of this duty, for that which resteth as a reason in all our actions, taketh place in this also (namely) the will of him, whose will ought to be a law to vs in all things.Deut.
11.19. Secondly, if any soule perish for want of the discharge of your duty, God will re∣quire their blood at your hands.Ez. 33.8 Gal. 6.10. Thirdly, that generall rule taketh place in this thing: Doe good to all; If good, what greater then to helpe them to the knowledge of the meanes of saluation? if to all, then especially to those whose soules in a speciall manner you haue the charge of. For the Author of them, hee is a neighbour Minister in your coun∣trey, in whose praise I spare to speake, his workes sufficiently te∣stifie of him.
Thus loath too long to keepe you
from the perusall and practise of this ensuing Catechisme, I earnest∣ly craue both your blessing, and prayers vnto the Lord for me, and the rest of vs whom the Lord hath made you a meanes of our being: that he also would giue vs heere an assurance, and hereafter a possessi∣on of an eternall blissefull and glo∣rious wel-being: vnto whose graci∣ous protection I commit you, and in whom I euer rest

