



CHristian friend, I am bold to send this small trea∣tise into the World, vnder your protecti∣on, moued thereunto, 1. in respect of your zeale to good things, right∣ly
ordered, 1. by the light of know∣ledge: 2. by a wise discretion; and 3. by sincere affection, which hath prouoked you to hate not onely the workes of wicked men, but also the vaine doctrines of such Teachers as are not acquainted with the truth. 2. In respect of your practise of good things, wherein you goe be∣fore many, as an example of good workes. 3. In respect of your affec∣tion, and kindnesse to me, who am but a stranger vnto you, and farre separated from you. That acquain∣tance I haue with you is of no long standing: yet for the time thereof I haue found so much fauour, and so vnexpected respects at your hands that the Law of equitie calleth on me for some answerable requitall of them. This paper gift therefore I commend vnto your religious care, and Christian practise, and
entreat your friendly acceptance of it, as an insinuation of my desire to be thankefull. The matter which it bringeth, is, A lesson for Com∣municants, teaching them seue∣rall duties, of good behauiour, be∣fore, in, and after the action of receiuing the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, very necessary to be taught, and learned in these sin∣full, and formall dayes, seeing there be many Communicants, and but few Catechumeni Communi∣cants, that are worthie partakers of the Sacrament. The stile and manner wherin it commeth abroad is plaine, familiar, and fitted for the capacitie, and vnderstanding of the simple, so as they that are in the lowest forme may gather somthing from it. In a word, whatsoeuer it is, I haue aduentured the publish∣ing of it, for the vse, and benefit of
the Church of God. If either to your selfe, or to any member there∣of it bring any little encrease of sound knowledge, and sweete fee∣ling in the mysterie of Christ,Ephes. 3.4. I haue my reward, and that which I can desire. And so beseeching God to endue you, and yours, with all sauing grace, to keepe you from falling, and to present you fault∣lesse, before the presence of his glo∣ry, with exceeding ioy, through Ie∣sus Christ; I heartily, and humbly take my leaue.
Rushden. Nouember 27. 1620.

