



MADAM: I can not more fitly salute you then in the phrase of Diuine S. Iohn: Grace be with you,2. ep. Ioh. 3. mercy and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Iesus Christ. This Sermon prea∣ched before you was attentiuely heark∣ned vnto, and the copie required after the speaking of it. My hasty returne from the Country to this eminent Cittie gaue me not time then to yeeld vnto that religious request. But now I haue sent it in a more publike forme, that others may receiue comfort if they haue neede of such balme. I am sure God hath prouided for euery one some crosse: ELI in his children, DAVID in his enemies,Dr. Hll. IOSEPH in his brethren, LAZARVS in his body, IOHN in his li∣berty, IOB in all.Pli: hist: nat: l: 7. No creature commeth weeping into the world but man, and no creature weepeth so much being entred into the world as man. Teares are the beginning and argument of life, so hold some Philosophers, & some Lawyers, life by weeping, holding that if the childe were heard cry, it is a proofe of his liuing.Aug: cons: l. 10. The Eyes are the chiefest hurt of the senses, the best windowes for Sathan: not euill in themselues
but in the effects, the heart corrupting them: and there∣fore haue teares.Mr. Greenham in his counsels Hearing is the sense of learning, but See∣ing is the sense of certaintie. A Christian compassed about with infirmitie may say as one did:Greg: Thomas doubting hath more profited mee then Maries beleeuing, yet now if we stag∣ger,Ioh: 1.46. a voice will call vs, Come and see. Our eyes must bee lifted vp, for our redemption is aboue: worldly obiects dazzle the sight in the corny vallies,Perch. dial. 6. airie mountaines, sha∣dowy groues, flowrie bankes, cleare fountaines, christall ri∣uers, greene meddowes, and beautifullest faces: as at other times in filthy dunghills, heapes of durt, mishapen mon∣lers, rotten carrions, they are lothsome to the sight. The sight of the wicked to flourish is greenous to the godly, in re∣gard whereof Pigmelius a graue Roman Prelate, not long after the Primitiue Church being fallen blinde was wont olemnely to thank God, that by that meanes he was freed from seeing the enemies of his Church, and especially Iulian the Apostate. But our comfort is that our sight shall be clea∣red, and no such obiects shall offend vs; for all occasion of teares shall be taken away, and our eyes wiped with Gods owne hand. He shall annoint our eyes with eye-salue that we may see.Rue: 3.18. A toy which can not (elect Lady) be expressed with pa∣per and inke,2. ep: Io: 12. but when we see God face to face. In the meane while our teares must be moderated, and we must waite patiently for this change. This is the aime of my poore me∣ditations in my Sermon, and being much bounden to your worthy and learned Husband, vpon your religious desire of the Copie, I commend it vnto your good Ladiship, and to all the louers of the truth who shall read it. And so leauing this memoriall of my respect vnto your Ladiship, whom I know to be zealous for the truth: with my deuotions for your honourable Husband, vertuous Selfe, and hopefull issue, I rest

