



MY welbeloued, and verie deare friend in the Lord: as God of his great good∣nes and aboundant mercie hath vouch∣safed you no small fauour, in that you are not onely the naturall sonne of a good man, but also the sonne of a verie faith∣full Minister of his holy word, thereby also a spirituall Father vnto you in the Gospell of Iesus Christ; euen to you a sonne of his best desires, and most comfortable hope, an heire to manie his earnest prayers▪ and supplications to God, a behoulder & witnes of his ho∣lie life, a sheepe of his deare flocke, and nowe a pastor of those who were lately his sheepe: so I beseech you for the Lords sake, to indeuour after no small and vulgar fruits of dutie and thankes to God your heauenly Father; nor of imitation in respect of the excellent vertues of your both naturall and spirituall Father.
Lay sure and fast hold, I pray you, on the blessing of his holie & feruent prayers, wherein with great wrestlings, he intreated God often, that hee would make you an in∣strument of greater glorie to him, in foyling the diuell, and furthering the saluation of his people much more then hee thought himselfe to haue attained vnto: though in truth hee quitted himselfe exceedinglie well, and greatlie pro∣spered in that spirituall fight and dangerous battell, and in promoting the saluation of verie manie.

Thus comfort you vs deare friend, the deare and louing friendes of your worthy Father: thus reioice you the hearts of Gods people: and thus tēder the good peace of your owne conscience I heartely intreat you. Where much hath ben bestowed, there much may iustly bee looked for: and therefore as good ground hauing receiued the best seede, yeeld you your best endeuor that you may bring foorth fruite after the fullest measure euen to an hundred fold. A¦mong other prouocations and incouragements let the pre∣sent Sermon of your Father be as the lift of a strong shoul∣der to further you (as longe as you shall liue) in the care of a godly life as he cōstantly liued: that growing to like per∣fection and ripenes of all holy ministery, you may after māy yeares dy the like death of the righteous that he died.
In the meane season, giue me leaue to commend it vnto you, as a most artificiall picture, better representing to the view of your inward sight, the spiritual image of your Fa∣ther: then any the skilfullest Limmer could haue drawne his outward shape, to the beholding of your bodilie eye.
Esteeme it, deare friend, as a verie worthy and memo∣rable monument of that pure and pithie manner of prea∣ching which he vsed: and as a notable president set before you, and before vs all; let vs follow it with as prosperous a pursuite as we may. And if we cannot attaine vnto it: yet let vs presse toward it as neare as we can. Wee all knowe what a blessing God gaue to his sincere and faithfull dea∣ling: that is, so plentifull a blessing, as is seldōe to be seene vpon the ministerie of any in a far greater congregation.
Now further, that which remaineth: ioine with me in request to the right worshipfull, to whom your Father did, both with hand and heart, while yet hee was liuing, dedicate this memorable gift, (a testimony of his speciall loue, from a most parentlike and pastorall affection to∣ward them) that they will accept it as one little siluer streāe, of pure and precious water, deriued vnto them from that more full and liuing springe, which was wont to flow dai∣lie
more plenteously, to the sweete refreshing and comfort¦ting of their soules. And albeit his person be now gone, and his pastorall care ouer them hath had an end, (which if they had continued to this day, would surely haue procured their most ready and thankfull accepting of the same) let vs be sutors, that the thing it selfe being of great worth, may be neuer the lesse regarded of them: remem∣bring still that they must giue an account vnto God, how they haue profited by his holy ministery. In which hope, let vs for conclusion, (omitting all complements wanting) beseech God the only full supplier of all defects: to blesse the holy doctrine of this one blessed Sermon, to as manie good endes and purposes, both to them, and to our selues, and to many other, as any one Sermon may be blessed and sanctified vnto.
And thus with my most hearty prayer, I doe commend both your selfe, and that right worshipfull familie, and all of the families of the Church of God, at your and their little Denham, to all further and more full blessing of God.
 London, this 2. of May. 1608.
