





RIGHT HONOVRABLE,
SOoner shall the heaven be without stars, the stars without light, the fire without heat, the aire without moi∣sture, the Sea without agitation, a faire med∣dow without grasse,
then the Church with∣out the poisonous tares, and noysome weeds of hellish heresies, which springing vp with the wholesome and soule-feeding wheat the Lord Iesus hath sowed in the heavenly field of his Church, hast to smoo∣ther it, ere it grow to any beautiful and fruit∣full perfection. For1 Cor. 11.19. there must be heresies, that they which are approved may be made manifest. Therefore, as God foretelling thatZach. 1.18.19.20.21. foure hornes should arise to scatter Iudah, Israel, and
Ierusalem, foretold also that he had appointed foure Carpenters to fray them, even so foreseing that by the ever-wat∣ching craft of the ever-waking divell, the vene∣mous seed of deadly er∣rors should grow with the good corne of the Gospell to choake it, he ordained diligent and faithfull1 Cor. 3.9. Labourers to weed and plucke them out by the roote.
These Labourers are the Pastours of the Church, who should be, not onely1 Tim. 3 2. . apt to teach
good and sound doc∣trine, but alsoTit. 1.9. . apt to con∣vince the gainesayers. And certainely, if it be the dutie of all Christians, not onelyAthenag. in legat. pro Chri∣stianis. . to speake of the truth, but also to dispute for the truth: How much more should the man of God, the Doctour of the Church beAug. de Doc. Chri. lib. 4. c. 4. Ʋeritatis propugna∣tor & er∣roris ex∣pugnator. defender of the truth, and over-commer of errour: Never was there in the Church greater need of both, then now that the Whoore of Baby∣lon giues to the Kings and great men of the earth, great bowles of
her phyltres to drinke, farre more dangerous then the waters of Ae∣thiopia;
Ovid. 15. Meta∣morphos. Quos si quis faucibus hausit,
Aut furit, aut patitur mirum gravitate soporem.
For assoone as they haue set that golden cup to their heads, they are possessed with a dizzi∣nesse, and, as if they had drunke a worse Nepen∣thé then that whichHomer. Odys. lib. 4. Helena gaue to Telema∣chus, they forget their owne name of Christi∣ans, and never speake
of Iesus Christ, but to seeke vnder a Herodian colour of worshipping him, to kill him againe in his members.
Of what pestilent herbes that loue-drinke is made, who knowes not? How all those that call themselues Ca∣tholiques are bewitched with it, who sees not? Where these mishapen and ougly plants, whose bane-giving liquor ba∣nishes the wisest men from their best wits, doe grow, who hath read in the seventeenth
chapter of the Revelation of S. Iohn what is writ∣ten of the woman ar∣rayed in purple & scar∣let, of the golden cup in her hand full of abomi∣nations, and filthinesse of her fornications, of the name written on her forehead in capitall Letters, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MO∣THER OF HAR∣LOTS, AND ABO∣MINATIONS OF THE EARTH, of the blood of the Saints wherewith she is drun∣ken,
of the beast with seaven heads she sits vpon, of many waters she rules over, and will not affirme boldly, that S. Hierome strayed not from the Truth, when he said it isHierony. ad Marcel linam vi∣duam. Rupes Turpeia, the Towne builded on seaven Mountaines, Rome, even that Rome where in Hieromes dayes was the true Church, the Trophies of the Apostles and Martyrs, the true confession of Christ, and was then decaying, then beginning to beRev. 18. the habitation of devils, the hold of every foule Spirit, and
a cage of every vncleane and hatefull bird?
There is the devils gar∣den, and his Gardener the man of sinne, the Sonne of perdition, whose e∣missaries runne abroad sowing every where the aconit of his most venemous doctrine, the only Marchandise these Mountebankes of the fourth vow fetch from that dungeon of infer∣nal fiends, which beingRev. 11.8. spiritually Sodom and Egypt, hath nothing but faire shewes of rotten and stinking drugges, like
theIoseph. de bello Iu∣daico. lib. 5 cap. 5. . apples of Sodom, which at the first touching va∣nish away in smoake and ashes, and worse then Egypt,
Odyss. lib. 4. 

Aboūds in evill weeds, & hath few or no good hearbes. Of these loath∣some and infectious hearbs, the best where∣of is but Swines-grasse, at my attendance at Court in Iuly last, I la∣boured to grubbe vp with the hooke-weed of the word of GOD
that poysonous Toad-stoole, called Transubstan∣tiation, the last and the foulest master-piece of work of the divels hus∣bandry, and wherein he delights most, because it is most like vnto himselfe: For by it Ceres & Bacchus are worship∣ped vnder the name of Christ, poore Christi∣ans blind-folded by the Corybantes of Babylon, are holden in hand, that a round and thin crust of the breadth of a shilling is Christs owne selfe, as big, as tall, as perfect a
man as he was on the Crosse, that at the Masse they see him, that at Ea∣ster they eate with the mouths of their bodies his flesh, bones, blood, and whole body, that therefore they must worship that crust with the worship of Latria due to none but God: So he makes them the greatest, or at least as great idolaters as ever were in the world: This seemed so barbarous to the Ambassadours of the Towpinambauts in Frāce not long since, that al∣though
they be the most barbarous people of the world, and eaters of mens flesh, yet to the naturall light that hath remained in their bru∣tish minds, this went beyond all brutishness, that reasonable men should eate that which they worship, or worship that which they eate: And certainely, said they, if Our God were as beneficiall to vs, as your Christ is to you, we would honour him the best we could, but we would not eate him. And one of them made a Proselyte by the Capuchin Friars
of Paris, being asked if he was now a good Christian, Yes, said he, for every day for my breake∣fast I eate one of your Christs.
What I then preached in two Sermons, both for the truth, & against this most abominable errour. I haue set down in this little Booke, which I dare to send abroad cloathed with the livery of your ho∣nourable & most wor∣thy Name, that appea∣ring to the common view with such a good∣ly face, it may be well∣comer
to the Readers, and as it shall please God to giue a blessing vnto it, helpe to recall and reclaime those that goe a whooring with the works of their own hands, or at least to di∣rect such of our owne, who desirous to wind the spole-fuls of wri∣thed and intricate con∣troversies, for not ha∣ving their sences exerci∣sed in such a wearisom and painefull labour, cannot finde the right ende of the thread, and being once entred
into the vnknowne crookes of that turning labyrinth, cannot goe thorow them without a more assured and in∣fallible guide, then the thread of Ariadné.
Your Honour having as great acquaintance with all kinde of true learning, and namely with true divinitie, as many of the learnedest, I confesse this Booke can haue no such vse to you-ward: Neither was that my intentiō when I honoured it with your worthy Name: My one∣ly
desire being to make it a true and publicke witnesse that since that time you vouchsafed me the honour of your loue, I could consi∣der, considering know, knowing acknowledg, acknowledging reve∣rence your manifold & rare gifts, quite voide of all ostentatiō, which the holy Ghost, as most precious stones, hath set in a heart of true god∣linesse, and which as they haue beene the happy and godly direc∣tours of our then most
hopefull Prince, so are they now the true and faithfull Counsellours of our maiesticall, he∣roicall, and religious King, who so long as his royall eares shall hang at the wise tongs of so moderate & godly Senatours, neither shall the distressed Church want protection, nor his Subiects iustice in him, nor he blesse-brin∣ging prayers and true obedience in them.
If any say a greater worke was due to so excellent a personage:
your Honour will an∣swere for me, thatDemost. . not great, but good things are best; that good is this little worke in the matter, that it is handled, al∣though not exquisitly in words, yet soundly. Moreover, I answer for my selfe, that by your meanes I came to the Kings knowledge, and by your recommenda∣tion was named by his Maiesty to be one of his Chaplaines: Therefore to you are due the first fruits of that harvest, which such as they are
I consecrate to your Ho∣nour, and my selfe to the continuance of your fa∣vour, offering my hear∣ty prayers to God for the increasing of his merci∣full & favourable bles∣sings on your graue and old age, on your right re∣ligious and honourable Lady, and all her most no∣ble and godly Family, till they come to their ful measure in Iesus Christ, in whom I remaine for ever,

