



NOW a long time, there hath bene, no lesse lear∣ned then large writing in our English tong, tou∣ching the iust confutatiō of sundrie pointes in poperie, specially of their priuat Masse, Praiers in a strāge language, Transsubstantiation, the real presence, the Supremacie, and the like. But all this while concerning the Na∣ture of man, and of the Grace of God, of Free will in nature, of concupiscence in the regenerate, of meritoriouse per∣fection,
faith, works, & the whole sub∣stance of iustification, the aduersaries haue brought vs hitherto no great mat¦ter. Of late in their English Rhemish notes as the great mistresse, and in M. Martins discouery as the handmaide therunto (for so he tearmeth his book) there is somwhat said, & shifts deuised. The most of al, that may seme materiall is borrowed of M. Stapletons dictates, their controuersie reader at Doway. In regard whereof & in som other respects in this discours I haue dealt more with him, then with any Latine writer else, & yet so that the greatest benefit therof may redound to thē that haue greatest neede, and can not happily so well vn∣derstand the Latine tong, from whence most of their slights are first deriued, & now put foorth into English scholies & smal pamphlets. Wherin if this my do∣ing shall displease M. Stapleton, more then he would, or I wish, as perhaps it maye, may it please him (for they of Rhemes are otherwise like to be occu∣pied)
wast vagaries set apart, euen as in the sight of God, without fraud & am∣biguitie, plainly, directly and shortly, to oppose as him liketh, for more triall herein, and he shall soone perceaue, that the seruaunts of truth, will not be asha∣med in due sorte by replie, to declare whose seruauntes they are. The whole book of his lectures in conueniēt time shalbe answered (if God will) by a most godly, learned, and painefull father. In the meane season (right honourable sir) this present dutie, which I haue perfor∣med, without recitall of farther circun∣stances in many wordes, alwayes trou∣blesome to greater affaires, I offer in most hūble maner I may, to your ho∣nours fauourable, & experienced pro∣tection. The Lord God blesse and pre∣serue your honours person, your ver∣tuouse Ladie, your godlie cares and counsels all in Christ Iesus alwayes.

