


CHristian Reader, among all the grosse and cry∣ing
sinnes which haue of late defiled and ouer∣spread
our Nation and the world it selfe, there are
few more common, few more dangerous, hurtfull,
and pernicious, then the vnnaturall, vnthrifty, odi∣ous,
and swinish sinne of Drunkennesse. A sinne,
which if we will beleeue theAug. Serm. 32 a Fratres in Fremo. De Temp se. 231. 23 Basil de letun. & ae E∣btate, et Lu∣xu serme Clem Alex. Paedag. l. 2, c. 2, 3, 4. Ambr. ae Elia. & leiun. c. 10, to 19 Chrysoft. Hō. 54, 57, 71. & ad Pop. An∣tioch. Hom. 27, in 1 Cor. Hier. Com l. 15. in Eze. 42. Chry∣solog serm. 26. Bern. de Mode Viuēdi, Ser. 26 See Puteani Comus. Opsopae∣us de Arte Bib. l. 2. Friseclinus in Ebriet. Mr. Harris his Diunkards Cup. Master Wards Wooe to Diunkards. The Homily against Drunkennesse. And Mr. Iohn Down∣hams Disswation from Drunkennesse. Fathers, (nayPlat Symposium. Legum Dial. 1. Plinie Nat. Hist. l. 14, c. 22. Zenophon de Instit. Cyri. l. 8. Memorabilium lib. 7. Seneca Epist. 24 83. Plutarch. de Sanitate tuenda. De Adulat: & Amicita. Horace Ipist. lib. 1. Epist. 5. Tacitus de Moribus German. cap. 7. Sobaeus sermo 18. Ouid. de Arte Aman∣di, lib. 1 In∣fidels
and Pagans whom Christians should excell)
Is but a flattering deuill; a sweet poyson; a voluntarie
madnesse; an inuited enemie; a deprauer of honestie; a
wronger of modestie; the mother of all sinne and mis¦chiefe;
the sister of all ryot; the father of all pride; the
author of murthers, quarrels and debates: the nurse of
furie: the mistresse of petulancie: the inflamation of
the stomacke: the blindnesse of the eyes, the corruption
of the breath, the debility of all the members; the accelle∣ration
of death: and poyson of the soule. A sinne which
crackes mens credites, exhausts their purses, con∣sumes
their estates, infatuates their sences, besots
their vnderstandings, impaires their healthes, di∣stempers

their constitutions, subuerts their bodies,
eates out their liues, ruines their families, grieues
their friends, brings wrath and iudgements on their
Countries, decayes their parts and morrall vertues,
disables them for all imployments, indisposeth them
to grace and godlinesse, and all the meanes and
workes of grace, and without Gods infinite mercy,
and their sound repentance,Prou. 23, 32 Nahum. 1, 10. 1 Cor. 6. 10. Gal. 5, 21. Mat 24. 49, 50, 51. damnes their soules.
Strange it is, that this most vnnaturall, vnprofitable,
vnpleasant, vnseemely, vnreasonable, brutish, base,
and shamefull sinne of all others, which makes men
odious and ridiculous vnto themselues, and all that
see them: which transformes men into beastes
and swine, or carkases of men: which fights against
theLuke 21, 34 Ephes. 5, 18. 1 Pet. 4, 3. Lawes of God, of grace, of nature, sense
and reason; whichPro. 23, 29, 30. Isay 5, 11, 22. Hab. 2. 15, 16. 1 Pet. 2, 11. Isay 28, 1, 3. wars against the peace and
safety of mens soules; which1 Cor. 6, 10. Gal. 5. 21. excludes and shuts
out men from heauen, and from1 Cor. 5, 11. Pro. 23, 20, 21 the societie and
company of Gods Saints, andSee Master Stubs Anato∣my of Abuses, p. 77, 78. Mr. Wards Woe to Drun∣kards. Mr. Thomas Beard his Theater of Gods Iudge∣ments. l. 2. c. 3. oft-times drawes
downe many heauy, fatall, sad and dreadfull indgements
on mens heads, (sufficient to amaze, to split, and
daunt the hardest and the strongest hearts, and to a∣wake
the drowsiest, and most stupified, and cauteri∣zed
conscienses of all such, who are infatuated, and
benummed with this hellish dropsie:) should so
farre insinuate it selfe into the affections, practise,
and liues of men (especially in these radiant, bles∣sed,
and resplendent dayes of grace,Tit. 2, 12, 13. Rom. 13, 12, 13 which teach
vs to denie vngodlinesse and worldly lusts, and to liue,
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world,
looking for the glorious and blessed appearance and

comming of the great God, and our blessed Sauiour Iesus
Christ) as to inthrall and captiuate whole Nations
to its base and slauish bondage, who professe them∣selues
not onely to be men and reasonable creatures;
but likewise temperate, sober, graue, deuout, religi∣gious,
and holy Christians. I confesse it seemes a
mystery and wonder vnto me, that naturall and rea∣sonable
men (much more that such as beare the
name and face of Christians) should so farre dege∣nerate
from the very principles of nature, and the
rules of common reason, as to be intoxicated, ina∣mored,
bewitched, and insnared with such an
Ebriet atem qui habet, se non habet: hāc qui habet, home non est: hane qui ha∣bet, non peca∣tum facit, sed ipse est pecca∣tum. Chry so∣logus Serm 26inhumane, absurde, and Swinish sinne as this,
which hath no good, no honour, profit, pleasure,
beauty, nor aduantage in it, to winne, allure, or in∣gage
men to it: yea, so sarre to be affected and de∣lighted
with it; as to reioyce and glory in it; to
magnifie, honour, and applaud, all those who are
deuoted and inthralled to it; andEst in con∣tēptu frugalis vita: libid po∣tands eunctos prodigiosa te∣net. Nemo bo∣nus nunc est, nec strenus esse videtur Plurima ni poterit perdere vina bibax. Nullus eris si sint ignauae ad pocula vires, Plurima ni sieces pocula, nullus eris. Obsopaeus De Arte Bi∣bendi, l. 2. to vilifie, con∣temne,
reproach, and vnderualue such, who hate and
loath it in their Iudgements, or abandon and renounce
it in their practise. Certainely, if I did not knowe
the truth and probate of it, by ocular and experi∣mentall
demonstrations from day to day; I could
hardly bring my vnderstanding to beleeue; that
men, that Christians should so farre affect, admire,
or odore, so foule, so filthy, so base, so vnamiable,
so vnfruitfull, vnprofitable and vnpleasant a sinne;
so vnnaturall and brutish a vice, as this Drunkennes
in most mens iudgement and experience is. The
reasons (as I conceiue) why men are now so much

infatuated with this so odious, execrable, and vn∣pleasant
sinne, are briefly these.
The first, is that very inbred corruption, and pra∣uitie
of humane nature: whichRom. 8, 7, 8. being a law∣lesse
and vnruely euill, that nether is, nor can be subiect
to the law of God, till it be mortified and subdued by
the power of grace; doth beare downe all the
bounds and rules of nature, reason, religion, tempe∣rance,
and fobriety, andIsay. 15. 11, 12, 22, 1 Pet. 4, 3, 4. Ad de∣teriora faciles sumus: nō pro∣num tantum iterest ad vi∣tia, sed etiam praecep: Sene∣ca. Epist. 97. carry men headlong vn∣to
Drunkennesse, riot, excesse of wine, and all vnreaso∣nable,
vnnaturall and beastly finnes and lusts, euen
with a full carere.
The second, is theEphes. 2. 2, 3 power of the Prince of the ayre,
the spirit who now worketh in the children of disobedi∣ence,
intending the lusts, & desires of their flesh & mind;
and carrying them captiue vnto finne. Who hath
lately gotten such high praedominancie in the soules
of vitious and carnall men, and added such impu∣dencie
and vnbridelednesse vnto their sinnes and
lusts: that they doe not onelyPhil. 3. 19. glory in their
drunkennesse and grosse intemperance,Esay 3. 9. proclay∣ming
it oft times vnto the world with Cornets,
Drummes, and Trumpets (the common ornaments,
melodie, solace, or incrediaries of their licentious,
Hoe non est gaudere, sed in∣sanire bibones, Obsepaeus, de Arte Bib. l. 2mad, deboist, bacchanalian, prophane and heathe∣nish
Healthes, and ebrious pot-battels) but euen
purposely bend and set themselues against the God
of heauen: trampling his word, his lawes, and all
his precepts vnder foote: violating the very lawes
of nature, and rules of reason: breaking all the cords
and ligaments of nature, modesty, temperance, and

sobriety, as if they had no Lord, no God, nor Ruler
ouer them: felling themselues wholly vnto all ex∣cesse,
and wallowing like so many base and filthie
swine, in the mire and puddle of drunkennesse, and
vomite; as if they were borne for no other pur∣pose,
but with that infamous, and drink-deuouring
Bonosus non vt viuat na∣tus est, sed vt bibat. Lypsius Centur. Mis∣cell. Epist. 51. Theatrum vi∣tae humanae. Bonosus for to swill and drinke.
The third reason of the encrease and growth of
drunkennesse, are those many specious, beautifull,
popular, amiable, and bewitching names and titles
where with this vgly, odious and filthy sinne, toge∣ther
with the Practisers, Patrons and Abettors of it,
are beautified, guilded, and adorned; and those com∣mon
termes and mottoes of ignominie, scorne, and
reproach, which Satan and his ebrious crue, haue
cast vpon the graces of temperance and sobrietie,
and on the persons of all such temperate, holy, and
abstemious Christians, who doe in truth pursue
them in their liues & practise. As allQuicquid vi∣tium erat, vir∣tutis nomen induit. Putea∣ni Comus. Probitatis in∣ertia nomen, Iustitiae for∣mido subit. Claud. in Eu∣trop. l. 2. Ne∣quitiae classes candida velae ferunt. Petro∣nius pag. 154. Vitia pro vir∣tutibus hodie habentur. Diō. Cass. Roman. Hist. l. 58. Non solum vi∣tiosa, sed & vitia laudan∣tur. Seneca E∣pist. 114. other sins and
vices: so Drunkennes is now shrowdedDucitur e∣brietas nunc virtus maxi∣ma: nemo. Carpentē bane sicco rebitur o∣re loqus: Quae∣ritur hac celebris nunc cunctis gloria: cunctis, Quaeritur hac nomen, gratia, fama, fauor, Obsopaeus de Arte bibendi. lib. 2. (nay coun¦tenanced,
defended, iustified and applauded,) vnder the
popular and louely titles of hospitality, good-fellow∣ship,
courtesie, entertainement, iouiality, mirth, gene∣rosity,
liberality, open house keeping, the liberall use of
Gods good creatures, friendship, loue, kindnesse, good
neighbour hood, company-keeping, and the like: and
Drunkards are likewise magnified, and extolled, vn∣der
the amiable, reuerenced, and applauded termes
of good-fellowes, wits; Poets; courteous sociableHaec tamen illi omniae cum faciant hilares niti∣dique vocantur. Iuuenal. Satyr. 11. mer∣rie,

ouiall, and boone-companions: generous, liberall,
free-hearted, valiant, and heroick Sparkes and Spirits:
sociable, pleasant, and good-natured Gentlemen: open,
liberall and free house-keepers; merryHence came the phrase pergracari; or Graco modo bibere: Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 28. c. 6. Alex. ab. Alex. l. 5. c. 21 Fran∣cis Irenicus: Germaniae Ex∣egeseos Tom. 1. l. 2. c. 1 . Greekes, and
such like stiles and titles: which set such a laudible,
specious, beautifull, amiable, and comly glosse and
varnish on Drunkennesse and Drunkards, which are
full odous, loathsome, and deformed in themselues:
that they doe euenallit enim vitium specis virtutis & vmbra. Iuen. Satyr. 1. vitta non decipiunt, nisi sub spece vmbraque vir∣tutum. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 7. c. 4. secretly &Quoedam vi∣tia species vir∣tutum praefe∣runt, ideoque pernitiosius su∣s sectatores decipiunt, quia se sub velami∣ne virtutum tegunt. Isi∣dor. Hispal. de Sum. Bono. l. 2, c. 35. Nullum vitium est te∣trius aut pesti∣lentius, eo quod in virtutis specie latet. Osorius de Gloria. l. 1. Sect. 7. dangerously insi∣nuate,
incorporate, and instill this beastly and pernici∣ous
vice, into the affections liues and practise, of carnall,
gracelesse, and vngodly men, whiles they present it to
them, as an honest, laudable, and necessarie vertue, with∣out
which there can be no loue, no fellowship, no
true society, nor hospitality, mirth, nor entertain∣ment
in the world: whereas they could not but ab∣horre
it, together with all those whose liues are
tainted and defiled with it, did they but suruay or
view it in its proper colours. Now as Drunkennes,
excesse, and Drunkards, are thus magnified, coun∣tenanced,
& applauded vnder these popular, good∣ly,
flattering, and insinuating titles; so Temperance
and Sobriety are deformed, vilified, derided, sen∣tenced,
condemned, and scoffed at, vnder the appro∣brious
and disdainfull names, of puritanisme, precise∣nesse,
stoicisme, singularity, vnsociablenesse, clownish∣nesse,
rudenesse, basenesse, melancholly, discourtesie, pride,
surlinesse, disdaine, coynesse, and what not;Dat veniam cornis, vexat cen∣sora columbas. Iuuenal. Sat. 2. and
temperate, sober, gracious, abstemious, and religious
Christians, who make a conscience of excesse vnder

the ignominious and reproachfull stiles, ofInsani sapi ent, nomen fert equus in∣iqui, Vltrae quam satis est virtutem si petat ipsam Horrace Epist. l. 1. Epist. 6. Puri∣tanes,
Praecisians, Stoicks; vnsociable, clownish, rustick,
peruerse, peeuish, humorous, singular, discourteous nig∣gardly,
pragmaticall, proud, unmannerly, degenerous,
base, scrupulous, melancholly, sad or discontented per∣sons.
He that is nowAnnon hoc ita fit in om∣ni populo? nonne omnem exuperantiam virtutis ode∣runt? quid? Aristides non∣ne ob eam ip∣sam causam pulsus est pae∣tria, quod prae∣ter modum iu∣stus effet? Cice∣ro Tusc. quaest. lib. 5. more holy, temperate, graci∣ous,
and sober in his life and carriage then the ordinarie
sort of men. hee that is reclaimed from his ebrious
and drunken company and courses, and will not
drinke, rore, carowse, health, play the good-fellow,
1 Pet. 4. 3. 4.or runne into the same excesse of Drunkennesse
and intemperance that others doe, and as himselfe did
heretofore, out of conscience, loue, obedience, and
true deuotion towards God: is forthwith hated, tax∣ed,
and branded for a Puritan, an Hypocrite, a Praeci∣sian,
and I know not what besides: euen by such
who deemed him an honest man, a sociable, boone,
and good companion heretofore, when as he would
swill and drinke, and health, as well as others: (as if
his temperance and sobriety did depraue, disparage,
vilifie & disgrace him:) an infallible argument, that
Puritans and Praecisians (as the world now takes
them) are the most religious, holy, temperate, so∣ber,
and obstemious men of all others; because they
are generally hated, stiled, and reputed Puritans and
Praeisians for this very cause; that they are quite re∣claimed
and estranged from Drunkennesse, health∣ing,
good-fellowship, and excesse of wine: & become
more temperate, sober, holy, and religious in their liues
then other men, whose ebrious, riotous and luxurious

courses they vtterly abandon and dislike,Sunt aliqui intempestiuè boni. qui cor∣ruptis moribus publicis conui∣cium benê vi∣uendo faciunt. Erg tanquam scelerum & malitiae suae testes extirpae∣re funditus nituntur, & ollere: gra∣uesque sibi pu∣tant sanquam vita eorum coarguatur. Idcirco aufe∣rantur, qui∣bus coram vi∣uere pudet, qui peccax∣tium frontem et si non verbis, quia tacent, tanien ips vi∣ta genere dis∣simili feriunt & verberant: Castigare e∣nim videtur. quicunque dis∣sentit. La∣ctantius de Iustitia, lib. 5. c. 9. yea
censure and condemne, by their practicall and holy
liues. This magnifying, then of Drunkennesse and
Drunkards vnder these popular, glorious, louely,
and applauded titles, which sound full sweete and
pleasant in the eares of most: and this depressing
and vilifying of Temperance, sobriety, and abste∣mious
Christians, vnder such ignominious, scorne∣full,
odious, base, and vndervaluing termes, (which
make an harsh, an vncouth, preiudicate, and vn∣pleasant
noyse, among the carnall, vulgar, and loo∣ser
sort of men;) is one of the maine and chiefest
causes why Drunkennes doth now so much diffuse
and spread it selfe.
The fourth cause of the increase and growth of
Drunkennesse, is the negligence and coldenesse of
Iustices, Magistrates, and inferiour Officers, in the
due and faithfull execution of those laudable and
pious Lawes and1 Iacob. c. 9. 4 Iacob. c. 5. 7 Iacob. c. 10. 21 Iacob. c. 7. Statutes, enacted by our King,
and State against this odious, swinish, vnthrifty,
and State-desturbing sinne: which if they were
as duly executed, as they are generally neglected,
(and soLex noua vsu non recepta viribus caret, & desuitudine tollitur. Gaillius Pract. Obser. lib. 2. Obser. 110. abrogated, frustrated, and euacuated for
want of execution) this noxious dropsie and disease
of Drunkennesse would soone be cured, and dryed
vp. If Iustices and Magistrates, were as diligent to
suppresse and pull downe Drunkennesse and Ale∣houses,
as they are industrious and forwards to Pa∣tronize
and set them vp,See 4 Iacob. c. 5. 1 Iacob. c. 9. to the great disturbance,

hurt and preiudice of our Christian Common-wealth;
the wings of Drunkennesse would soone bee clipt,
whereas now theyLeges opti∣tima si negli∣guntur, diss∣lutionem pari∣unt. Cafe. Pol. l. 5. c. 7. spread and grow from day to
day, because the sword of execution clipse them
not.
The fift cause, why this gangrene or leprosie of
Drunkennesse doth so dilate, inlarge, and propalate
it selfe, is either the ill example of some great men,
Gentlemen, Clergie men, and others, who insteed
of being patternes of temperance and sobriety vnto
inferiour and meaner persons, are oft times made
their presidents & plot-formes of Drunkennes and
excesse;Quantum pracellunt c∣teris magni∣tudne, tantis praestant im∣puritate. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 7. p. 277. transcending them in ebrious, riotous, de∣boist,
intemperate, and licentious courses, as farre as
they exceede them in their place and dignity. When
Gentlemen,Velocius & citius was cor∣rumpunt viti∣orum domesti∣ca exempla,  subeāt animos magnis ate∣ribus. Iuuen. Satyr. 14. great men, Magistrates and Mini∣sters,
who should bee guides and curbes to others,
shall take delight and pleasure in Drunkennesse and
excesse: either approuing them by their owne per∣sonall
practise; or else by tollerating, and allowing
them in their owne irregular and misgouerned Fa∣milies,
(which are oft times made the very Theaters
of Bacchus, and the very seminaries, sinkes, and pud∣dles
of Drunkennesse, vomit, ryot, and intempe∣rance;
vnder pretence of hospitality and free house-keeping:)
Non ampli∣us mirabor c̄ peceant qui ge∣nere ignobiles sunt, quand bi qui summ l∣lo nati sunt, peccant. So phocles Aiax Flag. NG. 1165.no meruaile if Inferiours (who com∣monly
adore Superiours chiefe and greatestCum surpia placent iis qui habentur boni, ceric valde ho∣nesta videntur esse malis. Euripid. Hyp∣politus Cor. Sect. 410. vices,
as so many glorious and resplendant vertues:) doe euen
plunge themselues, into the very dregges and boggs
of surfetting, Drunkennesse, and grosse intempe∣rance,
with greedinesse and delight, being animated,

and fleshed by those great examples, AsNemo sibi tantum errat, sed aliis rroris causa & au∣ctor est. Nem ita cadit vt nē alium in so at∣trahat. Seneca de Vita Beata cap. 1. all men, so
Magistrates, Ministers, Gentlemen, and great men,
especially, doe seldome erre alone; If these would but
reforme themselues, and rectifie their vnruly and
disordered Families, (which isDemum s am coercer plerisque had minus  est, quam pre∣uinciam ∣re. Tacus Agricolus vi∣ta. cap. 7. as difficult a taske
to many, as to rule a Prouince.) This sinne of Drun∣kennesse
would soone growe drie and out of vse;
where as now their ill examples feede and nou∣rish
it.
The last, though not the least occasion, why
Drunkennesse doth so much encrease and super∣abound
among vs; are those common Ceremonies,
wiles, and Stratagems, which the deuill and his
drunken rowt haue plotted and inuented, of purpose
to allure, force, and draw men on to Drunkennesse,
ryot, and excesse of wine. Not to diue into the
depthes and misteries of the black, the heat henish,
execrable, and InfernallSee Obsepae∣us, de Arte Bi∣bend. Art of drinking, in which
IMelius est aliquid neseire secure, quam cum periculo discere. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 22. c. 13. was nouer learned nor experienced: nor yet to
mentionSee Master Iohn Downam his Disswasiō from drunken∣nesse: and Mr. Harris his. Drunkenis Cup the Ta∣ble of Drun∣kennesse, & us potandi. the drinking by the Die, by the dozen, by
the yard, or such like hellish and vnchristian pollicies
and aloctiues, which Drunkards vse, to force, to
draw, or lead men on to Drunkennes and excesse;
in which euery Alewife and Mault sucker are farre
more learned and skilfull then my selfe: I dare a∣uouch
it for an approued truth: that there is no such
common bayte or stratagem, to winne, to force, in∣tice,
and lead men on to Drunkennes and intempe∣rance,
as this idle, foolish, heathenish, prophane,
and hellish Ceremonie, of beginning, seconding, and
pledging Healthes; which is nothing else in truth

and verity but a Bawde and Pander vnto Drunken∣nes,
and a praeludium, in-let, way, and passage vn∣to
all excesse. If Health drinking (which is the
very mother and nurse of Drunkennes) were but
once suppressed and banished the world, as an abo∣minable,
heathenish, vnchristian, and vnlawfull
Rite,See Argu∣ment 14. which had its birth and pedigree from hell it
selfe: the sinne of temulencie and Drunkennesse
would quickly vanish and growe out of vse: And
this hath caused me to propalate this short and rude
discourse against these Healthes, vnto the publique
view, that so I might at least asswage, if not expell
the dangerous dropsie and disease of Drunkennesse,
Hosea 4. 3.which makes our Land, if not the world it selfe, to
mourne and languish; in drying vp these noxious hu∣mours
and vnhealthy Healthes, which feed and nou∣rish
it. A Treatise (I suppose) which though it may
seeme harsh and vncouth at the first, to many habi∣tuated,
infatuated, incorrigible, or cauterized Drun∣kards,
resolued for to liue and die in this their sinne,
though they fri in hell for euer after; or to praeiu∣dicate,
I shall say to these. L∣gant prius. & postea despici∣ant: ne vide∣antur, ne u iudicic, sed au odi prasump∣tione ignorata dānare. Hier. aduer. Ruffin l. 2. c. 9. Tom. 2. pag. 251.forest alled, and prepossessed affections, (who
would rather maliciously fore iudge, and rashly censure
this Discourse and me before they reade it, then take the
paines for to peruse it; because they presume, that
none but factious, nouellizing, precise, or ouer∣zealous
Puritans condemne these Healthes, and that
not out of iudgement, but of peuish frowardnes.)
Yet questionlesse it will be acceptable and pleasing
vnto many: not only for theNaturale st potius non quam magna mirari. It  e∣nim compsiti sumus, vt nes quotidiana si admiratione digna sunt, tr seant; contra minimarum que{que} rerum s inslita prodi∣runt, specta∣culum dulce fi∣at. Sen. Nat. Quaest. l. 7. c. 1. Aertor est cu∣piditas ignota cognoscendi, quam nota re∣petendie ad ne∣ua omnes con∣currant, ad ne∣ua tēuentunt. Sen. cōtrouers. l. 4. Proaem. Nouitas auditoribus lenocinatur. Plin. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 19. Noua, & non in promptu posita, admirationem suiexcitant auditerem{que} allicinnt. Plutarch de Homero. Est qu{que} cunctarum nouitas gratissimarerum. Ouidde Ponto, lib. 3. Elig 4. noalty & strange∣nesse

of it, which addes delight and acceptation to it:
as treating of a Theame or Subiect, wherein few
haue lately, purposely, or largely trauelled, especi∣ally
in our English tongue: but likewise in regard of
the benefit and vsefulnesse of it: as being very sea∣sonable,
sutable, and needfull for these intemperate,
dissolute, and bacchanalian times of ours: where
in Healthes and Drunkennesse doe so much abound
(especially in those festiuall and blessed times of ioy
and thankfulnesse, wherein our temperance, sobrie∣ty
and holinesse should most excell:) that wee may
iustly feare, they will drowne vs in some great and
generall deluge of Gods iudgements ere it be long,
and cause the Lord to curse and crosse vs in all our
enterprises and designes (as he hath done for sundry
yeares, thoughIsay 42. 24. 25. Prou. 23. 34. 35. we consider and lay it not to heart,
in that penitent and soule-affecting manner as wee
ought) vnlesse we speedily repent vs of them: For
alas, how can we possibly expect or hope, that God
should auocate or withdraw his iudgements from
vs: that he should blesse and prosper vs in any kind;
that he should pleade our cause, or fight our battels
for vs: that he should guide, direct, or blesse our
King, our Queene, our Counsellours, our Nobles, or
our Rulers,Reges quan∣d boni sunt muneris est Dei quando vero mali, see∣leris est populi: Secundum me∣ritum plebeiū, disponitur vit rectrurn. Ira∣scent enim Deo, talem rectorem popu∣li suseipiunt. qualem pro peecat merē∣tur. Nannun∣quam etiam pro malitia populi reges mutantur & qui ante vide∣bantur esse be∣ni, accepto regno fiunt in∣iqui. Isiodor. Hispal. de Sum. Bono l. 3. c. 48. Concil. Parisiense sub Ludouico & Lothorio: 829. lib. 2. cap. 1. (whom God doth oft times curse and
alter for the peoples sinnes:) that he should speed our
Generalls, our Captaines, our Nauies, or our Armies,
Non igna∣uissiumorem hostium forti∣tudine obrui∣mur, sed slum vitiorum nostrorum impuritate superamur. Nemo sibi aliud persuade∣at, nem aliud arbitretur: solum nos mrum nostrorum vitiae vicerunt. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 7. p. 238. 278. which the Troopes and Armies of our sinnes, and
not the force and prowesse of our enemies, haue van∣quished

and put to flight:) when as our Healthes are
farre more dense and frequent, then our Prayers for
them? when as wee ouerwhelme and drowne our
soules and spirits, and quiteHabet h temulentia, vt & molliat & resoluat corda temulentrum Ambr. de Elia & Ieiun c. 12. Basil. de Ebri∣ctate & Luxu. Serm. Obso∣poeus De Arte Bibendi, l. 2. enerate, weaken, and
dissolue our bodies (which are, or should be1 Cor. 3. 16. & 6. 15. 19. Tem∣ples
for the holy Ghost to dwell in) with Drunkennesse,
ryot, and excesse of Wine; and cause the Lord of
Hoasts himselfe to be our enemy,Isay 8. 7. to 15. (whose force and
power no creatures can resist) by our intemperate,
ebrious, and luxurious sinnes? When as we put away
farre from vs the euill day, and cause the seate of vio∣lence
to come neere: stretching our selues vpon our cou∣ches
and beds of Iuorie: eating the Lambes out of the
stockes, and the Calues out of the stall: chaunting to the
sound of the Viole, and inuenting to our selues instru∣ments
of musicke (in these dangerous,Amos 6. 1. to 7. Isay 5. 11. 12. sad, and dole∣full
times, when as teares should bee our mirth and
chiefest solace,) which doe so farre infatuate and
stupifie our hearts and iudgements; that wee regard
not the workes nor iudgements of the Lord, neither con∣sider
the operation of his hands; (which we may iustly
feare are working of our ruine:) drinking Wine in
bowles; rising vp early in the morning, that wee may fol∣low
strong drinke, and continuing at it vntill night, till
wine enflame vs; as if we were free frō feare of euill, or
as if there were no God in heauen for to punish vs:
and yet not grieuing for the afflictions of Ioseph, nor for
our manifold and great rebellions against our good
and gracious God: whoseRom. a. 4. patient goodnesse, and
long-continued mercies, doe now call; and dread∣full
iudgements, force & summon vs to repentance?

Certainly, though I dare not antedate the sorrowes
of our Syon, or raise a feare or iealousie without a
ground; yet when I doe but seriously and cordially
suruay, that intollerableEzech. 16. 49 pride; that aboundance
of idlenesse; that fulnesse of bread; that lusting after
strange flesh (the sinnes that drew downe fire and brim∣stone
vpon Sodome long agoe;) those monstrous ha∣bites,
fashions and attires: that excessiue vanity, A∣theisme
and prophanenesse: that execrable and
Plures in∣uenia qui sae∣pius peiurent, quam qui om∣nine non tu∣rent. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 3. p. 79.frequent banning, swearing, cursing and blasphe∣ming:
that greedie couetousnesse, extortion and
oppression; that fearefull murther and bloudshed;
that scurrility, effaeminacie, wantonnesse, fornicati∣on,
whoredome, adulterie and vncleanenesse: that
generall neglect, contempt and hatred of God, of
grace, of goodnesse, and the Gospell: thatNihil amen∣tius est, quam in malis esse, & malorum intelligentiam non habere. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 6. p. 216. 217. stupi∣fied
and sencelesse security, and hardnesse of heart, in
the middest of feares and dangers: that degenerating
and growing worse and worse, not withstanding all
Gods iudgements,Non mirum est si quotidie deteriora pa∣timur, qui quo∣eidiè deteriores sumus. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 4. p. 111. which still encrease vpon vs, be∣cause
our sinnes encrease: that dissolutenesse, that
drunkennesse, deboistnesse, and excesse of Healthes;
together with those other troopes of sundry sinnes,
which walke so bold and thick among vs, in despite
of all those meanes which GOD hath vsed to re∣claime
vs from them: I cannot but conclude as
others doe: that these abominations and sinnes of
ours (especially in these times of feare and danger,
Isay 22. 12. Ier. 4. 8. & 6. 26.which cry and call for true repentance) prognosti∣cate
no victory, no good, no blessing, nor successe:
but vndoubted ruine and destruction to vs, vnlesse

we speedily repent vs of them. Wherefore (Chri∣stian
Readers) if you haue any compassion of your
owne poore soules (which Healthes andNahum. 1. 10 1 Cor. 6. 10. Gal. 5. 21. Drun∣kennesse
will damne to hell without recouerie, if you pro∣ceede
on in them:) If you haue any loue to God
and Christ; or any filiall feare of God, or of his
wrath and iudgements left within you: If you
haue any humanity or bowells of compassions in
you, towards the publicke good and safety of this
your deare & mother Church, and Country; which
haue so long supported you in peace and plenty,
euen beyond your hopes: If you haue any com∣miseration
of the poore distressed Saints & Church
of God in forraigne parts, who are almost swal∣lowed
vp of bloudie persecutors, whiles wee are
wallowing in carnall pleasures, and delights of sin;
in luxutie, ryot, Drunkennes, and all excesse, with∣out
any cordiall pitty or simpathizing compassion
of, or any sound humiliation for, their low estates:
If you expect or long for any prosperity, peace, or
plenty: any abatement, diuertion or extinguish∣ment
of Gods iudgements at home; or any successe
or victory abroad: let mee now entreat, and tho∣rowly
perswade you allRom. 12. 1 by the very mercies of
God and Christ (the most flexanimous, perswasiue,
and preuailing motiue of all others:) by the loue
you beare vnto the Church of God in generall; to
this your mother Church and Country; and to
your owne saluation: by that most sacred oath
and solemne rouenant which you haue made to
God in Baptisme, and oft renued in the bloud of

Christ, in the sight of many witnesses; and by that
strict, that terrible, and ineuitable account, which
you must shortlyDan. 7. 10. Math. 25. 32. 33 2 Cor. 5. 10. make before the barre of Christs
tribunall, in the open view of all the world: that you
wouldPsal 95. 7. 8. 2 Cor. 6 2. now, euen now I say, whiles the acceptable
dayes and times of grace and mercy last; whiles the
bowels and armes of Christ lye open to receiue
you, if you will come in: andDeut 22. 41 42. Psal. 7. 11 12. 13. Qui volunt a∣tem Dei spre∣uerunt inus∣tantem, volun∣tatem Dei sen∣tient vindi∣cantem. Pros∣per. Aquit. Re∣spons. ad Ob∣iect. 16. Vin∣cent. the arme and sword
of God are brandished and stretched out against you, to
your iust confusion, if you still stand out: abandon, ab∣iure,
renounce, and quite cast off for euer, those cur∣sed
and pernicious sinnes, in which you are all in∣uolued,
without any more pretences or delayes.
Aboue all, resist, oppose, shake off, and quite roote
out, the vnnaturall, vnreasonable, vnpleasant,Vno die bi∣bunt multe∣rum dierum labores. Ambr. de Elia & Ie∣iun. c. 12. vn∣thrifty,
prodigall, wastfull, beastly, and shamefull sin
of Drunkennes,Ebrietas multorum ma∣lorum metro∣polis. Athen. Dipnos. l. 10. c. 1. (the metropolis of many mischiefes)
which dothQui luxuri∣atur, viuens mortuns est: Ergo qui ine∣briatur, & mortuus & sepultus est. Hierom. Tom. 2. Epist. 63. c. 4 not onely slay, but quite interre the soules
of liuing men, and indispose them vnto all imploy∣ments;
and so make them a burthen, a trouble, and
incumbrance both to Church and State: together
with all heathenish, hellish, idolatrous, prophane,
luxurious, and excessiue Healthes, which are but
Panders, Bawdes, Attendants, and Vshers to in∣temperance:
for feare you bring your selues, your
soules, your bodies, yea and your dearest deare,
your Country vnto ruine; Let Great men, Gentle∣men,
Iustices, Magistrates, and those of better and
superiour ranke, as they tender Gods glory or their
Countries good, exile them from their houses, and
banish them for euer from their Tables; Halls and

Butteries: as at all times and seasons, so especially
in the Festiuall time of Christs Natiuitie: where∣in
Sub Christi∣no nomine Gentilem vi∣tam agunt, & aliud professio∣ne, aliud con∣uersatione te∣stantur. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 14. c. 2.Christians oft times act the parts of Pagans,
and turne incarnate deuils for the present, laying
aside all reason, temperance, grace, and good∣nesse,
as vnseasonable and vnseemely ornaments for
so good a season; giuing themselues wholly ouer to
gluttony, ryot, luxurie, Drunkennes, Epicurisme,
Health-drinking, idlenesse, chambering, wanton∣nesse,
vnlawfull pleasures, games, and carnall mer,
riments, and all excesse of sinne and wickednesse,
which may praecipitate and post them on to hell; as
if they were celebrating the ancient Bacchanalia, or
the deuils birth-day, and not the birth of Christ:
who came to redeeme and free vs from these infer∣nall,
heathenish, prodigious, gracelesse, prophane,
and godlesse practises, which Turkes and Pagans
would abhorre: and not to set hell loose; or to giue
men liberty and exemption to sinne without con∣trole
or mealure, vnder pretence of giuing honour
to his birth-day: Certainly Christ wil not be fed nor
honoured with the Deuils broth; with the Deuils
sacrifices and Drinke-offerings: with such odious,
shamefull, vile, and loathsome things, as Drunken∣nesse,
vomite, Healthes, and ryot are: Let Christi∣ans
therefore quite renounce them, and leaue them
vnto Bacchus, and his heathenish, Pagan, and infer∣nall
Crue: Let Magistrates suppresse & curbe them,
by executing all those lawes that are in force against
them, euen with care and conscience: Let Ministers

who areApost. Cano∣nes Can. 53. Deerete  Pp. Can. 10. Cne. dicenum. Can. 24. Car∣thaginense 3. Can. 27. A∣phricanum. Can. 7. Constā∣tinop 6. Can. 9 Turonense. 3. Can. 21. Cabi∣lon: 2. Cā. 44 Rhemense. 823 Can. 26. A∣quisgranense An. 816. Can. 60. 90. Refor∣matio Cleri Germanae R∣tisponae. 1524 Can. 3. 8. Conc. Colon: 1636. part. 2. cap. 25. part 5. c. 6. Au∣gustense, 1541. cap. 10. 19. Mo∣guntin. 1549. Can. 74. See Gratian, Distinct. 44. Bochellius De∣cret. Eccl. Gal∣lica. lib. 6. Tit. 19. enioyned by sundry Councels not so much as
to enter into any nne or victualing house (much less in∣to
a sauerne, Alehouse, or Tobacco-shop, where
too too many of them place their chiefest residen∣cie)
vnlesse it were in case of necessity when they trauell;)
Isay 58. 1. Lift vp their voyce and cry aloud against them; not
only by their doctrine but by their practise too:Iudg. 5. 23. Let
all who beare a louing heart to God, to Christ, to
Church, to Country, or themselues, come forth to
helpe the Lord, and this our Zion, against these migh∣tie,
generall, praeualent, and pernicious enemies,
which threaten a Catastrophe and deluge of Gods
iudgements to vs: for feare they inur that bitier
curse of Meroz, which no heart can beare. I for my
owne part can but blow the Trumpet, and giue the
on-set; it is others that must giue the foyle, and
ouerthrow to these hostile powers: If these my
weake and meane endeuours shall so farre preuaile
with any, as to cause them to take vp Armes against
these sinnes, that so they may suppresse or bridle
them; or to diuert, reclaime, and winne such from
them, who haue beene formerly enamored with
them, or held captiue by them; I shall thinke my
labour highly recompenced, and happily rewarded:
But if they proue vnfruitfull or ineffectuall vnto all,
or bring mee nothing but reproach and scorne,
among the looser and deboister sort; whose blacke
and filthy mouthes, or burthened and distempered
stomackes, may chance to vomite vp some cra∣pulous,
noysome, and superfluous crudities of

Nunquid aeger laudauit medicum se∣cantem? Se∣nec. Epist. 53.scandalls scornes, hatred, & reproach against me, be∣cause
I offer violence to their best beloued Dalilaes
and bosome lusts,Nulls gratae reprhensio est imo quod niul∣to peius est, quamlibet ma∣lus, quamlibet perditus ma∣uult mendaci∣ter praedicari, quam iure re∣prehendi: & falsarum lau∣dum irrisioni∣bus decipi, quā saluberrima admonitione seruari, Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 8. p. 279. whose iust reproofe they cannot
brooke: yet this shal be my ioy and comfort: that as
Drunkards scornful, rash, & vndeserued censures (which
Magna dementia est, verert ne infameris ab infamibus. Seneca Epist. 91.I deeme but folly for to feare)Regi∣um est male audire cum bene feceris. Plutarch Apotheg. Graec. are crownes and ho∣nors,
not blemishes and debasements; especially to
such as seek mens spirituall good and welfare,Qui laudem non appetit, nec centumeliam sentit. Bern. de Inter. Demo. c. 42. not
their praise: So God himselfe, how euer men requite
me, will yet reward andMens boni studii ae pii voti, etiamsi effectum non inuenerit capts operis, habet tamen pramium voluntatis. Salu. Praesat. in l. 1. de Gub. Dei. recompence me for this my
poore endeauour (being all that I could do or promise)
though he denie successe vnto it: which is not mine,
but his to giue. Thus leauing this poore Treatise to
thy charitable and pious censure (Christian Reader;
from whom I shall request this fauour onely; to read
and know before thou iudge:) I commend both it and
thee to Gods owne blessing. Farewell.

