



MY LORD,
IN this common calamitie of our late Soverainges death, (of whom it standes in doubt, whether his Life was more laudable and admired, or his Death more deplorable and regrated) out of a respectfull and reverent duetie to his Majesties blest memorie, in this time of vniversall mourning, I haue drawne vp, in a measured and footed stile, some Elegies, and Panegyrick verses; to rouze and stirre vp, by an examplarie Imitation, some more re∣fyned wits, (which owe their abilities and best endevours to this Princelie, and lamentable subject) to goe forward with mee in the course of publicke sorrow; and to devote their Hearts and Arte, to the serious condoling this vniuersall losse; the griefe whereof, is not

bounded by the Sea-bordering limits of his M. dominions, but is streatched out and spred abroad, as farre as the trumpet of Fame, (which hath borrowed all mens mouthes to sound the Heroick ver∣tues most perspicuouslie eminent in our late Soveraigne) is heard: and chieslie, his M. vnparalelled Pietie, and Goodnesse. And for the first, was it not cleere by the whole progresse of his blessed Life, that Hee was ever most anxious, and carefull to maintaine the Profès∣sion, (whereof Himselfe was a Princelie, and practicall example) of the true and catholick Religion. The vse and practise whereof, Grace from aboue, and industrious Learning had so refyned in him, & turned to so excellent a temper; that all the good Kings of the World, (of whom it is said Omnes bonos Principes in vno annulo posse perscribi,) were but as small starres compared to this raying Planet. And all those properties, which Holy write doth attribute to the few good Kings of Israell, & Iuda; and dispersed among them, did all concurre (as Propheticall epithets) in one symbolizing har∣monie, to make vp the perfite patterne and modell of a most excellent King in the person of his Majestie. And to his Goodnesse (a vertue answerable to Theologicall charitie) it was of a splendour so trans∣parent in his M. as the forgetfull silence of future times should never haue the power to smoother, or extinguish. And therefore should Hee not justlie be called , who alwayes affected the weale, and good of his subjects; yea, of all men; His Iustice was ever mixed with mercie; and His wrath, though justlie conceived, was tempred, and mitigated with the smooth oyle of his naturall clemencie; so that the Poets speach may bee turned ouer to Him;
Hee did but hate the fault, and not the faultie one. Compare him also with Ethnicke, and Paynim Princes, whose radi∣ant and splendide vices were busked vp with the false ornaments of vertue; and you shall find that there the best of them, as their Titus, their Trajane, &c. were but obscure glimpses, & as it were a twilight, in respect of that All-refreshing Sunne, which is risen in our age to this Northerne World: For their supposed morall vertues were but enforced sparkes, and flashes of fire, glancing from the recoun∣ter of pride, and naturall magnanimitie; and in this kinde a Beast tamed by industrie, as they were by precepts and imitation, may bee

called generous. But our SOVERAIGNES morall parts, were true flames of sacred fire, (still burning vpon the altar of Faith, offe∣ring vp the sweet smelling sacrifice of prayers, and contrition; (na∣ture and grace concluding and consummating in Him, what is most ex∣cellent both in practicall Theologie, and morall Philosophie. It is said by a learned Man, Pulchra haec laudatio, O virum do∣ctum! sed illa melior, O virum sapientem! & ista optima, O virum bonum! But all the three haue met together in this Wonder of Time, not a Man only, but a King; so that we are obliged with admirati∣on to cry out; O Regem doctum, sapientem, bonum! and that by excellence; and in a superlative degree. To explain by induction these His M. heroick parts deserveth whole Volumes, long tract of time, pennes of the most approved, and tongues of the most admired Spirits, wherein to bee summar and by an vmbragious vaile to lessen the native splendour of so excellent a Light, were impietie, and a crime almost of La
ese-Majestie; Therefore being of a meane stature, for feare of drowning, I will not wade too farre in this Ocean. But knowing that as your L. by nature and education, by common duetie of a subject, and many speciall obligements; was tyed in the most strict and forcible bond of sincere love, to your deceased Prince: and that the threnes, and grips of sorrow at this time possesseth your Heart; So I am sure, that these doleances, and complaints (abruptlie bursted foorth when first mine cares suckt in the never-enough deplored newes of His M. decease, as Symboles and tokens of my love, and allegeance) will bee favoourablie accepted, and gratiouslie protected by Your authoritie. That fountaine of Your L. excellent and eminent quali∣ties, apparent to all, hath streamed to mee some effects of Your grati∣ous favour, which in Will, wishes and performance of all dueties, and service that may fall vnder the compasse of my power, and abilitie, I shall endevour to acquyte, Remaining

