



RIght honorable, thrice worthy, ad true Chri∣stian Senators, your pi∣ous zale, and zealous pietie, in questioning some Popish and Armini∣an Bookes, which haue beene lately published (and I would I could not say authorized and patronized:) by some spu∣rious and Romanized, if not Apostalized Sonnes, and Pastors of our Church, to the inquietation of or State, the hzzard of our Church, the pro∣pagation of Popry and Arminianisme, the be∣rying of the truth, the encouragement of our Enemies, and the inexpiable blemish of our or∣thodox and Apostolicall Religion; hath, as at first inuited me to pen, so now emboldened mee to pblish, and dedicate, this BRIEFE SVR∣VAY and Censure of Maste Cozens his cozening

Deuotions to your Honours: if not to animate, helpe, or further, yet at least to ease you in the Anatomie and cleare Discouery of that virulent and popish poyson, which is couched in the veines, and cloaked vnder the Coule, and Saint-like habit of those new Deuotions, which now ex∣pect, nay neede, your doome and censure. As it fares with potent States and Nulla mag∣na Ciuitas diu quiescere po∣test: si foris hostem non ha∣bet domi inue∣nit. Liuie. Rom Histor. l. 30. sect. 14. Arma quae non habent hostem, saepisa∣me in ciuem conuertuntur. Case. Polit. l. 7. c. 14. p. 62. ample Cities; that they can no sooner want an enemie abroad, but pre∣sently they finde and feele some foes at home: so hath it of late befell our Church; who hauing secured her selfe against the feare of foraigne Enemies by those Quam gra∣ue & quam acerbe est ho∣stibus tam pro∣ligatis, & ne∣minex aduer∣so se opponere audente, vt ipsi nos oppugnare∣mus mutuo, & sic aetitiam in∣imicis atque adeò sum praeberemus. Theodoret. Ecclesiast. hist l 1 c. 7. sundry victories and glorious Trophis, which her Tyndall, her Fox, her Iewell, her Rai∣nolds, her Whitakers, her Fulke, her Perkins, her Abbot, her Whites, her Willet, her Morton, her Vsher, and her other learned Wothies haue oft∣times gained ouer Romes Master-Champions, and greatest Goliahs, who proclaime vs Victors by their long continued silence: is now endangered and almost surprised by Couzning and Non longe scilicet hostes Quaren li no∣bis, circumstāt vndique muros Virgi. Aeneid. l. 11. Intus ha∣bes, qu poscis. Ouid. Met. l. 6 Domesticke foes, who in fighting for her, doe but warre a∣gainst her: her foraigne peace, hath bred her warres and iarres at home; and raisd Virgil. Ae∣neid. l. 2. a Tro∣ian Horse within her bowels, which is like to set her all on fire at vnawares, vnlesse some showers of soueraigne Iustice quench her flames. Now blessed be the God of heauen, who hath in∣fused this Christian prouidence, and zealous care into your pious hearts, to single out these wilie and friend-seeming enemies of our Church, before you haue seized on those rauenous and oppres∣sing

Quot usquis∣que enm iux∣ta diuitem pauper, aut i∣tactus aut tu∣tus est? Quid enim omnium aliud dignitas sublimium quam proscrip∣tio ciuitatum: aut quid aliud quorundam, quos taceo prae∣fectura, quam praeda? Nulla siquidem ma∣ior paupercu∣lorum est de∣populatio, quā potestas. Ad hoc enim honor a paucis emitur, vt cunctorum vastatione sol∣uatur. Quo quid esse in∣dignius aut iniquius po∣test? Reddunt miseri digni∣tatum praetia quas none∣munt. Comerci¦um nesiunt, et solutionem sciunt: vt pauci illustrentur, mundus euertitur. Vnius honor, orbis excidium est. Veniunt plerumque noui nun, noui epistu ar a summis sublimitatibus missi, qui commendantur illustribus paucis ad exitiae plumorum: decernuntur his noua mu∣ner, decernuntur noua indictiones: decornunt potentes, quod soluant paupees: decer∣nit gratia diuitum, quoa perdat turba miserorum, Ipsi enim in nullo setunt, quod decernunt. Salu. De Gubernat. Dei l. 4. p. 104.105. l. 5. p. 161. 162. Wolues, which prey vpon our State. What Authority and right a Parliament hath, to deale in Ecclesiasticall affaires; to patronize Religion; to vindicate & plead its cause: and to arraigne, conuent, and censure such, who violate the setled and receiued Doctrines of our Church; let Christ Iesus testifie: who informes his Apostles and Saints: Marke 14.9. Luke 21.12.13. that they should be brought, not one∣ly before Councels and Synogouges: but likewise, before Kings and Rulers; that is before secular Magistrats: not for temporall and State affaires onely: but for his name sake, and for bearing wit∣nesse to his truth and Gospell: Whereby hee ad∣mits, that temporall Magistrates, may intermed∣dle with Religion, if occasion serue: Whence it was, that not onely Euseb. Eccl. hist. lib. 3. c. 16.17 Iohn the Euangelist, and other Iustin Martyr Atolog. 1. & 2. Tertul. Apolog. aduersus Gent. et ad Scapulam lib see Zozeman. Eusebius. Nicephe∣rus. Socrates. and the booke of Martyrs, according. Christians in the Primatiue Church, were conuented before temporall Magistrates for matters of Religion: but likewise St. Paul himselfe was by the very Iewes themselues accused Act. 24.25. & 26. before Faelix, Festus, and Agrippa, for his very preaching and Do∣ctrine; before whom he pleads his cause; and at last Act. 25.9.10.11.12. appeales to Caesars iudgement seate, euen in these particulars of Religion: which he would not haue done, had not Princes and secular Magistrates a Iurisdiction and Prerogatiue, as well in Church,

as State affaires. Not to trouble you with the See Thomas of Walsing∣ham. hist. Angl. Rich. 2. p. 256.257. petition of Mr. Iohn Witcliffe to the Parliament, in the time of Richard the 2. for the Reformation of the Clergie; for the weeding out of many false, and the establishment of sundry Orthodox point of Doctrine in our Church: his seuerall posiions. Ibidem. p. 205.208.209. That the Parliament or temporall Lords, might lawfully examine and discusse the State, the disor∣ders and corruptions of the Church: That they might lawfully and deseruedly, (yea that they were bound in conscience,) vpon the discouery of the Er∣rors and corruptions of the Church, depriue her of all her Tithes and temporall endowments, till she were reformed. And that any Ecclesiasticall person, yea the Pope of Rome himselfe might be lawfully accused, censured and corrected by Lay men: do sufficient∣ly confirme your Parliamentary praerogatiue in matters of Religion: Not to recite the opinions and Resolutions of two reuerend and learned Praelates of our Church Defence of the Apologie. part. 6. cap. 2. diuision 1. pag. 22. Iewell and Christian subiection, & Antchristian Rebellion. part. 3. neere the end. Bilson: who both acknowledge; that Ecclsiasticall or Church affaires, and matters of Religion, both may, and haue been alwayes debated, determined and set∣led in Parliament, as well in former, as in latter ages: Our Common prayer-booke, our Articles, and our Homilies, (in which the body of our Religion doth subsist) which are all established and setled in our Church by 2. & 3. Ed. 6. cap. 1.19.3. & 4. Ed. 6. c. 10.5. & 6. Ed. 6 cap. 1. 1. Eliz. cap. 2. Act of Parliament: together with Articuli super Clerum. 1. E. 2.36. E. 3. c. 8.1. R. 2. c. 13.15.2. H. 4. c. 25.4. H. 4. c. 17.2. H. 5. c. 7.26. H. 8. c. 1.2.27. H. 8. c. 15.28. H. 8. c. 10.31. H. 8. c. 9.14.32. H. 8. c. 15.26.33. H. 8. c. 31.32.34. & 35. H. 8. c. 1.35. H. 8. c. 5.1. Ed. 6. c. 1.2.

2. & 3. Ed. 6. c. 1.19.20.21.23.3. & 4. Ed. 6. c. 10.11.12.5. & 6. Ed. 6. c. 1.3.12.1. & 2. Phil. and Mary c. 8.1. Eliz. c. 1.2.5. Eliz. c. .28.27. Eliz. c. 2.39. Eliz. c. 8.1. Iac. c. 4.11.12.3. Iac. c. 1.4.5.7. Iac. c. 8. and sundry other Statutes, both in the times of Popery, (when as Clergy men had the greatst iurisdiction and command:) and since; for the establishing and setling of Religion; the or∣dering of Ecclesiasticall persons and affaires; and the suppression of haeresies and haeretiques: doe a∣bundantly testifie: that the Parliament hath an ancient, genuine, iust and lawfull praerogatiue, to establish true Religion in our Church: to abolish and supprsse all false, all new and counterfeit Doctrines whatsoeuer; and to question and cen∣sure all such persons, who shall by word or wri∣ting oppugne the setled and receiued Articles and Doctrines of our Church: what euer some ignorant or supercilious Clergie men (who can be content to merge and drowne themselues in secular Offices, and Imployments, in lay and State Affaires, against the resolution of See Apostol. Canones. Can.  7.80.82. Cle∣mens. Conflit. l. 2. cap. 6. Con∣cil. Elberenū. Can. 19. Car∣thag 1. Can. 6.9. 3. Can. 15. 4. Can 18.20.51.52.53. Chalcedon. Can. 3. Turnense. 1 Can. 5. 3. Can. 23. Aure∣lianense. 3. Can. 26 4. Can. 23. Mateconense. 1. Can, 11.13. Toletanum. 4 Can. 30.4. 11, Can. 6. Constanin. 6. Can. 9. Palatum. Vernis. Can. 16. Nicanū 2. Can. 10. Foro∣tuliense. Can 6. Cabilonnse. 2. Can. 5.6.11.12. Moguntinū. Can. 10.12.14. & sub Ra∣bano. Can 13. Rhemense Can. 29.30. Aquigian Can 85.93.100. Parisiense. l. 1. cap. 28. Meldense. Can. 49. Wormatense. Can. 67. Synod. 8. Oecumenica. Can. 4. Triburi∣ense. Can. 2. Coloniense. part. 2. cap. 25.30.1. Lateran. pars. 1. cap. 12. part. 17. & Can. 106. Reformat. Cleri. Germania, cap 4 Synod. Augustensis cap. 10. Concil. Tri∣dent Sess. 2. de Reformat cap. 2. Sess. 25 cap. 1. Sess. 25. cap. 17. See Gratian. Causa. 21. Quaestio. 3. Roger Houedon. histo. Angl. p. 589.590. Herom. Epist  ad Npotianū. Decreta Pelagii. cap 17 Surius Concil. Tom. 2. p. 295. Rescripta Nicholai. 1. Tit. 10. cap. 6.7. Bernard de Consid. l. 3. c. .. l. 4. c. 2. See Thomas of Walsingham hist. Angl. p. 181. podigma Neustria p. 132 Where vpon the petition of the ords in Parli∣ment. 4  of Ed. 3. all Bishops and Clergie men were dpriued of all theire tempo∣rall offices. sundry & famous Councels, which prohibit it.) do mutter and

obiect against it. What right or calling Laickes haue to write of matters of Religion, I haue fully discussed in a Perpetuity of a Regene∣rate mans e∣state: The appendix to the Epistle to the Reader.former Treatise: only let me adde to this; (to anticipate the enuious and malig∣nant Cauils of some peeuish Diuines, who would monopolize Diuinity to themselues alone:) that Laicks euen in the Primitiue Church, haue not only conuerted whole Nations vnto God: witnesse the Theodoret. Eccl. hist. lib. 1. c. 23.Indians conuerted by Erumentius; and the Theodoret. Ib. c. 24. Iberians, and Munster Cos∣mogr. l 4. c. 39. Bulgarians reduced and brought home to God from Paganisme, by two Chri∣stian woman; (a thing well worthy obseruation:) but likewise written of points and matters of Di∣uinity with publike approbation. Not to record those 16. ancient lay writers in the primatiue Church recorded by me in another place. St. Augustine himselfe informes vs in expresse termes: Extant libri quos adhuc laicus recen∣tissima mea conuersione conscripsi, &c. Contra Iulia∣num. l. 6. c. 4. Tom. 7. part. 2. p. 508. That hee pennd and published sundry bookes and Treatises of Diuinitie which are yet ex∣tant, whiles he was a Lay-man, not entred into Or∣ders. To passe by August. de Anima et eius Origine▪ l. 2. c. 1. 2.Vincentius Victor a young Laicke, who wrought three seuerall Treatises of Di∣uinity, which S. Augustine answered, together with whole Catalogues of moderne lay-Authors which I might enumerate: I shall ground and rest my selfe with that one famous example of Ori∣gen: who did not onely Euseb. Eccl. hist. l. 6. c. 19.20.21.22.23. compile many Commen∣taries on the Scriptures, and sundry other Treatises of Diuinity being yet a Lay-man, for which hee was honoured and respected farre and neere of all the learned and godly Bishops of his age, who were glad to learne Diuinity from him: but Euseb, Ecel. hist. l. 6. c. 19. did likewise di∣spute, and expound the Scriptures in open Church

vnto the people, being yet not called to the Ministrie, at the earnest suite and intreaty of the Palestine Bishops: For which fact of his when he was blamed and censured by one Demetrius; (a pragmaticall Clergie man as it seemes:) as being an vnheard of practise and praesi∣dent; that Lay-men should teach in the Church in the presence of Bishops: Alexander then Bishop of Ierusa¦lem, and Theoctystus Bishop of Caesarea wrought thus vnto Demetrius in defence of this fact of Origen: that he had reported a manifest vntruth: when as there might be found such Lay-men as had taught the people in open Assemblies, when as there were present learned men that could profit the people, and more ouer holy Bi¦shops at that time also exhorting them to preach: for ex∣ample sake; at Laranda Euelpis was thus requested by Neon; at Iconium, Paulinu was thus requested by Cel∣sus; at Synada, Theodorus was thus requested by Atti∣cus, who were no Clergie men, but godly brethren: It is like also (say they) that this was practised in other pla∣ces: So that by all these pregnant proofes and testi∣monies, it is cleerely euident, that not onely your Honors being but Lay-men may proceed iudicially: but I my selfe being See Doctor Sparkes An∣swer to Albi∣nes, cap. 13. And Bishop Vshers Prae∣face to Sir Christopher Syborps booke, accor∣dingly.
Nihil itaque indgnadū vel dolendum si quicunque de diuinis quae∣rat, sential, proferat cum non disptanti authoritas, sed disputationis ipsius veritas requiratur: atque etiam quo impeitor sermo, hoc illu∣strior ratio est Minutius, Fa∣l: Octuo. p 44. but a Laicke may goe on ministe∣rially; to suruay and censure these Cozening and Po∣pish Deuotions, as farre forth as they vary from the Scriptures, and the established doctrines of our Church.
Go on therefore, you Christian Heroes, and vali∣ant worthies of the Lord, to vindicate the caue, and Doctrines of our Church, against those Cozening, treacherous and rebellious Sons (if Sons) of hers, who haue betrayed her with a kisse and Atera manu ferunt lapidem dum panem ostentant al∣tera, Pauti. Aulularia. Act 1. p 82. wounded her with one hand, whiles they seemingly imbrace her with the

other: and the God of heauen shall be with you. And hue you not cause enough, (yea is it not now high time) to execute your power, and display your zeal, in the cause and quarell of our Church? doe not her goared sides, her bleeding scarrs, and festered sores, now need▪ may craue your helpe and cure; since Ier. 8.22. there is no balme in Gilead, at least no good Phisitian there, to suppell and bind vp her wounds? Since shee hath few Piests or Praelate, for to pitty her, fewer to succour her in her present dangers? Alas, whre are the learned, reuerend, humble, stout, and zealous Prae∣lates? where are the Ecclesiasticall or High-com∣mission Courts? where is the Conuocation or as∣sembly of the Prophets, that either do, or dare apply a salue or plaister, to her homebred maladies; or a∣uenge her of those treacherous, corrupt and Coze∣ning watchmen, Cantc. 5.7. who haue smitten her to the heart, and almost betrayed her to her Roman enemies? What Bishops Consistory, what Conuocation-house, or High-Commission Court, haue lately questioned, cen∣sured, suspended or degraded, a Mountague, a Cozens, a Iackson, or a Manwering? a Papist or Arminian? a Nonresident, or carelesse Pastor, who neuer feeds his flocke? a iouiall or good fellow Minister, whose Tobacco-pipe is his Psalter, and his Canne, his Text? or a rayling and inueying Shemie, whose sermos are but bitter, prophane, and poysonous Sayrs against the practicall power, and forwardest Professors of Religion; whom he reuiles and scoffes at vnder the name of Puritns, or holy Brethren; Heb. 3.1. 1 Cor. 16.20 Ephes 6.23. 1 Thes. 5.26. 1 Iohn. 3.16. a phrase which the holy Ghost doth of times vse? What Popish or Arminian bookes; what Isuiticall Treatises, or Ro∣mish prayer-bookes, Portuases, and Mannuals,

(which haue beene lately scattered) and printed here among vs in See Gees Catalogue of of Popish bookes, that haue beene lately printed and dspersed here in Eng∣land▪ great abundance;) haue been of late an∣ticipated, prohibited, or suppressed by them; though it be their proper Office to forestall, and crush them in the shell? Nay shall I speake the Maluerim ver effendere quam lacere adulido. Se∣neca de Cle∣mentia. cap. 2. truth vnto your Honors, (which I beseech you to lay neer your hearts or else farewell Religion:) what Popish and Armi¦nian bookes haue not beene vented, yea, countenan∣ced authorized, and borne out of late against all oppositions whatsoeuer, by some who say they are, (and I would to God they were,) the Fathers of our Church, and Pillars of our Faith? haue not M. Moun∣tagues two Popish and Arminian Bookes, (though questioned thice in Parliament,) beene licenced and approued at the fist by some, (I say not by such who had then Authority, though since they haue had thei Interregnum:) and since not onely not quaesti∣oned nor inhibited sale: but euen patronized, iusti∣fied, and protected by force and sinister practises, a∣gainst all aduerse powers? Was not the way and passge to the pesse blockt vp at first against all such whose zeale to piety, to the publicke weale and safety of our Church, had caused them to tk vp pen and paper armes against his Popish, and Armini∣an Doctrins? and hue not all their Orthodox nd pious workes which past the Presse by stealh or o∣thewise, bene questioned and prohibited, since the vnhappy breach of the lst Parlimentary Assebly, though they were tainted or accused of no Heresie, Scisme, False doctrine or Sedition? Was not reue∣rend Bishop Carltons booke, though backed with the ioynt Attestation of that learned Praelate, Dr. Dauenat Bishop of Sarum, Dr. Ward, Dr. Goad, & Dr. Bel-Canquell,

our selected Dort Diuines: togther with Dr. Succliffes booke, Mr. Rouse his booke, Mr. Burtons booke, Mr. Yates his booke, Mr. Wottons booke, Dr. Goads Paralell, Doctor Featlies Paralell▪ (o omit my owne poore Treatise of Perseuerance, which though it were licensed and reprinted, is yet suppressed and called in, vpon no doctrinall nor iust excptions:) inhibited, cald in and seized on, vnder the bare pretence of not being licnsed, but in truth because they did oppose Mr. Mountagues Popery and Arminianisme, (which the Parliament it selfe tooke notice of,) & displaid both it and all his treachery and falsehood to the wold? and were not all the Printers and Stationers, which were the instruments to publish thm vnto the world, conuented Ex Officio, before the High Com∣missioners, (where thy wre glad to buy theire peace at last) for their good seruice to our Church and State, in printing and divulging all tese books, to the affronting and suppressing of his spreading er∣rors? Since these old stirs and garbols, haue not these priuate Deuotions and houres of prayer, whose Censure and Suruay, I here doe humbly tender to yor Honours: beene licensed in a spciall manner for the Press, uen with an affixed and printed Approbati∣on; (like that of Dr. Whites, to Mr. Mountagues Ap∣peale:) and since its publication, so guarded and sup∣ported by Authoity, though fraught with 20▪ seue¦rall points of Popery, and patched vp of Popish ragges and reliques: that neither the complaints and cryes of mn against them, nor the voye and pre∣sence of a Parliament, could yet moue any of our swaying, great, and zealous Praelates to suppresse them, or passe a doome of condemnation on them:

who now insted of Answering, and inhibiting them, doe not onely dny to licence, but likewise diligently suppresse and intercept all Answers and Rplies vnto them, as the intercepting Mr Burtons Answer at the Presse, and the detaining of the Copie of this my present Censure in the Licensers hands, who will neither licence nor deliuer it, do abundanly testifie.
And is it not then high time for your Honours to engage, bestire, and shew your zeale in the cause, the quarrel and patronage of our Church and Faith, when Popery and Arminianisme are growne now so potent, so head-strong, so impudent, sawcy, and au∣dacious, as to ouer-top, controll, affront and beard the very truth and Doctrines of our Church; to Temeraria, falsa & impia dicta refelltote redarguste, re∣probate: Nam Intercipere scripta, & pub∣licatam velle submergere lectionm non est Deos defen∣dere, sed veri∣tatis testifica∣tionem timere: Arnob: Adu: Gentes l: 3. p: 104. stop their pleas, and brre their passage to the Presse in a peremptory and presumptuous manner, euen whiles the Parliament doores of Iustice stand wide open to heare their pressures, and auenge thir wrongs; bidding particular and personall defiance to these two spreading and combinings errors which threa¦ten ruine and surprisll to them? When those Con∣sistories and High-Commission Courts, which should be Sanctuaries, Shields, and chiefe Protectors to them, against domesticke vipers, which gnaw out their bowels; and those from whom they might ex∣pect and iustly challenge, the greatest fauour, aide, and best support; are now so farre from shielding and assisting them against their Mountebanke, Coze∣nin, and domesticke Opposites: that they doe euen bend themselues against them, in intercepting all supplies which priuate louers would impart vnto them; in silencing, questioning, and clubbing downe

such by force, who take vp armes in their defence aginst their personall, homebred, and professed foes? Als, whithr should our poore distressed Church, or our Religion flee? where should they seeke for succour and reliefe in this their forlorne and distressed condition; when as they are so forsa∣ken of their owne indeared and ingaged friends, that few of them hue eares to heare, or hearts to pitty their pressures and most iust complaints; and fewer courage, hands, or strength enough, to ease or quit them of these pressing, opressing, and suppressing vulters, which rent and teare their liurs and their in most parts? To you, to you alone (right Christian Senators, and valiant worthies of the Lord) they now addresse their tongue-tide grieuances, and silenced complaints: to you they flye for present succour and redresse against their aduerse and preuailing powers; and now implore your aide, your iustice, doome, and finall sentence, (euen with silent sobs and mournfull teares, because their mouthes are closed and shut vp,) against those opē & professed enemies whose woks and writings haue betraid their cause: and those ty∣rannicall vsurping powers, who haue enoyn'd them silence at the Presse, and intercpted or reiected all those Counterplees, Answers, and Rebutters which haue beene tendred, or drawne vp by any to vindi∣cate their right and cause, against homebred and per∣fidious Opposites: And can ou then denie their importunate, flxanimous and most iust equests, which you haue so readily and cheerefully embrcd at the first, whout Petition? Blessed be God, your zeale and courge for Religion are so eminent and intense already, that they neede no spus o mine

to quicken or xcite them, to so necessary and pious a worke: Therefore leauing all needlesse exhortations and encouragements to set on these requests, I shall brifely glance vpon the best and speediest meanes of disnrating our Church of all her prsent grie∣uances; of rescuing her restrained Doctrines from their Egyptian thraldome; of reinuensting them in their former priuiledges, and quitting them from all future dammages, incrochments, and inuasions whatoeur; which means I here humbly prostrate and submit to your mature, graue and pious wise∣domes, which haue no such Pole-star to direct them as themselues. The meanes which I shall meekely offr and propose to your refined iudgements for this purpose, are:
First, to suppresse those Popish Deuotions, and Armi∣nian  Treatises, which haue beene published of late a∣mong vs by appprobation and authority: and to ex∣piate; defecate, and puge out their Romish and Ar∣minian drosse and filth, at least by fire; that so they stand not as Records against vs, to the shame, the weakning, or betraying of our Cause, and Church.
Secondly, to Cuncta prius tentanda: sed immedicabie vulnus ense re∣seidendum est, ne pars syncerae trahatu. Oui. Metamop l. 1. lop off those putred, gangrend, festred and contagious members, who are like Grex totus in agris, vniu scabie cai: & porrigine porci, vaque con∣specta, liuorem ducit ab vua. Iuuen. Satyr. 2 to putrifie, leauen and infect the whole intire body of our Church: and haue already sowne by their pernicious writings the Tares of Popery, and Cockels of Arminianisme which sprout vp apce, amidst the Wheate and pure Doctrines of our Church: that so their Cum feriunt vnum non v∣num fulmi trrent Iun∣ct aque perusso tura auer solet. Ouid de Pont. l. 3. ele. 3 exemplary and open punishment may deterre all others, from he like udacious, scandalous, treacherous and pernici∣ous attempts.
Thirdly, to inquire out, the roots and great-bulkt 

trees which nourish and support those limbs and vn∣der-branches, which haue thrust forth these buds of Popery, and blossomes of Arminianisme, which your flamish zeale and feruency to Religon, are like to scorch and blast before they come vnto maturity: to discry those superiour spheeres, and vppermost wheeles which moue those lower and inferior Orbs, which now run out of course; to search those Dens and Burrowes out, which harbour and protect those Cant. 2.15. little Popish and Arminian Foxes, which now spoyle our Vines, and offer violence to their tender Grapes: and to discouer those higher Springs, and poysonous Fountaines, which send out those muddy, bitter and vnwholsome streames, which doe not water, but poyson and defile our Church. Certainly, these bud∣ding branches whose Popish and Arminian fruits you now examine, receiue their sap, their nourishment, and support, from some greater Trunkes and deeper Roots, which must be felled and stockt vp, before these bitter fruits will fade or fall. These petty Orbs and vnderwheeles, which haue made such ir∣regular motions, and commotions in our Church; deriue their motions, from some higher and superi∣our spheeres; which must be rectified, and reduced to their true and proper motions, before the lsser Planets, and clocke-wheeles of our Church will moue aright. These little Foxes, haue some strong and mighty Burrowes, wherein to shelter and repose themselues, which must be stopped and demolished, before the Grapes, the Vines and Vinyard of ou Church be freed from their inuasions: These poy∣sonous, muddy, and polluted riulets, descend and flow from greater streames, and higher Fountaines:

which must be knowne, dammed, and dried vp, at least diuerted; or else the waters of our Church will still be venomous, slimie and vnwholesome. And till all this be well accomplished, you shall but onely skinne, (and Alitur viti∣um, crescique tegendo. Virg. Gag l 3. Mul∣ta dum leiter corriguntur, sapius maira consurgunt. Concil. Cabi∣lonense 1. c. 19 so increase) not heale and cure the fe∣strd sores and wounds of this our Church; which will soone breake out againe with greater torment, and lesse hopes of cure.
Fourthly, to examine and finde out the cause (if it  be not like the head of Herodotus: Euterpe: secte 42, 43, 44. Strabo: Geog l. 17. Diodor: Sicul: Bibl: hist: l: 1: sect: 32: Lucan: Pharsal: l: 10: Nilus, vnsearchable and past finding out, though Purc: Pilgr: lib: 2: c: 19: some of late, record the conrary:) why Popish and Arminian bookes haue now of late beene published, printed, and countenanced by Au∣thority, and not suppressed as they ought to be? why there is now such diligent and daily search at Prin∣ting-houses, to anticipate and stoppe all Answers to Mr Cozens his, or Mr Mountagues Bookes? from what originall grounds, and whence it comes to passe, that the seuerall Answers and Replies to Mr Mountagues Gagge, and virulent Appeale, were deni∣ed licence at the first, and since surprized and call'd in, though there was neither matter of Haeresie, Schisme, false Doctrine, or Sedition in them, but onely a bare defence, and positiue iustification of the established Doctrines of our Church, oppugned and traduced in those Arminian and Popish Bookes of his, which were neuer yet so much as once inhi∣bited or questioned but in Parliament? and who were the principall Agents and Factors in this wor∣thy seruice, of suppressing all these Answers? The ucleating and discussing of these intricate and per∣plexed Quaerees, (a taske which well befits a Parlia∣ment) may happily reueale a world of treachery, and

vnfold a deepe, obstruce, and hidden Mysterie of Ini∣quitie; yea, it may chance to shake and ouerturne the very pillars, and foundation stones of the Roman and Arminian Faction, if it be but prosecuted, sifted, and ventilated to the full.
 Fiftly, to prouide; that all such vnauthorized An∣swers and Replies, consonant to the established Do∣ctrine and discipline of the Church of England, which haue beene giuen to Mr Mountagues, or any other such Popish or Arminian Bookes, and since suppres∣sed; may be henceforth lawfully printed and disper∣sed without controll, to counterplead and beat down Popery and Arminianisme; and to giue publike te∣stimonie and satisfaction to the world, that how e∣uer some haue lately broached, yet that our Church disclaimes and disapproues their Popish and Armi∣nian Doctrines. And withall, to secure the Authors, Printers, and Dispersers of all such Answers and Replies, from all High-Commission suits, and other troubles and vexations whatsoeuer: Else none will euer dare to write or print hereafter, in the defence and quarrell of our Church and Truth, in hard and euill times (from which God kepe vs) when Pope∣ry and Errour shall haue all, and Truth no sway, nor licence for the Presse; For Qui enim virtuem am∣plectituripsam, pramia sitol∣ls? Iuuenal: Satyr: 10. what encouragement can men haue to write, or to shew themselues actiue for the Churches good, when they shall haue no other reward nor gratification for their paines and indu∣stry, but High-Commission Suits and troubles: but heauy fines and mulcts, or long and tedious impri∣sonments and restraints (which is all the encourage∣ment, reward and thankes that some haue found:) And if no writers to vindicate Religion, the Truth

and Churches cause, when as they are opposed, by authoriz'd writings; then Truth, Religion, Church, (yea State and Kingdome which fall or stand toge∣ther with them) will soone be ouergrown with Hae∣resies, Errours, Schismes, Factions, and false Do∣ctrines, and so brought quite to ruine.
Sixthly, to take some speedy course, to inhibit the  publishing and diuulging of all Popish and Arminian Doctrines, either by word or writing, vnder seuere mulckts and penalties: and to establish some good and setled course, for the inhibiting & suppressing of all scurrilous and prophane Play-books, Ballads, Po∣ems, and Tale-bookes whatsoeuer: and the free and speedy licensing of all such orthodox, learned, and religious Tractates, as shall be thought necessary, meet and worthy for the Presse: that so Schollers may be incouraged to write and study vpon all oc∣casions for the Defence, the propagation and ad∣uancement of Religion; and not discouraged as they haue beene of late, because all their industry and la∣bour is but lost, and buried in silence and obliuion, for want of licence and authority to diuulge them in due season, for the publike good.
Seauenthly and lastly, to take speciall care and Or∣der, that the two famous Vniuersities of our King∣dome (the very nurseries and seed-plots of our Church) may be defaecated and purged, from all poysonous, Popish, and Arminian Doctrines: and that all such heads and fellowes of Colledges, together with all our other Diuines, who are either notori∣ously knowne, or iustly suspected, to be the chiefe Abbettors, Heads, or Patriots of the Arminian, or Popish cause or Faction, may be speedily conuented

before a selected Committee, assisted by some or∣thodox, choyce and prime Diuines and Prelates: to be there interrogated and examined, in all the now controuerted points of Popery and Arminianisme: and vpon their iust conuiction or attainder of all or any of the foresaid Points, to be enioyned a parti∣cular and open recantation of them in writing (to which they shall subscribe their names) so farre forth as they are dissonant either from the Homelies, Arti∣cles, and established Doctrines of the Church of Eng∣land, or Ireland; or from the fiue Conclusions and Resolutions of the Synod of Dort: or else vpon refusall of such recantation and subscription, Tutius est hos offendere quam demer∣isse. Seneca: de Beneficiis, l: 2. c: 24: to be immedi∣ately depriued of all their Ecclesiasticall and spirituall promotions whatsoeuer.
These are the wayes & courses in my raw conceit (which I humbly submit to your maturer iudge∣ments:) to quit and free our Church and our Reli∣gion from all their present: and to bulwarke, and se∣cure them against all future homebred opposites, and pressures whatsoeuer. Now hee who hath put that zeale, that care and courage into your pious hearts, as to ingage your selues in the defence and patronage of our Church and Faith, which are now beser, and violently assaulted, by troops of forraine and domestique Enemies, who would spoyle and cheat vs of them to our faces: inspire you with such heauenly wisedome from aboue, as may pitch you on the speediest, best, and safest proiects, for the ex∣tirpation and suppression of all their open or concea∣led Foes; the vindicating of their former purity & freedome: the establishment of their future peace: & the perennious preseruation and propagation of that

pure orthodox & sincere Religion which we yet en∣ioy. Which Religion, as it is the breath and fragrant odor of our nostrils; the delight and pleasure of our eyes; the swetest harmony and musicke to our eares; the most luscious hony and Manna to our pallats; the most rauishing ioy and satisfactory contentment to our hearts: (the onely food, the essence, life and be∣ing of our soules; the grand procurer of all our out∣ward comfort and prosperity; the onely Author of our peace and welfare; the most transcendent glory and honour of our Nation; the brazen wall, the strongest fence and bulwarke of our kingdome; the chiefest dread and terror to our Enemies; the sole encouragement and comfort of our Confederates; the fundamentall prop and pillar of our State; the onely pawne and euidence of our future hopes and happinesse; and the onely polestar, way and passage to conduct and lead vs vnto Christ, to God, to hea∣uen and eternall blisse: (all motiues for to prise and hold it fast, in these degenerating, declining and re∣uolting times:) so if we once but slacke our hold, or let it goe, (it being the very rocke on which our Church, our kingdome, and we all do rest and An∣chor:) both Church and State, our selues, our soules, and all we now posssse are wrackt, and lost for euer. Wherefore right Christian Worthies, what euer be∣comes of other outward Priuileges and Cito indigna∣tur libertas si opprimitr Nemo plus im∣petrat a libero quam qui ser∣uire non cogit: Hierom. Epist. 62, cap. 3. Ipsi Britanni dilectum ac tributa, & iniuncta im∣perii munera impegrè ob∣eunt simuria absint: has agrè tolerant am domiti vt pareant non∣dum vt serui∣ant: Taciti Aprioll vita: cap: 5: hereditary liberties, (the losse of which you cannot brooke with any patience; where as the condescending vnto them alone, would win your hearts and purses too:) be sure to hold fast and guard this maine foundation whereon our Church, our kingdome, and we & ours stand, against all Cozening vnder miners and Fauxes whatsoeuer,

who labour for to blow it vp: If this bee safe, our Church, our King, our Kingdome, our liues, our goods, and liberties are all secure; we need not feare, what Spaine, what France,Psal: 56, 11: Psal: 118, 6: what man can doe vnto vs: For then 1 Cor: 3, 21, 22: 2 Chron: 20, 15, 17, 22: Iudg: 5, 20. God is ours, Christ is ours, the holy Ghost is ours: Angels, and Men and all the hostes and creatures of heauen and earth, yea earth and heauen it selfe, and all is ours: all these will take our parts, & plead our cause against our Enemies;Rom: 8: 31. and if these be for vs, who, what can be against vs?? But if this be once endangered or rased but a little, O then we sinke, we droope, wee perish: our God, our Crowne, our peace, our glory, our wealth, our liberties, and all those sundry maga∣zines, and heapes of blessings which we now inioy, will forthwith take their winges, and flie away, and leaue vs destitute, helplesse, hopelesse & forelorne, in those ouerwhelming floods and bitter stormes of misery, bondage, sorrow, want, and woe, which shall euen breake our hearts, and crush our bones, and sinke our soules in endlesse horror and despaire. O therefore looke betimes to this Foundation, which now begins to shake, to totter, and moulder by de∣grees; settle but this a right, and roote out all those domestique Romane and Arminian Pioners, who dig so deepe and fast, to vndermine it; and then both Church and State will soone be settled in their for∣mer peace and happinesse: O consider, that the pre∣sent totterings, declinings, and ruines of our State, arise but from the wauerings, wastings, and backsli∣dings of our Church: Our State and kingdome now decline so fast, and hasten to the period of their for∣mer glory; because our Church, our faith, our loue, our Religion, lose their ground: Our Realme is full

of factions, and diuisions, because our Church is so: Popery, Arminianisme, False doctrines, sin, and all pro∣phannesse haue ouer-spred our Church, yea wasted & corrupted our Religion: no wonder then if pressures, greuances, losses, crosses, penury, misery, beggery, shame, and a world of other euils do now annoy our State: Our State Enemies, are no other but our Church Enemies: O therefore curbe, purge out, & quite suppresse, the Achans, Errors, and great Annoy∣ances, which trouble, oppresse and vndermine our Church, and our Religion; and then our State and Kingdome will be settled, and freed from those ma∣ny pressures, miseries, and afflictions which they now sustaine; and not before. In vaine is it to mend the tiles and vpper roomes, till the Foundation be repai∣red: in vaine doe any labour to repaire the decke, whiles the keele is full of leakes; whiles the head and heart is sicke, the other members cannot prosper. Ne∣uer looke that our decaying State should thriue or flowrish, till our Church be healed and recouered: Goe on and hasten therefore with this maine and weighty Cure, and haue a speciall eye to this great Cozening and infectious plague-sore, whose briefe Suruay and Censure, I here in all humility present and tender to your Honours: and the great Physitian both of soule and body, so blesse and ayde you in all your good endeauours; that all the festring wounds and sores of our gangrend and consuming Church and State, may now receiue a sound, a perfect, and a present Cure, & be reduced to their perfect sound∣nsse: that so our wildernesse may be like Eden,Isay 51, 3: and our Desart as the Garden of the Lord: that our wast places may be comforted, and all our sad and drooping

hearts may bee filled with ioy and gladnesse, with thanksgiuing and the voyce of melodie: that you, and I, 2 Chron: 7, 10: and all the people of the Land, in the period and per∣close of this your great Assembly; may be sent away vnto our tents and habitations, glad and merry in heart, for all the goodnes that the Lord hath shewed vnto Dauid and Salomon; to our King, our Church, our State, & to Israel, we his people, by this your happy, and much desired meeting: and let all that loue our Dauid, our Salomon, or our Israel say: Amen.

