



RIght Christian, Honourable, and Religious
Senators; that all-disposing Prouidence
of our euer-blessed GOD, which hath
lately Conuented, and since that Centered you,
with an vnanimous and inflexible resolution, vp∣on
the examination of the seuerall Innouations,
Restraints, and Pressures of our much endangered
Religion, to the great content and ioy of all good
Christians: hath at this time directed me to pen,
and inuited me to publish, this ANTI-ARMI∣NIAN
Index, (which here lies prostrate at your
feete, imploring your most gratious and free Pro∣tection,)
to further your religious and happy Pro∣ceedings,
in the discouery and suppression of those
Hereticall and Grace-destroying Arminian nouel∣ties,
which haue of late inuaded, affronted, and al∣most
shouldred out of doores, the ancient, esta∣blished,
and resolued Doctrines of our Church;
to the intolerable griefe of all true Christian
hearts; the exultation and triumph, of our Ro∣mish
Aduersaries; the prouocation of Gods heauy

wrath and curse against vs, (who hath blasted all
our publike Enterprises, since these Arminian Er∣rous
haue crept in among vs:) and to the great
endammagement and disturbance of our Church,
and State; which are like to sincke and perish
vnder them, vnlesse your medicinall and helping
hands forthwith support them. For me, or any
other now to question: (as I feare too many doe)
Whether Parliaments haue any true, or legall
right, in the reformation, establishment, and rescue
of Religion; in the explanation of our Articles, or
in Church affaires; were but to dispute; not one∣ly
our Non-Preaching, Pluralitie, Commenda, and
Non-resident men, (the chiefe Fomenters of Popery
and Arminianise, and the onely Cauellers at Par∣liamentary
proceedings in matters of Religion,)
Pluralities, Nonresidents, & Commen∣daes which are tollerated and admitted by the Statute of 25. H. 8. cap. 16. 20. & 61. 1 & 2. Phil. & Mary cap. 8. 21 H. 8. c. 13. et 28. c 13. are dissalowed by the Common Law. out of all their Benefices and Ecclesiasticall Promo∣tions,
(a happy and much desired worke:) but
euen all our Bishops, our Ministers, our Sacraments,
our Consecration, our Articles of Religion, our Ho∣milies,
Common-Prayer Booke, yea, and all Religion
out of our Church, which are no other way publikly
receiued, supported, or established among vs, but
by Acts of Parliament, as I haue more largely
proued in aEpistle De∣dicatory to Mr. Cozens his cozening De∣uotions. former Epistle. Hee who hath seri∣ously
suruayed the Statutes of our Kingdome, shal
finde Religion and Church-affaires, determined,
ratified, declared, and ordered by Act of Parlia∣ment,
and no wayes else; euen then when Po∣pery,
and Church-men had the greatest sway, in∣grossing
all Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction to them∣selues
alone: and shall wee then doubt, whether

Parliaments haue any Conusance of Religion
now? It is the positiue Resolution of all the Fa∣thers,
of all Proestant, (and I thinke of most
Popish) Diuines:See Mr. Iohn Northbrooke his Pore mās Garden. cap 48 BB Iwels De∣fence of the Apologie pat 2. c. 2. Diuisi∣on 1. . 522. &c BB. Bilson of Christian sub∣iection, and Antichristian Rebellion part 3. neere the the end, where this point is largely proo∣ued. That Kings, and temporall
Magistrates, ought to bee the chiefe Defenders and Pa∣trons
of Religion; the suppressors of Haeresies, Idolatries,
and false Doctrines: the principall Reformers of the
Church: and they produce the Examples of Moses,
Ioshua, Dauid, Iehosaphat, Solomon, Hezechiah, Iosiah,
Constantine, Charles the Great, Iustinian, Theodosius,
William the Conquerour, Henry the first of England,
Canutus, Edgar, Edmund, Richard the second, Henry
the fifth, King Iue, Alured, Ercombert, Ethelbaldus, and
others: together with the Prophesie of Isay, cap.
9. 13. Kings shall bee thy nursing Fathers, and Queens
thy Nurses: the 17. of Deutr. 18. 19. Psalm. 2. 10.
the 1 Tim. 2. 1. 2. Rom. 13. 1. 2. 3. Iude 1. 2. and
other Scriptures for to prooue it. Why then may
not our King, our Parliament, and Temporall Ma∣gistrates
now, as well as heretofore, intermedle
with Religion, if all these examples, this con∣clusion
passe for currant? Is it from any disa∣bility
in their persons, because they are but Laicks?
Why such were all these Kings and Magistrates:
Such were all the Ancient and Moderne Refor∣mers
of the Church, that euer I could read of:
Such were all our Parliamentary men in former
Ages,2. H. 4. c. 15. 2. H. 5. cap. 7. 25. H. 8. c. 14. 31. H. 8. c. 8. 14. 32. H. 8. c. 15. 25 34. H. 8. c. 1. 1. Marae Sess. 2. c. 2. 1. & z. Phil. & Mar. cap. 8. who established Poperie, and since that
28. H. 8. c. 10 34. H. 8. cap. 1. 1. Ed. 6. c. 1. 2. & 3. Ed 6. cap. 10. 11. 12. 5. & 6. Ed. 6. cap. 1. 3. 12. 1. Eliz. c. 1 2. 13. Eliz c. 12. 8. Eliz cap. 1. abolished it, by publike Acts of State, confir∣ming
that Orthodox and true Religion in our Church
which now we all professe: yet none findes fault
with them. Such a one wasSee the Hi∣story of the Waldenses, Booke 1. c. 1 Valdo, that Ci∣tizen

of Lions, the Father of the renowned Wal∣denses,
or Protestans in France, and the originall
Author of the first open defection from the An∣tichristian
Church of Rome: yet all good Pro∣testants
applaud this Act of his. Such are the
Maior part of our Ecclesiasticall Commissioners,
who yet determine of Haeresies, false Doctrines,
Scismes, and the sense and meaning of our Arti∣cles,
yet no man quarrels or excepts against them.
Why then should they deny this power vnto Par∣liaments,
because they are but Lay, which they
acknowledge, and admit in these? Especially,
since all our Churchmen are virtually included in
our Parliament, and so suffragate to its Conclusi∣ons
in our Prelates (the vnquestionable Iudges of
Points and Controuersies in Religion) who are
chiefe Members of this mixt Assembly, com∣pacted
both of Church and State, and so not
wholly Lay or Ciuill, as some vainely fancy.
Is it because Parliaments want Conusance or po∣wer
to deale in Church affaires, and matters
of Religion? How then was Popery heretofore
implanted, since that exiled, and our present Or∣thodoxe
Religion, with all its seuerall circumstan∣ces,
and adiuncts, estated, and lawfully setled in our
Church by Act of Parliament; if Parlia∣ments
haue no Legall, but onely an vsurped
Iurisdiction in Matters, Articles, Rites, and
Tenents of Religion, as some Papists haue auer∣red,
and theBB. Iewel, BB. Bilson, and Mr. North∣brooke letter (C) and Mr. Tyndall, Obe∣dience of a Christian man pag. 137. 138. fore-quoted learned Prelates and
Writers of our Church refelled? Certainely if our
Parliaments haue such a transcendent power, as to

authorize23. H. 8. c. 14. Sheriffes in their Turnes, and Stewards
in their Leetes and Wapentakes, to enquire of haeresie
and haeretiques: as to enable1 Eliz c. 2. Iustices of the Peace
and Quorum, to indite and punish Scismatiques: as to
27. H. 8. cap 15. 3 & 4. Ed. 6. cap. 11. associate an equall number of the Temporalty with
the Clergie, in collecting, ordering, and composing Ec∣siasticall
Canons, Lawes, and Constitutions, for the re∣gulating
of Ecclesiasticall Courts and persons, and the
better ordering of the Church: As to1 Eliz. c. 1. 13. Eliz. c. 12. See ca. 32. H. 8. cap 15. 31 H. 8. c. 14. authorize his
Maiesties Commissioners in causes Ecclesiasticall, though
Lay-men (as many of them are) to exercise all Spi∣rituall
and Ecclesiasticall Iurisdictions, Priuiledges,
Superiorities, Preheminences and Authorities, as by any
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power or authority hath here∣tofore
beene, or may lawfully be exercised or vsed, for the
visitation of the Ecclesiasticall State and persons, and for
reformation, order, and correction of the same, and of all
manner of Haeresies, Errors, Scismes, and Ecclesiasticall
Abuses, Offences, and Enormities: much more haue
they Iurisdiction of these things themselues; else
they could not collate, or transferre such Iuris∣diction
vnto others. Is it then because the worthy,
iudicious members of our present Parliament, want
learning, iudgement, or sufficiencie, to discerne of
Spirituall Truthes? to vnderstand the sense and
meaning of our Articles which themselues long since
13. Eliz. c. 12 confirmed? to distinguish Popish and Arminian
Errors, from receiued, from vndoubted Orthodox
conclusions? or because they are so barbarously
illiterate, or irreligiously ignorant, as not to know
the obuious, professed, established, and long con∣tinued
Doctrines of our Church, which euery ca∣techized

Country Peasant, or Schoole-boy can
repeate? Alas, what English, Spanish, Romish
spirit, can be so impudently absurd, so prodigi∣ously
intoxicated, as thus to idioize, yea quite
vnchristen the Piety, and all-sufficiencie of our
selected Senate, the most iudicious and supreame
Counsell of our King and State? Can any man
who knowes their most accomplished abilities;
their dexterity and insight in Religion, so much as
once conceiue, such a grosse stupidity, or more then
damnable and vnchristian ignorance in this very
flower of our Church, and Pillars of our State, as
that the proper sence of our receiued Articles, or
the long-continued, plaine, and oft-resolued Do∣ctrines
of our Church, are yet kept sealed from
them? What is this, but to brand them all for igno∣rants,
or to stitch the Colliers, or Papists blinde im∣plicite
faith vpon themSee Doctor Whites way to the Tre Church. Di∣gresse 2. to beleeue onely as our Church
beleeues, and yet to know no distinct particular Te∣nents
which she doth beleeue? What, but to aduance
our Ecclesiasticall Commissioners aboue our Parlia∣ment,
in admitting them to bee competent and
able Iudges of Haeresie, Scisme, and of the sence
and meaning of our Articles, when as the Parlia∣ment
which confirmed them are not such? and to
denie that priuiledgeActs 17. 11. Iohn 7. 17. ca. 10. 4. 10. 15. 27 1 Cor. 12. 10. 1 Thes. 5. 21. 1 Iohn 4. 1. 2. 3 2 Iohn 6. 7. 10. Gal. 1. 7. to 11. Math. 7. 15. 2 Pet. 3. 17. of iudging Doctrines; try∣ing
spirits; prouing all things, distinguishing the voyce
of Christ, and of his Spirit, from the voyce of Strangers,
Theeues, and false seducing Spirits, to the prime and
choysest of Christs Flocke, which is common to, in∣separable
from, the very meanest of his Lambes and
Sheepe? If then Parliaments haue alwayes ancient∣ly

intermedled with matters of Religion, by a
constant, iust, and Legall right: If there bee now
no sufficient disability, either in the Members, Iu∣risdiction,
Skill, or requisite Abilities of our pre∣sent
Parliament, to censure or examine the Violati∣ons
of our established Articles, and Religion, or
to settle, protect, define, declare, and ratifie the
proper sense and meaning of our Articles, and the
vndoubted Doctrines of our Church: I see no
cause why any Clergy men (vnlesse they are guil∣ty
of Sophisticating, or betraying the Truthes,
and Doctrines of our Church; and therefore
feare the doome of Parliaments, from which there
is no euasion) should quarrell, or except against
your pious progresse in matters of Religion,
(which most of all concerne vs) nor yet repine at
Laicks (as they do) for writing in their iust defence.
This stumbling-blocke of Parlimentary Iuris∣diction
in causes of Religion, (which stickes and
takes with many) being thus in briefe remoued;
and your present Honourable proceedings in the
examination of the innouations, and violations of
the ancient Religion, and the resolued Doctrines of
our Church, absolued from the vniust exceptions
of ignorant, obnoxious, or ill-affected Spirits, who
only censure and dislike them: It may be here de∣manded,
what Doctrines, what Religion are now to
be established? Surely no other but those Ancient,
Orthodox, and Dogmaticall Conclusions, which
the Church of England, since her Reformati∣on,
hath alwaies constantly embraced, ratified,
and defended as her owne; but those especially,

which Popery and Arminianisme haue of late in∣uaded.
Yea, but how may Parliaments infallibly
discerne what Tenents are our Churches genuine
Doctrines, when as both sides lay equall claime,
and title to our Church? Arminians now ap∣pealing
to Her, aswell as their Opposers.
For resolution to this Quaere, I shall first of all
take two things as vndoubted Theories.
 First, that the Church of England hath some cer∣taine,
positiue, particular, established, receiued, yea
resolued Doctrines, which shee may truely call her
owne: in which, all necessary Truthes, (especially
such, wherein the very marrow, efficacy, life, and
power of grace, and all true Christian comfort
doe subsist) are actually, euidently, and fully com∣prehended:
Else it will ineuitably follow, that as
yet shee hath no sound Religion in her, and is as
yet no true, no Christian Church.
 Secondly, that all these seuerall Doctrines, are,
not onely cognoscible in themselues; but likewise
publikly, indiuidually, and distinctly known in our
Church: else all our Articles, Preaching, writing,
and Disputes, (together with the bloud shedde of
our famous Martyrs, and all Apologies for our Re∣ligion)
from the beginning of reformation to this
present, are in vaine; and wee haue yet no other,
but an indefinite, confused Religion: an ambigu∣ous,
implicit, Popish Faith, (which in truth is no Re∣ligion,
no Faith at all:) and so our danger is,Math. 11. 21. to 25. Luke 10. 12. to 16. our
condemnation shall be greater, then euer Sodomes or
Gomorrahs were, who neuer had such meanes, such
light as we.

These two irrefragable Conclusions being thus
praemised: This Quaere may be thus resolued: The
onely infallible way to determine, to finde out
the ancient, the vndoubted Doctrines of our
Church, is to compare them with the Rules of
triall: The originall Touch-stone by which all
Theologicall Conclusions must bee examined, is
the Scriptures: and these, (together with the An∣cient
Fathers, and approued Councels) wee dare
to challenge as our owne, if the naked truth of
our Assertions were the thing in Issue: But our
present inquirie being of a different nature, to dis∣couer
the true Ancient Doctrines of our Church,
and distinguish them from pestilent vpstart Er∣rors;
wee must heere proceed by other Triers;
euen the Articles, Homilies, Common Prayer Booke; the
publike Euidences, Records, and Declarations; with
the concurrent Testimony of all the learned Wri∣ters
of our Church: the onely Grand-Iury-men to
try, the best Euidences, the sole Witnesses to proue,
the most impartiall and able Iudges to determine
the Doctrines of our Church. That which all
these doe ioyntly, cleerely, fully vote, confirme,
approue, and testifie, a Parliament may safely de∣clare,
and ratifie to bee; that which they all, or
most disclaime, a Parliament may iustly censure
not to bee; the vndoubted and resolued Doctrine
of our Church.
If then all these giue vp their ioynt and seuerall
suffrages for our Anti-Arminian Conclusions; If
they all passe Sentence against their opposite Ar∣minian
Errors, (as this present Treatise will vnde∣nably

prooue them to haue done) you may con∣fidently
declare, resolue, re-establish the one, as be∣ing;
exile, yea damne the other, as not being, the
Ancient, receiued, and vndoubted Doctrine of
our English Church.
And why should you now make any doubt or scru∣ple
of passing such a sentence? Neuer were there
any truthes more copiously confirmed; more
constantly defended; more posituely resolued;
more aboundantly propagated; more generally
Preached; more vnanimously imbraced; more
vncontrolably published, more peremptorily esta∣blished
in our Church, then these Anti-Arminian
Tenents, which I heere present vnto you: There
is scarce one publike (whether Ancient or Modern)
Act, Record, or Euidence of our Church, since
her Reformation hitherto, but doth in terminis, at
least in substance, guie iudgement for them: Scarse
a learned or godly Martyr of note or eminency in
our infant Church, but hath planted them with
his hand, watred them with his bloud. Scarce one
Diuinity Professor in either of our Vniuersities;
hardly an Orthodox or renowned Writer in our
Church, from the beginning of King Edward
the 6. his Raigne till this very present: but
hath subscribed them with his hand and feale, and
transmitted them to posteritie in some publike
Worke. Not one constant Preacher of a thou∣sand,
who hath not proclaimed them in the Pul∣pit.
Scarce a Graduate in Diuinitie, but hath ei∣ther
in Lectures or Disputes, defended them in the
Schoole. Scarce an Act, or Commencement hath

passed in either of our Famous Academies, wherein
all, or some of them, haue not bene publikely affir∣med
in Diuinity Exercises. Not one authorized
or approued Writer of our Church (for I count
notThree of their bookes were not ly∣censed. Barret, Thomson, Mountague, or Iackson such, the
only opposites to them, that I know off, and those
generally opposed, by all our Orthodox Diuines)
who did euer once oppugne them: Yea al such who
haue formerly but barked against them in their
inconsiderate Sermons, haue beene forced to sing
a publike Palinodie for their paines: as the Re∣cantations
of Barret, Sympson, and others largely
testifie: And shall wee now beginne to question,
whether they are the Doctrines of our Church or
no? because some pur-blinde, squint-eyed, ide∣all
Arminian Nouellists, begin for to dispute it?
What is this but to make a scruple, whether the
day be light, or no; because Buzzards, and blind∣men
cannot see it? or sottishly to enquire, whe∣ther
the Sunne stands centred in one constant cli∣mate,
whiles the massie Earth wheeles round; be∣cause
one brainesicke Copernicus out of the sublimi∣tie
of his quintessentiall, transcendentall Specula∣tions,
hath more senselesly, then Metaphysically,
more ridiculously, then singularly auerred it?
Shall others wilfull, gainefull, and aspiring blind∣nesse,
make vs to doubt our eye-sight? or shall the
absurd and idle Quaerees of some Romish or Tem∣porizing
Spirits, so vnsettle vs in our long-profes∣sed
faith, as to cause vs now to question the most
positiue, palpable, and resolued Principles of our
reformed Religion? Yea so farre to besot vs, as

to put vs to this irrationall, this frantique scrutinie;
Whether that bee the vndoubted Doctrine of our
Church, which shee hath alwayes hitherto belee∣ued,
embraced, professed as a truth: or that rather
which she hath alwaies Diametrally opposed, yea
censured as an Error? O let not vs be so vnchri∣stianly,
so Atheistically wauering in the Funda∣ment
all Tenents of our long-professed Faith, as
that this Apostolicall, Stigmaticall brand of an
admired subitane Galathian Apostasie;Gal. 1. 6. cap. 3. 1. 2. 3. 4. (I mar∣uell
that you are so soone remoued from him, that cal∣led
you into the grace of Christ vnto another Gospell:
O foolish Galatians who hath bewitched you, that yee
should not obey the truth, &c.) With the disgracefull
and soule-pricking obloquies of our insulting Ad∣uersaries
(who will be apt to vaunt, that we now
begin to doubt of our Religion, and fall backe to
them) should now iustly seize vpon vs, for our
halting in these oft, yea,The Articles of Ireland cō∣posed 1615. & the Synod of Dort: 1619. 1620. haue re∣solued al these points in ter∣minis. late resolued points, in which
both we and our Forefathers haue beene so long
instructed. Alas, why should Papists; why
Turkes, or Atheists thus reproach vs: Where
now is your reformed Religion, in which you haue
thus long reposed your Saluation, and imbarqued
all your soules? Where is the Faith, the Doctrines
of your Church, which you haue thus pertinati∣ously
embraced since your reuolt from Rome?
Where is the precious bloud of all your glorious
mocke-Martyrs, in which you haue so long glo∣ried?
Where the Orthodoxie, Learning, and So∣lidity
of your much renowned Academies?
of your vnparallel'd Martyr, Bucer, Tyndall,

Latimer, Beacon, Cranmer, Iewell, Nowell, Veron,
Fox, Fulke, Reinolds, Whitakers, Hooker, Hutton,
Cartwright, Hill, Babington, Willet, Perkins, Abbots,
Field, Crakenthorpe, Whites, Vsher, Prideaux, Ward,
Benefield, Sharpe, Sybthorpe, Ames, Featley, Wilson
Carleton, Dauenat, Morton, Goad, Belcanckquall, Bur∣tons,
your imcomparably learned King Iames, (the
Phaenix of his Age, and eminentest of his ranke
for solid learning) with all your other Centuries
of Writers in which you so much triumph?
Where the Authority of your Church, you Par∣liaments,
or your Articles; that you now begin
to doubt, yea, question and re-examine the truth
and verity of these dogmaticall Conclusions,
which all these haue planted, watered, sealed, and
setled thus among you? What a shame, a brand
a downefall will this bee to our Religion? What
an inexpiable blemish, and intollerable disgrace to
all our godly Martyrs; to these our famous Wri∣ters;
to our learned Soueraigne of blessed memo∣rie;
to his two vnparalleld Predecessors Queene
Elizabeth, and King Edward: to our whole glo∣rious,
and flourishing Church, since the beginning
of her Reformation to this present? What a griefe,
a heart-breaking to all faithfull members of our
Church & State? yea, what a dangerous Praecipice,
and fatall ouerture to all our soules: if wee should
now beginne to plucke those foundations vp, on
which wee haue thus long built, the hopes, the stru∣cture
of our eternall happinesse: or to call that
into question, which wee haue so oft resolued
for the vndoubted Orthodox beleefe and Tenent

of our owne; yea, of the Catholike and Apostolike
Church of Christ, frō age to age, which can neuer
totally, nor finally erre in Fundamentall truthes?
Memorable is the answere of that blessed anci∣ent
Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 4 cap. 15. Ni∣ceph: Calist Eccles. Histor. l. 3. c 34. Martyr, Policarpus, when hee was vrged by
the Pro-consul to blaspheme and denye Christ, that so
hee might escape: Fourescore and sixe yeeres (saith
hee) haue I serued him, neither hath hee offended me
in any thing; and how can I now reuile or denie that
King, which hath thus kept mee? Surely not to a∣scend
to Wickcliffe, Bradwardine, Bede, or Anselme
(who all concurred with vs in our present Tenents)
but to confine our selues vnto the Ages of those la∣ter
Martyrs, and Writers of our Church, which I
haue heere recorded: I can safely say, (and I hope
I haue sufficiently euidenced it in the ensuing Ca∣talogue:
that our Church hathMr. Tyndall with whom we begin our Catalogue was Martyred in the yeere 1536. Iohn Frith in the yere, 1533. Dr. Barnes in the yeare 1541. King Edward was crowned in the yeare 1546. So that these points haue continu∣ed in our Church well-nigh an 100. yeares. this fourescore
and sixe yeeres, and more; euen constantly embra∣ced,
and defended these Anti-Arminian Theses,
neither did they euer offend, or doe her harme in
any thing: (yea, they haue beene so farre from
preiudicing, or offending, that they haue accu∣mulated
her with all varieties of blessings, of con∣tentments,
making herIsay 51. 3. as the very Eden, and Pa∣radise
of God, while they dwelt in peace within her,
whereas now shee ebbs and sinckes together with
them:) And shall shee now proue so vngratefull to
her gracious God; so iniurious to these blessed
truthes, (wherein the very marrow of all true
Christian comfort, yea the strength, the ground
and certainety of our Saluation rest, though some
haue leited them as meere curious, and nice Dis∣putes,)

as now to question, yea silence and re∣straine
them, when they haue thus long kept her
in such peace and glory, asPrisca parē¦nescit, aequa∣lem poster nullum Exhi∣bitura dies: praeteritis m∣lir maor{que} futuris. Cāb∣deni Brittan. pag. 160. no former age hath euer
matched, nor subsequent dayes hae hopes to parallell?
What, shall we thus requite the Lord for these his
documents, wherein his incomprehensible Wis∣dome,
Freedome, Mercy, Iustice, Power, Grace,
and glory, shine foorth in greatest luster; as af∣ter
all the good they haue brought vpon vs, to
dis-inherit them of their ancient Freedome, and
by certaine Politike, and insensible gradations to
shoulder them out of our Church; that so Po∣pery
and Arminianisme (the fertile mothers of all
licentious dissolutenesse) may possesse their
throne? Shall wee thus repay our blessed Mar∣tyrs
for all their glorious sufferings, as now for
to dis-martyr, yea, vncrowne, and tread them
vnder foot, by disputing, or doubting these The∣ologicall
positions, which they haue canonized,
and sealed to vs with their bloud? Shall we thus
retaliate the very Pillars of our Church, and Pa∣trons
of our Faith, euen all our learned Writers,
as to brand them for illiterate, erronious, and se∣ducing
Nouellers, to their eternall infamy, in
rooting vp these fundamental Truths which they
haue planted; or re-implanting those Pelagian,
Arminian, Popish Errors, which they all haue la∣boured
to extirpate? Shall we now proue so vn∣naturall
to our Mother Church, as to rip vp her
wombe that bare, or cut off her duggs that nou∣rished
vs, in offering violence to these her sacred
Assertions, which did at first begette vs vnto

grace, and now cheerish and prepare vs vnto
glory? Or shall wee bee so iniurious, so destru∣ctiue
to our owne distressed soules, as to strippe
them naked of all coelestiall comforts? to vn∣bottome
them of all their hope and stay? or to
leaue them destitute of Saluation, in depriuing
them of all these sweete and rauishing cordialls?
in dis-lincking that Golden, that Adamantine
chaine of Gods immutable and free Election;
whereon their very happinesse, comfort, and Sal∣uation
are alone suspended? Let this, let this, bee
far from all our thoughts; at leastwise from our
practise. Farre be it from any of vs, especially,
from you right Christian Worthies, intrusted with
the care and safety of Religion, as to question or
doubt of these Orthodox, these sweet Conclusi∣ons,
so long estated, so oft resolued in our Church,
without any retractation, or controll.
Your onely care, your worke is now, to defend,
to settle them, not dispute them; to damne, yea,
quite extirpate their opposite Arminian Errours,
(which like Tares spring vp apace among vs, and
ouergrow our Wheate,) not to honour, counte∣nance,
or equalize them with them, by putting
them both to triall: to question, censure, and
condemne, their audacious open Aduersaries,
their secret dangerous Master-vnderminers,Sunt enim quidam qui sustissime dam∣natas impieta∣tes, adhuc li∣berius defen∣dendas putant: et surt qui oc∣cultius pene∣trant domos, et quod in aperto non clamare metuunt, in se∣creto seminare non quiescunt. Sunt autem qui omnino si∣luerunt mag∣no timore compressi: sed adhuc corde retinent, quod ore iam proferre non audent, qui tamen possent fratribus ex rioreipsius dogmatis defensione esse notissim Proinde alii seuerius coercendi, alii vigilantius vestigand: alii tractandi guidem lenius, sed non segnius sunt docen∣d, vt si non timentur ne perdant, non tamen negligantur, no pereant. Aug. Epist. 105. Sixto. It was his speech of the old, I may as truly apply it to our new Pelagians. who
are of different rankes, and must be dealt with in a va∣rious

manner;) not to discusse their verity, of
which our Church was neuer yet suspitious, in
the least degree. Proceede, therefore as you
(Gods name be blessed) haue already done: to
inquire out the Heads, the Nurseries, rootes, and
grand Protectors of our Popish, our Arminian
mungrell rabble, (which swarme like Locusts in
our Church of late) combining both together
(as is iustly feared) to eate out our Religion
by degrees, to spoile vs of these temporall
immunities, of those coelestiall treasures of Gods
sauing truth, which are farre dearer to vs, then
our dearest soules: and when you haue once dis∣couered
them (as you may quickely doe, since
practise, fame, and iealousie haue made them so
notorious,) it will be worth your labour to hew
them downe with speede, both root and branch,
at once; else all your superficiall hacking of some
smaller Issues, will but increase their growth, aug∣ment
their strength, and multiply their fruit,
their branches, and al-daring practises, when the
time, the feare of lopping are but passed ouer.
Trampling we know on Camomile stalkes, doth
but make them grow the thicker, spread the fa∣ster:
it is the breaking, not the bruising of the
roote that kills it. The mowing down of weedes,
of grasse; the lopping off of lesser branches
doth neuer hinder, but aduance their growth; not
lessen, but augment their number: The rootes
must first bee stocked vp, or else the blades, the
stalkes, the branches will not, cannot wither, or

giue ouer budding. Strike therefore at the roots,
as well as at the branches of these preuailing Fa∣ctions,
else all your lopping, will turne but into
pruning: your launching into festring; your me∣dicine
into poyson, to kill our Church the Pati∣ent,
but strengthen her diseases, which haue hi∣therto
got ground vpon vs, by all those former
Parliamentary lenitiues and verball purges, which
your Medicinall skill applyed to them.
It is noted of Pelagianisme, (of which the
doctrinall part of Popery, in the points of Grace,
and the whole body of Arminianisme are the re∣uiued
ashes, and new-raysed Goasts,)Illustris olim protulit Bri∣tannia dog∣ma hoc super∣, &c. Fe∣stus Hommius in Coonidem Gulielmi A∣rnesij. that it
tooke its rise in England,Hierom. ad∣uersus Pelagi∣um ad Cisi∣phontem: Ar∣gumentum: Prosperi Cro∣nichn. Biblio∣thecha Patrū: Tom. 5. pars 3. pag 12. Bede. Ecclesiast. Hist: Gentis Anglo∣rum lib. 1. c. 10. Meredith Hā∣mers Chrono∣graph p. 89. Pelagius the Father of it
being himselfe a Brittaine, and a Monke of Bangor:
What a regained Honour were it to our Nation;
What an inutterable benefit to our Church; What
a glory to this your Honourable and great As∣sembly,
if you could now at last eternally interre
it in the soile that bare it; and make its ancient
(now its second) wombe, its last, its endlesse
Graue? It was said by one of note, some fewe
yeeres past: (and I wish it may be Prophetically
true at least.)
Festus Hō∣mius in Core∣idem. Guliel∣i Amesi 1618. Tulit malum hoc & sustulit Brittania:
That England had both hatched and destroyed
this monster of old, of new Pelagianisme, which
Arminius and his followers had then newly raised
from Hell, to which it was of old condemned: But
alas, we see its liuing, and springing vp like Hy∣draes

heades; Its formerMultae dum leuiter corri∣guntur saepius maiorae cosur∣gunt. Cabilo∣nense Concil. 1 Can. 13. ouer-indulgent decapi∣tations
both at Dort, at home, being but a blood∣letting
to increase its future vigour, not a fatall
blow to bring it to its finall period; because it
cut not off those master-veines which gaue grea∣test,
though but hidden life and growth vnto
it. O therefore giue, and strike it, and its Armini∣an
Issue now at last, a finall, fatall, and heart-kil∣ling
blow, which needes no iteration; and bury
them this once so deepe, so sure, that they may ne∣uer
neede a second Funerall.
But how you will say, may this bee done? I
will informe you in a word or two.
It is Storied of theMath. 27. 60 to the end. chiefe Priests and Phari∣ses
(who were euer the greatest and most imbit∣tered
enemies to Christ and his Apostles, as their
successors, who will needes be stiled Priests, haue
since bene to his members,) that hauing crucified
our blessed Sauiour, because they would bee sure to
keepe him from rising from his graue againe, according
to his promise: they did not onely suffer him to lye in∣tombed
in a rocky Sepulchre, to the doore of which there
was a great stone rolled: but they likewise went and
made the Sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and setting
a watch, for feare lest his Disciples should come by
night, and steale him away, and say that hee was ri∣sen.
What these vile miscreants vainely did in
Antichristian, doe you Right noble Christians, in
true Christian Policie: Pelagius with his late-born
brat Arminius, hath beene oft times buried by
sundryConcilium Palestinum Africanum. Arausicyaum: Ancient, (someSynod of Dort, 1619. 1620. Conuo∣cation of Ire∣land, 1615. in their Articles then composed Moderne) Councels, and

Hierom. con∣tra Pelagianos Augustin. 7. Tom-pars. 2. Prosper. Ful∣gentius Ber∣nard. Orosius. Bradwardine. Fathers of the Church, but yet they haue alwaies
risen from the dead againe, to the great disquiet
of all true Christian Churches: If then you
chance to crucifie them once againe (as now wee
hope, wee pray you may, for feare their life
proue all our deathes: they being the Archest Trait∣ors
to our Church, our State, our soules, and sa∣uing
Grace:) you must not only see them intombed
for the present, though it be in graues of stone:
but likewise watch, and seale their Sepulchres,
making them sure for all succeding Ages, by some
inexorable, strict, and vigilant Acts of Parliament,
which no Charme, no Wile, no Force, or Policie
may euade; Else their Disciples will come by
night againe, (as they haue oft times done) and
steale them quite away; and not onely say, but
to our great disturbance, prooue; that they are
once more risen from the dead: So shall their
last resurrection be farre worse, our second dan∣ger,
your latter Error, farre greater then the first;
which God forbid.
Now the GOD of grace, and wisdome, so
ayde, direct, and guide your Honours with his
Spirit, in this great weighty Worke, (which
needes an heauenly power to accomplish it:) that
wee, to our vnutterable ioy and comfort, may
now at last behold, our drooping and declining
Orthodox Religion (the onely Center, Pillar,
Bulwarke, Garrison, Honour, Treasure, and con∣seruer
of our declining State, which ebbes and
flowes together with it) reuiued, aduanced, esta∣blished,

and secured once againe, against all For∣raine,
all Domestique hostile Forces, all Strata∣gemes
that oppugne it: and that all our eyes
may see with trimph, all Popery, all Olde, all
Newe Pelagianisme, with all the grand Fomen∣tors,
and Master-springs that feede them, (in de∣spight
of all their new-erected and much ado∣red
Altar-Idols,) arraigned at your dreadfull
Barre, condemned at your great Tribunall; execu∣ted
before your faces: layd dead and prostrate
at your feet: interred in some brasen Dungeon;
yea sealed vp, and strictly watched with such en∣uironing,
cautelous, ir-repealable, and adaman∣tine
Lawes, as may so presse them downe for
all eternitie, that they may neuer raise themselues,
nor yet bee raised in our Church againe. 
Amen.
Amen.

