



MOST illustrious, most renowned Foster-Mother,
(if it may be lawfull for me, a quondam-sonne of
yours, even now to stile you so;) the tender regard I have
of your unspotted fame, hath enforced me, out of my fili∣all
duty, to acquaint you with some notorious Errours,
and more than ridiculous Oversights of an Individuum-vagum-sonne
of yours, come forth in print of late under
your Authority, as same (I hopeMendax fa∣ma noces. Pro∣pertiul. 4. E∣leg. 2. p. 191. but lying) hath re∣ported;
which if you correct not in due season, (as I
presume you will) are like to make the world beleeve,
that Ignoramus, toPlayers and Playes, (whom both Fathers and Pagan Au∣thors rightly stile, the plague of soules) re∣move in times of pestilence from infected places where they have brought a plague, to pla∣ces not infec∣ted. avoid the Plague, hath fled from
Cambridge unto Oxford, this Vacation; and that you have
given him, not onely entertainment, but a new Com∣mission,
both to pen, to print, to act, and publish to the
world, hisThis is Mr. Widdowes 2. Booke. Second part. This Sonne of yours, which I
meane, is one Giles Widdowes, aMark. 12. 42, 43. poore haulting widdow
in truth for braines aud learning, of which hee never had
two mites: of whom I cannot say asActs 26. 24. Festus did of Paul,
that too much learning did make himHe hath been once or twice distracted. mad, but want of
wit. These Errours and Oversights of his, with which
I here acquaint you, are contained in a new divulged
Booke, much like the Authour; intituled, The lawlesse
kneelesse schismaticall Puritan, &c. In confutation of
which, I neede say no more to such as know him, but,

that Giles Widdowes Rectour of St. Martins Church in
Oxford, was the Authour; for whose use alone, (if wee
may beleeve the Title) it is imprinted, there being no∣thing
in it fit for other mens use, unlesse it be to make
them laugh these winter-nights. It was my chance in my
late passage through Oxford towards London, to heare,
that this ridiculous Pamphlet, (which made mirth e∣nough
in writing) was newly preferred (and that by
publike license) to the Presse, to make the Authour of
it (no simple Ignoramus) a foole in print. Whereupon I
repaired to the Printing-house, where I found the writ∣ten
Copie, (which I onely turned over, not perused) so
mangled, so interlined and razed by Mr.So have I beene enfor∣med, that he had the perusal of it. Page, and o∣thers
who perused it before its approbation, that there
was scarce one page in all the Coppie, in which there
were not severall written Errours, Absurdities and Im∣pertinencies
quite expunged; and if all of them had had
the signe of the Crosse upon their faces, as well as some,
the Printer questionlesse should have had no worke
When I beheld so many Errours crossed in the written
Coppy, (perchance to please the Authour, who in his
Pag. 71. 72. Booke hath made the Signe of the Crosse a necessary Ce∣remony,
he meanes (I take it) for to crosse out his Over∣sights;)
I expected none at all in the printed pages; on
which I had no sooner cast mine eyes, but I espied di∣vers
Bedlam Errours, and those so grosse, that I thought
such visible notorious malefactours (whose very faces
did proclaime their guiltinesse, though their tongues
were mute) could never passe through an Vniversity
presse, and not be pressed quite to death. Whereupon ta∣king
pitty on the crazie Authour, with whose many
knowne infirmities I was of olde experimentally ac∣quainted,
whiles I was a resident in Oriell colledge; and
withall compassionating the oversight of the Licenser,
who for feare of crossing out all the Booke, (as hee had
crossed out very much) permitted such foule grosse Erra∣taes
to passe uncrossed; (perchance because the Anti-puritan

Authour was here turn'd puritan,I heare that Mr. Widdowes was very an∣gry with Mr. Page, for cros∣sing out so much of his book as he did. in good ear∣nest,
and would not suffer these Infants of his pure braine
to be baptized with the Crosse, for which hee deserves a
Censure:) For the anticipation of that great scandal & dis∣reputation
which I presaged might light on you, Deare
Mother, for giving the least shew of approbation 
ridiculous erronious toyes as these; as soone as I arrived
at London, I wrote two Letters, the one to your pre∣sent
Vice-Chancellour; the other to your Sonne, Giles
Widdowes. wherein I informed them privately of these
ignorant absurd Mistakes, which were like to fly abroad
in print; advising them to correct them in due season, be∣fore
they were divulged, for feare they should eclipse
your honour, and blurre their owne repute. The Copies
of which Letters I shall here set downe, that so your
selfe and others may take notice, how fairely, how sin∣cerely
I have dealt both with you and them; and so see
what cause I have to write thus to you in print, to cleare
both my owne and your reputation.


SIR, the reverend respect I beare unto my much honou∣red
Mother, the Vniversity of Oxford, and to your
selfe as her Vice-Chancellour, hath induced me to present
you with the inclosed short Survey of Mr. Widdowes his
Answer to my Appendix, authorized by you for the presse,
(as friends informe me) through which it hath well-nigh
passed: In which there are so many grosse mistakes; so
many false, absurd, impertinent Quotations; so many illi∣terate,
ridiculous brainsicke passages, exposing the fren∣ticke
Authour to the lash, if not your selfe the Licenser,
and the Vniversity her selfe (whose Vice-Chancellour

 thorized, and whose Sonne hath penned, hath pub∣lished
so vaine erronious a Booke) to unexpiable disgrace:
that though they give an infinite advantage to my cause,
(which needes no Patron but it selfe;) yet I have chosen
rather to advise you privately as a friend, in time for to
correct them before they flie abroad, in print, then to hazard
your owne, or the Vniversities reputation, in suppressing, in
repenting the publication of them, when it is too late. For
mine owne part, I desire not to crush Mr. Widdowes his
Infant in the cradle, as though I feared it, there being no∣thing
in it worthy the Presse, much lesse a Reply: but my
desire is to conceale his knowne weaknesse, (if not the Vni∣versities
and your owne Oversight) by a timely discovery
of his authorized grosse mistakes; which if they should take
printed wings, and fly about, (as they are almost ready to
forsake their nest) I shall be forced in my owne defence, to
passe such a publike Censure on them, as will not onely
scare the oft distracted Authour out of his crazy wits, but
draw perchance some blot of disreputation on your selfe,
who should not suffer such cackling raying wild-geese as
these, to fly Cum privilegio from our Oxford presses. Thus
referring this short inclosed Survey of a whole field of tares,
and wild-oates, (which I would wish you to mow downe in
time) unto your grave consideration; I commend you with
my best well-wishes unto Gods direction: Resting
Lincolnes Inne.
October 20. 1630.

The Survey inclosed in this my Letter, (which I shall
now intitle, Lame Giles his haultings; Or, The Brainlesse
All-knee Superstitious Anti-puritan) was this which
followeth.

