



ALL Scripture is giuen by inspiration of God (deare and louing Brethren) and is profitable for doctrine,
2. Tim. 3.16.17 for re∣proofe, for correction, for instruction in righteousnesse, that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished vn∣to all good workes. And therefore the same Scripture is called,
Heb 6.5. the good Word of God,
Psal. 119.103. the sweete Word,
Heb. 4.12. the quicke and powerfull Word,
Colos. 1.5. the Word of truth,
Heb. 5.13. the Word of righteousnes,
Act. 14.3. the Word of grace,
Act. 13.26. the Word of saluatiō,
Psal. 19.7. making wise the simple, yea,
2. Tim. 3.15. wise vnto saluation through faith which is in Christ Iesus;
Psal. 19 . conuerting the soule, reioycing the heart, en∣lightning the eyes,
Rom. 15.4. instructing vs, and
Deut. 31.13. making vs to feare God, endring in vs
Iob. 20.31. faith,
Rom. 15.4. consolation, hope, patience,
Joh. 5.39. ha∣uing  eternall life,
Joh. 20.31. Gregor. 1. Ori∣gen. Isider. Ful∣gent. Athanas. Greenam. Ti∣len. Molin. for by it wee beleeue in Christ Iesus, and beleeuing we haue life through his name. Hence it commeth to passe, that the holy Scripture is for diuers considerations di∣uersly termed of the Fathers, both ancient and moderne; A long Epistle which the Creator sends to the creature. The Te∣stament
of God the Sonne. The Librarie of God the holy Ghost. The booke of true loue, wherein God vnfoldeth his loue vnto man. The mirror of Diuine grace and mans misery. The rich Treasury of the King of glory, wherein is the spiritual Manna, the Bread of life common to the perfect ones, and to the young ones; where is Iacobs Well, out of the which the learned and the simple may drinke; where are meates for all ages, the sincere and wholesome milke of the Word (the two Testaments being the two brests of the Church of God) for the new borne babes, and strong meates for them that are of full age; where are remedies for all euils, preseruatiues to keepe vs from diseases, plasters to heale our wounds, weapons against tentations, & heresies, a sword to kill hereticks, a touchstone of truth to display error, an exact rule of all things, the Mistris of faith and of vertue, a lanterne to direct our steppes, an anker in time of tempest. Yea, the Scripture is called Paradise, God sometimes
Ambros. ep. 41, Deambulabat Deus in Para∣diso, & nunc de∣ambulat in Pa∣radise Deus quando scriptu∣ras lego. Paradisus Ge∣nesis, in quo vir∣tuts pullulant Patriarcharum: Paradisus Deu∣teronomium, in qu germinant legis praecepta; Paradisus E∣uangelium, in qu arbor vitae bnos fructus facit. walked in Paradise (saith Saint Ambrose) and now God walketh in Paradice when I reade the Scripture. Genesis is a Paradise, wherein the vertues of the Patriarkes doe branch forth: Deuteronomie is a Paradise, wherein the Law doth spront forth. The Gospell is a Paradise, wherein the tree of life doth bring forth good fruits. And truly well may it be called a Para∣dise: for the godly person can in no place finde a sweeter and pleasanter refreshing then in the Paradise of the holy Scrip∣tures; where the tree of knowledge is, not of that that was forbidden, but of that which is appointed of God for the elect; where standeth in the middes the tree of life which is Chris;t. The dore whereunto is not kept close by Cherubins, and the fierie sword, but it is opened by the instinct of the holy Spirit, and the light of the Gospell to all that be hungrie; where the riuers be of liuely waters, whereof the Church of the faithfull is ouerflowne and cherished, and where the mindes of the godly are enriched with most fine gold and precious stones, that is with the riches of heauenly graces;
Muscul. loc. Com. cap. 20. de S Script. where bee trees of all sortes faire to the eye and sweete to the taste, trees planted by God, handsome and fruitfull, that is the Patriarkes Pro∣phets and Apostles; where the aire passeth very smooth and calme, I meane the breathing of the holy Spirit, most sweetly,
cherishing the hearts of the dwellers in this Garden: where the voice of God is walking and seeking the saluation of the sedu∣ced man, not crying this onely, Adam, where art thou? but calling all men also vnto him, instructing and teaching the ig∣norant, correcting and prouoking to amendment them that do sinne, shewing vnto them that bee deceiued the tree of true knowledge, leading them that bee subiect vnto death and de∣struction vnto the tree of life, raising vp them that are fallen, comforting the carefull, and refreshing them that bee wearie. The Garden of Eden, out of the which Adam was thrust for his disobedience, had scarsely the shadow of the true pleasure, which the Elect doe enioy in this garden of holy Scripture; wherein they heare the voice of God, they see the appearings of Angels, they bee conuersant with the holy Patriarkes and Prophets, with Christ himselfe, and the Apostles, and do feede on the tree of life, not onely taking no hurt, but exceeding pro∣fit, being made partakers of it for euer. But as the old Serpent indeuoured to banish our first parents out of the corporall and terrestriall Paradise, so hath he laboured to banish his posteri∣tie out of the spiritual and heauenly Paradise of the holy Scrip∣ture, depriuing them of the vse, profit, and consolation thereof. Witnesse the
August. contra Petil. lib. 1. c. 27. Circumcellians, who seduced by this old Serpēt, and brought into a distast & dislike therof, contemptuously re∣fused, and contumeliously reiected, yea, defaced and burnt the Scripture. If
Ioseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 4. a wicked Souldier and an Heathen was behea∣ded by the Commandement of Cumanus, an Heathen gouer∣nor of Iudaea, for tearing a copie of the booke of the Law of Moses, at the sack of a Towne? What were these wicked here∣ticks (not heathen but Christians, though vnder that name worse then Heathens in their Antichristian proceedings) wor∣thie of, for not onely refusing to enter into this spirituall Para∣dise of holy Scripture, but also for defacing and burning it? Surely they deserued to bee shut out of the heauenly Paradise, their names to be defaced out of the booke of Life, and they to be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, and there to burne for euer and euer. For if anyReuel. 22.19. man take away from the words of the booke of this Prophesie (which is not so much as to deface or burne the whole booke) God shall take away his part out of
the booke of life, and out of the holy Citie. Neither were these a∣lone, for others reiected the booke of God either in whole, or in part, though not with such contempt and contumely.
Epiph. lib. 1. tom. 2. haeres. 21. Omnem vero qui veteri Testa∣mento credit mortem subire. Si∣mon Magus with the Simonians his disciples; Cerdon, Carpo∣crates, Basilides,
August. de bo∣no Perse. lib. 2. c. 11. Maniches and Marcion with their Sectato∣res, reiected all the Canonicall bookes of the old Testament.
Epiphan. lib. 1. tom. 2. haeres. 33. The Prolemaits refused the fiue bookes of Moses. The Sad∣ducs receiued onely the fiue bookes of
Caluin. in harm. Euang. Ioseph. Anti∣quit. lib. 18. c. 2. Paulus Eber. de Relig & Repub. Iudaeor. Moses; so did the
Epiph lib. 1. tom. 1. haeres. 9. Samarits, though
Cyril. catech. 18 some hold they receiued the Prophets al∣so; whereas the
Cyril. catech. 18 Apelleans reiected both the Law and the Prophets. The Nicolaitaus reiected the booke of Psalmes, some of the Rabbins denied the booke of Iob. Porphiry despised Daniel; the Anabaptists refuse Ecclesiastes, and the booke of Canticles.
Tertul. aduers. Iudaes. Againe, the Iewes condemned the whole new Te∣stament. The
Irenae. lib 1. c. 26. Solo eo quod est secun∣dum Mathaeum Euangeli vtun∣tur. Ebionites, of the Euangelists embraced onely the Gospell of Saint Matthew. Crinth receiued none but Marke.
Tertul lib. de praescrip. haeres. c. 51. Irenae. lib. 3. c. 11 Cerdon and Marcion onely Luke. The
Ibidem. Valentini∣s the Gospell of Saint Iohn onely.
Epiphan. lib. 2. tom. 1. haeres. 51. The Allogians of all other hated Saint Iohns Gospell. The Tatians accepted one∣ly the Acts of the Apostles; which booke of all others, the
Eusebius. Se∣eri hereticks reiected, and the
August. lib. de vtilit. cre∣dendi. Manichees refused; so did
Tertul. de praescript. hares. Cerdon. The Ebionits
Irenae. lib. 1. c. 26. Apostolum Pulum recusant, Apostatam eum legi dicentes. could not away with any of S. Pauls workes.
Epiph. lib. 2. tom. 3. hres. 42. The Marcionits receiued but ten of Saint Pauls E∣pistles, reiecting those vnto Timothie, Titus, and the Hebrewes,
Irenae. lib. 1. c. 29. defacing also those places both in Saint Luke and the Epi∣stles which they embraced, that concerned either the Diuinitie or Humanitie of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, which
Tertul. aduers. haeret. c. 51. Solum Euangelium Lucae, nec tamen tum recipit, Aposto Parlique es, neque totas E∣pistolas sumit. Cerdon his Master practised before, neither embracing al Saint Pauls Epi∣stles, nor wholly those he embraced. Others reiected S. Iames Epistle and S. Iude; others the two last Epistles of S. Iohn; yea, some all Saint Iohns Epistles, with his booke of Reuelations, as
Epiphan. m. 1. lib. . haeres. 1. the Aogians, which booke
Tertul. . Cerdon also reiected. On the o∣therside, others haue added vnto the booke of God other bookes, as necessarie vnto saluation. The Gospels of Iames,
Peter, Andrew, Barnabas, Nicodiums, the Canons of the Apo∣stles, the Acts of Paul, Peter, Philip, Andreas, Thomas,
Epiphan. hae∣res. 61. which two last bookes the hereticks called Apostolici, did vse very much, and did take from thence their heresies. The Reuelati∣ons of Peter, Paul, Philip, Thomas, Steuen; the Reuelations, Doctrines, Manifestations, Mysteries, Traditions of Montanus, Marcion, Maniches, Valentinian, Ebion, Aplles, and such like hereticks; and so diuers haue added diuersely vnto the Word of God their owne words and traditions; whereas the Lord saith,
Deut. 4.2. Ye shall not adde vnto the Word which I commaund you;
Reuel. 22.1. for if any man adds vnto these things, God shall adde vn∣him the plagues that are written in this booke. Notwithstan∣ding as the ancient hereticks haue delt impiously with the Scripture by their additions & traditions, as also by their sub∣stration and detraction; so doe the moderne hereticks, name∣ly, the Papists, deale with the Scripture, detracting from it, and adding to it; for as Saint
Hyeron. apo∣log. contra Ruff. c. 11. Istae ma∣chinae haeretico∣rum. i. magistro∣rem tuorum sunt vt conuicti de prefidia ad ma∣ledictase confe∣runt. Ierome saith, this is the practice of hereticks, that when they are conuinced of trachery, they betake themselues to railing; so these wranglers perceiuing themselues conuinced by the Scripture, doe as they of whom
Jrenae. lib. 3. c. 2. Irenaeus speakes. set vpon the Scripture it selfe, taxing it of ambiguitie, and as hauing no authoritie, intending, as Saint
August. lib. 2. de nuptijs & concupisc. c. 33. Turrianus lib. 1. cont. sadeel pag. 99. Ekcius in En∣chir. loco. com∣mun. Pighius lib. 1. Eccles. hi∣stor. c. 2. Mortuum atra∣mentum, Euan∣gelium nigrum, theologia atra∣meniraria. Res nauimis & muta, nasus ce∣reus, regula lesbia, Delphicus gladius. O Quantum n∣bis profuit fa∣bula ista de Christo? Austin saith no other thing, then to bring the authoritie of the Scripture to naught; therefore they called the Scripture dead inke, a cer∣taine bare letter, a dead letter that killeth, the blacke Gospell, and inkie Diuintie, a dead and dumb thing, an vncertaine mu∣table mute and dumbe Iudge, a nose of waxe, a leaden ruler, Sphinxes riddle, a sword in a mad-mans hand, the apple of dis∣cord, yea, a Fable by Pope Leo the 10, O what aduantage hath this Fable of Christ brought vs? being of no more credit and authoritie then the Fables of Aesop, without the approbation of the Pope and of the Church. And these reproches and blas∣phemies are not maintained by the vulgar ort onely, but also yea especially by their Diuines, Popes, Bishops, Cardinals; for Cardinall Bellarmine, and Cardinall du Perron haue written against the sufficiency and perfection of the Scripture, the one spending a whole Chapter, the other a small Treatise to proue the insufficiencie and imperfection thereof; whereas it is the
All sufficient word of God, the true and perfect rule of our vn∣derstanding, the pillar of our faith, the firme and sure anker of our hope and saluation, sufficient both for our saluation (which some Papists doe confesse) and for our instruction, which they denie; witnesse B, who examining that glorious Martyr Master Hawkes,
Fx pag. 1440. pag. 1441. said, that he was a right Scripture man, and would haue nothing but Scripture, and his Chaplaine said, he would haue nothing but his little pretie Gods Booke; and is it not sufficient, saith Master Hawkes for my saluation? Yes, saith he, it is sufficient for our saluation, but not for our instru∣ction. Master Hawkes answered, God send me the saluation, and you the instruction. And surely it is sufficient not onely for our saluation, but also for our instruction, for if it sufficeth for saluation, how can it bee insufficient for our instruction? therefore the Apostle Saint Paul teacheth vs both the one and the other, saluation and instruction by the Scriptures; for first he saith,
2. Tim. 3.15. the holy Scriptures are able to make vs wise vnto sal∣uation through faith which is in Christ Iesus. Behold here, the Scriptures are sufficient for our saluation; and not onely for our saluation, but also for our instruction, for he saith, able to make vs wise vnto saluation, that is, to instruct vs to saluation, yea, in the next verse he saith, that the
vers. 16.17. Scripture is profitable for instruction in righteousnesse, that the man of God may be per∣fect. Behold, the Scriptures sufficient and profitable for our instruction; and not onely profitable to the man of God, to the Doctor, the Minister, and the learned; but also profitable to the ignorant, simple, and vulgar sort; for
Psal. 9.7. it maketh wise the sim∣ple; and therefore the reading thereof appertaineth as wel vn∣to the ignorant and vnlearned, as vnto the learned: for if it ap∣pertaine but vnto the learned to reade the Scriptures, it apper∣taineth then vnto none to reade them; for no body is learned before he haue read them; we reade not the word of God be∣cause we are learned, but to become so. And therefore the Pa∣pists doe wrong the people of God, depriuing them of the rea∣ding of the Scripture, lest, say
Hosius in loc. Com. they, the Porters, Coblers, Ba∣kers should be Prophets, farre vnlike to Moses,
Numb. 11.29. who wisht, that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit vpon them: but very like the Bsilidians, whose
steppes they follow, who (as
Jrenae. lib. 1. cap. 23. Ephiph. haeres. 24 Irenaeus and Epiphanius write) did hide their doctrines; We are men, said Basilides, all the rest are hoggs and dogges;
Matth. 7.6. Cast not therfore (said he) your pearles before swine, nor giue that which is holy vnto doggs: which was to confesse openly,
Bernard. in Cant. serm. 65. At istud apertè faeri est se non esse de ecclesia, qui onmes qui de ecclesia sunt canes censet & porcos. that he himselfe was not of the Church, cal∣ling all those that are of the Church swine and dogges. Yea, in hindering the people of God to enter into this sweete Paradise of holy Scripture; they are like the Scribes and Pharisees their forefathers, against whō our Sauiour Christ pronounceth this woe,
Matth. 23.13 Woe vnto you Scribes and Pharisies hypocrites, for ye shut vp the kingdom of heauen against men; for ye neither goe in your selues, neither suffer yee them that are entring to goe in. Besides, as they haue detracted from the Scripture by their blasphe∣mous reproches, accusing it of insufficiencie and imperfection, so haue they also added vnto it.
Cicero orat. 44. in Anton. Phi∣lip. secunda. Is Caesaris leges eas{que} praeclares euertie. For as Marcus Antonius did abolish the excellent Laws of Caesar,
Testamentum irritū fecit. Ibid. and made void his Testament,
Ibid. Acta Cae∣saris pacis causa confirmata  à senatu, qu quidem Caesar egisset, non e quae Caesarem egisse dixisset Antonius, &c. yea, when the Senate had ratified the Actes of Casar, hee added to Caesars Actes what hee listed, and would haue it to stand as sure, as if Caesar himselfe had enacted it. So these haue indeuoured to abolish the Law of God, to make void the Testament of our onely Caesar and Sauiour Christ, and haue added to his Testament what they listed, and will haue them to stand as sure, as if Christ had enacted them (yet they would make vs beleeue, that they doe
Ibid. Et tu in Caesaris memo∣ria diligens, tu illum amas mortuum. much in remembrance and honour of Christ, and that they loue him): for first, they adde vnto the Canonicall books of the Scripture, other books that are not Canonicall, but Apocrypha, because they finde in those bookes many things to serue their turnes, for the main∣taining of their heresies, which they cannot shide at all in the Canon of the Scripture. Secondly, because this is not suffici∣ent, they adde their traditions and determinations; yea, their gospels, wheras all addition of Gospels to the onely true Gos∣pell is execrable. Some, as the begging Friers, disciples of Saint Dominick and Saint Francis, inuented and published forth a booke ful of horrible blasphemies, which they named, the Gos∣pll of the holy Ghost, or, the euerlasting Gospell, full of their own ables and abominable errors, teaching that Christs Gos∣pell was not to be compared vnto it, and that the Gospell of
Christ should bee preached but ie yeeres; so they opposed the Gospell of their holy Ghost, to the true Gospell of the holy Ghost; their eternall Gospell  that Gospell, which is cal∣led
. 14.6. the euerlasting Gospell, to be prched vnto them that dwell the earth and to euery Nion, and kindred, and tongu, and ple, and that euen unto the ende of the world; wh their gospell was of the Deuill that impure spirit, & was not an euerlasting Gospel, but was soon refuted by Guili de ∣ct Amre, condemned by the Pope, & secretly burnt. Others call the Determination of the Church the Gospell, some ∣taining, that the Popes Decrall Episties are to bee counted among the Canonicall books, and made equall with the Scrip∣ture. Some making their humane ordinances equall with the Scripture in authoritie. Others peing them before it, and maintaining, that the authoritie of Ecclessticall tradition hath more force and fficcie to assure ur faith in all ctro∣uersies then the Scripture. Thus the hereties in
Irenae. lib. 3. cap. 2. Non ps∣si ex hijs ie∣uiri verit qui esci tradi∣tianē. N im per literas tra.  sed per  vo∣cem. Ires time maintained, that the truth could not be found in the Scripture, by such as were ignorant of tradition, and the great my∣steries of faith were no by the Apostles committed to his Disciples, but by word of mouth, and not by writing.
Epiph. heres. 48 August haeres. 26 Moutan confessed, that he admitted all the Scripture, yet hee seined ouer and besides, that the Comforter was come, to perfect, that which was but begunne; and so did adde vnto the doctrine of the old and new Testament ceraine other obseruations of his pretended Paracler, which might be such an holy Ghost as
Epph. heres 2 that of Simon Mag was, or such a one as was, carried in poste in a cloke-bagge from Rome to Trent. The Heretickes
Ter. de ∣ret. 50. N heres Al∣phab Gr∣rum comps∣runt. &c. Marcus and Clbarsu, did  new heresie out of the Greeke Alphabet, maintaining that the truth could not bee found out without these characters; and that the fulnesse & perfection of  w contained in these letters; for which cause Christ said, I am , and . The Here∣ticks, , Apelles, Mare, thsuch like, did boast, that they had receiued many doctrines and  without scripture.
Euseb. bist. lib. 5. c. 28. Eusebius els vs, that the Hereticke A∣m did beast, that his doctrine was  from the Aposto∣like .
Clem. Alex. . lib. 7. 
did glory in that he had a certain Glaucus for his teacher, who had serued as an interpretor to S. Peter; that Valentine did vaunt to haue been Saint Pauls auditor; that the Marcionites did brag that they were the disciples of them that had seene and heard the Apostle Matthias, of whom they held, obser∣ued, and teached their doctrine. In a word, as the Scribes and Pharisies esteemed the traditions of the Elders, the Rbbines their Cabala, the Moutanists the new Comforter; these Here∣ticks their reuelations and traditions to be necessary to salua∣tion, without the which the truth could not bee learned out of the Scripture. So the Papists doe maintaine, that the sacred and Canonicall Scripture is not sufficient to prooue matters of faith and charity, and therefore haue recourse vnto traditions and the vnwritten word, which are necessary to saluatiō. But as the holy Fathers did accuse, & that iustly, Samosateus,
Euseb. hist. lib. 7. cap. 30. because that departing from the Canonicall bookes, hee had been au∣thor of an hereticall doctrine, and had not followed the Apo∣stolicke doctrine. Euen so may wee accuse the Papists, who haue corrupted the word of God by their traditions and fa∣bles, and straying from the Scripture, haue strayed from the truth. And surely it is no maruell if they erre, so long as they forsake the sea-man compasse, without the which all things are to vs vncertaine: yea rather it were a wonder, yea more then a wonder, if without that compasse they could hold their course, and not suffer ship wracke against the rockes, the sands, and the vnknowne shores of humane traditions. For as
Plutar. in vita Thesei, in prin∣cip. Plu∣tarke saith, The Histriographers which doe set ooth the de∣scription of the earth in figure, are wont to place in the lower∣most part of their mappes the farre distant region vnknowne vnto them, and to marke in the margent such like notes and reasons as these; beyond these countries are nothing but deep dry sands without water, full of soule ill fauoured venomous beasts, or much mud vnnauigable; or Scythia forsaken for cold. Euen so say wee; The Scripture is a map, containing a description of the place of our soiourning here in this vale of misery, of our iourney to our heauenly Ierusalem, containing all thinge necessary for vs in this our pilgrimage, both for our instruction and saluation. Beyond the Scripture, and without
the mappe there of, as in the lowermost parts and borders of mappes, there is nothing but rra incognita, vnknowne land, and dry deres, full of barres sands of humane traditions; no∣thing but stinking pooles, full of venomous and cruell beasts: that is to say, of false opinions, and detestable heresies; nothing but vnknowne and doubtfull waies, the mother of all kind of errors. Beyond this Scripture, there is nothing but scriptura in∣cognita, the vnknowne and vnwritten word and traditions, dangerous gulphes and whirle-pooles, where the anker of our faith can haue no hold, where all our sounding plummets are found too short, and where wee must of necessity make ship∣wrack of our faith; and therefore wee keepe our selues within the mppe and compsse of the Scripture, the sea-mans com∣passe the rule of our sobriety, the bridle of our discourse, the li∣mit of our faith for our safety, lest wee should bee tossed and cast vpō some vnknowne coasts, & so perish,
August. Hypog∣nost. articul. 6. Sede in portu fidei catholicae, vbi te nua pos∣sit fluctuosae cu∣risitatis tempe∣stas turbare vel mergere. we rest our selues in the hauen of the Catholicke faith, where no tempest of trou∣blesome sity,  either trouble or drowne vs. If then they aske vs, why we retaine not their doctrine, their determinati∣ons, decrees, Councels, and traditions; we answere, that we re∣ceiue them not, because they are not described nor contained in the mappe of the holy Scripture: if they accuse vs
Matth. 15.2.3 Marke 7.5.7. as the Pharisies and Scribes did the Disciples of Christ, because wee walke not according to the traditions, of the Elders, but trans∣gresse them; wee will answere them with Christ; Why doe you also transgresse the commandement of God by your tradition? In vaine doe ye worship God, teaching for doctrine the com∣mandements of men. If they reproue vs because we
Fox. pag. 1441 Boner. will haue no more then Scripture teacheth; but euen as Christ hath left it bare we will answere:
Thomas Hawkes. He that teacheth vs otherwise, wee will not beleeue him. If they call vs Hertickes, wee will con∣fesse with Saint Paul, that
Act. 24.14. after the way which they call hereie, so worship we the God of our fathers, beleeuing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets, Nay, they themseles are Heretickes, because they doe not beleeue all the things that are written in the Law and the Prophets,
Fulke against the Rhemists. Tit. 3.10. but doe obsti∣nately defend grieuous errours, against the manifest authority of the holy Scriptures, and detract from them, and adde vnto
them, teaching another doctrine, another Gospell, and there∣fore are accursed: for it
Gal. 1.8. any man preach another Gospell vnto you then hat which you have receiued, let him be accursed. And,
Reuel. 22.18.19. if any man adde vnto these things, God shall adde vnto him the plagues that are written in this booke. If any man shall take a∣way from the words of this booke, God shall take away his part out of the booke of life, and out of the holy City, and from the things which are written in this booke.
But the Romanists doe not only detract from Scripture and adde vnto it, but they peruert it also by their false glosse, and irregular expositions, which they
2. Pet. 3.16. wrest vnto their owne destru∣ction, as S. Peter saith; witnesse the point of Euangelical Coun∣sels, which they display, to set forth their workes of superero∣gation, the supererogation of their workes, placing them a∣boue the perfection of the Law, the Law of perfection; though some of them denie any perfection in them, and maintaine that they doe auaile but instrumentally, accidentally and seconda∣rily to perfection, whereas
Thom. Aquin. 22. ae. Articul. 5. perfection doth consist esentially in precepts, and that precepts doe auaile primarily and essentially to perfection. And although the beginning, the author, the counsellour, the name, & the definition of Euangelicall Coun∣sels are not to be found in the Scripture, yet they would make vs beleeue, that these things are there to be found, though they varie in regard of the Author thereof. For Antoninus Arch∣bishop of Florence makes Saint Dominick a Spaniard the first inuentor of Euangelicall Counsels, and describes not onely Saint Dominicks conformitie with Christ, in his birth, in his miracles, in his authoritie and power (therefore was hee called Dominicus) and his visions which he saw stuft full with fond lies, and impious fables of horrible blasphemies: but hee tells vs also ouer and besides, strange things of him before hee was borne; for
Antoninus hi∣stor. part. 3. ti∣tul. 23. c. 1. § 1. Sed apertius pronunciatus fuit & declara∣tus particula∣rius in pictura quadam, quae reperta est in ec∣clesia Sancti Marci Venetiae; vbi antequam Dominicus nas∣ceretur in mundo, imagi∣nes duorum dopictae cernebantur à cunctis, quarum vna erat admodum religiosi in habitu ordinis praedicatorum cum lilio in manu, alter a similitud nem habebat Apostoli Pauli, pro pingi consneuit, super quam scriptum erat agios Paulus, id est sanctus, sub figura vero ad pedes sic, per istum itur ad Christum. Super figuram alteram scriptum erat, Agios Dominicus, sub istovero Facilius itur per istum nec mireris de scriptura huiusmodi; quia doctrina Pauli, ficut & caelerorum Apostolorum erat doctrina inducens ad fiem & obseruantiam praeceptorum. Doctrina Dominici ad obseruantiam consiliorum, & ideo facilius per ipsam itur ad Christum. he was more manifestly declared, and particularly
described by a certaine picture which was ound in ye Church of S. Marke as Voni, where before Saint Dominicke was borue the images of two men were seene of all men, whereof the one did represent a man very religious in the habit of the order of the Preaching bretheen, with a Lillie in his hand; the other had the resemblance of the Apostle Paul, as he is vsually pouraied, on the which was written, Sai Paul, and this vn∣derneath, By this man may ye come to Christ; vpon the other image was written S. Dominick, and vnderneath, But by this you may come sier; neither must you maruell at this, saith An∣tonius; for Saint Pauls doctrine, as of all the other Apostles, led but to faith, and the keeping of the Commandements: but Sain Dominicks doctrine should leade men to the obseruing of Euangelicall Counsels, and therefore the easier way to come to Christ by him. O intollerable blasphemie! But some goe higher, and make the Apostles inuentors, professors, obseruers, yea, and Counsellors of Euangelicall Counsels, and so reiect the former opinion, which makes the Apostles to bee leaders but to faith, and the keeping of the Commandements, and not of Counsels. Surely the Apostles were no obseruanins of Euan∣gelicall Counsels, they neuer begd, but laboured with their hands, and the greatest part of them were married. Indeede there was an error of those, that called themselues
Epiphanius haeres. 61. August. haeres. 40 Apostolici, as imitators of the Apostles, and termed themselues Aporacti∣ci, because they renounced their wiues and goods, dwelling onely in Cilicia and Phrygia, being the of-spring of the Tatian and Eucratian hereticks, who made the obseruation of these things necessary, affirming that none could be saued, that liued not single and in pouerue as the Apostles did, and reiecting those that did it not. Such Apostolici there were, but no such Apostles. But some goe a straine higher, and make our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, not onely a Commander, or rather Counsellour, but also a chief obseruer of Euangelicall Coun∣sels. But
Isa. 40.13. who hath been his Counsellor? who hath taught and instructed him?
Isa. 9.6. who is the Wouderfull, Counseller, the mighty God, the euerlasting Faher? To what end should he haue pra∣ctised Counsels? what, either to shew any imperfection of the Law by any new edition, or additiō to that Law which is most
perfect, or else to it an higher degree of glory in heauen? surely neither; and therefore Christs example is vnfitly alle∣ged for the practise of Euangelicall Counsels, which he neuer practised. Secondly, they erre in the baptizing of heir Coun∣sels, naming thē Euangelicall: for they say, these Counsels are of the Law, which they deuide into precepts and Counsels, and so parts thereof, and secondly, they say the Eunuches, Isa. 56. were obseruers of Euangelicall Counsels vnder the Law. Thirdly, they recommend nothing but works; now all works are of the Law, and if of the Law, they then are precepts, not Counsels. If then they are of the Law, they should bee called Law-Counsels; and if Legall, then not Euangelicall, because of the maine difference of the Law and the Gospell. But as they are not Euangelicall, nor of the Gospell, so are they not Legall, nor of the Law, according to their owne position and rule, because they say, they are Euangelicall; and therefore cannot be of the Law, by reason of the difference aboue men∣tioned. Secondly, the Law, first, communds alwaies, and ne∣uer counsels. Secondly, it bindes men to the obseruation there∣of. And thirdly all men. Fourthly, it threatneth punishment. Now Counsels, say they, first, commaund not, but counsell onely. Secondly, they are arbitrarie. Thirdly, they are not for all men, but onely for some men. Fourthly, they threaten no punishment; and therefore Counsels cann be of the Law by their owne rule. Thirdly, they erre in the difference which they put betweene Precepts and Counsels, first, that a Counsell is kept with greater difficultie then a precept, which is false; for it is harder to loue his enemie, which is a Precept of perfecti∣on, then to giue all his goods to the poore, which is a Counsell of perfection. Secondly, Counsels are arbitrary, which is also false, for
Iunius in Bel∣larm. 1172. Con∣silium diuinum infert necessita∣tem, humanum minimè. Humane Counsels are arbitrarie, Diine necessary, as those Counsels are; nay, humane Counsels are not arbitrary, but necessarie; if they bee the Counsels of a superiour to an ini∣our, as of a father to his sonne, of a Master to his seruant, of a King to his subiect, they are as much as a commond; how much more are the Counsels of the reor to his creature, the King of Kings to his seruants, of God to man? whose Counsels are his will his will is his Law and Commandements, and ther∣fore
necessarie. Thirdly, a Counsell not obserued, hath no pu∣nishment; yes it hath.
Pru. 1.26.27 28.30. Because ye haue set at naught all my Counsell, I will laugh at your calamitie, &c. wh your destructi∣on commeth, then shall they call vpon me, but I will not answere. They would none of my Counsell; therefore shall they eate of the fruit of their owne way.
Psal. 107.11. Because they contemned the Counsell of the most High, therefore he brought downe their hears with labour, they fell downe,
Bernard. super Cant. serm. 65. Euangelium ap∣pellasti? ad E∣uangelium ibis. and there was none to helpe. Counsels therefore not obserued haue punishment. Lastly, they appeale vnto the Scripture for their pretended Euangelicall Counsels: vnto the Scripture they shall goe, which is not for them, but a∣gainst them: for that of Saint Paul, 1. Cor 7. is not Counsell, but his aduice and iudgement, and his iudgement is a Com∣mandement; yea, admit it were a Counsell, it is a Counsell of the holy Ghost, and therefore a Commandement; and it is maruell that they alleage Saint Paul as a Counseller of Euan∣gelicall Counsels, seeing that Antonius makes him but a Tea∣cher of Faith, and of the Law, as wee haue seene. And Christs Counsels to the young man, Matth. 19. and to the Church of Laodicea, Reuel. 3. were no Euangelicall Counsels: for be∣ides that, that of Saint Matthew is called a Precept by
August. in epist. 89. quaest. 4. Saint Austin and many moe, yea, a generall precept by Guiliels de S. Amore, and that a man may obserue that Counsel of giuing all to the poore, and yet haue no reward, and so no Counsell: for
1. Cor. 13.3. if a gine all to the poore, and  no lour, i proireth him nothing: both of them are the Counsels of Christ, God and Man, and therefore Commandements, both of them neces∣sarie, and not arbitiary, both of them not obserued threaten punishment; for the one was excluded out of the King dome of heauē, the others were spued out of Christs mouth, for not ob∣seruing his Counsell, euen by the Papists confession. We say therefore, that these places will not serue their tue for their pretended Counsels, and the distinction betweene the Precept of God, and the Counsell of God is friuolous and improper ac∣cording to their sense and meaning. Indeede there may bee a verball and nominall distinction of the Counsels and precepts of God, but there can be no reall distinction of them: Precepts are Counsels, and Counsels are Precepts, at least particular pre∣cepts,
giuen to some in particular for some time, and some cir∣cumstance, for so Saint Austin, with some of the Fathers, yea, and Schoolmen and Papists too, call Counsels particular Pre∣cepts; and therefore Pope Nicolas the sixth confesseth,
Decret. lib. 5. tit. 12. cap. 3. Nonnulla Con∣silia Euangelica sub verbo & prohibitione praecepti. that there are some Euangelicall Counsels expressed vnder the terme and prohibition of Precepts.
But this point of Euangelicall Counsels with that of the Scripture, is more largely handled in this first Volume of Ia∣cobs Vow, the basis and ground of the ensuing volumes (the se∣cond beginning with the Treatise of Vowes, which shal come forth God willing, as soone as time and leisure will permit) which first Volume I haue translated, because I found the mat∣ter and subiect thereof learnedly handled, and very necessarie, not onely for those that are without, but also for those that are among vs, who may see in this Treatise as in a glasse, the errors of the Church of Rome in the points of the Scripture and Euan∣gelicall Counsels, with the refutation thereof. I alwaies liked that sentence of an ancient Father; It is, saith he, an act of mo∣desty, not to aduance your owne inuentions, but to declare that which you haue receiued of those that haue gone before you; therefore I neuer made vow, that I would not put my hand to any Translation or Paraphrase, as Du Bartas did, which he did not long obserue, for he translated that roiall and diuine
The Lepanto. Pom of our dread Soueraigne, as he himself confesseth in the Preface thereof: but haue had a desire to translate this booke, following therein the president and example of great men, Diuines, Knights, Lords, Ladies, yea, and Princes too that haue done the like.
The reason which hath moued mee (deare Brethren) to shroud this translation of mine vnder your names, is, because yee are both vnto mee, brethren of race, of place, and of grace, which containes more then can bee expressed, and is enough, yea, more then enough, to moue me to dedicate this booke vn∣to you; and therefore as God hath ioyned you both together in one of the neerest societies that can be, so haue I ioyned you both together in this Dedication. For, as
Hieron. ad Chromat. Non debet charta di∣uidere, quos a∣mor mutuns co∣pulauit. Hierome saith, this paper must not separate you, whom mutuall loue, yea, brother∣hood hath combined together, whose life, loue, and affection,
as Saint Ambrose speakes,
Ambros. in obit. Fratris sui satyri indiui∣duus spiritus in∣diuiduus affe∣ctus. are vnseparated, and vnseparable; so that as you enioy a certaine communion among your selues, so here you shall not haue a diuision. Accept then this small present (which though it bee but small, proceedes from no small affection) as a pledge of my vnfained and brotherly loue, and giue to this stranger thus homely apparrelled in this Eng∣lish habit, and speaking his English tongue, yet somewhat fearefull to set foote in forren ground, giue him your hand at his first entrance in token of welcome; intertaine him courte∣ously, and conuerse with him familiarly, so shall you finde in him both profit and pleasure. Thus commending and recom∣mending him to your kind acceptance, and you in my prayers to God, I beseech him to performe and finish that good work which he hath begun in you, that so you may proceede on in faith and godlinesse, making not your gaine godlinesse, but godlinesse your gaine, and laying vp for your selues treasures in heauen, and that as you are here combined together in bro∣therhood by consanguinitie, and in grace, in faith, and in loue, vnfained one to another by one spirit, & so heires together of one promise here on earth; so ye may at last as heires of God, and ioynt heires with Christ, possesse that spirituall and euer∣lasting inheritance in the Kingdome of heauen, whose King is the Trinitie, whose Law is charitie, whose Measure is eternitie.
Amen.
London. April. 30. 1617.

