


MOST HONOVRABLE.
As nothing can be lesse concea∣led, then the long, manifold, and knowne miseries of En∣glish Catholikes, for their ancient faith: So if we consi∣der, by what plots and practizes, the aduancement of Pres∣biterall discipline, hath beene and daylie is more and more affected, and only or chiefly (as the defendors thereof pro∣fesseIacob p. 73. of his reasons. Protestāt let∣ters in the end of the confe∣rence 1603. Purit. offer of confer. &c.) receiuing obstacle in course of learning, by the groundes of Catho∣like religion: The pennes and pulpits of Puritans, and their Printers will sufficiently write, preach and publish to the world, by whome and to what purpose, no smal part of these afflictions haue beene vrged and incited against vs; not only by those fewe, which refuse your externall conformity, but such as (for a fashion) followe it, to retayne themselues in authority.
For proofe whereof, the greatest number of the present Protestant wri∣ters, D. SutcliffeSutcliffe a∣gainst D. Kel∣lison, pag. 42., D. DoueDoue per∣swasion, p. 31., D. FieldField p. 170., M. WilletWillet An∣tilog. pa. 275., WottonWotton de∣fence of Perkins, pag. 28., MiddletonMiddleton papistomastix, p. 201., &c. doe teach, there is no matter of faith, no substan∣tiall, essentiall, or materiall point or difference in religion, betweene Protestants, and Puritans: But they are of one Church, Faith, and Re∣ligion. Then either they be Puritans, or of no religion: and it is not mate∣riall with them, whether men be of a true, or false religion, of any, or none at all. For his MajestyK. speach in Parl. 1603▪ conference at Hampton, p. 36. 80. 81. 82., the Bishop of WinchesterB. of Winchest. Suruey, pag. 466. 467. 474. 486. &c., D. CouellCouell defence of Hooker, p. 68. against Burges in Prefat. & pag. 33. (two of your best writers) M. ParkesParkes against lymbomastix, pag. 92. 93. & Prefat. & Apolog. Epistol. dedicat., M. OrmerodOrmerod Epist. dedicat. pict. Purit. &c., and others; conclude from their doctrine, and their owne bookes extant tell vs: Their religion is to
 beleeue; that euery Prince, King, or Emperor disanulling the Pres∣bitery is enemy to God, vnworthy to raigne, to be resisted by force of armes, not to be prayed for: No King, no Monarchy, no Bishop, no true Church in England, or wheresoeuer their Presbitery wanteth. The article of Christes discent to hell, is an jdle and vaine fansie, a meere dreame an intruded fable, a pernitious heresie. Christ was a sinner, suffered the torments of the damned, his diuinity, humanity, and saluation, heauen and hell, are questioned: the foundation it selfe is shaken. And such Professors haue professed, and profited so farre, that by outward signes, communion, profession, protestation, subscription, no man can tell, who is of what religion among them. For men by this doctrine (as his HighnesConference, supr. pag. 82. hath noted) will denie their religion, to make their party good against the Bishops. A chiefe Professor, may professeWillet Anti∣log. in prefat. Latin. to our So∣ueraigne, Puritanus non sum: I am no Puritan, to haue better meanes to writeWillet lym∣bomastix. Lymbomastix, andParkes a∣gainst lymbo∣mastix p. 106 become the greatest promoter of pre∣tended discipline. Though a Minister subscribe-foure times,Burges Apol & apud Co∣uell against Burges. He may defend both that and refusall; lawfull, &c.
Wherefore, seing such teachers by such meanes (as Protestants acknow∣ledge)Parkes Apol. epist. dedicat. Couel against Barg. in pref. Make way for Atheisme and Infidelity; andParkes supr. epist. dedicat. men say, they knowe whome to flie, but whome to followe they cannot tell: I hope it unto heynous sinne in Catholikes, not to followe such conductors. And for further excuse, because they write theyVniuersity of Oxfor. against the Millinar. petition, p. 32 are more famous for learning, then all the Ministers of Europe; and yet, doe not only refuse all equall triall offered by vs, but either calWillet Ec∣cles. triumph. pag. 40. & a∣pud Parkes against lym∣bomast. p. 28. the rules and principles of religion, which his Majesty approueth (and we humbly accept) a foolish conceit and ima∣gination, orWotton de∣fence of Per∣kins, p. 15. 16 vtterly reject them, and will only be tryed by themselues: A poore Catholike Student, in most dutifull manner presenteth vnto your Honours, these Protestant proofes, for all chiefe points of Catholike reli∣gion, only taken from their owne writings, since the beginning of his Maje∣sties raigne in England. First (to giue them all aduantage) because in this time, they haue written so much and so vncharitably against vs, that one of their owne number,Omer. pict. pap. in post∣script. epist. adjudgeth many of their bookes to the fire, and their au∣thours worthy death. Secondly, because I cannot tell, whether they wil allow what they wrote, or taught in the dayes of Queene Elizabeth; seing they defend, they may often change, & doe (Doue per∣swasiō, p. 31. at the least) at the change of e∣uery Prince. And so with all submissiue respect, I leaue this cause to your wisest consideration, and your most Honourable persons to Gods protection.
