



MOST Reuerend Father in God, it hath pleased the dispenser and giuer of all honour and prefer∣ment, out of his especiall proui∣dence, to aduance your Grace (next to our gratious and Dread Soue∣raigne) to the highest place of rule and dignitie in this our Church, whereby you are farre ingaged to patronize the truth of God, and the established and resolued Doctrines of our English Church. Which when I had well considered, it moued me to consecrate these first fruites of my studies to your Grace; which are nothing else, but a iust, (though weake and meane,) defence of a principell and ground of that religion, which hath beene long established and setled in our Church, till some factious and nouellizing spirits (if not worse) were so bold and impudent of late for to disturbe it. The men and meanes by which this truth hath beene

disturbed and drawne into question, are not vnknowne (I suppose) vnto your Grace: and therefore I neede not to informe against them. All that I shall say of them is only this; that they are now so potent and so poli∣tique, that if they are not speedily and carefully pre∣uented by your Grace, they are like to quell, at least to cloud, that glorious truth and Gospell (which hath shined so bright, so plentifully and comfortablie a∣mong vs for so long a season,) with the dismall, the dangerous and pernitious mists of Poperie and Armini∣anisme. Their bookes, you know, which are fraught with dangerous and hurtfull errors (and so much the more dangerous, because they are sweetned, cloathed and guilded ouer, with the name and countenance of the Doctrine of the Church of England) are printed and reprinted, sold openly and dispersed publikely with∣out controll: and the pious, wholsome and Christian labours of all such as would confute them (by reason of those meanes which they haue made) can either finde no license for the presse: or if they chance to come vn∣to the presse by stealth or otherwise, they are either quelled and smothered in it before they come vnto their birth, or else they are called in and quelled, before they can bee published and dispersed, for to cleare and vindicate the truth: so that by the suppor∣tation and propagating of the one, and the discoun∣tenancing and suppressing of the other, that truth of God which wee haue hitherto professed, is like to be betrayed. Shall these factious, scismaticall and here∣ticall spirits, bee so industrous to establish and to vent their Errors, and to quell the truth: and shall not wee be as diligent and couragious to defend it? shall they

with all their might and maine plant Poperie and Armi∣nianisme, nay Pelagianisme & Atheismie in our Church, and shall wee sit still with foulded hands, with silent tongues, and stupified hearts, and not labour to with∣stand them. Alas where is our loue, where is our zeale to God and to his cause? where is our ancient courage for the truth, that wee are now so cold and frozen, that we are now so much ashamed of that glorious Gospell of Iesus Christ which hath flourished so long among vs, and hath made vs a mirror and a spectacle of Gods mer∣cies vnto all the world; that now wee dare not, or at least wee will not, defend and take its part; that we dare not to (Iude 3.) contend and struggle for it? but that we suf∣fer it so willingly to bee surprised and betrayed, as if wee were more willing to be rid of it, then any longer to inioy it. Certainly this want of courage for, and loue vnto the truth, as it is a sure syntome, (Math. 24. 12.) that iniquitie doth abound among vs, so it may iustly cause the Lord to bring a famine and scarcitie among vs, (Amos 8. 11.) not of bread only (which now is very likely to befall vs) but euen of the word of God, which is farre worse: yea, it may prouoke him, and that deseruedly, (2 Thes. 2. 10, 11, 12.) to giue vs vp to strong delusions to beleeue lies, that we all may be damned, because wee would not receiue the loue of the truth, that so wee might be saued. O therefore let mee now beseech your Grace, that as in former times you haue, so now, you would take heart and courage for the truth. You haue many incouragements, many inforcements and ingagements for to doe it. For your incouragement, you haue the Lord of hosts, and the almightie King of heauen for to take your part; you haue the votes and prayers of all true hearted Christians, you haue all the

aide and assistance that heauen and earth can yeeld vn∣to you: O feare not then the (Isay 2. 22.) face or frowne of man whose breath is in his nostrells; feare not the power or the malice of any that oppose the truth, for wherin are they to be accounted of? the (Psal. 46. 7. 11.) Lord of hosts is with you, the God of Iacob is your refuge, man therefore cannot stand before you. For inforcements and incourage∣ments to be zealous and couragious for the truth, you haue very many. You are called to defend and to sup∣port the truth: the very nature and qualitie of your function, and the very dignitie of that place and per∣son which now you doe sustaine, doe euen ingage and binde your Grace to be couragious and zealous for it. God hath committed his truth & Gospell to your trust, and hath giuen it you in charge to propagate and defend it: God and our Gratious Soueraigne, haue committed the care and custodie of this our Church to your charge, and they haue giuen you more ability and power, (and so more cause) for to defend the truth and doctrine that is established and setled in it, then to other men: and therefore they will require and expect from your Grace, (to whom so much is committed) much more then they can, or will from any other. O therefore as you tender the glory and honour of the God of hea∣uen, the defence of Christ, and of his cause and Gospell: the peace and safetie of this our Church, which is com∣mitted to your charge: as you tender your owne honor and reputation with God & man, or that great account which you must shortly make to God, of that great stewardship of his which is committed to you: if you ender the good and comfort of your owne soule both here and hereafter: if you would haue Iesus Christ to

owne you, and not to (Make 8. 38.) bee ashamed of you at the last, when hee shall come in the glory of his Father with all his holy Angells: if you would not bee cast with those o∣ther (Reu. 21. 8.) fearefull ones, into that lake which burneth with fire and brimstone for euer: take heart and courage for the Lord of hoasts, and for his truth and cause, which now are likely to miscarie. Suffer not his word and truth to bee betrayed and suppressed, by scismaticall, factious, and Antechristian spirits, for want of suppor∣tation and defence: but since the eyes of God and man are cast vpon you, execute, stirre vp and act that place and power, which God and man haue giuen to you, to the quelling of heresy and scisme, to the extir∣pation of Poperie and Arminianisme: (which are now flowing in so fast vpon vs, that they doe euen threaten a sodaine inundation and deluge to vs) to the subuer∣sion of the kingdome of Satan and Antechris, to the maintaining and inlarging of the kingdome of Iesus Christ, and to the establishing of that glorious truth and Gospell, which hath flourished and shined so long a∣mong vs, to the admiration and mirror of our friends, and to the griefe and enuy of our aduersaries. Let not feare and cowardice, let not flesh and blood, or any other impediment whatsoeuer, daunt your courage, or coole your loue and zeale to Christ, or to his cause; but be willing to denie your selfe, to part with all for him, who hath euen denied himselfe, and parted with his life and all for you. And here I would intreate your Grace to pardon this my boldnesse and my rudenesse with you; (which though modesty and manners might cae mee to forbeare, yet piety and zeale to God and to his truth, and loue to this my Mother Church, to∣gether

with the necessity and extremitie of the times, hath made me guilty of it (I hope not faulty in it) and withall I humblie consecrate these Firstlings of my stu∣dies (being nothing else but a iust defence of a comfor∣table and Orthodox point of faith, which hath long beene setled and established in this our Church, and in all reformed Churches beyond the seas) which if your Grace will but vouchsafe to Patronize and shelter, they shall not feele, they will not feare, a totall or a finall ,
Now the God of all Grace, so beautifie and adorne your Grace with all the graces of his Spirit, so fill and replenish you with zeale, with fortitude and courage for the truth: and so firmely settle and establish you in the glorious and happy estate of true and sauing grace, that neither your Grace, (nor yet that truth and Gospell which  now inioy,) may euer feele a finall, totall, or a partiall fall.

