


I Cannot conceale (Vertuous & Gra∣tious Ladie) the manifolde benefits, that not onely I, but many others of the faithful seruants of God haue re∣ceiued at your graces hand. And for∣asmuch as I am perswaded, that the only glory of God & desire of aduan∣cing his trueth, hath beene the chiefe Prouokers of this your goodnesse: I
 seeno cause but that I, both for me selfe, and for them, (some of them being now a sleepe in the Lord, & re∣sting from their laboures) shoulde haue care to shew that thankfulnes, & good duetifull encouragement tow∣ardes your Grace, that therein your goodnesse hath iustly deserued. And this is the cause why at this time, I am bolde too dedicate these poore labours of mine vnto your Grace, as a poore pledge of my humble duety, and a testimony too the posterity of your hearty good will, and vnfained loue, to the glorious trueth of God. And albeit in respect of me and my labor, it be most vnworthy your gra∣tious protection, yet in respect of that excellent instrument of GOD who wrote it, the matter conteined in it, and the necessary vse of it, for this time, it is not onely worthy your defence, but deserueth great thankes of the whole Churche of GOD: as geuing light too many harde and doubtfull poyntes, concerning the
 Sacramentes, and cleerely satisfying the intricate Questions of curious demaunders, besides that it stoppeth the mouthes of many carping aduer∣saries both papists, and Vbiquitistes, who maintayne, I wotte not, what straunge and monstruous opini∣ons.
And surely the knowledge of these thinges, how needefull they are too all Christians, may heereby plainely appeare, for that Sathan the father of Lies, and aduersary of Gods euerla∣sting trueth, bestirred himselfe neuer more busily, for the ouerthrow and corrupting of it, then in this last age of the worlde, that partly by the bit∣ter inuasion of craftie and pestilent Heretikes, & partly by the malice of ignoraunce in many that professe themselues Christians, hee might e∣uen swallow vp (if it were possible) the moste beautifull spouse of the Sonne of God. But this is our com∣forte, that hee hath her in keeping who wil preserue her, who hath taken
 accompte of her members, and will not loose one, who will lead her into all trueth, and so mightily defende her, that Hell gates shall not preuaile against her. And too her vnder your name (good Madam) doe I conse∣crate & auow this poore myte for the causes aforesaid, most humbly besee∣ching you too accept of it, with the same affection that I offer it. I doe it not after the manner of the worlde, to get or craue any thing: I do it not to puffe you vp to pride and vainglo∣ry: but to prouok you to good things, that you may goe cheerefully on, in that happy course of the Gospel, wher into by his boūtiful goodnes you are entred. Your Grace now waxeth old, the dayes of your wearisome pilgri∣mage passe on apace, your continu∣all sickenesse, paynes, and infirmities are messengers of preparation too an other and better place. You haue therefore to looke about you, and to set all thinges in order towardes that heauenly iourney: Not onely to giue order for those things that concerne
 the Christian duety of yours, towards that great God, that you may leaue an holy posterity after you, or at least depart with a cleare conscience, for hauing perfourmed that duety: but also may your selfe bee furnished of that prouision, that may make you stande with peace in his sight. For the Lord knoweth vs. He seeth vs & pro∣ueth our hearts: The wicked hee will gather as a flocke together too the slaughter, and will consecrate them to death. There is no escape too bee made from him: for if they flie from his terrour, they shall fall into the pit, and if they escape the pit, yet they shall fall into the snare. They that are farre of, shalbe smittē with the plague and they that are at home, with the sworde: yea, they that remayne, the famine shall consume them. Where shall the wicked stand? if they scape, the Lyon, a Beare shal fal vpon them: and if both Lion and Beare touche them not, yet leaning in theyr owne home vpon the wall, (as the Prophet sayeth) An adder shall sting them. O that the wicked of the worlde, that
 haue no feare of God, who so delight in iniquitie, that they neuer satisfie thēselues in sinne, nor make no ende in their wrethed pleasures, would but consider Gods iudgements: for then vndoubtedly the terror of his name, woulde be as a bridle to holde them backe, from those monstruous trans∣gressions, that now adayes they com∣mit with all greedinesse, without all shame & modesty. If couetousnesse be in the head of all, (as the Prophet saith) Is ther any one that shal not pe∣rishe with the sword? there shalbe no way to flie: yes they shall flie, but not one shal thereby be saued. If they goe downe to hell, his hand shall fetch thē out: & if they ascend euē to heauē, he shal throw them downe. Admit they eat & drink, yet shal they not be satis∣fied. Their deuises & counsailes shalbe scattered. because GOD is with his chosen. If the Lord haue determined, who can defeate his purpose? if his hand be stretchd out, who cā turn it away? Feare ye wicked. What though your concorde bee strong, and your
 purpose is too perke and peere into heauen? shal not the Lord scatter you,Iob. 6. 17. or euer you bee warme in your place? Thanks be to God, who hath separa∣ted vs from the wicked, that we shold bee free from their destruction. And let vs keepe our selues from them, that they make vs not sinne agaynst our God. If the Lord deliuer them in∣toEnod. 23. 33. our handes, let not our eyes spare them to the death, let vs not pittie them, nor make any league with thē.Psal. 26. 4. I haue not sit (saith good Dauid) with the Counsell of vanitie, and I will not enter with those that deale in wicked things. They that helpe them are lyke vnto them, & they shall drinke of the wine of his wrath, they shal drinke of that which is mingled in the cupp of his wrath, and they shalbe tormented with fire and brimstone in the sight of his holy Angels, & in the sight of the Lambe. But the godly that heare this word & tremble at it, that beleeue in him, & obay his voyce, that loue him best and expresse their loue also to o∣ther, these shall lacke no good thing, they shall flourishe as the Palme tree,
 and as the Ceders of Libanus shall they be multiplied. Their inheritance is with the most highest, and their righteousnes is before him. Hee will giue them an euerlasting glory, and fill their soules with brightnesse, their bones will he deliuer, and they shall bee as a fruitefull Gardeine, and as a fountaine of waters that shal neuer be dry. They shall prayse him, because they shall reioyce in him, & their seed shalbe the seede of peace. If they fall, it shalbe to their good: For the Lorde vpholdeth them, and they shal not be confounded for euer. Oh that we had faithfull heartes, that we might true∣ly reioyce in his promises, then should we not feare. But if our sinnes might make vs sadde, that of taste and fee∣ling of hearte we might truely be cast downe in his sight, then should we re∣turne to him, that hath smitten vs, & call vpon him that he might heale vs. If we beleeued in him, we shoulde feare him, and our sinnes shoulde bee detestable vnto vs. To this ende (my gracious Ladye) hath God called vs
 nowe a long tyme by his worde, by signes from heauen, by monstruous and vnnaturall byrthes, by terrible and fearefull Earthquakes, that wee might leaue of this double dealyng in his sight, that we might serue him vn∣faignedly, not in a ceremony, as the maner of the world is, that we might acknowledge his power, gouernmēt and Scepter, to be ruled by him, and to couche downe vnder his hande. We haue had wonderful fiery impres∣sions, vnnaturall swelling and fading of waters, straunge and vnknowen Starres, Comets and bloody cloudes, with a late terrible Earthquake: such a one and so general, as neither in the remembraunce of our selues, nor of our forefathers, the lyke hath beene reade of: but alacke what warning haue we taken by these thinges? Ey∣ther we attribute them to meere na∣ture, and so lessen the warninges of God, or els wee quickly forget them, as though they concerned not vs. By the fine deuises of detestable Epi∣cures, and Godlesse persons, we make
 them fal vpon other lands, as though the sinnes of our lande were exempt from his iudgementes. As if nature were not made by God, or as though these straunge thinges were not vn∣doubted tokens of Gods anger, al∣ready kindled against vs: nay, though our owne heartes beare vs witnesse, that there neuer liued more vnthank∣full wretches in the worlde then wee, more irreligious, that for the moste parte, haue turned religion into wan∣tonnes, and denyed the power there∣of, and these many gratious yeares of peace, which should haue drawen vs forward & aduanced vs in the schole of God, we are farre worse then wee were in the beginning, and at our first entraunce: duller, farther of from knowledge, and more ignorant, then little children. And if there bee any thing in vs, it is onely in wordes. The murthers that are committed in the lād daily, are monstruous, the whor∣domes, incest, and Sodomitry most beastly and outragious, the pryde so
 Luciferlike, the couetousnes so exces∣siue, the idlenesse so common, the en∣uy so deadly, that euery mā can beare witnesse against his neighbor, and a∣gainst him self in his own conscience, which is more then a thousande wit∣nesses, that God in his iustice must needs plague vs.
The godly grone in this great o∣uerflowing of sinne, and the whole earth tottereth with the waight ther∣of, and yet where are the true fruites of our repentaunce? O wee fast and pray: I am very glad of that good forwardnesse and readinesse in our Christian Magistrates, but I woulde to GOD that wee knewe the true faste, that wee came not before GOD lyke hypocrites, but as in∣structed and true humbled Christi∣ans, that these strange things might indeede feare vs from our sinnes, and make vs refourmed from the hearte: then shoulde the Calues of our lyppes bee Sacrifices of a sweete sauour before our GOD,
 flowing from a true and liuely Fayth which shoulde holde vs vp in a better hope, and shoulde worke in vs, both to witnes to others, & to seale to our selues, that we were no counterfaites, but true Christians. And vnlesse this effect bee truely wrought in vs, let vs neuer flatter our selues, though in some colde sort we vse these outward exercises, and bow downe our heads lyke bull rushes. No no, God must haue a thorowe chaunge wrought in vs, or els he will chaunge our places: we must sauour more of mortificatiō, and holines must shine in some mea∣sure in vs. Let the worlde therfore, in that same godles contēpt of God & his diuine iudgement, see what fel vp∣pon their predecessours the wicked, that liued in Sodom and Gomorrhe, and would not heare the Preacher of righteousnes. If they haue the lyke pride, hard heartednes, riot, idlenes, and filthines not to be named, where will they stande when the earth shall sinke at Gods iudgements? Was God iust in punishing the Sichemittes, in
 hanging vp those twelue Princes, in slaying 24000. in the wildernesse, in rooting out the Tribe of Beniamin, in destroying the sonnes of Hely, in ba∣nishing of Dauid, &c? and will he not punish vs, which are sunke deeper in such transgressions? But as it is a most certaine signe of speedy and vnreco∣uerable destruction, whē men besides their sinnes lyue in all impuritie and contempt of repentaunce: so it must needes confirme Gods great iudge∣ment to be at hande, that the worlde is so secure euery where, and forget∣ful of those wonderful examples, that haue bene in tyme tofore. Before Ba∣bylon becked to destruction, GOD shooke it with a fearefull Earthquake vnder Sparett, the 17. Kyng of the Assyrians. Before that great fire kind∣led in Grecia vnder Phaeton the Kyng, and after a great Earthquake in Thessalia, in the tyme of Deucali∣on, as the hystoryes report, God de∣stroyed all the inhabitauntes thereof. Before those great iudgements were perfourmed towardes Israell, that
 Amos the Prophet threatened, GodAmos. 1. sent them a fearefull Earthquake in the dayes of Vziah. Orosius in his se∣conde Booke and thirteene Chapter, maketh mention of an Earthquake at Rome, when Proculus Geganus Ma∣cerinus & L. Menenius Lanatus were Consulles, after which followed such a terrible famine, that many, desperat through hūger, cast themselues hed∣long into the Riuer of Tyber. There folowed also an outragious pestilēce after an Earthquake, when Marcus Cornelius Magn. & Lucius Papiri∣us Crassus were Consulls. Before that same famous Peloponesiacke warre, that fell out to the destruction of the Athenians, there was a terrible Earth∣quake with a continuall fyre seene in the ayre for the space of threescore & fifteene dayes, at last a great stone be∣ing tumbled out of the ayre vpon the Citie. What shal I speak of that which swallowed vp Helice and Bura, twoo notable Cities, as Eusebius, Eutropi∣us & diuers other Authors witnesse? Iosephus in his Booke de Iudaico
 Bello, maketh mention of an Earth∣quake in Iudea, wherin there perished thirtie thousand people. And Corne∣lius Tacitus in his second booke saith, that twelue of the most notable Cit∣ties in all Asia were swallowed vpp in one night. In the 21. yeare after Christ Eusebius affyrmeth that these thir∣teene Cities fell with an Earthquake, Ephesus, Magnesia, Sardis, Mosthe∣ne, Mechiero, Caesarea, Philodelphia, Himulus, Tenus, Cumae, Mirthina, Apollonia, and Diahircania. What should I recken all: before that warre of the Parthians, when Carbulus was Proconsul of Syria: before the de∣struction of cruell Nero, at the death of Titus H. Vespasians sonne, there were terrible Earthquakes, and three famous Cities of Cyprus were swal∣lowed vpp: foure of Asia also in the tyme of Traian: further two of Gre∣cia, and three of Galatia. Oros. lib. 7. Cap. 12. Eutrop. Antiochia was so shaken, that scarsely Traian the Em∣perour escaped, read Dion. Nicome∣dian, and a great peece of the Citie of
 Nice in the time of Adrian, fell by an earthquake: so did Nicopôlis and Cae¦sarea two famous Cities, after which followed wonderful calamities in the time of Gordian. Tyre & Sydon was by the same meanes ouerthrowen, & so was many Cities of the East be∣fore the heresies of the Arrians tooke footing in the worlde, when good Athanasius and other faithful Bishops and Pastours were so cruelly persecu∣ted. I wil say nothing of Antiochia, of Neocaesarea, of Dyrachiū, of Rome, and Ierusalem it selfe: Neither will I speak of nearer tymes. For it were im∣possible to recken all, I referre al god∣ly men to the latter wryters alreadie published, cōcerning our late Earth∣quake. This is most certaine that it is an vndoubted token of gods displea∣sure towarde vs, to draw vs to speedy repentaunce. It setteth foorth vnto vs the groning of all creatures & of the earth it selfe for that restauration, which the Sonne of God, Iesus Christ our Sauiour shall perfourme at his comming. And I beseeche God that
 our heartes may bee so shaken from the highest to the lowest, that we may call our selues to a reckoning of our dayes paste, to shake of our former sinnes, that wee may mourne before he strike, that he may haue pitie vpon vs, that hee may molifie our stony af∣fections, to make vs tremble at his presence: to loue his Gospell with a more feruēt loue, and to couch down with al obediēce. This (good Lady) is the desire of my heart, both towards your grace, and towards all the Israell of God. In which state I assure my self, if we be foūd, though the foundation of the earth bee shaken, and the sea make a noyse, yet God will keepe Sy∣on, and the Apple of his eye shall not be touched. The Lorde Iesus keepe vs in this protection, that wee and ours may liue and dye in the hope & com∣fort hereof: to which I most humbly commende your Grace,
this first of May. 1580.

