



RIGHT Reuerend, be∣ing desirous to shewe some part of thanke∣fulnes for your Lord∣ships fauorable & vn∣deserued respect and kindnesse to me-ward, and with that in∣tent looking into my papers and studie notes, specially into such as were deli∣uered euery other weeke at ABING∣TON by OXFORD in your Lord∣ships Diocesse, among other things of

greater length, I resolued to reuise and frame out this exposition vpon S. Paul to the Galathians, with Obseruations, Questions, & Motiues: The rather for the shortnes of the text, best fitting with my leasurelesse occasions, and likewise for the waightinesse of many matters either naturally arising, or incidently taken, and accordingly discoursed.
Wherein to declare in what sort I haue gone in & out before that people & their worshipful neighbors repairing to them, and ioyning with them in this seruice for these many years together, albeit I haue much abridged, and some∣where enlarged and altered, yet for the most part these READINGS may be called but the REMEMBRANCES of things, that haue passed amongst thē, and nowe are briefely set downe in this short impression.
And herein plainly to confes what I

think of this bookish humor of writing bookes: truely, in them that can write why shoulde they (as it is in the Poet) Periturae parcere chartae? They haue a gift & a talent that way, & why should they hide it? For others, who may be better occu∣pied, there is no reason they abuse the Reader, & pester the world with vnpro∣fitable vanities.
For my selfe the last of many, and for the rest of greatest ability, al our books are but entrāces to the book of books, vnto the sacred Bible, & book of God: which were it indeed deeply imprinted in the harts of al mē, I could easily haue spared this simple labor, and could and would haue wished euen LVTHERS wish, vppon the same verie condition that he did: That al bookes els were in a faire light fiar.
But men beeing men (God so orde∣ring it) require & neede humane helps,

and Master LVTHERS booke vpon this very Epistle, is a profitable writing, and full of comfort.
Euerie man cannot readily vse the Scripture strait-way, euery man cannot at the first blush tell which Scripture is fittest for confirmation of this or that article in faith, which fairest for exhor∣tation in manners, which fullest for re∣futation of errors, & therefore by prea∣ching, by penning, by conference and by imprinting God hath prouided suf∣ficient aids as the times haue required, that men may looke and looke againe vpon things, examine the spirits, com∣pare matters and causes, ruminate and chue the kud, meditate the state of their saluation, and go the waies there-unto with a cleane and a clouen foot, that is, as ISICHIVS saith, with a wise, a dis∣creet & a distinguishing vnderstāding.
To these ends I haue performed this

present account of my dealing in your Lord-ships Diocesse, humbly crauing (may it please your Lord-ship so to ac∣cept thereof) it may be a slender monu∣ment and meane-pledge of greater du∣tie to your Lord-ship, and of my good will and FAREWELL to ABING∣TON, & likewise to the Gentlemen & Iustices neere adioining.
The Lorde preserue your honor to his holy will, & blessed pleasure.
From the New Colledge in OXFORD, 1587. IANVAR. 30.

