



RIGHT Reuerend Fathers in God,
Inegritas praesidentium, salus est subdi∣totum. Nam totius familiae Domini status et ordo nuta∣bit, si quod re∣quiritur in cor∣pore, non in∣veniatur in ca∣pite: Leo Epist: 87: cap: 1 in
whose pious integrity, and industrious vi∣gilancie,
the chiefest safety; in whose vn∣faithfulnesse,
negligence, or insollidity, the greatest
hazard, the inevitablest danger of our Protestant
Church, and long professed religion are suspen∣ded:
I here most humbly tender vnto your fatherly
and pious considerations, an vninterrupted Antithe∣sis
of the Church of England, from her very first re∣formation
to this present, against thatOosius, De Libertate Ar∣bitrij Apolog: contra Pelagi∣um, stiles it: Nefaria haere∣sis: venatissi∣morum dog∣matum abomi∣natio; serpens, suffocans{que} ha∣litus; most vene∣mous
Semi-pelagian heresie, and those Arminian
Novelties, which haue of late invaded, yea much
endangered her ancient, established, and professed Do∣ctrines,
which your EcclesiasticallBeneficium datur propter officium, Concil: Lateran, sub Leone 10, Sess: 9,
urius Concil: Tom: 4. pag: 635: B. Dignities, and
frequent Subscriptions to the Articles, Homilies, &
Tenents of our Church, engage you in a more speciall
manner to protect.

It is not, yea it cannot be vnknowne to your gra∣uities,
that olde Pelagius, and Faustus, who haue lyen
dead and rotten in their graues 1100 yeares, or more,
haue by a kinde ofSee Plutarch De his qui sero a Numine pu∣niuntur. Dio∣genes Laert lib 8. Pythagoras. Platonis Phae∣don: Tertullian de Anima, Hie∣rom. Epist. 59. cap. 2. Pythagorean Metempsy cho∣sis,
revived in Arminius and his followers now of
late, (asHaec vene∣natissimorum dogmatum a∣bominatio ha∣bet etiam nunc viventes mor∣tuos, mortuos∣{que} viventes. Nā Crigines, Pris∣cillianus, et Io∣vinianus olim apud se mortui in his vivunt; et non solum vi∣vunt, verum e∣tiam loquun∣tr; nunc vero Pelagius et Cae¦lestius in his vi¦ventes mortui, ecce adversus Ecclesiam, quod mi erum est; et quod multo merius est in Ecclesia palam sibilant, &c Orosius de Libertate Arbitrii contr. Pelag. Bibl. Patrum, Tom 15 p 144. Origen, Priscillian, and Iouinian did in
them) and not onely spoken openly against the
grace of God, and doctrines of our Church, which
is miserable; but even publikely preached and
written against them in our Church, without any
Ecclesiasticall censure or controll; which is farre worse:
It was the complaint of a Reuerend and learned Prelate
of our Church about some ten yeares since, in an E∣pistle
Dedicatorie vnto his Maiesty then Prince
of Wales:Teterrimus haltus nostras quoque partes nescio quo vento impetu perfla∣vit, et Theologos nostos nonnullos ita de nentarit, vt relicto fi lei trito, et probao tramite, n Arminii ansractas et praecipicia se commiserint, et dogmate etiamnum de∣struant Articulos Religionis, quos prius propria subscriptione confirmarunt. Ro∣bertus. Abbot Epise, Salisbuciensis, De Gratia et Persev, anctoru, Epist. Ded That the stinking vapors of Arminius
(whose heresies hee there learnedly encounters) had
beene blowne ouer from the Belgique shores vp∣on
our English coast, and so infatuated some of
our Diuines, that leauing the beaten and appro∣ued
path of faith, they betooke themselues vnto
the crooked wayes and praecipices of Arminius,
destroying the Articles of our Religion with their
Tenents, which they had formerly confirmed by
their owne subscription. What hee lamented and
condoled then, we haue much more cause to complaine
of now; when as these contagious vapours haue not one∣ly
dangerously infected many, but likewise animated

someStat ergo Go∣liah, proh do∣lor, in Ecclesia, superbia im∣manissimus, carnah poten∣tia tumidus, omnia se per se posse confidens et non solum stat; verum et provocat; si∣mul{que} per dies plurimos san∣ctum Israel ma∣nifesti timoris exprobrat: Oro∣sius contra Pe∣lag Apologia. Goliahs, to bid professed defiance to the
host of Israel in Arminius his quarrell, and to take
vp armes in his defence, against the oft resolued and
subscribed Doctrines of their Mother Church, who
hath enriched them with sundry fauours; and yet alas,
Orosius Ib. Ab Ecclesia siquidem haereseos impugnator ex∣pellitur,
et nutriri in sinu Ecclesiae haereticus in∣uenitur:
the impugners of Arminius his Champions
haue beene questioned, and molested; when as they
were neuer hitherto once publikely conuented by any
Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction, for these their dangerous
Innouations.
When these Arminian Errours were first broached
by Barret, and Baro, in Queene Elizabeths happy
Raigne, the zeale of ourSee pag. 10. to 14. 120 to 123. 127, 128, 129. Reverend Prelates, and
See pag 42. to 48. 120. to 15. Vniuersity heads was such; that they forthwith
proceeded iudicially against them, not suffering
them to rest or harbour in our Church: But alas
theFugit mer∣cenarius a r∣ctitudine iust∣tiae, a defensio∣ne Ecclesiae, a liberatione Pa∣triae, vel amore blandientis, vel timore persequentis. Bernard ad Pastores Sermo Col. 1730 D. cowardice, indulgency, and luke warmnesse
of our age is such, thatEt quidem isti sor∣titi sunt, ministerii locum, sed non zelum. Successores omnes cupiunt esse, imitato∣res pauci Bernard Sermo ad Cleum in Concilio Rhemensi Col. 1727, 1728. & ser∣mo super Cantica Col. 802. D. those who haue succeeded
them in their Episcopall Dignities,Operarii quanto rariores in terris, tanto cha∣riores in coelis habentur. Bernard ad Pastores sermo. Col. 1729. E. not their zeale,
(some few only excepted, whose paucity indears thē
more to God, to man; andMagna laus pacorum inter malos inquinatos ugi virtutum nitore immaculatis vestibus per∣manere. Primasius in Apocalip lib 1 fol. 5. B. adds vnto their
praise) haue scarce so much as once opened their mouths
in publike, against those ArminianFues sunt omnes haeretici: hi sunt Fures et Latrones qui veniunt in vestimentis ovium, intrinsecus autem sunt Iupi rapaces quotquot autem venerunt fures sunt et Latrones: Fures latenter nocen∣do, latrones aperte saeviendo: Bernard ad Pastores Sermo, Col. 1730. D. theeues, and

robbers, who by their secret pollicies, and publike
writings, haue lately preyed vpon the sheepe and Do∣ctrines
of our Church.
But now, since our religious Soueraine hath publike∣ly
professed in his latepage 42 Declaration to all his lo∣uing
Subiects; to maintaine the true Religion and
doctrine established in the Church of England,
(of which the Anti Arminian Tenents comprised in
this Antithesis are the chiefest branch) without ad∣mitting
or conniuing at any backsliding, either to
Popery, or Scisme: andpage 21 hath called God to
record, that he will never giue way to the autho∣rizing
of any thing, whereby any innovation may
steale or creep into the Church, but preserue that
vnity of Doctrine and Discipline established in
the time of Queen Elizabeth,See here p: 10 to 14: 42: to 48. 120. to 130. (In whose Raigne
Arminianisme was particularly exiled, ndour An∣ti-Arminian
Assertions settled in our Church:)
whereby our Church of England hath stood and
flourished ever since: Since King Edward the 6.
Queene Elizabeth, and King Iames of blessed me∣mory,
(anSee pag: 58, 59. implacable, professed Antagonist
to Arminianisme, to Arminians, to his dying
day) with all our learned Prelates, Divinity Pro∣fessours,
authorized Writers in their raignes; and
our godly Martyrs in King Henry the 8. and Queene
Maries dayes, whose names and works I haue here par∣ticularly
recorded in their order: since the Fathers
and Councels of the primatiue Church: the primi∣tiue
and moderne Churches of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, with their seuerall established Articles,
Homilies, Catechismes, Leiturgies, and Records:

(as I haue here infallibly demonstrated:) together with
the late dissolued Parliament, haue professedly oppug∣ned,
and solemnly condemned those Semi-Pelagian and
Arminian grace-annihilating Errours, which haue
lately crept into our Church; embracing, authorizing,
and establishing their Opposite Positions as the Ortho∣dox,
Catholicke, and vndoubted truth. Let mee now
beseech your Pieties, as you tender the honour of God,
the glory of his grace, (which should be dearer to you
then your dearest soules,) as you would gaine the loue,
and discharge the trust of your blessed Sauiour and
2 Pet: 5. 4. Hebr: 13: 20. Master-shepheard Iesus Christ,Hebr: 13. 17 1 Pet: 5. 2, , 4 2 Cor: 5-10 Frattes aliam Synodum pro∣nuncio vobis v∣bi Dominus se∣debit in judi∣cio; et ibi om∣nes nos oportet repraesentari; et ibi Deus iuste iudicabit or∣bem terrarum. Ibi omnes nos oportet reprae∣sentati (nisi quod dici ne∣fas est, mentia∣tur Apostolus) siue sit Papa, siue sit Cardi∣nalis, siue Ar∣chiepiscopus, siue Episcopus, siue diues, siue pauper, siue doctus, siue in∣doctus, vt refe∣rat vnusquis{que} rationem de his quae gessit in corpore, siue bonum, siue malum, Et si reddenda est ratio de his, quae quis{que} gessit in corpore suo; heu quid fiet de his quae quis{que} gessit in corpore Christi, quod est Ecclesia? &c. Bernard: ad Clorum in Concil: Rhemensi Sermo, Col, 1725. E. who will sum∣mon
you ere long before his dreadfull Tribunall,
to render an account of all the stewardships and
soules committed by him to your charge, (which
we may iustly feare,Messis quidem multa, et saccrdotes multi, et mer∣cenarii multi, sed operarii pauci: Isti voraciori ingluvie lucrorum, infinitas exigunt pecunias: his insatiabili desiderio inhiant; pro his, ne amittant, timent, et cum amit∣tum, dolent harum in amore quiescunt. Animarum nec casus reputatur, nec salus, Bernard Ibid: Col 1726. D. 1719. E too many sloathfull Ministers
who fish for tithes, not soules, do much neglect, as
being seldom resident at their charge, which they
scarce ever saw; but neuer resident in their pulpits, in∣to
which they seldome clime:) As you respect the peace
and happinesse of our Church, in which you are aduan∣ced;
the safety and dignity of our long professed Reli∣gion
to which you haue subscribed; in which you haue
beene borne, bred, and nourished: the honour and
Aman, coli, diligi, maius imperio est: Sym∣machi Relatio: Ambr. Tom. 5. p. 96. E. popularity of our Religious Soveraign, by whom
you are now intrusted with Religion, asSee his Maiesties Declaration, p 20, 21. with his

chiefest treasure;Subditi mi∣nus meruunt iniurias ab eo Principe quem religio um, et Deorum cultui deditum arbi∣trantur; ci{que} velut commili∣tones Deos et adiutores habenti minus infidiantur. Arist. Polit. l. 5 cap. 11. sect. 131. Magna, praeclara{que} res est, quum in aliis vniuersis, tum in Imperatore; religiosum esse, et fidei servantem, talem{que} cognitum esse. Zenophon. Orat, de Agisilao Rege. p 664. D. the conservation of whose
purity and freedome, will most ingratiate, indeare
his Maiesty to all his faithfull Subiects,Errat, si quis existimat tutum ibi esse Regem, vbi nihila Rege tutum est. Securitas securitate mutua paciscenda est. Vnum est inexpugnabile munimen∣tum amor civium, &c. Sencca de Clementia l. 1. cap. 19. whose
loue will proue his strongest guard, his richest mine
and best supply. As you would faithfully discharge that
great Episcopall trust, and dignity, which now rests vp∣on
your shoulders; not as a meereCastorinas quaerimus et sericas vestes. Et ille inter Episcopos secredit altiorem, qui vestem induerit clari∣orem. Ambr. De Dignitate sacerd c 5. Vbi proh dolor reperiemus Episcopos, qui post adeptam dignitatem in humilitate se contineant Nempe superbia iis occasio est vt ad tantam dignitatem aspirent, vt in ovile Christi impudenter irrumpant; cum tamen per Psalmistam Dominus dicat: Non habitabit in medio domus meae qui fa∣cit superbiam, &c. Ministri Christi sunt, et serviunt Antichristo: honorati ince∣dunt de bonis Domini, cui honorem non deferunt: vn le hine est iis quem quotidie videmus, meritricius nitor, histrionicus habitus, regius apparatus. Inde aurum in fraenis, aurum in sellis et calcaribus. Plus nitent calcaria, quam altaria. Inde mensae splendidae et cibis et scyphis. Inde commessationes et ebrietates Inde cythara, et ly∣ra, et tibia, redundantia torcularia, et promptuaria plena, eructantia ex hoc in il∣lud. Indedolia pigmentaria, inde referta marsuria. Huiusmodi sunt et volunt esse Ecclesiarum Praepositi, Decani, Episcopi, et Archiepiscopi, &c. Dicite ergo Archy∣diaconi, dicite Presbyteri, dicant etiam Pontifices, in fraenis, in sellis quid facit au∣rum? In vestimentis tantus ornatus? In cibis tam supersluus apparatus? Esca ven∣tri, et venter escis, Deus autem hunc et has destruct. Quis obsecro, Laicorum avi∣dius Clericis quaerit temporalia, et ineptius vtitur acquisitis? Cum tantu fastum videant Laici in supellectile Clericorum, nonne per eos potius imitantur ad mun∣dum diligendum quam ad negligendum? Medice cura teipsum: si mundum prae∣dicas contemnendum, contemne tu prius, et ad ipsum essicacius alios invitabis. Non sic profecto est, sed sicut populus sic et sacerdos: sicut Laicus sic et Clericus. Vter{que} cupit, vter{que} diligit mundum et ea quae in mundo sunt. Laicus tamen cum labore, sed Clerici sine labore volunt possidere totum mundum. Communicate volunt cu∣piditati et superfluitati hominum sed non labori: peecare volunt sed non flagellari cum hominibus: vnde timendum est, quod flagellentur cum daemoibus, &c. Ber∣nard ad Clerum et ad Pastores Sermo. Col. 1726, 1627, 1732. bee farre more to this purpose, super Cantica. sermo. 77. De consideratione. lib. 3. & 4. Ad Gnilielmum Ab∣batem Apologia, et Declamationes. empty, pom∣pous,

Lordly, pleasurable, gainfull, sloathfull, or
voluptuous honour: not as an Epicurean Euri∣pus,
See, or receptacle of delight, which calls men
from their former humility, frugality, and dili∣gence
in their ministeriall function, vnto a volup∣tuous,
sloathfull, secular, Pontificall, Lordly, proud,
vnpreaching life; as most Prelates deemed it, made
it in S. Bernards age: but as a2 Cor. 2 16 17. 1 Tim. 3. 1, 2 c. 4 10. to the end c. 5. 17. 18. 2 Tim. 2. 1. to 16. Mat 9. 37 38. Luke 10 2. 7. Iohn. 21. 15, 16, 17 Rom. 16 12. 1 Cor. 15. 10. 2 Cor. 11. 23. 1 Thes 5. 12 Episcopatus nomēest operis non honoris. August. De Ci∣vit Dei, l. 19 c. 19. Episcopi nomen, non Dominium, sed Officium: Prae∣sides non tam ad imperitan∣dum, quam ad factitandum: sarculo tibi o∣pus est non sceptro: Domi∣natio interdi∣citur indicitur ministratio. Bernard. De Consid l. 206. Si quis Episco∣patum deside∣rat, bonum opus desiderat: opusdixit, non honorem: laborem, non dignita∣tem: Primasius, Hierom, Haymo, Chrysostome, and Theophylact. in 1 Tim. 3. 1. Episcopatus nomen non est in honore, sed in onere: Greg. Mag. Epist. l. 7. Epist, 117. ponderous Of∣fice,
a laborious Calling, a heauy, difficult, and
perpetuall Worke, whichActs 20. 28.  Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Veri sacerdotes non excellentiam suam cogitant provecti, sed sarcinam: nec gloriantur de Officij dignitate, sed sudant potius con∣stituti sub onere. Hos non inflammat honor acceptus, sed exercet labor impositus. Prosper de Vita: Contempl: l. 2. c. 2. Concil Parisiens l 1. c: 4 summons you, to feed
the purchased and redeemed flocke of Christ, ouer
which the Lord hath made you Ouerseers, with
trible diligence, readinesse, and anxiety of heart
and hand; because it both redoubles your wages,
and augments your worke. As you desire to perpetu∣ate
the dignity, the respect of your Episcopall Iurisdi∣ction,
which hath grown distastfull vnto many through
the defaults of some. As you tender your owne perso∣nall
credit and esteeme with all good Christians,Se amabiles prae∣beant,
non verbo, sed opere: venerandos exhibeant, sed actu non fascu, Bernard. De
Consid l. 4 c. 4. Col. 687. M. Hoc affectare, hoc imitari decet: maximum ita haberi,
vt optimus simul habeatur. Seneca De Clementia, l. 1. c. 19.
who will reuerence you more for your piety and
goodnesse, then your state or greatnesse: As you
long to satisfie the expectation, to forestall the secret
iealosies and censures of our Church & Kingdome here,
whose eyes are now intent vpon you: or to avoid the

irrepealable, the eternall doome of Christ hereafter,
Rev. 21 8. when all fearefull,Ier: 23. 1. E. zech. 34. 2, 3. Zech. 11. 17. sloathfull, inuigilant,
and lukewarme shepheards, whoIer. 9. 3. want zeale,
and valour for the truth on earth, shall haue their
portion in the vnquenchable, and fiery brimstone
lake, which burnes foreuer. As you desire to antici∣paete
all future Parliamentary proceedings in matters
of Religion, the former, (which no doubt were legall,
iust, and honourable, though some repine against them)
being occasioned onely (as most coniecture) by the re∣misnesse,
conniuancy, cowardice, or indulgence of
some Ecclesiasticall Courts, in questioning, in con∣trolling,
the impudency, the treachery, and Errors of
suchNon sunt omnes amici sponsi, qui ho∣die sunt sponsi Ecclesiae: Ber∣nard: ad Cle∣rum Sermo, Col: 1727 K Churchmen, whoseMulti Ca∣tholici sunt praedicando, qui haeretici funt operando: Quod haeretici facebant per prava dogma∣ta, hocfaciunt plures hodie per mala exent∣pla: seducunt scilicet popu∣lum, et indu∣cunt in erro∣rem: et tanto graviores sunt haereticis, quan to praevalent o∣pera verbis Ber∣nard ad Pasto∣res Sermo, Col: 1732. G. hereticall, scanda∣lous,
vnorthodox, and pernitious doctrines, Bookes,
and liues, haue innouated, and blemished our Religion;
embroyled and defiled our Church: Let me now I pray
(vpon all these weighty considerations, and ingage∣ment)
if it may stand with my Iuvinility, and your
venerable, your hary grauity, to exhort you to that du∣ty,
which theDan: 7. 9: 13 22. ancient of dayes, (yea the verygra∣uest
of our Church, and State require at your hands) ex∣cite
yourVere enim Episcopalem vitam sequeris, si perzelum linguam; tu∣am, hos qui a fidei veritate dissentiunt, in Ecclesiae vnitatem reduxeris: Greg: Mag: Epist lib. a. Ex Registro Indict. 11. Epist: 59. Episcopall power, and providence; to
extirpate, to exile all Semi-pelagian Errors, and
Arminian Nouelties; all grace-defeating, all Church-molesting
Heresies, with their chiefe Fomenters: all
late-erected Altars, Images, Tapers, Crucifixes: all
new reuiued Popish Doctrines, Ceremonies, Duck∣ings,
Genuflexions, Easterne, yea Altar-adorations,
(complained of not long since in Parliament, as you

may remember) with all those other corruptions and su∣perstitious
reliques, which haue lately crept into our
Church, (in despite of all our3. & 4 Ed. 6 cap. 11. 2. & 3. Ed. 6. cap. 1. 5. & 6. Ed. 6. cap. 1. 1. Eliz. cap. 2. 13. Eliz cap. 12 Statutes,Rubricks in the Communi∣on. Rubricks,
Against the perill of Idola∣try; of the time and place of prayer part 2. p. 131. Homilies,Article. 22, 25, 28, 34. Articles,Canon. 14. 20. 75. Canons, andQueene E∣liz. Iniuncti∣ons, Iniunct. 3. 12, 23, 25, 31, 35, 49 & 5. er Tables in the Church. Iniunctions,
which prohibit them) through the audacious practi∣ses
of somePacem habet Ecclesia apud extraneos sed filii nequam, filii selcrati saeviunt in eam, qui propriam matrem evisceraut, vt se parat in honorem Bernard, ad Pastores Sermo, Col. 133. A. domestique crafty Mountebanks, who
would slily Cozen vs of our Religion vnder the
golden and holy pretence of Canonicall Devotion:
and withall to reestablish these Anti-Arminian ortho∣dox
Tenets of our Church, (which here I humbly
tender to your best protections) in their ancient, and
long enioyed purity, peace, and freedome: that so by
these religious atchieuements, you may giue some pub∣like,
Episcopum non aliud nisi Episcopalis opera designat; ex bono opere magis quam professione noscatur; actione poius quam no∣mine demonstramur. Fac taquei vt nomen congruat actioni, actio respondea no∣mini; Ne sit nomen inane et crimen immane; Ne sit honor sub imis et vita defor∣mis: Ne sit defica professio et illicita actio: Ne sit religiosus amictus, et irreligio∣sus provectus. Ne sit gradus excelsus et deformis excessus. Ne habeatur in Ecclesia Cathedra sublimor, et conscientia sacerdotis reperiatur humilier. Ne locutionem simulemus columbinam, et mentem habeamus caninam. Ne professionem monstre∣mus ovinam, et ferocitatem habeamus lupinam, Ambrose de Dignitate Sacerdotali, cap. 3. Tom. 4. p. 179. demonstratiue, actuall testimony to the world,
(which isPlerun{que} suspicionibus laboramus, et illudit nobis illa quae conficere bellum solet, fama: Seneca Epist. 13. suspiciones quas de aliquo con epimus animum nostrum ab illo reddunt alieniorem. Quare qui cupit sibi fidem haberi, has prius a se remoueat est necesse. Thucidides histor. lib: 6. p: 571. oft times iealous of your integrities vp∣on
small occasions) that you are all cordiall, sincere
and faithfull to our Religion, Church, and State: that
you are all valiant and zealous for the truth commit∣ted
to your trust: and that you are not onely tiular,

but reall Bishops, well worthyFuerunt an∣te vos qui se to∣tos ovibus pas∣cendis expone∣rent, Pastoris opere et nomi∣ne gloriantes; nil sibi repu∣tantes indig∣num nisi quod saluti obvium obviare puta∣rent: non quae∣rentes quae sua sunt, sed im∣pendentes. Im∣pendere curam impendere sub∣stantiam, im∣pendere et seip∣sos. Vndevnus illorum: Et e∣go, ait, super∣impendar pro animabus ve∣stris. Bernard. De Consid l. . c. 2. Col 884. K. to succeed those
pious and victorious Prelates, who haue in graven
those Anti-Arminian Conclusions which I haue
here contracted, with their mellifluous pens, and
sealed them with their blood; a sufficient engage∣ment
for me, for them to challenge the priuiledge of
your Episcopall patronage, against the malignancy of all
Opposers.
But perchance your wisdomes will obiect, that by
intermedling with these nice Arminian Controuer∣sies,
I haue incurred the danger of his Maiesties De∣claration
prefixed to the late reprinted Articles: there∣fore
I must onely expect an High-Commission
Censure from your Lordships, not an Approbation, or
friendly enterteinment of this vntimely Treatise;
which may chance to proue distastfull vnto some.
To this I answere first, (and for the truth of it I ap∣peale
vnto your Lordships, by whose advice this De∣claration
was at first contriued:) that it was neuer
his Maiesties, (nor I thinke your Lordships) intenti∣on,
to silence or suppresse; but rather to aduance by this
 Declaration, the ancient, positiue, established, and
resolued Doctrines of the Church of England, (es∣pecially
those which were professed and ratified in the
dayes of Edward the 6. Queene Elizabeth, and King
Iames of happy memory, as these Anti-Arminian
Positions were) as is cleere by the expresse words of
hisPag. 20, 21 42. Maiesties last Declaration to all his louing
Subiects, which well explaines the former. But all
these dogmaticall Anti-Arminian Conclusions which
I haue published, or iustified in this Antithesis, are but
the ancient, positiue, established and receiued Doctrine

of the Church of England, as the Booke it selfe, (toge∣ther
with two ReuerendBp. Hall, & Bp. , in their etters annexed to Bp. Hall's reconci∣ler, p 84, 85 Prelates of our Church,
who haue lately in two printed Letters, expresly uer∣ed,
That the Arminian Errors condemned in
the Synod of Dort cannot stand with the Doctrine
of the Church of England. And that none can em∣brace
Arminianisme in the Doctrine of Predesti∣nation,
and grace, but he must first desert the Ar∣ticles
agreed vpon by the Church of England; nor
in the point of Perseverance, but hee must vary
from the common Tenet, and receiued opinion of
our best approued Doctors in the English Church)
will iustifie against all Opposers: Therefore it is not
within the intent or limitts, (and so not within the
Danger) of his Maiesties Declaration, which I would
not wilfully, not willingly oppose.
Secondly, I conceiue, that this Declaration prohi∣bits 
nothing, but vnnecessary and curious Disputes
vpon bare coniectures on, or strained Collections
from our Articles: But in this Antithesis you haue
onely abare historicall recitall, in nature of a Catalogue,
of those scattered Records and writers of our Church,
which haue constantly oppugned these new Arminian
Errors, from the beginning of reformation to this pre∣sent:
It comes not therefore within the sphere of this
Declaration.
Thirdly, his Maiesties Declaration, was chiefly, to
suppresse all Innovations in Religion, together with
such vnnecessary Controuersies, as might disturbe
the Peace and settled Doctrines of our Church:
But this Antithesis serues onely to suppresse the In∣nouations
in Relgion, and to allay all moderne Armi∣nian

Controuersies which interrupt our Churches Peace
and Doctrines; by disprouing Arminianisme to be the
Doctrine of our Church, in such an apparant man∣ner,
that none can contradict it. Therefore it is wholly
with this Declaration, not against it.
Lastly, his Maiesties Declaration, prohibits prin∣cipally,
vnnecessary disputes about curious, nice,
and needlesse Schoole-points, of which men may be
ignorant without great danger: But I take it vnder
correction, that our Anti-Arminian Tenets, can
which the whole fabricke of our saluation, the whole
Doctrine and structure both of mans fall and corrupti∣on
of grace and glory; of Election, Reprobation, Pre∣destination,
Vocation, Iustification, Sanctification, Per∣seuerance,
and Glorification, are suspended) are no su∣perfluous,
nice, orSee Rom: 5 to 12. Ephes. 1. & 22 im 19 c. 2 19 20, 21 1 Pet: 1 & 2 Pet 1. See Article 17. Articles of Ireland: S. Au∣gust De Cor∣rept. & gratia, c: 14, 15, 16 & Tom 7: 2 part throughout. Calvin Instit. lib. 3 cap: 21. Peter Martyr in Rom: 9. Sturmius De Proedestinati∣one; Thesis 1. Polanus de Proedestinatio∣ne; with a lo∣ther Prote∣stants who haue written of these points, who accord in this, and there∣fore all Prote∣stant Churches in their seuerall Confessions haue recorded, and defined these as fundamentall truthes, See the harmony of Confessions, section 4. to 10. curious speculations, vnfit,
vnneedfull to be taught or published; but most
necessary, essentiall, comfortable, and fundamen∣tall
Truthes, in which the whole pith and mar∣row
of Divinity, the whole Doctrine of grace, and
mans salvation are included. This all the ancient
Councels, ana voluminous Treatises of the Fathers
in the pimatiue Church; this all the moderne Sy∣nods,
Articles, Confessions, Resolutions, and Wri∣tings,
both of our owne, and other Churches, against
Pelagius, Arminius, and their followers; as the pro∣fessed
enemies of the grace, and Gospell of God;
as Atheisticall Sectaries; yea wicked, pestilent, and
blasphemous heretiques, (as our late learnedSee pag. 59. 110 So∣ueraigne
hath rightly stiled them) doe abundantly te∣stifie:

All which would neuer questionlesse haue waged
such fierce, such perpetuall, and implacable wars against
these Pelagian and Arminian Heresies, were they
suchinnoxius, or triuiall Differences; such vnnecessa∣ry,
such curious speculations, as some of their Abetters,
(who then me thinkes should be ashamed conteniously
to foment them, to the great disturbance of our Chur∣ches
peace) would seeme to make them,Neglecta solent incendia sumere vires. Horace Epist: l. 1 Epist: 18. because they
would more easily induce men to neglect them till
they had gotten strength, and then to imbrace
them, to their eternall ruine. Since therefore these
Anti-Arminian Tenets (which I here onely vindi∣cate
to be the ancient, genuine, & vndoubted Doctrine
of the Church of England) are points of highest con∣sequence,
of greatest weight and vse; whence they haue
beene more ab undantly patronized, propagated, and
propugned, (not onely in the primitiue Curch, but
likewise in most moderne Protestant Churches, and
in the Church of England) then any other substanti∣all
points of Diuinity whatsoeuer; as is most apparent∣ly
euident. Since their opposite Arminian Errors,
(which are in truth meereSee Bellar: De Iustif lib: 3 Dr. Iohn White Way to the true Church Digress: 0, 41, 42 Bryery his Reformed Pro∣testant cap: 11. to the end; Bi∣shop Mortons Pro∣testants Appeale, l: 2 c: 10. accordingly Popery, andSee Pelagi∣us Redivivus: & heere p 59. Semi-Pe∣lagianisme,
at leastSee here p: 122, 123, 14. a bridge, a way, and portall to
them both) haue beene most constantly oppugned, both
in the Primatiue, our owne, and other Reformed
Churches, as a dangerous, and grace-nullifying
Heresie. And since Prosper himselfe hath expresly
recorded it, long agoe:Augustinus pia, constanti∣{que} doctrina a∣bundan: e pro∣bavit, praedi∣candam esse Ecclesiae prae∣destinationem, in qua est gra∣tiae praepara∣tio; et gratiam in qua est prae∣destinationis effectus; et prae∣scientiam Dei, qua ante saecu∣la aeterna quiae bus esset co la∣turus sua dona, praescivit Cuius predicationis quiquis est impugnator, apertissimus est  clagianae e∣lationis adjutor. Prosper. Responsio ad Excerpta Genuertsium: ub. 9. fol. 146, 147. That St. Augustine hath
constantly, piously, and abundantly proued: that
predestination in which there is the preparation

of grace; and grace in which there is the effect
of predestination; and the prescience of God, by
which he foreknew before all worlds on whom he
would bestow his gifts of grace, ought to be prea∣ched
to the Church. Of the preaching of which,
saith he, (I pray obserue his words, and marke them
well) whosoeuer is an impugner, he is a most appa∣rant
furtherer of Pelagian pride: (which I dare
presume is farre from his Maiesties royall thoughts to
be:) I may safely (as I hope) conclude on all these
premises: That this my Antithesis, (which I haue
divulged onely for the peace and benefit of our English
Church, and the stopping of all Arminians mouthes,
who now must either holde their peace, and yeeld their
cause, or elseVerba pis∣coporum et Clericorum, qui Apostolo∣rum sunt filii et haeredes, vim iuratoriam in se habent, vt in iis iusiuran∣dum sit, quod est verbum sim¦plex in aliis: et quod in aliis est simplex per∣iurium, sacrile∣gium sit in il∣lis, Petrus Ble∣sensis Epist. 51. Bibl. Patrum, Tom: 12. pars 2 p. 741. C. periuriously, sacrilegiously renounce
their Mother Church, and these her Doctrines, which
they haue subscribed, if not sworn to) is clearly with∣out
the verge and danger of his Maiesties Declarati∣on;
who neuer did intend so farre to countenance, to
grace an heresie, so branded, censured and condemned
by the primitiue Church; by forraigne Protestant
Churches; by the whole Church of England, with all
her learned writers, from her first reformation to this
present: and more particularly by his Royall Father,
whose faith, whose steps he meanes to follow: as for its
sake, its growth, and greater safety, to put these esta∣blished
and professed Anti-Arminian Doctrines of our
Church to silence: which is almost the highest digni∣ty,
the greatest conquest that Arminianisme can, or
would aspire to.
And now right Reuerend Fathers, hauing cleared
this obiection, giue me leaue to close vp this Epistle

withHebr: 12. 22 a word of exhortation, which I beseech you
for to suffer. Remember, I intreat you in the name
and feare of God, that you (together with the rest of our
reuerend and learned lergie) are theIsay: 52, 8. c 62 6. Ezech. 3. 17. c. 33. 2, to 12 Watchmen,
theIsay 4 5, 6. c. 26. 1. Psal. 48. 13. Garrisons and Bulwarkes of our Israel; to
giue her warning of; to protect and shield her a∣gainst,
those pernicious, subdolous, and seducing
Custodia vt sit sufficiens trifaria erit; a vi tyrannorum, a fraude haereti∣corum, a tenta∣tionibus dae∣monum: Ber∣nard: super Cant: Ser: 77. Col: 80. B. heretiques; those Popish and Arminian Aduer∣saries,
which warre against her faith, her peace, Gods
grace, our soules. If you then throughIsay 56. 10, 11, 12. Ier: 23. 1, 2. Ezech: 34. 2. 12. Non est speculator qui in imo est, spe∣culator quippe semper in alti∣tudine stat, vt quicquid ven∣turū est longe prospiciat. Et quisquispopuli speculator po∣nitur, in altum debet stare per vitam, vt possit prodesse per providentiam. Greg: Mag: Hom: 11. super Ezech fol: 284. L. worldlinesse,
negligence, sloathfulnesse, Epicurisme; or theRom. 16 18. Haeretici per dulces Semiones corda seducunt innocentium. Chrysost Hom. 24. in Mat.
sweete Syrenian songs of enchanting Mercuries,
Isay 56. 10. begin to sleepe, to slumber; to remit, or else giue
ou your spirituall watch, and ward, against these
Matth. 7. 15. 2 Cor. 11. 14. sheep like wolues friend-seeming Enemies,Isay 56. 9. which
come for to deuoure vs: If youIsay 56. 10. proue dumb dogs
that will not, cannot barke, at their approach, or trea∣cherous
Centinells, false posternes to beray vs to their
infernall malice; we must then bEzech 33. 2. to 12 &
Greg. Mag. Hom 11 super Ezech. See Hierom & Theodoret in Ezech. 33. needs surprised,
yea captivated & destroyed in a moment, through
this your negligence, and default; but yetEzech. 33 6. 8. c. 34. 9, 0 Heb. 13. 17. Acts. 20. 26. 27. Sanguis ergo morientis de manu speculato∣ris requitur quia peccatum subditi, culpa esse praepositi si tacuerit reputatur; quia ip∣se buncoccidit, qui em tacendo morti prodidit. Greg. Mag. Hom 12. super Ezech. our
blood shall be required at your hands. O therefore
rouse vp your selues with speed, andIsay 2. 8. Hab. 2. 1. stand vpon
your watch, your guard, for our security:Psal. 121. 4, 5, 6. close not
your eyes,Isay 62. 6. holde not your peace,Nehemiah 4. 21, 22, 23. lay not downe
your armes day nor night: imitate Nehemiah his

workmen;Nehem. 4. 17, 18. build vp the walls of our spirituall
Ierusalem with one hand, and holde a weapon al∣wayes
in the other hand, to keepe offNehem: 4. 7. 10 15. Samballat,
and Tobiah; those Arrabians, Ammonites, and
Ashdodites, those Iesuites, Papists, and Arminians,
who haue conspired together to ight against our
blessed Ierusalem; to breake downe her walls, and
lay her waste, as they haue done her bordering Chur∣ches:
Else that brand of holy Bernard, will iustly seize
vpon you.Super Can∣tica Sermo 77. Col: 802. D. Ad Clerum Sermo Col. 1728. . Parum est nostris vigilibus quod non
seruant nos, nisi et perdant: and thenIer: 23. . E∣zech: 34. 2. See Bishop Iewels Exposition on the Thessalo∣nians, p. 196. woe be to
you saith the Lord your God; whose woe none can
stand vnder.
You areMatth: 6. 14 15, 16. Phil: 2 15. the Lights,Math: 6 22, 23. 1 Cor: 12. 16. 21. Rev: 3. 8. c. 5 6. the Eyes,1 Sam: 9. 9. 11. 18, 19. 2 King: 17 13. 2 Chro: 33. 18, 19 Isay 30 10. the Seers, yea
Acts 20, 28 Hebr. 13. 17. 1 Pet: 5 2. Ouerseers of our Church; toEzech: 33. 2 to 12. see, foresee her
dangers,Isay 58. 1. discouer her increasing corruptions,Isay 21. 8, 9.
detect her wily Adversaries, with all their over∣reaching,
vndermining Pollicies,Math: 5, 14, 15, 16. c. 6. 22, 23. inlighten her
intire body,Luke 1. 79. direct her in the way of truth, of
life, of peace, andMat: 15. 14. keepe her safe from falls and
stumbles. If you then throughIsay 56. 10. ignorance, wilful∣nesse,
heresie, treacherie, flatterie, feare, earthlinesse,
or any other workes of darknesse,Micah. 3. 6.
Matth: 14 29. lose your light,
your eyesight: If you become eitherLucerna quae in semetipsam non ardet, eam rem cui supponitur non accendit Greg: Mag: Hom: 11. super Ezech. darke Lan∣thornes
which can yeeld no light, orIsay 29. 10, 11. c. 56. 10. starkblinde,
purblinde, squinteyed Seers, which either can, or will
not see; or oversee at all; or very little; or quite awry,
ouerthwart the sacred word of truth, and Doctrines of
our Church. Or if you proue such Pontificall1 Pet. 5. 3. Ezech: 34. 4. 3 Iohn: 10. Math: 20. 25, 26, 27. Luke. 22. 24, 25, 26. haugh∣ty,

Lordly, or domineering Ouerseers; as con∣temptuously
to disdaine & over-looke; or tyran∣nically
to insult or trample vpon your fellow-brethren,
and the Lords inheritance, a sinne of
which theQuanti Presbytteri con∣stituti obliti sunt humilita∣tis; quasi ideit∣co fuerunt or∣dinati, vt hu∣miles esse de∣sisterent. Quin potius humili∣tatem sequi de∣buerant, quia dignitatem fu∣erant conse∣quuti; dicente Scriptura: Quanto magnus fueris, tanto humilia teipsum Origen in Ezech: Hom: 9. Tom: 2. fol: 188. H. Peccat autem in Deum quicun{que} Episcopus, qui non quasi conservis servus ministrat, sed quasi dominus: frequenter autem et quasi amarus dominus dominans per vim, similis constitutus Egyptiis qui affligebant vitam filio∣rum Israel cum vi. Ergo memores esse debent verborum Christi. Principes Genti∣um dominantur iis, et maiores eorum potestatem exercent in eis; inter vos au∣tem non sic erit, &c. Origen in Mat: Hom: 31. Tom: 3. fol: 66. B. C. As hoc tantum potentes effecti sumus, vt nobis in subiectos dominationem tyrannicam vindicemus, non vt afflictos contra potentium violeniam qui in eos ferarum more saeviunt de∣fendamus. Prosper de Vita. Contempl. l. 1. c. 21. Multi autem cum regiminis iura suscipiunt, ad lacerandos subditos inardeseunt. Terrorem potestatis exhibent, & quibus prodesse debuerant, nocent. Et quia charitatis viscera non habent, domini videriap petunt, patres so esse minime recognoscunt: humilitatis locum in elationis dominationem immutant Et si quando extrinsecus blandiuntur, intrinsecus saevi∣unt. De quibus veritas dicit. Veniunt ad vos in vestimentis ovium, intrinsecus au∣tem sunt lupi rapaces. Greg Mag. Hom. 17. in Evangelia. fol. 320. C. D Fathers, andChaucer his Plowmans tale. Mr. Tyndall. Practise of Popish Prelates. Bishop Hooper. Decla∣ration on the 8. Commandement. fol. 76, 77, 78. Dr. Barnes his supplication to King Henry the 8. Our Homily against wilfull Rebellion. part. 5. Bishop Latimer Sermon before the Convocation: and 4. Sermon of the Plough. some others of more
punie dayes haue much complained, as being in∣cident
to divers Prelates of their times,Nos praesentibus de∣lectati dum in hac uita commoda nostra et honores inquirimus; non vt meliores, sed vt ditiores; non vt sanctiores, sed vt honoratiores simus aeteris festinamus: nec gregem Domini, qui nobis pascendus, tuendus{que} commissus est, sed nostras volup∣tates, dominationem, & caetera blandimenta carnaliter cogitamus. Pastores dici volumus, nec tamen esse contendimus: officii nostri vitamus laborem, appetimus dignitatem. Prosper de Vita Contempl: l. 1 c. 21. Vides omnem Ecclesiasticum zelum ferere sola pro dignitate tuenda? Honori totum datur, sanctitati nihil aut parum. Nisi quod sublime est hoc salutare dicamus: et quod gloriam redolet, id iustum. Ita omne humile probro ducitur, vt facilius qui esse, quam qui appare humilis velit in∣venias Timor Domini simplicitas reputatur, ne dicam fatuitas. Virum circumspe∣ctum et amicum propriae conscientiae calumniantur hypocritam &c Bern, de Consi∣derat. l. 4. c. 2. Col. 88 5. B. who
were more zealous to maintaine the outward
pompe and state, then to discharge the Pastorall
charge, and duty of their Episcopall function:

Quia eo ip∣so quod caeteris praelati sumus, ad agenda quaelibetmaio∣rem licentiam habemus, sus∣ceptae benedi∣ctionis mini∣sterium verti∣mus ad ambi∣tionis argu∣mentum. Greg Mag Hom. 17. in Evangelia. F. 321. C. Sed plerum{que} rector eo ipso quo cae∣teris praeemi∣net, elatione cogitationis intumescit. Subiectos de∣spicit, eos{que} sibi aequales natu∣rae origine non agnoscit: & quos sortis potestate excesserit, trancendisse se aetiam vitae meritis credit. Cunctis se existimat amplius sapere, quibus se videt amplius posse. In quodam enim se constituit culmincapud semetipsum; et qui aequa caeteris na∣turae conditione constringitur, ex equo respicere caeteros dedignatur. Omne sublim videt, et ipse est rex super omnes silios superbiae. Apostatae quippe Angelo similis ef∣ficitur, dum homo hominibus esse similis dedignatur, &c. x simulatione disciplinae, ministerium regiminis verrit in vsum dominationis. Greg. Mag. Pastoral. par 2. cap. 6. Rectores qui semetipsos diligunt pulvinos his exhibent, a quibus se noceri posse in studio gloriae temporalis timent. Quos vero contra se nil ualere con∣spiciunt, hos nimirum asperitate rigidae semper invectionis praemunt, nunquam cle∣menter admonent, sed pastoralis mansuetudinis obliti, iure dominationis terrent, Quos recte per Prophetam divina vox increpat, dicens: Vos autem cum austeritate imperabatis is, et cum potentia: Plus enim de suo authore diligentes, iactanter erga subditos se erigunt, nec quid agere debeant, sed quid valeant attendunt. Nil de sub∣sequenti iudicio metuunt, qui improbe de temporali potestate gloriantur Libet vt licenter et illicita faciant, et subditorum nemo contradicat. lb cap. 8. exalting themselues aboue their brethren, as if
they were kneeded out of some better clay then
they; as if they were installed Bishops for no o∣ther
purpose, butto renounce humility and meek∣nesse,
whose dangerous examples be it farre from any
of your Lordships now to imitate,Ephes. 4. 20. who haue not so
learned Christ, as these haue done. If you oversee
our Church, your stockes, either principaly, or solely:
for1 Pet, 5 2, Parvi deiecti{que} est animi de subditis non profectum quaerere subdito∣rum, sed quaestum proprium. In summo praesertim omnium Pontifice nihil turpius. Bernard de Consid. l. 3. c. 3.. Col. 879. K. filthy lucre, not of a ready minde, seeking
not them, but theirs; contrary to St. Paules prote∣station
to the Corinthians,2 Cor. 12. 14, 15. that he sought not
theirs, but them: for the children ought not to
lay vp for the parents, but the parents for the
children. Or if you commonly reside so farre remote,
so distant from your Bishopricks for your ease, your
profit, pleasure, or preferment sake, as that they are
quite beyond the compasse of your ken, your view,

much more your oversight: (a fault not tolerable in
any Overseers, as being diamitrally repugnant to their
Office; butSee Atha∣nasius Con∣stant: Epise E∣pistolae 8. De Necessaria E∣piscoporum re∣sidentia: Bibl: Patrum: Tom. 13. p. 487. to 491. Ambrose Ser: 7. 9. Greg. Pastoralium li. August. de Pa∣storibus. Mr. Tyndall pra∣ctise of Popish Prelates: Bi∣shop Latimer 4. Sermon of the Plough Bi∣shop Iewell on the Thessaloni∣ans, p. 406, 407 accordingly. most odious, most insufferable, in the
Master Overseers of Christs most precious flock,
and mens most peerelesse soules:) Needes must
our Church and we poore Lay-men being destitute of
light, of Eyes, of Seers, and vigilant Overseers,Hosea 4. 9. Isay 24. 2. be∣come
exceeding darke and blinde:Quidni pec∣cet licentiusva∣gum et male liberum vul∣gus, cum non sit qui arguat. Quidni licen∣tius quo{que} spolietur et depraedetur inermis religio, cum non est qui defendat. Quo enim refugium illis? Bernard De Consid l. 3. c. 4. be liable to
a world of dangers, errors, heresies, falls, and de∣viations:
Needes must weMath: 15. 14. Luke 6. 33. Ho∣sea 4. 5. fall into a ditch of mi∣serie,
and destruction at the last. O thereforeIsay 60. 1. Math: 5. 14, 15, 16. Phil. 2. 15, 16. a∣rise,
and shine forth before vs, byNulla alia doctrina sa∣cerdotis debet esse quam vita. Prosper de Vita Contempl. l. 1, c. 23. humility, by
purity of life, of doctrine, as the lampes, the splen∣dor
of our Church: that soMath: 15. 16. Luke 12. 33. Acts 26. 18. we from your light,
may receiue light, andIohn 12 38. Ephes: 5. 8. walke as children of the
light: See, see, rea foresee we beseech you, as we trust
you doe, and will doe) those hereticall precipices, by∣pathes,
snares and ditches, which are likely to endan∣ger,
misleade, intrap vs, if they are not prevented, yea
speedily removed by your providence: and then leade,
direct our Church and vs, inIer. 6. 16. that good, that olde,
Psal: 119. 30. that true, thatIsay 30. 21. Ier. 31. 9. straite, thatMath. 7. 14. narrow, andPsal. 101. 2. 6. per∣fect
wayPsal: 119. 30. of truth, ofIsay 59. 8. Luke 1. 79. peace, ofProv: 8. 20. c: 12. 28. c. 16. 31. righteousnesse,
Prov: 6. 23. c. 10. 17. Ier: 1. 8. life, andIsay 35. 8, 9. holinesse,Prov: 12. 28. Isay 35. 8, 9. Ier: 31. 9. in which there is no error,
danger, death, or stumbling. Remember, you are

all (Ministeri∣um praedicatio∣nis relinqui∣mus, et ad pae∣nam nostram, vt video, Epis∣copi vocamur, qui honoris nomen, non virtutis tene∣mus. Greg: Mag: Hom: 17. in Evang: f. 321. B. Non omnes Episco∣pi, Episcopi sunt. Attendis Petrum, sed et Iudam conside∣ra: Stephanum suspicis, sed et Nicholaum re∣spice. Non fa∣cit Ecclesiastica dignitas Chri∣stianum. Hie∣rom. Epist. 1. cap. 8. at least in name and reputation, and I hope in
truth) the Bishops, Seers, and Overseers of our Church:
Acts 20. 28. See Chrysost et Theophyilact. Ibid. Terribilis Sermo, et qui possit etiam impavida quo∣rumvis tyrannorum corda concutere. Bernard super Cantica Sermo 76. Col. 801. A. B. take heede therefore vnto your selues, and to all
the flocke, over which the holy Ghost hath made
you Overseers, to eed the Church (our Church)
of God, which he hath purchased with his owne
blood.Bernard Ibid Civitas est, vigilate ad custodiam, con∣cordiam{que}.
Sponsa est, studete ornatui. Oves sunt,
intendite pastui.Dan. 12. 3. Math. 13. 43. 2. Iohn 8. So shall our safety, our happinesse,
and tranquility; your glorie, your reward, your honour
be exceeding great.
Lastly, You are the chiefeIer: 3. 15. c. 17. 16, c. 23. 1. Eph. 4. 11. Pastors, andIsay 40. 11. Ier. 23. 4. c. 33. 12. c. 50. 6. zech. 34. 2, 3. 9. 10. 22. Shep∣heards
of our Church;1 Sa. 17. 24, 25. Ezech. 34. 2. to 20. Ioh. 10. 10. to 16. to guard, to rescue her
from those wolues, those theeues, and robbers
which seek for to devoure her:Ier: 31. 9, 10. Ezech: 34. 4, 5, 6, 12. to keep her from
straying from the folde of Christ, and sacred pa∣stures
of his word:Isay 40. 10. Ier. 3. 15. c. 23. 4. Ezech. 34. 2. to 24. Acts 20. 28. Ioh. 21. 15, 16, 17. 1 Pet. 5. 2. Petro terrio dictum est; Pasce: nec mulge, seu tonde semel additum est. Bernard Declam. Col. 928. V. to feede her with the word
and bread of life:Ier. 23. 4. Ezech: 34. 16. 22. Zech: 11. 16, 17. Ioh: 10. 12, 13. to sticke to her in all her dan∣gers
and distresses: and if occasion serue,Iohn 10. 11. 15. 17. to lay
downe your liues for her securitie. If any of you
then (which God forbid either you to act, or vs to sus∣pect)
should either degenerate intoConsiderate ergo quid de gregibus agatur, quan∣do pastores lup fiunt. Greg. Mag. Hom. 17. in Evang. f. 321. C. wolues, or ioyne
with wolues, to teare and spoile her dearest stockes, as
Paul prophesied long since:Acts 20. 29, 30. that some Elders of the

Church of Ephesus should doe, and asNon sunt pastores, sed traditores: dici∣mini pastores, cum sitis rapto∣res. Et paucos habemus, heu pastores, mul∣tos tamen ex∣communicato∣res. Etivtinam sufficeret vobis lana et lac; siti∣tis enim san∣guinem: Ber∣nard ad Clerum Sermo. Recto∣res moderni, non pastores, sed raptores: o∣vium tonsores, non ad viridia pascua ducto∣res: non dispen∣satores bono∣rum crucifixi, sed voratores, &c. Rodericus spec. vitae l. 2. c. 20. p. 316. see Bp. Whites Reply to Fisher p. 84, 85. others
since their times haue done, in former ages: If
you should turneIoh: 10. 12, 13. See Bernard ad Pastores Sermo. hirelings, or faint-hearted Shep∣heards,
to flee away, giue backe, or hide your selues
in times of tryall, when you see the wolues and
theeues approaching to assaile her: and so leaue
her openly exposed to their malice, when as youGubernatorem in tempestate, in acie militem in∣telligas Avida est periculi virtus, et quo tendat, non quid passura sit, cogitat: quoniam et quod passura est, gloriae pars est; Seneca: Cur boniviri mali fiant cap: 4.
should especially march before her, taking vp
spirituall armes and courage for her rescue. If you
suffer her to deviate from the folde of Christ, and pa∣stures
of his word; to stray vnto the broad, the bea∣ten
rode of Poperie, or by pathes of Arminianisme,
which lead vnto destruction, not labouring to reduce
her. If you sheere her fleece, and eate her milke, (as
wee all confesse, youGal: 6. 6. 1 Cor: 9. 7. to 15. 2 Thess: 3. 8, 9, 10. 1 Tim: 1. 17, 18. Quanti mercenarii in domo patris mei abundant panibus? Si panibus abundant mercenarii, nunquid same peri∣bunt operarii? Bernard ad Pastores Sermo, Col: 1729. E. may, whiles you haue care
to keepe, to feede, and cherish her) and yet neg∣lect
to clothe, to feede her with that heavenly
word, that spirituall daily bread of life, which
must nourish her vp vnto eternall life: a thing of
whichLac et lanas ovium Christi oblationibus quotidianis, et decimis fidelium gaudentes accipimus, et curam pascendorum gregum et reficiendorum a quibus peruerso ordine volumus pasi, de∣ponimus.
de Vita Contempl: l. 1. c. 21. Prosper, andQuid nos, (quod tamen sine dolore dicere nō possumus) quid nos O Pastores agimus, qui et mercedē consequimur, et tamē ope∣rarii nequaquam sumus? Fructus quippe sanctae Ecclesiae in stipendio quotidiano accipimus, sed tamen pro aeterna Ecclesia minime in praedicatione laboramus. Pen∣semus cuius damnationis sit, sine labore, hic percipere mercedem laboris. Ecce ex ob∣latione fidelium vivimus, sed nunquid pro animabus fidelium laboramus? Illa in stipendium nostrum sumimus quae pro redimendis suis peccatis fideles obtulerunt, nec tame contra eadem vel orationis studio, vel praedicationis, vt dignum est insu∣damus, Hom: 17. in Evangelia fol. 320. G. Gregory much complained in

their ages. If you retreat or fall off from her in times
of neede, and so proue herPraeposito∣rum est, prae∣ceptum tenere, et vel prope∣rantes veligno rantes instrue∣rene qui ovi∣um pastores es∣se debent, lanii fiant. Cyprian Epist. l. 3. Epist. 15. p. 145. slaughter-men, or
Quidemit∣tit oves in pas∣cuaabs{que} cu∣stode, Pastor est, non ovi∣um, sed Lupo∣rum: Bernard super Cant. Ser. 77. See Ier. 23. 2. 3. Ezech: 34. 2. to 16. 1 King 12. 17. Numb: 27. 17. Zech: 10. 2. wolfe-feeding, not sheepepreserving Pastors:
as some Fathers phrase it:Quidni peccet licentius vagum et male liberum vul∣gus, cum non sit qui arguat? Quidni etiam licentius spoli∣etur et deprae∣detur mermis religio, cum non est qui de∣fendat? Quo enim resugium illis? Bernard de Consid: l. 3. cap. 4. Col. 88 . A. Needes must her
sheepe and shee be scattered, lost, destroyed, and
made a common prey to all revenous beasts that
will invade them; or else exorbitate in their course
to their iust perdition. O therefore for the glory
of God the Father, who hath called; the honour of God
the holy Ghost, who hath consecrated; the loue of the
Lord Iesus Christ, who hath delegated you to the Mi∣nistrie;
(whoseSi diligis me, pasce oves meas. Si ergo dilectionis testimonium est cura pastionis; quisquis virtutibus pollens, gregē Dei pascere renuit, pastorem summum convincitur non amare. Greg: Mag: Pastoral: l. 1. c. 5. person you can never truly loue, vnlesse you loue his sheepe:) take courage, zeale,
and resolution to your selues, (as some of you to their
Gloria recte factorum perun{que} comes est. Cicero Tuse: Quaest: l. 3. honour haue already done) and now rescue vs from
those Iesuiticall, Romishravening wolues; those r∣minian
theeues, and wily foxes, who seeke to make our
Church their prey. Alas, why should any of you flie?
why should you now feare them, or giue place vnto
them? Yea why should you not encounter, and sup∣presse
them; since you haue God himselfe, our gra∣cious
Soveraigne (as his lateSee pag. 20, 21, 22. Declaration can suf∣ficiently
testifie) together with the whole State and
Kingdome, for to back you: the ensamples of your wor∣thy
Predecessors, of some few of your coetanian Bre∣thren,
to encourage you in this right Christian action?
You are our Pastors; youIer: 23. 1, 2. Ezech: 34. 2, to 20. tithe; we giue our fleece:
ô therefore keepe, ô rescue, cloth vs, and protect

vs (together with our Church, and her received
Doctrines) for it. You are our Shepheards, you eate,
we yeeld our milke: ô feede vs for it, with the whole∣some
the soule-saving word, and bread of life: You
Rom. 15. 27. 1 Cor: 9. 11. reape our temporall; ô sow, ô giue vnto vs spi∣rituall
things. You are our Master-heardsmen: your
wages, yea your flockes are great: ô then be vigilant,
diligent, carefull and laborious for them,The Bishops assembled at. 4. rimin request∣ed this of Con∣stantius; that Bishops might bee resident with their flockes, and not be banish∣ed their Chur∣ches. Socrates Scholast l. 2 c. 2 9 p. 281. resident,
and present with them; that soIoh: 10. 3, 4 14. 27. you may know
them all by name,Iohn: 10. 3, 4 goe in and out before them;
become1 Pet. 5. 3 1 Tim: 4. 11. Ad amorem patriae coelest is plus exempla, quam praedicamenta succendunt. Greg. Mag Dialog. l. 1. fol. 231. D. Validiora sunt exempla quam verba, et plenius est opere docere quam voce. Leo de S Laurent. Sermo. cap. 2. fol. 167. Facere maiorem vim habet quam di∣cere. Doctor magis debet esse vitae Doctor, quam sermonis. Chrysost Hom. 19 in Hebr. Tom. 4. Col 1608. & Hom. 5. in 2 Thess. Tom. 4. Col. 1299. A. even reall, instructing ensamples to
them, both in life, and Doctrine: that they againe
mayIoh. 10. 3. 16. 27. heare, mayIoh 10. 4. 5. know your voice; andIoh. 10. 4, 5, 9, 10, 28, 29. follow
you safe from earth to heaven, to your1 Thests. 2 19, 20. eternall
ioy, in thatPense∣mus ergo, qui vnquam per linguam nostram conversi, quide perverso suo opere no∣stra increpatione correpti, poenitentiam egerunt; quis luxuriam ex nostra instituti∣one deseruit, quis avaritiam, quis superbiam declinavit? Pensemus quod lucrum Deo fecimus nos, qui accepto talento, ab eo ad negotium missi sumus. Etenim di∣cit: Negotiaminidum venio. Ecceiam venit, eccede nostro negotio lucrum requirit. Quale ei animarum lucrum de nostra negotiatione monstrabimus? Quot eius con∣spectui animarum manipulos de praedicationis nostrae segite illaturi sumus? Po∣namus ante oculos nostros illum tantae districtionisdiem quo index veniet, et ratio∣nem cum servis suis quibus talenta credidit, ponet: Ibi Petrus cum Iudaea conversa, quam post se traxit, apparebit: Ibi Paulus conversum, vt ita dixerim, mundum du∣cens: Ibi et Andreas post se Achaiam; ibi Iohannes Asiam, Thomas Indiam in con∣spectum sui iudicis conversam ducet. Ibi omnes Dominici gregis arietes cum anima∣rum lucris apparebunt, qui sanctis suis praedicationibus post se subditum gregem trahunt. Cum igitur tot pastores cum gregibus suis ante aeterni Pastoris oculos ve∣nerint, nos miseri quid dicturi sumus, qui ad Dominum nostrum post negotium va∣cui redimus qui pastorum nomen habuimus, et oves quas ex nutrimento nostro de∣bemusostendere, non habemus? Hic Pastores vocati sumus, et ibi gregem non duci∣mus, &c. Greg: Mag Hom in Evangelia. fol. 321. F. great audit-day, when all the faith∣full

and soule-winning shepheards shall present
their severall regained flockes vnto their1 Pet: 5. 3, 4 Master-shepheard,
Iesus Christ, who shall then reward
them with a crowne of glory which fadeth not a∣way:
whereas he shall cloth all theeues, all wolues,
all hirelings, all invigilant, vnfaithfull, sloath∣full
and voluptuous shepheards, who haue no
flockes of saved, of converted soules to follow
them, with eternall shame. I shall wind vp all, in the
words of Bernard.Ad Pasto∣res Sermo Col: 1728. L. Ecce sacrū Evangeliū sub nu∣mero
triū personarū, includit multitudinem vni∣versam
Praelatorum. Proposuit enim nobis bonū
Pastorem, mercenarium, et furem. Si boni Pasto∣res
estis, gaudete; quia merces vestra copiosa est
in coelis. Si mercenarii estis, timete; quia pericu∣lum
vestrum grande est in terris. Si fures estis, in∣gemescite;
quia locus vester magnus est in paenis:
nisi properaveritis ad paenitentiam, et quae vovi∣stis
Domino Deo vestro, dignè reddideritis.
Now the Lord Iesus Christ, theHebr. 13. 20 great shepheard
of his sheepe, inspire all your Lordships with zeale, &
courage, for the perennious defence, & propagation of
those established Doctrines of our Church, (which
here I recommend vnto your best protection) and with
all other graces, requisite for the compleat discharge of
your Episcopall function: that so you may carefully keep,
& indefatigably1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5. feed the flock of God which is a∣mong
you; taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but
of a ready minde. Neither as being Lords over
Gods heritage, but beingPraepositi vi∣ta, subditorum regula: et quan¦tum pernicio∣sum est ad se∣quentium lap∣sum, ruinaprae∣positi, in tan∣tum contra vti∣le est, ac saluta∣re, cum se Epis∣copus per fir∣mamentum fi∣dei fratribus praebet imitan∣dum Cyprian. Epist l 3. Epist. 23. Sacerdotis praedicatio ope∣ribus confir∣manda est, ita vt quod docet verbo, instruat exemplo. Vera est illa doctrina quam vivendi sequitur forma. Tune vtiliter praedicatio profertur, quando effica∣citer adimple∣tur. Isiodor. Hisp de summo Bono. l. 3. c. 36. ensamples to the flock:
thē whē the chief shepheard shal appear, you shal
receiue a crown of glory which fadeth not away.

