



POEMES, RIMES, and Verses, some of them haue their delight, such as it is being sung to the Lute, or Harpe, and weltuned instru∣ment, but beeing read & duly cōsidered proue litle worth: with the Songs in scripture, and Psalmes of Dauid it is neuer so. If wee sing them they affect the conscience, and when wee reade them they instruct the soule, as the other partes of the Bible.
To these two endes, I haue dealte in a verse out of the Kingly Prophet, amongst your Lordships countrimen and mine, the Cittizens of Oxforde. I knowe you wishe them well in Christ Iesu with a speciall affection, and for my selfe, I haue suffici∣ent experience of your good loue to mee ward. The considerations whereof haue mooued me the rather to make bold, to
deliuer forth vnto thē in writing this ser∣mon vnder your L. name right wel repu∣ted of & deseruedly in this place, notwith∣stāding, that his late most false, shameles, & vnchristiā libelling wherof (I doubt not no kind of Sanardrin wil allow,Martine Marpr. & which I am assured, the best & best learned in the vniuersity, in no degree do affect, but gret¦ly lament, to see such intēperācy of tongs, and scorching fierbrandes to entermed∣dle, at the altar of the lord in his holy tem∣ple. Were all thinges amisse, is this the way to reforme, by lying, libelling and comparatiue reproches?
Nay, it may be if al his condicions were cō∣discēded vnto, yet considering his immo∣derat behauiour immediatly ensuing vpō the same, it may be thought such natures would neuer be quiet. So hard a matter it is (as the prouerbe is) to make a bed for a dog: for he wil alwaies haue it of his own making and fassion. Cōtentious men wil contend and will neuer be contented.
The corruptions of Patrons, the inabi∣litie of Ministers, their requisite diligence and some like matters of importaunce to be looked into and prouided for, by strength of best authority, for mine owne
part I doo greatly desire. But this Gentle∣mans humor hath, I know not what o∣ther vagarant and hungrie conceites. I craue pardon in respecting this man as he came in my way, I haue stept a side.
Truly a Prophet commonly is not ac∣cepted where he is born and brought vp, & for that cause Origen saith (but whence he had it I doo not know) that Paule ne∣uer preached at
Tharsis. But Oxford in this respect is no Tharsis, & you ioy to heare of their some more towardnes then hereto∣fore.
At the vttering this matter, me thought God mooued their harts, and I sawe it in their faces. Yet because that warmth or heate taken at the fire within, may bee soone cooled abroad in the winde I haue yeelded to the ordinary meane, in cōmit∣ting that external cause of their warmth to the presse, whereby they may ca∣rie as it were in their bozom a fier about with them: First as a signification or effect of my harts desire to doo them this good at this time principally, and then also as an intimation of a greater dutye to your Lordship.
Some yeres sence I conferred Salo∣mon
who was Dauids sonne, his estate with Queene Elizabeths raigne before the Vniuersity, and they haue it printed and reprinted, because some very fewe at their pleasure, must needes haue it so.
Here before the towne I haue assaied with like breuity to doo the like, in apply∣ing Salomons fathers comforts towarde vs and our Qeene, praying God from my very hart that his blessinges toward fa∣ther and sonne, to Dauid and vnto Salo∣mon, may intirely and ioyntly be and cō∣tinue most longe with her, and with her realmes to the worldes end, and namely in our proportion with vs, both Vniuersi∣ty and Towne, and generally so withall the whole Israell of God.
From New Colledge in Oxford.
Decemb. 7. 1588.
