


AFTER that I had gi∣uen our late Arrian the fall (moost Gracious Marye) I bethought me, vnder whose shylde I myght haply calenge the game. And diligently considering with my selfe, how that all my labours, and the fall which I haue gyuen, tende onelye to the mayntinaunce of the honor and glorye of the Glorious Virgin Marye, in defendynge and
vpholdynge the sweete fruit of her blessed wombe Iesus Christ in his true diuinitie and perfect equalitie with God the father (which my ad∣uersary wolde haue gladly leyde on the grounde): vnder whose banner thought I with better luck mought I entre the triumphe, and synge the victorye, then our Noble Marys. whose natiue gentylnesse is suche, that as her grace can not but vouch¦safe her good wyl in all honest qua∣relles: so in this especially she wyll not, but wyll and doo thuttermost: moued as well for the name sake, as also through the heuenly conformi∣tie of most godlye qualities in her, to the hygh resemblaunce & perfect imitacion of the other.
As who that dwelleth euermore in Galile,Mary dwelleth in Galile, īhabiteth Naza∣reth, espoused to Ioseph visited by Gabriel, Mat. i. the most glorius transmi∣gracion from the inordinate loue of the creatures into the Creator of al

Inhabiteth most willingly Na∣zareth, the sloure of virginitie, the braunche of diuine influence.
Accompanyeth continualye with Ioseph, the increase and augmen∣tacion of fayth and loue.
Admitteth dailye into the priuey closet of her heart Gabriell, the for∣titude and might of God. Through whose ioyfull Annuntiation, her soule springeth vp with hope. Affe∣cteth the fulnesse of Grace, the pre∣sence of the Lorde: And obteyneth a sertayne singularitie of blessed∣nesse, amongest all Ladyes.Mary ri∣seth and goeth in∣to the Moun∣tayne, co∣meth into the Cytie of, Iude, entreth ye house of zacharye, & salutith Elyza∣beth. Lu. i
As who againe daily riseth, from synne, from worldlye vanities and delyces.
Goeth, into the mountaynes, to∣warde the heauenly Ierusalem.
Cometh, into the Citie of Iude, the Citie of worthy prayse, and di∣uine honor: into the house of God,
to confesse her vnto his holy name.
Entreth, the house of Zacharye, the faythfull & worthy remēbraunce of the Lorde his preseptes.
Swetely saluteth Elizabeth, the saturitie and fulnesse of her God: Onely satisfieng her greedy desyre in him, Qui solus replet in bonis de∣siderium nostrum.
And as the true handmayde of the Lorde,Mery cō¦ceyueth, beareth & bryngeth forth Ie∣s{us} Christ. Math. i. conceiueth most worthely in her heart.
Beareth in perpetuall memorye.
And bringeth forth Iesus Christ, true God and man, in most goodly practise of godly lyfe.
Thus, most Gracious Marye, & blessed handmayden of the Lorde, debatyng with my selfe your Noble nature and heauenly disposicions: wherin, your Grace so nygh appro∣cheth to the perfection of that your Graces celestiall paterne, the holye
Virgin Marye: that in some mans head, wytte myght well gather, and reason conclude not a misse, one, & the same soule to be of bothe, the bodyes onely chaunged, accordyng to Pythagoras lawe. I saye, oc∣cupyeng my imaginacion after this sorte, within the circuite of youre Graces excellencye, I fynde matier ynough, encouragyng me, to wyll that I wolde, to lyke as I lysted: to doo in dede no lesse then in mynd, me thought I was euer a doyng.
Wherfore, as well for contenta∣cion of myne owne priuat affection, as that also I suppose it most meete and congruent: I haue not letted to committe these my labours, into the handes of the people, vnder the supporte and recognisaunce of your Graces title and name. Wherby, I doubte not, but the honest & godly sort wil like it the better: the cankred
and enuyous shal haue lesse force to endomage or hynder. Although I know their bytyng & carpyng styng wyl not a litle be sharpened therby, agaynst the same my doyngs: which I gladly do acknowledge, shall at∣chiue no small ornament and grace, through these four letters MARY: Thus in euery thyng Enuye dothe comitat vertue, no otherwyse then shadowe the bodye.
Howbeit, for my parte, I do nei∣ther couet the praise of thone, ne re∣garde the dispraise of thother. Only my desyre is, to exhibet a laboure in thōs eye commendable, without re∣specte of their commendation: And in the others fansye vituperable, withoute care or regarde of theire nyppe and checke. The fruite, no doubte of bothe, thonlye floure of your Graces name shinyng in their eye at the firste entraunce, shall
brynge forthe and yelde vnto me, in suche plenty, that it shall greatlye ensence and prouoke me herafter in the like oportunitie to wil most with the best, all if my power can do least with the worst. In meane tyme, I most hertely desire your grace, to as¦pyre & fauour that, that present is: the matier for the worthynesse, the Author, for his forward good wyll. Both of the matier, & the author his entent, your hyghnesse shall haue further instructiō, if the same vouch¦safe to reade my preface to my Coū∣treimen of England: wherin, I do bothe touche & teache, accordyng to my skyll & connyng: and towarde thende therof, doo disclose a worde or two, concernyng the late Arrian, and his fall. Thus the Lorde of Lordes, & Kyng of Kynges, Iesus Christ preserue and continue your Grace in all honor, glory, & welth, nowe and euer. Amen.
