



RIGHT WORFVLL, The due respect I owe un∣to your famous Nurserie both of Law and Piety, as my last Nursing Mother, and to your Worships in particular, as my especiall good Friends; hath at this time imboldened me to commend this HISTRIO-MASTIX to your worthy Patronage; which being wholly compi∣led within your Walls, implores no other San∣ctuary but your benigne Protection; of which your former Play-oppugning Actions promise it good assurance. For whereas other Innes of Court (I know not by what Malus usus abolendus. Lis telton sect. 12. evill custome, and Plus exem∣plo quam pec∣cato nocent; quod non so∣lum vitia con∣cipiunt ipsi, sd ea infunduut in civitatem; neque solum obsunt, quod illi ipsi corrum∣puntur, sed eti∣am quod cor∣rumpunt. Cicero De Legibus lib. 3. worse example) admit of common Actors and Enterludes upon their Viz. All-Saints, & Can∣dlemasse day. two grand Festivals,

to recreate themselves withall, notwithstanding the Statutes of our Kingdome (of which Lawyers of all others should be most observant) 22 H 8. c. 12 14 Eliz. c. 5. 39 Eliz. cap. 4. 1 Iac. c. 7. See here p. 492, to 497. have branded all professed Stage-players for infamous Rogues, and Stage-playes for unlawfull pastimes, See 1 Car. c. 1. 5 & 6 E. 6 c. 3. & here p. 241, 242, 243, 492, to 497. especially on Lords-dayes and other solemne Holy-dayes, on which these Grand-dayes ever fall: yet such hath beene your pious tender care, not on∣ly of this Societies honour, but also of the young Students good, (for the advancing of whose piety and studies, you have of late erected a magnifi∣cent Chappell, and since that a Library;) that as you have prohibited by late publike Orders, all disorderly Bacchanalian Grand-Christmasses, See here p. 743, to 783. (more fit for Pagans thā Christians; for the deboisest Roarers, than grave civill Students, who should be patternes of sobriety unto others;) together with all publike Dice-play in the Hall; (a most per∣ncious, infamous game; condemned in all ages, all places, not onely by See here Act. 7. Scene 3. especially pag. 618, 626, 627, 655. Councels, Cyprian. De Ludo Aleae lib. Tertullian d Pallio c. 8. p. 233. Ambr. de Tobia, lib. c. 11. Tom. 2 p. 280, 281. Chrysost. Hom. 15. ad Pop. Antioch. here p. 43. Ber∣nard. ad Mili∣es Tempii Ser∣mo, c. 4 here p. 560. Isiodo Hisp. Originum . 19. c. 60, to 66. Ioannis Saresberiensis de Nugis Curialium l. 1. c. 5. Petrus Blesensis Epist. 74. Fathers, Bp. Hoopers 3. Sermon upon Ionah, Bp. Latimer his 4. Sermon on the Lords Prayer, fol. 2. his 6. Sermon beore King Edward, ol. 70. his Sermon at Stamford, ol. 16. Thomas Beacon his Catechisme, f. 61, 369, 400. Rober us de Sorbona, De Conscientia lib. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 13. p. 382. with others here quoted, p. 626. in the margent. Divines, See here p. 626. in the margent. Civilians, Vid. ibidem. Canonists, Andreas Fricius de Repub. Emendanda, l. 1 c. 17. p. 62, 63. See here p 626 Poli∣ticians, and Petrarcha de Reedio utrius{que} Fortunae, l. 1. Dia∣log 26, 27. Erasmus Moriae Encomium p. 68, 69. Osorius de Regum Instit. l. 7. ol. 233. See p. 626. other Christian Writers; by Ovid. De Remedio Amorisl 1. p. 215, 216. Virgil. Epigram de Ludo p. 432 Horat. Carm. l. 3. Ode 24 p. 98. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 18. p. 269. Iuvenal Satyr. 8, 1, 14. p. 75, 110, 125. Suetonii Octavius sect. 71. Claudius s. 5, 33, 39. Nero s. 36. Domitianus s. 2. Athenaeus Dipnosoph. l. 10, c. 15, p. 703, 704. Platonis Lysis p 401. Zenopho hist. Graecae, l.  593. Cic Philip. 1.  tus de Mo  Germ. c. 8.  tarchi Athegm. Aleder p. 409. mianus Malinus Hist. l.  c. 9, 10. See annis Saririensis De gis Curiali l. 1, c. 5. Pet Blesensis Epi 74. Danaeus  Ludo Aleae. lexander ab lexandro l. 3.  21. Purchas Pilgr. l. 5, c. 15. & l. 3, c. 4. He∣rodoti Clio sect. 18. accor∣dingly. di∣vers

Pagan Authors of all sorts, and by See here p. 655. Ma∣homet himselfe; but likewise by See here p. 657, to 661. Iu∣stinian Codicis l. 3, Tit. 43, Lex. 5. George Whetston his Enemy of Vn∣thriftinesse, p. 15, 16. Centu∣riae Magd. 13. Col. 79, l. 42. The generall History of France, p. 114, 123, 138 Paulus Geschinius Constitutiones Carolinae, Rubr. 30, 31. p. 14, 15. sundry Hea∣then, yea Christian Magistrates Edicts, and by the 12 R. 2, c. 6. 17 . 4, c. 3. with sundry others here quoted, p. 494, 495. Statutes of our Kingdome; as the occasions of much idlenesse, prodigality, cursing, swearing, for∣swearing, lying, cheating, mispence of money and time, theft, rapine, usurie, malice, envie, fretting, dscontents, quarrels, duels, murthers covetousnes, acquaintance with ill company, povertie, ruine of many young Gntlemens, yea & Tradesmens fortunes and estates; with a world of such like mischiefes: which as they proclaime all publike Dice-play un∣sufferable in a Republike; so much more in an innes of Court: which cannot more dishonour it selfe, than in turning a professed Christmas Dice-house, or publike receptacle of all sorts of Dicers, of pur∣pose to enrich the Butlers, or to defray their Christmas expences; as if Innes of Court Gentlemen were so beggerly, that they could neither main∣taine their Officers, nor Christmas Commons, with∣out the infamous Almes, or turpe lucrum of their Dice-boxes; which empty many a young Students, trades-mans, apprentices, unfortunate gamesters purse, and See 17 E. 4, c. 3. Petrus Blesensis Epist. 74. Cyprian. De Ludo Aleae, with others accordingly. bring divers unhappy Di∣cers yearely to the Goale, if not the Gallowes, whiles they seeke to repaire their losses by robbery, cheating, and unlawfull meanes; leaving the guilt of all their sinnes, with many a bitter execration upon those Societies where they have lost their mo∣ney:

(All which your Worships have piously prevented to your deserved honour, by suppres∣sing Dice-play:) So likewise in imitation of the See Act. 6, Scene 5, p. 455, to 465. ancient Lacedemonians and Massilienses, or rather of the See here p. 465, to 473. & Act. 7, Scen. 2, 3 7. primitive zealous Christians, you have alwayes from my first admission into your Society, and long before, excluded all Common Players with their lewd ungodly Enterludes, from all your solemne Festivals; not suffering them so much as once to enter within your gates, for feare they should See Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5, &c. cor∣rupt the mindes, the manners, the vertuous educati∣on of those young hopefull vertuous Gentlemen com∣mitted to your care, by drawing them on to idlenesse, luxurie, incontinencie, prophanesse, and those other dangerous vices which Playes and Play-houses oft oc∣casion: they being no other, as the Fathers phrase them, but See here Act. 6, Scene 5, p. 474, to 477. Tempore illo∣rum Consulum gravissima pe∣stilentia uni∣versam Romā per biennium afflixit, pro qua depellenda Pontifices lu∣dos scenicos instituerunt: et sic pro de∣pellenda peste corporum, ac∣cessit morbus animarum. Her∣mannus Schedel. Chron. Chronico∣rum, AEtas 3, f. 83. a. the very plagues and poysons of mens mindes and soules. Which praise-worthy imitable act of yours, assures me of your kinde enter∣tainment of this my last-borne Issue: which though (by reason of some intervenient sub∣jects diverting my studies into another chan∣nell) it be ultimus in executione, yet it was pri∣mus in intentione, of all my printed Treatises, as some scattered passages against Stage-playes in my See my Perpetuity, Edit. 2, p. 586, 587. Healthes Sicknesse, Edit. 2, p. 74, 75. The Survey & Cen∣sure of Mr. Co∣zens his coze∣ning Devoti∣ons, p. 90. Lame Giles his Haul∣tings, p. 1. & the Appendix to it, p. 14. former Impressions, evidence. For having upon my first arrivall here in London, heard and seene in foure severall Playes (to which the pressing importunity of some ill acquaintance drew me whiles I was yet a novice) such wick∣ednes, such lewdnes as then made my penitent

heart to loath, my conscience to Ille poeni∣tentiam digne agit, qui sic praeterita mala deplorat, ut fu∣tura iterum non committat Isidor. Hisp. de Summo bono, l. 2, c. 13. abhorre all Stage-playes ever since: and having likewise then observed some wofull experiments of the lewd mischievous fruits of Playes, of Play-houses in some young Gentlemen of my acquaintance, who though civill and chast at first, became so vitious, prodigall, incontinent, deboist, (yea so farre past hopes of all amendment) in halfe a yeares space or lesse, by their resort to Playes, where whores and lewd companions had invea∣gled them, that after many vaine assaies of their much desired reformation, two of them were cast off, and utterly disinherited by their loving Parents, whom I heard oft complaining even with teares; That Playes and Play-houses had un∣done their children, to their no small vexation: (A good caveat for all young Students to Faelix qui∣cunque dolore Alterius disces posse carere tuo. Tibullus Elegiarum l. 3. Eleg. 7. keepe themselves from Play-houses by these two Youngsters harmes:) hereupon I resolved (out of a desire of the publike good) to oppugne these common vice-fomenting evills: For which purpose a∣bout some 7 yeares since, recollecting those Play-condemning passages which I had met with in the Fathers and other Authors, I dige∣sted them into one entire written Discourse; which having since that time enlarged beyond its intended Bulk, because I saw the number of Players, Play-books, Play-haunters, and Play-houses still increasing, there being above forty thousand Play-books printed within these two yeares, (as Stationers informe mee,) they be∣ing now more vendible than the choycest Ser∣mons;

The Fortune and Red-bull. two olde Play-houses being also lately ree∣dified, enlarged, and one White Fiers Playhouse. new Theatre erected, the multitude of our London Play-haunters be∣ing so augmented now, that all the ancient Di∣vels Chappels (for so the Fathers stile all Play-houses) being five in number, are not sufficient to containe their troopes, whence wee see a sixth now added to them; whereas even in viti∣ous Nero his raigne there were but Whence Se∣neca (writing of the vastnesse & populosity of Rome) thus com¦plaines: Quod tribus eodem tempore The∣atrs viae po∣stulantur. De Clementia l. 1, c. 6. And if three Play houses were too much in heathen Rome, shall sixe be suffered in Christian London? God forbid. three stan∣ding Theaters in Pagan Rome, (though farre more spacious than our Christian London) and those three too many: Hereupon I first commended it being thus augmented to the Licencer, and from him unto the Presse, where it hath lingred longer than I did expect. Which being now at last brought forth into the world in such a Play-adoring age, that is like to bid defiance to it, I here bequeath it to your pious Patronage, to whom it was at first devoted, not caring how it fares abroad, so it may doe good and please at home. Thus wishing all grace, all happines and prosperity to your Worships, and to the whole Society of Lincolnes Inne, together with all prosperous successe to these my unworthy la∣bours, I commend both you and them to Gods owne blessing. Ever resting

