



MOST DREAD SOVERAIGNE,
THE bleeding and almost desperate Condi∣tion
of the long established Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England, of late
yeares, not only secretly undermined by Po∣pish
Priests and Jesuites, but openly oppug∣ned,
affronted, by some English Priestes and
Prelates in divers Visitation-Articles, Sermons and printed
Bookes licenced for the Presse, to the intollerable contempt
of your Majesties late piousBefore the 39. Articles, and con∣cerning the causes of the dissolving of the Parlia∣ment. An. 1628. Declarations; Hath made me
so presumptuous, as not only to compile, but likewise to re∣commend
this unpolished Quench-Coale to your Royall Per∣sonage:
Wherein like a plain-dealing English-man, I have

according to my poore ability, not only defended the esta∣blished
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England,
in the particulars now oppugned, against those treacherous
rebellious Sonnes of hers who have professedly both in their
Sermons, practises and printed Bookes oppugned them, out
of her owne Records and Writers (which I have princi∣pally
made use of) but likewise discovered and layd open,
without flattery or partiallity, their desperate practises,
aymes, plots and intentions, to suppresse and roote out our
syncere Religion, and usher in Popery by degrees; Toge∣ther
with the method, and progresse they have made and
prosecuted in this their pernicious designe.
The reasons inducing me to dedicate this rude incompt
Discourse (which I had neither time nor opportunity to po∣lish)
to your Sacred Majesty were these.
1. First, to acquint your Highnes, with the severall
dangers wherewith the Religion, Doctrine and Discipline,
by Law establishest in the Church of England, are now sur∣rounded,
and those open affronts and oppositions made of
late yeares against it; Of which I presume, your Majesty
(who commonly see with other mens eyes, and heare with
other mens eares, as most Princes are forced to doe) have
not beene yet so fully acquainted, as your faithfull Subjects
could desire, especially by your Prelates.
2. Secondly, to informe your Majesty, how grosly some
of your Prelates and Chaplaines have abused your High∣nes
and your Subjects eares and eyes, both in the Pulpit, the
See A∣coale from the Al∣tar, p. 64. the Order, of the Counsell-Table con∣cerning S. Gregories Church: And Ibid. p. 15. 16. 17. 19. 53. to 58.Counsell-Chamber, and in printed Bookes, in the point of
Altars, and their situation of Communion-Tables Altarwise
against the East wall of the Quire; Which Altars & Situs of
Lords-Tables, they have peremptorily affirmed, to be conso∣nant
to the practise of approred Antiquity; Yea to the Statutes,
Doctrine, Canons and Discipline of the Church of England;

When as it is most apparant: That the primitive Church
laand Christians had no Altars, but Tables only, for aboue 260
teyeares after Christ; And that then and ever since, till now of
late, both their Tables and Altars were alwayes placed in the
MIDST of their Quires or Churches; As J have here plen∣trifully
manifested; And that they neither bowed to nor to∣wards
their Altars, as these new Doctours falsely dogmatize.
3. Thirdly; To present unto your Majesty, the many
dangerous Innovations and backslidings to Popery that
have crept into our Church of late, and now are publikely
justifyed in print, yea enjoyned by some of your potent Pre∣lates,
and enforced on your poore Subjects (especially godly
Ministers) under paine of suspension, excommunication, de∣privation,
yea fining, imprisonment and utter ruine in your
High Commissions, (atSee 1. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c. 1. first erected to suppresse all Poperie, In∣novations,
Errours and Episcopall enchroachments upon your
Eeclesiasticall Prerogative, but now used as the chiefe In∣struments,
to countenance and set them up,) in professed
opposition and rebellion against your Majesties Lawes, Pro∣clamations
and two late piousBefore the 39 Ar∣ticles; and of the causes mo∣ving his Majesty to dissolve the last Parlia∣ment, p. 20. 21. 22. 42. Declarations to all your lo∣ning
Subjects: VVherein your Majesty (to the unspeake∣able
joy of all your true-hearted people) calling God to record
before whom you stand, hath made this solemne Protestation.
That you will never give way to the authorizing of a∣ny
thing, whereby ANY INNOVATION may steale
or creep into the Church, but preserve that unity of Doc∣trine
& Discipline established in the Time of Queen Eli∣zabeth,
whereby the Church of England hath stood & flo∣rished
ever since. That you doe professe to maintaine the
true Religiō & Doctrine established in the Church of Eng∣land,
without ADMITTING OR CONNIVING AT
ANY BACKSLIDING TO POPERY OR SCHISME.
That you will not INDVRE ANY VARYING OR
DEPARTING JN THE LEAST DEGREE, from
the sed Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of Eng∣land

now established. And that you will esteeme those
subordinate Officers and Ministers that shalbe but negli∣gent
in seeing this your Declaration executed (much more
then those who apparantly oppugne it,) as culpable both
to God and your Majesty; And will expect that hereafter
they give you a better account; Yet notwithstanding both
these your royall Declarations; Some of your Prelates (who
were both privies and parties to them) with others of your
Clergie, have since their publication, not only suffered
many Jnnovations to creep and steale into our Church,
admitted and connived at many backslidings to Poperie
and Romish Schisme, and permitted naySee Shel∣ford, Ree∣ve, Chow∣naeus, Browne, Pockling∣ton, Hey∣lyn, Bi∣shop Whi∣te, A Coal frrom the Altar, the Female Glory, with other late licen∣sed Books, Bishop Wrens, Bishop Mountagues and Bishop Peirce their Visitation Articles. licensed in
print many varyings and departings in the highest degree
from the setled established Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England; But likewise been the chiefe Au∣thours
and fomenters, yea the open Abbettours and Com∣maunders
of them both in the Pulpit, High Commission,
their Visitation-Articles, Synodes, and in printed Bookes;
Especially in setting up, justifying, writing and preaching
for Images, Crucifixes, Altars, Priests, Sacrifices of the Altar,
bowing to Altars, to Communion-Tables, and rayling them in
Altarwise, with other particulars else-where specified in this
Discourse; In which we have lately backslided, not only to∣wards
Popery, but quite Apostatized to it, (as the Priestes,
the Papists glory and cracke in every place:) justifying in
some late printed Bookes,Chownaeus Collect: 16. 17. 18. Mr. Robort Shelford Priest Treatise concerning Antichrist. The Church of Rome to be a true
Church, and never to have erred in any fundamentall points, no
not in the worst times; And publikely maintaining the Pope
or Papacy not to be Atichrist, and Antichrist yet not to be

come, in open affront toFor  a∣gainst Dis∣obedience and wi∣full Rebellion. Serm. 3. 4. 5. our HomiliesOf Ireland, n. 80. Articles,Bishop Downham, Bishop Abbot, Dr. Beard, Mr. Squire, Mr. Powel, Richard Brightwell, Thomas Becon, and others of Antichrist.
Authorised Writers of all sorts, and the professed position of all
the Reformed Churches of the world.
So much doe some of your Prelates and Priests now dote
upon theRev. 17. 5. 15. 16. Whore of Rome and her abominations.
Yea such hath been the monstruous unparalled presump∣tion
of these undutifull, persidious Innovatours, since these
Declarations published by your Majesty, that they have
dared to purge, corrupt, sophisticate and Innovate the pu∣blike
Records and Monuments of the Church of England,
ratified by sundrie1. Eliz. c. 2. 13. Eliz. c. 12. 3. Iacobi c. 1. Acts of Parliament, without your Ma∣jesties
privity; To such an hight of insolency are they
growen.
I shall instance only in 3. particulars, worthy your Maje∣sties,
yea the whole Kingdomes consideration, and the seve∣rest
Censures that your Royall Justice can inflict.
First, they have purged & corrupted the Booke of Com∣mon-Prayer
in two severall places, the first whereof so
neerely concernes your Majesty, your Royall Confort and
Princely Issue, that J should be no lesse then an Arch-Traytor
to you all, should I not discover but conceale it.
In the ancient Common-prayer-Bookes there was this
Collect prescribed for the Queen, Prince and Royall Issue
O God, who art the Father of thine Elect and of their seed, we
humblie beseeth thee to blesse our most gracious Queen, &c.
These busy Innovatours, to testify their loyalty and duty
to your Majesty, your Queen and Royall Issue, have pre∣sumed
to expung you all out of the Catalogue of Gods E∣lect,
and to ranke you all in the number of Reprobates and

Castawayes, with one dash; Blotting this clause (who art the
Farher of thine Elect and of their seed) quite out of this Collect,
in all the late Common-prayer-Bookes; VVhereby they
have done as much as in them lies, not only to deprive your
Majesty and your Princely Jssue, of that temporall Crowne
of Soveraignty over these your Realmes, to which you are
Elected by God, but also to rob both your Majesty, your Noble
Queen, your Royall Issue, your most Illustrious Sister, and
her Princely Progenie, of that eternall Crowne of glory like∣wise,
to which bothCol. 3. 12 1. Thos. 1. 4. 1. Pet. 4. 1. 2. 2. Iohn. 1. 2. Thes. 2. 13. Charity and Loyalty enjoyne us, to be∣lieve
you are Elected through GodsEphes. 1 4, 5. 6. 7. 11, 12. Rom. 11. 5, 6. free grace and everlasting
decree; Elect, in the Collect, being taken in both these
sences.
VVhether these pragmaticall Refiners of this prayer, de∣serve
not aBishop Latimer his 2, and 5. Sermon before King Ed∣ward the 6. Tiburne-Tippet, at the least, for this bold at∣tempt,
I humbly submit to your Royall Majesty.
2. The second alteration they have made in the Booke of
Common-prayer is, in the Epistle for Palme-Sunday; small
in appearance, but great in consequence.
All the Common Prayer-Bookes before the yeare of our
Lord 1629. (as likewise, Tyndals, Couerdales, Thomas Ma∣thewes
and the Bishops Bibles, used in our Churches till Anno
1612.) read that text of Phil. 2. 10. according to the original,
the Fathers, all Latine Writers and Translations, but two of
late (to witt the Beza and Castalio, who render it Ad nomen,
not IN nomine, as all others doe) in this maner. That IN
the name of Iesus every knee should bow, &c.
But these Innovatours, to Jdolize the name Iesus, and usher
in the Ceremony of Capping and bowing to it (thereby to
make way for bowing to Images, Altars, Adoration of the
Eucharist and other Romish Innovations) in the yeare of
our Lord 1629. (the very next yeare after your Majesties
Declarations) turned this IN into AT the Name (as one Pre¦late
did the like before in the New Translation of the Bible
for the same purpose) contrary to the originall, the sence and

scope of the place, the Fathers, all former Common-prayer-Bookes,
& the very rules of our English Dialect; There being
no such phrase in the whole Bible, nor in any English Author,
that ever I yet read, as, AT the name, except only in this
mistranslated & corrupted text; But only, IN the name.
AT the name being pure nonsence; As appeares by turning
IN into AT, in all the texts of Scripture where this phrase
IN the name is used: As Math. 28. 19. Baptizing them in
the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost, Iohn
16. 23. Whatsoever yee shall aske the Father IN my
name, he will give it you: Acts 3. 6. IN the name of Iesus
Christ of Nazareth stand up and walke. Acts 9. 27. 2. 9. He
preached boldly at Damascus IN the name of Iesus: And
Acts 16. 8. 1. Cor. 5. 4. Ephes. 5. 2. 2. Thes. 5. 20. 2. Thes.
3. 6.
In all which if we convert IN into AT, and read them AT
the name, it makes both the English and text Nonsence, and
so it doth in this very text, Phil. 2. 10. As someLame Giles his Haul∣tings; and certaine Quaeries propoun∣ded to the Bowers at the name of Iesus, Qu. 1. 2. 3, 4. have mani∣fested
at large in particular Treatises of this Subject, and Cere∣monies
of bowing at the name of Iesus, when it is pronoun∣ced,
Ibidem, And the Appendix concerning bowing at the name of Jesus. brought in by Popes with indulgences, for idola∣trous
ends, and not knowne, not used in the Primitive
Church for above 1200 yeares after Christ; What ever
some have written or preached to the contrary, to abuse your
Majesty and Subjects with their Fables.
Who they were that originally caused these two altera∣tions
and Corruptions of the Common-prayer-Booke (to o∣mit
the changing of Minister into Priest, in some places) I
cannot certainly informe your Majesty; But if common same
and circumstances may be credited they were some of your
greatest Prelates this day living.

One of the chiefe instruments imployed in this good ser∣vice,
(who can discover the parties that sett him about this
worke; Then a Chaplaine to a great Bishop, now to your
Majesty) was Dr. Iohn Cosens, as I was long since informed
by your Majesties Printer Mr. Norton, upon the first dis∣covery
and inquirie after this abuse.
A fit instrument for such a purpose; Who but the yeare
before was accused in Parliament for dangerous words a∣gainst
your Majesty and the Reformers of our Religion;
To witt.See a briefe Hi∣storicall Narratiō of some notorious Acts and Speeches of Mr. Iohn Co∣sens at the end of Mr. Peter Smarts Sermon: Printed at Edinburg
An. 1628 That your Majesty was no more Supreame
Head of the Church of England next and immediately
under Christ, then the Boy that rubbed his horse heeles.
That the Reformers of our Church when they tooke a∣way
the Masse, tooke away all Religion and the whole ser∣vice
of God: They called it a Reformation, but it was in∣deed
a Deformation; That the Masse was a good thing
and a good word: As also for setting up Images, an Altar
and no lesse then 220 Tapers & 16 Torches on Candlemas∣day,
in the Cathedral Church of Durham, coutrarySee the Homily against the perill of Idolatry to the
established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of Eng∣land.
All which particulars were substantially proved against
him, both in the Parliament-house and at the Assises at
Durham, where he was found guilty upon an Indictment.
Yet in stead of punishments, answerable to these his offen∣ces,
(some whereof would have been capitall in other men)
he hath been so bolstred up by some great Prelates, neare
your Majesty; As that he hath received two or three great
livings for his encouragement since, and is now lately ad∣vanced
to be your Majesties Chaplaine in Ordinary, and an
head of a Colledge in Cambridge, (to helpe to poyson that
Fountaine of learning and religion, with the drugges and
dregges of Rome;) to the great griefe and discontent of
thousands; Honest Mr. Smart his prosecutour (for shewing
himselfe a faithfull Subject to your Majesty) being in the

meane time violently thrust out of his Preberdary of Dur∣ham
and his Benefice, deprived, degraded, imprisoned, fined
and utterly ruinated in his Estate, by your High Commissio∣ners
at Yorke, (though a man every way conformable to the
established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of Eng∣land)
only for opposing these Innovations of his, and prea∣ching
a Sermon against them in the Cathedrall at Durham:
That of the Poet being here really verified.
Iuveual. Satyr. 2. Dat veniam Corvis, vexat Censura Colnmbis.
These things no doubt have been concealed from your Ma∣jesty;
Which now being discovered, I trust you will lay
them to heart, and learne to distinguish good Subjects from
bad, in despite of all calumnies cast upon them by these per∣sidious
instruments.
I have the rather given your Majesty this hint of Dr. Co∣sens
his words and practises, (whom the Papists of Durham
now much honour and challeng for their owne,) because he
was one of the first men that brought Altars into our
Church, and the first I heare off, that turned his Communion
Table Altar-wise, and then into an Altar.
See qua p. before. Mr. Burgin, one of his Disciples, was the next that
imitated him, who taking away his Communion-Table, erec∣ted
an Altar in the East-end of the Chancle of his Parish-Church;
within the Bishopricke of Durham; Which Altar
(made of a Gravestone) he layd upon a wall of stone, not a
frame, adorning it with guilded hangings; Which done, he
read Second Service at it, (though above halfe his Parishio∣ners
could neither heare nor see him;) and fell devoutly to
adore it, till at last his foot hanging in his gowne, he unhap∣pily
fell downe against the Altar-steps, brake all his nose and
face, so as he sacrificed his owne blood both upon the steps &
Altar itselfe in stead of Christs, and was not able to walke
abroade in many dayes after.

From these two presidents and beginnings, have all those
other Innovation of this Nature sprung, which now spread
themselves farre and neare over all your Realmes of Eng∣land,
Scotland, and Ireland too.
So farre more prevalent and powerfull is Dr. Cosens and
his party, then either your Majesty, your Lawes, Declara∣tions
and loyall Subjects, or the established Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England; All which with the
Booke of Common-prayer, must now be Subject to their
correction and controll.
2. The second publike Monument of our Church, which
these Innovatours have corrupted, is the Eucharisticall prayer,
in the Booke of Common-prayer appointed for the 5. of Novem∣ber,
in perpetuall thankfulnes to God for the deliverance of
your Royall Father, your Majesty and the whole Realme from
that infernall, divelish, matchlesse Powder-plot of the Papists,
prescribed and set forth by the expresse Statute of 3. Iacobi,
. 1. which corruption nearely concernes your Majesty, yea
the whole Realme, and in my poore understanding deserves
as heavy a Censure, as any of those Powder-Traytors
suffered.
All the Bookes of this kinde from 3. Iacobi till 1635. ren∣dred
the chiefe passages in this prayer, in these tearmes.
Roote out that Antichristian and Babilonish Sect, which
say of Ierusalem, downe with it, downe with it, even to the
ground, &c.
And to that end strengthen the hands of our Gracious
King, the Nobles and Magistrates of the Land, with
Iudgement and Iustice to cut off these workers of Ini∣quity,
VVHOSE RELIGION IS REBELLION,
VVHOSE FAITH IS FACTION, VVHOSE PRAC∣TICE
IS MURTHERING OF SOULES AND
BODIES, and to roote them out of the confines of this
Kingdome.

This prayer (which some have observed, not to have been
read, but purposely omitted in your Majesties Chapple the
two fift of Novembers last past, be like by their direction
who have since perverted it,) in the last Edition 1635. is
thus treacherously Metamorphosed: Roote out that Ba∣bilonish
and Antichristian Sect (added. OF THEM) which say
of Ierusalem, &c, And to that end strengthen the hands
of our Gracious King, &c. to cut off THOSE (for
THESE) workers of Iniquity, VVHO TURNE RE∣LIGION
INTO REBELLION and FAITH INTO
FACTION.
In which strange alteration there are these notorious
treacheries, yea villanies, included not to be stighted
over.
1. First, there is a diverting of the maine edge and sub∣stance
of this Prayer from the Iesuites, Priests, Papists, and
Antichristian Babilonish Sect of Rome, particularly designed
in the first Prayer-Bookes, upon those Loyall Subjects and
Religious Christians, whom theD. Ray∣nolds de Idolatria Rom. Ec∣cles. Epist. ad Angl. Seminaria Sect. 5. p. 21. 22. Papists at first, and pro∣phane
licentious Romanizing spirits since, have slaundered
with the name of Puritans.Speeds History of Great Britaine. p. 1252. 1233. On whom as these Hellsh Tray∣tours
and their Confederates would have fathered this damnable
plot at first, had it taken effect, (as blessed be God it never
did) to make them more odious to the World; (Which themselves
confessed upon their examinations and our Historians record:) So
they have now turned the whole scope of this prayer (and
by cousequence the very practise and treason itselfe) upon
these poore Innocents; The only men aymed at in this al∣teration;
And the chiefe men declaimed against both at
Court, Westminster, Paules and our Universities in
the Sermons there preached of late yeares on the fift of
November, wherein most have paralleld them with, And
many affirmed them, to be farre worse then any Priests or Ie∣suites.

So much wee poore Puritans (never yet guilty of the least
treason or Rebellion against their Princes in this Iland, nor
of any such forgeries, Jnnovations, or Romish practises, as I
have here discovered,) beholding to the Iesuites, Priests and
some English Prelates, who have been guilty of many hun∣dred
treasons, Conspiracies and Rebellions against your
Majesties Royall Progenitors, as ourMr. Tyndals Practise of Popish Prelates, D. Barnes his Sup∣plication to King Henry the 8. Fox Acts and Monu∣ments, p. 321. 409. 410. 479. 533. 168, to 234. Antiqui∣tates Ec∣clesiae Brit. & Godwin in the lives of Anselme, Becket, Edmond, Odo, William, Arundell, Laughton, Stratford, Scroope, Poole, Wolsey, Adam de Orlton, and other Bishops. Historians and wri∣ters
witnesse.
And here by the way, your Majesty, (in despite of envy
and calumny may take Notice) First, that those who are now
slaundered under the name of Puritans, are your best and
loyallest Subjects, because most hated and slaundered by Ie∣suites,
Priests and Traytors, who would Father all villanies
and treasons on them; And hate them most of any people,
because truest to their Soveraignes.
2. Secondly, that no kinde of people in the World are
See Dr. Raynolds de Idol. Eccles. Rom. Epist. Ad Angl. Seminaria Sect. 5.
So much slaundered and traduced as they, though the Inno∣centest
men of all othors.
This the practise of the Papists toSpeeds History, p. 1252. 1253. translate this Powder∣plot
with all their treasons and rebellions from themselves to them,
and most Sermons preached before your Majesty can wit∣nes;
VVherein such things are broached, suchMr. Boltons Discouse of true happines, p. 193. slaunders
raysed of Puritans by Poeticall braines, and yet vented out in the
Pulpit as sacred Oracles, which the Divell himselfe would
blush to relate, and the Auditours know to be meere sig∣ments:
And all to make Puritans odious to your Majesty,
being the only men that keep both your Crowne and Reli∣gion
safe.

J shall therefore humblie beseech your Majesty, when ever
you heare any Legends or Declamations against Puritans
hereafter, to consider from what kinde of Persons they pro∣ceed,
and to put them that utter them to make proofe of
what they say, or else to brand them with an hot-iron in the
cheekes or forehead with an S for slaunderers; And then you
will never heare any more fables of Puritans, with which
your Royall eares are now so oft abused by the Iesuite
Contzens Disciples; VVho gives this as one chiefe rule
how to usher Popery into any Christian State,Polit. l. 2 c. 17. 18. 19 to slaun∣der
and disgrace the Puritans and zelots, to make them
odious both to Prince and people, and then Popery will
breake in without any opposition or noyse at all.
2. Secondly; By this perverting of this Prayer, the chiefe
Odium against Iesuites, Priests and Papists (theSpeeds History. p. 1249. Sect. 33. chiefe
Authour of this horrid treason) is mittigated and taken off,
that so they may take roote among us againe, to the ruine
both of Church, State, and (without Gods speciall protection)
of your Sacred Majesty, to whom they will ever be trea∣cherous,
as they haveDr. White his Defence of the way, c. 6. 10. The Homily for Whit∣sunday. D. Barnes his Sup∣plication to King
Henry 8. alwayes been to all Christian Prin∣ces
and Republikes, that would not be their slaves and
Vassals to yeild universall obedience to them in what
ever they should commaund.
3. Thirdly; By this Metamorphosis of, whose Religion is
Rebellion, whose Faith is Faction, &c. into. Those workers
of iniquity, who turne Religion into Rebellion, and Faith into
Faction: The Romish Religion is acquitted and purged
from that damnable, treasonable, Rebellious, factious Doc∣trine,
of the lawfulness of deposing and murthering Christian
Kings and Princes, excommunicated or deprived by the Pope or
enemies to the Roman Church and Faith; Of which the first
prayer, the Statute, of 3. Iacobi c. 4. in the forme of the Oath of
Supremacy, theOn Whitsunday and of wilfull Rebellion. Homilies andBishop Bilson of Christian Subjection and unchristian Rebellion, Part. 3. Writers of our Church, and

among others Dr. John White in his Defence of the way
to the true Church,The Insti∣tution of a Christā manchap. of Orders. Dens & Rex. c. 6. &c. 10. Sect. 5:6. 7. 8. and Dr.
Richard Crakanthrop in his Treatise of the Popes Tem∣porall
Monarchie, c. 1. and 11. Which Authours chapters
I shall humblie desire your Majesty and all that love either
your safety or Religion seriously to read over at their best
leisure, and then let them love Popery, Priestes and Iesuites
if they can or dare,) prove them deeply guilty both in point
of Theory and Practise; And if all these fayle, yet their
obstinate refusall of the Oath of Supremacy (which only3. Iacobi c. 4. Deus & Rex.
enjoynes them to renounce this Doctrine of King-killing) proves
them deeply guilty of it; (and can your Majesty trust such
neare about you, who will by no meanes sweare, they will
not murther nor deprive you?)
Now for any thus farre to gratify Traytours and Rebels,
as to acquit them from that very Doctrine which makes
them such, even then when they are quilty of it, must
needs be a danegrous, if not a Trayterous Act, perillous to
your Majesty and the whole Realme.
4. Fourthly; This Alteration extenuates the greatnes and
execrable odiousnes of that horrid Treason, both in respect
of the Actors, and that desperate Doctrine which moved
them to committ it; And to mince or extenuate such an un∣paralleld
treason as this, so execrable to all the world; Is no∣thing
else but to turne Traytour, and become guilty of the
same treason, or of another as bad as it.
Yea it is to be feared, that those who wilbe so perfidious,
as after thus many Yeares, to goe about to extenuate and les∣sen
such a Treason, have a minde to turne Traytours them∣selves,
atleast wise, to favour Treason and Traytours, and
have treasonable hearts within them.
5. Fiftly; This corruption is a large step to the abolishing
of the memory of this never to be forgotten Treason, and
of that solemne Holy-day on the 5. of November, instituted

by3. Iacobi c. 1. Act of Parliament, for this very end, that our un∣fained
thankfulnes for our happy deliverance from this
Hellish designe might NEVER BE FORGOT∣TEN,
but be had in A PERPETUALL RE∣MEMBRANCE,
that ALL AGES TO
COME may yeeld prayses to the Divine Majesty,
and have in memory THIS IOYFULL DAY
OF DELIVERANCE: (they are the words of
the Act.) For when such a treason begins once to be blan∣ched,
slighted, and the solemne gratulatory Prayers institu∣ted
for its remembrance thus miserablie to be corrupted.
the next step can be no other, but the abrogating both of the
Booke itselfe, and the solemnity kept in remembrance of the
treason; And then when this is effected, the next newes we
shall heare of from Rome, will be the deniall of the Fact,
that there was ever any such treason plotted, though sun∣drie
Histories specifie it; As they have long sinceBeyer∣linke Chro nog: p. 309. pub∣lished
in print, that Henry Garnet the Iesuite andSpeeds History, p. 1249. Sect. 33. Arch∣plotter
of it, had no hand therein; And that there wasSee Cookes Pope Ione and the Authours quoted by him. Ioannis Valerion de Sac dotum Barbis. Polychronicon. l. 5. c. 30. Caxion Chronicle, part. 5. An. 885. Volateranus Cem. 1. 22 f. 228. Marianus Scotus, l. 3. Aeas. 6. Anno 854. Col. 152. Martini Poloni Supputations, An. 855 Col. 152. Papa. 109.
never any Pope Ione, though above 20 ancient Popish Wri∣ters
record there was such a one, and shee a Pope, a strum∣pet,
a most say an English woman.
6. Sixtly, It is apparant, that this alteration was made
only to gratify the Priests, the Jesuites, Papsts, and men
Trayterously affected; Since all loyall Subjects and true∣bred
English spirits cannot but abhor it.

Therefore who-ever were the Authours or occasions of
it, (be they either Arch Prelates, Bishops, Priests, or other,
for J cannot yet certainly discover the parties, neither have
I any sufficient meanes or Commission to doe it, it being a
thing worthy your Majesties owne Royall Discoverie, as
the Powder-plot itselfe was your Fathers, KING
JAMES, his3. Iacobi c. 1. 2. 3. Speeds History, p. 125l. 1255. 1256. 1257. owne ever-blessed detection:) if it be not
See 1. E∣liz. c. 1. 27. Eliz. c. 2. 3. Ia∣cobi, c. 1. 3. 4. 5. Arch-Traytours and Rebels, yet J dare proclaime them
no friends to your Majesty, nor yet to the Church or State
of England, or to the Religion we professe, but enemies to
them all, and friends to none but Rome, whose iustruments
they were in this particular.
3. The third corruption and forgery, is in the very Ar∣ticles
of Religion of the Church of England, at first compiled in
King Edward the 6. his raigne Anno 1552. Revised and re∣established
Anno 1562. in Queen Elizabeths dayes, after
that Anno 1571. confirmed by Act of Parliament, 13. Eliz.
c. 12. and printed both in Latine and English the same yeare
by the Queens Authority.
The 20 Article in all these ancientYea in the Latine and En∣glish Edi∣tions, An. 1553. in King Ed∣wards dayes. Editions, and all o∣thers
in Queen Elizabeths raigne, (as likewise in the Articles
of Ireland, taken verbatim out of the English, printed at Du∣blin
Anno 1615. and twice reprinted at London, An. 1628.
& 1629. Artic. 75. of the Authority of the Church;) runs
thus: It is not Lawfull for the Church to ordaine any thing that
is contrary to Gods Words, &c.
But the Bishops to advance their owne usurped Autho∣rity
& gaine some colour to arregate to themselves a power
of prescribing new rites and Ceremonies, have forged a
New Article of Religion, and added it unto this, without ei∣ther
your Majesties or the Parliaments privity or consent,
and cuningly obtruded it on the Church of England; Ma∣king
this Article now to run thus: The Church hath power to
decree Rues and Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of
Faith. And yet (so farre runnes the Bishops forgery and

addition) it is not Lawfull for the Church to ordaine any thing
that is contrary to Gods Word written, &c.
Which whole first clause to yet: Is no part of the Article,
but a meere forgery and imposture of the Bishops; Whose,
glosse is as pernicious as the text, or woise: For, by Church
they understand nothing else but Bishops; Making the sence
of this forgery to be this: The Church, that is, the Bi∣shops
in their Visitations, Consistories and High Commis∣sions
(as they now de facto expound it, witnes their late
new Visitation Articles, Rites and Ceremonies which
they would hence justify and Authorize) and likewise the
Cleargie in their Conuocation without the King and Par∣liaments
consent) have both power to decree Rites and
Ceremonies, and Authority in matters of Faith.
An exposition & Doctrine quite contrary to the Statutes of
25. H. 8. 6. 19. 1. Eliz. c. 2. 13. Eliz. c. 12. and all Acts concer∣ning
Religion, Heresie, Bishops, and the like, yea directly re∣pugnant
to your Majesties Declaration before the 39. Arti∣cles;
And quite opposite to the Scriptures and all ancient
VVriters, who never tooke the word Church for Bishops or
Cleargie-men only, but for the whole Congregation, and as well
as much for the common-people as the Bishops and Ministers, as
the 19. Article next preceeding it, and ourMr. William Tyndall in his Treatise what the Church is Dr. Whi∣taker de Ecclesia, Dr. Field of the Church, Bishop Bilson of Christian Subjection, &c. part 2. p. 168. 169. 170. Writers plen∣tifully
witnes.
This forgery, how ill soever glossed, is thrust into both the
late Editions of the Articles, Anno 1628. published by your
Majesties speciall commaund, and made a part of the 20 Article,
notwithstanding your Majesty in your Declaration before
both these Editions; Expressely prohibited, The least dif∣ference
from the Articles of the Church of England allowed and
authorized heretofore in QueenSee the Declaration concerning the dissoluti of the Parliament. p. 21. Elizabeths dayes, or any va∣rying

and departing from them in the least degree, in which
it is not to be found; Nor yet in the Articles of Ireland: n.
75. taken verbatim out of this 20. Article, printed in Lon∣don
the very same yeare, or in the Addition of those Articles
An. 1629. a yeare after these two last impressions.
If the Bishops here reply, that they found it added in
Rogers his Exposition on the Articles, printed some yeares be∣fore.
J answer, that Coppy was not the Authorized Authen∣ticke
Originall by which they should be directed but a ba∣stard
Coppy, with which your Majesty would not have your
poore Subjects cheated or deluded.
Your Majesty therefore, prohibiting any the least difference
from the Articles allowed and authorized heretofore in Queen
Elizabeths dayes, by Parliament; Prohibited them to insert
this forged addition.
If they reply, that they were ignorant of the Originall
true Coppyes, and knew not this to be a forgery.
I answer, that this is very improbable, that so many great
Bishops should be altogether ignorant, which were the true
genuine Articles of our Church, who had read, subscribed
and given them in charge to others so often.
But admit it true, yet ignorance in this case is no plea at
all for any man, much lesse for Bishops; And if they are so
ignorant of the very Articles of our Church, J hope your
Majesty and others will thinke them very unmeet to be
Bishops in our Church, and trust lesse to their pretended
knowledge, judgement and learning in future times, giving
little credit to any thing they doe or say, without exa∣mination
of it, since they are so really or affectedly igno∣rant
of the veryWhich they might doe well to study a while, and give over their se∣cular Of∣fices and Affaires, which make thē so blinde and igno∣rant in divine things. Articles of our Church, in the which they
pretend most skill. But if they knew the very Originall Cop∣pyes
& Articles (as no doubt they did,) and that this clause
was not in them, but a meere late forgery, most fraudelently
and corruptly added to them; Then they were accessaries &

wilfull consenters to this forgery, to delude both your Ma∣jesty
and the whole Church of England with it; Yea pro∣tessed
rebels against your Majesties Declaration before these
two impressions, (made by their owne advice) prohibiting the
least difference from the sayd true Articles and Originals: And so
are they guilty of forgery, treachery and contumacy against
your Majesty in the highest degree.
See Crompos Iurisdic∣tion of Tit. Star∣chamber and Ra∣stals A∣bridgmēt forger of false deeds If a man forge but a private Wil or Deed, to cosen any
private man of any Inheritance, Lease or personal estate, he
shalbe severely punished in the Star-chāber, fined, pyllored
if not loose his eares beside. What punishments then doe
they deserve, who have thus corrupted the Commō-prayer-Booke,
the Prayers for the Gunpowder-treason and the Ar∣ticles
of Religion, (all ratified by Parliament & so matters
of Records & to8. H. 6. c. 12. 5. Elz. c. 14. corrupt or rase Records, or forge deeds
the second time is felony,) and to forge a new Article of
Religion, to deceive your Majesty & your whole Kingdom,
and that not only for the present, but for all future ages?
Certainly, hanging is to good for them. Should a poore
Puritane doe but halfe as much, the Bishops would have
drawen, hanged and quartered him long ere this, especially
if the thing were derogatory to their Hierarchie and Epis.
copall Iurisdiction. But Bishops and their Agents thinke
they may doe any thing in these dayes without check or
censure. Yet I hope your Majesty will not let them goe scot∣free
for these their forgeries & corruptiōs; If not all done by
their Commaund and privity, yet doubtles by their conni∣vance,
negligence and subsequent consents. And is it not now
high time for your Majesty to looke to these persidious In∣novatours,
and to repose no trust in them any longer, since
they are lately growen so powerfull, so insolent, as thus to
sophisticate, to pervert these very Originall Records of the
the Church of England, to which they have subscribed, and to
forge new Articles of Religion, to cheat your Majesty & the
whole Church of England with, for feare they proceed to
further forgeries of an higher nature?

VVee know, that the Bishops of Rome haveSee Dr. Craken∣thorpe his defence of Constan∣tine and of the Popes temporall Monar∣chie; and excellent Treatise to this pur∣pose. forged
a Donation from Constantine and others, with which they
have deluded and troubled all the world, thrust the Ro∣man
Emperours frō their Throne & Territories, and usur∣ped
a temporall Monarchie over all the world: VVe know
that the Bishops of England in King Richard the 2. and
Henry the 4. his dayesFox Acts & Monumēt p. 404. 405. 406. 481. 524. and Mr. Fullers Argu∣ment, 25. H. 8. . 15. forged two bloody Acts of Par∣liament
against the true Professours of the Gospell, to
which the Commons never consented, though they foisted
their assents into them, upon which tyrannous forged Acts
most of our Martyrs were butchered, & thousāds of godly
Christiās & loyall Subjects imprisoned, martyred, ruinated
and stript of all their goods, or else abjured, by blood-sucking
tyrannous Prelates.
Whether they may not in time proceed to the like attempts
if not severely punished for those fore-past forgeries and
corruptions of our Churches, Parliamentary Records; I
humblie submit to your Majesties and all wise-mens consi∣derations;
Ambition, tyranny, pride, & malice being bound∣les,
when they have once overswolm'd the bankes of due
moderation, or growen impudent and unrulie, especially in
Bishops.
Having thus represented to your Majesties Royall view
these 3 grand forgeries and corruptions, give me leave (I
humblie beseech your Highnes) to adde to these, two other
late Jmpostures obtruded on the Church of England.
1. The first by Dr. (then Mr.) Iohn Cosens and his con∣federates; Who Anno 1628. (the same yeare your Majesties
Declarations were published,) sett forth a Booke, intiteled:
A collection of private Devotions, or, the Howers of Prayer;
Wherein was much Popish Trash and Doctrine comprized,
and at least 20 several points of Popery maintained, to coun∣tenance
all which, in the Title and Epistle of this Booke, he
writes; That these Devotions of his, were after this ma∣ner,
published by Queen Elizabeth, and were heretofore

published among us by her High and Sacred Authority,
to witt, in the Preces of Horary, sett forth by her Royall
Authority Anno 1573.
VVhen as there is no Analogie at all either in matter, forme
or method, between these Devotions of his and those devout
Prayers of her Majesty, nor any of his points of Popery in
them, as hath been proved byCosens his Cose∣ning Doc∣trine. A tryall of Private Deuo∣tions. two particular Answers to his
Devotions in print: Yet these Devotions of his were never
yet suppressed, but publikely sold among us, approved by a
Bishops license, and now reprinted, to abuse your Majesties
poore Subjects, encourage Papists, and scandalize that ever∣blessed
pious Queen, as the Authour and Patronesse of his
grosse Popery. An abuse not tollerable in a Christian
State.
2. The second is as bad or worse. Anno 1631. One Iohn
Ailward (not long before a Popish Priest) published a Booke
intiteled: An Historicall Narration of the judgement
of some most learned Bishops concerning Gods Election;
Affirming the Errours of the Arminians, to be the Iudge∣ment
and Doctrine of the Church of England, and of the
Martyrs and Reformers of it, both in King Edwards and
Queen Elizabeths dayes.
This Booke (though written in professed opposition to
your Majesties Declaration before the 39. Articles, to Sup∣presse
Arminianisme (yet now made the only iustrument to
advance it and suppresse the truth) was licensed by Mr. Mar∣tyn,
then Chaplaine to the Bishop of London, now Arch-Bishop
of Canterbury.
The whole Booke except some 3. or 4. leaves containing
nothing else but a Coppy ef an Answer to a Letter, wherein the
Answerer purged himselfe and others from Pelagian Er∣rours, &c.
This Master-peece, forsooth, is pretended to be sett out by
the Bishops and Reformers of our Church in the inception
of Queen Elizabeths raigne by publike Authority, and the

Doctrine then taught and professed. When this new Booke
was printed, no Coppies must come abrode (as the Stationer
then affirmed) before theNow Canterbu∣ry. Bishop of London had presented
it to your Majesty, and gained your Royall approbation
thereof.
Not long after this it flies abrode ouer all the Realme,
to the great amazement and disturbance of many of your
Subjects: One of them comming to that learned Knights
hands, Sir Humphry Lynde, (better read in Fathers and
Popish Authours then English Antiquities,) he was so much
stumbled and greiued at it, that he presently repaired with
it, to a Gentlemans study of his acquaintance; Telling him,
there was a new Booke, freshly published, which proued the
Martyrs and Reformers of our Church to be professed
Arminians, and that this was the Doctrine publikely taught
and printed by Authority in the beginning of Queen Eli∣zabeths-raigne;
Saying withall, it would doe infinite harme,
and desiring him to take some paines to answer it.
The Gentleman no sooner turned ever two or three leaves
of the Booke, but he presently discovered the grand Impo∣sture;
Informing the Knight, that this Coppy of a Letter, &c.
was written by one Champenies, whom Iohn Venon (Divini∣ty
Lecturer of Paules in the first yeare of Queen Elizabeth)
An A∣pologie or Defence of the Doctrine of Pred∣stination . 37. expresly affirmed, to be then a ranke Papist and a Pelagian,
and that in answer to this Verons Lectu es of Predestination,
then publikely preached at Paules, (dedicated to Queen Eli∣zabeth,
and printed by Authority in the second yeare of her
Highnes raigne.)
He likewise acquainted him, that this Coppy of his Letter
was printed about the third yeare of her Dominion, with∣out
any Authours or Printers name thereto, or place where,
or yeare when it was printed, or any intimation at all that it
was ever licensed; All which were plaine evidences, that
it was printed in a corner, without any license at
all.

And whereas (sayd he) you desire a speedy Answer to it, if
you will give me but a paire of gloves, I will show you two
Answers to it, already in print above 0 yeares since, by pub∣like
Authority, and one of the first printed Coppies of this
Letter to boote.
To which the Knight replied, J am sure you doe but jest
with me.
No, sayd the other, I am in good earnest, wil you give me,
or wager a paire of gloves hereupon?
That (answered he) I will doe with all my heart.
Then, sayd the Gentleman, reach me hither those three
Bookes he pointed to.
He did so. The first was a Coppy of the Letter, without
name of Authour, Printer, date of time or place; Which
compared with that in this new Booke, proved the same ver∣batim.
Now, sayd the Gentleman, you have seen the Originall, I
will shew you the Authour of it, (which he did in Verons
Apology, f. 37.) and likewise two severall Answers in print:
The first by Iohn Veron himselfe fore-named, intitled:
An Apologie in Defence of the Doctrine of Predestination
Dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, and imprinted at London
by Iohn Tisdale in the fourth yeare of her Raigne; Where∣in
this whole Letter is fully answered: The second, by that
famous Learned Man and exile for Religion in Queen Ma∣ries
dayes, Robert Crowly; In his Apologie of those English
Preachers and Writers, which Cerberus the three-headed
Dogg of Hell chargeth with false Doctrine, under the
name of Predestination; Seen and allowed according to
Her Majesties Injunctions, and printed at London by Hen∣ry
Denham, Anno 1566. Wherein this whole Letter is at
large recited in severall Sections, and then answered Verba∣tim;
This Booke being nothing else but a particular pro∣fessed
Answer to it by publike Authority; As directly contra∣ry

to the truth and Doctrine of the Church of England
then taught and established.
When the Gentleman had shewed him these two printed
ancient Answers to this new Booke; He likewise turned to
Sems London, 1584. . 311, 312, 325, 326, 327, 124, 125, 126, 134, 164, 165, 178, 208. 215, 224, 226, 268, 270, 288, 295, 299, 308, 323, 14, 142, 18,  some passages in Bishop Latymer, which answered and
cleared his words cited in this Booke from any such sence as
it would fasten on them: And to answer the Passage in it
out of Bishop Hoopers Preface before his Exposition on the ten
Commaundements, He shewed him first, the Confession,
and Protestation of the Bishops Faith, dedicated to King Ed∣ward
the 6. and the whole Parliament, and printed at London
Cum Privilegio, Anno 1550.
Secondly, A briefe and cleare Confession of the Christian
Faith, containing 100 Articles, London 1584.
Thirdly, AnFol. 22  24. 29 40. 55, 56 57. 60, 63, 64 65, 78.  Exposition upon certaine Psalmes, Lon∣don,
1510.
Jn all which this godly Martyr did professedly in ex∣pre
tearmes oppugne all the Arminian points now con∣troverted,
and those this new Booke would fasten on him, by
over straining some of his words.
VVhich done; Now said the Gentleman, I have shewed
you many full old Answers to your, New Booke, and proved
it to be a meere lie and forgery from the beginning to the
end, yea the most grosse and greatest Imposture, affront and
impudent abuse that ever was put upon the Church of Eng∣land;
VVherefore, Sir since you are acquainted at London-House
and Lambeth, I pray informe the Bishop and Arch-Bishop,
what you have seen, and desire them to take some
speedy course to rectify this most foule abuse.
He did so: Yet the Booke was not called in, in a weekes
space or more; VVhich the Gentleman perceiving, went to
Lambeth, with his Bookes, shewed the Arch-Bishop, that
then was, what he had shewed the Knight; Desiring his
Grace, that the Church of England might not have such an

impudent strange Imposture thrust upon her.
VVhere upon he thanked the Gentleman; Protesting he
had shewed him that heIt seeme the Bi∣shops are none of the lear∣ned  men,  se well acqua∣ted with e W∣ters and Doctrine of the Church of Eng∣land, as some pri∣vate Gentlemē ar. never saw nor heard off before;
Desiring him to leave his Bookes with him for a weeke, af∣ter
which he would safely restore them.
VVhereupon, these Bookes, after they were halfe sold and
dispersed over the Kingdome, were only called in, but not
burned, nor any publike Act made against them, to discover
the practise and Imposture: Only the Gentleman was at the
cost, to send some of these old Bookes in answer of this new
Pamphlet, to the University Library at Oxford, and to Cam∣bridge,
acquainting some of his Friends there, with this
Decoy.
But now of late this Booke flies abrode into all parts, is
publikely sold in all Stationers shops, and thousands of your
Subjects, ignorant of the fraud, are meerely cheated and
seduced by it; the Licenser (if not the Authour) being since
aduanced; and the discouerer of this egregious Jmposture
(detestable both to God & man) most despitefully rewarded
and miserablie traduced, for his paines. O tempora! O mores!
that men should suffer for their good service in this
kinde.
Now J humblie referre to your Majesties most serious
consideration, whether all these particular Corruptions,
Forgeries and Jmpostures (the vndoubted verity whereor
is soone discouered by the Bookes themselves, which w
attest them doe not crie aloud to your Majesty for speedy
redresse, and proclaime the authours of them (though never
so great or powerfull) unworthy of your Majesties grace,
unmeet to be trusted or credited by your Highnes any more,
(for those who are thus treacherous and unfaithfull to their
Religion and Mother Church, how can they be loyall or
trustie to your Majesty? and worthy of the highest Censures
your Royall Iustice can inflict upon them.

Your Majesty hath called God to witnes inCon∣cerning the Disso∣lution of the last Parlia∣ment, p. 21. A Declara∣tion
to all your loving Subjects, (who dare credit you with∣out
an Oath,) That it is and alwyes hath been your hearts de∣sire
to be found worthy of that Title, which you account the most
glorious in all your Crowne, DEFENDER OF THE
FAITH.
And how can you better accomplish this desire of your
heart, or make yourselfe worthy of this most glorious Motto
then by rectifying all these most grosse abuses and Jmpo∣stres?
By rooting out all Innovations and back sldings unto
Popery, now crept into our Church, by reducing all your
Subjects to the unanimous profession of the long established
Doctrine of the Church of England; And by taking ven∣geance
upon all the grand Authours and Executioners of the
fore-mentioned Forgeries, Impostures & Innovations, which
dishonour your Royall Majesty, greive all your Faithfull
Subjects, betray and scandalize our Religion, make us a
Who would not laugh at these mad argumēts, Paa∣doxes and Frantique passages of Gles Widdows, Shelford, Reeve, many of which are as ridiculous and absurd as any in Ignoramus. very derision, prey and scorne to our Romish Aduersaries, and
draw downe the very plagues and vengeance of our of∣fended
God upon us, whose judgements now call for a spee∣dy
redresse of these things, at your Majesties hands, whom
they have most intollerablie and undutifully dishonoured?
For whereas your Roy all Majesty out of the piety and syn∣cerity
of your upright heart, hath in your fore-specified
Befoe the 39. Articles. And concerning the dissolution of the Parliament. p. 21. 42. Declarations, most seriously protested in the very presence
of God himselfe your perfect detestation of all Innovations in
`Doctrine or Discipline and backsldings unto Popey, professing
and proclaiming that you will by no meanes tolerate or indure
them, much lesse then favour or enjoyne them; Yet since these
disloyall Novellers, their Clients and Agents forgetting

their duty both to God and your Majesty, feare not to give
out in private speeches, and to intimite as much inA Coale from the Altar, p. 36. print,
that your Majesty doth not only connive at, but likewise un∣derhand,
either countenance or commaund by Letter or
Word of mouth, all these their Innovations and Apostacies
towards Rome, (with their putting downe of Lectures and
preaching, of their late silencing, excommunicating and per∣secuting
godly Ministers in sundrie Diocesses for not yeel∣ding
to these Jnnovations, or not reading the late Declara∣tion
for Sports in proper person in their Churches, which
they humblie conceive not to be your Majesties, and which
requires no such thing, that it should be read, much lesse
by Ministers themselves in proper person, and gives no man
Authority in case they read it not, to suspend or silence them
for it, to the Jnnocent peoples prejudice only, whose soules
are starved and murthered by this meanes:) and that they doe
nothing at all, but what they are enjoyned by yourThere was a Let∣ter lately read in some Chur¦ches of Ipswitch, as from the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury in the audience of all the people, affirming that your Majesty had given the Arch-Bishop order and direction for ray∣ling Communion-Tabes Altarwise, and that all Communicants should come up to the Rayle and receive, which much amazed the people, and Dr. Aylot the Arch-Bishops sur∣ragate oft times affirmed the same in Court to divers, who alleaged your Majesties awes and Declarations to the contrary. Maje∣sties
Royall Instructions; Endeavouring by these false Ru∣mors,
to make your Subjects believe (had they such a mira∣culous
Faith as to credit this impossibilitie) that your Ma∣jesty
is the Originall Authority and under-hand enconrager
of all these their execrable practises, Ceremonies, Novelties,
proceedings and backsliding; Of purpose to draw all the
Odium of them on your Highnes, and thereby as much as in
them lyeth, to alienate your Subjects hearts and affections

from your Majesty; Which intollerable, unpardonable scan∣dal,
were it as true as it is false; Yet it were their duty to
forbeare such speeches, or cast uch scruples into your Sub∣jects
mindes: But since they are most ntorious falsehoods
and disloyall Iesuiticall practises in the highest degree, ma∣king
your Highnes no better then a notorious Hypocrite or
dissembler both towards God and Man, as themselves are,
though all the world will be your Compurgatours to acquit
your Highnes from any the least suspition of such dissimula∣tion;
Your Majesty is now obliged both in point of honour
and Iustice to aveng yourselfe of such undutifull Slaunde∣rers
and Detractors from your Sacred Fame, and by a
speedy redresse of all their Innovations, Superstitions, Cere∣monies
and Abuses, to proclaime to all the world, that they
are none of yours, but their owne spurious issues, and that
your words and Actions both in publike and private are
ever consonant, uniforme, and the same in every respect,
without the least shadow of alteration, much lesse of dou∣bling,
either with God or Man.
If your Majesty now demaund of me, who they are who
have been the chiefe Authours and instruments of these
grosse abuses, forgeries Innovations?
I answer, that although it may prove dangeroos to me to
nominate them in particular, before your Majesty shall com∣maund
me so to doe, by reason of their over-swaying power;
Yet for your Majestis satisfaction herein; (A Coale from the Altars phrase.who can judge
of the Catt by her Claw) I shall give your Highnes a Register
of the names of some of the chiefe under-instruments, by
which you may easily discrie the heades and Grandes of
this disloyall crew.
One of the first and chiefe instruments your Majesty in
your RoyallPage 20. 21.Declaration and Proclamation hath pointed
out and nominated to my hands; To witt, Richard Mounta∣gue;
then Bachier of Divinity (since that time punished with

the fatt Bishopricke of Chichester for his notorious Schismes
and Innovations) whose Booke intituled, Apello Caesarem,
published in the yeare 1625. (as the words of your High∣nes
determine) did open the way to those Schismes and
Divisions which have since ensued in our Church. For
remedie and redresse whereof, and for Satisfaction of the
consciences of your good people, your Majesty did not
only by publike Proclamation call in that Booke of his
which ministred matter of offence, but to prevent the like
danger for hereafter, reprinted the Articles of Religion,
established in the time of Queen Elizabeth of famous me∣mory
(a plaine resolution, that your Majesty intended to
establish only the originall Coppy of the Articles confirmed
in Parliament by Queen Elizabeth, in which there is no such
forgery or addition to the 20 Article, as is before discove∣red,
not any other corrupted Coppy since;) and by a De∣claration
before those Articles did tie and restraine all opi∣nions
to the sence of those Articles, that nothing might be
left for private fancies and Innovations.
Yet notwithstanding this your Rayall care, this Booke of
his, (because not burn'd, and the Authour rewarded, advan∣ced
to be a governour in our Church, before any publike re∣cantation
of his Errours) is bought and sold; And he not
only in a newAppa∣ratus ad Hist. Ec∣clesiast. Latine Booke, but likewise in a Court-Ser∣mon
at White Hall in1636. Lent last, in your Majesties Sacred pre∣sense, (forgetfull both of his duty and your Highnes Decla∣ration)
hath presumed to plead, not only for a Limbus Pa∣trum,
bowing to Altars, and rayling in Lords-Tables Altarwise,
but likewise for Altars, Priests, and unbloody Sacrifices offred
upon Altars toe, in professed defiance to this your Decla∣ration:
For which some of your Majesties Courtiers who
heard his Sermon, then openly protested, that he deserued to be
hanged up in White Hall gate, (it were aSee B. Latymer his 5. Sermon before King Edward, f. 64. goodly signe, the

signe of such a Bishops skin and Rochet thus exalted) and
that they wondred how the Arch-Bishops could sit by and heare
such a Sermon, and not commaund him out of the Pulpit.
So insolent is this first grand Agent growen, because not
punished, but preferred for his first offences.
The next chiefe Fctor is Dr. Iohn Cosens, whom I have
formerly nominated; a man likewise much honoured, enri∣ched
& aduanced euen to your Majesties service, and the next
in some mens voyce to be recommended to a Bishopricke,
(if your Majesty reserve not the disposition of Bishop∣rickes
to your selfe, but suffer others to have a finger in
their disposall:) and all for the good Seruice he hath done
the Church of Rome, the affronts he hath offred to the
Church of England, and using such reproachfull words
against your Majesties Supremacy, for which another happily
might have had his head and quarters aduanced as high as
London bridge ere this, in Leiw of all ther preferments.
The happy successe of these two leading Instruments,
hath since encouraged many others to the like attempts; as
His first Sermon, p. 5. 37. where he tearmes the Lords-Table an Altar, Gods mer∣cy Seate, & pleades for bowing towards it. Dr. Lawrence, Mr.His 5. Treatises Cambridge, 1635. all absurd and Popish. Robert Shelford Priest,His Communion Booke Catechisme expounded, London 1635. the Epistles: And p. 17. 22. 35. 38. 39. 48. 60. 61. 62. 63. 74. 75. 76. 77. 90. to 111. (in the first Impression since torne out 127. to 141. 200. 201. 203. 20 206. 211. 216. Mr. Edmond
Reeue,Sunday no Sabbath: Vile throughout. Dr. Iohn Pocklington,The History of S. George, and of the Sabbath. Dr. Peter Heylin, (the
Authour as most conclude of A Coale from the Altar)Collectiones, An. 1635. Collect. 16. 17. 18. 34. 35. Chownaeus, andThomas Browne his Sermon: Oxon. 1634. The Female glory: Dr. Cosens Collection of private Devotions re∣printed, 1636. Bishop Whites Treatise of the Sabbath day the lat∣ter part and Epistle Dedicatory. Dr. Reades Visitation Ser∣mon, 1635. others in late printed Bookes and Sermons,

in hope, of like preferments, to broach many Arminian and
Popish Doctrines, Ceremonies & Innovations, cōtrary to the
established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of Eng∣land,
and in high contempt of your Majesties, Declarations;
Which Bookes were licensed by William Bray and William
Harwood, Chaplaines to the Arch Bishop of Canterbury that
now is, by Samuel Baker and Mr. Weekes, Chaplains to the
now Bishop of London, and by Dr. Beale, late Vice-Chancel∣lour
of the University of Cambridge; Yea one of them, de∣nying
your Majesties Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastiaall
and affirming the Church of Rome to be a true Church,
and not have erred in fundamentals even in the worst
times, dedicated to the present Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury,
was licēsed by his Chaplaine William Harwood, (yea
justified publikely by the Arch-Bishop in the High Com∣mission,
in the Censure of Dr. Bastwicke.)
Quid facient Domini, audent cum talia Servi?
When the Chaplains dare license such Doctrines, Bookes,
and Novelties by their Lords Authority, it is much to be
feared, that their Lords themselves dare doe as much or
more then this amounts to.
If your Majesty will but inquire of these new Authours
and Licensers, who are the men that cherish and counte∣nance
them; By whose Privity and Authority they have pre∣sumed
to attempt the writing and Licensing of such Bookes,
you may easily by these Rivulets trace out the Fountaines
from whence all these Enormities, Corruptions, Forgeries
and Innovations flow; And if you shall vouchsafe with all,
to cast your Royall eye upon the Remonstrance, touching the
encrease of Popery, Arminianisme, and the decay of Religion,
presented to your Majesty by the Commons house the last Par∣liament,
it is a thousand to one, but you will soone, dis∣cover

the very parties, not only by guesse but by
name.
Besides, if your Majestie will once more cast your prying
eye upon the late Visitation Articles of Bishop Wren, Bishop
Peirce, Bishop Monntague, and other your Prelates and Arch-Deacons,
visiting in their owne names and by their owne
Authority; Or cause a diligent inquiry to be made in all
places where Altars, Images, Crucifixes, bowing to Altars,
Tapers, rayling Communion-Tables Altar-wise, reading
Second-Service at the Altar, Consecrations of Altars, Chur∣ches,
Chappels are introduced, urged and many godly
conformable Ministers excommunicated, silenced, suspended
& persecuted for not submitting to these with other such In∣novations
and New-Doctrines; By whose Authority and
commaund these things are done and inforced; Or by what
Authority some Schollers, Ministers and Lecturers have
been refused to be admitted to holy Orders, Benefices and
Lectures, for not subscribing to certaine New-Doctrines &
Ceremonies underhand propounded to them; (And with all
take this into your Royall consideration, that inEd∣mond Reeve his Commu∣nion Booke Cate∣chisme expoūded Epistle Dedicatory, and p. 20. 205. 206. 211. 216. Robert Shelford his Treatise of Gods House, p. 20. A Coale from the Altar, p. 1. 26. 27. 64. three late
printed Treatises, Arch-Bishops, Bishops and Cathedrall Chur∣ches,
are made the Originall Patternes, by which all other Persons
and Churches must be regulated, in these very Innovations;) Your
Majesty without any further helpe or character, may infalli∣blie
discover, both the roots, the fountaines and Seminaries,
from whence all the premises issue.
More particular light then this, is neither yet safe for me
to give, nor necessary for your Majesty to require.
If any thinke I have gone to farre in this; Let him know;
That it is only the zeale of doing your Majesty, my Country

and Mother Church of England, faithfull service without
feare or flattery, (it being now no time to mince things, or
dissemble longer,) which hath thus farre transported me; In
whose just important cause and quarrell (how faint hearted
soever others shew themselves,) I shalbe ever ready, through
Gods assistance, not only to spend my Lie, my Limbes, my
Fortunes and Liberty, but my very Life and Soule, Chusing
rather to hazard all or any of these, then to behold my God,
my Soveraigne, my Country, my Relgion, secretly under∣mined,
abused, betrayed, trampled upon, or ruined, and yet sit
mute, neither discovering the contrivers, the instruments,
nor close cariages of such Antichristian, treacherous, disloyall
designes for feare of any danger, person, or Prelate whatso∣ever
And if J did it not when I had meanes and oportu∣nity,
I should neither deeme my selfe, a faithfull Servant to
my God, nor a loyall Subject to your Majesty, my Sove∣raigne.
And now since I have lanched thus farre out into this tem∣pestuous
Ocean. (perchance with hazard of drowning, or
Pyrats, unlesse your Majesty rescue me by a Patent of safe
conduct, and calme these boysterous Seas when they arise
to overflow me,) give me leave to wade but one step fur∣ther,
to acquaint your Highnes with the evill dangerous
fruites of these lewd practises, Bookes Innovations, and
then I shall cast anker in the secure Harbour of your Royall
Grace and Protection.
1. First, they have produced aboundance of Schismes,
Factions, arres, discontents, quarrels, heart-burnings, if not
mutuall malice, hatred and reproaches, among your people
in all places of your Realmes, and quite rent asunder that
ancient unity, peace, love and mutuall charity which flouri∣shed
among them, before these Innovations crept into the
Church.

2. Secondly, they have not only grieved, & vexed the righ∣teous
soules, but even quite dejected the spirits, and broken
the hearts of many thousand godly Lts and most faithfull
Subjects to your Majesty, who even pine away and languish
under them, for griefe and sorrow of heart.
3. Thirdly, they have bred a generall feare in the hearts, &
an over-great jealousie in the heades of your Loyall Sub∣jects
of an approaching alteration of Religion, and totall
Apostasie unto the Sea of Rome; They having little left
to secure or arme them against this feare and jealousie, but
the syncerity of your Majesties owne Royal heart to our Re∣ligion,
your comfortable, pious Declaracions (now trampled
by these Novellers under feet in open scorne) and the zeale
of divers of your Nobility, to whom Gods truth and our Re∣ligion
are dearer then their soules: Which no doubt they
will now declare by their actions in this time of need; To
your Majesties great joy and ease, and the daunting of these
strange audacious Innovatours, though hitherto many of
them have been over-silent.
4. Fourthly, they have caused many to turne Atheists,
Skeptickes or Newters in Religion, seeing our Church so
wavering and unconstant; Many to fall off to Popery, and
hundred thousands of Papists from conversion, by encoura∣ging
and hardning them in their Antichristian Errours and
Superstitions, to which they see us running, if not flying so
fast of late, that they say they need not come towards us, since
wee are posting so fast to them.
5. Fiftly, they have caused thousands of godly Christians
(theGen. 18. 24. to 33. Acts 27. 23. 24 Ier. 5. 1. Ezech. 22. 30. 31. Psal. 106. 23. Exod. 32. 10, &c. best Preservatives against Plagues and Iudgments) to
flie out to forraigne Countries and Plantations; Hundreds
to seperate from our Church, as now quite Romish and An∣tichristian;
And made thousands ready for to seperate, it

being now a common received opinion among many;See a Booke in∣titeled, The ne∣cessity of Seperation from the Church of
England. That
our Churches (especially our Cathedrals) are now so farre Popish in
all respects, (Latine Service only excepted, which they say is
countervayled by their merry all-sung never-wept Service,
which the people understand no more then Latine,) that we
have now the same, or at least as just cause to seperate from them,
as our godly Martyrs and Church had to seperate from Rome in
the beginning of Reformation.
And though the same reasons hold not alike of all Chur∣ches
for the present, yet that they hold as firme in regard of
the future, since now wee and all our Churches are taught
and commaunded, toReeve p. 20. 205 206. 211. 216. Shel∣ford, p. 20 A Coale from the Altar, p. 1 26. 27. 63. 64. imitate our Prelates and Cathedrals in
all their Romish Rites and Ceremonies as their Mother Churches
and true patternes of Imitation.
So that unlesse a speedy Reformation follow of these late
Corruptions and Innovations, halfe the Kingdome, for
ought I can conjecture, are like, either to turne professed Se∣peratists,
or else to leave the Realme; To such a passe have
your busy Prelates lately brought things by their new De∣vises,
Bookes, Articles, Ceremonies, Superstitions, and their
Suppressing of Lectures, Preaching, and godly comformable
Ministers, Sermons of Lords-dayes after-noones, Repetition
of Sermons, and the like.
6. Sixtly, they give a great occasion to Iesuites, Semina∣rie-Priests
and Friers, (of which there are now swarmes in
England, (there being above 60. Benedictine Monkes on∣ly,
besides other Orders in England, Anno 1624. as
appeares by theNam sexaginta amplius Mona∣chos Benedictinos Congregationi nostri subditos in Anglia memora∣ Apud N. le Maistre Instauratio Antiqui Episco∣porum Principatus. Parisijs, 1633. l. a. p. 280. Letter of Rudesindus Barlo, Pre∣sident of the English FRIERS of that Order, to

the Clledge of the Cardinals at Rome, dated the 12. of Decem∣ber,
1624. and many more, no question, of that order now;)
Who at this present use few other Arguments to seduce
your Majesties Subjects from their alleagiance and Religion
to Popery, then the fore-named Jnnovations and new prin∣ted
Popish Bookes, which they buy up with greedi∣nes.
Ibid. p. Residus Barlo in his fore-cited Letter to the Cardi∣ns
of Rome, to institute either Dr. Kellyson or Dr. Smith
two of his order) or both of them Bishops over the Priests in Eng∣land,
writes very confidently; That if one of these were made
a Romish Bshop here, Latioes intra unicum biennium fructus in
Anglcana missione aspecturi sitis, quàm hactenus in adem nullo
existente Episcopo per sexaginta jam elapses annos, conspexoritis;
They should see more joyfull fruites in this English mission
within one two yeares, then before they had seen in three-score
when there was no Bishop.
And I may as truely say, that since these Innovations have
growen publike and got head among us, these (See Francs∣cus de Sancta Clara: E∣dit. 3. printed all as most thinke in England to recōcile us to Rome, who makes good use of our Novell Authours & Vniversity Acts; To hearten his Roman Catholick, and seduce Protestants. new Bookes
been licensed, and all Confutation of them stopped at our Presses,
the Priestes, Iesuites and Popish Monkes (who have now a
Bishop or two at least) have perverted more by meanes of
them alone (for they could never hurt or wound us but with
our owne men and weapons) then in sixtie yeares before.
As therefore the encrease of Papists was one maine ground
and chiefe cause lately alleadged in the Star-chamber, of re∣suming
the London-Derry plantation into your Majesties hands:
So the selfe same reason should now move your Majesty to
recall these severall Innovations, and burne up these late No∣vell
Widdw, Shelford, and Reeue especially,  to make sport in akide. ridiculous Pamphlets, in affront of our best and solidest

Writers, which withdraw so many from your Alegiance, and
give the Priests and Iesuites cause to triumph over us, yea
to deride and flout us for our follies, Apostasies & miserable
publike contradictions.
7. Seventhly, they open the mouthes of this Babilonish
Crew, and of forraigne and domesticke Papists, to slaunder
both our Church and Arch-Prelates, as if shee and they, with
many other of our Prelates and Cleargie of chiefe note,
were now2. Pet. 2. 22. returning with the dogge to his vomit, and the
washed Sow to her wallowing in the mire, yea to the very vomit
and mire of that VVhore of Rome, which we had formerly
spned and cast out.
That this is the common Newes in most forraigne parts,
not only the reports of Travellers witnes, but Sr. Iohn Cooke
your Majesties principall Secretary of State, some few yeares
since (in the very infancy of these Innovations and backe∣slidings)
affirmed openly in Star-chamber (in the now Arch-Bishop
of Canterburies case) that this newes was spread as farre
as the very Wals of Rome itself, upon his certaine intelligence
thence; And therefore it was high time for your Majesty, your
Prelates and the State to looke more strictly to our Religion,
and to take away all occasions of such Rumours; Since which
there have been more occasions of them given then in for∣ty
yeares before.
So as this Rumour is generally believed abroad as a most
certaine truth and crept into some of their late printed
Bookes.
This likewise is the common confident discourse and
persuasion of most Priests and Papists at home, both among
themselves and in the Company of Protestants, over whom
they now seeme to triumph, and sticke not openly to affirme
and justify, that both our Arch-Bishops (to omit others) are
theirs.
To make this good, I shall give your Majesty two late

instances, of which I have certaine intelligence, (and wit∣nesses
too if need be,) worthy your Royall considera∣tion.
A Barkeshire Gentleman, of some worth, a Popish Recu∣sant,
was since Easter last 1636. at a publike meeting, where
were divers prime Gentlemen of the Shire, and 3 or 4 Iusti∣ces
of Peace, if not more; VVhere entring into Discourse
concerning some Controversies of Religion between the
Papists and us, with some of the Company, he used these
words in the hearing of them all; Well Gentlemen,
you may talke and discourse of your Religion as long as
you please, but we have the Queens Majesty and the
Arch Bishop of Canterbury firme on our side; And so long
wee shall make our partie good enough with you.
Some of the Company questioning him for these words;
He answered, He would justify and make good what he sayd;
But wasHad a Puritan, as they stile them spoken but halfe so much he should have been fined, imprisoned, pilloried, & lost his eares ere this. never yet (for ought I heare) required to doe it,
though intimation hath been given of these speeches to some
whom they much concerne.
When Dr. Cosens the last Summer 1636. removed from
the Bishopricke of Durham, to his Colledge at Cambridge;
He gave his Friends of New-Castle a farewell Sermon in the
Towne, at which Sermon (preached in the after-noone) most
of the Papists in that Towne were present: Two of them
the next morning meeting with two Marchants of the
Towne, who were Protestants, they went all into a Taverne
to drinke their mornings draughts: The Papists demaunded
of the Protestants, whether they heard Dr. Cosens his Ser∣mon?
One replied, that he only heard of it, but heard it
not, by reason of some busines that hindred him: The other

made Answer, that he heard it: The Papists demaund of
him how he liked it? He replied; That it was but a plaine
ordinary Sermon, and that he heard nothing extraordinary
in it: Yea, but said the Papists, did you marke his garbe,
his cringes to the Altar, and how he bowed himselfe when
Iesus was named? He hath the right garbe and duckes of
our Priests.
The other answered, he did not much observe his ge∣stures.
Well, said the Papists, Dr. Cosens is a learned honest
Gentleman, and to tell you truely, He and theSome reported it of Canter∣bury. Arch-Bishop
of Yorke are both ours.
The other bade them, take heed what they said.
Wee know well enough (said they) what we say, we tell you a∣gaine,
they are both ours.
Whereupon one of the Protestants merrily replied: If
you will needs have both of them to be yours, pray take
them to yourselves, we can spare them well enough.
Many words past to this purpose. The Protestants com∣plained
of these speeches as scandalous to the Arch-Bishop,
and acquainted him there-with.
Whereupon the Papists were Articled against in the High
Commission-Court at Durham, and cited to appeare there;
Appearance they made, but they have not yet made any full
answer, the busines being hushed up in a maner, and layd a∣sleepe.
Dr. Cosens in the meane time takes his journy towards
Cambridge; Most of the Gentlemen Papists in the Bishop¦ricke,
to prove him theirs, brought him a dayes-journy on his
way, and some of them as farre as Yorke.
Like speeches have been used by other Papists, yet more
privately & modestly. The like report they inIn a Dr. new Pam∣phlet stolen out of Studley his rayling Booke, for the most part, and of the same Subject. print of

Dr. Theodor Price, Subdeane of West-minster, that however
he lived like an Atheist, yet he died like a professed
Papist.
This, J confesse, is not only a report, but a truth; He being
a reported Papist long before his death; Which made many
wonder at the impudency of that great Prelate, who know∣ing
him intus & in cute, durst recommend him to your Maje∣sty
as the fittest man he in his conscience could pitch upon
to make a Welsh Bishop; And so earnestly, to stickle for
him against your Lord High Chamberlaine and his Chaplaine
Dr. Griffirth Williams; Especially being a man that never
preached all his life, but one Sermon (as was reported) and
that in Latine, penned (as was bruited in Oxford long ago)
by his Kinsman D. Lewes; And he not long after a notorious
Sodomite, Edmond Reeve the Catechism in the Commu∣nion Booke expoūded, p. 206. flying the Realme and losing his Provostship in
Oxford for this very Sinne; Yet now (without any purgation
or satisfactiō for so foule a crime) is preferred not only to the
Mastership of S. Crosses, but likewise made your Majesties
Chaplaine in Ordinary, (I will not say by whom,) and the
chiefe man imployed for the now Chancellour of Oxford in
his canvase for that dignity against the Earle of Pebroke
your Lord High Chamberlaine, who had most voyces, though
not the fairest play: It may be these Arch-Prelates counte∣nancing
and preferring of such persons, is one maine ground
of these Papists speeches; VVho are worthy to be punished
for them, if they cannot justify and make them good; And
they unworthy to stay one hower in their places, in case they
shall not or cannot both by their Actions, Doctrines &c pre∣ceedings
disprove them to be true, as J hope their Graces wil,
being Fathers in God, highest growen up into Christ in
all things, and the Eldest in Grace, for which cause the
word Grace is used unto Arch-Bishops, as Mr. Reeve
learnedly informes us.
But how-ever that shall fall out upon tryall, yet this cer∣tainly

is one fruite of these late Jnnovations and Bookes to
produce such speeches in these, and more mens mouthes then
three or foure.
8. Eightly, these Bookes, Innovations and Apostasies
both in Doctrines, Ceremonies and Religion, defiling our
Church, corrupting our divine worship, depraving our lives
and provoking God himselfe to anger in an high degree,
have (to our present terrour, feare and punishment) drawen
downe the heavy plagues and Iudgements of God among
us, in sundrie quarters and places of the Realme; Especially
in New-Castle (almost wholy unpeopled) and London;
VVhere the Pestilence hath already swept many thousands,
and yet still spreads and sweepes away more and more, and is
likely so to doe, till we all2. Chrō. 6. 28, 29. 30. c. 7. 13. 14. 15 c. 2. 12. 13 14. 15. 16 17. 18. joyntly humble our selves
with fasting,Zeph. 2. 1. 2. 3. weeping and mourning both in publike and
private for our sinnes and Innovations,Luke 13. 3. 5. reforme our wic∣ked
and prophane ungodly lives, and purge out all these
Idolatries, Superstitions, Errours, Ceremonies and
Innovations that have defiled our Church; VVhich Pest
now earnestly cals upon your Majesty, (whoseI say. 49. 23. Rom. 13, 1. 2. 3. Psal. 101. 3. 4. 6. 7. 8. chiefe charge
and office this is, (neither will your Bishops or under-Officers
negligence excuse your Majesty before Gods Tribunall, in
case it be not done,) even speedily, really, heartily and
thorowly to effect, for feare he whoPsal. 11. 5. Psal. 135. 10. . Iob. 12. 18. 19. even strikes through
Kings in the day of his wrath, with this pestiferousPsal. 91. 5. 6. 7. ar∣row
of his, which flies farre and neare among us (from which
 , Ayre, Fort, Cordials, nor aIsay 38. 1. 21. which sicknes most accord to be the plague of which the Emperour Theodosius the third died. Griston Imperiall History, p. 281. and the King of late, with sundrie heretofore. Crowne itselfe can

secure any) should likewise smite your Highnes or any of
Royall Seed as well as others, either to sicknes or death;
Either of which, the Lord forbid, & shield you from, as he
hath done hitherto to our greatest joy.
What other future euents and fruites these Innouations
may produce, unlesse the encrease and ushering in of Popery,
J cannot divine: Either of which would proue dangerous to
your Majesties, should they euer come to passe, as we trust,
we pray they shall not.
For that Christian King who lives under the Iurisdiction
of the Sea of Rome, or where Papists get the start (as all
Histories andMr. Tyndals practise of Popish Prelates. D. Barnes his Suppli∣cation to Henry the . D. Iohn White, Defence of the way, c. 6. 10. Fox Acts and Monu∣ments, p. 214. to 220. 717, to 728. 321. 409. 410. 479. 533. Dr. Crakanthorpe of the Popes temporall Monarchie, c. 10. 11. 12. our Writers witnes) are more miserable
then the poorest peasant, living in continuall danger both
of his Crowne and life; vnlesse he will be a meere vassall to
the Pope & his Cardinals, to feed those deuouring Harpyes
with their treasures, to fight for them with their armes,
when euer they commaund, and be vniuersally obse∣quious
to them in all their exorbitant Imperious requests;
yea not only the Pope and his Cardinals, but the poorest
Priest and Frier will be able to commaund and beard
him at his pleasure in despight of all his wealth and pow∣er,
of which your Majesties Royall Progenitours here in
England have had sufficient experience.
VVhat base and despicable account the Pope, his Bishops
and Cleargie make of Christian Kings, even of those who are
most obsequious to them, and how they jeare and flout them
even in print, I shall only instance out of the authorised wri∣tings
of a late Iesuites, which learnedOf the Popes temporall Monarchie, c. 1. p. 24. 25. 26. Dr. Crakanthorpe
hath thus quoted and Englished to my hand, worthy your
Majesties most serious contemplation.
The former of them isBea∣nut Con∣tro: Angl. q. 3 n. 14. 15. & 16. Becanut, who calling the Pope
a Shepheard, and Kings and Emperours DoggesPer Canes in∣tellig nur partim Reges & Imperato∣res. Ibid. nu. 15. or
Curres of this Shepheard, and sporting himselfe with
these Titles, saith, Igitur hi Can, therefore if these Dogges be
watchfull and trusty, they must be ready at the Shepheards
hand; But if they be lazie, mad or troublesome, the Shep∣heard
must presētly remove them, and put them from their
Office. This doth reason teach, this doth the Caunsell of
Lateran decree.
Againe, Christian Kings are Sheepe, are Rammes, are
VVolves, and are Dogges. VVhence it is that the Pope
carrieth himselfe in a divers maner towards them. As
they are Sheepe, if they be scabby, he may put them out of
the fold: As they are Rammes, if they be troublesome,
and push with their hornes, he may shut them up; As
they are VVolves, he may drive them away; Quatenus
Canes; As they are Dogges, he may put them from their
Office, if they be defective therein: And some of these he
doth by Excommunication, some by deposition. So Becanus
of late.
The other is Gasp. Scioppius, whose words are so contu∣melious,
even in the highest degree, that one may justly won∣der
that any of their Catholickes, but especially their Ca∣tholicke
Kings, can patiently digest them.
The Church, saith heEccle∣sia est Mandra, sive Grex, aut  jumstrum sive Asinorum, clitellariorum aut Sagmarirum. Gasp. Sciop. in Praesat. ad Imper. in Summa Cap. 147. is mandra jumentorum, sive A∣srum, a great fold of Beasts or Asses; Some are Pack-Asses,
Cum nos Christiani simus Dei jumenta sive pecora subjugalia, equi, muli, sive Asini Clitellarij, Dossuarij, Sarcina∣rij. Idem in Eccles, c. 147. p. 534. some Dosse-Asses, and other Burden-Asses.
And then telling, cujusmodiIbid. in Marg. Asini sumus nos Catholici,
what maner of Asses himselfe, and other Catholikes are;
We, saith he,Ibid. must be beasts which have understanding
and reason to obey Bishops with all humility and patience;
For theyIlli enim sunt Ho∣mines, sive Agasones, Muliones Iugarij: Illi nos Fraenant, illi loro alligant, nos agunt, nos stimu∣lant, nobis jugum imponunt. Ibid. p. 534. are the Men, they are the Muliters and Asse∣drivers,
they must yoake, bridle and saddle us, put halters
about our neckes, load and drive us; For others,Ibid. p. 535. they
are like to beasts, but tame & obedient beasts, such as must
doe what they are commaunded: For a goodBonus & intelli∣gens Asi∣mus audit Consilia & praeceptasal Malionis. Ibid. p. 536. and un∣derstanding
Asse is hee, that heareth and followeth the
direction and commaund of the Muliter.
Further, yet he addes concerning Kings, that RegesIbid. in Marg.
Catholici sunt Asini cum tintinnabulis; Catholike Kings are
Asses with belles about their neckes, as being the fore-Asses,
which leadTum caeteros Asinos, qui sonitum ti
tinnabuli de collo vestro pendentis audiunt, via ingredi faciatis. Ibid. the way to inferiour Asses.
And particularly for Charles the Great, whom he much
commends, he saith,Ibid. p. 536. 537. that Charles was a farre greater
and wiser Asse, then those Kings, who cast off the Popes
yoake; For Charles being tantus Asini, so great an Asse,
cryed (or rather brayed) out with a loud voyce, universa
Asinorum mandra, to the whole fold of Asses, that is, to the
whole Church, in this maner; For the memory of S. Peter.
Let us honour the Roman Church, and though they yoake
which the Pope imposeth be such, as wee can scarcely
beare, yet let us with devotion endure the same.
Ex-quibus verbis, saith Scioppius, rum Issachar agnosca,
de quo Genes. chap. 49. Issachar Asinus fortis.
By these words of Charles you may see, that he was a very

Issachar, of whom it is said, Issachar is a stronge Asse.
Is not this (may it please your Majesty) a fine peece of
Catholike Divinity, to account and call the whole Catho∣like
Church a fould of Asses; All Catholike Kings, Asses
with bels, all other Lay persons, Asses without bels; None
but Bishops to be Men and Muliters, and the Pope the chiefe
Muliter and driver of all the Asses?
So shall the Man be honoured, whom the Pope will ho∣nour.
The more zealous and devout one is in obeying him
and imbracing his Doctrine, the greater Asse they account
and call him.
Seeing therefore this is the high account, that the
Pope, his Bishops and Cleargie make of Christian Prin∣ces;
I presume your Majesty will never suffer the Pope the
chiefe Muliter, nor any of his, nor your owne Bishops, the
under-Muliters, to yoake, bridle, sadle, or put halters about
your Royall necke, or the neckes of any of your Loyall
Subjects, much lesse then to ride, jade, loade, or drive either
yourselfe or them, (all which they now attempt and aspire to
doe;) Since if your Highnes should honour them in all this,
yet shall you receive from them no other applause or
thankes, no other Honour or Title for your labour, then here
Scioppius, and they all by him, gives unto Charles the Great,
to be: Tantus Asinus, & verus Issachar Asinus fortis.
A Title J am certaine your Highnes will not so highly
esteeme of, as to deeme it,Decla∣ration concer∣ning the Parlia∣ments Dissolution. p. 21. the most glorious in all your
Crowne, as you deservedly doe that other, Defender of the
Faith, which you have better right to farre then this, which
all Christians cannot but detest, though these Popish He∣raulds
would bestow it on them.

Wherefore to draw toward a conclusion, J shall now most
humbly beseech your Majesty, upon the bended knees of my
soule, to receive the premises and this poore Quench-Coale
into your most Royall and pious consideration; And there∣upon
to take the Raines of Ecclesiasticall government and
affaires, from those who have thus abused them, (to your
Highnes, your Subjects and the whole Church of Englands
prejudice.) into your owne immediate hands; That so these
Abuses, Novelties and Corruptions here discovered; may be
thoroughly reformed, and the Kingdome of Jesus Christ re∣stored
perfectly and incorrupt among us.
Jt was an excellent Counsell, that the late famous Empe∣rour
Ferdinand gave to Maximilian his Sonne and Successour
when he lay upon his death-bed:Grim∣stons Im∣periall Hi∣story in the life of Ferdinād, p. 684.Banish from thee such
as seeke new meanes to oppresse and grieve thy Subjects.
O how well it becomes a Prince, to heare the afflictions
and grievances of his People, and to redresse them! Imi∣tate
not those who unburthen themselves all they can of
matters of Justice or Government, for it is thy chiefe
Office.
Unlesse your most Sacred Majesty follow this
his Royall advice, things are likelyer to grow worse then
better, if you remit all to your Prelates, and expect a refor∣mation
to proceed from them; VVho need most reformation,
and are the chiefe delinquents.
Martin Bucer (one of the wisest and learnedst men of
his age) in his BookeLib. 2. c. 1. 2. In∣ter Scrip∣ta Angli∣cana. p. 56. 57. De Regno Christi, dedicated to
King Edward the 6. Discoursing by what way and meanes
the Kingdome of Christ might and ought to be restored by
pious Kings, and what Counsellers they should use in this
Reformation, is bold to acquaint that godly King (who had
then at least as many godly Bishops as your Majesty hath
now, if not more,) that if he would have any restitution of
the Kingdome of Christ here in England, he must not

looke that it should proceed from the Bishops, neither
must he much depend on, or trust to their advice therein;
But must be the principall actor himselfe, and advise most
with men of an inferiour ranke.
His words (worthie your Majesties speciall observation
and fit for our present purpose) are these.Primum, haud
dubito Serenissime Rex, M. T. ipsam videre hanc, quam re∣quirimus,
imò quam requirit salus omnium nostrum, Regni
Christi restitutionē, AB EPISCOPIS NVLLO MODO
EXPECTANDAM, dum adeò PAVCI inter eos sunt,
qui vim hujus regni, & propria munia plane ipsi cognoscūt
PLERIQVE AVTEM EORVM ILLVD ET IAM
QVIBVS POSSVNT & AVDENT MODIS, VEL OP∣PVGNENT,
VEL DIFFERANT, VEL REMOREN∣TVR.
Meminisse ita{que} S. M. T. necesse est, regiam sibi ī hoc
Regno potestatē, a summo Rege Regum, & Domino Do∣minantium,
Iesu Christo, esse commissam; Omnemque ani∣mam
suo imperio subjectam, etiam Episcoporum & Cleri
Universi. Quocirca de horū munere & Ministerijs rite in∣staurandis,
hoc decet S. M. T. solititius ad vigilare, & studio
ardentiore in hoc ipsū incumbere, quo hujus reparatio func∣tionis,
ad salutē omnium plus adfert momenti; Et neglectus
ejus atque dissipatio majus omnibus salutis creat periculum
& infert damnum. Exempla itaque S. M. tuae proponenda
sunt, & summa religione imitanda, Davidis, Salomonis, Asae
Hiskiae, Iosiae, Nhmiae, & similium, quibus solidā pietatis
laudem, & probè administrati regni Scriptura attribuit. Hi
vero cum religio vera esset gravissimè ipsorum temporibus
collapsa, & Sacerdotium pernitiosè corruptum, ipsi sibi reli∣gionis
OMNEM PROCURATIONEM & RESTAU|
RATIONFM IURE & DEBITO RGII MUNERIS
SUMPSERANT: Es; sibi ex Sacerdotibus & Prophetis
ALIISQUE PIIS VIRIS ad hoc tam sanctum & arduum
opus adjunxerunt consiliarios & administres, o deprae¦henderant Dei scientia & zelo plurimum pollere.

Tum ante omnialegem Dei populo exponi, explicarique
MAXIMO STUDIO curaverunt. Deindè, nt Foedus Do∣mini
rusus toto corde omnes reciperent, & in veritate
sancirent legis obedientiam professi, persuaserunt. Atque
tum demam, ordinem & Ministeria Sacerdotum atque
Levitarum, cunctamque Religionis juxta Legem Dei ad∣ministrationem,
reconcinnaverunt: Ac nequis eam rursus
convelleret, vigilantissimè caverunt. De his piorum Prin∣cipum
studijs & conatibus ad restituendum suis populis
Regnum Dei, legantur & pie expendantur, quae divinae
Historiae narrant de Davide, 2. Sam. 6. 1. Par. 13. 14. 15.
16. 23. Et tribus sequentibus capitibus. De Salomone,
1. Regum 8. & 2. Paral. 5. 6. 7. De Asa, 2. Paral. 15. &
de Jehiskiah,Regi sum∣mam pro∣curatio∣nem Regni Christi competer. Quibus opus sit Regi ad hoc nego∣tium Con∣siijs. 1. Paal. 13. 2. Regum. 18. & 2. Paral 18. & 19. De
Iosia, 2. Regum 22. & 23. 2. Paral. 21. & 25. De
Nehemia, per totum ejus librum. In his itaque Historijs.
& Exemplis S. M. T. clare perspiciet, PRIMUM,
in officio esse suo, & sicut aliorum ordinum & numerum in
suo Regno, itá MAXIME SACERDOTALIS OR∣DINIS
ETMVNERIS IPSA SVSCIPIAT IN∣STAVRATIONEM.
Deinde videbit, ad hanc rem in
Consilium ei esse adhibendos, non qui magnificis modo
titulis, se Theologos & Sacerdotes profitentur, horum∣que
sanctissimorum munerum stipendia lauta invaserunt:
Sed quos ex fructibus ipsorum agnoverit, Regni Christi,
& cognitione, & studio esse prae alijs praeditos, atque fla∣grantes.
S cut David Consilium de instauranda Religione
primum coepit cum Principibus millenarijs, cum Centu∣riombus,
& Ducibus. Nec enim potest quisquam ad re∣parandam
Christi Regnum Consilium & operam suā con∣stanter
conferre, qui non se jugo Christi ipse quoque totum
submiserit. Tales verò Christus Rex noster sibi regignit &
format, ex quibus vult hominum ordinibus, nec ullis hanc
beneficentiam suam alligat hominum ordinibus, multò
minus inanibus titulis & larvis. Quo itaque pauciores

sunt in omnibus ordinis us, qui Christi Regnum & solide
habent cognitum, & in veritate cupiunt restitutum; 
diligentiore cura quaerendi, & selegendi sunt, in quacun∣que
illi hominum sorte inveniantur, qui S. M. T. in hae
causa & negotio Regni Christi plane suscipiendi,
& ad omnes Subditos ejus revocandi sint PRIMO LOCO
A CONSILIIS. Qui corporis restitui valetudinem ex∣petit,
is cerrè Medicos non adhibit sibi pro magnificis Ti∣tulis
& amplisopibus, quas Artis sibi praetextu cumulave∣rnt;
Sed quos cognoverit medendi & solida scientia,
fidelique voluntate pollere. Sic nemo se ei libenter navi
committat, quae ab eo regatur, qui nomine tantum & opi∣bus
se Gubernatorem jactet, peritiam autem navigandi
nullam teneat; Sed mavult quisque cum eo navigare, qui
tametsi obscuro sit nomine & tenuibus facultatibus, ad ritè
tamen gubernandam navem existat Probe doctus & exer∣citatus.
Quanto vero majore cura ac studio S. M. tuae in∣quirendi
sunt atque approbandi, quibus non corpora, sed
summam credat Religionis Christi reconcinnandae qua
aeterna omnium salus continetur? Adsit ergo S. M. T.
Rex nostet Christus, ut summam de Religione restituenda
Concilium eos sibi delegat Consiliarios, qui & vim Regni
Christi probè norint, & toto illud corde expetunt obtine∣re,
cum primis apud semetipsos, tùm etiam apud omnes
alios; Nihilque in eo humani commodi vel gratiae spec∣tent,
sed paratissimi sint extrema potius carnis incommoda
subire, quam ullam praeterire occasionem Regnum Christi
adferendi & propagandi.
This was Bucers advice to your pious Predecessour King
Edward, I hope it will not be unseasonable for me now to
recommend it to your Majesty: At whose Royall feet, I now
in all humility prostrate both my selfe and these my unwor∣thy
Labours, (voyd of all Courtship, Flattering Elegancie or
Trappings, and having nothing else but loyalty and plaine

Rusticke downe-right dealing, to make them acceptable
to your Highnes:) beseeching your Majesty (what ever
others may buze into your cares against them) to make a
charitable construction of them, as proceeding from the
reall syncerity and fidelity of his heart, who as he dayly
prayes to God for your Majesties long life and happines, as his
duty bindes him, and shall continue thus to doe; So he is,
and ever shalbe, ready to Sacrifice, not only his studies, but
life, and what ever else he hath, unto your Majesties service;
And, in despite of enuy and calumny, shall ever manifest
himselfe in all things,

