


MOST MIGHTIE KINGE: and MOST honorable Lordes: as among humane and naturall Combinations, non are greater, more ge∣nerall, and binding, then those of one nature, na∣tion, and kindred: Soe in nature nothin∣ge can bee more vnnaturall, then vn∣worthily to dissolue, violentlie to sepe∣rate, or destroy these vnions, soe inuio∣lably to bee preserued. All persecuted Catholicks of this kingdom armen, vni∣ted and comprehended in mankinde, equally as you, or the most renowned of you, or other protestants. They are of the same nation, our best belowed En∣gland, english with you. And verie late
 and new would that persecuting prote∣stants discēt appeare, whoe could truely say, hee hath noe preist or Catholicke of his familie, which in this longe and greuous persecution, hee persecuteth not, and himselfe in them. If any man obiect, that Religion for which they suffer, is of an heauenly, and high or na∣ture, religing and binding not only man to man, but man to his God, and maker, by the greatest felatie, and homadge: must answeare by yout one procee∣dings; This is soe far from excusinge your persecutions, that it vtterly accu∣seth, & in all true Iudgment more con∣demneth them. For your doctors assure vs, that the church of Christ cannot bee without true discipline, to punish, and correct offendors, and make yt an vnse∣parable note thereof; yett your same protestant both lawes, writers, and pro∣ceedings are witnesses, that your pretē∣ded Examples watrant, and power to punish (as you doe) the Reuerēd preists, and other Catholicks, of this kingdom, are by manie hundred yeares, to yonge, to make your Religion soe old, and powerable, that yt may safelie and secu∣rely persecute your. Mother church of Rome,
 that brougt vs forth to Christ, & who∣se obedient and dutifull children, you and all others ought to bee. That clay∣med authoritie by which you afflict vs, neuer receaued life, vntill the decaying time of kinge Henry the eight; And then your soe named Archbishop ParkerStatut. An. 24. vel 25. Henric. 8. Math park in antiquit. Britannic. in Henr. 8. Ioan Bal. l. descrptor Brit. in Au∣gustino fol. 34. 35. writeth, that the popes power and Religion had raigned in England aboue neyne hundred yeares. From the first conuersion of this english nation by S. Augustine, as hee meaneth, and an other of your stiled protestant Bishops in the words is wit∣nes. Augustinus Romanus, Benedictini sodaliij monachus à Gregorio primo ad Anglosaxones pa∣pistica fide initiandos Apostolus mittitur. Augu∣stine a Roman, monke of the company of Bene∣dict, was sent from Gregory the first an Apostle, to instruct the English Saxons in the papisticall faithe. And to proue this faith was thenBal. supr. fol. 34. receaued, hee addeth: Ethelbertus Rex Ro∣manismum cum adiunctis superstitionibus susce∣pit. Kinge Ethelbert receaued Romanisme, or Romih Religion, with the superstitions adioined. For soe your writers terme that sacred doctrine. Your blodye lawe against the venerable preists of that holie church, and profession, is of noe greater Anti∣quitie, then the seuen and twenteth
 yeare of the Raigne of Queene Eliza∣beth,Statut. An. 27. Elizab. cap. and then but the Edict of a wo∣man, not much powerable in spirituall busines. Yett Romane preisthood must needes bee as auncient as Romane Re∣ligion. Which your owne cited AuthorBal. supr. fol. 35 pag. 1. farther warranteth in this maner. Augu∣stinus introduxit altaria, vestimenta, vasa sacra, reliquias, & ceremoniarum codices, quae omnia cum benedictione Petri miserat ei Gregorius▪ Nam primum eorum studium erat circa missa∣rum oblationes, sedes episcopales, ac decima; & ob id coactâ synodo, mandauit Romanus vbique consuetudines seruari. Augustine brought in al∣tares, vestiments, holy vessels, Relicks and bookes of ceremonies, all which with the blessing of Pe∣ter, Gregorie had sent vnto him. For their first, or cheife studie was, about the oblations of mas∣ses, episcopall Sees, and Tithes. And therefore assemblinge a synode, hee commaunded the Ro∣mane customes to bee kept euery where. Then if (besides our seruice, and Ceremonies, as the Romane, and commaunde of that Mother church, Altares, masse, and sa∣crifice were then in vse, our preisthood could not bee wanting: for a principall doctor in your church with publick al∣lowance writeth: VVee cannot dislike theMorton Appeale pag. 162. l. 2. cap. 6. sect. 1. Reinolds conf. pag. 550. sentence of D. Reynaldes concerning the mutuall
 Relation and dependance betweene an Altar and sacrifice: But graunt that Altare doth as naturally, and necessarily inferr a sacrifice, as a shryne doth a Saint, a father a sonne. And hee addeth thus, Cardinall Bellarmine said truly. Viz, sacrifice & preisthood are Relatiues. Then if your doctors doctors, Reynolds, and Morton, with their approuers, approue this doctrine, they must approue also the antiquitie, and honor of our sacred preisthood, which your new learninge and womanly diuinitie haue pronown∣ced treasonable. And your present pro∣testant Archbishop and all others dire∣ctors of M. Mason teaching that all Ar∣chbishopsMson epis dedicator. of Canterbury before your first pretended and protestantlie made Bishop Matthew parker, were from S.Mason in cnscrat. of Matthew parker. Suecliffe pag d ell pag. 4. 5. Feild l of the church Ma∣sn supr. Augustine, consecrated after the Roma∣ne maner, and otherwise then you pra∣ctise, must bee of the same opinion, for our preists were made by them. And as D. Sutclisfe, D. Feild, M. Mason and others testifie, by this forme, Receaue power to offer sacrifice for the quick, and the deade: which is now vsed in the church of Rome, in which noe treason, but much spirituall power, and honor is conteyneth: And such, as it enforceth
 your present Ministery by all pretenceStatut. An. 27 Elizab cap 1. Msm Sut∣cleild sup. &c. they can, to clayme, though with note of treason, their callinge from that or∣dination. And such, that it maketh the lawful soe ordered to bee soe honora∣ble, that a cheife doctor in your Reli∣gion hath written of them in thes mostD Couell def of hoo∣ker. pag. 87 reuerend termes. o thes parsons God impar∣teth power, ouer his misticall bodye, which is the societie of soules, and ouer that naturall, which is himselfe, for the knittinge of bothe in one, which Antiquitie doth call the making of Christs bodie. By blessinge visible elements, itCouell sup pag. 105. maketh them inuisible grace, it giueth daily the holy ghost; it hath to dispose of that flesh, which was giuen for the life of the worlde and that blood which was powred out to redeme soules,Couell sup. pag. 87 88. 91. it is a power, which neither prince, nor potenta∣te, kinge nor Caesar on earth can giue. Then this state, a function soe honorable with God, and renowned in his holie church by the sentence of your owne doctors, may not bee condemned for a state of Treason. And soe manie Reuerend preists, aboue one hundred and twen∣tie, besides diuers of Religious orders, miserablie tortured, and putt to death, for that onelie cause in Englang, since that Edics of Queene Elizabeth, were
 not Traytors, and malefactors, but hap∣pie Saints, and blessed Martyrs. And your protestant persecution in puttinge soe manie, the fourth, third part, or mo∣re, of that little companie to that cruell death, with other manifold Afflictions vppon your contrie Catholicks, hath giuen occasion for straungers, to thinke and a famous protestant amonge you to write, in this maner: The sufferings andS. Edwyne Sandes in his Booke, Relation of the state of Religion cap. 31. Martyrdomes of English Catholicks in thes ti∣mes, are accōpted to the height of Neroes, & Dio∣clesians persecutions, and the sufferings on their side, both in meritts of cause, in extremitie of Torments, and in constancie and patience, to the renowned martyrs of that heroicall church age. Which noe man can denie, if hee consi∣der how manie hundred yeares wee en∣ioined peace, honor, renowne, & aboue the third part of the possessions, and re∣uenewes of this kingdome, with all Bi∣shopricks, Monasteries, and church li∣uings, with their priuiledges, and pre∣rogatiues,Hollnish hist. in will. Conq Speed ib. Booke of Domesday, &c. And now are not onelie spoi∣led and depriued of them all, but stiled, branded, and reproached with such In∣famous titles, additios, slaunders, and miseries, as neuer any such example can bee produced of like, and soe longe per∣secutions,
 prosecuted against the aun∣cient possessioners of Religion, and re∣ligeous preeminences, by soe late and new inuention, by straungers or ene∣mies; much lesse by contrimen add pro∣fessors of Christianitie. And yett his ma∣iesties regall sentence is: my minde wasK speach in parlam 19. of marrh An. 1603. euer free from persecution, or thrallinge of my subiects in matters of conscience. And againe: Correction without instruction (which, as be∣fore, you cannot sufficientlie giue vnto vs) is but tirannie. And writinge against Contadus vorstius, the dutche heretic∣ke, proueth, that if Catholicks should bee in error, yett they are soe far from deseruing persecution, and persecution of such nature, that their case needeth not fraternall, or frendly correption, or admonition: The wordes of his Censu∣re bee thes: If the subsect of vorstius his here∣sies,Declaratiō An. D. 1612. in the cause of D. Con∣rud. vorst. pag. 46. 47. had not beene grownded vppon, questions, of an higher qualitie, then touching the number, and nature, of the sacraments, the point of iustification, of meritts of purgatorie, of the visi∣ble heade of the church, or any such matters, as are in controuersie at this day betwixt the papists & vs: wee doe freely professe, wee should neuer ha∣ue troubled our selues, with the busines in such fashion. And yett all which was done
 therin, was but a gentle and frendlie Ad∣monition, without any breache of pea∣ce, leaque or amitie with that people.Isaac Ca∣saub. resp. ad epist. Cardi Per. in praefat. Feild l. of the church. Your Champion Casaubou, that hath priuiledge, soe often to call his doctri∣ne, the faith of our kinge, the faith of the en∣glish church, telleth you that thes contro∣uersies cannot bee determined without a generall councell, to whome D. Feild subscribeth, and attributeth onely to that, power to define, and punish for such things. And next to that, yeeldeth primarie doth of Iudgment, and to bee obeyed, to the church of Rome, hisFeild supr. l. 4. cap. 5. words bee thes: Yt is more to bee respected, and reuerenced, then the authoritie of catholicke doctors, and Bishops; or other apostolicke churches. Casaubon well knowinge the weake∣nesCasaubon supr. of your cause, addeth first: because you haue noe hope of a generall cowncell, that soe greate libertie of writinge one against an other might cease: againe hee wi∣sheth, that, seueris legibus trinque coercere∣tur, that it were brideled on each side with seue∣re lawes. Then you know by your owne doctors and Iudgments, how greate, and not to bee named, offence it is, with seuere lawes or edicts to commaunde and execute soe vndue and rigourous
 persecutions, against them whome you cannot Iudge, or condemne, not being condemnable.
But because, after soe manie humble, and earnest suites, and petitions, english Catholicks can finde noe hope of other triall, but to make their professed Ene∣mies in this case, and persecutors, their Masters, teachers, accusers, Iudges, and and sentencers: I am enforced to accept that moste vnequall, and vnreasonable conflict, to make your owne present protestant writers, and proceedings, Iudges betweene them and vs, in their owne cause: knowinge they dare notLactāt. fir∣diuin insti. l. 4. de vera sapient. ca. 12. Morton in appeale ep. dedicat. with any impudencie denye, against the light reason, and the christian philoso∣pher; that it is an inuincible argument to proue truthe, which is graunted or made by enemies themselues: especiallie seing by their com∣mon Harolde, Doctor Morton, they haue publicklie proclaimed yt, in thes wordes: The assistance of learned aduersaries; wee admitt for the greatest reason of satisfa∣ction. For if it bee held an excellent point of phi∣sicke, ex vipera theriacm, to turne poson into an Antidote against poyson: and in God accom∣pted an highe degree of vengeance, to turne the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and in Dauid
 celebrated as a principall matter of triumphe, to cutt of Goliah his heade with his owne sworde: and in Christ obserued, as an vnansweareable matter of conuiction, to iudge the euill seruant by his owne mouthe: and acknowledged in S. Pau∣le, as the moste expedite meanes of confutation of the men of Crete, to oppose against them, their owne, &c. And yett to giue them more aduantage, I wil demonstrate onelie by those english writers, and proceedings of their protestant Religion, which ha∣ue beene printed, published, or allowed amonge them, synce his maiesties co∣minge into England, and principallié within the first sixe, or seuen yeares thereof, that english Catholicks soe gre∣uously punished for refusinge to com∣municate with their contrie protestants in sacraments, seruice, sermons, or exer∣cises of their Religion, cannot doe yt, by their owne Iudgments, nor they exact yt, without moste greuous, dea∣delie and damnable syn.
And, because I freelie acknowledge myselfe a preist of the Romane church, and offer to defend, or proue, against all protestants, or other Enemies, the moste honorable dignitie of that sacred function; And your proceedings pro∣pose
 oathes, to trie the loialtie of en∣glish preists, and Catholicks, knowinge that wee will rather suffer deathe, and all miseries, as wee haue done, then to sweare any the leaste things, which wee thinke vntrue: Beinge now come to my decaying time, tree and fistie yea∣res of age, doe take and leaue behinde mee, as a memoriall of my Innocencie, this ensuing oathe: and desire it bee named.
An oathe of a Catholicke preist, his true alleadgeancie, to kinge and contrye.
Humblie submittinge my Iudgment in all religeous doctrine, with all true Christiās, to our mother church of Rome, a Ru∣leKings sp∣ac in h  parlament. to all both in doctrine and ceremonies (as his maiesties publicke censure is) I protest in verbo veritatis, takinge God, and the whole Court of heauen to wittnes, that I neuer com∣mitted in deed, word, or consent, any treason, or conspiracie, either against our kinge Iames his maiestie, whose moste dutifull, and obedient subiect in all ciuill obedience, I humblye acknow∣ledge myselfe, and soe entreate to bee accepted of him; or against Queene Elizabeth, his predeces∣sor, or any forreyne prince, in whose dominion I haue lyued. And I call againe God, and the Court of heauen to wittnes, that I neuer
 committed against this kingdome of England my dearest contry, or anyother state, or pro∣uince, where I haue lyued, or my parson in them, lyuing or deceased, murther, theft▪ Rapine, vio∣lence, vsury, oppression, enchanmnt, sorcerye, fornication, addultery, or other carnal act with any creature, periurye▪ false testimoni, glutto∣nie, drunkennes, or any greate or scandelous sinne, to my knowledge disgraceflly punishable by the lawes of England, of which  haue beene a student, and by the grace of God, giuen in my holy Religion, I hope, intend, and purpose, soe to perseuer all my life: Soe helpe me God, and his holy Saincts.
You see how confidentlie I haue sworne such an oathe of fidelitie, and Innocencie from offence, concerninge temporall Regiment, or dutie of a sub∣iect to his soueraigne; as I stand in doubt whether any of your pretended Cleagie protestant, will second mee therein or noe: And yett there is noe matter against your Religion contey∣ned in yt, as your soe named newe oathe of alleadgeance, comprehendeth against the Pope, and church of Rome, (as they haue censured) to whome soe greate respect (as before), is due by your owne doctors sentences: But I am out
 of all doubt, that manie reuerende, and learned preists, of this kingdome will in Innocencie add to that which I haue begun: And all the rest of that con∣secrated companie still sufferringe for that most glorious and holy cause, will bee able to performe as much in that kinde, as any temporall Soueraigne can in conscience exact of a spirituall and cleargie man; and more then your best and moste selected Bishops, or Mini∣sters will assume to doe. For matters of Religion, this treatise will bee our warrant, that wee must continue our vnitie, with our Mother church of Ro∣me, and not with those, whoe by their owne Iudgments and testimonies, are Hereticks, Scismaticks, damnably sedu∣cers, and seduced, and such, as by manie other titles, by their owne conclusions are men not to bee communicated with in busines of Religion, except men would willfullie incurre damnation: Such as your moste allowed doctors & writters, are most manifestlie proued in this worke, by their owne writings. Therfore I craue pardon, that the har∣shenes or distastfull euidence of thes protestant demonstrations, bee not im∣puted
 vnto mee, but to your owne pro∣testant, and puritane doctors, Authors and publishers of them, to the worlde: for by their authorities, and in their na∣me I am to dispute, & proceede in eue∣rie Argument, and conuiction. And be∣cause I desire to bringe securitie to all Readers, that noe english protestant, or puritane, can by their owne Religion take iust exception against the weakest Conclusion of this booke: I haue not handled any matters in yt, but such as by their owne agreement, ar essentiall, materiall, and fundamentall in Reli∣gion. For how soeuer otherwise they disagree, and ar not easelie to bee di∣stinguished, yett in thes soe necessarie, and vnseperable things, of true Re∣ligion, as they tell vs, they all agree.D. Georg. Abb. ag. Hill pag. 101. 102. 94. 106. 236. 237. 347. Doue per∣suas pag. 32. Morton full satisf. pag. 18.
The words of your present Archbi∣shop, of Canterbury, ar thes: protestants & puritanes did neuer differ in any point of sub∣stance in substantiall points of faithe there is noe variance amonge vs. And this hee affirmeth seuen times at the leaste in one booke. The protestant Bishop of Peterbo∣rough writeth thus: in maters of Religion wee all agree. D. Morton, D. Sutcliffe, D.
 Willet, Wotton, Middleton, Powell, theSutel ag. kll pag. 42 Willet An∣tib▪ pag. 15 Wottō def. of Perk pag 28. Middl pag 201. Povvel ag ap. ep. pag. 48. 45. A¦brdg. Edw. holy knight pag. 103. of his . Puritanes in their Abridgment with others too manie to bee cited are of the same opinion. And it is soe gene∣rallie allowed amonge them, that they tell vs, non but such as they terme Papists, Goliathes, vncircumcised Phi∣listines, lyers, and will affirme the con∣trarie. Your circumcised knight (as hee will bee named, writeth thus: our formalists and Presbyterians, how soeuer they bee somewhat different in habite, yett are they vnited in harte, readie at all times to Ioyne in battell against any vncircumcised Philistine, that dares contest against the vniformitie of theirRogers pref to the booke of articles. faith. Your publick glosser vppon your approued articles writeth in this ma∣ner: The verie brethren themselues doe write, that in regard of the common groundes of Re∣ligion and the ministery, wee are all one, wee are all of one faithe. VVee are ministers of the worde by one order: wee preache one faith, and substance of doctrine. Then which nothing was euer more truly said, or written.Willet. An∣tilog pag. 15. 20.
Your greate Controuertist D. Willet writeth thus: amonge protestants of ngland there is noe difference, or dissnt in any substan∣tiall point of faith. As for puritans and Caluinio-papists,
 they are termes of papists deuisinge.D. Georg Abb. sup. pa. 90. 106. 236. 237. Povvell sup. pag. 48. 52▪ Your present protestant Archbishop of Canterbury is soe confident herein, that hee vseth thes wordes: Noe Goliath against vs, can proue the contrary. D. Powell with publicke approbation, hath thes wordes: Noe reformer euer distinguished betweene protestants, and them of the re∣formed church. The puritans doe not affirme the diuision betweene protestants and them, to bee in substantiall points, non but papists affirme, that protestants and puritans differ in substantiall points of faith, and hee lyeth, which saith they differ in substantiall poyntes. Like are the testimonies of others, But thes are fullie sufficient in this pla∣ce. Therefore seeing I am to al∣leadge onelie causes, and reasons essentiall, and substantiall in Reli∣gion, from thes your english prote∣stant Bishops, and doctors, why their countrie Catholicks may not by their owne doctrines, and procee∣dings, communicate with them in matters of Religion; It is euident, that noe english protestant, or puri∣tane may, or in conscience ought, to denie any such authoritie to bee cited in this treatise, or any con∣clusion
 truelie and scientificallie de∣duced from such their allowed prin∣ciples▪ for in soe doeinge by their generall graunt before, hee should become, a papist, and a recusant to communicate with protestants; or a blasphemous Goliah, vncircumci∣sed philistine, or a lyer, by their ow∣ne censure and Iudgment: which would bee new and vrgent causes to auoide all spirituall communion with such men. Wherevppon, presuminge that noe aduersarie will soe muche disable my studyes in diuinitie, and artes subordinate vnto yt, But that I am able from graunted, and allowed principles, to deduce necessarie, and vndemiable Conclusions: I therefo∣re doe confidentlie name this worke. A booke of english protestants Demonstra∣tions, for English Catholicks recusancie. Because the moste iust causes of Ca∣tholicks refusall to communicate with protestans in Religion, are euidentlie proued by those prote∣stants them selues, in this Treatise. And soe in all obedient, and hum∣ble manner, I take my leaue; I rest and hope to continue for euer,
 in all dutifull, and beseeminge obe∣dience, and loue, to our moste bles∣sed Sauiour, his Holie church, and Religion, his maiestie, my dearest countrie, and your Lordships the moste honorable portion thereof; as I haue before professed, and obliged myselfe by attesta∣tion, and bonde vnuiolable.

