



MOst Gracious and dread Soueraigne;
inVt partes ho∣minis in corde vivunt, it a par∣tes Reipublicae in Rege. Case Poli. li 3. ca 7. whose spirituall & corporall health
and welfare, the safety, health and hap∣pinesse
both of our Church and State
subsist: I the most vnworthiest & meanest of your
true & faithfull Subiects, presuming on your Grace
& Clemency, haue made bold to consecrate this
meane & worthlesse Treatise, against Healthes, or
Health-drinking, vnto your sacred Maiestie: &
to commit my selfe and it, vnto your royall Patro∣nage.
The reasons which swayed and emboldened
me, to dedicate so small a Pamphlet, vnto so great

a Patron as your Maiestie, were chiefly these.
 First, because your Highnesse in regard of those
infinite & many Healths, which are daily carouzed
in your royall Name, throughout your Kingdome,
& else where: are more interessed in the theame &
subject of this compendious Discourse, then any o∣ther
that I know.
 Secondly, because your Majestie of all other per∣sons
within your owne Dominions, are most disho∣noured,
praeiudiced and abused by these Healths; &
that in these respects.
 First, in that your sacred Health, your Name,
your Crowne & Dignity, by meanes of Healths,
are made the daily table. complement, grace, &
first salute of euery iouiallerpetuat brie∣tas aulia vita mode est. Obso∣paeus de Atc Bibndi. lib: 2. Courtier; the grand∣serjeanty
& chiefe allegeance of euery great or
petty, of euery Corporation, Court or Country
Officer: the principall welcome and entertein∣ment,
of euery rusticke Gentleman: the piety, &
meal deuotion, of many a Trencher-Chaplin:
the logicke, theame & rhetoricke, of euery pot∣learned
Scholler: the phrase &His omnis in bbendo est forti∣tud. De Elia et Ieiun: cap: 12. Ta inter pulas fortis vir esse po∣test, quam in bel∣o. Eurip: Pany∣asides Stobaeus de Incontinea∣tia sermo 18. valour, of e∣uery
deboist and roaring Souldiour: the liuerie,
& table-buttrie-sellar-talke of euery good-fellow
Serving-man: the ceremonie, by-word, & ale.
discourse, of euery base Mechanicke, of euery ru∣sticke

Clowne and Peasant: the first ingredient,
of euery Drunkards Cup: the first Pot-seruice at
euery great or meane mans Table: the song, the an∣theme,
foot or musicke of euery festiuall & mer∣ry
meeting: the prologue or praeludium to eue∣ry
drunken match and skirmage: the orna∣ment,
grace or garland, of euery ebrious Round:
the onely Ramme or Pol-axe to assault, to force, &
batter downe; the most flexanimous Eloquence,
to sollicite; and the most energeticall and vncon∣trolable
Argument, to ouercome, the sobrietie &
temperance of all true-hearted, reallBedlus, qui di∣uinas Scriptur as legens, verb a verit in opera. Bernard. De or∣dine vitae: Col. 1116 h. practicall
& blessed Christians, (who make a conscience of
excesse, because the Scripture doth condemne
it:) the chiefe Alectiue, bait or stratagem, to draw
men on to drunkennesse; and the onely Patronage
and protection, to iustifie, countenance, and beare out,
the intemperance & riot of all such, who deeme ex∣cesse
& drunkennesse aDucitur ebrie∣tas nunc virtus maxima. Nec vi∣tium ebries as quaelibet esse po∣test. Obsopaeus de Arte Biben∣di. lib. I. & 2. vertue, & no sinne at
all; (at least but ventall) if your Majesties Healths
occasion it. And is not this a great affront, indig∣nity
& dishonor to your Majesty, that your sacred
Health, your Name, and royall Crowne, should bee
thus prophaned, & banded vp & downe in euery
Drunkards mouth? in euery Cup & Can? in euery
Tauerne, Tap-house, Hall, or Seller? (vnhallow∣ed,

base & sordid places, vnworthy of so holy &
great a Name and Presence:) that euery degenerous,
infamous & stigmaticall Belialist: euery deboist &
brutish Pot-companion, (whoseI Cor. 5. 11. Ephes 5. 11. Turpe est vi∣rum ebrium a∣pud sobrios es∣se: Turpe item est, si sobrius cum ebriis fue∣rit. Theogmede  stobaenm: dencontineusia, Sermo 18. very com∣pany
and acquaintance all Christians should
abhor:) that the very of scouring, dreggs, & scum
of men, should so farre debase & vnderualue them:
as to prostitute them to their swinish sinnes & lusts;
as to command & vse them at their pleasures, to en∣force
& toll on others to drunkennes & excesse: &
so to make the great Defendor of the Faith, the
ground, the Patron, & grand Protector of all in∣temperance;
as if Drunkennesse were the sole and
onely Faith that Kings defend? It was no little
griefe, nor trouble to great and good King Da∣uid,
thatPsal: 69: 12. hee was the drunkards song: and
shall it not then bee your Majesties greatest griefe,
and chiefe dishonour; that your royall Crowne and
sacred Health, should not onely be made the song,
the phrase, the complement, the ceremony, by∣word,
and pot-discourse; but euen the Glosse, the
Text, the Religion, the Engine, the Patronage,
the Plea and Iustification, the stallion, and vi∣zard of euery drunken Tos-pot, of euery sordidPessimum i∣nimiconim ge∣nus laudantes. Taius: Agrito∣la Sec. 13 Genus hominum adu∣latoribus pesti∣lentius nullum est: Pluarch: de lib. Ecandis.
hostile, and pernitious Parasite: as if you were no
better then the Diuell Bacchus, the Idol-god of

wine, of Healths, and drunkennesse? Doubtlesse
though it were the honour of heathen Kings, and
Diuell-gods in former ages, to haue their Healths
carouzed and quaffed off at euery solemne and festi∣uall
meeting; yet it is the greatest contumclie, in∣dignity
and dishonour to any good or Christian
King, who should bee a veryPsal: 82: 1: 6. Rex si officio suo suerit cum laude perfunc∣tus, quasi qui∣dam Deus in terris est: sin∣gulari cutu ac veneratione dignissimis: O∣sorius de Regum Inslit lib: 4. God on earth,
(not onely in respect of Soueraignty and command:
but likewise in theReges  meliores priva∣tis hominibus esse debent, quanto cis ho∣noratiores ex istunt rates Panigr Oser: lib: 4: de Regum Inssit. transcendency of grace,
of holinesse, and theFacere recte cines suos Prin∣ceps optimus saciendo oct ctiam hic em imperio maxi∣mns sit.  plo maior est:  Rom l 2: p: 134. I Tim 2. 1: 2, 3 exemplarinesle of his pra∣cticall,
pious, regulating and reforming life:) to haue
his Name, his Health, his Crowne and dignity
thus vilified and abused: by sordid, beastly, wicked
and vngodly men, to such sinester, sinfull, gracelesse,
heathenish and infernall ends as these; to patronize their
grosse intemperance, and so to drowne their
owne and others soules, in drunkennesse, riot, and
excesse of wine.
Secondly, as Healthes doe thus dishonour, so
likewise they doe praeiudice and wrong your sacred
Maiestie in two respects.
First, in merging, quenching and drowning the
multitude, heat and feruency of those publike and pri∣uate
Prayers, which euery loyall subiect owes vnto
your Grace. It is (m) Gods owne iniunction,
and it was the Christians practise euen vnder

paganNos pro saluse imperatorum Deumicoeamus aetenum, Deum viuum, et Deum vuitum, quem et if si Imperatores propicium sib in ter caeuros ma∣lune: pratantes umus omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam illis pro∣lixam, imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, populam probum, orhem quietum, quae∣cun{que} ominis et Caesaris vota sunt. Tertul. A∣pol. adv. Gentes cap. 30. 39. Emperours, in former ages,) that Sub∣iects
should make prayers, and supplications,
and intercessions for Kings, and all that are in
authority: not drinke, carouze, or reuell for them:
But by reason of the Divells malice, and mens pro∣digious
wickednesse: these holy and feruent Prayers
are turned into prophane, hellish, excessiue, and vn∣christian
Healthes: (theIsay 5 11, 12, 13, 22, 24, 25. Prov. 23 29. 30. Ioel. 1. 5, 6. Na∣hum: 1: 10. A∣mos 6: 6: 7: Isai: 27: 1, 2, 3: Hos: 4: 3: 11: cap: 7: 5: Deutr: 28: 59, 60, 61: Matth: 24: 49, 50: Luke 21: 34: compa∣red together. onely meanes to
draw downe curses and diseases, yea woes and
fatall indgements on a King and Kingdome:)
Hence it is now accounted a part of Puritanisme,
to make a conscience of praying constantly and pri∣uatly;
but a part of Protestanisme, piety, and true
deuotion, to make no conscience of drinking open∣ly
and howerly, euen beyond excesse it selfe, for your
Maiesties health and welfare: Hence is it, that
most men prefer their Healths before their Pray∣ers;
and therefore would rather drinke your Ma∣iesties
HealthDies admodum parna, breuis eti∣am nox vel ki∣berna potando vi∣detur. Basil de E∣brietate et Luxu Sermo. a whole night or day, or week,
or month: nay an whole yeare together, then pray in
priuacy and feruency one hower for it: Hence is it
that many men place their Religion Allegeance and
Deuotion in these Healths; thinking themselues most
pious, loyall, andNon prophanus molius esses quāsic velgisu? Minuc. Felix: Octav: pag: 77. Sic tum so maxim pios putans, tum maxime fiune impij. Lactant: de Iustit. lib: 5: cap: 10. religious to their Soueraigne,
when they are most prophane, and impious, most ri∣otous

and luxurious; in drinking downe his Health:
whence they deeme it a greater breach of allegeance,
piety, and deuotion, not to pledge your Maiesties
Health, then not to pray for it. So far haue Healths
incroached, and of late vsurped vpon your blessed and
best inheritance of your Subiects prayers: that they
haue euen quite extinguished the heat and feruency,
& much abated the multitude and frequency of them
throughout your Kingdome, to your incomparable
& peerlesse losse.
Secondly, they praeiudice your Maiesty exceedingly 
in interessing and engaging you, in the excesse and
drunkennes of many others; your Name being made
a party to it, and your Health an occasion, apologie,
praetence or iustification of it. Alas, how many thou∣sand
persons, both are, & haue been drawn on (especi∣ally
at festiuall and solemne times of ioy and thank∣fulnes)
to drunkennes & excesse: drinking their wit
out of their heads, their health out of their bodies,
& God out of their soules; whiles they haue beene
too busie & officious in carouzing Healthes vnto
your sacred Maiesty? Manifold are the mischiefs, sins
and inconueniences, which your Maiesties Healths
occasion in euery corner of this Iland, (which flotes
in Seas of sin and drunkennes,) & more are they like
to grow, if you preuent them not in time: Now

this is certaine, (if I may be so bold as toMauerim ve∣ris offendere quam placere adulando. Sene∣de Clementia. cap. 2. speake
the truth vnto your Grace, in this our flattering
age;) if that your MaiestieSeruorum fi∣liorum{que} pecca∣ta non coercere peccatum est: Lactantius de I∣ra Deicap. 18: Ioannes: Frid: de Ritu, Rib: ad San: lib: 2 cap. 2. see Deut: 13: 8. Psa: 50: 18, 21. Prover 1. 10. 1 Sam: 15: 9. to 24. ludg: 5. 23. 2 Chro 19 2. Hal: 2: 15, 16. Acts 8. 1. Rom: 1. 32. 1 Tim: 5: 22: Ioh: 10: 11: compared to∣gether. giue any tacite,
allowance, consent or approbation to these
luxurious and excessiue Healths, not laboring
with care and conscience to suppresse them;
you are then vndoubtedly made a party both
to the guilt and punishment of all the sinne,
the drunkennesse, and intemperance, that is oc∣casioned
or produced by them, in any of your
Subiects or Allies, (especially within the Verge
and compasse of your Court and Pallace:) which
the1 Tim: 6. 15: Rev,: 17: 14: cap: 19: 16. King of Kings, and Lord of Lords will
certainly require, at your hands, when as 25: 31. to 46. Rom: 14: 10, 12. 2 Cor: 5: 10. Rev: 20: 12, 13. all
mankind shall be arraigned before the barre
of his Tribunal, there to receiue an euerlasting
doome and finall censure, according to their
works, without respect of persons. Since there∣fore
these Healths doe not onely dishonour, but like∣wise
damnifie and praeiudice your sacred Name,
your Health, your Crowne and Person, in all these
respects: (which should cause your Maiesty, as
you tender the honor of your Name, and the eternall
welfare of your Souls, with care and speede for euer
toPrincipis b∣ni est, non tan∣tum id agere vt ipse bonus sit, sed et hoc essi∣cere, vt alii ma∣li esse desist∣ant. Salu. de Guber. Dci: lib 7. suppresse them:) I thought my selfe in some
sort ingaged by Duty and Allegeance, to appropriate

this Treatise to your Grace aboue all other Patrons
euen in this respect, to preuent all further mischiefs
that Healths might bring vpon your sacred Person,
Crowne or State.
Thirdly, I dedicated this Pamphlet to your
Majesty aboue all other persons; because as none
are so much interessed in this Theam and Subject,
so none are so able in respect of place and power;
none more obliged in regard of Duty, (you being,
the supremest Magistrate, andRex medicu est; et medico comparamr, vt saret. Plato de Regn; Case. Polit. lib 3 cap: 4. State-physiti∣on
vnder God himselfe,) to purge these hydro∣picall,
noxious, and superfluous humours, and vn∣healthy
Healthes, out of the body of our State
and Kingdome, which are now so much distempe∣red,
molested and ouercharged by them, as your sa∣cred
Maiesty: WhoseIudg. 9. 15 Ps. 78: 71, 72. Deu: 17: 16. 18, 19, 20 2 Sam: 24: 17 Nehem 2: 10 2 Chro: 1: 10, 11. cap: 7. 10 Neh: 5: 1: to 19.  K 21: 18, 19 2. King: 8: 3: to . Nullum orna∣mentum Prin∣cipis fastigio dignius pu∣chrius{que} est quam illa cor na ob ciues seruatos sen: de Clement: cap: 26. Principi et im∣peratori hoc consulendum est, vt cives set vent,  heg. Populi satus, est gloria Principum: Cas∣si. : lib: 2: : 41. Duty, Honor, & solemn
Oath it is: not onely to protect your Subiects,
from all externall violence, wrongs, and
dangers; to preserue their liues, their states,
their peace, and liberties; and to seeke their
temporall welfare, good, and happinesse, to the
very vtmost of your power: but likewise1 Sam: 23: 3. to rule
them in the feare of God, by vnsheathing, and
drawing out the sword of Soveraigne Iustice
against all sinne and wickednesse: by execu∣ting
wrath and vengeance vpon all them that

doe evill without respect of persons, as the mi∣nister
and avenger of God, designed for this
purpose. andRom: 13: 3, 4. Prov 20 26: ca. 25: 5. Rex regendo dictus est; non autem regit qui non corrigit. August: Enarun Isa: 44. by cutting off all the wicked
of the Land:Psal: 101. 5, 6, 7, 8. (especially all gracelesse, swinish, and
vnthrifty Drunkards, the very Drones and Cater∣pillars
of a Common-wealth; and the most vnusefull,
vnnecessarie, andQuid est homo ebrius nisi su perflua, creatu∣ra? cuius vita somnium est: cuius somnus mors est: Am∣br: de Elia cs Ie∣iv. cap. 16. superfluous creatures of
all others) that so you may cut off all wicked
doers from the Citty of the Lord, and from
your Court and Kingdome. on which they will
pull downe wrath & indgements, vnlesse the arme
& sword of iustice lop them off.
Fourthly, I did it to interest and ingage your Ma∣iestie,
(if it may stand with your Princely will and
pleasure,) in the defence and Patronage of this di∣stressed
Treatise: which by reason of the prauitie,
coldnesse, luxurie, and miserie of the times, can find
no license for the Presse, though it hath sought it fa
& neare: and therefore doth here humbly craue
your Maiesties most royall Protection, and Allo∣wance:
that so it may passe for currant Coyno: &
divulge & spread it selfe in despite of Bacchus, and
his ebrious Crew, to the affronting and suppressing
of Healths and drunkennesse, (the Epidemical
Diseases of our Nation, and theNulla in par∣te mundi cessat ebrietas. Plin: Mat Hist li. 14. cap 22. Ebrietas toto breviter non cessat in orbe. Sunt pas∣sim bibulis om ia plena yiris. Obsopaus de Ar∣te Bibendi: lib: 3. world it
selfe:) else it is like to proue abortiue, for want of

Mid-wife Authority to bring it forth: as many o∣ther
workes and writings haue done of late, if the
complaint of Stationers or Printers may be credi∣ted.
These are the reasons, (Gracious Soveraigne)
that animated and induced mee, to commend this
worthlesse and forlorne Babe of mine, vnto your roy∣all
Patronage: Not doubting but your Grace, vp∣on
these praeuious considerations, seconded by the
noualty and rarenesse of the subiect, which few haue
largely handled: will most graciously owne it, and
proue a safe and sure Sanctuary, both to me, and it,
against the malice, spleene, and power, of all who
shall oppose it. So shall this petty worke of mine,
(which here I once more humbly offer vnto your sa∣cred
Maiesty,) proue vsefull & profitable vnto men,
whose good: but fatall and pernicious vnto Healths
and Drunkennesse; whose finall ruine and subuer∣sion
I cordially affect: (as being theEbrietas for∣titudinis perni∣cies: Basil de E∣brietate et luxu Sermo. very bane
of fortitude and prowesse, the things which now
we need; and theGubernator ebriosus, et qui vis cuiuseun{que} rei praefectus, omnia subver∣tit, sie naui∣gium, siue cur∣rum, siue exer∣citum, siue quamcunque rem fidei sue commissam Pl to. li 2. de Repub. Stb u Ser. 1. ouerthrow of all martiall
attempts, and ciuill enterprises:) and I your
humble, loyall, and obedient Subiect, shall still con∣tinue,
(though not to drinke, carouze, and swill,
as others doe;) yet heartily to pray, for your Ma∣iesties
Health, and happy Raigne: which God
continue & prolong among vs, to our tempo∣rall,

and your owne both temporall, and eter∣nall
ioy, and blisse.

