


RIGHT Summa apud Deum est no∣bilitas, clarum esse virtutibus. Sola apud De∣um libertas est, non servire pec∣catis. Hierom. E∣pist. 4. c. 5. vertuous, pious, and most accomplished Gentle∣men, the present hope, the future prop and honour of our English Nation; that cordiall longing de∣sire of your temporall and eter∣nall felicity, which hath a long time harboured in the very innermost receptacles of my soule, hath, as at first provoked me to pen, so now at last to publish this HISTRIO-MASTIX for your common good, which here lieth prostrate at your feet, imploring not onely your naked acceptations, but your unprejudicated affections too; that so you may tho∣rowly scan it with an impartiall scrutinie, before you preposterously fore-judge it out of a misinformed pre∣judice.

It is not I suppose unknowne to any, Homines vi∣tiis suis sapien∣tiam inscri∣bunt, ut ab∣scondenda pro∣fitentur. Ita non ab Epicu∣ris impulsi lux∣uriantur, sed vitiis dediti luxuriam uam in Philosophiae sinu abscon∣dunt, et eo con∣currunt, ubi audiunt lauda∣ri voluptatem; quaerentes libi∣dinibus uis patrocinium a∣liquod ac vela∣mentum. Itaq, quod unum habebant in ma∣lis bonum per∣dunt, peccandi verecundiam. Laudant enim ea quibus eru∣bescebant, et vitio glorian∣tur: ideoque ne resurgere qui∣dem adolescen∣tiae licet, cum honestus turpi desidiae titulus accessit. Senec De Vita Beata cap. 12. what favour, what estimation Playes and Players have lately purchased in the opinions and hearts of most; which I feare are so strangely forestal∣led, so desperately infatuated with their Syre∣nian enchantments, that they will hardly brooke the sight, much lesse the reading of this Play-scourging Discourse, whose very title will be a sufficient war∣rant for many to condemne it, if not a Supersedeas to them to peruse it: such being the froward dispo∣sition of prejudicated persons, (especially when their popular universall overspreading pleasures of sinne in which they most delight, come once to See August. Enarratio in Psal. 128. p. 750, 751, 752, accordingly. be con∣trolled by some one private person, which is now the case of Stage-playes:) that let the truth be never so evident, the arguments, the authorities against them never so convincing, yet they will quite reject and precondemne them, ere they have once examined them. What therefore Octavius, pag 96. Minucius Felix, that famous Christian Lawyer, and De Idolorum Vanitate Tract. St. Cyprian complained of long since, against the Pagans of their age, in the name of all the Christians: Sic occu∣pant animos et obstruunt pectora, ut ante nos incipiant homines odisse quam nosse, ne cogni∣tos aut imitari possint, aut damnare non possint: Or what Apologia advers. Gentes, c. 1, 2. Tertullian writes in the selfesame case; Nolunt audire quod auditum damnare non possint. Malint nescire, quia jam oderint, adeo quod nesciunt praejudicant id esse, quod si sciant odisse non poterant, quando si nullum odij de∣bitum

depraehendatur, optimum utique si, de∣sinere injustè odisse. Quid vero iniquius, quam ut oderint homines quod ignorant, etiamsi res meretur odium? Tunc etenim meretur cum cog∣noscitur an mereatur. Vacante autem meriti no∣titia, unde odij justitia defenditur? quae non de eventu, sed de conscientia probanda est, &c. Or what De Iustitia l. 5. c 1. Lactantius of olde lamented upon the like occasion: Student damnare tanquam nocentes quos utique sciunt innocentes; itaque constare de ipsa innocentia nolunt; quasi vero major ini∣quitas sit probatam innocentiam damnare quā inauditam: the same I feare may be the just com∣plaint of this my HISTRIO-MASTIX now Many, I doubt, will censure, if not exclaime against it ere they reade it;Omnis enim malus ideo per∣sequitur bonū, quia non illi consentit bo∣nus ad malum. Facia aliquid mali, non ob∣iurget Episco∣pus, bonus est Episcopus, ob∣iurget Episco∣pus, malus est Episcopus So∣nat verbum, sonat sermo contradictor libidinis. At ille amicus libidi∣nis suae, et ini∣micus sermoni contradicenti amicae suae, in∣festus est, et o∣dit sermonem Dei. August. E∣narratio in Ps. 128, Tom. 8. pars , p. 751. Vid. Ibid. because it reprehends their vices: and some perchance will purposely disdaine to cast their eyes upon it, for feare they should approve it, at leastwise be unable to controll it. But however others may chance thus ignorantly or maliciously to forejudge it; yet I hope it shall finde no such ungen∣teile discourteous entertainment frō you deare fellow-Brethren, whose generous ingenuous education hath taught you thus much courtesie, whose religion and profession have learned you this good Lesson; to heare and know, before you sentence: since Gods Law, & ours too, Iohn 7.51. doth not judge any man, before it heare him, and know what he doth. What Seneca, Me∣dea, Act. 2, f. 145. Medea therefore requested of Creon; Si judi∣cas, cognosce: or what Epistola 110. Seneca desired of his friend Lucilius; Adhibe diligentiam tuam, et intuere quid sint res nostrae, non quid vocentur;

shall be my present suite to you;Legant prius et poste de∣spiciant, ne vi∣deantur non ex iudicio sed ex odii praesump∣tione ignorata damnare. Hie∣rn. Apologia advers Rfinū, l. 3. c. 9, p. 21. to peruse my HI∣STRIO-MASTIX first, and then to censure it as you finde it. Perchance it may seeme some Paradox, some meere fantastique Novalty, or strang Monster at the first in this Play-admiring age; wherein most men like the Acts 17.18, 19, 20. See Chrysostome, Theophylact, HRabanus Maurus, & Lyra, Ibidem. Athenian Epicurean Stoicke Philosophers, who encountred S. Paul, will be ready to demand in scorne, What will this Babler say? May we know what this new do∣ctrine whereof thou speakest is? for thou bring∣est certaine strange things to our eares; wee would therfore know what these things meane. But if you will doe it so much honour as considerate∣ly to revolve it, you shall finde it to containe nought else but resolved, uniuersally receiued ancient (though now forgotten) truthes; so farre from any suspicion of factious Novalty, or puritanicall singularity, that they have the concurrent testimonies, the una∣nimous resolutions of See Act. 7, Scene 1, here p. 545. sundry sacred texts of Scripture, of the See Act. 7, Scene 2, p. 551, & Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5. whole primitive Church and Saints of God, both before and under the Law and Gospell; See Act. 7, Scene 3, p. 570, to 668 the Canons of 55 seve∣rall oecumenicall, nationall, provinciall Synods and Councels of divers ages and Countries: to∣gether with the canonicall, the imperiall Con∣stitutions of the Apostles themselves, of Em∣perours, Popes and other Bishops, See Act. 7, Scene 4, p. 668, &c. & Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5. the workes of 71 Fathers and ancient Christian Writers of chiefest note, from our Saviours Nativity to the yeare 1200. the suffrages See Act. 7, Scene 5, p. 688, & Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5. of above 150 Christian Authors of all sorts, from the yeare 1200 to this present; the sentence of

See Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5. & Act. 7, Scene 6. p. 70, &c. 40 Heathen Philosophers, Orators, Histori∣ans, Poets; together with the Play-condemning See Act. 6, Scene 5 p. 455, to 473. & Act. 7, Scene 7. p. 713 &c. Lawes and Edicts of sundry Christian, yea Pagan Nations, Republikes, Emperours, Prin∣ces, Magistrates in severall ages; with the See Act. , Scene 5 p. 485, to 498. Act. 7, Scene 5, & 7. p. 715, 716. Statutes, Magistrates, Vniversities, Writers and Preachers of our owne renowned Kingdome; to back, to second them in all particulars; who all have long since passed this heavie Censure against Stage-playes: that they are the Se here p. 42 to 62. Act. 6, Scene 12. p. 522, to 525. & Act. 7. Scene 2. p. 561, to 68. very workes, the pompes, inventions and chiefe delights of the Divell, which all Christians solemnly abjure in their baptisme:See Act. 6 Scene 5. p. 447, &c. the most pestilent corrup∣tions of all mens (especially young mens) minds & manners; See Act. 6. throughout.the chiefe fomenters of all vice and wickednesse; the greatest enemies of all vertue, grace and goodnesse; the most mischie∣vous plagues that can be harboured in any Church or State; yea lewd infernall pastimes not tollerable among Heathens, not sufferable in any well-ordered Christian Republike; not once to be haunted or applauded by any civill vertuous persons, who are either mindfull of their credits, or of their owne salvation. Which as it controlls the grosse mistake of divers voluptu∣ous paganizing Christians in our dayes, who dote on Stage-playes as the most laudable, generous, if not necessary recreations; so it should now at last ingage all Christians for ever to abandon them; as the See Act. 4. Scene 1, 2. Act. 6, Sene 3, 4, 5, 12, 20. Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. accor∣dingly. very best of Saints, of Pagans have done in former ages. Alas, what goodnesse, what profit doe men reape from Stage-playes, that should any

way ingage their affection to them? Doe See Act. 7, Scene 3, 4, 5. they not enrage their lusts, adde fire and fewell to their unchast affections; See Act. 6, Scene 5. deprave their minds, corrupt their manners, See Act: 6, Scene 12, 18, 20. cauterize their con∣sciences, obdurate their hearts, multiply their heinous transgressions,See Act: 6, Scene 1, 2. Haec mala dedecoris impieatisque plenissima, a∣dorentur in templis, rideantur in thea∣tris, cum his victimas im∣molant, vaste∣tur pecus etiam pauperum; cū haec histriones agunt et sal∣tant effundan∣ur patrimonia divitum. Aug: Epist: 202, Tom: 2, p: 953. consume their estates, mispend their time,See Actus 6, throughout. canker their graces, blast all their vertues, interrupt their studies, indis∣pose them to repentance and true godly sorrow for their sinnes; make all Gods ordinances inef∣fectuall to their spirituall good, draw downe the guilt of sundry Play-house abominations on their persons, incorporate them into lewd ungodly company, and without repentance damne their soules Doe See Act: 3, 6, & 7, through∣out according∣ly. they not disho∣nour their most holy God, abuse their most blessed Saviour sundry wayes, blaspheame and grieve Gods holy spirit, prophane the sacred Scriptures and the name of God, deride and jeare religion, holinesse, vertue, temperance, grace, goodnesse, with all religious, vertuous persons, advance the Divels scepter, service, kingdome, by sowing, by cherishing the seedes of atheisme, heathenisme, prophanesse, incon∣tinency, voluptuousnes, idlenes, yea, of all kind of wickednes both in their Actors and Specta∣tors hearts? How many thousands have Stage-playes drawne on to sinne, to lewdnesse, to all sorts of vice, and a last sunke downe to hell, with the weight of those prodigious evills which they had quite avoi∣ded, had they not haunted Play-houses? How many Novices and Youngsters have beene corrupted, de∣bauched,

and led away captive by the Divel, by their owne outragious lusts, See Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5. by Panders, Players, Bawdes, Adulteresses, Whores, and other lewd companions, who had continued studious, ci∣vill, hopefull, towardly and ingenious, had they not resorted unto Stage-playes, the originall cau∣ses of their dolefull ruine? which bring no other be∣nefit to their Actors, their Spectators at the last, but this, See Act. 6, Scene 12, 18, 19, 20. to post them merrily on to hell with a greater loade of soule-condemning sinnes; Hieron Epist: 3, cap: 3. quasi vivendi sensum ad hoc tantum accepe∣rant ut perirent; as if they had received life for no other purpose, but to worke out their owne eternall death, which needes no other instruments to effect it, than lewd lascivious Enterludes. O therefore (deare Brethren) as you tender Gods honour the publike welfare, or your owne soules safety, abominate these glittering gawdy pompous snares, these See Act: 8, Scene 5, p: 789 &c. sugered poysoned potions of the Divell, by which he cun∣ningly endeavours your destruction when as you least suspect it: and if any of you have formerly frequen∣ted Stage-playes, either out of Adhuc enim non pueritia in nobis est, sed quod est gra∣vius, puerilias remanet: et hoc quidem peius est, quod au∣ctoritaem ha∣bemus senum, vitia puero∣rum, nec pue∣rorum tantum, sed infantium. Seneca Epist: 4. childish vanity, or injudicious ignorance of their oft-condemned mischievous lewd effects; or through the Arbitror ese hic nonnullos quos amici sui volebant rape∣re ad Circum, ad theatrum, et ad nescio quas hodiernae festi∣vitatis nugas. Forte ipsi illos adduxerunt ad Ecclesiam: sed sive ipsi illos adduxerunt, sive ab iis ad Circum adduci non potuerunt, in aqua contradictionis probatisunt: August: Enar: in Psal. 80, Tom. , pars 2, p. 8. over-pressing importunity of voluptuous carnall ac∣quaintance; or by reason of that popular erronious good opinion which our wicked times conceive of Stage-playes which humour them in their lusts; or because such In vitia alter alterum trudimus: Quomodo autem ad salutem re∣vocari possint, quos iam nemo retinet, populus impellit? Seneca, Epist: 41. multitudes resort now daily to

them, that they carry one another headlong to these sinfull pleasures without any sense of dan∣ger, or hopes of reformation; be you henceforth truly penitent for what is past, August. Enar∣ratio n in Psal. 84, p. 55. Quem delecta∣ba spectare, delectet orare; quem delectabant cantica nugatoria et adulterina, delectet hym∣num dicere Deo, currere ad Ecclesiam, qui primo currebat ad theatrum: as St. Augustine sweetly councels: and wholly abandon them for all fu∣ture time. And so much the rather, that you may now at last falsifie that ignominious Censure which some English Writers in their printed Workes have pas∣sed upon Innes of Court Students; of whom they re∣cord See Earles Character of a Player, Cha∣ract. 38. & Sir Thomas Over∣bury his Cha∣racter of an Innes of Court man, accor∣dingly. That Innes of Court men were un∣done but for Players; that they are their chiefest guests and imployment, & the sole busines that makes them afternoons men: that this is one of the first things they learne as soone as they are admitted, to see Stage-playes, Bishop Halls Epistles Decad. 6, Epistle 6. Mr. Bolton his ge∣nerall Directi∣ons for our comfortable walking with God, p. 73, 74; here p. 364, 365 Stephen Gos∣son his Epistle to the Right Worshipfull Gentlemen & Students of both Vniver∣sities and the Innes of Court prefixed to his Playes confu∣ted in five A∣ctions. & take smoke at a Play-house, which they commonly make their Studie; where they quickly learne to fol∣low all fashions, to drinke all Healths, to weare favours and good cloathes, to consort with ruf∣fianly companions, to sweare the biggest oaths, to quarrell easily, fight desperately, game inor∣dinately, to spend their patrimony ere it fall, to use gracefully some gestures of apish comple∣ment, to talke irreligiously, to dally with a Mistresse, and hunt after harlots, to prove alto∣gether lawlesse in steed of Lawyers, and to for∣get that little learning, grace and vertue which they had before: so that they grow at last pas

hopes of ever doing good, either to the Church, their Country, their owne or others soules. Which heavie Censure, if any dissolute Play-haun∣ters have justly occasioned heretofore, to the disho∣nour of those famous Law-Societies wherein they live, I hope their subsequent reformation will re∣verse it now; that so all England may henceforth experimentally discerne, that Stage-Playes and A∣ctors are as well condemned, detested by her Law∣yers, as by See here pag. 492, to 498 her Lawes and Statutes, which brand all Stage-playes for unlawfull pastimes; all common Actors, for notorious Rogues; too base Companions for generous spirits to beholde or dance attendance on, who were created for more no∣ble objects, more sublime imployments than base in∣famous Enterludes, or most abject Players. O there∣fore let the serious consideration of your owne native generositie, of your heroicke Studies, elevated with the sublimer contemplations of your transcendent Christian Nobility; which makes you Rom. 8.17 heires of heaven, coheires with Christ, yea,Revel. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. Kings and Priests unto God your Father, (who hath not onely Hebr. 2.7, 9. 1 Pet. 5.4. crownes of glory, but likewise an Luke 12.32. 1 Thes. 2.12. Hebr. 12.28. Iames 2.5. heavenly eternall Kingdome to bestow up∣on you) raise up your depressed mindes and thoughts so farre above these earthly childish vanities, as with a kinde of holie magnanimitie to trample them un∣der feete Hebr. 11, 25 as drossie filthie pleasures, unworthy any Christians presence, much lesse his approbation, who hath farre better, farre sublimer spectacles to beholde; even those which I shall here commend unto you in Cyprians words, in his elegant Booke against

Stage-playes: De Specta∣culis lib. Tom. 2, p. 244, 245. See Augustine Enarratio in Psal. 39, Tom. 8, pars 1, p. 416 417, 418. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos l. 2, Tom. 9, pars 1, p. 1393, here p. 345, to 347; & Tertullian de Spectaculis, c. 28, 29, &c. to the like pur∣pose. Habet Christianus Spectacula meliora, si velit; habet veras et profuturas vo∣luptates, si se recollegerit, et ut omittam illa, quae nondum contemplari potest, habet istam mundi pulchritudinem, quam videat atque mi∣retur; solis ortum aspiciat, rursus occasum, mu∣tuis vicibus dies noctesque revocantem, globum lunae, temporum cursus incrementis suis, decre∣mentisque signantem, astrorum micantium cho∣ros, et à summo de summa mobilitae fulgentes, anni totius per membra divisa, et dies ipsos cum noctibus per horarum spatia digestos, et terrae molem libratam cum montibus, et proflua lu∣mina cum suis fontibus, extensa maria cum suis fluctibus atque littoribus: Interim constantem pariter summa conspiratione nexibusque con∣cordiae, extensum aërem medium tenuitate sua cuncta vegetantem, nunc imbres contractis nubibus profundentem, nunc serenitatem refe∣cta raritate revocantem, et in omnibus istis in∣colas proprios, in aëre avem, in aquis piscem, in terra hominem. Haec inquam, et alia opera divina, sint Christianis fidelibus Spectacula. Quod theatrum humanis manibus extructum i∣stis operibus poterit comparari? magnis licet lapidum molibus extruatur, crusta sunt monti∣um; et auro licet ecta lucanaria reluceant, astro∣rum fulgore vincentur: nunquam humana ope∣ra mirabitur quisquis se cognoscerit filiū Dei. Dejicit se de culmine generositatis suae qui ad∣mirari aliquid post Deum potest. Therefore e∣very Christian though a Lay∣man ought t reade the Scriptures. Scripturis in quam sacris incumbat Christianus: (let Papists,

and those who are given so much to Play-bookes co∣sider this:) ibi invenie condigna fidei Specta∣cula. Videbit instituentem Deum mundum su∣um, et cum caeteris animalibus hominis illā ad∣mirabilem fabricam melioremque facientem: spectabit mundum in delicijs suis, justa naufra∣gia, piorum praemia, impiorumque supplicia: maria populo siccaa, et de pera rursus populo maria porecta: spectabit de coelo descendentes messes, non ex areis: inspiciet flumina transitus siccos refraenatis aquarum agminibus exhiben∣tia: videbit in quibusdam fidem cum igne luctu∣antem: religione superatas feras, et in mansue∣tudinem conversas: intuebitur et animas ab ipsa morte revocatas: considerabit etiam de sepul∣chris admirabiles ipsorum consummatorū jam vitas corporum redactas: et in his omnibus jam majus videbit Spectaculum, Diabolum illum qui totum detriumphaverat mundum, sub pedi∣bus Christi jacentem. Quàm hoc decorum Spe∣ctaculum Fratres? quàm jucundum? quàm ne∣cessarium? intueri semper spem nam, et oculos aperire ad salutem suam. Hoc est spectaculum quod videtur etiam luminibus amissis. Hoc est spectaculum, quod non exhibet Praetor, au Consul, sed qui est solus et ante omnia, et super omnia, immo ex quo omnia, Pater Domini no∣stri Iesu Christi, cui laus et honor in saecula sae∣culorum. These (my beloved Brethren) are the true celestiall worthie Spectacles of every pious Christian: O let your hearts, your mindes, your affections, your eyes and eares be wholly ravished and taken up with

these, which will onely bring true comfort to our soules. Let mee therefore lose up my Epistle to you with St. Augustines words: Enarratio in Psal. 80, & 81. Tō. 8, pars 2, p. 1, 18. Intendite ad mag∣na haec spectacula. Ista sunt spectacula utilia, sa∣lubria, aedificantia non destruentia, imò et de∣struentia et aedificantia: Destruentia recentes Deos, aedificantia fidem in verum et aeternum Deum: Let other men therefore who love their Stage-playes 2 Tim. 3.4 better than their God, their soules, resort to Theatres whiles they please; (August. Enar. in Psal 81. p. 18 Illi ha∣beant mare in theatro; nos habeamus por∣tum in Christo:) but let Christ Iesus be your Ephes. 1.23. 1 Cor. 15.28. all in all, your onely solace, your onely Spectacle, and joy on earth, whose soule-ravishing heart-filling pre∣sence, shall be your eternall solace, your everlasting 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 Iohn 3.2 Rev. 21.22, 23.visible all-glorious most triumphant Spectacle in the highest heavens; whither God bring us all at length for this his Sonne and mercies sake. Amen.

