



Right honourable and my very good friends.
BEcause the de∣sire of man is so insatiable, that

Ea saepe numero desiderat quibus maxime abundat, I hope I shall find pardon, who already having experiēce of your courtesies, do far∣ther presume up∣on your clemen∣cies; once desi∣ring your honors

to view and reade that which al∣ready you haue heard: It is no new Present, I presume to pre∣sent, but the an∣cient portion of your inheritance, that which your fore-fathers are already possessed

sessed with, Para∣dise it selfe; From whence, although it were part of his policy My Vncle Mr. Purchas (who stiles himselfe the Pilgrim) to fetch Religion, and fol∣low her about the world, yet shall it bee (God wil∣ling) the endea∣vour

of my pains, to follow you both, with all o∣ther truely Reli∣gious, to Para∣dise backe againe, where your ho∣nours shall bee receiued with ho∣nour farre sur∣mounting all dig∣nity, for there

shall yee bee ho∣nored of the Dei∣ty; God will then, and there, please to honour you, because yee haue honoured Him here. They that are here instru∣ments of His ho∣nour, shall hereaf∣ter be made par∣takers

of His glo∣ry, this you may see more plainely in these following meditations, the occasion of which meditations, up∣on this Text was, the late long wish∣ed, and at length, prosperous arri∣vall of your Lordsh

and your noble Lady. The joy throughout the Land was great, so soone as they heard of your Lordships safe ar∣rivall, in a secure haven; but how farre greater will the joy be, when yeshal once safely

arrive at that se∣cure heavē, whi∣ther ye are as of∣ten called to arise and come away: but in this your Pilgrimage to pa∣radise, methinkes I heare some Ro∣mish well read Catholike (that would faine be

your Pilate) tel∣ling you that St. Brandon, sayled thither, from Ire∣land in lesse then 3. dayes; yet I presume to say, that neither of both your Ho∣nours, in sayling to Ireland, were out of the way;

sure, I beleeue, St. Brandon had a more tedious passage from Ire∣land to Paradise, then by report he had, for as I remember, the same Historian tells me, that he met with that di∣velish Pirate Ju∣das

by the way, and he we know spared not One, tenne thousand times more inno∣cent. But lea∣ving this their Paradise, to them that injoy it, I a∣gaine wish your Honors, the frui∣tion of that Pa∣true

penitent up∣on the Crosse, purchased in a shorter space—This day shalt thou &c. where all your mour∣ning shall be tur∣ned into mirth, your fasting in∣to feasting, your sighing into sing∣ing

Alleluiah, with Him in the highest heauen; which that God in his good time would effectual∣ly accomplish, faithfully prayes.

