



IT hath bene long since the complaint of ve∣rie many, that
those whome they call the Schoolmen and Disputers, haue giuen the studies
of the holie Scriptures, not onely a great stroake, but euen a deathes
wounde. And therfore it will seme wonderfull, it may bee vnto some, that
the custome of disputing touching diuine matters, is retained in these
Churches and Schooles, which are reformed acording to the pure word of
God▪ For to dispute of euery matter (will some say) is
blame-worthie, neither can it be lawfull to call euery thing into question: but
only such mat∣ters, as being doubtfull and vncertaine in their own nature,
may be argued one boath sides, according as the opinions and iudgements of
men do vary and disagree: of which sorte there are many thinges in
Philosophie, which do so moue the mindes of men with a kinde of
probability, that it may be iustly doub∣ted, whether the things be as they
seeme or no. But Diuinitie is grounded vpon such a sure and certain
foundation, that there is no place left therein vnto doubting and
questioning. For he himselfe spake, that is not PYTHAGORAS, but
IEHOVA by his Prophets and Apostles in his word written by them,
tea∣ching  therein, the onely truth of those matters, which
neither eie hath seene, eare hath heard, nor euer enterd into the harte of
man, and which they whome God loueth, and who loue him againe, do obtaine of
the mercifull Lord, not by reasoning, but by beleeuing and leading an holy
life. This reason hath so pre∣uailed, that many godly & graue men, haue
either from their hartes as beeing of this iudgement, or for some other
cause ab∣stained, from this course of disputing touching diuine
matters. For godlines say they, is to bee taught and learned according vnto
the plaine and simple maner of Fishermen, and not by the subtilties of
ARISTOTLE: and that doubting of the A∣CADEMICKES (who as
AVGVSTINE saith) hold that men are to bee without all hope of
finding the truth, beeing an opi∣nion, that maketh men wauering and changeable,
ready to holde any thing, and to beare any face and countenance, is to be
vtterly remoued from the Church: wherunto you may adde as the Apostle
admonisheth vs, that we take heed lest any man spoil vs by philosophy:
neither indeed can it be denied, but that in the very first beginning of the
Church there was a very sore blowe giuen vnto religion, by those who being
swollen vppe by the pride of humaine reasonings, would rather submit
Christ vnto their iudgements, then themselues vnto his maiestie. So that
TERTVLLIAN long since, iustlie named the Philoso∣phers to be the
Patriarches of haeresies. Now in the ages follow∣ing, that wound was not
onely not healed, but made greater and grieuouser, by those who mingling
the Schoole Philosophy with Diuinitie, did make the Ladie and Mistres, to
bee at the commandement of the seruant and handmaide. For the craft of Sathan
was such, that whilest those, who (being otherwise good men) did
endeuour by the light of disputation, to cleare the truth against errors,
they themselues falling into far grea∣ter darknes, drewe others after them.
For why should wee not  so account of those questionarie
maisters as they call them? Whereunto (if vnto any other) that which
AVGVSTINE allegoricallie spake out of the eight Psalme, concerning
curious men may be most fitlie applied. The most earnest and obstinat
studie (saith he,) of all curious men, who seeke vaine and tran∣sitorie
thinges, is like vnto the fishe, that walke through the pathes of the Sea:
the which pathes, doe as soone vanish away and decay, as the water cōmeth
againe together, after it hath giuen place to any that passe or swimme
thorough it. Thus far AVGVSTINE. For what is more curious and more
intricate or brier like, then so many (not so sound as subtil)
questions, di∣uisions, distinctions and solutions of these men, whoe
stand gnawing vpon the bones of argumentes as TERTVLLIAN saith.
Verely that which is set downe in the Fables touching IXION,
rauishing the cloude in stead of IVNO, whence the
CENTAVRES were begotten, who killed one another, may be ve∣rie aptlie
applied vnto these men. For the bare shadow in steed of the solide
truth, being taken holde vpon and apprehended by them, hath altogether drunke
vp, and consumed the iuyce and moisture of godlines, so that there
remaineth nothing for them, but the dry and wythered barke: and it hath brought
forth so many controuersies and diuersities of opinions, which teach and
learne nothing els, but brawles and partes taking, that to recall so many
mindes and contrarie iudgements that deadlie gore one another vnto concord and
the right rule of reason, concord and reason it selfe cannot suffice
and bee able. For as NAZIANZEN sayeth, when as hauing once left
faith, we pretend the force and the abilitie of disputation, wee do no∣thing
els thereby, but blot out the authoritie of the Spirit by questionings. By
the which vnsuccessiue and lamentable issue, wee are earnestly
admonished, to betake our selues from their traine, who vse over
narrowlie and curiouslie to sift matters,  vnto the
assemblie of those, that are godlie and profitable hea∣rers.
But yet this was the falt of these men, who in diuinitie
ob∣serued not that rule. That nothing shoulde bee too much, which is
exceeding profitable in ciuil affaires. For it followeth not, because they
were over curious (which is not to bee com∣mended) that therefore carefull
diligence shoulde bee disliked, or sluggishnes and securitie thought
praise worthie. But holie things as they are to be dealt in with great
iudgment, so they are to be handled with greater pietie: for this latter is
as it wer the soule, the former being as the eie of diuinitie. The orations
of the Prophets, the sermons of Christe, the writings of the A∣postles, and
especiallie the Epistles of PAVL, do containe most sharp and
graue disputations, which can in no wise bee aptlie discussed, but by
the vse of reasoning. Our Sauiour Christ him selfe disputed with the
Doctors, Pharisies, Sadduces, &c. The same did PAVL with the
Iewes, with the Philosophers, with the brethren. The Fathers also
disputed: IRINEVS against the GNOSTICKES, TERTVLLIAN
against the MARCIO∣NITES, ATHANASIVS against the ARRIANES,
NAZI∣ANZEN, CYRIL, THEODORET, HILLARIE, AVGVS∣TINE, and many others,
almost against innumerable haeresies: but so as their disputations
wer not a bare exercise, or a setting forth for a shewe of their witts
for delightes sake: But all of them labored, that their reasonings and
controuersies, should not be so much subtill in shewe, as profitable
indeed.
And disputations saith AVGVSTINE become then
pro∣fitable, if nothing els be considered in them, but the waies of the Lord
which are mercy and truth: and when al deceit, sub∣tiltie, selfe▪loue,
and desire of the victorie is cleane remooued, and when of the contrarie
side, the desire of the truth, the loue and reuerence of Gods maiestie,
ioyned with modestie and sin∣glenes  is vsed therein: So that
whether wee doe louinglie con∣fer with our brethren and friends, our mutuall
reasonings of boath sides, ought to be as it were a Besome, to sweepe
away all errors: or if the aduersaries and Haeretickes be to be conuinced,
(which PAVL requireth of the Pastor,) were neither to seek
contention by the truth, nor victorie by contention, but onely the feare of God
and the edification of our neighbour. And it is a notable saying, which the
same NAZIANZEN hath to this purpose: namely, that it is not any
great matter to be ouer∣come with wordes or in reasoning: but it is a great
and dan∣gerous case to lose the Lorde: and certainely he hath lost the
Lord, as far as lieth in him, who doth make old lies and false∣hoods to
become new sinnes and transgressions, as it is in the auncint Prouerbs
among the Greeks. All christian doctors, then are so to frame and fashion
al their Schollers, that they timely season them with the iuice of these
vertues in such sort, as when afterwardes they shall come abroad from
their priuat studies, vnto any publick calling, they may perpetually retaine
the same. This point do we endeuor to perform according vnto our slender
abilitie, as in all the partes of our callings, so also in the exercise
of disputation, according as we are bounde by the lawes of our Schoole: who
in expresse tearmes do forbidde, that neither curious nor sophisticall
propositions, nor such as containe false doctrine in them be propounded,
and that all wrangling, curiositie, sacrilegious boldenes in corrupting the
word of God, euill contention, and obstinat headines be cleane banished from
our disputations. According vnto which pat∣terne, all those that will
sincearly iudge may perceaue, that these Principles haue bene framed. Now
they are published ac∣cording vnto the example of other most famous
Schooles, that it may appeare by this patterne of wholsome wordes, boath what
is taught in our vniuersitie, and after what manner  the same
is deliuered, (the which point also, is publicklie made knowne, by many other
the writings of our men:) and withall it may be manifested, that we are farre
from the defence of all false and erroneous doctrines, as far as our weake
capacitie is able to vnderstand the truth out of the worde of God alone,
ex∣pounded purelie, and according to the analogie of faith: and that we may
manifest, that as it becommeth honest temperat and sober men, we abhorre
from that stagelike vnseemlines of malepert reuiling, and railing against
those, that haue bin fa∣mous men, both for their godlines and learning,
whose vertues beeing now as dead Lyons, these Hares of our time, or rather
(that I may vse that old word of CATO) these woden Images do
reprochefullie defame. And yet do their railinges and scof∣fings light vpon
themselues. One of this number came out the last mart, from among the
HERDECANIE, who reckoneth vs vp among the ARRIANS,
NESTORIANS, and MAHV∣METANS, of the which crimes, I hope that the
Lord will neuer make vs guiltie, so these Principles doe shewe howe
false and shamefull the same is conuinced to be: Now this fellow hath put
vs in minde of that complaint of IEROME against his vp∣brayders, who
did calumniously slander not onelie his words, but also his very
syllables: being men notwithstanding of that sottish ignorance and
sielines, that they were not able, no not to reuile in their own wordes, but
were faine to borrowe the vnbrideled tongues of those enemies, that had bene
long since buried in the dust. But this honest man shall haue no
worse en∣treatie at our hands for this present time, but that which
PLV∣TARCH sayth, namelie, that it is a seruile thing to be
bound to answer every vaine fellowe. The Lord forgiue him all his
sinnes, and this great iniury also, wherewith he would haue re∣proched vs,
as also we (because we are Christians) doe forgiue him vnfeignedly. Now
vnto this purpose of publishing these  Propositions, is
ioyned another occasion, affoorded by manie godlie and reuerend men, who
hauing seene heere and there some Copies of these thinges, entreated both
others, and also my selfe, to send them some of them: and when as none
of the Printed Coppies were to bee gotten, they caused them to bee written
out for their vses. Amongest whome (right Hono∣rable) I remember that your
Lordship was one. For when you were at Altorfe, & bare with gret
commendations, the office of the honorable Lord gouernor in the Schole of that
famous & honorable Common-wealth of Norinberg, you desired by your
Letters, that I would send vnto you those principles, which we had
discussed and determined since your departure: Which thing also (if
you bee remembred) I performed accordinglie. The same did IONAS
MORAVNS, the most careful ouersee∣er of your studies craue at my
hand, as many others also haue doone: vnto whome, I thinke it was verie
delitesome, to see that web finished, which wee had onely begun, when
they were heere. Nowe as to your selfe, I thought that this worke would be
gratefull and acceptable vnto you, as for many causes, so e∣speciallie in
that, by reading these Principles, you maye call to mind, the endeuours
wherein you haue beene imployed in this studie of the word. For besides
that, you would not haue your self to be wanting in any dutie of godlines
while you were here, you were also an example vnto all others of industrie
and dili∣gence in the Schooles, not onely by hearing, but euen by your godly
and learned disputations. To the end therefore, that we might satisfie your
mind, and the request of others, the Propo∣sitions that haue bene heere
disputed vpon, for the space of som yeares past, are nowe gathered and
brought togeather into one bodie, and placed in that orderly sort, that I
thinke, they may not vnproperlie bee accounted a Methodicall summarie of
di∣uinitie: yet so, as a man may perceaue, both by the things them 
 selues, and also by the forme of speach, that these
thinges were handled in the Schooles: which is spoken, least any man
should require all things to be here exactly done. But whatsoeuer this
worke be, the same (right honorable) is offered and dedicated vnto your
Lordship, not onely in mine owne name, but also, in the name of that
worthie man, M. THEODORE BEZA, who tooke the greatest paines in this
worke: to let you vnderstand, that although, you haue beene this long time
absent, yet your memorie is fresh among vs, as also the remembraunce of
that noble Lord, the Lord IOHN your brother, and of many other the
honorable gentlemen of the nobility of POLAND: of whome, not a few
liued heere in times past, very Christianly and religi∣ouslie: And this I
doe, by reason of the excellent gifts, where∣with God hath endued you, the
which I beseech and pray him, for our Lord Iesus Christs sake to
increase and multiply. Fare you well, from Geneua the tenth of the Kalends of
September. 1586.

