


RIGHT HONOVRABLE,
THE Pope affecting a terrestriall Monarchy, to be exalted above all that is called God, & aspiring to a celestiall Hierarchy, as God to sit in the Temple of God; had never effected the former,
2. Thes. 2.
. if the Pope had not eaten up the Emperour: & might for ever have despaired of the latter, if that Church had not overtopt the Scriptures.
Omnium Bi∣bliothecas u∣nus mihi vide∣tur
12. Tabu∣larum libellus, & authorita∣tis pondere, & utilitatis uber∣tate supera Tul de Orat. l. 1. I am of opinion, saith the O∣ratour, that the little booke of the twelve Tables farre surpasseth all Libraries whatsoever; both for authoritie, and for perfection.
 If the two Testaments had, as they ought to have beene thus accounted of, that Church had never
Is. 14. 14. ascended aboue the heights of the clouds, to be like the most High in her authority: and if that Church had not mounted up so high aboue her owne Spheare, unwritten Traditions had never gained the credite to be compared for authoritie with the written word: and if unwritten Traditions, the pillar of Poperie, had not beene set up, Popery had long ere this fallen to the ground.
The Persian Magi found out a law, that The Kings of Persia might doe what they list; & by this generall law they concluded,
Herodot. in Thaa. That the Persian Monarch might marry his Sister. Soule-cheating Iesuites have likewise found an unwritten law, that whatsoever the Church doth, it must not be questioned; and by this gene∣rall law, they conclude, that a man may eate his God, and kill his King: by this they prohi∣bite the Scriptures, and the Cup in the Sacra∣ment: by this they condemne marriage in some: in a word by this unwritten law, they make new lawes, which shall bring a man to greater perfection then the Scripture can.
 This is that Trojane horse, out of whose bel∣lie there arise these and many more cursed doctrines. This is that sandy foundation of the towre of Babell.
This little, which I bring into the Lords store-house, may serve as a mat∣tocke to digge up this foundation; or as an engine to batter downe this towre. And though it bee but little, yet a little mite may well bee cast into the Lordes treasurie. Among the Heathens (as Pli∣nie writeth) hee that had not frankincense to offer, might offer
milke; and hee that wanted milke, might offer
salt. And in ho∣ly Writ,
Levit. 1.
. hee that had not a
Lambe, might offer turtles, and hee that had not
turtles, might offer two yong pigeons, What∣soever it is, it is the first fruites in this kinde of my labours, and the
Prodromus of this Kingdome which commeth to Your Honour for protection, as the spar∣row sledde for shelter to
Aelian. l. 13. c 31. Zeocrates bo∣some.
It commeth not as an informer, for Your L is
Act. 26. 3. expert in all customes and
 questions which are among us. Nor as a confir∣mer; for no Bariesus, or Iesuite of them all, is able to turne away Sergius Paulus, a prudent
Act. 13. 8. Deputie from the faith. But as an humble suppliant,
1. Craving pardon of this bold presump∣tion. And yet in this I was directed by a
Pindarus. fa∣mous Poet,
, to beginne with a glorious Preface. If then, for the beautifying of the frontispice of this Worke, I have beene too bold to praefixe the name of so great a Vice-Roy, blame not mee, but my director. Neither in this have I beene so bolde as this blinde
Bayard, or proud Iesuite, who durst presume to de∣dicate his Reply unto his sacred Majesty, in which hee assigneth no other lott to any
pag. 490. Protestant whatsoever, but the very pit of hell.
2. Some respect and acceptance of the Worke. As for the Workeman, if any glimpse of Your favourable aspect and countenance shall at any time shine upon him, it is more then hee can deserve. The acceptation of the Worke is the full
 satisfaction of the Workeman; or in the wordes of
Seneca,
Seneca de be∣nefic l. 2. c. 12.
Si gratè hoc, non benefi∣cium, sed officium meum accipias, ejus pensi∣onem solvisti. This acceptation and ap∣probation of it may proove profitable un∣to others, howsoever it bee unto mee, who by Your example, (though the sub∣ject deserve it not) may be drawne to doe the same.
And yet the subject of this little, is great, and deserveth no little respect and regard. If it were a needelesse
Act. 18. 15. question of wordes, or of names, Gallio the Depu∣ty would not regard it: but it is the greatest Question, the ground of all Questions, the foundation of Poperie, not one braunch, but the roote of the Romane superstition, the Master-veyne which feedeth all the rest, the Goliah of Gath, with whom if wee
1. Sam. 17.
. bee able to fight, and to kill him, they confesse they will bee our servants for ever. And in this beholde a sandie foundation, a rot∣ten roote, a veyne bleeding, and a Goliah vanquished.
 All these are nothing to those two Allectives, Your personall indowment, and Your Honourable imployment, which like two attractive Load stones, have drawne it to Your Honourable prote∣ction.
God hath honoured you with grace; this grace being wrought in you by the holy Scri∣ptures, the word of grace, he may haue hope of your gracious acceptance, that laboureth to vindicate the Scriptures from that disgrace, which gracelesse Tradition mongers bring up∣on them.
His Maiestie hath graced you with honor to be under him, and over us the defender of the faith. That faith which you are to defend by the sword, that faith I defend by my pen, namely the faith which was once delivered to the Saints, and is contained in the holy Scrip∣tures.
Stapleton would have had the Duke of Parma,
D. Staplet. E∣pist dedict. before his worke of lusti∣fication. to cut all knots with Alexanders sword, rather then to appease contention with the harpe of Apollo. S.
Augustine would have both the sword and the harpe joyned together, & gi∣veth his reason,
August E¦pist, 8.
Siterrerentur & non doce∣rentur,
 improba dominatio videretur: si docerentur et non terrerentur, vetustate consuetudinis obdura∣rentur. There is no cause to complain of an evil governmēt, for there hath bin more
teaching thē terror: but we have cause to pray, that terror may expell that hard and evill custome, which by teaching will not be removed. The Lord, who hath exalted you above the many
wor∣thies of Israell, grant that
Act. 24. 2 many worthie things may be
done for this Nation by your provi∣dence. In all things God guide You by his Counsell, and after all, receive you into glory.

