



HAuing of long time conceiued a purpose, (my good Lord) to giue some publicke Te∣stimony of my Loue to your Honourable Cit∣ty, the place of my byrth, J began now in the latter end of your Lordships yeare, to consider, that J could ne∣uer haue a fitter opportunity, for the accom∣plishment of my desire. Whereupon, beeing loath to vse any further delay, in letting passe so good an occasion, neere lost already, I was forced in hast, the time so requiring, to looke vp my old Papers, to see if I could finde any thing worthy to present vnto your Lordship. And while I was thus occupied, I bethought my selfe, of that Sermon which heeretofore

I made in the City, when it was newly visited with the late contagious sicknes, being drawn thither at the earnest request of a Worshipful friend. And this J thought the fittest, to pub∣lish at this time, for sundry causes First, to put vs in mind of the manifolde, Gracious, and Fatherly benefites, wherewith God hath bles∣sed vs aboue al the Nations of the Earth, and how we haue abused the same. Secondly, to set before vs the horrible sins wee haue com∣mitted, with our monstrous vnthankfulnesse against his Maiesty. Thirdly, to renew a fresh the remembrāce of his seuere Chastisements, lately, but most iustly inflicted vpon vs which we seeme to haue vtterly forgotten. And last∣ly, to admonish vs, that if neither his blessings nor punishments wil moue vs to repent & a∣mend our liues, hee hath yet more fearefull iudgements, to astonish our rebellious harts, & vtterly to make an end of vs, which though we haue escaped the plague, do still threaten our ruine and destruction. All which points, I had rather should be obserued out of the ser∣mon it selfe, then trouble this place with the repetition therof. The reason why I haue de∣ferred

this vnto the end of your yere, was, be∣cause I had partly heard by generall report, & partly seene with mine owne eyes, how hono∣rably you haue performed your Office, and passed your yeare with as much credit & ap∣plause, as any of your Predecessors, I coulde not but reioyce in your Lordships behalfe, & for a Testimony of my Gratulation, bringe with me this pore present, to the shutting vp of your yeare, not doubting, but your Lord∣ship will take the same in good part.
And thus (honorable, and right Worship∣full) commending this small exercise to your diligent reading, & carefull practise, with my harty Praiers to the Lorde, for the continu∣ance of his blessings vpon your Citty, & that it will please him to replenish the people vn∣der your Gouernment with the knowledge of his heauenly truth, and feruent loue of his holy Gospel, framing their harts in obedience thereunto to their eternal Saluation, I hum∣bly take my leaue. Pontefract, this first of Ia∣nuary, 1607.


