




MADAME,
HAVING receaued commandment frō a dying Freind to publish this Tran∣slation of the life of the Venerable, and holy Suor Maria Maddalena de Patsi, togeather with the Preface that goes before it, vnder such an a∣uow, as I should thinke most fit for such a subiect; I found my self cast vpon the same resolution by duty, which of my selfe I should haue imbraced, out of voluntary election, & affection: in as much

as the thing admitted of no de∣bate, or dispute, but that it must be presented to your Ladiship. For your Ladiship taketh not vp the life of this Great and Admi∣rable Woman vpon trust, since you haue read it in the originall tongue, and by meanes thereof you haue planted, not only in your owne Religious hart, but in the harts also of your own excel∣lent Religious, a most tender, & deere remembrance of her rare vertue. And besides I am in my selfe so much bound to your La∣diship, as that (hauing nothing of myne owne to present as a to∣ken of my true desires to serue you, I account this trust to haue come into my hands very luckily

since it helpes me to paye my debts, without any charge to my conscience, out of another mans goods.
It appeares already, that I need not bring this Holy Womā and your Ladiship acquainted togeather. That which I haue to say of her goeth in the Preface to the Reader. Of your Ladiship I only aske, that you will continue to make her as much your pat∣terne as you may; & I wish that as you were the first of our coūtrey, since the lamentable fall thereof, who made so high Nobility of bloud (as high perhaps as any Subiect in Christendome doth beare) stoope so low to the lure of Euangelicall Pouerty, and o∣ther

perfections: so the eminen∣cy of your Heroicall Example, may againe be able to bring for∣lorne vertue into request. Only I aduise the world, that, vnles it will amend, it come not neere your Ladiship, & the blessed cō∣pany of Religious, which you haue the honour & happines to gouerne. For I know not what re∣ceipt you haue gotten, but I am sure you haue it ther among you, to make Beauty chast, Pouerty commodious, Obedience easy, Vnderstanding humble, and the bitternes of Austerity, not only sauory, but euen sweet. And I be∣seech Iesus you may euer haue it; and that by the intercession of this great Seruant of his, & your

deuotion to her, both your Lad'. selfe, & your whole happy Con∣gregation, may obtaine as full a measure of benediction from his diuine Maiesty, as is cordially desired by

From Collen this 20. of April, 1619.
