


MOst Reuerend, Dutie makes
me bold, euen at my first looking
and leaping out of the dungeon of
Obscuritie, which hitherto had in∣closed
me, to interrupt your more
serious affaires, with the view of
these my labours. It is not their
worth, but your worthinesse that causeth this presumpti∣on.
For to whom should I rather present my first-fruits,
then vnto the High Priest, That hee might shake
them before the Lord, to make them acceptable?
Neither is any meeter to Patronise a Historie of Re∣ligion,
then he, to whose Person Religion giueth, and from
the same mutually receiueth, Patronage. And there∣fore
I, the meanest of Leui's sonnes, doe here offer vnto
your Grace, ASIA, AFRICA, and AMERICA,
and that in their withered and fouler hue of passed



out-worne rites, or present Irreligious Religions; not wa∣shed
with the purer streames of sacred Baptisme.
EVROPE challengeth a roome in this kind by her selfe:
nor would Christian Historie vouchsafe these Stran∣gers
her holy companie, and therefore hath enioyned me a
second Pilgrimage, and Perambulation ouer the World,
to trace her footsteps, and obserue euery where her Plan∣ters,
Corrupters, and Reformers.
Great is this burthen of atwofold World, and requires
both an Atlas and an Hercules too, to vndergoe it. The
newnesse also makes it more difficult, being an enterprise
neuer yet (to my knowledge) by any, in any language, at∣tempted;
conioyning thus Antiquitie and Moderne hi∣story,
in the obseruations of all the rarities of the World,
and especially of that soule of the world, RELIGION.
Yet haue I aduentured, and (I speake it not to boast, but
to excuse my selfe, in so haughtie designes) this my first
Voyage of Discouerie, besides mine owne poore stocke
laide thereon, hath made mee indebted to seuen hundred
Authors, of one or other kind, in I know not how many
hundreds of their Treatises, Epistles, Relations and
Histories, of diuers subiects and Languages, borrowed
by my selfe; besides what (for want of the Authors them∣selues)
I haue taken vpon trust, of other mens goods in
their hands. Wherein had I enioyed that Academicke
leisure,
  
Or the benefits of greater Libraries, or conference with
men more skilful: my Braine might haue yeelded a fairer
issue, a more compleate and better-armed Minerua.
But besides the want of these, the daily cares of my Fa∣mily,



the weekly dueties (in Preaching and Catechising)
of my Ministerie, the grossenesse of the Aire where I
liue, which (some say) makes a duller wit, I am sure, a
sicklier body; maypleade excuse for me. If not,
Clades Authore leuatur,
The World is the weight that presseth me, and my booke
shall haue this praise in the greatest dispraise,
Magnis tamen excidit ausis.
Howsoeuer; I shall thinke my selfe happie in your Gra∣ces
Examination and Censure, if it be not Impietie in me
to offer to intercept, and with interposition of these lines a
while to Eclipse, your Gracious aspect and influence vnto
our Church and State. And though your Grace can∣not,
for more necessarie imployments, and needes not, as
knowing them better alreadie, afford your Precious
time to these things of baser worth: Yet if your Recrea∣tions
shall vouchsafe them as Remembrancers, out of my
labours to refresh yours, I shall bee more then sufficiently
recompenced. Others may hence learne by that most la∣borious,
though not mostlearned argument of Inducti∣on,
two lessons fitting these times, the Vnnaturalnesse
of FACTION and ATHEISME: That law of Na∣ture
hauing written in the practise of all men (as we here
in the particulars doe shew) the profession of some Reli∣gion;
and in that Religion, wheresoeuer any societie of
Priests or Religious persons, are, or haue beene in the
World, no admittance of Paritie; the Angels in Heauen,
Diuels in hell, (as the Royallest of Fathers, the Father
of our Countrie hath pronounced) and all Religions on
Earth, as here we shew, being equally subiect to inequali∣tie,
that is, to the equitie of subordinate Order. And if I liue



to finish the rest, I hope to shew the Paganisme of
Antichristian Poperie, and other Pseudo-Christian he∣resies;
and the Truth of Christianitie as it is now profes∣sed
and established in our Church, vnder the Great
Defender of the Faith: for whose long Raigne, and
your Graces prosperous seruice vnder so Religious a So∣ueraigne,
I heartily pray vnto the King of
Kings, and cheefe Shepheard of our
Soules, IESVS CHRIST.
Nouemb. 5.
1612.

