



MY blusing disabilities haue at length adven∣tured to passe the pikes of censure, vnprovi∣ded of any other armes, or ornaments, then sincere loyaltie, devoted to my King and Countreys ser∣vice; rather then my King and Countrey should be (for want of a timely discovery of those dangers, wherein they haue beene cunningly and intricately en∣tangled) thrust blindfold upon the pikes of forreyne enemies, or the poyniards of domestick traytors. Sooner had these naked raptures visited the world, had this age afforded but an Exo. ▪ 17. Egyptian midwife to forward them. Faine would they haue fluttred abroad the last Parliament, but the supercilious lookes of over-awing greatnesse had so danted these degenerous times, that none durst adventure, to giue wings to their desire. Howsoever, I hope, their flight home, from a forreyne Countrey will not now be unseasonable. The raine was ceas'd, and the windowes of heauen were shutt, when Noah sent forth his returning raven; but the inunda∣tion remayned. All the fabrick falls not, assoone as ever the foundation sinckes: but the mystery of iniqui∣ty runnes on so many wheeles, that it is to be feared,

the removall of one (though it may slacken) can ∣erly hinder the motion. Yet unlesse all be dr∣ed, the danger may be (indeede) partly abated, can not be wholly avoyded. If any censure me for present∣ing so graue a subject, treading in measure; they may consider that the whole book is but an explanation of the Frontis-piece: & such expressions square best with a▪ metricall proportion. As for statelynes of style, my scantling of time permitted me not (had I affected that, more then plainnes, in so serious a matter) to be so refyn'd. Whatsoever the acceptance be, it proceeds from a well meaning hart. And J beseech God, that with the oracles of our Lawes, and ornaments of our state, (especially with him that is the chiefe of both) they may worke the same effects, for the preventing of imminent danger, and providing for the publique safe∣tie, that I desire. Whose consultations that they may haue free proceeding for the establishing such whole∣some Lawes, as may tende to the advancement of Gods glory, his Majesties honour, the Gospells encrease, and the Kingdomet welfare, I will dayly offer up my most earnest supplications before the throne of grace.
Strasborgh Aug. 23. sty. vet.

