



HOw hyghly all England is bounde to your incomparable ma∣iestie for the infinite and manifolde benefites receyued at your most gracious handes from tyme to time without ceasing, euē from the begynning of your most noble raigne: truly no mor∣tal tonge is hable with wordes sufficiently to expresse, or with secret thoughtes of hert worthely to contriue: Certes, it far passeth bothe the sklender capacitie of my wyt, and also ye rude infancy of my tong to do either thone or thother: yea another Cicero or Demosthenes wer not ynough here∣vnto. Wherfore omittinge or rather leauinge to some other the iust Encomye and commendation of your graces most ample dedes, worthy of eternall me∣morie, yet this one thing I dare full well affirme, that amonges all your ma∣iesties deseruinges vpon the christen religion (then which surely nothing can be greater) your highnes neuer did thing more acceptable vnto god, more pro¦fitable to ye auaūcemēt of true christianitie, more displeasaūt to the enemies of the same, & also to your graces enemies then when your maiestie lycenced and wylled the moost sacred Byble conteynyng the vnspotted and lyuely worde of God to be in the Englysh tong set forth to your hyghnes subiectes.
To the setting forth wherof (most gracious & moost redoubted soueraigne lorde) lyke as certeyn men haue neither vndiligētly nor yet vnlernedly traue∣led: So agayn it cannot be denied, but yt some faultes haue escaped their ha∣des. Neither speke I this to depraue or maligne their industrie & paynes takē in this behalf: no rather I think them worthy of no litle praise & thankes for the same, considering what great vtilitie & profit hath redounded to your gra¦ces hole realme by the publysshyng and setting forth therof, although it were not finisshed to the ful absolucion and perfection of the same. For assuredly it is a worke of so great difficultie. I meane so absolutely to translate the hole bible that it be faultlesse, that I feare it can scae be doone or one or two per∣sons, but rather requyreth bothe a deper confarrynge of many lerned wittes togyther, and also a iuster tyme and longer leysure.
Wherfore the premisses wel cōsidered, forasmoch as ye printers herof were very desirous to haue this most sacred volume of the bible comforth as fault lesse & emendatly, as the shortnes of time for the recognising of ye same wold require, they desired me your most hūble servāt for default of a better lerned, diligētly to ouerloke & peruse the hole copy: and in case I shold fynd any no∣table default yt neded correctiō, to amēd the same, according to ye true exēplars Whiche thynge accordyng to my talent I have gladly done.
These therfore my simple lurubraciōs & labours, to who might I better de¦dicate, thē vnto your most excellēt & noble maiestie, yt only authour & grounde nexte God of this so highe a benefite vnto youre graces people, I meane that the holy scripture is communicate vnto the same.
But now though many faultes pchaūce be yet left behind vncastigat, either for lacke of lerning sufficiēt to so great an enterprise, for default of leasure. I trust your maiestie & all other yt shal rede the same, wyll pardon me, consyde∣rynge (as I haue alredy declared) how harde & difficilt a thinge it is, so to set forth this worke, as shal be in al pointes faultles & without reprehension.
And thus I cōmit your most gracious & excellēt maiestie to ye tūciō of ye high∣est, to who be al honour, glory, & prayse, worlde without ende. AMEN.
