



SIR:
THe double title which you may justly chalenge both in the Authour and Translatour of this work, hath made this dedication a matter of necessity, not election. For the former, I dare not seem to instruct that knowledge to which I confesse I owe mine. But for the later, I beseech you give me leave to tell you in publique, what I have never blushed to professe in pri∣vate, of that deep interest which your early favours have purchased in all that I call mine, (except my faults,) such and so many as would have left me highly inexcusa∣ble if I should have entertain'd a thought of offering these my first fruits in this kinde upon any other altar than this. For, as touching my knowledge (if it be any) in the tongues, the common influence of your example, and your benigner aspect upon my meane endeavours made me first able to do something, and the desire of obeying your pleasure willing to doe this. I am bold to call it a worke of obedience, as being first occasioned by some speeches, which, however they proceeded from you, were received by me in the nature of a command: your wish in generall that such a thing were done, my obligations made me construe to an injunction of doing it. This pu me first upon it, and the everent opinion of your judge∣ment of the worke, with the grounded confidence of your future approbation of my pains, sweetned that into a re∣creation, which had otherwise beene a punishment. I will

not here indulge so much to my just ambition of proclai∣ming your virtues, as to insist upon each particular: one∣ly I shall begge leave to bee the weaker echo of the pub∣lique voice of that body over which it hath pleased God to make you the worthie Head, and my selfe, by your meanes, an inferiour member: To say, That we largely enjoy in you what wee shall ever pray for in your Succes∣sours; that your place may ever have as great an orna∣ment for the credit, and as happie an instrument, for the profit of our House: That, of those Royall favours which it pleased their Sacred Majesties to conferre upon us, (and ever blessed be their memorie therefore!) though in all humility we give Them the glory of being the Au∣thours, yet we cannot robbe your pious diligence of the praises due as to a principall procurer. We detract no∣thing from the fountain, when we commend the streams: nor is a benefit lessened by being obtain'd by intercession. The Majestie of Heaven does not ordinarily bestow his blessings without mediation: nor does the intervening of second causes render us lesse ingag'd to the first. To whom I do now, and shall ever, send up my heartie prayers for his choicest blessings upon you and yours: more particu∣larly, (as your present weaknesse now requires me) that Hee would be pleased to grant you a perfect health, and constitution of body answerable to that of your minde, for the greater manifestation of his glorie, the good of his Church, the joy and comfort of you and yours; in which number he desires to be reckoned who here presents him∣selfe & his present pains to your courteous acceptation, as
Queenes Colledge in Oxford April 1. 1638.

