



CAiphas beynge bysshope of that yeare, lyke a blynde prophete (not vnderstandyng what he sayd) prophecied, that it was better to put Christ vnto death, then that all the people shulde perysshe:Io. 11. c he mea∣nyng, that Christ was an heretike, a deceauer of the people, & a de∣stroyer of the lawe, and that it was better therfore to put Christ vn¦to death, thā to suffre hym for to lyue, and to deceaue the people. &c. where in very dede Christ was the true prophete, the true Messias, and the onely true Sauiour of the worlde, sent of his heauenly father to suffre the moste cruell, most shamefull, and most necessary death for our redempcyon: accordyng to ye mea¦nynge of the prophecie truely vnderstonde.
Euen after the same maner ye blynde bysshoppe of Rome, (that blynde Baalam I saye) not vnderstondynge what he dyd, gaue vnto your grace this tytle: Defen∣dour of the fayth, onely bycause your hyghnes suffred your bysshoppes to burne Gods worde the rote of fayth, and to persecute the louers and mynisters of ye same. where in very dede the blynde bysshoppe (though he knewe not what he dyd) pro∣phecied, that by the ryghteous admynistracyon and contynuall diligence of youre grace, the fayth shulde so be defended, that Gods worde the mother of Fayth with the frutes therof, shulde haue his fre course thorowe out all Christendome, but spe∣cyally in your realme.
Yf your hyghnesse now of your pryncely benignite wyll pardon me to compare these two bysshoppes (I meane bysshoppe Caiphas and the bysshoppe of Rome) & theyr prophecies together, I doute not but we shal fynde them agree lyke brethren, though the one be a Iewe and the other a counterfayre Christian. Fyrst, Caiphas prophecied that it was better to put Christ vnto death, then that the people shulde perysshe. The bysshoppe of Rome also, not knowynge what he prophecied, gaue youre grace this tytle: Defendour of the fayth. The trueth of both these prophe∣cies is of the holy goost (as was Baalams prophecie) though they that spake thē, knewe not what they sayd. The trueth of Caiphas prophecie is, that it was neces∣sary for mans saluacyon, that Christ by his death shulde ouercome death, and re∣deme vs. And the trueth of oure Baalams prophecie is,Nume. 24. c. yt your grace in very dede shulde defende the Fayth, Yee euen the true fayth of Christ, no dreames, no fables, no heresie, no papisticall inuencions, but the vncorrupte fayth of Gods most holy worde, which to set forth (praysed be the goodnes of God, and increace youre gracy¦ous purpose) your hyghnes with youre most honorable councell, applyeth all his studye and endeuoure.
These two blynde bysshopes now agree in ye vnderstādyng of theyr prophecies: for Caiphas taketh Christ for an heretike, Oure Balaā taketh the worde of Christ for heresie. Caiphas iudgeth it to be a good dede to put Christ vnto death, that he

shulde not deceaue the people. Oure Balaam calleth defendynge of the fayth, the suppressyng, kepyng secrete, and burnyng of the worde of fayth: lest the lyght there¦of shulde vtter his darknes: lest his owne Decretales & Decrees, his owne lawes and constitucions, his owne statutes and inuencions shulde come to none effecte: lest his intollerable exactions and vsurpacions shulde lose theyr strengthe: lest it shulde be knowen what a thefe and murtherer he is in the cause of Christ, and how haynous a traytoure to God and man in defraudynge all Christen kynges & pryn¦ces of theyr due obedience: lest we youre graces subiectes shulde haue eyes in the worde of God, at the last to spye out his crafty conueyaūce and iuglynges: and lest men shulde se, how sore he and his false Apostles haue deceaued all Christendome, specyally youre noble realme of Englonde.
Thus your grace seyth how brotherly the Iewysh bysshoppe and oure Balaam agree together, not onely in myter and outwarde appearaunce: but as the one per¦secuted the Lorde Iesus in his owne persone, so doth the other persecute his worde and resysteth his holy ordynaunce in the auctorite of his anoynted kynges. For so moche nowe as the worde of God is the onely trueth that dryueth awaye all lyes, and discloseth all iuglyng and disceate, therfore is oure Balaam of Rome so lothe that the scripture shulde be knowē in the mother tonge: lest yf kynges and prynces (specially aboue all other) were exercysed therin, they shulde reclame and chalenge agayne theyr due auctorite, which he falsely hath vsurped so many yeres, and so  tye hym shorter: and lest the people beyng taught by the worde of God, shulde fall from ye false fayned obediēce of hym and his disguysed Apostles, vnto the true obe∣dience commaunded by Gods owne mouthe: as namely, to obey theyr prynce, to o∣bey father and mother. &c. and not to steppe ouer father and mothers bely to enter in to his paynted religions, as his ypocrites teache: For he knoweth well ynough, that yf the cleare Sonne of Gods worde come ones to the heate of the daye, it shal dryue awaye all the foule myst of his deuelysh doctrines. Therfore were it more to the mayntenaunce of Antichristes kyngdome, that the worlde were styll in igno∣raunce and blyndnes, and that the scripture shulde neuer come to lyghte. For the scripture (both in the olde testament and in the new) declareth most aboūdauntly that the office, auctorite and power geuen of God vnto kynges / is in earth aboue all other powers: let them call thē selues Popes, Cardynalles, or what so euer they will,Ro. 13 a the worde of god declareth them (yee and commaundeth them vnder payne of dampnacion) to be obedient vnto the temporall swerde: As in the olde Testament all the Prophetes,Math. 17. d, Tit. 3. a Exod. 22. d. Psal. 81. a. Prestes and Leuites were. And in the new Testament Christ & his Apostles both were obedient them selues, and taught obedience of all men vn∣to theyr prynces ād temporall rulers: which here vnto vs in the worlde present the persone of God, and are called Goddes in the scripture, bycause of the excellēcy of theyr office. And though there were no mo auctorities but the same, to proue the p̄∣eminence of the temporall swerde, Yet by this the scripture declareth playnly, that as there is nothyng aboue God, so is there no man aboue the kynge in his realme but that he onely vnder God is the chefe heade of all the cōgregacyon and church of the same. And in token that this is true, there hath ben of olde antiquite (and is yet vnto this daye) a louynge ceremonye vsed in your realme of Englonde, yt whā your graces subiectes reade your letters, or begynne to talke or comē of your hygh¦nes, they moue theyr bonettes for a signe & token of reuerence vnto your grace, as to their most soueraigne lorde & heade vnder God. which thyng no man vseth to do to eny bysshoppe. wherby (yf oure vnderstondyng were nat blynded) we myght euy¦dently perceaue, that euen very nature teacheth vs the same, that scripture cōmaū∣deth vs: and that lyke as it is agaynst Gods worde that a kynge shulde not be the chefe heade of his people, euen so (I saye) is it agaynst kynde that we shulde knowe any other heade aboue hym vnder God.
And that no prest nor bysshoppe is exempte (nor can be lawfully) from the obedi¦ence of his prynce, the scripture is full both of strayte cōmaundemētes, & practises

of the holyest men. ✚ Aaron was obedient vnto Moses, and called hym his lorde,Nume. 12. b Ios. 4 c 3. Reg. 1. c. 3. Reg. 18. b. Leuit. 18. b. Math. 14. a. though he was his owne brother. Eleasar and Phinas were vnder the obediēce of Iosua. ✚ Nathan the prophete fell downe to the grounde before kynge Dauid, he had his Prynce in such reuerence (He made not the kynge for to kysse his fote as the bysshoppe of Rome maketh Emperours to do) Notwithstondynge he spared not to rebuke hym, and that ryght sharply whan he fell from the worde of God to adultery and manslaughter. For he was not afrayed to reproue hym of his sin¦nes, nomore than Helyas the prophete stode in feare to saye vnto kynge Achab: ✚ It is thou and thy fathers house that trouble Israel, because ye haue forsaken ye commaundementes of the Lorde, and walke after Baal. And as Iohan Baptyste durst saye vnto Kynge Herode: It is not lawful for the to take thy brothers wyfe. But to my purpose I passe ouer innumerable mo ensāples both of the olde Testa∣ment and of the new, for feare lest I be to tedyous vnto your grace. Sūma, in all godly regimentes of olde tyme the kynge and tēporall iudge was obeyed of euery man, and was alwaye vnder God the chefe and suppreme heade of the whole con∣gregacyon, and deposed euen prestes whan he sawe an vrgent cause, as Salomon dyd vnto Abiathar.3. Reg. 2. d. who coulde than stonde agaynst the godly obedience of his prynce (excepte he wolde be at defyaunce with God and all his holy ordinaunces) that were well acquaynted with the holy scripture, which so earnestly cōmendeth vnto euery one of vs the auctorite and power geuen of God vnto kynges and tem∣porall rulers?Exod. 22. d. Ierem. 29. b. Bar. 2 c Math. 17. d, Therfore doth Moses so strately forbyde the Israelites to speake so moche as an euell worde agaynst the prynce of ye people, moche lesse than to diso¦beye hym, or to withstonde hym. Doth not Ieremy the prophete and Baruc also exhorte the people in captiuite, to praye for the prosperous welfare of the kynge of Babilon, and to obeye hym, though he was an infidele? In the new Testament whā oure sauioure Christ (beyng yet fre & Lorde of al kynges & prynces) shewed his obedience in payenge the trybute to oure ensample, ✚ dyd he not a miracle there in puttynge the pece of money in the fysshes mouth (that Peter myght paye the custo¦mer therwith) and all to stablysshe the obedience due vnto prynces? ✚ Dyd not Io¦seph and Mary the mother of our sauiour Christ departe frō Nazareth vnto Beth¦leē, so farre from home, to shewe theyr obedience in payenge the taxe to the prynce?Lu. 2. a And wolde not oure Sauioure be borne in the same obedience?Ro. 13 a ✚ Doth not Paule pronounce hym to resyste God hym selfe, that resysteth the auctorite of his prynce? And (to be shorte) the Apostle Peter dothe not onely stablysshe the obedience vnto prynces and temporall rulers but affirmeth playnly the kynge (and no bysshoppe) to be the chefe heade. Innumerable places mo are there in scripture,1. Petr. 2. b. which bynde vs to the obedience of oure prynce, and declare vnto vs, that no man is nor can be lawfully excepte from the same: but that all the mynisters of Goddes worde are vn¦der the tēporall swerde: & Prynces onely to owe obedience vnto God & his worde.
And where as Anthichrist vnto youre graces tyme dyd thrust his heade into ye imperiall crowne of your hyghnes (as he doth yet with other noble prynces mo) that lerned he of Sathā the authour of pryde, and therin doth he both agaynst the doctryne & also agaynst ye ensample of Christe: whiche because his kyngdome was not of this worlde, medled with no temporal matters, as it is euydent both by his wordes and practyse: Luc. xii. Math. xxvi. Ioh. vi. Ioh. xviii. where he yt hath eyes to se, maye se: & he yt hath eares to heare, maye heare, yt Christes admynistracion was nothyng tēporall, but playne spiritual, as he hym selfe affirmeth & proueth in the fourth chapter of saynt Luke out of the prophete Esay: where all bysshoppes and prestes maye se, how farre theyr byndynge and lowsynge extendeth, and whe¦re in theyr office consisteth, namely in preachynge the Gospell. &c.
wherfore (most gracyous prynce) there is no tonge I thynke, that can fully ex¦presse and declare the vntollerable iniuries, which haue bene done vnto God, to al prynces and to the comynalties of all christen realmes, sence they which shulde be onely the ministers of Gods worde, became lordes of the worlde, and thrust ye true

and iust prynces out of theyr rowmes. whose herte wolde not pitie it (yee euē with lamentacyon) to remember but onely the vntollerable wronge done by that Anty∣christ of Rome vnto youre graces most noble predecessoure kynge Iohn̄? I passe o∣uer his pestilent pykynge of Peter pens out of youre realme: his stealynge awaye of youre money for pardons: benefices and bysshoprykes: his disceauyng of youre subiectes soules with his deuelyshe doctrynes and sectes of his false religions: his bloudsheddyng of so many of your graces people, for bokes of the scripture▪ whose herte wolde not be greued (yee and that out of measure) to call to remēbraūce, how obstinate and disobedient, how presumptuous & stubburne that Antychrist made the bysshoppes of youre realme agaynst your graces noble predecessours in tymes past, as it is manyfest in ye Cronicles? I trust verely there be no suche now within youre realme▪ Yf there be, let them remembre these wordes of scripture: Presump∣tuousnes goeth before destrucciō,Proue. 16▪  & after a proude stomacke there foloweth a fall.
what is now the cause of all these vntollerable and nomore to be suffred abhomi¦nacions? Truely euen the ignoraunce of the scripture of God. For how had it els ben possyble, that such blyndnes shulde haue come in to ye worlde, had not ye lyghte of Gods worde bene extyncte? How coulde men (I saye) haue bene so farre from the true seruyce of God, and from the due obedience of theyr prynce, had not the lawe of God bene clene shut vp, depressed, cast asyde, and put out of remembraunce? As it was afore the tyme of that noble kynge Iosias, and as it hath bene also amonge vs vnto youre graces tyme: by whose most ryghteous admynistracyon (thorowe the mercyfull goodnes of God) it is now founde agayne,4. Re. 22. b. 2. Par. 24. c. ✚ as it was in the dayes of that most vertuous kynge Iosias. And praysed be the father, the sonne, and the holy goost worlde without ende, which so excellently hath endewed youre Prynce¦ly hert with such feruentnes to his honoure, and to the welth of youre louyng sub∣iectes, that I maye ryghtuously (by iust occasyons in youre persone) cōpare youre hyghnes vnto that noble and gracyous kynge, yt lanterne of lyghte amonge pryn¦ces, that feruent protectour and defender of the lawes of God: which cōmaunded straytly (as youre grace doth) that the lawe of God shulde be redde and taught vn¦to all ye people: set the prestes to theyr office in the worde of god: destroyed Idolatry and false ydols: put downe all euell customes and abusyons: set vp the true ho∣noure of God: applyed all his studye and endeuoure to the ryghtuous admynistra¦cyon of the most vncorrupte lawe of God. &c. O what felicite was amonge ye peo∣ple of Ierusalem in his dayes? And what prosperous health both of soule & body foloweth the lyke mynistracion in youre hyghnes, we begynne now (praysed be God) to haue experience.Ierem. 44. d Foras false doctryne is the origenall cause of all euell pla¦ges and destruccyon, so is ye true executynge of the lawe of God ād the preachyng of the same, the mother of all godly prosperite. The onely worde of god (I saye) is the cause of all felicite,Sapie. 7. b. it bryngeth all goodnes with it, it bryngeth lernynge, it gē∣dreth vnderstondynge, it causeth good workes, it maketh chyldren of obedience, breuely, it teacheth all estates theyr office and duety. Seynge then that the scrip∣ture of God teacheth vs euery thynge sufficiently, both what we oughte to do, and what we oughte to leaue vndone: whome we are bounde to obey, and whome we shulde not obeye: therfore (I saye) it causeth all prosperite, and setteth euery thyng in frame: and where it is taught and knowen, it lyghteneth all darkenesses, cōfor∣teth all sory hertes, leaueth no poore man vnhelped, suffreth nothynge amysse vna¦mended, letteth no prynce be disobeyed, permytteth no heresie to be preached: but refourmeth all thinges, amēdeth that is amysse, and setteth euery thynge in order. And why? because it is geuen by the inspiracyon of God, therfore is it euer bryn∣gynge profyte and frute, by teachynge, by improuynge, by amendynge and refour∣myng all thē yt wyl receaue it,2. Tim. 3. b. to make them parfecte & mete vnto all good workes.
Considerynge now (most gracyous prynce) the inestimable treasure, frute & pro¦sperite euerlastynge, that God geueth with his worde, and trustynge in his infy∣nite goodnes that he wolde brynge my symple and rude laboure herin to good ef∣fecte,

therfore as the holy goost moued other mē to do the cost herof, so was I bol∣dened in God, to laboure in the same. Agayne, consyderynge youre Imperiall ma¦iestye not onely to be my naturall soueraigne liege Lorde & chefe heade of ye church of Englōde, but also the true defender and maynteyner of Gods lawes, I thought it my dutye and to belonge vnto my allegiaunce, whan I had translated this Bible, not onely to dedicate this translacyon vnto youre hyghnesse, but wholy to commytte it vnto the same: to the intent that yf any thynge therin be translated a∣mysse (for in many thynges we fayle, euen whan we thynke so be sure) it may stōde in youre graces handes, to correcte it, to amende it, to improue it, yee & cleane to reiecte it, yf youre godly wysdome shall thynke it necessary. And as I do with all humblenes submitte myne vnderstondynge and my poore translacyon vnto ye spi∣rite of trueth in your grace, so make I this protestacyon (hauyng God to recorde in my cōscience) that I haue nether wrested nor altered so moch as one worde for the mayntenaūce of any maner of secte: but haue with a cleare conscience purely & faythfully translated this out of fyue sundry interpreters, hauyng onely the many¦fest trueth of the scripture before myne eyes: Trustynge in the goodnes of God, that it shalbe vnto his worshippe: quietnes and tranquilite vnto your hyghnes: a perfecte stablyshment of all Gods ordynaunces within youre graces domynion: a generall comforte to all Christen hertes, and a continuall thankfulnesse both of olde and yonge vnto god, and to youre grace, for beynge oure Moses, and for brin¦gynge vs out of this olde Egypte from the cruell handes of our spirituall Pharao For where were the Iewes (by ten thousande partes) so moch bounde vnto Kynge Dauid, for subduynge of greate Goliath and all theyr enemyes,1. Reg. 17. g. as we are to your grace, for delyuerynge vs out of oure olde Babylonycall captiuyte? For yt which delyueraunce and victory I beseke oure onely medyatoure Iesus Christ, to make soch meanes for vs vnto his heauenly father, yt we neuer be vnthankfull vnto him ner vnto youre grace: but that we euer increace in the feare of him, in obe∣dience vnto your hyghnesse, in loue vnfayned vnto oure negh¦bours: and in all vertue that commeth of God. To whom for ye defendynge of his blessed wor¦de (by your graces most right∣full administracyon) be honoure and thankes, glory and dominyon, worlde without ende, Amen.

