



THe beginning of Schooles and Vniuersities (right Ho∣norable) in the Church of God, doth shew that they were planted to bee 1. Sam. 19.2▪ 2. King. 2.5. & 4.8. nurse∣ries of Prophets: who, being instructed in the truth of his word, might deliuer it to men; and lighten, as starres, the darkenesse of the world with the beames of it. But it hath come to passe by deuises of the dragon,Reue. 1.. whose taile drew the third part of the starres of heauen, & cast them to the earth, that they haue bene turned into seminaries of false Pro∣phets: to maintaine errours and the power of darkenesse, against the light and truth of Christ.

The primitiue Church had experience hereof in them Act. 6. ver. 9. of the Synagogue of Libertines, and Cyrenians, who disputed with Steuen. A lesson for the faithfull in the ages to folow, that they should not thinke it strange, or be dismayed, if Schooles & Vniuer∣sities of men professing wisedome were posses∣sed of folie, and sought to peruert the straight wayes of the Lord. The consideration whereof, as it was needefull for our predecessours, when Rabbines of the Iewes, Philosophers of the Hea∣thēs, Sorbonists amōg Christians, being seduced themselues, seduced others: so haue the Semina∣ries of our English students (erected by the Pope of late at Rome and Rhemes) made it needeful also for vs at this day. The more: how much the nerer their dealings do come to those of the Syna∣gogue of Libertines & Cyrenians. For as they defen∣ded ver. 14. the Iewish opinions receiued by tradition from their Fathers: so do the Seminaries the Po∣pish superstitions. As they did pretend the care of religion, ver. 11. of Moses, and God, the law, & the Tem∣ple: so do the Seminaries, of the Catholike faith, the Scriptures, and the Church. As the meanes they vsed were sclanders of Steuen, ver. 13. that he spake blasphemous wordes against the holy place, and the law: so do the Seminaries charge vs with reuol∣ting

from the holy Church, and corrupting the Scriptures. I am not worthie to be compared with the least ofthe seruants of God, who li∣ued at that time, in which he powred the giftes of his holy spirit from heauen so a∣boundantly. Howbeit, as it pleased him to rayse Steuen to dispute with some of the Iewish Synagogue: so hath he vouchsafed me of this fauour, that I should be called to conferre with certaine ofthe Popish Seminaries. Of whom, one, contented to proceede farther therin then the rest; by writing, not by word onely: hath giuen occasion ofthis, which here I publish. Wherein how indifferent∣ly he hath bene dealt with: himselfe hath decla∣red. My conscience, for mine owne part, beareth me witnesse that I haue endeuored to defend the cause of the same truth, with the same purpose, by the same principles, & groūds, that Act. 7.2. Steuē did. Wishing from my hart, (if so it please God,) that it may preuaile more with English Papists, then Steuens speech did with the Iewish Priests. But ready (by his grace) to endure their spite, ifthey hate me for telling them the truth, as the Iewes did him. Now, sith Luke, who penned the story of Steuen, sent it to Act. 1.1. Theophilus, Luk. 1.3. most noble The∣ophilus: I haue bene the bolder to present my con∣ference

vnto you, right Honorable; aduanced, in state, to be of the most noble; in minde, a Theo∣philus, and louer ofthe truth. Your benefites both publikely to our Vniuersitie, in maintenance of our priuileges; & priuately to me ward, a mem∣ber thereof: haue bound me to offer this testifi∣caton of a thankefull minde. And sith it hath bene (I know) a greefe vnto you, that the Popish Synagogue hath drawne . 23.1. proselytes thence: I thought it most meete that the labours spent with one so withdrawne, and printed to re∣claime them who are gon, if may bee, or at least to stay them who are not gon, should bring him the salue whom the sore had touched neerest. Which moueth me withall to beseech your Ho∣nour, that, as you haue begoon, so you will go forward in being carefull for our nurserie: that they, who haue the charge of husbanding it, may fense it and dresse it faithfully and wisely; that neither the wild boare of the forest, nor o∣ther vermin may anoy it; that Ezek. 47.12. the fruites of the trees therof may serue for meate, & the leaues for me∣dicine, through waters running out of the sanctuarie; and Gen. 3.9. the tree of life may grow in the middest of it, as in the garden of Eden planted by the Lord. So shall you leaue a most worthie monument of

a noble Theophilus: the reward whereof shall folow from God, Psal. 6▪ . who will render to euery man ac∣cording to his workes; the remēbrance shall rest in the Christian Church and common wealth ofEngland, to your eternall praise throughout all posteritie. The Lord of his mercie blesse you with continuall increase of the graces of his ho∣ly spirite: specially of that, 1. Ti. ▪ which hath the promise of this life, and of the life to come, to your endlesse comfort, through Iesu Christ the Lord of life. At London, the eighteenth of Iuly. 1584.

