



Worthy Sir,
IT is a Prouerbe no more common than true, that True Loue will creepe where it cannot goe; as appeares in that fact of Mary Magdalen, who wishing well to the person of Christ, shee washeth his feet; yea, it will be∣gin below at the ground, to ascend vp to the top; as Zacheus when hee climbed the figtree to get the sight of Christ. Loue to Christ will shew it selfe by a loue of his Church, and ascend to him in heauen, by speaking a good word for

it, and seeking and procuring her welfare here on earth.Matth. 28. Jt is that spirituall Temple to which Christ hath promised his perpetuall presence during the time of this world. And it is the duty of euery Christian, so farre as in him lyeth, to further the building thereof, according to that of Chrysostome Hom. in Act. 8. , that euery one of the faithfull ought to edifie the Church. Jf they can doe nought else, yet let them imitate Da∣uids patterne, Psal. 51.18. And hearken to his precept, Psal. 122.6 Sutable to the practice of the Jewes in the building of the Temple; some did giue one gift, some another, some did labour in hewing, squaring, others in bringing, and bearing them to the raising vp of the structure. But especially is the burden of this work layed vpon the shoulders of Ministers, which like Bezaleel and Aholiab, are fitted and furni∣shed of God for this worke, and haue the cure and care thereof committed to them. Now the Lord hath not giuen to all alike, but to some more, some lesse; yet all for the good of his Church. To the Author of this Treatise he had giuen more than ordinary gifts, as his works al∣ready

published do shew. He had the honor to be a wise Master-builder, to be like those builders in Nehem. 4.17. with one hand he wrought in the worke, with the other he held a weapon, as you shall see apparently in this Treatise, wher∣in hee doth confirme professed truths, and con∣fute opposite errors. Jt pleased God, whilest he was liuing, to make him an happy instrument of staying many in the Church, who were ready to fall from it, and to gaine many in, which by se∣ducements had been drawne away. And as God gaue such successe to his Labours when he was aliue; So, J trust, they shall find the same, though he be dead, if read with a single eye. I dare assure you it is not the Treatise of any o∣ther, but of him, whose labours need not feare the Light. Jt was perfected by his owne hand in his life, and giuen to a neare, and deare friend of mine, who rests in the Lord, who had hoped to haue published it in his life, but being called a∣way ere he could effect it, J haue endeauoured to helpe to bring it forth to light, and J doe here dedicate it to your Worship, whose worthy care and earnest desire I know is, so farre as in you lieth, to further the good of the Church. J might

say much of your worth to the world, but those that doe not know you, will thinke I flatter; those that doe, will thinke J say too little. But what Salomon saith of the vertuous woman, Prou. 31. vlt. so I of you, your owne workes praise you in the gates. And as Boaz said to Ruth,Ruth 3.11. so may J of you, changing the words a little; All the people, not onely of that place where you liue, and I was borne, but all the peo∣ple of that country know you to be a vertuous Gentleman. Go on, good Sir, stand for God, and he will stand for you, honor him, and as he hath, so he will honour; and what seruice J may doe you by my prayers, or otherwise, you shall be as∣sured of. The Lord blesse you and yours, and all your ample and religious kindred.

