



WORTHY LADY,
IT is the promise and worde of the Al∣mighty,1 Sam. 2.30. that he will honor them that ho∣nour him, which extendeth it selfe not onely to the time of this life, but to the time of death and after also: this promise it is our part and duty to verifie and make good to, and vpon the heads of all the people of God, both
 in the time of their life, death, and after∣wards, that so God may be found true in his promise, and to doe what hee hath sayd; This is done of vs, as by many wayes, so by keeping and being meanes of preserving an honorable memoriall of them, that therein they may for ever be blessed and honorable, according to that of Salomon,Pro. 10.7. The memoriall of the iust shall be bles∣sed,Psal. 112.6. and that of the Prophet David, The righ∣teous shall be had in everlasting remembrance, The consideration whereof mooved mee to thinke and consider with my selfe, how I might performe this duty to the Au∣thour of this following Sermon, which whilest I thought vpon, I saw no better meanes to performe it by, then by publish∣ing some of his worthy labours, that so (by,Heb. 11.4. and in them) he might liue and speake, though he bee dead, as it is sayd of Abell, and be had in everlasting and honourable remembrance to the ende of the worlde. For which ende, next to Gods glory, and the good of his Church, I haue published (for the present) two Sermons given me, by his Executors, which I found in his Study,
 perfected, and written with his own hand faire and legible, aboue any thing which yet I find of his, as if he had purposed them for the Presse, and had fitted them there∣vnto: one of which Sermons is this fol∣lowing, which I make bolde to offer to the view of the World, vnder the protecti∣on of your Ladiship. It needeth not a Let∣ter or Epistle of Recommendation from me or any other, it is able enough, and will speake for it selfe, both for Method and Matter, wherein, I dare say, as the Text is Methodically, genuinely, and naturally handled, so the matter is worthy and ex∣cellent, and divers passages therein not or∣dinary, and no wonder, seeing it is the worke of a skilfull Workeman, who was more then ordinarily gifted from God, and fitted for the Worke of the Ministery, which the Lord appoynted him vnto. The reason why I attempt the perfor∣mance of this Dutie first to him, is this, be∣cause he was one that loved me dearely in his life time, yea, honoured me much by his high esteeme, & reverent speech to all, of me, and his countenancing and incou∣raging
 me in the worke of my Ministery, for the space of nine yeares last past; during all which time, I exercised my Ministery in his charge, with great approbation from him, and comfort to him, as he often con∣fessed; so that I had reason to be first in this worke, and (lege talionis) to honour him that honoured me I haue made bolde, and beene moved to Dedicate this Sermon to your Ladiship for two reasons especially, first, because of that honourable esteeme and respect, which, I know, is seated in your religious heart, to all the faithfull Ministers of God, and was to the Author of this Ser∣mon in particular and speciall, whereupon I perswade my selfe, that you will esteeme and respect a Fatherles childe of his, now tendered vnto you, by me, (a friend to the dead and the living) and affoord it all the countenance you can, by kinde receiuing of it, and other wayes, as you would haue done to the Author of it, whom you oft desired to haue bin familiarly acquainted with, and to haue entertained, as you long haue done, and still doe, many of Gods faithfull Ministers and Servants. The se∣cond
 reason is, that I might take occasion hereby, publiquely to acknowledge my vnfained thankfulnesse to your Ladiship, for all the kindnesses, you haue shewed and done to me and mine.
This I thought to haue acknowledged long before this time, by publishing some worke of my owne, and dedicating it to your Ladiship, but haue hitherto kept back, for divers reasons known to my selfe, not∣withstanding, continuing my resolution so to doe, if God will and permit life and opportunity. Having thus rendred my rea∣sons why I dedicate this little worke to your Ladyship, I beseech you accept them for excuse of my boldnes in so doing, and accept this worke as the labour, yea the childe of a faithfull servant of God, and one that put vp many a hearty prayer to God for you, especially considering, it will requite all the countenance you can shew it, by the good which (through Gods bles∣sing) it will doe to your Soule, which I heartily wish to your Ladyship, and all that shall reade it, from him that is able with the showers of his grace to make it fruit∣full
 to you and them.Pro. 10.22. His blessing onely maketh rich both for Soule and Body; without his blessing wee Preach, and Print, and the people heare and reade, in vaine. To him that is the onely true God, one in Essence, three in Person, I doe, and dayly will, commend your Ladyship, in my dayly prayers, for attaynement of all needefull blessings for Soule and body in this life, and eternall Glory in the world to come, through our Lord Iesus Christ; In whom

