



Most gracious Soueraigne:
THose that are sup∣prest and helpelesse are commonly silent, wishing that the common ill in al sort might be with their particular misfor∣tunes: which dispo∣sition, as it is vn∣charitable in all men, so would it be in me more dogge-like then man-like, to bite the stone that strooke me: (to wit) the borrowed autho∣ritie of my Soueragne misinformed, seeing their armes and hands that flang it, are most of them al∣ready rotten. For I must confesse it euer, that they are debts, and not discontentments, that your Ma∣iesty hath laid vpon me; the debts and obligation of a friendlesse aduersity, farre more payable in all Kinds, then those of the prosperous: All which, nor

the least of them, though I cannot discharge, I may yet endeauour it.
And notwithstanding my restraint hath re∣trenched all wayes, as well the wayes of labour and will, as of all other imployments, yet hath is left with me my cogitations, then which I haue nothing else to offer on the Altar of my Loue.
Of those (most gracious Soueraigne) I haue vsed some part in the following dispute, betweene a Coun∣sellour of Estate, and a Iustice of Peace, the one dis∣swading, the other perswading the calling of a Par∣liament. In all which, since the Norman Conquest (at the least so many as Histories haue gathered) I haue in some things in the following Dialogue pre∣sented your Maiestie with the contentions and suc∣cesses.
Some things there are, and those of the greatest, which because they ought first to be resolued on, I thought fit to range them in the front of the rest, to the end your Maiestie may be pleased to examine your owne great and Princely heart of their accep∣tance, or refusall.
The first is, that supposition, that your Maie∣sties Subiects giue nothing but with adiunction of their own interests, interlacing in one and the same act your Maiesties reliefe, and their owne liberties; not that your Maiesties pietie was euer suspected, but because the best Princes are euer the least iea∣lous, your Maiestie iudging others by your selfe, who haue abused your Maiesties trust. The fear'd continuance of the like abuse may perswade the pro∣uision.

But this caution, how euer it seemeth at first sight, your Maiesty shall perceiue by many ex∣amples following but friuolous. The bonds of Sub∣iects to their Kings should alwayes be wrought out of Iron, the bonds of Kings vnto Subiects but with Cobwebs.
This it is (most renowned Soueraigne) that this trafficke of assurances hath beene often vrged, of which, if the Conditions had beene easie, our Kings haue as easily kept them; if hard and preiudiciall, either to their honours or estates, the Creditours haue beene paid their debts with their owne pre∣sumption.
For all binding of a King by Law vpon the ad∣uantage of his necessitie, makes the breach it selfe lawfull in a King. His Charters and all other in∣struments being no other then the suruiuing witnes∣ses of vnconstrained will: Princeps non subijcitur nisi sua voluntate libera, mero moto & certa Scientia: Necessary words in all the grants of a King witnessing that the same grants were giuen freely and knowingly.
The second resolution will rest in your Maiesty leauing the new impositions, all Monopolies, and other grieuances of the people to the consideration of the House; Prouided, that your Maiesties reue∣nue be not abated, which if your Maiesty shall refuse, it is thought that the disputes will last long, and the issues will be doubtfull: And on the contrary, if your Maiesty vouchsafe it, it may perchance be stiled a yeelding, which seemeth by the sound to braue the Regalty.
But (most excellent Prince) what other is it to th'eares of the wise, but as the sound of a trumpet, hauing blasted forth a false Alarme, becomes but common ayre? Shall the head yeeld to the feet? certainly it ought, when they are grieued; for wis∣dome will rather regard the commodity, then obiect the disgrace, seeing if the feet lye in fetters, the head cannot be freed, and where the feet feele but their owne paines, the head doth not onely suffer by participation, but withall by consideration of the euill.
Certainly, the point of honour well weighed hath nothing in it to euen the ballance, for by your Ma∣iesties fauour, your Maiesty doth not yeeld either to any person, or to any power, but to a dispute onely, in which the Proposition and Minor proue nothing without a conclusion, which no other person or power can make, but a Maiesty: yea, this in Henry the third his time was called a wisedome incomparable. For, the King raised againe, recouers his authority: For, being in that extremity as hee was driuen with the Queene and his Children, Cum Abbatibus & Prioribus saris homilibus hospitia quaerere & prandia: For the rest, may it please your Maiesty to consider that there can nothing befall your Ma∣iesty in matters of affaires more vnfortunately then the summons of a Parliament, with ill successe: A dishonour so perswasiue and aduenturous as it will not onely finde arguments; but it will take the lea∣ding of all enemies that shall offer themselues against your Maiesties estate.
Le labourin de la paurete ne saict poinct de breuct: of which dangerous disease in Princes, the remedy doth chiefly consist in the loue of the people, which how it may be had and held, no man knowes better then your Maiesty; how to loose it, all men know, and know that it is lost by nothing more then by the defence of others in wrong doing. The onely motiues of mischances that euer came to Kings of this Land since the Conquest.
It is onely loue (most renowned Soueraigne) must prepare the way for your Maiesties following desires. It is loue which obeyes, which suffers, which giues, which stickes at nothing: which Loue, as well of your Maiesties people, as the loue of God to your Maiesty, that it may alwayes hold shall be the con∣tinuall prayers of your Maiesties most humble vassall,

