




outline of shield


THree words in one escouchion displaying three vertues in one man, towards God godlinesse, to his countrey charitie, and goodnesse to thee, Deo, patriae, tibi, to God, his countrey, and to thee, doth Maister Lambert dedicate his booke. Which inuention of his▪ sorting well with my desire, though my desert be farre short of his, I will, God illing, in this act of dedicating this wothlesse worke of mine, try my skill how I
 can vse his instrument, contenting my selfe, as welt I may, to be his second. First, Deo, to God, as to my author, I the writer dedicate these my labours, my selfe, my whole life, and all my actions as God shall give grace. And this dedication brancheth it selfe out two wayes. Hallclu-iah, the dedication of praise, and Ho∣sanna, the dedication of prayer. It becometh vs well in all humilitie with thanks and praise to dedicate our workes to God, we being there∣unto instructed by nature it selfe. All riuers pay tribute vnto the Ocean, thereby acknow∣ledging their head, because the sea filleth them all, and supplieth all their wants: so must all soules give praise vnto God, acknowledging in him the fountaine of their essence or being, and the well of their being and doing well. Nam de plenitudine eius omnes bibimus, Of his fulnesse we all haue drunke: all our wants are supplied from him, all our diseases are cu∣red in him, al our goodnes is procured through him, all our life is guided by him, all our hap∣pinesse and saluation cometh of him, Omne datum, &c. Fuery good giuing and eueric perfect gift is from aboue, & cometh down from the father of lights. This alwayes with all thankfulnesse we do acknowledge, most mightle, most mercifull, most glorious God
 and Father. And this is our Hallelu-iah, our dedication of praise vnto the Lord. Our Ho∣sanna, our dedication of prayer, is Ana Do∣mine, Salua obsecro; Ana Domine, da suc∣cessum obsecro: Prosper thy king O Lord, O Lord prosper thy kingdome here with vs: pros∣per euery word and worke tending to the ad∣uancing of thy kingdome, our king, thy Christ, our Lord and God. Prosper O Lord this word and worke of me thine vnworthy seruant, that being of it selfe but granum, a very small thing in it selfe, but a graine, it may through thee be made semen, a seed, that is, of an esfectual qua∣litie, where it is but of a contemptible quanti∣tie. And blesse the growth of this seed by being present with vs, as thou hast bene with thy for∣mer seruants of old, that euery one of vs, know∣ing thee to be the chiefe and true husbandman, may pray and say vnto thee: Let my wordes O Lord drop as the raine, and my speech distill as the deaw: as the showre vpon the herbes, and as the great raine vpon the grasse: so let thy do∣ctrine in my mouth make fruitfull the hearts of all that heare it. Thus doth praise and prayer commend this cause vnto the Lord. In the next place, next vnto God, is the Church of God; which being a vine will afford a shadow to such as gather grapes; being an house ministreth a
 couering to the Ministers that be vnder her roofe; and being the mother of vs all, doth cha∣ritably accept the meanest offerings and deuo∣tion of the meanest of vs all. These be the argu∣ments that assure me, that albeit, as in the ma∣teriall tabernacle, so likewise in the spirituall building of the spirituall temple, some bring gold, that is, workes of greater moment, others bring siluer, things of brighter and finer shew, others bring brasse, matter of more strength, and others there be that bring blew silke, pur∣ple, scarlet, and fine linnen, that is, daintie de∣vices, delectable, curious, and costly: yet is it my hope still, that my poore endcuors, my home∣ly stuffe, whether haire or skins, or whatsoever else they shall be thought to be, will serue for some vse or purpose in the Church: and my willing mind to do good (though attended but a little, and extended in effect but to a few) shall not be condemned, though it deserue but slenderly to be commended. First in all our a∣ctios is God to be remebred, next the Church, thirdly some principall man in the Church, and lastly the good of every common Christian in this case is to be intended. The third point therefore is two fold: Tibi, to thee the patron of my paines, and Tibi to thee the reader of my bookes: the reading also being different, the
 one requiring an Emphasis, and the other in∣cluding an Antithesis. First Emphatics, and principaliter, emphatically and principally, putting a difference betweene the protector and the partner, betweene a father and a friend. Tibi to thee thou painfull pillar, and stout stā∣derd bearer of the Church: tibi to thee thou chiefi prelate of this our prouince: tibi to thee thou most famous Bishop of a most fertile coun∣trey and faithsull people: tibi to thee, to thee, I say, thou reuerend father, the learned Bishop of worthie Worcester, to thee I commend and dedicate these whatsoeuer labours of mine, la∣bouring much in my mind, how to make known vnto the world, and your Lordship, how much, aswel in the behalfe of my poore Church, whose case Itender as mine owne, as also in regard of my wretched selfe, formerly beyond all deserts fauoured, I stand in all dutie bound to honour your Lordship: but I have bene too forgetful of my dutie herein. I do also confesse my weake∣nesse and vnworthinesse herein: and even this is one of the degrees of happinesse: primus foeli∣citatis gradus est non delinquere, secundus delicta agnoscere; it is the first and chiefest point of happinesse not to offend, the second is, to acknowledge our offences; saith S. Cyprian. Now therefore as a faithfull messenger of a
 gratefull mind, Tibi to thee I send this sun∣burnt child of mine, it hath the maintenance of truth from the father of goodnesse; O let it, let it haue the countenance of authoritie from your fatherly goodnesse. This Tibi to thee is with difference and with preheminence: there is another without difference, and without ex∣ception: for he that publisheth any thing can forbid none, but committeth his writings indif∣ferently vnto all without any exception at all. Tibi to thee that art learned, or art vnlear∣ned: Tibi to thee that art godly, or art vngod∣ly, Tibi to thee that art good, or art bad: to thee that art sound of heart, or art not sound: Tibi to thee, that louest learning, and Tiburn to thee that louest not learning: Tibi to thee, that hast money, and Tibi to thee, that hast it not: Tibi to thee that buyest, and Tibi to thee that borrowest this booke: Tibi to thee, that passest by, and Tibi to thee, that comest in▪ to euery one seuerally sparing none, but pluc∣king them secretly by the sleeues: Tibi to thee belogeth to harken vnto the doctrine of truth. Tibi to thee that printest, that they may be sold: to thee that sellest, that they my be bought; to thee that buyest, that thou maist read; to thee that readest, that thou maist vn∣derstand; to thee that vnderstandest, that thou
 maist beleeue▪ to thee that beleeuest, that thou maist practise; to thee that practisest, that thou maist continue: to thee that printest, sellest▪ buyest, readest, vnderstandest, eleeuest, pra∣ctisest, continuest, and perseuerest in the word of truth, is this worke of truth committed. And thus we commit all to God, our selues with all. God saue England, and the King▪ and people thereof: God blesse Worcester, and the Bishop thereof: God send vs all his grace. Suckley in Worcestershire:  Nouemb. the 6. Anno Dom. 1604.

