



FOR your Honors many Honorable and friendlie partes, I haue hitherto on∣ly returned promises, and nowe for answere of both your aduentures, I haue sent you a bundle of papers which I haue deuided be∣twene your Lo.& Sr Robert Cecyl in these two re∣spectes chiefly: First for that it is reason, that wastful factors, when they haue consumed such stockes as they had in trust, doe yeeld some cullor for the same in their account, secondly for that I am assured, that whatsoeuer shalbe done, or written by me, shall neede

a double protection and defence. The triall that I had of both your loues, when I was left of all, but of ma∣lice and reuenge, makes me still prejume that you wil be pleased (knowing what little power I had to per∣forme ought, and the great aduantage of for war∣nedenemies) to answeare that out of knowledge, which others shall but obiect out of malice. In my more happy times as I did especially honour you both, so I found that your loues sought me out in the darkest shadow of aduersitie, and the same af∣fection which accompanied my better fortune, sored not away from me in my manie miseries: all which though I cannot requite, yet I shal euer acknowledge: and the great debt which I haue no power to pay, I can doe no more for a time but confesse to be due. It is true that as my errors were great, so they haue yeel∣ded verie grieuous effects, and if ought might haue beene deferued in fomer times to haue counterpoysed anie part of offences, the frute thereof (as it see∣meth) was long before fallen from the tree, and the dead stocke onely remained. I did therefore euen in deadstocke onely remained. I did therefore euen in the winter of my life, vndertake these trauels, fitter for bodies lesse blasted with mis-fortunes, for men of greater abilitie, and for mindes of better incourage∣ment, that thereby if it were possible I might recouer but the moderation of excesse, and the least tast of the

greatest plentie formerly possessed. If I had knowen other way to win, if I had imagined how greater ad∣uentures might haue regained, if I coulde conceiue what farther meanes I might yet vse, but even to ap∣pease so powerefull displeasure, I would not doubt but for one yeare more to hold fast my soule in my teeth, til it were performed. Of that little remaine I had, I haue wasted in effect all herein, I haue undergone many constructions, I haue beene accompanyed with many sorrows, with labor, hunger, heat, sicknesse, & peril: It appeareth notwithstand that I made no other bra∣uado of going to the sea, then was ment, and that I was neither hidden in cornwell, or else where, as was supposed. They haue grosly belied me, that foreiudged that I would rather become a seruant to the Spanish king, thē return, & the rest were much mistaken, who woulde haue perswaded, that I was too easeful & sen¦suall to vndertake a iorney of so great trauel. But, if what I haue done receiue the gratious construction of a painful pilgrimage, and purchase the least remissi∣on, I shal thinke all too little, and that there were wanting to the rest, many miseries: But if both the times past, the present, and what may be in the fu∣ture, doe all by one graine of gall continue in an e∣ternall distast, I doe not then knowe whether I should bewaile my selfe either for my too much trauel

and expence, or condemne my selfe for doing lesse then that, which can deserue nothing. From my selfe I haue deserued no thankes, for I am returned a beg∣ger, and withered, but that I might haue bettred my poore estate, it shall appeare by the following dis∣course, if I had not onely respected her Maiesties future Honor, and riches. It became not the former fortune in which I once liued, to goe iourneys of pico∣rie, and it had sorted ill with the offices of Honor, which by her maiesties grace, I hold this day in Eng∣land, to run from Cape to Cape, & from place to place, for the pillage of ordinarie prizes. Many yeares since, I had knowledge by relatiō, of that mighty, rich, and beawtifull Empier of Guiana, and of that great and Golden Citie, which the spanyards call El Do∣rado, and the naturals Manoa, which Citie was conquered, reedified, and inlarged by a gonger sonne of Guainacapa Emperor of Peru, at such time as Francisco Pazaro and others conquered the saide Empire, from his two elder brethren Guascar, and Atabalipa, both then contending for the same, the one being fauoured by the Oreiones of Cuzco, the other by the people of Caximalca. I sent my seruant Iacob VVhiddon the yeer before, to get knowledge of the passages, and I had some light from Captaine Parker sometime my seruant, and nowe attending

on your Lo. that such a place there was to the south∣ward of the great bay of Charuas, or Guanipa: but I found that it was 600. miles farther off, then they supposed, and manie other impediments to them vnknowne and vnheard. After I had displan∣ted Don Anthonio de Berreo, who was vpon the same enterprize, leauing my ships at Trinedado, at the port called Curiapan, I wandred 400. miles, in∣to the said countrey by land and riuer: the particulers I will leaue to the following discourse. The countrey hath more quantity of Gold by manifolde, then the best partes of the Indies, or Peru: All the most of the kings of the borders are already become her Maiesties vassals: & seeme to desire nothing more then her Maiesties protection and the returne of the English nation. It hath another grounde and assu∣rance of riches & glory, then the voiages of the west Indies, & an easier way to inuade the best parts ther¦of, then by the common course. The king of Spaine is not so impouerished by taking 3 or 4 port townes in America as we suppose, neither are the riches of Pe∣ru, or Nueua Espania so left by the seaside, as it can be easily washt away, with a great flood, or springtide, or left drie vpon the sandes on a lowe ebbe. The port townes are few and poore in respect of the rest within the land, and are of little defence, and are onely rich

When the fleets are to receiue the treasure for spaine: And we might thinke the spanyards verie simple, haueing so many horses and slaues, that if they could not vpon two daies warning, carrie all the Golde they haue into the land, and farre enough from the reach of our footmen, especiallie the Indies being (as it for the most part) so mountainous, so full of woods, riuers, and marishes. In the port townes of the prouince of Vensuello, as Cumana, Coro, and S. Iago (where of Coro and S. Iago were taken by Captaine Preston and Cumana and S. Iosephus by vs) we found not the value of one riall of plate in either: but the Cities of Barquasimeta, Valentia, S. Sebastian, Cororo, S. Lucia, Alleguna, Mare∣cabo, and Truxillo, are not so easely inuaded: nei∣ther doth the burning of those on the coast impouerish the king of spayne anie one Ducket, and if we sacke the riuer of Hache, S. Marta, and Cartagena, which are the portes of Nueuo reyno and Popay∣an. There are besides within the land which are in∣deede rich and populus, the townes and Cities of Me∣rida, Lagrita, S. Christofero, the great Cities of Pampelone, S. Fede Bogota, Tunia and Mozo where the Esmeralds are founde, the townes and Cities of Morequito, velis, la villa de Leua, Palma, vnda ā Angustura, the greate Citie

of Timana, Tocaima, S. Aguila, Pasto, Iuago, the great citie of Popaian it selfe, Los Remedios, and the rest. If we take the ports and villages with∣in the bay Vraba in the kingdom or riuers of Da∣riena, and Caribana, the cities and townes of S. Iuan de Roydas, of Cassaris, of Antiocha, Car∣ramanta, Cali, and Auserma haue gold enough to pay the King part, and are not easily inuaded by the way of the Ocean, or if Nombre de Dios and Pa∣nama be taken in the prouince of Castillo de oro, and the villages vpon the riuers of Cenu and Cha∣gre peru hath besides those and besides the magnifi∣cent cities of Quito and Lima so manie Ilands, ports, Cities, and mines, as if I should name thē with the rest it would seeme incredible to the reader: of all which because I haue writen a particular treatise of the west Indies, I will omit their repetition at this time, seing that in the saide treatise I haue anatomi∣zed the rest of the sea townes as well of Nicaragna, Iucata, Nueua Espanna, and the Ilands, as those of the Inland, and by what meanes thy maybe beste inuaded, as farre as any meane Iudgement can com∣prehend. But I hope it shall appeare that there is a way found to answere euerie mans longing, a better Indies for her maiestie then the King of Spaine hath any, which if it shall please her highness to vndertake,

I shall most willingly end the rest of my daies in fol∣lowing the same: If it be left to the spoyle and sac∣kage of common persons, if the loue and seruice of so many nations be despised, so great riches, and so migh∣tie an Empyre refused, I hopē her Maiesty will yet take my humble desire and my labour therein in gra∣cious part, which if it had not beene in respect of her highnes future honor & riches, I could haue laid hāds and ransomed many of the kings & Cassiqui of the Country, & have had a reasonable proportion of gold for their redemption: But I haue chosen rather to beare the burthen of pouertie, then reproch, & rather to endure a second trauel & the chaunces therof, thē to haue defaced an enterprise of so great assurance, vntill I knew whether it pleased God to put a dis∣position in her princely and royall heart eyther to fol∣low or foreflow the same: I wil therefore leaue it to his ordinance that hath onely power in al thinges, and do humbly pray that your honors wil excuse such errors, as without the defence of art, ouer run in euery part, the following discourse, in which I haue neither stu∣died phrase, forme, nor fashion, and that you will be pleased to estceme me as your owne (thought ouer dear∣ly bought) and I shall euer remained ready to doe you all honour and service.
W: R.
