



MAster Doctor, and you the rest, my louing friends. It is no insolete nor vnwarrantable course, for men to be publishers of the Labours of o∣thers, and to haue a hand in bring∣ing them forth into the view of the world, and that after the death of the Authors of them, if we ei∣ther consider the examples of the seruants of God in holy writ; as first of the men of Hezekiah, concerning diuers of Solomons Prouerbes Inscript. cap. 25. Prouerb.; secondly of Solomon, or some other, concerning the words of Ager Inscript. cap. 30. Prouerb.; and thirdly, of Solomon

himselfe, concerning the words and counsell of his Mo∣ther to him Inscript. cap. 31 Prouerb.: Or, if we consider the practise of holy men in all ages, both ancient and moderne, as, to instance in the writings of that late and worthy seruant of God Mr. Perkins,Vide Aben. Ez∣ra. Mercer. Iun. Cartw. Iansen. Muff. in hos locos. how many of them are extant, to his neuer dying fame? and yet most of them published by others after his death, as is plainely to be seene, if we looke but in the Ti∣tle-pages of most of them: Wherein those worthies did (as it were) the office of spirituall Midwiues in helping such children to birth: And, had it not beene great detriment to the Church of God, present, and to come, and great pitty that such goodly children should haue bin brought to the birth, and there haue perished for want of some to helpe to bring them forth? Vpon consideration of this that hath beene said. I haue afforded my helpe to the bringing forth of this ensuing Treatise, a worthy and excellent worke, of a learned and faithfull seruant of God (not long since de∣ceased) well knowne to you and me. The excellency of it wil appeare, first if the particulars therin intreated of, be but generally considered; as first, the spirituall Communion or coniunction that is betwixt God and the faithfull. Se∣condly, the bond of this coniunction, the loue of God. Thirdly, the ground of this coniunction, Christ Iesus. Fourthly, the speciall interest the faithfull haue in him, and he in them. Fiftly, the certainty of the spirituall safety of Gods children amidst all dangers, and against al commers. Sixtly, the assurance the faithfull haue, and may haue, in this life, of Gods loue, and so of saluation. Seauenthly, the Christian mans bearing of himselfe vp in, and against all danger, vpon this assurance, with a declaration and disco∣uery of diuers of our enemies, and what they can doe a∣gainst vs: If these be not excellent theames, I know not what are. Secondly, the excellency of this worke will ap∣peare if the strict and yet plaine and easie methode which is vsed therein, be considered, which will make it delight∣full to euery one that readeth it, methode being to the

matter spoken and vttered, as fashion to apparell, forme to building, and as Pictures of Siluer to Apples of Gold,Prouerb. 25.11. which make much to the lustre and beauty of the Apples, and cause them to be delightfull to, and to be much de∣sired, of the beholders. Thirdly, the excellency of this Treatise will appeare, if we consider the seasonablenesse of its birth: It is borne, and commeth forth in due time; For it entreateth at large of the afflictions & dangers to which the faithfull are, and may be, subiect in this world, and fur∣nisheth them with matter of support, in, and against them all. And when, or in what time could this Argument bee more seasonable then now, and at this time, wherein the Church and people of God are in such distresse, hazard, and danger, and the destroying Angell of God is so abroad in many places of the world, and all places almost filled with warres, and rumors of warres, and who knoweth when these things shall end? Fourthly, the excellency of this Treatise will appeare, if we consider the fitnesse of, and the enablements wherewith this man was enabled to write and speake of this Subiect, which were very great and ma∣ny, whether we consider the endowments of Learning, na∣ture, grace, or experience; for besides the three former, he was a man experienced in afflictions, being then, when he studied, writ, and preached these following Sermons, and for the space of many yeares before, a man of many trou∣bles, and of greiuous, and of heauy afflictions, by which (through the gracious blessing and worke of Gods spirit) he was made (as holyer and better, so) fitter to write and speake of the nature, kindes▪ degrees, and effects of trou∣bles and afflictions, and of what they can doe, and of the supports in them, & against them. For, as euery man is best able to speake, and discourse of that profession, and the Mysteries thereof, of which he is Nauita de ventis, de tauris narrat arator, enumerat miles vulnera, pastor oues. Propert., so is that man that is, and hath beene long a man of troubles, fittest to write and speake of them, and of all things belonging to them. That this man was, (both then when he writ, and spake

these Sermons, and had beene for long time before) a man of troubles, and heauy afflictions, besides the testimony of all that knew him, his owne words (which I finde written with his owne hand in his booke, by way of Preface to these following Sermons) doe plainely shew, his words are these: After a heauy burthen, of many heauy infirmi∣ties, and sore afflictions, and hideous temptations, long endured, and still continuing vpon me, I am come forth once againe to speake in this place, not in any sence of strength recouered, nor yet in any liuely hope of any abi∣lity to goe through with this great worke, but onely in o∣bedience to Gods commandement, who hath now brought mee, I know not how, vnto this seruice, and in faith alone. This Treatise (excellent as aforesaid in so many respects) I haue beene mooued to Dedicate to you Mr. Doctor, and to you the rest of my louing friends, for three reasons. First, because I conceiue that it doth more properly belong vnto you, then to any other, for, to whom should it belong, if not to you, Mr. Doctor, who succeed the Author of it in his pastorall charge? whereby you may see how & with what kinde of nourishment, he fed his, now your people: And to what people doth it more properly belong, then to you my louing friends, for whom it was first conceiued, studyed, penned, and preached? Se∣condly, that I might manifest my intire loue and hearty wel-wishing to you all, amongst whom I haue exercised my Ministery for the space of nine yeares last past, and still doe by the mercy of God. Thirdly, that I might bee a meanes of further knitting, and continuing you in vnfai∣ned loue one towards another, by ioyning you together in this Dedication of this worke, whom God hath, by his speciall prouidence, ioyned together in that neere band of relation, of Pastor and people. That this may be, and that you, and all others to whom this Treatise shall come, may gaine, as much spirituall good, as the Author, in stu∣dying, penning, and preaching, and I in publishing desire,

I doe, and will pray to him that is the God of loue, and the giuer of all good things, and that through him who is the Sonne of his loue, and the meanes and way of all good things to vs, euen the Lord Iesus,

