



HONOVRABLE SIR,
THough Nihili ad om∣ne nullaest proportio, there is no proportion betweene such a No∣thing as this, and the All of your all-deseruing fauours to∣wards mee; yet because the Moralist tells me, that where onely the qualitie
of the affection, and not the quantitie of the present is to bee attended, Modicum non differt à magno: it skilles not, bee the present great or small. And, Testes inhabiles tunc admittuntur, cùm ali∣oquì veritas haberi nequit, say the Lawyers: Witnesses lesse sufficient are admitted, when the truth cannot with∣out them be sufficiently tried; J will not once question your kinde and fauourable construction of this either little Modi∣cum of my loue, or insufficient witnesse of the truth of my affection towards you, to whom (vnlesse I would bee impudently bashfull) I cannot but ingenuously con∣fesse, that whatsoeuer is within the sphere of my actiuitie, hath long since been deseruedly due.
Hauing therfore pssed this Sermon for a Souldiour to fight against the Ro∣mish
Judas, the Priests and Jesuites, who are euer likeIer. 2.24. Jeremies wilde Asse, great with foale, and so the fitter to bee pursued, I know not vnder whose colours it should rather serue than yours; both because the many sweet influences of your fauours haue taken such hold and handfast of me, that though by the Ciuil Law, Ecclesiae res vltra triennium lo∣cari non possunt, Church-liuings can∣not be let forth for more than three yeers, yet by the Law of Ciuilitie, my selfe a Church-man, am bound to let and set my selfe to your seruice for euer; as also be∣cause you haue vowed your Knights ser∣uice to the defense of our Head-Cap∣taine Christ, against his and our Head-enemie the Pope, the Muster-master of the Priests and Jesuites: a sort of Ro∣manists, of whom I would wee might
not truly say whatCor. Tacit. Tacitus sometimes said of the Roman Augurs, Hoc ge∣nus hominum semper vetabitur, sem∣per tamen in Ciuitate retinebitur. They will euer be forbidden, yet will this Land of ours neuer be rid of them. To put by many other their matchlesse, more than Machiauellian Practises both at home and abroad, hee that shall but looke into their practise of the Pow∣der-plot, which I haue made the Sub∣iectum adaequatum of this Sermon, it cannot but resolue his heart (if truly honest) into that poeticall furie, Odero, si potero: si non, inuitus amabo. J know their cunning to be such, that they will disclaime what they cannot excuse, and rather than stand burdened with so foule a crime, disburden themselues of it what they may, by terming it the rashc Ouid.
attempt of certaine vnfortunate Gen∣tlemen, whom yet they account in no∣thing so much vnfortunate, as that it was not their fortune to speede in that dis∣mall enterprise. Howbeit, J verily be∣leeue, that had they sped, it would haue extorted teares from the Priests and Ie∣suites their taske-masters; teares, not of sorrow, but of ioy, such as Caesar shedde when Pompeys head was brought be∣fore him.
I trust, my loyaltie to my most graci∣ous Soueraigne, will excuse my presump∣tion, that I suffer my pen to trauell in the same path afterThe Bi∣shop of Lincolne. The Deane of Christ. church. two of the most bright and orient Lights of our Church, after whose haruest I am farre vnworthie to gleane: and my loue to your honourable selfe obtaine my pardon for entitling you to these my poore trauels: for whom,
as for my most honorable Lord and Ma∣ster your Father, the most noble Foster-father of the whole Clergie, with each branch and sprig of so noble a Root, my praier is and euer shall be to God:
Michael Serinius in antiquitat.Stet Domus haec donec fluctus Formica marinos,
Ebibat, & totum Testudo perambulet orbem.
Vntill a little-little Ant
Shall drinke the brackish Sea-waues dry;
And a Snaile compasse all the world,
Stand may that noble milie.

