



WORTHY SIR;
I Must acknowledge my selfe to haue long run vpon the score; so long, till Vsura superat sortē; the interest of your loue exceeds the principall of my abilities: all which (if they be ought) you may therfore challenge as due debt, and arrest them to bee continually at your seruice.
Yet rather than I will shew my selfe a right bank-rupt, most vnkinde to him that hath best deserued, and play off so kinde a Credi∣tour with Non sum soluendo; I will grow to a faire and honest composition, and pay you (as I may) though it be but Vnciatim.
O that I could truly say with that seruant in theMat. 18 26. Gospel! Sir, haue patience with me, and I will pay you all.
ButBernar. exonerando me magis onero; The more J labour to requite, the more J ob∣lige my selfe. For what doe J now but Ver∣suram soluere, borrow both of your pati∣ence, and protection to cleare the debt of your former fauours?
Ʋery likely that while J thus launch forth into the deep, and cast my nette vpon the face of the waters, it will fare with me as with o∣ther fisher-men, who among many fish meet with some Carps and if (by chance) they alight vpon a sturdy Iack, there is great tug betwixt them, whether they shall catch the Jack, or the Jack them. But in this case J am of Seneca's resolution;Senec. epist. 59. Cupio, si fieri potest, proitijs auribus quid senti∣am, dicere; sin minus, dicam & iratis. And yet I hope without breach of charity too.
Gloss. in∣terlin. Charitas ad saluandum violenta est.
What allowance soeuer it shall find abroad, it humbly craues your fauourable acceptance at home: yea, it also presumes, that because it is your infant (for, but for you, it had ne∣uer seene light) it shall also be heire of your fauour; Nato filio nata portio. And that becauseMarsil. Ficin. in e∣pist. Mercurius ante omnes stel∣las Phoebo semper est domesticus; Your self, who are learned Suprasortem supra∣vulgarem, will gladly patronise the digni∣tie of Diuines, which is the maine matter of this Sermon;
A matter (if any other) very materiall & necessary for these daies, because as a spice of all other diseases attends vpon the ague; and, Ad ignorationem elenchi reduci possunt omnes paralogismi: So the con∣tempt and slender regard of Gods Ministers is the matter and mother of all other enormi∣ties,
which so plentifully reigne in this irre∣gular age of ours.
Whatsoeuer it is else, it is the Votoria ta∣bula of my loue consecrated to the Temple of your Honor, which shall daily be frequen∣ted with my praiers vnto God; That as you, and your honourable good Lady are here Gemini in terra caro vna; so hereafter ye may be for euer Gemini in coelo, sydus vnum: And that both the hopefull and hoped fruits of both your bodies may bee as truly heires of both your virtues, as your self are of the manifold graces and blessings of your most honoured and honour-worthy Fa∣ther, whose vnworthy, but most obseruant seruant J am, and hartilie ioy to be.
And, as Coelum quietem suam sorti∣tur in motu; So in continuance of these my humble and hartie praiers vnto God for you, and yours, J shall euer rest

