



THE VVorthinesse of a certaine boke, lately
set furth in the name of M. IeVVel, doth in
England perchaunse, make it to be pretious
Vnto many, but Vnto Vs that are in these
partes of beyond the Seas, the Raritie only thereof,
gaue a Price and Value Vnto it. Inso much that
receiuing one of them for my selfe, two monthes
(at the least) after they had bene abrode in Eng∣lande,
I could not keepe the whole altogeather to
my selfe, but was faine to diuide it in the middle.
And yet there was no losse therein, because a frind
was gratified with that halfe whiche I mighte
spare, and the other remaining with me woulde
keepe me so long occupied, Vntill both of Vs might
hainge partes one with the other, and I (if I
thoughte good) continue my reading forwarde
as I had begon without any Interruption or stay
at all, But I savv such geare and such store therof,
in the one halfe only, that I had litle mind to goe
through the other. And now that diuiding of
the Fooke into tvvo partes vvhich the Rarietie
thereof occasioned me to make not altogeather so
vvillingly, but that I could haue vvished it better,
that same novv fell out so happely and agreably to



my purpose, that although I might consider and
see, vvhat stuffing vvere in the vvhole, yet, of free
choise and for good causes, I vvould meddle vvith
no more then the halfe. And truly, to choose
vvho can let me, except some such vnreasonable▪
Heretike as taketh all freevvill avvay, frō a man▪
Mary to choose any one vvay, of tvvo that may be
taken, that may be reproued in the Chooser, ex∣cept
the causes vvhich he folovved, be alovvable.
In the seeking of vvhich, least any man should ex∣tend
his vvit so much, that by long discoursing he
should make it the lesser and vveaker, and ima∣gine
vvith himselfe, vpon Secrete Conferences,
Policies, Conclusions and Orders made a∣mong
the Catholikes, for the ansvvering of their
Aduersaries: I vvill therefore shortly and faith∣fully
tell them my selfe.
First in foure Articles only, vvhich occupy vvel
nere halfe the Reply, I foūd so much mater vvorth
the briefe noting, that it vvould fully serue to the
making of a iust boke. Concerning then the
qualitie of those thinges, it vvas so corrupt and
infectuous, that it required some present and spedy
preseruatiue against it. I prouided also that
the reader should not be vvearied through any lōg
processe or discourse. Furthermore, if M, Ievvel
himself, in this vacation and leisure of his vntill



D, Harding come vpon him againe, or if any other
of the right Iannizers in deede vvhich haue fled
from the Catholike faith, vvould make me an An∣svver:
I thought good so to measure out my Booke
vnto them, that they should not put the faulte in
the greatnesse therof, vvhen they do not in conue∣nient
time say their minde vnto me for it. Byside
this, the chiefe poyntes vvhich I did minde to
speake of are such, that if I vvould haue perused
the vvhole Reply, yet I should haue brought but
more Examples only to the prouing of those my
Obiections against M. Ievvel, vvhich already are
declared by inough and sufficient. And to Con∣clude
I say only BEWARE OF M. IE∣WEL,
that is, I shevv good causes to the Indif∣ferent
Reader, vvherfore he should try him thrise,
before he trust him once: Other are comming,
vvhich shall bring him to more ieobardy, & strike
directly at that crafty head of his, as if they should
say, NOW M. IEWEL BEWARE.
Other causes therefore contrary to these, vvho
so euer shall name, he shall not expound my intent
and meaning, but open his ovvne euil minde and
suspitions. And I trust, as these seemed probable
inough vnto me, vvherefore I might and shoulde
ather certaine thinges (vvhat I vvould my selfe)
out of M. Ievvels boke, and dispose them as I haue



done, so may any Reasonable man be content vvith
this, vvhich for his vvarning sake I haue noted and
neuer think that M. Ievvel is not touched because
euery Article of his is not by me discussed: Or
that, for all this vvhich yet is said, he must not be
mistrusted, because euery line and sentence of his
boke is not Ansvvered.
For euery man, as he is vvel disposed, so may
he doe: and vvhat so euer vvay, close or Open, fre∣quented
or Solitary, Short or Long, Direct for∣vvard,
or about, Easy or Intricate, vvhat so euer
vvay be taken, if vve come to one end, and meete
togeather in the discouering of Craft or Heresye,
the cause of the Catholikes is the stronger, the
hartes of the Protestantes may be the fainter.
Some one (perchaunse) hath a patient minde
to folovve M. Ievvel, Sentence by Sentence: An
other vvill not be bound to goe after him vppon
euery trifeling Occasion, but leauing bymatters
and impertinent, gathereth out his Sense and con∣futeth
it: Some againe chooseth one Speciall Ar∣ticle
out, and spedely Ansvvereth it, An other
is not content vvith so sevv as one or tvvo, and
therefore is longer a doing. There is that thin∣keth
it inough to Iustifye the vntruthes that D.
Harding is charged vvithall. That seemeth not



inough to an other, but he noteth M. Ievvel for his
plaine lies, and them out of measure. VVhat shall
I say more of other? My selfe haue folovved an
order much different from any the forsaid, and no
doubt, but an other may come after all that is hi∣therto
reckened, and finde more matter againste
M. Ievvel vvith a peculiar disposition thereof.
Let the vvay therefore, vvhich any man ta∣keth
be neuer condemned, but the end to vvhich
he bringeth processes, let that be considered.
M. Ievvel (I speake it vvithout flattery) hath
a Rare gift in vvryting, he must not be proude of
it. He ventereth so boldlye, he fighteth so o∣penly,
and is armed so singlely, that if tvventye
Catholikes should at one time encountre vvith
him, no one shoulde neede to strike in the
same place that an other dothe, nor faile so to
strike him that his credite and cause shoulde be
vvounded. Yet, to them that stand a farre of
from the sight of the mater, he is harnessed so fine∣ly,
he handeleth his vveapon so cunninglye, he
chaungeth from one hand to an other so readely,
yea shrinketh and geaueth backe so Artificiallye,
that he may vvell seeme to haue done a greate
Acte, and to make it doubtfull at the least, vvho
hath the victorie.


And so concerning these tvvo poyntes, because
of the first, I may lavvfully take my vantage: And
though in most places I leaue him vntouched, in o∣ther
yet, (except he be vnsensible) I doe inough to
make him feele it. Then because of the second, I
geue thee (Indifferent Reader) lavvfull vvarning,
that of all men that euer hitherto haue vvryten,
he is the most Bragging, Deceitfull and Impudent.
Hovv true this is, it shall appeere by my profes:
And the profes hovv ready they are, it is euident in
this present Treatise, and shall further appeere by
an other vvhich is furth cumming. Concerning
this vvhich is Printed:
In the first boke therof, I haue brought into a
short Table or Sum, (as it vvere) the State of the
Question conteined in euery of the foure first Ar∣ticles:
The Art of M. Ievvel, in sauing himself from
Subscription in euery one: And the Issue of the Cō∣trouersy,
vpō vvhich a more direct Ansvver is to be
required, and more Iust reply to be inferred. And in
perusing of this part, it vvill be quickly seene, vvhe∣ther
I slaunder M. Ievvel, in charging him vvith
Shifting, Falsifing, Corrupting, and Desperate
handeling of such matters as come against him,
Or no.
In the second boke, I come to more particular



poyntes, And declare in seuerall Chapters, by most
manifest Examples:
That he hath ouercharged his Boke vvith Com∣mon 
Places, needlesse, but harmelesse.
That he starteth into Digressions, Impure and 
frutelesse.
That he troubleth Consciencies vvith other Cō∣mon 
places so frutelesse, that they vvill make them
faithlesse.
That he peruerteth D. Hardinges meaning.
That he disgraceth his Authorities.
That he vvrangleth vvith him.
That he dissimbleth or Butteth vvith him.
That he refelleth one Trueth by an other.
That he reporteth of him very vncourteously,
By all vvhich Euidences, if it be not sufficiently
proued, that he is a man of little Modesty, Truthe
and Conscience, I vvill shortly set furth a thirde
boke against him. In vvhich, the abusing of sundry
Doctours and vvryters Authorities, to the mainte∣nance
of his falseheade and Heresy, &c. shalbe so
plainly exemplified, that (I trust) it vvill be consi∣dered
as a true and profitable Conclusion: BE∣VVARE
OF M. IEVVEL.
But novv, after all these paines taken, some∣times
gladly, sometimes patientlye, but alvvayes
faithfully and that to this end, that Truthe might



be knovven, And falsehead detected, And that the
nevve Doctrine of the late Gospell might, either
best of all be forsaken, or els be better examined:
Are there none or very fevve, that vvill take the
paines to reade our Bookes? Or if there be,
that vvould gladly reade them, or vvith in∣differencye
iudge of them, is it not lavvfull to
bring some in for thē? VVhat haue the Catholikes
done of late, so vnnaturally, or vnreasonablye,
that from hencefurth they must vvryte no more
against the Chalenger? Or feare, that if they
doe vvryte, the Vates shall be searched vvhich
bring in the Bookes, and the Bookes not exami∣ned,
that bring in the Argumentes? Is it for our
person sake or our cause sake that vve are so ex∣cluded?
Is the place from vvhence vve vvryte, or
the matter vvhyche vve vvryte, cōdemned of you.
It is obiected vnto vs, that we are yonge
Dyuines. The Obiection vvere good if vve fo∣lovved
the deuises of our ovvne heades, and not the
lerned Commentaries of most Auncient Fathers.
But novv the person is young, the Conclusion is old.
And againe, the youngest dyuine emong vs that
haue vvryten, might fiue yeres sense, haue proceded
(vvithout Grace asking) and haue gone for a Do∣ctour
(if it had so liked him) in any of this Ages
heresies for any exception that vvoulde haue bene



made, against his Age or lerning. Not only as Do∣ctours
are made in the Country abrode, vvhere he
that can Read best, Or say vvithout Eoke most Or
Rovvle in Termes most fast, Or Rayle (in deede)
most loud, is Created a Doctour for his labour: but
as Doctors allso are made at these daies in Vniuer∣sities
by Disputing, Ansvvering and Grace taking.
But vve are not the wisest of all the Ca∣tholikes.
VVe may borovv then of our ovvn Com∣pany,
and neuer be in your daunger for lending vs
any. And yet that alone vvhich vve haue, is not so
simple but vve are able vvel to perceiue, vvher the
best of your Arguments faileth.
But we are the disconted of Louane.
If Louane it selfe be contented vvith vs, the Testi∣mony
of such an Vniuersitie, should be no reproche
vnto vs. As again, vvho cā blame any Catholike in
all the vvorld, for misliking the {pro}cedings of heresy?
It vvil be said we are fugitiues. VVe are
not of that kinde, of the vvhich it is vvrytten,
Fugit nemine persequente,Prou. 28 he fleeth
when no man pursueth him. Again, vve
are not fled so far yet, as Geneua is. Nor fled in hart
or behauiour from the Catholike Faith of all chri∣stendome,
Or from one heresy vnto an other.
And further it vvil be obiected, we liue in disor∣der.
In dede vve liue not vnder an hedor vvardē,



depriued of our Collegies, vvithout any our fault
against the Statutes: neither are there here such
Offices, Charges, Romes, or Places Vacant, by ta∣king
of vvhich the persons vvhich in England ful∣filled
the like very vvorshipfully and vertuouslye,
might declare hovv they be able to rule thē selues,
and also to kepe other in Order: yet vve liue vnder
the Rule of the holy Commaundementes of God,
and the approued Canōs of the Catholike Church,
And the lavvdable Customes or policies of the pla∣ces
where vve remaine.
And further yet, vve shall be saide to wryte
for corrupte and priuate gaine.
But vve are not (vve trust) so il frynded that
vve neede it, or so il disposed that vve minde it.
Againe, they vvhich haue forsaken great and sure
liuinges in England, of one, tvvo, or three hundred
pound yerely, they thought not (I beleue) to set vp
a shoppe beyond sea, and by making of nevv bokes,
and selling them for x. pence, or xij. pence a peece to
reare vp both Priuate and Corrupt gaine vnto
themselues.
To be short, we shalbe accompted vn∣naturall,
vvhether for sauing our head, vvhen
a blovv is comming at it? Or, for leauing our Cō∣modities
vtterly? Or chainging of the lesse for



the Greater? Or for Louing and Fearing of God
more then Man? Some are so kind to their Coū∣try
that rather then abide the lack of it, they care
not hovv farre they goe from God. And there haue
ben in times past some so faithfull to their Princes,
that (vvhether in Sport or Ernest) they haue said
it, he is not worthy of the fauoure of his
Prince, that would sticke to go to Hell for
his Prince. But he beleued, perchaunse there
vvas no Hell at all. And so night venter boldlye,
vvhere (by his iudgment) there vvas no daunger.
Othervvise if he had so much light of Eaithe, as to
confesse an Hel, and yet so great blindnesse of Affe∣ction,
as to loue any Creature so much, that he
vvould cast avvay his ovvne soule for euer the {pro}ppre∣ly
vvas vnnaturall, and his saying is Intolerable.
As for vs, God be mercifull, and geaue vs the
Grace to loue him best, nay to loue him vvithout
comparison. And after him to loue them best,
vvhich come nighest vnto him, either by Image
of Vertue, or Similitude of Povver and Office, eue∣ry
one yet in his degree and place.
But all these Obiections (I suppose) are Perso∣nal,
and may be made either of Idle heades for
their fantasy, or by Aduersaries, for some Anger,
Or of Gentlemen merchantes for their pleasure, or
of men right vvorshipfull, vpon sad reporte made



vnto them. But yet, vvhat is any of these vnto the
question: whether in the six hundred yeares
after Christ, there wer any Sole Receauing
or Receiuing vnder both kinds: And so furth
in any other of the Challengers Articles? nothing
at all vndoubtedly. For be they true, be they false,
(because vve vvil not spend much time about it,)
they concerne priuate mennes Conditions, and not
the Catholike Religion. And they are (as it vvere)
a spotted Cote vpon a Reasonable mannes backe,
but they proue not, that he hath no Reason at all
vvhich vveareth the Cote. VVherfore it becometh
not vs, so basely to thinke of their iudgements that
consider of our Bokes, that because of the Authors
small fauor, the boke it selfe should be out of fauor,
or because the person is Condemned, that immedi∣atly
the Boke is ansvvered.
Some cause therfore vndoubtedly there is, in the
Bokes thēselues, for vvhich they are misliked? But
vvhat is that? Is it for the Vntruthes sake vvhich
are conteined in them? Is it for the Wreasting
and Racking of the Scriptures? Is it for mis∣alleging,Iewel in his Pre∣face to the Reader.
misconstrueing, corrupting, or al∣tering
the holy Fathers &c. These thinges in
deede are directly obiected, to D. Harding, by M.
Ievvel but (I trovv) the Serche is not therefore a∣poynted,
that no Ansvver should come in against



them. Yet except this only be the cause, vvherfore
els is the bringing in of them so daungerous?
Is there any thing in them, against the Obedi∣ence
and Fidelitie due to a Soueraigne? Is there
any one blast in them against the Gouernment of
vvomen? Do they moue the Cōmons to take vvea∣pons
against the Nobilitie? Or doe they instruct the
Nobilitie hovv to let the Commons of their liber∣tie?
In one vvord to speake it, doe vve meddle vvith
the proper maters of VVeastminster Ilaule, Par∣leament
house or Cyuile Policie, and not only in∣treat
of Articles proponed in Scholes, meete for
Conuocations, and Generall to all Christendome?
Take (for exāple) any one, vvhat so euer you vvil,
of the Articles proponed by M. Ievvel. He denyeth:
vve affirme. He contrarieth vs: vve againe resist
him. Before any man encountred vvith hym, he
Raigned in peace and vvas Magnified. It vvas
thought, no man vvas euer hable to matche him,
and therefore for very despair of any succour, ma∣ny
submitted them selues vnto him. But novve,
sense there haue ben found, vvhich haue met vvith
him, it is perceaued that he had no certaine vi∣ctorye.
And if it seemed so before, yet novve the
battle beginning a freshe, there is sturred vp a clo∣ser
attention in euery mannes minde, to marke
hovv truely it is fought.


And in marking diligently, he is novve and then
found to be iustly noted of Hypocrisy, Foly, Heresy,
and other faultes, Novv they vvhich read not the
Bokes can not marke so muche: Yet they also, of o∣thers
that haue reader and considered, may lerne.
It cummeth then at length to the knovvledge of
many. And, the very nature of Truthe or disposi∣tions
of men so geuing it, many are confirmed, ma∣ny
are vvarned, many are troubled, euery one is
moued. Some see it manifestly, M. Iewel is cō∣futed,
other looke not so narovvly but say, I will
better thinke of these matters, Other be lothe
to chainge their opinion and are grieued to heare
of ought sayed against him: So that somevvhat is
vvrought, I think in euery man one vvay or other
about these matters.
This by likelihode then, is the Sedition, vvhich
our Bokes are said to moue: They confirme some in
the Truthe, that they be not lightly remoued from
it: They direct other vnto the Truthe, that they
pretend not lacke of Instruction: they confounde
and confute other by the Truthe, that they may
take lesse pride in their Chiualry: and they sturre
vp a General attention, to marke on vvhose side
the Truthe shall stand, and vvho shall most Faith∣fully
behaue himselfe in the mater.


Are the Authors then of this maner of Sedition▪
to be punished? Or the bokes, by vvhich Lies, De∣ceiptes,
and Heresies be detected, are they to be con∣demned?
If Protestantes may be suffered, to vvryte
as largely as they vvill, shall they be permitted allso
to vvryte as falsely as they vvill? Or if no Priuilege,
be it neuer so Speciall, doth license them to print any
Slaunders or Lies yet if aftervvardes they be found
out, and marked in theyr Bokes, may no man freely
tell them of it, but he shall incurre the daunger of
the Lavv, and further displeasure? Surely this case
is very hard, to call first, into Question, those Truthes
of vvhiche the Catholike Church vvoulde haue no
doubt feared: And then, to graunt the Protestāt such
fauour, that he might allvvaies denye and still driue
the Catholike to proue, And further (as longe as the
Catholike made a stay of yelding so much to his Ad∣uersary)
to dravv that to an Argument of a vveake
cause and a faint hart, and to incline to the nevve
Gospellers side: And novv last of all, (vvhen the
Catholikes ansvver them, and so ansvver, that they
make the other, euery day more and more to be ta∣ken
in their craft and heresy) novv, (I say) to forbid
the Catholikes to Ansvver for themselues, Or to
speake any more against such faultes as they finde,
this surely is a case very strainge and hard: So hard
vndoubtedly, that vvhat to ansvver vnto it vve can



not tell.
For if our Aduersaries vvill haue the matter tri∣ed
by Lerning, our Diuinitie (the end shall declare
it) is much truer than theirs: but if they vvill novve
defend themselues by force of Authoritye, One ex∣traordinary
Argument made by a nevve and freshe
Sercher, shall more dissvvade, then a vvhole shiplode
of our Bokes can moue, vvhen the reading of them it
taken avvay.
But is it not possible, to finde fauoure in his sight,
vvhich hath the Ordering of these matters commit∣ted
vnto him? Yeas verely possible inoughe, if the
Suer for it be notus Pontifici, and fauored of the
Superintendents? Louanians then must holde their
peace, but the Apology of England (I trovv) may be
heard. VVhy: vvhat sayeth it? Mary, for men to
be carelesse what is spokē by them and their
owne mater &c. is the part doubtlesse of dis∣solute
and Rechlesse persons,The Apo∣logy of England. and of them
which wickedly winke at the Iniuries done
vnto the name of God. Againe. Al Lawes
and Natures owne voyce, doe commaund vs
to defend our owne Cause and Innocencye.
Againe. The Auncient Christians. &c. put
vp Supplications, and made meanes to Em∣perours
and Princes, that they might defend
themselues and their felowes in open Audi∣ence.


Loe, hovv vvell the makers of that Apology could
speake for themselues, and hovv vvell it serueth our
purpose at this present? Yet the Oddes is exceding
great. For the Catholikes hauing continued time
out of minde, in a consent and certaintye of theyr
Faith, might vvell take order, that no man at all
should be suffered to speake againste those thinges
vvhich vvere so generally receiued and alovved: but
these men vvhich bring a nevv and vpstart Religion
into the vvorld, neither commending it by Authori∣ty
of any their Predecessours, nor concluding it by
Reason, nor Confirming it by Miracle, hovv shoulde
they forbid a man to consider and vevv their Opini∣ons,
and require him first to build vpon them, before
he see the sure ground of them?
If therefore vnto them it be an vnlavvfull and
vnnaturall matter, that it should be denied to any
man to defend his ovvne cause, it seemeth that vve
may vvel be suffered to make our Ansvvers vnto our
Aduersaries: And it seemeth allso, that those maye
Read our Ansvvers, vvhose losse and perill it vvil be,
to be kept, by any meanes, avvay from the hearing
of the cause examined.
But perchaunse they vvil not be knovven vvhich
made the Apologye: and cumming out vvithout a
Priuilege, vvho can tell vvhether it be of anye Au∣thority?
Especially D.Harding hauing ansvvered



it, and confounding the great boast and crakes set
vpon it.
VVhat say vve then to M. Ievvel himselfe? might
not he be inreted, to speak in his best maner, for vs?
Of the Readinesse of his good vvill, vve haue already
a Testymonie. For vnto D. Cole alleaging a Re∣cognisance,
vvhich so bound him in, that he vvas not
at liberty to dispute and reason vvith him, I would
wishe (sayeth he) the Quenes Maiesty would
not onlye set you at libertie,Iew. in the second answer to D. Cole. but also com∣maund
you to shew your groundes. Bysides
this, he hath so required, so desired, so prouoked, so
ernestly sued vnto the Catholikes, to haue their An∣svver
vnto his Articles, that if it should novv stande
vvith his good vvill and Conscience, yet it agreeth
not vvith his honor and vvorthinesse, to see in hys
life time such bokes, as to the vvryting of vvhich his
prouoking, gaue a necessary occasion, to be so condē∣ned,
that they shoulde neuer be examined or An∣svvered.
To you therefore M. Ievvel I speake it, as in this
case one of the Indifferent Readers. VVhy prouoke
ye vs to vvryte? VVhy consent you to this policye of
forbidding our bokes, that vve should not vvryte?
VVhy suffer ye not the Trueth to haue her ful course?
VVhy constraine you them by feare, vvhome ye shuld
better persvvade by lerning? VVhy foresee you not



that except our bokes be suffered to be Readen, you
shalbe iudged to be afraid, or ouercummed? VVhy
Consider you not politikely, that except the Papistes
doe keepe you occupied, you vvill fall to greater bat∣tels
betvvene your selues, and vtterly desye one the
other? You said in the Preface of your Reply:
Blessed be the name of God that hathe offe∣red
this Occasion. For I haue no doubt, but
of this necessary conflicte, through his mer∣cy,
there shall issue some sparkle to the Glo∣ry
of his name. VVhy suffer you then the mater
of Gods glory and your victory to be taken avvaye?
VVhy pretend you, as though you vvere sure of vvin∣ning
and glad of the Occasion, by vvhich your gospel,
the more it is impugned and standeth, the more it is
glorified, and yet heare of the prohibition of oure
Bokes, and hast not to say against it? If you had not
challenged the Catholikes, the case had bene more
tolerable, but novv it can neuer stand vvith your or
your Religions honesty, not to defende your selfe but
by terrour.
But (to returne againe vnto the Indifferēt Rea∣der)
let our sayinges, if they come properly and di∣rectly
from vs, be straitvvaies condemned: Let no
Reason and Argument be good for vs, thoughe the
very same in our Aduersaries case, must be admit∣ted
vvho so euer say nay: And let M. Ievvel forget



his old Charitye, and vvishe novve, that vve might
be constrained to holde our handes and tongues,
vvhich vvished before, that vve should be constrai∣ned
to vvryte and Speake: Let all these Iniuries be
patiently suffered: Yet vvho can let vs to vvishe
thee vvell, and tel thee of thy Soules daunger vvhen
Heresy is flattering vvith thee: And note the very
places vnto thee, in vvhich her lying Sprite is coue∣red,
And be glad to haue thinges for thee in a Rea∣dinesse,
if the vvinde should happely turne, to sende
them in to thee? Novv if this be an vnnaturall or
Seditious minde, haue me excused I pray thee, I ne∣uer
thought it so, nor feared, it vvould so be taken.
And I can not promise such Obedience, or vvarrant
to my selfe such perfection, that if a Rebell and Ad∣uersary
against God and his Church should openlye
blaspheme and deceaue, I vvould not speake against
him, and trouble his procedinges vvith my Obiecti∣ons.
Yet, if, as many other mysteries, vnheard of be∣fore,
be reueled in these daies, so it should likevvise
novv be brought vnto light, that allthough a Theefe
vvere espied to doe his feate in any house, no man for
all that should cry out against him, for fear of trou∣bling
them in the house, vvhich are at their bokes,
at their meat, at their game, at their rest, or anye
such like: then truely as vve might be so astonied at
this strainge Reuelation, that for a time vve coulde



not speake, yet neuerthelesse (I trust) vve shoulde
turne vnto God and pray. And so in like manner,
vvhen that is perceaued and confessed that in no
kinde of case, any more may be vvryten against M.
Ievvel, then shal vve pray God, as he hath vvrought
by our speaking, so that he vvill continue and vvork
by our silence. And as the silence of the Catholikes
vvhen they vvere excedingly prouoked to speake, did
more harme perchaunse then al the other argumēts
of the Heretikes, so the letting of the Catholikes to
speake, vvhereas through the importunitie of the
Aduersary, they haue bene moued therevnto shal by
Gods Grace, more sensibly make others to consider
vvhat Faith they haue forsaken, and vvhat opinions
they folovv, then if our Bokes should freely come in
and be Readen. Amen. Fare vvel, Reader, and be
Indifferent. At Antvverpe the .10. of May.


REgiae Maiestatis Priui∣legio
permissum est Ioanni
Rastello Anglo, vt librum
inscriptū, A Treatise intitled,
BEWARE OF M. IEWEL,
Typis mandare, ac impunè
distrahere liceat. Datum
Bruxellis. 8. Martij. Anno
Domini. 1565.
Subsig.
De la Torre.
