



RIght Honorable; vnworthy (I know) are these my endevours either to bee honoured with your worthy patro∣nage, or but offered to your iudici∣ous view. Yet your goodnes, as it doth exceed your Greatnes, so will it also (I trust) excuse my boldnesse, while I humbly begge of your Right Honourable Lordship, that as theCael Rhodo∣gin. lect. ant. lib. 20. cap 5. Ostrich, is said to hatch her egges not (as doe other birds) by sitting on them, but by the effectuall rayes of her eies: so you will deigne, by the comfortable raies of a gratious as∣pect, to animate and hatch (if I may so speake) this egge of your owne laying; which peradventure will otherwise be in no better case thanIob. 39.17. the Ostriches egges in the wildernes, ob∣vious to the incursion of every wilde beast.
—Virg. Etiam Parnassia laurus
Parva, sub ingenti matris se subijcit vmbrâ.
The Lawyers say, that Annulo alieno signans id in sub∣scriptione debet exprimere: He that signes with another mans ring, meete it is that he should signifie so much in his subscripti∣on; And I hold it a point of good ingenuity, in this my prae∣scription,Plin, ad Ves∣pasian. praefat. Fateriper quem profecerim, to acknowledge that it is your grane of mustard seed which by the blessing of God
is growne to so great a tree, in whose branches notMat. 13 32. the fowles of heaven, but the soules of all sorts of men here on earth may make their nests.
If any shal take this to be symptoma indicatorium (as Phy∣sitions speake) whereby they shall iudge me sicke of the worlds disease, scribendi cacoethes, that it ching custome of setting their paines a sunning, which hath possessed al sortes of men, learned and vnlearned, in these voluminous daies of ours, because most men being like Pilate, vniust Iudges of their own doings, will never reverse their sentence ofIoan. 19.22. quod scripsi, scripsi; I will not alleadge the rarity (I thinke I might say nullity) of sermons in this argument, which might haply be a tolerable, if not plausible, apologie: but will rather ex∣cuse my selfe (as I iustly may) by a longing desire I had to pre∣sent to your Lordship, as didGen. 27.19. Iacob to Isaak his aged father, a meate that your soule loveth; a sermon vpon this text, where in your soule so much delighteth. And no merveile; seeing it is a text of mercifull iustice, which is no lesse the ioy of your heart, than the dayly exercise of your whole life. If my art be not such as Rebecca's was to make a savourie meate of this kid of your owne flocke, so pleasing to your Lordships palate, that when you eate of it, your soule might blesse me: yet my heart (I am sure) is such asBer. in Fest. omn sanct. serm. 1. S. Bernards was, when he wisht vpon like occasion; Vtinam ego fidelis coquus, vtinam anima mea coquina vtilis videatur! O that my selfe were a skilfull Cooke to dresse it! o that my soule were a fit kitchin to dresse it in! But slēderly cookt as it is, my hope is that your Lordship wil not vtterly reiect it, who in the time of my nearer atten∣dance, did so often vouchsafe mee a gratious hearing of my more raw and rude meditations: but that you will favoura∣bly accept if not of what I offer, yet of what I would offer, aswell becauseAquin. Voluntas est mensura actionum; as because Impotentia excusat legem. It is enough forAelian. little birds to be , ovipara; it is for beasts that are bigger to be  vivipara. And for poore men that were not able to sacri∣fice a living bull, it was thought sufficient by the Gentiles, if they did butSuid. in. voc . Taurū è farinâ fingere: offer vp a bul of meale,
a bakers bull.
He that should but know, what incredible favours & en∣couragements I haue from time to time receiued of your Lordship (such as neither can I mention without note of ar∣rogancy, nor forget without impiety, but to deserue them is no lesse than an absolute impossibility) would never blame mee to be more than zealous, euen ambitious, to giue some (howsoever slender) testimony of my vnfeigned thankfulnes for them.
All the requitall I can make your Lordship for this your so great, so manifold goodnes towardes me, is (as thousands more do, and haue cause to do) first to praise God for you, who hath giuen you so heroïcall an heart, and then dayly to pray vnto him, that as for eloquence he hath made you a se∣condHomer. Nestor, from whose tongue flowed speach sweeter than hony,
:
So he would lengthen your yeares, as the yeares of Nestor, who because he lived three ages of men, was calledGell Noct, Att. l. 19. c 7. Trisae∣clisenex: yea and sweeten them too, as he hath done your speach: And, that as hee hath gloriously enriched you with gifts both of nature and grace, wherein none can equal you, but your selfe, like as Deo nihil nisi Deus aequale: so the glo∣rie of your Right Honourable Lordship, adorned by the Right Noble Countesse your dearest consort, and dayly propagated in your honorable posterity, may outline both you and them, and not end, but in that life of glory which shall haue none end.
While my heart is thus enditing of a good matter (forPsal. 147.1. a ioyfull and pleasant thing it is to be thankefull) I must adde yet one thing more; namely, that as your LP. is—Hor lib 2. Od. 17. mearum
Grande decus columen{que} rerum;
So shall you ever be my terrestriall trinity;
Theognis sub init.,
the beginning, middle and end of all my travailes: and as to your Lordship I haue long since sacrificed both my selfe & my whole liues seruice; so would I also bee ready (if it were
possible) to performe in act whatSen. de bre∣vit. vit. c. 8. the ancient were wont to professe in word to those whom they did most vehemently affect, Paratos se partem annorum suorum dare: even by shor∣tening mine owne yeares to lengthen yours: and will there∣fore end with thatTertullian. devout acclamation, wherewith they were wont to honor their triumphant Emperours:
De nostris annis tibi Iupiter augeat annos!

