


BIAS the wise Philosopher of Greece, when his Country was spoyled, and the people caried their goods away, be∣ing demaunded why he did not the like? answered, that he caried all that he had with him, meaning his vertue and learning: So I (my Right worshipful & singular good Master) hauing nothing of value in substance to bestow, doe here present you with such treasure as the Lord hath vouchsafed vpon me, which according to Bias opinion and mine owne likewise, is the greatest Iewell I haue, not doubting but you wil accept the giuers mind more than the gift, which I confesse is small. But being throughly acquainted with the great fauor your Worship bereth to such as delight in any good exercise, it hath imboldned me to put forth this simple Addition vnder your Wor∣ships defence. The entyre loue & exercise of this excellēt Arte, with drawing of proportions, Mappes, Cardes, Buildings, Plattes, &c. were the only studies whereunto I euermore haue bene enclined. Touching Drawing it was onely Dei beneficio, naturally giuen me from my youth, without instruction of any man, more than Loue thereof, dele∣ctation, desire, and practise. In this Art also hauing great delight, I had no other instruction at my first begin∣ning but onely this good Authors Booke, but after∣wards I greatly encreased the same during the time I

serued your Worship in Cambridge, in going to the A∣rithmeticke Lecture at the common Schoole: And more furthered since the time that I left your Worships ser∣uice, which is about 18. yeares past, by continuall exer∣cise therein (the mother and nurse of Science,) during which time my onely vocation hath bene (thinking it a meete exercise for a common welth) in training vp of youth to write and draw, with teaching of them the in∣fallable principles and briefe practises of this worthie Science, hauing (I praise God for it) brought vp a num∣ber to become faithfull and seruiceable to their masters in great affaires, and many of them good members of a common wealth, which is no small comfort to me in Christ. Amongst which number, a countriman of mine hath oftentimes bene verie inportunate with me, to do a deede of Charitie vpon the ground of Arts, vz. to per∣use and amende it of the imperfections and faultes, that haue crept into it through negligence of often printing. Which ernest request of his bred two strifes in me: The one was, I was loth to do it, knowing my selfe inferior to a great number that might better do it than I. And yet considering it is a Booke hath done many a thousand good, which when a young beginner com∣meth to a confused or mistaken figure, it bringeth him into a wonderful discoragement and maze: which thing considered, for meere loue to a common wealth, and to the Booke, being my first Author, I willingly graunted to do my goodwill. And passing vnder the file of corre∣ction, I heere and there encreast it with such necessarie Additions as I knewe might encorage a yong learner, and more woulde haue done, but for feare the Booke would rise too thicke or grow too dere. And being thus entered into the vaine thereof, and knowing that this Author was the onely light and the chiefest Lodestone

vnto the vulgar sort of English men in this worthy sci∣ence, that euer writ in our naturall tong, I haue (accor∣ding to my simple knowledge) yelded againe some part of my receiued talent with aduantage: and endowed him to the further encrease of his memorie, with Rules of breuitie and practize, abridged into a briefer me∣thod than hitherto hath bene published in our English tongue, with other right necessarie Additions, Rules and Tables, whiche I truste will doe my countrie good, and be right commodious to all sorts of men: all which I commit to the fauorable censure of your worship, and al such as loue knowledge, desiring their fauorable corre∣ction herein if ought be amisse. The which with greater affection than I am able to vtter, I Dedicate to your Worship, as a meete Patrone, both for lerning godlines, and loue of the same, which comming from your wor∣ship into the hands of many (shall I doubt not) do many good, as heretofore it hath alreadie done. So shall you (as the best benefactor of these labors) be partaker of all their prayers that shall reape profite or knowledge by this worthy Art, in Commendation whereof if I should write, I should rather blemish thā adorne it. For the Authors Epistle vnto that famous Prince of wor∣thy memorie K. Edward the sixt, and his Preface to the Reader, are sufficient.
Thus crauing fauourable acceptation of this my homely and dutifull present, I humblie leaue you to the conduction of the Almightie, whom I beseech long to preserue you in continuall health, with dayly encrease of worship, to the glorie of his name, and to the ioy of all such as loue you.
At my house in Southwarke
this 12. of Iune,

