




life, from entering in againe any more. Heerby as al their posterity may decerne, mās great ingrati∣tude for his creation, Sathans scandale in tpta∣tion, and the Lords prouidence in preseruation of his chosen from the beginning: when all beit he expelled them, he would not yet vtterly extinguish them, and though he terrifyed them he would not eternally torment them: But denouncing their enemie accursed aboue all cattell, (and giuing him iudgement that The seede of the vvoman should breake the Serpents head,Ibidem vz. 14. &. 15. Col. 3.) he yet dealt so mercifully by the Ministery of his cherubins these Angels with them, that he reserued them by repentaunce to returne into his kingdome by the redemption of his Sonne Christ Ie∣sus and through the regeneration of his holy spi∣rite. Great cause haue we therfore the remnant of their posterity in these late dangerous dayes, not onely to be ware by their harmes, but also carefully to indeuour our selues according to his holy word.Ieam. 4. To obay God, and to resist the Diuell. Againe in our liues and conuersations one to∣wards another, To be doing of good, and eschew∣ing of euill.Psal. 34. Finally in all temptations and tri∣bulations of the world, the flesh, Sathan, sinne, death and hell, to craue of God, for his sonne Christes sake, in our dayly prayers. That vve may not be ouercome vvith euill: But that vvith good vve may ouercome euill.Iohn. 18. Rom. 12. And so be thankfull vn∣to his diuine Maiestie, for his mercie in the Mi∣nistery of his holy Angells, whom hee hath made watchmen and superintendents ouer vs. And lyke as he promised to his seruant Moyses in

making of the tabernacle: That the Cherubins should stretch their vvinges on hye, couering the mercie seate vvith their vvinges, so as their faces being one tovvardes another,Exod. 25. vs 20. & 22. should also bee to∣vvardes the mercie seate: And againe, that from the mercie seate, betvveene the tvvo Cherubins, hee vvould tell them all thinges vvhat he vvould haue giuen in commaundement vnto the children of Israell: Euen so it would please him of his gra∣cious goodnes, to bee mercifull vnto his chosen Church dispersed throughout the world, in the building of his sonne Christ & his Gospell, with the sauegarding of his holy Angels: And that by his speciall grace he would be in the midest of his elect, to instruct them in his will that they may warely & worthely walke in the same. For, the Ministers cannot build Ierusalem before god laye the first stone: That is, Christ,Zach. 2. vvhich is full of eyes, both bicause he giueth light vnto others and that all ought to seeke light at him: As it was spoken vnto Iehosuah and his fellowes the Angels who represented the whole nomber of the faithefull. Notwithstanding it is alwayes seene, when God buildeth his Church, Sathan will set vp his Sinagog. And when good Isaac prospereth,Genes. 26. the wicked Palestines will labour to stoppe vp his pittes: yet hath God promised that vvhom Isaac blesseth, him vvil he blesse, & vvhom he curseth, him vvill he curse. And as the enuie of the cheefe Priestes and Scribes naught auailed against the miracles of Christ:Math. 21. but that in de∣spite of them he will haue little Children to cry Osyanna. Nor the false Apostles shall seduce





open and the Angels of God ascending and des∣cending about the sonne of man, and with him to liue euerlastingly, among al his elect Angels, Archangels and Saintes which incessantly shall sing,Reuel. 19. Alleluiah, Saluation and honour and glory, and power be vnto our Lord God, for euer Amen.
At London in Foster lane, neere S. Michaels in Cheape.
Ianuarii. 18. An. 1583.

