



FOr many ages past, it hath beene a custome amongst those who have endevoured to leave to posteritie, any monument of their learning and skil, to dedicate it to some
eminent personage: partly to expresse their gratitude for benefits received (whereof I may alleage many examples: partly to procure with the readers, a more easie ac∣ceptation of the worke, and a more firme protection for it from the reproachfull tongues of malicious censures, which no age hitherto ever wanted. I purposing to publish my Chirurgicall Lectures which I delivered to the worshipfull Company of the Chirurgeons of the famous Citie of London, on Tusedaies appointed for the keeping of their courts, & the performing of these exercises, these three yeares last past, and willing to keepe on foot this laudable custome, have made choice of your Honour as most fit unto whom they should be con∣secrated. For who can be a more fit patron, yea, I adde, a more competent Judge to these my labours than he, who hath pierced even into the mysteries of the art. Let no man thinke it any disparagement to any noble personage to have taken paines to attaine to some reasonable measure of knowledge in this art; But rather let him perswade him∣selfe
that it belongeth properly, and of right to such as are renowned for their greatnesse & valour to be well versed in this art. Achilles is no lesse famous for his cu∣ring of Telephus by art, than wounding of him by his strength and magnanimitie. Be∣sides this, seeing your Honour hath graced this Company by desiring to be admitted into it, rather than into any other, hath been beneficiall unto it, and hath embraced me with extraordinarie favour and respect, I thought it meet that some testimonie of deserved respect towards your Honour should be left to posteritie of all the Com∣pany in generall, and of me in particular. Receive then with a cherefull countenance this first volume of Chirurgicall discourses into your favour and protection. will serve you at the least for an index of such things as you have read set downe in other Authors dispersedly concerning these sub∣jects, and will further your directions, when occasion shall be ministred by any imploring your advice. This benefit will redound unto me, that the worke will
find the better entertainment at the Readers hands; because it sheweth in the beginning your Honours name.
In London the fifth of August 1634.
