



HOly Father in God, Even as the Shepheards of Israel (ac∣cording to Gods comman∣dement) humbled them∣selves under the High Priest∣hood, and afterward the El∣ders or Priests of the inferiour order did un∣to the Apostleship; So is it the duty of Pa∣tours unto the Bishoprick the succession of the Apostleship. Which highest order in the Chri∣stian
Clergie, though in these latter dayes some have endeavoured to have abolished; yet Christ (who is true in all his promises) having said, That the gates of hell shall not prevaile against his Church, hath moved the hearts of Kings to bee nursing Fathers thereof, and Queenes to be nursing Mothers. So that by the providence of Almighty God, and the true godly zeale of our most gracious Soveraigne Lord King CHARLES, the said sacred fun∣damentall order in the holy Ministerie, flou∣risheth in the Apostolicall Church of England. I (though the most unworthy among the la∣bourers in the Lords Harvest) did upon your Fatherhoods encouragement, compose a cer∣taine body of Divinity out of the bookes of the established Liturgie: and (thanks be to God) sundry of the elder and more under∣standing sort of people have made good use of the same: but experience hath taught, that the youth and the ignorant persons have need to have matters more plainely divided unto them, so as they may be able to receive the same. Now some will object against me and say, Whence have you such an ability? It is
therefore my duty for to acknowledge in all humility by whom I have profited. The first instrument which God used for to instruct me in theThe Athana∣sian Creed in the Divine Ser∣vice, saith; Whosoever will be saved, before all things it is ne∣cessary that bee hold the Catho¦lique faith. Which saith, except eve∣rie one doe keepe whole and unde∣filed, without doubt he shall pe∣rish everlastingly. And the Catho∣lique faith is, &c. In such manner also speaketh the Church in her sacred Ho∣milies. In the Articles to be enquired of, within the Arch. deaconry of Middlesex, given Anno Do∣mini 1632. and the 32. concer∣ning the Pa∣rishioners it is expresly pre∣scribed, That no∣thing must be tending to Poperie, Puritanisme, or any other Sect, errour, or heresie, against true Reli∣gion, and Catholique doctrine, now publiquel professed in this Church, or the government or Discipline of the Church of England, now within the Realme received and established by common authority. But though it is thus plainely and Divinely signified, what every one should onely professe; yet many are taken with such lightnesse of minde, as that they rather affect vaine novelty, than the said eternall verity delivered in the fundamentall bookes of our Church. Catholicke faith, was that most greatly learned Divine Master Doctor Overall, the late Lord Bishop of Norwich. Afterward I received further light in the great Mysterie of godlinesse, from that renowned and profoundly under∣standing Prelate in the Church, Master Doctor Buckeridge, the late Lord Bishop of Elie. And last of all, by the ghostly instructions received from your holy Fatherhood, I have not beene a little benefitted. Whereas for the use of the whole Parish of Hayes (whereof you were sometimes the worthy Rectour) this worke (how meane soever) is made, it hath seemed good to dedicate it unto your Lordship, who are an unfeined zealous honourer of the Di∣vine Service-doctrine of the Church; humbly craving protection for it under the reverend wings of your judgement; which vouchsafed,
I shall be the more obliged (as already greatly I am for all respect undeservedly granted) in my powers and prayers ever to acknowledge my selfe yours devoted. The Lord God Al∣mighty, which was, and is, and is to come, infinite, and incomprehensible, universally prosper your good Fatherhood unto all ful∣nesse of yeeres and dayes.

