



HOw commeth it to passe, that Rome is become the Seminary of mischiefe? an that where Martyrs once abounded, now Conspirators? the faith of that Church being once famous through the world but now her Bloodshed; all Christian Countries ha∣uing  her tumults, and many her Treacheries. Can we iudge her that delights in crueltie, the tender Mother? no, theRev. 17.4. scarlt Wh r? Are these her gentle warnings? her spirituall stripes? what to strike Nations to death? Did Christ euer prescribe, that a Church should bee advanced by such direfull designes, dismall stratagems? Let his Records bee searched, and the Grant of this charter shewn. No, this practise nature disclaimes, how much more Scripture detests? Traytors are the worst men in the bad age,Luke 21. 2 Tim. 3.4. yea the Monsters of the perilous times. Out of the Ma∣nuscript of Iudas, Treason may be prooued but out of the Gospel of Christ neuer: Oh then that it should be held the perfection of Religion, the mould of merit! I wonder those practised disci∣ples blush not to call themselues
Iesuites, and that the Pope the Crafts-master of the science doth not hang downe his head in the sight of the whole world, to stile himselfe the Vicar of Christ. Oh blessed Sauiour, thou which didst suffer thy owne blood to bee shed, and hadst rather loose thy life then thy meekenesse, which neu r struckest enemy to death, though thou haddestMath. 28. all power, which didstLuk 9.55. coole the breaths of them which would haue had fire fetched from heauen, and didst teach theMath. 26 52. Discipline of pa∣tience to that military Apostle which did cut off Malchus his eare, which thy selfe wert an innoc nt1 Pet. 1.10. Lambe, and didst send foorth thy Messengers asMath. 10 1. Lambes, which wouldst haue king∣domes
 subdued vnto thee by revealing of mysteries, and not by de∣priving of life, how wilt thou acknowledge such followers to bee of thy retinue? No here Antichrist is discovered, in that he is so pposite to Christ.Cum sitis inhumani, im∣pij, crudeles, homicidae, non ampl ucitis Ch istiai. Lu∣cifer, Carali∣tanr Athan l p
65 Seeing yare inhumane, impiou, cru∣ell, homicides, ye are no longer Christians. Their ab sing of the Scriptures, the mingling of their owne works with Christs precious satisfactions, the steame of their Brothell-houses, their shop of Imagery their new built Chaldron of Purgatory, the grounding of the principles of their Religion out of Apocry∣phall, allegoricall, parab licall places or out of most dark and intricate places of Scripture, from which no conuincing argu∣ments are to bee fetched, the voluntary confession of their owne Writers that neitherTransubstan¦stiation The vtter reiecting of Hoc est c ¦pus mu for a cleae place, and oncluding N n potest per vllam scriptu∣ram probati Fisher cont. capt. Babilon. n. 8. Bellar∣m nes conf s∣sing Scous his opinion (that there is not extant any place so expresse, that without the Churches dclaration, can eui∣dently constrne vs to admit it) not to be improbable
de Euch l. 3 c. 23. § Non dissimili. Transubstantiation,Hae Communion custome. G e de Val de vsu. Euch c. 10. lade of the peoples deuo∣tion H. Communion in one kind,Indulgences. Roff Assert luth conf. art. 18. Cajet opusc. tom. 1. tract. 15 de Ind cap 1. Indulgences,Sacrifice for quicke and dead. Cster in cop. oth fid. dem rep 5. c. 2 p 1. 2. sacrifice for quicke and dead,Prayers vnto Saints and Images Batn in
2 q 1 art. 0. prayers vnto Saints, worshipping of Images,Christ des∣cension into Limbus Patrum, no where expressed, that Chr st wnt thithe to deliuer the soules f the Fathers, Mc  Can l l. c. Theol. c 4 Christs descension into Limbus patrum,Confssion Glss in Gat. de poen. dist. 5 c 1 in poenit.
Confession, nor many other points are cleerely to bee proued out of Scripture their revi∣ving of the ancient heresies of theValent ut an Heraeonites for extreame v ction. Ire∣nae. l 1 c 11. Aug l  hae c 16 Valentinians, and Hera∣cleonites,Angelics for wo shipping of Angels,
Ag e haer. c 39. Angelickes,Capaians for woshippin of Images. Epiph haer. 27. Aug. de ar cap 7.
Capocratins,Collyridia f worsh pping of the vigin Mary,
Eph. haer 8. Collridians,Samsaeans for reliques, Epiph aer. 3. Sampsaean,Michees for Priests single l fe, Aug Epit 74 Id. de mo∣rib. Ecc & Mani. l. 2. c. 13.
Manichees,Mestaleans that Baptisme doth ey  e sinnes going before, Theod. diuin. Decre de Baptismo
Messalians,Ndiedales or their ae foted Fransis∣canes and Seculars, Aug de har c 58 Nodipedal,Catha st for merits, Isio 1 Etym. lib. 8 c. 4.
Ca∣tharists,Armezians for wosh pping of the Crosse, N.
ph l. 1. c 45 Armenians,Astoick for vo∣luntary poverty, Epiph haer 61. Apostolickes,Mar
us the  for hauing blo in the Chalice. Epiph haer. 34.
Marcus,Nouatians for doubting of remission of sinnes, Ab i. . de Poen. c. . & l. 2. c. 5. Novati∣ans and others, their Boy-fathers alleadged in solemne contro∣versies,
 the digladiations of their owne Divines against them, and the maine points of our profession proved substantially out of their owne Writers, make me to renounce them; but their con∣spiracies mak me to abhorre them, defy them, looke agast vpon them; but specially when treason comes to be dogmatised by their Schoolemen, every Romish Theologue almost now adayes not being able to compose a Body of divinity without this sangu∣inary Maxime ins rted, iustifying the lawfulnesse of Treason, and (as if it were a professed
) describing; and prescribing the meanes of it; making no conscience of it afterSuarez de∣fens. fid Cath. adv Aug. sect. exc. lib. 6. c 4. n. 18. condemnatory sentence, yea if the PopesBann 2. . p. 5. in erpretatiue sentence can but bee conceiued it is enough; to doe but deny their Religion, is toSand. de clau. Dan. p 25. runne vpon the sword of the Church,Suarez def. fid. at adv. Aug. sect. er. lib. 6 c. 4 n.
8. any person then appoin∣ted by the Pope my take away the life of his Soveraigne, if none bee appointed the Successor may doe it, if there bee no Successor the Kingdome may doe it; yeaMariana. instit. reg. p . Mariana is so impudnt that hee saith, tat it is a wholesome meditation for Princes to perswade themselues that they may bee then killed, and the party not onely to doe it lawfully but with glory and commendati n. Bellarmine I confesse was a modest Papist; his tenets not steeped in the au∣atiousnesse of many; yetMicah
7.4. the best of them is but a brier, and the most righteous sharper then a thorne-hedge, for when I consider hisBell de pon∣tif. l 5. c.
6.7.8. Bell de pot. um. Pont. ad Guliel Barcl. p. 97. treasonable conclusions, and his damnable Letter to Blackwell, what doe I hold him but a Cardinall En∣gine of sedition? The Pope is held by many a Holy Father, as if the Sanctuary of peace, truth, and piety were in his brest, yet when I call to mind how Vrban 2. held killing of Kings no murther but a zeale to the Catholicke mother, and how manyConsider the miseries of these Empe∣rours Kings, and Princes. Leo Isuus. Sigon. de rag. al. p. 10. uovicus pius papi mass. annal. p. 04. Childe∣rick. m in. gest. Fran. p. 03. Oho the gr a ui p. 6. c. 6 Henry the 1. Ben Cad. vit. Hild. p. 2 H r the 4. Nucl. p 77. Hen. 5 vrp p 22. Lotar us Otho Fris l 7 c 18. Fri. Barbaossa Nauct p 856. enry 6 Hoved p 63. Philip his brother, Nau. p 898. Otho 4. Wa sing Ypd Nust p. 4. rd. 7. Pndul. col. hist. Nap. p 245. Henry 7. Avent. p 57. 5 8 Wncl us hed. Ni m p 8. so n Q. o Naples Nauct. p. 024. Maned. K. of Nap. & . Nauct. p. 96. Cdinu Parai. vs. p 11. Ilian & Lawrence the Dues of Florence, Vol p. 51. Emperours haue beene troubled by Popes with the losse of their peace, kingdomes, or liues, and other Kings and Princes
 in the like manner molested, howMa. Paris. p. 223. King Iohn amongst our selues, andCu. Neu∣bg. p. 1.
Henry th second were put to basenesse, how Q. Elizabeth after the Bll of Pius Quintus was never at rest, howOr. Sixt. 5. ha. in Con∣f. . 159 Sixtus the ft iustified by a panegyricall Oration the murhering of Henry the third in France by a Dominican Friar, I can count the Pope no oer then a murthering Father, ye the Cut throat of Chri∣stendome Bede, when I recount the massacres of Merindoll and ies, Vs, Paris, and f that here intende in
England at this Gun pwder Treason, I can speake to Rme in no miler termes then God did once to Niniveh,Nah.  1. Oh thou bloody Citie.
Oh yee then which are the admirers of that Church, which think it the Paradice where the tree of life doth grow, and hold no ground holy but that which that Church sanctifies, see at last the Amnable impostures yee haue bee mis-led with renounce thatApo.
1.5. Woman of forncati ns, and2 Thess. 2.3.
Man of sinne bee it for no other reason then the e principles of blood; Treason can never bee an appendant of the true Faith. And oh yee Priests and Ie∣suits, the spirit of conspiracy, and nerues of treason, who with wit  the whole world, and haue raised vp nothing a great while but a learned vlny, by whom all the Commotions, the turbulencies is the Christian world hue bene either acted, or animated, consider at last what it is ye practise, Treason; Trea∣son, the attempt of rashsse, the v f ared; the scandall of humanity, the  of Religion; wi men should not doe it, good men wil not. What therefore will yee or this still streine your wits, and your neck s? and make your selues fearfull to your owne people, odius to vs? no, if reverence to God and man haue not qite frsken you if yee haue not forgotten the honor & safety o the men in y ur own corpses, desist from such hideous, hor∣rible, graceles dsignes. And the rather because (sauing the repu∣tation of your owne iudgements) yee are circumuented, being but made slaues to the subtilty, & insolency of your Pope; for what J beseech you (by all the priles of conscience that are left in your bosomes) hath beene these many yeares the maine incentiue of all your disloyalties; hath it not beene to make your Pope not onely cie Priest but chiefe Potentate in the Christian world? where his temporall iurisdiction hath not beene acknowledged, there ye
 haue laboured to thrust it in by this spirituall feat. But (if ye haue but one drop of spirituall oyntment left vpon your eyes) con∣sider if the opinion be not as vaine, as the attempt is desperate; who knowes not the forgery, as well as the ambition of this Title?
ButLuke 22.26. it shall not be so amongst you, damps the Popes affected Primacie ouer all Bishops; butIo. 18.36. my Kingdome is not of this wold, throttles ouer all his
Supremacie Kings & Emperors; Christ neuer assumed it, Peter never chalenged it, the auncient Bishops of the Romish Church never pretended title to it, how then should it now come to be a right vnquestionable? Search antiqui∣ties;Theo. l. 1. c. 7. Constantine the great was so farre from suffering Iulius the Bishop of Rome for being his Head that he gaue not, his Le∣gates (but Eustathius Patriarke of Antioch) precedency in the Councell of
Nice.Leo ad Cler. & plebem Constant. ep. 23.
Leo commanded not Martian the Empe∣rour to summon a Councell, but made humble request for it by the Clergy and people of Constantinople,Cum lachry∣mis & gemiti∣bus Leo ep. 14. ad Theodo∣sium. and with teares and sobs he begged of Theodosius to haue had a Councell in Italy but could not obtaine it; the words of Pope Agatho of old were not imperious to Heraclius, and
Tiberius the Emperours, butPro obedien∣tia quam de∣buimus. Con∣cil. Constant. Act. 4. For the obedience wee owe you, Gregory the Great acknowledged himselfe the seruant of Mauritius, forChristus do∣minari Impe∣ratorem militi∣bus sed etiam sacerdotibus concessit. Greg. lib. 2. ep.
103. Christ graunted the Emperour not onely to rule over souldiers but Priests; in Iustinians dayes it is euident that the Emperour was held so farre superiour to the Pope, that the sayd EmperorPontifical. Cont. tom. . in vita Vigilii. de∣posed two Popes, Silverius and Vigilius, and hee himselfe aswell as Theodora the Empresse thanked Belizarius their
Agent for it; Eutropius saith, that in former times such wa the obedi∣ence of Popes to Emperors that if the Emperor sent for the Pope,Omni neg∣lecta occasi∣ne. Eutropius. all businesse set aside, he went though he knew it were to goe into banishment. The boundlesse power and immoderate Ty∣ranny of Popes ouer Princes in those ages, then were not knowne; are yee not perswaded in your cnsciences, that the first raise of Popes, was by the Grace of Princes, and the next by thir owne masterlesse Ambition? your owne writers will testifie as much. Your Ceremoniry saith thatHoc affima∣mus ante Ca∣rolum mag∣num nemnem Imperii Ro∣mani coronam ex manu Pon∣tificis Romani scepisse. Cer. lib. 1. sect. 5. c. 7. before
Charles the great, no man euer tooke te Crowne of the Empire of the Pope,
Boniface the eighth, was the first that euer inuested himselfe in this supre∣macie,
 and yet (Major saith)Bonifacius 8. multum appa∣renter defini∣vit qud Rom. Ponti ex est supra ges in temporalius quod tamen oulatissin.  Theologi di∣cunt esse fl∣sum. Io. maior asent. distinc. 20. q.
2. the Iudicious Diuines of those times held it but a corrupt i e.Mea potestas non p ndt a Papa  a Deo immedia∣te, & vaum est quod dii solet Papam habere superi¦orē Part. vrsp. i Ludou. 4. Ludovicus the fourth, was wont to say, that it was a meere vanitie, to hold that the Pope had a Superiour to him vpon earth.Potests sae∣cu ar maior est spiituali, nec quod illa e est subiecta in aliquo Ioh. de Paris. de par. Reg. & papi. c 5. Iohannes de Parisijs con∣cludeth absolutely that the secular power is supreame.Non Apo∣stolico iure, Nc enim il∣lud tibi dae, quod non ha∣buit, Petrus potuit. Bern. de Consid. ad Eng. lib. 2. Fides tempo∣rum non E∣vangeliorum. Hilar.
Bernard himselfe avoucheth to the Pope, that his power is not by Apoli∣call right Why then fight ye thus for a new inuention? which if it be come to bee a point of faith, yet it is not the faith of the Gospell, but of the times, and that not of the purer Primitiue times: will yee bee the defenders of an vsurpation? and ven∣ter your liues and soules for a fancy of power? Oh that euer men of your acutenesse, and acrimony, should be thus infatuated to bee instruments of such flgitous, execrable practises for an arrogant person? who sees not that since the Pope came to this power, he ha h giuen himselfe to nothing but to haugtensse, and slothful∣nesse, he is too great now to open his mouth in a pulpit, or to busie his penne to discusse Controuersies of Diuinity, the zealous and laborious Bishops of Rome are vanished, thy preah only by your lips, and write onely by your hands their chi f study is now to in∣uent mischiefe, and to in ite you to attempt them; Oh therfore go open your closed eyelids, and rubbe vpon your consciences to take notice of the palbable grafts of the Popes, and to beware thm; fight not for Tyranny, dye not for Pride, shew not lesse mercy to Christians, then you doe to Iewes and Tukes, embrew not your hands in the blood of Princes, with shame blush ouer that which is past, with horror preuent all such future practises; get your Pope to giue satisfaction to all the World, for all former Treasons, to burne all sedtious bookes, or else assure your selves whatsoeuer ye can colourably pretend to the world▪ an infamy sticks vpon your Church, and your religion will be held as dangerous as corrupt. Thus out of ardent desire to procure safety to my Country and to get such blacke deformities wiped from the browes of all them that professe Christianitie, doe I offer these wholesome aduertise∣ments to your duest and deepest considerations, beseeching God that your pistols, poisons, powders, may now be laid aside, and that ye may fall to workes answerable to true prof ssion.

