


AS LOVE OF LEARNYNGE AND zeale vnto knowledge (most dradde so∣ueraine Ladye) dyd prouoke me to at∣tempte an enterprise farre aboue myne habilitie, that is, to buylde a Castle for Knowledge to reste in, after hir longe banishment & tediouse exyle. Althoughe I could not be permitted by disturbaunce of cruell For∣tune, to accomplish now my buyldyng as I had drawen the platte: yet in despite of Fortune, thus muche haue I doone. which is more then euer was done in this tonge before, as farre as I can heare. But considering by mis∣fortune this Forte lacketh fence, and needeth som good gouernoure to supplye that that wanteth, that Know∣ledge maye reste vnder safe protection, I thought it my duetye to make moste humble sute vnto your excellente Maiestie, that it might please your highnes to accepte this poore Castle into your gracious tuition: that not only in time of your Maiesties raign, but by your high∣nes speciall defence, Knowledge myght bee maintained and reuoked frō exyle. Vnto whiche sute I am the more boldened, throughe remembraunce howe Godde in de∣spite of cancred malyce and of frowninge Fortune, dyd exaulte your maiestie to that throne royall, whiche of iustice dyd belonge vnto your highnes, althoughe the musers of mischief wrought muche to the contrary. In whiche matter as Knowledge did detect the malyce of other, and taught your true subiectes their duty to their Soueraine, so Knowledge yet diuers waies shall fur∣ther your Maiestie. And therefore am I encouraged to
 sue to your royall excellencye, not onlye for to take into your highnes protection this Castle of knowledge, but all Knowledges friends, which in hir maintenaunce do keepe continuall warre against pestilente Ignoraunce, the subuerter of Realmes: which knoweth no vertu, ho∣nesty, nor duety, and therefore meaneth no truthe, how so euer she flatter. yet doth she often tymes shewe great countenaunce of friendship, when she meaneth nothing lesse. Here coulde I paint forth Ignoraunce in hir right colours, but vnto your Maiestie it is needlesse, whome God not only hath endewed with excellent knowledge, but also hath ayded with such prudent Coūcellars, that it maye seeme arrogancy in any suche as I am, to make explication, or in manner more then onlye insinuation of anye doubtefull matters. It maye therefore please your Maiesty, for loue vnto Knowledge, and fauour to your highnes subiectes, to accept this simple Castle into your graces defence, and so shall I bee animated to fy∣nishe the rest, and to publish it vnder your Ma∣iesties name. whome God of his mercy in∣crease in all honour royall, and true fe∣licity, and continue prosperouslye and longe amongest vs. Amen.

