



CHriste in his Gos∣pell (moste godlye and vertuous Ladye) ad∣monished his disciples and all others in them, sayinge.Luc. xi. Nemo lucernam accendit & in abscondito pomt, ne{que} sub modio, sed supra candelabrum, vt qui ingrediuntur, lumen videant. That is, Noman lighteth
a candell, and putteth it in couert nei∣ther vnder a busshell, but vpon a can∣delsticke, that they whiche come in, maye see lyght. Declaringe therby, howe earnestly he willeth the vertue of his veritie, and light of his worde, not to be obscured nor hidden (special∣lye in all suche as professe the same) as more plainly maye also appere by that which foloweth the like sentence writ∣ten by theuangeliste S. Mathewe sai∣ynge. Sic luceat lu vestra coram homini bus,Math. v. vt videant opera vestra bona. That is. Let your light so shyne before men, that they maie see your good workes. Whiche lesson euery, christian oughte christianly to considre, as mater com∣maunded by the highest maister, Christ himselfe. Wherfore hauing in my han∣des this worthie and notable worke, called the complainte of Grace, com∣piled by that worthie & notable clerke maister Iohn Redman doctour in di∣uinitie, deceassed, late maister or presi∣dent of Trinitie colledge in Cābridge, not verie longe before he left this trā∣sitory lyfe, whiche was. 1551. a tyme
(as in like wyse to longe before, and also to longe sithens) nothinge mere o∣penly to manifest so godly and so true a mater. For truth was than so tendre, that without great daunger she might not well be touched (witnes my-selfe, who also amonges others for truthes sake haue sundrely suffred). And dar∣kenes was than so dimme, and menues eyes were so daseled, or rather wilful∣ly blynded (by errour) that either they coulde not or woulde not loke towar∣des the true light,Ioan. i. tenebrae non compraehen∣derunt lucem. Neuertheles nowe (being lothe in this comfortable chaunge, or rather restauracion of Christes true religion, by the goodnes of God and the vertuous regiment of your moste gracious raigne: Whereof to speake more I wyll nowe omit, leste flattery shoulde seme a furtherer to wynne fa∣uoure for me, albeit the whole worlde must nedes witnes it with me. Being lothe I saie to see loste so clere a light of so learned a clerke, expressed aswell by his conuersacion of life as also by others his liuelye workes, wherof this
is one, a piece cleane repugnant to the sclaunderous reporte of somme per∣uers persons whiche sithens his de∣ceasse, haue not ceassed bothe to speake and to write of him moste vniustelye, (but such is the propertie of obstinate heresie, with falsitie to enforce her fro∣warde iniquitie). I therefore haue thought good, moste gracious ladye, not onelye to set it abrode, as a mir∣rour for all men to beholde themselfe truelie, but also for the worthynes of the worke, to dedicate it vnto your Maiestie, as to the clearest lanterne, giuinge fairest light to all vertuous lyfe & godly magnanimite. But here, ones againe I will saie, leste I should seeme as I saied, efisons to set furthe fained flatterie, although in verie dede, conscience cōmaundeth me to confesse it (as it is) a veritable veritie. And nowe, because tediousnes shall not a∣buse time, I will conclude briefly. Moste humblie besechinge thine ffable Trinitee, that as (by his diuine proui∣dence) your Maiestie in mariage hathe matched your selfe with suche a noble
Kinge & worthye Prince as no earth∣ly prouince hathe presentlie the like. Hit maie also further please his inesti∣mable deitie, to graunte vnto bothe your graces (indiuidedly) longe to lyue and raigne ouer vs in all healthe ho∣noure and felicitie. And that of your two moste noble personages, maye be procreat vnto vs such a poste∣ritie, as maie be to the plea∣sour of God, to the pro∣fite of bothe your dominions, and to the ful en∣creasse of true Christianitie. Amen.

