


WHan our saueour in the fyrst of Marke had caste out of a man an vncleane sprete, the Iewes were astōnyed, say∣enge: what new learnynge is this? It was thought new to those wretches for lacke of knowlege of scripture: which of all thynges was oldest, that is to saye the Gospell, the which was longe tofore promysed by the prophetes in the scripture, of ye sōne of God Iesu Christ. The same thynge was sayd to Paul, whan he preached Christ at Athene: they toke him & led hym to Marcis strete, sayenge: May we not knowe what new learnyng this is, that ye teach? for ye brynge in to our eares new thynges. Was the teachynge of the A∣postles (I praye you) strayght waye new, because it was thought new to the proude gentyles swellynge and bounde with theyr carnall and fleshly wysedome? Euen suche lyke thinges in these later dayes, do they al suffer: which teach purely the Gospel of the

gracyous fauour and glory of God. Which do not abuse ye worde of euerlastynge truth for auaūtage: but as it were of syncernesse, but as it were of god, so speak we by Christ in the syght of God. This is the new doc∣trine (saye our aduersaries) lately deuysed & frnyshed in the shoppes or workhouses of heretikes. Let vs abyde styl in our old fayth Let the holynesse of our fathers, the autho∣rite of the coūcels, the consent of the longe tyme & so many ages, holde vs in ye wayes of our fathers. Let the heretikes go & shake theyr eares, wt theyr new learnynge, which spronge and rose vp of late. Those thynges which we teach came not all from Christe and the Apostles by wrytynge, neuerthe∣lesse they came by a faythfull reuelacyon, & shewynge vnto vs. To whom I wyll an∣swere none otherwyse then Christ answe∣red the Saduces: Ye erre (sayeth he) and ar ignoraunt in the scripture. And wolde to God that I myghte purchace and obtayne so much equyte of a braynlesse kynde of mē as one heythen man sheweth to another: that is, yf they wolde fyrst heare the cause or matter, and then afterwarde (yf it please them) condemne hym that is accused. Now they condemne innocentes without ony

hearynge of theyr cause. And they crye vn∣to vs which defēde ye worde of God wt no∣thynge but galowes, ropes, and fyre, not witesafyng vs the leest corner of the catho∣lyke church. In so much that I wonder of what sprete they be of. For that gentle and pleasaunt sprete of Christ, the which fedeth the mysticall body, seketh for the health and not for the destruccyon of them that erre. Charite the frute of the holy goost (as the apostell sayeth) doth thynke none euell, but is glad and reioyceth with the trueth, bele∣ueth all thynges, trusteth all thynges. Su∣rely they that set asyde the blynde iudge∣ment of the affeccyon, and loke earnest∣ly vpon the matter, iudge otherwyse of vs. For the olde aūcient fathers dyd neuer knowe or heare tell, of the moost parte of those thynges, whiche oure condemners do teache: then ye maye be sure that theyr lear¦nynge ought not to be rekened for olde lear¦nynge and apostolicall. Furthermore not euery thynge that the olde fathers wrote sauoureth of the syncernesse and purenesse of the sprete of the Apostles. Certayne thyn¦ges which were deuised with in these foure hundreth yeares, yee rather euen of late haue bene receaued by and by of them, as

soone as they were made, namely this is theyr learnynge and so olde that they desyre for this, that the Gospell almoost shulde be cast awaye, and coūted as a new teachynge and learnynge. Therfore I wolde that they shulde knowe and vnderstande that we do teache and preache the olde and the trewe heauenly doctryne of the sprete: that is the gospell of god. The greate mystery of holy∣nesse and godlynesse that god was declared in the fleshe, was iustified in sprete, sene of the angelles, preached to the gentyles, that cōfidence was geuē to him in the worlde, & was receaued in to glory. What saye you be these newes: God dyd predestinate vs yt he myght chose and purches vs to be his sō∣nes, by Christe Iesus in his owne selfe, ac∣cordynge to the pleasure of his wyl, that the glory of the grace of God myght be praysed, whereby he made vs welbeloued, thorowe his welbeloud, by whome we haue redēpciō thorowe his bloude, forgeuenesse of synnes accordyng to the ryches of his grace: This was the fathers counsell vpon vs, before the begynnyng of the worlde, that he shuld saue vs, and calle vs with an holy vocacion, not accordyng to our workes, but accordyng to his purpose and grace, whiche is geuen vn∣to

vs thorowe Iesus Christ before the euer∣lasting times, but it is opened and declared nowe, by ye appearing of our saueour Christ which put deathe away and hathe thorowe the gospel brought forthe the lyfe into lyght and mortalite. The which thyng seyng that it was promysed so longe ago by the prophe¦tes at the cōmaundement of the holy gooste and nowe published thorowe al the coastes of the worlde, howe dare they for shame call it newe learnyng? Ceasse you wycked men and staunche your blasphemyes geue glory and prayse with vs vnto god: and enbrace & loue (as ye ought to do) the mysteries of the truthe with deuoute myndes, lefte ye be in¦durate and made harde harted of god, with the reprobate and castawayes: the which be¦leue not the truth, but alowe vnryghtuous¦nesse. The are is layed at the roote of the trees. Wherfore I doynge the offyce of a christen brother, haue made a comparyson betwene the newe learnynge and the olde, whereby deare brother thou maye easely knowe whether we are called worthely or vnworthely the preachers of new learnyng. For so dyd they call vs of late, scornynge and of a contempte, and you desyred of

me to know what I thought best to answer to these braynles and madde fellowes. The which thynge seynge that it can not be ex∣pressed in an epystell: I thought it beste to bestow a few houres in thys matter, in these dayes called fastyngam, in latyn carnis priuium, whiche hath the name of ye takyng awaye of fleshe. In the which dayes after ye maner of the gentyles and heythen men, they vse vncomly playes and games. Take in good worth the labour of your frende. Fare ye well, and to God for me a synner.
