


IT IS NOT VNKNO∣wen to youre maiestie, moste soueraigne lorde, what great disceptacion hath been amon¦gest the wyttie men of all na∣cions, for the exacte knowe∣ledge of true felicitie, bothe what it is, and wherin it con¦sisteth: touchynge whiche thyng, their opinions al∣moste were as many in num∣bre, as were the persons of them, that either disputed or wrote therof. But and if the diuersitie of opinions in the vulgar sort for placyng of their felicitie shall be conside∣red also, the varietie shall be found so great, and the opi∣nions so dissonant, yea plainly monsterouse, that no ho∣nest witte would vouchesafe to lose time in hearyng thē, or rather (as I may saie) no witte is of so exact remem∣brance, that can consider together the monsterouse mul∣titude of them all. And yet not withstādyng this repug∣nant diuersitie, in two thynges do they all agree. First all do agre, that felicitie is and ought to be the stop and end of all their doynges, so that he that hath a full de∣sire to any thyng, how so euer it be estemed of other mē, yet he estemeth him self happie, if he maie obtain it: and contrary waies vnhappie if he can not attaine it. And therfore do all men put their whole studie to gette that thyng, wherein they haue perswaded them self that feli∣citie,
doth consist. Wherfore some whiche put their felici∣tie in fedyng their bellies, thinke no pain to be hard, nor no dede to be vnhonest, that may be a meanes to fill that foule pauche. Other which put their felicitie in play and ydle pastimes, iudge no time euill spent, that is employ∣ed therabout: nor no fraude vnlawfull that may further their winning. If I should particularly ouerrūne but the common sortes of men, which put their felicitie in their desires, it wold make a great boke of it self. Therfore wyl I let them al go, and conclude as I began, That all men employ their whole endeuour to that thing, wherin thei thinke felicitie to stand. whiche thyng who so listeth to mark exactly, shall be able to espie and iudge the natures of al men, whose conuersaciō he doth know, though thei vse great dissimulacion to colour their desires, especially whē they perceiue other men to mislyke that which thei so much desire: For no mā wold gladly haue his appetite improued. And herof cōmeth that secōnde. thing wherin al agree, that euery man would most gladly win all other men to his sect, and to make thē of his opinion, and as far as he dare, will dispraise all other mens iudgemētes, and praise his own waies only, onles it be when he dissi∣muleth, and that for the furtherāce of his own purpose. And this propertie also doth geue great light to the full knowledge of mens natures, which as all men ought to obserue, so princes aboue other haue most cause to mark for sundrie occasions which may lye them on, wherof I shall not nede to speke any farther, consideryng not only the greatnes of wit, and exactnes of iudgement whiche god hath lent vnto your highnes person, but also ye most graue wisdom and profoūd knowledge of your maiesties most honorable coūcel, by whō your highnes may so suf∣ficiently vnderstād all thinges conuenient, that lesse shal it nede to vnderstand by priuate readyng, but yet not vt∣terly to refuse to read as often as occasion may serue, for bokes dare speake, when men feare to displease. But to
returne agayne to my firste matter, if none other good thing maie be lerned at their maners, which so wrōgful∣ly place their felicity, in so miserable a cōditiō (that while they thinke them selfes happy, their felicitie must nedes seme vnluckie, to be by them so euill placed) yet this may men learn at them, by those .ij. spectacles to espye the se∣crete natures and dispositions of others, whiche thyng vnto a wise man is muche auailable. And thus will I o∣mit this great tablement of vnhappie hap, and wil come to .iij. other sortes of a better degre, wherof the one put∣teth felicitie to consist in power and royaltie. The second sorte vnto power annexeth worldly wisdome, thinkyng him full happie, that could attayn those two, wherby he might not onely haue knowledge in all thynges, but al∣so power to bryng his desires to ende. The thyrd sort e∣stemeth true felicitie to consist in wysdom annexed with vertuouse maners, thinkyng that they can take harme of nothyng, if they can with their rwysedome ouercome all vyces. Of the firste of those thee sortes there hath been a great numbre in all ages, yea many mightie kin∣ges and great gouernoures, whiche cared not greately howe they myght atchieue their pourpose, so that they dyd preuayle: nor did not take any greatter care for go∣uernance, then to kepe the people in onely feare of them, Whose common sentence was alwaies this: Oderint dum metuant. And what good successe suche menne had, all histories doe report. Yet haue they not wanted excuses: yea Iulius Caesar (whiche in dede was of the second sorte) maketh a kynde of excuse by his common sentence, for them of that fyrste sorte, for he was euer woonte to saie: . Whiche sentence I wysshe had neuer been learned out of Grecia. But now to speake of the second sort, of whiche there hathe been verye many also, yet for this present time amongest them all, I wyll take the exaumples of
kynge Phylippe of Macedonie, and of Alexander his sonne, that valiaunt conquerour. First of kinge Phylip it appeareth by his letter sente vnto Aristotle that fa∣mous philosopher, that he more delited in the birthe of his sonne, for the hope of learning and good education, that might happen to him by the said Aristotle, then he didde reioyse in the continuaunce of his succession, for these were his wordes and his whole epistle, worthye to bee remembred and registred euery where.
.
.
That is thus in sense,
Philip vnto Aristotle sendeth gretyng.
You shall vnderstande, that I haue a sonne borne, for whiche cause I yelde vnto God moste hartie thankes, not so muche for the byrthe of the childe, as that it was his chaunce to be borne in your tyme. For my trust is, that he shall be so brought vp and instructed by you, that he shall become worthie not only to be named our sonne, but also to be the successour of our affayres.
And his good desire was not all vayne, for it appeared that Alexander was neuer so busied with warres (yet was he neuer out of moste terrible battaile) but that in the middes therof he had in remembraunce his studies, and caused in all countreies as he went, all strange bea∣stes,
fowles and fisshes, to be taken and kept for the ayd of that knowledg, which he learned of Aristotle: And al∣so be had with him alwayes a greate numbre of learned men. And in the moste busye tyme of all his warres a∣against Darius kinge of Persia, when he harde that A∣ristotle had putte forthe certaine kookes of suche know∣ledge wherein he hadde before studied, hee was offended with Aristotle, and wrote to hym this letter.
.
. that is Alexander vnto Aristotle sendeth greeting.
You haue not doone well, to put forthe those bookes of secrete phylosophy intituled,
 For wher∣in shall we excell other, yf that knowledge that wee haue studied, shall be made commen to all other men, namely sithe our desire is to excelle other men in experience and knowledge, rather then in power and strength. Farewell.
By whyche lettre it appeareth that hee estemed lear∣ninge and knowledge aboue power of men. And the like iudgement did he vtter, when he beheld the state of Di∣ogenes Cinicus, adiudginge it the beste state next to his owne, so that he said: If I were not Alexander, I wolde wisshe to be Diogenes. Whereby apeareth, how he estee∣med learning, and what felicity he putte therin, reputing al the worlde saue him selfe to be inferiour to Diogenes. And bi al coniecturs, Alexander did esteme Diogenes one of them whiche contemned the vaine estimation of the disceitfull world, and put his whole felicity in knowledg of vertue, and practise of the same, though some reporte
that he knew more vertue then he folowed: But whatso¦euer he was, it appeareth that Socrates and Plato and many other did forsake their liuings and sel away their patrimony, to the intent to seeke and trauaile for lear∣ning, which examples I shall not need to repete to your Maiesty, partly for that your highnes doth often reade them and other lyke, and partly sith your maiesty hath at hand such learned schoolemaysters, which can much better thē I, declare them vnto your highnes, and that more largely also then the shortenes of thys epistle will permit. But thys may I yet adde, that King Salomon whose renoume spred so farre abroad, was very greatlye estemed for his wonderfull power and exceading trea∣sure, but yet much more was he estemed for his wisdom And him selfe doth bear witnes, that wisedom is better then pretious stones. yea all thinges that can be desi∣red ar not to be compared to it. But what needeth to al∣ledge one sentence of him, whose bookes altogither do none other thing, then set forth the praise of wisedom & knowledg? And his father king Dauid ioyneth uertuous conuersacion and knowledg togither, as the summe of perfection and chief felicity. Wherfore I maye iustelye conclude, that true felicity doth consist in wisdome and vertu. Then if wisdome be as Cicero defineth it, Diui∣narum at{que} humanarum rerum scientia, then ought all men to trauail for knowledg in matters both of reli∣gion and humaine doctrine, if he shall be counted wyse, and able to attaine true felicitie: But as the study of re∣ligious matters is most principall, so I leue it for this time to them that better can write of it then I can. And for humaine knowledge thys wil I boldly say, that who soeuer wyll attain true iudgment therin, must not only trauail in ye knowledg of the tungs, but must also before al other arts, taste of the mathematical sciences, special¦ly Arithmetike and Geometry, without which it is not possible to attayn full knowledg in any art. Which may sufficiētly by gathered by Aristotle notōly in his bookes
of demonstration (whiche can not be vnderstand with∣out Geometry) but also in all his other workes. And be∣fore him Plato his maister wrote this sentence on his schole house dore. . Let no man entre here (saith he) without knowledg in Ge∣ometry. Wherfore moste mighty prince, as your most excellent Maiesty appeareth to be borne vnto most per∣fect felicity, not only by reasō that God moued with the long prayers of this realme, did send your highnes as a moste comfortable inheritour to the same, but also in that your Maiesty was borne in the time of such skilful schoolmaisters & learned techers, as your highnes doth not a little reioyse in, and profite by them in all kind of vertu & knowledg. Amōgst which is that heauēly know¦ledg most worthely to be praised, wherbi the blindnes of errour & superstition is exiled, & good hope cōceiued that al the sedes & fruts therof, with all kindes of vice & ini∣quite, wherby vertu is hindered, & iustice defaced, shal be clean extrirped and rooted out of this realm, which hope shal increase more and more, if it may appear that lear∣ning be estemed & florish within this realm. And al be it the chief learnig be the diuine scriptures, which in struct the mind principally, & nexte therto the lawes politike, which most specially defēd the right of goodes, yet is it not possible that those two can long be wel vsed, if that ayde want that gouerneth health and expelleth sicknes, which thing is done by Physik, & these require the help of the vij. liberall sciences, but of none more then of A∣rithmetik and Geometry, by which not only great thin¦ges ar wrought touchīg accōptes in al kinds, & in suruai¦yng & measuring of lādes, but also al arts depend partly of thē, & building which is most necessary can not be wt∣out them, which thing cōsidering, moued me to help to serue your maiesty in this point as wel as other wais, & to do what mai be in me, yt not ōly thei which studi prīci¦palli for lernig, mai haue furderāce bi mi poore help, but
also those whiche haue no tyme to trauaile for exacter knowledge, may haue some helpe to vnderstand in those Mathematicall artes, in whiche as I haue all readye set forth sumwhat of Arithmetike, so god willing I in tend shortly to set forth a more exacter worke therof. And in the meane ceason for a taste of Geometry, I haue sette forthe this small introduction, desiring your grace not so muche to beholde the simplenes of the woorke, in comparison to your Maiesties excellencye,, as to fa∣uour the edition thereof, for the ayde of your humble subiectes, which shal thinke them selues more and more dayly bounden to your highnes, if when they shall per∣ceaue your graces desyre to haue theym profited in all knowledge and vertue. And I for my poore ability con∣sidering your Maiesties studye for the increase of lear∣ning generally through all your highenes dominions, and namely in the vniuersities of Orforde and Came∣bridge, as I haue an earnest good will as far as my sim¦ple seruice and small knowledg will suffice, to helpe to∣ward the satisfiyng of your graces desire, so if I shall perceaue that my seruice may be to your maiesties con∣tētacion, I wil not only put forth the other two books, whiche shoulde haue beene sette forth with these two, yf misfortune had not hindered it, but also I wil set forth other bookes of more exacter arte, bothe in the Latine tongue and also in the Englyshe, whereof parte bee all readye written, and newe instrumentes to theym deui∣sed, and the residue shall bee ended with all possible speede. I was boldened to dedicate this booke of Ge∣ometrye vnto your Maiestye, not so muche bycause it is the firste that euer was sette forthe in Englishe, and therefore for the noueltye a straunge presente, but for that I was perswaded, that suche a wyse prince doothe desire to haue a wise sorte of subiectes. For it is a kyn∣ges chiefe reioysinge and glory; if his subiectes be riche in substaunce, and wytty in knowledge: and contrarye
waies nothyng can bee more greuouse to a noble kyng, then that his realme should be other beggerly or full of ignoraunce: But as god hath geuen your grace a realme bothe riche in commodities and also full of wyttie men, so I truste by the readyng of wyttie artes (whiche be as the whette stones of witte) they muste needes increase more and more in wysedome, and peraduenture fynde some thynge towarde the ayde of their substaunce, whereby your grace shall haue newe occasion to reioyce, seyng your subiectes to increase in substance or wisdom, or in both. And thei again shal haue new and new causes to pray for your maiestie, perceiuyng so graciouse a mind towarde their benefite. And I truste (as I desire) that a great numbre of gentlemen, especially about the courte, whiche vnderstand not the latin tong, or els for the hard¦nesse of the mater could not away with other mens wri∣tyng, will fall in trade with this easie forme of teachyng in their vulgar tong, and so employe some of their tyme in honest studie, whiche were wont to bestowe most part of their time in triflyng pastime: For vndoubtedly if the mean other your maiesties seruice, other their own wis∣dome, they will be content to employ some tyme aboute this honest and wittie exercise. For whose encouragemēt to the intent they maie perceiue what shall be the vse of this science, I haue not onely written somewhat of the vse of Geometrie, but also I haue annexed to this boke the names and brefe argumentes of those other bokes whiche I will set forth hereafter, and that as shortly as it shall appeare vnto your maiestie by coniecture of their diligent vsyng of this first boke, that they wyll vse well the other bokes also. In the meane ceason, and at all ti∣mes I wil be a continuall petitioner, that god may work in all englishe hartes an ernest mynde to all honest exer∣cises, wherby thei may serue the better your maiestie and
the realm. And for your highnes I besech the most mer∣cifull god, as he hath most fauourably sent you vnto vs, as our chefe comforter in earthe, so that he will increase your maiestie daiely in all vertue and honor with moste prosperous successe, and augment in vs your most hum∣ble subiectes, true loue to godward, and iust obedience to ward your highnes with all reuerence and subiection.
At London
the .xxviij. daie of Ianuarie. M. D. L I.

