



Most deare, and dread Soveraigne,
IT is not long, since there was but a step betwixt You and death, and that You were euen at the point of resigning this your earthly King∣dome for that heauenly, whither your Queene of pretious memorie is lately gone before you to take possession. The change though it had beene happie for You, yet needes must it haue beene bitter to vs that must haue lost you. But blessed be God, who hath frustrated our feare by exchanging it for ioy. The wished and thrice-welcome newes of your ioyfull resurrection, and of the rolling away of the stone from the sepulchre of Your bodie (
quasi ) hath alreadie been pub∣lished at the Crosse by a Right Reverend Praelate (a faithfull and timely messenger thereof) in the audience of all the States of your Kingdome.The Lord B. of London. This
VIVAT REX
of mine (proclaimed at the same Crosse now fiue yeares since and vpward, on the day of your Maiesties most auspicious and happie investiture into this King∣dome) is but the AMEN to that VIVIT REX of his. The reviving of Your Maiestie is the reviving of this Sermon, and the reviuing of this Sermon wil (I doubt not) bee the reviving of many a good prayer for your Maiestie. I am sure, it was no sooner vttered, but presently the tongues of many your loyall Subiects bespake it for the Presse, as desirous to haue it also
im∣printed in their hearts. Their hearts no lesse fixed to say VIVAT REX,Macrob. Sat. l. 2. c. 4. than was the tongue of the Cob∣lers Crow docil to AVE CAESAR. Your Maiestie (I dare say) will be farre from saying either to them, or me, as there Augustus saith to the Crow; Satis domi salutatorum talium habeo; though if You should, yet could neither of vs fitly reply with the Crow; Opera & impensa periit. For, whither such our salutations bee accepted of You, or not, yet I haue learn'd of the Apostle, that they are accepted of God.1 Tim. 2.3. To You therfore (Grati∣ous Soveraigne) doe we humbly offer this our ioint-salu∣tatiō, VIVAT REX: And for You doe we likewise offer vnto God this our ioint-supplication, VIVAT REX Be∣seeching him againe and againe; long and long to prorogue the Terme of this your mortal life, to the vtmost extent of natures liueliehood; And when the date thereof shall expire, to immortalize
Your Life and Memorie, Your Crowne and Dignitie in the golden line of life, the line of Your Posteritie. And, in the meane time, to grant, that as You are for birth Eu∣genius,
for glorie Eudoxus, for aequity Eunomius, for integritie
Eutropius, for pietie Eusebius, so for length of dayes you may be
Macrobius. Let him that is Amen it selfe say Amen!Apoc. 3.14. Amen say I

VIVAT REX.
