



RIGHT HONORABLE,
Lam. 3. 1. Deut. 32. 39 Deut. 28. 61. 65. Deut. 29. 24. 25. Psai. 40. 12 Lam. 3. 42. THE rods of the almigh∣tie, where∣with hee smiteth to heale, are so many

and diuers, and consequently the smarts and griefes which affect the minde so variable, both by reason of our sinnes multipli∣city causing, and our apprehensions entertaining them, that I can neither reasonably hope this spiritual electu∣arie, which I intend for the helpe of af∣flicted

mindes, can serue for euery ma∣lady, nor iustly de∣spaire of it meeting with some Rea∣ders, who shall by the assistance of the same Spirit which gaue it being, finde comfort in it: and that in diuers kinds; the indispositions of the soule being so complicate and mixed, that there

neede not (as the Aegyptians wereHerotus saith, A∣mong thē, Singulos morbos suos habusse mdco. woont to haue) a Physitian proper to euery disease: hee that hath acquain∣tance with one grief of minde, cannot but knowe many. But forasmuch as their causes differ,Queritae∣us alleth them, Fu ligniosos apores. Diaret Pohist. ap. 1. some proceeding of grosse melancholy, others of darke va∣pours dulling the

vnderstanding, and disturbing the elu∣ded phātasie, others of other causes, the consideration wher of is peculiar to the Physitian, my pre∣sent addresse is to those onely who are capable of the Ministers aduice, and the comfort of Gods VVord.As Plato, Aristot. Ze∣nophon. Plut arch. Seneca. and others. Truely the ancient Sages seemd to writ

many things lear∣nedly to helpe the perturbations of minde, some labou∣ringLib. 3. de Virginibus. to ground it on a supposed con∣stancie, not yeeld∣ing to calamities, some to bring it to a kind of stupidity, not feeling them, like those Artlesse Physitians, killing by too much cor∣recting some a∣bounding

humor, others inuenting some pleasing leni∣tiues and diuersi∣ons; of all I may say in a word, as Am∣brose of Pythagoras, euening musicke which hee vsed to refresh his heart wearied with cares, in vaine did they desire to remoue se∣cular griefes, with secular remedies,

for they more defi∣led & disordred the minde, by seeking ease in pleasures:At quiuis Christinus &c. primo statim oc∣cursu adul∣trina & falsa llo∣rum docu∣menta ex Lydio Scrp∣turae sacrae lapide de∣egit▪ Quer∣citan. de perturbat: anim. n∣t cap. 1. But euery Christian, may, by the true touch-stone, the holy Scripture, present∣ly discouer them all to be adulterate & counterfet; neuer a∣ny of thē so much as mentioning the name of Christ, and through him com∣ming to this caelesti∣all

Catholion of Da∣uid, HOPE IN GOD, in which is the onlyA Augu∣stine saith of Ciceros booke inti∣tuled Hor∣tensius which so much tooke him: Nec solum me &c. re in∣gebat, quod omē Chri∣sts no erat b. Couf. li. 3. c. 4. sound cure of a trou¦bled minde, & wher in the most illiterate Christian excelleth the most bookish Philosopher. Seeing therefore, by the good prouidēce of God, I haue become acquainted with the vsage & linea∣ments of a troubled

Plin lib, 3 5 cap. 10. soule, not onely by the view of others malady, but also by the sense of mine owne, as Protogenes the Painter, hauing his owne counte∣nance set by an half-famishing dy∣et, was thereby en∣abled to take the true aspect & pou∣trait of meagre La∣lysus to life. And seeing I haue not

onely gotten some knowledge of theHuius in∣uentionis principum, est ipsius morb cog∣nitio. Lacū. epitom Ga∣len. de meth medend. lib 2 fine. Initium medicae ar∣tis dedt ex∣perientiae urn in-stitut med lib. 1. . 1. disease (the begin∣ning of euery cure) but experience (which begat the Art of Physicke) hath made mee so much an Empiric herein, that I may at least (as they woont to doe be∣fore the rules of healing, were im∣proued to an Art)

tell others by what meanes the Lord hath comforted me. I haue therefore ad∣uentured this Be∣noni,The sicke wont to be carried out into the high waies that they might à prateriun tibus reme∣dia sciscit∣ri Heurn. q. s. the issue of mine experience into the publicke; that those Sermons which in their deli∣uery, were receiued with holy attention and good fruites of many Auditors, might not like those

Hebrew masculineExod. 1. bookes, liue one∣ly the houre of their birthes, and presently bee cast away, but re∣maine longer to Gods honour and the vse of his: yet can I not probably excuse my presu∣ming to tender your Honour this homely piece, ex∣cept I pleade your

accustomed zeale to Religion, and fa∣uour to learning, & that you vouch∣safed to honour our congregation with your presence, while most of these meditations were deliuering. The God of all consola∣tion make them ef∣fectually profitable to the Reader, and your Honour com∣pleatly

happy with all temporall and spirituall blessings in Christ Jesus, in whom Irest,

