



IN so moche al the effecte and summe of our salua∣cion consysteth only vp∣on fayth and knowlage of the sonne of God Iesu Christ, all the scriptures and prophetes berynge wytnes, I thynke it moch expediēt euery christē man to be well instructed, and traded herein, for the lacke wherof, we may see what great and lamēta∣ble incōueniētes is fallen amon∣gest vs christen men, howe pytu∣ously we wāder abowt lyke stray shepe, as the prophete sayth, vn∣certaine of our saluation, howe dyscomfortly we lyue, how despe∣ratly
 we dye, not knowīg which way to goo / howe ignorat how fleshly we be with out all ioy, all comfort all feelyng of the spiritt, with out all the trewe charite to our neighbours. For how can we loue oure neighbour trewly for gods sake whan we nether know nor feele howe god louyth vs. Whych thyngs verely declare yt we haue but litell faith in vs. For els, hauyng so many and so ma∣nifest promises of god for our sal∣uation in the fyrst testament, and the same also fulfylled so verita∣bly in the latter testament by the commyng of ye sonne of god, how culde we lyue in suche perplexite & doubtfulnes as we do, yf there were any knowlege or fayth in vs? What cōteineth the old testa∣ment, but only promises? Where vpon be these promises groun∣ded? vpon the law? How so, were
 not these promises made to A∣dam and to Abraham frely long before the lawe came, as scripture wytnesseth .iiii. c. yeres and .xxx.Gal. 3. And why then do we not beleue God? Why do we yet stand in fe∣are and doubt of oure saluation, as though we had no promises, but only our owne deseruynges to stay vpō? Is god a dissembler? Why than do we not stablysh our hartes at the promise of the lorde, and reioyse with faythful Paule triūphyng boldly agaynst all the gates of hell? With hym sayng, who shall separat vs from the lo∣ue of god, any afflictiō,Rom. 8. any vex∣ation, any persecution, other hū∣ger, or nakednes other any Ieo∣perdy, or sworde? No sayth he, thys I knowe & am full suer that nether deah, nor lyfe, nether An∣gel, prynce or pouer, nether thyng presēt, nor thyng to come, heyght,
 nor depthe, nor no other creature shall be able to separat me from the loue of god which is in Christ Iesu our lorde. Here we may ler∣ne the example of a faythful hart. Abraham likwise heryng the pro∣mise of god,Gen. 15. that in his old age he shuld haue a childe, howe firmely beleued he the lord, and the lorde dyd impute yt to hym for ryghtu∣esnes,Oculi do∣mini res∣piciunt fi¦dem. for he deliteth in nothyng so much as in our faith vpō hym. Nowe wether was it more harde for Abrahā to haue a child so old, or for vs to be saued after our de∣ath & trobele. And yet Abraham beleued the lord. And why do not we beleue hym as bouldly in our promises?Luc. 1. Mary heryng the pro∣mis of god beleued the angel put∣tynge no doubt as zacharei dyd, that she shuld haue a child a vir∣gine, and yet myght that seme as harde to her as thys to vs but
 what sayd the angell, No worde or promis is harde to god. And why do not we as wel take a bold confidence hauyng so many pro∣mises mayde to vs in all the pro∣phetes? What dyd Christe more commend in hys confesores than faith?Luc. 7. or wherin was he more an∣grye with hys apostles,Luc. 26. than for their weyke faith after so muche hearyng & seyng? Howbeit to say the truythe it is not so greatly to be merueled in vs, for how can we beleue the promises of god whan we know them not? or how shuld we knowe them whan we haue neither bibles to rede them, nor here them, neither be they opened vnto vs? And how can such miste∣ries be opened of the prestes, whā so many runne & so few instructed and sent of god? Wherfore in this part to helpe the ignorance and weyknes of my brithrē, for a more
 styrynge vppe of theyr faith, I thought it not vnprofitable to translate this golden boke of Vr∣banus regius a most christiā wri¦ter, very fruytful for euery christē man, the which booke I cōmend and committe vniuersally to the whole englysh congregation, and namly send it to you (moste reue∣rend father (both to declare some token of my obedient dwety to∣ward you, and also to minister to you some occasiō of further know¦lege and consolation whiche I most hartely desire in the Lord. Grace be with you and with all the congregacion. Amen.

