


ME thynketh (most reuerēde fa∣ther) that this say∣enge of our Sauy¦oure Christ (be oc∣cupied til I come) is an admonicyon of all other moste necessarye and profytable,Luc. xix. and xij Matth. xxiiij. & xxv mar. xiij aswell for the parentes or maysters to declare to theyr chyldren or seruauntes,Deu. vi and .xi, as to meditate and remēbre with themsel∣ues,

whylse they be sittynge in theyr houses, walkynge on theyr iourneye,Nu. xv. Ex. xiij. sleapynge or wakynge. And (as Moy¦ses sayeth) worthy to be tyed in a mās hande, as a signe or remembraunce, and that shoulde be, and moue betwe∣ne our eyes. To be bryefe, it is worthy to be written on the dore sylles, and on the dores of the house. And (oh) I woulde to God, that the voyce of the lord, myght (as the vehemēt sowne of the heauenly trumpe) astonny the ea∣res of all men so, that the drousye and slougyshe myght leaue theyr slouthe and idlenesse, and the forwarde and willynge be encouraged. For we see that mankynde (not muche inferioure vnto the angelles) is negligent, & wel∣most ignorante of hys owne worthi∣nesse, so that he is letted and holden backe with innumerable other occupa¦tions and busynesses, and as the wyse man sayeth. I haue seene (sayeth he) al thynges that are vnder the sunne, and beholde all together, is but vanitie & trouble of mynd. He sawe it,Ecclesi. i. and we knowe by experience (and that not

without great hynderaunce) that man¦kynd (as I haue sayd) followeth vani∣tyes, leauynge of in the meane tyme (yea contynuyng, laugheynge to scor∣ne) eyther altogether, other els for the moste parte, that most profytable and gaynefull trade of merchaundyse. Nei¦ther do they passe for the manyfolde rewardes that wysedome promyseth when she calleth them, nor yet for the punyshmentes that she threateneth. They passe not though she crye neuer so often in the myddes of the multytu¦des, and in the greate gates of the ci∣tye sayenge. My litle ones, howe lon∣ge wyll you delite in vanitie? And ho∣we longe wil foles desyre the thinges that be hurtefull vnto them? How lon¦ge wyl the witlesse hate wysedome? Conuerte your selues to amendemēt. Furthermore,Matth. xxij. a Lu. xiiij c Ap. xix c the lord sendeth hys ser¦uauntes to cal the gestes to the supper & all do excuse themselues. One mari∣eth a wyfe, an other proueth an yocke of oxen: but none of them doeth than∣kefully receyue the benefyte of that delycyous supper: and yet in the mea∣ne

tyme thynke oure selues well fed, notwithstandyng that we be vtterlye famysshed, and very happye: not with¦standyng that we be in the myddes of all miserye, and that we suffering gre∣at lacke of heauenly rychesse: are exce∣adynge ryche. In so great slougysshe∣nesse therfore, wherewith the bodye (beynge corrupted) doeth so muche o∣uerlade oure soules: we ought of con∣gruence cal to remembraunce the say∣enge of the Lorde, wherein (after he had delyuered hys summe of moneye) he preysed the diligent and faythfull seruaunte. And what diligence was that so greately praysed: or what sum∣me of money was it, that he lent and woulde receyue agayne with vsurye: It nedeth vs not to sende into far coū¦treys for straunge merchaundise. Yea we mai gain much more precious thin¦ges at home, that is to saye, our owne soules vnto christ, for the which al the world can not be a sufficient pryce. we may adourne & decke our soules with vertues, which are the true & vncoūtre¦fayt richesses. The wisdom also, which


preysed aboue all martchaundyse of golde, sayenge vnto hys sonne, Hap∣pye is the man that hathe aboundaun¦ce of wysdome.Matth. xxv. mar. xiij Luce. xij xix So greate a treasure, so innumerable commodities may we get vs, yf we bestowe the talent that is geuen vs a ryght. The talent is the worde of God, as the psalmist sayeth. The saynges of the Lorde are chaste sayenges,Psa. xij. syluer tryed in the fyer, pro¦ued thryse, & purged .vij. tymes. For after that the worde of God is prey∣sed and setforth by many and sundrye names of prayse,Esa. lv. Ioh. vij. beynge called the ly∣uynge water, wherwith the flammes of cōcupiscence are quentched. the bre∣ade of lyfe hauynge in it al delectatiō,Ioh. vi wherwith we maye feede our hungry soule, most pure wyne wherewith we may be made druncken and merye, the lyght of our fotesteppes, the swer∣de that destroye the aduersaryes of the trueth,Eph. vi the fyrey shylde wherwith we defende vs agaynst our enemyes, the sure rocke wherevpon we muste buylde the tutchestone wherewith all opinyons must be examyned & tryed,

whereby all workes muste be tryed, whether they be iuste or vniuste, whe∣reby all spirites muste be tryed whe∣ther they be of god or not, the keye wherwith the heauens be shut and o∣pened, the instrument wherwith we do confort the werynesse of thys oure exile, the soueraygne medicyne, wher¦with all dyseases are cured, the presēt remedye agaynst all daungers, the re∣lyques of Christe beynge absent frō vs, which we ought to kepe, obserue and worshyppe with all deuocyon, the chariote of fayth, the carbunkle of cha¦ritye: after that, I saye, the worde of fayth is praysed and set furth vnto vs by these names and many other,Matth. xxv christ also praysed it callynge it a summe of money or talent, and by these names he doeth also prouoke vs vnto mer∣chaundyse, to put vs in mynde, that we haue not receyued it for oure sel∣ues onelye, but for others also. And notwithstandynge that he, by hys spi¦rite, worketh all thynges in all: yet doeth he make vs hys workemen be∣yng but onely hys instrumentes. And

as he hath in heauen his ministrynge spirites: so hathe he in the earthe ap∣poynted vs his spirituall ministers, and stuwardes of his spiritual miste∣ries, to thentent that we shoulde com∣municate vnto our brothers for his fa∣ke the celestiall philosophie, euen with lyke charitie as he brought it from heauen vnto vs. Neyther is it vnfea∣melye to calle syluer moneye, but the money that is shut vp in the coffer is not moneye, euen by the testimonie of the heathen, which affirme that there cometh no fruite of moneye, if it be not vsed, and this thynge taketh place chifelye in spirituall thynges. For they are geuen, for the moste parte, not so muche for oure priuate commo¦ditye, as for the profite of the congre∣gacyon. Wysedome (sayeth the wyse∣man) that is hyd, & the treasure that is not seene, what vtilyte or profyte co∣meth of either of them. And therfore hath God geuen vs hys worde, not that we shoulde hyde it vnder the grounde, but set it abroade for the pro¦fyte of others. And therfore muste we

before all other thynges see, that tho∣rowe thys talent, the fayth in Christe, and the charitie towarde oure neygh∣boures do increase, and that we do de∣lyuer oure soules from worldely desy¦res, from the tyranny of pryde and en¦uye, and to be briefe, that we get suche a treasure, that we be made newe mē, strayngers in thys worlde, and (put∣tynge of the olde Adam) partetakers of heauen, not carnall but spirituall. For to dyge in the ground, is to be car¦nal, and to knowe and teache thynges that be carnal. Nowe yf we beyng car¦nal, shoulde presume to teach other the thynges that be spiritual: we shoulde not teach them, but for our sakes shall the worde of god be yuell spoken of. And for as muche as in our lyfe we serue the deuyll, and Christe in oure wordes: we shall hynder more with oure lyfe, then we shal profyte wyth oure wordes. It is the parte of an Hy∣pocryte, to carye in hys hande, the Te¦stament, goodly beset with golde and gylted, and to dispute and reasone

of the worde of God in euerye feaste or bākette, and yet in the meane tyme, to lyue as one voyed of all mercye, im¦pacient, ignoraunte of charitye, vn∣myndefull of modestye, and paste all shame. The eternall wysedome loueth none suche preachers, notwithstan∣dynge that it suffereth them. But we muste see that we honoure and reue∣rence god in hys miracles and won∣ders that he wrought, illumyne oure soules with hys helthsome doctryne, and that we (conceyuyng a sure hope in god through hys benefyte shewed) do inwardely burne with the fyer of loue. To conclude after that we (be∣ynge ryche of spiritual gyftes) haue gayned one talent by an other, and do possesse two talentes, that is to saye ly¦fe and doctryne: then muste we go for¦warde merilye,Eph. vi gyrdyng vp our loy∣nes, and pullyng on oure shoes to go forwarde in the Gospel of peace, that we may also wynne the soule of oure brothers. For thys is the wyll of god, that vntyll suche tyme as Christ was gone into heauen, secrete thynges

shoulde be spoken secretely in the ea∣res of our frendes, but fence he is go∣ne, and the spirite comē, deniynge him selfe to noman that wyll desyre hym vnfaynedlye:Mat. x. mar. iiij. Lu. viij. xij. Matth. xxviij mar. xvi i. co. iiij a Iob. xij c Sap. i. b he would that the gos∣pell should be preached on the toppes of houses, & that the preachers should runne into all the costes of the earthe, and declare the gospel vnto all naciōs estates, ages & sexes, in whome was any hope of any sparke of light, what shoulde candles do vnder a busshell. What shoulde money do without gai¦nes. And what shoulde fyre do,mat. v. b mar. iiij. Lu. viijb & xi. c with∣out it burne. Furthermore, the Apo∣stles were not sufficed with the prea∣chynge of helthfull doctryne, whylse they were yet on lyue in thys worlde, but to the intent to profite theyr poste¦ryte, they occupyed theyr pennes, that the spiritual traualle myght contynu∣ally beynge forth spirituall children. All they therfore be without Christiā charitie, and are infideles, whiche do let preachynge, and do forbyd that the christian people shoulde haue the new Testament, & the olde, to reade there

in theyr common tonge, as thoughe our misteries were oracles, and the christian writtynges contayned in the any thynge that loueth darkenesse. No doubte we are muche bounde to thanke God, for that he hath geuen the lyght of hys trueth vnto al nacy∣ons, in theyr owne tonges and lāgua∣ges. And besydes that euery nacyon is ryche in hys owne language: thys is also a syngular benifite, that we ha¦ue hys worde purelye and vncorrup∣ted in the greke tonge, euen as the A∣postles wrote it. So that yf they trans¦latours haue in any place sayled of the true meanynge. We may by the firste copyes amende th, which thyn∣ge shal be so much the more acceptable vnto vs, by howe muche more it doeth conduce vnto the reueilynge and ope∣nyng of the workes of darkenesse. Let vs be occupyed in them therfore. Not as the Pharisees, we sistynge on their chayres, do teache the thynges that they do not. Not as men destituted of charitye, & as Angelles preachyng mi¦steryes. Not as men tournyng syluer

into drosse & most precyouse wyne in water, that is to say,mat. xv. chaungyng gods lawes into mens tradiciōs, & making merchaundyse of that, which is godly which thynge the Antichristes do con¦tinually: for it is not mere that the wor¦de of god do obeye vs,Exod. xxxij. but that we do obeye it. It was a great offence to ma∣ke a caulfe of the Egyptians golde & howe much more damnable were it for vs to make of the Lordes golde, I∣doles to be set vp in the temple of god what abhomynacyon is in them, that auaunce theyr owne opinions in stea∣de of christe?mat. vij. Psalm. cxxxvi. Let vs be occupyed ther¦fore, but let vs not caste perles before swyne, but let vs geue them to suche exchaungers as be godly couetouse, & that wyl render gaines boeth to them selues, and vs to. For there is nothing to let in thys matter. There is no lack of money. For looe, we haue the Go∣spell, we haue also the Epistles, and besydes that we haue the talent, not the crueltye of that Lorde that rea∣peth where he showed not,Matth. xxv. for looe we maye occupye thys at libertye.

Let vs not laye for oure excuse, that we lacke cunninge or knowledge. For yf the word of God be in our hertes: we shall lacke neyther diligence nor wysedome.Matth. xxv mar. xiij Luc. xij and xix. Let vs thynke, that Christ hath not left vs money vnnumbred, but numbred, that is to saye a pounde of the which he wyl, that nothynge be conueyed awaye, nothynge altered or chaunged, nor any thynge spent in id∣lenesse. For he wyll requyre an accōpt and that onely were ynough to put a∣waye all slouthe, if it were not all rea∣dy to far drouned in dulnesse. For he sayeth, vntyl I come, that is, to iudge∣ment, and suche kynde of iudgement, that neyther the iudge shall be decey∣ued, the sentence altered, nor yet the gyltye. And that more is, he hath lefte the tyme vncertaine, because we shoul¦de watche alwayes, notwithstandyng that the tyme it selfe is but short. wher¦fore he sayeth, watche, because ye kno¦we not, in what houre the lord shal co¦me. Suche as be faythfull in a small matter, he wyl make gouernours of a greate deale. And such as he fyndeth

vnfaythfull, he wyll condemne to e∣ternall tormentes. What shall ryches¦se auayle then: what shall honoure, what shall greate frendshyppe auayl, what shal any thyng auayle then. Thē shall the chyldyshe eloquence, the bru∣tyshe and beastly sophistry, & the vn∣certayne wisedome of the worlde, kno¦we theyr vanitye.Luc. xix Let vs be occupied therfore,Ier. vij and let vs walke whilse it is daye. And (as Hieremy sayeth) before it waxe darke, and that oure fete stumble agaynst the darc∣ke hylles: let vs geue glorye to oure God. AMEN.

