



COnsidering that Mai∣ster Frederus, the latine translator of this heauē∣ly Sermon had bouldly dedicated his labors be∣ing but a latine trāslati∣on to three noble Dukes of Germanye, & thought it a worke well worthy their heroicall patronage, I could not obser∣uing decorū, sēd the same abroad, being now Englished vnder a baser patron, thē I found it latined. For so should I haue promoted yt  out of the haule into the kit∣chyen, which neither haules, nor earthly ha∣bitations can worthely entertaine. Where∣fore right honorable, and worshipfull Citi∣zens though England may well be called , a land of great Lordes, for the mul∣titude of nobles in it, and consequently easy to finde an Englishe patrone, to match those three Germaine protectors: yet haue I chosen to dedicate these my simple labors, to this noble Citye of London, and the honora∣ble,

and worshipfull Citizens thereof. And that for diuers causes: some wherof be these. First to geue this precious pearle a patron, whome of mine owne experience I know to be equall, nay far superior to all his German protectors, both in nobilitye, and antiquitye. For I would wishe that good, and Godly bookes, should finde as good enterteinement here, as els where. Secōdly to help the booke it selfe to better efficacy, and greater operati∣on amongest many, by dedicating it to many. For such is mans nature, that it easely admit∣teth, mindefully retayneth, and highly este∣meth yt, which good will gratefully offereth. Thirdly to do honor to this honorable Citye. For worthy workes are sayd, as wel to mag∣nyfye their patrons: as to amplifye their au∣thors. Fourthly to make some semblance be∣twixt ye patrons, to whom it is offered & this puple which seeketh at your hand to be de∣fēded. For this is a graue, & godly dialogue, well agreing with the persons of graue, and godly men, & matrons, such as many of this Citye are, and all ought to be. And lastly I haue dedicated this translatiō, (such as it is) to London: Because Londiners of all ye laye people of this lād, haue most leasure to read, best will to heare, greatest desire to learne, re∣diest wittes to conceaue, soundest Iudgemēt to decerne, and most loue to good bookes, & therfore most worthy of that honor, and pro∣fet,

which this way may rise of good & godly writinges.Luke. 9.26. And yet to promise that this dedi∣cation, and booke, shall bring you eyther ho∣nor, or profit I cannot, vnlesse both your Ci∣tizens take it thankfully, your Citye protect it faythfully, & your deedes expresse it liuely. This dare I promise, & say, yt all men, if they will, may by reading, imbrasing, beleuing,Iohn. 8.51 1. Ione. 5.1. & folowing the doctrine of this little booke, escape hell, and obtayne heauen.Reuel. 12.12. 1. Pet. 5.8 Luk. 22.31. For where as the deuill, first by a sencelesnes of sinne see∣keth to lead the vnregenerate to hell: and se∣condly by ye horrors of their sinnes would be∣reaue ye godly of heauē:Ephe. 2.12. And thirdly whereas man is altogether  & can neither saue himselfe frō ye one, nor obtaine ye other: but is, as an Aethiopian, in reading the reme∣dy ignorante of the remedy,Acts. 23. Luke. 24.16. and as a Cleo∣phas that talking with his sauiour, knoweth not his Sauiour: This one precious sermon, or dialogue, (by Gods grace) doth helpe all these euills: as by your patience I shall shew.
For whereas first the deuill, that subtile serpent, seeketh by keeping men in a senceles∣nes of sinne to lead them hedlong to hell: here may be gathered, that for sinne there must fo∣low death, the reward of sinne.Rom. 6.23. And such as is the worke, such must be ye wages: but sinne is infinite, therfore must needes folow death which is infinite. And this death, must be the death either of the offēder man or of the suer∣ty

Christ, apprehended by fayth. If it be the death of the suertye Christ, then is it infinite in preciousnes: but if it be ye death of ye offēder man, thē is it (horrescoreferēs.) infinit in hor∣riblenes. And who now shall the deuill here∣after entise to sin: seing euery sinner in sin∣ning doth either kil himselfe, or crucify Christ. Surely I thinke men will not buy drosse so deare. I thinke Christians will not  leese the kingdome of heauē for a short pleasure,Gen. 25.33. nay payne of sinne. I hope men will learne to be wise by Esaw, and not sell their byrthright of heauen for a vyle pleasant sin, & very cold messe of pottage: yea I thinke the very worldling, vncleane persō, and atheist (whome the deuill by this waye, chiefly haunteth after) will here make a pause, & say with Demosthenes  (nay ) . I will not buy repētance so deare: which if it please God, they doe, then this sermon hath well stopped vp the deuills former waye.
Reuel. 12.12.Secondly, when men beginne to repent, satan seeing that his kingdome is but short, besturreth him in his other way (to wit,) he seeketh by feare of Gods wrath, by horror of their falles, & by sight of their sinnes, to driue the godly to dispaire,Iohn. 5.25. and August l. 4. de trini∣tate. c. 3. Reuel. 12.4. & that especially while they are but yet setting first foote forwarde to God by repentaunce, while they are but yet greene from the former resurrectiō, while

they are but yet in the new byrth,1. Pet. 1.7. and while they be but yet weake, and vnacquainted with the fiery trialls,Deut. 8.3. with the Lordes bat∣tayles, with Gods crosses, & with the spiri∣tuall conflictes, in which our ould Adam, our naturall man the fleshly lustes, must in this lyfe be crossed, consumed, mortified, & slaine. But here are opened vnto them, the flowers of the prophets, & the chiefe promises of God concerning Christ,Rom. 15.4. which as they are of thē∣selues by the testimony of the new testamēt, the marrow of the worde, the kernell of the scriptures, the Ioy of our hartes,Math. 4.4. the stafe of our liues, the foode of our soules, & the power of God vnto saluation, to all that beleue: so doth there in opening of them, appeare a ve∣ry paradise of al spiritual pleasure, loue, hope, and peace, the sweete ryuers of Eden, which flowe so plentifully in this sermon, that they expell all feare of desperation, and so stop that other second way, whereby the deuill seeketh to deuour the childrē of God. For though the Godly be thus assayled by Sathā, and that in the greennes of their new byrth, & though the Deuill torment them with griefes, and feare them with death, hell and Gods iudge∣mentes: yet shall they finde in this sermon such, so great, and so sweete, promises of god in christ, yt there is no soul so fearefull, though most fearful, no fayth so weake, though most weake nor any man so ignorant, doubtfull,

and hartlesse, though he be most ignorant, doubtfull, & hartlesse, but yt he may in this sermō gather such hart, receaue such hope, and growe vnto such knowledge, strength and stabilitie, that if he will but come, and either heare it, or reade it, he shall returne as did Cleophas, leape lyke an hart, walke lyke a Lyon, & stand lyke a rocke which cannot be moued with any surging sea of temptatiō.
For that learned byshop of Germany doc∣tor Vrbane Regius hath here so displayed Christ, with ye kingdome of Christ, & the mer∣cies of god in christ, that if any sad Cleophas, doe but couet to come to Emaus,Emaus sig¦nifieth the bright mor∣ning. (ye bright morning) of the knowledge of Christ, & his kingdome, and will bring but so much good seede with him (by gods grace,) as that he hath a desire to know Christ, to heare Christ, to enioy Christ, and to reason and reade of Christ, (for this is fayth,) yea though he be heauy, and sorrowfull, and come weeping: yet shall he in this booke so meete with Christ and heare such a sermon of Christ, that it will last him, and not leaue him, vntill he come to the trew Emaus in deede, the bright know∣ledge of Christ: and there shall his blind eyes be opened,Cleophas signifieth all glory. Gene. 10.9 and he shall see, know, & acknow∣ledge Christ to be his sauiour, and shall re∣turne a right Cleophas in deede, and bring such showes of fayth, hope, and peace of con∣science with him, that Nimrods net shall be

broken, the pray, (mans soule) shall be deli∣uered, the feare of death, and desperation, shal be abandoned. And of this you may fetch (if you will) aprobatum est, out of the gospell of Saint Luke.Luke. 24.13 For he maketh mention of this sermon, and sheweth both when, where, why, to whome, & out of what Christ made it, & what effect it had in it. Thirdly where∣as (I sayd) we are by nature,Acts. 8.23. vnperceiuing Ethiopians, which reading the Prophets, vnderstād not the Prophets: this little booke wil well serue vs for a Phillip, a sound inter∣preter of the prophets. For it doth so drawe the vale and curtayne of the letter, that it ma∣nifestly sheweth the precious perle Christ,Math. 13.44. and 45. Iesus sig∣nifieth a Sauior. hid∣den vnder the letter: and it so plainely disco∣uereth the field of ye olde testamēt, that it lea∣deth vs by ye hand to our Iesus, yt great trea∣sure, hidden in the law, and the prophets. Yea it doth so playnly proue Christ to be Christ that both the ignorant Gentiles, and obsti∣nate Iewes, may know, and acknowledge, Christ to be Iesus, the sauiour of the world.
But because we are subiect to many eny∣mies, crosses, and temptations, and so haue neede of comfort: and because also, when we both haue, heare, and reade of comfort,Iohn. 20.25 we be as Thomas was, hard receauers of Com∣fort: I thinke it needefull, that for the better obtayning of comfort, we vse two thinges in the reading of good bookes, and the holy

scriptures the cornu copia of all comfort.
Math. 21.22.The first is that before we read, we pray. For as of ourselues we are, & haue nothing: so to faythfull prayers, is made a promise of all thinges. The second is that in all our pri∣uate reading we apply ye worde to our selues & take that which is there spoken, and reade to be spoken to vs, or him that readeth it: for els shall we neither haue our lyues mended, nor our soules comforted by the worde, and then the word, leeseth his fruitfull effect. But if when wee see, and heare, Ephraim, Ieru∣salē, & Iuda, or the scribes, & pharises threa∣tened, & reproued for their sinnes, we will in place of them, put in our owne selues, and names, and know it to be spoken to vs (as it is in deed if we be lyke thē,Ieremy. 5.9) then no doubt we shall read to our amendement. Againe if when we see promises made, and comfort ge∣uen, and forgeuenes graunted to Iuda, Ie∣rusalem, and Sion, or the Church, we will in place of them suppose, or put in our owne names, and persons, and both beleue, and know, that those promises, forgeuenes, and those comforts are made, set downe, and geuen vs, and euery one of vs that heare or read them, (as they are in deede yf we beleue them,Rom. 15.4.) then shall we finde in this sermon, and other holy scriptures such salue for our sores, and such comfort for our hartes, that sinne shallbe subdued, dispayre shall be

remoued, and our heauy hartes shall be com∣forted.
And here I will passe ouer the iust prayses which this booke deserueth, both in excellēcy of the matter, as god hath geuen it, & in lau∣dablenes of the maner as Vrbane hath hād∣led it. For in that it containeth ye prophecyes of Christ, and the promises of God, true salua∣tiō vnto all that beleue (a wine a man would thinke, vēdible enough amongest the depra∣ued, and dead sonnes of Adam) it doth suf∣ficiently approue, and promote it selfe. . Onely this I thinke meete, that before I end, I put you in remembraunce, that we are all by nature wicked, and the childrē of wrath, and death,Ephe. 2.3. and must without the knowledge of those thinges which are set downe in this booke, dye as we be, and be as we dye, euen with∣out Christ, firebrandes of hell. But now to returne where I began I beseech you hono∣rable, and worshipfull Citizens, that as you haue heard my dedication was not without cause: so now ye will graunt me a petition, or two which doe not exceede reason. The first is that (God hauing his dew prayse for all his goodnes) ye would both pardon this my bouldnes, and also vouchsafe my simple la∣bors (about the heauenly worde) no worse entertainement, and protection, then ye vse to shew to your earthly peuples.
Secōdly that if ye reape any profit by this worke, ye would geue deserued prayse to two learned, and well lyued doctors of this church namely M. Barnard Gilpin of the North, and M. Iohn Fox of the South. Whereof this godly, and painefull father moued me to translate it: and the other great Moecenas hath brought vp me poore sinner to this lit∣tle I haue, and many other learned men to the Churches commoditye. And lastly I be∣seech you in the Lord, that you will take pity vpon your wiues, your children, your selues, and your soules, to wit, that you will by hea∣ring, beleuing, & practising the word, seeke to be safe from Sathan, that seeketh to sifte you. Furnish your selues, and your familyes (I pray you) with spirituall armour. Geue your inward man, but euery moneth one of these articles for his repast, and let it be well digested. Let the spirite once rule ouer the flesh, and let Christes spouse the soule now at the last, be as well bewtified, as the Deuills cōcubine the world. . Eschew euill, and doe good. Recte iudicate, qui iudicatis terram. Iudge and gouerne well, and rightly, ye that be magistrats, least the Lord remoue your candlestick. Hādle not (O ye rich men) those, that falle into your lappes, with rigor and extremitye: and geue not your selues (ye poore men) to sinister & double dealing. De∣light not I beseech you (ye mē) in ye multitude

of your riches: nor (ye women) in the furni∣ture of your houses: watch ye which haue charge in your callinges, and keepe your selues cleare from the bloud of your families. Let not your wyues, children, and bodyes, so haue their willes, and pleasure,Ezechi. 3.18 that your soules (which must aunswere for it) suffer woe, and payne. . O laye hould, lay hold vpō discipline, and put away pride, couetousnes, lying, swearing, and cur∣sed dealing from among you. And all these shall you quickely, and easely doe, if you will pray hartely, if you will reade the word diligently, and if you will apply it wisely. Which the Lord Iesus, that dyed for you worke in you. And the blessed Lord God, which hath caused all holy scriptures to be written for our learning: graunt that we may all in such wise, heare thē, read, marke, learne, and inwardly disgest them, that sinne and distrust, may be remoued from vs, and we may in all our extremities be comforted, and euer hold fast the blessed hope of euerla∣sting lyfe, which he hath geuē vs in our Sa∣uiour Iesus Christ, who euer preserue you and his whole Church. Amen.

