



ARISTOTLE the famous Phi∣losopher, writing a boke to king Alexāder, the great and migh∣tie conquerour, began the Epi∣stle of his Booke in these woor∣des. Twoo thynges moued me chieflie, O King, to betake to thy Maiesties handes, this worke of my trauaile and labour, thy nobilitie and vertue, of the whiche thy nobilitie encouraged me, thy greate and singuler vertue, indued with all humanitie, forced and draue me thereto. The same twoo in your good Lordshippe, Nobilitie and Vertue, as twoo migh∣tie Pillers staied me, in this bolde enterprise, to make your good Lordshippe, beyng a Pere of honour, indued with all nobilitie and vertue: a patrone and possessoure of this my booke. In the whiche although copious and aboundaunte eloquence wanteth, to adorne and beau∣tifie the same, yet I doubte not for the profite, that is in this my trauaile conteined, your honour indued with all singuler humanitie, will vouchsaufe to accepte my

willyng harte, my profitable purpose herein. Many fa∣mous menne and greate learned, haue in the Greke tongue and otherwise trauailed, to profite all tymes their countrie and common wealthe. This also was my ende and purpose, to plante a worke profitable to all ty∣mes, my countrie and common wealthe.
And because your Lordshippe studieth all singula∣ritie to vertue, and wholie is incensed thereto: I haue compiled this woorke, and dedicated it to your Lorde∣shippe, as vnto whō moste noble and vertuous. VVher∣in are set forthe soche Oracions, as are right profitable to bee redde, for knowledge also necessarie. The duetie of a subiecte, the worthie state of nobilitie, the prehe∣minent dignitie and Maiestie of a Prince, the office of counsailours, worthie chiefe veneracion, the office of a Iudge or Magestrate are here set foorthe. In moste for∣tunate state is the kyngdome and Common wealthe, where the Nobles and Peres, not onelie daiely doe stu∣die to vertue, for that is the wisedome, that all the graue and wise Philophers searched to attaine to. For the ende of all artes and sciences, and of all noble actes and enterprises is vertue, but also to fauour and vphold the studentes of learnyng, whiche also is a greate ver∣tue. VVho so is adorned with nobilitie and vertue, of necessitie nobilitie and vertue, will moue and allure thē

to fauour and support vertue in any other, yea, as Tul∣lie the moste famous Oratour dooeth saie, euen to loue those whō we neuer sawe, but by good fame and brute beutified to vs. For the encrease of vertue, God dooeth nobilitate with honour worthie menne, to be aboue other in dignitie and state, thereupon vertue doeth encrease your Lordshipps honor, beyng a louer of vertue and worthie no∣bilitie.

