



RIght Honorable my singular good Lord and Ladie, as bountie and liberalitie in people of the greater sorte, is both seemely and very commendable, so in∣gratitude & vnthankefulnes in people that are in the meaner place, is very much reproachfull, and to be shunned. To the former the mighty men of the world are to be led, not onely by the saying of an heathen Oratour, who sayth,Isocrat. ad Demonic. Prae∣clarus est thesaurus, beneficium apud bonum virum collocatum, (i) A good turne done to a good man, is as great riches, or as a treasure to him that doth it: but also and especially because such treasures are there layd vp, where nei∣ther moth nor cankar corrupts,Mat. 6.20. and where theeves nei∣ther dig throgh nor steale;1. Tim. 6.19. this being indeed a good foun¦dation against the time to come, that they may ob∣teyne eternall life. The later, the inferiour sort and the re∣ceivers of good turnes should labour to avoyd, not onely be∣cause of that brand, which the very heathen men have set vpon ingratitude, as in the short and vsuall saying it is sayd, Perijt quod facis ingrato, That is cleane cast away, which is bestowed vpon an vnthankefull party. And, Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris, He saith all that may be sayd against a man, which calleth him an vnthankefull man: and, omnes immemorem beneficii oderunt, All men hisse and hoote at him which is vnmindfull of a good turne done vnto him.

But chiefely because the holy scripture (whereof one sentence should more move men, then all the sayings of heathen wri∣ters) noteth it as a reproachfull blemish in men:Ge. 40.23. as in Pha∣raos chiefe Butler, who did not remember Ioseph, but for∣gate him:Lu. 17.117 and in the Leapers, to whom our Saviour Christ sayd, But where are the nine? It hath pleased God, the giver and disposer of all things, to enable and move your Honours to be both free-harted, and open-handed; and as not ceasing to do good to the living and to the dead;Ruth 2.20. so to love sundry of our nation (I meane of our function) as both my selfe and others can iustly testifie:Luke 7.5 which if I for my part should not freely acknowledge,Gen. 41.9. I might truly say with the aforenamed Pharaos Butler, I call to mind my fault this day. Amongst sundry other your honorable favours on me conferred, I cannot without forgetting and blaming my selfe, passe by those which I received from you; as also (good Ma∣dame) from your good Lady Mother, the right Honorable and vertuous the Lady Anne Harrigton, when it pleased God so neere vnto death to visit me (by which your Christian kindnesses manifested both by word and deed, I was not only refreshed, but as it were revived) which visitation and re∣covery, as I trust I shall never forget, so together with the re∣membrance thereof, I continually call to minde (otherwise should I be most vnthankefull) the dayly and manifold cur∣tesies wherewith it pleased your Honors at that time to visit me. The which I am the more bold by your Honors patience to mention, because then I perceived there was nothing in your Honors house, that was either too much or too deere, which was not for my vse,Prov. 23.6. and that not with an evill eye, or in any sparing sort, but both in bountifull manner, and with honourable, both speeches and messages. So that I may truly say, for the heeding and cherishing, which from you at that time (when Death Gods Seargeant had as it were seized on me, had not the mercifull iudge of the world reprived me)

I received: as the Apostle saith, for his being received of the Galathians, who received him as an Angel of God: so like∣wise was I, at that time by your Honosr cherished and regar∣ded. Your Honors herein imitating, or rather exceeding that honorable woman of Sunem, in her kindnes towards Elisha. 2. Kin. 1.10 For retribution, the only thing that I either may or can re∣turne, is thankefulnes: which, as by these few lines I do in all dutifull and thankefull sort tender, so likewise by adventuring to present this small worke unto your Honours patro∣nizing and protection: which if it please you to undertake and accept, I shall both thinke the worke to be the more graced, and myselfe still the further obliged and bounden unto your Honors. The worke I confess being but a translation, is some∣what too meane to be dedicated to such noble personages as I hold your Honors to be, yet sundry reasons have emboldned and enduced me hereunto. At first, that the Author of this treatise did think this his originall worke and labour to be fit to be presented unto our late Soveraigne of famous me∣mory, as in his Epistle it doth apeare. Secondly, in regard of the excellent matter therein contained, it tending both unto the comfort of the godly, and confuting of the adversary. And thirdly, for that I know your honorable dispositions to patronize and countenance any treatises of this sort, whereby God may be either glorified, or good done unto his Church: as may appeare by the godly labours which sundry godly and painefull men have presented unto your Honors, as being undoubtedly perswaded of your soundnes in religion, as wherein indeed consisteth true honor, according unto that that is said unto Eli, 1. Samu. 2.30.Them that honor me I will ho∣nour: and answerable unto that which Salomon saith, Pr. 8.17,18I love them that love me: and, with me are riches and honour, even durable riches and righteousnes. Of this, as sundry others can testifie, so I myselfe can say much by ex∣perience, as being the poore Minister of the place, where your

Honors for some good space resided: during which time there were apparant tokens of your soundnes in religion, and care of the service of God, both by your ordinarie resorting unto the publike exercises, as also by the religious government and godly carriage of your familie, which was the lanthorne and mirror both of religion and pietie in our countrie and countie: your Honours presence making our little obscure place like unto a Citie, whereas now, through your necessarie absence, it is like unto a wildernes: and your hospitalitie and almes, the one entertaining sundrie your friends and neigh∣bours, and the other relieving not onely the needie of our con∣gregation, but also bountifullie refreshing the confining poore of our whole countrie. Neither that onely, but in sundrie other fruites doth your godlie care & love toward religion appeare: which as it is in it selfe, so I know your Honors do hold it the verie crest and top of your Nobilitie and Honour: for the which things sake, the Apostle accounted both his noble birth, and all other things to be but losse and dung, Phil. 3.4,8that he might win Christ. Amongst manie other testimonies and proofes thereof, this one commeth unto my mind, as not one of the least: which I am the more bold, and that without any adulatorie or mercinarie motive, particularly to mention, for that therein I shall but give unto your Honors your due, and likewise by mentioning your religious and honourable ex∣ample, aime at the provoking of others to be imitators of your godly president. It is this: Namely, for that you have beene alwaies readie rather to enlarge, then to straighten our borders, and to adde unto the portion of the Levites, rather then to thinke that too much which is alreadie alotted unto your house, name, and persons, by how much the contrary, in the infallible iudgement of sound divinity, is an undoubted marke of irreligion and impietie. for how can men say, that

they love the temple, when they shall either by their simonia∣call or sacrilegious dealing, iniurie those that wait about the altar? or how can men say, that they delight in the lawe, when they shall wrong the interpreters or expounders of the lawe? It were as if a man should say, I would gladly have the corne troden forth, and yet I will muzzell the mouth of the oxe that should tread it forth. 1. Cor. 9.9.Or as if a taskemaster should say I will have my whole tale of brick made up, and yet de∣liver no straw to make them withall: Ex. 5.10.8.which speeches are flatlie contradictorie, and cannot stand together. Sampsons wife said unto him, surely thou lovest me not, Iudg. 14.16.because thou hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and hast not told it me. The word and ministerie may much more say to such kinde of men, surely you love me not, because you detaine that frō me which you ought to yeeld. If Sampson were said not to love his wife, because he concea∣led that from her, which he was not bound to reveale unto her: then much more may these be said not to love, because they do detaine and withhold that, which by all lawe, equitie, and conscience they ought to give. These people may be resem∣bled unto those kind of professors, which S. Iarnes speaketh of, who saie, Depart in peace, warme your selves, Iam. 2.16.and fill your bellies, notwithstanding yee give them not those things which are needefull to the body. So these, I meane the more faire spoken sort of them, (for there is of them a ge∣neration, who as they have the vertue of subtracting our por∣tions, so have they the vice of detracting our persons) how∣soever, they can be content to give faire words, which, as the common saying is, will pay no debt, yet they are so farre off from thinking this godlinesse to be great gaine, 1. Tim. 6.5.6as that they do rather thinke that that which is gotten this way is cleere gaine: yea and do practise it, as though this corrupt gaine were godlines. These and many other sharp and acrimonious speaches, may justly be said against these forenamed oppres∣sors,

so that your Honors have much to thanke God and to reioice, in that, that by your religious and honorable carri∣age herein you have separated your selves from this kinde of men. 1. Tim. 6.5That which your Honors have many waies deserved from me, and that that I do unfainedly conceive of, and in all dutifull and Christian affection truly attribute unto your Honors, may both iustlie occasion me to enlarge my selfe to manifest and expresse my thankfulnes: but that, first I do suppose you are not delighted with having your owne praises sounded forth: and withall, your honorable and christian fame, is so sufficiently known unto the world, as that my selfe, the meanest of many that are shrowded under your honou∣rable wings and protection, neede not to be the trumpetter thereof. I will therefore, with all dutifull and thankefull re∣membrance unto your Honors end, with the saying of Boaz unto Ruth: Ruth 2.12.The Lord recompence your worke, and a full reward be given you of the Lord God of Israel. And likewise with that of Ruth unto Boaz, Verse 13.Let me still finde favour in your sight, my Right Honorable patrone, and patronesse, for you have comforted me, and spoken comfortably unto me your poore Minister, though I be not like unto one of your Ministers, but am the least of those of our sort and order, which are patronized and protected by you. The Lord continue your prosperous health and christian welfare, and ever more increase the noble honour of both your Honours.
From your Towne of Cheynis the ninth of Iune. 1604.

