




RIGHT VER∣TVOVS,
HAVING transla∣ted, & being now to publish this briefe
History of the Blessed man F. Ignatius of Loyola; I
could not doubt, but that it would be gratefull to YOV, who haue deserued
so well of his Children liuing in our afflicted Country. And therfore my
choyce was soone made of your Self, before all others, to direct this my
small labour vnto: which indeed is so small, that vnlesse the matter
which it cōtey∣neth were esteemed, it were not worth the offering to any.
Wherfore you must not thanke me, but your owne vertuous Disposition, if
you take any content∣ment therein.
To which (if you will needes haue some other to partake with
you) that Worthie and Reuerend Man Father Peter Ribadeneyra, who is
the Au∣thor, deserueth best to be added, being in a māner from his
Childhood brought vp in the Religious Schoole of the for∣said Blessed
Father, & continued ther∣in, with great edification, aboue 70.
yeares: and among his many pious and profitable labours, was very
eminent for his writings, especially in the Spanish Tongue, as is well
knowne to all of that nation, by his many deuout & learned Treatises
which are extant. But aboue all other, by those which appertayne to History
among which our Nation was not forgotten; for he translated & aug∣mented
D. Saunders Bookes, Of our English Schisme, beginning
with King Henry the VIII. who vpon the foule occasiō, which the
world knoweth, was the first cause therof and prosecu∣ting the same
vnto the later dayes of Queene Elizabeth.
He also wrote with great cōmenda∣tions the Liues of all the
Saints which are set downe in the Roman Calendar, and of diuers others. By
occasion of which he published this briefe Narratiō of Blessed
Father Ignatius, which I haue translated; wherein, as in an,
A∣bridgment, he, in few wordes, com∣prehendeth that which he had set down
more at large in a former Treatise, and withall inserted many not able
miracles, which had byn wrought by this Holy Man, for the most part, after
the edition of his former booke. And yet he relateth not all: for God hath
since that time lik∣wise continued to manifest the great sanctity of
this Blessed Father by many more, in diuers partes of the Christian
world. I will only make mention of one, which hath byn published in print,
and happened in the Prouince of Perù, and in the Citty of
Lima, of which I make choice, the rather, because the occasion
therof was taken by reading of those, which are recited in this Relation.
In the Conuent of S. Dominike in the forsayd Citty
there was a Religious man of that Order, named Father Al∣uarus de Molina, a man of good ac∣count, and only hindred from great
im∣ploiments by long & continuall sicknes: for he had byn molested with
a dead pal∣sy for the space of ten yeares; eight of which he had likewise
so terrible a con∣uulsion, as the Phisitians call it, that he could not
mooue his body, nor goe one steppe, nor lift his handes to his head, nor
almost speake any word that could be vnderstood. The Phisitians &
Sur∣geons had giuen him ouer, accounting his disease incurable. Wherefore
the good Father conforming his wil to that of God, spent most of his tyme in
praying & reading spiritual bookes, for which he aceded some helpe, not
being able to turne ouer the leaues himself.
Hauing ended one of those deuout bookes, he desired F.
Iames de Ojeda, a Religious mā of the same Order, to pro∣cure him
another, which he willingly vndertooke, & made choyce of this
our History, giuing great cōmendatiō ther∣of. The other accepted it very
willingly, & hauing read the Miracles cōteyned therein, he conceiued so
great deuotion to B. F. Ignatius, & had such firme cō∣fidēce
in his intercession, that he made a vow to fast his Vigil, or Eue, so long
as he liued, & to make a Cōmemoration of him twice euery day, besides
other deuo∣tiōs which he would always vse towards him, togeather with a
particuler affe∣ctiō & good will to his Order, if it plea∣sed God to
restore his health & strēgth by the prayers of this holy man. This vow
caused him extraordinary cōfort, & so he renewed it dayly, vntil it
plea∣sed God to renew & restore him his for∣mer health and strength,
which he did within lesse then a fortnight, after the first making thereof,
in manner fol∣lowing.

Vpon the 8. day of Nouēber, which is the Octaue of
All-Saints, in the yeare of our Lord 1607. betweene 4. &
5. of the clock in the afternoone, Father Aluarus sitting
in his chayre, as he was allwayes wont when he was out of his bed, felt within
himself an inward impulsion or motion, and as it were a voyce, which
incouraged him & sayd: Rise vp, & walke; & this was with so
great delight and satisfaction, that he stood vp, and began to goe: and
finding himself strong & able, he went downe a payre of stayres, where
he met with many that came from an Act of Diui∣nity, who did all wonderfully
admyre to see him goe in that manner. To whome he related his vow, & how
it had plea∣sed God to cure him thus perfectly by the intercession of
B. Father Ignatius.
By which narration of his, they dis∣couered yet more plainly the
greatnesse of the Miracle: for wheras before scarce any word
he sayd could be vnderstood, so that it was necessary to make him
re∣peate the same thing often, & to go ve∣ry neere vnto him; now there
was no such difficulty at all, for he spake very clearly &
distinctly. The Religious men of that house, seeing so euidēt a
Miracle, went presently into the Church, and F. Aluarus with them,
who hauing pro∣strated himselfe before the Blessed Sa∣crament,
the rest sung Te Deum laudamus, with Musike and Organs: which
being done, they sent word of all to the Colledge of the Society of
Iesus, diuers Religious men of S. Dominiks Order going
thither to congratulate with them, affirming that this Miracle had as many
witnesses, as there were Religious men in their house, & that it was
so euidēt, that the Diuel himself could not calumniate it: so that it
alone were sufficient to mooue any Gentile to belieue, that the
Catholike Romane fayth is the true Religion, and that B. Father
Ignatius is a Saint.
The Phisitians also did affirme with one consent, that it
was a manifest Mi∣racle, and Father Aluarus his dis∣ease was
so notorious, that a thousand wittnesses might easily haue byn found
to affirme the same. It was strange to see, what wonderfull Ioy,
Deuotion, and Admiration this Miracle caused in all that Citty. God grant we
may dispose our selues to find the like effects, which wee may the more
easily ob∣tayne, if we help our selues with the Holy intercession of
Blessed Father Ignatius. From the reading of whose history, I
will not detayne you any lon∣ger, but earnestly entreat you to be mindfull of
me in your deuout prayers, & particulerly in those which you make 
to this Glorious Patriarch. Which request I likewise make to
all others, who shall reape any benefit by this my small labour. And so I
end, and rest, This feast of All-Saintes 1615.

