



SVmmoning my senses together (Right ho∣nourable) and weighing your Lordships worth, and my imperfections: Dispaire had almost checkt my too too presumptuous forwardnesse, onely for intending to pre∣sent this simple worke into the hands of so noble a person: But Hope (chiefe mistresse of Desire, and eni∣my to Feare) began to animate my trembling thoughts with these perswasions.
Virgil, whose curious inuentions haue made his name im∣mortall, (though not for imitation, yet for pleasure) read En∣nius rough Poesies: the Delphian Oracle gaue Socrates as good a sentence for his well meaning mite, as to the proudest Athe∣nians, for their heapes of treasure. All that was pleaded before the Romane Senators, was not vttered by Tully, yet was it heard and allowed with plausible censures. Xerxes accepted as well of the poore mans handfull of water, as of the riche mans Goblet of gold.
Thus beholding right Honorable (as in a mirror) the estates or proceedings of passed times, and hauing in homely manner penned these few vnpolished lines, I presumed to present them into your Lodships hands: which although they are not stret∣ched to the delicate treble keye of such refined Poems, as

Maro  the ares of , yet they may bee  called, the frits of as well intended thoughts. For   with his (selfe conceipted sharp) ▪  ▪ ith his pproued skil. Euery painter can∣ , with Parrhsius, nor proportion the , with . Maiaes sonne refused not to  , faire Ie was content with Philemons . Although Fors Foruna gaue Vlisses, the sen∣tenc for his curious smothenesse, yet Aiax had an applawdi for his rough plainenes: & as no counsel could reuoke. Fabius ut Terenti , nor no surgion cure Hipolite but Eulapius, so no sunne can beautifie these deformed lines, but the glimses of your Lordships fauour, nor no salue be able to set these mangled strayns a foote, vnlesse it be ministred by your noble protecting hand. I seeke not Ascanius rich cloake for brauerie, but couet with Damidas Parret, to bee shel∣tred from the vultures tirany.
Then Right honorable, if it wil please your Lordship to har∣bour this handfull of harsh sounding sillables vnder the safe conduct of your honours faire protection, I shall not onely thinke them sufficiently guarded from enuious tongues: but also esteeme my selfe happie, to haue them shadowed vnder the winges of so worthy a Mecaenas. Thus hoping (though not for the worth of the present, yet for the true heart of the gi∣uer of) your honors gentle patronage, & resting in that hope I wish your honour the happie enioying of your honourable wishes.

