



YOV are not ignorant, as I think (right reuerend Father) that the corruption of our age is become euen lamenta∣ble, and the enormities vvhich novve doe reigne, verye great and grieuous. For pietie nowe preuaileth with fevv, but sinne seduceth many, & the most part slepe in sense∣lesse securitie. Vertue and godlinesse are almoste quite exiled, vice and vvickednes almost vvholy embraced: mē for the most part are become not godly but godles, not vertuous but vicious, professinge one thing in vvordes performing another in works: as swift as the swallow to runne vnto vanitie, as slow as the vvorme to folow ver∣tue and pietie. If any proofe be sought hereof, we neede goe no further then to dayly experience and vsuall ex∣amples: For to confes that there be some in dede which serue the Lord with vnfeyned fear & dutiful obedience, yet vvithout all dout the greatest part do liue very leud∣ly, and are too too slacke and remisse in matters of theyr saluation. In steede of humilitie many nowe a dayes vse hautines, in steede of prayer prating in steede of fasting feasting, in steede of almes auarice, in steede of setting forth Gods glory with their tongue which was made & giuen thē especially to that end, herrible dishonouring

of his holy name by most wicked and vnlavvfull othes, in steede of chastitye adulterie, vvhich is nowe coun∣ted almost no sinne, in steede of plain dealing deepe dis∣sembling, in steede of hearty good will hatred & malice, so that there is almost no faithfull friendshippe or loyall loue left amongst vs. But I cannot stand to rehearse al, so greate is the corruption and so many folde are the vices vvhich at this day doe reigne: yea manye are so farre frō leading a life vvhich beseemeth Christians, that in ver∣tuous behauiour and liuing they are farre inferiour to many of the heathen, as in sanctitie to Socrates, in ab∣stinence to Aristides, in integrity to Phocion &c: That I may omit many other which vvere vvith sundrye ver∣tues very plentifully endued, vvho notwithstandinge had onelye the lighte of nature and rule of reason to di∣recte them.
If then this age of ours be such, that all kind of vice so mightely preuaileth, vertue and godlines being litle or nothing regarded, which as I sayd by daily experience & vsual examples before our eyes is plainly proued, so that the vertuous actions of many of the Heathen may be to a greate number in these our dayes as it were lanterns of light, & patterns and examples to imitate and folow: If I say the case be thus (as vndoubtedly it is) how requisite are such remedies as may reduce men from such levvde liuing to the doing of their duetie?
By consideration of the premisses (righte reuerend fa∣ther) I vvas moued to employe some time to englishe this treatise, thinking that it vvill bee verye profitable in

these our dayes, wherin sin so aboundeth, forasmuch as in the same is set forth the folly of men in prolonginge the amendmēt of their sinfull life, as also the chiefe cau∣ses which moue them so to doe, with singular and soue∣reigne remedies againste the same: whereupon I haue entituled it (and that not amisse as I thinke) A GVIDE VNTO GODLINES, for that it reclaimeth men from sinne, vvithdravveth them from vice, and shevveth vnto them the right and plaine path to pietie & vertue. Now vvhat is better for men thē to follovv such a guide? what more profitable then to vvalke in such a path? which shal plainly appeare, if we consider from vvhence they leade and vvhither they direct, namely from vice to vertue, frō sinne to godlines, from the seruitude of Satan to the li∣berty of Christ, from the snares of the deuill to the fa∣therly fauour of our most gracious God.
As concerning vice or sinne from whence this Guide leadeth vs, it is vndoubtedly a thing foule and filthy, as by testimonies of the Scripture may be plainly proued. Dauid sayth: VVash me throughly from mine iniquitie, clense me frō my sinne, purge me frō my wickednes &c. Now vvhat do vve vse to wash? what to clense & purge but that which is vncleā & defiled with filthines? More∣ouer to omit how almost euery sinne is punished some vvay or other euen in this life, hovv great a discommo∣ditie is it that this vice or sinne bringeth vnto vs, in that it moueth the Lorde to vvithhold his benefits and blessings from vs? Most feruent is the loue of the Lorde God, yet the vvaters of wickednes are able to quench it:

exceeding great is his liberalitie and bountie, infinite is his clemencie and mercye, yet sinne is able to close his hand, and to cause him to detein his benefites from vs, sinne is able to make him of a gracious giuer a vvrath∣full reuenger, of a fauourable father a sharpe and seuere iudge: the like may be sayd of the rest of Gods benefits. Finally the end of sinne is eternall torments and perpe∣tuall paynes. Many thinges mighte be spoken pertinent to this purpose, some I onely briefly touch, manye moe I willingly omit, thinking these sufficient.
VVhereas this Guide directeth vs to vertue & god∣lines, it is a thing assuredly of a very great importaunce. For that vvhereunto it guideth vs, farre exceedeth all vvorldlye vvelth, all terrene treasures. Noblenes of birth is a thing much esteemed, yet is it receiued of our forefathers by succession: Riches are much regarded & had in great price, yet are they subiect vnto manye ca∣sualties: Beauty is a thing much loued and liked, yet is it also very fraile and fading: Helth of the body is muche to be vvished, yet is it diuers and sundry wayes mutable: strength of the body is of many much made of, yet is it by sicknes abated, by age adminished & vvasted. How∣beit vertue or godlines commeth not by succession, but frō the speciall grace of God, the fountaine of all good∣nes: Vertue is not subiect to vvorldly changes & chan∣ces, it is not by aduersity altered, by torments abated, by enemies taken avvaye, neither by anye other worldlye meanes fayleth, vnlesse man through his owne defaulte, be the cause thereof. It remaineth as vvell with the sick

as the vvhole, vvith the old as the young. Finally as they that follovv vice and perseuer in sinne, are the seruaunts of sinne & slaues of Satan: so they that embrace and ex∣ercise true vertue and godlines, are not bonde but free, not seruants but sonnes, euen the sonnes of God, and heyres annexed vvith Christ. For true godlines doth vn∣doubtedly proceede from a sincere faith, as the fruite frō the tree, the effect from the cause. Nowe in vvhome so∣euer such a faith is, they are free from the curse of the lawe, from the tyranny of Satan, from the daunger of death, from the horror of hell: they haue God to theyr father, Christe to their brother, they shall inherite the kingdom of heauen as the word of God vvitnesseth.
Forasmuch thē as the Guide vvhich vve haue spokē of, doth leade frō that vvhich is foule & filthy, vvhich kinde of things vve are vvont cōmonly to detest and loth, frō that vvhich excludeth vs from the fruition of Gods be∣nefites, from that vvhich hath so bitter and grieuous an end, euen eternall death and destruction, and not onely thys, but also directeth vs to that vvhich is so precious and profitable, whiche proceedeth from the grace of God the fountaine of all goodnes, which is not subiecte to worldy mutations, vvhich is an vndoubted fruit of a true faith, and therefore they that bee endued therewith are the sonnes of God and heyres of eternall blessednes: Forasmuch I say as this Guide doth thus leade & direct, who oughte not to be moste willing to follow the same to their no small commoditie and profit?
Thus haue I (right reuerend father) bin briefe & short

in a matter wherin I might haue bin larg & long. How∣beit I thinke those things which I haue entreated of suf∣ficient to cause the Christian reader the better to loue & like, the more vvillinglye to reade and peruse this present treatise, and also to embolden me to presume to publish the same vnder the protection of your reuerend name, forasmuch as by the premisses is proued that it contey∣neth matter very good and godly, and therefore is agre∣ing to your Christian conuersation, not for any instruc∣tion vvhere right graue and greate learning aboundeth, but onely for vvell liking vvhere good vvill is not vvan∣ting, which I earnestly desire and heartelye wish, being little or nothing doubtfull thereof. And nowe to con∣clude, the Lord God graunt for his Christes sake, that af∣ter yee haue runne the race of this mortall life, ye maye reape the fruite of an vnfeyned faith euen the saluation both of body and soule.
Amen.

