



Right Honourable,
I Am bold to present vnto your Honour, this plaine and homely Sermon, beseech∣ing you to accept it as a sincere (though a poore) testimonie of that most dutifull affection which I owe vnto you, in regard of that great kindnesse, and vndeserued respect, which your Honour hath euer borne towards me, for these many yeares wherin I haue beene knowne vnto you. The greatest Monarches haue vouchsafed, to receiue poore presents at the hands of such, as were not able to afford greater gifts. And I haue had so long and so good experience of your Honours noble disposition that way, as I doubt not, but this gift, how meane soeuer, shall be welcome for the affection of the gi∣uer. I confesse the Doctrine of the Sermon was chief∣ly applyed to the Magistrates of this city, before whom it was preached. But because I knowe, that there is as much need of reformation in the cuntry as here, especially in the matter of the Sabaoth, and be∣cause God hath now aduanced your Honour to a great place of eminencie in the cuntry, I hope it will not be offensiue, that I haue presumed to make you

the Patron of it. I haue long beene a witnesse of your Lordships great zeale in this respect. And therefore I doubt not, but as God hath now giuen you more meanes and greater power, so you will more earnest∣ly set your selfe to reforme those grosse abuses, wher∣by God is so much dishonoured, and his holy name and Gospell so highly prophaned. The Church of God hath had a long expectation of great good from your Honour. Now the time, by Gods mercy is come wherein you may glad the hearts of many of Gods people, by countenancing and supporting the despi∣sed ministerie, and by curbing & repressing the pride of insolent Papists and Atheistes, who daily more and more manifest their impudencie against the truth and seruants of God. But I take too much vpon me. You haue beene so long exercised in godlinesse, as I doubt not, but of your selfe you will bee forward e∣nough to euery good worke. I pray God blesse your Honour together with your most vertuous and reli∣gious Ladie, the hopefull Lord Clinton your eldest, sonne, that right noble Theophilus, and all the rest of your worthy childen. And the Lord enlarge your heart that you may render vnto him according to the reward bestowed vpon you.

