



MADAME,
This Pilgrime being drawn with a great desire to present himselfe, and his seruice to your Maiesty, was driuen backe by a double feare: the one, of offending
 with his ouer-boldnes, in presenting himselfe (poore Pilgrime) to so great a Princesse: the other, least the very name of Pilgrime might debar him of all accesse, and Audience. Yet at last he resumed his first resolution, conside∣ring that he was to appeare before a Queene, not so Great as Gracious, as all that conuerse in your Royall Court do try and testify. You are the daughter of that great and Gracious King, who heertofore hath with gracious ac∣ceptāce intertained this same Pilgrim in Frāce presented vnto him by that eloquent, learned, and Religious Frenchman F. Lewis Richeome. Accept then, MADAME, in England, what your renowned Father imbraced in France. He desireth only to be graced, and honoured with your Maiestyes Name, and to shroud himselfe vnder the winges of your Princely protection, and to be admitted your Maiesties poore beadesman.
For the bare Name of Pilgrime, though it may chance to breed some iealousy at the first; yet whosoeuer shall but search him, and examine his instructions, and directions, & find nothing but of deuotion, meditation, & prayer, and particulerly for your Maiesty; he
 may hope rather to be admitted for his inno∣cency, and loyall Intention, then excluded for the only name of Pilgrime; which Name (though now strange) hath heertofore beene so vsuall, and esteemed in our Court,S. Helene. and Country, as Kinges and Queenes haue not only vndertaken it, but gloried therein.Canutus. And so great (sayth an ancient Authour 900. yeares since) was the deuotion of Englishmen in that tyme,Ceadwalla. after all the Country was conuer∣ted and christened, that not only the Noble men, and the meaner sort, Clerickes and Lay∣ickes, but the Kinges, & the Kinges children leauing their kingdomes and the wealth of the world,Marcelli. in vita S. Switbr. haue out of their great deuotion chosen for a tyme to go Pilgrims for Christ on earth.
This Pilgrime was presented to your Ma∣iestyes Father in France, of purpose to offer his prayers for the then Daulphin, now King (the benefit and fruit whereof he hath found and felt in good successe of his affaires) and for all the Royall house, & Realme of France, wherein your Maiesty had a part: he com∣meth now wholy, and particulerly to do the like for both your Maiesties, that God (by the intercession of his Blessed Mother) would
 blesse your Royall persons, your people, and kingdome with all earthly and heauenly be∣nedictions: And namely, that hauing vnited you in the sacred bandes of holy Matrimony, and lincked your hearts with so fast Loue and Affection, as all your Subiects do ioy to see and heare, that he would also blesse you with the happy fruit thereof, and make his Maiesty a ioyfull Father, and You a Mother of many goodly, and Godly Princes, who may longe sway the Scepter of great Britaine after you, & may imitate in vertue and sanctity S. Edward, and S. Lewis your Maiesties glorious predeces∣sours, and in wisedome and valour, your Ma∣iesties noble Father of famous memory. Nei∣ther doe I see, MADAME, why this Pil∣grime should feare to come to any Court, or company, seeing he cōmeth euery where but among his fellowes; for though all be not Pil∣grimes of Loreto (neither is this booke only, or principally to direct such) yet whilest we liue in this world, we are (though as Kinges, Queenes, and Emperours) all Pilgrimes, as a great King sayd of himselfe, Aduena & pe∣regrinus sum ego.Psal. 38. Who though they haue thou∣sandes of Castles, and Citties, yet haue they
 not heere any one Ciuitatem permanentem, which shall not be taken from them before they dye, or they taken from it by death; but futuram inquirimus, hauing no mansion-house, or byding place in this world, we goe seeking one in Heauen, where be multae mansio∣nes. Which this Pilgrimage (vnder the sha∣dow of his other Pilgrimage) doth exactly teach vs to do, exhorting vs, with S. Peter,1. Pet. 2. as strangers and Pilgrimes to abstaine from car∣nall desires which fight against the soule, and to seeke the spirituall and eternall, the increase whereof will make your Maiesty greater before God, and man.
For the honours, and glory of this mortal life, your Maiesty hath as much, as your heart can reasonably desire: You haue for your An∣cestours great Emperours, and Kings of Hun∣gary and Bohemia; for your Progenitors, the great Dukes of Tuscany; for your Father, Great Henry of France; and for your husband, the King of Great Britaine, all Great. Being placed in the top of these honours, there is no roome for more, nor cause to desire any grea∣ter fortunes, but only those which may, and alwayes should, increase in vs, in this life, and
 prouide matter for a Crowne of glory in the next.
These, MADAME, are holy vertues which adorne noble & deuout soules, as silke, siluer, gold, pearles, and precious stones doe the body: these are the ornaments which haue aduanced meane women aboue Queenes, & Queenes aboue thēselues; as they did Hester, who though she were exceeding beautifull, yet her humility, modesty, charity, wisedome & other diuine qualities of her soule, made her more admired in her life, thē the beauty of her body, or the Diademe of her head; and after her death, hath left her Name grauen in the memory of all following ages.
These goodly ornaments, I say, to∣geather with the corporall guifts, which the hand of God hath liberally cast vpon You, wonne the harts of those who knew you in France, and were the titles wherby you were iudged to be a Princesse worthy of a King∣dome, and a fit Consort for so great a King. To conclude, these are the treasures, which only You, shall carry with You, departing this life, to raigne for euer in the other with the Blessed.

The other guifts, as beauty, riches, honour, Iewelles, the Crowne it selfe, and all other earthly treasures the spoyle of tyme, do passe from their being to their buriall, as a shadow that vanisheth, as a Post that gallopeth away, as a Ship on the sea, as a Bird in the ayre, who leaue no path, nor trace behind them; as dust, or a lock of woll hoysted with the wind, as the froth and fome of the Sea broken with a storme, as smoke dispersed in the ayre, and as the memory of a guest which stayeth but one night.
Thus sayd Salomon out of his owne expe∣rience; and we see as much euery day by ours.Sap. 5. How vaine then, O most Christian Queene, is all this world? What are her pompes, ho∣nours and pleasures, and their lasting, in com∣parison of that glory which expecteth vs in e∣ternity? A Glory, worthy of Kinges, and Queenes, and Princely soules, who know how to prize it in equall ballance, and to seeke it with high, and constant courage. A Glory, which I, and this Pilgrime, and all good Pil∣grimes besides do most hartily wish vnto both your Maiesties, after that you shall haue left vs many fayre, and sweet Princes (such as should
 come of the Lilly and the Rose) who may all represent the image of their Predecessours, & their vertues; who may be all worthy to weare Crownes, and to be with their Father & Mo∣ther crowned in heauen, hauing first raigned heere after them, long and worthily on earth▪ Amen.

