


BEING willing (most Ho∣nourable) in the sight of the world, to leaue some publicke testimonie of my humble du∣ty towards God, of my faith∣full seruice towards his Ma∣iestie, and of my vnfeigned good will to that in∣fortunate Countrey of Ireland, that hath beene so fauourably dealt withall, first by the milde & merciful allurements of our late Queene of most happy memorie, that was a louing Nurse, nay ra∣ther a kinde mother, that did still carke and care for them, with such compassionate loue & kind∣nesse, that she neglected nothing that was either fitting for a Prince to bestow of subiects, or be∣hoouefull for subiects to receiue from the Prince: And now againe, hath not this loue, this care, & thiS clemencie been stil continued vnto them, by the blessed and peaceable gouernment of our gra∣tious

King, and what is the conclusion, the peo∣ple were neuer more froward, neuer more obsti∣nate, neuer more peruerse, nor the state of that kingdome, neuer more desperate then it is at this houre, confused as well in the true knowledge appertayning vnto God, as in their duetie and o∣bedience belonging to their Prince, where the people are daily seduced, infected and peruerted by Iesuites, Seminaries & other runnagate Priests the ministers of Antichrist, wherwith the Coun∣try doth swarme, and haue so mightily preuailed, that they haue wrought a generall contempt, as∣well against his Maiestie himselfe, as against his godly proceedings.
And these be they that haue so abused and blinded the zeale of many good people, which otherwise without all question would bee more confirmable in the knowledge and loue or GOD, and in their obedience and duetie to∣wards their Prince: but so many seducing spi∣rits are planted in all the parts of that Realme, that if there be one that wil stand for the King, there is twentie for that one to maintaine the Pope.
But it will bee said, why these are no nouel∣ties, all this is well enough knowne to bee true, and what may I either doe or say in a matter that

so many learned men haue already dealt withall? that so many wise men haue had to doe withall, and so many politicke men haue so often vnder∣taken, and could neuer performe either meane to redresse or amend it. I confesse my learning is none at all, & therefore I will not meddle with those matters that are aboue my reach: my wise∣dome I acknowledge no more then my lear∣ning, and yet I hope it shall suffice to discouer a trueth in this matter that I haue vndertaken: with policie I will not meddle, neither is it for mee to deale wihall: but especially with that policie that belongeth to matters of estate I will not so much as looke after, yet I would bee glad to put in a helping hand: it is little that I can doe, yet hee doth well that doth some∣thing.
The diuell is not idle, and his Apostles doe neither slippe time, nor omit occasion: the Pope bestirres him with his Bulles, with his Indul∣gences, with his Pardons, with his Priests, with his Iesuites, with his Ministers of all sorts and of all professions: that are still conspiring that are still peruerting, that are still seducing in euery corner, in the Country, in the Towne, in the Cittie, perhaps in the Court▪ what, shall we not encounter them? (or at the least) shall wee

not discouer them what they be, to whom they belong, and what they indeauour? But they will say, I am no diuine, and it is trueth. I am no schol∣ler, and that is true too: what am I then? I am a Souldier, a professed souldier, better practised in my pike then in my penne: and may not a Soul∣dier indeuour himselfe for the glorie of his God, for the seruice of his King, & for the good of his Country? may not a Soldier vphold that religion either by word or writing, that hee must main∣taine and defend with the price of his bloode? is there any man to impugne this? if not, I hope my vnlettered diligence shall not be misconstru∣ed, that, knowing the state and condition of that miserable & wretched Realme of Ireland, where so many good people of all sorts are so cortinu∣ally seduced and abused by the Popes factors, I haue therefore collected and gathered this little treatise, wherein (according to the trueth testifi∣ed in the holy Scriptures) I haue not onely vn∣masked this broode of the generation of Anti∣christ, but I haue likewise so pluckt the visard from the Pope himselfe, that he might so appeare in his owne likenesse, that neither his fatherly lookes, nor his counterfeit shew of grauitie, nor that holie holie holinesse where with he hath so long disguised himselfe, shall be able to deceiue

any man (bee he neuer so simple) that will but vouchsafe to reade, and to beleeue but that which is testified by the word of the liuing God.
And here againe it will bee said, that all this hath beene already performed by seuerall learned and worthy men: but shall wee therefore leaue the field to the foe, because wee haue already gi∣uen him a conflict? shall wee not incounter him to day, to morrowe and euery day, that is continu¦ally bragging & brauing of vs? that is stil assailing vs with fresh supplies? that is still leuying of new forces to set vpon vs? that is still incroching, and neuer giues ouer to send his Agents, not by one, or by two, or by tenne, but by hundreds, and by thousands, and shall we not incounter him, but suffer him thus to draw away the harts of the sub¦iects, from the duetie and obedience they owe to their soueraignes, as they haue done and are dai∣ly practising in Ireland? nay shall wee suffer him, (without contradiction) to leade so many poore soules to destruction? For although all manner of sinnes did neuer so much abound, as they doe at this present, yet, of my conscience, the Pope him∣selfe doth send more soules to hell, and the di∣uell is more beholding to the Pope alone, then to all the rest of those vgly monsters, that are cal∣led by the name of the seuen deadly sinnes.

Lo here a matter of christian re morse, & shall we not now put to our helping hands on al sides to discouer this monster? shall we say it is a super∣fluous matter to reiterate any thing that may lay him open to the viewe of the world, that with his counterfeit shew of holynesse hath deceiued the whole world, and hath sent so many millions of Christian soules to the pit of perdition?
What I haue indeuored herein (I hope) will neither be thought to be vnnecessary, nor deemed to bee altogether vnprofitable: yet the rather to countenance both it and me, I haue with all hum∣blenesse presumed to offer them to your honour, to you whom God hath indued with the spirit of his trueth: being so much the rather incouraged with hope of a fauourable acceptance, knowing your godly disposition to be so zealously inclined to the true worshipping of God.
If my lines be not answerable to your exquisite iudgement, I doe then tender them to your ho∣nourable curtesie, that was yet neuer knowne to despise any mans indeuour that was honestly in∣tended; but if they fall out (as I haue ment them) for the aduancement of Gods glorie, why then they belong to your Honour as your owne pro∣per right, whom God hath aduanced for the set∣ting forth of his glorie, and hath giuen you both

heauenly wisedome and worldly honour, that you might continue (as hitherto you haue done) a principal instrument for the vpholding of the Gospell.
Pleaseth it your honour to accept of it, as an office and seruice of good intent: and although from a souldiers pen, yet as the earnest peny of a faithfull heart, that hath beene (and is) alwaies consecrated to do your Lordship all hum∣ble and dutiful seruice, and so in the like dutiful maner will rest.

