



CHristian Auditours, though among all the parts of Gods seruice, which wee are bound to performe, there are none more excellent, nor more honourable, then the worthy re∣ceiuing of his holy & blessed Supper: yet it is fearefull and lamenta∣ble to see, how much it is generally abused and profaned in the world. Some are ignorant, and vnderstand nothing at all of the true vse of the Sacrament. As our Sauiour Christ said to the woman of Samaria,Iohn 4.22 Yee worship that which ye know not: so it may be truely said to many at this day, They receiue that which they know not. They haue no iudgement to dis∣cerne the Lords body, and therefore they rush vpon these holy Mysteries without any re∣uerence.

Others are notoriously wicked, holding their sins in their right hand.Ierem. 7.9, 10 They will steale, murther, and commit adultery, and sweare falsly &c. As the Prophet saith, & yet thinke they may come and stand before God in his house:Matth. 7.6 and though in the sight of God, they be no better then filthy dogges and swine: yet they will presume to sit as guests at his Table. Others againe there are, that haue both know∣ledge and grace in some measure, and yet for want of due preparation, come many times to the Lords Supper, without that reuerence that is required.
For the reforming of all these abuses, I haue in your hearing handled in many Sermons, the Doctrine of this Sacrament, as the Apostle hath set it downe. And for the helpe of those that are ignorant, I haue drawne the summe of all that was publikely taught, into short Que∣stions and Answers, which here I commend vn∣to you, as an vnfained testimony of my loue. I confesse I owe much vnto you, for the great kindenesse which I daily receiue at your hands. For as you entertained me at my first comming with a generall consent:2 Cor. 8.3 so I beare you record, that to your power, yea and many of you, be∣yond your power, are willing to giue me bet∣ter maintenance (considering the pouerty of the

place) then many richer Parishes about the Ci∣tie doe affoord. All that I can doe, is to conti∣nue my paines among you, as I haue begunne so long as it shall please God. And I desire you all to labour together in prayer for me, that I may with all faithfulnesse fulfill the Ministerie that I haue receiued of the Lord.Coloss. 4.17. Thus hoping you will accept this small gift of mine, with the same affection that I offer it, I commend you all to the grace of God, beseeching him, to make your hearts stable and vnblameable in holinesse before God, euen our Father, at the com∣ming of our Lord Iesus Christ with all his Saints.

