



SIR,
THese are not now idle fancies of mine owne, hot ebullitions of a French bloud, youthfully soun∣ding the charge long before the combate; No nor of any one man alone, neuer so wise, neuer so temperat. They are the graue disputations, the sound decisions of a whole compa∣ny, one of the most famous, as one of the most aun∣cient in the world, for diuine and humane learning: Who now sets forth to the open view of all men what their opinion is about the Popes either lawfull or vnlawfull authoritie. No more are they any parti∣cular imaginations, or exact conclusions of Prote∣stants, the Popes open aduersaries, or some other (if there be any) of his violent enemies; who, perhaps to forward in their owne way, deny vtterly all the au∣thoritie of the Bishop of Rome, because he hath vsur∣ped

too much, and would haue Rome totally ruyned because there are many abuses therein; and not ra∣ther to be reformed by good lawes, reducing order & conueniency to their own auncient iust and lawfull vse: Much like vnto that people, that wholy forbids the vse of that good creature of God, wine, because hurtfull by accident, rather then to temper his furie with water, or moderate the quantity. They are, I say, the too too gentle, the too too indulgent determina∣tions of the Popes best friends, of his derest darlings, nay, of his owne strongest support in Fraunce, by whome he raignes yet there, and without whom he  not haue an inch of credit in that whole king∣dome: Determinations, which yet seeming to make good the reasons of the French Herald, & cōclude, ex obliquo at least, to his Croisade, makes mee the bolder to tender this vnto your Highnes, to whome that o∣ther was also dedicated: As a confirmation now by these wise men, of those reasons which, as his owne, he did at that time esteeme more foolish, then for the respect due vnto the assent of such persons, hee dares euer hold them hereafter. For indeed what shold we not boldly execute against him, that with fier and sword, open inuasion and secret treasons, declares himselfe so violent and bloudy an enemie to vs, though we not to him? Wee, I say, right reformed Christians and Catholiks who, rightly lightned with the shining truth of the spirit and the Scripture, haue so lawfully shaken off that most vniust, most vnsup∣portable iron-yoake of later yeares forged in the Church of Rome; when wee see his owne men, his

owne maintainers so flatly condemne him? But alas! what order to bee taken? I am not able to giue coun∣sell, much lesse to commaund. Onely this, my most harty prayer vnto the Almightie shal be, & as long as I breath I will neuer finish it, till it bee finished or my selfe; That now when it seemes that in these lat∣ter daies, by frequent disputations the truth beginnes to cleere it selfe of those darke clouds of ignorance, and thicke vayles wherein it had beene hitherto pur∣posely wrapt and ouercast; Now that it seemes that all Christians of all professions, at least those of the better sort among them, draw neerer then euer they did one to another, and all to that happy medi∣um, wherein consists the true and onely hope of a ge∣neral reconciliation, it may please his heauēly good∣nesse to stirre vp, and strongly moue all Christian Princes and Magistrates, as well Ecclesiasticall as Ci∣uill, to call together a good lawful and free Councel, as generall as may bee; wherein all absolute and ne∣cessarie points to saluation, being considerately with brotherly loue, and without animosity discussed, wee may with common consent of all, frame together a constant substantiall and vniuersall profession of our faith: As without doubt it would be a thing most fit to preuent and auoid many scandals, and easie enogh to be attained vnto, if euerie one would leaue all pe∣remptorinesse of his owne sence, and cleaue to the right naked and vnpassionate truth. It remaining, for the rest, lawfull to euerie nationall Church, in things indifferent and not altogether absolute and necessa∣rie to saluation, differently to beleeue according to

their best aduise and Christian libertie. It is a thing which (after God) wee must solely and onely hope from the hands of that thrice-great King your royall father, hee hauing a particular right to it by his title of Defender of the Faith, as indeed hee makes him∣selfe euerie day more and more worthy of the same, both abroad & at home, carefully suppressing here∣sies en in their birth, there by his credit, heere by his commaund, there by his word of aduice, here by his sword of Iustice. Oh! what helpe our famous Henry the Great would also haue yeelded to this, if those that did smell out some such purpose in him, had not, as vnluckely as traiterously shortned his daies.
But in that happie assembly let it not be forgotten for the first point and ground of all the following good, to giue backe againe to the Catholike Church her ancient right and authoritie; clipping the Popes wings of so much as he hath most tyrannously vsur∣ped, and reduced vniuersallity to his own particular. For otherwise, as long as that tyrannical, vnbridled, monstruous, impious, omnipotency (which none can tell yet how far it runneth, or can stretch it selfe,) be not limited within the bounds of reason, I meane of the law of God, there is no hope of reconciliation, no hope euer of any good at all. I doe not deny that the Bishop of Rome hath altogether no authoritie as from God; Neither but that he may haue a great deale more by the free graunt of Councels, or by the liberallitie of Princes. That which hee hath as from God, let him keepe it still in Gods name; The gifts of

God are without repentance. Yea,Rom. 11.29. let him keepe that which he hath lawfully receiued of auncient Coun∣cels, as the first place among the fiue Patriarkes, be∣tweene whome the care of all the Churches of the world was friendly and almost equally diuided, and to him by especiall assigned the care of these West-churches; In which respect only the King makes no difficultie to call the church of Rome,In his Maiesties first speech to the Parliament. our Mother-church. Let him also keepe that which auncient god∣ly Princes haue giuen him, though he cannot show, nor who, nor how, nor when: so that he acknow∣ledge it, at least, vse it as a free gift, and not like a des∣perate vngratefull rebell, to the preiudice of the heyrs of his benefactors. For in that case the gifts of Princes are not as the gifts of God, and, be they neuer so firmely sealed, neuer so auncient, or pleading pre∣scription, are euer and most lawfully subiect to a iust resumption. But if still through shame or mallice he be loth to accept of these most reasonable termes, & be brought againe to his first estate, thogh glorious enough for any temperate ambition; I meane to that which hee hath by the foure former generall Councels, and by the Emperours of those times (for otherwise to reduce him to that which hee hath by S. Peter, (if euen hee haue any thing by S. Peter) it were but a poore and verie beggerlie thing: Finally if hee will not voluntarily forgoe all vsurpation or a∣buse, neuer so auncient or moderne, let him be most iustl depriued thereof, as a preuaricator, and bee brought by meere force to that which he should vo∣luntarily and wisely yeeld vnto by right. Whereup∣on

strengthned now the more with the opinions of that famous Societie, which is no lesse then a little continually standing Councell in France, allowed by the Pope himselfe, I conclude still with the French Herald, to a generall Croisade against him that is now become the great enemy of Christendome; And that the executiō of the decrees of that blessed coun∣cell being put into your Princely hands, as the Lief∣tenant general of the high Defender of the faith, the whole Catholike Church, sighing and panting vn∣der the heauy loade of that cruell tyranny, may for e∣uer be beholding to your valor, and extoll you as the restorer of her liberty. Vp then, vp, braue Prince; the eyes of all Christendome are now cast vpon you, to see you beginne; you shall not want friends and fol∣lowers, euen more then you thinke, euen more then perhaps you looke for. Those that now dare not shew their heads for want of a Generall, will mount vpon the tallest coursers they can finde to shew their whole body, and draw with more hast to bee nearest to you; At least you shal know who be your friends. For if the first blow be not giuen vnto that monster by your Royal father, and the second and last by your selfe; sure, sure, I knowe not who will beginne, much lesse who shall make an end. And least any man be∣leeue that I stand yet wilfully and without iust causes in my old vaine; or that I perswade you vpon the reasons of strangers, or any moderne writers onelie; I end with an instance of your owne, a graue prophe∣cie or a sentence, if you will, giuen in this case almost foure hundred yeares since, by a right reuerend, god∣ly

bishop of yours, Robert of Lincolne, altogether out of likely-hood to sauor any thing of the hot French, or of the interessed Protestant. Another man of yours, your auncient and learned Mat. Paris citeth it,In Henrico iii. An. 1153. out of whose bookes I could bring almost as many arguments to this purpose, as there are leaues, how∣soeuer otherwise a passionate mainteiner of the A∣postolike sea. That good old Prelate dying in a full age, after that he had liued and serued here vnder the tyranny of three or foure Popes, Gregory 9. Celestin 4. Innocent 4. hauing held a long discourse with his Priests and Clergie the same night that hee dyed, in complaint of the hard and miserable estate of the Church in those times, accusing the Popes onely, as the totall cause thereof, and calling them Heretikes and Antichrists, at last did willingly yeeld vp his bles∣sed soule (the neerer to happinesse, the sharper-sighted and surer in her iudgements) with great vehemencie, sending foorth this last Oracle from the bottome of his heart. The Church shall neuer be deliuered out of this Egiptian bondage, vnlesse it be by the mouth of the bloody sword. To the sword then,Nota. to the sword, I durst almost say euen at this instant, for at last when Councell and all is done, wee shall euer bee put to it. Possession is very sweet; and that Iudicious man, best acquainted with the humour of Popes, knew full well that they doe not part so easily from what they haue once catched holde of. If all this doe not satisfie the worlde, truely then I knowe not what shall, though I knowe very well what should; howbeit hardlie of

more weight then that which is handled through all this Booke. Finally, to the end none may say that I am more ready to talke then to doe, I vow faithfully that if euer this holie purpose goe forward, and God let me enioy my selfe, I shall be one of the forwardest, in my poore con∣dition, to shew by my best ende∣uours in life or death, how much I am

