



WHEN I weye with my selfe, & diligently examine the similitude in S. Paul where he compareth the Churche of Christ to a naturall bo∣dy (moste honorable Lorde) I fynde that he can not iustely be taken for a membre of the same, which doth not imploy his studies to this ende, that he may likewise conferre some thing therunto in his vocatiō and calling, as in the naturall body euery mem∣bre helpeth the whole: For we se, that there is in a naturall body suche an affection, and desyre of euerye mem∣bre to helpe and maynteyne thother, that not onely the senses be redye to do their part and office, as the eye to
 see, the eare to here, and so likewyse in the teste of the senses, but also all the other partes of the bodye do soo muche care for the whole, that they shunne no danger, thoughe it be ne∣uer so great, to helpe and succour the same. If any man than, which bea∣reth the name of a christian, shal spy for the any thyng, that may conduce and profyte the misticall bodye, and dothe not his endeuour to the vtter∣moste to brynge the same thervnto: verely he is to be thought an vnpro¦fytable membre, not worthye in my iudgemente to be accompted of that membre, of whom Christ is the head. Surely it myghte be a great shame for vs Christians, if we shoulde not (hauyng such light of the gospel, as we haue) endeuour in some wyse to profite the common welth of Christ, when we shal call to mynde the excel∣lent saienge of the moste diuine phi∣losopher,
 whiche is, that we be not borne for our selues onely▪ but parte of our birth our natiue coūtrey doth chalenge vnto it, part our parentes, and an other parte also our family∣ars, and frendes. Plato dyd knowe onely by the lyghte of naturall rea∣sone, that al excellent and good gyf∣tes came of god, and were gyuen to thintent that a man shulde therwith helpe, and profyte others. Of the whiche opinion were also al the phi∣losophers, whiche had tasted of ho∣nest discipline and learnynge.
Who so euer therfore doth thincke hym selfe to be a membre of the com∣mon welth of Christe, whiche is his mystycall body, he must nedes much more be enforced of Christian know∣ledge and charitie to imploy his la∣bours in bestowing those giftes, whi¦che god hath gyuen him, to the pro∣fyte of others. Nowe than seynge
 that among the mēbres of this same misticall body many of theim be op∣pressed with greuous diseases, as des¦peracyon, to much affyance in them selues, and trust in theyr owne wor∣kes, and other grosse erroures, as su¦persticion, idolatrie. &c. wherby the most iust wrath, and indygnation of god is prouoked agaynste them, tru∣lye he were verye vnnaturall, and shulde tstifie that he had not tasted of the spirite of god, which neyther moued with thexample of the hethen nor with loue towardes the brethren consyderynge the greate daungers, that myght ensue here vpon, wolde take some paynes, and endeuoure to procure medicines, so farre forth as in him lieth to ease, and helpe the same. We haue exaumples hereof, wherwith we might be much moued continued by the most gratious wor¦kyng of god, euen from the apostels
 tyme. For the holy fathers, & mar∣tyres besyde theyr greate trauayle in confutynge of heresies (whiche was, and myght be a sufficient testimonie of theyr zele, and diligence) haue left also sondrye monumentes, and wor∣kes aswell parteynynge to the orde∣rynge of mens maners and behauy∣our, as also to the confirmynge of their consciences. And not only they but also men of this our age: for what godly wyttes hath god stirred vp? And howe diligently haue they applyed theyr studyes, and bestowed theyr talentes in garnishynge good learnyng, and settyng forth the syn∣cere and pure worde of god? and to passe ouer them, that haue taken ex∣cedyng great paynes in foreine, and straung countries, euen here in En∣glande, god hath moued many with sondry gyftes, some to be able to set forthe workes of theyr owne, and to
 hunte the Romyshe fox, and some al∣wayes with open mouth to crye out agaynst hym, & other some to trans∣late of other mennes. &c. And here∣vnto hath god also reised vp the har¦tes of noble men, that they doo not onely assist, and defende them, that bestowe their laboure herein, but also helpe forwarde with the same them selues: amonge whom I may moste worthely recompt your lorde∣shyp, whiche hath ben euer enclined to the settynge forthe of true godly∣nes, and religion, and to the rotyng out of false and feyed supersticion. whervnto god hath also prouyded for you alwayes ministers for the same. I therfore (though my talent be but smale) moued with these, and such lyke examples, thought that I coulde not be iustly rekened or takē for a membre of the mistical body of Christe, if that, when all true chry∣stians
 be so busily occupied, and la∣bour so dilgently in the lordes har∣uest, I shoulde be founde ydle, and vnoccupied, like to the seruaunte in the gospell, whiche hyd his talente, and brought it not forthe to profyte others. This last wynter therfore, whan I redde ouer two lytle bokes, whiche D. Iohn Riuius an excel∣lent lerned, and godlye man, compi∣led in the latyne tongue, thone of the refourmacion of mans maners, and lyuynge, the other of encouragynge them to dye, that be vexed with sick∣nes: and marueylynge muche, that such two bokes coulde be kepte hyd so long, and not translated into En∣glyshe, conteynynge suche a profita¦ble and necessarie matter, so apt and conuenient for our time: I thought that I shuld not be euyl occupied if I translated the same in to Englishe that they might be made commune,
 and profite the more, which whan I had finished, musynge with my selfe vnto what patrone I mought beste directe the same. I founde none lyke to your lordshyp, whether your ma∣nyfolde vertues or your zele to ad∣uaunce the glory of god be consyde∣red. And verely it semed to me, that it could not honestly be dewe to any besydes your lordshyp, for so muche as it was done in your lordshyppes house. The one parte of my labour which is now finished, I bryng, and humbly present to your lordshyp at this time, not bycause you haue any nede her of for your self, but bycause if it shoulde be commended by your lordeship, it myght be the better re∣ceyued, and profite the more. For be¦sides thopinion that men haue con∣ceyued of other vertues, where with your lordeshyp is endued, they haue also conceiued a singuler opinion o
 the zele your lordshyppe hath to set forth the pure worde of god, and to rote out false and feined supersticiō: which thing may apere very plaine, (as they also gather) bothe by other thynges, and also by thorder taken in your lordeshyppes house, concer∣nyng the true worshypyng, and due seruynge of god. wherfore seynge that the thynge of it selfe is so profi∣table and necessary, vndoubtedly it can not be but very wel receyued of all men, if your lordshyps commen∣dacion be there vnto added, whiche thynge if it come to passe, I doubte not, but as it hath profyted much in the latine tongue, so shal it sumwhat also do good in Englyshe. For al∣though it is not so finely translated yet I trust that the mynde of the au∣thore is so expressed that mine indu∣strye and labour herein, can not iust¦ly be reprehended, and fault founde
 withall of the tentyll and fauoura∣ble reder, whom I shal in this place moste hartely require for to accepte this my doynge, and interprete eue∣ry thynge herein, as he ought to do, for so muche as this is euen the first fruites of my wyt: and in so doynge (if I shall perceyue that this my la∣boure shall profyte the same) I shall be muche encouraged to go forward in suche lyke studyes, as may moste conduce, and hereafter to enterprise greater thynges. But fearyng leste I haue ben to tediouse to your lord∣shyp, and deteyned you longer, than becommeth me to do, from the swete and comfortable readynge of Riui∣us. I commytte the boke into your lordeshyppes handes, besechyng the euerlastynge and immortal God fa∣ther of our Lorde, and redemer Ie∣sus Christe, that he wyl graunt you dayely, more and more encrease of
 knowledge in his truthe, and kepe your hart awake contynually to glo¦rifie hym, that by thexample of your lordshyp others maye be styred vp vnto godlye lyuynge: and that he wyll assist you, and further you in al your godly affaires, which with the sonne, and holye ghost reygneth for euer: to whome be gyuen all prayse, honour, and glorye. So be it,

