



Right Honourable,
I First preched this Sermon at the buriall of one,M. Brockles∣by a Gold∣smith in Cheapside. who on his death∣bed gaue or∣der, that this Text might then bee handled. And hauing since, vpon some o∣ther occasion, enlarged the same, I haue presumed, in your Honors

name, to make it more publike, by committing it to the Presse. The reason that mooued mee, besides mine owne priuate respect (wher∣by I confesse I am bound to doe your Honour all the seruice I can, in regarde of the great fauour which for many yeares I haue found at your hands) is this, be∣cause I know the Doctrine of it doeth most properly appertaine vnto you: who a long time haue felt these blessed fruits of afflicti∣on your selfe in a most plentifull manner.Iames 1.4. Rom. 8.37. If euer Patience hath had her perfect worke in anie, it hath beene in you: who haue not on∣lie been thereby more then a Con∣querour: but also haue learned to contemne and despise all outward crosses, as not able to come neare your soule, beeing mounted vp so high aboue their reach. Yea

hereby the graces which GOD hath wrought in your Honour, haue beene so tried, like golde in the furnace, as they haue shined forth, in such excellent and glori∣ous manner, that all that haue knowne you, haue beene drawne into admiration thereof. For mine owne part, I must needes acknow∣ledge, that I neuer came to your Honour, but I went away asha∣med, to see my selfe so much infe∣riour in grace vnto you. I haue many times wondred, to beholde your exceeding diligent attention in hearing the word, your blessed memorie to retaine the thinges which you haue heard, and your godlie care to make an holie vse thereof in the whole course of your life. And as your desire is great to heare the word in pub∣lique: so you spend much time in

the priuat reading of the same, ma∣king it your chief delight,Psal: 1.2. 1 Cor. 1.5. Heb. 5.14. to medi∣tate in the Lawe of the Lord day and night: whereby you are made rich in knowledge: and, through long cu∣stome haue your witte exercised, to discerne both good and euill. But you haue not thought it sufficient to bee thus Christianly affected your selfe, but your care hath bin likewise extended to your chil∣dren that they also might be trai∣ned vp in sound religion. It would do a man good, to heare the sweet lessons and gracious instructions, which you like another Bath-sheba haue taught your little ones,Prou. 31.1. cau∣sing them as yong Timotheus did, to know the holy Scriptures,2 Tim. 3.15. euen from their cradles. Whereby you haue made so deepe an impression of godlinesse in their hearts, as (I trust) the diuell shall neuer be able

to rase out. Neither hath your goodnes bin dammed vp in your owne priuate familie, but it hath also flowed foorth to the good of others. For at such time as God denied your Honour that plenti∣full vse of his word, which I know you thirsted and panted after, as earnestlie as euer did the Hart af∣ter the riuers of water,Psal. 24.1. whensoeuer you had anie oportunitie of hea∣ring it offered vnto you, you did not ingrosse it, as worldlings doe their commodities, to your owne priuate vse alone, but with good Cornelius,Acts 10.24. you called together your neighbours and friends, that they also might bee partakers of the grace of God with you. And howsoeuer you haue not in for∣mer times had such means to per∣forme externall works of charitie, as God hath afforded vnto others:

yet to your power,2 Cor. 8.3. yea and be∣yond your power, you haue been willing to do good that way also. For you spent not your estate in pride and brauerie (for that you neuer affected) but your richest dressings and attire were the or∣naments of the Apostle, as Tertul∣lian saith. Your earings were the word of God, your neck-laces the yoke of Christ, your silken and veluet garments were pietie and holinesse. By which meanes you spared much from vaine and idle expences (wherein too many of your place doe greatly exceede) that you might haue something, to giue to such as stand need of re∣liefe: especially to the Ministers of the word, which brought vnto you the glad tidings of peace and saluation. There is none that hath beene more readie to entertaine

them at all times, nor to vse them with greater respect then your Honour hath done. And as I can witnesse, how earnestlie you haue desired, that you might but liue to doe more good in the Church of God: so I doubt not, but God hauing at the last, in mercie gran∣ted your desire,Psa. 66.13, 14 you will be mind∣full to pay the vowes, which your lips haue promised, and your mouth hath spoken in your affliction. I doubt not, but with vertuous Ruth,Ruth 3.10. you will shew more goodnesse in the latter end, then at the begin∣ning: that as all that haue knowne you, haue hitherto called you, The good Lady Clinton, so you may now be called, The good Countesse of Lincolne. You see (right Ho∣nourable) how farre I haue been transported with the admiration of your excellent vertues. God is

my witnesse, I haue not done it to flatter, or to giue Titles to your Honour, for then my Maker would reprooue me: and I know your hu∣militie is such, as you loue not to heare your owne praises. But I do it in the sinceritie of my soule, that GOD may haue the glorie of his graces, and that the Church may be edified by your example: I would all the great Ladies in the Land would treade in your steps: so should they shine as so many glorious diamonds in the Church of God. For it is not the greatnes of their birth, nor the eminence of their places, that can so enno∣ble them, and make them so tru∣lie honourable in the sight of God and his children, as the admirable graces which appeare in you. I pray GOD, euen from the bot∣tome of my heart, to blesse your

Honour with many happie daies, in this life, to perfect the good worke which hee hath begunne in you, and in the end, to bring you to that immortall inheritance that fadeth not away, which is reserued in Heauen for you.

