



MOst worthy & most renowned Prince, there is nothing more pleasing to a spi∣rit endued with knowledge, then Truth when she is most bare and naked.
The pure Corall needes no colou∣ring, and a good cause it selfe bringeth credit, it needeth not the help of Art.
The deceitful Phisitian giueth plea∣sant Syriopes, to make his poyson to goe downe the smoo∣ther, and the sweet songs of Calipso, were but subtill snares to Vlisses.
An oylie mouth may haue a gaulding minde, and it seemeth vnto me, that these professors of Eloquence are to be suspected, and their straining of words and sentences (as it were to set them on the Teynter) doth shewethe little plaine dealing that is within them.
Yet I would not seeme to take the Penne out of his hand that doth write of Eloquēce, for that were as if a man shuld labour to take the lightning from Iupiter, or to seeke to be∣reaue the fire of his heate.
And Art (I know) is the Pilot in the sea of wit: Art is the sword to conquere Ignorance: and Art is the sole directer when the worlde would erre. But yet to vse superflu∣ous Eoquence, in a matter of sufficient excellency, is a grea∣ter shew of a pregnant wit, then of a perfect wisedome.
Now sithens my abilitie serueth to no better purpose, then to set foorth in this kind of writing those experiments which 40. yeares training in the warres hath taught me, I haue not vndertaken as a subtill Logitian, for I neuer lear∣ned those places from whence arguments are drawne.
Those haue need of artificial speeches, who with pleasing words do go about to couer dishonest deeds.

The matters by me handled, I haue set downe plainly, I haue neither florished them with Art, nor smoothed them with Flattery.
I haue grasped at abuse: yet vnder generalities, not aiming at any one particularly, that hath not a guiltie conscience to accuse himselfe, I haue winked at somewhat, least I might seeme curious, and haue pretermitted necessities, in that they require matter passing my reach: neither doe I seeke heerein the praise of mine owne wit, but to declare the loue I beare to my Countrie, and the dutifull zeale I tender, (and withal humblenes I here present) to your excellēt highnes.
If my vnlettered diligence be gratiously accepted, I nei∣ther feare the spightfull eye of Enuie, neither yet the cen∣sure of any others in those things, which I haue onely con∣secrated to your gratious vewe.
I acknowldge mine owne vnworthinesse, and I confesse my little skill and abilitie to performe, but it is a gratious acceptance, that incourageth me, for I assure my selfe, that a magnificent and princely minde cannot want in him that is descended from so magnificent and princely rege∣nie: Alexander disdained not to be praised by a Mllr, and your grace (I hope) will accept the simple gilt of a soullier.
The subiect is not altogether vnnecessarie to be conside∣red of, for it concerneth the affaires of warre, a knowledge behouefull for the greatest Monarch, when a King is not so much renowned for his crowne, as for his courage and skill in the knowledge of armes.
For although all the giftes of Fortune are to be despised in respect of learning, yet in a Prince, there is nothing so glori∣ous as to be called a great Captaine, or a worthy souldier.
Accept them (gratious Prince) as the earnest penny of a faithfull heart, accept them and protect them from the malitious interpretour, accept them (with all humblenesse I beseech it) for his sake, that with all loue and dutie will daily pray, that as you are knowne to be descended from a most royall and princely progenie, and to be the vndoubt∣full heire of your worthie fathers Crowne and Scepter, so you may growe in renowne & honour equall to your aun∣cestors, & may succeed your royall parents in their vertues.

