



AMong all euils, well-nigh infi∣nite,
which, to the astonishment of eue∣rie
man, haue taken strength this daie
in the world, the securitie of men, in de∣laying
the amendment of their sinfull
life, is not the least; which when I re∣member,
and call into minde, which of∣ten
I doo, I am not a little amazed. And
surelie forsomuch as the life of man (as
holie Iob dooth witnes, and experience dooth confirme) is but
verie short; and a Christian should euermore consider that pre∣sentlie
he either must or maie die, (for our Sauiour willeth vs
to watch continuallie, to be readie against death,) the foolish∣nes
of men in prolonging repentaunce from daie to daie, maie
well make all men to wonder; vnlesse they be of the sect of Epi∣cures,
supposing the soule to die with the bodie, and after death
no parte of man to remaine. For otherwise, he which hath anie
care of his owne saluation, and beleeueth there be after death
both rewardes for the godlie, and punishments for sinners, can∣not
chuse but, not onlie for his owne part continuallie thinke of
repenting, while sinnes maie be forgiuen: but also in respect of
others, maruelouslie muze at their follie, which neglect a thing
so profitable, and so necessarie; and the more a great deale, for
that no man liuing is sure he shall liue, I saie not vntil night, but
an houre more, no not a minute or moment of time.
But to saie nothing of the yonger and lustier sort, who thinke



they maie haue whatsoeuer they hope for, though fondlie, and
foolishlie they doo so: what doo doting and bald men in their
old age, when they should spend the time which they haue to
liue in none other cogitations, and workes, but such as pertaine
vnto the attainement of saluation? Surelie they thinke as little
of death as yong men doo: and so deferre the amendment of
their life, and neuer thinke while time is to repent, as though
they could promise manie yeeres moe to themselues; which
thing notwithstanding they should rather wish, than hope for.
Yea, which is more wonderfull, and showeth more plainelie the
dotage of old men, they blush not at foure score yeeres of age,
to marrie wenches vnder sixteene yeeres. What more? I am a∣shamed,
it greeueth me to saie it, so I maie liue, and so I maie
haue Christ mercifull vnto me. Then what? wantonlie, delicate∣lie,
riotouslie they spend the time, they loue, they make good
cheere, they plaie the whore-masters, they are sweete in oint∣ments,
they take their pleasure; and as an old man in the
Poet saith:
Because my daies be short,
which I haue heare to liue;
To women, wine, and pleasant sport,
my selfe I minde to giue.
The same doo our old men in words commonlie, in deedes
openlie saie, and confirme by their life. Neither doo they, which
commit these hainous offences, euen with hoare heads (for
whie should I be afraide to speake it) make anie great accoumpt
with themselues, or care of reforming their manners; but are
Christians in name onlie, but in deede and life nothing so.
To come to the crooked old women, which haue had manie
husbands, what doo they? Surelie euen they too, when they are
most old, and full of wrinckles, make death a banquet (as the
Poet saith,) that is, they be not afraide to marrie yet againe:
whereas in deede, if they were touched with anie care of their
saluation, they should do better, if with Anna the Prophetisse, of
whom Luke. 2, 36, 37. maketh mentiō, they neuer went out of the



temple, but serued God with fasting and praiers night and daie.
I speake not of the yonger women, for whom, according to the
sentence of Paule, 1. Tim. 5, 14. 1. Cor. 7, 8, 9. it is better that they
marrie then to burne: but of old, and aged women, who in re∣spect
of their yeeres can beare no children. For they, after the
manner of doting old men (of whom I haue spoken) bid hone∣stie
fare-well, and care little what becommeth them. Such a
mischeef is in example. They alledge for them-selues solitarines
and pouertie▪ and other (as they thinke) iust causes at those
yeeres and likelie: but pretend they what they will, yet shall they
neuer prooue their intemperancie good either before God, or
men, howsoeuer they cloake and couer the same.
We dallie too much with our selues, we doo yeelde too too
much to our weakenes, or lust rather; we suffer our selues ouer
easelie to be snarled by the allurements of the flesh; we cast
not awaie the tendernes of our minde, we resist not the snares,
and ingines of Satan by continuall praier; we tame not our
bodie with abstinence, and fasting. Hence come the teares, as
it is saide; and this maketh such old marriages, in those yeeres
which call for a new life, and a new conuersation. For it were
time then, not to thinke of the short time, which is to be spent,
but of the life to come which alwaie shall indure. When thinke
you they will begin to amend, and haue regard of their saluati∣on?
When will they repent? When will they prepare them∣selues
vnto death, which marrie euen when they are going to
the graue? Either I am deceaued, or this is not the waie vnto
heauen, as the Tragicall Poet dooth saie.
Alack, alack, whether is the godlines of Christians gone?
Howe fewe are they, if there be anie at all, which call into minde
the shortnes, and vncertaintie of this life; death alwaies at
hand; the iudgement seate of Christ; the last iudgement; e∣uerlasting
felicitie in the heauens; the torments and cursed
state of hell? Neither the regarde of the kingdome of God, and
of an happie life dooth stir vp vnto godlines; nor the feare of
hell, and euerlasting destruction either reclame from offen∣ding,
or terrefie from sinne. Neither doo moste men giue credit
to the woord of God, and religion; or if they beleeue it, through



a vaine hope of Gods pardon toward the obstinate, and such as
perseuere in sinne; they moste foolishlie doo flatter themselues:
neither doo they endeuor by little and little to caste off wicked
custome, which in manner is turned into another nature. Sloth∣fulnes
and securitie hath inuaded them, being drunke as it were
with prosperitie; they are lead awaie and fed with a false and
foolish hope of longer life.
Manie also through confidence which they put in the Popes
pardons; in the superstitious woorship of S. Barbara; and in a
Friers cowle, thinke nothing at all of amending their life. Fur∣thermore,
some are spilled either through wicked companie,
and too much familiaritie with vngodlie persons; or by
the Sermons of vndiscreete men, by such I meane, as preach
much of the forgiuenes of sinne for Christ his sake, and of Chri∣stes
righteousnes; but either nothing at all, or verie little at all
of dooing and following the will of God; and of the sanctifica∣tion
of the spirit, wherebie we be renued vnto good woorkes.
To be shorte: No man contemning earthlie, breatheth and
sigheth after heauenlie things; no man is touched with the an∣ger
of God against wickednes; no man blusheth at the viola∣ting
of Gods commaundements; no man is reclamed either
from filthines through shame; or from sinne, through the feare
of God. So that euerie mans life is polluted with great sinnes,
and wickednes.
And although I graunt, what Seneca in a certaine place
writeth, that Hereof our elders haue complained, hereof doo we
complaine, hereof they which liue after vs will complaine, namelie that
good manners be ouerthrowen, wickednes dooth raigne, the world wax∣eth
worse and worse, and falleth into all vngodlines: though I graunt
this, I saie, yet I dare affirme that in this corrupt, and wretched
age of ours, all manner vices haue so encreased, that hardlie
greater wickednes cannot be. For what sinne or wickednes at
this daie is wanting, which if it raigned, this age might be
saide to be the more vngodlie for that respect? When as
in deede we can neither patientlie abide to heare our
sinnes laide afore vs; nor quietlie suffer to be reprehended: or
if anie can, it is as much as if a tale were told to a deafe man



(as the saying is). For no man amendeth his life or manners;
no man reformeth his wickednes by contrarie vertues; no man
healeth his sinnes past, no not with the least good woorkes.
I am greatlie afraide least in that daie of the great iudge∣ment,
our outragious wickednes; our lust, couetousnes, disho∣nestie,
pride, riotousnes wilbe condemned by the egregious and
most excellent vertues of Heathen men; as by the abstinence
of Aristides, the innocencie of Phocion, the holines of Socrates,
the almes deedes of Cimon, the moderation of Camillus, the ho∣nestie,
iustice, and faithfulnes of both Catoes; and who can recite
all of them? Yea, I am afraide, the sobrietie of the Turkes, will
condemne our gluttonie, and dronkennes. Yea, and Sodom, Tyrus
and Sidon, will there laie before our face our extreame wicked∣nes
euen in this new light of the Gospell; so that in the daie of
iudgement it shalbe easier for these, then for vs: as our Sauior
vpon like occasion threatened certaine townes, as Luke recor∣deth.
So that it plainelie appereth, how farre we be in deede from
right Christians, though we desire to be compted so. For in
vaine taketh he the name of a Christian to him, that dooth not
leade a life aunswerable and agreeable to Christian profession;
and (as Paule saith) worthie of God. Had we anie wit, the verie
name of a Christian would make vs blush, and be ashamed to
violate the commaundements of God.
O would to God, that at the length, though late, we would
repent, and turne vnto God with our whole hart, and not de∣stroie
our selues by deferring our amendment; the which ma∣nie-times
God punisheth both with sudden death, vnawares,
and also with euerlasting destruction: that in deede it standeth
vs vpon to haue in minde continuallie both death and hell, and
the tribunall seate of Christ; and to thinke that the eares of
our conscience be stroken both with the terrible sounde of
that trumpe, summoning vnto the last iudgement; and with
the dredfull voice of the iudge, condemning the wicked and
vngodlie mates vnto the fire which neuer shalbe quenched.
Now if these things doo nothing mooue the obstinate, I see not
what hope at all is left: and whether there be anie he dooth



know, who knoweth all things, euen God alone.
But omit we vaine, and vnprofitable complaints. Therefore (to
returne to our purpose) forsomuch as the securitie, & wickednes
of men in prolonging the correctiō of their sinfull conuersation,
is so great: I haue thought good, to seeke, out according to my
poore skill, some remedie for that matter, & to communicate the
same with the ruder sorte, if anie whit it may profit others. For
at the first I wrote the same for my priuate vse, that alwaie I
might haue before me that, which might waken me, as it were
out of the sleepe of too much securitie. Happie I saie much hap∣pie
is that man, which standeth in no neede of such a remedie
against the old man; nor of such a remembrance to cast-awaie
sloth. But, as I saide, the song which I sang to my selfe, I haue
thought good to impart with the simpler sorte, forsomuch as I
knowe in some respect it maie doo good; least with Aspendius
the Musicion, as the Prouerbe is, I sing within to my selfe. For
my desire is by all meanes to profit others.
Which my labor I haue thought good to dedicate to you,
most gratious Prince, and that in none other respect, but to
leaue a publique monument of our obedience toward you.
Accept therefore these things in good part, after your
wonted goodnes, and protect vs, as you doo.
At Misena, on S. Michaels eue, in the yeere
from the incarnation of our Sauiour Christ, 1547.
Translated the 23. of Februarie. 1581.
