



SIr, I present vnto you here a Sermon, pen∣ned by mee, concer∣ning the duety of a Godly Minister. I confesse, it may be thought great pre∣sumption, that I, who am the least of many thousands of my brethren, should take vpon me
to teach others,Magis mihi discendum quam docen∣dum,
Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 4. who stand more need to learne my selfe. But I may truly say, asSui magis admonendi, quam aliorum docendi gratia,
lib. 16. c. 5. A. Gellius said of a certaine booke of
Laelius, That I writ it ra∣ther for mine owne admonition, then for the instru∣ction of others. Whatsoeuer it is, I am bold to publish it to the view of the world in your name, both in regard of that desire I haue to testifie my thankefulnesse vnto you, for the great and vnde∣serued kindnesse, I haue many waies found at your hands, especially for that (as I doe willingly ac∣knowledge) you were the first that perswaded and encouraged me to enter into the Ministery, and the first place which I had in the Church, I had of your free gift: and also in respect of that reuerence, which I beare vnto your graue and venerable old Age:Venerabilis non annorum sed virtutum numero, Bern. de amore Dei, part.
2. Venerable, I say, not so much in number of yeeres (though they bee very many) as in aboun∣dance of vertue. It is not with you, as it is with too many, who being decrepit with age, and ready to be laid on the Beere,Senec. de breuit. vitae. haue no other argument to proue that they haue liued long, but their gray haires and their wrinckles. But you haue verified that speech of SALOMON, Age is a crowne of glory,Prou. 16.31. when it is found in the way of righteousnesse. The paines that you haue taken
in the Church,2. Tim. 4.2. in preaching the word in season and out of season (as the Apostle commandeth) will no doubt make you famous to posterity: espe∣cially considering, that euen now when your strength is spent, and your body worne, so as you might iustly with—Veianius armis Herculis ad postem fixis latet abditus agro, Horat. Veianius, long agoe haue han∣ged vp your armour, and betaken your selfe to rest, yet still you continue your wonted labour, as though you desired to end your life & your preach∣ing both at once. And when you shall be gathered hence as a ricke of Corne, you shall suruiue in those three worthy Sonnes of yours,M. Thomas Sparke of New Colledge in Oxford. M. Andrew Sparke of Pe∣ter-house in Cambridge. M. William Sparke of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford. whom you haue beene carefull to traine vp in the Schooles of the Prophets; two of them being already profitable Ministers in the Church; and the third, as he hath attayned to a great measure of learning: so, I doubt not, but he will imploy it to the edification of the body of Christ. But I am not willing to de∣tayne you with any further mention of these things. I beseech you to accept of these weake me∣ditations, with the same minde and affection, wherewith I offer them. And howsoeuer, I con∣fesse,Cypr. in Symbolum Apo∣stolorum. they be not worthy the exercise of great Di∣uines: yet if hereby I may excite some yong be∣ginners, to the more conscionable discharge of their
dueties, I shall thinke my labour well bestowed. I pray God still to blesse your godly labours, that when you shall haue finished your course, you may receiue that Crowne of righteousnesse, which is laid vp for you in the King∣dome of hea∣uen.

