



GOOD MADAME, there is such a satietie, if not a surfet of books at this day, that it may bee thought as superfluous to publish any new worke, as to carrie timber to the Wood, or water to the Sea. In which re∣spect, I had neuer presumed to set pen to paper, but only that I haue long desired, to giue your Ladiship some testimonie of my thankefull heart, for the fa∣uours I haue receiued at your hands. And though I know, that as Plinie said of Traian the Emperour,

you are most sparing in prizing and valuing the be∣nefits you bestow, because you giue them freely and put them not out to vsurie: yet if I should dis∣semble them, I might iustly be condemned of grosse ingratitude. I acknowledge you haue opened euen the fountaine of your good opinion to me, which hath flowed as it were with a full streame of pietie: and so many waies hath your vertue refreshed and relieued me, that I may truly say, as once Furnius said to Caesar, I shall liue and die vnthankefull. For when I haue done all I can, I cannot sufficiently con∣ceiue the thanks which you deserue. I am bold therefore, to present these poore fruits of my la∣bours vnto your Ladiship, to be a publike witnesse and pledge to all posteritie of my dutifull affection towards you. And though this paper-gift bee too base a recompense for your vndeserued fauour; Yet it being the best which my pouertie can affoorde, I doubt not, but according to your milde disposition, you will accept of it: respecting rather the affection of the giuer, then the worth of the gift, for if I were able to giue more I would performe it. I am not ignorant, that in publishing these my weake Medi∣tations, I shall expose my selfe to a thousand cen∣sures of curious and carping Readers: but I had ra∣ther be taxed of rashnesse in this behalfe, then iustly blamed for want of dutie. How meane soeuer they be, if they may any way benefit the Church of God; especially, if they may be any small meanes, to fur∣ther your godly endeauours in the way of Christia∣nitie, and to build you vp towards the Kingdome of heauen; I shall gaine that which I most desire. And

thus I commend your Ladiship to God and to the Word of his grace: beseeching him, that whatsoe∣uer good beginnings hee hath wrought in you, hee will perfit the same, vntill the comming of Ie∣sus Christ, that your last worldly day may be your assured entrance to euerlasting glorie.

