



DVrt de Pascolo in au∣lico suo politico, page 146. right Honou∣rable, being a wise courtier & a frend∣ly Councellor, ad∣vised al petitioners to Princes and to men of State, not to tender their suits in vnseasonable times, Sed id deferat auribus eius, nullo alio negotio defatigatis ne labor vel sit imperfectus vel Inanis. Pascolus his coun∣sell is good, yet I may not follow it: he was an old Courtier seasoned with ex∣perience, yet his direction at this time I may not embrace. For if I should not pre∣sent these papers vnto your learned & ho∣nourable censures, before such times as

your heads were free from publike cares, and your persons at rest from her Maie∣sties service, I should sooner write tenne such; then find time to present one such. And though the day affoords no leisure to survey it, yet often it falleth out, that cares in the day banish sleep in the night: And as it fell out with the great Monarch of whom the scriptures record,Ester. 6.1. Noctem il∣lam duxit Rex insomnem: so it may happen that though your leasures will be little in the day, so your sleep may be lesse in the night. And as that mightie Prince called for his Chronicles when hee could not sleep: so your Honours and VVorshippes would be pleased to peruse this small trea∣tise, when your common cares banish de∣sired rest. And though Nocturnae lucrubra∣tiones (if violent) be most daungerous yet being moderatly vsed they cause (as wee imagine the watch to wheele the faster, and the cloke to strike the sooner. Two rea∣sons haue emboldned me to present it to this o. Senate: the one that without checke of ill disposed, it may boldly and

plainlie shew to the world with what wre∣sting of Scriptures, wringing of fathers, and alleadging of fables and munkish mi∣racles, the Queenes subiects haue been so long deceived by Romish Priests, and yet vnder the colour of Catholicke religion: The second reason is, that your Honours seeing the manner of our combat, may witnesse to all men, that if they be beaten with their owne weapons, they haue no cause to brag of anie victorie to their fa∣vorits,In his Tra tado para∣naetico, pag 8. 9. nor complaine of any iniurie a∣gainst me. For I haue dealt with the Ro∣mane Priests, as the Pilgrime Spaniard ex∣horted the Princes of Christendome to deale with the Castilian king, That if ever they would tame the proud, bloudie, and insolent Spaniard, they should fight with him at home in his owne countrie in Spaine: for one blow at home, doth more discourage his subiects, daunt his Merce∣naries, male conteth his confederates, and displotteth his purposes, then twentie o∣verthrowes abroad: the one is visible, and therefore sensible and terrible, but the o∣ther

is so masked by lying Friers & Popish Pilgrims, & seditious Seminaries, that the king of Spaine hath ten foiles abroad, be∣fore the subiect heares one truth at home. This course I haue taken with the Priests, because I would discover the weaknesse of poperie to the best minded Catholicks: I haue gone home to them to their owne doores, fought with them within their own lists, at their own weapons, in the presence of their best friends, with their own transla∣tions, Fathers, Popes, Canons, Texts, and Glosses: and if they be foiled at their own weapons, then the best minded may see the weaknesse of their owne cause. And whereas this small labour hath manie ene∣mies of severall peevish humours, some condemned the whole worke of it, before ever they saw one word in it: others threat∣ned it death before it had life. In the first remaineth envie & indiscretion, for such as will censure before they see, are like such wise men as will shoot their bolt assoone at a bush as at a bird. In the second remaines malice, against which, & whom if it canno

defend it selfe with canonicall scriptures, auncient Fathers, and the practise of the Primitiue Church, as becommeth a true A∣postolicall Catholicke: then let them vse their old woodden arguments, and burne it as an hereticke. But seeing it had ene∣mies before it was borne, I knowe it will haue moe now it is abroad: because books are like ships at sea: for as the one is sub∣iect to all weathers, so the other to all cen∣sures. Therefore in trembling presumpti∣on I intreat your Ho. favours, shield, and protection, that though it were cōdemned before it was and may be now rent before it be read: yet that before it be iudiciallie condemned, it may plead in your presence like a subiect for it selfe, and according to the equitie of the cause, and the qualitie of the evidence, receiue your Honours learned and graue sentence (yet with all favour.) VVhich if you graunt, though the worke bee simple, I doubt not of the good successe, if trueth may take place. The which patronage of the cause, & par∣don for my boldnesse being obtained, I

will not cease to praise God for those ho∣norable victories against the insolēt Span∣iards, & periured rebels, in this your Ho∣nours godlie & politicke government at∣chieved: but also daily pray that you may not onely suppresse rebellion, but abādon superstition: plant in the Church truth, and in the commonwealth peace: for subiecti∣on without religion is but temporizing: & till religion be seated in the heart, look for no sound subiection generally & perpe∣tuallie in the land: For Peter told trueth when he said, Feare God honor the king: and the lacke of this feare of God & true re∣ligion, hath spent England so much bloud, and the Queene in her gracious raigne so much money, as the tenth part of both ioyntly at one time imployed, would haue conquered Spaine, and sackt Rome. The Lord blesse her Ma. vnder whom you most happily & prosperously governe, & grant that the worlds doome & her death may meet in one day.
From my house in saint Patricks close, Dublin this 14 of Sep. 1602.

