



THe Spirit speaketh euident∣ly,1. Ti. 4. 1.
That in the Later dayes
some shall depart from the
Faith, and shall giue heede
vnto Spirits of Error, and
Doctrines of Deuils. And surely, that
Prophesie, if at any time, is truly accom∣plished
in these our daies, on whom the ends
of the World are come: For Blindnesse and
Error is so vniuersally spread, like palpable
darkenesse, ouer the hearts almost of all,Esa. 1. 9.
that vnlesse the Lord had reserued vnto
vs euen a small Remnant, wee should haue
beene as Sodome, and should haue beene like
vnto Gomorrha. The sinnes of the People,
and negligence, with ignorance of Pastors,Ier. 3. 12. 15. Isay 59▪
are the cause hereof: for the hand of the

Lord is not shortened, that it cannot saue,
but our Sinnes haue diuided betwixt him
and vs, and hath made him hide his face,
that he should not heare. The iniquities
of the People haue commonly their begin∣nings
from their Teachers: Therefore
Christ,Math. 21. 12. when hee was to cure the disease
of sinfull Ierusalem, entreth first into the
Church, there to purge the impietie of the
Priests, which polluted with Couetousnesse
&c. the Sanctuarie of the Lord: Like
vnto a good Physitian, who searcheth the
Maladie from the roote. For this cause
are they styled Salt,Math. 5. 13. Watchmen, Light,
Trumpetters,Ier. 6. 17. Physitians, Souldiers; and
that they,Ez. 33. 2. in time, and out of time, bee
able to Teach,Isa. 37. 8. Exhort, Rebuke, Improue,
with all Patience and Doctrine:2. Tim. 2. for who
conuerts a sinner from the error of his life,Iac. 5. 20.
saues him from Death, and couers the
multitude of Sinnes.Mat. 18. 15. The Church is a
Building,1. Cor. 3. 9. and Preachers Builders▪ as
the Church of Ierusalem was reared by
the People with the Sword in the one
Hand,Neb. 4. 17. 18. and Trowell in the other, so must
they with wholesome and sound Doctrine
teach and resist the Gainesayers: and if e∣uer
there was need, now it is, when out of

that bottomlesse Pit there are risen swarms
of Locusts,Reu. 9. 2, 3 ouer-couering the face of the
Earth,Reu. 18. 3. making the People drunke with the
Wine of their Fornication and Idolatrie,
who haue taught the world,4. Sa. 2. 15. with the sonnes
of Elie, to take raw flesh, and sow Tares
among the Wheat.Luc. 24. 19. Now (I say) it is time
to be powerfull in deede and word before
God and the whole People: for he that will
doe and say,Math. 5. 19. shall be called great in the
Kingdome of Heauen. Ecclesia est Ci∣uitas
(saith one) propter Populi collecti∣onem,
sponsa prepter dilectionem, Ouis
propter mansuetudinem, Ciuitas est, vi∣gilate
ad concordiam: Ouis est, intendite
pastui, sponsa studere ornatui. Pastors
are Woers in Christs place, beseeching the
World to be reconciled vnto God. Wee
haue therefore to pray to the Lord of the
Haruest,Math. 9. 38. That he would thrust out faith∣full
Labourers into his Haruest, in this
great Desolation, and time of Corruption,
when Antichrist hath setled his Throne in
so manie hearts, whome the Lord shall in
the end confound with the breath of his
Nosthrils.2. Thess. 2. 8. Wee must not be partakers of
others sinnes,Isa. 11. 4. in betraying the Truth with
silence, but Foxes being driuen away, let

the Bed of the Church be watched by 70.
of Salomons Worthies: Of the which, as
I am not fit to be named one of the mea∣nest,
so haue I put in my Mite (for lacke
of a Talent) and snrowd me vnder your
Lordships wings, against all Rabzechez
Rayling:1. Reg. 1. 22. as Salomon with Nathans Con∣uoy
and helpe;2. Reg. 4. 13. the Shunamite by Elisha
his offer,Ion. 4. 6. were shadowed as with Ionas
Gourd; so doe I, induced by your Lord∣ships
rare and singular vertues, cast my
selfe vnder the Mantle of Protection.
Kings haue waded in this Matter: Of his
Maiestie,The Oath of Allegeance. God willing, there will be more
apt occasion to speake hereafter. But it is
memorable in the most mightie Edward
the sixt of good memorie; to whome, on the
day of Coronation, when three Swords
were presented (signes of the Kingdomes
of England, France, and Ireland) craued
the fourth to be brought; which was (after
enquirie) the Booke of the holy Scripture,
the Sword of the Spirit: Which did also,
notwithstanding his tender yeares (for he
died at sixteene yeares of age) compile,Obiit 1553. 6. Iulii. a∣mongst
other Treatises, a Comedie of this
Babylonicall Whore. Accept (Right Ho∣norable)
this first of these Heads belonging

to this matter: and so I humbly and hear∣tily
commend your Lordship to the grace of
God, which is able to build your L. further,
and giue you an Inheritance among them
which are sanctified by the Bloud of Iesus
Christ: in whose mercie I commit your
Lordship. Ianuar. 26. Anno 1615.

