



DVTY binding me (Right onoura∣ble) to shew some testimonie of a thankfull mind to∣wards you, I haue presumed so farre as to offer to your good Lordship this small exercise of mine, such as it is, which I haue taught and written according to the ability that God hath givē me, & as the charge committed to me required.
The Apostle Paule instructeth his scholer Timotheus, and in him all mini∣sters that haue the charge of teaching, to shew themselues approved vnto God, . Tim. .  as workemen that neede not to be asha∣med,

dividing the word of truth aright. For in so dividing of the word consisteth the life & force of the ministery, that all mē, what age or conditiō soever they be of, which wilbe fed to liue everlastingly, may haue their portiō of meate givē thē out of that word, & that in season, or cō∣ueniently, that it may be savoury & plea∣sant as the venifon of Iacob was vnto his father Isaac, and not vnsavoury as the sonnes of Elie made the offering of the Lord to be abhorred.
But such is the vntowardnes of this age, which, in respect of the time, should haue abounded with all knowledge ne∣cessary to salvation, that not only coun∣trey people (specially where the worde hath seldome beene divided aright) but also the inhabitants of townes & cities, in too many places of this lande, haue neede to be taught the first principles of the word of God. For now in the latter daies, on the one side, the pride of life, A∣theisme, & the custom of sin hath so be∣witched the world, that the heartes of most men are become fat, & their eares

are dul of hearing, that the word which they hear doth not profit thē: neither do the manifolde tokens of Gods anger re∣vealed against the impiety & vnrighte∣ousnes of this age, (as the pestilence, the late dearth, sundry new & strang sicknes∣ses) nor the present troubles of wars, be∣side other innumurable exāples of Gods displeasure daily seene among vs, any thing moue secure worldlings, and such as are hardened in vngodlines, to turne frō their own waies, & to obey the gos∣pell of God while it is yet called To day. And on the other side, the poison of the whorish church of Rome hath so spred it selfe over the worlde, that as certaine wilde beastes, of which Cicero writeth, Denl. deor. lib. 2. whē they be hūted, are wont with an in∣tollerable filthy sent to driue frō thē the hūters; so the leavē of Antichrist, though he be now hunted to his place, hath infe∣cted all that way where hee hath gon, that the vnholesome savor there of can∣not yet be purged with the bright fire of Gods word: no not in those places where the word hath of a long season beene di∣vided

aright, not withstāding the cōtinu∣al diligence of faithful Pastours in their ministery, the vnreproueablenes of their conversation, and the godly writings of many learned and zealous men.
For mine owne part (being one of the least & last among my brethrē in this so weighty a calling) as afflictions are the assigned portion of a Christian, I haue beene weakned with Gods visitation of sicknesse, & chastened with the adversi∣ties of this life, that little was the good that could be done by such as I am. I re∣joice of mine infirmities, knowing (as Mari hr. one, that was sufficiently tried with af∣flictions, hath writtē for the cōfort of o∣thers) that experience & practise in bea∣ring the crosse is that which maketh a right divine, & a true Christiō indeede. Howbeit, having, now aboue a yeare since, at several times, according to that measure of grace that I received, exerci∣sed vpon the latter part of the 3. Chap. of the ipist to the Hebrewes, & suppo∣sing that setipture to bee most fit to bee handled in these daies, and among those

people whō I was to instruct, I thought it my duty, and the rather being reque∣sted, to publish the same to the benefite of others, specially of such as hun∣ger after good things, & accept of that portiō of meat which curious & ful sto∣mackes haue no lust to. I haue added thereto a sermon, the matter whereof & the cause of annexing it to these Le∣ctures is briefly specified in the preface to the reader. if profane writings, as hi∣stories of profane mens liues, bookes of lustful loue, invented fables, & tricks of vaine mens wits, which helpe to builde the Babel of pride, & to fortifie the Egypt of sin, be so favourably received & stu∣died on in the world, much more is Christian doctrine to bee regarded of Christian men. And whereas greate clerkes and graue divines do out of the treasure of their many yeares studies bring their gold and blew silke to the building of the Lordes sanctuary, let goates haire be accepted at the handes of younger and Poorer men, so it bee fit for the building, and be offered of a wil∣ling

heart, as the Lord requireth. It  55 skilleth not what prowde and envious men iudge of our enterprise, so long as we haue the testimony of a pure consci∣ence. The world is alwaies like it selfe, ful of scorpion like scoffers. And it is no new thing to see the commō evil of en∣vie so to reigne in most men, that they haue other mens doings in obloquje, & eke to depratie them. And this they do, as the Poet saith: (ducunt; Vel quia nil rectum, nisi quod placuit sibi,  . . . Vel quia turpe putant parere minoribus. either because they count nothing well done, but that which pleaseth their hu∣mo: or else because they thinke it a foule disgrace that their inferiours should; go before them.
But that I bee not tedious vnto your honour; as I haue founde vndeserved favour at your handes, so, being not othervvise able to testifie my loue to you, I am bolde to present vnto your Lordship this litle fruite of my labour, hoping that of your wonted clemencie & favour, you wil accept of it, as a mite

of a willing minde, and vnfained good will. And in that I haue therein allead∣ged other authors beside the holyscrip∣tures, I did it of care to haue every truth confirmed in the mouth of approved witnesses.
I neede not heere speake of your Lordships good desertes. I know that a vertuous man loueth not to heare his owne praise: for it is better to be a good man indeede, then in mens opinion to bee so accompted. Wherefore as GOD hath exalted you to honour and dignitie, and (as a learned young man hath lately written to you) hath made you a keeper of many vines, and, as we see, hath wrought in you a notable care vnder her Maiestie to provide for the well-fare of his Church; so I beseech him that is Lord of Lordes long to pre∣serue your honour in al safety, and to in∣crease in you his giftes of grace, to the setting forth of his glory, to the continu∣al good of his church, & finally to your owne eternal comfort, through the me∣rits of his sonne Christ Iesus. And wher∣as

the world is in danger of eternal per∣dition, as great part through irreligious∣nes and atheisme without either know∣ledge or true feare of God, and a great part through affected ignorance and obstinate frowardnesse in Popish cu∣stomes; wee are to pray dayly that it may please God to wake men out of the sleepe of sinne and voluptuous living, and by the power of his holy word still to weaken the kingdome of sinne and of Antichrist, and to call those that are to bee called to the knowledge of his trueth while it is yet called To day.

