



SVSANNA heere, walkes forth the way to glory;
To shew her constancie and spotlesse fame.
If any fault, escape her faultlesse story,
The fault is mine; on me bestow the blame.
Which would her teach, before I could attaine,
Well tuned verse, or moralizing vaine.


Were shee or no; were Ioachim her goodman;
Had Iewes iuditiall law, and Sanhedrin,
To iudge of life, in stately Babilon;
Were Daniell hence, first knowne a Sambethin.
Were hee a childe, when hee so well presaged;
Or termed so, compared to these aged.


Were these two segniors heere, (base slaues to sin)
Achab and Tzidkja, in Ieremie.
Fell this before, or when full thrall was in;
Or Cirus reigne as some doe verefie.
Did all things passe, as they haue past the pen:
Or poeme-like to better liues of men.


These things I leaue, to iudgement of the wise,
(Gray headded Senate of our graue divines.)
If I should iudge, I should but preindize,
And with erronious letters, fill my lines.
It me contentes, that well I may avow,
The stories subiect, such as most allow.



Expect not heere, th'invention, or the vain,
Of Lucrece rape-write: or the curious scan,
Of Phillis friend; or famous fairy-Swaine;
Or Delias prophet, or admired man.
My chicken fethered winges, no ympes enrich,
Pens not full sum'd, mount not so high a pitch.


Let Colin reare his flight to admiration,
And traine his louely flocke, his pipe to follow.
Let Damons reach, out-reach all imitation;
And frame melodious hymne, to please Apollo.
The swaine that pend this pastorall for Pan;
Thought once to end his worke, ere bega.


For while I ment, to streigne these sorie noates,
Past Diapent, vnto a Diapason;
There fell a chaunce within our seely coates,
Both graeat and suddaine; able to amaze .
When mourning Mopsus cride, leaue of thy play,
Shift noates a side, flinge pipe and all away.


Cease seely man; pull downe thy wonted pride,
Enioine thy muse to mourne, and pen to moane.
(As did Amintas, when good Phillis dide)
For thou art quite forlorne, and left aloane.
Sith Thestilis, (thy Thestilis) hath left thee.
While death of greatest iewell, hath bereft thee.


For Thestilis was shee, which io'd thy springing;
Who eake allow'd thee breath, to blow thy pipe,
And idle time to whistle and be singing,
And bred thee vp, till thou were waxn ripe.
Th' Elixir of thy life, in loue was she;
Whose coine did quitessence, thy muse and thee.



Whose knight-riv'd birth, gaue blazon to thy bloud,
Whose godly end, doth endlesse heere abide.
Yet wanting her, thou wantest all thy good,
As doe more flockes; the damme, and lambes beside,
Whom ioyfull Thomas hath good will to vease,
From fruitfull lawnes, vnto a shorter lease.


This vncouth newes, did so my sences lame;
That though sweete Cynthius, sold me by the eare▪
My musicke after went in worser frame,
And as my musicke was, such was my cheere,
My looke vnlusty; countenaunce abated,
Minde make-content; muse weake and overmate▪.


Yet did I singe my sorrowes to an ende,
(An ende betakes, the longest tided day.)
And to a vertuous patronesse commende,
My homly verse, and rusticke roundelay.
Whose godly zeale, equivalent with Hanna;
Will not disdigne, to countenaunce Susanna.


