



REuerend & Religious Mother,
Many excellēt Treatises haue seene light by the happy pēne of F. Alfonso Roderigues, that great Master of spirit. But this alone may worthily seeme to carry the nature of a Centure, wherein all the lines of perfe∣ction drawne through his o∣ther workes come iointly to meete. The highest ayme of vertue both in time and eter∣nity,
is to set an exact confor∣mity betweene our soule and God: & the best wayes of spi∣rit, such, as leade to this toppe. What store of excellent pre∣cepts, solid helpes, and most ef∣fectuall meanes our Author hath heere collected to so no∣ble an end, diligent perusal wil discouer. To which purpose as I chanced vpon the worke ap∣parelled in English, so my sin∣gular affection and respect to your selfe & yours, would not permit me to stād long in de∣liberatiō whether I should first addresse it, after it had recei∣ued life from the print. For to whom can a treatise of diuine conformity be more due, euen in rigour of claime & challēge,
then to a family of that illustri∣ous Order, the Foūdresse wher∣of reflected vpō the world ad∣mirable light of exāple in this kinde; hauing bene trained in spirit as herselfe testifieth, vn∣der the conduct of three most eminent men of the Authors Profession; as of B. Father Bor∣gia Duke of Gandia and third Generall of the Society, Bea∣tified by the holy Church, Fa∣ther Baltazar Aluarez, whō by diuine reuelation she vnder∣stood to haue bene the grea∣test Saint then liuing in this world, and Father Francis Ri∣bera, whose rare vertue was ac∣cōpanied with equal learning. And who more worthy of the first view, then a Superiour of
the same family, by whose dis∣creet and pious gouernment the whole cōpany maintaines in flower & vigour the primi∣tiue spirit of their Foundresse, especially in this high point of true Conformity. Accept ther∣fore Reuerend Mother of this little presēt, rather as a pledge of cōgratulation, then a spurre of new incitemēt, with my best wishes that your house may e∣uer prosper, grow vp, & florish, as it doth, to the glory of our Lord, the honour of your Foūdresse, the Cōfort of your soules, and the good of our whole Nation.

