



IT is a receiued Maxime in warre, that if the enemy be once gone forth, as the Philistines Iudg. 16. were sometimes to destroy, it is not then wisdome any longer for the

aduerse part to hide his strength wholly in the Garrison; As Chri∣stians, we haue all some common enemies to fight against; and who then among vs is not engaged in the quarrell?
For me, I am the weakest of all Gods Worthies, yet in this common cause haue I been emboldned to ad∣uenture my selfe and my forces in∣to the field of Christs Church. Giue but the Word of your graci∣ous entertainement, they are all mustered vp to waite vpon your Honor, and to fight for you against the Dragon and his adherents. Indeed Iob saith, that when hee went out of the gate, the young Iob 29. 8. men hid themselues. And if the old Captaines be abroad, the fresh∣water Downham his spiritual warfare. Gouge in 6. ad Ephes. souldiers will not dare to shew their faces: But yet if we heare the Trumpet of God sounding out of Sion, if the faith of Christ, as

here, calling aloud vnto vs, then if I forget thee, O Ierusalem, let my Psal. 137. 5 right hand forget her cunning, and let him that hath a hand, go Exod. 17. 9 vp and strike Amalecke. For the Turkes say well, that all cannot be Knolls in Hist. Turc. Ianisaries, well experienced men at Armes, but there is also some good vse of their Asapi, of their rude and inexpert rabble, if it be for nothing else but, with their numbers, to blunt the sword of the Aduersary. So the Locusts, wee know, are a people not strong, be∣sides Pro. 30. 27 this, without a Generall, yet as Agur obserued of them long since, do they go forth by Com∣panies.
How much more then if the Lord hath spoken, as in Amos, Who Amos 3. 8. can but prophecie? So if our Ge∣nerall bids vs charge, who can but shew his courage? Then will euery woman proue a Deborah, an A∣mazon,

and forgetting her owne weaknesse, arme her selfe with a masculine valour. In this case, euery Mephibosheth, euery lame souldier, as he is not well able to fight, so, though hee could, yet will not he be willing to flie.
In hope then that your Honour will be pleased to be, as Iob saith of him selfe, Euen feet vnto the lame, I doe here most humbly commend Iob 29. 15. him to the safe Banner of your pro∣tection, and crauing pardon for my entrenching thus farre vpon your Noble fauour, because I am a Stranger to your knowledge, yet as a perpetuall honourer of your ver∣tues, I shall euer desire to rest,

