



MADAM.
FOR sundry causes this Treatise of mine seekes your patronage. One is, That interest of love and respect, which a long time (not my selfe alone) but sundry of our name and Tribe have received from your Ladiship. Another is, your loving acceptance of such former service of mine to God and his Church in this kinde, as hath privately come to your hands: wherein you have ingenuously professed your selfe to be a daily travailer with some fruit. Likewise that honourable esteeme which I have ever
 borne and beare to the memory of that noble and worthy Knight your deceased husband, was not a little moment in my thoughts: Not to speake of my acquaintance with some of your religious Race, of whom I say the lesse, as perswaded that they seeke the praise of God, not of man. Besides all these, I adde this: That my hope is, that from your patronage and protection, some of your owne ranke, and more of your inferiours, (who looke after bookes as much for the grace and allowance of their betters, as for the worth of their matter) might by reading thereof, be drawne to love them for the true good which they have gained thereby.
Yet I must not deny, but there is a greater motive than all these: Seldome have I seri∣ously conversed with your Ladiship at any time, but I have observed some carefulnesse in you to be setled upon some good evidences which might secure you of pardon, and fa∣vour with God. A solemne object! I confesse; the very thought whereof as you may blesse God for, so much more you shal have cause to prayse him, in vouchsafing you! Which shall come to passe, if (as alway, so) especially in
 this last act of your life, you shall give all diligence by reading, meditation, and prayer, to make it sure to your owne soule. My de∣sire therefore being, that I might conferre somewhat hereto; and sithence God hath cast your eye and affection upon my labours, (which doe cheefely ayme at this marke) I beseech the Lord so to guide your spirit in your perusall thereof; That (whatsoever you passe over besides) you may take speciall marke of those grounds of Humiliation, selfe-denyall, and faith, which most concerne the maine point of assurance. Neglecting no oc∣casion, if by any meanes you may atteine to the resurrection of the dead, and the whilst may be satisfied with peace and joy through beleeving. That so, your heart daily grow∣ing more tender, and confident upon the bare word of the promise (you neede no other support) your whole heart and conver∣sation may be moulded into a new creature, according to the measure of mercy!
I will not delay you with discourse about the contents of the ensuing treatise; that were but to prevent both the Epistle following, and the Booke it selfe. As touching helpes for your
 comfortable receiving (which I have noted you to speake seriously of) I cannot doubt but your Ladiship hath many, (though I know not any who have travailed in this kind with me, to unite the full doctrine and practise of the supper in one.) But for as much as it is be∣hoovefull upon such occasions, not onely to heare in publique, but also to have some reall subject at hand which may present the Truth to a desirous heart, and releeve memory; therefore I doubt not but this Treatise may ad a furtherance thereto. If, as the Lord hath with much labour & 6. or 7. yeares, thoughts (at times) now brought this poore fruite to the light, so he please to adde a sutable successe unto it, in his peoples practise: I shall have no cause to repent me. It is the Lord, who as hee is tyed to none of our tongues or pens, so yet hath bound himselfe to our faith, prayers and diligence. To whom therefore commending the issue of your Ladiships endeavours here∣in, together with the prosperity of your selfe and yours, an happy end of your long pilgri∣mage, and peace to Israel, I rest

