




THE holy Ghost teacheth vs god∣lines most forci∣bly, by the bre∣uitie of our life, naming it a vapour, grasse,Iam. 4.14. 1 Pet. 1.24 Esay 4.6. a span long; yea, it may abide any

extenuation in the world;Psa. 144.4. as to be called a bubble, a sleepe, a shadow; and the holy men of God, come so farre, as that they compare it to a thought, whereof there may be vnspeakeable thousands in one day, yea in an houre.Psal. 90.9. King Dauid saith, Behold, thou hast made my daies as a hand bredth,Psal. 39.5. and my age is no∣thing in respect of thee: surely euery man in his best estate is altogether vanitie. And another Kig, My habitation is depar∣ted and remooued like a sheepheards Tent,Esay 38.12 I haue cut off like a Weauer my life. And thus it is euident, that mans life (for its spee∣die motion in her short way)

is as swift as a Weauers shit∣tle,Ps. 103.16. and passeth as the wind. The swiftest thing in nature for motion (the Sun) may stand still,Iosh. 10 13 but mans life doth not stay, For euen when the Sunne stoode still a dayes iourney, mans life went forward. Wise Salomon▪ called it vaine, and not contented therewith seemed to correct himselfe, and called it vani∣ty it selfe.Psal. 62 9. But Dauid his Father goeth farther, and saith, Man is lighter then vanity, being layd in a balance. We (so fond we are) increase our count of daies, as the euill seruant did;Mat. 24.50▪ But his Master came in a day when hee looked not for him so did the foo∣lish

Virgins. It is good not to beguile our selues in com∣putation, but to be taught to number our dayes, which is a verie rare Arithme∣tique. If there were worlds in possession of them that are departed, they would gladly giue them vs for one day, or houre, which wee so little esteeme of.
Besides, death often ta∣keth violently from vs the time to come, yea from them which are most deare to God. Rachiell dyed in childe-bed, Elie brake his necke, the Prophet was killed by a Lyon,1 Sa▪ 4.18. 1 King. 13.24 Iob 1.18.19. 2 King. 23.29. 2 Kin. 39.6 Iobs children in their banqueting strucke dead, Iosiah kild by Pha∣raoh Necho, Isbosheth slept at noone, but was slaine

before he awoke, &c. Nei∣ther hath any Liuer surer charter of his life, vnlesse he could haue a lease of it, as Ezekiah in some sort had of his by Esaiah, wherein hee had very ill successe. Thus we ought to apply our hearts vnto wisedome, perswading ourselues that death is with∣in a minute, that it will ea∣sily dispatch that, which no Law, Prince, or Punish∣ment could doe: and if we would euery day thinke wee draw our last breath, wee should prepare vs, and re∣paire to the word, and goe boldly to the throane of grace,Heb. 4.16. that there wee may receaue mercie, and finde grace to helpe in time of need, knowing that it is a

greater benefit to be a liuing Dog,Eccles. 9.4. then a dead Lyon. For while that we liue, there is space for repentance, but after death there is none. And this Christ alloweth as a high poynt of wisedome in Marie, in that shee ha made so fit a choise of her times, in bestowing them on such a thing as should not be taken from her.Luc. 10.42 And here in this little Treatise, I shew that those times we bestowe on Gods worship, shall not end with the number of our dayes, but shall haue their abiding fruite for euer, and shall last as long as God himselfe shall endure. The which here I commend to your Maiesties gracious acceptance, hauing an eye

to the matter rather then to the manner,1 Cor. 1. for I would be seene in the simplicity of the Gospell, and euidence of the spirit, that the pow∣er thereof may appeare. And now vnto him that is able to keepe you, that you fall not, and to preset you faultlesse before the pre∣sence of glory with ioy, that is, to God onely wise, our Sauiour, be glorie, and Maiestie, and dominion, and power, both now and euermore, Amen.

