



WILLIAM HARVEY, D. of Phys.
DANIEL HARVEY, Merchant.
MICHAEL HARVEY, Merchant.
IOHN HARVEY, Esquire.
ELIAB HARVEY, Merchant.
MATHEW HARVEY, Merchant.

BRETHREN: And IOHN HARVEY, Merchant, onely Sonne to Mr. THOMAS HARVEY, Merchant, deceased.
THe Draught of this MAP of COM∣MERCE (Right worthy SIR and SIRS) was above twenty yeares past roughly traced out and delineated for the furtherance and helpe of mine own imployment beyond the Seas, at the charges and expence of that worthy Merchant, your loving Brother, and my deceased Ma∣ster THOMAS HARVEY; since whose death, you were pleased for some yeares to second what he had thus given a

a beginning unto, and by a continuation of that my then imployment, and an acceptation of my then indeavors and service in many parts of the World, inabled and gave mee meanes to proceed with that Modell I had to this end thus begun: But time and my Mercantile Af∣faires not permitting mee at that time to collect all those fit materials in those places, as were usefull and necessary to perfect this Fabrique, I have since my returne from my former imployment, beene so much assisted by your helpe, and so much helped by your assistance, that I have brought it after many yeares toyle (notwithstanding my many other publique and private affaires) to that per∣fection you now see it. Such then therfore as it is, in regard of the respect I owe to the memory and worth of that my deceased Patron, and of the gratefull acknowledge∣ment Iowe to your particular and joynt-courtesies:
Be pleased to accept of this my thankfulnesse, and let the WORKE (as a Child first bred under your Roofe, and since nourished and educated abroad for many yeares at his and your charges) find from you all not only a fa∣vourable Patronage and courteous Protection, but also a friendly acceptation. So shall the Author have just cause to honour your love, and still perse∣ver to love your honor, which he pray∣eth may not only yearly, but hourly be multiplied and increa∣sed unto you,

