



Right Worshipfull:
IN these last dayes, and peril∣lous times, among the rest of those dreadfull euills, which are fore-told should abound in them, a close & disguised 2. Timoth. 3. 5. contempt of religion may be iustly accounted as chiefe, which causeth and bringeth vpon men all disa∣strous effects, when although it be shadowed with a beautifull Maske of holines, faire tongued: yet false-harted, Titus 1. 16. professing they know God, but in works deny him. And among these there be two especi∣all sorts; the one, who entertaining a stubborne, and curious rash boldnes, striue by the iudgemēt of reason, to search ouer-deeply into the know∣ledge of those things which are farre aboue the reach of any humane capacitie. And so making shipwracke in this deep and vnsoundable Sea, o∣uerwhelme themselues in the gulfe thereof. The other kind is more sottish, dull, and of a slow wit,

and therefore ouer-credulous, beleeuing eueri thing, especially when they be carried by the vio∣lent tempest of their desires, and other vngouer∣ned affections; and among these the diuell vsu∣ally spreadeth his netts, as assured of a prey, way∣ting closely if hee can espie any, who either grow discontented and desperate, through want and pouerty, or be exasperated with a wrathfull and vnruly passion of reuenge, or transported by vn∣satiable loue to obtaine some thing they desire; and these hee taking aduantage, assaulteth with golden and glorious promises, to performe vnto them the wishes of their owne hearts; the drift whereof is (hee being as at the first incased in a subtile Serpents skinne) onely to enthrall and in∣vassall them slaues to himselfe. The first of these mentioned, are slie and masked Atheists, who o∣uer-shadow their secret impiety, loose and disso∣lute behauiour with some outward conformitie and shew of religion, snatching (as they thinke) a sufficient warrantize thereof from those disor∣ders they obserue among men, and therfore passe vncensured, hauing a ciuill, but dissembled car∣riage. The second be Sorcerers, Wisards, Wit∣ches, and the rest of that ranke and kindred: no small multitude swarming now in the world, yet supposed of many, rather worthy pitty then pu∣nishment, as deluded by fantasies, and mis-led, not effecting those harmes wherewith they bee charged, or themselues acknowledge. But con∣sidering they be ioyned and linked together with Satan in a league (the common and professed e∣nemy

of mankinde) and by his helpe performe many subtile mischieuous actions, and hurtfull designes, it is strange that from so great a smoake arising, they neither descrie nor feare some fire. And therefore, in respect of these, I haue at your appointment and request (for whom I am most willing to bestow my best labours and euer shall be) penned this small Treatise, occasioned by the detection of a late witch among you, whose irre∣ligious care, and vnwearied industry, is not to be defrauded of deserued commendation, and by mature deliberation, and discreete search, found out her irreligious and impious demeanour, and also discouered sundry her vnnaturall and inhu∣mane mischiefes done to others, whereof being conuicted, she was accordingly sentenced, and did vndergoe the penalty iustly appointed, and due by Law vnto malefactors of that kinde. After all which, you kindled with a holy zeale of the ad∣uauncement of Gods glorie, and giuing satisfa∣ction to euery one howsoeuer affected, intermit∣ted no meanes, vsing therein the labour of your carefull Ministers (willingly offering themselues in this holy seruice) whereby she might be broght (as one conuerted in the last houre) to the sight & acknowledgement of her heinous sins in ge∣nerall, & particularly of that of witchcraft, con∣fessing the same, & by true repentance, and em∣bracing of the tender mercies of God in Christ Iesus saue her soule (who refuseth no true and vn∣fained conuert at any time.) And hee gratiously blessing these religious endeuor, of yours, vouch∣safed

to second the same with a happy and wished for euent, which (as I hope) shall appeare mani∣festly in the following Treatise vnto all those who are not fondly, & without cause, too much wed∣ded to their owne conceits: And thus, desiring GOD most humbly to confirme and strengthen you in his truth, which euer you have loued, and is your due praise, and shall be at the last an ho∣nour vnto you: I rest

