



WEE are taught in that sa∣cred
booke of diuine Wis∣dō, this most sacred lesson,
worshipful Sir, Sapient. 15.
Too knowe God, is perfect
rightuousnes, and to knowe
his rightuousnes & vertue,
is the roote of immortality. A sentēce surely not
so shorte and sweete, as effectually and at large
comprehending firme comforte from the Crea∣tor
God vntoo the creature man. From which
God as we may define godlynes to proceed, tou∣ching
his Godhead; and vertue also as touching
his manhood: so this godlines and vertue inclu∣ding
his perfect righteousnes is according to the
measure of his grace, nowe and then infused vp∣pon
mankinde. Lactantius Firmianus seemeth
to affirme this by his testimony, in libro de opi∣ficio

Dei cap. 12. Where he saith. Vir dicitur, eò
quòd maior vis est in eoquā in foemina, & hinc
virtus nomen accepit. And although here man
seemeth to haue the prerogatiue of vertue, as of
most fortitude valiancy or manhood in him: yet
we must not any thing exclude the feminin sexe,
from the benefit of vnited godlines & vertue in
the Lord. For asmuch as God by the mouth of
his Prophet Dauid auoucheth by example, too
compare as wel the godly & vertuous womā, as
the godly and vertuous mā, Like vnto the tree
planted by the riuer side which bringes foorthe
his frute in due tyme & tyde. Psa. 1. ve. 3. But as
this true tree of godlynes and vertue according
to the prouerb may be planted by Paule; that is
to say by the holy Ghoste, watered by Apollo;
that is, by mans continual exercise, and by God
and from God receaueth her increase: so it is
oftentimes seene, where God hath his Church,
there wil the Deuil haue a Chappel. Yea where
hath any goodnes, godlynes or vertue takē root
or florished at any tyme, or in any age, but euen
there also enuy, malice & mischief would haue
a fling? Plutarch in his morals could say, that as
the shadowe followeth the body: so enuy euer∣more
accompanieth vertue, and as where is no
body, there is no shadow, so where is no felicity,
there is none enuy. For the holynes of Dauid,

innocency of Iob, wisedome of Solomon, forti∣tude
of Sampson, and vertue of the moste ver∣tuous
amongst mankinde could not auoide en∣mity
sufficiently, when the almighty Iehouah,
and most holiest Messias had his moste cruell
and spiteful enemies, the Iewes, Scribes, & Pha∣risees,
euer emong inuaying against him, circum∣uēting
of him, & subuerting his doctrine. Of the
true knowledge of God, of his rightuousnes, and
vertue rooted vnto immortality, in the hearts of
those that beleeued in him. But in their greatest
iolity of iustifying their owne wickednes, see∣ming
to thēselues to haue perfect holines, when
they had not, bearing the worlde in hande that
they brought forth sounde frutes of vertue, whē
they were filthily corrupted with alkind of vice:
Our sauiour Christe euen then and therefore
scourging them out of the Temple of Hierusalē,
to their shame and reproch, put foorth the para∣ble
of the Vineyeard, and of the labourers. Luc.
19. as thereby not onely confounding their fals∣hood
and reuealing their painted hypocrisie: but
also vtterly discouered thē to be voide of al true
godlines & vertue, yea & also the most extreme
enemies thereof.
Touching the defect of this tree of true god∣lines
and vertue, amōgst the worldly wyse Phi∣losophers,
it hath beene from tyme too tyme

apparantly prooued, that neither the Acade∣mici
resident in place where they taught morall
vertue, the Peripatetici preiudicating euentes,
the Cynici of baser cōuersatiō, the Eudomenees
for al their woorking good effectes, the Philo∣tethes
for al their arrogant glory in themselues
disdaining others, as though they only had per∣fect
zeale of trueth, the Phisici, for al their skil∣full
knowledge in thinges natural, neither the
Ethici, which taught their rules of good life and
manners, neither yet the Dialectici, of singu∣lar
dexterity in disputing and reasoning causes
naturall, coulde euer sauoure the taste of the
true knowledge of GOD and of his righteous∣nesse
and vertue rooted vntoo immortality: al∣though
in deede they tooke vppon them a kind
of prophane, godly, and vertuous lyfe, which
they thought in themselues to bee righte, which
also they taught vntoo the worlde in their
tyme.
But they were farre wyde from the marke,
they wādered in darknes for want of light, they
swallowed the sowre grape in wāt of the sweet,
and they crackte the shel, but founde no kernell,
they were alwaies learning, but neuer learned
in the lawe of the Gospell of Christe the Lampe
of light vnto saluation for as Lactantius Fir∣mianus
saieth libro. 3. diuinarum institutionum

they saw but a shadow, of true godlynes & ver∣tue,
and not the light therof it selfe, and they la∣boured
al their life for it but they coulde neuer
finde it. Bicause (saith he) they eyther retained
an vngodly religion, or else altogither maintai∣ned
the same.
But the Romishe Antichrist, and his cursed
crew the suckblood successors of the Scrybes &
Pharisees the broode of Belial, Nemrods neare
kinsmen and adherents of wicked Achab, haue
from tyme to tyme hearde seene, knowen and
perceaued, The affspring of the roote of Iesse,Esay. 11.
which (as Esay saith) shoulde ryse too beare rule
ouer the Gentiles, and in whome the nations
shoulde beleeue. Also they haue bene toulde (by
the Doctrine of our sauiour Christ in his sacred
Gospel, and by the testimonies of his Apostles,
Patriarcks, and Prophets) who was, and is and
euer shal bee the true vyne. The true husband∣man,
and the true labourers:Iohn. 15. yet of wilful blind∣nes
haue they refused too bee ingrafted in the
vyne of the true knowledge of God,Mat. 20. of his righ∣teousnes
and vertue rooted vntoo immortality.
Yet of obstinate malice haue they not onely re∣fused
the calling of the heauenly husbande man
Christ Iesus to come as labourers intoo his vin∣yearde:
But also with the wilde bore rooted vp
euery vyne of good doctrine in the Churche of

God & with the wicked husbādmen slaine not
only their Maisters seruauntes,Mar. 12. that is too say, a
nūber of godly preachers and vertuous persons
sent vntoo them; but also crucified the sonne of
God anew, by their horrible disordered institu∣tions
in their Churches and Synagogues.
That most Princely Prophet Dauid (woor∣shipfull
Sir) pronounceth al those too bee bles∣sed
which dwel in the house of the Lorde, that
is to say in the Churche of God, affirming fur∣ther,
that they shal praise him deseruingly world
without ende. Psalm. 83. Surely, if the
Lorde GOD the holy one of Israel shoulde
presently summon the husbandemen of his
Vineyearde throughout the worlde, too giue
perfect reckoning of due fructifying and happy
state of his Churche at this day: I doubt whe∣ther
any Nation vnder the Sunne, haue founde
so greate felicitie and blessinges abounding in
them, as this little Iland of ours, hath had in her
of long tyme, neither that any Nation hath
better cause too praise his holy name, for his
gracious goodnes, then wee haue, euen worlde
without ende.
Considering hee hath long since out of this
his Vineyearde in Englande pluckte vpp by the
roote that vnfruiteful figge tree of the PopesLuke. 12.

planting: Considering also that the vyne of his
glorious Gospel hath long florished, & stil doth
without the annoyance of any populer tree
of forraine Campania, maugre the malice of
her malignant aduersaries, from day too daye
fructifying in the true knowledge of GOD &
of his righteousnes and vertue vnto immor∣tality.
Wherefore as euery labourer in this Vine∣yearde
is bounden in duetie too bring with
him godly care for conseruation and preserua∣tion
of the welfare thereof: so ought ech one
faythfully to laboure in true godlines and ver∣tue
too such effect, that whereas oure Sauiour
Christe saith, there are yet foure Monethes, &
the Haruest wil bee heere anone: Wee shoulde
therefore be ready too reape the Haruest of the
Lorde, that wee may receiue reward, & gather
our fruites into the barne of euerlasting beati∣tude.
Iohn. 4.
To this ende and purpose (worshipful Sir,)
as one moste simple of many others, and boun∣den
in duetie with them of better ability I
haue heere not onely brought my best good
will but also abillity therewith: as too furder
the welfare of the Churche of GOD amongst
vs, if by any meanes it so please GOD may
possible.

I haue therfore (pressing my selfe an vnwor∣thy
labourer, lacking Columellaes cunning in
contriuing or trying, Palladius his experience
in planting and purging, and Verroes vertue in
aduauncing the beautiful beatitude of a vine∣yeard)
simply heere set downe the names & na∣tures
of a fewe true vyne plantes, collected the
branches out of sundry testimonies of sacred
scriptures, and framed in order the fruiteful ex∣amples
of oure sauiour Christe (or of as many
most excellēt godly and vertuous persons as out
of the scriptures onely sacred, I coulde select) to
beautify and fructifie the state of Gods Church
in this my natiue country: the patronaige wher∣of
I haue vowed vnto your woorthy woorship
(as amongst others godly and vertuous Gentle∣men
my good benefactors) at this present cho∣sen
for your liuely sinceare zele to Gods trueth,
your vertuous example of godly conuersation,
and singular loue to al good learning (proceeding
from the roote and braunches of your woorthy
progeny especially your right worshipful, grand∣father
M. Nicholas Vdale a man for al rare re∣spectes
of true Godlines and vertue beloued of
God, his Prince the renoumed King Henry the
VIII. his godly and vertuous spowse Queene
Katherin, and the blessed King Edward the VI.
and of al good and godly men) whose steypes as

you imitate, so therefore may you seeme woor∣thely
answerable too the protection of this and
farre better trauailes. To you therfore I say as a
valley replenished with the vertuous plantes of
your vertuous progeny, and as a florishing plant
in these most florishing daies of our diuine De∣bora
Queene ELIZABETH, whose gra∣tious
and blessed raigne, the Lorde proro∣gate
vnto the ende of the world) doo I with all
humble and hearty good will consecrate this
Vineyard of Vertue. And bicause good mea∣ning
hath many enimies in these dayes, and true
vertue neuer wanteth vniust enuie, I am in due∣tie
bound to praye vnto the Almightie continu∣ally,
that the Vineyard of the Lord so florishing
at this day in Englande, may be by him still pre∣serued
from those same popish perillous Coluol∣uoli,
whose propertie is, euer to be gnawing vp∣pon
fruitfull vines. And that my good meaning
in this litle labour may be also defended agaynst
that combersome neighbour the Collecabedge
beeing farther contrariety of nature, namely,
colde and moist alwaies noysome vnto the vine,
and onely refused of her aboue al other plantes,
roots, or trees. Vnto whom for her three harm∣ful
discomodities in engendring Melancholy, in
breeding noisom dreames, & hurting the lungs
in mans body, I may wel resemble, pale maleuo∣ 
