


Right reuerend:
IT is a most true and memorable saying of that ancient, eloquent & learned Father, Saluianus, B. of Massilia, that to fal into the error of a false opinion (though ignorantly) before a man doth know the truth, is a token of a mind rude and simple: but to perseuere in error after one hath bin told and admonished of the same, is an ar∣gument of a pertinacious & froward disposition. So S. Augustine: Aliquid aliter sapere, to relish a thing otherwise then it is, is an humane tentation (and infirmitie,) but for a man too much to be inamored with his owne conceit, or enuying his betters to come vnto the sacriledge euen of renting asunder the communion (of the Church) and of erecting of schisme, or heresie, it is diabolical pre∣sumption. And yet this frowardnes or pertinacy, or diuellish pride and presumption is so ingraffed in the hearts of most men (as Eras∣mus hath obserued, and experience doth proue vnto vs) as what

once they haue apprehended, they will euer hold; and what they haue published, they will not reuoke, be it neuer so offensiue, and in their owne conscience, erroneous, and vntrue. Erasmus doth well note, how most natures be stiffe in maintenance of their singular and selfe conceited fantasies. God be thanked, all men be not so. For of all professions, sects, and sorts of men (euen from the beginning, since learning, and wisedome by writing or bookes hath bin made knowne and obuious) there haue neuer bin wanting some, who haue bin inspired with such grace and good motions, as that they haue very ingenuously acknowledged their scapes, and willingly submit∣ted vnto the trueth, when it hath bin reuealed vnto them, howsoe∣uer afore they were otherwise minded, and aduersaries thereunto. So did Quintilian, yea and Tullie too afore him change their iudgements in points of Rhetoricke; so did Hippocrates, that so renowned Physition in matters of Physick; so Cornelius Agrippa about his hidden Philosophy. Orpheus, that Polytheian sang a palinodie, acknowledging one God at the length, who defended a multitude of Gods at the first: and S. Augustine too, when his gray haires were growen, most conscionably, and to his eternall fame and honor, very wisely corrected, and retracted, what in his greene yeres in considerately he had broched.
Neither in the times long past onely, but in this latter age also of the world, wherein we liue, haue such good spirits appeared. Theo∣dorus Gaza (for learning a rare man, & almost peerelesse) had his proper and peculiar errors, which when he saw, he was not ashamed to reuoke them, and to alter his iudgement vpon the admonition of Trapezuntius. Yea, and Theodorus Beza (no meane man nei∣ther in his time) as he was not without his faults, so had he not the face to iustifie, or stand stiffe in them, but very Christianly, and as one studious to keepe a good conscience both before God and man, grewe into an vtter detestation of, and amended them, (Quiquid offendere po∣tuit, damnaui, sustuli, iugula∣ui▪ saith Beza himselfe in his def▪ against Ge∣nebrards accus.) with points too of doctrine that gaue offence, as our Whitakers doth say.

Of whose mind had Heliodorus, Bishop somtime of Trice, bin when it was, he had comfortably enioyed still a faire and fat Bishopricke, which fondly hee did forgoe, because he would not consent to the burning of certaine amorous and prophane inuentions, penned by the said Heliodorus in his youth, but for their vilenes, by an whole Synod, or Conuocation of Bishops, and other clergy men condemned to the fire, as Nicephorus doth record. I spare to speake of Lu∣ther, Melancton, Caluin, and other learned men neither few, nor of meane account among all reformed Churches, and people, who preferring Gods glory before popular praise, haue satisfied good men, and made publike amends for some things vnaduisedly pub∣lished.
Neither haue there bin wanting some such among our selues, God be thanked. Ah gentlemen (saith a late writer in this kingdome) that liue to read my broken and confused lines, looke not that I should (as I was wont) delight you with vaine fantasies; but gather my follies together, and, as you would deale with so many paricides, cast them into the fire; call them Telegones, for now they kill their Father, and euery line in them written is a deepe piercing wound to mine heart: euery idle houre spent by any in reading them; brings a million of sorrowes to my soule. O that the teares of a mi∣serable man (for neuer man was more miserable) might wash their memory out with my death! But sith they cannot, let this my last worke witnesse against them with me, how I detest them. Blacke is the remembrance of my blacke workes, blacker then night, blacker then death, blacker then hell. So he; and euen in these very words: which would both Gentle, and all men well consider of and ponder, neither should the Presse, and Stationers shops be abused as they are, inuenting such bookes (to the high dishonour of God, and discredite of our Churches discipline:) nor men and women, leauing better things, addict themselues so greedily to the perusall, if not studie of vanities, which bring no good, but woful repentance in the end. The

man which this vttered was himselfe a good Scholar, but (euen as his very words doe import) a very vaine and vicious man: yet euen such persons with Publicans and Harlots sometimes doe repent, and to the great ioy of the holy Angels enter into the kingdome of heauen, as doe Schismatikes also now and then, but rarely yet, and as hardly as doe rich men into the celestiall paradise.
Bolton (that first broched among vs those opinions, which Browne afterward and his followers embraced as heauenly Ora∣cles) he saw his error at the last, was ashamed of them and repen∣ted: but how? wanting grace to confesse so much before God and his Church, like another Iudas he hung himselfe, and so desperately finished his daies.
Coppinger (that new prophet, and copartner in Hackets con∣spiracie for pretended reformation) he had a sight too of his errors and follies at the length, and an insight also into the truth, yea and after a sort repented; but being destitute of grace to retract his er∣rors, and not able to abide the terrors of a troubled and guiltie con∣science, he famished himselfe to death, as the storie of him doeth report.
On the other side, Arthington his example is memorable, he was vexed and pursued with the inward and most heauy iudgements of God vpon his soule, so long as he tooke Hacket (cursed Hacket) to be his soueraigne King and Sauiour: but he no sooner saw his errors, fell into a loathing of them, and made his recantation and reuocation of them, but hee found much peace and com∣fort in his soule, to his euerlasting welfare (as himselfe confes∣seth in his booke therof vnto the Lords of the late Queens Counsel)
Clapham (that out of England went first into the Low-coun∣tries; afterwards into Scotland; after that againe into ihe Low∣countries; then againe into Scotland; and once more into the Low∣countries, and all about the controuersies betweene the Brownists and vs) had a restlesse and perplexed mind, and could neuer be

quiet till he fell into a detestation of Brownisme, and their founders the disciplinarians, whom before he highly accounted of, and had both returned home, and reconciled himselfe wholly vnto the Church of England, from which he had estraied, as his Antido∣tum doth witnesse.
Such another was Pet. Faire-lambe (as arrant a Brownist as e∣uer liued, & one that for the propagating of that cursed sect, had tra∣uailed Sea and Land, tossed in bodie, troubled in mind) neuer quiet and at rest til God opened his eies, as he did Sauls, that he might see, and giuen him power to embrace the truth; yea, and to testifie the same by his publique Recantation, extant and in Print, before God and the world.
I am of mind (my good Lord) that there be among vs not a few of the Sectaries of al sorts, which with Bolton and Coppinger do see their grosse ouer-sights and errors in the points controuerted be∣tweene them and vs; but few there be which with Arthington, Clapham, and Faire-lambe haue the face and grace to confesse them to the world, deeming diabolical pertinacy to bee godly con∣stancy. Therfore that this their frowardnes may appere, euen as it is, both diuellish and hellish, I haue set downe (best knowne to your wise∣dome) the examples premised of persons, wherof all & euery of them haue both openly retracted, yea and by permanent monuments com∣mended vnto the ages succeeding the reuocation of their slips, and consent vnto the truth, in which their doing they haue purchased to themselues no discredite at all, but a very honest reputation a∣mong all good and wise men.
But all men haue not grace, yea of them which haue it, few haue the power openly, and vnder their owne hands to reclame and re∣tract that which erroneously they once haue held. And surely thogh it be necessary that all and euery one which goeth astray from the truth, do repent, and leaue his wicked opinions: yet that men should testifie their conuersion and comming home againe, after one and

the same fashion, it is not necessary and vrgeable.
And therefore doe I commend mine Antagonist sometime, M. Seffray, who though he disliked, yea and depraued our Kneeling at the holy Communion, asmuch as any man could do (witnesse his ob∣iections following) chusing rather both to abide the censure of au∣thority, yea and to be without the comforts, which they participate that with one heart and mind, brotherly and orderly come vnto the table of the Lord, then so much as to bend his knees at the recei∣uing that most blessed and heauenly Sacrament: yet notwithstand∣ing after friendly and brotherly conference had with him therea∣bout, altered his mind, allowing that which before hee condem∣ned. He hath not the power (weake man) either to thanke him, who after God hath opened his eies, or publikely to disclaime his errors: but he hath the grace for to abhorre them as monsters: and so much hath testified by his late orderly, and submissiue kneeling in the very act of receiuing the sacred bread and wine at the Communion the last Easter, in the place of his now most vsual abiding. A worthy re∣cantation not verbal to be heard, but real to be seene, or heard of: which I praise God for, and pray that he may doe the like in other things ceremoniall; which had he performed, he had still enioyed a sweete and competent liuing (to the singular refreshing of many a Christian soule, hauing a very good gift in preaching: and to the temporall benefiting of himselfe and his) which he hath forgone, (as the forementioned Heliodorus did his Bishopricke) chusing rather to leaue it, then to condemne his vanities.
Whose example (not in obstinate maintaining that which is erroneous and ill, but in yeelding vnto the truth discouered) if the other man (whose printed Pamphlet, or Proposition (accompanied, as himselfe thinketh, with arguments impregnable; as will appeare with vntruths, blasphemies, and impieties intollerable) about the foresaid Kneeling at the Communion, I haue here answered, and confuted) will follow, I shall thinke my paines very well imployed;

if not, yet shall the world see and perceiue the difference betweene a man simplie and ignorantly erring, and a peruerted and froward Schismatike; they being willing to heare and learne; the other stopping his eares, and hardening his heart against the truth: the one flexible, the other incorrgible: the one of ill becomming good; the other of bad prouing worse, of a Schismatike at the first, an He∣retike at the last. For no better shall I esteeme him if he hold on; and the end of Schisme is Heresie, if not Atheisme. His cause is the very same, and none other then M. Seffrais was; his reasons the same too in effect, though moe for number, yet not stronger in force. If therefore the said Seffray doth find in his iudgement the truth to be with me (which is stronger then both, and what either they haue broched, or any man can obiect against the same,) and thereupon hath yeelded, and resigned himselfe thereunto, there is no cause the other man, whosoeuer he be, should frowardly and fond∣ly standout. Reasons ought, but if they will not, let this example moue him to conforme.
The former of these Conferences hath beene performed (as the truth is) both by mouth and pen: by mouth, authority nominating me therunto, and M. Seffray calling for the same at my hands; and was had at mine owne dwelling house in Suffolke the last Haruest: by pen, at the desire of the said Seffray immediatly after our spee∣ches, and that not onely for himselfe (and peraduenture for others too of the Brother-hood) better to consider of, but also for the satis∣faction of him besides, who both motioned the same at the first, and desired it might be written for a further good.
And being committed to writing had so continued priuate in few mens hands (for any thing that was in my thought (God hee knoweth) touching the publication of the same) had not some persons (neere and deere vnto your Lordshippe: and for their vertues, lear∣ning, and iudgement, of more then ordinary account in our Church and State) vpon reasons both speciall and vrgent, very earnestly

moued me to make the same more common.
The other was occasioned by a certaine printed Libell, of not a∣boue two sheetes of paper (of which bulke, or thereabouts, myselfe haue seene diuers treatises published by the Sectaries, An. 1605. and so made purposely, they knowing, and foreseeing, that bookes of that size, and of small price, are both more readily bought vp on all hands, especially of the common people, whose fauour they hunt and hawke after; & more greedily read, & more easily vnderstood, then large, tedious, and deere discourses) published I wot not by whom, Neither must any en∣quire after him, or gesse who he was▪ Pref. to the propos. and printed I know not where, but doubtlesse beyond the Sea (for the Printer wanted an English Corrector:) but wheresoeuer, and by whomsoeuer printed and published (which for my part I shall not be curious to inquire after, as the publisher would not haue any man to be,) I haue thought it my bounden duety to answere and confute the same, both because it is of the same verie subiect which the former is, namely, against kneeling at the communion, as against flat Idolatrie; as also for that the same is purposely diuulged, both to harden such persons among vs (whereof the number is but too greate) in their folly, as imbrace and hold that errour, and to al∣lure so many of our Church as possibly may be, to be of that opinion.
And therefore both for the further and fuller manifestation of the truth by answering what the aduersaries hitherto haue deuised, and dispersed as well in papers priuately, as publiquely in print, a∣gainst the said Kneeling, for the vpholding of Schisme, and faction in that point; and likewise for the preseruation of many in the peace and vnity of our Church, and deliuery of others (so far as in me lieth) from this foule, and lothsome opinion; I haue thought it expedient, yea very necessary, the times considered, to vndertake this labour.
Whereby whatsoeuer the author of the said Libel hath obiected, is both answered and confuted; and what he hath written, ver∣ballie, and syllabicallie, (the order of a dialogue onely considered,

and obserued) yea and without omitting so much as a letter, set downe. This I speake of the booke it selfe. For as touching the Preface, it being partlie slanderous and reprochfull, partly in∣ticing all sorts of people vnto an open rupture, schisme, and forsa∣king of our Communions, because of the said Kneeling, I haue not medled therewithall, being for my part of all other men both most vnwilling to spend good and pretious houres about such matter, as cannot be stirred without offending the eares and stomackes of good men; and most hartilie sorie that any men, pretending sin∣ceritie (as all Schismatikes doe) should either employ their pennes, or thinke that euen their cause can be blessed of the highest, which hath no better meanes then lies, slanders, diffamations, and a∣bandoning the Vnion and Communion of Gods people, to vphold and support itselfe withall.
Now these my labours I verie humblie desire your Lordship to accept at the hands of an old Oxford, and Christ-church man (to whom it is no small ioy and comfort, that he liueth to see that Vniuersitie equall at least with any other place of Learning in the word, famouslie, and admirablie to flourish; and of that Vniuer∣sitie to obserue men of Christ-church, for their rare and singular endowments, to be of such note and regard with the King, and State, as that the gouernment of foure chiefe and eminent places, and Dioceses in this land, is at this present, committed to their trust and inspection, as most worthy Patrons and pillars for the supporting both of the vncorrupt doctrine, and holy discipline in this Church established.) And though I doubt not, but I am knowne vnto all your Honours in some sort, being sometime a poore member with you all, at one and the same time, of one and the same Colledge, or Cathedrall Church: yet doe I acknowledge this, and what els I am able to performe due vnto your Lordship more then vnto any other man, partly for that which it hath pleased you of late to write both vnto mee, and touching me in your letters

vnto that all worthie, M. D. Tinley, Arch-deacon of Elie (my right worshipfull good friend) which I haue both seene, and read, and with a thankefull minde recognise; partly for that which it hath pleased your Lordship to say & vtter vnto my selfe, since my comming vnto London; and especially because you haue vouchsafed to testifie your well liking of what I haue done, both by a more then ordinarie approbation, and desire that it might come abroad, and also by commending of the same vnto the presse, for the furtherance of the worke, and better publishing it vnto the world. Acknowledging therefore these your manifold vndeser∣ued fauours with a very thankefull heart, and promising my best to deserue them, I earst and againe very humbly desire your good Lordship to accept these treatises with the former, and same af∣fections at my poore hands, in respect of my owne handling, simple and slender bee they I confesse, but for their subiect, and these times of Schisme (wherein many writers, and spreaders of new and false doctrines may be seene, but few confuters of them; many disturbers of our Church, and vnderminers of the peace, and pro∣speritie thereof by factious and Schismaticall discourses, but few counterminers, or that stand in the breach, to keepe these aduer∣saries out of the Citie of God, and from the sheep-fold of Christ) very necessarie, and worthie your Lordships patronage and protection: and so very humbly taketh his leaue, the fourth of May, Anno. 1608.

