


RIght Honourable, as it hath alway befallen the best both Diuine and Humane lawes to be peruerted by common profanenes and lewd custome: so may it be verified in all o∣ther things of like precious nature, that they could neuer escape the taint of humane er∣rour and abuse. Witnesse the institution of the holy feast of Shi∣loh mentioned in this booke: which though first was chiefly vsed as a memoriall of Gods benefits, yet in processe of time grew to extreme abuse, and gaue occasion to the vnlawful stea∣ling of the virgins in their dances. Nay, witnesse euen this ap∣proueable custome of Dedicating bookes: which though it hath been long taken vp and continued for good and respe∣ctiue reasons: yet hath it been of old the practise of heretikes, and still is of vnworthy writers to conueigh the poison of their books into the inferiour sort, by stiling and gracing them with the names of remarkable personages.
Religion and Christianitie, the ministerie of the Word, and the Profession thereof, are things in name and nature, of the highest value: howbeit, as the fairest apple to the worme, so are these exposed to the treble corruption of error, infidelitie, and hypocrisie. Semblably, the writings of Diuine argument (whe∣ther

vpon Scripture, as this, or Treatises consonant thereto) are of singular vse in the Church: yet neuer free from the malig∣nitie of some men. Especially such as who either out of their curiositie can endure nothing which clawes not their leprous humor: or through their carelesnes, professe either to meddle with no mans writings at all, or without putting difference to embrace good and bad with equall affection.
For the two former of these three, (I meane the vngratious∣ly nice, and the gracelesly sensuall:) this I must say, that since the Scriptures themselues (the most solemne of all other both for matter and stile) cannot rellish with them: I despaire that my writings should procure their appetite. Yea peraduenture this worke of mine will displease their daintie eyes and fingers, by the very bignes, and so preiudice their further handling. These therfore (if their disease be incorrigible) I professe not myselfe a cooke, for to dresse their diet; but rather leaue them to feede vpon the chalke and morter of their vnsauourie Pamphlets, while others nourish their minds with more wholesome meate: and send them to the trough and akornes, since they refuse An∣gels food. For the latter sort, (since there is more hope to cor∣rect their error, then the others vice) I pray to God, that with their generall willingnes to reade, he would giue them an vn∣derstanding heart, to discerne aright of things that differ: that the holy eye of their iudgement may be, like a Musicall eare in the distinguishing of sounds, and like the fining pot of the Goldsmith, in seuering the gold from drosse, or his touchstone in discouering of mettals. Also my hope is, that such as buy new bookes of all sorts, may happily light vpon this, among others: which if they shall doe, I wish them no worse, then that the gaine they reape, and the taste they get from this, may dis∣grace and distaste with them, all fruitlesse and offensiue au∣thors.
Pardon me (right Honourable) if I haue been ouer bold, in aduenturing to publish these poore labours, and thrust them vnder your patronage. I haue not sinisterly aimed at the Poets marke, who wisheth all writers, to set a glosse vpon their worke . Pind. by a glorious entrance: But partly to shroud myselfe in God vnder your authoritie, against the tempest and violence of all

vniust censurers (such as I named before:) and partly (yet chiefly) to commend the diligent perusall of this booke to all religious or indifferent Readers, by your Honours example: perswading myselfe, that you will not more willingly become patrone to the writer, then a patterne of the things contained in the writing itselfe. And, as by Gods ordinance, the oyle of Consecration was first powred vpon the head of Aaron, yet Psal. 133. 2. staied not there, but ranne downe thence vpon his beard, and to the nethermost skirts of his clothing: so, I iudged this order no whit preposterous, if first I presumed to powre this oyle (fetcht out of the Lords Tabernacle) vpon your Honours head: that so from you (as the sweet showres trickling downe from the hill to the valley) the fragrancie and fruite hereof might descend lower vnto meaner persons.
Among sundrie other bookes of holy writ, which, in the course of my Ministerie, these fourtie yeeres past, God hath as∣sisted me to explane and go through with my Audience; I haue (for some causes) chosen this, to leaue as a poore pledge and memoriall to Gods Church of my fidelitie, paines, and loue. And, though I respected also the good and request of my owne Congregation herein, into whose hearts I desire doubly to fa∣sten the naile of wholesome instruction (which soone slippeth out): yet seeing my time is short, and my voyce cannot reach beyond her vsuall limits, I haue endeuoured with my pen to draw a long and a wearisome line, that the other defect might be supplied: looking vp to him for a requitall, who hath pro∣mised not to conceale the labour of our loue. Heb. 6. 10.
I haue (Right Honourable) purposely altered the course of my writing, which formerly I haue vsed in my Treatise. As Elisha the Prophet put his hands vpon the King of Israel his 2 King 13 16. hand, when hee bad him shoote: so, when wee vndertake the handling of Scripture, the holy Ghost allowes vs not to say all wee can inuent, but requires vs to put our hands in his hands, and to applie our selues more strictly vnto his drift, then in Tractates of our owne, wherein generally our scope and li∣bertie is more large. Yet as the text hath led me, I haue held myselfe to these two markes: The one more generall to build

vp the Christian Reader in faith and good life: To the which end as I haue alreadie written a large Discourse, (if it haue yet come to your Honours hands) containing grounds and di∣rections for the more easie practising and growing in them both, so now in this I haue annexed liuely examples out of the Scriptures to illustrate those precepts: the naturall repugnan∣cie whereof to flesh and blood might otherwise breake out in∣to gainsaying the Art itselfe and the practise thereof. The o∣ther, particular: to shew to the diligent Reader, what vse the historicall examples of the old Testament (especially) doe af∣ford vs: a matter in this our contemplatiue but cold age, little respected, and lesse vnderstood.
The which (such as it is) I haue boldly presented vnto your Lordship vpon a three-fold consideration. The first this: God who hath made you a principall member in this great bodie of our land, both in gifts personall and publique, hath iustly pro∣portioned a principall place of employment for you aboue o∣thers. Your complements of Nature, Art, Experience, he hath (I doubt not) accomplished with sauing grace. Your pietie towards God, testified by your reuerend hearing his word, and reflecting itselfe in loue vpon his Ministerie: your sage and well menaged gouernment of ciuill affaires: your lear∣ning bewraied by your iudicious and assiduous reading of Schollers bookes, and fauouring their authors: all these argue strongly, that though Poperie, ignorance, iniustice and euill manners could well forgo you, yet the Church, the Common∣wealth and literature could ill want you. And the same God who hath thus enriched you, hath crowned his gifts in you, so that while you liue, your Name is blessed, and at the end of this life, you shall not dye vndesired▪ Why hath the Almightie thus graced you? Doubtlesse not for yourselfe onely, but to this end, that as the Sunbeames drawing vp the sweet vapours from the earth, suffer them to fall vpon their thirstie mother a∣gaine, with a doubly fruitfull influence: so Gods talents mea∣sured out largely vnto you, might entirely returne their ho∣nour vnto the giuer with ouerplus. The vessell that is full, and runneth ouer, hath for itselfe, and bedeweth the earth also

which is neere it. And seeing the greatest goodnesse of the best creature cannot reach so high as God himselfe: therefore hee expects that you drop it vpon this lower region of Saints who Psalme 16. 2. excell in vertue; yea vpon his Church and Gospell, (whereto he hath by letter of Attorney made ouer all such debts) to the promoting and aduancing whereof, the aduantage of your Honour and authoritie (besides your other gifts) is chiefly to be employed. Giue me leaue then (I beseech) to improue that common interest, which our Mother the Church claimeth in you, for the vndertaking of this my writing. You are chiefe a∣mong the sonnes of wisedome, which is iustified of all her chil∣dren. Matth. 11. 19.
Secondly, your Lordship knoweth well, that the Church and Common-wealth are friendly neighbours, each borde∣ring vpon other, both compast with one wall, and both yeel∣ding Eadem sunt Ec∣clesiae & Ciui∣tis moenia. mutuall aids & defences each to other. As outward peace could hardly be setled, except humane lawes enioyed the bro∣therly assistance of the spirituall sword: (which is a law present when no other is, euen to the conscience) So the ministery of the word should not so much preuaile as it doth, (little though it do in comparison) except the pleasant dewes of Hermon did So Moller and others motra∣lize that in Psalm. 133. 3. refresh the barren mountaines of Zion, I meane, except the ci∣uill sword of iustice did backe and authorize the same against them, who profanely cōtemne the word, as the smartles stroke of a leaden edge. The due obseruation whereof (right Hono∣rable) hath caused me to offer you this gift, that so I (one of the meanest) might thankfully acknowledge in the behalfe of the . Actes 24. 2. whole Church, that vnder his Maiesty she hath obtained much quietnesse through you, and that many things are worthily done to this nation by your prouidence, (as sometime that e∣uill man but not euill Orator said to a person and in a case farre vnlike:) which I haue therefore vttered in your eare, not only for that your Honour is well able to digest your owne felicity . Pind. and merit, but that I might exhort you to excell yourselfe in time to come, and to bring forth most fruite in your age: re∣membring that it is as hard a thing to stand to the reparations of some house, as to build it out of the ground: and it hath euer

biniustly questionable whether the purchase, or preseruing of vertue be the more difficult. Sure it is that the Prologue and Scene of your life hitherto worthily carried, promise to the beholders a close deseruing rare applause.
Lastly, your place and name seemed to claime this Dedica∣tion. The booke I write vpon conteines the most famous hi∣story of the renowned Iudges of ancient Israel. And God hath set your Honour in the chiefe seat of iustice, euen made you (vnder his Maiestie our highest Iudge) the principall Iudge in our English Israel. Besides, the argument of the booke (if it please your Honour to take a view of it) doth as peculierly concerne you, the presidents of these Worthies well deseruing your imitation. As that Romane Captaine beholding the ima∣ges of his victorious ancestors, found himselfe enflamed with earnest zeale of equalling or surpassing them: so, I doubt not but the laying open of these Iewish Captaines in their liuely colours, will rauish your religious spirit, with the loue and emulation of their graces. And here (ere I finish) suffer me to recommend vnto your Honour, two of the most heroicall ver∣tues in these Gouernours. The one, their inuincible courage, (the Epitome of a Christian Magistrates worthines) though Iosh. 1. 2. they liued in the most forlorne times, and dissolute, wherein the Idolatries and iniquities of Israel, seemed to striue with her captiuities and calamities, and whether man sinning or God re∣uenging should get the vpper hand. A manifest token of the immediate warrantise of these Iudges from heauen; enabling and encouraging them with so incredible fortitude and suc∣cesse. The other (last named, but in nature first) is their ad∣mirable faith: which as the Author to the Hebrwes could not Heb 11. throughout. silence in that thicke clowd of witnesses, so thereby he impor∣teth, that is generally the life whereby all Christians liue; and Heb. 10. 37. especially the fortresse, yea armour of proofe for the Magi∣strate. Not onely the sword of the Lord in the hands of Gedeon, Barak, Jphtah, and Samson (mentioned in this booke) to fight with against their forreine enemies: but also a singular both offensiue and defensiue weapon, for your Honour first, and then for your inferiors in place of gouernment, against the

intestine aduersaries (no lesse hurtfull) of God, his Gospell, and our common peace. For this sword rusteth not, nor looseth her edge with time. In the desire of this happy blessing vpon these my poore trauels, I most humbly recommend myselfe and seruice to your Lordship, and your Honours person and weightie affaires to the protection and dire∣ction of the Almightie.
From my poore house at Wethersfield in Essex.
Ia∣nuary 20. 1615. resting


