



Worshipfull and welboloued in the Lord:
WHen that Master in the Gospell deliuered his goods vnto his seruants, hee gaue them with∣all a straight charge, that they should Occupie vntill hee came: Luke 19.13. And put forth those talents which they had recei∣ued; that so vpon his returne hee might receiue some answerable encrease. This charge doth binde mee as well as any other; for

what though my receipts bee small and little? yet for this little I shall bee called to account; (for so was hee that had receiued but one talent, as well as hee that had receiued fiue) (and how soone I know not.Math. 25.24. I haue beene, and daily am summoned to make readie: Deaths darts haue lighted round about me; and since my comming amongst you, two piercing Ar∣rowes haue beene shot at mee; the one of them lighted in my bed, the other by my bed-side; a Wife (so gracious, so dutifull;) a Childe (so apt, so forward) haue beene taken from mee. The falling of these shafts (besides much sickenesse, weakenesse, and o∣ther bodily infirmities) (for all which I blesse Gods name) doe call vpon mee to prepare and make my reckonings euen.Psal. 4. But alas! casting vp my ac∣counts, and communing with my owne soule vpon my bed, concerning my receipts and gaines, I found my selfe to bee much behinde hand with my Ma∣ster, which caused mee to cast about how I might redeeme part of that time which formerly I had so idly, so wretchedly, misspent. At last (hauing with all, other speciall reasons moouing mee thereunto) I re∣solued vpon this course; And as by preaching, so by publishing some part of what I had taught in Print, to seeke Gods glory, his Churches good, and my owne com∣fort and reioycing, in the day of the Lord Iesus. I doe confesse I haue euer thought it, and still doe thinke it, to be safer for me to follow Market nigher home, then to traffique abroad into other coasts and countries with my Little; To spend my time in preaching, rather then in printing such common stuffe as this. But for∣asmuch as ability of body (though not of minde) is

wanting, so that I cannot doe what otherwise I would; I am enforced to doe what I am able. And thus like a venturous young Merchant I launch forth into the deepe, aduenturing this my Ship vpon the dangerous and crosse Seas of mens different opinions. I know I shall be tossed with some stormie winds of euill censure, (though many would perswade me I shall haue a faire gale, and a good voyage of it:) But here is my comfort, my Ship is sound, and my tackling good, Hope is my Anchor, and Faith my Cable; Loue my Sailes, and Christ my Pilot. I doubt not then but I shall saue my Vessell, and bring it safe vnto the Hauen. What though I be somewhat sea-sicke in this my first voyage? I trust it will be but as Physicke for mee, happily it will cause me to giue an eternall fare-well to all such voyages, and make me resolue neuer to thrust my selfe into any more such rash aduentures. In the meane time (my worship∣full good Friends) this is yours, and so is the Author of it, who by many your respectiue fauours towards him, doth acknowledge himselfe to bee much obliged to you. And forasmuch as this is a time wherin euery gratefull person doth by some gift or other, shew some signe and token of their louing and kinde affection; In this I con∣forme my selfe to custome, and send this Paper-gift vn∣to you for your New-yeares gift, giuing it (not after the olde custome of the Heathen, who consecrated them after an Idolatrous and cursed manner in the names of Ianus, and of Saturne,Suet. in Tiber. cap. 34. Tertul. lib. de Idol. cap. 14. which custome Tiberius (as Suetonius doth report) did by an edict forbid, and was after condemned and abolished by the Church, as Hea∣thenish, yea diuelish) but as a testimoniall of my thanke∣full heart, and as a pledge to all posterity of my affecti∣on

towards you; desiring onely to be esteemed gratefull, and no otherwise to bee recompenced, then with your conscionable perusing of what is here presented. And so nothing doubting of your acceptance, I take my leaue; Not ceasing to pray for you, that your loue may a∣bound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all iudgement; and that you may discerne things that differ, and may be pure, and without offence, vntill the day of Christ, Resting

