



MOst gracious and dread Soueraigne Lord, I haue not presumed vpon this dedication, as being ouertaken with the forgetfulnes ei∣ther of your Maiesties greatnes, or mine owne pouertie: For I confesse, that if com∣parison were made that way, I might wor∣thily be blamed of presumption. But the truth is, that I laid in balance your mind rather then your Maiestie, and the argu∣ment rather then my penning of it. In this I confesse I presu∣med and I trust without desert of blame, that as you haue pre∣ferred godlines before glorie in the middest of this glorie which God hath brought you vnto: so you will preferre a trea∣tise of godlines, thus simply furnished, before a glorious stile. Which is not seldome repugnant to the simplicitie of holie things. And yet my meaning is to confesse to your Maiestie, that this argument deserued both a more learned and more gracious penne then mine. To which I would with al my heart haue giuen place, if I had either seene before me, or heard be∣hinde me the footsteps of any tending that way that I goe, though I confesse, there are some to bee seene trauailing in waies neere adioyning to this.
Concerning your Maiestie, I am perswaded, that you repose your greatest greatnes in the communion of Saints, and not in your seuered calling which is transitorie: and therefore will account your selfe honoured by the augmentation of grace, and the furtherance of true holines. Your Maiesties owne af∣faires must be permitted to inioy their opportunities, and your godly wisedome to inioy your choice in this varietie of reading. But I doubt not, but your godly heart will perswade you to receiue a booke of this kinde with a gracious hand, though it were to no other end, but to begin to Gods people in the entertaining of any true hearted motiue vnto holines. And this to say the truth, is that wherein I haue made bold to vse your gracious and renowmed name, to aduantage my in∣tent of furthering the people committed to your charge in their passage to saluation. Let it therefore (I most humblie sup∣plicate) please your Maiestie to giue allowance to my ende∣uour and drift, and to pardon my slips: for my meaning hath been to seeke the honour of God in this work, and to borrow helpe in this Dedication, of the grace he hath giuen you for such purposes.
Thus reioycing, with the rest of Gods people, for the comfort wherewith the Churches heart is comforted by you, and desiring the lineall descent of these kingdomes to your Maiesties royall posteritie, till Iesus Christ with his glorious comming obscure all the glorie of the world, I beseech the holie Ghost to be with your spirit, and keepe your Maiestie in Christ vnto the end.

