



RIght Reverend Father in God, and my Honourable Lord, my booke I dedi∣cate unto God, as I have my selfe, and all my labours long since. I present it to your Lordship, as the person to whom under God and the King, I am bound to give an account of my life, and labours in my vocation. A beneficed man, and a Preacher I have lived in your Diocesse these thirty yeares; many conferences I have had with Pa∣pists; many small tracts have I written, upon the request of some of our Church, who desired satisfaction in some points; diverse bookes have I briefly answered with marginall notes, or analyticall resolution of their discourse, intending them for private satisfaction. Only one escaped that happinesse of privacy, a short answer

to Mr. Fisher, which I gave, being in London, far from my bookes, farther from repose or quietnesse to study, in a case, which made me fall on my knees, and pray un∣to God to keepe to me the best things, whereby I might doe him service. In maximis angustiis, I wrote that short answer to Mr. Fisher. I may call it my Benoni, to which Mr. Fisher, or one for him, made a reply: and this is my defence of it, and our Church. It is not any great con∣ceit that I have of my labours, or my owne strength, that causeth mee to publish it; no, I say to my selfe, as was said to a weake Souldier, that girte on his armour to goe and fight:
Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis
Tempus eget—
And, God be thanked, we have many better, and those of late, whose workes for subject, and conformity of opinions, have that correspondency with this of mine, though for acutenesse and learning beyond it, as that, amongst other motives, caused me to publish it seven or eight yeares, after that it was finished. The bragging of the Romanist, their false hopes of the change of Religi∣on, and the vaine feares of others, have made me rub up my old harnesse, and to gird me to the battell, not daun∣ted with the insolency of some Papists, nor disquieted with the causelesse feares of some of our side, who, while they would seeme zealous against the Roman party, little consider, by their injurious traducing the Church they are members of, and the happy govern∣ment of it, that they help their enemies more then their most professed Champions. For my part, as I delive∣red in a Sermon before your Lordship, at your first Vi∣sitation, I am assured, that while we have the Scriptures, publike and private, in our mother tongue, and solid

Catechizing in the fundamentall points, wee need not feare Popery. This they well knew, that persecuted with Fier and Fagot, whosoever had the New Testament, or Old, or as much as the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the tenne Commandements in the English Tongue; they well knew, that to reade the Scriptures, and there finding, there is one Mediator betweene God and man, the man CHRIST IESUS, would make them that read it, though simple, to suspect the popish mediation of Saints departed.
2. The learning of the Lords Prayer, with this in∣junction pray thus, Our Father, would make the simplest to collect after this manner; if I may goe to God him∣selfe, and am so commanded by Christ, and have the example of the Patriarkes, Prophets, and Apostles praying unto God, and not unto men or Angels, with a promise from Christ, Aske and you shall have; and an invitation, Come unto me all ye that travaile, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you; why should I pray unto Saints without command, promise or patterne, nay, without faith, how shall they call on him, on whom they have not beleeved? In quem non crediderunt, Vnlesse they will say, which is a degree beyond ordinary Popery, that we may credere in hominem, vel Angelum.
3. The Creed being learned would make the simple consider, when hee heareth of other Articles of Faith not therein contained, as traditions unwritten equalled to the words of God, the Popes supremacy, to be the prime article of the faith, as Bellarmine to Blackwell doth call it, transubstantiation, invocation of Saints, veneration of Images, purgatory, seven Sacraments, Et quicquid novi semper apportat Roma, new articles, new monsters; to say thus, they are not in my Creed, it was

no part of my promise in Baptisme, no covenants of mine: I was made a Christian, without any such condi∣tions, any such articles.
4. In the Commandements, the simple doe finde the Papists forgery, if they blot out the 2d. Comman∣dement, or any part thereof: or their Idolatry in wor∣shipping Images, if they leave the text whole and un∣corrupted.
5. Having the whole Scriptures in their mother tongue, they finde the Papists prohibiting of marriage, and of meates, a doctrine of divels; their exercise of Religion in an unknowne tongue, to be but a tinckling Cymball; Antichrist to bee that man of sinne, which exalteth himselfe above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, to be the Whore that sitteth on seven hils, that sitteth in the Temple of God, &c. These things being commanded by the King, and earnestly pressed by the Bishops in their severall Visitations; make mee confident (as every moderate person is) that they, whose zeale against Rome is good, doe feare the alteration of Religion without cause; nay, have much to answer for both to God and man, for cherishing such unchari∣table suspitions in themselves and others.
Three things in your Lordships Visitation, did cause me much to reverence your person, and place. 1. Your personall presence in most parts of Your Diocesse. 2. Your admonition to the Ministers, to study and preach the Scriptures, and to Catechize carefully. 3. Your Lordships laying of hands upon Children, af∣ter Your Lordship had examined some by Your selfe, and the rest by Your Clergy; a thing of late neglected, and therefore lay heavie upon Your Lordship at this first comming, when there came so many, that Your

Lordships spirits were almost spent, and many were al∣most crushed with the thronge; I said then to Your Lordship, it was a great comfort to see the Church thus to suffer violence. And from all other violence the Lord of heaven deliver us: to whose protection my prayers daily commend Your Lordship;

