



TRuly and com∣monly is it saide (right vvorshipful) such prince, such people, such superiors such subiectes. For so do men frame themselues, & conforme their manners, as they see others placed in cheife seate of auctority, as it vvere to the vevve and sight of all men, addict themselues: thinkinge that to bee vvell donne, vvhich is donne by example. And therfore as a good prince by the exam∣ple of goodnes bringeth vnspeakeable commodities: so an euill prince by the

example of vvickednes, causeth infinit calamities in his realme and contrie. Xerxes most sauedgelie, set his vvhole delight in pleasure: by vvhose exam∣ple the Babylonians in naughtines ex∣ceeded all men, and in beastlinesse the brutish kinde. Nero contemned Philo∣sophie, excelled in Musick: vvhich made better learning among the Romans to decaye, & most men became Musicians. These vvallowed in vvantonnes, and their subiects follovved in vvickednes. Ptolomeie vvas studious, and prefer∣red the virtues of the minde before the vanities of the vvorlde. But vvhat came thereof? His subiestes the Aegyp∣tians proued the most profounde in the liberall sciences. If Englishmen at this daye, be not onely famous for all good lerninge, but zelous in deede in good religion, vvhat maruell? Our noble prince is both vvell learned in

humne literature, and vvell liued through diuine scripture. She doth em∣brace all godlynes, & her people through her example encrease in holines. Of vvhose most excellente virtues, not∣vvithstanding the boddy of her vvhole realme do sauor, and asvvell tovvne as citty: contrie as vniuersity are bettered by them: yet doth her Maiesties most noble Court more shine through them, then any parte of her kingdome. As may vvitnes her so graue, so godly counsai∣lers, her so prudent, so vigilant officers, her so faithfull, so trustie attenders vp∣pon her person. Amongst vvhome as your vvorship is not leaste gratious in her princely fauor: so are you not leaste glorious in the sight of the multitude. For hovv can it be, but he must nedes delight a faithfull people, vvhich so doth like a famous prince? The Lodestone by nature dravves Iron vnto it. All

good qualities by nature vvinne the harts of the multitude. But that Lode∣stone hath greatest virtue, vvhich hath the siluer color. But those qualities ador¦ned vvith the goodes of nature and fortune, get most good vvill. The dia∣monde though placed in Iron is of great value. Virtue though in the minde of baseste for condition, is very commen∣dable. But nothing doth so set out the Diamonde, as doth the Golde. But vir∣tue is then most vvondred at, vvhen it is in him, vvhiche for auctoritie is of povver, and for deserte, in fauoure vvith the best. VVorthy sir, vvhat your happy estate hath vvrought in others no hard thing it is to coniecture, vvhat it doth in me, by this my dedication it may be gathered, For vvere it not I percei∣ued an especiall excellencie in your vvorship (vvhich deserueth an especiall fame) more then in many, I could not,

leaug all, reserue the patronage of myst frutes of studie (by an especiall prerogatiue) to you alone. The vvorke I confesse to be far vnworthy, so vvor∣thy a patrō: notvvithstanding (because, those things (be they of nature neuer so simple, for value neuer so contemptible) are of contrimen vvell soughte for, vvhich are of courtiers vvell accepted: and of inferiors vvell bought, vvhich are of superiors vvel estemed) I thought it best humblie to offer the same vnto him, vvhich is in courte of suche aucto∣rity, as in contry he can do much, & e∣uery vvhere of such countenance, as no vvhere that vvilbe misliked, vvhich is anye thinge liked of his vvisedome. Receiue then I beseech you in good part this rude Anatomie at his hands, vvho vvisheth vnto your vvorship as much accesse of promociō in this life, & ioyes in heauen, as he vvhich is most desirous

of your eternal felicity. vvhich if you do, I doubt not, but that vvil be vvel∣come to others, vvhich is vvell receiued of so vvorthy a man.

