



MOst Reverend Father in God, there is no one thing in this world that of men truely zealous and Christian, in these latter dayes of the world with greater earnestnesse hath bin desired, then that by a joynt and common consent of all the Churches rightly, and according to the Canons of the sacred Scriptures, reformed, there might be a draught made, and divulged, containing, and ex∣pressing the sum, and substance of that Religion, which they doe both concordably teach, and uniformely maintaine.
That holy man (of happy remembrance) D. Cranmer (who sometime enjoyed that roome in our Church,Arch. Cran∣mer. which your Grace now worthily possesseth) in the dayes of that most godly yong Prince, K. Edward the sixt, employed a great part of his time and study, for the effecting of that work; and im∣parted

his thoughts with the most principall persons, and of rarest note in those dayes for their wisedome, piety, and cre∣dit among the people of God throughout Christendome. Mr. Calvin, understanding of his intent, addressed his letters unto the said Archbishop, and offred his service, saying, That might his labours stand the Church in stead, Ne decem quidem maria, it would not grieve him to saile over ten Seas to such a purpose.
But this proving a worke of much difficulty, if not alto∣gether impossible in mens eyes, especially in those dayes, to be brought about;Vnity of do∣ctrine in all Churches re∣formed. the next course, and resolution was, that every Kingdome, and free State, or Principality, which had abandoned the superstitions, and Antichristian Religion of the Church of Rome, and embraced the Gospell of Christ, should divulge a Briefe of that Religion, which among them∣selves was taught, and beleeved, and whereby through the mercy of God in Christ, they did hope to be saved. Which to Gods great glory, and the singular benefit, and comfort of all Churches, both present, and to come (as the extant Harmony of all their confessions doth most sweetly record) with no great labour was notably performed.
This worke of theirs told the Churches in those dayes, and doth us, and will informe our posterity; that not only in every particular State, and Kingdom, but also throughout Christen∣dome,Ab initio re∣formationis ardebant amo∣re veritatis omnes Politi∣ci, Ecclesiasti∣ci, Plebeii: Jezler. de diu∣tur. belli Eu∣char. pag. 49. Vnity of do∣ctrine in the Church of England, in King Edward the sixt his dayes. where the Gospel was entertained, the Primitive and Apostolicall daies of the Church were again restored. For the multitudes of them that did beleeve (I speake both joyntly of all, and severally of each reformed people, not of every parti∣cular person, fantastique, false apostles, and perverse teachers, or professors in any Church, who were not wanting even in the Apostles dayes) touching the maine, and fundamentall points of true Religion, were then of one heart, and of one soule, and did think, and speake one thing, and live in peace.
3. The said Archbishop (for unto whom better, after God, and the King, can we ascribe the glory of this worthy Act?) wrought this Vnity, & Vniformity of doctrine in this King∣dome, in the Halcyon dayes of our English Iosias, K. Edward the sixt of that name: and the same doctrine, so by his meanes

established in the time of peace (a notable work of peace) like a manly, heroicall, and heavenly Captaine under our Gene∣rall, Iesus Christ, he resolutely, even with his heart bloud, and in the fiery torments, afterwards confirmed in the dayes of persecution.
A certain learned man,Anno 1552. (speaking of the Religion here then professed, and writing unto the Lords of our late Queenes Councell) doth say, he (meaning the Papist his adversary, who charged our Church with discord, and disagreements about matters of Religion:K. Edward the 6.) Hee ought (said he) if hee had beene able, to have brought out the publike Confession, and Articles of faith, agreed in K. Edwards time: and have shewed any in England, that professing the Gospel, dissenteth from the same. So esteemed he (and with him many thousands of learned, and judicious men) of the doctrine then ratified by authority, and professed in this Kingdome.
But those dayes of our Churches peace continued not long (through our unthankfulnesse,Q. Mary. and sinnes) neither on the other side was our persecution permanent (through the goodnesse of God) though for the time exceeding vehement, and vio∣lent. For nubecula fuit, & citò transiit, It vanished away quick∣ly, as doe many raging stormes even upon the sudden: yet not through the power of Gunpowder, and treasons, but through the force of ardent prayers unto the Almighty. For arma ec∣clesiae, preces.
4. We find that Mr. Latimer (that sacred,The prayers of the persecuted Saints for the reducing of true Religion into the Realme. F. Latimer. and reverend Fa∣ther) addicted himselfe very seriously in those dayes unto the exercise of prayer; and his principall, and most usuall prayers were first, for himselfe, next, for the afflicted Church of England, and lastly, for Lady Elizabeth, that deceased King Edwards, and Queene Maries sister.
For himselfe he prayed, that as God had made him  (Mini∣ster and Preacher of his truth: so hee might constantly beare witnesse unto the same, and have the grace & power to main∣tain it in the face of the world; even till the houre of his death. For the Church of England he prayed, that God would be plea∣sed once againe to restore the free preaching of the Gospell

to this Realme (and this with all possible fervency of Spi∣rit, he craved at the hands of God.) And for Lady Elizabeth, that he would preserue, and make her a comfort to his then comfortlesse people in England. And the Almighty and our heavenly Father both heard, and granted all, and every of his petitions.
Mr. Gualter (that learned, painfull, and excellent Divine at Tigure, dedicating his holy, and Christian Comments upon the lesser Prophets unto D. Parkhurst,B. Parkhurst. Bishop of Norwich (who in the dayes of the forementioned Q. Mary, voluntarily had exiled himselfe so farre as Switzerland, for his preservati∣on, if it might be, unto better times) saith of the said Parkhurst, that when he lived in Tigure, Lady Elizabeth was ever in his mouth: her Faith, her wisedome, her magnanimous spirit, her virgineous and chaste behaviour, he would ever celebrate with high words and commendations, and that God would gard,Q. Eliza∣beth. and safegard her person for the good of his people, was his daily prayer: yea (saith the same Gualter) orabant idem tecùm pii omnes, it was not your prayer onely, but all Gods people so prayed besides. And their prayers were not made in vaine: For both Queene Mary lived not long; and Lady E∣lizabeth was placed in the Royall throne; superstition was expulsed, and true Religion againe, to the singular comfort, and multiplication of Gods people in this Kingdome, very solemnely restored.
Notwithstanding, an Vniformitie of doctrin to be taught embraced,True doctrine restored, anno 1558. and an uniformitie of the same esta∣blished, and published, an. 1562. and professed, by authoritie of the Prince, and State, was not published, till certain yeers after the Queenes attain∣ing the kingly Diademe; but then Articles of Religion, to the number of thirtie nine, drawne yet three yeeres afore, were commended to the consideration, and perusall of the whole Clergy of both Provinces, in an orderly, and lawfull assembly, or Convocation of theirs at London; and by a sweet, and u∣nanimous readinesse, thereupon by them allowed. This was effected in the yeer of our Lord 1562.Ann. 1562. (the same yeer that the mercilesse massacre at Vassey in France was committed by the Duke of Guize, and the same very time also that all the Pro∣testants

in that countrey of France, for holding and professing the same doctrine, were sentenced unto death, and destruction by the Parliament at Paris: after which their condemnation ensued those horrible, and more then savage murders, and slaughters of the Religious, and onely for their Religion, at Carrascone, at Tholouse, Amiens, Towres, Sens, Agen, Aurane, and many other Cities, Townes, and Villages throughout France.)
A principall contriver of this Vniformitie in Religion,Arch. Par∣ker. and thereby Vnitie among us, was another Predecessour of your Graces, even D. Parker the first Archbishop of Canterbury in the said Queenes dayes.
Hereupon Beza from Geneva, Doctrinae puritas viget in An∣glia, purè & syncerè; Religion flourisheth in England; Zanchi∣us, from Straborough, Per hanc Reginam factam, by her mean∣ing Q Elizabeths) comming to the Crowne, God againe hath restored his doctrine, and true worship; and Daneus, The whole compasse of the world hath never seen any thing more blessed, nor more to be wished then is her government.
So now again flourished those Apostolicall times (as I may say) of unitie, and Vniformitie of doctrine in our Church. For then were there no contentions, nor dissentions, nor thorny and pricking disputations among us, about questions of Re∣ligion, tantum res nobis cum satellitibus quibusdam Pontificiis (as Bishop Iewell said) we then skirmished onely with the Pa∣pists. As it was at the building of Salomons Temple: so was it with us then. We set upon the building of Gods House (which is his Church) without din, without noyse, and stirres. The adversaries without, heard us, and heard of our doings abroad by the pens of the learned Iewell, Nowell, Calfe∣hill, and such other Architects of ours; to our selves we were comely at Ierusalem; to our enemies, terrible as an Army of Banners.
6. Also what afore, viz. an. 62. they had agreed upon,Subscription required unto the Booke of Art. an. 12. the same at another Assembly at London, an. 71. and the 13. of Q. Elizabeth, according to an Act of Parliament then made, the said Clergie of England (the Archbishops and Bishops first

beginning, and giving the example) by their several subscrip∣tions with their owne hands, most readily did approve.
An. 1572.Howbeit in the yeere next ensuing, sciz. an. 72. (a yeere many wayes memorable) especially for the great, and general Massacre of above an hundred thousand Protestants in France, chiefely in Paris, and the countrey thereabout adioyning, be∣gun on St. Bartholmewes EveBartholo∣maeus flet, quia Gallicus oc∣cubat Atlas.; for Pope Gregories excommu∣nicating of Q Elizabeth, for defending this doctrine, and reli∣gion, which here we speak of; and thirdly, for the erecting of private Presbyteries now first in England) divers of the infe∣riour Ministers in, and about London, and else-where in this Kingdome, not a little disturbed the quiet of our state, and peace: some of them by untimely, and inconsiderate admo∣nitions, pamphlets, and Libels; others by obstinate refusing to subscribe, as both Law did enjoyne, and their Fathers in Christ, and superiours afore them had done. But these men speedily both by learning were answered, and by authority censured, suspended, or deprived.
Vnitie of do∣ctrine stil con∣tinued.7. And yet not one of these Recusants, and so not one of Englands Clergie, either now, or afore, did ever oppugne the received, publike, and Catholike doctrine of our Church, but most willingly approved, and applauded the same, as the truth of God.
For even the admonitioners themselves (which said that they did strive for true Religion; and wished the Parliament even with perfect hatred to detest the Church of England, whereof notwithstanding they were members) even they do say how they (meaning the Bishops, and their partakers) hold the substance of Religion with us, and wee with them. And againe: We all (of us) confesse one Christ. And their Cham∣pion doth acknowledge, that her Maiestie hath delivered us from the spirituall Egypt of Popery.
So that for doctrine (I means still for the maine points of doctrine) there was now a sweet, and blessed concord among us: which Vnity continued all that holy, and Reverend Fa∣thers, I meane Archbishop Parkers time, which was till the 17. yeere of Queene Elizabeth.
8.Archbish. Grindall After him succeeded in the said Archiepiscopall chaire B. Grindall, a right famous, and worthy Prelate; and for religi∣on so sound, as in K. Edwards dayes (had the Prince liued a while longer) he had beene promoted vnto the Bishopricke of London, vpon the translation of B Ridly vnto Durham (for these things had the State then in purpose) But God o∣therwise had decreed for their aduancements, as that the one of them should passe through the fire vnto the kingdome of heauen; and the other escape the dangers of many stormes, and waters, before he came unto any preferment at all. And so accordingly Ridly was burned, and Grindall banished, and both of them depriued either of life, or liuing, or both; and that for one, and the same cause, and doctrine, which they had preached, and we professe.
But the tempest being ouerblowne, and Q. Elizabeth (her selfe hauing likewise escaped the bloody hands of her cruell enemies, yea and Gunpowder traines, and Treasons too, in most barbarous manner laid to haue blown vp her Saint like and sanctified Body, and Soule, into the heauens; and all for her constant fauouring, and embracing this very doctrine) her Maiestie (not forgetfull what he had endured for the cause of Christ, and his Church) aduanced this zealous Confessour, and tryed Souldier, vnto the See first of London (afore designed him:) next of Yorke, and lastly of Canterbury.
The care of this Archbishop was great to further the glory of God, but through the enuy and malice of his ill-willers, his power was but small; his place high, but himselfe made low, through some disgraces, by his potent aduersaries: which he meekely, and patiently endured till his dying day.
6. During the time of this mans troubles, among other,The factious encrease, and grow confi∣dent. two things especially deserue obseruation: One is, the flocking of Iesuits into the Kingdom (who afore then neuer came among vs;) the other is the insolency, & boldnes of our home faction.
The Iesuits indicted Councils; summoned Synodes; ena∣cted and reuersed orders; and exercised Papall iurisdiction a∣mong vs: wee not witting, nor so much as dreaming of any such matter.
The Brethren (for so did they now stile themselues) in their Churches and charges would neither pray, nor say seruice, nor Baptize, nor celebrate the L. Supper; nor Marry, nor Bury, nor doe any other Ecclesiasticall duty according to the Law, but after their owne deuisings. And abroad (as if they had bin ac∣quainted with the Iesuitical proceedings; or the Iesuites, with their practices) they had their meetings both classicall and Sy∣nodicall; they set downe decrees, reuersed orders, elected Mi∣nisters, exacted Subscription, and executed the censures of suspeision, and excommunication where they thought good.
The Isues had for their prouinciall, first Robert Parsons, alias, Cowbuck then Weston, and lastly Garnet (which Garnet) continued in that office till the yeere 1605. when he was ap∣prehended, and for most horrible and hellish treasons, as an ar∣rant Traitor put to death in Pauls Churchyard the fame yeer. And the Brethren had their (I know not what) chiefe men. All of these residing in, and about London; and in speciall fa∣uour both with the Gentiles, and vulgar people of their seue∣rall factions: and so continued multiplying their number and growing strong, euen head-strong in boldnesse, and schisme, till the dying day of this most graue and reuerend Archbi∣shop, which was in the moneth of Iuly. 1583.
10. Some foure moneths afore whose death, the said Bre∣thren, at a certaine Assembly of their own appointing, among other things (as I find) decreed,Vnitie of do∣ctrine still hol∣deth among vs. An. 1583. that if Subscription unto the booke of Articles of Religion (afore mentioned, and still meant) should againe be vrged, the said Brethren might sub∣scribe thereunto according to the Statute. Which declareth that what diuersity, and disagreement soeuer was about other matters, yet abode there still a blessed Vnitie among vs tou∣ching the foundation of Christian Religion. And this was in 25. yeere of Q. Elizabeth.
Archbish. Whitegift.11. Next vnto him D. Whitegift, then Bishop of Worcester (a man deseruedly vnto that dignitie promoted, and for his manifold paines in writing, teaching, & defending the truth, his wisedome in gouerning, and his well demeaning of him∣selfe euery way, worthy the double honour which hee did

enioy, or the State could aduance him vnto) from thence was translated vnto the See of Canterbury.
No sooner was he confirmed in his office, but obseruing both the open & intolerable contempt in many places of all Church orders by authority prescribed; and hearing both of many secret conuenticles, and vnlawful assemblies in his Pro∣uince; and of the tumults, and garboiles abroad, and euen at his very admission vnto his charge, raised in Scotland, and that for the selfe-same cause, which by the Brethren here in England was maintained; and foreseeing the dangers, and troubles likely to ensue (for which he should giue an account, if in time he sought not meanes to preuent them) he thought it his bounden duty (for the preseruation of vnity and purity in Religion, the preuenting of further schisme, and the disco∣uery of mens inclinations either vnto peace, or faction) that all, and euery Minister Ecclesiasticall (hauing cure of soules within the Prouince of Canterbury) vnder his owne hand, and by subscription,Subscription the secōd time called for. should testifie his consent both vnto the points of Religion in the Conuocation, Ann. 62. approoued, and likewise vnto other Articles, necessary for concord sake of all, & euery man, Minister especially, to be acknowledged, and accordingly, by due course of Law called then thereunto. Which was done the very first yeere of his remoueall, and of her Maiesty the 26.Anno 1584.
This of the brethren was tearmed the wofull yeere of sub∣scription, but that they should so doe there was no cause, vn∣lesse they are grieued that factious spirits, and malecontented Ministers, and Preachers were discouered, and their erroneous, and schismaticall opinions brought into light. And surely ne∣uer was their subscription hitherto by authority vrged in this land, but diuers new fancies (held yet for truthes, not to bee doubted of, among the brethren) were thereby detected, for Gods people to auoid as monsters: neither hath our Church lost, by imposing, nor the aduersaries gained at the long runne, by refusing Subscription.
12. In the yeeres 71. and 72. when subscriptiom first was required, the whole land will witnesse, that many, and sundry

bookes (aswell in Latine,How basely the Brethren cōceiue of the doctrine by the Bishops agreed vpon, and esta∣blished by the Prince. as English) then, and afterward flew abroad. In which we read how then, and in those dayes, the truth of God did in a manner but peepe out (as it were) at the Screene, that Cranmer, Parker, Grindall, and all the other Mar∣tyrs, Preachers, and learned men (which first in our age brought the light of the Gospell into this Realme) did see a little, and had a glimpse of the truth, but ouersaw many things, which in these dayes of the Sunshine of the Gospell, men of meaner gifts doe see, and yet may not vtter them without great danger of the Lawes (through the iniquity of the times) though the said things now seene be comprised in the Booke of God, and also be a part of the Gospell, yea the very Gospell it selfe (so true are they) and of such impor∣tance, as if euery haire of our heads were a life (say the Bre∣thren) we ought to afford them in defence of these matters, the Articles of Religion penned, and agreed vpon by the Bishops, and Clergy, and ratified by the Prince, and Parlia∣ment, in comparison of these things now reuealed, and new∣ly come to light, are but Childish and toyes.
Thus write they (as your grace best knoweth, and I would haue quoted the places where they may be read, had I either not written vnto your selfe, or did write vnto a man vnac∣quainted with their bookes.) And had they here stayed, their words had bin able (without the more grace of God) to haue moued the Parliament, and all the people of this land (as they have preuail'd but too much already with their too credulous Fauorites) to thinke our Church, for all the reformation wrought, and Vniformity in doctrine established, to be much awry, and farre from the truth it should professe. But setting downe (as they haue done) and publishing both what the truth is, which now breaketh out, and offreth it selfe by their ministery to the view of the whole world (which afore did but peepe out at the Screene) and what the things be, which they of meane gifts doe see, and our Fathers, and the Martyrs, Bishops, and Preachers, both in King Edwards dayes, and af∣terwards (knowne, and acknowledged to be men of excellent parts either did not see at all, or ouersee: and what likewise

the points of doctrine newly now reuealed, their aternum E∣uangelium (which without great danger may not be preached in England, no more then the doctrine, and Articles of the Church of England, may be preached at Rome; and for de∣fence whereof they ought to afford euen their very liues, were they so many as the haires of euery of their heads) is, and be, they demonstrate themselues to be most childishly vaine, and idle in their imaginations; (which they take yet to bee illuminations of the spirit.)
13. For all their doings,The vncouth doctrine of the factious Bre∣thren. and discourses (to say the best of them) are but to erect a new (which they tearme a true) mi∣nistery, and their Discipline among vs.
Themselues doe say, The controuersie betwixt them, and vs, is not as (the Bishops, and their wil-willers) they would beare the world in hand, for a Cap, a Tippet, or a Surplesse, but for greater matters, concerning a true ministery, and re∣giment of the Church, according to the word: the one where∣of, that is, a true ministery, they shall neuer haue, till Arch∣bishops, and Bishops be put downe, and all ministers made e∣quall: the other also will neuer be brought to passe, till Kings and Queenes doe subiect themselues vnto the Church, and submit their scepters, and throw downe their Crownes before the Church and lick vp the dust of the feete of the Church, and willingly abide the censures of the Church, that is, of the Pres∣bytery. For as the Church is subiect vnto the ciuill magi∣strate in respect of his civill authority; so must the Magistrate, the King and Queene, subiect themselues, and be obedient to the iust, and lawfull authority of the Church. The ciuill ma∣gistrate is none officer at all of the Church. For Church-of∣ficers be non Magnates, aut Tetrarchae, not gracious, or hono∣rable Lords, but Ministers of the Church The Presbytery is the Church: and euery Congregation, or Church, should and must in it haue a Presbytery.
This is the Light, which indeed the Martyrs neuer saw; the Religion, which our Brethren striue for, the Truth which they may not preach; not childish doctrine, like the Bishops Articles, but the wise Gospel; the maine, and materiall points

of Religion, now in the dayes last of all (yea after the eighth Thorow breaking of H. N. his Euangelium regni) reuealed, and for furtherance whereof they are to lend, and spend euen all their liues, if occasion be ministred.
14. Strange and strong delusions: First, to take these and other such assertions for Truths, and heauenly mysteries, which are but the fancies of troubled braines, not grounded, nor truly gathered from Gods Word.
Next, to teach one another, and all their fauourers, how they should be as ready, and prepared euen for these matters, to give other their liuings, and to giue their liues (were they as many as the haires of (all) their heads) as Cranmer, Ridly, La∣timer did; and Parker, Grindall, and all other Preachers would, and euery Christian man and woman should, if they be cal∣led thereunto for the Apostolicall, and Catholique doctrine of our Church, which all Gods people doe know, and the Brethren themselues (as afore hath bin noted) doe confesse, is originally from God, and his written Word.
These and many moe (too many here to be recapitulated) such phantasies of theirs, or phrensies rather, this first sub∣scription brought first to light; and yet happy had it bin for Gods Church, and people, they had neuer bin broached.
Of the second Subscription vrged an. 84.15. Semblably the next subscription called for by the last Archb. your L. predecessor, an. 84. discouered euen the very thoughts and desires of those Brethren before, but now sti∣led faithfull Brethren, which haue, and doe seeke for the Discipline, reformation of the Church.
Many Treatises afore, but now, and diuers yeeres ensuing, they flew about, and abroad like Atomies; and by them the same things which afore, but in a differing sort, and in other words, they publish.
For touching Church officers, they name who, and how many sorts they be of them, viz. Doctors, Pastors, Gouernors, Deacons, and Widdowes, no moe, no fewer.
They say, euery Church must be furnished with a Teacher and a Pastor, as with two eyes; with elders, as with feet; with Deacons, as with hands. Euery Congregation must haue eyes,

hands, and feete, and yet neither all, nor at all any Congrega∣tion is to haue an Head, answerable to those Feet, Hands, and Eyes.
The Doctor, by their doctrine, must be a distinct minister from the pastor, and onely teach true doctrine, and neither ex∣hort, nor apply his doctrine, according to the times, and his auditory, nor minister the Sacraments. For these things the pastor is to performe. Which pastor also, whensoeuer he ad∣ministreth the Sacraments, must necessarily make a Sermon, or else he committeth Sacriledge.
And concerning discipline, by their doctrine, euery Con∣gregation must haue absolute authority, to admonish, to cen∣sure, to excommunicate, and to anathematize all offending persons, yea euen Kings, and Princes, if they be of the Congre∣gation. And no Prince but must be of some Parish, and vnder one Presbytery or other alwayes. Where this power is not, in their iudgements, one of the tokens of a true Church is wanting. For this Discipline with them is a marke of the Church, and numbred among the Articles of their Faith.
16. This (say they) is the great cause, the holy cause, which they wil neuer leaue suing for, though there should be a thou∣sand Parliaments in their dayes, vntil either they obtaine it, or bring the Lord in vengeance and blood against the State and the whole land, for repelling the same.The Brethrens diuine con∣ceipts of their Discipline. The discipline is Gods holy yoke, Gods scepter; the kingdome and throne of Christ.
Our controuersie (say they) whether Iesus Christ shall be King or no. Againe, the end of all our trauell is, to build vp the walles of Ierusalem, and to set vp thē Throne of Iesus Christ, our heauenly King, in the midst thereof; the aduan∣cing whereof is a testimony vnto vs, that we shall haue part in that glory, which shall be reuealed hereafter.
So learne we now from their said bookes, learned and de∣monstratiue discourses (which the Fathers, and our forefa∣thers neuer saw, nor had learned) both that their Discipline established and exercised, is a visible marke of a true Church; and to desire the aduancement of the same, an inuisible token of an elect childe of God: so as neither is that a Church, at

least no true Church, where their Discipline is not; neither they but titular Christians, no true Christians indeed, which either sigh, or seeke not to have it established, and Presby∣teries in euery parish to be aduanced.
17. The Articles of our religion (concluded vpon by the reuerend Clergie of our Church) with these learned,The Brrenue and continue their base con∣ceits of the publike Art of our religion, in comparison of their new Gospell. and all-seeing Brethren, are but the Bishops decrees, the Articles of the Conuocation house; and reueale some little truth: but these wise Brethren (so faithfull haue they bin betweene God, and his Church) they haue not failed to shew vs the whole counsell of God.
And yet these faithfull Brethren, either through forgetful∣nesse, or frailty, (or which I rather think) forced thereunto by the power of truth, doe plainely confesse, that those very decrees of our Bishops, and Articles of the Conuocation-house, euen that little, little part of the Gospell, which the said Bishops, and Martyrs brought to light, and hath enlight∣ned the whole Realme, containeth the very fundamentall points of Christianitie.
Whereof I still gather, that had their newly reuealed, tear∣med learned Discourses, & Doctrines touching Discipline, & their Presbyteries (howsoeuer with goodly, & glorious titles, to rauish poore hearts with the desire thereof, brandished, and set out) never bin divulged, or preached, we may be saued; but without knowing and beleeuing the Articles, or doctrine of our Church (which yet is not ours, but Gods) there is no sal∣uation ordinarily to be looked for, of any man: so true, and of such necessity is this; so impertinent, & vnneedfull the other.
18. Octogesimus octavus mirabilis annus: it was prophesi∣ed to be a wonderfull yeere, long afore it came, and wil neuer be forgotten now it is past.
An. 1588. Q. Elizabeth opposeth her authoritie a∣gainst the Br. their bookes, and writingsAmong the things for which the yeere 88. is famous, one and not of least regard, is; that afore it expired, these bookes of the Brethren, by a Proclamation from Q. Elizabeth, were denounced Schismaticall, and seditious; and the doctrine in them contained, erronious, tending to perswade, and bring in a monstrous, and apparent dangerous Innouation within her

dominions, and countries; and to make a change, euen a dan∣gerous change of the forme of doctrine then in vse. And therefore the said bookes were commanded to be brought in, and deliuered into the hands of authoritie; and speciall charge giuen, that no moe of that nature should come abroad, or be printed.
Whereby (so much as in that blessed) Queene, whose name with eternall honour shall be recorded these new fancies of the brethren were hissed, and exploded out of this Christian kingdom; and the articles, or publike doctrine of our Church confirmed, countenanced, and by the royall prerogatiue of that Peerelesse prince, more strongly ratified, and commended to her awefull and good subiects then afore.
19. The zeale of learned, and godly men hereupon was in∣flamed, and their courage so increased, as whereas afore this time but one or two, or a very few (the first whereof was your L. immediate Predecessor,Most learned and worthy men set them∣selues against the Br. and the Presbyterian discipline. whose memory be alway honoura∣ble among the Saints) did encounter the Brethren and oppug∣ned their fancies: now an army of most valourous, and reso∣lute Champions, and Challengers rose vp, which then, and pi∣uers yeeres ensuing (among whom as your Grace was the first in time which gaue the onset: so are you to be reckoned with the first, and best for zeale, wisedome, and learning) did con∣flict with these Brethren, defended the Prelacie, stood for the Prince, & State, put the new Doctors to the foile, profligated the Elders, set vpon the Presbytery, and so battered the new Discipline, as hitherto they could neuer, nor hereafter shall euer fortifie, and repaire the decaies thereof,
20. Notwithstanding what the brethren wanted in strength and learning, they had in wilynesse,A Stratagem of the Br. & though they lost much one way in the generall, & maine point of their discipline, yet recouered they not a little aduantage another way, by an odde and new deuice of theirs, in a speciall article of their classi∣call instructions.
For while these Worthies of our Church were employing their engins, & forces, partly in defending the present gouern∣ment Ecclesiasticall, partly in assaulting the Presbyterie and

new Discipline, even at that very instant the Brethren (know¦ing themselves too weake either to overthrow our holds, and that which we hold,Ann. 1595. or to maintaine their owne) they aban∣doned quite the Bulwarkes which they had raised, and gave out were impregnable, suffering us to beate them downe, without any, or very small resistance: and yet not carelesse of their affaires, left not the warres for all that, but from an odde corner, and after a new fashion, which we little thought of (such was the cunning) set upon us afresh againe, by disper∣sing in printed bookes (which for tenne yeares space before they had bin in hammering among themselves to make them compleate) their Sabbath speculations, and Presbyterian (that is more then either Kingly, or Popely) directions for the ob∣servation of the Lords Day.
This Stratagem of theirs was not observed then, neither (I feare me) is regarded as it should be yet: and yet did, and since hath, and doubtlesse in time to come, if it be not timely seene unto, with unsound opinions; and paradoxes will so poyson many, as the whole Church, and Common-weale wil find the danger, and inconvenience of them (so plausibie are they to men either popularly religious, or preposterously, and injudi∣ciously zealous.)
Certain fruits, and effects of the Sabb. do∣ctrine pub∣lished by con∣sent of the Brethren.21. In this their sally (as I said before) they set not upon the Bishops & their calling, their Chancelors, &c. (as Popish, and Antichristian) they let them alone, seeing and knowing they are too well backt for them to subvert: but (which are of great, all; and almost of the same antiquitie with Bishops divers of them, and I had almost said as necessarie) they rui∣nate, and at one blow beate downe all times and daies, by just authoritie destined to religious, and holy uses, besides the Lords Day, saying plainly, and in peremptorie words, that the Church hath none authoritie, ordinarily, or from yeare to yeare perpetually to sanctifie any other day to those uses, but onely the Lords Day.
They build not Presbyteries expressedly (though under hand, if it be well marked, they doe erect them in their ex∣ercises of the Sabbath:) but they set up a new Idol, their Saint

Sabbath (earst in the dayes of Popish blindnesse S. Sunday) in the midst, and minds of Gods people.
By the former they haue opened not a gap, but a wide gate vnto all licentiousnesse, liberty, & prophanenesse on the Holy dayes (which is readily, and greedily apprehended of all sorts of people euery where, especially of their fauorites) to the high dishonour of God, decay of our deuotion, hinderance of Christian knowledge and wisdome in all sorts, especially in the vulgar multitude, and poore seruants, aduantage of the common enemies, and grosse contempt of the necessary, and laudable orders of our Church. By the latter they haue intro∣duced a new, and more then either Iewish, or Popish supersti∣tion into the land, to no small blemish of our Christian pro∣fession, and scandall of the true seruants of God, and there∣with doctrine most erroneous, dangerous, and Antichristian.The summe of the Sabbath doctrine broa∣ched by the Brethren.
22. Their doctrine summarily may be reduced vnto these two heads, whereof the one is, that the Lords day (euen as the old Sabbath was of the Iewes) must necessarily be kept, and solemnized of all and euery Christian, vnder the paine of eter∣nall condemnation both of body, and soule.
The other, that vnder the same penalty it must be kept from the highest to the lowest, both of King, and people, in sort and manner as these Brethren among themselues haue deuised, decreed, and prescribed.
The former of these is like that of the false apostles which came from Iudea vnto Antioch, and taught the Brethren, that vnlesse they were circumcised after the manner of Moses, they could not be saved. Whom the Apostles, Paul and Bar∣nabas first, and afterwards Peter, Iames, and the rest at Ieru∣salem both zealously did resist, and in their Synod, or Conuo∣cation powerfully suppresse.
The latter, as bad as that, hath bin the mother of many he∣reticall assertions, and horrible conclusions.
I haue read (and many there be aliue which will iustifie it) how it was preached in a Market towne in Oxfordshire, that to doe any seruile worke, or businesse on the Lords day, is as great a sinne, as to kill a man, or to commit adultery. It was

preached in Somerset-shire, that to throw a bowle on the Sabbath day, is as great a sinne, as to kill a man. It was prea∣ched in Norfolke, that to make a Feast, or wedding dinner on the Lords day, is as great a sin, as for a Father to take a knife and cut his childs throate. It was preached in Suffolke (I can name the man, and I was present when he was convented be∣fore his Ordinary for preaching the same) that to ring more Bels then one upon the Lords day to call the people unto Church, is as great a sinne as to commit murder.
When these things I read, and heard, mine heart was struc∣ken with an horror, and so is it still, when I doe but think of them, and calling into mind the Sabbath doctrine, at Lon∣don Printed for I. Porter, and T. Man. An. 95. which I had read before (wherein very many things are to this effect) I presently smelt both whose disciples all those preachers are; and that the said doctrine had taken deep impression in mens hearts, and was dispersed (while our watchmen were other∣wise busied, if not asleepe) over the whole Kingdome.
The Br. Do∣ctrine of the Sa bath called in by authori∣tie, and for∣bidden any more to be printed.23. It is a comfort unto my soule, and will be till my dy∣ing houre, that I have beene the man, and the meanes that the Sabbatarian errors and impieties are brought into light, and knowledge of the State, whereby whatsoever else, sure I am, this good hath ensued, namely, that the said bookes of the Sabbath (comprehending the above mentioned, and many moe such fearefull, and haereticall assertions) hath been both called in, and forbidden any more to be printed, and made common. Your Graces predecessor, Archb. Whitgift, by his letters, and Officers at Synods, and Visitations, An. 99. did the one:Ann. 1559. 1600. and Sir Iohn Popham, L. chiefe Iustice of England, at Bury S. Edmons in Suff. An. 1600. did the other.
And both these most reverend, sage, and honourable Perso∣nages by their censures have declared (if men will take ad∣monition) that the Sabbath doctrine of the Brethren, agreeth neither with the doctrine of our Church, nor with the lawes, and orders of this Kingdome; disturbeth the peace both of the Common-weale, and Church, and tendeth unto Schisme in the one, and Sedition in the other: and therefore neither

to be backt, nor bolstred by any good Subiect, whether he be Church or Common-weale man.
24. Thus haue errors, and noysome doctrines (like byles,Purity of do∣ctrine all Qu. Elizabeths raigne main∣tained in Eng∣land. and Botches) euer, and anon risen vp (to the ouerthrow of our Churches health, and safety if it might be) but yet (such hath beene the Physicke of our discipline) as what by laun∣cing, purging, and other good means vsed, the Body still hath heene vpholden, and preserued from time to time.
And well may errors (like grosse humors, and tumors) con∣tinue among vs (as neuer Church was, or will be quite with∣out them while it is militant heere vpon earth) yet are they not of the substance at all of our Religion, or any part of our Churches Doctrine (no more then ill humors, which be in, are of the Body; or dregs in a Vessell of wine, be any part either of the Vessell, or Wine) which remaineth, as at the first, most sound, and vncorrupted: and so continued euen vntill the dy∣ing day of that most illustrious, and religious Princesse Queene Elizabeth.
The very Brethren themselves doe write, that
In regard of the common grounds of Religion, and of the Ministery, We are all one. We are all of one Faith, one Bap∣tisme, one Body, one Spirit, haue all one Father, one Lord;Ann. 1601. and be all of one Heart against al wickednes, superstition, ido∣latry, heresie; and we seeke with one Christian desire, the ad∣uancement of the pure Religion, worship, and Honor of God.
We are Ministers of the Word by one order; we administer Prayers and Sacraments, by one forme; we Preach one Faith and substance of doctrine. And we Praise God heartily that the true Faith, by which we may be saued, and the true do∣ctrine of the Sacraments, and the pure Worship of God, is truely taught, and that by publike authority, and retained in the booke of Articles; Hitherto the said Brethren. And this was their verdict of our Churches doctrine in the last yeere saue one of Q. Elizabeths raigne, then which nothing was e∣uer more truely said, or written. And this Vnity, and purity of doctrine she left with vs when she departed this world.



VVHo found this our Church (as all the world know∣eth) in respect of the grounds of true Religion, at Vnitie;Anno 1603. and that Vnitie, in Veritie, and that Veritie confirmed by publike, and regall approbation.
These Ecclesiasticall Ministers therefore (though a thou∣sand for number) who at his Majesties first comming into this Kingdome either complained unto his Highnesse of (I know not what) errors,King James a∣bused & trou∣bled with false informations and petitions of the Bre∣thren. and imperfections in our Church, even in points of doctrine (as if shee erred in matters of Faith) or desired that an Vniformitie of doctrine might be prescribed (as if the same had not already beene done to his hands) or (as weary belike of the old, by Queene Elizabeth counte∣nanced, and continued) desired his Majesty to take them out a new Lesson (as did the 71 Brethren of Suffolke) are not to be liked.
Neither can we extoll the goodnesse of our God sufficient∣ly toward our King, and us all, for inspiring his royall heart with holy wisedome to discerne these unstayed, and trouble∣some spirits; and inabling his Highnesse with power, and graces from above, to decree orders, and directions for the generall benefit, and peace of the whole Church; neither suf∣fered he his eyes to sleepe, nor his eye-lids to slumber, nor the temples of his head to take any rest, till he had set them downe (afore all other, though never so important, and weightie affaires of the Crowne, and Kingdome.)
King James pa∣tronizeth the Doctrine and Religion coun∣tenanced by Queene Eliza∣beth.26 My selfe have read, and thousand thousands, with an hundred thousand of his Subjects besides, have either read, or heard of Proclamations after Proclamations (to the number of sixe, or seven at the least) of bookes, and open speeches of his Majesty, uttered in the Parliament House (and all of them made vulgar within a yeare and little more, after his happy ingresse into this kingdome) and taking the administration of this most famous, & nourishing Empire upon himself (where∣by the doctrine in this Land allowed, & publikely graced and

imbraced of all sorts at his entrance into the Realme) hath bin not onely acknowledged to be agreeable to Gods Word sin∣cere, and the very same, which both his Highnesse, and the whole Church, and kingdome of Scotland, yea and the Primi∣tiue Church professed; but also by his authoritie Regall, and paramont (as one of the maine pillers supporting his Estate) ratified to continue; and all hope either of allowing, or tole∣rating in this kingdome of any other doctrine, religion, or fa∣ction whatsoeuer, opposite, or any way thwarting the Faith, and confession of the Church of England, in most plaine, pi∣thy and peremptory words, and speeches, cut off.
The yeere 92. was not more famous for the Vniformity of doctrin in religion then concluded, then the yeere 1604.Domii incar∣nati. An. 1604. is me¦morable, and will be for seconding the same: neither got the Clergie in those dayes more credit in composing the Articles of our Vnitie in Faith, then did the last Conuocation (whereat your Grace, then Bishop of London. was present and Presi∣dent) in ratifying the Acts, and Articles of their Antecessors; neither was Q Elizabeth more honoured in establishing them at the first, then is our K. Iames renowned, and more and more will be for approouing vnder the great Seale of England, the late, and last Constitutions, and Canons Ecclesiasticall.
27.Subscription, the third time vrged. Whereby no person shall hereafter bee receiued into the ministery, nor neither by Institution, or Collation admit∣ted to any Ecclesiasticall liuing, nor suffered to Preach, to Ca∣techize, or to be Lecturer, or Reader of Diuinitie in either Vniuersitie, or any Cathedrall, or Collegiat Church, Citie, or Market towne, Parish Church, Chappell, or in any other place in this Realme, except, &c. and except he shall first subscribe to these three Articles, &c. Whereof the third is, that he al∣loweth the booke of Articles of Religion, &c. Nor any licen∣ced to Preach, Reade, Lecture, or Catechize, comming to reside in any Diocesse, shall be permitted there to Preach, Reade, Le∣cture, Catechize or minister the Sacraments, or to execute any other Ecclesiasticall function (by what authoritie soeuer he be thereunto admitted) vnlesse he first consent, and subscribe to the three Articles.
Neither shall any man teach either in publike schoole, or in private house, except he shall first prescribe to the first, and the third Articles simply, &c.
Neither shall any man be admitted a Chancellor, Commis∣sary, or Officiall, to exercise any Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, except, &c. and shall subscribe to the Articles of Religion, agreed upon in the Convocation in the yeare 1562. &c.
And likewise all Chancellours, Commissaries, Registers, and all other that doe now possesse, or execute any places of Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, or service, shall before Christmas next in the presence of the Archbishop or Bishop, or in open Court, under whom, or where they execute their offices, take the same Oathes, and subscribe, as before he said; or upon re∣fusall so to doe, shall be suspended from the execution of their Offices, untill they shall take the said Oaths, and subscribe as aforesaid.
28. In which Constitutions the wisedome of his High∣nesse sheweth it selfe to be excellent, who indeed (as excee∣ding necessary, both for the retaine of peace in the Church, and preventing of new doctrine, curious speculations, and of∣fences, which otherwise daily would spring up, and intolera∣bly encrease) calleth for Subscription, in testimony of mens cordiall consent unto the received doctrine of our Church, but exacteth not their Oathes, as some doe; much lesse Oathes, Vowes, and Subscription too, (but onely in a particular re∣spect, and that of a very few in publike office) as our neigh∣bours have done.
Againe, he requireth Subscription, but not of civill Magi∣strates; not of the Commons (as else where some doe;) not of every man, yea of women, aswell as of men (as did the perse∣cuted Church at Franckeford in Queene Maries daies) not of Noble, Gentlemen and Courtiers, as in Scotland was Enacted in our Kings minoritie;) but only of Ecclesiasticall Ministers, Teachers, and spirituall Officers, or of those which would be such,Of the Sub∣scription cal∣led for. and so doe the reformed Churches in France, and Ger∣many at this very day.
Last of all, his Majestie calleth for Subscription unto Arti∣cles

of Religion, but they are not either Articles of his own lately deuised; or the old newly turkened: but the very Ar∣ticles agreed vpon by the Archbishops and Bishops of both Prouinces, and the whole Clergie in the Conuocation hol∣den at London, and that in the yeere of our Lord God, 1562.Cant. 2.127. and vnto none other; euen the same Articles, for num∣ber thirtie nineIbid., no moe, no fewer; and for words, sillables, and letters, the very same, vnaugmented, vndiminished, vn∣altered.
29. And being the same, the whole world is to know, that the Church of England is not in religion changed,The Church of England set∣tled, and con∣stant in her Re∣ligion. or variable like the Moon; nor affecteth noueltie, or new lessons, but hold∣eth stedfastly, & conscionably that truth which by the Mar∣tyrs, and other Ministers in this last age of the world hath bin restored vnto this kingdome; and is grounded vpon Gods written Word, the onely foundation of our Faith.
And being the same, all men again may see that we are still at Vnitie both among our selues at home, and with the neigh∣bour Churches abroad in all matters of chiefest importance, and fundamentall points of religion, though our aduersaries, the Papists, would faine beate the contrary into the common peoples heads.
And being the same, there is now (as also from the first re∣stauration of the Gospell among vs there hath beene) an Vni∣formitie likewise of doctrine by authoritie established, which at the Kings first arriuall among vs, was so much desired by the Brethren.
And finally being the same, let vs not doubt, but perswade our selues, that we shal find the Antichristian Church of Rome too the same, which for the same doctrine, and for none other cause, persecuteth al Christian Churches, but ours of England especially, with sword, fire, and power in most horrible, yea and hellish manner: the effect of whose hatred against vs, as we have often seene: so especially had we felt the same the next yeere after our Kings ratification of these Articles, had not our euer mercifull God most miraculously detected, both the Treason, and Traitors.Ann. 1605 For which his fauours his holy

Name be glorified of vs, and our posterity, throughout all generations.
The Brethren no change∣lings.36. So our Church is the same. But the Brethren, the faithfull and godly Brethren too the same now, which they haue also beene. If they be, then will they not deny (which An. 72. they writ) that we hold the substance of religion with them, nor which An. 602. they published, and is afore remem∣bred) that the true Faith by which we may be saued, and the true doctrine of the Sacraments, and pure worship of God be truely taught, & that by publike authority, and retained in the booke of Articles. And in this Confession I pray God they may constantly perseuere.
Howbeit euen these men (which in a generality doe allow the doctrine of our Church) being called by authority to ac∣knowledge their assent vnto every Article thereof in particu∣lar, they doe not a little debase the estimation of this doctrine of ours, and shew themselues but too apparent, and professed dissentors from the same. And though all of them doe, and will approoue some: yet not one of them will subscribe vnto all, and every of the Articles.
For vnto the articles of religion, and the Kings supremacy they are willing to subscribe. And they may subscribe (as a∣fore hath beene noted) vnto such of them, as containe the summe of Christian Faith, & the doctrine of the Sacraments. But vnto the same Articles, for number 36. agreed vpon in this Conuocation at London, an. 62. they neither wil, nor dare nor may subscribe. For neither the rest of the Articles in that booke, nor the Booke of common prayer, may be allowed, no though a man should be depriued from his ministery for it (say the said brethren in a certaine Classicall decree of theirs.) The late Polititian is not afraid to mooue the high, and most honorable Court of Parliament, that Impropriation may bee let to Ferme vnto incumbent ministers, viz. which faithfully preach in the Churches the true doctrine of the Gospell, ac∣cording to the Articles of Religion, concerning faith and Sa∣craments: meaning that such Ministers as preach the same do∣ctrine, if they proceed to the rest of the Articles, concerning

either Conformitie in externall, and ceremoniall matters; or Vniformitie in other points of doctrine contained in that booke, should not be partakers of that benefit, or of Benefices Impropriate.
31. If it be demanded, what the causes may be,Why the Br. will subscrib vnto some, but not vnto all the Articles. why they will vnto some, but will not vnto all; or why they will vnto those Articles which concerne Faith and the Sacraments, but will not vnto the rest subscribe? The reasons thereof be two, whereof
The one is, for that in their opinion, there is no Law to compell them to subscribe vnto all: For (say the Brethren re∣siant I know not where,) Wee have alwayes beene ready to subscribe to the Articles of Religion concerning the doctrine of Faith, and of the Sacraments, which is all that is required by Law. Also the Brethren in Deuonshire, and Cornewall: We are ready (say they) to subscribe to the third (which concerneth the Booke of Articles of Religion) so farre as wee are bound by Statute concerning the same, viz. as they concerne the doctrin of the Sacraments, and the confession of the true faith. And the 22. London Brethren tell King Iames to his head, how the Subscription which he calleth for is more then the Law requireth.
Their other reason is, because (as the Lincolnshire doe say) sundry (as the London Brethren affirme) many things in that booke be not agreeable, but contrary to Gods Word.
32. If these things be true which they doe alleadge, surely then are those men to be chronicled for the Faithfull, the god∣ly, and innocent Brethren indeed, whom neither present Be∣nefices can allure; nor the angry countenance, and displeasure of a King, even of the puissant, & powerful King of great Brit∣taine, can force to doe anything at his becke, and pleasure, ei∣ther against Law, or for which there is no law, and who had rather to forgoe all their earthly commodities & liuings, yea and to goe from their charges, and ministery, and to expose themselues, their wiues and children, to the miseries of this world (grieuous for our flesh and blood to endure,) then to approue any thing fob true, & sound by their hands, which is

opposite, or not agreeable to the reuealed will, and Scriptures of God.
But if these allegations of theirs be but weake, and sinfull surmises, or rather apparantly most false, scandalous, and slan∣derous imputations to their Prince, their mother Church, and this State, then doubtlesse, as they euen Christians now liuing cannot but take them: so ages to come will euerlastingly note, and censure them both for disloyall Subiects that so tra∣duce a truly, and most Christianly religious King, ill deseruing children, that so abuse their honorable, and reuerand Fathers, and superiours of State, and authority; turbulent spirits, not peaceable men, which raise such broiles, troubles, and diuisions in the Church and Kingdome (the issues whereof no tongue can foretell, and are fearefull being thought of) without cause and finally neither faithfull, nor godly Preachers, but vngodly broachers of vntruthes, and slanders, and the very authors and fautors of horrible confusion, and faction in Gods Church, whose peace they should seeke, and promote euen with their dearest blood.
33. Since the Statute for Vniformity in rites and doctrine was first enacted, moe then 35. yeeres haue passed, in all which space, neither the Brethren now being, nor the Brethren afore them liuing, haue hitherto shewne, of the 39. Articles, for names and titles: Which, for number, How many the Articles be which Ecclesiasticall Ministers necessarily must, how many which they may not, or need not, vnlesse they list, subscribe vnto (which I am sure they, or some of them, at one time, or other would have expressed) had the Law fauou∣red there recusancy, and they bin able to have justified their Maxime, which is. That they are not compellable by subscrip∣tion to approoue them all. Againe, since the first establishment of that Statute Law, the most reuerend Fathers, and truly re∣formed Ministers of this Church (sound for iudgement, pro∣found, for learning, zealous for affection; sincere, for religion, faithfull, in their Churches: painefull, in their charges: more profitable many wayes: of as tender consciences euery way, as any of these Brethren combined) according both to their

bounden duties, and (as they are perswaded) to the very pur∣port, and true intent of the said Statute, have alwayes both with their mouthes acknowledged, and with their pennes ap∣proued the 39. Articles of our religion for truthes not to be doubted of, and godly.
Yea, and the Brethren too themselues (which now so scru∣pulously, when they are orderly called thereunto, doe hold backe their hands, and will subscribe but choisely vnto some of them) euen they with their mouthes (which is equiualent, and all one) have, & that according to the Statute (or else their liuings be void) vpon the first entrance into all, and singular their ecclesiasticall benefices, openly both read, and testified their consent vnto the said Articles, for number euen nine and thirty, acknowledging them, I say, all of them to be agreeable to Gods word: whereof the people in their seuerall charges be ready witnesses to testifie so much before God and the world.
34. Againe, of these Brethren (that will subscribe but vnto which they please of these Articles) there be some who faine would beate into mens heads, if they could tell how to make it credible) that the Doctrine of our Church is altred from that it was in the raigne of Q. Eli. But this assertion being too grosse, egregiously vntrue,A late deuice of the Br. to shunne sub∣scription. & no waies iustifiable they second∣ly give out, and report (so industrious be they to inuent new shifts to cloak their inueterate, and rooted pertinacy) how the purpose, if not doctrine of our Church is of late altered from that it was. And therefore though they can be well content to allow of the old doctrine, and ancient intention: yet vnto the old doctrine, and new Intention of our Church, they cannot subscribe, might they either gaine much, or lose whatsoeuer they have thereby. Besides, this new Intendement, contrary to the old purpose, if not doctrin of our Church, is become now the maine, and principall obstacle why they cannot subscribe vnto the booke of Common prayer, and booke of Ordination, as earst they (some of them) foure times have done, when as∣well Intention, as Doctrine of our Church, was pure & holy,
Lastly, they seeme not obscurely to intimate vnto the State that were they sure, or might be assured, that the purpose of

our Church were the same which it was, neither varied from the doctrine; they would be prest, and as ready, euen foure, if not forty times moe, to subscribe vnto the forementioned bookes of Common prayer, and of ordination, as aforetimes they did, when they were out of doubt the Intention of our Church was correspondent to her Doctrine, that it was found and good. I haue foure times subscribed (saith a Brother) to the booke of Common prayer with limitation, and reference of all things therein contained (not vnto the purpose onely, or doctrine onely,) but unto the purpose, and doctrine of the Church of England. Yet cannot the same man with a good conscience so much as once more subscribe (which formerly, and that with a good conscience had subscribed foure times.) His reason is, Because the purpose, if not doctrine of our Church, (to which he referred his subscription) appeareth to him, by the late Canons, booke of conference, and some spee∣ches of men in great place, and others, to be varied somewhat from that which he before (not without reason) took it to be.
The purpose, and Doctrine of our Church continue the same.35. The purpose of our Church is best knowne by the do∣ctrine which she doth professe, the Doctrine by the 39. Arti∣cles established by Act of Parliament; the Articles by the words, whereby they are expressed; and other purpose then the publike Doctrine doth minister, and other Doctrine then in the said Articles is contained, our Church neither hath, nor holdeth; and other sense they cannot yeeld, then their words doe impart. The words be the same, and none other, then earst, and first they were. And therefore the sense the same; the Ar∣ticles the same; the Doctrine the same; and the purpose, and Intention of our Church still one, and the same.
If then the purpose be knowne by her Doctrine, and Arti∣cles; and the true sense by their very words: needs must the purppose of our Church be the same, because her Doctrine, and Articles for number, words, syllables, and letters, and every way be the very same.
And so our Churches intention in her publike Doctrine, and Articles reuealed, being good at the first, it is so still. For her purpose (continuing one and the same) cannot be ill at the

last, which was good (and so beleeued, and acknowledged, even by the Brothers subscription) at the first; or good in good Queene Elizabeth, and ill, in illustrious King Iames his dayes.
36. If the premisses sufficiently explane not the constancy of our Churches purpose in professing religion sincerely,Neither the Doctrine, nor purpose of our Church alte∣red. then cast we our eyes vpon the Propositions, which she publikely maintaineth; and if we find them the same which euer they have beene, then need we not doubt (the Brethren them∣selves being Iudges) but the Articles againe, their sence, the Doctrine, purpose, and Intention nf the Church of England (the Proposition interpreting as it were, the said Articles) is the very same it ever was.
Now that Propositions (pregnantly, and rightly gathe∣red, and arising from the articles) be the same, & for substance vnaltered (though vpon good considerations, some few bee added to the former) and all of them approued for true, and Christian, by the lawful, & publike allowance of our Church, the Booke here ensuing plainely will declare, and so demon∣strate withall not the Doctrine onely, but intention also of our Church, to be the same, and not changed: and being vn∣changed, the books then of common prayer, and of ordination too, considered in the purpose and intention of the Church of England, and reduced to the Propositions (as the Brethren would haue them) be well allowed, and authentically appro∣ued; and the said brethren with as good conscience now a∣gaine, and afresh may subscribe vnto all the Articles, euen concerning the Booke of common prayer, and of ordination, aswell as of the kings supremacy, and of Religion, as afore, often, and alwayes they did.
37. For my selfe (most reuerend Father in God) what my thoughts be of the religion in this Realme at this instant pro∣fessed, and of all these Articles, if the premisses doe not, that which here followeth will sufficiently demonstrate. Twenty, yea 22 yeeres agoe, voluntarily of mine owne accord, & alto∣gether vnconstrained, I published my subscription vnto them, my Faith is not either shaken, or altred, but what it then was,

it still is: yeeres have made those haires of mine gray, which were not; and time, much reading, and experience in Theolo∣gicall conflicts and combates, have bettred a great deale, but not altered one whit my judgement, I thanke God.
Nothing have I denied, nothing gaine-said, which afore I deliuered.
The Propositions are (and yet not many) moe; the method altered, quotations added, both, for the satisfaction of some learned, and iudicious friends of mine, requesting it at mine hands, and for the benefit both of the common, and vnlearned, and of the studious and learned Reader.
The whole worke expresseth aswell my detestation, and renunciation of all aduersaries & errors, opposite, crossing, or contradicting the doctrine professed by vs, and protected by our King, or any Article, or particle of truth of our Religion; as my approbation of that truth which in our Church by wholesome Statutes and Ordinances, is confirmed.
There is not an heretike or Schismatike (to speake of) of any speciall marke, that from the Apostles time hitherto, hath discouered himselfe, & his opinions vulgarly in writing, or in print against our doctrine, but this heresie, fancy, or phrensie may be here seene against one proposition or other. The Sects and Sect-masters aduersaries vnto vs either in the matter, or maine points of our doctrine, or Discipline; to one of our Articles, or other; wholly, or in part, which here be discoue∣red to be taken heed of, and auoided, are many hundreds.
38. This, and whatsoeuer else here done, either to the con∣firmation of the truth, or detestation of heresies and errors, I doe very meekely present unto your Grace, as after God, and our King, best meriting the patronage thereof.
My selfe am much, the whole Church of England much more bound vnto your Lordship; yea not wee onely now li∣uing, but our successors also, and posteritie shall have cause in all ages, while the world shal continue to magnifie Almightie God, for the inestimable benefits which we have & shall re∣ceiue from your selfe, & your late Predecessors D. Whitegift, Grindall, Parker, Cranmer, (of famous & honourable remem∣brance)

Bishops of our Church, Archbishops of the See of Canterbury; for this uniforme doctrine by some of your Lordships drawne, and penned, by all of you allowed; defend∣ed: and (as agreeable to the Faith of the very Apostles of Christ, and of the ancient Fathers, correspondent to the Con∣fessions of all reformed Churches in Christendome, and con∣trariant in no point unto Gods holy and written Word) com∣mended unto us both by your Authoritie and Subscriptions.
Now the all-mercifull God, and heavenly Father, which so inspired them, and your Lordship with wisedome from a∣bove, and inabled you all to discerne truth from falshood, and found religion from Atheisme, idolatry and errors, vouchsafe of his infinite goodnesse to encrease his grace more and more upon your Grace, to his owne glory, the Churches benefit, and your owne everlasting comfort.
And the same God, which both mercifully hath brought, and miraculously against all hellish, and divellish practices of his and our enemies, continued the light of his truth among us, give us all grace with one heart and consent, not onely to embrace the same, but also to walke, and carry our selves, as it beseemeth the Children of light, in all peaceablenesse, and ho∣linesse of life, for his Sonne, our Lord and Saviour Christ his sake. At Horninger neere S. Edm. Bury in Suff. the 11. of March. Ann. 1607.


