



LOuing and good Neighbours, the doctrine of Faith being gone forth into the World, I thought it not amisse that the Daugh∣ter should attend vpon her Mother: and therefore to put forth a Treatise of Loue, to follow after Faith, as they were both handled in

your hearing not very many yeares since. Now I desire that these things may liue and speake vnto you, when I shall be taken from you: In which two if you shall pro∣fit, you cannot but doe well, God shalbe much honoured, and I shall haue my great desire. Now this of Loue, I dedicate vnto you, that as you haue learned in some measure to loue one another. so that you doe it still, and encrease more and more. I found you, by the care & di∣ligence of my worthy Prede∣cessor, in a peaceable state. Thus, through Gods mercy,

haue you continued without rents or diuisions, sidings or part taking, in peace and v∣nitie these three and twenty yeares of my abode with you: wherein both the head and bodie of the Congregation looking one way, much ill hath bin hindred, and much good done and mainetained. And I hope so to leaue you: yea, my hearts desire is, that you may liue in peace, and godly loue when I am gone, that as you haue done, so you may draw altogether as one man. So shall nothing be too hard for you, nor no force of wickednesse bee able to pre∣uaile

against you; As a bound Fagot cannot be broken, though the band loosed and sticks shattred asunder, be∣comes weake. As few or no suits of Law haue bin found amongst you, but differences either betweene your selues agreed, or by indifferent Neighbours compounded; so doe still in the name of God. And as I haue euer found you forward in good sort to any deed of Charity, wherin you haue bin moued, besides the good prouision made for your own poor: so I beseech you to continue, that you may shew forth the fruit

of the Ministry of the Word so long, so long continued a∣mong you; and other townes seeing your well-doing and good order, may be prouoked by your example▪ and so God may haue much honour by you, and hee take pleasure to dwell among you, and be the God of your Posteritie after you, from one generation to another. Which I beseech him to grant for his mercies and his Christ his sake.
And you that be young now (which God be thanked giue good hope) if God let you liue to stand vp in your Pre∣decessours roomes, see that

you labour to quit your selues as well as they haue done; and better will be re∣quired, as hauing more light euery day, & their example to make vse of. In which hope I take my leaue, and commend you all heartily to the grace of God, remaining till death

