



RIght Honorable,The miserie of mankind in ge∣neral. ex∣perience
doth prooue
that miserable is the
state of mankinde in
this life. For we doe
both come into the
world in paine; and liue in cares; and die
with griefe. Our bodies are subiect to ma∣nifolde
infirmities; and perils: & our minds
to innumerable vngodlie perturbations.
Our whole life is verie trouble som; & how,
or where, or when we shal depart out of this
worlde, it is vncertaine.
And although this condition be alike to
the iust, and to the wicked; to the good,The great mi∣serie of the god∣lie in this world and
to the pure, and to the pollutedEccles. 9, 2.: yet none do
feele the smart hereof so extremelie as the
vpright dealers in the world, and such as



vnfeinedlie be religious. For theie are for
the most part oppressed, when the wicked
haue fauour; there impouerished, when the
wicked encrease in wealth; theie impriso∣ned,
when the wicked are at libertie; and
theie grieuouslie afflicted, when the vngod∣lie
do triumph.The troubles of the godlie dis∣maie them sometimes. This good men obserue ma∣nie-times,
and it dismaieth them not a litle.
As it did both King Dauid, & also the Pro∣phet
Ieremiah, when the one saidPsal. 73, 2., My feet
were almost gone, my steps had welnere slipt.
For I fretted at the foolish,3. when I saw the
prosperitie of the wicked.4. For there are no
bands in their death, but theie are lustie &
strong.5. Theie are not in trouble as other mē,
neither be theie plagued with other men.
Therefore pride is as a chaine vnto them,6.
and crueltie couereth them as a garment.
Their eies stand-out for fatnes;7. theie haue
more than their heart can wish.8. Theie are
licentious, & speake wickedlie of their op∣pression:
theie talke presumptuouslie. Theie
set their mouth against heauen,9. and their
tongue walked through the earth,12. &c. Loe,
these are the wicked, yet prosper theie al∣waie,
and encrease in riches.13. Certainlie I



haue cleansed mine heart in vane; and wa∣shed
mine handes in innocencie.14. For dailie
haue I bine punished, and chastened euerie
morning, &c. And the other exclamedIere. 12, 1.,
wherefore doth the waie of the wicked pro∣sper?
Whie are al theie in wealth,What the re∣probate do ga∣ther by the troubles of the godlie. that re∣belliouslie
transgresse? The reprobate also do
marke this, and therbie with corrupt iudge∣ments
theie falselie imagine, first, that ei∣ther
there is no God at alPsal. 10, 4.; or that he hath
forgotten his seruantes which put their
trust in himPsal. 10, 11.; or that he doth neither go∣uerne
the world, nor see their waiesEzek 9. 9.: & se∣condlie
that there is no life after this lifeWisd. 2, 2.,
nor iudgement to be fearedPsal. 94, 7.. Therfore saie
theieWisd. 2, 6., Come, and let vs enioie the plea∣sures
that are present; & let vs cherefullie
vse the creatures as in youth.7. Let vs fil our
selues with costlie wine, & ointments; & let
the floure of life passe by vs.8. Let vs croune
our selues with rose buds afore theie be
withered.9. Let vs al be partakers of our
wantonnesse, let vs leaue some token of
pleasure in euerie place: for that is our
portion, and this is our lot. Let vs oppresse
the poore that is righteous;10. let vs not
spare the widowe, nor reuerence the white



haires of the aged that haue liued manie
yeares.11. Let our strength be the lawe of vn∣righteousnes:
for the thing that is feeble,
is reproued as vnprofitable.12. Therfore let vs
defraud the righteous: for he is not for our
profite, and he is contrarie to our doings: he
checketh vs for offending against the lawe
of God; and blameth vs as transgressors of
discipline.13. He maketh his brag to haue the
knowledge of God: and he calleth himselfe
the sonne of the Lorde.14. He is made to re∣proue
our thoughtes.15. It greeueth vs to looke
vpon him: for his life is not like other mens:
his waies are of an other facion. He coun∣teth
vs as bastardes,16. &c.19. Let vs examine
him with rebukes and tormentes, that wee
maie know his meekenes, and proue his pa∣tience.20.
Let vs condemne him vnto a shame∣ful
death: for he shalbe preserued, as he him
self saith, &c. Thus speak the reprobat Epi∣cures
of this world. And so of eroneous sup∣positions,
namelie that there is not, neither
shal be a iudgemēt, theie do greedilie giue∣ouer
themselues vnto sinne; and are wholie
resolued neuer to repent. Which Atheistes
if euer theie did, I am perswaded theie



swarme in our age: as the present state of
this worlde can witnesse.The blessed state of the righteous.
Not withstanding, neither are the god∣lie
for al this to be out of hart; nor the wic∣ked
ouer-vanelie to insult. For both the
righteous shal florish like a palme treePsal 92, 12.; &
abide vnmoueable like the mountanes a∣bout
IerusalemPsal. 12▪ 2.: & the wicked shal soone
be cut-downe like the grassePsal. 37, 2., and wither
as the greene herbe. Because God wil arise,
and his enimies shalbe scatteredPsal. 68, 1. 2.; theie al∣so
which hate him, shal flie before him.The heauie iudgements of God vpon the wicked. As
the smoke vanisheth: so wil he driue them
awaie; and as the waxe melteth before the
fire, so shal the wicked perish at the pre∣sence
of the Lord. For manie sorowes shal
come to the wickedPsal. 32, 10.. He wil breake their
armesPsal. 37, 17.; crush their bones with a scepter of
ironPsal 2, 9.; and breake them into peeces like a
potters vessel. He wil raine vpon them
snares, fire, and brimstonePsal. 11, 6.; and bring them
at length into helPsal. 9, 17., into euerlasting tor∣mentesMatth 25, 41.,
where shal be weeping and gna∣shingLuke 16, 25.
of teethLuke 13, 28.. Euen this shalbe their por∣tionPsal. 11, 6..
The righteous shal see it, & reioice
when he seeth the vengeance: he shal wash



his feetee in the blood of the wickedPsal. 58, 10..
The righteous, I saie shal see it, & feare,
and shal laugh at the destruction of the vn∣godlie
man, saiengPsal. 52, 6. 7., Behold the man which
tooke not God for his strength, but trusted
vnto the multitude of his riches, and put his
strength in his malice.
The wicked theie also in themselues
shal freate for griefe of minde, and saieWisd. 5, 3.,
This is he whom we had sometime in deri∣sion,4.
and in a parable of reproch. We fooles
thought his life madnes, and his end with∣out
honour.5. How is he counted among the
children of God; & his portion is among the
Saints,8. &c. What hath pride profited vs? or
what profit hath the pomp of riches broght
vs?9. Al those things are passed-awaie like a
shadowe, and as a post that passeth by, &c.
And so al men shal acknowledge, howe
there is a God which iudgeth the earthPsal. 58, 11..
These thinges would the godlie haue
continualie in remembrance, doubtlesse nei∣ther
could the prosperitie of the wicked a∣stonish,The fruite of meditating vp∣on the iudge∣ments of God.
nor their own trouble some cōdition
ouerthrow thē, as it doth manie times: but
boldlie both with Paul theie would saieRom. 8, 35.,



who shal separate vs frō the loue of Christ,
&c; and with Dauid protestPsal. 23, 4., that though
theie should walke through the valleie of
death, yet they wil feare none euil; yea; they
wil not feare though the earth be moued,
& though the mountanes fal into the mids
of the seaPsal. 46, 2.. Because God is with them,
and hath laide-vp vnspeakeable blessings
for themPsal. 31, 19.; doth great things for them euen
before the sonnes of men; and in the end too
wil aduance them vnto euerlasting glorie,
honor, and peaceRom. 2, 10.. The wicked also in con∣sidering
these things must needes be terre∣fied
from much wickednes. For the verie di∣uels
when theie remember the iudgements
of the Lord do tremble againeIam. 2, 19..
Wherefore especialie (for other causes
I haue elsewhere specified in this my booke)The occasion whie this Booke was written.
both for the comfort of the one sorte, and
for the terror of the other, I haue written
this treatise following, wherein out of the
worde of God I haue proued, not onelie
that God wil (which thing manie Athe∣istes
doe doubt, and manie vtterlie de∣nie)
but also that God presentlie doth iudge
this worlde.


For which causes I haue intitled the same,
THE GENERAL SESSIONS, because
there is not a man, whom God doth not; nei∣ther
shal there be anie, whome he wil not
iudge. At which iudgement howe he wil
deale with vs, we are ignorant; what he
maie do in his iustice, we know ful wel.
And therefore, as that good King, of an
Heathen Prince, Philip of Macedon in his
cheefe prosperitie thought it the readiest
waie to deteine him both from insulting
proudlie ouer his vanquished enimies the
Athenians: and from oppressing tyranni∣calie
his distressed subiectes the Grecians, if
he were tolde euerie morning that he was a
man; and as the noble men of Aethiopia
had alwaies whensoeuer there went abrode,
a crosse, and a basen of golde filled ful with
earth born before them, that the one might
put them in remembrance that earth must
be resolued into earth, and the other renue
the memorie of Christ his passion; and as
the Aegyptians at al their solemne ban∣quets
had the image of death laide before
their faces, that the sight thereof might
withdrawe them from defiling themselues



with those vices which commonlie doe fol∣lowe
after rioting, and bellie-cheere; and
finalie as S. Ierome, whether he did eate, or
drinke, or whatsoeuer he did, seemed to
heare the terrible trompet sounding vnto
iudgement: so the readiest waie to please
God, and to auoide his heauie indignation,
is, in our prosperitie while the euil daies
come not, euerie morning with Philip to cal
into minde that we are men; when we are
abrode with the noble men of Aethiopia to
thinke that we are but earth; in our fea∣stinges
and triumphes, with the Aegypti∣ans
to fore-think what we shalbe; and with
good S. Ierome in whatsoeuer we are doing
to remember that a iudgement there must
be, yea and is neere at hand, at which God
wil bring euerie worke into iudgement with
euerie secrete thing whether it be good or
euilEccles. 12, 14.. For theie which cal into minde what
theie haue bine, haue theie anie grace, wil
blush; what theie are, wilbe humble; what
theie maie be, wil tremble.
And this treatise,Causes of this dedication. Right Honorable, I
thinke most meete to come from your Ho∣nors
hands into the world. First in respect of



my selfe. For greatlie I doe knowe, and con∣fesse
that I haue bine bound vnto your Ho∣nor
for manie great wordes of encourage∣ment
which it hath pleased you to giue me,
but especialie for that fauour which of late
I found at your Honors handes, and that
when I least looked for the same: the Lorde
requite you for it, and make me thankeful.
Secondlie in respect of the highnes of
your calling. For being, as you are appointed
the chiefest Iusticer vnder God and her
Maiestie in this realme, mee thinkes none
either ought sooner to be a reader, or wil
more gladlie be a patron, of God his iudge∣ments
than your Honor.
Last of al, in respest of their profite, who
are inferior persons both in the Church and
common-weale. For sure I am, the more
your Honor calleth into minde, which thing
your wisedome cannot be ignorant of, the
condition of the godlie in this life, the more
you wil being their special Patron by office
administer both comfort vnto them, which
theie haue neede of; and encouragement,
being manie waies by the wicked, which
make a praie of them, dismaied, while there



is none almost wil helpe. Thus I surcesse;
beseeching both your Honor in good part to
accept these my labors; and our Sauiour
Christ, who is ordeined of God a iudge of
quicke & of deadAct. 10, 40., euerlastinglie to blesse
you, & the virtuous Ladie your wife, with
your children, and familie. The 20. daie of
Nouember Anno 1581.

