


AS a Wheate Corne or other graine (Right Worshipfull) lying long buried in the bowels of the earth, dth in the end not∣withstanding, spring vp and yeele that encrease, that eiter the weakensse or strength of the body can afford. Euen so the interior zeale of mans heart (though it lye long shrwded in the breast with the vaile of resraint) will at last (neuerthelsse) come forth and shew the af∣fction therein conceiued and nourished.
At what time your Woship came in great Poste to your neighbour Towne of Twkesbu∣ry

in the County of Gloucester (opened the late Queenes death) and proclaimed the Kings Ma∣iesty: where (at your first entrance) another & my selfe (vpon strait charge giuen by the Officers of the said Towne) stood as it were Centinell (though little expecting such an alarum) I con∣ceiued a kind of grudge towards you for newes on the one side, but honoured you (and still doe, and great cause) for the other. To heare of her death did kill the heart: but intelligence of so gratious a King did raise it vp. The assu∣rance of the Gospell war life to the soule. And that the expected danger at the Queenes death, was euen with her death stifled to death, did augment the astonishment.
In what perplexity would that louing sonne stand (I beseech you) that should at one in∣stant heare of the sinister death both of father and mother? and while the tale were yet in tel∣ling, the father liuing, and in health should pre∣sent himselfe in presence, but withall assuring of the death of the tender mother.
Jn what perplexity (I say) would that son rest, in what confusion of minde and spirite, betweene ioy on the one side, and griefe on the

other? comforted by the life of the one, dismai∣ed by the death of the other? Ioy and griefe at ne instant equally weighing in the ballance of the heart, striuing for victory.
Such was the sorrow of many thousand lo∣uing Subiects at that day, and the same also a∣mong the rest was mine (Right Worshippefull) The which, by how much the more was great, by so much the more it made a deepe impression of zeale in my heart towards you. The print whereof hath euer sit hence lien hidden therein: and euen now (with the graine) hath found passage to creepe out and yeeld you this poore fruit, as a manifestation thereof. It is small I con∣fesse, and blasted in comming vp (and great cause too, for the root in bringing it forth, hath beene nipt with many vnkind frosts which hindred the growth.) Yet, as it is I present it. For good reason is, that you sowing the seed should reape the croppe. You cast the graine into the ground of my heart in a time of griefe, and now reape in a like season.
Receiue it therefore as your owne I beseech you, and in so doing, you shall adde life to the Tree, hereafter to yeeld you fruit of more plea∣sing

rellish. In the meane time, I leaue it to your fauourable acceptation, and you & yours to the Lord, who in mercy so blesse you in this life, that in the life to come you may attain that happinesse which is prepared for the elect of God. At my lodging in S. Giles in the fields, in Middlesex (where the hand of God hath set me) December 14. 1612.

