



GOOD MADAME:
I Was no sooner purposed to let this Copie passe the Presse, but I was as soone resolued to send it foorth vnder shelter of your La∣diships name, prefixed on the front. I knowe, Gods word can countenance it selfe, and needes no shelter of any humane arme: Yet I finde, not onely the writings of the most

and best; but euen some of those holy books in∣spired from Heauen, bearing in their fore-heads (as from the pen-men) a dedication. To your la∣diships name I then inscribe this; these reasons e∣specially mee thereunto inducing:
First, your Ladiship had a speciall hand in the first being & birth of it: for, it was by your means and furtherance, that I was remooued from the place where then I was, to that where now I am: vpon which occasion, these Sermons were there preached. Which great loue and vndeserued fa∣uour caused mee a good while since to register in my heart a grateful acknowledgement: and wan∣ting means in real requitance to express the same, I haue now presum'd in this dedicatiō to manifest.
Secondly, in respect of your own worth: wher∣of if I should make a due report, they which know you not, would judge I flatter; and if lesse, the which knowe you and your affection towards me, would say, I were vnthankfull. This I will onely say, That whereas the most of your place and rank,Luke 10.40. Verse 4. like Martha, incumber themselues about ma∣ny needlesse things; you, like Mary, haue chosen the better part. Your loue to GOD, zeal to his house, testified by your frequent repairing there∣unto, your daily performane of religious exerci∣ses; yea, priuately in your closet were God onely seeth and regardeth: your conuersation lead in fear (the fruit of all the former) testifie of you,2 Pet. 1.17 as did the piety & godlinesse of that Lady to whom that blessed Apostle S. Iohn wrote,3 Iohn 11 that you are E∣lect:

whereof you haue more cause to boast, then of any outward honour whatsoeuer. For, what is greatnesse without goodnesse? but like the Spar∣tans nightingale, a meer sound and nothing else. Go on, good Madam, in your godly course: and whiles others striue to settle their lands, secure their monies, confirm their estates (leauing their saluation vnwrought vp) let it be your principal endeauour, To conform your life still more and more to the rule of Gods most holy word, and to make sure your election vnto your self. For,2 Pet. 1.10 when men haue beat their brains, broke their sleep, wa∣sted their marrow, to bee wealthy, mighty; yet at last they shall be enforced to confesse, that To be saued was simply the best plot. Neither will a∣ny study yeeld true solid comfort, but what was spent about it.
Let not this my presumption bee offensiue to your Ladiship. It is more I owe vnto you than I can perform. Let my confession testifie my obli∣gednes; and this bee a witnes of my thankfull re∣membrance of my duety: wherein I desire to please at least God, not to offend at least you. The Lord make you to encrease and abound yet more and more in grace and goodnes,1 Thes. 3.12.13 and make your hart stable and vnblameable in all holiness against the coming of our Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christ. And so I rest; and still will rest
 Messing in Essex. Aug. 1. 1621.
