



HAuing before this, set forth a small tre∣tise, displaing a sort of men, in this our countrey of Eng∣land, imbracing an Author vnder two letters, H, and N. a∣bout sixe monethes agoe: I haue receaued since, from the same persons, sundry letters contayning matter against the doctrine publickly taught in the church of England: and answering certain matters contayned in the sayd booke, called The displaying of the Family of Loue, which answeres, some I haue put in print, the rest remayn: wherof this Libel is one of the chiefest, and as the same doth witnesse, is made and compiled by one of the chiefe of that sect, and the only man which was the occasion that any of HN his doctrine became conuersant with our natiue Countrey peo∣ple, (a thing greatly to be lamented.)
The name of the party is Christofer Vitel, sometime a Ioyner of London, and infected with that infamous doctrine of Airius, 0. yeares agoe▪ whose crede among the pre∣tended Family of Loue is very great, and therefore I haue vsed more diligence in an∣swering the same. Being (Right honora∣ble) unboldened to present the same vnto your honor, vpō vew and tast of your good inclination towards the true Church of Christ and the purging out of the same, all disorders and discords that therin groweth, or which blemisheth that beloued bride, as much as in your honor lyeth.
And if herein I shall seeme ouer bold, or presumptuous, considering my rude and vn¦learned capacity, I haue many examples, which may serue for my excuse. For, where should men (publishing error) seeke defence, but vnder the name and protection of such, as (through the Lords dispensatiō, and gift of singular wit) doe vnderstand falshood at the first sight, and haue authoritie to correct the same: and hate error and corruption, of a zeale to the glory of god, and a care of true Religion: and by rate goodnes of nature, doe loue the truth, and also sufficiently ad∣orned with corage to defend the same.
Accept therefore (most honorable) these my rude labors, in norable part, and geue iudgement where trueth lyeth. Accept my sericeable hart, to further the glory of christ

his church, and not the simple vtterance and smal skil, with les learning, as by the hand∣ling appeareth. Also consider the prouidēce of our God, which ruleth his childrē by his beck, and hath appointed your honor as a speciall Patrone in his Church, to heare the griefe and gronings thereof, and to vnder∣stand and see that truth be not defaced, tro∣den downe, or spurned at by heretickes, or wicked Atheistes, which the mixed Church is too too full of.
And as the Lord hath made your honor to feele the sweetnes of his sonne our Sa∣uiour: So I am perswaded that you bende your singular care, and deep consideration, that this our countrey of England, might be free from hereticks & deprauers of Christ his glory. And if it might please your honor to consider the root and ground frō whence this strange doctrin grew, the practises and meanes by which it is maintained and sup∣ported: And by this litle sayd by me, consi∣der with all, what might be sayd against this doctrine of H N. by men of knowledge and skill. And finding the roote nothing els but singularitie, ambition, pride, and carnall liberty. The shore and pillers that vphold it, wrong application of the holy Scrip∣tures, counterfaite shewes of piety &c. your honor shall perceiue (I dout not) how litle true reason these men haue, or sound argu∣ment to proue the particulars of their doc∣trine:

the body and substance being found in deede but a lumpe of olde worne heresies, newly hatcht by H N. Fidelitas, and lidad, men come out of the cloudes, as they would haue the world beleeue.
And as this doctrine hath increased and spred it selfe in many shires of this Realme. So if I should declare what euent doth fol∣low in many places, it were scarce credible. The fountaine or foundation thereof, is the opinion that these men haue, that they keepe the law of God in euery point, as he requy∣reth. er of commeth their doctrine of per∣fection, attayned vnto in this life, and as they tearme it, the beginning of immortali∣ty: then being made perfecte, they imagine themselues to be Godded with God, or in∣corporate to God, I will vse their own tearmes: with whom God in one being of his spirit, is hommisied, or become man.
Now hauing once planted this doctrine, what Sathan can worke with this perswa∣sion, is easily perceiued For when this doc∣trine is once beleeued, that their Elders cā∣not sinne, and whatsoeuer they commit, it cannot be sinne, because they are guyded by the spirite. And when all feare to offend, or conscience of sinne is excluded: to all bold∣nes and liberty to liue after our liking, a ve∣ry window is opened.
As there is no reason to maintayn this, nor truth to vphold this: So it is very ne∣cessary

that the simple people should be war¦ned to beware of this so suttle a doctrine: which they like very well of, because their teachers and Elders, vnder pretēce of plau∣sible precepts, delyuered to the simple at the first taste, of a godly life, which asore any thing they must imbrace: with many shewes of mortificatiō. Thē must they grow to the manly oldnes in the loue, which is that perfection which they dreame of. But the secret part of their doctrine is hid from the most parte: And all their bookes are not made cōmon to all, as containing to strong meate for weake stomaches: therfore their glas of righteousnes few must looke into, least their whole vanity, and corruption should be espyed. That booke therefore is a rare birde among this Family. And this suttlety doth Sathan worke to deceaue the simple, to keep certaine secret misteries, and doctrine, to worke admiration in the hartes of deceaued people.
Right honorable, I haue set downe this part of their doctrine, as a tast: what other matters they maintayne, by perusing this small treatse, shall easely be espied: how their chiefe Elder HN. is exalted, and called a Prophet: and that his prophesies shalbe proued true: and also they account of HN. in office to be a priest, and say that through his priestes office, God will receaue all men to mercy: so that our only Lord & Sauiour, is

smally accounted of: his offices are bestow∣ed vpon HN. These thinges, are too too ab∣surd, Right honorable, and worthy to be buryed in silence: had not Sathā raysed vp his impes to trouble his Church with these blasphemies: agaynst which, I haue bent that poore skill, and force I haue, to displey these men, with their doctrine. There are many, Right honorable: that could better, & more learnedly haue confuted their doc∣trine: but it is so vayne, and childish, that simple soules, and meanely exersized in ho∣ly scripture, are sufficiently instructed by the Lord, to manifest all their abhommations.
The simplier sort of these men, I take to be such as haue a desire to serue the Lord: and yet is their simplicitye caryed away by the Elder sort, or stronger men: conference in my opinion, is the best way to helpe the simple: which the Elder sort can no away withall: least their trecheryes should be es∣pied. dad, one of their writers, geueth thē such a precept in his booke, intituled a fruit∣full exhortation to the Family of Loue: in  sextion.
But ye shall not contend, or dispute with the blasphemers, and the tanglers about the scripture: nor with the apostates, or de∣cliners from vs, and our good doctrine: or with the selfe conceited wife: nor yet with any of all those, that bring in variaunce, and make breach, besides our good doctrine of the seruice of Loue.
It appeareth Right honorable, by this prohibition of this Elder: that conference, and disputation is forbidden them: especial∣ly the Elder sort: but the noces, which are not enterid into the secret partes of their doctrine: but are caryed away with a shew of pietye, and good lyfe, which at the begin∣ning is opened vnto thē: with fly, and sut∣tle perswasions: that nothing els is sought at their handes, but how the man might be made persite in Christ Iesu: but after once a step be made towardes them, or a tast of this doctrin: then bookes are bestowed vp∣on them, which they must reade: of HN. as his exhortation, his dialog, his pistles, the ex∣position of the Lordes prayer, with the Arti∣cles. &c. & as they profite in these, bookes harder to digest: as the Prophesie of the spi∣rite of Loue, a declaration of the Masse: the ho∣ly Lambe: the Gospel, or uangly of HN. &c. & last of all, the glasse of righteousnes, which few of this company haue: the other bokes more riser printed as is supposed, in Flas∣ders, and translated by this Libeller, into English: as he himselfe confesseth.
And here I craue pardon, in that I haue bin ouerlong: to trouble your honor with these repeticiōs: and I would to God, that I had no occasion ministred, once to name these persons, nor this error: then should Christ his Church, nor no member in the same, haue needed to bend their study, to

publish, or manifest the same. The Lord of mercy, geue your honor all increase of fayth with the trueth of true pietye: and continue in you a zeale of Christ his Church, with a care, y• nothing but trueth be taught there∣in: and that the contemners thereof, may be put to silence: so as our God may be glo∣rified: his people edified: error, and heresies subuerted, & trueth aduan∣ced: which the Lord God graunt, for his sonne, our Sauiour Christ his sake: to whom be honor▪ and prayse, now and euer.

