



THAT Whore of Ba∣bylon
in the holie boke
of Reuelations decy∣phered
by Saint Iohn,
Reuel. 17. hath bin long since,
& through the good∣nes
of Th'almightie,
is manie waies, and by sundrie meanes in this
last age of the world most notablie prooued to
bee the church of Rome.
Notwithstanding as common strompets of∣ten-times
put vpon them both the faces and
the persons of most honest women: so this



whore, filthie though she be and vncleane, yet
would she appeare in the eies of man to be pure
and chast, as the spouse of Christ. And as har∣lots
haue brazen faces, and dare compare, yea
and for pure behauiour some-while praefer
themselues to vnspotted virgins, & right so∣ber
matrons: so this filth albeit she know her
selfe guiltie of all manner pollutions, yet, such
is her impudencie, she blusheth not both to
compare he selfe for honestie with the best, &
make the world beleeue that it is not she, but
euen the lambes wifeReuel. 19. v. 7. 21. v. 9., that is naught and
vncleane.Demonstr. 2.
But, praised be God for the same, vaunt she
neuer so much of her holines,Test. Rhem. annot. Iohn. 16. v. 13. 17. vers. 17. Ephes. 5. v. 24. 29. and speake shee
neuer so blasphemouslie against the spouse of
Christ, her loose & lecherous life is well
knowen, and her abominations blazoned to
th'uniuersall world:1. Tim. 3. v. 13. so that she which giueth
out that she is cleane, is knowen to be nought
els but meere pollution; that saith she neuer
went astrayeN. Sād. de vi∣ib. Monar. lib. 8., neither can erreCatech Tri∣den▪ in exposit. Symb., is well
knowen to be euen the verie scūme of an∣cient
and newe errorsWhitak. a∣gainst W. Rei∣noldes. c. 5., the sinke or
draughte of heathenish idolatrieTheol. Wir∣temb. contra Bellar. p 254., to
haue erred in an hundredFla. Illyricus contra mend. Papist., yea, in sixe
hūdred points of religionHeshusius de 600. erroribus pontif., to haue ad∣ulterated



euerie principal head of Chri∣stian
doctrineTheod. Beza epist. 1., and to haue quite re∣uolted
from our Sauiour ChristCaluinus e∣pist. S regi Po∣loniae. f. 169..
This being so, great should the detestation of
her be in al our mindes; and if any natural af∣fection
we carie toward our deere mother, the
Church of Christ, we gladlie will imploy all
our giftes both of bodie, and of soule, & what
els soeuer graces we haue for the defense of our
mothers good behauiour, & for the bringing
of this bold huswife and most impudent har∣lot,
so much as in vs lieth, into a common ha∣tred
of all sortes, that if possible it were euen
the verie boies & moathers in the streete may
neuer heare Poperie named but they may hisse
at it, as they do at the sight of knowen bawdes
and naughtie-packes.
For my part Right Honorable, some-what
in this booke, as heretofore in other treatises
I haue done, and by Gods assistance and the
lawfull fauour of my Superiours, will pro∣ceede
to the displaying of her filthines more
and more to the world. For wel I see, which
that most Reuerend Father and blessed mar∣tyr,
Maister Latimer did long since obserue,
that th'impudencie of this whore is excce∣ding
great and intolerable, and therefore,



where occasion shall be giuen she is to
be gauled and spurgauled tooM Latimer his last wordes in his confer. with B. Ridley bout the Lords Supper., seeing
no better she will prooue. That which I looke
for at her handes, is but mortal hatred, for
my labour. For so do harlots requite such as of
good-wil, laie open vnto them their vngodli∣nes,
that they may amend.
And surely as in some thinges aboue men∣tioned,
so otherwise me-thinkes she doth nota∣blie
resemble the brothels and harlots of the
world, & therfore diuinelie by Gods spirite is
entituled the whore of Babylon. For harlots, if
they loue you, and you will not with like loue
answere them againe, they will hate you as
Putiphars wife did IosephGen. 39. v. 7. 8. &c., and those
wicked Iudges SusannaHist. of Su∣sanna.; Loue them and
they will abuse you, as Delilah did Samson
Iud. 16. v. 6. 17. &c., & that filth Apame Esd. 4. v. 29. 30., which proudlie
sitting on the right hand of the king, with her
right hand tooke the crowne of the kings head
and put it on her owne, and strooke the King
with her left hand; Leaue them once, & giue
your selfe to lead an honest life, either solelie or
in holie wedlocke, and they will pursue you
with malice euen vnto the death, as the late
murther of Abel Bourne is memorableViewe of ex∣pmples., to
this purpose.


So this whore of Babylon, if you loue her
not againe, she louing you, she wil hate you euen
vnto the death; If you loue her, she will abuse
you, & that too shamefully; If you praeferring
a Godlie life agreeable to Gods holy word be∣fore
her wicked companie, and cast her of, no∣thing
will pacifie her till she see your blood.
Of England this whore would be loued, but
England will bee chaste still with Ioseph,
and Susanna: and therefore England is
extremely hated. Spaine loueth this whore,
and Spaine is abused, shee sitteth on the
Kinges right hand, shee taketh his Crowne
with her right hand, & puts it on her owne
hed, and with her left hand she strikes him
on the face; hee gapeth and gazeth on her,
poore soule; if shee laugh at him, hee laugh∣eth,
and if shee be angrie with him, he flat∣tereth
till shee bee reconciled: yea hee will
not spare his owne bloud to enioy her loueApologie of the Pr. of O∣range..
France leaft her companie, what say I, leaft?
he onely cast a friendlie countenance towardes
the lambes wife, and her faithful seruantes,
& she was inflamed with iealousie forthwith,
she could not be pleased, she feared he would
cast her of, or not feed her malicious humor,
and therefore a brother of that brothel house



gratiouslie admitted vnto familiar speech in
his owne chamberLetter of H∣rie 4. K. Fr. and Nauarre. vnder colour of confes∣sion
De caede. &c. Gal. Regis Hē∣rici 3. epigrā∣mata. must be his priest, and cut his throat.
Honorable, there is no ioie, but in a godlie
conuersation; there is no setled comfort but
with the spouse of Christ. Th'end of harlots &
following thē, besides discredit in this world,
& consumption both of bodie and goodesProu. 6. v. 26., it
is vtter condemnation both of soule and bodie
in the world to comeGal. 5. v. 19. 21. Reuel. 22. v. 15.. Th' end of this whore
is euerlasting condemnation in hell fireReuel. 18. v. 8., and
besides their excessiue charges and expenses
Taxa. paenité. Duarenus de S. eccles. mi∣nist. ac benefi∣cus li. 1. c. 4., their end is th'utter wrath of God which
haue to do with her. To such I say from
the Lord, goe out of her good people, that yee
be not partakers in her sinnes, and that yee re∣ceiue
not of her plaguesReuel. 18. v. 4.. To your honor I
wish perseuerance euen vntill th'end in that
good religion which you do professe, to th'end
you may at length ouercome, & so eate of that
tree of life, which is in the middes of the para∣dise
of GodReuel. 2. v. 7. 17. and receiue the white stone, &
bee clothed in white araieReuel. 3. v. 5. 21., & sit with Christ
in his throne, euen as Christ sitteth with his
father in his throane.
And thus presuming of your wonted fauour
(wherof to my great comfort and encourage∣ment



I haue tasted) and nothing doubting of
your gratious accepting of this treatise, small
and simple though it be, I humblie take my
leaue of your Honor at this time; commen∣ding
your Lordship with al your good ende∣uors
for the welfare of the church, our Prince,
and Common-weale to the blessing of Th'al∣mightie.
From Horninger, neere S. Ed.
Burie in Suff. the 19. of September. Anno
1589.

