



IT is recorded in holie Scripture (right Honourable) that Iehosha∣phat King of Iudah,2. Chron. 17.7. much renow∣ned for his pietie, did send out his Princes to teach in the Cities of Iudah. By which act of his, and the setting downe of it by the holie Ghost, although I goe not about to confound their office and dutie with the Prophets and Leuites, yet they are not on the other side, to be taken and coun∣ted as nothing; I meane both his act, and the report of it by the holie storie. For though they did not preach to the people in the cities whither they came, hauing Leuites with them, to doe that seruice, yet their countenancing, authorizing, and backing of the Leuites, who did teach the people indeed; is not without cause said to be a preaching; seeing it made way to the people receiuing of it with much more readinesse and cheerefulnesse, then otherwise they would haue done: yea, they were much more incou∣raged to the zealous embracing and professing of it, with fruits following, and that by the aduancing and magnifying of it by such noble and worthy persons,

then might haue bin looked for at their hands other∣wise.
For though the word of God, and the pure do∣ctrine taught out of it, be of sufficient authoritie to draw and perswade the hearers to submit themselues to it; yet considering the blindnes, vntowardnes, and rebelliousnes of mans heart against heauenly things, a number would neuer haue set foote in the holie place to heare, for all the report that might haue come to their eares of the price and benefit of the glad tidings preached, if they had not been incoura∣ged and brought on by such worthie examples.
Oh, wee know what force there is in such meanes. In so much, as euen with vs, howsoeuer there are of the Nobilitie, many who haue the preaching of the Gospel in singular account, yet the people that dwell farre off from them, and be not seated neere to them, they (I say) hearken not after them, neither are any thing moued by them. But where such are seene by the people that liue by them, to haue the preachers of the word in high account for the message they bring, and to bee subiect to the holie doctrine which they teach; euen that is a strong cord to draw the infe∣riour sort to shew reuerence to the ordinance of God, and to cause them to think, that if such great persons so highly esteeme of their ministery and message, that there is (doubtlesse) some great matter that moueth thē to it. And though that be not all, neither is of any power to conuert the heart, (for that is the proper worke of the holie Ghost) yet many are at the first brought on to receiue the preaching of the Gospell, (who after feele the power of it also, and enioy the benefit of it) when yet their first beginnings there∣in,

are chiefly occasioned by the zeale and forward∣nes of such good patternes.
And this is one cause (Right Honourable) why we Gods Ministers doe much wish and pray for the superiours and great persons, and especially those who are noble and growing toward the highest pla∣ces, that they may be sincere and zealous for the truth, because, though they be no Preachers, as nei∣ther Iehoshaphats Princes were; yet wee know, how greatly they may set forward preaching, and honour God in going before the people in their holy course, I say, we pray that many of them may be such, euen as wee highly praise God for those, who are such al∣readie.
And as wee are glad to see them fauourers and fol∣lowers of that which we preach by the authoritie of God, (one father of vs all) so we desire (which is the next thereto) that they would be patrons of our wri∣tings, which we set foorth with the same mindes for the common edification of the Church of Christ, that when it is seene that such as are in high place, and zealous professors of the truth also, do make account of them; there may be farre greater hope that many others will doe the same.
And therefore I humbly craue of your Honour, that I who haue presumed to dedicate these few Ser∣mons to your Honour, may be with your good liking allowed so to doe. The which though they be things of small account, (as they are commonly reckoned to be) yet I would not haue offered them, if I had thought they might not promise that good to the Church, which I know your Honour is willing to further. Besides, if there be any thing in them worthy

your accepting, and reading, they are your due, by good right, and the testimonie of my thankfull heart, and the best that I haue to present to your Lordship; who though you neuer saw my face, yet euen vpon report of me to your Honour, did giue me cause to haue you in daily remembrance while I liue. But a word is enough of this.
To lay out the matter of the Sermons, I thinke it not meete to bee tedious to you about it, and the ra∣the for that it is in the short Epistle to the Reader done sufficiently; further then thus, to signifie, that the thing which is chiefly aimed at in them, (among many other to good purpose) is to giue helpe to the Reader, as need shall require, to make his calling, and consequently his election (as the Apostle Peter wil∣leth) sure. And thus not to bee further tedious to your Lordship, I end, praying God, that as hee hath honoured you in a double manner, so he would ac∣companie your earthlie honour with abundance of such blessings as are wont to goe with it, and multiplie your best honour with the va∣rietie and increase of his heauenly graces. From Weathersfield this 20. of Aprill 1612.

