



Worshipfull Sir:
WE reade that when a certaine Lacedemoni∣an Phylosopher had made a New Booke, and was about in o∣pen hearing to recite it (as the manner then was) Antaloi∣des Plunah in lacon apoph. demanded where∣of the argument was; who answering that it was of the praise of Hercules: replyed, But who dispraiseth him? intimating it a need∣lesse worke to praise whom all men admired.

So I occasioned to declare my hearty affecti∣on to your Worsh: for sundry extraordinary fauours, which could not be performed with∣out relating of many excellent vertues, wherewith the Lord graced you: I consi∣dering these premisses, in the very enterie, re∣tired lest I should seeme to vndertake an vn∣necessary labour, in commending whom none dispraised. Wherefore, diuerting from this purpose, I tooke it more beseeming for me to ioyne and oy with such as congratu∣late and praise God for you, who in these your greene yeares endued you with such pietie, wisedome and grauitie, which few of gray haies in our Country attained vnto; whereby, for your place and Worshipfull cal∣ling, you, in executing Iudgement and Iu∣stice, releeuing the Fatherlesse and Widdow, Iob. 29. 12 doing good to all, and iniuring none, of all sorts are highly magnified, drawing as with a secret Load-stone the hearts and prayers of your people vnto you, and for you: and which is the Crowne and Garland of all ver∣tue and generositie, approue a sincere fauou∣rer and furtherer of Christs holy Religion, and the professors thereof. Many for glory of the World, become famous Common-wealths men, but few for the glory of God, approue good Church-men and Religious Gentlemen; for al-be it in policie they can afford braue salutations, and reach the hand

to some rare Preachers, yet is it but as Sauls 1 Sam. 18. 29. & 19. 6, 9, 10, & 24. 17. & 26. 21. fauour to Dauid, by fits and fashions, being at continuall warre and hatred with their owne Parish Ministers, which made it a Pro∣uerb, That Gentlemen are Venison in Hea∣uen: but howsoeuer they take Religion to be but a foolishnesse, and a base slauery to serue the Lord, yet is there not any thing that more honoureth a Gentleman or Noble∣man, then to be a faithfull professor of Reli∣gion and vpholder of his Ministers; as to your cost you doe, which causeth them take vp Pauls prayer for you and yours: The Lord 2 Tim. 1. 16 giue mercy vnto the house of Onesipherous, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chaine, which shall one day doe you more good, then tenne thousand worlds to the wicked and irreligious: For howsoeuer they bragge in the depth of their sensuality, that they can be godly when they lst, and will the while bathe themselues in impiety, yet try it who please (and I would it would please them to try and goe through therein) they shall finde it an harder matter to become truly Religious then they thinke (which I speake not to discourage any from being godly, for God will sweeten and make casie the way to all that seeke his face:) but for your comfort, and the high commendations of all Gods Elect, who for sake all with Peter Mat. 19. 27 Phil. 3. 7. 8. and Paul for Christ, and account them but

dung. And let them know that for men and women abounding in all worldly contents, to forsake themselues, their ease, their wealth, their pleasures and profits, and to giue them∣selues wholly first to God (as did the Mace∣donians) and then for his sake to his Church, 2. Cor 8. 5. deuoting themselues wholly to his Worship and seruice whatsoeuer it cost them, not on∣ly to the losse of their goods, but also of their liues (if the Lord call them to it) is an ex∣traordinary grace and vnspeakeable gift of 2. Cor. 9 15 God, for which they are euer to be thankfull vnto the Lord; for vnlesse God had by the mighty grace, and power of the holy Ghost wrought this admirable worke in their hearts, they could not possibly get that great victory against their owne selfe-loue, Coue∣tousnesse, distrust in Gods prouidence and promises; yea, against the very power of the Diuell himselfe and all his complices, who with vnited forces labour, to hinder this worke which they see bringeth so great glo∣ry to God, credit to the Gospell, and Salua∣tion to mens Soules. But blessed be God, who (from among many) seected you to this high calling making you heire not one∣ly to your Worshipfull Parents possessions, but also to their piety and godly profession. And albeit the Lord for causes best knowne to himselfe hitherto maketh you childe-lesse; yet to his glory, and your comfort, hath hee

made you and your most vertuous wife, pa∣rents of your spirituall children; which (saith Ambrose) are farre better then any carnall po∣sterity, Ambrose. or names of sonnes and daughters. In which respect may it truely and comfortably be sald; Blessed are the barren, and reioyce thou barren that didst not beare, &c. for the desolate hath more children then the married wife, &c. Isa, 54. 1. so that as King Cyrus, when Lysander the Lacedemonian Ambassador saw his Orchard, Xeph in Oco. & citatur a Cicerone in Catone. called the Paradice of Sardis, and admiring the highnesse and straightnesse of the Trees, and how euen the rankes were set quadran∣gle-wise, demanded who had so set them? he answered: These trees haue I planted, these rankes haue I deuised, and many of these plants haue I set with mine owne hands. So when you in the great Day of the Lord shall appeare before God, accompanied with all these your spirituall children, whom you & your most gracious wife haue begotten and nursed vp to your Christ, and he demand of you, who these multitudes be? you shall ioy∣fully answere: These thy Ministers wee euer countenanced, cheered, and contributed vp∣to; to these Widdowes and Orphanes vvee haue beene as Father, & Mother; these poore afflicted haue we releeued, and many of these haue we brought vp in our owne house, and all thine elect people haue we euer louingly embraced: Whereunto the Lord of glory

shall answer, Well done good seruants and faith∣full, Math. 25. enter into your Masters ioy. Which the Lord grant you both to doe; for these in∣deed are the right Hounds and Hawkes (as Alphonsus King of Argons telleth an Am∣bassador, desiring to see his hunting Hounds) where with all good Nobles and Gentle∣men Aeas Syl∣ius de dictis. Alphonsi. should hunt for the Kingdome of Hea∣uen euen Christs poore afflicted members. And as Bnaiah and the people tell king Dauid 1 King.  . 47. of Salomon; God make the name of Salomon more famous thn thy name, and exalt his throane aboue thy throane, and as he hath beene with my Lord the King, so be he with Salomon: so con∣clude▪ I, the God of Heauen make your name more famous then your Fathers; and exalt you in all earthly preferments aboue him; and as he hath beene with him in all heauenly blessings, so be he with you; and the Lord say so too, Amen.
Good Mistris Bigges,
I haue little to say to your Worship, for re pleny makes me sant, vnlesse I should spe of you as Grigorie Nzianzen did of sius,  lin Athanasius; I shall   it selfe, because be comprehended  within him, and praising Vertue, I Crag. Haz. in Orat. u∣neb, Athan. should praise God himselfe; from whom Vertue  to men, that thereby we might be drawne vnto him, &c. and so say I, if I should praise

your vertuous life, I should praise Vertue it selfe, and seeing this is too ample a field for me to walke through, I will praise God for his rare Vertues bestowed vpon you, and withall, congratulate with you, that the Lord gaue you so good an Husband: many haue louing Husbands, but few finde good ones, who be helpers and partners with them, not only in worldy but in heauenly and spirituall exercises, and I doubt not but as an echo he findeth you appliable to draw with him Christs yake, that so you both may be glo∣rified together: And that as he prudently and prouidently planteth Gods sacrifice and seruice early and lately in your house and fa∣mily: so you as the Mistresse Bee in this holy Hiue (for so Xenophon cals the Wife) Xenoph. in Oon. will haue a speciall care and Christian Watch∣fulnesse to see the same practised, and to keepe your Hiue sweete and well stoared, suffering no Bees to be idle, but case them make faire hony-Combes and fill euery Celler: cast out all Droane Bees, suffer neither Waspe, Mouse, nor filthy worme to anoy your Bees Qui mone vt ,  iam facis, ille modo ladat, & hortatu  probat acta suo. uid. de trist. l. 5. lg. 14. nor robbe your Hiue: neither speake I this as perswading you to worke, for Bees neede no exhortation to labour for Winter, for it is naturall for them so to doe, but (as one tel∣leth his wife) to commend your endeauors heerein, purging your house from all pro∣phane and wicked people, that none from

Roome, nor Aegypt, nor Sodom anoy your painfull Bees, and defraud them of your la∣bours, defile the Hiue, and discredit both the Master and Mistris Bees, neither can I but ioy to see you so directly tread the steppes of godly Placill the Emperor Theodosius wife, who being gratiously instructed in Gods Word, furthered her Husband much in piety, was exceeding bountifull to the poore; would her selfe goe to the sick, visite and mi∣nister vnto them, and would often speake to her Husband to remember what he was before he was Emperor and what after, and called vpon him to be thankfull to God, and carefull to doe all good to his people; and so I am perswaded you do to yours and must do, and in so doing God will blesse you both, that you shall grow Bigge both in this and in the life to come. And whereas thankful∣nesse would I should, for many fauours recei∣ued, offer you some gratuitie, and supposing that nothing commeth more welcome to you then some jewell or ornament which naturally all weomen affect, as Ieremy writes; Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her attire: and these ornaments must not be Ier. 2. 32. jewels of Gold, Pearles, pretious-Stones or Purple robes, but such as best beautifie you in the eies of the Almightie (the Ornament 1. Tim. 2. 9. 1 Pet. 3. 3. 4 of Israel) and these be true godlinesse and Christian obedience in a constant procee∣ding

and carefull watchfulnesse ouer your Caluin in Ier. 2. 32. ertius lib. 4. cap. 6. Mat. 13. 44 45. 46. whole life, in weale or woe; this Robe co∣uereth all our foule and ragged attire, and maketh vs more amiable in the Court of Heauen then euer was Ester in Assuerus Pal∣lace, and although my penurie cannot giue you this (for heerein I am a beggar my selfe) yet I according to my poore skill, send you what direction I can to purchase the same, hoping you will accept thereof, not as a pai∣ment or requitall, but as an acknowledge∣ment of a debt. And that all the day time you will vse it as your aduiser and ouerse r of all your worke, and at night as a Curfu Bell to prepare you for your rest, and when you ouer-sleepe your selfe, as a Mid-night peale awaking you to serue the Lord, and at the Dawning as a true Cock to prepare for your speciall calling, and after as a Mor∣ning watch, calling to you betimes not to idle your pretious time; when you are in prosperity directing you how with Gods fa∣uour to continue and increase the same, in aduersity how to be ridde of it, how to vse your health for Gods glory & good of men, and when you are sick to death, how to pre∣pare your selfe for God, and how after death to enjoy a joyfull Resurrection: This doth Christian & godly Watchfulnesse grace you and all you take in hand, and so blesse you in all respects in the sight of God and men, that

you shall be a mirror to all the godly about you, so that whosoeuer passeth by and behol∣deth your dwelling place, shall giue it the name of the Citie of God, and pointing at it, shall say, The Lord is there: and the hearers shall answere, The Lord blesse thee O habitation Mar. 13 33 Eze. 48. 35. Ier. 31, 23. of Iustice and Mountaine of holinesse: which the Lord for Iesus Christs sake graunt, Amen. Chacombe this 20. of August 1619.

