



In this Vniuerse (Right Hon:)
THere are only two things that are the objects both of Contemplation and of Admiration, that is, the Creator, & the creature: amongst the Creatures onely two, An∣gels and Men; in Man only two parts; the body and soule; in the soule, onely two faculties, the minde and the will;  the minde, two things onely; GOD  his word: the Word of God is two∣fold;

internall and externall: the exter∣nall word is two-fold; spoken and writ∣ten: the written word hath two parts; the old, and new Testament; the old containeth two, Moses and the Pro∣phets; and Moses speaketh of these two we formerly mentioned, which onely are the obiects of our contemplations; euen the Creator, and the creature: the Creator we know via negationis, emi∣nentiae, & causalitatis? but we know the creatures, if they be sensible, Cognitione sensitiua? if not, intellectiua: but proper∣ly in this life we know not God, in re∣gard of his Essence, (for how shall we know him, of whome there can not be framed either Species intelligibiles or sensibiles, seeing that knowledge is per∣species;) yet in part we know him, in re∣gard we haue some knowledge of his personall and essentiall properties, of his effects and operations.
Which knowledge is but small, be∣cause our finite science cannot compre∣hend

that infinite Essence. For if a shell cannot contain the Sea, which is a crea∣ture; much lesse can our soules him, that is our Creator. The cause then why the Owle can not behold the Sunne, is in the eies of the Owle, not in the Sunne: so, that we cannot know God perfectly is not in God, who is most perfect, but in vs that are imperfect? & quidquid re∣cipitur, recipitur admodum recipientis, non ad modum recepti. Then our knowledge is so weake, that wee neither know the first effector, whose essence is most ex∣cellent; neither his first effect (I meane the first matter) whose existence is most impotent.
Yet a more eminent knowledge of our Maker haue wee than the Pagans, who only know him by his works, but we by his words: they by contempla∣tion; we by inspiration: they by sens∣lesse Images, we by his essentiall Image: they by painted and carued stones; we by that stone which the builders did re∣fuse,

which became the head of the cor∣ner, which was cut out of the moun∣taine without hands, which brake all heir Images to powder, vpon which are seuen eies, euen that tried and pre∣cious stone, that was laid in Sion: by him (I say) in whome the God-head dwels bodily, in whome are hid al the treasures of wisdome and know ledge, haue we the knowledge of our Creator; with∣out whom, our science is but igno∣rance, and our meditations, vexations.
This is that internal word, , by whome, and by whose spirit was spo∣ken and written this externell word contained in the Scripture, , in the which word, the Creator and the creature is only to be knowne, not only in all, but in euery part thereof, no lesse than the soule is all, in all the body, and all in euery part of the same: so is know∣ledge in this word. Now this externall word differeth from Christ the internal word of the Father, as in vs the word,

which is in our mind, doth differ from that, which is in our mouth and bookes: our internall speech and reason, is ge∣nerated in the soule, and of the soule, and is coetaneall with the soule: so is Christ begotten in the Father, and of the Father, ard is coeternall with the Father; but the word that is in out mouth and books, is accidental, and the effect of our internall word; so is that word, which is in the Scripture, and in the mouth of Christs seruants acciden∣tall, and the effect of Christ the inter∣nall word of the Father; who is both ratio & oratio patris, for  is both our soules, cognitione directa, doe vnder∣stand many things that are without the soule, but cognitione reflexa, she vnder∣standeth her selfe, and then, idem est in∣telligens & id quod intelligitur; so God doth know all his creatures, which are but his effects: but in vnderstanding himselfe from all eternitie, he doth be∣get that knowledge of himselfe, and in

himselfe, which is himselfe, euen Christ▪ his owne wisedome and knowledge.
Yet there is great relation betweene Christ, Gods internall Word, and the Scripture, his external word, for as none knoweth the Father but by the Sonne, his word internall; so none knoweth the Father & the Son, but by the Scripture, his Word externall. As the internall word was, Principium essendi, the be∣ginning of the creatures; so the exter∣nall is Principium cognoscendi, the be∣ginning of knowledge. As nothing did exist before the word internall, so no∣thing was spoken before the word ex∣ternall. As by the internall Word the world was created: so by the externall word the world is instructed. As that word was conceiued of the holy Ghost: so this word was inspired by the holy Ghost. As that word was persecuted by the Iewes, and crucified by the Roman Pilate: so this word hath beene falsified by the Iewes, and wounded by the Ro∣man

Prelate. As it was held vnlawful for the People to cōuerse with that Word so it was held vnlawfull, for the Lay people to conuerse with this word. As the Iewes did more regard their tradi∣tions than that word; so the Romans doe more regard their vnwritten lies, than this Word. As that Word was bu∣ied in a garden▪ and kept sure from his Disciples: so was this word buried in an vnknowne tongue, and kept close from Christians: & as this word, in despite of the Iewes▪ was restored to life; so this word, in dispite of the Popes, is brought orth againe to light.
This is that word, the Author, obiect, subiect, end, and ground whereof, is God, for verity admirable; for antiquity enerable; for sanctity incomparable; for tility inestimable: here is light for the lind, life for the dead, food for the ungry, drinke for the thirsty: here is the ee of life, the fountaines of liuing wa∣rs, Manna the food of Angels, pearles

and other rich Iewels; here is a banquet of many dishes; an Apothecaries shop with many medicines; a sweet garden▪ of many flowres; an Armour-house with many weapons; here is salt to season, milke to strengthen, wine to comfort, and hony to sweeten; here the cold may be warmed, the weary refreshed, the na∣ked clothed, and the filthy clensed. If thou desirest light and perfection, here is Vim aud Thummim; if the sight of thy sins, here is the golden candle sticke, if thou wilt wash thy handes and feete, here is the brazen lauer? wilt thou bee Purged from they Leprosie? here is the riuer Iordan; wilt thou florish▪like a Bay tree? thou must be planted by this riue▪ wilt thou bring forth much fruite? thou must be sowne with this seed; wilt thou sacrifice thy sins to God? thou must kill them with this sword; wilt thou goe to the kingdome of heauen? this is the on∣ly way; here is the fiery Pillar and the

cloud to conduct thee to Canaan; and ere is the Star that will leade the to find out the Son of righteousnesse, Iesus Christ that bright morning Starte, with whome we shall shine in eternity of glo∣ry, as Stars in the firmament.
In this word then must we conucrse both day and night, not in curious earching, and prodigious speculation; but in serious weeping, and religious a∣oration; neither must our minds be op∣ressed with terrestriall and infernal oc∣cupations: but they must be filled with elestall and supernall meditations. Therefore if we will profit here, we must last off all carnall affection, that wee ay receiue for our weary soules eter∣nall refection: for if no beast could uch the mountaine, and heare Gods aw: why should beastly minds touch e bible, and read Gods Law? And in arching this Word, let vs not in it arch for riches and honour to our

selues, which is to seeke for dirt among Iewels, and poyson amongst medica ments, to ouerthrow our selues: but l vs search for him, who only is sufficien to content our soules within our bodies▪ as hee was the only efficient to presen our soules into our bodies. Therfore w conclude with Augustine, Scriptur & creatura ad hoc sunt, vt pse quratur, ip∣se diligatur, & qui ipsam creauit, & q illam ispirauit.
The internall and eternall generati∣on of the word, was not knowne to th Gentiles: but was obscured with an ob∣scure fable of Minerua, begotten of I∣piters braine, by the which also they di signifie learned notions conceaued i the mind, & expressed by word or writ.
Then, to be short (right Honourable) heere I doe offer to your tuition an fruition my Minera, not begotten o my braine, but in my braine; neither i shee armed with a helmet, , and 

speare to terrifie Mmus; and therefore e more desirous shee is to shelter her∣lfe vnder the shadow of your Honors tronage, being perswaded that you e both a Patrone & a patterne of lear∣ng, the fruits whereof haue not only freshed the-hearts and eares of great rittaine: but with Dedalean wings they ue bin transported beyond the Ocean;  that Rhodans, Betis, and Rhens, haue asoned their siluer streames with the licious taste of your learned fruits. hen what remaines, quam vt ocior Icar

Visas gementis littora Bospri,
Sirtsque Getulas cnorus,
Ales Hyperebrosque campos?

Moreouer, your Honor being a Father d Patrone of iustice, if any wrong be fered to her by Mmus, she may bold∣ fly to the Chancery for succor: there∣re, I hope, that as your Honor hath rmitted your glorious titles to grace r Frontispice; so you wil not refuse to

beautifie her with your gracious aspec and respect. That GOD, which hat exalted you to so great dignities in thi world, preserue your body and soule, and crowne you in the World to come with blessed Immortality.

