



ALL knowledge, and all sciences in∣uented
by the wise men of this world
without the knowledge of IESVS
CHRIST, by whom remission of
sinnes is obtained to the miserable
soule, are but vaine and vnprofitable.
The Apostle reckoning, out his pre∣rogatiues,Philip. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
which were many, counts them all in respect of
the excellency and knovvledge of Christ Iesus to be but losse and dung:
Euen so it is with all sciences, if they be seuered from the
knowledge of Iesus Christ in the Gospell. For, what a∣uailes
it a man to knowe the height of the Heauens, the
courses of the Starres, the breadth of the earth, if in the
mean-tyme his conscience accuse him for his sinnes to be
vnworthie both of Heauen and earth? What auailes it a
man to seeke by Physick to prolong afraile temporall life
to the bodie, if his conscience tell him in the mean-tyme
that his soule shall perish for euer? What auailes it a man
to brag of the knowledge of the Lawe, if his conscience
accuse him to be most vnjust and worthie of eternal dam∣nation.
In these and such like things the wise men of this
world doe glorie, and yet they make not the soule the bet∣ter.

The knowledge of Iesus Christ in the Gospell is the
onely knowledge that preserues the soule, and makes it to
liue for euer,Ioh. 5. 39 as our Sauiour sayes, Search the Scriptures, for
in them ye thinke to haue eternall lyfe,Ioh. 17. 3 and they are they vvhich testifie
of me. And againe, This is life eternall that they knovv thee to be
the onely verie God, and vvhom thou hast sent Iesus Christ. Then
this science is to be sought, praised, and preferred to all
others in all respects Look how highly PAVL commends
it:1. Cor. 2. 6. 7. 8. 9. Wespeake, sayes he, vvisdome, among them that are perfite: Not
the vvisdome of this vvorld, neither of the Princes of this vvorld,
vvhich come to nought: But vve speake the vvisdome of God in a mi∣sterie,
euen the hid vvisdome, vvhich God had determined before the
vvorld vnto our glory: Which none of the Princes of this World hath
knovvne: for had they knovvne it, they vvould not haue crucified the
Lord of glory: But as it is vvritten, the things vvhich eye hath not seene,
neither eare hath heard, neither came into mans hart, are vvhich God
hath prepared for them that loue him: But God hath reueiled thē vnto
vs by his Spirit. Other sciences were inuented by men: but
God himselfe is the Author of this science, he reueiled it.
Other sciences are all inuented in tyme, but this science
is before all tyme, from all eternitie: other sciences
handles things corruptible and changeable the knowe∣ledge
whereof albeit it be pleasant and profitable for this
present life, yet it cannot reforme the soule to eternall life:
for all their vertue is but the couerture of vyce, but this
science settes out and reueiles to a broken harted sinner a
fauorable and reconciled God in Iesus, who is aduantage
both in life and death, and in whom the heigh and won∣derfull
things of God, and all things that the soule of man
can require for grace or glory, pertaining either to this or
to that other life,Col. 2. 3. 9 10. is contained: For in him are hid all the trea∣sures
of vvisdome and knovvledge, in him dvvelleth all the fulnesse of
the god-head bodily. Now this pretious treasure the Lord hes
committed to earthen vessels, he hes set in his seruice

base and contemptible persons to carie the message of re∣conciliation,
and to proclame to weary and loaden sinners
the glade tydings of saluation, he sendes out simple men
to manure his husbandrie: he sends them out as souldiers
to that spirituall warfare vvith vveapons that are not carnall,2. Cor. 10 4. 5.
but mightie through God, to cast dovvne holdes, to cast dovvne ima∣ginations,
and euery high thing that is exalted against the knovvledge
of God, and to bring into captiuitie euery thought to the obedience of
Christ. Whom for the message they carie, the Gospel they
preach, the word of life they offer, that hid treasure that is
committed to them, the Lord craues we should haue in
singulare account, honour and loue. And indeed if we
had the sight of the fearcenesse of that eternall wrath of
God for sinne, it could not be possible but we would say,
O hovv bevvtifull are the feete of them vvhich bring glade tydinges
of peace,Rom. 18. 15. and bring glade tydinges of good things! We cannot ho∣nour,
loue and highly esteeme of the Maister, and respect
the Gospell, if we hate and contemne the seruant and
messenger. And if we loue our parents, of whom we haue
nothing but misery, who hes conceiued vs in sinne, nuri∣rished
and trained vs vp in sin, and who by nature makes
vs aires of wrath and hell (for that vvhich is borne of the flesh
is flesh.)Ioh. 3. 6. O how excedinglie should we loue these whom
God makes instruments of our regeneration to beget vs
to God, to make vs his sonnes, and to translate vs from
darknesse to light from miserie to felicitie, from death to
life, from hell to heauen. And yet this vnworthie world
neuer duely accounts of them, but of all men they hate
most malitiouslie the true seruants of Iesus Christ. And
to passe by other ages and Countries, the Lord of the har∣uest
stryuing against our ingratitude hes sent out from
tyme to tyme into this Land sundry painfull laborers and
faithfull preachers of the Gospell, who preased in all re∣spectes
to approue themselues to God, to a good consci∣ence,

and to the consciences of so many as beleeued, of
whom the world was not worthie.
Among the rest whom God did bewtifie with singu∣lare
graces, the Lord in the person of M. ROBERT
ROLLOCK, that faithfull and reuerent seruant of Iesus
Christ, gaue vs no sober token of his loue. For we cannot
tell if vpon any almest in this Land the Lord bestowed
greater aboundance and varietie of graces of his Spirite,
if in any there was a more spirituall and heauenly
soule, if any spared themselues lesse and vndertooke grea∣ter
paines that they might be found faithfull and finishe
their course with joye, if any preased more to ap∣proue
themselues to God and a good conscience then he.
O what and how many giftes and graces were in the per∣son
of that man! in conceiuing he was quick, in judge∣ment
solide, he vttered the Word with great libertie, he
preached with euidence and demonstration of the Spirit
and power: in opening vp of the text and raising groundes
of doctrine he had a speciall grace, in teaching he was
cleare and sententious, in conuincing, powerfull: in ex∣horting
earnest and pithie: in correcting vehement: who
for graces being in account and honoured was more
humble? (& rara virtw humilitas honorata) who being pro∣uoked
was lesse vindictine? who preased more to keepe
the chaire of Veritie cleane from corrupt passions, that
the word of God might haue free passage and be glorifi∣ed?
Who sought the world lesse? Who estemed lesse of
these earthly thinges: For he behaued himselfe as a faith∣full
seruant of God, not seeking himselfe, but Iesus Christ,
as a pilgrime heere, yea and crucified to the world: for
knowing that here he had no continuing cittie, he sought
for one to come he had his conuersation in heauen, from
whence he looked for Iesus Christ his Sauiour to come.

And hauing liued such an holy life to the glorie of God,
there followed a most sweete and comfortable death in
Iesus, whom he counted alwayes to be his aduantage.Reuel. word 13.
And blessed are they that dies in Iesus, for they rest from their labours,
and their vvorkes follovv them. O how great a wound did the
church receiue by the losing of such a mēber! Experience
teaches vs this day when there is such distraction of harts
in the Church what inlack we haue of this man, whose
labours in the like dayes and cases the Lord while he liued
blessed wonderfully. His life preached his death preached
to the world: Many one who heard him found in expe∣rience
that he ranne not vnsent: For he laboured not in
vaine,1. Tim. 3. 2. &c. but the grace of God was powerfull in him, and by
him to many. Finally, he as a viue exemplar represented
to vs such qualities and conditions as the Spirite of God
requires to be in a Bishop of Iesus Christ.Tu. 7. 8 Put why insist we
to speake to you, Sir, of this man who was wel knowne al∣most
to all, but most interely to you: Neither was he stead∣able
to the faithfull that heard him by his vine voice onely
in his life preaching, but also his workes yet teaches the
posteritie. For his learned and judicious writtings left be∣hind
him in latine hes acquired to him a famous name and
reuerend account among the learned in sundry nations,
who professe that therby no smal edification redounds to
the Church of God. And therefore, seeing that God did
accompany his forme of teaching so powerfully with his
spirit and made it so profitable, we haue thoght meet to set
out these his Lectures vpon the two Epistles to the Thessa∣lonians,
that not only the simple may be instructed there∣by
but also the teachers may know and imitate his grati∣ous
forme of teaching: as likewise, because the other Ser∣mons
that were before imprinted hes bene receiued with
great lyking by the humble and such as desire to be edified,

Now, Sir, whereas others in such cases vses to say that
they were aduising as doubtsome to whose patronage
they should recommend their worke, we heerein are re∣leeued
of this care: we need no deliberation: for to whom
in all respects can it belong but to you? First in respect of
that inteere and exceeding loue and familiaritie that was
betweene you and the Author heereof. For from once
by his preaching the Lord wroght in your hart, all who
knew M. ROLLOCK knew also how ye loued him, dely∣ted
in his companie and conference, set your selfe in all
thinges to pleasure him, what testimonies of true loue
and vnfained kindnesse ye would haue vttered to him,
how freely for the loue of Iesus ye would haue communi∣cate
to him temporall thinges, (if that man, who was so
well content with that he had, could haue suffered you,
and had not stayed the course of your liberalitie.) Also
when that last messenger and fore-runner of death did
sease vpon his fraile and weakned bodie, few are ignorant
how carefull ye were for his greater ease to haue him
transported to your owne house: How liberallie ye and
your bed-fellow (whose praise ought not nor shall not be
buried in obliuion) bestowed on him all thinges necessare
and commodious, how chearefully ye receiued and in∣tertained
for his cause all them that came to visite him,
and what great benefite ye counted the Lord bestowed on
you in that he offered the occasion, which long ye wished
to showe your liberalitie in temporall thinges towardes
such a rate vessell of mercie and faithfull seruant of Iesus
from whom he had receiued so many spirituall thinges.
Againe who is ignorant, what affection and kyndnesse ye
haue vttered and daily vtters towardes his relict and post∣hume
for his cause yea and towardes all these who loued
him in Christ. Next, to passe by that M. ROLLOCK in

testimonie of his loue dedicate to you his commentare
in Latine on the second of these Epistles, as also that in
his Testament he ordeined that all his bookes which he
left to be printed after his decease should be dedicate to
you, and come out vnder your name and patrocinie, that
whosoeuer gote commoditie thereof, next after God,
might giue the honour and thankes vnto you, after a spe∣ciall
sort this worke requyres your patronage. For throgh
your care, moyen and expenses these Lectnres were col∣lected
and gathered from the handes of these who wraite
them from his mouth, by your moyen and procurement
they were reuised, corrected, and made apt for the prin∣ting
by your meanes they now see the light, which they
had neuer seene, but had bene buried in darknesse, if the
Lord had not made you an instrument to publishe them.
Last, if that the paines which hath bene taine in reuising,
correcting and making them apt for the printing might
yeelde any right to make choise of a patrone to this work,
we would not, nor could not offer it to any, but to you,
Sir, not onely because of the vndeserued loue and kynd∣nesse
ye vtter daily towardes vs, yea and towardes all the
seruants of Christ, both publikly and priuily as they them∣selues
doe testifie, but also in respect ye were the Author
to mooue vs to vndertake such traueiles. Indeeed such a
propine is farre inferior either to your desertes or our de∣sire:
and therefore we present it, not so much thinking
thereby to discharge and satisfie the debt, as to acknow∣ledge
our obligation to you, and to be a testimonie of our
thankfulnesse.
For these causes, Sir, we desire you to receiue this work
in your patronage and protection, to defend it from the
speaches of such as hes not learned yet to speake well of
any person or their workes. For we are not ignorant how

much and oft they who set forth other mens works vse to
be subject to the sharpe censure of men, and how little
thankes commonly, either they get, or may looke for of
many, so that few would be found to take trauaile in them,
except they were rather moued through the loue of the
glorie of God, and edification of his Church, then throgh
any thankfulnesse they may expect at mens hands. Last,
Sir, wearie not in wel-doing, goe forward to doe good
vnto the Saintes for Christs sake, and experience shall
giue you a proofe of the Lords loue and blessing vpon
your bodie, soule, and actions in this life, his Saints shall
loue you, his seruantes shall pray for you that ye may
finde mercy in that great day, and when ye haue run out
your course, when your journay shall be ended, when ye
haue foughten out the battaile, the Lord shall then ga∣ther
you to his Saints and crowne you with glorie. Now
the God of al consolation, Lord of Lords, and King of
kings, blesse you with al benefits spiritual and temporal,
direct you by his sprit, and preserue you long to the glorie
of his Name, and to he well of his Church, that your
pilgrimage being ended ye may with joy rest from your
labours in Iesus, in whose countenance is sacietie of joyes,
and at whose right hand are pleasures for euer more,
AMEN. Edinburgh the 16. of Iune. 1606.

