


HAVing long considdered and
advised with my selfe (because I
was never yet accustomed to such
matters) to whom I should de∣dicate
this translation of the Exposition,
(of that worthie seruante of GOD, of
blessed memorie, M. ROBERT ROL∣LOK,
who now resteth from his labour) vp∣ponsome
select Psalmes; Yee, right honora∣ble,

and dearely beloved in Christ, came
first into my minde. The chiefe thing that
mooved me thus to doe, was the discharge
of my promise, wherein I was bound vnto
you, ever since the booke came home (which
was in Sommer last) At which time, I
happening to reade vnto you a little of the
Exposition vppon the 42. Psalme: Ye desi∣red
me very earnestly to translate the whole
booke; which thing I granted-to, and pro∣mised
to performe. Behold therefore, my
promise is now in the mercy and assistance
of God fulfilled to you. And next, I being
ever desirous to testifie my duetifull and
thankfull minde vnto you (as one to whome
I was, and is much beholden to in many re∣spectes)
I thought that there could be no bet∣ter
meane, then the dedication of this pre∣sent
worke, vvhich conteineth great store
of most comfortable doctrines, as I truste ye
shall confesse, when ye haue well perused
the same, so that the onely reading thereof,
may iustly commend it many waies, even to
such as are of great learning, godlinesse,

and vertue. For if we respect the Author,
it is God himselfe, who vsed DAVID and
others, the penners of the said Psalmes, to
be his instruments, that his owne in the
day of their owne particular trouble and
affliction should not lack store of Spirituall
and heavenly comfort. And so it is the
word of Consolation, the lampe of light, to
leade the heauie harted, and casten-downe
Christian, by reason of the troubled con∣science,
by the burthen of sinne, through
the darke night and thick clowde of afflic∣tions,
to the throne of Gods mercy and
grace. More-over, there are verie fewe
heades of our Christian faith and religion,
(as Faith, Repentance, Iustification, Sanc∣tification,
the Resurrection of his flesh, Eter∣nall
life, the nature, causes, and effects of
Sinne Originall and Actuall, comfort
for the heavie and sorrowfull soule, and
sundrie such other poyntes) But they are
most pithily, solidelie, and with great evi∣dencie
of the Spirite set downe here. A∣gaine,
if wee haue an eie to the partie, by

whose ministerie and labours, this Exposi∣tion
was written: He was a man, as I may
be hold to testifie (being conversant with
him, both in Sanct-Andrewes, and in
this ciitie, neere hand this twentie yeares
by gane) to whom the Church of GOD
within this countrey, is as much beholden,
as to any one instrument that ever GOD
thrust out into his haruest, in this Church
of Scotland, being a man indewed with
excellent and manifolde giftes of GOD;
most diligent, earnest, and painefull in im∣ploying
of the same; for bringing vp of the
youth in godlinesse, information and in∣struction
in the Lord, beating downe of the
adversaries, winning of people vnto God,
edifying of the flocke of Christ, and shewing
good example to other in his vpright con∣versation.
And wee haue all iuste cause
to feare, that the taking away of such a
worthie light, is a fore-runner of Gods
severe iudgement to come vppon this sin∣full
Lande, which I am afrayde is nearer
then we suppose. Hee vvas in in his life

time a notable learned Doctour, and
a moste pithie Preacher of Christe cru∣cifyed;
Indued vvith as great humilitie,
as ever I knewe man of our Nation; which
is a rare gift in the more learned sorte,
(For knowledge puffeth vppe, sayeth
the Apostle) and one vvhome I maye
blesse the Lorde for his mercie in Christ
Iesus towarde mee, that ever I knewe, as
being the especiall instrument of GOD,
that planted the knowledge of my Savi∣our
in my hearte, vvhome I may call
vvorthelie my Father and instructer, in
the Lord Iesus Christ. And vvoulde to
GOD, that vve that are lefte behinde
him, in this miserable valley of teares,
could learne to haue our delight as little
set vppon this life, and thinges belonging
thereto (vvhere our cittie and place of re∣sidence
is not) as he had, vvhose onely care
vvas hovv to enlarge the Kingdome of
Christe, ever vvayting for the Cittie,
vvhich is not buylded vvith the handes,
But is everlasting in the Heavens, as

many a time, I haue heard him speake. I
say no more of him, for his workes alreadie
set out, and the seminarie which he hath
planted (I meane the Colledge of Edin∣burgh)
will continue his happie remem∣brance
to the posteritie to come. As con∣cerning
the translation of the worke itself,
I haue dealt as simplie and faithfully, in
turning it into English, as was possible,
being content to expresse the authors mea∣ning,
in most easie and simple tearmes, kee∣ping
his owne phrase of speach, so far as I
could attayne to. And so I humblie submit
the iudgement thereof, to your favorable
acceptation, the obteining thereof, shall
greatly increase my gladnesse, in that I haue
done any thing, whereby the Church of
God, or any particular member thereof, is,
or may be any whit edified. Receiue it ther∣fore
with as charitable a minde, as I doe
willingly offer it, as a token of my Christian
duetie toward you; Whom I recommende
to the Lord, and his grace in Iesus Christ,
beseeching his holy and sacred maiestie, to

continue his favour with you, your Hus∣band
(my Lor) dand your posteritie, to your
everlasting comfort in Christ, Amen.
From Edinburgh the third day of De∣cember
1599.

