



IT is an opinion (right honourable and most vertuous Ladie) not so true, as commonly be∣leeued and holden of a great manie, that the doctrine, faith and re∣ligion which the Po∣pish Romanists professe and maintain, is the olde and ancient religion, ordeined of God, witnessed by the Prophets and Apostles, and practised of all the godly from time to time: and that the doctrine or religion now profes∣sed in England, is a new doctrine, which had his beginning but hereby. Which imagina∣tion or conceipt of theirs doeth by so much the rather please them, for that by some hundred of yeres last past, the true & syncere doctrine of the Gospel being suppressed, ba∣nished, and in a maner extinguished, the er∣rours, or rather the heresies of the later Church of Rome, haue euerie where both flowed and flourished. Wherby it is come to passe, that like as a true and naturall mother, that hath beene long absent from hir house

and familie, at the length turning home a∣gaine, is not knowen, no not of her owne children: euen so, the ancient and Apostoli∣call religion hath beene so long absent, and lacking to her Christian children, that nowe at her returne shee is almost a straunger to all, and in deed knowen but to a few. Hence commeth it, that although vnfitly applied, yet vsually it is sayde of Romish superstition and idolatrie, The old Religion, the old Religion: and of the Euangelical doctrine of Christ Ie∣sus, The newe Religion, the newe Religion. Not for that it is so in deede, but because it seemeth so vnto them, who haue so long ga∣ped vpon their golden God of Rome, that they haue cleane forgotten poore and simple Christ Iesus of Nazareth: Whereas if men would reade the Scriptures diligently, iudge indifferently, and speake vprightly, they should soone perceiue, that neither our reli∣gion is newe, as they falsely charge vs, nor theirs olde and auncient, as they vainly boast of. For in them we are taught the true, im∣mutable, and most ancient faith and religion of the Patriarches, Prophets, and holy Apo∣stles. As that therefore which concordeth with them can not be newe: so that which dissenteth from them can neither bee true nor olde. The Lorde by the Prophet Iere∣mie saith,Iere. 6.16. Stande in the wayes and beholde, aske for the old way, which is the good way, and walke therein, and ye shall finde rest for

your soules.Hiero. lib. 2. com. in Ier. Which place Saint Herome ex∣poundeth thus, Wee must cleaue vnto the Prophets, and diligently behold and aske for the olde and euerlasting wayes, which more significantly in Greeke are called , which is the good way conteyned in the Gospel: we must walke in that, which when it is found refresheth and purgeth the soules of the faithfull:Ad Pomp. cont. Epist. Stephan. To the same effect S. Cypri∣an sayth. Si ad diuina traditionis caput reuer∣tamur, cessat omnis error humanus, &c. If wee would returne vnto the heade of diuine tra∣dition, all humaine errour should cease, &c. If a water pipe (quoth hee) which before ran copiously and plenteously, doe vppon the sudden giue ouer, doe not men go vnto the fountaine, that there the reason of the defec∣tion or giuing ouer might bee knowen, &c. Euen so it behoueth the ministers of God at this day to doe, keeping the diuine precepts: that if in any poynt the truth be changed or shaken, we might returne vnto the originall of the Lorde, the Euangelicall and Apostoli∣call tradition, that then the reason of our action might arise, from whence the order and originall hath proceeded. Thus farre Cy∣prian. Excellently therefore sayth S. Igna∣tius, Antiquitas mea Iesus Christus.Ad Philad. lib. 4. de vir∣ginitat. Christ Ie∣sus is my antiquitie. And Ambrose also, We do rightfully condemne all those new things which Christ hath not taught: for Christ is the way vnto the faithfull: If Christ then

hath not taught that we teach, we iudge euen that also for detestable. Hereunto Cyprian in another place. If Christ only be to be heard, we ought not to regard what anie before vs hath thought meete to be done, but what Christ who is before all, hath first done: nei∣ther ought we to follow the custome of men but the truth of God. O that according to this rule we might be heard, our cause deci∣ded, and the quarell ended: then woulde it soone appeare, howe vnder the visard of an∣tiquitie, they haue hidden a new startvp su∣perstition: yea that their whole pretenced religion is nothing else, but a huge heape of hypocrisie, and a store basket of all Aposta∣cie. Then should it be seene, that this refor∣mation is not a declining from the auncient faith, nor a bringing in of a newe: but a re∣ducing againe of the olde, and Apostolicall faith or religion. For the better profe wher∣of (most christian Ladie) I haue in certaine of their chiefest holdes compared their as∣sertions with the censure of the Prophets, Apostles, and auncient Fathers: to the ende that the indifferent Reader might partlie iudge by these, what is to be thought of the rest? In publishing whereof I haue had spe∣ciall respect vnto the profite and commodi∣tie of the common and vulgar sort of peo∣ple: that they might haue, not onely at a small charge, in respect of the price, but also with litle losse of time in respect of reading,

whereby they might bee either instructed, if they were ignorant, or the better confirmed if they had some knowledge. And these my labours whatsoeuer they are, I am right well assured, shall be by many degrees more gra∣cious and acceptable vnto diuerse, for that they proceede and come foorth vnder your honourable name and protection. Most hum∣blie therefore I beseech your honour to ac∣cept the same in so good part, as with a good will it is presented vnto you. Whereof as I nothing doubt, so will I neuer cease to pray vnto the almightie, that you may long liue in this worlde to his glorie, and the benefite of his Church: and finally after this life, may for euer reigne with Christ Iesus in his immortall & euer∣lasting glorie, Amen. December the 15. 1588.

