



RIght worshipfull, albeit that the true knowledge of Christ cru∣cified, of all other, be the most worthie and excellent: & albeit that in him be the only and full matter of mans gloria∣tion: yet few there be who striue to know him as they should, and to make him the matter of their reioycing. For to speake nothing of the Gentiles, who count the preaching of Christ crucified to be foolishnesse, or of the Iewes who count it a stumbling blocke, 1. Cor. 1, 23. or of the Turkes, who will not acknowledge him to be their Redeemer: euen they who haue bene baptized in Christ, & professe outwardly his word, & true doctrine, if they remaine in nature, & be not preuēted by the spirit of adoption, whereby they may see their owne miserie, their sinnes, & the terrours of the wrath of God for sinne, in the meane time that they professe Christ, they in heart scorne the Crosse of Christ, his woundes, and his blood, they account the knowledge

thereof of litle value: yea, they will preferre to it the knowledge of any thing here beneath, and they will seeke the matter of their gloriatiō not in it, but either in themselues, or els into the creatures of God, which in themselues are but transitorious shadowes. The naturall man will neuer thinke, that he can finde greater things in Christ crucified, than he will finde, if he obtaine the obiect which most he desires, likes and longs for. The ambitious man will not thinke that he can get greater honour, than to be called the sonne of a King or Emperour: he will not refuse with Moses, to be called the sonne of Pharaoes daughter, that he may be called the sonne of God, Heb. 11.24. The sensuall man cannot thinke that he can find any greater pleasure, than in his sinfull lust, & he will neuer chuse, rather to suffer aduersitie with the people of God, than to enioy the pleasures of sinne. The couetous man can neuer thinke, that any greater happines can be, than here on earth to haue gold, siluer and treasures: he will neuer with Moses esteeme the rebuke of Christ greater riches, than the treasures of Egypt. Only that man whom God preuents by his Spirit, and calles effectually frō the kingdome of darknes to the kingdome of light, wil account duely of the Crosse of Christ, & will say with the Apostle, God forbid that I should reioyce, but in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ, Gal. 6.14. and, I decreed not to know any thing, saue Iesus Christ, & him crucified, 1. Cor. 2.2: that man will call it the supereminent knowledge of Iesus Christ, Philip. 3.8: & he only will make Christ crucified to be the matter of his gloriation: for he will see, that God in him, as in a store-house hath placed all treasures, & that in him dwells the fulnesse of the Godhead bodely, Col. 2.9: he will thirst to be woompled in the wounds of Iesus, and washed in the blood of Iesus: yea, that man will see, that God hath manifested in Christ our Sauiour, and in his death and resurrection his glorious proper∣ties more clearly, than in the worke of our creation, or any other of his workes whatsouer: (for he is called, the brightnesse of the glorie, & the engraued forme of the person of the Father, & the Image of the inuisible God, Heb. 1.3.) and that man will see, that there is nothing, which the soule of man inlakes, stands in

neede of, or can desire, but he will finde it in Christ. Wouldst thou see the glorious properties of God? consider first, his power: albeit in the worke of creation his power appeared to be incomprehensible & omnipotent, when by his word he formed all things of nothing, & called these things that are not, and made them to be yet in the worke of the Redemptiō he manifested greater power: for notwith∣standing Sathan, the power of darknesse, the sinnes of the Elect, which Iesus bare, death and the graue were against him, yet power∣fully he raised Iesus from death, Eph. 1.19: there is a great power: and whereas in the Creation he formed to Adam a spous out of his owne ribbe: in the Redemption, he formed the Church of God out of the blood of Christ: there he gaue life, in commanding that to be which was not: here he giues life, not by life, but by death, & by the death euen of his owne Sonne. Albeit in the worke of Creation great, and more than wonderfull doth his wisdome appeare, in ma∣king this glorious and beautifull fabricke, & in making all things, euen contraries, to agree in such an harmonie: yet in the worke of Redemption, God by finding out a way, which no creature, neither man nor Angell, could inuent, how that iustice and mercie could stand together, hath shewed greater wisdome: his wisdome is such, that the Angels admires, and desires to looke in it, 1. Pet. 1.22. Albeit great anger & wrath did the Lord vtter many times against sinners: as in the olde world by the Flood, and on Sodome & Go∣morrhe, by raining from heauen brimstone and fire, he destroyed man, woman, young, olde, rich and poore without exception: yet more clearely was his anger against sinne seene, when for the sinnes of the Elect he spared not his own wel beloued Son, on whō they were laid: but made his wrath so fearfully to pursue him, that he cried, My soule is very heauie, euē vnto the death, Marc. 14.34: and, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Matt. 27.46. And albeit great loue did the Lord shew toward men, & gaue many testimonies therof, in giuing them life, & breath, & all things, Act. 17.25, in making his sun to shine on them, his raine to fal on them, giuing them fruitfull seasons, & filling their hearts with food &

gladnesse, Act. 14.17: yet neuer such loue shewed he, as when he sent the Son of God to be the Sonne of man, that the sonnes of mē might be made the sonnes of God againe: and when he made him to die, that men might liue. Herein (sayes Ioh. 4.10) is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs, and sent his Sonne to be a reconciliation for our sinnes: here only is an incontrollable te∣stimonie of an undoubted loue: and if ye will duly consider all the rest of Gods glorious properties, ye shall finde them all most clearly manifested in the person of Iesus Christ. Now wouldst thou know that in him thou shalt find all things that the soule of man stands in neede of, & can require? What can the soule of man require? Desirest thou honour? If thou beleeuest in him, he shall grant thee that power & prerogatiue, that thou shalt be the Sonne of God, Ioh. 1.12. Desirest thou riches? He was made poore, that thou through his pouertie mightest be made rich, 2. Cor. 8.9: not with transito∣rie and corruptible riches, but with riches and treasures incorrup∣tible & permanent: desirest thou food, meat, drinke to thy soule? He is that bread of life, he is that water of life: desirest thou wis∣dome, sanctification and redemption? Christ is all these vnto thee, 1. Cor. 1.29: Ioh. 8.12: Desirest thou light? He is the light of the world, Ioh. 8.12. Desirest thou life? He is thy life, Col. 3.4: What euer he suffered, it was for thee: for by his stripes we are healed, Esai 53.5: He was burthened with shame, that he might redeeme thee from shame, and cloth thee with glory: he was taken and bound, to set thee at libertie, who was bound with Sathan and sinne: he was mocked, and was dumbe before the earthly Iudge, that thou whose mouth before was closed through the guilt of sinne before God, might haue boldnesse & peartnesse in thy prayers & supplications: he suffered-anguish and griefe, that thou mightst finde comfort & ioy▪ he dranke the gall, that thou mightst drinke of a sweet and ioy∣full cuppe: he was naked, that thou mightst be clothed: and if thou wilt goe through all the points of his suffering, and apply them to thy broken and casten downe soule, thou shalt finde, that euery one of them shall furnish comfort vnto thee: yea, if thou be a true pe∣nitent

sinner, & beleeuest in him, thou shalt find all these miracles to be wrought and performed in thy soule, which euer the Lord in the dayes of his humiliy wrought on the body of any: thou shalt finde life to thy dead soule, eyes to thy blind soule, eares to thy deafe soule, limbes to thy lame soule, a new tongue to thy dumbe soule, &c. Therefore, as we should take pleasure & delite in reading the whole parts of the Scripture (for it is all by diuine inspiration, & is pro∣fitable to teach, to cōuince, to correct, & to instruct in righteousnes, 2. Tim. 3.16) so chiefly, that part which cōtaines the historie of the passion & resurrection of Christ: for of all there is none more profi∣table, none more necessarie, none more easie to be vnderstood by the simple, none more easie to be kept in memorie, none more forcible to mooue the affections, either to admire the incomprehensible and infinite loue of God toward sinners, or the fiercenes of his wrath for sinne, or the seueritie of his iustice in seeking such exact satisfactiō, or to moue to detest & abhorre sin, which made the Sonne of God to be made so vnworthily alwayes handled, & at last to be so shame∣fully crucified, or to reioyce for these incomprehensible benefits that Christ hath acquired to vs, our effectuall calling frō the kingdome of darknes to his marueilous light, our iustification in pacifying the wrath of God, in satisfying for sinne, in absoluing vs from guilti∣nes, in dying that we might liue, in bringing peace & ioy to the con∣science, &c. our sanctificatiō, whereby we are repaired to his owne Image. Nothing serues more for the mortificatiō, nor when we con∣sider how Christ hang vpon the Crosse for sin, nothing will moue vs more effectually to cōforme our selues to him as an ensample in his humility▪ patience, obediēce, loue: & finally in offering our selues to him, as he offered himselfe for vs, nor when by faith we beholde Christ on the Crosse crucified for vs.
Now this history of the death & resurrectiō of Christ haue ma∣ny worthy men learnedly & cōfortably handled & exponed with great painfulnes, & no lesse cōmendatiō: amōgst the rest, that reue∣rent & faithful man of God, M. Robert Rollocke of blessed me∣mory for his learned & iudicious expositiō thereof, & for his mani∣fold

other graces which God vouchsafed on him, deserues with the first to be cōmēnded: for God in him, as in a vine ensample, gaue vs a shew of such qualities & cōditiōs, as are required to be in a Bishop of Iesus Christ, 1. Tim. 3. In him learning & godlines stroue toge∣ther, knowledge & consciēce, art & nature, a professiō & an answe∣rable conuersatiō: he was faithfull & painfull in his calling, & his calling did he decore with an holy & harmlesse life: for betweene these two there was such an harmony & cōsent, that in reading his writtings, any man might see the maner of his life: & in seeing his life, he might also therein read his writtings: for his life spake what his pen wrote & his person was a patterne of his writtē precepts: he was neuer idle, but euer doing the office of a Minister of Iesus: either did he read, meditate, pray, comfort, preach or write: no trauell did he refuse that he might glorifie God, who sent him, enlarge the king∣dome of Iesus Christ, & acquire miserable soules from misery to fe∣licity, from darknes to light, & from death to life, that so at last he might finish his course with ioy: that was his meat & his drink, the delite & pleasure of his soule. Great graces did the Lord bestow vpō him, excellēt knowledge, great humility, feruēt zeale, charitable in∣terpreting of all mēs doings, compassiō toward all sorts of sinners. Who in cōceiuing was more quick? in iudgmēt more solide? in me∣mory more stedfast & sure? in deliuery more pithy, in conuincing more powerful? who with learning had greater facility & easines in declaring his mind, & resoluing ye text of Scripture? greater clearnes in raising ye grounds of doctrine? greater power in applying, greater wisdome in furnishing cōsolation, & greater dexterity in loosing of things obscure & doubtsome? In one word we may be bold to say of him, that which Nazianzene spake of Athanasius, that his life was a good definition of a true Minister & preacher of the Gospell. But we need not to insist in praysing him, seeing so many: euen all that knew him by face, or heard him, doe praise him for the singu∣lare & excellēt vertues & graces, that God bestowed on him: yea, they who neuer knew him by face, but by his learned & iudicious writtings dwelling afarre off, haue highly commēded him, & the

posteritie whose profite so much hee regarded in his labours, wee doubt not, shall know & praise him, and we had rather be silent, than to speake too litle.
Now, Sir, because we thought, that these Lectures on this history of the passion & resurrectiō of Christ in it selfe: for the matter so mouing & alluring, would profite & edifie many, if not of the most learned, at least, of the simple sort: & that other Sermons that were deliuered by him, and set out by vs of before, were well liked of by many, & that sundry hearing that they were in hands, longed to see them come to light, we haue takē some paines in reuising & corre∣cting them, not only for the loue & duty that we ought to that faith∣full & reuerend Author of them, who was our master: but also that with the greater liking & profite they might be read by al them that desire to be edified. And what our paines herein hath bene, few can well iudge, but those who haue bene acquainted with such cases: we haue endeuoured to giue the true meaning of the Author clearly, to make his methode plaine: we haue omitted many superfluous repe∣titions: we filled out vnperfect sentēces: we cleared things obscure: we rectified the sentēces which were inuerted: we endeuoured so far as was possible, to giue out his owne phrase, stile and matter. As for the matter, this we may boldly affirme, that it is fully set down, and that it is as good at least, if it be not better than his Latine Commentarie set foorth by himselfe: yea, we doubt nothing, but the matter shall satisfie all men, who craue edification: but as for the phrase & stile, we dare not say, that it will be found so absolute and exact in all thinges, as if it had beene finished by himselfe, before he ended his course, neither as we would wish, and other men woulde require: And what maruell? seeing neither did hee deliuer them of purpose to bee printed, neither did hee euer see them thereafter, neither were they receiued by his Schollers vpon that purpose: but onely for the hel∣ping of their owne memorie: yea, and at the first time after, that vpon your request, Sir, wee tooke paines vpon them,

we foūd such hardnes & imperfections, & that his own phrase & elegancy was not obserued, that we feared to hazard the name and credite of the learned & iudicious Author, who deserued so well of vs, yea, of the whole Church of God, & had left off the worke as vn∣perfect, if the earnest request of you, & of some other of the learned, (whose iudgmēts are to be reuerēced) had not encouraged vs therto. Yet we trust, that the stile shal not be much blamed, except by those, who beeing delicate eared, regardes language more thā matter: for there is here an easy methode, with a familiar stile condescēding to the capacity of the meanest, & answerable to the matter entreated, to wit, the crosse of Christ, which refuses to be decored with humane eloquēce, that ye matter be not obscured by the stile, but may appeare aboue it, as oft times M. Rollocke himselfe was wont to speake. Yea albeit it may be, that the stile in some few of the first Sermons be somewhat hard and vnpleasant, which we might easily haue amended, if we had not thought it vnmeete to haue set out his matter in our words: yet if any will read forward: especial∣ly, from that part where the Harmony of all the Euangelists is taken in, & all the foure are in such sort conferred together, that no cir∣cumstāce of the history of Christs death & resurrection is omitted, he shall euer find more & more contētment in all things. And as we haue taken paines for the profite & edificatiō of many: so we doubt not, but the successe & euent shal answere to our desire. For to speake nothing of the history it selfe, which is so plesāt, sweet, plaine, easy & forcible to moue all the affections of the soule: here ye will find, how euery clause & sentēce of euery one of the Euāgelists are linked together, & depend one vpon another; according to the order of na∣ture: here ye will see a plaine and an easy methode: here ye will see how clearly the doctrine resultes off the doctrine laid down: here ye will see fit applications to these times: & here ye wil see, when occa∣sion offers, how the enemies of the trueth of God, are pithily con∣uinced and confuted.
And now, if we would presume to dedicate this worke & our la∣bours therein to any other than to you, Sir, whose deseruings haue bin so great, both towards the Author himselfe, & vs also, we might

be iustly blamed, and could haue no shew of reasonable excuse: for first, who knew M. Robert Rollocke, but they also knew what en∣tire affectiō you caried towards him, & how carefull you were in all things to please him: euen frō the time that first your acquaintance began, till the time that he finished his course: none loued him more tēderly, none vsed him more familiarly, none delited more to con∣ferre with him priuately, & to heare his preachings publikely, none shewed greater gratitude towards him: for it was knowne by many, that it would haue bene your pleasure, if from your hand he would haue receiued a testimony of your loue, as a fruite of your faith wrought by his Ministerie: yea, he himselfe did acknowledge, that none was to be cōpared with you for gratitude & goodwill towards him: but chiefly, you declared your loue towards him▪ whē in his last disease you would haue him to come to your house, where you enter∣tained him (& for his cause many that came to visite him) liberal∣ly & honourably to his last breath, without any regarde of expēses, euen as a louing sonne entertaineth his father. Next, seeing the wil of the Testator should be sacred & inviolable: & in his testamēt he ordained, that whatsoeuer of his works should see the light thereaf∣ter, should be dedicate to you, with these solemne words, expresly dy∣ted by himselfe, GVLIELMO SCOTO in perpetuum testimoniū amicitiae nostrae dedico, cōsecróque (that where euer his works were read, your kindnes & affectiō towards him might be knowne, & your memoriall might endure to the posterity) who can iustly be offended, that this worke be dedicate vnto you? who can enuie your praise herein? thirdly, if there were no more, this one cause may be more than sufficiēt, to make this worke to come out vnder your pa∣tronage & protectiō, that you haue bene the only instrumēt to make it to see the light: for through your great care, earnest endeuoure & large expēses these Lectures were collected & gathered from all the partes of the Countrey, East, West, South, North, how far distant that euer they were, from the hands of his schollers, who wrote them from his mouth: by your dealing & procurement they were written ouer and ouer againe, reuised, corrected, & now made apt for the

Printing: so that by your means they now go abroad in the hands of mē, we trust, to the cōfort of many: lastly, we for our own parts offer our trauels in this worke vnto your patronage, as a monument, that we acknowledge our selues to be more obliged vnto you, thā we can requite: & of minds desirous not to be foūd vnthākfull for the vn∣deserued fauour you shewed to vs particularly: to speake nothing of the testimonies of your loue, which you shewed many wayes towards them whō the Lord hath set in his seruice, both far & near, which they thēselues doe acknowledge & professe. We offer therefore these Lectures, & our labours therein, vnto your patronage & protectiō, not only as a testimony of the Authors great liking and gratitude toward you, but also as a monumēt of our thākfulnes for your kind∣nes shewed vnto vs: finally, Sir, as God hath preuented you many wayes with his blessings, & hath made you sēsible of his loue, & hath giuen you an honorable accoūt, & estate in this world: so continue in the honouring of God, & doing good vnto his Saints, for his sake, & the Lord shall performe the fruite of his promises in you, which his Saints find by experience, his mercy shall neuer leaue you, vntill the time that he accomplish the worke he hath begun, & he crowne his grace with glory. Now, the God of all grace & peace, who is able to doe all things exceeding aboundantly, aboue all that we can aske or thinke, grant to you, Sir, according to the riches of his mercy, a long, happy & peaceable life here, to the comfort of his Church & Com∣monwelth, & that you may abound in euery word & worke, & that you may fight constantly the good fight of faith here on earth, that whē your course is finished, ye may be assured to receiue that crowne of glory in the heauens, which Iesus hath acquired to them that loue him: To whose gracious protection we recommend you in body and soule, with all the actions you enterprise according to his will, for now and euer, AMEN.

