


I May seeme slow in aunswering your letters (good Maister Iohnston) for that they were long in comming to my hands; I vnderstoode by them, to my great ioy, that you are safely arri∣ued in your owne countrie: and haue found your Churches there in ablesscd and peaceable state, wherein, I desire in heart, they may long continue. And why may I not confidently hope that this my desire shall be fulfilled? specially seeing they were from the begin∣ning The blessing of God on the Churches of Scotland. so happily, soundly, and excellently founded by those faithfull and worthie seruants of God, those skilfull mai∣ster-builders which begun the worke: and they whose∣conded them, brought no stubble or hay, but siluer, gold, and precious stones to the building: Nay which is more, the Lord himselfe hauing so clearely and apparantly fa∣uoured, and furthered their holy labours, that whosoeuer haue stumbled at this building, haue not onely missed and failed of their purpose, but haue been (as it were) by the strong, and powerfull hande of God, scattered and throne out into vtter darkenes. To these we may adde that sin∣gular,

and most precious gift of God, which the same good God hath bestowed vpon you, I meane your worthie King, Maister Bezas iudgement, and commen∣dation of the Kings Maie∣stie in the happie go∣uernment of the Churches of Scotland. whom he hath likewise miraculously preserued from ma∣ny and great perils, who hath ioyned to his singular, and admirable care, and watchfulnes, in defending the Gos∣pell, and preseruing the puritie, and vnspotted sinceritie of this Church, so great and exact knowledge of Chri∣stian religion from the very grounds and principles thereof, that the Lord it seemes hath made his Maiestie both a Prince and preacher to his people: so that your Our blessed King may in veritie, be well accounted a second Salo∣mon, who was both King and preacher. Realme of Scotland is now become of all other most hap∣pie, and may iustly hope for increase of tranquillitie and felicitie, if onely (as we are perswaded she will) she can discerne, and thankfully acknowledge the great blessing she inioyeth; and as she hath begun, so continue to direct them all, to the right scope and end, which is to his glorie, who is the father and fountaine of all goodnes.
And I assure you, I reioyce from my heart, that occa∣sion was giuen me to congratulate by these my letters your happie condition with the rest of my reuerend brethren, both by your countrie man Maister Dauid Droman, a man both godly, and well learned, whose presence though but for a few dayes, was most acceptable to vs here, who is now vpon his returne to you with these letters; as likewise in that I chaunced of late to meete with a great treasure, which I know not by what mishap being frequent in o∣ther mens hands, hath hitherto missed my fingers. For why should not I esteeme as a treasure, and that most pre∣cious, the commentaries of my honorable brother Maister Rollocke, vpon the epistle to the Romans and Ephe∣sians, Maister Beza commendeth Maister Rol∣lockes workes. both of them being of speciall note among the wri∣tings Apostolicall? for so I iudge of them, and I pray you take it to be spoken without all flatterie or partialitie, that

I neuer read, or met with any thing in this kinde of in∣terpretation more pithilie, elegantly, and iudiciously written: so as I could not containe my selfe, but must needes giue thankes, as I ought, vnto God, for this so ne∣cessarie, and so profitable a worke, and reioyce that both you and the whole Church enioy so great a benefit; desi∣ring the Lord to increase with new gifts, and preserue in saftie this excellent instrument, especially in these times wherein thorow the scarcitie of skilfull workemen which labour in the Lords vineyard, and by the decease of those well exercised and experienced souldiers, and worthie Christians, Sathan and his companions begin againe to triumph ouer the truth.
Concerning the estate of our Church and schoole, we yet continue, and proceede in our course, by the migh∣tie hand of our God and Sauiour, protecting vs, which is admirable to our very enemies, being deliuered from the iawe of death. But in truth, for ought we see, it is like to last but one yeare, our estate depending on those acts which shall bee concluded in the Or meeting at Roane. Or the Prince our neigh∣bour. diet of Roane betweene the French King, and our neighbour Duke, either con∣cerning peace or warre, wherein we hope to be compre∣hended vpon equall condition. In this fraile, and vn∣certaine estate that is our principall consolation, that we are sure this slender and twined threed, whereupon we rest, is sustained by the hand of our good God, who will not suffer that to be falsified which we haue learned of the Apostle, that all things worke together for the Rom. 8. good of those that loue him. In the meane while I beseech you brethren continue your remembrance of vs in your daily prayers. I for my part, for some moneths, though I be not much pained with any Feuer, Gout, Stone, or any of those sharpe diseases which be the vsuall

companions of old age, yet I feele my selfe so infeebled and weakned, that I am constrained in a manner to giue o∣uer both my publike duties, to keepe house and home, loo∣king euery day for that ioyfull and happie dissolution whereunto age it selfe calleth me, being now seuentie eight yeares old. And herein I desire your prayer with the rest of my brethren, by name of my reuerend brother Maister Meluin, and Maister Peter Iunius, whom (vnlesse memorie faile me) Maister Scringer of blessed memorie, was wont to call his cosen: vnto whom, remem∣bring withall my hartie commendations, I desire you to communicate this my letter, desiring the Lord (my deare, and louing brother) to preserue your whole Church there with his mightie, and blessed hand, against all both for∣ren, and domesticall dangers. Fare ye well from Geneua the Calends of Nouemb. after our olde computation. CIC. IC. XCVI.

