


HAVING cast mine eyes on the frame of this World, & somwhat par∣ticularly considered the works which are wrought vnder the Sunne; I beheld Man, placed as the top and chiefe of the Creatures, and I saw in Man the sparks of an excellent soule, which might seeme to iustifie this his preeminence: but with∣all hauing searched the depth and bredth of the life of Man, to see what great actions this

Eminent thing produced, or what extraordinarie happines he enioyeth sutable to his ex∣cellence; I finde generally, that this Head of the World doth vsually spend himselfe in base works of Vanitie, Labour, and Wickednesse; and is himselfe spent away by Miserie, Sicknes and Death. His actions are ei∣ther no actions at all, but idle, foolish, and superfluous recrea∣tions; or meere labours for his owne body, that hee may bee to morrow, not better, but the same that he was to day; or that he may better his estate by ma∣king himselfe worse, euen by the losse or diminution of his owne goodnesse; and yet at last, this estate which hee hath bought with himselfe, will

turne him out most vnkindly and vnthankfully from posses∣sing it. And as for Mans happinesse, most commonly he sends it before him, by propo∣sing high and remote obiects to his desires; which either he neuer ouertakes, or if he doe, it doth often vanish into No∣thing, as being made of meere Imagination; or if it will needs seeme something being attay∣ned, yet it is at last digested in∣to perfect Nothing, when that and the Owner thereof, are both deuoured by the wide mouth of Death, that eates vp all the thoughts and workes of perishing Mankind. But be∣fore Man arriues to this point of dissolution, by which hee comes to bee rid of his vaine

happinesse; miserie, sicknesse, and mutuall vexation (Man to Man being a continuall Hangman and Tormentor) by smarting and still-returning stripes, most often cut his little happinesse to lesser pieces, and ouercome the slight and slen∣der sweetnesse thereof, with the inter-mingled gall of so∣lide and substantiall griefe.
Now this being the state of Things, what is all that we see, and to what purpose is it? Are wee here met together to play the Wretches and Fooles? Is this our appointed taske to la∣bour for Vanitie? and to be i∣maginarily pleased, and really tormented? or to take great care and paynes to come to No∣thing? Is this the fruit of this

huge masse of Creatures, and of glorious Man, the princi∣pall of them? Surely, if wee should lye downe in this opi∣nion, we might also lye downe in amazement, wondring what we make here, and why Man was created vnto so great fol∣ly and misery. We might right∣ly cry out, that in regard of this World, the day of Death is bet∣ter then the day of Birth, and that not to bee at all, is better then them both. But here wee may not rest, for then all the Creatures, which we see, would rise vp against vs like so many Aduersaries, and Obiections. For it were a great iniurie to the Creator, to see and acknow ledge (which acknowledgment is extorted euen from meere

naturall men) a great wise∣dome in the Matter and Forme of the Creatures, and not to acknowledge a great wisedome likewise in the End of the Creatures; that he which made euery thing so orderly in his parts, should make a confusion in the whole; and that he who hath made so excellent things for Man, should make Man for basenesse, vanitie, and mi∣serie. Therefore I thought it most likely and safe, to beleeue that the Creator had not fay∣led in his Creation, but that the Creature had erred from the course and scope of his Creati∣on, and that Man by some fault of his owne, was gone out of the way, both in regard of im∣ployment and happines; which

two, in all probabilitie, should be found in one path, it being most agreeable to wisedome, that a Creature should then be in the best and happyest case, when hee doth the worke ap∣pointed him by his Creator. Then also it seemed necessarie to inquire what was that right way, from which Man had strayed; euen to search what was the true end of Mans acti∣ons, and the true scope of his desires; his duetie and his fe∣licitie.
What I haue met with, in this search, I haue here disco∣uered; and because there are three sorts of men, which espe∣cially doe erre in the matter of happinesse, for these especially haue I fitted the parts of this

Discourse. One sort of these are they, That come blinde in∣to the world, and so goe out, neither knowing, nor caring, nor asking, what they haue to doe here, nor what is chiefly good for them while they bee here, nor whether there be any other place for them when they depart hence. These for the most part doe what they see done, or what their owne lusts will haue done, and so hauing spent their time according to Custome and Concupiscence, they liue to no purpose, and die to no end, for ought they know. A second sort is of them, That thinke there is a happinesse, and a way to it; and which is more, they thinke they haue it; yet all the while

they goe without it, euen for this reason, because they thinke they haue it. For, not hauing it, by their beliefe that they haue it, they cease from seeking, and so from finding of that which may only be found by seeking. A third sort is, of such as thinke it enough to come with∣in the reach of happinesse, but care not much to fasten it or to increase it, but please them∣selues in looking on it, or onely in a little taste of it. It is good to be happy, they thinke, but it is not good to be too happy, and therefore they will gladly traf∣ficke some superstuous happi nesse, for a little folly and va∣nitie. To all these (which are almost all) are the chiefe parts of this Treatise directed, as

Nayles to driue out Nayles, e∣uen rules of Light and Blisse, to driue out the vsuall and re∣ceiued rules of darknesse and miserie; and to stand fast in their roome. Of these and the like directions let wretched and ignorant mankinde lay hold, as vpon Boords & Masts in this great shipwracke of Nature. Let them by such helps lift vp their heads aboue the element of Basenesse and Vanitie, wherein the sonnes of corrupted and degenerate Nature, like Fishes doe swim and liue, and die. And let them mount vp into that higher Region, wherein one∣ly true and very Men are to bee found, the rest being but the resemblances of Men,

and in substance the true Companions of brute and vnreasonable Creatures.

