



THere are onely two things that are the obiects both of Contemplation and of Admiration, that is, the Creator, and the creature: amongst the creatures onely two, An∣gels and men; in man onely two parts; the bodie and soule; in the soule, one∣ly two faculties, the mind and the will; in the minde, two things onely; God and his Word: the Word of God is two-fold;

internall and externall: the exter∣nall word is two-fold; spoken and writ∣ten: the written word hath two parts; the old, and new Testament; the old containeth two, Moses and the Pro∣phets; and Moses speaketh of these two we formerly mentioned, which onely are the obiects of our contemplations; euen the Creator, and the creature: the Creator wee know via negationis, emi∣nentiae, & causalitatis; but we know the creatures, if they be sensible, Cognitione sensitiua; if not, intellectiua: but proper∣ly in this life wee know not God, in re∣gard of his Essence, (for how shall wee know him, of whom there can not be framed either Species intelligibiles or sensibiles, seeing that knowledge is per species?) yet in part we know him, in re∣gard wee haue some knowledge of his personall and essentiall properties, of his effects and operations.
Which knowledge is but small, be∣cause our finite science cannot compre∣hend

that infinite Essence. For if a shell cannot contain the Sea, which is a crea∣ture; much lesse can our soules him, that is our Creator. The cause then why the Owle can not behold the Sunne, is in the eies of the Owle, not in the Sunne: so, that we cannot know God perfectly, is not in God, who is most perfect, but in vs that are imperfect; & quidquid re∣cipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis, non ad modum recepti. Then our knowledge is so weake, that wee neither know the first effector, whose Essence is most ex∣cellent; neither his first effect (I meane the first matter) whose existence is most impotent.
Yet a more eminent knowledge of our Maker haue wee than the Pagans, who only know him by his works, but we by his words: they by contempla∣tion; we by inspiration: they by sens∣lesse Images, we by his essentiall Image: they by painted and carued stones; we by that stone which the builders did re∣fuse,

which became the head of the cor∣ner, which was cut out of the moun∣taine without hands, which brake all their Images to powder, vpon which are seuen eies, euen that tried and pre∣cious stone, that was laid in Sion: by him (I say) in whom the God-head dwels bodily, in whom are hid al the treasures of wisedome and knowledge, haue we the knowledge of our Creator; with∣out whom, our science is but igno∣rance, and our meditations, vexations.
This is that internal word, , by whom, and by whose spirit was spo∣ken and written this externall word contained in the Scripture,  in the which word, the Creator and the creature is only to be knowne, not only in all, but in euery part thereof, no lesse than the soule is all, in all the body, and all in euery part of the same: so is know∣ledge in this word. Now this externall word differeth from Christ the internal word of the Father, as in vs the word,

which is in our mind, doth differ from that, which is in our mouth and books: our internall speech and reason, is ge∣nerated in the soule, and of the soule, and is coetaneall with the soule: so is Christ begotten in the Father, and of the Father, and is coeternall with the Father; but the word that is in our mouth and books, is accidental, and the effect of our internall word; so is that word, which is in the Scripture, and in the mouth of Christs seruants acciden∣tall, and the effect of Christ the inter∣nall word of the Father; who is both ratio & oratio Patris, for  is both. Our soules, cognitione directa, doe vnder∣stand many things that are without the soule, but cognitione reflexa, she vnder∣standeth her selfe, and then, idem est in∣telligens & id quod intelligitur; so God doth know all his creatures, which are but his effects: but in vnderstanding himselfe from all eternitie, he doth be∣get that knowledge of himselfe, and in

himselfe, which is himselfe, euen Christ, his owne wisedome and knowledge.
Yet there is great relation betweene Christ, Gods internall Word, and the Scripture, his externall word, for as none knoweth the Father but by the Sonne, his word internall; so none knoweth the Father & the Son, but by the Scripture, his Word externall. As the internall word was, Principium essendi, the be∣ginning of the creatures; so the exter∣nall is Principium cognoscendi, the be∣ginning of knowledge. As nothing did exist before the word internall, so no∣thing was spoken before the word ex∣ternall. As by the internall Word the world was created: so by the externall word the world is instructed. As that word was cōceiued of the holy Ghost: so this word was inspired by the holy Ghost. As that word was persecuted by the Iewes, and crucified by the Roman Pilate: so this word hath beene falsified by the Iewes, and wounded by the Ro∣man

Prelate. As it was held vnlawful for the people to cōuerse with that Word: so it was held vnlawfull, for the Lay people to conuerse with this word. As the Iewes did more regard their tradi∣tions than that word; so the Romans doe more regard their vnwritten lies, than this Word. As that Word was bu∣ried in a garden, and kept sure from his Disciples: so was this word buried in an vnknowne tongue, and kept close from Christians: & as this word, in despite of the Iewes, was restored to life; so this word, in dispite of the Popes, is brought forth againe to light.
This is that word, the Author, obiect, subiect, end, and ground whereof, is God, for verity admirable; for antiquity venerable; for sanctity incomparable; for vtility inestimable: here is light for the blind, life for the dead, food for the hungry, drinke for the thirsty: here is the tree of life, the fountaines of liuing wa∣ters, Manna the food of Angels, pearles

and other rich Iewels; here is a banquet of many dishes; an Apothecaries shop with many medicines; a sweet garden of many flowres; an Armour-house with many weapons; here is salt to season, milke to strengthen, wine to comfort, and hony to sweeten; here the cold may be warmed, the weary refreshed, the na∣ked clothed, and the filthy clensed. If thou desirest light and perfection, here is Vrim and Thummim; if the sight of thy fins, here is the golden candlesticke; if thou wilt wash thy hands and feete, here is the brazen lauer; wilt thou bee purged from thy leprosie? here is the ri∣uer Iordan; wilt thou floorish like a Bay tree? thou must be planted by this riuer; wilt thou bring forth much fruite? thou must be sowne with this seed; wilt thou sacrifice thy sins to God? thou must kill them with this sword; wilt thou go to the kingdome of heauen? this is the on∣ly way; here is the firy pillar and the

cloud to conduct thee to Canaan; and here is the Star that will leade thee to find out the Son of righteousn, Iesus Christ that bright morning Starre, with whom we shall shine in eternity of glo∣ry, as Stars in the firmament.
In this word then must we conuerse both day and night, not in curious searching, and prodigious speculation; but in serious weeping, and religious a∣doration; neither must our minds be op∣pressed with terrestriall and infernal oc∣cupations: but they must be filled with celestiall and supernall meditations. Therfore if we will profit here, we must cast off all carnall affection, that wee may receiue for our weary soules eter∣nall refection: for if no beast could touch the mountaine, and heare Gods Law: why should beastly minds touch the Bible, and read Gods Law? And in searching this Word, let vs not in it search for riches and honour to our

selues, which is to seek for dirt amongst Iewels, and poyson amongst medica∣ments, to ouerthrow ourselues: but let vs search for him, who only is sufficient to content our soules within our bodies, as hee was the only efficient to present our soules into our bodies. Therfore we conclude with Augustine, Scriptura & creatura ad hoc sunt, vt ipse quaeratur, ipse diligatur, & qui ipsam creauit, & qui illam inspirauit.
The internall and eternall generati∣on of the word, was not knowne to the Gentiles: but was obscured with an ob∣scure fable of Minerua, begotten of Iu∣piters braine, by the which also they did signifie learned notions conceaued in the mind, & expressed by word or writ.
Then, to be short (right Honourable) heere I doe offer to your tuition and fruition my Minerua, not begotten of my braine, but in my braine; neither is she armed with a helmet, aegis, and a

speare to terrifie Momus; and therefore the more desirous shee is to shelter her self vnder the shaddow of your Honors patronage, being perswaded that you are both a Patrone & a patterne of lear∣ning, the fruits whereof haue not only refreshed the hearts and eares of great Brittaine: but with Dedalean wings they haue bin transported beyond the Ocean; so that Rhodanus, Betis, and Rhenus, haue seasoned their siluer streames with the delicious taste of your learned fruits. Then what remaines,
quam vt ocior Icaro
Visas gementis littora Bosphori,
Sirtesque Getulas canorus,
Ales Hypereborosque campos?
Moreouer, your Honor being a Father and Patrone of iustice, if any wrong be offered to her by Momus, she may bold∣ly fly to the Chancery for succor: there∣fore, I hope, that as your Honor hath permitted your glorious titles to grace her Frontispice; so you wil not refuse to

beautifie her with your gracious aspect and respect. That God, which hath ex∣alted you to so great dignities in this world, preserue your body and soule, and crowne you in the World to come with blessed Immortality.

