



IT is the custome of most, to im∣pose a patronage of their errours upon some eminent person. But it shall bee my ambition in this my Dedication to manifest my observancie. Others make their choice of potent men, thereby to shun the darts of envy. It shall bee my glory to be thought worthy of invidency; whose ignorance is not so great but well

knowes that ever some will bite in secret; & scourge these errours of my youth with pri∣vate reproaches. But such malignant tongues I will counterpoise with the winde; and set as lightly by as they are vaine. And although I am confidently perswaded that the covert of your wings bee sufficiently able to shelter my faults; yet had I rather to expresse my du∣tie towards you in these naked infirmities, whose goodnesse truely knowes how Aus litera∣tum ignoscere Vegetius in Prolog. to pardon the bold adventures of learning. I present you therefore with ATHENS, whose deplorable raggednesse my papers well re∣semble▪ which may challenge this excuse, that they assimulate themselues to the Trea∣tise in them contained. Which of all men, I my selfe am conscious most unfitly to haue handled. That Citie once the Cic. Epist▪ nurse of rea∣son; Patercul. in ne . . which flourisht in eloquence, & braue atchieuements more then all Greece, could not, unlesse in her miserable ruines, haue without her disgrace beene spoken of by me. That ATHENS whence the learned Fathers of the Church suckt rare literature, Basil his

eloquence, Nazianzen his strength, & others their flowing Oratory. That ATHENS which who had not seene is by Apud D∣caearchum  Lysippus accoun∣ted a block. Accept, Honoured Sir, these Re∣liques of that famous Vniversitie, though by me offered, as Devotion paid to Antiquitie, by you well esteemed of, though among most of these our daies accounted durt; whose labour it is to seek new fashions, and like nought but what may be accounted no∣velty. Resembling the brute, of which Cice∣ro. Ad id solum quod adest, quod{que} praesens est se accommodat, paulum admodum sentiens praeteri∣tum, &c. never caring for what is past. But you weigh well the excellency of talking with those Champians of Learning, hun∣dreds of yeares since gathered to their former dust. By whose pensils wee see drawne the liuely images of deceased Monarchs, the formes of goverment, and very liues of states. Out of which patternes, if you please to deeme the least part of this to haue beene ta∣ken, it shall heap to my ioy that the follow∣ing Tract will not seeme a spurious and de∣generate▪

ofspring. Vpon presumption of which I feare not, as the Eagles doe their young, to expose my brood to the rayes of the open Sunne. Thus with continuall wishes for addition to your happinesse, I take leaue, From my Study in Merton College Iun. 9. 1637.

