


WHen I had finished my last sommers worke of reui∣sing, and correcting Ma∣ster Rollockes readings on the Colossians, I was in∣wardlie much affected with the holy spirit of the man, which I found as in that, so in the rest of his workes. Then my heart desired that as forraine Churches greatly reioyce in him, and blesse God for him; so the Churches of England and Scot∣land, might to their greater ioy heare him speake yet more vnto them in their owne natiue lan∣guage.
This is the cause (right worshipfull) that moo∣ued me the winter past, to gaine some houres from mine ordinarie labours, to giue this little

booke a new coate, that it might be knowne also in all this Iland, where it was first conceiued and borne.
It hath the protection of our most mightie King, for saftie and free passage into other parts of the world, where it hath been intertained with kinde acceptation: and so now, no doubt, it shall be no lesse in both these kingdomes, when as all true hearted subiects shall see, with what christian affection our most noble King affected this faith∣full seruant of Iesus Christ, and his holy workes. Now blessed bee God for being thus mindfull of vs; and for annoynting his sacred breast with such a measure of the spirit of iudgement, as an 2. Sam. 19. 27. Phil. 19. 10. Esa. 11. 3. 4. Angel of God, to discerne the things that differ, and so to respect the meeke ones of the earth, to the vnspeakable ioy of the good, and terror of the wicked.
Behold now, praise the Lord with vs, and let vs magnifie his name together, for the Lord hath done great things for vs: the Lord hath so set the wheeles of his admirable prouidence, and so car∣ried his blessed hand this yeare past in all his pro∣ceedings round about vs, and so touched the hearts 1. Sam. 10. 26. of all this kingdome, as hauing a purpose to ac∣complish a great worke in the building of his Church, and in his good time to lift vp such strokes as shall destroy for euer, euery enemie that doth euill to the sanctuarie. Psal. 74. 3.
The Lords compassions faile not: O Lord with∣draw Psal. 85. 3. 4. thine anger, and turne backe the fiercenes of thy wrath: Turne vs O God of our saluation, turne thou vs Lam. 5. 21. vnto thee that wee may bee turned, and cause thy face

to shine vpon vs, that we may be saued. Cease not to pray for vs, that we may not returne to our olde securitie and vnthankfulnes any more, but that wee may attend what the Lord saith, for now he begins to speake peace vnto his people, and vnto his Saints, crying in their doores euen as it Prou. 1. Psal. 85. 8. were in the open streetes, that they returne not againe to folly.
Now we see that the counsell of the Lord shall stand for euer, and that the thoughts of his heart shall continue throughout all ages: for he hath broken the counsels of the wicked, who haue euer sought to be possest of Gods habitations: but the Lord shall make them as stubble before the wind, the Lord will persecute them with his tempest, and make them afraid with his storme. O Lord fill their Psal. 83. 16. faces with shame, that they may seeke thy name. Finally, the Lord hath made our corners full and abound∣ing with diuers forts of blessings: hee hath made Psal. 144. 13. the barres of our gates strong, and hath setled peace in our borders: he hath stablished his Gos∣pell and holy couenant with vs: he hath taught vs to obserue his iudgements, and his wonderfull ad∣ministrations both of his iustice and mercie: he Psal. 147. 13. hath not dealt so with any Nation round about vs. Wherefore, O praise the Lord with vs: let England and Scotland now with one heart, as with one mouth praise God in all the assemblies: Psal. 6. 8. 26. O praise the Lord ye that are of the fountaine of Israel, praiseye the Lord.
To returne to our purpose, as touching this sweete treatise in hand, I say no more but this, (I trust the reader shall finde my words true) that so

many common places of diuinity as be here briefe∣ly couched, as branches appertaining to this one head, the religious and wise (I hope) shall finde them as iudicially, comfortably, and compendi∣ously set downe and knit together, as any one thing of this kinde as yet extant in the English tongue.
Next, as for the argument of this booke, our ef∣fectuall calling is one principall linke of the gol∣den chaine of the causes of our saluation. And it is the very first (in the execution of Gods eternall decree of our election) which manifesteth the e∣uerlasting loue of God in Iesus Christ vnto the heart of euery beleeuer: that almightie God should loue him being his enemie, seeke him, and finde him, when he wandered in the maze and vanitie of his owne minde, quicken him when hee lay dead in sinne, loose him when he lay fast bound in the bonds of death, inlighten him when he sate in extreame darkenes: giuing him the spirit of grace, and of faith by the Gospell, to attend his holy cal∣ling, and in time to reioyce with an exceeding ioy Rom. 5. 2. 3. therein.
Lastly for the translation, albeit I haue not fol∣lowed the authors words, yet haue I endeuoured faithfully to deliuer his meaning, in the plainest forme, and in words most in vse among the peo∣ple. Horat. art. non verbum verbo curabis redde∣re fidus inter∣pres. The Lord giue it a blessing, wheresoeuer it shall rest, among Gods elect of both these king∣domes.
Now (right Worshipfull Maister Scot) I come vnto yourselfe: your most christian and holy loue in these cold and euill times, as vnto all the Saint,

so specially to this good seruant of Christ, like as it comforted him greatly in his latter dayes: so as∣suredly it shall much refresh your owne heart, not onely all your life, but also much more (I doubt not) in the very houre of death.
There be three infallible notes knit together in one Scripture, to iustifie our pretious faith vnto our owne hearts, that we may be truely perswaded we are possest of that faith which shall iustifie vs before God: loue to the brethren, hospitalitie of loue, and christian sympathie to the Saints in their 1. 2. afflictions. Loue to the holy members of Christ, 3. is often commaunded and commended in Ioseph, in Moses, in Nehemias, in Daniel, in Dauid, who being aduanced to great dignities, yet esteemed they nothing more then the good of the Church, and to become seruiceable (as it were) by all meanes to the Saints. To loue the seruants of Christ, and to be beloued of Rom. 15. 31. Philip. 1. 9. them, it is (as Saint Iohn saith) an infallible argument that God hath taken vs by the hand, loosened our 1. Iohn. 3. 8. bands, and translated vs from death to life, and from 1. Pet. 2. 9. darknes into the glorious light of God. All that talke of Charitie, doe not loue the Saints, that is, the liuing members of Christ on earth. We may discerne our loue to be sound by these notes. First, it is a flame which comes downe from God into our Rom. 5. 5. Luk. 7. 47. hearts, kindling (as it were) within vs, and giuing vs no rest, till we performe duties to the Saints. And this is that which the Apostle meaneth, when he willeth vs to Heb. 10. 24. stirre vp one another vnto a paro∣xysme of loue. Secondly, hence it comes to passe, that loue to the Saints, being neuer colde, is neuer

idle in well doing, and therefore proceedes the second note which the same Apostle calles Heb. 6. 10. labour . Psalm. 16. 4, 5. of loue: for that this loue trauailes by all meanes possible, to doe good to the members of Christ. Thirdly, next, this loue is sincere Rom. 12. 9. voide of all dis∣simulation. Fourthly and lastly, it is Hebr. 13. 1. Act 2. 42▪ 46. constant, con∣suming, as a fire, all offences, Phil. 1. 9. 10. and cannot bee quenched.
The second marke, in the same Scripture, of our most holy faith, is Hebr. 13. 2. hospitalitie of loue (as the Syriack translation hath it) not of lucre. The Lord gaue often Rom. 12. 10. 11 1. Pet. 4 9. 1. Tim. 3. 2. 15. 20. charge by his Apostles concerning this, foreseeing the necessitie and afflictions of the Saints in the tenne bloodie persecutions, which euen then began and were to follow. The practise Hilariter exci∣pere, affabiliter tractare, ami dimittere. of this we see commended in all ages: in Abra∣ham and Lot receiuing Angels, they receiue them cheerefully, they intertaine and vse them courte∣ously, they dismisse them louingly. So did Bethuel Eleazar, so did Iethro Moses, so did Manoah the Angell of God, so did the good olde man of Gi∣beah, the Leuite and his wife; so did Obadiah the Prophets, so did the widow of Zarephath Elias, so did the Sunamite Elisha, so did Mary often re∣ceiue Christ, so did the Tanner and Cornelius Peter, Lydia and the Iayler the Apostles, Aquila and Priscilla, Paul; Phebe, and Stephanus many, and Gaius the whole Church at Corinth. All these are Chro∣nicled in the booke of God as most memorable presidents for all ages.
The third note of the precious faith of Gods e∣lect, in the same place annexed: is Christian sym∣pathy to the seruants of Christ in all their afflicti∣ons.

This grace is found, when loue hath set on fire our very Matth 9. 36. Philip. 1. 9. . bowels (as the holy Ghost speaketh) that in all their passions, it fils vs with a feeling and a tender compassion. This stirres vp men to Matth 25. 36. visit the members of Christ in all their miseries, to con∣sider Psalm. 41. 1. wisely of their afflictions, to Rom. 12. 15. mourne when they mourne, to Rom. 12. 13. distribute to their wants: and so to proceede on to the duties of instruction, ad∣monition, consolation, instant and Iam. 5. 13. 20 feruent in prayer, and to adde confession of sinnes, with fa∣sting, if the state and heauines of the affliction so require.
These things I write vnto you (right Worship∣full) first not so much for your instruction, as for the edification and confirmation of others, in this frozen age, wherein carnall and selfe loue, and all iniquitie increaseth, and loue to the Saints decrea∣seth and waxeth cold, as Christ hath Matth. 24. 12 forewarned vs: a manifest signe that sauing faith faileth, in most places, euen where it is professed most. Se∣condly, I write thus vnto you, for that you haue been taught of God (as I heare) to practise these things, and to obserue the Canons of Christ in his Gospell concerning loue to the Saints. This holy seruant of Christ Maister Rollocke, if he were liuing, could and would testifie of your sincere loue, when you intertained him into your owne familie, respecting his wants with all compassion and tendernes of heart.
The most prouident ruler of Heauen and earth, which hath shed, by the working of his holy spi∣rit, this precious loue into your heart, will fully repay and recompense this your loue, with mani∣fold

comforts of his spirit, euen then specially when the comforts and props of this present life shall most be wanting. Now the God of hope fill you with all ioy and peace in beleeuing, that ye may abounde in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost, that so ye may perseuer in this your holy faith in Christ, and loue to the Saints vnto the end.
Amen.

