



Brethren, by the Flesh or the Spirit▪ or both;
WHEN I sawe the Miseries of these Times, by a successine continuance o∣uer-taking each other, and the Arrowes of the Almigh∣tie to fall thick vpon vs, it

seemed to mee that Wrath was gone out against vs, and that the Hand of God was vpon vs. On the other side, when I saw the dulnesse and deadnesse of Men, who hauing the stripes freshly smarting and bleeding on their backs, and the sps galling in their sides, yet are like the Horse and Mule that haue no vn∣derstanding, the dulnesse of the people seemed to me more fearful then the punishments. For when a Nation growes stupid and senselesse at the Chastisements of God, and doth not or will not vnder∣stand Gods meaning in them, there goes out a speech from the Highest, Why should they be smitten any more? where∣of

this is the meaning; In stead of a fatherly Correcti∣on, there must come a swee∣ping Desolation. Therefore I thought it necessarie to be∣come an Interpreter to the people, though the meanest of a thousand, to shew Gods meaning in his chastisements; for by them God would haue something to be done, the do∣ing whereof may cure and re∣moue them. It may bee that some will require a propheti∣call Spirit, rightly to inter∣prete the Iudgement of God, as the rich Man would haue one to come from the Dead to conuert his Brethren; but to these I giue the same answer that was giuen to him; That the Scriptures  left vnto

vs for sufficient Interpreters. As Gods chastisements haue beene interpreted in them, so may we still interprete them. By this paterne haue the Fa∣thers and Ancients of the Church made construction of Gods Iudgements, and by great Reason. For God is still one and the same both in Iustice and Mercy, and there∣fore he hath left one and the same Word, whereby to con∣strue his Iudgements and Mercies. Accordingly from Gods Word in the old Te∣stament,1. Cor. 10. 11 Saint Paul tells vs in the New, That Gods pu∣nishments on the Israelites in the first Times of the World, are to be examples to vs on whom the ends of

the World are come. There∣fore let vs boldly, because safely, march vnder the Shield of so great an Ex∣ample, beleeuing with him that now, as heretofore pu∣nishments and sinnes are tyed together. Indeed, if God would haue altered his course, and by a new kind of gouernment send generall punishments where there are not generall sinnes, there might haue beene need of new Prophets, to haue broght vs Newes of a new Dispensa∣tion. But before wee begin this warrantable Interpre∣tation, let vs turne our Eyes to things most dangerously vnwarrantable, the Abuse and misconstruction of Iudge∣ments

commonly vsed. Some take no notice at all of the strokes of this Wrath, but with the Mirth and Mad∣nesse of Wine and Pleasures, take away the knowledge of it, as the Sacrificers in the Valley of Hinnon, by the nyse of Instruments tooke a∣way the cryes of their sacri∣ficed Children. Such merry men, singing and dancing to the Violl, and withall for∣getting the miseries of Io∣seph, no doubt, will cry out with Iudas. Wherefore ser∣ueth this waste? and with Dauids brother, out of the pride of thine heart ar thou come▪ downe to the battell. But I answere with Dauid, Is there not a Cause; yea, e∣uen

the greater Cause, be∣cause the Lion hath roared; and such beasts are not a∣fraid; so that the greater the number is of these mad men of mirth, the greater had neede to be the company of Mourners, or the mour∣ning of that Company. It is the mourning of the penitent, that maintaynes the mirth of the Delinquent, and it is the ten righteous Men that keepe fire and brimstone from a company of abominable So∣domites.
Others there are that gaze on the stroke, and stand a∣mazed at their miserie, but looke not vp to the highest Striker; yea, by murmuring and reyning,  to bite the

stones that are throwne at them. A third sort there is, that with earthly Balmes will cure the strokes of Hea∣uen, and by the strength of their plots will binde the hands of Omnipotence, and by the finenesse of their little Wits, will supplant the Coun∣sells of an infinite Wisedome. All these are out of the way, and either seeke no Remedies, or false Remedies, or Reme∣dies out of order.
Therefore with Elihu, when I saw there was no an∣swere in the mouth of these men, I thought to answere my part and to shew mine opinion. For my Heart was full and the Spirit within constrayned mee. A strong

desire possessed me that God might be pleased and appea∣sed, that my Country-men, euen after the Flesh, might be both temporally and eter∣nally saued, and out of this zeale the fire burst out, and these following wordes haue issued.
If any finde yet another fault, that the worke is great, and this worke is little, I answere; That a little Boat may land men on a large Continent, and the Discourse that of it selfe is little, may deliuer them into a large Countrey, where by their owne View they may make a large Discouery. It lands vs on the large Field of Con∣sideration; and therein wee

take notice of Gods Iudge∣ments, and of their Causes and Remedies▪ The first, their owne smart will disco∣uer; and the second, this fol∣lowing Map will somewhat delineate; and where it wants▪ refers  large ones already made. And in this fruitfull World of Paper, I desire onely to supply what is anting, not to adde vnto fulnesse▪ But the Readers themselues may make this worke greater three wayes, if they please. First, by ioy∣ning other Bookes to this, wherein are larger Discour∣ses of the Heads that are here but briefly touched▪ Second∣ly, by Communication; by calling ery one to his Neigh∣bour,

 Master to the Fa∣mily, the Minister to the  riend to his Friend  to consider of Gods Iudgement, of their Causes and Remedies. For by the Considerations of many, these Considerations  be increa∣sed; and his sparke shall be∣come a great fire, by bring∣ing much wood to it. Lastly, it may be ade great, by a great and powerfull opera∣tion,  a strong working in our Hearts and Lines. A little Doctrine may become great in working great ef∣fects; for  Ward is but a Seede▪ and like the least of Seede, yet in a good Heart it makes n Tree for the Birds  build on. Therefore as

much as thou wouldest haue it enlarged, so much be thou enlarged in thy ; for by yeelding is great Roome and great Nourish∣ment thou shalt make it great, in the growth of good Thoughts and good Actions. Therefore complaine not that it is little, when thou mayest make it greater thy selfe, and indeed this greatnesse is most to be desired. For then shall it somewhat resemble the Sermon of Ionah, which was little in words, but great in operation; for it turned and saued a populous Citie. But this greatnesse, comes chiefly from the Greatest, to him therefore, let vs pray, Turne vs, O Lord, and wee shall bee turned.
Amen.
