


RIGHT HONOƲRABLE,
THe ardent affection wherewith the best & sub∣limest Spirits have ever embraced the Sonnes of the Muses, is not in any example so appa∣rent, as in that matchlesse pattern of true Valour and Magnificence, ALEXANDER the Great; who having finisht the Conquest of Persia, and hearing every day of more Victories, did thus expresse his sorrow and discon∣tented affection; Think you to please me with any news, un∣lesse ye can tell me that HOMER is alive again? Such was his ambitious love to Poetrie. Under protection of this invincible example, I boldly make my Approaches. My Lines are alreadie drawn and perfected, whereby I am resolved to attempt your Lordships Favour; and I hope I shall winne the same without any danger or repulse. Yet do I not think to carrie it by any advantageous sur∣prise, or forcible irruption; but onely by a free and vo∣luntarie yeelding, which you may easily perform, with∣out any derogation to your Honour and Valour. And seeing now my speech is to a Souldier, give me leave in that little that I have to speak, to keep the same dialect. Forasmuch as I am now to expose my self to a World

of Enemies, I thought it fit to marshall these my lines after a warlike order. I have prefixed the approbations of my judicious in the front of this Book, to be as it were a Vantguard. Then followes in the middle my own Poem, which I account as the Main; and upon this I do most of all relie. Then I have reserved in the last place some few Elegiack Verses; which because they have alreadie past the Pikes of sharpest censures, and come off cleare in the judgement of the world, I make them my last refuge, and have placed them (as you may see) in the Rear. In this order I stand readie to receive the assaults of envious Carpers, and curious Criticks. I do not stand in any fear of your Honourable acceptation, and gracious interpretation of these my labours. The name and subject of my Book, which is GƲSTAVƲS Battels, is enough to assure me from all doubts & suspi∣cions. Seeing you have not thought much to spend your best bloud in defence of his cause, I cannot think you will be backward to patronize the memorie of his Name.

