



I Cannot more abhor flatterie, than your selfe will flie at the very shadow of it; as Moses at the sight of the Ser∣pent. But giue not backe, it is no such terrible obiect, which here I offer to your eies. It is but a rod, and that a gracious one, Gods blessing to our Nation euen in Blasting, and his mercy in Mildew. This I haue somewhat ouer-boldly aduentured to cast in your way before ye were aware of it. But you know to take it vp by the

true end, which it to testifie mine vnfained reuerence and respect, both to your selfe, and to the memorie of that most honourable man, that is gone before vs into his Masters ioy. I could not satisfie my selfe, if in the dedication of these my first labours of this kinde, I did not charge them, in the first place to visit that Familie, to which (as Gods instrument) I must referre the greatest part of my worldly encouragements, or vn¦dergoe the censure of the nine that returned not with thankes. Two poore mites these are, o which neither the Lords treasurie, nor your selfe haue any such need, but that they might well be spared; yet he that accepted the Widowes, giues me hope that neither he, nor the Widow will reiect mine. I speak not this in confidence of their worth (for slender they must needs be, that are spunne most out of mine owne meditations) but in regard of his goodnesse, that hath giuen you yours, and by his mercifull acceptation of our smallest endeuours done in truth, teacheth vs not to despise one onothers seruices, or offices of loue. That Ocean of his neuer exhausted bounty, likes it well, that to his glorie we should refund whatsoeuer good we haue receiued by his grace, be it lesse or more. The smallest drops of such raine when they fall into that sea, finde no lesse welcome, than the deepliest charged riuers. You desire (I know) to imitate the heauenly

Father, of whom we must all be followers, if we will be approued children; and euen in this. Therefore I feare not to present you with this small paper-retri∣bution. It is all and the first gift that euer I tendred, either to your selfe or to any other: a poore one (God wot) yet a demonstration of my thankfulnesse. Gold and Siluer I had none, or had I offered for your fa∣uours and my Lords, either before or after that I felt them, I am perswaded that the repulse would haue beene shamefull,Acts 8.20. and that too with S. Peters detestati∣on. Now also euen this my testimonie of your goodnes towards me, is more (as little as it is) than you expe∣cted, than you desired: so abundantly doe you content your selfe in the sole secrecie of doing well. And yet me thinkes, it is pittie that vertue should be so modest as to loue obscurity, vnwilling to haue it selfe knowne, when vice is growne so impudent, as not to feare the light. If painted visages (visards rather) dare bazard the censure of a publique view, should natiue beauty blush to shew its face? Yet your retirednesse is commendable, but your contentednesse with it, much more: in that hauing liued sometimes in the open eie of the world so worthily, you can now thus cheereful∣ly deuote your selfe (as it were) to a more priuate, not lesse pious course of life:Heb. 13 4. 1 Tim. 5.3. your former condition was honourable amongst all men; and none (saue

they that either know not the Apostles precept, or your selfe) but will say that your present is as much to be honoured. The ancient of daies giue you ful∣nesse of many, and happie yeeres, with the abundance of his blessings, that you may continue to be (as you are) a gratious president of pietie and grauitie to your sex; a long liu'd mother in Israel; the great comfort of your vertuous children; of whom you may say more truly than Cornelia of her Gracchi, Haec sunt ornamenta mea, These are my Iewels, these my abilements: Such be they long to your comfort, still to Gods glory, whose vnerring spirit of truth, con∣duct you and them, with vs all, through this wilder∣nesse of sinne, to our promised Canaan. And so I rest,

