



IFPTOLOME Kinge of Ae∣gypt, beyng exhorted by Demetrius Pha∣lareus a plea∣sant Orator, to buye Boo∣kes endyted of Princelie prowesse: for that he might reade therein those lessons, of the whych his friends or subiects durst not put him in remembraunce: tooke that his counsell in very good parte, rendring thankes for that his gentle admonition, promising to fol∣lowe his request in that behalfe: the one

sufficientlye aunswering hys function in exhorting: the other in obeying and yel∣ding to the same. I trust your grace (be∣ing both wyse and politike of your selfe, and therfore the lesse lacking others meane and weake Aduertisementes through the manifolde gyftes of your mirrored minde) wyll not mislyke, if I of bounde duety, and prest loyaltie, being youre humble and obedient Subiect (moste puissaunt Princesse) shall wyth bowed brest craue at your Maiesties hands, not the buying, or reading of all, or the most part of bookes written of gouernement, as Demetrius did of Ptolome: which were an endlesse and an infi∣nite worke, (although not a very chargeable to a Kings or Princes cofers) but onely the acceptment and shielding of thys briefe Diarie and small Manuell, and that wyth humble heart freely offred and behyghted (although grossely and rudely pende: be∣ing altogether vnworthy of sale, much lesse of gift) to suche a Portly and puissant per∣sonage. In the which your Maiestie may reade suche lessons, not only to ciuill, but also to heauenly policie and practise dire∣cted, as I (being a very blunt and vnskilful Oratour) eyther for want of audacitie, shall

not be able before your dreadfull counte∣nance to vtter and set forth, or your grace through magnanimitie and loftynesse of minde, shall of them in good part, after my meaning, not vouchesafe to conceyue: Dumbe and dead letters standing in no awe or note of bashfulnesse, presenting thēselues freely and frankly, wythout any copie, or chaunge of color: prest persons and humble subiects through weaknesse of mind, & bold∣ning courage, at the presence of the Prince trembling and quaking, and in discharging their tale stumbling and staying. For when as to meane persons some treatise and tenu∣re of learning is dedicated, a present palme of vnfeyned frendship is openly testified, a shielder and succourer of studious trauels is obtayned, the renowmed fame of the Pa∣trone to immortalitie is commended: then most chiefly doth the humble hostage of louing loyaltie in subiectes appeare, when as to a Prince the like is presented (who is in stede of an holie Anchor to all learned and skilful enterprises) when as partly they witnesse them selues to be greatly indebted to his royall estate, partly also by such oc∣casion he is allured to the study of wisdom. By which meane that taketh place, which

Plato pronounced of all cōmon weales, euen then they obteyning moste blessed estate, when as eyther Princes were occupied in wisedome, or the Professors thereof were exercised in ciuil gouernment. For if a wise Prince bee called in the Scripture,Sap. 6. the strenthning of the people, and the ordi∣narie cause and meane why Cities without any despeirment of ruine, be plenteouslye inhabited, and farced wyth Citizens: it shall by them most plainely appeare, howe wel & wisely Plato wrote, placing wisdome, the studie of Princes. Which trauell all way blessednesse doth prosecute, as the shadow vnseparably pursueth the bodye: I meane not the study of worldly wilinesse, but of the wisedome of God, vnto the which the holie Scriptures direct all redoubted Ma∣gistrates and Rulers of Kingdoms, euen by the voyce of the Prophet Dauid, soundyng in their eares: Erudimini qui iudicatū terrā. Serni∣te Domino in timore.Psal. 2. Be ye learned you which iudge the earth. Serue the Lord with trem∣bling feare. And not by his sole & only mo∣tion, but by the direction also of Salomon his sonne, a most perfect mirror of heauen∣lie knowledge. If you delyte in seates and scepters,Sap. 6. (O ye Kings & Princes) loue you

wisdome. For vnto you (sayth he) O Kings, my words be wholy tendered, that you with meeting armes, embrace Gods truth and wysedome, neuer goyng backe or reuolting from the same.Eccles. 10. I nede not further presse the preachers learned lesson: Diligite lumen sapi∣entiae, omnes qui praeestis populis. Loue ye the large light of wysdome, which gouerne and ouersee the populous multitude.Psal. 119. This light King Dauid called the worde of God, being a Lanterne to Princes feete, and a candle to theyr pathwayes. Thys light,Psal. 104. Prince Ioseph plenteously published, instructing the No∣bles of Aegypt wyth doctrine, teaching hir Senators the wysedome of God. May it therefore please your Maiestie, to appoynt him as a paterne before your eies, that tho∣row your heauenlie wysdome and zeale of Christian profession, your Grace may be cleaped a Mother of Religion, as he was, a Father of the Kyng of Aegypt,Gene. 38. a Nursse of Gods territorie and Church, as he was a fosterer, a shield to your subiects, as he was called a Sauiour of the world. Vouchsafe, O gracious Princesse,Gene. 26. in naturall affection ad godlie pietie to folow Abimelech, who was daylie saluted of the Palestines, our Fa∣ther

the King: that your grace also may so be renowmed and accompted of vs your most louing and obedient children, our Mother the Queene: In defending your sub∣iectes to aemulate Pharao, who was named of the Aegyptians, a reuenger of their iniu∣ries: In Iustice to imitate Samuell or Aristi∣des, In lofty courage to exceede Choelia and Portia, In liberalitie to aunswere Vespasian, In mekenesse to intercept Moyses & Adrian, In pacience, to forerunne Dauid or Ariston. Then shall we iudge of your grace, as Italie did of Saturne, he purchasing golden worldes vnto that fatall land. Then must wee (as no lesse we can, through your blessed and pea∣ceable gouernment) conceyue of your Maie∣stie, as the Romaines did of their Emperor Augustus, vaunting of him in thys sort: Ro∣mam inuenit Lateritiam, reliquil Marmoream. He found Rome builded with tyle & sherd, he left it to vs made of Marble. Then shall we esteeme thys Insule, most happie, when as on your grace all eyes shall be fixed, as on a mirror or motion of wisdome. Wherevnto (most dreadfull and Souueraigne Queene) I haue addressed the Methode of this booke, whych I haue dedicated vnto your Maie∣stie,

& that vnder the title of, A President for a Prince, for that most liuely (although succinctly) it displayeth the whole race and course of Princely life, the order of his acti∣ons, the suppressement of lose life, the re∣pulse of forren enimies, a retinuing of com∣mon peace, a naturall loue towardes hys subiectes, an earnest zeale of Gods house, and to conclude, a true, faithfull, and liue∣lie vsage of Christes Sacraments, which S. Augustine calleth the visible word, with all other good gyftes incident to a Princelie rule and prouince. Raise therefore (O most vertuous Princesse) according to your ac∣customed curtesie, at thys my humble and lowlie sute, the sitting sayles of your noble heart, rechase the beawtifull balle of youre thronging thoughtes, enhaunce the earnest allectiues of your stayed vnderstanding, vnto the reading and perusing hereof at your Graces lawfull leysure. And to God a∣lone, giue the prayse, who sowe in your most vertuous, and best meaning mynde, such immortal seede of his heauenlie grace nowe in youre yong and flouryshing age, that many yeares thys your Realme may enioy the plenteous fruite of thys hys bles∣sing

in your royall personage, to the day∣lie edification of hys Catholicke Church, and the continuall comforte of your Sub∣iectes.


Haec tibi quae dabimus tenui consuta libello,
Aspicienda oculis (casta Diana) tuis:
Non te, quid deceat (cui sunt sua iura) docebunt,
Sed dedit hoc oneris, officiosus amor.

