



MOst puissant King, my dread and deare Soueraigne, in most humble and submisse manner, I your highnesse most duetifull, and loyall Subiect, do herein present vnto your excellent Maiesty, the true report of a most fearefull accident, which Almighty God the King of kings, and Lord of Lords, sent among vs, your Highnesse poore subiects at Oluestone in the county of Glocester, on Thursday beeing the 28. of Nouember last: whereof I (your Maiesties said subiect) was both an eare, and an eye witnesse. The power∣full and admirable workes of God are for none more fit, and profitable, then for the Kings of the earth, whom the God of heauen, hath substituted next vnder himselfe, to order and rule the seuerall societies of men, in promoting piety, and preseruing iustice: forasmuch as next vnto the word, and the appendances thereof, (the most effectuall meanes) nothing doth, or can more effectually frame, or hauing framed, can more constantly continue them in the manage, and performance of all kingly duties, then the serious and often meditation of Gods wonderful workes, in the whole frame of the world, & the seuerall parts, and
portions of it. For as hystories, which are the remembran∣ces of time, and successes in time, are for all men meete, and commodious, but especially for Kings, Potentates, and great personages, their volumes beeing therefore well denominated, and called theirs; Principum bonorum, et he∣roum libri, good Kings, and great councellers bookes: so the large volume of Gods workes are open, and set before all, but for none so fit, and profitable, as for their Maiesties, that represent vnto vs the maiestie and power of almighty God. That as the beames of Gods glory shine in them, more then in others, so they before, and more then others should amire, and reuerence the beames of his glory, and greatnes in heauen, and earth, that hath made them so glo∣rious and great on earth. And if the knowledge of all the great, and admirable workes of God, be so necessary for all Kings, then the seuerall euents and successes that wonder∣fully, and extraordinarily fall our, & come to passe in their seuerall territories, and kingdomes, are in no sorte to be neglected, but so much the more to be remembred, and reuerenced, as God hath therein come more neerer vnto thē, then vnto others kings, & hath as it were spoken first, and more particularly vnto them, that thereof they might make first & most especially vnto themselues, a heauenly and christianly vse: humbly, and heartily to commit, and commend themselues, and their estates, to his ouerswaying and all ruling prouidence; That beareth rule ouer the king∣domes of men and giueth it to whomsoeuer he will.Dan. 4.29. And being thus deuoted personally, they may with all deuotion, and care, (according to the trust committed vnto them) order and direct, all their subiects in the feare of the Lord; Who according to his will worketh in the armie of heauen,Dan. 4.32. and the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand, nor say vnto him what doest thou? Whereby both King, and Subiect may know, and serue him, in whose hand is their breath,Dan. 5.23. and all their wayes.
Wherein forasmuch (my deere Soueraigne I speake it
withall reuerence of your excellent Maiesty) as the best Kings haue, and do sometimes shew themselues forget∣full, it were to be wisht, Georg. Codinus de efficial. pa∣latii. Con. vulgo Cu∣ciopal: the like of that old honourable office, Of a Kings remembrancer, were renued, and resto∣red, not so much to minde them of mens actions, and exploites, that haue worthily or valiantly behaued, or carried themselues in peace or in warre, that so they might receiue deserued honour, and recompence: as of∣ten, and againe to put them in minde of Gods great, and wonderfull workes, that his Maiestie might haue his due praise, and glory neuer sufficiently to be remem∣bred.
But sith there is no such particular office, which was Functio optime instituta, male exercita, possime abolita, well ordained, ill ordered, and most wretchedly abolisht;F. Iunij not: in Cu∣ropalatem. pag. 313. and that kings are left to be remembrancers vnto themselues, as of many other things, so of the wonderfull workes of GOD, abroad or at home, and that it doeth so highly concerne your highnesse, to make a good vse, of what hath so extraordinarily succeeded, within your Maiesties owns kingdome, which is not possible without direct no∣tice. I haue therefore thought it very dutifull, in the du∣tifullest manner, to make knowne to your Highnesse, and vnder your Highnesse, gracious approbation, to all your Maiesties subiects what, hath so wonderfully, and admirably falne out, the time and place forementio∣ned.
Prefixing a remembrance, but in briefe, of two o∣ther memorable, and most famous spectacles which within the space of forty dayes, haue likewise beene, to the admiration of the whole land. I wish also with the like commemoration, and praise of the Almighty power, and neuer fayling goodnesse of our most gratious, and mercifull God: Who for Christ his sake protect, and preserue your Highnesse, the Queenes Maiesly, the yong Prince, and all your Highnesse royall offpring, and issue,
all your Maiesties kingdomes, dominions, and faithfu subiects, from the entrage of Satan, and all his limmes, spe∣cially from the bloody attempts of all Antichrists brood: most particularly from the desperate villanies of all shorelings shauelings, and Iesuites, this ages (as they are, truely called) King-killers: long to raigne ouer vs, to the glory of Al∣mightie God, and the ioy, and comfort of all faithfull and true hearted Subiects.

