


MIght I not (Right Honourable) seeme ouer bold, or might my presumption therein be pardo∣ned: I should not only then hold my selfe freed from one of my chiefest cares, but also it woulde minister greate ioy vnto my distrustfull and fearefull mind. For now I rest doubtfull to make your Honours defenders of these my first fruites & simple labours: but I cannot on the sudden comfort my timorous and weake spirit with possession of such your fauours (and that it were vnmeete that good thinges should be hindred & buried for anie perticular respect,

I wil reserue vnto my selfe the hope of your good and godlie likings: and so as one who as well by the report of Gods deere children, both of preachers and others, as in some mea∣sure himselfe hath beene made acquainted with your holie & religious dispositions not onely in sauouring good things and the truth of the Gospell which is the power of God to saluation. Rom. 1.16. but also in furthering by all good & godly meanes the building vp of the beawtifull and precious house of God that the sanctified spouse of Christ Ephes. 5. might bee edified and furthered in all sound knowledge and holie faith. 2. Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. I wholly therefore depend vpon your fauou∣rable acceptance of the cause I handle, which I doubt not, but throughlie assure my selfe it shall doe great good in the Church of God: and bring singuler profite vnto Gods deare Saintes: and thus being resolued, that in re∣gard thereof, your Honours will vouchsafe to beare with my rasnesse and weakenesse, and take to your defence this godlie treatise of the grounds and principall questions of christian Religion: my proceeding wherein I leaue to be censurd by your wise and sound

iudgments: little regarding the carping mate and curious reader either of proud papist, se∣cret Heriticke, dissembling hipocrite or blind Atheist who neuer with godlie reue∣rence regard the truth of Christ, neither the deuiding of the worde of God aright. And thus praying that GOD of his great mer∣cies will blesse your Honours with all his good blessings, I humblie take my leaue.
Kingswood in Wilt. the 2. of September, 1589.

