



AS your place hath beene be∣fore (my brethren) famous▪ or rather for Idolatry infa∣mous: non tam nobilis, quàm nota, not so noble as notori∣ous: so woulde I nowe, (if I were able) perswade you, to redeeme, and purchase a new the losse of that long time so euilly spent: with the gain of greater knowledge, and more conscionable practise, in old and young of that glorious Gospell, which now thorough Gods mercies hath driuen away ignoraunce, en∣lightened your heartes, beegotten you to GOD, taught you his feare, and whereof you haue no far∣der hold, then at the Mat. 21. 33. will of the Lord. If Ephesus must redeeme the time spente in the honour of Diana, and Acts. 19. 28. dishonour of God, which walking now in the Ephe. 5. 17. knowledge of his will: what price thinke you of repentaunce must VValsingham lay downe, to recouer the losse of those daies, in the worship of an Idoll▪ and neglect of Gods ser∣uice? If Adam be Gene. 3. 17▪ curssed, for pleasing his owne fancie, and displeasing God: how sharpe a cursse thinke you, deserued that serpent, that first Gene. 3. 4. enti∣ced him herunto? If Israel did smart for Idolatrie, by whoring at 1. King. 12. Bethel: shall Heroboam goe free, that moued them to sinne? If the dayes of Iosiah must 2. King. 23. mourne, for the time of his Fathers: what

teares must Manasses shed that caused them to erre? And if all places in this land had neede to lament the filthie Idolatries of the former ages: how much more oughtest thou (VValsingham) bewaile, that hast reached foorth that Cup of poyson to infect them with all? The brasen Serpent was (. King. 18. 4.) pouldred to dust, as the instrument of the peoples fall: feare least God in iudgement make thee as dust, whiche hast caused many to slumber in their sinnes. The Temple, and house of that Idoll Baal was (. King. 10. 27) broken downe, and the Lord in his hoate displeasure made thereof a place of vile vse: thou hast been the seat and throne of many Balimes. Feare thou, and re∣pent: least the Lord in his firie wrath, make of thy proude shrine of Satan, a poore and miserable cot∣tage. Thou hast shaken the state, and enchaunted the mindes of kings, and princes, with the banefull dregges of mens inuentions: Nowe nourishe the soules of thy children that are in thee, with that (Pet. 2. 2.) sincere milke of Gods holy worde: thou hast been the puddle to defile thousandes, now become that same Bethesda (hn. 5. 2.) to heale thy selfe: thou hast beene to Englande as the waters of (od. 15. 23.) Marah to Israel, now sweeten thy selfe with the tree of life: thou hast been to all inhabitants as the vnfruitfull wa∣ter of (Kings. 2. 19.) Hiericho, now become seasoned with the salt of grace: thou hast by thy former filthinesse, drawne many to Hel: repent thee of that, and now let thy (atth. 5. 16.) light shine foorth, to call many to God. To conclude, thou hast been the very (ue. 16. 2.) foule cage of all hatefull and vglie birdes: now pray and la∣bour that thou maiest become the happie hauen, & safe harborough of all godlinesse, and integritie of life.
Amen.
Thine to doe thee good.

Sperando spiro.
Operando despero.
