


To the Queenes most Excel∣lent Maiestie.

I Haue found the charge that your Maiestie committed vnto mee for the setting downe of mine opinion, how your Realme of Ireland might with the least charge be reclaimed from Bar∣barisme to a godly Gouernment, somewhat difficult, by reason of mine owne insufficiency, many wayes for so weighty a cause. Neuer∣thelesse, entring into consideration, first of your Maiesties most godly and Princely care in this behalfe, and next of my most bounden duty to your Maiesty; I haue beene embold∣ned to set downe what I obserued, were the causes of the disorders of the Land, whilst I

had some peece of Gouernment in it, and what I then thought, and now doe thinke, may bee some meanes to reforme the same, most hum∣bly referring both my selfe, and this my sim∣ple discourse to your Maiesties, and Councels grauer & deeper consideration, and as humbly crauing pardon, if in seeking to discharge my duty truly and plainely, I touch any thing that may seeme offensiue.
It is most apparant, that the regard your Maiestie hath had to God, and his will in all your Princely proceedings, hath so wonder∣fully blessed your Estate, that as wee your faithfull Subiects, doe loue and honour you, so all forraigne Nations doe admire and reue∣rence you for it: A cause for vs to thank God most hartily, and a patterne for all Princes to immitate most diligently. Wee therefore to you, and you to God, are to giue all the ho∣nour and glory.
It is also apparant, what continuall care you haue had of that your Realme of Ireland. The great and almost insupportable charges that you haue sustained to doe it good, doth well witnesse the same. For so great a masse of Treasure haue you already imployed to that end, that no Prince in the world, (except your Maiestie, who hath bin moued with con∣science of your people, and feare of God only)

would in reason or good pollicy, giue so much for the purchase of such an other Land, to bee enioyed in peaceable possession. And yet, notwithstanding all that, your Maiesties care and cost that way, hath not hitherto yeelded that fruit that your Maiesty doth desire. For the State of that Country hath growne dayly from worse to worse, and from dangerous t most dangerous.
Many men doe alledge causes hereof: But next to the want of the true knowledge of God, and of the due course of Iustice, to giue euery man a peaceable propriety of that which is his owne; I take (vnder correction) that the smoothing vp of all former Rebelli∣ons, by Pardons and Protections, hath beene the misery and cause of most of this mischiefe. For if it were not too bitter a rehearsall, it were no hard matter to make it appeare, how one Rebellion during your Maiesties Raigne, hath hatcht another; and how againe of all them, this last more dangerous then they all, hath taken this strong rooting with forraigne combination.
Leauing this third cause a while, I craue pardon to say a little of the two former prin∣cipall causes, want of Religion, and Lawe. It is a lamentable thing to behold, how gene∣rally in that Realme, they are so farre, of not onely, from true, but also (in effect) from any knowledge at all of God; tha Saint Patrick

is more familiar, and of better credite with them, then Christ Iesus our Sauiour. How can a people so estranged from God, and their duty to him, haue any grace to know their lawfull Prince, and their duty to her? The like is to be said of the Lawes, from which they flye, as from the yoke of bondage, and not desire to be tyed by it, as by the linke of humane Socie∣ty, as they ought to be; The reformation must therefore begin at God. His will and word must be duly planted, and Idolatry extirped. Next, Law must be established, and lycentious customes abrogated.
The meanes to effect both, is now most fitly offered by the Rebellion now a foore: So as a man that should giue his opinion for the re∣formation of Ireand, might conclude all cir∣cumstances with this one short resolution: Correct this Rebellion throughly, and reforme Ireland presently. I must therefore craue par∣don to say a little more concerning this Rebel∣lion, before I meddle with other particulari∣ties of reformation. There be three strong rea∣sons to moue your Maiesty to correct this Re∣bellion with all earnest seuerity, not allowing pardon or protection to be giuen to any man, but vpon speciall and vrgent great causes. The first reason is, The charge that God hath com∣mitted to your Maiesty ouer that people, to see the good maintained, or at the least, defended, and the bad suppressed, or at the least repressed.

Then the account that God will require for the innocent blood, that hath beene there cru∣elly spilt by Traytors, and for the miserable oppression of the better sort of your Maiesties Subiects, who haue beene there burned, raui∣shed, robbed, and spoyled: the cry whereof is now shrill in Gods eare, for vengeance a∣gainst these cruell Rebels, and disordered dealers.
The second reason, is a present vrging ne∣cessity, which may not be neglected, but with dangerous errour in pollicy of Gouernement. For remit this Rebellion, and yeeld wholly and for euer the Lamb to the Wolfe, and the Subiect to the Traytor, who will so keepe him vnder, that hee shall neither will nor dare euer hereafter to oppose himselfe on your Ma∣iesties behalfe or Seruice.
The third reason is commodity: For (be∣sides that all rules and orders for reformation, may thereupon be the more readily and lesse chargeably put in execution) there will ex∣cheate to your Maiesty by due course of Iustice the better halfe of that Land, whereof what great ue may in short time accrew to your Maiestie, ouer and aboue, what may be imployed to reward and strengthen those that are dutifully disposed, shall in part appeare in place, where the commodities of Ireland shall purposely be spoken of.
Thus it appeareth, that the seuere correction

of this Rebellion, is the first and soundest step of reformation, and that the same is grounded vpon duty to God, necessity, pollicy, and commodity; all which points would yeeld a larger discourse, if that it were either my pur∣pose, or needfull to your Maiesty, who know∣eth and vnderstandeth all.
Least some might draw this mine opinion of a seuere correction, into the reckoning of a more cruell sentence then I meane: I protest it is farre from me to desire any extirpation; but rather that all might bee saued, that were good for the Country to be saued. Yet this I say, Till your Maiesties Sword hath meeke∣ned all, I thinke it neither Honour nor safety to graunt mercy to any. But when the Sword hath made a way, then, as to pardon all, would be too remisse a pitty: So, not to pardon ma∣ny, would be an extremity nothing agreeable to your Maiesties most godly and mercifull inclination. Otherwise there would be such a vacuity of ground there, (as it is already too great) that your Realme of England, though it be most populous, through your Maiesties most godly Gouernement, (God be thanked, and long continue it) were not able to spare people, to replenish the wasts.
It resteth now to speake of the particular meanes, as well to represse this Rebellion, as thereupon to reforme the Realme. First, very good choyse being made (as there is already)

of your Deputy, it is most requisite (for the time of his continuance in that Seruice, which in my opinion had need be seuen yeeres for so great a worke) that all his actions there be throughly backed by your Maiestie, and none of them crossed, to worke him your Mai∣sties disgrace (which the Irish will soone espie) either by suggestions thence, or practises here, during his continuance in charge there; but vpon his discharge to answere all with his life and liuing: your Maiesties Deputy being thus fortified with credit, he must also be through∣ly maintained with sufficiency of men, money, munition, and victuals: but before I speake of them, I thinke it necessary to remember, that for the principall points of the gouernment of that Land, it shall bee requisite that certaine rules be prescribed to euery Deputy by your Maiestie, and Counsell here. And yet he not to be so tyed to any of them, but that vpon vrgent causes he may breake or altar them.
To returne to prouision. And first for men. All wards being furnished, I take 800 English horsemen: 3000 English foot-men, and 1000 Galloglaghes, Kerne, and Irish shott will suf∣fice for this purpose: But because it shall bee necessary to ease your Maiesties good subiects of the Cesse for the souldiors, wherwith they haue beene hitherto burthened, I thinke it re∣quisite that in leuy of that Cesse, the pay be ac∣cording to the rates insuing, as your Maiestie

alloweth in all your other seruices. And the rather in respect as well of the painfull dangers that these Souldiers must abide, as also that they may liue without rauine and spoyle.




Euery band of 100 Horsemen to haue a Captaine at 6 s. 8 d. a Leiutenant at 3 s. 4 d. a Guidon at 2 s. a Trumpet at 18 d. a Surgion at 18. d and euery 15120 lib.horseman (besides 10 dead payes) at 12 d. which being all sterling, and euery band by the day to 105 s. by the moneth of thirty dayes, to 157 lib. 10 s. by the yeere of 12 moneths and fine odde dayes to 1890. lib. Jn all by the yeere.
Euery band of 100 foots▪men to haue a Captaine at 4 s. a Lieutenant at 2 s. an Ensigne at 12 d. a Ser∣ieant 45625. lib.at 12 d. a Drumme at 12 d. a Surgion at 12 d. and euery Souldier (besides 10 dead payes) at 8 d. which being all sterling ancient; euery band by the day to 4 lib. 3 s. 4 d. by the moneth of 30 dayes, to 125 li. by the yeere of 12 moneths and 5 odde dayes, to 1120 lib. 16 s. 8 d. Jn all by the yeere.
Euery band of 100 Kernes, Galloglaghes, and Irish shott, to haue a Captaine at 2 s. a Lieutenant at 12 d. a Guidon at 8 d. a Piper at 8 d. and euery Kerne 6874 lib. 38. 4 d.at 4 d. without dead payes, which being all sterling, a∣mounteth euery band by the day to 36 s. 8 d. by the moneth of 30 dayes, to 56 lib. 10 s. by the yeere of 12 moneths and 5 odde dayes, to 687 lib. 8 s. 4 d. Jn all by the yeere.
Totalis of your Maiesties pay. 67619 lib. 3 s. 4 d.



Adde for the Deputies and other officers enter∣tainment, furnishing of wardes, and other extraordi∣nary 37380. lib. 16 s. 8 d.charges, and also towards buildings in places conuenient, whereof the charge is very vncertaine.



Your Maiesties whole charge in certainty for this seruice, (excepting the vncertainty of the charges 100000 lib.of buildings) will amount vnto.




Here (by the way) I thinke it expedient, for auoyding of confusion of new and old recko∣nings together, that old former payes and debts remaining in arrerages vnto the taking of this seruice in hand be cleared, and dischar∣ged. And then for this new reckoning thus made, it behoueth to shew how or whence the money may be leauied. In mine opinion, (the things before rehearsed aduisedly considered) it were mony well bestowed for so good a pur∣pose, though the whole came directly out of your Highnesse Treasure; And yet it is to be remembred, that besides your Maiesties conti∣tinuall yeerely charge which is not small, you haue in some one yeere (as I am giuen to vn∣derstand) spent as much as this vpon that coun∣trey seruice. But considering the great char∣ges that your Maiestie hath and must sustaine otherwayes for the safety of your people and

Countries, you may in reason and honor admit an extraordinary remedie, though at the first sight, it carry some shew of an inconuenience. I suppose therefore (vnder correction) that it shall be good, that your Maiestie after the ex∣ample of France, Spaine and Flanders, where most of the small money consisteth of base coynes, doe also cause to bee coyned yeerely during the first foure yeeres, 100000 li. in pie∣ces of 8 d. 4 d. 2 d. and 1 d. the same to con∣taine, but a fourth part of fine siluer, letting all coines that are currant there of good gold and siluer to run as now they doe: so your Maie∣sties charge, besides all charges of coynage, wil amount to no more but 25000 lib. yeerely which in foure yeeres would come to 100000 lib. which by that time your Maiestie with Gods fauour should see would bring you a faire reckoning of that countrey and gouern∣ment.
The place fit for coynage, whether at the Tower of London, or any other port towne of England that hath more commoditie for fewell, or else rather in Ireland. I referre to your Maiesties, and Counsels considerations. If in Ireland, I thinke it very necessary to call in all the base money that is there now cur∣rant, paying ready sterling mony for the same, at the rates it now goeth. The masse of that base money would presently set the mint a worke: and being new molten, would with

some supply serue this turne. This being thought good: then surely the Towne of Rosse in the Countie of Wexford will bee a most apt place for the mint, by reason of the great abundance of wood which groweth a∣long the Riuer that commeth close by that town, the felling whereof will be seruiceable; not onely for this worke, but also for the qui∣etnesse of the countrey there abouts.
Some scruple may bee made here by the late experience of this Realme, what inconue∣niences may grow by imbasing the coyne. It cannot be denied, but it was somewhat incon∣uenient for this Realme, liuing vnder ciuill and orderly gouernment: yet the necessitie of the weighty seruice then being supplied by it, wee see all the inconueniences well ouercome through your Maiesties peaceable gouern∣ment, (God be thanked for it.) But the exam∣ple of this Realme, or of any other common∣wealth already reformed doth not hold in this case: For, as imbasing of coyne and such like dangerous innouocations may breed harme in well gouerned States: So in Ireland being all out of order it can doe no harme at all, but ra∣ther it is to be hoped, that the admission of this one small inconuenience, may be a meane to redresse, not onely a number of other greater inconueniences, but also it selfe too withall in the end.
Let it be confessed, that the prices of things

will by that meanes within a yeare or two, vp∣on discouery of the basenesse, rise to double, and that both Souldier and Country man shal for the time loose accordingly.
If the reformation doe immediatly recom∣pence the losse treble, then may I aske, what harme hath either Souldier or Country man receiued? That it will so, may appeare thus. Scarce the fourth foote of Ireland is at this houre manured; and of that scarce the fourth penny profit made, that the soyle would yeeld, if through a reformation the Husbandman might haue a safe and peaceable vse both of it and of his Cattell. And yet I say nothing of Mynes, and a number of other hidden Com∣modities that a ciuill reformed Gouernement would bring with it. Now it may please your Maiesty, that I may reckon, and reason thus: First, coyning in foure yeares 400000 pound, your Maiesties turne is serued for 100000 pound. Then calling it downe at sixe yeares end, to the iust value it is worth, whereby it will be for euer after a very necessary Coyne to bee currant, for the reliefe of your poore Subiects, not onely of Ireland, but also of Eng∣land, the Country shall lose 300000 pound. That this shall be treble recompenced, by the reformation I suppose will thus bee prooued. Allow (for example) that the whole profit of Ireland is not yearely aboue 100000 pound. Adde to this a treble profit in quantity of

ground to be manured, and another treble in quality of manuring, for two yeares betwixt the end of the Coynage and the fall, allowing the first foure yeares to be fruitlesly spent in reforming (though there bee hope that that time will be shortned) I thinke the reckoning of a treble recompence, falleth out apparantly. In these matters of State, there can be nothing set downe so plaine, that will not admit a con∣tradiction. And therefore (perhaps) it may be said▪ This is a good and easie speculation. But I trust (God giuing good encrease) it will proue as good and as easie an action. To God therefore, and to your Maiesties gracious con∣sideration, I thus leaue it.
Victualls and Munition are now to be pro∣uided for. And sure there must be speciall re∣gard had of both. Experience of the misery, and defect in Sernice, I found that way ma∣keth me to giue this speciall caution, leauing all particular direction thereof, to those that haue better skill therein then I haue. Neuer∣thelesse, the chiefe Victualer being chosen a man of good substance, skill, and conscience, he had neede (in mine opinion) be imprested 10000 pound currant money of England vp∣on good sureties, not onely to answere the Stock, but also to haue Grainers of Corne in places apt for the Seruice.
These things thus prouided; In mine opi∣nion, the standing seate for the Deputy and

the Law, would bee translated from Dublin, (which is apt for nothing else, but to send and receiue readily from England) to Atblon, which is (as it were) the Centre of Ireland, and scitu∣ate both in a good soyle, apt for all things ne∣cessary, and on the Shennon, which is the best Riuer of the Realme, and would with a small charge be made portable twenty miles aboue Athlon at least. By that meanes, as the Deputy may vpon euery occasion (be it neuer so sud∣daine) be within twelue houres in the farthest Prouince frō him: So in short time the repaire hither from all quarters of the Realme, would breede a thorow-fare, euen through Desarts and Woods, that are now lurking holes for Rebels, and Nourceries for Rebellion.
The Deputy thus furnished and seated, he had neede for his better assistance, to haue two Presidents with competent Officers to those States, and those such men for Religion, con∣science, courage, diligence, and ability both of bodies and purses, as respecting their duties to God and your Maiesty, the good of their Country and their owne credites, may attend their charges constantly against all toylesome dangers, & corrupt gaine, shewing themselues in all their actions reformers & not deformers.
Their standing seates will be most apt, the one for Mounster at Killmallock, the other for Vlster at Liffuer. So (as occasion shall require) may they best answere the Deputy, and the

Deputy then being, as it were, in the middest betwixt them, of equall distance from them both.
Then there is needfull to be two Marshalls, who being aptly chosen for the purpose, should at the direction of the Deputy and Pre∣sidents goe to one exployt, while they be ey∣ther at some other, or else otherwise necessa∣rily ministring Iustice. Thus the Deputy an∣swering, and they assisting one another, both the labour will be the easier, and the Enemie the more doubtfull, being set to fiue seuerall wayes. As before of the Deputy, so here of these Officers, I thinke it requisite that their Seruice haue some limitation of time, and that the Presidents fiue yeares, vnlesse sicknes, or other necessity occasion the contrary. And for the Marshalls, it were not amisse they were made Patentees to continue during life, vn∣lesse through misbehauiour they should de∣serue to be displaced, or through good desert to be better aduanced.
In choise of the Lord Chauncellour and all other Officers, there would be like regard had, that through needinesse they bee not carried from Iustice, which next vnder God must bee the chiefest reformer. The like is to be said of the Clarke of the Check, that he be a carefull man to see the bands full.
Also the Captaines, their Officers and Soul∣diers, that they make neither a Haruest of the

Seruice, nor a spoyle of the Subiects, but ra∣ther (together with seeking to suppresse the Rebellion without malice to any mans person) to sowe the seede of good example, whereby both themselues, and those that their Seruice shall be meane to reforme, may reape of God and your Maiesty an honest & godly Haruest, to the iust reward of their Seruices both for bodies and soules. There are diuersities of opinions, what seruice were fit to bee first at∣tempted, and where.
Some in Vlster against the Scots: Some in Connaught against the Burks: Some in Moun∣ster against Desmond: and some in Leynster a∣gainst Baltinglass, and each haue their reason: It were not good to neglect any of them, but presently at least to front euery of them: The choyse therefore where to begin, would be left at large at the Deputies discretion, to doe ther∣in as he seeth cause. Neuerthelesse, aboue all the rest, that in Leynster, which aptly may bee called an intestin mischiefe, would be (in mine opinion) first dealt withall as well for the in∣dignity of the matter, as also for the suppressi∣on of the Birnes, Tooles, and Cauenaghes, which (as now to Baltinglass) haue, and euer will be ready Rebellion to the Omoores, Oconers, and all others: For vntill they be ey∣ther extirped, or throughly brought vnder by fortifications vpon their fastnesses, Dublin, Kil∣dare, Westmeth, the Kings & Queenes Counties

cannot be cleare either of theirs, the Omoores and Oconors incursions & spoyles, or of doubt of the Magoghigans, Omoloyes, & other stirring Irish borderers. But they being suppressed, the Omoores & Oconors lose all their chiefe strength and refuge, and the residue with either the Sword or the Law, will be easily enough kept vnder: So as then the Pale may without feare or danger, attend your Maiesties other Seruice with their best ayde: That being happily (as it willw, ith Gods fauour, be soone at chieued) then is your Deputy to proceede against the rest, and still as hee goeth to make great paces throughout all their Woods and fatnesses, and small fortifications vpon euery their streight and strength, after the example of your Maie∣sties most Noble Progenitors in subduing of Wales. And whilst this is in doing your Maie∣stie, had neede to haue not onely part of your Nauy to lye on the Coast, to answere forraign attempts if there be cause, and to keep the Re∣bels from starting ouer Sea. But also small Ves∣sels to lye vpon the Scots to impeach their In∣uasions. The Rebellion being repressed, and your Maiesty hauing shewed mercy to those that you shall see cause to bestowe it well vp∣on, then must the fruits of peaceable Gouerne∣ment be made to appeare; To that end, it shall be requisite to call a Parliament, and by Au∣thority thereof, not onely to reuiue all former olde Statutes, that shall be consonant to a re∣formed

Gouernment; but also to Enact new for the establishing of the Articles ensuing, and such other, as vpon aduice shall be thought meete.
1. First, for as much as the only way for true obedience to the Prince, groweth by true knowledge of God, it shal be requisite that two Vniuersities, where the same may bee truly taught, be erected with as conuenient speede as may be. The fittest places for them will be at Lymbrick for the south part, and Arnagh for the North: The meanes to doe it, may bee partly by some of the Lands that shall excheat to your Maiesty by this Rebellion, and partly by imposition of workes, labours, carriages, and money, as Fines vpon those that shall bee thought fit to be pardoned.
2 Item, to the end it may appeare, that the reformation tendeth to a lawfull Gouerne∣ment, it shall bee meete that a Collection bee made of the Lawes already in force, and a publique denuntiation made by Procla∣mation, for the putting of them in pre∣sent Execution, especially the Lawes of King Kogish.
3 Item, the Earle of Ormond is to be com∣pounded withall for his liberties of Tibredary: so as your Maiesties Lawes onely ruling there, my Lord, neuerthelesse, to haue the Excheats, as by the ordinance of Wales the Lords Mar∣chers haue there: As for the Earle of Des∣mond

his liberties of County Pallantine in Ker∣ry, there needeth no composition with him, he being in Rebellion.
4 Item, that all Ireland bee reduced into Manours; so as hauing Courts, Barons, Leetes, and Lawdayes kept orderly vpon them, the people may haue Iustice for meane actions neere home.
5 Item, that all Cesse, cuttings, and Irish ex∣actions, as Bonnaght Coyne, and Liuory, Fowey, Soren Black rents, and such like bee cleane abollished: And that in lieu thereof a certaine Annuall rent bee rated vpon euery Plow Land, to the vse of the Lord by compo∣sition, tripartity indented to be made betwixt your Maiestie, the Lord, and his Free-holder by the Lord Deputy, Lord Presidents, or other Commissioners by them authorized, reseruing besides for your Maiesty, according to the Sta∣tutes made for that purpose, 13 shillings foure pence vpon euery Plow▪land, with prouiso, that if the Lord doe breake the composition, or take againe any of the said exactions, then hee to forfeit the inheritance of those Lands. And that by that tripartity Indenture, both the Lord and the Freeholder bee bound to let his demeanes, or any other Land that he shall de∣mise to the Tennant, otherwise called Churle, at a reasonable rent certaine, for terme of 21 yeares at least.
Thus the Freeholder and the Tennant be∣ing

at a certainty, and rid of the vncertaine spoyle, and spending of the Lord, and feeling the ease and commodity thereof, will with∣stand the vnlawfull attempts of the Lord, and be ready with his body and goods against him (if neede bee) at the deuotion of the State, that shall be meanes thus to enrich and better his estate.
6 Item, no Lord or Gentlemen for any re∣spect or colour of Seruice, be admitted to put vpon his Lordship or Signory any Galloglagh, Kerne, or Shot, or to grant them any Kenelagh. Follow Bonaghbeg or Bonaghburr vpon paine offellony: Neuerthelesse vpon any great ne∣cessity the Lord Deputy, or Lords Presidents, shall put in any Galloglagh, Kerne, or Shot, and those to be called and reputed your Maiesties Galloglagh, Kerne, or Shot.
7 Item, that all Brehons Carraghes, Bardes, and Rymers, that infect the people, Friars, Monkes, Iesuites, Pardoners, Nunns, and such like, that openly seeke the maintenance of Pa∣pacy, a Traytrous kinde of people, the Bel∣lowes to blow the coales of all mischiefe and Rebellion, and fit spies of Antichrist, whose Kingdome they greedily expect to bee resto∣red, be executed by Marshall Law, and their fauourers and maintainers by due course of Law, to be tryed and executed as in cases of Treason.
8 Item, if your Maiesty in respect of pol∣licie,

or otherwise, doe not thinke it good, vt∣terly to destroy the Irish Scots, that doe conti∣nually inuade your good Subiects, and ayde the Rebellious against your Highnesse: That it were well your Maiesty did graunt to the Earle of Arguile an yearely Pention for a time, to the end he should restraine them from com∣ming euer into England.
9 Item, that the English Horsemen & Foot∣men, the Galloglaghes, Kerne, and Irish Shot, bee placed in the seuerall Prouinces of the Realme, as the seruice and the necessity of the place shall require: And that of the Lands in your Maiesties disposition by Excheat or o∣therwise, as soone as conuensently may bee, some portions bee allotted to them to dwell vpon, and manure at a certaine reasonable rate. And yearely as the commodity of their Lands encreaseth, the wages to abate, and so at length cleane to extinguish.
10 Item, to the end the Ports in Ireland, espe∣cially of Mounster, may be inhabited and for∣tified against forraigne attempts; it shall bee well your Maiesty doe not onely strengthen the Priuiledges already graunted, but also graunt new.
11 Item, that Merchants in generall be pro∣hibited vpon paine of death, to sell Powder, or any kinde of Warlike Munition to any of the Irish.
12 Item, that honest and skilfull men be ta∣ken

out of euery Court of Record here, and placed there for the setling of the due course of the Lawes. And for their better encourage∣ment to doe well, that in respect of their ho∣nest trauels, they be promised preferments of Offices in the Courts here, as any doe fall fit for them.
13 Item, that the Glybb, and all Irish habite of men and women, be presently abollished, and that Orders be set downe for enlarging the English tongue, and extinguishing the Irish in as short a time as conueniently may be.
14 Item, that the factions of Butler and Ge∣raldine, with the titles of Ahmabo and Crgh∣mabo be taken away.
15 Finally, to the end your Maiesties State be more followed, and depended vpon then hitherto it hath beene, and the Lords of the Counties lesse, (reseruing to them the honour and reputation due to their places, as the No∣ble men here haue.) I thinke it very necessary that a suruay be taken of all their Lands: and that your Maiesty, by good aduice, shall take such a third part thereof into your hands, as shall lye fittest for the furtherance of your Ser∣uice▪ Giuing them of improoued Lands in England by way of exchange, a valuable re∣compence. So shall your Maiesties followers encrease, and theirs diminish to the great assu∣rance of your State there: Besides, that by that meanes your Highnes shall haue alwayes
