



AS it pleaseth the Lord of his vnsearchable wisdōe to plant in you the glis∣tering beams of his gos∣pell, and so heaped vpon you, as wel his blessinges for your body in this lyfe, as also endew∣ed you with his feare and loue, that your soule may attaine to the euerlasing life. So it hath pleased him also to ordaine the meanes that the same may be continued in you to the end: namely by his secret gift of grace, by his loue poured in yo∣ur hart, and by the pure preaching of his woord vnder so gracious a Prince, whose looue hath a long time shined, in this realme of peace of plenty, to the terror of the blinde thirsting Papists our dayly aduersaries. So that you may say with the children of God. Blessed are that people,



which liue in his feare: Yea blessed are the people whose God is the Lord and liue in his looue: Of which loue this Ser∣mon (heere Dedicated to your worship) largely and learnedly entreateth, the Au∣thor not knowen vnto mee, onely the excellencie thereof caused me to put it in print, that all that liue in the looue of God, might bee partakers of so good a worke. Heerein is set foorth the fruites of true faith, the vanitie of worldly wealth, the corruption of couetousnes the great∣nes of our sinnes, the punishment due thereunto, and the meanes whereby wee may be deliuered from the some, beeing a loadestone to direct our dooings, from the rankor of couetousnes, to bring vs to godlines. Wherfore Saint Paule, to with∣drawe vs from it, saith, godlines is great ritches, wee brought nothing into this world, and certeinly wee shall carry no∣thing with vs, wherefore while we haue foode and raiment let vs be cōtent ther∣with: and Saint Mathew writeth that if all men will seeke the kingdome of God and the righteousnes thereof, they shall not want, but shall haue all thinges cast vnto them from aboue. For if wee haue to maintaine vs in this life and cast



care on heauenly thinges, wee shall pos∣ses heauen, & raigne with Christ foreuer.
Wherefore Maister Caluin, vpon Paule to Timothy, saith. They that measure their religion by riches are heere taught that onely religion is the true riches. Wherby it appeareth that there is no∣thing more necessarie and needfull vnto the Saluation of a Christian then the knowledge, zeale, and looue of God and his religion. This bold attempt I doo of∣fer vnto your worship as a true argumēt of my duetifull minde, & not as a meane to you (now earnest in religion,) but vn∣to one of whose looue and godly zeale, in that behalfe I haue all ready had suffi∣cient triall. Beseeching therfore that by your worships well accepting it at my hand (though out of another mans caske) it may be the better, lyked, accepted and followed, of them that endeuour them∣selues to liue in the looue of our onely Sauiour. In which looue the Lord of his great mercy, côtinue your good worship, my very good Lady & your whole fame∣ly: and that all which be partakers of his feare and looue may bee inheritours of his euerlasting kingdome.

