


THe greate and cunning workemai∣ster, yea, the maister of all
mischiefe Sa∣tan, hath not ceased, euen from the firste creation of man,
to molest and perse∣cute the same, lying euer in wayt to destroy him,
as is playnely seene in his assaults, deliuered to our first pa∣rents
Adam and Eue, very shortlye after their creatiō: he neuer
left them, vntill suche time as he hadde caused them to
transgresse the commande∣ment of the Almighty, wherby they purchaced to
themselues, and to all their posteritie eternall damnation. He continually
putteth his cunning and Stratagemes in vse against seely poore man:
Sometime by open bat∣taile, as causing him to commit mur∣ther, adulterie,
theft, extortion, and such like grosse offences, against the
commaundementes of the seconde Table. Another time, he solliciteth him to
pride, Idolatry, blaspheming, vnbeliefe, lothing the word of God, contempte
of the same, rebellion a∣gainste God, vnthankefulnesse to∣ward God, and
such like, against the commandements of the first Table: whereby he
deliuereth vnto vs ter∣rible and dangerous assaultes, other∣times he
dresseth agaynst vs surprin∣ses, as when by meane of the ingraf∣fed
corruption whiche dwelleth in vs, he raiseth in vs
horrible motions, thoughtes, affections, and consentes, yea, and that whiche
most daunge∣rous of all is: he hath so banded oure eyes, that the
greatest number of men doe thinke filthy motions, vn∣cleane thoughts, corrupt
affections, and detestable consents to be no sin, vnlesse the acte do
ensue. But indede the Eternall, which hath created the heart, seeth all
these things in vs, and abhorreth and condemneth them, he is the searcher
of the raines, which knoweth the thought before it bee hatched in vs.
Wherefore, we haue great cause, to beg of God, his grace, that we may
vnderstand and know the ruzes and deceiptes of Sathan, whereby to auoyde
them, and when he shal at any time sollicite vs to any of the aboue named
things, or suche like, let vs then know that the enimy is at hand, that he
dresseth his scara∣muches againste vs: and that he pla∣ceth 
his ambushes to cut betweene vs, and our saluation:
wherefore, it behoueth vs to bee alwayes armed with the armour of God, whereof
Sainct Paule speaketh in the Epistle to the Ephesians, 6. Chapter, and to
bee well acquaynted with the per∣fect vse of our weapon: for oure eni∣mie is
both strong and skilfull, and woulde soone make an end of man∣kind, if that
God did not holde him in bridle: his cunnings are in maner infinite, he can
transfigure himselfe sometime into the likenesse of an Angel of
light, 
2. Cor. 12.13.14. yea, into the
likenesse of Christe himselfe, and alleage the Scriptures vnto vs, but
it shall be al∣togither to cast vs downe with the weight of our sinnes,
into desperati∣on, and so to damne vs: for he wyll alleadge vnto vs the
iustice of God, the horrour of oure sinnes, and the Law, cleane contrarie
to Christe, for Christe is the nouriture, medicine, and
consolation of afflicted soules, he will not breake the bruzed reede, nor
quench the smoking tow, wher∣fore we must beware of this false and
counterfetted Christe, he can make this day, that which is horrible sinne
to seeme to me to be no sinne, and to morrow that whiche is no sinne, to
be horrible sinne: thus can he am∣plifie and swell the least euill thing
that is, and make it to seeme as great and huge as a mightie Mountayne. I
haue spoken some thing of this cū∣ning aduersarie, whiche the sacred
Scripture calleth the great Leuiathā and the redde Dragon: to the ende we
might beware of him, and auoide his snares which he laieth aboue and beneath
vs, before and behinde, on euery side, and within and with∣out vs, to the
ende, that when wee shall feele our selues in any sort soli∣cited by
him▪ we maye forthwith re∣paire to our Panacea and most
hole∣some medicine for al diseases, which is the word of God,
in the which we shall finde all comforte: and hauing founde it we must lay
sure holde on it in all humilitie and Prayer, the whiche word doth euen
repulse and chase Sathan from vs. It is a lighte whiche lighteneth to our
feete, it is a most pure thing, it cōuerteth soules, it is a faithfull
witnesle, yea, it is the power of God to saluation to all be∣leeuers.
Saincte Paule calleth it the Sword of the Spirit, the which wōu∣deth and
putteth Sathan to flighte: it is that Sword, without the whiche we may not
fight the battayle wyth that strong and mightie enimie, with whome wee must
euerye one of vs fight a battayle, eyther in the time of oure healthe, or
else in the article of our death, for then beginneth he to play sharply the
accuser, then setteth he forth vnto vs the Lord Christe, as a lawgiuer
and exactor, then maketh he euery sinne to seeme twenty,
to the ende he maye make vs to disho∣nour God through vnbeleefe, and so to
fall into desperation: our aunswer must be to him, Satan thou canst not
speake truth except it be to get cre∣dite, whereby afterward thou mayst the
more boldly tel millions of lyes: but know thou, 
Hebr. 1.10. & 14.
that my Lord Iesus Christe hathe payde my debt more than abundantly, for
with one onely offering, he hath cōsecrated for euer thē which are
sanctified. Nowe God is iust, yea iustice it selfe, wherefore he is
contente with one (more than sufficient) paymente, for one thyng, wherfore
thou canst in no wise hurt me, if he can not in this sort preuaile. Then
commeth he in another lyke∣nesse; with his faire face, with flatte∣ring and
entising words, to lift vs vp into pride and vayne glorye, and would
perswade vs that we haue de∣serued Heauen and eternall life by our workes, vnto whome we muste answere in this sort, O thou
horrible enchanter, thou bearest me in hande that I am a Saincte, to the ende
thou mightest make me a Diuell. Who is he that doth that which is comman∣ded
him to doe? none; no not one, wher are then my deserts? I wil shew thee
Sathan, my Lorde Christ hathe taken from mee all my sinnes, and hath nayled
them to his crosse, 
2 Cor. 5. d. Rom. 8. 1.
Cor. 15. g. Ephes. 1.19. Ephes. 2.1.13
Coloss. 1.20. & 2.14.15 and hath cancelled the
obligation which was againste me, yea, he hath done more for me, he hathe
giuen mee all his deserts, to witte, his obedience, iu∣stice,
righteousnesse, and innocencie, as to a member of his bodye, where∣fore I
(being a member of his body) can no more bee damned than my Lorde Christe
may. Now when hee seeth himselfe thus aunswered and proued a lyar by the
sacred Scrip∣tures of God, whiche are the onely weapon wherewith to put him
to flight, he then yeeldeth all lost, ther∣fore we may easily
see how needeful it is to be armed against Sathan with the most
blessed word of God, wher∣with to quenche all his fierie dartes, and to
repulse all his assaults. Wher∣fore I haue turned this exhortation into
our english tongue, the whych was written in the French by a reue∣rend,
worthy, learned, and godly fa∣ther, to a noble, martiall, and Chri∣stian
Gentleman of France, his good Lorde and friende, wherewith in the time
of his quietnesse he might fitte his armoure and weapons in suche sort,
as by battayle, he might valiant∣ly fighting: obtayne a glorious and victorious
Crowne For as your ho∣nor knoweth, he that will be a good Souldioure, must
enter timely into the warres, therefore I saye, I haue turned into the
Englishe the same exhortation, for the profite of the Churche of God heere
in Englande. And albeit that the wordes be not many, they
be of singular valew and effecte, the whiche I haue published vnder your
honors name, doubting not, but that you will take my poore trauel in this
behalfe in good part. I haue added in the ende of it a Table of certayne
consolatorie passages of Scripture, whiche I haue gathered out of the old
and new Testament, for confirmation of oure faith, in the moste sweete
and comfortable pro∣mises of the almighty. For when we shal come to the
battayle, the which we must once sighte, eyther in the time of our health,
or else in the ar∣ticle of deathe (for none is crowned that fighteth not, and
a Christian life is a continuall warre) by the grace of God thys shorte
exhorta∣tion shall greatly helpe as manye as shall make the same familiar
vnto them, towardes the obteyning of the victorie agaynste the aforesayde 
trayned, experimented, cunning, mightie, and cruell enimie. In
London the twentith of Marche. Anno Domini. 1579.


