



BECAVSE I had my being from a woman, I thought none had more right to the grape than she which planted the vine. Considering there∣fore the manifold distem∣pers of body, which yee Women are subject unto through your ignorance & modestie, I could not but doe my best, to informe and

advise you in the conser∣vation of your own health. And when I had spent some meditations, and consulted with Galen and Hippo∣crates for my proceeding; amongst all diseases inci∣dent to the body, I found none more frequent, none more perilous then those which arise from the ill affected wombe: for through the evill quality thereof,Tatum cor∣pus ab uter afficitur. Hippoc. lib. 1. de locis in homine. the heart, the liver, and the braine are affected, from whence the actions vitall, natural, & animal are hurt; and the virtues concoctive, sanguifficative, distribu∣tive,

attractive,Galenus 6. de locis af∣fect. cap. 5. Bottonus de morbis mu∣lierum cap. 39. expulsive retentive, with the rest are all weakened. So that from the wombe comes convulsi∣ons, epilepsies, apoplexies, palseyes, hecticke fevers, dropsies, malignant ulcers, and to bee short, there is no disease Baptista Montanus d uterinis affect pag. 1. so ill but may pro∣cede from the evill quality of it.
How necessary therefore the knowledge of uterine diseases is, judge yee. And how many of you labour of them, all through your own ignorance and modestie, woefull experience makes it manifest. For when a

woman is afflicted with a∣ny disease of the wombe; first through her ignorance, shee knowing not the cause thereof being not instru∣cted in the state of her own body. And secondly through her modestie, being loh to divulge and publish the same unto the Physitian to implore his aide, shee con∣ceals her griefe and so en∣creaseth her sorrow.
For the aide and benefit of a woman in this cause, have I composed this trea∣tise; Wherein as in a glasse she may see her selfe in pri∣vate, and view the nature,

cause, signes, prognosticks and cure of all uterine dis∣eases, But yet no further, then thereby to bee instru∣cted to conferre with the Physitian for the cure of her griefe, least by the mis∣applying of the remedy you augment your disease, I confesse if you looke unto the matter it is old;Nil dictum quod non dictum, pri∣us. if unto the method new: part of it being selected out of the Greeks, part out of the La∣tines, and part out of the experience of my owne pra∣ctice, wherein I have fol∣lowed the industrie of the Bee, who gathers hony out

of divers floures to weave into her owne combe. Ma∣ny things more might have been added in it, which for modestie sake my pen hath omitted. I have also stooped to your capacities in avoid∣ing hard words and Rheto∣ricall phrases, desiring ra∣ther to informe your judge∣ments with the truth, though a plaine manner, then to confound your un∣derstandings with a more Rhetoricall discourse. But fearing to bee over-tedi∣us, craving acceptance for these first fruits of my braine, untill God indues

mee with a better harvest, I rest,

