



THe Egiptian Lady, (Right Worshipfull) looking earnestly in tra∣uaile, on the Picture of Andromida, was immediatly deliuered of a fayre daugh∣ter: and Acteon staring on those Nimphes naked and bare, was trāsformed into the shape of a Beast. Pigmaleon so long kissed the brethlesse lippes of that could Stone his picture, that he imbraced it a liuing portrature: & that young Iphis retayning till her mariage day the shape of a Maide, though attyred in the habite of a man, was then made a husband, for which he long wished, and enioyed the company of his beloued wife. The imaginations prooue oftē times of the full perswasions of the minde, iust to the perfect perfection of the honest meaning: & to like the best of any thing that cannot be bettered, is the way to be loued, and of moste to be liked. You may, behoulding this purging Pill, dislike it to be any daintie drugge: and yet reading it as you will (with reason) perswade your selfe to be a delicate Dishe: for happely what pleaseth you, liketh not the most: and yet beeing loued of you, may be imbraced of many. Euery man that behouldeth a protracture, cannot drawe a Picture: and ma∣ny eate a Peare, that cannot make a Plum. A young youth com∣ming into the studie of Thalias, and behoulding (at full) his Libra∣rie, began to peruse one booke, and then to looke in another: but not finding any for his reason, nor so mutch as one that he could

reade: I had rather sayd he, haue my bookes which are toyes, for that I know their meaning, then these which are true, for that I vnderstand not their manners. Another taking Ciceroes Pen, and beginning to write, drew foolish sentences, and mishapē sayings: why? said he, this is sutch a mans Pen, and yet see how disorderly it hath written? Aunswered another, but thou hast neither Ciceroes minde on thy Paper, nor his hand on thy Pen: how therefore couldst thou write faire, or inuēt finely? What yeeldeth sweeter fruite sayth Plato, then the wisdom of writing? and what sayeth Anaxagoras, yeeldeth more prayse, then the profit of the Pen? but Sir, if you expect commodities in these my cauils, you are like to be frustrate of your cogitation: and if you looke for wisedom of so wild a wit, you will prooue by his woords that he is but a wanton: and no maruaile, for the Fletcher maketh two shafts, be∣fore one seeme sure, and the Scriner may make two Pennes, be∣fore one prooue for his purpose: expect not then I beseech you of this plant but of two yeares grafting, so much fruite, as from the Tree of twentie yeares growing: For the Apprentice must cast any bill, before he keepe his Maisters booke: and the Shoema∣ker must learne to fashion a latchet before he sowe on a Laste. So, this simple Author must lie in Diogenes Tub, before his writing like his owne fantasye, and put on Socrates Gowne, before his dooings please all fauours. There was brought vnto Appelles the head of a Noble man, being slaine, to haue his counterfayte drawen, and the fauour that his face then retayned to be deuised: which he promised to do effectually, and to end it speedely: then wiping his face, being a little bloudy, perceiued him to be a good∣ly personage, when before he liued, though now (dead) he looked not so louely: then behoulding it better, sawe in his cheeke a lit∣tle cut with some blowe, whereout so fast as he wiped issued a drop of bloud: then he drew the fauour of his face, and the drop of bloud on his cheeke: said the other, wherefore hast thou made

his face so white, and his lips so wan, and yet that drop of bloud so on his cheeke? For (sayd he) were that spot away, they would thinke he lost all his bloud when he left his life, but now they may see, he inioyeth that dead, which he possessed liuing: If then Appelles had controulers, beeing so perfect a Painter, I surely shall finde cauillers for this vnperfect posie: the simplicitie of this work I know will cause it be liked but of few, yet some no doubt wyll reed it though but for a fashion: for though Narbonus were in his youth allured to many wanton lustes, yet once hauing felt the force of Fortune, was seduced to an honest lyfe. But as the Crow thinketh they are not her owne birdes, vnlesse they looke as blacke as her self, and the Eagle imagineth they are not her owne brood vnles they looke against the Sunne: so this youth would not be reformed vntyll he sawe his owne follyes before his face, nor be reclaimed tyll he had tasted some purging Pilles for his mad maladyes. But some (happely) will imagine me to haue beene in loue, for putting heere this name Lust, but rather they may think me to haue liued by the losse, that haue ben lured so mutch to my own liberty: yet I am like him in this respect that putteth vp a Supplication to his Prince, who regardeth not who dislike him so it please his person: So, first wil I way your proofe, and then regarde others propertye: He must I know arise earlye that shall like all men, and he must write well that shall please all mindes: but he that planteth trees in a Forest, knoweth not how many shall taste the Fruite, and he that soweth in his garden di∣uers Seedes, knoweth not who shall eate of his Sallets. He that planteth a Vine, knoweth not who shall taste his Wine: and he that putteth any thing in Print, must thinke that all will peruse it: If then amongst many blossoms, some prooue blastes, no mar∣uaile if amongst many Readers, some prooue Riders: but let them laugh, to see if I will lowre: for who so accepts not my good will shewes himselfe to haue but small wit: But as (all ready) my assu∣raunce

is sufficient of your goodnesse: so therefore am I bould to boast of your gratiousnes, for the which I present you this rude worke: Which, I beseech you to accept, though it come from a rusticall writer, so may you in time gaine a more stately stile, of so vnperfect a studient: and so shall you binde me to blaze your name to the farthest I may, with safetye, and to honour you in hart, who seemes to accept gratefully this my presumptuous proffer. Which seeing it hath so pleased you, I shall not thinke any one thing to great for your gaine, nor any so woorthy, my duety reserued. I obediently bowe to the knees of your courtesie, and yeeld my selfe alwayes at your com∣maund: wishing you the greatest happinesse your hart desireth, and that beatitude post funera: which your soule delighteth.

