



EVen as I can not refrayn but disclose and opēly pu∣blish it, so can I not wor∣thyly expresse or declare, howe ioy∣ouse a thing it is to our eares, how confortable to our herte, and howe pleasant to our eyes, to hear, vnder stande, and se: that your lordshyppe (hauynge such power geuen you of God and your Prince to suppresse, beate downe, and vtterly abolish, al vayne supersticion and false religi∣on, as you haue) doeth nowe, by the abundaunte grace of almighty God workinge in your hert, open∣ly repugne, suppres, & beate downe those vayne ceremonies, and super∣sticiouse

obseruaunces founded by the Byshoppe of Rome, that here∣tofore ye haue (to the moste part of men) bene thought to fauoure, vp∣holde, and maintaine.
In very dede. These manifest to∣kens that do nowe appeare in your good Lordeshyp, are verye ioyous vnto all suche men, as delite to se al superstition abolished, and true re∣ligion set forth and maintened: but much more ioyous to me and suche other, as be towarde your lordship in seruice. For nowe (ye lord be thā∣ked therfore) we haue aboundaūt∣lye inoughe wherewyth to stoppe the mouthes of the euil speakers, so that if they wyll not otherwyse be answered, we maye saye as Christ dyd to the froward Iewes. Operi∣bus credite. Lette the worckes (whi¦che ye se openlye done) cause you to leaue of your euyll speakyng, and to

learne to speake wel of such as god hath set in authoritie.
And to declare myne opinion of your Lordshippe, I haue thought it my dutye (beynge moued in con∣science to write agaynst the deuilish abuse of altares, so stifelie maynte∣ned by the stifenecked Papistes) to dedicate the same mi labours vnto youre good Lordeshyppe, trusting that if you will vouchesalfe to sette it forthe vnder your name, the peo∣ple will with better will embrace it and be the more edified by it.
Wyth full truste therefore, that your Lordeshyp will be my bucke∣ler and shylde of defence, whylse I fyghte vnder the banner of the lord of Hostes: I haue couragiouselye geuen the onset vpon the Romishe Enemyes, bendynge myne ordy∣naunce against the strong & mighty Botereulx of their Bulwarke (the

hygh altare I meane) whyche bei¦yng shaken downe, I doubt not the forte wyll sone be yelded vnto my grande capitaine Iesu Christe. Who preserue your lord∣ship to his honoure, & your lordships euer¦lasting wealth. Amen.
