


THE naturall inclination, the gentle amitie, and the feruent loue and fauoure, whych you mooste affectuouslye, entierlye, and perfitlye, do not onely owe, but haue, beare, and prose∣cute towarde me, my contrye, and contrye language: and againe the sodayne semblable vehemente affecti∣ons whych I moste comparable and ardent, mutual∣lye and dulye do beare towards you: hath caused me to abortiat, (if I myght speake my contry lāgage, I neaded not to borowe the latine terme, neyther make anye further explanation thereof) and to bring forthe my late conceyued chyld before hys naturall and de∣stinated tyme of byrthe.
But what than? For thys euyll chaunce there lyeth none other remedye, but eyther (if he seme to haue his lineamentes tyghtly proportionated, thoughe as yet somewhat lumpyshe) to lycke hym hereafter (as the Beare doeth hyr whelpe) into a more perfecte shape: eyther els, if he shal appeare ouermuche monstruous to take hym and throw him into the botomeles floud of Lethe, where then he shall neyther greue the Pa∣rentes hertes, nor yet offende the eyen of kynne, nor straunger.
But peraduenture ye wyll saye, what by all thys? ye speake in parables, but I pray you frende Sales∣burye speake plaine Englyshe to me. Well therfore to appeare in mine owne likenes, and to be as plaine as
 the playne of Salesburie. The sayde child is thys boke, whom you so inordinately desire to go abrode before the appoynted season by the determination of the graue, discrete and pithy Poete Horace Flactus, whose verses be not farre from these in sentence.
Whan that thy restles penne, of fame hath ought contrivd:
At Metius eare se that thou tune, the cord in work reuivd
And let them iudge therin, whose heares be grisely growne;
Let midle age, let vnripe yeres, theron their iudgmēt sowne
Than maist thou well at wil (nine yeres in trial spente)
Set forth the work of wisdomes braine, that the in lot is lent
The sounde escaped once, can not be called backe:
But shut vp thoughts in hert mai be, amēded wher they lack.
Yet neuertheles, for your faithful frendshyps sake I wyll not onely wynke at thys, but euen aduisedly wyl forsake the prudēt counsaile of the wise mā thus admonishynge. A fole differeth nothinge from a wise man whiles he kepeth silence: yea, and I am not aba∣shed to publishe these vnsauoury trifles (for the small commoditie that you shall perceiue by them) amonge the honourable theatre, and worshipfull company of the learned, whiche moste plentuously (thankes be to the Lorde) habound now in euery place.
But of whence than commeth this vnshamefaste boldnes? Marye of a licence graunted and prouided forme by the verye same Poete, whose owne praise, metre, and wordes (ne lest by vnapt traduction of the same, I should disgrace the diuine poeticall maiestie) I wyll here subscribe.
— hoc tibi dictum
Tolle memor, certis medium et tolerabile rebus
Recte concedi: consultus iuris et actor
Lausarum mediocris, abest virtute diserti
Messale, nec scit quantum Caselitus Aulus
Sed tamen in pretio est.

Besides thys, the head learned man of all our tyme euen Erasmus Roterodamus, holdeth soore on my parte, for it is a true said sawe (sayth he) yt there is not written so yll a boke, but it is worthy the reading for some consideration. And againe, he affirmeth euen a∣boute the same place that it is expediente to heare the vnlearned playe the oratours or preachers, whereby it maye appeare, what shall be decent, and what not.
Therfore (I saye) be it expedient or rather tollera∣ble to admitte as well some such vnlearned writters as haue not the grace to obserue To prepon or comly∣nes euery where, and at all tymes. Amongest whiche sorte I wyl not disdayne to be accounted, seyng I am adsured to satisfie in some parte your minde, thoughe it be but slenderly to the purpose.
And in as much as I am fulli perswaded that you be the man to whom boeth for good learnyng & per∣fecte iudgement therein, and for the fauour pretended towarde this feble enterprise, I neades muste com∣mit thys boke (if for the littlenes it may be iustely cal∣led a boke) not onelye to be redde, corrected, & perfec∣ted, but also to be defended frome the cancred maliti∣ous checkes of all those, who at all times canne be at better laysure to rebuke other mens doinges, than to do ought them selues. Thus fare ye hartelye well.
At Thauies Inne in Holburne more hastely, than spedelye. M.D.L.
