



WHat Ʋnthrifty kinde of Spirit is it, that the minde of the Man is now so obessed with! For what notion so e∣uer shall bee offered vnto it, differing but the least point from the vulgar ayres which Praeiudice hath formerly taken hold off: howbeit there appeare, whether manifest Argument of Necessity, or strong Inducement of Benefite; yet it is reproued and rejected onely for this; Because it is NEW. Where∣as

on the Contrary, let it present vs with va∣nity of delight, or choise of idlenesse, though to the ineuitable destruction of one and all of vs, yet by how much the Newer it is, by so much the more is it honoured, rewarded, and greedily imbraced.
An Instance hereof, may bee the present state of this our Christian world, in whose greatest part, this is found to be trew, that albeit there be tendered vnto vs, Stability of Estate, Treuth of Society, Peace and Plen∣ty on earth, and fauor with God and Man, such, as greater the world neuer before en∣ioyed: yet is there no place of audience to be gotten, euen for none other reason but this. That the path is New and vntroden; And wee must not bee weained from walk∣ing on still in the spiritual blindnesses, where∣with wee haue hitherto like Mould-warpes beene holden and delighted, as if it were writen in Capital letters for a Frontispice, on the Gate of our common sense [Non intret fru∣gi.] Let not a good Obiect be admitted, nor a thought of Grace be conceiued amongst vs.
Such lot hath this man of God, the Pen∣man of these Parables, bin forced to passe

vnder. Concerning whom, because in men of former times, there was onely a doubt∣fulnesse, for they were vnto them (perhaps through their owne negligence) not yet vnsea∣led; Therefore the men of our daies will out of a Preiudicate wilfulnesse,Iohn 9. vtterly abo∣lish them, and (as the Iewes did concern∣ing Christ) excommunicate as many as beare witnesse to any of them, how well so euer they shall be by the Spirt of God opened, and how comfortable so euer the things contained in them bee found vnto vs. [Thus doe men loue darkenesse rather then light,Iohn 3. least their deedes should be reproued.]
In the middest of so desolate a wildernesse more disordered then the brute sea (for the Ocean hath kindly returnes of ebbes and flowes, and his Decumanos fluctus, I was by a Mighty hand guided, to the taking vp of this our Prophet, cast out as condemned to perpetuall exyle, and not worthy the light of the Sun of Righteousnesse in his Church, when viewing well, I could discerne in him the life of Diuine seede; which I acknowleg∣ed my selfe bound by the lawes of Nature, common to vs both, to foster and cherish vn∣to

full growth, according to the best skill of my vnderstanding and light in heauen∣ly Mysteries. Wherefore I profered him my seruice and helpe, which euen at the very first was so chearefully accepted of him, that he immediately directed me to present him to you my excellent good Lord, with assu∣rance of good speed therby▪ wherfore with∣out delay I hasted to accomplish this re∣quest, neither hath my expectation erred for the Gratious enterteynment hee found at his first accesse to your Presence: simply clad (as he was) in Pilgrims Habit: No more then was sufficient to auow him one of Gods good Creatures, and a Christian (I meane that Extemporary Interpretation of him which some few Moneths sithence it pleased Your Honor to accept at my hands) now since he hath gotten about him better attyre and Language, hath emboldened him to make a Second shew of himselfe, in hope that by Your Noble Protection he shall not onely re∣couer against the vniust and vnworthy im∣putations layd vpon him, but be Restored wholy to the possession of his Original Ho∣nor: Namely; An Evangelical Prophet of our Lord Iesus Christ.
Certainly he acknowlageth the large∣nesse of Your Heart in vnderstanding the things of God, The brightnesse of Your Light in maters of Profoundest Search; and the Ardor of Your Spirit constantly aspiring vnto Motions of the Purest Aire: Such Hearts onely can vnderstand in these: Such Lights onely can discerne of them: And such Spirits enioy the Comfort of theit Dew vse: And because there are so few of such ones; therefore is it that this louely Stran∣ger hath beene so little set by among Men to their owne Reproofe and Losse inualua∣ble. His demands are just, and the profit he tendreth to the Honorers of him singu∣lar, as appeareth by that which is here re∣uealed out of him. So that the goodnesse of the cause it selfe remoueth all doubt, but that vnder your Excellencies countenance he shall assuredly finde plentifull regard, the Newnesse of his present habit and speech notwith∣standing.
As for my selfe; when I beheld (as I do dayly) the zelous and continual exercise of Pi∣ety in your owne Person, the gracious pract∣ise of Relligion in your family, the singular

good gouernment of your house, whereby the late dangerous times came not neere you, to touch you; nor any of yours (though be∣ing in the middest of them). I cannot but be perswaded, that your Noble and Pious spirit will vouchsafe to regard this my ende∣uors (weake that they are) and fill vp the wants with the sweetnesse of your good ac∣ceptance, which is wont not to reject any (proceeding from a single heart) that is not altogether vnsauory.
Wherefore my prayers vnto God for you (my Lord) are, that the Integrity of your wisdome, your Relligious learning, your ver∣tues and your valor may crowne you with Honours and Richesse, and graces and fa∣uors both with God and Man, as if with full Sheffes the field which the Lord will haue blessed.
These are the vowes which do with con∣tent and delight vnspeakable open the light of the Morning, and shut in the sight of the Euening dayly, to your Honours trewly loyal seruant and Chapellan:

