



AS your Maiestie Sir, after your accustomed & verte∣ous maner was sometyme discoursing at Table with such your Domestiques, as chaunced to bee attendant.
It pleased your High∣nesse (not onely to esteeme the percles stile of the Greke HOMER, and the Latin VIRGIL to be inimitable to vs, whose toung is barba∣rous and corrupted:) But also to alledge partly throw delite your Maiest. tooke in the Hautie stile of those most famous Writers, and partly to sounde the opinion of others, that also the loftie Phrase, the graue inditement, the facoūd
ermes of the French Salust (for the like re∣semblaunce) could not be followed, nor suffi∣ciently expressed in our rude and impollished english language. Wherein, I more boldly thē aduisedly [with your Maiest lycence] declared my simple opinion. Not calling to mind that I was to giue my verdit in presens of so sharp & clear-eied a censure as your highnesse is: But rashly I alledged that it was nothing impossi∣ble euen to followe the footsteppes of the same great Poet SALVST, and to translate his vearse (which neuerthelesse is of it selfe exqui∣site) succintlie, and sensibly in our owne vul∣gar specch. Whereupon, it pleased your Ma∣iestie (amongste the rest of his workes) to as∣signe me, The Historie of Iudith, as an agreable Subiect to your highnesse, to be turned by me into English verse: Not for any speciall gift or Science that was in mee, who am inferiour in knowledge and crudition to the least of your Maiesties Court: But by reason (peraduenture) of my bolde assertion your Maiestie, who will not haue the meanest of your house vnoccu∣pied, would haue mee to beare the yoke, and driue forth the pennance, that I had rashly pro∣cured. Indeede, the burden appeared heauy, &
the charge almost insupportable to me, neuer∣thelesse the feruent desire which I had to ob∣temper vnto your Maiest. commādement, the earnest entention to verifie my rash speaking, and the assured confidence which I ankred on your highnesse helpe and correction, encoura∣ged me so, and lightned on such wise my heauy burden, that I haue with lesse paine, brought my half dispaired worke to finall end. In the which I haue so behaued my self, that through your Maiest. concurrence, I haue not exceeded the number of the lynes writtē by my author: In euerie one of the which, hee also hath two sillabes mo then my English beares. And this notwithstanding, I suppose your Maiest. shall find litle of my Authors meaning pretermitted. Wherefore if thus much be done by me, who am of an other profession, and of so simple lit∣trature, I leaue it to be cōsired by your Maiest. what such as ar cōsummat in letters & knowes the weightie words, the pithie sentences, the pollished tearmes, and full efficacie of the En∣glish toung would haue done. Receiue thē Sir, of your owne Seruant, this litle worke at your owne commandement enterprised, corrected by your Maiest. owne hande, and dedicated to
your owne highnesse. If I haue done well, let the praise redound to your Maiest. whose cen∣sure I haue vnderlyen. If otherwise, let my de∣fault of skill, bee imputed to my selfe, or at the least my good entention allowed, whereby o∣thers may haue occasion to do better. To your highnes consideration, referring Sir, both my deligence done in this small translation, & the inueterate affection which I haue, and ought alwayes to beare vnto your Maiest. I commit with all humilitie, your highnes, your Realme and estate, to the gouernement of God, who gouerneth all the Worlde.
