



My good LORD:
I Had euer thought, the interest of but an ordinary friend, might haue drawne me to that, whereto the despight of a right bitter foe should not haue driuen me: till the Fate of these Sermons hath taught me my selfe bet∣ter, and now giuen me at once a sight both of my Errour and Infirmitie. The improbitie of some good friends, I had out-stood, who with all their vexation could neuer preuaile vpon me for the publishing of but the for∣mer

of them: when loe, at length the rest∣lesse importunity of hard censures, hath wrung both it, and the fellow of it out of my hands. So much haue we a stronger sense of our owne wrongs, than of our friends re∣quests: and so much are we forwarder to iu∣stifie our selues, than to gratifie them. How euer, if (by Gods good blessing upon them) these slender labours may lend any helpe to aduance the peace & quiet of the Church, in setling the iudgments of such, as are more either timorous than they need be, or contenti∣ous than they should be: I shall haue much cause to blesse his gracious prouidence in it, who, with as much ease, as sometimes hee brought light out of darknes, can out of pri∣uate wrongs work publike good. In which hope, I am the rather content to send them abroad: though hauing nothing to com∣mend them, but Truth and Plainenesse. Yet such as they are, I humbly desire they may passe vnder your Lordships protection: whereunto I stand by so many deare names engaged. By the name of a Visitour; in respect of that Society, wherof I was of late a mem∣ber: when founded by your Lordships

godly Richard Flemming, and Thomas Ro∣theram, Bi∣shops of Lin∣colne, Predecessors, hath had plentifull ex∣perience of your Lordships singular both Care and Iustice in preseruing their Statutes, and maintaining the rights of their founda∣tion. By the name of a Diocesan; in respect of the Countrey, wherein it hath pleased God to seate me: which hath found much com∣fort in your Lordships religious and mode∣rate gouernment. By the name of a Master; in regard of that dependance I haue vpon your Lordship by speciall seruice. Which, as it putteth a boldnesse into me, to tender this small pledge of my thankefulnesse to your gracious acceptance: so it layeth a strong Obligation vpon me to tender my best pray∣ers vnto Almightie God for the continuance and increase of his blessings vpon your Lordship, to the good of his Church vpon earth, and your eternall crowne in heauen.
Booth by Paynell Linc. Nouem. 20. 1621.

