


I Besech your worshippe not to mislike with me for omitting any parte of your accustomed title in this my letter, sithēs I doe it not of any contempt, but onely of conscience grounded vppon Gods worde: as who am persuaded the reli∣giō presently authorized in the realm, and consequently your ministery ther∣in, to be so far of from Christes true re∣ligiō, as it is far from Christ, to haue his
 Church (which after the publication of the Gospell ought,Genes. 22.26.28. Psal. 2.44 75.88.144 Philip. 2. according to the prophecies, to be openly spread through out the world, and her Citizēs ought to shyne in the middest of the peruerse nation,Isai. 54.60 Math. 28. of infideles, like starres, and to remayn gloriouse for euer in many na∣tiōs togeather) now first (after nine hū∣dred yeres oppression as your own bre∣thern doe confesse) to shewe it selfe abrode, and openly to be professed.
So that although it could be shewed that your faith had bene alwaies in the world (as it was not) yet in that (if at all it were) it lay hydden,Math. 5. it could not be the faith of Christes true Church, which neuer ceased to be a City built vpon a hil which can not be hid∣den. And he did sette his candel vpon a candelstick, not only to geue light for a few hundred yeres: but to geue light to all,Luc. 8. that either should come into his house or, tarie in his house.

And seing at al momentes men in diuerse countries came into Gods house by faith and baptisme,Isai. 2. & 62. Math. 28. and seing like∣wise he is with his disciples al daies vntil the end of the world, and not only liueth, but reigneth for euer,Luc. 1. regnabit. that is to say, abideth gloriously and roially in the house of Iacob, which is the Church, doutlesse his Church is for euer built vpon a hil, and therefore it can not be hidden any one moment, and his light neuer can cease to shyne, to thend it may euer be true which Malachias the Prophet saied:Malac. 1. From the rising of the sonne to his going downe, my name is great among the gen∣tils.
And yet seing Christes name is not great by them who beleue falselie, (for they must nedes also haue naugh∣ty woorkes, and so the name of God,Heb. 11. Isai. 52. Rom. 2. as Saint Paule saith, is rather blasphe∣med amonge the Gentiles, then glo∣rified by euil men) it remaineth, that
 Christes name must be great among the Gentills throughe a good faith, openly geuing light by the good works of true Christians, who may thereby cause Gods name to be glorified,Math. 5. and by their good conuersation may cause the Infidels to be conuerted vnto Christ.1. Cor. 7. 2. Pet. 3.
Now for asmuch as your faith was not openly alwaies professed in many nations together, but was altogether hidden before these fifty yeres, and so hidden,A Church vnder a bushel. that no history or Chronicle doth make mention of any congregatiō at all professing your faith from tyme to tyme in any Cities, Townes, Villages, or priuate houses of diuerse prouinces and countries at once: nothing can be iustly said or alleaged, why you should not renounce this obscure religion of yours, which is so slaunderouse to Gods gloriouse name, and returne again to that our Churche,A Church vpō a hil. which stode for euer vpon the hil, and whose light was ne∣uer
 so dimmed, or darkened, but that the very Iewes, Turks, Saracēs, Moores, and Tartariās, knewe where we dwelt, and what we professed.
I chose at this tyme to intreat with al sober Protestants the rather by your person (M. D. Parker) because I haue heard of so much good nature in your worshippe, that it was not vnlike, but he woulde voutesafe to heare what so euer should be reasonably said, specially touching Gods worde, and the practise of the primatiue Churche, of which pointes my chiefe talke shalbe at this tyme.
Many men haue laboured to geue diuerse Signes and Markes of the true Church, to thintēt it being ones knowē, al other controuersies may geue place to the pillor and sure stay of truth.1. Tim. 3. But that it may appear to them, who do not willingly stop their eares against the truth, what notable aduantage the Catholiks haue ouer and aboue the Pro∣testants
 in this behalf: I wil shew the truth of our Churche to be so safe and clere, that hitherto it was not possible for the Protestants themselues to de∣uise any such marke or signe of a true Churche, the which doth not much rather make for vs, then for them.
Gods vvord is not a suf¦ficient mark of the true Church.They teach Gods word to be the chiefe mark, whereby the true Church may be knowen, which yet can not wel be so, because the marke whereby an o∣ther thing is knowen, ought it selfe to be most exactly knowen, whereas we are not agreed, what Gods woorde is. For some call onely the writen letter and the meaning thereof, Gods woorde: others thinck many things to be Gods woorde, which are not ex∣presly writen, but are reuealed from God to the Church by the tradi∣tion of the Apostles,2. Thess. 2 Heb. 8. & 10. 2. Cor. 3. and by the holy ghost, who hath writen Gods lawes in our harts, and there hath imprī∣ted them.

Also we are not agreed vppon the writen woorde of God, because the Protestantes doe not admitte so many bookes of the olde Testament, as the Catholikes doe. Thirdly the mea∣ning of those bookes which we are agreed vppon, is altogether in question betwen vs. How then can that be a mark sufficient to shew an other thing to vs, which it self is not sufficientlie knowen of vs? All which reasons notwithstanding, the confidence of our cause is such, that I may graunt the woorde of God (what soeuer it be) to be a sufficient marke, where∣by Gods Churche may be knowen. And then I say, that euerie way Gods word standeth more on our syde, then a∣gainst vs.
For yf you meane by God worde,Gods vvoorde first vvith vs. the writen letter of the olde and of the newe Testament, we are before you in that behalfe: because you haue no assured Copies thereof, which were
 not preserued by the former Christiās, whome yee call Papists, of thē you toke as your baptism so your Bible. By them not only the old and the new testamēt, but also the works of the auncient Fa∣thers were copied out, printed, and layed vp in libraries, ād in other places whence they came to your hands.
If then the hauing of Gods woorde proue a true Churche, that is the more true Church, which had it first, special∣ly seing we came not by it priuily, or violently, but receaued it euē at the A∣postles hāds. For after that day where∣in S. Peter and S. Paule deliuered Gods word to the faithfull Romans, the Church of Rome hath alwaies kept it safe without either leesing, or corrup∣ting it.
 Again we beleue and acknowlege more of the Bible then you doe,More of Gods vvoorde vvith vs. by the bookes of Toby, of Iudith, of Wise∣dom, of Ecclesiasticus, and of the Machabees. All which we accompt
 for Gods own word, according to the cō∣sent of many auucientAug. de doct. Chri¦stia. lib. 2. c. 8. Gelasius in Synode 70. episco. Cōcil. Flo¦rēt. in fine-Trident. Session. 3. Fathers and councels: whereas you call them Apo∣crypha, and so make them vnable to decide any controuersie about religion.
Thirdly we doe not only graunt the Hebrew text of the old testament (such as may appeare vncorrupted) and the Greek text of the new testament, to be Gods word but we also acknowlege with the aūciēt Fathers, theIustin. in Apol. 2. Ireneus li. 3. c. 25. Euseb. de praeparat. Euang. li. 8. c. 1. Aug. ep. .8 Greek tran∣slatiō of the Septuagīts,Moe co∣pies of Gods vvord. ād with theSessio. 3. Tridentine Councel the cōmon Latin translation (which so many hundred yeres hath bene diligentlie expounded and preserued in the Latin Churche) to be of ful authority: Where as you geue small credit to either of these transla∣tions, except (by your iudgement) they agree with the first Hebrew and Greek copies. We then haue Gods woorde in moe authentik tungs and copies, then you haue.
Fourthly we preach, expound, inter∣pret, 
 and translate Gods word in all ma∣ner of tungs,Better vse of Gods vvord. better then you, because we doe these things, not only by inter∣nal, but also by such external vocation and commission, as may be shewed to haue sprung from the Apostles, by the lineal and ordinary succession of our bishops and priests. Whereas you can fetch no higher commission, then from the common weale, which neuer recea∣ued authority of Christ to make priests, or to send preachers: ād yet how shal they preache,Rom. 10. if they be not sent?
 Concerning that you reade Gods word to the people at you Church ser∣uice tyme in the vulgar tungs,Of Gods vvord in vulgare tungs. it is no perfection at all on your syde. For yee lack thereby the vse of the better tungs, as of the Greek and Latin: which were sanctified on Christes crosse,Luc. 23. Ioan. 19. as for all other holy vses, so most specially for to serue God withall at the tyme of Sa∣crifice, wherein he requireth the very best in euery kind to be offered vntoMalac. 1.
 him, as to our dreadful Lord, and lo∣uing father. And who douteth, but that a lerned, a holy, and a common tung, is more honorable, then a barbarouse, a prophane, and a priuate tung?
In so much, that in respect of the whole body of the Catholike Church (wherewith we specially communicate in our seruice and praiers) the vulgare tungs are much more to be accompted strange or vnknowen (which strange tungs onely S. Paule doth least regard) then the common tungs,1. Cor. 14. which were alone deliuered to the very first Chri∣stian Churche, by the Apostles them∣selues, in the East and west: not re∣garding the infinite multitude of vul∣gare tungs which were in particular prouinces of the same countries.the Greek and Latin Church. For of the Greek tung vsed in the East Chur∣ches, and of the Latin vsed in the west Churches, it came to passe, that it is al one to say, the Greek or the east Church, the Latin or the west Churche.





And surely seing Christ being vpō the Crosse (whence the paterne of al prayer and oblations is to be taken, si∣thens the Sacrifice which we offer (saith Cyprian) is the passion of our Lord) whereas he knewe right well,Li. 2. epi. 3 that the common people of the Iewes (the pure Hebrew tongue being either lost, or much decayed in cōmon speache, euery daie more ād more after the cap∣tiuitie of Babylon) could not vnder∣stand him,Math. 27. Psal. 21. did yet recite the beginning of the Psalme (My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken mee) in Hebrew, and did not either by and by, or at al interprete the same in the vul∣gar tongue: need we to doubt, but that after his example, we may doe the like in those tongues at our seruice, whiche Priests ād Clerks do vnderstād, though the common people doe not vnderstand the same?
VVe vse also vul∣gar tungs in our ser¦uice.But lest there should be any one iote wherin to passe Gods Catholik Church,
 we also haue in certaine countries, the vse of vulgar tongues in the Churche seruice, as in Dalmatia it is to be sene at this daie, and the like is said to be in Assyria, and in Aethiopia, the Chri∣stians of which Countries doe acknow∣ledge the Supreamacie of the Bisshoppe of Rome.
And although by this very meanes,Vulgar tungs cause bar∣barous∣nes. those Countries are become the more barbaous (for thereby the Priestes and Preachers can not reade either the Greek or the Latin Doctours) yet this good ariseth to the whole Churche of their losse, that it both hath all de∣grees of tungs (to wit, both, lerned and vulgar) in her praiers, and by the ex∣ample of those barbarouse countries, she warneth the other more ciuil parts to auoid that mischief, whereby those other men fel into that reproche of bar∣barousnes.
Moreouer, those Countries (some of which neuer knew any better then
 their own natiue tung) haue their ser∣uice in the vulgar tungs by mere force and necessity,Necessity forceth those coū¦tries to vse vul∣gar tūgs. and that allowed by the good dispensation and toleration of the See Apostolike, without breache of vnity: whereas the Protestāts hauing once had the Latin seruice, are fallen from Latin to English, that is to say, frō the better to the worse, and that also by making a schism,Ioan. 19 and by diuiding the coate of Christ (which was without any seame) into many partes, which thing the very vnfaithfull soldiours were afeard to doe. Thus touching the writen woorde and the vse thereof, there are many causes, why we should be in better case then the Protestants, but none at all, why we should be in worse.
 If not only the writen letter, but al∣so the plaine meaning of euery proposi∣tion be to be considered,The mea∣ning of Gods vvord. Math. 26. we read it li∣terally and plainly spoken, this is my body, and as the woords doe sound, so
 doe we vnderstand them. Why then is (this) which Christ pointeth vnto, de∣nied to be his body?Iacob. 2. A man is iusti∣fied of works, and not of faith on∣ly. Why then are good workes don in a right faith, denied to iustifie? or why is onely faith taught to iustifie?Rom. 2. The doers of the law shalbe iustified. Why is the law then taught not to be able to be don, or kept?Rom. 5. By the obe∣dience of one (which is Christ) ma∣ny shalbe made iust, that is to say,Constitu∣entur. iu∣stice shalbe wrought or setled in many. Why thē is it denied that we are made really iust? Or why is it taught, that righteousnes is onely imputed to vs, whereas S. Paul saith also,Rom. 5. the charity (or loue) of God is spread in our harts by the holy ghost which is geuē vs. This spreading ād stablishing of charity in our harts, is more then a bare imputing of charity to vs.
Whose synnes soeuer yee for∣geue, they shalbe forgeuen them.Ioan. 20.
 Why are then the bishops and priests (who succede the Apostles) denied to forgeue synnes?Luc. 22. He that is greater among you, lette him be made as the yonger. Why then deny you, that one was greater among the Apostles, or, that one stil is greater among the bishops, their successours?
Math. 16.Thow art Peter or a Rocke, and vpon this Rock I wil build my Churche. Why then is the mi∣litant Church denied to be built vpon Saint Peter, and vppon his successours in that chair and office?2. Thes. 2. Keepe the traditions which yee haue lear∣ned either by woorde, or by our epistle.
Chrysost. Hom. 69. ad Pop. Ant.Why then are traditions, yea though they be Apostolike (as the vse of pray∣ing for the dead is) so despised, that the very name of tradition vsed in the better part, can not be suffered to be in the English Bible, though it be both in the Greeke and in the Latin?
 He that ioyneth his virgin in ma∣riage, doth wel,1. Cor. 7. and he that doth not ioyne her, doeth better.
Why then is maryage made with you as good as the state of virginity where∣as S. Paule maketh the state of virgi∣nity better?
Vowe yee,Psal. 75. and render your vowes vnto God. If thow wilt be perfitte,Math. 10. goe and sel all things which thou hast, and geue them to the poore, and follow mee. There are eunuches, who haue gel¦ded them selues for the kingdom of heauen. Obeie your rulers,Heb. 13. and be subiectes vnto them. Why then are the vowes of pouerty, of chastitie, and of obedience (to all which the word of God exhorteth vs) accompted vnlaufull? Or why are men exhorted, yea constrained not to perfoorm them?
Doe yee the worthy fruits of penance, saith Saint Iohn.Luc. 3. Why then is satisfaction and penance despised
 with you? The husbands ād the wiues being two in one flesh,Ephes. 5. is a great Sacrament (or mystery, or a holy and secret signe) in Christ and in the Churche. Why then is the mariage of faithful persons denied to be a Sacra∣ment?
Philip. 2.Work your saluation (saith S. Paule) with feare and trembling. Why then are your so presumptuouse, as euen by faith, to assure your selues of your saluation? Or how can he feare, who is assured to be saued?Rom. 11. Or how can the depe secrets of Gods predestinatiō be ordinarily knowen in this life? Or is not faith an ordinary gift in the Chur∣che?
Thus might I goe through al the ar∣ticles in controuersie, and in euery one I should find your syde to be the farther  of, and ours to be the nere to the plain literal meaning of Gods word.The cir∣cunstāce and con∣ference.
If not only the plain vnderstanding of any one sentence, but also the circun∣stance
 of the place, and the conference of Gods word be necessary, haue we not vsed it in euery question which hath ben hitherto handeled? Here I must nedes referre the reader to my treatise of the Supper of our Lord,In the x. and xii. chapters. namelie in the fourth booke, and to my booke of Images in the v. and the xi. chapters. Item in this booke, to the second and fourth chapters. For in this preface, it were ouer tedious to handle so long a matter.
If you say,The best vse of Gods vvoorde suffiseth not alone I doe not conferre the pla∣ces so as I ought to doe, thereof riseth a new question, wherein we must haue a new iudge. For we beleue and vse the scriptures as wel as you, and better to, as I haue declared. Item we alleage lain words: we shew the circumstan∣ce to be for vs: we conferre one place with an other. If now all this will not nd the controuersie, it is cleere, that the only word of God, be it neuer so wel handled, is no sufficient mark to shew




 the truthe. For this is al that can be d about the word it self.
 Seing then we must go farther, I say the heads of the Church,Iudges. Aug. cont. Iulianum lib. 2. the Coun∣cels, the bishops, and the auncient Fa∣thers must be the Iudges, whether we do wel applie the holy scriptures, or no. For example:Math. 16. M. Iewel saith, S. Peter is not this rock whervpon Christ said he wold build his Church.  saie on the other syde,In the 4. chap. that S. Peter is this rock. And I shew it by the cir¦cumstance of the place, and by the cōfe¦rence of other holy scriptures. M. Iewe must needes say, that I do not wel cōfe the holy scriptures. I take then for my Iudges, aboue sixtē of the best doctors who expreslie stand on mie syde, as  wil shew in this present booke.In the 4. chap. So th this mark of the true Church also m¦keth clerely for vs. And surely althoug the protestāts in woords pretēd to ha the cōsent of the aūciēt fathers: yet th in truthe it is not so, this one thing m sufficieiētly declare, because whēsoeue
 anie occasiō neuer so far set maie serue, thei do what thei can to reiect the Fa∣thers partly by imputing errors to thē,In his Reply P. 3. 49. & P. 10. as M Iewel ordereth S Hilarie partly by denying the work to be theirs as he saith of Dionysi the Ariopagite ād of S. Chrisostō Liturgy, etaet. Another shift is, o alleage the priuate opinion of some one agaīt the cōsent of the rest, or to say that the fathers liued, when the tyme begā to be corrupted: and whē al other thīgs faile their plain doctrin and asser¦tiōs of the faith, are illuded with a like figuratiue speache. If in dede the fathers made for thē, they wold not thus shift their hands of the fathers, but the moe they could haue, and the better they a∣greed ād the plainer thei spake, the bet¦ter thei shuld be welcome. Wel seīg the Prostestāts (although falslly) yet cōmōly doe alleage the old fathers,The alle∣gation of Fathers suffiseth not. and we also do alleage them most plentifully, hereof it wil follow that neither the only alle¦gatiō of thē is so able to end a cōtrouersy,
 that the simple and vnlerned may be sure of the truthe.
 For which cause we must ioyne to the former marks,Traditiō, and pra∣ctise. the tradition and practise of Gods Churche, which being in euery mans eyes and eares, cā neuer deceaue him. We thinck (saith Chrysostome) the tradition of the Churche to be worthy of belefe.In 7. Thes¦salon. Hom. 4. Is it a tradion? Ask no farther.
This mark so euidently maketh for vs, that the Protestants are constray∣ned vtterly to deny all credit vnto it: for by this rule they are inexcusable who deny either the popes supremacy, which euer was so vniuersally practised, or the Sacrifice of the masse, or any like mat∣ter, which was and is generally recea∣ued in the Church.
But because many questions arise in the Church,Traditiō doth not suffise in cases. rather depending of subtill points in diuinity, then of euident cu∣stome and practise: if sodainly some ler∣ned men deny such An article of the
 faith, which before was not commonly preached of (as that the holy ghost pro∣ceedeth from the Son or any like) seing here tradition faileth, and the prea∣chers  are diuided:Generall Councels. Math. 18. Act. 15. the Church hath v∣sed the meane of Generall Councells, wherein the bishops of many countries meeting together, after sufficient deba∣ting, do publish the one part to be re∣puted hereticall. Whereby all men doe clerly know, what to follow, and what to auoide. Such a Councel gathered to∣gether of late at Trēt, published that to be the true faith, which we defend, ād the contaary to be hereticall. So that this marck is wholy ours.
But for as much as it is very hurt∣ful,Councels do not suffise. for so many bishops to leaue their cures so oft as any such question is mo∣ued, and also because their meeting is many tymes stayed by the occasion of battel, or of pestilence, or els for lacke of their safeconduct out of whose coun∣tries, or by whose countries, or into
 whose country thei shuld passe, and spe¦cially because whē they are come toge∣ther force ād violēce may be vsed as it was dō at the secōd Ephesine coūcel,Leo epist. 24.25.26 and at Ariminū: it is necessary, to haue some other more spedy, certain, and profitable way in the Church, wherby heresies may be soner staied, and Gods people more quickly instructed in the truthe.
 In respect of which consyderations, Christ hath most notably prouided,One high iudge. that one chiefe pastour and high bishop S. Peter shuld be set by himself ouer the whole flock in earth to confirm his bre∣thern,Ioan. 21. Luc. 22. and to fede them Of whose faith by praying for it, he hath assured vs. In S. Peters chaire the bishop of Rome sit∣teth, who is wel knowen to haue geuē publike sentēce against the Protestants for our faith and Churche, neither can the Protestants denie vs the assurance of this mark. The which mark because it is of most weighty importance, as being the easiest waie of al to find out
 the truthe, and which serueth in all cases without any exception: I haue made this treatise, to declare, that it is no lesse true, euen according to Gods woorde, then it is profitable and ne∣defull in all wise mens vnderstan∣ding.
Here I might make an ende, but that the Protestants affirme the law∣full preaching of Gods woorde, and the lawfull administration of the Sacramēts to be the thing wher∣by they will be tried, as though we nede not a new iudge to know what these terms doe meane.
For what call you lawful preaching,  or administring?Preachīg and Sacra¦ments. That (saie you) which is according to Gods woorde. Very well. Are we not now come a∣gaine to the first beginning of our talk? what call yee Gods woorde? haue I not proued (whatsoeuer it be) that it is much more with vs, then with you?
Adde hereunto, seing those are most
 lawful preachers who are most like vn∣to the Apostles,Psal. 18. Rom. 10. (whose sound went into al the earth, and their words into the ends of the world) wee are more like vnto thē, who within these nine hundred yeeres by our preaching haue conuerted Bohem, Saxonie, Friseland, Prussia, Liuonia, Den∣mark and diuerse other coūtries, then you, who in the same tyme liued so vnder a bushel, that noman aliue could heare you once pepe. Again our Sacraments being moe in number by fiue, then yours, were administred in the face of the world, euen as the Apo∣stles did administer them in Ierusalē, Corinth, Rome, and in such other cities and places: whereas you hadde not one Church or knowen howse of praier in the whole earth.
Persecu∣tion.The persecution (say you) of the Ro∣mish Antichrist oppressed vs, which mark also you alleage for the truth of your congregation. What masters? An∣tichristes
 persecution shall dure but three yeres and a half.Dan. 7. Apoc. 13. And is the Pope Antichrist, whose persecution (as you say) hath dured these nine hundred yeres?Math. 16. Hel gates shal not preuaile against the true Churche. And yet is your congregation the true Churche, against which you confesse Antichrist so to haue preuailed, that for many hū∣dred yeres, no man could tel, whether any such Church were in the earth, or no?
Surely hel gates preuailed not a∣gainst  vs any one momēt,Not to faile in persecu∣tion. although our Church hath ben assalted with al kinds of trouble: therefore this mark (that is to say, to stand safe and soūd against hel gates) is a token, that ours is the true Churche. For it is not persecution, but the conquering and preuailing against persecution, which is the true mark of Gods Churche.
But seing I promised to proue our Churche the more true,Vve are persecu∣ted. euen by your
 own Marks, let vs graunt, that Church to be true, which is persecuted, yet I say that you rather haue persecuted vs, thē we haue persecuted you. For, I pray you Syr, when the child who liued in one howse with his louing mother (as you did once in the same Catholik Chur¦che with vs) goeth afterward out of the house, and saith, his mother is a strong hoore (as you say by the Catholik church whence you are departed) if then the mother not being able by faire meanes to reconcile the child to her again, after lōg and oft warnings, doe pronoūce him a bastard member, and a renegate child doth the mother in this case persecute her child, or doth not the child rather persecute his mother?
Note vvel.The child began the defection, the mother defendeth her possession and in∣heritāce: and yet did we first persecute you? Remember what S. Augustin wri∣teth in this matter, ād that not of him∣self, but as taken out of S. Paule. Sara
 with her son Isaac doth signifie the Churche,Galat. 4. Agar with her son Ismael doth signifie carnall men, as heretikes re. Now wheras we reade, that Agar he handmaiden and Ismael suffered greuous things at the hāds of Sara,Genes. 2. yet S. Paule consydering, that Agar was not persecuted of Sara, before that she had through pride cōtemned her mai∣stres, doubted not to say, that Isaac suf∣fered {per}secutiō of Ismael.Galat. 4. As then (saith S. Paule) he that was according to the flesh (Ismael) did persecute him who was according to the spirit (Isaac) so is it now also, vt qui possunt intelligant,Aug. epis. 48. to then they who are able may vnderstand (saith S. Augustine) that the Catholik Church suffereth per∣secution by the pride and wickednes of carnall mē whom she goeth about to a∣mēd by tēporal trobles ād terrors. And much more followeth in S. Augustine writing against the Danatists, who being departed from the Church then,
 as you are now, said then, as you do now, that the Catholikes did persecute thē, and therefore that they were the true Church.
And surely if you can shew, that we through pride departed frō the obe∣dience, which we once had oughed to you, then in dede we might be saied to persecute you. But seing certeinly you were al once vnder the obediēce of our Pastours (as Agar the handmaiden was vnder her maisters Sara) and you through pride withdrew your selues frō vs,Gene. 21. and made a new congregation of your own erecting: doutlesse you are the Agarens and the Ismaelits but we being the childern of Sara, are altoge∣ther persecuted of you, and so that mark sheweth vs (whome ye cal papists) to be the true Churche.
 Are there yet any moe markes of the true Churche behind?Antiqui∣ty. Yeas, saith the Protestant. For Antiquity is ours altogether. Now you seme to say sum∣what.
 But yf the Church of Christ be in all but one, seing Antiquity is but the beginning or the aūcient state of Chri∣stes Churche, if the end of the same Church make for vs (as your selues can not deny, but that these nine hundred yeres, we were more like to be that Church of Christ which must be spread through all nations, then you) it is not possible, that the begīning should make for you. For Christes Church is euer like it self.
If you appeale to particular exā∣ples, I say, the Christians in the pri∣matiue Churche communicated vnder one kind both at Emaus,Luc. 24. August. de consen. E∣uangel. li. 3. cap. 25. Theophil. in 24. luce Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 14. Math. 9. and at Ieru∣salem, as the words of the holy scrip∣ture (which the auncient Fathers te∣stifie to appertein to the Sacrament of Christes supper) doe import. Item the Christians did then make and sette vp Images in the honour of Christ, as the most famous history of the Woman cu∣red of her bloody issue, doth most eui∣dently
 witnesse.
An. D. 50.Dionysius (whom M. Iewel con∣fesseth to be an aunciēt writer, as it may, saith he, many waies wel ap∣pere) maketh mention ofDe Eccl. Hiera. c. 2 insuffla∣tion, of holy oyle, ofCap. 3 altars, incēse, healthful sacrifice, ofCap. 4. holy Chrism and of holyCap. 5. orders of priesthood, of the prosession ofCap. 6. Munkes blessed with the signe of the crosse, shoren, and receauing a new gar∣ment, ofCap. 7. praying for the faith∣full sowles, ofIn epist. ad Demo∣philum. confessing synnes to a priest. All these thinges we haue, but the Protestantes know them not.
An. D. 70. Ad Smyr∣nenses.Ignatius speaking of such a Sa∣crifice, as ought not to be offered without the Bisshoppe, must nedes meane a publike and externall Sacri∣fice, for the making whereof a speciall minister was ordered. He woulde haue the Emperour to obey the bishop, he speaketh of Virgins,Ad Phila. which had
 consecrated them selues to God.Ad Antio∣chum. And commendeth a certaine ap∣pointed number of fasting dayes, to witte, fortie, which fast we call the Lent.
Iustinus witnesseth,An. Dom. 150. In Apolo∣gia 2. De coena. water to haue bene mingled with the wine, and, the Deacōs to haue caried the cō∣secrated mysteries (as we also doe) to them which were absent, which thing Caluin reputeth an abuse.
Pius the first,De cons. distinct. 3. Nosse vos. Euseb li. 5. c. 23. et 24 Epiphan. Haer. 50. Aug. 29. decreed Easter day to be kepte vnifoormlie of all men: wherevpon Pope Victor excommu∣nicated the bisshoppes of Asia for not obeying. And those who continued in their stubburnesse, were taken for heretikes both of the Greekes and La∣tins.
All doctrin is false and lying (saith Tertullian) which agreeth not with some Apostolike Chur∣che.An. D. 200 Our doctrine agreeth with the chiefe Apostolike Church of Rome:
 yours with none at all that is now in the earth.
De Corona ad vxorē.It was the custom in those dayes, to make oblations for the dead the twelue moneths day: to goe vnto the Stations,Euseb lib. 6. c. 7. Paula. ad Marcel. to 1. Hierom. to visit holy places, and specially those of Ierusalem, which cu∣stom dured frō Christes ascension vntil S. Hieroms tyme, through all Christen∣dom, and yet is called Pilgrimage of vs.
An. Dom. 250. De coena Do.Saint Cyprian confesseth the bread which our Lord gaue to his disci∣ples, being changed not in shape, but in nature, to haue bene made flesh.Cōfessiō to the priest. Serm 5. de lapsis. Item that euen the consent in hart to commit a great synne was to be confessed apud Sacerdotes Dei before the priests of God. And that, forgeuenes made by the priests is acceptable vnto God.2. Reg. 12. 2. Cor 2. Cyp. lib. 1. epist. 2. Item, that the temporal penance (which is due to Gods iustice after the fault is forgeuen) might for iust causes be forgeuen by the
 bishop,Nicen. cō. c. 11. which the Nicen councel doth also decree. And that is it, which we now call a pardon.
What should I here reherse the re∣uerence geuē in old tyme toEuseb. li. 7 c. 15. S. Iames chaier and to other Reliques, the so∣lemne dedicating ofLib. 9. cap. 10. Churches, the straight life ofRuffinus lib. 11. c. 4. Eremits, theTheodor. lib. 5. c. 21. driuing away of diuels by holy water, the auto∣rity ofBasil. de Spi. sancto c. 27. vnwriten traditions, the vse ofHom. in 40. Mart. praying to Saints, theAmbros. de poenit. lib. 1. c. 7. Sacrament of penance theEpist. 33. name, sacrifice, andde Sacra. lib. 4. c. 5. & 6. Canon of the Masse, the forgeuing of synnes by the priestes when theyChryso. lib. 3. de Sacerd. oynt the sick with oile in our Lords name, theHieron. contra Vigilantium. lights burning whiles the Gospel was readen, that a bishop can notLib. 1. contra Iouin. begette childern in his bishoply vocation, that a fixe or a certain,Ad Furiam. nū∣ber of praiers is praiers is prescribed, which ser∣ueth to cōfirm the vse of our beads: that he can not be a priest, who hath hadAd Gerontiam.
 two wiues, that theIbidem. bishop of Rome vsed to answer the consultations or re∣lations directed to him from the Coun∣cels both of the East and of the West, that theAugusti. in Psal. 37 fyre of purgatorie is more greuouse, then whatsoeuer a man may suffer in this life?
All these things were in the aun∣cient Churche: the same are in our Churche: the same are not in the Pro∣testants Churche: How then can it be, that Antiquity should either help the Protestāts, or hīder vs? As therfore we are assured of the mark of Antiquity: so let vs go forward with certain other markes, which are no lesse peculiar to vs.
 Among other things which staied S. Augustine in the right faith, this was one,The na∣me of a Catholik. Cont. epis. fundae. c. 4 because no heresie could obtein the name of the Catholike Churche, although euery heresie did much desier to obtein it. The reason is, for that heresies be but parts and pecu∣liar
 sects of some one country,August de vnit. ec∣cles. c. 1. or the do∣ctrin of a smal tyme, whereas the word Catholike doth betoken a certain vni∣uersall professiō during frō the beginnīg to the ending, and spread throughout. Those therfore who begā their doctrine after the Apostles tyme,Heretiks were either named of their master, as the Arriās of Arrius, the Pelagiās of Pelagius the Lutherans of Luther, the Cal∣uinists of Caluin, or of some place where they liued (as the heresy of the Phrygians) or of the falsehod which they taught (as Quartadecimani, Anabaptistes, Aquarij) or of some like particular circumstance.
But they were only called Catholiks, who kepte the vniuersall faith, which the Apostles had first taught,Catholike and which was continued alwaies in the whole Churche. To our purpose, I saie the Protestantes neuer hadde the name of Catholikes, nor neuer shall haue it, because they beganne
 after the Apostles tyme, to wit within these fiftie yeres. But we so had once the name of Catholiks, that we shall neuer leese it.
I doe not onely report me to al kind of histories and writers, who accomp∣ted for euer the flock and society of the Romā church for Catholiks (De obitu fratris. as S. Am∣brose,In Apol. cont. Ruf∣finum. S. Hierome and all maner of o∣ther Fathers do witnesse) but also I say our ennemies confesse this Marke to haue bē ours. Reade the very title of M. Iewels Reply, reade it, I say, ād see what God to his euerlasting damnatiō (if he repent not) caused him to write there.
The Title of M. Ie∣vvels Re∣ply.A Reply (saith he) vnto M. Har∣dings answere, by perusing wher∣of the discrete and diligent reader may easily see, the weake, and vn∣stable grounds of the Romā re∣ligiō, which of late hath ben accōpted Catholik. By I. Iewelbishop of Sarisburie.

Heare you not what he saith? The Romain religion of late hath ben accompted Catholike. As men ac∣compt a thing to bee, so doe they name it: those therefore who accompted the Romain Religion to be Catholike, na∣med it also the Catholike Religion. But S. Augustine saith:Cont. epis. Manichai cap. 4. Tenet me in ec∣clesia Catholicae nomen, quod nō sine causa inter tam multas haere∣ses sic ista Ecclesia sola obtinuit, & cet. The very name of the Catholik Church holdeth me in the Churche, the which name this Church alone hath not without a cause so obteyned, among so many heresies: that whereas all heretiks couet to be called Catholiks, yet yf any stranger ask, where the Ca∣tholik communion is kept, no heretike dare shew his own Churche (or palace) or house.
Behold, the true Church alone hath obteined the name of the Catho∣like Church, and no heresy could obtein
 the same. But we that are nowe cal∣led Papists, by Maister Iewels con∣fession: were of late accompted Ca∣tholikes, therefore we are the true Churche, and we are not heretikes at all. This Mark then standeth also on our syde.
 Beside the name of Catholikes, we also haue the continuall succession of bishops and priests,Successiō or vniuer¦sality. Ibidem. ab ipsa sede Pe∣tri (as S. Augustine speaketh) vsque ad praesentem Episcopatum, euen from the very See of Peter, to the bis∣shoply office which now is. Such a con∣tinual succession we shew from S. Pe∣ter himself vntil Pius the fifth, who presently fitteth at Rome in Saint Pe∣ters chaire. The same Marke (as being one of the most euident of all o∣thers) is approued by S.li. 3. c. 3 Ireneus, byde prae∣script. Tertulliā, byLib. 2. de schism. Optatus, andContra Luciferia. by S. Hie∣rome. The Protestantes on the other syde neither haue continual successiō of bishops, nor yet of any preachers, nor of
 ny peple that are knowen to haue pro∣fessed their faith. So that either no such ongregation was,Math. 10. Rom. 1. & 10. 1. Pet. 3. or they were al dam∣ed, because they were ashamed to cō∣fesse the Gospel of Christ by their word and conuersation before men. Marke wel this point: I can not see, what cā be reasonably answered vnto it.
Consyder now (good Reader) the riches and preeminence of our cause aboue the Protestants 1.Al these Marks Thevv our Chur∣che to be true. We haue Gods woorde before them, 2. We haue and beleue more of it, then they 3. We haue moe authentike copies, euen of those bookes, which they together with vs doe receaue for Gods woorde, 4. We haue a more certain commission to vse it in preaching, or otherwise, 5. We reade it in more holy and profitable tungs, 6. We vse it also in vulgar tungs without breache of vnity, 7. The plain meaning thereof maketh for vs, 8. The circum∣stance and conference thereof sheweth our faith to be the truer, 9. The aunciēt
 Fathers verait agreeth with our do∣ctrin. 10 The tradition and practise a only with vs. 11. Generall Councels are only with vs. 12. the vnity of one chief iudge is onely with vs. 13. The lawful preaching of Gods worde and the law∣full administration of the Sacraments is that, which wee vse. 14. Victory in persecution is ours. 15. Yea we are per∣secuted of the Protestāts our childern as of whome they were baptized, ād in whose vniuersities they were brought vp, ād now thei turn the weapōs which we gaue thē, against vs. 16. Antiquitie ād the practise of the primatiue Church is agreable to that of our tyme. 17. The name of Catholiks by their confession is ours. 18. The continuall succession a bishops we doe shew, and they can no so much as pretend it.
Rom. 3.Generally what haue they which w lack? haue they a faith iustifiyng? so haue we but not iustifiyng alone,Galat. 5. Iacob. 2. but iustify¦ing with charity, which is as it were
 he life of faith. Ergo their iustificatiō f faith alone, is a deade righteousnes: urs is it which quickeneth to life e∣erlasting. Haue they two Sacramēts? We haue seuen.1. Pet. 2. Haue they an inwarde riesthod whereby Christ is offered in heir harts? we haue an inward, and nIsai. 61. & 66. 1. Tim. 4. Heb. 10 outward, whereby he is offered oth in our harts, and in our hands. Do hey beleue that Christ with one Sa∣rifice paid our raūsom for euer?Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 10. & 11. We be∣eue it, and shew to the eye (vnder the foorm of bread) the self body sacrificed, and by offering and eating it sacramen∣ally with our mouth, we are made par∣takers of the redēption which is in it.
Is Christ with them the head and astour of his Church?Ioan. 10. Ephes. 1. We do not onely beleue so, but we shew it to be so by the real figure of one chief head ād Pastour of his particular flock in earth,Heb. 10. whereby the eternall thinges are liuely repre∣sented.
Doe lay men with them receaue the
 communion vnder both kinds? euen so doe they with vs by dispensation of the See Apostolike, in Austria, and in diuerse other parts of Germany, both without schism, and also without in∣iury of an other truth, which must con∣fesse one kind to conteine as much as both, and therefore to suffise alone. And both kindes were instituted of Christ,Math. 26. rather to shew by an vnbloody sacrifice the nature of Christes bloody sacrifice (where his sowle and blood was a part from his body and fleshe) then that any more is either conteined or distributed by both,Ioan. 19. then by one alone.
Heb. 13.Haue you Mariage in great price? Not in so great as we, who teache it to be a Sacrament, which by the out∣ward and visible signe of mutuall con∣sent in faithfull persons signifieth the gratious vnity of Christ and of his Churche and whiles it signifieth such a singular grace,Ephes. 5. it partaketh of the
 grace whereof it is the signe.
Yea but you allow Mariage in all kind of men? what? Euen in those,Math. 19. who haue gelded them selues for the kingdom of heauen? For they onely who make the vow of chastity, can iustly be said to geld them selues for the kingdom of heauen.Vvho geld thē∣selues for the King∣dom of heauen. For he that absteineth from Mariage without any vowe, he is not yet gel∣ded, sithens he maie lawfullie ma∣rie.
But whoso hath gelded himself for the kingdom of heauen, is meant to be no more hable to marie by the right of Gods law, and in very conscience, thē he is able by the course of nature to haue a child, who either is borne, or by force is made an Eunuche. For these three kinds of Eunuches Christ doth compare together,Math. 19. expresly geuing vs to vnderstand, that it is both praise wor∣thy to vow chastity, and when it is once vowed, that by Gods owne law there is
 no more possibilitie to return to the vse of mariage, then it is possible for a gel∣ded man to be restored again to that which he lacketh.
By these few examples it may appere, that you haue no maner of thing praise worthy, which we lack, whereas we haue a great nūber of things both good and laudable,VVhat thīgs the protestāts lack. and (many of them) ve∣ry necessary, all which you lacke. You haue no insufflations, no exorcism, no holy oyle in baptism, no holy Chrism in bishopping, no externall priesthood, no publik sacrifice, no altars, no censing, no lights at your seruice, no Images in your Churches, no adoration, no reseruation of Christes body, no Eremits, no Mūk no virgins vealed and consecrated, no vnwriten traditions, no communion with Saints, or with faithfull sowles, by praying to the one, or for the other, no Stations, no pilgrimages, no confession of synnes to the priest, no forgeuenes by the priest, no temporall satisfaction in∣ioyned,
 nor the same remitted by par∣don, no holy water, no holy vestments, no Reliques of Martyrs, no extreme vnction, no place of purgatory where their synnes may be released after this life, who died in charity, but yet not without the det of temporall purga∣tion.
You say falsely) that all these thinges are naught:Galat. 1. praeterquā quod ac∣cepistis. but once we receaued thē of our auncestours, and we iustifie thē by Gods word, and by the bookes of the auncient Fathers.
If we our selues had once had other things, and so had cast away those other and taken these (as you haue taken,Note. vp∣pon your own heads) naked tables in stede of adorned altars, praying toward the south in stede of praying toward the East mariage of priestes in steade of chastity, vulgar tungs in stede of holy and learned, the sacrifice of praysing God by bare words, in stede of Masse which praised him by the consecration
 of Christes owne body with other like matters) then in dede there had ben cause, why we might haue feared our owne dedes and inuentions.
But seing we made no new religiō, but kepe the olde:Philip 2. humilitie, obedi∣ence, and the keeping of vnity is our fault, if we haue any. Of such faults I beleue noman shall geue accompt but rather of pride,Rom. 1. 2. Cor 3. Galat. 5. of disobedience, of breakīg vnitie, of makīg schismes, and of troubling the Churche.
Neither can it be iustlie replied of you that you doe toward vs in chan∣ging our religion,Dissimile. as Christ and the A∣postles did toward the Iewish syna∣goge. For Christ changed his owne Re∣ligion (whereof himself was Lorde) and not onely theirs. But Luther is not that toward Christ, which Christ was toward Moyses, neither hath Cal∣uin that power to alter the state of Chri∣stes Churche, which Christ had to alter the Law.

It must be vnderstanded that in all Religions there is a law, which prescri∣eth in what maner God shalbe serued. The chief point of Gods seruice cōsisteth n publike Sacrifice. The Sacrifice de∣endeth of the Priesthod: for of what∣oeuer order the priest is, there after he maketh his sacrifice, whervpon S. Paul said:Heb. 7. The priesthod being transfer¦ed (or changed) it must nedes be, hat the law be transferred or chā∣ged also. Now from Adam til Christ, here was in dede an increase of out∣ward Sacraments and Cerimonies in diuerse ages. But there was no change t all of the solemne and publike Sa∣rifice.Genes. 14. For albeit Melchisedech rought foorth his vnbloody oblation, and blessed Abraham, yet it was don o shew afore hand, after what sorte Christ should make sacrifice in his sup∣per, and not to abrogate the order and kinde of bloody Sacrifices,Gene. 4.8 & 17. for they continued still, as Abel hadde begun
 with them. Likewise the Altars re∣mained in vse, as Noe had erected thē. Circuncision was kepte with the law. And the law with the Temple of Salomon So that from the beginning of the world til Christ there was increa∣sing of Ceremonies, but no taking away, no changing, no newe making or alte∣ring of the publike sacrifice.
For the change thereof is of such importance, that God would his owne Son to take flesh for the working of such a weighty matter, to thēd al mē should vnderstand, that God reserueth to his owne self the appointment of the Reli∣gion wherwith he wilbe serued. And the Religion (as I shewed before) con∣sisteth chiefly in the publike sacrifice and priesthood.Heb. 7.
Psal. 109.Christ therefore being a priest after the order of Melchisedech, when he had proued his commission frō God the Father by diuerse notable mi∣racles,Math. 26. in his last supper toke bread and
 wine accordingly as Melchisedech had foreshewē in a figure. He blessed brake,Genes. 14. and gaue saying, take, eate, this is my body which is geuen for you,Luc. 22. doe (or make) this thing for the remē∣brance of me.Facite. By which woordes the Apostles (and their successours in priest∣hod) haue commissiō to make of bread and wine the bodie and blood of Christ euen till the worldes end.Hiero. ad Heliodorū 1. Cor. 11.
This then is the publike and exter∣nall sacrifice of the new testament,Ireneus li. 4. c. 32. August. in Psal. 33. Con. 1. De ciuit. Dei li. 17. c. 20 Cont. ad∣uers. legis lib. 1. c. 18. the which Sacrifice (saith S. Augustine) is now spread in the whole circuit of the earth, and, it is come in place (saith he) of al the sacrifices of the old testament, and is the Sacrifice of the Churche.
And all the world doth know, that both the Greek and Latin Church hath euer vsed this blessed mystery, as the Sacrifice prophecied of by Malachy and belonging peculiarly to the Christian peple gathered out of all nations.Malac. 1.

Now to thinck, that Luter and Cal∣uin haue power to alter and abrogate this publike sacrifice (called now the Masse) it is to thinck, that Luther and Caluin are the same toward Christe, which Christ was toward Moyses. For that is it which Christ meaneth saying:False Christes. Math. 24 False Prophets, and false Christes shal arise. Verily, because some shall come, who wil arrogate that to them selues, which no creature cā do besyde Christ the Son of God, whose proper of∣fice and honour it is, to be of power to change the state and order of the pub∣like priesthood and sacrifice in Gods Church.Idolatries. They then are Idolatours, who supposing Luther and Caluin to be able to abrogate the former sacrifice and maner of seruice, and to sette vp a new foorm of publike prayer, do therein make them to be fellowes with Christ himselfe. But certainly they are false brethern and false Christes.
And whereas the Protestants pre∣tend,
 that Luer and aluin do all things according to Gods Worde (to o∣mit now, that the one of them techeth cleane contrarie doctrine to the other) they are so much the more to be abhor∣red: for as Christe in verie truthe in chaunging the Law fulfilled the old fi∣gures and the old prophecies euē so they (taking Christes power vpō them) pre∣tend falsly by changing Religiō,Math. 5. to haue their doings figured and prophecied of in the Gospell.
But if there can be but one Christ, and he can be but once borne, and di∣ed but once: be ye assured, these men haue no power to abrogate the Masse, or to take away the keye of our auncient Religion.
If any man say that our Masse is not that in deede, which we saie it is: I answere, that as we neuer reade the Iewish Priestes to haue erred, con∣cerning the substaunce of theire pu∣blique Sacrifice (because all the peopleExod. 23.
 were bound to frequent it by Gods own commandement) so it is much lesse pos∣sible that the vniuersall Churche of Christ should erre in that publike act, wherein Christ himself (saith S. Cy∣prian) is the Sacrifice.Li. 2. epi. 3 in Sacrifi∣cio quod Christus est. Math. 28. No no masters, Antichrists yee may be, Christ ye can not be. He is with his Apostles (ād their successours the bishops) al dayes vntil the worlds end.
This being so, reason would that all nouelties layed a syde, men should re∣turn to the old faith, and Church again. Wherevnto if I am so bolde as to ex∣hort you, M. D. Parker, before al other, I trust you wil not take it in euil part. For as my exhortation commeth of my wel wishing to your worship, so I con∣syder no Ecclesiasticall person in al our Country is able to doe more good in that behalf then you.
Consyder then for Gods loue in whose chaire you sitte, consyder whence the first Bisshop came who satte there, yea
 rther consyder what all your prede∣ssours taught, only one excepted, of whome all good and zealons men must eedes be ashamed,Cranmer as who at the en∣ing into his bishoprike was wilfullie orsworn to the Pope of Rome.It appe∣reth so by his Cate∣chism. And af∣erward changed his religion from Lu∣heranisme, to the Sacramentary here∣ie: And a little before his death, for a ew houres of temporall life sold his oore faith twise a day.
Neither was he otherwise a wit∣esse of your doctrine, then that despe∣ation made him pretend to suffer that for religion, which he must needes suf∣fer though he had changed his religion. That one desperat man then excepted who seemeth to haue ben of no religiō) l your predecessours were of our faith. What speake I of your predecessours? Al he bishops of the realme, yea al of the whole world were of the same belefe with vs, as it may right wel appere, for hat all the Catholikes in the world cō∣municated
 with S. Gregorie as wit the best man, the greatest Doctour, the highest Bisshop that liued in those dai∣es.Beda in hi¦stor. eccle. Gentis An glorum. Now S. Gregorie sent S. Au¦gustine to our Auncestours, frō whos time till the chāge which began a late all Christian men are knowen to hau beleued and professed that, which we doe presently defend.
If this holy felowship be not that Ca∣tholike and Apostolik Church which i al times and coūtries professed Christes Gospel then goe into the desert after Wiclef and Hus goe into the corners and priuie inmoste places of the house after the poore men of Lions.In deserto In pene∣tralibus. And then for the space of certain hūdred yers to∣gether, yee can not name, what prea∣chers or pastours your Churche had. But th{us} to flee into priui places, ād to lack opē preachers,Math. 24 is directly against the word of God,Prouer. 8. and expressely against the cōmā∣mēt of our Sauiour,Isai. 62. whose wisdō crieth in the tops of the waies and in the
 gates of the cities, whose whatchmē ease not to speak both day and ight vpō the wals of Ierusalē, in whose house the cādle stādeth vpō the candlestick to geue light to al mē,Math. 5. whose faith must be cōfessed with the mouth,Rom 10. & 1. Philip. 2. Psal. 44. whose gospel must not be blushed at, whose seruants shine like stars, whose spouse being most beawtiful through internal faith ād charity,Circuma∣micta va∣rietatibus is yet garnished about with variety of diuers tūgs which are daily heard to preache, ād ceremonies, which are daily sene in Gods seruice amōg the Catholiks.Memor ero nomi∣nis. Populi cō∣fitebuntur in aeternū. Which spouse also hath promised to be mindful of the name of Christ from generatiō to generation, in so much that, many peple shall confesse and geue praise to God for euer age after age.
If such a gloriouse, a manifest and a beautifull Churche must be beleued, then must Wiclef, Hus, and their fellowes be avoided, and our knowen, manifest, and in all generations most
 gloriouse Churche must be imbrace which neuer lacked a chiefe bishop i S. Peters chaire with a number of bi∣shops, and faithful nations obeying h doctrin and gouerment. The truth  which Catholik Church and chair th I might the more effectally persuade,The cause of this trea∣tise.  haue taken in hand to proue the S¦premacy of the bishop of Rome accor¦ding to the reason and meaning o Gods word. The which point alone if i be graunted, al other controuersies ar superfluous. For all is concluded vnder one, if one be appointed the chiefe shepheard by God ouer al sithens euery mā must heare ād obey the shepheards voice.Ioan. 10.
I request most humbly of your paciē∣ce to reade, or to heare the whole trea∣tise readen (which is not long) and not to condemne the matter before it be wel vnderstanded. If my discourse be doutfull, I am ready to make it plaine. If it seme to faile in proof, a charitable
 swere made vnto it shal shew by the ply how strong the Arguments ge∣erally be, concerning the chief points.
Thus taking my leaue I wish as wel  your worship as I do to my self, bese∣hing you not to miscontrue my doings, ut to take them so charitably, as they re meant. For God is my witnesse, the hing I seeke, is as well the reducing of hem to their Mother Church who are on a stray, as the staying of them who hrough mans frailty beginne to dout of their faith. Which effects God graūt through Iesus Christ our Lord to his own glory. Amen.
