



IN the French historie, which you did leaue with mee, I did find the whole historie of the Colloquie had at Poissie much more largely written in French, than euer I did see it in Latine. At this Collo∣quie the Cardinal of Loraine, being the chiefe, and capitaine on the part of the Pa∣pists, made an oratiō more glorious in shew, thā sound in trueth. The which to doe, hee had both the aduise, and prompting of the papistes assēbled vnder him; as of that sub∣till Sorbonist Despense, & of that little furie Xaintes, with their mates. Thus being vnderpropped, this Cardinall made an oration touching two pointes; The one was of the Church; the other of the Sacra∣ment, which with thē is called the Sacra∣ment of the Altar. This later point by

him handled after his sort, did so please our Papistes, that some of them did both translate, and publishe it in English, being as it were taken hott out of the Cardinalls mouth. The seconde part touching the Church he handled like a Cardinall, pain∣ting Rome so cunningly as he coulde; vn∣derpropping it with the holow, and rotten postes of Visibilitie, of personall suc∣cession, and ordinarie calling, (as they call it,) and such like stuffe. And there∣with did he driue with might and maine to deface the true Church of Christe, into which it hath pleased God to call vs, to whome he hath giuen grace to professe his holy gospell. Our Church hee woulde de∣face, because wee haue not those rotten pillers of visibilitie, personall successi∣on, and ordinarie calling, in such sorte as he claimeth them for Rome. I founde in your booke a verie short, but a pithie an∣swere made to this latter part of the Car∣dinalls oration touching the Church; the which, because I had not read it before,

did easily holde me in it. I liked it well, and so (I thinke) will you. I haue not the skill to be a perfect translator out of the French tongue; neither doe I take vppon me so to do; But yet I haue truely set downe in Eng∣lish the whole matter conteined in the an∣swere. That little, which I haue added to that which is in the French, is not from the purpose, I trust. This I giue to you now, as I did before, A briefe confession of ye christian faith, which I founde in that booke; And one thing more by the grace of God I intend to giue hereafter, if I may see the other volumes accordinge to your promise. This little scrappe taken out of the large French booke I sende to you; not that you neede it, for you doe vnder∣stand the French tongue much better than I; but I giue it to you, to the ende that it may remaine with you, as a testimonie of my dutie of thankefulnesse to you, for your great good will alwayes borne towards me; & that by these Englished scraps, you may be prouoked at your leasure to reade the

whole booke your selfe; and in the meane time, you may communicate in Englishe, some part of that good, which is in the French booke, to such as you thinke good. Accept my poore labour in good part, I pray you. I shall indeuour to doe more, God of his goodnes ayding me; to whose goodnes, and directi∣on I doe commende you.

