



YOV did sende of late vnto me, at one time (as you knovve) tvvo bookes, vvhich the
Lo∣uanistes had sent into Eng∣land: the one vvas a Primer, the other a
Psalter. The Primer is in latin, and is as I thinke, but a nevve burnishing of their old popish pelfe. I did not peruse it, neither do I entende to bestovv any labour thereabout. For manye yeares are passed, sithence I did leaue my Primer, neither haue I any pleasure novve to looke vppon those pudles of poperie, in vvhich I vvas plun∣ged
 in the dayes of my youth, and igno∣rance,sal. 25. I do rather vvith the Psalmist hum∣bly praye the Lorde not to remember the faultes and ignoraunces of my youth, but according to his ovvne kindnes and for his goodnes sake to forgiue me. It is besides all this novv become a tickle peice of vvorke (M. Robert) to medle vvith Primers: vvill you knovv vvhy? The olde Primers are of late greatly disgraced by pope Pius.nst. Pij v. For he sayeth, that they vvere filled vvith superstitious errours, and sayth: that many forged prayers vvere thrust into them vn∣der false and feyned names of Sainctes. He calleth also all the pardons graunted in thē, and printed in their rubrikes into doubte. Thus doth this Pope dashe the deuotion of papistes. Therefore lette olde papistes looke vvell vvhat Primers they vse, and take heede vvhich of them they doe trust, least they do not onely lose their labour, but fall into the displeasure of the Pope. And by the doinges of late Popes they maye see hovv vnsauery and vnsafe the doings of former
 Popes are, for that vvhich one allovveth, an other disallovveth, one promiseth, an other denyeth. Therefore I thought good novv to leaue both them, & their Primer. And because the Psalter seemed to be some straunge noueltie, vvith vvhich the au∣thours thought to make some freashe melo∣die, I did take this their Psalter into my hande: I did but touch the stringes thereof, to taste vvhat sounde it did giue: but I did not finde that in it, vvhich the name see∣meth to promise, rather I finde in it vnsa∣uery discorde, stringes false, and out of tune, & other such iarres, as by perusing this litle pamphlet you may perceaue. VVhich I doe not send to you (my good brother) as though I thought that you either delighted in such instruments as is that popishe Psalter, or that you needed my helpe to dravv you from the delighte or daūger of such trumpery, in vvhich Papists do take their pleasure. God hath by his grace separated you farre from that secte, and brought you into his ovvne schoole, vvhere you may, & do, vvith ioye,
 heare, learne, and taste of the svveetnes of the Lorde, and haue the songes of life, and saluation, praise the Lorde for it. And pray him to holde you euer in this vvaye of life, that you may alvvayes haue your harte, and eare open, and vvholly sette to heare the voice of Iesus: and also closed, shutte and fully turned from those false flatteringe, and entising, Syrene, popishe voices: vnto vvhich vvho so hearckneth pearisheth re∣mediles. Novve though you neede not my labour herein taken, yet in recompence of your freindly and kinde remembring of me vvith such nevves as do come to your hāds, I haue thought good to send you this vvrit∣ten paper, to remaine vvith you as a token of my good vvill tovvardes you. And if your sonne Iohn Aske, of vvhose vvell doinge in God, I haue some care vvith you, may be admonished by it to learne euen in his youth to bevvare of such Popishe pas∣time, as is made in that Popishe Psalter, & to giue heede to the truth of Iesus Christ, the only true doctrine of our life and salua∣tion:
 I shalbe gladde, and reioyce to see him enryched vvith that fayth vvhich dvvelled in Gillian his naturall mother, doth dvvel in you his natural father novv, and so I hope shall vnto the ende. That in∣crease of true vnderstanding vvhich doth giue life in God, I vvishe to you and all yours, vvishe you the same to me and mine. Lecester the
10. of October. 1577.

