


I Have been ever wil∣ling, (most Reve∣rend Father in God) as at all other times upon just occasion▪ so especially when cal∣led to preach at any publique meeting of the Clergy, to vindicate the Government and Rites established in the Church of England,

from the unjust aspersions, which in this last age have beene, and still are, cast thereon by ill affected spirits, with a great deals more noyse then there is cause. Not any way to comply (farther then duty and reason require) with the times; (which is the ready objection a∣gainst this course in every mouth: God pardon their uncharitablenesse and unrighteous∣nesse who so mis-judge!) but out of an earnest, and as I hope sincre, desire of advancing the peace of this flourishing Church and State: wishing unfainedly, that all wee who live in the visible communion of the same body as bre∣thren, might also as brethren (so far as were possible) Rom. 15. 6. With one mind and one mouth glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. It was no other then this very desire, that gave these two Serios their first life; nor is it any other thing now that bringeth them into farther light, then the possibility, if not rather hope, of prodcing some good effect that way: For as it is at all times in the hand of God, so is it many times his good pleasure al∣so, to blesse well-meant (though weake) endea∣vours, far beyond the proportion of their woth.

I know there are some 1 Thes. 5. 14.  and Tit. 1. 10. , men that will not be brought into order by any meanes, nor satisfied with any reason, so per∣versely minded are they, and so stiffened in their resolutiōs: who albeit they deserve very lit∣tle regard other wise, yet euen in respect of them also it is requisite the truth in these points should be sometimes opened; either to Tit. 1. 11. stoppe their mouthes from clamouring, if it may be, or at leastwise (if they will needs be doing) to render their obstinacy the more inexcusable. But it is principally requisite for those mens sakes, and in compassion to their soules, whose honest sim∣plicity hath been abused, and their weake con∣sciences mis-guided, by such Incendiaties, that they may be better informed: and partly also for the confirmation of those that are regular, that they may continue in their right minds, and not suffer themselves to be wrested out of their good beleef by the cunning engines of those that are chiefe factours for the faction. To any of which ends, if (by Gods good blessing) these my slender labours shall lend the least furthe∣rance, it shall nothing repent mee to have pub∣lished them. But this is all I am able to say for

them onwards: first, for the arguments, that I made choice to entreat of such as to mee seemed very usefull for these licencious times, wherein too too many plead Liberty and Conscience, in barre to Loyalty and Obedience: and then for the manner of handling the same, that I gave all diligence to deliver my selfe in the spi∣rit of truth and of meeknesse; that is to say, with all cleare evidence of reason, but without all either gall of bitternesse, or leaven of parti∣ality. However such as they are, I hubly present them to the service of God & his Church, un∣der your Graces protection: as unto whom, by a double title they most properly belong. First, for that they were both preached by appoint∣ment from your Grace: the former, in the Ci∣ty, when you were L: Bishop of London; the other, in the Country, at your late Metropo∣liticall Visitation: and to what hand should they rather returne, then to that that first occa∣sioned their being? As also, for that they tend to the suppressing of Novelties, and to the pre∣servation of Order and Peace (of both which you are most zealous) in that Church, wherein (under God and the King) you worthily sit at

the sterne. The God of heaven multiply his blessings upon you; prosper the affaires of his Church in your hands, that Truth and Peace may flourish therein more and more; and re∣member you according to all the good deeds you either have already done, or entend farther to doe for his house, and for the prosperity there∣of. So prayeth

Boothby Paynell Linc. 4. Febr. 1634.

