




I Soong of late as time then gaue me scope;
Howbee't for other times a way left ope:
But now, as now; to th'end my Lord may heare,
My voice, then hoars, to day is waxen cleere:
My former Shepheards song deuised was
To please great Scotus, and his Lycidas,
But this for Galla, whom th'All-mightie power
Hath made a Lilly-Rose, and double flower:
O Vally Lilly, and Sharon-Rose her blesse!
Though this good speed preuēted hath my presse:
Else had I not this peece of booke alone,
But whole Du Bartas offred at your throne;
For either nation counterpaged thus,
T'acquaint more vs with them, and them with vs.
Yet (o!) vouchsafe it thus and grant an eare
To these two Swains, whom I ore-heard whilcare.


As Shepheard Musidor sate on a balke,
Philemon commeth to him, and they talke
(Least on [quoth he] my tongue ore-often run)
Thus each with oth'r; I stay till they haue done.


Phi.
Good day! what not a word? how dost thou fare?
Or art thou sicke, or takest thou some care?


Mu.
Care, Shepheard? yea, to shew what ioy I can.


Ph.
How? that's a riddle; what's thy meaning man?



Mu.
For sith a Nymph, a daught'r of Shepheards God,
Who rules a world of sheepe with golden rod,
From loftie shrine descending yet will daigne
To stoope at this my cottage homely-plaine,
And of her fauour make herselfe the guage
To me, that ought her seeke on Pilgrimage:


Phi.
Oh, now I see whereon thy mind is bent;
How to prepare fit entertainement.


Mu.
What shall behooue me do, or how to looke?
For though I pawne my fairest pype and hooke;
That one, which Damon gaue me by his will,
That other woon in game on Magog hill;
Ile entertaine her (She, I pawne my life,
Will proue the greatest Kings child, sister, wife.)
Ile entertaine her: If I not mistake,
Some Wheat-floure haue I for a bridall-cake,
And Abricots, and Plums blacke, red, and white,
Preseru'd with hony cleere as chrysolite;
And nuts, and peares, and apples prety store,
My poultrie will affoord me somewhat more,
Except the Fox deceiue me.


Phi.
Shame him take!
Oft hath he made our Chaunticleer to quake:
But Creame and Butt'r is skarce yet out of horn,
And all Achats this yeare apprize to corn.


Mu.
I nothing buy, nor haue I much to sell.
Store is no sore; my house it finds full well.

For there is corne, and milke, and butt'r and cheese,
Thankes vnto Pales: then, if please my bees,
(That waxen wasps when any shrews do fret them)
But if I may by gentlenesse entreat them
To lend m'a combe as sweet as is my guest,
Enough it will be for a Sheepheards feast.


Phi.
Thou mak'st me think of my great gransirs cheere,
That would, but did not,
Ouid. 8. Mei. de Philemone & Baucide. Ʋnius anser eral minuna cuslodi villae.
kill for Iupitere;
And that he would was but a single goose,
The Sentinell of that skant furnisht house.


Mu.
I know the Gods do hart and welcome prize
Aboue great store of cheere and sacrifize.


Phi.
True, and their cheere some more, some lesse by rate
Not of their owne, but of their hosts estate.


Mu.
I haue a flocke too, Pan I praise therefore;
Though not so fat as hath beene heretofore.
But ile receiue this guest with such deuice,
As Shephard best becomes; no Muse is nice;
They quickly yeeld to grace a Pastorall,
Vranie, Thalie, Calliop, and all:
Such I prepare, and they will all be here,
With all the musicke of their heauenly queere.


Phi.
But how (I pray thee as thou lou'st the kirke)
Wilt thou deuise to set them all awerke?


Mu.
I haue a pricke-song for Calliope,
To trie her voice in euery moode and key:

And she shall sing the battell of those Rammes,
Who, to th'affrighting of our tender lambes,
In riualling for Helens of the flocke,
Affront each other with a cannon knocke,
Some faire Ewes wool-lock wearing each in horn,
Or other fauour as they wont toforn,
At feast of Gor, good Shepheard, that of yore
Embrew'd the Crosier-staffe with Dragons gore.
This order shall she sing of all most liefe;
Because my faire guest weds thereof the chiefe.


Ph.
So for Calliope: What for the rest?


Mu.
In Orchard, that my selfe with care haue drest,
My rarest tree (it beares but only seau'n)
Hath apples streaked like the Globe of Heauen.
On one of them Vranie shall discourse
Of euery starre the setting and the sourse;
And shew the Bride and Bridegroome all confines
Of his and her land, by the mid-day lines.


Ph.
Were lines of length, and breadth like-easly seen
It were not heard.


Mu
Then on the flowrie green,
Or in my garden shall Thalia sing,
How diuers waies dame Flora decks the Spring;
And how she smiles to see May after May
Draw'n-out, for her to tricke this Ladies way
With diuers kinds of diuers-colour'd flow'rs,

Some strew'd aground, soe hanging on the bow'rs;
As curious writers wont embraue their Text
With new and gueason words.


Phi.
On, on to th'next.


Mu.
Well-pleasing Euterp shall the next in order
With gentle breath enwhisper my Recorder;
And after playing sing, and after song
Trull-on her fingers all the cane along;
High, low, amids; now vp, now downe the key
With Re-Mi-Fa-Sol, and Sol-Fa-Mi-Re;
Declaring how by foure the selfe-same notes
Are set all tunes of Instruments and Throates,
Which are to sound the Queenes sweet harmonie,
Both of her minde and bodies Symetrie.


Ph.
As I haue heard report, such if it be,


Mu.
(Fy-on that If)


Ph.
Deserues it only she.


Mu.
But I proceed; On harpe shall Polymnie
Renew great Orpheus sacred memorie;
For louing only one; and her so well,
That he assayd to fetch her out of Hell.


Phi.
So Poets say, but such come neuer there:
From death perhaps.


Mu.
So would I do (I sweare)
For such a wife.


Phi.
So would not I for mine.

But now the rest; for heres but fiue of nine.


Mu.
Sweet Erato that sets my guest a fire,
Shall play the romant of her hearts desire:
So bee't her Grace it hold no disrepute
To heare it charmy-quauerd on her lute.
Then shal the Bride-maids & the Bride-men dance,
The Men of England, with the Maids of France;
And sing with Venus, Cupid, Himene,
This Madrigall, set by Terpsichore.
Spring-Quyristers, record this merry lay;
For Galla faire to day
Goes forth to gather May.
Grow all the Ground, but chiefely where she goes,
With White and Crimsin Rose;
Her Loue is both of those.
She shall him choose and take before the rest,
To decke her lockes and brest;
And both shall be so blest,
That they and theirs shall golden Scepter weild
Whereto must bow and yeild
The proudest plant afeild.


Ph.
So, here is worke for Muses all but two;
What hast thou more?


Mu.
Enough for them to do.


Ph.
Nay, vse but Clio; leaue Melpomene.


Mu.
Why leaue her out? a stately Muse is she.



Ph.
But still so sad, with looke cast-downe on earth,
I doubt hir presence will defeat the myrth.


Mu.
No, no, I will not part her from the Queere;
But fit her humor; and to mend the cheere,
(Out-set all other wofull destinie)
My fattest lambe shall make a Tragedie.
And sing the Muse will of no greater bug,
Then warre betwixt a yong child and his dug;
Controuling some, though not of high degree,
As cause thereof; ye Ladies pardon me!
The melancholie Muse yet saith, not I;
All that your Sex dishonour I defie;
But your faire bottles Melpomen doth thinke
Dame nature fill'd, for your faire bab's to drinke.


Ph.
Milke would she giue else only to the poore,
Not vnto such as drye't and spill'c a floore.


Mu.
And this 'tis like shee'll adde vnto the rest;
That Ladies child deserues a Ladies brest;
That brauer spirit suckt shall more embraue him,
And make him, man-grown, like a knight behaue him.


P.
Whē others make their gētle blod far-wors
By sucking young the basenesse of their nurse.
Mu For as their Heathen gods, the Heathen sayn,
No mortall blood had running in their vain;
But Venus wounded once by Diomed,
Ambrosian liquor at her finger shed:

Right so in blood of men there is great odds;
And such among them as are stiled Gods,
The finest haue, to breed their children food:
Blood was late milk, and milk will soone be blood.


Ph.
And some loue more (as cause of better luck)
Then wombe that bore them, paps that gaue them luck.
What parent would not such a reason moue,
Drawne from the gain, or losse, of childrens loue?


Mu.
I once beheld where Lady of high degree,
As with her Lord and others set was she,
In mids of dinner had her child brought-in,
And gaue it suck, scarce shewing any skin,
Through ynch-board hole of silk, pinn'd vp againe
When child was fed, without more taking paine.


Ph.
And is not this instinct through all dyssown,
That eur'y femall hatcheth-vp her owne?
Well, make an end.


Mu.
How can I be too long,
When Muses beare the burden of my song?
But here's a Trumpet, Fame selfe hath no better;
And Clio sounds it well, and i'le entreat her
Hereafter sing on high what foe shall bow
To th'issues of this happie match; but now
To surd it, as young trompeters are wont,
And, lest it sound too lowd, set stop vpon't;
Yet first bid welcome with a cheerefull clank

The French Deluce to Brytaines Rosy bank.


Phi.
Well fare thine heart for thinking on these things,
To please the children of so mighty Kings.
My selfe, though poore, wil thereto ioine my myte
On solemne day: so leaue thee for to night.


Mu.
And I so thee: time is our sheepe were penn'd:
The Sunne is soonken at the Landskop end.


Then Musidor made haste home, and began
Take order for the busines with his man.
(Wife had he none, the more was he distrest)
See (lad, quoth he) the house and garth well drest
To morrow morn; for then, or soone at least,
The sweetest Nymph on earth will be my guest.
Without, plash thistles and presumptuous thorns,
That neare the way grow-vp among the corns;
For feare they rase her hands more white thē milke,
Or teare her mantles windy-wauing silke:
Withìn, if Spiders heretofore haue durst
With cunning webs (where through the stronger burst,
And weaker flies are caught) presume to quyp
The sacred lawes of men; with besome stryp
Both web and weauer downe: be-rush the floore,
The porch, and th'entries, and about the doore;
Set eau'n the trestles, and the tables wax,
And strew the windowes: house that mistres lacks
O how (quoth he, and deeply sigh'd therat)

'Tis out of order; wants I know not what!
Haue care (my lad) and be as 'twere my sonne,
He lowted low, and said it should be don.
Much hereto more was written when the Queene
Her beautie shat'd your sea and land betweene:
But after landing long will be my booke
Held vnder presse: on part then please you looke,
Till come the rest; but ô with gratious eye,
And pardon, for applying Maiestie
To Shepherds stile! so may you see conspire
Th'English and French, as no third tongue comes nigher;
No not the Greeke, vnt' either; though Sir Stephen
Hath made the same with French to march full
As doth our English, and it shall yet more,
Now heart, and hand ye Princes ioyne: wherefore eauen.
I pray, and will, with Hymen all mine houres,
That, for the good successe of you and yours,
While earth stands Cent'r, and Heau'n in circle goes
Together spring French Lillie and English Rose.


