



SIR,
IT is not un∣knowne to schollers, and among them ap∣provedly received for
 Truth; That Chil∣dren are more obliged for Education, then for Birth; the one gi∣ving the bare Being, the other the well-Being. The first J had by Nature: As for the other, In those Annis pube scenti∣bus, when J was un∣der your Protection, you advised, and set me forward with that care, which might
 have made me enjoyed it by Art, had I beene so diligent a Scholler, as to have followed your highly to be com∣mended Instructions. What I have now wrote, you know, is all in Generalls, which none should take ex∣ceptions at. Yet lest surmising Iudgements should endeavour to rivet Generalls into the narrow and for∣ced
 compasse of Par∣ticulars, J have pur∣posely for borne divers notes of consequence. Yet whether in those now urged, or in the other suppressed, J vow and protest the syncerity of my intent, that J never meant to make any particular person the subject of them, to whom, either by the lawes of God or Nature, I stand
 bound either in duty or service: though false murmures have tra∣duced me so farre, I call my Judge in hea∣ven to the witnesse of what my Pen sets forth, that it was (without any oblique glancing toward thē) but a bare innocent Essay of my weake endeavours, and a testimonie, that you sent mee not from he
 Ʋniversitie so illite∣rate, as not to speake (though but imper∣fectly) my Mother tongue. Nay let ig∣nominy light on mee, and mine ad perpe∣tuum, if I deliver not the naked Truth of my harmelesse In∣tention. And fur∣ther satisfaction then this, if I would, I could not give. And as for others, if there be
 any so simple, as to demand it, they shall have no other then this. That I slight their thoughts more, then they can, or dare my words. Yet let them know, that, if J had been bent to have wrot Spleene, I would have penned it with such Characters of blood, as should have caused another De∣luge to have washed
 them out,
Nor should my pru∣dence have presented her selfe to a publike view without her As∣sociats, had not the usurped libertie of some endeavoured to have wronged mee in her, her in mee; Tra∣ducing the Authour, because they have lit∣tle acquaintance with the Subject.
True it is, where
 injuries are done, Mens thoughts are commonly of ill dige∣stion: the nature of wrong being not of an easie concoction. Yet none should wound Reputation, nor set too high price on weaknesse. Detra∣ctors venemous spee∣ches are as Figures drawne in water, whose malicious words not prevailing are but
 like the Fooles bolts shot upright, which in the fall in danger their owne heads. For such Malefactors, J conceive, neglect is the best revenge, it being greater glory to avoyd Injuries by Si∣lence, then to over∣come them by Re∣plying. And here J will make choice of Plato's answer (if neede require it)
 who receiving op∣probrious words from his Enemies, being desired, he should not returne the like inju∣rie, answered, Hee had not so much idle time, as to remember them.
But concerning your selfe, for your paines and care for my in∣struction, tàm mori∣bus, quàm doctrinâ, J must give thankes.
 Thankes J render as freely from my Heart as can be expressed by Tongue or Pen.
May then the con∣tent of your minde enjoy what it most desires, or deserves. May you live till time shall sicken with your age, And when Death comes, May you possesse the hope of your well spent life in Heaven. Such is
 the Prayer of your quondam Pupil, and ever servant,

