



My good LORD:
I Had euer thought, the inter∣est
of but an ordinary friend,
might haue drawne mee to
that, whereto the despight
of a right bitter foe should
not haue driuen mee: till the Fate of these
Sermons hath taught mee my selfe better,
and now giuen me at once a sight both of
my Errour and Infirmitie. The improbity of
some good friends, I had out-stood, who
with all their vexation could neuer pre∣uaile
vpon me for the publishing of but the
former of them: when loe, at length the



restlesse importunity of hard censures, hath
wrung both it, & the fellow of it out of my
hands. So much haue wea stronger sense of
our own wrongs, thē of our friends requests:
and so much are wee forwarder to iustify
our selues, then to gratifie them. How euer,
if (by Gods good blessing vpon them)
these slender labours may lend any help to
aduance the peace & quiet of the Church,
in setling the iudgements of such, as are
more either timorous then they need bee,
or contentious then they should bee: I shall
haue much cause to blesse his gracious pro∣uidence
in it, who, with as much ease, as
sometimes hee brought light out of dark∣nesse,
can out of priuate wrongs worke
publique good. In which hope, I am the
rather cōtent to send them abroad: though
hauing nothing to commend them, but
Truth and Plainenesse. Yet such as they are, I
humbly desire they may passe vnder your
Lordships protection: whereunto I stand
by so many deare names engaged. By the
name of a Visitour; in respect of that Society,
whereof I was of late a member: which
founded by your Lordships godlyRichard Flem∣ming, and Tho∣mas Rtherham, Bishops of Lincolne. Prede∣cessors,

hath had plētiful experience of your
Lordships singular both Care and Iustice i
preseruing their Statutes, and maintaining
the rights of their foundation. By the name
of a Diocesan; in respect of the Country,
wherein it hath pleased God to seate mee:
which hath found much comfort in your
Lordships religious and moderate gouern∣ment.
By the name of a Master; in regard
of that dependance I haue vpon your
Lordship by speciall seruice. Which, as it
putteth a boldnesse into mee, to tender this
small pledge of my thankefulnesse to your
gracious acceptance: so it layeth a strong
Obligation vpon me to tender my best pray∣ers
vnto Almighty God for the continuance
and increase of his blessings vpon your
Lordship, to the good of his Church vpon
earth, and your eternall crowne in heauen.
Bootheby Paynell Linc. Nouem. 20. 1621.

