



SIR,
HAuing first, vpon slow deliberation, resolued to publish these three Ser∣mons: my next resolution came on more readily, to present them to you. For which there was no need I should deliberate long: the consideration both of the Author and Argument prompting mee thereunto. For my selfe first; As you haue abundantly witnes∣sed vnto the world your good affection to mee, both by sundry other courtesies, and especially in being the chiefest meanes, (vnder the good Prouidence of God) by your free collation of a Benefice vpon me, of draw∣ing me from the Vniuersitie into these parts, where I am now settled: so I haue beene euer couetous of some faire opportunity, to witnesse vnto the world my thankfull acknowledgement of your kinde fa∣uours;

whereof▪ for want of better meanes I desire this Dedication maybe some expression. And then for the Argument; I knew none more fit to Patronage a Theame of Iustice, than your selfe: whom God hath endowed with strong abilities▪ many wayes, of Vn∣derstanding, Affections, Courage, Elocution, In∣dutrie together with outward Meanes and Power, in a gracious measure, and aboue many of your fellowes in the same office; to doe Him, and his Annointed, and their People, good seruice, in aduancing the course of publike Iustice, in the Countrie where you liue. In both which regards, as I presume these my me∣ditations concerning Iustice will not come altogether vnwelcome: so I am confident, that the manner of handling vsed therein, in taxing the Abuses with such Freedome, as (it may be) some will not rellish, will yet be by so much more acceptable to you, by how much more freely your owne heart, when you reade of them, shall witnesse your owne freedome from them. In which confidence, with all due respect. I commend these Sermons into your hands; and with my faithfullest deuotions, your selfe, and your Reli∣gious Lady, and whole family into the hands of God: who alone is able hath to continue and multi∣ply his blessings vpon you in the meane time, and in the end to crowne his owne graces in you with glory.

Booth by Paynell Line, 1. Mar. 1626.
