



My Alter Ego,
IF it may stand with Truth, that the Em∣perour Vespa∣sian, for everie day
 through the yeare, made some good Law for the Common-wealth, ex∣cepting two daies in the moneth of Februarie, in which hee was ledde away by the sensualitie of pleasures from the Publicke good; (the re∣membrance of which neglect, caused the in∣dustrious Prince to a∣bridge the Moneth of two dayes:) Or that To∣status (for which Storie fames him) did, from the day of his Birth, to the day of his Death, penne a sheet of Paper
 for every day, through his life at least; mea∣ning, That wherein his Youth had beene defe∣ctive, his Age had made it good; And, that the fruits of his riper yeares had supplied the slips of his Minoritie. If either of these Instances will carry truth, then, questi∣onlesse, I am not to bee blamed for that small space of late, wherein I have been wholy ad∣dicted to Studie, and Reading: And amongst my busied thoughts, have made choice of A∣pelles
 Poesie, Nulla dies sine lineâ; which can∣not bee taxed, unlesse it bee by those, who will say, there was Nulla linea sine die. What to write of, I made my Books my Counsellours: for they were ever so open hear∣ted to mee, that they would acquaint mee with others, and in∣forme mee of mine owne Faults without Flattery. They told me, Divinity was too deepe for my Capacitie, Geo∣graphie too laborious, Historie so various, and
 so full fraught with un∣certainties, that once begun, never at an end. And so ab Arte ad Ar∣tem, à Scientiâ ad Scien∣tiam, &c. At last, in this time of scarcitie, they advised mee to write De Moribus. And here∣in I conceived, the Foure Cardinall Virtues were most necessarie, since they are the Heads of Morall Philosophie. But, because the name of Philosophie seem∣eth odious to ignorant eares, I thinke it not amisse to instruct their
 Simplicitie, in telling them in the words of Saint Augustine, If Phi∣losophers have spoken that which is true, we ought not onely to beleeve it, but re∣taine it as our owne.
There is a Divine, a Naturall, and a Morall Philosophy.
The Theological Phi∣losophy is that Know∣ledge, or Rudiment of Knowledge cōcerning God, which may bee obtained by the Con∣templation of his Crea∣tures, which Know∣ledge may be truely ter∣med
 Divine in respect of the Object. As for the Naturall, I will leave it, for the most part, to the Naturalists. And for the Morall; If it please you to observe it in its Sapientiall part. Read quod sequitur, I doubt not to give some satisfaction herein, since all Professions are from Philosophy served and supplied.
That I have inter∣mingled my Discourse, I want not Authority for it: Plato mixed Philosophy with Theo∣logy:
 Aristotle with Logicke: Proclus with the Mathematickes. Reade Saint Augustine, Bernard, Gregory, I dare say, almost all the Fathers have linked Morality with Divini∣ty. Nay goe to the sa∣cred Text, and you shall find golden Philosophy inserted in holy Writ: I have heard it delive∣red in the Pulpit by a reverend Penman, That Solomon reduced his three Divine Tracts to the order of Philoso∣phy: As if in his Pro∣verbs
 he had tutored his Sonne with Morality; In his Ecclesiastes, by a Didacticall Discourse, he had read a Naturall Philosophy Lecture; And in his Diviner Canticles, had framed a speculative supernatu∣rall Dialogue: Nor was his Reason to bee disallowed of, since it did proceed from that learned Expositor, Hugo de Sancto Victore.
Now first, if it should bee asked wherefore I write, since I have be∣gun to build my House,
 before my stones are ga∣thered; like an ill Cooke, serving up my Dishes before they bee seaso∣ned. I answer, that the Activest part of Man is his Mind; I thought it not fit, that it should be eaten away with the Rust of Idlenesse; Idle∣nesse being the Grave of Living Man, a thing wherein life dieth; the use of Bookes being to encrease Knowledge, and to bring forth the Dead speaking with the Living The Dew of Heaven looseth it selfe
 in the Earth, unlesse it bee collected into some Receptacle: So learning, and Knowledge soone perish, and vanish into Oblivion, if they be not preserved in Bookes. Secondly, why I quote my Authors, it being thought by some Pe∣danticall. I answer, I would not bee behol∣ding to so many Credi∣tors, without giving them some note under my hand. And if mista∣ken Criticks will but looke backe, and search Antiquity, they may
 find that in those flou∣rishing yeares in the nonage of Nero, the Common-wealth was never better governed, then it was by Seneca a Pedant: So was it in the minority of Gordia∣nus by Mesellinus: Nay goe to the Bishops of Rome, you may find Pius Quintus, and Sixtus Quintus, were both Pe∣danticall Friers, and ne∣ver better government then in their times. I have endeavoured to hit the Truth, therby to muzzle the Mouth of
 Contradiction: For as I would not please any in their faults, so I would not bee faulty to please any. Lastly, why I direct this Virtue to you; It is not because I think you want it, but, by reason of your fa∣miliarity with it, I sup∣posed you to bee a fitter Iudge of it. True it is, the vanity of most Writers hath beene to throwe their wit in Inke, as Mad men doe stones in the Aire, not caring whom they hit;
 Being free of the Wit∣brokers, uttering none but stollen Wares, with∣out Acknowledgment; making their Braines Quivers of Iests, travel∣ling in their studies till they are delivered of the Aire. What I have done, I thinke I may avouch, since I was so thrifty, as not to pur∣chase papers, lest I should be forced to pay more for the Silence, then for the Worke.
In that I write not Great words, nor High-borne
 Language, it is, because I have seldome found a Verbalist a Materialist; great Words being commonly atten∣ded on by little Iudge∣ments. To please all men in one thing is im∣possible; For the same cause, that made Demo∣critus laugh, made He∣raclitus weepe. The skilfullest Fisherman, that ever was, could never please all Fish with one baite; Nor the solidest Writer all men with one Booke.
 The generall Fancy of the World being like Plutarchs Moone, who desired her Taylor to make her a Peticote, but before the Taylor had brought it home, the Moone was in an∣other Quarter.
Now are there not some detracting Mo∣musses, who (like the Booke-worme) live on∣ly to destroy Learning, lending long eares a∣gainst them they love not? And perhaps sup∣posing me to bee like a
 Statue in the High-way, directing others, but not following one step my selfe: Or like Noahs Carpenter, building an Arke to save others, yet cannot helpe my selfe, taxing mee as Diogenes did Musitions, saying, They could skilfully tune, and order the strings of their Instru∣ments; but the affe∣ctions of their Minde were disordered, and quite out of tune. I am apt to beleeve this and more: For what Flo∣wer
 hath entred into the hive of their hearts, which they have not converted into poy∣son? Nor is this any wonder, Truth had e∣ver but ill-favoured At∣tendants; Veritas odium parit. Goe on then; dart your quills of Cen∣sure, with the Porcu∣pine, at him, that touch∣eth you not. I must rest satisfied, since it is not in my power to tie loose Tongues; yet I wish, That all Malici∣ous power may loose
 its sting: That Envie may flie mens Soules, That it be blinde. Yet I shall neither feare, nor care. Onely I will say to them that use it, as Damodoclus said to the Milesians, That they were no Fooles, yet they did the same things, that Fooles did.
As for you, unto whom I Dedicate it, if my paines should bee so fortunate, as to bring forth such is∣sues, as may imprint
 the least Consolation in your heart, then, perhaps, I will goe on with the three lat∣ter Cardinalls; know∣ing, that my Penne is but as a Cypher in A∣rithmeticke, which, without the Figure of your Approbation, adds nothing. If not, that Penne, that wrote this, shall ever be con∣fined to a Standish. If it please you, I am pleased. Howsoever, I have given Satisfacti∣on to one, that heere∣in
 approoves that Mar∣tiall Resolution:
Haec, si displicui, fuerint solatia nobis:
Haec fuerint nobis praemia, si placui.
CHRON.
PIVS IESVS
 HENRICVM SANDYS
 AB HOSTIBVS
 TVEATVR.
 MDCVVVVVVIIII.
 1634.

