


IF he that mainteneth a right good cause, yet partly for feare of the deceits and suttiltie of his aduersaries, partly for mistrust of his own knowledge and memoric, dare not ap∣pere in iudgement without his aduocate or protour with : seing y• sending foorth of a booke into y• light of y• world is y• dan∣gering to haue it sūmoned to so manie courts, as it shalbe brought into howses, & y• appering before so manie iudges, as be readers thereof: what aduocat and proctour, yea rather what Doctor and Patrone am I constrayned to seek, who do not only set foorth mie book to be readen of whatsoeuer English man, but also write of suche a matter, as being of most weight, is most diligently examined in these our dayes? and wherein I am sure to find as wel the Lutherans as the Zuinglians, (though vtterly dissa∣greing betwene themselues) yet against me not only agreing to be seuere iudges in the reading, but also to be cruel aduersaries in their iudgement. Which seing it is so, let noman wonder, that I, not mistrusting anie whit the vniuersal cause of the Ca∣tholiks, but misdoubting mine own wit, and the shamelesse shifts of our aduersaries, haue chosen to dedicate this work to y• mysteri of thy glorious body and blood (Lord Iesu Christ,) to , those that now take vpon them to misiudge y• manifest & effectu∣all words of thy blessing and thanksgeuing, pronounced by tho in thy last supper, making a figuratiue speache of a proper: and, whereas thy true body and blood itself worthie of all honour, is

through thy godhead made really present, teaching not with∣standing for their parte, the substance of bread and wine still to re∣main, and therefore an idol to be falsely et vp and worshipped by the Catholiks: to th'intet, I saie, those false teachers maie either through thy grace be conuerted from thr misbelefe, (whereof I most humbly beseche the) or els if they wil stubbnly persist in their detestable opinion, maie euen presently be confounded with the maiestie of thy name whose glorie they oppgne.
For what can be more dishonorable to thy goodnes, then if it maie be truly reported, that the wisedome of god did institute his chief Sacrament in such words, ye which either being true and not beleued, should brden our consciences with infidelitie, or being earnestly beleued, and yet not conceaed in proper speache, should bring vs into manifest danger of idolatrie? sith no faithfull man beleuing this to be thy body (as thou hast said it is) can abteineMat. 26. Psal. 98. from the singular worshipping of that singular fotestole of God. Now soeuer it be with other men, I adore thee my God and lord really present vnder the formes of bread and wine after couse∣cration dewly made. Beseeching thee of pardō for my synnes by the same propitiatorie sacrifice of thy body and blood, which be∣ing made once with bloodsheding vpon the crosse, causeth theHeb. 10. Malac. 1. fruits therof to be daily applied in that cleane and vnbloody sa∣crifice of the masse. To this great mysterie of thy real presence I dedicate these my paines, as to the most vndoubted fountain, cause, and supporter of them. In this faith I was baptized and made a member of thy mystical body, in the hope to mainteine this  mi parents and frinds did set me to schole, in the vehement loue and affection thereof I haue written this rude and simple work. And to whom should I refer the praise and thanks for it, but vnto the alone? Or of whom shuld I craue the

protection thereof, but of thee? seing thou only art a meet patrone for the defence of any booke, which only art alwaies present, wheresoeuer and whensoeuer it shalbe examined. To the honour therefore of thy body and blood I offer this poore mite of my sim∣ple vnderstanding (thy mercifull gift, whatsoeuer it be) trusting thou wilt not suffer, neither the truthe of thy gospel to be long vnrestored in the desolate Ile of pitifull England, nor me thy poore seruant through  or naughty liuing to perish euerlastinglie.
AMEN.
