



REverend & Right Worsh: Fathers and Brethren, be∣loved in our Lord & Saviour Christ Iesus. Having of late been induced & perswaded (vp∣on former triall of my strength in privat exercise) to haue delivered some part of this Treatise in publike place; and after∣wardes finding my selfe prevented by that infirmitie which at other times had overtaken me in your hearing, to my no

small discouragement, and the griefe of many my good friendes; I was enforced to forbeare the place, and to leaue the exercise vnperformed; yet supposing this to be an honest and lawfull kinde of Vorsura, to borrow of my hand, to pay my tongues debt, I haue presumed to present it to your graue iudgements in writing, and vnder your Worsh: names to publish it to the world. What the wil and purpose of God is, in this māner to put me to silence, I do not busy my selfe to inquire, neither would I haue other rashly and curiously to iudge;Exod: 29:29: 2. Tim: 4:5: Secret things belong to God. In that I cōtinued thus vnserviceable for the work of an E∣vangelist, in speech and vtterance, I re∣solued with a Reverend man among vs, Evangelizare manu & scriptione to preach (according to my poore ability) by my hand and by writing.D. Rainolds Epist. ad Com Essex. Let no man thinke that I pretend infirmity as a co∣vert for Idlenesse, for I haue heretofore offered and presented my labours, of a

willing and ready minde, when I might haue withdrawne my selfe. And I feare to truant in this busines vnder any such coulourable excuse, least that shold be∣fall mee, which happened vnto Caelius, who to avoide the Ave potentiorum, to giue his attendance earely and late vp∣on the great ones of his times, faigned himselfe sicke of the gowt, so cunning∣ly, that his hypocrisie came home to him, and he fel sicke of the gowt indeed, Tantum cura potest & ars doloris,Martial. l. 7 Epig. 38.
Desit fingere Caelius podagram.
What my infirmity is I cannot well tell you, because Galen saith it hath no name; yet I finde that it effecteth that which there he saith, loquelam,De Sympt, Causis lib. 2 cap. 2. quae vo∣luntatis nō leve est opus, prorsus adimit, it cleane depriveth & bereaveth a man of speech, which is the principall worke and the most noble Action of his will.Iam. 3:2. Enarrat. in Psal. 37. qui in lingua non pecca∣vit, &c. Saint Iames faith, according to St. Au∣gustines reading, that hee that offendeth not in his tongue is a perfect man, it is

ment that sense according to which the Paroemiast speaketh in multiloquio stul∣tiloquium;Prov. 10.19 where Austen saith Non fru∣stra lingua in vdo est,Aug. ibid. quia facilè labitur. The tongue may as well offend in too much silence, as in lavishnes of wordes. For to be wilfully silēt in Gods messadge, in which the neglect is attended on with a vae,. Cor. 9.16 Ier: 48:10. & negligēce with a curse, is to faile of a Ministers active perfection, the chiefe complements whereof, are the right vse of his hand and tōgue. If I haue wilfully neglected, or negligently hand∣led the worke of the Lord,Psa. 137.5.6 then let my tongue ever cleaue to the roofe of my mouth, and let my right hand also forget her cunning;Mark. 7:35. Luke 1:64: Motus lin∣guae vitia∣tur per sep∣timam ner∣vorum con∣iugationē. Gal. de lo∣cis affectis lib. c: 2. But seeing it hath pleased God not to loose the strings of my tongue for vtterāce, as to Zacharias, but rather by solution of the cōiugation of nerves to disable my speech; J must learn with Saint Paule even in this also to bee con∣tent. Philip. 4.11. Especially seeing that Gods worthiest servantes haue

complained of like infirmities.Ser: 44. in Cant. Saint Bernarde saith, that weaknes of bodie of∣tentimes inioyned him silence, and infor∣ced him to pause in the midst of his ser∣mons, and abruptly to breake off his Dispu∣tations and Lectures. Concerning this present discourse; as I conceived it vpō occasion of the daunger of these times, and since haue inlardged it with a Sum∣mary collection of that, which at other times I had delivered elsewhere touch∣ing the same matter; I thought it good to shoot it abroad like one of Ionathans Arrowes,1. Sam. 20.22. to giue men warning of Gods displeasure, beseeching him to guide it to the marke wherevnto it was level∣led, namely to worke in vs all, a trem∣bling feare of his wrathfull indignation, & our true & harty conversion, which I pray God to graunte vnto vs. And I humbly beseech your Wor: to accept this my silly labour with that wōted fa∣vour, wherewith I haue alwaies founde my indeavours to haue beene accepted

and intertained of you. God of his mer∣cie double his Spiritual graces vpō you, giving you a large heart,1. King. 4.29. to vnderstande and to comprehende the riches of his goodnes and the wonderfull thinges of his law, and replenish you with godly zeale seasoned with discretion, truely to seekc the advancement of his glory & sincere worship, and the good of his Church. From Magdalen Colledge this 13. of March, 1603.

