



IT were a matter most absurd, most discreet and
famous Princesse, to suffer this briefe translation,
as it were by hap hazard, to present it selfe at the
feete of this great Queene, without your fauoura∣ble
safe conduct. Men might say: What presump∣tuous
doult is this, that dare thus approach to this
Maiestie, newly arriued for our tranquillitie, and
as yet ignorant of the manners & fashions of this Countrie? Is she not
sufficiently bufied in the receiuing of her deserued honours, done vnto
her both by great and small, townes and communalties as she goeth?
Is not her name sufficiently honoured with that high title which the
heauens and her vertue do graunt her? What can this man adde to
her glory, sauing only his particular vowes of small efficacie? Pardon
me good Lady, and if it please you to way this my zeale in the ballanc
of your singular wisedome, and if you finde it ouer light or of bad assay,
send it to the minte and suppresse it: but if it hang in equall peyse, as
we say, or that it be too light of some few graines, doe it this fauour,
to let it passe at how low a price so euer you shall thinke good. This be∣nefite
shall proceed only from your fauour and courtezie: and by this
course you shall stirre vp the gallant spirits of France to seeke to delight
her with some braue and comely conceipt, saying: sithe this man for
so small industry employed vpon another mans argument was so fauon∣rably
accepted, how much more shall we in giuing her Maiestie a farre
richer gift? yet it is alwayes to be considered, that Maiesties do limit
their contentment not after the valew or riches, which they need not,
but as things do delight them. Witnesse the common example of the
king that accepted the country mans Radishes, who was well rewar∣ded:
and the Gentleman who grounding himselfe vpon the like rea∣sons,
looked for a farre greater rewarde if he presented a better thing,
and therevpon presented his Maiestie with a goodly horse and of great
valew: to whom the king, very well conceauing his meaning, gaue in
reward the poore mans Radishes which he had deerly paide for. Thus
I beseech GOD most excellent Princesse to keepe and preserue you.
Written in the holy yeare 1600.

