



May it please your GRACE:
YOVR most Noble and pious Disposition (to omit other Motiues and Ob∣ligements) hath embolde∣ned me to present You this Treatise, (writ in behalfe of the Clergie:) which in all prostrate humilitie is here tendred to your Gracious Acceptance. Great is the Honor and Eminence, to which God hath exalted you; and will be yet much greater, if you honor him (againe) in his Prophets and Embas∣sadors; who are (as S. Paul teacheth)
worthy of double honor;
Tim. 5.7. and are ho∣noured by our blessed Sauiour, and his Holy Spirit, with these glorious Titles, The Light of the World.
Mat. 5.14 Reu. 1.20. The Starres & Angels of the Church. The Charrets and Horsemen of Israel.
 Kin. 2.12 Which the Deuil well know∣ing, sometime endeauours to eclipse their Splendor, and poyson their Re∣putation, by the venemous Tongues of wicked Miscreants: otherwhile, total∣ly to extinguish and ruinate them, by the cursed plots and persecutions of bloody Tyrants: by whom, he common∣ly vses to discharge his great Artillery against them; who being once cut off, it must needs exceedingly enlarge his Kingdome of Darknesse. Thus in an∣cient time, that BASILISKE, Diocle∣sian, being mounted on the Imperiall
Throne, most cruelly massacred the Priests and Pastors of the Church. Yet this Murthering-piece (in the iust censure of a famous learned Lawyer) was not so preiudiciall to Christianity,
L. Coke,  Winch. ca as that SERPENTINE, Julian the Apostate, who (as Ecclesiasticall Histories report) slew & marty∣red the verie Priesthood it selfe: for he rob'd the Church, & stript Spirituall persons of their Reue∣nues. Whereupon ensued great Ignorance, and extreme decay of Christian Religion; there being none that would apply them∣selues, or Children, or any they had in charge, to the study of Di∣uinitie, when they saw that after long and painfull studie, they should haue nothing to liue on.
(Thus farre, that Oracle and Miracle of the Law.) And hence it was, that in the last Age and Centenarie, that great red Dragon,
Reu. 12.3. whose name, is a Destroy∣er (Reuel. 9.11.) was so busie in ali∣enating the Churches Patrimonie, in demolishing her goodly Mansions, and Monuments, and in conuerting the Houses of God into Stables, (or worse:) and all vnder a faire colour of
Non rem, ed modum  mno.) REFORMATION (which certen∣ly, is a good word; but it hath serued to gild many a rotten post.) And this still is the Diuels Method and manner of proceeding, where he gets to be pre∣dominant, and finds fit and actiue In∣struments for his purpose. Jt was well obserued by a
5 Ben Ru. Noble Knight in his Speech to the Honourable House of Commons, the last Session: That
although the Calling of Mini∣sters, were neuer so glorious within, yet outward pouertie would bring contempt vpon them; especially among those who measure men by the acre, and weigh them by the pound (as most doe.) Which (he said) he found by experience in Germany, where hee saw the stipendarie Ministers of the Reformed Churches despised & neglected by reason of their pouertie, be∣ing (otherwise) very graue and learned men. And there is no doubt (MADAM) but it is the maine drift and masterpeece of Satan, and his In∣fernall Engines, and Emissaries (at this day) to reduce the Preachers of Gods sacred Word here in England,
to the like penurious and despicable Estate, thereby to euacuate the Dig∣nitie of their Calling, and vtterly to annihilate their persons & Doctrine, (For Dauid himselfe, a man of admi∣red graces, a diuine Prophet, and mightie Warrior, yet (in King Saul's time) profest, that being a poore man, hee was but lightly esteemed, 1 Sam. 18.23.) To preuent therefore this dangerous stratagem, and cunning sleight of the old Serpent; it is the duty of all good Christians respectiue∣ly, especially of those whom God hath blessed with Honor, Wealth, and Au∣thoritie, to giue all due Honor, Ayd, and Support to the chosen Messengers and Embassadours of the King of Heauen; whose sacred and honorable Function was once in better esteeme
with the World, when a Priest mar∣ryed a Kings Daughter (For so it is recorded, 2 Chronic. 22.11. viz. Iehoshabeth the Daughter of King Iehoram, the Wife of Ieho∣iada the Priest.) As for those proud Pharisaicall Peacockes,
Tit. which pro∣fesse that they know God, but in workes deny him, and in a pretended zeale to the Gospel, make Stales and Pack-horses of their Preachers, and yet rob them of their Maintenance; (scarse affording them, the crummes that fall from their Worships Tables) they shall (without due Repentance, and Restitution) one day know and feele, that the prophane contempt, and base entertainment of them, rebounds vpon Christ which sent them: for so himselfe proclaimes, Luke 10.16.
Hee that despiseth you, despiseth me. Vndoubtedly, these self-conceited Humorists, and Solifidian-Nullifidi∣ans of our Time, haue by their sacri∣legious dealing, and irreligious de∣meanour towards their spirituall Guides, made themselues worse then Heathens and Barbarians: For how carefull was Pharaoh (a Heathen King) in the extremitie of Famine, to prouide for his Priests, and preserue their Lands from Sale or Alienation? Gen. 47.22. And what wonderfull kind, yea Honorable Entertaine∣ment did the Barbarians shew to S. Paul, and his distressed Companie? (See Acts 28. vers. 2, 7, 10.) Which memorable Examples, the Spirit of God hath not registred in vaine; but for our Instruction, and the Conuiction
of their execrable Impietie, which in their hungry zeale, gape after the spoyle and ruine of the Church. Yet (to giue these Hypocrites their due) they are content that the Kings Daughter (the Church Representa∣tiue) be all glorious within; but,
Ps. 45.14 that her Cloathing should bee of wrought Gold; fie, they hold it very vnfitting: Jt were (say they) farre more decent and commendable for the Ecclesiasticall State to con∣forme and sute it selfe to the Apostles Pouertie, and to that pure and primi∣tiue Time. This, they thinke, is a Seraphicall Speculation, and worthy our best Attention: And J doubt not, but the Church will be content to ad∣mit this Conformitie, vpon condi∣tion, that (according to the same
Rule, and Example of the deuout Christians of that Age) these Preten∣ders to Religion, and all other Pro∣fessors of Christianitie will instantly sell all they haue, and lay downe the price at the Churches feet, Act. 4.34. Surely (MADAM) were these People in truth the Children of God (as they strongly fancie themselues; Narcis∣sus-like, being in loue with their owne supposed Beauty) they would be better affected to the Church (the Mistresse of heauenly Truth) and not goe about (like pernicious Furies) to cloathe Her in Raggs; that so feruently and fre∣quently endeuors (by the dispensation of Gods holy Word and Sacraments) to adorne their Soules with the preci∣ous Pearles, and inestimable Jewels of all Christian Vertues; and to inuest
them (Luke primâ stolâ) with the Rich∣embrodered Robes, and Royall Orna∣ments of a true, iustifying, and sauing Faith. But they well shew of what Spirit they are: euen of such a one, as would fright the whole Packe of them, if he should appeare and bristle among them at their Conuenticles, or Night-Assemblies.
The GOD of Heauen assist and comfort your GRACE with his Holy Spirit; make you a happy Jnstrument of much Good to his Church; and crowne you (in the end) with a Dia∣dem of eternall GLORIE.

