



RIght Worshipfull,2 Pet. 1.13.14 St. Peter foreseeing, by speciall reue∣lation, the nighnesse of his departure, thought it a part of dutie, so long as hee was in this Tabernacle, to stirre vp the people of God, by putting them in remem∣brance, and, as it should seeme, iudged it not e∣nough to teach voce & exemplo, except hee also left behinde him, a liuing remembrancer in wri∣ting: as if hee had conceiued the triple, pasce, gi∣uen him in charge, to import as much, as pasce verbo, pasce exemplo, pasce scripto. The same, vpon like ground, I cannot but acknowledge a duty in
 mee. Reuelation I haue none, but sensible notices enow, frequent infirmities, proclamers of mor∣talitie, that seeme to threaten a speedy dissolution of mine earthly tabernacle. God may be pleased to support it, beyond my hopes, and aduised de∣sires; how euer, my prayer is, if God be so plea∣sed, that my Master, when hee comesLuk. 12.43., may finde me so doing, and my people haue some meanes to keepe in remembrance doctrines taught them.Heb. 2.1. How leaking, and sieue-like our vessell of memo∣ry is, in retayning the liquor of diuine truth, whose wofull experience teacheth not? If I may heale these breaches in my people, and any whit further the faith of Gods Church, I haue my desire, and shall glorifie God in this behalfe. The inscription is yours by iust title; as, for the manie personall desernings of you all at my hands, so for the sup∣port, some of you affoorded to my pressures: and help you lent mee in bringing these rude notes to their first light, which otherwise had perished, as abortiues, through malice of the aduersary. You delight not in complements, else would I giue them. Thus onely I pray to be reputed, thank∣full: thus onely to be recompensed, with your conscionable perusing of what is here presented. The many scapes, which as a man, I haue made, let your loue couer. The helpes, if any, brought to the vnderstanding of this Epistle, (iustly termed by Diuines The Key of Scripture) vse to your fur∣ther edifying in our most holy faith. I end with
 that prayer of Paul for Onesiphorus.1 Tim. 1.16.18 The Lord grant mercy to you and your housholdes, that haue so many wayes and often refreshed me, and were not ashamed of mine afflictions. The Lord graunt you, to finde mercy with the Lord at that day, Amen.
From Pitmister, May 5. 1611.

