



WOrthies, loe to you at last; Saint Pauls Antichrist in such linea∣ments as that Apelles his pencell, or coale rather was pleased to shadow him in. Lusted I say not, vnuailed onely, and made more barefaced, to yeeld his vgly visage to view of Gods people. How vexeth it to see Israel still halting twixt the two opinions? After de∣molishing the Idoll so long fore done, a fresh plea∣ding for Baal? Were it not hee seemes in his con∣sumption, neere his abolition, I should suspect some boding of his new erection. Auertat omen Deus. How much better had it beene neuer to haue knowne,
then knowing to turne backe from the holy Commande∣ment? The latter end of such men, will prooue worse then their beginning.
I promise, and perswade my selfe better things of you, and such as accompany saluation: so hereditary seemes right Religion to your Honourable family; hauing continued therein, descents more then Paul mentions of Timothie. If to your establishment in the present trueth, and furtherance of Faith, in times so wauering, this poore paines may be auaile-some, I haue my desire: and shall thinke (thorough your fauourable acception) some small part of my great debt of thankefull obseruance, wherein I ac∣knowledge my selfe to stand obliged to you, and yours, tolerably at least, discharged. Faxit Deus.
Withall you haue such as this Scripture afforded, doctrinall conclusions many for information of iudgement: exhortations frequent, to excite lan∣guishing affections; comforts not a few, for support of the trembling conscience, rules to examine our Spirituall estate; characters of gracious vertues; directions for morall practise. In the close, perswa∣sions to the loue and study of peace, more largely pressed, perhaps of purpose, to worke towards vnion the diuisions of Ruhen occasioned by great thoughts of heart. Sirs, said Moses, yee are brethren; why striue yee? de lana Caprina, for the breath of the people, so long, so eagerly, till Religion be neglected; Prayers interrupted; Charitie violated; care of Countrey forsaken; Iniquitie growne impudent, so as to dare giue affront to Authoritie. Oh that our Sauiours aduise might preuaile, to keepe our salt within our selues, so should we soone haue peace one with another.

For your part, worthy Sir, I haue neuer obserued your temper auerse, much lesse abhorrent from tearmes of peace. Desire onely you should aduance aboue the ordinary of peaceable or patient, to be∣come Pacificus; a peace-maker in Israel. The worke were more then generous; truely Honourable; no lesse then Princely. The stile such haue, in our Saui∣ours language, is no lesse then Sonnes of God; Hoc a∣gamus. And the God of peace shall be with vs.
Now for the great kindnesse wherewith you haue refreshed my bowels, I must pray as beggers; the Lord reward it you. As Paul for Onesiphorus, the Lord grant you, and yours, to finde mercy with the Lord at that day. I rest
Pitmister, Nouember 4. 1626.

