



OYuers mortal mē
which either knew
not, or of weyknes
{per}fectly cōsidred not
Chryst (most drad 
most gracious soue∣raygne
lord) haue de¦uerslye
laboured to
seke them immortal
name and memory:
Of which some bicause they could not atteyn
it by their worthy actes, haue sought the same
by vnworthy and most heynous crymes, as
Pausanas, which only to get hym a {per}petual
name, slewe the myghty and victorious king
Philip of Macedonia, as also he whiche for
the same intent purposed to haue set on fyre
the most famous tēple of Diana in Ephesus.
Others there haue ben, and at this daye be,
men of excellēt litterature & eloquēce, which

with their pen haue ought this gular fame
amonges whome euen they also which haue
most of all dispraysed and sharpely rebuked
in others this ambicion of name, yet to theyr
own workes wherin they haue to vehemēty
reprehended other, coulde not tempre ne stey
themselues from prefixing their own names.
So impotent a thynge, o vnquencheable is
this thurst, this desyre or glory.
Agayne, other some there haue ben, men of
most noble hert & high courage, whiche haue
laboured to win them renowme and ame, ei¦ther
by feates of armes, or by prudently coun¦sellyng
& administrating cōmon weales: as
Philip kynge of Macedonie, Alexandre the
great, Themistocles, Phociō, the two Scipi∣ons,
Pompey, Iullius Cesar, Lue us Sill,
Cicero, Lygurgus, with inite other.
Socrates (althoughe he knew not Christ,
yet for his great sanctimony & purenes of life
a mn more worthy to be reputed aaynt thē
many of our omysh sayntes) being demaun¦ded
by what wayes a mā might wyn an ho∣nest
fame, answered: If thou shalt apply thy¦selfe
to be such one in dede as thou deest to
be counted, as who sholde saye: wylt thou be
counted a furtherer of iullyce, a good prince,
a good couneer: Then indeuour thy self to
be such in dede. For vndoubtedly like as the
shadowe foloweth the body, as a cōpaignion
inseparable, euē to doth glory, renowme, and
fame accōpany excelēt veues, worthy gestes,
and noble qualityes, and that so moche the
rather, if the same be vnloked or. Of whiche

thinge, albeit there want no goodly exemples
euerye where aswell in prophane hystoryes
as in the holye scryptures, yet this one acte of
a woman & that a famous synner shall at this
tyme suffyce. Mary Magdaleyne to whome
bycause she loued moche, was moche forgy∣uen,
at a souper in whiche Chryste was pre∣sent,
whyle her syster minystred at the table
before all the gestes, of an excedinge zele and
loue she bare to Chryste annoyted wt a ryght
precyous oyntement his feete, and with the
very heare of her heed dryed them agayne.
Here I dare boldly saye this Magdaleyne
loked for no fame by this facte, yet what an∣swered
Christ to suche as murmured against
her & said, this oyntmēt might haue ben solde
for moche money and giuen to the poore Ue∣rely
(sayth Chryst) I saye vnto you, where so
euer this gospell shal be preached throughout
all the world, this also that she hath done shal
be told for a remembraūce of her.
But nowe to reflycte my oracyon vnto
your mooste royall maiestie, surely I can not
but be throughly perswaded as well by the
contyuall procedynges, as by the successe
of thynges, that not onely your graces moost
delyberate prouydence, but also the prudente
counsels of certein of your maiesties faythful
counseylours, haue not proceded of any am∣biciō
of name, but of a mere zele & ardent loue
towardes the publyque weale, & furtheraūce
o gods sacred trouth. Wherfore where lo e∣uer
throughout the worlde the abolyshment
of the bysshop of Romes vsurped power shal

be bruted or cronicled, there also shal be rea∣ported
the most gloryous actes of Henry the
eyght kynge or Englande, as chefe furderer
and worker of the fame. And sēblably where
so euer his maiesties noble actes shall be bru∣ted
there also shal not be forgotten the memo¦ry
of certayne his counsellours, namely of the
lorde Crumwell, so worthye a counselloure
of so worthye a prynce.
But agayne lyke as renowme foloweth
excellent vertues, so enuye pursueth hygh re∣nowme.
I saye, it is not possible but suche as
haue the gouernaunce of thynges, and be in
great authoritie shal be hated, maligned, en∣uyed,
euyl spoken of amonges the multitude.
Alexādre the great when it was shewed him
that a certayne lende person had spokē many
delyyteful wordes of him, answered to such
as were aboute hym, Surely I tell you, it is
princely & a thing appropryed to a great and
noble man, that when he hath done well, he
shall be reaported euyll. So erronyous is
the iudgement of the people, so pestyferous
is the enuye of malycious & despytefull per∣sons.
Pocion the Atheniense was a coūsel∣lour
moche more profytable then pleasaunt.
Demosthenes contraryly was rather a plea∣saunt
councellour then profytable. This stu∣dyed
moch to folow thaffections of ye people
the other egrely resysted the same with his
holsome counsels, when on a tyme they mette
togither, Demosthenes thus greted Phociō.
By the goddes imortal, Phocyon, yf the peo∣ple
of Athens begyn ones to rage, they wyll

surely kyll the. Trouth, sayde Phocion, they
wyll kyll me in theyr rage, but the will they
kyl, when they come to theyr ryght wyites.
Doubteles (mooste myghtye and redoubted
prince) it can not be dyssembled, but as cer∣teyne
or your graces counseyl be highly pray¦sed,
extolled, and magnityed of many: So
agayne on the contrary part, they be enuyed,
malygned, and hated of others, namelye of
suche as either haue enuye at theyr vocacion,
or be yet styll roted in theyr popyishe super∣stycion▪
Or these some perchaunce in theyr
turyous rage, wolde desyre theyr deth.
But agayne the same yf at any tyme they
shall retourne to theyr ryght wyttes, wyl ra¦ther
wysshe (as not a fewe alredy haue done)
the contuion of suche, as haue meynteyned
them in theyr rebellyous su{per}sticiō. I meane
the bysshop of Romes priuy adherent{is}, who
withoute questyon do hate all thinges that
tend to the aduauncement of gods honour, &
detection of theyr cloked hypocresye.
But as the lorde of hoostes hathe hyther∣vnto
protected and directed youre excellente
maiestie and certayne of your moost fayth∣full
counsayllours agaynste the mooste vn∣godlye
and pestilent conspiracyes of youre
ennemyes in all youre affayres: so I beseche
him in suche wise to poure out his grace vpon
the rest of your graces louynge subiect, as we
all togither with one accorde, tolowynge your
highnes as our heed and myghty shepeherde
maye vtterly vomyt out of vs all papisticall
venym, and hertely at laste imbrase the pure

and syncere verite of gods moost holy worde.
To the illustracyon and settynge forth wher∣of,
as it is not vnknowen, howe moche your
moost faythfull counseyllour myne olde may∣ster
and synguler good lorde, my lorde priuy
seale hath conferred and holpen, so of his stu∣dyous
procedynges and circumspecte per∣seueraunce
in the same, this onely thinge suf∣ficiently
declareth, that nowe of late he hathe
impelled me to translate in to Englysshe this
bake of Erasm{us} Sarcerius, a treasure inesti∣mable
vnto chrysten men, in whiche boke he
hathe so compendiously, so absolutely & frut∣fully
handeled all the common places of the
chrysten religyon, as neuer afore this tyme
hath ben done of any, namely in suche forme.
A daungerous pece of worke doubteles,
and full of diffycultie it is, so to handle these
maters as shall in all poyntes satisfie the ex∣pectaciō
of the readers, as declareth eloquent∣ly
wrytinge to your most redoubted maiestie,
the excellente clerke Philip Melanchthon in
his epystle before his common places, whose
iudgement this Sarcerius foloweth welnere
in all thinges. Onely in this they differ, that
Melanchthon dyrecteth his style to the vn∣derstandyng
onely of the lerned persons well
exercysed in scriptures. This tempereth his
penne also to the capacitie of yonge student
of scripture and suche as haue not had moche
exercise in the same.
Nowe it hathe ben an olde prouerbe and
not wtout cause celebrate of all ages. Quot
capita, tosensus, so manye hedes, so many

myttes, I graunte the godly and lerned men
in the pryncipall articles of our faythe do not
varye, but do constauntly synge all one note,
yet neuerthelesse in other dysputable mat∣tiers
(in whiche it is not mete for euery man
to wade) as predestynacyon, contyngencye,
frewyll, & suche lyke, there hathe ben always,
and yet is some dissencion, so that what one
aloweth an other disprayseth, what one dis∣{per}ueth,
an other approueth. And yet it can not
be denyed but there is one symple infallible
trouth who so can attayne it.
The cause of this blindnes is, that sithens
the fall of Adam, at whiche tyme mankynde
was depryued of the similitude of god, vn∣to
whiche he was fyrste create, mans wytte
hathe ben so darkened and his nature so spot∣ted
and cankred with the originall vice, that
he can not but be wrapped in infinite errours.
Onely god hathe perfecte intellygence, and
is true in his wordes. Omnis autem homo
mendax. There is no man but he lyeth, but he
erreth, but he both disceyueth & is disceyued.
Best is he that erreth leest. Saynt Augustyn
wrote very moche, but agayne he retracted
moche. It is not possyble for one man bothe
to wryte moche, aud to write al thynges true
that shall nede no reprehensyon. In a longe
worke (sayth the poete Horace) a man maye
other whyles lawfully slombre. Neyther do
I speake this bycause I knowe any notable
errour in Sarcerius.
But forasmoche as the iudgementes of
men be variable, and namely in this kynde

of wrytynge, it is very harde to satisfye all
mens myndes: Therfore if either this excel∣lēt
clerke Erasmus Sarcerius in his writin∣ges,
or I in my translacion shall not through∣ly
answere is your maiesties and other mens
expectacion: It shal apperteyne to a christian
modestie to interprete all thynges vnto the
best parte.
As for exemple: It is not vnknowen what
great alteracion hathe lately ben amonges
lerned men concernynge frewyl. Some haue
put frewyll in no thynges, some on the con∣trary
parte haue gone aboute to meyntayne
frewyll in all thynges. Agayne other goynge
in the meane betwen both these extremes, as
Melanchthou & this Sacerius, with many
other excellent clerkes, haue denyed frewyl
onely in spiritual mocyons and that also in
such persons as be not yet regenerate and re∣nued
by the holy ghost, & yet in the mean sea¦son
they take it not so awaye, but they leue
them also in spirituall mocions a certeyn in∣deuour
or willing, which indeuour neuerthe∣lesse
can fynishe nothinge, onles it be holpen
by the holy ghost. This (after my pore iudge∣ment)
is the ryghtest and truest waye.
But now, if accordynge to the varietie of
mans iudgement, the same shall not forthwt
appere to others, set them not incontinuently
damne and gyue sentence of other mens wri¦tynges,
but diligently enserche the scripture,
which is the only rule & touche stone, where∣with
we ought to trye the trouthe from the
vntrouth, the pure and syncere doctrine from

the corrupt & hypocriticall. If they shall fynd
any thing ryghter or better then this doctrine
let them louyngly imparte and communicate
their waye vnto vs, yf not, let them vse this
waye with vs.
But what so euer this boke is (for to your
graces most exacte iudgement I refer it) lyke
as by the īpulsion & cōmaundemēt of my said
old master my iord priuy seale, I haue trāsla¦ted
it ī to oue vulgare tong: So his lordship
hath willed me (wher as els I wold not haue
ben so bold) to offre and dedicate the same vn¦to
your moost noble & redoubted maiestie, to
thintent that where as he dyd lately p̄fer me
vnto your graces seruice in ye office of ye signet
(for what qualities he espied in me I can not
tel) I might at lest testifie & declare vnto your
highnes my prōpt & redye mynde to do your
grace such pore seruice as to my habilite may
extende. And so consequently that this boke
vnder your maiesties protection and patro∣cinie
may the more plausibly and gredyly be
deuoured of the people, for whose only cause
and edificacion youre hyghnes and suche as
be your moost prudent counsaylers haue pro¦uyded
dyuers holsome bokes to be set forthe
in englysshe.
In dilatyng of which ryght excedyng and
hygh benefyte with infinyte other wrought
to the inestimable vtilitie of the people, I wil
not further at this present procede, onely I
beseche our lorde, that lyke as your hyghnes
hath hyther vnto with moost prudent, godly
and gracyous meanes, wonderfullye holpen

the state and publyke weale of youre graces
most florishing realme, so your maiestie may
procede, and to thende perceuerin ye same, to
the glory of god, your highnes honour, vnitie
of your subiectes, welthe of your realme, de∣ogaciō
of the bisshop of Romes vsurped po∣wer,
reioyse of your welwillers, confusion
of your graces aduersaries. Thus most
myghty, most hygh, and most graci∣ous
soueraygne lord I commit
your hyghnes to the holye
Trinite, to whome be
all honour, prayse,
and glorye for
euermore.
Amen.

☜☞
