



RIght Honorable, and my very good Lord: Sensibly hee spake, and fittingly to his times, who wayling said; Nusquam inue∣ni requiem, nisi in li∣bro & claustro. Men∣tior, if my Soule ac∣cord him not. A win∣dow too soone I o∣pened it, as Noah to his Doue, to see, if yet the bil∣lowes of the ancient Deluge were calmed: if in
 some eminent Mountayne shee might find a place to settle on. And behold, all swelling with the surges of Ambition, or soyled with the slime of Luxurie and basest Auarice: no place safe where shee may pitch her foote. Blessed be that God, that giues the hand, to receiue her backe into the Arke. O munde immunde, said Saint Austine in his holy indignation. How fastens our purest sub∣stance on thy pollutions? why seekes it rest in that, whose composition is of tumults? , that haue begunne by Grace, to retire my minde, from the tumultuous hurly-burlies it is tossed withall. And now with Agur I pray,Pro. 30.8. Lord, feede me with foode conuenient for me: my Tuguriolum, my little Sheepe-cote, affoording retired priuacie, shall yeeld more tranquillitie, then the See of him, that would be stiled, Monarch of the Catholique Church.
Right Noble Lord, fallor? or doth your heart applaud vs? that hauing more then suruiewed what euer contentment the Royallest Court could affoord; and spent the better dayes in seruice to the State, at length makes choice of priuacie, as safest harbour for old Age. Whether, trow I, doe you more pitie men launching into that Euripus, or praise God for your owne safe arriuall? Thanks be to God, that hath safe rendred you to your selfe; and taught you to make deuotion the taske of your Age.Eccl. 12.13. Hoc est omnis Homo, To feare God and keepe his Commandements. Continue herein, I dare promise your conscience more tranquillitie, your person more honour, then all the Courts of the world can
 affoord you. Still let your soule be enamoured on the beautie of the Lords house: Still make your Closet a Temple, wherein the praises of God may sound day and night. Haec via ad magni Regis Pala∣tium. To vrge perseuerance and progresse in san∣ctitie, is the bent of this Scripture, thought proba∣bly the first of the New Testament, , hold fast what you haue receiued: Hee is faithfull that hath promised to giue you the Crowne of Life. Exiguum est quod restat. To faile in the last Act is not so shamefull, as discomfortable, sith wee know who said,Psal. 92.14. Old Age must be more fruitfull. If to these intentions my poore paynes may be vsefull to your Lordship, and the Church of God, I haue what I seeke; for other things, prouidebit Deus. To whose gracious guidance and blessing, I humbly betake your Lordship; and rest

From Pitmister in Sommerset,
SEPTEMB. 29. 1618.
