



Much honored Sir,
AFter I had (though not with∣out many modest reluctations, first, from within) obteyned leave of my selfe, to make those thoughts, which have already, in some part, passed, in a transient sound, by the eares of some, legible, in a larger Volume, by the eyes of many; I could not be∣thinke

mee of a Nobler Patronage, than from your selfe; a worthy, not more highly placed upon the [hill] of deserved Eminence; then (as your Name proclaimes you in your conspi∣cuous, and devout practices) a most accompli∣shed, and exemplary [Saint.]
My engagements to thatMr. Peter Tayler. good friend (whom I have have not lost, only seene to be sent before me to his heaven) whose decease gave an hint unto these slender, yet (as my hope is) usefull meditations, were such; as that, methought, I could not suffer my respects to yeeld up with him, on a suddain, their last Ghost; nor one grave to swallow both his corpse, and memory: I tooke therefore this cue of opportunity, as, to testifie my respective∣nesse to him, and to those surviving, who most neerely related to him, so withall, to leave some publique monument of all gratitude (most worthy Sir) to you; not more endeared unto him dissolved, in his life time, than rich in many favors to my selfe; which were there∣fore the more Noble, and of higher value, for that, they utterly transcended all deserving∣nesse in me: should I attempt on this occasion,

to blazon the armes of your eximious worth, resplendent in a Coate, (whose crest must needs be glory) embellished by so various graces, (which, like the [Can. 1.11. golden] borders of the Spouse, [overlaid] with [silver,] having the [best] sides [inwards,] in a close integri∣ty; set you beyond the reach of flattery, or the shocke of envy;) alas! the best Heraldry of mine eloquence would here be posed; and in so copious, and full a theam my oratory quite languish under the povertie of but-apt expres∣sions: give me leave then to admire, what I am not able by mine insufficient quill, to am∣plifie enough in you: Let this suffice; your verie Name so well resembled in yourConveniunt rebus [nomi∣na] saepesius. actions hath made you a perfect Mirror to the West: Lord! what a blessed prospect is it? thus to view greatnesse, and goodnesse, as righteous∣nesse and peace, toPsal. 85.10. claspe each other; or, like Davids Palace, and Gods Tabernacle, to dwellPsal. 132.13, 14. together, upon one Sion! Goe on, Noble Sir, to credit your Countrey, (the love whereof is like the orient rayes of the brightest Taper of the Firmament, universally display∣ed upon you) by your worthy undertakings:

persist couragiously to be, not more a promo∣ter, than (as you have long beene) aMatth. 5.9. maker of peace and amity; it shall winne youRom. 15.13 peace of soule, and carry you upon the wings of honour, as another Noahs Dove, to the Arke of that happinesse, into which theIsa. 9.6. Prince of peace himselfe shallGen. 8.9. receive you (out of a troublesome and stormy world) by the armes of his mercy: Continue still to make your House a Temple, where the dayly incense of Devotion ascends up as a rich perfume (sweetened by theRev. 8.3, 4. Angell of Gods pre∣sence) unto Heaven; and where each tongue to me seemed as a severall Organ, to sound out Gods praises. Be notGal. 6.9. weary to daigne countenance and encouragement to the1. Tim. 6.11. men or God, who1 Tim. 5.17. labour in the Word and Doctrine: Loe! we need such Patrones to support us under the unwor∣thy affronts of carnall and besotted earth∣wormes, who sleight and under-value even theMatth. 7.6. Pearles of Heaven it selfe, because (which is their grosse stupidity and2. Cor. 4 4. blind∣nesse) brought to them by us but in2. Cor. 4.7. ear∣then vesells.
This poore piece of my Labours, (in the Lords greatMatth. 9.37. Harvest) humbly prostrates it selfe, to be shrowded under the wings of your favour; vouchsafe to cover it by them; it shall, under such a protection, slight the meagre aspects of any, whether malecon∣tented, or malevolent dispositions.
The Sermon was, at first indeed, in Prea∣ching, but as that1. King. 18.44, 45. little Cloud, like to a mans hand, seene by Elijahs servant from the top of Mount Carmel; but it's now swollen, and womb'd-out into a bigger one; from whence, if but some few drops distill, to refresh the LordsPsal. 68.9. inheritance, I shall re∣joyce in that good God of mine, who hath thus farre1. Tim. 1.12. enabled me, after myRom. 12 3. measure, for his weighty service.
Nothing remaines, but that I earnestly im∣plore the full blessings of Gods both hands to be powred upon you; and, with you, upon your vertuous Consort and Familie; and that theHeb. 13.20, 21. God of peace, who brought a∣gaine from the dead our Lord JESUS, that great Shepherd or the Sheepe, through the blood of the everlasting cove∣nant,

make you perfect in every good work, to doe his will; working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight; through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Exon, 12. Febr. 1639.
