



SIR, I haue often catched at some oppor∣tunity, to giue publike testimony of my thankefull remembring your de∣ceased Fathers kind euery, performed to me. A duty it was, to present freely: to me a Kindnesse, that I was selected. The recompence expected I haue carefully made good, by instructing my people; with what industry, God knowes: with what fruit (I thanke God) many soules can witnesse. This kind of testimony I the rather embraced, for that it afforded occasion, to cleare my selfe of some fond impu∣tations, and of stopping the mouthes of vnreasonable men, that (euen for paines) haue made me their by-word. It were long, to reckon vp all slanders of the malicious. These are the chiefe, Vnlearned, singular, turbulent, factious. As touching Learning, I neuer much vaun∣ted; but by the grace of God I am that I am. He knowes much,Phil 3 10 1. Cor 2.2 Act. 7.22 that knowes Christ crucified and the vertue of his resurrection: yet, had I the learning of Moses, who was skilled in all the learning of the Egyptians, yea, the knowledge of men and Angels, I would endeuour in preaching to obscure my selfe, that the power might bee knowne to be of God For Singularity, this is mine A∣pology; single I may go, (more shame for those should keepe me company:) singular, I am sure I am not, sith neyther I affect lonenesse (would God all the Lords people were Pro∣phets, all Prophets, labourers!) and the course I held, is
 prescribed with a thundering adiuraion, hauing euer also bene holden by all faithfull Pastours. The way of trauell is indeed least trauelled,Gen. 49.15. and Issachar loues his ease: yet thus I resolue; rather then lose heauen, to go alone; and neuer to be so good a fellow, as to run (with Idlers) to hell for company. My Turbulentnes, let these things witnes; my parting with many rights for peace sake: disgesting in∣iuries, I say, not onely without Reuenge, but euen without seeking for iust defence: raylings, slanders, assaults, hazard of life, indeed what not? and vnlesse they will indite mee for not admitting sicam totam into my bowells,Cic. pro Rosc. Amerin. I know not what show of turbulentnesse they can accuse me of. For Faction, let my courses speake: in regard of the Church, for doctrine I teach none but what she professeth: for dis∣cipline, throughout conformable to the orders prescribed. If this be the matter, that the multitude is deuided, the cause would be inquired, whether mine, or Gods. Not where dissentions are, there presently is the Preacher facti∣ous. It hath euer bene one Accidentall effect of the Gospel, to worke seperation:Luk. 12.51. shall I say, betwixt a man and his neighbour? nay, betwixt a man and his child: nay, be∣twixt a man and himselfe. And let others please them∣selues in their peaceable Ministery, I shall neuer thinke hee knowes the vse of the Fanne,Mat. 3.12 that is, alwaies tossing, and makes no seperation. My comfort is in the middest of these trialls:Mat. 5.12 Thus persecuted they the Prophets that were before me. Concerning this present Sermon your Wor∣ship may thus vse it with profit: as 1. a spurre to Profici∣ency. 2. a whip for Security. 3. a preseruatiue against Apostasy. The Lord graunt you and yours, me and mine, the whole Church of God a right vse of it. And thus iudge of the Authour; Hee wisheth you more good, then he can do you, and rests euer,

From your Pittmister: October, 10. 160.
