



SIR, when I first meditated what at your instance I revised, and now al∣most enforced, publish: I expected cō∣tradictions from Mammonistes, and scarse hoped to perswade men savou∣ring of better things. Such a holdfast is covetousnes; so incredulous is pre∣iudice. Farther opposition from bre∣thren, and Iudicious men, was as farre from my thought, as I am in this point from their opinion. But Austin saith wel;Aug. cont Ad∣vers. leg & pro∣phet. li. 1. c. 2. Deus donat prodesse nobis non solûm quod docet ve∣ritas, verùm etiā quod obstrepit vanitas. And such oppo∣sings against truth are thus farre for it, that they occasion more intentiue search, and clearer discovery of the truth. My purpose is not to prescribe to any mans faith. Nam quis ego sum? Even the least of Gods little ones. Yet as one that hath obtained mercy of God to be faithfull, let me en∣treat this favour from men, to be heard on even termes, with mē, I freely confesse, of far greater gifts, yet, as I thinke, having no such evidence in this point, to carry away so hād∣smooth
 a conclusion of such dependance. This, I hope, will ap∣peare to any impartiall reader, that the reasons here brought for tythes, are much nearer to demōstratiue, thē those against them are to probable arguments. My poore paines I haue inscribed to your worship, as for many your well deservings of me, and the Church of God; so for that you first vrged a re∣view of the first rude draught, and haue given me so manie occasions to thinke you will not be the last in practising this vnprofitable profitable conclusion, when once your Iudge∣ment shalbee convinced. And though I loue not to bee per∣emptory, (for I know mine owne blindnes) yet this I thinke I may say; the reasons on both sides being peized in even bal∣lance, there will scarce be left place for an  or suspense of Iudgment, except men be resolute to hold their conclusion in despight of all contrary premises. Now the God of all truth direct our hearts to the knowledge and loue, and obedience of the truth. And the same God that begun his good worke in you, confirme, and perfect it to the day of our Lorde Iesus Christ. Amen.

