



Reverend Sir,
THat which was graced with your audience, in preaching, with your thanks, when prea∣ched, be pleased now to ho∣nour with your noble Patro∣nage in print; which is a kind of preaching too, that, as2 Sam. 18.23. Ahimaaz did Cu∣shi, and SaintJohn 20.4. John Saint Peter, doth [out-run] the vocall, by so much farther, as it can lengthen out its strides (as Procrustes stretched his guests, inPlutarch. in vita Thesei. Plutarch, that were for his bed otherwise too short) to reach it self unto the hands, and eyes of those good Catholike Christians, unto whose ears my voice, had it bin Stentorian, or as aMar. 3.17. Boanerges, could not come: To preach by the pen, which in the expression of Cle∣mens
 Alexandrinus is, , is as usefull sometimes as to doe so by the tongue; and this instruction by the— hand, like to a wedge of gold beaten into a plate, spreads more a∣broad, and often with as large emolument to the Church, as that which is by lively. Clemens A∣lex. lib. prim. Strom. speech, or sermo∣cination. I may seeme perchance by this to light a candle to the Sun, and to cast my spoonfull into that vast Ocean of knowledge, which we (though sitting upon the very lees and dregs of time for Atheisme and ill practice, which with bleeding hearts we view abroad, and wonder at) have lived to see make up that prophesie of great Daniel, who foretold it should
[Dan. 12.4. abound]; and of the Kingly Prophet, whose prediction is now at its full height, and  of accomplishment, God gave the word, and great are the company of thePsal. 68.11. Preachers; when thus comparatively I lay me in the ballance, I finde most others to preponderate; sith I must on the generall audit of my selfe, confessedly, with Paul, bring in my account with2 Cor. 12.11 I am nothing. , and with good Calvin, mine emptyCalvin. Inst. lib. 2. cap 5. sect. 13. in fine. , saying of all my best parts, and performances, as S. Andrew of the five loaves and two fishes, ; alas!John 6.9. What are these? They reach not, as I reade of Davids
 later Worthies, unto the dignity of the2 Sam. 23.19. former, who did not more outstrip in worth, then Saul did overgrow in1 Sam. 9.2. stature his under brethren, or Zache∣us [Luke 19.4. climb'd] up on the Sycamore, o'relooke the com∣pany in the way below with Christ: But when a∣gaine I meditate, that even a paire ofLuke 2.24. Turtles, and the twoMar. 12.42, 43. Mites, where there was no more to give, were valued by that God (who measureth more by quality, then byNon de pa∣trimonio, sed de animo opus ejus exami∣nans, & consi∣derans non quantum sed ex quanto de∣disset. S. Cypr. lib. de opere & cleemosyn. sect. 14. quantity) as a rich oblation, and a large additament to the common corban, and the treasurie of the Church; and when I think that my little light, though but as a candle, or a glimmering ray of that orientMal. 4.2. Sun of righteousnesse, is given, and derived to me, not to be hidden under theMat. 5.15. bushell whether of covetousnesse, or obscurity, nor to be set under theLuke 8.16. bed of lazinesse, or sluggish ease, much lesse to be dipped in the liquour of what is [Isa. 5.20. called] good, but
[is] the worst of fellowship, till it be quite extinct; but as Saint Paul saith even of the com∣monest gift of the Spirit, that its bestowed, not for ostentation of the haver, but for to1 Cor. 12.7. profit withall the whole Church; Why should I be shie to pay, though but myEccles. 1.7. rivulet, as in tribute to this Ocean; and to improve, though but my (one) talent, to the best advantage of my Lord and Master Christ, who
 is wont to give to him thatLuke 8.18. hath (and having doth employ) theMat. 25.28. more, by how much more the good al∣readie given spreadeth, and doth become diffusive to communitie. I would not therefore with the Spider weave this web to thrust it to a corner, but with the Silk-worme rather spinne my thread so that it might help to cloath at least some younger children of the Church. I must confesse the Presse may now well be∣gin to surfet, and asGen. 49.14. Issachar to couch down under the burdens of those sons of Anak, those Giant-like voluminous writers on this my subject: those are your bulky Elephants that with whole1 Mac. 6.37. castles-full of pa∣per on their backes, occasion the common Readers to keep aloofe; their purse-strings are too weake to tye and hold them, and the acies of their eie-sight hebe∣tated by so too-big objects: I have not written—Tenuis mihi campus aratur. such Iliades after Homer: Many before me have done worthily thisEst illud mag∣nae fertilitatis opus, Ovid. Trist. lib. 2. larger way in Ephratah, and for it are become, as the people in the gates told Boaz, ve∣ryRuth 4.11. famous in our Bethleem. I have chosen to pre∣sent my Mother-Church, as Saint Austin did Lau∣rentius, with an enchiridion onely, as having lim∣med out what is more copiously pourtraied by others, into a smaller draught, and so doe offer it, as were Homers Iliades to that mightie Monarch, in a
 Nutshell to her. I must expect (having thus hoised up my saile to steare amaine) some sur∣ges, some whistlings of your windy spirits, that like to summer flies will blow corruption on the sweetest of provision: Wee are fallen into those times wherein all Sermons are most sure of censure, most of all unsure of practice; so that when our Sermon is ended, wee can hardly say our Sermon is done; wee heare more often of our owne good voices, elocution, memorie, then of our hearers holy doings: My hope is not so high as to please all, nor my intention so factiously sordid, as to displease any; yet I cannot but suspect the worst, for that whereas I hitherto (mineAnno
[tri∣cessimo] car∣nis assumptae, Salvator ad si∣gna, & miracu∣la, & doctri∣nam usus est potestate— non antea, quia hac aetate tempus doctri∣nae insinuatum est rationabi∣le; & ante has metas perpe∣ram invadi magisterium data est forma; quia non com∣petit annis im∣pubibus sede∣re in cathedra, &c. Cypr. de je∣jun. & tentat. Christi, Sect. 1. age not daring farther) have beene one∣ly as a Standing in a Faire set up before a∣nothers doore, and have beene read but in a Preface to some bookes published of my fathers by me; I must now stand alone upon my owne bot∣tome by my selfe: and yet not all alone, but as the learners hand, though framing characters, yet by direction of the Scrivener that holds and guides it, so I have singly vented nothing, or at all steared the least point farther then as I have beene gui∣ded by the proper starres and cynosure of the wor∣thiest
 in our Church of England; whose names are now all noted in my margin, which I could not men∣tion in my preaching, lest I should have lost my Ser∣mon in so large quotations. Honoured Sir, amidst the many dangers it is like to meete with, vouchsafe to patronize this my first publick Theologicall Essay by your countenancing of it: I shall [so] lesse feare either the spleen or gall of any Reader. One Plato, saithMarcil. Fi∣cin. in vita Platonis. Unus Plato plus est quàm Atheni∣ensis populus. Marcilius, is worth all Athens else; one pearle out-vies a thousand pebles; one such Mecoenas, so acute an Aristarchus of all learning (who approves) beares down before him, like an Indian Hurraca, all the sullen opposition of the whole droves of Momus.
Should I here take occasion to blazon your so many excellent graces, which be like the Spouses flock of sheep which came up from the washing, even-shorne, each one being, not like the Pelican in the wilder∣nesse, alone, but every one bearingCant. 4.2. twinnes, and none is barren among them: Should I pen-down in this Epistle that those which are in others rare, and sin∣gular, are in you but ordinarie and common, I should but make that legible by your owne, which hath long since been visible to the eies of others that have truly known you. But though your various graces (as being all links of one and the same chain) might well claime
 as those in theScholiast. in Thucyd. Lacedaemonian army, a priviledge all of them to be Captaines, and to lead; yet that which is, as Davids Tachmonite, the2 Sam. 23.8. chiefe among these Captaines, and which, as King Lemuels vertuous daughter, dothPro. 31.29. excell the rest, is your humble and ad∣mired Patience: This is that bulwarke which as aMat. 7.25. rocke returnes the billowes of malevolence in froth, and makes the shafts of the meagrest envie to bee split in vaine: This is that which doth, and shall preserve you, as Alpheus, still untainted by the washings of the bitterestSic tibi cùm fluctus subter∣labêre Sica∣nos, Doris amara suam non intermis∣ceat undam. Virg. Eclog. 10. Doris, till you salute at last the limpid Arethusa, and sweet fountaine of all blisse. I will assure you, noble Sir, as the great Doctour of the Gentiles told his endeared Corinthi∣ans, my heart is much2 Cor. 6.11. enlarged towards you, and my respectfull thoughts be most voluminous, though now my quill (much like mine oratorie, too jejune and dry) hath thus epitomized my expressions in a line or two.
But I perceive, as Jordan above his bankes, the measure of my affection hath over-swoln the bounds of an Epistle: What remaines now, but that I must implore the favours of Heaven on you, and that you may still persist to beautifie the seat you sit in, to credit the West, and to adorne the Gospell: Mee,
 both your selfe, and your so rarely vertuous con∣sort, (a genuine branch of a most holy, and de∣vout stocke) shall ever have, though your meanest friend, yet one that hath resolved to print himselfe

Exon.
May 11. 1639.
