



Most worthy Matron:
TO auoyd the imputation of In∣gratitude this slender Epistle of mine prostrates it selfe to your fauourable acceptation, desiring (though meanely) to expresse its Authours seruice, and (that indubitate office & act of loue) his thankfulnesse for that abun∣dance of kindnesse, couetesy and well-willing, which from the infancy of your acquaintance with our deare Father, has beene from you propagated to vs branches of that root. Were it not, that I should be fouly iniurious to a Saint in Heauen (the memory of whom, as of a iust man is for euer blessed) I could
 willingly desire the accomplishment of that w which once some, (though in another case) sub¦ing vnder the Statue of Brutus, made, would G thou wert aliue Brutus! so I, would heauen would restore him, whose image externally I beare, & hope to be made heire of those vertues (the best inheri∣tance) resplendent in him, that hee might himselfe haue presented you with this badge of his thankful∣nesse, the contrary whereof was euer odious to him, and abhorrent from his nature; but since I cannot craue the fruition of his presence without bereauing him of felicity, let this gratefull office tendred by his Sonne haue accesse at the barre of your courteous ac∣ceptation, and if it (weighed in the ballance of your rich fauours) come short of equall counterpoizing them, you may in part ascribe it to the tenuity of the enditers immature iudgement, and want of rhetoricke to set it downe, but chiefly to the greatnesse of your kindnesse, which transcends the capacity of so illite∣rate a pen-man; but what you finde defectiue on my part, suppose (if there be any sence of such things a∣mong the Saints in Heauen) to be supplyed by the approbation of him, whose sonne I was. The pre∣sent here offered vnto you is a Sermon preached by the Authour, my deceased Father, at St. Maries in the Vniuersity of Cambridge, when he commenced Doctor of Diuinity, which through the importuni∣ty of some my worthy friends, and men of iudge∣ment, who wish well to the Common-wealth of Is∣rael, I haue put to the presse, hoping, that when it's brought forth, and exposed to the open world, it may finde safe shelter, and protection vnder the wings of
 your patronage. In it it you  y furtherance of your faith, I dare promise for the Author, that he hath his desire; as for my selfe, be pleased thus to thinke, I had rather be accounted any thing, then vnthankfull. Now, the God of all grace, that hath called you to his eternall glory by Christ Iesus, make you perfect, confirme, strengthen and stablish you in the true faith of his sonne, deliuer you from euery e∣uill worke, and preserue you to his heauenly king∣dome. Amen.

From my Chamber in Kings Colledge in Cambridge.
Nou. 18. 1628.
