


SIR,
AS God hath most aboundantly bles∣sed your Highnes, in honouring you on both sides with twoDos est Ma∣gna Parentum Virtus, Horat. Carm. l. 3. Ode. 24. wor∣thy Parents, whose Memorie (as now) will be euer deseruedly honoured: so it is iustly expec∣ted, that their Royal Vertues (al∣readiePreciosa Principum in∣genia & Vir∣tus quae ante annos viget. Cassiador. happily begun) shall be renewed in your Highnesse (as in a more, Euripid. Meleagr. liuely monument,
 then of Marble or Brasse) and (if it were possible) in well doing andQuod prae∣stibilius aut pulchrius mu∣nus Deorum quàm Sanctus & Dijs simili∣mus Princeps. Plin. in Paneg. Traian. pietie you shall not onely paralell, but sur∣passe them.
Your Kingly and Learned Father Dauid hath so broken the Ice to your Highnesse, his beloued young Salomon, (by laying such foundations for the gouernement of your selfe and your Israel after him) that whatsoeuer can be added, is but inferre lumen mortale splen∣dente sole.
By which only reason, I haue presumed (with Phaeton, trusting to my borrow'd wings) to present vnto your Highnes this deformed Portraiture, drawn from the Paterne (of theVinci eru∣bescens A∣pelles tertio colore line∣as secuit nul∣lum relin∣quens ampli∣us subtilitati locum, Plinius l. 35. cap. 10. Apelles like Picture) of , that
 by the view of such a dismem∣bred Monster, your Highnesse may prosecute the imitation of that Worke, that no Man (ex∣cept vnmatchablePyrgotelis ita omnium sculptorum peritissimus, vt Alexander e∣dixit ne quis eum quam il∣le sculperer, Plin. l. 7. cap. 37. Appoli. lib. 1. Florid. Cicero Epist. 12. ad Fa∣mil. Ʋal. Max. c. 11. l. 8. & Ho∣rat. Epist. 1. l. 6. Pyrgote∣lis, that hath ingrauen it vpon the MarbleNihil est accepta Virtu∣te quod (mor∣tali animo aut manu) immor∣tale queri po∣test, Val. Max. of inobliterable Vertue) is able to equalize.
If it will please your Highnes to Grace these my idle Labours withLaetissima Principis fa∣cies & amabi∣lis vultus in omnium sub∣ditorum ore oculis & ani∣mo sedet, Plin. in Paneg. Traian. a smiling countenance: (being all I desire) I shall thinke my Idlenesse fortunate, and en∣deuour hereafter to finde out some other subiect, more Wor∣thie your Princely entertaine∣ment. Thus Sir (renewing the oath of my loyall seruice to your Highnesse by my pen, that formerly I did solemnely sweare by the holding vp of my hand in a steele Gantlet, now asha∣med
 to bee seene for rust) I doe humbly take my leaue, and shall euer remaine,


