



SIr, Had I not been such a remote stran∣ger to Greatnes, yet, beyond you, scarce should I haue sought a Name to Honor this place. Being, as fortune hath plac't mee, I well could not, without charging my Free∣dome of spirit with what, as the worst in Manners, it euer hated; Flatterie. But I was resolu'd, that, as the Architecture of olde Temples, you know, was either Dorique, Jonique, or Corinthian according to the Dei∣ty's seuerall nature, so in analogie, should Gifts of this kind be to the Receiuers, & that Bookes should most fitly be consecrated to true louers of Goodnes and all good Lear∣ning. I would call Books onely those which haue in them either of the two obiects of Mans best part, Verum or Bonum, and to an

instructing purpose handled, not what euer onely speaks in Print and hath its litle worth ending in its many words. In this of Mine dealing with Verum chiefly, in matter of Sto∣rie and Philologie, I giue you the greatest interest, that in a thing of so Publique right may be enioyed. Your more noble Studies, Vertue, Learning, and your Loue, to what euer is in those Names, made you most ca∣pable of it. And to speake here freely, the speciall worth of your Qualitie and of some more (luti melioris) compar'd with that world of Natures infinitely varied by base∣nesse of Spirit, Daring ignorance, Bewitcht sight, worst of inclination, expressions of scarce more that's not Bestiall then what Clothes and Coffers can, and the like haue made me, I confesse, doubt in the Theorie of Nature, whether all known by the name of MAN as the lowest Species bee of one Forme. So Generous, so Ingenuous, so pro∣portion'd

to good, such Fosterers of Vertue, so Industrious, of such Mould are the Few: so Inhuman, so Blind, so Dissembling, so Vain, so iustly Nothing, but what's Ill dis∣position, are the Most. Our long societie of life, and the special Desert, which you know you may truly challenge of my Endeuors, entitled You to it as from Mee. Neuer shall I not confesse you to haue been to me . Some yeer since it was finish't, wanting, only in some parts, my last hand; which was then preuented by my dangerous and tedious sicknesse; being thence freed (as you know too, that were a continuall, most friendly, and carefull wit∣nesse) by the Bounteous humanitie and aduise of that learned Phisician Doctor Ro∣bert Floyd (whom my Memorie alwaies honors) I was at length made able to perfit it. And thus I employd the breathing times, which from the so different studies

of my Profession, were allowed mee. Nor hath the Prouerbiall assertion, that the La∣dy Common Law mustly alone, euer wrought with mee farther then like a Badge of his Familie, to whom (by the testimonie of the wisest man) euery way seems full of Thornes, and that vses to excuse his labour with a Lion's in the way. I call you not my Patron. Truth in my References, Likely∣hood in my Coniectures, and the whole Com∣posture shalbe in steed of One, and of all else which, like inuocations of Titulina, might be vsed. It comes to you only, that, if it liue, it may be an enduring testimonie of our Loues and your Desert. Happinesse euer second your wishes.
Uiue diù nostri Pignus memorabile Voti. with you, 
at the Inner Temple, Septemb. XXIII. M. DC. XIV.
