



Sir,
WHilst Ministers preach Fune∣rall Sermons, they find the wind setting in their faces from their auditors: some thinke that too little, others that too much, and
 most that what is spo∣ken concerning the dead is but formality or flattery; They report that the Aethio∣pians doe picture Angels black, and Divels white, and I thinke that theyAmandus Polanus Syntag. Theol lib. 20 c. 17. justly suffer censure who doe knowingly call evill good and good evill: yet I deeme, that meete and just praise is a due to Gods Saints departed, andSalatia vivorum, non suffra∣gia mor∣tuorum. Orationes Aug. though they add not to their honour and happi∣nesse being in Heaven; yet they may proove both comforts and instructions to the living left upon
 earth; especially to such who forgoe those with griefe whom they for a time enjoyed with love; I doe not send the living to the dead with Papists, yet let mee tell you, that there are these things comfortable to the living from the dead. 1. Their holinesse of life, and com∣fort in death, grounded evidences for our hope of their future happinesse: And 2. That there shall be a time of meeting and en∣joying each other againe at the last day, such being not lost but gone before
 us; add to this the good of their examples (which are of great force) for the teaching of posterity; who may take them for their patterne, and so re∣semble them in their religi∣ous courses, that they may seeme to survive in them: both these ends are my aime in publishing this Sermon, and with it the just testimony which I gave unto your late loving and beloved Wife, whom death hath freed from all sinfull and sorrowfull evils, and brought to the enjoy∣ment of her God in Hea∣vens
 happinesse; shee well knew that the world could never make her fully hap∣py; and that Christians are never in their best con∣dition, till that they are in their heavenly condition; I desire not to renew your griefe, but to shew that I had a share in your losse of that Iewell laid up by God in the highest Heavens; whom all your care and cost (which did demon∣strate you to be a loving Husband) could not lon∣ger continue on earth: whilst shee was yours, you did (I confesse) what could
 be done for her credit, comfort, and continuance, and thereby deserved from her that praise which of∣ten shee gave of you to my selfe and others; but being gone, there re∣maines a double monu∣ment of her; one of her owne, for shee hath left with you those in whom shee liveth, whom (I need not say to you) you must love as a Father, and a lit∣tle the more for the Mo∣thers sake; another of mine in this Publication, wherein her memory is made pretious among the
 Saints, and perpetuated unto all posterity; a Worke done by mee up∣on your owne earnest in∣treaty, and therefore can∣not but be welcome un∣to you. You have your desire, let mee have mine. Thinke of your losse; and remember your selfe, and place, in which God hath set you; doing things so, that your com∣fort within, and credit without, may still be up∣held in the Churches of God, amongst whom you have obtain'd an ex∣cellent name: I need
 to say no more to you, but that I am

From my house in S. Dunstances in the East, London.
