



My deare and worthy friends,
SAint Bernard with a very apt phrase, answered a speciall friend of his, challenging of him in the streines of affecti∣on, thus, O scrutans renes
 et corda Deus, &c. quòd diligam illum ex dono tuo & suo merito, tu scis & ego sentio, quatenus autem diligam, tu scis, e∣go nescio, (that is) Oh Lord, thou who knowest and searchest the inmost closets of the heart, that I love my friend, thou knowest it, and I know it: how much I love him thou doest know, but I doe not know. The same I apply to my selfe and all of you; if suspecting my affecti∣on to you, because of my de∣parting
 from you, Lord, thou who knowest all things, thou knowest that I love them, and I know it, how much thou onely knowest, but I cannot expresse.
You were a people (of all that hitherto I have lived with, and of all that ever I preached unto) of the most generall union with your selves, and of the most liberal and unwearied affection to your Minister; the maine scruple many times to mee, was, lest divers of you should
 out-stretch your measures.
All the respects which you owed and shewed to my Ministery, and all the en∣couragements which you heaped on my selfe, I doe now the second time publike∣ly acknowledge: and as my thankfulnesse presents it self to you all, so in speciall man∣ner to you, much honoured Captaine, and your worthy wife, by whose good opinion and affection I was (through Gods mercy) brought unto that place: you have so ad∣vanced
 your favours both to my selfe and some friends of mine, that I doe most gladly embrace this present occasion of publike testimony and ac∣knowledgement; not that it is sufficient to cleare all ac∣counts, but onely that you may know, kindenesses long since given, are never lost in a thankefull breast.
My desire for you all is, that ye may be saved, and my desire to you all is, that yee would seriously answer the many precious and heavenly
 opportunities of Gods grace; it is not onely a vanity, but a danger, a danger both ex∣treame and sure, to dally with our soules: God hath sowne much seed by many of his ser∣vants among you, and beleeve me, he expects an harvest, wee cannot answer great meanes with great sinfulnesse or little goodnesse. To whom any thing is given, of them some∣thing is required, (even the man of one talent was made accountable) but to whom much is given, of them much
 shall be required. My deare friends if ye be wise, be wise for your selves, be good in∣deed. You honour our ministe∣ry, and provide well for your owne eternall good; when you goe into an holy way, and goe on in that way, the sight is incongruous, and the ac∣count will be sad, when Mi∣nisters doctrines are very heavenly, and peoples con∣versation are very earthly and sinfull; a melting heaven and a hardned earth meet ill. At length let us see our ser∣mons
 and pains in your lives; we preach and dye, and men heare and dye; we preach out our health, our strength, our lives; Oh that our hearers would take pitty on us, and mend their hearts and waies. If we boast that our meanes are greater then others, wee must tremble also to thinke if our accounts, before God should prove worse then o∣thers.
Therefore for your parts, as you have begun, so with all alacrity and industry, conti∣nue
 and persevere. Our life is short, duties many, worke daily, and reward sure and e∣nough. An eternity with God should make us good, and keepe us doing, and hold us faithfull, and make us fruit∣full. To the everlasting arms of his protection, and to the perpetuall influences of his grace and mercy in Christ, he commends you all, who is, to you all,

