


BEloued in the Lord, this Sermon was lately preached in your parish; it is now to be acted (if I may say so) vpon a Theater;Theatrum mundus. & I am intreated (as it were a prologue) to say vnto you, Come and see.Ioh. 1.46. I need not to doe it, for you, who are carefull to come and heare, will (I hope) be as carefull to come & see. Come there∣fore, I beseech you, and behold another Iohn Baptist, in the spirit of Elias, preparing in your harts a way for the Lord:Luke. 3.4. and saying vnto you as God saith to all, This is the way, walke in it.Isay. 30.21.
Are you desirous of a guide in this way? here are two offering of themselues, God & Baal; the one will con∣duct you to the land of Canaan,Ios. 1.2. the other will lead you blindfold to Samaria2. King. 6.19.. If you follow the one, you wil worship in mount Zion;Is. 2.2.3. If the other you, must goe vp to mount Gerizim;Ioh. 4.20. and there adore Ieroboams calues,1. King. 12.28.
This latter is a way pleasing now a daies to many, but the issues thereof are the waies of death?Prou. 14.12. And when the passing bell calleth, there is so litle cōfort in that passage, that many, who haue gone it, forsake it at the last.
I reade of a learned popish doctor in Germanie, who at the howre of his death, entring into a meditation of the insufficiencie of his merits, cried out after this manner,Selnec Instit. pag. 386. Alas what shall I now doe? No workes doe me any good; none comfort me; none cheare me; Since then I finde nothing
 in myselfe to stay vpon, this will I doe; Haue mercy vpon me O Lord, for thy sonne Christs sake, and receiue my soule. It is the safest way as Bellarmine confesseth, and the onely way, as the scripture proueth.
Looke not then vpon Baal with his 450. false Prophets;1. King. 18.22. but looke vpon God with his seruant Eliah.1. King. 18.30. Baal as an Vlysses will transforme you; as a Syren seduce you; as an Helena corrupt you; and as Naash the Ammonite make no couenant with you, vnles he may plucke out your right eye of knowledge, and so bring a shame vpon Israel.1. Sam. 11.2.
Our God is not like their God, our aduersaries being iudges.Deut. 32.31. He is our sunne,Psal. 84.11. without him it is night: our starre,Reu. 2.28. without him it is darknes, our life,Ioh. 11.25. without him it is death; and our guide, without him wee shall neuer make our pathes straight.Ps. 25 8.
It is better to limpe in the strait waies of God, then to runne and rampe on in the broad pathes of Baal; you know these things, happie are ye if ye doe them.Ioh. 13.17. In a word, learne by this godly treatise, to detest that faith, not of Iesus, but of the Iesuites, which teacheth, that you must eate your God; and may kill your King.
Qui cum Iesu itis, non itis cum Iesuitis,
You that doe follow Iesus trace,
will neuer like the Iesuites pace.
The Lord make you as beautifull in the eyes of God, as you haue made your Church to the eyes of man. 
Aprill. 16. 1611.

