



FAcile omnia tenenti, multa superfluè Bern. ep. 138. ad Hen. reg. Ang. ingeruntur. Many words to a man of vnderstanding, are more then enow. It was your desire to haue some thing said on this ensuing Text; your desire to know, intimates your will to obserue. Prius vtique est scire deum: con∣sequens Lactant. de inst: lib 6 cap 5. est colere. A man must know God, before he can serue him. It was your pleasure to assigne me the Speaker; your choice argued your opinion: Oh that it were as easie for me to make good, as (for him that sometimes saide) to say, Faciam vt ista de me tua duplicetur opinio. It is now Cic. Epist. your propper goods; It is your goodnesse to communicate it to the good of others. Bonum quo Communius, eo melius. Arist. The more common that a good thing is, the more good it will doe. Quibus parum, vel quibus nimium est, mihi ignoscant, Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. li 22 c. 30. quibus autem satis est, non mihi, sed domino mecum, con∣gratulantes, agant gratias. If ought be amisse, the fault is mine: If well, the praise is Gods.

And now, as Demosthenes spake to the Athenians,  Dem. : : That as he respected them in all things, so they would him in this one: So also would I make bold, of you, to beg this fauour, that as I haue euer honoured your Vertues, and now ventured into the world to Obserue you: so you would vouchsafe to Patronize my Obedience, a more acceptable sacri∣fice 1 Sam. 15. 22. then the fat of Rammes, and to suffer it to passe vnder your name; , as an Argument of your Isocr. ad Dem. Fauour, and my Respect. . Some body perhaps may be the better for it: you cannot be the worse; , Though not Isocr. sup. the richer, yet the more renowned. Pleaseth it you, that as you haue made your House, as Obediahs Caues, to hide the Prophets of the 1 Reg. 18. 13. Lord, and to feed them: so you would make your Name also, as the house of the Lord, to preserue the Bookes of the Prophets, and pro∣tect 2 Reg. 22. 8. them. And so I leaue this Suckling at the breasts of your fostering, and you and yours to the fostering Father of the Church, and rest,
Aug. ad Paulin. ep. 32.
