



SEE, (gracious Soueraigne) See, how many and great reasons, both from the Ar∣gument, and the Author, do draw this Treatise to your Sacred hands. From the Ar∣gument: A Sacred, and high subiect; requireth a Sacred and sound Iudgement: The Churches Sacred patrimonie; a Kingly, Sacred patroci∣nie: And Sacrilege, a proud and insolent sin; a Sacred and powerfull scepter to suppresse it. All which, are only, and most eminent, in your most Sacred Maiestie, SKILL, WILL, and POVVER.
From the Author: This seemeth to require a
 Sacred pen-man too: True. And though I be not of the Tribe of Leui, yet I hope of the tents of Sem, how Simple soeuer. Yea, behold what interest I haue also in our Sacred Dauid: Euen deuoted to his seruice, by my parents, before I was; Thereafter, named in, and after his Maie∣sties owne name, before himselfe could know it; yet after knowledge, confirmed: And in his H. Court, almost euer since, both nursed, and schooled. And so is our Dauid, the King of my birth; the Master of my seruice; the father of my name; framer of my nature; and the Gama∣liel of my education; at whose feet (no, at whose elbow, and from whose mouth) I confesse I haue suckt the best of whatsoeuer may bee thought good in me: his iust right therefore, and my chiefest glorie.
Becommeth it not well then (SIR), where the Soueraigne proueth a Salomon; his Cour∣tiers proue Nehemiahs, (though sparingly here compared?) When He, is Pater Ecclesiae, and E∣piscopus aulae, by authoritie proclaiming, and by practise prouoking vnto vertue; they, to shunne both ignorance and silence? Truly, it goeth neuer better, then when the Church Courteth it, and the Court Churcheth it: for
 Moses and Aaron were brothers.
But to our purpose (SIR). When I consi∣der, how God hath made you, not onely our Prince, but euen our princely Patriarke, our IACOB; deliuering you from so many Esaues, as he did Jacob, bringing you home againe af∣ter your marriage, as hee did Jacob; and also, setling you in your Canaan, more, than hee did to Iacob: and againe, seeing your Maiestie per∣formes Jacobs vowes to God, viz. Defending his faith; building his houses; but chiefly this, Of all that thou shalt giue me, I will giue the tenth vnto thee, I had bin too to vnworthily by your Maiestie named Jacob, if I should not, with my sword in the one hand, and penne in the other, both Court it, and Church it; that is, build vp, with our Royall IACOB, the breaches of Ieru∣salem.
But the breach (SIR) is great; not only in Lime and Stone, but in the liuely Stones of Gods worke, the Leuits themselues. Their Tithes are abstracted; themselues distracted; and so, the Gospell contracted and confined,2. Thes. 3.1. that it Runneth not, as it should. Your Com∣mons pay Tithes; your Leuites lacke Tithes; your Lords and Laicks haue been bathed in
 blood about Tithes. Your poore labourers, may say with the true Israelites,Deut. 26.13. J haue brought the hallowed thing out of mine house: but they cannot say on, And J haue also giuen it vnto the Leuites. Why? Because there commeth a kind of Pirat Ships, with Acts of Parliament in their flags, and carrie all away.
Your SKIL knoweth this (SIR) best of any; your WIL wisheth it were mended; and God hath giuen you POVVER to performe it. All three are promised in your BASILICON DO∣RON to your Sonne;Lib. 2. and according to that promise, are all three, in some measure, begun already by your selfe, in annulling in a part, that Vile Act ofWhereby Tithes were annexed to the Crowne. Annexation. Vile, your Ma∣stie hath most truly termed it: for it hath made Vile your Leuites, and so, the Word vile in their mouthes. Your Maiestie hath annulled it, so farre as concerneth Bishops; Let it, and all the rest also fall, as concerne the Leuites. Since you haue setled your Aarons, in their Ierusa∣lems;Neh. 10.37. Let not their brethren begge (as they doe) in the cities of their trauels: they are all of one Priesthood; all of one Prince You haue annulled Annexations; ReuerseBy which Tithes are e∣rected in Tē∣porall Lord∣ships, to the Subiect. Erections. Your Bishops can enforme SKIL; your Com∣mons
 all attend, and call vpon your WILL; and of all Estates, enough ready to second your POVVER.
I graunt, your Maiestie hath to doe with many Achans: but what are they to the rest of Jsrael hauing God and Moses on their side? Let them appeare at the dores of their tents, and shew Quo iure. Achan stole his; and theirs, will be found little better: A Parliament (say they): but this treatise, (by Gods grace) shall proue, that long before there was either King or Parliament in Jsrael, Tithes were taken vp for Gods perpetuall worship; and so can neuer come vnder the power of Prince or Parliament further, than by their Lawes, to enforce the payment of them according to Gods Law: So all is but stealth, or robberie: for, Nemo potest plus iuris in alium transferre, quàm ipse habet: The Parliament then, neuer hauing power to dispose of them, The possessors must be in malà fide. A Parliament maimed of the chiefest member, in a Kings younger age, hath forfeited Christ; and may not another Parliament perfect in all the members, in a Kings full and perfect age, recti∣fied by knowledge, again restore Christ? In that Parliament Leui, the chiefest member, (and
 whom only, the cause concerned) was not cal∣led; so, God was vnconsulted; Christ his Sonne, forfeited; his Church spoyled; the King couse∣ned; the Commons oppressed; was not this a vile Act? One Parliament more then (SIR) for Christs sake: it may be, some wil parle for Christ. Leui will pleade for himselfe; he will shew the Law; he dare now say, Nolumus.
Much more might be said (SIR); though nothing more then your Maiestie knoweth. It suffiseth me, a poore (yet a trustie) Souldier, once to haue cried, Courage, to his King and Captaine, in the day of danger: and I beseech God, that as many may admire your Maiestie for working it, as shall enuie me for writing it. But all must rest vpon your Highnesse more ripe and Royall resolutions; wherein, and in all the courses of your Long-wished life, I shall euer pray for all such happinesse, as best be∣commeth

