



Reverenced Vncle,
I Have long run upō your score, so long, till Ʋ∣sura superat sortem, the interest of your love ex∣ceeds the principall of mine abilities: Yet rather than prove a Banckrupt, I
 will compound and pay you as I may, though it be but Vnciatim. I would I could say with that Ser∣vant in the Gospell, Sir, have patience, I will pay you all; which seemes impossible for me. I must borrow of your patience and protection, while I present you with this in part of payment:Ex meran∣do me ma∣gis onero. Bernard. so stri∣ving to disingage my selfe I runne further into debt. I pay not this to free my selfe for,Senec. Qui, quo sit liber gratus est, haud gratus est; nor to procure ingage∣ment
 from you:Durand. Sent. lib. 2. d. 27. q. 2. for Pri∣us debitum solvitur quam meritum acquiritur. You will not wonder what businesse my Citizen should have with you a Counsellor, for you know he cannot be compleat in his actions, unlesse grave Counsell be his Director. Yet you may wonder how my young yeeres dare venture to instruct o∣thers. Brutus soliciting Statilius to adhere in the Conspiracy against Cae∣sar, was answered by him, that he allowed the
 enterprize to bee just, but disallowed of the men that should performe it My subject you will not dislike: but that I a yong Citizen should treat of it, perhaps you will not al∣low. You may say to me as Isaak to Jacob, how hast thou found it so soon my Sonne? The Learned lament the losse of those Bookes which Brutus wrote of vertue, because they account it a goodly thing to learne the Theo∣rick of such as understand the practise well; they and
 onely they are fit to write of affaires, whose owne hands have bin imployed in the conduct of them. That I have manag'd bu∣sinesse, may authorize me to write of it: but since I have not done it long, may make you question whether my Writings Wilbe worth the reading That Augustus which had been supreame Iudge of the world when he was but nineteene yeeres old, would have another to be thirty before he should bee thought a competent
 Iudge of a Cottage or Farme. Yet I hope I need not aske leave to thinke that hee who at twenty yeeres hath not given some token of his suffici∣ency, wil hardly doe it af∣terward it is a true French Proverb,
Si l'espine non picqu quand nai,
A peine que pic{que} jamai:
A thorne unlesse at first it prick,
Will hardly ever pierce to'th quick.
Hanibal and Scipio lived the greater part of
 their lives with the glory they had gotten in their youth, and though after∣ward they were great in regard of others, yet were they but meane in respect of themselves. Let this excuse my youths bold∣nesse, & let your goodnes pardon his presumption, whose All if that be any thing, you may claime as your due and arrest for your service.

