



IT may seeme strange (most reuerend, and mine honourable good Lorde) that in this learned age of the world, wherin the truth of Iesus Christ hath giuē so cleare a light, and that God of his mercie hath restored the Gospell vnto vs, & caused the beames thereof to shine ouer all Countreys, in such sort, as now the simple, the vnlearned, the rich, the learned, the worshipful, the Honorable, the States and Princes of the world are become the Professors,D. Bishop in his Epistle De∣dicatorie to the King. and maintainers of it, there should notwithstanding, euē in this kingdome remaine such a number of recusant Papists, as the Papists thēselues haue made their crakes and vaunt, stiling them all, with the name of Dutifull and well deseruing Subiects. How Dutifull subiects they haue bene, quid audiam verbùm videā facta? Let the sundrie intended inuasions against this Kingdome, and forraine practises abroad, procured onely by their meanes: let their trai∣terous, and rebellious enterprises, their piuate plottes, machina∣tions, poisonings, murthers, let the pouder treason, the eternall shame of that murtherous and bloodie generation, the memorie of which most detestable and damnable fact, all the indices ex∣purgatorij in the world shal neuer be able to blot out, make ma∣nifest to all the Christian world, how vniustly, and vntrulie they challenge to themselues the name of dutifull and faithfull sub∣iects,
 whose deadly hatred and vnnaturall practises against our Church and Common-weale, haue proued by many degrees far more dangerous, then euer were the practises, and plottes, & re∣bellions of that cursed seede of the Cananites, Ammonites, and Iebusites against the state and gouernment of the Israelites, the chosen people of God. Touching the number of recusant papists in other shires, I haue no great skill: it may be, it is greater in tale then it is in strength. But howsoeuer it be, the greater the nūber of thē is, the greater danger accrueth both to the Prince & state of this Land. Onely thus much I may truly affirme, that if all the Prouince of Canterbury were as free from that leprosie and contagious infection of Poperie, as is the Diocese of Canterbury, the Papists should haue small cause to make their boast & crakes of so many & so manie. For whereas there are in the Diocese of Canterburie & Rochester, some 398. parishes, betweene 90. & an hūdred thousand cōmunicants, there were not (as I am ve∣ry crediblie enformed) found of record the last assise aboue the number of ten recusant papists. So that thus much I may truly report, for the honour of the Countie of Kent, that as in the time of Iulius Caesar, they alone were in his iudgement of all the Bri∣taines, accompted to be omniū humanissimi: and in the time of Edward the first reputed to be omnium bellicosissimi, & therefore as Geruasius affirmeth by a preheminēce, in right of their manhode challenged to themselues the foreward of all bat∣tells, as of right belonging vnto them, because they were the onely people of the land, that were neuer vanquished by the Conque∣rour, but yeelded themselues by composition: euen so at this day, considering the small number of recusants, & withall, the great number of reuerend Preachers and Pastors dispersed ouer all the Countrey, men furnished and qualified with very rare and excellēt gifts, for the worke of the ministery, they may deserued∣ly be reputed, omniū fidelissimi: the most loyall and faithfull subiects of this kingdome. A large proofe of whose fidelitie, the late Queene of most blessed and happy memorie, found in her greatest need, when vpō the suddain arriuall of the Spanish ships vpon our Seas, by the pollicie and vigilancie of S. Thomas Scot,
 being then one of the Deputy Lieutenāts for those parts (a knight of whome I can neither speake nor write without much honour, there were gathered together within the space of 24. houres, the nūber of eight thousand valiant fighting men, ready to encounter the enemie. At which time there were sundry preachers of vs in that Camp, some preaching on our horse-backes, some vpon the tops of trees, others in pulpits made of turfe, where we might be∣hold and see that huge Armado of Spaine, whome the Pope had blessed, & christned, by the name of the inuincible Nauie, which in very few daies after, how it fell from an vnmeasurable high ioy to an vnmeasurable deep dispaire, their great castles of com∣fort being ouerthrowne, and brought to the ground: I neede not further relate, the storie thereof being yet fresh in the memo∣ries of many thousands liuing this day.
This which I haue here set downe for the honour of our Ken∣tish people, I haue written it partly to note one speciall sweet fruit of the Gospel, wheresoeuer it hath free passage; that is, that it sea∣soneth the hearts of all that sincerely professe it, with fidelity, loy∣altie, and all manner Christian subiection to the higher powers.
Partly againe, that it may adde some incouragement to your Gra: the more willingly (as leisure & oportunity shall fit) to come among vs, specially whē your Grace shal come to a people so ciuil, and so ingenuous, so kind, & so religious, and so louing, and respe∣ctiue of their Diocesan, as no one countrey of this Kingdome can afford vs the like president. Which to be true, the late most wor∣thy B: mine old Maister, B: Whitgift, of most learned, & god∣ly memorie, found by good proofe, at his first cōming downe into Kent, whom the whole Gentrie of that Diocese entertained, no o∣therwise then the Galathians did the Apostle S. Paule: that is, like an Angell of God, with such obsequiousnes, esteeme, and reuerence as was fitting for the condition and state of so graue a Bishop, and so worthy a Prelate.
As for vs both of the Laitie and Clergie of your Graces Di∣ocese, as wee haue great cause of reioycing offered vnto vs all, to stirre vs vp to a thankefull congratulation of your Lor: late de∣serued preferment, & withall, to magnifie the great goodnesse of
 God towardes vs, in that hee hath aduanced your Grace to that height of honour, to make your Grace a glorious instrument of much good to this Church of England, the charge and gouerne∣ment whereof, next vnder our gracious Soueraigne, is principal∣lie committed; So for mine owne particular, considering the continuall flowe of those manifolde fauours your Grace hath bene pleased to shewe vnto mee, which with all due thankeful∣nes, I most willingly acknowledge, hauing no other meanes out of my small fortunes to doe you honour, I haue presumed in a Christian boldnesse, by way of Dedication, to offer this paper present vnto your Grace, a Sermon which this last moneth I preached before a very honourable, worshipfull, and a most lear∣ned and religious auditorie of the parish of S. Martins in the fieldes. Thus presuming (as you see) of your Graces accep∣tance, and bolde dedicating this small and simple discourse vnto your Grace, which I confesse to be much vnworthy your worthi∣nesse, I will not cease to pray vnto God to requite, and recom∣pence seuenfolde into your bosome, both this, and all other your vndeserued fauours towards me. And thus beseeching the God of heauen and earth againe and againe, to multiplie his richest blessings and mercies towards you, by giuing you honour here, and honour euer, in his happie Kingdome of eternall comfort, I rest.

