



YOV may think Sir, some want of
discretion in mee, for thus bold∣ly
presuminge to thrust into your
handes these Tragedies of SE∣NECA.
From whych boldnesse,
the very Conscience of myne own
vnworthynes, might easely haue
dissuaded mee, had not certayne
learned Gentlemen of good credite and worship thereun∣to
persuaded & animated mee. Assuring mee (where of
I thought my selfe afore assured) that your VVorship (such
is your loue to learning, & the generosity of your Heroi∣call
mynde) would daygne not onely to dispence with my
temerity, but also take in worth my affectionate simpli∣city.
And yet (all this notwithstandinge) well durst I
not haue geuen the aduēture to approch your presence, vp∣on
trust of any singularity, that in this Booke hath vn∣skifully
dropped out of myne owne penne, but that I hoped
the perfection of others artificiall workmāship, that haue
trauayled herein aswell as my selfe should somewhat couer
my nakednèsse  pùrchase my pardon. And hard were

the dealing, if in payment of a good round gubbe of Gold
of full wayght and poyse, one poore peece somewhat clypped
and lighter then his fellowes may not be foysted in amōg
the rest, and passe in pay for currant coigne. Theirs I know
to be deliuered with singuler dexterity: myne, I confesse
to be an vnflidge nestling, vnhable to flye: an vnnatural
abortion, and an vnperfect Embryon: neyther throughlye
laboured at Aristophanes and Cleanthes candle, neither
yet exactly waighed in Critolaus his precise ballaūce. Yet
this dare I saye, I haue deliuered myne Authors meaning
with as much perspicuity, as so meane a Scholler, out of so
meane a stoare, in so smal a time, and vpon so short a war∣ning
was well able to performe. And whereas it is by some
squeymish Areopagites surmyzed, that the readinge of
these Tragedies, being enterlarded with many Phrases
and sentēces, literally tending (at the first sight) some time
to the prayse of Ambition, sometyme to the mayntenaūce
of cruelty, now and then to the approbation of inconti∣nencie,
and here and there to the ratification of tyranny,
can not be digested without great daūger of infection: to
omit all other reasons, if it might please thē with no fore∣stalled
iudgmēt, to mark and consider the circumstaunces,
why, where, & by what maner of persons such sentences are
pronoūced, they cānot in any equity otherwise choose, but
find good cause ynough to leade thē to a more fauourable
and milde resolutiō. For it may not at any hād be thought
and deemed the direct meaning of SÈNECA himselfe,
whose whole wrytinges (penned with a peerelesse sublimi∣ty
and loftinesse of Style, are so farre from còuntenaun∣cing
Vice, that I doubt whether there bee any amonge all
the Catalogue of Heathen wryters, that with more gra∣uity

of Philosophicall sentences, more waightynes of sappy
words, or greater authority of soūd matter beateth down
sinne, loose lyfe, dissolute dealinge, and vnbrydled sensu∣ality:
or that more sensibly, pithily, and bytingly layeth
downe the guerdon of filthy lust, cloaked dissimulation &
odious treachery: which is the dryft, wherunto he leueleth
the whole yssue of ech one of his Tragedies. Howsoeuer &
whatsoeuer it be, your VVorships curteous acceptaūce shal
easily counterpoyse any of our imperfections. Vnto whose
learned Censure, wee humbly submit these the exercises of
our blusshing Muses. The Lord God in mercy long pre∣serue
you in health and dignity with daily encrease of ma∣ny
his gracious gyfts, already rychly abounding in you: to
the propagation, and aduauncement of his truth (where∣of
yee are a zealous Professor, to the honoure of her Ma∣iestye,
to whom you are a most loyall seruitour, and to the
generall benefite of your Countrey, whereof you are a rare
and most worthy Ornament.
From Butley in Chesshyre the 24. of Aprill.
1581.

