



THe Lord (Right worshipfull) the most wise disposer of all actions, hauing giuen vnto me his least able minister, an entrance into the Towne of Mildenhall, to publish there in the cares of that great people, according to his grace bstowed vpon me, his glorious Gospell: I was streightway, after I had some knowledge of their state, moued with com∣passion towards them, and framed my selfe so neere as I could, to vse such a familiar, and plaine kind of teaching, as I thought to serue most for their vnderstanding and capacitie. And although I had not granted vnto mee, (which was neuer yet granted to any faith∣full minister) to please, & approue my doings to all: yet a fewe skorners set apart, which seem as the Prophet speaketh,E  To haue made
a couenant with death, and to bee at an agreement with hell, being more deuout to serue Bacchus, then the true God: and ther∣fore can like of no Prophet, except such, as saith an other Scripture, Can walke in a li∣ing spirit,Mich. 2.11. and prophesie vnto them of wine, and strong drinke: And a few other which being altogether worldly minded, be frosen in their dregges; which seeme to haue made their large Fen their God; it pleased God to make the rest, likers & allowers of the holy doctrine, wishing to haue the same con∣tinued amongst them, and willing to impart something of their substance vnto the dispo∣ser, towards his maintenance and liuing. In the behalfe of these, (Sir) I doo vnfainedly thanke & blesse God the Father, Lord of hea∣uen and earth, by his Sonne Christ, conceiuing no small hope, through his blessing, of their more increasing and growing in faith and godlines, which God grant vnto them for his Christ his sake Amen In the behalfe of those, I do earnestly pray, inforcing my selfe in all my doctrine,Iude. 23. as the Apostle Iude saith, to saue them with feare, and to pull them out of the fire, wishing that at any time God would giue them repentance, that they may come to a∣mendment, out of the snare of the Diuell. But
if they will not heare this, My soule shall weepe in secrete for their pride,Ierem. 13.17 (as the Prophet speaketh) & mine eie shall weepe & drop downe teares to see Gods iudge∣mentes vpon them. And now if I might speake of your worship without suspition of flatterie, & coorying of fauour, by your dili∣gent attending vpon the hearing, accompa∣ned alwaies with your vertuous wife, most godlily likewise disposed to heare the holy word of God, and so much as might be your whole familie And by your good countenāce most cheerefully shewed vnto me, a poore mi∣nister of God, that I may not speake of other your beneficence towardes mee, you most eui∣dētly declared, not only what loue your selfe had vnto the truth of God, that is his word, & his pure and holy worship, but also your care by your godly exāple to draw others to like and allow of the same, that so Christ Iesus might be enterteined & his kingdome erected at Mildenhall. And I cannot forget how (which did declare your desire and care to haue the word of Gods grace, that is the Go∣spel continued at Mildenhall, for the salua∣tion of the people) you spake to the Right ho∣norable the Lord North, comming ouer to his house at Mildenhall, not only to shew me his
fauourable countenance, for my continuance at Mildenhal, but also to procure me a more ample, and large salery and stipend: which thing his Honour, of his godly disposition vn∣to Religion, was willing to doo. In conside∣ration of these things, as they concerne Gods glorie, first I giue God hartie thanks: Second∣ly as they concerne the helpe of me his Mini∣ster, not otherwise knowing how to requite a∣ny way your Worships good will, as a testi∣monie of a gratefull minde, I bestowe vpon your Worship, & the vertuous Gentlewoman your wife, a litle Catechisme, which I haue lately made, in my small iudgement, not alto∣gether vnfit (for indeed I laboured to make it fit) for the state of the inhabitants of Mil∣denhall, not for any great vse of your selues (for I verily perswade my selfe, that you haue not now neede to learne the first prin∣ciples of the word of God, but are able to dis∣iest much stronger meat,) but for the vse of your babes, your two sonnes, and daughter, and others which afterwards it may please God to giue, and blesse you withall, whome I doo not doubt, to be instructed in the princi∣ples of Religion, so soone as they haue laid away their stammering tongues, according to Gods commaundement giuen to all parents,Deut. 6.7.
without exception of degree,Psal. 78. ℣s 5, 6, 7. Ephes. 6.4. and condition in the world it will be vnto you both, no lit∣tle care and studie: which that it may be so, I shall daily pray. Accept (good Sir) of this mine enterprise, as I trust you will; And thus I take my leaue, beseeching God that yee doo none euill, that his good graces may be multi∣plied vpon you, and that your whole spirit, soule, and bodie, may be kept blamelesse vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ.

