



PArtly Experience of the former friendly acceptation of my good will (right woorshipfull) and partly pre∣sumption vpon the same agayne, twoo bold guides, haue moued me to attempt the Dedication of these two other partes of Commentaries (to the which also is ioyned an Addition of the horrible, and cruell slaughter of the Admirall Chastillon and other No∣bles) vnto you: hoping that as you haue already worshipfully receyued the first part, and taken the same to your protectiō, so likewyse you will not refuse these other partes, set foorth with such diligence as conueniently might be vsed. The gyft (which is my small labour in the Translation) is scarce woor∣thy the presenting to your worship, but the Argument which concerneth the affaires of so noble a kingdome as Fraunce is, I boldly presume in the learned Authours name too presente vnto you: especially seeing the reading and knowledge ther∣of shall not onely redound to the profyt of our Countrey, but also greatly illustrate and set forth the glory of God. For whē we shall compare our happy estate, with the miserable condi∣cion of the afflicted people in Fraunce: when (I say) wee shall call to mind the happy dayes of peace and concorde, and the prosperouse successe in our ciuill gouernement, which by the vnspeakable mercy and goodnesse of God, wee haue enioyed since the raigne of our gratiouse Soueraigne: and contrary∣wyse, the bloudy warres, the sore dissentiō and stryfe, with the horrible desolation that hath ensued in the realme of France, we cannot choose, but we must needes be forced too magnifie and extol the great mercies of our God, which hath deliuered vs from the lyke destruction, no lesse deserued by our sinnes.

Shall we say that the Frenchmen our neighbours are greater sinners than any other Nation vnder heauen, because of the great desolation fallen vppon them? No verily, but except weeLuke. 13. repent, wee shall in lyke manner perishe. Therefore (right woor∣shipfull) by the benefite of this discourse of the ciuill warres, we shall not onely be drawne to the knowledge of our selues, but also bee prouoked to gyue God moste harty thankes, for our quiet & peaceableestate, which by our Soueraign Prince we enioye. These are the frutes which shall ensue to the Chri∣stian Reader, by these Commentaries: the which if they maye reape, as no doubt they shall: I may account my labour well bestowed.
Thus hauing boldly craued your worships courtesie in re∣ceyuing this base and simple present of myne, I cease wyth thankes for your liberalitie shewed towardes me: committing you & my good Lady your wyfe, into the handes of Almigh∣ty God, who send you prosperouse successe in al your affaires, desired health, and the blessed felicitie of Gods Electe in the kingdome of Heauen.

