



VNder hope of your honorable
fauor & good likyng, I prace
now intoo the Court ageine
after long discontinewaunce,
attendyng as an interpreter
vpon the worthy Phlosopher
Seneca, sometyme a Courtyer,
and also a Counseller of the
greatest state in the worlde. The matter whiche
he is too speake of, is the true maner of benefityng
or doyng of good turnes; a thing of all others most
profitable for mans life, and whiche maketh men
like vntoo God. In the declaration whereof, he
sheweth what a Benefite is; why, how, when, too
what ende, and on whom it is too bee bestowed;
what reward is too bee looked for in the dooing
of it, and what frute it yeeldeth again. Likewise at
whose hande, with what mynde, and when a bene∣fite
is too bee receiued: how and when wee should
requite it, or remaine still detters for it; and by
what meanes a man maie bee either beneficiall or

thankfull, euen without cost or peine. His princi∣ples
and preceptes are, in substaunce, Diuine; in
forme, Philosophicall; in effect, frutefull. His sen∣tences
are short, quick, and full of matter; his wor∣des,
sharpe, piththie, and vnaffected; his whole or∣der
of writyng graue, deepe, and seuere; fitted al∣together
to the reforming of mennes myndes, and
not too the delyghting of their eares. But great
is the libertie of truthe emong wise menne, and yet
greater is the prerogatiue therof emōg good men.
For wise men knowe that the wholsemost meates
are not alwaies best in tast, nor the moste souerein
medcines alwaies pleasauntest. And good menne
being desirous too haue their faultes rather cured
than couered, doo finde as well in infirmities of
mynde, as of bodie, that the first step to helth is too
discerne the diseaze, and the next is too receiue the
right Medicine for it: Onely too the vnwise and
wicked sorte, truthe is troublesome and odious;
because they cannot abyde the bryghtnesse of her
countenance, nor the power and maiestie of her
presence. I haue therefore thought this woorke
not vnmeete too bee put intoo our Moothertung,
that the mo myght take benefyte by it; nor yet vn∣expedient
too comme in Courtyers handes, who
shalbe so muche the greater Ornament too them∣selues,
and too the place whereof they take their
name, as their Courtesies and Benefytes bee mo
and greater towardes others. And how woorthie
it is too bee embrased of Counsellers; I referre
mee too the iudgement of suche as shall voutsafe

too read it. Of this I am fully perswaded, that you
will thinke it a verie fit present for mee too offer
vnto you in respect of the place wherintoo you are
called; and a sufficient Argument and Witnesse of
my duetyfull good will towards you. And thus
recommending this my trauell too your
good and honourable protection, I
humbly take my leaue. Writ∣ten
at my House in the
Parish of all Hal∣lowes
in the
Wall
in London the .xvii. day
of Marche.
1577.

