



IT maie be demed in the iudgement of the worlde, a great presumptiō in me (right Ho∣nourable) thus vnaduisedly to aduēture the discourse of this late blazing Starre, whiche appeared the x. daie of October laste 1580. whereof verie small (or rather no
 accompt at all) is made emong the vulgare sort, for that it hath not altogether suche splēdant bright∣nesse, and glisteryng radiation, as some other Cometes heretofore haue had. I knowe (I say) I shalbe launced with the bitter reproofes and Zoilous reprehensions of cer∣taine fine mouthed mates, who looke for finer phrases, and more mellow and sugred sentences, then my poore skill or habilitie will a∣ford. My onely drift herein (right Honourable) is to disswade the worlde, from freezing in the dreg∣ges of their synnes, by admonishe∣yng them of the finall dissolution of the Engine of this worlde, and
 seconde commyng of Christ in the cloudes, whiche by many manifest and ineuitable reasons J gather, can not bee farre of. Jn respecte whereof, accordyng to the duetie of my profession, J exhort all men to awake out of their slepe by ear∣nest repentance, whiche is the per∣fecte and plain path waie to auert Goddes iuste plagues, deseruedly threatened vnto vs. The artifici∣all description of whiche Starre, together with his appearance, mo∣tion, colour, continuance, mat∣ter, forme, significatiō, and effect, as J by the aduise of some right skilfull in the Mathematiques, haue (by the waie) superficiallie
 touched: So dooe J leaue the fuller delineation thereof to them, who professedly dwell in the same Art, (Astronomie I meane) & are best hable to yeeld their learned reso∣lutions. My profession drawyng me an other waie, requireth an o∣ther maner of methode, which as J haue here to my poore skill dis∣couered: So am J with all humili∣tie, moste duetifully to craue your Honors pardō, for the acceptance thereof at my handes, till it shall please God to enhable me with o∣ther opportunitie, to preferre vn∣to your Lordshippes censure, some other woorke of greater momente & importance. Till then, alwaies
 J shall humblie beseeche the Al∣mightie, lōg to preserue your good Lordshippe with honour, healthe and all felicitie to his Di∣uine will and plea∣sure. Amen.

