



THe Scripture of truth, wherein the mysteries of Religion are treasured vp, hath three (amongst others) not a litle more eminent, most worthie of our daylie and holiest medi∣tations. They are by some called,Bernardus in Vigilia Natalis. The wonders of wonders, & are in them∣selues most admirable, and surpassing
 comfortable for vse, manifested by the Highest,Ioh. Heid feldius. for the sure blessednesse of all Gods children, without which, all men had perished eternally. Not to speake of the blessed Trinitie, the greatest of all mysteries; the three here meant, are three Vnions, or Couplings in one, of things in themselues most different.
The first is, the Vnion of the God∣head to Manhood, in the person of Iesus Christ, whereby he is God and man, Immanuel, God with vs.
The second is, the Coupling of Mo∣therhood and Virginitie in one wo∣man, the blessed Marie, whereby her Sonne is called The Sonne of man.
The third is, the begetting of Sa∣uing-faith, in the soule of sinfull man, whereby a sonne of Adam, be∣cometh a childe of God, an heire of saluation.
The first, and third of these myste∣ries, are ioyntlie declared by Paul, in these words: Great is the mysterie of
 godlinesse;1. Tim. 3.16. God was manifested in the flesh. — Beleeued on in the world.
The second was foretold by the Pro∣phet Isaiah:Isa. 7.14. Behold a Virgine shall conceiue and beare a Sonne.
These are comfortable secrets, which none fruitfully know but the Lords he∣ritage, that are taught by his Spirit. These manifest how God is neare vnto vs, and dwelleth with vs, and in vs, as in his holy Tabernacle. These are the appointed means of our saluation and blessednes. These mysteries so high, and holy, must be sought into by humble and earnest prayer, with much reuerence of heart, by reading, hearing, and inten∣tiue meditation; we must beleeue them, and reioyce greatly in the sound and lasting consolation they bring vn∣to vs.
When man by his sinne was wofully fallen from God, and the blessednesse wherein he was set, and by his Aposta∣sie,
 had cast himselfe and his posteritie into the state of damnation: then, euen then did God manifest his vnspeake∣able loue in restoring him againe in∣to the fauour of his Creator, and to the hope of a greater blisse then that which he had lost. It was agreeable to the Lords holynesse, for manifesting his mercy and iustice, that as man made the fault, so man should make the a∣mends. But man alone could not do it, (the Creator onely could repaire the creature.) God therefore becometh man, that so he might throughly do it. And he was manifested in the flesh, (not for a small time, as he appeared to the Patri∣arches,) but the second Person in Tri∣nitie,Iohn. 1.14. The WORD, euen the only be∣gotten of the Father, was made flesh, and dwelt among vs, full of grace and truth. That man might be made partaker of the diuine nature, & enioy eternall peace with God: The Captaine of our saluation tooke not on him
 the nature of Angels,Heb. 2.16. but he to tooke on him the seed of Abraham; in all things it behoued him to be made like his brethren, that he might be a mercifull and faithfull High-priest, in things pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the sinnes of the people. This is the first, high, glorious, and comfortable mysterie.
The second craueth of vs like holy admiration and firme faith. Will God dwell in a Tabernacle? in a Temple? or as Salomon saith:1. King. 8.27. Wil God indeed dwell on the earth? will he that made the heauens, take flesh of the wombe of a Virgine? haue her indeed to be his mother, and yet she continue a pure and vndefiled maide? Yes assuredly, & it is a wonder without all example, and a miraculous worke of him,Psal. 146.4. that alone worketh wonders. Motherhood and virginitie meete in Marie, the most blessed of women, & in her alone. And hath correspondencie, to that ad∣mirable
 Creation in the beginning, where Eue, the mother of all liuing, was miraculously made out of the side of man alone: so of the wombe of a woman alone, was borne the holy Messiah, e∣uen Iesus Christ our Lord, for the fulfil∣ling of the Couenant of grace, which God made with man. The womans seede shall bruise the serpents head.Gen. 3.15. This is the second secret, and high mysterie of Christian Religion.
The third wonder is, that faith and mans soule so meet, that man who is a sinfull sonne of Adam; by faith be∣cometh a child of God, according as it is written:Gal. 3.26. — Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Iesus.
Here we may take vp Dauids words, and say:Psal. 144.3. Lord, what is man, that thou takest knowledge of him, or the sonne of man, that thou makest ac∣count of him? The difficultie of sound beleeuing in the Messiah the Sauiour of his elect, and the wonderfull mercy
 of God in that rare grace, will better ap∣peare, if we call to minde, how that e∣uen in Paradise, man beleeued not God, (when he said,Gen. 2.17. Thou shalt die the death:) and did beleeue the diuel,Gen. 3.4. (Ye shall not surely die.) Now that man is fallen from integrity, and captiued in Originall and Actuall sin, to beleeue a promise of eternall life, that God will make him an heire of heauen, for Iesus sake, is aboue all humane learning, sense and reason. And this hope and confidence is onely in that litle flocke, where Gods Spirit doth powerfully worke it. How few beleeue, Isaiah com∣plaineth:Isa. 53.1. —Who hath beleeued our report? and to whom is the arme of the Lord reuealed? How great a work of God, faith is, Paul witnesseth: — Who beleeue according to the wor∣king of his mighty power,Ephes. 1.19 which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. Certainlie as there was a darknesse in all Egypt,
 that might be felt:Exod. 10.22. but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings: Euen so all the chosen Israel of God now, haue Christ the light of the world dwelling in their hearts by faith. But the whole world of Hypo∣crites and vnbeleeuers, loue darknesse and abide in it for euermore.
Hereupon it followeth, that Iewes, Turkes, Pagans, Vnbeleeuers, and Hy∣pocrites, who haue no communion by faith with the Sonne of God mani∣fested in the flesh, abide vnder the curse and wrath of the Almighty. But the chosen litle flocke, to whom the my∣steries of Christs kingdome are known, who soundly, and with all their heart, beleeue in Iesus Christ the Son of God, conceiued by the holy Ghost, borne of the virgine Mary; that he the promised Messiah, is their king, priest, and pro∣phet, and by his obedience vnto death, hath wrought their full Redemption, and made their reconciliation with
 God: these through faith in his bloud, haue Christs righteousnesse imputed to them for the attaining of saluation; these haue a ioy glorious and vnspeak∣able; these cleaue to God in true holines; and in the end, for this their Media∣tors sake, receiue a crowne of righte∣ousnesse, and the blessednesse promised that lasteth euermore.
This litle Treatise will so far lay o∣pen, & vnfold these three profound my∣steries, as may giue occasion to the well-minded readers, to make further search into so high, holy, and necessarie do∣ctrines, as are primary pillars of true Religion.
And now, worthie Madame, in that I commend vnto you, my poore en∣deuours contained in this litle booke, it is out of a good desire, to further you in the best things, to procure you some litle helpe, to get greater increase of the chiefe blessings; to cast in my myte by writing also, to adde that way some∣what
 to your spirituall treasure, of knowledge, holinesse, and comfort, as one desirous to be thankfull to God for his manifold mercis to you, in that since your coming among vs, you make it daily euident, that you haue a hearty loue to true Religion; and take much comfort in the Ministery, and publike worship of God established: as also that by your good example, & blamelesse con¦uersation, you grace your holy professi∣on, going before many, in many Chri∣stian duties. Assure your selfe, your careful labouring to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ, will giue you an heauen vpon earth, and shall be your crowne in the day of the Lord: when all those that suffer their hearts to be stolen away from God and godlinesse, by excessiue cares or pleasures of this world, shall haue their sorrowes come vpon them like armed men, and their end shall be fully miserable. Mind you it well, I pray
 you;Eccl. 8.12. Though a sinner do euill an hundred times, and his daies be pro∣longed, yet surely I know, that it shall be well with them that feare God, which feare before him. But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his dayes, which are as a shadow, because he feareth not before God. Earnestly, & constantly seeke after those lasting ioyes, where is mirth without all mour∣ning, life without vexation; eternall happinesse, by a blessed communion with the eternall God, who wil be all in all to them that loue him.
Passe ouer no day, wherein you call not to minde, the many, sweete, free blessings of the almighty, bestowed vp∣on you; but by them prouoke your selfe to offer to him, the heartiest sacrifice of thanksgiuing that you can attaine to, accōpanied with hūble, faithful, feruent prayers, for increase of his best bles∣sings to you and yours; that your happi∣nesse
 begun here, may be continued e∣uerlastingly.Act. 20.32. And now I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you vp, and to giue you an inheritance, among all them which are sanctified.1. Thes. 5.23. And the very God of peace sanctifie you throughout, and I pray God, your whole spirit, and soule, and bodie, be preserued blame∣lesse, vnto the coming of our Lord Iesus Christ. 
Amen.

Be thou faithfull vnto the death, and I will giue thee a crowne of life. Reuelation 2.10.

