



THese my inducements passing ouer with si∣lence many others, by which I haue re∣solued to relinquish & renounce the com∣munion of the pre∣sent Bishop of Rome, and to adioyne my selfe to the Catho∣like, and truly Apostolike Church of England; I doe not therefore addresse vnto you, thereby to craue your patronages, but to require your seue∣rest censures: expecting only, and humbly beg∣ging 
 and doe daily multiply obloquies against me; yea and libell also against me, in respect of my booke written in defence of my Prince and Countrie: doe presume to Dedicate these my Motiues, (which will proue nothing acceptable to Rome, or to some of your tastes) to your worthy per∣sons and names: the truth is, the cause of this, is my considence in truth, which I deliuer: the which being gratefull to her veriest enemies, cannot but be grateful to many of you, to whom I know the verie sound of truth is pleasant, though through the seducements of your lea∣drs, and your little reading of Gods Word, and bookes of controuersie, you are now mis∣led mgnrance: but (veritas filta temporis truth is the daughter of time, shee doth not alwaies appeare at the first, as God wot shee hath very latelie (would God sooner) to me; yet now shee is come and appeareth, (I professe without ly∣ing God is my witnesse) I senbile feele (in such sort as the soule can feele) my vnderstanding and soue, as it were a new inlightned, illustrated, con∣sorted, and encouraged by a new change and translation out of the  1. shadow of darkenesse, into the Ad Colss 1. Kingdome of Gods beloued sonne Iesus: for whose testimonie, Oh how hap∣pie should I bee to suffer euen death it selfe. But because I am growne of late so con∣temptible with you (wherein I reioice) haue, and doe vndergoe the same fortune which my  6. deare Sauiour, and onelie Master Iesus did su∣staine,
 being conuersant vpon earth; in respect of the honor of the cause which I haue vndertaken (sufferte modicum quid insipientiae meae) suffer a lit∣tle of my folly (to vse the words of the2 Ad Cor. 11. Apostle in like sort, beginning to commend himself) in com∣mending of my self to you; in such things where∣of, for some circumstances, I take now no com∣fort, but rather am ashamed of them, and with my very soule doe lament them. When I liued in the Romane English Colledge (I begin there, if any one can say any great ill of me, before that time or since, let him not spare to speake, hee hath good leaue) it is well knowne, how I was re∣puted to haue profited, being there better estee∣med, (then I euer thought of my selfe) and for learning compared with your Doctor Norrice, (a man of farre worthier partes then my selfe,) with whom also, (had not his oppositions against the gouernours of the English Colledge; and the generall commotion of the same Colledge let∣ted it) at that very time I had defended publike Theses and Conclusions out of the whole corps and body of Diuinity; the same being with their Epistle Dedicatorie allowed and readie printed for that purpose: but because Doctor Norrice might not haue that honor (in respect he was thē in opposition against the Superiours): I was desired not to expect (lest also the Bishop of Cassa∣no, Doctour Norrices Patron, and fauourer then, should bee discontented thereat) the same at Rome; but I was promised to performe it in
 Spaine, whether I was sent with letters of as fauourable commendations, both from the su∣periours of the Colledge, and their Generall Claudius Aquauiua, as euer anie English Priest had: and also with as ample faculties into Eng∣land (yea in some things as it is well known con∣cerningThe Rect r of the English Col∣ledge, ihed me to set downe in writing, what faculties I desi∣red, and that hee would procute from the Cardi∣nall protector confirmation, & allowance of the same, which was accordingly done so largely, as none had so large before, whereof I haue a Copy to shew. dispensations in all degrees of marriages contracted, or to be contracted touching all Ec∣clesiasticall positiue impediments, letting or dis∣soluing marriage, more ample then any other euer had before mee) as any Priest or Ignatian then in England had. And if I was not in good esteeme then and there? why did the Superiors of the English Colledge request me onely alone aboue others to write a short letter, rather then a Petition to the Pope, who then was Clement the 8. by the same to giue testimonie to that Pope, of their vpright gouernment in the Colledge, which then was so eagerly called in question by most of the English there? I could vse more fol∣ly (courteous Reader) in adding many more very fauourable particulars, as of my free accesse to Cardinall Catetane Protector; to their General Aquauiua, &c. but I haue been too foolish alrea∣dy, being constrained thereunto. Since my com∣ming into this Kingdome, it is well knowne, I haue been too too industrious in exhorting, prea∣ching, &c. And it is as well knowne that my con∣uersation and entertainement hath beene with the best (Honourable not excepted) let those, who haue knowne me last and longest, (who are
 very Worshipfull, very true hearted English, and vnacquainted with the Equiuocating Spirit) Speake what my carriage and conuersation hath beene. But good Iesus, why doe I thus trouble my selfe, thus to waste paper and inke? calumni∣ated I am, and most disgracefully calumniated I shall be (as the Right Honourable my Lord of Canterbury his Grace presaged to me when I first told his Grace of my resolution) but I will reioyce therein, and shall esteeme all as dungge, so that I may gloryAd Galat. 6. in the Crosse of Iesus Christ the onely comfort and ioy of my soule, theAct. 4. on∣lie hope of my saluation. Let hell it selfe spew out against mee all most disgracefull taunts and calumniations: I will to God commend my cause, hee will bring the truth of my innocen∣cy in the end to light: I will in the meane vse pa∣tience, the anker of all Christian soules in times of any tribulations and distresses. Thus most humbly beeeching, with heart prostrate, and in all your behalfes the mercies of the 1 Ad Tim. 2. onely Ad∣uocate and Sauiour of Mankind, that you may returne to the Isai. 51. & ad Corinth. 1. cap. 10. Rock (vnde exctsiestis) from which you are cut, and here after build onely vpon the Ad Corin. 3. rock & foundation Iesus Christ (commending you all to his mercies and protection) I take my leaue of you all, this present Sunday, being, the 26. of Ianuary. Anno Salutis, 1612.

