



IT must not seeme strange (most Reuerend Fa∣thers in GOD, and my much beloued Bre∣thren) if, seeing the Captaines of Israel be gone forth to warre a∣gainst Antichrist, a Souldier of a meaner rancke, moued with the goodnesse of the cause, enter the battaile, and ioyne himselfe to the standard. For all doe see the Pope re∣new the old warres, and cannot rest quiet, but assayes by all meanes,Papistas nostros, nostras dicerem. how he may recouer the possession of GREAT BRITAINE being lost, and in a vaine hope thereof our Papists in the masculine, (I should haue said in the feminine but that I should seem to some
 to haue spoken false Latine) are growne more in num∣ber, and farre more insolent then they were wont here∣tofore. Who then; though he be the meanest seruant of Christ borne vnder, or rather with the Gospell restored, without which he would not deeme Paradise it selfe to be a pleasant Country; would not resist and withstand to his teeth Antichrist himselfe renewing his forces, and taking courage vnto him with such earnestnesse, to recouer that seat from whence aforetime he was iustly cast out? I was not ignorant what labours were to bee vndertaken, what wronges were to be digested, by them who enter combate, and maintaine fight with so cruell an enemie: so that it were better for them to be silent, if they thought what were auaileable rather for their owne priuate, then for the publicke estate of the Church of Christ. But that which vsually falles out in warre, that the tried prowesse of the Captaines doth by their ensample whet on the courages of the Souldiers, and doth stirre vp and pricke forward their sluggish mindes to the effecting of some exploite: The very same doth happen to Gods Ministers in this spirituall warfare, to whom there is abilitie giuen from God, to some greater, to some lesse, to all some. Whereby though they can adde nothing to the matters in controuersie, and it may bee they ought not: because not new things are to be de∣liuered by Diuines, but after a new manner as Vincentius wrot, nor with a diuers faith, but with a diuers stile as Austen warneth: yet notwithstan∣ding both by the consent of their testimony, & with the difference of their giftes and the varietie of discourse they can and ought giue their helping hand to the Gos∣pell. That was also an encouragement that assoone as
 the beast wounded with the kings speare began to grunt,Bellarmine Parsons. Pacenius. Christano: Becan. Coquaeus, and many others. it presently cast vp out of his mouth a great swarme of Iesuites, who should not so much refute with argu∣ments, as traduce with slanders, written with the hand of scorpions, the Kings maiestie, being not onely the best of Kings, but the best of men, and vndoubtedly the true Defender of the Faith. Right Heretickes; who murther men not with the sword, but with their wiles, as Ierome writeth: for a mans style may bee counted aswell a cutthroate, as a sworde drawne against Kings, whose honour seemes to be more deare and ten∣der vnto them then their liues. So that Iames Cle∣ment, or Francis Rauillacke, were no more cruell in wounding the Kings body, then Bellarmine, or Pace∣nius in wounding the Kings name. It is said that Eth∣nicke Rome did imprint that letter, whereof Cicero makes mention not to the table of iudges, as diuers in∣terpret it, but as Cicero and Pliny, to the head and forehead of false accusers; to the leaden head, and iron forehead, that they may carry countenances as stigmati∣call slaues branded with the markes of those letters in disgrace of their slanderous tongues, whom Plautus doth therefore tearme litered men. Truely it may seeme very vniust, if I doe not desire that those Iesuits should be accompted litered, whom popish Rome doth nourish and cherish within her, as those old geese, and dogges, who by their cackling and barking, did pursue any that assaulted the capitall. Adde that those two staues, whereof Zacharie the Prophet maketh menti∣on, the authority of Magistrates, and the obedi∣ence and agreement of Subiects,Za: cap. 1. vers. 7. calling the one the staffe of beauty, the other the staffe of
 bondes, These gracelesse Iesuits endeauour to breake them both, making rebellion an Arittle of their faith, wherein they goe so farre that they be not only conuin∣ced of our side, but euen of their owne. For of late certaine secular Priests as they are called, more mode∣rate in shew then the rest, that they may the more free∣ly disperse abroad closly among vs the seedes of super∣stition, do cunningly inueigh against the Articles of treason, brought in by the Iesuits; whenas Alan and many other secular Priests do both command and pra∣ctise treason. Our men therefore both as good Pa∣triottes and as faithfull Ministers, being bound with the double bond of warfare, euery one of them for his Graces, for his time and place, much more for his power ought to oppugne both these Articles, whereby we may maintaine according to our vocations the liberty of the kingdome, vnder which we were borne, together with the truth of the Gospell by which we were borne again. Wherein the most learned Byshoppe of Elye doth very iustly taxe the Ministers that are luke-warme and si∣lent in a businesse of such importance,Epist Dedi∣cat. to the KING. who do not bestow their paines in writing, when as this cause, as hee saith, is to be reckoned among those, wherein he that gathereth not with Christ, doth scatter a∣broad with the enemie of Christ; wherein if any man shall not deliuer his faithfull knowledg, ee shall not deliuer his owne soule. And doth adde this, that in such a busines you were better want power then will, and abilitie then faithfulnesse. Which I remember was sometime tould me of that most Reuerend Archbyshoppe D. Whitgift, then when the quarrell on both sides was not so hot, when hee wished
 that in so great a plenty of excellent Diuines among vs there were more that would imploy their spare times from their duty of preaching, in the paines of writing. I am come therefore into the fielde being thereto prouo∣ked with the goodnesse of the cause, the ensample of the Captaines, the iniury of the enemie, the Oath of war∣fare, the encouragement of the Fathers, that I might somewhat daunt the enemie, insulting so vnworthily.
To which purpose I thought good to set this taske to my selfe, that I might lay open the new creede of faith, gathered out of the new Articles of faith both open and secret by the Byshoppe of Rome himselfe, not so much for our owne Countrimen that are Papists, whom if so many bookes so excellently set foorth in English cannot satisfie, nothing at all can satisfie; as in a Latine Dia∣logue for their sakes that are in forrain parts. And this Dialogue is diuided into three bookes, whereof two of them are now set forth, the third God willing, which at this time lieth in scattered papers, if my health will permit shall be committed to print assoone as may be. In all which I first bring in a certaine Iesuite Robert Sa∣turnine a turbulent and wicked fellow, who with his choisest arguments doth egerly defend heresie and trea∣son: And I ioyne with him for an answerer Antonius Patriotta an Orthodoxall Diuine.Cicero. You know the man∣ner of Dialogues, that men speake those things in them, which they neuer spake. Therefore Saturnine will happily complaine, that those things are laid to his charge which he neuer spake, whenas I dare religiously affirme, that this factious Priest doth not vse onely the arguments of the chiefest Iesuits, but their methode and their wordes, chiefly of Alan, Bellarmine and
 Parsons, that any of them in all things may seeme to be Robert Saturnine.
I haue prefixed before the Dialogue a true looking-glasse for the Pope, i. a liuely picture of Antichrist pro∣phetically drawne out by S. Paul and S. Iohn, expoun∣ded by the antient Fathers as farre as they could fore∣see, and by the new more certainely by the euent; I thought good to set it together with short conclusions, prest to that end, wherein the Pope with all his rabble may discerne himselfe. For the order of nature did re∣quire, that he should euict the Pope to be Antichrist, which appeareth by the Glasse, who had a purpose to proue poperie to be Antichristianity, which is taught in the Creede. I thought good to set before them both, the Glasse of Christ, and a short compendium of Chri∣stianity, fetcht out of the Gospell, and expressed in my Epistle to the Christian Reader. For you know that two duties belong to the Minister, one that hee preach Christ sincerely: the other that he plainely lay open An∣tichrist, as that worthy man and Martyr of God Iohn Husse thought in his time.
Now all this (I know not how little or nothing) fa∣thers and brethren, I submit to your iudgement, and commit to your patronage. For those reasons which seemed equall to me to take in hand the defense of the busines, should seem so to you for the defense of my per∣son. I, when I read that there was mention made of the popish creede by our men, but saw that it was laid open by none to my knowledge of set purpose with any of their discourses, I tooke the matter in hand not so much in hope to performe that I should doe, as for desire to trie what I could doe, hoping thereby to stirre vp other
 mens cares who can deale in the busines more learned∣ly and eloquently. You haue hitherto heard why I vndertooke this labor: now if it please you vnder∣stand, why I dedicated it to you. For when I percei∣ued that the whole body of Religion was to be hand∣led by me in this Creed, I thought good most humbly to call together the Religious Clergie to bee Pa∣tron of this worke, of whom the Romish Clergie haue taken so many deadly blowes, that they feare no Clergies forces and blowes more; and whom it greeueth them to see endowed of God with so ma∣ny excellent parts of pietie, knowledge, tongues and prophesie. Therefore that great Tiberine fisherman, when as his trade of fishing began to be laid aside, and waxe cold, because that certaine great fishes had bro∣ken out of his netts torne and worne for age, drew vnto him certaine skilfull workemen out of our Vni∣uersities, with deceitfull rewards, who might mend againe the netts being so tatterd and torne, and make them fit to catch not Soules but Crownes; and those whom he first caught with his golden baite as fishes, he sent backe againe as fishermen. Whereto agreeth that of Martiall.
He sent vs great rewards,
but sent them on a hooke:
How can the fish on fisherman
in louely manner looke?
With the same cunning deceipt he doth daily ende∣uour to entangle young learned students, and to en∣tise them with deadly gifts vnto him, that they may helpe, and vphold his forlorne and desperate quarrell. Wherein he seemes to be like to that Pithius the vsu∣rer
 in Cicero,Cic: Offic: 3. who that he might cosen Cannius a plaine countrey Gentleman, calld to him all the fisher∣men, and taught them what they should do, that they should fish altogether, and bring the fish when it was caught, and lay them at his feete, by which deuise hee might sell his farme at a dearer rate. So the Bishop hath sent for fishermen out of Germanie,Which is the Popes signet. but chiefly out of England, vnder the ring of the fisherman, who should secretly returne to the fish ponds whence they came, and being caught themselues should catch others, and should bring their boates, and fishes of all sorts, to him, that by that meanes he might make the marchandise of his Church the more salable. This is the Bishops cunning. Was this the reason he allured our youth vnto him with rewards, and placed them in his Colleges of Rome and Rhemes, that he should send them backe twise worse than hee found them? This cousenage of our young men, wherewith this grand cousoner of the world doth vphold his seat, is to be preuented with all the aduise we can. Whereby hee doth plainly shew, what great confidence he puts in our mens witts, wherewith he perceiueth, that the tower of Babylon is both most egerly defended and impugned in this age of ours. Hee hath none of his side more learned than the English-Priests, chiefely the Iesuites, who that they might infect the English, write in English, in the iudgement of wisemen ele∣gantly, in the iudgement of fooles probably, that they may supply that by the goodnes of their style, which is wanting to the goodnes of their cause. Neither yet doe they bring any new matter, but they pol sh and trim ouer their old stuffe, obiected a hundred times
 by their side, and refuted a hundred times by ours; and they cast a new colour and flourish ouer there thred∣bare and withered arguments, that the Iesuites schoole may seeme to haue refined old poperie, as Medea did Pelia with her enchantments.The discrip¦tion of a Papist. But it doth bewray in the encounter both her feare and diffidence, while she doth enlarge the Canon with the Apocriphals, diminish the Scripture with her traditions, ouerthrow the originall with her translation, peruert the text with her glosse. In the meane while she sends out bookes wherein she stuffes out hir arguments concluded commonly out of meere al∣legories, enforced proportions, lame similitudes, fained miracles, foolish reuelations, naked names of Fathers, hired testimonies of Scholemen, which she (I must con∣fesse) hath furnished with fine words and well polished, and with a curious composition of sentences, attiring the Romaine harlot with all her trimmings, with the entisements whereof the vnstable and vnwary young age of many may be caught and deceiued. Vpon the Fauorers of which bookes, who either bring them ouer to vs, or by reading defend them, or giue them to other to be read with allowance of them; I wish that punish∣ment might be inflicted,D. Ed. Cok. do: com: place in his Epistle pre∣fixed before the case of Postnati. which a most Reuerend Iudge declareth to be prescribed by law. The authors of these bookes, assoone as the Italian ayre hath blowne vpon them, do thinke the northerne people to be scarce men, who write against them though they write with a better conscience and greater faithfulnesse then themselues. For they hold themselues to the true Canon, they trust wholy to the writen word, they go to the originall,The discrip¦tion of a Protestant. they haue the same text and commentarie, but that they bring in the Apostles breaking the way, and the Fathers
 following after, as witnesses of their owne times, as those that iudge the Apostles in a matter of faith are to hee harkened vnto without the Fathers, and not the Fathers without the Apostles. So they doe not play with reedes in their hands like the Aduer∣saries, but strike thorow with their dartes: neither doe they alleage arguments without testimonies, or testimonies without argumentes: which they doe not reckon vp for number, but consider for the weight: neither do they deceitfully vrge parcells taken out of the body of the Scripture, as the Aduersaries, who read them reported out of some magistrall booke or other; but alleage them being furnished with all circumstances, that from thence they may inferre and vrge the truth: neither doe they follow after types and allegories, but search out the inward substances and natures of things, neither doe the vse any whorish trimmings, but such sound and sober ornaments, which become the cause of God. Fearefull opponents, great Orators, such as ma∣ny more are to be esteemed who doe not write, whose stinges if any shall thinke are lost because they lye close, he is much deceiued. By hearing of whose learned Lec∣tures and Sermons, and reading their bookes I ingenu∣ously confesse, I come better instructed and prepared to defend the cause. That as we read the familie of the Scipios were borne to the ruine and ouerthrow of Carthage, so me thinke I may hope, that our Clergie is borne againe of God and sent into the world to the vtter ruin: and destruction of Rome. Whom therefore may I better desire to be the Patrone of my labors, then that Clergie that is the fatall vanquisher of Rome? I may adde thereto, that seeing my selfe in the former course
 of my life haue beene ioyned with many notable men in the Vniuersitie, either in the fellowshippe of studies, or in the Court in the dutie of preaching, or in conuersati∣on in the bond of friendship: I thought by this my duti∣full Dedication I should renew the memorie of our ac∣quaintance in Christ. Last of all, who is ignorant that our writers, when once they haue stirred vp more ear∣nestly the God of this world, and haue touched Anti∣christ to the quicke, with what virulent calumniati∣ons the professed enemies will traduce them? And it is not to be wondered at, if they spare not their bookes whose throates they would cut: and detract from their good names, whose liues they seeke after? who when they cannot doe mischiefe to good men by themselues, will attempt to effect it by false brethren. If this were done in the greene tree, how much more in the wither∣ed? and if they deale thus with the tale Cedars, how will they presse downe the meane trees, and lower shrubbs? The greater is my hope, that it will come to passe that they who write, being moued with the sense of their iniurie: and they that do not write being mou∣ed with the goodnes of the cause, will by their authori∣tie maintaine another, that offers himselfe to danger for the glory of Christ. For the Doctors and writers in the cause of the Gospell as they be most odious to such as bee wicked so should they be most deare to them that be well giuen. For these causes (Fathers and Brethren) I haue thought good to haue these my small labours to be most humbly and dutifully dedicated vnto you, in whose re∣ligion I thought faithfulnesse; in whose doctrine assi∣stance; in whose loue comfort; and in whose authority helpe did consist. You haue seene as I said at the first the
 insolencie of the Papists, your Fathers haue felt their crueltie, you cannot neither ought you to forget the powder or rather the Iesuits treason; which threatned the Kingdome; the massacres of Paris, and the Church; the fires of Queene Marie: whose imbers the Pope your old friend O ye Clergie of England doth hide and couer, he doth well remember your dutie, he forgets not your loue toward him. Against your argument drawne from the Scripture he fetcheth his drawne from the fa∣gots. You passe ouer the fire couered ouer with false ashes.
Therefore that which ministreth occasion to many to write, the same must be an occasion for all to take heed. And that which was cause to me to seeke for your pa∣tronage and helpe, the same should be the cause of stir∣ring vp our zeale, and watchfulnesse. GOD preserue the KING and Kingdome, GOD defend the Clergie the most flourishing of the whole world, being the eye of the Kingdome, from the iniuries and treacheries of all their enemies.

