



MADAME:
IT hath beene & is an euer-vsance of Authours, in publishing their works, to make free choise of som worthy Patron or Patronesse: to∣wards these, acknowledging a dutie of Gratitude; In others, ad∣miring and honouring the lustre of those vertues whereon they treate, for some, aduenturing to giue further instruction, and incouragement, in their most approued endeuours; from all, crauing the honour of Patronage; to all, recording (for all Po∣sterities, so much as may lie in them) a perpetuitie of a memorable fame. An honourable seruice, which (if of worth) all Worthies haue euer accepted grati∣ously and worthily.
Modest Ladie, tis also a modest boldnes of Truth especially of Christian Truth, that she dare knock and craue welcome at the Gates of all those, who are Louers of Truth: Great is Truth and euer preuaileth, euer iustified of her owne Children. My selfe then, who com in this Dedication, with a Present of Truth, doe presume a Welcome with her who is a Child of
 Truth, a Daughter of Religious Parents (Parents of diuerse Children louers of Truth) all Louers of Truth; of that Truth (I say) whereof the beloued Disciple hath written, that it abode in the Ladie Elect, himselfe, her Children, and was also to abide in them for for euer. A Welcome then, and gracious accep∣tance I doe presume, and assure to my selfe, in this my seruice.
Three words onely, of three reasons (omitting others) for this my Dedication. First, in you, a cour∣teous Modestie (when I name Modestie, I name an as∣sured Emblem of all vertues) which I haue obserued in you, but haue more fully heard of you. Secōdly, for you, an intended confirmation of your faith in that Christian Truth whereof you are a Louer, and sincere Professor. Thirdly, from my selfe a duetie of Gratitude towards you, acknowledging your euer∣readynesse for my good; your oft most louing and kind inquirie after the Welfare of those who are mine, and who, in the obligation of Gratitude, to∣gether with my selfe are and shall bee yours. The God of Truth confirme you in all Truth, blesse and perfect your Right worthie Knight with your selfe, in all increase and aboundance of temporall and eternall happinesse. Amen.

