


RIGHT HONOVRABLE
SVCH is the condition of bookes (though the lynes of them may haply be as ap∣ples of beaten gold,) that like houses without couers, they are not reputed per∣fect, vnles they beare in their Fronts the Name of some Potent Patrone, whereby they may be shadowed from the blasts of ignorant and ma∣licious Censurers. Our most Christian and vi∣ctorious
 Soueraigne, hauing as another Dauid with the flint of Gods word, and the slnge of his admirable Spirit, smitten the Golias of Rome in his forehead, wherewith he lyeth prostrate on the ground, groueling in the ignominie of his meretricious enormities; hath by his Princely example, drawne diuers of his Worthies to ga∣ther vp the spoyles of his victories; amongst whom, and behinde whom, my selfe as a soul∣dier postliminio in praelium reuertens, haue (being moued thereunto by the zeale of Gods truth) vndertaken this taske, to reueale the Antichri∣stianisme of his Exuuies, I meane his rotten and ragged miracles. Hauing finisht the Treatise, and bethinking my selfe of a Patrone, I concei∣ted tht the Patronage of such an argument, was meete for the Emperour himselfe; and also that his shield would be more then needfull, for the defence of a poore Souldier against a world of Aduersaries. Yet weighing with my selfe, how his most learned eyes, and victorious hands, are filled with presents of Bookes from euery hand, and of euery argument, I resol∣ued not to presume in this kinde; and yet for my securitie and safetie, I determined not to depart a latere Principis, whose Princely fauour
 I haue already layd vp as a crowne vpon my heart. To your most Honourable Selfe there∣fore, who for your rare Vertues are honoured with the grace of being Comes Pallatinus à latere; I haue presumed to present this my worke, and to lay it into the hands of your most Honoura∣ble and Christian Patronage. I nothing doubt of your Noble admittance of the same, such a Humanitie is seated in your Noble brest, as in a naturall Center; and such is the nature of the argument handled, that it beareth this affiance with it selfe, that it will not bee vnwelcome to so Religious and Christian a Peere of the Church.
If I be demanded the Reasons of this my Dedication to your Honour; I summe them vp thus; Loue, Opinion, Religion; Loue, for I confesse ingenuously, the very first moment I saw your Honour attending vpon our Soue∣raigne, your most Noble aspect did present to my apprehensfull view, true Nobilitie, ador∣ned with a Christian , and a Panoplie of all vertues, which then like a Load-stone drew my minde to loue and admiration of your most Noble Person, the which some courteous respects of your Honour to my selfe
 haue since confirmed. Opinion, and Fama verax, which reporteth your Honour to be a worthy Fauourer of learning; an Honourable Mecaenas, to all such as desire your Patronage: a noble testimonie of true Nobilitie, brought forth in your birth, nourished by your education, perfe∣cted by your affectation and prosecution of all noble studies. Religion, wherein your Honour by the hand of heauen (for this Donum optimum is from aboue, à Patre luminum) appeareth by imitation, to be another Iob; sincere, vpright, and fearing God; siding to no side, but walking via regia, & via media, before the Christ of our Lord, and Christ our Lord: by which Christian Collar of vertues, (though your place be most Honourable) I may say in Agesilaus his words, Conciliasti loco dignitatem.
When I weigh with my selfe, how his most Excellent Maiestie, clothed with the zeale of the glorie of Gods house, after a most learned Pre∣monition with pen, hath in his excellent Decla∣ration pro iure Regio, consecrated himselfe Pugi∣lem, a Champion to the warres of the Lord: I can∣not but be comforted to thinke, what com∣manders he would finde, who like Isadas, holding lance in one hand, and sword in the other, will be rea∣dy
 ruere in hostes. And would God, the day were come, that the old Romanes wisdom were followed, who resolued to fight against Philip in Grecia, lest they should be put to defend themselues against him in Italie: So our Chri∣stian Monarch, would be pleased to command the Capitoline Ioue of Rome to be assaulted, who now by himselfe in his Breefes, and by his Igna∣tians furiall bookes, sendeth Sentences most furi∣ous into this Kingdom, not to be written with inke but with blood, as his Maiestie writeth: which his presumptions, what are they else but incitements to some hellish and furious Rauillacs? At whose head and Crowne doth Suarius ayme and point in his most furious booke? My pen dreadeth to write, what his Maiestie hath declared in his most learned Declaration, touching the same point. And may not Clemencie it selfe be awa∣ked with such roares, to doe such things as appertaine to the seueritie of iustice? Opus alie∣num, opus eius. What shall we say? Let vs pray, Memento Domine Iacobi tui & omnis mansuetudinis eius. Let his enemies o Lord be confounded, who proiect euill to his soule: And grant Lord that the presage which one Worthington, hearing of the happie▪ Inauguration of our most gracious
 Soueraigne, vttered at Valladolid in these words, We are vndone, we are vndone, Iames of Scotland is proclaimed King of England. Let it O Lord proue a true prophecie, against them and their Ioue; let them be vndone at home, and abroad; night and day; sleeping and waking; in them∣selues, and in their posterities; who thirst thus after the blood of thy Annointed Ones, and haue made thy house a den of theeues▪ If peaceable Salomon become Lion, by their traiterous pro∣uokings, let them impute it to themselues; San∣guis eorū, supra capita eorum. And so most hum∣bly leauing my Booke vnder your Honors gra∣cious protection, I pray most heartily the Lord Iesus to blesse your Honour, with an assured pledge of true happinesse in this life, and with fullnes thereof in the life to come. Amen.

