



Right Honourable,
SOuldiers that carie their lives in their hands, had

need above all others to carie grace in their hearts, that so having made peace with God, they may bee fit to en∣counter with men. And having by faith in Christ disarmed death before they dye, they may sacrifice their lives with the more courage and comfort: which to neglect being a mat∣ter of eternity, is not valour but desperate madnesse, because in

this businesse as in o∣versights of war, there is no place for a second repentance, the first er∣ror being unrecovera∣ble. In evills above the strength of man to pre∣vaile and his patience to endure, there God hath planted the affecti∣on of feare, which might stirre us up to avoyd the danger by flying to him in Christ who being our friend it is no matter who is

our enemy: wee may be killed, but cannot be hurt; so safe it is to be under his command that hath command over Death, Hell, Iudg∣ment, and all that wee most feare. Yet such is our nature that by fa∣miliarity with danger, wee grow by degrees insensibly to be harde∣ned against it, and to looke no further then death, as if to die were onely to give up the

ghost, and then an end of all. And hereupon it is that they that fol∣low the warres are ge∣nerally taken to be men not most religious. The more respect those of that profession de∣serve, that have learned upon what tearmes to live and dye, that are sure of a better life be∣fore they leave this, that have layd up their life in Christ; Amongst whom (right Honou∣rable)

the world hath a long time taken no∣tice of you, in whom both religion, and mili∣tary imploymēt, meek∣nesse of spirit, with height of courage, hu∣mility with honor, by a rare and happy com∣bination have met to∣gether. Whereby you have much vindicated your profession from common imputation, and shewed that Piety can enter into Tents,

& follow after camps. and that God hath his Iosuas, & his Corneliuses in all ages. But I will not use many words of your selfe to your selfe, because though you have done much that may and will bee spoken of, yet you love not to heare or speake of what you have done.
I may seeme to some unbefitting to offer a discourse of a bruised

reede, to such a strong and flourishing Cedar. But experience shew∣eth, that the strongest plants in Gods house are exposed sometimes to strong windes of temptation, and there∣upon meet vvith brui∣sings; that they may the better know by whose strength they stand, and that the greatest may learne to goe out of themselves to the same common rocke and

fountaine of strength with the meanest. DA∣VID was a valiant man, yet upon experi∣ence of his oft failings and recoveries, he be∣came towards God as a weaned child. Low∣linesse of mind to God∣ward, and greatnesse of spirit against his ene∣mies may well stand together, for the way to bee above all other things, is to submit to God first. Besides; this

Text speaketh of the prevailing government of Christ in his Church and in his Children, which may bee an in∣couragement to your Lordship still not only to owne the cuse of Christ in these times wherein men are asha∣med of what they should glory in, and glory in their shame; but likewise to fight the Lords battels (whē called to it) and helpe

him against the migh∣tie, for victory atten∣deth Christs side in the end. Though God to revenge the quarrell of his Covenant, suffers his enemies, to prevaile yet for a time, to harden them the more, yet they have undertaken a damned cause, and howsoever the Church hath justly provoked God, yet the cause shall stand impregna∣ble against all created

power of Devills and men. We naturally de∣sire victorie, and many desire it more then truth o goodnesse, which onely are victo∣rious, and so out of a depraved judgement they crosse their owne desires, seeking to o∣vercome in that where∣in it were safer for them to be overcome, they then are sure to meet with shame in the conclusion in stead

of victory; or else we must deny Christ to be King of his Church, and Iudge of the world. Proceed on still (honorable Lord) to stand for Christ both in Peace and Warre, and this shall be found to your Honour, when Christ shall come to bee glorious in his Saints, that he thought you worthy to honour himselfe by, when o∣thers that oppose or

betray the cause of Christ for base ends, shall not dare to hold up their ha ds.
I would not divide you from your Hono∣rable Lady, being ob∣liged to both, and both being one as in other bands, so in that above nature, in love to the best things: both ex∣emplary in all religious courses, both in your places likewise having been imployed in great

services for the com∣mon good, so that not onely this, but forraign States are bound to bless God for you both. Going on in these waies you will finde God making his pro∣mise good of honoring them that honour him.
I doe not so farre o∣ver-value this poore worke, as to thinke it worthy of your Ho∣nors, but thus I thought

meet to witnesse my deserved respect to you both. If I bee to blame for suffring these Sermons long since preached, thus to come forth, others must di∣vide the fault with me, who had brought it to that passe, that it was al∣most necessary for mee to take this course. The Lord continue to bless your Honours with all your branches, and to maintaine his grace in

you, untill hee hath brought forth judge∣ment unto victory.

