



Noble Sir.
AS you had a Partner-ship, in seruice, in estate, nay in the hearts each of other, with that euer-memorable Partner and brother of yours, Master Richard Fishburne, as ap∣peared in health, but most plainely in the time of his sicknesse, by your mutuall teares often∣times interchangeably answering each other, so so giue mee leaue I pray you to make you Part∣ners still in this Worke, for I consecrate this li∣tle
 booke to your liuing Person, and to his li∣uing Memorie. To cast fresh flowres of Com∣mendation vpon him that is gone, and that be∣fore you, were but to moue you to a new regret, and sorrow for him, nay it were to lend eyes to the Eagle. To tell you that which you knew better then my selfe. To write of you, not what you deserue, but what I owe, I dare not, lest the least suspition might take you, that I did not write but paint, nay, not paint but dawbe; For I so farre vnderstand you, that you loue not the common varnish of the world, and that you turne in the fairest part of your abili∣ties from the ordinarie view; wherein I must needes say, you much honour your selfe, and shew your selfe a true Diamond, which Artists best discerne, by shining in the darke, it being as great wisedome in our sufficiencie not to know our selues, as it is in our wants to know our selues.Sicut liuoris nota est silere quod nouerā, ita crimen est non enarrare quod senseram Fulgent Car. Mytholog. l. 2. Onely herein your modestie disaccomo∣dates your friends, while it will not admit, no not a deserued thankfulnesse. And I my selfe while I feare by writing what I might to flatter you, am forced by not writing, in a manner to be vnthankfull. Yet I consider againe, that pa∣per
 is but a weake reflexion of a stronger affe∣ction; and no true friend when hee writes most, yet hath that gift to write as fully as hee loues: therefore instead of my pen I enclose my heart in this small leafe, and present them both together for a token of my sinceritie to you; and because I may not bee so thankfull for that loue of yours which is past, my resolution is with me to promise you my best seruice to come; An instance of which in short (because an Epistle as Seneca saith,Sen. Epist. 45. must not fill the Readers hand) is this little booke which I now dedicate to you, the first Commencement and beginning of my labours in this kind, and vndertaken not for the burnishing of mine owne name (as mine owne conscience dictates vnto mee) but for the lengthning of his memorie, who was your deer∣ly-accounted Partner, and my deepely-esteemed friend. Accept it I beseech you, for the argu∣ments sake, it is of Charitie, a vertue, I know you loue with the very inside of your heart, accept it for his sake whose Character it is, with whom as you were Partner on earth, so I pray you may be Partner with him in heauen. Nay such a claime your owne goodnesse hath giuen
 mee in you, and such ground haue I gotten of you by your fauours, that J dare intreat you to accept it for mine own sake, as proceeding from that heart that hath no fur∣row of dissimulation in it & from him, who vowes himselfe

