


IT is both rightly and excellently affermed of Marcus Tullius Cicero, in his first booke de officijs (right Excellent Princes & my moste gratious souerayne Lady) that no man is borne into this wolrd for his priuat and singuler weale, because our Countrie chieflie, partely our parents, & part∣ly our kinsfolke do require as it were a duety of vs, & recompence for that the whiche we haue receiued and like as the members of mans body be di∣uers in number, and haue according to their diuersitie diuers and peculier properties so is it in a good and well setteled cōmen weale: in whiche ther is no office so base, or handie worke so simple whiche, is not necessary and profitable for the same. And as the mem∣bers of the body doing without impedimentes their naturall dueties, ye whole body is in an helth∣ful hermonye, & able to performe all that belongeth to the same. So is it in a publike weale whē all men in their calling, do labour not onely for their owne gayne, but also for the profit and cō∣moditie of their Countrie▪ which thinges when I according to my small Capacitie did waye with my selfe, I was as it were stirred forward to do my duetie vnto this my Countrie wherin I liue and am a member. And so much the rather, for that being seruant vnto the Right honorable Duke of Northūberlād. 1550. It pleased his grace for my forther knowledg to maītaine me in Italie ther to cōfer wt the doīges of ye skilful maisters in architectur, & also to view such aūciēt Monumentes hereof as are yet extant▪ whervpon at my retourne, presenting his grace with the fruites of my trauailes, it pleased the same to shewe them vnto that noble king Edward the vi. your maiesties most deare brother of famous memorie, whose delectation and pleasure was to se it, and suche like. And hauing the sayde trikes and deuises aswell of sculture & painting as also of Architecture, yet in my keping, I thought it good at this time to set fourth some part of the same for the profit of others, especially touching Architecture: wherin I do followe not onelye the writinges of learned men, but also do ground my selfe on my owne experience and practise, gathered by the sight of ye Monumentes in Italie. And because all the members of the body haue cheflye and principally a duetie to the head, as gouernour of the whole, and without which, al the other can not liue. So my duety inforseth me most soueraigne lady (the perfect & natural head next vnto God of this our common weale,) to shew a token of the same vnto your highnes, in presenting these my poore and simple laboures whervnto I am the rather boldned considering your highnes delight in all kynd of good learning, and parfect skill in the tonges and sciences Most humble beseching your royall maiestie to vouchsafe to let this my small trauaile and woorke passe vnder your noble pro∣tection and defence: and I according to my bound and duety shall pray to God for your long life and pros∣perous Raygne, with peace and tranquilitie to his honour and glorie. Amen.

