



AS I descended (right hono∣rable and my good Ladie) into a secret consideration of the age of this present worlde, and of the last ende thereof, I perceyued, that our sauiour Christ, in going about by sundry signes and tokens, to foreshew & premonish his elect, of the ruinous decaye and dreadfull downefall of this last generation,Mat. 24.37 Mar. 13.32 Luk. 17.28 1. Pet. 3.20 compared the dayes therof to the dayes of Noe before the floode, what time the wicked gaue ouer them selues to all vnrighteousnes, heaping one sinne vpō an other, vntil the water came and swept them all away: to the ende by due remembraunce of Gods fearefull plagues, most iustly powred vpon that sinnefull and carelesse generation, the godly myght in all reuerence and holy conuersation, watch and wayte within the arke of Christes Churche,
 for that long wished & most welcome time, of their trāslation to eternal happines. which thing, whilest the faithful haue reason to re∣member, it banisheth farre from them the vayne delights of earthly vanities, and prepa∣reth them most readilie to the obedience of the worde of God, whereby they be fore∣warned with watchfull Noe, of many future woes & feareful daungers, and also enkinde∣led in true godlines and holines of lyfe, with feare & trembling to worke their saluation.Phil. 2.12. For sith they knowe themselues on earth to be but straungers,Ebr. 11.13. where al things must con∣sume, and haue a sodaine and a certaine end, their chiefest purpose ought to be, (as sayeth the Apostle) to be sober,1. Pet. 4.7. 1. thes. 5.3 and to watche in all godly conuersation vnto prayer. For sodain∣ly, no doubt, the ende shall come, as was the comming of the flood in Noe his time, yea euen in an hower, when man thinketh not, and then blessed shall he be, that is founde in Noe his arke, & watcheth, with his garments cleane,Apo. 16.15 Mat. 25.10 and his lampe of righteousnes bur∣ning, for he shall enter with the bridegrome into rest, and so be saued from destruction.
Neither doe I see what dayes may be so rightly compared with the dayes of Noe, as these wherein we lyue: vvherein so fewe be
 righteous, & so many sleeping in securitie of sinne. Whereat I can not but tremble, to be∣hold in the spirit, the great calamities & end¦les woes which may fal vpō this sinful gene∣ration, the wickednes wherof is written with a pen of yron, & with the piont of a diamōd:Ier. 17.1. which these eyes of ours are verie likelie to behold,2 Re. 22.11 Isa. 49.8. & 55.6. except with good Iosias we be hum∣bled in this acceptable time & day of grace, to seeke vnto the Lord, & in true repentance, to auoyde his heauie wrath. For, no doubt, since the first tyme that Englād euer had the knowledge of Gods Gospel (I speake not of the times of ignoraunce, the mystie cloudes whereof are past) was there in it, neuer more ripenes of all maner of sinne, and carnall se∣curitie, then these present dayes in all estates expresse, and therefore the more we stand in daunger of destruction.
God hath called vs earely and late by the preaching of his worde,2. Chro. 36 15. but we are nothing better: what remayneth then, but that we feele his scourges?Gen. 19.2. pet. 2.6. When Sodome and Go∣morrha woulde not be moued by the prea∣ching of iust Lot, what remained but fire and brimstone from heauen to be their de∣struction? When Pharao and the Egyptians refused the wordes of Moses,Exo. 14.28 the red sea was
 appointed to be their confusion.2. King. 17.6, 14. When Isra∣el and Iuda would not be counselled by the voyce of the prophets of God,Ier. 4. & 7. & 19. the Assyrians and the Babyloniās were raised vp to plague them & destroy thē. When Ierusalē was no∣thing bettred by all the sermons & miracles of our sauiour Christ,Luk. 19.43 and vvould in no vvise acknovvledge the time of her visitation, the Romanes vvere appointed to bee her deso∣lation. And euen so in this sermon ensuing, it may be gathered, that vvhen the carelesse man refuseth to be vvarned by the vvord of god, the Lord hath many plagues prepared for his destruction. Can the Lords vvord thē be of some so stubbernely among vs contē∣ned, and hypocritically of other some recea∣ued, & the fruits of holy life in fevv brought forth, and the land escape vnpunished? It is to truely verified of vs, vvhich in times past vvas vvitnessed of the dayes of Noe, vvherin al flesh had corrupted it selfe, & filled the lād vvith iniquitie, whilest only Noe and his fa∣milie being but a fewe in number, vvere oc∣cupied in making of the Arke for their deli∣uerāce. Wherof (Madame) vvhē I had prea∣ched before your honour, more compendi∣ously perhaps, through shortnes of the time,
 then eyther your Honour could haue desi∣red, or I my selfe haue vvished, I was then of some so vehemently required, to impart in vvriting to their further consolation, vvhat then in pulpit I had spoken, that notvvith∣standing I iudged my labours to simple to passe abroad, and my selfe farre vnmeete for such a purpose: yet durst I not deny to cōfort such, as thirsted after spiritual knovvledge, & to warne such as would escape, of the ven∣geance to come, and so eftsoones resolued my self, as nere as god vvould giue me leaue to explane and augment, vvhat my purpose vvas then in the pulpit to vtter. Neither had I far to seeke to vvhose patronage, I might commend vvhat herein I vvent about, vvhē as dayly your honours godlie zeale and ver∣tuous life, called me to offer it vnto your wis∣dome: whose vvilling hart, not onely I haue had experience of, to accept my laboures in good part before this time, but also see your vvhole endeuour alvvayes bent to further the proceedings of the Gospell, and to re∣clame this ignorant country frō their vvon∣ted erroures, to the church & arke of Christ. A rare vertue in your sexe, and such as may condēne the slackenes of some other kinds, vvho care full litle hovve it goeth vvith
 the Churche, so they them selues may liue at vvill and ease.Psal. 119.30. But as your honour hath chosen the vvay of trueth to bee your trea∣sure and delight,Psal. 119.30. and eke your perfect wise∣dome and nobilitie,Deut. 4.6. and also by your happy and welcome comming into these rude and desert partes, haue ministred great solace to the godlie: so do I wishe with all my heart, and dayly pray, that your honour may hap∣pily proceed, as you haue vertuously begun, to the great benefitte of Christes church, & to the comfort of your quiet conscience in the last day.




