



AFter that I called to minde (Right Ho∣norable,1. Re. 2.1. Pro. 4.1. 2. Re. 23.1. and my ve∣rie good Lord) the diligent care, and prudent prouision, which Dauid and o∣ther good Princes and rulers of Israel had, for planting true religion in their Families, for their better conuersation and good gouernement, according to the lawe and rule of faith: and had bene also often intreated and earnestly inuited by some, my verie friendes, and suche as loue the saluation of the faithfull, to contract some compendi∣ous and Christian forme of godlie in∣structions
 and sweete prayers much re¦quisite in well disposed families, whose godlie demaunde I was not willing to denie,1. Luc. 214. bothe because I see the lacke thereof in manie families, to require so needefull a labour, and also, because I woulde not abridge my duetie to my brethren and felowshippe of the faith∣full, if it were but, with the poore wi∣dowe, to cast two mites into the trea∣surie: And waying also with my selfe, howe manie busie braines are occupi∣ed, to quarrell without a cause with truth it selfe. I thought your honoures Godly Patronage to be a sure asyle, to support and defende against the sting of carping Zoilus, whatsoeuer in godly wise herein I shoulde propound. And therefore I haue boldlie presumed too rest vpon your Honoures hoped pro∣tection, as the chiefest anchore holde I had herein, and take effecte, to the ende my laboures might the better proceede. Whereto (my good Lorde) I was diuerslie incensed. First by your Honoures good liking and procurati∣on of good litterature from time to time whiche, neuer happened to anie
 without deserued prayse and iust com∣mendation.
Secondly, I was moued by your Honours good acceptation of my stu∣dies in the Lorde, and other good re∣membraunces towardes me, both of youre honour, vnto whome I re∣count my selfe most deepely indebted, and also of my good and most vertu∣ous Ladie, whom the Lorde hath ioy∣ned, as a moste comfortable delight and helpe, vnto your honour. Whose faithfull societie and happie felow∣ship, importeth an euident argument of Gods greate goodnesse towardes you, in blessing you with the felowship of such a one, as few or none excell or goe beyonde in trew godlinesse, hone∣stie, and vertue. To whom for her Ho∣noures good affection to Christian re∣ligion, I recognise my selfe muche bounde with all obedience.
Thirdly, I was prouoked herevnto, specially, because such is and ought to bee the zeale and loue of all nobilitie, (whereof your honour is a most tow∣warde Braunche) alwayes with maine and might, to defend the cause of true
 Religion to the glorie of God, and sal∣uation of his people, for whiche cause the Lorde hath stirred vp moste noble men and godlie Magistrates, to be as Patrones, and protectoures to the Ambassadoures of his worde, for the better proceeding of religion. So he raysed vp Moses to Aaron, Iosua to Eleazar, Dauid to Nathan, Asa too Azariah, Iehosaphat to Micha, Eze∣chias and others to Esaie and Ieremie, Zerubbabel to Iehoshua, and finally, the Emperoure Constantine to the councel of Nice. All which were right∣lie termed Nobles, for the zeale and loue they had to true religion. And albeit, by sinister and crooked meanes some were ennobled, and so crept in∣to the carefull chaire of worldlie dig∣nitie, yet none were euer rightly and in verie deede accompted noble, but such as vndertooke the patronage and aide of Christian religion, which thing I humblie craue vpon your Honoure. For euen in this wise,Deut. 4.4. Moses doth call the Israelites a pretious and a noble ge¦neration, so long as they obserued the commaundements of the Lord. Vpon
 the like condition,Psal. 89. &. 132. the Lord established his mercies with king Dauid his Ser∣uaunt: that the throne of Iuda should not be destitute of one to raigne vpon the same for euer.1. Reg. 2.1. To which thing Da∣uid had respect, when he lay vppon his death bedde, and therevpon councel∣led Salomon his sonne, (to whom the kingdome was promised,) to walke in the way of truth, wherein he had bene brought vp: to the ende he might pro∣sper and haue good successe.Fox Pag 125 To like purpose, Romanus a man of great no∣bilitie, being caried to the place of martirdom for the profession of Chri∣stian religion, (a rare thing in Nobles to beholde) boldely auouched, that his nobilitie rested not so much in the bloude of his Auncestoures, as in the profession of the Christian faith, and other vertues thereto agreeing. And therefore he saide, Non progenitorum sanguis, sed Christianae pietatis professio me nobilem facit, that is, Not the bloud of my progenitoures, but the profes∣sion of Christian religion, maketh me noble and renowned.Rom. 11.17. And in deede if we shoulde with a single eye, looke to
 the Prosapie of Adam,Eph. 2.23. and wild oliue tree, out of the which all fleshe was ta∣ken, there woulde be no great cause of triumph to anie, of any thing whiche wee haue of nature:Ro. 6.5. &. 8.15 16. But this is and ought to be manns chiefe nobilitie, that he is graffed in Christe Iesus by faith, adopted to be the child of God, made by faith pertaker of his graces,Theodorit. lib. 5. ca. 17. and felow heire of his kingdome, and this is very nobilitie. Wherewith Saint Ambrose beeing moued, aduertised the Emperour Theodosius (and in him all nobilitie) to consider his nature to bee fraile, least happilie principallitie shoulde blinde him, and make him quite forget himselfe, and his obedi∣ence towardes God.
Wherevpon, it may be gathered (right honorable) that not onelie the Poten∣tates of al sortes, ought well to remem∣ber their calling, but specially, to ad∣dresse them selues in all obedience, to serue the Lorde, to foster his churche, to promote and defende his true religion: For therefore are they cal∣led to nobilitie,Psal. 2.11. Isa. 49.23. wherein, I woulde to God it might well please euen all de¦grees
 of suche as bee exalted on highe and gouernoures of families, deepely to acknowledge and confesse, that the Lord hath made them Fathers for his trueth, Patrones to mainteine religi∣on, and lightes of godlie life for o∣thers to followe. For, like as the sonne in the firmament,Plato. giueth light to all the regions rounde about him, and by his bright appearing expelleth the darke∣nesse, comforteth and cheereth the worlde: Semblably, shoulde nobili∣tie banish sinne and corrupt religion, and be a lantern of Godlie life to com∣forte and shine to others, that they mighte directe their liues after their good ensamples,Phillip 2.15. as the Apostle wisheth the godlie to bee without rebuke, in the middest of a naughtie and croked generation, among whom they should shine as lightes in the worlde. For as the Philosopher Plato saith, suche as the Heades and Rulers be, such com∣monlie bee the rest of the common multitude.Isocrates Vpon the which considera∣tion the Athenians Oratour Isocrates wisheth all men of nobilitie, to pro∣pose their liues, as a paterne for others,
 to follow, knowing, that the manners of a whole towne or countrie doe re∣semble the wayes and dooinges of the higher sorte.Lib. 3. Ca. 1. To the like ende sayeth Enagrius in the ecclesiasticall histories. that the life of a noble man shoulde be an image of vertue, for his subiectes to follow,Contra Dona∣ristas. that they might the sooner bee allured to vertue and godlinesse. Thus Sainte Augustine saieth, that ru∣lers ought to serue GOD, not onelie in liuing godlie and modestlie them∣selues, but also in bringing others to vertue and true Religion. Thus it was saide to Arcadius the Emperour, that godlinesse was sufficient to the sal∣uation of the noble men, without the whiche their Pompe and outwarde strength was nothing woorth. Where∣vppon (my verie good and vertuous Lorde) I may conclude and define with Sozomenus,Sozo. lib. 9. Cap. 1. that godlinesse or loue of true Religion,Lib. 1. Ca. 1. is the greatest honour and renowne of true nobilitie. And therefore as Constantine saide sometimes to Sapors king of Persia,Theodorit. lib. 1. Ca. 25. so say I to all such of high degrees, which feare the Lorde: like as in keeping of
 the sacred faith, they are pertakers of the light of truth: so in following the light of truth, as a guide, they at∣taine straight to the sacred faith: which thing may well inkindle in the lo∣uing and zealous hearts of noble men and all others a feruent minde, to the imbracing and spreading abroade of true religion.Niceph. lib. 4. Ca. 34. And euen as Cyprian let no day passe, without the reading of Tertulian: nor Alexander without the reading of Homer: nor finally, Apelles without some line proportio∣ned: so were it meete that no degrees, shoulde lose anie opportunitie or oc∣casion graunted to the meditation of Christian religion: but rather being taught by the example of the Empe∣rour Constantine, woulde repose their whole studie in the word of God And as for other things in the worlde, they are but vanitie and vexation of spirite. For all flesh is grasse,Eccle. 1. Isa. 40.6. and all the glorie of man is as the flowre of the fielde, which standeth beautifull to day, but tomorow is cut downe, dried vp, and withered. And what harme were it then, if some good man would put all
 degrees in minde, as the Macedonian did Phillip,1. Iohn. 2.16. and say: remember man, that thou art but mortall, and that no∣thing is in the worlde, but the luste of the flesh,1. Cor. 7.31. 2. Cor. 5.10. the lust of the eyes and pride of life, & that the figure of this worlde vadeth fast away, that wee must also all appeare before the tribunall seate of God, that euerie one may render an accompt for that which he hath do ne in the bodie, be it good or euill. Were it not a meanes, to make euerie one more watchefull in his office? wherein than ought mans delight to be? surely as the Prophete saith: Let not the wise∣man glorie in his wisedome, nor the strong man in his strength,Iere. 9.23. nor the riche man in his riches: but let him that reioyceth, reioyce in this, that he vnderstandeth and knoweth me: For I am the Lorde, whiche shewe mercie, iudgement,Eccle. 11.9.10. &. 12.2. and righteousnesse in the earth, for in these thinges I delight, saith the Lorde. To the like purpose, is the good and wholsome counsel of the Preacher, Reioyce (O young men) saith he, in thy youth, and let thy hearte cheere thee, in the dayes of thy youth,
 and walke in the wayes of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, but knowe that for all these thinges, God wil bring thee to iudgement: therefore take away griefe out of thine hearte, and cause euill, to departe from thy fleshe: for childehoode and youth are vanitie. Remember now thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, whiles the euill dayes come not, nor the yeares approche, wherein thou shalt say, I haue no pleasure in them. O woulde to God that this godlie counsel might preuaile in princelie and noble hear∣tes, and in euerie high and low degree, and especially in heades of housholdes, which best becōmeth their personages: Than woulde they enquire after the Lorde, and make his trueth, their cheife delight, and lay a sure foundati∣on in the way of righteousnesse, than shoulde this bee their ioy and tri∣umph: To knowe the Lorde to be their GOD, and themselues to be his peo∣ple, and to haue the testimonie of a good conscience. Than shoulde they make answeare to their obedience rightlie to the woorde of GOD,2. Cor. 12. than
 shoulde they doe the dueties of faith∣full and loyall subiectes, and satisfie her Maiesties desire. Finally, than woulde they tender the state of Churche and common weale, and shew themselues carefull for the saluation of Israel.
And because there is no good be∣ginning for the accomplishing of these things, but in the wisedome, feare, and knowledge of the Lorde, the seede whereof is sowen in your honoures heart, to my great comforte and hap∣pie hope of helpe, that your honoure will set forwarde and mainteine the trueth of Iesus Christ in this poore countrie, and Labirinth of ignorance & sinne, I here most humbly commend vnto your honoures godlie zeale, a shorte forme of Christian Religion, and godlie gouernement, most meete in wel disposed families to be obserued. Wherein is to be scene the summe of Christian doctrine, faith, and godlie prayers, most meete for this our pre∣sent estate: beseeching your good Ho∣noure, in lieu of better, to accept the same in good parte, at my willing handes, recognising my selfe muche
 bounden vnto your Honour, with all obedience for euer. And therefore knowing the knowledge of true Reli∣gion, to be the delight and comforte of the godlie,Psla. 119.24.105. Ro. 10.8. Isa. 11.4. Iohn. 1027. 2. Cor. 2.16 the light vnto theyr pathes, the doctrine of faith vnto sal∣uation, the scepter and protection of Gods kingdome, the marke and badge of Gods Elect, and sauour vnto life, I here do present, the summe therof vnto your Lordship, in token of a thankefull remembraunce of youre Honoures courtesie towardes me, and in hope of fauourable acceptation thereof, Wish∣ing no lesse vnto your Lordeship, then increase of all heauenlie graces and perfect happinesse tho∣row the mediation of the Lord Iesus: in whom I bid your Honour most hartely fare well.

