



CIvill Iustice (most Gracious Soveraigne) and Externall Peace, be, as all confesse, two things, in everie Common-weale, much to be honoured and highly respected: but they are then, doubtlesse, of best and worthiest esteeme, and most blessed of GOD, when, together with them, Gods Religion flourish∣eth,

and the Supremacie of Kings and Princes,Rom. 13 1.2. Tit. 3.1. Matth. 2.21. Deut. 8 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 &c. Levit. 26 3, 4, 5, 6, &c. Deut. 7.11, 12, 13, 14, &c. 1. King. 2., 4. 1 Chron. 8.7, 8, 9, 10. within their owne Dominions, is also, as one of his sacred ordinances, duly reverenced and obeyed. For, in the diligent observance of Gods ordinances, ad∣ded to civill Iustice and externall Peace, it is (as your Majestie best knoweth) that the solid, durable, and complete Happinesse of every Kingdome, espe∣cially that professeth God and his word, consisteth. Howbeit, concerning points of civill Iustice, and, ex∣ternall Peace, I shall not neede, here, to speake anie thing: because in those two points, and generally in all matters Temporall (as they be called) the pre∣tended Catholicks of this your Majesties King∣dome, doe already, of themselves, willingly professe and yeeld a very good conformitie, without any op∣position or contradiction. I wish, they did also shew, (as of right they ought, and upon better information received, I trust they will) the like good conformity, as touching the two other points (which be, indeed, points of the greatest & highest importance) name∣ly, concerning your Majesties Supremacie, and the Religion: in which two points, it is, that their great defect, and unconformitie, appeareth.
The cause hereof, they alledge to be their Con∣science, and so I also conceive it: But what maner of conscience it is, themselves should more seriously

consider. For if it be (as it is indeed) not a right, but a wrong and an erring conscience, all men will grant, that such a conscience ought to be rectified and reformed, and not persisted in. If then, matter sufficient to satisfie their consciences, in these points, shall be shewed unto them, it is as much as they can desire: and from thenceforth, they must eythe be conformed, or else be held utterly unexcusable, as having after that, nothing further left to alledge or pleade for themselves in the case. This therefore is the thing that I have here attempted & endevoured to do & perform, as I was able, and as my other im∣ployments in the affaires of the Cōmon-weale, would permit me. I confesse, that it might have been much better done by sundry, and innumerable others, that be farre more learned, and have also much more lei∣sure for these things then I: and that much more might likewise have beene spoken in every severall and particular point, then is here by mee delivered: But as I could not, nor desired to speake all, but so much as might suffice; so neyther doe I doubt but there will here be found matter sufficient, (if not re∣dundant) to give contentment & satisfaction to the conscience of any, that will be reasonable and equall, and not suffer himselfe to be transported or caried away with prejudice, or with perverse or partiall af∣fection.

The VVorke, is, I grant, in respect of mee, in no sort worthy your Majesties view or patroci∣nie: yet in respect of the matter therein handled, it being the cause of no lesse then of God himselfe, and of his Church, and of all Christian Kings in gene∣rall (if they all knew, or would take notice, of that which of right belongeth to them) and it being your Majesties owne cause more specially and particular∣ly: I thought it meetest, and my bounden duetie, to dedicate it (as here in all humble submission I doe) to your most excellent Majestie. The Almightie e∣vermore keepe and preserve your Highnesse, to the great glory of his Name, the further comfort of his Church, and of all your Majesties Dominions, the most ample propagating of his religion, and the con∣fusion of all false and Antichristian Doctrines, and to your owne everliving honour in this world, and everlasting felicitie in the world to come, through Iesus Christ. AMEN.

