

TO MY DEARE LADIE AND SISTER, THE CONVN∣TESSE OF PEMBROKE.
HEre now haue you (most deare, and most worthy to be most deare Lady) this idle worke of mine: which I fear (like the Spiders webbe) will be thought fitter to be swept away, then worn to any other purpose. For my part, in ve∣ry trueth (as the cruell fathers among the Greekes, were woont to doo to the babes they would not foster) I could well find in my harte, to cast out in some desert of for∣getfulnes this child, which I am loath to father. But you desired me to doo it, and your desire, to my hart is an absolute com∣mandement. Now, it is done onelie for you, onely to you: if you keepe it to your selfe, or to such friendes, who will weigh errors in the ballaunce of good will, I hope, for the fathers sake, it will be par∣doned, perchance made much of, though in it selfe it haue deformities. For in∣deede, for seuerer eyes it is not, being but a trifle, and that triflinglie handled. Your deare selfe can best witnes the maner, be∣ing done in loose sheetes of paper, most of it in your presence, the rest, by sheetes, sent vnto you, as fast as they were done. In summe, a young head, not so well stayed as I would it were, (and shall be when God will) hauing many many fancies begot∣ten in it, if it had not ben in some way de∣liuered, would haue growen a monster, & more sorie might I be that they came in, then that they gat out. But his chiefe safetie, shalbe the not walking abroad; & his chiefe protection, the bearing the liue∣rye of your name; which (if much much goodwill do not deceaue me) is worthy to be a sāctuary for a greater offender. This say I, because I knowe the vertue so; and this say I, because it may be euer so; or to say better, because it will be euer so. Read it then at your idle tymes, and the follyes your good iudgement wil finde in it, blame not, but laugh at. And so, looking for no better stuffe, then, as in an Haberdashers shoppe, glasses, or feathers, you will conti∣nue to loue the writer, who doth exceding∣lie loue you; and most most hartelie praies you may long liue, to be a principall orna∣ment to the familie of the Sidneis.

