


FENCING (Right honorable) in this new fangled age, is like our fashions, euerie daye a change, resembling the Ca∣melion, who altereth himselfe into all colours saue white: so Fencing changeth into all wards saue the right. That it is so, experience teacheth vs: why it is so, I doubt not but your wisedome doth con∣ceiue. There is nothing permanent that is not true, what can be true that is vncertaine? how can that be certaine, that stands vpon vncertain
 grounds? The mind of man a greedie hunter af∣ter truth, finding the seeming truth but chaun∣ging, not alwayes one, but alwayes diuerse, for∣sakes the supposed, to find out the assured cer∣taintie: and searching euery where saue where it should, meetes with all saue what it would. VVho seekes & finds not, seekes in vaine; who seekes in vaine, must if he wil find seeke againe: and seeke he may againe and againe, yet all in vaine. VVho seekes not what he would, as he should, and where he should, as in all other things (Right honourable) so in Fencing: the mind desirous of truth, hunts after it, and hating falshood, flies from it, and therfore hauing mis∣sed it once, it assayes the second time: if then he thriues not, he tries another way: whē that hath failed he aduentures on the third: & if all these faile him, yet he neuer faileth to chaunge his weapon, his fight, his ward, if by any meanes he may compasse what he most affect: for because men desire to find out a true defence for them∣selues in their fight, therefore they seeke it dili∣gently, nature hauing taught vs to defend our selues, and Art teaching how: and because we misse it in one way we chaunge to another. But
 though we often chop and change, turne and returne, from ward to ward, from fight to fight, in this vnconstant search, yet wee neuer rest in anie, and that because we neuer find the truth:English maisters of defence, are profitable mem∣bers in the com∣mon wealth, if they teach with ancient English weapons of true Defence, weight and conuenient length, within the compasse of the statures and strength of men to command, be∣cause it maketh them safe, bold, valiant, hardie, strong and healthfull, and victoriou  the warres, ser∣uice of their Prince, defence of their friendes and countrey. But the Rapter in reason not to be taught, nor suf∣fred to be taught, because it ma∣keth men feare∣full and vnsafe in single combat, and weak, & vn∣seruiceable in the warres. and therefore we neuer find it, because we neuer seeke it in that weapon where it may be found. For, to seeke for a true defence in an vntrue weapon, is to angle on the earth for fish, and to hunt in the sea for Hares: truth is ancient though it seeme an vpstart: our forefathers were wise, though our age account them foolish, valiant though we repute them cowardes: they found out the true defence for their bodies in short weapons by their wisdome, they defended them selues and subdued their enemies, with those weapons with their valour. And (Right hono∣rable) if we will haue this true Defence, we must seeke it where it is, in short Swords, short Staues the halfe Pike, Partisans, Gloues, or such like weapons of perfect lēgths, not in long Swords, long Rapiers, nor frog pricking Poiniards: for if there be no certain grounds for Defence, why do they teach it? if there be, why haue they not found it? Not because it is not: to say so, were to gainesay the truth: but because it is not cer∣taine
 in those weapons which they teach. To proue this, I haue set forth these my Paradoxes, different I confesse from the maine current of our outlandish teachers, but agreeing I am well assured to the truth, and tending as I hope to the honor of our English nation. The reason which moued me to aduenture so great a taske, is the desire I haue to bring the truth to light, which hath long time lyen hidden in the caue of con∣tempt, while we like degenerate sonnes, haue forsaken our forefathers vertues with their wea∣pons, and haue lusted like men sicke of a strange ague, after the strange vices and deuises of Ita∣lian, French and Spanish Fencers, litle remem∣bring, that these Apish toyes could not free Rome from Brennius sacke, nor Fraunce from King Henrie the fift his conquest. To this desire to find out truth the daughter of time, begotten of Bellona, I was also moued, that by it I might remoue the great losse of our English gallants, which we daily suffer by these imperfect fights, wherein none vndertake the combat, be his cause neuer so good, his cūning neuer so much, his strength and agilitie neuer so great, but his vertue was tied to fortune: happie man, happie
 doale, kill or be killed is the dreadfull issue of this diuellish imperfect fight. If that man were now aliue, which beat the Maister for the scho∣lers fault, because he had no better instructed him, these Italian Fencers could not escape his censure, who teach vs Offence, not Defence, and to fight, as Diogenes scholers were taught to daunce, to bring their liues to an end by Art. VVas Aiax a coward because he fought with a seuen foulded Buckler, or are we mad to go na∣ked into the field to trie our fortunes, not our vertues? VVas Achilles a run-away, who ware that well tempered armour, or are we desperat, who care for nothing but to fight, and learn like the Pigmeys, to fight with bodkins, or weapons of like defence? Is it valour for a man to go na∣ked against his enemie? why then did the La∣cedemonians punish him as desperate, whom they rewarded for his vallour with a Lawrell crowne? But that which is most shamefull,To this it will be obiected, that in the warres we vse few Rapiers or none at all, but short Swords. To that I answere: Those are insuffi∣cient also, for that they haue no hilts, whereby they are insuffi∣cient in their de∣fence, and espe∣cially for the hād, which being stro∣ken although with averie smal blow, most com∣monly is the losse of a mā, because the force of his hand being taken from him, he is neither able to defend his life, nor greatly to offend his enemy: and againe, since the Rapier-fight hath bene taught, for lacke of pra∣ctise they haue lost the vse of the blow. they teach mē to butcher one another here at home in peace, wherewith they cannot hurt their ene∣mies abrode in warre. For, your Honour well knowes, that when the battels are ioyned, and come to the charge, there is no roome for them
 to drawe their Bird spits, and when they haue them, what can they doe with them? can they pierce his Corslet with the point? can they vn∣lace his Helmet, vnbuckle his Armour, hew a∣sunder their Pikes with a Stocata, a reuersa, a Dritta; a Stramason, or other such like tēpestuous termes? no, these toyes are fit for children, not for men, for stragling boyes of the Campe, to murder poultrie, not for men of Honour to trie the bat∣tell with their foes. Thus I haue (right Honora∣ble) for the trial of the truth, betweene the short Sword and the long Rapier, for the sauing of the liues of our English gallants, who are sent to certaine death by their vncertaine fights, & for abandoning of that mischieuous and imperfect weapon, which serues to kill our friēds in peace, but cannot much hurt our foes in warre, haue I at this time giuen forth these Paradoxes to the view of the world. And because I knowe such straunge opinions had need of stout defence, I humbly craue your Honorable protection, as one in whom the true nobility of our victorious Auncestors hath taken vp his residence. It will sute to the rest of your Honours most noble cō∣plements, to maintaine the defence of their
 weapons whose vertues you possesse. I agrees with your Honourable disposition, to  with fauour what is presented with loue. It  with your Lordships high authority, to weigh with reason, what is fit for marshall . It is an vsuall point of your Honor, which win your Lordship loue in your countrey, to defend the truth in whomsoeuer: and it addeth a supply to that vvhich your Lordship haue of late begun to your vnspeakeable honor and our inestima∣ble benefite, to reduce the  vvith hilts ouer the hands,Why should we leaue the hand naked, since ther∣by our limmes & liues are defen∣ded, our enemies discomforted, wounded, and executed? I see no reason but that the hand should be as well armed and proui∣ded for, as anie other part of the bodie. to the Romaine disci∣pline, no longer then they might draw them vn∣der their armes, or ouer their shoulders. I call or any of these respectes, I rest assured that your Lordship vvill vouchsafe to receiue vvith fauor and maintaine vvith honour these Paradoxes of mine, vvhich if they be shrouded vnder so safe a shield, I vvill not doubt but to maintaine vvith reason amongst the vvise, and proue it by pra∣ctise vpon the ignorant, that there is no certaine defence in the Rapier, and that there is great aduantage in the short Sword against the long Rapier, or all maner of Rapiers in generall, of vvhat length soeuer. And that the short Staffe
 hath the vauntage against the long Staffe of twelue, foureteene, sixteene or eighteene foote long, or of what length soeuer. And against two men vvith their Swordes and Daggers, or two Rapiers, Poiniards & Gantlets, or each of them a case of Rapiers: vvhich vvhether I can per∣forme or not, I submit for triall to your Honors martiall censure, being at all times readie to make it good, in vvhat maner, and against vvhat man soeuer it shall stand vvith your Lordships good liking to appoint. And so I humbly com∣mend this booke to your Lordships vvisedome to peruse, and your Honour to the Highest to protect in all health and happinesse novve and euer.

