



IT is the accustomable vse of this foolish Age (MADAME) to claime Nobilitie vnto it selfe; drawing the Originall therof frō diuers Foun∣tains: some frō the discent of their Pro∣genitors, which the Poët scorned; not thinking that to belong to them which they themselues did not atchieue: Nam genus, & proavos, & quae nō fecimus ipsi Vix ea nostra voco.
Others, wiser than these, affirmed that onlie Vertue did nobilitate; it beeing a gift of the minde, of more worth than anie fleshlie prerogatiue: By which the ancient Romanes Lacedemonians, and Athenians, studied to be famous thorow the world. But what were all these
Cardinall Vertues? (though they could haue attained vnto the perfe∣ction of them) but shining sinnes, (as Sainct AVGVSTINE sayeth) without CHRIST. For true Religion onlie perfecteth Nobilitie, and maketh men partakers of the Diuine Nature, which consisteth in the knowledge of the true God, and his worship, according to his will. This maketh Dauid, who sprang of the base root of Iesse, more famous than Nebuchadnezar; & Salomon to be prefer∣red to Cyrus, Alexander, or Iulius Caesar, euen till this day. And again, since God hath trained vp your Ladiship vnder the hand of a blessed Mother, that yee haue sucked (with your Milke) the knowledge of the Trueth frō a Child, and growing in grace with your years, I wish that as your Lad. is borne noble by birth, and by your singular vertues become more noble; so by the sincere profession of the Trueth yee may be∣come most noble. Therfore I haue pre∣sented these Seauen golden Lockes of Spi∣rituall Vertues to be worne of your L. as Ornamentes (of more worth than
brodered Gold or precious Pearls) vp∣on the hid man of your heart: which will make you more beautifull in the eyes of Iesus Christ, your spiritual Hus∣band, than if ye had all the glory of the worlde. Your spirituall Philistims, who creepe into Noble mens houses, wil la∣bour to rob you of your Ornamentes: therefore beware of Dalilah, and her en∣tising speaches; that yee may holde fast the Trueth to the ende, which ye haue by hereditarie possession; and I trust shall deliuer it to your children. So be∣seeching God to multiplie all the gra∣ces of his Spirit vpon your Lad. with temporall felicitie, and hereafter heape vpon you the eternall weight of glo∣rie, I rest

