

This same is the title of the 4. Psal. Lāmen∣atzeah oftentimes in the Scriptures is taken for the Presidents who are chiefe in any thing▪ as 2. Chron. 18. & 34.18.The sweet singer of Israel giues it to a sweete singer. I thinke it to be best translated, To him that excelleth. Neginoth was an instrument of musick, vp∣on which they played. So they did not on∣ly reade the Psalmes, but also sing them; yea so distinctly, that the people easily might vnderstand them: not so much addicted to the note or tune, as to the matter;Mat. 26.3 as our Sa∣uiour did sing after the Communion; and
Paul commandeth it, Col. 3.16.
Musicke is an Art very pleasant, delecta∣ble and profitable, to stirre vp the affections of man to Gods seruice,The com∣modities of musick. 2. Kin. 3.15 or to restraine the anger and perturbations of our nature, as was in Elizeus, who sought for a minstrell to appease him.
But first we haue to see, that this excellent Psalme is committed to an excellent per∣son, who hath great cunning to put it forth to the vse of the Church; teaching vs here∣by, that spirituall exercises are not to be put into the hands of ignorant dolts, who haue no wisedome or skill to set forth the glorie of their God. For the subiect being most glorious, why should it be concredited to such as haue neither learning not wisdome? And if that singing should haue so worthy instruments, what do ye thinke of the prea∣ching of the Gospell? of which the Apostle saith, Who can be sufficient for those things? Happie then is that Church when learned men are promoted to good places, where∣by the word may be further aduanced. And in a miserable case are those who are com∣mitted to the charge of ignorants,Against ig∣norant and idle prea∣chers. idle bel∣lies, and such like, who are vnfit to take the care of Gods people, for whom they shall
be countable to God at the great day, and Gods vengeance shall be vpon them in this world.
Dauid he aduanceth musick very much, as Solomon also after him;1. Chron. 15.16. and the Musicians were distributed into certaine classes and orders.Col. 3.16. 1▪ Cor. 14.15. The antiquitie and ancientie hereof maketh much for its commendation, for God did inuent it. This is a principall sci∣ence, and yet in hath few aduancers. Mens deafned eares betoken their beastly igno∣rance, who will not suffer themselues to be wakened and roused vp from their security and sleepe.
There are some good Christians chalen∣ged,  who being of a melancholious nature, are thought to abhorre all musicke and mu∣sicall instruments.  But men are deceiued herein: if musicke be free of profanitie and superstition, there is no good man of reli∣gion who cannot but like it well, and de∣light greatly therein. But the auarice of our age, as it hath bin the decay of many scien∣ces, so likewise of this.Nota. The Church being spoiled of her rents, is not able to entertaine this science as it should be; which God supply whē he thinketh time. And this I say not, that I do like either the profanitie of
beastly men, that in stead of heauenly songs sing bawdie ballads; or of such superstitious Papists; who sing and tune Latine words in their Masses, thereby mocking God, and making religion a sport. But the abuse of that science I disallow; the vse I allow and approue, as most necessarie to Gods glorie. And seeing it will be perpetuall in the hea∣uens, why should it not begin on earth? There shall be a naturall, not artificial song; of which we shall sing for euer the song of Moses the seruant of God.Apoc. 15.3 Let vs therefore begin on earth,Nota. learne of our Gamma, and enter into our Alphabet here, that we may be perfect Musitians, when we become per∣fect our selues in glorie. Here let vs sing with grace in our hearts to the Lord,Col. 3 16. reiect∣ing vaine, idolatrous and profane ballads, and sing spiritually vnto the Lord.
When Nathan the Prophet came to him.
Dauid (as is thought) lay a yeare almost in this sinne asleep, till God wakened him by Nathan,Ionah 1.6. as he did Ionas by the Pilot. It is certaine we would sleep vnto death before we awake from sinne, if God did not put vpon vs,Man is ly∣ing asleepe till God waken him and stirre vs vp. We are so benum∣med by the spirit of slumber, and possessed by a lethargie, that all our senses are stupified
till Nathan come and awake vs.
Next, God sends him that which he prai∣ed for, euen a faithful admonisher.Psal. 119. One Pro∣phet cometh to another: yea a greater then himselfe;1. King. 13.18. not as the old Prophet came to the yong at Bethel to deceiue him, but as a fa∣ther to admonish his child.
There should be an holy freedome and libertie among Preachers,Pastors should freely re∣buke the vices one of another each one should freely rebuke another when they see them doing wrong. One should not winke at an other, as most part do; and others being re∣proued, rage mightily, saying with Zidkiah, When went the Spirit of the Lord out of me to thee?1. King. 22.24. Esa. 30.10. They rebuke the rebuker, They say to the Prophet, Prophecie not.
Obserue moreouer, that Nathan cometh first to Dauid, not Dauid to Nathan: the Physitian to the patient, not the patient to the Physitian. Christ himselfe came to the sinners and Publicans, and called them to repentance.
This is against the pride of some,Mat. 9.13. Against the pride and lazinesse of Preachers. and la∣zinesse of others, who will not come or take the paines to visit weake Christians, yea will scarce admit them to their presence when they come, as though they were Prin∣ces. Woe to their pride who come not to
the sicke, and heale not the broken, (as saith the Prophet) but feed themselues with the fat of the sheepe.
Let none of higher gifts despise those of lower. Acts 9.17.God vseth Nathan a Prophet, inferiour to Dauid both in Prophecie, wisedome and other gifts, to be an instrument to warne Dauid. Let none then of greater gifts de∣spise those of lesser. Ananias taught Paul, and here Nathan Dauid.
After he had gone in to Bathsheba. Albeit Dauid thought he had hid himselfe well e∣nough, yet God found him out by Nathan. Adam hid himselfe among the bushes, but God called to him,Gen. 3.8. Where art thou? Let vs not then dreame, that God doth not see vs, and whatsoeuer starting holes we seeke to hide our selues in. The woman lighteth the candle,Luk. 15.4. and findeth the lost pennie; and our Shepheard will seeke his lost sheepe, and bring it home againe. No wither can we go from the all-seeing eye of God.
Gone in to Bathsheba. As Dauid was an example of the frailtie of mans nature, and Nathan of a faithfull Preacher, so Dauid set∣teth down what euils do come of the beau∣tie of women, which is conioyned with im∣pudencie and leuitie. For if she had not wa∣shed her selfe naked before the pallace, and
consented so readily to the King,Against the impudency of women▪ that he should come in to her (a filthy action spo∣ken in cleane termes, as Christians should do the like) there had not bin such abhomi∣nable crimes committed. She representeth many women in our days, shamelesly haun∣ting such places where they may giue occa∣sion to mē to suit after thē,Gen. 38.1 as Tamar sitting by the high way when Iudah came by. This doth not disgrace honest women, but ra∣ther giueth them matter to glorifie God, who hath not suffered them to be deborde in their filthy affections. As the wise mari∣ner seeing others by throwing themselues in danger suffer shipwrack,Simil, thanketh God who kept him from the like; so honest wo∣men may praise God that he hath preser∣ued their honestie, which was not in their owne hand.
Beautie is not to be euill thought of, be∣ing a benefit and blessing of God:Beautie a blessing of God, if not abused, but the abuse of beautie▪ by the tentation of the di∣uell and deceitfulnesse of our owne nature, when Satan allureth vs to dishonour God, and destroy that goodly peece of workman∣ship which God hath made vp in vs, by that which should haue bin an instrument to prouoke vs to Gods seruice.Pro. 31.30▪ Beautie is de∣tfull.
Absoloms beautie deceiued him,c. Sa. 14.15 and many with him haue beautie, but haue no grace to vse it well.
Finally, I see both the persons are noted by their names, and not obscured: wherein the Spirit of God in his word, as in a true mirror and glasse, representeth euery ones naturall face, either in their beautie or in their blemishes. So Iohn Baptist spoke par∣ticularly to Herod,Math. 14.4. and the Prophets to their Princes. They closed not vp their reproofes vnder generalities, that they might inter∣prete them any way which pleased them best; but called blacke, blacke, sowre, sowre, and sweete,whosoeuer sin openly, ought opē∣ly to be rebuked. sweete. For particular applicati∣ons to eminent persons is most requisite; and those that sin openly, should be openly rebuked, that others may stand in awe.
