



AT the divulging of my former Booke, (Right Honorable), there were many great and vaunting speeches uttered by the pretended Catholickes, as if forthwith, or at least, very speedily, it should have beene fully and sufficiently answered. And indeede within a while after, came forth an an∣swere, not to the whole Booke, but onely to a part thereof; namely, to the first two Chap∣ters contayned in the first part of it, made by one that calleth himselfe Iohn at Stile: who knowing (as it seemeth), the weakenesse of his owne an∣swere,
 therein promised, a better and further an∣swere, that should then shortly come forth to the whole Booke: which should be so substan∣tially done, as that it should be suteable and cor∣respondent to the three Conditions required by me. This maner of answer, to the whole booke, promised so long since, is the thing that I have all this while expected; & in expectation where∣of, I have hitherto deferred to publish a Reply to any other answere. But having now thus long expected it in vaine, & not knowing when it wil appeare, or whether ever, or never: I thinke it not amisse, in the interim, to reply to that answere, which marcheth and masketh under the name of Iohn at Stile, as having no other, nor better, as yet, to reply unto. Where, first of all, it were fit to learne, what this mans right and proper name is. But because hee is so loth to declare it, I care not much to know it; for it is not somuch the man, as the matter he delivereth, that I regarde. Howbeit, for his owne credite, and the credite of his cause, (if any credite had belonged unto it), it had beene much better for him to have put no name at all unto that his worke, then a wrong, false, and counterfeit name, as hee hath done. For, if in the verie first entrance, hee thus
 misdemeaneth himselfe, and feareth not to utter so great an untruth: What good dealing, or sin∣cere truth, may we expect from him, in the resi∣due of his discourse? Wherein also, whilst hee strived to make more hast then good speede, hee hath shewed himselfe to bee, like canis festinans, caecos edens catulos. For, howsoever he thrusteth himselfe forward, and will needs take upon him, to be Iohannes ad oppositum: yet he speaketh very little, or nothing ad propositum. Insomuch, that sundry, by reason of the futilitie and frivolousnes of that his answere, have thought it not worthy or meete to bee replied unto. Neverthelesse, be∣cause all be not of that understanding and judge∣ment, as to bee able to discerne the frivolousnes and weakenesse of it: and that the pretended Ca∣tholickes, doe, for their parts, so highly esteeme, approve, and applaude it, (for Regnat inter caecos Luscus): and for that I am also, therein, so parti∣cularly touched and taxed: but chiefly and espe∣cially, for that Gods Religion, and his Majesties Supremacie, (which two things ought ever to be most deare unto us all,) be there purposely and professedly encountred and oppugned: I could doe no lesse, in good dutie, and for all these re∣spects, but make and publish this my Reply unto
 it: for the further confirmation of the Prote∣stants in those two maine and most weightie points: & for the further confutation also, & con∣viction of the Papists, & making them yet more and more inexcusable, if after so cleare & abun∣dant evidence of truth, (and consequently against all good Conscience,) they will still bee wilfull, stubborne, and unreformed herein: which yet I trust they will not be. For, they know, that du∣rum est contra stimulos calcitrare:Act. 9.5. Act 5.29, Proverb. 21.30. and that there is no hope, that ever they shall or can prevaile, that be , that is, Fighters and Contenders against God, and his Religion, or any of his Sacred and Divine Ordinances. Yea, in such a case, what is fitter, then duro nodo, durus cuneus? And so sayth Tertullian,Tertul. lib. cont. Gnostic. cap 21. Aug. Epist. 48. & Epist. 204. that duritia vincenda est, non suadenda; and this rule S. Augustine also giveth & teacheth, that, men in error, are first to be taught, admo∣nished and instructed; but if after all this, they will notwithstanding (without any ground of sufficient reason), be and continue perverse and obstinate, then must terror, punishment, and co∣active Lawes, be put in execution, for the reclay∣ming of them. For, Qui Phreneticum ligat & Le∣thargicū excitat, ambobus molestus, ambos amat, saith the same S. Augustine. But of this point concer∣ning
 the authoritie of the Regall & Civill sword, and power coactive, to be extended against re∣fractary and contemptuous offenders, (aswell in matters Ecclesiasticall, and touching Religion, as in matters temporall, and concerning the Com∣mon-wealth), more is spoken in my former Booke, and in this also afterward, upon occasion given by mine Adversarie: and therefore I shall not neede, heere to speake any further of it, especially to your Lordshippe, whose wisedome can, and doth easily perceive, not onely how lawfull, but how expedient, requisite, and neces∣sary also it is, to be extended and used in his due time and place. These things, (Right Honora∣ble), I am humbly bould to Dedicate unto your Lordshippe: Both, because unto you it is, that under his most Excellent Majestie, the chiefe care of matters concerning the good of this King∣dome, doth appertayne: And because also, such is knowne to be your noble and pious disposition, as that a worke of this sorte, you are ever most readie and willing to accept and patronize. God (if it be his will) convert the Papists of this Kingdome from their errors, to his truth: and preserve your Lordshippe to his glorie, the good of his Church, the benefit of this Common∣weale,
 and to the increase of your owne honor in this life, and to your everlasting happinesse in the life to come, through IESVS CHRIST. Amen.

