



Right Honourable,
THE continuall fa∣uours J receiued from your L. at my being in FRANCE, doe (and shall al∣wayes) binde me to serue and honor you in what J may. And now pur∣posing with my selfe to consecrate to this our Age and to Posteritie, the memorie of Henry the 4. the
 late French King, (whose most deplorable Murder, sorrow it selfe can neuer sufficiently bewaile) J esteemed the Dedication thereof, (as well in respect of my owne par∣ticular dueties to your L. as in re∣gard of the Qualitie of the Sub∣iect, whereof J write) to belong to you, more then in Part. For with whome may my Narrations of the wonderfull passages of his Life hope to finde more gracious acceptance, then with your L. whom J knew to be so great an honourer of his Per∣son, an eye-witnesse of his Royall Parts, and one that had receiued so many ample fauours from him be∣ing aliue?
The Circumstances of his be∣ing Murdered, (J cannot call it
 his Dying, for they Die not, but are made to Die, who are so Mur∣dered) are best knowen to your L. whose speedie Letters gaue our STATE the first notice of his Fall. J onely now set them downe to pro∣pose to your Thoughts the Con∣sideration of Humane frailtie, and the Weaknesse euen of grea∣test Greatnesse, so often as you call to minde that KING, then whom, the Princes of the Christian world cannot haue a more ample or apposite Subiect to meditate vpon.
It was about Christmas last past (your L. did then too through∣ly thinke of it J am sure, euer after to forget it) that the rumour of our Kings death was spread ouer the
 French Court; which (though it were but a rumour, and against which all those then about you oppo∣sed themselues) strooke you notwith∣standing so full of dolour and af∣fliction of spirit, that J suppose how much your Noble and gentle nature was wounded with the sight of this Kings wounds. Two nota∣ble occurrences, that in your Lordships Trauels you should heare of the murder of your owne King, (which prooued otherwise) and be an eye-witnesse of the Mur∣der of another, which was too true; and both of them the greatest Kings of Europe.
Your Losse in Him was great; great, in loosing a KING, from whom you had receiued so gracious
 respects; great, in cutting off your Honourable purpose of follow∣ing his Fortunes in those Germane Warres, wherein you should haue seene so warrelike Lessons read by so Excellent and profound a Master.
But GOD (whose Prouidence and Power is as infallible, as vn∣resistable) hath diuerted him from finishing that great Affaire, which he hath left (I hope) to be consum∣mated by another. I cease from further troubling your Lordship, and so rest

