



MAny good Captains (Right Reverende and my very good Lord) thinke it, not their duety, to fight thēselues, but only to giue cōmand to others: and Physici∣ans without blame prescribe to others that which they apply not to themselues: but of the preacher of the worde of God it is justly required, no lesse in life & practise, thē in speech or wri∣ting, to expresse the soundnes of doctrine, or, to speake it in Homers words,
.
as by his doctrine hee must preach to our cares, so by his example hee must preach to our eies: that so by both he might lay hole of our hartes, as by the light of the one hee must direct vs that we stray not, so by the footsteps of the other he must lead vs that

we stumble not, & by the harmony of both affect vs that we slacke not. Thus if he doe, not only teaching, as Christ taught, but also Mat. . 19. living as he teacheth others to liue, hee shall be called great in the kingdome of heavē: he shal be eckoned amōg the hers of the Christā common wealth. By hid doctrine hee shall win assent and obedience: by his example, imitation and loue: and by both admirati∣on and reverence. That the author of this learned and godly sermon is one of these, there is no need to prooue: nor how his life and practise, as if it had beene the other twin of the same mother, or the other hand of the same body, hath alway been answe∣rable to the doctrine of humility, which in this sermon is handled at large, although I envy not that there are very many argu∣ments to make this point plaine: yet I could wish there were not so many by one: and that, seeing his humble and modest minde may & doth otherwise so easily appear, he would spare to shew it, by his vnwillingnes to publish his learned labours: by which at this time others are forced to publish some parte of them for him without making him acquainted therwith. As for the rest seeing it must be so, we are content ▪ even vntill God shall put it into

his minde, to stay for that for which hee is in debt to vs (,Rom. 1. 14. every man that hath received of God is a debter to Christ in GOD and to the1, Cor. 3. 22. 23. church in Christ) but for this little streame of the great river of his godly learning we hope at length wee shall not only obtaine pardon, for publishing it vvithout giving him notice (for so heretofore it hath hap∣pened to many learned men, and as Possi∣ds reporteth, even to Augustine in manie of his workes) but also deserue thankes of the whole Church of God, whē the auctor by this experience in the lesser, gessing howe his greater paines will bee accepted, shall beginne to dare to bring foorth the ampler & more laborious fruits of his lear∣ned and religious study.
As surely meete it is that he which is so well armed and provided should not feare to venter: and that the lesse the certainety and the shorter the continuance of the life of man is, the sooner the common wealth & Church should enioy the life & vertue of him that is excellent. If vvee will vse none but Pompey (saith Catulus in a deliberation of heaping imployments vpon none but Pompey) what if wee loose Pompey, whom thē shall we vse? it is not good (saide the Lacede∣monian

captaine that overthrew the Em∣pire of the Athenians) that Grece shoulde haue but one ie: and as the proverbe tells vs it is good to haue more ankers thē oue for our ship to rest vpō. For though it be good if there be any (though but one) to say with than Amazon in Virgl.

Audeo, et Aenead promitto occurrere tur∣mae,
Solus: et intest as aces contra obvius re.

yet it is better, if there bee another to re∣plie out of the same place in the Poet.
Mecum partire laborem
Better I meane, not only because if one die the other may succeed & fish that which he leaues vuperfect: as Homer notes it as a comforte to Protefilou his souldiers, after the death af their captaine,
:
But also that, if the one fall, the other, as it is in the 4. of Ecclesiastes might help him vp: that as Euryalus. & Nisus, they might be mutual aide and comfort each to other:
His amor vnus era, parr{que} in bella ruebāt:
That as the tvvo brethren in the same Poe, Pandaus and Bas so they might stand forth the one on the one side of the gate, the other on the other, iointly stop∣ping the entrance & irruption of the com∣mon

enemie.

Daxtrâ et laevâ pro turribus astent:
Armas ferro, et crstis capi alta corusci.

for, to say the truth neither can the quick∣sighted eie of the sunne () be throughly circum∣spect in all things: nay he is not able to see round about any thing: whence it is saide,
Etiam capillus vus abet vmbram suam.
neither was Hectors speech of Achilles emu∣lation or envy, rather then truth, whene he tould his souldiers,


.

He must be greater then any Achilles (for it is proper to God alone) which would be a∣ble to bee alone. Even Adam in Paradise had neede, and everie creature hath neede of a helper. I confesse (the thankes be vnto God) there are many helpers in our church, ioyning hand with him vpon whō out eies are chiefely fixte: even more then those 9. Peers, of whom, when Achilles ceased from warre in his disconte, Aax makes boast to Hector: that without the hardy Achilles there was choise enough of one to encounter him .
Yea, if our Latona had but two to maintain

her quarrell yet Latonaes two would easily bee sufficient against Niobes never so ma∣ny:
.
But if the best among vs continue thus dif∣fident of their owne ability (how confidēt of the cause soëver they be) it i to bee fea∣red, least hee which as yet hath, or may haue many helpers, bee at length either left alone, or without a fitte helper. Such a one as this autor (to speake without the dis∣prise of any) sure would be. As he that is not partiall even in this his godly Sermon may discerne him: as he can know a I yon by his claw, and Hercules by his singer.
.
as he that is not in turba may by feeling bee found out by him that is blinde.

,
.
.

I speake even of the  which in this ser∣mon appeareth: whether we cōsider the di∣rectnes of his method, & distinct ordering and handling of so many chiefe pointes of diine meditation and singular vse, or his zeale in affection, or his discreet moderati∣on n applying, or delightfull copiousnes in . I speake the more sparingly of

him because I speak as it were to his face: & because I speake to you (Right Reverend) which haue knowne him so long▪ and ever since you knewe him, haue loved him so deatly. But I would his modesty woulde not forget her selfe in one thing, nor make him in iudging of himselfe to attribute (al∣most against modesty) more to his owne iudgment, in which he is too severe to him∣selfe, then to your ps. farre more indiffe∣rent estimation. whose intirenes of affectiō towards him, seeing it first arose frō iudge∣ment, cannot bee any better argument a∣gainst the soundnesse of the iudgemente, then the sweetenesse of the fruite is against the soundnesse of the roote. For why shoulde hee suffer his learned papyrs to bee like the hidden riches of a covetous man, good for none vntill the ovvners death? as if it vvere not with the workes of learned men, that are published after the auctors death, as with children which are borne after their fathers death () or as if since falshood now hath gotten so strong a heade, the shamefast modesty of the learned vvere not to bee contente to scken her bridle, and to suffer zeale to vse the spurre. It is not shamefastnesse

nor her daughter silence, of which they nowe have neede. Both of which, as they are excuses for me diocrity, so they are pre∣iudices against excellency: as they are al∣way the wisedome of fools, so in such times as these are, they are the folly of the wise. Neither is it much more excusable, in such times of nede, for the learned to hide themselues with Achilles, then for the vn∣learned to thst themselues forward with Thersites. As much as the one kinde over∣shooes by boldnes, so much the other fals short by fearfulnes, both of them are much amisse. And therfore Xenophō in his third booke of Memorables, makes Socrater to ke no lesse care to disswade Charmides, the vncle of Plato the Philosopher, from refraining himselfe, then to disswade Glau∣co, the brother to the same Plato, frō thru∣sting himselfe forwardes, to medle in the buisines of the publike state. The former of these was a man of very much worth, but of too little boldnes: the later was a man of very much boldnes, but of too little worh. The fault of the later was more odious but the fault of the former was more hurtfull, more reason to blame the later: but more neede to blame the former. The later by too much contemning others, and magni∣fying

himselfe, made himselfe cōtemtible: but the former by too much regarding o∣thers and contemning himselfe made him∣selfe vnprofitable. The later by his boldnes gained the dispraise which he might haue avoided▪ but the former by his shamefast∣nes avoided the commendation which he might haue gaed▪ asmuch as the one nee ded the bridle, so much the other needed the spurre: the one for his owne sake, that he might leaue drawing on harme vppon himselfe: the other for the cōmon wealths sake: that he might leaue of with holding the publique good. For so is every vertue and especially the godly learning of the chieffest among vs: the honestum is proper, but the profit is cōmō: it is  it is Thesaur{us} ecclesiae: I meane not for any In dulgences after they are dead, but for presēt vse while they live. By how much the ra∣ther I hope, that every one which loues the truth (seeing himselfe also hath a part in e∣very common good) wil both by his grate∣full acceptance encorage, and by his praier to God aide & further the reverend auctor of this godly sermon: that neither sickenes, nor any other barre may hinder him from performing, for the advancing of the truth, farre greater thinges, then as yet appeare▪

for my selfe, as I could willingly, thinke of my self that I am : So I will alway pay him, & alway owe him al the duties of loue▪ for which vnto him ever since my child∣hood: and to you (right reverend) for these many yeares, I am very deeply engaged. Of your Lp. hee could say, in his preface to an Gene most profitable work of yours▪ that he wold be your remēbrācer . The argumentes which there hee vses, with the whole cōparisō, in which he prefers writing before publik preachig by word of mouth may be returned vpon himselfe: with that which Pomponius in Plutarch, dehorting his sonne Numa from private obscurity, tells him▪ that it is God which calles him, & sufrs not his giftes to sleepe in him: that the meanager of publique buisines is as it were the hande of God: that hee must not , play the fugitiue, or deny God such service as in offng occasions and guing abilities he requires: nor aban∣don the , the fielde & matter of good actions▪ But my purpose is not to tell him what he should do, as indeede it beseemes me not, but onely to signifie our desire cō∣ing wth your Lps. of whose desire, &  desire I am not altogeather ig∣norant:

and by whose careful remembring him I hope at the length he will shew him∣selfe . that so we might bee beholding to your Lp. not onely for your own excellēt labours; but in some sort also for his: as we are not a little to S. Hila∣ry, and to Ctesiphon, to the one for stirring vp S. Austine in the western countries, and to the other for stirring vp S. Hieronym in the Eastern coūtries; against the spreading infection of Pelagius. this I hope hereafter to see. Meane while I haue beene bolde to present this parcell of his learned paines to your Lordship: to whom I know it shall be right welcome, even for the auctors sake, as to all that know him.
.
Thus commending your Lordship to the gracious goodnes of the almighty, that you may long continue a principall instrument of his glory, and of the good of his church: I humbly take my leaue. 
frō Corpus Christy Colledge in Oxford Nov. 12. 1602.

