



MAy it please your Grace,
This History, as for the raritie and varietie of the subiect, so much more for the judicious Eyes it is like to vnder∣goe, and most of all for that great Name, whereof it dareth implore Protection, might and ought to haue beene clad in better robes then my rude military hand can cut out in Paper Ornaments. But be∣cause, of the most things therein, I am no Compiler by hear∣say, but haue beene a reall Actor; I take my selfe to haue a propertie in them: and therefore haue beene bold to chal∣lenge them to come vnder the reach of my owne rough Pen. That, which hath beene indured and passed through with hardship and danger, is thereby sweetned to the Actor, when he becometh the Relator. I haue deeply hazarded my selfe in doing and suffering, and why should I sticke to hazard my reputation in Recording? He that acteth two parts is the more borne withall if he come short, or fayle in one of them. Where shall we looke to finde a Iulius Caesar, whose at∣chieuments shine as cleare in his owne Commentaries, as they did in the field? I confesse, my hand, though able to weild a weapon among the Barbarous, yet well may trem∣ble

in handling a Pen among so many Indicious: especially when I am so bold as to call so piercing, and so glorious an Eye, as your Grace, to view these poore ragged lines
Yet my comfort is, that heretofore honorable and vertu∣ous Ladies, and comparable but amongst themselues, haue of∣fred me rescue and protection in my greatest dangers: even in forraine parts, I haue felt reliefe from that sex. The beaute∣ous Lady Tragabigzanda, when I was a slaue to the Turkes, did all she could to secure me. When I overcame the Bashaw of Nalbrits in Tartaria, the charitable Lady Callmata supplyed my necessities. In the vtmost of many extremities, that blessed Pokahontas, the great Kings daughter of Virginia, oft saved my life. When I escaped the crueltie of Pirats and most furious stormes, a long time alone in a small Boat at Sea, and driven ashore in France, the good Lady Madam Chanoyes, bountifully assisted me.
And so verily these my adventures haue tasted the same influence from your Gratious hand, which hath given birth to the publication of this Narration. If therefore your Grace shall daigne to cast your eye on this poore Booke, view I pray you rather your owne Bountie (without which it had dyed in the wombe) then my imperfections, which haue no helpe but the shrine of your glorious Name to be sheltered from cen∣sorious condemnation. Vouchsafe some glimpse of your ho∣norable aspect, to accept these my labours; to protect them vnder the shadow of your excellent Name: which will ina∣ble them to be presented to the Kings royall Maiestie, the most admired Prince Charles, and the Queene of Bohemia: your sweet Recommendations will make it the worthier of their good countenances. And as all my endevours are their due tribute: so this Page shall record to posteritie, that my service shall be to pray to God, that you may still continue the renowned of your sexe, the most honored of men, and the highly blessed of God.

