



HONORABLE
IF the Lord did not like, that men should sorake and gather their fields, as nothing might remaine for the poore to glean after: Assuredly, him∣self
 suffereth not the great and glo∣rious Field of his Word, to be so reaped downe by any (beeing a Fountain of liuing waters, neuer to be drawn dry: and contai∣ning in it the very hid wisdom of God). But something remai∣neth, which the poore may come af∣ter, and gather vp. I confesse, that many of Gods worthy Seruants haue taken paines in this kind, and that vpon this subiect, The Doctrin of the Sacrament, to the great bene∣fit of those who desire to be acquain¦ted with the same, how to come pre∣pared vnto the Lords Table: yet as a poore man, and one that hath a great charge, I haue come after, and
 gathered a gleane or two out of the Lords field, for me and mine, from the which none are forbidden, but rather, inuited to come, and take freely. And albeit, it be but a little that I haue gathered, yet with the VViddowes Oyle and Meale, which also was but little, may not∣withstanding (by Gods blessing) bee good releefe vnto the poorer sort, that want better prouision: Whatsoeuer it be, to your Honors it comes for shelter and protection▪ And why should I any whit doubt of your Honourable acceptance, hauing known you (Syr) from your youth, to be both religiously educa∣ted, and for your sober, studious,
 and most religious Conuersation, worthily held your Countries Ho∣nour. And for your Honourable LADY, aboue many of her ranke, especially in those partes, God hath seasoned her affection with loue to the Trueth, and ten∣der respect vnto the despised Ministery amongst you: who re∣ioyce in you both, and expect that as God hath honoured you aboue o∣thers, so you shold still countenance his seruants, and shine as lights, in the midst of a crooked and peruerse generation. And when the Lorde shall call you (Syr) into greater im∣ployment in the Common-wealth, the Church will expect, you should
 promote her causes, and stand still in the maintenance of pure religi∣on. Goe on therefore I beseech you still, in that good way you haue be∣gun: VVhat though ye find little encouragement from the World, your reward is with the Lord. It was the great prayse of Righteous Lot, that he liued Righteously in that age, and in that place: I leaue the application. These beeing the dayes fore-tolde by our blessed Sauiour, where∣in men, as in the dayes of Noah,Luk. 17.26.27. and Lot, doe Eate and Drinke, Buy, Build, and Plant, &c. Altogether vnmind∣full of him who is readie
 to come as a Theefe in the Night: At what time they onely shall be blessed that watch.
I haue endeauoured in the Sermons following, to shew men the way how to perfourme a∣right, one of the most excel∣lent partes of Gods worship, the receiuing of the Sacrament of Christs Supper: wherein I haue laboured to proue the great necessi-of a godly preparation that must be made thereunto, wherein it doeth consist, the manes to be vsed to Communicate worthily As also, the great hurt and danger that is like to follow the vnworthy receiuing of the same.

These are the things that are here offered vnto you. I confesse, you de∣serue a better oblation, then the ten∣der of this small Booke: But may I adde, but one graine to your godly care of a Christian life, with which I offer my most inward affections, I haue my expectation I know your sufficiencie in this kind, aboue ma∣ny of my profession, yet I rest assu∣red, you will not refuse the helpe of those whose function and calling it is to attend thereon: and in an humble maner offers the same vn∣to you.
And so I commend you both to that God,Iude 24 who is able to keepe you, that you fall not: and
 to that VVorde of his grace,Act. 20.32. Luk. 10.42. which as it hath taught you, to chuse the good part, that shal not be taken from you so is able, to build you vp fur∣ther, and to giue you an in∣heritance amongst those that are sanctified. And rest
Prittlewell this 18. of Nouember 1620.

