



IN reading of Authors either divine or hu∣mane, Deare Madame, men haue ever propoū∣ded to themselues diffe∣rent endes according as they haue beene divers∣ly affected; which is not to bee wondred at, saithSenee ep. 109. the most sage heathen, sith in one and the same meddow the oxe seekes grasse, the dogge a hare, the storke a snake or lizard.Bernard. in Cantie. serm. 36. Bernard the best author that lived in so bad a time, reduceth these endes to fiue. There are, saith he, some that desire to know only that they might knowe, and this is fil∣thy curiosity; and there are some that desire to knowe that they themselues might bee knowne, and this is filthy vanity; and there are some that desire to knowe that they may
sell their knowledge, and this is filthie gree∣dinesse, and there are some that desire to knowe that they may edifie others and this is charitie, and there are some that dsire to knowe that they themselues may bee edified, nd this is wisdome. So that of these fiue ndes of knowledge onely the two latter are commendable, namely, when we covet know¦ledge either to better our selues or others in vertue and pietie. Which two endes for my owne part I haue through Gods grace ever principally intended in the course of my poor studies, seriously considering with my selfe how vaine even the lawfull knowledge of al other things is without the knowledge of those things which concerne our owne wel∣fare and happinesse: which your Ladyshippe may finde expressed with profitable parti∣cularitie in the second section of the first Chapter of this Treatise. Now because there is nothing the knowledge whereof so neerely toucheth vs as of our misery, and true and effectuall remedies against our misery, there∣fore haue I in these my first labors published in print made choice of that argument, not only to edifie others, but also to edifie my selfe, and to haue in a readinesse necessarie antidots and preservatiues against such cros∣ses as I both heretofore haue felt, and also must feele still as long as my habitation is in
this vale of teares. Touching the manner of my handling this so important a subiect I may say asIust Lips. Politic. in prooemio. a great Scholler of these times said of a worke of his of another nature, that all things in this Treatise are mine, and no∣thing mine: all things mine in regard of the collection and disposition of them, & nothing mine in regard of the things thēselues, which I haue taken out of others, or at least very little mine. I held this course best for sundry reasons which I cannot but impart to your good Ladyship. First hereby I laid a necessi∣ty vpon my selfe to ranke and put in order my best observatiōs in reading both humane and divine authors concerning these two so materiall points before specified, namely mās miserie, and his reliefe. Secondly distrusting myne owne sufficiencie to handle any matter laudable out of mine owne meditations, I thought it good to make my selfe beholden to others, whose names & credit could not but procure authoritie to the worke and stir vp attention in the readers. Thirdly forasmuch as it is impossible for a man to avoid concur∣rence and coincidence both of notions and tearmes with others that haue written long before, which in this malignant age of ours might breed suspicion both of theft & vaine glory, as if I had robbed others of their medi∣tations, and would deriue the praise thereof
to my selfe, I haue therefore alleaged the au∣thors themselues where I needed not, in ve∣ry many things which mine owne thoughts suggested vnto me. As for the stile, saving where I tie my selfe to the words of others, it is plaine and familiar without pompe, art, or affectation, which I naturally as much abhor as any man living: and that specially in such an argument as this, where I labor to com∣fort my selfe and others against the two maine branches of mans miserie, the evils of paine, and the evils of fault, that is, the evils we suffer, and the evils which we doe, sinne, and the punishments for sinne.Fab. Quin tilian. Instit Orator. lib. 9 c. 3. & l. 11. cap. 1. The verie heathen Orator hath wisely observed that they are altogether vnworthy of mercy, that can talke arteficially of their misery: &Arnob. cō∣tra Gentes lib. 1. a Christian author well saith, that when wee deale in matters that cannot stand with af∣fectation & ostentatiō, that is, that admit no florishes of art, vnlesse men will bewray pal∣pable both absurdity and hypocrisie, we must regard what is said, not with what delight it is said. For it is an argument of too vaine and wanton a mind to seeke for pleasure in earnest and important matters. Now as for the reasons that haue moved me to dedicate these meditations to your Ladyshippe, some∣thing must be said thereof, I am not ignorant that men in the dedications of their labours
are led with sundry and very different re∣spects; some intend the eternizing of their fame and memorie to whome they dedicate their writings, as we read of that intolerable arrogant AppionPlinius na∣tur. hist. prae∣fat ad Ves∣pasian. who was wont to brag that he made all them immortall to whome he vouchsafed to intitle any of his books. But as for this benefit, nether doth your Ladyship esteeme it, whose thoughts are not confined within the compasse of this world were it eternall, nor can I bestow it, being so meane and obscure, that it were madnesse in me to thinke that I could ennoble others by anie monuments of mine, although otherwise wish, I were as able to doe it, as I know your Ladiship worthy thereof, & that as heSen ep 23 saith of Pomponius Atticus, Cicero's letters will not suffer the name of Articus to pe∣rish, so it were in my power to perpetuate your memorie. Others by their dedications hope to extort some benevolence or gift from their benefactors, neede beeing, if I may so speake, the fatall penance of most Schollers. And indeedGulielmus Xylander as Lewen Clai. us reorts praefat. in Dionem a se editum. a worthie Scholler of our time (an eternall blot and reproach to the time) confessed to a friend of his, that famine not fame had caused him to publish divers of his workes But neither was this any motiue with me herein, sith your ingenuous bounty towards my selfe, and others (so farre as your
intricated and distracted state will permit) is so open that it rather needs restraint then provocation, or excitation, and for my owne particular, it hath ever beene far beyond not only my desert, but also my desire. But to come to the more ordinary endes of such dedicati∣ons, they are principally three, comfort, honor duty, or rather discharge of duty, all which I confesse, haue prevailed with me, in the de∣dication of these my slender discourses vnto your Lady ship. Many haue not only dedica∣ted their writings, but directed their whole Treatises to such as they desired to comfort, asPlutarch. consolat ad Apollonium Plutarch,Senee con¦solat. ad Po∣lyb. Abin. Martiam. Seneca, and others. Now this Treatise of mine, tēding only to comfort vs in generall against all misery, wherevnto our life in this fraile and transitory world is subiect, I haue dedicated the same to your Ladyship, that if it afford any vse of that na∣ture, your Ladiship might principally haue the benefitte thereof, whose almost insup∣portable crosses yea without great measure of grace, meerely insupportable, stand not a little in need thereof: I must in discreation o∣mit particulars, which are to well knowne to them that know you, & your state. Secōd∣ly, whereas many in their dedications, as much as in them lie, seek to honor their ver∣tues to whom they intitle their works, I pro∣fesse, that I haue here in much respected the
same, in behalfe of your Ladiship. For ha∣ving beene a long time an eye witnesse of your vertuous and religious conversation, & occasionally as it were enforced to take no¦tice of the manifold and excellent graces of God shining in you, I could not but most wil∣lingly imbrace any opportunitie to giue some publike testimonie therevnto, and a fitter could not occur then the publishing of this Treatise. And yet here I must doe you wrong by omitting particulars, who of your exces∣siue modestie would hold your selfe wronged if I should in particular giue you but your due praises, and specifie your most eminent vertues. I therefore rather chuse to wrong you indeed, then you should conceiue and complaine that you are wronged. Lastly, as for obligation and duty, mine towardes your Ladishippe is so greate, that this con∣sideration alone without any other motiue would haue beene sufficient to make mee straine my best indeavours to the highest, to strike out some part of my scoare, if paper payment may bee currant, and verball ac∣knowledgement may satisfie for reall be∣nefittes, which indeed cannot bee, but by the favourable acceptance of generous and noble mindes, who deeme that merce∣narie beneficence is no beneficence. Of which temper knowing your Ladiships spirit
to be, I haue beene encouraged to shift out by this kinde of beggerly recompence. I heare therefore, deare Madame, present vnto you the Anatomie of my best thoughts, entreating your favorable acceptation thereof. To you are they due aboue al others, such as they are being the fruits of that tree, to wit my vn∣worthie selfe, that hath continually bin wa∣tered and cherished by your manifold Chri∣stian favors. But here againe, I must for∣beare particulars, least I should be offensiue; and therefore I end, mosi affectionately com∣mending your good Ladyship to the grace of God in Christ. Barstable in Devonshire 1609. Ianuarie 1. alias Newyeares day.

