


GENTLEMEN, there was neuer Author
nor practised Gunner euer able (as I am per∣swaded)
to describe at full, or could shew per∣fectly
the efficacie and force that Gunpowder
is able to accomplish, it being a mixture of
such a wonderfull operation and effect, as by dayly experience
we find. And although diuerse men in diuerse ages, haue
inuented diuerse engines and Ordinance for offensiue and
defensiue seruices by Gunpowder to be perfourmed, yet none
hath nor could euer attaine to that full perfection, to know
precisely what straunge effects the said mixture is able to
worke. Also diuers learned men haue inuented many ex∣cellent
rules pertaining to the Art of Gunnerrie, and a great
many of them haue and do erre in the principals of their in∣uentions:
and the cause is, for want of due practise therein.
For the Art of Gunnery doth require great practise and ex∣perience,
to declare the rare secrets thereof; which is not for
meane men to attaine to, for that the charges is great.
And albeit, I am the least able of a great many to take a∣ny
matter in hand, pertaining to the same Art, being but a
sworne scholler thereto, and my abilitie far vnable to put in
practise that I would: yet because I haue serued a prentize∣hood
twise told since I tooke my oth, and neuer hearing of a∣ny
that hath compiled any Arithmeticall rules or secrets
(which is the fountaine head from whence all Arts or scien∣ces
do spring) into one volume, I thought it my part and duty
(according to my skill) to do the best I could therein, for the

benefit of others, and that in the plainest maner I could, that
such as are not well seene in numbers Art, might the sooner
vnderstand the same. And albeit I haue herein shewed but a
few Arithmeticall conclusions belonging to the Art of Gun∣nerie,
yet the experienced Gunner or skilfull Mathemati∣tian,
by these few may deuise a great many moe, for seruice
offensiue and defensiue, by Arithmeticke and Geometrie to
be performed. All which conclusions (gentle Readers) I haue
thought best to frame in easie questions, shewing the answers
or resolutions thereof. And although they be but meanly fra∣med,
I hope you will accept the same in good part, the rather,
for that they are a yong Gunners practises. And if there be
ought herein that may profit you, yeeld me your friendly cen∣sure,
I craue no more: or if in any place I haue erred, either
gently correct it, or passe it with silence, or in friendly sort ad∣monish
me thereof, I deserue no lesse.
There is a great many that can spie a mote in another mans
eye, that had neede to haue a beame pulled from their owne:
some wil scan verie curiously, and sooner find two faults then
amend one. If you be of that mind (friendly readers) I mind
not to make you my iudges.
The widowes mite was aswell accepted as the gifts of the
wealthie. A souldier in Alexanders campe, in the dry desert
presented the king his helmet full of cold water, saying, if I
could haue gotten better drinke, your Grace should haue had
part: the which the king gently accepted and liberally re∣warded,
answering, I wey not thy gift, but thy willing mind.
But I seeke no reward for my trauell, but onely you will wey
my mind is willing to do my countrey good, and to profite the
readers: and not to carpe with Momus, nor disdaine vvith
Zoilus, nor sooth vvith Zantippus. In so doing you shall en∣courage
me to set penne to paper, and to flie a higher pitch

pertaining to this new found Arte. Othervvise, if you spit
out your spite against me for my good vvill, I will as meane∣ly
account of your malice, and so as I find you, looke to haue of
me. 
From my poore house in Barwicke vpon Tweed this 2.
of May, 1600. 
