


INasmuch as I
vnderstande, that both in
fauourable perusing the
dooings of other men, and
also in knowledge of the li∣berall
Sciences, you excell
all others, wherof I my self
also haue had so good expe∣riēce,
so as I cannot seeme to haue presumed vnadui¦sedly
vpon your courtesie, any further then becom∣meth
me: I thought to dedicate the web of thys my
little worke specially vnto you, as at whose hande I
hoped eyther for your learnings sake to bee the soo∣ner
allowed, or for your courtesies sake to bee the easier
borne withall. The booke is framed to a breefenesse,
and (as farre as reason woulde suffer) so moderatlye
abridged, that there is not in it, eyther too lauash a∣boundaunce,

or to nigardly skantnesse. And if you
consider it aduisedly, you shall finde it rather leuened
with knowledge, then vernished with eloquence. For
I confesse my selfe to haue studied earnestly certaine
choyse Bookes, to the intent to digresse further of frō
thinges knowne, and to make longer tariance in
things more strange. Recitall of places occupyeth the
most part of this worke, as whereunto the whole mat∣ter
is somewhat inclined of it selfe. And heereof I
minded in such wyse to entreate, as I might set out
the platts of the famous Lands, & the notable Bayes
of the Sea, euery one in theyr order, keeping the ac∣customed
distintion of the world.
Also I haue interlaced many thinges some what
differing (but not disagreeing) from the matter, to
the intent that (if nothing els, yet at leastwyse) the
varietie it selfe myght ease the wearines of the Rea∣ders▪
Heerewythall I haue expressed the natures of
men and other lyuing things. And not a few things
are added concerning straunge Trees and Stones: cō∣cerning
the shapes of farborne people: and concer∣ning
the diuersities of customes of vnknown nations.
Moreouer, there are diuers thinges worthy to be in∣treated
of, which to passe ouer, I thought had beene a
poynt of negligence, inasmuch as they be auouched
by the authority of most allowed wryters, which thing
inespecially I would your wysedome shoulde vnder∣stand.
For what can wee callenge properly for our
owne, sith the dilygence of menne in olde tyme hath
beene such, that nothyng hath remayned vntouched

vnto our dayes. VVherefore I beseech you waygh not
the credite of this woorke that I put foorth, in
the ballance of thys present tyme. For I ensuing the
print of the olde stampe, thought good rather to take
my choyse of all the olde opinions, then to alter them.
Therefore if any of these thynges shall sound other∣wyse
to your vnderstanding, then I wysh they shold:
I pray you beare wyth my vnskylfulnes, and let those
Authors which I haue followed stande to the auouch∣ing
of the trueth. And euen as they that drawe the
Images of men, setting all the rest aside, doo first and
formost proportion out the head, & meddle not with
portraying out the other limbes before they haue ta∣ken
theyr begynning (as yee woulde say) at the very
topcastle of shape and proportion: So wyll I also take
my begynning at the heade of the world, (that is to
weete) the Cittie of Rome. And although the best
learned Authors haue left nothyng that may bee spo∣ken
a newe to the prayse thereof, and that therefore
it be almost a superfluous matter to trace the pathe,
that hath beene troden ouer in so many Chronicles.
yet neuertheles, because it shal not be altogether ouer
slipped, I wyll set forth the Originall thereof wyth as
much faythfulnesse as may be.
Farewell.
