



IT hath pleased God to deale verie graci∣ously with your L. your thankfulnesse to his Maiestie wil nota∣bly appeare, if you goe on in doing your best for the increase of Gods religion. The high way to compasse this, is the calling for, and placing of such in the lande, as by gods blessing are able and willing to pro∣fite his Church. When fitt men are found out they must haue both defence & main∣tenance:
defence, that for well doing they be not discouraged: maintenāce, that they may attende vpon Gods seruice without distraction of minde. If this were put in practise, almightie God should bee better serued then he is, and our gracious soue∣raigne Queene Elizabeth more heartely obeyed then shee is. Howe singlie many parts of this realm are furnished with tea∣chers, all the worlde doth see: the enemie with great ioy, the godly with great grief. The cause of this mischiefe is either great want of iudgement, or great corruption in thē which do preferre, & are preferred to ecclesiasticall liuings. The first of these is a grose fault, but the latter is intollerable sin, as is manifestly proued in the nexte leafe after this epistle. Our Vniuersities both haue and do bread vp many excellent mē, and may well be cōpared to the Apple tree of Persia, which in good mesure doth bud, blossō, & beare fruit al times of the yere. Before that students do come to excellent passe, their paines and charges are verie great, for without labour and Gods bles∣sing, learning is not come by, and without expence, studie cannot be maintayned.
When students are furnished with know∣ledge,
are they prouided for? is good done to thē for the churches greater good? it is verie cleare that they are singly rewarded, and the case of manie both in the vniuer∣sities & abroad doth sufficiētly proue this. But answere peraduēture wilbe made that these studentes must vse meanes for their preferment. If by meanes we vnderstande coasting vp & down ye coūtrey for liuings,Iudg. chap. 17. verse 8. it was ye practise of Michahs priest, & is at no hād, to be liked of: if by meanes be vn∣derstood either buying of places right out, or departing with some part of the cōmo∣dities, it is a grieuous plague, & must bee taken head of: for it infecteth both the ta∣ker, & the giuer, & some other partes of the Church of God: the taker, because it maketh him thinke vily of religion, when he sees & feeles ye corruption of a teacher: the giuer, for besids the present shipwrack of a good conscience, he is driuen to sell deare because he bought deare: the church of God, for it pesters it with vnfit & cor∣rupt both teachers & gouernours, wher∣by gods honor is greatly defaced, & ye good subiects of the land, very greuously offen∣ded. I may add to this, yt this mischief, if it
not in time meete with, will be the vndo∣ing of Cambridge and Oxford, and con∣sequently bring forth Barbarisme.Gene. cha. 47 verse. 22. The priestes of Egypt were carefully prouided for in the time of famine, and shall a num∣ber of our learned preachers almost famish in the florishing estate of the realme of England? The popish sort are very carefull that the Popes plough goe forwarde, they spare neither cost not labour to increase superstition. Howe bountifully their priests are dealt with euery man may see, and their liberalitie doth more hurt Gods religion, then we are aware of. Shall they prouide extraordinarilie for theirs, and shall ourgodly and learned students not haue that prouision which of right be∣longs vnto them? they which are seruante to any mē of trade, are after a time in case to maintaine thēselues & theirs, and shall the vniuersitie diuines after many yeeres studie and great expense, be compelied for want of maintenance either to commend themselues to the staffe and waller, or be∣take themselues to some other course? ma∣ny seruants in court, for a litle and meane seruice receiue great good of their Lordes and masters charge, & what haue the stu∣dentes
committed not to haue prouision of their own, that is to say, of the Chur∣ches charge. Good my L. tēder the studēts cases, & seing almighy God hath giuē cō∣maundement for their defence and proui∣sion, haue good care especially of such as are furnished by almightie God for the comfort of his Churche. If your Lord∣ship worke the good of these (which I do and will pray for) you shall do God great seruice, & he wil multiplie his blessings & fauour vpon you. As for them which are guilty of corruptiō, either by taking or gi∣uing money, because their sinne is very great, they must first make restitution of money, & Church liuings, vngraciouslye come by, & then craue pardon humblie as almightie Gods handes for these grose e∣normities.
This order which I prescribe is gods or∣der, and therefore with al reuerence to his Maiestie must be liked of. If restitution be not made by such as are in case to doe it, their repentance is no repentāce, & there∣fore the pardō they looke for at gods hāds will not be graūted thē. I beseech almigh∣tie God either to giue these men vnfained repentance of his great mercy for the lesse
hurt of the church, or to cōfoūd thē of his iustice for the greater good of his church.Aug. epist. 54. ad Macedomum. Nehem. chap. 5. verse 13. And as to Nehemias praier in another case of oppression, the Lords people said Amē: so I doubt not but your Lorship and all which feare God both in the court, & o∣ther parts of this land, wil say many a har∣ty Amē, to this praier of mine, against the spoyle of both church & vniuersities.
I did present to your L. when I waited on your honor in the court, a latin Sermō: be∣cause it pleasd you to take it in good part, I am now bold to offer to your L. a Trea∣tise of the Sacramēts for another testimo∣nie of my dutiful mind. If it shal please you to peruse it, I doubt neither of your profi∣ting by it, nor of your good accepting of it. The stuffe in this treatise is very soūd, and hath in it varietie inough for the cōpasse of so short a writīg. Thus desiring almigh∣tie God to increase his good gifts in your L. for the great good of this noble land, & for your own singuler comfort, I take my leaue of your good L. in most humble ma∣ner. At Cambridge the 15. of May. 1582.

