



Right Worshipfull:
IT may bee wondred at of many, es∣pecially in these daies wherin there
 is such a satietie, if not a surfet of bookes, and that vpon this subiect of Repentance, that I should thus carry tim∣ber to the Wood, or water to the Sea. And the rather for that my late publication of my exercises of the same subiect, The Eunuchs Conuersion; my reasons are these. First, the good content my hearers had at the publike preaching
 of the same, was no small motiue vnto mee to present the same things to their eares, which were so accepta∣ble to their hearts: And oh that the Lord would be pleased to co-operate to make them partakers of that sauing grace. Secondly, for that there hath bin none in our Church (for ought I know) that hath fully handled the History.
 And lastly, for that no one place of Scripture, or example of Gods mercy, is more abused then this of the Peni∣tent; for alas, how many desperate sinners haue beene imboldened to sinne by his example? for what, say they, Did not the Thiefe on the Crosse, at last repent, and was hee not saued? Not considering, that repentance is Gods gift,
 and that, as an Antient doth well obserue, Though God giue for∣giuenesse of sins to al that repent,Qui promi¦sit poeniten∣ti veniam, non promisit peccanti poenitenti∣am, Aug. he giues not re∣pentance to all that sinne, Neither consider they that the conuersion of this man was not ordi∣nary, besides, it was par∣ticular, and that particu∣lar examples are not to be vrged for a generall practice, especially in so weighty a matter, as the
 saluation of the soule is: nor how Christ now vpon a speciall occasion to shew the effect of his bloud, the power of his sufferings, and to mani∣fest to the sinfull world, the truth of his God-head, euen at the lowest ebbe of his humiliation, would conuert a sinner. These things they re∣maine willingly igno∣rant of, whereas indeed it is a thousand fold
 more probable that such shall dye as they haue liued, impenitent∣ly, wickedly, and despe∣rately, with the Impeni∣tent, and so be damned, rather then to haue such a singular grace giuen them, and mercy shew∣ed at last hour to repent with the Penitent, and so be saued. This being the condition of so ma∣ny in the world, oh how do it concerne euery
 faithfull Minister of Christ, to strike oft vp∣on this string, to presse hard vpon this duty, and to bring them to see (if it be possible) the mi∣serable condition of an impenitent life. These are the motiues that haue so preuailed, to bring these collections to light. And now Right Worshipfull, I beseech you that the world may receiue
 them at your hands, and vnder your name, which why should I doubt of, since your zeale for Gods house, loue of the truth, with that incouragement you daily giue to such as bring the tidings of peace, may assure mee that a Present of this nature, cannot but bee acceptable vnto you. Now if this poore worke may adde to the
 benefit and good of Gods Church, and further the worke of Repentance, which these times call for, as my hope is through Gods mercy it may. And that you and yours, who deserue so large a measure of ho∣nor & respect frō Gods Church, may hereby bee further incouraged in your godly course, who I confesse deserue
 a greater gift, and bet∣ter Present then I am able to giue; it is all I desire, and therein shall much reioyce, and glorifie God in that behalfe. And thus I commend you both to God, and to the word of his grace, who is able to build you vp further, and to giue you at last an Inheritance amongst all those that are truely sanctified.

So prayeth hee who desireth to bee and re∣maine,

