


RIght Honourable La∣die: whosoeuer is en∣graffed into the bodie of Christ, and duely considereth the mani∣fold stratagems of the olde serpent, and his wicked instruments, must needs be mooued with mutuall compassion, to pitie their e∣state, and with all abilitie receiued from God, to preuent their subtilties, and to hin∣der their malicious proceedings. For if Sa∣than continually doe compasse the earth like a roaring lyon, seeking to deuoure: if

his children (hauing their fathers nature) doe compasse sea & land, to withdraw from the faith: if both children and father, with all his angels of darkenesse, doe transforme them selues into Angels of light, to deceiue ifit were possible, he very elect: how much more ought wee to regarde our brethren, the children of God, least they become the children of Hell, be deuoured of the great àragon, and be drawne to haue pleasure in vnrighteousnesse, and to worship the beast. Beholde howe they hazard their goods, their landes, their libertie, and their liues, and being, as it were, inflamed with the fire of hell, they come amongst vs to set on fire the Temple and citie of our God, to burne vp the corne, the oliues, and the vineyard of the Lord of hosts; that is to say, more plain∣ly; these Romish and Rhemish foxes ende∣vour by all means to poyson our youth with the leauen of popish opinions, to confirme the aged in their olde superstitions, and to withdraw all men as well from the holy ser∣uice of Christ, as from their loyal obedience to their gracious soueraigne. Therefore it is full time, that wee should all say with the spouse in the Can. Take vs the foxes, not on∣ly the greatest, but euē the litle foxes which destroy our vines: and further to afford all

that litle helpe we can, for the quenching of these Antichristian firebrands. This moo∣ued the author of this treatise, * Doctor Sohn pub∣like profes∣sor of Diui∣nitie at Hei∣delberg. The matter of this booke. as diuers other very godly and learned men, to write diuers books for the benefit of the Church: amongst which, this seemeth very worthie both his paines of writing, and our deligence in reading thereof. For here is deliuered a aplain and sound description of Antichrist, and the same so mightily applied and surely fastned vpon the Pope, that he must either change his nature, which is vnpossible, or else be enfolded within this conclusion, The Pope is Antichrist. Here he is most liuely painted foorth vnto you by his name, quali∣ties, and progenie: by his doctrine, miracles, and authoritie: by his life, his habitation, and the time of his reuelation, continuance, and vtter destruction: here the doctrine of Christ is opposed to that of Antichrist, and soundly confirmed, not with the weake reede of humane constitutions, nor with the sand of mans traditions and authoritie, but with the sacred rock of Christ, his Apostles, Euangelists, and Prophets: so that though the windes blowe, and the raine fall, and the floods be at, and the gates of hell be opened a∣gainst the same, yet it shall not fall: for it

is grounded vpon this rocke, The word of the Lord endureth for euer.
Therefore who soeuer pleaseth to see the truth of this great controuersie, may within fewe houres know (and that out of the word of God) what we ought to iudge concerning the Pope; namely that hee is Antichrist. Whereupon it will follow, that as the Baby∣lon of Antichrist is not the Ierusalem of Christ, nor the religion of the beast, the worship of the Lamb: so the Popish Church is not Bethel but Beth-auen, not the Church of Christ but the synagogue of Satan: and the religion of the Pope, is not the religion of Christ, but the superstitious homage of the cursed beast. So that it cānot be but a lewde practise of them, who ende∣uour to make an vnion of two religions, No vnion of the two religions. which differ in them selues as light and darkenesse, who doe altogether forget that heauenly voyce, Reuel. 18. 4. Goe out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sinnes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues.
Nowe that many may be benefited by this learned treatise, beeing earnestly en∣treated and greatly vrged by a good friende of mine: I haue aduentured to expresse

my authors meaning, after a plaine manner in our owne language, and to commit the same to the blessing of God, and the friendly acceptation of the Christian Reader.
And these my first fruits of this kinde, I am bolde to dedicate vnto your Honour, most Honourable Ladie, beseeching you to accept of this as of a small, yet a publike te∣stimonie of my bounden duetie, thankefull remembrance, and heartie affection, which I can not any way expresse, but doe entirely beare toward your Honour, and the rest of your most Honourable name and alliance. Whose Honourable fauour and goodnesse, (the fruit of true faith, syncere loue, and pure religion) as it hath beene comfortable to many of Gods children, and especially vouchfafed to my Father, my selfe, and o∣ther friendes, so is it a worke which God him selfe will regard and reward in mercy, with an immortall crowne of euerlasting glorie: Who keepe, direct, and blesse your Honour, with the right Honourable my good Lorde, and all yours in Christ Iesus, that beeing furnished with all spirituall graces and temporarie benefits, needefull for this life and the life to come, you may continually walke in the waies of righteous∣nes,

and enioye at the length the incompre∣hensible ioyes of the kingdome of heauen, the end of your hope, the saluation of your soules, through Christ Iesus.
Amen.

