



WHEREAS (Right Worshipfull) but a small and short rem∣nant of dayes is alot∣ted vnto euery one of vs, to try the hazard and ad∣venture
of this world in Christs holy Merchandize: I being sub∣iect to this common case, and most certaine vncertainty of our life; neither knowing if, perhaps, at this present, my staffe standeth next the doore; haue beene, and am desirous in this behalfe, so to bestow all my possiblle ende∣uours, and labours, in this my Lord and Maisters Traffique; as that neither I may returne vnto him with a Talent in a Napkin, but may leaue behinde me some poore token and testimony of my loue and duty towards his blessed Spouse. This hath cau∣sed me to take in hand this short Comment vpon the 51. Psalme, or, The Repentance of Dauid, an elect and chosen vessell, pro∣nounced by the mouth of the Lord, to bee, A Man after his owne heart. Where we may see
the great weaknesse & frailty of Gods Children,Iob. 9.3. Psal. 130.3 Psa. 143.2. when the Lord shall but a little leaue them vnto themselues. Our frailty appeares in this, that we cannot perceiue the things that are of God: if we cannot perceiue the good, much lesse can we do it; yea, so that if the Lord should looke straight∣ly what is done amisse, who should bee able to stand? If the Lord should enter into iudge∣ment with vs, none could in his sight bee iustified. If Moses, the faithfull, fell into infidelity; Da∣uid, the holiest, became pro∣phane; Salomon, the wisest, com∣mitted so great follies; and Peter the louingest, denyed his Mai∣ster: If the Saints, and deere friends of God haue fallen be∣fore our eyes, let vs lay aside trust in our owne strength, not taking their falles to bee our
standing: but rather by them to measure our selues, and the guilt of our sins; gathering, as it were, the whole Lyon by the paw. Let vs rise with them by repentance, let vs sorrow with them for our sinnes; and that because Christ all perish.Luk. 13.5. And that we may, with Dauid, repet and turne vnto the Lord.Rom. 2. Consider his Mercies in forgiuing,Gen. 39.9 Rom. 2.5. Esay. 26.9 Luk. 3.14 Psal. 90.12. his Benefits in giuing, his Patience in forbearing, his Iudgements in punishing, the Word preached, Sinnes commit∣ted, and that Few shall be saued: the shortnesse and vncertainty of life, & the certainty of death. Pray we cannot, vnlesse wee re∣pent; and perish we shall, vnlesse we repent: but blessed shall wee be if wee repent. Now because this Psalme is a most blessed Psalme of true and vnfeigned re∣pentance,
I made choyce of it to treat of in my Cure, neuer in∣tending that these weake exerci∣ses should come to the publique view of the world: But being at last ouercome by the earnest re∣quests of diuers godly and well-disposed Christians, to yeeld my consent to the publishing of this worke: And considering that in this writing Age of ours, amongst the number of bookes without number, no man hath wholly trauelled herein in our tongue, that euer came to my hands; for then I should haue denyed my Pen this honour: and withall, how many a despe∣rate sinner, and ignorant soule hath been imboldened to sinne by Dauids example, neuer loo∣king into his repentance, How he watered his couch with teares, and how he sate well-a-daying




his griefe of heart, and cryed a∣gaine and againe, and still a∣gaine, for mercy and pardon at Gods hands, ere he could be as∣sured of the pardon of them. These considerations striuing and struggling so long within me, vntill they had gotten the conquest of such shamefast and fearefull motions wherewith men are well acquainted, who are at all acquainted with their owne infirmities; I was thereby at length drawne to this bold & hardy resolution, as to commit it to the Presse; and so to the eyes of them whose great and sharpe censures I haue euer, with trembling, thought of hereto∣fore; and euen now would shun them with all willingnesse. And here I present vnto your Wor∣ships this poore Talent of mine, as to whom of right it doth be∣long:
for, Precedens beneficium, sequatur officium: Which may it please you to accept at my hands, as at one that wisheth all happinesse to you and yours in the Lord, your worships accep∣tation shall be my sole satisfacti∣on. The bond of my duty hath this onely bound of my hope, humbly crauing that your fauo∣rable wisedomes would supply the wants of this thing; and that this so simple a gift may bee ac∣cepted of you rather for my good meaning, and the end wherefore I do it, then for the value of the thing it selfe; hauing an eye to the matter, & not to the maner: for my desire is not to bee seene in the high and intricate questi∣ons of mans wisedome: but in the basenesse and simplicity of the Gospell, that it may appeare in the power thereof. Thus, as
God hath ioyned you both in the neerest societies, so pardon me this boldnesse, who haue ioyned you together in this De∣dication. The God of Heauen giue you both that blessing of blessings, which (if Ierome say true) few men haue, that you may, transire à delicijs ad delicias, go on from grace to grace, and bee a long time happy in this life, and for euer happy in the life to come. Roxwell this 26 of Nouember.

