



Right worshipfull,
THe whole bodie of Theologie, may well bee rendered into these two heads, The know∣ledge
of God, and of our selues; the latter consists principal∣ly in the knowledge, first of a mans naturall misery: se∣condly, of his selfe-insuffici∣encie to come out thereof: And thirdly, the All-suffici∣encie that is in Christ. And all sound preaching, that aymes at the conuersion of hearers, must ayme at these things as most necessarily to be knowne, to life and salua∣tion. The Subiect matter of the ensuing History of the Eunuchs Conuersion, is excel∣lent to this purpose, if the workmanship were sutable.
But herein haue I applyed my selfe to my countrey hearers, euer endeuouring that they of the lowest forme might learne some∣thing. But now as my de∣fects in handling the Histo∣ry haue need to be couered and graced by the counte∣nance of some, who is of note and respect in Gods Church: So why should I doubt of this fauour from you (Sir) hauing so con∣stantly heard of your most religious respect vnto our Tribe, and loue to the truth. Blessed be his Name that
hath so engrauen this part of his image vpon you, whereby a good euidence is ministred vnto your own heart, that you are translated from death to life: It is the portion but of a few, and therefore you are to esteeme it your greatest honour, and your vnperishing riches; whereas all earthly great∣nesse abstracted from this, cannot make you truly hap∣pie. Theodosius, that Noble Emperour was wont to say, Magis se gaudere quod Mem∣brum Ecclesiae Dei esset, quam Caput Jmperij: He accounted
it more honour that he was a member of the Church, then Head of the Empire. Hoc est enim omnis homo, Eccl. 12.13. To feare God, and keepe his Commandements. Continue herein, and let your works be more at last then at first; I dare promise your conscience more true tranquillity herein, and your person more honour, then the whole world besides can affoord you. And thus humbly crauing pardon for my boldnesse, I commend this worke to your reading; The Noble Ethiopian to
your imitation, and your bo∣dy and soule, with all yours, to the protection of the Al∣mightie. My selfe remai∣ning,

