



IN the building of the ma∣teriall Temple, which the Lord himselfe commanded (Right Reuerend Father in God) As Moses the seruant of the Lord deliuered the forme of it,Exod. 25.40. as he had receyued of the Lord in the Mount: So the people of Israel with ready hearts, and willing minds furthered the same, howbeit, one after one manner,Exod. 35.22.23. and an o∣ther after an other. The wealthiest a∣mongst them, and such as were best able,
 brought siluer and gold earerings, brace∣lets, and Iewels of gold: A second sort of people brought blew silke, purple, scarlet, and fine linnen: Others, in regard of their pouerty brought Goats hayre, Rams skins, and Badgers skins, euery one answerable to his ability: No man appeared before the Lord empty: and God accepted of the mea∣nest gift that proceeded from a willing heart, aswell as the greatest. So fareth it with me a poore Labourer in the Lords Vineyard, I acknowledge my own wants, that I am not able to bring any great and glorious offering: yet I haue brought here a small present, as it were, a little Goates hayre, or (as with the widdow) two Mites to bee cast into the Treasury of God. It is the old and ancient doctrine of faith and repentance that I heere entreat of, a need∣full Subiect, especially in these dangerous dayes, wherein men labour more for the shewes of godlines, then for the power of it: for we need not so much to complain of ignorance in this age (for many haue knowledge) as the want of sincerity. I haue endevoured in this short Exposition
 to set out the nature of true repentance, which onely is to bee found in the godly, being sound and sincere: as also the hy∣pocritical repentance of the wicked, which is but for a time, not durable, nor lasting. If my lines be plaine, they best answere a straight and an euen leuell. The euidence of the spirit is best seene in plainesse. And now this poore labour of mine flyes to your Lordship for protection, not fearing your iudgement in the allowance, or doubting of your fauour in the acceptance thereof: for matters of learning, are most fitte to bee presented to those that excell therein; for, as the Prouerbe is, Scientia neminem habet inimicum, praeter ignorantem, so by the same rule, may I say, Scientia ne∣minem habet amicum & Mecaenatem, nisi stu∣diosum fautoremque bonarum literarum. And although (Right Reuerend) I know right well, that you not onely fauour Religion, but are an earnest professor thereof, and that I need not exhort and stirre you vp therein; yet let mee in most humble man∣ner desire you, that as you haue done much good since you came into this place, so
 your works may bee more at the last, then at first, and that you would still honour him, who hath honored you, and imploy still those rich talents of learning, authori∣ty, and fauour of your Soueraigne, (which your great Master hath bestowed on you) to the aduancement of Gods glory, & the good of Gods Church. That by you, god∣ly and painefull Ministers may more and more be encouraged in their holy calling, and that those malicious enemies of Gods truth, the Papists, may be more and more discouraged, and rooted out from troub∣ling Israel: They are Babylons Children: Blessed are they that dash their heads against the stones: Some shall haue the honour) I assure my self) to be the instruments vnder God, vtterly to root them out of this land; Let it not passe your hands: Who knoweth whether you are come to your place for such a purpose? Vse your fauour you haue with his Maiestie, to waken his sleeping lawes, that as hee hath long sung mercy, so hee would at last tune Iustice against the Pa∣pists of our land; and commaund that his laws may haue their course, that they may
 not beare it ont with full breast, & go vn∣controlled as they doe amongst vs. It is a worke not vnfitting your Lordship (being called to be a Gouernour of the Church) to incite his Maiesty to this.
I beseech your Lordship pardon my boldnesse, being a stranger vnto you, and one of the meanest of the Tribe of Leui, within your Diocesse; yet one that wisheth all good to Sion. Be you still for God in al your wayes, and God will bee still for you in all your wayes; aduance him still, and he will aduance you, yea perpetuate vnto you an honourable name and memory a∣mongst his faithfull heere, and crown you with an euerlasting crowne of glory a∣mongst his Saints in the heauens.

