



MAy it please your Maiesty to take a second Suruey of this sillye Ser∣mon. When it was first vttered, you did not one∣ly heare, but hearken, & incline your eare: as it were with your gratious attention to

help out my bad elocution. Pittie so bad a voice should euer offer so great a wrong to the moste learned and iudicious eare of so good a King.
Howbeit, volenti non fit in∣iuria. And, if wee were not all deceiued, you were as willing to beare, as I could be vnwilling to offer eyther this or any such iniurie to a person so sacred. But now I feare me, if it should please you to take it into your hands it wil prooue but tapestry worke, fairer a farre off then neare at hand.
The greate difference betweene di∣uine and humane wrightings. Of those the more we drinke, the more we may: the deeper the sweeter. Of these to sippe it is sufficient, Gustata magis quam potata ant. Howsoeuer it be, it was the com∣maundement of our moste Reuerend Me∣tropolitane that I should put it in Print, which I would more willingly haue put to fire ere euer it saw light. But beeing as it is, if to this his pleasure it shall please your

Maiestie to adde your fauourable aspect, vnder the coniunction of two Planets so great, so gracious, I nothing doubt but the Blacke-Smith will thriue If no vse else be made heereof, yet shall the world abroad, that thinkes there is nothing but gilding in the Court, heereby take notice of your exceeding patience, and my greate boldnesse, for the further imholdening of better Orators in this heauenly businesse: to thinke how great a God they serue, be∣fore whome al the Gods of the earth throw downe their Scepters and yeelde that obe∣dience, as best beseemes such subordinate Soueraignes, to the greate Lord Para∣mount. Whose pleasure it is notwithstan∣ding, that as wee come from him with all boldnesse, so we should stand before them, as his Leiuetenants, with all reuerence. This was then my meaning to reforme al, without offence to any. And if any thing were wanting in my duetie, sure I am it

was supplyed by your goodnesse. The Lord of heauen increase and multiplye these heauenlye blessings vpon you and yours, to your and our eternall comfort in the Lord.

