



THis worke, right Honourable, right Wor∣shipfull, and the rest, though small in shew, yet great in substance, doth yeeld much light to our enterprise now on foot: whether you desire to know the present and future commodities of our countrie; or the qualities and conditions of the Inhabitants, or what course is best to be taken with them.
Touching the commodities, besides the generall report of Cabeça de Vaca to Charles the Emperour (who first tra∣uelled through a great part of the Inland of Florida, next adioyning vpon our Virginia) That Florida was the ri∣chest countrie of the world; and, that after hee had found clothes made of cotton wooll,Chap. 35. he saw gold and siluer, and stones of great value: I referre you first to the rich mines of gold reported to be in the prouince of Yupaha, and described in the twelfth Chapter of this Treatise to come within our limits: And againe, to the copper hatchets found in Cutifachiqui, standing vpon the Riuer of Santa Hele∣na,
 which were said to haue a mixture of gold. It seemeth also that the last Chronicler of the West Indies, Antonio de Herrera, speaking of the foresaid Riuer of Santa Helena, which standeth in 32. degrees and an halfe, alludeth to the prouince of Yupaha,Decad. 3 lib. 8. cap. 8. in these words: Y el oro, y plata, que hallaron, no era de aquella tierra, sino de 60. leguas, adentro al norte, de los pueblos dichos Otapales y Ola∣gatanos, adonde se intiende, que ay minas de oro, plata, y cobre. That is to say, That the gold and siluer which they found, was not of that countrie (of Santa Helena) but 60. leagues distant toward the North, of the townes called Ota∣pales and Olagatanos, where we vnderstand that there are mines of gold, siluer, and copper. By which reckoning these rich mines are in the latitude of 35. degrees and an halfe. I desire you likewise to take knowledge of the famous golden prouince of Chisca, stretching further to the North, where∣of the Cacique of Coste gaue notice to Ferdinando de So∣to in the towne of Chiaha,Chap. 15. affirming, that there were mines of copper, and of another mettall of the same colour, saue that it was finer, and of a farre more perfect lustre, and farre bet∣ter in sight, and that they vsed it not so much, because it was softer. And the selfesame thing was before told the Gouernour in Cutifachiqui: who sent two Christians from Chiaha with certaine Indians which knew the countrie of Chisca, and the language thereof, to view it, and to make report of that which they should finde.Chap. 23. We likewise reade not long af∣ter, that the Gouernour set forward to seeke a prouince called Pacaha, which hee was informed to be neere vnto Chisca, where the Indians told him, that there was gold. And in another place hee saith;Chap. 24. That from Pacaha hee sent thirtie horsemen and fiftie footmen to the prouince of Caluça, to see if from thence he might trauell to Chisca, where the Indians said, there was a worke of gold and copper. So that here is
 foure times mention, and that in sundrie places, of the rich and famous goldē mines of Chisca, and that they lie beyond the mountaines toward the North, ouer which they were not able to trauell for the roughnes thereof. But what neede I to stand vpon forren testimonies, since Master Thomas He∣riot, a man of much iudgement in these causes, signified vn∣to you all, at your late solemne meeting at the house of the right honourable the Earle of Exeter, how to the Southwest of our old fort in Virginia, the Indians often informed him, that there was a great melting of red mettall, reporting the man∣ner in working of the same. Besides, our owne Indians haue lately reuealed either this or another rich mine of copper or gold in a towne called Ritanoe, neere certaine mountaines lying West of Roanoac.
Another very gainfull commoditie is, the huge quantitie of excellent perles, and little babies and birds made of them, that were found in Cutifachiqui. The abundance whereof is reported to be such,Chap. 14. that if they would haue searched diuers graues in townes thereabout, they might haue laded many of their horses. Neither are the Turkie stones and cotton wooll found at Guasco to be forgotten, nor passed ouer in silence.
But that, which I make no small account of, is, the multi∣tude of Oxen, which, from the beginning of the 16. to the end of the 26. Chapter, are nine seuerall times made mention of, and that along from Chiaha, Coste, Pacaha, Coligoa, and Tulla, still toward the North, to wit, toward vs, there was such store of them, that they could keepe no corne for them: and that the Indians liued vpon their flesh. The haire of these Oxen is likewise said to be like a soft wooll, betweene the course and fine wooll of sheepe: and that they vse them for couerlets, because they are very soft and woolled like sheep: and not so onely, but they make bootes, shooes, targets, and other things necessarie of the same. Besides the former bene∣fits,
 their young ones may be framed to the yoke, for carting and tillage of our ground. And I am in good hope, that ere it be long we shall haue notice of their being neerer vs, by that which I reade in the Italian relation of Cabeça de Vaca, the first finder of them; which writeth, That they spread themselues within the countrie aboue foure hundred leagues. Mreouer, Vasques de Coronado, and long af∣ter him, Antonio de Espejo (whose voiages are at large in my third volume) trauelled many leagues among these heards of Oxen, and found them from 33. degrees ranging very farre to the North and Northeast.
A fourth chiefe commoditie wee may account to be the great number of Mulberrie trees, apt to feede Silke-wormes to make silke: whereof there was such plentie in many places, that, though they found some hempe in the countrie, the Spa∣niards made ropes of the barks of them for their brigandines, when they were to put to sea for Noua Hispania.
A fifth is the excellent and perfect colours, as black, white, greene, yellow, and red, and the materials to dye withall, so often spoken of in this discourse: among which I haue some hope to bring you to the knowledge of the rich graine of Co∣chonillio, so much esteemed, and of so great price. I speake no∣thing of the seuerall sorts of passing good grapes for Wine and Raisons.
Chap. 31. & 32Neither is it the least benefit, that they found salt made by the Indians at Cayas, and in two places of the prouince of Aguacay: the manner also how the Inhabitants make it, is very well worth the obseruation.
One of the chiefest of all the rest may be the notice of the S uth Sea,Chap. 31. & 32 leading vs to Iapan and China, which I finde here twice to be spoken of. Whereof long since I haue written a discourse, which I thinke not fit to be made ouer common.
For closing vp this point, The distances of places, the qua∣lities
 of the soiles, the situations of the regions, the diuersities and goodnesse of the fruits, the seuerall sorts of beasts, the va∣rietie of fowles, the difference betweene the Inhabitants of the mountaines and the plaines, and the riches of the Inland in comparison of the Seacoast, are iudicially set downe in the conclusion of this booke, whereunto for mine owne ease I re∣ferre you.
To come to the second generall head, which in the begin∣ning I proposed, concerning the manners and dispositions of the Inhabitants: among other things, I finde them here no∣ted to be very eloquent and well spoken, as the short Orations, interpreted by Iohn Ortiz, which liued twelue yeeres among them, make sufficient proofe. And the author, which was a gentleman of Eluas in Portugall, emploied in all the action, whose name is not set downe, speaking of the Cacique of Tul∣la, saith, that aswell this Cacique, as the others, and all those which came to the Gouernour on their behalfe, deliuered their message or speech in so good order, that no Oratour could vtter the same more eloquently. But for all their faire and cunning speeches, they are not ouermuch to be trusted: for they be the greatest traitors of the world, as their mani∣fold most craftie contriued and bloody treasons, here set down at large, doe euidently proue. They be also as vnconstant as the wethercock, and most readie to take all occasions of aduan∣tages to doe mischiefe. They are great liars and dissemblers; for which faults often times they had their deserued pai∣ments. And many times they gaue good testimonie of their great valour and resolution. To handle them gently, while gentle courses may be found to serue, it will be without com∣parison the best: but if gentle polishing will not serue, then we shall not want hammerours and rough masons enow, I meane our old soldiours trained vp in the Netherlands, to square and prepare them to our Preachers hands. To con∣clude,
 I trust by your Honours and Worships wise instructions to the noble Gouernour, the worthy experimented Lieutenant and Admirall, and other chiefe managers of the businesse, all things shall be so prudently carried, that the painfull Prea∣chers shall be reuerenced and cherished, the valiant and for∣ward soldiour respected, the diligent rewarded, the coward emboldened, the weake and sick relieued, the mutinous sup∣pressed, the reputation of the Christians among the Saluages preserued, our most holy faith exalted, all Paganisme and Ido∣latrie by little and little vtterly extinguished. And here re∣posing and resting my selfe vpon this sweete hope, I cease, be∣seeching the Almightie to blesse this good work in your hands to the honour and glorie of his most holy name, to the inlarge∣ment of the dominions of his sacred Maiestie, and to the generall good of all the worthie Aduenturers and vndertakers.
From my lodging in the Col∣ledge of Westminster this 15. of Aprill, 1609.

