


MAnie suting their la∣bors to the popular vaine, and guided by the gale of vul∣gar breath, haue di∣uulged diuerse pa∣theticall discourses, in which if they had shewed as much care to profite, as they haue done desire to please, their workes woulde much more haue honoured their names, and auailed the Readers. But it is a iust complaint among the better sorte of persons, that the finest wittes loose themselues in the vainest follies, spilling muche Arte in some idle phansie, and leauing their workes as witnesses, howe long they haue beene in trauaile to be in fine de∣liuered of a fable. And sure it is a

thing greatly to bee lamented, that men of so high conceite should so much abase their habilities, that when they haue racked them to the vttermost endeuour, all the prayse that they reape of their employment, consisteth in this, that they haue wisely tolde a foolish tale, and carried a long lie ve∣rie smoothlie to the ende. Yet this inconuenience might finde some ex∣cuse, if the drift of their discourse le∣uelled at anie vertuous marke, for in fables are often figured morall trueths, and that couertly vttered to a com∣mon good, whiche without a maske woulde not finde so free a passage. But when the substance of the worke hath neither trueth nor probabilite, nor the purport thereof tendeth to anie honest end, the writer is rather to bee pitied then praised, and his bookes fitter for the fire then for the presse. This com∣mon ouersight more haue obserued,

then endeuored to salue, euerie one be∣ing able to reproue, none willing to re∣dresse such faultes, aucthorised especial∣ly by generall custome: And though if necessitie (the lawlesse patrone of en∣forced actions) had not more preuailed, then choise, this worke of so different a subiect from the vsuall vaine, should haue beene no eye-sore to those that are better pleased with worse matters. Yet sith the copies therof flew so fast, and so false abroad, that it was in danger to come corrupted to the print: it seemed a lesse euill to let it flie to common viewe in the natiue plume, and with the owne wings, then disguised in a voate of a ba∣stard feather, or cast off from the fist of such a corrector, as might happily haue perished the sound, and impedn some sicke and sory fethers of his owne phan∣sies. It may be that courteous skill will recken this, though eourse in respect of others exquisite labors, not vnfit to en∣tertaine

well tempered humours, both with pleasure and profit, the ground therof being in scripture, and the forme of enlarging it, an imitation of the an∣cient doctours, in the same and other pointes of like tenour. This commodity at the least it will carie with it, that the reader may learne to loue without im∣proofe of puritie, & teach his thoughts eyther to temper passion in the meane, or to giue the bridle onely where the ex∣cesse cannot be faultic. Let the work de∣fend it self, and euerie one passe his cen∣sure as he seeth cause. Manie Carpes are expected when curious eyes come a fishing. But the care is alreadie taken, and the patience waiteth at the table, readie to take away, when that dish is serued in, and to make roume for others to set on the desired fruit.

