



RIght Honourable, and all others of our Sexe, vpon my repaire to London this last Michaelmas Terme; being at supper a∣mongst friends, where the number of each sexe were e∣quall; As nothing is more v∣suall for table-talke; there fell out a discourse concerning women, some defending, others obiecting against our Sex: Vpon which occa∣sion, there happened a mention of a Pamphlet entitu∣led The Arraignment of Women, which I was desirous to see. The next day a Gentleman brought me the Booke, which when I had superficially runne ouer, I found the discourse as far off from performing what the Title promised, as I found it scandalous and blasphemous: for where the Authour pretended to write against lewd, idle, and vnconstant women, hee doth most impudently rage and rayle generally a∣gainst all the whole sexe of women. Wherevpon, I in defence of our Sexe, began an answer to that
full Pamphlet. In which, after I had spent some small time, word was brought mee that an Apologie for women was already vndertaken, and ready for the Presse, by a Ministers daughter: Vpon this newes I stayed my pen, being as glad to be eased of my en∣tended labour; as I did expect some fitting perfor∣mance of what was vndertaken: At last the Maidens Booke was brought me, which when I had likewise runne ouer, I did obserue, that whereas the Maide doth many times excuse her tendernesse of yeares, I found it to be true in the slendernesse of her answer, for she vndertaking to defend women, doth rather charge and condemne women, as in the ensuing dis∣course shall appeare: So that wheras I expected to be eased of what I began, I do now finde my selfe dou∣ble charged, as well to make reply to the one, as to adde supply to the other.
In this my Apologie, Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull, and all others of our Sexe, I doe in the first part of it plainely and resolutely deliuer the worthinesse and worth of women; both in respect of their Creation, as in the worke of Redemption. Next I doe shew in examples out of both the Testaments: what blessed and happy choyse hath beene made of women, as gratious instruments to deriue Gods bles∣sings and benefits to mankinde.
In my second part I doe deliuer of what estimate women haue been valued in all ancient and moderne times, which I prooue by authorities, customes, and daily experiences. Lastly, I doe answer all materiall obiections which haue or can be alledged against our Sexe: in which also I doe arraigne such kind of men,
which correspond the humor and disposition of the Author; lewd, idle, furious and beastly disposed per∣sons.
This being performed, I doubt not but such as heretofore haue beene so forward and lauish against women, will hereafter pull in their hornes, and haue as little desire, and lesse cause so scandalously and slanderously to write against vs then formerly they haue.
The ends for which I vndertooke this enterprise, are these. First, to set out the glory of Almightie God, in so blessed a worke of his Creation. Second∣ly, to encourage all Noble, Honourable, and worthy Women, to expresse in their course of life and acti∣ons, that they are the same Creatures which they were designed to be by their Creator, and by their Redeemer: And to paralell those women, whose vertuous examples are collected briefly out of the Olde and New Testament. Lastly, I write for the shame and confusion of such as degenerate from wo∣man-hoode, and disappoint the ends of Creation, and Redemption.
There can be no greater encouragement to true Nobility, then to know and stand vpon the honour of Nobility, nor any greater confusion and shame, then for Nobility to dismount and abase it selfe to ignoble and degenerate courses.
You are women; in Creation, noble; in Redemp∣tion, gracious; in vse most blessed; be not forgetfull of your selues, nor vnthankefull to that Author from whom you receiue all.
