



AT the instaūt request
(dere frynde Maister
Tindale) of an olde &
familiar acquaintaūce
of myne, Iohan Uog∣ler
an Almayne borne,
I translated this litle
wurke oute of Latine
into Englishe, and from poesye to prose
aboue iii. years ago. And now it came
in my mynde, not only to make it com∣men
vnto you, but a so to dedicate it, &
so publysh it fourth in your name The
author therof, called Baptista Mantua∣nus,
was an excellent Poete in the pro∣uynce
of Lumbardye, brought vp in the
noble cyte of Mantua, where as Uyr∣gyle
the famouse Poete was borne also.
And though he wer a supersticious fryre
of the secte of reformed Carmelytes, as
they there called them, yet was he a man
of most excellent learnynge in Latine,
Greke▪ and Hebrue, & smelled out more
abuses in the Romysh churche, then in
those daies he durst wele vtter, Notwith¦stāding

he spared not in his earnest writ∣tynges,
at times, both breuely and sharp¦ly
to towche them.
In hys fift Egloge, in declarynge the
nature of Auarice, he bryngeth in Rome
for example Rome (sayth he) rendereth
nothynge els, but very tryfles. And for
them agayne she receyueth good golde.
Uayne promyses shall ye haue there, and
nothynge els▪ For alas, all that she se∣keth
is moneye. Couetousnesse at thys
daye rewleth all there, and vertu is vtter¦ly
bānyshed. And in the .ix. Egloge he de¦clareth
at large, that all kyndes of vyces
are at Rome muche made of, and be had
in great honour. Also in Libro .ii. Sylua¦rum,
he saith: Mars is father to the Ro∣manes,
and Lupa their nource, for in le∣cherie
and murther spende they all their
lyues and studie. If ye mynde to lyue
wele (sayth he) come not at Rome. For
though ye maye at Rome do all other
thynges, yet ye may not there lyue wel,
or leade an honest lyfe.
In hys first boke de Sacris diebus, as
he dare, he holdeth with the maryage of
Byshoppes, and sayth: That in the pry∣matyue
churche their lyues were muche
better, and more holye hauynge wyues,
then now hauyng none. And that it was
a more sure waie a great deale, and more

agreable wyth gods lawe, then thys o∣ther,
consyderynge that God neuer ab∣horred
marryage, but sanctified it. The
vnmarried state is ieopardous (he saith)
and suche a bytter yoke when it is pro∣fessed,
as Christ wold neuercharge any
man with. Yea so cruell a burden, as yet
to thys daye bryngeth fourth many vn∣naturall
monsters (abhomynacyons he
wolde saye) and by an horrible presump¦cyon
was first inuented. In the xii▪ boke
of the same wurke he reprehendeth the
Schole doctours, for sophistically con∣tendynge
about tryhles, and vanitees,
as was the questyon of our Ladies con∣cepcion
amonge the orders of fryers:
and the argument of leuended or vnle∣uended
breade in the sacrament, agaynst
ye Grekes. Many great strifes hath bene
(he sayth) and brawlyng battailes, wise
men sumtyme lawghynge both the par∣ties
to scorne, as they haue in high seats
dysputed the matters. For both labours
hath bene vayne, presumptuouse, rashe,
and folyshe, theyr reasons weake and
theyr matter vnauaylable, more for oste¦tacyon
then any good learnynge.
In hys seconde boke of the lyfe of Ni¦colas
Tolentyne, in speakynge of Bi∣shoppes
and priestes, he sheweth of what
ambycyon, tyrannye, pryde, and deadly

hate they were in hys tyme. They spent
all theyr dayes (sayth he) in banketynge
and lecherie, yea Rome that is boasted
so holye, becommynge a most execrable
brothell house▪ The popes most holie pa∣lace
(whych is. S. Peters owne cham∣ber)
is now so pestered with whores, that
it stynketh to hell gates. Ye the sauour
therof so molesteth heauē, yt it is now be¦come
to all the whole worlde abhomy∣nable.
The great byshops, Ordynaries,
Abbottes, Deanes, Prouostes, and suche
other, whych dailye offer vp the vnsau∣ry
sacryfyces (or synge masses whether
ye wyll) & eate theyr vnleuened cakes
or whyte waffers, care neyther for Christ
nor hys doctryne. They thynke there is
no manner of lyfe after thys, for they
neyther double hell nor dampnacyon.
In dyuers of hys bokes, he hath many
lyke sentences, whych noteth hym not
altogether to be a Papyst, though he
were in the tyme of most depe papistrye,
and a Fryre.
By this we maye wele perceyue, that
in all ages and in all congregacyons,
some godly men there were, whych ha∣uynge
the ryghte sprete of the chyldren
of God, smelled out that fylthie Iakes
of the Deuyll, that malygnaunt syna∣goge
of Rome, what though they dyd

 by the vnpurenesse of the tyme in
manye other thynges. The worlde was
yet neuer so sore oppressed with the depe
slepe of darkenesse and ignoraunce, but
some lyuely spretes were alwayes vygi∣launt,
to wake the multytude. For he
that kepeth Israel, doth neyther slūber
nor slepe. Psal. C.xx. And as concerning
thys present treatyse, that deathe is not
to be feared, whych Baptista first wrote
to a frynde of hys, a peere or senatour of
Bononye, called Iason Castelius, he
sheweth hym self no lesse dyuynely then
naturally, no lesse christenly, then poety¦cally
to handle that matter. But this I
leaue to the dyligent reader, because the
sayd treatyse doth follow here in course.
In confirmacyon of that Christē rule
whych he hath therin very plenteouslye
persuaded, the scriptures of God hath
muche to vtter, if they were throughly
searched. If God hath enacted it, that
all men, ones shall dye. Hebre ix. who cā
withstand it? Who can auoyde it? If all
men haue one enteraunce vnto lyfe, and
one goynge out in lyke maner agayne.
Sap. vii What man wyll alwayes lyue,
& neuer se death? Psal. lxxxviii. If pros∣peryte
and aduersyte, lyfe and deathe,
came all of the Lorde. Eccle. xi. Whie
shall we not with pacient▪ Iob gyue hym

thankes for it. Iob. i. If by hys first ap∣poyntment,
earthe must nedes to earthe,
from whence it was fyrst taken. Gene,
iii. Whie shall we not faythfully watche
vpon the daye & houre? Math .xxiiii. He
that hath in remembraunce the ende of
that thyng whych he hath to perfourme,
shal neuer do amysse. Eccle. vii. though
deathes remembraūce be bytter to that
man whych hath pleasure in hys ryches,
Eccle. xiiii. Yet be not thou afrayde ther
of, whych hast thy consolacion in Christ
Phil. ii. for precyouse in the Lords sight,
is the death of true beleuers. Psal. C.xv.
And blessed are they whych departeth
in the Lorde. Apoca. xiiii. for the sowles
of the ryghteouse are in the hand of god
Sap. iii. and now rest frō theyr labours,
Apoca. xiiii. No malycyouse tormente
hurte them any more. Neyther hunger
nor thirst greueth thē, God hath wyped
awaye all sorowfull teares from theyr
eyes. Apoca. vii. Muche better is deathe
then a wretched lyfe, or a lyfe in cōtynu∣all
syeknesse. Eccle. xxx. Yea, the losinge
of our lyfe (Christe sayth) is the sauynge
therof. Luce. ix. Deathe was to. S. Ste∣uen
a swete slepe in the Lorde Acto. vii.
Saynt Paule calleth deathe auaūtage,
and a thyng best of all to be lewsed from
thys fleshe, and to be with Christ. Phil i.

He yt heareth my wurdes (saith Christe)
and beleueth on hym that sent me, hath
euerlastynge lyfe, and shall not come in
to dampnatyon, but passeth from death
to lyfe. Ioā .v. Whie then shulde a man
professinge Christe, feare to dye?
All this haue I written to you (my spe∣cyall
good frynde maister Tyndale) kno¦inge
you to be, not vnlyke faythful Si∣meon,
a man fearynge the Lorde, and of
longe tyme lookynge for the latter con∣solatyon
of Israel. And now beholdinge
it presently in them that reioyce in the
wurde of the Lorde, and are throughe
faythe ordayned to eternall lyfe. Actes.
xiii. ye haue no more care for thys lyfe
transitoriouse▪ But nowe from hence
fourth with the said Simeon, ye dailye
desyre to departe in peace, because ye
haue san of saluacion, both the lighte
and the glorye in Iesu Christ, for al true
beleuers▪ Luce. ii. to you (I saye) haue
I dedicated this simple labour of mine
to whom I acknowledge my selfe to be
most hyghlye bonde, but yet the veryte
more, desyerynge you to accept it wyth
no lesse good harte then it is sente,
trustynge hereafter to send you
muche better▪ Thus euer
fare ye wel in Christ
Iesu. Amen.
