



YOur Vertuous requests, to which your de∣serts gaue the force of a com∣mandement, won me to satisfie your deuotion, in penning some little discourse of the blessed Mary Magdalene. And a∣mong other glorious examples of this Saints life, I haue made choice of her Funerall Teares, in which as she most vttered the great vehemencie of her feruent loue to Christ, so hath she giuen therein largest scope to dilate vpon the same: a
 theame pleasing I hope vnto your selfe, and fittest for this time. For as passion, and espe∣cially this of loue, is in these dayes the chiefe commander of most mens actions, and the Idol to which both tongues and pennes do sacrifice their ill be∣stowed labours: so is there no∣thing now more needfull to be intreated, than how to direct these humours vnto their due courses, and to draw this floud of affections into the right cha∣nel. Passions I allow, and loues I approue, onely I would wish that men would alter their ob∣iect, and better their intent. For passions being sequels of our nature, and allotted vnto vs as the handmaides of rea∣son, there can be no doubt, but that as their authour is good, and their end godly; so their
 vse tempered in the meane, implyeth no offence. Loue is but the infancie of true charitie, yet sucking Natures teat, and swathed in her bands, which then groweth to perfection, when faith besides naturall motiues, proposeth higher and nobler grounds of amitie. Ha∣tred and anger are the neces∣sarie officers of prowesse and iustice, courage being cold and dull, and Iustice in due reuenge slacke and carelesse, where hate of the fault doth not make it o∣dious, and anger setteth not an edge on the sword that puni∣sheth or preuenteth wrongs. Desire and hope are the parents of diligence and industrie, the nurses of perseuerance and con¦stancie, the seedes of valour & magnanimitie, the death of sloath, and the breath of all
 vertue. Feare and dislikes are the scoutes of discretion, the harbingers of wisedome and pollicie, killing idle repentance in the cradle, and curbing rashnesse with deliberation. Audacitie is the armour of strength, and the guide of glo∣rie, breaking the Ice to the har∣dest exployts, and crowning valour with honorable victo∣rie.
Sorrow is the sister of mer∣cie, and a waker of compassion, weeping with others teares, & grieued with their harmes. It is both the salue and smart of sinne, curing that which it chastiseth with true remorse, & preuenting need of new cure with the detestation of the dis∣ease. Despaire of the successe, is a bitte against euill attempts, and the hearse of idle hopes,
 ending endlesse things in their first motion, to begin. True ioy is the rest and reward of ver∣tue, seasoning difficulties with delight, and giuing a present assay of future happinesse. Fi∣nally, there is no passion but hath a seruiceable vse either in pursuite of good, or auoidance of euill, and they are all benefits of God, and helpes of nature, so long as they are kept vnder vertues correction.
But as too much of the best is euill, and excesse in vertue, vice; so passions let loose with∣out limits, are imperfections, nothing being good that wan∣teth measure. And as the sea is vnfit for trafficke, not onely when the windes are too boy∣sterous, but also when they are too still, and a middle gale and motion of the waues serueth
 best the saylers purpose; So nei∣ther too stormy nor too calme a mind giueth Vertue the first course, but a middle temper be∣tweene them both, in which the welordered passiōs are wrought to prosecute, not suffered to per∣uert any vertuous endeuour. Such were the passions of this holy Saint, which were not guides to reason, but atten∣dants vpon it, and commanded by such a loue as could neuer exceede, because the thing lo∣ued was of infinite perfection. And if her weaknesse of faith, (an infirmitie then common to all Christs disciples) did suffer her vnderstanding to be decei∣ued, yet was her will so setled in a most sincere and perfect loue, that it led all her passions with the same byas, recompen∣cing the want of beliefe, with
 the strange effects of an excel∣lent charitie. This loue and these passions are the subiect of this discourse, which though it reach not to the dignitie of Maries deserts, yet shall I think my indeuours well appayd, if it may but woo some skilfuller pennes from vnworthy labors, either to supply in this matter my want of ability, or in other of like pietie, (whereof the Scripture is full) to exercise their happier talents. I know that none can expresse a passion that he feeleth not, neither doth the penne deliuer but what it copieth out of the minde. And therefore the finest wits are now giuen to write passionate discourses, I would wish them to make choise of such passions, as it neither should be shame to vtter, nor sinne to feele.

But whether my wishes in this behalfe take effect or not, I reape at the least this reward of my paines, that I haue shewed my desire to answer your cur∣tesie, and set forth the due praises of this glorious Saint:

