



GREAT LORD,
THese are a Widdowes teares, vouch∣safe your wonted eye; Elegies ex∣torted forth by the sad Relict of Master Henry Chitting: I had else no purpose thus to feed the surfe∣ter, as little desire as desert for Printing; And therefore here my penne (as for the most part, man) comes into the dangerous World, first crying, lamen∣ting common frailty in a private losse, indeed such blackes best suit this season of
Printed in Lent, the Plague not al∣together ceased in this King∣dome. humiliation. For though our bloody waters (thanks bee to God) are
well abated, yet still our Rachel mournes, the Pro∣phets rod still cryes unto the Citty,
Micah 6 9. and to the Coun∣try also; both sicknesses of body and security of minds, call loud enough for cautions of mortality: one, through the wealth and pleasures of the world, perswading us of Tabernacles heer; The other by the downefall of many round about us, bidding us build on a more firme foundation. None knowing how soone the lot of Jonah may fall upon their heads, it becomes us all (like Abraham) to be oft sitting in the dore of our tents .i. Cogitantes de Egressu,
Gen. 18.1. thinking of our dissolution and more permanent provision: and in this Christian-Map you have the means of both, both worlds delineated, compared, motives and directions for the better choyce. I confesse, an ordinary, but a needfull subject, drest like a childe of sorrow and my busie charge; plaine and serious, without either descant or embellish∣ment: Such as it is (with the Authour) is your Honors prostrate; Importunity brings it
Yet not to travell far, but 50. printed, visits but some few friends, whose love, J hope, wil cover the Errata. abroad, Gratitude, to your Lordship; and theres magnanimi∣ty in accepting small things, as well as in conferring great, your Lordship both waies known innobled. I am not ignorant how that the gravest Pauls and learned Gamaliels of the times ambiat your Noble Patro∣nage; enough to argue it presumption in the younger Timothys (to erect such great gates to their little Citties, as your prefixed Name) but that tis knowne as well,
1 Tim. 4.12. your equall goodnesse (tutor'd by Saint Paul)
countenanceth virtue in all ages; and for mine owne part (I confesse) of all ill manners I most decline in∣gratitude:
Qui ingratum omaia dixerit. Pardon then well-affected Zaches though they clime a little to have a sight of virtue, suffer us engag'd spectators, to behold your brightnes, as wel as to enjoy your influence: stars lose not of their height or luster, for the gazers meanenesse; nay, oft have I seene an humble Valley grace a stately Mountaine: nor will a Deaths-head spoyle a Christian feast, any more than those old Macedonian Banquets. Yet this I serve up here (Right Honorable) not as a Philips Monitor (I know your zeale needs no remembrancer) but as the Poets congratulator, Qui monet ut faci∣as quod jamfacis, &c.
ipse monendo laudat, & hta∣tu comprobat acta suo. Ovid. Matth. 27.57. Your exemplary piety, like that noble Arimathaean (building the Sepulcher in the Garden) ruminates these Novissima, even in the midst of earthly happinesse; and in the throng of all your stately cares, finds opportunities of retird devo∣tions: mongst which at any time, if a favourable eie but second the encouragement of your gracious eare, these Funeralls may haply prove my studies Natali∣tialls; and future time give the world better Testi∣mony of his thankfulnes, who in the mean while, is at his prayers for your Honours, Stocke and Branches, Vine and Olive-plants; that you may all bee happy with the dew of Heaven, and fatnesse of the Earth. Tis the dayly appreciation of

From your Islington Feb. 19. 1637.
