



YOur vertuous re∣quest to whiche your deserts gaue the force of a com mandement, won me to satisfie your deuotion, in penning some little discourse of the blessed Mary Mag∣dalen. And among other glorious examples of this Saints life, I haue made choise of her Funeral Tears, in which as shee most vttered the great vehemency of her feruent loue to Christ, so hath shee giuen

therein largest scope to dilate vp∣pon the same: a theame pleasing I hope vnto your self, and fittest for this time. For as passion, and espe∣cially this of loue, is in these daies the chiefe commaunder of moste mens actions, & the Idol to which both tongues and pennes doe sa∣crifice their ill bestowed labours: so is there nothing nowe more needefull to bee intreated, then how to direct these humors vnto their due courses, and to draw this floud of affections into the righte chanel. Passions I allow, and loues I approue, onely I would wishe that men would alter their obiect and better their intent. For pas∣sions being sequels of our nature, and allotted vnto vs as the hand∣maides of reason: there can be no doubt, but that as their author is

good, and their end godly: so ther vse tempered in the meane, impli∣eth no offence. Loue is but the in∣fancy of true charity, yet sucking natures teate, and swathed in her bandes, which then groweth to perfection, when faith besides na∣turall motiues proposeth higher and nobler groundes of amitye. Hatred and anger are the necessa∣ry officers of prowesse and Iustice, courage being colde and dull, and Iustice in due reuenge slacke and carelesse, where hate of the faulte doth not make it odious, & anger seteth not edge on the sword that punisheth or preuenteth wrongs. Desire & hope are the parents of diligence and industry, the nurses of perseueraunce and constancy, the seedes of valour and magnani∣mity, the death of sloth, and the

breath of all vertue. Feare and dis∣like are the sconces of discretion, the herbingers of wisedome and pollicy, killing idle repentance in the cradle, and curbing rashnesse with deliberation. Audacity is the armour of strength, and the guide to glory, breaking the ice to the hardest exploites, and crowe∣ning valour with honourable vic∣tory.
Sorrowe is the sister of mercy, and a waker of compassion, wee∣ping with others teares, and grie∣ued with their harmes. It is both the salue and smart of sin, curing that which it chasticeth with true remorse, and preuenting neede of new cure with the detestation of the disease. Dispaire of successe, is a bitte against euil attempts, and the herse of idle hopes ending en∣dlesse

things in their first motion to begin. True Ioy is the rest and reward of vertue, seasoning diffi∣culties with delight, and giuing a present assay of future happinesse. Finally, ther is no passion but hath a seruiceable vse eyther in the pur∣suite of good, or auoydance of e∣uill, and they are all benefites of God and helpes of nature, so long as they are kept vnder vertues cor∣rection.
But as too much of the best is euill, and excesse in vertue vice: so passions let loose without lim∣mits are imperfections, nothing being good thatwanteth measure. And as the sea is vnfit for traffick, not onely when the windes are too boisterous, but also when they are too still, and a middle gale and motion of the waues serueth best

the sailers purpose: So neither too stormy nor too calme a minde gi∣ueth Vertue the freest course, but a middle temper betweene them both, in which the well ordered passiōs are wrought to prosecute, not suffered to peruert any vertu∣ous indeuour. Such were the pas∣sions of this holy Sainte, which were not guides to reason, but at∣tendantes vpon it, and comman∣ded by such a loue as could neuer exceede, because the thing loued was of infinite perfection. And if her weakenes of faith, (an infirmi∣ty then common to all Christes disciples) did suffer her vnderstan∣ding to be deceiued, yet was her will so setled in a most sincere and perfect loue, that it ledde all her passions with the same bias, re∣compensing the want of beliefe,

with the strange effectes of an ex∣cellent charity. This loue & these passions are the subiect of this dis∣course, which though it reach not to the dignity of Maries deserts, yet shal I thinke my indeuors wel apaide, if it may wooe some skil∣fuller pennes from vnworthy la∣bours, eyther to supply in this matter my want of ability, or in o∣ther of like piety, (wherof the scri∣pture is full) to exercise their hap∣pier talents. I know that none can expresse a passion that hee feeleth not, neyther doth the penne deli∣uer but what it coppieth out of the minde. And therefore sith the finest wits are now giuen to write passionat discourses, I would wish them to make choise of such passi∣ons, as it neither should be shame to vtter, nor sinne to feele. But

whether my wishes in this behalf take effect or not, I reap at the least this reward of my paines, that I haue shewed my desire to answer your courtesie, and set forth the due praises of this glo∣rious Saint.

