



THe manifold fauors that your GRACE hath extended to me, euen from be∣fore I was knowne vnto you by face, and euer since hath continued them abundant∣ly

without any my deserts: hath imboldened me (most reuerend Father in God) to Dedicate vn∣to your GRACE, and gracious protection, these my last la∣bours in this cloud of witnesses of Gods truth. An argument it is vnto some, of some seeming difficultie, and a rough path vn∣to many vnusuall trode in, and therefore requireth a far more able meanes to smooth the way then either my wit, or weake a∣bility can any waies aford. That the Scriptures Genealogies are vaine: some that follow their owne vaine in preferring zeale before knowledge, would haue the Apostle to pronounce. O∣thers (besides their authority, for that they are penned by Gods Spirit) account them vse∣lesse and empty, either to bee

knowne or taught. To meete with both, my selfe of many thousands the least, haue assaid, first, in drawing the lineall de∣scents of all the Tribes, and of e∣uery family from first to last, to illustrate the text: and especially theirs of Iudahs, that lead vnto Christ. And now in this small treatise doe endeauour to shew their vses, both in the holy sto∣ries, to whom they are staies, and in confirmation of Gods promises, to whom they are a great cloud of witnesses. But for my refuge against the oposers of this my so weak a performance, to whom shall I flie, but onely to your Grace, whom God and his Maiesty hath appointed to the helme of Christs ship in these Brittish seas. And who formerly was one of those re∣uerend

Commissioners that ap∣proued and authorised the publication of my draughts of the Scriptures Genealogies vn∣to the world. That I am not a Leuite I confesse, and farre vn∣worthy to offer, or to come neer vnto the Altar, I acknowledge; yet am I not thereby quite ex∣empted from seruice, but am in∣ioyned (as all others are) to la∣bour, and to lay hand to the for∣warding of Gods worke. For not onely the Leuites ministred to the prouision of the first Ta∣bernacle, but euery one of them also (that were numbred from twenty yeers old and aboue, a∣mong sixe hundred thousand, three thousand fiue hundred & fiftie men) did offer his halfe shekell for the setting forward of the Sanctuary. And for the in∣crease

of Gods treasurie, the poore widdow did minister as well as the rich Pharisee. The seruant that had but one Talent in charge, for hiding that one was condemned, & the frutlesse fig-tree withered in one night. The very heathen man could say; That man is not borne one∣ly for himselfe, & we know that all must labour in the Lords vine-yard, and not stand idle all the day. And sure I am that your GRACE, as another Moses, wisheth that all the people in the Host could prophesie with Eldad & Medad: & as Gods high Priest, continually shaketh the Censer of sweet prayers, for the wealth of his Zion, & peace of our Church: in whose hand I pray that Aarons rod may long bud, & that from your forehead

may long shine Holinesse to the Lord. That God therefore who hath indued your GRACE with many blessed graces in this mortall life, continue them long to his glory, your own comfort, and our consolation: and after your Pilgrimage in this vale of teares, crowne you in the life of immortality, to reigne with his Christ, and as a starre to shine a∣mong his elect and chosen chil∣dren for euer.

