



SINCE the preaching of this ser∣mon following (Right honorable) J know, you are not ignorant, how ear∣nestly I haue beene requested, to publish the same in Print: consi∣dering therefore, that therin, there was set before vs in that Honora∣ble person, at whose buriall it was preached, such an example both of liuing, and dying well, as being now by this means made further known, maie through Gods goodnes, provoke many the better to imi∣tate the same: and weighing also with my selfe, that as his death was precious, in the eies of the Lorde, so it was and is, my duety to do anie thing that lyeth in me, to further the continuance of his name, in blessed and everlasting remembrance; I haue yeelded, as your Honours see, to this request. Indeede when J preached it, by reason of the shortnes of time, that then J was tyed vnto; that there might also be time, without staying of the assembly too long, for the performance of the solemne and Honorable funerall rites; J was dri∣ven to cut off much, that I had thought to have vttered, and but briefly and lightly to run ouer sundry thinges, which more at large, my purpose was then to haue handled. Al which now, I haue thought good according to my first full premeditation, in print to set downe
 wherevppon, in remembring what was saide, and now in conferring this therewith, some difference there will be found: But yet, that will be, not for the substance or matters therein handled, at all; but onelie that some of them are further prosecuted here, and vrged, then for the reason aforesaide, they could be then. And to you three iointlie, I haue beene bolde to dedicate it, because as in nature, so in truth, I know the losse of this Honorable man, toucheth you three, neerest: wishing and hartely praying you, with the reading and meditation of the matters herein conteyned, to comfort your selues, and to mode∣rate your sorrow, otherwise, for the losse of such an one. For hereby you shall (I hope) plainely perceiue, that he was such a one, whome the Lorde of speciall fauour towarde him, hath taken hence; and that therefore howsoeuer, we haue lost him, God hath found hi and that whatsoeuer wee haue lost, out of all doubt, he hath found both perfect peace, and ioy in soule; and most sound and quiet rest in bodie. And therefore in his respect, you shall hereby finde, that they that loued him most, haue most iust cause to reioice. Jndeede in res∣pect of our selues, this sermon will laie before you, that there is iust cause of mourning, for all that hee hath left behinde him: yet with∣all it will shew you, that the ende and vse hereof ought onelie to be this, to awaken vs so out of all securitie in our sinnes, as that wee maie, by heartie repentaunce, and true turning vnto God in time, turne away the fearefull euils, that otherwise the taking awaye so fast of such, threatens vs. J trust therefore, if your honours will voutchsafe to take the paines, seriously to read and to consider here∣of, that no small comfort and good, will in these respectes arise, and grow vnto you, thereby. And this, J must needes saie to your fur∣ther comfort, that the great concourse of people vnto his buriall, and the crying and weeping of all sortes there, was such: as in my opinion it was a notable argument, that, as he was doubtlesse, beloued of God, so was he vnfeinedlie honoured and loued of men. Herein also appeared an euident token of Gods favour towardes him, that as he had liued honorably, so it pleased the Lord, to take him hence, according to his owne vsuall, and often repeated request, (though e had beene a great man of warre) in such peace, in his own bedde,
 in his owne house, as he did; and withall to bring him, with such ho∣nour, as questionles he was brought to his graue. For when the waies of men haue not pleased the Lorde, wee finde often in the scriptures, that they both haue beene threatned, and that so it hath come to passe, that they should not haue the honour of the ordinarie buriall, meete and vsed to persons of their estate: as wee maie read and see, Psal. 79. vers. 3.1. King. 21.23. & 2.9.35. &c. and Ier. 22 18. &c. And of the contrarie, we finde it very often noted in the same, as an argument of Gods favour, towards them when men haue so died, as that they attained vnto honorable and convenient buriall. As wee maie finde touching Abraham Gen. 25.8. touching Iacob Gen. 49. & 50. vers. 29. &c. & 2.3. &c. touching Dauid 2. King. 2. vers. 0 yea and touching Christ himselfe, Ioh. 19 ver. 38.39. &c. Great∣lie therefore in this respect, in my iudgment, are you Right Honora∣ble Ladie his wife, to be commended, especiallie thinges concerning the world, standing with you now, no otherwise then your good frends know they do; that you haue thus honorably as you haue, perfourmed this duetie vnto him. For though J am of the same opinion, that he was, that wrote that tract, de cura pro mortuis gerenda, of care to be taken for the dead, commonlie fathered vpon S. Augustine that ista omnia, id est curatio funcris, conditio sepultura & pompa exequiarum, magis viuorum sunt solatia, quam subsi∣dia mortuorum Cap. 2. that is, that al these thinges, the care had about the dead bodie, the maner of the buriall, and the solemnitie of the funeral obsequies, are rather comfortes for the liuing, then anie helpes of the dead; yet J am of this iudgement thereof, so they bee done and vsed without superstition, and but as is decent and sit, for the state of the person (as in this case J am sure they were) they are commendable tokens and arguments, both of dutifull loue and regarde, in those they leaue behinde, towardes them: and also so ma∣nie good means, to shew and nourish their hope, of a ioiful and com∣fortable resurrection. Do we not read, euen that our Sauiour Christ himselfe, defended Marie Magdalens fact, when some of hls disciples murmured at it, in powring a box of very costly ointment on his head: in that she did it to bury him. Mat. 26.
 ve. 7 &c. And is it not reported, to the cōmendation, both of Ioseph of Arimathea, & of Nicodemus, that the one, to the decēt burial of Christ, bestowed vpon him a sepulchre, & linnē cloths to wrap his body in, & that the other brought mirhhe & aloes, an 100. poūd weight, that so with sweet odours, according to the ma¦ner of the Iews, they might bury him? Ioh, 19.38.39. &c. Surely Gen 50. it is recorded, that when old father Iacob was dead, & the care of his funeral was cōmitted vnto his son Ioseph, that not onlie he caused by his phisitiās, his body to be embalmed, but also with an Honorable cōpany & great solemnity, though to his very great cost, according to his fathers desire, he carried it frō Aegipt into the land of Canaan, to bury him with his fa∣thers Abrahā & Isaac, in the caue & field that Abrahā had bought to bury in, of Ephron the Hittite: & this is writē in his cōmendation, & was indeed, both a notable argument in him of pie∣ty towards his dead father, & also of hope that he had of the resurre∣ction. And therfore, though I wish, that al superstitiō & needles & vndecent superfluitie be abādoned in such cases, & generally in the burial of the dead; yet I cānot but greatly like & cōmend, that such, decent & comlie order be kept therin; that maie according to euery mans degree, argue & nourish both these amongst al his welwillers, that he hath left behinde him. And therefore once againe, I cannot but reioice, in al your behalfes, that you were also of one minde, as I know you were, that this last duety should so Honorably be performed vnto the bodie of this Honorable Lord as it was, & ther in you maie all take comfort. Further, it ought to be now, ground of no smal con∣solation vnto you al three, that one, hath had of him, that thus Ho∣norablie liued an died, such a son in Law; the other such a husband; & the third so worthie a father, as he was. For if it be matter of dis∣comfort of the contrarie as everie one seeth by experience, & ther∣fore wil confesse it is; whie should not this alwaies be matter of reioi∣cing to euerie of your Honors, as oft as either you remember him, or heare him remembred by others? And such a neere and domesticall example ought both to comfort much, & also to provoke to imitatiō of the same: & I hope & pray God that it maie: that so yet, though
 to vs he be dead & gone, yet his vertues & noble qualities, maie stil liue & shine, to the comfort of al his welwillers, in his, that he hath left behinde him. Finallie iustlie maie it be a comfort vnto you, & so to the praise & glorie of God, I would wish you al hartelie to take it so and vse it, that euerie one of you (to saie no more) haue so iust cause, both before God & man to comfort your selues one in another as you haue: one that she hath such a daughter, & daughters sonne; the other, that the Lord in his mercifull providence, hath giuen her both such an Honorable careful & louing mother, and a good and to∣ward son; & the third, that he hath so vertuous, religious & Hono∣rable, both grandmother & mother. O howe ought this to abate and moderate your former sorrow, seeing now there is no remedie? And what an excellent and strong means are you, and J hope will be, as long as you liue together, not onlie of comfort everie waie one vnto another, but of counsailing, directing, and strengthening, where most neede is, one of another, in a holie course? A threefold corde is not easilie broken, saith the Preacher, Cap. 4. ver. 12. But the greatest comfort of all, that both you and all other of Gods children in the midst of all the afflictions of this life, haue, is this; that that God whom you serue, remaineth for euer one & selfe same, that hee is al sufficient & an exceeding great rewarde to his, that his providence howsoeuer thinges fall out standeth immutable, and that therfore without al question, howsoeuer we cannot perceiue it as the first, al things, & therefore euen those thinges also, which seeme vnto vs most to crosse the same, shal by his diuine wisedome and power, turne to the good, and benefit of his. Rom. 8.28. With al these things therfore, once againe, beseeching you to comfort your selues, & one another: praying the Lord effectuallie you maie so doe, & that all his good blessings to your own euerlasting saluation maie be powred and continued vpon everie of you, & all yours for euer, J cease from anie further troubling of your Honors, at this time. As Blechley this first of December. 1593.

