


HIgh and mightie Monarch, and my most dread & gratious Soueraigne, being one of them, that by your most Honorable Councels letters, in your Maie¦sties name, were called to be before your high∣nes, at the conference at Hampton Court, and receiuing there such satisfaction as I did by your excellent Maiesties owne most readie and apt answers to the doubts and obiections there and then proposed: as I could not but then greatly reioyce in my heart, and praise and magnifie the Lord for the same, so euer since, though to the better satisfying of all others, I haue not onely in my practise accordingly yeal∣ded vniuersall conformitie, but priuately by word and writing also haue laboured to per∣swade
all whom I haue met with, to do likewise: yet seeing and obseruing so many stil to refuse, I could not but think it my bounden dutie to God and his Church first, & then to your highnesse, by writing some short Treatise to doe the best that I could, to further your most gracious & christian purpose, resolution, & determination in the said conferēce, which was (as I conceiued it) by your most princely moderation, & resolu∣tion, first of al in our home controuersies amongst our selues about our Churches Liturgie or Hierarchie, so to knit vs all together in vnitie, & verity, as that al our forces hereafter might more strongly be bent & employed against our common aduersaries, so the better also after to draw them to conformity with vs in the exerci∣ses, and profession of our true and pure religion. And therfore now wel nigh two yeares ago, ha∣uing writ this Treatise, and finding that the priuat vse therof, though it hath done good with som, yet to that purpose could reach but to a few, it hauing in this time comd & bene in the view of some of the most reuerend Bish. & so hauing
also got allowāce by authority to be printed, & hereupon hauing bene by thē and many others which haue sene & read the same, much vrged to publish it, I am bound thus to dedicate it to your Maiesty, & so to offer it to the sight of all, who shalbe pleased to read it. And the rather I thought iustly I might so do, for that the ground of most of that I haue said therin to the satisfy∣ing of my brethren, arises frō the speeches, an∣swers, & determinations that your highnes self gaue in the forsaid cōference. But indeed I must needs confesse, I durst not yet thus far haue ad∣uentured, but vpon comfortable remēbrāce of your Mai. vouchsafing the next morning after the said cōference to send for me, & thē to giue me that most gratious coūtenāce & most princely kind words that you thē did, in cōsideration of a book that your highnes vnderstood I had writtē, & bin in some trouble for in her Ma. time that last was, touching succession. Pardon me ther∣fore most gracious soueraign if to testify in some
measure my loyalty and thankefulnes for the same, I venture now againe into your highnesse presence, with so small a present as this. For you being pleased to accept the same, & to giue it passage thus vnder your most roial patronage and protectiō, to the end aforesaid, vndoubted∣ly it wil & may much the sooner get liking and entertainment withall, & so also giue the bet∣ter satisfaction and contentment to all them whersoeuer it finds the same. Thus therefore once againe most humbly crauing pardon for this my great boldnes, & hoping of your Ma∣iesties fauorable acceptance hereof, & most in∣stantly vpon the knees of my soule begging of the almighty, that your Highnes & your most royall issue may most happily & prosperously reign & rule ouer vs, while the Sun & Moon endure, to his most gracious protection I com∣mend your Maiestie now and euer. From Bletchley in Buckinghamshire. 1607.

