



SInce the preaching of this fu∣nerall sermon following (right Honorable) I haue beene ear∣nestly vrged, & entreated both by wordes and letters of good brethren to commit the same to writing, and so to the print. And in deede their dealing with mee therein hath beene so effectuall, that, though I had rather preach ten sermons, than pen one, and haue alwaies hi∣therto beene very hard, considering the mul∣titudes of bookes already published, to bee in∣treated to publish any of my poore labors, yet in this, loe, I am ouercommed. And truely a∣mongst diuers other reasons moouing mee to yeeld hereunto, this hath not been one of the wekest, that therby not only they which heard mee preach it might for that present haue so noble an example both of sincere religion, and holy life sounded in their eares, but also both
they and others at their pleasure might haue the same laide downe before their eies, to the stirring vp and prouoking them, the rather by consideration of the doctrine set downe in this sermon, to imitate and followe the same. For seeing it hath pleased our God (no doubt of great mercy to him) thus, as hee hath, to take him in peace from vs, that wee cannot a∣ny longer enioy him liuing amongst vs as hee hath done, yet by this and such like meanes af∣ter a sort (I hope) to the good of many he shall liue still. Nay I am out of doubt of it, that as his death was precious in the eies of the Lorde, so he shalbe had in euerlasting remembrance, & his name shall neuer be put out. In the meane time it is greatly to be wished, that we, whome he hath left behinde, would take occasion by this his taking from vs, to learne that, which e∣uen therby wee haue iust occasion giuen vs by the Lorde to learne, which is; to feare that the Lord is in preparing some great scourge for vs for our great vnthankfulnes after so many be∣nefites both heauenly and earthly a long time bestowed vppon vs, in that hee beginneth thus to gleane from vs (least they should see to their griefe the euils to come) such deare seruants of his: and thereby also to take oc∣casion to repent, and to turne vnto the Lord vnfeynedly, that so he may turne the deser∣ued
euill day from vs. For in the 2, of Esay. 3. for the like sinnes and transgressions of the people, as are amongst vs, the Lorde threat∣neth, that euen therefore hee would take away the honourable and vvise counseller. And yet notwithstanding this plaine vvarning after∣warde the Prophet complayneth thus. The righteous perishe, and no man considereth it in his heart: and mercifull men are taken avvate, and no man vnderstandeth that the righteous is taken avvaie from the euill to come, Chap. 57.1. And I feare though the Lorde hath not barely threatned, but in deede hath taken a∣way from vs an Honourable and vvise Coun∣seller, in that this worthy Earle of Bedforde is nowe deade and buried, that yet most iustly the Prophets complainte maie bee renued amongest vs. God of his mercy therefore giue vs grace better to consider thereof e∣uerie one of vs, that vvee maie finde out the Lordes counsell therein: and so take occasion, by an effectuall and vniuersall turning vnto the Lorde to preuent the euill thereby, and by such other like examples threatned to come vppon vs. It maie bee that the enuious and malitious Papist (who alwaies gathereth poyson thence, from whence hee shoulde and might, if hee had the grace, gather honie) vvill not sticke to
thinke and say also, that God hath taken him away, as he hath, & his three sonnes with him in his anger and displeasure towardes him and his house. But whosoeuer considereth the do∣ctrine set downe in this sermon, they all liuing & dying in the Lord, and in her maiesties loy∣all and faithfull obedience, as they did, hee shall bee enforced to confesse, that (by what meanes, or by what kinde of sicknesse so euer they parted hence) they died in the fauour of God: & who so weigheth further, that it is the Lords property to beginne euen at his owne house, thereby to woorke a greater terrour in others, and withall foreseeth vvhat heauie plagues and miserable daies our sinnes dayly cry and call for, he cannot chuse but see, that the Lorde herein hath shewed a marueilous great mercy to him, and to those of his house. Truely by occasion hereof rather (to the asto∣nishmēt of al papists, who obey not the gospell of God) we may say with Pet. 1. Epi. 4.17. The time is come that iudgement must beginne at the house of God. If it first beginne at vs, what shall the ende bee of them, that obey not the gospel of god? But (to leaue this noble Earle & his sonnes in the hands of the Lord in blessed test & peace, and these malitious papists to thē selues as men in whome then sinne of spirituall whooredome with the garish & Babylonicall
harlot is growen to such rottennesse in their bones, that there is small hope, or rather none at all of their recouery, such is the iudgement of God vpon them, because light is come into the worlde, and yet they loue darknes more than light) concerning this sermon following (right Honourable) it may be in perusing of it you will finde some difference in it, from that which you heard. In wordes it cannot bee but there is, because I had takē but short notes be∣fore, and it is impossible for me to call to remē∣brance the very wordes, wherein I vttered it. But as for matter I am sure you will perceiue it is all one with the other, and in wordes too, as neare as memorie could well serue to call them to minde. In deede because then when I preached it in diuers points I was enforced (as I thinke you might well perceiue) through the shortnes of time left and alotted me, but sum∣marily to touch many thinges, that more at large I had purposed to haue prosecuted, and therefore perhaps then was the obscurer; I haue heare in this according to my ful purpose and premeditation then set thē downe, where∣by it groweth to bee somewhat longer nowe, than it was then. The hardnes and vnpleasant∣nes of the stile I must desire your Honour, and all others to beare withall. For (as you knowe) my manner is not at anie time to studie for
wordes, but for matter. Which so I deliuer in such wordes as I may bee vnderstood of them that heare mee, I care for no more. For the thing onely that I alwaies seeke, is to edifie thē that heare me with as good and necessary do∣ctrine as I can. As for gloriousnesse of words & pleasant and delicate speech I think it becom∣meth the philosophers chaire, but not the pul∣pit. For I finde, that Paul hath written, that hee vvas not sent to Preache the Gospell vvith vvise∣dome of vvoordes, least the Crosse of Christ should bee made of none effect, 1. Corinth. 1.17. And therefore vvhen hee came among them he saieth hee came not vvith excellencie of vvoordes, or of vvisedome, shevving vnto them the testimonie of God. For hee esteemed not to knovve anie thing a∣mong them, saue onelie Iesus Christ and him cru∣cified, 1. Corinth. 2.1.2. Sometimes there are some sentences of the Doctors and ancient fathers interlaced, but they are not by mee at any time alleadged as though their testimonie or iudgement vvere a sufficient argument to grounde a trueth vpon. For all trueth must haue and hath his sufficient warrant from the canonicall Scriptures; and hauing so, it is a trueth though all the Doctors and Fathers shoulde gaine-saie it. I onely therefore bring them in as vvitnesses of the trueth in their times receiued, partly to shewe the Popish
vaine bragge of antiquitie in these pointes, and partely to beate them from their errours vvith their owne weapons. Howbeit here∣in I haue beene very sparing, though indeed I might haue beene in the citing of them ve∣rie plentifull, they are so full of excellent sen∣tences to the same endes and purposes, for the vvhich these fewe out of them vvere al∣leadged. Nowe my reasons that moue me to bee so bolde, as to make this Sermon ap∣peare againe after this sorte vnder your Lord∣shippes protection, making my choise of you to dedicate it vnto, are these: First I am perswaded that you vvere a principall meanes, that I vvas occasioned first to con∣ceaue and preach it. Secondly, you are the man, to whome among all other and aboue all other I am most bound for your manifolde kindenesses diuersly shewed vnto mee: and therefore hee that maie most iustly chalenge all dutifulnesse, and tokens of thankeful∣nesse, vvhich lie in my poore povver to shewe: amongest vvhich I beseech you ac∣cept this as one, though it bee but a small one. Thirdely I knowe suche is your sincere affection to the trueth of Doctrine therein contayned, and such vvas your vnfayned loue and affection to-vvardes
him, whose memoriall it still reuiueth: that as you took pleasure in hearing of it once, so you wil delight your selfe in reading & perusing of it often. Which reasons considered I hope you will beare with my boldnes herein, and others I trust, whosoeuer they bee, will approue of this my so doing. And therefore beseeching the Lord of his mercy long to preserue you, & your vertuous and good wife my verie good Ladie with all your children in health, all true honour and prosperity, I cease from any farther troubling of your Honor at this time. At Bletchley the 25. of December, 1585.

