



Most graue, and honourable Senate:
WHen children are pressed with the want of good,
 or feare of ill, they resort vnto their Pa∣rents. This is our present case. The sute which wee present vnto your graue iudgements, and Paternall care, is no lesse then a matter of Religion and State. For so it is, that two revolted children of this our English Church and Common-wealth, are risen vp in hostile manner a∣gainst their Mother.
She hath decreed (even in so many words) that,

The Romish Church, is so farre wide from the nature of the true Church, as nothing can be more.
They vndertake to maintaine, that,
The present Romish Church, hath the true, and formall essence of a Church.

This then is our request,
 that, your Wisedomes will be pleased to take this deed of theirs into your father∣ly consideration, and to procure such redresse therein, as standeth with your place, and power: Herein wee doubt not to be heard; because, (according to the law of God, and instinct of nature) Fathers lay vp for their Children, and most willingly expend their store vpon them, when need requires. Our confidence herein is the more increased, by two reasons; to wit, Our perpetuall experience of your willing, & ready providence for this our Church & Common-wealth, & the greatnesse of the matter wherein we are your humble Petitioners.
If our Church had said nothing,
 or spake doubtfully of the point, then we had not put it to their account as a fault, because, in all ages, and in the present Romish Church such Divinity disputations haue beene and are allowed: And there is good reason for it, for thereby the trueth (in all doubtfull things at last) hath beene cleerd: and hath had the victory in the end: and, for this very cause, the present Romish Church doth voluntarily, (& of choise) giue leaue to their schooles, to dispute the points of the concurrence of actuall grace, and mans will in every supernaturall action. And of the kinde of worship to be given to the Images of Christ, the Virgin Mary, and the Saints: because, it now appeares, that the words of the Trent Coun∣cell, touching them both, are doubtfull and ambigu∣ous.

But this is not our case;
 our Church hath delive∣red her Judgement in a single Proposition, consisting of termes wherein there can be no doubt, or question; and the attribution is vniuersall, and without limita∣tion: so as, no reasonable man can make a question of her meaning. Now (beholde) she hath not rested con∣tent with this, (which indeede is enough) but, (to pre∣vent the ignorant obstinacy of all Opponents) she hath declared, by a comparison of equallity, the extent and amplitude of her predication: and saith, The Church of Rome is so farre wide from the nature of the true Church, as nothing can be more. Whereby we vnderstand, that, shee conceiues the present Ro∣mish Church to bee wholly destitute of every (the least) jot or tittle of the nature, and essence of the true Church: for so it is with every Society, which is so farre wide from the nature of the true Church, as nothing can bee more.
Now, what title shall we giue to this deed?
 vnder what head shall hee ranke this offence? what punish∣ment or degree of punishment doe they deserue? Sure∣ly it is not within the power of my vnderstanding, nor in the nature of my place, and condition, (finally) to determine: vnto you, and to your most deepe and profound Iudgement, must I appeale for that: Yet I humbly craue leaue to shew my opinion, lest I seeme causlesly to complaine.

The deed of these men,
 can deserue no lesse then to be branded with the name of contention: for, from a roote of bitternesse, and the spirit of contention, it did originally grow and arise; J say it sprang from hence: because the tree and all the branches thereof, savours of such a root, and cannot be conceiv'd to grow from other soile. Contention it is, and nothing else: because it opposeth things ordeined, and setled solemn∣ly and with great authority, and so continued for ma∣ny yeares together, no man daring publickly, and pro∣fessedly to say against it. But, which is most of all, subscribed it is, as the faith of our Church, by these very Opponents. Yea, a high degree of contention it must be accounted because, the minde from whence it did flow, seemes altogether vnquiet, and restlesse. Who would not content himselfe with that faith that is thus established. I say thus, because the parties that collected it, vsed all possible diligence, and faithful∣nesse: they were learned, and of exceeding gravity, and staydnesse: all ages (with vs) haue agreed vnto their iudgements: yea, even these Opponents haue had their share in it, and not in words, onely, that passe away: but vnder their owne hand writing, that remaines for ever. Can the gainsaying of things thus adorned, and commended to these Opponents, proceed from any ground but the spirit that can finde no place to rest in? Surely no: and J presume, that every ad∣vised man will say so with me.

These Opponents doe tell vs,
 (and we must say so too, if wee will beleeue them) that, It is charity to∣wards the Romish Church that hatched this deed: but we must not trust them, the father and the childe are so vnlike. What does charity bid them hate their friend? Loues he indeed, that pulleth out his Mothers heart to giue life to her vowed foe? These Opponents may say so: because this their deed sorts with it, but, he that hath his eyes in his head, will reckon them a∣mongst that number, who casteth about firebrands, and deadly things, and saith I am in jest, Prov. 26.19. Jf then their charity was vnfeigned, they would loue their Mother first, and others after, and in relation vnto her: seeing then, these Opponents doe not so, but the contrary, we must conclude, not their charity, but, their contention, formed this deed.
This deed can be no lesse a sinne against God,
 and I thinke others will say so with me: though I giue no other reason for it, but the odious account which the Apostle makes of such as are contentious. 1 Cor. 11.16. An offence it is against our State; because, the continuance in things well ordered is a fundamentall law, in every Common-wealth. So is it an offence hai∣nous and grievous: for he that severs and puls asun∣der the limbes of the body, destroyes the person, and he that doth so, must be reckoned a maine and principall destroyer thereof; and thus doe these Opponents: the
life of our Church, and all the members thereof is made, and vnited together, into one body by the Arti∣cles of her faith: he then, that, overthrowes, and de∣stroyes those Articles; discipates, and haleth in peeces her whole body, and being: and thus doe these Oppo∣nents in their deed in question.
Punishment is due vnto them,
 & so much (J hope) J may say without offence, vnto your high, and ho∣nourable authority: because, the thing it selfe is so apparent. Very reason it selfe doth tell vs, The sub∣version of every being that is good, makes guil∣ty of punishment. Now the deed in question being a subversion of the faith of our Church of England, by the same rule, must needs likewise make so guilty. The degree of this punishment, J dare not name, J may not thinke vpon, seeing the cause now in hand is presented before your sacred Tribunall, whose office it is to discerne, determine, and adiudge the same. Yet (with all submission) J craue a word or two of that matter. If any vnder the command of Rome, should oppose the very words of the Trent Councell, especi∣ally where the thing is decreed explorately, so as no question can bee made of her sense & meaning; such a one, J say, should bee held worthy of no small pu∣nishment, and we certainly know it, because such per∣sons are pronounced accursed by that Councell; & pursued with fire, and all extremity, as perpetuall ex∣perience
doth shew. If these Opponents lived in that Church, & should defend this sentence, [The office of judging the sense & meaning of the Scrip∣tures belongs not to the Church] we might ea∣sily guesse at their punishment. Jf then) hat Church esteemeth such opposition vnto her faith to demerit so highly, how can we esteeme to deserue but little, see∣ing what their faith is to them, the same our faith is to vs: but with this difference, their faith is erroni∣ous, so is not ours; as the ensuing discourse will evi∣dently shew: how much (then an opposition to an er∣ronious faith is lesse hurtfull, then an opposition to a true faith, so much more punishment doto be deserue, that opposeth ours, more then he that opposeth theirs: & thus much is all wherewith I will trouble you tou∣ching the deed in question.
Now, J hope J may also without reproofe,
 shew some other reason whereupon to moue you. If this deed be let passe without controle, see what will follow. 1. Our enemies of the Romish Church will triumph over vs, and thus they will argue: With you is not the true Church, for where that is, there is vnity, and a meanes of vnity in all matters of faith: but these are not with you: for see, your Church beleeveth that the Romish Church hath not the nature of the true Church, yet two of yours, yea & after their subscrip∣tion, doe out face her with the contradictory, & carry
it away when they haue done, no man sayes black is their eye. 2. The salvation of the vnstable, & vn∣wise will be really hindred: such a man will say vnto our Church; if you taught mee the way to life, doubtlesse you would agree in it, or suppresse the gain∣sayers: seeing therefore you doe neither the one, nor the other; wee must conclude, that the way to life is not with you, & consequently it is no where, for in your iudgement, the Romish Church hath it not; or (at least) men of good parts might say; if you agree not vpon the way to heaven, then 'tis hopelesse for vs to finde it; because, with you are the aged in yeeres, great in experience, abundant in learning, considerate in resolving, & in the office of governing: if our hopes to finde heaven be vaine, & idle, why shall we bestow our paines that wayes? who would labour without pro∣fit? who would lay out his silver to fill his belly with the East winde? Surely no man: wherefore here is our rest, seeing there is no profit in the service of God, we will determine with our selves & say, We care not for the knowledge of the most high, let vs cast his lawes behind our back; let vs eate, and drink, for to morrow wee shall die. 3. The glory of our Church (at least) is abated, nay, I may truly say, her beauty is stayned with an eye-sore, too vgly to be looked vpon. He that casteth dirt in his Mothers face, where∣in nothing is wanting for feature, or complexion, shall
haue little thankes for his labour: what then shall bee bee accounted, that scratcheth her, till shee bleedes? Nay more, that pulleth off, & treadeth vnder foote, all the ornaments of her countenance? If our Oppo∣nents gaue the lye to a man of honest reputation, hee should disgrace him not a little; but if hee charged him with that lye, to the losse of his credit for ever, we know he should burt him finally, & for ever. But thus (J say) if no better then on this manner, deale these Opponents with their Mother the Church of England: shee hath determined what must bee held in certaine points of religion, & in that her counte∣nance exceeds in beauty; because she did so determine, for the avoiding of contention, and setling of Peace: Peace, (yea Peace) that visage of Peace, the most louely, delightfull, and acceptable countenance, of all countenances: yet beholde, & cease not to wonder, our two Opponents will not keepe this peace, they haue broken downe the walls of that fortresse, what shee intended for vnity, & concord they divert to fracti∣on, and discord, & so haue robbed her, of her goodly, & beautious feature, & complexion. Nay, which is more, they haue given her that lye, which will stick to her ribbs for ever, without the exemplary punishment of these offendours: for, if she be false in her greatest children, for learning, gravity, wisedome, & piety, all met together, when they gaue that witnesse; then
who will trust her? for, if her word can be true at a∣ny time, it would be true then. Now, those, & each one of them, are so inconvenient that, J conceiue, they must be esteem'd so intollerable, if that be so, wee haue good reason to bemoane our selues vnto you, & seeke for redresse at your hands.
Can wee imagine,
 that, our Church and the soules of her children, onely, shall bee losers by this deed in question? Surely no man can bee so much mistaken: for marke, if they scape with this deed, who will not thus argue? If Opposers in matters of faith bee not reck ned offedours, then Opposers in matters of State must be held innocent, seeing the first is of more dan∣gerous consequence then the second. If wee may op∣pose the State, who vvill obey? seeing liberty is bet∣ter fancied then subiection, Jf vvee are freed from obedience, then farevvell government: seeing, to go∣verne, & to obey, are such relatiues as doe stand, & fall together. If then, governing & obeying be taken avvay, all things come to confusion. As then vvee vvill a void destruction to our Church, & Common∣vvealth, so must vve open our selues before you, & eraue your assistance.
Hither to I haue opened our cause,
 & the reason of our request, it remaineth, (as some men vvould con∣ceiue) that I moue you also to the manner vvherein to proceed in the cause: but, I altogether decline that,
such assurance haue I of the abundant wisdome iudge∣ment, learning, & providence vvhich dvvelleth a∣mongst you, that in my selfe I blush to thinke of that deed. Some perhaps would incourage mee to provoke you to redresse this evill by force of Argument, but that pleaseth me as little: because I know the trueth of God remaineth with you, & therewithall the loue of the trueth; so as, you cannot be negligent in this businesse: seeing the loue of the trueth causeth such as haue it, to doe nothing against the trueth, but for it, I am assured, the voice of Christ when he comes to Iudge the world, does perpetually sound in your eares; even as if by liuely & personall voice, you heard him say: Thou good Steward, and faithfull, thou hast beene faithfull in a little, I will make thee Ruler over much, enter into your Masters joy.
Shall I tell you, no hindrance lyeth in your way,
 that may discourage you from this worke? No, no: that is altogether needlesse. Wherefore J haue no more to say, but (in the words of God himselfe:) Goe on in this thy strength, thou mighty man: for God is with you. And we, for our parts, doe liue in a ioyfull expectation, of a good, & a happy issue, because we know, God is the authour of trueth, and his eye lids preserue pure knowledge, at whose ari∣sing all his enemies, (even the maintainers of er∣rour) shall be scattered: And you most graue &
honourable Senatours are worthy, watchfull, & provi∣dent instruments vnto his sacred Maiesty our dread Soveraigne, in procuring the welfare of all the true members of this our English Church & Common∣wealth, among which members I rest,

