



ALbeit (right worshipfull) Much reading (as wise Sa∣lomon saith) is a wearinesse of the flesh:Ecclesiastes 12▪ 12, yet it is daily seene, that as many mens mouths loue to taste of diuers dishes, so many mens mindes take delight in reading diuers Bookes: especially if they finde that they fitte their hu∣mours. For some can away with no pen, but that which is dipt in gall: O∣ther
some like only of such pens as are dipt in hony. Some loue that which tasteth sowre: some that which tasteth sweet. Some in reading seeke for pro∣fite, some for pleasure, and some for both; So that hee laboureth in vaine, that shall study to please all. What profite (with delight) the reader shall finde here (I meane the vnlearned rea∣der, not the learned) when he hath read it ouer he shall see: and as hee findeth, so let him report: alwayes remembring that men haue their infirmities, & that God onely is wise. And because it is the part of vs that are Ministers, to do what in vs lyeth to season mens soules with the Salt of the word, I was bold to take the name of a Salter, and with such Salt as I found in the Lords Store-house, to shew my selfe willing to season (through Gods helpe) such as shall stand in need hereof. I could wish with all my heart, that such as want any of this kinde of salt would go themselues to the pits, and places from
whence I had it. But for that some are ke to sicke Patients, which not being ble to go themselues to the Apothe∣aries for Purges or Cordials, or what else they want, take them at the hands of the Physition: I haue taken some paines to prouide, and haue in a eadinesse to serue such Chapmen as shall come vnto me for themselues or their friends; and I trust it shall doe them good, if they will suffer them∣selues to be seasoned with it. And be∣cause there be many which being ter∣rified by Iesuites and others, refuse to come to our Churches; and some, which though they do come, yet can∣not away with some Rites and Cere∣monies that are yet in vse here: I haue in the end of this Sale set downe a fa∣miliar and charitable conference with both sorts. As for the more learned sort of Recusants, if that which is writ∣ten by those Reuerend and Learned Men now gone to God, B. Iewel, Do∣ctor Fulke, Maister Nowel, and others,
will not satisfie them, I know not what to say to them, but leaue them to the Lord, who ordereth and disposeth all things in Heauen and Earth to his owne glory.
And now to end; I beseech your Worships, sith some (vnknowne to me I protest) haue brought these my poore labours to the Presse, bee not offended with mee for placing you in the fore-front of them: but (like Courteous Knights) defend them, not with your keene Swords, but with your kinde words.
At Leckhamsteed, Nouemb. 9. 1611.

