



Madame.
THis censorious Age wants not many who judge of Bookes by their Vol∣lume, and such will thinke the Dedication of this short Discourse ra∣ther





a Disparagement then an Honour to your Ladiship, not confide∣ring the Dignity of the Contents, nor the limits of a Homily. The curi∣osity of this their Vo∣luminous ignorance, I shall very shortly satisfie by placing your Ladi∣ships name before a farre greater Worke; which (Heaven asststing) may Eternize You and it selfe. In the meane time, to the more knowing, this Treatise will appeare as great in Value as small in

Bulke. The Subject of it is the Obiect of our faith, and the Worker of our Redemption, Christ Iesus, without whose merito∣rious Oblation man were more miserable then the Beasts themselves, or the very stones he treads on, to whom there is no paine after this Life, no Hell awarded. Had not He endured unexpressa∣ble torments on the Crosse, wee had never beene pertakers of the inconceiveable ioyes in Heaven. It is not with

us Christians, as with the Heathen; for the ri∣fing of the Sunne they adore brings them light, but the setting of the Sunne we worship gives us an Eternall Day. This bitter Passion of his, that wee might remember hee instituted his last Supper; the principall time of whose Celebra∣tion is now at hand. You have a Soule cleare, and prepar'd to entertayne this Royall Guest, in whom Maiesty, and Hu∣mility gave each other

the first kisse. You have the peace of Conscience farre above that of Na∣tions, which commonly is made upon necessity, and broken upon advan∣tage, whereas this▪ is fixt (like the great Infu∣ser of it) and transcends all humane happinesse whatsoever. You have a Charity ready to em∣brace all that meere it, and to pardon all that provoke it, You are friends with all, and surely none Enemies to you. If any such there

are, they can be no o∣ther then the Windfalls of Nature, such as nei∣ther Vertue, nor any of her generous Brood will stoope to gather. You have no crying Vices that call upon GOD for Vengeance, but cry∣ing Vertues you have many, which call up∣on Men for applanse & admiration. These per∣fections of yours, Ma∣dame, will receive, if no encrease, certainly no diminution by the pervsall of this sad Dis∣course,

which will infect you with sorrow; but such a noble one, as will well become you, and render you amiable in the eyes of your Re∣deemer. Hee long pre∣serve your Ladiship on earth, a glory to your Sexe, Nane, and Nation, and give You a seate in Heaven next your most excellent Mother, the very imputation of whose pious and He∣roicke actions is able to restore luster to a Fa∣mily as long lost to Ho∣nour,

& Vertue as Yours hath enjoyed their glo∣rious Shine. And this prayer shall be as exten∣sive as the life of
Madam,

