


SIR:
AS it pleased you to appoint mee a certaine time, to giue answere of my pur∣pose, or refusal of Conformi∣tie: So I haue at last resolued to offer it vnto you in these my Letters; Confessing ingenuously, (for some re∣spects seeming weighty to my poore iudgement) my vnwillingnesse thereto, if by any meanes I
 might auoide it: Howbeit, seeing I see the sway of Authoritie ouer-ruling, and inforcing thereun∣to, partly in obedience to it, and partly for other more important reasons swaying my Conscience; I giue you to vnderstand, that I am resolued to Con∣forme. To the which resolution, I confesse I was the rather drawen, by the mixture of your dis∣creete proceedings, yet not so much driuen there∣unto by your publike authoritie, as drawen by your priuate lenitie and kindnesse, and vndeserued re∣spect vnto my meannesse; I being well acquainted with the common condition of mans will which may be induced, when it cannot be inforced. And I trust with equall good conscience and successe, to pro∣ceede and continue in seruice vnto God and to his Church in this my Conformitie, as before I did in not Conforming: And I heartily wish, that in the like case all others did the like. This I can say, that my indeauours haue not beene wanting to perswade others, wherein I haue preuailed with not a few: And I am perswaded, that if my reasons of this point, might see the light (authoritie giuing way thereunto) it would more preuaile to induce men of contrarie iudgement, then many other bookes pen∣ned to that purpose. Not for any worth of Art
 or reading that is in them more then others, my selfe being the meanest of many thousands for a matter of this nature: But partly in respect of the qualitie of the penner, (which haue beene I confesse a Non-conformitan) and partly because of the con∣clusion prooued, which inforceth the imputation of a sinne vpon the sufferers of silencing for not confor∣ming; a matter which of all things the Ministers of this kinde will least indure: And partly also for the sufficiency of the Truth presented in those reasons.
Now, if any shall thinke the booke vnfit to bee published, because it reacheth not home to prooue the conueniency or necessitie of the Ceremonies themselues: they may bee pleased to consider, that this position of mine, being onely proposed by way of presupposall, concludeth nothing to crosse that. I haue endeauoured to prooue this, others (whose knowledge and dexteritie is greater) haue libertie to prooue further if they please. But this I may more then probably affirme, that the very most of not conforming Ministers will hearken vnto this, when (I am assured) they will not vnto that. My reasons I offer to your Learned view, and correction of authoritie. If any thing bee found in them hindering the passage thereof, I wish it bee
 censured with a Deleatur: For that my intenti∣on is not rashly to thrust out any thing offensiue to authoritie, but that which may bee to the profit of the Church: Which I humbly desire of God in this, and al other mine indeauours for his owne names sake. To whose sauing grace in Christ, I commend you, with many thankes for your many vndeserued fauours. This 21. of October 1617. Thornebury.

