



BEeyng my selfe (Right vvorship∣full) earnestly re∣quested of many that feare GOD, and sundry of my friends, being laboured by others of the god∣ly to persuade vvith me, for the publishing suche doctrine, as it pleased God to giue me to vt∣ter at Paules Crosse not long sithence, I haue at length yeel∣ded
 vnto their earnest sute, not beeing ignorante hovve manye sharp censures vvill passe vpon this my doing, nor yet vvhat diuers iudgements shall be giuē of this my trauell. But hovvsoe∣uer mē iudge or thinke, as tou∣ching my self,1. Cor. 4.3. I say vvith Paule, I passe very little to be iudged of them, or of mans iudgement, no, I iudge not mine ovvn selfe. There is a God that iudgeth, vvho knovveth my singlenesse in this behalf, and that the only marke I shoote at in the put∣ting it to print, is his glory, and the further profiting of hys Churche, and greater edifying of his people: for if it pleased him in greate mercie to graunte
 such successe vnto that vvhyche vvas then spoken by mouth vn∣to a fevv, that they vvere therby instructed to amendmente of life, I doubte not, but of lyke goodnesse he vvill graunte, that the making heereof by vvrigh∣ting common vnto manye, as it vvill longer and more surely re∣maine settled in their memories, so it vvil also vvorke more frute∣fully, to their putting it in dayly vre and practise. And as all the vertues vvhiche are heere sette dovvne to be in Cornelius, are suche, as ought of euery good Christiā to be follovved: so the godly bringing vp of all his fa∣mily in the feare of the Lorde, being on our parts after his ex∣ample
 faithfully performed, the Lord vvil in like sort blesse this needefull trauell in vs, as he did in him. Wherfore I am humbly in Christes name, to request all your Worships, vvith the rest of Cornelius his vertues, chiefly to bee carefull to practise this, of trayning vp your children and families in the word & knovv∣ledge of the Lorde, and so shall you haue them godly, obediēt, gentle, trustie, and faithfull, like as othervvise you vvil find them vvicked, vnruly, stubborne, pic∣kers and stealers, vntrue and vn∣faithfull. Novv concerning my purpose, of offering this my simple labour and trauaile, such as it is, vnto youre vvorships fa∣uourable
 acceptation, there bee many causes and reasons mo∣uing me therevnto, but chiefely that this vvay I might leaue vn∣to the vvorlde a testimonie of a dutifull and thankefull mind for your good vvilles tovvards me, in placing me Scholemaister of your free Schole of Tūbridge, honorably foūded by that vvor∣thy Knight Sir Andrevve Iud, sometime Lord Maior of youre famous Citie of London, and vvorshipfullye and liberally to youre great costes and charges mainteyned, against the bad at∣temptes of those that vvente a∣bout to haue made it their ovvn priuate possession, vvhiche facte of him, the honorable founder,
 and you the vvorthye maintey∣ners & defenders, I trust the L. vvill vse as good examples, to moue others to do the like, for the training vp of youth in the feare of God, vvhich dutie I be∣seech him to grant me faithfully to performe tovvardes youre Schollers, vnder my charge, to his glory, your ioy and cōforte, and the benefite of his Church in time to come: and that finally according to his good pleasure, he vvould long blesse and pros∣per youre Worships, to the maintenance of all good lear∣ning & godlines. Fare you vvel. From your free Schole at Tun∣bridge this .4. of Septem. 1578.

