


SIR,
I Present unto your Ma∣jestie a defence of the common Quarrell and Libertie, which the whole World expect∣eth and waiteth for, from the happie suc∣cesse of your designes: Her Cause can more justly be consecrated to
 none, because it can more powerfully be defended by none. This Controversie, touching a matter of singular excellencie, is publike; and therefore ought not to be agitated, but before them, upon whom the publike safetie relyeth. The securitie of the Christian World is invaded; and there∣fore assistance is to be craved from Him alone, who onely can when he will, and will when he can, restore peace and tranquillitie to the World. The ambition of the Enemies, is insatiable: whilest it is preparing a Warre for Europe, it published a counterfeit Peace to the Germans. To the end, that it may openly deceive, it doth secretly make an agreement; that it may more safely beguile men unarmed, it doth in name onely banish Warre out of the Empire: This fraudulent agreement hath beene rejected by the valour of the Swedes, repelled by the for∣titude of the French, and despised by the con∣stancie of the Protestants. For this cause, they are proscribed as Enemies of the common peace, and disturbers of the publike quiet; and although they doe with force of Armes ende∣vour the common Concord, yet being left deso∣late and innocent, they beare the blame of the
 continued Warre. By this Worke, we answere that Calumnie, and turning backe the points of the Darts upon our Adversaries, we shew, that they onely are the Confederate Enemies of Peace, who carrying ordinarily in their mouthes the name of Quiet, doe meditate in their hearts perpetuall Warres and Discords; and masking their Tyrannie with the name of Libertie, their Invasion with Pietie, and their Conspiracies with publike Securitie, with a counterfeit shew and specious colour, doe attribute most honest names unto most dis-honest actions, and most dis-honest actions unto most honest names. As if your Majestie, and yours, did of your owne accord take Armes against them, and not by compulsion repell Armes, voluntarily taken a∣gainst you and your Confederates; or, as if they did ever offer any Peace unto you, but an un∣just one, or you ever refused any just one; or, as if they can hope for any firme tranquillitie, as long as they retaine to themselves those estates of other mens, which they have, and lay claime to those they have not. But men, who have no colour of title to possesse things belong∣ing to strangers, have need to betake them∣selves
 to fallacies of words, thereby to deceive those that will beleeve them, as well by words as by deeds. You, SIR, who have Iustice for your Companion in all your doings, need no cases, or out-sides of words; but you doe ex∣presse in words the sinceritie which you practise in your life. For you keeping a Watch over the publike tranquillitie, and not over your owne private benefit, doe so defend that which is your owne, that you covet not that which is another mans; you doe so protect your friends, that you doe not oppresse them as your enemies; and though your selfe doe injurie to none, yet you revenge the injurie done to your Confederates; and doe advance the bounds of your Empire rather by the glory of your brave actions, then by the extending of your Territories. Where∣upon it falleth out, that as there can be no com∣parison of peoples, or parallell of strength be∣twixt your subjects and friends, and your ene∣mies, so there is also a vast dissimilitude of causes. They professing a horrible ambition of ruling over all, out of the private and greedie desire of Soveraigntie, doe pick a quarrell against the Church, and doe raise the Armes of the Empire
 unprovoked, in a most violent manner, against those that would oppose them; they doe compell the people, by enticing and drawing them on with specious shewes and names of things, to serve their ambition; and endevour to bring all Germanie under their yoke meerly through necessitie of despaire; having beene for many yeeres past pittifully oppressed with a most grie∣vous Warre, and exhausted of all her strength and wealth. Your Majestie being content with the Territories of your fore-fathers, and your owne triumphs, doth never take Armes, but a∣gainst your will; never lay them downe, but willingly; and having used them onely for the defence of your subjects, your friends, and com∣mon right, doth maintaine the libertie of all, the securitie of every one, and the safetie of Eu∣rope, with no lesse clairitie then you go ne them with equitie. Whereupon it commeth to passe, that whereas the captivitie of the Empire seemeth to be greedily gaped after by them re∣coverie of libertie is endevoured and effected by you; the World is troubled by them, pacified by you, and Germanie, oppressed by them, is relieved and restored by you. And let all things
 be so subject to the Lawes of Heaven, that Iu∣stice, Vertue, and Felicitie fighting on your side, and Trecherie, Cowardise, and Calamitie taking part with your Enemies, Providence may con∣fesse, that she oweth Victorie to the one, and Vengeance to the other. Therefore, Most Christian King, be pleased to entertaine this Opening and Pleading of the Publike Cause, and to take knowledge of the Innocencie of this continued Warre, presented to you in writing, as you doe defend and countenance it in action. Let your Majesties protection be open to the defence of Libertie, who even from your tender age have ever beene a Sanctuarie to the ba∣nished, a Refuge to your Confederates, a safe∣gard to the afflicted, and a most certaine com∣fort to all people. Your friends relying upon this, will not feare any Warre from their Ene∣mies, and will hope for a Peace from you, that shall uphold Law and Iustice: Which Peace, when you shall have redeemed the Right of common Libertie, you will resolve upon; having resolved, you will give it; and having given it, you will preserve it for ever.
