



RIght Worshipfull, the principall thing of which I reade in holy Scriptures which makes vs both acceptable to God, & approued of the god∣ly, is the grace of regeneration, & to become new creatures, this a∣lone, when all other things faile, commends vs to God, this distin∣guisheth the good from the bad,
 the precious from the vile, the godly from the wicked: this grace Right worshipfull, as being of all others most requisite, I most wil∣lingly commend to your wise and Christian Consideration, hauing experience of your Christian loue. The authour of this Psalme was blessed Dauid the sweet singer of Israel, wherein the Prophet tea∣ches vs the way to true blessednes, that is, to feare God and delight in his Commandements, for cir∣cumcision is nothing,1. Cor. 7.29 and vncir∣cumcision, is nothing, but the kee∣ping of the Commandements of God, I may truly say of this new creature,Prou. 31.29 as Salomon speaketh of the vertuous woman, many are the graces of Gods spirit, but this excels them all.
This is it indeede which will make you thrise blessed, both of
 God and all good men, for the kingdome of God is not meate & drinke, but righteousnesse, peace,Rom. 14.17 18. and ioy in the holy ghost, and hee that in these things serueth God is acceptable to him,1. Sam. 2.30 and approo∣ued of men, they that thus honor God, hee will honour, whereas those that despise him neglecting the meanes of regeneration, shall be lightly esteemed, for there is no respect of persons with God, but be hee what he will be, noble or ignoble, in euery nation, he that feareth God,Act 10.35. and worketh righte∣ousnesse, is accepted with him. First therefore seeke the kingdom of God and his righteousnesse, and all other things (as honour,Mat. 6.33. wealth, and riches) shall bee cast vpon you, namely, in the sober vse of lawfull meanes, this is the good and right way only to feare
 the Lord, and to serue him in truth with all our hearts:1. Sam. 12.23.24. by this ye shall be sure to haue the honor that comes from God, as Christ sayth,Ioh. 12.26. If any man serue me, him will my father honour; whereas on the contrary, without this we can neuer haue Gods approba∣tion, though wee may haue the worlds commendation, yea thogh the world, and all men in the world speake wel of vs, we may be accursed:Luke 26. Cursed are you when all men praise you; that is, if God dis∣praise you, and ye want his appro∣bation and commendation. Woe be vnto you, though all men speak well of you, and know it for your vnspeakeable comfort,Psal. 4.3. that you being godly, God setteth you a part for his owne selfe, all Gods delight is vppon the Saints on earth,Psal. 16.4. and vpon such as excell in
 vertue, the Lord taketh pleasure in those that feare him, the Lord ta∣keth pleasure in his people,Psal. 147. & 149.4. & will beautifie the meeke with saluation and remember with ioy the words of God by Moses, if wee heare Gods voyce indeed, with care & conscience to practise it, by liuing in faith, repentance, and new obe∣dience,Exod. 19.5. you are Gods chiefe trea∣sure aboue all people, though all the earth be his. Thus hoping for pardon of my boldnesse, I intreat your fauourable acceptance and patronage hereof, & humbly take my leaue, beseeching Almighty God to blesse you & yours, with the encrease of all blessings spiri∣tuall and temporall, according to the many graces bestowed vpon you. The Lord Iesus Christ him∣selfe, and God, euen our Father, which hath loued vs, and hath gi∣uen
 vs euerlasting consolation, & good hope through grace, esta∣blish you in euery good word & worke, the Lord fill you with all spirituall grace, that so you may be presented most glorious with∣out spot & wrinkle in the Church triumphant, and that by our most blessed and alone Sauiour Iesus Christ the righteous, to whom be glory and maiestie, dominion and power, now and for euer, Amen.

