



RIght Honourable, being in∣formed by my learned friend and most earnest and effe∣ctuall furtherer of Nauiga∣tion for the common good of his countrey M. Richard Hackluit, vpon the dedica∣tion of his first volume of discoueries vnto your Lor. about a yeere since, of the singular affection your Lor. beareth towardes the aduancement of knowledge and skill among our seamen in marine causes; so farre foorth that to the end they might be the more stirred vp and holpen this way, your Lor. would not onely be a meane vnto her Maiestie for the establishing of an ordinary Lecture to be read for their instruction, but also rather then so good a purpose should fall to the ground would be at some charges your selfe for the bringing of it to effect: I conceiued no smal comfort vpon this report,

considering that now of late, the right honorable Count Maurice of Nassaw, L. high Admirall of the vnited Prouinces of the low countries hath shewed himselfe wholly to be of your Lor. minde, thinking it a most principal point for the welfare of their estate to haue their mariners now entring in∣to long voyages to be better informed in matters cō∣cerning their faculty, thē heretofore they haue bene. To which end he hath lately caused a certaine ex∣hortatory iniunction to be published, and hath also giuen commandement that the same should be dili∣gētly obserued by all masters of ships and their com∣panies within the same Prouinces. By obseruation wherof they may haue a more certaine and compen∣dious way, whereby they may guide themselues to come to any place they shall desire at sea, with a streighter course, and in shorter time then hath bin commonly accustomed: VVhich way is to be found by knowledge of the latitude and variation of the place wherto they purpose to go. For seeing one and the same place hath alwaies the same latitude and variation, whereof the one sheweth what situation the place hath between North and South, the other between East and VVest, it cannot be but that the master of the ship bringing himselfe to the latitude

and variation of the place to which he purposeth to go, must needs bring himselfe to the same place also.
Considering therefore howe great profit might hereby redound to seamen if the variations of all places were truely known, the said Count Mau∣rice hath giuen commandement to all that shall take charge of ships, that before they set forth, they should prouide themselues meete instruments for that purpose, that into what place soeuer they shall come, they may diligently search out the declination of the magneticall needle from the true North (which they cōmonly cal the variation of the Com∣passe) and that after their returne into their owne countrey they should giue a true certificate of those obseruations to the rest of their collegues and com∣panies of the Admiralty, that by them they may be brought into some good order and method, and so be published for their common good. Desiring also as it may appeare to stirre vp other nations to the same care and diligence in obseruing the variation, he hath caused the said iniunction to be published, not only in his own natiue tongue, but in the French and Latine also: intending (as it may seeme hereby) to make not only it, but also his honorable desire in furthering this obseruation commonly known to

all Christendome. Desiring therefore, according to the measure of my small abilitie, to be a fur∣therer of so good a purpose of so famous a per∣sonage, I haue done mine indeuour to make the same knowen to all English mariners, by publishing the foresaid Iniunction in their mother tongue: nothing doubting, but as they haue not bene inferiour to a∣ny nation, either for excellency of skill, or felicitie in performance of their most wonderfull Nauiga∣tions, and that principally in this most happy time of your Lor. enioying your most honorable office of high Admiralty: So, if it might please your Lor. to giue them to vnderstand that your Lor. would be very loth that English mariners (whom I haue knowen to haue had the skill, to finde out places at sea by the latitude & variation, after the same ma∣ner that is prescribed in this booke, more then ten yeres since) should now (either for too much spa∣ringnes in not preparing, or for want of diligence in heedful vsing meete instrumēts for that purpose) cast themselues behinde the Netherlanders; there may assured hope be conceiued, that they wil not on∣ly not come behind, but farre exceed, and go beyond them, or any other nation. And so much the rather there is reason to induce vs to be of this opinion, be∣cause

there hath bene a secret of the magneticall needle first reuealed by our countriman M. Rob. Norman, wherof other nations as yet seeme to be ignorant, I meane the falling of the North end of the needle touched with the loadstone vnder the ho∣rizon. Of which new-found propertie if there shal be diligent and continuall obseruation made, espe∣cially in long voyages, there may in all likelihood no lesse profit arise thereby then by the variation.
Considering therefore how greatly your Lor. au∣thority, yea inclination or beck onely mought pre∣uaile to moue the minds of all English mariners to the diligent, heedfull, and continual obseruation of these so rare and wonderful properties of the mag∣neticall needle, at all places wheresoeuer they shall come, wherby so great profit may assuredly redound not onely to seamen, but euen to the whole body of the Christian commonwealth: I was imboldened, recounting with my selfe your Lor. exceeding cle∣mencie conioyned with so high authority to bring before your most honorable presence this Dutch Pi∣lot (as it were, for so I may not vnfitly call this booke) whom since his arriuall here I haue onely taught to speake English that so he might be the more seruiceable vnto your Lor. and to all English

seamē in that he professeth, which is to bring them to any place in the main Ocean, by a shorter course, then hath bene accustomed. VVherein because the renowmed Count Maurice his master hath giuē him so great credit, as to cōmand him to be imploied by al that take charge of ships vnder his office of admiralty, may it therfore please your L. to affoord him the fauour as to commend him to all English maisters to be thorowly examined by due triall of exact obseruatiō in al places at sea; to the end that if he shall be found indeed to performe so much as he promiseth (whereof there is giuen exceeding great hope by proofe already made by some of our skilful∣lest English nauigators) he may for euer after be re∣ceiued with enterteinmēt worthy so notable seruice.
Thus nothing doubting that this Dutch Pilot so highly commended by so worthy a personage, shall find such fauourable acceptation at your L. hands, as in your Lor. high wisedom to him duely appertai∣neth: I most humbly beseech the Lord of all Lords to increase your Lor. with all true honour in this life, and with endlesse blisse in that life which shal last for euer. 23. Aug. 1599.

