



RIght Honorable, the former Treatise, which within these two yeeres I pre∣sented vnto your Honour, I compiled out of two worthie works, written in Latine, by that worthie seruant of Iesus Christ, and famous light of the Church of Christ, Doctor Whita∣kers, against two sworne slaues of Antichrist, Campian and Dureus, and I brought them by your Ho∣nours appointment, into one vo∣lume,
 and translated them into our owne tongue. The subiect of it was faith, the defence of the true Catholike faith, as it is held in our Church, and all the Churches of God, against those Catholike de∣prauers of it. And now I offer vn∣to your Honour (a free will offe∣ring) a Treatise of practise, and o∣bedience, containing the doctrine of repentance, Isai. 22.12. Calling to weeping, and mourning, to baldnes, and gir∣ding with sackcloath. A point of that necessitie, that Christ maketh mans saluation, or damnation to depend on it: Luke 13.3. Except you amend your liues, yee shall all likewise perish: and of which Chrysostom speaketh thus: Non cecidisse graue est, sed post lapsum non resurrexisse, sa∣tanicum & per∣nitiosum est. Chrysost. hom. 22. ad pop. An∣och. It is no great thing to fall into sinne, but it is diuellish, and deadlie, after the fall not to rise again: where∣upon the Lord saith, Ierem. 8.22. Is there no balme in Gilead? is there no Physiti∣an there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recoue∣red? Yet happily may it seeme to most men, to bee an vntimelie
 birth, to be brought foorth now in the daies, & time of our Isai. 22.13. ioy and gladnesse, slaying of oxen, and killing of sheepe, eating of flesh, and drinking of wine: and if that was wisdome in Abigail, 1. Sam. 25.36. not vpon Nabals feast day, not when his heart was mer∣rie within him, to acquaint him with heauie newes, and mourne∣ful tidings of Dauids wrath and re∣solution, but to stay till the feast was ended; it may happilie in me be iudged a point of follie, while our feasts lasts, yea in the middest of our reioycing, to offer to your Lordship, and the view of others, this tractate of sadnes and sorrow, mourning and humiliation. My apologie is at hand, my defence not farre to seeke.
The case is not alike, and so our course may well differ; for with them the danger was well ouer, Dauids wrath was well appeased, so that shee might with safetie watch a fitter opportunitie, to communicate those things vnto
 him. But with vs, and our times, the danger is imminent, our Da∣uid is not appeased; Isai. 9.12. For his hād is stretched out still; so that delay were now very dangerous, and not to hasten to the practise of it, verie pernicious to mens both pre∣sent and future state.
Skilfull Physitians haue their time of the yeere, of the Moone, and of the signe, which they hold best and fittest for letting of blood, cutting, searing, and admi∣nistring of purging potions; yet if they see the state of the sicke pati∣ent cannot well abide so long vn∣dealt with, but in some diseases it be dangerous to delay a day, nay but a few houres, (as in a pluresie) they wil open a veine, though the signe be in the vitall parts, which in their generall practise they hold vnfit, and often ioyned with great danger: neither doe men vsuallie reprooue them for it, vnlesse it be out of their ignorance. Can I then of any man be iustly blamed, if I
 offer this spirituall Physicke to all, and be S. Pauls preacher 2. Tim. 4.2. Out of sea∣son, euen now as it were to let the sicke blood, when the signe is ve∣rie nie the heart? Seeing if wee had no particular occasion, by Gods iudgements, yet the gene∣rall condition of all, who are mor∣tall, and the generall infection of all, who are sinfull, and the abso∣lute necessitie of this dutie, which being not taken in hand in time, but deferred a day, nay an houre or two, may as much danger the spirituall estate of the soule, as o∣mitting of bleeding in a pluresie, may the health of the bodie. See∣ing the Scripture speaketh but of one time or day, of turning vnto God, which time and tide being not taken, there is no turning of the tide againe, no reuolution of the time, but that though a man may liue with Esau many a yeere after he hath lost ye opportunitie of the blessing, and of repentance, to seeke it, and that with a
 fountaine of teares, Heb. 12.17. Yet hee may not find place to repentance. It cannot then vpon the point bee vnseasonable, for me to cal for this in euery season; which at no time can come too soone, nor yet too late, so it be serious, and true: but the occasion being let slip, cannot be recouered againe, if a man would giue a world for it. Besides, I am not without president of the like. For the holy man Iob, Iob 1.5. called, and commanded his sonnes to sacrifice, and so to repent (for thi∣therto the burnt offerings hee made, led them) not at the end of their feasts, when their seuen daies were ouer, but euery day, lest that should fall out which hee feared, that they should sinne a∣gainst God, though it were but in their hearts, (so carefull was he) a thing easily seasing vpon the hart, hands, and tongue, when the re∣bell flesh is pampered with full diet, and many dishes, and the mind with pleasures and delites
 transported out of it selfe; yea and fearing also, that which after fell out, lest if they deferred their re∣pentance, and seeking of reconci∣liation, they might be ouertaken with death in the very act of their feasting, Vers. 18.19. as they afterward were, when they began their courses of feasting, euen in the first day. Hath not that also some resem∣blance with this, Iohn 19.41. that Ioseph built his sepulchre in the place of his pleasure, his garden, as knowing how easie it was for him in his pleasures to forget himselfe, and his end? And if we be men of the same matter, and cast in the same mould, yet their holines excee∣ding ours, this doctrine of humili∣ation, may not be vnfit for vs, not onely to be known but practised, lest if wee deferre it, it should fall out with some of vs (as it may wel with all) for any Writ of pri∣uiledge wee can sue out, that wee may with Iobs sonnes, bee taken before our feasts be ouer, and ere
 euer the time of feasting come.
If this season be vnfit, because the time is our feast, yet being the doctrine of mortification and re∣nouation, of putting off the old man, and putting on the new, of making 2. Cor. 1.17. men new creatures in Christ Iesus, when old things are passed a∣way, and all things are become new; I suppose it to haue a speciall fitnes for the time.
Now this I offer to your Ho∣nor, to continue the signification of my dutie, begun in the former, as by a freewill offering, when the other was enioined by your Ho∣nour, and so could not so effectu∣ally intimate my dutie. Yet in this I respect not dutie only, but desire of your Lordships spirituall, and eternall honor, which must be ob∣tained by walking this way, or els there is no way to compasse it.
I vndertooke to handle this point publikely, at the request of diuers of my auditorie, who had often heard me presse the necessi∣tie
 of it, and yet not so distinct∣lie conceiuing the nature of the thing, desired I would diuert my ordinary course of preaching, and handle this point at the full, and in all the particulars.
I now haue written it by others importunitie, who desired it for a more publike good, and offer it first vnto your Honour, which I desire might haue not the least, but the best part, and profit in it, and by it.
May it please your Honour to heare thus much from mee, that this dutie belongs to honourable Personages, men of your place, as well as to the poorest pesants, as the precepts of the scriptures, and the practise of King Dauid; Salo∣mon, Manasses, and others doe proue. The reason of which is, be∣cause now though there be diffe∣rence of men, as there is of coun∣ters, while the Merchants account lasteth, some standing for pence, some for pounds, some for hun∣dreds
 and thousands: and as of plaiers while they are vpon the stage, some going for rich, some for poore, some for knights, some for kings while the play continu∣eth; and as of trees in the forrest, some are oakes, some elmes, some poplers, some thornes, some briers and brambles, while they stand growing: yet when the ac∣count is ended, when the play is finished, when the trees are cut downe, specially burnt to ashes, there will bee no difference at all. So, and more it wil be after death, when men shall al appeare before Gods iudgement seate, that there will be no difference, specially in respect of God; for then shall the poore appeare without their rags, and the rich without their bags, Kings without their crownes, Nobles without their ensignes of honours, Bishops without their rochets, Iudges without their commission, Sergeants without their coifes, Lawyers, Ministers,
 and other scholars without de∣grees, and signes of order, yea e∣uery man as naked as he came in∣to the world, and more naked then he went out of it, by as much as his winding sheete, coffin or tombe commeth to. But euerie man shall haue the workes of his person, place, age and condition with him; hee that hath eschew∣ed euill, and done good, hee that hath mortified the flesh with the lusts thereof, and been re∣nued in the inward man, (the ve∣rie pith and marrow of his repen∣tance) Rom. 2.7. He that by continuing in well doing, hath sought glory, and honour, and immortalitie, shall haue eternall life; whereas hee that hath but pampered the flesh, and tooke all care to fulfill the lusts of it, renu∣ing nothing, but retaining old A∣dam Vers. 8.9. Disobeying the truth, and obey∣ing vnrighteousnesse, shall haue in∣dignation, and wrath, tribulation and anguish, &c. whether hee bee Iew or Grecian, one or other, whatsoeuer
 he be, Vers. 11. for there is no respect of per∣sons with God.
If I bee blamed for bringing this doctrine to the Court, and commending it to your Honor, as well as preaching it to the cōmon people, this will bee my defence.
And thus hoping of your Ho∣nours good acceptance of this small new yeeres gift: praying the Almightie to renue you by his spirit and grace, through faith and true repentance, that you may not onely continue honou∣rable vpon earth, in the Kings Court, but your Honour may be multiplied in heauen, in the Court of the King of Kings: I humblie take my leaue.

