


VVhereas you areThis epi∣stle vvas vvriten in laten by the au∣thor him selfe. (most Reuerēd Pre∣lat)
as you forefathers were by orderly
vocation placed as Patrone and pro∣tectour
to this vniuersite of Ingolstad,
sithen that also the right honorable
Prince Albert Duke of Bauaria hath
set me ouerseer and gouuerner of the same, it had be∣comed
me long ere this time to haue offred vnto you
my seruice: especially hauing certain matters commit∣ted
to my charge, whereof I should before this time
haue conferred with you. But whereas oure volun∣tarie
deliberation by trouble of time was defeated, be∣ing
constrained, not as I would but as I was forced,
to yelde to necessite, and therefore must omitte the
one, and do the other: Yet in this busines to be some∣what
occupied, and in the principall by the waye to
be doing, I haue not suffred suche leasure as at times
happened, to passe withoute some frute of publicke
commodite. Whereof hauing longe thought, it se∣med

me, I coulde not by the waie more profitably be
doing then if (at what time other plaie or banquet) I
laboured vppon some such thing as might enforme
the poore deceaued people, and not offend rulers and
magistrats. And to this ende truly, these darke win∣ter
dayes as leasure serued me, I haue compiled this
booke, framing my stile after a rude and simple sorte,
that the vnlearned might vnderstande me, but letting
passe no iote of the truthe, to cure and remedy the
falshood. Although therefor the lerned by this booke
shall not perhaps be much instructed, yet the good
witte shall finde herein that is right worthy to be
knowen. and truly in medecines the wise Phisician
will not so much regarde that they be pleasaunt or
fayre to the eye as that they be holesome.
This is therefor my meaning and the marke I shoo¦te
at,The intēt of the au∣thor in this vvor¦ke. that the good people may be admonished of the¦ir
saluation and aduertised of the daungerous decei∣tes
of heretikes by whose crafte and guile we see the
noble Romain empire much weakened and empaired
euen nowe to fainte, and thousands of Christen sou¦les
other where daily to perish. But the deceites of the¦se
heretikes being spredd so farre and so diuersly in
Christendom, that the vnlerned can not comprise
them and the lerned scant espie them, it shall be inou¦ghe
for the people to lerne to knowe them selues to
be people, that is to vnderstande that it is ynough for
their parte to learne of the spirituall magistrat, howe
to do their duty to God, and of the ciuill or tempo∣rall
magistrat to learne their duty to their prince, and

in all thinges rather to lerne then to teache, rather to
obey then to commaunde.
For these two estates the spirituall and the tem∣porall
haue of God him selfe ben ordained, duly rece¦aued
of vs, confirmed and established by lawes: and
haue serued vs as two walles by the which the power
of the Romain empire hath ben in Germany stayed
vp and continued all most these eight hundred yea∣res.
And truly as longe as matters appertaining to
God were by the spiritualty, and the common wel∣the
by the temporalty gouuerned, and the lawes off
bothe estates ordained were inuiolatly obserued, thē
Germany might contend in wisedō with the grekes,
in stoutnes of courage with the Romanes, in god∣lines
with all Christen nations: then it mought mo∣re
surely of vs then of the Romanes be saied.
By auncient lawes and men doth stande
Thestate of Germany and Allemain lande.
Then it could, when lawes ruled men, not men the
lawes maintaine peace abrode, and reste at home: kepe
out their enemie valiantly and gouuerne their people
in all felicite.
But Satan not abiding the repos of this countre,
stirred vp Martin Luther a German borne, pricked
him with furious rage: and draue him so forwarde,
that he ouerthrew all auncient lawes, by the which
this Empire hitherto hath staied and continued: and
placed for them newe by the which it should perishe
and fall. Luther iolted and enraged by this rider Sa∣tan,
began with a fury to set vpon the two saide wal∣les

of the empire, and in shorte time, as well by his bat¦tering
the walles were sore beaten, as by the sounde
slepe of the rulers the warde and watche was forsa∣ken:
And that in such sorte, vntel one of the walles,
the Spiritualty, was vtterly ouerthrowen: the other,
the Temporalty, was put in greate hazarde: For so it
proueth in dede. when that (as the poete saieth)
The sore dissembled doth fester and groweCor. 3.
While the idle shepeard taking his ease,
Sercheth not spedely the wounde to knowe,
But asketh the Gods to cure the desease.
But this negligence being ones committed and done
it can not nowe be vndone: Yet although of thinges
past we haue the remembraunce only, consultation
or deliberation we haue none, truly I can not forget
with what a perpetuall ignominie and shame we are
to be noted, that coulde suffer a lewd frier, and that
neither craftely cladde in his shepes cote, neither ex∣cellently
lerned, to worcke so foule and so pernicious
a mischef against all Christendom, that hauing first
all most ouerthrowen the Spiritualty, he hath so
shaken and weakened also the Temporalty, that it se¦meth
rather already fallen downe then liekely to
fall.
But what entry made Luther? Howe began he to
ouerthrowe these two estates? His beginning was
surely vaine and foolish, and stuffed all with lies.
The principles and growndes (saieth he) of the papistes are the
traditions of men not expressed in holy write, the pope of Ro∣me,
doubting and vncertainte of the grace of god. But who

saieth this? Luther euery where. What witnes hath
he? Ihon Brentius in his booke of the causes of dissen∣sion:
But howe proueth he it to be trewe? for none o∣ther
reason forsothe but for that Luther is (as he sa∣ieth)
an Euāgelist, and Brentius is an other S. Ihon. I
thinke the thirtenth Apostle. But as for these princi∣ples
or groundes, there was neuer Catholike that so
much as dreamed them. so farre is it that any man af∣firmed
them or defended them.
The true principles of Diuinite with vs are and
haue allwayes ben these.The prin¦ciples of the catho¦like reli∣gion. first the worde of God to wit
the doctrine of the prophets and the Apostles, and
brefely al the holy Scripture whiche we call the Bi∣ble.
The seconde principle is the right and Catholike sen¦ce
and vnderstanding of tbe worde of God deliuered by
the Apostles to their successours and by them spred
through the whole worlde, declared also in many
Councels of the holy fathers and brought in to Ca∣nons.
For this Catholike exposition of the holy scri∣pture,
bicause it was deliuered vnto the Apostles by
Christ him selfe, and by them left vnto their lawfull
successours with the very text of the scripture, the∣refore
it is cōmonly called the Tradition of the holy
fathers, and oftentimes, the vnwriten verite in re∣spect
of the writen texte. And bicause the truthe off
the text and of the right vnderstanding of the texte
must nedes be all one, truly our aduersaries do slaun¦der
vs, fayning that in triall off cōtrouersies we woul¦de
beside the worde of God sett as iudge the tra∣ditions
of men directly against the worde of God.

The third principle is that holy continuall succession
of the See Apostolike and other bishops in the Catholike chur¦che.
For if we be able to proue by order of continuall
succession that all bishops as well before vs as nowe
haue allwaies expounded the holy scriptures euen as
the first Apostles did, can there be any more certain
waye for the vnderstanding of scripture then this is?
I would gladly heare what can be saied against it.
The fourthe principle is the vnite and consent of the Ca∣tholike
churche, Whereby it is made that the like truthe
be in euery part that is in the whole, and so contra∣ry
wise. These are (moste Reuerend Prelate) the right
principles of Christian doctrine: these are the foun∣dations
of all truthe: these as foure quarres or corner
stones holde vp the Catholike churche: and there∣fore
it is called One, Holy, Catholike, and Apostolike chur¦che.
For of these principles dependeth the Authorite
of the councels. Of these the holy Canons haue the∣ir
beginning: and of these, all laufull and laudable
rites of the church take force and strength.
These then being the principles of our religion,
not those which Brentius falsely chargeth vs withal,
Princes and rulers ought to looke more nerer vnto
the doings and sayings of their preachers. But nowe
Bretius to make an oppositiō of the foresaide forged
principles, our principles are (saieth he) the worde of God,
Christ, and an assured certainte of oure confidence in Christ,
But what is I praie you, this your worde of God?
This it is, that all maner of folke, mē and womē, coo∣kes
and coblers, baudes and buchers, tinkers and tai∣lers,

pedlers and poticaries, minstrels and mummers,
and all such like, be priestes, be bishops, be doctours,
and pastours, and haue authoritie to administrat the
Sacraments, to interpret Scripture, and what interpre∣tation
eche one by the drifte of his braine draweth
out of scripture, that to be the pure ghospell off the
Lorde, and the expresse worde of God. This is not
(right Reuerend father) the worde of God, but the
worde of the diuell him selfe, inuēted of Luther, not
inspired by the sprit of God. For that man entending
to peruert all that appertained to God or to man,
laboured, trauailed and endeuoured by al meanes pos¦sible,
that there might remaine no spirituall magistrat
whiche might by authorite discerne betwene leper
and leper,Leuit. 13. maintaining the right doctrine of the ghos∣pell
and remouing the bastard. And this labour of
Luther being well liked of Sathan, he imagined an
other worde of God, as that among Christen men shoulde
be no ciuill magistrat: for all princes were fooles tyrans and men
of no religion.In his boo¦ke de secu∣lari pote∣state. to thentent that, if perhaps the heresies
of Luther were condemned by the Spirituall magi∣strat
and so forth with cōmitted to the secular sworde
princes therunto might haue no authorite. Hereup∣pon
he forbiddeth Christen men to kepe warre against the Tur¦ke,In a boo∣ke against the tvvo commaū¦dements of the Em¦perour.
and commaundeth subiects to rebel against their princes.
Strait vppon this arose an other worde of an other
God, that all lawes of chaste and single life shoulde
be taken awaye, teaching amonge a sorte of maydes
and yonge men that Man was no more able to refraine his
fleshly lustes then not to spet when nature prouoked.In lib. de Matrimo. Againe

that fasting and abstinence from flesh nothing helped pra∣yer,In libel. de matrimo.
nothing furdered deuotion made nothing to sobriete.
These smaller pointes being first all most conquered,
he reacheth to higher and diuiner matters. First bi∣cause
he teacheth that sinne is not by the grace of baptime
taken away in dede,In Assertiō ad Leonē. but is saide and fained only to be taken a∣way,
hereof he savve it vvolde folovve that mē oughte not
be estemed righteous and good in dede,In his ser∣mons at Smalcal∣dium. but onely accompted and
imputed for such. Then bycause he made no difference
nor degre of grace, he admitted no encrease in vertu,
and therefore could not abide the Sacramēt of Con∣firmation.
Fardermore bicause if sinne be not rooted
out if there be no encrease of grace nor goodnes, but
al is only by maner of accōpte and imputing, thē must
he also infer, that the presence of Christes body may not be in
earthe, that no sacrifice be admitted, and (vvhich folovved
thereupon) no priesthood nether. And of this point the
Zuinglians picked out one worde of their straunge
God and the Lutherās an other. of this spring also a∣rose
the doctrine teaching mā to be iustified by only
faith: hope, charite, repentaunce and other good wor¦kes
being pernicious and hurtefull to saluation. what
frute then thinke you proceded hereof? This sothely
and many other.Caluin in his insti∣tutions. For if God doth compell man
to sinne, as Luther and the Caluinistes do write, ho∣we
can God require good workes or by what lawe
can be punish sinne, seing that he worketh sinne in
vs, and good workes are thought to be pernicious?
And truly if there be no rewarde for vertu there shall
be no punishment for sinne. And then there is no hel
nor place of punishment: as in the seacoste townes

of Germany it is taught: there is no diuell to execute
that punishment as Osiander teacheth.
This worde not of God but of the diuell beyng
laied,Abhomi∣nable he∣resies of the Lu∣therans touching Christ. this principle being put, an other principle con¦cerning
Christ ensued: as that the humain nature of
Christe is god, as the Swenckfeldians will haue it, or
contrairely that Christe is not God as the Seruetians
teache and Mathias Flaccius, affirming that the worde
in the first of Iohn is not the sonne of God.
Lo how fertill and abundant was this principle
of Luther and Brentius. There were in times past and
are also nowe a dayes whiche openly denie Christ
to be the son of God: affirming him to be the son of
Ioseph and Mary. Which Mary also had (as they saye)
many other children beside Christ. Other there be
nowe which teache the ghospell of S. Iohn to be a
tale of Plato, baptim to be the inuentiō of the diuell.
And that there is not in God the Trinite of persons,
some other doubting whether this Trinite be man
or woman. So taught euen this winter a certayn new
ghospeller in Sternberg a towne of Morauia,Detesta∣ble here∣sies cōcer¦ning the Blessed Trinite. and
that with the fauour of the people, but much against
the will of the Bishop of Omoluke their diocesian.
There be nowe in Hungary also, which in their bap¦tim
leaue out cleane the name of the Son. There be
in many places the Seruetians, which call the bles∣sed
Trinite by the name of the hellhownd Cerberus
whom the poetes fained to haue thre heads. With li∣ke
horrible blasphemies two other ghospellers daily
preache, the one in the hilles of Gutni, the other in

Zary a village of Silesia. In Pintzou a towne of Po∣leone
George Brandat and Peter Statorius teache o∣penly
that there is not one, but thre Gods, and eche
of them of diuers and distinct natures no lesse then
thre diuers men. So that there is not one substaunce
of the godhed but thre, and thre different operations
thre diuers willes. And that the Son is lesse then the
father. As for the crede of Athanasius that it ought
rather be called the crede of Sathanasius the diuell
him self. And these felowes Brandat and Statorius be∣ing
admonished of such blasphemous doctrine, and
required by what authorite or whose persuasiō they
durste sowe suche blasphemies, they answered, they
were moued thereunto first by the authorite of Cal∣uin,
of wolfgangus Musculus, of Peter Martyr of Bul¦linger
and such like masters, then by the euidence of
the holy truthe, which hitherto hath layen hidd and
nowe was from God vnto them reueled: These thin¦ges
to be as we saye, Stanislaus a Baron of the realme
of Pole, Mathias Stadnitzky, and Franciscus Stanca∣rus
do write.
But bicause this parted confusion of so diuers opi∣nions
can not well be perceaued and is harde to be tri¦ed
or discerned of such as gladly receaue al nouelties,Lutherās in Bohem teache the soule to die vvith the body.
there is vpsterte this very winter in Bohem a newe
Secte. The which to take awaye this confusion, and
to sett forthe a brefe and compendiouse waie of the
Lutheran doctrine, teacheth openly and affirmeth,
that all other opinions and doctrine of God, of the

worshipping of God, of faith, of good or euill wor∣kes,
and to be short of any saluation of man, be but
olde wyues tales and fonde inuentiōs. This onely to
be a sure and infallible lawe and the true sincere
doctrine, that man bothe body and soule after this
life vtterly perisheth, no sence or life remaining af∣ter
death here. Lo to what point the preachers of
the newe ghospel haue brought their doctrine vnto.
Lo the marke and scope of all their doings.
The third principle of the Lutheran ghospell is,
saieth Brentius, an assured certainte that euery mā
hath of his faith in Christ. But for the loue of God,
what is this assured certainte of faith? May we not
as well call day night and light darknes?No cer∣tainte of faithe in Lutherās. But what I
praye you is this so assured and vndoubted certeinte
of faith amonge the Lutherans? It is peraduenure
that certainte of faith which for the clerenes and e∣uidence
of it, hathe so surely and with suche constāt
consent and maruaylous agreement ioyned together
the Lutherans, that in all their new ghospell no dis∣sension
can be founde, no variaunce in any article of
their faythe, no heresyes at all in their doctrine may
be espied. For if constant certaynte bredeth true con¦corde
and agreement (as a certain philosopher witte∣ly
reporteth) then surely vncertainte and wauering
in opinions muste nedes brede strife. Hereof then we
may clerely gather howe trew this thirde principle
of Luther is: for such is the certaynte of their faithe
as the agreement of their opinions is. The whiche

howe greate and of what maner it is, they haue them
selues declared,See the third par¦te of this booke. and we will not dissemble it. These
are the principles of the reformed ghospell laied by
Luther, repeted by Brētius, and admitted of the who¦le
swarme of sectaries. Nowe bicause in the principle
all is contained and many labels depend thereof,
what roufe thinke yow will the diuell buyld vppon
these foundations of Luther? For the effect neuer ex¦celleth
the cause. Truly these consequents and labels
depended of suche holy principles.the labels of the Lu¦therās prī¦ciples. To make of chaste
membres of Christ filthy membres of an harlot, of deuoute
and well disposed Christians, wicked and vnruly subiects, of
sober and temperat, glutons and Epicures, yelding to all fil∣thy
lust and pleasure, whose bely is their God, whose faithe is
perfidiousnes and no faith at all. And to this butte and
scope of Luther many haue preuily aimed at, but tho∣se
of Bohē haue nowe openly shott at it and stroken
the very marke, preaching in open pulpits that the
soule dieth with the body. But bicause Epicure him
selfe taught, that to get pleasure, a coulour of vertu
must be caste, and the diuel perceauing wel that pub∣lick
magistrats could better be chaūged thē vtterly ta∣kē
away, he thought better to traine this herde of Epi¦cures,
fleshly and worldly mē, to the yoke of Mahome¦tās
doctrine, being so sure they should be his owne, thē
to leaue thē vnder the roufe of the Catholike church
where he stoode allwayes in doubte to lese them. The
diuell therefore hath so directed allwaies and tray∣ned
all contentions and variaunces in religion, that
all heresies ende in the Alcoran Mahomets lawe.

All historiographers that write of the first begin∣ningThe lavv of the Turkes compiled by hereti∣kes.
of Turkes affirme with one assent that the la∣we
of Mahomet writen in the Alcoran was com∣piled
by one Sergius an Arrian, and Ihon a Nesto∣rian
bothe auncient heretiques, and of a certain Ie∣we
of the Talmudistes. Now although the heresies
which haue in our vnhappy time spronge vp be ma∣ny
and diuers, yet if the chiefe of thē and moste rece∣aued
were examined and cōferred diligētly with tho∣se
thre sectes aboue mencioned, we should plainely
and euidently perceaue that the drift of the diuell is
no other nowe a dayes,Note the ende of present heresies. then by the meane of these
heresies to traine vs vnwares from the faith of Christ
to the cursed infidelite of Mahomet. Petrus Stato∣rius
chargeth Franciscus Stancarus with the heresie of
Nestorius, and he againe the other with the heresie
of Arrius. And bicause Stancarus is a famous Iew and
Talmudist, and Statorius is by professiō a Caluiniste,
partes hath so hotly and earnestly bē taken on bothe
sides, that nowe not only in Pole and Hungary, whi∣che
are Realmes nighe vnto the Turkes, but also in
Silesia, in Morauia, in Bohem and other prouinces mo¦re
remote, greate contentions haue ben kindled the∣reupon
and be yet hotte. And what other thinge (o
mercifull God) can we looke for? If Christen men
call the faith of Christ in doubte, if they denie it o∣penly,
if they embrace the abhominable doctrine off
Mahomet, is it likely that whose doctrine they allo∣we,
his power and rule they will refuse? no truly. But
these may seme paradoxes and beyonde all credence.





Woulde God they were so. But I feare me they are as
true as the ghospell. The causes be euident and open.
surely the euent of all likelyhood will be corres∣pondent.
Let them enquire that be ignorāt, and tho∣se
that see and knowe the thinges to be as we saie, let
them well waighe them. But I will not make so euill
abodement. I will rather wish and hope well. and
much more rather woulde I be counted a lyar and
vnprouident, that it might not so proue, then true
and wise, that they shoulde so proue.
But nowe to couple more closely and to strike
more directly oure aduersarie whom I labour here to
saue, I saye, the only remedy for the mischef that han¦geth
on vs, the only meanes to escape this vtter de∣struction
of Christendō, is to come backe frō when∣ce
we departed, to returne to the vnite and cōsent of
Christendom and all Catholike people. For why? be
we Germans Christē men? So are other nations and
countres also. Yf then we be not the whole corps off
Christendom, we are yet a parte of it. But that parte
is foule (say the S. Austen)ib. confes. whiche agreeth not with
his whole. What then? surely this is the only medici∣ne
for our desease, the only remedy for this mischef,
the only hope of amendment, if that we being not
the whole corps of Christendome but a parte of it,
suffer not our selues to be persuaded, that any one
parte of the body can be saued: when the whole peri∣sheth.
The nature and property of a generall councel
is, to cure euery parte of Christendom, neglecting
none. Such a councell nowe therefore being called

and prouulgated we are al called,The coun¦cell being novve en∣ded vve ought vvith o∣ther Chri¦sten coun¦tres con∣forme ou our selues thereūto. no man is excluded.
Truly no mans greafe or desease can be so greate, but
that the Coūcel is able to remedy it. Nor none is of
such vertu and perfection but that by the councel he
may be more commēded. Will we therefore auoide in
time ths paganisme of these Epicures? let vs all em∣brace
the wholesom rule of Christen faithe, sub∣mitting
our selues to the holy Councell. Will we
caste of the yoke of Mahomet? Will we flie the ido∣latry
of the Alcoran? Let vs seeke vnite, let vs come
vnto the Councell, and (all force of armes laied asi∣de)
let vs quietly and with leasure debate our cause,
let vs in al softnes and loue deliberat and cōsult of the
publike weale of vs al.1. Cor. 13. For Charite as S. Paul teacheth is
patiēt, is gētle, Charite striueth not, it doth not frowardly, it
is not prowde, not ambitious, it seketh not her owne interest.
it is not prouoked, it thinketh no euil, it reioyseth not of ini∣quite
but is delyted in verite. it suffreth al thinges, it beleueth
al things, it hopeth al things, it abideth al things.If Chatite vvere in protestāts they vvoulde neuer re∣fuse the Councel. Let this la∣we
of the Apostle and rule of Christian Charite be
the foundation of the proclaimed councell, the ma∣ner
of ordering it, and the intent of debating in it.
But you will saye. VVe are greuously offended with
them. Truly that is greate pitie. But Charitie is patient,
suffreth all thinges, is not prouoked. Our aduersaires be
vnlerned: Charite striueth not, is not proude not ambitious
Our aduersaries be riche and kepe that is not their
owne. yea they haue that is oures. Charite seketh not
her owne interest, it doth not frowardly. It semeth the

councel wil deceaue vs and not kepe promis with vs
Charite thinketh no harme, but beleueth al things, hopeth all
thinges. But what if peraduenture we be there cast
and condemned Charite reioyseth, not of iniquite, but is
delited in verite. Truly I am fully persuaded that if we
woulde all with this minde and intent come to the
Councell, we shoude seking all for the truthe quicke¦ly
see an ende of controuersies, and seeking all vnite
returne home in perfit agreement.
But you require to knowe the iudge and or∣der
of this councell? In good time. for the protestants
woulde one of their flocke to be iudge and likewise
the Catholikes of theirs: againe they desire one order
and these an other. For priuat affections are on bo∣the
sides feared, lest the true iudgement be thereby
corrupted. Howe shall we then do to haue a Iudge
voide of all suspicion that may vprightly iudge?The Ca∣tholikes desire no other iud¦ge of pre¦sent Con¦trouersies Let
the worde of God and the Catholike and right in∣terpretation
of that worde be iudge: in the whiche
interpretation there is surely no lesse truthe then in
the very texte of the worde of God. For what can be
more impudent and vnreasonable then to embrace
the text only and reiecte the right and Catholike vn∣derstanding
of the same,. to admit that is spoken, and
refuse that is mēt, to vrge the letter that of it selfe kil∣leth
and flye the spiritual meaning which geueth life?
Herein therefore the greatest point of our debate cōsi¦steth
whē the Catholike shal interpret holy scripture
otherwise then the protestant or the protestāt other∣wise
then the Catholike, to knowe which of these

two bringeth forthe the more Catholike, more right
and more receaued interpretation. And in this deba∣te
the ende must nedes be, that they be iudged to
haue brought the righter, the more Catholike, and
the more receaued interpretation, which are able eui∣dently
to showe their interpretation alleaged to be
Catholike and Apostolicall, that is, to haue proceded
from the Apostles, to haue ben receaued of their suc∣cessours,
deliuered from hande to hande by continu∣all
succession, and spred through the whole corps of
Christēdom, and so to haue come and reached euen
to vs. They agayne must nedes be thought to haue
alleaged the false and bastard interpretation of ho¦ly
scripture; which are not able to deduct it from the
Apostles, nor to proue it vniuersall.
As for example.A clere ex¦ample off debating a contro∣uersy. Let vs suppose, that now in the
councell with these newe Arrians of our dayes this
question were to be debated: Whether Christ be in dede,
the Son of God and of aequall substaunce with the father, or
no. where as the Arrians denie this, the Catholikes do
affirme it, and the Arrians for their parte alleage that
place of scripture where it is writē, Pater maior me est,
The father is greater then I am,Ioan. 14. Ioan. 10. againe the Catholikes
alleage an other place, Ego & pater vnum sumus, I and
the father be alone: and eche of them interpreting their
place alleaged, but bothe of them diuersly, what can
now help the very writen worde of God and bare
text of the scripture to terminat this debate? the wri∣ten
worde is on bothe partes expresse and of bothe
admitted. Wherein then standeth the controuersie?

truly not in the text but in the right vnderstanding of
the text. Not in that which is spokē but in that which
is ment. Is not this I praie you agreable to the worde
of God? standeth it not with all reason, that the same
interpretation and vnderstanding of an alleaged text
be iudged right and lawful, which can euidētly be pro¦ued
to haue ben deriued from the Apostles and so re¦ceaued
and vsed in the whole corps of Christēdom? I
verely can imagin no better. And with this my iudg∣mēt,
agreeth wel that Noble and wise Emperour The∣odosius,
the first, who in this very question of vs pro∣pounded,
chose for iudge in that controuersie the Ca¦tholike
and receaued interpretatiō of holy scripture.
For thus we reade in the ecclesiastical historie of So∣crates,
of one Sisinnius who gaue the Emperour this
councell to aswage the greate contentions that were
then in the church, through that heresie of Arrius.
This Sisinius was,Socrates. li. 5. cap. 10. Sozomenus li. a. ca. 17 Nicephor. libro. 12. Cap. 15. as Socrates writeth, an eloquent mā,
a man of much experience, very well sene in the olde
writers expounding holy scripture and a good philo¦sopher.
This man therefore perceauing that by dispu¦tations
and conferences with heretikes, the schisme
grewe on more, and wexed more cōtentious, he adui¦sed
Nectarius then Patriarche of Constantinople in
this maner. The olde writers (saieth he) teache all waies the
Son to be coeternall with the father, wherefore they neuer
would affirme that the Son had any beginning of substance.Good Counsell of Sifini{us} to defeate heretiker.
Let vs thē leaue these Logicall disputations, and looke vnto
the expositiōs of the olde writers. Put it therfore in the Em∣perours
head that he cal the heretikes before him and aske thē

what accōpt they make of such doctours and fathers, as wro∣te
before their heresie began: and whether they iudge them to
be Christen men or none of the church. If they mislike thē, let
them (if they dare) condemne and anathematise them. If they
so do, the very people will ouerrunne them. And so truthe
shall ouer come. But yf they do not repell the olde doctours, it
shall thē be our part to bring forth their sayengs, and by their
testimonies confirme our doctrine. This being tolde of
Sisinius, Nectarius goeth forth with vnto the Cour∣te,
and declareth vnto the Emperour the aduise off
Sisinius. who liking it very well, and going wisely a∣boute
the matter, called the heretikes before him, and
dissembling his purpose demanded them only whe∣ther
they made any accompt of the Doctours of the
church which liued before their heresie began or no.
They not reiecting those writers but calling them
their masters and fathers, the Emperour asketh them
againe whether they woulde admit them as worthy
witnesses of the Christen faith. The chief masters
of that heresie, hearing those wordes, doubted much
what they might answer. Whereuppon they striued
amonge them selues, some thinking the Emperour¦ment
wel, some mistrusting the issue of his demaun∣des,
and perceauing they made litle for their purpo∣se.
For they were not all of one minde touching the
writinges of the olde fathers, differing in that point
not only from other religions, but also from them sel¦ues
who professed all one religion. Thus their wic∣ked
doctrine was discouered and confounded, as the
buylders of Babel by their variaunce in language. For

the emperour preceauing their disagrement, and seing
they trusted only vpon contentious disputing, regar∣ding
not the exposition of olde writers,Olde here¦tikes dispi¦se the ho∣ly fathers as our protestāts novv. he toke an
otherwaie with them commaunding that eche reli∣gion
should in writing shortly comprise the effect of
their doctrine and opinion. Thus farre the history of
Socrates. That Sisinius though good not to dispute
with heretikes, it was not his first deuise. The holy
canons had commaunded the same.In pre∣script Tertullian and
other holy fathers had writen the same.
And the cause why they thinke it not expedient
to trie by disputation matters of our faith is,vvhy it be houeth not to dis¦pute vvith heretikes. that all
heretikes do vtterly take away the true principles off
Christen religion, which are the sure groundes off
good disputation, and place in their stede false and
forged which are all vncertain: and maye serue (as we
see in coūting) sometime for more, sometime for les∣se,
sometime nothing at all. For he that taketh away
the generall and the whole, howe can he be sure of
the partes? Or if ye denie the substance, to what
purpose were it to dispute of the accident? To none
at all. Therefore he that listeth dialectically and scho¦le
like to reason with an heretike, if he agree not first
with him for the principles, he shall fight he woteth
not against what, nor to what purpose. and sooner
shall ye take a hare with a taburin then conclude
a suttell heretike with an argument. For he hath no
certainte in his doctrine: but is ready to denie that he
graunted the last worde before, and likewise to gra∣unte
that he laste denied flitting and flieng as vaun∣tage

serueth.
Brentius affirmeth the only text of the writen
worde to be the first principle of Lutheran religion.
But in such sorte that it may be lawfull out of this
writen text to cut of the epistle of S. Iames,Vide praefa¦tiones Lu∣theri in hos¦libros pri∣mae editio. cast awa∣ie
the epistle to the Hebrews, refuse the Apocalypse
of S. Ihon, and condemne the bookes of Machabes.
This principle serueth also to reiect any other part of
the whole Bible. for if any sentence euidently ex∣pressed
in sctipture be brought against him, strayte
Brentius crieth. The Hebrewe text readeth not so.
The greke copies haue otherwise. And this principle
of the only text serueth so fit for these heretikes pur∣pose
that for conference with them no waye can be
made, nor ende can be founde. Then the Catholike
and Apostolicall vnderstanding of holy Scripture
which is euery where one and allwaies agreable with
it selfe, which is deriued from the Apostles, which
is the present iudge in all controuersies, they vtterly
refuse, and very rudely and impudently appeale vnto
Christ, whom in earthe present iudge we can not
haue.In Bohem and in the seacost tovvnes of germa¦ny. Whom yet some of them denie to be God, some
to be man, and some other saie he is but a tale of Pla∣to.
And yet forsothe they boaste of the certainte of
their faith, which in dede is most vncertain, as their
most manifest dissension well declareth.
A very vaine and childish crake it is, to crie allwa∣ies
that their Cōfession of Augspurg is grounded vp∣pon
the doctrine of the prophetes and of the Apo∣stles.
For who saieth so, but they them selues and of

their only fecte, which first inuented it and would
impudently compel all Christendō to receaue it? But
if you ask them howe they proue it, they will saie
vnto you, All the articles of our Confession agree
with the prophets and the Apostles, and differ frō
thence in no point. O the madnes of our countre.
That which is called in question, they laie for their
groūdes, bringing for proufe that which ought to be
proued. What child in logick would so fondly reason?
For if you denie againe that the articles of this their
confession is grounded vpon the doctrine of the pro∣phets
and the Apostles, what haue they then to saye?
peraduenture left they may seme to be put to silence
they will beginne to interpret and cōfer Scripture to∣gether,
after their maner. But is not this the foule fau¦te
in logike called Petitio principij, that is, to aske that
whiche ought to be proued? For when we blame the
Cōfessiō of Augspurg we blame nothing els but the
false and wronge interpretation of holy Scripture v∣sed
in that Confession. But you will saye. We may as
well refuse the interpretation that the Catholikes do
bringe of their owne. Well truly and worthely. For
who will heare the Catholike doctour if he bring
forthe nothing, but saie only that the doctrine of the
Catholike churche is grounded in holy Scriptures?
This must not be tolde but be proued.
What then will the Catholike bring that the he∣retike
shall not be able to bring? He will surely bring
and declare first the interprerarion of Scripture which

he vseth to be vniuersall, to haue ben deriued from
the Apostles, to be receaued and allowed in all Chri∣stendom.
Then he will showe that euery article and
principall point of our faith hath ben confirmed by
miracles. Last of all he will teache you that all mat∣ters
of the Catholike church, which be proper of the
newe testament, are founde expressed by euident fi∣gures
in the olde Testament:The diffe¦rence be∣tvvene ca¦tholikes and here∣tikes. What difference then
is there betwene the right Catholike and the decea∣ued
heretike? Truly herein heretikes agree with the
Catholikes, that bothe embrace, alleage, and defend
holy scripture as the very worde of God, hut herein
differ all heretikes from the Catholikes, that these
bring the Catholike and vniuersall interpretation of
holy scripture, they bring their owne priuat and here∣tikall.
These are able to proue their doctrine by mira∣cles,
they are neuer able: Last of all, that these are able
to showe the matter of the newe Testament by the
figures of the olde lawe (as in the sacrifice, in the scra¦ments,
and ceremonies) they can not.
These two different waies being by iust balances
indifferently pondered, and tried, it will soone appea∣re
whiche ouerwaieth the other. And in dede if they
bereue vs of the common and receaued iudgement
of the whole churche, wherewith all thinges in the
church are iudged, why may they not in like maner
take away all the rest? For as if ye plucked out a mans
eyes and yet wolde saie that ye bereued him not of
that which might be sene, euen so it is, if heretikes
graunt vs the text of the bible and yet take from vs

the true vnderstanding thereof. If it forceth not
whether we vnderstand holy Scripture rightly or
no, howe shall we then discerne fashood from the
truthe? Whereby shall we trie the truthe, or what iud∣gement
shall the churche haue of the truthe? And
who woulde folowe such teachers of religion whi∣che
confoundeth truthe and falshood together,
which spoileth vs of all iudgement of the truthe,
which leaueth vs no meanes to trie the truthe, which
blindeth and blereth our eyes of all intelligence? Yet
in better case were the Cimmerij, who although they
had loste the light of the Son, yet might vse the fire.
But these men that take awaye from vs the consent
of Christendom and the iudgement of the chur∣che,
which mocke and scorne at the miracles of
God, which refuse the doctrine and figures of Moy∣ses,
do leaue vs in such horrible darcknes, that we
haue not so much as one sparckle of light remai∣nin
Euen in the time of the Apostles heresies spran¦ge
vp,Actor. 8. as of Simon Magus, of Hermogenes, of Philetus,
and such like.2. Tim. 1. The mar∣ke of the heretikes of the pri∣mitiue church. But by what marke trowe ye was
the doctrine of these heretikes knowen from the do∣ctrine
of the Apostles, but that the Apostles and all,
that folowed them were Of one harte, one minde, and o∣ne
belefe? And this only touchestone left Christ to
knowe the church by:Actor. 4. that whereas two or thre be ga∣thered
together in his name, and agree in any matter,Math. 18. there he
is to be founde in the middest of them. This consent then
and agreement in any matter, as in the Apostolicall
doctrine, and right vnderstanding of holy Scripture,

being vniforme and all one in all, howe can it not be
the sure and certain iudgement of the Apostolicall
doctrine and of the churche? Beside as in Christ him
felse, so in his Apostles it happened that such as bele∣ued
not their wordes through infirmitie, were yet
forced to beleue their miraculous workes, they being
an euident proufe from God of their doctrine. Far∣der
such ordre of the church, as the Apostles began
to frame, and left to their successours to be perfited
and thoroughly poolished: they thought it to be sha∣dowed
in the figures of Moyses lawe, and expressed
in the light of the newe lawe. But what like to the∣se
marks of the true church did Simon Magus, Her∣mogenes,
and Philetus bring? euen so much as nowe of
late, Luther, Melanchthon, and Caluin. For these newe
doctours be not of one harte, one minde, nor one be∣leefe,The same marck in our he∣retikes.
and much lesse such disciples as folowed these
false preachers. For these dissent in euery point, agree
in no point: and therefore Christ the author and
God of vnite is not among them, but the diuell the
master of all dissension. Caluin very childishely and
vainely going about to excuse him selfe, saieth that
the Lutherās are no more to be blamed for that so di∣uers
and so horrible heresies springe vp nowe a daies
in euery place, then the Apostles were in their time,
vnder whom many haeresies also sprange vp.A notable testimo∣nie of the Caluini∣stes aga∣inst Lu∣ther. This
maketh nothing for your excuse, Caluin. You denie
flat Master Caluin and so do al your companyons of
Zurich that Luther was any prophet at all or in any
point like to the Apostles. But you saie the diuell

spake in his mouthe, not the holy goste.In the third tre∣atise of the chur∣che of Zu¦rich aga∣inst Lu∣ther. The which
testimonie of your church of Zurich the truer it is,
the more ye proue the very same diuell to speake in
your selues. For the very same Luther in diuers poin¦tes
of your doctrine you folowe, whom you write
and affirme to speake by the instinct of the diuell.All nevve sectes ha∣ue begon of Luther
And what newe secte is nowe in any place of Chri∣stendom
which hath not drawen the first acte of his
tragedie out of Luthers schole? whēce toke Munzer
the beginning of that greate rebellion of the com∣mons
in Germanie but of Luther?In a boo∣ke against the tvvo cōmaūdements off Caesar. For He forbad
men openly to obey their princes and condemned al
warre againe the Turkes whom he writeth to be
tenfolde better then our foolish and madde princes.
So he termeth them. Whence digged out the Anabap¦tistes
that carrē of the olde heresie of the Donatistes?
Out of a certaine epistle of Luther ad Waldēses, in the
which he writeth, That it were better not to ba∣ptise
children at all then to baptise them without
faith. Whence toke Carolostadius occasion to renew
the heresie of Berengarius? Out of his commen∣tary
on S. Ihon and the translation of these wor∣des
 The fleshe profiteth nothing.Ican. 6. See the 3. treatise of the chur∣che of Zu¦rich and The ea∣uenly pro¦phets off Luther. I rea∣ken
here vp the notable and principal sectes only of
our time. I coulde saye as much of the baser sorte, if it
were nedefull, whiche are so diuers and so many, that
we see almost as many sectes as families amonge the
Lutherans.

For these therefore and other waighty considera∣tions,
which all to recounte were now out of time,
If I mought be credited or beare any authorite amon∣ge
princes in this matter, (most Reuerend prelate) I
would geue thē that aduise that Sisinius made vnto
the Emperour Theodosius. That is. They should char∣ge
and commaund their preachers and ministers to
accept and acknowledg for right, that sense and vn∣derstāding
of holy scripture, which is Catholike and
may be deriued from the Apostles, and approued by
the testimonie of miracles: and that to be false which
is priuat, of their owne forging, and whereof they be
not able to showe any furder euidence. And truly vn∣lesse
this aduise other by my suggestion or by some o∣ther
mās be not put in to the head of princes and per∣suaded
them, we shall neuer liue in quiet: the churche
will be ouerrunne, and we of Germany shal other be∣come
slaues to the Turkes as the grekes are, or to the
Moscouites, as the Liflandmen are, or (whiche will
be more miserable) we shall be vtterly in perpetuall
thraldome as the Iewes, the Hungarians, and many
other countres are now. But I will leaue (as I saide)
these euill abodements. and will praie vnto God,
that it will please him rather to beare downe our sin∣nes
with the balance of his mercie then to exa∣cte
them to the rigour of his iustice: graunting to
our aduersaries the loue of Christian and Catholke
concorde, and to vs the amendment to a perfi li∣fe.
The wrath of God is slowe, and although allwa∣is

iust, yet neuer without mercie, if at lest we labour
rather to trie it mercifull then iust. For it inuiteth vs
first to acknowledg our sinne and expecteth our re∣pentaunce
before it pronounceth sentence to con∣demne
vs. And what may we thinck of the proui∣dence
of God, taking awaye the auncient and aged
princes and leauing aliue the yonge, which for their
tender age and small experience are like to swarue
and misse in many matters? Within the cōpas of the∣se
thre yeres or there about what number of princes,
kinges and Quenes, haue departed this worlde? And
to begin with the most principall, The Emperour
Charles the fifte died the laste yeare.The dea∣the of ma¦ny greate Princes in a shorte time. About that ti∣me
died his two sisters, Leonore wife vnto Frauncis
thē frenche kinge, and Mary wife vnto Loys kinge
of Pannonia. Mary also Quene of England maried
vnto kinge Philip his son. About that time also died
Ihon kinge of Portugall, Bona wife vnto Sigismun∣de
kinge of Pole, and Isabell his daughter maried
vnto Ihon kinge of Hungary. Not longe after also
died two kinges in Denmark, Christern and Christian
sonne to kinge Friderike which had longe kept the
other in prison. Shortly afther these Harry the
Frenche kinge died, and a litle before him Paule the
fourth B. of Rome. What shall I nowe talke of the
death of inferiour princes? In the compasse of a shor∣te
time died fowre of the Princes Electours of the
Empire,Moguntia. the bishops of Treuires, of Ments, and of Colo∣nie,
and Ottohenricus, Counte palatin of the Rhene,
and in Italy the Duke of Venis. But what shall I spe∣ake

of those whiche died this laste moneth,In Noth. An. 1560 Gustanus
king of Suethland, Frauncys the second, the frenche
kinge, and Ernestus Duke of Bauaria? Michael also Ar¦chebishop
of Salisburg a vertuous and lerned bishop,
the bishops also of Frising and of Eystat your prede∣cessour
haue about this time ben taken out of this
worlde. And although it be true that Euripides saieth.
 al mē are borne to die, and that
Eschilus an other poet writeth .
To serche out the cause of death is in the secrets of for∣tune,
yet the like is not of such straunge and rare ma∣ner
of chaunces. True it is and by a most iust order
of nature hath allwaies ben a constant and sure rati∣fied
lawe that which Horace the poet writeth. Pallida
mors aequo, & cae.
VVith like force and foote, death striketh at the doore
Of the princes highe palais and the cottage of the poore.
But that so many kinges, so many Quenes, so many
Princes in so short a compas (as of thre yeares) should
all departe this life, it is a rare matter: the like where∣of
hath in fewe ages happened. And may we thinke
this to be a mere chaunce and casualtie, or rather to
haue proceded of the vnfallible prouidence of God?
Truly as the first I can not thinke, so the last I must
nedes beleue. For doth not God by the mouthe of
his prophet Esay declare vs his diuine prouidēce he∣rein?Esaiae. 3.
For Lo (he saieth) the Lorde God of hostes doth take
away from Hierusalem and Iuda euery valiaunt and
stronge, abundance of bread and of water, the mighty
and man of warre, the iudge and the prophet, the wise and the

aged mā, the prince of fiftie yeares olde and the honourable, the
Senatours and mē of vnderstāding, the master of craftes and
the well spokē wisemā. And I shal geue thē childrē to be the∣ir
princes, and the delicious, and wāton shall haue the rule of
thē, the people shall be ouerrūne, and one mā shall be set against
an other, euery mā against his nighbour. Tbe boye shall pre∣sume
against the elder, and the vile prson against the honou∣rable,
and so forthe. Thus the pophets in times past did
so pronounce of the Iewes, that it may well seme to
be mēt also of vs Germās. The truthe of the prophet
concerning the Iewes the euent declared. And that
he will not lye touching vs, it is not nede to declare in
wordes, the daily experience dothe showe it.
But seing that this mischef is so farre growen,Non nisi . that
by only repentaunce we may escape the rodde, better
it were for vs to amend our selues quietly, then to re∣prehēd
other sharply: seing that so it is now, that if as
an inferiour you do brotherly aduertise men, you a∣uaile
nothing by entreating: and againe if as a superi∣our
you commaunde you get nothing by forcing.
Peraduenture therefore (as S. Basile saieth) in the like
cause of a cōmon vice  Better
a man to holde his peace then to speake,In orat. ad∣uers. ebrios Being the parte
of a good oratour as well in time to kepe silence as
when occasion serueth to talke. For as by doing the
one he profiteth much, so by neglecting the other he
hurteth sometime. And this the nerer I considre, the
more lothe I am to set vppon this enterprise. And tru¦ly
if I folowed herein my owne priuat quarel, I might
worthely seme vndicret and rash, which would

prefer my priuat commodite or incommodite before
the publick and common, or woulde esteme my pri∣uat
displeasure more then the profit and instruction
of many. But the loue of truthe shall here ouercom.
which as it is oppressed by silence, so being discoue∣red
taketh force againe. I had rather therefore, if I
must nedes somewaies offend, smarte for telling the
truthe, then for dissembling by flattery. Therefore iff
I declare that which I haue perceaued, if I aduertise
men to beware of the mischef that I haue incurred
my selfe, I trust in so doing I shall offend no man. I
knowe there are amonge the rulers and noble men,
which if they plainly perceaued the deceites of these
heretikes, and knew what mischef ariseth thereby to
them selues, to theirs, and to the whole common wel∣the,
they would not slowly and slackely as I did very
vnwise, but with spede as wise men returne to the tra¦de
of auncient and Catholike religion.
Therefore writing this booke (most Reuerend)
I haue eftesoones ioyned teares with praiers bese∣ching
allmightie God as well for my enemies as for
my frendes, that it will please him of his goodnes to
geue vs all one minde, and one vnderstanding, that
we may knowe no other thinge,1. Cor. 2. nor thinke our selues
wise in any other point, then in Iesus Christ and he for vs
crucified, For he is the shoot anker of all Christian re¦ligion,
he is the only porte of our saluation. Who so
straieth from him, he leseth God and life euerlasting.
And to this ende haue I directed bothe all other tra∣uaill
of my life, and this my present labour, that the

vnlerned might hereby charitably be admonished,
and the lerned might haue occasion better and depe∣lyer
to consider these matters. In the meane season I
haue endeuoured that in such thinges as I bring out
of stories and factes of our time I might content all
men, offend no man. But if there be any man that
thinketh him selfe offended with this my booke, o∣the
bicause I haue spoken more plainely then he
would I should, other bicause he taketh my wordes
otherwise then I meaned, him I beseche most hartely
that he call vpon me and heare what I can saye for
my selfe. Surely I shall not be so frowarde nor so vn∣kinde,
but being better instructed of any man, I will
with all courtesie thanke him therefore: and much
more will I be glad to submitt my selfe to the lawfull
and Catholike censure of the church. Which being
most reasonable, if I can nether by entreating, nether
by any right obteine of my aduersaries, I will patiēt∣ly
suffer, by God his helpe, all that may happen, and
will defend notwithstanding according to my po∣wer,
the truthe of God his worde as longe as I liue.
Contenting my selfe for al rewarde of my paines, if
I may by this small trauaill either call any one backe
thas is gone astraye, or confirme any man that hath
hitherto remained in the truthe. Especially in this
your Diocese, most Reuerend Praelat to whom this
vniuersite of Ingolstad is subiect. Wherefore I most
humbly commend vnto yow bothe this schole, espe∣cially
the study of Diuinite therein, and me and all
myne.

Fare yow well.
Writen on Christmas eue, in the en∣de
of the yeare. 1560.

