



Honorable Sir,
WE reade in the Booke of Exo∣dus how God by MOSES,Exod. 35.45 and MOSES from God, commanded the
 people of Israel to bring their offerings and gifts for the erecting and building of the Tabernacle. Whereof some brought more rich, sumptuous, and costly gifts, as Gold, Siluer, Eare-rings, Rings, and Bracelets, all being Iewels of Gold. Some more meane, base, and of lesse value, worth, and esti∣mation; as Rammes skins, Badgers skins, Goates haire, and such like: all which they did performe and exe∣cute, so willingly, readily, chearefully, and freely; that they brought too much, and more then was sufficient for
 the seruice of this Sanctua∣ry,Exo. 36.5.7 and the vse of the worke of the Tabernacle which the Lord commanded to be made. This most notable, rare, and admirable exam∣ple of their willing hearts and minds, in seruing God with their earthly goods: I haue propounded to my selfe to be imitated and fol∣lowed in a two-fold re∣spect: First, for consolation; herein comforting my selfe, that God who accepted their meanest offerings to∣wards the building of an earthly Sanctuarie, will much more accept, allow,
 and approue of this Spiritu∣all offering which so volun∣tarily and cheerefully I be∣stow to the glory of God, & furtherance of the worke of his Spirituall Sanctuary; for God doth loue a cheere∣full Giuer, and regardeth more the heart in giuing, then the gift it selfe. Second∣ly, for instruction, teaching mee not to burie my gifts and Talents in the Earth, with that euill and slothfull Seruant mentioned of, in the Gospel,Mat. 25.25. but to put them forth, and imploy them to the vse and benefit of Gods people, the good of his
 chosen, the profit and com∣moditie of all true hearted and truly deuoted Christi∣ans.
Sir, to this end therefore I haue written this little Booke. First, to admonish some kinde of people, (who for lacke of experi∣ence, neuer feeling other daies then these, full of peace and quietnesse) that thereby they might learne the better to apply vnto themselues whatsoeuer they shall heare or reade of the tryall of GODS Chil∣dren, lest falsely imagining the same to appertaine
 either to the times that are past, or to other Nations, it fall suddenly vpon them as a Thiefe in the night, and they be destitute of all hope and comfort. Last of all, to comfort another sort whom it hath pleased God to presse downe with sor∣rowes, and to exercise with the continuall afflictions & calamities of this Mortall life, as no times seeming fa∣uourable vnto them; they can scarse receiue the words of any comfort. And wher∣as euery one in his calling is bound to doe some thing to the furtherance of the holy
 building. I haue according to my duty brought my poore basket of stones to the strengthening of the walls of that Ierusalem, whereof by grace we are all both Cittizens and Mem∣bers. And heere I present vnto your Honor this poore Talent of mine: which may it please you to accept at my hands, as at one that wisheth all happinesse to you and yours in the Lord. Your Honours acceptation shall be my sole satisfacti∣on: the bond of my dutie hath this onely bound of my hope; humbly crauing
 that your fauourable wise∣dome would supply the wants of this thing: and that this so simple a gift may be accepted of you ra∣ther for my good meaning, and the end whereof I do it, then for the value of the thing it selfe: If you iudge them worthy, vouchsafe them I pray you your Pa∣tronage: if not, your par∣don; at least your gracious and fauourable acceptance, according to the kindnesse of your nature and wonted courtesie in other matters. The which thing if you will bee pleased to doe, it
 shall not onely greatly re∣ioyce mine heart, but make mee much indebted vnto you for the same. The Lord for his Sonnes sake graunt that this labour of mine may bee accepted of the Saints, and tend vnto Gods glorie: and I hearti∣ly beseech the Lord, the GOD of all Grace, and Gi∣uer of all Blessings, that hee would multiply his hea∣uenly Grace vpon you and yours, that you may al∣waies walke worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things. Thus crauing pardon for my boldnesse
 I humbly take my leaue. The God of heauen giue you that blessing of bles∣sings, which Ierome saith, few men haue, that you may goe on from Grace to Grace, and be a long time happie in this life, and for euer happy in the life to come.

