



RIghte Reuerende in CHRIST,Saluia: Massil. de guber∣nat. Dei. the anger of God, & his fearefull pu∣nishments (for Iradiui∣nitatis est poena peccantis) hath bene heauie vpon vs for the space of these almost sixe yeares. The cause doubtlesse is the sinnes of the time, which haue defi∣led the Land, and prouoked God to send such plagues as may purge the land of vs, when we will not purge it, and our selues from our sinnes. Which sinnes, what they are, as I haue touched diuers in the Ser∣mon following, so none seemeth to mee
to be more offensiue to the eyes of God, then that popish Idolatrie which is com∣mitted in the land, wherewith euerie place, countrie and Citie is horriblie de∣filed; though as the prophet speaketh,Ezek. 8.12. it is but in the darke, and in the chamber of their imagery. Which was an occasion to me, beeing called to the stage of the land, to act this part I haue done in this Sermon: namely, to perswade euerie man to iudge himselfe; and them, to whom the sword of iustice is committed, to iudge other malefactors, specially Romish Ido∣laters, and to execute the iust lawes vpon them; because God will not iudge when man doth iudge before: as the Iudges of assile will not censure againe those male∣factors, whom the Iustices of the sessions haue formerly punished. But when this is neglected, God will, and can not, for his iustice, but he must bring this & the like fearefull iudgementes vpon the land. Which as they were the occasion of my preaching of this doctrine, so they are some causes of my publishing of it in wri∣ting: to trie if I might by any meanes pro∣uoke euery man in his seuerall place and
condition to this preuenting course of Gods iudgementes; At the least, I shall haue my owne discharge by it. Now I haue presumed to bring it forth into pub∣like vnder your name and countenaunce for diuerse both publike, and priuate rea∣sons and respectes: Publike, first you are now aduanced to a speciall place of go∣uernment in the Church, and haue that authoritie in your hands, that you may cause & effect great reformation of man∣ners and redresse of many things, which are highly displeasing to God. To which if I might be any occasion to excite your Lordship, I should thinke I had effected some great good: because your example, as it might prouoke others in authoritie, both in Church and common wealth to do the like; so it might animate them to goe forward, with hope it would be well accepted of his highnes, when they shall see you, (who haue beene so continually in his presence, and so daily conuersant with him, and can not but knowe his heart & affection) take some round and constant courses in reforming of abuses both in manners and doctrine.

Secondly, your place you yet enioy so nigh vnto his Maiesties person; whereby you haue done hitherto good offices to the Church,The Eng∣lish de∣sence of the Popes Breeues, & Bellar. Letter. (her enemies being witnes) in iustly and wisely exasperating his Ma∣iesties heart against these foxes, who would destroy her vines. Now if I might bee anie meanes to further your willing minde to be constāt in this dutie, I should iudge it in me a good seruice to the Church, as in your selfe it will be a glori∣ous seruice to the King of Kings; honou∣rable to his highnes, profitable to the Church, comfortable to all her friendes, and bring you great honour from God and good men. Which pointe I will not here much presse in the particular, see∣ing I haue in the treatise following don it in the generall; though to vse Bernards words in another case,De diligē∣do Deo. Non prout dignum rei, sed prout datum mihi. Yet let me intreat your Lordship, or rather adiure you by that honour and sauour which God hath giuen you with your Soueraigne, and by that account you must giue for the im∣ployment of it, before the great King in that great day, that you would goe on in
this so religious and profitable a worke, namely, to excite his Maiestie to wakē his sleeping lawes, that as he hath long sung mercie, he would at length tune iustice; and command indeed that his lawes may haue their course,Psal. 101.8. that betimes he would de∣stroy the wicked of the lād, & that such workers of iniquitie may be cut off from the citie of the Lord. It is not vnfitting your Lo. (beeīng called to be a reuerēd Bishop, a gouernor of the Church) to incite him to this, since it was the consecrating of the Leuites hands to the Lord, for euery man to slay his bro∣ther,Exod. 32.29.27. his companion, and his neighbour, who had defiled the land with Idolatrie. And it is no lesse then necessitie requireth of his Maiestie, both for the good of him∣selfe,Thomas Worthing∣tonus pres∣byter. his posteritie (those hopefull plants) his whole people, and the church of God. Sith they boast not at home onely, but a broad, of the great increase of this Idola∣trous broode amongst vs. There is one who hath lately published two Tomes of Bristowes the Iesuite, written in Latine, called Motiua Anti-haretica, who in his Epistle Dedicatorie, speaks thus; Post diu∣turnas in Anglia ingrauescentes, pro fide Ca∣tholica,
persecutiones, ita plus solito crescat Ca¦tholicorum ibi mumerus, ac zelus, vt spes ef∣fulgeat (Diuina praestante misericordia) totum illud amplissimū Regnū, ad sanctaematris Ec¦clesiae gremiū breuirediturum. Is it not then more then need & high time, that his Ma∣iesties former lenitie shuld be turned into iust seueritie? lest he may seeme to succee∣ding ages to forget both his God & him∣selfe, his posteritie, & people. Which may easily be preuented, if his lawes may be at length with some roūdnes executed, spe∣cially against the seedes men of treason & idolatrie, by whom this popish superstitiō is nourished & increased in this land. For so saith the former authour in the same place, commending the founders and vp∣holders of their Seminaries, as the foun∣tains of those waters which haue watered these weeds till they be fit for the fire, ad∣ding, that His enim in collegijs Sacerdotes ini∣tiati, & inde in Angliā missi, tū paruas ibi reli∣gionis reliquias cōseruerunt, tum easdē (vt nūc videamus) in immensum propagarunt. These then by confession beeing the preseruers and the increasers of this Idolatrie among vs, there is no way to preuent the cōtinu∣ance
and increase of this, by ing off such at least who husband this Idola∣trous worke: least  should growe to that, they would haue it, the ars to  more then the wheat; when without great dan∣ger and disturbance to the whose, and ha∣zard of the Church, they cannot be dealt withall. Now that your Lordship hath such an opportunitie to further this busi∣nes of the Lord, who knoweth whether you are come to such a place for such a purpose? &c whether, whē some would haue cast you out, you haue yet but God bene kept in, to such an end? The sanour God brought you first into, with your Soueraigne, and his vpholding of you in it to greater aduancement, seemeth to reiuie no lesse of you. Without which, I should doubt, you can neither performe thankfulnesse to God, nor faithfulnesse to his Maie∣stie.
Pardon, I beseeche your Lordship, my plainnesse and boldnesse; which I excuse with that of Bernard to Eugenius: Atten∣do celsitudinem honoris, & è vicino periculum reformido: and with that of Hieroure to Salvina, Absit vt sinistrum quicquam mihi
de te suspicari liceat: sed ex abundantia lubri∣cam aetatē (dicerem ego,Epist. 9. lubricum statum & gradum) monuisse, pietatis est: imò amo∣ris non vulgaris.
Now the priuate reasons which haue moued me to make choise of your Lord∣ship, vnder whose name this slender la∣bour of mine might appeare in the sight of men, is your auncient fauour which you bore to wardes mee in the Vniuersi∣tie; and that good respect, though vnde∣serued, which you had of mee, for my good and preferment there: as al∣so since, the renewing of the same many wayes towards mee, euen now when you are aduanced to honour and place of dig∣nitie. So that I could doe noe lesse then returne a bare & naked signe of my good will and heartie affection, for so great fa∣uours. Now, the Lord of glorie make you faithfull to himselfe, and your Soue∣raigne, to the Church in generall, & your owne wherof you are made ouerseer; and that for the furtherance of Gods glorie, the aduauncement of Christs holie Gos∣pell, the comfort of his glorious spouse the Church, the confusion of the Popes
glistering Concubine,Nos iusti∣tiā nostrā & Eccle∣siae Sponsae nostrae no∣letes negli∣gere. Bo∣nifac. 8. de immunit. Eccles. c. quomā in sexto. the seate of Anti∣christ, and to the discharge of your con∣science in this life, and your account in the great day.

