


THe holy spirit of God by his Pen∣man St. Paul, tels vs, and teaches vs, that1. Tim. 4 8 Godlinesse hath the promises both of this life present, and of that which is to come. Among which, this is none of the least,Psal▪ 112.6 The righteous shalbe had
 in euerlasting remem∣brance. Namely, such a re∣membrance as the wise man speaketh of;Prou. 10.7 The memoriall of the iust shall be blessed. Such a blessing it is, as isPro. 22.. A∣boue great riches, aboue siluer and gold. For no man of any ingenious disposition, but if hee had these two pro∣pounded to him, riches with shame, and pouerty and penu∣ry with true honour and good reputation, and free choise giuen him; but he would freely chuse the latter before the for∣mer: yea such a blessing it is, that men who were able to iudge, thought it not inferior but aboue their naturall life. As that learned Rabbi, broght
 vp at the feete of Gamaliel, speaking of his good reputation saith;1. Cor. 9.15 It were better for me to die, then that any man should make my reioycing vaine And Tertullian by a speech of his to the persecuting tyrants sheweth, that thus they esteemed it, and professed no lesse to the world.Ad Lenorem proxime damnan∣do Christianum, quam ad eonem, confessiestis labem pudiitae apud nos omni atrociorem poena, & omni morte reputari. Tertull Apoll. VVhile you condemne, saith he, a Christian matron to a baud, rather then to a Ly∣on, you openly confesse for vs, that we abhor the blot of Chastitie and honestie, more thē all other punish∣mēts; yea then death. And this is that which the light of Reason teacheth men; that for a man to die honourably, is
 no death; for a man to liue dis∣honourably, is worse then death. And as it is a curse for a man, to suruiue his good name, so is it a blessing his good name should suruiue him. So that, he which helps to keep the righteous in a blessed me∣moriall or remembrance, hee doth but bring the promised blessing of God vpon the head of the righteous, helpng to honour those whom God would haue honoured, and who haue honoured God; yea, as I may so speake, he helps to pay Gods debt to the righteous; hee ha∣uing made himselfe aDebitorem se fe∣cit promittendo. August. debter to them by promise. A thing that all ought to doe, and not vnbefitting any, no not
 the Ministers of the Gospell; when as our Sauiour Christ saith, concerning Mary;Mark 14.9 Wheresoeuer this Gospel shall be preached through∣out the whole world, this also that shee hath done, shall be spoken of in re∣membrance of her. And by whom more then by the Mi∣nisters of the Gospell? who if they must honour her, by re∣porting what she had done, be∣ing but one act of pietie per∣formed to Christ, how much more may they do it for those, who haue performed many and manifold workes of pietie and charitie to Christ and his members? Vpon which ground, I tooke my selfe warranted to
 expresse the loue and honour I bore towards your deceased honourable sonne and brother, in speaking those things I did at his funerals concerning his truely religious life and right blessed death, wherein I labou∣red to make euident to others for imitation, that grace which God had made so emi∣nent in him. The whole Au∣ditorie were much affected with it, and many both godly and learned, both Ministers and others desired much to haue it published to the world, whereof diuers the same day set vpon, and since by letters haue importuned mee much, besides others in the name of many (who haue but heard a
 flying report of the excellent graces and most worthy parts that was in him, and de∣liuered by me) haue still pres∣sed me to imprint it, to make that common to others, which was so louely in the eares of those that heard it. After all this I began to thinke, that this proceeded from the Lord, and to say with my selfe, as the Apostle Peter to others,Act. 11.17 VVho was I, that I could let God. So, who am I, that I should let God, thinking also with my selfe, that that which was so desired of many, might be by the grace of God profita∣ble to many mo; knowing that God hath not onely, appointed his word to beget faith, and
 teach godlines, but by the same word, hath sanctified the ex∣amples of godly men, to pro∣uoke to godlines: as is manifest in holy writ; yea examples are of that force, that men are of∣ten won by them to the liking of the word, who before had either a hatred or distaste of it; and after, by the word are wonne vnto God. Many men must see the Gospell in the liues of the professors of the Gospell, before they will beleeue it in the mouthes of the Preachers of it. And as Chrysostome saith of the Gentiles:His quae dicun∣tur a no non in∣tenduni Gentiles, sed his quae gerun∣tur a nobis Ho. 70. ad Pop. At. They doe not regard what things are vttered by vs, but what are acted of vs. So may I say of many who liue amongst vs,
 and beare the name of Christi∣ans, they little regard either what we preach, or professe, but what wee practise.2. Pet. 3.1. And if the husbands may be wonne with∣out the word by the submisse and meek conuersation of their wiues; thē may others with the word by the holy conuersation of those who professe the word, be wonne vnto godlines. And as by others, so I am perswa∣ded by the life and conuersati∣on of this holy young Saint (so was he in earth, so is he in hea∣uen) of whom I will not heere speake much, lest any should taxe mee with flattery. Yet this I will say (glorifying God that I can truely say it of him, not to honour him so much by
 it, as the Gospell of Iesus Christ:) that I challenge the whole armie of the vncircum∣cised Philistimes of Rome, to bring me forth the greatest Goliath, I say not of the like age, honour and rancke, but almost of what age or degree soeuer, that euer shewed so much power of popery or the forme of seeming sanctitie, as this young man Dauid did, the power of true pietie and godli∣nes. Let them then cease de∣fying the host of Jsraell, when they came hardly paralell our younglings with men of the best grouth they haue or for∣merly haue had. But if I shold follow this matter I shold hard∣ly keepe measure, and therfore I
 will content my selfe with this.
Why I haue dedicated this to your name cānot be strange to any which know the great & nie intrest you had in the subiect, and so most right to the Sermon. To say nothing of my owne bond who haue recei∣ued such loue from him, for which I must and will honour all his; yea who haue so deepely tasted of the bountie of you his honourable mother. Accept it I pray you as a smale testimo∣nie of my thankefull minde, & as a true testimonie of that loue and reuerence that I haue borne to that grace of God which was manifest in him. The Lord hath greatly honou∣red you with the worty being
 and the blessed memory of such a gratious Sonne, such a godly brother, yea so honoured you as in all respects he hath hardly honoured any Mother, any Sisters; hauing giuen you, his honourable Mother, the fruit of all your great care, labour, and cost you so naturally and religiously tooke, in tilling his young heart, wherein you not onely laboured by your selfe in his infancie, as another mother ofProu 31. the worthy Lemuel to instruct him, teaching your Timothie like another Eu∣nice (renowned in holy writ)2. Tim. 1.5. & 3.15 The holy Scriptures of a childe, and seeking to plant in him the vnfained faith which dwelleth in you his
 mother. But also prouiding for him a worthy Tutor, a man of no lesse piety then lear∣ning (Oh that all of your ranke would doe the like, then might we hope for more religi∣on and pietie among our Nobi∣litie) who might perfect that your sex had begun, but could not thorowly performe; and after most plentifully rewar∣ded him,Ruth. 2.20. Not ceasing to doe good to the liuing and to the dead, for his sake to his wife and children. Of which you reaped a plentifull and timely haruest of ioy and comfort, though it is your griefe to liue to see his autumne and fall.Iob 2.0. Must we receiue good at the hand of God,
 and not receiue euill? But yet giue leaue to adde (Iob 32.22. For I may not giue titles, lest my maker should take me away suddenly) as Ber∣nard in another case;Deus exhonrans, on erat Ber. When God doth vnburden vs, he doth burden vs: So God ha∣uing vnburdened you of that griefe and sorrow, of that infa∣mie & reproch which many mo¦thers and sisters haue, & to to many of your rank, while theirs liue licētiously, reprobate to euery good work, dishonou∣ring Christ Iesus whom they professe▪ and their kindered from which they did proceed. I say while God hath vnbur∣dened you of this, and honored you with the contrary, he doth
 onerate and burden you with the dutie of thankefulnes, which among other duties is this, that you continue with a godly zeale and Christian care to imitate and emulate the worthy graces and practise of godlines which were in this your honour & crowne, which is worthily esteemed in him, and will be in you, the highest matter of your honour and praise. Diuines giue the rea∣son of it to be this, because by pietie and holines of life wee ascend,Ad primarium illud bonum vnde originem traximus Nazian. orat. 33. in land. Hiero. to the first and pri∣mary good whence we had our beginning. And in the Apostles phrase it is to2 Pet. 1.4. Be partakers of the godly na∣ture. Seeing we are the gene∣ration
 of God, made to his i∣mage, what greater glory cā we haue thē to preserue that image & be like vnto him to whose similitude wee were made, for as one saith,Vna nobilitas imitatio dei. There is no ho∣nour to the imitation of God: which is then performed when we imitate those who haue walked with God. The Heathen man saith,Vt quise co∣munt adhibent speculum, sic ge∣sturus negotium proponit sibi lau∣datorum virorum exempla. Plutar. That as they who dresse themselues vse glasses, so those who are to performe any thing, propound to themselues the examples of praise-worthy men. You honoura∣ble Ladies haue a most true, and (as I may so speake) a na∣turall glasse to see to addresse your selues to goodnes by, euen
 the life of your worthy, it is that which will sooner checke you then any, as it ought to di∣rect you more then any▪ nay it is that by which others will sooner reprehend your stepping aside and straying. I humbly beseech you therefore (giue me leaue to further your forward∣nes) walke after his waies & runne with good resolution the race of pietie and true godlines he hath finished before you, of whom I may say as Ambrose of Abraham,Mortuus est imbona senecture, eo quod in bonitate propositi perman∣sit. He died in a good age, for why? he per∣seuerd in his good resolu∣tions euen vnto the end, and now enioieth the crowne of life.
And so I humbly and hartily
 commend you all to the grace of God which is able to build you further, & giue an inheri∣tance among them who are sanctified by faith in Christ Iesus and so I rest.

