


IN Extolling Religiously the conso∣nante vnitie of the Trinitie, as the sacred harmonie of the heauenlye deitie (Righte Honourable Eatle) Aurelius Augustinus that aunciente Orthodoxus, meriteth Christian cō∣mendation and memorie not onely for those his six bookes De Trinitate greatly edifying the church of God, in faith vnited, and in concord esta∣blished, but also for that his learned trauell in Libro de Incarnatione Domini, contra Iudaeos: Ende∣uouring to win the way ward Iewes, vnto God, and his church: as by that similitude especially where he saith, Iudaee cytheram re∣spice vt musicum melos sonisq́ue dulcibus reddat: Tria pariter adesse videntur. &c. Allegory of the Deitie in Trim For, as he biddes the Jew behold the Harpe, what musicall melodie it hath, and in sweete tunes, by those three ce∣currentes, videlicet, Ars dictans, Manus tangens, and Chorda reso∣nans (which altogether working make consonant concord in Mu∣sicke:) So, thereby allegorically figuring Monochordium Deitatis in Trinitate personarum, as The vnitie of Trinitie in Deitie,One God, and one Church. He mea∣neth none other thing, but to diwade the Iewe from ignorance of God, to the knowledge of him, from incredulitie to beleefe, and of an enemie vnto God and his church to become an embracer of him and a member of his misticall bodie whereof S. Paule true∣ly reporteth, as in I. Cor. 12. True worship∣ping of God. There is one God which worketh all in all. &c. And againe Rom. 10. One God ouer all, rich towardes all, that call vpon him, (whether they be Iewes or Gentiles,) none which beleue in him shall be ashamed &c. Also as in the 12. Rom. and in 4. Ephesians the liuely members and benefites of his churche are at large de∣scribed. These things then thus framing, what more sacred sub∣stantiall Instrument, then The Essence of God, as in his holy word

reuealed, and of vs acknowledged? videlicet John 1. There are thre vvhich beare vvitnesse in heauen: The Father, The Worde, and The Ho∣ly Ghost, and they three are one. One God of diuine essence, spiritual eternall and omnipotente: (sayth Dauid Chytrus) in regula vitae. And what more sacred consonancy of heauenly harmony in Dei∣tie, then The vvill of God, as in his word reuealed & of vs acknow∣ledged, in a three folde benefite towardes mankinde? videlicet,
1 Touching our Creation. Gen. 1. Let vs make man after our ovvne similitude and likenes. 2 Touching our Redemption. Ephes. 1. By Christ vve haue redemption in his bloud, and forgeuenes of our sinnes, according to the riches of his grace. And 3 Touchinge our Sanctification. E∣phes. 1. VVe are sealed vvith the holy Spirite of promise vvhich is the pledge of our Inheritance. Which Essence and Will of God as the heauenly instrument and sweete sound in his benefites is onely apparant by his sacred worde published to the Patriarkes, Princes, and Prophets, and in the Gospoll of Christ Jesus, and doctrine of the Apostles: Concorde of Christ and his Church.Like as our Sauiour himsel concludeth the same consonant concord of God and his church, when on this manner he prayed vnto his father for the same. John 17. That all vvhich beleeued in him, might be as one: That they might be one, like as his father and he vvas one: I in them, and thou in me (saith he) that they may be made perfecte in one. This verely is that ducer Harpe whose consonante con∣corde S. Augustine so highly cōmending would haue the Jewes to be hearers of this musicke in the church of God, by faith, fol∣lowers in vnitie of Religion, and fullfillers in life and conuersa∣tion: Accordingly also as that Princely Prophet Dauid swete∣ly played vpon and song to his Harpe this diuine Harmonicum Hemystichion. Psal. 68. A God making men to be of one mind in an house. vers 6. And againe as that wise sonne of Dauid, King Salomon hath it in his Canticles of the true vnitie and louing concord be∣twene Christ the spouse and his church, the spouses singing. One is my Doue, one is my Darlinge. Cantica canticorum. cap. 6. Gene. 1. 1. Iohn 1.Thus then (and in this church, the glory of God and his inestimable bene∣fites sounding towardes men) what more dulce & delectable De∣cacorda Cithera, what more profound Fidicula, then whose firste string is the eternall Woord of God. The Ten strin∣ged Harpe of the true church of God. Secondly, what better cor∣ner stone then Christ Jesus? Ephe. 2. Thirdly what better opera∣tion then the Holy Ghost? Eph. 4. Fourthly, what better builders then Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles and Euangelists, 1. Cor. 12. Fiftly, what better building then Faith in the promises of God? Matt 16. Sixtly, what better churche, then Worshippers in Spi∣rite and Trueth? 4 Ioh. Seauenthly, what profounder pillers, then True Religious Princes, & True Godly Pastors? Apoc. 3. Eightly, what brighter lights, then Sincere godly liuers? 1. The. 5 Ninthlye, what heauenlier vertue then louinge concorde in the

Trueth? Ephes. 4. Tenthly and lastly, what greater ioye, then Life and Blessednes euerlasting? John 16. But contrary wise as our Sauiour Christ Jesus himselfe found the ignoraunt, incre∣dulous, iarring and indurate Jewes a figure of Sathans Sy∣nagogue, misvnderstanding his wordes. John 6. The iarringe Harpe of the Iewish Syna∣gogue. Murmuringe against him and his miracles. John 7. 9. Malignantly minded to mischiefe, cap. 10. & 12. Because obseruing the Lawes of Mo∣ses, vsing supersticious circumcision of the flesh and worshipping abhominable Idols, (as Esay cap. 6. saith) They had their harts har∣dened, their eares stopped and their eyes shut vp: So euen these 1. Honou∣ring Moyses and hating the Messias, 2. Louing the Law and lathing the Gospell, 3. Following the flesh, defying the Spirite, 4. Addicted to darkenes, leauing the light, and 5. Fancying fi∣gures not affyinge in the trueth, 6. Bondage embracinge more then freedome, 7. Death more then life, and 8. Transitorie plea∣sures more then ioyes eternall. No maruell it was if this godly father S. Augustine (findinge the Jewes in his time, of like iar∣ringe incredulitie, ignoraunce and induracy) Iudaee Cythe∣ram respice vt musicum melos sonifq́ue &c. Laboured to bringe home the loste sheepe vnto Christes folde with the fatherly aduer∣tisement of this so Grande Doricum: not as Mutus but Musicus Hypparchyon thus soundinge vnto them. And as thus these iar∣ring Jewes, like vnto Cainites haue beene rather worse & worseMalignan Church. after admonishment so in al ages the members of the malignant church of Rome, as Tirantes, Hipocrites, Epicures, Sophi∣sters, Papistes, Atheistes, Anabaptistes, Jesuites, Sectaries, and Scisiatickes, are those Jewes and Judasites, touchinge whome the holy Doctor S. Ambrose super Lucam 15. cap. sayth: Dominus impios quaesiuit, qui eum non quaesiuerunt. And this hee doth of his great goodnes and merry towards sinneful mankind to the greater encrease of his church, kingdome, and glory: But contrary wise like subtill serpents they stop their eares, as deafe worke he neuer so worthely by his wisedome and wonders vnto them: approuing this proueth true in themselues. Asini Lyrae au∣scultatores, Whereby very well appeareth in them this sentence of S. Ambrose also in lib. De Abel & Cain. Nihil grauius quam er∣rantem a Deo deseri vt se reuocare non possit. Whiche thinge no doubt as it encreaseth the kingdome and churche of God, by the decay of the kingdome or Synagogue of Sathan, so with toothe and nayle he laboureth to holde faste, that he fall not, accordinge to that saying in the Reuelation 12. Therefore reioyce ye heauens and ye vvhich dvvell in them: VVo he vnto the Inhabitantes of the earth and of the Sea, because Sathan is come dovvne vnto you hauing greate vvrath, Knovvinge that he hath but a small time. And therfore of late this Ninus of Babi∣lon as hee still not onely confirmeth at Rome abhominable ido∣latry

bringing foorth Beel, Baal and Beelzebub (saith Nicolaus Lyra. in 14. Sap.)Antichrist and his whelpes. his whelps of the same bloudy brood: but also di∣sperieth them into sondry kingdomes and countries to disturbe the sweete concord of the church and Gospel, and altogether hin∣dering the conuersion of others like themselues, doe seeke their owne and others vtter subuertion. To be shorte (how secretly s euer some of those helhoundes arriuing in englande haue hiddeEnemies intent hath euil euent. themselues) and how subtilly soeuer like scinatiekes they pur∣posed by entent to build Thebes with Orpheus: yet the euent fal∣leth out that they rather practised with Thales to sowe discord a∣mongst the Lacedemonians: But as the Lord neither slombereth nor sle∣pth vvhich keepeth Israell,Psal. 121. vers. 4. so it is hee whiche turneth their mischiefe vpon their owne pates, and it is his Sonne Christe Jesus our Mediatour, which (against the siftinges of these Scismtickes)Luke 22. hath prayed vnto his father for vs, That our Fayth should not faile vs. Making milde Moses to ouermatch the Musitians daunsinge about the Calfe. Exod. 32. Zealous Phineas to find out the Ma∣dianitih fornicators, Num. 25. Godly Iudith to behead the Phi∣listian Holopherns. Judith. 13. Good Helyas to reproue the wan∣dring people and also to be reuenged vpon Baals priests. 3. Reg. 18. Faithfull Paul and Barnabas to reproue the false Prophet Ba∣riehu subuerting the Lordes wayes. Act. 13. Godly learned Am∣brose and painefull Prudentius by diuine assistaunce to confute these blasphemies and scisines. Finally, and neither yet wil iustTrue Prayer ictorious. Iacob leaue wrastling with the Angell, vntil by prayer he obtaine the victory and beare away the blessing. Genes. 32. With which Harpe and harmony of Prayers (annexing therunto Confession and Thankesgeuing) as the threefold sacrifice moste acceptable to the eyes and most delectable to the eares of the heauenly Ieho∣uah. (Right Honourable) As those same xxiiij. Elders worship∣ping the Lambe with their Harpes and golden Vyals in the v∣niuersall, true, Catholicke, Propheticall and Apostolicall Mili∣tant and Triumphant Church of God, from the first age of the world hetherto allwayes Haue honoured the Lambe as most vvoorhy of Povver, and Riches, of VVisdome, Fortitude, Honour, Glorye, and Blesinge euerlasting.Reuel. . So likewise (as members of the same vniuersal church and heyres of the kingdome of Heauen in this latter age) mani∣fold causes haue the Churches of England and Irelande (consi∣dering the time of their blessed visitation, vnder the gracious pea∣ceable and prosperou gouernement of our most honorable He∣ster. Vertuous Iudith and diuine Debora, Queene ELIZABETH) with that Princely Prophet, Sacred Psalmograph, Incom∣perable Captaine and Inuincible Conquerour King Dauid (the chosen Instrument of Gods Mercy and Trueth euerlastinge,

To rule ouer Israell and Ierusalem, 1. Reg. 16. To feede Iacob his seruunt & Israell his Inheritance. Psal 78. vers. 71. To shine in his throne as the Sunne in the Lordes sight, and the Moone perfect for euer. 2. King. 7. Yea and be a faith∣full vvese in heauen for euer. Psal. 89. vers. 38.) Euery one continually confes∣sing our infirmities and the manifold mercies of God: To prayse the Lorde vvith the Harpe and voyce of Psalmes. Psalm 98. And so vvith the Tribes of the Lord to goe vp to Hierusalem, To pray for her peace and prsperitie. Psal. 122. Yea for the collection of her outcastes, And the healing of their riefes. Psa. 147. And finally (with thankeful Dauid as thankefull Israelites) to laude the Lord before his arke all the dayes of our life in holynes1. Sam. . and righteousnes according to his good pleasure and measure of his grace bestowed vpon vs. Where amongst manye farre more meete members for this purpose, in acknowledginge my selfe to be Little Laodocus in arte magna, not any thing like countuailea∣ble to Nicostratus in re parua magnus: yet putting to my prest best good will. Amongst those I say (Quos Musicen docet amor & si sint indocti prius.) Whome Zeale teacheth knovvledge: though they be vn∣learned before. Which loue well learning and haue but little them∣selues, which tender the wellfare of Gods Church, and yet are no diuines. Whiche labour for▪ learninge and lacke liuinge: And which imitate other mens workes to instruct themselues. So in experience of translatinge (as my Summum Singulare & Specia∣le Bonum, Animi, Corporis & Fortunae donum, to profite my selfe and others) I chauneed lately vpon these Expoitary Schlia of the Godly Learned and Reuerend D. Victorinus Strigelius a singuler Professor of diuinitie in these our dayes yet liuing: very briefly, godly, learnedly and profoundly expounding the whole booke o King Dauids Psalmes. Out of whiche whole volume (contey∣ning two Coines) I haue tranlaed onely▪ The firste one and twentie Psalmes and expositions thereof: but specially the verse ac∣cording to the Latine Exemplar, being of the Geneua transla∣tion, after the Hebrue sence, and (so neere as I could imitate the authors meaninge therein) nothinge dissonante from our vulgar and vsuall translation dayly read in the Churche of Englande: Not without the helpe of a rare well disposed diuine and learned Achates (scintillas graecas obcurioresq́ue theologicas locutiones ex∣cudens) as Virgill saith: Of home (being sometime my Schole∣fellow vnder the Reuerend M. Robert Bater Schoolemaster euen then of Ne arke, deceased) as I maye nowe saye wyth Plutarck, Plus Didimus habit, Plus Philomelus habet, recomping what I then was, and what hee nowe is. I heere haue by Gods helpe and his, perfourmed (perhaps Velut demulsor minor in re magna) my not vpolished altogether, nor yet vnprofitable tran∣slation as I trust in God. Accordinge to my humble and hartye

prayer beseeching the most beneficiall goodnes of God to tourne and transpose the same to good purpose of publike vtilitie in his chosen church, as seemeth best to his glory, my Princes honour, and commoditie of my natiue countrey. Whereas, especially in the Royall Court of her Princely Maiesty God by his gratious prouidence hath of longe time prosperously planted and replent∣shed your honourable good Lordshippe with rare and excellent in∣dumentes of body and minde as true godlines, perfecte vertue, graue wisdome wholesome counsell, constant fidelitie and noble magnanimitie, with a sincere supportant eale to true Religion, godlines, vertue, and good letters to the aduauncemente of her Maiesties Royall Regiment, and profite of the weale publike in her Highnes dominions. So on my poore behalfe, In testimony of a Christian weale to Gods glory, loyall harte to my Princes honour, earnest good wil to the weale publike of my natiue coun∣trey, but specially of true harted Synterisin & Proerisin towardes the heauenly country of the hiest Iehouah, that celestiall Hierusa∣lem. I haue withall humble and duetiful regard adressed this my poore trauell vnto your Honors moste noble patronage, as one whose Heroicall vertues in patrociny counterpoysable to the Princely protection of the first noble patrone that Honourable Augustus High Marshal of the most sacred Empire that now is. Your Honor assuredly shall by Gods grace, of your godly eale adorne both patrones & expositors godly purposes, aduaunce the honor of God, your Prince, and country: not a little adubra∣ting by your accustomed clemency the true and vnfayned good∣will of me the Translator. Who humbly beseechinge your Ho∣norable Lordship to accept in good woorth the same my good wil and duetifull endeuour in this respecte, doe rest continually and faithfully, prayinge vnto the Almightie and immortall God to preserue your Honor with the Honourable Lady and Countee your louing Spouses, wt long life prosperous health, encrease of honor and perpetual fruition of life and blessednes euerlasting, in, the eternall kingdome of God and his Sonne Christ, that Roote and of spring of Dauid the bright shining day starre, Apoc. 22. To whom with the Holy Ghost, three in person and one eternall God be all do∣minion, power, prayse, honor and glory for euer and euer. Amen

