



Most Noble Earle, and Right Honorable Lord.
IF Dauid so well accpted of the kindnes of Barzillai the Gilaa∣dit (though his subiect) perfor∣med1. Sam. 17. 27. vnto him in his distresse by the treason of his sonne Ab∣salon, that being deliuered and restored to his kingdome, he did not onely offer Princely entertainment to the said Barazillai himselfe, but
 vpon his refusall thereof did also most graciously accept of his sonne Chinham to be in his Court: yea,2. Sam. 19. 33. 36. if he were also so mindfull of the said loyall kindnes of Barzillai, that vpon his death bed he gaue charge to his sonne Salomon to shew kindnes to the sonnes of the said Barzillai, and to let them be of those that should1 Kin. 2. 7. cate meate at his table, because they had come to him when he fled from his sonne Absolom: yea, if mercilesse and1. Sam. 39. 44. & 20. 33. vnnaturall Saul that would haue killed his owne sonne Ionathan, spared the Kenites for the kindnes of Iethro their father, 400 yeares before shewed to the1. Sam 15. 6. Exod. 18. 17. Israelites in giuing good counsell to Moses for the better gouerment of the Israelites, and in directing of them in their iourneys in the wildernes, if (I say)Num. 10. 31. Dauid so respected the kindnes of one of his subiects that ought in duty and alleageance to haue perfor∣med much more vnto him: and if that mercilesse Saul shewed kindnes to the Kenites for the kindnes of Iethro so long before shewed to the Israelites, much more may I poore man and forlorne creature acknowledge my selfe bound to performe all duety and seruice vnto your Honors, for the Honorable fauours of the Noble Earle of Warwicke now de∣ceased vnto me, a meere stranger vnto him, and al∣together vnknowue, but onely by the commenda∣torie testimonie of that graue and religious gentle∣man Mr. Iohn Butler of Toby Esquier, now also at rest with the Lord. Hauing therefore nothing else whereby to expresse my duety to your Honours, I am bold to present such as I haue, the rather, because as I dedicated the first fruits of my like labour to my old most Honorable Lord before mentioned, about
 some 24. yeares past, euen before I was throughly knowne vnto him, and that because of his most Christiā care for the churches of God in Essex wher∣of he was Patron, so I thought I might the more presume of your Honorable acceptance of these my paines, the rather because in respect of my ma∣nifold infirmities by age, they may be my last. The more also that God himselfe hath now honored your Noble house, and made it renowned in the Church, both by the profession of the Gospell, and also by the protection of the professors thereof, euen now to the third generation of your name, the more my selfe and all other that loue the Gos∣pell haue cause to honor you: euen as the more any king aduanceth any subiect, the more all other sub∣iects ought to respect such a subiect for his kings sake, yea we haue the more cause to pray also for your honors, so to continue still your honoring of the Lord, and of the Gospell most worthy of honor, as you haue begun, that your selues and your po∣steritie may yet be the more honored: yea, and this as a Minister of the Gospell I exhort you in the name of the Lord Iesus, that shewed me mercie in making me a Minister, that you continue so much the more so to do, by how much the more enemies the Gospell dayly hath, both of A theists and of car∣nall professors thereof, and also and especially of papists: not onely in other countries but euen in our owne: and those euen of your owne rancke: I meane of the nobilitie it selfe: besides them of the gentry and other inferiours at the commaund of such superiours. Herein if ye shall ouercome (as I
 doubt not but that ye shall) oh how great shall your honor then be. One of you two now do sometime weare a coronet with other the like princes, and do sit in Parliament with one of the Lords Cheife Kings and Iudges of the earth. But the time shall come, when the Lord Iesus, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords,Psal. 2. 10. Reu. 17. 14. and 19. 10. Mark. 8. 38. comming in the glorie of his Father, with his holy An∣gels: and sitting in iudgement vpon men and Angels shall crowne you both with crownes better then of the finest gold, euen of righteousnes, life and glorie, which2. Tim. 4. 8. Iam. 1. 12. 1. Pet 5. 4. Reu. 3. 4. &. 21. shall not fade: and shall also giue you both to walke with himself in white, yea to sit likwise with him in his throne, as himselfe hath already ouercome, & sitteth with his Fa∣ther in his throne. Are you not affected with these things, I doubt not but you are, & be ye so alwaies to the end. Yea as Paul hauing highly commended the1. Thes. 4. 9. 10. Thessalonians for such brothely loue, that he needed not to write vnto them thereof, because they were taught (inwardly) of God, to loue one another, and so indeed did, yet for all that exhorted them more and moreHeb. 6. 10. 11. to abound in so doing: and as the Apostle to the He∣brewes, hauing said that God was not vnrighteous that he should forget the worke and labour of their loue, which they had shewed to his name in hauing ministered to the Saints, and yet ministring, doth for all that desire euery one of them to shew the same deligence to the full assurance of hope to the end, so do I (Right Honorable) exhort you to do the like for the aduancing of the Gospell, and the countenancing and comforting of the professors, especially the sincere and painefull Ministers thereof euen to the end: that your present comfort from consideration & hope of the former
 glorie promised, may be the more inlarged in you. And verily ye haue the more need so to doe, be∣cause the enemies of the Gospell doe not onely in∣crease and swarme, but also they thinke they doe God best seruice that doe most persecute it, and theIoh. 6. 1. 2. professors & Ministers therof, even to death it selfe. But hereof the Lord Iesus hath told vs before, that when it should come to passe we might not be of∣fended neither meruaile at it. Heereby also all that loue the Gospell may be the better assured that theyIoh. 15▪ 19. Phil. 1. 28. are not of the world but of God. This to such aduersa∣ries is a most sure token of perdition, but to them that are so persecuted of saluation, Finally, this plainely be∣wrayeth that religion that is so bloudy and merci∣lesseIam. 3. 15. 17. to be the wisedome that is earthly, sensuall and deuilish; because that that is from aboue is pure, peace∣able, gentle, easie to be intreated, full of mercy. Lastly heereby therefore all men may be the more encou¦raged to put forth their hands for the vpholding of the Gospell heere professed by vs, and of the pro∣fessors and Ministers thereof, as likewise to do what els they can and may for the opposing, oppugning, and ouerthrow of poperie, and of the champions thereof: as whose cheife weapons for vpholding their abominations, are slaundering of Gods ser∣uants, crueltie, and treacherie, all which the ProphetPsal. 5. 6. saith the Lord abhorreth. If there were nothing else to condemne papists and to discouer them to be ofIoh. 8. 44. the deuill, who hath bin a murderer and a lyer from the beginning, these onely were sufficient. And there fore these should the more prouoke all that loue the Lord Iesus to set themselues against Rome the daugh∣terPsal. 137. 8.
 of New Babilon, and to reward her as she hath serued others. The rather because she shall as certainly fall, as old Babilon is long since fallen. Yea, I doubt notReu. 18. 3. also, but that some yet striuing tooth and naile to support her, shall at the last, and ere it be long, either in the sight of the truth, or in the loue of her riches be principall agents in her destruction. He that in∣quirethPsal. 9. 12. for bloud, and that daily bringeth to light the most secret murthers that are, and causeth such mur∣therers bloud to be shed, and in iustice to be spilt on the ground, will at the last much more be reuenged of that Roman Antichristian bloudy and trecherous brood, that hath betrayed and murthered, and day∣ly doth betray and murther so many thousands and millions of his Saints, whose death is most deare andPsal. 116. 15. precious in his sight. The greater any are the forwar∣der should they be in repressing this generation, Whose teeth are as swordes, and whose iaw teeth are asPro. 30. 12. kniues to deuoure the poore of the earth, and yet are pure in their owne eyes. To behold one to murther ano∣ther, and not to resist the murtherer what may be, is (as I heare) by our law, and as I am sure by the Law of God to be an acter in shedding of bloud.
How much more are they to be oppugned that liue by the bloud and death of other. Curse ye Me∣roz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the in∣habitantsIudg. 5. 23. thereof, because they came not to the helpe of the Lord, to the helpe of the Lord against the mightie. If they be cursed that came not to helpe the Lord (or that came not to helpe when the Lord helpeth) in such a case, and that against the mightie, how shall they escape that come themselues forth, against the
 Lord, and against his people, and yet for all that say they are for the Lord, and that themselues onely are his people? As they that are blessed of the Lord shall beGen. 27. 33. Num. 23. 8. vers. 19. blessed: so they that are cursed of the Lord shall be cur∣sed. Hath the Lord said and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken and shall he not make it good? In this respect therefore as all men should be the more ready to op∣pugne that man of sinne, and to helpe them whom he persecuteth, so especially they ought to feare the putting their hand or little finger, in the least degree to ayd him, and to vphold and repaire his state so long since decaied, and begun to fall. If Ioshua cur∣sedIosh. 6. 12. before the Lord the man that should rise vp, and build Iericho, which notwithstanding we neuer reade to haue bin a bloudie Cittie, how much more may all they looke for a curse that rise vp to support Rome, that alwayes not so much before as since it hath beene the seate of Antichrist (I meane of the Pope) hath bin a most bloudy Cittie, and hath mur∣dered more men, women and children, (of the Saints and of other) then euer had dwelt in Ierecho before the said curse of Ioshua, from the first founda∣tion thereof to the time of Ioshua? The bloud of one Abel cryed to the Lord from the earth for suchGen. 4. 11. &c. vengeance that the Lord so cursed the earth, and Caine himselfe for shedding the same, that he being made a fugitiue and vagabond vpon the earth cryed out vnto the Lord and said, My punishment is greater then I can beare. Oh then how lowd is the cry of the bloud of so many thousands as that man of sinne hath shed and dayly doth shed? Verily, as he hath a long time shewed himselfe to be the man of sinne, so all2. Thes. 2. 3.
 men shall shortly see him to be also the child of perdi∣tion. The longer the Lord hath suffered him to rage and reigne, and to exalt himselfe aboue all that is cal∣led God &c, and to sit in the Temple of God, and to shew himselfe as God, presumptuously forgiuing sinnes, dispensing with sinnes, casting downe to hell those whom God hath prepared for heauen, aduancing them to heauen, and canonizing them for Saints, that were traitores and rebells heere in earth against Princes, and so speaking great thinges, and blasphemies,Reu. 13. 5. 6. & 17. 3. yea being full of blasphemies, the longer (I say) the Lord suffereth him thus to do, the greater certainly, and that speedily will be his condemnation. This is so much the more manifest, by how much the more now he rageth and stormeth as a man hauing the panges of death vpon him. The deuill himselfe rageth the more, and did the more rent and teareMark. 9. 20. the child possessed with him, by how much the nearer he saw his eiection to be; yea when Christ charged him to come out of him, and to enter no more into him, euen then did he rent him sore, andvers. 25. vers. 26. laid him for dead, so that many said he was dead. Pharao and the rest of the Aegiptians, notwithstanding all the great signes & wonders the Lord had wrought amongst them, did then most cruelly oppresse the Israelites when the Lord was neerest to deliuer them, and to ouerthrow the said Pharao and all his hoast in the red sea. As therefore Moses said to the Israelites greatly fearing and murmuring, whenExod. 14. 13. they saw Pharaoh following them behind, hard at the heeles, and the red sea before them, Feare ye not, stand still, and see the saluation of the Lord; for the
 Aegiptians whom ye haue seene ye shall neuer see againe, so may I and all other the Lords Ministers say to all the Lordes people now fearing because of the Ro∣manists present raging, and preuailed against the Churches, Feare not, stand still, and see the Saluation of the Lord. For the time cannot be far off when thisReu. 17. 16. and 18. 18. great Whore of Rome shalbe iudged and burnt with fire, and her Cittie laid wast and desolate. Then shall all her friends howle and cry as bitterly, as euer they mer∣rily reioyced and tryumphed and much more then euer they made the Lords people to weepe and mourne. As therefore Right Honorable, you are wise, iudiciously to consider of these things: as you are godly to helpe the Lords people against the mightie by your daily praiers, for performance of his promises in confounding his said mightie ad∣uersaries, and doing to them as sometimes he did to Midian, and Sisera, and Iabin, and to other hisPsal. 83. 9. old enemies, so be you also strong in the Lord, and inEphes. 6. 10. the power of his might, to do whatsoeuer you now may or shall hereafter be able to do, by your selues, or by your acquaintance of like place and honor with your selues: yea also, with all such as ouer whom you shall haue any authoritie from his most excel∣lent Maiestie. Too much is knowne to be done for the said enemies of the Lord, euen by the papists heere at home, and much more is done then is knowne. Shall therefore such friends of the Lord as your Honors are, doe little for him, and for his people▪ God forbid. As therefore the Apostle ex∣hortethHeb. 10. 24. the Hebrewes to consider one another & to pro∣uoke vnto loue and to good workes in generall, so I be∣seech
 you to suffer the wordes of exhortation to do the like in this speciall against that Belzebub of Rome, and all his deuouted and sworne friends: that by your noble examples, all other may be the more prouo∣ked to doe the like also. Do the new Edomites cry one to another against the Church. Rase it, Rase it, euen toPsal. 137. 7. the foundation thereof, and shall not all that loue the Lords Ierusalem cry the like against the new Babilo∣nians the enimies of the Lords said Ierusalem, for whose downefall and vtter ruine we haue so many promises deliuered in the presentence, as certainly to assure vs of their performance, as if they were al∣ready performed? Farre be this from all such no∣ble spirits as yours is. Hate you therefore that shamelesse and gracelesse Whore of Rome. Hate her (I say) and all her bauds the Iesuites and other Se∣minarie Priests. Hate them, hate them with perfect hatred. The more you shall hate them, the more assurance you shall haue of the loue of God towards your selues: especially if with the hatred of them you shall loue all them that do hate her and hers. You haue most worthily begun. Since also yourCal. 5. 7. beginning, you and your noble ancestors haue run well. Let nothing hinder your obedience to the truth vnto the end. Let none take your crowne from you. That crowne (I say) that much more ex∣celleth all the Crownes and Diadems of all Em∣perors Kings and other Princes in the world, then all the said Crownes and Diadems doe excell the basest pebble-stone that is. It may be also that some∣times you may with other your like Peeres of this Kingdome speake a word in such a season to his most
 excellent Maiestie, for the helpeing of other Churches abroad, against the furie of their Anti∣christian Roman aduersaries, and for the repressing of Iesuites, Seminarie Priests and other obstinate & traiterous harted Papists at home, It may be (I say) that you with other may speake a word in such sea∣son that shalbe as apples of gold in pictures of siluer:Pro. 25. 11. both for the greater glory of God and also for the better comfort of the Churches, and the like safetie of his Maiestie himselfe, of his Royall posteritie, and of all his kingdomes. As the Lord sometime in the very like case cursed him that did the worke ofIer. 48. 10. the Lord negligently, and kept backe his sword from bloud: so shall all Princes and other most certainly be blessed, that in these distresses of the churches shalbe mer∣cifull (according to the mercie of God, whereby them∣selues haue bin aduanced) for they shall obtaineMat. 5. 7. Iam. 2. 23. mercie, and their said mercie shall reioyce against iudge∣ment.
As hitherto Right Honorable I haue directed my speech to both your Honors ioyntly, so giue me leaue now to conuert my selfe to you my yong Lord more especially; whom before in the inscription of this myepistle dedicatorie I haue mentioned. And so much the more do I presume thus to do because you are not nobly desended onely according to the flesh, but also because you come of a stocke as noble for religion and the profession of the Gospell. For of my knowledge you are now the fourth of that Honorable house in a right line that haue bin re∣nowned in the Churches for profession of the Gos∣spell, and fauour vnto the professiors and Ministers
 thereof. Your Honorable great Grand-father main∣tained in his house learned Mr. Wright, afterward called from thence to be Preacher at Ispwich in Suf∣folke: & then from thence remoued to Dinnington, where yet (I hope) he remaineth, a graue reuerend and vigilant pastour. My selfe also once being at Hampton-Court about some 43 yeares past, when Doct. Some was to preach before most renowned Queene Elizabeth of most blessed memorie, did there see your said Noble great Grand-father, in his humilitie to be as carefull (yea also painefull) to see all things in pulpit to be fit for him, as if he had beene some inferour officer in the chappell to haue looked vnto such things. Of your late Noble Grand-father the memoriall was and is most sweet and precious, and will neuer die. Of your most No∣ble Father I haue said ynough before in this my epistle dedicatorie to him and your selfe. Heere al∣so may not be forgotten the most virtuous and gra∣cious Countesse and Ladie your Mother, of pietie and modestie a most worthy patterne to all other Noble women of like sort.
How good also is the Lord vnto you in your christian education and instruction vnder Mr Col∣lens the godly and painefull pastour of Braintree, as it were at the feete of Gamaliel? In which respect itAct. 22. 3. may be said of you as Paul writeth of Timothie, that2. Tim. 3. 14. 15 you from your childhood haue learned and knowne the holy Scripture. Therefore also all that know these things may the better hope the like of you, that Paul testifieth of Timothie touching the faith of his Grand-mother and Mother, yea in a degree higher
 viz that the faith which dwelt first in your Honorable2. Tim. 1. 5. great Grand-father: secondly in your Grand-father, thirdly both in your Noble Father and Mother dwelleth also in you. All these things considered I may well say, that you are not onely Nobly discen∣ded, but also Royally euen of the bloud Royall of heauen, of God himselfe. So also you are a greater heire then of an earthly Earledome, euen of theRom. 8. 17. Kingdome of heauen: and heire together with Christ Iesus of an heauenly inheritance, immortall &c.1. Pet. 1. 4. And for your preseruation vnto this inheritance, the Angels not onely pitch their tents round aboutPsal. 34 7. Ioh. 10. 28. 1. Pet. 1. 5. Psal. 5. 13. you, but God himselfe also guardeth you with his power, and compasseth you about with his fauour. God there∣fore being greater then all, you may no more doubt of your preseruation to the foresaid heauenly in∣heritance and Kingdome, then you may doubt of the power of God. As you are heire apparant to an Earle, and may hereafter be an Earle, you haue men to attend vpon you: but as you are such as before I said, you haue the glorious Angels of heauen to waite on you, and to beare you in their hands &c. In thePsal. 91. 11. 12. resurrection you shall not onely be as the Angels ofMat. 22. 30. God in heauen, but you shall be also like vnto Christ Iesus himselfe: being where Christ Iesus is, and beholding the glorie of God &c. O Right Honorable, were Peter Iames and Iohn so rauished with the sight of ChristMat. 17. 4. Iesus his transfiguration onely for a time, that they prayed him they might neuer depart from that mountaine wher they saw him so trāsfigured: How therefore ought your Noble heart to be rauished with the certaintie of the euerlasting promises?
 Therefore also reioyce more in these things, then in all your earthly honors whatsoeuer. And as the Lord hath thus highly honored you, so labour you (I beseech you) to honor him accordingly: not so much considering what benefits you haue receiued from him for this life, and for the life to come, as deliberating with your selfe what to render vnto himPsal. 116. 12. Luk. 12. 40. in behalfe of them. Vnto whom much is giuen, of him much is required. So shall you indeed present your selfe such a sacrifice as in the treatise following you shall see the said mercies of God to bind you vnto. The same that Dauid said to Salomon, know the God1. Chron. 28. 9. of thy Fathers, and serue him with a perfect heart &c. Euen the same I beseech you to consider to belong vnto you. So shall you be sure of that that Azariah2. Chron. 15. 2. said to Asa, namely that the Lord will be with you, while you be with him &c. As you are one of the sonnesPsal. 29. 2. of the mightie, so giue vnto the Lord glorie and strength: yea the glorie that is due vnto his name. He that onely1. Sam. 2. 7. 8. aduanceth whom it pleaseth him, can also bring low them whom before he hath aduanced. As young as youPsal. 113. 7. are, you haue seene meane persons aduanced to great honor: and Noble Houses brought to deso∣lation. Let not your tender yeares preiudice your consideration of these things. For in this treatise you shall afterward see, that men may too long de∣ferre the sacrificing of themselues vnto God, but they cannot begin to soone. And indeed what sub∣iect can begin too soone to serue such a soueraigne as will entertaine him into any speciall seruice? That you may so do, beware (I beseech you) of flatter∣ers: beware of euill councell to the contrarie: both
 of superiours and also of equals. Let the testimoniesPsal. 119. 24. of the Lord be your delight, let them be your counsellors. yea persons also of such emminencie haue neede likewise to beware of seruants. For euen such some∣times doe more preuaile by euill suggestions, then the grauest learnedst and godliest diuines can do by their best instructions. Notwithstanding as the A∣postle saith, I am perswaded better things of your Ho∣nor:Heb. 6. 9. and such as beseeme all Christian wisedome: viz that you will continue according to your begin∣ning: growing like a Cedar in Lebanon, flourishing likePsal. 92. 12. 13. a palme tree in the Courtes of God; bringing forth fruit in your old age: and being then (in your inward man) fat andin good liking. Therefore to conclude with the wordes of Peter, as your Lordship shall grow in age, strength, stature and outward comelinesse of person, so I beseech you all so to endeauour to grow2. Pet. 3. 18. in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ.
To speake againe ioynctly to both your Honors, although my labours following be not worthy to be presented to such Honorable persons, yet as God himselfe towards the building of his Tabernacle, as well accepted the small gifts of the poore sort, viz goates haire, red skinnes of Rames, and badgers skinnesExod. 35. 22. 23 &c, as he did of the braccletts and earerings, and ta∣bletts, and other Ieweles of gold, offred by the Princes, and other the richest sort of the Israelites, so I do hum∣bly craue the like acceptance of this my poore trea∣tise in my old and poore state presented vnto your Honors in testimonie of my thankefull minde for those fauours I receiued long since of that most No∣ble Earle late deceased, and now in heauen resting
 from all his labours, and enioying the fruite of all hisReu. 14. 13. workes. Indeede Right Honorable, my thankefull minde for the said favours required, the later I pre∣sent these my labours unto you, the more exact in all reason they should haue bin, because as every Grammer scholler hath learned, that Gratia ab officio qud mora tardat abest, So Seneca hath also wel sayd,Seneca. epis. 82. Beneficia crescunt mora, tantò{que} plus solvendum quantò tardiús. Ingratus est qui beneficium reddit sine usura. Whereunto agree the wordes of Tullie, Terra nun∣quam sine usura reddit quod accepit, sed alias minore,Cicero. de senectute. plerun{que} maiore cum faenore: and elsewhere, Beneficio provocati imitari debemus agros fertiles, qui maltò plusDe offic. lib. 1. afferunt quam acceperint. And as in the beginning of this my Epistle, by some divine examples, I shewed that the kindnes of Ancestors is to be remembred to their posteritie, so Dionysius Halicarnassaeus by the light of nature speaking of a worthy Romane, saith, Quamdiu ipse vixit, illinos decuit pro beneficijs habere graciam Nunc verò postquam fato functus est, posterisDionisi Halicar. lib. 4. cius referenda est: ne videaminicum corporibus simul defodere beneficiorum memoriam. These things I ac∣knowledge so much the more to oblige me vnto both your Honors in respect of the honorable fa∣uors of the late most Noble Earle vnto me; Not∣withstanding as Tullie againe saith, Malui me tibi de∣berePhilipie. 2. consiteri, quam cuiquam minus prudenti non satis gratus videri, so say I to your Honors, I had rather acknowledge my selfe to owe to you more dutie (being as I am) then to any that cannot well iudge seeme not at all to be thankefull. For although ac∣cording to the former wordes of Seneca benefits doe
 require so much the greater thankes by how much the late: they are performed, yet according also to other words of the same Seneca, in the same epistle Beneficium non quantum sit, sed a quali profectam ani∣mo perpenditur, I doe likewise hope that your Ho∣nors will not so much regard this my gift it selfe, as esteeme of the mind where with I present the same. In hope whereof, as likewise of your pardon both of my boldnes in dedicating the same vnto you, and also of my tediousnes in this my epistle, I now being going the way of all the earth, as Ioshua said to the Isra∣elites,Iosh. 23. 14. and Dauid to Salomon, and being ready to be1. Kin. 22. Philtpi 1. 23. 2. Tim. 4. 6. dissolued, and to lay downe my earthly Tabernacle, and the time of my departing being at hand, and so be∣ing shortly to take my leaue of all the world, doe also in the meane time most humbly take my leaue of your Honors, not ceasing whiles I liue to pray for your long continuance heere, with a daily en∣crease of grace and honor, and for your euerlasting happines and glorie in the world to come.

From my poore lodging in the poore Hospitall cal∣led S. Bartholomewes by Sandwich in Kent. August 20. 1622.
