

To the right honorable Sir Tho∣mas Egerton knight, Lord keeper of the great Seale of England, grace, mercy, peace, and plenitude of temporal and eternal beatitude in Christ Iesus our Lord, and Sauior euerlasting.
NOw, euen now amongst vs in these later dayes (right Honourable and chosen Patron) do the prouidence, presence and promises of God ap∣peare, worke, and prooue effectual∣ly according to that saying of the holy God of Is∣rael▪ in the dayes of Samuel. Th that honour me I will honour,1. Samuel. 2.30▪ and they that despise me shal be despi∣sed. This was then spoken and afterwardes effe∣cted touching the carelesse and disobedient chil∣dren of Ely and their posteritie, as inward aduer∣saries of the welfare of Gods Israel. This was also then spoken,2▪ Sam. 8.17. and afterwardes effected in a godly religious and iustified Zadok (succeeding Abia∣thar, one in authoritie with king Dauid) against his outward enemies the Philistines and other nations in those victories▪ For as in all ages and

nations there haue been, are, and shalbe both in∣ward aduersaries and outward enemies, disho∣nouring God, & honoring man more then God: So the Lord of all power, and God of all grace, hath euer had a righteous Abraham in Caldea, a iust Lot in Sodome, a godly Daniel in Babylon, a deuout Tobyas in Niniuie, a patient Iob in Husse, and a zealous Nehemias in Damasco: who both amongst inward and outward enemies haue ho∣noured God and been honoured by him, despi∣sing those which haue despised him. And againe, Gods prouidence, presence, and promises haue been no lesse effectuall with others, as Ionathas in the Court of Saul to fauour Dauid: Obadia in the Court of Achab to entertain the Prophetes: Abdemelech with king Zedechias, to intreate for Ieremie: Petrus, Dorotheus and Gorgonius in Dio∣clesians court to embrace Christianity: & general∣ly to honour God, which hath honoured them, and to despise those which haue despised him. Neither in our time hath Gods goodnesse in this failed. For like as we haue had, and still haue in∣ward aduersaries, as Athistes, Epicures, Hypocrites, and voluptuous worldlinges which contemning the grace of God, peruert both their owne waies, and hinder, discourage, diminish, and blemish the welfare of the godly elect by faith: So this our age and present happie state, wanteth not forreign enemies farre off, which with Tyranny, Papi∣stry, Infidelitie, Heresie and Schismes lie lurking, looking for a day to assault vs, and bend all their pollicies, and powers to subuert vs, which haue

honoured God, who hath honored vs, and who may iustly contemne them that contemne him. As blessed be God for his louing fauour and vn∣speakeable mercies manifested long agone, and of late time vpon this our little Bethulia of Eng∣land, where our gratious Iudith humbling her selfe in his feare, seeking the honour of God, hath been honoured by his prouidence, is honoured by his presence, and shalbe honoured by trusting in his promises aboue humane expectation, to his endlesse glory and praise, and our continual com∣fort: but to the contempt and confusion of all contrary opposite powers whatsoeuer. In respect whereof (Right Honourable) and for that both Prince and Piere, rich and poore haue iust cause to reioyce in his feare, and to be thankfull for the enioying of this his fauor: As I (of many others which may doe better) acknowledge my selfe to be one of the least in abilitie, yet for that I would not be the last in good will of any which can or may any way expresse their dutifull indeuour in Honouring that God which hath honoured vs, and contemning them which contemne him, and vs. Ha∣uing these xx. yeares and vpwardes, applied my time & talent in translating learned mens works out of Latin into English, approued by authority, & furthered by faithful benefactors, wheras I did certaine yeares past dedicate some of these Expo∣sitions vnto the right honourable learned and vertuous Sir C. H. K. Lord Chancellor, of Eng∣land, and after him another portion to the right honourable Sir I. P. K. Lord Keeper, &c. your

honours Antecessor: and last of all, another part, to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie well ac∣cepted: Do now addresse, and dedicate the expo∣sition and translation of these fewe Psalmes mo vnto your honourable good Lordship: as vnto that honourable personage,Iemie 44.19. chosen of the Lord, for a shepheard to stand before him in practise a∣gainst all inward aduersaries of Gods Israel a∣mongst vs,Isay. 49.2. and as a chosen shaft in the quiuer of the Lord for praier, against all forraigne enemies far from vs. Humbly beseeching your honourable good Lordship heerein thankfully to accept my good wil: to the furtherance of my poore pen and studie: And my heartie and thankfull praier shall be dayly prest vnto almightie God for your ho∣nourable lordships long life, health, increase of honour and permanent heauenly felicitie in Christ Iesus.
London in S. Brides parish, 2. No∣uember, 1596.

