



Most gracious and dread Soveraigne,
MAns greatest Miserie is seene most in the mar∣ter
of happinesse; and when God presenteth
the chiefe good, then Sathan presseth to turne
it into our chiefe ill.
Of all things on earth only mans Soule keepeth a con∣scionable
correspondence with God, because it is onely
capable of his instructions and inspirations; and able to
give him a meeting in affection and action. And yet in
the matter of true happinesse it was most miserable. For
though God made Adam happie, yet by his fall, losing
happinesse, he had neither conscience of miserie, nor
care of recovering what he had lost. And which is to be
lamented, all mankinde (except the handfull of the
Church) for more than three thousand yeares lived
in the brutish opinion of the soules mortalitie.Aug. Civit. 18. 25. Then
Thales, in the daies of Manasseh and Numa, obser∣ving
exactly the heavens motion, raised this con∣clusion;
That mans soule which could observe those
things, had a greater respect to heaven, than to gaze upon it;

which could be no other but to dwell in it: whereupon
he inferred the soules immortalitie. Thereafter the Phi∣osophers
layd clearer grounds, and raised clearer con∣clusions:
and thereupon began to thinke of true happi∣nesse
for an immortall soule. But though they resolved
that happinesse is the fruit of the union of the soul with
the eternall God, yet they fell foule both in the conceit
of their Gods, and of happinesse it selfe. Their carriage
to their gods was insolent: They tyrannized over them,Tertull. Apol. Arnob. contra Gentes, Minu∣tius. Lactantius
and served themselves of them rather than served them.
They made them; they casheered them: They ingaged
them for money, and exposed them to a licitation or ro∣ping
in the market. And if they were not so rid of
them, they cast them as blockes to the backes of their
fires. And all the honour they gave to the things those
blocks represented, was to finde libertie to sinning. For
they honoured seditious Iupiter, contentious Mars,
drunken Bacchus, licentious Venus, &c. that they might
finde a patrocinie of their sinnes in themselves,Scurrilatis po∣tius quam divi∣nitatis officia. Aug. Civit. and yet
they never sought true happinesse of any of them; for
the offices which they assigned to their select gods were
rather scurrilitie than divinitie.
In like manner they erred both in the matter of hap∣pinesse,
and the way of acquiring it. As for happinesse,
though Saint Augustine multiply their opinions to 288.Civit. 19. 1.
yet they neither agreed among themselves, neither any
one of them apart with himselfe; and none of them all
found the truth. If we looke to them joyntly, they are
like blinde Andabats smiting other.Aug. contra. Acad, 3. 7. If severally, they
are like Bedlemits, every one feeding himself in his own
fancie, pretending a confidence that hee had found the
truth, but within full of restlesnesse. Cicero presenting
all these sects, sheweth that there was none of them
who tooke not prioritie to themselves. The Socraticks
seemed to come neere by their maxime.Nihil se mal∣le quàm virum onum esse. Aug. Epist.That they de∣sired
nothing more than to bee good men, And yet they
knew not the way:Quid attinet scire quo eun∣dum, nisi scia∣mus qua eun∣dum, Bern. Je∣jun. 4. f. 39. c. 2. And what availeth it to know whi∣ther
to goe, if we know not the way how to goe? And when

S. Augustine asked a Pagan Philosopher, what was that
way to be good? He got no other answer, but that men
should be purged by sacrifices, and reconciled to God by in∣tercession
of the lesser gods.
Plato over-reached them all, affirming,In cognitio∣ne & imitati∣one Dei. Ci∣vit. 8. 8. That true hap∣pinesse
consisted in the knowledge and imitation of God.
He went also further to his purifications, ayming at the
reall change of the person, which Porphyre long after
him did purifie more: But they were nothing but the
evanishing of fleshly minds. Aristotle envying his Ma∣sters
Divinitie, turned him unto nature, and disputed
much of vertue; but proved miserable in his life, and
with the restManciparunt virtutem vo∣luptati. Aug. Civit. 5. 19. mancipated vertue unto pleasure. And
though Epicurus by some abstract Maximes (gathered
by Seneca) would mitigate his brutish opinion; yet it
is sure hee pleaded all for base pleasure, and measured
happinesse as grosly as he did the Sun, whose diameter he
alledged was but two foot.
Thus they blinded both the world and themselves,
and for keeping their own credit, made men think there
were many happinesses,Erant tan∣tum multi er∣rores erran∣tium, & non multa summa bona. Aug. lib. arb. 2. 10. which were only errors, and
not many chief goods, And the best of them, when they
had wrought their mindes to this, that God was the
chiefe good: yet they knew him not clearly, and there∣fore
came back to their wonted darknesse, not so much by
choice as by wearinesseNon tame∣lectione quàm fatigatione. Aug. de Mor. Ecc. 7..
So by aPoenali mor∣bo plus sitiunt quàm capiunt. Aug. Confess. 11. 12. penall disease they thirsted more than they
could conceive: They were blown up with pride, and
sought vainely to build happinesse to themselves. ButQuanta est vanitas, quan∣ta insania, ho∣minem morta∣lem in seipso fidere ut beatus sit. Aug. ep. 52. how great vanity is it, and how great madnesse, for a
mortall man to trust in himselfe to be happy! ForNon accipit humana natura ut per s∣am potestatem beata fit. Aug. de Gen. 2. 15. hu∣mane
nature hath not that power to be happy by it self, be∣causeNon facit hominem beatum, nisi qui fecit hominem Deu. Aug. epist. 52. none can make man blest, but he that made man.
God ever kept the doctrine of true happinesse in his
Church:Gen. 5. 24. Enochs walking with him, and translating to

heaven was a reall document of it: The Patriarchs
conversing with God, the exercise of his worship un∣der
the law, and the preaching of the Prophets made it
to shine clearly long ere Thales advertised the world of
immortalitie. And yet when the Iewes would bee like
the Gentiles, they obscured that doctrine: And the Sad∣duces
brought into their Church Epicurus opinion of
the mortalitie of the soule. But Christ refuted their er∣rour,
and positively designed in one sentence more than
they all.Joh. 17. 3. Aug. de mor. Ecc. 18. This is life eternall to know thee to be the only
true God, and whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ. S. Augu∣stine
laboured painfully nine years to find out the truth:
He assayed the sects of the Philosophers one after ano∣ther,
but found it with none of them: Then he turned
him to the Christians, add falling upon the Manicheans,
was more perplexed with their fancies than before,Consess. but
being advertised to reade Scripture, he found the truth
and true happinesse in Christ.
This is your Majesties glorie, that true happinesse is
more fully preached under your Majesty, than any King
on earth. Paganisme and Mahumetisme overwhelme
all without the Church: Superstition marreth it in Pa∣pists,
and the craft of Hereticks obscureth it among some
Protestants: But under your Majesty the salvation of the
Lord is near to them that fear him, that glory may dwell in
our Land.Psal. 85. 9.
The Lord who hath made your Majesty a King of ma∣ny
Kingdomes, make your Majestie more and more a King
of many blessings, that we all walking in truth and love,
righteousnesse and peace kissing one another,Psal. 21. 6. we may all in
the end be happy in him, who is true happinesse.
Edinburgh, 15. Maii, 1633.

