


KIng Dauid the man beloued of God after his owne hart (Right Honorable and most worthy Mecenas) though he was also the faithfull feeder, the Shepheard of God,1 Sam. 16.7. the seruant of the Lord, the Conquerour in∣uincible, the Captaine of the destitute, the sacred Psalmograph, the melodious Musitiō, the sweet singer of Israel, and Patrone of sin∣gers, the praise-worth Prophet of God the annointed of the Lord, and princely figure of Christ, the soueraigne King of all kinges: Albeit (I say) he was such an earthly personage, endewed with mo heauenly graces, then euer any was either before or after him: yet, in himselfe feeling, and of himselfe confessing great and manifolde infirmitie of humane nature, by many his most greeuous conflicts betweene the Spirit and the Flesh, suffering (according to the say∣ing of Saint Paul, that old beaten souldier of Christ) Inward feares, outward feightinges. 2. Cor. 7.5. he found also by experience in the world both inward and outward enuy, both domesticall and for∣reine enmity, and vnder the handes of the highest Iehouah, both temptations of abiections, troubles of deiections, and tryalles of his truth, constant faith and vnfained conuertion. So as by the prouidence of God: seeing all this, sorting for his best behoofe beyond either his desire or desert (As all thinges worke for the best

to them that loue God &c. Rom. 8.28.) amongest his other greeuous complaints in his sacred Psalmes, to mollify his miseries with me∣ditating of Gods mercies, hee eftsoones tooke into his handes the harpe of his heauenly harmony, sounding thereuppon and singing to the same such like consolatary conclusions of Gods goodnes to∣wards his elect, as this is: Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord deliuereth him out of all. Psa. 34. vers. 19. And againe such like testimonies of Gods indignation against the reprobate as this is: ibid. But mallice shall slay the wicked, and they which hate the righteous shall perish. vers. 21. That these effectes apparantly were thus proued in him and his enemies, the history of his life and acti∣ons, and the euents of his enemies enterprises most euidently do testify. For it was a thing past his and all humane expectation and helpe, that he so mighty a Personage, aduaunced from the sheep∣hooke to the scepter. 2. Sam. 7.8. From a Kings page. 1 Sam 16.21 to a kings personage. 1. Sam. 5.3. Long persecuted by Saul. 1. Sam. 18. whose life he saued 1 Sam. 24.13. committing those two horri∣ble sinnes. 2. Sam. 11. And so vtterly destitute of all sauegard and safety in himselfe, for which he felt Gods iudgement and iustice threefolde, viz.  the death of the Childe borne  his banishment for the facte, and  temptation of abie∣ction for exercise of his faith, his owne sonne his hartes greefe 2. Sam. 17. and so many nations his vtter enemies, Ps. 18. It was (I say) a thing impossible with man, and past all his expectation, that this desolate Dauid should find such fauour with God and man, as to reobteine a right recouery of that, which he had before lost with so great iniustice, viz. Gods grace and fauour, his estate of digni∣ty, kingdome, life, and felicity: Notwithstanding, such was the pro∣uidence, presence & promise of the most highest Iehouah (as is affir∣med by the holy Ghost, the true witnes of Gods most worthy will & working herein. The Lord in his mercies so looked vpon him with his louing fauour, that he searched the secrets of his hart, heard his sorrowfull sighes, salued his sore, renued his spirit, remitted his sin, healed his harmes, saued his life, prolonged his dayes, continued his kingdome: and finally, clothed his enemies with shame, but made his Crowne to florish, Ps. 132. vers. 19. Then all which blessings none could bee more at any time or greater, by God bestowed vppon any mortall Prince or Potentate vpon earth: whereuppon highly commending the great goodnesse and mercie of Almighty God as the onely vmpier in this spirituall and corporall conflict, well and worthily ascribing the glory of this triumph vnto the highest Ie∣houah, doth this learned expositor Victorinus Strigelius thus pro∣foundly

inferre of this Warriour and wrastler: Dauid being temp∣ted, prayeth: praying, hee was deliuered, and being deliuered he gaue thankes. O excellent order of a princely warfare, O more sur∣passing vertue of diuine deliuerance, O most blisfull Conquerour by the crowning Creator. Many proud pompus and mighty Mo∣narckes of old time, as idolatrous, tirannous and wicked Pharao, Nabuchadnezar, Antiochus, and such others, extolling themselues for Gods, contemning the true God, and afflicting his people for their true profession, haue warred against those weaklinges to the distruction of their bodies, soules, kingdomes, and infinit thow∣sandes others of their aliaunces: and after them such other pro∣phane princes, foreprophecyed of by Daniell, as the Assirian and Caldean Lyon, the Percian Beare, the Macedonian Leopard,Dan. 7. cap. verses 4.5.6.7. and the Romane beast farre differing from the others, all warring against the Sainctes of God, attributing their victories to their owne valors, derogating the glory of the immortall God, haue destroyed diuers kingdomes, their owne and others, with infinit thousandes of bo∣dies and soules into perpetuall perdition, with Sathan and his an∣gels for euer. But this diuine Dauid, the Lords Conquerour so fought his battels against the enemies of God and his truth, as this interpreter inferreth of him in the 7 Psalme, that the very youthes of his people and dominions, might at home in the Church and Scholes heare, reade, learne & profite in the law of Moyses and doc∣trine of the Prophets, touching the promises infallible of the euer∣lasting kingdome of Christ, and the saluation of all the faithful for euer: of which euerlasting kingdome, Salomon sonne of the said K. Dauid was also a liuely and expresse figure, as in the 45. Psalme is mentioned.
Such a peaceable, spirituall and corporall warfare in this last age of the world, hath God of his vnspeakable goodnesse, grace, and mercie giuen vs this many yeares in England by the preaching of the Gospell in the Halcion daies of our most sacred Saba, Queene Elizabeth, hearing, honouring and aduauncing to our great com∣fort and consolation the wisedome of Christ himselfe a better then Salomon, Idque sub summi Iehouae  nostro, Gen. 5.1. Wherein (Right Honorable) wee haue manifolde and great causes in euery degree with the same our diuine Debora, as∣well Gouernours as all others,Iudges 5.9. willing persons among the people of Is∣raell to praise the Lord of Hostes for his late most gracious victory gi∣uen vs ouer the Spanish Sysera by sea: As also with the same our humble Hester to celebrate the Lordes louing mercies,Hest. 15.22. with conti∣nuall remembrance of thankefulnesse for supplanting and suppres∣sing

the prowde, hauty enterprises of hawty Haman domesticall, so as we may say, The Lord hath saued his Sion, dwelling with the Daughter of Babel, 2. Zach. 7. And finally, with the same our ioy∣full Iudith (the exaltation of Hierusalem, the glory of Israell, and re∣ioycing of our nation) To sing a song of praise vnto the Lord of hostes for his heauenly helpe,Iudith 13.4.9. in ouercomming, subuerting, and vanquish∣ing the pollicy, power, and practises of that Olophernes, the romish Antichrist, and his mischieuous members, the Iesuitish Semina∣ries and Sectaries, with such other forreine Scorpions, whatsoeuer and wheresoeuer. Since therefere the solace of the Lords Syon, and ioy of his Hierusalem in our churches and common wealthes of England and Ireland, by the gracious and omnipotent presence and preseruation of Christ himselfe, the true Michael and head of his church and kingdome euerlasting, enuironed with his ange∣licall ministers and watchmen ouer vs (as this princely Prophet Dauid sweetly singeth) Continueth still firme and immouable, Psal. 125.2. There neither is, nor ought to be any member of this body, no nor the meanest, nor basest labourer in this Vineyard of the Lord so florishing, but he is bounden by all good and dutifull industrye to bestowe his time in praying for, his trauell in prospering, and ta∣lent in preferring the beauty & beatitude thereof, to the aduaunce∣ment of Gods alone glory and continuall comfortes of the faith∣full: Amongest whom (Right Honorable good Macenas) reputing my selfe simplest of many thowsands, and much bounden vnto the goodnes of God, and those good benefactors which any way haue helped or healed my weake estate, and supported my poore possi∣bility, both in the study of my translations, and in the exercise of my pen in writing (two simple shiftes in me, but singular giftes in others of better countinance in the Church and common wealth.) Here therefore finding my selfe indebted vnto your noble bounty, more thē vnto any other Benefactor whatsoeuer yet liuing: I hum∣bly craue pardon of your Honor for my long delayed duty, and humbly beseech your accustomed benignity, now (though late to accept in good worth (as in part of paiment of my debt-bounden duty long since lyable to your Honorable desertes) this pittance of my poore study and pen, which is my last translation intituled, A proceeding in the Harmony of the princely prophet Dauids Harpe: (wherof a former part was dedicated to the late noble Erle of Warwicke deceased) a token of my true intent (as God knoweth) which would painfully put in vre the performance of my bounden duty, to the full satisfaction of all my honorable, worshipfull, and worthy good benefactors, and their worthy good expectations:

Though my hinderances haue bin great, and my infirmities are yet many, Euen as the distressed wight wandering from Hierusalem to Ie∣richo, desirous to be setled at Gods good pleasure,Luk. 10. in the consolation of the faithfull, till God the restorer of them that trust in him, do fur∣ther increase and confirme me with his grace, fauour and comfort. In meane time I rest, humbly crauing and hartily beseeching the same omnipotent and immortall God, to blesse and preserue your Honorable good Lordship with long life, prosperous health, in∣crease of Honor in the earthly Syon, and with the perfruition of life and ioies in the celestiall Ierusalem, for euer & and euer. Amen. London, at my poore house In Saint Martins parrish by Ludgate this Thursday the 22. day of Aprill be-in S. Georges euen, anno Christi 1591.

