


BEloved I am not ignorant, howe dangerous a thing it is to write bookes in these daies, partly in respect of the greate varietie of all learning in many, vvhich thereby are able more ea∣silie to finde a fault in any man his vvritings, then the author (for the most part) himselfe, and partly of the great curiosity of other vvhich are readie to reprehend the best, and to finde a knot in a rush; yea not onely to carpe at that vvhich deserueth no blame, but often∣times to condemne that vvhich they ought ra∣ther to commend, or vvhich at the least they cannot amende. The consideration of this, did at the first make me for a long time to vvish this labour that I haue novve taken, to haue beene set vpon by some other, more able to haue gone (as we say) through-stitch therewith then my selfe, before I durst once beginne to set my penne to paper for the writing my medita∣tions
 thereof. After also that I had begun ana finished this treatise, in such sort as novv it commeth forth (some smale things onely ex∣cepted) I staied the publishing thereof, to see if any other vvould haue preuented me in this argument, that so I might not haue laide my selfe open to those reprehensions and censures, vvhich nowe perhaps I may incurre and su∣staine. At the last seeing none other to deale therein, and thinking it to be a thing very profitable, yea beeing persvvaded of the profit thereof by some other, whome I desired to read the same written; (as vvhose iudgements I did much better trust vnto then to my ovvne) I laid aside all such feare: and respecting the cō∣mon good of many, more then mine owne pri∣uate credit and estimation vvith a few, I haue boldly committed it (as ye see) vnto the print, and doe novve exhibite it vnto your reading. Although therefore it may be, that it shall passe through the fierie and sharpe purgatorie of many such quicke heads & nimble tongues, as to vvhich almost nothing will be welcome: yet I hope that it shall also finde courteous and fauurable entertainment with many, which will make such profitable vse thereof, as I haue commended in the ende, and in regard where∣of, I regard not all the obloquie of the other. I
 craue also yea and trust, that what faultes so∣euer haue escaped me herein, they may be the more fauourably interpteted, and the more e∣silie pardoned, because this treatise is not onely the first fruites of my labours thus published, but also such an argument, as wherein I doe not remember any other professedly to haue taken the like paines. If hereafter any man of great learning generally and particular∣ly of much reading and deepe iudgement in diuinitie, shall thinke this worke to be insuffi∣cient in this kinde, and shall therefore take the same theame in hand, and handle it more substantially and sufficiently: I shall not onely not enuy the same or be grieued therevvith, but I will also vvillingly accept it, reuerently esteemē it, and be hartely glad of it. In the meane time I entreat all Christian readers of this booke, thankfully to looke, and charitably to peruse the same, euen as they would haue o∣thers to accept the like trauell of themselues. Neither let them be offended vvith my plaine manner of handling these arguments, but ra∣ther let them seriously vvaie the matter and substance it selfe. For it is not finenesse of vvordes but pith of matter that must edifie to the vvorking, confirming, or increasing of true faith and godlines. Good and whole some
 meate is not the vvorse to be liked, for beeing serued to the table in a earthen or wodden ves∣sell. If also one argument please not, yet let no man be discouraged, but let him proceede to the next, and so to them that followe. Where there is varietie of dishes, there men not li∣king of one vvill tast of an other. The like fa∣uour I entreat in the reading of these argu∣ments, hoping that the further men proceede in reading this treatise, the better sauour they will finde therein. Nowe as I entreat all Chri∣stian readers generally to accept courteously of my paines in this booke, so more specially I pray the same of such, as are my friends dwelling in the places before mentioned, or elswhere. For beeing specially bound vnto them, either by kindnes or by kinred, and beeing not able to doe that good to these that nature it selfe requi∣reth, I was the more willing to publish this trea∣tise, as a testimonie of my thankefulnes to the one, and of my welwishing mind vnto the other. As therefore in this speciall respect, I doe offer this generall treatise vnto them both, that they may make the more speciall vse thereof vnto themselues, so I doe desire them especially to ac∣cept it.
Touching the addition of the dainties of po∣perie annexed to the treatise, partly to shew the
 vnlearned learning of their popish great clarks in diuinitie, when poperie it selfe was at her top and top gallant; and partly to discouer the a∣bominable blasphemies, and blasphemous abo∣minations of their religion: (vvhich to many perhaps were before secret and altogether vn∣knowne) touching this addition (I say) of the se things I doe also desire that it may find the like courteous entertainment. And least any man should thinke that these things thus added, were gathered out of such authors as were of no ac∣count in their church, (as likewise many slender things might be collected out of the bookes of some simple writers amongst vs, that are of no reputation in our church) least also touching those things that I haue gathered out of their seruice bookes, any should imagine them to be such, as they themselues should now disclaime, I haue sufficiently preuented these obiections in the addition it selfe, shewing that the authors by me here trauced, had great allowance from the Popes owne vnholines, and were of high e∣stimation in their churches, and likewise proo∣uing their ancient seruice books in the things here expressed, not to differ frō their new books newly reformed by the coūcil of Trēt, neither yet to be any whit in a manner now reuoked. Much other the like popish trash I might haue noted
 out of other the like popish bookes, but to avoid tediousnes vnto other, I did the more willingly spare my owne paines. Thus committing your selues with the successe of these my labours vn∣to the Lord (who worke both in you and in me more perfect hatred of popery and all other er∣rours, and more vnfained loue of his truth, that we may the better continue therein, and be the more plentiful in all the fruits thereof,) I do lo∣uingly take my leaue of you, frō Billerim in Es∣sex the seuenth of March in the yeere of our Lord according to the cōputation of the church of England 1597. almost nowe ended.

