



RIght Honourable, your fauour hauing beene such towards me, as that both either vpon my cō∣mendation before I was by face knowne vnto your Lordship, and especially my selfe sithens that time haue thereby sared the better, I could not but in all dutie thinke of some way, whereby to shew my selfe in some measure thankfull for the same. Hauing therfore taken a litle paines in ga∣thering these generall arguments against the whole masse & lumpe of poperie, as in defence likewise of the generall doctrine publikely, and by publike authoritie professed in England, I thought your Honourable curtesie to be such, that these my labours would be accepted as some testimonie of my gratefull minde. Neither am I bold to offer them vnto your Honour, in re∣spect onely of that your singular fauour towards my selfe, but also because the same your Hono∣rable fauour hath beene extended and is exten∣ded
 towardes all, whome your Honour hath seene forward in the profession of that religion, the defence whereof is the chiefe subiect matter of this treatise. Yea so haue you vouchsafed to countenance such persons from time to time not disdaining the meanest, that this your Christian and godly minde is much more worthie this worke, then the worke it selfe any waies worthy to be presented to so great a person. For by this loue towardes the professours of the truth, hath euidently appeared your affection towards the truth it selfe. This affection also towardes the truth it selfe, euen towardes the truth, which in this treatise is commended and iustified, hath in like manner beene most plainely testified vnto this whole countrey of Essex, by your singular care for the placing of godly and sufficient mini∣sters in all places, where the patronage of bene∣fices by the auncient lawes of this realmes hath beene your right. And both these, to wit, your loue vnto the persons professing this religion, and your like affection towards the religion it selfe, haue plētifully declared your true zeale of God himselfe and of Christ Iesus. For Christ accoū∣teth that done to himselfe, that is done to them Math. 25. 40. that belong vnto him. And as the enmitie a∣gainst God his truth and the professours there∣of, endeauouring to suppresse the one and to re∣presse the other, doth testifie the like enmitie against God himselfe and Christ Iesus, so the Mah. 25. 43. Act. 9. 4. contrarie loue towardes both, doth declare the like loue towards God himselfe and Christ Ie∣sus. Further your honourable care (before men∣tioned)
 for the furthering of this religion, shew∣ed by prouiding such sufficient ministers for in∣struction of the people in the true knowledge thereof and obedience thereunto, hath also wit∣nessed and doth daily witnesse your vnfained loue vnto men. For what greater worke can there be for the benefits of their soules? yea both of their soules and of their bodies, of this life and of the life to come. For who knoweth not but that as the Gospell is the power of God vnto salua∣tion, Rom. 1. 16. Iam. 1. 21. 2. Tim. 3. 15. Psal. 19. 7. Frov. 1. 4. and the word conteined in the holy Scrip∣tures (which also containe this religion here commended) is able to make men wise vnto the same saluation: so also that that wisdome which the gospel and word of God teacheth, hath in Prov. 3. 16. her right hand length of daies, and in her left hand riches and glorie? As therefore to hinder the go∣spel and word of God, doth plainly bewray the hatred of men, which cannot be saued by any o∣ther meanes without it, (for which cause the A∣postle speaking of the Iewes saith first, that they 1. Thess. 2. 15, 16. were contrarie or aduersaries vnto all men, & then immediatly addeth as a reason or confirmation of the former, that they had forbidden them to preach the word vnto the Gentiles, vvhereby they might be saued) so to promote the same word, can not but witnes the contrarie. Finally this your godly care, hath in like sort the better witnessed, & doth witnes your faithful heart, both towards her most excellent Maiestie, and also towardes the whole realme. For it cannot be but that the more the true knowledge and feare of God a∣boundeth,
 by the more plentiful preaching of the word also will abound true obedience vnto her Highnes, and vnfained loue betwixt subiect and subiect: by both which the barres of the gates of the whole kingdome, must necessarily be the stronger against all fortaine aduersaries. Sith therefore (Right honourable) it hath plea∣sed God, of his aboundant goodnes and rich grace, besides your great earthly honour, thus more highly to honour and aduance you in hea∣uenly things, as I doe in this respect the more boldly dedicate this treatise of religion to your Honour so zealous of religion, so in all humilitie I desire the same to accept therof, and to vouch∣safe your honourable protection therunto. And because your former zeale perswadeth me the same of your Honour, that the like perswaded the Apostle of the Philippians, namely, that he Philip. 1. 6. that hath begun this good worke, will also finish the same: therefore that vse of this treatise, which in the ende I wish generally to all great persons al∣readie called to the fellowship of this true reli∣gion, I doe more specially commend vnto your Honour, namely that you will yet be zealous thereof, as hitherto you haue beene and are. Yea let not your zeale onely continue, but let it be such also as Salomon describeth the loue of the Church to be, strong as death, cruell (or hard, or Cantic. 8. 6, 7. inuincible) as the graue, whose coales are fierie coales, and as a vehement flame, (or as the flame of God) and the which much water cannot quench. Yea because the Lord Iesus reprehendeth the
 slaking of the first loue of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 4, 5. threatning also to come against her, and to remooue her candlesticke out of her place, except shee repen∣ted and did her first works: therefore also your loue abound more and more, as the Apostle writeth vnto the Philippians: and as our Sauiour him∣selfe Phil. 1. 9. commendeth the loue of the Church of Thyatira, saying, that her workes were more at the Rev. 2. 19. last then at the first. This the Lord requireth of all, but especially of such as himselfe hath most highly aduanced, and made the sonnes of the Psal. 29. 1. mightie: yea this is the ende for which he doth thus aduance them, and make them so migh∣tie. Ester 4. 14. Neither neede any man to feare any dis∣grace or dishonour by such forwardnes in zeale: yea rather euery man is to hope the contrarie. For God himselfe hath expressely promised, to 1. Sam. 2. 3. honour them that shall honour him. Therefore the Apostle hoped and fully assured himselfe, that in Phil. 1. 40. nothing he should be ashamed, but that Christ should be magnified in his bodie: where by opposing his owne shame to the magnifying of Christ, and the magnifying likewise of Christ to his owne shame, he plainely teacheth, that they that stu∣die and bend their endeauours most to magni∣fie and exalt Christ, neede not to feare any shame and disgrace of themselues. Moreouer they that continue the honouring of him, with that honour and according to that honour whereunto he hath exalted them, shall build vp the surer house to their owne posteritie. For as the Prophet speaking generally of the man that
 feareth the Lord and delighteth greatly in his com∣mandements, Psal. 112. 1. 2. that his seede shall be mightie vpon the earth: so more particularly the Lord promi∣sed to Dauid, to set vp his seede after him, which 2. Sam. 7. 12. should proceede out of his bodie, and to establish his kingdome. And this promise all men knowe to haue beene most amply performed. Yea to Iehu (a man not so according to God his owne heart as Dauid was) did the Lord promise, that because he had diligently executed that which was right in 1. King. 10. 30. God his eyes, &c. (though not with a perfect heart) therfore his sonnes vnto the fourth generati∣on, should sit vpon the throne of Israel. This pro∣mise also was performed vnto the full. For Iehu himselfe beeing reckoned for one, Zecharia the sonne of Ieroboam king of Israel, was the fifth discent from Iehu. And this honour was more then the honour of any other king of Israel, after the diuision of the kingdome. For no other king of Israel besides Iehu, had aboue one or two at the most (as seuerall generàtions) of their owne stocke and line, to succeede them in the king∣dome. Three indeede are said to haue succeeded Homri, to wit, Ahab, Ahazia, and Iehoram: but this last was not the sonne of the middle, but both Ahazia and Iehoram were brethren, and the sonnes of Ahab and Iezabel. Now to re∣turne to the fruit of beeing zealous in honouring 2. King. 3.  and 9. 22. the Lord, when the threede of all earthly ho∣nour shall be drawne to an ende, so as that it can not possibly be lengthened one inch more,
 then shall beginne the honour that is without ende. Then shall Christ confesse them before the Mat. 10. 22. cō∣pared with Luke 12. 8. Father, and before his Angels in heaeuen, that haue confessed him before men in the earth. He will not commit the proclaiming of their praise to any other, as Ahashuerosh did the praise Ester 6. 11. of Mordecai vnto Haman, but euen himselfe will be as it were the Herauld thereof. Nei∣ther will he whisper the praise of such in se∣cret, but he will publish and proclaime it in the greatest and most honourable assemblie that e∣uer was. Yea this Iesus the king of glorie shall Math. 23. 35. Dan. 12. 3. Math. 22. 30. Philip. 3. 21. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. place them at his right hande, and shall make them like to the starres, yea to the sonne in fir∣mament, yea to the angels, yea euen vnto him∣selfe. Verily (Right honourable) this glorie, though it should continue but one daie, is more then all earthly glorie, though it should conti∣nue a thousand yeares. If Dauid saide the like of the courts of God vpon earth, what may be Psal. 84. 10. saide of the highest court of God in the high∣est heauen? what heart therefore would not be enflamed and set on fire with the know∣ledge and certen assurance of these things? when Peter, Iames, and Iohn, did see Christ Iesus in the mountaine with Moses and Elias in that glorious apparell for a while, which one day they should put on for euer, how were they affected there with? Truly so that although they themselues were not one whit transfigu∣red with Christ, yet they could haue bin cōtent for euer to haue dwelt in that mountaine, onely
 to haue enioyed this glorious sight of Christ, Moses, and Elias. For what said they? Peter spea∣keth for the rest, as oftentimes he did for all (not as beeing the head of all, but as hauing the bol∣dest spirit) and said, Master, it is good for vs to be heare: if thou wilt let vs make three tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias. Were these thus rauished with the bodily sight of the glorie onely of Christ and of two other, and that vpon the earth, and but for a time? How then should the heart of euery Christian be rauished with the spiritual sight by faith of the euerlasting glorie of Christ Iesus, of all the Saints general∣ly, and of himselfe particularly, which one day they and himselfe shall haue for euer in the hea∣uens, and whereof in the meane time by the same faith, they and he are as certenly assured, as if they were alreadie in possession thereof? How zealous also should euery the like Christi∣an heart be of this our religion, whereto onely this glorie is promised, and whereby onely it is to be attained? So great was the glorie of Moses, hauing talked but a while with the Lord in the mountaine at the receiuing of the law, that with∣out a vaile the Israelites could not looke vpon him. Exod. 34. 33. Was glorie so great at the giuing of the law vnto Moses? How great then shall it be at the finall rewarding of the perfect obseruation and full satisfaction of the law by Christ Iesus? was glo∣rie so great after a while talking with the Lord? how great then shall it be when we shall haue our whole conuersation and liue with God for
 euer? was glorie so great in an earthly moun∣taine? how great then shall it be in the high hea∣uens? was glorie so great vpon corruption? how great then shall it be, when that that is sowen in dishonour, shall be raised altogether in glorie? was glorie so great vpon weaknes? how great then shall it be, when that that is sowen in weaknes, shall be applied in power? Finally was glorie so great vpon a naturall bodie? how great then shall it be, when that that is sowen a naturall bo∣die, shall be raised in a spirituall bodie? I write not these things (Right Honourable) so much for the enlarging of your zeale towards the religion in this treatise following commended, as for the better prouoking also and quickning of this zeale in all other the like noble persons. The ra∣ther also and the more plentifully haue I beene bold to deale herein in this my epistle Dedica∣torie, because I thought it might be, that some would read this epistle, which would read but little else of this booke: and that othersome would hereby be the more excited to the rea∣ding of the whole treatise. Now what shall I say more? The same God that hath begun this noble worke of zeale in your noble heart towards this religion, make the same perfect. The same God that hath so highly aduanced you vpon the earth, that sometime you sit with most noble Queene Elizabeth cloathed with Parliament roabes in great dignitie, so also exalt you, that you may walke with his sonne Christ Iesus in heart clothed in white, yea and that you may Rev. 3. 4. ad 2.
 sit with him in his throne for euer, as himselfe sitteth in the throne of his Father. Thus most humblie crauing pardon of my boldnesse, I doe also humbly take my leaue of your Honor. At Billerim in Essex, the 7. of March, in the yeare of our Lord, according to the computation of the Church of England. 1597. almost expired.

