




THE Lord our God (right
honorable) hauing by the power of
his word, created Heauen and Earth,
with all thinges what soeuer, for the
comfort and vse of Man: the last of
all other (euen the sixt daye) made
Man after his owne similitude and
likenesse, that in him he might be glorified aboue all
other Creatures. And therfore, wheras in making of
other thinges, he vsed onely this Woord, FIANT, be they
made, or let them be made: when he came to make Man,
as it weare aduysing himselfe, and asking councell at his
wisdome, he said, FACIAMVS HOMINEM, let vs make▪ Man,
that is a wōderful Creature: and therfore is called in greek
MICROCOSMOS, a litle world in himself. And truely he
is no lesse, whether we consider his spirituall soule, or his
humaine body. For what Creature is theare vppon the
face of the Earth comparable to man, either in body or in
mind? what creature hath a soule immortall inherent in
his body, but onely Man? what Creature can forsee things

to come, remember things past, or iudg of things present,
but onely man? what Creature beareth the ymage of God
about with him, but Man? what Creature is made so erect
to behould the Heauens, as man? What Creature may be
likened to man, either in proportiō of body, or gifts of the
soule? And (finally) what Creature hath the promise of the
resurrectiō & glorificatiō of their bodies, & of eternall life
but onely Man? Than seeing the Lorde hath made Man
thus glorious, and preferred him in euery degree, before al
other Creatures (the Angelicall Creatures set a part) it is
manifest, he hath done it to some end & purpose, namely,
that he might be glorified in him, and by him aboue all
other his works, according to the measure of his integritie
excellency and perfection. And hereby we may learn that
it is the will of GOD, that we bend all our force to the
aduauncing of his glorious Name, the edification of his
People, and the building vp of his Church, which he hath
redemed with the bloud of his deare Sonne.
Which thing (mee think) is notably figured foorth vn∣to
vs in the .25. of EXODVS wher the Lord commaunded
Moyses to build him a Tabernacle, or howse of prayer, to
this end and purpose (doubtles) that therin his lawe might
be read, his Ceremonies practised, Sacrifices, Victimates &
Holocaustes offred, and his glorious Name called vppon
and obeyed. To the erection wherof, euery one conferred
some what, some brought gold, some siluer, & some brasse,
lead & tinne, other brought silk, purple, skarlet, and other
ornaments, and the meanest brought some what, namely,
skins heare, sand, lyme, morter, wood, stone, and such like.
Euen so (right honorable) would the Lord haue euery one
to conferre some what, euen such as he hath, to the buil∣ding
of his spirituall howse, the Church purchased with
the bloud of Christ. Wherfore seeing it is so, that euery
one is to further this spirituall building to his possible
power, I haue rather chosen with the simplest, and meanest
sort to bring, though but heyre, sand, skins, lyme, morter,

wood or stones, than altogether to contribute nothing.
Not doubting, but that the chief Maister and Builder
of this howse, Christ Iesus, will not dislike, but accept of
my poore contribution, no lesse than he did of the poore
wydowes Mite, to whom was imputed that she had cast
more, in Gazophilatium Templi, into the treasury of the
Temple, than all the rest: for what she wanted in effect,
that she supplyed in affect, And for that also the Lord our
GOD committing his talēts to euery one, whether more
or lesse, not onely requireth of vs the same againe simply,
but also, as a straight computist, demaundeth interest and
gaine of euery one of vs: & for that not only, he is a mur∣therer
& a Homicide before God, who slayeth or killeth,
a Man with materiall sword▪ but he also, vho may preuent
the same, and will not. And not onely, he is guiltie of
haynous transgression that committeth any euill really,
but also he who consenteth to it as he doth, who holdeth
his peace, or he who by any means might auoid it, and ei∣ther
for negligence wil not, or for feare of the world dare
not. Therfore, albe it, that I haue receiued, but one poore
talēt, or rather the shadow of one, yet least I might be re∣proued
(with that vnprofitable Seruaunt) for hyding my
small talent in the Earth▪ not profiting therwith at all, ei∣ther
my self, or others, I haue aduētured the making of this
litle treatise, intituled, (The Anatomy of Abuses,) hoping
that the same (by diuyne assistance) shall somewhat con∣duce
to the building of this spirituall howse of the Lord.
And although I be one (most honorable Lord) that can
do least in this Godly course of life (palpable barbarisme
forbidding mee so much as once to enter into Wysdomes
school) yet for that somewil not, for feare of losing world∣ly
promotion (though in the meane tyme they lose the
Kingdome of Heauen,) Other some dare not for displea∣sing
the world: I say, for these, & semblable causes toge∣ther,
with the zeale and goodwill I beare vnto my Coun∣trey,
and feruent desire of their conuersion and amende∣ment,

I haue taken vpon me the contryuing of this book:
Which GOD, graunt may be with like plausible alacritie
receiued, as with paines and good will, I haue published
it, for the benefit of my Cuntrey, the pleasure of the God∣ly,
and amendement of the wicked. And I doubt not,
that as none, but the wicked, and peruerse whose gawld
backes are tutched, will repyne against mee, so the Godly
and vertuous, will accept of this my labour, and trauaile
herein, whose gentle fauour and goodwill, shall coun∣terpoyse,
(and farre surmount with mee) the maligne sto∣macks,
and stearn countenances of the other. After that
I had (right honorable) fully perfected this booke, I was
minded, notwithstanding, both in regard of the straunge∣nes
of the matter it intreateth of, and also in respect of the
rudenesse of my penne, to haue suppressed it for euer, for
diuerse and sundrie causes, and neuer to haue offred it to
the viewe of the world. But, notwithstanding, being ouer∣come
by the importunat request, and infagitable desire of
my freinds, I graūted to publish the same, as now you see,
is extant.
But, when I had once graunted to imprinte the same, I
was in greatter doubt than before, fearinge, to whome I
might dedicate the same so rude and impolished a worke.
And withall I was not ignorant, how hard a thing it is in
these daies to finde a Patrone of such books as this, which
sheweth to euery one his sin, and discouereth euery Mans
wicked waies, which indeed, the vngodly cā not at any hād
abyde, but as it were mad-mē disgorging their stomacks
(Cum in Authorē tum in codicem plenis buccis,
& dentibus plusquàm caninis rabidè feruntur:)
they rage, they fume and rayle both against the AVTHOR
and his booke. Thus (vacillante animo) my minde
wandring too and fro, and resting, as it weare in extasie
of despaire, at last I called to mind your honorable Lord∣ship,
whose praises haue pearced the Skyes, and whose lau∣dable
vertues are blowen, not ouer the realme of England

onely, but euen to the furthest costs and parts of the world.
All whose vertues, and condigne prayses, if I should
take vppon mee to recounte, I might as well number the
starres in the Sky, or grasse of the Earth.
For, for Godly Wysdome, and zeale to the truth, is
not your good Lordship (without offence be it spoken)
comparable with the best? For sobrietie, affabilite, and
gentle curtesie to euerie one, farre excelling many.
For your great deotion and compassion to the poore
oppressed, in all places famous: For Godly fidelitie, to
your Soueraigne, loue to the CVNTREY, and ver∣tues
in generall, euerie where most renowmed.
But least I might obscure, your Worthie commenda∣tions
with my vnlearned penne, (lytle, or no thing
at all emphaticall) I will rather surcease, than further
to proceed, contenting my selfe rather to haue giuen a
shadowe of them, than to haue ciphered them foorth,
which indeed are both infinit, and inexplicable.
In consideration (whereof) not withstanding that
my Booke be simpler, baser, and meaner, than that it may
(without blushing) present it self to your good Lord∣ship
(being farre vnworthie of such an honorable Per∣sonage)
yet accordinge to your accustomed clemency
I most humbly beseache your good Lordship to receiue
the same into your honors Patrociny and protection, ac∣cepting
it as an infallible token of my faithfull heart,
seruice, and good will towardes your honorable Lord∣ship:
For proofe whereof, would GOD it might once
come to passe, that if not otherwyse, yet with my hum∣ble
seruice, I might shewe foorth the faithfull and euer
willing heart I beare in brest to your good Lorde∣ship,
protesting before Heauen and Earth, that though
power want yet shall fidelitie, and faithfulnes faile neuer.
And because, this my Booke is subiect (my verie good
Lord (to as many reproches, tauntes and reproofes, as euer
was any litle book (for that few cā abyde to haue their sin

detected) therfore I haue had the greatter care to commit
the same to the guardance and defence of your honour,
rather than to manie others, not onely for that GOD hath
made your honour a Lamp of light vnto the world, of true
nobilitie and of al integritie and perfection, but also hath
made you his substitute, or vicegerent, to reforme vices,
punish abuses, and correcte sinne.
And as in mercie he hath giuen you this power and au∣toritie,
so hath he giuen you a hungrie desire to accom∣plish
the same according to his will: Which zeal in your
sacred brest, the LORD increase for euer.
And as your Lordship knoweth, reformation of maners
and amendement of lyfe, was neuer more needfull, for,
was pride (the chiefest argument of this Booke) euer so
rype? Do not, both Men and Women (for the most part)
euery one in generall go attyred in silks, veluets, damasks,
satans, and what not? which are attyre onely for the no∣bilitie
and gentrie, and not for the other at anie hand? Are
not vnlawfull games, Playes and Enterluds, and the like
euery where vsed? Is not whordome, couetousnes, vsurie &
the like daylie practised without all punishment or lawe?
But hereof I say no more, referring the consideration,
both of these and the rest, to your Godly wysdome. Besea∣seaching
your good Lordship, to perdon my presumption
in speaking thus much, for (Zelus domini huc adegit me:)
the zeal of my God hath dryuen me heather.
Knowinge, that the LORD hath ordeined you, to
himselfe a chosen vessell of honour, to purge his Church
of these Abuses, and corruptions, which as in a table are
depainted and set foorth in this litle booke.
Thus I cease to molest your sacred eares any further with
my rude speaches, most hūbly beseaching your good Lord
ship not onely to admit this my Book into your honours
patronage and defence, but also to persist the iust Defen∣der
therof, against the swynish crew of rayling ZOILVS
and flowting MOMVS, with their complices, to whome

it is easier to depraue all things, than to amend any thing
them selues. Which, if I shall perceiue to be accepted of
your honour, besides that I shal not care for a thousand o∣thers,
disliking the same, I shall not only think my self to
haue receiued a sufficiēt guerdon for my pes, & shalbe
therby greatly incoraged (if GOD permit) hereafter, to
take in hand some memorable thing to your immortall
prayse, honour and renowne, but also shall daylie pray to
GOD, for your good Lordship long to continue,
to his good pleasure and your harts desire,
with increase of Godly honour, re∣ward
of laudable vertue, and
eternall felicitie in the
HEAVENS, by
Iesus Christ.
Columna gloriae virtus.

