



MOST Christian Princesse, most Gracious QVEENE, and my most sacred Soue∣reigne Lady; if Cicero the most learned eloquent Oratour, be∣ing desired to say his minde in matters of importance, answe∣red, (excusing himselfe) that he had read nothing the day before: and if the Centurion a man of valour and authoritie disabled himselfe asMatth. 8. 8. one vnworthy to receiue Christ the King of kings vn∣der his roofe: much more may I being long since a simple poore scholler from seuen to fourteene yeeres of age enfranchised in a free Grammar schole, (where∣of was Founder and Patrone that learned worthie subiect M. Iohn Magnus, an officer of good accompt to the most noble King Henry the eight, your Maiesties

deare father of blessed memorie) after that other se¦uen yeeres discontinuing from the same in this fran∣chised Citie of London, and for these 31. yeeres here labouring (as God vouchsafed me ability) to renewe and increase my poore and simple talent, not yet attei∣ning to perfection of learning, nor maintenance of li∣uing; much more, I say, may I seeme so simple a schol∣ler to excuse my selfe as altogether insufficient to pre∣sent or preferre my mind, or any my so slender labors vnto your so learned and excellent Maiestie. And much more may I seeme to disable my selfe (a subiect of such inferiour estate) as vnworthie to craue or re∣ceiue for protection of my vndeseruing industry, the gracious fauor of so sacred a QVEENE, the peerelesse Peragon of all earthly Princes at this day. But because (as Christ the God of Gods, and Kings of kings onely knoweth, whose image and authoritie shineth in your roiall Maiesty, and in whom and for whom according to all duty I honor your most excellent Highnesse) I come not with Cicero, vttering eloquence plausible to any Romane Caesar, nor with Demosthenes to admire at prophane King Philip the son of Amyntas, but (by your sacred Maiesties most Gracious pardon, and godly Princely fauour, here with all submission, craued) I come dutifully addressing, dedicating, and presenting this my poore vnpolished trauell, and translation of these fewe Psalmes mo into English: yeelding them also for a deuoted pledge of my loyal duetie and due∣tifull allegeance vnto your most excellent Maiestie, as to the elect nursing mother of Christes Apostolicke Church, a Royall fosterer of the right, true, and Euan∣gelicall faith, and a magnificent defender of the true Christian professors of the same, Euen so, (my most

Gracious, Natural, and dread souereigne Lady) in all loyall and dutifull obedience, I humbly craue and be∣seech your most excellent Highnesse, albeit with aged Barzillai I haue herein brought my imperfect2. Sam. 19. 35. sence and skill in this musicall melodie and heauenly har∣monie of the Harp sounding in King Dauids Court. And though I serue in here at the Bridegromes feast (where Christ our Sauiour is present) meare water with cleare wine, that it would please your most gracious Maie∣stie,Iohn 2. 7. of your sacred censure and Princely beneuolence to conceiue and receiue in good part my true intent, dutifull zeale, and painfull poore trauell herein: euen as our Sauiour Christ couceiued and receiued TheIohn 5. 9. petition of that person 38. yeeres grieued with a disease, and in his mercie cured him. Also, As one awaking vp last of al,Ecclus 33. gathering after others in the vintage, &c. And finally, asIohn 2. 10. the Lord Iesus accepted in good part the seruitors best wine kept vntill the last seruice. Which my present poore trauell, as I beseech the onely Almightie, true & eter∣nall God to frame adapt and coapt to the perpetuall aduancement of his glorious name and euerlasting kingdome: So I humbly craue and heartily beseech his diuine Maiestie, long, graciously, victoriously and blessedly to protect and prolong the dayes of your Royal Maiesties reigne ouer vs, to defend you king∣dome and true subiects, with the happie increase of your faithfull friends, either to the speedy conuersion or vtter subuersion of all inward and outward ene∣mies to the premises, by and through Christ Iesus our Lord and Sauior euerlasting. Amen. Sept. 29.

