



OUR Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus (right reuerend
Father in God, honorable Lord,Iohn. 14. 6 and right worshipful
Patrons) as hee rightly called himselfe the way, the
truth, and the life of all faithfull beleeuers and good
liuers, and was so in deed: the way by example not er∣ring;
the truth, by promise not failing; and the life by reward neuer en∣ding:
so on a time ascending up a certaine hill (after he had in a prolix
sermon instructed his Disciples, and a multitude of others his follow∣ers
in the way, truth, and life of perfect blessednesse vpon earth, and the
fruitfull effects thereof in the life euerlasting) said vnto them; yee are
the salt of the earth, & the light of the world:Matth. 5. 13 14 As it might well seeme
attributing the first title (salt of the earth) vnto his disciples, as they
which (with the table of the Testament) deliuering sincere doctrine, &
it (with the pot of Manna) ministring the sacraments by Christs insti∣tution
(seasoning the soules of Gods seruants) and (with Aarons rod)
executing discipline vpon disordered liuers within the Church: And
by the second title, light of the world, fully attributing vnto temporal
magistrates (as to the learned in the lawes divine & humane) the light
of righteousnes, sword of truth, and ballance of iustice, with iudgement
to cherish the good and punish the euill liuers in the common wealth.
And so making of both a blessed and happy coniunction or incorporati∣on
of good gouernement, hee added hereunto this rare and notable con∣clusion,
A citty that is set on a hill cannot be hid: signifieng thereby
a Citty so gouerned, is a right Hieropolis or sacred Citty; and a king∣dome
so administred is a right Hierarchia or sacred principalitie,
knowne, beloued of friends; feared and made famous among enemies
both neare and far off. Such in truth (blessed bee the true omnipotent
and immortall God) hath been the happy state of this citty of London,
yea and whole kingdome of England, though low insituation, yet high
in acceptation with God and good people of all nations: vnto which as
I a poore member thereof (God be my witnes, defender, Iudge, and

reuenger) haue alwaies wished well in goodwill, goodworde, and good
workes (to my poore power,) so eleuen yeares nowe past I signified the
same specially by translating the learned Vrbanus Rhegius his godlie
exposition vpon the 87. Psalme, intituled the Solace of Sion and ioy
of Ierusalem; and dedicating the same vnto the then Right Honora∣ble
Sir George Barne Knight, Lord Maior of this Citty, who thank∣fully
accepted my good wil therein. For it carried this credit with it,
Her foundations are vpon the holy hils, and holy, innocent and the
best members of this our Church and common wealth have profited
thereby I doubt not: But nowe if there bee any vnholy, nocent and bad
persoyet remaining, either within or without the gates of that Hieru∣salem
or vision of peace, (as God which once promised to search it doth
best see;Sopho. 1. 12 for man seeth not as God seeth. 1. Sam. 16. 7.) whether he
be a forger of falshood. Iere. 10. 14 slanderous seruant. Pro. 13. 5.
euill nurtured child. Ecclus. 22. 7. and so a carnall master, Iohn. 3.
10. and a carelesse parent, 1. Tim. 5. 8. with blinde seer and deafe
hearer, Esay. 42. 8. (whereof too many I haue found as I can conuince)
I pray to God humbly and hartely these either speedely (if it be his hea∣uenly
holy will) to conuert by doctrine and discipline in the church; or
(if so they will not bee conuertible) at his good pleasure, in his iustice
and iudgement, to subuert them perseuering in their malignities in∣flexible.
In the meane time with all humble and hartifull duty I
commend this my present poore labour to the aduancement of Gods
glory ineffable, hir maiesties continuall honour, and your honours and
worships fauorable protection; first as vnto that Aaron whose sincere
doctrine with example of life, and discipline as your rod (which God
long make to bud and blossome in blessednes,) and consequently as vnto
that Mercury which tuning this my harp in right concord of goodwil
(as I deliuer it / may sende the sweete solace thereof from your sincere
brests, not vnto an earthly Apollo to regratifie you with an earthlie
scepter, but to the heauenly Iehoua, who may best rewarde you with all
abundance of heauenly happines in the life euerlasting, which God for
his sonne Christs sake grant vnto your honors and worships.
At my poore house in S. Brides parish in fleetstreet, this 24. of
August. 1598. 
