

TO
THE RIGHT HONORABLE
RALPH FREEMAN, now Lord Maior of the City of
LONDON, Sir Edward Barkham, Sir Martin Lumley, Sir Iohn Gore, Sir
Hugh Hamrsley, Sir Richard Deane, Sir Iames Cambell, Sir Robert Ducy, Sir
George hitmore, Sir Nicholas Raynton, Knights; Edward Litleton, Esquire,
Recorder of LONDON: And to all the other Aldermen,
Brethren-Senators in the state of so famous a City; All of them
being my Honorable and worthy Masters:
A. M. Wisheth the fruition of all temporall Felicities in this life; and the
never-failing fulnesse of blessednesse in the life to come.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THis famous City hath now enioyed the
peacefull succession of more than one
and thirty worthy Lord Maiors, since
Master Iohn Stow (the painfull Searcher
into Reverend Antiquity) did first pre∣sent
LONDONS SVRVEY to this Ho∣nourable
Senate, Sir Robert Lee, then
Lord Maior, with gracious and favourable acceptance.
Who purposing to adde increase to this Worke (accor∣ding
to the dignity of the Subiect) but prevented by infir∣mity,
and Sicknesse-bringing Death, imparted not only his
good Intentions, but best Collections also unto me, by his
importunacy now perswaded both to correct the Errors,
and perfect so well deserving a VVorke: And had his re∣quest
beene wanting, the respect and honour I owe to this
Royall City (the tender Mother and Nurse to us both)
had beene incitement enough to further a Booke of such
consequence, as far as my weake abilities would give leave.

Having therefore at first drawne a briefe Discourse there∣of,
lest I might unadvisedly dash on the Rocks of Displea∣sure,
I delivered it to the Right VVorshipfull, Sir Henry
Mountague, then Recorder of London, by whom com∣manded
to appeare before your Worships in the Councell
Chamber at Guild-Hall, I received Encouragement and
Authority, with promise of helpe and furtherance, to per∣fect
this worthy Monument. VVhich accordingly (after
the care and paines of twelve yeeres travell about it) I pre∣sented
unto this Honourable Senate, in the yeere 1618.
But now that I might adde a Complement to this Survey,
which might best become it, have I done my diligent en∣devour
(unto which have I called the assistance of other
learned Antiquaries) to set downe Methodically,M. D. the Ori∣ginall,
Increase, Moderne Estate, and Government of this
City; as also by what Name, or Office rather, whether of
Port-graves, Port-reeves, Barons, Provosts, or Bayliffes,
the Governours, Rulers, and Magistrates were anciently
distinguished.
Before all other, I find the name of Alderman, well wor∣thy
observation, as being derived from most venerable An∣tiquity:
Cmbd. in Brit. For ancient Records say, that in the dayes of King
Edgar, there was a worthy Noble man, of the Blood Roy∣all,
named Ailwine, in great authority and favour with
the King, insomuch that he was therefore termed, Healf-Koning,
as much to say, as Halfe-King; and by Office was
stiled, Alderman of all England: as appeares by this Epi∣taph
engraven on his Tombe, in that Famous Monastery
(by him founded) in the Ile of Ely:
Hic requiescit D. Ailwinus, incliti Regis Edgari Cognatus,
totius Angliae Aldermannus, & huius sacri Coenobii mira∣culosus
Fundator.
Here resteth Lord Ailwine, Cousin to the Noble King Ed∣gar,
Alderman of all England, and miraculous Founder
of this holy Abbey.

VVhich plainly sheweth, that in those times of ancient
and venerable respect, this Title of Alderman, was only gi∣ven,
for a further addition of Repute and Honour.
Some Authors have delivered,Math. Paris. Geffery Monm. Will, Malmes. Pol▪ Virgil. that men bearing such a
Stile, were sometimes called Doomesmen, sometimes Ealder∣men,
Judges of the Kings Courts, &c. As being distinguished
by those additions of Honour and Esteeme from other men,
for their greater maturity of Iudgement, gravity of yeeres,
experience and person; and therefore the fitter for weighty
imployment in the State-affaires, by apt correspondency of
their trust and fidelity. Which name of dignity declaring
the most eminent degree of Magistracy, doth still (as here∣tofore
it hath) extend it selfe thorowout all England, in Ci∣ties,
Townes, and Corporations; and in some the Alderman
only is the chiefe Commander: Even so is it much more
Maiesticall here, in the supreme City of the whole Land,
London, the Metropolis of Great Britaine, the Mother of
authentike Memory, the Ancient and Moderne Seat of our
Kings, yea, the very Chamber Royall for Maiesty it selfe,
and the open Haven for all Merchandise and Commerce,
as being the rich Store-house of Peace and Plenty.
It shall be needlesse to trouble your Honour, and the rest
of my worthy Masters, with repetition here of those Officers
and Governours, that ruled this Great City in elder times,
because you shall finde them sufficiently set downe in their
apt and distinct places, untill this higher degree of Honour
came to full perfection, I meane the Maioralty, which some
hold to be in King Iohns time, but most maintaine & avouch
it to bee in the first yeere of King Richard the first, whose
Vertue and Courage won him the name of Cueur-de-lion.
From which happy beginning, it hath neither beene mine,
nor my most industrious and helpfull Friends good fortune,W. W.
to ranke downe in formall order the successive line of the
Sheriffes, Maiors, and Aldermen, according to my former
intended purpose, concerning their Birth-place, and Paren∣tage;
nor how many of them this Honourable City it selfe

then yeelded, as challenging them her owne Off-spring, she
being as well a loving Mother to breed them in her owne
Bowels, as a carefull Nurse afterward to bring them up.
For my selfe, Londons Off-spring, though the meanest,
yet hold I it no small attribute of Honour to record it, how
much more Glory then for you (equall in worth and ranke)
to reade it, and what comfort for Posterity to remember and
acknowledge it, that this Ancient, Famous, and Renowned
Mother City, never wanted from time to time Honourable
Sonnes of her owne bearing and breeding, to sit at Sterne, to
undergoe all Offices of Credit and Authority, yea, even the
Maioralty, from Father to Son in the third Generation;
and they to boast their Grandfathers, and great Grandfa∣thers,
Witnesse Garrards. Bares. Rowe. Branch, &c. borne & bred in this worthy City, some to the fourth,
others the third, but many the second Generation, as in the
Reportary following will more at large appeare.
I forbeare to speake of such as have beene Aldermen and
Sheriffes;Witnesse Barnhams, Fa∣ther and Son. first, the Fathers; then, the Sonnes; yet neither li∣ving
to enioy the Maioralties Dignity. As also what flu∣ent
plenty of Magistrates in the same high Office, the seve∣rall
Sheirffes of England have yeelded, wherewith the said
Discourse will more familiarly acquaint you.
And now, let me beseech your Honour and VVorships,
to allow this Survey of London your gracious entertainment;
and the rather, for that it now comes in a fairer Volume than
ever, replete with plenty and enlargement of memorable
Additions, not only with the splendor of Armes, and other
glorious Ensignes of Honour, but with speciall observations
of venerable Antiquity, and infinite supplements of Ancient
and Moderne Monuments, as well of the Churches in the
famous Cities of London and Westminster, as in foure miles
compasse round about them, such as before this instant were
never published.
