


HAuing made the first part of the Anatomie of abuses (Right ho∣norable, and my verie good Lord) and dedicated the same to your good Lordship, I thought I should then haue taken mine Vltimum vale, for euer-needing to write anie more of this argument againe. But seeing the diuell our anci∣ent aduersarie in the fulnesse of his malice hath since spued out his poison▪ and powred out his filthie dregs of infinit corruptions, blemishes, and abuses (al which

to comprehend in number were Infinitum finito com∣prehendere) amongst vs of late daies more than euer were heard of before. I was compelled for the health of their soules, and benefit of my countrey, to take in hand afresh this new tractation, intituled The display of Corruptions, wherein are laid open diuers and sun∣drie abuses, corruptions, and blemishes crept as well into one sort of men as into another. And hauing fini∣shed the same, and committed it to the presse, I stood in suspense, douting to whom I might dedicate the same, as well for the argument, and matter which it hande∣leth (being a otch, which some frosen in the dregges of their sinne cannot in any wise abide to be touched) as also for the inhability and indignitie of the author But at the last considering with my selfe the proximitie, the semblance, and neerenesse of the arguments, as well of my first booke of the Anatomie of abuses as also of this the Display of Corruptions, I could doe no lesse than to dedicate the same to your excellent Lordship, to the end, that your Honour (whom the Lord hath made the mirrour of true nobilitie) might see, as it were in a glasse) a briefe summarie of the corruptions and abu∣ses that reigne in these daies. And not onely for this cause was I incited to commit the defense of this lit∣tle treatise to your Honourable Lordship, but also and in especiall, in demonstration of my thankfull hart, and vnfained goodwill towardes your Honour▪ in that it pleased the same (farre beyond either my desart or ex∣pectation) not onely to accept, and take in good part my former simple booke of the Anatomie of Abuses, but al∣so most honourably to shield the same vnder the wings and guardance of your Lordships protection. In recom∣pense whereof, if mine habilitie were answerable to my

faithfull hart, and goodwill borne to your Honor, then should this present gift be as great, as now by reason of the contrarie it is small and contemptible. And al∣though I may be adiudged of som to be ouer presump∣tuous in dedicating this booke vnto your Honour, yet if they will consider, that such treatises as this (and es∣pecially in these corrupt daies, wherein no man can a∣bide to heare of his faults) are not to be dedicated to euery one without exception, but to such whom GOD hath blessed (as his glorious name be praised therefore he hath done your Honour) with all graces and gifts. either spirituall, or corporall whatsoeuer. And therfore haue I had a special regard, that as this my booke doth discouer and lay open to the view of the world, manie and sundrie corruptions, abuses, and blemishes in euery degree, so I might dedicate the same to one free from all the same blemishes and corruptions, least otherwise it might happily be a pricke to his eies▪ and an offense to his mind. For this (right Honourable and my very good Lord) I hold for a Maxime, that he who is licen∣ciously and dissolutely inclined, can hardly in any sauce brooke or disgest good bookes, which reprooue such things as he so greedily thirsteth after. This maketh many a one of a giltie conscience (when he cannot abide to heare his faults ript vp, bicause he is faultie) to cast away good bookes, and to contemne both them and the authors, who with great studie labour and paines haue finished the same for the glorie of GOD▪ and benefit of their country. But had euery one tasted of the fauoura∣ble acceptation of their patrones, to whose tuition they commend their labours, as wel as I haue of your good Lordships not onely acceptation, but also most bounti∣full remuneration, they should not neede to feare any

refusall of their faithfull good wils in exhibiting good works vnto their protection and defense. Which thing though I can neuer sufficiently in effect regraciate, yet in affect I will not faile (Christ willing) to the end of my life faithfully to supply. And truly not without great cause am I bound so to doe, and not onely I, but euen all that in any respect haue to deale with your ho∣norable Lordship. For what is the common bruit noised of your Honour? Truly this. That your Lordship for gentlenesse and affabilitie (whereof I haue tasted to my singular comfort) is surpassing any, in good consci∣ence, mercie, and compassion inferiour to none, in noble prowesse, valiancie, & magnanimitie comparable with the best. In wisedome and vnderstanding singular, in zeale to the truth and christian religion famous, in de∣fending of equitie and iustice renowmed. Finally, in all kind of vertue equall with any, so as I will not feare to call your good Lordship a perfect patterne of true nobilitie in all respects. Thus hauing rather as the peinter doth, to draw the lineaments of your Lordships vertues with my rude pensill, than to display the liuely proport on of the whole bodie thereof, which is vnpossi∣ble, I will surcease the same For if I should take vp∣on me to discipher foorth the whole bodie of your Lord∣ships deserued commendations, I should rather not knowe where to end, than where to begin. But least I might seeme to aggrauate your sacred eares, occupied with grauer and sager matters than these, I will draw to an end, most humbly beseeching your good Lordship to receiue this little treatise into your Honors patro∣nage▪ with like plausible alacritte as your Honor recei∣ued my former dedication. And not only to receiue the same into your Lordships protection, but also to re∣maine

the iust defender thereof against the filthie crew of flowting Momus, and railing Zoilus, with their complices of bragging Thrasos, and wrangling Phor∣mions, to whom as the Greeke prouerbe saith: , It is easier to carp, & to find fault with, than to imitate, or amend. And thus crauing pardon at your good Lordships hand, for this my bold attempt, I most humbly take my leaue, com∣mitting your Honor with my good Ladie your wife, and all the rest of your honorable progenie, and aliance to the tuition and protection of the blessed God, who keepe and preserue the same, in his faith, feare, and loue all the daies of your life, with in∣crease of much honour, and eter∣nall beatitude in the hea∣uens by Iesus Christ.

