  

SInce the first publishing of the perambulation of Kent, by that learned Gentleman M. William Lambert Esquire, I haue hearde of sundry other able persons to haue (according to the desire of that au∣thor) assayed to doe somewhat for the particular Shires and Connties, where they were borne, or dwelt, of which none that I knowe (sauing M. Nor∣den, for the Counties of Middlesex, & Hertford) haue vouchsafed their labors  to the commō good in that behalf. And therefore concurring with the first, in the same desire to haue drawn together such speciall descriptions of each place, as might not onely make vp an whole body of the English Chronographie a∣mongst our selues: but also might giue occasion, and courage to M. Camdin to increase and beutifie his singular worke of the whole, to the view of the learned that be abroade. I haue attemp∣ted the discouery of London, my natiue soile and Countrie, at the desire and perswasion of some my good friendes, aswell because I haue seene sundrie an∣tiquities my selfe touching that place, as also for that through search of Recordes to other purposes, dyuers written helpes are come to my handes, which few o∣thers haue fortuned to meete withall, it is a seruice that most agreeth with my  professed trauelles. It is a duty, that I willingly ow to my natiue mother & Countrie. And an office that of right I holde my selfe bound in loue to bestow vpon the politike body and members of the same: what London hath beene of auncient time, men may here see, as what it is now euery man doth behold: I know that the argument, being of the chiefe and principall Citie of the land, required the penne of some excellent Artisen, but fearing that none woulde attempt, and finish it, as few haue assay∣ed any, I chose rather (amongst other my Laboures) to handle it after my plaine manner, then to leaue it vnper∣formed. Touching the Dedication, I am not doubtfull where to seeke my patrone, since you be a politique estate of the Citie, as the walles & buildinges be the materiall partes of the same. To  you therefore, doe I addresse this my whole labour, as well that by your au∣thority I may be protected, as warran∣ted by your own skill and vnderstand∣ing of that which I haue written, I con∣fes that I lacked my desire to the accō∣plishment of some speciall partes; but I trust hereafter that shalbe supplied, and I professe (if more touching this worke come vnto me) to afforde it, in all dutie. In the meane time, I recommend this to your view, my laboures to your consi∣deration, and my selfe to your ser∣uice, (as I haue professed du∣ring life) in this or any other.
