



Most Dread Soveraigne,
BOth these Arguments craue your Ma. kyndlie patrocinie: as Father of that Prince, whose birth occasioned the Thanksgiving: And Sonne of that King, who went before all Kings, in vindicating royall Authoritie▪
Gods Providence over Man (his last Creature in time, but first in Loue) is so great; that his care of o∣ther Creatures comparatiuely seemeth a Neglect: Hee hath distinguished him in Order and Degrees:Rom. 13. 1. Proverb. . 6. Gathered him in Societies: And perfited these Socie∣ties with an supereminent power. That Head giveth a natiue influence to its Bodie, and the Bodie subie∣cteth it selfe to that Head.
Wee bring this Law from the Wombe written in our Hearts; and Christ confirmed it by Word and Example: Hee disposed so his Birth at Bethlehem, that at once hee fulfilled his Fathers promise, and o∣beyedMicah. 5. 2▪ Luc. 2. . Augustus Edict beeing taxed in his Mother: The Church for ten Ages followed her Head in that Obedience. Though her Worke bee Heavenly

by the Keyes of the Kingdome of Heaven, to winneMatth. 16. Iohn. 10 bros ▪de dig. Sacerd, cap. . Ibid. cap. 2. Soules o Got; and her Reward bee to sit on Thrones, and judge the Tribes of Israel: Yet shee gaue to Cae∣sar the things that are Caesars. And though Ambrose say, that Sublimitas Episcopalis nullis potest compara∣tionibus aequari And nihil esse in hoc scdo sublimi∣ius sacerdote; yet hee both practised and perswaded obedience to Princes.
But Babl confounded all: And Antichrist (in a more fearefull Collision of the Civill and Ecclesia∣stick Powers, then the two Hills in Marius & SylaesVtrum mair dignitas pra∣dia dividendi an peccata di ittendi. Co d. lib. 1. August. Cavit 2. 6. Vniu in orbe Ip. Rex.  nium{que} Prin∣cip s pr∣um. &c. Marta. Iris. Epist dedi. Paul. 5. Suarez defen. 6. 6. ellar. Apol. time) trod the honor of Princes in the dust: he thought it greater to divide Lands, than remit sins; and thurst himselfe in their Thrones: Hee exposed their King∣domes to violence; and their sacred Persons and Au∣thoritie to contempt:: These insolencies might seeme tolerable in times of blindnesse, as S. Austine spea∣keth of Romulus Apotheosing: But now after so long contest, they maintaine them. Their Advocate affirmeth, & Paul the fifth approved it, That he is the onelie Emperour and King; the Superiour of all Kings, from whom all Iurisdiction floweth. What ever in dan∣ger they deny; or in necesitie they mitigate, this is the just Modell of their Pope, and the prime Article of their faith.
That Luciferian pride was so eminent in Popes, that it is hard to know, whether to wonder more at the Impudencie of Christs Vicar vsurping, or the pati∣ence of Princes suffering. Poperie was never further from the Truth, and meeknesse of Iesus, then since it was

Iesuited: That name is not a denomination of a new Zeale or goodnesse, but the maske of exquisite craft and crueltie; and the tincture of impenitencie: AndCypr. de Ie∣u. as the Apostle maketh the opposition of Christus and Antichristus; and Cyprian of Spiritus and Anti∣spiritus, somay wee of Iesus and Anti-Iesus.
But God by Reformation hath mended that con∣fusion: The light of the Gospel hath at once re∣vealed his heresie in Doctrine, and tyrannie in Vsur∣pation.Revel 17. This is a tryall of Princes; for they are free and happie Princes who haue shaken off his Yoak; and reformed themselues, and their Kingdomes to the Gospel of Christ: But thrise miserable are they who lye still drunke in her fornications.
God in mercie hath put your Ma. in the first ranke: The Titles of Defender of the Church from King William of Scotland, Innocen 3 and of Defender of the Faith from Henrie 8. Leo. 10. Bull. 12. of England; are both En∣signes of your profession, and remembrancers of your royall Duetie; to defend the true Church, and the true Faith, your Ma. devotion testifies the peaceable part of the discharge: And doth promise the other part by the Sword, when GOD shall honour Kings to execute his will on the Whore. And in GODS time, they who now adhere to her, shall count it their happinesse to follow your Ma. Example.
Behold now your Ma. Happinesse in their miserie: Their common end (to destroy Protestants) hathCard. Lothar. Practic. Cancell. Hisp. Aphor. Card. 16 22. made them Confederats▪: But God hath divided them by their privat ends like Sechem and Abimelech:

And juggling Protes, of a bloodie Dragon, it turned a craftie Serpent, and seeketh his saftie, by wynding betwixt the Iealousies of these great Princes. Hee is carried violentlie as hope and feare, canvasse him:Id. 9. 20. Rut fire will breake out from Abimelech and devoure Sechem And these Princes shall dwell in brotherlie loue, when they receiue the Gospel of peace.
This private offering is a fruit and testimonie of a commoun joy: the Flowre of the States of this land (pre∣sent in this Citie, at the glad newes of the Princes birth) were overjoyed: And this citie expressed their loyaltie in all significations, so that no place of these three Kingdomes could exceede.Virum nego∣tiosisimum in Repub. Epist. 54.
It was S. Austines discretion to Macedonius a Iudge, taken vp with publick affaires, not to deteine him with long Epistles: What shall wee doe to so great a KING?
Almightie GOD, who hath set your Ma. on these three Thrones, multiplee royall gifts on your sacred per∣son,Psal. 21. 6 and make You a King of many Royall blessings: That great Britaine vnder you, and your clement Name, may more and more be a terrour to Anti-christ, a comfort to the Saints, and a Land wherein GOD de∣lighteth to dwell.
AMEN.

