



ALthough (my good Lord) I cannot without griefe remember the daungerous and hurtfull effectes of the late stirres which certaine factious persons haue made, both in the Church, and common wealth about the new consistoriall gouernement; yet se∣ing diseases cannot be wel cured, vnlesse they be made knowen; nor well knowen, vnlesse the patient declare them: I could not re∣fraine from vttering them, being one of that Church and state, that hath so long suffered them, yea though not I onely, but all others whom they concerne, should of importune shamefastnes conceale them: yet would they not, being so great be concealed. It is well knowen what scandale thereof hath growen to religion, diuers wic∣ked persons are thereby confirmed in their atheisme: weake christi∣ans are either driuen backe to poperie, or discouraged from com∣ming forward to embrace religion: the Seminaries abroad are re∣plenished with many towardly schollers seeking that abroad, which they dispaire to finde at home: sectes & euil opinions growe vp, lyke noysome weedes in diuers corners; those that should and would re∣presse them, are by domesticall stirres of secret enemies thuarted & hindered: The Papists take thereby incouragement, and hope for in∣nouation.De schism. lib. 3. quo bello Ca∣tholici indies plu∣res, constantio∣résque in fide sunt facti, saith he, speaking of his false Catholikes, and Romaine per∣uerse taith. Sanders in his booke, as he calleth it, of schisme, doth bragge, That through these contentions the Romanistes dayly multiplied among vs, and grewe more resolute. they also from these domesticall braules made by some against our Church doe drawe an argument to harden mens hartes against religion, and the authors of religion. bothIn lib de can∣sis cur catholi∣sis, &c. Vlenbergue, and Rosse in their seditious treatises against vs, doe much insist vpon that poynt: and it is a common obiection made by
the enemie, yea a matter not lightly feared of frendes.
For learning hath lost almost all reputation, while these vnlearned and vnwise confistorians declame against learning, and seeke no fur∣ther diuinitie, then Caluins and Bezaes and Iunius his glosses and commentaries, and without ground of learning and artes, as it were with vnwashen feete, enter into the Lordes sanctuarie. while the fathers and auncient writers of the Church are despised, and euery man taketh vpon him to interprete scriptures after his owne foolish conceite, and forceth them to serue their owne changeable humors: they runne into diuers daungerous opinions. I reporte me to the strange doctrine ofTheologia sacra. Fenner and his Maister T.C. in their new booke of Consistoriall diuinitie. of the lawe, gospell, sacraments, and eccle∣siasticall gouernement, there is scarce any poynt deliuered without error, but those are faultes of a lighter marke in respect, of poyntes concerning the diuine essence, and the Trinitie, whereof they talke strangely. In theTheologia sa∣cra lib. 1. diuine nature they confound essence, and person; and deuide the persons of the Trinitie into two members; and make the sonne together with the holy ghost to proceede from the father: where all religion saith, that he is borne of the father, which is the characteristicall difference of that person. further they affirme that the holy ghost proceedeth from the father,Ibidem. without mentioning the sonne. they teach also that hatred as it is attributed to God is the essence of God. And while they would com∣mend their fond preaching, and disgrace the scriptures: Iohn PenrieIn his sup∣plicat. one of the great disciplinarian prophets, eyther like a dolt, or (if he defend it) a blasphemous heretike Maketh Christ to be the word prea∣ched, therein destroying Christes eternall essence, and diuinitie. inThe booke was offered to the par∣liament by com∣mon consent of this faction: that it might through∣out England be recented. their Communion booke they haue taken out two articles of the Creede; namely that of Christes buriall, and Christes descending into hell; and added a newe Article: viz. of their new fantasticall discipline: a compendious and short way to erect their new kingdome. for articles of our Creede are rather to be beleeued, then to be disputed of. In their Creede al∣so, they make Christ to be borne of the virgine according to the flesh, di∣uiding Christ into two parsons with Nestorius. lastly (for here I meane not to speake of all) they forget A petition in their braue paraphrase of the Lords prayer. which matters are very shamefull, and yet not to be denyed. for their owne worthles bookes conuince them.
While they haue refused the olde order of preaching, and follow∣ed the stile of Bezaes vaine, and verball sermons, whereof I, and ma∣ny
others that haue heard, and read them are witnesses; their exposi∣tions be eyther verball, or fantasticall, or both. their prayers for the most part are disordered fancies, yea some times malicious inuectiues, full rather of wordes then deuotion; conceiued without studie, and vttered without iudgement: which kinde ofMatth. 6.7. verball babling Christ condemneth as heathenish.
To leaue matters of the Church, we see how schooles are decay∣ed, and how both learning and rewardes of learning are dayly dimi∣nished: and all this while these vnworthie fellowes first thinke that all learning is conteined in Caluins institutions, and Bezaes opuscula, and secondly measure euery mans merites by their owne foote, and allow no more to others, then they suppose they deserue themselues, taking away all hope of honor or rewarde, by making the ignorant iudge of the merite of learning, and talking of certaine strange positions of fortie pound pensions. as if fortie, or a hundred pounds yeerely were the vttermost reward, that learning coulde deserue: and euery other sort of men were worthie of most high rewardes, and preferment. the number of schollers decreasing in both the Vniuer∣sities doth declare how much men are discouraged; and examples of this sacrilegious discipline otherwhere receiued, doe shewe what fur∣ther wracke is to be feared hereafter.
The gouernours both of Church and schooles are contemned: I would I might not say discouraged. they are made markes for licen∣tious youthes armed with malice to shoote their boltes against. the lawes are not onely contemned, but most boldly oppugned: yea with such confidencie, that law is now accounted disorder, and faction and tu∣mult, termedPetition to her Maiestie. reformation: and libellers in euill time called reformers. what resteth for them to worke, but that al wise, and learned men be∣ing put from gouernment, the seely sots which these call elders, and certaine famous authors of popular faction should be placed in the highest offices, or else that lawes being not executed, or Iudges cros∣sed in executing of iustice, the contumacious might liue as they list: wherein they seeke nothing, but that eyther the forreyne enemie may oppresse vs, or els inward tumult, and disorder consume vs.
But I doubt not but her Maiestie, and all those that beare office vn∣der her, will take speedie order. that it is not alreadie taken, many do wonder, some doe complayne. but the clemencie of her Maiesties times, and her benigne nature doth afford vs answere. she will not
haue any complaine, that in this case, any are punished, but such as are obstinate, heynous, and notorious disturbers of the state. because they were not at the first knowen for such, shee would not haue them punished for such. besides this, the height of the stile, and the loude bragges they made of their discipline, made many beleeue, they did it eyther of simplicitie, or zeale, or error. few suspected the greedines of some, and malice and ambition of others: their notorious hypocrisie could not of long time be discouered. but now their leudnes is appa∣rent, and their false visage is dismasked. let them therefore beware, that they abuse not the clemencie of the times, or hope for continu∣ance of vndeserued fauour.
The vanitie of their bragges, and weakenesse of their cause is eui∣dent to all, that are not eyther wilfully blinded, or naturally ignorant. All the demonstrations of their discipline are discifred, and stand confuted. they doe not so much as goe about to defend them. their whole plots of false discipline lye razed. they cannot say a word for them: in this late petition wherein they had occasion to shewe their skill, they haue not so much as answered one argument brought by vs against them.The defence of Bezamade for his Aldermen most weake, and simple. as in a desperate cause they haue intreated Beza to say somewhat. wherein we may see that their forces are spent to the last man. yea so spent, that they haue no hope of recouerie. for what saith he good man? hee telleth vs a long tale of his Geneuian deuises, hut neyther doth hee answere our arguments, nor bringeth scripture, fathers, or reason for his cause. vnlesse wee beleeue him on his bare word, the controuersie is at an end. call you this answering? this is ra∣ther the playne ouerthrowe of his cause. for while hee went about to answere, he hath confirmed our cause saying nothing either for him∣selfe, or against vs, but what he in his olde age dreameth. where was T.C. that valiant champion of discipline all this while? where was W. Tr. W. Ch. D. Sp. could not one of them speake for their cause, but they must send to Geneua for a speaker? it is too great, and notable a confession of the weakenesse of their cause.
As for him, or (that I mistake not) them that made the petition lately printed, and pretended to be presented to her Maiestie on the behalfe of the Puritans; they doe not deserue the name of speakers: vnlesse it be among Puritans; where euery one that can prate, is sayde to speake. For what say they for their cause? their onely reason is, because Caluin, Beza, Daneus, Carpentier, Golart, Perot, Tauergues, Pol∣lan,
Sneccan, and a number of other authors (of whose names and gestes we should neuer haue heard, if these mē had not in this cause brought their names to light) doe speake somewhat for their consistorie, that there∣fore we are to like of it. A goodly reason: yet such a one, as I thinke they will not admitte against their discipline. For albeit Master R. M.B.M.G. M.A. M.H. M.D. M.W. and infinite other learned, and good preachers among vs, (yea such, as one of them is to be va∣ed against many of these ignorant and presumptuous disciplinarians) do like of the present gouernment: yet are they not therwith satisfied. nay, albeit all the ancient Fathers, and acts of Counsels do like of the auctoritie & gouernment of Bishops: yet are these fellowes stil con∣tending against it. That the same was established by most learned and godly men, that in Q. Maries time gaue their liues for the testi∣monie of the trueth, they litle weigh: nay, they neither care for them, nor their authoritie.
With what face then can they alledge Golart, Pollan, Sneccan, and a number of birdes of like feather, and men neither wise nor learned, nor that haue ground of antiquitie or reason; seeing they renounce not onely the authoritie of our men more learned then they, but of our Martyrs more holy men then they: yea and all the writings of the Fathers, and actes of Counsels speaking of the authoritie and state of Bishops, and such a gouernment as we haue? In times past they were wont to tell vs of certaine lawes established by God himselfe; and made vante, that they would proue their discipline out of Gods word. Why then are they now mute? why are not these lawes, and this worde brought forth? why are they silent in bringing forth these mightie reasons? when all is come to all, must we rest on Golart, Pol∣lan, Tauergues and Sneccans, & three or foure odde compagnions idle conceits? there can nothing be deuised more absurd, nor sencelesse.
Therefore hauing nothing to say in defence of their cause, now in a desperate rage they begin to reuell not onely at Bishops, but also at Lawes and Iudges, and the ordinarie tryals of this Realme. The drift of the petition is to shew, that Iohn Vdall was wrongfully condemned. they insinuate therein, that the Iudges were either corrupted, or blinded, and that the euidence was wrested. They say in plaine tearmes, that Iud∣ges haue no skill to deale with such fellowes as Iohn Vdall: another kinde of man percase, then he is taken to be. Is hee trowe you any of Hac∣kets or Coppingers consortes? to bring Bishops into hatred, they haue
after their petition collected diuers Articles, and by them and by cer∣taine calumnious interrogatories haue gone about to bring them in disgrace with the multitude: that if they cannot haue their desire of their celestiall consistorie; they may be yet reuenged of such, as they take to be the hinderers of their purposes.
Whose malice to encounter, as before I haue answered their cauils against the ecclesiasticall gouernment of our Church to the vtter dis∣grace of the Consistorie: so now hauing other occasions to print a discourse against Bellarmine, and forreine aduersaries of our Church, I haue thought good to recreate my selfe with this more easie labour, and to answere their cauils at our proceedings in law, together with such authorities as they bring for the proofe of their consistorie, to the finall discouerie of their vnbrideled malice: that all seeing the naked∣nesse of their cause may ioyne together to extirpate the reliques of those, that haue bene causers of these stirres.
Against this my purpose, I doe vnderstand, that diuers exceptions are taken. First, those that fauour the consistoriall discipline, doe say I withstand a noble worke of reformation; and therefore cannot like of my doings. but vnto these this whole treatise shall make answere: for thereby it shall appeare, that their whole course tendeth rather to confusion, and disorder of Church and state, then to reformation of eyther: and therefore seeing they doe declare themselues open ene∣mies both vnto the present state, and to me in this cause, I doe not re∣gard what they like, or dislike. no doubt, but that open enemies will like that best, which for the State is worst, and greatly prayse that, which tendeth to the hurt thereof.
Others there are, that condemne all those discourses, that are writ∣ten of both sides concerning this argument, which albeit they would seeme to be friendes: yet in deede are enemies, as well as the other. For no more is he an enemie that oppugneth vs in plaine fielde, then hee that trecherously seeketh to discourage such as are forwarde in mainteining the State at home. and albeit they would colour their malice with pretence of detestation of contention among friendes: yet doe they vs wrong, to accompt them that oppugne the state, friendes; or attribute the cause of contention to vs, that onely defend the State against contentious, and malcontent persons, such as would ruinate the same. for not those that defend, but those that begin the braule are contentious. Were it not thinke you a ridiculous thing for
a man to say, that valiant men that fight for their countrey, are con∣tentious; and a poynt of trecherie to discourage them? why then should not the like bee thought of those that condemne them that write in defence of the present gouernment, of religion, and learning, in like degree, as if they had writ against the same? These men are sorie that any should stop the breach against such, as seeke to enter to make spoyle, and therefore, as secret enemies, or weake persons, that neither vnderstand matters of State, nor reason, are to be contemned, if not reproued.
A last sort there is, that percase mislike the sharpenesse of my stile. but they must consider, that in this discourse I deale not against men of learning, or grauitie, or such as desire to learne, or finde out trueth: but against ignorant, wilfull, and seditious Libellers, that seeke partly by falshood, and partly by disgrace of some bad persons vnworthy of their places to discredite the whole ecclesiastical state: against whom no sharpenesse of stile can be sufficient. but I did respect rather what became me to speake, then what they deserued to heare.
This discourse I present to your Lordship, a man well acquainted with the humors of the men, and weakenesse of their cause, & a Iudge most skilfull in law. Vnto whom should wee seeke for resolution in law, and redresse of wrong, rather then to him that beareth so honou∣rable a charge in matters of Iustice? vnder your name I would it should come to the handes, and viewe of all other reuerend Iudges, learned Lawyers, and well affected subiectes. Wee desire nothing more, then that matters may bee examined according to iustice, and doubt not, but if that may be obtayned, that the controuersie will bee ended, and the calumnious mouthes of factious persons stopped. for seeing the platformers haue neither support of trueth, nor law; what man will doubt, but that they are to be repressed aswell by Iustice, as by disputation and discourse?
That is the meanes to ende all our complaynts, the remedie of our common griefes, if the perturbers of our State at home were first cal∣med, I would not doubt, but forrein aduersaries would soone be dan∣ted, and the mindes of friendes vnited, to the ioy of all that loue the trueth of Gods religion, and seeke the long continuance of her Maie∣sties peaceable reigne, and the florishing state of the Church.
Accept therefore I beseech you, my good Lord, this my good will, which I testifie vnto you in this Treatise. Due it is to you, being so
forwarde and vpright in matters of Iustice, and was expected at my handes being specially touched in the petition which I answere, I make your Lordship and all the learned, yea all indifferent men iud∣ges. Iudge therefore according to iustice and trueth. There is no reason I should require fauour in this cause, further then my simple skill, and vnsufficient handling of matters for want of time, and being oppressed with other businesse shall require fauour.
The Lord send peace to his Church, and heape vpon you, and all others that loue his trueth, all heauenly graces, that by your meanes enioying the benefites of true religion, iustice and peace, wee may consent in one trueth, and ioyntly in his holy Church glorifie Christ Iesus the Prince of peace.
In London the 20 of December.

