



THere are two principall offices, most worthy & excellent Prince, of a true Christian. the first is, To decline from euill: the se∣cond is, To do good. And these two, as they are necessarily re∣quired in all, so principally in those, which are to command and gouerne others. But the ground of both is the true Catholike and Apostolike Faith; without the knowledge wherof, not only good things are often times refused, as euill; but also things euill embraced for good.
Seeing then our aduersaries the Papists of late time haue both violently and fraudulently sought to bring backe into his Maiesties Domi∣nions,
whereof your Grace by the grace of God is vndoubted heire, not onely the heresies and superstitions of Popish religion, but also the ty∣rannicall gouernment of the Pope, that is so pre∣iudiciall both to Princes and their states, and also to all Christians & their liberties; I haue thoght, I could not doe either to God or my Countrey better seruice, then to declare to the world both their weake and absurd grounds, and their impi∣ous and wicked doctrines, and how they haue proceeded in the maintenance and defence of the same. And this I doubt not would appeare far more cleerely, if without preiudice of mens persons, or respect of priuat mens interests, mat∣ters might be debated before indifferent Iudges, and soundly tried by the touchstone of holy Scriptures, and none of those excluded from hearing, that professe true Catholicke religion.
My purpose is not, God I take to witnesse, to touch any man particularly, but onely to set forth the trueth of all matters, that the obstacles of Christian vnity, and the causes of the good successe of the Turke being remoued, we may all for the most part consent in the vnity of the Catholicke faith, and conioyne our mindes and forces the better to resist publike enemies.

This I present to your Grace, as the first fruits of my affection and seruice, that thereby learn∣ing to eschew euill, and to embrace that which is good and pious, you may, as it followeth in the 34. Psalme, seeke peace & follow after it. Nay you may the better be instructed not only in follow∣ing the true meanes of peace, but also obtaine your desires, and for euer truly possesse it. This your affection in pious promoting the true ser∣uice of God, & preuēting of the trecherous plots of the factious complices of Antichrist, shall be the foundation of your prosperous estate. It shal increase the ioy of your noble Father our Soue∣reigne Lord and King, and glad your Mother, whose hearts ioy you are. S. Iohn reioyced to see the children of that noble lady, to whom he directed his second Epistle, walking in trueth. And this is the affection of all your friends and wel-willers, who reioyce to see the heroicall vertues of your Father budding forth in your Grace. The Prophet Psal. 112, doth assure vs, That his children that feareth the Lord shalbe mighty vpon earth, and that the generation of the righteous shall be blessed. On the other side the aduersaries of religion shal weepe and lament, when they shall see the Pro∣phesies of S. Iohn, Apocalyp. 17. and 18, con∣cerning
the destruction of the great whore, and the ruines of the city of Babylon accomplished, and the rather, as we hope, by your Fathers and your godly endeuours and meanes. Vouchsafe therefore, most gracious Prince, to giue reading to this Discourse made in opposition of that in∣famous libell, which not long since one Matthew Kellison a Priest of Baal, and a marked slaue of Antichrist, presumed to direct to the King your Father: and consider what reason he had to talke of the surueying of religion, seeing his owne re∣ligion can so euill abide any examination or sur∣uey.
The Lord of heauen blesse you with all spiri∣tuall graces, and the rest shalbe added vnto you. This is also the continuall prayer of all the ser∣uants of God & your Fathers true subiects, That your Grace may be made a worthy instrument to aduance Gods glory, and that the vowes of your Parents, and all well affected to his Maiesty and to your Grace, may plentifully be perfor∣med in you.

