



ALthough, Sir, many of your good friends and folowers haue both long looked, and much de∣sired to heare from you: yet, I doe assure my selfe, they looked for nothing lesse then to receiue from you such a slender and tri∣fling pamphlet as this, which goeth vnder the name of your apologie. they expe∣cted rather to see those famous obseruations of yours, which you haue written against the Rhemish annotati∣ons vpon the new Testament, which they esteeme so highly, or els some such like notable learned, & labori∣ous worke against the cōmon enemie. I, for my part, when I first heard, that your name was once againe come in print, and that ye had now at length broken your long kept silence, looked (at the least) for someTanquam ele∣phanti partum. great and learned volume in defence of that cause, for which you haue so much practised, and so long and ve∣hemently contended; and which you were wont so highly to magnifie. I did well remember how you promised, that forIn the front of his first reply. Syons sake you would not holde your peace, nor for Hierusalems sake take any rest. as if this mat∣ter of your forged discipline were your onely Syon, and that holy Hierusalem, for which you contended. you tolde vs further, and that (I thinke) in very good sad∣nesse, that1. reply. if euery haire of your head were a life, you ought to afford them al for the defence of your cause. You affirmed
also that your disciplinePreface 1. re∣ply. is agreat part of the Gospell: that it is a1. and 2. reply. matter of faith, and an essentiall note of the Church: that the Church without it, is like a gardenPref. 1. reply. without a hedge: nay finallyM. Cartwr. table. that it is Christes kingdome vpon the earth. I could not therefore thinke otherwise, but that now you had vndertaken the defence and accomplish∣ment of that most glorious and necessary worke. Nei∣ther could I imagine, that1. Thess. 2. contrary to the Apostles example, you would seeke for glory at mens handes; or els like the princes of the Iewes,Iohn 12. esteeme more the praise of men, then the glory of God: and to come neerer you, that you would abandon the defence of your Syon, yea and of your holy citie Hierusalem, and would suffer your hedge to go downe, and your Church to lye waste, and plainely would renounce a great part of the Gospell, and of your new faith, and all this to talkeThe argument of M. Cart∣wrights booke. of the vse of money, and purchases of land, and Hackets and Copin∣gers matters, and your owne fancifull opinions, and vaine praises.
Yea, and all that haue heard of your fame, expected farre other matters, then this short pamphlet like two ballades stitched together at your handes: and not on∣ly expected, but also desired and wished, that if needes you would take penne in hand, you would trauaile in your former cause, rather then in this priuate quarrell betwixt your selfe and me. and that also was my ear∣nest desire. not that I would haue that fire stirred, which once you had kindled, and is now either quenched or well couered; but that I hoped, that by your defence all men should clearely see, first the nakednesse and weakenesse of your cause, which with no eloquent glo∣ses you could couer, nor with pretence defend; and next, that the same is not ouerborne by authoritie, as
some beare men in hand, but reiected, repelled, and de∣spised, as a new forged deuise, repugnant to al antiqui∣tie, to all iustice, to al reason, and trueth.
As for this your apologie or briefe answere, as you call it, it satisfieth no mans expectation, or desire, as I thinke. if you respect the principall cause; it is altoge∣ther impertinent, if you seeke to iustifie and cleare your selfe, you haue done iust nothing. that is apparent by these particulers. You deny, that you did execute any part of your brother Stubbes his last will. an vnkinde part (you must needes confesse) especially if he requested you, or meant to put you in trust. but what is that to the mat∣ter? that you haue dealt in the execution of my Lord of Leycesters will concerning the stocke of his Hospi∣tal, you cannot deny. Likewise most apparent it is, that you haue dealt (how wel, I know not) in diuers other ci∣uil causes. which is sufficient to make that cause good, for which I alledged that argument. You say also, that you haue not three or foure mannours; and percase you are sorie for it. but what apperteineth that to your elder∣ship? I trust you meane not, if you had them to con∣uey them ouer to some friends in trust for maintenance of a learned ministery, for want of which your consorts pretend to bee so much offended. Neither is the want of land or fee any blemish to your credit. for many ve∣ry honest, and learned men haue not so much as one quarter of your reuenues. you tell vs that you leant not 300. li. to Francis Michel, but only 200. pound. and yet nei∣ther is greatly material, whether it be. rather then you would loose either 200. or one hundred pounds, you would percase wish you had neuer spoken worde for your consistorie. you take it in euill part, that I should cal the Hospital, whereof you are master, your Hospitall;
and yet is the speach common, and no harme meant, not is it any aduantage to your cause, whether it be cal∣led my Lord of Leycesters Hospital, or your hospitall. if so be you might haue had your foolish course, many learned men would not haue bene so wel mainteined, as the poore of your Hospital. Such like be your com∣plaints, where you take your selfe charged to be a man that hath strange conceites concerning extemporall pray∣ers, and working of miracles. neither of these matters ap∣perteine to your consistorial gouernment, nor great∣ly touch you in reputation. Your acquaintance with Co∣pingers causes, and allowance of Martins libels, I con∣fesse, are foule matters, and touch you in your reputa∣tion; yet doe they concerne the consistoriall cause, but litle.
Besides this, albeit your principall drift in this your apologie was to cleare your selfe of all notes of disloy∣altie, and lewd opinions, and lewd practises; yet haue you done none of these. nay in those matters that con∣cerne Stubbs his will, the purchase of lands, and lending of money, wherin you seeme to haue most aduantage, you do but trifle. all this now I wil briefly note, but the proofes you shall see largely deduced in the discourse ensuing. First where I doe make diuers questions, and some that touch you very nerely, you passe the most of them ouer with silence. but if you would haue iustified your selfe, you should haue answered them al, and that in direct and plaine termes. IAnswere to the petit. p. 186. aske you whether Fen∣ners booke which he entitleth sacram Theologiam, and which you seeme to allow, conteine not strange diuini∣tie: and gladly would I know, if you mislike any thing in that booke, what the points are you mislike. you an∣swere nothing. IIbid. p. 189. demaund of you whether Barowes er∣roneous
conclusions doe not folow of your assertions. And what say you to it? forsooth nothing. I aske if the Prince refuse to reforme the Church, how far inferior magistrates, and the people may proceed therein; and thereto your answere isIbid p. 194. & 195. silence. I demaund of you, if you and your consorts do not thinke the practises of Ge∣neua and Scotland for the setting vp of their discipline lawfull, and worthy to be folowed: and to this you sayIbidem p. 195. nothing. I demaund further, whether you and your fellowes haue not assembled in synodes and conuenti∣cles, and there decreed and enacted certeine Ecclesia∣stical canons and rules, & subscribed and practsed them contrary to her Maiesties lawes, and the statutes of the Realme: and you also answer, as to other matters. I de∣sired to be resolued, whether you had disgraced her Maiesties Ecclesiastical lawes, reformation, & gouern∣ment, & you respect my desires nothing. Diuers other matters likewise I demaunded of you, vnto which you answere nothing. nay in the matters concerning Hac∣kets practise, and Martines libels, and her Maiesties su∣premacie, you answere imperfectly and vnsufficiently. you dare not set downe my whole question, nor con∣fesse al was done concerning Copinger and Martin. nor wil you answere directly to those particuler points of her Maiesties supremacie, which the statutes and lawes giue her. and doe you thinke, that this kinde of answe∣ring is sufficient to cleare you. Why, then let Sanders, Allen, and those Papists and traitors which confesse so much in termes, as plainely and openly as you do as yet, be cleared. concerning Stubbs his wil, and your dea∣ling with Francis Michel, and others, you haue also per∣uerted my meaning, and altered my words, and maner of writing. who then seeth not how litle meanes you
had to cleare your selfe, being put to these hard shifts, and not daring to set downe his words, whom you pre∣tend to answere? but this we shall see more euidently when wee come to the examination of the particulers of your briefe.
Further, your answer is altogether vnsufficient. you do still cry out in your tragicall maner, slander, slander: and yet you doe not vnderstand what is slander. you ought therefore to vnderstand that slander is,L. 1. ff. ad S. C. Turpil. when matters criminal are purposely, and falsly obiected. but those things, of which you go about to purge your selfe, are either not criminal, or els most true, & in part by your selfe confessed. your selfe confesse, that some things obiected to you are in their owne nature indifferent. how then are they slanderous? that you were acquain∣ted with Hackets and Copingers practises, and disliked not Martines courses, shalbe proued. that you would not at the first answere to certaine points concerning the Queenes supreme authoritie in causes ecclesiasti∣cal, youIn this booke and in the que∣stion concerning that matter. confesse. how then can you say, you are slan∣dered? because forsooth, as you would insinuate, you did afterwards acknowledge it, & now offer to sweare it. and yet you wil be taken halting, when you come to the particuler points of that authoritie. You deny that you allowed M. Fenners strange diuinitie concerning ouerruling and deposing of Princes by inferior magi∣strates; yet haue not I said more then your own words wil proue and iustifie. That which I say cōcerning wor∣king of Miracles and extemporal prayers, you witting∣ly, as it seemeth, mistake, and answere not: which argu∣eth, that your conscience tolde you, that I said nothing therein but trueth, & trueth whereof you are ashamed. the execution of wills and purchase of lands is not cri∣minall.
beside that, what I said either concerning such matters, or els your maner of employment of your mo∣ney, in effect and substance shalbe proued sufficiently. what reason then had you so vnaduisedly to challenge me, and so deeply to charge me with this hainous mat∣ter of slandering? nay what meant you, or howe durst you once talke of slanders hauing your selfe slandered the ecclesiasticall policie of the Church as vniust; the reformation thereof, as prophane and impure; the au∣thoritie of Bishops practised in this Church, as anti∣christian and contrary to Gods worde; the clergie of England as destitute of an ordinary and lawful calling, you hauing no other order then Deacon, that I know; the people of this landCartwr. table. as refusing Christ to reigne o∣uer them; the preaching of the word, as not orderly; the administration of the Sacraments in this Church, as not pure nor sincere? neither haue you so good rea∣son to charge me, as I haue to charge you with slande∣ring me, hauing without cause imputed this vnto mee, and charged me with shifting, and I know not what vn∣christian dealing, and hauing put foorth and excited your friend to raile on me, and charge me with diuers odious matters in the preface to your booke. matters, which I do the lesse regard, for that as hee hath rashly charged me; so he hath wickedly blasphemed God, say∣ing that God hath blasted my penne with a lying spirit, attri∣buting therein the wicked act of lying to God himselfe, which is the Spirit of trueth; and not only to me, which cōfesse my selfe to be subiect to many errors. of this, M. Cartwright, me thinks, you should haue had more care, and vsed therein more diligence, and not suffered such blasphemies to passe in the forefront of your booke.
But, may you say, if you haue not slandered me; yet
you haue wronged me. as if it were wrong to deale a∣gainst the troubler of our peace, the chiefe authour of your schisme, the disturber & slanderer of this Church and state. and yet haue I done nothing otherwise, then beseemed mee. In my first bookes I dealt with you no further, then the cause constreined me, & your impor∣tunitie, that first began to oppugne the Church, pro∣uoked me. In my answere to a certaine petition in the behalfe of your selfe, and your side, I do confesse, I dealt with you more particulerly. but I was drawen to it by the authors odious questions and courses. When the petitioner said, Quaere of Matth. Sutcliffe, who is euer carping at M. Cartwrights purchases, why he may not sel his fathers lands, and buy others with the money: how could I satisfie the man, vnlesse I touched you particulerly. blame therefore him that began the braule, if you finde your selfe therewith agreeued; and not mee, that did nothing but defend my selfe, and answere.
What should I speake of the harshnesse, and rough∣nesse of your stile? your booke it selfe, albeit I say no∣thing, will herein say sufficient. against so megre and wretched a discourse, what neede I say any thing?
Yet partly least you should enter into presumption, as if you had triumphed ouer me, and sufficiently iusti∣fied your selfe; and partly also to represse that hautines of spirit that possesseth you, and maketh you so impati∣ent of due reproofe; and partly to cure your followers of that mad humor, that maketh them suppose you to be a man without blame and error; I haue vndertaken to examine, & to looke into this treatise of yours more particulerly, although otherwise most vnworthy to be refuted, or looked vpon. and the rather for that your friend that hath made the preface before your booke,
doeth make such great brags of this defence, and stan∣deth so confidently vpon your innocencie, and would haue all my writings esteemed and iudged according to this rule.
I haue also added such questions as you omitted, praying your answer for my satisfaction. if you mislike this course, blame your selfe, that drew me forth to iu∣stifie my doings, and would not giue mee any rest by your importunitie. but if you doe still like it, and will further proceede to charge mee with slandering you; then for your owne credite, if not at my request, set downe my wordes truely and wholy, and forbeare to forge and deuise matters calumniously. I haue shew∣ed you both in this booke and in my answere to M. Throkmorton a precedent. deale not worse with mee, then I haue done with you. but percase all this request is needlesse. for I trust his example, (who now is si∣lent, as it seemeth, for ought he dare auowe) wil teach you not to stirre coles well couered too rashly, nor to prate of needlesse matters foolishly, nor to runne wil∣fully into danger, when no man driueth you.
This my answere, albeit you looke not for it, I dedi∣cate to your owne selfe, and not without iust cause. challenges they say require answer, andIueunda re∣rum verissitudo. one good turne requireth another. all men that haue good minds yeld. like for like, and pay homeQuod a se al∣latum est, id sibi relatum puter. Terent. in prol. phorm. as much as they haue receiued. yea gratefull mindesVberiore men∣sura quam acce∣peris. Cicer. ex Hesiod. pay all with ouerflowing measure. I doe not looke for any thankes at your hands. I know it is an vngratefull world. yet if you will patronize this booke and vouchsafe to stay the vnbridled tongues of your disciples, that in their Bacchanall banquettes and disciplinarian feastes degorge their malice, and speake their pleasures of whom they list, I wil accept it at your
hands as a fauour, and put it into the reckening of your good doings.
More I haue to say vnto you: but the rest you shall receiue in my answere to your challenge, praying you to thinke nothing ouermuch, nor lightly to condemne any thing, before you haue talked with your friend Master Throkmorton, to whom, I doubt not, but you will discommend me, and therefore I desire not to be commended to him. and so commit∣ting, and commending you both to your sober thoughts, I bid you, a dieu.

