


TO THE MOST RELIGIOVS AND VER∣TVOVS PRINCE KING IAMES, by the grace of God King of En∣gland, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the true, auncient, and Catholike faith.
AS Kings receiue their king∣domes and authoritie from God; so, most gracious and dread Soueraigne, they pros∣per and flourish most, when they empoloy their royall au∣thoritie for the aduancement of the true seruice and honour of God. Of Hezekiah the holy Scriptures giue testimonie, That he did vprightly in the 2. King. 18. sight of the Lord, according to all that Dauid his father had done, and that he tooke away the high places, and brake the grauen images, and cut downe the groues, and brake in peeces the brazen serpent that Moses had made. And againe, that he claue to the Lord, and departed not from him, but kept his commandements. Therefore it followeth; So the Lord was with him, and he prospered in all things that he took in hand.

The same we likewise find verified in your Maiesties predecessor Queene Elizabeth of glorious memorie. At her first coming to the Crowne, she brake downe gra∣uen and molten Images, she tooke downe high altars, and remoued away all monuments of superstition out of the Church: she feared not the malignitie of men, but claue to the Lord, resoluing to keepe his holy com∣maundements, and to see God worshipped according to the prescript rule of his sacred word. She was all her life long a harbor to the distressed children of God, a refuge to the oppressed, a protector of the persecuted for the testimonie of Christ Iesus, & a nursing mother of Gods Church. Therefore God maruellously protected her, both against the force of forreine enemies, and also against the conspiracies of domesticall traitors, and cau∣sed her to prosper in all her affaires. She liued & raigned long and happily, and dying left behind her a sweet me∣mory of many blessings by her meanes bestowed vpon her people.
Contrariwise, such as either know not, or did not re∣member from whence they receiued their kingly ho∣nor, but either neglected the worship of God, or else for Gods worship established superstition and idolatrie in the Church, haue seldome long raigned, or prospered in their kingdomes. Ieroboam forgetting what great fauor God had done him, aduancing him from low estate to the kingdome, and renting it from the house of Dauid, to giue it vnto him, receiued a threatning message from the Lord by the hand of the Prophet Ahijah, 1. King. 14. The same also was shortly after accomplished. For God brought euill vpon the house of Ieroboam, and cut off his posteritie, because he did euill in the sight of the Lord, and erected idolatrie at Bethel. Likewise Queene Mary,

who brought this land not onely vnder the commaund of Spaniards and Italians, but also vnder the heauie yoke of Antichrist, burdensome both to mens ciuill estates, and also to their consciences, & erected superstition and idolatrie, which before had bene banished, and persecu∣ted the Saints of God that would not bow their knees to Baal, had a short, troublesome and vnhappie raigne, and left behind her nothing but hatred for her crueltie, and infamy for her vnnaturall dealing with her subiects, and misgouernement.
In both we find that accomplished which the Lord speaketh by the Prophet, 1. Sam. 2. Them (saith he) that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be de∣spised. For neither will the Lord faile his inheritance, nor Psal. 94. hath the throne of iniquitie fellowship with God. Dagon could not stand before the Arke of God, nor shall the 1. Sam. 15. worshippers of Dagon preuaile against the seruants of God. The which although both particularly in the di∣uers gouernement of Queene Elizabeth and Queene Mary, and also generally by the examples of all, that ei∣ther fauoured or disfauoured true religion, it appeareth most euidently: yet because Robert Parsons an Apostate somtime from religion, and now an vtter enemie to the state, and a renegate Englishman for hatred to the truth, and loue to Poperie, in a large discourse doth endeuour to disgrace the proceedings of Queene Elizabeth in re∣formation of religion especially, and to commend the State of the realme vnder Queen Mary, and of all Papists vnder the Romish gouernement, I haue thought good particularly to demonstrat. I haue also wiped away both his malicious imputations, & encountred him in his rai∣ling inuectiues, defending the honor of our dread So∣ueralgne, whose memorie shall neuer die in the minds

of her louing subiects, and answering for true religion calumniated by the slanderous tongues of the supposts and slaues of Antichrist.
This discourse, although not of that perfection that it may seeme worthy to be presented to so great a King, yet for that it containeth a defence of your Maiesties predecessor, which you honour, and of that religion which you professe; I am bold to consecrate to your Maiestie, as the first fruites of my loyall affection to∣wards you. Therin also your Maiestie may see, not only a precedent to follow, but also a reward proposed to those, that studiously and couragiously seeke to aduance pietie and true religion.
The aduersarie by all meanes seeketh to suppresse truth, and to aduance idolatrie and popish errors, mis∣construing things well done, imputing crimes to inno∣cents, excusing offenders, denying things manifest, for∣ging and deuising matters neuer done, nor imagined. But while he hath sought to bring disgrace, not onely vpon true religion, but also vpon the restorers and de∣fenders thereof, he hath giuen vs iust occasion to shew that the doctrine, religion and practise of Papists, is not only repugnant to truth, but also enemie to Princes and States, grieuous to Christians, and profitable to none, but to the slaues and adherents of Antichrist. Further, I haue made it apparant, that the state of popish Reli∣gion is no way to be maintained, but by trecherie and massacres, by lying, railing and forgerie, being hatefull both to God and man, and the cause of many miseries and calamities.
Vouchsafe therefore, most worthy and noble King, to reade this discourse ensuing. It shal declare vnto your Maiestie plainely, by what meanes you may establish

your estate. Queene Elizabeth in her latter dayes was made beleeue, that remisse dealing in matters of reli∣gion would assure her life, often sought for by Papists; and her State, that they by all meanes haue sought to ouerthrow. But this her remisnesse gaue her enemies oportunitie to practise against her life, and to make a strong partie against Religion and the State, as your Maiestie very well knoweth. For the same is lately bro∣ken out, to the hazard of your royall person, and the in∣dangering of the State: and God knoweth whether those that haue intended mischiefe against your royall Maiestie, that neuer offended them, did not worke mischiefe against her, whom they tooke to be the obstacle of all their plots and desseines.
Your Maiestie, I doubt not, will wisely consider of these plotters, and their abettors, and all their practi∣ses. A King (saith Salomon) that sitteth in the throne Prouerb. 20. of iudgement, chaseth away all euill with his eyes. But his eyes must be in his head, and he must sit in the throne of iudgement, and execute his lawes. He must not suffer them to escape vnpunished, that mali∣ciously seeke the bringing in of strangers, and the sub∣uersion of Religion and the State. A wise King Ibidem. (saith a wise King) scattereth the wicked, and maketh the wheele to turne ouer them. Who these plotters are, I haue declared in the treatise following. And that they excuse not themselues by Religion, I haue disco∣uered the deformities of their Religion, as well as their wicked treasons. All which I present to your Maiesties graue consideration, beseeching him that is King of Kings to endue you with wisedome and all royall and heroicall vertues fit for the managing of so great king∣domes, that you may both triumph ouer all your ene∣mies,

and also long sit in the royall seate of these king∣domes, to the honor of his diuine Maiestie, and the comfort of all your louing subiects.
Your Maiesties most loyall and louing subiect

