



THE last Session of the Par∣liament, my good Lorde, I answered a certain petition then diuulged and printed by the Masters and tea∣chers of Popish religion: and this, I had well hoped, would haue satisfied their disciples and folowers, see∣ing their learned leaders so silent and vnable to replie. But I perceiue that the common saying now prooueth true, That many schol∣lersCicer. Epist. famil lib. 9. ad varronem. passe their Masters. For if they had not excelled their teachers in immodesty, they woulde not haue rubbed ouer that rustie stuffe, which their betters are ashamed to bring againe vpon the stage: and if they had not passed them in boldnesse and importunitie, they would haue forborne to importune his Maiestie and the state further, in matters formerlie, for such graue and important considerations, most worthilie reiected. And yet I speake not this, to the intent to clear their masters. For beside that this seemeth a de∣uise
of their Masters the Massepriestes and Iebusites, that make others to solicite their forelorne cause, Chrysostom homil. 43. op. imperf. in Math. telleth vs, that the impiety of the schollers is to be imputed to the masters.
The argument of both petitions is one in effecte, and therefore much more needeth not to be said now then that which is formerly aunswered to the Masse∣priests. Yet because all haue not seene the former pe∣tition and answer, nor vnderstood their gunpowder, and rebellious practises; and these Lay, or rather lame Romane Catholikes, seeme to stand more vpon their loyaltie, then the other; I thought it not amisse, after this late discouery of their most horrible treasons, par∣ticulerly to examine this discourse also, and with mar∣ginall Glosses to poynt to the fooleries of their text, which notwithstanding I would not haue all simple pa¦pists take, as spoken to thēselues. for my meaning was to touch only these Petitioners, and such as subscribe this factious Petition.
Much adoe we haue about toleration of popish re∣ligion, but we may say, as Saluianus lib. 7. de prouidentia said sometime in another case: vtinam hoc remedium ma∣lorum, & non diuturna toleratio. I would this toleration, which they desire, were a remedie of their pretended euills, and not rather a long continued toleration of mischiefes, and that both in the Church and state. For why, I beseech you, may we not so say, seeing no∣thing can be granted, that is either more derogatorie to Gods honor, or more preiudiciall to the Kings ma∣iesty and state, as hath in part appeared by this late at∣tempt, and as God willing it shall at large, with moste
inuincible arguments, be demonstrated?
This my discourse, most reuerend Father, I present to your Honor, as a pledg of my loue, and an acknow∣ledgment of your Lordships fauours towards me: and the rather, that both your Lordship and al true Chri∣stians truelie zealous for the cause of true pietie, and studious of the safety of their countrie, may thereby vnderstand, how much it importeth them all to con∣cur in repressing such notorious insolency, & factious courses. These men, they are like the heretiks, of whom Irenaeus lib. 5. aduers: haeres. speaketh, which being blind in matters of truth, did contradict their own saluation. Caecuti∣entes circa veritatem, saith he, suae contradicunt saluti. But pious governours will neither neglect the safety of re∣ligion & the state, nor of these contētious gainesayers of truth, if they doo not wilfully shut their eares to the truth, and their eies to the light, and carelesly neglecte the restraint of the vnderminers both of the Parlia∣ment house, and whole State. Wherefore referring these matters next to Gods prouidēce, to the zealous care of our superiors, I commend this worke and my selfe to your Lordship, and your Lordships prospe∣rous estate, to the fauour of the almighty. London, this first of Ianuarie, Anno. 1605.

