



SIr N.D. or Noddy, or howso∣euer it shall please you to stile your selfe, being a man but of two orHomo trium literarum. three letters, it should seeme you were in a fitte of a cholericke feauer, when you wrote your late Wardword. For euery where you fret, fume, and chafe, and all the dishes of your feast are chafing-dishes, and hot words both against your aduersary, and others. No doubt you were distempered, or else I thinke, you would not haue raued, or rather raged after such a mad fashion. You seeme also to be full of galles, scabbes, and sores. For what else should make you to crie, and exclaime so passio∣nately, when you are but lightly and tenderly touched? I can compare you to none more fitter, then to that vlcerous fellow inIn Niptris. Cicer. Tusc. 2. Sophocles, that could not abide the hands of surgeons:
Abscedite, saith he, dimittite.
Nam attrectatu, & quassu saeuum amplificatis dolorem. Your selfe and your cause is so ful of botches, that you can abide no shaking, nor handling; and therefore withIbidem. Phi∣loctetes may say,
Iam iam absumor, conficit animam
Vis vulneris, vlceris aestus.
 Like you are to dameIn the Italian legend, in the life of Saint Catharine. Bonauenture sister to Catharine of Siena that noble Romish saint, that was like to die, as oft as she heard but one foule word; so tender harted was shee. And you are so tender eared, that you cannot abide to heare any euill word of the pope, or of his agents. He may proceed against vs, as an enimie; and his agents may broch rebellions and treasons, and else what mischiefe they can; and yet we may neither touch your holy father, nor lay open the lewd practises of enemies and traitors. And be∣cause Sir Francis doth touch the hostile actions of the Pope and Spanyard, and treacherous practises of Romish priestes and Iesuits; youIn the preface to the Warde∣word. leape suddenly into your raging and impatient fits, and complaine of railing and calumnia∣tion saying, that his discourse is an iniurious pamphlet, and a biting libell, and that he is enraged with a furious veine of in∣uectiue spirit neither sparing God, nor man. And as if this had not been sufficient, you tell vs further, that theThis applied to Andreas Philopater or Parsons, is true. flowers, or rather furies of his discourse are lying, forging, falsifying, igno∣rant vaunting, odious scoffing, malitious calumniations, sediti∣ous interpretations, bloodie exaggerations, barbarous insulta∣tions, and that he rusheth further to the open assault of forreine monarkes, their honors fame and reputation.
But rage, and reuell as long, as you list: I doubt not, but all honest men will commend vs, and all moderate men will allow vs to speake in defence of our Prince and coun∣trey. Our countrey is deare vnto vs, and if all valiant men ought to venture their liues for it, litle should we deserue, if we would not open our mouthes to speake for it. Heathen men by no pretence of religion could be drawen from de∣fence of their countrey. Fabius Maximus was woont to say, that those attempts were done according to religion, that were done for the safetie of the state. Dicere ausus est, saithDe senectute. Tully, optimis auspicijs ea geri, quae pro salute reipub. fie∣rent. AndIliad. . Hector said, that whatsoeuer the chanting of
 birdes foretold, it was best to defend valiantly a mans coun∣trey.  saith he, . And shall we vnder a pretence of false religion abandon true religi∣on, for which we are to forsake father, mother, wife and children, and all we haue, and for pretence of (I know not what) danger, forsake our most deere countrey, for which euerie honest man ought to giue his life, and all he hath? If you talke with Parsons the Iesuite, he will tell you, that it is no such discommendable matter, to speake what we can in defence of our countrey, and of religion, especially against the publike enimies of religion, and of our coun∣trey, and against disloyall traytors, that are with their en∣tisements drawne to rayle against their Prince, and to be∣tray the cause of religion, and their countrey. Be they mo∣narkes, or be they fryer frapartes, popes or cardinals, terre∣striall gods, or carnall men: if they be our enimies, and seeke our destruction, and the destruction of our religion, Prince and countrey; I esteeme him but a base fellow, that feareth to encounter them in any sort. That priuilege doth the law of warre giue vnto vs, to strike any, that will come against vs in the field. Certes, if it be free for you to defend the cause of publike enimies, that with fire and sword seeke to destroy vs; of wicked and traitorous priestes, Iesuites and their consorts, that by secret practise would vndermine the state, and bring forreine enimies vpon vs; of impious and idolatrous heretikes, that goe about to erect idolatry and popish impieties; you must giue vs leaue to speake for our religion, that is most catholike and apostolike; for our Prince, that is so gratious and mercifull, and offendeth in nothing more, then shewing such grace, and mercie to so mercilesse and wicked traytors, as seeke her destruction, and the desolation of this countrey; for our selues, that professe true religion, and abhorre Romish idolatry, super∣stition and heresie.

With Sir Francis you haue no reason to be offended, if you be, as you pretend, a friend to her maiestie, and the countrey. Hee speaketh against the Spaniard: and why should he not, the Spanish king, without all iust cause, pro∣fessing himselfe our enimie? He weigheth little the popes authoritie. And hath he not reason, the pope in his tyran∣nie shewing himselfe, not onely to be our enimie, but also the enimie of Christian religion, & of Christs church? He toucheth also the practises and treasons ofGifford, Wor∣thington, &c. priestes andParsons o Delman, Hit, Walpooi, &c. Iesuites, and their adherents: but not without iust cause, seeing they haue shewed themselues not catholikes, as you terme them (for catholikes neuer held either any such re∣ligion, as theirs is, nor sought by violence to murder law∣full Princes, and ruinate their natiue countrey) but dange∣rous traytors, and most maliciousTestified by Sixtus Qintus declaratorie sentence against the Queene. enimies of their coun∣trey. Likewise he commendeth her Maiesties clemencie, and you haue no cause to dislike the same, least percase it may please God to turne her hart through your vngrate∣fulnesse, and hatefull practises, from her entended course of clemencie, which is not well fitting for your sharpe hu∣mors, into a course of iustice, which your treacherous and most wicked practises doe drawe vpon you. This is his course against enimies, this is his dealing with his soue∣raigne. He neither iniustly chargeth his enimies, nor doth he basely or seruilely flatter his friends and superiors.
But admit your aduersarie had not vsed either that moderation in his stile, or sinceritie in his dealing, which might passe the iust censure of seuere iudges; yet no man hath lesse cause to finde fault with these courses, then your selfe and your consorts. For in railing and calumniation no man may compare with you. It is not one only biting libell and iniurious pamphlet, which you haue set out, but very ma∣ny and diuers. I will deale plainly with you, for that I am well acquainted with your stile, and know your lewde pac∣king,
 and practising, and can conuince you, if you haue your steele vizor on, and shame not to denie so plaine mat∣ters. I say then, that you Robert Parsons falsly abusing the name of Iesus, to ouerthowe the truth of Iesus, haue pub∣lished first certaine chartels against your friends in Ox∣ford: secondly, one famous or rather infamous libell a∣gainst the Earle ofLeicesters cō∣mon-wealth. Leicester: thirdly, another singleEntitled, a confutation of pretended feares. li∣bell against the late Lord Treasurer: fourthly, another in∣famousThe words by no loyall sub∣iect may be spoken. libel against her Maiestie, & against all her chiefe counsellers vnder the name of Andreas Philopater. Nei∣ther can you excuse your selfe, thatA Iesuite re∣siding in the court of Spaine, and Parsons disciple and Agent. Creswell was the man that made the Latine, which you cannot doe, when as you either made it first in English, or else gaue him all his ar∣gument. Fiftly, you holpe Allen in his libell against the Queene and state anno 1588. and published diuers copies. Sixtly, you set out Dolmans treacherous discourse to shew your selfe not onely a libeller, but a notorious traitor and sworne enemie to your countrie. AlbeitThe discouery of a countersect conference. one of your friends doth only terme it a chartell or libell. This wardword shal make vp the seuenth libell; and the patched relation of the conference betwixt M. Plessis and Eureux, sent vs late∣ly from Rome, the eight. Beside these you haue published diuers base and paltrie pamphlets not woorthie to be men∣tioned: and these be the flowers or rather furies of your writings, and the fruites of your inuectie veine. Neuer did any vse more lying, forging, false dealing, scornfull gibing, odious bragging, then your selfe, in all your writings. Your owneThe priestes banded in En∣gland against the Iesuites. friends accuse you of Machiuilian and Tur∣kish practises, and well doe your writings and doings de∣serue these titles. The like also may be verified of Sanders, Rishton, Ribadineira, Allen that hungrie cardinall, & other your friends. Tisiphone and the furies of hell spoke with their toongs, wrote with their pennes, and wrought in their malicious harts. It is your selfe therefore, and your trea∣cherous
 consorts, vpon whom all the reproofes, wherewith you load your aduersarie, do light fitly, and lye heauily.
And that you shall perceiue by this discourse ensuing. Wherein, if I reforme your error in many things, where∣of before you were ignorant; you are to thanke me. If you fee the hostile dealings of your friends the pope and Spa∣niard declared and auowed; and your owne and your con∣sorts treasons, and a great masse of your hidden villenies discouered, & take it grieuously: you may thank your selfe, that gaue the occasion. If any Papist finde himselfe agrie∣ued with my plainenesse; let him impute the fault to you also, that first began to stir these coales, and to the myste∣ries of popish religion, that contain such deepe matters of rebellion and treason; and not to me, that being thus pro∣uoked, haue so plainely reuealed them.
Because vpon small aduantages, you haue made great triumphes, and called your aduersary forth to answere you, as it were in eight encounters; vanting and facing, as if you were to play your maisters prises: I haue taken vpon me to ioyne with you vpon your owne ground, and to try with you at your owne weapons, hoping to prooue you ignorant both of state matters, wherein you pretend to know such secrets, and also of sound diuinitie, and other learning; of which your friends and your selfe make such vants. For matters concerning Sir Francis Hastings his owne person, I refer you to his owne answere, that may suf∣ficiently satisfie you. For the rest I thought it not amisse to discourse with you more at large.
And because you goe about to carie away matters with faire pretenses, as if you papists the popes children were the only catholikes, and did professe the ancient faith of the catholike church, and as if all others were heretikes, and wrong beleeuers; I doe also vpon your lend glosses draw you out into fiue new encounters; wherein if you
 ward not the better, it shall be prooued, First, that you are no catholikes, nor hold the catholike faith; secondly, that your religion is a new deuise, and not the auncient reli∣gion of Christs church; Thirdly, that you are heretikes; Fourthly, that the Romish Church is the harlot of Baby∣lon, and not the true church of Christ. And lastly, that your consorts haue beene executed for treason most iust∣ly, and not for religion. Which being prooued, I trust, your selfe will confesse, that wee haue iust cause to main∣taine that religion, that we professe, and to withstand anti∣christ, the Spaniard, and all their adherents, that goe about both by force and treason, to worke the destruction of her maiestie and this state; and all because wee doe publikely maintaine this truth. And although you will not confesse it, that shut your eies against the light of truth; yet I hope all the world shall perceiue both the wrongs of the pope and Spaniard, and of your selfe and other rinegued Eng∣lish, that adhere vnto them, and also the iustice of our de∣fence, that are forced sometimes to take armes, and vse our best meanes for the sauegard of our countrey, our Prince, our wiues, our children, our libertie, our lawes, our friends, most violently and wickedly oppugned vnder the pretence of restoring Romish religion.
This discourse it may please you to accept, as procee∣ding from him, that is desirous to enforme you of a truth. And well can you not refuse it, seeing it is an answere to your challenge, and containeth a reply to your eight tre∣cherous encounters, and your bold and shamelesse petiti∣ons. Seeing you are come into the fielde, you may not refuse to defend your selfe. Seeing you present vnto vs your petitions, and are become an humble sutor at the court, you cannot refuse your answere and dispatch. I doe also desire answere in my new encounters; and protest, that if you come not forth; you shall be baffuld for a co∣ward,
 vnwoorthie to beare armes in this kinde of warfare. If you be not at leysure, by reason of your treasonable nego∣tiations against your countrey, let Creswell or some other trecherous babling Iesuite stand foorth, and try his skill. It standeth you much vpon. If you cannot without rayling, and calumniation make an answere; then I hope, that all such, as you haue abused, will forsake you, as rayling here∣tikes, false teachers, and false traytors to your countrey; and that they will also abandon the new deuises, wicked here∣sies, and strange religion which the popes and papists most wrongfully called catholikes, vnder the colour and false maske of catholike religion, and the catholike church, haue defended and maintayned. At the least they will take heed, how they either runne wilfully into dangerous trea∣sons and rebellions, or ignorantly admit into their coun∣trey forrein enimies vpon the popes warrant, or vpon pre∣tense of religion, which they are neuer able to maintaine, to be either ancient, or catholike, or true.
And this I thinke will sufficiently cleare Sir Francis Hastings both of adulation, and of calumniation, and all other odious imputations, which you haue layde to his charge: if not in your eies, nor iudgement; yet certes in the eies of all indifferent men. As for others, we neither force their might, nor weigh their malice. Let the ire of forrein princes be neuer so implacable, and course of home tray∣tors neuer so desperate, as you do threaten vs: we shall by the grace of God haue meanes to withstand their force, pro∣ceeding from notorious iniustice, and, I hope, that our superiours according to lawes will encounter with the de∣sperate courses of traytors.
Doe you leaue your threats, and your facing, and for∣ging, and calumniations and raylings, and in a moderate course prepare your selfe to iustifie your chalenge, and with substance of matter to answere that, which we haue
 obiected against you, or else you will plainely declare your selfe a wrangling traytor, that haue nothing to accuse vs of, but that we loue true religion, our Prince and countrey; nor to hate vs for, but that we hate your abominable facti∣on, and false religion, and meane manfully to encounter both Italians and Spaniards, and English traytors, and all the world, that shall beare armes against vs. If you shall happen to keepe silence, we cannot chuse, but proclayme your disgrace, as abandoning that quarrel, which your selfe began.
In the meane time, while you are buckling on your armes, I haue some words to speake to the by stan∣ders or readers. Be not offended, I pray you. It shall not be long, before I come into the steccato, and buc∣kle with you againe.
