



AMongst Artes and Sciences (Right ver∣tuous Lady) there is none, without com∣parison, more beseeming our Christian care, then that which teacheth to liue well and god∣lilie whilest wee are heere, so when we are gone wee may liue eternally. For most sure it is, that vpon this moment of time, depends either an vnrecouera∣ble losse, or a happie welfare in



the world to come. And from hence is it, that I call the well ordering of life in this world, A learning to liue: a lear∣ning, because wee ought to make it a matter of labour, and studie; to liue, because with∣out good and godly life, wee are said rather to be, then liue.
To stirre vp our dulnesse to this learning, I haue thought good to lay before the eies of the well disposed mind, the Te∣nor of the life of Christ, the best pattern for imitation that euer the world had. Children will follow their parents. Na∣ture doth teach the Bees to goe forth at the very voice of their King or Leader: wee may goe to Schoole to those small crea∣tures, wee haue not onely the voice of our heauenly King & Leader, but according to his



humanitie, his example also to call vs forth to gather the plea∣sant sap of seueral vertues, that so at the euentide of our age, we may returne loaden with the sweete honey of holinesse, vnto that safe Hiue of euerlasting peace.
From this most diuine life of Christ our Sauiour, there doe arise three principall reasons, before other, for our better in∣struction in this lesson of Lear∣ning to liue. The first is drawn frō the lesse to the grea∣ter, as thus, We should be hum∣ble, meeke, patient: Christ the Sonne of God himselfe was so. The second is taken from his example, We should be help∣full vnto others, louing to our friends, charitable to our ene∣mies: this our Redeemer did. The third is from the end, Wee



ought to endure the crosses & calamities of the world: Christ endured them, and so entred into his glory.
How little this Learning is thought vpon, much lesse pra∣ctised, wee see it too apparantly before our eyes. Of this Saint Chrysostom complayned long agoe, when hee willed men ey∣ther to haue opera secundum professionem, that is to say, workes according to their pro∣fession, or professionem se∣cundum opera, a profession agreeable to their workes: for this default, there needes no farther proofe but experience, when some haue little of Chri∣stianitie, except the name.
Other Treatises (right ver∣tuous Lady) may seeme forci∣bly to call men to the amend∣ment of life; by this, in tabing



a suruay of the life of Christ, they are rather allured, then called, onely when they remem∣ber, that of Christ they are cal∣led Christians. In the whole Tract, if I shall but adone drop to the maine Ocean, I haue at∣tained the farthest of my de∣sires. None can sooner repre∣hend the meanenesse of my la∣bour, then I willingly repre∣hend my selfe. The patronizing heereof I most humbly cōmend vnto your Ladiships protection, whose I remaine euer in all de∣uoted manner.

