






HAuing a desire (right Honorable) to see the state of this our noble Ilande (in the bowels wherof as in the womb of my mother, I was both bread and borne, and wherein I haue liued euen to this present day) I tooke my gelding about the Annunciation of S. Ma∣ry last past, and so trauayling from place to place, within one quarter of a yere (or a

little more) I performed (by Gods good prouidence, and his blessed protection) as much as I purposed, compassing the whole realme (in effect) round about. Which long and wearysome iorney, (al∣beit to my great charges, and paynes) I vndertooke, partly for my priuate plea∣sure and recreation, partly for the auoy∣dance (if it might please God) of this ge∣nerall infection of the plague, which now raigneth and rageth not only in this ho∣norable City, but also almost throughout the whole realme vniuersally, and partly to acquaint my selfe with the maners and dispositions of the people, and finally, to see and viewe all such monuments, edifices, and memorable deedes as our good Ance∣stors haue left behinde them. In all which my progresse (right honorable) obseruing euery little circumstance as neerely as I could, I found (if not all) yet very many things out of order, and farre from that perfection, which I hoped, and loked for.

For as concerning the people, I founde them in most places, dissolute, prowde, enuious, malicious, disdaynefull, couetous, ambicious, carelesse of good workes, and almost altogether irreligious. For the Cuntreys themselues, I found them both pleasant, and delectable, and abounding with all kinde of commodities and store, so as nothing seemed to be wanting that mans hart could desire vnder the sunne, saue only good people, and the same thank∣full to God for his so great, so inestimable, and so infinite blessings bestowed vppon them. And as for the ancient monuments which our good forefathers lefte vs (as namely Hospitalls, Spittles, Almes houses, Churches, Chappels, Schooles of learning, Bridges, high wayes, pauements, causies, and the lyke) I founde them, some quite dissolued, (so as scarse any small remem∣brance thereof is in many places to bee seene) and othersome so ruinate and de∣cayed, as if the first founders thereof were

nowe liuing and shoulde see them, they would not take them for their owne, but rather for some disproportioned miscre∣ants foysted in, in their places. Which ge∣nerall decay of all good workes, or rather playne defection and falling away from God, (right honorable) when I conside∣red, returning to London from my long and paynefull iourney, and hauing re∣posed my selfe there a little, I was moued (I protest before God) euen in conscience to write this little treatise, to the end, that eyther by example, exhortation, or one meanes, or other, I might stirre vp the mindes of men, (at least of those whose hearts God hath touched) if not to doe good workes themselues, yet to maynteyne those which our predecessors haue left be∣hinde them. The want whereof, as it is a blemish to our profession, so is it a cause that maketh the enemy to barke against vs, as if our Religion were nothing else but playne talking, and not walking, nay

playne Atheisme, and Libertinisme, for so they falsely beare the world in hand. And therefore I pray God we may, if not for conscience sake, yet for feare, or if not for feare, yet for very shame now at the last indeuour our selues to do good works, and to leaue some monuments and testimo∣nies of our christian zeale, and charitie behinde vs. For else I am afrayde, least not onely our good forefathers, but also those which we accoumpt prophane and wicked persons (as Christ speaketh) shall goe before vs into the kingdome of hea∣uen. But of these matters we shall haue oc∣casion to say more in the further discourse of this booke, and therefore to bend my stile towards your honor. After that I had in some sort penned this little treatise, I considered with my selfe to whome I might dedicate the same, and so after many ratiocinations pro & contra, I was at the last resolued to consecrate the same rather to your Honor, than to any o∣ther,

and that for two causes: First, for that it hath pleased God, to call you (and that most worthely) to the regiment of this so famous and populous a City, to this end (no doubt) that by the sword of authoritye you might suppresse vice, and by the scepter of wise gouernment, you might commaund and enioyne men to the practising of good workes. And secondly, for that the same God hath made you not onely zealous of religion, but also of good workes, all which heere∣after (Christ willing) shall be registred in theyr due tyme and place, to your immortall fame, honor, and renowne. Accept therefore (my very good Lord) according to your pristine affabilitie this little Treatise, published in your Honors name, and admit both it and the Au∣thor thereof, into your patronage and protection, so shall I thinke my selfe suffi∣ciently remunerate, and the Church of God being edified thereby, shall prayse

God for you to the end. And thus I most humbly take my leaue. From my lodging by Cheape side this 8. of Nouember. 1593.





