



THat desire you haue to serue GOD, in holinesse of life, and very towardly dispo∣sition

euen from ten∣der yeares so applia∣ble to vertue & lear∣ning, (wherein you may waxe olde by the grace of God,) haue often mooued me, to beseech him, who hath beganne this good in you, to continue the same, euen vnto an aged, and happy ende. For assuredly our reli∣gious dutie, and res∣pectiue deuotion to God, is woorth all

the worldes dignitie beside, nay without this, all the dignitie of this worlde is no∣thing worth. Is not godinesse the flower of all our actions? Yes verily. Do but trie me (saith the Lord) if I will not poure out a blessing? Malach 3.10. hath he not sayd, I will honor them that honor me. 1. Sam. 2.30. Et diligentes me dili∣go, & I loue them that loue mee, Prou. 8.17?
To exercise your deuotionate duetie to God, so often, (and therefore often) as you prepare your selfe vnto the Blessed Sacramente (that high misterie of hu∣mane saluation) I commend vnto you, the Meditations hereafter following: which Meditations, in part gathered out of the auncient Fa∣thers, & some late re∣uerend writers of this age, as Luc. Penel.

& others translated, augmented, & brou∣ght to a methode, I offer withall (as a te∣stimonie of my due∣tiefull regarde to∣wardes you) vnto your sober and gen∣tle paronage, where∣in, what is performed you may happily by obseruinge finde. The occasion first moouing mee to ga∣ther somewhat ten∣ding to deuotion vp∣on this subiecte, I

meane the vse of the most holy Sacrament was the necessitie I found, of some good meanes, to stirre v at times beseminge mens best, and best disposed considera∣tions, towardes the high misterie they had in hand. With discourse of contro∣uersie nowe a longe time, no lesse lear∣ned, then large wri∣ting, we haue had in our English tongue▪

but all this while, we haue not much ex∣tant appertayning to the substance of the misterie it selfe, and our Christian deuo∣tion towardes the sme.
In the olde Law the Leuites must first bee sanctifyed, and then they sanctifie the people, the priests prepare themselues. and others: but vnto this passeouer euerie one with all prepares

himselfe, for that e∣uery one hath a soule to saue.
God saith vnto the people of Israell▪ when your children shall say vnto you. Quae est ista religio, Exod. 12.16. What meanes this religion o what is this so∣empne obseruation wee keepe? you shall sy vnto them, this is the Lords passe-ouer &c. which, as it had a memoriall of a

great deliueraunce past, so was it a most liuely type and figure of the true passe-o∣uer that was to come, wherein the bloud of that most inno∣cent Lambe of God, that tooke away the sinnes of the world, was in loue, shedde, for the redemption of vs all. And there∣fore, of all in generall may that of Ezechi∣ath, 2. Cron. 30. bee well inferred. The

Lord be mercifull vnto them, that prepare thē∣selues heereunto &c. And to your selfe (most vertuous gen∣tlewomn) I may more properly apply the same in particu∣lar, the Lord euer∣more bee mercifull vnto you, in prepa∣ring your whole hart to keepe this Passe-ouer, vnto the Lord your God, who, of his infinite mercy, graunt you a prospe∣rous

course of life, for the time present, and for the time to come, I se euerlasting.

