



I Do heere presēt your Lordship with a smal Treatise. Small, I say, in respect of my la∣bours (for what should I need to labour in answering so friuolous & triuial matters) and not great in respect of the volume, for that fewe wordes might serue to cleare all doubtes, that stand vpon our aduersaries bare wordes. Yet I hope, it shall not bee esteemed either vntimely or vnprofitable, if we regard the argu∣ment. For it conteineth a necessary defence of our Christian faith, and of the professors thereof against the wicked calumniations of a rayling Masse-priest called Kellison, and a sober answere to his virulent, and per case vinolent inuectiues, by him entitled a Sur∣uey of the new Religion.
The reasons that mooued mee to direct this discourse to your Lordship are diuers. First your deepe iudgement and skill in mat∣ters of this nature. Next your piety and zeale for the cause of Religion. Thirdly your place in this Christian Common-wealth. And lastly those honorable fauors, which it hath pleased your lord∣ship to shew to me in particuler, and to Gods Ministers in generall. For if the same were approoued by a man of such authority and
 iudgement, I doubted not, but it would receiue grace the rather in the common estimation of others. And being published in defence of piety and Religiō, I presumed it would receiue good intertain∣ment at the handes of euery man studious of truth and piety. Fur∣thermore if any false companion should take vppon him, either to giue out false particulers of his Maiesties landes, or to make a sur∣uey of them without warrant, or iudgemēt, it belongeth to your place in this state, to reuew and controll his indiscretion, and to punish his presumption. Much more therefore behooueth it you, considering your functiō & eminent place in this Christian state, to concurre with vs in censuring this madde Surueyor of Religi∣on & controlling his indiscreete & ranging discourse hauing in so many particulers wronged the King of Kinges, and his eternall truth.
What the end was of this his Suruey we may easily coniecture. As the Priestes, Scribes, and Pharisyes by rayling against Christ and his Apostles sought to drawe the peoples affection from them, and to allure them to like their errors; so this Priest of Baal by his slaundrous imputations laid vpon Christian Religion, and the professors thereof seeketh to disturne mē from the loue of truth, and to draw them to Popish errors. It may be also, that seeking to defame others, he thought to qualify the enormities of his owne cōsortes, and their wicked Heresyes. The Donatistes, as Optatus in lib. 1. aduers. Parmen. testifieth, went about to defame o∣ther mens liues, that they might cause their owne faultes to be passed in silence. Vt crimina in silentium mitterent sua, vi∣tam infamare conati sunt alienam.
What substance is in this worthlesse worke it appeareth plaine∣ly by his tedious preambles, idle discourses, false collections, weake conclusions, forged allegations, & his other fooleryes too common in euery Chapter. The whole volume of his sycophanticall Suruey is nothing else, but a composition of diuers old endes of childish declamations, mingled with a decoction of stale calumniations a∣gainst particuler men many times, and in diuers Bookes reiected
 by vs, and now againe brought forth by him, therby to empoyson his credulous folowers, if they happen to taste so vnpleasant a po∣tion. This Booke he had little reason to call a Suruey of Religiō. For therein he neither obserueth rules of Religion, nor of commō ciuility. It might rather haue beene titled a surfet of a madde Masse-priestes malice, degorged out of a corrupt stomacke fraught with vndigested humors of Popish calumniations & He∣resies. Quod descriptionis dedecus? saith Hierome Lib. 1. contr. Iouinian. That is, what a shamefull Suruey is this? But better may we apply these wordes to this Suruey. For it is both shamefull, and harmefull, and seemeth to sauor rather of a mad-mans malice, then of a Doctors learning and sobriety. As Epiphanius saith of Photinus haeres. 71. Verba maledicentiae neutiquam consistere valentia euomuit. Hee hath degorged a∣gainst vs many rayling termes, but they haue neither groūd, nor coherence.
I need not insist long to tell your Lordship, what manner of man this Kellison is. Let his Booke and our answer speake. He calleth himselfe a Doctor. But as Hierome epist. 61. speaking of a cer∣taine Bishop doubteth whether ludio an episcopus loquitur, so I may doubt of this Doctor, whether hee was an Italian mounte∣bancke, or a Doctor of Doway. Some say it is not long since this great Doctor was my Lord Vauxes Butler. And the rather I beleeue it, for that he hath set vs a broach a Butte of his owne er∣rors, lyes, and fooleryes. His friendes suppose, that as his heart is become Spanish, so hee hath better grace in drawing of Spanish wine then in talking of Religion.
Little did either the man, or his matter deserue answere. But yet for the instruction of the simple, and confirmatiō of the weake, I haue bestowed some labour in examining the particulers of this Suruey. Weake men, and such as haue no strength often are ouer∣throwne by weake aduersaries. In pugna puglum et gladiato∣rum saith Tertullian lib. de praescrip. aduers. haeret. plerun{que} non quia fortis est vincit quis, aut quia non potest vinci, sed
 quoniam ille qui victus est, nullis viribus fuit.
If by our labours either the weake be confirmed, or the strong emboldened, and stirred vp to contend more resolutely for the truth; they are in part to ascribe the same to your Lordship, by whose protection I haue the more firmely withstood the malice of such, as went about to stoppe the course of my studyes, & to whose Patronage I consecrate this my briefe censure of a malicious ad∣uersaries suruey. It should haue come foorth long since, if eyther my troubles had giuen me leasure, or my meanes ability, to publish it. But I thanke God, that the same encumbrances do not hinder it still.
Vouchsafe therfore, my good Lord, to accept of this small dis∣course, as a memoriall of my dutiful affection towards your Lord∣ship, and a testimoniall of my gratefull acceptance of your loue and fauor towards me. And as you haue alwayes professed the true Christian and Apostolike faith, and detested all errors and abho∣minations of Popery; so still endeuour zealously to maintaine the same truth against all the calumniations & treacherous practises of all such, as audaciously and impudently oppugne the fayth and seeke to draw men into errors God will honor those that seeke his honor vnfeynedly, and such as cary themselues as lukewarme, shall be cast out of his mouth, and deemed vnworthy to rest in his holy Mountaine. Thus relying vpon your fauor, I commend this Treatise to your Lordship, and your Lordship to the Almightyes protection, beseeching him to blesse you and yours in this life, and in the life to come to giue you a crowne of glory promised to all those that shall perseuer to the end, and manfully and seriously contend for the maintenance of truth, and the setting foorth of Gods Glory.

