


TWo things per ad∣uenture (right worshipfull) may be maruailed at,

concerning this litle booke, as namely, first why I haue published it, considering the great number of bookes, ei∣ther of the same, or verie like argument, extant in these dayes. Secondly, wher∣fore I haue dedicated it ra∣ther vnto you, then to anie other. For the first, I pro∣test before God, who know∣eth the secrets of all hearts, I haue not published it, ei∣ther for vainglory, lucre, or

gaines, nor yet for any other priuate respect of my owne whatsoeuer, but at the in∣stant request, and earnest desire of one of my verie good friends, and alliance also, who yet being liuing, and the onely man that hath borne the whole charges of the impression thereof, both can, and I know will (if need should require) iustifie the same, against any that should auerre the contrarie. And

for the second, when I con∣sidered with myselfe, howe much b und I haue alwaies beene to your worship, euer since the time that I was first acquainted with you, for your good opinion you haue euer cōceiued of me, & sundrie other your courte∣sies shewed towards me, far beyond my deserts or expec∣tation: As also when I cal∣led to remembrance your feruent zeale hich you

haue euer borne to the word of God, & holy religion, your exquisite knowledge there∣in, your carefull indeuour to put the same in practise, and to frame your life therafter. Briefly, when I remembred your maruailous humilitie and lowlinesse of mind, your wonderfull modestie, gen∣tlenesse and affabilitie, your rare continencie and inte∣gritie of life, with infinite the like vertues and graces,

wherewith God hath beau∣tified & adorned your wor∣ship aboue manie others, I say, when I remembred these things, with many mo, I could do no lesse (hauing so fit an occasion giuen me, by reason of my friends im∣portunacie) then to dedi∣cate these my labors to your worship, though not as a guerdon answerable to your deserts, yet as an infallible testimonie, pledge and to∣ken

of my thankful good wil and gratefull heart towards you. And albe it that in re∣spect of the form or methode of the booke (for herein I haue not studied to be curi∣ous) it may seeme to be base and contemptible, and such as is farre vnworthie to be exhibited, to so wise, so dis∣creet, so godly and religious a gentlewoman, yet in re∣gard of the matter, which is heauenlie and diuine, I

most humbly beseech you to accept therof, and to permit the same to go forth to the view of the worlde vnder the gard of your protection, and to patronize both the author & the booke against the poysoned tongues of rai∣ling Phormions, and flou∣ting Momusses, to whom all good things are had in disdaine. And in so doing, both God shall bee glorified by you, the church & Saints

shall praise God in you, and I my selfe besides that I will not rest vnthankfull to you to the death, will not cease also to pray to God for you. And tus I most humblie take my leaue. From my Chamber, this pre∣sent 10. of April. 1592.

