



AS the holy Apostles, Right Worshipfull, so all faith∣full Christians deriue their faith from CHRIST. Acceptam à CHRISTO disciplinam fideliter natio∣nibus assignarunt, saythDe prae∣script. TERTVLLIAN, spea∣king of the Apostles. Hee is the Foundation that cannot fayle, and the Truth, that cannot erre; and therefore, are the Faithfull sayd to bee built vpon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets;Ephes. 2. because they first Preached CHRIST, the onely Corner-stone, and mayne Foundation of the Church. Vpon the Foundation of CHRIST and his Apostles
both St. AVGVSTINE and all the ancient Fathers built their Faith.
Doe wee then thinke, that the Translator of St. AVSTINES Confessions a notorious Rinegate from the Faith of the Church of England, hath reason out of that Father to draw his Romish Doctrine? Sure no, the poyson of his Heresie cannot be found in that holy Fathers Workes. All his Confessions are directed to GOD, and neyther to Saints, nor Angels, nor to the Virgin MARY, as is the vse and practise of the Synagogue of Rome. The Popes two Swords, and his triple Crowne, his supreme Power to judge, his Cardinals, Hierarchicall Or∣ders, and Vniuersall Monarchie ouer the whole Church hee knew not. The reall presence of CHRISTS Body vnder the accidents of Bread and Wine, and the eating thereof by the mouth of the Faithfull; yea, by the mouthes of the Reprobate and brute Beasts hee neuer taught. Neyther did hee teach the monstrous Doctrine of Transubstantiation and the reft of the abominable Heresies, established against vs in Trent.
Hungry Dogges may dreame of Bread. , sayth THEOCRITVS in Pis∣catorib. And as ATMANASIVS sayth, in Apolog. Defug. Heretikes forge opinions according to their owne pleasure. Pro libidine sua id opinâtur quod volunt. But Truth will alwayes stand firme.
Wherefore, seeing this Apostate, so vnkind to his Parents, so false to his Countrey, so malicious to Religion, hath some yeares since published St. AV∣GVSTINES Confessions, translated into English, in a
long Preface, and diuers false marginall Notes, Ob∣seruations, and Calumniations, endeuouring to in∣duce the simple to dislike the Truth professed in this Church, and to affect and approue the corruptions of Popery, as if S. AVGVSTINE did fauour his Sect, and dislike our Confession; I haue thought it a Worke worth my labour, to Vindicate that holy Father out of this impure fellowes false fingers. Not that you need to bee resolued of the truth of Reli∣gion, wherein I know you are firmely established; but to the end, that what I write for the establish∣ing of the weake, comming foorth vnder the Pa∣tronage of your name, might remayne as a perpe∣tuall testimony of that loue and respect, which I haue borne and alwayes shall beare you.
These fellowes impudently arrogate to themselues the Name of Catholikes. But, as ATHANASIVS saith in his 2. Orat. against the Arrians; How can they bee reputed among the members of the Catholike Church, whose Faith is not Apostolike? This young Nouice may please himselfe with his childish Annotations and Prefations; but, I shall show they are no bet∣ter, then those Childish fables and fooleries, which S. AVSTINE, Lib. 2. contr. Academic. would haue cast out of mens hands. Nay, diuers points of Poperie are no better then those monstrous Fancies, which ORIGEN condemneth writing against CELSVS. And this I shall (God willing) hereafter plainely demonstrate, and not onely take from him all that hold, that hee thinketh to haue, eyther in Saint AVGVSTINES Confessions, or in any other Booke of his.

This Treatise I consecrate to GOD vnder the Patronage of your fauour, beseeching him that it may profit many, so, that the Thankes may re∣maine to you, and that thereby you may vnderstand how much I honour you, and that I shall alwayes remayne:

