



THe publike affaires of this State, right honourable, depending so much upon your counsell and direction, I should not onely wrong you, but others also, and forget my selfe, if I should either holde you with any long discourse, or impor∣tune you with the hearing of a priuate quarrell betwixt me and a certeine base and vnworthy aduer∣sarie, whose pleasure is to contend with me about certeine small quirks and questions. It may also seeme a matter vnwoorthie your place and person, to offer vnto you a small treatise concer∣ning so small trifles, the aduersaries whole discourse, which I answere, being spent about certeine pretended vntrueths and falsifications, wherewith he would gladly charge me, if he could. Yet forasmuch as this controuersie grew first out of a chal∣lenge made by me some two yeeres since to Robert Parsons, a man, rather for his hatred to the State, and treacherie against his Souereigne, than for learning, vertue, or pietie, knowen to many: and seeing the author of this quarrell now hath enfor∣ced me to discusse some points both of Religion, and State, not vnprofitable to be well vnderstood; I haue made bolde to pre∣sent this treatise ensuing, that conteineth not onely my former challenge, but also an answere to my aduersaries friuolous ob∣iections, to your Honors hands.

The whole is diuided into diuers chapters, of which diuers doe conteine intire discourses, whereof you may chuse, and reade one or more, as your great occasions, and laisure will permit. and none there is, I hope, so barren, but it may yeeld some fruit. But if it may please your Honor to peruse the whole, you shall then better vnderstand, not onely the occasions of this quar∣rell, but also the iustice of our cause, and the vaine cauils, which our aduersaries make against vs, for want of better matter, when as we without all circumloquution charge them with hae∣resie and falshood in matter of religion; and disloyalty and trea∣chery in matter of State.
Your Honor shall also thereby perceiue the great weaknesse of our aduersaries cause, and the pouertie of the principall actors in the same, who abandoning the maine points in controuersie, begin now to picke quarrels, at words, allegations, points, quo∣tations, and other by-matters, and ceasing to ioine with vs, and like Diuines to argue, and dispute, fall to plaine calumnia∣tion and railing. for hauing some yeeres past written diuers treatises, not onely against Robert Parsons, but also against Robert Bellarmine the chiefe Patriarke now of all the Pa∣pists, and hauing published a challenge against Rob. Parsons, and proued, that his consorts the Papists are neither good Ca∣tholicks, nor yet true Subiects; yet do I not finde any, that dare encounter me hand to hand, nor haue I receiued any answere to any purpose, nor haue I yet encountred any, that hath opposed himselfe to any discourse or argument of mine. Parsons, he is content to be silent, and he that hath put foorth the pamphlet called The detection, albeit he could not holde his peace, yet could he not say much, being of the number of those idle fel∣lowes, qui nec tacere, nec rectè fari possunt. he doth onely except against certaine allegations, and by-matters, and quota∣tions of my challenge; but the discourse it selfe, and the conclu∣sions thereof were either too heauy for him to lift, or too hot for so frigide and maleficiat a fellow to touch.

If then law doth iustly praesume him to be guiltie, that being arreigned at the barre standeth mute; then is it not to be prae∣sumed, that either Rob. Parsons is cleere, or his cause good, or that his clients are such, as he pretendeth, againe, if Decius in l. , ff. de reg. iur. & Barth. in l. quaesetum. §. de∣ni{que}. ff. de fundo instructo. lawyers say true, that exceptions confirme the rule in cases not ex∣cepted; then hath my aduersarie confirmed the maine dis∣course against Parsons, and his adherents, hauing not said any thing vnto it, but only excepted against a few places, whereof he taketh 13. to be vntruly alledged, and 13. to be falsified.
Furthermore, if in the very places, where my aduersarie thought to winne greatest aduantage, he hath gotten nothing, but rather shewed his owne ignorance & malice; I hope all in∣different men will well allow of the rest, and grant, that I haue vsed more than ordinary circumspection in this labour. for doe what a man can, yet may either marginall notes be misplaced, or words stand disorderly, or things be mistaken. Finally, if to answere the aduersaries obiections, and to encounter him in his turne, I shalbe able to charge not onely Bellarmine, Baronius, Parsons and such like meane fellowes, but also the Pope him∣selfe & the Church of Rome with vntrueths and falsifications, which can not be answered; then Gods iustice will appeare, that hath brought them into the pit, which they digged for others, and I hope they will henceforth forbeare to charge me, and other honest men with lies, and falsifications, finding themselues most guiltie, and vs in respect of themselues most innocent. Of all men the detector shall haue least reason to make a challenge concerning vntrueth and falsifications being able to answere nothing in a In an an∣swer to a ca∣lumnious re∣lation, the Papists stand charged with diuers falsifi∣cations, and yet dissemble the whole matter. cause, where he is defendant, nor able to iustifie that pamphlet, which himselfe hath published.
But of all these matters your Honor shall then be able best to iudge, when you shall haue read the discourse ensuing, and com∣pared his exceptions with my challenge, and my answere with his vaine exceptions. all which I doe present to your Honor, as much esteeming your iudgement in such cases, and desiring to
 haue my cause heard and tried by men of such integritie, and iudgement, and little weighing the vaine cauils of others, if my labors be approued by men of such grauitie and wisdome.
The worke as far as it concerneth my aduersaries excepti∣ons is not great, nor the controuersie betwixt mine aduersarie and me materiall. but the fault was not mine, but his, whose trifling pamphlet at this time gaue mee no better subiect to worke vpon. yet this profit may the readers reape by it, that they shall hereafter not need to feare either the vaine brags, or great words, and titles which the Papists do arrogate to them∣selues, seeing they are demasked, and declared neither to be true catholicks nor loiall subiects, if they hold the grounds of Popery.
But whatsoeuer this treatise is, or may effect, I beseech your Honor to accept it as a token of his deuotion, that is a member of that Vniuersitie, whereof you are Chancellor. and as you do suc∣ceed your worthy father in that place, so I beseech God, that you may not only succeed him, but also surpasse him, if it be possible, in his zeale and pious care to aduance true religion, and lear∣ning. During his time, although none of Baals priests durst ei∣ther looke into the Vniuersitie, or shew himselfe abroad in this realme, yet did they secretly keepe in corners. but by your Ho∣nors care and vigilancy, according to her Maiesties late Edict, we do hope to see them not onely repressed, but also quite expul∣sed, and returned to him that sent them.
What their errors are, and what they deserue, it may in part appeare by this treatise. the rest we refer to those, whom it con∣cerneth. And so loth to interrupt the course of your more seri∣ous congitations and actions, I end, beseeching the God of hea∣uen to blesse you with his heauenly graces, and as he hath vsed you hitherto, as a notable instrument to aduance religion, lear∣ning, and iustice, so to grant, that all that loue true religion, lear∣ning, and iustice may long enioy your helpe and fauor.

