



THE shew of antiquity in matters of religion being so plausible to the multitude, and so sorcible to per∣swade the simple; I maruell not, my good Lord, if our aduersaries the Papists, who shew themselues also aduerse to truth, do both commonly and willingly entitle their errone∣ous doctrines concerning the worship of Saints and Images, the Popes indulgences, Purgatory, and all their traditions and trash, though neuer so new, the Old Religion. Your Lordship also well knoweth, what paines Parsons the Iebusite hath taken in his bookes of Three Conuersions, to prooue, that the ancient inhabitants of this land were conuerted to that religion, which is now professed and taught at Rome, not doubting, but if he can prooue it so ancient, that the same will soone be admitted as true, as being deriued from the A∣postles, and most ancient and sincere Bishops of Rome.
Hauing therefore commiseration of the ignorance of sedu∣ced Papists, and willing to consirme good Christians in the truth, and to arme the weake against the assaults of such sedu∣cers, I haue vndertaken to examine his whole discourse con∣cerning the three supposed conuersions of England, wherein

Parsons indeuoureth to prooue the antiquitie of Popish religiō within this Iland, seeking from the true religion professed here to bring vs back to the haeresies and captiuitie of Rome, more odious farre then that of Babylon. And this I vndertake not because he deserueth to receiue any long or curious answer, but rather to shew. his consorts, that he bringeth nothing, which cannot easily be answered.
Some do esteeme the booke very much in regard of the strangenesse and noueltie, promising not only a narration of the planting of religion in England by Austin the Monke, but also a confirmation of the history of King Lucius, and E∣leutherius Bishop of Rome, and new tidings of a new con∣uersion of Brittaine wrought by S. Peter himselfe: matters of which many will be glad to heare. But he that diligently peruseth what he hath written, shall soone lose all his longing. For whether we consider the subiect of this discourse, or the manner of handling the same, there is nothing that can any way satisfie the reader. The proofes stand vpō coniectures. The authors stile is harsh and vneuen. His rehearsals thick and te∣dious. His purpose fond & foolish. Three things he striueth to prooue. First, that this land was thrise conuerted to religion by preachers sent frō Rome, viz. by S. Peter, Eleutherius, and Austin. Secondly that the same was conuerted to no other re∣ligion then that, which is now preached and mainteined at Rome. And thirdly that therefore we are now to learne reli∣gion, and to receiue direction and gouernment from thence. But the first is very euill performed. For of the first conuersion by S. Peter he is scarce able to bring any coniecture. The se∣cond seemeth fabulous. The third concerneth not the whole land, but only a few Saxons. In the second he hath altoge∣ther failed, not being able to prooue either his Tridentine, or Decretaline doctrine concerning the Pope, the Masse, the sea∣uen

Sacraments, the worship of saints and idols, and such like matters in question out of the histories of those tis. In the third point he trauaileth in vaine. For why should England be more subiect to Rome for receiuing the Christian faith from thence, then Rome to Hierusalem, from whence the sound of the Gospell went into all lands? In the second part of his three Conuersions he seemeth to make great inquirie for our Church and religion in former times. But when he can∣not deny, but we hold all the Christian faith either taught expressely by the Apostles and holy Fathers of the Church, or explaned in the sixe generall Councels; and do only condemne the corruptions of later time brought in by the Decretals and Schoolemens frapling disputes; he sheweth himselfe a blinde searcher, that can neither see, nor sinde our faith and Church before these late dayes. Physitions say, that melancho∣like men are much subiect to dreames. Melancholici saith one of them . It seemeth therefore, that Parsons wri∣ting this booke of three Conuersions, wherin so many dreames and fancies are conteined, did ouerflow with melancholy. But writing the second part of his treatise it seemeth, that he was in a dead sleepe, and had his senses so bound, that he could neither feele, nor see any thing. In time past, they say, he was able to write well: but now his bookes are like the coynes, of which one in Plautus talketh. The last are the worst.
And this I doubt not to make to appeare in this my an∣swere, the which I make bold to present to your Lordship, as a testimoniall of my thankefulnesse, and a pledge of my affe∣ction & loue. And the rather, for that, as your Lordship hath bene a principall helper to free me of my troubles, so you may first taste of the fruite of my trauailes. It is more then a yeare since I first framed this treatise, but could not publish it by reason of my other occasions and disturbances. But now that

your bountifull fauours haue giuen me some time of brea∣thing, I thought I could not better employ my life and breath, then in the common defence of the truth. Vouchsafe there∣fore, my good Lord, to accept of this small present, and to take both the gift and giuer into your protection. And so I shall be more free to do God seruice, and more wil∣ling to employ my selfe for his Church, and alwayes rest

