



IN the Gospell after S. Matthewe (right hono∣rable, and my very good Lorde) oure Sauioure Christ teacheth vs most notably, how to knowe and discerne false Prophetes, from such as bee the true Pastours, & Ambassadours of Iesus Christ: when he saith, They shall come vnto you in sheepes clothing, but inwardly they are rauening wolues, you shal know thē by their fruites. Then if the fruites of conuersation bee the ensignes, the badges, and cognizances to know false Prophets by (as our sauiour sayth they are) thē surely may we iudge, nay certain∣ly perswade our selues that the Papistes are those false Prophets, Apostataes, and seducers

which the word of God speaketh of: as in the further discourse of this booke shall manifestly appeare: for not only do their works & fruits conuince them heereof, but also their false, se∣ditious erronious, and heretical doctrine doth argue the same. But they will easilye wipe a∣way this blot: and saye that we are those false Prophets of whom Christ speaketh of. To whom I answeare, let their workes, and doc∣trine bee compared to ours, and bothe pey∣zed in the equall ballance of Gods worde (the onely touchstone to trie all controuersies by) and then shall it easilye appeare whether they or wee are the false Prophetes. Doe not they come vnto vs in sheeps cloathing, I meane in suche habite as portendeth all kinde of auste∣ritie, humilitie, and holinesse of life outward∣lye: as namelye, in their Surplesses, Copes, Tippets, forked Cappes, Miters, Hattes, Cro∣siers, Hoodes, Cowles, Tunicles, Sandals, Shirtes of hayre, and a thousande other like playerlike garmentes? yea and doe they not teache that all holinesse consisteth in these ragges? Is not this to come in sheepes cloa∣thing? But they will obiect, if thys bee so, why doe you weare some of these garmentes? I aunsweare, wee haue some of them in deede

but that is vppon sufferaunce and permission onely, not vppon constrainte or necessitie as theirs are. Besides, ours is commaunded by a Christian Queene, and therefore lawefull, theirs by Antichriste, and therefore vnlawfull. Againe we vse them as things indifferent they as things of necessitie, we repose no religion in them, they relye holy vpon them.
And for theyr doctrine, it is so erronious, so corrupte, so seditious, nay so blasphemous, and Sacrilegious, that it would greeue a Christian manne to thinke of it: As Prayer for the dead, Iustification by good works, Purgatorie, Lim∣bo Patrum, Inherēt Rightuousnesse, Inuoca∣tion to Saincts, Transubstantiation, Adoration of Images, their seuen coūterfait Sacramentes extreeme vnctiō, christening of Bels, hallow∣ing of churches & churchyardes, makinge of holy bread, holy water, Auricular confesion, shrift, penāce, absolutiō, masse, mattēs, diriges, Lady Psalters, tapers, candles, bedes censings, ringings, perfuminges, & legions of like trūpe∣ries, which the word of God knoweth not: of al which pointes of doctrin of theirs I wil in∣treat in a book by it self god willing very short¦ly, wherin shal appeare whether they or we haue ye truth. This is their godly doctrin which

ther it com nerer to the word of God, or ours, let the world iudge. And yet notwithstanding they set a faire face on it, they stamp and stare, & beare the world in hand, that theirs is the truth. For say they, our doctrine standeth vpon sure pillers, antiquitie, vniuersalitie, generalitie & the like. Our doctrine is proued by discent of Bishops from time to time, by consent of all nations and so foorth, but your doctrine is newe and starte vppe the laste day, &c. But whether theirs or ours bee the newer it shall appeare in the discourse following. First wee are able to proue that our doctrine is auncien∣ter then theirs, ye as auncient as God himselfe whose truth it is. And first to begin with the diuine institution in Paradice: wee reade that God the father gaue vnto Adam his word & commandement, to wit: Thou shalt not eat of the tree of knowledge of good and euil, in∣grauing, and as it were imprinting, this word & commandement in the heart of Adam, and in him, in all his posteritie. By the which lawe, of conscience then liued almost 2000. yeeres without any other law or word written, being guided & directed by the holy Ghost in all their actions: the 2000. yeares being ended, & men waxing dissolute, licentious & wicked, ye

Lorde (as Theophilactus witnesseth) disday∣ning to speake to them any longer by his spirit for that they became wicked, gaue thē a Lawe, (for before they hadde no written Lawe, God appearing to them I meane the fathers and Patryarches, in visions in apparitions, in dreames, sometime in the forme of angels, & waifaring men, sometime in one shape, some∣time in an other, according as their weakenesse could beare) written by the finger of God in two tables of stone, which is the x. commaun∣dements. Then Moses at the commandement of God committing to writing, the x. com∣mandements with his other fiue books, as he was taughte and directed by the suggestion of the spirit of God, ruled the Israelites thereby. The old testament being thus written by the seruant of God Moses, & his faithful prophets at the commandement of God▪ continued in force til the cōming of Christ, which was in e∣ffect 2000. yeeres after. Thē our sauiour Iesus Christ, cōming in the flesh, gaue in comman∣dement to his Euangelists, Apostles, and pro∣phets to write the new testamēt, which they, by the direction of gods spirit, did most happi∣ly perform. These 2. testaments now, the old & the new God be thāked, we haue. Now let the

papists disproue this if they can, or if they haue any other Gospell, let thē bring it forth: They cānot deny, but we haue the same word of god which God the father, our sauiour Christe & the holy ghost haue giuen to the woorlde: & this being graunted, it must needs folow, that our doctrine is true, & theirs most false Now let them deriue their antichristian doctrine li∣neally from suche antiquitie, & truth as this, if they can: but that they shall neuer bee able to do. For their doctrine hath bin longer in pat∣ching, then Solomons temple was in building. Yea within these x or xii. hundred yeeres, there was not a scrap of their pesteferous doctrine coyned: no the egg was not thē laid that hat∣ched that poisoned Cocatrice. Then the truth of gods word throgh the iniquitie of time, be∣ginning by little & little to suffer eclipse, at the last sprang vp such mountaines of heresies, & corruptiōs, cast out of the bottomles pit, & as it were spewed out of the Diuels mouth, that the truth was altogether obscured.
Then Antichrist the pope sprong vp challen∣ging superioritie ouer all the face of the earth, and he begun the Romish religion, & so euery one succeeding him put to somwhat yea euery Frier, Monk, Abbot, Prior, Prouost, parson, Vi∣car,

Cardinal, and euen al in general added to it, euery one a patch. So that the papists religi- (if it may bee called a Religion) is nothing els than the shreddes, the peeces and patches, the drosse & dregs of corruptible mē: & ours the doctrine of the holy ghost. But although that it could not be proued that our doctrine is aū∣cienter then theirs, yet the truth of the same dependeth not vpon the antiquity. For Christ saith in the Gospel, Ego sum via, veritas & vita: I am the way, the truth, and the life. He saith not, I am custome, I am antiquity. And therfore I say Antiquitas sine veritate est vetustas erroris: Antiquity without truth, is the aūcient of error. Custome, nor antiquity cā not make that true, whiche in the beginning was false: neither can the nouelties, or newnes of anye thing make that faise, which of it selfe is true. Hereby it is manifest, that the papistes doctrin is a doctrine of noueltie (I had almost said of diuilry) and ours a doctrine of al aunci∣entnes the auncientest: and yet wold they car∣ry awaye the truth with a counterfeit shew of antiquitie. And whereas also they depend so much vpon vniuersality forsooth, god be than¦ked, their doctrin is not so vniuersal, as they make fare of. For if ye nūber of thē that haue

receiued it bee compared to the number of thē that haue not receiued it, they shal seeme not to bee one for a thousande, naye not one for ten thousand. For all the Easte churche neuer receyued his doctrine, the Greeke Church neuer admitted it. The greatest parte of Italy, of Fraūce, of Flaūders, Rushia, Musco∣uia, Denmarke, England, Scotland, Ireland, and many other countries besides, haue vtterly cast off his Antichristian yoke & vsurped gouern∣ment. And therefore is not his doctrine so v∣niuersal as he wold perswade the world. But they will saye, who shal be iudge of the truthe of our and your Doctrine betwixt vs, I aun∣sweare, the word of God according to this say∣ing of our sauiour Christ. Verbum quod ego predicaui vobis iudicabit nouissimo die: The woorde that I haue preached vnto you, shall iudge in the last daye.
But to leaue their doctrine, and to come to their liues▪ it is obiected, they liue well, and are plentifuller in good works then we, there∣fore their doctrine and their faithe is the truth. I aunswere there is a non sequitur or rather a mere Fallax in this argument, for good works before the world is one thing, & good workes before God is another. Those

which in the eies of the worlde seeme to bee good works, may be before god most filthy & abhominable: except they spring out of a liue∣ly faith it is vnpossible they shuld please God, as Paule sayeth. The Iewes, the Turkes, the Paganes, and Infidels doe good workes out∣wardly (as it shoulde seeme) but because they are wythout Faith, they please not God. And euen suche are our Papystes good woorks: if they may be called, Good works, and not ra∣ther Ciuilia opera Ciuel woorkes or woorks of office, which the Diuelles them selues may doe. Besides this, if they doe any good workes, they are most detestable and lothsome before God, because they seeke to be iustified and saued by them, yea to merite heauen, & to make God greatly indebted and beholden vnto them. And therefore I conclude that the papists although they do neuer so many good works outwardly, yet are they but hypocriti∣cal, and no true good woorkes indeed. They erre in the nature of good works also: for those wherevpon the Lorde hath set his seale and brande of curse and malediction for euer, they call good workes: as namely the building and erecting of Abbeies, nunneries, priories mo∣nasteries, & other religious houses, guilding

of Images, erecting of Idols and statuaries in churches: creeping and offering to crosses, gi∣uing of money to buy cups chalices, copes, & other rich ornamēts of the church. To bestow largely vpon bels, but specially vpō priests and clarks to sing masse for their soules, diriges trē∣talles, Ladyes Psalters, suppressing of Gods worde, slaying, murthering & killing of Gods Saintes for the maintenāce of their kingdom, & a thousād like, which they cal good works, but indeed are ye works of the Diuel. But such as the worde of God doth commend vnto vs for good works, as namely, to visit those that are in prison, to clothe the naked, to feed the hungry, to lodge the harbourlesse, to relieue the poore & needy, to helpe poore orphanes, widows and fatherlesse to their ryght, and such other good woorks, with them they haue no∣thing to do, or if they haue, they doe them in such sorte, and with such a mind, and intenti∣on, as they are not to be called good works, in respect of the end, as I haue shewed before. Thus we (see right honourable & most illustri∣ous Lord) how they delude the worlde with their pretened shew of good works and doc∣trine: neyther whereof are agreeable to the word of God. For as for them, they haue not,

nor will haue anye thing in the Churche but mens traditions, humaine inuentions, and vaine constitutions of corruptible men, for∣med and framed in the forge of their own de∣ceiptfull brayns, whereas the Lorde speaking from heauen, saith, Hic est filius meus di∣lectus ipsum audite. This is my welbeloued sonne heare him, heare him. And in the Gos∣pel after S. Matthew, our sauiour Christ saith: In vain doe they worshippe me, teaching the doctrines and traditions of men: And yet for all this they will haue nothing in the church, but the vaine traditiōs of men, cleane contrary to the word of God. And, as for their adulte∣rate liues, if any man waigh thē in the ballaūce of impartial iudgment, he shal find them worse then the Sodomites, how soeuer they blanch them, and set a glosse vpon them, to bleare the eies of the world withal. And no maruaile, that they liue most vilely. For whē they haue done, they haue a tricke of Legerdymayn to obsolue them selues a culpa & paena, that is from the fault be it neuer so haynous, & frō the punish∣mēt due for the fault. Al which abuses because I haue laid thē down more at large in the fur∣ther processe of this booke, I wil referre your honor to the same.
And now (my very good Lord) to bende

to bend my style towards your honour. What shal I say? May it not be woondred, with what face I haue presumed to dedicate this woorke to your Honourable Lordeshippe rather then to many others? Truely it maye so. But two thinges in especiall haue moued me thereto: ye one, the Godly affectiō & zeale which your Lordship beareth in sacred brest to the truth of God his worde and true religion: the other the vnfayned goodwill and fidelitie which I euer haue and doe beare to that honorable house, the verie diademe and mirroure of true nobilitie. And to say truthe, to whom should one dedicate the fruites of his labours, but to such as be both learned themselues, and other∣wise famous and illustrious? whiche thing (yf it be so) to whō shold I present these few blos∣sōes of my immature studies rather then to your honorable Lordship? whose worthy fame not onely for your incomparable curtesie, af∣fabilitie, and gentlenes towardes all men, but also and in especiall for your singular zeale to God his sacred truth, integritie of life, libera∣litie towardes them that haue need, valoure, prowesse, magnanimitie, or els whatsoeuer may decore or beautifie true nobilitie, is blo∣wen throughe out all Europe. Which brute

throughe the golden trumpe of fame, soun∣ding in my eares, excited me the rather to pre∣sent this my booke to your sacred honour, rather then to anye others: moste humblye beseechinge the same not onely to pardon my great presumption in this my bolde attempt, but also to receiue the same into your honors patronage and protection, defending as well the author from the open violence of malici∣ous enimies, as also the booke from the slaun∣derous tongues of flouting Momus, and ray∣linge Zoilus, to whom all good thinges are had in contempte, and I shall daylie praye to God for your honorable Lordeshippe long to continue in health, and prosperity both of bo∣dy and soule with increase of much honor, re∣ward of laudable vertue, and eternall felicitie in the heauens by Iesus Christ.

