



RIght Honorable and my most honored Lord, albeit I haue no special place allotted mee in the building of the holy Temple of our Sauior, yet [I hope] I may be permitted to behold, with ioy of my soule, the rising of those beautifull wals, and now and then [out of a zealous desire to haue the worke go forvvard] set my hand thereunto, though I ranke my selfe but amongst the meanest of the labourers, those 3. score and ten thousand that beare burthens. I presume I may: and haue therefore brought this little Stone, or peece of morter, or vvhatsoeuer it proue, to further that holy building. The rather, because it is so maliciously withstood by the crooked generation of Iannes and Iambres, who
[albeit they shall not preuaile, as the Apostle assureth them [for truth must haue that priuiledge] bend [notwithstanding] all their povver against it, & do their vtter∣most to laie the same [though it be Gods owne house] leuell vvith the ground. vvho can be silent that hath tongue or pen in such a cause? It is our maisters owne quarrell. Canes latrant pro Do∣minis suis tu non me vis [saith a learned Father] latrare pro christo? Yet what I haue written is but a letter, and that, a Loue-letter; but it is [most Noble Lord] A christian Loue-letter, per∣svvading al (though perticularly directed to one) of the Romishe religion, with mild and charitable phrase, to a true faith in the bloud of Christ Ihesus. This letter I make bold [but in most hum∣ble
manner] to present vnto your Ho. Which in respect of the Au∣thor [after the Phylosophers rule] I will neither praise nor dis∣praise Laudare se vani, vituperare stulti: yet thus much it con∣cerneth me to make knowne, & (without imputation of arrogan∣cy) I may report, that when I had writ this treatise (dreading the insufficiencie or partiallity of mine owne iudgement) I appealed vnto two most reuerend and learned Diuines, for their censure; vvho vvhen they had perused it, sent me away, my pains comen∣ded, the booke not discommended, nor my selfe any way discoura∣ged; Othervvise, it should neuer haue selt the presse, at least, ne∣uer haue presumed vpon so Honorable patronage: Notwithstand∣ing, I confesse it is vnvvorthy your regard. But I hope your Hon: will deale no vvorse vvith me then Christ did vvith the poore Widdovv in the Gospell: shee brought her farthing, I bring as much: Ioffer all I haue, she offerd no more: and, that vvhich ma∣keth a Mite a Million, vvith a free hart I cast it into the tresurie. As a pledge therfore of my loue to the church of Christ, my loyaltie to my King and country, and lastly of my most humble and my most dutifull affection vnto your Ho: (though I am vnknovvn vnto you, as for any extraordinary means I haue, I am euer likely to be] I most humblie beseech your Lo: that the same may find your How and gratious acceptance.

