



SIR,
IT was not thought of Old (however the Conditions of Men, and their Times vary) either Presumption or Rudenesse in the Divine, to sa∣lute his Superior with a Kisse. Prophets have done so to Kings themselves at their Regall Un∣ctions, in the very Dawne of Soveraignty; And A∣postolicall men to their greatest Proselites, in the first rising of the Christian Church, where the prime Ceremony was a Kisse; And a Kisse like This I pre∣sent you with, Osculum Charitatis, a Kisse of Charity. A Kisse indeed of your owne choice, in your first honouring of it from the Pulpit; and now, in all justice of your countenance at the Presse. A Kisse much like your selfe, and Actions, where there is such a sweet mixture of Charity with Power; that I know not well, whether I should rather magnifie Fortune,
 that you are Great; or Vertue that you are Good. Your Noble Deportment in the publike Services of your Countrey, your great and unpattern'd Supplies of your ingag'd and necessitated Friends; your courteous and liber all respects to those despised ones of mine owne Coate (besides the daily flowings of your Elëemosinary Bounties) can speak what temper you are of; In all which, though you wanted not a Trumpet to proclaime you, yet you blew it not your selfe: So just you are to your owne merits, that doing Courtesies, you scorne to blabbe them. Maxima Laus est, non posse laudari; Tua, non velle. It is the greatest argument of Praise, to be beyond it; of Noblenesse, without it. Merit will be Merit without popular acclamations, and common applause doth not alwayes give Lustre to particular ho∣nours, but sometimes Suspition. For mine own part, my Style and Disposition both are too rough for a Pane∣gericke; And indeed, to sow pillowes under El∣bowes, I ever thought fitter for an Upholster, than a Divine. However, let the world know, I no lesse hate. Rudenesse, than Flattery; And as I would not be thought clawing, so not uncivill; especially in religi∣ous Ceremonies, in this holy one of the Kisse: which I shall desire you to entertaine fairely and cheerefully, with an even Brow; and not like the coy Dames of our Age, turne the Cheeke for the Lippe, and so lowre a Kisse into a Scorne; That were to lessen you in your former ingenuities, and cast a cloud over those vertues which so make you shine in the opinion of others, and me

