



SIR,
THere are other reasons besides that common motiue, and po∣pular pretence of the importunity of friends, which hath now put this lit∣tle manuall into the world. It was composed by the Author (for I cannot say
that it was written by him, but rather dictated as hee spake it) lying on his bed of sicknesse: and therefore hee intended to haue kept it pri∣vate, iudging it vnworthy other mens approbation, because vnworthy his own. Neverthelesse it secretly crept into the presse, and re∣turn'd from thence full of faults like the Printer of it, who had as little authority to Print it at all, as Print it false. There was no other way to suppresse the old impression, but by a new, which I haue here done, set∣ting it out the second time, but in a lesse volumne, and with lesse faults.
There is one motiue more,
and that more important then the former. The Au∣thor since his death (for in his life time malice it selfe was never so audacious as to dare ecclipse the bight∣nesse of his integrity either in life or doctrine) hath had his faith branded with the name of apostacy, and his profession with heresy. But whither he were a professed open enemy, or an hypocri∣ticall friend, which hath done him this wrong, I for∣beare to name. Whosoever he were, this ensuing treatise will put him both to shame and silence; and therefore I need not make any apolo∣gy for him, whose owne
workes speake in his de∣fence.
Sir! it was formerly made solely yours by the Au∣thor, and therefore in the dedication it now iustly claimes your patronage on∣ly. If it satisfy not the more curious reader, yet hee that made it, thought his paines fully recompenced in that it gaue you satisfaction; nei∣ther doth the reward of my labour spread it selfe vnto others, but is wholy termi∣nated in your acceptance. If it chance to bee condem∣ned as imperfect, because he hath not spoken all, that might haue beene said on this subiect; I adde, neither
hath he spoken all that hee could. It was intended for a letter only, and therefore not to swell into a larger volumne; yet I presume there is as much in the an∣swere, as the Priests motiues require, & more peradven∣ture then he ever expected, or at least thank't him for. Such as it is, it is once more made yours by him, who desires to be esteemed

From Christ-Church in Oxon.
Iun. 28. 1635.
