



INfinite are the benefits (right Honourable) that God hath prouided for man; but a∣mongst them all, the word of God hath the preeminence. For howsoeuer the fruition of the rest may seeme to make a man happie in this life; this, and onely this, doth make a man2. Tim. 3.17 absolute, as1. Tim. 4.8. hauing the promises of this present life, and that which is to come. Yea the keeping hereof doth addeProu. 3.12. an encrease of pro∣speritie to Salomons royalties; but the want hereof madeGen. 4.12.14 Kain a vagabond, and a runnagate, who was the heire of Adam the greatest Monarch; andGen. 27.40. Esau to liue by his sword, that had the birthright of better promises. The chiefest point of the Scriptures is that which saueth; namely,Rom. 10.9. confession of Christ, and faith in him. But that which striketh the veriest Atheist with greatest con∣sternation;
 the false worshipper with most astonish∣ment; and the looker on with deepest admiration, isIsai. 45.21. & 41.21. &c. and 43.12. & 44.7. the propheticall spirit here to bee found, and no where else, truly, plainly and perfitly setting downe before hand, what shall be accomplished afterwards in his due time. Hereby the erroneous haue bin of∣tenMat. 22.40. &c. conuicted; and they whichDan. 9.2. &c. waited vpon the Lord singularly directedEst. 4.1. and comforted. This spi∣rit which hath bin alwaies in the word of God, doth fully shew it selfe in the Reuelation. For in it the Lord hath written vp before hand, the steps of his proui∣dence, by which he would rule the Christian world,cap. 1.19. from the time of the Apostles to the last day. Herecap. 13. the reader and hearer are blessed: the godly witnessescap. 2. & 3. of Christ are directed in their greatest tentations; andcap. 44. the honourable, wise and godly polititians in theircap. 4.11. and 5.5. grauest deliberations, andcap. 11.17.18 reuising of histo∣ries, &c. Now, though many haue laboured very profitably in the vnfolding of this booke; yet wise∣dome lieth so deepe in the waters, thatEccl. 24.32. the first man hath not knowne her perfectly; no more shall the last seeke her out. For her considerations are more abundant than the sea; and her counsell profounder than the great deepe. But howsoeuer it be, yet not∣withstanding withDan. 12.4. often running it ouer, know∣ledge is euer encreased; and this was my comfort that sought to be further satisfied in a scripture of so great vse. That which I haue attained vnto (seeing the importunitie of many godly men hath preuailed with me to publish) vpon good reasons, I doe hum∣blie present vnto your Lordship. For first, the Lord hath so mercifully disposed for me, that both I, and mine, doe liue vnder your Lordships patronage:
 wherefore I was bound to make some remonstrance of my thankfulnes; and wanting other meanes I tooke this opportunitie. Againe, I was not onely set on worke to study this booke; but also much encou∣raged and holped herein, by your most honourable, wise, learned, and godly Father my dearest Lord; and therefore was to returne the fruites of my labour to his house. And further, I giuing it abroad in the lan∣guage of my nation, as a counterpoyson against the shamelesse fraudes of popish seducers; your Lord∣ships experience affoording you greater satisfaction of the times than can be knowne by bookes, will be a strong retentiue to wauerers, when they see the re∣lation of the present popish impieties, to be patroni∣zed by your good Lordship. Great and many were the benefits which the Church of God obtained by the sincere and godlie profession of the Gospell, which your Lordships most honorable ancestors did make. Your LordshipsThe Dut∣chesse of Suf∣folke. grandmother did suffer much for the Gospell, euen vnto banishment; her Graces faithfulnes appeared herein, that in the daies of her prosperitie, and peace at home, she isBy Master R. Allen some∣times her Chaplen. repor∣ted to pray vnto God, with lifted hands and eyes vn∣to heauen, that the Lord would continue her house in honour, to the glorie of God, and of the Gospell of Christ for euer. Your most honourable father, with the blessed sword of Gedeon, did fight in the defence of the Gospell; and in a sicknes, thought insupe∣rable, stood so resolued in the truth, that hee desired none other graue, than to die in the defence of the Gospell, and of his Queene. Both of them regarded the Lords Prophets, and them that feared his name, both small and great. Their vertues haue a part in the booke of life, in the holie citie, and in the things
 which are written in this booke. Honourable Lord, the loue you beare to the Gospell, and your wisdome in taking to wife a daughter of the true God, doe make demonstration that your Lordship doth inhe∣rit the vertues of your most Christian ancestrie. To your Lordship therefore I presume to dedicate this Treatise. The subiect is Scripture, and therfore wor∣thie your hands; the manner of explaining is some∣what new, a thing that is wont to bee desired; the maine is historie, which giueth contentment and in∣struction to the studious. Let the faithfulnes and du∣tifull affection of the giuer, counterpoise the home∣lines of the handling. And so I doe most humblie take my leaue; praying vnto God, that we which ho∣noured your Lordships most honourable ancestrie, may still encrease our thankfulnes to God, and the ioy we take to see your Lordship and all yours euer abounding in all the blessings of almightie God; and that stil of your Lordship also Christ may say (as now he doth)Cant. 6.11. My soule hath set me in the chariots of my noble people.
From my poore house at Halton-Holgate.

