


Worthy Sir,
BEing moued to adioyne to the precedent Can∣zonets, th'ensuing Nectarines of the late Ex∣cellent Viscount St-Albans, (the Prince of English Oratory) J presum'd to inscribe them (cum super-pondio) to your Noble Selfe, whom, for your honorable Quality, rare Skill in Antiquities, exquisite Iudgement, and generous Loue to Learning, I may iustly stil (sine parpurismo)
Dulce Camaenarum decus, & Fax aurea Phoebi;
The Muses Darling, and bright Phoebus Flame.
The Subiect is ponderous and Diuine, being a graphicall Delineation of Humane Misery: And well it were with men of Merit, if in this World of Vanity, so full of changes and counter-changes, as it seems a very Field of Flint sowne with Teares; they were not ouerpressed with those myoparones
: Vid. Baysium de Re Nauali. piratici, or Land-pirates, which
Orat. in Ti∣marchum. Æschines speakes of; nor by the combination of prodigious Rakehels, surrounded with an Ocean of Ʋillany. Such Monsters of Humanity, and Demi-Deuils, are the Lares et Lemures, the Ghosts and Goblins of this gloomy Age. I remember I haue read in the
Digested in∣to 2 Bookes: The 1. Diabolus infulatus; or Plutoes Peram∣bulaiō in the North: Dedica∣ted to the pious vses of Guzman d'Alfarache. The 2. Diabolus infatuatus, or, A Spectacle of Bribery and Beggery: Ded. to Mat. Dodsw. of Corke. Workes of Sir Io. CRAG, (a famous Kn. in Cumberland,) this me∣morable Distich;
ONGE walkt the Vrchin and the Elfe,
But NOW the Great Deuill himselfe.
For the Illustration whereof, y is please you to reflect (a little) on the ancient Poets Description of HELL, (the Grand-Deuils HALL) which (they say) is moated round, and for
want of a BRIDGE, Charon, Plutoes MAN, ferries ouer poore Soules in white Sheets, sometime
A  of  (at once) in an Church, seene not long since. 17 at a clap. Vnder which cu∣rious Emblem (for it is no vaine Fiction) is mantled a dainty Mo∣rall, well knowne to learned Mythologists; the Reserch whereof I referre to intelligent Readers studious of Antique Matters. Certes, Saint Paul, not without cause, term'd Poets,
See Titus 1.12. and the Ge∣ne Note there. Prophets: for by the Attestation of profound Theologians, there is (indeed) a Crim-Tartar, Mogul, or Captaine-Deuill of that Tartarean Region, sti∣led in Scripture Belzebub, and (misnamed) by Exoterick Diuines,
Contrary to the iudgement of Antiquity: for in the Pri∣mitiue Church diuers were baptized by that Name: as Lucifer Caralita∣nus, &c. Lucifer: which Mille-artifex, and Master-Fiend bath at his becke Legions of vnder-ministers, and (as I may say) Rurall Dro∣medaries and Diabolitinoes, which incessantly sharke and ramble abroad for his Prouant, (whiles the Great Machiauilian. Cacus, or Cacodaemon himselfe ORDINARILY resides in his Vulcanian Forge, and dismall Den, whetting his grisly-griping Tallons.)
But to adjourne the further Elucidation hereof to some other Op∣portunity, and to returne to your Honor'd Selfe. If Crispinillus Momax take occasion hereby (for it is not in my power to stop laxa∣tiue Lips) to hisse-out his
Bane-spitting Murmures, and detracting Spels;
Qualia credibile est rictu ructâsse trifauci
Cerberon, & Stygij Monstra tremenda Canis:
I trust you will (in a sacred Fury) bandite the scandalous Ba∣boune, ad Insulas fustitudinas, or rather to Mount-Falcon. Thus commending th' Addresse of these Delicatezze to your Generous Acceptance; whose vnparalleld Worth, Noble Esteeme, vndaunted Valour, and Daring (yet Suffering) Spirit (suteable to the
1. Gaudet Pa∣tientia duris. 2. Seruire Dea regnare est. 3. De Gouernour. E. Vent. Grace. Mot∣toes of your Ancient and Renowned Family) deserue to bee recor∣ded to After-Ages; I recommend you to the Highest MAIESTY: resting

