




RIGHT HONOVRABLE AND MOST WORTHY,

COMNENVS the Emperour is most highly cō∣ended by Venerable antiquity, for that after glorious conquest, and mous victory ouer his yled enemies, he pla∣d a beautyfull Image  the B. Virgin in the ūphant Chariot, pre∣red for himselfe; That
the Mighty Citty of Rome, Lady and Mi∣stresse of the VVorld, might vvitnesse, hovv duely and faithfully h did honour & reuerence her, through vvhose ay and assistance (next after God) he atchieued th same. A greater victor haue you obtayned ou farre more potent ene∣mies; and your gratefu mindes & feruorous de∣uotions in aduaunci
the honor of the Blessed Queene of Angells, and ovverfull Empresse of he vvorld, vvill not on∣ly be a most faithfull re∣ognizing of her ready help, to the full accom∣plishment of your spiri∣tuall Conquests; but al∣so yield a most svveet & fragrant odour, of this present age, to all true∣arted Catholikes; and leaue a most memorable example of your vertu∣ous
endeauours to all Posterity.
Seneca vvorthily vvri∣tes,Lib. de prouid. cap. 1. that, Inter bonos vi∣ros & Deum amicitia est, conciliante virtute: Be∣tvveene good men and God, there is a straite band of friendship, by reason of Vertue. Wher∣by it comes to passe, that by your Generous actes of vertuous life, hauing contracted, and (by your earnest seeking to ad∣uaunce
the honor of his Elected Mother) confir∣med this perpetuall lea∣gue of perfect Amity vvith God; there must needes follovv that fri∣endly & familiar com∣munication, that hea∣uenly comfort, and vni∣forme consent of harts, both vvith God, and a∣mongst your selues, vn∣to vvhich they only are vvorthily to be admit∣ted, vvho haue deserued
to be are a part in this ce∣lestiall harmony, vvher∣by to be made truely happy.
My vnvvorthynes therfore finding you so highly esteemed in this melodious Quire, doth present this little Trea∣tise vnto you; not much vnlike to poore people, vvho vse to offer trifling Nevv-yeares-giftes vnto Great men, thereby to make their vnvvorthy
Presents an humble pe∣tition of some greater guerdon, and revvard. So if my slender labours might gaine so much honour, and make me so happy as to be remem∣bred in your deuout, & much respected Com∣munity, I should thinke my selfe most aboun∣dantly satisfied. This my vnpolished lynes doe humbly request, not by any vertue frō themsel∣ues,
but for her sake of vvhom vve novv treate. In hope vvherof I rest,

