



WHatsoeuer thing I haue hitherto written (Most noble Ladie) con∣cerning controuersies of Reli∣gion, it is of that nature, that in∣case no further were added, it would bee the more easilie com∣ported with: for manie of the Ro∣mane Church, condiscende vnto this, that worshipping of Images is not necessarily required, nor an essential point of Chri∣stian Religion: Neither can they find one example in all the Booke of God of Inuocation of Saincts: Purgatorie is an opinion, whereinto they themselues much differ: and they talke of it sometimes with derision and mocking

words. Reade the History of Thuanus, what was thought Histor. Thuan. li. 3 of the soule of Francis the first, P. Castellanus was in one opinion, the Doctors of Sorbone in another, Mendosa as a courtesant in the third opinion, assuring himselfe, that if king Francis soule went to Purgatory, it stayed not long there, because it was neuer his custome in his life time to stay long in one place. But now (Madam) the course of the History hath led me so far forward, that I must touch the very apple of their eye, and enter into their most holy place, and declare, that their seruice, which they count most holy, is but vile abomination in the sight of GOD: And their doctrine concerning the Vicar of Christ, the successour of Peter, and the holinesse of the Masse, and the plurality of their Sacraments added to Baptisme, and the Lordes Supper, is but like wind: And wee are warned by the Apostle Paul, that wee should no more bee children, waue∣ring and carrie about with euery winde of doctrine: for false Ephes. 4. 14 doctrine is justly compared to winde in the baddest qua∣lity of it: Sometimes it is easterne, cold, stormy, & withe∣ring, so that the eares of corne (blasted with the easterne wind) are counted thinne, and empty eares: Euen so, false doctrine exicateth & dryeth vp that appearance of sap & Genes. 41 grace that seemed to be amongst people.
The Romane Church in our dayes bring vp their dis∣ciples, as the harlots of Heliopolis in Phaenitia brought vp their children before the dayes of the good Emperour Constantine. These children afore-saide knewe not their Fathers, for they were strangers: and the Harlots of Helio∣polis had liberty to prostitute themselues to the lust of strangers: so it came to passe, if children had bene procrea∣ted in this libidinus copulation, the stranger was gone, and the procreated child depended onely vpon the mother, for hee knewe not his father: Euen so, in the subsequent

Centuries, the Romane Church disacquaint their children with the voyce of God, sounding in Holy Scripture. It is now enough to beleeue as the Romane Church (the mo∣ther of all Churches) beleeueth: and the chaire of Rome, in matters of Faith, it cannot erre. But wee must depende vpon the voyce of God our Heauenly Father, who hath begotten vs by the vncorruptible seede of His word, who 1. Pet. 1. & 2 hath also fostered vs with the sincere & reasonable milke of His word, who hath anointed vs with the Balme of Gi∣lead, Ierem. 8. 22 who maketh glad His owne citie, euen with the wa∣ters of His own Sanctuarie. The lowde sounding trum∣pet Psalm. 46. 5 of vaine and railing wordes, wee leaue to the aduersa∣ries of the trueth: for that is their armour, wherewith they fight against the Gospell of Christ. Yet let them vn∣derstand, that God hath hanged vp a thousand shields in the towre of Dauid, euē all the targats of the strong men. Cant. 4. 4 Thus leaning vpon the strength of the armour of God, I set forward to the Historie and Treatises, beseeching the Lord of His vnspekeable fauour and grace to blesse your Ladiship, and all your Noble house for euer,
Amen.

