



Right Noble and worthy,
SVCH as doe prayse the worthies, do cloth them with the robes of others that haue gone before them in vertues of like nature. A thing which I cannot doe of your Plantation, seeing neither Testament (that I can find) dooth afford vs a Parallell in men of like quali∣tie. That great, and golden SEN∣TENCE, The seede of the woman, shallGene. 3. 15▪
 breake the Serpents head, (the onely subiect of all ages) with a part of the wisedome that is folded therin, hitherto hath beau∣tified the world with admirable and plea∣sant varieties; more rich and delightfull then all the ornaments of Princes palaces, or the Curtaines of Salomon. Here may we see the Flood, the burning of Sodom; the drownng of Pharoh: the subduing of the Cananites by Dauid and his sonnes; the breaking of Monarchies into chaffe: theDan. 2. 35. surprising & conquering of great Nations,Ephe. 6. 17. by Fisher-men, with the sword of the spi∣rit; the stamping of the Dragon (the Hea∣then Empire) into peees by Constantine;Euseb. de vita Constantini. the desolation, and nakednesse of Anti∣christ, now readie to be cast into the fire. Manifest demonstrations of the Serpents bruised head. But here is not all. These things were done in a corner, in compari∣son of that which is in hand, and remai∣neth to be accomplished at the last iudge∣ment. Long since the Gospell of Christ did ride forth conquering that hee might ouer∣come.Reue. 6. &. 19. And NOW, the hostes that are in hea∣uen
 doe follow him on white horses. Now theIsai. 52. 10. Lord hath made bare his holy arme, in the sightReuel. 19. 12. of ll the Gentiles; and all the ends of the earth shall see the saluatiō of our God. NOW many Mighty Kings haue set their Crownes vp∣on the head of Christ. The valiant soul∣dier saith, The shields of the world belong toPsal. 47. 9. God. The true Nobilitie, haue vpon their horse bridles, Holinesse to the Lord. AndZach. 14. 20. now the wise and industrious Merchant, doth hold the riches of the Gentiles too base a fraight for his shippes. He tradethIsai. 60. 9. for his wisedome, that said: Surely the Isles wait for me (saith the Lord) and the shippes of the Ocean most especially: namely to carry the Gospell abroad. The people in mul∣titudes, like stronge thundrings, doe say Hallelu-iah▪ And who is wanting in thisReuel. 19. 6. blessed expedition? Surely, not any tribe, Prayse ye the Lord, — for the people that offeredIudg. 5. 2. themselues so willingly. For who can with∣draw himselfe from concurrence in so good an action: especially, when he shall but read, or heare, that one sentence which Deborah did sing: Curse ye Meroz, sayd the
 Angell of the Lord curse the inhabitants therof:Iudg. 5. 23. because they came not forth to helpe the Lord.
This land, was of old time, offered to our Kings. Our late Soueraigne Q. Eliza∣beth (whose storie hath no peere among Princes of her sexe) being a pure Virgin, found it, set foot in it, and called it Virginia. Our most sacred Soueraigne, in whom is the spirit of his great Ancestor, onstantin te pacifier of the world, and planter of the Gos∣pellEuseb. de vita Constantin. in places most remote, desireth to present this land a pure Virgine to Christ. Such as doe mannage the expedition, are carefull to carry thither no Traitors, nor Papists that depend on the Great VVhore. Lord fi∣nish this good worke thou hast begun; and mar∣ry this land, a pure Virgine to thy kingly sonne Christ Iesus; so shall thy name bee magnified: and we shall haue a Virgin or Maiden Britaine, a comfortable addition to our Great Britaine.
And now Right Worthy, if any aske an account of my vocation, to write and Preach thus much; I answere: that al∣though I could not satisfie their request
 that would haue me goe; yet I could not omit to shewe my zeale to the glory of God. If they aske account of my Dedica∣tion, I answere, your vertue hath exacted it. If any man list to be curious, or conten∣tious, wee haue no such custome, nor the Churches of God. Hold on your blessed course, and you shall receiue blessings of Christ. Blessed bee the Lord God; euen thePsal. 72. 18. 19. God of Israell, which onely worketh great won∣ders, and hath put these blessed thoughts into your Christian hearts, And bles∣sed be his glorious name for euer, and let all the earth be filled with his glory, Amen, Amen. 

