



SIR,
TIs acriticall age we live in, where Divines and Poets have alike fate and misery, most men frequenting Churches as they doe Theaters, either to clap or hisse; and it is with the Auditors of the one, as with the Specta∣tors of the other; sometimes they bestow their Laurell, sometimes their Thistle; Applause sometimes, sometimes censure. Vnhappy Creatures that we are to be thus fed with Aire, as if we no longer liv'd by the Spirit of God, but the breath of the people. And if this Ayre were either pure or temperate, it were a passable calamity; but it is for the most part, poyson'd and corrupt. Loose men breath their rottennesse and filth upon us; and it is not wit (for sooth) nor bravery, except it be drivell'd up∣on the Priest, whom they all besmeare with calumny, and rake the very kennell for dirt to fling at him, as if he were the only prodigy of the times, S. Paul's  , or  , the very dung of the world, 1 Cor. 4. and the off∣scouring of all things unto this day. This is the com∣mon misery of our Tribe, and it was mine, in opening the
 folly of this Pseudo-Prophet; which hit so unhappily with the temper of those holy Monopolizers (which pretend so much to be the only men of the Spirit) that the Catharist was up in Armes, and Demetrius, and the Zealous Crafts-men were about mine eares; who put me (without mercy) to the push of their Pike, and shot their poyson'd Arrowes, even bitter words against me, such as malice could only sharpen, or falsehood levell. But notwithstanding the Spirit of Rabshakeh, and the venome of those sanctified Raylers, I wanted not my Propugners amongst the impartially judicious, both Di∣vines and Layicks; and with the latter of these, more e∣minently, your selfe. And had I had no more, it was enough that there was Seymour in it, a name that in∣volves Nobility, and the better part of it, Vertue; and the better part of vertue, humility and courtesie, and all these temper'd in you with a religious observance of the Rites of the Church you live in; so that you are not transported with change and novelty; not apt to be misted with any false light of the times, not with the Ignis fatuus of our Prophet here, no Proselyte of Schisme or Innovation, but a man fast to your selfe, constant and resolv'd in all your actions; which is an ex∣cellent temper to make a Christian of, and a sure foun∣dation to build true friendship on, especially in this age of words, where Integrity and Goodnesse are so rarely met with, by me (I am sure).

