



RIght Worship∣ful, if your fauo∣rable eyes may vout safe to read what my spare houres haue brought forth: thogh smal in shew, yet great in substance; I hūbly intreate you to be my protection; and thought it be but as a lit∣tle
streame in respect of the whole Ocean of godly books that are gone before; yet therein when your leasure best serues you, you may re∣fresh and comfort your selfe, vnto a farther backing on of your worships, godly, vertuos and religious liues.Psal. 12.7 The word of God saith the Prophet Dauid is pure,Mat. 24.12 euen as siluer which from the earth is tried and purified seuen times in the fier, which word plainelie and plentifully telleth vs that iniquitie shall abound in the latter daies:1. Thes. 5.3. how then should I crosse my lips, & crie hush, or peace, seeing that if Gods booke be true, while men cry peace, peace, sudden destru∣ction
shall fall vpon them:Mar. 12.30 The rather therefore I thought good to set foorth, to the view of the world, this my Diuine Eccho, whereby the godly may bee comforted and the wicked conuerted; I haue named it the Diuine Eccho, for that as your worships may see, how the Christian soule doth sud∣denly returne backe and an∣swer like the Eccho, or rather I may say more truely like a voice from heauen, vnto what he demaundeth of her, directly giuing the last sound of the word; both soule and body, heart and hand must agree together to serue the Lord. And if your worship
should aske me why I should write thus phantastically (as you may terme it) of an Ec∣cho, which before now was seldome or neuer heard of; I then must bring Dauid for my Author and pattern who in his 27. psalme, when the Lord said vnto him seeke yee my face, his soule answered like an Eccho, thy face Lord will I seek, seek my face, I seek thy face: and if you aske yet farther, why I should bring in a second or a Diuine Dyogi∣nes, it is to shewe how euerie man, and therefore much ra∣ther how euery Christian, should liue contentedly with Dyogines the Cynicke, not caring for the thinges of this
world, and vsing it, with Paul as if he vsed it not; Let mee now intreate your Worships grauities to accept hereof; as some token of my true and sincere affection. And if this as I doubt not, bee entertai∣ned with kinde acceptance, I purpose God willing heraf∣ter to present you with a sub∣iect of better worth: so lea∣uing your Worships to the protection of the Al∣mightie, I rest.

