



Right Honourable my singular good Lord,
IT was Tertullian's observa∣tion of Heretickes, Nostra suffodiunt ut sua aedificent Tertull de praescript a vers. haeret. cap. 42.: Your Lordship is well infor∣med by experience, that the Romish Clergie who disdain the stile of Hereticks, are like Ʋnderminers, like Builders: For what kinde of Ʋndermining is left unpractised to make way, ut sua aedificent, that they may build up their Babell, and ad∣vance their ROMAN See? The Scripture the Rule of Faith they undermine by their Ʋnde scis? allowing it neither authority nor Com∣mand, but because their Cheife Pastour de∣clares it, expounds it. The Church they under∣mine by assuming her Name, defiling her Do∣ctrine. Councels, by denying their lawfulnesse,
 unlesse called and approved by Rome: Bishops & Preists, by making them Delegates to his supposed Holyness, rejecting their Commissi∣on received from CHRIST. Neither cease they here, but Princes and States they under∣mine also, sometime by raising open VVarre, sometime by Bosome-conspiracies, Powder-plots, & other secret attempts. Nor doe these Ʋnder∣miners looke alway like Faux in the Vault, but they will appeare somtimes as it were Angels of Light: Princes shall have Thousands of their Pennes Iesuite Fisher in his Epistle to the King., but I thinke rather Pen-knives: They wilbe strongly tyed and united to his Majesties Crowne, & the more familiaritie they have with him by whom Kings do raigne, the more awfull will they be found unto his Holy annointed The Iesuite in his Epistle Dedicatory., and all this, as the Divell to our Saviour, ut sua aedifi∣cent, that Princes may fall downe and worship their Beast. We may goe further; None escape them. They undermine & Populum & Primates Populi, by subverting their Estates, Proselyting their Children: and yet the keeping backe of these Ʋnderminers from his Majesties pre∣sence is censured by Mr Malone (our Iesu∣ite) to be the fruite of waspish emulation In his Epistle Dedicatory., as
 if these things might be done, and yet they re∣maine faithfull to their Prince, his State and Dignitie. But their Allegiance may well be dis∣cerned by their Obedience: For, besides their immediate addresse to Rome, their acknow∣ledging a PROTECTOƲR In a letter of LVD. CAR. LVDVISIVS S. R. E. VI∣CECANCEL∣LARIƲS, superscribed thus, Rev. PP•i.. Praefect p. P. Car Excalceaterum in Reg Hiber∣nia. Dated. Rome 10. Kal. Iii, 1631. which is in my hands, and con∣cerneth the quarrels of the Regulars and Seculars in the points censured by the Doctors of Sbon, 5. an. 1631. Vt rei veritas innotesat scri∣ptum est ad quosdam illius Regni Praelatos â qu. bus expe∣ctatur infor∣matio. Interim vsum est sacrae Congreg.ni ut nos ex munere PROTECTORIS quo fungimur admoneamus, & rogemus V.  ne ex dolore aut vin∣dicta illatae, ut praetenditur, calumniae quid quam agat erga tumultus authores, ne maj∣res xcitentur turbae, sed offensiones & injurias suas uorumque reittat scr Con∣greg.  quae plenè satisfaciet, & justâ censurâ corripiet, ac poenâ afficiet mniae dum constire it Architectos. there, and abusing his Majesties Subjects by pressing their Consciences to yeeld subjection (against his sacred Commaunds) to none but from thence, There is dayly resisting of his ROYAL Commaunds, in matters that are not absolutely Spirituall: For there being Publication of His Maiesties ROYALL pleasure for the chan∣ging of the Popish Calendar, which ever since the times of Rebellion was observed in the Province of Vlster, Did they obey? This it may be they will glory in; But for what other then Politick respects? How was the Titular Pri∣mate advised by his Councell learned Was he not pressed to disobey? Was it not reputed in∣convenient to alter the same? Did he not cen∣sure the receiving of the Kings command against
 this their disobedient practise to be no other∣wise then to obey men more then GOD! That if obedience should be yeelded herein, their Adver∣saries (so he stiles his sacred Majestie & Councell) wilbe encouraged to publish more severe e∣dicts against them, & sic paulatim serpet Can∣cer In a letter written partly in Irish, partly in Latine, to the Titular Primate, super∣scribed, To his much esteemed assured loving frind Mr Willi∣am Bitagh these in haste where∣soever. These are the points for which it were inconve∣nient to alter the time heere praesrtim hoc anno. , quod videamur obs∣dire hominibu magis quam Deo, recipiendo TEMPORA∣LIVM Potesta¦tum mandata contra rceptam Ecclesiasticam lgem, idque  dium religionis nostrae; und ADVERSARII animentur ad alia magis nociva praecepta can∣ra nos denda, dum iderent nos minoribus praeceptis emperare, & sic paulatim serpet Can∣cer &c.. Doe they apprehend his Majestie & Coun∣cell for Adversaries? Who can then esteeme thē for Friends? Shall a rebellious intrusion bee e∣steemed the Oracle of GOD and checke the Regall Power, as proceeding from Men, and yet Subjection not violated, but their Obedience must remaine firme?
Much more in this kinde may be presented to your Lordship, if it were not superfluous, but by this it may appeare, how that (notwith∣standing their pretences) Princes are relished or distasted by them in ordine ad spiritualia, as they countenance, or exalt their Popish Facti∣on. For to omit other things, the Iesuit his con∣temptuous reproaching of the learned defence of his Majesties supreame power, made in the Castle-Chamber in the time of your Lordships
 Government here, doth declare how invious∣ly they heare of his Maiesties eminent and glo∣rious Prerogatives. But the more they declare themselves enemies to our Faith & her Defen∣der, the more I doubt not, but all sacredly af∣fected will arme themselves to resist them, in these their contrivings & secret imaginations.
I doe not come with this Dedication to move your Lordship hereunto, for it hath beene your VVorke; & who is or hath beene more Faith∣full amongst all the Servants of my Lord the KING 1. Sam. 2.? And for your pious affection to the true Religion I could speake more then I sup∣pose your modesty would be willing to heare; so that I doubt not, but in this way you will prosper and flourish, (Ʋnus Deus & plures A∣mici) being confident that there will never be wanting Blessings & Honour to him that ei∣ther walkes with GOD or for him. Neither is it a light Argument of your loue to Pietie and Religion, that in the time of your Lordships Government (imitating herein BOTH your most glorious MASTERS) you were a Fa∣ther to the Cleargie and Ministers of GOD; your last Act amongst us shewing with how sa∣cred
 an esteeme you reverenced their Persons; when by your practise you taught the most Honourable of the Kingdome to acknowledge them for men appointed by GOD to blesse in his Name.
I will now draw to an end, excusing my presumption in offering this to your Lord∣ship; but I could doe no lesse, in regard I have no other meanes to acknowledge your libe∣rall favours and bountie to mee, and to give your Lordship an Accompt, that although they can never be deserved, yet they are not altoge∣ther misplaced or cast away. The LORD multiply his Blessings upon your Lordship, and inflame your affections more and more to his Glory, that hee may crowne you with his mercies here, and eter∣nitie hereafter; which he shall ever pray for that is

