


RIght Honorable and reue∣rend.
When Moses, vpon the top of Pisgah,Deut, 34, 1, & 3, 27. did view the Geo∣graphie of the promised land, to the East, West, North, and South, with the Plaines, Mountaines, and Seas; he de∣parted satisfied, because his eie was not dim.Iosua, 18, 8, 9. And whē the land was Topographically to be described, to giue vnto seuerall men their inheritances, the Suruaiors presented their plots to Ioshua, the Captaine of the Lords host; who, by Gods authoritie, should quiet all questions that might arise by striuers. But when I climed the Pisgah of the Re∣uelation, where might bee taken the perspectiue of the land, that Christ, with his holy people, shall possesse, by the preaching of the Gospell; taking due notice of the dimnes of mine eies, I submitted all my labour to your Lordshippes true, and perfect sight, and censure.
And now, hauing drawne a plot of one particular place thereof, labouring to put the seuerall tenures, in their di∣uers, yet proper colours, (seeing the importunitie of ma∣ny would not suffer me to secreate it) I doe humbly returne
my suruey, not onely to your Lordships censure; but also to your most fatherly and Christian patronage. Humbly cra∣uing your good Lordship, (seeing all the tenants will neuer be pleased with my doing) both to defend me frō the cauils, and calumniations of the contentious, (of whose fury I haue had too much experience:) and also to interpose your honou∣rable authority, that all men may content themselues with theyr owne lots. My skill is small, & therfore I desire the iust to reproue mee, where my hand, or eye hath fayled: but I dare be bold to say, that, in that which I was able to doe, I haue been faithfull. If your Lordship vouchsafe me this ho∣nourable fauour, to accept, and protect my labours, I shall be much encouraged to take the like paines in the rest: I hope, to the glory of almightie God, the benefite of his Church, & demonstration of my dutie vnto your good Lordship, whom God euermore preserue vnto eternall happines. Ianu: 25. 1606.

