



Most Honor'd Sir:
THe heauenly Light of Diuine Truth shining in the sa∣cred Scripture, hath enabled our Soules cleerely to see their owne Excellence; viz. that they are by Creation Spirits
Eccles. 12.7. or spirituall Substances; of an
Mat. 10.28. immortall Nature; in Duration, eternall; as being (in Tertul∣lians phrase) Afflatus oris Diuini, the immediate Handiworke of God; and consequently
Quicquid ex nihilo fit, est in∣corruptibile. incorruptible. Yea, such is their exquisite Beauty and absolute Perfection (considered in their owne
The Essence of God, An∣gels, & Soules, is knowne to God alone ex∣actly. Athanas. Tract. de Defini∣tiombus. Essence) as the most amiable Reflex of Diamonds, the Virgin-blushes of Ru∣bies, the azure veines of Saphires, the greene lustre of Emeralds, the various beames of Iacincts, and the radiant constellations of the fairest and most Orient Vnions, are neuer able to parallell. Thus Nobly-descended and rarely-qualified is the Soule; a Creature of such An∣gelicall Serenity, as that the MAIESTY of HEAVEN (enamour'd on his owne bright Image) made this goodly Globe of Heauen
Ita S. Chrysost. and Earh for her solace and Contemplation, wooed her with most ardent and inflam'd Affection, stiling her
In Salomons Song. his Loue, his Doue, his Sister, his Spouse: and lastly, married her to Himselfe for euer, by assu∣ming our Humane
Deus & huma∣na natura vniun∣tur: non Deus & Homo; quia non Persona & Per∣sona. Assumpsit Deus non Homi∣nem sed Humani∣tatem. Nature, which hauing hypostatically and indissolubly vnited to his DEITY, hee accomplisht in it the most Admirable Worke of our Redemption, inuested it with Jm∣mortality by his Resurrection, and aduanced it to his Heauenly Kingdome (far aboue all Coelestiall Powers) by his Ascension. And now is MAN, in regard of this superexcellent Honour, become (in this point) superiour to the ANGELS, as being participant of the

St. Pet. Ep. 2. chap. 1. v. 4. Diuine Nature subsisting in the most Sacred Person of our euer-bles∣sed Lord JESVS, whose glorified Humanity is most triumphantly enthroniz'd at the Right Hand of God on High.
Thus hath the King of Angels (in his ineffable loue to our Soules) exalted this humane Flesh, aboue the highest Hierarchy; to the a∣mazement of those Heauenly Spirits, (as the
St. Pet. Ep. 1. chap. 1. v. 12. Prince of th' Apostles intimateth.) Neuerthelesse, if an exact Suruey be taken of this pre∣sent World, will there not be found in all Estates such a generall Apo∣stasie from the Loue of God, as if Men were altogether Soule-lesse; or (at least) Sense-lesse how infinitely the Creator of the World values that peerelesse Pearle, which this shell of Mortality containes: [a Pearle so inestimable, as nothing in Heauen or Earth, but the very
Our Saui∣ours Heart was pierced with the speare for our sinnes: O that our hearts might be pier∣ced with true compunction and Repen∣tance! other∣wise wee haue no part in his Passion. HEART BLOOD of the ONELY SONNE of GOD could re∣deeme] To instance this sottish Madnesse, and Epidemicall Corrup∣tion in all Degrees and Delinquents, were infinite J will therfore (in present) cull out onely some, that are (in their owne Conceits) the Creame of Christendoms, the purest and demurest Professants, in com∣parison of whom the obedient Children of the Church of England, are reputed prophane and Vnsanctified Persons.
Eccl. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 7. Eusebius (an Au∣thenticke and approued Author) hath a memorable Hstorie applia∣ble to this purpose. He relates how he saw at Tyre (a City of Phoeni∣cia) diuers naked Christians exposed by their Persecutors to cruell Panthers, mighty Beares, and
 wild Bores, to be deuoured by them: which rauenous Beasts, although they were prouoked by the Christi∣ans to assaile them, (for so were the poore Soules commanded) yet they vtterly refused to hurt or approach them: but on the contrary, they slew at the Insidels (without the Barres) which exasperated them a∣gainst the Christians. To make some Application and Ʋse of this rare and miraculous Euent: I haue learned by good Intelligence, and your Noble Selfe, with many Thousands (in plagâ hyper-Boreâ) were ocular Witnesses, that certaine externall Professors
Of these, see an excellent Sermon, called Corona Charita∣tis, pag. 28, 29, 30. of Christi∣anity, yet internall Contemners of the Ordinance of Christ in the Mi∣nistration of their owne
Heb. 13.17. Pastors, hauing long panted after their Extirpation and Destruction, combin'd together at last (as close as
See Iob c. 41. v. 15, 16, 17. Leuiathans soules) to strip them of their Reuenues, incarcerate
A Diaboli∣call Act. Reu. 2.10. Thus the Arri∣ans raged a∣gainst Ortho∣dox Teachers, especially a∣gainst Athana∣sius, who was faine to slye from their hellish surie. See his Apologie for his Flight, &c. and his Epistle ad Solitarios: where he writes, that hauing beene twice depriued by 2 false Synods, he was at last absolued, and re∣stored to his Church, notwithstanding the former Sentences of the Hereticall Bishops, who (as he elegantly termes them) were rather Catascopi then Episcopi, Catchpoles then Bishops. their Persons, disseaze them of their Frecholds, (by Bribery and
Legall Sleights) dissipate their Goods, ruinate their Families, begger their Posterities, and (to teare them quite in pieces; O most detesta∣ble Immanity!) infame them with a thousand virulent Aspersions and venemous Jmputations: assuring themselues, though their tongues ranne neuer so false a Gallop, yet some maleficiate or other would be∣leeue them: [the credulity of the Ʋulgar (especially in Clorgie mens Cases) being such, as if a Gnat but spread his Wings betweene them and the Sunne, to thinke it eclipsed.] These things being so, let any Christian or Pagan iudge, whether those wild beasts in Eusebi∣us, were not infinitely more humane, compassionate, and mercifull to the designed Martyrs; then were these vnchristian Kernes, masked Miscreants, and Diabolicall Decoy's, to their conformable Prea∣chers; in whose Coats seeing they could not finde a hole, they resolued to fret one. Vndoubtedly (you bloody Bores, selfe-admiring Liber∣tines and Cyclopicall Canibals) your crying Sinnes and thundering Crimes of Oppression and Ravine (though mantled with Hypocrisie, the Deuils Masking-sute) haue entred the
Iam. 5.4. eares of the Lord of Hosts. For howeuer this vnhallowed Crew may (in a spirituall Phren∣zy) flatter and hug themselues in their abhorred Rapacity, and sing Requiems and Lullabies to their senselesse Soules, and cauterized Consciences, as if they should neuer tremble before the terrible Tribu∣nall of the Iudge of all the World, for these blacke Deeds, and execra∣ble Enormities: yet certainely these artificiall Villanies are Vulne∣ra in capite canis, such mortall Wounds to their inward-bleeding Soules, as those Saluages shall neuer licke whole with a generall and superficiall Confession of their sinnes, nor be once admitted to Gods sa∣cred
Obserue well what our Saui∣our saith tou∣ching this point, Matth. 5. v. 23, 24. Altar, to make their peace with him, till they be first reconciled to their offended Brother, and haue (to their vtmost Ability) made due Repaire of Honour, and Restitution of Liuelyhood to the Parties so hamously wronged. And albeit this Canting Fra∣ternity seeme to haue made a League with Satan, and are yet insensi∣ble of the Horrour of the Fact: notwithstanding, as that which is written with the juice of a LIMON, apreares not at first, till you hold it to the Fire: So, when these dis-gallanted
See Act. 14, from the 11. v. to the 20. Lycaonians shal one day, (without speedy and effectuall Repentance) haue the full Vi∣alls of Gods Ʋengeance powred and prest on them, (roaring in Hell∣fire with
In an old Manuscript lately found at Chester, it is re∣corded, that Pilate was cal∣led Pontius, à Ponte, of a Bridge; and not of the Ile Pontas: How∣euer, he is ge∣nerally held a damned mis∣creant. PONTIVS Pilate, Barabbas, and other Infernall Mon∣sters) then shall they cleerely reade in the blacke Bookes of their vast Consciences, their Barbarous Acts, and Deuilish Complots, writ∣ten in the hugest Capitals.

But to returne where WE BEGAN, and to leaue these merci∣lesse Wretches to the Judgement of God; whom (from the Center of my Soule) I beseech to giue them the Grace of
The proper ct of Peni∣nce (in this Case) is Resti∣ution or Sa∣efaction; without which t nothing a∣aileth the Delinquent, hough he hould hang imselfe with Judas. Repentance: J haue here (Most Honor'd Sir) presum'd (in lieu of your many signall Fa∣uours) to present you this small Manual of Meditations in Ʋerse, published vnder the Coniunction and sweet Aspect of most eminent STARS, and written (as I am credibly certified) by a Diuine Laureat (deceased;) whose maine Drift is to eleuate the Soule to Heauen, from these bewitching Vanities of the
The Earth was made for Man  Man for Earth. Earth: A Noble and Coelestiall Theme, and neuer more seasonable then now: In which re∣gard, I was confident it would be no vnwelcome Newyeeres-gift to your Noble-spirited Selfe, whose Heroicke Disposition and pious Af∣fection to Diuine Exercises, and Composures, accompanied with a li∣berall Hand to learned and Orthodox Ecclesiasticks, and a piercing Iudgement wisely to discerne betwixt an accomplisht Scholler, and a popular Parakito, or Skip-Iacke-Fellow of empty Boldnesse; as also your frequent Largesses to the Peore, and Donatiues to the Distres∣sed; your graue Moderation and prudent Dispensation of Iustice; your generous Hospitaelity, rare Affability, and vnexampled Humanity; your resplendent Dignity, Illustrious Family, and Honourable De∣portment, haue purchas'd you the singular Loue and Obseruance of all good Patriots. Your Magnifique Entertainement of his late
King Iames: (In his Return from Scotland.) Ma∣iestie (of Sacred Memory) at your Basilicall TOWER, [one of the brauest Seates in Europe] was no small Renowne to your Selfe, and your most Nobly-accomplisht
Sir Gilbert Honghton. Sonne: But your Munificence to the oppressed and afflicted members of Iesus Christ, [seasoned with true Faith and
Contritio est extremitas do∣loris. Contrition; and sugred with Holinesse, without
Reu. 2.10. which, no man shall see the Lord] will gaine you (at last) Coro∣nam Amarantinam, an Imperiall Diadem
Hebrewes, chap. 12, v. 14. of Blisse (with your peere∣lesse Lady deceased) in the Empyréall Heauen. Thrice Happy, O! and most Heauenly Soules, whom the blessed Angels shall so beare in Triumph to that Glorious Ierusalem! To which Soueraigne Felicity, that your euer-honor'd Selfe, your Worthy Sonnes, and Excellent Daughters (the Crystall Mirrors of Modesty) may arriue (at the end of this Span-long Life;) is the hearty Prayer of
Augustae Trinobantum. Festo Theogonias.

