



MY good Lords, I had intended to haue presented to your hono∣rable Ladie-mother, now at rest with God, the first fruits of my labours in this kind, containing a iust defence of Gods truth and the credit of Dorts Synod against some of Arminius his schollers here at home, who will not be reclaimed by the graue sentence of that late Councell, nor affrighted with the strange death of their maister: but as Arrius his fol∣lowers, after his fearfull death did labour to scatter his errors farre and neare, so do these with vs. But
your Honours may obiect to me, . To which I answer, that partly , and partly the importunitie of some enemies did draw me forth both by preaching and printing to assay to stop the mouthes of gainsayers. Now I humbly offer to your Lordships view the true Chhristian Noble-man, who by the Spirit of Adoption calleth God Abba, Father, Rom. 8.15. and which Iob stiles Christ, Iob 19.25. Goeli, My redeeming kins∣man; and with Isay, Isa. 5.1. Dodi, My neere kinsman. Your Honours may best challenge this little Treatise as your owne right, because that I gained the greatest part of my litle learning through my acquaintance with your honorable fathers house and family, where you had a most religious and truly noble breeding and education, by the zealous care of your pious and truly religious fa∣ther, and Ladie Bathshebah neglected not to teach her yong Lemuels humane and diuine knowledge, Prou. 31.1, 2. Your truly noble fathers house for state and go∣uernment somewhat resembled Salomons Court, 2. Chron. 9.4. where Shebaes Queene obserued the meate of his table, the sitting of his seruants, and the atten∣dance of his ministers. And your famous Wilton house, like a litle Vniuersitie was a more excellent nurcerie for learning and pietie, then euer it was in former times, when King Edgars daughter Editha had her residence and regencie there: so that Popish S.F.E. had no need to seek the restoring of it to its former vses. Wilton house had in it that godly learned Phisitian and skil∣full Mathematician M. Doctor Moffet my most wor∣thy and kind friend; it had in it great Hugh Sanford
learned in all arts, sciences, knowledge, humane and di∣uine, vsque ad miraculum, whom I euer obserued as Horace did his Maerenas euer before him, singul∣tim pauca locutus, from whom I neuer departed without some profit. To passe ouer Gerard the Herbal∣list, M. Massinger and other Gentlemen schollers. Ne∣uer noble house had successiuely deeper Diuines, namely Bishop Babington, B. Parry, M. Connā, M. Walford, M. Parker, M. Bigs. In this noble House Babingtons rules of pietie and honestie swayed, swearing was ba∣nished; yea the house-keepers and inferour seruants well knew and practised the grounds of Religion, as Ie∣rome commendeth the ploughmen of Palestina for their Halleluiahs. These were the Trophees of your fathers house; he honoured God, and God honoured him, and you his seed enioy the blessing: whereas the seed of the wicked, lo ijqqare le holam, shall not be famous for e∣uer, Isa. 14.20. The seed of the righteous shall be great or strong in the earth, Dor iesharim ieuorach, the ge∣neration of the vpright shall be blessed, Psal 112.1, 2. Wisedome with an inheritance is good, saith Salo∣mon, Eccles. 7.12. God hath blessed your Honours with a goodly heritage, Psal. 16.6. The price of wisedome is in your hands, Oh let your hearts be to it, Prou. 17.16. To whom much is giuen, of them much is required, Luk. 12.48. You cannot say with the Poet,
.
. Nor with Vlysses in Homer,
,
.

 Serue the Lord with ioy of heart for the aboundance that hee hath giuen you, Deut. 28.47. Let your houses not be like Eugenius Tertius Bernards scholler his house, & recipiant & faciant bouos. Oh let the vn∣fained faith, as Paul speakes to Timothy, 2. Tim. 1.5. that dwelt in your good father, dwell in you.
The Lord blesse your Honours, and increase in you all the graces of his holy Spirit, for his Christs sake, in whom I rest,

