



SIR;
THis flies not to you for peru∣sall barely, and suruey, but for protection; I want not a a Reader, but a Vindicator; such a one, as can aswell iustifie Jnnocence, as shrine it: an Agent remark'd, no lesse for Goodnes, than for Power. And, in this my Appeale to Worth and Iustice, J sincerely wish, that, whilest I a∣wake your Charity, I pull not on you Enuy, or Dishonour; 'tis not my intention, but my feare. For, amongst other my weake endeuours
which haue formerly aduanc'd me to the vnde∣serued applause of many. This had the Hap∣pinesse to displease, and I thinke it not my wound, but my Glory. Impartiall discourses are equally blunt, and honest; and tho' some∣times, they haue their relish and farewell in di∣stast, yet that is their Crowne, and not their Fate. Howeuer, an affected Stoicisme I euer loath'd, and not onely as a Stoicisme, but as af∣fected. There is nothing so open to contempt and laughter, as a compos'd sullennesse. 'Tis true, a natiue roughnes and austeritie of language, I haue pupill'd from my youth, That's mine owne, J confesse, but I dote not on it; my Child but I lull it not; and therefore, if it sometimes proue way∣ward, and offensiue, Nature praevaricates, and not will. I was neuer yet guiltie of a premedita∣ted trespasse on mens Names, or Honours; J haue neither so much time for rancour, nor disposi∣tion; or had I both, I should haue here strangled them for his deare memory, to whom I owed, not onely my seruices, but my selfe. Hee was nobly your Associate, (my honoured Sir) and (for J must still boast in the liuery) my Master; nay, my Patron; and, what is higher yet, my friend, my vnshaken friend. These haue so ingag'd me
both in Ciuill and Religious bonds, that should I labour to dissolue either by any Reall affront, or discourtesie to his Tribe, I were neither mor∣rall man, nor Christian; and yet, loe, I am more than both, a Diuine; but, a saucie one ('tis ru∣mour'd) and a Cruell; a sordid also, and Con∣temptuous; and, (O my impossible guilt! my vniust calamitie!) a false one, and vnthankfull. Such Liueries I can weare with as much patience as the the former, tho not triumph; and yet these, againe are not my Crosse, but my Laurell; I grow greene in the opinion of mine owne inno∣cence, tho' wither, perhaps, in the Respects of others; who, if they were not so hot as to rauish words vnnaturally, and force them from the ho∣nest intentions of the Speaker, they should finde, I am a Leuite, still, and not a Libeller; and, what I preach'd, was not an Inuectiue, but a Sermon. Me thinkes, it is neither Charitie, nor Iudgement in a hearer, to wrest Diuinity to the disuantage of his owne honour; 'twas n'ere my Custome to rubbe harshly, on particulars; my re∣proofes were, as they should be, of sinnes, and not of Persons; and those too, ran generally, which no Circumstances can reduce to paticulars, but where the Parties are either preiudicate, or
guiltie; And, if any such I met with, (as I hope I did not) let them learne to reforme, and not to censure; and thanke him for his home-spun ad∣uertisements, who was rather a Remembran∣cer of their errors, than a Iudge. This is the way to rescue their honour, and my innocence; which, as it hath beene euer taught to magnifie worth in others; so, to presume on yours, that, when you haue read impartially this sad peece of mine, you will say that I haue beene a faith∣full Seruant to my dead friend, and yours, whose noble respects to mee, I haue found to suruiue in you; whom, for many solid and materiall fauours, I am captiu'd to obserue, whilest I am

