



THE prouident care of our GOD (most noble Ladie) hath appoin∣ted, that the vertues of his Saintes like vnto gold, should bee tried in the furnace, purged from drosse, & counted pretious. In the first 300. yeeres of our LORD, the faith & patience of Christians was tried with the yoke of tenne cruell persecutions. In the next 300. yeeres, the knowledge of the Church was tried by heretiques, who by the mistie cloudes of errour, ende∣uoured to blind-fold the eyes of men, and to lead them captiue from the simplicitie of the trueth of God: But in these ages also the power of the light of God was ma∣nifested,

euer dissipating darknesse, as the Sunne rising abolisheth the darknesse of the night. This is an incou∣ragement to vs, when wee see false Teachers dayly re∣newing their Fortes, to fight against the trueth, as the Philistimes did, who faught against Dauid in the valley of Rephaim, after they had bene oft ouercome by him. The last period of all their obstinate reluctation against the Anointed of the Lord, was losse and hurt vnto them selues, and dishonour to their gods, whom they were compelled to leaue behind them, and Dauid tooke them, and brunt them with fire, and the place was called Baal. perat-zim, that is, the rupture of Baal. The aduersaries 1. Chr. 14. verse 11. of the Gospell, in our land, by renewing their forces againe, are procuring a newe name vnto their idoles. They cannot bee content with the names of Baal-Por, Baal-Meon, Baal-Thamar, Baal-Chatsor, Baal-Gad: But they will spread out their banners in the valley of Re∣phaim, against our Soueraigne LORD, his Highnesse Statutes and Lawes, longing for the last name Baal-Pe∣ratzim. The grandour of the speeches of Scottish Pa∣pists, is not vnknowne to mee: but tumour and swelling in the flesh, is seldome joined with salubritie and health. It is time for mee to bee afraide of the din of emptie pit∣chers, when I finde them furnished within with holie Lampes, and to be backed with the sound of holy Trum∣pets, blowne by the Commandement of GOD: I meane such as were in the Armie of Gedion. Of this I am Iudg. 6. verse 16. fully perswaded, that the light of GOD, the trumpet of GOD, the sword of GOD, and Gedion shall haue the vpperhand in GODS appointed time. Some of them seeme to be deuout, and they lament for vs, as Iaakob la∣mented for his sonne Ioseph, whom he supposed to haue Gene. 37. verse 34. beenedead: But our lamentation for them, is grounded

on better knowledg, as the lamentation of Ioseph was, when he fell vpon his Fathers face, and wept vpon him, Gen. 50. verse 1. and kissed him. Alwayes (Madame) consider, that the sense of feeling, the chiefe of all senses, the most vnsepa∣rable companion of the spirituall life, is most inlaking in them, who striue against the Gospell of CHRIST preached in this land. They haue so many easie remedies at hand to vnladen their soules of the heauy burthen of sinne, such as sprinckling of holy water, auricular confes∣sions, and pennance, indulgences and pardons, that they neuer suffer men to enter into a deepe consideration of their own miserie, & of the superabundant compassions of GOD, freely pardoning sinne: but they are content with the superfice and scruif of new inuented remedies. In the meane time (Madame) receiue vnder the shadow of your Ladysh. fauourable protection, this Booke also, Of the Arrian and Eutychian persecution, wherein, as in a viue mirrour, is represented the falshood, deceite, and sub∣tilty of lying Teachers; and likewise their mercylesse in∣humanity and cruelty against GODS seruants, when they are assisted by the supporting strength of secular po∣wers. And let your La. and your noble house continually Epistle Iude, verse 11. beware of Teachers, whom yee find to bee deceitfull and bloody, for they walke in the way of Cain.
Now the mercies of the LORD IESUS, the au∣thor and finisher of our faith, attend vpon my Lord your Husband, vpon your Ladiship and all your noble house, for now, and euer,
AMEN.

