



GENTLEMEN;
THat which I here pre∣sent
you with, is a Mi∣litary
Argument: the
fitter for Military men
therefore: whose Ex∣ercise
and Delight, is
in the fayre practise of peaceable Armes.
This is my best hope, that it may be fa∣vourably
accepted, for that my Theme
and my Patrones are so well suited. So
should every thing be, about a Souldier.

I doe it not upon any vaine thoughts
or presumption, to teach you new wayes:
a many of you, and your Leaders espe∣cially,
are so curious I know, & so skil∣full,
at least, in the Theory of a Souldier,
that you need not my Booke for a Mai∣ster
in this kinde. Tis meant for your
Recreation: to put you into Discourse
now and then: and to testifie withall,
mine owne private respects both to your
Persons, and of your Practise; thats the
purpose of it. And truely very fit it is,
that some body in the generall name,
should encourage your Exercise with
an acknowledgement, how much your
Countrey is beholding vnto you: what
though you haue not for your Countries
cause as yet resisted vnto bloud? nor in the
open field done dutie against a foe? what
though the fayre Armes that you put
on, be for ornament rather, than for de∣fence?

yet is your Military skill and dex∣terity
at your Orders, Motions, Postures,
and Handling of your Armes; as much
(perchance) as many an old Leaguerers
that hath. That our Age and Nation
are so happy in a still and gentle peace;
as neither doe we stand in need of your
valours; nor haue you your selues any
great use of your owne courages: blessed
be the Lord of Hosts therefore, who hath
not dealt so with any Nation. That here's
no sword drawne in our Kingdome, but
that of Iustice; and that of Honour some∣times,
which is gladly stooped vnto with
a bended knee; we are to thanke our roy∣all
Soveraigne for, who is so studious of
our quiet. And under the favour of the
first sword; may wee all be ever happily
protected: and to the gracious stroake of
the second sword, I could wish with all
my heart, that all your shoulders that
deserve it, were submitted. Valour & cou∣rage

I assure my self you would all shew;
should but your Country require your
service: and did she so, you should be a∣mong
the first & the best men, that her
safetie must rely vpon. That the King∣dome
hath by this means, the more that
are enabled to defend it; is partly owing
vnto your forwardnesse: and that there
is a new Militia every yeare reered vp,
and a continuall supply of a Military
breede of Practitioners; is to be ascribed
to your example. I know you much ho∣nour
that miracle of Souldiers, the King
of Sweden: & by that time you haue read
this; you will find more cause for it Here
in the First part, shall you find him Re∣ligious;
in the Second, Iust: & in the Third,
most Sufficien for an every way accom∣plisht
General: Devotion, Iustice, & a mar∣tiall
excellency, make vp his Discipline.
Farewell Gentlemen, and be pleased to
accept of this, and of the good will and
service, of the namelesse Author.
