



Right Worshipfull,
WOnderfull is the power of the Al∣mighty in the sense of Smelling, and powerfull is his providence in the object of the same, whether corporall or spirituall: for as the first object is double; naturall and artisiciall, so is it a double demoustration of that vigilant care. The first part of this ocular argument is this goodly Theatre, the earth garnished with her glo∣rious garment of Flora's fertilities, that admirable di∣versitie of fragrant flowers, The second part is appa∣rent by that acumen hominis, which God hath instil∣led into his reasonable creature, for the refreshment of
the spirits through the nostrils: for the witty industry of man about the procurement of artificiall smels, is great, as appeareth by his diligence about the Moschat, Sivet,Conradus Gesner. Hist, of foure footed beasts. &c. But as the spirituall smell of the soule is farr more pretious, so is the Divine Love & Providence in this, farre more great and gratious; the impregnable proofe & pregnant trueth wher of is his eternall word, whence the Redeemed of the Lord doe gather odorife∣rous flowers, to prevent the noysome and loathsome smell of impietie; the contemplative smelling of which gratious garlands is the continuall delight of Davids Blessed man, Psal 1.2. & the practique a sweet savour unto the Lord, as in the example of Noah, Gen 8.21. Now out of this sacred Garden (by the blessing of that ever. blessed Gardener) I have gathered a few spirituall flowers, which I present unto your Worship in testimo∣nie of my thanksulnes for all your constant loves, ear∣nestly craving that these first fruits of my poore La∣bours may passe into the world under the shelter of your gratious acceptation; which patronage if I obtaine, then shall this Tuzzimuzzie have its wished and ex∣pected smell. Though theresore the mighty Apolloes of this Learned generation could have dedicated vnto your W. a farre more odoriferous Nosegay, yet re∣ject not this simple one.
The Persian Prince tooke in good part
The water of the well,
Because he saw the giuers heart
The givers gift excell.
So let it please your W. to respect, Non quid, sed quo animo: for what I can, I offer.

For loe I offer at your kindnesse shrine
This little Incense, or this flower of mine.
And so I humbly take my leave, commending both your selfe, and all yours to the effectuall blessing and grace of the Lord, and to the power of his word, where∣by hee is able to build you up further, and to give you an incorruptible inheritance among those that are cal∣led, and sanctisied through faith in the Lord Iesus.

