



SYR It may be you will take it vn∣kindly to see vnawares your selfe and your papers thus in print. But I was moued to doe it by due cō∣sideration of that which follow∣eth. I receaued them not as se∣cret, neyther do I thinke you gaue them to be con∣cealed. You wrote against a printed Catalogue of Catholike Professors, wherof a deare friend of mine is the Author, giuen you vpon a former Conference which your self procured betweene some other of my Friends and your Doctors, concerning a Prote∣stant Catalogue; which Conference though pri∣uatly intēded, was afterwards victoriously printed. Wherefore writing them as you did, against such a

Booke, and vpon such an occasion, you might easi∣ly thinke they would be answered; and it is not strāge they should come to be printed. As the great opinion which others had of your deepe learning, and your owne profession of your great skill and reading in the Fathers, made me diligently to peruse those authorityes alleadged by you: so hauing well examined them, I thought my selfe diuers wayes o∣bliged to giue a large & full Reply vnto them. And being as you are most extremely, and most vehemēt∣ly distant in opinion from me; no maruell, if to be better vnderstood, I speak so lowd that all the Land may heare me. And for the same cause you must pardon me, if I rather choose to expose both you & my selfe to the iudgment of others, then hauing ta∣kē some little paynes in this matter to make you the only iudge of my labours. The old Maister Buggs be∣ing carried away with Ecce in Penetralibus, thinketh to haue found the Messias in your study, and was wholy transported with those chosen places, and se∣lected authorities contayned in your papers; which tending to no lesse then the losse of his soule, meri∣ted great compassion: the like may happen to others which deserueth preuention. Your owne Doctors haue already adorned the Pageant of their victory with the publication of your Names: Vnto you is giuen the driuing on of the Chariot: and the old Maister Buggs is led in Triumph. Some perchance haue been taken in the net of the Title, and may be freed againe by the net of Christ; which therefore

should not hange in the Riuers of priuate papers, when the other flyeth in the ayre, but should be cast into the Sea of the wide World, to gather and draw togeather all kind of fishes. In this net the Fi∣shers themselues are happily taken, and all they that are not taken, are lost for euer. The other of the He∣retikes is but a net to catch flyes, which though cū∣ningly wrought, must in tyme be swept away to∣geather with the Spiders. They haue printed against vs, and renewed an old Decree against our printing: if no Reply should be made, some of them would thinke, that now they might lye by Proclamation. What greater signe of falshood, thē hauing told your owne tale to seeke to stop the mouthes of your Ad∣uersaries with old Statutes? But the State neuer in∣tended to make a Law against God, his Word will not be tyed. All Princes should serue it, and all printing Presses must be subiect vnto it. Therfore no maruell, if the taking of one Presse do set two more on worke, and that your Doctors by seeking to suppresse the Truth, do presse it forward. You know then what moued me to diuulge your papers giuing the Fathers their due. I haue told you your owne, but sparingly; and if you knew my hart, you would see, and confesse that I had done it friendly, Belieue, and you shall vnderstande, Belieue the Fathers and you shall vnderstand the Fathers, He that hea∣reth not the visible vniuersall Church, is no better then a Heathen, and belieueth neyther Church nor Fathers: but the vnlearned not knowing the doctrine of the

Church and the vnstable forsaking that which they haue knowne, as they peruerte the Scriptures, so al∣so they preuert the Fathers to their owne damnation: from the which I beseech God deliuer you, praying you likewise to thinke no otherwise of me, then as of

