



MOST REVEREND,
IN matters of Bounty or Benefit received, He that speaks thanks, Sigratum dix∣eris, omnia dixcris. Sen. lib. de Ben. 2. commonly, Speakes all; The Divine not so, His profession requires aswell De∣votion, as Gratitude; and what is onely Acknowledgement in others, should be Prayer in him. These have made
 way for this Ambition of mine (for so it will be censur'd) in seeking your Grace's Patro∣nage; to which, by your former great Fa∣vours and Incouragements, I have met with a double staire; The one, in my first admission to spirituall preferment; The other, in setling it, when it was disturb'd; Both these, here bound up by a thankfull and zealous obligation, in this Tender of my poore Endeavours: which, though I feare, will scarce hold waight in the Scale of your stricter Iudgement; yet, in that of your Charity, They may passe, perhaps, with a Graine or two, (as oftentimes light peeces doe) and so vindicate me from the impu∣tation of that loose and lazie Ignorance, which the very Spirit of Ignorance would put up∣on me; where Ʋociferation is cried-up for Industrie; and Faction for Holinesse; and a bitter and unbridled Zeale for sound knowledge. But notwithstanding the foaming of those muddie waters, Springs may runne cleare; and I doubt not, but Mine shall, if they finde a Current in your Graces Protection; with whom, though in the most Criticall and envious Eye, All things are cleare and
 pure, without the least taint or tincture of corruption (like waters in their own Source and Fountaine) yet the Waters of Marah have been round about you, and no doubt, but your Grace hath had a taste (no lesse than others of that Hierarchy) of their Gall of Bitternesse. Witnes their divine Tragedies and impudent Appeales; their late Curranto's, Acts 8.23. and Legends of Ipswich, and since (I know not by what poore Haberdasher of smal wares) Their Looking glasse for Lordly Prelates; In which they have not so much wounded the particular Honours of eminent and lear∣ned men, as strucke through the sides of Religion it selfe, in blemishing the outward face of the Church, not onely by obtruding to her, her former Spots and Moles (as what Church was ever yet without them?) but over-spreading it with a kinde of Leprosie; And so, insteed of being blacke, Cant. 1.5. like the Tents of Kedar, They would make her uglie, like the Tent of Korah, thereby exposing her to the scornefull eyes of her enemies abroad; and (if possibly) of her owne Sonnes at home. Now, if bold men dare thus play with the very Beard of Aaron, Psal. 133.2. what will
 they doe to the Skirts of his Rayment? If the goodly Oake, and the Cedar be thus beaten on with their Tempests, what shall become of the slender Firre Tree, and the poore Shrub of the valley? If Schismaticall hands be catching at the Mytre and the Rotchet, how will they rend the contemptible Hood and Surplesse? Certainely, if the maine Pillars and Buttresses of the Church be once shaken, the weather-beaten Tiles and Rafters will be tumbling about their eares; However, in despight of the envious Basiliske, Psalm. 57.4 this poyson of the Aspe, and Gall of the viper, the speares and arrowes and sharpe Swords of these holy Libellers (O blessed for ever be the God of Heaven; and under him, here His God of earth, Ezra 7.6. a most Gratious Soveraigne!) Ezra is in high Favour, and The King hath grant∣ed him all his requests according to the hand of the Lord his God upon him: So that, your Grace is still above danger, and shot-free of their Power, though not of their Envie; which; no doubt, is curst enough, but that her hornes are short; and if they were not, I might ap∣positely enough bring home, That to your fatherly Care of the Church, here (a word
 onely or two exchang'd) which in the like case, S. Ierom did to the learned Bishop of Hippo, the great Repairer of the primitive Faith; In orbe celebraris, Canonici, Te, Epist. 57. D. Aug. circa si∣nem. Condi∣torem antiquae rursum Fidei venerantur; & quod signum majoris eft gloriae, omnes Schisma∣tici detestantur; & Tuos, pari persequuntur odio; ut quos Gladio nequeunt, voto intersi∣ciant.
Pardon this Digression, most Reverend Father. Obscure men may, without offence, deplore the miseries they cannot redresse; Those that are more eminent, may doe both. A Generall Harmony, aswell in Do∣ctrine, as in Discipline is yet wanting in the publike practice of our Church, though not in the Principles thereof; which is the maine Anvile most of my Sermons ham∣mer on; where, though you shall meete, belike, with much dust and rubbish, yet there is a way begunne to a richer Myne, which more elaborate and higher wits may dig after, if they please. And as in publike Vineyards, there are tàm Vvae, quàm Labruscae, here a wilde Grape, there a Greene one; yon∣der a Third, in its full bloud, more ripened
 for your Palate; So it is in this mixture of my labours, according to the disposition of their severall Dedications; where, though every peece may finde an Incourager, None a Vindicator justly, but in a religious and learned Metropolitan, to whose Graci∣ous hands are in all obedience offered, These and all the Powers of

