



AS there is not anie one thing, whereof he, that is in hand to build any great and magnificent building, should bee more carefull, then that he do lay the foundatiō therof firm and sure; otherwise, he shall not only lose his cost and trauell spent about it, but also endanger his life in it, by the vn∣expected tumbling of it downe vpon his head: so likewise, that Christian, who would so build vp and reare the great and lusty frame of the work of his saluation, that hee may not in the end both lose his labour and charges, and
also himselfe bee crushed vnder it, and vtterly perish by the dreadful fall there∣of; as it befell to him, who built his house vpon the sand:Math. 7.27 hath need to look to lay the foundation thereof certaine, sure, and proportionable in the vndecei∣uable and steady principles & grounds of Christianitie; which doe virtually comprehend and sustaine the huge and weighty burden of the whole building of religion, wherin he doth repose him∣selfe.
Which grounds, though they ly low in the building, are not therefore the more to be neglected or dispised of any, but rather the more to be regarded and carefully preserued, for the necessary vse and aboundant profit, which thence doth arise to a sound Christian: for this foundation beeing once well layd and continued, it is a strong fortresse against errour and heresie: for though a man be not so expert in the Scripture, as to know the true and naturall meaning of all the texts thereof, yet may he boidly reiect that doctrine,2. Ioh. 10 which doth not proportionably agree with the frame and analogie of faith,Rom. 12.6 summarily com∣prised in the grounds of religion for the
simple truth comming all from the same Spirit, cannot bee contradictorie to it selfe.
Againe, by the knowledge of the prin∣ciples of religion, a good Christian may be both an vnderstanding and iudicious Reader and hearer of the word: for there is not any truth deliuered cōcerning our saluation, which he may not plainly see both to arise from, and agree with some of the grounds and principles of religi∣on, whereunto he may referre it: for the truth is vniforme.
Finally, a man furnished with the sound vnderstanding of these grounds,1. Pet. 3.15. 2. Tim. 2.2 is able to render a good and sufficient reason of his faith; and to informe and establish o∣thers in the same things, not confusedly only in some good notes here and there scatteringly gathered, but orderly and with iudgement in the whole frame of Christian Religion, briefly compact in one intire bodie.
Further, that these Principles of Reli∣gion should bee set downe by way of Question and Answer, it is without que∣stiō the most profitable way for the sim∣pler sort of people; the which course of catechising, is both largely cōmended by
the learned, and straightly vrged by au∣thority, of which kind of teaching there be models and methods almost infinite: which in my iudgement is not to be bla∣med as a vice, but rather commended as a vertue; when they doe all agree in the same substance of truth, though differ in the manner of contriuing and handling thereof, according to the variety and multiplicity of the gifts of Gods Spirit:1. Cor. 12.4. for therby a more irrefragable testimony is publikely giuen to the truth, when all writings apert, and after seuerall maners, doe all agree in one and the same verity. And whereas the disposition, manners, and opinions of seueral people, in seueral places and ages do differ; for the rectify∣ing thereof, these seuerall and differing formes and methods of teaching are wel (by Gods prouidence) fitted.
Now, seeing that after that Catechifme set downe in the book of Common prai∣er, whereby children are prepared for confirmation, wee are not by authority tied only to vse al any one certaine form of Catechism, for the edification of them of riper yeeres: therefore taking the be∣nefit of that common liberty, for the fur∣ther building vp of that part of Gods
Church committed to my charge, I doe by the long and earnest importunity of many of you (my louing friends, to whō I am not onely willing cheerefully to im∣part my trauels,1. Thes. 2.8 but euen also mine owne selfe for your good) suffer this briefe and plaine draight to be wrung from me, to come abroad amongst multitudes of the same nature: not hereby to finde fault with, or disparage any of them, but that thereby with my greater ease I may the better benefit and helpe you, both by ca∣techising and preaching: for when both catechising and preaching come framed out of the same mould, the one orderly agreeing with the other; the one doth both confirme and illustrate the other to the hearers: as when the foundation and walls of a house are both of one propor∣tion, it is most strong and sightly: and also the Church being by this little pub∣like taste satisfied and contented touch∣ing the same doctrine,Gal. 2.9 which you are or∣dinarily taught in priuate, her approbati∣on and allowance thereof, may bee a strong motiue to cause you the more to regard it: for my part, I haue no greater ioy then that you walke in the truth.3. Ioh. 4
Take this as a fore-runner and pledge
of a larger Treatise, which some of you haue much expected, to wit, the body of practicall and case diuinity, which lon∣ger time, by further experience and stu∣dy, must first better perfect and polish. In this method, I haue sought to be both short and plaine, for to helpe the memo∣rie and vnderstanding of the meanest a∣mongst vs; the proofes I haue quoted with the Answeres, the words whereof I pray you to search, for the benefit both of your selues and families: that your faith being built, not vpon mans word but Gods,2. Tim. 1.12. it may remaine sure, knowing whom you haue beleeued.
And so I pray you, my good friends, giue all diligence to make your calling and election sure,2. Peter 1.10, 5 by adding vnto your faith vertue, to vertue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, to temperance patience, to patience godlinesse, to god∣linesse brotherly kindnesse, to brotherly kindnesse loue: and so being careful that both you and yours bee fearers of the Lord,Psal. 115.11, 12, 13, 14. you may be assuredly perswaded that God will be your helpe and shield, he will blesse you both great and small, the Lord wil increase you more & more, you and your children, as hee hath done
your vertuous forefathers in this place, who haue proued it true, that Godlinesse is great gaine.1. Tim. 6.6 Now the very God of peace sanctifie you throughout; and I pray God your whole spirit, and soule,1. Thes. 5.23. and bodie be preserued blamelesse vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. AMEN.

