


DIuers men (Right noble & most renowmed Earle) according to the diuersitie of their natures doe di∣uersly seeke to excel others: as in the auncient Ro∣mane state, Crassus the rich by wealth, Pompei the great by honor, Caesar the meeke by friendes, Ci∣cero the eloquent by learning, Cato the wise by counsell, Fabritius the temperate by integritie, Bru∣tus the stoute by fortitude, and Scipio Affricanus by bountie, and libe∣ralitie: In all common weales are like dispositions: And verily riches wel vsed are ornaments of peace and sinewes of war: honors wel got∣ten & true nobilitie are of peerelesse price, especially in a comely perso∣nage, and manly coūtenance: friends vnfained a treasure thā the which nothing more trustie: what is more sweete than learning? highlier to be prised than wisedom? rather to be vsed than temperance? more valu∣ed than magnanimitie? & neerlier resembling the boūties of God than true liberalitie? As eche of these though desired for priuate praise, and singled from others is a singuler ornament, so being ioyned with more of the rest, and imployed to the publike good, cannot but make a man to be admired. But if al these together were inspired into one as though all the planets had agreed by their gratious aspects, and sweete influen∣ces to furnish a man at all assaies, would not the eyes of all mens minds be as it were dazeled at the bright beames of the right peerelesse nobili∣tie of such a man? especially if they shall see it wholly dedicated to the glory of God, the good of the Church and common wealth. I dare not apply this directly to your Honor, least it may seeme to sauour of flat∣tery. But if it may please your wisedome to suruay the excellent giftes, wherwith God hath singularly graced your honorable estate, if it ap∣peare that you haue imployed your wealth to the good of Gods Church, in this are you like the wise rulers of Israel, who freely offered precious stones, and costly perfumes to the worke of the tabernacle: sofarre as you haue vsed your honorable estate to countenance the Gos∣pel, and the professors thereof, therein haue you resembled the proui∣dent Ioseph, whom God exalted aboue all Pharaohs house, that so he might relieue his olde father Israel, and the families of all his brethren: wherein your Lordship hath vsed her Maiesties fauour to the building vp of the walles of Gods Church, therein haue you liuely represented the right noble Courtier Nehemiah, whose countenance was sad be∣before Darius his king, vntill he had obtained letters, leaue, & furniture, to repaire the walles of the holy Citie: So oft as your godly policies, graue coūsels, & wise speeches, haue directed for the peace of England, haue confounded the counsels of our Romish Achitophels, haue disa∣pointed the treasons of our Absoloms, so often hath your Honor bin found faithfull to your Prince, to your Counrie, to the Church, as Hushai the Archite Dauids friend. If by prayer and fasting you haue called for the helpe of God, as Ezra: if your hand haue bin as the hand of Ioab against the enemies of your Prince, and for the people of God in the loe countries: if you haue enlarged your heart and hand in gifts to many, who haue trauailed to benefite their countrie and profit the Church, as Salomō rewarded Hiram, & those who wrought al skilful workes for the Temple. If in all these things God haue inhabled your Lordship in some measure, or in most of them in great measure, to his glorie, the peace of the Church, the wealth of the land, and honor of the Prince, then both haue you wherein to reioyce, and the eies of all men whom to behold, as a common Patrone of all those, who in any zealous desire imploy their paynes to profite their countrey and the Church of God. Wherfore licensed to dispose (as I will) of this English worke made by Master Cyprian Lucar with a dutifull zeale to benefite his natiue soyle, I thought it my duetie to offer it to your noble patro∣nage, as a present most fit for your Honor, & most profitable for these times.
Your L. her Maiesties liefetenant in the loe countries hath endured great trauailes in the cause of God, and your Prince, and can any thing be more acceptable to your Honor than that which may be both for chiefe defence of the friends, and greatest anoyance of the enemies of God and your Prince. Againe, when can such a present be more seaso∣nable than now, that so many Princes of the earth haue conspired a∣gainst the Lord & our Prince the Lords anointed? and what can more astonish the eies, and eares of the profane hearted and earthly minded enemies of Gods religion, and our Princes peace, than the lighteninggunpowder and the thundering Cānon? what can more encourage & strengthen souldiers who shal fight the battailes of God & our Prince, then skilfull shooting in great and small peeces of artillerie? than artifi∣ciall making of saltpeeter, gunpowder, mynes, and many sorts of fire∣workes? than right vse and practise of al those and many other seruicea∣ble deuises? Then to whom rather than to your Honor? when rather than now? What rather than this martiall booke may I offer for a pre∣sent in these martiall times? seeing it is not onely a rich storehouse ga∣thered by the forenamed Master Cyprian Lucar out of the famous Ni∣cholas Tartglia and diuers other Authors in diuers languages, but also by diuers of Master Lucar his deuises greatly furnished and enriched. Most humbly therefore I beseech your Honor according to the won∣ted nobilitie of your wel affected mind, to accept of this my present, as a sure pledge both of my zeale to your L. and loyall care to further whatsoeuer may benefite my Queene and countrie. The Lord of his mercie still protect our Prince, defend our countrie, and preserue your Honor that long you may aduaunce your wealth, fame, honor and friends, your person and power, your temperance, wisedome, forti∣tude, affabilitie and liberalitie, to the maintenance of our happie peace, propagation of true religion, defence of the holy Church, the Gospel, and the glorie of God.

