



MY verie good Lordes, as Sainct Iohn pro∣poundeth vnto vs two sorts of children, of whome he calleth the one the children of God, and the o∣ther the children of the deuill: so doeth the holie Scripture plainly testifie, that in the day of iudge∣ment there shall bee a maruellous difference be∣tweene the one and the other. For the one shal in∣comprehensibly and eternally be blessed, and the other extreamely and infinitly accursed and wretched. This difference which shall then appeare betweene the children of God and the children of the deuill, doth aduertise and admonish vs, that there ought also to be a great difference betweene them, euen in this life. And in deed euery one may well vnderstand that the waie to heauen is one, and to hell another, and consequently that the workes and affections of Gods children are of one sorte, and the workes of the children of the deuill of another. Neuertheles, so brutish are many become, that they neuer think vpon this difference betweene the one and the other, neither in regard of this life, nor of the life to come. Others thinking slightly thereupon, do neuer take information of this difference, to vnderstand it: Others somewhat vn∣derstanding it, are so dazeled with the glistering shew of the world, & so carried awaie with the lusts of the flesh, that they haue no care therof: Yea euen among the children of God, liuing in this peruerse world abandoned to all wickednes, we see verie few that doo make shew of that difference, that in this life should be betweene them and the children of the deuill. Now Saint Mathew in this sentence, Amend your liues, for the
 kingdome of heauen is at hand: hauing comprehended the sum∣marie of the first Sermons of Iesus Christ and S. Iohn the Baptist, doth to this purpose teach vs. First, that all the duties of the children of God are contained in this word Amend: also that the same is it that repre∣senteth the difference betweene them and the children of the Deuill, in this life. Secondly, that the apprehension of the kingdome of heauen to be so neare vs, ought mightily to induce vs to Amendement. Vpon this consideration, to the end to correct the negligence, or rather the bru∣tishnes of men in this point, I haue vpon this argument framed these fower books: In the first, shewing how many dangerous follies there are that hinder man from Amendment. In the second, Wherein we are to Amend. In the third, who ought to Amend: And in the last, haue I laid down the causes that should induce vs to Amend our liues, gathered out of the names and attributes of Iesus Christ, & out of this reason by him selfe set downe, For the kingdome of heauen is at hand: The whole tending to make vs to vnderstand and indeed to practise the difference which euen in this life ought to bee betweene vs and the children of the Deuill: to the ende to hope with incomprehensible ioye to be∣holde for our selues the most blessed separation that shall bee betweene them and vs, when wee shall bee lifted vp into the fruition of the eternal glory that is prepared for vs in the kingdom of heauen. And vpon three principall reasons haue I resolued and emboldned my selfe to present & dedcate them to your Lordships. The first is generall, com∣prised in three points. First, in consideration of the seruent zeale & ho∣ly affection that you doe testifie to the preseruation and maintenance of the true and pure religion: Secondly in regard of your iustice and poli∣ticke gouernment, administred with such discretion, wisedome and e∣quitie, that al your louing Subiects are in dutie to acknowledge and con∣fesse themselues to be blessed therein: Thirdly in respect of your wonder∣full courtesie, which you vouchsafe to extend to the faithfull, fled into this towne: who liue vnder your authoritie and gouernment in as great case, libertie and freedome, as possibly they might in their owne natiue countries: Which example of your clemency is also seconded by the mar∣ueilous humanitie of your subiects towards those that are harboured a∣mong them. The second reason is in respect of the French Church, to the seruice whereof it hath pleased God to call me. In that your Lo. haue
 permitted & authorised the holy publick ministerie with all things ne∣cessarie to the same: That you haue prouided thē of a larg & cōuenient Church. That you giue maintenance to thē for three ministers: Lastly that you exercise and performe a verierare and true Christian charitie to the poore of the same Church. And this your wonderfull charitie, with other the vertues before noted, do I here set downe, first to the end that all and euery the members of the said French Church, may more and more perceiue how deepely they are bound to bee your faithfull and obedient subiects: Secondly that they may vnderstand and the more di∣ligently put in practise their dutie, in feruent praier vnto God for your health and prosperitie: Lastly, that all other Magistrates may in heart bee moued to imitate the example of those vertues that shine in your Lordships. The last reason is particuler to my selfe: in regard of the de∣sire, that you had to retaine me to the seruice of this Church, which your selues vouchsafed to testifie, in that besides your liberalitie extended to the two other ministers, you offered to prouide me also both of a house & maintenance: As in effect it pleased you at my cōming to make demon∣stration of your fauor, liberality & affection towards me in that behalf. Whereupon all such graces as God hath vouchsafed to bestow vpon me, being in reson & vpon iust cause vnto you due & vowed: I haue formed and doe acknowledge my selfe bound to dedicate and present these my fower bookes of Amendment of life vnto you: to the end that being pub∣lished vnder your name, they may witnesse as wel my bounden dutie vn∣to you: as also my desire (according to my smal habilitie) to employ my selfe in the seruice both of the Church and your Lordships. Beseeching God, most magnificent and vertuous Lords to maintaine you in his ho∣ly protection, and with his holy spirite to guide you in all your affaires, with increase of all prosperitie both spirituall and corporall. And par∣ticulerly so farre to fauour me with his grace, as so to blesse this small worke, together with the affection wherewith it is vnto you presented, that being acceptable to your Lo. It may especially redound to the ad∣uauncement of the kingdome of Iesus Christ. From your town of Amster∣dam. This last of Iune. 1594.

