



FOrasmuch as it hath plea∣sed almightie God of his infinite goodnesse, to giue vnto the glorious Gospell of his eternall sonne, so long & pro∣sperous successe in this our Coun∣trie; it is now time (right Honorable and my verie good Ladie) for euerie one that is a true professor of the same, all carnall perswasions of hu∣mane reason deluding the soule be∣ing set aside, to prepare our selues to the day of trial. For although it plea∣seth God sometimes, for the gathe∣ring of his Church, to giue vnto it as it were
Halcyon daies: yet com∣mon it is not, that it should any long time continue in rest and pleasure. Nay, by the word of GOD wee
know, & by experience sometimes of our selues (her Maiesties royall person not excepted) and now of our neighbours round about vs we see, that the Church of God in this world, as it euer hath bin, so must it euer be vnder the crosse. And there∣fore if wee will bee compted of the Church indeede, and glorie in that excellent name of a Christian, let vs knowe assuredlie, that vnto vs, euen vnto vs (that haue so long liued in rest and pleasure, if wee be the chil∣dren of God) in some sort and mea∣sure a triall must come. For, if God chastise euerie sonne whom he re∣ceiueth, and euery member of Chri∣stes body must be fashioned like vn∣to the head, if the afflictions of this world are manifest tokens to the children of God, of his fauour and loue towards them, and sure pledges of their adoptiō: how can we looke, or how can we desire to bee exemp∣ted
from this common condition of God his owne children and house∣hold? To this end therefore (right Honorable Ladie) I haue translated this little booke, first to admonish some (who for lacke of experience, neuer feeling other daies than these full of peace and quietnes) that they learne to applie vnto themselues whatsoeuer they heare or reade of the triall of GOD his children, least falselie imagining it to appertaine either to the times that are past, or to other Nations, it fall sodainlie vpon them as a theefe in the night, & they be destitute of all hope and comfort. Secondlie, to awake others aboun∣ding both in knowledge and other graces, whom notwithstanding, sa∣tan (by the deceaueable lusts & vaine pleasures of this wicked world) hath so rockt a sleepe, that they seeme al∣most, as they that are diseased with the Lethargie, to haue forgottē both
themselues, their holie calling and profession. Last of all, to comfort an other sort, whome it hath pleased GOD so to presse downe with sor∣rowes, and to exercise with the con∣tinuall afflictions and calamities of this mortall life, as no times seeming fauourable vnto thē, they can scarse receiue the words of any comfort. And because your Honor hath been of long time, not onlie a professour, but also a louer of the trueth, whom the Lord (exalting to an higher place of dignitie than many other) hath set vp, as it were a light vpō an high candlesticke, to giue light vnto ma∣nie, I haue especiallie dedicated vn∣to your Honour this my poore tra∣uaile, humblie beseeching the Lord to make it no lesse comfortable to your Honour, and to those that shall reade it, than it hath been vnto me who haue translated it. Euerie one in his calling is bound to doo some∣what
to the furtherance of the holie building; but because great things by reason of my sex, I may not doo, and that which I may, I ought to doo, I haue according to my duetie, brought my poore basket of stones to the strengthning of the walles of that Ierusalem, whereof (by grace) wee are all both Citizens and mem∣bers. And now to returne to those whō experience hath not yet taught, and whom prosperitie will not suf∣fer to awake: I earnestlie beseech them both in the Lord, no longer to deceiue themselues with vaine ima∣ginations, neither to suffer their hearts so to be tied to earthlie vani∣ties, that they should despise or neg∣lect those things that cā truely make them happie indeed. When it shall please GOD to open their eyes to discerne betweene heauenlie and earthly, betweene things transitorie, and things euerlasting, I know they
will of themselues bee ashamed of this their negligence. For what are all the pleasant things of this world, which most bewitch the minds of men, if they be compared with hea∣uenlie and eternall things? If statelie & sumptuous buildings do delight; what building is so statelie and glo∣rious as newe Ierusalem? If riches; what so rich as that, whose pauemēt is of pure gold, whose foundations and walls of precious stones, & gates of orient pearles? If friends, kins∣folke and neighbours; what Citie so replenished as this, where God him∣selfe in his Maiestie, Iesus Christ the head of the Church in his glorie, & all the holie Angels, Patriarchs, Pro∣phets, Apostles and Martirs do dwel together in happinesse for euer? If honor; what honor comparable to this, to be the seruant and child of so mightie a King, and heire of so glo∣rious a kingdome; where neither
time doth consume, nor enuie de∣priue of honour, nor power of ad∣uersarie spoyle of glorie, that is end∣les & incōprehensible? If then there be no comparison betweene things heauenlie and things that are earth∣lie, and no man can attaine to the things that are heauenlie, but by the same way that Christ himselfe at∣tained vnto them; which was by the crosse: why (casting off all impedi∣ments that presseth downe) doo we not runne on our course with chere∣fulnes and hope, hauing Christ so mightie a King, for our Captaine & guide, who (as the Apostle saith) for the glorie that was set before him, indured the crosse, and despising the shame, sitteth now at the right hand of the throne of God? How slowe and dull of heart are wee, if as Esau, (who for a messe of pottage sold his birthright) wee are contented for a small and short pleasure in this wic∣ked
world, to leese that incompa∣rable and euerlasting glorie, which Christ the sonne of GOD with so great a price hath purchased for vs. The Lord giue vs wisedome to vn∣derstand, & grace to heare his voice while it is saide to day, that when daies and nights & times shall cease, wee may (without time) enter into his ioye and rest which neuer shall haue end. The Lord euer preserue your Honor; and adde vnto a mul∣titude of happie yeares spent in his feare, a continuall increase of al spiritual graces to his glo∣rie, and your endles comfort.

