

VNmatchable Cheualiere, I am bold to commit a poore Goose to your impregnable prote∣ction and patronage, I knon there will be as much to doe in the keeping of her, and with a
much danger, as was the conquest of the Golden Fleece, the Apples of the Hesperides, or the
sauing of Andromeda by Perseus: and but that your valiant atchieuements are knowne 
approued, I would neuer haue put my Goose to your inuincible Guard: the enemies that 
assault you, or attempt to take her from you, are many, whom in dutious courtesie I will describe vnto y:
First, the Powlters will assaile you with a terrible battry of rotten Eg-shot, to surrender the innocent Goose,

that they may murder, imbowell, pluke, and prostitute her to sale of who giues most. See, the Vthal∣
will come vpon you with a fresh alarum for her feathers, to stuffe the empty paunches of then B Isters,
Pillowes, and hungry Bed-tikes. Thirdly, the Cookes in squaarans, ai'd with Dripping pannes and ss,
instead of Speares, before they will lose their Fs, (and the king of their fingers to bote) will fight heoly
for the Goose till all smoke againe. Fourthly, the Apothecaries (raher then they will want the sweetnesse of the
pinguidity or feundous fat of the Gooses axunga (vulg  called g  they will so pelt   with pils,
instead of pellets, that they will make all stinke againe. Fiftly, the kit a-made will throw salding
ater at you, but she will haue one of her wings to sweepe downe Cbwebs, and dcspossesse Spiders of the ha∣bitations
they haue built out of their owne bowels. Sixtly, the lethers, and Archers, seare they will
inke your skinne full of t-holes, but they will haue er  s, to make them   dead, then the
Goose could liuing. Seuenthly, the Poets for her Quils, will call another penny lsse, thread  Par∣liament,
and ordaine Satiricall Statutes, and Trgall Acts against you, and  their scattred ima∣ginations
they will sale the skies as high as sullen Saturnes altitude, and rake into the  west psundy of
Barrathrum, forraging thorow the earth, ayre, and seas; but they will stigmatize, canterize, and Epi∣gramatize,
Anagramatize you, till you make a surrender. Eigtly, the Lawyers well sirke and firt
you tossing you betwixt hard fortune and ill lucke, that you will be almost mad, or bee in great danger to have
very little lest. Ninthly, the scriuners, publike Ntaris, or notorieus publians, will not
onely ioyne with the Lawyers, and the Poets against you: but they will neuer procure you any money when you
neede, without excessiue brokage, great credit, or good security. Tenthly, Shop-keepers (if you hold
the Gooses Quils from them) haue sworne, that they will euer keepe you out of their bookes. And lastly,
schoole-boyes will throw whole voleyes of stones at you, where-euer they see you, if you alow them not Pens,
though it be but to scrible or make ewes letters.
Thus hauing layd open to your Herculean view, the labours and dangers that you are like to suffer in
protecting the Goose Now I thinke it fit (vnder correction) to cloze vp my Dedication with some duti∣full
counsell, that though your enemies are mightie and many, and that they doe preuaile against you, and
with their multitude take from you both the flesh and feathers of the Goose, (which indeed belongs not to
you, nor doe I dedicate them to you) yet here is your true honour, and that which makes all me admire
you, that her better part, her genious, her intellectuall vnderstanding, her capacity, and reuerend gra∣uity,
her wisedome, and her very spirit; neither man, Deuill, or Dragon, is able to bereaue you of, as
long as you haue a sword to defend it. I haue dedicated a Booke of a Begger at this time to Archy,
but most noble Sir, onely to you my Goose, so leauing you: Not doubting of your acceptance, and pro∣tection:
I wish you such increase of honour as is sutable to your Heroicke enicauurs and vnimitable
wisedome.

