

Which nay scene, fearce, or Printers  worke when a  
into the Proffe, yet Cormorant oppresse, and therefore worthy to the prest;
but mu Cormorant hath neither  his   .  smooth the
fai of the  wor stoped his mouth to  
tuous: I have thought good to sympathze  and I
haue done my best to handle it in a fatable .
The Cormorant is nost castly unduced to ass, nor I to stattery.
J.s best serunce is harsh and vnsectable, so is my style. His bi∣ting
is sharpe and percing, so is my phrase. His thro wide and
spacious, my subiect is spaous. His color is blacke, Id sooner deeds
of knesse. Hee grabs and spuddles for his prey in muddy holes
and obscure cauernes, my Muse ferrus hase debaushed wretches in their swmsh dens. Hee like
the Crocodile moues the vpper chap, thus Treatise condemnes that beasts dissmula. Hees
swallowes downe his meate without taste, this booke distastes such as sinne without touch of conscience.
The ods is, my Cormorants appetite is limited, but must of theres is vnsatable.
I ayme not at such mens  as may fall by msirmty, for that were the Esops crab, to
offer to teach others to goe right, going crooked my selfe.
Detraction is priuate wounding of means name, and flattery and a deourer of men aloue. If I
can sayle betwixt these two, and not be spht, I shall arriue at my desired [part.
In my passage I shall have Polipheme casting rockes to sincke me, Criticks misconstrung my words.
like spiders sucking poyson out of wholsome flowers.
But from these Antipodes to goodnesse, by their Abesis to , I appeale to my conference, which
it a witnesse to me that can neither accese or condomme me.
Fayme at none but such as deuoure others, and set make thirst to keepe themselues out of thereach of
Law, I name none personally, and therefore with the faults, to amend with silence, rather thereby rub∣bing
off a spot to make a hole in the whole cloth, for I leaue gleanings enough to make a second part if
need require. Such stomackes as cannot dgest this doth,  me rather de to them a Choake-peare them a
Gudgeon.
There is no degree of man or woman, whatsoeuer, from the Court to the Cottage, or from the Pallace
to the Plough, but many make good ese of this Poem, either for merry recreation, or vtees defamation:
and in a word, if it please the  or be any way profitable for the confirming of the good, or refor∣ming
the bad, I have then my full recompence, with the effect of my intentous and wishes.

