


IT is a most firme demonstration of Gods excellency that although all creatures depend on him, yet is there such a Sea of goodnesse in God, that is neuer dryed vp. No one creature, not the greatest is able to vphold it selfe. God is euery way sufficient of himselfe and could giue himselfe full satisfaction, if their neuer had beene a world. The happiest of the creatures is hee that comes neerest to God. He that can subsist (if he be put to it) without any creatures helpe, and depends soly on the Creator. This excellent condition can none attaine vnto, but he that hath, and knowes he hath a speciall interest in God. So fleeting are all worldly contentments, that nothing can bee firme that is built vpon them: the times in which wee liue are the last dayes: the Churches full of warres, blood and troubles: our sinnes haue deser∣ued that the cloudes of affliction should crosse the Seas to follow vs.Psal. 61.2. Happy is he therefore that is set vpon a rocke
higher then himselfe. Happy is hee that can say, and say feelingly,Psal. 56.11. In God haue I put my trust, I will not bee afrayd what man can doe vnto mee. Happy is hee that finds an Arke at home that can hide him when the wa∣ters are farre aboue the highest mountaines.Gen. 7.19, 20. Happy can he neuer assuredly be that fals short of this, and settles his rest on any thing vnder the Sunne. He must come to Salo∣mons experimentall conclusion, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. The subiect of these paines is so much the more worthy acceptation, because it is a ladder that leads to the happiest and surest condition. If in the handling I fall short of other mens expectation, I shall be glad to see other men handle it more exactly. To my selfe it is some comfort, I haue written that which hath stayd me in many, & through Gods grace may stay me in any tryals. You and yours Madam haue I chosen for the Patrons of this worke, in regard of that ancient acquaintance that hath beene betweene vs: Your Family hath left mee as many tokens of your loue as I haue Children. That short space which I liued in the City how much I was indebted to you, I forbeare to speake, and de∣sire rather to speake to God to requite it. And since I haue receiued much comfort, and many kind encouragements and remembrance from your and their ourtesie. I haue not seene a Family in the City to my best remembrance which God hath so plentifully watred with spirituall and temporall showers of blessings in the Roote and in all the Branches. Your house and posterity are a remarkable example of Gods pro∣mise of benediction and multiplication to them that feare him.Psal. 128. If this labour may be pleasing and profitable to you, I shall hope it will be so to others. So I leaue it as a per∣petuall token of my neuer-dying affection to your Family, wishing you, what the Title offers you, Selfe-satisfaction. Lesse I cannot wish you, more I need not. Let it suffice then that I rest,

Clapham, Aug. 27. 1633.
