

GEntlemen, I pray you take me not for a common Ferriman to Conicatchers: I
transport this fellow this once, not out of confederacy, but out of commisera∣tion.
For I confesse ingenuously, at first sight of his pittifull Preface, he turn'd
all my malice into compassion. For I had thought, hauing giuen himselfe the
Title of his Maiesties Poet, and by his owne confession poore enough to be
one, that necessity (at least) would haue begot that which a beggar cals Phrase
him. Whereas this Cadworme, hauing onely got Rime, which is but the buttons and
 to couple Verse together; or as the wings of a Butter-flye now turn'd out of his Sum∣
weeds, hee appeares to be the same which I euer held him to be; A most naked and
ched Mungrell, not able to pen a letter in true English, though it were to borrow mo∣.
But you will say, it was the badnesse of the matter, & being the absolute & only profest ly∣
of our age, it behou'd him to build vpon his memory, which Artists say, is an enemy to wit:
 hereon his memory is so short, that as we speake of the Italians, they tell lyes so long till
 beleeue themselues for truths; so this Hydra-tong'd Proteus-prater in his owne and
 selfe same pestiferous Preface auer's, and confutes, and then auer's againe the same con∣tradictions
which he denies, that he was tyed to performe the Challenge at the Hope: Yet
, he confesses he sent his man backe with the earnest, which he sayes was fiue shillings;
say ten but we will not contend for the summe, had it beene ten pounds hee'll as soone pay
as fiue shillings. Did I giue him fiue shillings earnest? then no question but it was to tye him
 bargaine, was the money certaine, and the conditions at his owne choice? Indeed, he
es to haue money for a Song, but I haue more wit then to be one of his Patrons. But his
 plaid the knaue (as how could he doe other, hauing such a Master) and ran away with
 money; was euer poore Rat driuen to more extremity to free her selfe from the trap by
ning off his owne taile, is Monsieur le Foggnieurs seruice so cheape, that it will be sold for
five shillings. He will say his Annagram is, I will feare no man. It is a deere Anagram Monsi∣
, it cost you fiue shillings: For had you fear'd your Man, you would neuer haue trusted
him: but you may see the scald Squire will haue his Iade, though it be but a scabbed one;
his Man hath beene found in three or foure tales about the vnfortunate fiue shillings. First,

he confest that hee paid it to a Broker for the loane of a Cloake for his Master to goe twi
to the Court in: Secondly, that he paid it for the hyre of two Shirts for his Master, which
he had to ride into the Country withall: Thirdly, that hee gaue it to a Punke for her diui∣dend,
which Punke was to haue a share in their Riming and whistling, and they were to sha
with her in her commings in: Fourthly, that he paid it to a Broome-man, for foure paire 
Bootes for his Master, at fifteene pence a paire. Was euer Poore crowne so martyr'd and qua∣ter'd,
amongst Brokers, Knaues, and Whores? But were this all the dust that stucke on 
Coate, his man might beat it out of it; you shall finde he hath a Father to father his ly
on, which Sire of his (as hee saith, sent for him into the Country) I say twas the Thiefe who
pardon he was to get. Now sayes hee, whether should I obey my parents, or Iohn Taylor
Surely thy Father, Mounsieur, for he hath much need of a sonne that will Father thee. Nay
such a father that gaue him a hundred pound at parting, (I hold my life he meant with apu
for a parting blow.) This lye, a man would thinke, carries some colour with it, did not th
witlesse Asse himselfe discouer it to bee but a Vizard. For a little before, he writes, Might he
haue had fiue pound, he would haue staid his iourney. Doth not Esops pluck'd Crow looke
like a Rooke now? Vngracious Child, wouldst thou preferre fiue pound to thy fathers bles∣sing?
came the hundred pound so vnlook'd for, that the hope of it was not worth fiue
Surely Gentlemen, (I hope) to auoid this tax, hee will in his next edition confesse himselfe
the child of the people: and the hundred pound was one of his poeticall fictions, for as yet
one penny of it was neuer extant. And beleeue it, his faith, his father, and the money are alo
Implicite, neuer made manifest.
Imagine, his Father had beene able to giue him 100. pounds, would hee haue bound hi
Prentice to a blinde Harper, whose boy he cannot deny but he was, whom the hungry saw
scroyle almost famisht with beguiling him of his victuals? so that the poore musician was
faine to shift him off, for his guts were clung in his belly, and Fennor meant to make Ha
strings of them. But thinke you if his Father had beene of that worth, that he would haue suf∣fered
him to runne ouer the earth like one of Caines Imps, that had a Plough tayle of his own
to tye him to? But you will obiect a reconcilement vpon better fortunes, he is now married
and hath a stayd head. He hath call'd the King master, and the blacke Guard fellowes: heo∣nors
change manners, I confesse, and that he is adorn'd, I will not deny; the hundred pound
well laid out, shall speake his Fathers bounty. At thy return, Mounsier Le Fognier, what became
of the mony? didst thou pay the Hackney man for horse-hire? hee pleads not guilty, because h
receiued no gilt? thou hast but one only part of a Gentleman in thee, and that is, thou wilt p
no debts: didst thou buy houshold stuffe? Let the Thiefe speake, who is most familiarly gu
vnder colour of a pardon: but thou holdst it lawfull to punish Sinners. Didst thou buy appare
with it? No verily, he pawnd his Cloake the next morning of his returne. Oh inuisible summ
what is become of thee? This was a hidden blessing, whose effects are not yet to be seene. T
one of Erra Paters predictions, tis intailed vpon his Issue. But to conclude, if it were lawfull
for me to examine thee at Staffords Law, I would make thee confesse the receit of ten shil∣lings,
the acknowledgement of my bill, the acceptance of thy answere, and thy word and pro∣mise
for thy meeting me, and that I neuer receiued mony or message to the contrary. A
which thou didst confesse to me before fiue Witnesses since thy booke was written, when th
paidst me my Mony: and this and more I could make thee say and sweare, or else I would
beat thee to mash, and make a Gally-mawfry for Dogges of thee. But I think it time to lea
Prose, and fall into Verse, for the satisfaction of the Reader, thy shame, and my Fame.

