




MY humble Muse, in lofty manner sings
The 7 Kingdomes were,

1. Kent.
2 South-Saxons, Sussex and Surry.
3 East-Angles, Norfolke, and Cambridge-shire.
4 West Saxon, Barkshire, Deuonshire, Somersetshire, and Corne∣well.
5 Mertia, Glostershire, Herefordshire, Worcester, Shropshre, Scafforshire, Cheshire, Warwike, Leycester, Noreb, Oxford, ∣ingham, Bedford, and halfe Hartfordshire.
6 East-Saxon, Essex, Middlesex, and halfe Hartfordshire.
7 Northumberland diuided to two Kingdomes,  nd Bernicia, all brought to one Monarchy by Egler:  West-Saxons, and called England, 196 yees after .
 A Catalogue of Englands mighty Kings:
At first I do begin with Troian BRVTE,
And following Chronicles I do dispute,
Proceeding briefely with their Raignes and Names,
Till these blest dayes of our best Monarch IAMES,

Tis but an Argument thats written here,
That in such time such and such Princes were:
But he that meanes their Actions more to know,
May read Boetius, Hollinshed, or Stow,
Or our true labouring Moderne Master How,
Which Authors, Learned Iudgement do allow:
Or if youle see how former times doe runne,
Reade the laborious paines of Middleton.
We haue had Kings since Brute, of royall Blood,
One hundred forty sixe, some bad, some good,
Foure Queenes in all, this time did only Raigne,
Whose Memories in Histories remaine.
So in two thousand and seuen hundred yeeres,
We had thrice 50 Princes it appeares.
This Kingdome here was fiue times won and lost,
And Kings (as God decreed) oft chang'd and tost.
Sometimes one swaid the Scepter, sometime twaine,
And sometime seuen at once did rule and raigne,
Till sixe (by bloudy warres) lost life and throne,
And valiant Egbert ioyn'd them all in one.
But since (through Heauens high prouidence) I see,
Tis growne more great, and greater like to be:
Long may He liue, by whom in one 'tis guided,
And may they sinke that wish't againe diuided.
Then (Noble Lord) with good acceptance take
This Poem, for the Royall Subiects sake,
And though it be not compleate as it should,
Beare with it, and accept of what I could,

The matter's worthy, though the manner poore,
VVhich makes me heere your Patronage implore,
And may you be externall and internall,
Blest and aduanc'd to happinesse eternall.

Your Honours in all obseruance to be commanded,
Iohn Taylor.
