


MOst Potent and Powerfull Imposture, take it not amisse that I a poore
worme of your own breeding, doe (in waie of retribution) giue
you here the encrease of my Tallent, which I haue beene almost 60
yeeres a gathering. It was told me that when I first came to visit
you, that I cri'd and Waw'ld, and that when I leaue you, I shall sigh and
grone: and euer since I knew you, I haue loued you so well for the good parts
I haue seen in you, that I could verie willingly be glad to change you for a bet∣ter.
I know not what Title to put vpon you, you haue as many stiles alreadie
as the great Turke; with the soldier, you are a hard World; with the Diuine, you
are a wicked world; with the Lawyer you are a contentious world, with the
Courtier you are a slipperie world; with most men a mad world; and with all
men a bad world. The Diuell (your brother) and your sister the (Flesh) hath
quite spoiled you of all your good qualities and conditions; and (worse then
that) they haue made you blinde, that you cannot or will not see your owne
faults, and you haue blinded all your inhabitants that they can neither feele or
perceiue their miseries: for which cause, I haue made bold to dedicate this
Volume to your greatnesse, wherein (as in a glasse) you may view your im∣perfections.
Here shall you see all your foure ages now combind in one; first,
This is the Golden age, for Gold can doe any thing; it can both cleare and
bleare the eies of Iustice: it can turne Religion into Policie, Pietie into per∣iurie,
and what not. Siluer indeed lookes white, and white is the colour of
Age (Ergo the Siluer age) which though it run in an inferiour straine to Gold,
yet it works wonders, and without it there is no market kept in Church or
Commonwealth: for whosoeuer is King, Pecunia is Queene. The Brazen age
is apparant in euerie mans impudencie; most men and womens foreheads
or our-sides (which are their actions) doe manifest that they liue in an age of
Brasse. Lastly, the Iron age is palpably present, for many soldiers (who maine∣taine
their liues with daily seeking their deaths) haue stomacks like Estriches,
and (through want of meanes) they eat vp their swords and pistols. Amongst
all these, I haue long time noted your great bountie, you haue beene so fauo∣rable

to giue some men as much ambition as serued them (iustly) for the
breaking of their necks. To some you haue giuen Abundance, and you haue
made that Abundance beget Auarice, and that Auarice to beget destruction: some
you haue furnished with beautie, and that beautie hath confounded chastitie:
on some you haue (suddenly) thrown honors and promotions, and those you
haue loaden with enuie, slander & continuall perplexities. In a word, your gifts
are so mischieuously mixed, as wit with beggerie, follie with wealth, and the
like, that I protest I am wearie of you, which makes me thus bold to tell you
of your iadish tricks. You neuer fauored me, and therefore I haue no reason to
flatter you, nor will I flatter you or any man that shall or will doe me fauour.
I neuer will make my tong like a plaisterers Trowell, to dawbe and smooth
ouer the vices or villanies of any, with Sicophantizing Parasiticall flatterie.
World, all that I craue of thee liuing, is a graue when I am dead; and although
I flatter thee not; yet I loue thee not, (nor haue I any reason for it) for to mee
thy fawnings haue been frownings, thy beneuolence maleuolence, the cour∣tesies,
cares and crosses, and thy riches (innumerable) restlesle perturbations:
besides, when our blessed Sauior was vpon the earth, thy estate was so vile and
damnable, that though he praied for his tormentors and crucifiers, yet he one∣ly
excluded the World (by name) out of his praier saying, I pray not for the world:
and can there be any hopes that thou art any better now then thou wert
then; nay, it is to be doubted that thou art rather worse. So that if any man
will say that he hath occasion to loue thee, hee is either a foole or a mad man:
indeed our first father was too diffident towards God, and too credulous to∣ward
Thee; our first mother was a lyar, and our first brother was a murtherer,
this is the sweet kindred wee came of; yet thou (Obewitching world) doest
puffe vs vp with pomp, making vs forget our originall, and esteeme our selues
Demie-gods, when we are farre lesse then men; there is a more resemblance
of immortalitie in a suite in Law, then in the life of a man; and we are so
credulous, that when the whoremaster is called honest man, the Knaue will
belieue himselfe to be so. Truth is (and euer hath beene) dangrous to be spo∣ken.
It cost Iohn Baptist his head, and Clytus his life.
World, I haue two requests to thee, which if thou grant mee I will ne∣uer
thanke thee: the first is good cloathes, (for those beare a monstrous sway)
because I haue occasion to speake with great men, and without good cloathes
(like a golden sheath to a leaden blade) there is no admittance. Secondly,
that thou wilt keepe close from my Readers all preiudicate opinions, or let
them be perswaded that this following Booke is not of my writing; for op∣pinion
doth worke much in such cases; There were Verses once much estee∣med
for their goodnesse, because it was thought that a learned Italian Poet

named Sanazarus made them; but afterward, being found to bee of a poore
mans writing, they lost their estimation. An Anthem was once sung before
the Dutchesse of Vrbin, and but slightly regarded; but after, beeing knowne
that Iaquin de pris made it, it was extolled. So for my poore inuentions of
my poorer selfe, were it namelesse, I am perswaded that it would passe more
blamelesse, howsoeuer (world) to thee I send it; I know thou hast many hu∣mours
and qualities, and I hope to finde some of the best of them, resoluing
to take my lot as it fals with patience, fortitude, and as many vertues as I haue,
and more too; knowing my selfe for two conditions to haue no fellow; first,
in beeing a Sculler; secondly a VVater-Poet; of the last of which, there is and
shall bee no more I hope. And knowing further, that the way to im∣mortalitie,
is euer to remember mortalitie, and that death hath more manners
then an Ague; for death will bee a mans guest but once, which when hee
comes, I wish all men readie to bid him welcome; So world, in plaine
termes I tell you there is no trust in you (yet I like a foole put you in trùst
with my Booke) the reason is, I am wearie of you and it, and take leaue
to leaue you.

