

IVdiciall Reader, after a Supper of Slanders, giue me leaue to bestow a Banquet of Defence;
which, I hope, shall rellish with more delight in thy generous opinion. I am sorry that my
Penne is pluckt backe from better Occasions, to answere an Opposite so ignoble. But seeing
my Reputation is shot at by such a poysoned Pistoll, I thought it meete to serue out the Bal∣let
of his Infamy with my approued Honesty, before it grew ranke, or festered too farre i
the Worlds Apprehension. But to the purpose: Master Taylor, the Gentleman-like
Sculler at the Hope on the Banke-side, at a friends house of mine, acquainted me with his Proiect; which
was as followeth: That hee the said Taylor had studied such seuerall Humors in Prose, as neuer were th
like before: (which indeed fell out true, to his shame) wherein he would haue me ioyne; hee to play a Sc
in Prse, and I to answere him in Verse: Whereto I condiscended, on these Conditions; viz. That I might
haue halfe the Commodity thereof, Or Security for fiue pounds; Or else twenty shillings in hand, and the
rest as the Day affoorded. Next, That I might heare his Booke read (which was fit) to know on wh
ground I might build my Inuention. And last, That I should see the Manner of his Challenge bes
it was published, and set my Answere to it with my owne hand. To all which hee granted, and deliuered
mee fiue Shillings vpon the same: Whereupon I promised faithfully, That if all this were on his part per∣formed,
I would (God willing) meet him, and with my best endeauour striue to giue the Audience content.
Now, here I must enreat you, before you condemne mee, note but the Occasions of my Breach of Promise:
This Water-Taylor, with his Confederates, presuming he had bound mee with his Earnest-money, prin∣ted
his Challenge-Bill, and my Answere annexed thereunto, without my Hand, Knowledge, or Consent:
Nay more: My Answere was by him set vp so meane and insufficient to so brauing a Challenge, that I al∣together
disliked thereof (as I had reason) and thereupon sent my Man with the Money fiue dayes before
the Play, to certifie them, That I was otherwise employed, and would not come, in regard of the Wrong
done vnto mee, in setting vp my Answere without my Consent: My Man deliuered the Message, b
lost the Money at Play, emboldening himselfe vpon the Wrongs I had receiued; which I haue since payed.
And the same day I receiued a Letter out of Warwickeshire from my Father, That he was not well; wish∣ing
me and my wife to repayre vnto him with all possible speed. Now, you that are Parents of Children, or

children to Parents, Iudge, whether I ought rather to disobay my Father; or displease Iohn Taylor; Pur∣se
my Fathers hate, or lose a Scullers loue; and I hope yo will say. I had sufficient cause to keepe mee
 the Hope. But fearing my homely Truth (though it be sufficient to plead my Honestly) is not answe∣r
 to your expectation of my Practise in Poesie; I will, as neere as I can, fit my Muse to your liking,
which is my content: And euer rest honester by Land, then Taylor by Water,

