



My most Honourable good LORD.
May it please your GRACE,
IT was obedience to my Superiour that ingaged me upon this last Anniversary commemoration of the great Goodnesse of God Almighty to our King and Country in the discouery of the most dam∣nable

Powder-Treason. It was a blessing which no tongue could expresse, much lesse mine, which had scarce learn'd to speake, at least, was most unfit to speake in the Schooles, of the Prophets. Delicata autem est illa obedientia que  quaerit. It had beene no good argument of my obedience to have disputed the inconvenience of my person, and the unaptnesse of my parts for such an imployment I knew God, out of the mouth of Infants, could acquire his praise, and if my heart were actually as Votive as my tongue should have beene, it might bee one of Gods  to perfect his owne praise out of the weaknesse and imperfecti∣on of the Organ. So as I was able, I endea∣vour'd to performe it, having my obedience ever ready for my excuse to men, and my willingnesse to performe my duty, for the assoylment of my selfe before God; part of which I hope was accepted, and I have no reason to thinke, that the other was not par∣doned.
When I first thought of the Barbarisme

of this Treason, I wondred not so much at the thing it selfe as by what meanes it was possible for the Divell to gaine so strong a party in mens resolutions, as to move them to undertake a businesse so abhorring from Christianity, so evidently full of extreame danger to their lives, and so certainly to in∣curre the highest wrath of God Almighty. My thoughts were thus rude at first; but af∣ter a strict inquisition I fond it was appre∣hended as a businesse (perhaps full of dan∣ger to their bodies, but) advantagious to their soules, consonant to the obligation of all Christians, and meritorious of an excee∣ding weight of Glory, for now it was come to passe which our dear Master foretold, men should kill us, and thinke they did God good ser∣vice in it. I could not thinke this to be a part of any mans religion, nor doe I yet believe it. For it is so apparently destructive of our deare Master his Royall lawes of Charity & Obedience, that I must not be so uncharitable as to thinke they speake their owne minde truly, when they professe their beliefe of

the lawfullnesse and necessity in some cases of rebelling against their lawfull Prince, and using all meanes to throw him from his kingdome, though it be by taking of his life. But it is but iust that they who breake the bonds of duty to their Prince, should like∣wise forfeit the lawes of charity to them∣selves, and if they say not true, yet to bee more uncharitable to their owne persons, then I durst be, though I had their own war∣rant. Briefly (Most R. Father) I found a∣mongst them of the Roman party such pre∣vailing opinions, as could not consist with loyalty to their Prince, in case hee were not the Popes subiects, and these so generally be∣lieved, and somewhere obtruded under pe∣rill of their soules, that I could not but point at these dangerous rocks, at which I doubt not, but the loyalty of many hath suffered shipwrack, and of thousands more might, if a higher Starre had not guided them bet∣ter, then their owne Pilots.
I could not therefore but thinke it very likely that this Treason might spring from

the same Fountaine, and I had concluded so in my first meditations, but that I was wil∣ling to consider, whether or no it might not bee that these men were rather exasperated then perswaded, and whether it were not that the severity of our lawes against them might rather provoke their intemperate zeal, then religion thus move their setled consci∣ence. It was a materiall consideration, be∣cause they ever did and still doe fill the world with outcries against our lawes for making a rape upon their consciences, have printed Catalogues of their English Martyrs, drawn Schemes of most strange tortures imposed on their Priests, such as were unimaginable, by Nero, or Dioclesian, or any of the worst and cruellest enemies of Christianity, endea∣vouring thus to make us partly guilty of our owne ruine, and so washing their hands in token of their owne innocency, even then when they were dipping them in the blood Royall, and would have emptyed the best veynes in the whole Kingdome to fill their Lavatory. But I found all these to be

but Calumnies, strong accusations upon weake presumptions, and that the cause did rest where I had begun, I meane, upon the pretence of the Catholique cause, and that the imagin'd iniquity of the Lawes of England could not be made a vaile to cover the de∣formity of their intentions, for our Lawes were just, Honourable, and Religious.
Concerning these and some other ap∣pendices to the businesse of the day, I expres∣sed some part of my thoughts, which be∣cause happily they were but a just truth, and this truth not unseasonable for these last times, in which (as S. Paul prophecyed) men would be fierce, Traytors, heady, and high min∣ded, creeping into houses, leading filly women captive, it pleased some who had power to command me, to wish me to a publicatiō of these my short and sudden meditations, that (if it were possible) even this way I might expresse my duty to God and the King.
Being thus farre encouraged, I resolved to goe something further, even to the bold∣nesse of a dedication to your Grace, that since

I had no merit of my own to move me to the confidence of a publike view, yet I might dare to venture under the protection of your Graces favour. But since my boldnesse doth as much neede a defence, as my Sermon a Patronage, I humbly crave leave to say, that though it be boldnesse, even to presumpti∣on, yet my addresse to your Grace is not al∣together unreasonable.
For since all know that your Grace thinks not your life your owne, but when it spends it selfe in the service of your King, oppo∣sing your great endeavours against the ze∣lots of both sides who labour the distur∣bance of the Church and State, I could not think it  to present to your Grace this short discovery of the Kings enemies, , and proper to your Grace who is so true, so zealous a lover of your Prince and Country. It was likewise appointed to be the publike voice of thanks∣giving for your Vniverfity (though she never spake weaker then by so meane an instru∣ment) and therefore is accountable to your

Grace to whom under God and the King we owe the Blessing and Prosperity of all our Studies. Nor yet can I choose but hope, that my Great Obligations to your Grace's Favour may plead my pardon, (since it is bet∣ter that my Gratitude should be bold, then my diffidence ingratefull) but that this is so farre from expressing the least part of them, that it layes a greater bond upon me, either for a debt of delinquency in presenting it, or of thankfulnesse, if your Grace may please to pardon it.
I humbly crave your Grace's Benediction, par∣don, and acceptance of the humblest duty and observance of
Your GRACES: most observant and obliged CHAPLAINE

