



NO Hanging, Tap'strie, Quilt, or Co∣uerlet,
This dedication of my wit could get:
No Mattresse, Blanket, Sheet, or Fetherbed,
Could haue these labours of my working head:
But (cold by Nature) from my Nurses dugge,
My inclination still hath lou'd a Rugge:
Which makes my thankfull Muse thus bold to be,
To consecrate this worthlesse worke to thee;
Thou that within those happie Iles doest bide,
Which Neptunes waues doe from our land diuide,
Wherein the Holy Iland stands a Fort
That can defend, and iniuries retort,
That doth command a goodly Hauen nigh,
Wherein a hundred Ships may safely lie:
Thou in the  Fairn Iland  7. mile the Holy into the sea, Holy Iland seuen miles Barwicke.  Fairne all of Sea-fowle in such ance, as yo step but Egges or : They misse lay on Saint es day, and might after as there is  to be seene. taple Ilands  to the , and stand mile from it he sea, where wle vpon the  are so thicke  vpon the nd vpon the  & with such sitie build ests, as the  man cannot hat egge in  place againe  once taken  abide in the  place Vpon  flight the sea  couered for  a mile, and eauens aboue  obscured for present. Farne and Staples bearst such sway,
That all the dwellers there doe thee obey;
Where Fowle are all thy faire inhabitants,
Where thou (Commander of the Cormorants,)
Grand Gouernour of Guls, of Geese and Ganders,
O're whom thou art none of the least Commanders,
Whereas sometimes thou canst not stirre thy legs,
But thou must tread on tributarie Egs,
For they like honest, true, plaine dealing folkes,
Pay thee the Custome of their Whites and Yolkes,
Which to thy friends oft times transported be,
As late thou sentst a barrell full to me:
And in requitall to so good a friend,
This Prisone, and this Hanging here I send.
Because within the There is but one house there, all the dwellers else being Sea-sowle, who will her know offences nor punishments. Fairne and Staples too,
The dwellers doe as they doe please to doe;
Their pride and lust, their stealing & their treason,
Is all imputed to their want of reason;
I therefore haue made bold to send thee this,
To shew them what a Iayle and Hanging is.
Thou hast from Hermes suck'd the Quintessence
Of quicke Inuention, and of Eloquence,
And thou so well doest loue good wittie Bookes,
That makes thee like Apollo in thy lookes:
For Nature hath thy Visage so much grac'd,
That there's the Ensigne of true friendship plac'd.
A Chaulkie face, that's like a Pewter spoone,
Or Buttermilke, or Greene cheese, or the Moone,
Are either such as kill themselues with care,
Or hide-bound miserable wretches are.
Giue me the man whose colour and prospect,
Like Titan when it doth on Gold reflect,
And if his purse be equall to his will,
Hee'le then be frolicke, free, and Iouiall still:
And such a one (my worthy friend) art thou,
To whom I dedicate this Pamphlet now;
And I implore the Heau'ns to proue so kinde,
To keepe thy state according to thy minde.

