



RIght Honourable, worthy is that saying of Salomon, Cant. 2.2. Like as the lillie among the thornes, so is my loue among the daughters. By the lillie is meant the Church, and the true members of it: so called, 1. Because they are planted by the good husbandman in the feild of the Church, watred with the dewes of heauen, hedged and pre∣serued by his continuall care. 2. They are beautifull, for Salo∣mon in all his royaltie is not clothed like one of the lillies of this feild, who are couered with the roabe of Christs righte∣ousnesse, who is the true Salomon. 3. They are fragrant for their smell: The smell of their garments, (that is,Cant. 4.11. the graces of God, which decke and adorne their soules, as a costly and comely garment doth the bodie) are like the smell of Lebanon: which in the spring by reason of the Cedars, and other sweet trees, gaue a most sweet sent: euen so these graces in Gods children smell sweete, that is, are in much acceptation, and delightfull to God and good men. By thornes are meant wic∣ked men, hypocrites, heretikes, tyrants, open and flagitious sinners, scandalous in doctrine, and life: so called, 1. because although the earth be a naturall mother to them, as a step∣mother to the lillies; yet Satan the malicious man busieth himselfe in the incessant sowing and setting of them. 2. They would for euer choake and keepe vnder the lillie, if the hand of God were not euer with it to preserue it. 3. They are dan∣gerous to meddle withall, except a man be well fenced: hard∣ly can a man carrie coales in his skirt, and not be scorcht; and

as hardly runne into wicked companie, and not be hurt. So is my loue: the faithfull spouse of Christ is his loue. So called because, 1. he maketh her louely: 2. accounteth her so: 3. worketh a reciprocall loue in her heart towards him: 4. desi∣reth mutuall coniunction with her, and effecteth it: 5. his loue beeing liberall, he giueth her himselfe, and with him∣selfe, all things which pertaine to life and godlinesse: euen grace here, and glorie hereafter. Among the daughters: not virgins, as Cap. 1.2. who make vp this loue of Christ; but all other assemblies in the world, which professe themselues daughters, by challenging the Catholike Church for their mother, and yet indeed cleaue vnto it but in outward professi∣on onley.
From this place I gather two conclusions. First, what is the estate of the Church in respect of it selfe, it beeing as a lillie among thornes. Secondly, what it is in respect of God, so is his loue among the daughters: The former sheweth, that the condition of the purest Church vpon earth, is to be beset with dangerous and noysome thornes, hurtfull and gracelesse men, who prick and annoie the lillies in their goods, names, liberties, and liues. For when there were but two persons borne in the world; one was a lillie, and the other a thorne, which trod downe the lillie. Cain drew his brother into the feild and slue him. Afterwards, when one would haue thought that all the thornes had bin destroied by the flood brought vp∣on the world to this purpose, yet was there a Cham left, of whome quickely sprowted that cursed race of the Cana∣nites, who were euer pricks in the sides, and thornes in the eyes of Gods people. It is no newe thing for Iacob to be ouertopped by an Esau: nor for Ioseph to be pricked and molested both at home and abroad: neither his fathers house, nor his fathers eye can safegard him. Nay, the fairest lillie that euer saw the sunne, was most beset with thornes that euer was: all his innocencie, wisedome, meeknesse, puritie, and loue, could not keepe them off him; but they pricked him to the heart, and wounded him to the death, euen the shamefull

and ignominious death of the crosse. How was this lillie be∣set with thornes in Egypt, in the wildernesse, in Babylon, in Iudea, when Christ sent his Disciples out as sheepe among wolues? how in the tenne persecutions? how at this day? and so shall it be till the great day, in which all the thornes shall be cast into the fire. And no wonder, thornes do but their nature, which are good for nothing but to pricke and to burne. It standeth therefore the lillies in hand, to be so much the more carefull to fence themselues against their molestati∣on. And this shall they doe by obseruing these fowre rules. 1. Because the thornes hinder the rooting of the lillies, these must double their diligence in the rooting of themselues in the grounds of true religion: for this yeeldeth hope of ri∣sing, stablishing, and continuance in the faith. 2. Because thornes seeke to keepe the sunne from the lillies, and hinder the comfortable heat and light of the word from them: these must so much the more carefully frequent the places where the light of wholesome, pure, and comfortable doctrine doth more brightly displaie it selfe. 3. Because thornes seeke to pricke the lillies in their names and profession: these must more circumspectly fence themselues, with innocencie and godly conuersation, and in nothing, in no part lie open vnto them. 4. Because the lillie is a weake plant to defend it selfe from the stiffnesse of the thorne, it must fortifie it selfe partly with comfort in the presence, care, and loue of God the hus∣bandman who is euer in his feild; and partly with the pray∣er of faith, that he would be pleased still to looke vnto it, to raise vp Pastors and teachers according to his owne heart to water, cherish, and preserue it: especially in these last daies, wherein the feild is ouergrowne with scandalls, Apostacies, trials and reproches, wherewith the lillies are daily scratched, torne, and in great ieopardie.
The second conclusion is, that the Lord maketh a pretious account of euerie faithfull soule, and preferreth it aboue the wicked, so farre as a lillie is for the beautie & sweetnes of it, to be esteemed aboue all the thornes with which it can be beset.

And indeed beleeuers are the most precious of men, the most noble persons of the earth, descended of the blood of Christ, neere vnto God, and next attendants to the king of glorie: advanced aboue all the rest by the speciall grace of free ele∣ction, of iustification, of sanctification, and adoption. And who can denie seeing these are Gods peculiar, an hallowed thing, a chosen people, the Lords first fruits, his remnant called out of all nations and kinreds, the sonnes and daughters of God, brethren of Christ, and heires apparant to the crowne of heauen; but that they are highly aduanced as the choise of God, and Gods delight aboue all the people of the earth? And hence followeth it, that whosoeuer would be in this price and reckoning with God, must be sure he be a lillie; which he shall know by these three notes. 1. If he be planted in the garden of God, and be a true member of the Church, not tied to it as a scion to a tree by a threed of outward profession, but by soundnes of faith, and loue; the former of which setteth into the head, and the latter vniteth to the members. Secondly, if he haue the beau∣tie of a lillie vpon him, 1. in the sight of God, by the righte∣ousnesse of Christ iustifying and couering him. 2. in his own eyes, by the sanctification of the spirit daily washing the con∣science from dead workes. 3. in the sight of other men, by an innocent life and godly conuersation. Thirdly, if euerie where he leaue a sweet smell behind him, that the places where euer he goe sauour of the graces of God laid vp in his heart: by bewraying the humilitie, faith, loue, patience, hope, so∣brietie, and the like. A lillie can leaue no stinke behind it any where, as many in their meetings, whose speaches are, if not hurtfull, yet vnsauourie and vnfruitfull.
These things I write not, as taking vpon me to teach your H. who wanteth not choice men and meanes to bring you forward both in the vnderstanding of pure doctrine, and in the institution of holy life. But 1. to put your H. in mind how highly the Lord hath honoured you both in his owne eyes, as also in the eyes of his children. The former, in that vnto out∣ward greatnes (which is as a rich legacie giuen by God both

to good and bad) he hath vouchsafed to adde the chiefe good, and made your H. RICH indeede by disposing vnto you the inheritance of his children: which is apparant, in that by a sound profession of the truth, he hath planted you in his own ground or garden; in that he hath set the beautie of a lillie vp∣on you; and hath graced you with a sweet smell of many pre∣cious graces, which euerie where you leaue behind you. The latter, both in that he hath put in your heart a speciall care of fencing your selfe by religious and innocent walking; where∣by you haue adorned your holy profession, in not laying your selfe in any part open to the enuious scratching of thornes: As also hath expressely engrauen this part of his image vpon you, to esteeme his children as lillies among thornes; whereby a good euidence is ministred to your owne heart, that you are tran∣slated from death to life. 2. That I might stirre vp your H. as you haue cause to reioyce in, and set your heart vpon this pur∣chase which is the portion but of a fewe, to esteeme it, as it is, your truest honour and nobilitie; your vnperishing riches and treasure: whereas all earthly glorie, and greatnesse, worldly wealth and abundance, abstracted from this, neither are your owne, neither if they were, can they make you happie: It was an excellent speach of that noble Emperour Theodosius,Magis fe gau∣dere quod mē∣brum Ecclesiae Dei esset, quam caput Imperij. of whome Augustine writeth that he was wont to say, that hee accounted it more honour that hee was a member of the Church, then the head of the Empire. 3. That I might adde one incitement and prouocation to proceed (as you haue be∣gun happily) in the loue and practise of true pietie: wherein whilst you profit and encrease, you prouide a good stocke for the time of neede. Let your H. giue me leaue to encourage you to goe on in ennobling nobilitie it selfe, by beeing infe∣riour to fewe of your honourable ranke,Nec iam ferre potest Caesarve priorem Pom∣peiusve parem. Lucan.
Humilitas vir∣tus Christiano∣rum, prima▪ se∣cunda, tertia. August. as in your outward estate, so in the beautifull gifts and ornaments of your mind: such as are humilitie, humanitie, a lowly and louely carriage. Let Caesar and Pompey, & other gallants striue to be superiours in pompe and envied greatnesse: it is your honour to haue learned that humilitie is the first, second, and third staire of

Christian nobilitie. Go on in the strength of the Lord, to continue a singular ornament, and muniment of the com∣mon wealth, which is not made by any thing more outward∣ly happie, then in Godly Magistracie, and nobilitie. Go on in shewing your selfe a carefull patron of the Church of God, in making free and vncorrupt choise of such Pastors, as whose holy doctrine and life,Quibus studio est . are the counterpaine one of the other: in which godly care your H. hath worthily carried the palme. These were the cheife motiues, which drewe on this my pre∣sumption to dedicate this labour vnto your H. although I wā∣ted not some more priuate respects also to force me therunto: namely, that I might giue some publike testimonie of my loue of your vertues; some appobation of my christian dutie, and some signification of my thankefull mind (as for other fa∣uours so also) for your Honours Christian and constant loue of that worthy and vertuous Ladie the Ladie Russell, whom I could not but affoard an honourable mention in this dedica∣tion, which I must needs confesse, had beene her right if God had seene good to haue added vnto her daies. Accept I humbly beseech your H. the mind of the offerer; accept also the booke offred, if not for the author of the commentarie, yet for the author of the text, and the argument which is worthy your H. name and respect. I doubt not but your H. shall re∣deeme many vacant houres in reading ouer many of the trea∣tises therein contained. And thus crauing pardon for my boldnesse, I commend your H. to the grace of God, who protract your dayes and yeares, according to the large graces bestowed vpon you; and prosper and finish the good worke he hath begunne, by adding that which is▪ yet lacking to your faith and graces, till he haue fitted you vnto, and filled you with glorie and immortalitie. Amen. 
From my house at Watford. March 16. 1612. 
