



MOst noble Prince. It succee∣deth with the Art of Logike, as it doth with a drug of rare vertues: which resting con∣fined within the limits of the Apothecaries shop, winneth not anie opinion or credit with men: but being taken out and skilfully applied, discloseth her value & me∣rit. So this art resting imprisoned within the lists of the schoole and the cabinets of the learned, findeth no grace or regard: but being drawne foorth as it were into the field of imployment and seruice, it doth then manifest to the world the proportion of worth and respect, that is due vnto her. For to be able, first to contriue and perfit the frame of a dis∣course: and then againe to discouer and lay foorth in the pure naturals not onely the seuerall members, but the particular structure and conformation of the same: what estimation doth it not deserue? And this

is it which Logike doth vndertake and performe. Out of the former imployment this worthie art fur∣nisheth vnto vs varietie and choise of arguments for cleering the cause in question: and directeth vs to hold that, which is true and iustifiable: to disclaime that, which is inconsequent: to marshall each thing in his proper ranke and place. Out of the other vse and seruice it yeeldeth vnto vs a benefit of no lesse moment and aduantage: wee being guided by her addresse in the examination and triall of the worke made: to the end we may not be deceiued with any outward lustre and shew, but be exactly informed how sound and warrantable it is, that is propoun∣ded. Hereupon answerably to the direction in this behalfe, in the first place wee consider what the pro∣per subiect is, that is deduced and handled: the in∣obseruation whereof being the originall of an erro∣nious and misguided course in iudging. For as wee cannot iudge with what commendation and credit, either the Canonier dischargeth his shot, being ig∣norant of the marke whereat he leuelled: or the Na∣uigator performeth his course, being not made ac∣quainted to what cape or port he would arriue: so in case it be vnknowne vnto vs what is the peculiar different and position debated in anie tractate or speech, we cannot discerne with what soundnes and wisedome the dispute is managed: we cannot chal∣lenge ought as impertinent: nor take exception to inconsequences. Hauing found and obserued the question, we are in the second place to examine the qualitie of the proofes alleaged, and how iudiciously the illustration thereof is carried. Wherein if we shal proceed by the square of this art: whatsoeuer is base

or fine in the mettall of any discourse, this artificiall touchstone of Logike will vpon application and tri∣all immediatly detect. It will in particularitie shew whether the wit hath failed in the search of allega∣tions: and whether error in liew of truth, inconse∣quence in steede of an vncensurable conclusion, dis∣order in place of methodicall proceeding hath been intertained. Neither must we apprehend that in this imployment she is like the vnskilfull Painter, who cannot with his pensill represent other forme than of a fish. This may I truly auouch, that as there is no obiect visible, which the well affected eye hauing the concurrence of a fit and rightly disposed meane see∣eth not: and no magnitude which the learned hand of the Mathematician measureth not: so there is no subiect of what nature soeuer, falling within the reach of naturall reason, which by Logike the ex∣presse image thereof cannot be disputed. Out of this large extent it is, that the said art is of excellent and meritorious seruice in deliberations and resolutions of State, in courts of equitie and iustice, in the field and consultations militarie, yea in all questions of humane and ciuill consideration. That matters di∣uine and Theologicall are not excepted, but that in the handling and iudging of them also Logike ser∣ueth for a singular light and helpe: I appeale to the Diuines of this and all former ages. For a further proofe whereof and by way of instance in this be∣halfe: though I am not of that reuerend and worthy profession, hauing been imployed in seruices of a different qualitie: yet haue I of late in this time of my idlenes, vnder hope of pardon at the hands of our professed Theologians, attempted by the dire∣ction

of the said Art an Analysis of certaine choise Psalmes. This Analysis I haue presumed (most noble Prince) to dedicate vnto your Highnes, not onely that it might serue as a pledge of my indisguised and perpetuall deuotion to your seruice: but for that al∣so the subiect analysed is a meditation performed by a great Prince, and for the nature thereof no argu∣ment of vulgar and humane conceit, but surpassing and diuine: and therefore a Prince in either respect the fittest person for a dedication of this kinde. To tender the work of a great Potentate vnto one of an inferiour representation and ranke, would be liable to the exception of disparagement. Neither doth it cease in regard of the vnfolding & exposing thereof to view, to be the act of a Prince: no more than ad∣mirable excellencies leaue to be such, when they are discabineted & presented to the eye. And whereas it is an inspired & sacred work, it is vpon this ground also not vnmeete to bee exhibited vnto Princes. For they holding their royalties and honours at the will and pleasure of the Lord of Lords, cannot o∣therwise assure their inuestiture and interest in them, than by a course of obedience vnto his will. This o∣bedience is not performable without information taken of what is pleasing. This information is taken from the voyce onely of the Lord in Scripture. This voice is the precept there deliuered, or the iustifiable and recommended practise of sanctified persons. Now this subiect, whereof I make tender vnto your Highnes in a Logicall Analysis (whereby it is strip∣ped as it were of all outward habit, and laid foorth in the first and naturall lineaments) is able to supplie vnto the greatest Princes speciall direction both out

of precept and president, how to please him who hath thus aduanced and honoured them. Would your Highnes be informed what person it is, who onely is capable of a blessed and prosperous estate? The first Psalme will resolue you that the person of a Prince, as he is a Prince, is not the seate of this bles∣sednes and felicitie, but so farre foorth as he is a per∣son whose delight is in the law of the Lord. And therefore the Prophet in the Psalme following, out of a desire that Kings and Princes should partake in the glorie of this happinesse, earnestly perswadeth them to the doing of homage and worship vnto Christ Iesus: which is a course of pietie, wherein be∣sides their presenting in priuate of all spirituall ser∣uice vnto him, they professe withall in publike their alleageance and readie obedience to the royall au∣thoritie and lawes of his kingdome. Would your Highnes be aduertised what sort of people they are, whom you ought specially to respect and esteeme? The Psalmist will tell you out of his owne practise, Psal. 16. that they are the worthies and excellent of the earth. Would your Highnes vnderstand what loue and regard you are to beare to the Sanctuarie and place of the Lords worship? It may please you to take notice hereof out of the 84. Psalme: where King Dauid imparteth with vs his passionate longing to returne vnto the house of the Lords publike ser∣uice, recommending it by way of admiraiton as most worthie of al respect and affection on our part: and valuing his participation there with the godly in the said seruice aboue all the regalities and honors in this world. Would your Highnes bee presented

with a picture of the miseries whereto both Prince and people are subiect? This picture the 90. Psalme with the 39. affoordeth vnto vs. There Princes may learne that our fairest and best daies are vexation and griefe: that Man, and whatsoeuer is of strength and excellencie in man, is for weaknes and brittlenes like a moth: that our life for length is as a spanne, as no∣thing, as a day past, a watch in the night, a dreame, a word, a thought. Would your Highnes behold as it were in a glasse the singular aduantages and priui∣ledges of depending on the Lord? This glasse will the 91. Psalme furnish vnto you. To be short: if your Highnes desire to see a president how a Prince shuld demeane himselfe, either in the case of any his ca∣pitall transgressions against the Lord, or in the case of blasphemie committed by others: the cariage of this worthie King Dauid will in either case serue for a most worthy president. In the 51. Psalme, whereas hee had by misgouernment of his person mightily transgressed, being admonished hereof by Nathan one of the Lords faithful remembrancers, he perfor∣meth two remarkable duties: the one of humbling himselfe before the Lord out of a repentant heart: the other of earnest mediation, that the Lord would be pleased not to interpret his transgression to the preiudice of the Church and Common-wealth of Israel. In the 94. Psalme, finding himselfe disabled to proceede in iustice against some, who being not contented to tyrannize the Lords people, did with∣all disgorge blasphemie against the Lord himselfe, he doth first solicite the Lord to a reall execution of his wrath against them: and then by a quick and

pertinent apology he cleereth the glorious and fear∣full name of the Lord from all imputation and dis∣honour. You see hereby (most worthie Prince) the ground and inducement of this my dedication: which if it may in these your tender yeeres be of a∣ny vse vnto your Highnes, either for instruction in the knowledge of that eternall Lord, who will ho∣nour Princes in case they honour him, or for admo∣nition of dutie in your cariage towards him: I shall attaine to the scope of my deseigne herein. The al∣mightie King so blesse your Highnes in the course of your education, that it may be a meane to supply your noble heart with all prince∣ly vertues, and draw vpon your person all honourable happinesse.

