



Right Worshipfull,
PEarles are small in quantitie, but great in their hidden qualitie, and smaller often in the
weight than in their worth: such an one is this which I haue pre∣sented vnto you as a token of my due respect and vnfained loue to your selfe, and the Church in your familie. Pearles from earth fit not common persons; but this from heauen be∣longeth to all who meane to partake in the com∣mon saluation. As this Pearle is yours in the common right of Saints, so this offer of its is yours by a second and more peculiar right, as who first helped it out of the
darke into this light. Your earnest and often desires of some of the written notes of this Treatise, drew from me a promise, the thought of the paiment whereof, was my first thought of this publication. And now this Pearle being yours, weare it as your chiefe ornament, the price of which raiseth your owne price and rec∣koning in the eyes of God and good men,Pro. 30.10. aboue the Carbuncles and Rubies. Other orna∣ments seuered from this, are but beautifull vani∣ties.
The largest reue∣nues, the richest estates, the most ample trea∣sures, the costliest cabi∣nets, filled with pearles and precious stones, sets the person wanting this pearle, in no higher rec∣koning than common flints, or other contempti∣ble stones,Isa. 40.15. with him to whom the Nations are but as the drop of a bucket, or as the dust of a balance. So of all naturall endowments, wee may compare them (as Salomon doth beau∣tie) to a ring of Gold, which outwardly com∣mendeth
the wearer; But the iewell of this ring is this pearle of the Gospell, or the life of the Gospell, in the life of the Gospeller. Let this Iew∣ell be lost once, or mis∣sing, the ring may be gilded, and glistering without, but the touch∣stone and triall will finde that it was neuer gold.3 Ioh. 4. And because I know that you haue no greater ioy than to see your children walke in the truth, I am assu∣red, you will gladly af∣ford them an equall share with you in this so
precious a commoditie, and therefore haue I ta∣ken them into this dedi∣cation.Psal. 127.5.Blessed are you that haue your quiuer full of such louely ar∣rowes. Of the vertu∣ous woman is said, Her children praise her.Prou. 31.28.Were this a verball praise of the mouth, chil∣dren might seeme testes è sinu, and the sprea∣ders of the partiall prai∣ses of their mother; but this is an actuall and so∣lid commendation, and vnsuspected, when the shining vertues of the feare of God, sobrietie,
and modest conuersation of children, proclaime the grace, pietie, and care of the mothers edu∣cation. Among that rich store of earthly comforts, with which God hath be∣set you, you haue none comparably gracefull to this, if you except your sweet societie with your graue and religious hus∣band.
And now to you three daughters, worthy of such a Mother: When I call to remem∣brance the vnfained faith, which dwelt, and yet dwelleth in your
Grand-mother, (whose reuerend old age is crow∣ned with an ancient and honorable profession and practise of holy religion aboue any I know in these parts) and in your deare mother; and am assured it dwelleth in you also, I could not but put you in remembrance, to stirre vp the gift of God that is in you: And exhort you, as you haue happily begun, to hold on in the way of grace, and see that your works bee more at last than at first. God hath
aduanced you into the fellowship of religious and compleat Gentlemen your husbands, to faire estates and portions in this world, but especially to a sure expectation hereafter, by meanes of your inseparable coniun∣ction to your Head and Husband Iesus Christ. You must now aduance him who hath thus ad∣uanced you, and loue him for himselfe, who hath loued you in his Sonne: and hold euery new sense of mercy, a new spurre and prouocation vnto dutie. In the way
and pace in which you goe, I must acknowledge I passe and slip an oppor∣tunitie, by passing ouer in silence so many com∣mendable parts in you all,Prou. 31.30. which make you worthy to bee praised among women fearing God. But my praises can lift you no higher than your owne vertues doe, whose diligent paines in gaining knowledge of holy things, conscionable practise of sound religi∣on, charitable refreshing of the poore members of Christ, and whose hum∣ble, sober, wise, modest,
and louely carriage, (especially in these loose dayes) are as so many tongues, and mouthes, and pens (without mine) to publish your due praises: and know∣ing that you will be bet∣ter pleased, that I turne my praises into praiers, for your progresse and prosperitie in the good way, I shall endeuour to supplie that want this way, heartily commen∣ding you to the power of his grace, who only can further enrich you with the pearle of the Gospell; who also giue you with
the new yeere, new sup∣plies of all holy graces, till the new man be com∣pleat in Iesus Christ, in whom I rest

