



Noble Sir:
IT is a truth able to en∣dure
the most fiery times
& trialls,I. Lambert Martyr. None but Christ,
none but Christ. Ignatius
expresseth as much,
drawing neare to his
Martyrdome,Epist. ad Ro∣manos. Let come upon me fire, crosse,
meetings of wilde beasts, cuttings, tearings, brea∣kings
of bones, rendings of members, dissolutions
of the whole body, and all torments of the devill,

, only that I may gain
Iesus Christ. Thus he, intreating the Romans
not to intercede for him, and hinder his
uffering for the Gospell. And thus the ser∣vants
of God in these last times, when Ro∣manists
have thrust them into flames and
other calamities.
Christ is all,Col. 3. 11 and in all, said the Apostle.
 Look to the Church: he supplies all de∣fects
of his people, heales all their infirmi∣ties,
puts on all comfortable relations, and
procures all saving benefits, In the golden
chaine of our salvation, which reacheth
from eternitie to eternitie, we shal observe,
that Christ is the owke or closure that ty∣eth
every linke together: as in these lines.
He is the foundation of our election, E∣phes.
1. 4.
He is the price of our redemption, 1 Pet.
1. 18, 19.
He is the cause efficient of our regenera∣tion,
Eph. 2. 10.
He is the author of our justification
Ier. 33. 16.
He is the beginner and perfecter of our

sanctification, Heb. 12. 2. Iohn 15. 4, 5. He is
the matter of our consolation, spirituall and
temporal, c. 16. 37. Rom. 5. 1. He is the sweet∣ner
and sanctifier of all our troubles, Rom. 8.
37. &c. He is the assurance & pledge of our
resurrectiō, 1 Cor. 15. 20. He is the procurer
& producer of our glorificatiō, Iohn 17. 22.
Rev. 21. 23. All of thē good grounds of cō∣fort,
& set forth the happines of Gods peo∣ple.
All of them disgrace merit, & the wor∣thinesse
of the creatures, Men and An∣gels.
All of them magnifie Gods love and
wisedome, call unto thankfulnesse, and
would make us content with little. All in∣vite
labour, to make sure of a portion in
Christ, without whom all is as nothing.
And finally, all command those that are in
Christ, to be all unto him, do all for him,
give all, suffer all, speake, live, die, rejoyce in
all through him, and with him expect all
in his heavenly kingdome.
Looke to the Word, wherein all these 
things are revealed: Christ is evidently the
matter and summe of the Gospell: and the
Apostle affirmes the like concerning the

Law,Rom. 10. 4. Christ is the end of the Law for righte∣ousnesse
to every one that beleeveth. First, by
similitude, saith Austin: when a man is come
to the end of a way, he can go no farther:
so when a Christian is come to Christ, he
hath no farther excellencie to seek or go
unto: in Christ there is enough and enough
to reconcile him to God, and bring him to
heaven.Cont. Iul. 9. Secondly, for perfection, saith Cyril▪
When a thing is finished, it is said to come
to an end, as namely in weaving a garment▪
so Christ hath finished, perfected, and ful∣filled
the Law: he came not to destroy,
but establish it: so that in him we have a
perfect righteousnes to present God with∣all,
even as the Law required, Gal. 2. 16. 21.
Thirdly, he is finis intentionis: the Law
bids us look to Christ, in whom only we
can live: both the Morall Law, in the holy
precepts of it, impossible in this our weak∣nesse,
therefore have recourse to Christ,
Rom. 8. 3, 4. together with the curses and
threats of it, whereby it is a sharpe Schoole∣master,
leading to Christ, Gal. 3. 24. As also the
Ceremoniall Law, all whose shadowes figure

out Christ and his benefits, Heb. 10. 1. Now
is Christ come (saith Tertullian) who is the end
of the Law,Do cibis Iud. cap. 5. opening all the dark matters of it,
anciently covered under the mists of Types and
Sacraments: An excellent master, an heavenly
teacher,Cont. Faust. a setler of truth to the uttermost. Austin
calls Moses his ceremonies, prenunciative or
foretelling Observations:Advers. Iud. and saith, We are
not now constrained to observe things used in the
Prophets time, Non quia illa damnata, sed quia
in melius mutata sunt; not for any evill in them,
but because they are changed for the better.
What they foretold, and how they are
changed for the better, this Treatise in part
discovereth, and I purpose not now to dis∣course.
These glorious times of the Gospel
shew evidently, how much the truth ex∣celleth
the shadow: the vertue common
to the ancient beleevers, as well as unto us:
Christ Iesus yesterday,Heb. 13. 8. and to day, and the same
for ever: but as the manifestation is more
cleare, so the grace is more plentifull and
comfortable. The same Testator made
both Testaments, and these differ not real∣ly,
but accidentally; the Old infolding the

New with some darknesse, and the New
unfolding the Old with joyous perspi∣cuitie.
This glorious dispensation of grace, as
it stands by the good pleasure of God, so
also by his manifold wisedome, who in
severall approches of his mercy and good∣nesse
drawes still nearer to his Church, and
yet reserves the greatest for his Kingdome
of glory. Even now, in this marvellous
light of the Gospell, we have our divine
ceremonies and sacraments, see him afarre
off, know but in part, darkly as in a glasse,
and receive our best contentment by the
acts of faith, while the Word and Spirit
make us know the things freely given us
of God in Christ Iesus. But time shall bee,
when (to say nothing of the estate of the
Church after the ruine of Antichrist, and
calling of the Iewes) we shall in heaven
see him whom we beleeved, face to face,
clearly, perfectly, immediately, without Sa∣craments
or Types, in the fullest vision,
nearest union, and absolutest fruition. Ne∣ver
till then shall we comprehend wholly

what is the marrow of that text,John▪ 14. 6. I am the
Way, the Truth, and the Life.
To your Worship I commend this
Treatise of that illuminate Doctor, excel∣lent
sometime in following and opening
an Allegory, and now more excellent in
enjoying the Truth it selfe: of whom, while
here a Preacher, you shewed your selfe a
joyfull Hearer (as of other faithfull Pastors
at this day) with obedience of the truth,
religious care of your family, integrity in
your office, love of good men, both in the
Ministery and private estate, and all Chri∣stian
behaviours; as the fame of your sweet
savour goes forth in the Church of God, to
which I doubt not but this Treatise will
be the more welcome, because of your
worthy name prefixed. It is an Orphane,
and the Widow desires it should be your
Ward, who in your love can best tender it,
and by your authority defend it sufficient∣ly.
The God of heaven increase all hea∣venly
graces and comforts in your noble
heart abundantly, and adde unto your
dayes, honours, and blessings of all sorts,

till these shadowes flie away, and the true
Day-starre arise upon you in glory: the
hearty prayer of one, who is, and desires
to be reckoned among
Isleworth Iune 20.
1635.

