


To the most mighty Monarch of Mont∣zago,
the modell of Magnanimity, the
map of man-darring Monster-quellers, the thrice three
times trebble triple renowned Alphebo, ornamented hono∣rable
Knight of Standsalio, Treldedo, Maroua, Fregero, Anda∣lowsia,
and the sky-scaling mountaine of Mulletto. Illustri∣ous
Pheander, victorious and valarous Champion to Don
Phoebus, great Duke of Delphos, and the Oracle of Apollo;
Marquesse of Muzetta, and the lake Asse-Phaltites: Earle of
Vtopia; Lord and Dominator of the Promontory of Poli∣pratemost:
The vnconquer'd all-conquering Mayden Knight,
by reuelation, by creation, by procreation, and conten∣tation:
the vnmatched Phoenix, and foure-fold comman∣der
of the Inchanted Islands, by nomination, by Banner, by
warlike atchieuements, by natiuity, by descent and processe,
matchlesse and vnparelleld Sir Thomas Parsons, Knight of the
Sunne, great cousin Vermin to the seldome seene Queene of Fayries, and
hopefull heire apparant to her inuisible Kingdome.

VNmatchable Cheualiere, I am bolde to
commit a poore Goose to your impregnable protection
and patronage, I know there will be as much to doe in
the keeping of her, and with as much danger, as was
the conquest of the Golden Fleece, the Apples of the Hesperides, or the
sauing of Andromeda by Perseus: & but that your valiant atchieue∣ments

are knowne and approued, I would neuer haue put my Goose to
your inuincible Guard, the enemies that will assault you, or attempt to
take her from you, are many, whom in duteous courtesie I will describe
vnto you: First, the Powlters will assaile you with a terrible battry of
rotten Eg-shot, to surrender the innocent Goose, that they may murder,
embowell, pull, plucke, and prostitute her to the sale of who giues most.
Secondly, the Vpholsters will come vpon you with a fresh Alarum for
her feathers, to stuffe the empty paunches of their Bolsters, Pillowes,
and hungry Bed-tikes. Thirdly, the Crokes in squadrons, arm'd with
Dripping-pannes and Spits in stead of Speares, before they will loose
their Fees, (and the luking of their fingers to boote) will fight hotly
for the Goose till all smoke againe. Fourthly, the Apothecaries (ra∣ther
then they will want the sweetnesse of the pinguidity or fecundious
fat of the Gooses auxungia (vulgarly called greace) they will so pelt
you with pills in stead of pellets, that they will make all stinke againe.
Fiftly, the Kitchin-mayde will throw scalding water at you, but shee
will haue one of her wings to sweepe downe Cobwebs, and dispossesse
Spiders of the habitations they haue built out of their owne bowels.
Sixtly, the Fletchers, and Archers, sweare they will pinke your skinne
sull of Ilot-holes, but they will haue her pynions to make them flye swif∣ter
dead then the Goose could liuing. Seauenthly, the Poets for her
Quils will call another penny-lesse threed-bare Parliament, and or∣daine
Satiricall Statutes, and Tragicall Acts against you, and with
their scattered imaginations they will scale the skyes as high as sullen
Saturnes Altitude, and rake into the lowest profundity of Barra∣thrum,
forraging through the earth, ayre and seas; but they will stigma∣tize,
cauterize, Epigramatize, and Annagramatize you, till you make
a surrender. Eightly, the Lawyers will firke and firret you, tossing
you betwixt hard fortune and ill lucke, that you will be almost mad, or
be in great danger to haue very little wit left. Ninthly, the Scriueners,
publike Notaries, or notorious Publicans, will not onely ioyne with the
Lawyers and the Poets against you: but they will neuer procure you any

money when you neede, without excessiue brokage, great eredit, or good
security. Tenthly, Shop-keepers (if you hold the Gooses Quils from
them) haue sworne that they will euer keepe you cut of their bookes.
And lastly, Schoole-boyes will throw whole voleyes of stones at you,
where euer they see you, if you alow them not Pennes, though it be but
to scrible or make Iewes letters.
Thus hauing laide open to your Herculean view, the labours and
dangers that you are like to suffer in protecting the Goose, Now I
thinke it fit (vnder correction) to closevp my Dedication with some
dutifull counsell, that though your enemies are mighty and many, and
that they doe preuaile against you, and with their multitude take from
you both the flesh and feathers of the Goose, (which indeede belongs
not to you, nor doe I dedicate them to you) yet here is your true honour,
and that which makes all men admire you, that her better part, her
genious, her intellectuall vnderstanding, her capacity; and reuerend
grauity, her wisedome, and her very spirit; neither man, deuill or
Dragon, is able to bereaue you of, as long as you haue a sword to de∣fend
it. I haue dedicated a Booke of a Begger at this time to Archy,
but most noble Sir, onely to you my Goose, so leauing you. Not doubting
of your acceptance, and protection: I wish you such encrease of honor
as is suteable to your Heroick endeuours, and vnimitable wisedome.


