



RIGHT WOR∣shipfull and Chri∣stian friendes, so soone as God gaue me a calling to be∣come your teacher; I bethought mee which might bee the fittest course and carriage of my Ministrie, both for your best pro∣fit and mine owne discharge: and after a little deliberation, I easily re∣solued of three thinges. 1. to call you

to a loue, and a cheerefull frequen∣ting of the holy exercises of Religion in the house of God; by which as by a praeface I entered into my labours, and this from the example of Da∣uid. Psal. 84. 10. 2. to teach you how to behaue your selues being pre∣sent before God. from the example of Cornelius, Act. 10. 33. 3. to preach Christ vnto you; which by Gods mercy I haue also performed out of Peters Sermon following frō ver. 33. to 44. Wherin I haue  intreated of the most fundamal points of our Christian Religion: in∣deauoring in all these to approue my heart vnto the Lord, and my desire of your profiting euen to your selues. Of the first of these I haue here gi∣uen you a further view and account; the other two depend one vpon the other, & containe a labour of longer time; besides that the eye of our expe∣rience hath seene what a surfet & lo∣thing

this our age hath taken of sound practical diuinity: & there∣fore onely thus much I haue presu∣med for your sakes to publish, to the purpose that each of your families might haue a coppy for the helping of your memories; not intending any further view of clearer light. But if the Printers haue ouer-intreated me to make the benefit (as they tearmed it) more common; then I shall desire of such as for whome these thinges were not principally prepared, the forbearance of any curious censure, seeing it was plainly fitted and prea∣ched vnto a plaine auditory, and not intended to behold such an open light. Wherein yet it may afford this vse, that being a subiect in which I haue obserued none going before me by way of treatise; it may yeeld both occasions and groundes to some more able instrument to inlarge and a∣dorne so necessary and so profitable

an argument. Which heartily I wish; the rather, because in these desolate daies of ours, these beauties of Gods house, are by so many men, & so many meanes obscured, as that nū∣bers giuen-ouer to Atheisme and li∣berty, are bold not onely to moue (which were too much) but strongly defend that our Saboth is either not to be kept, or not so straightly: that either our Sermons neede not to bee heard or not so frequently: & that to walk according to the light here shi∣ning, at least so accurately & strict∣ly Ephe. 5. 15 . as the Apostle prescribeth, is too much precisenes: the which with sundry other disguised conceites of vayne men, if they shall preuaile so far as they threaten, surely our Be∣thels in shorte time will become Be∣thavens; our houses of God, dens of theeues, and the voice of our Church will be no other then that of Nao∣mi. Ruth. 1▪ 20 Call mee no more beautifull;

for why should yee call me so, see∣ing the Lord hath humbled mee, and the almighty hath brought mee vnto aduersity, how glorious a worke thē would it be to ioyne in the preseruing of the beauty of the king∣dome of Iesus Christ? and that not by any artificiall paynting of the face of this chaste spouse (for that is fitter for the Romish Harlot) but by a plaine manifestation of her owne face and natiue beauty out of the word, which preferreth her beauty before that of the Rose of the field, Cant. 2. 1 and the Lilly of the vallies, and af∣firmeth that the Lilly among the thornes doth not so surpasse in beau∣ty as she doth among the daugh∣ters. Surely such a glorious worke as this shal not want a glorious reward. But to returne to you ye hearers, these briefe notes being properly yours, to you they are of right directed as a testymony of my loue and inward af∣fection

vnto you: the which (if the Lord had thought meet) I desirously would haue still testified by voice a∣mong you, rather then by this my writing: by which I recommend these few lessons to your Godly learning, and my self vnto your praiers.

