



CHRISTIAN FRIENDS:
I Am (I suppose) a stran∣ger to most of you, unlesse peradventure you tooke notice of me in preaching the Sermon at the Fune∣rall of your worthy Doctor the Author of this Booke: and so I hope you will conceive, that I present not this Worke unto you in mine own name, but one∣ly

in behalfe of the Widow, whose mo∣destie permits her not to come in Print. To you, her worthy Friends & Neigh∣bours, shee desires to have these Labors dedicated, as to whom shee judgeth them most properly due: and wisheth you the same profit and comfort in reading, as did her deare Husband in preaching. By faith, Abel being dead, yet Hebr. 11. 4. speaketh, faith the Apostle to the He∣brewes: By faith also, and these works of Faith, doth your late worthy Pastor yet speake unto you: and here while you reade, you may imagine, hee still calleth to Faith, Obedience, Repen∣tance, Growth in the Knowledge and Feare of GOD, with all courage, wise∣dome, humilitie, heavenly-mindednes, and unblameableness of living. His reward is now with the Lord, whose hee was, and whom he served. His Name in the Church sweet and preci∣ous, and ever will be while a Church remaines on earth, to worship GOD a∣right,

and to distinguish Beleevers from unbeleevers, or misbeleevers. The In∣struction is yours, to follow his holy Doctrine and Example. And happy shall every Soule be, which heedfully followeth The Clowd of Witnesses. Hebr. 12. 1.
For the Worke it selfe, I have not much to preface, onely our hope is, that for supply of defects, or conni∣vence at them, the untimely decease of the Author, and your owne ingenuity, will yeeld abundant Apologie. The substance is the same with his owne Notes: the Tables mine: other things the Printers. Let the benefit be yours, and wee have our desire. And certain∣ly, hee that falls to the matter with love and hearty affection, shall reape some benefit: For while hee reades, hee will easily understand, that in this life the Church, and faithfull members of it, must ever be encountring with spiritu∣all wickednesses, (which calls to watch∣fulnesse:) and yet is sure of victory, hath

help enough, well led by an able Cap∣taine, and furnished with armour of proofe (which calls to chearfulnesse in 1 Tim. 9. 12 fighting the good fight of faith.) And when hee that understands it, shall carefully addresse himselfe to the practise of it, he shall well redeeme his time in reading, honour his Captaine who hath chosen him to bee a Souldier, performe his vow made against the devill in his Bap∣tisme, prepare by smaller skirmishes for great and fiery tryals when they shall come; and so having striven lawfully, 2 Tim. 2. 5. 4 8. shall receive the Crowne which the Lord the righteous Iudge shall give him at that day, with all that love his appea∣ring. Plentifull Encouragements wee have, both to enter these lists, and hold out to the end. Deale couragiously, and 2 Chr. 19. 11 the Lord shall be with the good. Feare not, nor be dismayed: goe out against these your spirituall enemies, and the Lord will be with 20. 17 you. And all hands here may be brought together to the fight: even every one

that is an Angell of Michael: wee must strive together for the faith of the Gospel: Phil. 1. 27. and our united forces shall be much the more puissant and unresistable: E∣specially while wee help one another by our prayers; which is my request for my selfe, from you all, and I rest
Isleworth.
Feb. 25. 1632.

