



SInce it pleased the almighty providence, by your free choyse, to give me charge over you, I have not spared my paines to acquaint you with the counsell of God, according to the measure of grace bestowed on mee. My aime hath beene to speake to the meanest capacity, for the informing of every mans judgement, and the awakening of every

mans conscience: and my prayers have beene frequent unto him who hath com∣mended unto me this peece of service; that he would please to make me an able instru∣ment of your good: neither hath my suc∣cesse discouraged mee, who have for the greatest, and best part of you; found you a willing and loving people. If any be as yet otherwise minded, and have not given up themselves to God, and to his Mini∣sters; by instructing them still with meek∣nesse, and waiting when God will give repen∣tance,2 Tim. 2.25. wee will not distrust that grace of God, by which the worst one day may be wonne to consider; 1. That it is a most dangerous thing long to enjoy the good meanes of grace, and not to get grace by them. 2. That the more powerfull and profitable the Ministery is which an unre∣formed man liveth under, the more un∣happy and damnable his estate his. 3. That the long and often refusall of Gods call, giveth the Lord just occasion to call no more. 4. That it is not the having or hea∣ring of a Teacher that will availe an un∣converted man, but a discerning of the

Lords voice, and an opening the doore of the heart to the Lord, who hath a long time stood knocking and seeking en∣trance.
And now because love is a loadstone of love,Magnes a∣moris amor. I could not but thinke of some re∣turne, and thankfull acknowledgement of your loving respect of my selfe and weake labours among you, for whose sake I have recollected the heads of many Le∣ctures preached among you, and presented in a shorter view or modell; the marrow and substance of sundry discourses more largely handled in the delivery. For as un∣to you, under God, my time, my strength, my labours in publlke and private are most due, so herein I render to you but your own▪ and that perhaps not uncalled for by you· These lines will call upon you for 3 duties especially. First, every day to strive in subduing in your selves your personall corruptions, till you have brought downe every high thing, and thought into holy subiection. Secondly, most inwardly to af∣fect holinesse in your selves, and most en∣tirely to love such as walke most holily, as

being the likest, nearest, and dearest unto God. Thirdly, to see that every part of your lives aime at progresse to full holinesse. My desire of the Lord is that there may be ad∣ded to your perusall, a second addition of blessing and successe. My request to you all is, kinde acceptance of this my labour, as a pledge of my care over you, and of my heartie desire every way to helpe you for∣ward towards your desired end. My en∣couragement and recompence shall bee your profiting and progresse in an holie re∣formation of heart and life. This is the right praise of a Preacher. And though I can promise, or presume nothing of my owne strength, which is well nigh drawne out by the painfull labours of my Ministe∣rie above thirtie yeares; yet (the Lord as∣sisting mee) my purpose and endeavour shall be to frame this latter age, and act of my life, sutable in paines to the former; so as it may be most fruitfull unto you, and usefull unto the Church, into whose trea∣surie I have cast another mite. I shall bet∣ter attaine my purpose by the assistance of your prayers: which I desire may dailie

meete with mine, for you all, before the throne of grace for mutuall blessing. And so I rest:From my study Novemb. 17. the happy day of that admi∣red Queene E∣lizabeth, the worlds won∣der, the famous Mother of our Country, and nurse of our religion. 1630.

