



RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL:
WE reade, that when Obed-edom entertained the Arke of the Lord, the Lord blessed Obed-edom, and all that hee had, because of the Arke of God. That Arke was a signe of Gods presence, and a type of our Ministery, to

which Iesus Christ hath tyed his speciall presence. That Arke was graced with many miracles: By it, the waters of Iordan diui∣ded themselues, and gaue way to Israel to passe, as on dry land. By it, the huge walls of Ierico fell downe to the ground. By it, Dagon, the Idoll of the Philistims, was throwne to the earth and dis-membred. This our Euangelicall Arke is countenan∣ced with as many, and mighty miracles as e∣uer that was: It passeth all the Israel of God thorow the mighty flouds, and impassable streames of afflictions and impediments, that otherwise would stop them in their way to Canaan. By it, the huge walls of wic∣kednesse, and lusts, euen all high thoughts, lift vp against God, and reared vp against heauen, are throwne downe, and cast to ground. By it, the adored Dagon of Popish Idolatry, and superstition; of errours, he∣resies, false-worship, and ignorant con∣ceits, is cast vpon his face, not able to abide the presence of the Arke, and truth of God: and a thousand such miracles are daily wrought by it in the conuersion of men.

From that Arke, the Lord gaue immediate answeres, and diuine Oracles. From ours, we haue as sure directions, in all cases of faith, and sound doctrine, and also of Chri∣stian manners. In that, were the Tables of stone written with Gods finger: In this, are those Tables, not laid vp, but vnfolded, and Christ, the end of the Law, included. Before that, was the Pot of Manna, and the flourishing Rod of Aaron. This exhibiteth Christ the Bread of Life, and the Manna that came downe from heauen; together with his Rod and gouernment, which see∣med quite cut off, and withered, in his death; bur gloriously budding, and flourishing a∣gaine in his powerfull Resurrection. Now the way to meete wih blessing, is, to enter∣taine our Arke, as Obed-edom did that. For it was not the presence of the Arke, but Obed-edoms reuerent entertainment of it, that procured his prosperity. No more is it the presence of a powerfull Ministery (sup∣pose by Christs owne person and presence) but the kind and louing respect of it, that may expect blessing from it. This kind en∣tertainment

Obed-edom expressed in these particulars.
1. He loued God himselfe first, and for his sake, the Arke of his presence. Hee that loues not God, can neuer entertaine the Arke: and a sure signe of a man hating God himselfe, is the hatred of a faithfull Mini∣stery.
2. Obed-edom embraced the Law of God with a reuerend affection; and for the loue of that, entertained the Arke, in which the Law was preserued. For if Obed-edom had violated the Tables of stone, or broken the Rod of Aaron, or mis-vsed the Manna; he had been so frrre from being bettered by the presence of the Arke, that it would haue proued his destruction. No man can friendly embrace the Ministery, that liueth in the ordinary violation of any of the Lawes of God; or despiseth any of the rules by which Iesus Christ gouerneth his Church. Yea, for such a man to liue vnder a godly Ministery, it rather furthers his Iudgement, than any way procures his pro∣sperity.
3. Obed-edom entertaining the Arke, en∣tertained also the Officers of it; hee brake not off the rings, nor the barres in the rings, by which it was carried to and fro. No man can benefit himselfe by the Mi∣nistery, that despiseth such godly Ministers, who as the barres in the rings of the Arke, propagate the Truth, and carry the Word of saluation among the Nations. This en∣tertainment of the Arke of God, hath pro∣mise of blessing to our selues, and all that we haue. It is true, that Gods presence is not to bee desired for outward blessings: but yet euen these are annexed often vnto it. For godlinesse is neuer without some great gaine; nor the doctrine of godlinesse so sory a ghest, but it leaues some bounti∣full gratuity for kind and louing entertain∣ment. The Arke was neuer separated from the Mercy-seate; to shew, that Gods mercy is neere vnto him that affecteth Gods pre∣sence.
To you (Right Worshipfull) I commend this care of prizing Gods Arke, set vp a∣mongst you, because I thirst after your

prosperity. Faile in this, and you haue let out the vitall spirit of your Corporation, which shall runne vpon rocks and ruine, as the ships on a stormie Sea, whose Mariners haue cast away their Card. Your wisdomes know what Gods Wisedome is plentifull in teaching, that declining in goodnesse, for most part bringeth a declination in the outward estate: whereof Salomon had wo∣full experience; whose departing from Gods wayes, lost him ten parts of his King∣dome at one clap. The dying speech of Phineas his wife is memorable; that when the Arke was taken from Israel, The glory is departed from Israel. Many things I might heere moue in, but I spare both you, and my selfe, seeing I can weakly speake vnto you. Onely now I will turne precepts into praiers, that as the dew from Hermon, and Mount Sion, did distill on the valleyes round about them; so may this Towne, by your prudent gouernment, bee a pat∣terne of piety, charity, and sobriety, to the whole Countrey about you. And as this fa∣mous Towne for pleasant situation, and

rich commodities, for prudent gouernment and ciuill state, but especially for the plen∣tifull meanes of knowledge and grace, is as a light set vp in a Candlestick, as a Tower on the top of an hill, and as a Beacon to the whole Countrey: so your godly care may be so much the more to walk worthy your great priuiledges. For if darknesse should be on this Hill, what can be expected in the valleyes? And if your faith should not bee published, and your obedience should not come abroad, among whom Gods Arke hath been seated so long, who can expect the continuance of your prosperity? I speak not, to blot you with dis-respect of your Ministers, or the meanes of Gods presence which you enioy; for I praise God, to see the House of God so frequented, and your selues can confesse, how God hath been a good Pay-master already for some good affections this way, in much increase added of late yeeres to the outward estate both of your publike Corporation, and many pri∣uate persons: but to incourage you, both to the continuing, and adding to that you

haue begun; as knowing, it is no lesse ver∣tue to keepe, than to get; and that the more respect you giue to the Arke of God, the more will the Lord respect you in good∣nesse. Your example that are in eminent place, shall greatly further in others with Gods glory your own reckoning. Of Vespa∣sian we reade, Bonis legibus à se latis multa correxit, sed exemplo probae vitae plus effecit a∣pud populum: Good Magistrates doe more good by good examples, than by good Lawes: and on the contrary, Plus exemplo nocent quam peccato: Their sinne is not so hurtfull as their example. But I haue inioy∣ned my selfe silence; and onely for your furtherance to the duty perswaded, make offer to your Worships this little helpe and direction. A signification of my loue, a te∣stification of my duty, and a piece of my thankfulnesse for sundry fruits of your lo∣uing respect of me both publike and per∣sonall. And to whom should I rather de∣dicate this labour, than to you, who heard it preached with much gladnesse? some of whom haue often professed the

much comfort and content which you re∣ceiued in the hearing, and since haue been instant spurres and perswaders for the pub∣lishing, that you might haue it by you for a more continuall and constant direction. As I haue giuen way to your desires: so God giue a plentifull blessing vnto it, as al∣so to your whole gouernment and Corpo∣ration, that it may still bee happy in the Arke, and for the Arke. Amen.

