



RIGHT Reverende Father, and my ve∣ry good L. I am bold in your Lordshippes name to present to Christ his Church these my travailes vndertaken in de∣fence of the same against her capitall enemy the great Antichrist, especial∣ly seeing your Lordship is our Coronell vnder whose conduct we, that are lea∣ders of smal bandes vnder your regiment, are marshalled along vnto these our military services, and are encouraged to fight the Lords battles. VVherefore I am most humbly to craue not only your Lordshippes approbation herein, but also your spe∣ciall protection, that so the better successe may ensue.
And I am most earnestly to exhort all those which are Lea∣ders with me of smaller companies, that they would submitte themselues dutifully to the government of their Lieftenant generall, and Coronels appointed over them for their spiritu∣all services, that they take them for their governours and not for their enemies, and that they be preast and ready to put in execution their lawfull designmentes, (howsoeuer some of them perhappes may conceaue, that there might bee devised some better course for the menaging of these affaires.) For doubtles whersoeuer the Generall & Coronels be not readily o∣beied by their vnder Officers, but deemed & iudged for deadly enemies, there must needes arise sedition and mutinies, and so in the end, vnlesse it be prevented, the vtter overthrowe of the whole army. As therefore, my brethren, wee would bee
 loath to be the meanes to weaken & dissolue the Lords bands, and to strengthen and encrease the force of the enemy, let vs so stand vpon our several watches, that we keepe our selues to our owne colours, and discerne our chiefest Patrones & Pro∣tectors from our most dangerous and deadly foes, and distin∣guish our Fathers, that haue begotten vs through the gospell, from such as would bastardize vs, if they could, and rob vs of our caelestiall and heavenly inheritance. Yea whereas the ene∣my by strong leagues and confederaces, and by all meanes that pollicy can devise, or industry bring to passe, hath long time sought to strengthen himselfe that he might bring vs to vtter destruction: how ought we with one heart and one soule ioine togeather for our owne preservatiō, & especially for the fur∣thering of the glorious gospell of Christ our Lord, & for the establishing of his kingdome? VVe knowe all very well that by peace and vnity small things become great, as by discorde and dissention great things are brought to nothing. And therfore I cannot but greatly reuerence that godly affection of that re∣ligious & reverend father in God THOMAS COOPER late Bishop of VVinchester, who lying in his death bed, whē sense, reason, & iudgment began to faile him, yet this desire did not waxe weake, but his importunate wil (if I may so tearme his holy and godly zeale ther in) was, that set praiers should bee appointed for the peace of this our Church, & for the esta∣blishing of Christian loue and vnity among our selues The which thing, as I take it, would the more easily come to passe, if we would duely weigh with our selues, that government and ceremonies (about the which we contende) are only in gene∣ral Calvin. in J. ep. ad Cor. c. 11. commanded in the word of God: but what special kinde of government is fittest for every time and countrey, & what ceremonies in particular belong to order, comelines, and edifi∣cation, these things are not left in the power of private per∣sons
 (for that woulde tende to confusion and all disorder, and cause Controversies to be endles) but to the povver of such as be in autoritie, and the determination of their holesome lawes.
The articles of faith saith Tertullian be the law of faith: Tertul. d virg. vtad. this law remaining, other matters of discipline and conver∣sation doe admitte the novelty of correction, the grace of God working, & profiting the Church to the end. VVhere∣fore as I would exhort our Leaders of smaller companies to ac∣knowledge and reverence their greater Commanders, and to submit thēselues to their governemēt; so I vvould also most humblie beseech those wich are in higher place & autority to embrace with loue their inferior Officers, which are desirous to keepe the vnity of the spirit in the bonde of peace. And Hostes iudi∣candi suns qui contrae remp. arma ferunt. non qui suo iudie cio tueri ve∣lint remp. that they will not over hastely adiudge all those to be factious & mutinous, who differ a little in iudgemēt frō thē in the or∣dering of the battle, & in the māner of performing of this or that peece of service; if they fly not, nor turne their backes in the skirmish, but advaūce their ensignes couragiously, & em∣ploy their forces māfully against the enimy. The time hath ben Euseb. lib. 5. Cap. 23. whē that the diversity in fasting (& so no doubt in other mat∣ters of the like kind) hath ben thought to haue ben a cōmen∣datiō to the vnity in faith. The time hath beene when heady Idem. lib. 5. Cap. 26. Victor seeking a victory to himselfe and so hindering the conquest and triumph of the truth, hath beene overruled by a discrete Irene perswading peace, that so the gospel might gette the greater victorie. The time hath beene when rash Iosuah provoking meeke Moses to put to silence Eldad Numb. 11. & 28. and Medad for prophecying in the host, and not being present as it vvere before his Consistorie, receaued the cheeke for his labour: Enviest thou for my sake? I would to God all the LORDES people could prophecie, and
 that the Lord would put his spirit vpon them. For if Christ Ph. 1. 18. be preached any manner of way it ought to be the matter of great ioy to every true & sincere Christiā: And if to vs this di∣spēsatiō be cōmitted, woe, woe vnto vs if we preach not the 1. Cor 9. 16. Gospell: but if we be instāt herein in seasō, & out of season, and feede Christes sheepe againe & againe, for that they are redeemed with his owne blood, happie are we even by the testi∣mony of the Lord himselfe, seing we are possessed with his loue. And happy also is the estate of those sheepe which haue Ioh 21. 15. a faithfull sheapheard to goe in and out before them, and to lead thē alonge into the pastures of righteousnes: as lamenta∣ble is the case of those Cōgregations which are as sheepe scat∣tered abroad without a sheapheard; as wretched is the es∣tate Math 9. 36. of that ground, which hath no skilfull husbandman to ma∣nure the same. Surely the harvest is great & the labourers are but few & therefore we must make earnest suite to the Lord of the harvest that he would thrust forth labourers into his harvest. And may we not as truly say, that these battles are hote, & that the leaders thereof on the adverse part are ma∣ny, expert, & cruel & therefore that there is great neede that all the Leaders of the Lords armies should be stirred vp & en∣couraged each by other to stand vp in the breach and couragi∣ously to withstand the force of the enimie? The which thinge if any of thē shall either be vnwilling or vnable to performe, order had neede to be taken presētly for such, least the armie thereby should be brought in great danger.
And verely (right Reverend in the Lord) it is lamentable to behold what great massacres, blindnes, and ignorance, su∣perstition and Idolatrie do make as yet in the middest of many Congregations, who are laide as it were wast and desolate, for want, as it may be supposed, either of hability, or else of in∣dustry in their Leaders which should withstand the force of
 these enimies. How many are there even among those which outwardly notwithstāding cōforme thēselues to law & order, who feede still vpon poisō, for want of holesome foode to be so divided, that they may be able to receaue the same: & like silly sheepe are still ready to stray hither & thither & to become a pray to the greedy wolfe, for wāt of such a sheapheard as should still goe in & out before thē, and direct them along in a right course? For is it not with vs (who are in this our Church as it were the feete of the Ministery) as it was with that image represēted to Nabuchadnezzar in a dreāe, whose feete were part of iron & part of clay? For there are in many (the Lord be blessed for thē, & encrease the number of thē) the strength of iron, whereby they are enabled to stay the people vpright, & to keepe thē in obediēce to God & to their Soveraigne: and there are others like moultring clay hauing little power to strengthē thēselues, & lesse hability to stay others.
Thus am I bold to intimate the estate of Christs sheepe vn∣to your Lordshippe being our great sheepheard, who not onely by your antority do require our watchfulnes & diligence over our severall flocks, but also by your owne example do perswade vs therevnto verifiyng by your practise the truth of that say∣ing of one of your L. most famous Predecessors; that, as an Emperour should die standing in the fielde, so should a B. in the pulpitte. The high and cheife Bishop of all our soules visite your Lordship daily with his mercies, encrease his gra∣ces & blessings vpon you, & preserue you both in body & soule to his owne honour, & to the benefite of his Church. Amen.

