



HONOVRABLE AND RIGHT WORTHY,
THE publike de∣monstratiō which you haue lately
giuen of your true desire to fol∣low the footsteps of our Lord, vn∣dergoing so heauy a Crosse for his sake, with so ready and resol∣ued a mind, hath moued me to dedicate this little Booke of the Imitation of Christ vnto You: assu∣ring my selfe that it will be no lesse gratefull to You to see it ap∣peare in light, purged from many mistaken sentences which were in the former Translation, then the reading and practice therof will be profitable to others; it being so diuine and excellent a worke, as in the opinion of such as can best iudge of this matter, of all the Bookes which are written, that treate of spirit and Christian Per∣fection, the holy Scripture ex∣cepted, it is inferiour to none, if it excelleth not all.
No 'booke hath byn more approued by generall consent, none more often printed and translated
into diuers languages, none more esteemed, commended, yea com∣maunded also by the chiefe Mai∣sters of Spirit of some Religious Orders, to be often read by euery one in priuate, and once a weeke publikely to all. So full of sweet sense is this diuine Flower, that the most spirituall bees may day∣ly draw from thence great plenty of celestiall hony. It is a dish of so diuine meate, that it neuer satiates the deuout mind: but as the Wis∣dome of God doth promise to all such as fit at that heauenly ban∣quet; so shall they find in this spi∣rituall food, The more they eate it,Eccl. 4. the more they shall hunger after it.
And the reason heerof is, for that it contayneth so great depth of spirit, and so great store and variety of heauenly documents, that it seemeth euer new to the Reader, and like another Manna affoardeth to euery one that de∣lightfull
tast which best agreeth with the palate of his soule: and none can loath it, but they whose lustes do carry them to Aegyptian slauery. A true Israelite may feed vpon it fourty yeares togeather, and euer find such pleasing tast and increasing strength by vse ther∣of, as will sustaine him in the de∣sert of this world, & enable him to goe on without fainting, till he arriue at his promised inheri∣tance of eternall rest.
The practise of that which this Booke doth teach, couereth the soule with the rich garment of grace, and adorneth it with the splendent pearles of Euangelicall Perfection, which maketh vs more pleasing in the sight of God, then can the deckings of all earth∣ly iewells make the fayrest Lady in the Kingdome where you are, appeare beautifull to the eyes of men. It returneth aboundant
Gayne for sustained Losses, and enlargeth the Liberty which is now restrayned. It raiseth vp to cheerefull confidence the deba∣sed head, and placeth in a Throno of endles Honour those who in this world doe seeme imprisoned in the blacke cloud of disgrace.
To Yov therfore who haue so willingly endured the losse of your earthly substance, I haue thought good to present this E∣uangelicall Pearle, and incom∣parable Treasure contayned in a little roome. Heere you shall find the most perfect manner of con∣forming our selues to Christ our heauenly Patterne, and see the vertues set forth in their colours which did most shine in the life of our Lord himselfe; and read in plaine and vulgar phrase those Lessons of high Perfection, which are commended vnto vs by the highest Wisdome, and which haue
made as many Saints, as they haue had diligent and obseruant fol∣lowers.
ACCEPT therfore I be∣seech you this little Present, pre∣sented by him who wisheth you much more temporall happinesse then your present state affoardeth; and that endles glory, wherof your present suffering is no vn∣certaine pledge. This first of No∣uember. 1612.

