



NOne are more to be commended (right Hono∣rable) than those who wer the first inuenters and fin∣ders out of Artes and Sci∣ences, wherwith mankind is beautified and adorned, without the which giftes he were but naked, barba∣rous and brutish, yea and a seruile creature. It was not for nothing that the elders in times past did so muche celebrate the instituters of those things: as Herodotus wri∣teth, that the Egiptians before all other men first foūd out the yere by the course of the Planets, and deuided it into .xij. mon∣thes. Diodorus assigned it to the Thebanes, the which stan∣deth well with the opinion of Herodotus, bicause the The∣banes be a nation of Egipt. As Numa added to the yere Ia∣nuary and February, Romulus ordred Marche, Aprill, and May, Augustus an other part, and so Iulius Caesar made vp

the perfect yere, as Polidorus Vergilius witnesseth in his boke De inuentoribus rerum. But how much praise is to be giuen to such as haue inuented good lawes & statutes for the bride∣ling of the Barbarous and wicked, and for the maintayning and defending of the iust? As we reade that Isis ariuing in Egipt, brideled that Countrey, and ordained good common wealths. How did the Scicilians honor Ceres, for that she was the first inuenter of wheat sowing, with other innumerable? Among all other, none in my iudgement is more worthier to be praised, thā the first finders out how to make ships and ves∣sels nauigable for the sea. Strabo writeth that Minos king of Crete, had the first rule of the sea. But Diodorus sayth, that Neptunus had the Empire of it afore him, for he inuented the feat in rowing of boates, and made a nauie, and was made Admirall of it by his father Saturnus, and Plinie reporteth that King Erichthas deuised boates first, and rowed in them on the Red sea. Some say they were ordained by the Troyans in the narow seas called Hellespontus: some thinke they were inuented in the English sea. Danus as some write, was the first that vsed any ship when he sailed out of Egipt into Grece. But for more assurance, what so euer their opinions be, as touching the beginning hereof, (as we rede in the holy scripture) Noe was the first inuenter or maker thereof, before the floud. The ingenious industry of man hath brought many things to a no∣table and good perfection, as well in Cosmography and Naui∣gation, as in any other arte or science: for no doubt, (as it ape∣reth by this trauaile or worke of Cosmography & such like,) the olde ancient writers, as Ptholomeus and others, were de∣ceiued, in that they iudged this Newe found Worlde, or the West part to be vnhabitable. How muche are they to be prai∣sed, that for their Countrey sake refuse no imminent perill, leauing the Pleasaunt bedde of Delicacie, and the seate or cradle of Sensualitie, their landes and goodes, their Wiues

and children, which in dede, are dearest vnto them, to aban∣dō themselues and their swetest liues to the fauoure of the boy∣strous seas, to the hap of the vnconstante windes, to the chayre of fortune, and finally to a thousande imminent euils, onely to encrease the fame and good renowme of their countrey. A∣mong the which I might rehearse, that this most noble Seig∣norie and Territorie of England hath of late yeares gotte the fame and renowme, that it hath had in times past, by Naui∣gation lately atempted by many and sundrie of our countrey∣men, (God graunte them still to go forwarde and encrease in those and such like enterprises, to Gods glory and the benefite of this common Wealth.) But alas, the greater number of mē are giuen to idelnesse or sensualitie, as if I mighte say nowe: where are the Tiberians, the Metelli, the Emili, the Marij and the Catones? Among the number of a great many, and in the middest of aboundance and pleasure, we meditate no∣thing else but onely securitie, almoste abhorring to heare the name of trauell or payne, by which it may be sayde to vs, in a manner, as it was sayde of Haniball, after the battell Tra∣simenius or Cannas, that his wintering at Capua in pleasure and delicacie was more noysom and hurtfull vnto him, than either of the battels before named. We reade after that Ale∣xander had vanquished almost the thirde parte of the world, hauing ouerthrowē the mighty King Porrus one of the stron∣gest Kings of India, with whom (as rehearseth Plutarche in the life of Alexander) he among all other had moste to doe, hauing also subdued vnto him the mighty King Darius, hea∣ring the Philosopher Anaxagoras, in a certayne lecture, hol∣ding this opinion, that there were Worldes out of number, therewith he burste out sodaynely into weeping, his friendes moued with this sight, demaunded whether any mishap had fallen vnto him mete to weepe for or no, he sayde these wordes: Oh, haue I not good cause to weepe trowe ye, that

there being worlds innumerable, I am not yet come to be full Lorde of one? of whom I gather the inceasable stomake, glory and renowme, how little he estemed him selfe and his King∣doms, without the name of victorious and mighty. Among and aboue all (as affirmeth Plutarchus) he estemed the Ilia of Homer, bicause in the same was declared the excellent prowes of Achilles. Thus (right honorable) we see, the valiant and curagious personages of the world haue brought to passe many excellent enterprises, so that their fame shall neuer dye, atcheued as well by sea as by lande, as this worthy traueller Andrewe Theuit, in this his Nauigation of the New found World, which I haue dedicated vnto your honor, as a tokē of my good will, the which after your great & waighty affaires, it may please you to vse, and to pardō this my rash enterprise, wherein I am enboldned to prefer this towards you, as a thing very rare, and of such exquisite doing, as before this time the like hath not ben heard of, whose annotations therin be such, as no Cosmographers hereto before haue done the like: desi∣ring your honor so to accepte the same, as the good will of him that gaue it. And thus I commit your good Lordship to the tuition of God, who preserue you and all yours in health and eternall felicitie. Amen.

