


IT is truly said (Right reuerend and my very good Lord) that a foolish Iudge doth ouer-hastily giue sen∣tence, not rightly apprehending, or duely weighing all things belonging thereunto. An example whereof we haue both in Iewes and Gentiles, vnto whom the Gospel preached, was a stumbling-blocke, and seemed to be a foolish and an ab∣surd doctrine, they being carried away so to iudge by this hasty conceit, that a man who came himselfe to shame & death, could not bring others to life and glory.
Whereas if they had rightly apprehended, and duely weighed and considered, that sinne was a most shamefull and deadly euill, which could not, as Gods decree stood, bee done away, but either with the shame and death of the of∣fender, or of some other party that should vndertake to sa∣tisfie
 the iustice of God for the same, they would haue per∣ceiued that the Gospell reuealing Christ Iesus the aeternall Sonne of God, assuming humane nature, and ioyning it in∣to one person with his diuine, and therein performing all things necessary for our full reconciliation to God, that so by his humiliation and shamefull death, he might bring u to life and glory; they would (I say) well haue vnderstood that the Gospell thus reuealing Christ Iesus vnto us, is the 1 Cor. 1. 23. power of God, and the wisdome of God.
And verily the Gospell is the most powerfull wisedome that euer was reuealed to man; because it maketh men, that by the corrupt suggestions of Satan were made mad, & Luc. 15. 17. Eccl. 7. 27. 2 Tim. 3. 15. put out of their right mind, wise to saluation by faith in Christ: yea is not the sincere embracer of the Gospell, the wisestman that liueth on earth, seeing he only embraceth the right meanes whereby he may be made happy and bles∣sed? And is not the sound preacher of the Gospell, who tur∣neth the hearts of the Fathers to the children, and the dis∣obedient to the wisdome of the iust, and so maketh a people ready prepared for the Lord, the disposer of the chiefest Luc. 1. 17. blessings that the Lord bestoweth vpon his dearest ser∣uants.
And is not also the carefull and watchfull Bishop, that is a guide set ouer the guides of the Lord's flocke, and a Super∣intendent ouer the Lord's watchmen, and is to commaund that they teach no other doctrine, nor mingle wilde goards 1 Tim. 1. 3. with the wholesome food that is appointed for those that 2 Reg. 4. 39. Tit. 1. 5. are of the Lord's Family, and if any such thing be done, to redresse the same, is not (I say) such a one a singular, yea an honourable instrument vnder God; that those so sruitfull labours of all inferiour Ministers, may bee made powerfull vnto many for the saluation of their soules?

Now the labors of Ministers are then powerfull, when the wisdome of the word of God is made manifest by them, which is, when the right sense thereof is explained, and iu∣stified by cleare and sound arguments, and reasons. For he that will vrge the bare and naked words of the Scripture, without the true sense and meaning thereof, is like to a souldier that will fight with a scabbard without a sword. And he that will vrge a sense thereof not iustified & clea∣red by sound and sufficient reasons, is like to one that will fight with a sword without an edge. For they are the solid reasons whereon the wise and holy doctrines of the diuine word of God are grounded, that giue light & weight there∣to, and are, after a sort, the very life thereof. And hereof it is that all manner of learned Professours, especially among Christians, he they orthodoxe, or be they haereticks, offer to iustifie their seuerall opinions by sound & solid arguments concluded in true syllogismes, and to that end require pub∣like disputations. Now if all require the truth of their o∣pinions to be thus tried, then they may not in any case re∣fuse and shame this manner of tryall.
Wherefore as Festus said vnto Paul, when he had ap∣pealed Acts 25. 12. vnto Caesar: Hast thou appealed vnto Caesar? vn∣to Caesar thou shalt goe: So say I vnto all learned Profes∣sours of Christianity: haue yee appealed vnto reasons con∣cluded in true syllogismes for the iustifying of your seuerall positions? by reason ye shallbe tryed, and to the censure thereof ye ought to stand.
And this I haue sufficiently proued in the explication and confirmation of the third proposition of the former part of this Treatise, by the approbation thereof giuen vnto me from your LOrdships owne mouth, after you had duely perused the same, being committed vnto your Lordships
 iust censure. Wherefore according to the old Prouerbe, Sci∣tum est Athletam placuisse Herculi; as he may bee taken for a sufficient Champion that is approued of Hercules: so that Treatise may be esteemed to be furnished with suffi∣cient munition, that is approued of a wise Colonell.
And hereupon I am bold to craue to haue it published vnder your Lordships protection, that so it may be the bet∣ter accepted, and that some of the Lords souldiers may bee strengthned and inabled thereby, with better courage to fight the Lord's battles. And thus commending your Lordship to God and to the word of his grace, which is able to build further, and to giue you an inheritance among them that are sancti∣fied: I rest

