


HOnorable & Right Wor∣thy, the publike demon∣stration which you haue lately giuen of your true desire to follow the footsteps of our Lord, vndergoing so heauy a Crosse for his sake, with so ready and resol∣ued a minde, hath moued mee to de∣dicate this little Booke of the IMI∣TATION OF CHRIST vnto you: assuring my selfe that it will be no lesse gratefull to you to see it ap∣peare in light, purged from many mistaken sentences which were in the former Translation, then the rea∣ding and practise thereof wil be pro∣fitable to others; it being so diuine and excellent a worke, as in the opi∣nion

of such as can best judge of this matter, of all the Bookes which are written, that treate of Spirit & Chri∣stian Perfection, the holy Scripture excepted, it is inferiour to none, if it excelleth not all.
No book hath bin more approued by generall consent, none more often printed & translated into diuers lan∣guages, none more esteemed, com∣mended, yea commanded also by the chiefe Masters of Spirit of some reli∣gious Orders, to be often read by e∣uery one in priuate, and once a week publikely to al. So full of sweet sense is this diuine Flower, that the most spirituall Bees may daily draw from thence great plentie of celestiall ho∣ny. It is a dish of so diuine meat, that it neuer satiates the deuout mind: but as the Wisdome of God doth pro∣mise to all such as sit at that heauen∣ly banquent; so shal they find in this spiritual food, The more they eat it, the more

they shall hunger after it. Eccles. 4.
And the reason hereof is, for that it containeth so great depth of spirit, and so great store and variety of hea∣uenly documents, that it seemeth e∣uer new to the Reader, and like ano∣ther Manna, affordeth to euery one that delightfull taste which best a∣greeth with the palate of his soule: and none can loath it, but they whose lustes doe carry them to Aegyptian slauery. A true Israelite may feed vp∣on it forty yeares together, and euer finde such pleasing taste and encrea∣sing strength by vse therof, as wil su∣staine him in the desert of this world, and enable him to goe on without fainting, till he arriue at his promised inheritance of eternall rest.
The practise of that which this booke doth teach, couereth the soule with the rich garment of grace, and adorneth it with the splendent pearls of Euangelical perfection, which ma∣keth

vs more pleasing in the sight of God, then can the deckings of all earthly jewels make the fairest Lady in the Kingdome, where you are, ap∣peare beautifull to the eyes of men. It returneth abundant gaine for su∣stained losses, and enlargeth the li∣berty which is now restrained. It rai∣seth vp to cheerefull confidence the debased head, & placeth in a Throne of endlesse honour those who in this world doe seeme imprisoned in the blacke cloud of disgrace.
To you therefore who haue so willingly endured the losse of your earthly substance, I haue thought good to present this Euangelicall Pearle, and incomparable Treasure contained in a little roome. Here you shall find the most perfect manner of conforming our selues to Christ our heauenly paterne, & see the vertues set forth in their colours, which did most shine in the life of our Lord

himselfe; and reade in plaine and vul∣gar phrase those Lessons of high per∣fection, which are commended vnto vs by the highest Wisdome, & which haue made as many Saints, as they haue had diligent and obseruant fol∣lowers.
Accept therefore, I beseech you, this little Present, presented by him who wisheth you much more tem∣porall happines, then your present state affordeth; and that endlesse glory, whereof your present suffe∣ring is no vncertaine pledge. This first of Nouember. 1612.

