


WHat I at first intended for mine owne imployment to passe away spare time, and afterward purposed for your pri∣uate exercise onely, is now made pub∣lique not by my free and voluntarie e∣lection; but by an accident of neare nature to con∣straint. For hauing hastily finished the translation of these two first comedies of Terence, and ended the foure first acts of the third, I missed my booke one alone day, and then found it againe gelded of the three Latter Acts of the third Comedie. Shortly after I met the Copie thereof in the hands of a Sta∣tioner: whence I coniectured that my booke had been copied out by character for sale; and that done by some lame and ignorant Author, who was not able to be his owne discipherer. I had neglected this thiefe, this plagiarie; and had suffered him to make vse of my labour, but that one honest and learned gentleman had seene my doings in Andria, and who also knew I was about the residue. You apprehend the iust reason of this publication. As touching my
Dedication, I do not so much doubt the imputation of carelesnesse of my credit in seeking Patronage from raw and greene youth, as I feare the challenge of ambitiousnesse in prouiding Patrons, who are to stand vp in all succession of times so long as your Schooles foundation shall continue: and some of you being likely very shortly to become of most full abili∣tie to defend your vnknowne Client. But till you arriue at such maturitie, giue me leaue to main∣taine my selfe, and to prepare you.
I haue alreadie heard somewhat, whereby I further suspect how I may be further quarelled. There will perhaps some be found who on their good faiths will protest that this generall licentiousnesse of turning Latine bookes into English, caries with it much inconuenience. I hope in the generall loosenesse they include not those extant translations of Liuy, Plinie, Plutarch, Suetonius, Tacitus, and the like Authors: if they meane onley such versions as was that of Ouids Art of loue, & the like bookes tending to corruption of youth, I will ioyne with them; and adde, that such translations are not onely inconue∣nient but impious also. But in Terence is no such danger. In those few passages where his matter beares any ranke sent or sence, you shall find it hushed by some modest close Eclipsie, or stopping Aposio∣pesis; or else couched vnder such darke and misti∣call termes, as the young scholler cannot apprehend to any danger of defiling: which course I haue also
pursued. Besides Terence (as I heard) hath for∣merly beene Englished and published: so that this way I might decline the crime, of first turning him into our tongues, but because I neuer saw that En∣glish Author, and therefore know not how he hath carried it, I dare not shelter my selfe vnder such precedent: but I dare venture to share with Theod. Beza in any hazard of this imputation; and let such Cauillers know, that they by this aspersion shall bee found to wound that learned Frenchman through my sides: for his translation is extant, imprinted in French on one side and in Latine on the other side of euery leafe: and is now in the handes of all young schollers, throughout the whole French King∣dome. From the matter of the translation I come to the manner, and therein do foresee, that it may be obiected, that where Terence many times vseth generall tearmes, I do so rashly perticularlize him, places that in many places I retaine not the purpose & meaning of my Author; and againe, that in some my English doth not render the Latine truly: by the first they would inforce, that I conceaue not the drift and scope of my Author; by the later that I vnderstand not his words. I will onely giue you two or three instances, the better to prepare you to ap∣prehend the rest. An. Act. 1. Sc. 1. ver. 3. Curentur haec that these things be well ordered or looked too, I in special tearmes thus restraine, that these things be well cooked; hauing relation to Isthaec intrò au∣ferte


going before, where I vnderstand Isthaec to be meant of prouision for a dissembled wedding supper. Here it may be opposed by some, not out of their owne braines or conceipt, but by arguments filched out of blinde and ignorant Authors, that I am be∣side the cushion. I am not ignorant of three reasons vsed aboue a hundred yeares agoe against this inter∣pretation. First it is said that Auferre is a word denoting things contemptible, and therefore cannot be meant of Cates or dainties of diet. Se∣condly, it is affirmed that here was no such pro∣uision made as would require these seruants to car∣rie in: and this they ground on the words of Dauus Act. 2. Scen. 2. Paululum obsonij. And againe, Act. 2. Scen. 6. Vix drachmis inquit obsonatus est decem. Thirdly, they vrge the old French printed bookes, where by the pictures expressing the argu∣ments of euery Scene certaine logges or billets are sigured, and not baskets with prouision from the market. Whence they would inferre that by Isthaec no feasting stuffe is intended but matter of fewell onely. Perceiue you not the blockish conceipt of these loggerhead arguers? stay a while; and perhaps I shall affoord you meanes, better to vnderstand the matter. First, therefore I confesse and auoid the argument of contempt: for though Auferre (accor∣ding to Donat) be commonly vsed of things spoken of with disdaine, yet not alwayes so; for that which Terence meant by Auferte isthaec in the first line, is
named Curentur haec in the third: Now Curatio in its proper notion is Medicinae, aut (quae est eius famula) coquinae; and cannot be said of any thing whereof we speake with disdaine or loathing. Dauus words proue nothing: they only extenuate, do not deny the prouision. And for the French pictures. Painters and Poets (you know) take much libertie: but for answer I say, that Ascensius a learned Critique, great Grammarian and famous Printer aboue 100. yeares ago in France, and so best able to determine, the doubt, taking vpon him to argue the question, hath left the matter indifferent: yet inclines ra∣ther to Edulia then ligna. And me thinks such inter∣pretation may be euinced by euidence of reasons; for besides that a wedding was strongly to be borne vp (this could not handsomely be carried without a feast) it is manifest that Simo came from the mar∣ket: for so Pamphilus, Act. 1. Scen. 5. Pater prae∣teriens modò apud forum. Did these sernants at∣tend Simo thence with billets or bauins on their shoulders? this construction were as ridiculous, as improbable that a man of Simo's estate whose sonne was worthy to receiue tenne talents in portion with a wife, Act. 5. Scen. 4. should be vnfurnished of such ordinarie prouision. Or came these seruants emptie home after Simo? and were appointed to carrie in logges and fagots then lying before their Masters doore? this coniecture is as absurd; for how came the wood there? why did it trouble the stage? or
which way might it concerne the Argument? Espe∣cially why should Sosia formerly made free, now suspect that his Master Simo would Mutare factū; and recall him to a second bondage, by imposing vp∣on him such slauish drudgerie as Curare focum; a scullions no freed mans office? what art needed here∣to? and Sosia tenders imployment of art in the words immediately following Quid est, quod ars mea tibi efficere possit amplius? Indeed to steward a feast had in it some art, and seemes to haue beene a part of freed mens imployments, Eunuch, Act. 3. Scen. 5. ver. 60. Thus I hope I haue giuen you some reason of this interpretation. Besides Guido hath long ago so construed it, viz. Anno Dom. 1497. and Ascensius reuiewing Guido & in many places cor∣recting him, hath yet herein against his owne french printed copies allowed him, at lest left it indiffe∣rent. I told you before I had heard somewhat: it was of him in whose hands I met with my adulterate copie. This man charged the booke with many foule errors, and that iustly: One thing he taxed which was mine owne; yet which I durst not maintaine, for feare of giuing suspicion that I was father of the rest. Ander. Act. 2. Scen. 2. The words were Olera & pisciculos portantem in coenam seni, Which I render with hearbes and small sprots for the old mans supper: The challenge was, that the doer tooke Pisciculus to be Latine for the sprot; beside (said he) it would be considered whether this fish were to bee
found in the Attick seas. I would not haue vouch∣safed answer hereunto, but that many coincident passages in the booke will directly fall vnder the same friuolous cauill. In this respect therefore I thought good to satisfie you herein; that by the same reason you may be the better armed to defend the residue. I know Pisciculus to be a generall word including euery species of small fishes, and not the sprot onely, as well as Cetus doth comprehend Quamuis belluam marinam, and not the whale a∣lone: yet should I translate Immania cete hideous or dreadfull whales, I thinke the sharpest sighted Grāmarian wold wink at it. Whither the sprot hath euer bin eaten in Athens, I neither know nor care: I writ in London, and would speake to be vnderstood: And being to set downe a poore & homly fish supper thought by sprots it might be wel expressed. Master Gascoigne long since translated a Comedie of A∣riostoes, which he Englished Supposes: this was presented in Grayes Inne. He therein thus describes an homely and scanty supper — One small shottrell a peniworth of cheese, and ten spurlings. I thinke no wise man would presse that translator to instance in the very fishes in kind by Ariosto named: I could in∣deed haue wished hee had named some other course fish better knowne to his audience: which hee might haue done if hee had said, One shotten herring, and some halfe score of red sprots: For my part, I do not vnderstand what a Shottrellor a Spurling meaneth.
Yea Terence himselfe in the Eunuch Act. 2. sc. 2. brings in Gnato reckoning vp a number of seuerall kinds of Victualers, Cetarij, lanij, coqui, fartores, piscatores &c. It shall be hard for the best Critique to proue all these professions to be had in Athens in Menanders time. This is  Comicū as par∣donable as vsuall among translators. Furcifer I call pillorie roague: the pillorie beeing with vs a punish∣ment of reproch, nearest to that which they vnder∣went, who thence were called Furciferi amongst the ancient Romans. Grammarians diuide themselues into two parties about the word Riscus, Eunuch A. 4.1.6. I incline to the one side, and imagine it some such thing as is our hampar of Wicker couered with leather. Peniculus is a word of large extent, and ma∣nifold signification, I render it a moppe wherewith our seruants vse to clense wet floores; if another shall call it the Cookes maukin wherewith they cleare ouens, I will not challenge it. Many things were in Athens in Menanders time, which Terence had ne∣uer seene, there were as many in Rome in Terence his time, which no English man knoweth. Shall I be driuen to giue names of things not extant? If I put in things now in being to supply the place of other things long since lost, to the vnderstanding of my Reader and sufficient expression of my Author, I hope I can be no further required. These and the like are the maine things which I doubt to heare of; for the rest I leaue to your free and curteous censure; which yet
I desire you to spare, till a few yeares more bee ouer your heads; and then also to vse this method. Let the originall and the English copie be laid together; con∣sult for euidence with the old expositors: if they chance to wrangle (as they do almost euery where) then if you please hearken to Donat and Ascensius; if these at any time be silent, or else varie (this hap∣pens seldome) then make vse of your owne iudgment. After this course taken you may with pleasure stuffe your booke with marginall castigations; to me it shal be no disparagement, to you it will proue much ad∣uantagious; there being no booke of this kind, to the studious and often turning ouer whereof I would more willingly excite you. The hope of this your di∣ligence shall incourage me to let slip no vacant time til I haue sent the other foure Comedies among you. Now the Father of lights and giuer of all good gifts enlighten your vnderstandings; strengthen your me∣mories; rectisie your wils; and furnish you with all needfull graces, that you may become a comfort to your parents and gouernors, a credit to your schoole-Masters, and Tutors, an ornament to the Church and state wherein you are to liue. In the meane time. committing you to your studies, I bid you heartily farewell.

