



TIs late: and rather time to lye downe and rest, then to sit vp and discourse. The very can∣dles of my life burne dimme, which shewes it to bee bed-time. But I know not how, a friend, a deare and dearely
 respected friend, and worthy to bee so respected,Vnready Age is eady for heauen. knockt at the doore, whilst I was making my selfe vnready. No sooner I heard who it was, but I had Donne: left of vntiring my selfe, and wisht rather to tire al my powers, then he should want a welcome. I am now therefore ready againe, but so vnrea∣dily ready, as I was inforced to rubbe mine eyes to put off drowzinesse, be∣fore I could fit my selfe to giue him entertainment. Tis you, deare Sir, that after a soaring flight of many yeeres, haue now lighted vpon a faire Tree,Pos cubila quies vnder whose branches it is my fortune to hold a poor cottage, (sub∣iect (God knowes) to winde and wea∣ther.
 The motion of your wings was to mee a warning of your comming:Vltimae Musarum aetas. & though it be in the wayne-time of my life, I could not chuse but open the doores of my heart to receiue you. To your friends I was heretofore bound in dutie,Obligation com∣mands duty. and (in our youthfull societie) to your selfe in loue. But as the times are now, I reioyce that I shal haue cause to shew you both my loue and duty. Flatterie be farre from me, as I wish my soule from Atheisme. Yet I must ingenuously confesse,To obserue, is a sllable more then to serue. as an ancient obseruant of your worth, that your yong daies were to me of much admiration, as these dayes are now of deserued reuerence. To shew ther∣fore
 my dutie, it becomes me to meet you with humilitie, as one of the Churches Seruants: and to shew my Loue, I haue thought fit to prouide for you such a present, as for the pre∣sent, I was able to giue, and I know you doe loue pure, and vndefiled Poe∣sie. In respect of my weakenesse, you may call it an Aprill Daisie, in the Lap of Winter, quickly blasted: but in re∣spect of my aspiring Loue, and your affecting Goodnesse, I hope it shall be receiued and welcomed as a Rose at Christmas, the New-yeeres gift of Art and Nature.its are best welcome in Winter. If I haue soard into the Sunne, and singed my plumes, my fall will be easie in your armes. And
 I hope for the loue of the Muses (who in your Youth initiated you their Son,Worthinesse  Youth,  venerable. and now in your Age haue elected you a Patron) you will open the im∣braces of fauour, and graciously giue me your acceptance, with a pardon for my daring into so high a Subiect. And as to you in Capite, so to the rest in Ca∣pitulo, I humbly come for acceptance and pardon: as well knowing, you will all thinke better of me, that with Icarus I mount high,Os homini lime dedit. and fall into a faire Sea; then I should haue reel'd a∣bout with Bacchus, and falne into a foule Puddle. A Poet that is obscene forgets his Scene: and I dare promise, that if there be any spot or blemish in
 this Poesie,Venus had a Mole. the fault is not in the Sub∣iect, but in the Accident. The blacke Inke may blot the faire paper: and my vnskilfulnesse mis-shadow the Lawes Beauty. But seeing velle and posse are not in euery man,In things lauda∣ble, the will is pleadable. Est voluisse satis shall be my pleading Aduocate. And so with my Loue and Duty equally twined together, either into a Lawrell or a Willow Garland (which you please to account it) I offer it vp with a desire it were worthy (I will not say your best, but) any little acceptance: and therewithall rest

