




MOst Gracious, and most hopeful∣ly Puissant Prince, Place may yeeld much preiudice against the perso∣nall performance of any good acti∣ons, to those mens conceits, who make custome a vertue, with

the blinde Pharises, thus taunting at NI∣CODEMVS; John 7.52. Art thou also of Galilee? search and looke: for out of Galiee ariseth no Prophet.
But such sinister thoughts God in his prouidence so graciously preuenteth, that as the Sunne shineth in euery Climate; and fruits are there found proportionable to the measure of celestiall influence shed downe by the Spheres-orbicular motions and light to the same place: so Christ is preached euery where, and pious plants are there discouered, answerable to that mea∣sure of sauing Grace, which God in his mercie, by the vniformely working moti∣ons of his free Spirit, and light of his Truth, vouchsafeth to send them, as Peter said in his Sermon to CORNELIVS, Act. 10.34.35 Of a truth, I perceive, that God is no respecter of persons; but in euerie Nation hee that feareth GOD, and worketh righteousnesse, is accepted with him.
My hearts true comfort is then well set∣led by a full assurance of right good accep∣tance, in offering to your Gracious High∣nesse, this small reward of a poore Prophet, since the place whence it commeth is priui∣ledged

from preiudice, it being your High∣nesse owne Principalitie of Wales.
For albeit some Iohn Penrie against the vn∣learned Mini∣sters in Wales to the Right Ho∣nourable Lord, Henrie, Earle of Pembroke, Lord President of the Marches of Wales. Schismatically-rash Censurers, in times past, layd an heauie a∣spersion of a Galilaean barrennesse vpon this Countrie, for want of Prophets and Prophets Children therein: yet God bee thanked, their complaint was causelesse, since not to rifle vp any olde Rowles and Registers of the Ancient Brittaines, great endeuours, and good proceedings in all holy Learning, and deepe Literature, God no sooner sent the beames of his Gospell to shine vpon this Hemisphere of the Reformed Church of Great Brittaine: but presently Wales was, as well as other places of this Kingdome, comforted with the warmth of this hea∣uenly Light, conueyed thereinto, euen through the hard stormes of those Anti∣christian Persecutions in former times, by the faithfull Ministerie of blessed Bishop Far∣rar, Rawlins, White, and o∣ther at Gloce∣ster, Worcester, &c. burnt. Martyrs and glorious Confessors, and now conti∣nued, yea, and mightily encreased by the faithfull paines of zealous Pastors, our Right Reuerend Fathers, and pious Pres∣byters, who Iohn 5.35. like shining and burning Candles,

haue so cleered these Coasts of the Clouds of Popish Ignorance, that Wales is like Ga∣lilee in the dayes of Christ Iesus, TheMat. 4.16.17 people which sate in darknesse, seeing great light. A full proofe whereof your Graces Highnesse daily findeth by the growth of godlinesse in Persons of all sorts, by the loyall obedi∣ence of all true-hearted Subiects, and by the constant obseruance of all good Or∣ders set downe most intirely, by those most Honourable, Godly, and Prudent Sages of his Maiesties Councell, within these Mar∣ches, of whose sincere Gouernment and Guidance of this your Highnesse Principa∣litie, I must needes say as I finde, the Lord the Searcher of all hearts, knowing that I lye not, in the wordes of EVRIPIDES, Euripid. in Antiope apud Tholosanum lib. . de Rep. cap. 1 : By the sentence of these men, the Cities are well inhabited, and so is the House; also they are helpfull to Warlike affaires.
For these fiue yeeres together, I being called through Gods meere Prouidence, by the sole care and fauour of a most Wor∣thie Sir Edward Herbert, Knight of the Bath. Personage for all deepe Learning, and truely tryed valour, to his immortall

honour, into this parcell of GODS true Vineyard, can testifie with all boldnesse the happie successe of those true paines, which God hath in his mercy blessed to the com∣fort of vs his poore Seruants, that we labour not in vaine;Iohn 4.36. reaping and receiving wages, and gathering fruit vnto life eternall.
The liuely strength of which great en∣couragements hath and doth animate me Gods poore Creature, to spend all spare time from the ordinarie execution of my necessarie Function in preaching GODS Word vpon the Lords Day, and at other fit seasons, in writing out and publishing such of my Sermons, as are iudged by my Hearers to bee most profitable, that what was lost in hearing, may by reading be re∣couered, and what was well heard, might better bee holden; by the Example of the olde Vid. Danaeum cap. 20. Prole∣gom, in Mnor. Prophetas. Prophets and the Apostles of Christ, who preaching much, yet penned no more then what Gods Spirit thought fit and pro∣fitable for the present, and to future Ages. And so vpon this settled resolution, which I trust in God, good men will iudge truely honest, I fastened my Studies for some

time vpon this Sermon, preached long since, yet freshly desired to bee published for their benefit, by diuers godly Learned, especially, for that our Antichristian Aduer∣saries seemed much discontented, that their Pope should be arraigned and adiudged to bee that Great Antichrist; and themselues to be prooued so plainly Antichristian, euen open Rebels to Christ and Christian Prin∣ces, whereas (as they thinke) in the Theo∣rique part, Andreas Eudaemon hath answered our obiections, and for the practique, their loyaltie is approoued in the sight of GOD and Man.
Indeed this Argument is the very roote of all the differences betweene them and vs, vpon which, after so many Great Lear∣ned Men, I doe not presume to deliuer more then hath beene said, but only to re∣fresh the Memories of the Learned, with a new Method of olde matters; both re∣plying vpon Eudaemon, where he seemeth to presse, and explayning the miserie of our enslaued Countrymen vnder the Pope.
Al which I most humbly present to your Highnesse, as to whom the execution of

most things here mentioned may chiefly belong, for the rooting out of Antichrist, and vtter extirpation of the Romish Babylon; since what God hath begunne by the Gra∣cious hand of our most Learned, Wise, Godly, and Puissant Soueraigne for the de∣tection of that Man of Sinne, Your Graces Highnesse in Hereditarie imitation may fi∣nish in due time, to the Glory of God, in maintenance of Truth, and your owne e∣ternall Honour, by settling Gods people in this happy, healthfull, and orderly peace. The God of Power and Grace so blesse your Excellencies Highnes with all the rich Endowments of his holy Spirit, that with the full encrease of all true Honour, your Grace may passe many many good dayes here on Earth, in all Peace and Godlinesse, with the sealed assurance of endlesse Hap∣pinesse, in the heauenly Ierusalem, with the general Assembly and Church of the First-borne in Iesus Christ. Amen.

