


SAint Paule (right Worshipfull) the e∣lect and chosen ves∣sell of God,Acts. 9. to beare his name a farre off, before the Gentiles, among his sundrie, and godlie counsels, hath this good lesson also:1. Tim. 4. Ineptas & aniles fabulas deuita: exerce autem te ip∣sum ad pietatem: Auoid foolish and old wiues fables, and exercise thy selfe vnto godlines. Wherin is plainelie set downe vnto vs, what we must auoid, refuse, and eschue, and also what we must follow, im∣brace, and exercise. In the first part of his counsell, there is forbidden not onelie all



 foolish tales, vaine speaches, & idle talke, which is accomptable before God:Matth. 12. but also all infamous papers and bookes, fil∣thie songs and sonnets, vnchast fables & tragedies, which may be well comprised therein: though some of late yeares are found so impudent, and past shame, that they haue nothing doubted to entitle their pamphlets, the Castell of loue, and Court of venus, which doo not onelie of∣fend the chast eares of the godlie reader, but also giue an offense to his good con∣science. Bicause they be not to the mind of the holie Apostle, which teacheth vs thus:Ephes. 4. Omnis sermo malus ex ore vestro non procedat: Let no filthie communication proceede out of your mouths, but that which is good to edifie withall, as often as need is, that it may minister grace vn∣to the hearers. But what edifieng, & what ministring of grace is found and had in these & the like works, the Lord knoweth that it is too too pitious and lamentable. And in the second clause of his counsell is conteined the onlie scope & end wher∣vnto all mens actions & deeds ought to
 be directed; namelie, that they should ex∣ercise themselues vnto godlines all their life long, as they promise in their new birth, wrought by doctrine in the holie Ghost and faith at Baptisme,Iohn. 3. Coloss. 2. which re∣presenteth in vs the renewing of the spi∣rit, & mortifieng our members in Christ, by the which we are buried in death with him. And right blessed is he verelie, that so walketh in godlie exercises in the course of his pilgrimage,Psal. 119. Psalm. 41. that in the end he may be found vndefiled in the waie, and not haue his sinnes imputed vnto him. For the Lord shall deliuer all such in the time of trouble. This considered, and mine office remembred, I was the more willing to deale (as I could) in these scripture questions and chalenges; which ended, dutie commanded me to offer the same vnto your tuition, as a manifest to∣ken of good will, knowing that you are a zelous louer of Gods holie word, a dili∣gent reader, and a gladsome folower of the same, euen from your childhood, when you were deliuered to my gouern∣ment, to be instructed in good literature,
 and induced to vertue. And experience hath taught me, that your courtesies are such, that you allow of euerie mans good meaning (though far your inferiours) with fauourable acceptance. The Lord therfore euer so preserue your Worship,1. Thess. 5. that in nothing you may be blamed, or accused in the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ,2. Thess. 1. when he shall shew him selfe from heauen, with the Angels of his power, and flaming fier.

