



HOw necessarie it is (my Honourable good Lord) for a true Christian Congregation, to haue set ouer them a fit man of God, who by his learned tongue may minister a word in due season to the wearie, and by his good example of life, guide the wandring and wilfull Sinners, vpon their true Repentance, into the way of Peace, I neede not demon∣strate, since daily experience hath well approoued, that where no Prophesie is, the people perish: or (as some

Pagnine & Arias Monta∣nus in 29. Pr. 18 well learned men interpret the Originall) the people are idle, spending the Lords Day, and other good times, vain∣ly, if not villanously in idle sports of fleshly lusts, which fight against the soule, like the olde Gentiles, carryed vn∣to dumbe Idols, euen as they were led. For like people, like priests: they must needs bee lost sheepe, when their Shepheards, in the times before, caused them to erre, and goe astray, by turning them away vpon the Moun∣taines, either to wander like Math. 12.44. the dispossessed restlesse spirit, from the Church, or if they come neere it, to wor∣ship what they know not.
But albeit the murdering and the lying Deuill, in his oldworne hatred against mans soule, seeketh still to de∣uoure, and darken all vision and knowledge of God, by the stoppage or hinderance of the seasonable settling of powerfull Preachers of Gods most holy Word amongst Gods people, euen Zach. 3.2. as Satan stood at Ioshuah his right hand, to resist him from building the Temple: yet God in his mercy so visiteth his holy Ones, that they at their need shall not want a Scribe well taught vnto the Kingdome of God, for perfecting the Saints, for the worke of the Ministerie, and for the edifying of the bodie of Christ: Because that some, either planting PAVL, or watering APOLLOS, shall be sent from God, into the World, as into the Vineyard, at euerie houre, till the end of the day.
For haue there not beforetimes for the space of these sixteene hundred yeeres together, many Prophets and Righteous men appeared in the World? May not wee find by the delightfull perusall of the Stories Ecclesiasticall, how good men were appointed from God, either by an ex∣traordinarie

calling to reforme things amisse, or in ordi∣narie function to preserue things well settled? Surely if this present Generation wil harken, neither to the piping, nor to the mourning of their play-fellowes in the streets, that is, Hieron. Hi∣lar. & Aquin. in Matth. 11. if so they will not attend either to the Gospell, or to the Law, that comforting, this correcting in the preaching thereof; then are they cleane without excuse; then must they expect from the mightie hand of God, most iust and seuere punishment for their so wilfull a Re∣bellion, and resistance of Christs raigning ouer them.
Indeed the Haruest is great, but the Labourers are few, if we regard who are fit for these things. Yet, since one of a thousand may, by casting out the draw-net, gather very many of euery kinde, as PETER wanne two thousand at once; and since of those many, but a few may be chosen, as all the bidden guests had not on a wedding garment; the Church may haue choice enough of faithfull Pastors, if she seeke them hre they may bee found in Naioth or Mount Ephraim, in our blessed Vni∣uersities, where the abundance of God Spirit most com∣fortably appeareth in the multitude of Prophets, and the profitable variety of refined conceits in Prophets Childrē; some excelling in doctrine, others in exhortation; this man in the gift of tongues, that man in discussing of doubts; one in sweetnesse, another in soundnesse, and euery one in some degree indued with such graces, as may iustly giue occasion to any carefull Christian, of doubt and distracti∣on in making a good choice of such a fit man of God, as may faithfully dispose the secrets of God. Yea, and fur∣ther, as some may presently, vpon the touch of the coale from the Altar, in the zeale of Gods glory, say with the

Prophet, Here am I, send mee: so other may offer their seruice vnseasonably, being either young Schollers, rather puffed vp in pride, then furnished with fit learning, or an ouer-worne Seniour superanited from paines, and soaked so in ease, that he cannot well endure the watchfull labours of a faithfull Pastour, or lastly, a Wolfe in a Sheepes clo∣thing, who in his Colledge, might be like a young Serpent, not hardened in sing and harmelesse, onely by the most wholsome restraint of Collegiate discipline: but com∣ming abroad, may appeare in his likenesse, eyther of a po∣litike-Popish Time-seruer, or of a peeuish-pepusian distur∣ber of the Churches peace.
And therefore the holy Ghost had good cause and great reason to lay downe plainely in sundry places of sacred Scriptures, the readiest meanes, and truest marks of Tea∣chers and Guides; those for finding, these for tryall; and both together for our direction, who are first to search, that we may finde; and then to try what we haue found, whether he be a seeing or a blinde Guide; a Shepheard, or a Wolfe. For we must try all things, and not beleeue, till we haue tryed the spirits that are come into the world; see∣ing, as SALOMON Prou. 14.15. obserued, The simple beleeueth euery word; but the prudent man looketh well to his goings; as did good IEHOSHAPHAT, in hearing AHABS prophets, and the noble Beraeans, in trying by the Scriptures the words of Saint PAV.
A Christian dutie so absolutely necessary, that I, the least and meanest of all Christs seruants, being called by Gods prouidence, at the godly appointment of your good Lordship, signified vnto me by my most faithfull friend M. THOMAS KYFFIN, your Lordships Chapleine, to

preach at Welch-poole before your Lordship, vpon the next Sabbath after your Lordships Visitation there holden before, could not thinke of any other better subiect, then of this spirituall tryall, which the Church thought fittest to bee taught to Gods people at that time, by this Text of Scripture, which I then expounded, being a part of the Gospell appointed to be read in the Church that day. For I thanke God for his mercy, those my poore labours were by his onely blessing so well accepted, first, by your good Lord∣ship; secondly, by my learned and most religious brethren of the Ministerie; and lastly, by all Gods people then hea∣ring mee, that vpon the earnest request of diuers godly Christians for the sight of my notes, I haue (I feare, too boldly) enterprised to publish them vnto the world, some∣what enlarged in forme more then in matter, as the iudici∣ous then hearing, but now reading, will beare me witnesse.
Treasure hidden, and sealed fountaines are vn∣profitable, said Apud Epi∣phanium lib. de ponder. & mensuris. PHILADELPHVS, exhorting the Iewes to turne the Scriptures into other Languages: and NERO Sueton. in Neron. could apologize his presumptuous piping, by the Greeke Prouerbe, There is no respect of secret Mu∣sicke. For a candle must not be put vnder a bushell, neither should the talent be hid: Horat. lib. 4. Od. 9. Paulùm sepultae di∣stat inertiae celata virtus.
Onely now my feare is in the disproportion of my poore gift, no manner of way worthy to be offered to your good Lordship, whose dignitie requireth the liueliode of a lear∣ned tongue, for the true expressement of that due thanke∣fulnesse, wherunto I stand for euer obliged, by the strength and sweetnesse of your Lordships great fauours, both gene∣rally declared by your Lordships good proofe of my poore

endeuours, and particularly demonstrated by your good Lordships late beneficence, collating most freely vpon mee, a further good meanes for my greater encouragement in liberall studies, and the better maintayning of my comfor∣table charge. For vnthankfulnesse is a great sinne, and the least suspition thereof is a great griefe to a true honest man, who will not be like a Cullinder, letting all slip tho∣row, reseruing nought for thankfulnesse, which is a bind∣ing vertue vnto three good duties: Aquin. 22. q. 18. act. 2. in c. first, of acknowledge∣ment for the receite; secondly, of readinesse in giuing of thanks; and thirdly, of recompence by an honest requitall according to his abilitie.
Yet since, as SENECA Lib. 5. de Be∣neficijs cap. 5. well determined, it is no shame for inferiours to bee ouer-matched by their superiours in the entercourse of beneficence; here is my comfort, that your good Lordship, according to that great measure of Gods Image in you, will accept my willing minde, according to that I haue. For in the offering of Purification, the poore womans Pigeons were as well accepted, as the fat Lambs of the rich: in casting into the treasurie, the Widdowes mite was more commended, then the rich mens great and superfluous gifts: and in respect of good vse, or enioying of worldly riches, a little that a righteous man hath, is better then the riches of many wicked.
I yet lessen no mans gifts; in the conscience of mine owne weaknesse, much fearing the successe of this my bold enterprise, in offering this small token of my bounden duty vnto your good Lordship, to whom this my seruice most properly belongeth, in regard not onely of the first preach∣ing thereof before your Lordship, in the time of your Lord∣ships

most godly Visitation of Priests and people in your Lordships Diocesse; but also of that true, right, and most liuely patterne of a good Guide and a faithfull Shepheard, which by Gods grace your Lordship most constantly exhi∣biteth in the sight of all the world, formaliter & effecti∣uè, as our Schoolemen say; formaliter, in your owne Person, by the full performance of all those Episcopall ver∣tues, which S. PAVL prescribed vnto his sonne TIMO∣THIE; and effectiuè, in ordayning and inducting other fit Guides, whose brests haue in them Vrim and Thum∣mim, light and perfection, great learning and good life, vnto Pastorall places within the large precincts of your Lordships Diocesse.
Vox beatitudinis tuae in toto orbe pertonuit, & cunctis Christi Ecclesijs laetantibus, diaboli venena siluêre, saidTom. 1. Ep. 71. HIEROME to THEOPHILVS: a Pres∣byter to a Bishop, in that hearty congratulation of his god∣ly zeale for the building of the Church of Christ, where∣in I am bold to present vnto your good Lordships Patro∣nage This Triall of Guides, vsed by your Lordship for the example of others, to the good of the Church. Vouch∣safe then, my good Lord, for Christ his sake, a fauourable acceptance of this my small endeuour, till God by his grace, through your good Lordships great encouragement, enable me vnto higher and better things; seeing in solemne de∣uotion I professe before God in Christ, with GREGORIE NAZIANZEN, Orat. 8. , not onely to looke to mine owne Commoditie, but also to the Profit of others, ouer whom by your good Lordship I am appointed, through the mercy of God, a Watchman, and a Shepheard, to ouer-see and feede, not preaching my selfe,

but Iesus Christ the Lord, and my selfe their seruant for Iesus sake. For as all other Ministers of Christ are, Nazian. ibid. so , I am onely an Instrument of God, an Instrument by his onely grace, indued with reason, yea, an Instrument fitted, and striken vpon by the most excel∣lent Artist, the Spirit of God.
And therefore I conclude this my poore Dedication of this small Worke, with a double Commendam to the Guidance of this most gracious Gouernour, first, of you Lordships Person, Family, and most comfortable Posteri∣tie, saying withall the Louers of your Righteousnesse, Psal. 35.27. Let the Lord be magnified, which hath pleasure in the prosperitie of his Seruant; and secondly, of all vs your Lorships Clergie, and all our painefull labours, with the words of MOSES, Psal. 90.17. Let the beautie of the LORD our God be vpon vs, and establish thou the workes of our hands, vpon vs; yea, the works of our hands, establish thou it: for of him and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be glory for euer. AMEN.
Mountgomerie,
March, 10.

