



IF the duty of a Subiect and seruant, were not a most sufficient reason to consecrate all labours & endeauors to the ho∣nor and protection of his Lord and Ma∣ster: yet to whom are Animaduersions
 more proper then to the Magistrate? Or to whom should the defence of the do∣ctrine of Tythes be dedicated, but to the Defendour of the Faith? All these rights in your sacred Maiesty are su∣preme; and therefore haue emboldened me your poore vnworthy yet faithful sub∣iect and seruant, to implore your sacred patronage of these animaduersions on the History of Tythes, that so the defence of faith may extend it selfe to the mainte∣nance of the preachers of the faith, and the temporall food of their bodies may be established by diuine and humane autori∣ty, who prepare, the spirituall foode of soules.
But more especially, that pious deuo∣tion and zealous affection, wherewith your gracious Maiesty embraceth and vpholdeth the Ancient doctrine and di∣scipline
 of the true primitiue Church, to whom,Beda in ho. Infra Octau. Ascens. perfectum est vitae magisteri∣um Ecclesiae primitiuae actus imita∣ri, The imitation of Reuerend and sound antiquity, is the perfect schole of faith and life, by which patterne your sacred pen and sword hath suppressed all schis∣maticall and turbulent paritie, and con∣founded all Jdolatrous superstition, and treasonable practises. This is that which hath most encouraged me,Conc. Car∣thag. 5. c. 9. & passim in Concil. postulare ab Imperatore defensorem, to implore your Royall and religious patronage, who are the aduocate and nursing father of Gods portion the Church, and of the Churches portion, that is Tythes, due to God himselfe in acknowledgement of his supreame right and dominion, and giuen by God himselfe, to them that serue at his Altar. And so much the rather for that
 Kings as they are in their power the I∣mage of God,August in qu. ex V. Test. c. 106. who sayd, The Tythe is mine:Leu. 27.30. 1. Sam. 8. v. 15.17. so in the right of their sustenta∣tion haue the proportion of God, Tenths: which quantity in Tribute was so vsuall amongst the Grecians,Hesychius in Ʋerb. . that  and  to tithe and pay Tribute, were as properly Synonymaes, as  and  to tythe and consecrate, So that to assume the protection of Gods challenged Tenth as∣signed to his ministers, is indeed to streng∣then the reason of that right of Tribute allowed to your selfe. And surely this number Tenth, or Tithe, is sacred and very mysticall; and communicated onely to sacred and consecrated persons that are Gods Ʋicars vpon Earth, that is Kings and Priests; decima Regis, & decima Sacerdotis, who both stand in Gods place and receiue this portion as
 Gods vpon earth; and this number is so acceptable and familiar to God,Lib. de con∣gress. quaerēd. eruditionis causa. as Phi∣lo speakes, that it doth properly belong to him, and by his assignement to those who resemble him.
It was the saying of an Ancient in S. Augustine:Epist. 20. Quibus satis persuasum esset, vt nihil mallent se esse quam vi∣ros bonos, his reliquam facilem esse doctrinam, To those, who only inde∣uour to be good men, all other instruction is easie, and among them this doctrine of Tithes need no enforcement nor defen∣der. But couetousnesse hath so blinded religion, and custome so hardned consci∣ence, and might so abetted sacrilege, that vnlesse,Isidor. sent. lib. 3. c. 51. Quod non praeualet Sa∣cerdos efficere per doctrinae sermo∣nem, potestas hoc imperet per disci∣plinae terrorem, The magistrate com∣mand
 what the Minister cannot per∣swade, Religion must giue way to sacri∣lege, and Christ to Mammon. Jt was the complaint of Goffridus Abbot of Vendosme to Goffridus Bishop of Chartres,Lib. 2. ep. 24 Quod seculares homines sua consuetudine sanctae Ecclesiae authoritatem conantur adnullare, That secular men by custome would abro∣gate the Churches authority, which is too true now. And it is the Church of Englands petition to her foster-father, to her Soueraigne, vt reddantur quae sunt Dei, Deo. And since, Res Ec∣clesiasticae quia diuini iuris sunt,Iuo ep. 112. in nullius bonis sunt, Church-goods be∣cause Gods right, are not to be accounted any mans possessions; Non suntinter res mundi deputari credendae sed Dei,Lib. de vita contemplat. lib. 1. cap. 16 as saith Prosper: Why should
 men who may not couet their neighbours goods, couet that which is Gods, and pre∣scribe against diuine right, making cu∣stome and humane practise, and positiue law, the basis, or maior proposition of their syllogisme or conclusion, which they call conscience; that so they may lay sa∣crilegious hands vpon Gods portion, that is tythes, which surely must all be voyd and vniust, as M. Selden ingeniously confesseth pag. 150. if tithes be due by diuine right vnto the Ministers of the Gospell. Wherein although I hope the Authours harty submission hath cleered his iudgement concerning any de∣rogation intended by him against the di∣uine right of Tythes, yet because I am afrayd this History of Tythes hath af∣foorded premisses to some, and to others great surmises of religious practise of sa∣crilege,
 while they see, and heare, but ex∣amine not) manifold quotations of Scri∣ptures, heathen writers, Rabbines, Fa∣thers, Councels, Jmperiall Lawes, pri∣uate Chartularies, and many vncouth and vnusuall marginall notes, whereby they hope, nay resolue their owne desires are vnanswerably defended.Lib. 2. ad Monymum. Yet, I hope, as Fulgentius saith of Heretikes and their Arguments, Nouum non est vt Haeretici illis propositionibus se veri∣tatem superaturos arbitrentur, qui∣bus facillime superantur, so in this Historian, his owne authorities being faithfully discouered, do easily ouerthrow the credit of all his consequences.
Lib. 5. ep. 6.Saint Gregory sayd to Childebert, Esse Regem quia sunt & alij, non mirum; sed esse Catholicum quod alij non merentur; hoc satis. Giue me
 leaue to applie it: Your Maiestie is a great King, and a mighty Monarch, whom God hath crowned with many Kingdomes aboue your Ancestours, and made you the vniter of Crownes: and this is common to many others with your Maiesty. Your Maiesty is a true Chri∣stian Catholike King, Defender of the true, Ancient, Catholike and Apostolike faith, which is almost proper to your selfe; they that boast to be called Christi∣an & Catholike, may not compare with your Maiestie in this stile. But J must adde another word out of the same Saint Gregory: Regiam,Lib. 9. ep. 57 quod maioris lau∣dis est, ornatis sapientia potestatem. This is your owne proper and peculiar, no King can share with you in this honour; you are a most learned & iudicious King, who with your great knowledge and ad∣mirable
 pen, haue, and doe dayly adorne your Regall power with your singular wisdome & learning: Rex Theologo∣rum, a King of many excellent & lear∣ned Diuines, and Rex Theologus, a King, a Diuine, who are Antesigna∣nus a leader among your great Bishops and worthy writers: And which is hap∣pie for my Argument, a founder, a re∣storer, & an endower of Bishopricks with Tithes, I beseech your sacred Ma∣iesty, let me, and this poore worke of mine, march vnder your Banner, it will stand against all enemies if it may but carry your Maiesties name & protection. And so I will end with the prayer of those Fa∣thers of the 12. Toletan Councel, to God for their Prince,Can. 13. Vt det amatori Chri∣sti Serenissimo Domino nostro at{que} amantissimo Iacobo Principi, impe∣rare
 clemēter, regnare foeliciter, ha∣bere de clementia fructum, obtine∣re de iustitia praemium, de pietate Trophaeum, quo & hic inuictus vi∣ctor hostiū semper appareat, & post diuturna huius seculi curricula, ad regnum aeternum cum suis omnibus coronandus perueniat: praestante Deo, & Saluatore nostro Domino Iesu Christo, qui cum patre & san∣cto spiritu in Trinitate, viuit & reg∣nat Deus in secula seculorum. Amen.

