



HOnoured and beloued of
all that know you, and
the Truth, for the truth
sake that dwelleth in
you, as also for your
(more then ordinary) loue vnto the
truth, lately expressed in the furtherance
thereof in the Welsh Language, among
Welsh families, who neuer enioyed it
before this time in the like manner and
measure, who are greatly bound to

blesse God for you, and to blesse the
time that euer he put into your hearts
to take that blessed course of sending
home into their houses and families the
Word of Life and Saluation, to bring
them to life and saluation: The name∣lesse
Author of this Welsh Treatise
knowne vnto you all by name (though
not vnto the world) dedicates this his
little Booke vnto you all, though not
by name, knowing that it is your ioy,
that your names are written in the
Booke of God, rather than in the books
of men, such of you as vnderstand not
the subiect, matter, and scope of this
treatise (being in a language vnknowne
vnto you) be pleased to vnderstand that
it containeth that necessary and weighty
duty of reading and searching the Scrip∣tures,
grounded vpon the command of
Christ. Ioh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures
for in them ye thinke ye haue eternal life,
&c. and setteth forth the necessity im∣posed
vpon all sorts, of searching the
Scriptures, for the attaining of Eternall
life, together with the transcendent au∣thority,
excellency, and vtility of the

Scriptures aboue all other writings, as
also the hainousnesse of the sinne of
neglecting this search, with the fearfull
punishment due to all that neglect it,
discouering also the manner of right and
profitable searchings, together with two
generall Epistles written, the first to
all the Ministers of Wales, the second,
to all the common people thereof, con∣taining
sundry arguments and motiues
to moue all the Ministers, to stirre vp
their congregations to the buying and
right searching of the Scriptures, and to
moue their people to yeeld thereunto,
answering all the objections of all sorts
of men (that could be remembred) ob∣iected
against the daily due search of
Scriptures in families, by all sorts, all
done familiarly, by way of questions
and answeres, with as much breuity and
perspicuity as could bee, all gathered
principally out of the Scriptures them∣selues,
together with collections of the
principall things drawne out of the best
Authors, who haue written (in sundry
languages) of the same subiect. There
is also annexed hereunto a short Cate∣chisme,

containing the duties of parents
and children, with domesticall prayers.
May it please you therefore, honorable,
worshipfull, and beloued, to vouchsafe
the acceptance thereof, and as you haue
beene lately pleased, after your great
care, paines, and charges vndertaken,
in procuring the printing of the Welsh
Bible, to send it abroad into the country
of Wales, so be pleased to send this Welsh
booke after it, which may happily o∣uertake
it, spurre it forward, yea, goe
before it as an Harbinger into many
houses and families, to prepare a roome
for it, in their houses and in their hearts,
and returne againe to giue that holy and
blessed booke of God the meeting, by
causing many so to doe, and to procure
it welcome among many, who vnto this
day, neuer gaue it entertainement into
their hearts or houses; seeing that by
this little booke they now vnderstand
that the Bible now printed for them,
is the booke of God, which he hath sent
from heauen into this World, to bring
them out of this world into heauen, by
the dayly and due search thereof.

Sith the Lord in great mercy hath
bin pleased to vse you as his instruments
to prepare and conuey the Bread of life
in a whole loafe into Wales; oh that he
would also be pleased to vse you as his
instruments to send some skilfull Diui∣ders
and faithfull Distributers of this
spirituall Loafe, and Bread of Life, for
children may perish for want of bread,
with a whole loafe before them, if there
be not some to diuide and distribute it
vnto them in due season: Enquire after
our estate this way, and accordingly pi∣ty
our misery, in regard of our necessity,
that (if you can doe any thing) you may
helpe vs, that the blessings of many that
are ready to perish may fall vpon you,
be it so, O Lord, for the Lord Iesus sake,
euen so be it,

He was worthy for whom he should doe
this, for he loueth our nation, & hath built
vs a Synagogue, Luc. 7. 4. 5.
It grieued them exceedingly, that there
was come a man to seeke the welfare of
the children of Israel. Neh. 2. 10.

