



GOOD Madam, these ensuing lines (such as they are) when they were first framed (which is now above twelve moneths since) were at that time no farther in∣tended, than that place and con∣gregation where they were then preached: but in regard it hath pleased Almighty God, since that time, to give diverse occa∣sions for the further pressing of

this duty of hospitality to stran∣gers; and especially the other day,On Sun∣day mor∣ning the 21. of February, 1635. when no lesse than sixteene or seventeen saile of Ships were at one time cast away upon our Coast, to the great losse of many mens goods and lives; and that our people for the most part (es∣pecially of the meaner sort) for ought I yet perceive, continue still in their wonted course of barbarisme towards the distres∣sed,Sic assue∣verunt, ut recte fieri patent. Erasm. Colloq. Pereg. Religion. ergo. being so accustomed here∣in, that (as he in Erasmus wit∣nesseth of the Marine parts of this kingdome) They think they do well, in what they do; not∣withstanding the many admo∣nitions to the contrary. Hereup∣on I have boldly adventured to make that publike to the view of many, which was first utte∣red, in the hearing but of few;

as hoping that this o necessary a duty, may againe and againe be read, and throughly ponde∣red, till at length it bee practi∣sed: for our memories are dull, and commonly what goes in at the one eare,Vox audi∣ta perit, littera scripta manet. comes out at the other, but this may profit for ever. Truly, I cannot but blush, when many times comming in∣to other parts, I heare the re∣ports that are given of the un∣civill carriage and evill beha∣viour of our neighbours, (li∣ving by the Sea-coast) when such miserable objects of cala∣mity, happen amongst them: and that not only from men of our owne nation, but from For∣reiners, who sometimes unhap∣pily, having suffered shipwrack upon our shore, in mine owne hearing have said, That they

had rather fall into the hands of Turkes and Infidels, and should finde more curteous usage from them in these cases, than from the English.Iam inde non belli gloria, quā humanita∣tis cultu inter flo∣rentissi∣mas orbis Christiani gentes in∣primis flo∣ruit. Cam∣den. Brit. de Norma. Surely a great blot and blemish to so famous an Island as this hath been accoun∣ted, which (as a learned Coun∣trey-man of ours saith) Ever since the Normans first com∣ming into it, both for military matters, and all other of huma∣nity and civility, hath bin par∣allelled with the most flouri∣shing Kingdomes of Europe and our Christian world:Visam Britannos hospitibus feros. true it is, in ancient times the inha∣bitants of this Countrey,Horat. Carm. lib. 3. Od. 4. were accused of incivility and cruel∣ty towards strangers, hospites mactabant pro hostia (saith Acron,) they killed them for sacrifice, and no marvell, for

then were they more heathnish, barbarous, and uncivill, (if that be true, which Caesar and o∣thers report of them) than are the savage and wilde people in the Easterne and Westerne In∣dies at this day; voide of the light of grace, not acquainted with the lawes of common cour∣tesie: but being conquered by the Romans, they learned more civility, and barbarisme in this nature was esteemed as a most heynous offence. Much more then ought it so to be accounted of in our dayes, when both Na∣ture, Reason, and Religion, joyntly with one consent con∣demne it. How displeasing it is in the sight of God, and clean repugnant to that quiet and peaceable government (by his gracious providence) now setled

amongst us, I have here in this Sermon in some weake measure endeavoured to demonstrate. The which I present unto your Ladyship, not only to make ma∣nifest mine unfained thankful∣nesse, for your love and kind∣nesse expressed towards me and mine, ever since my first com∣ming into these parts; but also in that I am certaine, your La∣dy-ship can beare witnesse with me, that I speake the truth con∣cerning many particulars re∣prehended in this following dis∣course. Now if these my weak meditations may bee any whit availeable, for the redressing of this so hatefull a vice; I shall thinke my paines well bestowed; howsoever I leave the successe thereof unto God, and rest

