



Right Honourable,
I Take confidence from your Lordships goodnesse, in the very entrance of this Epistle, to professe, with Simplicitie, and according to the faith I owe my Master now in Heauen, That it is not vnto your selfe, but to your Lord∣ships Father, that I Dedicate this my Labour, such as it is. For neither am I at liberty to make choice of one, to whom I may present it as a vo∣luntary Oblation, being bound in duty to bring it in as an Account, to him, by whose Indulgence, I had both the time, and Ammunition to per∣forme it: Nor if such Obligation were remo∣ued, know I any to whom I ought to Dedicate it rather. For by the experience of many yeeres I had the honour to serue him, I know this, There was not any, who more really, and lesse for Glories sake, fauoured those that studi∣ed the Liberall Arts liberally, then My Lord,

your Father did; nor in whose house a man should lesse need the Vniuersity, then in his. For his own studie, it was bestowed, for the most part, in that kind of Learning, which best deserueth the paines and houres of Great Persons, History, and Ciuill knowledge, and directed not to the Ostentation of his reading, but to the Gouernment of his Life, and the Publike good. For he so read, that the Lear∣ning he tooke in by study, by iudgement he dige∣sted, and conuerted into Wisdome, and ability to benefit his Countrey; to which also hee applyed himselfe with Zeale, but such as tooke no fire, either from Faction or Ambition. And as he was a most able man, for soundnesse of aduice, and cleere ex∣pression of himselfe, in matters of difficulty and consequence, both in publike and priuate; so also was he one whom no man was able either to draw, or iustle out of the straight path of Iustice▪ Of which vertue I know not whether hee deserued more, by his seuerity, in imposing it (as he did, to his last breath) on himselfe, or by his Magnani∣mity in not exacting it to himselfe from others. No man better discerned of Men; and therefore was he constant in his Friendships, because he re∣garded not the Fortune, nor Adhaerence, but the Men; with whom also he conuersed with an open∣nesse of heart, that had no other guard then his owne Integrity, and that Nil Conscire. To his Equalles hee carried himselfe equally; and to his inferiours familiarly; but maintaining his Respect fully, and onely, with the natiue splen∣dour of his worth. In summe, hee was one in whom might plainely bee perceiued, that Ho∣nour and Honesty are but the same thing, in

the different degrees of persons. To him therefore, and to the memory of his worth, be consecrated this, though vnworthy Offering.
And now, imitating in this Ciuill Worship, the Religious worship of the Gentiles, who when they Dedicated any thing to their Gods, brought and presented the same to their Images; I bring & pre∣sent this Guift of mine, the History of THVCYDIDES translated into English, with much more diligence then elegance, to your Lordship, who are the I∣mage of your Father, (for neuer was a man more exactly coppied out, then he in you,) and who haue in you the seeds of his vertues already springing vp. Humbly intreating your Lordship to esteeme it amongst the Goods that descend vpon you, and in your due time to read it. I could recommend the Author vnto you, not impertinently, for that he had in his veynes the blood of Kings; but I chuse rather to recommend him for his writings, as hauing in them profitable instruction for Noble∣men, and such as may come to haue the mannaging of great and waighty actions. For I may confi∣dently say, that notwithstanding the excellent both Examples and Precepts of Heroique Vertue you haue at home, this Booke will conferre not a little to your institution; especially, when you come to the yeeres, to frame your life by your owne Obser∣uation. For in History, actions of honour and dis∣honour doe appeare plainely and distinctly, which are which; but in the present Age they are so dis∣guised, that few there bee, and those very care∣full, that bee not grossely mistaken in them. But this, I doubt not, is superfluously spoken by mee to your Lordship: Therefore I end with

this prayer, That it will please God to giue you Vertues sutable to the faire dwelling he hath pre∣pared for them, and the happinesse that such Ver∣tues leade vnto, both in, and after this world.

