


RIght Honorable, whereas Loue among men, was sometimes of so great accompt, as the same hath been taken to be the first and chief cause of a Com∣mon-wealth, and not vtilitie, (as affirmeth the learned Scot) which enforced men by a naturall in∣stinct to communicate their priuate labors to pub∣like vse, being for such their loue, requited with the loue of those, whom they did so benefite. Now, the matter is cleane contrarie: for who is more misli∣ked of the worst, which are the most, than he that studieth most to common profite? Which conside∣ration, as it hath been one hinderance to me in my Studie (the more is my fault) so is it the cause, why I purpose to suppresse, to the vse only of my priuate friends, that, which otherwise, I could be contented should bee common. And although they can by no meanes occupie either their Sense, or Reason, but the same will leade them perforce vnto a thankefull remembrance of our fathers, who haue by cunning, ei∣ther ordered the nature, or inuented, or ordered the qualities of things, in a most pleasant course: yet they themselues haue no care, to practize in the like manner, for their owne ease, and helpe of their posteritie: suffering their knowledge gotten in the time of their life, to depart with their last breath: And some more vnlouing than others, neither will themselues, neither will they without reproches, suffer o∣thers to labour in like practizes of Arte, seeming of condition, somewhat like the man, that being cured of follie, was highlie offended, affirming, that he neuer liued so pleasant a life, as when he was a foole. So as we may see (except it be in some men more Christian than others) now, churlishnes to succeede loue, vnthankeful∣nes,
thankefulnes, follie, wisedome: that being most true in the multitude, which luuenal saith of his times:
The earth doth now bring foorth, of bodie small
Bad men, of little wit, or none at all.
But to the Cause, the Scope, and Center of all my speeches, that is, concerning the Arte, in studying, or ordering the Common Lawes, as I neuer fainted in opi∣nion, that the same may bee performed, and in what manner: as staying my selfe vpon Principles, which of their owne nature are inexpugnable, and feare not the frowning of a Censurer. So doo I feare nothing more, than that I haue small part in the same performance: for I am hindered in the meanes, which are said to be∣long to a Student of the Common Laws, that is, to be leade in his seate, to haue an yron head, and a golden purse. For the first, how little time (of late) I haue sate at it, they could be are me witnes, that haue been acquainted with my busines. For the second, how greatlie I haue been distracted, I my selfe knowe, Nec ostentabo vulnera & sicatrices meas. For the third, my purse was neuer so heauie, but that I could lift it without helpe. Moreouer, I finde with some griefe by obseruation in other men, that he that practiseth in any publike cause, (as Cardanus saith) set∣teth to sale his owne imperfections, his faults will swell in the eyes of his Aduer∣saries, he must subiect himselfe to infamous slaunders, enuious reproches, and con∣tempts, which notwithstanding ought againe of him to be contemned: Vt deriso∣res nostros de sumno quasi despicientes, derideamus. Yet herein I doo content my selfe, as, he to descry land, whereunto the Pilot must guide the ship: or as a weake wretch, to giue aime vnto others, whose strings I am not able to stirre, and whom I wish, may strike the marke.
London this 27. of September 1587. From Crowne Court in Chauncery Lane.

