


I Praesume not (Dread Soue∣raigne) in this praefixed Title, to praescribe praecepts politike to any Christian Prince, much lesse vnto your Sacred Maiestie. Should I attempt any such ar∣gument, it would appeare in me Annibalem Phormio, as the Adage is, and I were much out of mine Element. This is a proiect more fitting, so high, and Mightie a Prince, as you are,. Plutarch in his Apop∣thegms. and alreadie in that your Kinglie Gift to a King most absolutely performed. As Plutarch said of that very same word: so may we of that your worke, . What is it then, which in this Inscription of mine I would
 so faine insinuate to my Lord, and King? VVhat but that he alwayes be like himselfe? that he read himselfe as it were, & rule out of his owne booke? Admit then (most Christian King) thou surpas∣sedst in perfection (as I pray God thou maiest) all Christian Princes vpon earth; admit no man re∣mained, whom thou mightest imitate;August: on these words; The Iust shall see, &c. Psal. 52. Ipse Chri∣stus tibi remanet; there remaines yet for thee The Imitation of Christ. Beholde the man. Loe here isA Ken∣ning-Glasse for a Christian King. Hom: Iliad 1. Val: Mar: 3. A Kenning-Glasse for a Christian King. As out of those three verses of Homer the Author therof expressed (he said) the very liuing Image of Ioue
, and so forth: So this Inscription I extract out of these three words ofIohn 19.5. The first Booke. Deutr. 17.18.19. &c. Luke. 16.2. Iohn; , Behold the man. As thou art a Christian, so is this a Common Glasse to thee (O King) with all other Christians, as in the first Diuision of the third generall Circum∣stance of this text, and third distinction I haue de-declared: As thou art a King, so doth it (out of thine ovvne mouth) more properlie concerne thee; Aswell for that a King is to compute vnto God for each Christian soule in his whole Common∣weale: as that theIsai. 24.2. Ecclus. 10.2.3. Hierō: ad Helio∣dor. Plat. in polit. Regis ad exempū, &c. Cl. Claud: de 4. consulat. Henorij. vvhole Common-vveale is natu∣rallie conformed vnto the customes of her King. And therefore of choise I consecrate it vnto thy Christian, and Kinglie calling. Accept then in good part (most Gracious King) this thy poore Schollers praesent. Christus tibi liber exemplaris est.Ioh. 13.15.  Constant. ad Sanctorum coetum Orat. c. 12. in Eusebius. I haue giuen thee (saith Christ) an example. He is an euerlasting example for thee: Imitate him, and thy subiects will imitate thee. He is a most, Phalereus to Ptolome in Plutarch. Exemplar states-booke for thee: Read him,
 and thy Subiects will reade thee. He is a Mir∣rour of Magistrates for thee, A Kenning-Glasse for Kings: assimilate thy selfe vnto him, and thy sub∣iects will assimilate themselues vnto thee.Chrysost: And this is, the Office and vse of this Glasse.
JAMES the Minor (saith one) was very,Ludolph: de vita Iesu Christi, part. 2. c. 59 Galat. 1.19 frater Iesu Ioseph: . 20. Euseb: Ec∣clesiast: hist: 2.1. very like Christ in face: and for that cause espe∣cially (the said writer surmizeth) he was cal∣led the Lords brother. I dispute not of the one, or the other, of, or on. It seemes he was well seene in this Spirituall Glasse: Else whence in his face are those rayes of virtues? his Humilitie? for he vvas calledIacobus Minor Lu∣dolph: as afore. So  in Damas∣cen. IAMES the lesse. His Iustice? for he was called. Ex Hegesipp: comment. 5. Euseb. 2.23 IAMES the iust. His all manner of virtues? for so I suppose, when Christ said vnto him;Matt. 11.29. Iames 1.23 Iames 2.1.4.9. Iohn 2.14.15. Learne of me, for I am humble and meeke: he learned him with humilitie all manner of vir∣tues.
Good King, will it please thee to consider not sleightly, as did that man in Saint Iames his natu∣rall face, but seriouslie thy Spirituall face in this Glasse, as Saint Iames did? wilt thou compare, and compose the cariage of thy whole life according∣lie? Thy Greatnesse must vouchsafe to do then, as this Iames the Minor, as this James the Iust did: thou must out of thy Iustice distributiue go on in Gods name, as thou hast begun: thou must, as A iust STEƲƲARD, diuide aequallie; to thy selfe thine owne, to the Common weale her owne, to the Church her owne, impartiallie, without accep∣tation of persons: thou must scourge out all Mono∣polye-mongers, and such like monsters out of thy common-weale: as Christ did those Money-chan∣gers out of his Church: thou must suppresse all
 Church-robbing-Christ-robbing Satans,Th' Eng∣lish Chro∣nicles in VV: Rufus. Iames 1.27 Isaiah. 49.23. August. de Ciuit: Dei. 5 24.25. &c. Iames 2.8. Iames. 4.10 Of Iames of Hieru∣salem,  Euseb: Hist: Ecclesiast. 2.23. De Imitat: Christi W: Th: à cam∣pis. 3.55. 1. Sa. 15.17 Psa. 82.6.7 Amos 6.12 13. suggest∣ing thee; So svveete is the bread of Christ: and a daintie foode for Kings. To be a Father vnto the fatherlesse, an husband to the widowes, a Foster-father vnto the Church of Christ, Hae tibi erunt ar∣tes; — Here is thy glorie (O King) Si Iustus imperas, if thou fulfill the Royall lavve.
Out of thy Humilitie likewise, thou must continu∣ally cast dovvne thy selfe, and kneele, and Camell thy knees before the Lord thy maker, for thy sinnes, and for the sinnes of thy people: thou must ae∣steeme thy selfe so much, and no more, as God aestee∣meth thee; thou must be little in thine owne eyes. In short thou must reiect thy many flatterers, that will say; Thou art a God; and respect thy fewe friends, that will tell thee; Thou art a man. . — I haue said; Yee are Gods, but yee shall dye like men. This is indeed to be James the lesse, this is the way to be James the Great, this is indeed to be James the Iust. Doe this, and thou dost rightlie, Behold the man: do this, and thou dost rightly contemplate Christ. This is that then, which I was so faine to insinuate vnto thee, my Liege Lord, and King, induced hereto, in ge∣nerall, as your subiect, in speciall, as your Priest, and Scholler: As a Priest in way of conscience I chose to do this, as knowing Amaziah of old, what he said vnto Amos; O, thou the Seer, go, flee thou away into the land of Judah, and there eate thy bread, and Prophesie there. But Prophesie no more at Beth—el. For it is the Kings Chappell, and the Kings Court. As your Scholler in all conse∣quence,1. Kings 1.39.40. I could not choose but doe this; Amidst our great Oxford Hosanna to adde my Aramites
 crie to, Malco legnolemin cheife;Dan. 2.4. 1. Kin. 1.31 Prou: 8.15. Prou. 21.1. God saue my Lord King James for euer.
Now the very God of heauen, and earth (in vvhose hands are Kingdoms, and the hearts of Kings) confirme your Maiesties Throne,Psal: 89.36.37. as the Sunne in heauen, and the Throne of your Sonne, as the Moone for euermore. Direct your hearts and handes,Psal. 78.71.72. that you may seede your peo∣ple in Jacob, according to the Simplicitie of your hearts, and guide your inheritance in Israel accor∣ding to the discretion of your hands:1. Tim. 6.15. Apoc. 17.14 & 19.16. and graunt you both Grace, and your seed after you, alwayes to haue this Kenning-Glasse afore your eyes; Euen The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

