



RIGHT HONOURABLE,
YOVR late No∣ble acceptance of these rude and raw Medi∣tations, conceived at first for mine owne,Hebr. 12.9. but preacht for your Honours solace (when once the Father of spirits, by transplanting your darling-daughterThat hope∣full young plant, the Lad, Susan∣n Cran∣field. in∣to
 his heavenly Paradise, had assign'd you a share in our common calamity) hath now occasioned and encouraged me to this o∣ver-bold Dedication. You looke not, Madam, I be∣leeve, for courtship and complement from a man of my coate and quality: And to give slattering titles were (besides the dint of the divine displeasure) to despite you with seeming honours.Iob. 32.22. A downe-right truth takes far better with an honest heart, then a smooth supparasitation. But were your Honour of their straine that sound a trumpet before them in the streets,Matth 6.1. Matth. 23.7. and love long ∣lutations in the Markets, 
 might perhaps, as fitly and as fully as another, tell the world of your singular hu∣mility in height of honours, your heart-attracting Cour∣tesie to those of meanest ranke and quality, your ex∣emplary readinesse to re∣lieve the poore Afflicted, your uncessant paines in getting knowledge, and so sutable a practise of that you know, as hath made my selfe, and many more judicious, to value your Honour not according to these outward vanities, but those inward vertues which the very Heathens accoun∣ted the only true Nobili∣tyNobilitas sola est at{que} unica virtus. Iuvenal. Nobilis gene∣re, nobilior sanctitate Augustin. epist. 179.. But I know well, both ow hard it is for the best to profit by praises, and
 how little they desire them that best deserve them. I shall therfore turne praises unto prayers, be∣seeching him who teacheth His to profit,Esay 48.17 who giveth wisdome liberally, and up∣braids not,Iames 1.5. to give your Honour a right sanctified use of former crosses, and to crowne the Calendar of your life (for future) with many Festivalls. So pray∣eth He that is, and will be

