


THE prouidence of All∣mighty God doth ap∣peare in many great and wonderfull things (Right honorable Car∣dinall:) but specially in this, that he hath made his B. Mother the Patronesse and pa∣rent of mankind. For seeing that hu∣mane imbecillity was subiect to innume∣rable chaunces, he euer determined to ap∣point such a keeper and defendresse vnto the same, as chiefly aboue all others, both
would & could deliuer their health euery way beset with dangers, & blesse their life with true & happy goodnes. For our mighty God hath made his B. Mother a companiō of his diuine maiesty and power, as far as may be lawfull; long agoe bestowing vpon her the speciall prerogatiue and prin∣cipality of all heauenly and earthly crea∣tures. According to whose will (as much as the protectiō of mankind doth require) he moderateth the earth, the sea, heauen and nature it self: at whose intreaty, and by whome, he bestoweth diuine treasures and heauenly gifts on mortall men: that all may vnderstād that whatsoeuer doth flow from that eternall and most sacred Foun∣taine of goodnes to earth, that it doth flow vnto vs by Mary his most B. Mother. What region therfore, what people, what nation is there, where the Patronage of Mary is not illustrated with miracles, consecrated with Houses, adorned with titles? But among all the sacred Houses dedicated to the B. Virgin Mother of God, one House of Loreto doth excell: which with the fame of her name, hath both filled the whole world: and also for the space of these many ages, is reuerenced dayly more and more with the concourse and frequency of all
people and nations. For as other Churches of our B. Lady are (for the most part) the refuges of particular Citties & Coūtries: so this seemeth to be the common refuge of all people and nations. And therfore to you (Peter Aldobrādino) I specially dedicate the History both of this House & Church, aswell in the name of our whole Society, which you fauour with singular beneuo∣lence, as in my owne, who for the same cause must needes confesse my self to owe more to your singular humanity, than I am able to performe. Nether must any mer∣uaile why we write this History in Latin, for they erre (by some mens leaue be it spoken) and measure the thing rather by the loue which they beare to their natiue tongue, than by the truth it self, if any thinke, that more fruite of a History may be receiued by this our late and Tuscane lāguage, than by the old & Latin tongue. For the Tuscane tongue doth not much passe the boūds of Italy it self, which heer∣after an interpreter of this History may sa∣tisfy: but the Latin tongue doth go far & neere, almost through all people and na∣tions, that the Roman language may ex∣tend further than in times past the Roman Empire did. And if the protection of the
B. Virgin of Loreto be shewed to all Coun∣treys of the world: truly with good reason we may wish, that her glory and fame, may go as farre, as the Christian Religion & re∣uerence hath donne. Wherfore (most hono∣rable Cardinal) with that benignity wher∣with you are wont to receiue our Men, re∣ceiue this small gift of our Order; and per∣mit the most famous name of Peter Aldobran∣dino to be carried ouer most remote nations and countreys, togeather with the History of Loreto, that it may be a monument of your singular deuotion towards the B. Virgin of Loreto, and a pledge of our gratefull & propense good will towards your name.
Farewell.
