



CONSIDERING with my self (right vertuous M.ris M.) to whom of mortal crea∣tures, euen next after that glorious Virgin the Mother of our mercifull and great God, I might pre∣sent and deliuer this discourse (being as it were the gate of the flourishing pla∣ce where the true spirituall Paradise was planted, to be opened for the well-fare
of our distressed Countrey: me thought none could better performe so singular an office of duty towards B. Mary of Lo∣reto, than they, who with the example of Virginall purity, haue euē from their cradle beene allwaies specially deuoted to that place, and haue much desired to heare and to read the meruailous won∣ders of so mercifull a Patronesse, that their soules might be fully replenished, and happily blest, with the great com∣fort of so diuine a benefit. Among whome, who may be iudged more wor∣thy than shee, in whome from infancy, the disposer of these celestiall graces, hath dwelt both by name & grace? And that she may allwaies dwell in your reli∣gious hart, to the increase of your noble vertues, and to the good of many soules; to you (deuout M.ris M.) I present this small token of my dutifull affection, that by your singular piety, and true Chri∣stian zeale towards this miraculous place, others may know what vnfayned happines (if any be on earth) this little
booke doth set before their eyes. For as by her glorious merits, and the disposi∣tion of the Father of mercies, B. Mary of Loreto hath deserued the principality, and to be Queene of all heauenly crea∣tures: so by the sanctification and will of Mary, the most sacred House of Loreto, hath euer beene the first of all places consecrated to her name on earth; and that in so meruailous a manner, that the most B. Queene of Angells doth be∣stow her Angelicall benefits so bounti∣fully in this place, that there is none, although he doe not visit her with cor∣porall presence (if conueniently he can not) but in spirit only, that departeth hence without the speciall reward and blessing of Loreto: such a fountaine of sanctity haue the merits of this Virginall Queene produced for our miseries & in∣firmities, that (O wonder!) these burdēs seeme, as it were, to be remooued and taken from vs, during our aboad in that Paradise, which B. Maries habita∣tion, touchings, and vertues haue truly
sanctified, for the good & well-fare of her Suppliants for euer. Which you de∣uout M.ris M. knowing to be true, will not cease this haruest-tyme of your life to gather into the treasury of your hart, all spirituall seedes of celestiall glory, with more singular example and zeale of the honour of her your Patronesse, of your owne perfection, and the good of all that shall concurre with you, in this most profitable seruice of the heauenly Queene. And that you may most faith∣fully performe it, heere once againe you your self, and they by you, receiue the full view of that true flourishing vine∣yard and of all her heauenly fruites, that among such variety, you may make speciall choice of some of her odorife∣rous vertues, which haue so singular a quality, that they neuer change their first beauty, but still adorne the soule with greater purity, than the brightest planets, these corruptible heauēs: which God graunt to be your happy choice, that still in this earthly peregrination,
you may be made more like to her, whose name you beare, that as a well-deseruing seruant, you may sollace with her, in the ioy of eternall beatitude.
 From my poore dwelling, this 29. of March. 1608.
