



AGAINST griefe conceiued in the death of a vvorthy friende, often times succour is sghte in a Tombe or other monument, thereby to deliuer the deades vertue & cōmen∣dable life, from the vnkinde forgetfulnesse of vnthankfull men. Therefore vvith the familie of the author of this booke, and vvith me also vvhich in good vvill to him in his life, and so∣row for his death come next vnto them, it falleth out very well, that the solce which our poore e∣state denieth vs, the learned diligence of our de∣ceased friends, by making at vnarares his owne tombe in his life time, hath supplied vnto vs. Now if by dedication of it vnto you, it be (as it were) sette vp in your Colledge, it hall be (I hope) a thankefull worke: considering that whe∣ther you looke to the kinde of a tombe in gene∣rall, or to this in particuler, the worke bringeth
 you commendations from them both. For wheras other tombes are often times the generatiō of full csers, without cōpany had with any great vertue or singuler learning, this is the birth of the i▪ sanctifying by the true feare and knowledge of God. And where others come out of the hoppe, this cōmeth out of the schole, and that of Christ: Those may bring vs some message of death, but these bring also the good tidings of life, and that in death: vvith a number such preheminences, for which as this kinde of monument ought of right to haue the right hād of the other, so ought it to haue gladder eyes to looke rather vpon it, thē vpon the other. And as for the speciall matter which commendeth this tombe, it may be drawē from the workeman of it most plentifully. He was first by a scholership, and after by a felowship planted in your Colledge: Therefore it will rellie the better that it is frute of your owne planting: The worke was both made and vttered in your Colledge, and for it alone: if you shoulde not therefore prepare your selues at the warning of others, be yet in a readines at the voyce of your owne, and proper trumpet. It cost him the loss of his felowship, I might haue sayde of his life: which by quietnes in his Colledge, should likely haue bene prolōged. So that herein it is prouided euen for them, to whom dayntie things are not dedicate vnlesse they be deare bought. If you
 looke also that it shoulde be farre fetched, the principall and as it were the marble thereof was taken from the highest heauen, the grauing from the vtmost parts of the earth, whither by an vn∣satiable hunger of reading, he had (sitting in his study) trauailed. For, beginning at Rome (I meane the olde and eloquent, not this barbarous Rome) and from thence taking his iorne, into Greece, he landed in Canaan, where he had gotten not the bare & empty ake of the three, the Latine, Greeke, and Hebrue tongues, but with them the good marchandise of arts & sciences contai∣ned in them. For although in the loue which he bare to a simple and plaine handling of the word of God he suppressed the shewe of them, yet, at the faces which are continually in the Sunne can not but be tanned and slayned therewith, so his speach could not but cary some colour of the learning and knowledge wherein he was continu∣ally conuersant.
And as for the chaunge of his life, if a good death doe wash away the filth of the former life, his death (which was such as my soule wisheth, and hopeth for the like) must needes set a plea∣saunt gl both vppon the rest of his life that was holily led, and vppon this worke especially, which thorough conscience of a great dutie discharged therein, caused him to goe e ragiously to meete with death, and (as i were) to take it by
 the hande or euer it had taken him.
Bring hither therefore your eyes: first, indif∣ferent to iudge of the sinceritie of it▪ then di∣screte, that you may discerne his spirite zelous with iudgement and earnest in waighty matters: bring thirdly your learned eyes, that as in a peece of tapestrie, you may see with the varietie of colours, the diuersitie also of the knottes and flowers not onely to looke on, but to take them out and make the like. So shall your profite be plea∣sant, and your pleasure profitable, so shall you of his losse get gayne, & of his payne get pleasure: finally so shall that which was to him the val∣ley of Achor, be vnto you the gate of hope. And I beseech that holy and blessed Trinitie whiche is the patron of your Colledge, that he would so fill you with al knowledge, especially of himselfe, that after you haue brought many to this bles∣sed societie, your selues may enter into that holy felowship whervnto (in Christ) you were chosen before the beginning of the world. Amen.

