



RIght worthy DEANE, if it be true that the Heathen man said, Otiū sine literis mors, & viui hominis sepultura, I thinke there is nothing more commendable then the study of those Let∣ters and that poynt of Learning, which GOD himselfe hath wrote, not onely by the great Spirit of the Prophets, but also by his owne hand, without Scribe or other instrument, (the Creati∣on and seuerall dispositions of liuing creatures:) wherin with the greatest and noblest Characters that euer were, he hath engrauen the highest vvisedome of all Maiestie. And to say the truth, no knowledge of politicall States, no Science Geographicall of the round Worlds Orbe, no speculation Astrono∣micall of the Heauens lights or motions, nor Art of speech, reason or workes, is compa∣rable to this Learning, but a man destitute heereof, is dead and buried in a liuing graue, stinking before God and Angels. Wherefore this beeing my opinion, and I trust the syncerity of my iudgement touching Gods liuing works, it may serue for a reason for the vndertaking of these labours; because as Xenophon writeth vpon another case, Ek toon po∣noon malaka gignetai, out of these paynes are begotten many pleasures.
But whereas some thinke that there is knowledge enough of those creatures by theyr out-sides, & the noyse of theyr names, is a complete Lecture for humane vnderstanding, I would but referre them to Philo Iudaeus, writing in his Questions vppon Genesis in this manner; Sicut caeci tractant tantum ipsam corporis spissitudinē tactu, non decus colorum, non formas, non figuras, non aliud quicquam eximiae qualitatis testimonium praebens: Sic minus docti, & inertis animae oculi, nihil in historijs intrinsecus cernere possunt. Wherefore, seeing that blind men cannot be comforted so much by their groping feeling, as other which en∣ioy the commodity of all their sences, no man shall iustly blame the Printers and my la∣bour, if we set forth Gods workes fiue times more plainely, pleasantly, and largely, then euer before they were in any language of Christendome.
I haue therefore now aduentured to put abroade into the World, the second Booke of Liuing-creatures, which entreateth of Serpents, and all venomous Wormes of the Earth and Waters; vvhich for their Maker had the Sonne of GOD as vvell as men, for their antiquitie, were from the beginning before men; for their wit and disposition in na∣ture, come neerest to men; for their seate and habitation, dwell in one and the same Ele∣ment with men; for their spirits & inclination, are most vnreconcileable enemies to men; and for their vse and commodity, very beneficiall to men: Therefore their knowledge is from God, their continuance from Heauen, theyr natures worth our study, & the fruite seruiceable to man-kind.

Aequè pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aequè.
Aequè neglectum pueris, senibus{que} nocebit.
I could therefore arrogate to my selfe that Virgilian praise, Pandere res alta terra & ca∣ligine tectas: but I will not, for if I haue deserued well, let another mans mouth speake it, and if the present enuious world will not, posterity I know will glorifie God for me. For my conscience beeing free from the rust of vaine-bragging, I dare be bold to pray vvith Nehemiah, Recordare mei Domine in bonitate, secundum omnia quae feci huic, populo: And therefore, if I be not buried till I be naturally dead, I will neuer die in idlenes, nor carry a∣bout my body, to containe a liuing mans Sepulture.
Although (I trust) it shall appeare to you R: W: that there is store and variety of mat∣ter comprised in this thinne Volume of Serpents, insomuch as it is needlesse for mee (if not impossible) to say much more, yet pardon me (according to your accustomed clemen∣cie) if I range a little in this poynt of Diuinitie, which is the cognizance I weare, and the robe where-withall it hath pleased my Sauiour Iesus Christ to clothe mee, that I should be the man and the meane, (although the meanest of a thousand now aliue) to declare & publish to this present, and all succeeding ages of our Country-men, the secrets vvhich God hath registred in the indelible natures of liuing creatures.
I haue oftentimes admired the frequent mention of Serpents, which you know (bet∣ter then my selfe) is more then once remembred by GOD in Holy-vvrit: but especiallie there are three memorable things concerning Serpents recorded; First, a History, the se∣cond; a Figure, the third; an Allegory. The History, is the seduction of our first Mother by a Serpent. Whereof Authours write diuersly, enquiring whether it were a true Ser∣pent, or a false created Serpent, or the Deuill, (which our Sauiour termeth a Serpent in trope,) were also so called by Moses: but the aunswere is made, that it was a true Serpent, and that (as Peter Lombard writeth) he was onely permitted by GOD to take the Ser∣pents body to doe that thing, his words Lib: 2. Sent: dist: 21. Cap: 2. are these; Serpentem autem animal ex omnibus delegit, tum quia rationali creaturae omnis irrationalis subiecta erat: tum quia per solum serpentem id facere à Deo permissus est diabolus, non autem per columbae formane, quòd fortasse maluisset, vt melius fraudem subesse in satanae verbis, Homo ex eo sub∣olfaceret, quòd Serpens loquebatur. Et clarius ipsius tentatoris, id est, diaboli natura, per co∣lubru illum tortuosis anfractibus mobilem, ac proinde magis operi isti congruum, significare∣tur. Which opinion (as you know very well) was before him giuen by S. Austen, Lib: De Ciuit: Dei, 14: & cap. 11.
Iosephus writeth, that before that time, the Serpent was very familiar with man, and that the deuill chose him for that purpose, by false friendship to deceiue him, vvherefore God in the Iudgement after the fall committed, tooke away from him his legges, & ma∣keth him creepe vppon the earth. But seeing there is no such thing reported in Genesis, especially that the Serpent lost any members, I will not auerre that for truth: but rather adde vnto Peter Lombard, that the Serpents subtiltie, aboue all the residue of creatures, was the cause that the deuill entred into him. Where-vnto Epiphanius in his Treatise a∣gainst the Ophitae, agreeth. But in this action, the Serpent was but the deuills trunke, nei∣ther serued it for any other purpose but to couer him; so as the words which were spoken, were the words of the deuill, and that S. Austen De Gen: ad lit: writeth, Serpentem, dum cum Eua loqueretur, neque intellexisse quid diceret, neque rationalem animam habuisse. But as hee speaketh by phanaticall men, so did hee out of the Serpent. And yet GOD (be∣cause hee was the deuills instrument) hath taken from him his voyce, leauing him onelie hyssing; and insteed of those smooth words where-withall the woman was beguiled, hee hath giuen him poyson vnder his tongue, to which the Scripture alludeth, Psalm. 140. 3. Rom. 3. 13. as Iosephus also affirmeth, Lib: 1. cap. 3. Antiq. And for this cause also was it punished to grouell and creepe vpon the earth, and to suffer the enmity of man. For accor∣ding to the Lords saying, that hath no power but to byte our heeles, & lower parts, and we on the other-side, make all force to bruize his head. I shall not need to allegorize this story, it is better knowne to you then to my selfe, and I list not write those things vvhich are impertinent to the matter. And therefore thus much shall suffice for this first record of the Serpent in holy Scripture, and so I will proceede to the second.

Another memory of the Serpent is, the type of Christ Iesus, represented in the Brazen Serpent, erected at the Lords owne commaundement, for the curing of the Burning-ser∣pents poyson in the Wildernes. Many such statues of Serpents I haue remembred in the discourse following, differing onely in the end and benefit. This working miraculouslie those things, because it represented Christ crucified, which those could not doe, being but the inuentions of man: yet of this Saint Austen maketh this elegant allusion to Christ, in Iohn 3. Tract: 12. Magnum hoc Sacramentum & qui legerunt nouerunt &c. This, sayth he, is a great Sacrament, and they which haue read it, know it. For what are the fiery-byting-Serpents, but sinnes arising out of the mortality of flesh? What is that same Serpent lif∣ted vp? but the death of our Lord vpon the Crosse. For because death came by the Ser∣pent, death is figured in the forme of a Serpent. The byting of the Serpent was deadlie, the death of our Lord was liuely. The Serpent is looked vpon, that it might not be harm∣full, death is looked vpon that it might be of no force. Sedcuius mors, mors vitae, si dici po∣test mors vitae, imò quia dici potest, mirabiliter dicitur. Shall not that be spoken which was to be done? Shall I be scrupulous to say that, which my Lord did not disdaine to doe? Was not Christ life? and yet he was on the Crosse. Was hee not life? and yet hee dyed. Sed in morte Christi mors mortua est, quia vita mortua occidit mortem, plenitudo vitae occidit mortem, absorpta est mors in Christi corpore. But as they which did looke vpon the Brazen Serpent, did not perish although they were bytten; so they which by fayth looke vppon Christ crucified, are saued from the perrill of their sinnes: but with this difference betwixt the type and the person represented, that they were saued from a temporall death, and the faithfull from an eternall. Thus farre Saint Austen, and thus much of the Serpent in fi∣gure.
The third and last mention of Serpent that I apprehend, is that allegoricall precept, or instruction of our most blessed Sauiour, where he exhorteth vs to be wise as Serpents, to be innocent as Doues. Which words haue often driuen mee into the serious considerati∣on of the Serpents nature: that so I might at one time or other, attaine our Sauiours mea∣ning, for surely I thought of them, as that Learned-man did of the Iewes, Hostes sunt in cordibus, suffragatores in libris: and because of Christs reference, whatsoeuer the Serpents are in their nature and inclination to vs, yet in their wisedome (as in a Booke) they are our instructors and helpers. And certainely, seeing there are no vertues of that worth to a Christian life, as are Innocencie and Wisedome, I could neuer satisfie my selfe in their diquisition, how we should goe to creatures so farre different in nature, betwixt whom is no concord, and take out their seuerall vertues, to marry them together in one humane breast. Well I knew the worth of those vertues, and the necessity of their imitation, yet how to make vse of them in a Christian life, was Hic labor, hoc opus.
The Serpent in the earth, & the Doue in the ayre, doth it teach vs that with wisedome we must dwell below on earth, and with inocencie, as with the wings of a Doue, flye vp into heauen aboue? Or that in our pollicie while wee liue, wee may wind and turne in worldly affayres like a Serpents path, but in heauenly, keepe a straight and swift course, like as the Doues doe in their flight? Or that wee be euer armed to defend our selues, as the Serpent is with poyson, neuer vnfurnished, and yet be without hart and courage, as is a Doue? Or that there were no man in nature so wise as Serpents, or so innocent as Doues? Surely these thoughts draue me to looke vpon the Fathers, the best Expositors of this Text, for my satisfaction; that at least, if I could neuer attaine to the perfect science of Wisedome and Innocencie, yet I might shew my louing endeuour vnto both. They told me with one consent, that forasmuch as men desire wisedome vvithout innocencie, our Sauiour to reprooue that affection, teacheth to conioyne both together, for Pruden∣tia sine simplicitate, malitia, simplicitas, sine prudentia stultitia: and therefore, Ne machine∣mur dolos, habeamus simplicitatem Columbae, et ne ab alijs supplantemur, astutiam Serpentis: to this effect you know they all vvrite. But yet this did not satisfie mee, for mee thought there was yet a more eminent meaning, or deeper secret, like some new Mercurius, or E∣lixar vitae, contayned in those words. Wherefore I sought further, and so I found, that Serpents defend their head, so must men theyr fayth; that they cast theyr skinne, so must men their sinnes; that they stop their eares against Inchaunters, so must men theyr eares

against the deuills tentations; that they byte at mens lower parts or heeles, so must we at the roote of our vnlawfull desires; that for hatred of men they seek peace among thornes and bryars, so must good men flie the society of those things which might endanger their soules; that they swym keeping their head out of the water, so ought men not to be drow∣ned in pleasure; that they eate dust, according to the sentence of the Almightie, so must we be content with whatsoeuer estate God shall send vs: and to conclude, saith S. Austen Solertiam habent in foetuum aeducatione, in latibulorum aedification, in nutrimentorum acqui∣sitione, in vulnerum medicatione, in nociuorum euitatione, in mutationis temporum prae cog∣nitione, & suorum comparium dilectione. These are high poynts of vvisedome for men to imitate, and I know not what more can be added vnto them, if they were generall, except I should reckon the vicious affections of Serpents, which haue far moe disciples then their vertuous inclination.
The Serpents spirit is a lofty and high spirit, reaching not onely after men, but also after the birds of the ayre, not beeing afrayd of the Elephants. Heerein many follow them, for
Omnis cura viris vter esset Induperator.
And it is true, as writeth Seneca, Animi hominū sunt ignei, & prouide sursum tendunt. It was the poesie of Pompey, Semper ego cupio, praecellere, & esse supremus. And of Caesar, Ma∣lem in appido primus esse quam Romae secundus. Another vice in Serpents is theyr desire of reuenge, for euen to the losse of theyr lines, and when they are more then halfe dead, they kill other. Euen so it is become a noble euill to shed blood, or at the least to disgrace and disable other to the poynt of death. S. Austen sayth, that as a vessell is corrupted vvith the sharpe Vineger it contayneth, so is the body and minde of man, by the wrathfull re∣uenge it taketh. The inhabitants of Dinantium, a Towne of Burgundie, to despight theyr Duke Charles, for some iniuries to them done, made his picture of vvood, with all his Armes and Coates of honour vppon it, and so brought the same to a Towne of his called Bouinium, where they set it in a filthy stinking poole, full of Toades and Frogs, and other venomous beasts, and cryed out to the Bouinians, Hic sedet magnus bufo Dux vester. To whom the Bouinians sent a man with dehorting perswasions, to remoue their minds from that vndutifull disloyaltie of contempt and rebellion, which they shewed against theyr Prince; but that messenger they instantly killed: afterwards they sent a little boy, vvith Letters to perswade them to make peace, sue for pardon, and to turne away the rage of vvarre which the Duke was preparing against them; as soone as the little boy had deliue∣red the Letters, they tore him in peeces like so many Wolues.
Thus they tooke theyr reuenge; and shortly after came the Duke with his royall Ar∣mie, and razed downe theyr Citty to the ground, killed and executed many of the inhabi∣tants; the residue he cast by couples into the Riuer Mosa, where they all perrished, men, vvomen and chyldron, so that the third day after it was sayd, Hîc fuit Dinantium. The Duke himselfe, for this great reuenge enforced by rebellion & murther, escaped not scot∣free, but was the last of his race, and left the Duchy to another Family. Thus if in men there raigne the wrath of Serpents, they must also looke for the ruine of Serpents, and be∣come like bruite beasts that perrish.
I omit to speake of theyr flattery, embracing while they sting; theyr treachery, lying in waite in the dust or grasse to doe harme; their venome where-withall they are euer armed to spoyle; theyr ingratitude, when they kill them that nourish them; theyr voracity, when they kill much more then they can eate; theyr hostility, whereby they bid battell to all li∣uing creatures; their contempt of the reuerend visage of man, whereby they neither spare vitious nor vertuous; and theyr desire to liue alone, destroying all other to multiply their owne kind; like our English-Enclosers, who doe herein follow the wisedome of the Ser∣pent, but not the innocencie of the Doue. Of all these and many more, if I did write to a man of meane knowledge, I would enlarge and apply in seuerall examples, but to you R: W. it is as needlesse as to light a Candle at noone day.
To conclude therefore, I onely affect three things in the Serpents wisedome, whereof two haue beene practised by the Church already, and the third remaineth now for vs to imitate. First, in the beginnings of the Church, all the haeresies did chiefely tend against the doctrine of the Trinitie, or Vnitie, or Deitie, or true humanity of our Sauiour Christ:

as you know the Simonians, Cerinthians, Arrians, and other detestable beasts did inuent. Against them all the noble Christian Bishops and Fathers did oppose themselues, and de∣fended their head, viz. Iesus Christ, to be true GOD, and true man; and so at one time were wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doues, dying for his sake that dyed for them.
Secondly, when by the corruption of time, and long current of many continued euils, the Church grew ouer-worne with many superstitions, so as the face thereof was disfi∣gured, and the pure wedding-garment which Christ put vppon it, ouer-growne, and co∣uered with the beggers-cloake of humane inuentions; then God made his instruments to follow the Serpents wisedome, in passing thorow a narrow passage of persecution, death and fire; and so stripped off that ouer-growne skinne, whereby the Prime decour, & com∣linesse of the Churches party-coloured coate of fine Needle-worke, resembled in the Ser∣pent, is againe manifested. Thus farre they proceeded. And thus we haue seene the cor∣respondence of figure to figure already performed.
But the third and last thing, is that part of the Serpents wisedome, whereby shee forsa∣keth societie of men, and Citties or places of pleasure, and dwelleth alone in the hedges, wildernes, or desolate Rocks. It was a true experimentall saying of him that wrote, Ex∣trema Religionis, vel in superstitionē, vel in profanitatem recidunt. Now we haue ouer-pas∣sed Superstition, I am out of feare that the Church shall neuer-more haue a thick skinne: we haue fallen into open prophanenesse, and contempt of one another, (if not of God,) which must be remedied by the Serpents wisedome. And I thinke we must depart out of the ciu ill and worldly wayes, and affayres of men, and betake our selues to more priuate and secure habitations, where the open enemy can neither so soone find vs, or wound vs. I neede not prosecute this matter, or at the least, if I should, I must exceed the limits of a Dedication, onely this I say, that if the Church and Church-men, could put on one mind and ioyne together in this action, whereby men might be esteemed for theyr worth, and not for their wages, I know the people would hunt after vs in deuotion, where now they tread vppon vs in prophanenesse. For we beeing made poore, base and contemptible be∣fore theyr eyes (which are the liuing organs of grace,) they tread vppon all the residue, euen to the blood of the New-Couenaunt: and therefore, once more I pray that the sons of Leuie may speake one thing.
I haue now said my full, & heere I present vnto you my Second Treatise of liuing Crea∣tures, hauing collected all that is written of this Argument, out of seuerall Authors into one Volume and method: so that whatsoeuer Gallen gaue to Piso, Aristotle to Alexander, Oppianus to Antoninus, Bellonius to Cardinall Castillion, Fumanellus to the Senate of Ve∣rona, Cardan to Madrutius the Prince of Trent, Grinaeus to Collimitius, Gesner to Grauius, Caronnus to Sir Horatio Pallautino, Maiolus to Heberus, or any other that euer writ of Serpents, or venomous Beasts, that doe I heere dedicate to you, as the euerlasting pledge of my loue, honour, and seruice vnto you. Which I shall entreate you to enter∣taine and accept while it may honour you, because it hath Gods worke for a subiect, and refuse it not, when it shall any way ecclipse or dazle your light with Prince or people. And for my selfe, let me be bold to conclude with this my vnfayned protestation.

Sum tuus, & sine fine tuus Decane Manebo,
Cum socijs, quorum sine felle & candida nosti
Pectora, sic in te sibi constatura deinceps.
De te nil dubite, si tu tamen ambigis, istas
En, desiderij pignus, pius aspice chartas.


