



THe Library of English Bookes, and Catalogue of writers, (Right Worthy and Learned DEANE, my most respected PATRON) haue growne to the height, not onely of a iust number, but almost innumerable: and no maruell, for God himself hath in all ages preserued lerning in the next place to life; for as life is the Ministeriall Gouernor and moouer in this world, so is learning the Ministeriall Gouernor and moouer in life: As an Interpretor in a strange Country is necessary for a traueller that is ignorant of Languages (or else he should perish,) so is knowledge and learning to vs poore Pilgrims in this our Perigrination, out of Paradice, vnto Paradice; whereby confused BABELS tongues are againe reduced to their signifi∣cant Dialects, not in the builders of BABELL to further and finish an earthly Tower, but in the builders of IERVSALEM, to bring them all to their owne Countrey Which they seeke, and to the desired rest of soules. Literae obstetrices artium quarum beneficio ab interitur vndicantur. As life is different and diuers, according to the spirit wherein it is seated, and by which it is norished as with a current; so also is Learning, acording to the tast, vse, and practise of rules, Canons, and Authors, from whom as from a Fountaine it taketh both beginning and encrease: euen as the spirit of a Serpent is much quicker then the spirit of an Oxe; and the Learning of Aristotle and Pliny more liuely and light some then the know∣ledge of other obscure Philosophers, vnworthy to be named; which either through enuie or Non proficiencye durst neuer write, Si cum hac exceptione detur sapientia vt illam inclusam teneā, nec enuntiem, reijciam. Nullius boni sine socio iucunda est possessio. And therfore I say with Petrus Blesen: Scientiarum generosa possessio in plures disper∣sa, non perditur, & distributa per partes, minorationis detrimentum non sentit: sed eo diuturnius perpetuata senescit, quo publicata foecundius se diffundit.
The greatest men stored with all helpes of Learning, Nature, & Fortune, were the first wri∣ters who as they did excel other men in posessions & wordly dignity, so they manifested their Vertues and Woorth in the aedition of excellent parts of knowledge, either for the delight or profit of the world, according to the Poets profession:
Aut prodesse volunt aut delectari poetae,
Aut simul & iucunda & idonea dicere vitae,
Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci,
Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo.
Yet now of late daies this custome hath bin almost discontinued to the infinite preiu∣dice of sacred inuiolable Learning and Science, for Turpis sepe fama datur minoribus, (as Ausonius wrote in his time) for indeed the reason is pregnant:
Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat,
Res angusta domi.
But yet the great Rectour or Chauncellor of all the Academyes in the world Iesus Christ, In whom are hid all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge, the Maister of that Colledge wherin he was but a Seruant or Steward, That was learned in all the lear∣ning of the Egyptians, (I meane Moses) the first writer, the first Author, the first c∣mender of knowledge, and the first ordainer of a lawfull Common-wealth, and ruler of Church and state, hath not leaft our age without some monuments of great Princes, Earls, Lords and Knights for the Ornament and honour of learning, who for generall and par∣ticular causes and benefits haue added their names to the society of writers, and divulged their workes in print, which are likely to be remembred to the worlds end. Such are our most temperate, Iust, VVise, and Learned King and Soueraigne. The Right Noble, and Honourable Earle of Surrey, long ago departed out of this earthly Horizon. The now li∣uing Earles of Dorset, Northampton, Salisbury, and many Knights, Sir Phillip Sid∣ney, Sir George Moore, Sir Richard Bartlett, Sir Frauncis Hastinges, and others. But of Aarons, and such as sit at the Helme of the Church, or are woorthily aduaunced for their knowledge in learning and state, I meane both Bishops and Doctors, almost in∣numerable of all whom I can sy no more, if I were woorthy to say any thing, then apply vnto them particularly that which was said of one of the greatest schollers and Diuines that euer England had.Bish. Iuel.
— Dic obsecro sancta
Posteritas, nec enim mihi fas est dicere: tantum
De tantis tacitum, aut tantos audire iuuabit.
Then why should I presume, being euery way the least and meanest of all other, now the third time to publish any part of my conceiued studies for the age present and succeeding, and so to haue my name inrolled amongst the benefactors and Authors of Learning.
— Non omnia grandior aetas,
Quae fugiamus habet; seris venit vsus ab annis.
Alas sir, I haue neuer abounded in any thing, except want and labor, and I thanke God that one of these hath bin prepared to feed the other, therefore I wil not stand vpon any mans ob∣iections, who like Horses as it is in the fable being led empty, wel fed, and without burden, do scorne the laden Asse, adding misery to his loade, til his backe was broke, and then was al laid vpon the pampred disdainfull Horse: euen so, these proud displeasing spirits are eased by the labors of vs that beare their burthens, and if they content not themselues with ease, but wil also sit in the seat of the scornful let them remēber, that when our backs be broke, they must take vp the carriage. But pardon me (I beseech you) if by way of Preface I open my hart vnto your Wor: who is better able then ten thousand of the Momusses, and more charitably ge∣nerous in receiuing such gifts with the right hande (as these are) although they were giuen vvith the left; for seeing I haue chosen you the patron of this worke, I vvil breefely declare and open my mind vnto you concerning the whole Volume, sparing any other praises of your demerits then those vvhich by Martiall are ascribed to Regulus, vvhich I vvill vvithout flattery or feare of the enuious thus apply vnto you:
Cum sit Sophiae par fama & cura deorum [SSS. Trinitatis]
Ingenio pietas nec minor ipsa tuo.
Ignorat meritis dare munera, qui tibi librum
Et qui miratur [Nejile] Thura dari.
So then leauing these peroations, I vvil endeauor to proue vnto you that this vvork which I now publish and divulge vnto the world, vnder the patronage of your name is Diuine, & necessarie for all men to knovv; true, and therefore vvithout slander or suspicious scandall to be receiued; and that no man ought rather to publish this vnto the World, then a Diuine or Preacher. For the first, that the knovvledge of Beasts, like as the knowledge of the other creatures and workes of God, is Deuine, I see no cause why any man shoulde doubt thereof, seeing that at the first they were created and brought to man as we may read Gen. 1.24, 25. and all by the Lord himselfe, so that their life and creation is Deuine in respect of their ma∣ker,

their naming diuine, in respect that Adam out of the plenty of his own deuine wisdome, gaue them their seueral appellations, as it were out of a Fountaine of prophesie, foreshewing the nature of euery kind in one elegant & significant denomination, which to the great losse of all his children was taken away, lost, & confounded at Babel. When I affirm that the know∣ledg of Beasts is Deuine, I do meane no other thing then the right and perfect description of their names, figures, and natures, and this is in the Creator himself most Deuine, & there∣fore such as is the fountain, such are the streams yssuing frō the same into the minds of men. Now it is most cleare in Gen. how the Holy-ghost remembreth the creation of al liuing crea∣tures, and the Four-footed next before the creation of man, as thogh they alone were apoin∣ted the Vshers, going immediately before the race of men. And therefore all the Deuines ob∣serue both in the Haebrew, in the Greeke and Latine, that they were created of three seueral sorts or kinds. The first Iumentum, as Oxen, Horse, Asses & such like, Quia hominum iuuamenta. The second, Reptile quia hominum medicina. The third, Bestia 1: à vastando, for that they were wild & depopulators of other their associats, rising also against man, after that by his fal he had lost his first image & integrity. Now were it not a knovv∣ledge Deuine, why should the holy Scripture relate it, and deuide the kinds? Yea, why should al holy men take examples frō the natures of Beasts, Birds, &c. & aply thē to heuenly things, except by the ordinance of God they were both allowed and commaunded so to do; and there∣fore in admiration of them the Prophet Dauid crieth out, Quam magnifica sunt opera tua domine, omnia in sapientia fecisti. The old Manichees among other blasphemies accused the creation of hurtfull, venomous, rauening, and destroying Beasts, affirming them to bee made by an euill God, and also they accused the creation of Mice and other vnprofitable crea∣tures, because their dulnesse was no kinder to the Lord, (but like cruel and couetous misers, made no account of those beasts, which broght not profit to their purse. You know (Right Ler∣ned D.) how that graue Father answereth that calumny, first affirming that the same thing which seemed ydle to men, was profitable to God; and the same that appeared vgly to them, was beautifull to him, Qui omnibus vtitur ad gubernationem vniuersi. He therefore wisely compareth a fool that knows not the vse of the creatures in this World, to one ignorant that commeth into the workehouse of a cunning man, viewing a number of strange tooles, and hauing no cunning but in an Axe or ae Rake, thinketh that al those rare inuentions of a vvise Workman are ydle toies: and vvhilst thus he thinketh, wandring to and fro, not loo∣king to his feet, suddenly falleth into some furnace in the same Work-house, or chance to take vp some sharpe tool whereby he is vvounded, then he also thinketh that the same are hurtful and daungerous. Quorum tamen vsum quia nouit artifex, insipientiam eius irridet, & verba inepta non curans officinam suam constanter exercet. But vve that are ashamed to deny the vse of instruments in the shops of rare Artisans, but rather admire their inuen∣tion, yet are not afraid to condemn in Gods storehouse sundry of his creatures, which are rare inuentions, although through folly we be vvounded or harmed by them, and therfore he con¦cludeth that al beasts are either vtilia, and against them we dare not speake; or pernitiosa, whereby we are terrified, that we should not loue this perillous life, or else they are superflua, vvhich to affirme were most ridiculous: for as in a great house all things are not for vse, but some for ornament, so is it in this World, the inferior pallace of God. Thus far Austen. Therfore I will conclude this first part, that not only the knowledge of the profitable crea∣ture is diuine, and was first of all taught by God, but also of the hurtfull: For a wise Man saith Salomon, seeth the Plague (by the reuelation of God) and hideth himselfe from it. And Iohn Bap: Quis vos docuit ab ira ventura fugere. These things haue I principallie laboured in this Treatise, to shew vnto men what Beasts are their friendes, and what their Enemies, vvhich to trust, and which avoyd, in which to find norishment, and which to shun as poison. Another thing that perswadeth me in the necessarie vse of this history, that it was deuine vvas the preseruation of al creatures liuing, which are ingendred by copulation (ex∣cept Fishes) in the arke of Noah: vnto whom it pleased the creator at that time to infuse an instinct, and bring them home to man as to a fold: surely it was for that a man might gaine out of them much deuine knowledge, such as is imprinted in them by nature, as a tipe or spark of that great vvisedome whereby they vvere created. In mice and Serpents a foreknowledge of things to come, in the Aunt and Pismire a prouidence against old age; in the Bear the loue of yong: in the Lyon his stately pace; in the Cock & sheep, change of weather; as S. Basill in

his Hexameron, etiam in Brutis quidam futuri sensus est, vt nos presenti vitae non ad∣dicti simus, sed de futuro saeculo omne studium habeamus.
For this cause there were of beasts in holy scripture three holy vses, one for sacrifice, ano∣ther in vision, and a third for reproofe and instruction. In Sacrifices were the cleane beasts, which men were bound first to knowe, and then to offer; for it is vnreasonable that those things should be sacred at the Lordes altar, which are refused worthily at priuate mens Ta∣bles. Now although we haue o vse of sacrificing of Beasts, Nam sicut bruta pro peccatis immolabantur, ita iam vitia pro corporibus. Yet we haue vse of cleane Beasts for foode and nourishment, and therefore for the inriching of the minds and Tables of men, it is nece∣sary to know not onely the liberty that we haue to eat, but also the quality and nutriment of the Beast we eat, not for any Religion, but for health and corporall necessity. This point is also opened in this story, and the other of Sacrifice, wherein I haue not omitted to speak of the Di∣uine vse of euery Beast, both among the Iewes, and among the prophane Gentiles. Now for the second holy vse of Beasts in visions, the Prophet Daniels visions, and Ezekiels, and S. Iohns in the Reuelation doe testifie of them, whereby the most Deuines haue obserued how great Princes and kingdomes after they haue shaken off the practise of Iustice and piety, turn Tyrants and rauening Beasts. For so man being in honor vnderstandeth not, but becommeth like the Beasts that perish, and so as Dionisius saith by visions of beasts, Infima reducuntur per media in suprema. Now there were as S. Augustine saith, three kinds of visions, Sen∣sibiles, intellectuales, & imaginariae: the first were most pregnāt, because to the vnderstan∣ding and conceiuing, a man neuer lost his sences, and therefore God did sodainely create sa∣uage Beasts both of naturall and extraordinary shapes, whereby he shewed to his seruants the Prophets, the ruine or vprising of beastly states and kingdomes. And not onely thus, but al∣so in heauen (as Saint Iohn saith) there are foure Beasts full of eyes before the throne of God: both which must needs magnifie the knowledge that we may haue of these Quadrupedes; for seeing God hath vsed them as Sacraments or Mysteries to containe his will, (not onely in monstrous treble-headed, or seuen-horned-shapes) but also in pure ordinary, natural lims & mēbers: how shal we be able to gesse at the meaning in the secret, that do not vnderstand the reuealed? And what vse can we make of the inuisible part of that Sacrament, where we know not the meaning of the visible? Doth the Lord compare the Diuell to a Lyon; euill Iudges to Beares; false prophets to Wolues; secret and crafty persecutors to Foxes; open ene∣mies in hostility to wilde Boares; Heretickes and false Preachers to Scorpions; good men to the Fowles of Heauen, and Martyrs to Sheep, and yet we haue no knowledge of the nature of Lyons, Wolues, Beares, Foxes, Wilde-Bores, or Scorpions. Surely when Salomon saith to the sluggard go to the Pismire, he willeth him to learne the nature of the Pismire, and then according thereto reforme his manners: And so all the world are bid to learne the natures of all Beasts, for there is alway something to be learned in them, according to this saying of Saint Basil. A deo nihil non prouidum in naturae rebus est, neque quicquam pertinen∣tis, ad se curae expers, & si ipsas animalium partes consideraueris, inuenies quod ne∣que superfluum quid conditor apposuit, neque necessaria detraxit. Then it being cleare that euery beast is a natural vision, vvhich vve ought to see and vnderstand, for the more cleare apprehension of the inuisible Maiesty of God, I vvill conclude that I haue not omitted this part of the vse of Beasts, but haue collected, expressed, and declared, vvhat the vvri∣ters of all ages haue heerein obserued.
Novv the third and last holy vse that is made of Beasts in Scripture, is for reproofe and instruction; so the Lord in Iob. Ch, 38, & 39. mentioneth the Lyon, the Rauen, the Wilde-Goats, the Hindes, the Hinde-Calues, the Wilde-Asses, the Vnicorn, the Ostriche, the Stork, the Puissant-Horse, the Hauke, the Eagle, the Vulture, the Whale, and the Dragon, that is, the Fovvles, Fishes, Serpents, and Four-footed-Beasts: Al vvhich he reckoneth as known things to Iob, and discourseth of as strange things in their natures as any vve haue inser∣ted for truth in our History, as may appeare to any man vvhatsoeuer, that vvil looke stu∣diously into them.
Shall I adde heereunto hovv Moses, and all the Prophets, Saint Iohn Baptist, our most

blessed Sauiour, saint Paule, and all the Writers since his time (both auncient and latter) haue made profession of this part of Diuinity; so that he was an vnskilfull Deuine and not apt to teach, which could not at his fingers end speake of these things: for (saith our Saui∣our) If I tell you earthly things and ye beleeue not, how shall ye beleeue when I tell you heauenly things?
Salomon, as it is witnessed in holy Scripture, wrote of Plants, of Birds, of Fishes, and Beasts, and euen then when he stood in good fauour vvith God, therefore it is an exercise of the highest Wisdome to trauell in, and the Noblest mindes to study in: for in it as I wil shew you (with your good patience for I haue no other Praeface) there is both the knowledge of god and man. If any man obiect Multa multi de musca de apicula de vermiculo, pauca de Deo, I will answer vvith the words of Theodorus Gaza: Permulta enim de Deo is tractat, qui doctrina rerum conditarum exquisitissima, conditorem ipsum delarat, neque musca, neque vermiculus omittendus est vbi de mira solertia agitur. Wherunto Saint Austen agreeth vvhen he saith, Maiestatem diuinam aeque in formicae membris atque magno inuento tranante fluuium. And for the knovvledge of man, many and most excellent rules for publicke and priuaete affaires, both for preseruing a good Conscience and auoiding an euill daunger, are gathered from Beasts: It were to long to run ouer all, let me (I beseech you) be bold to reckon a few vvhich discend from nature our common parent, and therefore are neither strained, counterfait, inconstant, or deceiptfull; but free, full of power to perswade, true, hauing the seale of the highest for their euidence; constant and ne∣uer altred in any age: faithfull, such as haue beene tryed at fie and Touch-stone.
Were not this a good perswasion against murder, to see all beasts so to maintaine their na∣tures, that they kill not their owne kind. Who is so vnnaturall and vnthankefull to his pa∣rents, but by reading how the young Storkes and Wood-peckers do in their parents olde age feed and nourish them, will not repent, amend his folly, and bee more naturall? What man is so void of compassion, that hearing the bounty of the Bone-breaker Birde to the young Eagles, will not become more liberall? Where is there svch a sluggard and drone, that considereth the labours, paines, and trauels of the Emmet, Little-bee, Field-mouse, Squir∣rell, and such other that will not learne for shame to he more industrious, and set his fingers to worke? Why should any man liuing fall to do euill against his Conscience, or at the tempta∣tion of the Deuill, seeing a Lyon will neuer yeeld: Mori scit vnici nescit; and seeing the little Wren doth fight with an Eagle, contending for Soueraignty? woulde it not make all men to reuerence a good King set ouer them by God? Seeing the Bees seeke out their King if he loose himselfe, and by a most sagacious smelling-sence, neuer cease till he be found out, and then beare him vpon their bodies if he be not able to fly, but if he die they all for sake him. And what King is not inuited to clemency, and dehorted from tyranny, seeing the king of Bees hath a sting, but neuer vseth the same?
How great is the loue and faithfulnesse of Dogges, the meeknesse of Elephants, the mo∣desty or shamefastnesse of the adulterous Lyonesse, the neatnesse and politure of the Cat and Peacocke, the iustice of the Bee vvhich gathereth from all flowers that which serueth their turne, and yet destroyeth not the flower. The care of the Nightingale to make her voice ple∣sant, the chastity of a Turtle, the Canonicall voice and watchfulnesse of a Coeke, and to con∣clude the vtility of a Sheepe: All these and ten thousand more I could recite, to shew vvhat the knowledge of the nature of brutish creatures doth worke or teach the minds of men, but I vvill conclude this part vvith the vvords of S. Ierom against Iouinian. Ad Herodem dicitur propter malitiam. Ite & dicite vulpi huic. Luke 13. ad Scribus & Pharisaeos genimina viperarum Mat. 23. ad libidinosos equi hinmētes inproximorū foeminas. Ier. 5. de voluptuoso nolite mittere margaritas vestras ante porcos. De impudenti∣bus, neque sanctum date canibus Mat, 7. de infidelibus Ephesi cum bestiis, pugnaui in similitudine hominum, And thus farre S. Ierom: vvhereby we may boldly auerre by way of induction; that wherein the knowledge of God, the knowledge of man, the precepts of Vertue, the meanes to auoid euill are to be learned, that Science is Diuine and ought of all men to be inquired and sought after: and such haue I manifested in this history following.
Now againe the necessity of this History is to be preferred before the Chronicles and re∣cords

of al ages made by men, because the euents & accidents of the time past, are peraduen∣ture such things as shall neuer againe come in vse: but this sheweth that Chronicle which was made by God himselfe, euery liuing beast being a word, euery kind being a sentence, and al of them togither a large history, containing admirable knowledge & learning, which was, which is, which shall continue, (if not for euer) yet to the worlds end.
Et patris, & nostras, nouumque prematur in annum
Membranis intus positis delere licebit
Quod non aedideris.
The second thing in this discourse which I haue promised to affirme, is the truth of the Hy∣story of Creatures, for the marke of a good writer is to follow truth and not deceiuable Fa∣bles. And in this kind I haue passed the straightest passage, because the relation of most thinges in this Booke are taken out of Heathen vvriters, such as peradventure are many times superstitiously credulous, and haue added of their owne verie many rash in∣uentions, without reason, authority, or probability, as if they had beene hyred to sell such Fables: For, Non bene conducti vendunt periuria testes. I would not haue the Rea∣der of these Histories to immagine that I haue inserted or related all that euer is saide of these Beasts, but onely so much as is saide by many, For in the mouth of two or three witnesses standeth euerie word: and if at any time I haue set downe a single Testimony, it was because the matter was cleare and needeth not farther probation, or else I haue laid it vpon the credit of the Author with special words, not giuing the Reader any warant from me to beleeue it.
Besides I haue taken regard to imitate the best Writers, which was easie for mee to doe, because Gesner relateth euery mans opinion (like a common place or Dictionary, as he pro∣fesseth;) and if at any time he seemed obscure, I turned to the Bookes which I had at hande to gesse their meaning, putting in that which he had left out of many good Authours, and lea∣uing out many magicall deuises. Now although I haue vsed no small diligence or care in col∣lecting those things which were most essentiall to euery Beast, most true without exception, and most euident by the Testimony of many good Authors, yet I haue deliuered in this trea∣tise many straunge and rare thinges, not as fictions, but Myracles of nature, for wisemen to behold and obserue to their singular comfort, if they loue the power, glory, and praise of their maker, not withholding their consent to the things expressed, because they intreat of liuing things made by God himselfe. Si ergo quaerimus quis fecerit deus est, Si per quod, dixit fiat, & facta sunt: Si quare fiat, quia bonus est. Nec enim autor est excellentior deo, necars efficacior dei verbo, nec causa melior, quam vt bonum crearetura deo bono, and this Plato said was the onely cause of the worlds creation, vt a deo bono opera bona fierent.
Now I doe in a sort challenge a consent vnto the probability of these thinges to wise and learned men, although no beleefe. For Fides, is credere inuisibilia; but consensus is a clea∣uing or yeelding to a relation vntill the manifestation of another truth; and when any man shall iustly reproue any thing I haue written for false and eroneous, I will not sticke to release the Readers consent, but make satisfaction for vsurpation. But for the rude and vulgar sort (who being vtterly ignorant of the operation of Learning, do presently condemne al strange things which are not ingrauē in the palms of their own hands, or euident in their own heards and flockes): I care not, for my eares haue heard some of them speake against the Historie of Sampson, vvhere he tied fire-brands to the tailes of Foxes, and many of them against the myracles of Christ. I may remember you (R.W.) of a Countrie tale of an old Masse-Priest in the daies of Henry the eight, vvho reading in English after the translation of the Bible, the miracle of the fiue loaues and tvvo Fishes, and vvhen hee came to the verse that recko∣neth the number of the ghuests or eaters of the banquet, hee paused a little, and at last said, they vvere about fiue hundred: The clarke, that vvas a little vviser, vvhispered into the priests eares that it was fiue thousand, but the priest turned backe and replied vvith indig∣nation, Hold your peace sirrha, we shall neuer make them beleeue they were fiue hun∣dred.
Such Priests, such People, such persons I shall draw vpon my backe, and although I doe not challenge a power of not erring, yet because I speake of the power of God, that is vnli∣mitable, I will be bold to auerre that for truth in the Booke of creatures (although first ob∣serued by Heathen men) which is not contrary to the booke of Scriptures.
Lastly, that it is the proper office of a Preacher or Deuine to set foorth these workes of God, I thinke no vvise man will make question, for so did Moses, and Dauid, and Salo∣mon, and Christ, and S. Paule, and S. Iohn, and S. Ireney, S. Gregory, S. Basill, S. Austen, S. Ierom, S. Bernard in his enarrations or Sermons vppon the Canticles, and of later daies Isidorus, The Monkes of Messuen, Geminianus, and to conclude that orna∣ment of our time Ieronimus Zanchius. For how shall we be able to speake the whole Coun∣sell of God vnto his people, if we read vnto them but one of his bookes, when he hath another in the worlde, which wee neuer study past the title or outside; although the great God haue made them an Epistle Dedicatory to the whole race of mankind.
This is my endeauor and paines in this Booke, that I might profit and delight the Reader, whereinto he may looke on the Holyest daies, (not omitting prayer and the pubicke seruice of God) and passe away the Sabbaoths in heauenly meditations vpon earthly creatures. I haue followed D. Gesner as neer as I could, I do professe him my Author in most of my stories, yet I haue gathred vp that which he let fal, & added many pictures and stories as may apeare by Conference of both together. In the names of the Beasts, and the Phsicke I haue not swar∣ued from him at all. He was a Protestant Physitian, (a rare thing to finde any Religion in a Physitian although Saint Luke a Physitian were a writer of the Gospell.) His praises there∣fore shall remaine, and all liuing creatures shall witnesse for him at the last day. This my la∣bor whatsoeuer it be, I consecrate to the benefit of all our English Nation vnder your name and patronage, a publique professor, a learned & reuerend Deuine, a famous Preacher, obser¦ued in Court & Country, if you wil vouchsafe to allow of my labors, I stand not vpon others, & if it haue your cōmendation, it shal incorage me to proceed to the residue, wherin I feare no impediment but ability to carry out the charge, my case so standing that I haue not any ac∣cesse of maintainance but by voluntary▪ beneuolence for personall paines, receiuing no more but a laborers wages, & but for you, that had also been taken from me: Therfore I conclude with the words of Saint Gregory to Leontius, Et nos bona quae de vobis multipliciter praedicantur addiscentes, assidue pro gloriae vestrae incolumintate omni∣potentem valeamus dominum deprecari.

