



MOSTE GRATIOVS SOVERAIGNE:
Becaus the children of God bee peaceable, and the Kingdom of heaven be∣longeth to the poore in spirit, and contention is a hinderance of under∣standing, and Skorners are farr from it: becaus wisdom is the true happines, and stops the mouth of iniquity: becaus the lion and the serpent is vanquished, and Iu∣stice raigneth, and the Turtle dove is com and heard in our land: becaus the glory of the law & the strength therof shineth in your Majesties hart, by cleernes of judgement & golden verity: becaus your Majesty is the Prince of peace; & an endles gouvern∣ment is layd upon you; and none els is fitt to sit upon the Throne of David: I humbly present unto your Majestyes handes, this Scepter of the Psalmes of David, his ser∣vice & my paines to your Majestyes service; as fear to whom fear, and honour to whom honour, & Scepters to whom Scepters belong, beeing an instrument full of eyes, sharp & provident & fitt for gouvernment, made of Moses and the Prophets, & hath Christ and his Apostles looking on it. That your Majesty may never bee weary of beholding it: when your Majesty shall perceive how potentiall it is made for the Church: by sweet invitation of skorners, by revelation to the Ignorant, and re∣solution to the straitened. How therby, the wisdom of the Ministry of that great congregation and Allowance of the Temple of Ierusalem, and their blessing of the poore, with instruction, & crowning of them that keep the law & reprobation of the contentious, to answer all reprochers: the most heavenly perfection of the church, that beareth all peace and beatitude, is brought to light. By dividing the waters of the Scriptures and making a cleer passage through the depth therof. The rod of government that ceaseth all contention in them, and melteth the hard rocks & bringeth liquor of life out of the same. Considering the heighth of the stile, and depth of the invention; the reach of the work, and largenes of Matter, becaus the world (I suppose) have no more such piles: I make your Majesty the Pillar and stay of all. And as the deliverance is upon the knees of your Majestyes Dominion: that your Majesty may live in them, and they bee susteined by your Majesty, that your Majesty my live eternally with them, and they with your Majesty, that your Majesty bee ever blessed by them, & they by your Majesty, that your Majesty may sanc∣tify them, & they may sanctify your Majesty. That your Majestyes name may bee their sanctuary, & they the Ministers to extoll the same, as long as the sunn and moon la∣steth. That by the light in the night of them, & the clowdynes in the day time: they may, & the Church may, & all the Godly may, walk safe & untouched of the Enimy, and live and Conquer for ever. Seeing all kinde of rule and art & government & regularity is conteined in them, that nothing is wanting. That your Majesty like David may lead yours with a skillfull hand, & feed them hartily. And thus have your Majesty a most glorious entrance into the strong and invincible citty of Da∣vid, the fort of Sion. Where all the blinde and lame are smitten, and a most hea∣venly pile of cleernes and uprightnes and Kingdom of knowledge is erected. By Principles in the tongue, and in religion, and in divinity, by letter and figure, till it

come to a perfection of strength & glory for the defendour, & such was the occasion of this work. The work is so well knitt together from Psalme, to Psalme, & one mat∣ter to another, and one thing with another: that they are not to bee sundred for the strength therof. And that your Majesty may say the same: and perceive, how the stile is lifted from the ground, & how the heavenly understandíng is overcovered with cloudes: I here present a revelation therof, by naturall Arguments rising from them, for your Majesty to lean on, while your Majesty ministreth just judgement, & giveth the strength of the Law to your people, to feed on. And that your Majestyes endes may bee ever blessed: that the wicked bee Cutt off, and the just may ever possess the land & peace enough to delight them. And now the vail of all is drawen & the light is manifest: I moste humblely submit all to your Majesty, the Shield of Truthe, and end with Iob. No man can bee silent for want of knowledge. I therfor repent; and give over, pray your Majestyes pardon, & conclude with prayer for your Majestyes dayes and raigne, as the dayes of heaven with all happynes.

