



RIGHT HONOV∣RABLE,
HAVING translated
the R. Father Horatius Tursellinus Histo∣ry
of S. Francis Xauiers life, out of Latin
into English; I am emboldned, setting

all former desgnes aside, to dedicate the
same vnto your Honour.
The times vvill not permit me to ex∣presse
to the World, the Reasons and
Grounds I haue in my Hart, for so bold
a resolution. The Almighty Spectator
sees and beholds them, in vvhose di∣uine
applause I rest fully comforted, and
content. Yet thus much I neyther can,
nor vvill conceale: Your Noble Lineage,
farre more ennobled vvith the rare dis∣positions
of your Mind, hath made me
not to rest, vntill I resolued to leaue be∣hind
me to the vvorld, this first, perpe∣tuall
Monument of the deserued Re∣spect,
and Regard, I ovve vnto Your
Honour.
Hearing also, vvhich is famous
ouer all our Land, vvith hovv great
Resolution and Constancy, your Honour
had stood firme, and immoueable in the
Professiō of the Catholike Roman Faith,

and this euen in the middst of strongest
Reasons, Tryalls, & Prouocations to the
contrary; I could not but designe the
Worthiest Champion of the same Fayth,
to be held vp, & imbraced in the chast,
and constant armes, of so Worthy and
Renovvned a Personage, as your Ho∣nour.
This self-same Faith vvhich hath byn
by You so Heroically maintayned, did
this Holy and Religious Man S. Francis
Xauier, carry on alōg in these our daies,
not only into India, and the vtmost O∣rient;
but first of all did bring it also, into
that stout, and Warlike Iapony, novv
much more ennobled, vvith the purpled
Bloud of so many Glorious Martyrs that
haue layd dovvne their dearest liues, in
testimony, & defence thereof. And ther∣fore,
as he vvent before in Latin vnder
the Protection of the Vicar of Christ,
Pope Clement the eight; so novv it vvill

not seeme amisse, that he appeare in En∣glish
vnder the Patronage of your Ho∣nourable
Fauour: And by your Meanes
brought, as it vvere, out of India into En∣gland,
there made knovvne and vievved
of all.
You, MADAME, shall be a Pa∣tronesse
to your Patron, and a Mother
to your holy Father S. Francis Xauier,
attired in this English Habit, vvhich I
haue made for him. If I haue lessened
him vvith my Translation, You may
comfort your selfe vvith the incompa∣rable
vvorth of so renovvned a Patron.
If I make him lesse, yet the King of Tra∣uancoris,
together vvith his subiects, stiled
him GREAT FATHER, and by his
Royall Edict cōmanded, that all should
obey the GREAT FATHER as him∣selfe.
The King of Amangucium in Iapo∣ny,
ioyfully receiued Presents from him,
and heaped Royall fauours vpon his

son. The King of Bungo sent for him by
letters, honourably entertayned, prote∣cted,
reuerenced, and admired him.
Iohn the third King of Portugall, vvho
first moued and caused his going into In∣dia,
gaue into his hands the Popes letters
Patents, vvhereby he vvas made Aposto∣licall
Legat in the East, seconded him
vvith his Royall Fauour, commaunded
his Acts to be sought out, iuridically e∣xamined,
and proued. When they came
to his hands, he sent them to ROME,
and by his Embassadours, laboured to
haue him a Canonized Saint; vvhich thē
being hindred by the Kings death, hath
byn of late performed by Pope Gregory
the XV. so as novv all Catholique Prin∣ces,
and Kings bend their Royall knees,
and are humbly prostrate to S. Francis
Xauier, yea the Popes triple Crovvne
lyeth dovvne at his glorious feete.
Besides, that ƲƲhich I dedicate to your

Honour, is not so much a Saints Lyfe,
as a complete History, artificially cōpi∣led
vvith much pleasing variety, and e∣legancy;
vvherein diuers, and sundry
courses are traced forth, for all to fol∣lovv.
Bishops & Priests, Ecclesiasticall &
Laymen, Kings and subiects, Souldiers
by Sea and Land, Rich and Poore, all
shall find that vvhich belōgs vnto them.
For this holy Saint, though he vvere so
far gone in contemplation, that force of
Celestiall ioyes made him often cry out,
It is inough, O Lord, It is inough: yet vvas
he for all that, neuer out of Action, but
dealing vvith al sorts of people vvrought
himselfe out, euen All to all.
Moreouer, so various is this History,
as it cannot be but delightfull and plea∣sant,
by reason of so many Countryes
briefly & liuely described; so many dif∣ferent
dispositions and strange manners;
so many Rites and Ceremonyes of false

Religions, togeather vvith sundry super∣stitions
of Idolatrous Priests; The igno∣rant
Brachmans in India; The superstiti∣ous
Cacizes in Socotora; The arrogant
Bongi in Iapony, must needs yield a plea∣sing,
and attractiue delight to all atten∣tiue
Readers.
Finally (vvhich is most to be estee∣med)
there vvilbe foūd shining through∣out
this vvhole History, all kind of hea∣uenly
vvonders & miracles; not as Ton∣gues
only from Heauē, ānouncing Gods
Glory, Goodnesse, Prouidence, and Mu∣nificence;
but as certaine diuine Markes
also, of S. Francis Xauiers most eminent
Sanctity.
Wherefore, as I consider his glorious
VVorth, vpō my knees I pray vnto him
that he vvould vouchsafe to be a singular
and speciall Patron to your Honour; but
as he he goes vested in this English attire
vvhich I haue made him, I humbly re∣quest,

your Honour vvould be pleased to
be a Patronesse vnto him. Wherein I rest
confident, and

