



MADAME,
IF deepe ingage∣ments may war∣rant a Dedica∣tion, I have enough to pa∣tronize this my bold at∣tempt, in craving your No∣ble
 Patronage in this little Treatise. All that I seeke herein, is, to be reputed ob∣sequiously thankfull to your Honour, for a great part of my little livelyhood. All that I am able to returne, for so many reall courtesies, is this poore Paper-gift. Had I a better present, your La∣dyship should be sure of it: ut non malè ohm ille Grculus Augusto.. But blind Nature saw, and could say, that Bountie con∣sists not in the worth of the gift, but in the will of the GiverArist. E∣thic. lib. 4. ubi au libe∣ralitatem metiendam este, .. And the God of Nature hath seal'd to this truth in many sacred instan∣ces. Noah's sacrifice could not be great, yet was greatly accepted. The Poore-mans goates-haire takes as well at the doore of the Tabernacle,
 as the Rich mans purple: The womens Bracelets and Looking-glasses, as their husbands Gems and Iewels. Hee that had not an Oxe, might offer a Lambe: If a Lambe be not in the power of his hand, a paire of Tur∣tles shall excuse him. If hee have not that, a handfull or two of Flowre, with a corne or two of Salt, shall sufficeLevit. 5.6, 11, 12, & 14.10, 21, 30, 31.. So low doth the Most High stoope to our meanenesse. The Widdowes two mites went as far, as some other mens two millions. And those poorest of Christs people that were willing indeed, but never (alas) able to deale almes in all their life, shall yet heare at their death, Come yee Blessed: for I was an hun∣gry,
 and yee fed mee. The high heaven may be seen tho∣row a low lattise: and so may a large heart in a little gift. Howbeit, who can call a thankefull acknowledgement (if heart-sprung) little, when all the Fee that our Saviour called for, for his cures was, Go, and tell what God hath done for thee? This, though I, and other your Honours Beneficiaries should faile to do, yet God is not unrighte∣ous to forget your worke, and labour of love which you have shewed toward his Name, in the support of his publike service; and in that yee have ministred to the necessities of his Saints, and doe also ministerHeb. 6 10. Goe on, good Madam, to sow yet
 more of these good workes, both of Piety and of Cha∣rity, into Gods blessed bo∣some: the fruit and comfort whereof, you shall be sure to reape in your greatest need. For hee that soweth bounti∣fully, shall reape bountifully, saith that great Apostle. Now, God All-sufficient, make all grace to abound to∣ward you: that you alwaies, having all sufficiencie in all things, may abound more and more daily to every good worke2 Cor. 9.6, 8.. This, after S. Paul, is the constant, and instant Prayer of

