



YE haue heare published in print, in Questions & Answeres, (beloued in the Lord) the Summe of that exposition of the Lords pray∣er, which for your edifying, and the instruction of your families, I made more at large in forme of Catechising, for the Euening pray∣er exercise vppon the Sabboth dayes, in suche sorte as you then hearde, and as God vouchsafed to inhable mee. It may be obiected, that many godly writers haue hād∣led
 this argument verye learned∣lye, and published the same to the benefite of the Church in their catechismes, whose forme, in respecte of the matter, it might well haue beseemed mee to haue vsed. All this, with reuerence both of the Objectors and Wry∣ters, I acknowledge to bee moste true. And, if I had contented mee selfe therewith, it woulde haue made more with myne ease. Not to offende these Wry∣ters, but to satisfie these Obje∣ctors, the reason, which moo∣ued mee in this sort to collect both the Questions and Aun∣sweres, foorth of learned Au∣thors, which more at large haue interpreted this Prayer, is this. In most Catechismes, the Que∣stion is briefe, and the Aunswere is large: So that the Childe,
 whose memorye is short, and capacitye weake, doth hardlye at once commit so muche to remembraunce, and heardeli∣er conceiue what hee rehear∣seth. To ease him in the one, and to helpe him in the other, I haue indeuoured mee selfe to vse breuitye in both. And yet, I must confesse, that a dutifull care to deliuer effectuallye and playne∣lye the full summe and comfor∣table sense of euerye woorde of this most diuine Prayer, hath for∣ced mee some-tymes in the Aun∣swere to lay downe more wordes, then willinglye I woulde. But how so euer I haue behaued mee selfe in Methode, since I haue vsed truethe and sinceritye in matter, I truste you will ac∣cept my good will, and ap∣prooue my laboure. I haue
 thought good to publishe this my trauel, to satisfy the godly desire of some parentes well disposed, that the copies might be multiplyed to the benefite of the youth. Howe necessarie it is, that we be conti∣nually exercised in prayer, the ma∣nyfould perrilles both of bodye and of soule, wherwith wee be in∣uironed, sufficientlye sheweth. How comfortable it is so to bee occupied,Psalme 81.8 & 86.5.6.7. GOD allowing vs to flee vnto him by prayer, in the day of our trouble,Psalm 50.15. and promisinge vs of his mercie to heare vs, and to deliuer vs forth of all our dis∣tresse, It may easilie by the faithful bee conceiued, Howe fruitlesse a thinge it is, to demaund of GOD in our praier, that we ought not, or in suche sorte as wee should not, CHRIST shewethMath. 6.7 when as hee condemneth suche prayers by the
 name of BABLING. Therefore, that our praiers maye be fruitefull and comfortable, CHRIST hath giuen vs this forme of praier, with∣in the bounds whereof, the praiers of the faithfull must be conceiued. Now, for so much as your duty is, (ye Christian parentes)Ephes. 6.4 to bring vp your children in the instruction and information of the Lorde,1 Tim 2 1.2 whereof praier is no meane part1. Thes. 5.17 wherin we shold be exercised con∣tinually: exercise therfore, I besech you in the LORDE, your families, with such diligence, in these Ques∣tions and Answers, that they maye therby be taught reuerently to talk with the LORDE in their praiers. Which fruit of my simple labors, if it may please God, that I may see, it wil be no small incoragement vnto me, to proceed in my ministery, as I haue begon. God blesse you, in∣large
 his gyftes among you, and e∣stablish you in his truth. Amen.
 SALOP the first of May. 1585.
