



THINCKE not to much, good sister, what you haue had, but considre what you haue, remembre not what you haue ben some tymes in the worldes eies, but what you be now in goddes eyes. Lamente not that you lost, but ioie in that you haue founde. Whan you were high, you were surely low, now that you ar low, you ar surely high. Let this sincke in to your minde, that if wordlye thinges had not ben ta∣ken from you, you shuld shortely haue bē taken from them, and perchaunce if they had not ben so drouned, they wold haue drouned you, before death had remoued you from them. If no aduersite had ass∣ailed you, you had ben a ded sea, and the patiēce, & other singular vertues, which now shine in you, had ben quenched, e∣ther in your selfe vtterly, or touchynge
 the knowlege of anie other, vnfruteful∣ly. And therefore Seneca truly saide, that, that person is verye miserable, who neuer felt anie miserie. The world ment to impouerishe you, but God hath enry∣ched you. The world wold depresse you, but God hath aduaūced you. The world thought to ouerwhelme you with heaui¦nes, but God hath filled you with tru ioi¦es. The world labored to staine you with infamie, but God hath made your name both cleare, and pure, and also to sende forth a pleasant odor amonge his saītes. You haue not thā lost somuch, as you haue founde. Only beware for the tyme to cūme, for more remaineth to be laied vpon you for a farther trial. Yea, I know that Circe the sorceresse hath al readie, & wil more here after allure you with hir enchaunted cuppe. But let not the swetenes of the cuppes lippes, and the pleasantnes of the poison begile you. Rather chose to drinke the lordes cup∣pe, which though it haue a bitter tast in the first draught, yet in the ende purging corrupte, and noisome humors, it ma∣keth a pure, and cleane bodie. You know that as goddes goodnes hath made you
 my natural sister, so his wrath hath gi∣uen to vs both, and to the rest of our bre¦thern, and sistern an vnnatural stepmo∣ther. How vnmercifully, and cruelly she hath delt with vs, and how sharpely she hath whipt vs, you can remembre, and if she beginne now to smile vpon you, she meaneth the more mischeife. Take hede good sister, a stepmother, wil euer be a stepmother. Giue yourselfe ernest∣ly to readinge of the holie scriptures.
Holde fast the doctryne that our holye brother, and eldest saue one, religiously mainteined, whom our stepdame labo∣reth to deface, I trust in vaine. Flie aswel al idolatrical, as al Anabaptistical straūge opinions. To which ende I haue dedica∣ted this my litle trauaile vnto you, as to my derest sister, & whom I most desire to be preserued pure, and spotles in euerye parte. I am not ignorāt that the better you shalbe, & sincerer in treu religiō, the more you shal anger our stepdames testie harte, and the les fauor you shal fin¦de in your iust requestes. But I haue mo∣re regarde to the welth of your soule, thā to the welth of your bodye. And there∣fore I haue sent you this preseruatiue
 which our stepdame, if she were, as she can pretende, shuld take in good parte. But so that she maye liue in hir babiloni¦cal whoredome, and droncken lustes, and swille in the wine of Aegyptes errors, I perceaue she passeth not much, how other thinges goe, Lift you vp your mindes ey¦es, and beholde the glorious face of the lorde Iesus, while our stepmothers eyes ar daseld with the glisteringe vaine glo∣rie of the world, & toteth al daye in the deceaueable painted face of a monstru∣ous man, triple in head, and double in herte. O that she might be made better, but see that you in the meane while be nor made worsse by hyr. Let the frute of my worste parte, that is with you, see the frute of my better parte. Commende me to him, whom lawes permitte you to love, to whō god graū∣te in heauen, that he se¦keth in erth. The lorde Iesus guide you euer with his holie spirite, my entierly biloued.

