



I Haue bene reque∣sted (right honou∣rable) by one, whose motion, in honest causes, is vnto me as a commandement, to bestowe vpon him that sim∣ple Sermon, which by Gods as∣sistaunce, I made before your Lordsip in S. Maryes Church  ewesbury, the 26. of May 584. Although my maner haue bene hetherto, for the most part
 rather to delyuer vnto the Church, through my laborious translations, the learning of o∣ther, then, in this learned age, to offer to publique viewe, myne own poore trauels: yet because the aucthority of the requester, then one of my hearers, was so great, and his wisedom so graue that it stoode with dutifull mo∣destie, rather to yeeld than to deny, I foorthwith called my selfe to remembraunce, what I had vttered (as God vouchsafed to inhable me) and committed the same to writing, as leisure did serue me. My trauayle again by me perused, seemed in mine eies so seelie, that casting it a∣side as an vntimely bearthe, hi∣therto I haue detracted the performaunce of my promise▪ But nowe considering that a
 promise aduisedly made, may not rashly be broken, I find my∣selfe in duety forced, to do that, which in Christianitie, I was then required. And, acknow∣ledging it my duetie, to vse my tongue and my penne, rather to the benefit of my country, then the winning of credite, I haue boldly resolued, so to keep pro∣mise, that the good of my ser∣mon, by the benefite of the print, may become common to al the godly. Although the mat∣ter therein contained be warrā∣ted by Gods word, and the do∣ctrine therin taught be necessa∣rie for the tyme, yet, because the maner of the deliuerie there-of is homely and base, it is altoge∣ther vnworthy in your L. name to be published, who worthely are become a patron of the
 workes of the best learned. Ne∣uerthelesse, since your Lordship in this my labour hath the best interest, because except you had vouchsafed that time to haue heard me, I had not that daye spoken (being no ordinary day of my weekly exercise) and, that it pleased you of your singular humanitie, to prooue my duti∣full indeuour, I make bolde in humblenesse, to offer that nowe to your eyes, which in dutiful∣nesse I sounded then in your eares. If I were able to deliuer vnto you a more worthy mo∣nument of my duetifull thank∣fulnesse, for the manifold bene∣fites by me vndeserued, which vpon me you haue largely be∣stowed, verely I would be infe∣riour to none of your debters in will, which haue them all my
 superiours in habilitie. And therefore I hope your H. wil ac∣cept that which I can, seeing I cannot that which I would. Our memory cannot commit to ob∣liuion, how curteously you ac∣cepted that meane, and yet wel meant intertainmenr, which the towne of Shrewsburie in dutie gaue vnto you L. And the po∣steritie, no doubt, shall heare of your thankefull accepting of many wel-comes, your cheerful hearing of many orations, your circumspect view of the situati∣on and buildings of the towne, your graue conference with the Magistrates in the gouernment there of: your comfortable go∣ing into the free Grammer schoole, to experience the to∣wardlinesse of the youth there, your Christian presence in the
 Church at the Sermon, your painefull trauell in arbitrating controuersies, your large giftes vnto maister Bayliffes officers, your liberall rewardes vnto the scholemaisters, your charitable almes vnto the poore, all the whiche vertues did then shine in you, as in a moste cleare mir∣rour of true nobilitie. Neither did you forget in that your pro∣gresse, that you, with the rest of Gods children in earth, are strangers and passengers in this world,Gen 47.9. as our fathers were,Heb. 13.14. which haue not here a continuing citie, but seeke one to come. Therefore as a prouident peregrine, you carefully tooke your spirituall repast, in euery of your mansi∣ons, in feeding vpon the worde of God preached before you, for the better refreshing of the
 soule. In this your christian per∣taking of the heauenly foode, it pleased GOD of his gracious prouidence, aboue myne expe∣ctation, to vouchsafe, that I did twise serue at his spiritual table, once in the countie of Stafford, where I was borne, and once in Shrewsburie, where I haue my charge, The dishes, whiche I offered to the gestes, were not dainty (I do cōfesse) yet because they were wholesome and sauo∣rie, being well seasoned with the salte of Gods word, I make bold vnder your honourable prote∣ction, to offer the one of them to the taste of the godly, that by this meanes the feast may be still continued. I doubt not, but they will take it in good part, which haue learned, that God,1. King. 19.6. which fed ELIAS with bread
 and water,Ioh. 6.11. and refreshed hys people with barly loues and small fishes, will, that wee craue at hys handes not dayntie,Mat. 6.13 Luc. 11.3. but dayly bread, contenting our selues with homely, yet wholesome foode. From others, (if there be any, as I doubt there be manie) whose taste is so curious, that they will not, or stomacke so lo∣thing, that they cannot find any sweetnesse in the word of God,Deut. 8.3. Mat. 4.4. Luc. 4.4. whiche is the foode of the soule, I expect no suche thing, but referring them to the Lord, I humbly desire him of his mer∣cy, (if it be his will) so to purifie their heartes, by the operation of his spirite,Psal. 34.9 that they may taste and see, how good the Lordis.Luc. 14.15. So shall wee be blessed, eating our bread in the kingdome of God. God long preserue your honour, and
 so guide you with his holy spi∣rite, that you may more and more set foorth his glory, bene∣fite hys Churche: and pro∣fit your Country. Salop the 24. of October. 1585.

