



RIght Honorable Lord, Time is the measure of all things, and therefore to shewe the misertes thereof is the fittest noueltie for our daies. To consider the ancient or first time of the world, which God created and approoued to be good, Gen. 1. 4, 5. where of one speaketh thus,
Flumina iam lactis, iam flumina nectaris ibant,
Flaua{que} de viridi stillabant illice mella;
And this was called the golden age of the world, wherein were riuers of milke and nectar, and the rocks dropped downe honie; where in was no destroying sword, or pining sicknesse, or burning hatred, or wearisome labour to molest or disquiet the life of man: would make vs either to woonder like fooles, or to weepe like wise men. But time is changed, it was golden, it was good; it is wooden, it is euill: short was that time; for it continued not many (or as some thinke) not any daies, for sinne followed the creation; therefore time may well clad her selfe in mourning weede, and say with Iacob, Few and euill are her daies. Zimri was a king, yet it lasted but seuen daies, and then he burned him∣selfe aliue; so time was glorious but seuen daies, and then he burned him∣selfe aliue; so time was glorious but seuen daies, and then it fell into flames of woe, that euery childe of time may weepe with Ierusalem, Lament. 4. 16. and say, The crowne of our head is fallen, woe now vnto vs that we haue sinned. If I may be so bold with your Lordship to stand a little on the miseries of the world, and to picke out here and there a consideration or an ex∣ample

from ancient historie, whereunto your Lordship as vnto all other good learning haue deuoted your selfe; I knowe that you will easily say with that princely-wisest-Salomon, that all is but vanitie and vexation of spirite, and much commend the sor∣rowes and teares of Heraclitus, who neuer laughed; and of Serapion, who euer weeped; the one for the world, the other for Cassianus. his sinnes. If now your Honour aske me of the state of the world, or the whole life of man liuing in the world, what opinion I euer hold concerning the same, I must answer you, that it is the house of mourning, and not one commeth thither, but in all the partes of his life and profession he may truly say,
Quisquis non causas mille doloris habet;
that he was borne in sorrow, and liueth in sorrow, and dieth in greefe, and is buried in lamentation, though afterward he liue in glorie; for ante mortem nemo beatus. The world consi∣steth of two sorts of men, of good men and euill: good men doe euer sorrow, for the worlde is their hell; and euill men shoulde euer sorrow, because God is their enimie: the one for the afflic∣tion which they feele, the other for the iudgement which they feare; yea verily weeping seemeth so naturall in our sinfull state, that ioy constraineth men to weepe. For so we reade of Io∣seph when he saw his brethren, and met with his father; and of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, when the Seuentie interpreters had Ioseph. de an∣tiq. lib. 12. finished the Bible, and deliuered it to him, he wept for ioy abun∣dantly. If we turne our eies to pitie the estate of the distressed, although our selues haue not tasted of aduersitie; yet this pitie if it be true pitie, will enforce vs to greefe. When Xerxes had his Herod. lib. 7. infinite huge armie in the fielde before him, and tooke a view thereof, he could not refraine from weeping to see the miserie of mankinde. When Scipio had set Carthage on fire, and sawe the Sabel. Enn. lib. 9. Enn. 5. flames there of soaring vp to the cloudes, although he was their enemie, yet the teares trickled downe his cheekes to beholde their ruine. When Titus besieged Ierusalem, and sawe euery Ioseph. lib. 7. cap. 24. day the infinite number of dead bodies throwne ouer the wals into the ditches, which famished in the citie, whereby he knewe

their surpassing calamitie, whereof himselfe was the cause; yet in compassion of their estate, he could not behold them but with waterie eies. To goe yet farther in the affections, if men be an∣grie they will easily mourne, as Christ did ouer Ierusalem: and thus you may beholde, how ioy, and loue, and hatred, and pitie, and anger, and desire doe call men to mourning. Mourning and lamentation are so needefull, that God hath made euery creature fit for the same. The heauens haue their cloudes, the earth hath his riuers and fountaines, the beastes haue their roa∣rings and howlings, and the hard marble stones send foorth their fountaine teares. Againe, if we looke into the causes, as we haue looked into the affections, we shall perceiue that the same causes haue caused much mourning, which pretended much reioycing. Some will thinke that men hauing fine wits, and hauing attained great knowledge being good Polititians, the world will neuer frowne on them, & time shal neuer lament them: but you know it is far otherwise; for one saith too truly, that the best clerks haue the worst fortunes. For Socrates died in prison; another by swal∣lowing Stobaeus ser. 96 of a raw fish; Aeschilus was brained with a tile; Sopho∣cles perished with a bunch of grapes; the dogs tore Euripides in peeces; Homer was famished, Aristotle drowned, and Glaucus an excellent Phisitian was put to death by Alexander (and as Plutarch saith) was crucified: would not this make a man to mourne to see such rare wits haue such hard haps, and may not Time well lament her vnwoorthinesse, because she may not nurse such children? Surely the Prophets haue for the most part tasted of this cup, and violence hath brought them to their latter ende. But peraduenture although the world doe frowne vpon schollers, yet it laugheth vpon other, for kings and souldiers liue in the world without all want. But they are much deceiued; Saul was a king, yet he slew himselfe; Caesar was a king, but he was slaine in the Senate; Valens was an Emperour, yet flying to a shep∣herds Fulg. lib. 1. 2. cottage was burned therin; Vigellius lost his eies; Clau∣dius Herminianus was eaten with woormes, as Herod was; Cypr. aduers. Demetr. Seuerus for very griefe did poyson himselfe, as Annibal did: and one said well; if the people knew but the least part of a Princes

cares, they would thinke the cloth of state woorse then a russet coate. And for soldiers or men most excellent in armes, they are destinated to labour while they conquer and get fame, and to mourne being discountenaunced ready for death. Therefore warre, said Augustine, Malis videtur voluptas, bonis neces∣sitas. Aug. de Ciuit. lib. 7. cap. 11. Sab. lib. 4. Ennead. 6. Pompey had three seuerall triumphes into Rome, yet what was his ende? Sylla and Marius what notable things did they, and whom did they not ouercome? yet they became priuate, and came home by weeping crosse. All the liues of Greekes and Romanes in Plutarch will testifie the hard hap of martiall men, and who is he that can abstaine from teares, to heare or read of that noble and Christian Belisarius, who after thirtie yeeres seruice to his Lord and Emperour, had both his eies put out for his reward? Yet rich men if they be priuate, or haue but a little authoritie, may be thought to lead the best liues, and not to be lamented: Surely most of all, for of them it is said most truely,
Quaerere vt absumant, absumpta requirere certant,
At{que} ipsae vitijs sunt alimenta vices.
Crassus a rich Romane for his wealth was beheaded by Sure∣nas. Plutarch. Boeth. lib. 8. Beda doth often shew and lament the riches, riot, expence, security, & ease of the Britons, declaring that all these things did but fat thē vp against the day of slaughter. He was not far amisse that said, that Princes must be vsed as fire; for it is not safe to be neere it, nor yet good to be too farre from it. And I would that all rich men would euer remember that fearefull saying of our Sa∣uiour, How hardly shall a man that hath riches enter into the kingdome of heauen: It is easier for a gable to goe tho∣rough the eie of a needle, &c. The raigne of Salomon was a most peaceable time, and so happie as neuer was in Israell; yet the people had many insufferable burdens, so that without discontents none can liue. Aristides was hated for his iustice, Antonius surnamed Philosophus an Emperour, because he would draw all things to the exact rule of learning, was accused to execute ty∣rannie vnder pretence of Philosophie; and no maruell, for Christ was called a deceiuer though he wrought miracles: thus are good

endeuours crossed. To goe yet farther and to looke into the life of man, the same thing which doth make it commendable, doth make it lamentable: Beautie is a great grace to men or women; yet Absolon, Vasthi, King Assuerus his Queene, Bethsabe, Lucrece, Cleopatra, and many other, as the wife of Constan∣tine whom he burned, haue beene vndone by these things wher∣by God aduanced them. Children are like Oliue-plants, whose fruits make their parents faces cheerefull: yet it is too true Vide, patriproles luctus vs{que} quo creet: foolish children are Eurip. heauines to their parents. Plutarch telleth vs that one Iphis saw at one time buried his two sonnes and a daughter. Iacob was Plut. de amore much troubled with his sonnes, and so was Samuel and Dauid, and many other: so that as their mothers weepe in their birth; so their fathers weepe in their bringing vp. But the sorrow that parents endure by their children is lamentably set foorth in this example. One Bochna a woman hauing two sonnes, leauing the greater in her house, tooke the lesser in her hande to a riuer side Duditius de cometis. neer hir dwelling, and sitting by the water she heard her elder son to crie: she hastened into her house leauing the yoong one behind her, and comming in, she found that her sonne had thrust a knife into himselfe and lay on the earth drawing his last breath: the tender mother seeing the bleeding child, pulled out the knife and the child died, which she must needs behold with a heart readie to breake for sorrow: and hauing layd it foorth, went to fetch in the childe which she had left by the riuer side to comfort herselfe in him; but when she came, she found the waters had carried him away and drowned him: oh, then shee tare herselfe, neuer cea∣sing her violent outcries, til she had made an end of her owne life. These with a thousande other examples and considerations to mitigate the loue of life, and to encrease repentance, I could ea∣silie produce to shewe the ruines of time, as a reason of this my labour: Which in most humble manner I offer vnto your Lord∣ship, as the conscience of your former honourable fauour towards me doth binde me aeternally to studie by all meanes possible to sig∣nifie my thankefulnesse vnto your Honor, the meane of my pre∣ferment; being desirous that all good men into whose handes

these my poore labours shall come, should account themselues be∣holding vnto your Lordship, for that your fauour gaue encou∣ragement and meanes vnto me for the better penning and pub∣lishing heereof. Wherefore, my humble suite is, that your Honor would vouchsafe the patronage hereof, being assured that more learned then my selfe will accept my good will, and good men will helpe me with their praiers to God; vnto whose sweete aeternall fauour I commend your Honor: that you may liue long, to the benefite of your countrey, the aduancement of your Honor, the comfort of learning, and aboue all, to his glorie, who shall glorifie you in the heauens. And thus crauing pardon for my boldnesse, I hum∣blie take my leaue re∣maining

