



RIght Worshipfull, when I was cal∣led by my Lord of London to preach at Pauls Crosse, I resol∣ued with my selfe to answere with Moses,Exod. 5.10. I am not eloquent but slow of speech, slow of tongue; with Ieremie,Ier. 1.6. I can∣not speake for I am a child in vnderstanding; with Iohn Baptist, non sum dignus,Matth. 3.11. I am not worthie; and with Saint Paul,1. Cor. 15.9. I am the least of the Apostles, not worthy to bee called an Apostle; neuerthelesse being commanded I did obey, obeying spake, speaking, feared rather a reprouing then an approuing of that I spake; howbeit (beyond all desert and de∣sire)
 it pleased some of friendship and affe∣ction to commend, others of fauour and good conceit euen then conceiued, instantly to vrge that my poore paines might be printed, which I vtterly refused as vnworthy to see the light; since I vnderstand by some, that some haue giuen out, that if I will not giue a true and perfect copie, they will put it out in parts, peeces, and imperfect as they tooke it: of two euils therefore I haue chosen the lesse, chusing rather to vndergo the hard censures of such, as are more readie to censure others then doe any good themselues, then to suffer this sim∣ple Sermon without my knowledge and con∣sent to be thrust forth in imperfect notes. I affect not popular praise, nam quis ego sum, aut quae est in me facultas? Neither doe I respect the vncharitable censures of Pa∣pists,usten. Atheists, Schismatickes; for, qui vo∣lens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi meae: He which with his will im∣paires my name, against his will augments my reward. But my desire is onely that my poore talent may bee imployed to Gods glory; let God be glorified by me, and let me still bee vilified for Gods sake. Not vnto mee O Lord, not vnto mee, but to thy holy
 name giue the glory.
That I am bold to shroud these first fruits of my simple labours vnder your Right Wor∣shipfull patronage (besides priuate causes) your Zeale of Gods glory, delight in Gods sa∣cred word, great loue to learning and religi∣on, good fauours towards Gods Ministers haue deseruedly inuited mee; macte virtute esto: goe forward I beseech you in godlines, encrease in grace, grow from strength to strength, from vertue to vertue, be constant in the faith, stoutly defend the truth, earnest∣ly contend for the truth, let not the cunning Papist seduce you, nor the malecontent Schis∣maticke insinuate himselfe into you, nor the godlesse Atheist ring and sing in your eares diuellish charmes; but honour him sincerely which will honour you, loue him feruent∣ly which loueth you, delight in him chief∣ly which delighteth in you, cleaue to him inseparably which will neuer forsake you: sed quid verbis opus, vbi nihil opus? I know you doe it,Phil. 1.3.4.5 and I thanke my God hauing you in perfect memorie alwaies in all my prayers, praying with gladnesse because of the fellow∣ship which you haue in the Gospell, from the first day I knew you till now; yet as Paul, Syl∣uanus,
 and Timotheus gaue hearty thanks to God for the Thessalonians, that they had receiued the Gospell, in such sort that they were examples not onely to them of Macedo∣nia and Achaia,1. Thes. 1.2.7. but also to the Christians in all quarters; so doe they earnestly desire them to continue according to their good begin∣nings;cap. 4.1. we beseech you brethren (say they) and exhort you in the Lord Iesus that ye encrease more and more, as ye haue receiued of vs, how ye ought to walk & please God; as if they shuld haue said, we do not command you as Lords o∣uer you (as now the Pope doth) sic volo sic iu∣iubeo, stat pro ratione volūtas; & as Cō∣stantius that Arian Emperour, quod ego volopro canone sit; but we beseech, entreat and exhort you by the Lord Iesus, that if you respect and reuerence Christ, if you feare him as a Lord, and loue him as Iesus, suffer the words of exhortation; for wee speake from him and for him: In like maner I beseech you (Right worshipfull) giue me leaue, currenti addere calcar;Seneca. habet hoc proprium ge∣nerosus animus vt excitetur ad honesta; It is proper to a noble minde to bee excited to honest actions; and seeing I know that you know in religione vera virtus, in virtute
 vera nobilitas; and that nulla vera religio sine sapientia,Lactantius. nec vlla vera sapientia fine religione. Pardon my Zealous affection and tender care of your euerlasting good, enforce∣ing mee to beseech you to goe forward in good things, and encrease more and more in godlinesse, for declining in religion brings a staine of honour, and a decay euen of tempo∣rall portion: I feare it not in you; for as it is no small comfort to mee often to call to mind the tractablenesse, willingnesse, readinesse, I found in you to drink in thirstingly the prin∣ciples of religion, when I taught you also the rudiments of Grammar; so is it, and euer shall be my great comfort, not onely to heare of it, but often to be an eye and eare witnesse of your zeale for the truth of God, I meane your resolute constancy, and constant resolu∣tion to defend the truth against malicious Papists, malecontent Schismaticks, and mis∣creant Atheists: continue in the same, fight the good fight, stir vp that gift of God which is in you, be faithfull vnto the end, and in the end you shall receiue the end of your faith e∣uen the saluation of your soule: In the meane time I humbly beseech you to pardon my im∣portunate boldnesse, and accept of this poore
 widdowes mite, as an vndoubted testimonie of my vnfained affection towards you in the Lord.
Now the Lord of Lords enlarge his mercies more and more towards you, perpetuate to you an honourable name and memory a∣mongst his faithfull seruants in this present life, and crowne you with an endlesse crowne of glory in the life to come.

