



Sir,
WHat is not mine owne, I
cannot dedicate, and ther∣fore
can neither prefix your
name nor mine before this
Booke. I appeale to you here, not as an
indulgent Patron, but a learned Iudge:
Of such you have the two requisites, A∣bility

and Commodity. The first is
within you, an acute and solid Vnder∣standing;
the latter, without you, a com∣pleat
Library, which Chrysologus
stiles the onely Paradise of this world.
You sit every day most happily incircled
with the most famous Writers of all kinds.
Thus environ'd, the poorest Schollar
thinkes himselfe majestically enthron'd,
and securely guarded. There is not a
quotation in this Treatise, which you
cannot readily bring to the Test, and
therefore I choose you as a most fit Trier
of the Authors Integrity, in whose praise
when I have spoken much, it wil appeare
in a discerning eye too little. His Bre∣vity
is such, that sometime I resem∣ble
him to one who makes an exact
surveigh of an Immense Kingdome in
a moment; sometimes to the Sunne

himselfe, who compasseth the world in
a naturall day. For the same proporti∣on
holds this short Discourse with vast
Antiquitie. I dare maintaine that in
farre greater Ʋolumes of the same sub∣ject,
(as Medulla patrum, Favus
patrum, Flores patrum) you shall not
finde so accurate a judgement of the
Fathers, neither delivered with so en∣tire
a faith, and so cleane a sifting of
the Meale from the branne, of their per∣fections
from their errors.
More Sentences, it may be, they con∣taine,
and the more the worse; For those
wretched Summularies, or Florists are
the very Bane of Learning, who in
stead of culling out the choycest flowres,
doe, indeed, nothing but weed Authours:
They leave the pure wine behinde, and
give their thirstie Readers the unsavou∣ry

Lees to drinke.
Beleeve mee, the Fountaines them∣selves
are farre sweeter. Possevin
hath inserted Campians ten Rea∣sons
in his Biblfotheca Selecta, and
alleageth the cause to be his feare, lest the
Ʋolume being so small, Hereticks might
in time collect, and sacrifice them all to
Vulcan. I thinke this little worke is of
as great value, and merits no lesse care,
especially since it is already become so
rare, that it is hardly by prayer, or mo∣ney
to be purchased Of its dignity this
is no obscure Argument, that the learned
sonne of our Tossanus thought it
worthy the Dedication to Iacobus Ar∣minius,
who rose with as great a
lustre as any light of the Moderne
Church, though it was his evill Destiny
to set in a Cloud. For the Translation

I say little, both because it is mine owne,
as also that books of this nature admit no
flourishes, nor Elegancy of phrase. I am
confident I have not altered the sense,
and that is as much as the most severe
Criticke can require at my hands. The
love to Knowledge, and her Professors,
is yours by Inheritance, who derive it
from your truly great Father, on whose
Head my Divining Soule fore-sees im∣partiall
Posterity setting that Crowne
which as yet the Modesty of his friends,
and the Malice of his enemies deny
him. I presume therefore that you
will adde the perusall of this Treatise
to your other favours, which are so
many, that should I endevour to summe
them up, I should at once prove grate∣full
to you, and tedious to the Reader.
I beseech you therefore to accept of

the bare acknowledgement, and of
the religious protestation that I am,
Noble Sir,

