


THE graue and wise Philosopher, Hipocrates, well waying the con∣ditions and qualities of humaine life, briefely in few wordes com∣prehended the whole that is contained in the same, when he said: Life is short, knowledge long, time swift, occasion headlong, and experience dangerous. This is (right honourable and reuerend Praelate) a Sentence so pithy, prosound, and delicate, that it were not possible for any man in howe long wryting so euer, better or more materially to expresse the misery of those that are passed out of this world, of vs that as yet liue in it, and of as many as shall heereafter be while it endureth: And I know not who is so deuoyd of sence, but that sometimes thinketh with himselfe how wretched and vnstable is our estate, how swiftly and irreuocably time flieth away, and howe small a space our life endureth, which at such time as wee thinke that we haue reaped some knowledge and vnderstanding of some things in the world, though God wot it be but little in respect of the much that it is to be knowne; then presently commeth Death and cutteth vs off, who for late that he stayeth, yet cōmeth he in the childhood of our vnder∣standing. For if we marke it well, we shall finde, that how wise and inge∣nious so euer we account our selues, yet that in the very Winter and last of our life, we begin to learne and see new Accidents, at which we wonder as things that were neuer heard of before, and though we imagine that there is nothing in the whole world of which we are ignorant: yet euery day al∣most presenteth to our eyes some new matter or other vnknowne and vn∣vnderstood, thereby to abate the vaine conceaued pride of our owne vni∣uersall knowledge; and if we should liue a 1000. yeeres more, we should in like sort daily find new things to astonish vs. Those that are wisest ther∣fore, are neuer puffed vp with such an opinion of their owne wisedome: but conforming themselues with the truth, doe say as Socrates sayde? One thing onely doe I know, which is, that I know nothing. This proceedeth of the shortnes of our life, the greatnes of the world, the secrets of Nature, the weakenes of our vnderstanding, and the error with which we abuse our selues in thinking that all things to be knowne, are comprehended in that little which we know. Diuers therefore of cleare iudgments, seeing the end of their dayes vnineuitably approach, sustaine no small griefe to see that they scarcely begin to know the worlde, and to vnderstand some particularities thereof, when forcibly they are constrained to leaue the same, and so to dye with the milke of wisedome in their mouthes. The excellent Philosopher Gorgias Leontinus, hauing liued a hundred and seauenty yeeres, when the houre of his death drew neere, seemed to be very heauy and sorrowfull; and when his friends and Schollers endeuoured to giue him consolation he aunswered: My sadnes is not because I dye, but because hauing studied all my life, it faileth me now when I begin to know and vnderstand somwhat. So mighty is Nature and diuers in her workes, and the world so great, that

there are euery day new nouelties brought vnto our notice of which though I know your L. being so wise and well experimented, will make no won∣der; yet you will receaue delight to finde some of them heere briefely col∣lected together, with other singularities full of pleasure & recreation, which collection I haue taken the hardines to dedicate vnto your Lor. calling it the Garden of curious Flowers, to the end, that vnder the fauour and pro∣tection of your Lor. it may appeare abroade, without fearing the censure of such, as are accustomed to murmure at other mens labours, who nowe perchaunce will be silent, in that it is protected by your L. the quallity and merite of whose person, with the most honourable antiquity of his Noble stocke and lynage, is so notorious to all men, that the basenes of my bar∣raine stile should rather preiudice the same then otherwise: leauing there∣fore to speake thereof, I beseech th' Almighty to defend & keepe the most Honourable and reuent person of your L. in all faelicity, with encrease of Honour, as we your L well-wishers and Seruants doe desire.

