


Great LORD and LADY,
IT were vaine to excuse
this enterprize, your
goodnesse will not re∣fuse
it, it were folly to
commend it, your wis∣domes
might iustly ex∣plode
it. I will not say, I contriued and
compiled it for your sakes, so shoulde I

seeme to begge your thanks, and depriue
my selfe of a vniuersall benefite; for wee
that labour in the Church, must not bee
personall. Yet I will say, that I would not
divulge it to the world, but vnder the ho∣nor
of your names: And if it could adde
either Goodnesse or greatnesse to your Ho∣nours,
(as I hope Almighty God in time
will both) I would euery line had beene a
leafe, and euery page a volume, till both
your soules and selues could say with Sa∣lomon,Eccle. 2, 25
who could eate or hast to these things
more then we?
You are nowe become other then you
were, and the graces of your Noble Na∣tures
and education, begin to appeare to
the view of all that will beholde you: for
your great places haue mounted you on
the highest seates, whereby you cannot
bee secret though you woulde; for you
may not discend that Theater of Honor,
till you dye, Principibus regnare est viuere,
& non regnare est mori, Princes & Rulers,
their life is to be eminent, and when they
cease to be eminent, they dye, and cease
to liue. VVherefore you see (without
my Narration) the good and euil in great
personages will disclose it selfe, so as all the
enemies shall not staine their Vertues,

which will breake forth like the Sunne in
his heighth and heate; nor all the flatte∣rers,
with their seuerall false colours, and
false praises, so enammell and gilte ouer
their vices,Conscientiā malā laudātis preconiū non sandt, nec bonam vulne rat conuitiū Aug. contra petil. but they will discouer them∣selues,
and if they would not, yet an euill
conscience is not cured with false praises,
nor a good one wounded by vniust re∣proaches.
Your Hon: are greatly blessed by
Almighty God, & I am assured you will,
as you ought, euer acknowledge his
goodnesse and greatnesse, the Author of
yours: For you haue not forsaken your
Fathers houses, with Abraham, Iacob, and
other, but you are both heires of your
Fathers houses, and in their houses, to
your mutuall glory, your coniunction
hath increased their honour for you ac∣quired.
And that which hapneth to fewe,
is fallen vpon you, euen in your first and
yonger yeares, to be rich, and good, God
graunt it to continue, and (without ble∣mish,
to the Noble Stemmes from which
you are descended) I will not cease to
pray, that you may bee glad Parentes of
many children like your selues, and you,
and your Posterity, be greater and better
then they, if it bee Gods good will and
pleasure.

The first thing wherein your Hon:
must now shew your selues to the worlde,Your Lord∣shipp shall finde them anciently di∣uided into Regra, satra∣picia ciuilis & priuata, of which the second, which is the Lordly House, fit∣teth your Honour.
is your Houshold gouernment. Houshold
Gouernment, I say, the Parent & first be∣ginner
of Common-wealthes, the Semi∣nary
of Kingdoms, & Counsels; the dis∣cerner
of naturall wisedome, the Archi∣tect
of honour, and Disciplinarie schoole
of a wise, vertuous, and happy life: from
which Almighty God setcheth his By∣shops.
The Romaines, and best common-wealth-men,
fetched their Consuls & Tri∣bunes,
and many times Kings haue beene
chosen out of this ranke. The wise Salo∣mon
is an Authour of this gouernment,
as you may reade in the succeeding dis∣course.
Antoninus was made an Empe∣ror,
out of this sight, proofe, and hope,
who is commended for taking away all
wages from the ydle, and leauing nothing
to his Daughter,Iul. Capito∣linus. but his priuat Patrimo∣ny.
Hermion, the fift King of Germanie,
who liued after the floud,Auenti. lib. 1. annal. Bo∣cor. foure hundred
and eleuen yeares, much about Abrahams
time, is likewise remembred for his oeco∣nomy.
VVhē he went abroad to fight, he
gaue diligent order for his Husbandry at
home. I could speake of Eberhard a Duke
of VVittenberge, for this cause honoured

like a God. Of Galeacius, of Columella,
and of Cato the wise, who wrote heereof,
and is commended for this saying,Plutarch. Non
deterior domus rector quam ciuitatis. A
Housholder is not inferiour to the Go∣uernour
of a Citty, and he that is not wise
in Domesticall matters, shall neuer bee
trusted in the Common-wealth.
For these causes, when I came vnto
Hartfield, after seauenteen years absence,
(the first Pulpit that euer I ascended, and
the first place of my Ministerial function)
I chose to speake heereof, how, and with
what successe your Hon: haue hearde,
and I am not now bound to make relati∣on
thereof, or trouble my selfe, against
rash, ydle, false, and at the best, ignorant
censures; yet as euill Lawes gaue occasi∣on
to good manners, sinnes to Sermons,
so hath contradiction to many good
Bookes, and therefore I resolued first for
your Honours satisfaction, and in you for
a more vniuersall commodity to all my
Countrey-men, to giue my Sermons a
publicke birth, through my further tra∣uell,
praying your Hon: to be the wit∣nesses
of their Christendome, that they
containe nothing but Christian doctrine,
and let them be called, the Housholder.

Conueniunt rebus nomina saepe suis,
I trust that either their Ancestor (I mean
Salomons Text) who was a Preacher, from
which I haue lineally deriued them. Or
at the least, some Aungell of God, may
giue me (with blessed Zachary) a suffici∣ent
warrant, to take Tables and write,
Their name is the Housholder,Luke 1, 63 & so I hope
they shall grow in fauour with God, and
all good men.
To conclude therefore, right Noble
and happy Earle and Countesse, you haue
already begun as much as I haue obser∣ued,
your Family, and Domesticall af∣faires
are handled, not as though their
Gouernors were but twenty, yea rather,
sixtie yeare olde. You haue done as well
for the time (I thinke by inspiration) as
all the Diuines could haue aduised you,
Purging out the old leauen from the fami∣ly
to you descended. Yet giue mee leaue
to say one thing, for the enemy of man∣kind
is cunning. VVhen Humericus pur∣ged
his Court from the Manichees (a pe∣stilent
kind of Haeretickes, which made
two Gods) in crept the Arrians, which
denied Christ to bee God: and thereof,
there was a vision: First, a holy man saw
a Church full of men, and presently after

they were driuen foorth, bee saw it full of
Swine.Victor. de persecv. vād. lib, 2. I compare not your Hon: to
Humericus (a wretched & Haeretical Van∣dall)
nor the iustly expelled Domesticals
to such mē, but only the prophane beasts
which wil be any thing, or of any religiō,
for your Hon: fauour, and entertain∣ment.
These I compare to beasts & swine,
liuing in eating & drinking,Swearers & drunkardes are no more tollerable in a family thē Arrians in a Church. and pleasure,
whom I pray God to weede out, if any
such be, or to keepe out of your Family,
them that by any preferment of friend or
so may be commended vnto you. I could
say more, but I will not trouble your pa∣tience
with these plain discourses. I hope
that Iesus who hath formed your Hon:
before you were, and now reformed you
since you were, wil make you not Cypres∣ses
only, but Oliues & Vines, for his owne
glory, for the Church, for your Nation,
for your families, & for your owne soules
estate, which I intreate you to prefer be∣fore
all earthly honour and glory, and so
I rest.

