



RIght Honorable, I fynde in peru∣yng of auncient wryters, that it hath ben the custome of the grea∣test Estates and Princes in the worlde, when they haue had inter mission frō the serious and weigh¦tie affayres of their Realmes, to bestowe their ydell tymes in reuoluyng and pervsyng stories. For we reade that Artaxerxes, surnamed Longimanus, the fyfte kyng of Persia, vsed to haue the Chrona∣cles, bothe of his predecessours and of his own tyme, also read before him a nightes when he went to rest. And Alexander the greate, ad that noble wryter of the famous battell of Troye in such veneration, that he neuer went any wher, but he had his workes about him, nor neuer slept, but that he had thē vn∣der his pyllowe. Moreouer comyng into a schole, and fyndyng not Homers workes ther, he gaue the Ma∣ster a buffet with his fyste: Meanyng thereby that ye knowledge of Histories was a thyng so necessary to all estates and degrees, that it was an offence to be

without them. For like as in Musike many notes and many tunes make one concent and one Harmonie: so also in an History, the varietie and multitude of examples, tend all to one ende, that is, thaduaunce∣ment of Vertue, and the defacyng of Vyce. Offryng thēselues as a moste clere and perfect myrror, wher in for a man to behold, I say not the outwarde por∣trayture and lineamentes of his bodye, but the very lyuely Image and expresse figur of his inward mind enstructyng him how to gwyde and order hymselfe in all things. For what can be a greater enforcemēt to cheualrie, then not barely to hear, but in a maner presently to behold the sage and graue consultaciōs of expert Captaynes? the spedie puttyng in practise of things deuised? the pollicies & stratagenies in ex¦ecutyng of them? the fauorable assistence of fortune to the same, with the fame and renowne of valiant enterprises? what can be a greater encouragement to Vertue? then to se men raised from lowe and base degre (as it wer out of the dust) vnto high estate & honor? to se Realmes florish? to see common welthes prosper? to se good mē exalted & euil mē suppressed to se peace and tranquillity obserued? to se Nacions willingly offer their obediens? to se lōg continuāce in felicity? wt honorable report & wishyng for after ye decease? On the contrary part, what cā be a greater

dehortacion from vice, then to haue laid before ones eyes not only the heynousnesse and enormitie of the offence? but also the miseries, calamities, shames and punishmentes worthely ensewyng vpon the same? with endlesse reproch and infamie after death? and so consequentlie what can be more commodious and profitable then an Historye? Agayne, what can be more pleasant, or more to the satisfying and conten¦tacion of mannes nature (which is alwayes desirous of newes and couetous of knowledge) then syttyng quietly by himself, to receiue tydings of thyngs done through the whole world? to behold the places, the persons, the tymes, and the thyngs with thorder and circumstances in doyng of the same? to se so many rū nyng streames? so many high montaynes, so many ra¦gyng seas? so many wylde forests and deserts, so ma∣ny straunge beastes, fowles, fyshes, serpents, herbes and trees? so many large contries? so many rich and populous Cyties? so many welgouerned cōmon weal∣thes? so many good lawes and customes? and so many sundry sortes of people? togyther with the natures, disposicions, effectes, descriptions, situacions, cōmodi¦ties, pleasures and displeasures, foundacions, conti∣nuances and decayes, beginnynges, procedynges and endynges of the same? and that in such sort as euery thing may seme, not to be reported, but to be present

ly in doyng? Now at such tyme as I had finished my translacion of thistories of Iustine (who in so small roume and in so fewe wordes, comprehendeth so ma¦ny and so notable thynges, that it is to be doubted, whether he be more brief of sentence, or copious of matter) as I stayed with my selfe (as it were to take breath at thend of my race) deuisyng to whome I might specially dedicate the same: It came to my re∣membraunce, that sithens it had pleased Almighty God, to take to his mercy your Lordships noble fa∣ther, (to whom I had long before vowed this my tra uell) there was not any, who eyther of dutie mighte more iustly clayme the same. or for whose estate it semed more requisite and necessarie, or of whome I thought it should be more fauorably accepted, then of your honor. For (to omit other things, wherof this tyme and matter serueth not to speake) it is not vn∣knowen to others, and I haue had experience therof myself, howe earnest a desire your honor hath natu rally graffed in you, to read, peruse, and cōmunicate with others, as well the Histories of auncient tyme, and thynges done long ago, as also of the present e∣state of thinges in oure dayes, and that not withoute a certayn pregnancie of witte and rypenesse of vn∣derstandyng: The which do not only now reioyse the hartes of all such as beare faithfull affection to tho∣norable

house of your auncestours, but also stirre vp a greate hope and expectacion of such wysedom and experience in you in time to come, as is mete and be∣semyng for so noble a race. To the furtherāce wher of (because I will not be ouer taedious in wordes) I will briefly propound vnto your L. no mo but twoo examples, which are mencioned among many other of like purport in this boke. Thone is of the valiant Epaminondas Prince of Thebe, who beyng an ex∣pert Captayn and politike in all Martial feates and warlike affaires, was neuerthelesse so well lerned, that it was a wonder to se howe a man bredde, and broght vp in Philosophy, should come by such know∣ledge in feates of Armes, or howe a man accustomed to the licentious libertie of the Campe, should re∣teyne suche exquisite knowledge in Philosophie, with vnspotted innocencie of lyuynge and conuer∣sacion: whose fortune was suche (by the consente of all wryters) that the strength, the glory, and the re¦nowme of his countrie, dyd bothe ryse with him and dye with him. Thother example is of Arymba kyng of Epyre, who beyng very yong at the decease of his father, was by the aduise and consente of the whole Realme, duryng his nouage, sente to Athenes to be enstructed in Learnyng and in Phylosophie. At hys returne then into his owne Realme agayne,

he chose him a sage and graue counsell, created offi∣cers, made good lawes, abrogated euil customes, and finally so stablished the state of the common welthe, that he semed to haue made the Realme new. And looke howe much he was better lerned then his aun¦cestors, so much the story reporteth him to haue ben the better beloued and honoured of his subiects. Let these and such other examples (where your L. shall fynde store in this worke) encourage youre tender yeres, runnyng in the renoumed fotesteppes of your famous auncestours, to procede in learning and ver¦tue (which are thonly ornamentes of nobilitie, or ra∣ther the very true nobilitie it self,) ī such sort as you may be able to doe acceptable seruice to your Prince and your countrie, Your Prince and your countrie for your weldoyngs embrace you and esteme you as a Iewell, and Yourself thereby become equall to any of your worthye Predecessours in aduauncyng tho∣nor of your noble house: wherof as your greate for∣wardnesse geueth assured hope and expectacion, so I moste hartely beseche Almighty God to fur∣ther, augment, establish, and confir∣mate the same in your L. with thabundaunce of his grace.

