



MADAME,
THere are three ne∣cessary vertues well be-seeming euery Christian Man, Charity, Fidelity, and Humility, both towardes God and Man.4. Reasons of louing God. Math. 23. 9 There are foure reasons (to passe by many moe) which should moue vs to the loue of God: First,Iam. 1. 18. because hee is our gracious Father, who of his owne will begat vs with the word of truth, that we should be as

the first fruits of his Creatures. Now if a childe shall loue his fa∣ther, of whom he hath receiued a part of his body, how much more ought he loue God, (Qui animam suam infundendo creauit, & creando infudit) of whom hee hath receiued his soule, and to whose goodnesse he stands ob∣liged both for soule and body, both for the being & continuing of them? Therefore Dauid saith, Thou hast possessed my reines,Psalm. 139 13. Psal. 71. 6. thou hast couered me in my Mothers wombe. Vpon thee haue I been stai∣ed from the wombe: thou art hee that tooke me out of my mothers bo∣wels. And Iob long before him, Thine hands haue made me,Iob. 10. 8. 11. 12. and fashioned me wholly round about; thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and ioyned me together with bones and sinewes: thou hast giuen me life and grace, and thy visitati∣on

hath preserued my spirit.
Secondly,2. Reason. God is to be loued for his most sweet and pleasing nature, which the wicked indeed feeleth not; because (as Isidore saith) he hath lost the palate of his heart with the feuer of iniquity.
Thirdly,3. Reason God by his beneficence hath deserued our loue:Ioh. 3. 16. for out of his meere loue he sent his own and onely Son into the world, to saue vs when we were lost, to re∣deeme vs when we were captiues, and by his death to giue vs life when we had deserued nought but death.
Fourthly, aske now the beasts,4. Reason. Iob. 12. 7. & they shall teach thee, and the fowles of the heauen, and they shall tell thee: speake to the earth, and it shall shew thee, or the fishes of the sea, & they shall declare vnto thee. Euen these things in their kindes do praise

God, and shew their loue vnto man, for whom they were ap∣pointed: and shall man shew no loue to God; and in loue do no∣thing for God, for whom his creatures doe so much good, & suffer so much euil, being all put vnder his feet, and subiected to his power,Psal. 8. 6. 7. 8. All sheepe & oxen, yea & the beasts of the field, the fowles of the aire, and the fish of the sea?
Of the manner how wee ought to loue God.Now because a man hath in him life like a plant, sense as a beast, and vnderstanding proper to a Man, therefore it behooues him to loue God with his life, with his senses, and with his reason. Our Sauiour saith, we ought to loue God with all our heart, with al our soule,Mat. 12. 37 1. With all our heart. and with all our minde. We ought to loue him with all our heart, that is, with all our af∣fections, delighting and ioying in him more then in any thing:

For he loues not God, that de∣lights in any thing more then in God: and as St Austen saith, Mi∣nus te amat, qui aliquid tcū amat,A Simile. quod non propter te amat. By how much the more the lower bowes of a Tree are multiplied, by so much the lesse it groweth vp∣wards: so by how much the more a man doth loue these things beneath, by so much the lesse is his loue erected and lif∣ted vnto God aboue: therefore such loue is to be pruned & cut away, as superfluous branches frō a tree, that it may thriue the better. God requires the whole heart, My son, giue me thy heart,Pro. 23. 26. A Simile. like some noble Bird of prey, that seizeth vpon the heart: for he alone created it, he alone co∣uers it, and he only can content and fill it. Totum exigit te,Augusine. qui fe∣cit te totum, he requires thee all

that made thee all.Si totum me debeo pro me fa∣cto, quid addam iam pro me re∣fecto? Bernard. If we owe our selues wholly for our generati∣on, what shall wee adde for our regeneration? Neither are we so easily new made, as made. In the first work God gaue vs vnto our selues: in the second he gaue vs himselfe, and restored vs vnto our selues. Being therefore both giuen and restored, we doe owe our selues for our selues, and we do owe our selues twice. But what shall wee repay vnto the Lord for himselfe? For although we were able to repay our selues a thousand times, what are wee vnto the Lord?A Simile. If a man had some speciall iewell which he is minded to giue away, he would bethinke himselfe where hee might best bestow it. Our heart is the best member which wee haue, and God is our best friend, let vs bestow it vpon him: it is

not lost, that is giuen vnto him.
Secondly,2. With all our soule. wee must loue the Lord with all our Soule, induring rather the separation of the soule from the body, then that our soule should be separated from God, who is the soule of our soule, & the comfort both of soule and body.Our life and senses should be bestowed vpon God And because our soule affoords life and sense vnto the body, therefore to shew that we loue God with all our soule, we ought to honour him with our liues all our life long, and with all our senses, suffering them to be guided by his will, and chu∣sing rather to bee depriued of them all, then of him, that gaue them all.
Thirdly,3. With all our minde we must loue him with all our minde and vnder∣standings and cogitations be∣ing fixt vpon him, and ruled by him: His word should informe

nd direct our reason;God m haue o though & vnder∣standing our rea∣son rightly informed, should rule our wils, our affections and conuersations, in all which wee ought to seeke and apply our selues vnto God, that our liues, our affections, our wils, and our vnderstandings may be said to be Gods, so as although we liue, yet we may truly say, We liue not, but God doth liue within vs. And so much for our loue of God.
Of self loue Why and how a mā should loue him∣selfe.Loue of Man is either loue of our selues, or of our Neighbour. That a man should loue himselfe it is very necessary: for he that loues not himselfe, cannot loue another. And as St Austen saith, Sinon nosti diligere teipsum, ti∣mo ne decipias proximum sicut te∣ipsum; if thou knowest not to loue thy selfe, I am afraid least thou shouldst deceiue thy neighbour as thy selfe. Yet is it

no easie matter for a man to loue himselfe aright: for he that loues iniquity hateth his owne soule, and hee that loues himselfe in the way of sin, doth loue a rob∣ber condemned to dye.Augustine. Si malè amaueris, tunc odisti: si benè ode∣is, tunc amasti: If a man loue himselfe amisse, hee hates him∣selfe: but if hee hate himselfe well, then he loues himselfe. If a man loose himselfe by louing himselfe, then he finds himselfe, if he hate himselfe. Let vs there∣fore learne to loue our selues by not louing our selues. He that hates his lusts, loues himselfe: he that loues his lusts, hates himselfe. He that will loue himselfe well, must loue himselfe in God, and or God: and either because he is Gods, or that hee may bee Gods. nd thus much for Selfe-loue.
Our Neighbour also is to bee

loued, whether friend or foe, rich or poore, yong or old, high or low:Gregory. Why our neighbour is to bee loued. For (Per amorem Dei a∣mor proximi gignitur, & per amo∣rem proximi amor Dei nutritur) the loue of our neighbour is be∣gotten by the loue of God, and the loue of God is nourished by our loue of our Neighbour. Here first I say, we ought to loue our neighbour, because he is a Man of the same flesh with vs, or because he is a Christian of the same faith, incorporated into the same body, and animated by the same spirit. In whomsoeuer Christ doth shew himselfe, he is to bee loued, in the poore as in the rich, without respect of per∣sons. A Diamond is a Diamond whether set in Gold or Siluer, or in Iron, or Wood, and hee that reiects or cōtemnes Christ in a poore man, loues not Christ

in a rich man, but riches: yea,5. Reasons of louing our ene∣mies. Math. 5. 44 we are to loue our Enemies. So Christ said, and so he did. Hee said so: I say vnto you; Lue your enemies, blesse them that curse you, doe good to them that he you,Colos. 1. 22 Rom. 5. 8. and pray for them that hurt you. And so hee did; for vs, which were strangers and enemies, hath he also reconciled. Whiles we were yet sinners, Christ died for vs. Secondly, thus it behooues vs to doe, that wee may resemble our heauenly Father, and shew our selues to be his sonnes: For hee sendeth his raine on the iust and vniust. Thirdly, else shall we loose our reward:Math. 5. 45 46. For if you loue thē that loue you, what reward shall yee haue? Fourthly, because GOD hath selected and singled vs out from the multitude of the world, therefore wee must bee singular and egregious for our

conuersation:Mat. 5. 47. If yee bee friend∣ly to your brethren onely, what sin∣gular thing do yee? do not euen the Publicans likewise? And shall Christians do no more thē Pub∣licanes, then Turkes, then Indi∣ans, then naturall men? Fiftly, it is by our Apostle comman∣ded and commended vnto vs, When hee saith;Gal. 6. 10. Let vs do good vnto all; if vnto all, then vnto our enemies;Rom. 12. 20 Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him, saith he, If hee thirst giue him drink. Now if wee must not deny him our beneficence, then not our beneuo∣lence for it is no good deed, if it bee not of good will: And if we must recompence no man euill for euill,Rom. 12. 17. then not to our enemies; and where there ought to be no maleficence, there should also be no malevolence; as wee must not worke him ill, so wee must not

will, nor wish him ill.
So then our Neighbour is to bee loued,How our neighbour is to be lo∣ued. but how? Euen as our selues; which As doth not shew partiality, or equality, but simi∣litude; not measure, but manner;Mat. 22. 39 that is to say, Holily, Iustly, Truely, and Constantly: Holily,Sanctè. that is, for GOD, and not against GOD, vnder GOD, not aboue GOD: For he loues not GOD, that loues his neighbour with GOD, whom hee loues not for GOD; and hee that loues his neighbour more then GOD, is vnworthy of GOD, and makes his neighbour to be his GOD.
Iustly,Iustè. for a man must not loue his neighbour in euill, or for euill, but in good, and for good: Hee must bee so loued, as that his vices may be hated: Hee must bee loued, if not (quia iustus) because hee is iust, yet (vt

sit iustus) that hee may become iust. Loue must not bee the bond of vnrighteousnesse; we may not loue a man so as to fall in loue with, and to learne his vices.
Verè. August.Truely, that is in the Truth, For (nemo potest veraciter esse amicus hominis, nisi primitus fue∣rit amicus ipsius veritatis) no man can be a true louer of a man vnlesse first he bee a louer of the truth. I say againe truely, that is, the man must be loued, not his riches, honours, greatnesse, his good must be sought, and not his goods; hee, not his. Some loue their neighbours, as dogs doe bones, for the flesh that is on them; or as men do Trees, for their fruite; or as Kites do a Car∣kase, for reliefe: But wee ought to loue them euen for them∣selues, for this, that they are men, or for this, that they are vertuous

and good men.
Lastly,Perseueran∣ter. Of the cō∣stancy of loue. our Neighbours are to be loued Constantly: With some men, friends are like flowers, which are esteemed of no lon∣ger, then whiles they are fresh. Many mens loue is like to that of Harlots, who loue, whiles there is lucre; they loue not the man, but his gifts: They are like the Gleads in the fable, that fol∣lowed the old wife bearing Tripes to the Market, but for∣sooke her home-ward, when she returned empty. A man shall be loued in prosperity; but it is a question whether the man, or his fortunes, bee rather loued: Aduersity will try the force of friendship, and vertue of loue: Hee which forsakes his Neigh∣bour in aduersity, doth mani∣festly shew that hee loued him not in prosperity: It was not the

man which was loued, but the mans prosperity. But we ought to bee constant in our loue: Whiles we see either Humanity, or Christianity, we haue cause to loue.Gal. 6. 9. Let vs not therefore bee wea∣ry of wel-doing:Heb. 13. 1. Let brotherly loue continue. And so much for cha∣rity, which for perpetuity,1. Cor. 13. 13 and seruiceablenesse vnto others, is more excellent, then either faith or hope.
Of faith∣fulnesse.The next is Fidelity, when men are fast and faithfull vnto men for GOD, and vnto GOD for GOD himselfe. This faithful∣nesse vnto GOD is demonstra∣ted by fearing him vehemently, by obeying him constantly, by dispensing faithfully, by keeping things committed to him care∣fully, by louing him incessantly, and by suffering for him coura∣giously. The reasons that should

moue vs heereunto are many.7. Reasons o Fidelity. Reu. 2. 20. 1. GODS Commandement. Bee thou faithfull vnto the death: 2. His Promise, And I will giue thee the Crowne of life.2. Tim. 4. 7. 8. I haue fought a good fight, (saith Saint Paul) and haue finished my course, I haue kept the faith: heeres his Fidelity: From henceforth is laid vp for mee the Crowne of Righte∣ousnesse: theres his reward. 3. The example of GOD, and his seruants: Of GOD,Psal. 94. 14. Psal. 146. 6. Ier. 32. 40. who failes not his people, forsakes not his inheritance, but Keepes his fide∣lity for euer, and will not depart from them to doe them good. Of his Seruants, as Abraham, Iob, Moses, Daniel, and the Martyrs, whom no death could daunt, no torment could afright, no plea∣sure hold, no promotion pre∣uaile with, no allurement in∣chant, but claue fast to GOD,

and chused rather to die for Him, then to liue against Him. 4. We desire GOD to be faith∣full vnto vs, therefore we should shew our selues faithfull vnto Him. 5. Wee exact fidelity of those, that are vnder vs, there∣fore in reason we should behaue our selues faithfully to GOD, which is aboue vs. 6. Fidelity is a most certaine argument of fe∣licity,Mat. 1. 22. Heb. 1. 39 for hee that endureth to the end shall bee saued: Finally, vn∣faithfulnesse is punished with perdition:Reu. 21. 8 Fearefull and vnfaith∣full persons shall haue their part in the lake, which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the se∣cond death; And so much for Fi∣delity.
Of humi¦lity.The last is Humility, wherby we doe not ouer-weene our selues, but behaue our selues humbly towards GOD, and Man. Hu∣mility

is to be shewed towards a mans Superiors, Equals, and In∣feriours.Iam. 4. 7. 10 The Superiour of all Su∣periours is GOD. Submit your selues vnto GOD: cast downe your selues before the LORD, and hee will lift you vp. GOD is Omni∣potent, All-VVise, most Iust, and hath absolute authority ouer all flesh, therefore wee ought to humble our selues before him, and throw our selues downe be∣fore his Foote stoole. Second∣ly, we ought to carry our selues lowlily towards all our Betters. Therefore the Law saith,Ex. 20. 12. Honour thy father, and thy mother: And Saint Peter,1. Pet. 5. 5. yee younger submit your selues vnto the Elders. Third∣ly, towards our Equals,Math. 7. 12. For wee must do, as we wold be done by: wee would haue our equals giue vs due respect, and not by pride exalt themselues aboue vs. In gi∣uing

honour (saith Saint Paul) go one before another:Rom. 12. 20 Rom. 13. 7. 8. Giue to all men their due; owe nothing to any man, but loue. It was Pompeis too-great statelinesse, that hee would ac∣knowledge no equall. Fourthly, towards our Inferiours:Why wee must bee humble toward our inferi∣ours. For it is a mans honour sometimes to neglect his honor, and his grea∣test Greatnesse, in case, not to know his greatnesse. I suppose there is in euery man some∣thing, which craues our humili∣ty; and euen this should make vs humble vnto all, because life and death is common to vs all, because by Nature wee are sin∣ners all, and it is nothing in vs, that makes the difference, but the grace of GOD vnto vs, which was neuer deserued of vs. For who hath separated thee?1. Cor. 4. 7 and what hast thou, that thou hast not receiued? It behoues vs therefore

(as we are exhorted) To submit our selues one vnto another,1. Pet. 5. 5. and to decke our selues inwardly in lowlinesse of minde:Luk. 18. 14. For euery man that exalteth himselfe, shall bee brought low: and he that humbleth himselfe, shall bee exalted. For GOD is gracious to the humble, but opposeth himselfe to the proud, hee breaketh their bran∣ches, hee teareth them vp by the rootes, hee scattereth brimstone vpon their dwellings, hee tum∣bles them from their seates, and laughs at their downe-fals.
Thus haue I giuen you a say of that, which is more largely handled in this Booke, which I Dedicate vnto your Ladiship, in whom these three vertues, by the Grace of GOD, haue met together, & do kisse each other, beseeching this good GOD still to increase his Graces in you,

and at the length to Crowne you with eternall glory in the heauens.
Saint Giles in the Fieldes, August. 13. 1614.

