



BEeing prouoked (right worshipfull) by your manifold curtesies at all times she∣wed to my mother & mee. Lest I should seeme ingratefull (which of all sinnes, both towardes God and amongest men, I accompt the greatest) I was euen en∣forced to shewe my selfe thankfull vnto your worships. And whereas at this time, euerie one, doe not onely in wordes but also in deedes, with their presents & gifts, shewe some signe and token of this their thankefulnes: Euen so I also, out of my simple garden, haue chosen a handfull of Flowers, as it were a Nosegay (the best present I could get) to offer vnto you: In the which, although some of the flowers perchaunce shal seeme rough, and to haue some prickes, yet I trust (as the Gilliflower and the Rose) they smell sweete, that is, taste of trueth: being grounded on the vndoubted trueth of Gods worde.
The which I haue intituled, A defence of our daies, against the murmurings and complaints of manie: Then the which murmuring and complaining, we haue no one sinne amongst vs more common: nor anie one more odious to the Maiestie of God, which stoppes his blessings from vs, & yearely, in my iudgement pulles his heauie wrath and plagues vpon vs: For amongst the old Israelites, after their departure out of Egypt,Exod. 16. this sinne was almost continuall, and daily among them: they were neuer content: they still found fault with somthing. They either lacked water, or victuals, or Quailes: or their enimies were too mightie for them, or Moses & Aaron tooke too much vpon them. And by this meanes, those 40 yeares they angred the Lord, and prouoked the holie one of Israel (as saieth the Psalmist.) And S. Paul by their examples giues vs a lesson:1. Cor. 10. Be not murmurers (saith he) as some of them were, and were de∣stroyed of the destroyer. Thus to murmure or complaine, we
 accompt but a small thing, & almost no sin at all. But behold, it is a deadlie sinne, it bringeth death, vnnaturall & vntimelie euen of the destroyer. And surelie I feare mee, this one thing hath caused the vntimelie deathes of manie of our riche men this last yeare: When as God had sent them plentie of corne, yet they were not content, they would hurd vp their old. They would saie, it wil be deare still: nay they would deuise how to make it deare. They would complaine of much strawe & little corne, and so no doubt they angred the Lorde God with these hurdings vp & murmurings: and euen shortened their owne daies. For we are all taught this generall lesson by our doctor & master S. Paul:1. Thess. 5. Phil. 2. In all things giue thanks: And againe, do al things without murmurings & reasonings. And Dauid shewes vs the talke & speaches of Gods seruants: They saie alwaies, the Lord be praised. And S. Paul himselfe, not onlie by word of mouth, but by his own example teacheth vs this lesson, who going vp to Ierusalem, and as he went by the waie, certaine Prophets tolde him, that of a trueth he would be hardlie wel∣comed thither, & that he should be bound & imprisoned, who neuer grudged at such hard tydings, but ioyfullie aunswered: The Lords wil be done.Ecclesiasti∣cus. 39. ver. 13. I am not readie to be bound, but to die for the Lord Iesus. And Ecclesiasticus giueth vs this counsel: Hearken vnto me O ye holie children, & bring foorth fruite as the Rose that is planted by the brookes of the field, and giue you a sweet smel, as incense, & brings forth flowers as the Ly∣lie, & giue a smell, & sing a song of praise Blesse the Lord in al his works. This is a sweet rose vnto the Lord, euen at Christyd. This is the sweete frankinsence that the Lord delightes in. This is the pure white Lyllye flower. And none may saye, what is this? wherefore is that? At all times conuenient, they shall al be sought out. We shall one day perceiue that all the workes of God, euen our great fluddes, our yll seede forrowes, our great windes, our weete haruestes, shall tende to the saluation of our soules, though they diminish the gaine of our purses. Therefore let vs not saie: Oh what a weather is this? Oh what a haruest is this? But rather, the Lord be praised, who sendeth this. The booke of the wisedom of Salomon, in the first Chap∣ter teacheth vs the same lesson, as a chiefe and principall point of wisedome. The eare of Ielousie heareth all thinges, and the noise of the grudgings, shall not be hidden. Therefore beware of murmuring which profiteth or auaileth nothing.
 See what great reasons Salomon alledgeth, that wee should be∣ware of this murmuring. He compares God to an earnest louer, which cannot abide his giftes, his tokens to be founde fault withall. The Lord markes our words & gestures, when he sends vs raine, windes, faire weather, how we take these his tokens. He tryes vs whether we loue him or not. If we frowne when we re∣ceiue them, it is a signe wee loue him not perfectly in deede. A true and a faithfull louer will receiue anie thing, and that cheerefully at his louers handes: So ought wee to doe at Gods handes. Secondly, all our murmurings and complainings a∣uaile nothing, they make the weather neuer the better, there∣fore they are in vaine. Beware therefore of vaine murmuring and complaining. The Lorde, when as wee our selues deserue to be drowned with the olde worlde, for despising not Noah the eight preacher of righteousnes, but euē eight score: He drownes our Haye & our pastures, when as we our selues deserued to be destroyed with those same couetous Gergesites: For despising his Gospel, & making light account of it. He killes & destroyes but our swine. He rottes our sheepe. When as the Axe being laid long agoe to the roote of the tree by manie Iohn Baptists: who preach vnto vs euen his verie commission & preaching (Repent for the kingdom of God is at hand.) And we waxing euery yere worse and worse, deserue quite to be cut downe: he doth by his sharpe windes, of warres & taxes, but pluck of our leaues, pinch our purses. And shal we complaine? or not rather commend, & extoll this great goodnes of our God: and finde fault with our selues, and say with Dauid, in the like case being plagued for numbring the people: Loe, it is I that haue sinned, & that haue done wickedly, but those sheepe, what haue they done: Let thy hand I pray thee, be against mee and against my fathers house. Thus we ought in all these externall plagues & punishments of the Lord, to find fault with our selues, and to saye, that wee haue deserued euen the same plagues, & not to find fault with those iudgements of God, which are far lesse then we haue deserued. And yet surelie amongst vs in these daies, no sin more cōmon. We shal come in no place, we shal talke with no man, but we shal finde him complaining, or grieued with somewhat. The gentle∣man, he complaines, all things are deare, & money skant, & his charge great: which dearth in trueth, him selfe in some parte, is the cause of: For if hee let his pastures & fermes deare, he must needes buy deare againe. The husbandman he complaines, that
 corne is too cheape: he is not able to paie his rents & seruants wages of his crop. The Artificer, he saith, there are so manie of an occupacion, that one cannot liue by another: and that he can not get his debtes paid, whose prices, without all conscience, the Lord sometimes plagues with euil paiments. The seruants some times lack masters, (men wil do their worke them selues) some lack wages, some victuals. So that from the top to the toe, no part is free: euerie one is grieued, euerie one complaineth. So that this plaister is verie necessarie, the disease being so general, & dangerous. Therefore I conclude with our last weekes lesson out of S. Paules Epistle to the Philippians fit for our times:Phil. 4. The Lord being euen now at hand in deede: Reioice in the Lord al∣waie, & againe I saie reioyce: Let your curtesie or gentlenes be knowen or manifest to all men. The Lorde is euen at hand. Be careful for nothing, but in all things, let your petitions be ma∣nifest vnto God in prayer & supplication with giuing of thanks. Let vs reioyce in the Lord, who is now our aduocate, our lawyer that pleadeth al our causes, shal be our Iudge. Let our curtesie & mercifulnes be knowen to al men, that we may find mercie & curtesie at the Lords hand at that daie: For with what measure we measure to others now, in the chaffe and pelfe of this world, shal then no doubt be measured vnto vs againe. The Lorde is euen at hand: let vs be careful for nothing, but in al our needs & necessities, let vs praie vnto him, and we shal receiue. What is more easie then to aske and haue? But aboue al things let vs giue thankes. Let vs beware of murmuring & complaining. So shal the Lord, not only this yeare, but euerie yeare, powre down his blessings vpon vs. Thus desiring your worships to accept this my simple gift, praying the Lorde to blesse you both with his holie spirite this yeare & manie others, to his glorie, & the benefit of this our countrey, and in the world to come, of his great mercie, to crowne you with euerlasting glorie: I moste humblie take my leaue.
Welborne
this xv. of Nouember. 1589.
