


GOod Christian Rea∣der, if any thing in this Treatise, seeme to thee ouer bitter or sharpe, I humbly beseech thee to consider with thy selfe, that, that purgation which Galen the prince of Physitions commonly vsed, was called Hiera-picra, that is, holy-bit∣ter; And such also are Iesus Christs me∣dicines, which he applieth to our sicke soules: and that this is a canker that I goe about to cure, & therfore as Chirur∣gerie teacheth, lenitiues will doe no good, but rather increase the venome thereof. Nay I beseech thee consider, that I deale with the root of all euill, co∣uetousnesse; and with that noisome pe∣stilence that raigneth now in our age, as it did in the daies of Ieremie: and there∣fore I had need of a sharpe hatchet, to cut vp that root, and of some forcible



Mithridate to preserue frō that plague: of whose effects and infection and cure, Ieremy writes thus: I will giue their wiues Ier. 8. 10. to others, and their fields to heires; for eue∣ry one of them, euen from the least to the greatest, is giuen to couetousnesse; and from the Prophet to the Priest, euery one dea∣leth falsly. Here first are the effects of this noisome plague of couetousnesse, that their wiues were giuen to others and their fields to heires: Here is also the in∣fection or cause of these effects, because they are all giuen to couetousnes & they all deale falsely. It is reported that we haue tasted those former fruits & effects, for there died of the late plague many moe men than women: and is it not like∣ly that the same effects sprong from the same roote? and if this be true, then let vs all beware of couetousnesse and false∣hoode in our dealing. But the true cure of this plague which followes in the Prophet, is taught vs by the contrary. For they haue cured the hurt of the daughters of my people, (saith the Prophet) with Vers. 11. sweete words, saying peace peace when as there was no peace. Gods Ministers must



cure this plague not with oyle: but with sharpe wine, they must not here speake faire, if they meane to doe any good, but thunder. And therefore those nice eares that cannot abide their thunder, shall die of this plague, and perish in their sinnes.
Lastly, if through humaine frailtie, any faults haue escaped (as who is it that erres not?) remember that lesson which nature teacheth; That of all liuing crea∣tures man doth most often twinckle with his eyes, to teach him not to be a ri∣gorous censurer of his brethren. Ponder wisely, iudge charitable, pardon cur∣teously, and if thou be sicke of this dis∣ease, repent speedily. For God shakes his rodde ouer thy head euen now, and the day of the Lord draweth nigh.

