


Right Hono:
THE REASONS (ES∣pecially) inducing me to expose my selfe to the wounding darts of ma∣lice and enuie, by publishing these Collections, are in number Fiue. 1  The vniust clamours of Papists so frequently crying out both in words and in writings of breach of promise, bloud, and bloudy persecution for Conscience. 2 The preseruation to my poore powre  of the Honour of our late Queene of famouse and blessed memory, and also of the honour of the Kings Maiestie, so vniustly by them taxed and reuiled, being set like Rabshakeh to rayle vpon the Hoast of the li∣uing God. 3. In regard of your Honourable selfe  who haue been chosen and singled out by wicked men both at home and abroade, as a Butt, whereat to shoote their venemous arrowes of slaunder, threat∣nings and reproch, by laying greuious, but false impu∣tations vpon your Honour, of plotting Tragicall strata∣gems against Catholiques (so stiling themselues) and see∣king

 king the bloud of Recusants. 4. A Desire, quantum in me est, to cleare our late memorable Queene, our pre∣sent Gracious King, your honourable selfe, and the whole State both then and now, as also the Ghospell which we professe from vniust bloud-shedding, or any desire thereof, rightly retorting it vppon themselues, in approuing by particular instances out of their owne I. W. priest his popish Martyrologe published Anno, 1608. your Honours Assersion to be true: That in the Raygne of those two Sisters, (to wit, Q: Mary, and Q: Elizabeth) of different religions, there was more bloud shed in the lesse then six yeares of the first, then in full forty and fowre of the later, as by the Register fol∣lowing  appeareth. And lastly a Generall ease inten∣ded vnto all, in vnderstanding the double account of his Maiesties Raigne of England and Scotland, and the Concurrance of the one with the other.
The reasons also wherefore I, (being vnro your Ho∣nour vnknowne, and with all, populorum, cum censu, tum doctrina penè infimus) presumed to shroud my selfe vnder your Hono: winges, are (Chiefly) likewise Fiue.
 1. The Honorable report of your name, for many and excellent things are spoken of thee, for thy zeale to Religion, loue to the State, and more expected from  thee, most faithfull Councellor. 2. Because none can haue a better sence and feeling of anothers griefe, then he that hath felt the like Afflictions: Your Honour hath been by Sathans instruments threatned with vn∣avoydable Death, (But God who hithervnto hath, still defende you) and yet are those, who were sayd to haue vowed the enterprize, tearmed good men by those that in the libell seemed (but God forbid that euer the saf∣tie or ouerthrowe of the State, should rest in their pow∣er) to dislike of the powder treason: therefore I doubt not but your Honour will defend the poore in a iust cause, if neede so require, against the rage and furie of

the wicked and mightie. 3. In regard the cause, (your person excepted), is, Secundum quid, all one, for which your Honour hath been reuiled, mis-iudged, slaundered and menaced, with mine, for which happe∣ly I also may vndergoe the like, Namely, The Consci∣onable seruice of my Soueraigne in my meane, but contented place. 4. Yours Honours owne Position, That that seruant, whose faith and zeale in the seruice of his King, stands in awe of enemies, eyther for power, or enuie, is not worthy of protection, warranteth that these my meane, but daring-loyall indeauours, in behalfe of my Soueraigne, shall finde fauour with your Honour.
5. Because true Nobilitie (which were it not that I  speake vnto your Honor, I would say were seated in your breast) neuer respecteth the person of any man▪ but the qualities, affections, endowments, and intenti∣ons of the mind, and therefore myne owne priuitie to my owne thoughts, which telleth me, and that vppon good grounds, that your Honor deserueth well of the State in Generall, and doth loue it, and are generally in a recyprocall manner of them beloued, doth also assure me in particular, that nothing which is vertuous, can from a good affection be commended vnto so Honorable a Patron, and suffer shipwrack by Contempt. Your Honor hath elsewhere spoken in your owne person, That you would glory more to be al∣waies found his Maiesties honest and humble subiect, then absolutely to command in any other calling, euen so I (the weakest of many thousands) desire nothing more (par∣don herein Noble Lord my ambition) then that I may be able to performe some seruice vnto God, my Prince, Country, and the furtherance of the Gospell, and in them vnto your Honourable selfe: And herein Right Honorable Lord, namely, in Desire to do good, the poorest subiect his Maiestie hath (absit inuidia Dicto) may equallize his greatest Peere, for the Loue, Faith,

zeale of the one, may be as great, firme, deuout as the other, the difference consisting onely in outward meanes to approoue them in both. The God of all power and might who exalted the Father of so hono∣rable a sonne, to be Lord high Treasurer vnto so wor∣thy a Queene, and the sonne of so honorable a father, to beare the same office vnder so Gracious a King on earth, the same God for his sonnes sake, through the Grace of his holy spirit, bind vp the sonne as I hope already he hath done the Father, in the bundle of his Saints, that (after your long and faithfull Seruice to your earthly Prince,) with the father, Sonne and Holy Spi∣rit, you may enioy the true Treasure of eter∣nall happines in the Kingdome of Heauen. Amen. Amen.

