



RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, ma∣ny
write, and many more doe
speake of Death: and it were
not much, if as many wrote
thereof, as could write at all.
For it is the Way, that all must walke in: and
although to all it be either very fortunate, or
very fatall, yet of the most it is forgotten, till
it seeme to seize vpon them: yea, euen we,
that speake and write about it, are sometimes
too vnmindful of it; perhaps then also, when
we speake and write vpon it. But howsoeuer

wee doe forget it, it will bee sure to remem∣ber
vs. It hath been wisely said, that to speake
and thinke often and seriously of hell, is a good
meane to saue the soule from hell: so I suppose
that a sad and sober thinking, and remem∣bring
of bodily death, will bee a blessed helpe
to keepe the soule and bodie from eternall
death. It is strange to see the feares of many:
yet euen the fearefull sometimes shew small
feare of death, except then, when it is to bee
embraced. Others well neare with the feare
of death are brought to death. Some will not
beginne to liue, till they feele themselues
beginne to die. And how many are there,
that are a-fraid of death, and yet dare play
with the sting of death? It were no great mat∣ter
to handle a Snake, when her poysoning
tooth is pulled out: but to flie a Snake, and in
the meane time not to feare that, which
makes her venome, were (I wot not well)
whether more base, or foolish. I know not why
death should not be counted terrible, whiles
her venomous and killing tooth is in her head;
but that being once pulled out, why shee
should affright a man, I see no reason. For
why should he feare death, whom death
doth helpe, not hurt, and ease rather then end?

Hee that dies, whiles he liues, liues whiles he
is dead: yea, and that death at last shall meet
with death it selfe. Certainly death cannot
be ill to him, that liues well: neither is that
worthie the name of death, which is made
the doore of life. Yet I finde the vertuous
sometimes appalled with her grisly lookes.
They are loth to part, that haue liued long
together: and a man can scarce without some
reluctation forsake the house, wherein he was
bred, and hath euer liued, since he liued, to
dwell in another, though a better, Coun∣trie.
But (me thinks) the delicacie of the place,
the affluence of all good things there, a∣mongst
these the fellowship of the Saints, the
presence of that louing and beloued Sauiour,
the fruition of the All-sufficient God, toge∣ther
with a certaine expectation of a ioyfull
returne at last, should satisfie the departing
Soule, and settle her vnruly passions.
As for you (Right Worshipfull) I doubt not
but that God, to whom you striue to liue,
hath taught you both ere now to die. I write
not these things therefore, as intending to
instruct you, but rather to shew that the me∣morie
of your loue doth liue within me, and
as one desirous by putting you in minde of

those things, which ye know alreadie, that,
whiles you liue, the remembrance of them
might not die. Read them at your leysure,
and enioy them. And that God, vnder whom
they were begunne and ended, giue a blessing
to them: vnto whose sauing grace I do com∣mend
you both, beseeching him in Christ
Iesus to vouchsafe you his loue while ye liue
on earth, and to crowne you after death with
eternall life in heauen. London St. Clem.
Ann. 1612. Nouember 5. A day neuer to bee
forgotten of true English hearts.

