


THat saying of Queene Hester to the most famous King Aha∣shuerosh, (most dread Soueraigne) doth, as it were, en∣force me, to make this my humble Peti∣tion to your Highnesse: If we were sold to bee bondslaues, or hand∣maides Hest. 7. 4. (saith shee) I would haue held my tongue, although the ad∣uersary



could neuer recompence the King this losse: But let my life Verse. 3. be giuen me at my request, and my peoples.
There is a mightie Thorne sprung vp of late, in diuers places of this Realme, like to that cruell Haman; which doeth not onely goe about to im∣pouerish your Maiesties Subiects, but quite to roote them out: I meane Inclo∣sure of Fields and Commons; whereas the Lords of Manours, and Freehol∣ders will haue all their landes which haue heeretofore lien open, and in Com∣mon, (so that the poore might enter Common with them) now laid together in seuerall. And hereby the poore can∣not enioy their ancient Commons and liberties. And this cankred Thorne al∣so deuoureth Gods people, which is his inheritance, as the Psalme teacheth vs, Aske ofme, (saith God) & I will giue Psal. 2. 8. thee the people for thine inheri∣tance,



&c. and the vttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. In∣closers to maintaine their owne inhe∣ritances, doe make no conscience to impaire this inheritance. Where God 2. Cor. 1. 11 hath beene praised with many mouthes, there now shreeking Owles, and other vncleane birds make their nestes.
It dishonoreth also your Maiesty, and weakeneth your Highnesse power. For, in the multitude of people is the Pro. 14. 28. honour of a King, saith Salomon, and for want of people commeth the destruction of the Prince. But this Inclosure where it commeth, dis∣peoples Townes, as common experi∣ence lamentably teacheth. And where∣as your Maiestie might haue had great choice of Souldiers, and able men for seruice in warre (if neede required) now there is almost none to be had, but a Sheepheard and his dogge. This In∣closure



also hurteth the commonwealth: For where no oxen are, there the cribbe is emptie, (saith Salomon) Prov. 14. 9. but much increase commeth by the strength of the oxe. But inclo∣sure decareth Tellage, and turneth good arable land to Pasture. These Inclosers thinke that the gaine of their Pastures, eaten with sheepe, commeth more easily to them than being tilled; and therefore they will neither plowe nor sowe themselues, nor let their land to such as would till it: and so by this meanes they bring a dearth upon this Land, which is one of Gods Eze. 14. 13. plagues. Yea, the Cities and Townes Corporate are maintained by the Coun∣trey: For the plowe maintaines all trades, as Mercers, Grocers, Tanners, shooemakers, Glouers, Smiths, Tay∣lors, Ioyners, Carpenters &c. But since Inclosure began, all these Artificers prooue by experience, that they cannot



haue such vtterance and returne for their wares as heretofore: because that husbandmen were wont to maintaine many seruants, which did yeerely buy their wares of them; which multitude of seruants inclosure needes not. Oh Inclosure then, to be hated of all Gods children, which deuoureth their fathers inheritance! and to be detested of all your Maiesties faithfull subiects, which dishonoureth your Highnes, by dimini∣shing the people of your land, and pro∣cureth your Maiesties destruction (as saith Salomon) and to be abhor∣red of all true harted English men, which bringeth afamine, one of Gods plagues vpon this our Common wealth. Nay, which goeth about to impouerish our Grand mothers and most famous Cities.
I knowe, Inclosers can vrge many plausible reasons for themselues, but their reasons are humane, and not



grounded on the word of God. These dangerous and desperate effects so appa∣rantly spreading both into the hart of Gods Church, and of the Common-wealth, inforceth me, humbly to present this my Petition to your most sacred Maiestie, with these reasons against Inclosure. Least by holding my peace, and suffering the Lords inheritance to I know where ther hath beene before In∣closure 320. com∣municāts: but now there be scant 160. be impaired, I should be condemned at that day as an vniust Steward: and seeing your Maiesties power to be di∣minished, and not giuing warning, I should be reputed a faithlesse subiect to your Highnesse: and perceiuing the Common wealth hereby to be damnified and halfe beggered, I should be estee∣med an vnnaturall childe, to this my most louing mother.
I am also incouraged with confi∣dence of your Gracious acceptance of this my humble suite, with that (Ma∣shall) your Maiesties godly and gol∣den



saying, to your Princely sonne, that hee should bee the poore mans King. The cure of this canker, and the rooting out of this thorne, will make glad your poore subiects hearts. For as we reade, Salomons subiects were as many in number as the sand of the 1. Kin. 4. 20 Sea, eating drinking and making merrie; And at this marke shoulde Christian Kings aime, that their sub∣iects should doe the like. But inclosure diminisheth the number of Gods peo∣ple, killeth their hearts, and abridgeth both their mirth and maintenance: And your Maiestie being a second Sa∣lomon in this our Israel, I most hum∣blie craue your gracious and tender care heereof, in your sacred session and high court of Parliament; for that all your afflicted subiects, are ready to crie with the Prophet. It is high time for Psal. 119. 126. thee Lord to lay to thine hand, for they haue destroied thy law, which



is christian charitie. The Lord Iesus blesse your Maiestie with a long and prosperous raigne, to the glorie of his name, encrease of his Church, and be∣nefit of this Common-wealth, for his glorious names sake.
Amen.

