


RIght Honoura∣ble It is a true & Ingenui pu∣dotis est fateri per quo profe∣ceus, & haec quasimere as authoris. Plin ancient saying, It is the property of an honest and ingenuous minde, to ac∣knowledge by whom we haue re∣ceiued profite, & this is as it were a reward to the author. Now see∣ing bookes and writings are the
 greatest riches we haue, being the issue and ofspring of our best stu∣dies and dearest endeauours; I could not but present to you the first fruits of that tree whose plan∣tation was caused by your owne hand; and the rather that I may giue some poore pledge and obui∣ous testimony of my thankfull commemoration & acknowledge∣ment of such fauours as haue bin on my part receiued from that no∣ble personage who is now gathe∣red to his Fathers, as also for that fauour and countenance which still I receiue from your selfe. I will not speake much of him whose owne workes haue giuen testimony enough to the world, &
 added as to your Honour, so to your comfort: yet to free my selfe from the aspertion of Dixeris male∣dicta cuncta, cum ingra∣tum homi∣nem dcris. vnthankfulnesse which is a sinne of sinnes, and all the evills a man can speake of, I must needs say something of him, for the constan∣cy and fidelity of whose loue, I re∣ceiue still daily comfort: least iust∣ly the world might say of mee ac∣cording to that inscription which Scipio Africanus caused to bee set vpon his Tombe when hee had done many fauours for Rome & afterwards was banisht by them. Ingrata Patria, ne offa qui∣dem mea ha∣bes. Val. Max. Vnthankfull countrey that hast not so much as my bones. Yea the world can testifie how profitable he hath beene to Church & Com∣mon wealth, who from a louing
 and noble ambition tooke alwaies pleasure and delight to be benefi∣ciall to such as stood in need of him; and that not after the man∣ner of our ignoble benefactors in these daies, who professe charity, in meane time the obiect dies, and this is to set a dish of meat vpon a dead mans graue; or else they doe good when they themselues are departed, which howsoeuer it may comfort the liuing yet addes no ioy to him that gaue it being dead; good workes being done after death wee carry the Lan∣thorne behinde vs, it may guide and comfort the followers, but we see not what wee doe our selues: but good workes done in our life
 time, is to carry the Lanthorne before vs, whereby we administer helpe to others, and to our owne comfort behold it our selues. It shall suffice to speake but in gene∣rall; for should I proceed to the commendation of his particular vertues, I presume I should be an∣swered as he that spent a long O∣ration in praise of Hercules, Quis vituperauit? Who disprais∣eth Hercules? Yet I could not but breake his boxe of spikenard wherein his good name was enbal∣med, that the perfume and swee∣nesse thereof might somewhat im∣part itselfe to the world, conclud∣ing my speech of him as Philip of Hipparchus, hee died seasona∣bly Sibi mature  mihi .
 for himselfe but to mee too soone: Let mee therefore returne vnto you most Noble Lord bearing the character & impresse of all his worthy partes, as though they came by succession and inhe∣ritance, beseeching you to accept these my poore labours, though they be nothing equiualent to that maine debt I owe vnto you. Your acceptance I craue especially be∣cause I know in this world and Babel of distraction and confusi∣on of diuided mindes no man can please all, but some will presume to taxe the whole world: but this shall be my comfort, that I haue euer found the best learned and in∣genuous, the most modest and gen∣tle
 censurers of others: for which cause, I was moued and embolde∣ned to shelter my selfe vnder your religious and iuditious protecti∣on, which may be to mee like the buckler of Aiax, to sheild me from the detraction of many. And as Antimachus being forsaken of all his auditors, proceeded in read∣ing his booke, because Plato was left, esteeming him to ouer value them all: so if many shall disdaine, and reiect my labours, yet if it please you to approue & like them, it shall administer comfort and encouragement to me: as for such as want both learning and chari∣ty to iudge aright, or to iudge in loue, I passe not, if they vse the
 freedome of their owne natiue iudgements, & I will resolue as in the Tragedie, as I haue little hope to obtaine their fauour so care I little for their frowne, envy may disdaine, draw bloode it cannot. Thus being as confident of your fauour, as I am certaine of the vn∣constancy of the most, I leaue you and all yours to the blessed and prosperous protection of the All∣mighty, and remaine

