



THe same thing chaunceth nowe, and hath chaunced euer since the be∣gynning, vnto all true pre∣chers, and defenders of Goddes holy worde: that chaunced vnto the noble, and doughtye warryer, Hercules. Hercules for the loue that he bare vnto his country toke many a ieoperdous, and labor sum worke in hande: and euer after that one was ended, another began, so that they myght haue semed to be tyed together wyth chaynes: one dyd alwayes so cōtinually, and almoste touchingly folowe onother. But his trouble and bu∣sines, that he had with the kylling of the seuen hed∣ded water snake called Hydra: is moste lyke in all poyntes, vnto the labour sum worke of Christes soul¦diers, and true preachers, for euer as he kylled one heade with his arrowes, and strooke it of with hys sworde: There rose vp another agayne, vntyll that at the length he destr them wyth fyrebran∣des. Euen so the Aposte of Christe, as they had ouercōmed one labour, they were cumbred streigth way with another. Fyrst they had much a do, in con∣uertyng the Iewes from theyr euil lyfe: and not a lit∣le to do, to pull them from the false beleue that they
 had, to be iustified by the workes of the law: which for all that they kept not they had muche to do, to bryng the Iewes from the ceremonyes of Moyses lawe: and to make them beleue, that they were put downe by the death of Christe. The turning of the heathen from ydolatry vnto the belefe in Christ, af∣ter that they had conuerted many of the Iewes, was both a ieoperdous, and a tumbrous labour. But af∣ter all these great laboures, there rose vp a sort of he¦retikes: who wold haue not only defaced, & blotted out all of the prayse, that the Apostels wan by theyr labours: but vtterly haue destroyed, and vndone all their doynges. The names of the heretikes were, Simon Magus, Ebion, and Corinthus. Austen, Am∣brose, and Hierom, with other lyke fathers, in their tymes, had great trouble and beesines with the in∣numerable enemies of Christes trueth. And we in our tyme are not in all pointes vnlike vnto Hercu∣les. For one labour euer successiuely receyueth, and foloweth another. First in Cambridge about .xx. yea¦res ago, ye toke great paynes to put men from their wyl workes: as pylgrimage, and settyng vp of can∣dels: and with great labour ye brought many from them vnto the workes, that God commaunded ex∣pressedly in his holy scripture: and to the reading, & study of Gods worde: al dreames, and vnprofitable gloses of men set a syde, and vtterly despised. Then this fundacion of Goddes worde, ones layde, we that were your disciples, hadde much to do in Cam∣bridge: after your departing from vs: with them that defended praying vnto sayntes, iustification of wor∣kes, holye water, superfluous holy dayes, the sacri∣fice of the masse, lyinge of parsons frō their benefi∣ces, prouision for purgatorye, the syngle lyuyng of ministers, and the superstitious choyse of meates: & many suche other doctrines, contrary vnto the scrip∣ture. And though this stryfe agaynst Gods enemies, were common to me  many: yet I had specially to do with a bucke: wi a certayn man, that had a name of the colour of adder: with the fox and hys foster: and with a certayn wytche, called maystres missa. But after I was easid from al these monsters, by the help principally of almyghty God, and by the
 yde of the kyng, and his counsell: I thought to ha∣ue bene at good rest, and quietnes from contentious striuinges, wherewith I had bene muche troubled in tymes past: and had fully purposed, to haue set all my ordinaunce against grosse vyces, and noughtye lyuyng of the people in this realme. But beholde so∣denly sterte oute a woode spirite, muche perillouser then all the beastes, that I had to do with before: not because he is stronger, then the other: but because his poyson, that he intenderh to spoute oute, is more perillous, then the others poyson was. Some man peraduenture wyll saye, that if I woulde, I myght haue auoyded all these perilles: if I would haue medled with my Physick only, & not haue cumbred my self with matters of diuinite: and that I am ther∣fore well worthy this trouble. To whom I aunswer, that if that I had had such a conscience, as to many now a dayes haue: that I could haue founde in my harte, to take the dignities, rewards, and lyuynges of Christes churche, and to do nothyng for them, and if that I hadde not thought it better, that one man should runne into ieopardy, then that many thou∣sandes should haue ben poysoned with the poyson of Pelagius: I myght in deede haue easely auoyded this perillous labour. But after that my lorde Arche¦byshop of Yorke, had ones geuen me a prebende: I could not be quiet, vntill that I had licence to reade, or preache. Whiche obteyned: I began to rede, and so to discharge mi conscience. And because I dyd per∣ceyue, that diuerse began to be infected with the poy¦son of Pellagius: I deuised a lecture in Thistel∣worth, agaynst two of the opinions of Pelagius: na¦mely against that childer haue no original sin, & that they oughte not to be baptised. But within a few we¦kes after: one of Pelagius disciples, in the defence of his masters doctrine, wrote against my lecture, with all the cunnyng and learning, that he had. But lest he should glorye and crake amonge his disciples, that I could not aunswer him: and to the intent, that the venemous seede of his soweyng maye be destro∣yed, and so hyndered from bryngyng forth frute: I haue set out this boke, to aunswer hym, in the one of his opinions: and (God wyllyng) when I haue set
 out my Herbal, I shal aunsuer hym to the other. And this small worke I dedicate vnto you, as a worthy patrone for it. I myght haue dedicated it vnto some great man of aucthoritie, power, and ryches, but con¦syderyng that nether aucthoritie, power, nor ryches, are able to defende my boke, if the Pelagians should write agaynst it: I haue chosen you as a patron, to de¦fende it with your learning: whiche is only a better defence, then all the dignitie & riches of the worlde be they neuer so great. Nowe after that I haue desi∣red you to be a patrone vnto my boke: I must aske you counsel: how that I, and my felowes shal behaue our selues agaynst this monstere of our tymes: that ye may by our labours, be put afterwards to lesse payne. This monstre is in many poyntes lyke vnto the watersnake with seuen heades. For as out of one bodye rose seuen heades: So out of Pelagius rose vp these seuen sectes: Anabaptistes, Adamites, Loyke∣nistes, Libertines, Swengfeldianes, Dauidianes, and the spoylers. Sum would thincke: that it were the best way, to vse thesame weapones agaynst thys manyfolde monstre, that the papistes vsed agaynst vs: that is material fyre, and faggot. But me thynk: seyng it is no materiall thynge, that we must fyght withal, but gostly, that is a woode spirite: that it we¦re moste mete, that we should fyght with the swor∣de of goddes word, and with a spirituall fyre against it: or elles we are lyke to profit but a litle in our be∣synes. Paule, a noble capitayn of Christes warres, in hys epistle, that he wrote vnto the Ephesianes: counselleth his yonge scholars (whiche, he sayth, must fyght against spirituall craftines and subtel∣ties) to put vpon them all the hole armour of God, & to take the spirituall sworde, the worde of God. Christe also in the .iiij. of Mathew teacheth vs by his example to fygh, with spirites, with the spirituall wepones of the worde of God, as he dyd: and so dyd Austen, and Hierom, coniure, and dryue away spiri∣tes in theyr dayes. Then when as the enemie is a spirite, that is, the goste of pelagius, that olde here∣tike: ones welle laid, but now of late to the great ie∣perdie of many raysed vp agayn: the wepones, & the warriers, that must kyll thys enemie, must be spiri∣tuall.
 As for spiritual weapons, we may haue enow out of the store house, or armory of the scripture: to cō¦found & ouertrow all the gostly enemies be they ne∣uer so many But where, & from whence, shal we ha∣ue spiritual warriers ynow fit for this fyght? If that we had no mo enamies, but this alone, the fewer sol¦diers would serue: but when as tie spite of fornicatiō and aduoutre, the rauening rentraysyng sprite, the sprite of gluttony, the sprete, of Lucian, Iuliane, and Epicure, within finite swarmes mo of spiritual ene∣mies, haue besegd the churche round about: we had nede of a great dele of mo souldiers, then al the scoles that are in this realme are able to set furth: if so ma∣ny scoles haue bene put down of late, as the comon rumor reporteth. But what wold that help to the in∣crease of warriers: if that the olde numbre of scoles were set vp again: if ether the scolars shuld want li∣uings to fynd thē, vntill they myght come to be per∣fyt souldyers: or if they grewe vp, & became good soul¦diers: then the lyuing, that was ones apointed only for spiritual souldiers: shuld be giuen ether vnto car¦nal wariers, or to other that by their dignite haue forsworne all common spiritual war, and myght get their liuyng wel enough otherwyse by their owne vocations? For that wold both discorage scolares frō this kinde of study: and wold compel them, that were able to exercyse the spiritual war, to turne them sel∣ues to other sciences, to get their liuinges therwith. For although the war be spiritual, and the souldiers occupie chiefly their sprites▪ yet are they not without bodies: which (as they are worthy) must nedes haue meat, drinck, & cloth, & all other necessaries. Wher∣fore if that we will haue the church of Christ, deliue∣red frō the enemies, wherwith it is nowe besieged: we must prouide not only liuings for yonge scolars, that they may continue in this godly study: but also that the rype, & perfit souldiers may haue sufficient li¦uinges: that they nede not for lack of liuinges, to rū∣ne to their aduersaries, for better wages, to cōmit tre¦son against vs. Almighty God preserue you: & graunt you strēgth, & helth: that ye may cōtinue in preachīg, to the ouertrowing of al wickednes, & to the promo∣cion of the true worde of God: to whom be al honour and glory, for euer and euer Amen.
