



RYght myghtye princes & honorable lordes, thys haue I marked in dy∣uers places of Germani: that after that the burges¦ses and cytezenes haue bylded them cyties, and haue made good and hol¦some lawes for the maintenaunce of all kynde of good order there: ha∣ue chosen vnto them certeine lordes whyche they call in theyr tounge Schermheeren, that is, defendyng lordes, to defende theyr cities, when as they are perfytlye bylded and set in good order: Knowyng wel by ex¦perience, that there is no cytie so
 strongly bylded and well ordered, but it shal haue enuyers and mortal enemyes at one tyme or other.
Euen so I, after that I had made thys lytle boke, and set it in as good order as I coulde, fearyng, nay ra∣ther precyslye knowynge, that there shall many aryse, whych wyl either slaunder it, and blame it, or els wyl condemne it and burne it, as an he∣reticall and seditius booke: before they haue caste and reproued it by any sufficient wytnesses, ether of scripture, or of reason, amonge all the hole nobilite of Englande, I am compelled by great nede to chuse you, and desyre you to be patrones, and defenders of this my lytle boke onely so farre as it agreeth with na¦tural reason, and wyth the wrytten worde of God. Yf that any wise and learned man can reproue and iustly ouercome any thynge that I haue wrytten in thys booke, wyth reason and scripture, I wyll amende it that is amysse: and recant it whyche is wrytten agaynst the scripture. But yf no suche thynge can be founde in it: I beseche you as Goddes mini∣sters, and officers vnder hym, to de∣fende
 it so longe as it shalbe founde reasonable and godly. But leste, I shuld put you, vnto to muche paine: I wyll aunswere aforehand to sum obiections, whych I reken wyll be made agaynst me. Some who wold be loth that theyr sores shulde be tou¦ched: wyll saye, why do ye not go a∣boute as well to heale the clergye, & the cōmones, as ye go aboute nowe to correcte vs? There is neither of bothe those orders, but it hadde as muche nede of Physike, as the nobi¦lite hath. I aunswere that yf the clergye be sik, the nobilite ought to be their phisicianes and healers.
Howe can the nobilite heale them: when they are sik them selues?
Howe shall the cōmones be healed, when as their physicians in politike thynges, the noble men: and theyr physicianes in spirituall matters, the shepherdes are bothe so sik, that they are not able to do theyr owne duties? Therfore it is not possible to heale the other two orders, excepte the order of gentylmen be fyrst hea∣led. Forthermore, whē as I intende to intreate of diuerse matters, after the order of physike: what a foolyshe
 Physician shulde I haue bene, yf that I shulde beselye haue gone a∣boute to heale the legges and the thyghes, and not offered any reme∣dye at all, vnto the harte, the lyuer, and the hede? When as all phy∣sik wolde that the principall partes shulde be fyrst loked to, and healed, because all the prosperite and health of the lower partes, hange vpon the health and welfare of the ouer and principall partes, and the nether partes muste nedes be sike, as long as the ouer partes are not perfytlye healed. Thys matter is proued to be true, not only by physik and na∣turall reason,Eccl. 10. but also by the scri∣pture whyche sayeth. Eccle, 10. As the gouerner of the cytie is: so are also they that dwell in it. Then se∣ynge that these gentylmen wyll be the principall partes, and the hede of the common wealth: acording vn¦to reason and to nature, they muste go before all the reste in the cōmon wealth, whyche thinge they can not do, yf they be not healed before.
Therfore it is necessary that the gēt¦lemen be fyrste healed. Where in,
 when I haue done as muche as I can do for my parte: I wyll offer some physike both vnto the clergye, and to the yemanry of thys realme, leste I shulde seme to fauour one kynde of men more then an other. Yf any man thynke that I dishonor your lordshippes in dedicatyng my boke vnto you, and in speakynge vnto you and to other lordes, in ma¦ny places of the booke: as thoughe ye were onely the sik men to whom I offer physik onely to: I aunswere that therin, I dyshonour you not, but honor you as muche as lyeth in me, whilse I make you the heade of all the nobilite in Englāde vnder ye Quene. For when as ye are ye heade of the bodye of the nobilite, it were no wysedome for me to speake vnto the sik belly fete and backe, whyche for lacke of eares can hear nothing at all. When a man hath the goute in his too, or the ciatica in hys huc∣kell bone, or the collik in hys bel∣lye, no wyse physician wyll speake vnto the too, nether vnto the huk∣kell bone, nether vnto the bellye,
 but he speaketh vnto the heade, whych heareth and receyueth coun∣sell, and physik also, for all the reste of the partes of the hole bodye, and thoughe these aboue named partes be onely vexed, and the hede be hole and sounde, yet God and nature haue ordeyned, that the hede shall bothe receyue all maner of counsel, & medicines, be they neuer so bitter & vgly, for the vylest parte of al ye bo¦dye. Therfore I dishonor not your lordships but honor you, as mych as lyeth in me whē as I do none other wyse vnto you, then God and natu∣re wolde that I shulde do. Thys in moste humble wyse I beseche your lordshippes for the loue that ye owe vnto God, and to the cōmon welth of Englande that ye loke well vpon my physik, and trye it to the vtter∣moste, yf ye fynde it lawfull, then take it vnto you, and into you, and dispose it, and sende it to suche par∣tes of the bodye of the nobilite as ha¦ue moste nede of it, and I dout not, but that many that are nowe sicke shalbe well healed, to the glorye of God, and to the profyt of the com∣mon
 welthe. The Lorde Iesus the great Physiciane whyche is able to heale both bodye and soule: heale all them that are sik, and saue you from all enemies, both bodely and goostlye. Amen.
