



RYght hono∣rable and renou∣med Barons, it is nobly written by Isocrates, that chil¦dren oughte too keepe their fathers Friends as diligēt∣ly: as they woulde their owne inheri∣tance. And your father of worthy me∣morie, loued my father deerely, & hee liued togither with your Grandfather many yeeres in the Courte of Duke George the noble Duke of Saxonie, and he was borne in the dayes of your Greatgrandfather of Austine Turler his father, who was then Consull of
 Lesnick, which towne is vnder your in∣risdiction at this day, and whereof my Vncle is nowe at this present Con∣sull, one whom yee knowe ryghtwell. Wherefore, I haue often deuised with my self, by what meanes I might like∣wise continue this frendship, or rather testefie my dutie towards you & your familie, and if it could bee, how to en∣large the same, but hetherto I coulde finde no good opportunitie, for that yee were of so smal yeeres that wanted rather instruction in discretion, and good manners: then to bee occupied in debating of graue matters, and also yee had such instructers, and schoole∣maisters, that if yee followed their do∣cumentes there should redownd great honour to your selues, and great com∣moditie to your subiectes. Albeit then it be so, that ye haue no neede of myne admoniciō, either to the studie of ver∣tue & godlinesse, or towards the attai∣ning of good artes & learning: yet the significatiō of a mans dutie is wont to be acceptable to good natures, & such
 especially such as are of Nobilitie, and descended of the greatest parentage. Thus staying my self vpō this groūd: I sēd vnto ye this booke which I haue written in the behalf of such as are de∣sierous to traueill, and to see forreine Cuntries, & specially of students. For since Experience is the greatest parte of humane wisedome, and the same is increased by traueil: I suppose there is no man will deney, but that a mā may become the wiser by traueiling. How beit if in any thing: surely in this most diligent circumspection is very requi∣site, by reason of the daungers that of∣fer themselues vnto traueilers, and the weakenesse of mans iudgment, which vnlesse it be then confirmed by vse & experience, and holpen by the counsel of others: it will soone be brought into errour. Here is moreouer to be added, that the youth and flourishing yeeres are moste commonly employd in tra∣ueill, which of their owne course and condicion are inclined vnto vice, and much more ernestly imbrace the same
 if it be entised thereto, which manica time and often chaunceth in trauey∣ling: wherfore, mee thinkes they do a good deede, and well deserue of al mē: that gyue preceptes of traueyling. Which thing, althoughe I perceyue that some haue doone: yet haue they doone it heere and there in sundrie Bookes, and not in any one certeine place. And being a necessarie thing to haue all such matter in a readinesse as may well and profitably be said of one thing: I haue therefore handled that argument according to the definitiue Methode, as they speake in the schooles, and haue comprehended al∣so, as I iudge, in one Booke, whatsoe∣uer is necessarie for any to know con∣cerning the due taking in hand of tra∣ueill, and the prosperous perfourming of the same. I haue also adioyned vn∣to this discourse another booke, wher∣in I haue applied those preceptes of mine, vnto such things as seemed vnto me worthy the seing and obseruing in the Realme of Naples, which beeinge
 none other thing then an example of such documentes as wee haue set down in the first Booke: I haue therefore made the title vnto all the whole wri∣ting, Of Traueill, and of the Realme of Naples, because no man shall thinke that I haue coupled contrary thinges togither. For although in deede it bee one thing to intreate of the Realme of Naples, and another thing to giue pre∣ceptes vnto such as meane to traueill: yet since traueiling consisteth of view∣ing & diligent consideratiō of things, and preceptes are lightned by exam∣ples: there is no iust impediment to the contrarie, but that I maye ioyne these twaine togither. And as I haue also admonished in the booke: I trust that this my labour will bee the more acceptable vnto some, for the same cause. For if they shall want preceptes they shall finde them heere in a readi∣nesse, and if they do require an exam∣ple agreeable to preceptes, they haue heere suche a one beefore their eyes which may both instruct their mindes
 and also inflame them vnto the know¦ledge of most bewtifull sightes, and Antiquitie. Receiue in good parte, Right honorable and renoumed Ba∣rons, this simple gifte from mee, and therin my dutie and seruice towardes ye and your familie. Which if it shall please you to do: I wil do min indeuor to omit nothing which I may thinke to tende vnto the commendation and ornament of your house: and that my good will may be knowen vn∣to you hereafter, by some tra∣ueill of more graue ar∣gument.
Fare yee well.
