



MAdame, rare and ad∣mirable are the fa∣uors which we haue receiued of the Lord, & by his grace enioyed now al∣most fiftie yeares together. He hath giuen vs his Word and Gospel, his lawes and statutes: hee hath planted a

Vineyard amongst vs, and sent his Prophets vnto vs. Hee hath brought vs out of captiuitie from vnder Wea∣sterne Babylon, and dispelled the Egyptian-like darknesse of Romish superstitions. Hee hath not dealt so with euery Nation. Moreouer, hee hath imparked vs with the pales of Peace, and hed∣ged vs about with the Lawrells of Prosperitie. He dooh fill our barnes with plentie, & causeth our cups to runne ouer. He hath put the Palmes of victorie into our hands, the Garlands of triumphs about our heads,

and hath made our verie e∣nemies seeke to be at peace with vs. Hee hath turned our speares into spades, our swords into sythes, and our pikes into pennes; yea to make a perfect and plenary demonstration of his loue vnto vs, and hatred of our Aduersaries, he hath of late vouchsafed to vs both Prince and People,Neuem. 5. 1605. a verie wonderfull and great Deli∣uerance, from a most bar∣barous and vniuersall con∣fusion, plotted, and almost performed by the children of Babel, the Minians of that purple Harlot. But

how doe we remonstrate our thankfulnesse and loue to him? Alas, our ingrati∣tude is too-too manifest. Our sinnes doe testifie the same to our faces. Igno∣rance, Oathes, Prophanati∣ons of the Lords day, Neg∣lect, yea and palpable Con∣tempt of the Gospell, and of Gods faithfull and ho∣nourable Embassadours, with many other grieuous and transcendent enormi∣ties, do so swell & abound in the multitude, as that if they were not by force held in with the piles of whole∣some lawes, and the banks

of gouernmēt, they would quickly ouerflow, & beare and beate down all before them. So that the Lorde may say of vs, as Moses som∣times said of Israel:Deut. 32. 15. But hee that should haue bene vpright, when he waxed fatte, spurned with his heele, and forsooke God that made him, and regarded not the strong God of his saluation: not much vnlike wee are (for the most) to the yong Hindes mentioned in the booke of Iob, who when they are waxed fatte, and growne vp with corne, Goe from their dammes,Iob. 39. 7. and returne no more vnto them. Iosephus

writeth, that the Riuer Ior∣dan doth carrie the Fishes so long sporting themselues, and floting aloft, till at length it casts thē headlong into the Dead Sea,Mare mortuum. where they perish: so it seemes our prosperity, through the corruption of our heartes, hath trained vs on so long, that wee haue fallen into a Sea of sinnes, and a gulfe of wickednesse. What can we now expect of God, besides the complement of that dreadfull minace vpon vs, with which, the declining church of Ephesus was som∣times threatned:Reue. 2. 5. to wit, the

remouing of her Candlestick out of his place vnlesse she did repent? If we therefore desire the continuance of the Gospell among vs, and of all outwarde blessings, which attend vpō the true professors and embracers of it, we must in the feare of God, Search & trie our waies, and turne againe vnto him. A∣mend your waies and your works (saith the Lord) and I will let you dwell in this place.Ier. 7. 3. 2. Chron. 30. 9. The Lord our God is gracious and merci∣full, and will not turne away his face from vs, if we conuert vnto him. Pliny saith,Plin. lib. . cap. 26. that the Ri∣uer-horse feeling himself too

fatte,Plin. lib. 8. c. 26. & ouermuch grown, pricketh a veine in his legge with some sharpe reede newly cut, and by letting himselfe blood, doeth so helpe himselfe, and preuent the daunger, which he was subiect before to fall into: so when wee swell with pride and selfe-loue, and when we waxe grosse spi∣rited, and fatte at heart, and when the corrupt humors of our soules abound, our best phisicke is, to prick our hearts with true compunc∣tion of spirit, and remorse of conscience, and to let our selues blood of those

corrupt humours by true repentance, and godlye sor∣row. If wee neglect the performance of these du∣ties, wee may iustly feare, that the Lord will remoue his fauours from vs, & giue them to a people that will bring forth better fruites. To helpe forwarde this godly practise, I haue com∣piled, penned, and now published, these sequent exhortations: which I de∣dicate and offer vnto your Ladishippe, especially be∣cause I knowe you loue this Doctrine, & the faith∣full practisers of the same.

Thus taking my humble leaue, I recommend you to the grace of God.
Cuxton. March. 25. 1607.

