


MADAME,
AFter I had writ∣ten these lines, (for I know not well how to call them) I long dis∣coursed with my selfe, whom to I might present them: At length I bethought my selfe of your Ladiship, whom I deemed very worthy of them; and am bold, vnder

your Name, to publish them vnto the world. If herein, or by any other meanes, I may further your knowledge or deuotion in true Christia∣nisme, I shal reioice. I seek for nothing, but your soule for Christ, that in him it may be presented pure and perfect vnto God. Your Wisedome, and not your Wealth, that you may bee wise in Christ Iesus, according as S. Paul doth teach you: If any man a∣mong or. 3. 18 you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a foole, that hee may bee wise: for the wisedome of this world is foolishnesse with God. To know Christ well, is the chie∣fest learning; and to serue

him truely, is the greatest freedome. Mary was happy in bearing him, more happy in beleeuing in him, in that shee bare him in her breast, whom she bare before in her belly. And though euery La∣dy cannot be a Mary, a Mo∣ther to him in the flesh; yet euery true Christian Lady is a kinne to him in the faith, flesh of his flesh, and bone his bone, a very member of his body in a spirituall sence. Whosoeuer (saith he) shall doe Mat. 12. 5 Luk. 8. 2 the will of my Father, which is in heauen, the same is my Bro∣ther, and Sister, and Mother. And this is the better: for the Christian blood, as Christian, is the best blood in the world

A man in any other blood may perish: but he that hath this blood in his heart, shall neuer perish. If a Christian, during a Christian, may bee damned, then say that Christ himselfe may be damned al∣so. VVhich, what religious eare can endure to heare? But I will detaine you no longer: but leaue you to those things which I haue prepared for you. If they shall finde your kinde accep∣tance, they haue what they come for; and I that for what I sent them. Vse them, and peruse them at your leasure: and God giue them fauour in your heart. The great God of heauen and earth

protect and blesse you, and all your children, and keepe you all for euer in his faith and feare, that yee may see his face to the eternall com∣fort of your soules in heauen.
Saint Giles in the fieldes, October 5. 1614.


