



AS AT WHAT time (Madame) I first published this fond & slender trea∣tise of Sonets, I made bolde with you in dedication of so vnworthy a booke to so worthie a Ladie: so haue I now also rubde my browe and wiped a∣way all shame in this respect, aduen∣turing not to cease, but to increase my former follie, in adding moe So∣nets to those I wrote before. So much



the more abusing in mine owne con∣ceite your Ladishippes patience, in that I had pardon before of my rash attempt. But see (Madame) what presumption raignes in retchlesse youth. You accepted that my first of∣fer of honorable and meere curtesie, and I thereby encouraged, blush not to procede in the like trade of follie, alwayes hoping for the lyke accep∣tance at your hands, which if should faile me (as I hope it shal not faile) then should I hereafter not once so much as dare as to set pen to paper for feare of controlment and check, which howe grieuous it is to a yong



man nowe (as it were) but tasting with his lippe the brim of learnings fountaine, and saluting the Muses at the doore and thresholl, neyther is your Ladiship ignorant, and I myselfe presume to know. Wherfore as I haue (Madame) by a little in∣larging this Booke, inlarged not a little my follie: so is my humble sute to you a little to inlarge your bounteous curtesie, J meane in well accepting the increase of these my follies, proceding not so much vpon any light affection, as desire to ac∣knowledge a greater dutie. It shall not be long (I hope) but that my



hande shall seeke in some part the requitall of your bountie by some better deuise, though not more lear∣ned treatise. But what shoulde I stande vpon termes of skill? know∣ing that it is not the worke that your Ladiship doth so much regarde as the Writer, neyther the worthinesse of the thing, as the good will and meaning of the Deuiser therof, of∣fering his dutie in such wise as best aunsweres his abilitie and power. For as if subiectes shoulde haue re∣spect more to the vnworthinesse of such things as they giue their Prin∣ces, than regard the worthie mindes



and good natures of their Souereig∣nes in well accepting such slender trifles at their vassels handes, they should quyte be discouraged from e∣uer offering the like and slender gif∣tes: so if I should cast an eie rather to the basenesse of my Booke, than account of your Noble nature and accustomed curtesie in well recey∣uing the same: neither should I here∣tofore enboldned my selfe so farre as to haue offred you this trifling trea∣tise, nor now haue the hart to aduē∣ture anew, although somewhat pur∣ged of his former faults and scapes. I cannot leaue to molest your noble



eies with suruey of my rashe compi∣led toyes. It may please your Lady∣ship to wey my well meaning hart, at what time occasion ministers you the pervsing of my booke, and this to deeme, that desire alone to manifest my dutie to you, was the onely cause of this my enterprise. Which done, I haue at this time no more to trouble your Ladyship, but ending my Epi∣stle, to craue the Gods your happie preseruation of present Honor, and luckie increase of blessed happes in all your life.

