



RIght worship∣ful, many, large and admirable are the bene∣fits wherwith the Lord hath honoured vs these fifty by-past years toge∣ther. He hath borne vs, as an Eagle doth her Birds vpon his wings,Deut. 32.11 and walled vs in with

his loue. He hath giuen vs his Word, and his Sacraments of grace; he hath sent vs his Pro∣phets, and Embassadours: he hath compassed vs with peace and prosperity, making vs to eate the fruites of the fields, and causing vs to sucke hony out of the stone,Deut. 32.13 and oyle out of the rocke. He hath set most noble Gouernours ouer vs: he hath filled our hearts with the ioyes of victories, & hath put the songs of deliuerances into our mouthes.
But lamentable is the en∣tertainement, which his loue hath found amongst vs, who (like those ancient Israe∣lites) haue corrupted our selues to¦wards

him by our vice;Deut. 32.5 15.21. a peruerse and tortuous generation, who being laden with fatnes, haue spurned with our heeles, and prouoked his Highnesse with our vanities.
For first, if we consider the transcendent profanenes and affected ignorance of the mul∣titude, & the flagitious irregu∣larities of many desperate A∣theists, Epicures, Nullifidians, as in∣festant as the frogs of Aegypt,Ex. 8, 3.14. which made the land to stink; it may be truly said of them (vngratefull wretches) that they cast the filth of their feet in his face, they recom∣pence his grace with grace∣lesnesse,

and presse him with their sins as a Cart with sheues not Men, but Monsters, which (like Moles) digge groueling in wickednes (as in the ground) and ceasse not till they haue cast vp a Mountaine of hatefull enormities against the hea∣uens.
Secondly, if we call to mind & seriously perpend that pe∣stilent and prodigious Powder-plot,Nouem. 5. An. 1605. and some other execra∣ble and vnnaturall attempts and machinations of some of our Italianated Catholiques in spe∣ciall, & the incorrigible ob∣stinacie of them all in gene∣rall, (like the Sycamore, which

the more it is moistened, the drier it waxeth) it wil appeare impossible for thē to purge themselues of palpable in∣gratitude and disloyalty; be∣ing aduersaries to his truth, setled vpon the lees of their owne feculent opinions, a∣doring the Idols of their owne distempered braines, pollu∣ting his worship with su∣perstitious aditions, and bea∣ring no good will vnto his people.
Thirdly, if we do well ob∣serue the preposterous & dis∣astrous studies of many schis∣maticall and refractarious spirits, their heate, their vio∣lence,

and vncharitablenes, how vnnaturally they do re∣iect & reuile their Mother, how passionately they doe blas∣pheme the Church, which God hath planted with his owne hand, and with what morosity they haue ab-alie∣nated themselues from their Bretheren; they can by no pretext acquit themselues of great vndutifulnes vnto God, being so turbulent in his House, so disobedient to their Mother, & so farre exorbitant in all their courses; not much vnlike to mothes, that fret the cloth, wherein they breed; to water-boughes, which hurt the tree,

from which they sprang.
And finally for the more hopeful and ingenuous, if we doe but consider the remis∣nesse of too-too many, the re∣traits, the standings, the di∣stractions, the doubtes, that are too common, too conspi∣cuous (arising partly from the corrupted fountaine of our na∣ture, which is not drained dry till death; and partly procee∣ding of the vicious ensam∣ples and scandalous dmea∣nure of hypocrites & profane extrauagants; and partly also through the differences of o∣pinions, and the vnbrother∣like hanging-off and flying off of

many Romanists & other Sepa∣rists, al Nouelists) if these things (I say) be well considered, we cannot but confesse that we are behind in duty, and haue not made such vse of Gods mercies, as wee should haue done.
What remaineth for vs then to do? Surely we should all repent, all, All without ex∣ception. We should examine our selues, rectify & settle our iudgements, and turne the cur∣rent of our harts & liues, & sue for pardon, bewaring that we be not (like Bowles) ouer∣swaied with the wrydrawing Byas of our owne conceited¦nes

and home-bred concupi∣sence; lest the Lord being ex∣asperated against vs, our day be turned into darknesse, our light into night, our fame into shame, & so be made the spect∣acle of his wrath, and scorne of the world.
We are Gods House,1. Cor. 3.16. and the Receptacles of his Spirit, which is the author of holinesse, & the source of perfection: we are his Fleld, his Vineyard and Garden of delight; our duty therefore is to cleanse & adorne our harts to be faire and fruitfull, plea∣sing and not offensiue. The Sunne of righteousnesse hath shone long amongst vs with

exceeding brightnesse (in the Gospell) and with his heat hath moulten the Cloudes aboue vs, which haue emptied them∣selues like bottles vpon vs; and therefore to testify our plea∣santnesse and fertility for the remōstratiō of our gratitude, we should abound in grace, increase in knowledge, and perfume the aire about vs with our fragrant sauors, and not poison it with filthy fumes, like stinking dunghils.
To further this both deser∣ued and desired duty, I haue penned, and now am bold to publish this Tractate folowing, which I haue presumed to de∣dicate

and present vnto your VVorships in this plight you see, (partly for that great respect, which you haue euer had of Gods faithfull Ministers) wi∣shing it may find but quiet house-roome in your hearts, and so I shall enioy my wish, and it no meane reward.
Now the very God of peace sanctify you both through∣out,1 Thes. 5.23 and so honour you with his grace, that hauing fi∣nished your race in this world, you may rest and reigne for euer in the world to come.
London, October 28. 1609.

