



WE reade in holy Scripture, Right Honourable, that godlines with contentment is great gaine,2. Tim. 6.6. for it hath not onely promise of this life but of the life and glory to come: for proofe whereof we haue in the person of Obed-Edom, That when the Arke of the Lord, was well entertained in his house,2. Sam. 6.11. both he and all that did belong to him were blessed of God, for the Arke was not
onely a token of Gods presence, but also a type of our ministery; To which God hath conioyned himselfe to be present with vs vnto the end of the world. By the Arke many miracles were done, by it the waters of Jordan were diui∣ded, the walls of Jericho fell downe to the ground, the Jdoll Dagon was dismembred. But the Arke of the new Couenant doth much more, it passeth all Gods children through the mighty floods of afflic∣tion, breaketh downe the walls of temptation, ca∣steth Popish Jdolatry to Gebena from whence it came, as not able to looke the truth in the face, this doth present Christ the way, the truth, and the life, and doth exhibite Christ vnto vs, God and man to be our righteousnes, sanctification and re∣demption. Now the way to meet with all these bles∣sings, with Obed-Edom, is to entertaine the Arke of the Gospell, but yet these blessings are not obtained in respect of the presence of the Gospell, but in respect of beleeuing, obeying, and reuerent estimation and entertainement of the same, for as we must loue God, imbrace his lawes, aduance the Gospell, so must we imitate the example of O∣bed-Edom, who did not breake the tables of
stone, Aarons rod, or misused Manna, which would haue bred his ouerthrow, but as he did car∣ry a reuerent respect and estimation to the Arke, so he did to the supporters thereof, he brake not off the rings, nor the barres in the rings, by which it was carryed from one place to another. Jt is a dif∣ficult matter for a man in our dayes to profit him∣selfe by the Gospell, that doth for any earthly re∣spect, despise a powerfull Ministery, who as the Barres in the Arke doe preach the truth, and car∣ry the Arke of the Gospell vnto the world; neither was the Ring or Barre changed, but keept as it was ordained by God and his seruant Moses; and wheresoeuer this hastie disposition is, we may assure our selues it leaues some bountifull remem∣brance: to your Lordsh. is recommended a care of the reuerent estimation of the Arke and affaires thereof. You are as a towre vpon the top of an hil, & so much the more reason haue you to walk wise∣ly, & that in respect of your great priuiledges, that the lawes of God & the kingdom may be conioynd with an vpright and godly course of life, because Plus effecit apud populum, which laudable course your L. doth follow, which hath the more
emboldened and encouraged mee to present this small token of my good wills vnto your Lordship, albeit J haue not vsed the common Method of ma∣ny in the like case, which were rather to write of you, then to you, yet neither to be neglected, for in publishing (though sparingly) my knowledge of your worth to the world, some might taxe mee with flattery which J condemne in others, but on∣ly on the other part, some may censure me to haue written of you according to the pouerty of my abi∣lity rather then to the fulnes of your merite, but howsoeuer peraduenture it will seeme strange when this commeth to your Lordships hands, what assurance of your good acceptance, should haue mooued me to dedicate the same vnto you, J haue not done it mercinarie, further then my paines may aduance the Gospell, for then I would haue presented it to your hands; nor vaine glori∣ously in crauing your approbation, but freely and honestly out of that respect which J owe to that innate goodnesse, which J hope is and shall ex∣presse it selfe in you. And herein I thinke my selfe happy that J liue to know one of so great qualitie as your selfe, whose breast goodnesse makes her ha∣bitation
which J may the more boldly say, in that J heard from your mouth, that your desire was to aduance and prefer, those that were worthy to the worke of God, for the which, and for mine owne part also, as J endeauour my selfe to runne after the high calling of God in Christ Iesus, so I desire to imitate the fertill lands, Qui multo plus red∣dunt quam acceperint, quia si non dubita—mus bona conferre his qnos speramus no∣bis profuturos, quales debemus esse in eos qui iam profuerunt? But yet J say, Non red∣derevero, bono viro, it cannot absqua iniuria id facere possit, Receiue then a signification of my loue, a testification of duty. Accipe ergo hanc obseruantiae meae humilem tesseram, & quidem sereno vultu ac animo clemen∣ti accipe: Inde pium meum in te affectum elice, meque clementia solita porro prose∣sequere. Illud vbi impetravero magnum me quid impetrasse existimabo, pro quo tamen nil praeter preces pias, officia & obsequia humilia reponere queo. And thus humbly ta∣king my leaue, wishing to your Lordship all health and happines, with the increase of all spiri∣tuall
and temporall blessings. And that this small gift may haue as good acceptance in your Lordships fauour, as it is well intended by me: to this effect I pray the very God of peace sanctifie you throughout, and I pray God your whole spirit, and soule and body, bee preserued blamelesse vn∣to the comming of our Lord Jesus Christ: in him, Farewell.

