



I Stood in doubt somwhile (Right Reuerende and my especiall good Lord) whether I might presume to make dedication of so simple and slender a matter vnto your graue and learned Grace: but knowing how much I stood bound vnto your great and exceeding charitie: and considering with what fauour you do affect a simple and well meaning minde, and how reli∣giouslie you haue prosecuted my irreligi∣ous demeanor, in receiuing me as a lost & straied sheepe vnto the fold of Christ againe, and waying therewithal, that
notwithstanding my true and vnfained returne, yet euerie sleight action of mine may seriouslie be Censured of such as are not giuen to speake the best, but en∣clined to iudge the worst, I thought it expedient for mine owne comfort to flie vnto your Lordships patronage, and I hope for the causes before considered that I may boldlie do it without presumption, not doubting but that thereby I shal safe∣lie be defended from the sinister opinion of all my aduersaries.
May it please you therefore to vouch∣safe to accept this simple Sermon, which for the vtilitie of many, and for the hurt of none I haue caused to be published in printe, a matter though small in sub∣stance, yet great in good will, and the grateful acceptance therof at your Lord∣ships handes may be an incouragement to greater endeuours. It was not my pur∣pose and meaning at the first to put this forth in print, but vppon an occasion as your Lordship may vnderstand in the
Preface, and since it hath so fallen out that I did determine it to come abroad, I thought I could not do better then to shroud it vnder the couert of your wings.
And in an other respect I am glad that the occasion hath bin offered me to set this foorth in publike, that withall I might publish vnto the world yet once a∣gaine the constancie of my faith, which by reason of my former inconstancy hath bin hardly Censured of manie as well Protestantes as Papistes. The Papist thinking that I was ashamed of my late publicke action at Paules Crosse, and the Protestant thinking that I did it but dis∣semblinglie. To the first I answere with the Apostle S. Paul. Non erubesco Euangelium:Rō. 1.16. Est enim virtus Dei in salutem omni credenti. I am not ashamed of the Gospel, for it is the power of God vnto saluation to all beleeuers. And to the other I do answere with our Sauiour. Nolite iudicare,Mat. 7.1.2 vt non iu∣dicemini: in quo enim iudicio iu∣dicaueritis,
iudicabimini. Iudge yee not, that yeè be not iudged: For with what iudgement you do iudge, you shall be iudged. And therefore leauing the true discussion thereof vnto the euerla∣sting Iudge that knoweth the secrets of all mens hartes, and shall lay open to all the world in the latter day the priuitie of a mans conscience, I will say no more but this, that I may satisfie him that standeth in doubt of me, if I can. That I do professe my selfe to be no otherwise in hart, soule, and conscience, then I do set downe here by pen, namelie a true seruant of Iesus Christ, one that hath bin by his mercie called and reclaimed from the floods of errors, Idolatrie, and su∣perstition, wherewith I haue bin hereto∣fore ouerwhelmed, and that mine eies are opened, and do behold my Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus in his Gospel, and do receaue & imbrace him in his word, and that I obey and serue him in that true maner & forme that he hath pre∣scribed
in the same. And that I do from my hart, as I haue heretofore testified, re∣linquish and abandon the Pope and the sea of Rome so far forth as it mainteineth Idolatrie, fauoureth superstition, nouri∣sheth schisme and deuision, teacheth dis∣obedience both to God and Princes. And I do renounce him for Gods Vicar on earth, which rebelleth against the Lord in Heauen, in ouerthrowing kingdoms, murdering of annointed Princes, remo∣uing subiectes from their due and natu∣rall obedience, and all to mainteine him selfe in pride and Antichristian gouern∣ment, acknowledging no other Church but the vniuersall Church of Christ dis∣persed throughout the world, nor any o∣ther hed of the same then Christ Iesus, by the merits of whose passion I hope to be saued, and in whose faith I purpose to liue and die.
This being my publicke and outward testimonie, yet once againe by this occa∣sion vttered, I hope all good and Godly
men will rest fullie satisfied, and as for the mouthes of the vngodlie in time the Lord shall stop them.
I needed not (my good Lord) vnto your Paternity haue vsed this protestati∣on, and yet I hope the renewal thereof with the cōtinuance shalbe no smal com∣fort vnto you, who thirsteth the health of my soule as your owne.
The cause chieflie why I did it, was to stoppe the tongues of such as are alwaies itching to hurt and preiudice other men. I haue said my minde, it resteth that I pray for them, to graunt me patience to beare the rebuke, and that I may haue grace to remaine irreprouable vnto the end: for the which I doubt not but your Lordship of your Charitie will vouchsafe to say Amen.
To trouble your Lordship farther by way of Preface I thought not neede: where∣fore beseeching your Grace to pardon my bold attempt, to accept of my poore ende∣uour, I conclude, praying God continu∣allie
to blesse you, to make you a carefull and vigilant Pastour ouer his flocke, to endue you with all graces necessarie for the gouernment of the same. And so kissing the hand of your Paternity, with all humilitie I take my leaue. From my chamber in London. Nouemb. 1589.

