



THE greatest difference that the Philosophers could finde (right Honorable) betweene man and beast, was the rule of reason, wherby they could perceiue that man could giue iudgement of things present and things past, and comparing them together, could (after a sort) prognosticate of things to come, which moued them according to theyr power and vnderstanding, to labour night and day in continuall meditation of the excellencie of the same, to seeke the adorning and beauti∣fying thereof, with all those things which brute beasts for lacke of reason coulde not haue: as namely, the continuall searching out of natu∣rall

causes, the daily consideration of the effects, and operations of things in this world: and the particular qualities of euery seuerall beast, bird, fish, tree, herbe, worme, fruite, stone, and e∣uerie other creature whatsoeuer. The benefite of whose diligēce redoundeth euen to our great good, and consolation, as the Physitian verie well knoweth, and the diseased patient sensibly feeleth: yea, and (which more is) they stayed not themselues in this alone, but labouring still to beautifie that same diuine part of mans mind (I meane reason) they inuented another kynde of flower, whiche they called Morall Philosophie, wherewithall their meaning was, to haue the effects of reason rightly ruled, to shine foorth most brightly in euery particular action of mans life, putting all their contem∣plations by this meanes, in assiduall and dayly practise: wherein, how excellent they were, and how forcibly they vsed it in their conuersation, and also how equally it directed all their deedes by iustice and equitie, their owne writings re∣maining yet, and their notable acts recorded in histories, do better & more plentifully declare, then either I can, or my present purpose may suffer me. Onely thus much is to be saide, that their vertues were so excellent, that we aime stil at them, and their common wealths so well or∣dered, that we make them our continuall plat∣forme & patterne: and the nearer we come vnto diuers of thē, the better we thinke our gouern∣ment established. Now it is not vnknowne vnto your honor, nor to any other that haue the true feeling of Gods grace working in their hearts,

and the Sunne of righteousnes shining in theyr consciences: that the Lord our God, the creator of all things, our redeemer, preseruer and sancti∣fier, hath giuen vnto vs not only the knowledge of all these things (in some measure) which they had in great aboundance, but (which more is) a farre surpassing and more excellent difference, to seuer vs withall from the rest of his creatures, then euer they had, or once thought of, to wit, the knowledge of his loue and fauour towards vs in his Sonne Iesus Christ. For albeit it be true that reason is the essentiall and formall dif∣ference, as they call it, betweene man and beast, yet we see euen in them some sparke, and as it were, some speciall kind of reason: for to try the same in particular effects, we see that a Dog can discerne his maister from another man, yea, though he be twenty yeares from him, if it be true that Homer reporteth of Vlisses his dog,Odiss. 17. & him that vseth to hurt him he can shun, and can fawne on him that cherisheth him. The bird also can foretell whē raine wil fall. The Emit in the time of sommer, maketh prouision for winter. Many there be, such like as these which we reade of in Pliny & Aristotle, writing of the nature of beasts, and whiche by our owne experience we daily see. But this is so farre from seeming to be reuealed to any other creature, that it is a para∣dox, and a strange thing to many of vs, that dif∣fer frō bruite beasts by reason, & therfore which is the drift of this whole discourse, it standeth vs vpon which professe the name of Iesus Christ, which do acknowledge him to be giuē of God the Father, and sealed vnto vs by God the holy

Ghost, for our eternall saluation: to haue an especiall care, that as Christ sayth of the wicked, (that they be wiser in their generation, then the children of light) so it be not sayde of vs,Luke. 16, 8. that the Paganes, Heathen, and Gentile Philoso∣phers, be not found in the sight of God more diligent in their humane profession, then we in the profession of Iesus Christ: I meane more glorious in shewing foorth the fruite of their Philosophy in their actions, then we of our di∣uinitie in our life and conuersation. And sure∣ly, I would to God that we could truly and rightly follow their steps in one thing, which is this: I reade of them that the more know∣ledge they obteined in their Philosophy, the more they abandoned themselues from the va∣nities of the world, so that one casteth his gold into the sea,Crates. another carried all his substance with him wheresoeuer he went: another con∣tented himselfe with a tub or tunne to dwell in,Bias. in steede of his house:Diogenes. all of them whatsoe∣uer they possessed, they did willingly employ it to the encrease of knowledge in themselues and others. But do we so? no. We seeke how to serue God and Mammon too:Matth. 6, 24. we labour to become religious in shewe, and couetous in deede: We desire to come to Christ by night with Nicodemus,Iohn. 3, 4. for feare of worldly losses, we seeke to crie Lord, Lord, but we haue no care to do the works of the Lord.Matth. 7, 21. 2. Tim 3, 5. Matth. 20, 22. We make a shewe of godlinesse, but we denie the power thereof: we wish to sit at the right and left hand of Iesus in his kingdome, but we are loth to drinke of his cup. (All in one word) We professe Iesus

Christ,Iude verse. 4. but turne the grace of God into wan∣tonnesse. Hence it is that wickednesse doth so abound, that Sathan hath preuailed so much, and that so few endeuour a godly life: euen for that the enemie can perswade them that profes∣sion will serue, that a shewe is sufficient. But howsoeuer it be, that so many be drunke with this cup of Sathans poison, against whome in truth, the Heathen Philosophers that neuer knew God, shall rise in the day of iudgement and condemne them, for that they haue beene more carefull to shew the fruite of their profes∣sion in vpright dealing (though it was in vaine) then these haue bene, yet it behoueth all them that see these things, and are greeued with the consideration thereof, and are not spotted with the same brand, to be so much the more care∣full, as the euill is common, that they smell not of their abhomination, that they depart from them,Reuel. 18, 4. and be not partakers of their sinnes, that they hate the garment spotted by the flesh, that they fashion not themselues like vnto thys world,Iude verse. 2, 3. Rom. 12, 2. but that they be changed in their shape, by the renewing of their mindes, and that thereby their profession may be adorned,Tit. 2, 10. and the truth thereof in their hearts and conscien∣ces forceablie established. When I considered these things (right Honorable) and sought out of Gods booke (which is the looking glasse discouering all enormities) wherein the chiefe cause heereof should consist: I perceyued (so farre as my small knowledge could atteyne vn∣to) that the lacke of the right vse of Gods word, and heedefull care to be gouerned by the

same, did ingender these, and infinite other ab∣hominations: and therefore for mine owne comfort, and the instruction of others, I dyd make choyse of the history of Peters denying of Christ to entreate vpon: which being ended, for certayne considerations heereafter mentio∣ned, I haue so neere as I could, penned it accor∣ding as it was spoken: Most humblie beseeching your Honour, that the same may proceede vn∣der the wings of your defence and protection, which I doubt not shall be by that meanes of the godly sort, the better accepted, and of the cankered caterpiller the lesse touched, so shall I be bound (which notwithstanding is my du∣tie) to pray vnto the Lord God of heauen, for the encrease and continuance of the graces of his holie spirit vnto your honour, to guide and direct the same in all your good and godly en∣terprises whatsoeuer, that thereby Gods holie name heere vpon earth may be glorified, hys children mainteined and cherished, sinne and iniquitie cut downe and quenched, Iesus Christ his Gospell promoted and ad∣uanced, and your owne conscience vnfaynedly comforted. Amen.

