



RJght Honourable, there be two causes which should mooue and force all hearts to mourne and lament (the feare of euils and losse of good) these two may come in one day, saith the Pro∣phet,Isa. 47.9. there are two sorts of men, the one good, the
other euill; good men doe euer sorrow, for this world is their hell; and euill men should euer sor∣row and lament, for God is their enemy? the one for the afflictions which they feele, the other for the iudgements which they may and doe feare: Verba iusti dolore sunt plena.Gregor. Mag. 5. moral. To the wicked Stimulus conscientiae est scelerum paena. The times are such as should bedew, the words of good men with lamentation. Quocunque ad∣spiceres luctus gemitusque sonabant, For∣maque non taciti funeris intus erat.Hier. in vlt. c. Esae. The godly doe and must take to heart griefe for sin: for thereby God is mooued to wrath against vs, the times of griefe beseemeth not the seasons of ioy. Heu quàm difficile est imitari gaudia falsa?Ouid. 1. trist. & 3. Claudian Difficile est tristi, fingere, mente, iocum. My speech must be short, because J speak of griefe, which our times doe require to bee performed of all, albeit a few of all doe supply the same: yet they to whom the Lord hath bestowed many and rare blessings, may and should fill vp the gap. Of the which number your L. is a speciall member vn∣der God and his Maiestie in this kingdome for the aduancement of Gods glory, and all good workes;
which godly and noble, and worthy disposition, is knowne to bee in you, the effect is at all occasions proouing the same, to the great comfort of all well disposed people of this land.Luke 2.52. And as the Scripture saith, That as the Lord Jesus, our righteousnes, did increase in yeares, stature and wisedome, so he did in the fauour of God and man; and from Christ as the fountaine, these blessings are distil∣led vpon the children of men, according to the mea∣sure of Gods dispensation: which Salomon pray∣ing for obtained, whose example no question your Lordship hath followed, who not onely haue Gods holy Spirit, moouing you to bee zealous of good workes, whereby Gods great fauour is manifested; and in so great estimation with so mighty a Mo∣narch: but also honoured, respected, loued, by Church and policy, and so by consequent most de∣seruing, that all should haue their eyes and hands directed vnto you, as to praise God for so good an instrument, as also to encourage you to goe on in so godly and righteous course of life to the end of this mortall life, and then to enioy your crowne of life eternall. Jn consideration of these great gifts be∣stowed on you, J haue made choise of your honour,
and that with great cause, Sivc enim illustrem generis prosapiam scrutor, sive devotam in Deum pietatem ruminor, sive summam in literas & studia humaniora, propensionem reputo, sive siugularem in Doctos & lite∣ratos quosvis clementian pensito: sive illu∣stres dotes alias, verè dignas considero, op∣time, inter optimos in venio.Seneca lib. 1. cap. 8. de ben. And seeing these gifts are extended to many out of your Lordships good inclination, and vnto me also, J cannot but say with Aeschines, who when Zo∣crates schollers did bring gifts vnto him in token of their thankfulnesse, yet Aeschines his affecti∣on was comparable with any, albeit worthy of Zo∣crates, but one thing J freely giue which is my selfe. And seeing J haue receiued fauour at your Lordships hands, J wished J could expresse my thankefulnesse in greater measure, then my abili∣ty will permit: yet J offer my seruice and this myte of my weake labours to your honourable pro∣tection, albeit not fit for the presse in so great light, had I not beene vrged by the well affected that heard it. It merits with the security and ini∣quity of the time, my desire is, that it may rouse
vp, all those that are asleepe in sinne, a double re∣spect makes it due vnto your Lordship, Nimis enim ingratus scytha vel geta fuerim, if J should not acknowledge my particular obligation, and secondly your Lordships propensitie, and ar∣dent study to aduance Gods glory, the safety of his roy all Maiestie and welfare of your countrey, for these causes and many more, Libellum mole quidem, sed non pondere exiguum, reue∣renter offero, atque inscribo, & hoc quali∣cumque monumento, singularem obser∣uantiam, gratitudinem & charitatem me∣am declaratam, ac testatam volo, ala∣criori animo obtaturus multo nobiliora, si facultas voluntati respondere posset. And thus ceasing further to trouble your Lord∣ship, but neuer ceasing to honour and serue you, praying the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ the father of glory and mercy, who in these last dayes of the world hath drawne vs out of darknesse vnto his marueilous light, through the Lord Iesus by the spirit in the word, increase, preserue, and blesse your honour, with all sort
of heauenly and earthly blessings, and when yee foughten the fight of faith and finished your course with ioy, that yee may at the last day, be crowned with immortall and eternall glory.

