



WHEN I consider with my selfe
(right honorable) that inestima∣ble
crowne of immortall glorie
which it hath pleased God the fa∣ther,
in his sonne Iesus Christ, to layMath. 25 34. vp in
store for those, whom (of his mercyEphes. 1. 4. 5. and free
fauour) he elected vnto him selfe before the
foundations of the vvorld: and with all those
Actes. 14. 22. many tribulations and afflictions, by which
his heauenly vvisedome hath appointed them
to enter into the same: I see (as in a glasse) be∣fore
myne eyes, the cause that moued our Sa∣uiour
Christ to say, thatMath. 7. 14. straite is the way,
vvhich leadeth to life and fevv, there by that



finde it, and the blessed Apostle Paule to set
downe:Rom. 7. 23. there is a law in my members, rebel∣ling
against the law of my minde and leading
me captiue vnto the lawe of sinne: for as the
glorious maiestie, of that heauenly ioy doth ra∣uish
the minde of euery man, to wishe that hee
might be partaker of the same, so (on the other
side) the consideration of afflictions and present
calamities, that all2. Tim. 3 12. those who will liue godly
in Christ Iesus shall suffer, doth not onely terri∣fie
many, from taking in hand the profession of
Religion: but greatlyRom. 7. 24. vexeth and greeueth
(euen) the deare children of God:Iob. 2. 3. &c. and maketh
such a cōtradictiō, betwixt the flesh & the spi∣rite,
that they seeme in such wise to be distra∣cted,
as though they were deuided into two
parts. The one striuing with mayne and might,
to go, toward hell: the other labouring, by all the
force that it is able, to goe towardes God. But
those that euer meane to take that course
which (alone) leadeth to the kingdome of hea∣uen,
must not onelyIohn. 5. 39. seeke out of the word of
God to know, what he would haue them to do,
and carefully to put the same, in practise: but
also, they must make theirLuke. 14. 26. &c. accompt to haue
infinite, and continuall Crosses (euen) for the
same: so that vnlesse, they be thus resolued, that



in respect of Iesus Christ, theyPhil. 3. 8. accompt all
things vile (and therfore for the professing, and
bearing witnes vnto his truth, are contented to
abide, all extremities, that Satan, the world, or
their owne flesh, can rayse vp against thē) it is
vnpossible that euer they shouldMath. 24 13. continue
vnto the ende that they might be saued. For
God in his wisedome, hath sene it most meete,
that they who shall reigne with his sonne Iesus
Christ, shall also be conformed vnto the simili∣tude
of hisRom. 8. 17. sufferinges, toMath. 20 22. drinke of the cup
that he did drinke of, and to be Baptised with
his Baptisme. Now Satā (who is a sworne ene∣my
to mankinde, and seeketh as a1. Pet. 5. 8. roaring Li∣on
whom hee may deuour) taketh occasion by
this decree of God to driue man into all extre∣mities
inward and outward: to the end that he
may winne him vnto himselfe, in leauing the
course of godlynesse, and giuing himselfe ouer
to commit all iniquities, and that with greedi∣nesse:
and so much the rather because hee fin∣deth
our corrupt nature, conuenient matter to
worke vpon, which in itGene. 6. 5. selfe is altogether e∣uill:
so that (excepting onely those whō it plea∣seth
God of his mere mercy (in Iesus Christ) to
regenerate, by theIohn. 15. 3. knowledge of his word and
Ephes. 1. 13. working of his holy spirite) all the posteritie



of Adam, is vtterly seduced by Satan to be in∣strumentes
of enlarging his kingdome, and en∣creasing
their owne condemnation. And those
whom the Lord hath reclaymed from the ser∣uice
of sinne, vnto the obedience of his Gospell
haue euer bene, and to the end of the world shal∣be,
so tempted of Sathā, so hōted at, abhorred,
and abused of the world, and so enticed by their
owne flesh to retire vnto the league, and amitie
of the world agayne: that they seeme to be of1. Cor. 15. 19.
all men most miserable: but this is their onely
comfort, and (in deede) the ioye that passeth all
the pleasures of the world, that their trouble is
but for aPsal. 30. 5. tyme: God will release them, andReuel. 7. 17.
wipe all teares from their eyes: that as theyRom. 8. 17.
are afflicted with Christ, so shall they be glori∣fied
and reigne with him: that the Lord ma∣keth
aPsal. 116. 15. glorious accompt (euen) of the death
of his Saintes and reserueth their teares inPsal. 56. 8.
a bottle, yea hee accompteth all the troubles of
his childrē to be hisActes. 9. 4. 5. owne, because (in deede)
they suffer for his sake: but they shall not lacke
their reward: yea such a reward as is, ten thou∣sand
times exceedyng the measure of their sor∣row:
for theRom. 8. 18. troubles of this life are not wor∣thy
to be compared to the glory, that shalbe re∣ueled.
But yet we haue great neede to be com∣forted,



and stayed, least we should beHeb. 12. 3. wearied,
and faynt in our myndes, for so much as no
correction for the tyme, is ioyous, but tedyous
sharpe and greeuous: able to make vs fall
downe vnder the burthen of the same, vnlesse
it please the Lord, to teach vs how, and to giue
vs might to support and susteyne it: which is
no where els learned neither any other meanes
giuen, then onely thePsal. 119. worde of God, whiche
the Lord hath giuen vnto vs, for that purpose.
Now, for so much as an experience, both of
the subtiltie of our enemie in our afflictions,
and also of the meanes how to beate him backe,
is to be seene in those temptations of our Saui∣our
Christ in the wildernesse, because I hauing
in my ordinary course Preached vppon the
same, and diuers who receiued present com∣fort
thereby (beyng desirous to haue the conti∣nuall
vse of the doctrine deliuered out of
them) desiring me, to pen the same: I condis∣cended
vnto their desire and (as neare as I
could remember) haue set them downe as they
were spoken: sauyng (onely) that in some par∣ticular
applications I haue had regarde (in
writtyng) vnto those to whose handes they
may come: as (in speaking) I respect myne
Auditorie. And I am bolde to make choyse



of your honor to whō I may dedicate the same,
partly for that I might shewe some token of
thankefulnesse vnto the same, for your fauour
towardes me, and especially for that I am per∣swaded
the doctrine, therein conteyned wilbe
acceptable vnto you. The Lord of heauen
and earth (from whom all true honour com∣meth)
increase the same vnto your due∣ty
more and more: for the aduaunce∣ment
of his glory in this world,
and the eternall comfort of
your owne soule in the
worlde of come.
Amen.

