



MOst gratious and happy Prince: not long sithence a certaine Religious Gen∣tleman asked me two que∣stions touching those weightie wordes of the Apostle Paul in the 1. Corin. 11. Let euery man therefore exa∣mine himselfe, and so let him eate of this bread, & drinke of this cup. The first was: whether euery Christi∣an be bound of necessitie to examine themselues before they doe receiue the Lords Supper or not.

The second was: wherein that ex∣amination of euery ones selfe dooth consist, or what the points bee, which euery Christian by this examination must find in himselfe, before hee can receiue ahe Lords Supper.
Two questions, deseruing a very care∣full answer, because they are as great and as needfull, as euer any can be in these daies.
The former toucheth the care∣lesse Atheist, who is wont, to presume to the Lordes holy Supper, not ca∣ring what hee doeth. The latter concernes the blinde ignorant sort, which are wont thither to flocke (it is a wonder to see) not knowing, what they doe. By both which, this great Sacrament is euery where fear∣fully abused, and the breaches of Si∣on and the ruines of Ierusalem there∣by become most lamentable.
For this cause, at that time with
 my best endeuour, I answered the que∣stions in our priuate conference toge∣ther, with all such doubts and obiecti∣ons, as did arise from, and were occa∣sioned by that our speech. Sithence, I handled the same abroad by publike preaching, as occasion was offered, which heard: I vnderstood, that ma∣ny were delighted in the diuine me∣thod. Many much reioyced at the plaine and easie order, affirming, that they had red sundry godly writings of the same argument, & heard diuers learnedly entreating of those words of the Apostle: but that the way to the performance of this duty of examina∣tion, was neuer tracted so plain, so rea∣die, so easie. Lastly therefore, not know∣ing what hurt the hiding vp of this simple Talent may do: & againe, what gaine and profite the occupying of the same abroad by Sea & land, through Gods blessing might bring vnto his Church,
 I thought best for that end to put pen to paper, and humbly to dedicate the same to you (most noble Prince) especially for two causes,
The first and chiefest is: after your most noble Father, our most gratious Soueraigne King Iames, whom God long preserue, you are our next glad∣some hope, to gouerne these Realmes and Kingdomes with wholesome Lawes, and chiefly with sincere loue vnto Gods true Religion, whereof this little booke containes a part: where∣in (I hope) your gratious clemencie will not onely take well in worth my good will and meaning, but also will put thereto the signet of your prince∣ly licence and allowance, vnder which this little Talent, Quod sentio, quam sit exiguum, may passe, be tra∣ded, and vsed, the rather because it is the marchandise of heauens king∣dome.

The other cause is: as my grand∣father Doctor Tye was Tutor to Prince Edward, afterward King Ed∣ward the sixt: so likewise, though I neither desire, nor deserue the like place, yet am I glad (most noble Prince) to shew any token of mine vn∣fained hartie dutie & loue vnto your Grace, whereby (so farre as I may be bold) I might bid you hearty welcome into these your Fathers Dominions: wherein in my daily praiers, I humbly craue of almightie God, in all happie peace to establish his excellent Maie∣stie, and his royall Progenie euen to the worlds end.
Your HIGHNESSE,

