



THe woondring Queene of She∣ba (right Hono∣rable) presented the most wise Salomon with the golde of O∣phyr, & richest gifts of the land. The Samnites brought with them a greate mass of treasure for the noble Ro∣mane Marcus Crassus. Howe preposterous then may I seeme, which presume to bring into your honourable pre∣sence Lernam malorum, as it were a lazary of Leapers? Pardon (right Honourable) my rudenesse herein, and take it well in woorth, though it may of some be reputed
Calabrihospitis munus, a trifling gift. Things which haue a base and rude forme, not bombasted to please the fantasie, somtimes affoord more profit then is expected. Happily this home-spunne webbe may be profitable to ma∣nie, and therein acceptable to your Honour, a principall piller of common wealth. For as the soule is much more excellent then the bodie, so whatsoeuer tendeth to the good thereof, is farre more precious then golde, and to be preferred, before all bodily and earthly treasure. But a secret and hidden maladie, such as is sinne, the sickenesse of the soule, the decay of men, the ouerthrow of Nations, and the ruine of the whole worlde, can neuer be well cu∣red and reformed, except first discouered. For which cause, ten capitall sinnes are in this Catalogue detected, being as forcible to bring this noble Realme of England to thraule, as Iosephs ten brethren were to sell him into the captiuitie of Aegypt: in the which men in this age are gone backeward from God, ten degrees further then the shadow of Ahaz diall out of course:2. Sam. 20.3. so as if they doe not spedily repent, and sequester these ten, as Dauid did his ten polluted concubines, they will be vnto vs as ten women,Leui. 26.26 that shall bake our bread in the ouen of scarcitie, and deliuer the same to vs by waight: And at the last God will say vnto vs,Num. 14.22. as he said to the Israelites. This people that haue tempted me with these ten tempta∣tions, shal not see the land of promise. Therfore (right Honourable) as Aesculapius temple in the city Epidau∣rium in Grece, was to all maner diseased persons which resorted thither a meane to recouer desired health, (such medicines as would cure their maladics being there re∣uealed vnto them:) so the generall good which I wish all to find in the discouerie of these ten so cōmon euils, (that not so fewe as ten righteous persons, for the which God would hauespared Sodom and Gomorrah, might bee
found among vs) hath moued me, though after a plaine and rude sort, to publish the same. For as of ten tribes one remained still to the house of Dauid: and of ten Lepers one became a faithfull conuert: and of ten virgins, fiue were wise, and waited for the comming of Christ: so in this euil generation, God will (I doubt not) reserue to him selfe a remnant which shall keepe themselues and their garments vnspotted of the world. Further, your honou∣rable vertues shadowed with no cloudes of vice, and of your wisdome correspondent to your place, hath mooued me to present this to your Lordships hands: yet, not with∣out feare to aduenture so base a gift to so worthie a per∣sonage. But the late experience of your honourable cour∣tesie, hath imboldened me to make it a messenger of my dutie and vnfained loue towards you. May it please your honour to accept it, I cannot but reuerently acknowledge that it proceedeth more of your noble minde, then of the worthinesse of the gift: and in regard thereof, holde my selfe so much the more bounde in all Christian dutie to your honour during life. Thus beseeching almightie God to blesse your Honour, I wish to the world, the loue of God the father, an vniuer sall peace at the last to his mi∣litant Church, confusion of all hypocrites, and to all his chosen people euerlasting life in the kingdome of heauen. Amen.

