


THE Euangelist,Luke. 1. Acts. 1. S. Luke (Right Wor∣shipfull) had his Theophilus to whom hee dedicated his Gospell: a diuine matter, to a godly mā. This example may seeme to haue procured many good men since that time, to dedi∣cate the fruite of their learned stu∣dies, to some of godly qualitie, that they might be as a Rampier to their vertues, to repell those whelpes of Cerberus that hellish dogge and a bar to peeuish Momus, which will euer be finding fault in Apelles woork. Seeing therfore that many of the best lear∣ned
 fathers in these latter euill times, haue gladly sought the prote∣ction of great states, I thought it not good to publishe this little booke, without the countenance of such a one as might be a patrone to the sāe against such peuish carpers. The mat∣ter of it selfe is such, as it needeth not the weake defence of man, being the doctrine of the holy Ghost, vttered by the blessed mouth of S. Paul: and yet the children of God, are bound to defend and aduaunce it to the vt∣termost of their power, on the be∣halfe of the Lorde Christ, (to shew their zeale and loue) against his ad∣uersarie, that monster Antichrist: for the vnderpropping of whose king∣dom, those kings and nations of the earth,Apoc. 17.2. and 18.3. which haue tasted of the en∣chaunted cup of fornication of the Babilonicall Strumpet, (which is a more pestilent cup then that Nectar of Cyrces, which transformed men into beastes) do band themselues to∣gether euen at this day, and thereto do bend their whole forces. But the Lorde will shortly destroye that man
 of sin with the breath of his mouth.2. Thess. 1. This is the matter (Right Woorship∣full) in it selfe excellent, the com∣mon knowledge whereof is very ne∣cessarie, because it occasioneth a de∣monstration of the end of the world therunto annexed, to awake carelesse Atheistes, which are lulled asleepe with worldly pleasure in the cradle of securitie: The expounders also of the Apostle Paules minde in this ar∣gument, (whose names are hereto prefixed) are such principall pillars of the christian Church, as their iudg¦ment will stand firme with out any iust controlement. My paines in the collection and translation out of La∣tine into Englishe, (the least, yet faithfully herein bestowed) I offer to your woorshippe, crauing accep∣tance of so small a gift. And because my case may paraduenture nowe stand no better then it did longe since with the Philosopher The∣odorus Atheniensis, who complayned of great discourtesie shewed vnto him, because those thinges which he gaue with the right hande, were
 snatched vp and taken by his audi∣torie with the left: meaning there∣by his workes and lectures which he publishing to good purpose, were wrested and sunderly by captious carpers canuassed with sinister inter∣pretations: therfore in most dutifull humility, I shroud my selfe vnder the cloake of your courtesie, which I heare and partly knowe to be such, as I looke not to bee shouldred out and reiected, but freely to be allow∣ed the benefite of your goodnes. In assured hope whereof, I rest, leauing this as a testimonye to the worlde, what a reuerend opinion I haue of you, both in respect of your humble courtesie, (wherein you shew foorth the right patterne of a Gentleman) & also in respect of that godly zeale toward the Gospell of Christ, which by effect hath alwayes appeared to be in you. Thus praying God to blesse your worshippe, I wish charitie from God to the world, peace at length to his warfaring Church, confusion of all manner of hypocrits, fauourable
 inclination and Iudgment of great personages to his worde, and to the godly trauellers in his Gospell long life, and most prosperous reigne to our gratious soueraigne Prince, and true happines to al her subiects that wish the same: And euen with my whole hart, I pray God the father of heauen, and his sonne our Lord Iesus Christe, to be a bright pillar to vs in the darknesse of this worlde, and to make all his chosen people at his time, partners of the most ioyful and heauenly kingdome. Amen.

