



BEing not ignorant (right worshipful and vertuous Ladie) of the manifolde disputations not onely a∣mong the learned, but al∣so of the great varietie & diuersitie of opinions among the vulgar people and simple sorte, concerning the Sabboth day, & the right vse of the same: some with the wayward and superstitious Iewes obstinately and stifly maintaining the ceremonial obseruation of the seuenth day,Sundry o∣pinions concern∣ing the Sabboth daye. the which they hold in no wise to be mutable, or to be altered and changed: o∣thers with the Atheists and godlesse Epi∣cures vtterly denying, that there ought to
 be any obseruation and keping of any day at all as wholly & dedicated vnto the Lorde his seruice: and yet moreouer some others, who albeit they graunt it meete & requisite that there should be some certain & set day of the week seuered out frō the rest for the vse of the ministerie & Church meetings, yea and the same also to bee that daye which we cōmonly call the Sunne-day, or Lords day, yet holding it lawfull as well on the same day, as any other day in the week, to exercise the customable & vsual works, euery man of his ordinarie trade & vocati∣on: I haue thought with my selfe that I could not do better thē to see: out a reme∣die for the staying of the cōsciences of the weaker number in this great varietie and doubtfulnes of assertions, tending to the o∣uerthrow of religion and impeachment of gods seruice. Meeting therfore with a god∣ly & learned Worke of one Vrsinus a Ger∣man in the which are profoūdly & pithily handled many theologicall discourses and points of religion, & among the rest, this of the Sabboth, in his expositiō of the 4. cō∣mādement, finding the argumēt sit for the circumstance of the time, I haue turned the same into our mother tongue, for the fur∣ther
 benefit of the godly & christianly dis∣posed, that they may haue in this poynt wherwith to satisfie both thēselues and o∣thers. For in this smal treatise is debated the right vse of the Sabboth day,The Ar∣gument and con∣tents of this trea∣tise. what exerci∣ses on the same are allowable & what to be refrained, wherin it is kept, & wherin it is brokē: their argument cōfuted, that think it not lawfull for Christians to keepe the the Lords day, & their reasons also answe∣red, which so stoutly cōtend for the Iewish obseruatiō of the seuēth day: al these things being proued with most strong & euident proues out of the word of God and holy scriptures, & that in such sort, that the lyke is hardly to be met withall in so briefe & short a Pāphlet or treatise. The necessitie heerof is apparant in regard of the time, wherein is so diuersly disputed concerning this questiō: the profit likewise shall easily (I doubt not) be reaped of all such as with single harts & vpright mindes shal diligēt∣ly and without parcialitie peruse the same.
This my small labour, such as it is (simple & slender I confesse, in regard of my pains in trāslating, but much behoueful & auail∣able, in regard of the matter, for the church & people of god) I make bold to offer vn∣to
 to the gentle acceptation of your good Ladiship, for manie causes.
First, that besides the manie other hea∣uenlye graces of faith, knowledge of the will of God, loue vnto his euerlasting truth and holy Scriptures, care to walk in life and conuersation accordingly: with making much of the professors, and chief∣ly the preachers of the same: it maye be a further spur vnto you, to the stirring vp & increasing of your godlye zeale for the Lord his seruice & carefull sanctifying of his holy Sabboth, not onely in your owne person, but also in your whole familye: so that it may be truly said of you, to the glo∣rie of God & comfort of his people, as we read of that good & vertuous captaine Ie∣hoschuahh: I & my houshold wil serue the Lord. For albeit the nūber be smal, & the people few that haue a due regard of chri∣stian spending the Lordes daye, in hearing the word preached, in receiuing the sacra∣ments, in praier, supplication, & thanks-gi∣uing, & in priuate cōferring with their fa∣milies at home, of the word publiky prea∣ched (the greatest multitude both of men and women of all degrees and callinges, letting loose the raynes, and giuing
 out the bridle vnto all kinde of vanities & licentiousnesse) yet let this be your crowne and glorie (good madame) letting these go, to haue imitated and followed the exam∣ple of those vertuous gentlewomē of Thes∣salonica, whose praise is in the Gospel,Act. 17.2 3.4. for their great diligence in reuerent obseruing the Sabboth day, & in vsual frequenting & resortīg to heare the word, for the great cō∣fort of their soules. And further, in the same place is the example of the godlye wo∣mē of Beroea cōmended, who not of custōe,Act. 17.10.11.12 but of zeale, not of constraint, but with all willingnesse, not as sad & heauie, but with all readynesse and ioyfulnesse, not onelie heard the word preached by Paule and Si∣las, at the publike assemblies and meetings of the Church, but also vsed dailie and pri∣uate conference in their houses at home, in serching the Scriptures, whether the things were so or no. How comfortable is that also which we read in the 16. of the Acts,Act. 16.12.13.14.15. of the practise of the zealous women of Philippos, who in the coldnesse and slack∣nesse of men (as may appeare, & very pro∣bablie be gathered) customablie assembled to the riuer without the Citie, to heare Paule preach on the Sabboth, where by
 the opening of the heart of Lydia, it plea∣sed the Lorde by the conuersion of one poore woman to beginne his kingdome in Macedonia, which woman is praised not onelie for religiousnesse in her selfe, but al∣so for her whole familie, beeing godlie and christiālie disposed. For the text doth men∣tion, that she was baptised, & all her house: which Sacramēt (no doubt) the holy Apo∣stle would not haue administred vnto thē, vnlesse he had found in them the fruites & testimonies of true Christianitie:Reade the Epistle of S. Iohn vnto the elect lady And here at no hand may wee let passe the worthie cōmendation, which Iohn giueth vnto the most vertuous & worshipful Lady and her children, whose conuersation before the world was agreeable vnto their profession, according as the truth of the Lord requi∣reth that it should be. Which singular and notable exāple, as it generallie concerneth al christian and godly women, so dooth it most neerelie and properlie belong vnto your good Ladiship, & all other gentle wo∣men of your place and calling.Ro. 15.4. For, if what∣soeuer examples of the olde fathers in the Scriptures are written for our learning, that by reading their examples, we should
 expresse and followe their vertues, then doubtlesse are all women of great wor∣shippe and dignitie of this godlie Ladie to learne, that it is not sufficient that they be religious and godlie themselues, but that they also labour to haue their whole fami∣lies and households vnfainedlie to feare the Lord, which thing cannot bee performed without the diligent hearing of the word on the Lords day, & other meetings of the Church, and priuate labouring in instruc∣ting and dailie teaching of our charges at home, the which good exercise, as I can hope for at the handes of manie, so I can promise and assure my selfe, that it shall bee carefullie practised of your W. of whome I heare so well for zeale and loue of the truth, nothing doubting but that beeing compassed about with so greate a cloude of witnesses,He. 12.1.2 whose care hath beene so vehement and earnest for the true spending of the Sabboth, and Christian education of their famylies, with performance of other dueties of Godly∣nesse, all lets and stumbling blockes being remooued, you will dailie adde vnto that great good forwardnes, which the lord hath
 wrought in you alredie a plentiful increase in all vertues, beautifying and garnishing a Christian Ladie, God by his holie spirite working in your heart a burning desire euerie daie more and more to imitate the commendable examples of these holy ma∣trones before alleadged.
Secondlie, hauing receiued many bene∣fits at the hands of that worthie Knight, sir Iohn Pellam, your late deceased husband, a Gentleman so well deseruing of his com∣mon wealth and Countrie, that verie enuie her selfe, if neuer so faine she woulde, shall yet neuer be able to burie in the dark lake of obliuion his due deserued praises: I haue thought it meete and requisite to giue out before the world some dutifull testimonie of a thankfull minde in regard of the same, least I might worthilie be condempned of that vice which is both hated of God and detested of men, I meane the foule staine of ingratitude, which the verie Heathen haue recorded to be the chiefe ring-leader vnto all filthinesse,Xenophō In his first ooke of he edu∣ation of Cyrus. as being alwaies accompani∣ed with blushles shamelesnesse, which may easily perswade vnto al kind of wickednes.
Thirdlie, in regard of your owne W. omitting such good graces, as are generally
 knowen by the working of God his spirite to be in you, to the comfort of the godlie, (because that you of your modestie cannot abide to heare them, nor I without suspiti∣on of flatterie may be thought to name them) the particular knowledge of vnde∣serued gentlenes from your good L. meant vnto me, most worthilie craueth some du∣tifull signification of my gratefull remem∣braunce of such most curteous kindnesse, the which, because my poore abilitie wyll suffer no other waie to expresse, accept (I most humblie beseech you) these paper thanks, vntil God shall offer some fitter oc∣casion to testifie that vnfained thankeful∣nesse, which your singular courtesie most iustlie doth require, praying in the meane season the Lord, most abundauntlie in this life to direct you in all your waies to his glorie, and ioy of his chosen, and in the life to come to make you partaker of those vnspeakable blessings, which in most rich mercy he hath prepared for all those that in his Christ do trulie feare and serue him, to whome be all glorie both now and for euer Amē. Frō Tunbridge, the 20. of Oct. 1584.

