


AS three speciall occasions mo∣ued S. Peter to offer his la∣bour in buil∣ding of three Tabernacles;Mat. 17, 3.4. one for Christ one for Moses, and one for Elias: euen so (right Worshipfull) three speciall occasions moued me to offer this my la∣bor
 in the building of a spirituall Ta∣bernacle, one for meere1 Cor. 12, 12.13.14. to 25. Phil. 2, 19.20.21. 1. Cor. 10, 24. care andAct. 24, 16. Rom. 9, 1.2.3.4.5. con∣science to myLeuit. 25.25.48.49. Rom. 9, 5. contrimen in Wales, one to kindle my1. Sam. 16.2.20, 2.4.9.12.13.17.12, 10. faithfull affections to∣wards you, and one to satisfie the re∣questBy his let∣ters dated, Ianuar. 20. Apr. 5. And one, May 2. 1592. of a right worshipfull gentleman, Sir William Herbert knight, who would ioyne with me in this worke. If the care of my countrimen might be vnsupplied; and if the worthinesse of this learned and zealous knight might be (as he is in the graue) for euer si∣lenced; yet the heartie affections, the bond of thankefulnesse, and the chri∣stian duety I owe you, can no way so effectually be discharged. Wherein also I shall make cleare my good conscience towards the one, and my humble due∣ty towards the other: which if you shall please to patronize, whatsoeuer is found wanting by him which is dead, shall be supplied (I doubt not) to your contentment, by them which are aliue.

Exo. 37, 7. As the two Cherubins which Mo∣ses made, tended to the preseruation of Gods people,The Me∣thod and nine ob∣seruations. and therefore both were placed vpon the Arke as one: euen so (good worshipfull Sir) the two former books which I made, tended to the in∣struction of Gods people, in the holie Bible; and therefore I haue placed them both in one.Psal. 62, 11.12.13. As God spake once and twice that power and mercie belongeth vnto him: so I will speake once, twice, and euer to his maiestie, that power may be giuen by his spirit, and mercie by his sonne, to all that long with Zeale to the knowledge hereof. These are to certifieIer. 9.17.18.19. you, though not for news, there was greatEzech. 32.1.2.3. lamenta∣tion in Syon, because of Gods iustice for their sinnes, as there was great la∣mentation for Pharao in Aegypt, be∣cause he was a lion in the land, and a dragon in the sea; and as there was greatHest. 4.3. sorrow, fasting, mourning, and
 weeping, among the Iewes, because the king had decreed their deaths: euen so there is great cause of lamentation, fa∣sting, mourning, and weeping here in England, becauseIer. 9, 21. death is scaling our windowes, theEze. 32.4. beasts of the fields hungering to deuoure our bodies; our bloud readie to water the land;Eze. 32, 6. and ourMat, 7, 19.13, 42.43.18.9. Iud. 9, Reu 19, 20. soules as prepared for the fire of hell, by reason of sinnes in theHos. 4, 1.2. common sort, of horrible crueltie in many of them that areEsa. 3, 12. Hos. 7, 3.4.5. great, and of the gene∣rall ignorance of Christ, according to his gospell, in euerie sort. If it please you to compare the raigne ofKin. 20, 21. Manas∣ses, sometimes king of Iudah, with the raigne of Marie; sometimes queene of England, you shall finde little oddes in the innocent blood that the one shed at Ierusalem, and the innocent bloud that was shed at London, &c. which God the righteous iudge hath not yet fully reuenged, because that the vnifor∣mitie
 in the professiō of Christ these 36 years, is not yet perfect, & the persecu∣tion of former times are not done away by repentance. For notwithstāding the great2. Kin. 22.23. zeale of Iosias, with the obedience of his people, yet the former sinnes of Manasses would not be forgottē. Ther∣fore God knowes, and most wise men sees, we haue vrgent occasions mo∣uing vs to pray, yea, to pray heartely vnto Iesus Christ the aeternall king, for Elizabeth our queene, and other hir subiects, that either be will vtter∣ly forgiue, or at the least grant, that the penaltie deserued doe not fall vpon vs, nor vpon our children. And albeit we cannot shake off the generall condem∣nation threatned and knowne to hang ouer England, yet hir maiesty with vs, and we with hir, loathing our own sins, and detesting the abhomination of o∣thers, shall be singled and seuered to preseruation, come the desolation neuer
 so terrible and suddaine. Ierusalem which was sometimes the citie of the great king, the keeper of the diuine oracles, the receptacle of Angels, and the continual presence of God himselfe, is now become a place of sulphir and hellish flames, inhabited with Oules, Estriges, and such like noisome crea∣tures euen so they that haue eyes to see, may yet see the tears and desolation of the great and famous citie of London, & they that haue ears to heare, may yet heare the cries of hir children, the piti∣ous lamentation of hir women, and the sighs of hir men in euerie street: some for their parents, some for their chil∣dren, some for their wiues, some for their husbands, some for mony, and some for meat, which the last years plague hath ruinated, depriued, and desolated. Whether this were a reuenge of their sinnes yet liuing, or a reuenge of their sinnes alreadie dead, and yet
 vnrepented, it is not knowne; but sure it is many woes are past, and ma∣ny more are to come, if the perusing and the examinatiō of our selues, worke not in vs the consideration of that great zeale of Gods glorie, the desire of building the Lords house, and the practising of such an vpright life as was in the antient fathers of the church. Wherefore I humbly intreat you, and in Christ Iesus I desire you, al∣beit your place be not to reforme these things, so generally out of frame, yet reforme and amend your selfe and your owne houshold: ioyne with them, that they may ioyne with you. My good worshipfull and Christian friend, as I cannot charge you nor any of yours, for any disorder, so I cannot leaue to intreat and desire you to walke warily and wisely in this crooked and froward generation, ground your own foundati∣on sure, take heed to your selfe, looke that
 nomanReu. 3, 11. take away your Crowne. The deuill offreth violence, hold therefore fast that which you haue, watch and pray, O pray continually, powre out your supplications before God mor∣ning and euening, both you and your hoshold.Psal. 5, 3. Morning and euening (said Dauid) will I direct my praiers vnto thee. As the morning and euening is a sit and a conuenient time for sutors to attend vpon great men, and as the morning was a sit and a conuenient time to gather Manna:Gen. 28, 18. euen so (good sir) the morning and euening is a sitte and a conuenient time, for you and your houshold to become sutors vnto the great maiesty of God, for the spiri∣tuall Manna, the food of your soules. As Moses was commanded to come vp to Sinai, with the two tables of the law, early in the morning: euen so are we commanded to appeare before God in our chambers, early in the morning,
 before we goe abroad, hauing the two Testaments of God in our hands, lear∣ning how to honor his maiesty in the one, and how to vse our bretheren cha∣ritably in the other, both which are the two principall dueties of euerie christian. As the learning must needs goe before the practising, so the practising must needs follow after the learning. Learne (I beseech you) there∣fore, and teach your houshold the lear∣ning of the Lord, morning and eue∣ning; not in regard of him to whom all times are alike, but in regard of your selues, because in the morning & euening is the fittest and most conueni∣ent time, by meditations and praiers to recommend your soules vnto his maiesty, and to contemplate of heauenly things. And thus hauing indeuored your ease and speedy profit in these my introductions, by taking some thing away, and by adding other more need∣full,
 with answers to three necessarie questions, I take my leaue, not for∣getting my humble commendations to your selfe and to the good Christian Gentlewoman Ms. Barbara your wife, desiring the maiesty of my aeternall God to finish your labors to the glorie of his name, to the good of his saints, and to the saluation of your and their soules. From Leonard Shorditch, the 18 of Octob. 1594.

