



VLYSSES (Right worshipfull) ha∣uing spent some time in the Court of Aeolus, where he was friendly entertained, desired at length to be dismissed: his sute was granted, and he sent away in Princely man∣ner, with all the windes tied vp in a bottle, to be commaunded as he thought best. He was not past a dayes iourney or two from the shore, but he went to wracke tho∣rough the misdealing of those, to
 whose safe conduct he had com∣mitted himselfe, and by the winds was driuen backe againe to the coast of Aeolia. His weather bea∣ten men, and himselfe being refre∣shed as time & place then serued, he set forward to Aeolus his Court, hoping to find such entertainment as he found before. Not daring so∣dainly to enter in, he rested him∣selfe at the Porter his lodge, where he heard these words:
.
It may be they moued his pati∣ence a little, because they touched his former estate, yet hauing bet∣ter conceite of others in that place he let them passe, and preased for∣ward to the presence of the King, sitting not farre off with his Nobi∣litie about him, to whom he spake
 thus in humble manner:
. And that his request might the better preuaile, he ad∣ded his reason, (For it is not likely though his estate were bad, that he would craue any thing more then reason.) . But he was so farre off from finding his expected reliefe, that he was com∣maunded to get him thence with these hot wordes to his cold com∣fort:
.
Such as Vlysses his departure was from the Iland Aeolia, such was mine from London Northward; such as his entertainement was at his returne, such was mine cōming thither againe. For miscarying in that voyage besides mine expecta∣tion
 (I would say my desert were it not presumption) I found that of Horace to be true:
—Diffugiunt cadis,
Cum faece siccatis amici,
Ferre iugum pariter dolosi.
Some said they could not, some durst not for feare, and some an∣swered they would not helpe to re∣paire that losse, which the vnkind Northerne blast had inforced me to. VVhat should I do, or what o∣ther thing could I doe in this case, but that which Vlysses had donne before? . I suffered all, and bare it out, not lying still as a man carelesse, but knowing mine head and handes (vnder God) to be my best friends, I set them to their old occupation againe, tea∣ching the Mathematicall arts, and penning, or translating such books as I thought most conuenient for
 that purpose, of the which this booke is some little part. And for so much (Right worshipfull) as I intended therein not onely your pleasure, but your profit especially among the rest, I am bold to make that intent knowne in dedicating it vnto your VVorship, & crauing your fauorable acceptance therof, which if it please you to afford, you shall inuite me to a farther worke, and bind me not to be vnthankfull for your friendly fauour.

