


SOlons law to the Athenians (right
Honorable) adiuged him to die, &
vnworthy to liue, that in time of
ciuill garboyles, as carelesse of the
weale publike, withdrew himselfe
and became a neuter. Which
law, albeit proceeding from a Pa∣gan,
yet holding affinitie with ho∣ly
writ, I cannot but approue, and wish the same were
also of force among Christians. Professed Christians I
meane, which (in these factious broyles in the common
wealth of Israel, wherein Religion seemeth to be rent
(as it were) in two, each part challenging the truth as
his owne proper, whereas but one Truth there is, and
the same indiuisible) are either carelesse and negligent
in the Lords worke, and so accursed: or els become
luke-warme, awaiting onely occasion to runne with

the streame, and cleaue to time and stronger part for
their better safetie. Both which, as abominable to God,
are to be spued out of his sacred mouth: & to be shun∣ned
of men as the Apostle willeth. Sith hated then of
God, and detested of men, I conculde with Solon, such
Foxes not worthy to liue among Christians, & would
God they were cut off from destroying the Lords vine∣yard.
The consideration whereof, and that my selfe (al∣beit
simple and most vnworthy of many thousands, se∣cluded
from the world, and cut off from the societie of
men, or meanes of imployment to benefit (as of right
it claimeth) my natiue country) am also a member of
this Christian cōmon wealth: hath made me charie to
be taxed with the guilt of like crime: & careful to auoid
the note of both the one and the other, prickt there∣fore
with the spurre of dutie, zeale, and hartie desire to
good the Region, wherein I first tooke breath (though
little carefull of my good) to the vtmost stretch of my
poor abilitie, I bring here my endeuour, and translati∣on
into our vulgar tongue, for the helpe and instructi∣on
of the simple. The due commendations of the Au∣thor
and Subiect farre exceedeth my reach, and there∣fore
do leaue them to the censure of the learned. And
taught by long experience, your Lordships godly
zeale for the aduauncement of true religion and due
execution of iustice (the hauing or wanting whereof,
is the glorie and suretie, or maime and ruine of all
sttates and kingdomes) and seeing your Lordship by
diuine goodnesse placed, and by Regall power depu∣ted
in this selfe same common-wealth, for a light vnto
others, and a Shepheard to feed the people with iustice
and iudgement. These (my good Lord) with the wor∣thinesse

of the worke, best beseeming so worthy a Pa∣tron,
together with humble acknowledgment of dutie
to your Lordship haue caused me make choise of your
honorable selfe, the better emboldened thereunto by
your good acceptance of my former booke. And so I
humbly commend this my trauel to your like view and
protection: not doubting but your Lordship, after your
wonted honorable disposition will vouchsafe to take in
worth my simple present, and pardon my presumption
proceeding from an affectionate desire to do your ho∣nour
seruice, whereunto before all men, I acknowledge
my selfe bounden, and my dayly study shall be imploy∣ed:
I beseech the eternall Deity, to increase his graces
in your Lordship, that his glory may more thereby ap∣peare,
and multiply your dayes as the dayes of heauen,
to pull the pray frō the Spoylers iawes, and relieue the
oppressed. And so in all humilitie I take leaue. Fleete
my miserable prison this 24. of October. 1600,

