



WORTHY SIR:
I Confesse, I somewhat in∣cline
to bee of your minde,
that if unto the authorities
drawn out of Scriptures and
Fathers (which are common
to us with others) a true di∣scoverie
were added of that Religion which
anciently was professed in this Kingdome;
it might prove a speciall motive to induce
my poore country-men to consider a little

better of the old and true way from whence
they have hitherto been mis-ledd. Yet on the
one side, that saying in the Gospel runneth
much in my minde;Luke 16. 31. If they heare not Moses
and the Prophets, neyther will they be perswaded,
though one rose from the dead: and on the other,
that heavie iudgement mentioned by the A∣postle;
2 Thes. 2. 10, 11. because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might bee saved, God shall send
them strong delusion, that they should beleeve lyes.
The woefull experience whereof, wee may
see daily before our eyes in this poore nation:
where, such as are slow of heart to beleeve
the saving truth of God delivered by the Pro∣phets
and Apostles, doe with all greedinesse
imbrace, and with a most strange kinde of
credulitie entertaine those lying Legends,
wherewith their Monkes and Friars in these
latter daies have polluted the religion and
lives of our ancient Saints.
I doe not deny but that in this Countrey,
as well as in others, corruptions did creep in
by little and little, before the Divell was let
loose to procure that seduction which pre∣vailed
so generally in these last times: but as
farre as I can collect by such records of the
former ages as have come unto my hands

eyther manuscript or printed) the religion pro∣fessed
by the ancient Bishops, Priests, Monks,
and other Christians in this land, was for
substance the very same with that which
now by publike authoritie is maintained
therein, against the forraine doctrin brought
in thither in later times by the Bishop of
Romes followers. I speake of the more sub∣stantiall
points of doctrine, that are in con∣troversie
betwixt the Church of Rome and
us at this day; by which only we must iudge,
whether of both sides hath departed from
the religion of our Ancestors: not of matters
of inferiour note, much lesse of ceremonies
and such other things as appertaine to the di∣scipline
rather than to the doctrine of the
Church.
And whereas it is knowne unto the lear∣ned,
that the name of Scoti in those elder
times (whereof we treate) was common to
the inhabitants of the greater and the lesser
Scotland (for so heretofore they have beene
distinguished) that is to say, of Ireland, and
the famous colonie deduced from thence in∣to
Albania: I will not follow the example of
those that have of late laboured to make dis∣sension
betwixt the daughter and the mo∣ther,

but account of them both, as of the same
people.
Tros Rutulusve fuat, nullo discrimine habebo.
The religion doubtlesse received by both,
was the selfe same; and differed little or no∣thing
from that which was maintained by
their neighbours the Britons: as by compa∣ring
the evidences that remaine, both of the
one nation and of the other, in the ensuing
discourse more fully shall appeare.
