



MY singular selected friēds, hauing published many and sundry bookes of di∣uinity, and resolutely cō∣cluded with my self there to surceasse, knowing this to be the enuious and maligning age, in which few men shal be condignely rewarded, neither yet from vniust imputations, and impious calumniations freed: yet
for all that I was occasioned, or rather (as I may say) violently importuned for my owne better instruction and sa∣tisfaction, being more surprised with sorrow then with the losse of all the kingdomes of the world, carefully to collect answers to diuers questions, and obiections which did assaile my soule, for and as concerning the deceasse of some such as did most nearely concerne me, and exceeding dearely appertaine vnto me. And hauing therewithall re∣ceiued through Gods mercie, that which of all other things I most speci∣ally desired; I was drawne dutifully and respectiuely to consider that my case was, or might be yours, and the cō∣mon case of all men. Wherefore I tooke in hand methodically to dispose of all those dispersed collections into this booke, as your Worships may see. Wherin I alledge nothing but true sen∣tences, & examples of holy Scriptures, and that so warrantably, so briefely, and so plainely, as that I might not seeme tedious to the wise and learned, nor yet obscure to the simple and sor∣rowfull
hearted. Humbly and heartily desiring you in liew of my labor, and in recompence of my loue, that you wil be pleased sometimes to sequester your selues from your publike affaires, yea and sometimes from your most priuate occasions, for the orderly and through reading thereof. Assuring you vpon my poore experience, and vpon the iudge∣ment of the best learned writers, that there is nothing so effectuall in Gods word, except the graces of his holy Spi∣rit, to make a regenerate man to mourn in mirth, to solace in sorrow, and to apprehend the right vse of all the meanes, which God hath ordayned for the preseruation of life, vntill the time of death doth come; as the meditation of mortality, with Scripture answers cōtemplatiuely to euery such question and obiection, as may be raised con∣cerning death: together with deuout prayers going before, and thanks∣giuing following after. Or otherwise a thousand to one, death brings with it feare, feare brings an increase of natu∣rall torments, an increase of torments,
brings distraction of memorie. After∣wards followeth all idle, dissolute and damnable speech, and so from one de∣fect vnto another, an obliuiō of Christ and his kingdome, as the diuell would haue it. Thus I end, hauing timely inough I hope forewarnd you, with my hearty desires vnto his holy Maiestie, to comfot you in your affliction and tribulation, that you may be able and readie to comfort others, to the glory of his holy name, and the euerlasting comfort of your owne soules. 
From Stretton Lefield in the countie of Darbie,
this 3. of Iuly 1612.

