


RIght Honorable, I know none amongst all the women in the world, vpon my forty yeares reading, neither yet truly reported by any, to whō this book doth so properly appertaine to be carefully read, as to your self. In respect specially of Gods mercy wherin he hath made your honor admirably memora∣ble for your exceeding wisedome and abounding graces: which was plainly seene in your patient abiding of one such double deadly dayes newes, cōcer∣ning your noble son, & your worthy ho∣norable
husband, as made al England, France, and Ireland, more astonished thē that great inuincible Armado of Spaine, valorously floting vnder saile vpon our narrow seas. And there is al∣so another famous respect of Gods mercie, and the kings Maiesties fauor vpon you, for that there is yet aliue a noble Earle of Essex, euen out of your owne loynes, who is like to repaire the ruines of his father, to raise his and your honourable house farre more re∣nowmed, and lineally to leaue it so to be vpholden for euer. Madame, when the foundation of the Temple at Ieru∣salem was newly laide, the sound of the people for ioy could not be discer∣ned from the noise of the Priests,Ezra 4. Le∣uites, and Ancients for weeping: euen so right Honourable, your, and their most louing friends in that dolefull day, could not discerne whether the ioy for the Queenes maiesties safetie, or the sorrow for their deceasse was the
greatest. Although indeed some of both sides, most vnconsiderately were partiall in their ioying, and other some exceeding in their sorrowing; yet the maiestie of God did most di∣uinely and most duly traduce the one to temper the other in you, who had the greatest cause of both. Labor you there∣fore good honorable Lady so to abound in ioy for them, whose soules are in heauen, & so to abound in sorrow for your owne sinnes, that whilest you are aliue, it may not be discerned in which of both you exceed. And labour to a∣bate your sorrow for the father which is dead, because his heroicall honour, and Christian magnanimitie is yet a∣liue in his sonne. As for the maner of their death, it maketh nothing at all to the matter of their saluation, nor for the time of their dissolution, as you may reade in this booke, by many in∣fallible sentences and warrantable examples of Scripture particularly,
after this maner: First, that death hath his prerogatiue and priuiledge in ge∣nerall. Secondly, that death makes this world no world, and men to trade and trauell, to buy and sell vpon all vn∣certainties. Thirdly, that the decree concerning the time of death, is inuio∣lable and vnrepealable. And fourthly, how variable, and how sundrie wayes death seizeth: vpon some with the stroke of an Angel, vpon some with the stroke of iustice, vpon some with the stroke of a friend, and that vnwitting∣ly and vnwillingly; vpon some with the stroke of an enemie, wittingly and willingly. Some godly men do kill and destroy themselues, but vnwittingly and vnwillingly: and some vngodly men do kill and destroy themselues wittingly and willingly, euen by their owne act and deed. And now to con∣clude, you know that honourable honor resteth not in the dignitie that men & women haue, but in the good works
whereby they deserue: and you know as stigmaticall brands are tokens of former felonies, euen so procrastinatiō breadeth dangers. Apply your selfe therefore good honourable Lady vnto the conueniency of the time, for you know not when death will light on you by many yeares, nor the manner of it by many hundred wayes; that whensoeuer and howsoeuer it fals, you may haue recourse to the death of Iesus Christ, to whose holy protection I leaue you, &c. Newly from the Printers Presse, the 3. Iuly, 1612.

