



AS amongst all ordi∣nary accidents inci∣dēt to the prosperity & aduersity of man∣kind, there is nothing more momentarie then mariage: e∣uen so, right honorable, there is no∣thing more answerable to the salua∣tion & condemnation of mankind then death. For as by the one all men come into the world, & by the other all men go out of the world: euen so by both, all men without the merits of Iesus Christ, shall go
into hell fire. Yet for all that, there is nothing more out of the minds of men then death, nor any thing lesse feared then Gods irefull iudgments which follow after. As may ap∣peare in euerie profession which is stained and polluted with heathe∣nish impietie: the like was not in the time of blindnesse and ignorance; whereby it may be truly said, that the last of the three reuolutions sig∣nified by seales,Reu. 5.1. & 8.2. &. 17.1. by trumpets, & by viols, related to be the dishonour of God, and the disturbance of the Church militant, is now more fresh and more ragingly reuiued, then in any of the two former reuolutions, consisting of 600. yeares. Your Lordship perhaps will say, What is that to me? how can I redresse it? I know my Lord, I know, and in truth I must acknowledge, that you are an example vnto others, for the di∣ligent hearing of Gods holy word
preached, and for the sincere recei∣uing of the Sacrament: well may your Honor go on and be strength∣ned with the zeale of Gods glory, and be recommended before the throne of Gods grace, by the pray∣ers of such as you did releeue when they were oppressed. But the prin∣cipall cause of this my clamor is, to put you in mind of that you know, to wit, seeing sinne is so generall & the same so horribly hainous, that there is nothing else to be looked for but death, and not that death onely which is the common visita∣tion of all men; but also the second death, which is the perpetuall re∣ward of the diuell and the damned. And also, my Lord, the speciall end of my writing vnto your Honour, is, so much as in me lieth, and as du∣tie binds me, to make you partaker of the fruit of my poore labor, with other my honourable and worship∣full
friends. Nothing doubting but vnder that truth and plainenesse wherein I haue so faithfully ende∣uoured, and so heartily desired the good also of so many thousands as to whom it may come; your Lord∣ship shall sauour so much of some thing, as that you will say hereafter for your labor in reading of all, you are right glad, and haue therby lost nothing. Thus briefly and most humbly I end, desiring the Maiestie of our eternall God, through the mediation of Iesus Christ, to beau∣tifie and to adorne you and your honourable Lady with all spirituall graces, and that you both may see, (like your selues) according to your hearts desire, your childrens children vnto the third and fourth generation. 
From Stretton Le∣field
the 3. of Iuly, 1612.

