



SIR, I present vnto your iudicious view, the Plague of Men, and the auncient Disease of Women: a Subiect knowne, but too-too well, to many, and yet not written of by any heretofore, as farre as I can finde. Tasso toucheth it (here and there) in his Workes: and A∣riosto glanceth at it (a little) in his ORLANDO FV∣RIOSO; onely this graue Author BENEDETTO VARCHI, hath discoursed of it at large. The draught is both Philosophicall and pleasant; If it like you I esteeme the lesse what Others distaste therein. The auncient Ro∣manes vsed to set forth the portratures of their best Friends in the formost front of their Pallaces; and so I hope you will vouchsafe that I may blaze your name, in the frontispice of my Booke. Neyther doubt I but that

you will as kindly entertayne it, as it is heartily recom∣mended vnto you, considering my meaning, and lear∣ded Martials, is all one in this point:

Quod non argentum, quod non tibi misimus aurum,
Hoc faecimus causa (Stella diserte) tua
Quisquis magra dedit, voluit sibi magna remitti,
Fictilibus nostris exoner atus eris.


That we no Gold nor Siluer doe thee send,
Twas for thy sake (kinde Stella) courteous Friend.
Who great things giue, doe looke for great againe,
Our trifting toyes shall ease thee of that paine.

This Worke then being but a trifle, my labour there∣in cannot be much, which, neuerthelesse, if it be any, is onely due to your true, courteous, and bountifull Na∣ture; to which not my selfe alone, but diuers other Gen∣tlemen, as well English as Strangers, were beholding for the kinde Entertainment you gaue vs at our being in Italy together. Accept then, this small Mite in part of a greater amends. It is some comfort to an honest minde, to render what (to his power) he can, although not what he should; and better to repay a small Interest, then keepe backe Principall and All, as many Bancke∣rupts (of good Manners) vse now a dayes to doe. And thus with my best wishes for the good of your Worthy selfe, and of your vertuous Lady, the true Paralell of all Courtly Perfection, I end,
From my Lodging in Holborne, this 7. of Nouember, 1614.

