



AS a pretiousCant. 1, 2, 1. Ioh. 2, 20.27. ointment being poured foorth casteth out, and sprea∣deth abroad a sweet, a fragrant, and an odiferous smell farre and near: euen so (good Christian Lady) the name and fame of such as are annointed with the holy Ghost, doth cast out and spread it selfe farre and near, verie sweet to the nosthrils of the Almigh∣tie,
 and verie delightfull to the mem∣bers of Christ. Though the distance of place, and the conueniencie of time, hath not ministred vnto me any ac∣quaintance with you, nor occasions to see you, yet yourAct. 10, 2. deuout behauiour, your fulnesse of almes, and your con∣tinuall praying, with other your mo∣dest and chast conuersations, being cast out and spread abroad farre and near, makes me bold to write vnto you, as to one perfectly knowne, and wel acquain∣ted, and that with no lesse than three speciall and waightie occasions, mo∣uing and vrging me. The first is, to as∣sure you and to protest vnto you that I haue truely, sincerely, and faithfully, published this your husbands labour, annexed with my owne, as he desired (by the fauour of a worshipfull gentle∣man who hath vndertaken to patro∣nize the same with the rest.) The secōd is, to desire pardon of your Ladi∣ship
 for the long delaing thereof, si∣thence my importunities are iust, and my excuses reasonable. The third is, in the mercifulnesse of Christ Iesu to exhort you, and to comfort you on∣ward in the good way and right course which your Christian husband hath left you. He hath broken the yse to his pains, you may see the cleare water at your pleasure: he hath crazed the shell to his verie death, you may take the kernell all your life: and he hath sauo∣red of the sauce that was soure, now you may assay and eate of the sweete. His pains hath brought him at the last to drinke of Christ, the water of life: his continuall hungring after righteousnesse, hath brought him to eate of spirituall Manna, the food of his soule: and his bitter annoy is chan∣ged into heauenly and eternall ioy.1. Cor. 15, 49. He that bare in the earth the image of the earthy, now beares the image of the
 heauenly. He once was subiect to sinne because he was subiect to the law, and being subiect to the law, he was sub∣iect to death, but thanks be to God, who hath giuen him victorie in Iesus Christ. Death is now dead, death is swallowed vp, his death is dead, and how?1. Cor. 15, 57. Hos. 13, 14. Esa. 25, 8.9. 1. Cor. 15, 54.55.56. Sinne is the sting or the life of death, the life of sinne is the law; now, take away the law, take away sin; take away sinne, then death is dead, death is gon and vtterly destroyed:Luke. 7, and to con∣clude, your husband (sweete Lady) is aliue, he is not dead but liueth, he was a knight on earth, he is now aGal. 5, Re. 1, 6. Cant. 5, 1. king in heauen. And since his chance was to make such an exchange, good Madame be merrie, though his companie was your comfort, yet be not against his preferment, and know this to be a common and a commendable saying, Past cure, past care. Out of remedie, out of remēbrance.1. Sam. 12, 20.21.22.23. Dauid whilst his
 sonne was aliue, fasted and wept bit∣terly, but when he was dead, he was merrie and reioysed greatly. As it is sure whilst your husband was aliue, you did the one, so now seing he is dead let it be surely seene for good example that you doe the other. As Dauid said of his sonne I shall goe to him, but he shall not come to me: so say you, (good worshipfull Lady) I shall goe to my husband, my husband shal not returne to me. Beare you the crosse valiantly, which you haue taken vp zealously, no manner of discōtentment is ioyous for the present time, but grieuous, neuer∣thelesse afterwards it bringeth quiet rest. As fine Gold is wrought in flaming fire, and white siluer in blacke pitch, euen so glorie is to be gotten with the depth of danger, and pleasure with the price of paine. As the roots of a tree are bitter and the fruits sweete, euen so of bitter annoy comes pleasant ioy,
 and of an heauie sute, happy successe. That it may be a parcell of your ioy in heauē to see him which was your ioy in earth, remēber the instruction he gaue you whilst he was liuing, remēber the councell he gaue you whilst he was dy∣ing, & remember to keepe in practise seriously, and sinceerely, among your houshold, the studie and the excercise of true religion, according to the do∣ctrine of Iesus Christ. To whose holy tuition and mercifull prouidence I leaue your Ladiship, with so many good desires for your godly deserts, as miles hath seuered S. Iulian and S. Leonard.

