



Most Gratious and Dread Soveraigne.
WEe finde it recor∣ded for the ever∣lasting honour of Theodosius the yon∣ger, that it was his use Socrat. lib. 7. hist. cap. 22. to reason with his Bishops of the things contained

in the holy Scriptures, as if he him∣selfe had beene one of their order: and of the Emperour Alexius in lat∣ter dayes; that Suthym. Zigaben. in Praefat. Dog∣maticae Pano∣pliae. whatsoever time hee could spare from the publike cares of the Common-wealth, hee did wholly employ in the diligent reading of Gods booke, and in con∣ferring thereof with worthy men, of whom his Court was never empty. How little inferiour, or how much superiour rather, your Majestie is to either of these in this kind of praise, I neede not speake: it is acknow∣ledged even by such as differ from you in the point of Religion, as a matter that hath Io. Brere∣ley, in his E∣pistle before S. Augu∣tines Reli∣gion. added more than ordinary lustre of ornament to your Royall estate; that you doe not for∣beare so much as at the time of your bodi∣ly repast, to have for the then like feeding

of your intellectuall part, your Highnesse table surrounded with the attendance and conference of your grave and learned Divines.
VVhat inward joy my heart con∣ceived, as oft as I have had the hap∣pinesse to be present at such seasons, I forbeare to utter: onely I will say with Job; that Iob 29.11. the eare which heard you blessed you, and the eye which saw you, gave witnesse to you. But of all o∣ther things which I observed, your singular dexteritie in detecting the frauds of the Romish Church, and untying the most knotty arguments of the Sophisters of that side, was it (I confesse) that I admired most. e∣specially where occasion was offred you to utter your skill, not in the word of God alone, but also in the Antiquities of the Church: where∣in

you have attained such a measure of knowledge as (with honour to God, I trust I may speake it, & with∣out flatterie to you) in a well studi∣ed Divine we would account verie commendable, but in such a Mo∣narch as your selfe almost incredi∣ble. And this is one cause (most Gratious Soveraigne) beside my generall duty, and the many speciall obligations wherby I am otherwise bound unto your Majestie, which hath emboldned me to intreat your patience at this time, in vouchsafing to be a spectator of this combate, which I am now entred into with a Iesuite, who chargeth us to disallow many chiefe articles, which the Saints and Fathers of the Primitive Church did generally hold to be true; and un∣dertaketh to make good, that they

of his side doe not disagree from that holy Church, either in these, or in any other point of Religion.
Now true it is, if a man doe only attend unto the bare sound of the word, (as in the question of Merit, for example) or to the thing in ge∣nerall, without descending into the particular consideration of the true ground thereof (as in the mat∣ter of Praying for the dead) he may easily be induced to beleeve, that in divers of these controversies the Fa∣thers speake cleerely for them and against us: neither is there any one thing that hath wonne more cre∣dit to that religion, or more advan∣ced it in the consciences of simple men, than the conformitie that it retaineth in some words and out∣ward observances with the ancient

Church o Christ. Whereas if the thing it selfe were narrowly looked into, it would be found that they have onely the shell without the kernell, and we the kernell without the shell: they having retained cer∣taine words and rites of the ancient Church, but applied them to a new invented doctrine; and we on the other side having relinquished these words and observances, but retai∣ned neverthelesse the same primi∣tive doctrine, unto which by their first institution they had relation.
The more cause have I to count my selfe happy, that am to answer of these matters before a King that is able to discerne betwixt things that differ, and hath knowledge of all these questions.Act. 26.26. before whom therefore I may speake boldly: because

I am perswaded that none of these things are hid from him. For it is not of late daies that your Majestie hath be∣gun to take these things into your consideration: from a childe have you beene trained up to this war∣fare; yea before you were twenty yeeres of age, the Lord had taught your hands to fight against the man of sinne, and your fingers to make battell against his Babel. Whereof your Paraphrase upon the Revela∣tion of S. John is a memorable mo∣nument left to all posterity: which I can never looke upon, but those verses of the Pöet runne alwaies in my minde:
Caesaribus virtus contigit ante diem;Ovid.
Jngenium coeleste suis velocius annis
Surgit, & ignavae fert mala damna morae.
How constant you have beene ever since in the profession and maintenance of the truth: your late protestation, made vnto both the houses of your Parlament, giveth sufficient evidence. So much whereof as may serve for a present antidote against that false and scan∣dalous Merc. Gal∣lobelgic. ann. 1623. Oration spread amongst forrainers under your Majesties sa∣cred name: I humbly make bold to insert in this place, as a perpetuall testimony of your integrity in this behalfe.
His Maje∣sties Answer to the Peti∣tion of the Parliament touching Recusants, 23. April. 1624.WHAT my religion is my bookes doe declare, my profession and my beha∣viour doe shew: and J hope in God, J shall never live to be thought otherwise; sure I am, J shall never deserve it. And for my part I wish that it might be writ∣ten

in Marble and remaine to posteritie, as a marke upon me, when I shall swerve from my Religion. for he that doth dis∣semble with God, is not to be trusted by man. My Lords, I protest before God, my heart hath bled, when I have heard of the increase of Popery: and God is my Judge it hath beene so great a griefe unto me, that it hath beene like thornes in mine eies and prickes in my sides; so farre have I beene and ever shall be, from turning any other way. And my Lords and Gentlemen, you all shall bee my Confessors; if J knew any way better than other to hinder the growth of Po∣perie, I would take it: and he cannot be an honest man, who knowing as J doe and being perswaded as I am, would doe otherwise.
As you have so long since begun, and happily continued, so goe on

(most renowned King) and still shew your selfe to be a Defender of the faith. fight the Lords battells couragiously, honour him ever∣more, and advance his truth. that when you have fought this good fight,2 Tim. 4.7.8 and finished your course, and kept the faith; you may receive the Crowne of righteousnesse, reserved in heaven for you. for the obtai∣ning of which double blessing, both of grace and of glory, together with all outward prosperitie and happi∣nesse in this life; you shall never want the instant praiers of

