



THE people in times past did praise and ex∣toll by Pictures and Epigrammes the fa∣mous deedes of all such persons, whosoe∣uer in any verteous qualitye or liberall sci∣ence excelled. Sulpitius Gallus among the Romanes was highly renowmed for his singuler cunning in Astronomy, by whose meanes Lucius Paulus obteined the victory in his warres against Persius. Pericles also a∣mong the Athenians was had in great admiration & ho∣nour for his profound knowledge in Philosophie, by whom the whole citie of Athens was from care and woe deliuered, when they supposed their destruction to bee neare at hand, by a blacke dareknes of some admiration hanging ouer their citie. How honorably was Apelles

the Painter esteemed of mighty king Alexander by whom onely he desired to be painted. But amongst all other arts and Sciences, whose praise in tymes past flourished and shined most brightly, Chirurgery among the wise Grecians lacked not his praise, honor and estimation. For did not that worthie and famous captaine of the Grekes Agamem∣non loue dearly and reward bountifully both Podalerius and Machaon through whose cunnings skill in Surgery, thousands of worthie Grekes were saued aliue and healed, who else had died and perished. And further here to speak of Philoneter, of Attalus, of Hiero, of Archelaus, and of Iuba kings of famous memory, who purchased eternall praise by their study and cunning in Phisicke and Surgery. But now in these our dayes enuy so ruleth the roste, that Phi∣sicke should be condemned, and Surgery despsed for euer but that sometime payne biddeth battaile, and care kee∣peth skirmish, in such bitter sorte, that at the last this Ala∣rum is sounded out, Nowe come Phisicke, and then help Surgery. Then is remembred the saying of Iesus the sonne of Sirach: which is notable, Honour the Phisition and Chirur∣gion for necessitie, whom the almightie God hath crea∣ted because from the hyest commeth medicine, and they shall receaue giftes of the King. Wherefore wee exhorte the wyse man that he in notime of prosperitie and health, neglect these noble artes and mysteries of Phisicke and Chirurgery, because no age, no person, no countrey can long time lacke their helps and remedies. What is it to haue landes and houses, to abounde in siluer and golde to be deckt with pearles and diamondes, yea and to pos∣sesse the whole worlde, to rule ouer nations and contreys: and to lacke health, the cheefest Iewell and greatest trea∣sure of mans lyfe and delight.
Consider then we besech your Worships, what praises are due to such noble Sciences, which onely work the

causes of this aforesaide health, and how much the weale∣publike are bounde to all them, whose cares and studies dayly tendeth to this ende. Amongst whom here is to be remembred Maister Vicary Esquire, Sergeant Chirurgion to Kings and Queenes of famous memorie: Whose lear∣ned worke of Anatomye is by vs the forenamed Surgions of Saint Bartholomewes in Smithfeild, newly reuiued, corrected and published abroad to the commoditie of o∣thers, who be studentes in Chirurgery: not without our greate studies, paynes and charges, And although we doe lacke the profound knowledge, and sugred eloquence of the Latine and Greke tongues, to decke and beautifie this worke, yet we hope the studious reader shall thereby reape singuler commodity and fruit, by reading this litle treatise of the Anatomy of mans body, the which is onely groun∣ded vpon reason and experience which are two principall rootes of phisicke and Surgery. As it is graunted by Galen in his third booke De methodo medendi: and wee who day∣ly worke and practise in Surgery, according to the deep∣nesse of the Arte, aswell in greeuous woundes, vlcers, and Fistules, as other hyd and secrete diseases vpon the body of man, dayly vsed by vs in S. Bartholomewes hospitall, & other places, &c. Those poore and greeued creatures, as∣well men and weomen, as children do knowe the profitte of this arte, to be manifold, and the lacke of the same to be lamēted. Therfore Galen truely writeth, saying, That no man cā work so perfectly, as aforesaid, without the know∣ledge of the Anatomy: For (saith he) it is as possible for a blinde man to carue & make an image perfect, as a Chi∣rurgian to worke without error in mans body not know∣ing the Anatomy. And further, for as much as your Wor∣ships are very carefull for those poore and greeued crea∣turs within the Hospital of S. Bartholomewes. &c. wher∣of Maister Vicary was a member: We are therefore now

encouraged to dedicate this litle worke of the Anatomy, being his and our trauells, to you as Patrons of this booke to defend against the rauening Iawes of enuyous Backby∣ters, which neuer cease by all vnlawfull meanes to blemish and deface the workes of the learned, expert, and well dis∣posed persons. Finally, we do humbly craue of your good∣nesses, to accept in good part this treatise concerning the Anatomy, as the fruites of our studies and labours, where∣by we shalbe much better encouraged to set foorth heere∣after other profitable works for the common wealth. Heerein if your Wisedomes do vouchsafe to heare our re∣quests, and to allow these our doinges, as did noble Ama∣sius king of Aegipt accepte the laboures of his painefull Artificers, We haue not onely to thank your Wor∣shipes for so doing, but also to pray vnto the almightie God to requite your good∣nesses, receauing you into his protection and keeping.
Amen.
