



MY LORD:
THe subject of this Sermon is your Coate of Armes. The most goodly and fai∣rest armes that ever I or any in the world set his eyes upon. CHRIST IESVS the great Pastor and Bishop of our soules sits in your azure field in a faire long garment of beaten gold, with a sharpe two edged Sword in his mouth. Is it accounted a great grace, and that for Kings and Princes too, to carrie in their Shields, a Ly∣on, an Eagle, a Lilly, a Harpe, or such like animall or artificiall thing? How much more honour is it then I pray you to carrie CHRIST IESVS in your Shield, who is Lord of Lords and King of Kings? I haue put the best colours vpon this worthy subject as would drop from my Pencill, but still I see, Materia superabit opus, the matter will goe beyond the workemanship. I can say so feelingly of my selfe, who am privie to mine owne great weakenesse; I durst say so of any other that will

undertake this taske, I meane to emblazon this Coate: Let him be as quicke and curious, and cunning and ex∣pert, and everie way as well furnished for this employ∣ment, as mortalitie is capable of, yet still he shall come short of giving this charge his due; Materia superabit opus still. All my feare is, the matter is so high, and the workemanship about it so slender, that the worke∣manship will more disgrace the matter, then the matter will grace the workemanship. I know mine owne selfe best, and I measure my selfe by my selfe; and yet I know it is my maister CHRIST whom I here describe; and I know that my maister (where there is a good heart) well accept the will for the deed. I doe not boast of performance, but can comfort my selfe in my endea∣vour. My undertaking hath beene gratefull to some, and I am told my labour may bee profitable to others. Now then in adventuring to send it abroad for the profit of others, both Law and Equitie hath Entitled your Lordship to the Patronage of it. For mee to seeke ano∣ther Patron, were all one, as if I should rob your Lord∣ship of your Coate, or bestow your armes upon another. Besides, your Lordships many favours heaped upon mee doe Challenge not onely the fruit of my studies, but bring mee further into your debt, to owe unto you euen my selfe. Accept then I pray you graciously what is offered duti∣fully, and blesse him with your prayers, who prayeth for Gods blessing upon you and yours. Ever resting
From my house at Cockfield. Feb. 24. 1626.
Your Lordships Servant to bee commanded in the worke of the Lord.
THOM: á VICARS.
