


GEnerous and religious Readers; to you haue I heretofore written my Viam re∣ctam ad vitam longam; not to Rusticks, or men of vile and rusticke quality, who savour onely of the earth, and respect no∣thing lesse then the welfare of their Bo∣dies; nor to any prophane, or seeming religious Patron of wicked and dishonest persons: But to you, I say, that are religious and truly generous, that maintaine your blood, and reputations by your noble and vertuous lives, have I written that Dieteticall Treatise: and now, in regard of your benigne Acceptance thereof (lightly esteeming the ob∣liquity of some that are wise onely by inheritance, or that are of a detracting spirit) have perfected the same, with a Second part, for the preseruation of your lives and health, which if yee will in any measure obserue, Vos enim arctis∣simis regulis non obstringo; I nothing doubt, but yee shall to Gods glory, your owne comfort, and good of your Countrey, live, a long, happy, and healthy life. But, be∣cause
it may happen, inregard of the great infirmity of Nature, in these last times, that yee may have some con∣flicts with sicknesse, I will give you my advice therein, lest being sicke, and seeking remedy by Physicke, yee fall, as the old saying is, from Charybdis into Sylla, from one evill in∣to another as bad, if not worse. When yee are visited with Sicknesse, yee must consider that it is a symptome of your sinne; and therefore first by humble confession, and a peni∣tent heart make peace betwixt God and your Conscience, and then send for the Physician: But for what Physician? not for the Mountebanke that deludes you with impostures; nor for the audacious Surgeon, that will take away your life, I meane your blood, upon every light occasion; nor for the arrogant, and too too dishonest Apothecary, that against conscience, against the lawes, and against laudable and ancient customes, exercises Physicke, and growes insolent with the Title of a Physician; nor for any other such igno∣rant Empericke, Qui And abatarum morè, clausis ocu∣lis, cum aegrotorum morbis pugnat, facir{que} per mortes experimenta; applying without any true respect had of the temperature, age, sex, or time of yeare, one and the same re∣medy unto every one, as though every man had one and the same nature, and state of body, or did labour in one and the same disease. But send for such a Physician as is Phy∣losophically learned; that is honest, religious; that deales faithfully and discreetly with the sicke, and that regards more the curing of the sicknesse, then the reward: such an one, so often as yee haue occasion, send for, loue, and enter∣taine kindly, for hee will pray vnto the Lord, that he would prosper that which hee giveth for your ease and remedy. I cannot but here taxe some Physicians; I wish there were no such Spurii amongst us, more base and inhumane then
the basest Mechanicks, who, Canino more, abide not men of their owne ranke and quality, but hate and detract them; and yet these great Worthies,A Note of baseness, if not also of insufficien∣cy. out of what humour judge yee, not onely Fidler-like hang after the heeles of great men, to bee set a worke, and insinuate with Gentle∣women (working vpon their light credulent nature) telling them, That their skill, for curing their infirmities, tran∣scends other men; but also become & collogue with base and unworthy people to have their alarum of praise. Among Physicians, these I suppose are they that respect their owne gaine more then the glory of God, or the good of the Patient, and therefore very worthy to bee exploded, Ex Medico∣rum albo.
What shall I say of some Divines, who (Salva sancti∣orum reverentia) besides the cure of Soules, take upon them the cure of bodies, because the Ocean of sacred Theo∣logie is not sufficient for their swelling braines, and perhaps puffed up with Quintessences. Quid illis cum Medicina? Let them looke to the Charge that Saint PAVL giueth unto them. Verely,2 Tim. c. 4. v. 1, 2.5. I wonder how they can bee insensible of the great burthen of Soules that lye upon them, for which in the great and terrible day of accompts, they must give accompt; and then, when not onely the actions of all men,Exech. 28.8. but also the very secret motions and intentions of the heart shall bee made manifest; what will these halfe-curing Phy∣sicians of Soules and bodies doe, when they shall bee questi∣oned, not so much for how many bodies they haue cured; perhaps for how many they have sent packing to Sheol by their importune and preposterous physicke, as for how many Soules they have cured and purged from the filth of sinno and iniquity, by their diligent ministery of the sacred Word, and converted unto God.

But as for Women that with much temerity, take up∣on them to give and prescribe medicines, and the same not of the meanest ranke neither, as though Physicke, the most mysticall and noblest of all Arts, were subject to their shal∣low and precipitate apprehension (reverence to those Gen∣tlewomen, that binde up Lazarus soares, and refresh them with the fragments that fall from their Tables) I must tell them, that if they doe it out of pure charity, it is sinfull, because there is error in the action; if out of any vaine glo∣ry, it is more sinfull; if out of a desire of gaine, it is most sinfull: Of all which, our poly-pragmaticall Ministers in all likelihood, that cannot containe themselves within the limits of their owne callings, goe not free and unfaultie. Marcilius Ficinus,Lib. de Trip. vita Apolog. a Priest, and well learned in the my∣steries of Physicke, endeauoring to prove the lawfulnesse for Divines to exercise Physicke, concludes that they must doe it, Charitatis gratia, for charities sake. And is not this thinke you, the marke that our practicall Ministers ayme at? I will not condemne all; but so many of them as I know, deale in physicke, as they doe sometimes for a Par∣sonage, they take not fees directè, like Physitians; but in∣directè, under the name of a Druggie medicine, or per∣haps a strange elaborated Quintessence, exhaust the pati∣ents purse much more then the generous and learned Phy∣sician. And if you will looke into their lives, you shall finde some of them to be prophane; others, especially those whose braines swell, and are overheated with Quintessences, to be heady, proud, contentious; and yet after a puritanicall fury, holy. To the best of them, I say as Saint PAVL did to Archippus: Take heed to your Ministerie.
If the best learned, and such as bend their whole forces thereunto are but sufficient to undertake the practice of
Physicke, what shall bee judged of the rabblement of Em∣perickes, and other unworthy and distracted Practicioners? Well, the time will come, when wee shall be all convented to yeeld an account for all our actions, wee shall not bee a∣ble to conceale any of them from God, at whose name wee should tremble, the great Iudge of all the world, to whom the very secret motions of our hearts are manifest, and who will reward every man according to his worke. Know then, whatsoever thou art, that it is not all gaine that is gotten, except it be well gotten, and with a good conscience; which I wish all men, and by name, such as usurpe the practice of Physick, to the ruine & hurt of many, to lay to their hearts, as a cordiall Antidot against all unlawfull gaine, and bee reformed.
But is the fault altogether in them that usurpe the pra∣ctice of Physicke? No verely; It is as much, if not more, in the absurdity of them that expose their bodies they care not to whom; and if they chance, through the benefit of nature and a strong constitution, to recover; or for that, the cause of the infirmity was formerly by some learned Physician re∣moved, as it oftentimes happens, a great cure is wrought, the report whereof, with the light vulgar, and other base minded people, is so prevalent, as that it is able to raise one from being a parish Clarke, to the title of a great Phy∣sician; and yet all this while, the Cure, if there were any, was but accidentally, rashly, or preposterously effected, to the great injury of nature, and shortning of the dayes, though the ignorant Patient vnderstand it not. But if the Cure, or rather the Hurt, shall by an out-landish Empe∣ricke, or Surgeon, that apud nos, turnes Physician, and that no meane one neither, bee effected, the more admira∣ble. For verely, such is the inconstancy, folly, and per∣versnesse
versnesse of most our people, that a Physician, how learned and honest soever, and blessed of God in his courses, can∣not, vnlesse hee bee Outlandish, or at least in his birth and education, altogether a stranger and remote, bee in any good esteeme with them, for they must have physicke from farre, Nihil praetiosum domi: the proverbiall saying is not more ancient then true, Rara sunt chara: Sed mun∣dus vult decipi, & decipiatur.
The men of this world are, in their worldly affaires, wise, and doe with the Chinoys, see with both eyes, and will, rather then lose one foote of land, retaine the best counsell that can bee had; but when their health, quae cum om∣nibus mundi copiis non est commutanda, shall by sick∣nesse bee called into question, an illiterated Empericke, a peremptorie usurping Apothecary, an ambitious Surgeon, scarse the supersicies of a Physician, perhaps a parish Clarke, or a sorcering Horse-leach, or any other of what condition soever, whether Insidell or Christian, whether vertuous, or full of all impiety, it matters not, is a Physician meet enough to encounter with sicknesse, death's Champion. O genus hominum insulsum, quibus Helleborum porri∣gendum, ut purgato cerebro desinant delirare.
Dolendum sanè in Repub. literata, that the noble Art of Physicke, should by the toleration of unworthy Practi∣cioners be disgraced, and the people hurt. Wee have lawes to prevent this evill, utinam vitam habuissent, I wish they had their due execution; but I doubt not, but that our most gratious & learned SOVERAIGNE wil, at length, cast an eye of reformation and respect upon the disgraced fa∣culty of Physicke, which Kings and Princes in former times, by their owne proper studies greatly graced, and represse such, as under colour of helping, destroy many of his peo∣ple,
abs{que} poenae metu; and so reduce the noble Art of phy∣sicke no its ancient splendor and dignity; as it is to be seene at this day in some well governed Common-weales in that respect.
But, having taxed divers, I must looke to have some scandalous and malicious imputations cast upon my selfe, not onely from them that are taxed, but also from a Grand Caitiffe-fordian Momus, who with his Foule Mouth, and Doggish Teeth, hath mightily defamed mee, and delacera∣ted the former Impressions of my Via recta ad vitam lon∣gam. As for the former sort I passe not, I have delivered my minde freely, and I know I speake the truth; and if I should bee commended of One that is full of all impiety, that is a common Rayler, Slanderer, and Detractor, and under whose lippes is the poyson of Asps, I should cry out, Quid mali feci? But I, lightly regarding the obliquity of ma∣levolent and detracting Spirits, conclude with the honest Reader; to whom I wish these my labours very profitable.
APRIL 22. 1603.
Vale, Et sis mihi, ut ego tibi.
