


SIR: Here you may behold, as in a Looking-Glasse, many Sickely Faces, not of Heathen men, but of pretended Christians, with Heathenish Conditions. A Glasse of Steele, farre truer then that Mathematicall one, whereby some haue proiected to discouer with more then Humane Spectacles Another World in the Moone; of Seas, Lands, and Woods, like Ours, before it was lately dis-robed of this latter Ornament by the greedinesse of a few Iron Maers. Here you may see what a number of Diseases haue taken Roote within vs. Yea more, then euer were practized be∣fore Noahs Flood.
The maine Cause of their Destruction proceeded from their Carnall matches, The Sonnes of GOD, with the Daughters of Reprobates, where we trans∣gresse

not onely in that. but in many other a contrary to our Christian duties, who haue bin now enlightned for the space of these foure score yeares. Here likewise you may find preseruatiues and Cures both to preuent the imminent plagues, (which we haue worthily deserued,) as to heale the most disordred, both Bodily and Spiritually, (if they be not past Grace;) yea, and to dispossesse them of Diuels, without prophane Holy Water, or Po∣pish Exorcismes. But before these, as a Frontispice vpon a Gate, I haue fixed the foure first Verses of purpose, that once a day at least, you may repeat them ouer. And for the rest, if you read them once a Weeke, I doubt not, but you shall receiue thereby some spirituall Comfort among other Helpes to Deuotion, which are not wanting in your House. Howsoeuer, I am assured your Cogitations shalbe somewhat rouzed vp to looke about you, and to make some doubt, that you haue not many yeares yet vnexpired of your Pilgrimage here on Earth. For our worst part must rot, before it rise vp to Immortality.
The thought of Death, I confesse, is terrible, and hath perplexed many, specially, Great persons, in∣somuch that Queene Elizabeth of famous Memory, albeit in all other matters an incomparable religi∣ous Princesse, and adorned with masculine Vertues, yet She could not endure to heare of Old Age, nor Death. For when a Learned Bishop of our acquain∣tance had in a zealous Sermon admonished her to thinke on her last End, by reason of her great Age, which few Princes had attayned vnto, and of the Climactericall yeare of her Life, which hapned at that time, She tooke it so impatiently that the Bi∣shop

for his good intentions, was not only distasted by her, but put for a time to some trouble. Yet God, who neuer forsakes them, that quit them∣selues like Men in his Seruice, did euer sithence, vntill his Decease powre downe many Worldly Blessings vpon him, so that I thinke few Bishops of this Kingdome left behind them to their Wiues and Children such faire Estates, as be left vnto his Wife and Children. The which questionlesse were conferred vppon him, to let the Cowards and Claw-backes of the times vnderstand, what a sweet smelling Sacrifice in his sacred Presence is Magnanimity grounded on Faith and piety; as well appeares by those Martyres in Queene Maries dayes, for whose glorious sakes the Eternall Maiesty at the intercession of those Martyres Generall, his dearely beloued Sonne, did by shortning of those Marian dayes restore that Reformed Religion to this King∣dome, which hath chased hence those False Pro∣phets, who set to sale the Bodies and Soules of Men, togither with the Rabblement of Idolaters, Abbey-Lubbers, Fayries, and Hob-Goblins; and doubtlesse will continue the same vntill the Worlds end: Notwithstanding these our Present and last Conflicts with the Spirituall Dragon, and with those Spirits, which issued out of his mouth; where∣in we haue much a do to escape their Ambuscadoes, Quirkes, and socret Stratagems practised by our Schoole-men, which are farre more dangerous then their open Violences, being such, as it is Written, A∣ble to deceiue the very Elect, if it were possible. But to returne where I haue digressed, the Remembrance of Death will prepare vs for th' other World What can be btter for vs, then to be loosed from the lumpish

clog of Flesh and Blood, which must not inherite Heauen, before it bee purified, as the Holiest and best Patriarkes were, and to liue with Christ in per∣petuall Ioyes.
Seeing that Death brings with it so great Happi∣nesse, I hope you will not be offended with me, it by Calculating our Ancestors Yeares, for these three last Dsns, I seeme to put you in Minde, that you ought not to expect much longer time, then they enioyed. Our great Grand father, Hugh Vaughan, Gentle-man Vsher to King Henry the 7th who is Famous in our English Chronicles, for the Iustes in Richmond, before the sayd King, agaynst Sir Iames Parker, about our Ancestors Armes and Scutcheons: Where the sayd Sir Iames lost his life, in the first Encounter. Our sayd Great Grand-Fa∣ther, dyed before he was fifty yeares old. Our Grand-father, who built our House, nay yours by Birth right, (called The Golden Groue,) dyed a∣bout the fiftieth sixth yeare of his Age. Our Fa∣ther likewise about those yeares, payd Nature her Debt. Why then should we expect for a greater Lot? We want not aboue three or foure yeares of theirs. But suppose we should arriue to seauenty, or eighty, or by the helpe of this Dyet, which I here discouer, to the long Age of the Swethens, it would but augment our sinnes and sorrows. There∣fore let vs liue mindfull of that, which cannot be auoyded.
For which purpose a Pagan King vsed euery mor∣ning to haue a Dead mans Skull brought to remem∣ber him, that he was a mortall Creature. So in like manuer we see in our dayes many Persons wea∣ring Rings with a Deathes Head engrauen in the seale:

Others with a Posie on the inside, including the Remembrance of Death. Memento mori. But because this Subiect breeds sadnesse, I haue added some more plausible passages to profit the Body, as∣well as the Minde.
Now hauing discharged the part of a Brother, in this necessary point, whereto all Adams Posterity are subiect, Sooner or Later: I will now shew where∣fore I entituled this Diminutiue rapture, The New∣landers Cure, more for others satisfaction, who know me not, and yet may by our Free Charter of Election, and the illumination of Gods working Spi∣rit meete with some passage in this Cure, to con∣firme them sure in their Christian Calling, and per∣haps mooue some to lend their helping hands to the Building vp of our New Church, in that remote Countrey, then for any desire I haue to reiterate a matter of Tauetology, like the Cuckoes Song, vnto you, who from the beginning haue bin acquainted with my Actions in this kinde. About thirteene yeares past, being interessed by Patent in the South part of New found Land, from our late King of happy memory: I transported thither certayne Colomes of Men and Women at my owne Charge: After which, finding the Burthen too heauy for my weake Shoulders,  assigned the Northerly proportion of my Grant, vnto the Right Honourable the Lord Vicount Faulkland, late Deputy of Ireland, a Noble Gentleman, of singular Wisedome, Vertue, and Experience: And vppon your motion to my Lord Baltimore, who to his immortall prayse, hath li∣ued there these two last yeares, with his Lady and Children.
And for my selfe, during such time as I remye

in this Kingdome, for the setling of my priuate Fortunes, which for ought I see, I must chiefly relye vppon to supply me there, vntill the Planta∣tion be better strengthned, and fearing the displea∣sure of the Almighty, who threatens those, which causelessely looke backe at his Plow: I sent forth, (like Noahs Doue) my late Workes, called The Gol∣den Fleece, and my Cambrensium Caroleia, to stirre vp our Ilanders Mindes to assist and support for a time our New-found Ile, which rightly may besti∣led Great Britaines Sister, or Britanniol, in regard that for these fourescore yeares and vpwards, She hath furnished vs with Fish and Traine, which by Exchange returne vs sundry kinds of Commodi∣ties.
In like manner to let the World vnderstand, that my Zeale to New-found Land is not frozen. I tooke her for my Gossipto this Pigmey infant, which now is named the New-Landers Cure. But why should I among so many thousands of Greater Power aspire to such an Atlanticke Waight, which is able to crush into the Earth another Sutton? It is the Lord of Heauen and Earth, whose Powerfull Presence O∣uer-lookes all the foure Quarters of the Earth, who preferres sometimes the most simple to His Workes of Honour, before the Grand Epicures of the World, As the Lillies of the Fields, before the Royalties of Saiomon, euen our Mighty GOD, who is so wonderful in all his Deedes, made chyse of me for his vnworthy Instrument to doe some good in this Heroicall Enterprize.
For this cause, and also to edifie my Country with those Bookes, which from time to time, euen from my Youth vp I Published, hath He bestowed

a double Talent vppon me. For these Ends it plea∣sed His Sacred Maiesty to reserue my Seruice for the Publicke Good, by preseruing my Life most Mira∣culously aboue the ordinary sort of men from Fire and Water, and twice from his Pestilentiall Ar∣rowes.
Vppon a Christmas Day 1602. In France at a Passage of two Leagues broad betwixt Tremblado and Marena falling ouer board a Ship, in a most terrible Tempest, I floated amidst the Waues of the raging Sea, being ignorant of Swimming, a∣bout a quarter of an houre: Onely with an Oare in my hand, which casually fell vnto me, by what meanes to this present, I cannot tell. And which is most strange to Humane sense, the Storme calmed suddainly, during my aboad in this perplexity, vn∣till the Barke, from which I fell, found leasure to turne about, and take me vp being ouer-wearied, and at the very point to throw away the Oare, and perish. Assoone as I was taken vp, the Storme be∣ganne againe so suriously, that the Mast brake within a foote of the But, and with the fll had like to ouer-turne vs all.
In Ianuary 1608. I was stricken with a sulphure∣ous dampe, my House was battred about my eares with Lightning and Thunder, the Artilleries of Gods Glory, in that fearefull manner, as your Selfe beheld the next day, after the ruines of the Catastrophe, not without great astonishment and admiration, how miraculously I escaped.
In August 1603. in the hottest time of the Sicknesse, in my returne from beyond the Seas, I was not affraid to stay a while in London.

And during the last and greatest Pestilence, 1625. I frequented the Citty from the beginning, to the latter end, as our famous Country-man Sir Thomas Button, and our vertuous Cousen his Lady, in whole House I continded the most part of that Summer can beare me Witnesse, when you and others of my Friends wondred at my Boldnesse. By which Extraordinary deliuerances I gather, that his Omnipotent Maiesty hath ordayned me, as a Fire brand so often taken out of the Flames, for some glorious seruice of His, eyther to do some good vnto my Follow Christians by my Publicke Writings, or else to aduance this hopefull Planta∣tion by my personall paines and industry. And if I faile in my Presages for this last, I am fully per∣swaded, that I shall no tlight vpon a worse Fortune then chanced vnto a Gentle-woman of Italy, who hauing her destiny told her by an Astrologer, (as that Sexe like Eue is ouer-credulous,) that she should be married to a Prince, she refused many good Mat∣ches, in hope of her Princely preferment, vntill after many yeares expectation in vaine, fearing, as the Prouerbe is, To lead Apesin Hell, she consen∣ted at last to marry with the Principall of an Vni∣uersity, who in that place had the Title of Prince. If I misse in my actuall performance for New-found Land, it lyes not in the power of Flesh and Blood, to take away my Zealous intentions, nor can my Foes (if any such at all haue) deny, but that ueaner men then I, haue had the Lucke to be married to the Muses: As also the mightiest Lords of the earth haue thought themselues graced to be entertained their Seruants and Woers. The truth is, I am ad∣dicted both to the Muses, and New-found Land. And

I could wish, that I had that Command ouer some Misers Purses, or of theirs, who may dye without Issue, and leaue their Fortunes to thanklesse World∣lings, for the benefit of New-found Land, as Marke Anthony had at Athens. For when the Citizens had cologuingly presented him with the Image of their Goddesse Minerua, because he wanted a Wife: He answered, that he kindly accepted of their Offer; and therefore he must needes haue 1000. Talents of them, as a Dowry fit for so great a Princesse. The charge certainely is great now at the first, yet if there were but twenty such Persons but of my poore meanes and resolution, I would not doubt, but before seauen yeares, our New-found Land should not onely double those sayles of Ships, which Trade thither at the present, but likewise the yeare∣ly Gaines, which our Marchants doe reape from that Country, for these many yeares togither, com∣puted to be aboue 200000. pounds a yeare. Indeed there be some Hopes that the London and Bristow Marchants will now after these late stormes settle there some Iron-workes, Glasse-houses, and for the making of Salt.
And likewise that my Lord of Faulk and, and our Noble Brother in Law, Sir Henry Salubury Ba∣ronet, with some Gentlemen of North-Wales, will the next Spring proceede to doe somewhat in that Country, which with open armes awaites for their comming. And also there be others out of Eng∣land, to whom I haue freely as I haue receiued, as∣signed Grants, which haue faithfully promised to Plant in their seuerall Diuisions. The which, if they performe, my costly Cares for Sacrifice would be the lesse.

But because my Experience teacheth me, that we oftne meete with backe-sliding and inconstant men, like Worldly Demas, then with bountifull Conuerts, like that Terentiam Demea, I cannot build my Foundation on such slippery mould, but must resolue with my owne poore Estate, to con∣tinue what I haue long since fruitlessely begunne.
After this sort those renowned Monsieurs, De Monts, and Poutrincourt were deluded aboue two yeares, by some Courtiers at Paris, and therefore they concluded atlast, no more to trust any but themselues, for the Erecting of their Plan∣tation in Canada, two hundred Leagues beyond our New found Land. Hap what hap may, I haue broake the Ice, I haue past the Ru∣bicon.
In the meane time, let me intreate you to conceiue charitably of our New-Land Plantation, which by one hard Winter, among many more to∣lerable, is like to suffer; and to regard this Little God-child of hers. And it you, or any other of our Friends, when wilde or i regular Passions breake out beyond the bounds of Reason, shall meete with some Letiue, by meditating on the toward∣ly disposition thereof, as the discased Israelites found ease with beholding the Brazen Serpent: Do but say, Well-fare the New-landers Cure, and that's as much as I expect for my paines. The Lord enrich you with Heauenly happinesse, as hee hath bountifully dealt with you in this World. And if hereafter it fortune, according to Your Hopes, that you shall liue in Court, as hereto∣fore you haue, to your singular Praise, and your Friends Comfort, for many yearestogither:

Let not transitory Pompe, nor vaine glory, seduce Your Noblest Part to forget the poore New-Landers Cure; nor Him, whom you are tyed in Nature to Respect and Chees, who reciprocally shall cuer, during Life, continue in all Christian Offices

