



FOr, as much, as I haue all ready set fourthe, the doctrine of predestinati∣on, and of the deuine pro¦uidence of God, wherein I haue strongly proued by manifest textes of the scriptures, and sufficient au¦thorities of the aunciente wryters of the primitiue church, that God hath from the beginninge, orday∣ned and appoynted some, for to be felow heyres with his sonne Iesus Christ, of his heauenly kingdome, and some again to be euerlasting∣lye dampned in hell fire: and that whome he hath ordeined before, to
 enioy and possesse euerlasting life, them he hathe chosen in hys sonne Iesu Christ, afore the foundacions of the worlde were laide, whiche thynge he dyd of hys free mercye and goodnesse, and withoute anye respecte at all of their owne deser∣uinges or merits, for to setforthe ye glory of his grace, & to declare hys mercy throughe oute al the whole world: but whome he hath apoyn∣ted to be the vessels of hys wrathe, them he hathe accordinge to hys ryghteous and vnserchable iudge∣mente styrred vp for to be the ex∣amples of hys iustice, and for to be glorifyed by their dampnatyon, wherin he dothe them no manner of wrong, sithe that he rewardeth them, accordinge to theyr naturall corruption, whiche they haue of their parent Adam, wherbi we are all in generall, subiecte to euerla∣sting damnation, so yt if he shoulde damne vs all, he shoulde do vs but right, and no iuste occasyon at all,
 could we haue, to complain of him or of his most righteous iudgemēt I haue thought it good and expedi¦ent, for to adde vnto it, the mooste necessarye doctrine of free wyll. Whiche as it dothe altogether de∣pend of the other, and is most sure¦lye grounded in it, so it can not be substantially vnderstanded, wyth∣out some sight and knowledge of the same, as it doth euidentlye ap∣peare by those, which plainely af∣fyrme that, onlesse we haue free wyl, vertue shall not be rewarded, nor the workes of the saints crow¦ned: which if they would consyder from what beginning, the doctrin of Predestination dothe fetche the glorye of the saintes, they shoulde sone espy out theyr owne erroure. Whome (sayeth the Apostle) God hathe chosen, them did he cal, whō he hathe called, them did he iusti∣fye, and whome he hathe iustified, them did he glorify. Wherfore thē, by the sayinge of the Apostle, are
 the faythfull crowned wyth eter∣nal and euerlasting glory?Why the faithfull are crow∣ned with euerla∣sting glo∣rye. because forsothe, that by the fre mercye of God, and not by theyr owne indu∣stry, they be both chosē, called and iustified. Heare doe we learne, in these fewe words, that all the hole glory of our saluation, ought only to be geuen and attributed vnto the free election of God, whereof doth proceade, come and sprynge, bothe the will and power, that we haue, to do any thing, that is good and acceptable before the maiestye of our heauenly father. Yea before we be renewed by the holy ghost, and made newe creatures in oure sauioure Iesu Christe, we are the seruauntes of synne. What fre∣dome then canne we iustlye boaste or bragge of? Vbi spiritus domini, sayeth saynte Paule,ii. Co. iii ibi libertas: where the spirite of the Lorde is, there is libertye and fredome.Ioh. viii. A∣gaine: Si vos filius liberauerit, vere li∣beri eritis, that is to say:

If the sonne doth delyuer you, ye shall be free in deede.What we are as long, as we be voide of the spirit of God. These say∣inges, do sufficiently declare, that as long as we are voide of the spi∣rit of God and are not yet set at li∣berty by the sonne, we are nought els but the bond slaues of Sathan the dyuell of syn & of deathe. Many other places of ye scriptures, might I heare aleadge, which do teache that of oure selues, we be not able to think a good thought. But lest, I should be tedious vnto your ho∣norable Lordship, I wyll omytte them, and shew brieflye, what the Concil of Myluente did most god∣lye and catholikely decree and de∣termyne touching this matter:Sinodus mileuen∣tana. If any man (saye the holye fathers gathered in that Concyll) dothe affyrme,Note ye wel those things ye free wyll men. that we canne by the vertue and strength of oure owne nature thinke or chuse, as it is expedyente, anye good thynge that pertayneth to oure saluation, or agree and consent to the whole∣some
 preachinge of the gospell, without the illuminating, and in¦spiration of the holye ghost, who geueth vs a pleasure or swetnesse in consentinge, and the truthe in beleuinge, he is deceaued with an heretical spirit, not vnderstanding the voyce of God, sayinge in the gospell: without me, ye can do no∣thinge,Iohn. xv. nor the sayinge of the A∣postell,ii. Co. iii. where he sayeth: Not that we be able to thinke any thinge of oure selues, as of our selues, But our suffiencye or ablenesse is of God. Again: If any man doth con∣tentiouslye maintaine, that God doth tarye for oure wyll, that we maye be purged from synne, and doth not confesse, that by the infu∣sion and working of the holy ghost it is wrought in vs, that we be wil¦ling to be purged, he doth resiste & withstand the holy ghost him self, sayinge by Salomon: The wil, is prepared of the lord. And also ye A∣postle,Philip. ii which preacheth whole∣somelye,
 that it is God,August. ad Sim∣plici. that wor∣keth in vs both the wyll, and the worke, according to his good wil. Wher the Apostell doth sufficien∣tlye shewe, that the wil it selfe, is made good in vs, by the workinge of God. For, if we shuld aske, whe∣ther the good wil, is a gift of god, or not, I maruail, if any man dirst say nay.Here we do learne that we can not pray vnto god with¦oute the especiall grace of God. Esa. lxv. Rom. x. Moreouer (say the fathers afore reherced) If any man dothe saye, that the grace of God, can be geuen by humaine inuocation, or mans calling vpon god, & not that the grace it selfe dothe worke or bringe to passe, that God is called vppon of vs, he dothe gaynesaye Esaye the prophet, or the Apostell speaking the same: I am founde of them, that soughte me not, and dyd appeare playnely vnto them, that dyd not aske of me. What canne be spoken more playnelye of the vnablenesse of manne afore hee be regenerated or borne of newe by the spyryte of God?

All men maye easely see by these sayinges, whiche are moste surely grounded in the worde of the ly∣uinge God, what wyl and streng∣the we haue of oure selues, to doe any thinge, that pertaineth eyther to the glory of God, or to our own saluation. Therefore, I can not but maruaile at our pope pelagi∣ans and at the viperous broode of the fre wyll men whych do styll to the greate iniurye of the gratuite and free grace of God,The pope pela¦gians and the viperous broode of the free wil men. so set oute boast and aduaunce the free wyll and strength of man, whyche (as sainte Augustyne sayeth) is verye sore hurte and wounded, whych is all to shaken, and lost, hauinge more nede of a true confession thā of a false defence. Against thē now at this present, beinge forced ther∣vnto by the great loue & vehement zeale that I beare vnto the truth, I haue taken vppon me for to wryte, that so I maye somewhat releue and helpe the poore simple
 and ignoraunte, whome by theyr pestiferous doctrine they cause for to leaue the sure stai,To staye vpon free wil, is to leane vp the brokē rede of Egipte. that we haue in the free mercy and grace of god and to leane vpon the broken rede of theyr free will. Whyche is the next way, that Sathan the deuell, the enemy of our saluation can de∣uise, for to throw them headlonge into the bottomlesse pit of eternall dampnation. Theyr argumentes, which they do so gaily paynt out, wyth wrasted textes of the scryp∣tures, I haue diligently confuted, not sticking, as occasion did serue, to borowe of other, whiche haue foughte agaynst that monstruous heresye before me, those thynges, whych I iudged mete for my pur∣pose. For, when we haue an ene∣my to ouercom, it maketh no mat∣ter whether we ouercome hym, wyth s newe weapon, that was neuer occupyed before, or wyth a weapon that hath bene all readye occupyed of other. In temporall
 warres, what dothe it skill, whe∣ther we beate downe the common ennemy, with our owne weapon, or with our felowes weapon? So that he be beatē down & ouercom, it is all one thinge. We al oughte to seeke the glorye of God, and to fyght agaynste the common enne∣my of it, let vs not therfore enuye one at an other, but let vs faithful¦ly helpe, aide, chearishe and com∣forte one an other in this pearyl∣lous fyght. As for my parte, I am ready at all times, in thys so iust a warre against the ennemies of the grace of God, to retch forthe myne helpyng hande vnto all my fayth∣full brethren, trustinge that they wyll doe the like vnto me. Howe muche, I haue farthered nowe the cause of the truthe, lette the god∣lye iudge. Onlye this shall be to desire your honorable Lordshyppe to accept this my rude labor, whi∣che withall due submiffion I offer vnto youre honoure, as vnto the
 Mecenas and patron of all godlye learninge and true religion, bese∣ching almighty God the authoure of al goodnesse, to prosper al your godlye enterprises to his honoure and glorye, and to the com∣mon wealth of this floryshynge realme.
