



INImitation of that Burgundian Booc, that saluted the French King with a present of Ra∣dish rootes, and al∣so of the Persians, who by reason of their countrey-cu∣stome durst not Ire salutatum Satrapes sine muner magnos, Greet their great Lords without some gratefull gift:
Right prudent dprdent Lords, I present a meane obiect to your indicious sights. A meane obiect indeed, if yee regard the worth of the per∣son that presents it, or the person whom it con∣cernes,

being the spitefull Spirit of Detraction, yet tollerable perhaps, if yee receiue the presentours readie will with the reflection of your comfor∣table countenance: but most noble, and worthy to be ennobled with your patronage, if yee respect the meanes and Circles, (as I know you doe) whereby this Spirit is Coniured and Conuicted, euen by the sword of Angels, the mysticall sword, the word of God: and also by the sword of man, Alexanders sword, the decider of our Gordian doubts. VVith the former sword Michea confuted the false Pro∣phets of Samaria, Michael cōfounded the detracting Dragon, and Michaels followers here on earth the false Prophet of our Christian Church, that dceiuer, that deprauer of the holy Ghost, and of his pretious properties. With the latter sword men punish men malicious men. With this sword a King plagued Midas for his doltish Detractiō: & a Queene plagued Niobe for her courtizan comparison. VVhether these obiects be noble, tollerable, meane, or as waste leaues good for nothing, saue for Apothe∣caries to wrap about their drugs, I submit them, and compromit them together with my selfe to your Honors graue arbitrement, in hope that yee will ascribe all imperfections to my want of per∣fections, to the breuitie of time, and to the sodain∣nesse of the accident.
For the worlds great Thunderer hauing lately ta∣ken vnto him my deare wife by a sulphureous dampe of lightning, and shaken some part of my house with a thunder-clap, hath likewise strooke

me with such an amazement in mine vnderstan∣ding, with beholding out of my tabernacle of flesh and bloud the glorious gleames of his power, that truly I must needs confesse my selfe to be some∣what backward in penning and painting out this handy-worke of his, almost as ominous to me, as his hand writing was to Balthasar in Babylon. To this I may adioyne multitudes of impediments as well of publike causes and suites abroad, as also of mine owne priuate affaires at home. All which concurring vpon me in confused heapes, some by importunitie of office, some of necessitie, and some by Sathans suggestion commmonly euery day since that fatall blast, caused such vnpolished points, as in the reading may occurre to your learned view.
And yet for all this, Right honourable, I had not so abruptly at this time hastened on mine abortiue worke to your presence, were it not, because I would stay betimes the forward steps of Sathan, and also because I would stop the vnpure mouthes of pratling Momes, and tatling Niobes, who inter Bacchanalia amidst their pots of drinke, their pipes of Tobacco, and idle fits of iollity establishing the shallow foundation of their re∣ports vpon the flying and lying rumours of licen∣tious libellers, doe blasphemously blaze abroad to the derogation and preiudice of the powerfull Lord of lightnings, that the Diuell our spirituall Tempter acted this terrible tragedie. Some other times they giue out, that the same Diuell coniured

vp at mortall mens commaunds, tooke her away bodie and all, or at leastwise some principall part of her bodie. VVhich sacrilegious imputation as I know Gods elect do alreadie both loath and laugh to scorne: so I doubt not but all others shall by this present Treatise learne to leaue it off as a poi∣soned paradoxe.
Againe, there is not wanting a sort of suspicious Critickes, who arrogating to themselues the gift of Prophesie, or reuelation from aboue, doe make a taunting table-talke of this heauenly visitation in lieu of a grace or salt to season their meates with∣all, by attributing this vnexpected chance to some secret sinnes of hers. VVhich Scrthian censure all her acquaintance will contradict, and condemne of calumniation. All her familiar acquaintance wil consent with one voyce, with one mind in the scrutinie of her triall, that she liued as innocently, as industriously, as honestly, & as humbly towards God and man, as any whatsoeuer in all her country, without deceit, without Detraction. And if this be a Demonstration infallible, that out of sure premisses we inferre a sure conclusion, that none dieth ill, who hath liued well, (for a good tree euer beares good fruit) and that we must iudge men by their liues, and not by their deathes, then dare I assuredly assume, that she died as guiltlesse as those, on whom the Tower of Siloc fell. By the stayres of hell she swiftly climed aboue the starres of heauen. By lightning flames (as Elias in fi∣ry Chariots) her soule soared vp aloft into the

Region of eternall light.
Othersome in mine owne countrey more pas∣sionate, because I reforme disorders, and would redresse certaine misdemeanures whereof they claime prescription as an hereditarie or necessarie euill, doe euaporate these vncharitable speeches touching my proceedings, that God sent these pro∣digious euents, as prodromes and forerunners of his indignation conceiued against me for my seue∣rity of iustice. Summum ius, summa iniuria. Ex∣treme iustice, extreme iniurie. Which Detraction of theirs I will only countermine with that graue authoritie, interpreting old Augustines honest minde; Rash iudgement hurts not the person that is iudged, but rather him, that so rashly iudgeth, Quia cunvolumus aliena per iram coercere, grauiora committimus, by reason that when we would cor∣rect the faults of other men in passion, our selues commit more grieuous faults.
Another kind of Detractours measuring our actions by the ell of their owne guiltie con∣sciences and vsurping the Popish partes of Ghostly Confessors, doe parley in priuate among themselues, that our iust Iehouah darted this la∣mentole mishap, as a mysticall scourge for some silent sinnes of mine. At which accusation I will t equiuocate, nor endeuour to acquite my selfe hereof with the presumptuous Pharisee, for I frankly acknowledge, as one of Adams progeny, that I am throughly tainted with the leprosie of sinne: whereof I expect no deliuerance at all by

any earthly Aesculaptus, saue onely by the fiery Ser∣pent which healed the Israelites. I am carnall as S. Paul said, and sold vnder sinne. Yet notwith∣standing, if sinne present doe not please me, I know that sinnes past shall neuer harme me. But as there be differences and degrees in sinnes, wherein for the most part I shake hand with these Detractours, so dare I partly aduenture to cleere my soule from one particular sinne, (like as Luther iustified him∣selfe from auarice) that my nature euer abhorred iniustice or partialitie, though I might haue hazar∣ded the loues of my neerest kinsfolkes. Let im∣pious Ismael, and enuious Haman (whose words are swords) combine together, let them throw forth what Detractions they can, like stumbling blockes in my way: I passe not for them. On the contrarie I will glorie with that Gentile in Ta∣citus: Fulgorem bonorum à me nunquam praela∣tum, excubias ac labores vt vnum ex militibus pro in∣columitate Imperatoris malle. That I neuer preferred bright shining goods, but chose rather watchings and labours, as one of the common souldiers for the Emperours safety, and for the wea of my Countrey.
Such disgracefull libelles spurging vp from the stemme of blasphemous Detraction were diuulged and dispersed abroad in all places farre and nigh. VVhich when I had throughly ruminated and re∣uoued in my mind, looking withal into the depth of their cankred corruptions, how that our hea∣uenly King is highly iniured thereby, as also how

that his Diuine titles are daily dishonoured, despi∣sed, and detracted with their wilfull, wanton, and vnwise speeches, whereby that member or out∣ward sheath wherein our thoughts are folded, which should bee the faithfull Interpreter the soule, Oraculum animae, speculum mentis, miraculum naturae, is commonly peruerted from Christian puritie to wilfull blasphemie, so that Nazianzens saying is verified in our age, Linguādimidiam huma∣norum vitiorum partem sibi vendcat, halfe the vices, which we commit, are committed by the tongue. Nay, our whole life is full of the tongues wic∣kednesse: Tota vita nostra linguae delictis est referta, as Basil wrote. At this prodigious degeneration my spirit seem'd to sparkle, as a blazing starre with∣in me, portending miseries to such mischieuous wretches, yea, it burned as a blast of fire in the fur∣nace of my bodie, incensing the principall powers thereof, (as kindes of greene fewell ordained for this purpose) to consume some of those saplesse shrubbes, or at least (as smoking firebrands) to ter∣rific children from playing too much with sacred mysteries, from laughing, like vnnaturall Cham at Noahs nakednesse, from mocking at Elishaes reuerend head, and (to speake like a Poet) from pluc∣king ouerlong at Iupiters beard, from polluting their fathers ashes.
These, these motiues, Right noble Lords, enfor∣ced me to expose abroad mine vntimely Embrion, not altogether shapt aswell as I intended, nor yet growne to that maturitie, as the Satyrist an∣sweredin

defence of Virgils Aeneads.
Vt ramale vetus vaegrandi subere coctum:
Like an old bough full ripe with barke.
But what perfect essence nature denies vnto it, or what complete forme Art conceales from it, I humbly craue that all may be construed in good part by your Honorsboundlesse bounties, wher∣to, as to a diuine Oracle or discreet Rhadamanthes, I flie for verdict in the behalfe of this worthlesse worke, which once againe I dedicate Dijs tutelari∣bus to your heroicall vertues, eyther by them sig∣ned ominously with print of chalke, or with coale, or (according to the Greeke custome) with the blacke letter  destinating death, to be . censured worthy of immortalitie and of euer∣lasting Cedar, or else to be cancelled in per∣petuall obliuion and Cymmerian darkenesse.
