



SOm per¦aduēter (mooste myghtie princes) wil mer∣uail and wonder,
 that I beyng but a pore strā∣ger, dwellinge here wythin your graces dominion, dare be so bold to dedicate any ma¦ner of booke vnto your maie¦stye, beynge so seriously occu∣pied in the waighty affayres of the common weale, and al∣so so earnestlye geuen (& that to the greate comforte of all youre louinge subiectes that heare of it) to the study of de∣uine letters, and diligent rea¦ding of the godlye and lear∣ned workes of the auncyente fathers of the primitiue chur¦che. But they shall I truste, cease from meruailing, when they shall both call to remem¦braunce thys saying of Paul: there is neyther Iewe nor Grecian, ther is nether bond
 nor free,Gala. iii. there is nether man nor womanne: For, ye are all one in CHRIST IE∣SUS: and also when they shall sette before theyr eyes, the exceadynge greate Cle∣mency, and Princelye good∣nesse, that your grace is most richly endued withall.
Whyche onlye at thys pre∣sente haue so comforted mee, that puttinge all vaine feare a syde, I dare nowe wyth all due submyssyon and sub∣iecte lyke reuerence, offer thys my rude laboure, vn∣to youre soueraygne Maie∣stye, not doubtinge but that youre Grace wyll, accor∣dynge to youre wonte and accustomed bountuousnesse, accept this my good wil that
 I beare, both to your person, and also to the faithfull con∣gregation of Gods people. For whose sake, I haue at thys time enterprised and ta¦ken in hand to wryte and set∣forthe thys small treatyse of Predestination and of the de¦uine prouidence of God, to this end that I might enarm and fence the true churche of God againste the pestiferous sect of the fre wil men of oure time,Why the free wyll men are enemies vnto the doctine of Predesti∣nation. which are for non other cause enemies vnto the most comfortable doctrine of Pre∣destination, which is plainlye inough (if men wil haue eyes to see) setforth vnto vs in the infallible worde of God, and sacred scriptures, conteined in the canonicall bokes of the
 old and new Testament, but because that they wyll haue part of our saluation to be at∣tributed vnto oure selues, & to the merites of oure owne workes, and not the hole glo¦rye thereof to be geuen vnto Christ, and vnto the merites only of his death, passion, and bloudshedding. Suche hathe bene alwayes the subtyl and crafty wilynesse of that most ancient serpente, who decey∣ued in times past, oure fyrste Parentes, Adam and Eue, for to make vs before the de∣uine maiestye of God rancke sacriledges, I mene traitors, robbers of Gods glory. For, whatsoeuer of our saluation, we doe adscribe eyther vnto our selues, or vnto our owne
 merites and deseruyngs, the same we do most sacrilegious¦ly plucke & take away frō the gratuite and mere mercye of god, & from the merits of the death, passion, & bludsheding of his son Iesu christ our lord & sauior. I do here let passe, that by thimpugnyng of this doctrin sathan the deuil, go∣eth about, as much as in him lieth, to ouerthrow the infalli¦blenesse,By what meanes we are certifed of oure elec∣tion. and certainty of our election, wherof we be certifi¦ed by the preaching of Gods word by thinward workyng of the holy ghoste, and also by iustification, which we do ob∣tain frely by faith in the only begotten son of god. For take away the right vnderstāding of the matter of predestinati∣on,
 the assurance of our salua¦tiō, which springeth of the fre electiō of god, wherby we are chosen in Christ Iesu afore ye foūdacions of the world wer laid, is clean ouerthrowne,Ephe. i. & the whole doctrine of iustifi∣cation by faith, as builded vp on a sandy grounde, is moste easy to be blowne downe by the daungerous blaste of the wicked temptation of the spi∣rit of mistrust & misbeleue, or of wauering doubtfulnes. I know (most gracius princes) that I shal haue many enne∣mies, for wrytīg of this work but I wil desire thē all, in the bowels of our sauioure Iesu Christ, that they will vouch∣safe to read the whole tretise through with patiēce, sobrie∣ty,
 and iudgemēt, and then I do not dout, but that their āger will be pacified, & their min∣des satisfied, if at least, thei be so reasonable, that eyther the scriptures or the authorities of the ancient fathers, can in any wise satisfy them. And as for those,  that do obiect yt this doctrin of predestinatiō doth hinder the preaching of gods word, & causeth that it cānot profit,Aunswer August de bono perseue¦rantia. cap. xiiii. I wil answer them by s. Augustine, who wryteth on this manner: As though this doctrin had hindred the Apo¦stle s. Paule to do his duetye, who so often times did com∣mend vnto vs and teache the doctrine of Predestination, & yet neuer ceased to preache ye worde of god. Againe: As he
 that hath receiued the gift cā better exhort & preache, so he that hathe receiued the gyfte doth hear the preacher more obediently, and with greater reuerence. And a little after: we do therfore exhort & prea¦che, but they onli, which haue eares to hear do hear vs qui¦etly, or obediently, & to theyr owne comforte: and in those that haue them not, thys sen∣tence is fulfilled, that hearing with their eares they do not hear: for, they hear wyth the sēce of the body, but not with the consent of the hart. Now that some haue eares to hear & some haue not, it is because that it is geuen of the father to some of them to come vnto the sonne, and to thother not
 geuen.Rom. xi. Who knewe the mea∣ninge of God, or who was a counsell with him? What mā art thou that doste aunswer God?Rom. ix. Muste that be denyed, whych is plaine, because, that can not be knowne, whych is hidden and secreat? And in a other place: I pray you (saith this holy father) if som vnder the shadow of predestination,Augu. de bono per se. ca. xv. geue them selues to slouthful negligence, and as they are bent to flater their own flesh, so followe their owne lustes, must we therfore iudge, that this which is wrytten of the foreknowledge of god, is fals. Now surely this is very han¦some, and to the purpose, that we shal not speake that, whi∣che by the scripture is lawful
 to speake. But we feare (wyll some say) least he shuld be of∣fēded, which is not able to vn¦derstande & take it. And shall we not in the meane season fear, least while we holde our tonge, he yt is able to take the truth be taken & snarde with falshode & error? Moreouer thus he doth wryte in ye same self boke: Sith the apostles & doctors of the church,Capi. xx. which came after thē, did the one & the other, both teaching pure¦ly & sincerly the grace of god, which without ani merits, is geuē frelye vnto vs, and also reteining or keping the faith¦ful in godly obedience, lyfe & māners, what moueth these our aduersaries (being ouer∣throwne with the manifest & inuincible truth) to think thei say
 wel, affyrming that although this doctrine of predestinatiō be true, yet it ought not to be preached vnto the people: yea so much the rather, it oughte to be throughly preched, that he that hathe eares to heare, may hear. Mani other nota∣ble sayinges myght I aledge out of his boke, which is inti∣tuled: De bono perseuerantiae except I should feare to be ouer tedi¦ous vnto your maiesty.The godlye warning of Saint August. This onlye will I adde, howe that thys holy ancient father doth warne vs of two thynges in teaching this doctrin of pre∣destination. The one is that we wade in it no farther, thē the scripture & worde of God doth lead vs. The other, that we hide nothing frō the true church of god, that is reueled
 vnto vs in the boke of God, but faithfully set it forth to ye edifying and comfort of gods people. Whiche ii. poyntes, I trust, I haue most diligently obserued, as it shal apear vn∣to al thē, that shal with iudge¦ment, & with a single eie, read ouer the hole boke, markinge well the methode or order of teachinge, that I haue vsed throughout the whole work. Thus I make an end, humbli beseching your most excellēt maiesty, of your gracious and benygne goodnesse, to accept this mi simple trauel, waying rather the faithfulnes of my true hart toward your high∣nes, then the smalnes of this my gifte, that so it maye passe forth, through your highnes name & permissyon, into the
 handes of your vnfained and faithfull subiects, to the more full strēgth in the knowledge of god and of his holy and de¦uine misteries, and also to the more perfect assurāce of their saluation in Christ Iesu, who of his tender merci and good¦nes, vouchsafe to defend and preserue your most gracious highnesse from al your enne∣mies, and with his holy spirit so to fil, strengthen, and com∣fort your princely harte, that ye may at al times, boldly set forth his glory, and maintain it vnto your liues end. Whiche the Lorde longe continue to hys ho∣nor.
