

WHereas latelie at the death of that most godlie and graue diuine P. Martyr Vermillius I made an oration openly in our Schoole, where∣in I comprehended briefelie the historie of his life, manie of
Peter Martyrs friendes and mine desired of mee that I woulde recognise the same, and augment it if it were possible, and so to put foorth the same into light. Which thing I coulde not denie them, aswell for their loue towardes mee, as also for other great causes. For albeit that my Oration be not so well furnished and composed, as it can ex∣toll
Martyr with deserued praises, yet doe I thinke that the same for the true and syncere commemoration of the thinges themselues wilnot be altogether vnwelcome vnto such as bare good will vnto Peter Martyr. For I haue declared nothing but that which either I my selfe haue seene, or haue learned of witnesses worthie of credit. For I haue indeuored earnestly herein, to know euen as perfectlie as might be, al the historie of his life of those which were conuersant with him. Wherein I was holpen by others, but especially of Iulius Terentianus who both was
Martyrs scholer in Italie, and in his banishment and al his peregrinations, coulde neuer be separated from him vntill his death. Manie thinges also did I vnderstand, by diuers of Martyrs owne writings, and by his letters vnto his friends, and in like manner by the letters of his friendes vnto him, the which I diligentlie perused and by the good will and request of his heyrs gathered them into order. Wherefore this Oration of mine, such as it is (for I knowe well and confesse willingly that all my workes are but slender and bare) I thought good to sende vnto you reuerende Father, and that it shoulde passe foorth openlie vnder the authoritie of your honourable name. For since you both loued and honoured
Martyr while he liued, I doubt not but that the remembraunce of him woulde be to your ioy and liking, and I iudge that the incredible sorrowe which I thinke you haue taken for his death, cannot be better reliued by anie meanes than by the continuall memorie and consideration of the diuine vertues which shined in him. And because the life of Martyr was throughlie well seene and knowen vnto you, you may verie well also iudge of the trueth of my discourse. You liued in Englande with him vnder King
Edwarde of happie and godlie memorie. But the state being changed, when by reason of the imminent perils, and the perse∣quution which then waxed hote, manie good men went out of their countrie, you in your banishment ariued againe at your Martyr, as it were in a certaine port of your studies: and so liued with him, both first at Strasborough, and then after with vs at Zuricke, and was a perpetuall companion and as∣sistant of his studies and labors which were verie great. And nowe after that by the singular bene∣fit of God, through the indeuour, good will and diligence of the most excellent Queene Elizabeth, the true Religion beganne to be perfectlie restored amongest you, and that you together with manie other godlie and learned men were restored to your countrie, and that you were aduanced to great honours, according as your excellent vertues deserued, you being absent did alwaies through conti∣nuall  letters and all manner of dueties carefullie and diligently maintaine your auncient friendshippe. For you accounted him insteede of a father, and he in like manner most willingly confessed you to bee vnto him in age a sonne, and in dignitie a father. Nowe sith that by domesticall familiaritie and con∣tinuall acquaintance you haue had full triall of his wit, learning, godlinesse, modestie, humanitie and sweete conuersation, and haue also hearde of him manie thinges concerning his life (for he vsed som∣times to recken vp to his friendes request those thinges which had happened to him both in Italie and else where to their great delight) shall iudge best of all other of the trueth of this Historie. And (vn∣lesse I be deceiued) you will rather iudge, that manie thinges which belonged to his praises are either omitted of mee or else not sufficientlie expressed according to the worthinesse thereof, than to affirme that I haue cōmended him aboue his desert. And perhaps also those of Martyrs friendes among you will iudge no lesse, & diuers noble and gentle men, and also reuerende Bishoppes and manie other wor∣thie men which sometime knewe Martyr & loued him wel, if so be that anie of them will vouchsafe to reade this Oration of ours which I doubt not but many will in whose mindes the memorie of Martyr though hee be deade is deepelie imprinted and firmely fastened. But the iudgements of these men I dare not withstand, but rather I confesse a fault before iudgement: and I desire pardon partlie because I thinke that I do iustly deserue pardon, if I alone not being sufficiently indued with the power of wit and eloquence, and therewithall let with sorrow and heauinesse, coulde not in speach comprehend all the praises of that man (whose vertues alone manie ages before haue not had the like comparable vn∣to his) and partly because I thinke that not onelie the successe but also my purpose and will of taking the worke in hande ought to be regarded. For I meant for this cause speciallie to publish those things which I had learned of my friends, and gathered by some reasonable studie, to the intent that notable and elo∣quent men, fauouring and louing Martyr (as I know many both Italians and English men, and also
Germans and French men did) stirred vp by my example, might easilie performe that which I for ma∣nie causes could not doe, namelie to celebrate the praises of Martyr by an excellent, eloquent, and well furnished Oration. And this office vndoubtedly now that Martyr is deade manie Godly men wish it had beene performed of you, which knewe both what you are able to doe in eloquence and are also full assured how greatly you loued Martyr. And they thinke that such kinde of Orations are not repug∣nant to your office and dignitie: since that with such kind of funerall Orations, both Nazianzene, ho∣noured
Basil, and Athanasius; and Ambrose, Valentinian, and Theodosius, & his brother
Satyrus; and other Bishops, other excellent men: And that they doe not require this of you (right reuerend Fa∣ther) they are mooued by this reason, namelie that they thinke there wants not in you anie good will, but leasure and time: For how great labours you indure in inlarging the kingdome of Christ, and with how great studie and diligence you execute the office of a Bishop, we also are not ignorant though wee be farre distant from you. But in the meane time if by this my Oration I may prouoke you to describe the prayses and life of Martyr: (euen as cunning musitians are oftentimes prouoked by the rude playing of others: that as it were of a certaine indignation, they which before would not, doe afterward plaie most excellentlie) I shall receiue sufficient fruit of my labour: but if you lacke time and to others wil∣lingnesse to doe it, yet at the leastwise I wish that this my Oration may be extant, not for a memo∣rie of him, which he by his owne writings and labours hath procured to himselfe to be eternall, but that they which are mindfull of his name, may yet at the leastwise haue this hystorie such as it is of his life, wherein they may see both the beginnings and proceedings of his studies, and from thence fetch ex∣amples both of manifolde and rare vertues. Nowe I craue of you (right reuerende Father) that you will take in good part this token of my dutifull goodwill towards you: and in the considering of this Ora∣tion, not to haue so much respect to me, as to Martyr himselfe, whom the whole hystorie doth concerne. Indeede your loue towards me required that I should giue some greater and more notable testimonie of my obseruation towards you, but since my habilitie serueth not, therefore I beseech you rather haue respect to my good will, and continue your accustomed loue and good liking of me. Fare you well right reuerend Father. Dated at Zurick the principall Citie of Swicherland the 4. Calendi of Ianuarie,
1562.
