


THe People in times past did prayse and ex∣toll by Pictures and Epigrames, the famous de∣des of all sutche persons, vvho so euer in any vertuous qualitie or Libe∣ral Science excelled. Sulpitius Gallus a∣mong the Romanes vvas highly renovv∣med

for his singuler cunning in Astro∣nomie, by vvhose meanes Lucius Paulus obteyned the victorie in his vvarres a∣gaynst Percius. Pericles also among the Athenians vvas had in great admiration and honour for his profounde knovv∣ledge in Philosophie, by vvhom the vvhole Citie of Athens vvas from care and vvoe deliuered, vvhen they suppo∣sed their destuction to be neare at hand, by a blacke darknes of some admiration hanging ouer their Citie. Howe ho∣norably vvas Apelles the Paynter estee∣med of mightie king Alexander, by whō onely he desired to be paynted. But a∣mongst all other Artes and Sciences, vvhose prayse in tymes past flourished and shined most brightly, Chirurgerie among the vvise Grecians lacked not his prayse, honour, and estimation. For dyd not that vvorthy and famous captayne of the Greekes Agamemnon loue dearely, and revvarde bountifully both Podalerius and Macham through vvhose cunnings skill in Surgerie, thousands of vvorthy

Greekes vvere saued aliue and healed, vvho els had dyed and perished. And further heere to speake of Philoneter, of Attalus, of Hiero, of Archelaus, and of Iuba, kinges of famous memorie, vvho purchased eternal prayse by their study and cunning in Phisicke and Surgery. But novve in these our dayes enuie so ruleth the rost, that Phisicke should be condemned, and Surgerie despised for euer, but that sometime payne biddeth battayle, and care keepeth skirmishe, in suche bytter sorte, that at the last this Alarum is sounded out, Novve come Phisicke, and then helpe Surgerie. Then is remembred the saying of Iesus the sonne of Sirache which is notable, Honour the Phisition and Chirurgion for necessitie, vvhom the almightie God hath created, because from the hyest commeth Me∣dicine, and they shal receyue gyftes of the King. VVherefore vve exhort the vvyse man that he in no tyme of pro∣speritie and health, neglect these noble

Artes and mysteries of Phisicke and Chirurgerie, because no age, no person, no countrey can long time lacke their helpes and remedies. VVhat is it to haue landes and houses, to abounde in siluer and golde, to be deckt with pear∣les and Diamondes, yea and to possesse the vvhole vvorlde, to rule ouer Na∣tions and countreys: and to lacke health, the cheefest Iuel and greatest treasure of mans lyfe and delight.
Consider then vvee beseeche your VVorships, vvhat prayses are due to suche noble Sciences, vvhiche onely vvorke the causes of this aforesayde health, and hovve muche the vveale publique are bounde to al them, whose cares and studies daylye tendeth too this ende. Amongst vvhom heere is to be remembred Master Vicary Esquire, Seriaunt Chirurgion to Kinges and Queenes of famous memorie: VVhose learned vvorke of the Anatomie is by vs the forenamed Surgions of Sainct

Bartholomewes in Smithfeelde, nevvly reuiued, corrected & published abroad to the commoditie of others, vvho be Studentes in Chirurgerie: not vvithout our great studies, paynes and charges. And although we do lack the profound knowledge and sugred eloquence of the Latin and Greeke tongues, to decke and beautifie this vvorke, yet we hope the studious Reader shal thereby reape sin∣guler commoditie and fruite, by reading this little Treatise of the Anatomie of mans body, the vvhich is onely groun∣ded vpon reason and experience, which are two principal rootes of Phisicke and Surgerie. As it is graunted by Galen in his thirde Booke De Methode medendi: and vve vvho dayly worke and practise in Surgerie, according to the deepnes of the Arte, aswel in greeuous vvounds, Vlcers, and Fistules, as other hyd and secrete diseases vpon the body of man, dayly vsed by vs in S. Bartlemews Hos∣pital, and other places. &c. Those poore

and greeued creatures, aswell men and women, as children do knowe the pro∣fite of this Art to be manyfolde, and the lacke of the same to be lamented. Ther∣fore Galen truely vvriteth, saying, That no man can vvorke so perfectly as a∣foresayde, vvithout the knovvledge of the Anatomie: For (sayth he) it is as possible for a blinde man to carue and make an Image perfect, as a Chirurgi∣on to vvorke vvithout errour in mans body not knovving the Anatomie. And further, for as muche as your VVor∣ships are very careful for those poore and greeued creatures vvithin the Hos∣pital of S. Bartlemevves. &c. vvhereof Master Vycarie vvas a member: VVe are therefore novve encouraged to De∣dicate this little vvorke of the Anato∣mie, beeing his and our trauayles, to you as Patrons of this Booke, to defende a∣gaynst the rauening Iavves of enuious Backbyters, vvhiche neuer cease by all vnlawful meanes to blemishe and de∣face

the vvorkes of the learned, expert, and vvel disposed persons. Finally, vve do hum∣bly craue of your Goodnesses, to accept in good part this Treatise concerning the Ana∣tomie, as the fruites of our studies and labours, vvhereby wee shal be muche better encou∣raged to set foorth hereafter other profitable vvorkes for the common vvealth. Heerein yf your VVisedomes doo vouchsafe to heare our requestes, and to alovve these our doo∣inges, as dyd noble Amasus king of Egypt accept the labours of his payneful Artificers, vve haue not onely to thanke your VVor∣ships for so dooing, but also to pray alway for you vnto the almightie God to re∣quite your goodnesses, receyuing you into hys protection and keeping.
Amen.
