


WHen as the last yere (most curteous Her∣man) I pervsed the writings of the exceeding godly & notable learned man Peter Martir my scholemaster, and had gathered togither out of his librarie euery small pam∣phelet noted wyth his owne hand, I lighted by chaunce vp∣pon certaine papers cast a side
 and layde apart, wherein were diuers holy praiers of his owne hand writing. And when I had pervsed these diligently ouer, I thought it meete to put them forth in print: for although I certainlye knewe hee did not make them to that intent, yet neuerthelesse there bee dy∣uers causes which moue me to go on vvith my former deter∣mination. The first is, that whē the counsaile of Trent began, there rose vp both grieuous & deadly warre in Germanie for Religion, at which tyme Mar∣tir finished these praiers which he openly vsed in the Schooles
 at Strasborow at the end of his lectures, and are now very con∣uenient to be set forth in these dayes, wherein it behoueth vs to make feruent prayers vnto almightie God, that the like to the Counsaile of Trent being novv ended be not kindled a∣gaine. Moreouer the prayers conteyned in this small booke, are both plaine, and do verye little disagree from the wordes of the Psalmes, vvhich I ac∣compt to bee highly esteemed amongst praiers. For diuers ar∣guments of many Psalmes are briefly and euidently expoun∣ded in these prayers, and a nū∣ber
 of darke and hard places made plain with a notable Pa∣raphrase. VVherefore I doubt not but that such as be desirous to read this short little booke, shall reape farre greater cōmo∣ditie therby then many would suppose. Novv haue I dedica∣ted this small booke vnto thee (my deere Herman) that thou mayst haue both our Martyres token of remembraunce and mine also. For seing that thou diddest honour and reuerence Doctor Martyr (so long as hee liued) like a father: and more∣ouer louedst me so excedingly hitherto, as I maye rightfully
 place thee in the number of my deerest friendes: I verilye thinke that thou vvilt take this booke in right good vvorth, (although it be of a very small volume) vvhich I sende vnto thee being vvrittē in both our names. For so oft as you shall looke in this booke (vvhich of your godly dispositiō you vvil do very oft) so many times shal you call to minde the remem∣braunce of your olde friendes, not altogither to thee vnplea∣sant (as I hope.) Neyther can the death of Doctor Martyr cause vs to be any thing forget∣ful of him: nor yet the distance
 of place be any breach of our vnfeyned good vvill so long as vve haue life, that vve shoulde retain any whit lesse the frend∣ship heretofore begunne vvith letters and a friendly recorda∣tion of olde acquaintance.
Fare vvell
at Zurike the xx. day of Iune in the yeare of our Lord 1564.
