



WHen I oftentimes consider with my selfe (right honourable Sir, whome for godlines and learning I reuerence) all those things which happened all that whole time that I dwelt in En∣gland, it driueth into me a great and manifolde griefe. And in es∣peciall it is a grief vnto me, that so great an hope of the gospell of Iesus Christe, and of pure doc∣trine in that Realme, geuen by the most mighty and most mer∣cifull God, and confirmed by the great laboure, industry, and study of godly men, hath now in a maner vtterly pearished. It is a griefe vnto me, to thinke that that most noble wit, most sacred brest, and incredible piety of that famous king Edwarde the .vj. of that name your most deare pupill, is so sodainely taken from vs. It is a griefe vnto me that so many English men, being of great fame & renoum, as well for theyr piety as for theyr knowledge and nobility, are by voluntary exile for religion sake, dispersed throughout externe and straunge countreys: and they which at home were counted moste noble, and heroicall, doe now wander abrode as men obscure, ab∣iect, and in a manner vnknowne to all men. But it is well in that this happeneth not vnto them for any wicked actes by them com∣mitted, or for filthy life, but only for the name and doctrine of oure Lord Iesus Christ. It is also a griefe vnto me, that so great a mul∣titude of godly brethren are (as doubtles it is to often from euerye where signified vnto vs) moste cruelly for theyr holy profession put to the sworde, fire, and tormentes: whome, for as much as they are our brethren, and haue to theyr head together with vs one and the selfe same Christ, and are members of one and the selfe same body, and finally are euen oure owne bowels, when we heare to be en∣treated with so great cruelty and tyrāny, it is not possible, but that we also should in minde be shaken with horror, and set on fire, euen as they are in body tormented and murthered. These and a greate many moe things being vnto me a great griefe, so that I am nowe in a maner hardened to any newe griefe, yet cease I not to haue an eye hither and thither, to see if I might by any meanes gette some healthfull and profitable remedy bothe for my selfe and for such like as I am: but now I haue long time had experience of, that it is in vaine to hope for mannes helpe, or for ayd at the worlds hand. And
 therefore I persuade both my selfe & also others to withdraw their mindes from the aides of the flesh, and to implore the heauenly and diuine helpe: which doubtles I see is offred vnto vs two wayes. One is, that we with prayers turning our selues vnto Christ, shold say: How long Lord shall the wickednes and fury of Idolatry, of supersticions, and of the ignorance of the scriptures range abroade on the earth? How long Lord shall thy holy Gospell be troden vn∣der foote? We in dede haue sinned, we haue ben rebellious against thee, and haue not harkened vnto thy wordes, for which cause we are iustly, and for our euill deserte, thus daily put o confusion and shame. But thou O Lord our God are most iust in all thy workes. But on the other side Lord, for as much as it belongeth to thy cle∣mency and constancy, to haue mercye, to spare, and most faithfully to kepe thy couenauntes and promises, how long Lord? how long wilt thou be angry vnto the end? Remember not our iniquities of olde. Wherefore we beseeche thee, that for as much as in these laste times, thou hast by pouring abrode thy plenteous light, (and that being most mighty,) vouchsafed to make manifest vnto men which lay in darknes, yea more then palpable darknes, the secretes of thy truth: thou woldest once at the length turne away thy wrath and fury from our ingrate mindes, and from the most greuous sinnes, whereby we haue laid forth thy most holy name, and the pure doc∣trine which we professe, to euil speakings and to blasphemies. And deliuer thy congregation from the contumelies and oppressions of the wicked, which doubtles light not only vpon vs, but also vppon the maiesty of thy name. Although thou of thyne owne nature be , that is, vntouchable, and not able to be hurt. Illu∣minate O most louing Christ, thy face vpon the Church redeamed with thy bloud, which is now in a manner vtterly lefte desolate. Thy name only, and not any other mannes name, we call vpon, not vndoubtedly trusting to any our own righteousnes, but to thy goodnes only and mercy, that thou woldest either appoynt an end or measure of those euils, and lenify the vexation wherwith we to∣gether with our brethren are afflicted, or that thou wouldest at the least vouchsafe to geue vnto the hearts of thine, such faith and con∣stancy, that they fall not away from the profession of true piety, yea rather that they may so nobly and valiantly behaue them selues, that by their exile, emprisonment, pouertye, ignominy, sworde, fire, and how cruell so euer kinde of death it be, the liuely knowledge of thy gospell may more and more shine forth, and be made more ma∣nifest to the whole world. This kinde of ayde and remeady, (right honorable sir,) is the first, which I see is to be sought for at Gods hands against our euils, and which the holy Fathers, prophets, A∣postles, and blessed cōfessors of the Christian faith, with great fruit vsed in their afflictions. Wherfore seing that God heard them pray¦ing after this maner, or muche like therevnto, let vs in no wise di∣strust, but that he will also heare vs when as we haue cōmon with them, one and the selfe same cause, and one and the selfe same God. Vndoubtedly if he heard them, he will not despise our prayers: but
 forasmuch as he is alwayes like vnto himselfe, if he most louingly and with incredible facilitie receaued theyr prayers, he will also fil vs making supplicatiō vnto him, not with a small but with a most ample consolation. The second helpe which is also brought vs from God, and is euery where offred vnto vs, are the holy scriptures, which we ought alwais to haue in our hands as a present remedy. For if we be enfected wt ignorāce, there shal we finde light to shake the same of: if we be disturbed with sundry perturbations, and lan∣guishing affectes of the mind, and if also we be vexed with the con∣science of most greuous sinnes, in them are offred vnto vs remedies both easy & redy: if we be oppressed and in a maner ouerwhelmed with the troubles and greues of outward thinges, there shall we find sound and firme consolation: if we be sometymes in a perplex∣itye, not knowinge in thinges doubtfull whiche way to turne our selues, we can in no other place better then there, finde good and faithfull counsell: if we be tempted, and be in daunger (as it often∣times happeneth) of our saluation, there we haue a most strong & most sure place of refuge. And doubtles our latter Dauid, drue out from no els where, but out of this scrippe, most small stones of the word of God, wherewith he smote the forehead of Goliah, and fel∣led to the ground Sathan, by whome he was tempted in y• desert. Wherfore the first Dauid, not without iust cause wrote that he con∣sidered wonderfull things touching the lawe, that is touching the scriptures of God, and that he had hidden in his hart the worde of God, to the ende he might not sinne against him, and this word he confessed to be his consolation in affliction, for that the wordes of GOD quickened him. What should a man seke farther: here out doe flow the fountaines of our Sauiour, and we are all inuited, freelye to drawe water out of them, whereby our intollerable thirste is quenched and satisfied with a singular desire to obtaine blessednes. Here haue we a storehouse of GOD full stuffed with the plenty of all good things, and set abrod wyde open for vs, ther∣out may euery man prouide for his owne want. Here is layde for vs a table most plentifullye furnished, where the wisedome of God hath mingled for vs most pleasant wyne, wherewith euery man may most penltifully refreshe him. Here is set forth for euery man a garden and paradise more pleasant then the garden of Alci∣noes & Salomon. Wherfore let vs gather out of it things profita∣ble & not hurtful. Let vs rather imitate y• bees then y• spiders, in suc∣king out the most sweete iuyce, and not the deadly poyson. We vse commonly with an incredible study to embrace bookes set forth by any industry of man, whereout yet we attayne nothing els, but a meane how either to defend or to recouer health, or a way to en∣crease thinges domesticall, or rules to gouern a commonwealth, or institutions of husbandry or of other artes, or some entisements to pleasures: how much more is it profitable for vs with our whole hart to apply our selues to the reading of the holy scriptures? For∣asmuch as in them speaketh not vnto vs humane wisedom, but God himselfe, vnto whome vndoubtedly if we harken & geue hede
 we shall receaue a singular alacrity and chearfulnes of mynd, we shall driue away heauy cogitacions, we shalbe eased and lightened with a most sweete consolation, and shall put on strength aboue mans reach, we shall now thinke nothing hard or difficill, we shall thinke the yoke of the Lord and his crosse to be thinges most light, and shall offer our selues most redy for his name sake to suffer any thing, yea and being instructed with heauenly eloquence, we shall talke vnto men not with the wordes of men, but with the wordes of God himselfe. Doubtles I know that there are many, which be∣leue not these thinges, and that there are not a few which deride them and thinke that we are out of our wits, but I would gladly desire these men to vouchesafe once to make a profe, & besech them not to disdayne to reade. I dare sweare, and that vpon my greate perill, that they shall at one tyme or other be taken. They shal at the length feale how much these thinges diuine differ from humane thinges. They shall feale I say, if they reade attentiuely & diligent∣ly, that at the length thorough the mercy of God these scourges of feare and shame are encreased in their sences: they shall feale them selues to be effectually perswaded, once at the length to dye vnto death, that they may liue to life: they shall feele also themselues smitten with an horror of their sinnes and pleasures past, when as before in them they thought themselues blessed, & happy. They shal feele that the whole misery of this carnall life, is heaped vp before their eyes, and they being tormented with the bitter feeling ther∣of, it will cause to burst forth out of their eyes greate showers, and mighty floods of teares, for the oracles and words of GOD, when they are earnestly read, and deapely cōsidered, do not slightly nippe the mind, but do most deapely digge into the hart with most sharpe prickes, and therout after a sort plucking vp by the rootes vices, & wicked actes, do in their place plant peace of conscience and spiri∣tuall ioye: they shal also at the length fele kindled in them the won∣derfull and most pleasant loue of the swetenes & goodnes of God. Wherefore they being thus vtterly changed, shalbe compelled to say that which Dauid excellently well recordeth: How swete are thy words made to my iawes, they were sweter vnto my mouth then hony. But of such an helpe, then which can nothing be found more diuine and more heathfull, are those men depriued, whiche o∣ther will not read Gods bokes at all, or els reade them with a cer∣tayne disdayne, lothesommes and contempt, so that they haue no zeale to the wordes of God, but thorough theyr owne proper deui∣ses, their mind is vtterly caried to other matters. Of which impiety and wickednes God in y• Prophet Osea the 8. chapiter greauously accuseth Israell saying, I haue written to them the greate things of my law, but they were coūted as a strange thing. Doubtles those children are to much degenerated, which count that voyce where∣with theyr most louing parent calleth vpon them to liue godly and vertuously; for a strange voyce: and contrariwise do folow as theyr owne and proper voyce that which is in very dede a strang voyce: and so it commeth to passe, that after the maner of betels they re∣fuse
 swete sauors, and go to stinking donghils. Wherefore it is not to be meruailed at, if they waxe rottē in the filthy puddle of world∣ly pleasures, if they be burnt vp wyth vnwoorthy and filthy cares, If they dispayre in aduersities, and if at the laste they perishe in sinnes, and in a lyfe altogether corrupted. In summe as tou∣ching the holy scriptures, I may iustly pronounce (although some∣what inuerted) that which Demostenes affirmed of money, name∣ly, that with the word of God ought al things to be done, and with out the same can be done nothing that is good. But what go I a∣bout? Do I take vpon me to set forth the commendacions and pray¦ses of ye holy scripture? This doubtles is not my purpose, but hauing mencioned a part many thinges, which both engender & encrease my sorow & griefe, I thought good to adde remedies which I saw were geuē of God agaynst the same griefe: namely, holy prayers, & reading of ye holy scriptueres. These things, as they are the weapōs of Christians, especially in those troublesome times of theyrs, so (right honorable & worthy sir) there was no nede that you should with many wordes be by me admonished of them: when as I am not ignorant, what your piety and learning is, and how redy and well in vre you are in either kind of those actions. Wherfore it may seme that I ought rather to haue shewed this, how you thorough these most excellent aydes, haue bene holpen euen to this time hy∣therto, and that not only thereby you susteyne your selfe, but also become euery day better, wiser, and stronger. Howbeit this feared me away from doing so, for that I thought it not good to molest your eares, for I know that it is much agaynst your will to heare your owne prayses. Neither doubtles is it nedefull to set forth your vertues chiefely of this kind, when as it is well knowen and vn∣derstanded of all men, that with out such aydes you had neuer ben able to reach to yt excellency of Christian vertue, of the knowledge of things diuine and humane, of holy conuersation and of notable valiantnes and perseuerance in the confession of the true fayth. To what purpose then haue I written these thinges. To this end vn∣doubtedly, that writing vnto you touching thē, I might instruct, teach, and comfort others which should read them, and ther withall set forth vnto them a man, which continually vsing the aydes be∣fore set forth, doth both offer vnto God most acceptable sacrifices, and also comforteth and strengthneth himselfe in the Lord, and moreouer geueth a singular example to others for the wel ordering of thinges in the pure and sincere religion of Christ. I for my part doubtles haue euen since the time that I dwelt in England, borne a singular loue, and no smal or vulgar affection towards you, both for your singular piety and learning, and also for the worthy office, which you faythfully & with great renoune executed in the christiā publike wealth, in instructing Edward, that most holy king and most worthy to be beloued, whose wit, goodnes, religion, and ey∣ther vertues heroical, yea rather Christian, may indede be touched, but can neuer be praysed according to theyr desert. Wherefore whē in that realme, and in that office I began to loue you (right hono∣rable
 sit) and afterward God by his singuler prouidence which he vseth in the gouernment and administration of things pertayning to his, so wrought, that I saw you againe in Germanie, and knew you to be euen the selfe same man you were before, I was so affec∣ted y• where as before I did indede loue you, yet now I do most feruently loue. Wherfore I oftentimes thought with my selfe, how I might once in some thing if it were possible, signifie and testifie, both how much I esteeme your vertues, and how gratefull I am towardes you, for the benefites which you somtymes haue bestow¦ed vpon me: but to accōplish this I had for a long ceason no occasi∣on offred vnto me. I happened afterward to come to Tigure, but since my departure from you, that selfe same cogitatiō neuer went out of my minde. Yea rather I always thought it my part once at the length to pay vnto your honour, that whiche vnwitting vnto you I had in my minde with a good will promised vnto it. Wher∣fore mynding now to put abroade my commentaries vpon the E∣pistle of Paul to the Romanes, I thought it good to set them forth vnder the protection of your name: and fully persuade my self that you will take it in good part. Although at the first you can not but wonder, and peraduenture take it ill, for thinges which are not lo∣ked for, and which happen besides expectation, do commonly cause admiration. And we see that a light gift, and such a gift which tur∣neth rather to a burthen, then to honour, is many tymes not so wel accepted. Wherfore I hartely beseche your honour to pardon my boldnes, which I cannot tel whether others wil call rashnes. And I thynke that that thyng which I haue besides your knowledge thought vpon, came from the spirite of God, which gouerneth our hartes: and receiue this booke dedicated of me vnto you with the same fauour, wherewith that your most worthy and deare pupill Edward king of England not long since receiued my other Com∣mentaries vpon the first epistle to the Corinthians: and conceaue that my minde was by this dedication (how meane soeuer it be) to ioyne you a scholemaister of much renowne, wt ascholer of most ex∣cellency. Doubtles by the authoritie of the king I taught at Ox∣ford in his last tyme, those thinges which you shall here read, and when it was not onely required, but also vrged at my handes to put abroade this worke, I yelded thereto. But considering that it was due to some man of the Englishe nation, I thought you a mā most mete, to whom it might be geuen in the stede of the king now dead. Wherfore I earnestly desire you to take that which I haue done not in ill part, but in good, neither thinke that I ment to bur∣then or to charge you, but rather after asort to couple you together with my king and yours, and in some part to answere vnto your deserts both towardes religion, and towardes my selfe. I know doubtles that the thinges which are here taught of me, will not make you either much ler neder, or much better: for you both know them alredy, and also as much as the state of this flesh will suffer do expresse them in your maners and life. But forasmuch as all are not come so farre, I desire and besech God the father of our Lord
 Iesus, that the thinges white are put abrode vnder your name, may at the least be profitable vnto others, though you your selfe litle nede them, and that they may enioy the fruite hoped for. For my earnest desire is that these my writinges may serue to the vse of the Church of Christ: My desire is to confirme, to amplifie and to illustrate ye Gospel of the sonne of God: My desire is to establish the weake in fayth, and playnly to enstruct the vnlerned. And that I may attayne to these thinges, I most earnestly require of you, by your most faythfull supplications and prayers at Gods hand to obteyne them: but I am aferd lest you or some other, should aske me: what neded you at this time to take such great paynes in the interpreting of this epistle? Did you thinke that we wāted exposi∣tors either old or new? Doubtles you were not ignorāt of thē; whē as you so often in your commentary alledge both Greke and latine Fathers: neither can you dissemble that you haue not sene the lat∣ter writers for insome places you so follow and treade theyr steps, that it playnly appeareth that they are after a sort red in your wri∣tinges. To these thinges first I answere, that I did not at the first take in hand this charge to write an exposition vpon this epistle, for I knew right well that the Fathers both Grekes and lattines haue with great labour and fruite exercised themselues herein. Neither was I ignorāt that there are of the latter writers, which haue done the same. First Phillip Melancthon, a notable man, who elegantly and with an exquisite methode hath more then once ex∣planed this epistle. Afterward Martin Bucer, a man not onely en∣dued with singular pietie and incomparable learning, but also so long as he liued coupled with me in most deare frendship, set forth vpon the selfe same epistle a large and learned commentary. And I had red also two other most shining lightes of the church, Bul∣linger, I say, and Caluine, both most faithfull pastors, the one of the church of Tigure, the other of the church of Genena, ether of which men hath with great trauaile to the great profite of the flocke of Christ set forth most excellent and most learned commentaries v∣pon all the epistles of the apostle: but it is not my entent in thys place to collect and celebrate the prayses and vertues of all these men. And I knew that there haue bene others and that not a few whose learned trauailes vpon this epistle of Paul haue bene set a∣brode, and therfore there was no cause (as I said) why I shoulde take vpon me the trauaile to frame a new interpretation, when as other men had in this kind of speaking sufficiently and aboundant¦ly trauayled. But thus stoode the case, when in England, during the time of the Gospell I was appointed to teach at Oxford: I pub¦likely enterpreted the first epistle to the Corinthians, and also this epistle to the Romanes, & as the maner is, I priuately collected those interpretacions yt I dayly vsed, which afterward, by the ear∣nest sute of others I was compelled to put abrode, and to make common to all men those thinges which I had noted for my selfe alone or a few of my frendes: wherefore that whiche I tooke not in hand to any such purpose rather to the contrary, first God, and
 then y• instant desires of men, haue brought to this point: namely, y• those things which were at the beginning destinied to be famili∣ar and priuate schrolles, shouldbe turned into commentaries. Nei∣ther do I professe my selfe to haue bene y• only author & finder out of all those things which I haue vpō this epistle written. For I haue ben in many things excellētly wel holpē by the old writers in espe∣cial, and also no lesse by the new, such as I haue before mencioned, vnto whome yet though I haue not bene euery way and in all thinges agreeable, yet haue I not done that either of a corrupt af∣fect of the mind, or of a desire to gaynesay, or of a lust to reproue a∣ny man: but for that I iudged otherwise of some certayne thinges then they did: which I doubt not seing it was done with a good mind, shall also be taken in good part, when as by this meanes is not broken the vnity of the Church, neither is any part of my good will & reuerence towardes thē thereby empayred or diminished. Secondly this I thinke to helpe to the defence of this my edition, for that the fruitfulnes of the holy scriptures is so great, that it can not all whole be drawen out of any man, thoughe he be neuer so wise, learned, wittie, and industrious. Wherefore this is earnestly to be wished for, that all men might prophesie, to the end that those vnmeasurable riches which still lye hidden in the mines of y• word God, and in the hidden vaines of the holy booke, may with great study be digged out. Which thing as I to my power haue taken vpon me to do, so I besech the sonne of God, that others may sur∣cede, which may pricke out gold and siluer much more pure then mine, that vppon Christe the only foundation of our fayth may be built most perfect doctrine to the commoditie of the Church. Now should rest for me somewhat to speake of the worthines, commodi∣ties, and entent of this epistle: but I thinke it good at this time to leue the matter vntouched, partly for that these thinges are in a maner knowen to all men: and partly for that in the pre∣face we haue spoke so much as we thought sufficient touching this matter, and touching a few other thynges pertayning to the same. Wherefore omitting them at this present, this agayne I desire and require at your handes (right honorable and worthy sir) that you would vouchsafe to accept my small gift, as a moste certaine pledge of my loue and affection towardes you, neither take it in ill part, that with my bolde offer, I presume to trouble your honour.
¶ Fare you well, and God send you as you haue begn long to liue to our Lord Iesus Christ the sonne of God and redemer of manking.
Written in my study at Tigure the Kalēdes of August. 1558.
