


WE haue with our gret harmes longe tried, no∣thing to be more perilous thē wic¦ked follye armed with princely au¦thoritee, Blessed be the heauenly God, moost gracious
Mary, we nowe sauour what inesti∣mable good thinge is godly wisedome, coupled with power imperiall. The first nedeth not proffe, for all haue felt, and none can denay: I hother is nowe in vre, that wordes were vaine to de∣clare, where deedes are present plentu∣ouslye to shewe. What glorie hereof riseth vnto youre maiestie, I neither can expresse as I would, nor yet wil as I may, hauing experience of your gra∣ces nature, delighted to do the beest in all, and least of al to heare of it againe. Sparing therfore to praise, whō none but the wicked cā dispraise, I yet with other can not but reioyce, that so high wisedome, so heauenlye inclination is nowe (by Gods prouidence) matched with semblable authoritie of highe go∣uernaunce: that what Godlye wayes for the maintenaūce of Gods honour, and the wealth of this realme, youre grace of heauenlie inclination hath to∣fore wished, whē ye could not require, of high wisdome hath thought right to be done, when ye lacked might to doo: the same hensfurthe your maiestie (of
right) may will, and of authoritie com∣maunde: that where as heretofore vn∣der men of courage more stoute to doo their wyll, then godlye deuoute to doo thinges wel, the trueth of Gods word, and the zeale of good workes haue de∣taied: so hereafter, vnder Mary a lady of he auenly simplicitie, ye liuely sparke of godly loue may eftsones kindle that was extinct: the bright sterre of Euan∣gelike lighte maye shine, that was ob∣scured: the righte vaine of heauenlye doctrine maye appere, that was stop∣ped vp. If all could that woulde, your highnes shoulde lacke no helping han∣des to further youre maiesties godlye purposes. Amongest them that haue muche good wyll, and litle power, I haue alwayes claimed to be one, and nowe for maintenaūce of that claime, I do moost humbly beseche your high∣nes to accepte this litle worke, whiche presently I present vnto your grace, that beinge accepted and authorised by your highnes, it mighte finde fauoure with other, that can not but like what your wisedome hath not mislyked.

Wherein I haue expressed bothe my humble and loyall hart towardes your maiestie, & also my vehement affection towardes my naturall countreemen, and most earnest desire of their happie retourne home to trueth, that haue so long straied from home in errour. And for asmuche as many seme to stray, be∣cause they knowe not their home, nor the waye thither: I haue deuised for them a perfect table, wherin our home is lyuelye set furth, and the waye also thither. Our home I cal the catholike church, the true spousesse of Christ, our most louinge mother. The way to this home is to folowe her ordinaunces and lawes. This haue I done, howe euer the dede be liked with other, if youre maiestie allowe the intent of the doer, I haue a great portion of my desire. The grace and blessing of God be with your highnes euer and euer. Amen.

