



EXperiment partly, and partly Presumption, two bolde guides, haue mooued me to attempt your honour with the dedication of this booke. Ho∣ping that as you haue already honorably receaued the lat∣ter two bookes and a parcell of another, ioygned with the former seauen of Virgils Aeneidos translated into English meeter by Thomas Phaër, and taken them to your honorable protectiō: So likewise your honour wil not refuse the same worke agayne imprinted, & set forth with such diligence as cōueniently might be. Which, to thintent it should not alwaies remaine vnperfect, but rather answer the purpose wherto M. Phaër had respect when he tooke it in hande, (which was to delight the nobilitie of this Realme, and others that should vouchsafe to reade it) and also that so noble a Poet should not sustaine so foule a mayme in the English tongue, as alwaies to lye vnfynished: I haue en∣terprised more ventrously then wisely, & with better cou¦rage then cūning to end that which he left vnperfect. Not that I thinke my self cōparable vnto him in any thing that he tooke in hande, for so would I not haue your honour, or any other to iudge of me. But seing so many excellent wit∣tes as since his time haue flourished, haue left it vntouched: I haue bin bold at length to spend Time, & hazard Esti∣mationtherin. The acceptation wherof, as it wilbe, I hope, at some mens hands: I embrace: and at others: I do not reguard. Vnto your honour, whom I presume to make patron herof, with al humility, & dutiful reuerence I sub¦mit myself, and my trauailes. That if it shal hap the same in the accepting, to cōceaue any good opinion therof, ether for wel doing, or wel meaning: I am fully satisfied. Wher∣of I stand in the greater hope, since your honour being ad∣uaunced vnto the dignitie wherin you now stand, through your owne industrie and vertu: can deem the better of such labours, and do vse more entierly to embrace with fauour, such as beare goodwil vnto learning. And hauing alredy stoared your self sufficiētly with such plausible furniture: yet amongst al other good gifts wherwith god hath endued you, both for your owne ornament, and for the commodity of the cōmonwealth of England, persuade your self that there is no one vertu that more amplifieth your title of ho∣nour, then that curtesie, & affability which you shew vn∣to suters, and such as haue occasion to attend your honour. Wherin though som suppose that a disgracing of Nobi∣litie, and worship doth consist: yet then they shall know it to be contrarie, when they shall begin to know themselues, and to vnderstand that such meanes do make men not only noble aboue the Cōmonaltie: but excellent also aboue the Nobilitie. Almightie God perserue your honour with wisshed encrease, prolong your daies with happie delight.

