



WHat deepe and rare poynctes of hydden secrets
Ʋirgil hath sealde vp in his twelue bookes of
Aeneis, may easelye appeere too such reaching
wyts, as bend theyre endewours, too thee vnfol∣ding
thereof; not onlye by gnibling vpon thee
owtward ryne of a supposed historie, but also by
groaping thee pyth, that is shrind vp wythin thee
barck and bodye of so exquisit and singular a discourse. For where as
thee chiefe prayse of a wryter consisteth in thee enterlacing of pleasu∣re
wyth profit: oure author hath so wiselye alayed thee one wyth thee
oother, as thee shallow reader may bee delighted wyth a smooth ta∣le,
and thee diuing searcher may bee aduātaged by sowning a pretiou∣se
treatise. And certes this preheminencye of writing is chieflye (yf
wee respect oure old latin Poëtes) too bee affurded too Virgil in this
wurck, and too Ouid in his Metamorphosis. As for Ennius, Horace,
Iuuenal, Persius and thee rablement of such cheate Poëtes, theyre
dooinges are, for fauoure of antiquitye, rather to be pacientlye allo∣wed,
thean highlye regarded. Such leauinges as wee haue of Ennius
his ragged verses are nothing current, but sauoure soomwhat nappy
of thee spigget, as one that was neauer accustomed too strike vp thee
drum, and too crye, in blazing martial exploytes, alarme, but when
hee were haulfe tipsye, ac Horace recordeth. Thee oother three, ouer
this that theyre Verses in camfering wise run harshe and rough, per∣fourme
nothing in matter, but biting quippes, taunting Darcklye
certeyn men of state, that liued in theyre age, bee sprinckling theyre
inuectiues with soom moral preceptes, aunswerable too thee capaci∣tye
of eurie weake brayne. But oure Ʋirgil not conten wyth such
meigre stuffe, dooth laboure, in telling, as yt were a Cantorburye tale,

too ferret owt thee secretes of Nature, with woordes so fitlye coucht,
wyth verses so smoothlye slyckte, with sentences so featlye orderd,
with orations so neatlie burnisht, with similitudes so aptly applyed,
with eeche decorum so duely obserued, as in truth hee hath in right
purchased too hym self thee name of a surpassing poët, thee fame of
an od oratoure, and thee admiration of a profound philosopher. Ha∣uing
therefore (mi good lord) taken vpon mee too execute soom part
of mayster Askam his wyl, who, in his goulden pamphlet, intitu∣led
thee Schoolemayster, dooth wish thee Vniuersitie students too ap∣plie
theyre wittes in bewtifying oure English language with heroical
verses: I heeld no Latinist so fit, too geeue thee onset on, as Virgil,
who for his peerelesse style, and machlesse stuffe, dooth beare thee
prick and price among al thee Roman Poëts. How beyt I haue heere
haulf a guesh, that two sortes of carpers wyl seeme too spurne at this
myne entreprise. Thee one vtterlie ignorant, thee oother meanelye
letterd. Thee ignorāt wyl imagin, that thee passage was nothing crag∣gye,
in as much as M. Phaere hath broken thee ice before mee: Thee
meaner clarcks wyl suppose, my trauail in theese heroical verses too
carrye no great difficultie, in that yt lay in my choise, too make what
word I would short or long, hauing no English writer beefore mee
in this kind of poëtrye with whose squire I should leauel my sylla∣bles.
Too shape therefor an answer too thee first, I say, they are alto∣geather
in a wrōg box: cōsidering that such woordes, as fit M Phaer,
may bee very vnapt for mee, which they would confesse, yf theyre
skil were, so much as spare, in theese verses. Further more I stand so
nicelie on my pantofles that way, as yf I could, yeet I would not renne
on thee skore with M. Phaer, or ennie oother, by borrowing his ter∣mes
in so copious and fluent a language, as oure English tongue is.
And in good sooth although thee gentleman hath translated Virgil in
too English rythme with such surpassing excellencie, as a verie few
(in my conceit) for pyekt and loftie woordes can burd hym, none, I
am wel assured, ouergoe hym: yeet hee hath rather dubled, then de∣falckt
oght of my paines, by reason that in cōferring his translation
with myne, I was forced, too weede owt from my verses such choise
woordes, as were forestald by him: vnlesse they were so feeling, as oo∣thers
could not countreuaile theyre signification: In which case yt
were no reason, too sequester my pen from theyre acquaintance, con∣sidering,

that as M. Phaer was not thee first founrder, so hee may not
bee accoūpted thee only owner of such termes. Truely I am so far
from embeazling his trauailes, as that for thee honoure of thee En∣glish,
I durst vndertake, too renne ouer theese bookes agayne, and
too geeue theym a new liuerie in such different wise, as they should
not let with M. Phaer his badges, ne yeet bee clad with this appar∣raile,
wherewith at this present they coō furth atyred. Which I spea∣ke
not of vanitie, too enhaunce my coonning, but of meere veritie,
too aduaunce thee riches of oure speeche. More ouer in soō poinc∣tes
of greatest price, where thee matter, as yt were, doth bleede, I
was mooued too shun M. Phaer his enterpretation, and clinge mo∣re
neere too thee meaning of myne authoure, in slising thee husk
and cracking thee shel, too bestow thee kernel vpon thee wyttye
and enquisitiue reader. I could lay downe heere sundrye examples,
were yt not I should bee thoght ouer curious, by prying owt a pim∣ple
in a bent: but a few shal suffice. In thee fourth booke, Ʋirgil de∣ciphering
thee force of Mercurye among oother properties wry∣teth
thus.
Dat somnos adimitque, & lumina morte resignat.
M. Phaer dooth English yt in this wise.
And sleepes therewyth he geeues and takes, and men from death de∣fendes.
Myne enterpretation is this:
Hee causeth sleeping and bars, by death eyelyd vphasping.
This is cleene contrarie too M. Phaer. Hee wryteth, that Mercurye
defendeth from death, I wryte that yt procureth death, which (vn∣der
his correction) dooth more annere too the author his mynd,
and too natures woorcking. For yf Mercurye dyd not slea beefore
yt dyd salue, and procurd sleeping eare yt caused waking, Nature
in her operations would bee founderd, thee fat were in thee fire,
thee marcket were mard. Too lyke effect Chauncer bringeth, in
thee ift booke, Troilus thus mourning.
Thee owle eeke, which that hight Ascaphylo,
Hath after mee shright al theese nightes two:
And God Mercury, now of mee woful wreche
Thee soule gyde, and when thee list, yt feche.
Againe Virgil in diuerse places inuesteth Juno with this epitheton,

Saturnia, M. Phaer ouerpasseth yt, as yf yt were an idle woord shuf∣fled
in by thee authoure too dam vp thee chappes of yawning ver∣ses.
I neauer, too my remembraunce, omitted yt, as in deede a terme
that carieth meate in his mouth, and so emphatical, as thee ouerslip∣ping
of yt were in effect thee chocking of thee poet his discourse, in
suche hauking wise, ac yf hee were throtled with the chincoughe.
And too inculcat that clause thee better, where thee marriadge is
made in thee fourth booke beetweene Dido and Aeneas, I ad in my
verse, Watrye Iuno, Althogh mijne authour vsd not thee epitheton,
Watrye, but only made mention of earth, ayer, and fyere: yeet I am
wel assured, that woord throughly conceaued of an heedeful stu∣dent
may geeue hym such light, as may ease hym of six moonethes
trauaile: which were wel spent, yf that Wedlock were wel vnder∣stood.
Thus Virgil in his Aeneis, and Ouid in his Metamorphosis are
so tickle in soom places, as they rather craue a construction than a
trāslation.
But yt may bee heere after (yf God wil grace my procee∣dings)
I shal bee occasioned, in my Fin Couleidos, too vnlace more,
of theese mysteries. Which booke I must bee manye yeeres breedin∣ge:
but yf yt bee throughly effected, I stand in hoape, yt wyl fal owt
too bee gratum opus, not Agricolis, but Philosophis.
Now too coom too theym, that guesh my trauaile too be easye,
by reason of thee libertye I had in English woordes (for as I can not
deuine vpon such bookes, that happlye rouke in studentes mewes,
so I trust, I offer no man iniurie, yf I assume too my selfe thee may∣denhed
of al wurcks, that hath beene beefore this tyme, in print,
too my knowlegde, diuulged in this kind of verse) I wil not greatly
wrangle with theym therein: yeet this much they are too consider,
that as thee first applinyg of a woord may ease mee in thee first pla∣ce,
so perhaps, when I am occasioned too vse thee selfe same woord
els where, I may bee as much hyndered, as at thee beginning I was
furthred. For example. In thee first verse of Ʋirgil, I mak, season, long
in an oother place yt woulsteede mee percase more, yf I made yt
short:
and yeet I am now tyed too vse yt as long. So that the aduan∣tage
that way is not verie great. But as for thee general facilitiee,
this much I dare warrant yoong beginners, that when they shal
haue soom firme footing in this kind of Poetrie, which by a litle
payneful exercise may bee purchast, they shal find as easye a veyne

in thee English, as in thee Latin verses, yee and much more easye
than in the English rythmes. Touching myne owne trial, this much
I wil discoouer. Thee three first bokes I trāslated by startes, as my
leasure and pleasure would serue mee. In thee fourth booke I did
task my self, and persued thee matter soomwhat hoatlie. M. Phaer
tooke too thee making of that booke fifteene dayes. I hudled vp
myne in ten. Wherein I coouet no prayse, but rather doe craue par
don. Forelyke as forelittring biches whelp blynd puppies, so I may
bee perhaps entwighted of more haste then good speede, as Syr Tho
mas More in lyke case gybeth at one that made vaunt of certeyn
pild verses clowted vp extrumpere.
Hos quid te scripsisse mones ex tempore versus?
Nam liber hoc loquitur, te reticente, tuus.
But too leaue that too thee veredict of oothers (wherein I craue
thee good lyking of thee curteouse, and skorne thee controlment
of thee currish, as those that vsuallie reprehend moste, and yeet
can amend leaste) thee ods beetweene verses and rythme is verye
great. For in thee one euerye foote, euerye word, euerye syllable, yea
euery letter is too bee obserued: in thee oother thee last woord is
onlye too bee heeded: As is very liuelye exprest by thee lawyer in
empaneling a iurye.

Johannes Doa:M. Kytchin. in Counee∣te pag. 51. A.
Richardus Roa:
Iohannes Myles:
Thomas Giles:
Iohannes Den:
Willielmus Fen:
Willielmus Neile:
Iohannes Sneile:
Johannes Hye:
Thomas Pye:
Richardus Leake:
Johannes Peake.

Happlye such curious makers, as youre lordship is, wyl accompt this
but rythme dogrel: but wee may suite yt wyth a more ciuil woord,
by terming yt, rythme peale meale, yt rowles so roundlye in thee
hyrer his eares. And are there not diuerse skauingers of draftye poë∣trye
in this oure age, that bast theyre papers wyth smearie larde sa∣uoring
al too geather of thee frynig pan? What Tom Towly is so
simple, that wyl not attempt, too bee a rithmoure? Yf your Lordship
stand in doubt thereof, what thinck you of thee thickskyn, that
made this for a fare wel for his mystresse vpon his departure from
Abingtowne?
Abingtowne, Abingtowne God bee wyth thee:
For thou haste a steeple lyke a dagger sheathe.

And an oother in thee prayse not of a steeple, but of a dagger.
When al is goane but thee black scabbard,
Wel faer thee haft wyth thee duggeon dagger.
Thee therd (for I wyl present your lordship wyth a leshe) in thee
commendacion of bacon.
Hee is not a king, that weareth satten,
But hee is a king, that eateth bacon.
Haue not theese men made a fayre speake? If they had put in Migh∣tye
Joue, and Gods in thee plural number, and Ʋenus wyth Cupide
thee blynd Boy, al had beene in thee nick, thee rythme had beene
of a right stamp. For a few such stiches boch vp oure newe fasshion
makers. Prouyded not wythstanding alwayes that Artaxerxes, al
be yt hee bee spurgalde, beeing so much gallopt, bee placed in thee
dedicatorye epistle receauing a cuppe of water of a swayne, or elles
al is not wurth a beane. Good God what a frye of such wooden ryth∣mours
dooth swarme in stacioners shops, who neauer enstructed in
any grammar schoole, not atayning too thee paringes of thee Latin
or Greeke tōgue, yeet lyke blynd bayards rush on forward, fostring
theyre vayne conceites wyth such ouerweening filly follyes, as they
reck not too bee condemned of thee learned for ignorant, so they
bee commended of thee ignorāt for learned. Thee reddyest way the∣refore
too flap theese droanes from thee sweete senting hiues of
Poëtrye, is for thee learned too applye theym selues wholye (yf they
be delighted wyth that veyne) too thee true making of verses in
such wise as thee Greekes and Latins, thee fathers of knowledge, ha∣ue
doone; and too leaue too theese doltish coystrels theyre rude
rythming and balducktoom ballads. Too thee sturring therefor of
thee riper, and thee encouraging of thee yonger gentlemen of oure
Vniuersityes I haue taken soō paynes that way, which I thoght good
too beetake too youre lordship his patronage, beeing of yt self
oother wise so tender, as happly yt might scant endure thee typpe
of a frumping phillippe. And thus omitting al oother ceremonial
complemētoes beetweene youre lordship and mee, I cōmit you and
youre proceedinges too thee garding and guiding of thee almigh∣tie.
From Leiden in Holland thee last of Iune. 1582.

