



ONe cheefe fruite of reading (Madame) is a con∣firmation of iudgement, and therefore necessarie wee reade good things, to the ende, that with a vertuouse exercise in conuersation, our conscience may also settle, and our selues reste supplied with wholesome instructions conducible to a happie state and direction of lyfe. And albeit (with the Philosophers) all knowledge of it selfe is good (as by Histories to discerne the pollicies of times and seasons, and out of other Artes and Sciences to draw the nature of elementes, and propertie of na∣turall things) yet (with S. Paule) by the knowledge of the Scrip∣tures the  of God is made perfect,2. Tim. 3. and redily prepared for al good works, the same beeing a dignitie far aboue the value of the earth, and a Philosophie which shines (as S. Peter sayth) like a Candle in a darke place: yea it bringes vs into hope,2 Pet. Rom. 15. Iames 1. and hath power euen to saue our soules. So that if our trauell in other Artes and Scien∣ces yeelde vs benefite in Ciuill and Politike respects, the studie of the Scripture implyeth a heauenly fruite, as by the which our sinnes are qualefied, our soules releeued, our faithe assured, and last∣ly our whole life ledde (as it were by an Angell of purpose) to the visible societie of soueraigne felicitie. Wherein by how muche this fruite is preciouse and certayne, by so muche are wee drawen in a

necessarie consideration to Christianitie, so to trauell in the vse of it,Luke. 16. as wee stande not guiltie with the ignorant man in the Gospell, to whom it was sayd, haddest thou not Moyses and the Prophets? as aduising vs thereby not to disguyse our incredulitie with wante of knowledge least Moyses, the Prophets, and the Scriptures also iudge agaynst vs.
Heare (Madame) if my sufficiencie were as equall to watche with the nature and maiestie of this high cause, as all Christians liue vnder a condition of necessarie duetie, to know and set foorthe the Scriptures, I could adde many authorities to my present pur∣pose, not to vndertake thereby to prepare your conscience, which I doubt not is infallibly settled in a perfecte Methode of Gods true Religion, and much lesse to induce your zeale, which J know is in∣finite in the best degree secundum scientiam, as the Aptle adui∣seth: not to instruct your conuersation, to which is lly fulled a full example of all vertues, nor yet to leade your minde to be more spiritually edified, seeing your societie with publike Lectures and Sermons this last winter in London, standes to witnesse ur holy desire, the same also stretching (with the Psalme) to suche a vehe∣ment thirste after Gods worde, that euen your boarde (which J did often assist) was seldome without the felowship of deepe De∣uines and Preachers, to the ende that as your example drew others to seeke God in Sermons abrode, so also your selfe by priuate confe∣rence might be throughly resolued in euery doubte touching your Christian opinion, and so be no lesse perfect towards God, that hap∣pie in the voyce of the worlde touching your honorable direction of life, which carieth suche generall integritie in all your dealings, that J haue heard it often doubted, whether your Reuerend father hath had at any time more comfort in all his transitorie felicities, than in the successe of suche a daughter, by whose vertues his house is ray∣sed into dignitie, and his aged yeres exercised in consolation.
I coulde further enlarge in the particular effectes of your deepe discretion, as your wise behauiour amongst the French to discharge the high trust of your husbande, when God had called him from you, your deare care to conuey his dead body with honor from that forreyne place, your vnfayned duetie of a wife in his honorable Fu∣nerals, your honest conscience to defray his debtes, and indue such

his seruants as depended vpon him with competent consideration, your rare pollicie of a mother to establish your children like the sonnes of suche parents, your continuall  yelding charitie to the poore: and lastely your great chag to entertayne men of Artes and learned Faculties, by which your house seemes an Vni∣uersitie of learning. All which, albeit J rather touche slightely, than bring foorth with their due commendation, (as eschewing the note of flatterie, although no truth can be disguysed) yet if I should be silent, and all others vnthankefull to the memorie of those dog, time hirselfe would norish them, as beeing publike monumentes which can not be defaced.
Onely it may please your Ladyshippe to lay afore you these first fruites of my duetie and honest affection, vnder this little ar∣gument of Religion, which albeit is not worthy your view by any indeuer of mine, yet waying with the qualitie of the matter, your disposition to holy things, I hope it will not proue altogether im∣plausible with you, as conteyning a familiar sense in Gods deepe mysteries, with expresse difference betweene the rude sophistrie of the Papistes, and milde simplicitie of the reformed side: Which J beseeche you so fauor with your authoritie and name, that by how muche our Christian countreymen (by your good meanes) may frutefully communicate in so necessarie a benefite, euen by so muche also they may bee drawen too glorifie God, and pray communi voce to giue you societie with that holy widdow which S. Luke commendes so much in his Gospel.Luke. 2. At London .iiij. July. 1571.

