



RIght Worshipfull, great is the per∣uersenesse of Mans nature, as may appeare by the multitude of errors, and false religions, of the which the world is now sicke euen vnto death. For the Iewe hath his, the Turke his, the Indians theirs, the Papist his:

yea and almost euery man is ready to turne his fansy into faith (so common is this kind of Alchymie) and to make doctrines of his owne deuises; so fond we are by reason of selfe-loue, and the blindnesse of our minds.
But (as Eli sayd) this is not well. For there is but one true Religion, and as In Natiu. Dom. Ser. 4. Nisi vna est, fides non est. Leo saith, Faith is either One, or None. Now because there are so many religions in the world, therefore some will be of none, but stand as it were a∣mazed, not knowing what course to take, like the Eccles. 10. 15. fool, that Salomon speakes of, which knowes not the way into the Citty. It be∣hooues

vs therefore seeing such variety of professions to looke before we leape, & to sound the waters before we hoyse vp our sailes (for heauen is no harbor for he∣retickes, no common Inne for all kinds of Trauellers) I meane afore all to consult with the written word of God, the oracle of truth, the ground of faith, a Psal. 119. 105. lan∣terne to our feet, & a light vn∣to our path, & is 2. Tim. 3. 16 profitable to teach, to conuince, to correct and instruct in righteousnesse, that the mā of God maybe abso∣lute. Heare (saith S. Aug. ep. 48. Audi dicit Dominus, non dicit Don &c. Austin) Thus saith the Lord: not, thus saith, Donatus, or Rogatus, or Vincentius, or Hilary, or Au∣stin,

but, Thus saith the Lord. Is. 8. 20. To the Law, and to the Te∣stimony (saith Esay:) if they speake not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. By the Scripture God speaketh his whole will, saith Per Scrip∣turam Deus loquitur omne, quod vult. Moral. l. 16. c. 16. Gregory. If therefore men would in the true feare of God and lowlinesse of spirit desire diuine directi∣on, and attend vnto the word, vndoubtedly they should see their way before them, and could not be so transported of Impostors, as they vse to be. For Psal. 25. 9. 12. 14. them that be meeke, will he guide in iudgement, and teach the hum∣ble his way. What man is he, that feareth the Lord? Him

will he teach the way, which he shall chuse. The secret of the Lord is reuealed to them, that feare him; and his couenant, to giue them vnderstanding. And as our Sauiour speaketh, Ioh. 16. 23. Whatsoeuer ye shall aske the Father in my Name, he will giue it you. So then, if we will not giue eare vnto Man, but vnto God, if we will not trust vnto our owne wings, but seeke for aide of him, we may boldly expect assistance of him according to his word. And because to be∣gin a course well is nothing, vnlesse a man continue con∣stant in it; therefore it be∣houes vs to cleaue fast vnto the faith, auoiding all impo∣stures

of Heretickes whatso∣euer. For the furtherance hereof, this Treatise was first written in Latine aboue a thousand yeares agoe, by a learned and godly French∣man, whose authority is no∣thing lesse to be respected for his Monasticke kinde of liuing, considering that our moderne Monkes haue al∣most nothing of Antiquity besides their name. And for the same purpose we haue turn'd it into English, desi∣ring the Almightie to be∣dew the same with the bles∣sing of his grace. My labour I account as due to the Church in generall, and a∣bundantly deserued of you

both in particular: if there∣fore you shall accept it, I shall haue my full desire.
The God of heauen and earth preserue you by his grace, that after this life on Earth ye may be presented to Iesus Christ to liue in heauen with him in eternall glory.
Amen.
London S. Clem. April 14. 1611.

