


WHen Hanniball a manifold wintered souldiour, a Generall of meruelous iud¦gement and worthines had giuen eare a while to Phormiō ye Philosopher, dis¦coursing before him of martiall matters, the duty of a Generall and office of ech man yt commeth to field: beyng demaunded at length what he thought of him, whome the Lippewise men estemed the wysest and learnedst of the worlde, aunswered: that fooles he had heard many, but a more dotyng foole then this Phormion was, he neuer heard. It semed to him very straunge, that he whiche neuer went further then the scoole, neuer fought but with the rod, shoulde giue preceptes to hym that had spent all his life in martiall affaires, obtained moe vistories then he had red ouerthrowes. And may it not (right honorable) seme as straunge to your good Lordship, and be dee∣med of some others, as greate dotage for me a simple souldior better practised abrode in martiall matters, then furnished at home with cunnyng of the scoole: to deale with matters of hie diuinitie? But I take not vpon me to teache of my selfe: but to translate out of others, nor do I meane to bragge of any skill, but to
 testifie my good will employed to profite others: yet do I not thincke it a matter vnmeete for my profes∣sion and callyng, to knowe the truthe of Gods holy worde, and to further in the same as many as I may. For requisite it is (as your honor and wisedome right well vnderstandeth) all Christians to knowe their God: further if they will be the children of his king∣dome to worcke through obedience to his will as the Apostle sayth: their owne saluation with trembling and with feare. A souldior is not excluded from this band, he must needes in this battell keepe his order hil.  and do (by grace) his vttermost endeuoure: leaste the muster maister, Christe do casse him, and so osuc, 7 with great reproche deualize hym. VVe read that for a litle pilfering of a common souldior, the whole armie of the Lorde was in daunger and lyke to haue ben defeacted, But the blasphemie, incōtinency, out∣rage, and suche lyke that in many countreis, in the warres in our dayes are vsed: are in deede a great oc∣casion to procure and purchase those dreadfull pla∣gues, whiche we often see light vpon nations. VVher¦fore that we may continew in quiet peace, & whē oc∣casion shall require, obtaine Godly victories, expedi∣ent it wer, and for my countreys sake I wish, that our souldiors may be well instructed, in the knowledge and feare of God: so much the rather, for that their
 lyfe is doubly incertaine. Anacharsis thought saylers and such as trauayle by sea, to be rather of the nōber of the dead, then of the liuing: by cause that he which is in most assuraunce, is alwaye within eight or ten ynches of his death. And is not a souldior euery mo∣ment of an houre more nere his bane, amyd so many great shotte, samll shot and other weapons? VVher∣fore it were good, not onely for the parties them sel∣ues, but also for all Christian cōmon wealthes, if they whiche are called to serue in warres, were well in∣structed in the knowledge & fear of God, as god be thāked some of thē are, I would thinck my self sure∣rer in the company of fiue hūdred well trayned soul∣diors, whiche were instructed in the feare and loue of God: then in that of xv. hundred whiche are as well trayned and exercised in the vse of their wea∣pons as they, and doe want the other chief instructi∣on. And for my parte beyng a simple one, am not asha¦med to be exercised in the study of Gods booke: no more, then to be in the fielde exercised, in the vse of any weapō or order, although my studie in it be not such as I wish it to be: yet hauyng receiued great pro¦fite & cōfort of conscience, by reding of sondrie wor∣kes of diuinitie: and namely by the readyng of a worcke of Maister Peter Viret, intituled the Chri∣stian instruction, I would not bereaue my countrey
 mē the commoditie of the same: but thought my selfe bounde in conscience to make them partakers ther∣of. VVherfore hauing translated the first parte of it into our tounge with boystrous and rude termes, as a man vtterly voyde of eloquence: I haue committed the same to the printe, and so farre presumed vpon your honours goodnes, as vnder your Lordshippes name to suffer it to come to the sight of others. May it please you, to accepte this simple token of my tra∣uaile & poore good will towardes your honor. I dout not but some shall receiue such fruite of it, as they shall like well my labour, and pray for your Lord∣ship, vnder whose name it is published. And so shall my desire in Christ be satisfied. God prosper your ho∣nor in health and high estate. God encrease his faith and his feare, in you. Right honorable I haue added in the end of this worke, a table contayning the principall matters, that are entreated of, in this worke, to the end that men may the more easily find them. God defend you and preserue you.
