



GOd the myghtie gouerner of all thynges, lōgety∣me sythens, hath witnessed, by his excellēt prophet Moses, that for the trāsgressiō of hys holy lawes, he wolde plage the people wt sondrye, & greuouse diseases. Howbeit our blin¦denes hath ben so great, yt in the multi¦tude of moste fylthye, & shameful bot∣ches, sores, & other pitious maladies we haue not perceaued, how horrible a thynge synne is, & howe present ven∣geaūce the dyspisyng, & neglectyng of goddes dredfull cōmaūdemētes, bryn¦geth vppon vs, no not when we haue be burnte wyth fyery carbuncles, nor when our fleshe hath bene toren from the bones, & eaten vp wyth lothsome cankers, nor whē we haue ben myse∣rably tormēted, wyth yt moste fylthy, pestiferous, & abominable dysease the Frenche or spanyshe pockes. In these I saye so manyfest punyshmentes of god, for the outragious transgression of hys lawes, we haue not acknowle∣ged the excedynge wyckednesse of our nature, nether haue prayed for the ho∣ly sprite of god, whych mought chaū∣ge, & transforme our corrupte byrthe, & create in vs new hertes, with ye printe of fere & hūble reuerence to godward. Yea, we haue ben so farre of frō suche a purpose, yt some of vs haue bragged of our natural strēgthes, to our owne shame, & confusion. But as thys oure blyndnesse, and moste shamefull wyc∣kednesse, is of al men to be abhorred & detested, so the vnmeasurable mercye of god is to be enbraced, reuerented & merueyled at, whych in the myddest of our abomination, & deseruyng of al ex¦treme tormētes, hath euer remembred hys natural goodnesse, both gyuynge vertues to herbes, stones, trees, & me∣talles, wherewyth our euels myghte be eased, & also styrryng vp mē to note suche thynges, & to practyse them vpō our paynfull griefes. So yt we maye playnlyse, yt he delyteth not in our byt∣ter punyshmentes, but rather leadeth vs to the knowlege of the horriblenes of synne, yt we might hate, & abhorre ye same, & seke the true & certayne reme∣dy therof, in hys dearly beloued sonne Christ Iesus our only sauiour. Now as they bene to be cōmended, whyche haue endeuoured thē selues, wt great labour, studye, & trauayle, to consyder the wonderful workes of god in ye fyr¦mament, & heauēly bodyes: So they ben not worthye the lest prayse, which haue crept vpon the groūde, and haue thought it expediēt, & fruteful to serch out suche proprieties, and vertues, as god hath gyuen to thynges in or vpō the earth, for the succourre, & cōforte of mortall men. Howbeit of thys sorte of men, some haue studied only for know¦leges sake, & some haue applyed theyr knowlege to the ryght vse, & haue ther to left in bokes ye thynges yt they had noted, obserued & proued to procure ye easement of our myseries & greuouse maladyes. In which nōbre of good, & studiouse men Iohanne Vigo (whom at the request of my frende I haue tur¦ned into our language) obtayneth not the last place. For though he were not brought vp in the knowlege of ye ton∣ges, yet through hys synguler wytte, longe experience, & diligent studye, he hath inuented, and set forth more no∣table
 thinges in the arte of chirurge∣rye, than anye other hytherto. And I thynke that nothyng canne better tes∣tifie and prooue the connynge of this man, than that he continued so long, with so greate prayse, practysynge at rome, in suche a multitude of pockye curtisanes, neyther priestes, bysshop∣pes, nor cardinalles, excepted, as it playnlye appeareth in his booke. For where suche carions ben, the best Ae∣gles wyll resorte. But it is not so co∣mendable to sette forth Vigo his sci∣ence, and cunnyng, which clearly shi∣neth by it selfe, and nedeth no borow¦ed lyght: as it is worthy shame and reprofe, of rasshe iudgement, to repre¦hēde or fynde a faut, in so fayre a face. As touchyng my laboure, applyed to ye translation of this present worke in consideration of youre sondrye benefit¦tes conferred vnto me, I dedycate it vnto youe, good myaster Tracie. Not that I thynke it a thyng moste fyt for youe, for as moche as youe haue best∣owed the most parte of youre tyme in the fruitefull studies of the holy scrip¦ture, but that at this tyme it may be a monumēt & token of my mind, towar¦des youe whiche can not be (except I were chāged in to a worse nature, thā anye barbarouse Scithian is of) but most louyng. For whan I was desti¦tute of father & mother, youe concea∣ued a very fatherly affection towarde me, and not onelye brought me vp in the vniuersities of this & forayne real¦mes, with your great costes and char¦ges, but also moste earnestly exhorted me to forsake the puddels of sophist∣ers and to fetche water from the pure fountaynes of the scripture. Where∣in youe haue drawen out such a sam∣plar to al fathers in lawe (as they be called) as hitherto of fewe hath bene deuysed, of none welnyghe practised, and put in vse. Wherefore seyng that you haue ben the autour and cause of that simple lernyng that I haue ob∣teyned, I thought it my duetie to ren¦der the fruytes therof vnto youe. And albeit that bothe youe desyre, and I delyte more to trauayle in the holye wrytynges, yet I feare not, but that this booke, beyng so necessary for the commune weale, shall be vnto youe ryght pleasaunt. For after the know∣ledge of oure saluation, which holye and onelye restethe in goddes anoyn∣ted kynge, we maye conueniently pro∣cure, not the lustes and pleasures, but the requisite helth of our bodies, that we may be the more able to serue our turne, and to labour in the lordes vy∣niarde. Yea, and I can not telle whe∣ther anye man hath receyued the true knowleage, and spirite of Christ, that pitieth not the greate sickenesses, and diseases, wherin we are wrapped on euerye syde. For this cause, I haue thought it not vnprofitable (let some busie speakers, rather than doers ba∣ble what they lyste) to bestowe some labour, and tyme, in translatyng this booke, whiche conteynethe so manye goodly remedies, for the diseases that communelye, and iustelye happen vn∣to vs. Whyche thyng if it shall plese your ryghte godlye iudgemente, and suche as youe be, the barkynges, of o¦ther shall lytle trouble me. But nowe I wylle hynder youe no longer frome the readenge of Iohn Vigo his woor¦kes, trustynge that youe wylle take this my dedication in good parte, & haue such gentle remēbraūce of me, as I am euer bound too haue of you.
FINIS.
