



HAuing long since perused a Treatise, written in French by M. Peter Vyret, whiche was dedicated by him, to the faythfull: and hauing for my priuate exercise trā∣slated the same, I little thought to haue sent it abroade, but shewing it to some god∣ly, whose iudgements I craued, both of the matter, & trāslatiō, they doubted not to giue great commendation of the one, and it plea∣sed them to set downe their allowance of the other, and withall perswaded me, the matter to be very profitable, for these our times, & that by many reasons: whereupon I became so encouraged, as (considering the argument to be so apt and fit for this age) I would not keepe back this so fruitfull a treatise from the viewe of my countrie men, but haue ad∣uentured to publish the same in english, how rudely soeuer it be translated. And nowe (Madam) hauing beene long debtor to your Ladyshippe, for your manye honourable fa∣uours extended towardes me, and hauing long desired to yeeld some token of thank∣fulnesse; sith I can no way deserue or recom∣pence the least part of your goodnes, I am bold to present vnto your honour these first
 fruites of my labours, which is the transla¦tion of this little treatie; and therefore hum∣bly do pray you it may passe vnder your pro∣tection: the authour wherof, was wel known to some godly learned yet liuing amongest vs, to be a godly, zealous, and learned prea∣cher in Fraunce, and many wayes a man of rare giftes. The matter is a christian counsell and direction, how the professours of the Gospel should behaue and keepe theselues from being stained, or defiled with the su∣perstitions of Poperye, bee they neuer so conuersant amongest suche as professe the same: So that I cannot doubte, but that this little treatyse wyll haue good ac∣ceptance with all the Godlye, and well dis∣posed, both in respecte of the Authour, and the matter. But for my selfe, who haue taken vppon mee to bee the translatour▪ I maye iustlye doubte it can hardelye de∣serue allowance, both because my skyll is shorte to translate with iudegement, and my style too base to haue the handling of so good a woorke: yet beeing embol∣dened by the allowance of some, that haue already seene it, and hoping to bee fauoura∣blye iudged of by all, that hereafter shal per∣use
 it, and trusting of your honours well accepting of this my labour, bee it ne∣uer so simplye perfourmed; I doubte not to put it to the printe, and presume to dedicate the same to your Ladishippe. Accept it (good Madam) in liewe of a bet∣ter presente: And licence mee, in this preface (onely purposed to your selfe) to speake somewhat in a geueralitie to o∣thers. I finde by experience that Sathans shiftes encrease dayly, eyther to make vs flatte enemies to religion, or colde friends: for euen amongest those, whiche bragge greatly of the Gospel, and will defie him, that shall call him Papist, and will ioyne with Gods people in hearing of the worde, and receiuing the Sacramentes, euen a∣mongest these there bee some, (I saye) which are so farre shorte from true fee∣ling of religion, that they reserue to them selues a religion for all companies, and can easily make shift to liue in all ages: and these men woulde fayne perswade them selues, that there is such a conueniencie betweene religion and superstition, betweene the Gos∣pell and Popery, that they may holde both: they woulde fayne make themselues to be∣leeue, that the dissent betweene papistes and
 vs, which doe professe the Gospel of Christ, is only about certaine ceremonies, the vanity of which opinion, is so largely confuted by sundry well learned: that I neede not to stand therevpon. But to you, whome the Lord hath seasoned by a better spirit, then to professe for fashions sake, let me speake bold∣ly without offence. If you haue well weigh∣ed and considered what thraldome your selues, or your brethren were in, when Pa∣pistes did beare stroke: and had the guiding of this common wealth at their will; you cannot but tell your selues how little fauour the zealous professour found, whose share it was to receiue al sharpnes and seueritie, that could be deuised: and then how can you for∣get to be thankfull vnto God for this our present tranquilitie, and peaceable professi∣on of his Gospell, and for our Soueraigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth, his especiall and principall instrument thereof: by whom as the chief meanes, we haue been deliuered frō superstition & Popery, & haue been brought to tast how sweete the Lord Iesus is, in the voyce of his gospel, a blessing vnspeakeable, and such as fewe of our neighbours haue attained vnto in like measure, for what na∣tion can be named, that euer so long toge∣ther
 enioyed such quietnesse as Englande? which sheweth Gods blessing to haue fol∣lowed vs most gratiously in our gouern∣ment: and what country or nation in the world can be shewed to haue the doctrine of the Gospell, taught generally and by autho∣ritie, with more soundnes and sinceritie, then in England: which argueth the great mercy, and fauour of God towords vs, in dayly tea∣ching his prophets to speake, that his truth may sound in the eares of al that wil willing∣ly heare it. But haue we this by desert: or can we chalenge it before other nations: no, no: but if we learne not to vse our peace whilest we haue it, and to take profite by this doct∣rine of saluation whilest we enioy it, & shew our selues dayly and hourely thankefull for the same, our peace shall bee taken from vs when we least looke for it; and this Gos∣pell will bee giuen vnto a nation that shall bring foorth the fruites thereof. Let vs ther∣fore looke about vs in time, lest we learne to late. Our well setled peace in these dayes of our godly Prince Edward the sixt, with the ioyfull libertie of professing Christe his Gospel, which vnder him, we then enioyed, adding hereunto the sodayne and lamenta∣ble alteration, which succeeded his happye
 gouernment by his vnlooked for cutting of; might sufficiently warne vs. We can haue no colour to chalenge this our peace and prea∣ching of the Gospell in anye certayntie, which both wee enioye onely by the mer∣cifull goodnes of our good God, who in his fauour and loue hath allotted both vnto vs for our good, if with thankefulnesse wee receiue them; and can learne to vse them, to our profite: If otherwise wee abuse them, he can and will in his displeasure for our sinnes take them from vs, turning peace in∣to warre, and the light of his Gospell into the darkenes of superstition and poperye. If we will but enter into consideration with our selues, and weigh the state of our neigh∣boures and bretheren in Flaunders, and Fraunce; whome the Lorde, hath long kept vnder the crosse of affliction and perfe∣cution, and withall indifferently compare our offences with theirs; wee shall ea∣sily see the zeale of England and to religion farre colder, the obedience to the Gospel farre shorter, al sinn generally much more aboun∣ading. Why then should we looke for the con¦tinuance of these blessinges without amēd∣mēt. If we wil enter into our owne conscien∣ces & truly examine our selues, whether wee
 haue beene rightly pinched and grieued at the misery of our brother Ioseph: whether wee haue sighed and mourned before the Lord for Israels calamitie: we shal finde that selfe loue hath borne so great a swaye in euery of vs all; that we haue been little, or nothing touched with the churches miserie. Howe then can we looke to escape the iust iudgement of God, for so horrible faultes & defectes: Lastly, if wee consider through∣lye, howe mercifullye the Lorde hath dealte with vs in this time of our peace: wherein the Gospel of our God hath had his free passage, and the preaching thereof in many pla∣ces (by Gods mercies) beene most plen∣tifully perfourmed, and weyghe with al, how thankefully we haue receiued the same, and what profite wee haue reaped therby: we shall the most of vs (I feare me) finde our selues so farre short in eyther, that rather we may feele in our selues iust cause to accuse our selues, for neglecting, contemning, and misusing the graces of God, offered vnto vs in this his holy Gospell. For that we haue neither learned diligently, nor beleeued soundly, nor embraced thankfully, nor wor∣shipped religiously, nor confessed freely and constātly, nor obeyed sincerely, nor aduāced
 zealously the will and truth of our God, re∣uealed vnto vs in the preaching of the Gos∣pell. But as I accuse not all, so as an aduise to all, I say with the Apostle. Let him that think∣eth he doth stand, take heede he fall not. And because we haue no inheritance, or such as∣surance of this our peace, but that it is to be turned into warre and persecution, when the Lord our God thinketh good: let vs not fol∣lowe the beastly rule of the pampered E∣picures, who say to themselues, Ede, bibe, lu∣de, post mortem nulla voluptas. But let vs hear∣ken vnto the wholesome counsel of the Apo∣stle Peter. Let vs hence forward learne to liue, as much time as remaineth in the fleshe, not 1. Pet. 4. after the lusts of men, but after the will of God. For it is sufficient. &c. For surely in fo∣lowing the lewde fancies of fleshe and blood, we doe tread the path to death, and walke the readie way to destruction. But if we striue to mortifye the lusts, and deedes of the fleshe, we are led by a right line, dyrect∣ing vs to the true life: that neuer shall haue end. Therefore whilest we enioy the benefite of this our peace, let vs apply our selues to the practising of that in shew we professe, and let vs labour to grow in knowledge, that we may be able to discerne the spirits and to
 giue a reason of our faith with iudgement & vnderstanding: So shall our peace be greatly profitable vnto vs, and we therby better pre∣pared to abide with patience, what the Lord by persecution shall lay vpon vs. It was not allowed for a good Plea, that the Scribes and pharisees should chalenge themselues to be the children of Abraham: for that (as our Sauiour Christ chargeth them) they did not the workes of their father Abraham, but of their father the Diuell. No more can it be accepted at our hands to chalenge the title of christianitie, to say wee professe Christ his Gospell, vnlesse we bring foorth fruites an∣swerable to so high a calling. For as Chry∣sostome sayth. Non Christi nomen solum chri∣stianum facit, sed Christi veritas, quia in no∣mine Christi multi ambulant in veritate au, tem eius pauci. And there is no man truely tearmed a christian, but he that striueth to go as neare to Christ in his life & conuersati∣on, as he cā. Our wel selted peace, must needs auayle vs much, if we vse it, and our selues in it to the glorifying of our God: for to this end only is our peace preserued to vs. But if in this time of our peace, we will liue delici∣ously, walke wantonly, sleepe in sinne, and wallow in all manner of sensualitie, we shall
 surely become false prophets to our selues, & whilest we perswade our selues of a pleas at peace, beholde present destruction. The Isra∣elites groned long vnder the burden of cru∣ell Pharaoh, who seeing them multiplye and encrease dayly in number of persons, and wealth of substance, he endeuoured and put in practise, both by tiranny and cruel sla∣verye to oppresse them. But the Lord loking mercifully vpon his people, deliuered them out of the tyrantes handes, and plagued their enemies in most sundry & strange sorts, and in the end most miraculously made one self sāe place a passage for the deliuery of his children, & pitte of destruction to their ene∣mies pursuing them. Yet see the ingratitude of mans heart, they were no sooner deliue∣red, but they immediately forget so great a benefite, and fell to murmuring, grudg∣ing, and repining against their GOD, who so gratiously had wrought their deliuerance. I will not apply this, but leaue euery man to his owne conscience to consider in himselfe, whether he hath beene sufficiently thanke∣full, for our mercifull and miraculous de∣liuerance out of that popishe persecution, practised against Gods people, in the time of
 Queene Marye. Or rather, whether that (Gods great blessing and benefite therein beeing forgotten) wee haue not throughe ambition, conetousnes, or carnall securitie, beene so drowned in worldly cares, that we haue murmured, grudged, and repined a∣gainst GOD and his ministers, as the Israe∣lites did: which being true (as it can hardly be denied) we must looke to be trayned vp with the Israelites in a newe schoole. For when prosperitie and peace could not make them to knowe him, in yeelding due reue∣rence & obediēce to him, He visited thē with sharpe roddes and plagues, that by his correction hee might drawe them to seeke to him for remedie against his scourges, and earnestly to repent them for their rebellion and wickednes agaynst him. And this did the Lorde of loue to his chosen children, that they might not styll wallow with wic∣ked worldlinges in all licentiousnes of euill. There be some of that vayne and wicked o∣pinion, who when they cannot couple the Gospell of Christe, and Poperye togea∣ther in the couples of their conceite, as they would do, then they fal to another bare & bad sift, perswading themselues that they
 may worship God according to the maner of the countries, that they are in, and yet be good Gospellers still, not remembring that confession of Christ, and outward acknow∣ledgement of his truth (a speciall part of his worship & our seruice du to him) is required of vs. For they are the wordes of our Sauiour Christ, that we must confesse him before mē: And who knoweth not, that men cannot see into our hearts, therefore with our mouthes we must confesse him. Notable also is that, which the spirit of God setteth downe by Paule to the Corinthians. Our bodies (sayth 1. Cor. 6. he) are the temples of the holy Ghost, and wee are not our owne, for wee are dearelye bought, therefore wee must glorifie God in our bodies, & in our spirits, for they are gods. Wherby it appeareth, that the Lorde hath such and interest & right in vs, & ouer vs; that no half seruice cā plese him, but he must haue vs whole, and he will be wholy serued by vs. Therefore they, that in any respect refuse to confesse Christ before men, do bewray them selues to be eyther faithlesse, or very fainte in faith: and let them vrge neuer so much, that with their inward mā they serue god, & cary a loue to Christ his truth, they shal finde it is no good plea in diuinitie, neither will
 it prooue good before God at the generall day of account: when all fleshe must appeare before the iust iudge, to giue a reckoning of their stewardeship. As for those to whom the name of God seemeth strange, and are loth to heare of any religion, they are not vnlike to Epicures, of whom it is written: that when he saw great contentions amongest the phi∣losophers touching God, he did take (as hee thought) a shorter way, & flatly denied God. Of which kind of men I wishe withall my heart, there were not ouer many amōgest vs. It is a dangerous thing, when men become deriders and mockers of the worde, and wil scoffe and taunt at such as in reuerent re∣gard therof, seeke to walke according to the prescript rule, set downe by the same: for frō them, by little and little, all sence and tast of truth is taken, and they goe on in degrees of vngodlines so farre, vntill they shewe them∣selues to be such, as doe hate the truth, and then are they giuen ouer to fulfyll their lusts, making their bellye their GOD, bestowing their whole life in their owne fylthie & flesh∣ly pleasure: for they liue to serue no other God indeede, and so at length there is with thē no truth, no religion, no God, but they make a mocke of all religion & truth, and are
 giuen vp to belieue lyes, and to folowe vanities, and nothing else. And thus in fine they becōe so bold, that they deny God, yea they be so cūning in the diuels crafe, that they do reason against God, and openly pro∣fesse that Christ his truth is but a fable, as this day giueth feareful examples of too ma∣ny: The Lord our God refourm thē, and shew them the light of hys countenance, and bee mercifull vnto them. And so with griefe to thinke that there should be any such, I leaue them. As for you, whō the Lord hath so sea∣soned by his spirit, that you haue learned to bee a law to your selues, & do endeuourithat one and the selfe same woorde, might both teach and rule you, although they giue you bynames for so doing: be not difmayed, but hold on your course, & be it so farre frō you, to thinke your selues pure, & learne to haue such a liuely sense, and feeling of this festering fore of sinne, eating vs to eternal destruction, if our Phisition Christ, put not to his helpe to heale the same by the blood of his passion, as that you acknowledge with the Prophet, all your righteousnes to be like a stayned cloth, and to this end labour in your selues, & per∣swade it in others to go on still, and to be cli∣ming vp from step to step, towards the mark
 of perfectiō set before vs: not thinking it suf∣ficient to begin well, and there to stay, nor to goe and grow forward for a time, and thē to stand still, but we must know that perseuerāce hath the promise, for he that perseuereth to the end, he shalbe saued. This then being the setled perswasion of all that truely feare the Lord, let not their course be hindered, ney∣ther in their course let them be discouraged, but carrying in thēselues the testimony of a good conscience, that they haue in thē selues a desire to encrease daily from fayth to faith, from knowledge to knowledge, from godli∣nesse to godlinesse, vntill they become per∣fect men in Christ Iesus: let them knowe it is their glory to beare reproch for good dea∣ling. See that none of you (saith the Apostle) suffer as a murtherer, as a theefe, as an euill doer, or as a busie bodie in other mens mat∣ters, but if anye man suffer as a Christian &c. 1. Pet. 4. This is the portion of Gods people, to suffer for wel doing; and of this we ought not to be ashamed, but for this we must glorifie God: neither is this the vttermost of our triall, to be euil spoken of, but we are like to taste the smart of a more sharpe schoole: Our sinnes prouoke it, Gods iustice doth threaten it, and
 I see not how we should auoyd it. Let vs learn therefore to be wel prouided against the day of tryal. And surely if we professe, as we seem, or carry that sincere zeale, as we ought, wee haue cast our reckoning, we know the pryce, and therefore will endeuour to prouide for paiment. Crux comes Euangely: is an old rule, and he is a very delicate, or rather faintehear∣ted souldiour, that loketh to ouer come with out fighting: or to winne victory with∣out contending: and how can he fight, that is vnprepared to the battell? or contend for victory, that is vnprouided? And to be armed at all poyntes, This lesson well learned, wyll teach vs that, Tota vita Christiani hominss, si secundum Euangelium uiuat, est crux at{que} mar∣tyrium. Let not your heartes be troubled therefore, neither feare, and let your patient mynds be knowen vnto all men, for the Lord is at hand. It is notably said of a learned Fa∣ther, that tribulation and trouble is to a iust man, as the file to the yrō, the fornace to the gold, the bridle to the horse, and the whippe to the Asse. The fyle, as it is commonly seene, maketh yron the brighter, the fyery fornace maketh gold the more glorious, the bridle withholdeth the headdy horse, that hee goe not whither him listeth, the whippe keepeth
 the dul Asse in such awe, that he dare not but goe on. And this doth affliction to euery true Christian. Let vs not be dismayed therefore, though our peace be taken from vs, and per∣secution come in place: For to vs that haue a sure testimonie sealed vp in our consciences, that we are Gods children, it shall turne to great good, beyng sure that our heauenly fa∣ther wil lay no more vpon vs, thē he wil make vs well able to beare. We see by experience, that where the Prince or chiefe Magistrate fauoureth the profession of the Gospel, the most part wilbe Gospellers. But like experi∣ence hath taught vs, when times of tryall haue come vpon them, what time seruers some haue shewed themselues. But to suche, our god cōmeth not as a correcting father, but as a destroying iudge. For obedience to the Lorde God, and the profession of his truth, is not tyed to the pleasure of Princes. He that confesseth me before men, I will confesse him before my father in heauen. But he that denyeth me. &c. And we must learne to say with the Apostle Paule. If I seeke to please men, I am not the seruant of Christ. It is an olde saying and a true. All is not Gold that glistereth, but the fiery fornace wil soon try it. Euery piece of yron that wee see, is not
 perfect and sound yron, for sometimes it is eaten through with the canker; and this, when the file commeth vpon it, is easily knowne. Wheate and chaffe lye mingled to∣gether in one barne, til a gale of wind come, and blowe them in sunder, and then they ap∣peare both plainely what they are: let vs ac∣quaint our selues with our good GOD by continuall and heartie prayer, that by his goodnes wee may bee prepared against the day of his visitation, to abide what in mercy he shall think good to lay vpon vs. The feare∣fulnes of fleshe and blood is such, and the delight therof in worldly prosperity so great, that aduersitie is not easily borne. Imprison∣ment is accounted painefull, but it is more painefull to enioy libertie vpon euill condi∣tions. The prisons are thought lothsome & vnsauery, but yet not more lothsome, then the sweetest houses, where the feare of God is wanting. It is grieuous to man to be soli∣tary and alone, yet better is it to be so, then in companie with the wicked. It toucheth vs very neare to loose liuing and goodes, but it shal be found to touch nearer to loose the fa∣uour and grace of God. We vse it as a com∣mon speech, that life is sweete, but most sweete and pleasant is it to loose this life, full
 of mortall miseries, to finde and enioye the life full of eternall ioyes. We are loth to leaue our friendes, wife, and children, but we must beware, that in abiding with them wee stay not in the displeasure of our God. These tri∣als must needes come vpon vs, and whoso∣euer liueth to it, is like to tast of thē. But be of good cheare, Whom the Lord loueth, hee chastiseth, euen to this ende, that hee might call them to remember their sinnes, and so runne by repentance to him and aske mer∣cy: and then he might pardon and forgiue them, in respect wherof we are not to lamēt, but to prayse the Lorde, not to be dismaide, but to be cōforted, that our God wil vouch∣safe to offer vs his crosse: whereby he seeketh to traine vs vp to the place of endlesse ioye and comfort. It is an assurance laide vp vnto vs, that if we suffer, we shall raigne. If we con∣fesse him before men in earth, hee will con∣fesse vs beefore his father in heauen. If wee bee not ashamed of his Gospell heere, he will not be ashamed of vs at the last daye. Remember the words of our sauiour Christ in the. 5. of Mathew. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousnes sake, for theires is the kyngdome of heauen. Call to
 mynde that which Paule saith in the 8. to the Romaines. The afflictions of this life, are not to be compared to the ioyes of the lyfe pre∣pared for you. Wherefore seeing that euen in the crosse we beholde and see the mercie of our God, which is more sweete, and to be set by then any mucke or pelfe of this world, yea much more then is life it selfe. Let vs keepe on our course, Let vs walke before our God in simplicitie of heart, knowing this, that not a heyre of heade can perish without the wil of our heauenly father, neither can a∣ny man, or diuel be able to attēpt any thing, much lesse to do any thing to vs, without the sufferance of the Almightie: And when leaue is graunted, they shall goe no further then he will. Wherefore casting all our care vppon the Lord, who careth sufficiently for vs: Let vs lay aside all feare, and onely studie, whilest we liue heare, to please him, and to keepe our consciences cleane from the pollutions of this present age, that both our minde and tongue, our life and beliefe may be answera∣ble to eche other, and that for euer the word of truth may be a light to lighten our steps in the path of true holines. The Lorde in the riches of his mercy impart vnto vs all, such
 portion of his holy spirit, that when the time of our tryall shall come, and that the winde of persecution shall blow vpon vs, we may be founde pure golde, made clearer by the for∣nace, & perfect yron, bryghtened by the fyle, and good Wheate, seuered from the light chaffe, and so constantly continue Christ his faythfull souldiers, and seruantes to our liues end. And thus (Madam) haue I dedicated to your selfe particulerly a translated treatise, as a pledge of my reuerend loue I beare you: and to others, generally a long and rude Epi∣stle with it. Your selfe I trust will accept my simple trauaile therin, & take it in good part: and others, I hope, to whose handes this E∣pistle and treatise shall come, will make fa∣uourable construction thereof, and will beare with all defectes therein, whatso∣euer. My desire was to warne & encourage, which how weakely soeuer it be perfourmed, I trust it shall no whit hinder, but rather fur∣ther to so necessary a meditation, that obtai∣ned, I haue my desire: beseeching God to o∣pen our eyes, that we may see our deserts, & thereby know our perils, and knowing the same, may labour to meete the Lord by re∣pentance, before he come: whether it bee for a time to scourge vs in iustice, or to performe
 the last time of his comming in iudgement, to euery one, the portion allotted vnto him for his hire, from the beginning: which time of his comming, the Lorde hasten to per∣forme and fulfill for his electes sake.
Amen.
