


IT is most truelie written by the ancient fa∣ther Lactantius (Right worshipfull) that God made man for two causes: the one that he should acknow∣ledge and confesse him, to be the true and immor∣tall God, and to honour him in all holinesse and righteousnes. The other was for mans owne sake, that ech one should loue and defend the other. For if, of one man whome God made, all others had their offspring: then are all they bretheren, and of one and the same blood. But for brethren to be di∣uided and not to loue ech one the other, it is most vnnaturall and execrable before God and man. And for asmuch as such is the state & condition of man, that he was neither borne for him selfe alone, nor yet can liue by himselfe alone, it is most necessarie, that he doo endeuour himselfe vnto those endes for which he was made and created. That is, that he doo first and cheestie serue and honour the eternall God (for whose honour he was made) in all holinesse and righteousnes: & then to yeeld vnto man (to whose comfort he was borne) those offices of humanitie whereby mans societie is conserued: which doo stand and consist in this, that euerie one doo prosecute another, in all beneuolence, beneficence, gratefulnes and humanitie. For who so is not thus affected, dooth degenerate from the true nature of man in his first creation, & is become worse than the brute beast. Wherefore in the former ages, not onelie the children of God, and the professors of his word, haue beene carefull herein: but the Gen∣tiles also, and the nations which knew not God, haue beene earnest to main∣taine the common societie, and to performe one to the other all offices of hu∣manitie. For as Cicero saith, Nihil magis ad humanae vitae societatem tuendam, & ad amicitias conciliandas & confirmandas adiuuat: Nothing doth more nourish loue, and preserue common societie, than good will performed in the offices of hu∣manitie. Who so then is carelesse herein and breaketh the bondes hereof, he is as the godly father saith, Nefarius, parricida, & omnium pessimus.
This is so excellent a vertue, so much tending to the honor of God, so agre∣able to nature, and so most necessarie for man: as it had his beginning and was ingraffed in man, euen in his first creation, so hath it had his effect among good men in all ages, and in all well gouerned Cities and common wealths, euen a∣mong the verie nations: whereof to recite manie examples which are to be drawne from the Israelites, Persians, Assyrians, Grecians, Romanes, and sundrie other nations, it were too long and almost an infinite discourse. And therefore leauing all them I will come to this realme of England, our owne natiue countrie, which though it be the remotest Iland in all the Ocean seas, & taken as it were for a new world of itselfe: yet is it not inferiour to anie nation or people what∣soeuer, either in true religion towardes God, or in dutifulnes to the Prince and Magistrates, or in anie action tending to the conseruation of the common societie, and the nourishing of good will among men. And besides that, this land hath these things in common with others: yet, it hath also certaine parti∣cular

branches and vsages of beneuolence, loue and good will, among priuate men peculiar to themselues, and which in other countries is not vsed. Among manie others, I doo note and obserue the old and ancient manner of giuing of new yeares gifts. I know the Persians of certaine times did with great reuerence offer presents vnto their kinges. And the Parthians would neuer come emptie handed before their Princes. And likewise the Romane souldiers would at the beginning of euerie yeare, present their Emperours with some one thing or o∣ther: euen as the noble men of England for euer from time out of minde haue doone, and yet vpon new yeares daie doo humblie present to the Kings and Princes of the same, some strene or present, dutiefullie witnessing a bounden duetie of their part, as also the Princes by a like gift returned, doo testifie their good will of the other part. But the like course of courtesie, beneficence, and beneuolence to be vsed among the common people, and the inferior sort a∣mong themselues: I take it to be proper and onelie vsed within this Realme of England. For besides the yearelie haruest dinners, and other like meetings, vnto which one neighbour conuiteth an other: the tenants also to their land∣lordes, the seruants to their Maisters, and one neighbour to an other, faile not at new yeeres tide to congratulate a good successe of the yeare past, and wish the like of the yeere to come, with some present or gift: but among none is it more firmely obserued, than by the babes or little children, named godchil∣dren, who at that time make their repaire to their Compatres, named godfa∣thers and godmothers: before whom they doo humblie kneele downe, and by the name of a blessing, doo as it were, giue thankes, bicause they were witnesses to their baptisme, and doo craue their helpes for their increase and continuance in that faith which they promised for them. And therewith doo present vnto their said godfathers and godmothers some one thing or other, in token of their thankfulnes, which giftes in the elder ages were for the most part Akornes, Nattes and Apples.
Of this manner and vsage ensued manie and great commodities both com∣mon & priuate, which turned to the benefit of the common wealth, & to the in∣crease of the societie of man: for the Akornes, nuttes, and the kernels of apples were then vsed to be cast and sowed in the ground, whereof in course of time did grow and increase the great abundance of timber, and the plentie of fruites, which their posteritie could not lacke, and the common wealth cold not want: further it bred such a loue betweene the godfathers and the children, as next vnto the naturall parents could not be a firmer. The one alwaies reuerencing, and other louing each other. The parents also being as it were alied by this kind of courtesie doo call one the other gossop, as who saith, Gods helpers, they lo∣uing as brethren each one the other, most sincerelie and friendlie. And their children and offsprings treading the trace of their parentes, are affected one to the other as brethren of one and the same familie. These and such other like things when I had considered, it came to my minde and remembrance, how that I my selfe haue beene sometimes a foster childe to this Citie & common welth, being a free citizen borne, and descended of parents, who in their times sate in the cheefest seate and chaire of gouernment: and was by them in my tender yeares & minoritie committed and commended to the credit and gouernment of the Magistrates of this citie. Wherefore as vnto deere parents I thought it my part not onelie as a foster child, but rather as a naturall sonne to yeeld some remembrance of duetie vnto you. And therefore taking the oportunitie of the time present, and the occasion of some things otherwise offered, I haue thought

good by waie of a strene or new yeares gift to offer and present vnto you this litle Pamphelet. Which in outward apperance is slender as the hasell nut; but as by breaking the shell you shall find a kernell, so if you open this booke you shall learne the things most expedient and necessarie for you to know. It is the abridgment or summarie of such speciall points, as be incident to euerie of your particuler officers: which you ought not onelie to know and to vnderstand, but also to see to be doone and exequuted. You haue in an open assemblie giuen your oth, and sworne by the name of the Almightie and eternall God, and pro∣tested by the great Iehouah so to doo: wherefore to be remisse, negligent or care∣lesse therein, you shall not onelie offend against the common wealth, but most grieuouslie sinne against the diuine Maiestie, whose name by your sollies is di∣shonored, and which so great a sinne cannot of his iustice be vnpunished nor vn∣reuenged. And for as much as the Magistrates are Gods Ministers, substitutes and vicars vpon earth, and from whom all power and authoritie is ordained; I am here vpon some occasion, to aduertise and remember you, that there be two speciall things required at your hands. The one is concerning God and his seruice in religion, the other concerning your selues and your office in politike gouernment. The latter dependeth vpon the first, and cannot haue any good successe where the first is not kept and regarded: for as a learned man at the common lawes saith, Seeing that lawes must be obeied for God, it folow∣eth of necessitie that he which will haue them to be obeied rightly, must first learne to honor God truelie: or else where this foundation faileth (euen as a house builded vpon sand) the other falleth. It is therefore and ought to be your most cheefe and speciall care, that not onelie you your selues, but all and euerie such as be vnder your gouernment, doo honor and serue the euerlasting God in true religion, and according to his prescripts and commandements, and then of consequence your politike gouernment must and shall prosper & haue successe. And that you are thus bounden to doo, read the volumes of Moses, who was Magistrate vnder God of the Israelites, and he did both deliuer them lawes how they should honor the true God of Israel, as also set downe punish∣ments for the breakers thereof. The like after him, did Iosua, and the Iudges o∣uer Israel, and the kings ouer Iehuda: as in the bookes of the Iudges and in the Chronicles of the Kings dooth appeere.
For all things to be well doone must take their beginning from religion, as the godly diuine saith, Nulla politia feliciter constitui potest, nisi prima curapieta∣tis sit. Preposterous then is the iudgement of those who would haue that reli∣gion should perteine onelie to the bishops and clergie, and that the ciuill Ma∣gistrate should deale onelie in matters of policie: but the law of Moses, and the lawe of the Gospell doth determine the contrarie, and chargeth the ciuil Ma∣gistrate with both, making the same to be his talent, for which he must as a good Steward make his accompt. If this be true as it is most true, how carefull and vi∣gilant ought the Magistrates of this citie to be, that the people committed to their gouernment, should not thus in the light of the Gospell walke in darke∣nes, and liue most dissolutelie and looselie? I know the Gospell is preached most sincerelie, and the Sacraments ministred most purelie, and yet small is the num∣ber which imbrace the same sincerelie, and liue thereunto accordinglie. For looke you vpon the face of this common wealth, and you shall find it in as bad or worse state, than was the state of the common wealth of the Israelites in the time of Ezechiel, or rather woorse concerning religion. For Atheistes. Papistes, & blasphemers of Gods holie name, swarme as thick as butter flies, without checke

or controlment. The Sabboth of the Lord appointed to be kept holie, and we commanded to sanctifie the same, & to giue our selues to the exercise of good workes, to be diligent in praiers, & to be attentiue to the hearing of Sermons, is of all other daies most licentiouslie spent in sinne and wickednes, the same being counted so much the more holie, as it is spent most idelie and wickedlie. For be the Preachers neuer so godlie and earnest to call, let all the great belles of S. Peters ring out neuer so lowd, there will not be halfe so manie gained into the Church: as one with a pipe and a whistle shall gaine into the streetes to see vaine and foolish spectacles. For let there be a beare baiting, a bull baiting, an enterlude, or anie such vanitie, euerie man is in hast to runne headlong to it, & the time neuer too long to haue there fill thereof. And yet if there be no such plaies or games, they will rather sit idle in the streetes, than be well occupied in the churches.
Euen as it was said merilie of a preacher, that when he sawe the people to depart out of the church from the Sermon, spake vnto his auditorie: saieng, Good people, it is said there is a man in the Moone, but beleeue it not, for there is no such thing, but if you will goo forth into the Churchyard, you shall find twentie knaues in the sunne. And this is most true: for whensoeuer there is anie Sermon, send you one out into the streetes, and there shall you find the greatest number, some to knocke there heeles against the stalles, some to walke vp and downe the streetes, some sitting at the tauerne gulping and drinking, some at ga∣ming and plaieng, some piping and daunsing, and finallie none well occupied. This is most true, the matter is apparant, the fault is knowen, a redresse is wish∣ed, but nothing is doone, which thing is much bewailed by the good and godlie. It hath beene oftentimes mooued by some one man of great honor, calling, and authoritie; it hath beene aduised and persuaded by most learned and godlie preachers, and it is wished by all good and godlie men, that some one good and learned preacher were appointed in this Citie, who vpon the Sabboth daies might catechize the children, teach the old, and instruct the people, whereby they might be reclaimed to God, nurtered in religion, and amended in life. But Durus est hic sermo, this is a hard saieng, and who can abide it? And therefore manie be the deuises to stoppe so good a course. Some altogither being like to the Aspis, who stoppeth both hir eares against the voice of the enchanter, al∣leging that there is too much preaching. And of their opinion am I, that preach∣ing is to much, but to no other than too the lost sheepe of Israel, and to the children of condemnation: for as S. Paul saith, If our Gospell be hid, Iis qui pereunt est absconditum, it is hid to them that are lost. The bread of the Angels was vnsauerie, but to those onelie who were to perish whiles the flesh which they lu∣sted was in their teeth. Some doo like verie well to haue the catechizing, so that they might be no contributors, and so would shift it ouer vnto the church men, as though it were their onelie duetie to doo it, and these shew themselues to be the children of the corrupted Adam, who being reprooued for his trans∣gression, chargeth his wife with it, and she shuffleth it ouer to the diuell: and so in this, euery man so thrusteth it one from another, that nothing is doone. And what wilbe the end thereof, it is easilie to be knowen, if men would either be∣leeue the booke of God, or consider & call to remembrance what hath befallen in the like in times past. The Poets among their manie goddes, haue deuised & imagined, that one of them hath two faces, the one before looking foreward, & the other behind looking backwards, & this god they call Ianus, of whom the moneth of Ianuarie taketh his name, and the first daie of the same is called

Newyeeres day. By this is means & moralized a man of great wisedome, know∣ledge, and experience, and who looking to the times past and obseruing the e∣uents thereof, doth forecast the sequele of the like to come. If you then as eue∣rie wise Magistrate ought to do, would as a Ianus looke backe into the old world, and read the bookes and histories of that age, shall find that Noah the preacher of righteousnes, did teach and persuade the people to repentance almost one hundreth yeeres togither, but bicause they were werie of his preaching, & would no more thereof, God sendeth the great deluge and drowned the whole world. Sodoma would not listen to the counsell of Loth, wherefore God with fire and brimstone from heauen consumed them to ashes. The foolish Israelites not contented with such incenses and manner of religion as God by Moses had or∣deined, would needs haue another of their own deuise, & in offering the same, the earth opened and swallowed them vp all aliue. The same people were fed with Manna, the foode of Angels, which God from heauen prouided for them, and they waxed werie thereof, and would needes haue chaunge of meates (as we of religion) but the meate was no sooner in their mouthes, than was Gods vengeance vpon them, and stroke them with a great plague.
The foolish Israelite neglecting the obseruing of the Lords Sabboth, would needes folow his worldlie causes and gather wood, had his reward, and was sto∣ned to death. The whole nation of the Iewes were called by the Lord Iesus to the doctrine of the Gospell, but they would not vnderstand nor accept the time of their visitation, wherefore they felt the heauie hand of God, and were vtterlie consumed with famine, pestilence and the sword, and the citie & temple (wher∣of they made a great aduante) was not one stone thereof left vpon an other. The cities of Capernaum, which reached vp euen vnto the heauens, Ephesus, Co∣rinth, Antiochia, and sundrie others among whom the Apostles had planted the Gospell, when they lothed it and waxed wearie thereof, the Lord lothed and waxed wearie of them, and all they some by earthquakes, some by fire, and ma∣nie by the enimies were vtterlie wasted and consumed. And as he hath thus doone with cities, townes, and countries, so hath he shewed the like power vpon mightie Princes and Monarches, which haue not harkened vnto his voice nor obeied his commandements. Nabuchadnezer, Pharo, Herod, Nero, Caligula, Domitia∣nus, Traianus, Hadrianus, and a number of other Atheistes, who denied the Lord God, his Christ and his Gospell, he tormented them with such plagues, tor∣ments and troubles, that of their miserable liues they made most miserable ends. If then the Lord God hath thus dealed with all the nations of the world, and with his owne peculiar people, if he haue not spared the children of his owne familie, nor fauoured the vineyard of his owne planting, nor yet regar∣ded his owne countrie, nor accompted of his owne citie, what shall it be thought he will doo with this ingratefull citie of Excester, which haue tasted of infinite his blessings, and haue a long time beene fedde with his heauenlie Manna, and yet haue and doo dailie contemne his lawes, cast awaie his commandements, and be wearie of his doctrine: what is it, that we can iustlie claime or chalenge for ourselues, why the Lord should not shorten his hand, and be no longer fa∣uorable vnto vs? Is it our antiquitie? Be it that this citie is verie ancient, and was builded at the first comming of Brutus into this land, about two thousand fiue hundred yeeres past, before or when London was: yet the cities of Enoch, Nineue, Babylon, Corinth, Athens, Troia, and Carthage were long before it.
Is it for religion? I grant, that the Gospell is truelie preached, and the Sa∣craments sincerely ministred. And so was it at Hierusalem, Antiochia, Corinth,

Ephesus, and manie other places. Is it bicause it is pleasantly seated, and stan∣deth vpon the top of a hill, in the open prospect of the world, & neere the seas? So was Hierusalem, Capernaum, Tyrus, and sundrie other cities. Is it bicause it is rich and inhabited with rich marchants and occupiers? So was Tyrus and Sydon, and others. Is it for the fertilitie of the soile, and the abundance of all things, wherewith God hath blessed it? So was the whole land of Palestina, who for the great blessings of God in nature, was said to be a land to flow with milke and honie. And yet all these peoples, nations and countries, lothing his word, for their vnthankfulnes and not seruing God in true religion were vtterlie destroi∣ed by the mightie hand of God, and now remaineth scarse anie signe or memo∣riall of them.
And shall this citie of Excester which is but a sower grape, a wild Oliue, & is of his good mercie ingrafted in the place of the naturall branch, and yet hath doone the like or woorse transgressions, shall shee I saie be free from the like punishments? No, no: although God in mercie haue long & oftentimes borne and winked at the sinnes of this citie, yet he will not so doo foreuer. It is an old saieng: Go the pot neuer so often to the water, yet at length it commeth home broken. Sundrie and manie times (like vnto the citie of Hierusalem) hath it beene in great perils by the Brytons, Romanes, Saxons, and Danes, and manie times hard assailed with intestine warres, and the Lord hath alwaies from time to time deliuered it, but they still continuing or rather increasing in sinne, haue and doo dailie greeue the Lord, and doo accoler at his heauie hand. Be you but in∣different viewers of your present state, and be you your owne Iudges, and you shall not denie (vnles you be like vnto the Fairies, called Lamiae, whose nature is that being within their owne house, they be blind and cannot looke vpon their owne faults, but being abroad can see euerie other mans dooings. But that pride, couetousnesse, whoredome, malice, enuie, excesse, gluttonie, drunkenes, vsurie, extortion, dissimulation and hypocrisie, and almost all kindes of sinnes dooth swimme and abound in euerie place of this citie, and shall it not be reuenged? The Prophet condemned Sodoma but for foure speciall sinnes, pride, fulnes of bread, idlenes, and carelesnes of the poore, but looke into Excester, & you shall find fortie times foure, and yet we can lie snorting and sleeping in our sinnes, as though it were Omnia bene. The more is our securitie and carelesnes, the grea∣ter wilbe our plagues in the daie of vengeance, and so much the more, bicause against our knowledge and profession we doo offend God: for as Christ saith, If I had not come & spoken vnto them, they should not haue sinned, but now they haue no cloake for their sinne, vnlesse we doo the sooner conuert and amend.
Well you are Gods ministers, and he hath appointed you to be his Moyses vnto vs, and therefore you must in this dangerous case, stand before him betweene him and the people, and likewise to stand in the middle of the peo∣ple betweene the liuing and the dead, wherebie is meant, that you are not one∣lie to present yourselues before the Lord in a perfect and a pure religion, but also must procure and prouide your Aarons and godlie preachers, who hauing in their brest plate Vrim and Thumim, doo catechize, teach and instruct your ci∣tizens to know God and the grounds of Christian religion, wherebie they may be a holie people vnto the Lord. And then also you yourselues must be men of corage, fearing God, dealing truelie, and hating couetousnes, and so to stand in the middle of the people, betweene the quicke and the dead; that when the people doo come vnto you, you doo exequute iustice, and iudge vprightlie in punishing the offender, and acquiting the innocent. For your direction in these

two pointes you haue for the first, Gods holie word and Testament, which the Lord hath commanded, should neuer depart out of your mouths, and continuall meditations: for the other you haue sundrie good and politike constitutions, and ancient ordinances of this your citie, out whereof I haue drawen this litle Pamphlet and strene, referring you for your further instructions to the great Leger or blacke booke, wherein at large I haue set downe whatsoeuer concer∣neth the state of this citie, and the gouernment of the same.
Which good courses if you will folow, notwithstanding the ship of your common wealth being ouerladen with sinne and iniquitie, is in great danger of shipwracke, and to be ouerwhelmed, yet Christ will be in readines to calme the seas, and to saue both you and your ship, if you shall awake him, and conuert vn∣to him. And then this your ancient citie which hath continued for these manie hundreds of yeeres, shall as the mount Syon be firme and neuer be mooued, but God shall saue keepe and defend it, that you and your posteritie maie still dwell in it and haue it in possession, and you yourselues when you are called to an accompt shall for the well imploieng of your talent, bee rewarded, and enter into the ioie of your Lord. And thus commending my selfe and this my strene vnto your good acceptation, I doo take my leaue.
Exon the last of the old yeere, and the beginning of the New, 1583.

