



WHO SO VVEL
feleth the dueties,
that belonge to an
honest hart, and is
any thing acquein∣tid
with those thre
ladies, which won¦derfully
mainteine
the ioyfull societie of mans lyfe, cal∣lid
amonges the Grecians Charites,
among the latins Gratiae, he can not
moste gentyll mayster Crumwel, but
se infinite causes, why I ought with
al force of body, al strength of mynd,
all alacritie and chierefull prompte∣nes
of courage, study to gratifie you,
study to make you beare with oone,
that fayue wolde, and neuer can be
able to come out of debte. The fyrste
of these thre dames, is Bountyfull be∣neficence,
a lady of louely coūtenance,
and noble stomake, one that alwaies

longeth, styl hauing that she longeth
for, alwayes with childe, and stil de∣lyuered,
alway profytynge, and styll
lustynge to profite, alwaye helpynge
some, and styll desyrefull to helppe
mo. The grekes name her sometyme
Eurydomene, whiche signifieth a lar∣ge
and a plentifull gyuer, some tyme
Aglaia, whiche soundeth amonges vs
gladnes, teachyng men euen by her
name, that of dutie, benefittes ought
to be gyuen chierefully. The seconde
ladye is Thankefulnes of minde, neuer
forgettynge benefyttes receyued, her
name is Thalia, whiche sygnifieth
fresshenes or greenenesse, bycause du∣tie
and honestie woll, all pleasures,
all benefites styll to be fresshe in me∣mory,
styll to be greene, neuer to wy∣ther,
neuer to faade, all tyme to flo∣ryshe.
The thyrd lady is Euphrosyne,
muche lyke her syster Aglaia, a damo∣sell
full of solace, full of delectation,
continually deuisyng, by what mea∣nes
she may do pleasure for pleasure,
recompence kyndnes with kyndnes.
Authors of greate name and muche
wysedome, make these thre, to go all

hande in hande, the fyrste lokyng styl
forwarde, not ones castynge her eye
backe, neuer imbraydyng benefites
giuen and paste. The seconde and the
thyrde euer more beholding the fyrst,
with amiable coūtenance, with feith¦full
eye of remembrance, and full in∣tente
of recompence, as farre, as po∣wer,
fordred with mooste desyre may
or can. Under suche cloudes, sage and
graue wryters, are wonte darckly to
insinuate thynges of greate weyght,
thynges very necessary for the quiet
and honest leadyng of mannes lyfe,
thynges worthy to be of all men en∣braced,
worthy to be set fixed and en∣grafted
in al mens hartes. They per∣ceyued,
that moral preceptes plesant∣ly
set out in feate colours of wyttie
phantasies, both crepe faster into out
bosomes, and also tarye there with
muche more delectation and profite,
than they wolde, beyng playnly spo∣ken.
wherfore as you nowe see, what
they mente by those three ladyes, soo
you muste also nedes see, howe I am
bounde, to owe you my harte, my ser∣uyce,
with al that they bothe may do

for you. For how can I, my lord your
father, beyng so far in amours, with
that louely ladye Eurydomene, leaue
myne attendance vpon the other two
damoisels, before life leaue me? How
canne I, beyng enuyronned with soo
many and ample his benefites, not
desyre Thalia & Euphrosyne, that they
bothe reporte me, to lacke power, but
no good wyll, I trust they bothe shal
haue good cause, so to do. Certes, if I
had sene, where either my lyttel wit,
or poore harte might better haue ser∣ued
his lordeshyp, then in openynge
vnto you, his dere and entierly belo∣ued
sonne, suche preceptes of vertue,
as may make you most lyke your no∣ble
father, there are noo peynes that
coulde haue kepte me from doyng of
it. Assure your selfe, mayster Crum∣well,
if labour, and harte may paye
the tribute, that loue oweth, you shal
neuer nede to areste me. This boke,
was gathered by Ludouicus Uiues,
a man greatly conuersant in all good
authores, and excellently wel sene in
all kyndes of learnyng. The booke
hathe vndoutedly, muche more lieng

in his bosome, than the tytle promy∣seth
in the forehed. It is not onely an
Introduction to wysedome, but if ye
goo as it leadeth you, it introduceth
wysedome into you, rootyng the loue
and desire of vertue in your harte, ex∣tyrping
from it al maner of vyce, and
all vncleannesse, furnishing you with
generall preceptes, for all kyndes of
lyfe, for all ages, for all degrees and
conditions, whiche preceptes, if you
harbour in your breaste, muste nedes
be a greate stay, helpe and comforte
vnto your tēdre age. They shal bring
to passe many thynges in your lyfe
tyme, with greate pleasure, and no
payne at all, whiche otherwyse expe∣rience
ofte tymes poudred with byt∣ter
repentance, shulde sease at length
teache you. It is as wyse Socrates
sayeth: Preceptes of learnyng were
inuented at the fyrste, as a nedefull
staye and succour vnto mans mynde,
wanting knowledge and experience:
euen as a staffe is gyuen of necessitie,
to staye vp a feeble bodye. Assuredly,
I knowe no one booke vntranslated,
that hath halfe so many holsome do∣cumentes

as this hathe, none that
may so well leade you the ryght way
to true honour, none where ye maye
eyther with more delite, or more hope
of your game, trace trewe nobilitie.
Folowe your leader, go on with your
guyde, you shall fynde all the steppes
and grices, wherby not only my lord
your father, honourably hathe clim∣med
to nobilitie, but al other, that in
dede are or were at any tyme noble.
You shall fynde many thynges here
that maye be to men in wealthe and
worshyp an ornament, many that are
to men assauted with the surges of
sower fortune, sure coūsailours, brin∣gyng
with them, besydes ryght and
honest consolation, muche delectable
doctrine: finally, many that are a so∣uerayne
medicine al moste for al dis∣eases.
The booke is nowe youres, I
truste as the Iewels, whiche it offe∣reth
vnto you, be great, rare, and pre∣ciouse,
that so ye wol se them layd vp
in place mete for suche ryches. Locke
them faste in the cheste of your harte,
gyue the keye to remembrance, that
she may let them out, and carye them

home agayne, at suche tymes as ye
shall thynke conuenient. If ye make
these preceptes yours, by vse of them
speaking as they teach you, working
as they aduise you, who shall haue
more cause to reioyse of it, than you
your selfe? wherin can you more plese
my lorde your fathers mynde? what
thynge can more satisfye his desyre?
what greater comforte can come to
his lordshyp, then to se you most lyke
him in conditions? What greater
worshyp to you, then to treade in his
steppes? what hygher pleasure to all
them that loue bothe? your countrey
knoweth, what noble feates my lord
your father hathe wrought by wyse∣dome,
lady gouernour of all vertues?
who knoweth not, howe honesty may
reioyse, howe truthe & religion maye
holde vp theyr handes to heuen, that
god hath sente to so gratiouse so pru∣dent
& wyse a prince, so good so wyse
and so faythefull a councellour? to so
noble a mayster, soo deligente a mini∣ster,
to so hyghe couragiouse and ver∣tuouse
a kynge, a subiecte of so noble
an harte and stomacke? I must leaue

of, I am entred iuto to longe a mat∣ter
for a shorte epistle. Wherfore I
can no more, but with al harte, desire
god, that it may please hym, longe to
preserue noble HENRY the VIII.
styll in all wealthe, in all honour to
reygne ouer vs, to the settyng forthe,
of goddis honour, to the spredyng a∣brode
of his glorie, to the magnifieng
of his name in all places, longe to
preserue my lord, to the furthe∣rance
of the same. Finally,
that ye may be heyre of
his lordeshyps qua∣lities
and ver∣tues,
as wel
as of his
honour
and
worldely dignitie. And
thus our lord send
you euer well
to fare.
❧
