


WHEN I DO THINK
and consider (right worshipful) of
the noble state and great maiestie of
the high Courts of Parlements of
this Realme which for the exellēcie and worthi¦nes
therof, is of all true English men to be hono¦red
and imbraced: I doo foorthwith fall in great
dislike as wel with my self as with others, which
beeing in learning ignoraunt, in wisdome weke,
in experiēce vnskilful, and in euery respect very
vnfit for such an honorable assembly, should be
chosen and admitted to the same.
For by the ancient orders and prescribed lawes
of this land: onely such are tobe elected and to
haue place there as for grauitie, wisdome, know¦ledge
and experience, are reputed and knowen
to be the moste chosen and principall persona∣ges

of the whole land and Realme. And this
court beeing in authoritie highest, and in power
cheefest: none should to be thorderers, Iudges
and councellers therof, but such as in vertues and
good conditions are answerable to the same.
The order (therfore) among the Romains
was that none should be receiued or allowed to be
of their Senate house: vnlesse he were graue in
yeeres, and wel experienced in common affaires
of the publique welth. The Lacedemonians ad∣mitted
none to be an Ephorus amōgst them: but
that he were a tryed man for knowledge and ex∣perience.
The Athenians would be assured
that he should be wise and lerned, that should be
of their counsail.
The like order also was and is within this
Realm, the same being deriued and taken cheef¦ly
from emong the Romains, emong and vnder
whome: diuers of tholde and ancient Kings of
this Realm, haue ben bred and brought vp.
And by meanes of the wisdome, learning
and knowledge, learned emong them, haue not
onely attained to the Septer of this realme: but
also some of them haue been the monarches and

Emperours of the whole world.
These good Kings and Princes (I say)
finding this land by disordered life, lawles liber¦tie,
and lose behauior to be brought to an vtter
ruin, decay and desolation, no reason longer ru∣ling,
nor good order allowed, then as priuat a∣ffections
and selfwil would allow and like of:
after many deuises, consultations and attempts
for redresse, no way could be found so good, no
remedie so present, nor help so speedy: as to e∣rect
and establish a Senate of the most graue,
wise and expert personages of the whole Rea∣lme,
called by the name of a Parlement. For as
Patricius in his third Book, De institutione Reipub▪
saith. The best order of gouernmēt of the com∣mon
welth: procedeth alwais frō tholde and anci¦ent
Senators, which are reputed and taken to be
the fathers of the common welth. For as fathers
for their Children: so these for the cōmon welth
are moste careful and tender.
And albeit the King or prince be neuer so
wise, learned and expert: yet is it impossible for
any one to be exact and perfit in all things, but
a Senate of wise, graue, learned and expert

men, beeing assembled in councel togither: they
are as it were one body, hauing many eyes to se,
many feet to go, and many hands to labour with∣all,
and so sircum spect they are for the gouern¦ment
of the commōwelth: that they se all thīgs,
nothing is hid or secret, nothing is straunge or
new, nothing is to great or weightie to them,
but whether it be in causes of war, or of peace:
they wilbe wel aduised, and measure all things,
with good reason, circumspection and policie.
Moyses therfore, although (hauing talked
with God face to face, he were aboue all others
most wise, discreet and learned, yet not trusting
all togither to his owne wittes: made choice of
all thelders of Israel, and by their councel did or¦der
and direct the publque state & cōmon welth
of his people, and likewise beeing councelled by
his father in law Iethro, to prouide emong all
his people, strong, couragiouse and valeāt men,
(and such as feared God, dealed truely, and
hated couetousnes) to be rulers ouer the people,
to gouern and iudge them, he did so, onely the
greatest and weightiest matters whiche tou∣ched
God: were brought before him alone.

Wherfore according to the good profitable
and ancient orders of the Romaīs and Israelits:
these good Kings doo erect a Senate or Par∣lemēt.
Lawes are prescribed how the same shuld
be kept, orders made what manner of persons
shalbe elected and chosen for the same, and con∣stitutiōs
setfoorth how and in what sort lawes
and ordinaunces shalbe made for the benefit of
the common welth. And surely these good and
wholsome orders being put in vre and execution:
the benefit therof grew so much in short time,
that there was as it were a Metamorphoses of
the state of the publique weale in those daies, for
what Sedition and contention had disordred:
good order and concord recouered. What loose∣nes
and dissolutnes of life had marred: honest be
hauiour restored. What disobedience had decay∣ed:
loiable obedience amēded. And finally what
soeuer by any disorder was amisse: was by these
meanes reformed and redressed: and the euils
which were crept and brought in by ambition,
couetousnes, debate, malice or enuy: were so re∣formed
as that the people beeing better gouer∣ned
and instructed: would not be caryed with e∣uery

affection, neither yet prefer priuate pro∣fit
and wilful lusts, before the common and pub∣lique
welth.
Lo, suche are the frutes which grew of the
Parlements, and thus doth it fare in all estates
where good men doo rule, wholsome lawes are
made, and good order kept and obserued, and so
long doo common welths florish: as when prīces
do rule and gouerne by law, and people loyally
obeying doo liue vnder law.
Erasmus in his Book De institutione principis
Christiani▪ saith, that good lawes vnder a good
Prince: doo make a happy Realme and fortu∣nate
gouernmēt. Cuius tum felicissimus est status, cum
principi paretur ab omnibus, atque ipse Princeps paret le∣gibus
leges autem, ad architypum aequi et honesti respondēt
nec alio spectant, quam ad Rem communē in melius pro∣uehendam.
Whose state is then moste fortunate
when the people doo obey the Prince, and the
Prince obeyeth the lawes, and when lawes bee
made iust and right, and for the better aduaunce¦ment
of the common welth. And surely these
are so in seperable that in a good commō welth
they cannot be disseuered, but a good Prince

and good lawes must be concurrant, for although
it be a rule that Quod principi placet legis habet vigorē,
& that Prīces heasts ar lawes: yet the Ethnicks
them selues doo holde thoppinion and affirme,
that vnlesse the lawes be iust and made according
to the rule of wisdome, and for the cōmon welth:
it is no law, for that is a law, Quod sapienti bono∣que
principi placet cui nil placet, nisi quod honestū, ac quod
seniorū, iuditio atque sētentia probatum est fore Republica.
And surely in my oppinion, if it behoueth
Princes to be valeant in armes, and expert in
martiall affaires, wherby to with stand the ene∣mye,
and to represse the rebel: much more ought
he to be wise and learned, that he knowing the
lawes and keeping the same, may the better go¦uerne
his people in peace and keep them in duti∣ful
obedience.
Wherfore Iustinian the Emperour in the pro¦heme
to the instituts, hath this sentence. Impera∣toriam
maiestatem, non solū armis decoratam sed et legibus
armatam esse oportet, vt vtrumque tempus, et bellorum, et
pacis, recte possit gubernari. an Emperour or a king
ought not onely to be skilful in feates of armes:
but also to be wel learned and instructed in the

lawes: that he may preuail against his enemye,
as also peaceably gouerne his Subiects. It is al∣so
an olde sentence, and for the worthines therof
grauen in Golde among the professors of the
common lawes of this Realme, Arma Regum Lex.
And therfore the Egiptians did think it
more honorable and commendable that Kings
should be rather learned in good studyes, then ad¦dicted
to martiall feates, and therfore their
kings did with great diligence apply thē selues
to the studyes of wisdōe and knowledge, neither
did any King emong them think that he did or
could gouerne wel: vnlesse (as in authoritie, so al¦so
in wisdome, vertue and learning) he did excell
all the rest of his Subiects and people. Then if it
be so necessary and expedient for the common
welth that the same be gouerned by learned and
wise rulers, and guyded by iust and good lawes:
how happy, blessed & fortunate is this realme of
Englād, which hath foūd both thone & thother?
For neither Athens with their Solon, and
his lawes. Sparto with their Licurgus and his
lawes. Egipt with Mercurius and his lawes.
Rome with their Romulus and his lawes. The

Italians with their Pithagoras and his lawes,
and finally a number of other famose contries
and worthy gouernors, of whome great aduaunt
is made: are not to be compared to this little ile
and Realm, which in bothe respects hath passed
and excelled them all. For the Kings and rulers
therof (not for a short time: but in the course of
many hundrethes of yeeres) haue not been so vale¦ant
as wise, not so couragious as prudent, not so
puissant as learned, and not so politique in the
feeldes: as graue in the Senates. Likewise the
lawes, in equitie most vpright, in iudgemēts most
true, and in conscience moste resonable. The ob∣seruation
and keeping of which lawes: hath heer¦tofore
preserued this Realme from forain ene∣myes,
defended it from ciuil seditions, and kept
the people in safetie, so that is vrified whiche
Melanchton writeth of Solon. Denique vita ho∣minum,
tranquilla et honesta manebit: seruandi leges, dum¦pia
cura manet.
It resteth now that if we doo minde to be the
naturall Children of so wise fore Fathers, the
obedient Subiects of moste worthy Rulers, the
obseruers of moste godly and wholsome lawes:

that like to our ancestors we doo carefully and o∣bedyently
in all dutifulnes liue after their race
and dispose our selues after their examples: for
if we doo once yeeld to the breach therof, then be
assured, the destruction of our selues, the decay
of our posteritie, and vtter ruin of our common
welth wil shortly and immediatly folow.
For no longer shall our life be in safetie: then
we doo dutifully obey the Prince and obediently
obserue the lawes.
The olde and ancient Fathers in the former
ages, were so straight in this poynt, that they
would in no wise commit the least breach of any
law. For Chilo the Lacedemonian, was of the
oppinion, that the common welth could no longer
endure then whē the lawes were firmely obserued.
Heraclitus of Ephesus saith, that Citizēs
are more bounden to fight for defence of their
lawes: then for keeping of their walles, for with
out walles the Cittie might stand, but without
lawes it could not continew, and yet bothe are to
be defended.
Archidamus saith, that in all wel gouer∣ned
commō welths: all degrees and estates of peo¦ple

are like obedient to the order of the lawes as
wel the magistrat: as the inferior, & the King:
as the Subiect. Saint Paule saith, that he is not
the iust man, which onely knoweth the lawes: Sed
qui factis legem exprimit which liuing vnder the law
dooth obey and keep the same. And surely if
we English men would doo the like, and folow
the steps of such common welths, as whose states
continued so long as they kept their lawes, and
also consider how this Realme hetherto, by that
meanes hath been and is preserued: we shall not
need to feare of our estate, dout of our fall, or
mistrust of our decay. No forain inuations shall
preuail against vs, nor yet intestine seditions be
able to anoy vs, for such is the nature of the par¦lements,
that all mischeefs, inconueniences and e∣uels
are foreseen: and all good orders deuised as
befor the common and publique weale, no man of
what estate so euer he be: can go awry or trans∣gresse
his commission, but is vnder the order of
that assembly, and of such ordinaunces as by the
same are to be deuised. For the King him self
although he be the cheefest ruler, yet by the laws
of this realme, he cannot establish order or make

any law: but onely in Parlement, and with ad∣uise
and consēt of all the estates and sages of the
same, which law being kept, how can he with ti¦ranny
oppresse his people, or with exactions ran
sack and spoile his commōs? If the noble man can
be no farther allowed, then to do and speak that
which shalbe liking to the King and his whole
Parlement: what wrōgs or iniuries can he offer
or minister? If no mā ought to be a knight of the
Parlement, vnlesse he be Cinctus gladio: that is to
say, wise, prudent, expert and politick in marti∣all
affaires: what warres can aduisedly or rashly
be taken in hand? if no man can be a Citizen or a
Burgesse ther, vnlesse he be ancient, wise, graue
and resiant in the place for whiche he is chosen:
what euil lawes can passe and be concluded? yea
what things amisse in any parte of the Realme,
shall not vpon diclosing, foorthwith and spedely
be redressed?
If Salomōs wise and anciēt senators ought to
haue place in Parlement: what shall the rash and
yung coūcellers of Rohobohādo ther? If Moi∣ses
by the aduise of such ancient elders of Israel
as were wise, valeāt, dealed truely, feared God,

and hated couetousnes, did direct the people in
iudgement and gouern thē in iustice: what shall
children, yungmen, and such as neither fear god
nor hate iniquitie, which are of no experience or
knowledge: sit in Senate of the wise, and giue
iudgemēt emong the graue and learned? Finally
if the olde Senators and wise Fathers, ought
there to sit in ancient order and in graue maner:
what place is there for punies, rash heddes and
yung men, who hauing no learning, and lesse ex∣perience,
are caried away (as a fether with the
winde) with euery light toy, making no account
nor hauing any regarde at all to the publique
weale?
And surely that our Parlements should be
kept in such order: the good ancient Kings of
this realme with great aduise did so ordain, and
great penalties are prescribed, and punishments
appointed against such as shalbe remisse in ob∣seruing,
or guiltie in the breach therof. If we
therfore, for whose safetie and preseruation so
good and wholsome lawes, which haue been made
and heertofore obserued, should degenerate
from our forefathers, and be remisse or carelesse

in the keeping of the same: let vs be assured that
as we shall right worthely, so shall we assuredly
feel the smart therof to the vtter destruction of
our selues, the subuertion of the common welth,
and decay of our posteritie, for so hath it hap∣pened
and be fallen to all the estates, kingdomes
Realmes, Citties and common welths, of all
the world, whose destruction and decay began
with the contempt and decay of their lawes and
orders.
Where is the wel gouerned estate of the A¦theniences?
What is become of the noble estate of
the Romains? What is become of the prudent go¦uernment
of the Ephoros in Sparta? Nay what
is become of the Israelits the chosen people of
God? are not they driuen out of their owne land,
and become vagabōds through the whole world?
are not they so lothesome that all sorts of people
doo in a manner shun and abhorre them? It is an
olde saying: Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum,
happy is he that can beware by an other mannes
harme. Wel, if their be any feare of God in vs,
if any zeale to our cōmon weale, any care of our
posteritie, or account of our owne safetie: let vs

haue an ernest regarde to the preseruation of
that which is the preseruation of vs, Let vs keep
that which keepeth vs, maintain that which main¦taineth
vs, and defend that whiche defendeth vs.
Let vs preuent and beware that in choice of the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses: none be cho¦sen
which are straungers to the common welth,
yung of yeeres, weke of discretion, and timerose
to speak: but such as are graue, wise, anciēt, and
expert, fearing God, dealing truely, according
to the ancient orders, lawdable customes and
prescribed lawes of this Realme.
And for asmuch as the orders, vsages and
customs of the Parlements of this Realme, are
for the most part, and to most men hidden and vn∣knowen,
and yet moste expedient and necessary,
that none should be ignoraunt of them: I haue
thought good vpon considerations to make a col∣lection
of them, and finding some alteration
and varietie of the Parlements in these dayes,
from them which were vsed in the elder dayes:
I haue made the discription bothe of the one and
of thother.
The first and ancientest orders I haue tran∣slated

out of an olde, and an ancient Lattin Re∣cord,
which I haue of the Parlemēts kept in the
time of King Edward the Sonne of King E∣theldred,
named Edward the confessor, about the
yeer of our Lord. 1046, which were duely for
many yeeres before and after his dayes kept
and obserued.
The others are of mine owne deuise and col∣lection,
according to that which I saw and lear∣ned
at the Parlement holden at Westminster, in
the xiij. yeer of the reign of Queene Elizabeth,
Anno. 1571. at which I was present, being one
(though vnworthy) of the said house and assem∣bly.
I haue beē the more willing to set the same
foorth: because I knowe it moste necessary and
needful to be knowen, and that it toucheth the
whole estate and common wealth of this Realme
very neer. For if the Rulers and gouernours of
Citties and townes, doo not more carefully look
to the choice of their Citizens and Burgesses:
their states may paraduenture be in daunger to
be shaken, and their gouernments be in peril to
perish.
And as for zeale and good wil to the whole

common welth, and my natiue Contrey, I haue
taken this little trauail: so of bounden deutie, I
haue thought good to offer and presēt the same
vnto you, partely that a Legiar & memoriall of
so worthy and necessary a matter: might remain
and be emong your Records, for the better in∣struction
of your selues, and all others which shal
repair vnto you for the same. But cheefly to
yeeld my self vnto you moste humble and thank∣ful,
for your good wil and tender affection to∣wards
me, for albeit you had the choice of sun∣dry
wise men, which (for their grauitie, experi∣ence
and knowledge farre exceeding me) were
more fit to haue supplyed a place in that hono∣rable
assembly: yet you of a good wil conceiuing
the best, made choice of me preferring me before
the wise, and ioyning me with the discreet, and
although by meanes of sicknes, the vse of my
speech not seruing, I could not speak my minde
in that pluce, as of duety and consciēce I ought
and would haue doon: yet in such credit of that
assembly I was, that by a whole and a generall
concent of the Parlemēt: I was eftsoones chosen
to be a Comitte in sundry matters of charge and

importaunce, and they with whome I was ioy∣ned,
although they were personages of much ho∣nor,
and great experience: yet such credit they
gaue to my words and so allowed of my sayings:
that with good allowance they relyed vnto the
same. Whatsoeuer credit or cōmendation, grow∣eth
to me heerby, I doo, must and wil, wholly im¦pute
it vnto you. And therfore as one bounden
vnto you, and altogither dedicated to your ser∣uice
and commaundement: I doo offer this my
simple and rude collection vnto your worships,
praying and beseeching you not to haue respect
to the simplicitie, rudenes and sclendernes of the
matter offred: but to the good wil of the offe∣rer.
I haue before this attempted and begun to
to draw and make a discourse, of the antiquitie,
estate and gouernment of this Cittie, thinking
when I began: I should long ere this haue absol¦ued
the same, and haue offred it vnto you. But in
the middle of my trauails, beeing by your con∣sēts,
called to folow the weightie affaires of the
right worshipful, Sir Peeter Carew knight, in
Ireland: I was cut of and dissapointed, sithens

beeing returned, I haue for the moste part been
so ouer charged with sicknes, and mine affecti∣ons
haue been and are so distempered: as that o∣portunitie
and power haue not yet serued to fo∣low
the absoluing of that, whiche my good wil
and ernest desire wissheth.
Neuerthelesse, hauing perused the discrip∣tion
of this Cittie, which was of mine owne col∣lection:
I haue vpon the sight of more matter en¦larged,
augmēted and brought the same to such
a perfection, as for the time and matter suffi∣cient.
The imperfections (if any be) I wil heer
after as occasion shall serue: supply and amend,
in the meane time, hauing ioyned the same vnto
this, and thinking it moste meet to be offred vn∣to
you: I doo moste humbly pray you, accept the
same in good parte.
The Lord God from whome commeth what
so euer is good, and who directeth the councels
of the Iust, and prospereth the diuices of the
godly: send his holy spirit vpon you, that you li∣uing
in the feare of him, may hate iniquitie, ab∣horre
couetousnes, and without affection giue

iust Iudgements, and in all trueth, equitie and
iustice: gouerne, rule and direct the people, ouer
whome he hath made you the gouerners and Ru¦lers,
whereby his name may be glorified, the
common welth prospered: and you at length
sitting with the xxiiij Elders, may be
crowned with them, and inioy that
peace and blessing whiche is
prepared for such as
execute iustice and
giue true Iudge¦ments.


Post mortem Vita

