


ABout a few yeares past, right Honorable, re∣uerend and worshipfull, I was requested to giue out the description of the citie of Excester, some one (then liuing) pretending and minding after the or∣der of Ministers, to set foorth a generall description of the whole realme of England, and also a Topo∣graphicall and a particular discourse of euerie pro∣uince, citie, and towne, in the same. This request ten∣ding to so good an end, liked me so well, that albeit I were and am verie vnfit, and of small knowledge, to wade into such a matter: yet when I sawe no man would take it in hand, I was contented to yeeld therevnto. And finding no such thing before doone, my paines were the greater, and I driuen to make the more diligent search and in∣quirie, for such old and ancient presidents, records and writings, as might be found and had for my best furtherance herein. In which my trauels, it was my hap among other things, to haue the sight of a certaine table within your Ca∣thedrall church, which cheefelie conteined a certeine Catalog of a few Bishops thereof. I did not so much reioise at the sight thereof, at the first, but when I had throughlie perused and considered the same, I was sorie, that no one man, in the course of manie yeares, had continued it. At length, considering with my selfe, that there is such a sympathie and affinitie, betweene this citie and the church, both which are inclosed and inuironed within one wall, and be as it were one bodie, though in certeine priuiledges distinguished; and that in the search for the one, I might the better doo the like in the other, I did resolue my selfe, to be∣stowe my trauels in both alike, and yet greatlie was I herein discouraged, for being an earnest sutor to some of your owne companie, for some helpe out of your auncient records, I had small furtherance; some being more suspicious than needed; some if I may speake it, vnder your patience, not vnlike Aesops dogge, who would neither eate haie himselfe, nor yet suffer the oxe to doo it, by meanes whereof, I was driuen to picke out els where what I could, which I doo persuade my selfe to be so much the more imperfect. Well, what I haue doone for the citie, I haue presented it to the Maior and magistrates of the same; and what I haue doone concerning your church, I doo here most humblie offer vnto you, the effect whereof is; The antiquitie and first foundation of your cathedrall church, when and by whom the same was doone, and then the Catalog of all the Bishops that I can find, which haue beene of this prouince, as well before as si∣thence the sea was stablished in this church and citie. And for as much as the Bishops were alwaies accompted to be the fathers of Gods people, for the di∣rection of them in all holines, vertue and religion, I will by way of a little in∣troduction, set downe the beginning of christian religion, within this realme,

and of the first placing and appointing of Bishops ouer this prouince and coun∣trie of Deuon and Cornewall. It is recorded in sundrie histories, that immedi∣atlie vpon the death of Christ, the Gospell was preached in this land of Eng∣land. Some write, that Simon Zelotes, one of the apostles was here and preached; some write that S. Paule was here, and did the like; some saie that Ioseph of Ari∣mathia, did come into this land, when king Aruiragus reigned, & did both preach and baptize the king and his people; some saie that it was some one of the apo∣stles, but they name him not; but whosoeuer was the preacher, true it is, that Christ was preached, and his Gospell receiued, euen with the first: notwith∣standing, the seed was cast among the thornes and high waies, and brought foorth no fruit, but as a candle vnder the bushell, and as fire raked vp in the im∣bers, it seemed to be hidden and buried, vntill the time of king Lucius the sonne of king Coyleo, who about the yeare of the Lord 187. was by the goodnes of God called to the knowledge of the Gospell; and he foorthwith expelled all the Archiflamines and Flamines, and constituted in their places, Archbishops and Bishops, which were in number three of the one, and xxviij. of the other; and at this time the prouinces of Deuon and Cornewall were vnder the Archbishop of London, for of anie other particular Bishop, there is no mention made. And notwithstanding, the Gospell had his free passage for the time, yet clouds coue∣red the sunne, and through persecutions, the godlie were put to silence, and the true religion seemed to be extinguished, for almost about foure hundred yeares, vntill the time of king Vlphus, then king of West sex, or West Saxonie, who about the yeare of our Lord 636. was conuerted vnto christian religion, by the good and godlie man Birinus, and the sea for West sex was appointed to be at Dorche∣ster, and then vnder the same were the prouinces of Deuon and Cornewall a∣bout twentie yeares, vntill the time of Kinwalchus, who builded the church of Winchester, about the yeare 654. and he remooued the sea from Dorchester vn∣to Winchester, and thencefoorth was all Deuon and Cornewall vnder the Bi∣shop of Winchester, for and about fiftie yeares, vntill the time of king Iewe. In whose time about the yeare of our Lord 705. there was a synod or a prouinciall councell, holden vnder Brithewaldus Archbishop of Canturburie, in which it was ordeined, that the Bishoprike of Winchester, should be diuided into two Bi∣shoprikes or diocesses: that is Winchester, and Shereborne, and then vnder the Bishop of Shereborne, and in his Diocesse was Deuon and Cornewall, and so thenceforth did this constitution hold and continue about two hundred yeares, vntill the time of king Edward the elder, the sonne of king Alphred, who making a progresse through out his kingdome of Westsex, came to this citie of Excester, and found both it, and the whole countrie cleane destituted of Bishop or prea∣cher, and so had beene for sundrie yeares, wherevpon by the aduise of Pleymun∣dus Archbishop of Canturburie, a synod or a prouinciall councell was kept in Westsex: and therein it was ordeined and concluded, that in euerie particular prouince or shiere, within Westsex, there should be a particular Bishop: and then one Bishop was appointed for Deuonshire, and an other for Cornewall. Werstanus was consecrated Bishop of Deuon, and his sea was then at Tawton, now named Bishops Tawton, and from thence shortlie after remooued to Kir∣ton, and after manie yeares, from thence to Excester. Herstanus was consecrated Bishop of Cornewall, and his sea was first at S. Petrokes in Bodmin, and after re∣mooued vnto S. Germines, and at length was vnited vnto Crediton, and in the end both were remooued vnto Excester. And for as much as I haue not yet found anie thing of the Bishops of Cornewall, worthie memorie, I will deale

and set downe onelie the Catalog of the Bishops of Deuon and of Excester, and what I find doone by them or in their time worthie the obseruation. I know that for want of knowledge in me, there be manie imperfections herein. But among so manie wise godlie and learned men, as you are, I hope that some one good man or other, and hauing accesse vnto your euidences and records, will either reforme what they find amisse, or impart it vnto me, that I may so doo it, when time and opportunitie shall serue therevnto. And thus much concerning the first receiuing of the true and christian religion, and appointing of Bishops in this prouince of Deuon. And for as much as this pamphlet doone and written a fewe yeares past, came vpon some occasion to my hands, to be reuiued at this present time; being the end of the yeare past, and the beginning of the new now come, in which it hath beene an old vsage and custome among good freends, and especiallie of the yoonger to their elders, and of the inferiour to their supe∣riours, to offer some small present, ech one to the other, congratulating thereby the good successe of the yeare past, and wishing the like to come, and considering also, that you which doo labour in the word and in doctrine, doo dailie beget vs through the Gospell in Christ Iesus, and are his ministers to our saluation, and therefore the more worthie of double honour; and for as much as I my selfe am (his name be praised) by these meanes made partaker of his heauenlie bles∣sings, and dailie confirmed, doo thinke my selfe most bounden to be thankefull and gratefull vnto you all herein. Wherefore these my trauels, so much as con∣cerne your church, I thought it good, by waie of a strene, to offer and present vnto you, praieng you, that though it be somewhat imperfect, yet such as it is you will accept and take in good part, not respecting the slendernes of the thing offered, but the good will and beneuolence of the offerer. And herewith also I am to praie you to call to your remembrance, that as the old yeare is past, and the new is come; so that euerie one doo cast awaie the old man, which is cor∣rupt, and put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousnes and holines, and that you be renewed in knowledge after the image of God, which created vs, and to cast awaie the workes of darkenes, and put on the armor of light, walking honestlie as in the daie time, not biting nor deuouring one the o∣ther, least we be consumed one with another: but walke in loue, and peace, long suffering, gentlenes, goodnes, faith, meekenes, and temperance, which are the fruits of the spirit, crucifieng the flesh and the affections and lusts thereof; and thus hauing purged awaie the old leauen, and being freed from sinne, and made the seruants of God, and prepared to good works through Christ, you maie haue your fruits in holines, and in the end to enter into the ioie of our Lord, and life euerlasting. And thus commending you vnto the eternall and euerliuing God in Christ Ie∣sus, I doo most dutifullie take my leaue. Exon the last of the old yeare, and the be∣ginning of the new. 1583.

