



IDo perceaue, and by daylye experi∣ence do vnderstād most worshipfull Syr: how men do erre, and are sore deceaued and begi led in the election and choyse of their wiues: and howe vncurtously and vngentlye they do vse and intreate them, that of equitie and ryghte should be most fauourably and pleasauntly vsed and . For why? what thing should a man loue or intreate more amiably or more swetely, then his owne wyfe, that is to saye, his owne fleshe aud bloude? theCorin. vij. whiche no man (except he be very brutishe and beastly) can or ought to mislyke, hate, or in any maner of wise abhorre. But yet how these poore silye wemen are handled, and of theyr owne husbandes misordered, contemned, abhored, yea, and oftentimes without cause reiected, I reporte me vnto the gentle reader of this booke: the whiche

yf he haue anye  of wytt or reason, shall  conceaue this thyng to be true, and the vndiscrete electiō and choyse of the  to be the onely and originall sprynge and occasion thereof. For in thys our time, a time (I saye) mooste tamentable, menne choose not their wiues for their honestie and vertue, but for their intisinge beautie: not for theyr  and womanly maners, but for theyr possessions and ryches: not to  and brynge forth children to the prayse and lawde of God, but for carnall  and pleasure: not to be well and , occupied at home, but ydely and wan∣tonly to spende the tyme abroade: not to be godly, but wordlye: not to be humble and , but to be prowde and : not to regard theyr husbandes , houshold, and profyte, but theyr owne lustes and so∣lace. Wherein is the cause then of theyr wrangelynge and gerre, but onelye in the  election and choyse of theyre1. Cor. . wyues: and because they doo not, when they haue them, informe them godly, and vertuouslye instructe them: for of whome shulde they be instructed and taughte, but of theyr owne husbands? But per aduēture ye wil say, we are not learned, nor we haue not redde at any tyme, how to choose them, and howe to teache them, we knowe not. In asmuche therfore as I nowe perceaue and knowe, that ye can not for lacke of ex∣perience and knowledge  thē, & that ignoraunce is the roote of suche sinister and  choyse of youre wyues, and the cause

of youre so greate debate and stryfe. I haue translated this excellent and fyne peace of worke of Mayster Uiues a Philosopher moost famous, the which doth teache men, howe to choose theyr wyues, howe to loue and to intreate them, how and where with to instruct them, howe to araye and semely to apparell them, howe to chasten and cor∣recte them, howe in theyr absence, and in theyr age to vse them: and at theyr depar∣tynge vnto god, howe to leaue them. And on the other syde, it teacheth your wyues howe to feare and to honour god, howe to loue, obey, aud serue theyr husbandes, how to brynge vp and nourter theyr chyldren, howe to haue an eye to theyr husbandes honestie and profyte, whether they shoulde be learned or no,  auctors they should reade, what company they shoulde haunte and auoyde, howe to kepe theyr howses in good reporte, and them selues cleane and vndefiled. O how excellent then, and how profitable a booke is this, for the welthe bothe of man and woman, & moste worthy to be redde of all christians, and of those, whyche desyre and seke to lyue quietly in matrimony, & ioyfully in this transitorye vale and dungen of al misery. Reade it ther fore at your leasure moste worshypfull syr, but yet with iudgement I pray you: for as it is a worke moste meete and conuenient for al that maye mary, so it is for your mai∣stershyppe moste frutefull, & considerynge your present estate and condition, mooste neadefull. For who can be ciricumspect

ynoughe in the election and choyse of her, whome a man cannot electe by gods lawe,Mar. x tyll death them departe, nor yet refuse, but for fornication, nor at no tyme (she beyngeLuc. . alyue) mary any other withoute the spot and  of adulteri. Counsell therfore wyth Mayster Uiues, howe to choose a wyfe, and choose her, that feareth god, and wyll be obedient and reformable, and suche a one, as shall geue no occasion of breache, or of diuorsement, the whiche (O lorde) is nothynge in these oure dayes regarded: for why? to haue many wiues at once, or to re∣fuse her by some cautell or false interpreta∣tion of gods moste holy worde, that mysty∣keth, is at this present but (as men call it) a shifte of descante. O heauē, O earthe: but who am I that goeth aboute to counsell you so prudent a man, so well learned, so circumspecte in all thynges: and that hath a forehande proued the course and trace of matrimony, howe godly & plesant a thinge it is, if the parties be of one accord & minde, and in Christes true religion of one sayth & opinion. But let the noble orator Mayster Uiues be al mens guyde and counseyler in this weyghty mater. And in such lyke be∣ware of temerarious hastynesse, nor beleue not  yonge and lyght counseller: for after light credence, commeth heauy repen∣taunce. Thus god preserue your mayster shyppe, moste humbly desyrynge the same, to accept this my rude translation in good parte, and as a token and a pledge of my vn∣fayned and cordiall loue to you wardes.
