



THIS my present at∣tempt and enterprise, will, perhaps minister vnto the reader dou∣ble cause of admirati∣on, the one, by reason of the publishing, the other in the respect of the dedication of this simple and plaine discourse. Touch∣ing the first, albeit I may iustly depose, and call God to witnesse that this ser∣mon is thus imprinted and made com∣mon, not by any vaine desire of mine, or terrene purpose in me, but at the impor∣tune suite of diuers godly men both of ye Citie where it was preached, and of the Countrie where I inhabite: yet I am en∣forced openly to acknowledge that it is
 my bounden dutie of my selfe, without request, euery way to seeke the glorie of my God, by exhorting priuately, by preaching publikely, by writing gene∣rally, to the verie vttermoste of my power and abilitie. Howbeit, I am here constrayned humbly to bewraye myne owne infirmities, with heartie prayer for greater strength. For mine own sim∣plicitie and want of profounde know∣ledge, the aboundaunce of most learned volumes dayly set out, together with cō∣sideration of many curious heades and carping tongues, these so preuailed with my flesh, as neither I could, of my selfe, be moued, nor by the importunitie of others, for a good space, induced, to pub∣lishe this treatise. But at length my wea∣kenesse was somewhat strengthened, and I persuaded, not onely by the rea∣sons of men, whome I haue good cause greatly to reuerence: but also by the ho∣ly spirite of GOD, to collect this Ser∣mon out of my notes, & send it abroad, to the end, that, as by vttering thereof it pleased the LORD GOD mercifully to touch the heartes of some: so, by wri∣ting
 and imprinting thereof, it may like the same Lord as graciously to touch the heartes of many. So that my onely drift and purpose herein, is to seeke the glo∣rie of our good God, by attempting, as he hath inhabled mee, to reclaime the wicked, to confirme the godlie, to con∣uerte the deceiued, to encourage the conuerted, that, as God hath created all, offered saluation to al, and nourished vs all, so through his sonne our Sauiour CHRIST, he may be glorified by vs al.
This glorie of our God ought to bee of so precious and deare accounte with vs, that we shoulde directe whatsoeuer good thing wee haue to the aduaunce∣ment of his glorie. This is not the doc∣trine of carnall man, but of that moste excellent doctour. IESVS CHRIST, and of his holy Apostle S. Paule. Christe the maister saith, First seeke the kingdome Mar. 6. 33. of God and his righteousnesse, &c: And Paule the seruant, speaking of the Lord God, telleth vs, that, Of him, throughe him, and for him, are all thinges, and there∣fore Rom. 11. 6. addeth, to him be glorie for euer: A∣men. These and many the like scriptures
 teach vs that we are created, redeemed, sanctified, and preserued, yea, that all ye Lordes blessinges so without measure dayly powred vpon vs, tend to this end that his most glorious name maye bee continually extolled by vs. Both Moses Exo. 32. 32. Rom. 9. 3. and Paul were so zealous for this glory, as they preferred the same to their own saluation. But alas, such is the misera∣ble condition of the world, that few are founde willing to take anye little paine, or to susteine the short displeasure euen of the vilest men, thereby to shewe their longing desire of God his glorie. Men, of all sortes, are made so drunken with their own vaine glorie, and in such manner bende them selues to maintaine that ignominious and shamefull glorie, as in the meane time, the glorie of God is cared for, accounted of, and longed for, but of verie fewe, and as it were, of an handfull, in respecte of the huge multitude of so innumerable people. From this most impure and deadly im∣poysoned fountaine of vaine glorie issu∣eth the Papistes glorious opinion of their meritorious workes, their proude
 conceipt of mans righteousnesse, their bloudie argumentes against iustification by faith, their obstinate defences of most grosse impieties, their daily coyning of newe counterfeit miracles for the vn∣derpropping of their nowe falling king∣dome. From this filthie puddle of vaine glorie springeth the contemptuous dis∣dayning of ouermanie to submitte their stiffe necks to the sweet and easie yoke of Christe. Hence it is that the verie Angelles of GOD his Church, and true ministers of his worde are sternly frow∣ned vppon, iniuriously thrust to the walles, and handled vnreuerently, vnles with Popishe dirige, they will sing, Pla∣cebo: and as the Iewes willed Esay, speak Placentia: and with the Terentian Gna∣to. Esay. 30. 10. ait, aio: negat, nego: that is to say: vn∣lesse they will with Iudas betray their maister Christe, and frame them selues to feede the sinfull humours of carnall men, by wilfull neglecting the seuere commaundementes of Almightie God. Hence it is, that, if contempte of true religion, lothing of Christs holy Gospel, countenauncing of the wicked, corme∣ranting
 of earthly thinges, carnall talke, vaine delectations, horrible blasphemie, pride in apparell, epicurisme in diet, de∣ceite in bargaining, vnchristian conuer∣sation, if these, and the like enormities be reproued, and the terrible iudgemen∣tes of God denounced againste them, vaine glorie will then be inflamed and set on fire with reuenging anger, and at daggers drawing with such preachers. Thus I might proceede to prooue that vaine glorie doth euery way so abound, as the aduauncement of God his glory is lamentably neglected.
Oh, that man had regenerate eyes to looke throughly vpon, and deepely in∣to himself, he should then wel perceiue that no glorie, but all shame is due to him: he shoulde then be compelled to confesse, that whatsoeuer good thing he hath of the bodie or minde, the Lorde God hath there with adorned him, that he the authour therof might be glorifi∣ed with and for the same. Saint Paul to extinguish and quench out mans gree∣die thirst of vain glory demaundeth of man this question, What hast thou that 1. Cor 4. 7.
 thou hast not receiued? To the same ende that vniuersall speach of Saint Iames Iames. 1. 17 may be fitly applied. Euery good giuing and euery perfect gift is from aboue &c.
Wherein the holy ghost teacheth that all the good things we enioy, either tem∣porall, or spirituall, they haue streamed from the euerlasting founteine of God his vnspeakable liberalitie, that for and with the same we shoulde magnifie and praise his most glorious name. The Lord therefore in mercie graunt, that euery man, in his seuerall vocation, may so har∣tely bend all his affections, giftes, welth, wisedome, worship, honour, or what so∣euer the Lorde hath blessed him withal, to the magnifying of him our most gra∣tious and louing father, that euery one of vs may with a good conscience and truly say with holy Dauid, Not vnto vs, ô Lorde, not vnto vs, but vnto thy name Psal. 155. 1. giue the glorie, &c. And with Saint Paul, God forbid that I should glory or reioice, but in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ, where∣by the world is crucified vnto me, and I vnto Galat. 6. 14. the worlde.
Thinke not (right Christian Ladie)
 that these words are vttered so much to instruct you, as to enforme the reader of this letter vnto you. For by good expe∣rience I haue comfortably found both in the right honorable my very good Lord your wise and louing hous bande, and in your good Ladiship, his Godly and obe∣dient espouse, such care of Gods glorie in aduauncing true religion, in demea∣ning your selues in the educatiō of your children, in gouerning your family, in countenauncing of vertue and learning, in cherishing the poore and needie, as I might deseruedly be deemed vnwise, if I had not obserued it: carelesse, if I did not remember it: vnthankefull, if vpon offred occasion, I would not testifie it. But thanked be the king of eternal glo∣rie, this your care of GOD his glory is so vniuersally knowne to the whole realme, & so ioyfully acknowledge of ye Godly therein, that I neede not produce my self for an experienced witnes of the same. Wherfore to conclude this branch, I will heartily offer vppe mine incessant prayers to the Lorde God, in the name of his sonne our sauiour CHRISTE,
 that both you, and all Christians, may daily and continually growe not onely into such contempt of vaine glory, and al vaine thinges: but also into such loue and longing of his true glorie, and all heauenly things, as, in these euill dayes, ye may haue the sure testimony of your owne consciences, that you haue zea∣lously sought GOD his glory, and in the end, through Christ, be made partakers of his eternall glorie.
As this care of Gods glorie hath drawen others to desire, and me to pub∣lish this sermon, which I trust, will pre∣uent the vncharitable suspiciōs of some, and stay the rash tongues of others: so, me thinketh, I am to be blamed neither by you, nor of any other for dedicating the same to your Ladishippe. For, not∣withstanding nothing be therin taught, which you haue not long ago learned, and nothing in such manner deliuered by me, but hath ben and may be much bettered by others: yet your Ladiship, by perusing thinges alreadie learned, shall not be altogether vnprofitably oc∣cupied, and at the least this my fact shall
 make some outwarde shewe of mine in∣warde heartie thanksgiuing for the be∣nefits bestowed vpon, and the trust re∣posed in me your humble and faithfull seruaunt.
And when I considered, that by my Lorde and your La. I was first called from the vniuersitie to teach your two sonnes, (and those such children, as for the true feare of God, zealous affection to his word, obedience to their parents, reuerence to their superiours, humility to their inferiours, loue to their instruc∣tour, I neuer knewe any excell them) & also that by the same meanes I was like∣wise first called from teaching of chil∣dren, to enstruct men, verely I coulde not but dedicate the first fruites of these my so generall labours to some of that house, whence I was first sent out to be a poore labourer in the Lords great har∣uest. You shall here find no profounde learning, no exquisite art, no curious eloquēce, to delight your learned eares: but finde you shal the simple truth now imprinted as it was then vttered, to comfort your Christian hearte. And I
 am throughly perswaded, that as I haue the sure warrant of Gods expresse worde for confirmation of the trueth herein conteined: so the holy spirite of God will in such wise affect you with a like and loue thereof, that he will com∣pel your heart to think, and your toung to say, Amen: Yea, and to confesse, that, albeit a sinnefull man was the homely vtterer, yet the holy Ghost is the vn∣doubted authour of the same.
Nowe least the portall shoulde be as great as the house, and the preface as long as the treatise, I will conclude and cease from further troubling you. But, I trust, not to surcease from hearty pray∣ing the Lord God so to deuor the harts of your good La. of your children and whole family with the holy fire of his heauenly spirite, that ye may dwell in his court, and be satisfied with the pleasure of Psal. 65. 4. his house, euen of his holy temple: that the Psal. 69. 9. zeale of the Lordes house may eate ye vp: that with good consciences and ioyfull spirites, ye may truely say, ô Lord, I haue loued the habitacion of thy house, and the Psal. 26. 8. place wher thine honour dwelleth: Finally,
 that ye may be of that bright heauenly wheate, whiche shall bee gathered into the celestiall garner by the Lorde Iesus, who, for euer, mightily protect, and mer∣cifully preserue you.
At Easeling by Feuersham in the Countie of Kent.

