



RIght Honourable, and right Worshipfull, fin∣ding you alwaies hand in hand, neerely vni∣ted, with those firme combining bonds of nature, vertue, loue, and pure religion, I haue presumed, (hoping without offence to any) humblie to craue you ioynt-Pa∣trons of these my indigested la∣bours: which being accepted, as they are presented, signes of my
humble loue and dutie, and may further seeme worthie the iudi∣cious reading, I haue my desire, and the labour (I trust) will prooue lost on neither side. The subiect is very diuine, answering your affe∣ctions: exceeding high, not vnbe∣fitting your personages: most ne∣cessarie, and therefore not vnwor∣thie your studies. Touching my own meannesse, the Heathen man pleades for me: Non quis, sed quid dicit attendito:Sencca. Not who saith, but what is said, ought to be conside∣red. Christ is that good Sower, his Ministers but as baskets contai∣ning the seede;Christus semi∣nat, nos Cophi∣ni seminantis. amongst which, since it hath pleased him to ac∣count mee as one, (of all other though most vnsufficiēt) my hope is, that I may inclusiuely say with Augustine;Aug. de Doct. Christi. Etiam in nobis aliquandò ponere dignatur quod velit spargere: Euen into vs silly ones doth Christ
sometimes vouchsafe to put that, which hee purposeth to sow a∣mongst his childrē. But the phrase is rude: I wish (Right Honorable) that I could play the Rhetorician, docendo, delectando, flectendo;Aug. de Doctr. Christ. lib. 4. in tea∣ching, delighting, perswading: yet since the first is a worke of necessi∣tie, the latter of victorie, and that other but of meere delight, it shall reioyce me to performe the two chiefe, leauing the lesse necessarie to those that excell therein.Seneca. Non delectent verba vestra, sed prosint: Our words must rather bring pro∣fit, then procure delight. The sicke man respects the good potions, and not the eloquence of the Phy∣sition: and it is a rule in Ambrose,Melius est vt nos inteliigant populi, quàm vt commendent Grammatici. Ambros. rather to speake that the meanest may cōceiue, then that the Gram∣marian may commend. But aboue all, the precept of the Apostle, Let all things bee done to edification, is
most to be respected. In graue and diuine sentences, it often prooues, vt dum numerus addatur, pondus de∣trahatur, that whilest men adde an eloquent forme of words, they de∣tract from the substance of the matter:August. where wee onely desire that that which is shut may be o∣pened, what good doth the gol∣den key if it will not open, and what hurt doth the wooden key if it doth open? If the method seeme preposterous,Bern. ad Eug. I appeale as Bernard to Eugenius; Confusa disterminat consideratio: If due considerations will reduce all into order. Where∣in my hope is the greater, in that experience doth teach, that the most worthie, and best affected, verum magis amant in verbis,August. quàm verba, do rather looke to the truth deliuered, then respect the manner of deliuerie. If nothing is said but what was heard before, yet facilis
est obliuio boni;Hieron. A good thing (saith Hierome) is soone forgotten, and therefore not vnprofitable to re∣call things to minde, that we may not be vnmindfull. The end of all,Sunt qui scire volunt, eo tan∣tùm fine vt sci∣ant, & turpis curiositas est: alij, vt scian∣tur. & turpis vanitas est: alij, vt scienti∣am suam ven∣dant, & turpis quaestus est: aly, vt aedifi∣cent, & pru∣dentia est. Bern. whether it be only to know, which is but curiositie; or that I may bee knowne, which is but vanitie; or that I may sell my knowledge, which is but auarice; or that I may helpe others, which is Chri∣stian prudencie, I leaue to God that can iudge the truth, and to you his deare children that haue learned to thinke the best. And thus committing your Honorable estates to the Almighties sauing protection, my labours to your fauourable censures, and my selfe to your due command, I rest,

