


RIght H. the heauens, th earth & al things in them do sing with Dauid both mercy & iudgemet, they teach vs that God doth whatsoeuer pleaseth him, being able to punish them which forget his mercies, and ready to blesse those that feare his iudgements: for in the hea∣uens we may reade, that he which made them glori∣ous, is himselfe of exceeding glory; that he which en∣ritcheth them so mightily for the comfort of man, is vnto man of exceeding mercy. In the shaking of the earth we may reade, that the Ruler of the earth is mighty: and in the fruits of the earth we do enioy the fruits of his bounty: all which matters are therefore published, that in his Maiesty hee may bee feared, and in his mercie loued. But because we are blinde, and cannot see to reade the works of God to our instruction: wee haue the word of God also from whence, if we be not deafe, we may heare the same doctrine to our edi∣fication: for it telleth vs, how in louing sinne iudgement is to be feared, in a∣uoiding iudgement repentance is required: in true repentance mercy is assu∣red, in imbracing mercy Eternall happinesse will be graunted. But because the whole Booke of God to idle schollers may seeme too tedious, we haue the Psalms of Dauid more compendiously teaching doctrine fit for vs: for if we would see the danger of sinne, they wil shew it: if we would know how to turn from sinne, they will teach it: if we would praise God for his mercy receaued, they can direct vs: if we would pray to be deliuered from misery, they will be good guides vnto vs: yea in euery good action wee shall finde in the Psalmes sufficient instruction for vs. And that our meditations in the Psalmes may not want their delight, we haue that excellēt gift of God, the Art of Musick to accompany them: that our eyes beholding the words of Dauid, our fin∣gers

handling the Instruments of Musicke, our eares delighting in the swetenesse of the melody, and the heart obseruing the harmony of them: all these doe ioyne in an heauenly Consort, and God may bee glorified and our selues refreshed therewith. But I leaue this Argument to Dauid himselfe, who in consideration of the premisses exhorteth vs to make melody with hart and harpe, with trumpet and lowde Cymball; as if he had said that no way is sufficient to furder men on earth in their praising the Lord of Heauen. I onely am to yeelde a reason of this my present doing: My honorable good Lady, as zeale to Gods glory hath caused me to publish this worke, so dutie to your H. hath moued me to present it to your Ladyship: whose loue of piety and care of Religion haue beene alwaies such, that your owne happinesse is sealed vp to you in your possessing them: whose fauours to me in the dayes of your H. husband, sometimes my good Lord and Master, haue beene so great, that I may not forget them: and hauing no way to shewe a thankefull mind, but by presenting this simple work vnto your H. I humbly craue pardon for my boldnesse in offering it, and fauor from your Ladyship in accepting it, leauing these my simple labors vnder your H. protection, and commending your H. to the protection of the Almightie God.

