



RIght Honourable:
 All actions of poize better accomplish their wished ende, either by remunera∣tion, or a dutifull affection (I si∣lence both solid direction and adiument, which onely preuent errour, and supply de∣ficencie) due reward the former, multi∣plies and cheares vp endeauour, yet so bee∣ing the base-borne birth of euery seruile nature, onely the last is the true loadstone of labour, this beeing the generous off∣spring of vntainted liberall thoughts: Howeuer, we though saplesse branches of the happy oliue tree (our owne actions vn∣sutable

to demerit) may worthily declaime against the pioners of due desert (giue me leaue to vse that word) who bury it in base obliuion. Yet we all, I can truly a∣vouch (as that Honourable oracle of wis∣domeNorthampt. could say) doe happily liue vnder Li∣bra, vnder the golden line of Iustice, mo∣deration, and grace, so that we cannot tell whether nights or daies be more happily passed o're our heades. Yet this surely is (nether doth errour transport me) in re∣gardIulian in his Casar. of our happie Marcus Philosophus, (whome Silenus in his pasquil could not carpe at, so worthie was his deportment) I say in respect of the Princely Head it selfe chiefly, to many the fountaine heade of honour; and as we may rightly say in generall (if considering Iustice) deriuing honourable equitie to all. Nor can I im∣peach some of the noblest senses atten∣dants on this head; who in a Iustice Geo∣metricall are euer wont to parallel reward with merit, and not like Salomons sleeper to fold vp the chill hands of their fauour in their owne warme bosomes: yet the Muses may complaine the number of such are too fewe.
The auncient honours, fraunchises, and

immunities of the Muses, the adoring of learning which was of olde, causeth those teares that then brast out of their faire cesternes for exultation, now in moderne time, to haue recourse back like Iordan to drowne the swolne heart in discontent: on∣ly now our pennes doe shedde forth a many teares of inke, abundance of these droppes, the liuely resemblances of our sorow-duld, nay dead eyes: and this is the reason why all our pennes (I thinke) are more imploied now then wont, like silly Israelites ener ma∣king vp the tale of bricke: to let the in∣gratefull world see, that as gifts are more inhaunced, so the remunerating hand is much shortned.
Before the temple of Romulus therePatricia. Plebeia. Plin. 15. 29. were two myrtles grew, the one Senatori∣all, the other vulgar, for so they tearmed them: whiles the one was euer greene the other withered: there was an intercourse in their flourish and decay, two intimates of Senate and the Commonaltie, either of their languid authoritie, or of their flouri∣shing dignitie: for when the Senate was in glory, the other was in subiection, and so the contrary. Fauour and dislike, reward, and neglect to learning and ignorance,

wisedome and folly, be as them two myrtles to them two states: learning must needes flourish and dispread her golden bowes whiles the blessed beames of respect and fauour doe happily reflect vpon her:
—Immensum gloria calcar habet: as the Poet saies fame, so fauour is a spurre: by this, learning (prizelesse in it selfe) gets it esteeme: whereas neglect of merit it dulls and rebates the quicker edge of all proceedings, and then folly (contemptible in it selfe) gets the vpperhand. Speake I all this, not as though your Honourable selfe (a knowne Patrone vnto learning) were in ecclips for deficiency that way, nor speake I this as if mine owne worthlesse action were worthie of the poize, or did basely expect reward, due to desert and not to me: but onely in their persons whose merit hath beene very much, and against them who haue very little esteemed it: for vertues and better parts most vsually like liuely sparks of Vestall fire, are rak't vp in embers of obscuritie: my speech doth ayme at some, who may, no doubt, peruse these lines with a blushing eye. What I harbour in my brest, I doe reserue to my owne vnsyllabled cogitations: and so much

for the respectlesse world.
Now for your worthy Honour which I euer will esteeme, the dutifull affection I beare and euer will to it, hath beene a spurre to pricke me on (though free and ready of my selfe) amongst the troupe of Secretaries, to presume to offer vp this poore paper sacrifice as incense on Miner∣va's shrine. My ruder hand wherein lear∣ning is not palmestred, has onely pende what it could copie out of my cogitations, though surely first they leuild at a fairer marke, not soaring for a vulgar stoope. If I haue er'd, it is in loue and in constraint: as with a disease so with actions past: a disease at first is easily cured, but hardly seene: but in processe of time, it is easily seene, but hardly cured: so that nowe a fault can not be salued, except by the pre∣tious balme of a more gratious accepta∣tion.
Let this I pray your Honour, be attour∣ney to plead for my defect, in that I, like the Syrens, who are wont in procella can∣tare, in malacia lugere, to sing in a storme, and mourne in a calme, doe likewise, being incūbred with other necessary occurences for my degree, tune these my vnpleasant

notes, too rude a touch and harsh a melo∣dy for a nimble apprehensiue court-like eare, which feedes daily on diuiner foode, on the Pythagorean harmonie that raui∣shes the inward sense.
Concerning my subiect, it is nothing rare: for there is no soile in the whole Elysian field of diuine writ that lies fallow, vacant, and vnsowne, so toylesome euer hath beene the cunning hand of industrie in this fruitfull plot, both for Pauls plan∣ting and Apollos watering, so that I might worthely haue put my stammering pen to silence: onely it pleasing his excellent Maiestie to daigne to grace with vnex∣pected fauour these lines in words deliue∣red to his vnderstanding eare, I so beeing called to their divulgation, did deeme it not vnmeet among the rest happily to hold the plowe, not looking backe so much as to mine own wants: & therfore haue I chosen to shrowd this abortiue issue of my braine, vnder your Honours gracious wings, my selfe beeing happily couched vnder them alreadie, hauing sweete repose vnder the shade of that vine I most did affect, and whose clustred branches I wil euer honour both with my heart, my tongue, my penne

and all. Humbly suiting your Honour for this, to entertaine these fewer drops of du∣tifullnes distilled from the limbecke of an humble true heart and hand (vnanswera∣ble either in their portion or proportion to your worth) which I wholly dedicate as a free will offering to your Honours sacred altar, as great an offerer (in a respectfull ballance) for this my silly Lambe, as they that sacrifice their Hecatombs. Daigne at your Honours vacancie to looke on it: the glorious sunne it selfe may without impeachment to his worth, cast his plea∣sing rayes vpon the barrennest ground, as well as on the most fertile soile: so may the leaden mine partake as well the blessed hidden influence of heauenly starres, as the golden minerall without disgrace to con∣stellation: and it may so come to passe, your Honour may gather hunnie from this homely weede. Thus in all humility reque∣sting earnestly your Honours future grace and fauour, by whose gracious meanes my happier studies may be incouraged to wor∣thyer tasks, as also my fortunes bettered: howeuer, beeing contented with the lowest ebbe, as it shall please the hand of proui∣dence to dispose of me: whose fauour ne∣uer

was as yet to any like the Poets Tene∣dos,
statio malefida carinis:Virg. a trustlesse anchor-hold to the sea-beaten barks: I humbly take my lowliest leaue, beseeching the Almightie that as both your Honourable selfe, your right Noble Ladie, and all your Oliue branches, that plant your table round about, haue had the mercies of God hetherto, not in any little epitome, but as we may so rightly say, in the largest volume of his vnspeak∣able bountie: so still and still to all posteri∣tie, (euen from a single well wishing heart vnto you all) you yet may tast the ore∣flowing cup of Gods endlesse fauours, both here in the wildernesse of this world, and there in the true land of promise, the king∣dome of blisse, whether we all if rightly bred, if true trauailers, must happily direct our iourneyes.
And thus againe I humbly take my leaue. From my chamber in S. Iohns Col∣ledge once graced with your Honours re∣sidence. Iun. 28. 1608.

