


MOST MIGHTY PRINCE,
I HOPE it will not be deemed any presumption, but rather a iust and necessary pre∣uention, for me to offer this my Treatise con∣cerning Antichrist to your Soueraigne Maiesty. Sure I am that it procedeth from a loyall and dutifull mynd desirous to auoid all occasion of offence, and ready to imploy my best la∣bours, yea my life it selfe in your Maiestyes seruice. My aduersary likewise hath prouo∣ked
 me hereunto who togeather with M. D.  Powell haue taken the same course with their disputations of the same subiect.
And though they may seeme to haue the better hand, by reason of your Maiestyes edu∣cation, and present profession: yet I want not reasons of encouragement, wherby I may be induced to hope and expect your Maiesties fa∣uourable patronage and protection. At least your Maiesty giueth all men good leaue, to dispute of this Controuersy, by accounting the Protestants proofs but bare coniectures: yea promising to yield to the Truth, when it shalbe manifested by more forcible Argu∣ments, and more probable Interpretations; which we haue good cause of hope to see shortly performed, by the labours of so ma∣ny learned men of forraine Nations, who haue endeauored to giue your Maiesty satisfa∣ction in this kynd. In the meane space, we cannot but highly extoll this rare modesty in so great a Monarch; especially when we heare M. Powell, and other such vnlearned Vpstarts protesting with full mouth, that they know as certainly, that the Pope is the great Disput. de Antichr. in initio. Antichrist, as that God is in Heauen, and Iesus Christ
 our Sauiour, and Redeemer.
Certainely, it is strange, how any man could fall into a fit of such extreme, and im∣pudent madnes, were it not that God permit∣teth sometymes such excesse of malicious fol∣ly, for the reclayming of others misled and seduced by these erring guids and false Pro∣phets. In which respect I haue alway thought this Question very profitable, and of great importance, to omit how necessary the dis∣cussion thereof may proue sooner then we are aware, in regard of the true, and great Antichrist himselfe; whose comming we haue far more reason to expect in our dayes, then the Ancient Fathers had in theirs.
Thus the diuine Goodnesse alway tur∣neth euill into good, and maketh all things concurre to the welfare of his Elect; and by this strang paradox and calumniation, pre∣uenteth and prepareth vs against Antichrists comming, with an exact Discouery of his whole proceeding, and persecution: which whosoeuer considereth attentiuely, as it is layd downe in the sacred Scripture, and decla∣red by the holy Fathers, will easily perceaue that hitherto the chiefest signes, and notes of Antichrist haue not byn fulfilled by any. So
 that indeed there can be no doubt, or que∣stion, whether he himselfe be come; only some controuersy might be moued, which of his forerunners doth most resemble him.
And in this also the matter may easily be decided; for who seeth not, that the false Ma∣homet draweth nighest vnto him both in name and deedes? His name contayning the num∣ber 666. which is by S. Iohn assigned to Anti∣christ, and his impiety, enmity, and persecu∣tion against Christ, and Christians is notori∣ous to the whole world. For which cause there haue not wanted some, both Catholicks, and See Pee∣rius in Apoc. Protestants, who haue persuaded themselues, that there is no other Antichrist to be expe∣cted. But these are euidently confuted by ma∣ny inuincible arguments. Notwithstanding this their errour, though neuer so grosse, may seeme in some sort excusable because they im∣pugne a certayne, and manifest enemy.
But what shall we say of those who take their marke so much amisse, that they make the chiefe visible Pastour of Christs Church a member of Sathan, yea Antichrist himselfe? Can any thing be more absurd, or intollera∣ble? Is it possible, that any Christian would giue Luther the hearing, when his proud
 spirit of contention, and contradiction made him first breake forth into this open blasphe∣my? How did not Princes perceaue, that this was the high way to all rebellion? Could they conceaue or imagin, that Temporall Autho∣rity & Iurisdiction would be regarded, where the chiefest spirituall power vpon earth was thus impudently contemned, and trodden vnder foot? Can they trust to their Pedigrees, when they see the continuall succession of 1500. yeares so lightly esteemed? What bet∣ter Title can they pretend for themselues, then the expresse words of our Sauiour, with which he established S. Peter, and his Succes∣sors?
Your Maiesty wisely obserued, that vn∣lesse In the con∣ference at Hampton court. the Authority of Bishops were mayntai∣ned, that of Princes could not stand: No Bi∣shop, no King, saith your Maiesty. And cer∣taine it is, that no lawfull Bishop can be vp∣holden against the Popes Authority, to which all other spirituall Iurisdiction is subordinate. Can any Iudge or Magistrate of the Realme be independant of your Maiesty? This is so euident, that euen the Puritans themselues, though otherwise neuer so blinded with ma∣lice against the Pope, could not choose but see
 it. For which cause they stick not to protest to all the world, that if the Prelats haue the Truth (es∣pecially in this point) the Pope and the Church of Rome (and in them God, and Christ Iesus himselfe) haue great wrong and indignity offered vnto them, in In the Christian and modest offr &c. published anno 1606. pag. 16. that they are reiected, and that all the Protestant Churches are Schismaticall in forsaking vnity, and communion with them.
Thus then it plainely appeareth that the Protestants, neither according to the Truth it selfe, nor in the Puritans iudgment, can de∣fend themselues, & their pretended Bishops, but by establishing the Pope, and Roman Church. And all the vehemency which they vse against the Pope to proue him Antichrist, falleth vpon themselues, who participate with him in admitting the Hierarchy of Bishops. And as for other proofes proper to Puritans, they are inforced to answere them as well as we; yea most of all these Arguments be such; as might very easily be turned against any lawfull Prince whatsoeuer; and much more against such Protestant Princes, as besides their Temporall power make clayme to spiri∣tuall Iurisdiction. Let any discreet Reader re∣flect vpon all particulers, and he will easily discerne, that if Catholicks had byn no more
 moderate then Luther and other Protestants were, King Henry could not haue intitled himselfe Head of the Church in spirituall, and Eccle∣siasticall affayres, without hauing the name of Antichrist applyed, and appropriated vnto him. For if such contumelious inferences be made against the Pope in great part, because he is supposed (though falsly) to arrogate more to himselfe in Temporall affayres, then of right he ought; how much more would the same imputation fall vpon such a Prince, as did first vsurp spirituall Iurisdiction, without eyther example or other probable pretense?
But I will not vrge these odious inferen∣ces any further: your Maiesty will easily con∣ceaue how far this proiect might be pursued. And by perusing this small labour of myne, which I now offer to your Maiesty, it will manifestly appeare, that we haue euident, and inuincible Arguments taken out of Scri∣pture and all Antiquity, to free our chiefest Pastour, the Popes Holynes, from this most absurd and false calumniation: and that what∣soeuer any Protestant can answere to these our proofes, is without any difficulty ouer∣throwne, and confuted. As likewise their ray∣ling inuectiues, and friuolous obiections are
 presently dissolued, & returned vpon them∣selues. All which considered, I account it no presumption to be an humble Suppliant to your most Excellent Maiesty for some release and mitigation in the pressures, and persecu∣tions which Catholicks endure, vnder this pretence of the Popes being Antichrist.
For how can it possibly stand with iustice or reason, that a lawfull Prince should punish his loyall subiects for performing their duty to their spirituall and lawfull Pastour? That Rebells should vphold Hereticks, who are Traytors against God and his Church, it were no meruaile, since they all agree in the impu∣gnation of superiour powers. And yet it is too notorious to the world, what Catholicks suffer for their conscience in your Maiestyes Dominions? what losse of lyuings, & liberty, yea sometyme of life it selfe? How busy are Purseuants in ransacking their houses, abusing their seruants, and apprehending their per∣sons? What insolencyes and vexations are they constrayned to endure? And to omit the generality, and seuerity of this persecution, from which neither frailty of sex, nor band of matrimony, nor Nobility of birth can e∣xempt any; how many things lye hid and
 vnknowne, which would astonish and amaze the world if they were laid open to the view therof? What prying and inquiring into mens secret actions; in somuch that euen ordinary prouision for the sustenance of nature, can∣not be made without suspition of Treason, as appeared not long since by the pot of peares, which were supposed to haue bene balls of wildfyre. How many are beaten, and tormen∣ted euen to death in priuate houses, without any publick tryall? Some Prentises in the Cit∣ty of London can giue good testimony heerof.
I might adde such other particulers, as the rods kept in store by some of no small ac∣count, for yong youths vnder twenty yeares, whom they vse like schollers, thinking it not to be against their grauity to whip them pri∣uately with their owne hands. But I will not offend your Maiestyes eares with the reci∣tall of such base, and vnworthy actions. Only I will humbly beseech our Blessed Sauiour to moue your Maiestyes hart to take pitty and compassion of these abuses, by giuing present Order for the redresse, and reformation of so much, as your Maiestie already misliketh, which we hope to be the greatest part.
And for the rest, we only craue this fa∣uour,
 that we may be spared, vntill vve be heard: for vve nothing doubt, but that if your Maiesty vvould once resolue to informe your selfe thoroughly of the truth, God vvould not be vvanting to our iust desires, and to your Maiesties so Honourable and ne∣cessary endeauours.
GOD of his goodnes direct and protect your Maiesty. AMEN.

