



RIGHT HO:
AMONGST many wor∣thie, and true Pro∣fessors of the Gospel,

I haue presumed, and emboldened my self to dedicate this little book vnto your H. view, and although not worthy your ac∣ceptation, being not done scholler-like, yet for that good wil I beare vnto the truth, and for the truthes sake, I hum∣bly entreat your Ho∣nor to accept there∣of, and howsoeuer it may seeme distastfull

vnto all disobedient and vnsanctified spi∣rits, which haue, as Saint Iude saith, sepa∣rated themselues, yet vnto all faithful Chri∣stians which truely fight vnder the ban∣ner of Iesus Christ, I know that such will not onely accept my good will, but like∣wise louingly and thankfully bee rea∣dy to embrace my poore indeuors here∣in,

seeing that I haue kept my selfe, being guided by the Spirit of God, in that sancti∣fied place, of Christs Vineyard alone, and yet for all this I know that the malice and mischiefe of Sathan is such, that from all those haters of their brethren, who with hateful Esau, haue se∣parated themselues, & contemned their birth-right, I expect

no better gratuitie at their hands, then deadly hate and re∣uenge: and my rea∣son is this, because Grapes cannot grow vpon Thornes, nor Figs vpon Thistles. If that kingly Pro∣phet DAVID had great cause to com∣plaine of his times, how that his enemies were greatly multi∣plied, & his sorrowes much increased: by

how much more hath our most gracious King iust cause to complaine, seeing that Sathan now worketh after such a strange and most fearefull manner, by his wicked instru∣ments, as the like was neuer heard nor seen from the beginning of the world vntill this present time; of which times Saint Paul hath truely pro∣phesied,

should bee most perilous, & that this is true, who is he that liueth in our daies and seeth not, that prophesie, the which our blessed Sauiour fore-tolde should come to passe euen hard before his comming to Iudge∣ment, how that it is now by the children of disobedience most fearefully working amongst ys, that

is; how that the Sunne Mat. 24. 29. should be darkned, and the Moone should lose her light, how that the Starres should fall from Heauen, and the powers of heauen should be sha∣ken. Againe, who is he that doth but look Mat. 24. 21. about him, and like∣wise seeth not, how that those immediate tribulations, the which our blessed Sa∣uior foretold, should come to passe, euen

hard before these fearefull signes, are now alreadie fini∣shed, part of them in our late and gracious Queenes time of fa∣mous memorie, and likewise the rest of these tribulations be∣ing the greatest, in his Maiesties time, e∣specially since his Highnesse came a∣mongst vs? For who is hee that knoweth not, how that bloudy

Cain, that man of sin, would not haue left one Abel aliue, if that God himself had not stood in the gap, for vs? Now for these tri∣bulations, I doubt not, but that the very strengths of them are alreadie past, and that this most feare∣full plot of Gunpow∣der Treason, & what else was the very last shake of the glasse.
These and such like

persecutions and tri∣bulations, haue at all times, and in all ages displayed themselues against the poore de∣spised Church of CHRIST: but of all those engines which Sathan by his instru∣ments hath deuised, was neuer the like heard of as that fear∣full plot of Gunpow∣der, which they offe∣red to shake vs with∣all, and yet behold,

most worthy Sir, there is such a feare∣full shaking by the children of disobedi∣ence, now amongst vs, as for the time ne∣uer was, nor I hope neuer shall be, untill the day of iudgment, we haue but yet spo∣ken of the shaking of our mortall bodies.
But behold, and yee shall see further, how that Sathan by his sharpest & most hot

instruments, doth now shake the verie powers of heauen. For Iesus Christ who now sitteth in hea∣uen, hauing receiued all power from God his Father, is so sha∣ken at this present time, in his wounded members, that ex∣cept God of his infi∣nite mercy vnto his little Church, had ap∣pointed and ordai∣ned our most graci∣ous

King, as aspecial meanes to hinder Sa∣than in his progresse herein: I am verily perswaded, that ha∣uing preuailed so far alreadie as hee hath done, that if hemight but bee suffered to haue his intent fur∣ther, that according to our blessed Sa∣uiours speech, no flesh should bee sa∣ued: and there∣fore for this cause, I

most humbly craue vppon my bended knees, that as GOD by his mighty power and loue vnspeake∣able vnto his church, hath so often stood in the gap against the power of Sathan, and his most wicked in∣struments, to deliuer his Sacred Maiestie from so many emi∣nent dangers, that now at last it would please his Grace, in

some recompence of so many and vn-vtte∣rable great fauours, receiued, to stand once more in the gap for him, then as we haue had alwaies iust cause, our com∣forts beeing increa∣sed, and our spirits further emboldned, to cry still from the bottom of our harts, with heartie teares of repentance, vnto the Lord of Hosts, that as

hee hath so many se∣uerall times miracu∣lously defended, and protected his Maie∣sty: so it would please him still for the great honor of his Name, and the great com∣fort and good of his Church, to defend & protect him still vn∣der the shadow of his wings, and not onely himselfe, but likewise our most gracious Queene, with that

most blessed and hopefull Progenie, that it wold so please him, to protect them all in safetie & peace, that neither the wild Bore of the Forrest, nor Esau this most wicked hunter, which hunteth cruelly with∣in this English Pale, may euer preuaile, or take any further roo∣ting herein: and here once againe, let no man bee offended,

that seeing this vnna∣turall brother hath not only broken that vnion, which should bee amongst Christs members, and so fal∣len from Christ him∣selfe, but doth like∣wise dayly withdraw infinite multitudes, by his life & doctrin, to become deadly haters of their bre∣thren, in so much that loue & charitie hath lost her sight: there∣fore

still vpon my bended knees, I most humbly craue, that seeing the Lord of heauen and earth is by them so greatly dishonored, it would please his sacred Ma∣iestie, to stop the pas∣sage of these violent Hunts-men, which wilfully spoile and destroy the game: Then according to our blessed Sauiours speech, that last signe

of the Sonne of Man immediately before his last comming to Iudgement, shall more cleerely ap∣peare, amongst the clouds; then shall there bee such cause of reioycing, as mee∣ting Iesus Christ our Redeemer, we shall reioyce with him for euermore.
Our blessed Saui∣our saith; Hee that is not with mee, is against

mee, Mat. 12. 30. And Saint Iohn saith, There are many Antichriss, whereby we know that it is the last time, I. Ioh. 2. 18. & in the begin∣ning of the next verse, he saith, They went from vs, but they were not of vs. Now if any would know, who these specially are which are against CHRIST; and so as Saint Iohn saith, be∣come Antichrists:

Saint Paul, Saint Pe∣ter, and Saint Iude, prophesying of these last times, plainely describe, and haue set them down by their qualities and condi∣tions, all agreeing as it were with one consent saying, that they are spirits of dis∣obedience, as appea∣reth in the thirteenth to the Romans and se∣cond verse, and in the second of Peter,

the second Chapter and the tenth verse: And in Iudes Epistle the eighth Verse. Now Saint Iude go∣eth on farther, agree∣ing with Saint Iohns words, and saith in the nineteenth verse, that they haue sepa∣rated themselues; vp∣on which words of these two blessed A∣postles, Saint Iohn, and Saint Iude, I ga∣ther and finde, that

there is no sect vn∣der the whole cope of heauen, which can so iustly deserue the title of this seuered imputation, as this Sect now resident amongst vs, com∣monly called Puri∣tanes. For although the Pope of Rome is not onely a disobe∣dient spirit, but like∣wise deserueth the highest roome a∣mongst the Anti∣christs,

yet to say properly, hee is gone from vs, would but proue an improper speech, because hee neuer was of vs: now for this our elder brother, it may true∣ly and properly bee said, how that hee is gone from vs, for a∣greeing in this word onely in Christ, may truely be said, that he was of vs. Now the question is how and

why he is gone from vs, but the question is needelesse. For who seeth not how that vaine glory and the very darknesse of his owne conceite hath so bewitched him, that as Saint Paul saith, hee hath but a shew of godli∣nesse, denying the power therof: 2. Tim. 3. 5. that as the dogge who had the sub∣stance but in his

mouth, seeing the shaddow in the wa∣ter, snatcht thereat, and solost both; euen so hath he done: for hauing the substance no lowersettled then in his mouth, spying some outward obser∣uations in that wate∣rie ayre of his owne conceit, hath leaped thereat so farre from Christ, that accord∣ing to the Prophet Esayes speech, who

saith, They come neere mee with their mouth, and honour mee with their lips, but their heart is farre from mee, Esai. 29. 13. So that like hatefull Esau, ha∣uing sold his birth∣right for meere vani∣tie, Gen. 25. 4. is now become such a dis∣obedient spirit, and so fleshly minded, as Saint Peter, and Saint Iude saith, 2. Pet. 2. 10. that he is not afraid,

to speake euil of dig∣nities, and despise Dominion, Iude the eight verse, who re∣sisting power as Saint Paul saith, re∣sisteth the ordinance ordained of God, Rom. 13. 2. So that it may be gathered by these blessed Apo∣stles, and finding it true by wofull expe∣rience, that as Saint Iohn, and Saint Iude say, he being gone

from vs, in separating himselfe, is now be∣come such a sect, that who seeth not, how that both by his life & doctrine, hee doth nothing else, but breake that vnion which ought to bee betwixt the mem∣bers of Christ? so that it may most truely bee said of him, and al the rest of this sect especially, that ac∣cording to S. Iudes

words, They are be∣come but wandring Starres, Iude verse 13. being as our blessed Sauiour saith, Starres fallen from heauen, Mat. 24. 29. who resting themselues in their owne imagina∣tions, may truely be said to fall from Christ. Who hath by their disobedient practice, & euill con∣uersation darkened the Gospel, ment by

the Sunne, and like∣wise smothered loue ment by the Moone, who with their accu∣sing and condem∣ning Iudgements in their doctrin against the wounded mem∣bers of Christ, cause the very powers of Heauen to shake, This interpretation was reueiled vnto mee by the Spirit of God: I am no Schol∣ler at all, as your Ho∣nour

knoweth, and therefore not fit to diue into these secret mysteries: I am only a poore man, but yet not destitute of Gods Spirit, euen on whom that old pro∣uerbe is fallen,
None so we begone,
As first a man, and then none.
And therefore be∣ing in my priuate chamber, musing of the causes of the sin∣fulnesse

of this age, many things came into my minde, and amongst the rest, I was induced to write, and yet not knowing what to write, the spirit sug∣gested these things vnto mee, the which I haue presumed to offer vnto your Ho∣nours view; and al∣though vnworthy, to present such a weake thing vnto your iudi∣cious

eye, yet for his cause who hath em∣boldned me, I hum∣bly intreat and craue your honourable fa∣uor, but to cast your eye thereon, where∣in nothing can bee found, but the in∣struments of Sathan stil prosecuting their owne imaginations, in persecuting the poore and despised members of IESVS CHRIST, who by

their life & doctrine Gods Name is so greatly dishonored, and loue and chari∣tie so smothered, that the Kingdome of Christ is hindered, both in particular, and in general: but as that worthy Apostle Saint Paul faith, Their madnesse beeing now e∣uidently knowne vnto all men, I hope they shal preuaile no longer: 2. Tim. 3. 9. And thus

may your Honour see, and the whole world perceiue, how that God who sitteth aboue, hath alreadie decreed, that in de∣spite of Pope & Pu∣ritan, and all the rest which withstand Ie∣sus Christ & his An∣ointed, that his Ma∣iestie who loueth peace, shall by Gods protection liue a peaceable time a∣mongst vs, and as he

hath protected and deliuered him from many dangers, will continue his loue vnto him and his, and keepe them safe vnder the shaddow of his wings, and hereafter will that God of peace carrie him by his blessed Angels into euer∣lasting peace: vnto which peace, God of his infinite mercie, bring both you and

yours, for his honour and blessed names sake. Amen.
I most humbly take my leaue, and rest at your Honors command,
IOHN WALKER.
