



RIGHT HONOVRABLE,
IN the vision of Ezechiel, there was rota in rotâ; One wheele, within another: my desire is, there may be here, ala in alâ; One wing, within another: (or rather indeed) one wing, vpon another: the wings of these Seraphins, within the wings of your protection: and the wings of your protection, vpon the wings of these Seraphins. For as in the Tabernacle, the faces of the Cherubins, looked towards
 the seate of Mercie: So do the faces of these Seraphins, looke towards the Seate and Sea of your Honourable fauour and gracious pietie. Stories write of FORTVNE, and VICTORIE, that when they came from MACEDONIA, and coasted towards ROME, they put off their wings, and layd them downe, as if they would go no further. What are these winged tracts and fea∣thered writings, but in the Prophets phrase, liber volans? In the Poets language, ? If once they come into your Honours pre∣sence, they will leaue their wings, and seeke no other Patronage. When they first sounded in the aire, for the most part, you gaue them audience. Now they first come to the light, vouchsafe them countenance; and let them euer glorie, in his name, that sits like an Angell, in the Church of God: and doth most truly verifie, the cha∣racter of Athanasius; who was said to bee, : Of an heauenly, and Angelicall presence: of a more heauenly and Angelicall vnderstanding. God forbid, I should dip my pen in oyle, or mingle honie with my sacrifice; as one that would en∣chant your eares, with the Syrens language, of demulcent vanities: Church and State, Altars
 and Tribunals, haue witnessed the Nobilitie of your Soule, and quit me of that suspicion: whose diffusiue goodnesse many haue found, and do iustly honour. Augustine writes, of that good Father Ambrose, that his breast was Sanctū Dei Oraculum, an heauenly Oracle, from whence God spake. There is none almost so igno∣rant, of your diuine Excellence, but is readie to make the Parallel: and we reade of the same Fa∣ther in his life by Costerius, that he was neuer aduanced to any gouernment in the Church, though neuer so powerfull and sublime, quin ampliore dignus haberetur, but that he see∣med worthie of a greater: Such is the worlds o∣pinion of your rare VVorth, and Senatorian E∣minencie; though you begin with Hilarion, in Saint Hierome, Calcare mundi gloriam, To contemne and trample vpon the outward Pompe of humane glorie. I haue not least rea∣son, though I am least able to do your Lordship seruice, and therefore as your fauours towards mee, haue bene like the Graces in Seneca, Virgines, pure, and chaste Virgines; not vio∣lated, or depraued with the least touch, or thought of corruption: So must they be euer Iuvenes, greene and flourishing, lest at any time they die,
 and perish through vnthankfulnesse, or obliuion.
It is my wish, that I had some lasting monu∣ment, of Art, and Wit; more durable then brasse or marble, to engraue the memorie of your Sacred and Diuine merits: that you might not onely be chartaceus or parietarius; but Cedrinus and Marmorarius, or that which comes nearest to eternitie. Well may you challenge the learnedst pen, since your Diamond-pointed quill taken from some Angels wing, hath giuen a kind of immor∣talitie to the learnedst, and best of Kings, our late SOVERAIGNE, of most pretious and bles∣sed memorie. But what can you expect of him, that is but , (as Saint Basil writes of himselfe) one of those ancient fisher-mens dis∣ciples? All that my Tree beares, is but fruite of this kind, wherein your Lordship most abounds. Yet am I encouraged by that of the Epigram∣matist,
Iupiter Ambrosiâ satur est, & Nectare viuit:
Nos tamen, exta Ioui, thura, merum{que} damus. to waite behind, at your Honours feete, with the poore Oblation of this worthlesse mite: and to draw you a while (as Bernard did Eugenius) ab amplexibus Rahelis, from the care, and exercise of publike administrations. If there be
 small good in the Tree, there is much in the Bush: and therefore lest I should be ouer-trou∣blesome, to Moses talking with God in the mount; I end with Iacobs beneplacitum. The good will of him that dwelt in the bush, rest vpon the top and flower of your sacred and diuine Excellence.

