



HONOVRABLE SYR,
IF I be accused of indiscretion for publishing this Treatise, which may seeme needles: yet I hope to be accounted either happy or prudent in finding so worthy a Patron to so simple an Orphan, which I destinated vnto your HONOVR, when you

were lately heere in this Courte of SPAINE, from whence I now send it to follow his good fortunes vnder the protection & acceptance which then it pleased you to promise him. Also it comes vnto your HONOVR in a double duty, acknowledging both those Titles, for which commonly all Authors doo seeke Patrons vnto their Bookes: to wit, either for the manifest excellent Dignities of the Protectors, whose fauour is sufficient to giue them courage against malice▪ or els for certayn pri∣uate Duties & Respectes wherin the writer is obliged vnto his Patron to shew some thankfullnes.
In both these Rightes I do heerin send nothing but your owne iust Due, and my humble Duty; intreating you by acceptance to giue life & comforte both to this Booke, & to the Author, who relyeth on your accustomed fa∣uours, and among diuers others doth beare himselfe bold vpon your former Curtesyes. And surely he were extremely fearfull whosoeuer shoulde shew himselfe a Coward vnder the assurance & protectiō of so Honorable, so Noble, so Valorous, so Ancient, so Religious, and so Expert a Commāder, as Syr William Stanley, whose name hath pre∣sent renowne in all Christendome, and his memory will be famous to all posterity. All his vertues are so bright that I knowe no malice which dare barke against them: or if any slaunderers do reproache him, yet for him that saying of A. Gellius may be a sufficient defence: Numquam vir bonus veriùs laudatur, quàm cùm à malis vi∣tuperatur.

A good man is neuer more truly praysed, then when by euill men he is reproached; for indeed such mens wordes are no slaunders, and it is an euident signe of vertue to be maligned by the vicious.
In Religion he is a Catholique, as his Ancestors haue bene: and herein so zealous, strict, and deuout, that some do well resemble him to the good Centurion (whose seruant our Sauiour healed) for his Humility, Faith, O∣bedience, and Gouernement. Others do accounte him a∣nother Cornelius, for his feruorous Prayers, many Almes-deedes, and continuall Hospitality. And besides all these, I do esteeme him a second Ioseph of Arimathia, principally for his notable Deuotion vnto the most holy Sacrament of the Altar, which is the same Body of our Sauiour Christ taken downe from the Crosse, embalmed and bu∣ryed in the new sepulcher of our garden, when with a cleane, new, sweet conscience we receiue the blessed Communion, applying to our soules therby the merits of our Sauiours Passion, and embalming his most pre∣cious body with the odours of our good workes perfor∣med in his grace.
Neither is he vnlike the same Ioseph in Honorable Au∣thority, or in Nobility of birth, being regarded for both of thē as a principall man, not only amōg his owne Na∣tion, but euen among Strangers. As for the one, I call to witnesse the Ancyent and Present Noble Earles of Der∣by, of which renowned Family he is a true Stanley, an

Honour to his Name, and the glory of his House. Next for the other, I appeale vnto the testimonyes of Spani∣ardes, French, Dutch, Italians, Germans, Scottish, Irish; and euen to the Hollanders his Enemyes, who haue often seene or heard for certain the vndoubted tryal of his Prowesse: in so much that all sortes do no lesse acknowledge him Honourable for his Desertes, then for his Dignityes, as a man worthy of high place in Commaund and Counsell. Noble in his Nature, besides his birth: Valourous in the Feild, or at a Fort: in defending like a strōg Sheild, & like a sharp Sword in assaulting; and so in both like Fabius & Marcellus conjoyned, wherof the one was called the Buck∣ler and the other the Sword of the Romans, against Hani∣bal.
And furthermore in all these so happy, that he hath liued to be Old and Ancyent in yeares, hauing passed ma∣ny perills; and so blessed of Allmighty God, whom he hath serued with such Deuotion, that he neuer yet tooke any foyle, or suffred disgrace whersoeuer he had any Cō∣maunde: and Time was, when if his Counsell had bene followed, the Enemy had bene more fully defeated, or vtterly ruyned.
Wherfore lastly I may conclude, that he is an Experte Warriour, because he is so Ancyent in his art, and so hap∣py in his successe, wherin although fortune many times for our sinnes do fayle the Valiant; yet neuer did any at∣cheiue a lucky enterprise who was not also Prudent. And

so I affirme his Merites and his Memory to be so notable, and so durable, that as of Cato it was sayd, He shall need no Statua, nor any Graue-stone, wherin to continue or engraue his Heroycall Name; but rather if he should want any such Monument or other rewarde, as of the same Cato, so of him it will better be said. Why hath Memorable Stanley so lit∣tle, when others haue so much? For it is a more glorious fame to haue had excellent great merites with a small monu∣ment; then to haue exceeding rich Tropheys for some poore desertes.
And these thinges, HONOVRABLE SYR, I haue spoken in a third person of you, rather then vnto you; as in your absence, not before your face: because I knowe you loue not to heare your owne prayses, how True, Iust, or Due soeuer they be: & yet because they are your Due, Iust, & True Ensi∣gnes of Honour, according to the custome of most E∣pistles Dedicatory, I am bound to display them in the forefront of this Bookes array: for the encouragement of freindes, for the terror of foes, because the Hono∣rable Vertues of the Patron are the comfort & safegarde of the Suppliant.
Wherfore I humbly beseech you to haue patience for these intentes to endure the rude rehearsall of your prayses, wherso you may take these deformed lineamen∣tes, rather for a mortification then any commendation, by viewing your glorious colours blotted by my pen,

which otherwise are sufficient to frame a most comely picture by the hand of skill. But I intreate you to pardon my playne boldnes; to accept my willing seruice; to in∣tertayn these paper leaues into your Patronage; to fauour them your selfe; to further them with others; and if by them any good redound to any soules, my desire is that God may haue the glory, & you the thankes, and that I may sometime be remembred in your deuout prayers: assuring your Honour (as I am bound) neuer to omit you in my poore supplications. And so I beseech our Lord Iesus to keep you, and all yours, for his owne precious merites, and by the intercession of our blessed Lady, and of all holy Sayntes, and in particuler of S. Valentine Priest and Martyr, on whose festiuall day I wrote this, 
from Valliadolide the 14. of February. 1612. 
