



I Should labour much in my
excuse, euen to mine owne
iudgement, of the highest
boldnesse, in daring to present
these Papers to your Highnes,
if there were not some releeuing circum∣stances,
that giue mee hope, it shall not
be disagreeable to your higher goodnesse.
There is nothing can see the light, which
hath the name of Spaine in it, which seemes

not now properly yours, euer since it plea∣sed
you to honor that Countrie with your
presence. And those very Motiues to the
Romane obedience, which had beene re∣presented
vnto you there, in case you had
giuen way to the propounding them, are
in these Letters charitably and calmly exa∣mined.
Betweene a couple of friends, bred
in the same Colledge (that of the founda∣tion
of Sir WALTER MILDMAY of
blessed memorie, whom with honor and
thankfulnesse I name) chosen his Schollers
at the same election, lodged in the same
Chamber, after Ministers in the same Dio∣cesse.
And that they might bee matchable
abroad as well as at home, attendants in the
same ranke as Chaplaines, on two Hono∣rable
Ambassadors of the Majestie of the
King your Father in forraine parts; the one
in Italie, the other in Spaine. Where, one
of them hauing changed his profession,
and receiued a pension out of the holy In∣quisition
house, and drawne his wife and
children thither, was lately often in the
eyes of your Highnesse: very ioyfull I sup∣pose
to see you there, not more I am sure,

then the other was solicitous to misse you
here. These passages betweene vs I haue
hitherto forborn to divulge, out of the hope
of further answer from Master Wadesworth
according to his promise; though since
the receipt of my last (being silent to my
selfe) he excused him in sundrie his Letters
to others by his lack of health. Nor should
I haue changed my resolution, but that I
vnderstand that presently after your High∣nesse
departure from Spaine, hee departed
this life. Which newes though it grieue
me as it ought in respect of the losse of my
friend, yet it somewhat contenteth me, not
to haue beene lacking in my endeauour, to
the vndeceiuing a well-meaning man tou∣ching
the state of our differences in Reli∣gion;
nor as I hope to haue scandalized him
in the manner of handling them. And con∣ceiuing
these Copies may be of some pub∣like
vse, the more being lited vp aboue their
owne meannesse by so high patronage, I
haue aduentured to prefixe your Highnesse
name before them. Humbly beseeching
the same, that if these reasons be too weake
to beare vp the presumption of this Dedica∣tion,

it may bee charged vpon the strong
desire some way to expresse the vnspeake∣able
joy for your Highnesse happy
returne into England, of one
amongst many thou∣sands,

