



RIGHT Honorable, I was longe in a strange debate with my selfe, whether it were best for me to write some thing in excuse of this slacke performance of my promise made vnto your Lordship now more then a yeare past, for the speedie translation of VVageners two bookes of Nauigation; or simplie to present it vnto your L. leauing all excuse apart, as that negligent seruant of Athens, in Plutarch, who in a cloudie day being sent home in hast for his maisters cloake, went therwith directly to Rome, from whence about a yeare after returning and watching when his maister was abroad in a great shower, came running as though he had been but then sent, & cast the cloake on his maisters backe, saying, Sat citò si satis oportunè. Though this might somwhat fit my purpose, & was verie well taken for the time as a sufficient satisfaction for the offence committed: yet in my conceite, it can not be thought but a very vndutifull and reprouable part. And therefore I choose rather (as in duetie it becometh) hum∣blie to beseech your L. pardon, then to borrow any shift or colour to shadow my default: with assured hope (not∣withstanding) that as I was willyng to commit the errour, in taking vppon me a matter so far beyonde my reache: So your L. wilbe pleased to giue eare vnto such honest reasons as may make way for mine excuse in your L. graue iudgement. I must then plainly and simplie confesse that I no sooner vnder-took this woork then mistook it, not considering what perfect knowledge, proper termes and peculier phrases are necessarilie and inseperablie incident to the true interpretation of any Mechanicall science, much more to this notable art of Hidrographie or Nauigation: the want whereof did driue me to reade many bookes, and to confer with such as either for their knowledge or ex∣perience could any wayes further mine intent. But as it chaunceth to busie Builders desirous to excell the Modell, not forecasting such accidents as might interrupt my purpose, I was likewise much deceaued euen in the estimate of my labour, time, and charge of the compassyng of my dessein: For by reason of my dayly attendance on your L. and the rest of my Lordes of her Maiesties most Honorable priuie counsell, I was forced to take such time for this worke, as I could, by stealth, both for the translation it self, and for the ouer-seeyng of the negligent grauers: besides many o∣ther my particuler and priuate lets. Howbeit I may assure, that (except som errours in the printing) there is herein performed the part of a faithfull interpretour: and (be it spoken without preiudice to the Aucthour) by the aduise of the best experienced, haue in many places amended and bettered him: Besides the fit application of the Ta∣bles to the English stile and Calculation, explaned with diuers familier examples. Moreouer in most of the Plots, the Sea is purposly left in blanc, because the Traueiler, finding perchance some poynt of the Compasse, risings of Lands, Depths, Soundings, or ought els mistaken; or some Rock, Sand, or other danger left out, or not rightly ex∣pressed (for nothing so perfect but hath his fault) may as he traueileth set downe and correct the same with his owne hand, as it shall best like himselfe: which doubtles wilbe no smale furtherance and contentment euen to the best Docters in this science. In this translation I haue indeuored by all meanes (which in this and all other arts ought to be vsed) to imitate the plainest stile and common manner of speeche, as easiest to be vnderstood of all sorts of men.
But concerning the goodly science of Hidrographie how worthie of all praise it is, both in it self and in respect of the fruits thereof, as it hath heretofore appeared by Histories of time and testimonies of men: so of late hath it shined most brightlie since our most famous traueilours (to their endlesse renowne and honour of their countrie) haue aduentured the discouerie of diuers vnknown coasts: and by the singuler assistance of the Almightie God, haue com∣passed the Globe of the whole earth: wherby (no doubt) many excellent wits haue by their manifold experiences & ob∣seruations contriued one perfect art: in so much as, me thincketh, there is ministred very great reason to prefer it be∣fore all other arts or sciences whatsoeuer. For to omit those commen commendations wherewith Gorgias and Protagoras weare wont to garnish all artes, pleasant for knowledge, profitable for practise, necessarie for life: this hauing an excellent aboundance of all these, with many other rare and peculier vertues all redounding by the vse and
 practise thereof, to the publick benefit of the whole body of the common wealth, and eache particuler member in the same, hath been not only, as an Eliphāt, ten yeres in breeding, but euen as much time as the world hath yet stood to come to perfection. The first inuention wherof, furthered with the artificial aid of many a hidden, strange and almost super∣natural deuise, since added to the same by the most studious trauillour and industrious Mathematician, He that would throughly consider, should find matter rather myraculous to wonder at, then to be thought compassable within the reach of mans Capacitie: yea he may in this as in a mirrour, behold the inestimable bountie and infinite goodnesse of God, who, of his vnspeakable loue towards man kinde, which in his secreat wisedome he had determined for the main∣tenance and releef of humane societie, hath from aboue powred this excellent skill and knowledge into the mindes of men, onelie thereby to haue his wonderfull workes knowne, his praises published, and his holie name from one nation to another glorified.
But what do I seeme to enter into the perticuler praise of this art, seing things of greatest profit are set forth with least price: where the matter it self carieth credit, the man with his comment gaineth smale commendation. It should be therfore, me thinketh, a greater shew of a pregnant wit then perfect iudgement, with affected eloquence to commend this art, or to expresse how necessarie the perfect knowledge therof were for all nations.
Yet if this peereles misterie be of such excellent desert, and high accompt to al the rest of the world, it must needs be most beneficiall and acceptable vnto this our natiue countrie, not only for that it is an Island, and that, one of the most famous in all the world, liyng, as it weare a Triangle, in the great Ocean, enuironed with most dangerous waues, Races, Sands, Rocks and Shoalds; and hauing a people naturally apt and geuen to Seafaring: Besides many other necessarie and politicall reasons: But for that it is the holy Sanctuarie, and (almost) only refuge for the afflicted: & the blessed seat of her Sacred Maiestie: whose incomparable and diuine vertue, the enemies of God and man do most maliciously enuie: and incessantly seek by all diuelish deuises & practises whatsoeuer to bereaue vs of, as of a most pre∣cious Iuell; which all true Christians esteeme of far greater worth and valew, then all the Indian riches.
Wherefore I cannot but perswade my self, but as their raging mallice doth daylie increase and come to height, so the means of our defence in this skill shall still be multiplied. And albeit your L. commandment and charge geuen me to translate these books, hath manifested your zeale and affection for this common good: yet in mine opinion it hath more highly commended and aduaunced the work it self, in that your Honorable approbation hath credited and au∣ctorized it. For if the Geometritians triumph, of that Oracle which Appollo gaue to the inhabitants of Delos, as∣king counsell at his mouth for remedie of their plague: that they should double his cubick Altar: which Plato con∣strued, that they must studie Geometrie: How much more ought all such as trauaill by Sea, and especially our Eng∣lish Mariners, reioyce and resolue them-selues of the worthinesse of this woork: and hereby (no doubt) haue no lesse cause dulie and daylie to pray for you by sea, then an infinit number of others her Maiesties good subiects, for your bountie, pietie, and Iustice vprightly ministred do zealously by lande.
As for the vnskilfulnesse in handling hereof, I haue no other meanes to couer it, but as the Poet Accius did his shortnes, who being a person of a verie lowe stature, pourtraied for himself a verie tall picture: so I, being but of smale desert, haue gotten me a most honorable & worthy patron. Following herein Teucer, who thought himself salf vnder the shield of Aiax: protesting, that, as by the daily most comfortable testimonies of your especiall fauour and goodnes towards mee, I am aboue all men liuing most bounden to you. So do I acknowledge mee your onlie owne, and do vtterly disclayme of any maner interest in my self: which, with this; and ought els within the compasse of my litle power whatsoeuer; I humblie offer vp vnto your L. as a pledge of my most dewtifull and faithful affection to you & yours. And thus all together vnable to satisfie my self in sufficiently expressing my thankfull minde and loyall hart, with my feruent prayer I commit the rest to be supplied by the giuer of all goodnesse, whom I most humbly beseeche bountifully to reward your L. with increase of Honour and all happines, in this world, and after a longe race heroi∣cally run, a crowne of euerlasting honour.
From the Court at S. Iames.
20. Octob: 1588.

