


IT is an olde custome, and confirmed by examples of holy Fa∣thers that the professours of good Artes and learning, vse to dedicate the fruites of theyr studyes, eyther to theyr friendes, or to men of honour and authoritie, whereby to procure eyther their fauour and good wyll, or else to make them defenders of their labours and paynes. And where∣as I haue thought good (most honourable Lordes and fathers) to de∣dicate my labors vpon the Actes of the Apostles chiefly vnto you: many and weightie causes haue mooued me therevnto. For priuately your li∣beralitie towarde mee, required the same, and publikely the continuall care that you haue to profite your countrey, and religion in generall, en∣forced me to shew myne alleageance & good hart, towards you, with some dutie of gratitude & thankfulnesse. Wherby that feruent desire that you beare vnto godlinesse might be set forth with the publike testimonie of our Church, whose example now many yeres, diuers excellent states of common weales, haue not bene ashamed to ymitate. Howbeit, to tell you the playne truth, the chiefe cause of this my dooyng was, for that I perceyued the matter of this booke, and the conside∣ration therof appertayned vnto you principally: For in this boke is conteyned, a most absolute paterne and forme of Christes vniuersall Church, which it behooueth all such as are in authoritie & beare rule, well to knowe and vnderstande. For those men that say temporall magistrates haue nothing to doe but with temporall matters, and woulde haue them vtterlye to abstaine from entermedling in ecclesiasti∣call affayres, are in no wyse to be regarded? which men seeme to mee to be of opinion, that they would haue common weales exempt from Gods prouidence, without the which the verye Gentyles per∣ceyued they coulde not stande or be preserued. And who knoweth not that sentence of the Godly and princely Prophete: Except the Lorde keepe the citie, the watcheman waketh but in vayne. Which also exhorteth kings and Princes to suffer themselues to be instructed in the word of God, and to kisse and reuerence Iesus Christ the sonne of God. But to what ende should kings be taught the word, if there be no vse of the same, in the administration of the common weale? And howe shall they kisse or reue∣rence Christ, if they neglect his Church, which he esteemeth dearer than the apple of his eye, yea, than his life? And how can they neglect that body, whereof if they be not members vnder Christ their head, they can not be saued? We must hearken rather vnto Esaias, who prophecying of Christes Church, amonge other thinges sayth. Kinges and Queenes shall be thy Nurrices. In which wordes, he seemeth not so much to comfort the Church as to sette foorth the office and dignitie of Kinges and Rulers, which chiefly appeareth in this, that God doth vouchsafe to commit vnto them the care of his Church, which he hath redemed with the bloud of his sonne. In dede we must confesse that God hath herein no neede of mans helpe, if he would vse his absolute & perelesse power. Neyther deny we that many times Churches are increased and defended rather by the power and vnspeakeable councell of God, than by the industrie of man. But this commeth not so to passe bicause God disalloweth the care and dutie of Magistrates, but that it might appeare howe all prayse and glorie, is to be ascribed to him onely, bicause no man should thinke religion depended more vppon the will of man, than vppon Gods proui∣dence. In the meane season such is the goodnesse of God, that he doth vouchsafe to take men to be hys coadiutors & helpers, by their ministery to regenerate his elect people through the word, & defendeth the same vnder godly magistrates, against ye rage of this world, in the midle of present daungers on euery side, that they may liue in peace & rest, as farre forth as is conuenient for their faith and saluation. And that this is the will of God, not only the scriptures testifie, but the whole consent of all nations doth likewise proue ye same. Certes in that golden world of the Patriarkes, we read that one man was both king and priest. But when God afterward vnder the law would haue these offices seuered, yet ordey∣ned he a great coniunction and amitie betweene the kinges and priestes, least eyther the kings shoulde reigne without religion, or the Priestes by them not cared for, and regarded, might at the plea∣sure of wicked men bee misused. Wherevnto also maye be referred, howe God when he first gaue his lawe vnto the Iewes, chose Moses and Aaron, which were brothers germaine, & committed to the one the charge of the Tabernacle, and Gods whole seruice, and to the other, the ordering of the common weale: therby teaching vs that then both Churches and common weales are in most safetye, when bro∣therly concord and agreement is betweene both these administrations. This thing all those iudges and kinges well perceyued, which are commended in the Scriptures for their well gouerning the common wealth. Such as we reade chiefly, Gedeon, Samuel, Dauid, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Iosias were, with whome, if a man would compare the residue that the holy ghost, hath noted as naught, he shall find this to bee the cause as well of priuate, as publike calamitie, that they haue thought the worde of GOD,

and care of religion, hath eyther nothing belonged vnto them, or else that they might dallye and playe with the same at their pleasure. And if we will reade the Hystoryes of the Gentyles, it shall ap∣peare they were woonderfullye deceyued in the knowledge of the true GOD, and that therefore they polluted the seruice of God with horrible errours. And yet they firmelye helde this as a generall rule and principle, that common weales coulde not be happely gouerned without the true worshippe of God, and knowledge of his will, which was the cause that they greatly reuerenced the Philoso∣phers, as professours of rare and singuler wisedome, and in doubtfull affayres asked counsell at the Gods, and in erecting of Temples, Altars, and Images to them, spared no kinde of lauishe, and cost. Uerilye the people of Athens, whose Citie was compted as a publike vniuerstie and schoole of wisedome, so thought the care of religion belonged vnto them, that amonge the articles of publike othe ministred to their Citizens, this was the chiefe. . That is to say, for the Temples and seruice of the Coddes, I will fight both alone and in company. These menne thought that whosoeuer were desirous eyther of publike peace or priuate thryft, ought to haue a speciall regarde of Gods honor. Let no man therefore accuse me of temeritie, if I saye, that such are destitute of common sense, and blinder than the prophane Gentyles, which crie out, the care of the Churche and religion, belongeth not to temporall Magi∣strates and rulers. And I thinke I shall not do much amisse, if I say that such are to be auoided, as the publike and open enimies of mankind. For take away religion from man, and what shal remaine wher∣in he shall differ from the brute beasts▪ we see in them like motions of affections, as are in wild beasts. And if they were not bridled with the feeling of religion, they woulde burst out at euerye occasion, and the more they are armed with authoritie, and with the sword, the more harme they woulde doe. Ther∣fore that we offende not through the bolde and preposterous wisedome of the flesh, it shall be verie pro∣fitable to haue a true paterne and forme of a Church for men, to follow in their Councels, that desire eyther to mainteyne the Church, or else to reforme it being fallen in decay. This paterne the holy scrip∣tures in euerie place set out vnto vs, and while the lawe endured, it did set forth vnto vs all the partes thereof vnder the figure of the Tabernacle, and in the time of the Prophetes, vnder the allegorie of a spouse, a flocke, a vineyarde, the Temple and Citie of Ierusalem. A most absolute and euident paterne or President of the Church, this booke comprehendeth, and setteth foorth vnto vs, declaryng that the same so grewe and increased, as the Prophetes once described it vnto vs, bicause none shall saye that we still had in our mouth such a Church, as neyther was euer vpon the earth, or euer shall bee, as wise men vsed sometymes to saye of Plato his common weale. For although wee shall hereafter see the accomplishment and full perfection of the church in heauen: yet doth this booke set before vs such a pre∣sident therof, that whosoeuer frame themselues thereafter, shall be members of that heauenly and per∣fite church, and shall also vnderstand what way is best to take in preseruing and reforming their Chur∣ches, and shall be offended at no chaunces of aduersitie, nor yeelde to the dreames of such as obtrude vnto vs a straunge forme of Church, saying, our predecessours wanted many things, which holye fa∣thers afterwarde ordeyned, and were receyued and established by authoritie of generall Councels. For where this booke conteyneth in it an Hystorie of about .xxvij. yeares, settyng out vnto vs the Actes done in the Church ouer all the worlde, besides the sermons of the Apostles, their Counselles, their sayings and doyngs, aswell publike as priuate, opened in a plaine and sufficient narration or discourse: who will not say but hee is impudent, that will affirme there are diuers other thinges necessarie vnto saluation, which wee knowe the true Christian Church in the Apostles tyme had not. Furthermore, what arrogancie were it to contende with the Apostles, whome the sonne of God appoynted to bee the teachers of all the worlde, and to be witnesses of his doings, as though wee were able of our selues to inuent or deuise a more absolute and perfite thing than they? It shall also be very profitable, to marke the trade and order of this Primitiue Church, as out at a loupe, or creuise, and the chiefe poyntes thereof, which Luke sayth, sprang first of the word of God, after Christ was ascended into heauen, and from thence had sent his holy spirite, through whose inspiration, the Apostles beganne to preach the Gospell vnto the worlde, and to bring disciples or beleeuers vnto Christ. Wherevppon wee gather that they which either will be members of Christes Church their selues, or bring other to the com∣munion and felowshippe thereof, must beginne with the wholesome doctrine of the worde of God. For where by byrth we are the children of wrath, wee must needes be regenerated from aboue, to become the children of God. The seede of this regeneration is the eternall worde of God, which beeing prea∣ched by the ministerie of man, but quickened in the myndes of the hearers by the power of the spi∣rite, renueth the whole nature of man, so that his fleshe being mortified, he lyueth onely vnto GOD through Christ, who not long before being estraunged from God, lyued vnto sinne. And the Apostles taught but one vniforme doctrine of the worde in all places, the which worde Christ himselfe distribu∣ted into hys partes, when he first commaunded repentaunce to be preached in his name, and then next forgiuenesse of sinnes. And although the Apostles had not alwayes one kinde of hearers, but such as seemed greatly to differ, both in vocation, conuersation, & nature: yet did not they thinke it good, for this cause, to chaunge or omit any thing in the doctrine of the gospel, being wholy busted, to bring many men vnto Christ, by duly & orderly dealing of his word. And vnto this doctrine of ye word, they ioyned ye vse of the sacraments, and those whome they perceyued to beleue, they tooke into the societie of the Church by baptisme with all their family, and deliuered to them the sacrament of thankesgiuing in such sort as

Christ prescribed, the often receyuing whereof sealed to them the benefite of their redemption, and a thankefull commemoration of the Lordes death is therein celebrated, and the whole bodye of the Church is the more surely knitte togither with the bande of loue and charitie. And by these meanes, within the space of eyght and twentie yeares, it is euident the whole worlde was brought vnto the o∣beysaunce of Christ, and that by the ministerie of such as were neyther of noble stocke, dignitie in cal∣ling, nor of any estimation in learning. Therefore this was the verie working of God from aboue, wherein wee haue to reuerence his power, and to embrace his goodnesse, which so graciously prouided for the worlde, liuing oppressed vnder the tyrannie of the deuill. This booke setteth forth most dili∣gently the exercises of the Primitiue Church. Great sinners and notorious wicked men, such as not long before, had wickedly enterprysed to shed the bloud of the only begotten sonne of God, embraced the doctrine of the gospell. And the same being brought to the consideration of their sinnes, openly confessed them, and trusting in the onely mercie of God through Christ, obteyned fauor and forgiuenesse. From thenceforth forsaking their former sinfulnesse, and taking a better waye and trade of lyfe, they forsooke their companie, by whome before they were polluted. And to their Godlye life, they ioyned prayers, wherein they were feruently occupied, both in consideration of their owne infirmitie, and by reason of dayly perilles and incombraunces, as many examples declare. And for that they woulde haue neyther doctrine nor the wholesome frequenting of the Sacramentes to cease, they had a speciall regarde that there might be Ministers, and Elders euerywhere appoynted, whome they placed in euery Citie, and with great diligence kept in dooing their dutye. And at length least the profession of Christ might seeme to consist onely in vaine contemplation, there sprang and grewe among them such feruent loue and li∣beralitie, that we may in these dayes sooner woonder at the same, than follow it. For eche Church and congregation faythfully made prouision for their poore, and those Churches that were of best habilitie and ryches, relieued the want and pouertie of others further of, sending to them such collections of mo∣ney as they had made and gathered for them. Well remembring vndoubtedlye our Sauiour Christ, which being readie to leaue the earth, appointed the poore in his place, promising to accept whatsoeuer benefite bestowed vpon them, as done vnto his owneselfe. And where being occupyed in such Godlye exercyses, all men ought to haue made much of them, and loued them: they yet founde on euery syde most grieuous enimyes. The Iewes, Scribes, and Phariseyes, and Philosophers of the Gentyles gainsayde them, whereby they were enforced to haue perpetuall conflicts with those, that had the chiefe commendation for wisedome, and learning, as well amonge the Iewes as the Gentyles. Moreouer, euen out of the Church it selfe arose false brethren, who both through their lewde conuersation hindred the growth of the Church now springing, and offended very manye with their craftie and deceyueable enterpryses: such as Ananias was among the Iewes, and Simon Magus amonge the Samaritanes. And certaine wicked persons giuen vnto vnlawfull sciences muche troubled the Apostles, and the o∣ther godly. Bariesu, or Elymas the Sorcerer in Cyprus, a mayde possessed with a prophecying spirite at Philippi, and certaine exorcistes, or coniuring Iewes, at Ephesus. And when the deuill perceyued, he coulde nothing preuaile by any of these instrumentes, he began to styrre vp the Magistrates and Ru∣lers, by them to keepe vnder the towarde croppe of the true and healthfull fayth. And this thing the Iewes first began, to bring Christes religion the more in suspicion, seeing that Nation where it first sprang, receyued not the same. Herevppon the Apostles were called before councelles at Hierusalem, were commaunded to silence, were beaten with roddes, and so being further threatned, were lette go againe. At length Stephen was stoned, the godlye driuen out of the Citie, and persecution raunged in euery place, neyther were the Apostles themselues spared. For Herod beheaded Iames, and thought for the Iewes pleasure to haue serued Peter likewise, if God had not after a myraculous sorte, deliuered him out of the present daunger hee was in. And the Iewes were not content themselues to reiecte Christ as none of their king and sauiour, but also they would not haue him to reigne among the Gen∣tyles. Wherefore they mooued and procured vprores agaynst the Apostles in all places, as appeareth by the adoe that happened at Antioche, Iconium, Lystrae, Corinth, Thessalonica, and many other places. And finally they brought to passe, that the Apostles, and professors of the Christian fayth, were repor∣ted to bee guyltie, not onely in matters of religion, but also to haue oldelye transgressed and broken the Romayne lawes, and to haue troubled and distourbed the whole worlde. Wherevppon the mat∣ter went so farre, that the Romaine Emperours also, whose power at that tyme stretched ouer all the worlde, drewe their sworde agaynst the Christians. But among all these so great and many daun∣gers, and in so craftie and most cruell attempts of the enimies, there appeared a marueylous constan∣cie of the Apostles and other beleeuers, whereby they both truely and plainely protested their fayth in Christ, and boldly defended and mainteyned the doctrine of truth, and neyther by flattrie or threats, coulde be brought to forsake the standing, wherein God had placed them. Therfore our faythfull God did not fayle them in so Godly a constancie, but declared by many and euident tokens, that he had a care of his Church. For being in bandes and prison he deliuered them out of the same, by the ministerie and seruice of Aungelles: he comforteth them with ioyfull ightes and visions: he armeth them with the spirite of constancie: he giueth them a mouth and tongue which none of the enimies was able to re∣sist: he confirmeth the doctrine and faith of his people with myracles: he effectually draweth the min∣des of men to beleeue them: and to be short, he causeth the doctrine of the Gospell, dispite of the worlde and Prince thereof, through fire and sworde, luckily to spreade ouer the whole face of the earth. In

these things is conteyned a perfite and an absolute paterne of a Church, wherevnto all things written any where else in the scriptures touching the Church, maye bee referred. This fourme or frame of a Church, it is euident, that you also (most honourable Lordes) haue followed. For where GOD did vouchsafe about .xxxix. yeares past, to illuminate our Countrey Heluetia, with the light of his word, and to call it from the darknesse of superstition into the brightnesse of his Gospell, you thinking there was no longer lingring to be made, began aduisedly and seriously to consider howe Christes kingdome might be restored in your common weale. Therefore you thought it good out of hande, to mooue the Bishoppes, and specially him of Constantia, to whose charge your whole Countrey belonged, to laye to their handes with you in abolishing of abuses and superstition, and to take order for the reforming of the Church with your aydes and assistaunce. But whyle they forgetting their vocation and dutyes, made delayes, you thought it shoulde be much to your shame and reproche, to see their negligence anye longer hinder the publike saluation and glorie of God, and therefore (for that you woulde not want of your duties) you were the Capitaynes and beginners of so godly an enterprice your selues: following the examples of Ezechias, Iosias, Constantine, and diuers others, which we reade in tymes passed did the like with great commendation, when the ministers and Bishops of the Church were founde slacke in their office. For appoynting a publike and generall assemblie of all the Ministers both in your Ci∣tie, and whole territorie, you willed them to deliberate and conferre among themselues out of the word of God, touching the chiefe pointes and articles of fayth and religion. And there were, that earnestlye withstoode this your deuise, saying the determination of this matter belonged not to the iudgement of one common weale or Prince, but to the authoritie of an vniuersall, and generall councell. Howbeit their authoritie was of no such force with you, that it coulde make you looke behinde you, after you had once set your hande vnto the plough. And therefore your godly begunne enterprise did prosperouslye proceede. For in that disputation the truth had the victorie, and that in such sorte, that the greatest part of them that came to assault the same, yeelded therevnto of their owne accorde, and thought their greatest prayse and glorie to consist herein, that God had giuen them grace to bee so happely ouercome, and to follow Christes Chariot in triumph. From that daye forwarde you neuer ceased to deuise and doe all such thinges as you perceyued did appertaine to the glorie of Christes kingdome. For you purged and rydde your Churches of the drosse and filthinesse of Images and Aultares, and cleered Christes doctrine from the pernitious inuentions of mans traditions, enacting by publike authoritie that none shoulde eyther reduce and bring againe, the superstitions abolished, or else teach the flocke of Christ any thing disagreeable to the doctrine of the Gospell. The vse and administration of the Sa∣craments, you caused to be brought to the fourme and order first instituted: you caused prayers aswell publike as priuate, to be duely ordered, and whatsoeuer other duetyes of true fayth, you caused to be exercysed according to the prescription of Apostolyke doctrine: yea, you caused your publike lawes, and discipline of maners to be refourmed after the rule of the gospell. And bicause no man should think you did these thinges eyther for desire of priuate lucre, or for that you delited in nouelties, you had a speciall regard that others might haue the whole fruite and auayle of the reformation, and your selues all the payne and labour in reforming. For you did not lyke sweepestakes rape and reue the Church goodes into your handes, nor put any man eyther of nobilitie or of the Church from theyr right. For those which were deceyued and caryed with the common sway of ignoraunce, you laboured to winne by friendly and brotherly instruction, and did not vncurteously cast them of. Wherby it came to passe, that they which were best witted amonge them, did afterwarde great good seruice to Christ and to his Church: and other whome eyther age, or dulnesse of wit hindered, you suffered paciently to enioy their goodes and reuenues, bicause they shoulde haue no occasion eyther to make complaint, or tumult. And whatsoeuer of those goodes fell to your administration, was appoynted partlye for the building and mainteyning of schooles, and partly for the sustentation and relieuing of the poore. For you vsed in li∣berall wyse to mainteyne not onely the professors of sciences and tongues, but also certaine studentes of the same, to the number of fourescore, with continuall stipende and exhibition: insomuch that the most part of them which at this day preach Christ in your Citie, and Countrey, (which haue in them about an hundred and fortie parishes) are bounde and beholden to your liberalitie, for the rowme and place that they now are in. And such was your dexteritie in handling all these matters, wisedome in taking counsell about them, and modestie in executing them, that the thing which seemed impossible to be done, was easily brought to passe: insomuch that within short space of time, in a free nation, with∣out any feare of publike tumult or sedition, with great approbation of the people, all these things that we haue spoken of were both taken in hand, and brought to an ende. For although they which thought Poperie was gainefull, and therfore coulde not well brooke the ouerthrowe thereof, attempted oftenti∣mes many things: yet through the singuler benefite of God, their enterpryses were alwayes in vaine, and the tempestes by them raysed were chased away by the wholesome breath of our heauenly father. Where according to the precept of Christ, both the simplicitie of Doues, and wisedome of Serpentes, appeared in your deuyses. For as often as your aduersaryes went about eyther by flatterie and fayre promises, or by fearefull menaces to withdrawe you from your purpose, or at least woulde haue per∣swaded you to haue left all controuersie in religion to the iudgement of the Bishops and Clergie: you still aunswered them both wisely and plainly after this sort: that you coulde not, nor woulde not denie or reiect such thinges, as you had learned out of Gods worde, were true, and that you were readie to

render a reason of your beliefe to any man that shoulde demaunde it of you: yea that you woulde wil∣lingly yeelde to any man that coulde conuince you of error▪ by the holy Scripture, and coulde teach you a better waye of saluation than you helde. Diuers your aunsweres of lyke kinde and tenour there are wherewith you stopped the mouthes of a great many, and wherein still maye be read that saying of the Apostles: Whether it be right before od to hearken vnto you rather than God, iudge you. For we can∣not choose but speake those things which we haue both seene and heard. Againe, We ought rather to o∣bey God than men. Therefore the heauenly grace of the eternall God fauoured and prospered so godly enterprises: whereby it came to passe, that your common weale hath most happily escaped all kinde of tribulations, and at this day in the middle of the horrible and daungerous styrres and troubles of all Christendome, doth not only liue in peace hir selfe, but also is a most safe sanctuarie for forreyners and straungers resorting to hir from all places. Therefore great and weightie causes as me thinketh haue mooued me (most honourable and my especiall good Lordes) to dedicate this my labour and traueyle vnto you, wherein according to the grace of God bestowed vppon mee, I haue gone about to open and make plaine that booke, which describeth the fist countenaunce and looke of that Church that is called the primitiue Church, wyth the proceedings, encrease, and whole estate of the same, a president wher∣of, I see you haue followed, with no lesse industrie and diligence, than good and happie successe. Which president if they shall follow which shall suceede you, in gouernement of the common weale, they shall both see howe you haue done nothing rashly, and on a head, and shall also perceyue themselues woonder∣fully pricked forwarde, to obserue and keepe with all their power, that fourme and order of a refour∣med Church and Religion, that they shall receyue of you. And surely it shall be verie profitable to me∣ditate oftentymes, by what meanes and beginnings, our auncestours deuised such an order and fourme both of Church and common weale. For in so doing they shall neyther regarde slaunderers, which maliciously depraue thinges done well and godlily, neyther shall they be turned from the truth for anye stormes of persecution, or threates of the worlde that may aryse. It is also profitable manye tymes to talke of these thinges before the people, which as they are ledde most commonly with things present: so doe they easily forget thinges passed and gone, and verie seldome thinke of things to come. There∣fore they allow not the deuises of the Magistrates, but when they see them ioyned eyther with present profite, or cleere of perilles and daunger. For as soone as daunger once appeareth, they finde fault and lacke of wisedome and equitie in those, whose councels they ought faythfullye to set forward and o∣bey. But if they did vnderstande, that their rulers had God for the authour and guyder of their drifts and deuises, and that they did whatsoeuer they did, according to their duetie, then surelye they woulde learne more religiously to iudge of their rulers, and more easilye to obey them, and woulde not so so∣denly bee mooued and turned at euerye rumour of daunger arysing. Surely this was the thing that I chiefly ment and intended, when I began openly to reade this booke to the flocke of Christ among you, and to publishe and set abroade that which I had openly spoken and declared. For I sawe that the state of this age waxing euery day woorse and woorse, was such, that it was most nedefull continually to per∣vse the bookes of holy scripture, and to sette before the people, the examples of the primitiue Church, conteyned in the same, that they shoulde not be deceyued with the gloses of such as vnder a false colour and pretence of antiquitie, burthen vs with newe errours, and accuse those thinges of noueltie, which graue and godly menne haue restored vnto vs, out of the worde of God. Accept therefore, these my labours (mine honourable and good Lordes) with such fauour, as you haue manye yeares borne vnto the truth, and vnto mee, and manye other my fellowes and coparteners, euen from our childehoode. Continue your good will vnto the students of diuinitie: holde on your accustomed humanitie and gen∣tlenesse toward the pilgrimes and banished for Christes sake, abide in the mainteyning of your lawes, and correcting of the peoples maners, in enhaunceing vertuous exercises, and in bridling wickednesse with iustice. In many places the horrible contempt of God reigneth. Diuers doe wickedly reiect the wholesome benefite of Gods worde, and the knowledge of Christ. Charitie in most men waxeth chill, and fayth fayleth euerie day by little and little. Iniquitie aboundeth, and newe croppes of naughti∣nesse dayly encrease. God therefore being angrie▪ threatneth vs with punishment, and feareth the world with woonders, monsters, and horrible vprores of kingdomes. And yet will he neuer fayle them which abyde and continue in promoting his glorie, defende the Church of his Christe, and according to the measure of their vocation, perseuere in doing their duetie. He shall blesse your labours, and go∣uerne your councels by his spirite: he shall blesse all your people, so that they shall of their owne accorde, obey your wholesome lawes, and moste happilye enioye the gladsome benefite of euangelicall peace. He shall blesse your whole Church, so that it shall go forwarde euerie day more and more in the doctrine of godlinesse. To him who is the onely Lorde of Lordes, the immortall and euer∣lasting God, be blessing, honour, power, and glorie for euer. Amen. Giuen at Zurich, in your famous and chiefe Citie of Heluetia: the first daye of August, in the yeare of oure Lorde. 1557.
