


MY VERY GOOD LORD, sundry menne haue sundry mea∣nings in dedycating their studyes and traueyles to such men of ho∣nor as you are. Some seeke their friendshippe and good will, some augmentation of lyuing, some au∣thoritie to commende and sette foorth their woorkes and labours, some one thing, some an o∣ther. And I haue herein beene ledde with none of these consi∣derations. For your honors beneuolence and friendship, I long sithence well founde and prooued, which gaue me the best part of that exhibition, wherby I lyued in Italie three or foure yea∣res togither, and whereby also I lyue at this daye the better: I meane the experience and knowledge which I learned in that space. And mannes allowaunce or authoritie, the maiestie of the matter that I offer vnto your honour needeth not, which (for that it is the worde of God almightie) is so farre from ta∣king any authoritie of man, that rather man should haue no au∣thority at all, if it were not, & especially men in authority such as you are, of whome God sayth, Per me Reges regnant. &c. Otherwise in respect of mine owne simple handling thereof, I must plainelye confesse, that it hath neede of the meanest and simplest mans allowance that is. As for lyuing I haue not hy∣therto greatly gaped after, as knowing I haue more than eyther

I euer made great suite for, or can well deserue: my small suf∣ficiencie, and the great charge of Ministerie committed vnto me, being well weighed. Mine onely intent in this simple la∣bour of mine was, to shewe my selfe some maner of wayes not vnmindefull of your Lordshippes liberalitie so longe agone be∣stowed vpon me, nor of that great humanitye which the same vsed about a nine yeres past, twise in one Lent at the Court, be∣ing then at White Hall, towarde so poore a man as I, preuen∣ting my bashfull nature and slackenesse of speach towarde my superiors, with such curteous affabilitie, that among the mani∣folde experiments which I had eftsoones before seene in you, of a noble and gentle nature, I iudged this not one of the least. For true Nobilitie consisteth not somuch in the goodes of fortune, gorgeous apparell, and prowde and hauty lookes and behauior, as in courteous countenance, and other vertuous qualities of the minde, the verye true implementes and furniture of a right Courtier. And in whom soeuer these qualities are to be found, he may truely be called Nobilis. But peraduenture your Honor will say, my gift is the lesse thankeworthy, the longer your good desertes towarde mee, haue bene forgotten. Verilye, my good Lorde, it was alwayes no lesse truely, than commonly sayde, of such exercises and enterprises, as this of mine is, Sat cito si sat bene. And to forget a benefite or good turne, of all other vn∣kindenesses is the woorst. For vnkinde he is that denyeth a good turne receyued. Vnkinde also he is that will not acknowledge it: & further, he is vnkinde that doth not requite it if he be able: But of all other, he is most vnkinde that forgetteth it. And for proofe that I neuer forgat your honors good will & friendship, I could shewe you the three bookes of Machiauelles discourses translated by me ut of Italian into Englishe, more than four∣tene

yeares past, which I thought to haue presented vnto your Honour, but was stayed therefrom, partly bicause I hearde the worke inueighed against at Paules crosse, as a treatise vnwor∣thy to come abroade into mennes handes, and partly for that I hoped still to haue some other matter more plausible and accep∣table to gyue vnto the same. Albeit to confesse a truth, I heard no such stronge reasons alleaged against the booke, but they myght (as I thought) with ease ynough haue beene answered, although the Inueigher was himselfe a discourser. In deede I suspected mine owne rude and vnripe translation, and therfore I was the easlier induced to suppresse it. Therfore with such men of Honor as you are, which (as Seneca sayeth) vse to keepe no kalender of the benefites that they bestowe, and as Christ sayth, let not their left hande knowe what their right doth, but looke for their reward in the world to come: these fewe words I hope, or rather I am sure, may suffise for answere. Albeit, I see not but as the same Seneca sayth also, beneficium reddidit, qui li∣benter debet. And for my parte I shall alwayes gladlye con∣fesse, that I am more bounden vnto your Honor, than I am lyke at anye time to make satisfaction for. This booke which I haue here translated, shall for many skilles I trust, be welcome vnto your Honor. First, bicause it is the Actes of the Apostles, which conteyne in them the infallible and vndoubted wordes of lyfe and saluation, and a true hystorie of those thinges which the Apostles did and taught after Christes ascention. Secondly, for the wryters sake which was S. Luke, whose praise is in the Gos∣pell. Thirdlye, for his sake to whome Luke did dedicate it, which was Theophylus, a noble manne and of authoritie, but (which commendation farre passeth all other) a sincere louer and faithfull setter forth of Gods true religion and honour. I would make comparison betwene you, if I spake of your Honor

to others and not to you, for so perhaps shoulde I not incurre so much suspition of flatterie, as to prayse you to your face. Last of all, for his sake which by his learned commentaries vpon diuers partes of the scripture, hath deserued so well of all vnfeyned Christians, but specially in these Homelyes of his, written vpon the Actes, wherein he hath both most plainly and soundely ope∣ned the greatest misteries, and controuersies of these dayes, most meete and necessarie for euerye true Christian to knowe. Of whome I will speake no further, least in pervsing the worke, your Lordship may finde, howe farre his desertes shall passe all praise that I am able to giue him: and considering that the re∣uerende Father in God the Bishop of Norwich nowe liuing, hath made certaine learned Verses in Latine, which are prin∣ted in the forefront of his booke, in commendation of the same. Why your Lordship should accept it, bicause it is by me trans∣lated, there is no cause. For I am, inutilis seruus, and haue done but my duetie (if happily I haue done so much) in respect eyther of the seruice I owe vnto our Englishe Church in gene∣rall, or to your Honor in perticular. And therfore being so ma∣ny wayes bounde vnto your Honor as I am, I finde no remedie, but to desire I may yet further be bounde vnto the same. And this is as Tullie interpreteth the matter, I will speake it in his woordes, animi ingenui, cui multum debeas eidem velle pluri∣mum debere. Hereby therefore shall your honor binde mee the more vnto you, if you accept and thinke well not of the worke for my sake, but contrary wise of me for the workes sake, and for my poore good willes sake, which finde my selfe so estreighted with the consideration of your merites towardes mee, and with the slender amends that I am able to make againe for the same, that I am driuen to Aeschines shift, sometyme Scholler vnto Socrates. He being of himselfe but a pore yong man, & not able

worthily to recompence Socrates for the learning that he had gotten by him, and perceyuing diuers other of Socrates Schol∣lers did gratifie him wyth sundrie riche and sumptuous pre∣sentes: Sir (sayth he) I haue no meete or worthie thing to present your worship with, and hereby most of all perceiue I, how poore I am, therfore I giue vnto you that onely thing that I haue, which is my selfe. This I beseech you (sayth he) take in good part. Nowe surelye (quoth he) what else can this be, but a verie great present and gift, vnlesse perhaps thou make little or no account of thy selfe. Thus trusting my poore pre∣sent shall be none otherwise receyued, at your honors hande, than was Aeschines at Socrates. I most humbly com∣mende mee vnto the same, beseeching almightie God for Christ his sake, to giue you a lyfe wherein you maye long defende and maintaine his honour and glory.
 At Herne the xxj. of Aprill. 1572. 
